TEXAS
Bulletin of the

		 ARCHEOLOGICAL
Volume 82/2011
			 SOCIETY
Timothy K. Perttula, Editor

Published by

at Austin
2011

CONTENTS
Foreword, Timothy K. Perttula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v

The Archeology of the Texas Archaic
The Texas Archaic
Timothy K. Perttula  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas
Michael B. Collins, David M. Yelacic, and C. Britt Bousman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain: The Buckeye Knoll Site
(41VT98) on the Lower Guadalupe River near Victoria, Texas
Robert A. Ricklis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site: Six Thousand Years of Hunter-Gatherer
Family Cookery in South-Central North America
Alston V. Thoms and Patricia A. Clabaugh  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
The Armstrong Site: A Transitional Archaic Occupation along the Eastern Balcones Escarpment
Eric A. Schroeder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  117
The Berdoll Site: An Early Archaic Camp on Onion Creek, Travis County, Texas
James W. Karbula, John A. Campbell, and Bradford M. Jones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  135
An Archaic Wooden Bowl from the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas
Michael R. Waters, Shanna Daniel, Juan Arista, and Robson Bonnichsen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
Heated Rocks as Evidence of Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations in Texas
Michael B. Collins  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis:
Interpretation of Surface Artifact Distributions at the El Arenal Site, El Paso County, Texas
Myles R. Miller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres: A Case Study from Fort Hood, Central Texas
Steve Carpenter and Christian Hartnett . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223
A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin, Travis County, Texas
Andrew F. Malof and Matthew S. Taylor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  251

iii

Texas Archeological Society
Other Reports
Clovis, Folsom, and Midland Artifacts between Dallas and the Navasota River
William L. Young . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 281
The Shifting Sands Site: A Southern Plains Folsom-Midland Assemblage
Richard O. Rose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 299
Jensen Biface Cache (41HE366), Henderson County, Texas
Harry J. Shafer and Mark Walters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  325
The Harris Ranch Petroglyphs of the Eastern Trans-Pecos
Solveig A. Turpin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
Notes on Archaic Environments at Los Remotos, Nuevo León, Mexico
Solveig A. Turpin and Linda Scott Cummings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 347
Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House
Jim Bruseth, Pat Mercado-Allinger, James Woodrick, Tiffany Osburn,
Jeff Durst, Brad Jones, Bill Pierson, Charles Gordy, and Robert Marcom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  357
Archeological Activities at 41AU82, Houston’s “Camp West of Brazos”
James Woodrick  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 379
Flickr to Flakes and Blogs to Bifaces: Utilizing the Web to Enhance and Encourage Public
Involvement in Archeology in a Case Study from the Excavations at the Vara Daniel Site
(41TV1364) in Austin, Texas
Mason D. Miller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 395
List of Authors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  411

iv

Texas Archeological Society

Foreword

1991. Thanks are due to the fine folks that worked at
Morgan Printing (and now work at Ginny’s Printing)
and helped us with production and printing of the
BTAS, especially Terry Sherrell, Blake Mitchell, and
Mark Hillis.
Finally, I offer my full support to the new editor
of the BTAS: Dr. Tamra Walter of Texas Tech University. I look forward to seeing the 2012 BTAS and
other volumes to be done under her editorship.

As this is the last Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society (BTAS) done under my editorship, and
I have done quite a few, I want to thank the authors
who have taken the time to provide contributions to
this volume, as well as to the many other authors who
have contributed to the other 20 or so volumes of the
BTAS I have worked on over the last 20+ years. It has
been a productive and interesting time.
I also want to thank past and present members
of the Texas Archeological Society Board of Directors and Executive Committees, as well as the general membership of the Texas Archeological Society,
for their support of the BTAS as it has evolved since

Timothy K. Perttula
Editor, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
March 2011

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

v

The Texas Archaic
Timothy K. Perttula

The archeology of the North American Archaic
period (ca. 10,000-2500 years ago or thereabouts)
and hunter-gatherer lifeways has been a common
topical or thematic point of discussion in recent
years (Alt 2010; Bousman and Vierra 2011; Sassaman and Holly 2011). This has been true whether
the focus has been on the long course of this part of
the native history in the Eastern Woodlands (Sassaman 2008, 2010), the Mid-continent (Emerson et al.
2009; Jefferies 2008; Lovis 2008); the Southeastern
United States (Anderson et al. 2007; Claassen 2010;
Thomas and Sanger 2010; Saunders 2010; Sassaman
2011), or the Western United States (McBrinn 2010;
Graf and Schmitt 2007; Mabry 2008; Prentiss 2008;
Roth and Freeman 2008).
The archaeology of the Texas Archaic has
rarely figured in these recent broad and synthetic
discussions of the character, diversity, and complexity of the Archaic archeological record in North
America, which puzzles me. Texas sits astride both
the Eastern Woodlands, the American West, the Gulf
Coast, and the Great Plains, and has considerable
environmental and ecological diversity: the Archaic
archeological record is almost certainly as diverse
over the long-term (e.g., Vierra 2005, 2009; Thoms
and Mandel 2007; Houk et al. 2008; Kibler and Mehalchick 2010; Nickels and Bousman 2010; Quigg
et al. 2010). Archeological research on the Texas
Archaic has the potential to contribute to larger discussions of the Archaic period across time, changing
paleoenvironmental condition, and vast expanses of
space (i.e., landscapes and places).
The main purpose of this volume is to provide
an opportunity for archeologists working on Texas
Archaic sites and Archaic research problems to
communicate the results of their findings, as well
as their views of the character of those Archaic
societies that lived and ranged in different regions and
ecological habitats in what is now Texas. The papers
on the Texas Archaic in this volume are welcome
contributions to studies of technological change and
continuity, the development of social complexity,

relationships between peoples and past environments,
and the nature of responses of past Archaic societies
to changes in the natural environment.
References Cited
Alt, S. (editor)
2010 Considering Complexity. University of Utah Press,
Salt Lake City.
Anderson, D. G., M. Russo, and K. E. Sassaman
2007 Mid-Holocene cultural dynamics in southeastern
North America. In Climate Change & Cultural
Dynamics: A Global Perspective on Mid-Holocene
Transitions, edited by D. G. Anderson, K. A.
Maasch, and D. H. Sandweiss, pp. 457-489. Elsevier,
Amsterdam.
Bousman, C. B. and B. Vierra (editors)
2011 On the Brink: Transformations in Human Organization and Adaptation at the Pleistocene-Holocene
Boundary in North America. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station, in press.
Claassen, C.
2010 Feasting with Shell in the Southern Ohio Valley: Sacred Sites and Landscapes in the Archaic. University
of Tennessee Press, Knoxville, in press.
Emerson, T. E., D. L. McElrath, and A. C. Fortier (editors)
2009 Archaic Societies: Diversity and Complexity across
the Midcontinent. State University of New York
Press, Albany.
Graf, K. E. and D. N. Schmitt (editors)
2007 Paleoindian or Paleoarchaic? Great Basin Human
Ecology at the Pleistocene-Holocene Transition.
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Houk, B. A., K. A. Miller, and E. R. Oksanen
2008 The Gatlin Site (41KR621): Investigating Archaic
Lifeways on the Southern Edwards Plateau of Central Texas. SWCA Cultural Resources Report No.
149, SWCA, Inc., Austin, and Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 108, Texas Department of
Transportation, Austin.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

2

Texas Archeological Society

Jefferies, R. W.
2008 Holocene Hunter-Gatherers of the Lower Ohio River
Valley. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
Kibler, K. W. and G. Mehalchick
2010 Hunter-Gatherer Resource Acquisition and Use
in the Lower Bosque River basin During the Late
Archaic. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
81:103-126.
Lovis, W. A.
2008 Hunter-Gatherer Archaeology and the Upper Great
Lakes Archaic. The SAA Archaeological Record
8(5):27-30.
Mabry, J. B. (editor)
2008 Las Capas: Early Irrigation and Sedentism in a
Southwestern Floodplain. Anthropological Papers
No. 28. Center for Desert Archaeology, Tucson.
McBrinn, M. E.
2010 Everything Old is New Again: Recent Approaches
to Research on the Archaic Period in the Western
United States. Journal of Archaeological Research
18(3):289-329.
Nickels, D. K. and C. B. Bousman (assemblers)
2010 Archaeological Testing at San Marcos Springs
(41HY160) for the Texas River Center, Hays County,
Texas. Archaeological Studies Report No. 13. Center
for Archaeological Studies, Texas State UniversitySan Marcos.
Prentiss, A. M.
2008 Imagining the Archaic: A View from the Middle
Fraser Canyon of British Columbia. The SAA Archaeological Record 8(5):31-35.
Quigg, J. M., C. D. Frederick, P. M. Matchen, and K. G. DuBois
2010 Landis Property: Data Recovery at Three Prehistoric
Sites (41PT185, 41PT186, and 41PT245) in Potter
County, Texas. 2 Vols. TRC Report No. 150932. TRC
Environmental Corporation, Austin.
Roth, B. J. and A. Freeman
2008 The Middle Archaic Period and the Transition to Agriculture in the Sonoran Desert of Southern Arizona.
Kiva 73:321-353.

Sassaman, K. E.
2010 The Eastern Archaic, Historicized. AltaMira Press,
Lanham, Maryland.
2011

Shell Mounds of the Middle St. Johns Basin, Northeast Florida. In The Origins of Monumentality, edited
by R. Rosenswig and R. Burger. University Press of
Florida, Gainesville, in press.

Sassaman, K. E. (editor)
2008 The New Archaic. The SAA Archaeological Record
8(5):6-40.
Sassaman, K. E. and D. H. Holly, Jr. (editors)
2011 Hunter-Gatherer Archaeology as Historical Process.
University of Arizona Press, Tucson, in press.
Saunders, J. W.
2010 Middle Archaic and Watson Brake. In Archaeology
of Louisiana, edited by M. A. Rees, pp. 63-76. Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge.
Thomas, D. H. and M. C. Sanger (editors)
2010 Trend, Tradition, and Turmoil: What Happened to
the Southeastern Archaic? Anthropological Papers
Number 93. American Museum of Natural History,
New York.
Thoms, A. V. and R. D. Mandel (editors)
2007 Archaeological and Paleoecological Investigations
at the Richard Beene Site, South-Central Texas.
Reports of Investigations 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Vierra, B. J.
2009 Keystone in Context: A Significant Archaic Period
Site in El Paso, Texas. Keystone Heritage Park, Inc.,
El Paso, Texas.
Vierra, B. J. (editor)
2005 The Late Archaic across the Borderlands: From
Foraging to Farming. University of Texas Press,
Austin.

“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate
and Projectile Points in Texas
Michael B. Collins, David M. Yelacic, and C. Britt Bousman

Abstract
We explore the relationships between paleoclimatic conditions and the geographic distributions in Texas of
time-diagnostic projectile point types represented by finds at the Gault site in Central Texas. We assume no
particular correlation between projectile point types and the ethnic identities of the people(s) who used them.
Over the approximately 12,000 year record, eleven climatic intervals can be generally recognized. Changing
moisture regimes have had an influence on projectile point type distributions along with other factors such as
population increases over the millennia. Increasing resource availability during mesic intervals is inferred to
account for expanded projectile point realms whereas more restricted realms during xeric intervals are inferred
to be a response to less abundant resources such as bison. These findings suggest that continued inquiry along
these lines is warranted employing better paleoclimatic evidence, improved artifact typologies, broader ranges
of artifact categories, and improved chronological controls.

Introduction
Archeologists working in Texas began in earnest in the late 1940s to formalize a projectile point
typology that could serve as a chronological framework and as a trait useful in defining archeological
cultures. J. Charles Kelley and Alex D. Krieger
were particularly instrumental in this effort (Kelley
1947; Krieger 1944, 1947). Definitions of certain
widespread types, particularly the “Early American
Hunters” forms being defined beyond the borders
of Texas, were incorporated into the typological
constructs of the state when their presence made this
appropriate (Krieger 1947). Texas projectile point
typologies were first consolidated and formalized
with publication of the seminal An Introductory
Handbook of Texas Archeology in 1954 (Suhm et al.
1954). This compilation sold out in short order and
its artifact typologies were reissued with minor revisions in a different format (Suhm and Jelks 1962).
As intended by the authors of the Handbook,
projectile point typology in Texas has undergone
many changes over the nearly 60 years since it was
first published. There have been additions, deletions,
revisions, several new compilations, and the emergence of a hoard of typologists who have engaged
in very much wrangling over types and what they
mean (e.g., Davis 1991; Johnson 1989a; Mitchell

1976; Prewitt and Chandler 1992; Turner and Hester
1985, 1999; Utberg 1969).
Typology was meant to be a tool for, not an end
in, archeological inquiry, but it came to excessively
dominate much of the research done in the state.
Considerable effort to build and refine regional
archeological chronologies in the state focused on
typological constructs of projectile points and all
too often those chronologies became the goal of
research instead of means to other ends as seen in
examples by Johnson (1962), Shafer (1963), and
Sorrow et al. (1967), and as critiqued by Black
(1989), Collins (1995, 2004), G. L. Ellis (1994),
Johnson (1987, McKinney (1981) and others. The
stature of projectile point typology has declined as
a result, but the vast effort that has gone into these
studies produced a data base useful for many purposes beyond chronology-building.
In this article, we attempt a different application of existing projectile point typologies. To our
knowledge this particular approach has not been
attempted before. We ask these questions: what are
the distributions across the state of those projectile point types that occur at the Gault site in Bell
County in relation to a generalized paleoclimatic
reconstruction of the region, and what might those
distributions mean? We are using the types in a
completely socio-culturally neutral sense; that is, we

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

4

Texas Archeological Society

are not assuming any particular relationship of point
types to ethnic groups. In part this is because we feel
that the form of projectile points is more functional
than social and says more about hafting technology,
weapon systems, and related kinds of behavior than
it does about the ethnic identities of the users (Dial
et al. 1998; Collins 2007). But it is also because
whatever the relationships between projectile point
types and people might have been, it is unlikely that
those relationships remained the same across the
state and throughout the thousands of years covered
by our study. Ethnographic accounts demonstrate
that design choices of projectiles (and their points)
are influenced by many factors in the natural, social,
and technological contexts of projectile use (C. Ellis
1997). Knecht (1997:19) summed up the relevant
findings of ethnoarcheology succinctly with “…
studies explicitly concerned with projectile point
morphological variability have shown that projectile
point form and size are determined by a multiplicity of factors including hunting conditions, targeted
prey species, raw material availability, technological
parameters such as bow weight, body size of the
hunter, skill of the manufacturer, and individual and
cultural preference.” Given spatial and temporal
variability across Texas in all of these factors, the
prehistoric record of types must reflect a complex
history of influences.
So what do we expect to learn? Gault is relatively centrally located in the state and it was occupied,
albeit intermittently, throughout the known prehistory of Central Texas, a span of about 14,000 years
(Collins and Bradley 2008; Collins 2002, 2007). It
is located in a northern extension of the Balcones
Canyonlands and is, therefore, an ideal site for this
study because it afforded inhabitants with reliable
water, abundant chippable stone of high quality,
and an optimum diversity of physical and especially
biotic resources (Collins 2002, 2007). These local
conditions were clearly attractive to people throughout the Late Pleistocene and the entire Holocene no
matter the swings in climate.
By contrast, many prehistoric sites are less
optimally situated and record more sporadic occupations. For example, over the long occupational
prehistory of Lubbock Lake in the central Llano
Estacado, intensity of site use varied significantly
(Johnson and Holliday 1987:100-115). Lubbock
Lake is well endowed with resources compared to
much of its High Plains surroundings, but it and
those surroundings are marginal in regard to water
availability. Human activity, as a result, was severely

reduced during the dry intervals of the past (Johnson
and Holliday 1987:25). Thus, we suggest that at a
statewide scale, temporally sensitive artifacts should
generally reflect the aggregate response of site occupations to each of the recognized climatic intervals
of Texas. Climate is, of course, but one of many
factors influencing the movements and settlement
patterns of people. Undoubtedly the nature of the
political landscape was a significant factor as were
others for which we have few avenues of investigation. But because Texas spans a clinal increase
in rainfall from west to east (current means range
from 8 inches to 56 inches or 700 percent) (Figure
1), water deficiency is exacerbated across almost
the entire state by an average evaporation potential
of 81 inches to 45 inches over the same west-east
cline (Larkin and Bomar 1983). Changing rainfall
regimes result in east-to-west or west-to-east shifts
in biotic communities. Humans clearly had to cope
with adverse shifts or take advantage of favorable
shifts by adjusting their territories and changing the
mix of subsistence resources upon which they relied,
and these leave indelible traces in the archeological record. We infer that other responses occurred,
including political ones, but we expect less clear
archeological evidence to have survived.
Climate changed dramatically during the time
span of prehistoric occupations at Gault. Two sets
of proxy climatic data are available for the time
span of interest to this study, one based on pollen from Weakly and Boriack bogs in east central
Texas (Bousman 1994, 1998b), the other based
on small animal remains from Hall’s Cave near
the center of the Edwards Plateau (Toomey 1993;
Toomey et al. 1993). The bog pollen sequence is
not well-constrained chronologically; however, the
available dates indicate relatively constant rates of
sedimentation, from which Bousman interpolated
the sequence we use here. His interpretation of
the reported pollen data from the bogs considered
the relative frequency of grass to arboreal pollens,
which yields a climatically sensitive pollen record.
A deeply stratified, abundant, high-resolution sequence of small animal remains was found in Hall’s
Cave. The upper 2 m of the sequence is considered
here and the climatic history we use is based on the
relative proportions of the least shrew, Cryptotis
sp. (which requires relatively moist habitats). to the
desert shrew Notiosorex sp. (which occupies more
arid habitats) (Toomey 1993; Toomey et al. 1993).
This sequence is constrained by 41 radiocarbon
dates provided to Toomey by Stafford Laboratories

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas

5

Figure 1. Isohyet map of Texas illustrating the modern precipitation averages as they increase from west to east across
the major drainages basins of the state.

(Collins 2004:113). The two climatic sequences
inferred from the bog pollen and fossil shrew data
are quite similar overall, but vary somewhat, particularly in the timing of climatic shifts. Since the
two data sets are 225 km apart along the east-west
moisture cline, these may reflect time-transgressive
responses of the environments to climatic change.
Alternatively, the interpolated chronology in the
bog pollen sequence may not accurately reflect the
timing of the climatic shifts.
Compared to mean values for modern climate,
we identify relatively mesic, xeric, transitional from
mesic to xeric, and transitional from xeric to mesic
periods. There are 11 such periods: two are mesic,
five are xeric, two were times of a shift from mesic

to xeric, and two were shifts in the opposite direction. Below we present a series of maps that show
where Gault was within the geographic distribution
of diagnostic point forms for each of those 11 periods. We refer to these distributions, informally, as
“realms.” As a consistent geographic frame of reference, we describe each realm in relation to the biotic
region terminology depicted on the map in Figure 2.
Whatever the mix of adaptive, social, technological, cognitive, or historical mechanisms was that
controlled intervals of stability and times of change
among types of projectile points, we see distinct
changes in the realms of which Gault was a part.
Since Gault’s realms tend to expand in more mesic
times and constrict in more xeric times, we conclude

6

Texas Archeological Society

Gault site
Figure 2. Environmental areas of Texas as used in descriptions of point distribution realms in this article (assembled
from multiple sources).

that climatic conditions exerted a strong influence
on the distributions and movements of the people or
peoples using the forms of projectile points we find
archeologically.
More than people were effected by climate
change. Bison populations in Texas varied from
relative abundance in mesic times to relative scarcity in xeric times (Dillehay 1974). We believe that
our findings reinforce earlier suggestions that large,
broad-bladed projectile point forms were specifically designed for use in killing bison (Bement et
al. 2005; Dial et al. 1998; Wyckoff 1995).

Projectile point typology is almost as much
an art as it is a science. Inexperienced analysts
commonly make misidentifications that seriously
reduce the value of their study. Experienced and
knowledgeable typologists frequently disagree on
identifications. Were we to uncritically use type
identifications made by a mélange of analysts in
this study, the results could be significantly flawed.
Fortunately, Elton Prewitt (1995) has presented a
summary of precisely the kind of data needed by
this study—statewide distributions of 151 projectile
point types based on 60,519 specimens reported in

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas
736 publications. Prewitt did not personally make
the typological identifications, but he vetted the
reported data based on his expertise, which in 1995
was grounded in three decades of study of the subject. This insures a high level of consistency in a major part of the data upon which we base the present
study. Since Prewitt was particularly concerned with
frequencies of occurrence per county for each of his
151 types, he had to take great care to insure that
he did not inadvertently count the same specimen
multiple times. We are not basing our conclusions on
relative frequencies so much as overall distributions,
so we have augmented Prewitt’s report slightly with
some distributional data generated since his work
was published and significantly with a distributional
study of selected Paleoindian types, specifically Clovis, Folsom, Midland, Wilson, Dalton, St. Mary’s
Hall, Scottsbluff, Golondrina, and Angostura.
Bousman’s unpublished study of Paleoindian
archeological components was accomplished by
first referring to the previous lists published in
Bousman et al. (2004), which represented known
Paleoindian site distributions as of 1994 when
those data were collected directly from the records
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at
The University of Texas at Austin (TARL). In 2010
the Texas Historical Commission made the Texas
Archeological Atlas database searchable, and in the
fall of 2010 a new list of all the Paleoindian sites was
constructed. These were compared to the Bousman
et al. (2004) published records and to preliminary
lists in Prewitt (1981, 1983, 1995) and McKinney
(1981). The individual components were identified
with a keyword search in the Texas Archeological
Atlas database, and then confirmed with a positive
recording of diagnostic projectile points at a particular site. Then the locations were gleaned directly
from the geographic coordinates recorded on the Atlas entries, or if coordinates were missing, extracted
from locations plotted on the associated maps. In the
latter case, the locations were re-plotted on Google
Earth images and detailed coordinates extracted
there from. The sites, components, and geographic
coordinates were recorded in a MS Excel file and
downloaded into ArcMap. Individual component
maps showing site locations and drainage boundaries were prepared in ArcMap and exported into
Adobe Illustrator, where the generalized distributions were drafted.
A number of implications are suggested by our
findings, as we discuss in the conclusions of this
article. These fall into three categories: specific

7

cultural-historical interpretations of the data;
potential insights into the broader cultural meanings
of projectile point forms; and some suggested
avenues for further inquiry.
The Gault Site
Gault has been known among local folk as a
large and prolific prehistoric site for something over
100 years. It attracted the attention of Professor J.
E. Pearce, founder of the Anthropology Department
at the University of Texas. In 1929 and the beginning of 1930, Pearce excavated at least two trenches
across a portion of the large Archaic midden and collected some 5000 artifacts, most of which are projectile points. Pearce’s collection is housed at TARL.
Among the many points Pearce collected were the
key specimens Prewitt used in defining the Andice
point type (Prewitt 1983). Since Pearce, professional
activities at Gault were a cursory reconnaissance
by Thomas R. Hester and Pat Mercado-Allinger in
1988, limited test excavations conducted by Hester
and Michael B. Collins briefly in 1991, another brief
excavation by Hester and Collins in 1998, extensive
excavations by Collins, Hester, Harry J. Shafer and
Michael R. Waters between 1999-2002, and excavations by Collins from 2007 to the present.
A darker side to the history of the Gault site
has been its extensive looting, beginning soon after
the locality was cleared and put into cultivation,
ca. 1908, and lasting until 1998. In their reconnaissance of 1988, Hester and Mercado-Allinger felt
that the site was very likely totally destroyed, but
subsequent investigations have shown that most of
the damage was confined to the midden deposits of
Early, Middle, and Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric
ages. Underlying deposits of earliest Archaic and
Paleoindian ages are extensive and almost completely escaped the decades of plundering (Collins
2002, 2007).
Environmental Setting
Located in south-central Bell County, the Gault
site is situated at the head of a spring-fed stream valley near the eastern boundary of the Edwards Plateau
(see Figure 1). Sites and locations such as this have
long been recognized as dynamic and hospitable to
humans. A diversity of plants, animals, and physical
resources abound in a setting termed the Balcones

8

Texas Archeological Society

Canyonlands (Kutac and Caran 1994). Here canyons
are carved by springs and streams into the Edwards
Plateau, perpendicular to the Balcones Escarpment,
thereby making geology, soils, climate, and hydrology the underlying factors contributing to the region’s
physiographic uniqueness and economic viability.
As mapped by the Bureau of Economic Geology
(Barnes 1974), the Gault site is on and around Quaternary Alluvium and lower Cretaceous sedimentary
rocks, including the Georgetown Formation, Edwards Limestone, and Comanche Peak Limestone.
These Cretaceous limestones support prolific modern range and farm land as well as human, animal,
and plant populations. They also contain a great
amount of fresh water (Sellards et al. 1932). The
Edwards Limestone, where exposed, provides an
abundance of high-quality chert, and where buried,
is the primary water-bearing stratum of the Edwards
Aquifer, one of the most productive aquifers in the
southwestern United States (MacLay 1979). Water
of the Edwards Aquifer issues forth from a great
number of springs in the eastern portion of the Edwards Plateau, and in the vicinity of Gault, numerous small, reliable springs form the headwaters of
Buttermilk Creek. While there are reliable springs,
weather is highly variable; topography of the region, cool dry Pacific air, and warm humid Gulf
air contribute to erratic patterns of precipitation.
Humid maritime air flows inland perpendicularly to
the Balcones Escarpment, and when the moisturerich air reaches the topographic feature, it is lifted,
moisture condensed, and unloaded (Caran and Baker
1986; Slade 1986). Orographic cloud bursts may
release a relatively high amount of precipitation on
a confined area in a short period of time, resulting in
the region’s tributaries and river levels to rise rapidly
(Woodruff 1979). Drought, however, is also a common feature of Central Texas weather; there is not a
decade in the twentieth century that did not include
drought (Bomar 1983:153). Over greater periods of
time, the region’s climate is characterized as moist
with mild winters, wet all seasons to dry summers
(east to west), and with long hot summers (Köppen
Climatic Classification: Cfa-Csa, east to west), but
climates are variable as well (Mauldin et al. 2010).
Native plants and animals are well adapted to these
weather and climatic vagaries. In any given year,
some of the biota will thrive as others are stressed,
but in another year conditions may reverse as will
the success of the various species.
Flora and fauna of the region comprise a mixture of biological characteristics of neighboring

regions; Balcones Canyonlands are found at the
transitional zone between the Edwards Plateau to
the west and the coastal plain to the east with the
Balcones Escarpment along the juncture. In other
words, the Balcones Canyonlands are a regional
ecotone. Blair (1950) noted that the Balconian
Province contains flora and fauna found throughout
the state plus endemic animals; however, Blair’s
Balconian Province does not quite encompass
Gault’s location. Ellis et al. (1995) point out that
there are many discrepancies in the delineation of
natural and cultural regions, or rather, that there
is tremendous diversity in the environment of
Central Texas—its environmental heterogeneity
may in fact be its most significant characteristic.
Nonetheless, the Balcones Canyonlands support
generally robust ecological systems composed of
evergreen and deciduous woodlands containing a
variety of trees. Neighboring Edwards Plateau flora
is a grassland-woodland-shrub land mosaic, where
grasslands separate copses of woody vegetation,
and the Blackland Prairie consists of bunch grasses
and interspersed oak, juniper, and mesquite (Gould
1962; Ellis et al. 1995). At a slightly smaller scale,
Gault is situated in a local ecotone, where flora
and fauna of the Lampasas Cut Plain, to the north,
and Balcones Canyonlands intermingle. These two
environmental zones differ in that the Lampasas Cut
Plain, although considerably disturbed by modern
agricultural practices, supports a greater amount of
grassy vegetation, and Post and Blackjack oaks supplant Plateau live oak to the north (Kutac and Caran
1994). Tightly coupled with bedrock and flora, soils
are a result and recorder of conditions and events.
Described by Huckabee et al. (1977), soils in the
vicinity of Gault are Speck series in upland settings,
Real association along valley side walls, and Lewisville silty clay and Frio silty clay along streams.
Lewisville and Frio silty clays are deep and contain
the best potential for archeological site integrity,
due to their rapid depositional processes (primarily
from fluvial and colluvial action with minor aeolian
contributions).
This environment favored a long human
subsistence based on hunting and gathering and
mitigated against any food production depending
upon cultigens less adapted to local conditions. This
makes Central Texas an ideal laboratory for studying hunter-gatherer adaptations over the entire span
of its prehistory (Collins 1995, 2002, 2004). Gault,
like many other archeological sites along spring-fed
streams in the Balcones Canyonlands, has been an

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas
attractive place for human habitation from the Late
Pleistocene to the present.
Distributions
Each of the point type distributions we review
is informally referred to as a realm and is here
presented in approximate chronological order by
point type name and discussed briefly according
to its geographic extent, spatial relationship to the
Gault site, inferred paleoclimatic context, inferred

9

presence or absence of bison, and in some cases
other aspects of its realm. A series of maps depict
each of these realms.
Clovis (Figure 3)
This early projectile point type is very widely,
although unevenly, distributed across North and
Central America (Bradley et al. 2010), and has been
reported, at least sparsely, in all of the physiographic
areas of Texas (Meltzer and Bever 1995; Bousman
et al. 2004). It is diagnostic of the most prolific and

Figure 3. Realm of Clovis projectile points during an interval of transition from xeric to mesic climate with bison present.
The gray shading on this map, as well as on the rest to follow, represents the known distribution of the various point types.

10

Texas Archeological Society

best defined component documented at the Gault
site, from which the Clovis realm extends great distances in all directions (Bradley et al. 2010). Clovis
points were long thought to have been an indicator
of a specialized big game hunting mode of subsistence, a notion no longer considered valid (Collins
2002 ). Very late in the Clovis interval, or possibly
afterwards, climate shifted from xeric to mesic,
perhaps precipitously (Clark et al. 2002). Bison as
well as other large Pleistocene mammals were present across the state. The presence of Clovis points in
highly varied environments of its total realm in the
Americas is a strong indicator of a generalized rather
than a specialized adaptation. Clovis sites are generally ephemeral in most environments across the
state, but along the ecotonal boundary between the
Edwards Plateau and the Gulf Coastal Plain larger
and more complex sites are found, notably Pavo
Real and Gault (Collins 2007). It has been noted
that this distribution is not unlike that seen during
Archaic intervals characterized, for example, by
Andice/Bell/Calf Creek and by Montell/Castroville
points when large camp sites were occupied by foragers around the southern margin of the high plains
and large animal kill sites (mammoth and bison in
Clovis times, bison in Archaic times) were dotted
across the plains (Collins 2007). An adaptation to
relatively dry conditions based on generalized foraging in the better-watered zone along the Balcones
ecotone, combined with large game hunting on the
plains, probably by specialized hunting parties, is
indicated by this pattern.
Folsom, Midland (Figure 4)
The Folsom/Midland interval falls within the
Younger Dryas climatic interval, which developed
rapidly and produced relatively cool, moist conditions across Texas. It was a time of relatively
abundant bison and Folsom and Midland projectile
points and other tools evidently are diagnostic of
a specialized bison-hunting subsistence adaptation characterized by high mobility (Amick 1996;
Meltzer 2006). Folsom points are distributed widely
across Texas and beyond, primarily on the plains and
adjacent grasslands, a correlation noted by Largent
et al. (1991) and Meltzer (2006). Other than its
absence from the southern Brush Country, much of
the Coastal Prairie, and the Southern Piney Woods,
the Midland distribution is almost identical to that
of Folsom, although fewer finds are reported. As
Largent et al. (1991) stress in their study, Folsom

finds occur across part of the Edwards Plateau, but
the numbers of such finds are small; the same is true
of Midland. This may reflect unpredictable bison
occurrences on the Plateau during Folsom/Midland
times. At such sites as Pavo Real (Collins 2003) and
Gault (Collins 2002), where chert crops out some
distance removed from the prairie grass lands, the
Folsom/Midland components are characterized by
depleted and discarded stone tools and by debris
from the production of new stone tools. Gault is in
the east central part of the Folsom/Midland realm.
Folsom, Plainview/Goshen, and Cody seem to be the
main early prehistoric intervals that reflect the specialized big-game hunting adaptation once thought
to characterize all Paleoindian intervals (Wormington 1957). The limited use of Gault during these
intervals is probably best explained by the adaptive
focus on open grassland habitats.
Dalton (Figure 5)
The major distribution of Dalton in Texas is a
narrow, arching southwestward extension from that
part of the Dalton homeland in eastern Oklahoma,
southwestern Arkansas, and northern Louisiana onto
the eastern Edwards Plateau. This distribution is
almost coterminous with the prairie lands. There are
a few widely scattered finds of Dalton reported from
farther west on the High Plains and Lower Pecos.
We suspect these latter numbers would be greater
were not numerous Dalton points on the plains being
mistakenly called “Meserve.” Dalton is poorly dated
(Justice 1995), but may be a near contemporary of
Folsom/Midland (Morse and Goodyear 1973), and
therefore may date to the Younger Dryas, during
which time bison would have been present. This
could account for the scattered finds of Dalton on
the High Plains, in the Lower Pecos, and the eastern
prairies; however, good archeological associations
of bison remains with Dalton are lacking. Gault
is near the southwestern edge of the major Dalton
realm of Texas, but is far to the east when the western finds are considered.
Wilson (see Figure 5)
These early corner-notched points are distributed
across the southern part of the state in a broad band
from the Piney Woods parallel to the Gulf Coast,
across the southern part of the Edwards Plateau and
eastern-most Trans Pecos, and onto the southern part
of the High Plains (primarily in the upper drainage

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas

11

Figure 4. Realms of Folsom and Midland projectile points during an interval of mesic climate with bison present.

basin of the Colorado River). They are also found on
the Blackland Prairie and Oaks Woods and Prairies.
The age of Wilson suggests that it was in use as the
climate was well along in shifting from mesic to
xeric and probably after bison had departed much
of the state. Gault is near the north central part of
this realm. Since the Wilson type (Dial et al. 1998;
Weir 1985) has not been defined as long as many of
the types discussed here and because its general size
and outline are similar to other, better-known cornernotched types, we suspect that it is under represented
in the literature. Our data are based on rigorously
classified specimens according to the subtle attributes
that define the type (Dial et al. 1998).

Scottsbluff (see Figure 5)
Scottsbluff points are a Paleoindian type widely
distributed across the Great Plains of North America.
Their realm in Texas covers the eastern woodlands
and prairies, a part of the Coastal Prairie in South
Texas, most of the Edwards Plateau and adjacent
margin of the Rolling Plains, and a narrow swath
on the eastern side of the High Plains, primarily in
the basin of the Colorado River, but also in a limited
area of the uppermost Brazos River basin. The dating of Scottsbluff and its general lack of association
with bison remains in Texas places it relatively late
in the transition of climate from mesic toward xeric

12

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Realms of Late Paleoindian projectile point types during a transition from mesic to xeric climate evidently with
bison populations declining; types Dalton and Wilson occur relatively early in this interval, types Scottsbluff and St.
Mary’s Hall occur near the middle of the interval, and types Golondrina and Angostura occur relatively late in this interval.

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas
and it seems to fall mostly if not completely in a
period of bison absence. As a distinctive type that
has been known for several decades, the Scottsbluff
realm is probably more reliably demarcated by its
point distributional data than Wilson (above) and
St Mary’s Hall (below). Gault is situated near the
center of its realm in Texas.
St Mary’s Hall (see Figure 5)
The realm for St. Mary’s Hall points is based
on rigorously applied criteria derived from the
subtle attributes by which the type was defined
only 12 years ago (Dial et al. 1998). The realm is
a tight arc along and near the eastern fringe of the
Edwards Plateau on and near the Balcones Escarpment, from near the Gault site almost to the Lower
Pecos with two small outliers on the High Plains.
This lanceolate Paleoindian point with concave
base and ground lateral edges has long been, and
continues to be, confused with Plainview points, so
its distributional data are probably masked by many
misidentifications. It dates to the latter part of the
shift from mesic toward xeric climatic conditions
when bison were evidently absent from all but the
outlying parts of the realm.
Golondrina (see Figure 5)
Late in the swing toward xeric from mesic
conditions when bison were largely absent from the
state, Golondrina points occurred in a realm covering most of the southern half of the state except
for the upper and lower reaches of the coast and
the eastern woodlands. The realm extends into the
southern part of the rolling plains and across the
Basin and Range. It also extends northward through
the Blackland Prairie. Gault is located in the east
central part of this realm.
Angostura (see Figure 5)
The realm of Angostura points covers all of the
central part of the state with extensions southward
across the southern Coastal Prairie and most of the
Brush Country, eastward onto the upper Coastal
Prairie and parts of the Piney Woods, northward
onto the Grand Prairie and Blackland Prairie, northwestward along the western fringe of the Rolling
Plains, and westward across the Lower Pecos and
into the eastern Basin and Range. Angostura points
bridge the transition between the Late Paleoindian

13

and the Early Archaic as conditions were becoming
xeric and bison were generally absent from the state.
Gault is near the center of this diverse realm.
Hoxie (Figure 6)
A very dry climatic interval prevailed during
the time Hoxie points were in use. This early Holocene condition is the beginning of the Altithermal,
a prolonged dry interval which affected human adaptations widely in the northern hemisphere (Booth
et al. 2005; deMunocal 2001; Munoz et al. 2010;
Nelson et al. 2004; Roberts et al. 2011). Its impact
on those people whose realm includes Central
Texas is clearly seen in the constricted distribution of Hoxie points in the better watered areas of
east central Texas along the eastern margin of the
Edwards Plateau, adjacent areas of the Blackland
Prairie, western Oaks Woods and Prairies, and interior Coastal Prairie. Bison were absent from the
state at this time and at the Wilson-Leonard site the
exploitation of aquatic resources is a prominent part
of the subsistence regime (Collins 1998), indicating
an oasis-like focus to settlement in the Balcones
Canyonlands area. The diversity of biotic resources
at and near Gault as well as the occurrence of chert
and reliable water made this an ideal locality near
the west-central margin of the Hoxie realm.
Gower (see Figure 6)
A near contemporary of Hoxie, Gower points
occur during the very dry interval of the early Holocene and occupy a similar though larger realm
that extends across the Edwards Plateau to the
Lower Pecos, Rolling Plains, lower Coastal Prairie,
and parts of the Blackland Prairie. This constitutes
a moderately diverse array of habitats with Gault
located toward the northeastern extent of the realm.
Bison were absent during this interval and generalized hunting and gathering seem to be indicated for
the adaptations related to Gower points.
Martindale (Figure 7)
Following the extreme xeric conditions experienced during the Hoxie and Gower intervals,
climate in the region began to ameliorate from xeric
to less xeric. Bison remained absent, or nearly so,
across the state. Martindale points exhibit a very
distinctive and somewhat curious distribution. This
realm is similar to that of Gower but with minor

14

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Realms of Hoxie and Gower projectile points during an interval of xeric climate with bison absent.

expansion to the east, an extension south across
the Brush Country and lower Coastal Prairie, and
two significant westerly extensions, one across the
lower Pecos and into the Big Bend area of the Basin
and Range province of the Trans Pecos and another
across the Rolling Plains and up the Brazos River
drainage onto the High Plains. Gault is situated near
the east central margin of this realm. From their contexts in Central Texas sites, a generalized hunting
and gathering life way is suggested for both Gower
and Martindale. However, too little is known about
the nature of Martindale interval adaptations in
these two westerly extensions of range to offer any

explanation, but it would seem that the implications
are worthy of a concerted inquiry.
Uvalde (see Figure 7)
Uvalde points are roughly contemporary with
Martindale points and occur during the same trend
from xeric to less xeric conditions. Bison were evidently absent or nearly so. The Uvalde point realm
extends south from the Grand Prairie, along the
Blackland Prairie, and across the Coastal Prairie to
the central coast and westward across the Edwards
Plateau, Central Mineral Region, lower Rolling

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas

15

Figure 7. Realms of Martindale and Uvalde projectile points during a transition from xeric to less xeric climate with
bison absent.

Plains, Lower Pecos, and into the east central part
of the Basin and Range. This realm encompasses a
relatively diverse mix of habitats from the eastern
prairies to the comparatively arid central Trans-Pecos,
with Gault near its east central margin.
Andice/Bell (Figure 8)
Proxy environmental data indicate that a brief,
partial amelioration of the Altithermal occurred at
about 5500 to 6000 B.P. across Texas and beyond.

Conditions were significantly less xeric, bison
returned to Texas for the first time in nearly 4000
years and remained for perhaps 500 years, only to
disappear for another 2000 years. Andice points are
large, thin, broad-bladed forms adapted to hunting
large game and are commonly found in association
with bison remains (as are the morphologically
similar and partly contemporary Calf Creek points)
(Collins 1995, 2004; Wyckoff 1995). Bell points
are a regional type that commonly co-occur with
Andice, but they do not have as strongly expressed

16

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Realm of Andice/Bell projectile points during a brief interval of partial amelioration of xeric climate with
bison present.

basal notching or such large and broad blades. The
extensive geographic occurrence of Andice and
Bell points across virtually all but the northern
High Plains and western Basin and Range of Texas
places Gault in the east central part of their realm.
Overall this distribution suggests an adaptation
to relatively favorable climatic conditions and an
important subsistence role of bison. Andice and
Bell are probably regional variants of the morphologically highly similar Calf Creek points of

eastern Oklahoma, Eastern Kansas, Arkansas, and
Missouri.
Travis/Nolan (Figure 9)
Following the previous less xeric interval, xeric conditions returned, bison disappeared, and the
broad, thin Andice and Bell points were replaced
by long, narrow, relatively thick Travis points and
moderately thin, broad Nolan points. These forms

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas

17

Figure 9. Realms of Bulverde, Travis/Nolan, and Taylor projectile points during an interval of xeric climate with bison absent.

18

Texas Archeological Society

are relatively widely distributed across the southern
two thirds of the state and most of the Basin and
Range region. They do not occur on the High Plains
nor in the northeastern areas of the state. Gault lies
in the east central part of this realm. It is not evident what factors might explain the inclusion of the
Trans-Pecos in their realms, and such an expanse of
the remainder of the state being frequented by users
of these point types during what is inferred to be a
relatively dry climate regime.
Bulverde (see Figure 9)
As another point type occurring during a time of
bison absence in the same xeric climatic interval as
the Travis and Nolan types, Bulverde points have a
very similar but somewhat more extensive distribution. Like Travis and Nolan points, Bulverde points
are absent from the High Plains, the extreme eastern
edge of the state, and far South Texas. Gault is in
the east central part of this realm, and as with Nolan
and Travis, it is unclear what factors might unite this
diverse realm during xeric times.
Taylor (see Figure 9)
Taylor points are anomalous among projectile
point forms in the Texas Archaic. They almost
always occur in low frequencies at the sites where
they are found and are morphologically quite distinctive triangular forms without stems. This is
another of the types dating within the xeric interval
along with Travis, Nolan, and Bulverde. Bison were
absent. The Taylor point realm is closely similar to
that of the other three forms in this interval without
the extension into more westerly Basin and Range.
Gault is centrally located in the Taylor realm. It is
once again not clear why this wide distribution occurs during a relatively dry climatic regime.
Pedernales (Figure 10)
Pedernales points are a hallmark of the Central
Texas Archaic with a distinctive form that occurs in
a large number of sites, often in very large numbers.
It falls into a period when climate is shifting from
relatively xeric to relatively mesic and when bison
are comparatively abundant. These points are found
over most of the state except far South Texas, the
rolling plains and much of the High Plains, and the
western Basin and Range. They are found across
the southern High Plains in the upper reaches of

the Colorado River drainage. Gault is in the east
central part of this realm. This overall distribution
seems consistent with relatively abundant rainfall
across the state.
Castroville (Figure 11)
The most pronounced mesic interval in the Halls
Cave proxy climatic data is between about 3500 and
1200 B.P. It is of shorter duration in the bog pollen
data, from roughly 2000 to 1000 B.P. Given the probability that the lack of robust chronological control in
the bog sections contributes to this marked discrepancy and the fact that the bison presence evidence seems
more in line with the longer mesic interval indicated
by the Hall’s Cave evidence, this discussion follows
the latter. Seven point types (Castroville, Montell,
Lange, Marshall, Marcos, Ensor, and Darl) fall into
this interval and all manifest relatively extensive but
not identical geographic realms. Castroville points are
found in the Blackland Prairie and westward across
the Grand Prairie, much of the Rolling Plains, the
Central Mineral Region, Edwards Plateau, Lower
Pecos, and the eastern fringe of the High Plains.
This was a time of relative bison abundance, and
Castroville points are found in direct association with
bison at both kill and habitation sites. The long, broad,
blades and robust hafting elements on this point style
are well suited for taking large game. Gault is situated
near the east central edge of this extensive realm.
Montell (see Figure 11)
Montell points share much of their geographic
distribution with that of the Castroville points, with
which they evidently are also contemporary. This is
a mesic time with bison present widely in the state.
Montell points co-occur with bison remains in Bone
Bed 2 at Bonfire Shelter, but it cannot be determined
if they were used in the same or separate bison
drive events. Montell points are found in a broad
swath from the eastern Basin and Range and Lower
Pecos areas in the west, across the Edwards Plateau,
Central Mineral Region, northern Brush Country,
southern Rolling Plains, and onto the Grand, Blackland, and Coastal prairies. Gault is located in the east
central part of this realm
Lange (see Figure 11)
Lange points are found over all of Texas except the southern Brush Country, the upper Coastal

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas

19

Figure 10. Realm of Pedernales projectile points during a transition from xeric to mesic climate with bison present.

Prairie, far western Basin and Range, and parts of
the High Plains. It is of interest that the intrusion
of Lange points onto the High Plains occurs in the
Colorado River and Red River drainage basins but
not in the Brazos River drainage. This is a mesic
interval and bison are widely present in the state.
This is another broad-bladed point well-suited for
bison hunting. Gault lies near the center of this
expansive realm.

Marshall (see Figure 11)
Marshall points are reported from the central
and eastern Basin and Range, Lower Pecos, Edwards
Plateau, Rolling Plains, and the eastern fringe of the
High Plains in the Red and Colorado river basins.
Gault lies near the eastern boundary of this range.
This distribution accumulated during a mesic interval
when bison were present, and the point form has the
attributes that are well suited for hunting big game.

20

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. Realms of Late Archaic projectile point types Darl, Ensor, Castroville, Montell, Lange, Marshall, and Marcos
during a mesic climatic interval with bison present.

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas
Marcos (see Figure 11)
Marcos points are one of the most widely distributed point types in Texas, covering all of the
state except the most extreme western Basin and
Range, the southernmost Brush Country, the gulfward edge of the Coastal Prairie, the eastern edge
of the Piney Woods, and the Red River valley. The
climate was mesic, bison were present, and Marcos
points are among the broad-bladed, wide-stemmed
points deemed well suited for bison hunting. Gault
lies a bit south and east of the center of this very
extensive realm.
Ensor (see Figure 11)
Ensor points date toward the end of the last
major mesic interval in the paleoclimatic history
of Texas. They are very widely distributed and are
contemporary with a bison presence in the state.
These points occur everywhere in the state except
the western fringe of the High Plains, the southern Brush Country, and the upper Coastal Prairie.
Among the points that are contemporary with bison,
Ensor points are toward the smaller, narrower size
range and have less robust hafting widths. Gault is
near the center of the Ensor realm.
Darl (see Figure 11)
These small narrow points with slender haft
elements are generally considered to be one of the
last Archaic dart point forms in the state. They fall
near the end of the last major mesic interval and
the end of a bison presence interval. Darl points are
found across the eastern half of the Edwards Plateau,
the northern half of the Brush Country, the Central
Mineral Region, parts of the Coastal Prairie some
distance from the coastline, the Oaks Woods and
Prairies, Blackland Prairie, and the Grand Prairie;
they extend across the southern fringe of the Rolling Plains and just to the edge of the High Plains
primarily in the Brazos River drainage basin. Bison
populations seem to have been meager. Gault is near
the center of the Darl realm.
Scallorn (Figure 12)
Climatic conditions were shifting from mesic to
xeric and bison were absent across the state during
the Scallorn interval. As the first major arrow point
to appear in Central Texas, Scallorn points evidently

21

reflect a significant technological shift to the bow
and arrow. These points are widespread across the
state and also occur more frequently than any other
type in anatomical positions in burial contexts that
suggest fatal arrow wounds (Prewitt 1974, 1982).
This is also a time when strife is evidenced widely
across the southwestern and eastern United States
(Cordell 1997; Milner et al. 1991). The Scallorn
realm is quite extensive, occupying all of the state
except the southern part of the Brush Country, lower
Coastal Prairie, western fringe of the Piney Woods
(more specifically, along the Trinity River basin),
and the western fringe of the High Plains. Gault is
in the east central part of this realm.
Perdiz (Figure 13)
The arrow point type representing the last defined prehistoric interval in Central Texas is Perdiz.
There is an unexplained and significant divergence
in the climate indicated by the bog pollen data and
that based on shrews from Hall’s Cave. Climate had
shifted to a brief mesic interval, according to the bog
pollen record, which would seem to correspond to
a return of bison to the state. A strongly expressed
dry interval is indicated by the Hall’s Cave evidence.
Since the Hall’s Cave sequence is better dated, it carries a higher level of confidence, but in other dry intervals, bison seem to disappear from the state. The
matter is not resolved and may be fairly complex,
perhaps with a tipping point reached in the shrew
populations near Hall’s Cave while less impact is
recorded in the pollen data in the bogs. Evidence
abounds that these points were used successfully
in bison hunting. Perdiz points are found all across
the state except the northern High Plains and the
Rolling Plains. They are also relatively abundant,
especially considering the relatively brief interval
during which they were in use. Gault is near the
center of the Perdiz realm.
Conclusions
People who occupied the Gault site from time
to time throughout the known prehistory of Central
Texas were hunters and gatherers and, therefore,
not tethered to gardening or farming plots. They
undoubtedly moved often and, at least at some
times in the past, probably roamed over a wide
territory. Distributions of time sensitive projectile
point types are sometimes inferred to reflect the

22

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 12. Realm of Scallorn arrow points during a transition from mesic to xeric climate with bison absent.

extent and nature of such territories at least to
some extent, as LeRoy Johnson has done for the
users of Scottsbluff points (Johnson 1989b) and
for those (“folk” in Johnson’s terms) responsible
for the Toyah archeological manifestation (Johnson
1994). But that inference rests in part on an assumed
correspondence between material culture (including
arrow point forms) and “a people,” which may not
be a reliable assumption. We take an alternative view

that infers only that those people occupying any
given site and using a particular style of projectile
point contribute to the overall distribution of that
point style by their own actions, but that there may
very well be other people using that same style who
are ethnically, socially, politically, linguistically,
or otherwise distinct at least to some degree. In
other words, we are seeing a tangible relict of some
form of sharing of a material or set of materials.

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas

23

Figure 13. Realm of Perdiz arrow points during an interval with bison present.

The sharing may be little more than reliance on a
common technology involving weapons or weapon
systems. Users of that technology might even have
had hostile relations with other users.
The climate model we use is very generalized
with smoothed curves, and depicts a single variable—moisture. This is suitable for a preliminary
look to see how climate might have influenced the
extent to which users of a specific point type were

dispersed over the territory of Texas. Were a climatic
history built on better data and more variables used,
one might expect the results to be more informative.
We suggest that this preliminary excursion indicates
that a more detailed study would be warranted. We
reiterate that this study only considers projectile
point forms that are present at the Gault site and that
also have a sufficiently robust regional data base to
support an assessment of their distributions.

24

Texas Archeological Society

One conclusion that is evident in our findings is
that changing moisture regimes have had an influence on projectile point distributions, but that it is
equally evident that other factors are also at play. It
can be assumed that population increased from low
at the beginning to high at the end of the human
prehistory of Texas (undoubtedly with considerable
variation in rate at times [Prewitt 1985]). Population increase can be further assumed to have likely
produced a more crowded landscape with increased
political diversity and potential for competition over
resources.
Thoms (2009) infers that the hot-rock cooking
technology so characteristic of much of Texas prehistory reflects a response to the need for processing
lower-yield plant foods due to population pressure.
Hot-rock cooking left a conspicuous technological
record, and there are probably many less evident
ways knowledge of the region and its potential increased over time and afforded groups better ways
to deal with times of stressed resources.
Two of the past moisture regime intervals were
mesic. One is from ca. 11,000 to 10,500 B.P. with
only two dominant projectile point types (Folsom
and Midland). The other is from ca. 3000 to 1200
B.P., with at least seven Central Texas projectile
point types. In the first, Folsom defines an extensive realm based largely on bison hunting. Midland
points show a somewhat less extensive distribution
but probably also represent activities that depended
upon bison hunting. In the second, nearly 8000
years later, bison were being hunted and multiple
projectile point types were in use. Collectively these
seven types are also widespread and individually include four that are very widespread (Ensor, Marcos,
Marshall, and Lange) and three that are moderately
widespread (Castroville, Montell, and Darl). By
the time Darl projectile points were in vogue, bison
may have become less abundant as the region was
on the cusp of a shift to more xeric conditions.
Folsom and Midland may well be the signature of
one or a few closely affiliated cultural groups of
the region, whereas by the later mesic interval the
cultural and political reality may have been more
complex. We suggest that it is unlikely that any of
these seven projectile point types hallmark a restricted cultural grouping. If, in fact, the region was
a mosaic of many cultural or political territories, a
“Marshall People,” for example, would not likely
be free to roam as extensively as the distribution of
Marshall projectile points might suggest. We would
hypothesize that a projectile point form shared by

multiple groups might be the better explanation for
the observed dispersion of each of these seven projectile point forms. A possible alternative to this is
an hypothesis that the group or groups using a particular style of point form maintained an aggregated
population in a home territory within its realm but
periodically dispatched small, far-ranging hunting
parties who left their distinctive projectile points
over a much wider area. Johnson (1994) offered a
similar characterization of the Toyah interval and
Perdiz points.
There are five xeric intervals. The proxy climate
data identify the earliest (ca. 9000 to 8000 B.P.) as
having been quite severe. Two point types mark
this interval. These are Hoxie, with the most limited
realm evidenced in this study, and Gower, with a
less limited, but still not extensive, distribution. At
Wilson-Leonard, this interval was characterized
by the greatest reliance on aquatic resources in the
site’s 11,000 years of occupation (Collins 1998).
The eastern margin of the Edwards Plateau was
evidently an oasis setting during significant parts of
this xeric interval.
Some amelioration of the early xeric phase
occurred ca. 8000 to 7000 B.P. and two projectile
point types, Uvalde and Martindale, were in use.
Uvalde projectile points manifest a fairly limited
realm; Martindale points define a somewhat more
expansive realm overlapping with that of the Uvalde
point but also extending farther south and northwest.
The northwestern expansion extends all the way
onto the High Plains, but only within the Brazos
River drainage.
Amelioration of xeric conditions continued,
although we interpret the climate data to suggest
that it was still drier than today’s average. From
about 6000 to 5500 B.P. there was a brief return of
bison and hunters using Andice and Bell point types
engaged in bison hunting over a large realm. This
hunting extended into the Pecos River valley and
onto the High Plains in the Brazos River drainage,
but not onto the rest of the High Plains or farther into
the Basin and Range area. More severe drought conditions returned for the interval from 5500 to 3500
B.P. Four point types, Bulverde, Nolan, Travis, and
Taylor, were employed during that time. Bulverde
was widely distributed except for the High Plains,
but it was present in the Brazos River drainage up
to the edge of the High Plains. Nolan and Travis
show more restricted realms through Central Texas
and westward into the Basin and Range with minor
reaches to the south and north, but not to the east.

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas
Taylor, which is a somewhat aberrant triangular type
in Central Texas, is found relatively widely and in
diverse environments. In the Late Prehistoric xeric
interval of ca. 800 to 500 B.P., bison were present and a relatively new technology, the bow and
arrow, was in use with arrows tipped with Perdiz
arrow points. Pottery and some use of cultivated
corn is part of the adaptive stance of those who used
Perdiz arrow points in a realm covering much of
Texas. Robert A. Ricklis and Leroy Johnson see this
pattern somewhat differently, with Ricklis (1994)
interpreting it as a technological complex shared by
multiple groups and Johnson (1994 ) finding a single
widespread ethnic group. In the succeeding Colonial
intervals, Spanish and French explorers found numerous distinct groups across the region (Campbell
1988; Wade 2003), but they also encountered at least
one small group (Juan Sabeata’s band of Jumano)
whose wide ranging travels extended over much of
the state. However, it appears that a realm consisting
of multiple groups sharing a suite of material traits
better fits with both the archeological evidence of
this interval and the ethnohistorical evidence of the
immediately following early historic interval.
Two intervals are times of transition from xeric
to mesic conditions. The earliest at ca. 11,000 B.P.
was the time when Clovis projectile points were in
use. More detailed climatic reconstructions show
the dry interval to have actually ended abruptly.
Clovis was very widespread, perhaps partly due to
a relatively sparse human population. But this was
not the colonization of an empty realm by nomadic
big-game hunters as there were clearly at least a few
people present before Clovis (Collins and Bradley
2008) and Clovis exhibits a generalized hunting and
gathering adaptation that included the taking of big
game (Collins 2007). It is likely that the apparent
wide expanse of this realm is strongly influenced
by the big game hunting, whereas the concentration
of larger camp sites along the south and east margin of the Edwards Plateau is indicative of broader
spectrum foraging (Collins 2007). The argument
that archeological Clovis is the result of the spread
of “a people” versus the alternative that it is a
techno-complex shared by multiple peoples must be
viewed in the much broader context of the “Clovis
conundrum” (Collins, in press). The brief interval
of Clovis, perhaps only 300 years (Waters and Stafford 2007), and the distribution of its distinctive
stone working technology from the Atlantic to the
Pacific and from Canada to Venezuela (Bradley et
al. 2010) in many contrasting environments raises

25

the daunting question of how this might have happened. It seems entirely implausible that “a single
people” could have spread so far so quickly in so
many environments with little or no adjustment in
their stone-tool production behavior. On the other
hand, it seems equally implausible that a technology
of any kind could be spread across multiple peoples
who were present in North, Central, and South
America (Collins, in press) without each imparting
refinements, adjustments, or other changes. A later
transition from xeric to mesic climate occurred between ca. 3500 and 2500 B.P. and it, too, is manifest
primarily by one Central Texas projectile point type:
the Pedernales. Pedernales projectile points occur
widely in Texas other than in the far west and the
far north. This realm expands westerly from Central
Texas into the Pecos River drainage of the Basin and
Range region and onto the High Plains in the upper
Colorado River drainage. Bison were evidently
present. If these users of Pedernales points spread
across much of the state while hunting bison, their
absence from the Brazos, Red, and Canadian River
drainages might be the result of resistance by other
bison-hunting groups in those areas.
Two climatic intervals were transitional from
mesic to xeric. One occurred between 11,000 and
9000 B.P. in what archeologists refer to as the Late
Paleoindian. The other occurred in the Late Prehistoric between about 1200 and 800 B.P. Given the
long duration of the earlier climatic interval, it was
undoubtedly a time of climatic fluctuations that
are masked in the simplified scheme we use. Also,
because of its long duration, this climatic interval
witnessed considerable change in projectile point
forms with six named types being considered here.
There is not a good internal chronology for the point
types of the Late Paleoindian, but enough is known
to at least place types Wilson and Dalton toward
the earlier part of the interval and types Scottsbluff,
St. Mary’s Hall, Golondrina, and Angostura in the
later part. Bison were evidently more abundant in
the earlier, and less abundant in the later, parts of
the Late Paleoindian. Earlier Wilson and Dalton
points both exhibit moderately-sized realms with
a coherent eastern spread and a dispersed western
expansion. Wilson is concentrated closer to the
Gulf Coast with a narrow span across the Edwards
Plateau, the Lower Pecos, the Pecos River valley,
and along the Colorado River drainage near and
onto the High Plains. This could be interpreted as
an adaptation to bison exploitation in the prairies
and grasslands of this entire realm, but better data

26

Texas Archeological Society

associating Wilson points with bison hunting would
be needed to support the inference. The full Dalton
realm extends across the southeastern United States
with only a minor area across northeastern Texas
and the eastern Edwards Plateau and isolated occurrences in the Lower Pecos, northwestern most
Edwards Plateau, and the far northern High Plains.
This is another distribution that could reflect bison
hunting in Texas and it is interesting that the Dalton
and Wilson realms are almost entirely separate with
very little overlap. Neither form is adequately dated.
With Wilson occurring between 9500 and 10,000
B.P. at Wilson-Leonard (Bousman 1998a) and Dalton said to date between roughly 9900 and 10,500
B.P. (Morse and Goodyear 1973), there is the possibility of some temporal overlap of these two types.
Following Wilson and Dalton in the Late Paleoindian are Scottsbluff, St. Mary’s Hall, Golondrina, and Angostura point forms. Scottsbluff is
another extremely widespread type that occurs
across the Plains and Prairies of North America
from northern Louisiana to northern Alberta, and
it was used in bison hunting. Much of its realm
in Texas is grassland except for its eastern occurrences in the Piney Woods, but overall it is a
distribution that would be expected of use by bison
hunters. St. Mary’s Hall points are concentrated
along the Balcones Escarpment with outliers on
the northern High Plains. This is another example
of a distribution that might reflect a concentrated
territory of foragers along the well-watered edge
of the Edwards Plateau who also deployed hunting parties onto the High Plains, supposedly in
search of bison. Overall, the Golondrina realm
is a broad arc through the prairies and along the
eastern Edwards Plateau with a large extension
across the Lower Pecos and the southern Basin and
Range and a minor expansion along the Colorado
River drainage into the Rolling Plains. Almost all
of this offers proximity of grasslands to ecotones
along the Edwards Plateau, the Rio Grande and its
tributaries, and the mountain ranges in the Basin
and Range, and thereby affording resources well
suited to broad-spectrum hunting and gathering.
Angostura style points span the transition from the
Late Paleoindian into the Early Archaic and seem
to occur when it has become dry and bison were
largely gone from the region, at least in Central
Texas. The large expanse of contrasting habitats
incorporated into the Angostura realm does not

suggest any adaptive specialization and may reflect
multiple territories of groups sharing a common
technology.
Climate and physical geography in Texas combine to offer archeologists an ideal opportunity to
investigate human adaptations to contrasting and
frequently changing conditions. Eastern Texas is
better watered than is western Texas, and the intervening transitional zone has migrated westerly in
wetter times and easterly in dryer times. The physiography of western Texas offers numerous ecotones
between open areas which are potentially grasslands
and contrasting areas of relief, sheltered localities,
and reliable water. Examples are the margin of the
Edwards Plateau, the uplands and canyons of the
Lower Pecos, the caprock along the edge of the High
Plains, and the mountains of the Basin and Range.
The degree to which each of these presented suitable
resources varied with climate changes over time.
We have offered competing hypotheses that at
various times in the prehistoric past, relatively widespread realms were unlikely to be the result of occupation or movements of a single group of people and
therefore evidenced technology shared across social
boundaries, or, alternatively, that a single group occupying a portion of its realm might deploy small,
wide-ranging hunting parties who might disperse
diagnostic artifacts over the remainder of the realm.
This latter hypothesis is most viable if couched in
terms of the more restricted area of occupation being
centered on one of the many ecotones found across
the state and the more dispersed hunting parties
moved across the open areas. Careful and detailed
examination of the nature of the localities where
projectile points comprising a realm were found
would be an initial task. Castroville points occur
in large residential sites with burned rock middens
in Central Texas, but tend to occur in kill sites and
more ephemeral camp sites or as isolated finds in
the Lower Pecos and on the High Plains, a close
fit to the ecotonal residential model coupled with
dispersed hunting parties.
We hope to stimulate further inquiry along
these and other lines using better paleoclimatic reconstructions, improved artifact typologies, broader
ranges of artifact categories, and improved chronological precision. A key to any success that this may
afford will come from scholars employing wider
regional perspectives than usual. Also, a bit of direct
historical reasoning derived from the ethnohistorical
record of Texas would be beneficial.

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas
References Cited
Amick, D. S.
1996 Regional patterns of Folsom Mobility and land use
in the American Southwest. World Archaeology 27
(3):411-426.
Barnes, V. E.
1974 Geologic Atlas of Texas: Austin Sheet. Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Bement, L. C., E. L. Lundelius, Jr., and R. A. Ketcham
2005 Hoax or History: A Bison Skull with Embedded
Calf Creek Projectile Point. Plains Anthropologist
50:221-226.
Black, S. L.
1989 Central Texas Plateau Prairies. In From the Gulf to
the Rio Grande: Human Adaptations in Central,
South, and Lower Pecos Texas. By T. R. Hester, S.
L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K.
J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 17-38. Research
Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.
Blair, W. F.
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G. W.
1983 Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Booth, R. K., S. T. Jackson, S. L. Forman, J. E. Kutzbach, E.
A. Bettis III, J. Kriegs, and D. K. Wright
2005 A severe centennial-scale drought in midcontinental
North America 4200 years ago and apparent global
linkages. The Holocene 15(3):321-328.
Bousman, C. B.
1994 The Central Texas Pollen Record: A Reinterpretation.
Current Research in the Pleistocene 11:79-81.

1998a Late Paleoindian Archeology. In Wilson-Leonard:
An 11,000-YearArcheological Record of HunterGatherers in Central Texas. Vol. 1, Introduction,
Background, and Syntheses, assembled and edited
by M. B. Collins, pp. 161-210. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin and Report 10,
Archeology Studies Program, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation,
Austin.

1998b Paleoenvironmental Change in Central Texas: The
Palynological Evidence. Plains Anthropologist
43:201-219.
Bousman, C. B., B. W. Baker, and A. C. Kerr
2004 Paleoindian Archeology in Texas. In, The Prehistory
of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 15-97. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

27

Bradley, B. A., M. B. Collins, and A. Hemmings
2010 Clovis Technology. International Monographs in
Prehistory, Ann Arbor.
Campbell, T. N.
1988 The Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico: Selected Writings of Thomas Nolan Campbell. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Caran, S. C. and V. R. Baker.
1986 Flooding along the Balcones Escarpment, Central
Texas. In The Balcones Escarpment, edited by P. L.
Abbott and C. M. Woodruff, Jr., pp. 1-14. Published
for the Geological Society of America Annual Meeting, San Antonio, Texas.
Clark, P. U., N. G. Pisias, T. F. Stocker, and A. J. Weaver
2002 The role of the thermohaline circulation in abrupt
climate change. Nature 415:863-869.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 66:361-400.

1998 The Place of Wilson-Leonard in Southern Plains
Prehistory. In Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-Year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central
Texas. Vol. I, Introduction, Background, and Synthesis, assembled and edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 277291. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin and Report 10, Archeology Studies Program,
Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department
of Transportation, Austin.

2002 The Gault Site, Texas, and Clovis Research. Athena
Review 3(2):31-41, 100-101.

2003 Paleoindian Pavo Real. In Pavo Real (41BX52): A
Paleoindian and Archaic Camp and Workshop on the
Balcones Escarpment, South-Central Texas, by M.
B. Collins, D. B. Hudler, and S. Black, pp. 83-190.
Studies in Archeology 41, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
and Report 50, Archeological Studies Program,
Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department
of Transportation, Austin.

2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of
Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 101-126. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

2007 Discerning Clovis Subsistence from Stone Artifacts
and Site Distributions on the Southern Plains Periphery. In Foragers of the Terminal Pleistocene in North
America, edited by R. B. Walker and B. N. Driskell,
pp. 59-87. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

In press Initial Peopling of the Americas: Context, Findings, and Issues. In Cambridge World Prehistory,
edited by C. Renfrew and P. Bahn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

28

Texas Archeological Society

Collins, M. B. and B. A. Bradley
2008 Evidence for Pre-Clovis Occupation at the Gault Site
(41BL323), Central Texas. Current Research in the
Pleistocene 25:70-72.
Cordell, L. S.
1997 Archaeology of the Southwest. Academic Press, San
Diego
Davis, D. R.
1991 Prehistoric Artifacts of the Texas Indians. Special
Edition. Pecos Publishing Co., San Antonio.
deMenocal, P. B.
2001 Cultural Responses to Climate Change During the
Late Holocene. Science 292:667-673.
Dial, S. W., A. K. Kerr, and M. B. Collins
1998 Projectile Points. In Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000Year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in
Central Texas. Vol. 2, Chipped Stone Artifacts, assembled and edited by M. B. Collins, 313-445. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin and
Report 10, Archeology Studies Program, Report 10,
Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department
of Transportation, Austin.
Dillehay, T. D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes
on the Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist
19:180-196.
Ellis, C. J.
1997 Factors Influencing the Use of Stone Projectile Tips:
An Ethnographic Perspective. In Projectile Technology, edited by H. Knecht, pp. 37-74. Plenum Press,
New York.
Ellis, G. L.
1994 Archeological Overview and Theoretical Perspectives. In Significance Standards for Prehistoric
Cultural Resources: A Case Study from Fort Hood,
Texas, by G. L. Ellis, C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler,
and J. M. Jackson, pp. 41-99. Technical Report CRC94/04. Construction Engineering Research Laboratories, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Champaign,
Illinois.
Ellis, L. W., G. L. Ellis, and C. D. Frederick
1995 Implications of Environmental Diversity in the
Central Texas Archeological Region. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 66:401-426.
Gould, F. W.
1962 Texas Plants – A Checklist and Ecological Summary.
The Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas,
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College
Station.

Huckabee, J. W., Jr., D. R. Thompson, J. C. Wyrick, and E.
G. Pavlat.
1977 Soil Survey of Bell County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service,
in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Washington, D.C.
Johnson, E. and V. T. Holliday
1987 Lubbock Lake Artifact Assemblages. In Lubbock
Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern High
Plains, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 100-119. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1962 The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern
Texas, with a Preliminary Definition of the LaHarpe
Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32:141-284.

1987 A Plague of Phases: Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy
in Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:1-26.
1989a Classification of Stone Projectile Points by a Small
Texan Folk Community: A Case Study. Texas Journal of Science 41(2):194-203.

1989b Great Plains Interlopers in the Eastern Woodlands
during Paleo-Indian Times. Report No. 36. Office
of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
1994 The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk as Seen
from the Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16 of
Kimble County, Texas. Report 38. Office of the State
Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission and the
Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.

Justice, N. D.
1995 Stone Age Spear and Arrow Points of the Midcontinental and Eastern United States: A Modern
Survey and Reference. Indiana University Press,
Bloomington.
Kelley, J. C.
1947 The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the
Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
18:115-128.
Knecht, H.
1997 The History and Development of Projectile Technology Research. In Projectile Technology, edited by H.
Knecht, pp. 3-35. Plenum Press, New York.
Krieger, A. D.
1944 The Typological Concept. American Antiquity
9:271-288.
1947 Certain Projectile Points of the Early American
Hunters. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 18:7-27.

Collins, et al.—“Realms,” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points in Texas
Kutac, E. A. and S. C. Caran.
1994 Birds and Other Wildlife of South Central Texas.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Largent, F. B., M. R. Waters, and D. L. Carlson
1991 The Spatiotemporal Distribution and Characteristics
of Folsom Projectile Points in Texas. Plains Anthropologist 36:323-341.
Larkin, T. J. and G. W. Bomar
1983 Climatic Atlas of Texas. LP-192, Texas Department
of Water Resources, Austin
Maclay, R. W.
1979 Hydrogeology of the Edwards Limestone Reservoir.
In Stratigraphy of Edwards Group and Equivalents,
Eastern Edwards Plateau, Texas, edited by P. R.
Rose, pp. 51-58. South Texas Geological Society,
Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies,
and the Society of Economic Paleontologists and
Mineralogists Annual Meeting, San Antonio.
McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southwestern Texas: The Problem of the Paleo-Indian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:91-120.
Mauldin, R. P., J. Thompson, and L. Kemp
2010 Reconsidering the Role of Bison in the Terminal
Late Prehistoric (Toyah) Period in Texas. In Toyah
Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric Economic
and Social Processes, edited by N. Kenmotsu and D.
Boyd. Texas A&M University Press, College Station,
in press.
Meltzer, D. J.
2006 Folsom: New archaeological investigations of a classic Paleoindian bison kill. University of California
Press, Berkeley.
Meltzer, D. J. and M. R. Bever
1995 Paleoindians of Texas: An Update on the Texas
Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:47-81.
Milner, G. W., E. Anderson, and V. G. Smith
1991 Warfare in Late Prehistoric West Central Illinois.
American Antiquity 56(4):581-603.
Mitchell, J. L.
1976 A Tentative New Type of Late Paleo-Indian Point
from South Texas. La Tierra 3(1):20-22.
Morse, D. F. and A. C Goodyear
1973 The Significance of the Dalton Adz in Northeast
Arkansas. Plains Anthropologist 19:316-322.

29

Munoz, S. E., K. Gajewski, and M. C. Peros
2010 Synchronous environmental and cultural change
in the prehistory of the northeastern United States.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
107 (51):22008-22013.
Nelson, D. M., F. S. Hu, J. Tian, I. Stefanova, and T. A. Brown
2004 Response of C3 and C4 plants to middle-Holocene
climatic variation near the prairie-forest ecotone of
Minnesota. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 101(2):562-567.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County, Texas. Research Report 49.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

1982 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox, Loeve and Tombstone Bluff Sites in the Granger Lake
District of Central Texas. Archeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central
Texas, Volume IV, edited by T. R. Hays. Archeology
Program, Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas
State University, Denton.
1983 Andice: An Early Archaic Dart Point Type. La Tierra
10(3):1-6.

1985 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central
Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.

1995 Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:83-173.
Prewitt, E. R. and C. K. Chandler
1992 Axtell: A Middle Archaic Dart Point Type. La Tierra
19:15-20.
Ricklis, R. A.
1994 Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in
the Project Area during the Latter Part of the Late
Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric
Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley,
Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Roberts, N., D Brayshaw, C. Kuzucuoglu, R. Perez, and L.
Sadori
2011 The mid-Holocene climatic transition in the Mediterranean: Causes and consequences. The Holocene
21(1):3-13
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932 The Geology of Texas: Volume I, Stratigraphy. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas
at Austin.

30

Texas Archeological Society

Shafer, H. J.
1963 Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified
Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 34:57-81.
Slade, R. M., Jr.
1986 Large rainstorms along the Balcones Escarpment in
Central Texas. In The Balcones Escarpment, edited
by P. L. Abbott and C. M. Woodruff, Jr. pp. 15-20.
Published for the Geological Society of America
Annual Meeting, San Antonio, Texas.
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer, and R. E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Reservoir. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project No. 11. Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, University of Texas
at Austin.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Special Publication No. 1, Texas Archeological Society, and Bulletin No. 4, Texas Memorial Museum,
Austin.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25:1-562.
Thoms, A. V.
2009 Rocks of ages: propagation of hot-rock cookery in
western North America. Journal of Archaeological
Science 36(3)573-591.
Toomey, R. S., III
1993 Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal Changes at
Hall’s Cave, Kerr County, Texas. Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Texas at Austin.
Toomey, R. S. III, M. D. Blum, and S. Valastro, Jr.
1993 Late Quaternary Climates and Environments of
the Edwards Plateau, Texas. Global and Planetary
Change 7:299-320.

Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Texas Monthly Press, Austin
1999 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Gulf Publishing, an imprint of Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers, Inc., Lanham, Maryland.
Utberg, N. S.
1969 The Indian Artifacts of Mexico and Southern Texas.
Privately Printed, Edinburg, Texas.
Wade, M. F.
2003 The Native Americans of the Texas Edwards Plateau,
1582-1799. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Waters, M. R. and T. W. Stafford, Jr.
2007 Redefining the Age of Clovis: Implications for the
Peopling of the Americas. Science 315:122-1126.
Weir, F. A.
1985 An Early Holocene Burial at the Wilson-Leonard Site
in Central Texas. Mammoth Trumpet 2(1):3.
Woodruff, C. M., Jr.
1979 Land Resource Overview of the Capital Area Planning Council Region, Texas – A Nontechnical Guide.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Wormington, H. M.
1957 Ancient Man in North America. Popular Series 4.
Denver Museum of Natural History, Denver.
Wyckoff, D. J.
1995 A Summary of the Calf Creek Horizon in Oklahoma.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society
42:179-210.

New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain:
The Buckeye Knoll Site (41VT98) on the Lower
Guadalupe River near Victoria, Texas
Robert A. Ricklis

Abstract
Excavations were conducted at the Buckeye Knoll site in 2000-2001 by Coastal Environments, Inc., under
contract with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District. Stratified deposits at the site produced
evidence of prehistoric occupation spanning some 10,000 years. A sizeable, formal Early Archaic cemetery,
AMS-dated to between cal 7500 and 6200 B.P., was partially explored on the top of a small, mound-like knoll
near the western end of the site. A lack of radiocarbon dates from domestic debris deposits during this same
time period strongly suggests that the site was set aside as a special mortuary precinct during this 1300 year
interval. A unique assemblage of mortuary artifacts accompanied the numerous graves and includes a variety
of chipped stone artifacts, ground stone items such as plummets, bannerstones, and grooved stones of quartzite
and limestone, plus an array of ornamental artifacts made of marine and freshwater shell. Bioarcheological
analysis of human bones and teeth permit the aging and sexing of most of the burials. In combination with the
varying amounts of materials placed within graves, it is apparent that a portion of the adult male population
enjoyed relatively high status in this Early Archaic society. The Buckeye Knoll mortuary data show similarities with patterns of emergent socio-cultural complexity of contemporaneous Middle Archaic cultures of the
U.S. Southeast, and it is concluded that hunter-gatherer people of the Texas coastal plain were participating
in patterns of cultural development that were widespread over much of eastern North America by the seventh
millennium B.P.

Introduction
The Buckeye Knoll site (41VT98) lies on the
margins of level upland prairie terrain, overlooking
the floodplain of the Guadalupe River immediately
to the west of the site (see Figure 1). The site is situated on an elongated promontory, a local extension
of the uplands that is a remnant left by long-term
erosion of the valley wall (Figure 2). The highest
point on the site, at the west end of this promontory,
is a mound-like knoll that is covered in flowers of
the scarlet buckeye during the spring, from which
the site takes its name.
The site was initially tested by Richard Weinstein (1992), who assessed it as having high research
potential, and deemed it eligible for inclusion in the
National Register of Historic Places. The catalyst for
the data recovery work reported in this article was
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ plan to widen
and deepen the Victoria Barge Canal, an artificial

waterway that had been cut through the eastern end
of the site in the 1950s.
Buckeye Knoll is a multi-component site that
saw recurrent occupations by prehistoric huntergatherers throughout most of the known regional
cultural sequence. Time-diagnostic artifacts represent use of the site for domestic habitation during
the Late Paleoindian, the Early, Middle, and Late
Archaic, and the Initial and Final Late Prehistoric
periods. Additionally, prehistoric human burials
at the site can be placed, on the bases of accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) radiocarbon dating,
diagnostic mortuary artifacts, and stratigraphic
positions, within the three major temporal subdivisions of the Texas Archaic (i.e., Early, Middle, and
Late). The great majority of the burials pertain to a
discrete cemetery, dating to what I have designated,
in site-specific terms, the Early Archaic II period
(Ricklis 2007a), AMS-dated to ca. cal 7500-6200
B.P. All burials of this period at Buckeye Knoll were

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

32

Texas Archeological Society

ad

.
Brazos R

Gu

R.
rado
Colo

TEXAS

alu
pe
R.

41VT98

o

lf
Gu

of

xic
Me

2

50

0
Km

Figure 1. Map of the central coastal plain of Texas, showing the location of the Buckeye Knoll site
(41VT98) and the major river drainages mentioned in the article.

Figure 2. Topographic map of the Buckeye Knoll site, showing locations of excavation areas/units, plus
backhoe trenches (numbered) and shovel tests along the banks of the barge canal (West Canal Bank Area,
or WCBA). “Midden areas” represent areas of dark-colored, organic-rich soils with high concentrations
of prehistoric cultural debris.

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain
found atop the aforementioned small knoll near the
western end of the site (it should be noted that the
“Early Archaic II” is contemporaneous with part
of the Middle Archaic as defined in eastern North
America, an inter-regional disjuncture of cultural
taxonomy that merits consideration, as discussed
further on in this article).
Data recovery excavations were carried out
at Buckeye Knoll between October 2000 and July
2001 by Coastal Environments, Inc., under contract
with the Galveston District, U. S. Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE). The excavations, under my
direction, were conducted on the top of the knoll,
as well as on its northern, western, and southern
slopes (see Figure 2). Additional work was done
along the spine of the promontory, on the more-orless level terrain to the east of the knoll. In total, 136
1 m2 units were excavated across the site which, in
conjunction with numerous backhoe trenches around
the site’s margins, allow for a confident reconstruction of its overall stratigraphy. Several years were
devoted, subsequent to completion of the excavations, to laboratory processing and analysis of the
materials collected from the Buckeye Knoll site,
and to a complex series of negotiations with Native
American tribal representatives, ultimately leading
to a decision by the USACE to analyze the findings
and to then repatriate all mortuary materials (human
bones and associated artifacts) to representatives of
the Lipan Apache for reburial. Reburial was undertaken at the site (within the bounds of our backfilled
excavation area on the knoll) in May 2006.
Detailed osteological and dental analyses were
carried out by Glen H. Doran, Christopher J. Stowjanowski, and others at the Department of Anthropology, Florida State University. Geoarcheological
field work was conducted concurrent with our
archeological excavations by Charles D. Frederick
and Mark Bateman of Sheffield University (England). Paleoenvironmental reconstruction was done
by Bruce M. Albert on the basis of palynological
data he obtained from radiocarbon-dated sediment
cores extracted by Glen Doran from the alluvial
fill on the Guadalupe River floodplain immediately
adjacent to the site.
A multi-volume technical report (Ricklis
2007b), describing the excavations and findings,
has been prepared and is presently undergoing final
editing for publication in the near future. Included
therein are the multiple data bases and findings of
the various subcontracted specialists listed above,
along with many others. The present article can

33

only present a summary of the voluminous data
generated during the investigations, and focus on
some of the most significant and salient interpretations of those data, as they pertain to an updated
perspective on the regional Archaic. Details upon
which the present article is based are presented in
the technical report.
Site Stratigraphy: A Condensed
Geoarcheological Overview
The Buckeye Knoll Site consists of a series of
definable sediment strata, mainly comprised of silty
sands, overlying a geologic substrate consisting of
the dense clays and sandy clays of the Pleistocene
Beaumont Formation (Brown et al. 1976). All cultural materials and features were found within the
silty sand strata, which, on and around the knoll,
had combined thicknesses of around 1.5-2 m. On the
western knoll top and generally along the topographic high point of the aforementioned promontory,
these culturally relevant strata rest directly upon the
ancient, eroded, and weathered surface of the Beaumont Formation clay. Along the slopes of the knoll,
a culturally sterile stratum of alluvial Deweyville
Formation sand was inset against the Beaumont
clay, separating it from the overlying Holocene silty
sands that contained archeological materials. These
Deweyville sands represent the edges of a major
Pleistocene geologic alluvial unit, deposited within
the Pleistocene floodplain and along the valley
wall, and optically stimulated luminescence (OSL)dated at Buckeye Knoll, by Frederick and Bateman
(2007), to the Late Pleistocene, ca. 50,000 years B.P.
Reworking of these sands is the likely source for
the culturally relevant strata, which were probably
redeposited by localized aeolian activity during the
terminal Pleistocene and the Holocene (Frederick
and Bateman 2007).
The culturally relevant silty sand strata on the
knoll top, where our most intensive field efforts (72
1 m2 units) were made, exhibited a tripartite stratigraphy (Figures 3 and 4). The uppermost stratum,
designated Zone 1, was some 50-70 cm thick, dark
gray in color, and contained little cultural material other than sporadic pieces of chert debitage
(likely translocated by bioturbation from deeper
levels) and a few fragments of historic (19th-20th
century) glass, metal, and ceramic artifacts. Underlying this was Zone 2, an approximately 60-90 cm
thick stratum of silty sand containing profusions of

34

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Wall profile, north edge of Knoll-Top excavation, showing the stratigraphy discussed in text. Scale at lower
right is marked in 10 cm increments.

W88

W86

W84

W82

W80

S14

S16
Burial

Beaumont Clay

2 meters

Figure 4. Stratigraphic profiles, Knoll-Top excavation, along grid lines S14 and S16, showing major strata and the
locations of burials. Note that all burials (numbered, oval outlines) are within Zones 3A and/or 3B, except for Burial
32, a Late Archaic grave in Zone 2.

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain
prehistoric cultural debris and having a very dark
gray, nearly black, color, presumably the result of
the high organic input associated with frequently
repeated prehistoric human occupations. Finally,
Zone 3, the lowermost cultural stratum, was a silty
sand layer, lighter in color (yellowish-brown) than
Zone II, but containing abundant chert debitage and
chipped stone projectile points of Late Paleoindian
types (Golondrina, St. Mary’s Hall, and Wilson) and
other tools as well as numerous intrusive human
burials dating mainly to the Early Archaic II, ca. cal
7500-6200 B.P.
In terms of time-diagnostic artifacts (i.e., typed
stone projectile points and pottery sherds), the three
strata on the knoll top showed a coherent chronological sequence. Zone 1 did not produce any such
materials, and, as noted before, was nearly devoid
of prehistoric cultural debris; it is considered to
post-date the prehistoric occupations of the knoll-top
portion of the site. Zone 2 contained abundant diagnostic material, and can be subdivided accordingly
into three temporally definable levels. The upper
one-third of Zone 2 produced time-diagnostic lithics dominated by Scallorn arrow points, and yielded
AMS radiocarbon dates (on deer bone collagen)
falling into the Initial Late Prehistoric period, ca.
cal A.D. 930-1290. The middle one-third of Zone 2
produced a range of Late Archaic dart point types
(Ensor, Godley, Fairland, and Matamoros), and is
radiocarbon dated to the Late Archaic III period
at the site, ca. cal B.C. 100-A.D. 410. The lowest
one-third of Zone 2 produced Morhiss and Lange
points and is radiocarbon dated to cal 1780-250 B.C.
(Late Archaic I and II). Zone 3 yielded largely Late
Paleoindian point types (Golondrina, St. Mary’s
Hall, Wilson), estimated to date to ca. 8000-7000
B.C., although it did not contain preserved organic
materials for radiocarbon dating.
The fact that the base of Zone 2, which is dominated by Late Archaic diagnostics such as Morhiss
and Lange points, directly overlies Zone 3, containing Paleoindian materials, suggests a chronological
hiatus caused by a geological unconformity at this
point in the stratigraphic sequence. This is further
indicated by the fact that the numerous Early Archaic II burials, dated by AMS on human tooth
collagen to between cal 5500 and 4200 B.C., were
found in abundance in Zone 3, at times in the upper
few centimeters of that stratum, suggesting that they
represent grave pits that must have originated from a
surface at a higher elevation that became erosionally
deflated during the Middle Holocene, prior to the

35

beginning of Zone 2 sediment accumulation. With
few exceptions, these burials could not have been
interred in pits dug from a surface within Zone 2, as
the graves are several thousand years older than the
abundant occupational debris in Zone 2. In one of
the exceptional cases (Burial No. 25), where a Late
Archaic burial intruded into Zone 3, a grave pit filled
with the nearly black sediment typical of Zone 2
could be easily discerned against the lighter-colored
matrix of Zone 3. Such was never the case with the
Early Archaic burials, for none had a detectable
and distinct grave-pit outline; the earlier burial pits
had been dug from a now-deflated surface prior to
the accumulation of the nearly black, organic rich,
sediment of Zone 2.
A second area of the site on which our work was
focused was the western slope of the knoll, where
a block of 24 1 m2 contiguous units was excavated
(Figure 5). Here again, a three-part stratigraphic
sequence was revealed (Figure 6). Zone 1, ranging
in thickness from between 50 and 150 cm, yielded
diagnostic materials pertaining to both the Late
Prehistoric period (fragmentary arrow points and
sporadic aboriginal pottery sherds) and the later
part of the Late Archaic (Kent and Ensor points).
This stratum produced an AMS date on deer bone
collagen with a calibrated range of A. D. 650-780,
and an OSL date on sand of 450 ± 250 B.C. Zone
2, immediately underlying Zone 1 and generally
40-50 cm thick, produced dart points ascribed to
the early Late Archaic (Bulverde, Pedernales, and
Morhiss), and contained the single isolated burial
of an adult female in an extended supine position
(Burial No. 30). Zone 2 produced an AMS date on
deer bone collagen with a calibrated range of 18801580 B.C., plus four OSL dates all falling within the
range of 1600-800 B.C. As in the case of Zone 2 on
the knoll top, Zone 2 on the west slope was nearly
black in color, again presumably the result of high
organic input related to human occupation. The
lowest cultural stratum in this area, Zone 3, was a
lighter-colored (yellowish-brown) silty sand, about
50 cm thick, that contained abundant cultural debris
of the Middle Archaic period, including numerous
Early Triangular dart points, a barb fragment of an
Andice point, as well as several Refugio dart points.
This stratum produced a calibrated AMS date range
(on deer bone collagen) of 2570-1870 B.C. and an
OSL date of 2640 ± 460 B.C. A fourth stratum, Zone
4, consisted of an essentially sterile yellow sand, up
to 40 cm thick, interpreted as the edge of the late
Pleistocene Deweyville Formation where it was

36

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Excavation in the West Slope area, in progress during spring, 2001. Note the different strata, defined on the
basis of contrasting colors, in the wall profiles.

inset onto the sloping valley wall. A sample of sand
from Zone 4 yielded an OSL age of ca. 50,000 years
B.P. (Frederick and Bateman 2007). The eroded
surface of the still-older Beaumont Formation clay
was exposed immediately beneath Zone 4.
In sum, the stratigraphic and artifactual evidence at Buckeye Knoll indicates recurrent occupation of the site beginning in Late Paleoindian times
and persisting through the Archaic and into the Final
Late Prehistoric period. The general chronology at
the site is graphically illustrated in Figure 7.
The frequency of repeated occupations of the
site is reflected in the large quantities of materials
recovered. These include 48 arrow points (mostly
Scallorn), 300 whole and fragmentary dart points
representing types dating from the Late Paleoindian through Late Archaic periods, 17 chipped
stone scrapers, seven bifacially flaked chert knives,
nine Clear Fork tools, ground- and rough-stone
implements including abraders (n=11), milling

stone fragments (n=9), manos (n=6), cylindrical
sandstone pipe fragments (n=2), hammerstones
(n=16), implements of bone (75 awls, 20 engraved
pins, and several bone beads), and 96 aboriginal
pottery sherds representing contemporaneous Late
Prehistoric coastal (Rockport phase) and inland
(Toyah horizon) ceramic traditions. Additionally,
the excavations recovered a total of 181,781 pieces
of lithic debitage (derived overwhelmingly from
locally available chert river cobbles) and 107,923
burned clay nodules.
A Brief Note on Some
Apparent Long-Term Trends
in Human Ecology at
Buckeye Knoll
In addition to the many artifacts, large quantities
of faunal bone and freshwater and marine/estuarine

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

37

S27
S29

S31

Humus
S33

W14

Humus

W16

Humus
BHT
45
W18

2 meters

Burial

Beaumont Clay

Figure 6. Three stratigraphic profiles at 2 m intervals, West Slope excavation block, showing strata (including Deweyville
sand at base of Zone 4), and an isolated Late Archaic burial (No. 30), in the lower part of Zone 2.

38

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Generalized culture chronology at Buckeye Knoll, based on time-diagnostic artifact types and chronometic
(C14, AMS, OSL) dating of materials from various strata (detailed supporting data presented in Ricklis 2007a). Ages
shown at the left are based on calibrated standard and AMS radiocarbon dates.

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain
shell were recovered from the Buckeye Knoll excavations. Detailed faunal analysis carried out by
Susan L. Scott (2007) indicates that the occupants
of the site procured a wide range of mammals
(most importantly deer), reptiles, and birds from the
nearby floodplain and upland prairie environments,
as well as freshwater fish from the Guadalupe River
and saltwater fish, presumably from the downstream
estuarine waters of San Antonio Bay. Freshwater
mussels and estuarine bivalves (mainly oysters and
Rangia cuneata clams) were also gathered and their
shells discarded at the site, although not in the profusions that would leave behind true “shell midden”
deposits. Thus, it may be inferred that the occupants
of the site were exploiting both the prairie-riverine
resources of the interior and the fish and shellfish
available in nearby coastal estuarine waters.
Interestingly, Scott’s analysis showed a longterm, apparently gradual, shift in emphasis from
an overwhelming preponderance of large mammals
such as deer and antelope toward an increasing reliance on smaller game (Figure 8), plus a parallel increase in the proportional representation of smaller,
as opposed to larger, fish. She interpreted this to
reflect increasing pressure on the environmental
resource base through time, thought to be the result
of long-term growth in human population. Since
none of the AMS dates obtained on faunal bones
predates ca. cal 4500 B.P., it is apparent that earlier
faunal materials were not preserved at the site and
thus the trend noted by Scott probably represents
the Middle Archaic into the Late Archaic and Late
Prehistoric periods. Whether or not this trend can be
projected backward into the Early Archaic and Late
Paleoindian periods cannot be ascertained with the
available data.
Extensive sampling of sediment matrix samples
for flotation was done during the field work. Although flotation in the laboratory yielded only small
amounts of charred macrobotanical material (in general such materials, including wood charcoal, were
not well preserved), some suggestive results were
obtained. Samples from the knoll top excavation
area yielded carbonized seeds of goosefoot (Chenopodium sp.), mustang grape (Vitis sp.), hackberry
(Celtis sp.), pokeweed (Phytolacca sp.), and various
grasses. A general trend of increased abundance of
these materials in upper levels (Figure 9) suggests
that plant resources may have increased in importance over time, although this apparent trend could
actually reflect poorer preservation in deeper and
older components at the site. Nonetheless, such a

39

pattern might correspond to a broadening of the
subsistence base, as just suggested for animal resources, and future researchers should stay alert for
testing this possibility at other sites in the region. In
this context, it is worth mentioning that two fairly
large pit features were recognized at Buckeye Knoll,
one on the knoll top and the other on the west slope.
Both were roughly cylindrical in cross section, with
diameters of around 50-60 cm and depths of about
100 cm. In cross section, it was possible to discern
that both pits originated within the Late Archaic
stratum (Zone II), and both extended downward into
the upper few centimeters of the Beaumont clay,
leaving clear circular depressions in the clay surface. The size and shape of these Late Archaic pits
suggests that they functioned as storage facilities,
perhaps for gathered plant foods, suggesting that
plant gathering had become particularly important
by Late Archaic times.
Prehistoric Mortuary
Patterns at Buckeye Knoll
Mortuary data from Buckeye Knoll comprise
the most informative aspect of our findings. A total
of 75 prehistoric human burials were exposed at the
site. All but one of these, an isolated, extended Late
Archaic burial in the west slope excavation (Burial
No. 30), were found within the excavations on the
knoll top (Figure 10). Human osteological and dental analyses conducted by Doran and Stojanowski
determined that the remains of at least 116 individuals were represented (Doran 2007; Doran and Stojanowski 2007; Stojanowski 2007). The discrepancy
between the number of burials identified in the field
(n=75) and the number of individuals recognized in
the laboratory reflects the facts that (a) some of the
burials contained the remains of more than one individual, and (b) small bones and teeth had become
displaced by bioturbation during the thousands of
years since their burial, and some probably represent
individuals in burials originally located beyond the
limits of our excavation. Certainly, there are doubtless numerous additional human burials on the knoll
top that were outside the excavated area, since it is
estimated that only about one-third of the cemetery
area was exposed. Thus, it may very conservatively
be estimated that at least 200 individuals were interred at this location.
Most of the human remains from Buckeye
Knoll are placed within the temporal and spatial

40

Texas Archeological Society

WS Bone Weight by Level
4
6
8
10
12

Large Mammals
Small mammals,
birds, reptiles

14

Fish

16
18
20
22
0

500

1000

1500

Figure 8. Proportional representations of various faunal taxa (expressed as weights in grams),
West Slope excavation, by 10 cm arbitrary levels (Levels 4 through 22). Note the general
long-term trend of a decrease in large mammals, and a corresponding proportional increase
in small mammals and fish. Time range represented is from the Middle Archaic through the
Late Archaic and into the Late Prehistoric period (simplified from Scott 2007).

bounds of an Early Archaic cemetery, based on: (a)
their stratigraphic position in Zone 3 in the knoll
top area, and an absence of fill from superior strata
within the graves (with the notable exception of a
Late Archaic burial, No. 25, mentioned above); (b)
the fact that the majority (16, or 76 percent) of the
AMS dates on burials (n=21) pertain to a restricted,
AMS-dated chronological interval between 7500 and
6200 B.P., calibrated (Table 1); and (c) the presence

of a distinctive and presently unique assemblage of
mortuary artifacts (grave goods) distributed amongst
the burials in Zone 3, including narrow-bladed
lanceolate dart points, grooved stones of quartzite
and limestone, ground stone artifacts of types that are
rare in Texas and not reported in later Archaic burials
from the coastal plain region (perforated plummets
and winged bannerstones), numerous tiny Marginella
shell beads, and bivalve-shell pendants. In total, on

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

41

Macrofloral Remains by AU, Knoll Top

Analytical Units

AU 1
Phytolacca
Grass (undiff.)

AU 2

Vitis
AU 3

Celtis
Chenopodium

AU 4
0

2

4

6

8

No. of Specimens
Figure 9. Bar graph showing numbers of specimens of charred seeds of several plant species found in flotation samples
from various analytical units (AUs) on the Knoll Top. Note the dramatic increase of specimens in the Late Archaic III
(AU 2) and Initial Late Prehistoric (AU 1) contexts. AUs 3 and 4 represent the early part of the Late Archaic and the
Late Paleoindian periods, respectively.

31
20

6

70

63

21

68

64

24

65

35

21

26

69
29

61
58

23

71
8

37

BUCKEYE KNOLL SITE
(41VT98)

54

52

7

KNOLL-TOP CEMETERY AREA

4

43

3

38

36
59

42
39
74
32
56 34

1-A

55

60

9

5

2

48

57

51

41
67

1-C
1-B

25

40

53
50

16
66 18 47
62
73
49
42a 44
13
17
45
46
72

28

27

10

11
12

33

Figure 10. Map of the Knoll-Top excavation, showing the locations of the 75 human burials identified and numbered
during fieldwork. All but five of the burials were in Zone 3, and are assigned to the Early Archaic II period on the basis
of stratigraphic position, inclusive grave artifacts, and/or AMS dates.

UCIAMS-11697
UCIAMS-11698
UCIAMS-12023
UCIAMS-12024
UCIAMS-12025
UCIAMS-12028
UCIAMS-12029
UCIAMS-12030
UCIAMS-12032
UCIAMS-12033

University of
California
at Irvine

* 2-sigma, calibrated using Calib 6.0 Program.

human tooth
human bone
human bone
human bone
human bone
human bone
human bone
human bone
human bone
human bone

human tooth
human tooth
human tooth
human tooth
human tooth
human tooth
human tooth
67B		
34		
13		
47B		
50A		
57		
67B		
73		
74B		
75

74		
27		
6		
71		
23		
5		
55
-17.6 ‰
-17.0 ‰
-14.9 ‰
-13.1 ‰
-18.4 ‰
-28.6 ‰
-21.3 ‰
-17.3 ‰
-17.1 ‰
-14.4 ‰

-15.8 ‰
-16.2 ‰
-16.3 ‰
-15.6 ‰
-18.1 ‰
-13.6 ‰
-17.8 ‰
5970 ± 20
3500 ± 20
6110 ± 25
6085 ± 25
4755 ± 20
6040 ± 25
5936 ± 25
6005 ± 30
4705 ± 20
6075 ± 20

5830 ± 30
7570 ± 55
5470 ± 35
5750 ± 30
2120 ± 30
5880 ± 45
5990 ± 35

OC 44622
OC 44623
OC 44624
OC 44625
OC 44626
OC 44627
OC 44628

-17.4 ‰
-19.6 ‰
-21.7 ‰
-19.7 ‰

Wood's Hole

5940 ± 40
5490 ± 40
6390 ± 40
5630 ± 40

6060 ± 40
5580 ± 40
6610 ± 40
5720 ± 40

1A
8
49
27

Beta-153915
Beta-157422
Beta-157423
Beta-157424

Beta Analytic

human bone
human bone
human bone
human bone

Corrected
Age, Yrs. B.P.

						
Laboratory
Lab. No.
Material
Burial
C14 Age
δ C13

BC 4910-4790
BC 1890-1760
BC 5030-4950
BC 5060-4930
BC 3640-3520
BC 5000-4850
BC 4850-4730
BC 4990-4830
BC 3460-3380
BC 5050-4940

BC 4780-4600
BC 6510-6340
BC 4370-4250
BC 4690-4520
BC 210-50
BC 4850-4650
BC 4970-4790

BC 5200-5180
BC 4490-4470
BC 5620-5490
BC 4620-4480

Cal. Date
Range*, B.C.

Table 1. Radiocarbon Dates (AMS) on Collagen from Human Bone and Tooth Pulp from Buckeye Knoll Burials.

6860-6740
3840-3710
7030-6900
7010-6880
5590-5470
6950-6800
6800-6680
6790-6870
5410-5330
7000-6890

6730-6550
8460-8290
6320-6200
6640-6470
2150-2000
6800-6600
6920-6740

7150-7130
6440-6420
7570-7440
6570-6430

Cal. Age
Yrs. B.P.*

42
Texas Archeological Society

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain
the basis of these criteria, 107 (92 percent) of the
estimated 116 individuals are assigned to between cal
7500 and 6200 B.P. Two individuals (1.7 percent) are
placed within the Middle Archaic (ca. cal 6000-4000
B.P.), based on AMS dating of bone and/or toothpulp collagen, and seven individuals (6 percent) are
dated to the Late Archaic (ca. cal 4000-1200 B.P.),
based on factors of stratigraphy, AMS dating, and/
or the inclusion of known Late Archaic diagnostic
artifacts as mortuary offerings.
All of the individual AMS radiocarbon dates on
human remains are listed in Table 1. Given that the
results come from three different radiocarbon laboratories and are in essential agreement, these dates
can be accepted with a high level of confidence. The
high density of burials on the knoll top, and the fact
that the great majority fall within a single discrete
time period, combine to indicate that these remains
constitute one of a very few examples of early (pre5000 B.P.) mortuary sites with abundant preserved
skeletal remains in North America, the only others
being the Windover site in Florida (dating to ca. cal
7000-8000 B.P.; Doran 2002) and the Black Earth site
in southern Illinois (ca. cal 6000 B.P.; Jeffries 1982).
A key point of considerable cultural significance is that the numerous Early Archaic burials at
Buckeye Knoll constitute a true cemetery, meaning
a designated place on the landscape set aside for,
and devoted exclusively to, mortuary practices.
Despite extensive excavations on the knoll top, the
west slope of the knoll, and areas to the east of the
knoll (see Figure 2), and water screening through
1/8-inch mesh of all excavated sediments, none of
the lithic or shell artifact types that were found with
the early burials were recovered from non-mortuary
debris deposits. All whole and fragmentary stone
artifacts from these various areas were examined
with an eye to identifying broken specimens of the
same types/forms found in the early cemetery, with
consistently negative results. In other words, the
artifact assemblage that is diagnostic of the Early
Archaic burials at the site (i.e., slender lanceolate
dart points, grooved stones, bannerstones, plummets, and Marginella shell beads) was not represented in domestic debris deposits anywhere on the
site. Secondly, with only a single exception, none of
the 21 radiocarbon dates on organic materials from
domestic (i.e., non-mortuary) debris deposits (deer
bone collagen, shells of Rangia and/or oyster) have
centroids that fall between 7500 and 6200 B.P., the
time frame of the early cemetery (Figure 11), as
indicated by AMS dating of collagen extracted from

43

human bones and teeth from 16 individual burials.
A single date on human collagen (Burial 49, with
a 2-sigma calibrated age range of 7570-7440 B.P.)
suggests that there may have been a short period
of overlap between use of the site as a residential
encampment and as a cemetery at the very earliest
time of cemetery use, but that such dual use, if it
occurred at all, was soon abandoned (by ca. cal 7200
B.P.). The chronological incongruence of the Early
Archaic cemetery and occupational debris at the site
is clearly indicated in Figure 11.
The relatively few burials found on the knoll
top that have AMS ages outside this time range are
interpreted to represent occasional interments of
deceased individuals in conjunction with earlier and
later use of the site for domestic habitation. This is
suggested by the facts that such burials are relatively
few in number and were nowhere found in sufficient
numbers or in a spatial concentration that would
suggest the existence of a formal cemetery before
7500 cal B.P., or after 6200 cal B.P. Very relevant in
this regard is the fact that the ages of a few earlier
and later burials derived from AMS dating are not
mutually exclusive of the ages of domestic debris
deposits at the site.
The Key Characteristics
of the Early Archaic II
Cemetery at Buckeye Knoll
The Early Archaic cemetery, and the burials it
contained, can be characterized succinctly as follows:
• A dense clustering of human burials dating to
between cal 7500 and 6200 B.P. Sixty-nine
burials ascribed to this period, on the basis
of AMS dates, stratigraphic positions, and/or
kinds of mortuary artifacts, were identifiable
in Zone 3 on the knoll top as either recognizable articulated skeletons or as discrete clusters of disarticulated human bones.

• All of these burials were found within the
knoll top excavations, with the densest clustering of graves situated at virtually the exact
center and highest topographical point of the
knoll. The spatial isomorphism of the densest clustering of graves and the center point
of the knoll strongly suggest that the knoll, a
distinctly mound-like natural formation, was
intentionally selected as the locus of a formal
cemetery for its topographic prominence and

44

Texas Archeological Society

Yrs. B.P.

Non-Mortuary

Burials

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

Period of Early Cemetery

8000

9000
Figure 11. Calibrated age ranges for all radiocarbon dates from Buckeye Knoll, with AMS dates on human bone/tooth
collagen from burials, and dates on faunal samples (AMS on deer bone, standard C14 dates on estuarine shells) from
domestic debris deposits. Note the nearly total lack of overlap between the age ranges for burials in the early cemetery
vs. domestic debris deposits, strongly suggesting that the site was reserved exclusively for mortuary ritual purposes
between ca. cal 7300 and 6200 B.P.

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

45

Figure 12. View of the Buckeye Knoll Site, looking west toward the knoll-top area. The mound-like configuration of
the knoll top is delineated by the dashed lines. Trees to the left, in the background, are part of the woodlands on the
Guadalupe River floodplain.

perhaps, in particular, for its mound-like form
(Figure 12).
• Interments of the deceased were made in
several different modes of burial, including:
(1) flexed or loosely flexed body positions
(53 percent), (2) sitting positions (13 percent)
in which the body was interred cross-legged
with the spinal column and torso in an upright
position (although subsequently collapsed
onto the leg and pelvic bones), (3) secondary
or “bundle burials” (burial of disarticulated
skeletons, 29 percent), and (4) skulls only
(i.e., without the postcranial portions of the
skeleton ) (4 percent). No extended burials or
cremations pertain to the period of the early
cemetery.
• The cemetery had a demographically normal representation of adults (both male
and female) ranging in estimated ages from
early post-adolescent to over 55 years old,

and subadults (ranging in age from infancy to
adolescent). While younger subadults appear
to be under-represented in the burial population, this is commonly the case in archeological mortuary samples, where the smaller
and less-dense bones of infants and young
children are under-represented due to poor
preservation. Bioarcheological analyses suggest an essentially healthy population (Doran
and Stojanowski 2007), notably devoid of
the treponemal diseases (Rothschild and and
Rothschild 2007) that are suggested for later
Texas aboriginal populations (e.g., Jackson
et al. 1986), dentitions largely free of caries,
though generally exhibiting considerable tooth
wear (Stowjanowski 2007), and a scarcity of
skeletal traumas such as would result from
accidental injuries or wounds sustained in interpersonal or inter-group conflict. The Rothschilds (2007) have noted that the absence of
treponemal infections matches findings in the

46

Texas Archeological Society
interior Southeast, where contemporaneous
Middle Archaic populations were free of these
diseases, in contrast to surrounding areas.
Speaking in general terms, the Early Archaic
population at Buckeye Knoll was healthy
(adaptively successful) and they carried out
their lives in a relatively peaceful social environment (in no instance was there evidence for
projectile points as the cause of death, such as
was the case for one Late Archaic burial [No.
25], wherein a dart point was embedded in
the right scapula, and evidence for traumatic
injuries was minimal).

• Artifacts directly associated with the burials
are numerous, with some 60 percent of the
Early Archaic burials containing grave goods.
In the aggregate, these associated items form
a distinctive and unique mortuary assemblage
consisting of flaked chert artifacts (dart points,
preforms, a large unifacial scraper of Georgetown chert, a Guadalupe Tool, plus a unique
oversized stemmed biface with a length of over
28 cm), numerous ground stone items (limestone and quartzite grooved stones, winged
bannerstones, and perforated plummets),
flint-knapper’s tool kits containing antler billets and pointed-bone flakers, shell ornaments
(perforated bivalve shell pendants, tiny marine
gastropod shell beads), red and yellow ochre in
nodular and powder forms, and a few lumps of
asphaltum, some of which bear impressions of
woven-fiber fabric or basketry.
• The two most abundant classes of mortuary
artifacts—grooved stones (n=22) and shell
ornaments (n=1770)—were not evenly distributed within the cemetery area. The grooved
stones were found almost exclusively in the
northern portion of the area, while shell ornaments were with burials in only the southern
portion. This phenomenon suggests that there
may have been a social distinction between
individuals buried in the northern sector and
those buried in the southern sector. While
somewhat speculative, it can be tentatively
suggested that there existed a duality within
the prehistoric society, perhaps in the form of
societal moieties or distinct lineages.
• Stable isotope (C13, N15) data indicate that
the diet of the population was based on a
combination of inland (terrestrial/riverine) and
coastal (marine/estuarine) food resources. The

stable isotopic signatures of the Early Archaic
human collagen at Buckeye Knoll fall in between those from Late Archaic cemeteries on
the coast and Late Archaic cemeteries at inland
locations on the coastal prairies (Hard 2007).
It can be concluded that the Early Archaic
population represented in the cemetery moved
more or less regularly, in their subsistence
pursuits, between the interior and the coast,
suggesting that the coastal-interior cultural
boundary that emerged in Late Archaic times
(Hard 2007) and continued into Late Prehistoric times (Ricklis 1996), did not exist prior
to ca. cal 6000 B.P.
Evidence for Status
Distinctions in the Early
Archaic Buckeye Knoll
Population
Grave goods were distributed unevenly amongst
the Early Archaic burials. Given that unequal placements of material items in graves is generally taken
as an indicator of a corresponding inequality of social status within the past society that is represented
(e.g., Binford 1972; Brown 1971, 1981; Chapman
and Randsborg 1981; O’Shea 1984; Wason 1984), it
can be suggested that the hunter-gatherer population
who buried their dead at the site did not live within
a strictly “egalitarian” social system.
In an effort to gain further insight into this issue, the various kinds of mortuary artifacts associated with the Buckeye Knoll burials were assigned
values according to the estimated labor investment
(time and energy) required for their production
(Table 2). For example, it is assumed that the time
and energy needed for the production of a bannerstone, which was meticulously shaped by cutting
and grinding of the stone and the time-consuming
boring of the cylindrical hole that penetrates the entire width of the artifact, was substantially greater
that the labor expenditure required to make a dart
point. The production of the dart point requires,
in turn, more labor investment than is required to
make a preform or a tiny Marginella shell bead,
which is produced by the simple act of abrading
a small hole in the thin body whorl of the shell
surface. The production of a grooved stone from
hard, dense quartzite is assumed to be highly labor
intensive and, in fact, this has been empirically
demonstrated by faithful replications produced by

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain
Table 2. List of kinds of mortuary artifacts in the
early cemetery at Buckeye Knoll, and corresponding
value assigned to each item in terms of the estimated
relative labor input for its production.
Item
Quartzite grooved stone
Limestone grooved stone
Bannerstone
Plummet
Oversized stemmed biface
Dart point
Biface (knife/dagger)
Preform
Guadalupe tool
Large uniface
Flake
Hammerstone
Abrader
Ochre
Asphaltum
Bone/antler tool
Canine-tooth bead
Shell pendant
Marginella/nerite bead
Unmodified bivalve shell

Assigned Value
10
3
10
3
15
2
2
1
2
3
0.1
1
1
0.5
0.5
2
1
1
0.1
0.5

Bill Birmingham (Victoria, Texas) using only stone
tools; Birmingham reports (personal communication, 2004) that some 25-30 hours are required to
produce one of these artifacts.
Clearly, the values in Table 2 are estimations,
and are not intended to portray any precise definition
of actual labor input. They are believed, however,
to roughly approximate the differing costs of making the various kinds of artifacts, and thus to be a
useful measure of the relative value of each kind of
mortuary artifact type.
When the assigned value of the artifacts from
each individual burial is placed within the context
of all of the documented Early Archaic burials, a
rather clear pattern emerges, namely, that most of the
highest-ranked individuals (i.e., those whose graves
contained the greatest summed value of inclusive
goods), are adult males (Figure 13). The single possible exception is the fifth-highest ranked burial (No.
61), which contained remains of both an adult male
and a juvenile of indeterminate sex; the latter was

47

recorded as the primary individual by virtue of being
represented by the most skeletal elements, and this
is reflected in Figure 13. Adult females and children
consistently have relatively lower values, suggesting that they had lower statuses than the relatively
highly ranked adult males.
At the same time, many adult males also show
relatively low ranks, suggesting that not all adult
males in the population enjoyed equally high status.
On the basis of these data, it can be inferred that only
a portion of the adult male population had elevated
status; perhaps these individuals had attained their
social positions by means of personal abilities and/
or accomplishments (e.g., leadership in decision
making, exceptional abilities as hunters, craftsmen,
or perhaps as shamans).
Generally, it is risky to infer the specific nature
of the personal qualities that gave relatively high
status to a specific individual, but in at least three
cases, tentative inferences can be made:
• Burial 6 contained the cranium of an older
adult male and was accompanied by an unusually high number of grooved stones (10 of
quartzite and one of limestone). This burial
also contained two hammerstones (quartzite
and chert); these are the only hammerstones
found in the cemetery. The utilized (battered)
edges are morphologically similar to the one
used by Birmingham to replicate the quartzite
grooved stones, insofar as the working edges
are narrow enough to have served in the
painstaking process of producing the shallow grooves in the surfaces of these artifacts.
Given the large number of grooved stones associated with Burial 6, a highly ranked burial,
as well as the presence of a hammerstone that
could have served in their production, it is
possible that this individual was a craft specialist who produced these artifacts. In this
context, it should also be mentioned that one
each of the quartzite and limestone specimens
in this grave had been intentionally shattered
(“killed”) and the resultant fragments had
been scattered within the grave. These are
the only specimens of this artifact form found
that had been so treated, suggesting some
kind of special significance for this type of
artifact within the context of this particular
grave, and perhaps a correspondingly special
relationship between the individual and the
artifact type.

Texas Archeological Society

48

Rankings Value (based on artifact scores)

100

80

60

40

20

0

1

10

20

30

Rankings (from highest to lowest)

Adult Male

Subadult, intet. Sex

Adult Female

Adult, indet. Sex

40

Figure 13. Bar graph showing rankings of Early Archaic burials in the Knoll-Top cemetery, based on the summed values
of all artifacts included with each grave (assigned values are shown in Table 1, based on estimated production cost for
each kind of artifact). Note that most of the highest ranks are for a portion of the adult male population.

• Burial 8 was a loosely flexed adult male who
was accompanied by a flint-knapping tool kit
(Figure 14). The hypothesis that the artifacts
comprised a tool kit is based on the facts that
they were tightly clustered together (near
the individual’s pelvic area), and that they
consisted of a large antler section (perhaps
intended for use as a billet in the afterlife),
several smaller billets made of bone and/
or antler, plus pointed bone tools that could

have served as pressure-flaking tools. Also
included were items of chert, including two
finished slender lanceolate dart points, as
well as several chert flakes, plus a small
tabular slab of sandstone that could have been
used for abrading the edges of bifacial tools
during the reduction process. The presence
of this tool kit suggests that this adult male
may have been a more or less specialized
flint knapper.

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

49

#8
Mag. South

S12W84

Plummet #2250
Plummet #3007

Tool Kit
Figure 14. Burial 8, a loosely flexed adult male accompanied by a flint-knapping tool kit (large antler section,
bone/antler flakers, chert flakes and points, a sandstone abrader) near the right hip, and two perforated
plummets by the left femur.

• Burial 74, another adult male, contained an
interesting array of mortuary artifacts of a very
different kind. This individual was accompanied by artifacts of a distinctly non-utilitarian
sort, including an oversized stemmed biface,
a pair of winged bannerstones, and a small,
tightly clustered pile of over 600 Marginella
shell beads. The oversized biface (length=
>280 mm) is a unique item. It is extremely
well made, and in profile has a virtually
straight edge, and the stem is fishtail-shaped
and bifacially fluted with heavy grinding along
its lateral edges. It is too large to have served
in daily use as an ordinary domestic tool, and

high-powered microscopic use-wear analysis
revealed no evidence of use as such (Barrett
2007). The piece had been expertly thinned
by soft hammer percussion removal of broad,
shallow flakes that tended to meet along the
mid-line of the artifact, and to dive slightly, in
places creating a shallow trough along the center line. In terms of form (the fishtail-shaped
stem, rounded and unbarbed shoulders) and
technology (stem fluting, diving thinning flake
removals, and stem edge grinding) this artifact very closely resembles the fluted Fishtail
points found in Central and South America and
ascribed to a Paleoindian occupations of those

50

Texas Archeological Society
regions (e.g., Mayer-Oakes 1986; Morrow
and Morrow 1999; Pearson 2002). This specimen is also unique in terms of its material, a
mottled brown and cream-colored resilicified
brecciated chert from an unidentified geological source (the fact that the object showed a
bright yellow-to-orange color under ultraviolet
light suggests that the material might have
come from the Edwards Plateau of Central
Texas). If this biface is, in fact, an oversized
version of a fluted Fishtail point, it must have
been extremely valuable, as it would probably
have originated far from Buckeye Knoll, both
in terms of geographic space (i.e., it may have
come from at least as far away as southern
Mexico) and in terms of time (it would have
been made during Paleoindian times, several
thousand years before its interment in Burial
74, which is AMS dated to ca. cal 6500 cal.
B.P.) In other words, this artifact would have
been a rare heirloom piece that was passed
down through many generations. The presence
of slight “prehensile” wear (Barrett 2007) on
the faces of the artifact does, in fact, fit with
the idea of long-term handling, while the absence of use wear suggests a non-utilitarian,
probably ritualistic, function.
Similarly, the bannerstones may have had
a non-mundane and perhaps ritual and/or
symbolic function. While in general banner­
stones are often assumed to have served
as atlatl weights, their extreme rarity in
Texas contexts suggests otherwise. The
two specimens from Burial 74 were found
resting one against the other directly upon the
basal Beaumont clay, and thus were clearly
placed together within the grave. Both are
of a type known as “Semi-Lunar Winged,”
which is widely distributed throughout the
Southeastern, Midwestern, and Northeastern
portions of what is today the U.S. The type
is estimated to have been made and used
between ca. 4500-3500 B.C. (Lutz 2000).
Given that the two specimens from Burial
74 were both resting on the surface of the
basal Beaumont clay with the central bored
holes in a nearly vertical orientation, it is
unlikely that they were attached to atlatls
or any other kind of shaft. This, combined
with their rarity, suggests a supra-mundane
and ritually significant function. Finally,
the 600+ Marginella beads found near the

bannerstones, in a pile approximately 10
cm in diameter, would also not have served
a mundane technical purpose. Presumably
they were ornamental, although the fact that
they were piled together (as though originally
within a perishable container) rather than
aligned as they would presumably have been
had they been threaded on a necklace or sewn
onto clothing (as was observable in certain
other burials at Buckeye Knoll), suggests that
these specimens may have been emplaced
with this individual as an inherently valued
non-utilitarian commodity. In sum, the adult
male in Burial 74 was exceptionally well
provided for, in terms of mortuary “wealth,”
but the provisions were not of a mundane
nature, suggesting that he may have derived
his status from a supra-mundane role, such as
that of a shaman.
The Early Archaic Mortuary
Artifact Assemblage
The many artifacts (n=1394) found in direct
association with burials in the Early Archaic cemetery form, in combination, an assemblage that has
been heretofore unrecognized in Texas and that is
readily distinguishable from later Archaic mortuary assemblages on the Texas Coastal Plain, such
as Ernest Witte, Crestmont, and other sites in the
lower Brazos-Colorado River area (Hall 1981,
2002; Patterson 2000), and Loma Sandia in Live
Oak County (Taylor and Highley 1995). Given its
present uniqueness, and its representation of an
unrecognized Early Archaic mortuary pattern, it is
worthwhile to concisely describe the salient traits
of the assemblage.
Flaked Stone Artifacts
Artifacts of flaked stone (all of chert) in the
early mortuary assemblage at Buckeye Knoll consist
of a variety of dart points and other tools, the aforementioned oversized stemmed biface of probable
ritual function, bifacial preforms, and modified and
unmodified flakes.
Dart Points
Ten dart points were found directly associated
with seven of the burials. Six of these are slender

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

c

b

a

51

cm

d

e

f

g

Figure 15. Lanceolate points (a-f) and a leaf-shaped (Lerma?) point (g), all directly associated with burials in the early
cemetery at Buckeye Knoll, dated to cal 7500-6200 B.P. Specimen e has light edge grinding along the lower lateral edges.

52

Texas Archeological Society

cm
Figure 16. Corner-notched dart point, Burial 4. The dotted
line delineates the extent of light basal edge grinding.

cm
Figure 17. Stemmed dart point associated with Burial
51. Dotted lines delimit the extent of heavy stem edge
grinding. Cross-sectional profile at the top shows effects
of alternate blade-edge beveling.

lanceolate points (Figure 15a-c, e-f), one is a
corner-notched point (Figure 16), one is a stemmed
point (Figure 17), and one is a leaf-shaped specimen (Figure 15g). The stemmed specimen has
some resemblance to known Early Archaic types
(e.g., Uvalde) and may fit into the generic category
of bifurcated-base points. The lateral edges of the
stem are heavily ground. The corner-notched specimen has broad basal corner notches that create a
short, expanding stem. There is light grinding along
the basal edge. This point cannot be easily assigned
to any existing typological grouping, although perhaps it is related to various early corner-notched

types found in the greater Southeastern U.S. (e.g.,
Palmer points). The leaf-shaped point, unstemmed
and un-notched with a rounded base (Figure 15g),
was found next to the cranium of Burial 16. It is not
placed within any existing typological category,
although some archeologists might classify it as
a Lerma point (Turner and Hester 1999:145). It
lacks edge grinding. In addition to these, a distal
fragment from Burial 74 (Figure 15d) may pertain
to the slender lanceolate group, given similarities
in dimensions and flaking patterns.
As can be seen in Figure 15, the slender lanceolate points exhibit a degree of morphological
variability. Specimens a-c are characterized by
convex blade edges, a gently tapering point (specimen b does have a less gracile taper, probably the
result of resharpening), and narrow, straight bases.
Specimens a and c both have serrated edges created by the removal of contiguous pressure flakes
(more pronounced in Specimen c). The absence of
edge serration in Specimen b may be the result of
the same reworking that created its shorter, more
stubby form. Specimens a and b were both within
the aforementioned tool kit with Burial 8, so the
variability in form is not the result of a chronologically significant temporal separation. None of these
three specimens show discernible edge grinding on
the blade edges or the base. Although these points
do not fit into any currently defined type, similar
specimens are known from the larger surrounding
area, particularly from the Kennedy Bluffs site
(41BP19) to the northwest in Bastrop County,
where Bement (1989) identified 12 similar, untyped
slender lanceolate points of probable Early Archaic
age. Points of this description may sometimes be
misidentified as Angostura, a type that pre-dates
the Buckeye Knoll specimens by three millennia or
so. Future research should be attuned to identifying
additional specimens from secure, well-dated contexts. I have tentatively applied the name “Buckeye
points” (Ricklis 2007b) to the Buckeye Knoll slender lanceolate points, but additional research will
be required to establish these points as a formal
type dating to the fifth millennium B.C., and to
define their geographical distribution.
A tenth specimen is a distal fragment found
with Burial 26 (Figure 18). Edge grinding is present on one of the lower lateral edges, beneath what
may have been very weakly defined shoulders. This
specimen may have been essentially lanceolate in
form, or, alternatively, it may have had a stem section that was nearly as wide as the main body of

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

53

the point. The absence of the basal portion makes it
impossible to determine which was the case.
Guadalupe Biface
A single Guadalupe Biface (Figure 19) was
found with Burial 58. This item is 92.3 mm long,
with a maximum width of 31.7 mm and a maximum
thickness of 21.2 mm. It is plano-convex in cross
section and has a steep bit on the dorsal side created
by a series of long, parallel flake removals. Despite
the fact that Buckeye Knoll is within the core area
of this type’s distribution (see Turner and Hester
1999:256), this specimen is the only one found at the
site (i.e., none were found in non-mortuary debris
deposits), further supporting the conclusion that the
site was not occupied as a domestic habitation locus
during the period of the Early Archaic cemetery.
cm

Figure 18. Distal fragment of a dart point, Burial 26. The
dotted line at the lower left represents edge grinding. This
specimen appears to have been either lanceolate in form,
or to have had a broad stem section below very weakly
defined shoulders.

cm
Figure 19. A Guadalupe Biface found with Burial 58,
showing the dorsal surface and a lengthwise crosssectional profile.

Preforms
A late-stage bifacially flaked chert perform
(Figure 20), probably intended for the production of
a slender lanceolate dart point, was found associated

cm
Figure 20. A bifacial chert preform from Burial 61,
probably for a slender lanceolate dart point.

54

Texas Archeological Society

cm

Figure 21. Four of the nine preforms found as a clustered group with Burial 6.

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain
with Burial 61. Another possible dart point preform
was found with Burial 22. This specimen bears
traces of red ochre on both of its faces.
A tight cluster of nine preforms was found in
apparent association with Burial 6 (Figure 21). All
represent relatively early stages of bifacial reduction, ranging from fully bifacially flaked to only
partially flaked specimens that still retain cobble
cortex on all or part of one face.

55

Large Uniface of Georgetown Chert
Associated with Burial 58, this specimen
(Figure 22) is an exceptionally large flake of
Georgetown chert, measuring 199 x 121.7 x 27.2
mm in maximum length, width, and thickness. The
material is a high-quality, fine-grained, dark gray
tabular material that is readily distinguishable from
the tan/brown/yellowish cobble cherts from which
most debitage and tools at the site were produced

cm

Figure 22. A very large flake of tabular Georgetown chert from Burial 58, with unifacially flaked edges. Light polish
along the flaked edges (dashed lines) suggests its use as a tool, probably as an unhafted scraper.

56

Texas Archeological Society

and which would have been locally available from
point bars in the Guadalupe River just a few km
upstream from Buckeye Knoll (Hunter 2002; Bill
Birmingham, personal communication, 2003). The
specimen from Burial 58 is thus unique, and represents the relatively long-distance transport of raw
material from Central Texas, or perhaps acquisition
from (and interaction with) contemporaneous people
operating in that region. The dorsal surface of the
flake is grayish-white and has a heavily patinated
cortex, while the opposite (ventral) surface bears a
broad bulb of percussion and reveals the dark gray
interior of the material. Unifacial edge modification
in the form of short, steep, flake removals created a
scraper-like configuration. Polish along these edges,
visible under 45X magnification, indicates utilization, presumably as an unusually large scraping tool.
Other Bifaces
In addition to the projectile points described
above, finished bifaces from the Early Archaic
cemetery include four additional specimens. One
of these is the oversized stemmed biface described
earlier, and noted to show close similarities in form
and flaking technology to the Paleoindian fluted
Fishtail points of Central and South America.
As discussed, this specimen is unlikely to have
had a mundane function, and is believed to have
had a special ritual or ceremonial significance. It is
pictured here (Figure 23), along with an illustration
that juxtaposes its basal section with a fluted Fishtail
point from Belize, Central America (Figure 24),
whereby the similarities in outline, flaking patterns,
and stem fluting may be seen. The stem edges of the
Buckeye Knoll specimen are heavily ground.
Two elongated and unstemmed bifaces (Figure
25) were found together as a pair next to the upper
torso of Burial 1. Both specimens were aligned
with the long axes parallel to one another. Both are
lanceolate in outline and have convex edges and
more-or-less rounded bases. They are of similar
size, the slightly shorter specimen having a length
of 134.8 mm and a width of 34.3 mm, and the larger
having a length of 188.4 mm, and a maximum width
of 35.4 mm. Both are distinctly bi-convex in cross
section, and both have a maximum thickness of 13.1
mm. The larger of the two bears light edge grinding
on the base that extends more than halfway toward
the distal pointed end. The other specimen has unground edges. These items are both relatively thick
in relation to their widths, which, in conjunction

with their relatively large sizes, suggests that they
did not function as projectile points. In fact, usewear analysis showed attrition only at the distal tips
(Barrett 2007), suggesting that these pieces were
daggers or points on thrusting spears.
A thin, bi-pointed biface (Figure 26) was
recovered from Burial 21. This piece has a length
of 102.7 mm, a maximum width of 35.1 mm, and
a maximum thickness of 8.9 mm. The edges bear
short pressure flake scars and are un-ground. This
specimen may have served as a knife. Light use wear
(Barrett 2007) suggests only brief use.
Ground/Polished Stone Artifacts
Bannerstones
Three bannerstones were found in association
with burials in the Early Archaic cemetery. As already mentioned, two of these (Figure 27) rested
together as a pair with Burial 74. The third (Figure
28), found in two pieces within a few cm of one
another, was associated with Burial 44. All three
specimens are made of limestone, and all three fall
into the Semi-Lunar Winged type as defined by Lutz
(2000). The largest specimen, made of a compact,
fossiliferous limestone, measures 145.1 x 54.0 x
23.4 mm in maximum length, width, and thickness.
The second-largest (associated with the first specimen) has a length of 84.9 mm, a maximum width
of 35.8 mm, and a maximum thickness of 22.2 mm,
while the smallest (from Burial 44) had an estimated
length of 82 mm, a maximum width of 37.4 mm, and
a maximum thickness of 23 mm. The bored holes
in all three specimens have similar diameters (13.5,
14.0 and 14.5 mm, respectively). The specimen with
Burial 44 was probably intentionally broken, given
that considerable force would be needed to break the
object in two, and the two fragments were not found
in direct contact with each other, as might be the
case had the object been broken post-depositionally
and in situ.
Plummets
Four plummets (Figure 29) were recovered
from the Early Archaic cemetery. Two were found
as a pair in Burial 8, and the other two were a pair
in Burial 66. All are made of limestone, have teardrop shapes, and bear perforations at the narrower
ends. Perforated plummets are found in more or less
contemporaneous mortuary contexts in the central

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

57

cm
Figure 23. Oversized biface with fluted, fish-tail-shaped stem, found with Burial 74. The stem lateral edges are heavily ground.

58

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 24. The base of the oversized biface from Burial 74 (left), alongside a classic Fluted Fishtail point (right) of
Paleoindian age from Belize, Central America. Close similarities in form and flaking patterns are visible.

cm
Figure 25. A pair of large bifaces, probably daggers or
points for thrusting spears, from Burial 1. The dotted line
on the specimen on the right delimits light edge grinding

cm
Figure 26. Thin, bi-pointed biface from Burial 21.

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

59

cm

Figure 27. Pair of Semi-Lunar Winged Bannerstones, found together with Burial 74. Both are made of limestone (the
bottom specimen is fossiliferous).

60

Texas Archeological Society
Mississippi Valley area (e.g., Charles et al. 1988).
They are also known from Southeast Texas and the
Upper Texas Coast, although apparently from much
later contexts (Story 1990:221; Ensor 1998:380),
but have heretofore not been reported this far south
on the Texas coastal plain. The fact that the four
specimens were found as two pairs may suggest that
these artifacts were bolas stones. Indeed, the pair
with Burial 8 was found sufficiently close together
in such a position (near the mid-shaft of the left femur) as to suggest the possibility of suspension on
cords or thongs attached to this individual’s waist.
Grooved Stones
cm

Figure 28. Winged bannerstone of limestone found broken
into two pieces, in association with Burial 44.

a

Two varieties of grooved stones were recovered
from the Early Archaic burials at Buckeye Knoll.
Specimens of the most abundant (n=17) variety are
made from hard, compact, fine-grained quartzites

b
cm

c

d

Figure 29. Perforated limestone plummets, found as pairs with Burial 8 (a-b) and
Burial 66 (c-d).

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

61

Figure 30. A representative selection of quartzite grooved stones from various burials.
Note that the re-assembled specimen on the lower right, from Burial 6, had been smashed
and the pieces scattered within the grave.

in colors ranging from deep purple, reddish-brown,
to light gray. Such quartzites are abundant in
cobble form in alluvial gravels of the Guadalupe
River (Bill Birmingham, personal communication,
2004). These specimens (Figure 30) have variable

length-to-width ratios (ranging from 1.2:1 to 2.7:1),
and thus have shapes varying from relatively short
and stubby to gracefully elongated.
Five specimens are made of limestone; these are
all relatively short, with ovate shapes, and bear cut

62

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

c

d

cm
Figure 31. Limestone grooved stones from various burials. Specimen d, from Burial 6, had
been broken and the pieces scattered within the grave.

and/or abraded V-shaped grooves that circumscribe
the artifacts, running parallel to the long axes (Figure 31). The grooves on the quartzite specimens are
very shallow (0.5-2.0 mm deep) and range between
8-13.6 mm in width. They were made by means of a
carefully controlled pecking action, and have even,
neatly parallel edges. As with the limestone variety,
the grooves in the quartzite specimens circumscribe
the stones along their long axes.
As may be seen in the accompanying illustrations, the quartzite specimens are all expertly
shaped, are relatively thick and bulbous at the
mid-sections, and then are symmetrically constricted before flaring out at the ends. The shapes
are clearly deliberate, and must have been created
by means of meticulous pecking, grinding, and
polishing of the hard stone. The surfaces of all
specimens are well smoothed, and in some cases
lightly polished. The surfaces within the grooves
were frequently less finely smoothed and were usually left unpolished.

Based on contexts and associations, the quartzite and limestone varieties were used contemporaneously, and were probably functionally equivalent. A
broken (intentionally “killed”) limestone specimen
(see Figure 31d) was found in Burial 6, in association with 10 quartzite specimens, one of which (see
Figure 30, lower right) had also been intentionally
smashed. Burial 65 contained a pair of grooved
stones (Figure 32), one of the quartzite variety, the
other of the limestone variety. These items were
found resting next to each other, indicating with
virtual certainty that they were emplaced together
as a pair.
The function of these artifacts is unknown.
They have a general resemblance to some Waco
sinkers, ovate-to-elongated stones with notched or
grooved ends, reported mainly from inland Central
and North-central Texas (e.g., Watt 1938; Story
1990; Turner and Hester 1999). While the Buckeye
Knoll specimens are more elaborately shaped and
more carefully finished than is typically the case

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

63

a

cm

b

Figure 32. A pair of grooved stones found together in Burial 65: a, limestone; b, quartzite.

with Waco sinkers, it is possible that all of these
artifacts are generically related in terms of function and basic formal characteristics. Based on a
redundant co-occurrence with Late Paleoindian
and/or Early Archaic dart point types from surface
contexts, it has been suggested that Waco sinkers
pertain to a relatively early portion of the regional
culture chronology (Boyd and Shafer 1997; Story
1990). This finds apparent support in the fact that
Waco sinker-like grooved stones were recovered
from strata pertaining to terminal Paleoindian and/
or Early Archaic periods at the Wilson Leonard
site near the eastern margin of the Edwards Plateau (Sullivan 1998). It is perhaps likely that the
grooved stones from Buckeye Knoll, in particular
the relatively elaborate quartzite specimens, represent a supra-mundane variant of a more widespread utilitarian artifact form, a variant possibly
produced and reserved for use in ritualistic (in this
case, mortuary) contexts.
Shell Ornaments
Shell ornaments are by far the most abundant
class of artifact (n=1770) from the Early Archaic
cemetery. Of these, 1323 specimens were found
in direct association with individual burials, while
the remaining 447 were found scattered within the

surrounding Zone 3 matrix. The vast majority of the
shell ornaments (n=1725, or 97.5 percent) consist
of beads made from the shells of the tiny marine
gastropod, Marginella apicina. These shells were
transformed into beads by the simple tactic of creating a small hole in the outer whorl by means of
abrasion (Figure 33e). The fact that 419 specimens
were “floating” in the Zone 3 matrix is explained by
the ease by which these tiny, light-weight, objects
could be displaced by the bioturbational activities of
small animals (e.g., pocket gophers, insects, worms)
and root activity.
Also present in the Zone 3 matrix, and likely
originally associated with one or more Early Archaic
burials, were two olive shell beads (see Figure 33d),
and a single fragment of a tubular whelk columella
bead (see Figure 33f). Ten pendants made from
bivalve shells were found in direct association
with burials. In these cases, each shell had a single
suspension hole drilled near one end; there were no
other observable modifications (Figures 33a-c and
34a-c). Burial 55, an adult female in a seated position, had four such pendants against the upper-front
portion of the chest cavity, as though they had been
originally suspended as a necklace. Three were
made from freshwater mussel shells (Straphitus undulatus) and the fourth was made from a shell of the
estuarine clam species sunray venus (Macrocallista

64

Texas Archeological Society

b

a

cm

d

e

f
c

Figure 33. Shell ornaments from various burials in the Early Archaic cemetery: a-c, sunray venus clamshell pendants (in
c, the suspension hole may be worn away by deterioration of the shell); d, olive shell bead; e, Marginella shell beads;
f, fragment of a tubular conch columella bead.

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

65

cm

Figure 34. Pendants made from freshwater mussel shells, all found in the chest area of Burial 55, an adult female,
suggesting that they formed part of a necklace.

66

Texas Archeological Society

nimbosa). Six sunray venus pendants of the same
kind were found as a cluster in Burial 26, the poorly
preserved interment of an adult female and a ca.
three year old child.

Each tooth bears a bi-conically drilled hole near its
proximal end. These teeth came from a moderately
large canid, probably a good-sized dog or a coyote.

Artifacts of Bone, Antler, and
Mammalian Canine Teeth

A total of 12 burials contained ochre (iron oxide) pigments in the form of either small nodules
or powder. Red ochre was found in 10 graves, with
eight graves containing from one to several small
nodules, and two containing small masses of ochre
powder. Two additional graves contained a few
small nodules of yellow ochre. As mentioned above,
a bifacial perform associated with one burial (No.
21) was stained with red ochre powder.

The greatest concentration of bone and antler
artifacts (Figure 35) consists of the flint knapping
tools contained in the already mentioned tool kit
associated with Burial 8, an adult male. The largest
of these is the proximal portion of a white-tailed
deer antler (Figure 35c). There was no discernible
use wear on this piece, and it may be that it was
included for use as a knapping billet in the afterlife.
Four specimens, two of bone and two of antler,
have ends that were rounded off by use, and these
are thought to have served as small billets or flakers. A thin and elongated piece of mammal (deer?)
long bone (Figure 35g) has a pointed distal tip and
is rounded on the proximal end and, and could have
served as a tool for fine pressure flaking. A larger
and thicker section of bone, also with a pointed end
(Figure 35h), may have had a similar function. Also
found within this same cluster of bone and antler
tools were two unmodified canid radii. Based on
their size and the absence of any sign of utilization,
these probably came from a single fairly large dog,
and perhaps were token representations of a hunting
dog favored by the adult male in Burial 8.
A second, smaller knapping tool kit was found
with Burial 49, a flexed adult male. As in Burial 8,
the tools were found as a cluster resting next to the
individual’s hip. Included were a section of deer
metapodial with a pointed distal end, possibly for
pressure flaking, and a fragment of deer antler that
may be the remains of a partially decayed billet.
An elongated, blade-like chert flake and two small
lanceolate dart points (see Figure 14e-f) were found
resting next to these tools.
Two other items, a thin and finely shaped distal
fragment of an awl or needle with Burial 7, a flexed
adult of advanced age (>55 years) and indeterminate
sex, and an unmodified basal deer antler fragment
with Burial 75, a poorly preserved adult also of
indeterminate sex, complete the inventory of bone/
antler tools.
Finally, five perforated canid canine teeth (Figure 36), probably beads, were associated with Burial
55, the adult female mentioned above who had four
associated bivalve shell pendants (see Figure 34).

Ochre Pigments

The Early Archaic Cemetery:
Its Significance and Implications
The early cemetery at Buckeye Knoll is a
unique archeological phenomenon in Texas. While
numerous other sizeable prehistoric cemeteries have
been documented on the Texas coastal plain, they
all pertain to much later time periods. Well-known
examples are the Late Archaic cemeteries in the
lower-Brazos/Colorado river areas such as Ernest
Witte, Group 2 (41AU36, Hall 1981), and Crestmont (41WH39, Hall 2002), Loma Sandia in Live
Oak County (41LK28, Taylor and Highley 1995)
and large coastal cemeteries such as Callo del Oso
(41NU2; Jackson et al. 2004; Ricklis 1997) and the
Oso Dune site (41NU37, Cox and deFrance 1997)
near Corpus Christi. These various sites exhibit
significant differences in modes of burial (supine extended body positions at the lower Brazos/Colorado
river sites vs. flexed burials at Loma Sandia and the
coastal cemeteries) and kinds of associated mortuary artifacts (stone gorgets, boatstones, corner-tang
bifaces and large whelk shell pendants at the lower
Brazos/Colorado sites vs. projectile points, milling
stones, and tubular stone pipes at Loma Sandia).
Despite such differences, which, in combination
suggest that there were geographically distinct
mortuary traditions on the coastal plain during the
Late Archaic, the general period to which all of these
sites pertain (all date to after 1000 B.C. [Hall 1981;
Taylor and Highley 1995; see also Perttula 2001]),
the suggestion has been made that the cultural
conditions that fostered the establishment of large
cemeteries (increasing population densities and a
concomitant emergence of group territorialities that

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain

67

c
b

a

cm

e
g
d

h

f

Figure 35. Bone and antler tools from the flint knapping tool kit found with Burial 8: a, e-f, small billets or flaking tools;
b, d, bone billets; c, portion of a large section of deer antler; g-h, pointed bone tools, probably used for pressure flaking.

68

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

c

d

e
cm

Figure 36. Beads made of perforated canine teeth of a medium-sized canid mammal (dog, coyote?), found with Burial
55 and probably part of the same perforated bivalve necklace shown in Figure 33.

were marked and legitimized by formal cemeteries;
e.g., Story 1985), emerged during the Late Archaic
only after long-term regional population growth.
The presence of the sizeable cemetery at Buckeye Knoll roughly four to six thousand years earlier
requires a reconsideration of this model. If it is
assumed that large, formal cemeteries do, in fact,
reflect the emergence of territories controlled by
corresponding socio-economic groups, then it must
be concluded that such factors had emerged on the
Texas coastal plain by as early as cal 7000 years
B.P. Thus, the idea that the region saw a gradual
and largely unidirectional trend toward increasing
population density from the Early Archaic to the
Late Archaic may be too simplistic. The Buckeye
Knoll cemetery population was sustained by a
subsistence economy based on a mix of inland
(terrestrial-riverine) food resources and coastalestuarine resources, and the combination may have
provided a return on labor investment that could
support a relatively high local population density
by 7000 B.P., leading to the establishment of group
territoriality and its corollary, a formal cemetery
that served as a marker of territorial identity and
control. Whether or not other, contemporaneous,

groups in the surrounding region were similarly
organized and created comparable cemeteries cannot be answered at present, although this certainly
seems possible given the number of coastal plain
streams flowing into estuarine bays along the coast,
and the potential for other groups to have had similar adaptive systems that incorporated both inland
and coastal resources into subsistence economies.
Buckeye Knoll and the Eastern
U.S. Middle Archaic
A number of aspects of the Buckeye Knoll
cemetery suggest the emergence of a degree of
cultural complexity by cal 7000 B.P. These include:
(1) the establishment of a formal cemetery as a
specially designated place for the burial of the dead
and the performance of mortuary rituals, reflecting
a division of the landscape into distinct profane and
sacred sectors; (2) the fact that part of the male
population received preferential treatment in death
(relatively greater material “wealth” in the form
of grave goods), suggesting at least an incipient
degree of ranking within the social organization;
(3) the possible emergence of societal moieties,

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain
as reflected in a spatial duality in distributions of
mortuary artifacts in the cemetery; (4) the laborintensive and skilled production of ground stone
artifacts (bannerstones, plummets, and grooved
stones) that were interred with the deceased, suggesting the possible existence of at least part-time
craft specialists; and (5) the ability to procure
marine shell from the coast and exotic stone (e.g.,
Georgetown chert) from Central Texas, suggesting some capacity to organize exchange and/or
procurement strategies that ranged between the
Gulf coast and the Edwards Plateau region of the
interior. Perhaps most basically, hunter gatherers
on the Texas coastal plain were expressing supramundane concerns for the dead, and presumably
the existence of an afterlife, through the material
factors of a designated formal cemetery and a relatively elaborate constellation of high-value mortuary artifacts (bannerstones, plummets, grooved
stones, and the oversized stemmed biface).
While these material manifestations are presently unique for this early period in Texas, they have
recurrent counterparts in contemporaneous Middle
Archaic cultures far to the north and east, within
the central Mississippi River valley region and the
greater Southeastern U.S. Archeological research
in those areas has, in recent decades, resulted in a
cumulative data base that points to the appearance
of similarly elaborate mortuary practices represented
by graves containing various offerings that include
bannerstones, perforated plummets, oversized
bifaces, and shell ornaments (e.g., Brookes 2005;
Charles et al. 1988; Wiant et al. 2009), and wherein
such objects sometimes were intentionally broken
(ritually “killed”) upon interment with the deceased
(Johnson and Brookes 1989; Samuel O. Brookes,
personal communication, 2005), as was also the case
at Buckeye Knoll.
Most spectacularly, recent findings in the
Southeast have indicated that Middle Archaic
populations were constructing sizeable moundplaza precincts. Mounds and associated enclosures
at sites such as Watson Brake, Frenchman’s Bend
and Caney Mounds in Louisiana (Gibson and Carr
2004; Saunders et al. 1997; Saunders 2004; Clark
2004; Kidder and Sassaman 2009), as well as a
number of sites in Mississippi (Brookes 2004:111),
are now known to have been constructed as early
as the sixth millennium B.P. Thus, monumental
earthworks were being raised several thousand
years prior to the construction of the Late Archaic
mounds and concentric earthworks at Poverty

69

Point, long thought to be the earliest example of
such activity in the eastern U.S.
Samuel O. Brookes (1997, 2004, 2005) has
recently argued that the Middle Archaic in the
Southeast witnessed the emergence of some degree
of socio-cultural complexity, based on finds that
suggest specialized production of artifacts that
were imbued with symbolic power, such as stone
effigy beads, bannerstones, quartzite grooved stones,
plummets and oversized chipped-stone bifaces.
Brookes suggests that the raw materials for the production of zoomorphic effigy beads were obtained
through exchange networks and that finished beads
were also distributed over a wide area via comparably extensive networks (Brookes 2005). Oversized
Benton-type bifaces were exchanged throughout
northeastern and eastern Mississippi, and were buried in caches that also included bannerstones (Johnson and Brookes 1989). Brookes notes that the early
Southeastern mound groups represent a period of
complexity several millennia prior to the emergence
of the temple-mound complexes of Mississippian
cultures, the products of complex, chiefdom-level
societies supported by extensive maize agriculture.
Further, he suggests that the oversized bifaces of
the Middle Archaic may have been an early expression of the ceremonial swords or ritual dance
knives (atassas) documented ethnohistorically as
Southeastern ceremonial objects and represented
archeologically by oversized flaked-stone knives
found in Mississippian period burials (Brookes
2005). In short, Brookes suggests that some of the
fundamental aspects of the cultural complexity of
Mississippian times have antecedents as far back in
time as the Middle Archaic.
In their recent discussion of the Archaic
cultures of the Southeast, Kidder and Sassaman
(2009:671) also remark upon the phenomenon of
Middle Archaic complexity, noting that “…a hallmark of the Middle Archaic in some regions is extensive elaboration in mortuary behavior and grave
furnishings. The available evidence indicates the
pace of change was increasing rapidly and was especially marked during the later part of the Middle
Archaic, or by 6800-5700 cal B.P.” Kidder and Sassaman (2009:675) suggest, moreover, that Middle
Archaic mound constructions represented “the
creation and perpetuation of a ritual landscape,”
but that they “need not be seen as the products of a
highly complex or elaborate economic or political
hierarchy” (see also Saunders 2004). They go on to
state, however, that the mounds do:

70

Texas Archeological Society
…clearly indicate the existence of leadership positions, given the need to plan,
mobilize labor for, and execute the construction of these features. The absence
of markers of permanent economic
inequality or political ranking suggests
that these apparently complex behaviors
were embedded within cosmological or
ideational realms without being manifest in permanent structures of political
authority or economic control…Across
much of the Southeast, social organization appears for the first time to have been
increasing in relative complexity…and
specific nonfunctional or exotic artifacts
suggest that some people or groups had
a status that was socially, and possibly,
politically distinctive. Some people
were being buried with more goods, and
their graves or grave furniture was more
elaborate than the rest of the population
(Kidder and Sassaman 2009:675).

These observations are directly relevant to
understanding and contextualizing essential aspects of the contemporaneous Buckeye Knoll
cemetery. At Buckeye Knoll, we see evidence of
the intentional segregation of a specific locus on
the landscape as a ritual mortuary precinct, and
the selection of a naturally mounded landform
for this purpose may reflect an ideological, even
archetypal, importance of mounds, as expressed
in the artificially constructed features in the Southeast. Further, the Buckeye Knoll data suggest that
a portion of the male population had relatively
high status, perhaps indicative of a socially, and
possibly, politically distinctive social subgroup, as
well as the possible existence of societal moieties.
The fact that the highest-ranked burials at Buckeye
Knoll were adult males suggests, moreover, that
relatively higher status was achieved rather than
inherited, given that in a strict pattern of inherited
status, we should expect to see subadult burials
with comparably high status and no such examples were clearly present in the Buckeye Knoll
cemetery. Nonetheless, the data do suggest that a
portion of the adult male population had relatively
elevated status, and it may be reasonable to infer
that those individuals were exceptional by virtue of
demonstrated abilities as leaders and/or specialists
(e.g., specialized craftsmen, or in the case of Burial
74, perhaps a shaman who provided a metaphysical
link between society and the spirit realm).

A Long-Term, Diachronic
Perspective
With a calibrated age range of ca. 7500-6200
B.P., the Buckeye Knoll cemetery is at least as old
as the relatively complex cultural expressions currently documented for the Southeastern U.S. Middle
Archaic, and it predates the construction of the
early mound complexes in Louisiana and Mississippi by more than 1000 years. Thus, we should not
automatically assume that the people of the Texas
coastal plain were simply passive recipients of influences coming from more “advanced” cultures of the
Mississippi River valley or areas further to the east.
Rather, it seems more appropriate to view Buckeye Knoll as one expression of a very widespread
process of emergent complexity that was shared
by societies who were distributed over a very wide
area that included the Southeast, the Mississippi valley, and points as far west and south as the central
coastal plain of Texas.
The fact that this pattern is recognizable within
mortuary contexts suggests that it was ideologically
rooted, rather than a reflection of an institutionalized allocation of socioeconomic or political power.
In other words, the material expressions found in
the graves may be viewed as representations of
a fundamental belief system or worldview that
characterized much of the Eastern Middle Archaic
and was shared by hunter-gatherers living on the
Texas coastal plain. While we cannot specify the
content of such a belief system, we can, at least,
infer that it included concepts about the afterlife
(since it is manifested in mortuary contexts), that
it involved a magico-religious dimension, and that
its archeological markers included specific material
appurtenances, such as bannerstones, perforated
plummets, grooved stones, shell ornaments, and
oversized bifaces, as well as behavioral patterns
such as the ritual breakage or “killing” of such
objects, all of which are traits found throughout the
greater Southeast (but not all traits are necessarily
present at any given location).
While this particular constellation of traits is
temporally restricted to the Middle Holocene (i.e.,
the Early Archaic II at Buckeye Knoll and the contemporaneous Middle Archaic in the Mississippi
valley/Southeast), a comparable and analogous pattern existed several thousand years later, after ca.
1000 B.C., during the Late Archaic of Texas and the
contemporaneous Early to Middle Woodland periods
of the East. The distinctive Late Archaic mortuary

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain
pattern identified by Grant Hall (1981, 2002) in the
area of the lower Brazos and Colorado rivers, while
including a completely different mortuary artifact
assemblage, expresses a commonality with contemporaneous cultures to the north and east, analogous
to the much earlier linkages evidenced at Buckeye
Knoll. Numerous Late Archaic cemetery sites in the
lower Brazos-Colorado area are characterized by a
high percentage of graves containing mortuary artifacts, which in turn suggests an ideational importance
placed on mortuary ritual. Moreover, the specific artifact traits involved include items such as boatstones,
two-hole stone gorgets, large marine shell pendants
and, at the Bowser site (41FB3), a pin fashioned
from native copper (Patterson 2000), all of which
have direct counterparts in the elaborate mortuary
assemblages of eastern Early and Middle Woodland
cultures such as Adena and/or Hopewell and/or the
many related manifestations across the eastern half of
the North American continent. Hall (1981:291-309),
in fact, ascribed the redundant occurrence of such
artifacts on the Texas coastal plain to a “Late Archaic
and Woodland Import-Export Sphere.” He further
noted (Hall 1981:299-302) that this “sphere,” and
the specific artifact traits that characterize it, seem to
disappear from the Texas archeological record by the
period defined as the Late Prehistoric, and that “the
retreating westerly margin of the sphere reached the
Allen’s Creek [lower Brazos drainage] area between
A.D. 200 and 400.” Thus, the Late Archaic-Woodland
interaction ceased at approximately the same time
that the intensive mortuary ritual and exchange patterns of Middle Woodland Hopewell, and related
Eastern cultural patterns (such as Marksville in the
Lower Mississippi Valley area), were coming to an
end (cf. Fagan 2005). LeRoy Johnson remarked upon
this phenomenon and has suggested that the Late
Archaic-Woodland connections reflect the spread of
a belief system that was prevalent during this period
(Johnson and Goode 1995:96-97).
In light of this evidence, combined with the
Buckeye Knoll findings, it is apparent that prehistoric hunter gatherers on the Texas coastal plain
had long-term connections with cultures far to the
northeast, and that the intensity of the connections
varied markedly through time, with the periods of
the most pronounced linkages being in the Early
Archaic II, ca. 5000 B.C., and in the Late Archaic,
after 1000 B.C. and until ca. A.D. 400. In this connection it should be noted that currently available
evidence suggests minimal emphasis on mortuary
activity, and an absence of elaborately accoutered

71

graves, during the Texas Middle Archaic (i.e., ca.
cal 6000-4000 B.P.) and Late Prehistoric periods on
the central coastal plain of Texas (Figure 37). The
temporal intervals of heightened mortuary elaboration on the Texas coastal plain correspond with
periods of emergent complexity in the East, first
in the Middle Archaic and then later, in the EarlyMiddle Woodland periods, eras marked by relatively elaborate mortuary patterns and widespread
exchanges of materials and dissemination of ideas
across eastern North America. Given that the central
coastal plain of Texas is geographically situated at
the southwestern margin of these developments, it
can be hypothesized that manifestations within this
Texas region represent the effects of a heightened intensity of belief systems during specific periods, and
concomitant behavioral manifestations, throughout
the eastern half of the continent.
In sum, the Archaic cultures of the Texas coastal
plain should not be simplistically characterized as
either strictly egalitarian, nor were they isolated
from cultural developments taking place elsewhere.
They were, in fact, participants in a much larger cultural universe that extended to the Mississippi River
valley and into the greater Southeastern U.S., and
their mortuary activities reflect the waxing and waning of systemic energy over the millennia that was
channeled through belief systems and, ultimately,
manifested in mortuary ritual.
Acknowledgements
Funding for the Buckeye Knoll project was
provided by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Galveston District, under a contract with Coastal
Environments, Inc. (CEI). Richard A. Weinstein, a senior archeologist with CEI, directed testing at the site
in the late 1980s as part of an archeological survey of
the Victoria Barge Canal, on which Buckeye Knoll is
located, and visited the site several times during the
2000-2001 data recovery excavations and shared his
knowledge of the site. The data recovery field crew
is thanked for their hard work and perseverance during the nine months of excavations. These capable
people included Bruce Albert, Nancy Beaman, Jimmy
Bluhm, Ashley Hall, Kelly Janway, Floyd Jones,
David Martin, Donna Nagle, Richard Santos, Greg
Sundborg, Kali Tighe, Matt Taylor, and Doug Wells.
Madeleine-Sophie Ricklis and Laurid Broughton
processed the many thousands of specimens in
CEI’s Corpus Christi laboratory. The Museum of the

72

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 37. Bar graph showing percentage of graves with inclusive mortuary artifacts from various mortuary sites on the
central coastal plain of Texas, interpreted to reflect long-term fluctuations in the elaboration and importance of mortuary
ritual since ca. 7000 B.P. (ages are based on calibrated radiocarbon dates). Note peaks in mortuary offerings ca. 7000
B.P. (Buckeye Knoll) and in the Late Archaic, 2800-1800 B.P. Data (other than from Buckeye Knoll) are derived from
Perttula (2001).

Coastal Bend, Victoria College, agreed to serve as the
permanent curational facility for the non-mortuary
portion of the Buckeye Knoll collection. Glen H.
Doran (Florida State University) and Christopher
Stojanowski (Arizona State University) also visited
the site during the excavations, and Glen generously
extracted sediment cores, using a Geoprobe coring
device he transported from Tallahassee, from the
nearby floodplain for fossil pollen samples for paleoenvironmental reconstruction carried out by Bruce
M. Albert. Bill Birmingham (Victoria, Texas) donated
his time and considerable skill to reproduce examples
of the quartzite grooved stones recovered with burials
and he, along with the late E. H. “Smitty” Schmiedlin,

shared their first-hand knowledge of Victoria-area archeology with the author. Alexander N. Cox produced
the fine graphite illustrations of mortuary artifacts that
are included in this article. Samuel O. Brookes, archeologist with the U. S. Forest Service (Mississippi)
was most helpful in introducing the author to certain
fundamental aspects of the Archaic of the Southeast.
The Dupont Corporation (now Invista, Inc.) allowed
us to conduct excavations on their property, and to
tap into their water-pumping station on the banks of
the Guadalupe River in order to water-screen all of
the excavated sediments from the site. All of these
people and organizations are thanked for their interest
and participation.

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain
References Cited
Barrett, J. W.
2007 Appendix D: Analysis of Use Wear on Stone Tools
Recovered at the Buckeye Knoll Site (41VT98). In
Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the Buckeye
Knoll Site, 41VT98: A Major Locus of Hunter-Gatherer Occupation and an Early Archaic Cemetery
Near the Lower Guadalupe River, Victoria County,
Texas, compiled by R. A. Ricklis, pp. 1430-1601.
Draft report submitted to the U. S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Galveston District by Coastal Environments, Inc., Corpus Christi, Texas, in press.
Bement, L. C.
1989 Excavations at 41BP19, The Kennedy Bluffs Site,
Bastrop County, Texas. Contract Reports in Archeology No. 5. Highway Design Division, State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.
Binford, L. R.
1971 Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their Potential.
In Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary
Practices, edited by J. A. Brown, pp. 6-38. Memoir
No. 25. Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D. C.
Boyd, C. L. and H. J. Shafer
1997 Another Look at the Distribution, Age and Function
of Waco “Sinkers.” Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:263-271.
Brookes, S. O.
1997 Aspects of the Middle Archaic. In Proceedings of
the 17th Mid-South Archaeological Conference,
Memphis Tennessee, June 29, 1996, edited by C.
H. McNutt, pp. 55-70. Occasional Paper No. 18.
Anthropological Research Center, University of
Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee.
2004 Cultural Complexity in the Middle Archaic of Mississippi. In Signs of Power: The Rise of Cultural
Complexity in the Southeast, edited by J. L. Gibson
and P. L. Carr, pp. 97-113. University of Alabama
Press, Tuscaloosa.
2005 Assuaging Archaic Assumptions. Paper presented
at the 25th Annual Mid-South Conference, Tunica,
Mississippi.

Brown, J. A.
1981 The Search for Rank in Prehistoric Burials. In The
Archaeology of Death, edited by R. Chapman, I.
Kinnes and K. Randsborg, pp. 25-68. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, England.
Brown, J. A. (editor)
1971 Approaches to the Social Dimensons of Mortuary
Practices. Memoir No. 25. Society for American
Archaeology, Washington, D. C.

73

Brown, L. F., J. L. Brewton, J. H. McGowen, T. J. Evans, W.
L. Fisher, and D. G. Groat
1976 Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coast:
Corpus Christi Area. Bureau of Economic Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Chapman, R., I. Kinnes, and K. Randsborg (editors)
1981 The Archaeology of Death. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, England.
Charles, D. K., S. R. Leigh, and J. E. Buikstra
1988 The Archaic and Woodland Cemeteries at the
Elizabeth Site in the Lower Illinois Valley. Center for
American Archaeology, Kampsville Archaeological
Center. Kampsville, Illinois.
Clark, J. E.
2004 Surrounding the Sacred: Geometry and Design of
Early Mound Groups as Meaning and Function. In
Signs of Power: The Rise of Cultural Complexity
in the Southeast, edited by J. Gibson and P. Carr,
pp. 162-213. The University of Alabama Press,
Tuscaloosa.
Cox, K. A. and S. D. deFrance
1997 The Oso Dune Site (41NU37): A Late Archaic
Cemetery on the Central Texas Coast. La Tierra
24(3):15-33.
Doran, G. H.
2007 Age and Sex Distributions in the Buckeye Knoll
Burial Population. In Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the Buckeye Knoll Site, 41VT98: A Major
Locus of Hunter-Gatherer Occupation and an Early
Archaic Cemetery Near the Lower Guadalupe River,
Victoria County, Texas, compiled by R. A. Ricklis, pp.
970-1004. Draft report submitted to the U. S. Army
Corps of Engineers, Galveston District, by Coastal
Environments, Inc., Corpus Christi, Texas, in press.
Doran, G. H. (editor and compiler)
2002 Windover: Multidisciplinary Investigations of an
Early Archaic Florida Cemetery. University Press
of Florida, Gainesville.
Doran, G. H. and C. Stojanowski
2007 Bioarchaeology of Buckeye Knoll: Skeletal Analysis.
In Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the Buckeye
Knoll Site, 41VT98: A Major Locus of Hunter-Gatherer Occupation and an Early Archaic Cemetery
Near the Lower Guadalupe River, Victoria County,
Texas, compiled by R. A. Ricklis, pp. 636-770. Draft
report submitted to the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District, by Coastal Environments,
Inc., Corpus Christi, Texas, in press.

74

Texas Archeological Society

Ensor, H. B. (editor)
1998 Eagle’s Ridge: A Stratified Archaic and Clear Lake
Period Shell Midden, Wallisville Lake Project Area,
Chambers County, Texas. 2 Vols. Reports of Investigations No. 4, Wallisville Lake Series. Geo-Marine,
Inc. Plano, Texas.
Fagan, B. M.
2005 Ancient North America. Thames and Hudson,
London.
Frederick, C. D. and M. D. Bateman
2007 Appendix A: Geoarchaeological Investigations at the
Buckeye Knoll Site. In Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the Buckeye Knoll Site, 41VT98: A Major
Locus of Hunter-Gatherer Occupation and an Early
Archaic Cemetery Near the Lower Guadalupe River,
Victoria County, Texas, compiled by R. A. Ricklis,
pp. 1210-1280. Draft report submitted to the U. S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District by
Coastal Environments, Inc., Corpus Christi, Texas,
in press.
Gibson, J. L., and P. J. Carr (editors)
2004 Signs of Power: The Rise of Cultural Complexity in the Southeast. University of Alabama Press,
Tuscaloosa.
Hall, G. D.
1981 Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory
of the Lower Brazos River Valley, Texas. Research
Report No. 61. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.

2002 Archaeology at the Crestmont Site. General Investigations Report No. 1. Archaeology Laboratory,
Texas Tech University. Lubbock.
Hard, R. J.
2007 The Stable Isotope Data from Buckeye Knoll:
Contextual Interpretations. In Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the Buckeye Knoll Site, 41VT98: A
Major Locus of Hunter-Gatherer Occupation and an
Early Archaic Cemetery Near the Lower Guadalupe
River, Victoria County, Texas, compiled by R. A.
Ricklis, pp. 617-635. Draft report submitted to the U.
S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District, by
Coastal Environments, Inc., Corpus Christi, Texas,
in press.
Hunter, D. G.
2002 Lithics. In Archaeological Investigations at the
Guadalupe Bay Site (41 CL 2): Late Archaic through
Historic Occupation along the Channel to Victoria,
Calhoun County, Texas, edited by R. A. Weinstein,
pp. 363-442. Coastal Environments, Inc. Baton
Rouge, Louisiana.

Jackson, A. T., S. A. Tomka, R. B. Mahoney, and B. A.
Meissner
2004 The Cayo del Oso Site (41NU2), Volume I, A Historical Summary of Exploration of a Prehistoric
Cemetery on the Coast of False Oso Bay, Nueces
County, Texas. Archeology Program Report No. 68,
Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Division, and Archaeological Survey Report
No. 350, Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of San Antonio.
Jackson, B. E., J. L. Boone, and M. Henneberg
1986 Possible Case of Endemic Treponematosis in a Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Population on the Texas
Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
57:183-193.
Jeffries, R. W.
1982 The Black Earth Site. In The Carrier Mills Archaeological Project: Human Adaptation in the Saline
Valley, Illinois, edited by R. W. Jeffries and B. M.
Butler, pp. 75-451. Research Paper 33. Center for
Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois
University, Carbondale.
Johnson, J. K., and S. O. Brookes
1989 Benton Points, Turkey Tails and Cache Blades:
Middle Archaic Exchange in the Southeast. Southeastern Archaeology 8:134-145.
Johnson, L. and G. Goode
1995 Holocene Climates and Archeolgocical Preiods
on the Eastern Edwards Plateau. In Past Cultures
and Climates at Jonas Terrace, 41ME29, Medina
County, Texas, by L. Johnson, pp. 76-102. Office of
the State Archeologist Report 40. Texas Department
of Transportation and Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Kidder, T. R. and K. E. Sassaman
2009 The View from the Southeast. In Archaic Societies,
Diversity and Complexity Across the Midcontinent,
edited by T. E. Emerson, D. L. Mc Elrath, and A. C.
Fortier, pp. 565-606. State University of New York
Press, Albany, New York.
Lutz, D. L.
2000 The Archaic Bannerstone: Its Chronological History
and Purpose from 6000 B.C. to 1000 B. C. Hyneck
Printing, Richland Center, Wisconsin.
Mayer-Oakes, W. J.
1986 El Inga: A Paleoindian Site in the Sierra of Northern
Ecuador. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society No. 76. Philadelphia.
Morrow, J. E. and T. A. Morrow
1999 Geographic Variation in Fluted Projectile Points:
A Hemispheric Perspective. American Antiquity
64(2):215-230.

Ricklis—New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain
O’Shea, J. M.
1984 Mortuary Variability: An Archaeological Investigation. Academic Press, Orlando.
Patterson, L. W.
2000 Late Archaic Mortuary Tradition of Southeast Texas.
La Tierra 27(2):28-44.
Pearson, G.
2002 Pan-Continental Paleo-Indian Expansions and Interactions as Viewed from the Earliest Lithic Industries of Lower Central America. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, University of Kansas,
Lawrence, Kansas.
Perttula, T. K.
2001 Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices in the Rio
Grande Plains and Central Coastal Plains Archaeological Regions of Texas. La Tierra 28(3-4):2-83.
Puseman, K. and L. S. Cummings
2007 Appendix C: Pollen, Phytolith, Macrofloral, and
Protein Residue Analyses at the Buckeye Knoll Site,
41VT98. In Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of
the Buckeye Knoll Site, 41VT98: A Major Locus of
Hunter-Gatherer Occupation and an Early Archaic
Cemetery Near the Lower Guadalupe River, Victoria County, Texas, compiled by R. A. Ricklis, pp.
1341-1429. Draft report submitted to the U. S. Army
Corps of Engineers, Galveston District by Coastal
Environments, Inc., Corpus Christi, Texas, in press.
Ricklis, R. A.
1996 The Karankawa Indians of Texas: An Ecological
Study of Cultural Tradition and Change. University
of Texas Press, Austin.

1997 Archaeological Testing at the Callo del Oso Site
(41NU2), Nueces County, Texas. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus Christi, Texas.

2007a Establishing the Chronology of Occupations at
Buckeye Knoll. In Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the Buckeye Knoll Site, 41VT98: A Major
Locus of Hunter-Gatherer Occupation and an
Early Archaic Cemetery Near the Lower Guadalupe
River, Victoria County, Texas, compiled by R. A.
Ricklis, pp. 228-254. Draft report submitted to the
U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District
by Coastal Environments, Inc., Corpus Christi,
Texas, in press.

2007b (compiler) Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the
Buckeye Knoll Site, 41VT98: A Major Locus of HunterGatherer Occupation and an Early Archaic Cemetery
Near the Lower Guadalupe River, Victoria County,
Texas. Draft report submitted to the U. S. Army Corps
of Engineers, Galveston District by Coastal Environments, Inc., Corpus Christi, Texas, in press.

75

Rothschild, B. M. and C. Rothschild
2007 Periosteal Reaction in “Virgin” Texas, 6,000-7,000
B. P. In Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the
Buckeye Knoll Site, 41VT98: A Major Locus of
Hunter-Gatherer Occupation and an Early Archaic
Cemetery Near the Lower Guadalupe River, Victoria County, Texas, compiled by R. A. Ricklis, pp.
964-969. Draft report submitted to the U. S. Army
Corps of Engineers, Galveston District by Coastal
Environments, Inc., Corpus Christi, Texas, in press.
Saunders, J. W.
2004 Are We Fixing to Make the Same Mistakes Again?
In Signs of Power: The Rise of Complexity in the
Southeast, edited by J. L. Gibson and P. J. Carr, pp.
146-161. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
Saunders, J. W., R. D. Mandel, R. T. Saucier, E. T. Allen, C.
T. Hallmark, J. K. Johnson, E. H. Jackson, C. M. Allen, G.
L. Stringer, D. S. Frink, J. K. Feathers, S. Williams, K. J.
Gremillion, M, F. Vidrine, and R. Jones
1997 A Mound Complex in Louisiana at 5400-5000 Years
before the Present. Science 277:1796-1799.
Scott, S. L.
2007 Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Bone. In Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the Buckeye Knoll Site,
41VT98: A Major Locus of Hunter-Gatherer Occupation and an Early Archaic Cemetery Near the
Lower Guadalupe River, Victoria County, Texas,
compiled by R. A. Ricklis, pp. 403-452. Draft report
submitted to the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Galveston District by Coastal Environments, Inc.,
Corpus Christi, Texas, in press.
Stojanowski, C.
2007 Bioarchaeology of Buckeye Knoll: Dental Analyses.
In Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the Buckeye
Knoll Site, 41VT98: A Major Locus of Hunter-Gatherer Occupation and an Early Archaic Cemetery
Near the Lower Guadalupe River, Victoria County,
Texas, compiled by R. A. Ricklis, pp. 771-953. Draft
report submitted to the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District by Coastal Environments,
Inc., Corpus Christi, Texas, in press.
Story, D. A.
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West
Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Food Production
in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19-56.
Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

1990 Culture History of the Native Americans. In The
Archeology and Bioarchaeology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, Volume 1, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A.
Burnett, J. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B.
W. Olive and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. 2 Vols.
Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.

76

Texas Archeological Society

Sullivan, L. A.
1998 Ground and Other Non-Chipped Stone Artifacts. In
Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-year Archaeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas, Volume
III: Artifacts and Special Artifact Studies, edited and
assembled by M. B. Collins, pp. 708-722. Studies in
Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, and Report
No. 10, Archeology Studies Program, Environmental
Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Taylor, A. J., and C. L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site
(41LK28): A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in
Live Oak County, Texas. 2 Vols. Studies in Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Turner, E. and T. R. Hester
1999 Stone Artifacts of the Texas Indians. 3rd Revised
Edition. Gulf Publishing Company, Houston.

Wason, P. K.
1994 The Archaeology of Rank. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, England.
Watt, F. H.
1938 The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archeologist
1(4):21-70.
Weinstein, R. A.
1992 Archaeology and Paleogeography of the Lower
Guadalupe River/San Antonio Bay Region: Cultural
Resources Investigations Along the Channel to Victoria, Calhoun and Victoria Counties, Texas. Coastal
Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.
Wiant, M. D., K. B. Farnsworth, and E. R. Hajic
2009 The Archaic Period in the Lower Illinois River Basin. In Archaic Societies, Diversity and Complexity
Across the Midcontinent, edited by T. E. Emerson,
D. L. Mc Elrath and A. C. Fortier, pp. 229-285. State
University of New York Press, Albany, New York.

The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site:
Six Thousand Years of Hunter-Gatherer Family
Cookery in South-Central North America
Alston V. Thoms and Patricia A. Clabaugh

Abstract
Excavations at the Richard Beene site (1989-2005) in south-central Texas yielded evidence for 6000 years
of intermittent occupation by hunters and gatherers. Well-preserved and well-dated Archaic components
(9000-3000 B.P.) are encased in 15 m of well-stratified, fine-grain, overbank sediments. Approximately 700
m2 of hand-excavated sediment yielded artifacts, ecofacts, and features representative of occupations during
the Early, Middle, and Late sub-periods. Types and ages of projectile points are consistent with the region’s
established culture chronology. Features also conform, in general, to types found throughout south-central
Texas and adjacent regions. What is especially remarkable about the site’s feature assemblage is its diversity
of well-preserved cooking features, including several types of family-sized ovens and open hearths. Sheet middens are thin, suggesting short-term occupations. As interpreted, all of the Archaic components at the Richard
Beene site represent short-term, multi-family encampments oriented toward procuring deer and root foods,
much like those described by Cabeza de Vaca when he traversed south-central Texas almost 500 years ago at
the dawn of the region’s written history.

Introduction
The Richard Beene site (41BX831) in southcentral Texas’ Medina River valley is a well-dated,
deeply buried, stratified locality with discrete
artifact and feature assemblages that span the Holocene epoch. Well-stratified late Pleistocene paleontological deposits extend back to at least 15,500
radiocarbon years ago (B.P.). The site is buried in
15 m of fine-grained over-bank alluvium, designated
Applewhite terrace fill. It virtually stands alone in
Texas in that it represents all of the Archaic period
in 10 m of fine-grain alluvium at a single locality
at least four hectares in size (Thoms and Mandel
2007a; Figure 1). Excavated sites of this nature
are rare along North America’s entire Gulf Coastal
Plain (Anderson and Sassaman 1996; Cable 1996;
Kimball 1993).
In the 1990s, extensive block excavations were
undertaken at the site by the Center for Ecological
Archaeology at Texas A&M University. This fieldwork, together with test excavations at nearby sites
and survey work along the Medina River (Carlson
et al. 2008), was undertaken in conjunction with

plans by the City of San Antonio to construct
Applewhite Reservoir. Accordingly, these studies
were carried out under terms specified in a Texas
State Antiquities Permit. Subsequently, the reservoir project was cancelled by public referenda
(Thoms 2007a). The Richard Beene site is among
several State Archeological Landmarks in the onceproposed reservoir area. Intermittent field work
continued there until 2005. Final results are presented in a two-volume monograph titled Archaeological and Paleoecological Investigations at the
Richard Beene Site, South-Central Texas (Thoms
and Mandel 2007a). The site is now a centerpiece
of the 1200 acre Land Heritage Institute, an ecological and cultural park along the Medina River
that is owned and operated by a community-based
non-profit foundation for educational, research,
recreation, and tourism purposes (http://www.
landheritageinstitute.org/).
Excavations at the Richard Beene site totaled
approximately 730 m2 (ca. 168 m3) and yielded
almost 100,000 artifacts (Clabaugh 2007), the vast
majority from 12 archeological deposits, herein
termed components, assigned to the Archaic period,

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

78

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Physiographic map of North America showing the location of the Richard Beene site (Thoms 2007a:Figure 1.1).

dating from ca. 9000 to 3000 B.P. Forty-four conventional radiocarbon ages in years B.P. derived
from soil bulk carbon (i.e., total decalcified soil
carbon) and charcoal in archeological features,
artifact-bearing sediments, and tree-burns establish
a chronological framework for the site’s occupation
history (Mandel et al. 2007; Figure 2). Component
nomenclature is derived from the name of the paleosol or pedocomplex that encompassed a given archeological deposit (Figure 3). These well-stratified,
varyingly preserved components are representative
of the Early (ca. 8700–6500 B.P), Middle (ca. 4100

and 4500 B.P.) and Late (ca. 3500–2800 B.P.) Archaic periods. They are overlain by a pedoturbated
Late Prehistoric component with an abundance of
fire-cracked rock (FCR) along with Perdiz points
and Leon Plain pottery (Thoms 2007b, 2007c).
This article describes and interprets Archaic
feature assemblages at the Richard Beene site.
It draws directly from chapters in the site’s
monograph, especially “Ecological Setting: The
Lower Medina River Valley and Surrounding Inner
Gulf Coastal Plain” (Thoms and Mandel 2007b),
“Feature Assemblage” (Clabaugh and Thoms

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

79

Figure 2. Schematic cross-section showing stratigraphic units, soils, and radiocarbon ages from: (a) wood charcoal; and
(b) total decalcified soil carbon (Mandel et al. 2007:Figure 3.3)

80

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Wide-angle photograph of the south wall of the reservoir spillway trench showing the approximate boundaries
of paleosols and the locations of type profiles for stratigraphic units.

2007), and “Archaeological and Paleoecological
Records: Summary and Synthesis” (Thoms 2007d).
To provide an ecological context for the site’s
archeological records, we begin with an overview
of environmental and paleoenvironmental settings.
To set the archeological stage, we present a
chronologically organized overview of the Richard
Beene site’s Archaic components. It is followed by
discussions of the site’s feature assemblages with
emphasis on cooking features. We conclude with
our contention that the preponderance of evidence
indicates that features in these components, spanning
6000 years, are representative almost exclusively of
cooking facilities and discard patterns indicative of
very short-term, multi-family encampments.
Ecological Contexts
Archeological and paleoecological data from
the Richard Beene site provide a long-term perspective on the use of a riverine locality in a subhumid,
subtropical savannah setting near the western edge
of North America’s Gulf Coastal Plain. The site lies
within the northern limits of today’s Tamaulipan
biotic province which is characterized, in part, by
Neotropical species such as jaguar, peccary, coati,
armadillo, and alligator (Blair 1950). Its setting
is decidedly riverine, buried beneath a 15 m high
terrace along the Medina River. Its position on the
regional landscape is notably ecotonal, being near
the intersections of four major ecological zones:
(1) Post Oak Savannah; (2) South Texas Plains; (3)

Edwards Plateau; and (4) Blackland Prairie (Figure
4). A presence, today and probably in the past,
of hickory, oak, pecan, sycamore, and bald-knee
cypress, together with raccoons, white-tailed deer,
turkeys, and alligators, calls attention to the site’s
proximity to forests that dominate the continent’s
southeastern quadrant.
Throughout the last 9000 years B.P., the Richard
Beene site was well-placed as a locality for efficient
exploitation of subsistence-related resources, remains of which were recovered or inferred to once
have been present in the site’s archeological deposits
(Figure 5). Bedrock constrictions just upstream from
the site limit the width of the river’s meander belt.
As such, the spatial relationship between the channel
and the site changed little during the Holocene and
last few millennia of the Pleistocene (Mandel et al.
2007). Accordingly, spatial relationships at a microenvironmental level (cf. Butzer 1982) remained
stable among the local floodplain, terrace tread, and
upland landscapes.
Salient characteristics of the local setting
throughout the Holocene include: (1) proximity—
ca. 100 m—to the channel of the Medina River,
which provided potable water, fish, turtles, river
mussels, and gravel bars with chert and limestone
cobbles suitable for tool making; (2) proximity—ca.
200–300 m—to sandstone outcrops that provided
cook stone (i.e., FCR) raw material for use in earth
ovens and other cooking facilities as well as for
grinding slabs; (3) adjacency to a comparatively
wide portion of the floodplain that served as a ready
source of fuel, wood for shelters and tool/utensil

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

81

Figure 4. The Richard Beene site in relation to Texas’ ecological zones (modified from Fry et al. 1984).

manufacturing, plant material for making mats and
baskets, as well as pecans, deer, and other foods;
(4) situated at the upstream end of a broad, partially
wooded, flood-prone terrace that supported a variety
of game animals and plant foods including false
garlic, onions, rain lily, and probably camas; and
(5) proximity—ca. 0.5–1 km—to upland savannahs,
habitat for white-tailed deer, pronghorn, bison, a
variety of small animals, and plant foods, especially
prickly pear.
Significant environmental changes certainly
occurred in the surrounding uplands during the last
9000 years, but concurrent changes on the Medina
River bottomland may have amounted to only minor
fluctuations in the relative amount of arboreal coverage and types of grasses. Rates of sedimentation and
pedogenesis also fluctuated, but floodplain alluvium
remained primarily overbank silty clay (Mandel et
al. 2007). This kind of depositional environment
tended to preserve the spatial integrity of artifacts
and features in most of the site’s components.

Although the same species of river mussels were exploited throughout the Holocene (Neck 2007; Brown
2007), isotopic analysis of their shells revealed a
marked cool period about 4100 B.P. and, compared
to modern mean temperatures, slightly warmer conditions between 8800 and 8100 B.P. (Brown 2007).
Analysis of snail shell types and their isotopic
signatures recovered from 22 soil horizons between
the modern surface and the base of the earliest Holocene paleosol (i.e., upper Perez) indicate a grassdominated prairie to savannah setting, with only
moderate occurrences of woody species (Fredlund
and Neck 2007; Neck 2007). Pollen analysis, albeit
based on poorly preserved samples, shows that the
arboreal assemblage 3000 years B.P. was similar
to the modern one (Dering and Bryant 2007). Oak,
pecan/hickory, mesquite/acacia, and willow-type
charcoal fragments were recovered from tree burns
and cultural features in deposits dating between
about 8800 and 4100 B.P. All of these species are
common in the area today. The significance of a

82

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Aerial photograph (1985) showing the location of the Richard Beene site in relation to probable source areas
for the recovered subsistence-related archeological remains (Thoms and Mandel 2007:Figure 2.7).

single piece of bois d’arc charcoal, dated to about
8700 B.P., is not well understood. This species is
among the hard woods routinely used as tool wood
by native people in the American Southeast. Its
present-day distribution is north and west of the site
and it may have grown nearer to the site in the past
(Dering and Bryant 2007).
Pollen data for south-central Texas as a whole
indicate a mosaic vegetation pattern (i.e., savannah), similar to that documented for the early
historic period, probably prevailed throughout the
Holocene (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Dering and
Bryant 2007). Grasslands expanded appreciably
during relatively dry periods and arboreal coverage increased during wet periods (Bousman 1998).
Although climatic fluctuations certainly affected the
region’s food-productivity potential, the extent to
which these changes are reflected in the archeological record at the Richard Beene site remains unclear.
Important taphonomic issues with the faunal
assemblage have yet to be resolved, especially those
concerning differential bone preservation. Nonetheless, the general nature of faunal remains from

all components does not suggest major changes in
the relative contributions of key animal resources
(Baker and Steele 2007). With one exception, a
pronghorn medial phalanx, all of the identified
faunal remains represent species common to bottomland settings. Pronghorn tend to inhabit the kind
of open terrain that would have been common in
the adjacent uplands (Yoakum 1978). Freshwater
mussel shells constituted the most ubiquitous food
remains (Thoms 2007c). Deer, rabbit, and rats were
the most common terrestrial remains and turtles,
snakes, and fish were present in most components
(Baker and Steele 2007). Bison remains were not
recovered from any of the components. All of the
identified fauna could have been procured readily
within 100 m of the site.
Overview of Archaic
Components
Throughout the Holocene, hunter-gatherer
lifeways persisted in south-central Texas. Corn,

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site
beans, and squash were grown during the Late
Pre-Columbian era by native groups living within a
few hundred kilometers to the north, northeast, south,
and west. In the early 1500s, when Europeans first
traversed parts of what is today south-central Texas,
important food resources for hunter-gatherers included white-tailed deer, rabbits, fish, shellfish, prickly
pear, pecans, mesquite beans, and roots. Later, in
the 1600s and 1700s, Europeans reported that bison
and pronghorn were plentiful and that they were
hunted by Indians. During the mid-1800s, Lipan
Apache groups occasionally planted corn and other
crops along Hondo and Cibolo creeks, southwest and
southeast of San Antonio, respectively, and along the
Guadalupe River to the northwest (Smith 2005:189).
All 20 excavation areas at the Richard Beene
site, including 12 major deposits assigned to the
Archaic period, are analogous insofar as each
one contained chipped stone, FCR, mussel shells,
and bone fragments scattered in varying densities
within and between features. Similar kinds of
features, including open-air hearths, earth ovens,
mussel shell concentrations, and sheet middens,
also are represented in most components (Thoms
2007c). Components differ markedly, however, in

terms of artifact densities (Table 1 and Figure 6)
and proportions (Figure 7). Projectile points were
important elements in most of the site’s components
and their ages were consistent with the region’s
well-established chronology (Dockall and Pevny
2007; Hall et al. 1986). Figure 8 illustrates projectile
points, adzes, and other selected tools representative
of the site’s major components. Description and
interpretation of inter-component variations in
artifact assemblages are discussed elsewhere in
terms of: (1) spatial distribution of artifacts and
features (Mason 2003, 2007); and (2) tool types and
core-to-debitage ratios (Dockall and Pevny 2007).
Note that the relative locations of letter-designated
excavation blocks referred to in tables and figures
herein are illustrated in Figure 2.
Early, Early Archaic Period—Upper Perez
Component—ca. 8600–8800 B.P.
The site’s oldest Archaic sub-period occupation
post-dates the well-known Younger Dryas period,
which was the most prominent cooling period of the
last 15,000 years, and it coincides with the onset of
the Altithermal. Rates of sediment deposition were

Table 1. Artifact-class density comparisons per excavation block/cultural period, listed in rank order
(Thoms 2007d:Table 15.1).
Artifact
density per
component

Debitage density
by component
(count/m3)

FCR density by
component
(count/m3)

Mussel umbo
by component
(count/m3)

Bone density
by component
(count/m3)

MA(lA)
lE(G)
MA(uA)
eEA(N)

MA(U)
eEA(N)
MA(lA)

eEA(H)
LPC(uB)
MA(uA)

8
9
11

MA(U)
106
LPC(uB)
124
eEA(T)
18
eEA(T)
119
MA(U)
168
LPC(uB)
28
LPC(uB)
136			
MA(uA)
8
eEA(H)
156					
							

MA(U)
eEA(N)
MA(lA)
eEA(T)
LA(lB)

18
22
28
30
39

High

lEA(G)

105

Low

MA(uA)
8
eEA(N)
26
			
			

9
20
23
29

6
8
11

Moderate

LA(lB)
lEA(G)
MA(lA)

191
238
304

eEA(H)
eEA(T)
LA( lB)

83

238
309
341

lEA(G)
eEA(H)
LA(lB)

48
60
63

* Abbreviations: LPC (uB)=Late Pre-Columbian, upper Block B; LA(lB)=Late Archaic, lower Block B; MA(uA, lA,
U)=Middle Archaic, Blocks upper A, lower A, and U; lEA(G)=late, Early Archaic, Block G; eEA(H, T, N)=early, Early
Archaic, Blocks H, T, N.

Figure 6. Bar graphs of the densities of stone tool types from the major components (Thoms 2007d:Figure 15.44).

84
Texas Archeological Society

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

85

Figure 7. Pie charts showing proportions of artifact classes within each of the major excavation blocks/culture periods
(Thoms 2007d:Figure 15.4).

steady, but comparatively slow, resulting in the
thick, cumulic profile that characterizes the Perez
paleosol (Mandel et al. 2007; see Figure 3). Argilliturbation was evident in all of the upper Perez excavation areas, which ranged from 7.2 to about 11 m
below surface (bs) and over a distance of some 100
m (Thoms 2007c). Conventional radiocarbon age
estimates of 8640 ± 60 B.P. and 8805 ± 75 B.P. were
obtained on wood charcoal from sheet middens in
one block excavation area. A charred nut hull from

artifact bearing sediments in another block yielded
an age estimate of 8810 ± 60 B.P. All block excavation areas representing this sub-period were affected
to some degree by flood scouring. Lag-deposits were
widespread and only one block area contained in situ
features (Thoms 2007b).
Each of the blocks in this component has decidedly different artifact densities and proportions.
As a whole, however, the Perez tool assemblage
was more diverse than tools representative of other

86

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Chronological ordering of representative projectile points, adzes, and other selected tools recovered from the
Richard Beene site (Thoms 2007d:Figure 15.42).

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site
components (Thoms 2007c). Beaked, graver-like
tools were especially common, as were thick bifaces, blades, large burin spalls, and a wide variety
of edge-modified tools. Biface densities were similar
to the other components. Lerma bifaces and Angostura points occurred only in the Perez component.
Almost all the projectile points were Angostura
(see Figure 8), most of which were represented by
proximal ends. Some of the Angostura points were
reworked into drills. Core reduction and the manufacture of flake tools were well represented whereas
biface manufacturing was poorly represented. Clear
Fork tools, along with a variety of beaked and
notched edge-modified tools, and perhaps burins,
indicate that woodworking was important as well
(Dockall and Pevny 2007).
Faunal remains, other than mussel shells, were
scant. Bone fragments tended to be small and rounded. Only a few remains were identified to species
but here, as with all the other Archaic-age deposits,
deer- and rabbit-sized animals were comparatively
well-represented (Baker and Steele 2007). Judging
from the sparse evidence at hand, it seems likely that
deer provided the bulk of the meat diet.
Feature types included mainly amorphous FCR
concentrations. A few of these may represent cooking features, but most are likely to be fortuitous
lag deposits. Sheet middens were identified in one
block, which also contained the only in situ cooking feature, a small basin with FCR. Large pieces
of FCR were especially common in another block
and probably represent remains of flood-scoured
earth ovens. With a total of 22 features recorded in
some 240 m2 of excavated area (Table 2), the feature
density in this component is about one per 11 m2,
which is low, compared to the other components.
Middle, Early Archaic Period
Occupations—Elm Creek Components—ca.
7300–8300 B.P.
Climatic conditions appear to have fluctuated
considerably during this time period, but overall it
was cooler and probably wetter than the centuries
that preceded or followed it. Rates of sediment deposition were rapid, albeit sufficiently punctuated to
allow for comparatively moderate soil development.
From 8500 B.P. or so until about 7500 B.P., as much
as 2 m of fine-grain alluvium accumulated. Deposition was especially rapid when the Perez paleosol
was buried sometime after 8600 B.P. (Mandel et al.
2007).

87

Only 28 m2 were excavated within several small
blocks comprising the Elm Creek components.
Three areas were excavated to salvage features
exposed by pan scrapers. A small block (4 m2)
was excavated through the paleosol, which extend
from about 7.7 to 9 m bs. A larger block (15 m2)
was opened and partially excavated but only a
few artifacts were recovered before it was flooded
during a heavy rain and destroyed. In general, the
excavated areas had a lower chipped stone artifact
density than did the other occupation surfaces/zones
(Thoms 2007c).
Compared to other components, several of the
Elm Creek blocks yielded very high densities of
FCR, almost all of the rocks from features upon
which the blocks were centered. Wood charcoal
from three isolated earth ovens yielded radiocarbon
age estimates of ca. 8080 B.P., 7910 B.P., 7740 B.P.,
and 7645 B.P. Several stone tools, including edgemodified flakes, a thin biface fragment, a Clear Fork
tool, and a possible bola stone (see Figure 8) were
recovered along with ubiquitous mussel shells and
a few bone fragments too small and weathered to
be identified. Projectile points were not recovered.
A tabular sandstone grinding slab was recovered
from an exposure of the Elm Creek paleosol in a
backhoe trench and two stone axes were found on
exposures of the paleosol in the spillway trench
(Thoms 2007c).
Feature types included a large basin-shaped pit
with carbon-stained sediment and a few pieces of
FCR (probably an earth oven), and two large (ca.
1 m diameter) flat-bottomed earth ovens with rock
heating elements that contained large and small
pieces of sandstone (see Table 2). The flat-bottomed
features were probably built on the surface, such that
their heating elements were “platforms” covered
with earth when the oven was sealed. These were
the best preserved earth ovens at the site and, as
such, they served as “type features” for interpreting remains of other flat-bottomed, oven-like FCR
concentrations.
The area excavated in the Elm Creek paleosol
was much smaller than in the other paleosols because
the overall artifact and feature density was comparatively low. Our judgment about the comparative
density of cultural materials is based on equally intensive examinations of equally extensive exposures
of all the paleosols. Accordingly, it is our contention
that the Elm Creek component appears to represent
sporadic, short-term encampments occupied by a
few families or small groups. Construction and use

1 (12)

–

–

–

–

–
1

Lower Leon Creek
(upper A)
Middle Archaic

Upper Medina
(lower A & U)
Middle Archaic

Lower Medina
(G)
middle, Early
Archaic

Elm Creek
(K, M, & O)
middle, Early
Archaic

Upper Perez
(H, Q, & T)
early, Early
Archaic

TOTALS

–

Basin
with few
FCR

Upper Leon Creek
(lower B)
Late Archaic

Payaya
(upper B)
Late PreColumbian

Components
Cultural Period
(Block)

Very large
> 175 cm
diameter

7

–

1 (109)

5 (30,
33, 51,
59, 77)

–

–

1 (25)

–

Basin
with
FCR

2

–

2
(64,
80)

–

–

–

–

–

Lens
of
FCR

1

–

–

1 (79)

–

–

–

–

Basin
with
out
FCR

2

–

–

2 (46,
63)

–

–

–

–

Oxidized
lens with
out FCR

1

1 (19)

–

FCR
concentration

Large Size (60 to 175 cm diameter)

2

1
(107)

–

–

–

–

1 (10)

–

Basin
with
few
FCR
–

Basin
with
lens
FCR

6

–

–

3 (68,
72, 73)

1 (26)

–

2 (21,
27)

Cooking (Heating) Related Features

12

–

–

9 (43, 44, 48,
54, 62, 70,
75, 29a, 29b)

1 (11)

1 (4)

1 (14)

–

Basin
without FCR

3

–

–

2 (65,
66)

–

–

1 (28)

–

Oxidized
lens with
FCR

7

–

–

–

4 (42,
53, 67,
74)

1 (23)

2 (5, 9)

–

Oxidized
lens with
out FCR

Small (< 60 cm diameter)

7

4 (84, 90,
102, 114)

–

2 (69),
78)

–

–

1 (18)

–

FCR
concentrations.

Table 2. Descriptive feature types and their frequencies by component and cultural period (Clabaugh and Thoms 2007:Table 13.3).

51

5

3

24

6

2

11

–

SUBTOTALS

88
Texas Archeological Society

1 (3)

Lower Leon Creek
(upper A)
Middle Archaic

1 (93)

Upper Perez
(H, Q, & T)
early, Early Archaic
6

1 (61)

Elm Creek
(K, M, & O)
middle, Early Archaic

TOTAL

1 (41)

Lower Medina
(G)
middle, Early Archaic

–

2 (22, 97)

Upper Leon Creek
(lower B)
Late Archaic

Upper Medina
(lower A & U)
Middle Archaic

–

Mussel shell

1

–

–

–

1 (34)

–

–

–

Chipped
stone

8

2 (106,
108)

–

4 (45, 49,
60, 71)

1 (115)

–

–

1 (96)

Sheet
midden

8

8 (82, 83, 86,
89, 94, 99,
101, 113)

–

–

–

–

–

–

Lag deposit

Debris (Artifacts and Ecofacts) Concentrations

Payaya
(upper B)
Late Pre-Columbian

Components
(Block)
Cultural Period

8

2 (95, 97)

–

2 (47, 76)

1 (2)

1 (7)

2 (8, 15)

–

Tree/root
burn

1

–

–

–

–

–

1 (13)

–

Krotovina

2

2 (98, 104)

–

–

–

–

–

–

Undetermined
(e.g., organic stain)

?atural Features

34

15

1

7

3

2

5

1

SUBTOTAL

85

20

4

31

9

4

16

1

TOTAL

Table 2. Descriptive feature types and their frequencies by component and cultural period (Thoms and Mandel 2007:Table 13.3), cont.

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site
89

90

Texas Archeological Society

of family-size earth ovens (ca. 1 m diameter) with
rock heating elements is especially well represented.
Judging from the isolated nature of identified features
and overall low artifact densities and diversity, it
seems likely that use of the site area during middle
Early Archaic times was by fewer people for a comparatively limited range of activities.
Late, Early Archaic period—lower Medina
Component—ca. 6900 B.P.
This period falls within the long Altithermal,
which was interrupted by comparatively cool conditions between about 8000-7000 B.P., and peaked
about 5000 B.P.. Rates of sediment deposition were
especially rapid during this long drying trend, with
as much as 4 m of alluvium accumulating between
about 7300-5000 B.P. Deposition rates were highest
at the outset of this period, as evidenced by stillstratified sediments (i.e., BC horizon) in the lowermost part of the Medina pedocomplex that underlie
the site’s best-preserved component (Mandel et al.
2007; see Figure 3).
Some 230 m2 were excavated within several
blocks approximately 6.5 m bs. All of the blocks
were in the 3Bk3 horizon of the Medina pedocomplex, immediately overlying the BC horizon. Although this is the site’s best-preserved component,
bioturbation is apparent, primarily from widespread
tree-burns on the occupation surface and occasional
tree-roots casts (Thoms 2007b).
Compared to other components, the lower
Medina component yielded high densities and
proportions of chipped stone debitage and mussel
shells. It produced the second highest density of
bone fragments. FCR density was lowest of all the
major components. This component is well-dated
to ca. 6900 B.P. by five radiocarbon ages on wood
charcoal from features and a tree burn that appeared
to originate from the same surface as the features.
Almost all of the projectile points were stemmed
and barbed types with indented-bases, including
Bandy, Baker, Martindale, and Uvalde (see Figure
8). Many of the points were reworked and often
exhibited beveled edges and incurvate blades. Other
tools included preforms, thin biface fragments, a
drill tip, and several thick bifaces, including a Clear
Fork tool. Small burin blades and cores were also
recovered. Overall, the late, Early Archaic assemblage has a greater diversity of artifacts than the
middle, Early Archaic assemblage but less than the
early, Early Archaic assemblage. The flake-to-core

ratio was highest of all the components and small,
interior flakes were unusually common, suggesting
that biface manufacturing and reconditioning may
have been considerably more important than during
other periods (Dockall and Pevny 2007).
Deer and deer-sized bones were well represented and several long-bone fragments exhibited spiral
fractures characteristic of green bone. The only
definite pronghorn remains, a single toe bone, came
from this component as well. Rabbit bones were
unusually common, including one small bone tool
made from a radius. Turtles, hard- and soft-shell,
were also common. Other identified vertebrate fauna
include fish, snake, squirrel, gopher, rat, porcupine,
and canid. Many bone fragments were charred or
calcined (Baker and Steele 2007). Here too, it seems
likely that deer provided the bulk of the meat diet.
Projectile points and thin bifaces—big-game hunting tools—are well represented.
As with most components, small cooking
features outnumbered large ones. Those in this
component were especially well preserved and, as
such, some of them were “type features” for the site.
Feature types included small (>0.6 m diameter),
basin-shaped, shallow, rock-less pits (i.e., hearths),
small, basin-shaped pits with FCR (i.e., hearths with
an inset cook-stone griddle), a large (ca. 1 m diameter) oven-like feature with a rock heating element,
FCR concentrations of undetermined function (two
small and one large), mussel shell concentrations, a
large sheet midden, and oxidized areas (seven small
and one large), possibly surface hearths or rock-less
ovens (see Table 2). Feature density was high in this
component with one feature per 7 m2.
Density and cluster analyses identified proportionately more domestic zone units than in any
other component. Most of these were areas with low
artifact densities and that contained small cooking
features. Peripheral zones with varying quantities of
artifacts and a diversity of features, including a sheet
midden with superimposed small cooking features,
were widespread and accounted for most of the occupation area (Mason 2003, 2007).
Spatial distributions of artifacts and features in
this component are consistent with the presence of
multiple residential structures and provide the best
evidence at the site for temporary, family-sized (ca.
3–6 m diameter) lodges or huts similar to those described by Cabeza de Vaca (Krieger 2002; Thoms
2007f) and later-day Spanish and French travelers
(Foster 1995, 1998). Areas with fairly high densities of mussel shell, chipped stone, and bone may

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site
represent dumping grounds that were less used than
discrete concentrations designated as sheet middens.
Cooking activities are well represented by small
hearths, some of which are likely to have been inside
residential structures. A few larger, outdoor-sized
cooking features were present as well.
River mussels were consumed in relatively
high numbers as were rabbits and turtles. Deer were
probably the primary big game animal, although
pronghorn were hunted. Final manufacturing and
reconditioning stone tools were important camp
activities. Uncharacteristically of the site as a whole,
all stages of projectile point manufacturing were
represented in the late, Early Archaic component
(Dockall and Pevny 2007).
The lower Medina component most clearly
represents remains of short-term, multiple-family
encampments. Judging from its well preserved
character, a paucity of overlapping cooking features,
and considering that the vast majority of artifacts
and features were confined to a lens not much more
than 15 cm thick, this area was probably occupied
intermittently for no more than a few decades before
the encampment remains were buried beyond the
usual reach of pedoturbation.
Middle Archaic Period—Lower
Leon Creek and Upper Medina
Components—4100–4500 B.P.
Climatic conditions for this relatively short
time period appear to have been cooler and wetter
compared to the several centuries that preceded or
followed it. By 4500 B.P., sediment deposition had
slowed considerably and substantial soil development occurred in the upper portion of the Medina
pedocomplex. Deposition increased rapidly just
before 4100 B.P. when flood sediments buried the
underlying Medina soil (Mandel et al. 2007).
About 60 m2 were excavated in three areas that
dated to this time period. The lower Leon Creek
component is buried in the BC horizon of the Leon
Creek paleosol; about 3 m bs (see Figure 3). It immediately overlies the upper Medina component,
which is represented by block excavations in two
areas separated by about 100 m (Thoms 2007b,
2007c). Two of the three blocks were well preserved
and one was poorly preserved due to argilliturbation.
Radiocarbon age estimates were obtained from three
stratigraphically distinct deposits: (1) charcoal from
a burned tree root originating in the BC horizon
of the Leon Creek paleosol yielded an estimate of

91

4135 ± 70 B.P.; (2) charcoal from a tree burn in the
ABkb2 horizon of the Medina pedocomplex yielded
an estimate of 4570 ± 70 B.P.; and (3) isolated charcoal fragments from the argilliturbated block, also
in the ABkb2 horizon of the Medina pedocomplex,
yielded estimates of 4430 ± 50 and 4510 ± 110 B.P.
(Thoms 2007c).
Compared to other site components, the Middle
Archaic deposits had low to moderate densities of
most artifact types, with the notable exception of
a very high chipped stone debitage density in the
upper Medina component. Only a few tools were
recovered from the three blocks (Thoms 2007c). The
highest proportion of mussel shells, FCR, and bone
fragments occurred in the upper Medina components.
Projectile points recovered from these blocks
and nearby mechanically exposed surfaces of the
upper Medina pedocomplex include Desmuke and
Bell/Andice-like specimens, and a reworked Travis
point (see Figure 8). One Uvalde point, ostensibly an
Early Archaic type, was also collected; it had a patina that develops from prolonged exposure to sun.
It may have been collected elsewhere and brought
to the site by one of its Middle Archaic occupants.
The Middle Archaic components also yielded a few
thin bifaces and adzes. One of the upper Medina
components had an unusually high debitage-to-core
ratio. Overall, there is considerably less evidence for
biface reduction in the Middle Archaic assemblage
than there is for the late, Early Archaic component
that preceded it or the Late Archaic component that
followed (Dockall and Pevny 2007).
The sample of faunal remains from the Middle
Archaic components is small. Charred, calcined,
and spirally fractured deer- and rabbit-sized bones
are present, along with a few small rodent bones
(Baker and Steele 2007). Again, it is likely that deer
provided the bulk of the meat diet. As with other
components, the relative abundance of projectile
points and thin bifaces attest to the importance of
big-game animals. River mussel usage was comparatively high in the lower Leon Creek component.
Feature types included small, basin-shaped,
rock-less hearths, a small, basin-shaped hearth with
a lens of FCR, small FCR concentrations, a chipped
stone concentration, and a mussel shell concentration (see Table 2). The small cooking features tended
to contain the same kinds of artifacts as did the
identified domestic and peripheral zones. Several
of these cooking features were within identified
domestic zones and it is possible they were built
inside residential structures (Mason 2007). Here

92

Texas Archeological Society

too, feature density was high, with one feature per
5.5 m2.
The well-preserved lower Leon Creek component likely represents remains of short-term family
encampments that spanned a decade or so. Considerably more time may be represented in the upper Medina components that are encased in well-developed
Bk horizons. Cooking activities are represented
by small features, most with little or no FCR, and
by the remains of an earth oven with considerably
more cook stone. The comparatively high density of
scattered FCR in the argilliturbated upper Medina
component is also suggestive of earth-oven cooking.
Manufacturing and reconditioning stone tools was
comparatively important in one of the upper Medina
components (Dockall and Pevny 2007).
Late Archaic Period—upper Leon Creek
Component—ca. 3500–2800 B.P.
Climatic conditions for this time period, as well
as those during the preceding 1000 years or so, were
drier and probably warmer than present. Compared
to the preceding 2500 years, rates of deposition were
relatively rapid, with at least 1.5 m of fine-grained
alluvium accumulating in just over a thousand years
(Mandel et al. 2007).
The upper Leon Creek component is buried in
the A/Bk horizon of the Leon Creek paleosol between about 0.75 and 1.75 m bs. It is only moderately
well preserved due to substantial bioturbation and
argilliturbation. Weak cultural stratigraphy—three
comparatively high-density sub-zones—was discernible, however, within the meter-thick zone of artifactbearing alluvium. Excavation, totaling some 120
m2, focused on the middle or a “target” zone which
had the highest density of FCR and several features
(Thoms 2007b, 2007c). The upper Leon Creek component has a single radiocarbon age estimate—3090
± 70 B.P.—obtained on wood charcoal from the site’s
only very large (ca. 2 m diameter) cooking feature,
a basin-shaped earth oven with a modicum of FCR.
Overall, this component has the general appearance
of a sheet midden, or perhaps an incipient burned rock
midden, with embedded features (Thoms 2007c).
Compared to other components, the upper
Leon Creek component yielded the highest overall
density of FCR, including many large pieces. This
suggests that earth ovens and probably plant foods,
including roots, were important. Mussel shell density was the highest of all components and chipped
stone debitage density was comparatively high as

well. Tool density was higher than all but the early,
Early Archaic components. Broad-bladed barbed
projectile points and other thin bifaces indicative of
hunting activities dominate the assemblage (Dockall
and Pevny 2007). Temporally diagnostic projectile
points were found in essentially correct stratigraphic
order. Ensor points tend to be in the upper sub-zone,
Marcos and Lange points in the target sub-zone,
and Marshall and Nolan points in the lower zone
(see Figure 8). Wide, thin, knife-like bifaces were
common. Heavy-duty tools, including adzes and
choppers, were present in lower densities. Grinding
slabs were better represented than in any other component. Core reduction and biface manufacturing
were both characteristic of the upper Leon Creek
component (Dockall and Pevny 2007).
Faunal remains occurred in comparatively
moderate densities and preservation was better than
in most of the components. Deer and rabbit bones
were identified to species and deer-sized bones were
common, along with a few teeth fragments. Charred,
calcined, and spirally fractured bone fragments were
identified. Water turtle, gopher, beaver, and canids
(i.e., dog, coyote, and/or wolf) were present, along
with snake and wood rat (Baker and Steele 2007).
Judging from the number of deer and deer-sized
bones, deer probably provided most of the meat consumed. Here too, the relative abundance of projectile
points and thin bifaces attests to the importance of
big-game hunting.
In addition to the very-large cooking feature,
other feature types included remains of small, basinshaped, rock-less features, a small, cooking feature
with a lens of FCR, several FCR concentrations, a
mussel shell lens, and a small oxidized lens, probably a rock-less cooking feature (see Table 2). With
a total of nine features recorded, the density was low,
with one feature per 11 m2 (Thoms 2007c). Density
and cluster analyses showed the upper Leon Creek
component to be dominated by high densities of FCR
that were interpreted as sheet midden deposits and
peripheral zones. Only five percent of the units were
characteristic of domestic zones, some of which clustered around small cooking features (Mason 2007).
This component’s high density of material and
multiple features in three sub-zones characterized by
different types of dart points are consistent with the
concept of multi-family, short-term encampments.
In general, hot-rock cooking, arguably including
plant foods, is well represented by densely scattered FCR and remains of rock-filled, oven-like
features. It seems likely that at least some of the

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site
small cooking features would have been used inside residential structures. River mussels appear to
have been consumed more intensively than during
any other time period. Tool manufacturing, reconditioning, and hunting-related activities are well
represented (Dockall and Pevny 2007).
Feature Assemblages
Given the urgency typical of many large scale
mitigation projects (Figure 9a-f), feature discovery
and recovery was very fast paced (i.e., salvage
mode). Under these field conditions not every feature could be thoroughly excavated; however, there
was sufficient time to excavate features in large
block excavation areas. In all, 85 cultural and noncultural (i.e., naturally occurring) features were recorded and identified. Non-cultural (n=11) features
included tree and root burns, krotovinas, and organic
stains (see Table 2).
Feature Types
Cultural features are grouped into one of two
classes (i.e., broad categories): debris concentrations
and cooking-related features. Debris concentrations
were subdivided into three descriptive categories
based on the dominant artifact type(s) in a given
concentration: (1) river mussel shells; (2) chipped
stone; and (3) admixtures of artifacts. Mussel shell
lenses, 0.25-3 m in maximum horizontal dimension
and ca. 5 cm thick, tend to be accompanied by a
few pieces of FCR, chipped stone, and occasionally
bone. The single identified chipped stone lens, 1
m in maximum dimension and ca. 5 cm thick, was
associated with one bone fragment. Mixed artifact
concentrations, 12 m in maximum dimension and ca.
10 cm thick (but up to 40 cm in pedoturbated contexts) typically included FCR, chipped stone, mussel
shell, and bone fragments. This is a catchall category
that encompasses intact concentrations (Figure 10ab) as well as lag-deposited artifacts (Figure 11a-b)
and comparatively thick pedoturbated artifact-rich
deposits that lacked readily identifiable features
(Thoms 2007b, 2007c).
Cooking-related features are subdivided according to size, with small features being less than
60 cm in diameter and large ones greater than 60
cm but less than 1.5 m in diameter. Only one of the
identified cooking features exceeded 1.5 m; it was
classified as very large (ca. 2 m in diameter). The

93

rationale for imposing size as a defining criterion
is to distinguish between cooking facilities small
enough for hearth cooking or heating and those
too hot (i.e., too large) to work around or cook on
without being burned (Clabaugh 2002). Among ethnographically known hunter-gatherers, smaller fires
are especially characteristic of domestic zones, both
inside and outside residential structures, but they are
built elsewhere around the camp as well (Clabaugh
2002; Thoms 2007f). Larger fire structures tend to
be built in peripheral zones where ample space was
available to work around them and carry out associated tasks (e.g., cache fuel, gather cook stones and
packing materials, and dispose of FCR, charcoal,
and food remains) (cf. Binford 1983:187–190).
Size designations were applied to each of five
cooking feature categories in our typology: (1) basin
with some FCR; (2) basin with discrete lens of FCR;
(3) basin without FCR; (4) oxidized sediment (i.e.,
thin lens as opposed to a basin) with FCR; and (5)
oxidized sediments without FCR. Cooking features
were identified by the nature and configuration of
their primary constituent elements, FCR, burned
and charcoal-stained sediments and, often, varying
amounts of burned and unburned mussel shells,
faunal bone, and chipped stone (Clabaugh 2002).
As noted, only one very large cooking feature
was discovered at the site; it was in the Late Archaic
component, basin-shaped, about 2 m in diameter,
and some 30 cm deep. Its bottom was oxidized and
carbon-stained with a thin scatter of FCR (Figure
12). Most large cooking features with FCR were
flat bottomed. Those with a lens of FCR tended to
be underlain with charcoal and oxidized sediment
(Figure 13a). Those lacking or with very little FCR
were basin shaped and filled with carbon-stained and
oxidized sediment (Figure 13b). Small features with
FCR were less than 60 cm in diameter, usually 30 to
40 cm in maximum dimension. Most were in shallow
basins filled with varying amounts of carbon-stained
and oxidized sediment and occasionally charcoal
(Figure 14a-b). A few were flat bottomed and did not
appear to have been in a basin. Small features without FCR were of similar size and shapes. They were
delimited by carbon-stained and oxidized sediment
and occasionally charcoal (Figure 15a-b).
The most ubiquitous artifact associated with
the site’s features is FCR. Almost all of the cook
stone material at the site is Eocene-aged, Wilcox
sandstone. Today, it occurs as outcrops on the terrace tread within 300 m of the site and along the
terrace scarp within about 500 m of the site (Figure

94

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

c

d

f

e

Figure 9. Excavations underway: (a) upper Leon Creek
component; Late Archaic, ca. 3100 B.P.; (b) lower Leon
Creek component; Middle Archaic, ca. 4100 B.P., showing
a rock-less, basin-shaped pit about 25 cm deep, well
defined by oxidized and blackened fill; (c) lower Medina
component; late Early Archaic, ca. 6900 B.P.; and (d-e)
Elm Creek component; middle part of the Early Archaic,
ca. 8000 B.P. and; (f) along the spillway trench wall, in the
upper Perez component, early part of the Early Archaic,
ca. 8700 B.P.

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

95

a

b
Figure 10. Examples of intact artifact-concentration feature types: (a) mussel shell concentration, Middle Archaic
component; and (b) portion of a sheet midden, early part of the Early Archaic.

96

Texas Archeological Society

a

b
Figure 11. Examples of lag-concentration features in the upper Perez component, early part of the Early Archaic: (a)
FCR concentration showing the imbricated character of tabular FCR associated stream-worn pebbles; and (b) large,
FCR “lagged” feature.

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

97

Figure 12. Late Archaic, very large, basin-shaped pit in the upper Leon Creek component, interpreted as an earth oven.

16). It is likely that outcrops now buried by the
Applewhite terrace fill were exposed nearer to the
site during much of the Holocene. These local outcrops are composed of lenses, some more indurated
and notably less friable than others. Sandstone in
these outcrops tends to separate “naturally,” along
weakly cemented bedding planes, into tabular pieces
less than 5 cm thick. Some of the most indurated,
and least friable, lenses yield “solid” pieces that are
10–20 cm thick. Less than five percent of the site’s
cook stone was caliche and, presumably, it was
derived from the Somerset paleosol’s petrocalcic
horizon that was exposed on-site some 9000-8500
B.P. (Figure 17). FCR cobbles, mostly limestone and
quartzite, represented only a fraction of one percent
of the cook stone assemblage. The paucity of river
cobble cook stones was surprising given their common occurrences in nearby gravel bars where chert
cobbles were procured as tool stone material.
Feature Functions
Functional distinctions among cooking features
are derived from: (1) similarities between attributes

of a specific feature and attributes of ethnographically known cooking facilities (Thoms 2003, 2008);
and (2) expectations about the likely manifestations
of those features in the archeological record (Table
3 and Figure 18). Although botanical and faunal
preservation conditions were poor, feature morphology tended to be sufficiently well preserved to
recognize considerable inter- and intra-component
variation and suggest probable functions for most
of the features.
In general, large basin-shaped features with
carbon-stained fill, with or without FCR, were determined to be remains of earth ovens. The presence of
substantial quantities of carbon-stained sediment is
indicative of a closed cooking facility wherein charcoal continued to burn, albeit in an oxygen-poor environment. Large, flat-bottomed lenses of FCR (ca.
40 kg) and substantial quantities of carbon-stained
sediments were judged to be intact heating elements
in earth ovens. Large-size FCR concentrations lacking carbon-stained sediments might represent poorly
preserved earth ovens with heating elements built on
the ground surface as well. On the other hand, this
feature type could represent discarded cook stones.

98

Texas Archeological Society

a

b
Figure 13. Examples of Middle Archaic, large-size, earth-oven features: (a) flat-bottomed, with FCR lens; and (b)
basin-shaped, carbon-stained, sparse FCR.

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

99

a

b
Figure 14. Examples of late Early Archaic, small-size cooking features, basin-shaped with FCR lens, interpreted as
cook stone griddles; (a) in cross section; and (b) in plan view.

100

Texas Archeological Society

a

b
Figure 15. Examples of late Early Archaic, small-size cooking features, basin-shaped without FCR, interpreted as surface
hearths; (a) in cross section; and (b) in plan view.

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

101

Figure 16. Eocene-aged Wilcox sandstone outcrop, ca. 0.5 km west of the Richard Beene site.

Figure 17. Spillway trench wall at the Richard Beene site showing the Somerset paleosol’s petrocalcic horizon (caliche)
that was exposed on-site some 9000 to 8500 B.P..

Scattered FCR in the immediate vicinity of remains
of open pits, representing discard and scavenging
activities; also other scattered camp debris, furniture
rock, and unused cook stones
Scattered FCR in the immediate vicinity of remains of
surface “ovens” (i.e., open-air griddles) representing
discard and scavenging activities; also other scattered
camp debris, furniture rock and unused cook stones

Basin-shaped pit (ca. 1 m diameter x 0.3 m deep) with FCR lens, mostly mediumsize large rocks, underlain by thermally unmodified sediment; nearby surface hearths
(ca. 1 m diameter) where rocks were heated, represented by ash, oxidized sediments,
and a few pieces of FCR, burned bone (possibly from fuel residue), flakes and tools
expected therein as discard from routine clean-up activities

Large to medium, presumably flattish, rock(s) on or just below the occupation surface, underlain and encompassed by thermally altered sediment (oxidized, perhaps
some carbon-stained); burned bone (possibly from fuel residue), flakes and tools
expected therein as discard from routine clean-up activities

Basin-shaped pit (ca. 1 m diameter x 0.3 m deep) partially filled or lined with
medium and large FCR (typically not carbon-stained), or occasionally a large flat
rock, underlain by thermally unaltered sediment; nearby surface hearths (ca. 1 m
diameter) where rocks were heated, represented by ash, charcoal, oxidized sediments, and a few pieces of FCR

Bucket-like (i.e., near-vertical side walls) pits, 0.3-0.45 m in diameter and 0.150.45 m deep, partially filled with small, possibly medium-sized, FCR, not typically
carbon-stained, underlain by thermally unmodified sediment; nearby surface hearths
where rocks were heated, represented by ash, charcoal, oxidized sediments, and a
few pieces of FCR, burned bone (possibly from fuel residue), burned flakes and
tools discarded in the fire pit

Surface hearths where rocks were heated, represented by ash, charcoal, oxidized
sediments, and FCR (not typically carbon-stained); concentrations of discarded
small- and possibly medium-sized FCR, burned bone (possibly from fuel residue),
burned flakes and tools, possibly discarded in fire pit

Open-pit drying
ovens, rocks heated
elsewhere
(Smith 2000:7.157.16)

Surface “oven,”
rock(s) heated
therein (Smith
2000:7.20)

Steaming pits;
rocks heated nearby
(Smith 2000:7.19)

Stone-boiling in a
pit; rocks heated
nearby (Smith 2000:
7.16-7.19)

Stone-boiling in
a container; rocks
heated nearby Smith
2000:7.16-7.19)

*Original rock sizes: large rocks, >25 cm in diameter; medium rocks, 0-25 cm in diameter; small rocks, less than 10 cm in diameter

Comparatively dense, scattered FCR in the immediate stone-boiling area, representing discard and
scavenging activities; also other scattered camp
debris, furniture rock, and unused cook stones

Comparatively dense, scattered FCR in the immediate vicinity of remains of stone boiling pits or
concentrations representing discard and scavenging
activities; also other scattered camp debris, furniture,
and unused cook stones

Scattered FCR in the immediate vicinity of remains
of steaming pits, representing discard and scavenging
activities; also other scattered camp debris, furniture,
and unused cook stones

Expected Archeological Characteristics of
Non-Feature FCR
Scattered FCR in the immediate vicinity of remains
of earth ovens, representing discard and scavenging
activities, and perhaps rocks used with oven-top fire;
also other scattered camp debris, furniture rocks,
and unused cook stones

Expected Archeological Characteristics of Resulting
Fire-Cracked Rock (FCR) Feature(s)
Basin-shaped pit, 1-3 m in diameter and 0.1-0.3 m deep, sometimes with rock lining
and always with a lens of FCR (i.e., heating element) underlain by and intermixed
with thermally altered (oxidized, carbon-stained) sediments; FCR (small to large*),
typically carbon-stained and mostly fragments, varies considerably in size, whole
rocks often found along edges of heating elements; burned bone (possibly from fuel
residue), flakes and tools expected therein as discard from routine clean-up activities

Hot-Rock
Cooking Facility
Earth ovens, rocks
heated therein (Smith
2000:7.8-7.15)

Table 3. Summary of expected archeological correlates for the nature and distribution of fire-cracked rocks used in hot-rock cooking facilities (Thoms 2007g).

102
Texas Archeological Society

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

a

b

c

d

103

Figure18. Examples of generic cook-stone features typical of those used in western North America: (a) closed oven with
a fired-in-situ heating element; (b) closed steaming pit with cook stones heated outside the pit; (c) open-air, hot-rock
griddle; and (d) stone boiling in a pit with cook stones heated on a nearby surface fire.

Small basin-shaped features, with or without
FCR, and that either lacked carbon-stained sediment
or contained only minor amounts, were considered
to be the remains of open-air hearths wherein most
of the fuel burned to ash. Those with a singlelayer lens of FCR (ca. 2-7 kg) were termed griddle
hearths; those without FCR were simply termed
hearths. Oxidized lenses, with or without FCR, were
considered to represent surface hearths of one type

or another. Small-size concentrations of FCR could
be poorly preserved hearths or simply discarded
FCR from cooking features or stone boiling.
It is also possible that some of the surface
hearths with FCR could have been used to heat
rocks for stone-boiling and some of the FCR scattered throughout the site might have resulted from
discarding stone-boiling rocks used in baskets or
above-ground hide containers (cf. Quigg et al.

104

Texas Archeological Society

2001). However, we have downplayed the importance of stone boiling at the Richard Beene site,
in comparison to open-air-hearth and earth-oven
cooking, largely because experimental work indicates that the local calcite-cemented sandstone tends
to crumble during a single stone-boiling episode
(Jackson 1998). Moreover, rock types more suitable to stone boiling, including quartzite and hard
limestone, are readily available in the gravel beds
near the site, but they were not a significant part of
the site’s FCR assemblage. Furthermore, the site is
lacking in rock-filled pit features characteristic of
stone-boiling pits found at many sites on the Great
Plains (Frison 1991; Reeves 1990).
For heuristic purposes, the various artifactconcentration features were also assigned a suggested function. Mussel shell lenses were designated
as mussel shell dumps, insofar as they appeared to
represent little more than the residue from a family meal. The only identified chipped stone lens
was interpreted as a chipping station; most of the
flakes here appeared to have come from a single
core or perhaps a preform (Dockall and Pevny
2007). Admixtures of artifacts that appeared to be
in situ were designated as sheet middens (i.e., refuse
dumps), whereas those that also contained stream
worn pebbles or imbricated artifacts and pebbles
indicative of flood scouring were designated as lag
concentrations (Thoms 2007b, 2007c).
Conspicuously absent are pit features of any
kind with vertical or steep walls (e.g., storage
pits, post holes, and deep [>30 cm] cooking pits).
Given the well-preserved nature of cultural and
non-cultural features in general and considering the
extensiveness of excavations and vertical exposures
in trenches, we expected to find pit features. It is
plausible that the lack of pit features is simply a
reflection of the site’s clayey soils, which compared
to sandy soils, are not particularly conducive to pitdigging. The apparent absence of pit features might
also reflect site usage during the rainy seasons when
pit storage or deep-pit cooking would not have been
viable due to wet or saturated sediments. A better
understanding of the apparent absence of such features awaits future research on the general nature
and distribution of pit features in clayey sediments
elsewhere in the region.
Feature Comparisons
Late Archaic deposits, at about 3100 B.P., are
dominated by small features with and without FCR,

although this is also the component where we identified our only very large cooking feature (Figure
19a). The two Middle Archaic components, at 4100–
4600 B.P., are dominated by small features without
FCR (Figure 19b-c). The late, Early Archaic component, at about 6900 B.P., is dominated by small but
more varied features. Increased variation may result
from the comparatively large size of the excavation
area, some 230 m2 (Figure 19d). The middle, Early
Archaic component, at about 8100–7500 B.P. and
represented by excavation of only 27 m2, yielded
several large-size earth ovens and one mussel shell
concentration (Figure 19e). As noted, most of the
early, Early Archaic component, ca. 8700 B.P., was
flood impacted and only one small intact cooking
feature was encountered (Figure 19f).
Figure 20a-f compares the relative percentage of feature constituents, namely lithic debitage,
FCR, mussel umbos, and faunal remains in cooking
features to non-feature areas, which tended to have
low density debris scatters. Overall, percentages are
quite similar, although lithic debitage occurs more
densely outside than inside the features, as would be
expected. Interestingly, both burned and unburned
debitage, mussel shell, and bone occur in cooking
features, but their distributions remain to be qualified. The presence of unburned material in cooking
features is interpreted as resulting from clean-up
activities, wherein loose debris on the surface was
swept into nearby cooking features.
Assuming that these predominately small cooking features were used for several days, it would
have been necessary to remove the feature fill periodically. Patterned removal of ash and debris from
these features would inevitably result in basins of
varying depth and, presumably, nearby accumulations of debris scatters where the fill was dumped.
To assess this idea, we compared the contents of
feature fill to the contents of the sheet midden features in the late, Early Archaic component where
the site’s best preserved features were occurred. The
nature and distribution of these features is best seen
in a plan view of the largest of the five blocks in this
component (Figure 21). This block is dominated
by small cooking features but there are a few large
ones as well. Sheet middens are also present and in
some areas they overlapped small cooking features.
Further analysis of artifact distributions might result
in the delineation of more features beyond those
identified during fieldwork (cf. Mason 2003, 2007).
In general, constituent elements of the cooking
features also are proportionally similar to those of

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

105

Figure 19. Inter-component comparison of feature type distributions: a, Late Archaic; b, Middle Archaic, lower Leon
Creek component; c, Middle Archaic, lower Medina component; d, late, Early Archaic; e, middle, Early Archaic; f,
early, Early Archaic.

106

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

c

e

d

f

Figure 20. Inter-component comparison of relative percentage of cooking feature and non-feature constituents: (a) Late
Archaic; (b) Middle Archaic, lower Leon Creek component; (c) Middle Archaic, lower Medina component; (d) late,
Early Archaic; (e) middle, Early Archaic; (f) early, Early Archaic.

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

107

Figure 21. Plan view of block excavation showing the distribution of FCR, mussel shells, chipped stone, bone, and
features in one block area of the lower Medina component, late, Early Archaic, ca. 6900 B.P. (Clabaugh and Thoms
2007:Figure 13.15).

sheet middens in the late, Early Archaic (Figure 22).
The exceptions are that debitage is more common
in the sheet middens and bone is more common in
the cooking features. We interpret these patterns

as an indication that much of what is represented
at the site began as activities around these cooking features, which are then cleaned and the debris
dumped to form sheet middens.

108

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 22. Relative percentage of primary constituents
in cooking features and sheet middens in the late, Early
Archaic lower Medina component.

Summary and Concluding
Comments
The feature assemblage at the Richard Beene site
spans almost 10,000 calendar years (i.e., 9000 radiocarbon years B.P.) and includes intact cooking features and debris scatters representative of the Early,
Middle, and Late Archaic archeological periods, as
well as a Late Pre-Columbian sheet midden deposit
(Figure 23). The site’s debris scatters, including mussel shell concentrations, sheet middens, and chipped
stone concentrations, tend to be small in size or vertically thin, attributes indicative of occupations by
small groups for a few days or weeks at most. All but
one of the cooking features at the site were less than 1
m in diameter and most contained varying quantities
of FCR, burned and unburned chipped stone, mussel
shells, and bone fragments. Said differently, most
artifacts at the site likely originated in the immediate
vicinity of small, family-sized hearths. Results of
Mason’s (2003, 2007) analyses of spatial patterning
that are indicative of domestic and peripheral zones
lend credence to this suggestion.
Collectively, the site’s features represent a
diversity of activities that are typical of what one
would expect to be found at short-term huntergatherer encampments occupied by a few families

at most (Figure 24a-e). As can be inferred from
ethnohistorical and ethnographic accounts of Indian
lifeways throughout the Gulf Coastal Plain, these
multi-family encampments typically contained
numerous wickiups, and cooking fires were used
outdoors as well as inside the residential structures
(Clabaugh 2002; Thoms 2007e, 2007f).
Cherry Tree rock shelter in Travis County
contained a similar variety of small cooking features
(Kotter 1985). Small features with a few pieces of
FCR also occur in deposits at the Wilson-Leonard
site dated ca. 9400–9990 B.P. (Bousman et al. 2002;
Guy 1998) and at the Armstrong site where they date
as early as ca. 8500 B.P. (Schroeder and Oksanen
2002:46; see also Schroeder, this volume). Earth
ovens and other large-sized cooking features at the
Richard Beene site are clearly too large to have
been used inside residential structures. These large
features are comparable in size to FCR features
at other sites in the Applewhite Reservoir area
(McCulloch et al. 2008), as well as to those typically
found at sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir area
to the south (Hall et al. 1986; Scott 1982; Thoms
et al. 1981) and throughout South Texas (Hester
1991). They are also similar to earth ovens found
along Yegua Creek to the north (Thoms 2004) and
throughout the Post Oak Savannah region (Fields
1995). In other words, short-term, multi-family
encampments were among the most common
site types in south-central Texas and probably
throughout the Archaic period.
With the exception of the single very large
earth oven in the Late Archaic component, cooking
features at the Richard Beene site are not nearly as
large as earth ovens, with heating elements 2–3 m
in diameter, typically found at burned rock midden
sites in the Edwards Plateau and adjacent parts
of the Blackland Prairie (Black and Creel 1997;
Ricklis and Collins 1994). The suggestion here
is that the comparatively small size of most oven
features at the Richard Beene site indicate a presence of fewer people at any given time or, perhaps,
simply less feasting in comparison to many other
sites in the region where very large earth ovens
are common.

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

109

Figure 23. Chronological ordering of representative feature assemblages from Archaic components at the Richard Beene
site (Clabaugh and Thoms 2007:Figure 13.39).

110

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 24a. Artist’s reconstruction of occupations at the Richard Beene site: Late Archaic, upper Leon Creek component,
ca. 3100 B.P. (Thoms 2007d:Figure 15.13).

Figure 24b. Middle Archaic, lower Leon Creek and upper Medina components, ca, 4100–4500B.P. (Thoms 2007d:Figure
15.20).

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site

Figure 24c. Late, Early Archaic, lower Medina component, ca. 6900 B.P. (Thoms 2007d:Figure 15.25).

Figure 24d. Middle, Early Archaic, Elm Creek components, ca. 7650–8080 B.P. (Thoms 2007d:Figure 15.30).

111

112

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 24e. Early, Early Archaic, upper Perez component, ca. 8700 B.P. (Thoms 2007d:Figure 15.40).

References Cited
Anderson, D. G. and K. E. Sassaman (editors)
1996 The Paleoindian and Early Archaic Southeast. The
University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
Baker, B. W. and D. G. Steele
2007 Late Pleistocene Through Late Holocene Faunal
Assemblage. In Archaeological and Paleoecological
Investigations at the Richard Beene Site in SouthCentral Texas, edited by A. V. Thoms and R. D.
Mandel, pp. 229–240. Reports of Investigations No.
8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Binford, L. R.
1983 In Pursuit of the Past: Decoding the Archaeological
Record. Thames and Hudson, New York.
Black, S. L. and D. G. Creel
1997 The Central Texas Burned Rock Midden Reconsidered. In Hot Rock Cooking on the Greater Edwards
Plateau: Four Burned Rock Midden Sites in West
Central Texas, Volume 1, by S. L. Black, L. W. Ellis,
D. G. Creel, and G. T. Goode, pp. 269–314. Studies
in Archeology 22, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin and

Archeological Studies Program, Report 2, Texas
Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.
Blair, F. W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of
Science 2(1):93–117.
Bousman, C. B.
1998 Paleoenvironmental Change in Central Texas: The
Palynological Evidence. Plains Anthropologist
43(164):201–219.
Bousman, C. B., M. B. Collins, P. Goldberg, T. W. Stafford,
J. Guy, B. W. Baker, D. G. Steele, M. Kay, A. C. Kerr, G.
Fredlund, J. P. Dering, V. Holiday, D. Wilson, W. Gose, S. W.
Dial, P. Takac, R. Balinsky, M. A. Masson, and J. F. Powell
2002 The Paleoindian-Archaic Transition in North
America: New Evidence from Texas. Antiquity
76:980–990.
Brown, D. O.
2007 Freshwater Shell Isotope Studies. In Archaeological
and Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard
Beene Site in South-Central Texas, edited by A. V.
Thoms and R. D. Mandel, pp. 101–112. Reports of
Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985 A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of
Texas: An Overview of the Pollen Evidence. In
Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant, Jr. and R.
G. Holloway, pp. 39–70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists, Dallas, Texas.
Butzer, K. W.
1982 Archaeology as Human Ecology: Method and Theory
for a Contextual Approach. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Cable, J. S.
1996 Haw River Revisited: Implications for Modeling
Terminal Late Glacier and Early Holocene HunterGatherer Settlement Systems. In The Paleoindian
and Early Archaic Southeast, edited by D. G. Anderson and K. E. Sassaman, pp. 106–148. The University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
Carlson, D. L., P. A. Clabaugh, R. D. Mandel, and C. D.
Pevny (editors)
2008 Prehistoric Archaeological Investigations in the
Applewhite Reservoir Project Area, Bexar County,
Texas. Reports of Investigation 7. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Clabaugh, P. A.
2002 Preserving the Feature Record: A Systematic
Analysis of Cooking and Heating Features from the
Richard Beene Site (41BX831), Texas. Master’s
thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
2007 Appendix B: Provenience Table. In Archaeological
and Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard
Beene Site in South-Central Texas, Volume II, edited
by A. V. Thoms and R. D. Mandel. Reports of Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology,
Texas A&M University, College Station.

Clabaugh, P. A. and A. V. Thoms
2007 The Feature Assemblage. In Archaeological and
Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard Beene
Site in South-Central Texas, edited by A. V. Thoms
and R. D. Mandel, pp. 251–304. Reports of Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Dering, J. P. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
2007 Plant Remains from the Richard Beene Site: Implications for Holocene Climatic Changes in South
central Texas. In Archaeological and Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard Beene Site in
South-Central Texas, edited by A. V. Thoms and R.
D. Mandel, pp. 241–250. Reports of Investigations
No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas
A&M University, College Station.

113

Dockall, J. E. and C. D. Pevny
2007 Lithic Assemblages: Transitions of Holocene Technological Organization. In Archaeological and
Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard Beene
Site in South-Central Texas, edited by A. V. Thoms
and R. D. Mandel, pp. 177–228. Reports of Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Fields, R. C.
1995 The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East
Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:301–330.
Foster, W. C.
1995 Spanish Expeditions into Texas: 1689–1768. The
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Foster, W. C. (editor)
1998 The La Salle Expedition to Texas: The Journal of
Henri Joutel, 1684–1687. Translated by J. S. Warren.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Fredlund, C. and R. Neck
2007 Stable Isotope Analysis of Land-Snail Shell Carbonate. In Archaeological and Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard Beene Site in South-Central
Texas, edited by A. V. Thoms and R. D. Mandel, pp.
113–122. Reports of Investigations No. 8. Center
for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University,
College Station.
Frison, G.
1991 Prehistoric Hunters of the High Plains. 2nd edition.
Academic Press, San Diego, California.
Fry, R. G., K. L Brown, and C. A. McMahan
1984 The Vegetation Types of Texas (Map). Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Guy, J.
1998 Analysis of Cultural and Non-Cultural Features. In
Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas, Volume
IV, assembled and edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 10671212. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin, and Archeological Studies Program, Report
10, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.
Hall, G. D., T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black
1986 The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological
Investigations. Choke Canyon Series, Vol. 10. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.

114

Texas Archeological Society

Hester, T. R. (editor)
1991 The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological Symposium. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Jackson, M. A.
1998 The Nature of Fire-Cracked Rock: New Insights
From Ethnoarchaeological and Laboratory Experiments. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Kimball, L. R.
1993 Rose Island Revisited: The Detection of Early Archaic Site Structure Using Grid-Count Data. Southeastern Archaeology 12(2):93–116.
Kotter, S. M.
1985 Cherry Tree Shelter: Excavation of a Stratified Late
Archaic and Neoarchaic Rockshelter, Travis County,
Texas. Research Report 92. Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Krieger, A. D.
2002 We Came Naked and Barefoot: The Journey of Cabeza de Vaca Across North America. The University
of Texas Press, Austin.
Mandel, R. D, J. S. Jacob, and L. C. Nordt
2007 Geomorphic Investigations. In Archaeological and
Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard Beene
Site in South-Central Texas, edited by A. V. Thoms
and R. D. Mandel, pp. 27–60. Reports of Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Mason, J. B.
2003 Analysis of Site Structure and Post-Depositional
Disturbance at Two Early Holocene Components,
Richard Beene Site (41BX831), Bexar County,
Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
2007 Spatial Analysis of Site Structure. In Archaeological
and Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard
Beene Site in South-Central Texas, edited by A. V.
Thoms and R. D. Mandel, pp. 305–336. Reports of
Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College Station.

McCulloch S., J. Saunders, G. Hall, J. Miller, and C. Freuden
2008 Test-Excavated Sites. In Prehistoric Archaeological
Investigations in the Applewhite Reservoir Project
Area, Bexar County, Texas, edited by D. L. Carlson,
P. A. Clabaugh, R. D. Mandel, and C. D. Pevny,
pp. 167–286. Reports of Investigation 7. Center for
Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University,
College Station.

Neck, R.
2007 Late Pleistocene and Holocene Environments in the
Medina Valley of Texas as Revealed by Nonmarine
Mollusks. In Archaeological and Paleoecological
Investigations at the Richard Beene Site in SouthCentral Texas, edited by A. V. Thoms and R. D.
Mandel, pp. 87–100. Reports of Investigations No.
8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Quigg, J. M., M. E. Malainey, R. Przybylski, and G. Monks
2001 No Bones about It: Using Lipid Analysis of Burned
Rocks and Ground Stone Residues to Examine Late
Archaic Substances Practices in South Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 46(77):283–303.
Reeves, B. O. K.
1990 Communal Bison Hunters of the Northern Plains. In
Hunters of the Recent Past, edited by L. B. Davis
and B. O. K. Reeves, pp. 168–194. Unwin Hyman,
London.
Ricklis, R. A. and M. B. Collins
1994 Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the
Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas.
Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Schroeder, E. A. and E. R. Oksanen
2002 Data Recovery at the Armstrong Site (41CW54),
Caldwell County, Texas, Vol. I: Background, Methods, and Site Context. PPA Cultural Resources
Report 0284. Paul Price Associates, Inc., Austin.
Scott, R. F., IV
1982 Part I: Prehistoric Investigations. In Excavations at
Sites 41LK31/32 and 41LK202 in the Choke Canyon
Reservoir South Texas, by R. F. Scott, IV and D. E.
Fox, pp. 1-90. Choke Canyon Series 8. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.
Smith, F. T.
2005 From Dominance to Disappearance: The Indians of
Texas and the Near Southwest, 1786–1859. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Thoms, A. V.
2003 Cook-Stone Technology in North America: Evolutionary Changes in Domestic Fire Structures
During the Holocene. In Le Feu Domestique et ses
Structures au Neolithique et aux Ages des Metaux,
edited by M.-C. Frere-Sautot, pp. 87–96. Collection
Prehistories No. 9. Editions Monique Mergoil, SaintApollinaire, France.

Thoms and Clabaugh—The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site
2004 An Assessment of Archaeological Records at Late
Somerville State Parks and Trailway: Past Land-Use
Patterns and Future Research Directions. In Yegua
Creek Archaeological Project: Survey Results from
Lake Somerville State Parks and Trailway, EastCentral Texas, edited by A.V. Thoms, pp. 169–186.
Reports of Investigations No. 5. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College
Station.

2007a Archaeological Studies at the Richard Beene Site. In
Archaeological and Paleoecological Investigations
at the Richard Beene Site in South-Central Texas,
edited by A. V. Thoms and R. D. Mandel, pp. 1–14.
Reports of Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College
Station.

2007b Excavation Areas and Site-Formation Contexts. In
Archaeological and Paleoecological Investigations
at the Richard Beene Site in South-Central Texas,
edited by A. V. Thoms and R. D. Mandel, pp. 61–86.
Reports of Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
2007c Excavation Strategies and the General Nature of
Archaeological Deposits. In Archaeological and
Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard Beene
Site in South-Central Texas, edited by A. V. Thoms
and R. D. Mandel, pp. 139–176. Reports of Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
2007d Archaeological and Paleoecological Records: Summary and Synthesis. In Archaeological and Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard Beene Site
in South-Central Texas, edited by A. V. Thoms and
R. D. Mandel, pp. 337–380. Reports of Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
2007e Cultural Contexts: Ethnohistoric and Archaeological
Records. In Archaeological and Paleoecological
Investigations at the Richard Beene Site in SouthCentral Texas, edited by A. V. Thoms and R. D.
Mandel, pp.123–138. Reports of Investigations No.
8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

115

2007f Learning From Cabeza De Vaca. Texas Beyond
History. Editors Stephen Black and Susan Dial.
http://www.texasbeyondhistory.net/cabeza-cooking/
index.html accessed January 24, 2011. University of
Texas at Austin.

2007g Ethnographically Documented Land-Use Patterns
and Archaeological Expectations. In Sites and Site
Formation Processes in the Tobacco Plains and Vicinity: Archaeological Investigations in the Middle
Kootenai River Valley, Northwest Montana, edited
by A. V. Thoms and P. A. Clabaugh, pp. 59–75.
Reports of Investigations No. 9. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College
Station.

2008 The Fire Stones Carry: Ethnographic Records and
Archaeological Expectations for Hot-Rock Cookery
in Western North America. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 27:443-460.
Thoms, A. V. and R. D. Mandel (editors)
2007a Archaeological and Paleoecological Investigations
at the Richard Beene Site in South-Central Texas.
Reports of Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas.

2007b Ecological Setting: The Lower Medina River Valley and Surrounding Inner Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Archaeological and Paleoecological Investigations
at the Richard Beene Site in South-Central Texas,
edited by A. V. Thoms and R. D. Mandel, pp. 15–26.
Reports of Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Thoms, A. V., J. L. Montgomery, and A. W. Portnoy
1981 An Archaeological Survey of a Portion of the Choke
Canyon Reservoir Area in McMullen and Live Oak
Counties, Texas. Choke Canyon Series, Vol. 3. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Yoakum, J. D.
1978 Pronghorn. In Big Game of North American: Ecology
and Management, edited by J. L. Schmidt and D. L.
Gilbert, pp. 102–121. Stackpole Books, Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania.

The Armstrong Site: A Transitional Archaic Occupation
along the Eastern Balcones Escarpment
Eric A. Schroeder

Abstract
Archeological excavations at the Armstrong site uncovered a number of features, stone tools, and faunal
material that record a dynamic period of Native American prehistory that occurred during the Late Paleoindian/
Early Archaic transition. Evidence from Armstrong and other sites along the Balcones Escarpment suggests
an increasing trend of decreased mobility accompanied by a shift in technological orientation from a lifeway
focused on game to one more focused on a broad range of foods on the landscape. Radiocarbon dates associated
with regional assemblages indicate that this apparent shift was well on its way by 9000 B.P., but that some
vestiges of the “plains” big game hunting tradition persisted to at least 8000 B.P.

The Armstrong site is situated a few miles
southeast of the Balcones Escarpment along the San
Marcos River in Caldwell County, Texas (Figure 1).
In the vicinity of the site, the Blanco and the San
Marcos rivers join to form a wide and expansive,
nearly level, alluvial plain that is marred along its
surface by a series of flood chutes and sloughs. The
Armstrong site lies adjacent to one of these sloughs,
where fine-grained alluvial sediments accumulated
during extremely high flood stages of the river
(roughly on the order of a 500 year flood).
The repetitive occurrence of this geologic
phenomenon over time acted to capture a piece of
ancient prehistory, which was discovered by archeologists working in the area in the fall of 1997.
While surveying the plowed field in the vicinity of
the slough, numerous artifacts were observed along
the surface, mostly consisting of prehistoric stone
tool debitage; however, some early 20th century artifacts were also noted. Shovel testing and backhoe
trenching resulted in the recovery of a significant
number and diversity of prehistoric lithic material,
including specimens of burned rock, all covering a
site area measuring ca. 36,000 m2 in size (Kotter
and Jones 1999).
Late in the following year, archeologists conducted a series of test excavations in the area of
the slough and uncovered evidence of human occupation at the site, mostly dating between 9000 to
8000 years B.P. (Oksanen et al. 2002). The 70 m3
of excavations at the site has yielded 2345 items of

stone tool debitage, one ground stone specimen, 399
specimens of faunal material, 10 features, and 17
radiocarbon dates (Schroeder and Oksanen 2002).
The Geomorphic Setting
The Armstrong site lies buried within finegrained alluvial deposits that were laid down during
periodic flooding events within a slough located on
the San Marcos River floodplain. The slough deposits are inset along the horizontal boundary between
two older allostratigraphic units, designated as the
Q4 and Q3 landforms. Both landforms are likely
Pleistocene or older in age, given stratigraphic characteristics observed in exposed trench profiles and
geologic core samples.
The Q4 landform is the oldest geologically, and
is comprised of at least two strata. The lowermost
stratum (Stratum 1) encountered during the investigations consisted of a matrix-supported gravel unit,
cemented together by pedogenic calcium carbonate.
Its overall thickness is unknown, as only the upper
1 m of the unit was encountered during the work at
the site. Nevertheless, the gravels are largely cobblesized, consisting of well-rounded limestone and occasional quartzite clasts. Pedogenically precipitated
calcium carbonate permeates the sandy fines and
cements the gravels together, forming a hard layer
of calcrete. The level of calcrete development is
indicative of a Stage IV-level morphology on the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

118

Texas Archeological Society

Armstrong
Site

Figure 1. Armstrong site location map.

Machette scale, and suggests that the Q4 is at least
Pleistocene in age. Overlying Stratum 1 is a 0.6 m
thick yellowish-red silty clay (Stratum 2). Stratum
2 contains many inclusions, including land snail
tests, as well as occasional caliche fragments and
limestone pebbles.
Much less is known about the Q3 landform,
other than it lies buried underneath younger Holocene floodplain deposits. Geologic coring suggests
that it consists of at least two strata. The lowermost
unconformably overlies the scoured bedrock valley
floor, where its basal unit consists of a channel-related
gravel deposit that measures as much as 8 m thick.
Overlying this is a 3 m thick accumulation of finegrained alluvium that expresses a strong brown moist
color and a Stage II+ calcium carbonate level of development. Younger alluvial deposits unconformably

cap the Q3 landform, and artifacts of Late Paleoindian age were recovered along its buried surface
approximately 100 m to the south of the Armstrong
site. Given this data, the antiquity of the Q3 landform
is estimated to be at least Pleistocene in age.
Site Stratigraphy
In the vicinity of the Armstrong site, the Q3
landform is buried under as much as 3 m of mostly
fine-grained alluvium that was deposited in and
around the slough during extreme flood events.
These flood deposits become thinner laterally along
a north/south axis until they pinch out entirely as
the eroded unconformities of the Q3 and Q4 landforms abruptly rise to the surface. The archeological

Schroeder—The Armstrong Site

caliche fragments, and snail shells are distributed
throughout the fine matrix of the stratum at a
frequency of ca. 5 percent by volume. Soil profile
characteristics include an Ap Horizon within the
upper 40-50 cm of the stratum, that grades to a Btk
Horizon in the lower half of the exposure.
Aside from an occasional isolated artifact from
Stratum 2a, Stratum 1a, by far, contained the bulk of
the cultural materials at the site. Upon initial inspection of the trench profiles, a diffuse, yet definable,
stratigraphic break was visible between the two
strata; however, further stratigraphic subdivision
was problematic, due to the overprinting caused by
soil development, and the fact that almost all of the
archeological material at the site occurred within the
soil weathering zone.
An attempt was made to improve the fidelity of
the site stratigraphy by conducting soil chemistry
and magnetic susceptibility analysis of soil column
samples taken during the excavation of the site.
Previous studies have shown that activity areas at
archeological sites are sometimes marked by certain
chemical compounds that form in place with the
breakdown and decomposition of organic materials
(see Cook and Heitzer 1965; Schuldenrein 1995).
Key compounds of interest include phosphate and
potassium. Of these, phosphates tend to stay fixed
in the soil profile, as it bonds with other compounds
that are more resistant to leaching and weathering.
Elevated levels of potassium also occur in archeological sediments, as it is the residue left behind
by the burning of wood. Magnetic susceptibility

98
97
96
95
94
93
92
91

Flood Channel

Meters relative to the site datum

investigations at the site exposed ca. 2.5 m of flood
deposits that lie along the northern edge of the
slough, of which two strata were defined as Stratum
1a and Stratum 2a, from lowermost to uppermost,
respectively (Figure 2).
Only the upper 1.5 m of the lowermost stratum
defined at the site (Stratum 1a) was exposed in the
excavations. Stratum 1a is comprised of a yellowishbrown (10YR 5/6 moist) silty clay loam with a
median grain-size diameter of 3.17 on the phi scale
(very fine sand). Soil structure is characterized by
strong fine sub-angular blocky peds. Clay films are
common and moderately thick. Inclusions are represented by well rounded limestone pebbles, caliche
fragments, cultural debris, and occasionally, whole
and fragmentary land snails; these comprise ca. 10
percent of the profile by volume. These inclusions
appear to be more concentrated within the upper
20-30 cm of the stratum. Overall, pedogenic calcium
carbonate content is relatively high, at 40-50 percent
by volume, which is exhibited as common filaments
and fine threads, and few small nodules 1-4-mm in
diameter. Soil development observed in the stratum
reflects a Btk Horizon.
Stratum 2a overlies Stratum 1a along a clear
and wavy boundary. It is comprised of a 1 m thick
unit of dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/4 moist)
silty clay. Median grain size diameter is 3.05 phi.
Strong fine sub-angular blocky peds comprise
the soil structure of the stratum with calcium
carbonate filaments and moderately thick clay films
both common. Well-rounded limestone pebbles,

100
99

Site Area
K Horizon

Stratum 2a
Stratum 1a

Fine Sand
Clay Sand
Gravelly Clay

Q4

Q3

Kpg
0

Figure 2. Armstrong site stratigraphy.

119

100 m

Vertical Exaggeration X 10

120

Texas Archeological Society

measures the resident magnetism of archeological
sediments such as wood ash, burned sediments, and
paleosols, and is considered particularly helpful in
defining occupation zones in regions like Central
Texas where low resident magnetism tends to be associated with calcic soils (cf. Takac and Gose 1998).
Combining the results of these analyses with the
vertical distribution of cultural materials, as many
as four occupation zones were identified at the site.
The youngest and therefore highest occupation
zone (Occupation Zone 4) was encountered at about
60 cm below datum (bd), where the stratigraphic
contact between Stratum 1a and Stratum 2a occurs.
This same stratigraphic break is also marked by an
increase in both phosphate and potassium, as well
as in magnetic susceptibility values. The next correlative jump in phosphate, potassium, and magnetic
susceptibility values occurs around 1.1 and 1.2 m
bd, correlating with another dense concentration of
cultural material identified as Occupation Zone 2.
Occupation Zone 1 represents the third correlative
spike in all three values, where it too marks a dense
accumulation of cultural debris from 1.5 to 1.8 m bd.
Except for a slight rise in potassium levels at 90
cm bd, Occupation Zone 3—lying immediately underneath Occupation Zone 4—offers an exception to
this established pattern, where an accompanying rise
in the other values was absent among the data. The
high potassium levels could be accounted for due to
the fact that the sample was taken adjacent to Feature
2, a large burned rock concentration. The accompanying low phosphate values and low resident magnetism
indicate the absence of a living surface at this depth,
all suggesting that Feature 2 is likely intrusive, and
likely represents cultural occupation during the Early
Archaic II interval (more on this later).
The Archeological Remains
The analysis of the archeological assemblage
included both traditional analyses of lithic tools
and faunal material, but also incorporated numerous
proxy studies such as microscopic use-wear analysis, fossil DNA, an analysis of fatty acid residues,
as well as stable carbon/nitrogen isotope analysis
on burned rock in an attempt to provide comparative data regarding feature function. Fossil pollen,
phytolith, and diatom identification in combination
with stable isotope analysis on soil column samples
was also conducted to reconstruct local biotic conditions during the period of site occupation. Each of

these studies contributed in their own unique way
toward a better understanding of the occupation of
the site, but also provided future comparative data
for other assemblages of similar cultural contexts
(see Schroeder 2002)
Previous analysis of the archeological assemblage was organized by its division into four occupation zones. The intended purpose was to view
the data at a more minute scale to better facilitate
intra-site analysis and comparisons. However, after
reopening the previous reports and reviewing the
data almost a decade later, in addition to having the
advantage of the subsequent work of others in the
intervening period, I decided it was necessary to
increase the scale of the data to make it more palatable for inter-site comparisons concerning regional
cultural continuity and change.
To accomplish this task the archeological deposits at the site were regrouped into two culturalchronological packages. The oldest and deepest occupation zones at the site (Occupation Zones 1 and
2) were grouped into a Terminal Paleoindian component, while the remaining two occupation zones
(Occupation Zones 3 and 4) were combined into a
Early Archaic component. The Early Archaic component was further subdivided into Early Archaic I
and Early Archaic II intervals to express a division
between earlier and later Early Archaic deposits.
Both components at the site are separated in space
and time by about 20 cm of deposits and 500 years,
respectively. All radiocarbon dates cited in this article are conventional age estimates in radiocarbon
years B.P. (see Schroeder and Oksanen 2002).
The Terminal Paleoindian Component
This component was recovered from the lower
half of Stratum 1a of the slough deposits. It consists of a total of five features—one burned rock
concentration, two burned rock clusters, and two
concentrations of mainly bone and other occupational debris—620 lithic debitage, 193 fragments
of bone, and nine fragments of freshwater mussel
shell recovered from a zone that measures approximately 50 cm thick and dates from about 9000 to
8500 B.P. Technically, this could also be considered a very Early Archaic component based on the
chronology developed from the Wilson-Leonard
site (see Bousman 1998). However, the data from
Armstrong suggests that a distinct Late Paleoindian
tradition, although waning, still existed until about
8500 B.P.

Schroeder—The Armstrong Site
Feature 8 is the largest of the burned rock features, and is a burned rock concentration consisting
of about 26 burned rocks. Most of the rocks are
burned caliche fragments, but with a few limestone
and quartzite cobbles, arranged in four groupings
as a discontinuous ring, covering an area approximately 1 m in diameter (Figure 3). The biggest of
the groupings is in the southwest quadrant of the
feature, where approximately half the rocks occur in
the feature. Some of these rocks are surrounded by
dark-stained sediment and oxidized clay, and some
of the larger rocks in this particular grouping appear
to tilt inward as if they once lined a shallow basin.
In the northeastern quadrant of the feature four
burned mammalian bone pieces were found: one
of these was a deer/pronghorn diaphyseal fragment
with a helical fracture. Analysis of floatation samples taken from the feature fill found charred oak,
elm, and mesquite wood, as well as charred acorn
and hackberry nutlets.1 Six of the feature rocks were
sampled for lipid residue and stable isotope analysis.
Lipid residue results produced signatures consistent
with the fatty and lean meat portions of large herbivore (n=5), and one had a value indicative of a

121

medium high fat content plant similar to mesquite
beans or corn.2 Stable isotope signatures from these
same feature rocks clustered in the region indicative
of modern values for C3 plants and C3 animal meat
and flesh. More specifically, five of the samples clustered near a modern value for mesquite sap, while
the remaining two clustered closest to a modern
value for bison meat juice. Radiocarbon dating of a
charcoal sample from this feature produced an age
estimate of 8720 ± 60 B.P.
Feature 2T was a small cluster (60 cm in diameter) of six burned caliche clasts and a limestone
cobble, surrounded by oxidized soil and an associated charcoal stain. Carbon flecks, small unburned
caliche clasts, and land snail tests were common
in the immediate vicinity of the feature. Culturally modified materials associated with the feature
included burned chert debitage, burned bone fragments of medium-sized and large-sized mammal,
and a burned tibio-fibula segment of a muskrat
(Ondontra zibethicus). Examination of flotation
samples produced carbonized hackberry nutlets, and
lipid residues on burned rock indicated a signature
for large herbivore fatty meat. This same burned

Figure 3. Feature 8 burned rock concentration in the Terminal Paleoindian component.

122

Texas Archeological Society

rock also produced a stable carbon isotope signature
indicative of contact with a substance like mesquite
sap. A charcoal sample from this feature has an age
range of 8560 ± 40 B.P.
Feature 1T is comprised of a tightly packed and
roughly rectangular cluster of 21 burned caliche
clasts that was approximately 30 cm long, 20 cm
wide, and 10 cm in thickness. The clasts were piled
two layers high and many were fractured in place.
Processed fill from the feature yielded a carbonized
hackberry nutlet and a small rodent tooth fragment.
Analysis of associated faunal material included five
unburned as well as one burned bone, all identified
as medium-sized mammal. Lipid residue results
indicated that one caliche specimen had been in contact with the lean meat of a large herbivore. Stable
isotope analysis of this same specimen produced a
value that lies between C3 plants and animals and
C4 plants, but the values are closer to the former.
Charcoal from this feature had an age range of 8490
± 40 B.P.
Feature 4 is a small accumulation of mostly
bone and, to a lesser extent, individual caliche
clasts and flake debitage, arranged together in an
area ca. 20 cm in diameter (Figure 4). The bone in
the feature was identified as two mammalian long
bone segments: one was a deer/pronghorn diaphyseal fragment, while the other was a distal left tibia
from an antelope (Antilocapra americana). This
specimen had a helical fracture. The caliche clasts
were unburned; however, macrobotanical analysis
of the feature fill identified oak charcoal fragments.

The debitage in the feature included a single large
billet flake.
Feature 5 consists of a small cluster (12 cm in
diameter) of bone material and a tooth fragment
(Figure 5). The bone was identified as rib fragments,
and both the ribs and the tooth fragment were Bison
antiquus. The other bone fragments from the feature
(n=13) consisted of unburned mammalian bone
scrap. Macrobotanical analysis of the feature fill
produced no evidence of charred material.
Three fragmentary projectile points were recovered from this component. One is clearly the
basal section of a St. Mary’s Hall point, while the
other fits within the Barber category (Figure 6a).
The third point exhibits characteristics relative to
Golondrina, Gower, and Hoxie projectiles; this point
exhibits both bifacial retouch along one edge and
unifacial retouch along the other (Figure 6b). What
is common to all these points is that they have basal
grinding and slightly to moderately indented bases.
The assemblage also includes three bifacial
Clear Fork tools. One is a complete tool that appears
to have had considerable use. Under high magnification, both striae and possible wood fibers were seen,
and it was reported that the tool was likely employed
in a “whittling” motion. Another tool is more in the
form of a Stage I biface, whose present outline and
thickness suggest that it was intended to have been
a Clear Fork tool; however, a sizable flaw in the
material likely precluded its further reduction. The
third Clear Fork tool has been broken by a straight
snap fracture common to adzes. Although there is

Burned Pebble
98.80

Burned Bone
Fragment
98.80

Chert Flakes
98.00
Tooth
98.78

0
Figure 4. Feature 4 debris accumulation, Terminal Paleoindian component.

10

20cm

Schroeder—The Armstrong Site

Bone
Mass

Tooth
Top Elevation
98.71m

Top Elevation
98.72
0

10

20cm

Figure 5. Feature 5 bone concentration, Terminal Paleoindian component.

b) 15-2A

a) 20-12B

d) 12-6B

c) 12-13A

e) 12-11A
f) 11-10A

g) 10-4D

Figure 6. Armstrong site projectile points. Terminal Paleoindian component: a, Barber; b, Unknown
type. Early Archaic I Interval: c, Angostura; d, Thrall; e, Hoxie/Gower; f, Angostura; g, Hoxie.

123

124

Texas Archeological Society

some chipping along the edges of the fracture, the
small size of the fragment likely made it unsuitable
for rejuvenation.
Other tools represented include a distal tip of an
unfinished biface, the tip of a perforator, a radially
fractured biface, and 11 flake tools. Microscopic
use-wear analysis of the flake tools indicate that at
least two were used to work hard to moderately hard
materials, and of these two, one also exhibited a fine
seriated edge indicative of cutting a soft material.
In terms of the identifiable faunal remains, bison, deer/pronghorn, and antelope are almost equal
in frequency. Recognizable elements attributed to
Bison antiquus include both ribs and teeth. This
particular species was identified based on the size
and cortical thickness of the rib specimens. Skeletal
elements attributable to deer and or antelope include
long bone diaphyseal specimens. Other minor faunal species include a range of rodents (including
muskrat and plains pocket gopher), turtle, bird, and
several species of freshwater mussel.
The Early Archaic Component
This component was isolated in the upper 30
cm of Stratum 1a of the slough deposits at the site.
Archeological evidence recovered included four
features: two lithic debitage concentrations, an accumulation of faunal material, and a burned caliche
scatter. Radiocarbon age ranges indicate that the
majority of the deposits date to around 8000 B.P.,
while some isolated deposits—notably Feature 2—
date to as late as 6700 B.P.
Identified as an accumulation of occupational
debris within an 80 cm area, Feature 9 consists of
a bison rib segment, at least six fragments of mammalian bone, 14 mussel shell fragments, and two
burned caliche pieces. A Hoxie/Gower projectile
point was found in the same unit and level as the
feature.
Feature 11 is a 1 m diameter scatter of several
small burned caliche clasts. Each of the caliche
clasts measures between 4-5 cm in size, except for
one 10 cm clast. Nine mussel shell fragments were
within the debris scatter. A sample of burned rock
returned a lipid residue signature of both the fatty
and lean portions of large herbivore. Stable isotope
analysis of this same specimen produced values
that were outside the ranges of any known plants
or animals.
Feature 10 is a concentration of lithic debitage
(n=18) and three small fragments of burned caliche

(Figure 7). Also associated with the feature are two
mammalian long bone segments. One of these bone
segments was an antelope diaphyseal fragment,
while the other was a helically fractured deer/pronghorn long bone. The concentration of debitage includes several narrow biface thinning flakes. A variety of other flakes are short, narrow, platform flakes
that flare quickly and terminate in hinge fractures,
as well as narrow sharply curved flakes that appear
to have been removed from across the biface from
one edge to the other. The presence of these types
of flakes is consistent with the production of tools
such as bifacial gouges and lanceolate projectiles.
Feature 1 is also an accumulation of lithic debitage, consisting of 12 tertiary flakes and a core, all
of fine-grained chert of various local materials (Figure 8). Flake morphologies include one complete
hard hammer flake with an acutely angled platform,
three complete billet flakes, and four billet flake
fragments. Two of these are burned, and all but three
items are patinated on both sides. While these flakes
are characteristic of narrow, thick biface manufacture, two of the specimens exhibit traits particular
to the production of gouges and lanceolate tools.
The core is bifacial with several flakes removed in
classic bi-directional fashion, and the removal of
flakes from the core has created two lateral edges,
suggesting its employment as a tool. The recovery
of several Clear Fork tools adjacent to the feature,
combined with the unique characteristics of the
debitage, is strong evidence that the feature resulted
from the manufacture of such tools.
Feature 2 is a concentration of burned rock and
two nearby burned rock clusters. The concentration
is comprised of 19 burned caliche clasts and one
tabular burned limestone cobble, forming a single
layer of rock ca. 80 cm in diameter (Figure 9).
Approximately 50 cm to the northwest of the concentration lies a small cluster of six burned caliche
clasts, while two caliche clasts occur 50 cm to the
southwest. There is little elevation difference among
the rocks in the concentration, suggesting that they
were placed along a flat surface. The soil matrix
both within and surrounding the feature showed no
evidence of oxidation, discoloration, or charcoal
stains; however, macroscopic examination of the
fine matrix revealed charred bits of oak, elm, and
walnut/hickory wood. In addition, a charred bulb
fragment of a wild hyacinth (Camessia sp.) was
identified, as well as charred hackberry nutlets. A
single piece of carbonized material was obtained
from the feature and produced a date of 6780 ± 50

Schroeder—The Armstrong Site

Figure 7. Feature 10 flake debitage concentration, Early Archaic I interval.

Figure 8. Feature 1 flake stone debitage accumulation, Early Archaic I interval.

125

126

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9. Feature 2 burned rock concentration (possible rock oven), Early Archaic II interval.

B.P. Lipid residue analysis of burned rock samples
from the feature indicated a diversity of fatty acid
signatures, including low fat content plants, large
herbivore, and fish. Stable isotope results obtained
from these same rock samples are indicative of C3
animal meat, flesh, and plants.
A total of six Early Archaic projectile point
fragments are associated with this component, and
of these, as many as four types are represented (see
Figure 6c-g). These include a Hoxie/Gower hybrid,
one Hoxie, one Thrall, two Angostura, and one
Golondrina-Barber. Some common characteristics
of these points are that the stems appear to be either
smoothed or ground; however, grinding along the
basal edge is present on the lanceolate forms, and
largely absent on the stemmed forms. Basal concavities tend to be more pronounced in the Hoxie types as
opposed to being practically absent on the lanceolate
forms (Angostura and Thrall specimens). Bifacial
resharpening tends to be present on the Angostura
and Thrall points, while the unifacial alternating
bevel technique occurs on the Hoxie. Breakage patterns tend to be the result of use rather than from tool
maintenance or post-depositional causes.

The most numerically dominant formal tool
represented in this component is the gouge or adze
(n=12) (Figure 10). The gouge specimens are Clear
Fork tools, while the other tool appears to resemble
the Brushy Creek biface (see Dial 1998:527). At
least five of the gouges have wear patterns in the
proximal region of the tool, indicating hafting.
One specimen has a transparent, colorless mastic
residue on the proximal tip, showing that the tools
were likely fitted with handles or hafts. About 33
percent of the gouges are fragments of tools that
were probably broken during use. The others exhibit
resharpening and edge damage. The evidence of
use-wear, breakage patterns, and the type of edge
damage indicate that these artifacts were employed
in a scraping motion on a hard contact material.
Other formal tools assigned to this component
include perforators (n=6), both bifacial and unifacial forms. At least two of the specimens appear to
be manufactured from a recycled projectile point,
but this is problematic. However, one of the tools
appears to have been recycled from a gouge, as usewear patterns were recognized on both ends of the
specimen. Wear patterns observed on some of these

Schroeder—The Armstrong Site

a) 10-2B

b) 10-9E

1

2

3

4

5

6

c) 10-13A

f) TO-1

d) 10-17A
0

127

e) 10-19A
7

8

9

10 cm

Figure 10. Clear Fork tool specimens, Early Archaic I interval component.

tools show a light polish that indicates contact with
a soft material. One such tool had this wear pattern
on its distal tip, but also had what was believed to
be residual plant material on the bit end as well.
In contrast, one distal tip fragment exhibits heavy

polish and damage caused by heat, suggesting use
on a hard/high silica material.
Thirty-seven flake tools are assigned to the
component and likely represent expedient tools
used to meet the needs of an immediate task. Of

128

Texas Archeological Society

the flakes with platforms, 17 exhibit hard hammer
morphology, while seven are soft hammer flakes.
Seventeen of the 37 flake tools were subjected to
use-wear analysis, and of these, use-wear patterns
were observed on 13 of them. Two exhibited usewear indicative of contact with hard/high silica
materials, another contact with possible bone and/or
antler particles. Two had wear patterns indicative of
contact with moderately hard materials; three with
soft to moderately hard materials; and three with soft
materials. Methods of employment were reproduced
on three specimens and included: whittling, planing,
or a complex cutting motion; whittling; and use as
a possible spokeshave or draw knife, respectively.
In addition to these, five tools warrant mention:
two blade flakes and three burins. One of the blade
flakes has both unifacial and bifacial edges that
appear to have been used to cut soft to moderately
hard materials. Another blade flake was in contact
with hard materials. Two of the three burins have
modified edges, and one appears to have been used
as an engraver.
Aside from 121 pieces of unidentifiable mammalian bone, bison, deer/pronghorn, rodent, and
antelope all appear to be equally represented with
a Minimum Number of Individuals of 1. Number
of elements representative of each of these animals
include: a Bison antiquus rib segment, a rodent tibia
fragment, a helically fractured deer/pronghorn diaphyseal segment and skull fragment, and a humerus
and long bone fragment from an antelope. Additionally, 12 freshwater mussel shells (representing as
many as seven different species) are present in this
component.
A total of three radiocarbon dates were secured
from scattered charcoal samples along the living
floor of the Early Archaic component. Surprisingly,
all three dates clustered within a span of 100 years of
each other, placing the age of this component around
8000 B.P. The referenced assays are 7960 ± 60 B.P.,
8080 ± 50 B.P., and 8070 ± 60 B.P.
Discussion
The small sample of archeological materials
recovered from the Armstrong site make comparisons difficult with other sites in the region
with similar components—such as Richard Beene
and Wilson-Leonard—mainly because the sample
at Armstrong is less than 10 percent of the sample
sizes of the Early Archaic deposits at these sites.

Nevertheless, the components represented at the
Armstrong site do present some unique and worthwhile points for discussion beginning with the
Terminal Paleoindian period.
For instance, features from the Terminal Paleoindian component at the Armstrong site are similar
to those found in the Late Paleoindian component
at Wilson-Leonard. Features 1T and 2T at the
Armstrong site correlate well with those classified
as “concentrated small clusters of burned rock” at
Wilson-Leonard. Although some of these features at
Wilson-Leonard were hypothesized as being stone
boiling or storage pits, there was little evidence to
fully support this assertion other than proxy data
obtained from macrofaunal remains (Bousman
1998:194). However, burned rock from feature 2T
at the Armstrong site was subjected to lipid residue
analysis, producing evidence that the rocks had been
in contact with the fatty portions of large herbivore.
In addition to this, not only did the majority of the
faunal assemblage at Armstrong include burned
mammalian bone, but it also contained helically
fractured deer/pronghorn long bones, which is considered a widely recognized pattern associated with
marrow extraction and bone grease processing.
An interesting anomaly linked to Feature 2T at
Armstrong, which also at least tangentially supports
stone boiling, is the fact that marine diatoms were
found in a sample of the feature fill (Winsborough
2002). How to explain the presence of these microscopic organisms? One possible explanation could
be that these are fossil diatoms that are eroding from
nearby Cretaceous deposits. Another, and even more
intriguing prospect, is they could also have been
left behind from an aqueous solution that contained
sea salt.
Another feature type in the Late Paleoindian
component at Wilson-Leonard that was also represented at Armstrong was the “burned rock cluster,”
where cooking of animal foods was assumed to be
the primary function (Bousman 1998:197). Feature
8 at Armstrong can also be considered a burned rock
cluster. Here flotation analysis of feature fill resulted
in a plethora of wood charcoal, charred acorn, and
hackberry nutlets. Notwithstanding the hackberry
nutlets, which were present in the flotation samples
from several other burned rock features at the site,
acorns stand out as a probable food source, mainly
because it is widely known that one way acorns are
processed is through charring (Gifford 1936). Lipid
residue analysis of burned rocks from Feature 8
showed that three of the five sampled rocks had had

Schroeder—The Armstrong Site
contact with the lean portions of large herbivore.
Other lipid signatures from this feature included
contact with the fatty portion of this same animal
type, while one sample returned a result indicative
of contact with a fatty acid profile similar to modern
control samples for mesquite beans or corn. Based
on these results, it is logical to conclude that Feature 8 may likely represent some sort of grilling or
parching feature.
Radiocarbon dates obtained for the Terminal Paleoindian component at the Armstrong site include
one from feature 2T at 8560 ± 40 B.P., two from Feature 8 at 8990 ± 40 B.P. and 8720 ± 60 B.P., and one
from feature 1T at 8490 ± 40 B.P.3 In comparison,
these dates correlate well with those from the Late
Paleoindian component at Wilson-Leonard, which
was defined to date from as early as 9500 B.P. to
as late as 8400 B.P. (Bousman 1998:208). Like the
Terminal Paleoindian component at Armstrong, both
St. Mary’s Hall and Golondrina-Barber diagnostic
points were also found in associations with this same
component at Wilson-Leonard.
The Early Archaic component at Armstrong can
be isolated into two intervals: Early Archaic I and
Early Archaic II. The earlier interval (Early Archaic
I) represents the bulk of the deposits attributable to
the Early Archaic component. It is represented by
four cultural features and associated living debris
dating from around 8500 to 8000 B.P., and contains
Angostura, Thrall, and Hoxie projectile points. The
Early Archaic II interval is defined based on the
presence of a single burned rock cluster (Feature 2)
that apparently represents the remains of a pit oven
that was dug down into the Early Archaic I deposits,
and possibly even into the underlying Terminal Paleoindian component. Supporting evidence for this
interpretation is provided by a radiocarbon date of
6780 ± 50 B.P. obtained from the feature. This date
is incongruent with (a) the cluster of ages provided
by other dates from the Early Archaic I interval, (b)
the presence of an inverse relationship among the
soil chemistry values where an increase in potassium
levels was unaccompanied by correlative increases
in phosphate and magnetic susceptibility levels, and
(c) the presence of a Golondrina projectile point in
close proximity to the feature, but clearly an outlier
among the grouping of projectile points that are associated with the Early Archaic I interval at the site.
The Early Archaic I interval at Armstrong produced a small number of diverse types of cultural
features including bone accumulations, debitage
concentrations, and a burned caliche cluster. This

129

sample, while admittedly small in comparison to the
100 features recorded for the Early Archaic component at Wilson-Leonard, is in many ways evidence
of a broader range of activities for the Early Archaic,
especially with the presence of features suggesting
activities other than hot rock cooking. For instance,
of the 100 features documented at Wilson-Leonard,
99 include cooking features associated with burned
rock, while the other is burned sediment (Collins
et al. 1998:215). Although the number of features
recorded for the Angostura component at Woodrow
Heard is closer to the sample size at Armstrong, it
too was limited solely to cooking features comprised
of burned rock (Decker et al. 2000). If one considers the number of features represented for the Elm
Creek and the Upper Perez components at Richard
Beene (Thoms 2007), the feature assemblage is
closer in diversity to that encountered at Armstrong,
with 10 burned rock features, eight lag deposit features, and two mussel shell features. Many of the
lag deposit features at Richard Beene, assumed to
be accumulations of cultural debris moved about
by geomorphic processes, resemble similar feature
types documented in the Early Archaic I interval and
the Terminal Paleoindian component at Armstrong.
At the Armstrong site, these features were defined as
refuse accumulations that signify camp maintenance
activities. The appearance of these types of features
may have significant implications relative to huntergather mobility, or for that matter, immobility. This
is based on the idea that people who intend to inhabit a camp for a short time bring few items with
them, and in most cases, do not stay at a particular
camp long enough to require them to invest time
and energy in camp maintenance. As a result, they
tend to have less trash and engage in less activities
involving camp clean-up (cf. Kent 1993).
The burned rock feature assigned to the Early
Archaic I interval at Armstrong (Feature 11) is a
scatter of burned caliche of unknown function;
however, the presence of lipid residues on the rocks,
indicative of both the fatty and lean portions of large
herbivore, suggest that they may have been used in
stone boiling and bone grease production. The bison
rib segment in Feature 9, and the helically fractured
deer/pronghorn long bone in Feature 10, can both
be seen as supporting evidence for this activity.
Stone boiling and bone grease extraction are also
apparent Early Archaic activities at Wilson-Leonard;
however, this was not considered to be an activity
undertaken at Richard Beene at that time, where the
functional interpretation linked to the abundance of

130

Texas Archeological Society

burned rock leaned more toward the preparation of
edible roots (Thoms 2007:379).
The lithic tool assemblage from the Early Archaic I interval at Armstrong is consistent with those
at Wilson-Leonard, Woodrow Heard, and Richard
Beene. They contain both lanceolate and stemmed
dart point forms, an abundance of Clear Fork adzes,
perforators, beaked gravers, burins and burin spalls,
as well as a number of other expedient tools. Ground
stone tools as well as cores are severely underrepresented at the Armstrong site. This pattern is also
noted at Wilson-Leonard and Woodrow Heard, and
ground stone is completely absent at Richard Beene.
Also, the ratio of formal to informal tools for the
Terminal Paleoindian component at the Armstrong
site is 1.25:1, whereas for the Early Archaic component the ratio reverses to 1:1.75. This diametric shift
in the flake stone tool assemblage is consistent with
the focus on expedient technology as opposed to a
curated technology. (cf. Binford 1979; Shott 1986).
In terms of projectile points, those representative of the Early Archaic I interval at Armstrong include the co-occurrence of Angostura, Thrall, Hoxie/
Gower, and Hoxie types within a range of 20 cm in
elevation of each other, and along a surface that was
securely radiocarbon-dated between 8000-8400 B.P.
At Richard Beene, almost all the projectile points
recovered from the Upper Perez component are Angostura (n=14), with the exception of a Hoxie and a
Plainview. The Upper Perez component at Richard
Beene is radiocarbon-dated between 8600-8800 B.P.
At Wilson-Leonard, Angostura, Hoxie/Gower, and
Hoxie points are associated with radiocarbon dates
from burned rock features dating to around 80008200 B.P. (Collins et al. 1998:239). If we look at the
Angostura component at Woodrow Heard, where,
like at the Richard Beene site, this was the only
type of point found, radiocarbon dating of features
placed their age at between 8000-8400 B.P. (Decker
et al. 2000:292). There are two conclusions that can
be drawn from these disparate radiocarbon-dated
components and their associated projectile points:
either Richard Beene represents an earlier Angostura
occupation, or the dates of the Upper Perez component need to be reevaluated.
Conclusions
The most salient theme of continuity one can
draw from the assemblages at Armstrong and those
of others in the region is this notion that the Early

Archaic in Central Texas denotes a period of decreasing mobility. This is marked by the appearance
and increasing proliferation of fire-cracked rock
as heating elements to cook and process not only
animal foods but also plant foods; the presence of
refuse concentrations, the increased frequency of
informal versus formal tool types in conjunction
with the focus on local lithic resources as opposed
to exotics; as well as the diversity range of faunal
material in the assemblage. These are clear deviations from that of earlier Paleoindian assemblages.
Aside from some taphonomic alterations to the
bone assemblage, the preservation of faunal elements is relatively good at Armstrong in comparison
with other assemblages in the region. However, at
Armstrong, bison remains (Bison antiquus) were
identified, along with deer and antelope (Johnson
et al. 2002). Other fauna included a broad range of
small animals, rodents, and mussel shell. With the
exception of ancient bison, this diversity expressed
in the faunal assemblage reflects a continuity among
the other regional Early Archaic assemblages, where
this pattern is considered to be consistent with reduced mobility.
A major discontinuity with other regional assemblages is that some feature types that occurred
at Armstrong were either severely underrepresented
elsewhere or were documented, but later discounted
as possible cultural features all together. These include concentrations of miscellaneous occupational
debris (refuse accumulations) like that found in Features 4, 5, and 9. The presence of refuse accumulations are important occurrences since they relate to
site maintenance activities, suggesting longer term
occupations.
Perhaps what we may be seeing in the archeological record of the Late Paleoindian/Early Archaic
transition is a relatively gradual cultural-technological change over a span of several hundred years,
where a former tradition of relative mobility began
to move more toward the opposite end of the spectrum in the direction of relative sedentism. Binford
(1980) captures this phenomenon in his hunter-gatherer settlement model, where he visualizes two types
of hunter-gatherer settlement systems: foragers and
collectors. On the one hand, foragers practice what
is called high residential mobility, meaning that they
move their base camps more frequently over larger
distances; on the other hand, collectors move their
base camps less frequently and focus on logistical
mobility, meaning task-oriented groups conduct resource forays within a defined area and then return

Schroeder—The Armstrong Site
to a base camp with either raw or processed goods.
This model should not be taken to mean that a
hunter-gatherer group can be pigeonholed as either
a forager or a collector; instead, one should imagine
they lie on the opposite end of the spectrum from
each other, and reality is somewhere in the range
between the two extremes. This model can become
increasingly more complicated depending on the
“patchiness” and seasonal variability of biotic resources within a given range.
Setting this concept more within the context of
the current issue, Kelly and Todd (1988) proposed
that perhaps Paleoindians oriented their technology on specific game animals; that is to say that
they focused their attention on the movements and
behaviors of a specific range of target animals as opposed to a technology that was landscape-oriented,
where knowledge is focused on the locations and
seasonal availability of resources within a defined
geographic area. In this sense, the Paleoindian
lifeway can be viewed as one leaning more toward
the forager end of the continuum, characterized by
a somewhat high residential mobility and high logistical mobility in addition to range mobility. But
as climatic conditions became increasingly warmer
following the Younger Dryas at the beginning of
the Holocene, game animals either adapted to new
niches or became extinct, and human populations
increased, resulting in shrinking territories. The old
ways slowly become obsolete, and the pendulum
started to swing in the direction of the collector
strategy, favoring those groups who possessed more
of a landscape-oriented technology, one characterized by lower residential mobility and, depending on
the patchiness of resources, compensated with either
lower or higher logistical mobility, within a range
that was more geographically defined.
Against this backdrop, the Early Archaic assemblages cited here have features involving the use of
fire, and an increasing sophistication in its use, as
people began to experiment with the processing of a
diverse range of local plant and animal resources. In
addition, the formal tool assemblage also increased
in complexity with the addition of the adze and the
perforator, complemented by an increase in ground
stone, as well as expedient tools. It is inferred from
these patterns that groups were becoming less mobile and more locally intensive in their resource
extraction efforts. This pattern is generally the case
at the Armstrong site in the Early Archaic.
The preservation of certain faunal elements
there is enlightening. For instance, the assemblage

131

is mostly deer and pronghorn specimens, especially
long bone elements. Elements of Bison antiquus
are a close second in frequency, represented by rib
segments and teeth. Next on the scale of decreasing
presence of mammalian fauna are rodent elements
such as teeth and long bone fragments, followed by
antelope long bone segments. In addition, freshwater
mussel shell occurs in high frequencies, but in terms
of total biomass, large to medium-sized mammals
(i.e. bison, deer, and antelope) comprise the bulk of
the animal food resources at the site.
The presence of ancient bison at Armstrong
supports the notion of a big game hunting tradition
that, although waning, still remained a key aspect
of regional subsistence until around 8000 B.P., as
opposed to the disappearance of this lifeway at
around 9000 B.P. (cf. Butzer 1990:30). This may
help explain the continued presence of a Paleoindian
Plains tool tradition in the assemblages well into the
early part of the Early Archaic period (Collins et al.
1998; Decker et al. 2000).
Although it is tenuous to infer much from
the preservation of bison ribs and teeth, ethnoarcheological studies have shown that depending
on whether meat was either abundant or scarce,
arctic caribou hunters would be faced with a set of
choices. Generally, in situations where the demand
for meat is low or distances between the kill site
and base camp are large or difficult to negotiate,
hunters would select the choicest pieces, leaving
behind those of lesser utility (Binford 1978). In
the case of the Armstrong site, then, it is unclear
whether ribs are considered choice pieces or not;
depending on the time of year they may well be. Of
most interest is the bison teeth because they suggest the presence of bison skulls. Bison skulls as
choice parts may be indicated at one kill site on the
High Plains dating to around 6400 B.P. There, the
remains of 61 individual bison were represented,
23 of which were identified as female. Female
skulls were absent from the assemblage, suggesting that they were deliberately removed and taken
elsewhere (Frison 1991:188).
So, assuming that ribs and skulls are considered
choice pieces, one has to determine whether the
demand for meat is either high or low. Addressing
this, what is observed is an apparent increase in
both aquatic species and small animals such as fish,
shellfish, rabbits, and rodents in regional faunal
assemblages (Collins et al. 1998:239; Baker and
Steele 2007). Although by no means are these species ubiquitous in these examples, but together they

132

Texas Archeological Society

comprise a significant sample. This pattern of meat
consumption is consistent with observations made of
modern hunter-gatherers where the presence of these
types of animals as a component of their diet was a
reflection of low hunting returns (Kelly 1995:108).
Based on this, one may assume that the demand for
meat during this period was high; therefore, Early
Archaic hunters may have been willing to travel
farther distances on logistical forays to acquire it,
and due to high transportation costs, only brought
back choice pieces.
The density of occupational debris between
the Terminal Paleoindian and the Early Archaic
components is represented by a considerable increase during the latter. This significant leap in
occupational debris from the Terminal Pleistocene
to Early Archaic components can be considered the
result of either one of two possibilities: (1) that the
occupation occurred repeatedly over time along a
long stable surface, or (2) that occupations were
more intense and involved larger band sizes (i.e.,
larger populations). The case at Armstrong tends to
suggest that the Early Archaic component accumulated over a relatively short span of time as the three
radiocarbon dates had a centroid range of no more
that 100 years. So, one is led to the conclusion that
the higher density of Early Archaic occupational
debris represents a more intense habitation by larger
groups of people over a relatively short span of time.
The suggestion that the Early Archaic I interval
represents a relatively short period of time provides
an opportunity to explore another question: “what
do different point types actually mean?” Referring
back to the model proposed by Kelly and Todd
(1988), they suggest that as populations increased
and territories and landscape technologies became
more established, that the need to minimize
the uncertainties of the environment may have
led to social developments such as interaction,
trade, and the building of alliances. In this sense,
could the mix of “plains”-style lanceolate points
with possible “woodland”-style stemmed points
represent some sort of interaction between
plains hunters and woodland gathers? This type
of interaction is certainly documented in the
ethnohistoric record, when in the winter of 1535,
Cabeza de Vaca encountered the “People of the
Cows” living among settled pueblo groups in the
vicinity of La Junta (Krieger 2002:86). If there is
any truth to this possibility, it would make sense
that the Balcones Escarpment would be the place
to look for it, as it can be considered the margin

between the plains to the west and the woodlands
to the east. Alternatively, some ethnoarcheological
data indicates that different spear point styles are
not necessarily associated with distinctly different
groups. For example the Loikop, a pastoral group
in modern east Africa, have many different spear
point styles, each reflecting one’s social rank and
status within the group (see David and Kramer
2001:361-362). Something like this would be very
difficult to either prove or disprove archeologically.
Another aspect of the archeological record that
supports increasing sedentism through time at the
Armstrong site and others is the increasing frequency
of adze tools. Studies have shown that although employed on a wide range of materials, working wood
is considered the primary use of the Clear Fork tool
(Hudler 1997). Woodworking is recognized as one
of many important activities at the Richard Beene
site, where it is hypothesized that woodworking may
have involved the building of structures (Thoms
2007:379). In fact, the existence of an Early Archaic
shelter has been documented on the Edwards Plateau
in Concho County (cf. Lintz et al. 1995).
In summary, the archeological assemblage
recovered at the Armstrong site represents a material record that accumulated during a dynamic
period of North American prehistory. The evidence
suggests that the site likely represented a residential base camp occupied by peoples who were
struggling environmentally and socially with the
rapidly changing world around them. The various
pressures applied by regional climatic and biotic
change experienced during the Late PaleoindianEarly Archaic periods had a profound impact on
the thinking of the age, causing many groups to
shift their technological orientation from one based
on an understanding of game animals to one that
was increasingly landscape-focused. Decreased
mobility and the packing of people within defined
areas likely compelled interaction among groups.
Evidence from the Armstrong site and other sites
of this time period in the region suggests a move
toward lower residential mobility combined with
relatively higher logistical mobility.
End Notes
1. A hackberry nutlet is the seed portion of the fruit
of a hackberry tree (Celtis sp.). The fruit is a small drupe
6-10 mm in diameter, edible in most species, with a dry
yet sweet sugary taste, similar to a date.

Schroeder—The Armstrong Site
2. The identification of lipid residues is based on
carbon-chain isomer signatures obtained from archeological samples that are then compared to those of control
samples obtained from modern plants and animals. Thus,
the results are couched in terms of the archeological
sample’s resultant isomer signature relative to the range
of signatures obtained from modern control samples.
Therefore, the translation of the result is mainly a literary device to facilitate communication, and should not
be confused as being an exact match to particular plants
or animals.
3. Two other dates obtained for the Terminal Paleoindian component are 7130 ± 60 B.P. and 6550 ± 50 B.P.
The samples for these assays were found together in the
same unit where extensive rodent burrowing was evident,
and are not considered reasonable or accurate dates for
the component.

References Cited
Baker, B. W. and D. G. Steele
2007 Late Pleistocene through Late Holocene Faunal Assemblage. In Archaeological and Paleoecological
Investigations at the Richard Beene Site, South-Central Texas, Vol. II: Archaeological Studies, Synthesis,
and Appendices, edited by A. V. Thoms and R. D.
Mandel, pp. 229-240. Report of Investigations No.
8. Center for Ecological Archeology, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Bettinger, R. L.
1991 Hunter-Gatherers: Archaeological and Evolutionary
Theory. Plenum Press, New York.
Binford, L. R.
1978 Nanamiut Ethnoarchaeology. Academic Press, New
York.
1979 Organization and Formation Processes: Looking at
Curated Technologies. Journal of Anthropological
Research 35:255-273.

133

Butzer, K. W.
1990 The Indian Legacy in the American Landscape. In
The Making of the American Landscape, edited by
C. P. Conzen, pp. 27-50. Unwin Hyman, Boston.
Collins, M. B., J. Guy, and S. W. Dial
1998 The Archaic Period, 8800 to 1300 B.P. In WilsonLeonard: An 11,000-year Archeological Record of
Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Vol. I: Introduction, Background, and Syntheses, assembled and
edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 211-270. Studies in
Archeology No. 31, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, and
Archeology Studies Program, Report 10, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs
Division, Austin.
Cook, S. F. and R. F. Heizer
1965 Studies on the Chemical Analysis of Archaeological
Sites. Publications in Anthropology 2. University of
California, Berkeley.
David, N. and C. Kramer (editors)
2001 Ethnoarchaeology in Action. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Decker, S., S. L. Black, and T. Gustavson
2000 The Woodrow Heard Site, 41UV88: A Holocene Terrace Site in the Western Balcones Canyonlands of
Southwestern Texas. Studies in Archeology 33. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Dial, S. W.
1998 Clear Fork Tools. In Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in
Central Texas, Vol. II: Chipped Stone Artifacts assembled and edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 507-535.
Studies in Archeology No. 31, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin, and Archeology Studies Program, Report 10,
Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Division, Austin.

1980 Willow Smoke and Dogs’ Tails: Hunter-gatherer
Settlement Systems and Archaeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45:4-20.

Frison, G. C.
1991 Prehistoric Hunters of the High Plains, Second Edition. Academic Press Inc., New York.

Bousman, C. B.
1998 Late Paleoindian Archeology. In Wilson-Leonard: An
11,000-year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Vol. I: Introduction, Background,
and Syntheses, assembled and edited by M. B. Collins,
pp. 161-210. Studies in Archeology No. 31, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin, and Archeology Studies Program,
Report 10, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.

Gifford, E. W.
1936 California Balanophagy. In Essays in Anthropology,
edited by A. L. Kroeber, pp. 87-98. University of
California Press, Berkeley.
Hudler, D.
1997 Determining Clear Fork Tool Function Through UseWare Analysis: A Discussion of Use-Ware Methods
and Clear Fork Tools. Studies in Archeology 25.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

134

Texas Archeological Society

Johnson, E., S. Baxevanis, and S. Willett
2002 Appendix E: Taphonomy of the Armstrong Vertebrate Faunal Assemblage. In Data Recovery at the
Armstrong Site (41CW54), Caldwell County, Texas.
Vol. I: Background, Methods, and Site Context.
edited by E. A. Schroeder, and E. R. Oksanen, pp.
229-258. PPA Cultural Resources Report No. 284.
Paul Price Associates, Inc., Austin.
Kelly, R. L.
1995 The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer
Lifeways. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington.
Kelly, R. L. and L. C. Todd
1988 Coming into the Country: Early Paleoindian Hunting
and Mobility. American Antiquity 53(2): 231-244.
Kent, S.
1993 Models of Abandonment and Material Culture
Frequencies. In Abandonment of Settlements and
Regions: Ethnoarcheological and Archaeological Approaches, edited by C. M. Cameron and S. A. Tomka,
pp. 54-73. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Kotter, S. M. and J. T. Jones
1999 Site Descriptions. In Historical and Archeological
Investigations along the Guadalupe-Blanco River
Authority’s San Marcos Raw Water Pipeline, Hays,
Caldwell, Comal, and Guadalupe Counties, Texas,
edited by E. A. Schroeder, pp. 58-110. PPA Cultural
Resources Report Number 236. Paul Price Associates, Inc., Austin.
Krieger, A. D.
2002 We Came Naked and Barefoot: The Journey of Cabeza de Vaca Across North America. University of
Texas Press, Austin.
Lintz, C., A. Treece, and F. Oglesby
1995 The Early Archaic Structure at the Turkey Bend
Ranch Site (41CC112), Concho County. In Advances
in Texas Archeology: Contributions from Cultural
Resources Management, Vol. I, edited by J. E.
Bruseth and T. K. Perttula, pp. 155-185. Cultural Resource Management Report No. 5. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Antiquities Protection,
Austin,
Oksanen, E. R., C. A. Weaver, E. A. Schroeder, and G. T. Goode
2002 Archeological Testing of Four Prehistoric Sites
Along the Guadalupe-Blanco River Authority’s San
Marcos Raw Water Pipeline, Caldwell and Hays
Counties, Texas. PPA Cultural Resources Report No.
262. Paul Price Associates, Inc., Austin.
Schroeder, E. A.
2002 Data Recovery at the Armstrong Site (41CW54)
Caldwell County, Texas. Vol. II: Cultural Interpretations. PPA Cultural Resources Report No. 330. Paul
Price Associates, Inc., Austin.

Schroeder, E. A. and E. R. Oksanen
2002 Data Recovery at the Armstrong Site (41CW54),
Caldwell County, Texas. Vol. I: Background, Methods, and Site Context. PPA Cultural Resources
Report No. 284. Paul Price Associates, Inc., Austin.
Schulderein, J.
1995 Geochemistry, Phosphate Fractionation, and the
Detection of Activity Areas at Prehistoric North
American Sites. In Pedological Perspectives in Archaeological Research, edited by M. E. Collins, B.
J. Carter, B. G. Gladfelter, and R. J. Southard, pp.
107-132. Special Publication No. 44. Soil Science
Society of America, Madison.
Shott, M. J.
1986 Settlement Mobility and Technological Organization:
An Ethnographic Examination. Journal of Anthropological Research 42:15-51.
Takac, P. R. and W. A. Gose
1998 Magnetic Susceptibility of Sediments. In WilsonLeonard: An 11,000-year Archeological Record of
Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Vol. IV: Archeological Features and Technical Analyses, assembled
and edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 1329-1341. Studies
in Archeology No. 31, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, and
Archeology Studies Program, Report 10, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs
Division, Austin.
Thoms, A. V.
2007 Archaeological and Paleoecological Records: Summary and Synthesis. In Archaeological and Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard Beene Site,
South-Central Texas, Vol. II: Archaeological Studies,
Synthesis, and Appendices, edited by A. V. Thoms
and R. D. Mandel, pp. 337-380. Report of Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archeology, Texas
A&M University, College Station.
Winsborough, B.
2002 Appendix E: Microscopic Analysis of Sediments
from Archeological Site 41CW54. In Archeological
Testing of Four Prehistoric Sites along the Guadalupe-Blanco River Authority’s San Marcos Raw Water
Pipeline, Caldwell and Hays Counties, Texas. by E.
R. Oksanen, C. A. Weaver, E. A. Schroeder, and G. T.
Goode, pp. 237-242. PPA Cultural Resources Report
No. 262. Paul Price Associates, Inc., Austin.

The Berdoll Site:
An Early Archaic Camp on Onion Creek, Travis County, Texas
James W. Karbula, John A. Campbell, and Bradford M. Jones

Abstract
In 2006, archeologists from Hicks & Company, Inc. conducted testing and limited data recovery investigations of the Berdoll site (41TV2125), an Early Archaic campsite located within the floodplain of Onion Creek
in Travis County, Texas. The Berdoll site represents a temporary camp seasonally occupied by small, highly
mobile Early Archaic groups. The site is deeply buried to depths of 5.5 m below surface and is well preserved
within Onion Creek terrace deposits. Although a sparse lithic and stone tool assemblage was recovered, the
site contains a diverse faunal assemblage and direct evidence of plant food processing between 7606-8291
B.P. (AMS dates in radiocarbon years before present). The archeological remains provide indications of the
subsistence patterning and cultural ecology of these early groups. The site data reinforces evidence of the shift
to the concentrated exploitation of starchy plant foods at approximately 8800 B.P. that carried on throughout
the Archaic in Texas, and this site represents one of the earliest and best preserved examples of cooking onion
bulbs in earth oven features in Central Texas.

Introduction
A subsistence economy focused on a broad-based
exploitation of small game and plants is considered a
hallmark of the transition from Paleoindian to Archaic
lifeways in both Texas and the southwestern United
States (Willey and Phillips 1958; Vierra 1994; Bousman et al. 2002; Collins 2004). Such a transition has
been interpreted as beginning as early as 9500-10,000
B.P., such as during the Wilson Interval occupation
at the Wilson-Leonard site (Collins 1998a). The
Late Paleoindian period may best be considered
as a series of transitional adaptations characterized
by the continuation of broad spectrum hunting and
gathering to one increasingly focused on the use of
large earth oven facilities primarily for the baking of
plant foods at more centrally focused and intensively
occupied campsites. The shift from primarily smallerbasin features at temporary sites to the mass use of
burned rocks to create large earth ovens for plant food
processing may have occurred within the context of
slightly drier environmental conditions emerging at
the beginning of the Holocene epoch. Collins (1998a,
2004) suggests that the Early Archaic period is one of
a generalized subsistence base focused on the use and
exploitation of a variety of resources, but primarily
focused on baking inulin-rich plants utilizing burned

rocks and burned rock cooking facilities (earth ovens
and burned rock middens) with an increasing intensity beginning ca. 8800 B.P. This reflects a change
from a more nomadic and broad-ranging mobility
strategy to one more focused on the repeated use of
specific places on the landscape, and co-occurs with
the terminal use of lanceolate Angostura projectile
points, eventually changing to the more frequent
use of stemmed projectiles. Prior to the Angostura
interval, smaller cooking features were predominant.
The shift from smaller cooking and warming hearths
to larger, more complex, earth oven appliances in
association with Angostura lithic and stone tool assemblages is well documented at roughly this time at
numerous Early Archaic sites (Collins 1998a; Decker
et al. 2000; Thoms 2007). Collins (1998b:64) suggests that a priority in the investigation of this Archaic
record is to better understand the fundamentals of that
adaptation, and to determine the significance of its
variation, seen over time and across space.
Collins (1998c:279) suggests that at ca. 8800
B.P., occupants of the Wilson-Leonard site began to
construct and use diverse and mostly large domestic cooking appliances that employed hot rocks as
heating elements. Previously, smaller cooking features with fewer stones were in use. The shift from
smaller and simpler to larger and more complex hot

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

136

Texas Archeological Society

rocks appliances marks the beginning of the Early
Archaic at the Wilson-Leonard site; by 8200 B.P.
there were large, fully developed, rock-lined earth
ovens. Evidence suggests that various foods, both
plant and animal, were cooked in the earth ovens,
but that inulin rich camas (wild hyacinth) bulbs
may have become an important staple. These bulbs
require moist baking or steaming for extended periods of time, conditions that can only be met in a
sealed oven. These new subsistence practices began
with a distinctive cooking technology using layered
arrangements of heated rocks in earth ovens that
allowed for the exploitation of a broad range of geophytes. These included upland xerophytic plants like
sotol and other species such as Lily family onion
bulbs that grow in wetter environments (Decker et
al. 2000:3). This technology, once perfected for hyacinth bulbs, may have been used in the preparation
of almost every other kind of food, and remains of
fish, large and small mammals, turtles and mollusks,
along with acorns, walnuts, and other plant foods,
are found closely associated with ovens (Collins
1998c:280). Black et al. (1997:255-268) also suggest that perhaps the ovens remained specialized
facilities for those commodities requiring long cooking times. Repetitive use of multiple earth ovens
resulted in the formation of burned rock middens
(Collins 1998a).
The Berdoll site (41TV2125) has distinct
evidence of a large earth oven (Feature 11) dated
to approximately 7854-8103 B.P. (AMS dates in
conventional radiocarbon years B.P.; hereafter, all
dates provided are in conventional radiocarbon
years B.P.). The oven remnant contains extensive
charcoal remains: charred Lily onion bulbs and
charred acorns along with oak and black walnut, as
well as willow/cottonwood fuel remnants. A total
of six radiocarbon ages were obtained from Feature
11 from charred materials located within and under
the lower rock layer within the intact structure of
the feature. The charred onion bulbs in F11 at the
Berdoll site may represent one of the oldest reliable dates on wild onion use in Central Texas. No
projectile points were recovered from in situ contexts at the Berdoll site. The lithic artifact density
suggests low intensity and short term occupations.
Broad spectrum resource exploitation is also indicated by the diversity of recovered plant and animal
resources, as is the extensive use of fire-cracked
limestone rocks from readily and locally available
sources. The majority of the Berdoll site features are
comparatively small basin hearths used for cooking

and warming. The notable exception is the large
earth oven (Feature 11) and associated oven (Feature
10). If the Early Archaic period is characterized by
the use of formally constructed large earth ovens to
process geophyte plant foods, as well as the broad
spectrum exploitation of all available resources, then
the Berdoll site can be considered to represent an
Early Archaic adaptation.
The Berdoll site, for whatever reason, was neither as intensively nor repetitively occupied as the
Wilson-Leonard site and represents a much shorter
term and shorter duration occupation. There are only
a few tool types at the Berdoll site: bifaces, cores
made of river cobbles, flake tools, manos/hammerstones, and a sandstone grinding slab. There are no
projectile points recovered from secure contexts, nor
adzes, burins, gravers, or unifaces. The lack of adzes
suggests wood working was not an important activity at the site, and the general absence of unifacial
tools suggests little focus on hide working. Perhaps
being of a more temporary nature, wood and hide
working were not important site activities. While
sample size may be a factor, for both features and
artifacts, the density and composition of the Berdoll
assemblage appears very different from most Early
Archaic burned rock midden sites. The generalized
and often simple stone tools at a site such as Berdoll
are of a character that could be associated with a
wide range of potential activities and they do not
suggest the site served as a specialized locale for
the intensive exploitation of a particular resource,
or as a location for intensive production. A limited
set of activities took place at the Berdoll site: plant
food processing, snaring, trapping, gathering, butchering, biface manufacture, and retooling. Perhaps
the Berdoll site represents a temporary plant food
processing and retooling station, and not a significant seasonally occupied and focused base camp,
one occupied by only 1-2 small family groups at
different times.
Background
This article summarizes 2006 testing and data
recovery investigations conducted on the Berdoll
Project Specific Location (PSL) at the Berdoll
site in Travis County, Texas. These investigations
were conducted between June and August 2006
for Lone Star Infrastructure (LSI) and the Texas
Department of Transportation (TxDOT) in support of the SH 130 highway project. The Berdoll

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site
PSL is a privately-owned borrow pit in support of
construction of the proposed SH 130 highway project. Project Specific Locations (PSL) are privately
owned areas of temporary construction related to
the development of highway infrastructure. The
Federal Highways Administration (FHWA) has
previously determined that PSLs are not federal
undertakings and are therefore not subject to Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act
of 1966, as amended. The investigations were
required by the Exclusive Development Agreement (EDA) between LSI and TxDOT but were
not subject to Federal or state review. However,
per the EDA, cultural resources investigations for
PSLs were under the direct oversight of the Austin
District of TxDOT.
The Berdoll PSL lies within the Onion Creek
floodplain and also the much larger Colorado River

Figure 1. Project Location.

137

terrace. Elevations in the project area range from
432 to 439 ft. amsl. The Berdoll PSL is roughly
bounded by Onion Creek to the west, the Berdoll
Property line to the east and north, and Pearce Lane
to the south (Figures 1 and 2). The Berdoll site is
located along the eastern edge of the Berdoll PSL
at the base of an upland ridge, between the upland
slope and an ephemeral drainage in the Onion Creek
floodplain. The Berdoll PSL totals 96.88 acres on the
east side of the proposed SH 130 right-of-way and
54.57 acres along the west side.
The Berdoll site was discovered during survey
and deep backhoe trenching investigations conducted at the Berdoll PSL in the spring of 2005. The
site is deeply buried below approximately 4.5 m of
overburden consisting of colluvial and alluvial sediments. The site consisted of two discrete prehistoric
components identified between 60-180 cm bs and

138

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Site Location.

380-480 cm bs along the edge of the Onion Creek
floodplain. The upper component was determined to
be a low density scatter of cultural material with a
single hearth feature, and did not contain significant
deposits that warranted additional investigations. In
contrast, the lower component had two deeply buried hearth features in Trenches 8 and 12 that dated
to between 9190 ± 40 B.P. and 9540 ± 40 B.P. (on
bulk sediments).
Following the survey investigations, and at the
request of LSI and TxDOT, Hicks & Company,
Inc. drafted a research design and scope of work
for conducting testing investigations at the Berdoll
site. With no regulatory framework, no federal
undertaking, and LSI contractually committed only
to the testing phase, all parties agreed to only one
phase of additional field investigations. Further, due
to the nature of the SH 130 design build project and
the scheduling demands to rapidly have the Berdoll
sediment fill for the highway, only one phase of field
excavations was plausible. Therefore, the research
design for archeological investigations in the lower

component at this important site had to accommodate both testing and data recovery priorities in
one streamlined field investigation. After consultation among all parties, and based on the survey
radiocarbon dates and other survey data, a set of a
priori research questions were developed relating
to critical information gaps in the transitional Late
Paleoindian to Early Archaic archeological record,
and if test excavations determined that there were
archeological data with the potential to address
any of these critical research questions, then data
recovery would consist of procuring a larger sample
size using appropriate techniques to address these
questions.
Environment and
Geomorphic Context
The Berdoll site is located along lower Onion
Creek in Travis County, Texas. A tributary of the
Colorado River, Onion Creek is perennial, but

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site
its discharge varies widely, both seasonally and
annually (Caran 2009). This reach of Onion Creek
drains generally eastward, following a course that
takes it close to its bedrock valley wall. Bedrock
is composed of soft claystone and marl, part of
the Sprinkle Formation of the Upper Cretaceous
Taylor Group. These strata are easily eroded and
particularly unstable. Where it is exposed in the
locally steep southern valley wall, the Sprinkle
Formation produces abundant slope wash and small
landslides. These colluvial deposits interfinger
with overbank and inset channel deposits along the
southern edge of the Onion Creek flood terrace.
Relief above the channel of Onion Creek is
between 4.3-8.8 m, and between 9-13.7 m above the
Colorado River (Caran 2009). Overbank deposition
has been the dominant local geomorphic process in
the site area throughout the Holocene, producing a
thick sequence of up to 6 m of vertically accreted,
relatively fine-grained deposits. Both the Colorado
River and Onion Creek were the sources of this fine
sediment, although Onion Creek was probably the
major contributor throughout much of the Holocene.
Along the present channel of Onion Creek, bedload
and levee deposits have accreted laterally. The soils
that develop in relatively coarse-grained Onion
Creek terrace deposits are often highly calcareous,
but otherwise less mature, with A-C or A-B-C
profiles and thin B-horizons.
Along the toe of the bedrock valley wall at the
edge of the Onion Creek flood terrace, the survey
trenches exposed highly calcareous sandy clay
containing cobbles consisting of large fossilized
marine mollusks. The sediment composing these
deposits derived from the adjacent bedrock slopes
as slope wash and small landslides, which moved
down slope and interfingered with the overbank and
chute-channel deposits composing the Onion Creek
Terrace fill. The valley wall is capped by Middle
Pleistocene Colorado River gravel, the Capitol Terrace fill. As the soft bedrock slopes are eroded, the
erosion-resistant Capitol Terrace deposits are undercut, releasing pebbles and cobbles of extremely hard
chert and quartzite. The hard gravel is washed down
slope, where it accumulates as a thin lag deposit.
Isolated pebbles and cobbles can be seen on the
Onion Creek Terrace and within its fill (Caran 2009).
The Berdoll site is on a high alluvial terrace
of an ancient channel of Onion Creek that drained
generally to the northeast to its confluence with the
Colorado River, approximately 2.7 km downstream.
The topography slopes to the northeast ca. 70-75 cm

139

in elevation per every 100 m, and also descends to
the east towards the Onion Creek channel remnant.
Basal Onion Creek gravels were identified in survey
Trench 4 at approximately 8-10 m bs, and 20 m
east of the prehistoric cultural materials in Trench
4. Through the course of its early meanderings, this
ancient thalweg of Onion Creek closely followed
the adjacent bedrock valley wall to the east of the
site and terrace landform. The prehistoric remains
in Trench 4 and subsequent data recovery Trench 12
represent the eastern extent of the cultural materials
exposed during the investigations. It is clear that
the prehistoric peoples occupied at various times at
least a 200 m length of the terrace of Onion Creek
at this location.
Cultural and Natural
Stratigraphy
The Berdoll site is identified at a consistent
elevation between 3.6-5.5 m bs within a discrete
sediment depositional episode dating from approximately 10,000-8000 B.P. The fill containing
the site at the base of the T2 Onion Creek terrace
represents one of the earliest of multiple Holocene
aggradational events by the meandering Onion
Creek documented on the Berdoll tract throughout
the Holocene. While the age of this depositional fill
is estimated to span nearly 2000 years, the actual
age of the cultural deposits may reflect a much more
narrow time interval, as it occurred on what was a
stable fill surface during a brief hiatus of aggradation. Following the cultural occupations, significant
aggradation resumed burying and preserving the
site under a mix of over 3-5 m of alluvial and colluvial sediments. This sediment profile formed a
weakly developed soil series through time with the
site materials located in a thin, weakly developed
paleosol (Cb Horizon) located at the base of the
sediment profile.
The soil stratigraphy across the site is very
complex and widely varied. Within these variations,
observable in trench profiles across the site, is
a fairly consistent occurrence of archeological
materials within a single depositional context. As
noted above, the site is located on a high alluvial
terrace, overlooking an ephemeral drainage scar to
the east, with a relict Onion Creek meander channel
passing from the south across the western site
boundary. The entire terrace at this location consists
of ancient Holocene terrace deposits, probably

140

Texas Archeological Society

relating to the original Onion Creek channel. The
frequent flooding of Onion Creek created ideal
conditions for intact site preservation, with only the
low-energy floodwaters and fine-grained sediment
reaching the relatively high site location.
Sediment stratigraphy within the extensive
Onion Creek terrace deposits was identified in three
basic zones. Zone 1 is colluvial slope wash characterized by thick clay that is very dark grayish-brown
and of a different texture than the underlying brown
alluvial sediments. The thickness of Zone 1 varies
in depth from south to north across the landform. As
would be expected, there is less colluvial accumulation in the southern portion of the site, because of the
lower elevations to the north. Zones 2 and 3 represent
underlying alluvial deposits. Zone 2 consists of brown
silty sandy clay, while Zone 3 is a very silty/sandy
clay that is yellowish-brown to light yellowish-brown
in color. Zone 3 represents a paleosol. The Early
Archaic archeological deposits are confined to Zone
3 and are found at consistent elevations sloping from
south to north across the terrace landform.
Block and Feature
Discussions
The Berdoll site was identified during the initial
survey of the property through the excavation of
four exploratory trenches. Two of these trenches
yielded burned rock features at depths of 4 m bs
(Feature 2) and 4.71 m bs (Feature 4). These features
were discovered below a thick layer of colluvium
and alluvium. Due to the depth of the deposits, the
upper 3 m of sediment was removed over the whole
site to facilitate the hand excavations. This was done
in conjunction with the borrow pit excavations.
Testing and data recovery proceeded in an arbitrary
north-south oriented grid with an arbitrary elevation
of 100 m at the primary site datum.
Five excavation blocks, each measuring 100 m2,
were laid out across the site (Figure 3), and one of
the exploratory trenches from the survey (Trench
12) was expanded. Two additional blocks, G and H,
were expanded areas overlying features that were
exposed during additional trenching at the site. A
total of 25 test units were excavated within the various blocks, ranging in size from 1 m2 to 4 m2 and
20-120 cm in depth. In all, 33.6 m3 of sediment was
excavated from the site by hand.
Ten features were identified within the handexcavated units at the site, including Feature 4 from

the survey. The features consisted of burned rock
concentrations and concentrations of charcoal and
snail shell. Feature 11 is the largest feature and is
the central element of an earth oven. The artifacts
were limited to a small collection of formal lithic
tools, debitage, red ochre, mussel shell, and bone:
six bifaces and biface fragments, four cores, 214
pieces of debitage, nine edge modified flakes, two
battered stones, one metate fragment, 24.2 g of mussel shell fragments, and 295 pieces of fragmented
bone. A single Martindale projectile point was recovered from the exposed surface of the excavation
area after stripping. While this point is believed to
date to the Early Archaic period, its provenience is
not sufficiently secure to warrant its inclusion as a
diagnostic element of the occupation.
Occupation Zones
Multiple lines of archeological data indicate
two prehistoric occupation zones within the T2
terrace basal fill. Evidence for these two zones is
most apparent in Block A (see Figure 3). In this
block, excavation data from eight test units indicate concentrations of cultural materials at two
distinct elevation ranges. Seven test units in Block
A produced evidence of cultural materials in the
upper zone equivalent to the upper portions of the
graded, artificial surface. The upper zone in Block
A is contained within approximately 20-25 cm of
sediments (100.08-99.86 m below datum) and consists of poorly preserved scatters of burned rock,
debitage, animal bone, and mussel shell fragments.
Two features are identified in this upper zone: poorly
preserved, small, low density scatters of land snails,
smeared charcoal, and a few highly fractured burned
rocks (Features 7 and 9). One core fragment was recovered in the upper zone in Unit 6. Two conjoining
pieces of a biface were recovered in this zone, one
from excavations in Unit 18, and the other from the
graded surface in the west corner of Block A.
In Block A, the lower zone of cultural materials
is similar in content but clustered lower in the sediment profile (99.56-99.26 m in elevation). Six test
units (Units 3-4, 6-8, and 12) had evidence of these
slightly deeper cultural materials. The lower zone
has a low density lithic scatter, with bone and mussel shell, and burned rock fragments. Notably, Unit
12 had mussel umbos in the lower zone. Feature 8,
a charcoal stain and a dense concentration of land
snails, is identified in Unit 6. One edge modified
flake was recovered in the lower zone in Unit 3.

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site

141

Figure 3. Map of excavations at the Berdoll site.

Figure 3. Map of Excavations at the Berdoll Site.

Artifacts in Block A occurred in a very low
density across the eight 1 m2 test units. Seventyone pieces of debitage, a core, biface, and an edge
modified flake comprise the chipped stone artifacts;
the assemblage also contains 258 burned rock, 4 g
of mussel shell fragments, and 30 pieces of bone
(Table 1). Artifacts are concentrated in two separate
occupational zones between 100.06-99.86 m elevation and 99.56-99.26 m elevation.
Evidence of the uppermost occupation zone is
also present in Block B. Very low density prehistoric cultural materials are identified in three test
units between 100.51-100.11 m in elevation. These
materials are 25-45 cm higher than the uppermost
cultural materials in Block A, which is northeast
and down slope towards the confluence of Onion
Creek and the Colorado River (see Figure 3). Given
the approximately 80 m distance between the two
blocks, and the natural rise in the landform between

them, the Block B materials are attributed to the uppermost cultural zone located at the base of the T2
Onion Creek terrace deposits.
The cultural materials and their density in
Block B are consistent with those of Block A. The
primary evidence of cultural occupation in Block B
is Feature 6. The feature consisted of a dark stain
with mottles of burned earth, charcoal, and ash.
Lithic debitage, animal bone fragments, pieces of
red ocher, and one mussel shell umbo were collected
within the feature.
Overall, the features in Blocks A and B appear
to be poorly preserved remnants, perhaps washed
and eroded from flooding and pooled into clusters
along with snail shells resulting from fluvial events,
or perhaps they are surface burns of such pooled
materials from natural fires. This phenomenon
has been previously suggested for similar types of
features identified in terrace deposits along Onion

edge
ground and
modified
pecked
flake
stone
mussel
shell (g)

snail		
shell
bone

red
ochre (g)

Block A	 Total
71
1
1
1	 	
4.0	 	
30	 	
100.12-100.06
1	 	 	 	 					
100.06-99.96
43					
1.6				
99.96-99.86
17									
99.86-99.76		
1								
99.76-99.66			
1			
0.2				
99.66-99.56						
0.1				
99.56-99.46
1					
0.3				
99.46-99.36
7			
1				
29		
99.36-99.26
2					
1.8		
1		
											
Block G	 Total
45	 	 	 	
1	 	 	
91	 	
100.76-100.64
4							
4		
100.64-100.56
9				
1			
1		
98.89-98.76
17							
28		
98.76-98.66
15							
58		
											
Block H	 Total
25	 	
1	 	 	
165.2	 	
34	 	
98.68-98.58
25		
1			
165.2		
34		
											
Trench 12	 Total
6	 	 	
3
2
46.0
4
46
49.3
 	
99.57-99.47
4	 	 	
1	 	
40.7	 	 	 	
99.47-99.37
1			
1
2		
1		
0.2
99.37-99.27
1			
1			
3		
22.3
99.27-99.17						
5.8			
26.8
99.17-99.07										
 	
99.07-98.97	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	

					
					
Elevation
debitage
core
biface

Table 1. Artifact Recovery from Block A.

3,069
83
435
579
1051
917
4

11
11

190
6
3

199

258
1
121
12
2
4
2
100
1
15

burned
rock

142
Texas Archeological Society

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site
Creek (Campbell et al. 2006). Numerous pieces of
charcoal were collected from Feature 6, but all were
too poorly preserved for radiocarbon dating. The upper occupation zone in general is poorly preserved.
Block G
Block G was expanded from an exploratory
trench to an area 5.5 x 5.5 m in size. The block was
excavated after a possible rock feature, Feature 12,
was discovered during the excavation of Trench G
(see Figure 3). Two test units were placed within
the area of the highest burned rock concentration to
delineate Feature 12; only two levels were excavated
in each unit. Block G produced 45 pieces of debitage
and 91 pieces of badly fragmented bone as well as
199 burned rocks associated with Feature 12, between
98.89-98.66 m (see Table 1). A quartzite hammerstone was also found in association with Feature 12 at
98.73 m. Three Feature 12 radiocarbon samples were
submitted for radiocarbon dating, and they yielded
conventional age ranges of 7955 ± 64 B.P., 8065 ±
79 B.P., and 8026 ± 68 B.P. Half of the latter sample
was also submitted to Beta Analytic, Inc., returning
an age range of 7910 ± 40 B.P. (Table 2).
Block H
Block H was also expanded off of an exploratory trench after a concentration of burned rock and
charcoal was uncovered during machine excavations.
The block was scraped over an area 5.5 x 5.5 m in
size, and a single test unit was placed in the area of
the highest burned rock concentration (Feature 14).
Artifacts in Block H included an early stage biface, 25
pieces of debitage, 165.2 g of mussel shell, 11 burned
rocks, and 34 bone fragments (see Table 1). All artifacts were found in association with Feature 14 at an
elevation range of 98.68-98.58 m. One of the pieces
of bone is a well preserved deer mandible fragment.
In addition, several (n=7) mussel shells were found
scattered within 2 m of Feature 14. During laboratory
analysis of the artifacts, nine of the flakes recovered
from Feature 14 refit onto the early stage biface. Two
charcoal samples collected from Feature 14 yielded
conventional age ranges of 7904 ± 68 B.P. and 7925
± 64 B.P. (see Table 2).
Backhoe Trench 12
Backhoe Trench 12 was originally excavated
during the initial survey of the Berdoll site. A single

143

feature was identified in this trench at 4.71 m bs
(99.41 m in elevation). At the time of the survey,
Feature 4 was exposed, mapped, photographed, and
several radiocarbon samples were collected; it was
covered with plastic and reburied under sediments
to preserve it for further excavation during testing.
During the testing, Trench 12 was expanded to
expose a larger area surrounding Feature 4: at its
base, Trench 12 was approximately 5 m wide by 12
m long (see Figure 3) and Feature 4 remained intact.
Feature 13 was identified during the expansion of
the trench and a single test unit was placed over
it. Five additional test units were excavated within
Trench 12 that uncovered two additional features,
Features 10 and 11 (Figure 4). These features are
characterized by dense concentrations of burned
rock, charcoal, and other cultural debris.
Backhoe Trench 12 excavations produced 46
pieces of bone, six pieces of debitage, three edge
modified flakes, two ground stone fragments, 46.0
g of mussel shell fragments, four snail shells, 49.3
g of red ochre, and 3069 burned rocks, in association with a suite of features (see Table 1). Three
broken flakes (one secondary, two tertiary) and red
ochre (22.5 g) were recovered in association with
Feature 4 between 99.47-99.27 m. Associated with
Feature 10 (between 99.67-99.27 m) was an edge
modified flake, one tertiary flake, and a large burned
sandstone metate fragment. Feature 11 had an edge
modified flake, a possible piece of ground stone,
20.9 g of ochre, and a single mussel shell umbo (5.8
g). An edge modified flake and four flakes were collected in Feature 13, as well as a single mussel shell
with the umbo (40.7 g).
Feature Discussions
Feature 4
Feature 4 is a burned rock concentration 57 x
66 cm in size, distributed vertically between 99.4199.22 m (Figure 5). Charcoal in the profile suggests
it had a basin shape. Twenty burned cobbles were
recorded within it, and these were predominantly
chert cobbles (90 percent) or quartzite cobbles.
There were also numerous smaller fragments of
burned chert and heat-spalled chert fragments in
the feature. Only one piece of lithic debitage was
recovered as well as a piece of red ochre. The soil
within the feature is stained a darker color than the
surrounding matrix and suggests in situ anaerobic
heating (reduced soil).

144

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Radiocarbon Dates from the Berdoll site.

				
			
Elevation
Sample #
Block Feature
(m)

Measured
C-14 Age
(Years BP)

Conv.
C-14 Age
(Years BP)

13C/12C
Ratio (‰)

5
B
6
100.37
8259 ± 66
8291 ± 66
-23.01
42
T12
4
99.35
7725 ± 70
7736 ± 70
-24.30
43
T12
4
99.35
7914 ± 68
7878 ± 68
-27.23
45
T12
4
99.27
7960 ± 40
7920 ± 40
-27.2
45
T12
4
99.27
7638 ± 66
7606 ± 66
-27.05
							
47
T12
11
99.33
8058 ± 63
8026 ± 63
-27.02
							
48
T12
11
99.19
7950 ± 40
7910 ± 40
-27.2
48
T12
11
99.19
8101 ± 40
8066 ± 57
-27.21
49
T12
11
99.19
8060 ± 40
8010 ± 40
-27.8
49
T12
11
99.19
7905 ± 56
7854 ± 56
-28.22
							
							
66
T12
11
99.11
8152 ± 66
8103 ± 66
-28.03
							
59
G
12
98.77
7968 ± 64
7955 ± 64
-25.81
60
G
12
98.74
8079 ± 79
8065 ± 79
-25.87
65
G
12
98.7
7930 ± 40
7910 ± 40
-26.5
65
G
12
98.7
8051 ± 68
8026 ± 68
-26.58
67
H
14
98.62
7922 ± 68
7904 ± 68
-26.12
68
H
14
98.62
7937 ± 64
7925 ± 64
-25.73

2σ
(Cal. BP)
9470- 9090
8640- 8390
8990-8540
8990- 8610
8550-8480
8250-8210
9080- 9050
9040-8640
8980-8600
9150- 8650
9020- 8740
8980- 8880
8870- 8820
8810-8520
9270- 8850
8840-8770
9000- 8610
9250- 8600
8980- 8600
9090- 8640
9000- 8250
8990- 8600

Notes*
UGA
UGA
UGA
Beta
UGA
UGA
Beta
UGA
Beta
UGA

UGA
UGA
UGA
Beta
UGA
UGA
UGA

*UGA=University of Georgia; Beta=Beta Analytic

Feature 4 is a small cooking feature based on
the density of burned rocks at its center. The proximity of Feature 4 to Feature 11, an earth oven, also
suggests that this feature may be the product of
waste material discarded from Feature 11 (Figure
6). Both features are associated with the same occupational horizon in elevation; however, Feature
4 is a more discrete rock concentration, probably a
separate cooking facility with associated subsistence
remains.
Five flotation samples were collected from the
feature (9.4 liters of sediment were floated). These
contained 1.1 g of charcoal, 13 bone fragments, and
several micro-fragments of debitage and burned
rock. The bone fragments were from a small mammal. Charcoal analyzed from the flotation sample
consisted of burned oak (n=2) and burned willow/
cottonwood (n=4). Three charcoal samples, Samples
42, 43, and 45, were collected in situ and submitted

to the University of Georgia for radiocarbon dating.
These samples all yielded similar conventional age
results, Sample 42 at 7736 ± 70 B.P., Sample 43 at
7878 ± 68 B.P., and Sample 45 at 7606 ± 66 B.P.
Sample 45 was divided in half and one half was sent
to Beta Analytic, Inc., yielding a conventional age
of 7920 ± 40 B.P. (see Table 2).
Feature 6
Feature 6 is an ovate-shaped stain of charcoal
and burned earth located in Block B. The feature is
137 x 81 cm in size and occurs between elevations of
100.51-100.28 m. This feature contained two small
fragments of burned rock and was defined primarily
by a dense concentration of charcoal, burned earth,
and ash. Artifacts recovered from the feature include
21 pieces of debitage, 38 bone fragments (mainly
burned), and less than 0.1 g of mussel shell. Both

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site

145

Figure 4. Features in Trench 12.

Figure 4. Features in Trench 12.
of the burned rock fragments are burned fossil mollusk. Feature 6 was bisected at its widest point, and
in profile, it has a shallow basin shape that is 11 cm
thick at its deepest point.
Feature 6 most likely represents an ephemeral
campfire. The presence of ash, charcoal, and burned

earth indicates that in situ burning was occurring.
The lack of burned rocks may suggest that it was
used for short duration cooking episodes. The
abundance of bone indicates that the function of
this feature was focused on cooking animals rather
than plant material.

146

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Overview of Feature 4 in Trench 12.

Feature 4 & 11
Unit 10 Level 3

Figure
6. Plan
viewView
of Feature
4 and east
of Feature
11. 11.
Figure
6: Plan
of Feature4
and edge
east edge
of Feature

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site
One flotation sample from this feature contained
134 bone fragments, 18 charred plant remains,
burned earth, charcoal, and several micro-fragments
of debitage. The bones were from large mammal
(n=3), small mammal (n=43), and cottontail rabbit
(n=2); the remainder were indeterminate vertebrate
remains. The charred plant remains and the charcoal
could not be identified as to the type of resource.
One of the charcoal samples collected from within
the feature returned a conventional radiocarbon age
of 8291 ± 66 B.P. (see Table 2).
Feature 10
Feature 10 was approximately 1.5 m south of
Feature 4 (see Figure 4). It is a concentration of
burned rocks 138 cm wide and 94 cm long between
99.52-99.32 m in elevation (Figures 7-8). The
feature extends over approximately 60 percent of
the unit but is concentrated mostly in the northern
corner. A total of 139 burned rocks were in the
feature: 18 limestone, 92 quartzite, and 29 gypsum
cobbles and fragments. One piece of debitage, an

Figure 7. Feature 10 in Trench 12.

147

edge modified flake, and a sandstone metate were
recovered from Feature 10. Charcoal was moderately dense throughout the feature, but was limited
to small fragments and flecks. Two charcoal samples
were collected from Feature 10 in Level 2, but
proved insufficient for radiocarbon dating. Burned
earth was also observed beneath several of the rocks
in the feature, as well as a soil stain approximately
80 cm in diameter, indicative of in situ heating.
Much like Feature 4, Feature 10 may be a hearth
or earth oven based on the density of burned rock.
The darker stained soil in the feature matrix suggests
in situ anaerobic heating (reduced soil); however,
that may also be the result of charcoal and/or anthropogenic waste diffusing into the surrounding
matrix. Like Feature 4, Feature 10 may also have
been utilized in conjunction with Feature 11, the
earth oven, either as discarded waste material or as
a partially disassembled source for rocks.
Four flotation samples were collected from
Feature 10 (8 liters of sediment). Artifacts recovered from the flotation samples include 2.2 grams
of charcoal, two bone fragments, and several

148

Texas Archeological Society

Legend
Soil stain

Burned Rock
C-14 Sample
Mussel Shell

Bone Fragments
Debitage
Ochre

Snail Shell
Flake

Figure 8. Plan view of Feature 10 in Trench 12, Unit 21, level 2.

Figure 8: Plan view of Feature 10 in Trench 12.
micro-fragments of debitage and burned rock. Charcoal analyzed from the flotation samples consisted
of elm (n=4) and willow/cottonwood (n=2). The
bone fragments could not be identified.
Feature 11
Feature 11 is a large burned rock-lined earth
oven with a very dense, circular, concentration of
burned rocks and charcoal. It measures 200 x 130 cm
in size (see Figure 4) and occurs vertically between
elevations of 99.49-99.07 m; only 70 percent was
exposed during the excavations (Figure 9). A total of
688 burned rocks were recorded within the feature
as well as several hundred more small fragments of

burned rocks (Figure 10). The vast majority of the
rocks are burned chert cobbles (n=647), along with
gypsum, quartzite, and fossil mollusk. In profile, the
feature is basin-shaped and 41 cm thick at its deepest
point (Figures 11-12).
Based on the morphology of the feature and
its contents it apparently functioned as an earth
oven for cooking plant material. The presence of
charred lily bulb fragments strongly supports the
idea that Feature 11 functioned as an earth oven as
these plant materials require a long time to cook
at moderate to high temperatures (Thoms 2005).
The rock lining of the basin of the oven would
have functioned both as an insulator and a heating
element for cooking food.

d matrix

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site

149

Figure 9. Feature 11 earth oven in Trench 12.

Feature 11

Figure 10: Feature 11 Plan view showing different layers of rocks and co
samples.
Figure 10. Feature 11 plan view showing different layers of rocks and collected matrix samples.

150

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. Profile of Feature 11; note the pit shape and dark charcoal stains below the rocks.

Figure 12. Schematic profile view of Feature 11.

Figure 12: Schematic profile view of Feature 11.

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site
A single edge modified flake was the only
chipped stone artifact recovered from the feature,
along with mussel shell fragments (5.8 g) and red
ochre (14.6 g). Charcoal was distributed throughout
the feature but the highest concentrations were found
beneath the rocks and at its base. The sediment and
rocks at the base of the feature were heavily burned;
the rocks were severely fractured and more friable
due to excessive heating.
Nine flotation samples were collected from
Feature 11 (18 liters of sediment). The flotation
samples contained 4.6 g of charcoal, charred plant
remains, and several micro-fragments of debitage
and burned rock. Charcoal consisted of oak (n=10),
black walnut (n=6), and willow/cottonwood (n=2).

Figure 13. Feature 12 location in Block G.

151

The charred plant material recovered were onion
bulb fragments (n=3) of the lily family. There were
no faunal remains in Feature 11. Together, the five
charcoal samples from the feature yielded a conventional age range of 7854-8103 B.P. (see Table 2).
Feature 12
Feature 12 is an ovate-shaped concentration of
burned rock and stained earth that is 185 x 135 cm
in size (Figures 13-14), and occurs between 98.7698.56 m in elevation. A total of 187 burned limestone
rocks were in the feature, as well as 45 pieces of
debitage, 91 bone fragments, two possible quartzite
hammerstones, burned earth, and charcoal. In profile,

Figure 13: Feature 12 location on Block G.

152

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 14. Schematic Feature 12 plan view.

Figure 14: Feature 12 plan view schematic.

the feature appears to be a shallow basin-shape, 17
cm thick at its deepest point (Figure 15), and it was
probably used as a cooking and warming feature.
Four flotation samples (8 liters of sediments)
were collected from Feature 12. Artifacts recovered
from the flotation samples include oak charcoal
(n=2), 244 bone fragments, and several microfragments of debitage and burned rock. Analysis of
the bone fragments identified very small mammal
(n=165), small mammal (n=5), medium mammal
(n=8), large mammal (n=64), and deer (n=2). Three
recovered charcoal samples yielded conventional
ages of 7955 ± 64, 8065 ± 79, and 8026 ± 68 B.P.;
this latter sample was split and the half submitted to Beta Analytic for AMS radiocarbon dating

yielded a conventional age of 7910 ± 40 B.P. (see
Table 2).
Feature 13
Feature 13 measures 93 x 83 cm in size and
occurs between elevations of 99.60-99.47 m. It is
circular in plan view, defined by the limits of the
burned rocks and soil staining (Figures 16-17). In
profile, the rocks are flat-lying; however, charcoal
staining and burned earth below the rocks form a
7-9 cm basin below the rocks.
Feature 13 is located more than 4 m southwest
of Feature 11 (see Figure 4). It is likely a cooking
feature associated with the occupational surface

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site

Figure 15. Feature 12 profile showing shallow basin.

Figure 16. Feature 13 in Trench 12.

153

154

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 17: Plan view of Feature 13, note stained areas.

Figure 17. Plan view of Feature 13, note stained areas.

observed across the remainder of Trench 12. The
staining and burned earth suggests in situ burning
and supports the idea that this feature functioned
as a hearth. The large amount of faunal remains in
this feature, relative to other features in Trench 12,
suggests that its function was focused on processing
animals and it was not directly associated with the
Figure 17: Plan view of Feature 13,
function of Feature 11, which appears to have been
used for plant processing.
A total of 132 burned rocks were recorded in
Feature 13. These rocks were chert, sandstone, and
quartzite cobbles and fragments. Four pieces of
debitage and one edge modified flake were also recovered from the feature. Faunal material recovered
included 35 bone fragments and 40.7 g of mussel
shell fragments. Four flotation samples were also
processed from Feature 13 (7.75 liters of sediment).

Materials from the flotation samples included 2.7
g of charcoal (oak, n=1) and willow/cottonwood,
n=2), 38 bone fragments, and several microfragments of debitage and burned rock. There were
five classes of fauna from the feature: very small
mammal (n=14), small mammal (n=34), jackrabbit
(n=6), cottontail (n=1), and mussel. The remaining
note
stained
areas.
bone could
only be
identified as vertebrate in origin.
Feature 14
Feature 14 in Block H is 74 cm long by 60 cm
wide (Figure 18) and occurs vertically between 98.7398.59 m. The feature is defined by the limits of the
burned rock, as well as a dark soil stain and charcoal concentration at its center (Figure 19). Eleven
burned limestone rocks were in the feature as well

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site

155

Block H

Burned Rock

Charcoal
Rabdotus
Soil Staining/Feature
Boundary
Chert Lithic
Mussell Shell
Downward
Slope Line
Test Unit
Hand-Cleared
Areas

Figure 18. Feature 14 location in Block H.

as four intact mussel shells (Figure 20), 25 pieces of
debitage, 34 bone fragments, including a portion of
a deer mandible with teeth attached (Figure 21), and
a biface. As mentioned earlier, nine flakes recovered
from the feature fill refit onto the single biface.
Feature 14 is mostly likely a cooking feature
based on the in situ burning and burned rocks present. The burned rocks are less densely concentrated

relative to the other features on the site. The abundance of animal bone, including the deer mandible,
suggests that this feature’s primary function was
in animal processing; however, acorn fragments
suggest that some plant processing occurred here
as well. Lithic reduction was also occurring in the
vicinity, given the presence of debitage and more
notably the bifacial core with refitting flakes. Dates

Figure 18: Feature 14 location in Block H.

156

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 19: Feature 14 plan view showing stained area and artifacts.

Figure 19. Feature 14 plan view showing stained area and artifacts.

Central Feature Group
returned for this feature overlap with those of Feature 12: two radiocarbon samples from Feature 14
have radiocarbon ages of 7904 ± 68 and 7925 ± 64
The central feature group in Trench 12 repreB.P. (see Table 2). It is likely, given that Features 12
sents a very well preserved set of burned rock feaand 14 are only 15 m apart and have a similar artifact
tures associated with wood charcoal, animal bone,
assemblage, that they are associated.
and charred food remains. These deposits probably
One flotation sample (2 liters of sediment) was
represent the same series of occupations that were
Figurefrom
19:Feature
Feature
14 planinview
showing
stained
area
and
artifacts.
collected
14. Artifacts
the flotadocumented
in the
lower
occupation
of Block A.
tion sample include charcoal, 51 bone fragments,
The central feature group uncovered in Trench
burned earth, five burned seeds, and several micro12 are four medium to large-sized burned rock
fragments of debitage. Charcoal samples consisted
features at a consistent elevation of 99.60-99.07 m
of acorn fragments (n=4), oak (n=5), and willow/
in the T2 terrace sediments (Features 4, 10, 11, and
cottonwood (n=7). The burned seeds could not be
13). Three of the features (Features 4, 10-11) are in
identified to species. The bone fragments from the
very close spatial proximity, and are confined to a 45
feature included very small non-poisonous snake
cm vertical zone (99.52-99.07 m). They are a small
(n=1), small mammal (n=10), medium mammal
cooking-warming hearth (Feature 4), a large basined
(n=7), large mammal (n=8), and deer (n=8).
earth oven rock bed remnant (Feature 11), and a

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site

Figure 20. Overview of Feature 14.

Figure 21. Deer mandible associated with Feature 14.

157

158

Texas Archeological Society

stained rock-less pit and adjacent burned rock rake
out pile (Feature 10). The top elevations of these
three features are within 11 cm of each other’s vertical range (99.52-99.41 m), suggesting these were
placed on the same archeological surface. Feature
11 in Trench 12 extends deeper into the sediments
than the other features (to 99.07 m) and is clearly a
basined pit. The fourth feature in the cluster (Feature
13) is slightly higher in elevation (99.60-99.47 m),
and is located approximately 3 m south and slightly
upslope of the primary features and therefore a 10
cm rise in elevation could be expected. Feature 13
consists of a cooking-warming hearth excavated into
a shallow charcoal-stained basin.
The central feature group in Trench 12 occupies the same position on the landscape (northeast
to southwest) with regard to topography, and it
is located at an equivalent elevation to the lower
cultural occupation in Block A (99.56-99.26 m).
The cultural materials documented in Block A are
located approximately 30 m northwest of Trench 12,
and therefore 30 m further distant from the Onion
Creek channel. The vertical range of Features 4
and 10 (99.52-99.22 m), in Trench 12, is basically
equivalent to that of the lower occupation in Block
A. Feature 11 is also located at an equivalent elevation (99.49-99.07 m) given the strong evidence that
F11 was a deep basin-shaped pit used as an earth
oven. Feature 13 in Trench 12 is located closer to
the cultural remains in Block A and can be expected
to have been placed on an archeological surface
slightly higher in topography (99.60-99.47 m) than
the other central group features. For whatever reason, perhaps related to a greater distance from Onion
Creek, the central feature group in Trench 12 is well
preserved. In fact, this feature group is located only
several meters northeast of what must have been the
edge of the Onion Creek channel, based on survey
data from Trench 4. A low density of artifacts were
associated with the central feature group, including
flakes, possible edge modified flakes, ground stone,
bone, red ocher, and bits of mussel shell. Feature 11
had charred wood and lily onion bulb fragments, red
ocher, and only a few flakes. Feature 13 contained
numerous identifiable rabbit bones from two species
(cottontail, jackrabbit) and a chert core.
Blocks G and H
Features 12 and 14 in Blocks G and H may
represent prehistoric activity that occurred on the
same depositional and archeological surface as the

central feature group in Trench 12, and the lower
occupation zone in Block A. Multiple lines of
evidence—including feature types, feature content,
elevation, and topographic data—suggest the Block G
and H occupations occurred on the same archeological
surface as their counterparts up the terrace to the
southwest. The Block G and H occupations were on
a relatively stable alluvial surface that represented a
brief hiatus in the flooding events and deposition of
Onion Creek overbank sediments.
Blocks G and H are located approximately 80
m northeast and down slope from the Trench 12
central group features in the direction of the confluence of Onion Creek and the Colorado River. The
elevation difference between the two distinct groups
of features is approximately 75 cm, which might be
expected that far down slope. The elevation range
for Features 12 and 14 (98.84-98.52 m) is approximately 74-76 cm lower than the elevation range for
the lower occupation in Block A (99.56-99.26). The
bottom edge of the rocks in Feature 12 in Block G
(98.84-98.66 m) originates 14 cm higher than the
bottom edge of Feature 14 in Block H, basically
overlapping in elevation (98.73-98.52 m). The upper
edge of Feature 12 is 11 cm higher than the upper
rocks of Feature 14. Both Features 12 and 14 are
located in a similar position on the landscape with
Feature 12 located approximately 15 m to the east
and closer to Onion Creek.
Features 12 and 14 are consistent in morphology
and artifact content; their morphology and content
is consistent with that of the central feature group
in Trench 12. Feature 12 is a scattered lens of rock
and charcoal-stained earth in a shallow basined pit,
while Feature 14 is primarily charcoal-stained earth
and a few burned rocks. Both features had debitage
and bone fragments, burned wood charcoal, and
burned earth. Feature 12 had small, medium, and
large mammal fragments as well as deer, while
Feature 14 similarly had small, medium, and largesized mammal and eight identifiable deer elements,
including a mandible fragment with teeth. Oak
charcoal was recovered in Feature 12, along with
both oak and willow/cottonwood in Feature 14, and
charred acorn fragments.
Overall, Features 12 and 14 strongly resemble
Feature 13 in the Trench 12 central feature group in
that all three consist of hearth remnants primarily
delineated by charcoal-stained earth and burned
sediment in a shallow basin with associated
burned rocks, debitage, and animal bone. Features
12 and 14 were the location of deer processing,

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site
and Feature 13 had different species of rabbits.
Both oak and willow/cottonwood charcoal were
recovered in Feature 13, along with debitage,
an edge modified flake, approximately 75 bone
fragments, a chert core, and bits of mussel shell.
Similar lithic and stone tool densities are recorded
from all three features. These three features are
very similar in morphology and content and based
on reconstructions of the topographic landform, are
distributed at equivalent elevations in the T2 terrace
sediments. Both the central feature group and the
features in Blocks G and H are very well preserved
structurally and preserved organic remains, such as
charred wood fuel and food remains, were prolific
in the feature groups.
Radiocarbon Dating
of the Central and
Other Feature Groups
A total of 17 samples of charred botanical remains were submitted for AMS radiocarbon dating
from the Berdoll site (see Table 2). All but one of
the samples was collected from the lower occupation
zone from the central and other feature groups. Four
of the larger samples were split and half submitted to
each laboratory for comparative purposes. Results,
on the surface, indicate a conventional age range of
7606-8291 B.P., based on the youngest and oldest
ages from Features 4 and 6. This range of occupation
would support the idea of numerous, sporadic, low
intensity occupations over some 685 years. However,
the preponderance of the most reliable radiocarbon
dates (see below), especially those collected from
pristine contexts in the central and other lower occupation feature groups, indicate that the majority of
the occupations occurred over a much more narrow
367 year span (7736-8103 B.P.); considered critically, these dates may more accurately be assigned
to an approximate 212 year time span (7854-8066
B.P.). Numerous ages from these samples overlap
at 7854-8066 B.P. These overlapping ages from
samples collected in different feature groups further
support the contention that Features 12 (Block G)
and 14 (Block H) and the Trench 12 central feature
group represent a series of more or less contemporaneous occupations that occurred on a temporarily
stable terrace landform, before aggradation resumed
ca. 7600 B.P. and buried these occupations.
The site’s oldest and youngest radiocarbon
ages represent only two of the samples and might

159

be considered less reliable because the bulk of the
calibrated age ranges (n=13) cluster at 7854-8066
B.P. In fact, Sample 5, from Block B, Feature 6, was
the only sample dated from the upper occupation
zone due to the fact that numerous collected pieces
of charcoal from the poorly preserved upper zone
were considered insufficient for AMS dating. Feature 6, dated at 8291 ± 66 B.P., is associated with a
13C/12C ratio of -23.01 ‰. This is a slightly lower
value than the majority of the reported ratios and is
perhaps related to the slightly older age relative to
the other dates.
There is previous evidence of this type of
contamination from the age ranges obtained from
Feature 4 during the initial survey. These Feature 4
samples were identified as sufficient to submit for
AMS dating in the field but were later categorized
as “soot” by Beta Analytic, Inc., who asserted the
samples would not survive pre-treatment for AMS
dating. Beta suggested that the AMS technique be
used on the “bulk sediment” rather than submit
these samples to pre-treatment. The accompanying
conventional age ranges of 9190 ± 40 and 9540 ±
40 B.P. are now considered erroneously old for the
site given the preponderance of radiocarbon data
and other dates obtained from Feature 4. As they
are bulk sediment samples, these older dates may
be the result of the influx of older organic material
from surrounding sediments.
In a similar vein, the youngest age from the
site is from a sample that was split and sent to two
laboratories (see Table 2: Sample 45). One result
was a later date of 7606 ± 66 B.P., whereas the
same sample at the other laboratory measured 7920
± 40 B.P.; this age range overlaps with the bulk of
the radiocarbon age ranges from the site. There is
considerably closer overlap between the other three
split samples from the two laboratories; in fact, the
ages are very comparable (see Table 2, Samples 48,
49, 65). All three ages cluster at 7854-8066 B.P.
Thus, it may be reasonable to assume that the oldest and youngest radiocarbon ages from the site are
not completely accurate regarding the incipient and
terminal occupation dates.
The radiocarbon dates from Features 12 and 14
may be considered to represent the primary period of
occupation at the site. As previously discussed, the
elevation ranges, spatial relationship, morphology,
and artifact associations indicate that Features 12
and 14 occurred somewhat contemporaneously and
on the same stable surface. The radiocarbon ages
from these features identify the most probable time

160

Texas Archeological Society

period for the lower occupation zone and all of the
central and other feature groups. Four radiocarbon
ages from Feature 12 overlap at ca. 7910-8065 B.P.
(see Table 2). These represent three separate charred
samples from a 7 cm thick section of the feature
(98.70-98.77 m). One sample was split and produced
two ages spanning only 116 years (7910-8026 B.P.).
Feature 14 had two radiocarbon dates that also overlap at ca. 7904-7925 B.P. (see Table 2).
Dates obtained from the central feature group
from Features 4 and 11 are consistent with a primary period of occupation spanning the period from
7854-8066 B.P. Four separate radiocarbon ages were
obtained from Feature 4. Two of these dates range
from 7920 ± 40 B.P. to 7878 ± 68 B.P. The other two
range from 7606 ± 66 B.P. to 7736 ± 70 B.P. This
latter date is also associated with a 13C/12C ratio of
-24.3 ‰, which is perhaps suggestive of the influx
of younger or different organic materials into the
sample. The remaining AMS samples from Feature
4 all have C13/C12 ratios of -27 ‰, highly suggestive
of wood charcoal.
Six separate radiocarbon ages were obtained
from Feature 11 in Trench 12 (see Table 2). These
ages exhibit considerable overlap from 7854-8066
B.P. as a group, thus dating the feature, and these
ages also overlap with the age ranges from Features
12 and 14. Two of the submitted samples were split
and represent ages obtained from both radiocarbon
laboratories. All samples were collected within a 22
cm elevation of one another (99.11-99.33 m). Split
Sample 48 yielded nearly identical radiocarbon ages
at 7910 ± 40 B.P. and 8066 ± 57 B.P. Split Sample 49
yielded ages of 8010 ± 40 B.P. and 7854 ± 56 B.P.
Another sample yielded a radiocarbon age range of
8026 ± 63 B.P. Only Sample 66 (see Table 2) yielded
a slightly older but still overlapping radiocarbon
age range at 8103 ± 66 B.P. It is interesting that this
sample is the deepest of the group (99.11 m) and was
collected from the extensive charcoal present below
the rocks in the bottom of the pit. As a group, the
Feature 11 age ranges exhibit considerable overlap
with the Feature 12 and 14 radiocarbon age ranges
from samples ca. 80 m northeast and down slope
from the central feature group.
In sum, there is considerable evidence of overlapping conventional radiocarbon age ranges obtained
from anthropogenically modified fuels and foodstuffs
extracted from within prehistoric rock feature contexts from the lower occupation zone at the site. They
indicate that the primary period of occupation at the
Berdoll site occurred from 7854-8066 B.P.

Site Integrity
Collins (2004:112) suggests that isolated
components with high integrity exhibit evidence
of rapid burial, lack evidence for extensive postdepositional disturbance, and contain a relatively
homogenous or consistent artifact assemblage.
An isolated component should be present within a
specific landform at a consistent elevation range. A
high integrity component should exhibit structural
preservation in terms of features and intrasite activity areas and associated preservation of organic
remains. Dateable organic remains should equate to
a relatively narrow or significantly narrow period
of time. A high integrity component may contain
organic remains indicative of subsistence patterns.
Archeological investigations have confirmed all
of these aspects of integrity for the Early Archaic
remains at the Berdoll site.
A consistent elevation range in the sediments
with archeological deposits, feature morphology,
temporally overlapping radiocarbon ages, and artifact associations—combined with excellent organic
preservation—indicate a high degree of site integrity for the archeological remains. The Berdoll site
retains good and definable site structure. Two types
of hearth features are consistently observed in the
sampled remains. These are moderately-sized, single
rock lens, slightly basined cooking and warming
hearths primarily associated with meat processing,
and quite large, deep basined rock-lined pit ovens
or rock-less pit oven remnants primarily associated
with plant food processing. The artifact assemblage,
including faunal remains, is consistent across the
site, yet is diverse, and exhibits highly variable
patterning at specific locales. The artifact assemblage, however, does not represent a homogenous
distribution of similar types and densities, which
could indicate mixing and cultural overprinting of
the remains, or bioturbation, but rather has patterned
spatial arrangements around rock features. Different
and variable artifact assemblages are consistently
associated with different types of features, which
indicate distinct and different behaviors occurred in
different site areas.
Whether these data reflect the behavior of multiple groups briefly inhabiting the site over several
hundred years, or a much more narrow range of occupation length, the high integrity patterning is evident. Identifiable and low density faunal and mussel
recovery (just a few deer, or rabbit and mussel umbos) around a rock feature, in the context of single

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site
event indicators such as multiple lithic conjoins/
refits, and only a few different chert material types
observed, which varies by feature location, strongly
suggests a high integrity archeological component,
or components. Distinct individual and group behaviors are indicated by the patterned archeological
remains recorded at the site. Artifacts and feature
patterning and type allow for a reconstruction of
both individual and group behaviors and provide
insight into the nature of the prehistoric cultural
adaptation that occurred approximately 7600-8300
radiocarbon years ago at the Berdoll site.
Distinct distributional patterning indicating
different site behaviors in different site locations
is observed in both the faunal and floral remains.
Their patterning suggests the processing of faunal
and floral materials either in preparation for cooking or following their cooking. Certain faunal and
floral types were found to occur in clusters within
the site associated with particular features (Figure
22). The faunal remains were consistently of particular skeletal elements—lower limb or cranial
fragments—that often exhibited lower rates of
burning and occasionally displayed characteristics
of processing. Both plant and animal processing
areas are concentrated around features. Focusing
strictly on the lower occupation zone at the site,
rabbits were processed in Feature 13 (Trench 12).
Deer was processed in Features 12 and 14 (Blocks
G and H). Processing of small mammals appears
to have been particularly common in Block A.
Floral processing seems focused within the areas
of Backhoe Trench 12 in association with Feature
11, and in Block H (Feature 14).
This pattern of processing areas is most notable
in the recovery of the deer and large mammal (likely
deer) remains associated with Feature 12 and 14.
Approximately 96 percent of the 75 pieces of deer
or large mammal were found in association with
these two features. Deer and other unidentified large
mammal bone (likely deer in the absence of other
identifiable species) is spatially constricted. Those
identified elements are all cranial or leg and foot
elements. These elements may represent discard
from the butchering of deer that was brought back
to camp intact. This interpretation is at least partially supported by the lack of burning evident on
the bone. Unlike the majority of the bone recovered
at the site, the deer and large mammal bone from
these contexts are unburned, and hence apparently
uncooked. Furthermore, the presence of spiral fractures on the three long bone fragments from Feature

161

14, on what would generally be considered a higher
utility portion of the bone, appear to have been
processed for bone marrow. A small quartzite hammerstone and chert cobble recovered in association
with Feature 12 may be associated with marrow
extraction, although none of the deer or large mammal bone in this unit had spiral fractures. At Features
12 and 14, deer was processed for meat, marrow, or
hide. The uncooked bone was discarded (cranial and
foot elements). Other small animals were processed
and consumed at these locations and discarded in the
general activity area.
There is a significant concentration of rabbit/
small mammal bone in Feature 13: cottontail (n=1),
jackrabbit (n=6), and small mammal (n=34); only
six pieces are burned. The identifiable elements
were cranial or leg parts. The occurrence of cranial
and leg portions of rabbit seems strongly indicative
of the locations of processing of these animals and
reflects the attitudes of the people that occupied the
site toward the selection and discard of particular
portions of the animal.
A second spatial pattern applies to the faunal
remains, not one based on species specific clusters
suggesting processing; this other pattern is characterized by mixed remains of diverse species that are very
fragmented and burned. Such a pattern is suggestive
of a thin sheet midden containing food debris associated with consumption and discard. That the majority
of the small mixed bone is burned is also strongly
suggestive of this bone being refuse. Furthermore,
that this larger spatial pattern co-occurs in most units
with evidence of more specific processing, suggests
that the small hearth features are less activity specific
areas than part of living areas in which a variety of
activities occurred. For example, in Block H where
Feature 14 was excavated and found to be associated
with a concentration of deer (n=2) and large mammal (n=64) remains, mussel shell, unknown medium
(n=8), small (n=8), and very small mammal (n=165)
and indeterminate vertebrata (n=3) were also recovered. Similarly, in the adjacent Block G, small unknown mammal (n=10), medium unknown mammal
(n=7), indeterminate vertebrata (n=39), and a single
vertebrate of a small non-poisonous snake, were all
recovered alongside deer (n=8) and large mammal
(n=8) bone in units associated with Feature 12. That
the assemblage is consistently mixed across the site
would seem to fit well with a pattern of tasked food
resource acquisition and preparation, and subsequent
communal sharing and discard, occurring within a
structured social environment.

Figure
22: Distribution
of faunal
remains
Figure
22. Distribution
of faunal remains
across the Berdoll
site.

across Site 41TV2125.

162
Texas Archeological Society

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site
Perhaps the most significant contextual association of floral remains was their association with
a large pit oven (Feature 11) in Backhoe Trench
12. Three charred onion bulb fragments from the
Lily family (Liliceae) were recovered from feature
flotation samples. The recovery of these remains
in a large basin-shaped pit oven strongly suggests
that Feature 11 was used for the steaming or baking of these plants. Prolonged cooking of the lily
bulb fragments or other type of starchy root plants
is necessary to render them edible. The tradition
of using large earth ovens to cook these plants is
well documented in Texas as well as in much of the
United States (Thoms 2005; Dering 1999). In Central Texas, the use of this technology in association
with bulbs of the lily family are well documented in
association with Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric
occupations (Thoms 2005; Karbula et al. 2001; Feit
et al. 2006; Karbula et al. 2007; Miller et al. 2007).
Because of the fragile nature of the remains, to
date there has only been limited evidence of their
use in Late Paleoindian/Early Archaic times at the
Wilson-Leonard site, although large earth ovens
from this period have been documented at other sites
within this general time period (Black et al. 1997;

163

Thoms 2005). The recovery of lily bulb fragments
in Feature 11 provides a significant contribution to
understanding the purpose and use of these types of
features in the Early Archaic.
Fragments of burned acorns (n=4) were also
recovered in Feature 14. These were found alongside
five pieces of an unidentified seed. Like lily bulbs,
it is necessary to cook acorns in order to remove
the tannins to make them palatable. While these
may have either been cooked in the adjacent burned
rock hearth or burned after being disposed of, the
recovery of a hammerstone in this same context
may be tentatively linked to the processing of these
items. Plant processing was clearly occurring in this
portion of the site, although it remains unclear what
the stage of food preparation was.
Regarding the processing of plant materials, of
note is the recovery of a sandstone metate from Feature 10, even though this artifact was not found associated with any plant foods. Feature 10 is located
in close proximity to Feature 11, the large pit oven
containing charred lily onion bulbs. The metate,
apparently broken and discarded in Feature 10 for
use as a cook stone, was manufactured of non-local
sandstone (Figure 23). Johnson (1991) has argued

Figure 23. Sandstone metate recovered from Feature 10 at the Berdoll site.

164

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 24. Bifaces and biface fragments recovered from the Berdoll site.

that ground stone is a hallmark of Early Archaic
occupations. It bears mention that the burial of the
Paleoindian period woman excavated at WilsonLeonard included a piece of battered and ground
stone as a grave good, clearly indicating the use of
this technology, and its potential social importance,
from an early point in time (Bousman et al. 2002;
Sullivan 1998).
The lack of cultural overprinting, defined as the
reoccurring, episodic occupation of a single locale by
multiple groups through many thousands of years, is
evident in multiple data sets from the Berdoll site.
Beginning with stone artifacts, densities, distributions, and chert material types all support the notion
of an archeological component or components that
occurred over a relatively narrow time interval. Only
216 pieces of debitage were recovered in the testing
and data recovery investigations in multiple site contexts. A total of six bifaces, nine possible edge modified flakes, four cores, and three pieces of ground or
battered stone represent the total number of tools and
cores in the assemblage (Figures 24-25).
The low density of artifacts could be attributed
to the use of the site by small, highly mobile groups,

and a heavy emphasis on manuports, artifact curation, as well as reuse. The lack of suitable lithic
material does not seem to be a reasonable explanation due to the outcropping chert and quartzite
Capitol Terrace gravels and nodules eroding from
the adjacent hilltop and in the Onion Creek streambeds. The low numbers of tools and debitage seems
to be a reflection of a low intensity and generalized
occupation. The types of debitage indicate a broad
spectrum of knapping activities occurred during the
occupation, including both early stage cobble reduction for bifaces or perhaps expedient flake tools as
well as later stage tool finishing or refurbishing.
These activities, however, occurred in relatively
discrete locations across the site and often seem to
represent only one or two individual events.
Further suggestions of primary context are present in the stone tool collection at multiple locales.
Two lenses of cultural materials were observed in
Block A separated by approximately 30 cm of sediments. These consisted primarily of charcoal smears
containing debitage, and a few stone tools, some
bone, some charred food remnants (onion bulbs and
acorns), ocher bits, and baked clay. Debitage from

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site

165

Figure 25. Edge modified flakes recovered from the Berdoll site.

the lower lens consisted primarily of three chert material types. Debitage from the upper lens consisted
primarily of two material types, a banded tan grey and
a yellow-brown. Conjoining pieces of a biface manufactured on the banded tan grey chert were recovered
from above and below this lens of material. It seems
probable that the two different chert material types in
close proximity in Block A may represent individual
knapping episodes, and in at least one instance the
manufacture of an abandoned biface.
In Block H, one group of yellow tan-brown
flakes recovered from around Feature 14 refit onto
a stage 1 biface recovered in direct association with
the feature (Figures 26-27). These refit flakes reflect a single knapping episode that occurred over a
short period approximately 7900 radiocarbon years
B.P. A second group of opaque grey flakes (n=12)
from Feature 14 context are interpreted to represent a second knapping event from an unidentified
cobble. Two of the flakes in the second opaque
grey group represent refits. Unlike most other site
contexts, debitage around Feature 14 represents
the initial reduction of roughly fist-sized cobbles.
In Block G, only two different chert material types
were recovered around Feature 12, an opaque grey
and a transparent brown. The debitage in Blocks

A, G, and H may be representative of single knapping events.
Flake type and density seem related to particular
site locations, individual features, and feature function. Flintknapping occurred primarily in the location of small burned rock features peripheral to the
oven processing area at the site. Certain locales or
feature types seem to have been the focus of the initial reduction of one or two cobbles, whereas other
feature types (smears, dumps) and general discard
areas reflect later stage bifacial reduction and the
resharpening and refurbishing of dulled tool edges,
or the production of flakes for use as expedient tools.
Features 12 and 14 (Blocks G and H) appear to
represent single lens basined hearths that were the
loci of initial stage lithic reduction of chert cobbles
(i.e., a high ratio of primary and secondary flakes
to tertiary debitage). A possible hammerstone was
recovered in apparent direct association with Feature
12. The refit flakes from the biface around Feature
14 (see Figures 26-27) are overwhelmingly primary
and secondary decortification flakes. Adjacent to
Feature 14, flakes of primarily a single material type
(opaque grey) also represent initial reduction.
In contrast, very few and different flake types
were recovered in Trench 12 earth oven contexts.

166

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 26. Biface from Feature 14 with refit flakes.

Only four flakes were identified anywhere near
Feature 11, the largest pit oven. Another four flakes
were recovered in Feature 13, another possible pit
oven or small cooking hearth located in the western
portion of Trench 12. The only other debitage collected in Trench 12 contexts were several possible
edge modified flakes, these being suggestive of
expedient use and discard.
In conclusion, artifact density, distributional
patterning, compositional analyses, feature morphology, site structure, and the nature of identified

prehistoric activity areas—as well as radiocarbon
age determinations and stratigraphic correlations
between different site contexts—indicate an intact
archeological component or components at the base
of the Berdoll tract Onion Creek terrace fill. All of
the discovered features in the lower occupation zone
can be attributed to a series of low density, temporary, occupations by small groups over a period of
approximately 212-367 or more years, which were
more or less preserved in a pristine state by the
resumption of significant Onion Creek aggradation

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site

167

Figure 27. Biface from Feature 14 with refit flakes assembled.

of fluvial sediments ca. 7600 B.P. The Berdoll site
is certainly not culturally overprinted based on the
assembly of multiple archeological data sets, including elevation range, feature morphology, artifact
content, and radiocarbon age ranges. Variation in
feature elevation between the two feature groups
is attributed to the natural sloping topography of
the landform, the probability of a similar sloping
prehistoric landform, and the deposition of variable
amounts of colluvium with distance away from the
adjacent high ridge overlooking the site.
Artifacts, features, organic associations and
intrasite patterning all suggest a much more narrow
range of occupation than is indicated by the radiocarbon ages. The observed patterning is consistent
with the interpretation of an isolated archeological
component or components if the 212-367 year primary period of occupation as indicated by radiocarbon ages was in fact a much more narrow time
interval of several weeks or months. All the other
indicators of an isolated archeological component
attributed to a small group or groups of people
following a highly mobile, temporary, and broad
spectrum resource strategy are present, except the
radiocarbon ages, which reflect at least 212 years
of occupation of the site. Is it possible that 212-367
years is the closest and most precise approximation

of the actual period of occupation that dating is
going to provide on what could have been a much
shorter duration of events? Is it possible that due
to the great antiquity of the archeological remains,
dates all overlapping at 7854-8066 B.P. are the closest and most precise resolution that can be achieved
on the actual dating? Is it reasonable to propose
based on the preponderance of other archeological
data sets that these remains represent short duration
temporary camps occurring for no longer than a few
weeks or months? Does the very fact that there are
13 radiocarbon dates that significantly overlap from
7854-8066 B.P., from features almost 80 m distant
from one another, mandate examination of the remaining different data sets in consideration of this
possibility, and to evaluate this hypothesis?
In terms of actual duration of stay, the archeological data indicates a much more narrow range of
occupation than can be pinpointed by the radiocarbon dates, even though the dates are quite consistent
and robust. The archeological data defines just how
narrow the time frame for the prehistoric occupations may have been. On the premise that much of
the site area extends further to the southeast along
the base of the upland ridge, paralleling the Onion
Creek paleochannel, and outside of the project area,
it is our opinion that a number of additional earth

168

Texas Archeological Society

ovens and small basined hearths, and activity areas,
remain unexposed and not sampled at the site. The
central oven area as reflected by Feature 11 probably extends further southeast along the edge of the
paleochannel of Onion Creek. An individual oven
may require two-three days of preparation, firing,
and use. Given a reasonable projection of the number of these features outside the project area, a group
of 10 earth ovens and additional associated hearths
may represent a duration of stay of no more than a
few weeks or months, with a number of individual
and group activities occurring at ancillary hearths
across the larger site area and outside of camp limits
in hunting areas.
Alternatively, it is also possible that the site was
seasonally occupied by very small groups creating
individual ovens and hearths over a considerably
longer period of time, perhaps hundreds of years as
indicated by the radiocarbon data. It is impossible to
pinpoint the issue any farther, and both viewpoints
should be recognized, but the nature of the assemblage and individual behavioral episodes indicated
by the lithics, fauna, and features are more consistent
with a very short term occupation and argue against a
longer several hundred year period. Individual behavioral episodes reflected in the faunal, floral, and stone
tool assemblages, as well as feature morphologies,
may represent considerably less time, and numerous,
separate, potentially isolated activities.
Summary and Conclusions
The Wilson component at the Wilson-Leonard
site contains stemmed projectiles that are deeper
and older (10,000-9500 B.P.) than occupations
containing lanceolate Golondrina-Barber, St.
Mary’s Hall, and Angostura forms (Collins
2004). All of these Late Paleoindian occupations
(Wilson, Golondrina-Barber, and St. Mary’s
Hall) are associated primarily with small cooking
and warming hearths, rock scatters, or rings that
resemble displaced hearths (n=39). Three features
in the Late Paleoindian deposits resemble relatively
deep, rock-less pits, less than 1 m in diameter and
filled at least partially with anthropogenicallymodified burned sediments. The deepest of these
pits contained two slab-like rocks. These three
features may have been small baking facilities for
the processing of plant foods. Comparatively, the
size of the overwhelming majority of the discrete
features documented in the Wilson-Leonard Late

Paleoindian occupations is notably smaller than the
large earth ovens of the Archaic period, and there
are no formally constructed large earth ovens. This
changes decisively at Wilson-Leonard in the Early
Archaic period ca. 8800 B.P. with the documented
presence of Proto Middens A and B overlying earth
oven bed remnants. Charred hyacinth bulbs from
Proto Middens A and B were dated at 8250-8000
B.P., and are from contexts overlying the earth oven
bed remnants. Multiple earth ovens (e.g., Black et
al. 1997) and other burned rock features comprise
these proto middens (Collins et al. 1998:233-239).
Thus, the earth ovens are considered to be as old as
8800 B.P. at the site, and occur in association with
lanceolate Angostura projectile points.
Recovered in association with these Early
Archaic features are charred wild hyacinth bulbs,
mussel, rabbit, fish, turtle, snake, frog/toad, rodent,
carnivore squirrel, deer, and antelope. Aside from
projectile points, stone tools in the Early Archaic occupations at the Wilson-Leonard site include Clear
Fork tools, both unifacial and bifacial, perforators,
bifaces, burins, and other unifacial tools (Collins
et al. 1998:224), along with a few grinding stones.
Large earth ovens are documented in Angostura contexts in several other Central Texas sites by
approximately 8800 B.P. The Richard Beene site
(41BX831) in the Applewhite Reservoir of Bexar
County, Texas, contains a discrete, well-dated Angostura component (8640-8900 B.P.) containing two
earth oven basal remnants and other rock features
(Thoms 2007:364). At the Number-6 site (41BX996)
in Bexar County, Texas, multiple overlapping, very
large earth oven remnants dating to ca. 8500 B.P.
occur in association with charred wood (Black et
al. 1998:57). At the Woodrow Heard site in Uvalde
County, Texas, large cooking facilities interpreted as
earth ovens are part of ca. 8000-8300 B.P. Angostura
component with associated charred sotol or yucca
leaf bases (Decker et al. 2000:303). The deepest
occupation of the Loeve site in eastern Williamson
County, Texas, had earth ovens associated with a series of three radiocarbon ages (6900-9650 B.P.), one
of which is 8500 B.P., and Angostura-like lanceolate
projectile points (Prewitt 1974).
One of the most significant and important
sites in terms of Early Archaic comparative studies
and also potential data gaps in the Early Archaic
archeological record, has emerged from the Richard Beene site, along the Medina River, south of
San Antonio, Texas. Intensive investigations were
conducted in a series of alluvial terrace deposits

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site
(Thoms 2007:360-369; Thoms et al. 1996). The
most important and well preserved occupation may
be an Angostura component, radiocarbon dated at
8700 B.P. (upper Perez Paleosol, 10 m bs). The Elm
Creek Paleosol of the site (9-11 m bs) had earth oven
remnants and associated radiocarbon ages of 76508100 B.P. but no projectile points. Additional Early
Archaic occupations containing a diversity of Early
Archaic artifacts at the Richard Beene site, including
stemmed projectile point forms, are higher in the
profiles (6 m bs for the Lower Medina), in the Lower
Medina Paleosol, dated at 6930 ± 65 B.P.
At the Number-6 site, a series of large spatially
overlapping earth ovens with associated lid or rake
out piles underlay a dense concentration of fire
cracked rocks, the latter described as a sheet midden
(Component 3). The largest of the rock oven beds
(Strat 28) measured 3 x 2 m and contained nearly
700 rocks. This oven bed underlay the sheet midden
(Strat 19) which was a concentration of over 1400
mostly small to medium-sized, highly fractured
burned rocks (Black et. al 1998:25). No projectile
points were recovered in these deposits, only a perforator with flaking suggestive of Late Paleoindian
parallel oblique pressure lanceolate technologies.
Based on the ca. 8500 B.P. radiocarbon assays, this
component may be Angostura in origin (Black et al.
1998:30). Other Early Archaic Component 3 stone
tools at the site include Clear Fork and Guadalupe
tools, both unifacial and bifacial forms, bifaces,
unifaces, cores, hammerstones, and modified flakes.
From the debitage, a fair amount of biface manufacture appears to have occurred.
Similar findings are reported at the Woodrow
Heard site. There are three types of rock features
in the Early Archaic Angostura and succeeding
intervals, as well as Middle to Late Archaic
intervals: (1) small basined hearths; (2) rock
rings and associated griddles; and (3) earth ovens
(Decker et al. 2000). A clearly defined Angostura
occupation with Angostura darts and earth oven
remnants (Feature 14, Feature 75, and Geological
Unit I) is securely dated at 8000-8400 B.P. (Decker
et al. 2000:129, 178). The earth oven remnants are
generally defined as larger than 1 m in diameter with
rocks arranged in one or more layers and densely
packed. Numerous artifacts were present both inside
the features and surrounding them, including a small
sample of a wide variety of small, medium, and
large-sized mammals, especially deer.
Early Archaic stone tools at the Woodrow
Heard site include bifaces, Clear Fork gouges, and

169

Guadalupe adzes (Decker et al. 2000:249-290). A
number of identified flake tools include unifaces
as well as modified and edge-altered flakes. Also
present are a number of sequent flake tools, a highly
distinctive tool type “made on oval flakes detached
sequentially from a tubular chert nodule” (Turner
and Hester 1993:285). These unifacial and modified flake tools may have been used for the slicing
of fibrous plants and/or the processing of animals,
much in the way of end scrapers (Decker et al.
2000:269). Also present are burin spalls, bifaces
with burins struck from them, and a few ground
stone implements.
The Berdoll site contains unequivocal evidence
of a large earth oven dated to approximately 79008000 B.P., and its use is clearly associated with
charred lily onion bulbs and possibly charred acorns.
The charred bulbs in Feature 11 may represent one
of the oldest dates on charred onions in a Central
Texas archeological site. No projectile points were
recovered from in situ contexts. The lithic density
suggests occupations were low intensity and short
term. Broad spectrum resource exploitation is indicated based on the diversity of plant and animal
resources, as is the extensive use of fire cracked
limestone rocks from readily and locally available
sources. The use of limestone and other rocks in
thermal cooking features, and the disposal of large
quantities of highly fractured spent rocks, reflects
the use of small cooking warming hearths, and also
the construction and use of larger pit oven features
at the site. These types of features represent the
processing and utilization of both animal and plant
foods, including readily available resources such as
nuts and mussels, and indicates overall broad spectrum resource exploitation of the local environment.
The majority of the Berdoll site features are
comparatively small basined hearths for cooking
and warming. The notable exception is the large
earth oven (Feature 11), an associated oven (Feature
10), and an unexcavated area that could potentially
contain numerous additional ovens. If the Early Archaic period is characterized by the use of formally
constructed large earth ovens to process geophyte
plant foods, and generally by the broad spectrum
exploitation of all available resources, then the
Berdoll site can be considered as an example of an
Early Archaic adaptation. If the formal construction
and use of very large earth ovens represents the shift
to the Early Archaic interval in Central Texas, irrespective of associated projectile point types, then
the Berdoll site archeological record is consistent

170

Texas Archeological Society

with the observed and now well documented Early
Archaic pattern for Central Texas.
The lithic tool assemblage associated with
burned rock features at the Berdoll site was restricted in quantity and types of tools. This included
a small collection of six bifaces or biface fragments,
representing both specimens abandoned in the early
stages of shaping and finished and/or reutilized tools
that were discarded after they were broken. Two of
the fragments were found to refit to form a lanceolate biface. The most common tool type discarded at
the site, and presumably the most commonly utilized
as well, were simple flake tools (n=9) that exhibited
macroscopically visible edge modification that likely resulted from use. Other tools included a broken
sandstone metate, a quartzite mano/hammerstone,
and a chert hammerstone. As was the case with the
tools, there is only a limited amount of manufacturing debris recovered from the site. This includes four
cores and 214 pieces of debitage. Based on the types
of flakes present, the debitage appears to be a mix
of both early stage biface or core reduction flakes
and later stage tool finishing or resharpening flakes.
The faunal and floral assemblages clearly indicate that during the likely brief occupation of the site
the inhabitants were exploiting a broad spectrum of
plant and animal resources from the local environment. The faunal assemblage is particularly varied,
including large, medium, small, and very small
mammal species, as well as amphibians and reptiles.
Although many of the pieces were too fragmented
to identify to species level, deer, rabbit, frog, rodent,
turtle, mollusk, fish, and snakes were all present.
The evidence of the use of different plants is less
robust, but shows evidence of the use of wild onion
and acorns. The Berdoll site clearly fits the proposed
time frame and cultural ecology for an example of
a fully developed Early Archaic broad spectrum
resource adaptation.
What may be unique about the Berdoll site is
that when compared with components of reasonably similar ages from other sites, it may represent
a particular and as of yet poorly described site type
in the Central Texas Early Archaic settlementsubsistence system. While the short term and low
intensity occupation indicated by the excavations
at the Berdoll site compares favorably with the Elm
Creek component at the Richard Beene site, it is
quite distinct from the apparently larger and longer
term encampments associated with Angostura-age
components at other sites. For example, Component
3 at the Number-6 site, the Wilson-Leonard Proto

Middens A and B, and the Angostura components
at the Richard Beene, Woodrow Heard, and Loeve
sites all appear to represent occupations with an
increasing intensity and duration of occupation and
bulk plant food processing for a group of at least
several nuclear or family kin groups, as part of an
increasingly sedentary seasonal round. Black et al.
(1998:83) note the similarities between the Component 3 ovens and assemblage at the Number-6
site to the Proto Middens A and B complex at the
Wilson Leonard site. Both have a very large central
oven feature surrounded by additional basined oven
beds and underlying them a dense sheet midden
of smaller rocks. The ages of the two components
range from 8250-8500 B.P. Both components represent incipient burned rock midden formations which
became increasingly dense with repeated oven use.
Both represent the establishment of the economic
shift to bulk plant processing at ca. 8200-8500 B.P.
The Angostura component at the Richard Beene
site (Upper Perez Component, Blocks H and T) is
described as a large sheet midden with embedded
earth oven bed remnants and a series of smaller cooking and warming hearth features (Thoms 2007:365).
In addition to Angostura darts, beaked, graver like
tools, thick bifaces, blades, large burin spalls, bifaces,
Clear Fork adzes, and edge modified stone tools are
all part of a relatively diverse lithic assemblage. Both
the Woodrow Heard and Richard Beene lithic assemblages are consistent in that they include a variety of
stone tool forms. The Angostura occupation tool kit
was relatively diverse, with hunting, food processing, wood working, and other implements. Wood
working, bone working, butchering, hide processing,
gearing up for hunting forays, and the manufacture of
expedient tools are all represented at Richard Beene
(Thoms 2007:366). The Upper Perez component is
described as an Archaic adaptation based on the vast
numbers of burned rocks compared to lithic debitage,
and the presence of Angostura darts and Clear Fork
tools. The occupation is characterized as the remains
of a short term multi-family encampment. There
seems to be great continuity between all of these
sites in terms of site and feature structure, artifact
assemblages, organic and faunal associations, and in
relative age (8000-8800 B.P.). It appears that from a
regional perspective, Early Archaic adaptations were
changing from 8800 to 8000 B.P., continuing broad
spectrum exploitation of plant and animal resources
but beginning the shift to large oven construction,
increasing oven-based plant food processing, and a
greater degree of site sedentism.

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site
In contrast, the Berdoll site has significantly
fewer burned rocks and lithic artifacts than any
of the aforementioned Angostura sites. Berdoll
site rock features are spatially discrete and there
is no spatial overlap between them or evidence of
a significant burned rock sheet midden. There is a
thin sheet midden of faunal remains and very small
burned rock fragments between features and across
the larger site area. This seems different from diffuse
collections of thousands of small burned rocks at
the Number-6 site (Strat 19) or the Wilson-Leonard
Proto Middens. Perhaps through repeated oven use
and construction the Berdoll site rock accumulation
would have come to resemble these sheet middens.
However, since the Berdoll site was not as intensively nor repetitively occupied as the other Angostura
sites, it represents a much shorter term and shorter
duration occupation.
There are only a few tool types at the Berdoll
site: bifaces, cores made of river cobbles, flake tools,
manos/hammerstones, and a sandstone grinding
slab. There are no projectiles recovered from secure
contexts, or adzes, burins, gravers, or unifaces. The
lack of adzes suggests wood working was not an
important activity at the site, and the general absence
of unifacial tools suggests little focus on hide working. Sample size may be a factor, for both feature
and artifacts, but the density and composition of the
Berdoll assemblage appears very different from the
Angostura sites. Rather, the generalized and often
simple stone tools are of a character that could be associated with a wide range of potential activities and
they do not suggest the site served as a specialized
locale for the intensive exploitation of a particular
resource or as a location for intensive production.
The Berdoll site does resemble the Angostura
sites in feature morphology and a possible focus
on plant food processing and broad spectrum resource exploitation, but it is very different in terms
of artifact assemblage, occupational intensity and
duration, as well as being slightly later in time when
comparing conventional radiocarbon ages between
the different sites. A much more limited set of activities is indicated at the Berdoll site (plant food
processing, snaring, trapping, gathering, butchering, biface manufacture, retooling, etc.). Perhaps
the Berdoll site represents a temporary plant food
processing and retooling station and not a seasonally
occupied and focused base camp, one occupied by
only 1-2 small family groups.
The Early Archaic adaptation at the Berdoll
site, however, is comparable to the ca. 8000 B.P.

171

Elm Creek component at the Richard Beene site.
Elm Creek components yielded large numbers of
burned rocks, but almost all from features, which is
different from the other Richard Beene components
yet similar to the Berdoll site. Features include a
large basin-shaped earth oven, flat-bottomed platform earth ovens, and smaller features (Thoms
2007:360). Artifacts include edge modified flakes, a
thin biface, a Clear Fork adze, a possible bola stone,
a tabular sandstone grinding slab, mussel shell, very
small bone fragments, and no projectiles. Thoms
(2007:360) suggests the Elm Creek components
were sporadic, short term encampments occupied by
a few families at most. Based on the isolated nature
of all identified features, low artifact densities and
an overall low artifact diversity, site usage was confined to a limited set of activities, compared to other
components, by fewer people and for brief periods
of time. The Elm Creek occupation clearly involved
the construction and use of large earth ovens to
process root foods. This description fits the Berdoll
site very well. In considering the conventional age
ranges between the two occupations, there is considerable chronological overlap from approximately
7600-8100 B.P.
The Berdoll site and the Elm Creek occupations
at the Richard Beene site may represent a different
functional site type in the Early Archaic, although
the subsistence base was the same, where they
were less intensively occupied by smaller groups
for a shorter period of time. The aforementioned
Angostura sites were all intensively occupied base
camps and gathering locations for larger groups.
Given the similar subsistence base with minor root
food variation and broad spectrum resource exploitation, the intensity of the prehistoric occupations
at sites such as Wilson-Leonard and Richard Beene
may be attributed to either topographic variation or
socio-cultural factors involving kin groups, or both.
The differences in site type may be attributed to
structural variation among different components of
the overall subsistence-settlement-mobility system
of a larger clan-based group. Perhaps this is related
to subtle differences in resource type, seasonality, availability, or location, but more likely it is
related to the associated movements of individual
kin groups, and clan gatherings, or the result of unknown social factors. The Berdoll site and the Elm
Creek component at the Richard Beene site may be
variations of this theme. Or the Berdoll site may
represent a type of post-Angostura cultural adaptation more in keeping with the Early Archaic Split

172

Texas Archeological Society

Stem lithic tradition that is generally dated from
6500-8000 B.P (Karbula 2000; Karbula et al. 2007;
Thoms 2007; Thoms et al. 1996).
References Cited
Black, S. L., L.W. Ellis, D. G. Creel, and G. T. Goode (editors)
1997 Hot Rock Cooking on the Greater Edwards Plateau:
Four Burned Rock Midden Sites in West Central
Texas. 2 Vols. Studies in Archeology 22. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, the University of
Texas at Austin.
Black, S. L., J. W. Karbula, C. D. Frederick, and C. G. Mear
1998 Archeology along the Wurzbach Parkway: Module
5, Testing and Geoarcheological Evaluation at the
Number-6 Site (41BX996) and Other Sites. Studies
in Archeology 29. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bousman, C. B., B. W. Baker, and A. C. Kerr
2004 Paleoindian Archeology in Texas. In The Prehistory
of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 15-97. Texas
A & M University Press, College Station.
Bousman, C. B., M. B. Collins, P. Goldberg, T. Stafford, J. Guy,
B. W. Baker, D. G. Steele, M. Kay, A. Kerr, G. Fredlund, P.
Dering, V. Holliday, D. Wilson, W. Gose, S. Dial, P. Takac,
R. Balinsky, M. Masson, and J.F. Powell
2002 The Palaeoindian-Archaic transition in North
America: new evidence from Texas. Antiquity 76:
980-990.
Campbell, J. A., S. C. Caran, J. W. Karbula, and B. King
2005 Results of Archeological Field Investigations at the
Berdoll SH 130 Project Specific Location along
Onion Creek, Austin, Travis County, Texas. Hicks
& Company, Austin.
Campbell, J. A., J. W. Karbula, and M. C. Stotts
2006 Archeological Investigations of Additional Properties in Segment B of the Proposed State Highway
130, Williamson and Travis Counties, Texas. Archeology Series No. 170. Hicks & Company, Austin.
Caran, S.C.
2009 Project Environment and Geomorphology. In The
Berdoll Site, A Transitional Late Paleoindian-Early
Archaic Camp in the Lower Onion Creek Basin, Travis County, Texas, by J. A. Campbell, J. W. Karbula,
B. M. Jones, and M. C. Stotts, pp. 7-14. Archeology
Series No. 186. Hicks & Company, Austin.

Collins, M. B.
1998b Background to the Archeological Investigations. In
Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000 Year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas, Volume
I, assembled and edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 5567. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin, and Archeology Studies Program, Report 10,
Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Division, Austin.

1998c The Place of Wilson-Leonard in Southern Plains
Prehistory. In Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000 Year
Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in
Central Texas, Volume I, assembled and edited by
M. B. Collins, pp. 277-291. Studies in Archeology
31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin and Archeological
Studies Program, Report 10, Texas Department of
Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division,
Austin.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of
Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 101-126. Texas
A & M University Press, College Station.

Collins, M. B. (editor and assembler)
1998a Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-year Record of Hunter
Gatherers in Central Texas. 5 Vols. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin, and Archeology
Studies Program, Report 10, Environmental Affairs
Division, Texas Department of Transportation,
Austin.
Collins, M. B., J. Guy, and S. W. Dial
1998 The Archaic Period, 8800 to 1300 B. P. In WilsonLeonard: An 11,000-year Record of Hunter Gatherers in Central Texas, assembled and edited by M. B.
Collins, pp. 211-270. 5 Vols. Studies in Archeology
31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin, and Archeology
Studies Program, Report 10, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation,
Austin.
Decker, S., S. L. Black, and T. Gustavson
2000 The Woodrow Heard Site, 41UV88, a Holocene Terrace Site in the Western Balcones Canyonland of
Southwestern Texas. Studies in Archeology 33, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin, and Archeology Studies Program,
Report 14, Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Division, Austin
Dibble, D. S. and D. Lorrain
1968 Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde
County, Texas. Miscellaneous Papers 1. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.

Karbula, et al.—The Berdoll Site
Feit, R., B. King, B. Jones, and R. Lassen
2006 Archeological Testing of Sites 41CC311 and
41CC312, Concho County, Texas. Archeology Series
No. 160. Hicks & Company, Austin.
Ferring, C. R.
1994 The Aubrey Site: A Clovis Occupation on the
Southern Plains. Program and Abstracts of the 52nd
Annual Plains Anthropological Conference and 65th
Texas Archeological Society Annual Meeting, p. 48.
Lubbock.

173

Prewitt, E. R.
1974 41TV285: A Deeply Buried Hearth Site in Central
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University
of Texas at Austin.

1981 Culture Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Garner, L. E. and K. P. Young
1976 Environmental Geology of the Austin Area--an Aid
to Urban Planning. Report of Investigations No.
86. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Sullivan, L. S.
1998 Ground and Other Nonchipped Stone Artifacts. In
Wilson Leonard: An 11,000 Year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas, Volume
3, assembled and edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 703722. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin and Archeological Studies Program, Report
10, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.

Hester, T. R. and H. J. Shafer
1995 Early Holocene Occupations in the Lower Pecos
Region of Texas. Abstracts of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archeology, p. 93.
Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Thoms, A. V.
2005 Rocks of Ages: Propagation of Hot-Rock Cookery
in Western North America. Manuscript on file, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University,
College Station.

Johnson, L., Jr.
1991 Early Archaic Life at the Sleeper Archaeological
Site, 41BC65 of the Texas Hill Country, Blanco
County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology Report
No. 39. Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation Highway Design Division,
Austin.
Karbula, J.W.
2000 Investigations of the Eckols Site (41TV528): A
Stratified Prehistoric Terrace Site on Barton Creek
in Travis County, Texas. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Karbula, J. W., R. Feit, and T. B. Griffith
2001 Changing Perspectives on the Toyah: Data Recovery
Investigations of 41TV441, the Toyah Bluff Site, Travis County, Texas. Archeology Series No. 94. Hicks
& Company, Austin.
Karbula, J.W., M.D. Miller, J. Jarvis, B.M. Jones, S.C. Caran,
P. Dering, and B.M. Albert.
2007 Results of Testing and Data Recovery Investigations
at Site 41WM989 For The Proposed State Highway
45 Project. Archeology Series No. 161. Hicks &
Company, Austin.
Miller, M. D., J. W. Karbula, B. M. Jones, and S. C. Caran
2007 The AEP/LCRA Del Rio Transmission Line Rebuild
Project Archeological Mitigation Excavations at Site
41UV68, Uvalde County, Texas. Archeology Series
No. 179. Hicks & Company, Austin.

2007 Archaeological Records at the Richard Beene Site:
Summary and Synthesis. In Archaeological and
Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard Beene
Site 41BX831: South Central Texas, edited by A. V.
Thoms and R. D. Mandel, pp. 337-380. Reports of
Investigations No. 8. Center for Ecological Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Thoms, A. V., D. D. Kuehn, B. W. Olive, J. E. Dockall, P. A.
Clabaugh, and R. D. Mandel
1996 Early and Middle Holocene Occupations at the
Richard Beene Site: the Southern Texas Archaeological Association Field School Project. La Tierra
23(4):8-36.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Gulf Publishing, Houston.
1999 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Gulf Publishing, an imprint of Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers, Inc., Lanham, Maryland.
Vierra, B. J. (editor)
1994 Archaic Hunter-Gatherer Archaeology in the American Southwest. Eastern New Mexico University
Press, Portales.
Werchan, L. E., A. C. Lowther, and R. N. Ramsey
1974 Soil Survey of Travis County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

An Archaic Wooden Bowl from the Gulf
Coastal Plain of Texas
Michael R. Waters, Shanna Daniel, Juan Urista, and Robson Bonnichsen

Abstract
We report the discovery of a wooden bowl carved from Live Oak (Quercus virginiana) that is directly radiocarbon
dated to 4205 ± 30 years B.P. , or 4660 to 4835 calibrated years B.P. This unique artifact was found in a sand pit
in Clute, Texas, during the excavation of mammoth remains and the investigation of the geological exposures
within the pit. This is an artifact type that is unknown in the artifact inventory of the Archaic period of Texas,
but not unexpected given the widespread presence of stone gouges at this time.

Introduction
Wooden artifacts are typically not preserved at
archeological sites, especially in the southeastern
United States, because of post-depositional physical,
biological, and chemical processes. Here we report
the discovery of a Late Archaic wooden bowl that
was found in a sand pit on the coastal plain of Southeast Texas. This bowl is the oldest wooden bowl
from the Gulf Coastal Plain and it is an artifact type
that is unknown in the prehistoric wooden artifact
inventory of the Archaic period of Texas.
Location, Geological
Context, and Chronology
The wooden bowl was discovered during the
excavation of a mammoth in a commercial sand pit
located 18 km inland from the Gulf of Mexico in
Clute, Texas (Figure 1), at 90o 01' 45" N Latitude
and 95o 25' 06" Longitude. The sand pit is at an
elevation of 15 feet above sea level.
Commercial sand operations exposed a 12 m
thick sequence of sediments (see Figure 1; Urista
2009). The lowermost unit (Unit I) consists of estuarine clay with oysters (Crassostrea virginica) still
in growth position. This unit is part of the middle to
late Pleistocene Beaumont Formation. These deposits are unconformably overlain by alluvial channel
and point bar sands (Unit II). Coarse-grained quartz
particles from the sand yielded a luminescence age

of 66,000 ± 7000 years B.P. (UIC-1383; Table 1).
Wooden tree trunks and limbs were plentiful within
the lower portions of this unit and this wood yielded
an age of 38,820 +2840/-2090 14C years B.P. (GX30701). The radiocarbon date should be considered
a minimum age, because it is close to the limit of
the radiocarbon method and because of problems
measuring the carbon-14 content of the sample. The
luminescence age is likely more representative of
the true age of the mammoth. Within the sands, a
cluster of mammoth (Mammuthus) bones consisting
of a tooth, radius, ulna, mandible, femur, and two
tusk fragments were recovered along with horse,
bison, and other megafaunal remains (Urista 2009;
Daniel 2007). These bones were accumulated naturally within a channel. This unit is truncated and unconformably overlain by a thick section of alluvial
channel and point bar sands (Unit III). It is within
these sediments that the wooden bowl was found.
The time period of deposition represented by
the sediments in the sand pit range from Oxygen
Isotope Stages 5 to 1 (ca. 130,000 years B.P. to the
present). Unit I, which was deposited in a brackish
water environment, likely represents the high sea
level stand during Oxygen Isotope Stage 5e, when
sea level was near its present position (Anderson and
Fillon 2004; Simms et al. 2007). The erosional unconformity separating Units I and II likely represents
fluvial down cutting during Oxygen Isotope Stage 5a
and early Stage 4, when sea level fell to its lowest
levels (ca. 60,000 to 80,000 years B.P.; Anderson and
Fillon 2004; Simms et al. 2007). Unit II represents

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

176

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Map showing the location of the sand pit. Generalized stratigraphic diagram of the
stratigraphy exposed in the sand pit.

Table 1. Green (514 ± 40 nm) Stimulated Luminescence (GSL) ages on coarse-grained quartz extracts
from fluvial sediments from the Vernor Mammoth site, Texas.
		
Field #
Lab #
Vernor Lum-1
aMultiple

Equivalent				
a
b
b
b
dose (Gy)
U (ppm)
Th (ppm) K 0 (%)
2

UIC1383

83.72 ± 7.01

1.0 ± 0.1

2.1 ± 0.1

Dose rate
(Gy/ka)

GSL
age (ka)

0.91 ± 0.01 1.27 ± 0.06 66.0 ± 7.0

aliquot regenerative dose method following normalization procedures of Jain et al. (2003).
Th and K20 content by ICP-MS, eAges included a cosmic ray dose rate of 16 mGray/ka from calculations of Prescott
and Hutton (1994) and an assumed burial moisture content of 10 ± 3 %.
All errors are at one sigma. Analyses by the Luminescence Dating Research Laboratory, University of Illinois at Chicago.
bU,

Waters, et al—An Archaic Wooden Bowl from the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas 177
deposition in a fluvial environment during the rest of
Oxygen Isotope Stage 4 and also during Stage 3. This
age assignment is confirmed by the luminescence age
from Unit II. The overlying sands of Unit III were
deposited when the Oyster Creek Meander Belt of the
Brazos River was active from ca. 4000 to 1000 years
B.P. (Aten 1983; Abbott 2001), late Stage 1.
The Bowl
The bowl was found out of context about 20
m east of the mammoth remains. A sand lens in
Unit III above where the bowl was found contained
abundant woody branches and twigs. A twig from
the sand layer yielded a conventional age of 3760
± 60 14C years B.P. (GX-30849), 3995 to 4235 cal
years B.P. (1 sigma). A piece of wood from the
bowl was submitted for radiocarbon dating and
yielded a conventional date of 4205 ± 30 years B.P.

Figure 2. Views of the wooden bowl.

(UCIAMS-12039), 4660 to 4835 cal years B.P.
(1 sigma). The date for the bowl and twig do not
overlap, even at two standard deviations. The older
age for the bowl indicates that this artifact likely
came from the alluvial sands immediately under the
dated woody organic lens. The bowl was an isolated
find; no other artifacts were recovered. We believe
that the bowl was likely lost by its owner near the
river’s edge and deposited downstream on a point
bar and subsequently buried within the alluvium of
the Brazos River. The bowl was preserved because
it remained in permanently saturated conditions
until the water table was artificially lowered by the
commercial sand operations.
The bowl is irregular in shape, but is generally
round with a maximum length of 19.8 cm, a maximum width of 17.9 cm, and maximum depth of 6.1
cm (Figures 2 and 3). The bowl capacity is 850 ml.
The bowl form flares gently upward with low sloping walls. The rims are generally rounded and vary

178

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Oblique view of the wooden bowl.

from 8.4-16.1 mm in thickness. The bowl is made
of Live Oak (Quercus virginiana) which is native
to the southeastern United States. The bowl’s round
shape and tight, wavy cross-grain suggest that it was
made from a knot.
Cut marks are present in a number of areas on the
bowl’s interior and in only two areas on the bowl’s
exterior surface. Most of the cut marks show no
preferred orientation, but a few areas show repeated
unidirectional marks denoting chopping and scraping.
These marks could have been produced by a stone
adze, such as a Clear Fork Gouge or similar tool,
which is well represented in the Archaic period assemblages of Texas (Collins 2004). There is no evidence
of burning or heating of the wood. This evidence
suggests that the bowl was manufactured by chopping
out the interior portion of the bowl with stone tools,
followed by grinding to smooth the surfaces.
Washes of the bowl’s interior yielded only
pollen found in the modern environment and provided no useful information about the bowl’s use or
function. No residues are present on the interior or
exterior of the bowl. The bowl was conserved using
silicon oils (Smith 2003; Daniel 2007) to prevent

shrinkage and disintegration of the specimen. This
method preserves the wood and original morphology of the bowl.
Wooden bowls are rare from the archeological
record of the southeastern United States. At the
Windover site in Florida, a small carved bowl or cup
made of live oak was found with burial 150 (Doran
2002). This specimen is smaller than the Texas specimen. This burial also had a bottle gourd that had
been turned into a container that dated to 7290 ±120
years B.P. (Beta-20450). Also, a wooden mortar
made of live oak was recovered from this site. Two
wooden mortars were also recovered from a pond in
the Ocala National Forest in Florida (Willis 2003).
Both were created by burning and cutting and were
dated to 2410 ± 40 years B.P. (Beta-168137) and
2550 ± 40 years B.P. (Beta-168136). These artifacts
are different from the wooden bowl reported here.
Conclusions
Wooden bowls are rare in the archeological
record. This specimen is the oldest wooden bowl

Waters, et al—An Archaic Wooden Bowl from the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas 179
discovered in Texas and the Gulf Coastal Plain,
dating to the early years of the Late Archaic period.
This bowl shows that organic artifacts were a part of
the Archaic assemblage of the Gulf Coastal Plain as
one might speculate from the ethnographic records
of historic native peoples and the presence of stone
tools that were used for woodworking that are found
at Archaic sites in Texas.
Acknowledgments
This was Rob Bonnichsen’s last field project. As
usual, many people and organizations rallied around
Rob to help him with his excavation of the mammoth
remains. These include member of the Brazosport
Archeological Society, Brian Miles, Steve Duffy,
Charlie Gordy, Dick Gregg, Sue Gross, Chris Kneupper, Marla Laughlin, Angela Mehner, Carl Mehner,
Susan Mehner, Tommy Nuckols, Johnney Pollen,
Sandra Pollen, Bob Schlemmer, Pat Simisky, and
James Smith. Many Texas A&M University students
helped with the excavation as well. Ruth Foreman
orchestrated all the accommodations and food for the
crews during the excavation. Also Sharon Foreman,
Peggy Raymer, Joe Taylor, Wayne Smith, Darryl de
Ruiter, Glen Doran, John Anderson, and the Clute
Police Department are thanked for their contribution
to the project. Conoco Phillips provided financial
support and Tom Rich and Regina Slaydon helped to
secure this support. Support was also provided by the
Chair in First Americans Studies at Texas A&M University. We also thank the many hotels and restaurants
in Clute and Lake Jackson for their support of the
project. Finally, we thank Kenneth Vernor, president
of Vernor Material & Equipment Company, for his
support of the project.
References Cited
Abbott, J. T.
2001 Houston Area Geoarcheology: A Framework for
Archeological Investigation, Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway
District. Archeological Studies Program, Report 27.
Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Division, Austin.
Anderson, J. B. and R. H. Fillon
2004 Late Quaternary stratigraphic evolution of the northern Gulf of Mexico margin. Society for Sedimentary
Geology, Tulsa.

Aten, L. E.
1983 Indians of the upper Texas coast. Academic Press,
New York.
Collins, M. B.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of
Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 101-126. Texas
A & M University Press, College Station.
Daniel, S. L.
2007 A Mammoth of a Project: The Conservation of a
Columbian Mammoth. Master’s Thesis, Department
of Anthropology, Texas A & M University, College
Station.
Doran, G. H.
2002 Windover: Multidisciplinary Investigations of an
Early Archaic Florida cemetery. University Press
of Florida, Gainesville.
Jain, M., L. Botter-Jensen, and A. K. Singhvi
2003 Dose evaluation using multiple-aliquot quartz OSL:
test of methods and a new protocol for improved
accuracy and precision. Radiation Measurements
37:67-80.
Prescott, J. R. and J. T. Hutton
1994 Cosmic ray contributions to dose rates for luminescence and ESR dating: large depths and longterm time variations. Radiation Measurements
23:497-500.
Simms, A. R., K. Lambeck, T. Purcell, J. B. Anderson, and
A. B., Rodriguez
2007 Sea Level within the Gulf of Mexico since the Last
Glacial Maximum with implication for the melting
history of the Laurentide Ice Sheet. Quaternary Science Reviews 26:920-940.
Smith, C. W.
2003 Archaeological Conservation using Polymers : Practical Applications for Organic Artifact Stabilization.
Texas A & M University Press, College Station.
Urista, J.
2009 Stratigraphy and Geochronology of the Vernor Mammoth Site, Clute, Brazoria County, Texas. Master’s
Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas A & M
University, College Station.
Willis, R. F.
2003 Two Bowls—One Pond: Recovery of Two Prehistoric Wooden Mortars. Paper presented at the 2003
Florida Anthropological Society Meeting.

Heated Rocks as Evidence of Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer
Adaptations in Texas
Michael B. Collins

In former times meat was boiled in the rawhide, in holes in the
ground smeared with mud,
and heated stones dropped in (Denig 1930:582)
Abstract
Prehistoric burned rocks are exceeded in abundance only by chert debris in open sites and by plant parts in
dry rockshelters in the limestone areas of Texas. Prior to 1988, with few exceptions, only minimal and ad hoc
studies were made of burned rocks. Since 1988, explicit questions have increasingly guided application of
diverse analytical techniques integrated with comprehensive archeological investigations. Radiocarbon dating
results show that for more than 8,500 years, beginning ca. 8,800 years ago, the earth oven with rock heating
elements was an essential and versatile part of hunter-gatherer adaptations to changing environments. With
this research well along, it is time to turn to some less obvious aspects of heated rock technology. The use of
boiling stones is one such activity, the archeological evidence for which is of comparatively low visibility, but
it reveals another aspect of hot rock cookery in the region’s prehistory.

Introduction
Sites with large and conspicuous amounts of
burned rock have attracted archeological attention
in Texas for almost all of this century, but the rocks
themselves were generally afforded little analytical
attention during most of that time. Effort was directed mostly toward the recovery and study of “artifacts,” meaning chipped or ground stone, pottery,
or other such forms. Organized groups of burned
rocks were routinely designated as “features” and
documented, but the rocks were rarely collected or
analyzed; field descriptions typically were minimal.
Stimulated in part by a symposium on burned
rock middens convened by Thomas R. Hester in
1988 (Hester 1991), archeologists working in and
near Central Texas have since that time directed
considerable effort toward the study of burned rock
features as well as multiple attributes of the burned
rocks themselves, conducted controlled experiments,
and combed the ethnographic record for detailed
accounts of the use of heated stones (e.g. Abbott
and Frederick 1990; Black et al. 1997; Collins
1991, 1998; Collins et al. 1990; Creel 1991; Ricklis
and Collins 1994; Stark 1997, 2002; Takac 1998).

Substantial progress has been made, this line of research is currently very active, and much untapped
potential remains for investigators in the future.
For those unfamiliar with the archeology of the
limestone areas of Central and Western Texas, it is
difficult to imagine how ubiquitous and abundant
burned rocks are on most prehistoric sites. It is typical to observe multiple tons of heated and thermally
broken rocks on a single site in the forms of dispersed scatters, small discrete features, or mounded
accumulations (“middens”), and thousands of such
sites have been documented (Creel 1997). So the
progress we have made in understanding the behaviors that produced this vast archeological manifestation pertains to a major part of the prehistoric record
in the region.
So vast are the quantities of burned and heatfractured limestone rocks and the numbers of sites
where they occur in abundance that, by comparison,
some other kinds of heat altered rocks seem to be of
nearly inconsequential numbers. One kind of rock in
this status is considered here: rocks inferred to have
been used in stone boiling. Stone boiling has been
given comparatively little attention in Central Texas
archeological studies.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

182

Texas Archeological Society

One line of evidence that has been pursued
in regard to the burned rock middens of Texas is
the possibility that they resulted in part from the
processing of large quantities of acorns from the
oaks that grow in considerable abundance in much
of the same geographic area where burned rock
middens are found (Creel 1986, 1991). Among the
hypotheses is the suggestion that stone boiling with
limestone results in considerable thermally broken
rock (hence, middens) and that limestone being a
carbonate acted to help neutralize the acidity of the
acorns being so boiled (Black and McGraw 1985;
Creel 1991; Hester 1973; Jones 1981; Witkind
1977). This view is no longer held in much favor (cf.
Johnson and Goode 1994:33), and is being replaced
by alternative explanations for midden formation
and different hypotheses as to how acorns may
have been cooked (Black and Creel 1997:296-305).
Cooking in earth ovens using limestone rocks as
heating elements is currently thought to be the major
midden-forming activity and it is further postulated
that, among various other foods (such as hyacinth
bulbs [Collins 1998], acorn meal was baked in these
ovens. It is not my intent here to renew the argument
that stone boiling accounts for burned rock middens
but to suggest that among the complex mix of
materials comprising burned rock middens are hints
that stone boiling was in use along with the ovens.
A first task in this line of inquiry is to simply
formulate the questions regarding how stone boiling
might fit into broader adaptive patterns, what the
evidence might be for stone boiling features, and
what might distinguish boiling stones themselves.
Rigorously setting down these questions depends
upon assumptions about the way boiling stones
and stone boiling features enter and survive in the
archeological record. Here I attempt to formulate
these questions using a few selected general ethnographic accounts and some bits of archeological
evidence from sites in the Central and Lower Pecos
archeological areas of Texas.
Stone Boiling
One of the major food preparation techniques
among peoples lacking ceramics is stone boiling
(Driver and Massey 1957:229-233). Specifics of the
technique vary from culture to culture, but in general
the procedure is to introduce heated stones into a
container of liquid in order to heat the liquid. Boiling
stones must be able to withstand the thermal stresses

of heating and cooling and be minimally soluble in
the liquid to be heated. Containers may be of bark,
wood, pitched basketry, skin or another membrane,
or even consist of the body cavity of an animal. Skin
or membrane containers may be supported in a pit
or on an above-ground frame. Numerous detailed
ethnographic accounts describe episodes of stone
boiling, among them these typical examples:
Assiniboin: “A basket served for a boiling pot.
Stones were heated and deposited in the basket with the food… the baskets were covered
with buffalo skins and placed in an excavation
when used for cooking. Both fish and game, as
well as pulverized bones, were boiled” (Lowie
1909:188).
Jumano: “They fill half a large calabash with
water, and throw on the fire many stones of
such as are most convenient and readily take the
heat. When hot, they are taken up with tongs of
sticks and dropped into the calabash until the
water boils from the fervor of the stones. Then
whatever is to be cooked is put in, and until it
is done they continue taking out cooled stones
and throwing in hot ones. Thus they boil their
food” (Hodge 1907:105).
Comanche: “They had always stewed some
meat in the buffalo paunch, heating it by immersing hot stones in the water, since a fire could not
be built directly under the pouch” (Wallace and
Hoebel 1952:71).
Tlingit: “The wooden vessels, in which they
cook their fish… and as they cannot be set over
the fire, they make the water boil in them with
red-hot pebbles, which they renew till their food
is sufficiently dressed” (de Laguna 1972:393).
Tlingit: “They place [dried fish] in a straw
basket which is very flexible and is so closely
woven that not a drop of water can come out.
In this they put it to cook with seawater, and so
that the basket may not burn underneath they
have various red hot stones which they throw
inside, according as necessity demands, always
maintaining the heat until the dried fish in small
fragments forms a mess and then they eat it” (de
Laguna 1972:394).
Tlingit: “Several times we saw the natives pour
water into one of these baskets in which was

Collins—Heated Rocks as Evidence of Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations in Texas
the flesh of sea wolves or of nutria, which they
are accustomed to eat, place it near the fire, put
heated stones into it with two little sticks, take
them out cooled, and repeat this action until that
stinking food was boiled” (de Laguna 1972:394).
Northern Maidu: “The [acorn] dough is…
placed in a cooking-basket, with the addition of
water… The mass is stirred, and then hot stones,
taken from the fire with the aid of two sticks,
are placed in the basket, till the whole contents
is brought to a boil” (Dixon 1905:187).
Shasta: “Acorn-soup was made here precisely
as among the Maidu, except that a more or less
ornamental mush-paddle, about sixty centimetres in length, was used to stir it with. The stones
used for cooking were, as a rule, of a porphyritic
or close-grained igneous rock, selected because
it did not splinter or disintegrate when heated
and suddenly cooled” (Dixon 1907:426).
Wintu: “For acorn soup, meal placed in basket
and boiled with hot smooth round rocks about
size of tennis balls. These saved from one occasion to the next. Women always on the lookout
for suitable stones. Four or five rocks placed
in basket. As soup boiled, stirred with wooden
paddle. When well cooked, rocks removed and
wiped off with index finger” (Dubois 1935:19).
Patwin: “A corn soup or gruel… required
three baskets to cook well. The hot stones were
picked up with two sticks and first dipped into
a basket of water to remove the ashes, then
dropped into the acorns. They were removed
from this with two paddles…of oak, a foot and
a half long, with blades the size of a palm. Then
the gruel was carefully poured into another basket so as to leave behind the fragments of rock
that had become detached” (Kroeber 1932:276).
Several observations important to archeological inference are to be made from these accounts.
Foods that were boiled included fish (Assiniboin and
Tlingit), meat (Assiniboin, Comanche, and Tlingit),
pulverized bone (Assiniboin), and acorns (Maidu,
Shasta, Wintu, and Patwin). Although not specified,
the Jumano account implies that boiling was used
on various kinds of food. The containers (baskets,
wooden vessel, calabash, and buffalo paunch) are
all perishable. In the Assiniboin account, baskets are
lined with buffalo skin (because it was impervious?)

183

and placed in a pit in the ground (for support?), which
raises the question of the purpose of the basket (i.e.,
why was the pit not simply lined with the buffalo
skin?). One possibility is that the basket insulated the
water from the ground that otherwise could absorb
much of the heat generated by the procedure.
Accouterments for handling the hot stones and
stirring the boiling food range from simple sticks to
tongs and mush paddles. The Patwin used two sticks
to bring the stones from the fire to the gruel (after
first cleansing the stones in another basket of water)
and then two paddles for removing the stones from
the cooking basket. Other groups, such as the Mono
(Gifford 1932:22), used long looped stirrers that
were very effective for securely handling the rocks.
Since boiling stones will be one of the primary
archeological indicators of this technology, the information in these and other ethnographies is of
particular interest. It is not unusual for details on the
stones to be lacking, as in the Assiniboin, Comanche,
and Maidu passages quoted above. The Jumano account mentions that the kind of stones used had to
“readily take the heat,” implying selectivity in the
types of stone. This is more explicit in the Shasta
and Wintu passages as well as in the observation by
Beals (1933:352) that the Nisenan “use only soapstone rocks.” The Shasta as a rule used “porphyritic
or close-grained igneous rock” that was selected because “it did not splinter or disintegrate when heated
and suddenly cooled” (Dixon 1907:426). The Wintu
boiled with “smooth round rocks about the size of
tennis balls” which they “saved from one occasion to
the next” and for which they were “constantly on the
lookout” (DuBois 1935:19). It is clear from these and
other accounts that, ideally, boiling stones were hard,
smooth, resistant to thermal fracture, insoluble, and
of manageable sizes. That this ideal was not always
met is suggested by Kroeber’s (1932:276) observation that the Patwin found it necessary to carefully
decant their acorn soup from the boiling basket in
order to leave behind thermal fragments of the
boiling stones. There are also clear indications that
stones were handled carefully not only because they
were hot, but probably also to prolong the life of the
stones. If suitable stones were abundant, which was
certainly true for the glacial outwashes in Yakutat
Bay, homeland of the Tlingit (de Laguna 1972:2129) and is implied for the Jumano account (“many
stones of such as are most convenient”), there would
be little need to conserve them. However, if stones
suitable for use in boiling were absent or scarce, curation would be expectable, meaning that they would

184

Texas Archeological Society

be heated with care (including bringing the water
temperature up gradually to reduce thermal shock),
saved for many repeated uses, perhaps transported
from campsite to campsite, and probably selected
for qualities that insured long use lives. Since much
of Central Texas is impoverished in stones suitable
for stone boiling, curation of suitable pieces would
be the expected behavior.
Archeological Evidence
for Stone Boiling
Under ideal circumstances, all of the three
kinds of evidence for stone boiling could be found
archeologically. These would be remains of the container, the boiling stones, and the residues of foods
prepared by boiling, preferably in tight association.
Good archeological cases have already been made
for prehistoric stone boiling, such as the one argued
by Delpech and Rigaud (1974) for Flageolet I in
France. Pits, smooth river stones of quartzite reddened from heat, and especially patterned breakage
of mammal bones found associated in levels of early
Upper Paleolithic (Perigrodian) age were inferred by
analogy to Nunamiut data to indicate bone greasing.
In a site where other kinds of heat altered stones are
infrequent, this pattern is relatively evident. However, in sites like many of those in Central Texas
where fire-cracked rock from ovens and other appliances is prolific, evidence for stone boiling may
be nearly overwhelmed.
Limestone rocks used as heating elements in ovens or other kinds of fire places were needed in large
numbers and had a relatively short use-life because
of their susceptibility to breakage from heating. In
contrast, because boiling stones were selected to
withstand thermal stress, were heated and cooled
with care, and not many were required for food
boiling, their numbers would be comparatively low
and the rate at which they entered the archeological
record was quite low. This principle has been well
articulated by Shott (1989).
Boiling stones should be of hard rocks resistant
to thermal stress, smooth, and of optimum size
(perhaps 5 to 10 cm in maximum dimension). They
should manifest evidence of having been heated,
macroscopically, microscopically, or perhaps
with archeomagnetic or other attributes requiring
laboratory procedures to detect.
Use of above ground, perishable containers for
the stone boiling of liquids is not likely to leave

archeological evidence, whereas some evidence for
the use of pits may survive. Pits in which fires were
built, such as earth ovens, are generally discernible
where heat altered the earthen walls of the pit even
in the absence of heat altered stones. The earth
around skin- or membrane-lined pits used exclusively for stone boiling, however, would not have
been heated sufficiently for there to be any lasting
evidence of the heating. Pits dug into middens and
subsequently filled with midden debris would be
almost invisible archeologically. Any small pits in
archeological sites are possible candidates for having been skin-lined receptacles for stone boiling.
The oft-reported small “pits,” often called “trash
pits,” could well be an archeological signature of
boiling pits later filled with midden or sediment. An
intriguing example is that reported from the Loeve
Fox site in Central Texas:
Ash Pit 2. Concentration of ash, charcoal,
and burned rocks in Excavation Unit 2.
The feature consisted of a small pile of
burned rocks about 1 foot in diameter
adjacent to the north side of an ash and
charcoal filled pit which was also about
1 foot in diameter. The pit was generally conical, but rodent disturbances had
obscured the edges of parts of it (Prewitt
1974:68-69).

Finally, direct archeological evidence of plant foods
prepared by stone boiling would survive only under
extremely favorable conditions. Bone greasing, on
the other hand, is recognizable from patterns in the
condition of preserved bone (Bonnichsen 1973;
Binford 1978; Vehik 1977).
In sum, then, evidence for stone boiling at prehistoric sites in Central Texas would be expected
to consist of small pits, small numbers of boiling
stones, and quantities of bone debris from greasing,
assuming that open sites are unlikely to yield data
on boiling of plant foods or boneless pieces of fish
or other animals. At sites with abundant fire cracked
rocks, the aggregate evidence for stone boiling
would be relatively inconspicuous.
A Stone Boiling Feature
from the Lower Pecos
Region, Texas
Excavation at the Perry Calk site (41VV87), a
limestone rockshelter with dry deposits overlooking

Collins—Heated Rocks as Evidence of Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations in Texas
the Rio Grande, unearthed a well-preserved,
hide‑lined pit (Collins 1969:7-11) that may have
been used in stone boiling (Figure 1). The pit, which
probably dates to the Late Prehistoric, was dug from
the top of culture-bearing deposits in the shelter
and was filled with sterile cave dust and limestone
spalls. It had three distinct linings. The first (lowest)
consisted of 17 small, flat, thin pieces of limestone
carefully arranged in the bottom of the pit. Over
these was a thick layer of intertwined leaves of
succulents (550 of sotol and 12 of lechugilla) and
wooden branches (10 of oak and one of croton).
The oak branches were broken (not cut) from living
trees in the late spring or early summer and placed
in the pit while still supple, indicating the season in
which the pit was constructed. Resting directly on
the leaves and twigs was the leather. A thin patch of
dried mud adhered to the interior of the hide lining
at its deepest point in the pit.
Although it cannot be conclusively demonstrated that this pit functioned as the container for
stone boiling liquids, it is a distinct possibility.
Overall, the leather lining formed a deep, conical,
impervious basin suitable for holding liquids. The
lining of twigs and leaves of sotol and agave would
have insulated the liquid container from the cave
floor deposits. In this interpretation, the stones in the
bottom of the pit are of unknown function. Found
in this and most other shelters of the area are hard,
smooth, igneous and metamorphic stream cobbles
collected from the gravels of the Rio Grande. These
would make ideal boiling stones, although none of
the ones in this shelter was found in clear association
with this feature. The bit of mud in the bottom of
the leather pit lining appears to consist of fine dust
and ash that was obviously wet at least once while
it was in contact with the leather. This could have
resulted from the last use of the feature and would be
an expectable constituent of the residue that would
settle into the bottom of a stone boiling pit. It is also
possible that rain could have been driven far enough
into the shelter by wind to dampen dust in the bottom
of the feature sometime shortly after its last use.
A Case for Prehistoric Stone
Boiling in Central Texas
The almost ubiquitous limestone of Central
Texas could have been heated and used to stone
boil, but experiments have shown that its properties
are less than ideal for that purpose. It cracks under

185

thermal stress (Creel 1991:42; Jones 1981:32;
Witkind 1977:207) and is somewhat soluble in
water, especially if the water is at all acidic (my own
casual attempt at stone boiling acorns with limestone
produced a limy sludge in the bottom of the
container). More importantly, as noted above, this
interpretation has given way to one that views the
copious regional burned limestone rocks as mostly
coming from earth ovens. The Late Archaic burned
rock midden at Mustang Branch in Central Texas is
one of the sites where this seems to be clearly the
case (Ricklis and Collins 1994). A sequence of at
least two large slab-lined earth ovens had been built
in the center of a small midden of fire-cracked rocks,
all of limestone (Collins 1994:103-110). What is of
interest here is that found in that same midden were a
number of exotic quartzitic rocks and an abundance
of pulverized and heat-altered mammal bones.
These stones and bones have all the attributes to be
expected of bone greasing by stone boiling (Collins
1994:167; Masson and Holderby 1994:403-410).
Seventeen specimens from the midden are
quartz-rich rocks, seven of quartzite and 10 of sutured vein quartz (Collins 1994:152). The quartzite
pieces (Figure 2) are all broken and have attributes
of having been acquired from stream-gravel deposits and to have been heated. Two of these quartzite
pieces were evidently used as hammerstones (Figure
2a-b) and one is a mano fragment (Figure 2c); it is
here inferred that they were also used as boiling
stones. The vein quartz pieces (Figure 3) are also
all fragments and were recovered as splinters and
spalls of larger, rounded cobbles. These are nearly
pure, clear quartz which does not readily show any
effects of heating, although some of the splinters resemble the debris that results when a piece of quartz
explodes from having been heated too rapidly. All of
these have a pink tinge that fades from the exterior
toward the interior; this would appear to be from
heating. The quartz pieces could be chipping debris
or fragments of hammerstones, but neither chipped
stone artifacts nor hammerstones of quartz were
found in the site, nor is sutured vein quartz very
suitable as a hammerstone since it tends to readily
fracture along the sutures under impact. Overall,
the forms and fracture patterns of the quartz pieces
would also be consistent with their use as boiling
stones. Rounded cobbles of quartz and quartzite
are ideally suited for use as boiling stones in that
they are resistant to thermal stress and insoluble
in any liquid and food mixture suitable for human
consumption. The inference that I prefer is that all

186

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

Figure 1. Lined conical pit of Late Prehistoric age in Perry Calk rockshelter (41VV87), possibly used for stone boiling:
a. Photograph of pit showing the uppermost lining of skin resting on lining of leaves and twigs; b. Photograph of pit
showing lowermost lining of small stones.

Collins—Heated Rocks as Evidence of Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations in Texas

187

Faunal remains from the midden at Mustang
Branch offer even more compelling evidence of bone
greasing and, by extension, stone boiling since this
midden is mostly pre-ceramic in age (Masson and
Holderby 1994). Skeletal elements of deer were numerous, but also present in minor numbers were those
of bison, antelope, and numerous small mammal taxa.
Bones from the midden are not weathered, but show
a high degree of breakage and burning. Stone boiling
alone would not account for the extent of burning
seen in this sample, but some burning could result
from exposing bone to the fire to remove the periosteal sheath prior to boiling (Bonnichsen 1973:10),
and much of the breakage would be consistent with
exposing the marrow and cancellous interior for better

or most of these artifacts are broken or abandoned
boiling stones that had been brought to the site and
carefully curated (Collins 1994:152, 167). That
some of them were also used as hammerstones and
manos does not detract from this inference, as it
would be entirely sensible to apply quartzitic rocks
to such multiple functions.
It is important to note that these 17 stones were
recovered among 3.4 metric tons of fire-cracked limestone rocks, which gives an indication of their comparative visibility. It almost certainly does not, however,
indicate the relative importance of the two cooking
technologies. Faunal remains showing evidence of
bone greasing are probably a better indication of the
amount of stone boiling that occurred on this site.

a

b

c

Figure 2. Quartzite stones from the burned rock midden (41HY209M) at the Mustang Branch site: all of these are
suitable for use as boiling stones: a, fragment of metaquartzite with indications of use as a mano and as a hammerstone;
b, fragmentary metaquartzite hammerstone; c, mano and hammerstone.

188

Texas Archeological Society

a
b

d
c

Figure 3. Fragments and flakes of sutured vein quartz from the burned rock midden (41HY209M) at the Mustang Branch
site; all of these stones exhibit a pinkish discoloration possibly derived from heating: a, Fragmentary cobble, possibly
used as a mano; b, Fragmentary mano with one smooth and one pitted face; c, Fragmentary cobble; d, quartz flake.

grease extraction. Inadvertent burning of bone scrap
after boiling probably would account for much of the
evidence seen in this midden. Similar patterns of bone
breakage and exposure to heat are seen commonly at
sites in Central Texas, and exotic quartzitic rocks are
also nearly ubiquitous but usually in small numbers
at any given site. The case is far from conclusive, but
strongly indicated, that bone greasing by stone boiling
was practiced in the pre-ceramic past of Central Texas.
Conclusions
If the foregoing argument is accepted that stone
boiling may be fairly ubiquitous but of low archeological visibility in Central Texas, then the following
implications must be considered.

•

•

•

By its nature, stone boiling does not produce the copious byproducts that the use
of earth ovens produces, especially if the
boiling stones are durable curated items.

Because of lower visibility, the extent to
which stone boiling may have been used
is likely to be underestimated, and always
going to be difficult to ascertain.
Faunal data may provide the best line of
evidence for estimating how important
stone boiling may have been, but the
evidence from bone debris is difficult
to quantify because of extensive
breakage. Boiled bone is not absolutely
distinguishable from bone resulting from
other food preparation techniques, and it

Collins—Heated Rocks as Evidence of Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations in Texas

•

is probable that any group employing the
technique would apply it as well to plant
foods for which the evidence is far less
likely to survive.

Boiling would be a logical and important
complement to roasting and earth-oven
baking in that such baking requires considerably greater labor and time and that
boiling effectively captures some of the
nutrients lost in roasting arid baking.

In sum, the long record of successful hunting and gathering in Central Texas (Collins 1998,
2004), with the demonstrated importance of hot rock
cookery (Black et al. 1997), is an expectable place
to find evidence for stone boiling. By its nature, that
evidence will be significantly less conspicuous than
is the evidence for use of limestone in ovens.
The primary purpose of this article is to stimulate further inquiry into the topic by pointing out the
possible evidence and by suggesting the following
directions for future research:
•

•

•

•

•

In the same way that investigation of
heat-altered limestone rocks was furthered by systematic and logical inquiry,
the archeological evidence likely to be
diagnostic of stone boiling needs to be
stipulated.
The stipulated evidence must be in the
categories of context as well as in the defining attributes of stone boiling features,
boiling stones, and the floral as well as
faunal remains that should be expected.
At the regional scale, contextual considerations include availability of suitable
stones for use in boiling, the presence of
plants suited for boiling, and the occurrence of faunal taxa likely to have been
prepared by boiling.
At the scale of the single site, multiple
lines of evidence need to be found in a
context supportive of close association;
these include evidence for containers,
boiling stones, and food byproducts of
boiling.

Stipulation of the expected archeological
indicators of stone boiling must depend
in large measure on careful and extensive
study of the rich ethnographic record.

•

189

Finally, further experimentation to
determine what, if any, physical attributes
are imparted to stones of various lithologies
used in stone boiling, for example, since
access to the stones for placing them in
the container is essential, oxidation rather
than reduction (as seen in some oven
stones) is expectable; what seem to be
archeomagnetic consequences of cooling
while being stirred have been detected in
systematic thermal demagnetization (Gose
1999); distinctive thermal stress cracking
may occur in some lithologies; and
etching and other surficial consequences
of contact with boiling liquids of various
compositions are possibilities.

First and foremost, we need a more rigorous
definition of the criteria for recognizing archeological evidence of stone boiling. Stone boiling was
inferred at Mustang Branch inductively without having predicted it prior to field work and the evidence
was pieced together retroductively. Better cases will
emerge from more systematic inquiry.
References Cited
Abbott, J. T. and C. D. Frederick
1990 Proton Magnetometer Investigations of Burned Rock
Middens in West-Central Texas: Clues to Formation Process. Journal of Archaeological Science
17:535-545.
Beals, R. L.
1933 Ethnology of the Nisenan. University of California
Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 31(6):335-414.
Binford, L. R.
1978 Nunamiut Ethnoarachaeology. Academic Press,
New York.
Black, S. L. and D. G. Creel
1997 The Central Texas Burned Rock Midden Reconsidered. In Hot Rock Cooking on the Greater Edwards
Plateau: Four Burned Rock Midden Sites in West
Central Texas, by S. L. Black, L. W. Ellis, D. G.
Creel, and G. T. Goode, pp. 269-305. Studies in
Archeology 22, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin and
Archeology Studies Program, Report 2, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs
Department, Austin.

190

Texas Archeological Society

Black, S. L. and A. J. McGraw
1985 The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change
and Continuity in the Upper Salado Creek Watershed, South Central Texas. Archaeological Survey
Report 100. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Black, S. L., L. W. Ellis, D. G. Creel, and G. T. Goode
1997 Hot Rock Cooking on the Greater Edwards Plateau:
Four Burned Rock Midden Sites in West Central
Texas. 2 Vols. Studies in Archeology 22, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin and Archeology Studies Program,
Report 2, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Department, Austin.
Bonnichsen, R.
1973 Some Operational Aspects of Human and Animal
Bone Alteration. In Mammalian Osteo-Archaeology:
North America, by B. M. Gilbert, pp. 9-24. Special
Publications, Missouri Archaeological Society,
Columbia.
Collins, M. B.
1969 Test Excavations at Amistad International Reservoir,
Fall 1967. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 16. The University of Texas at Austin.

1991 Thoughts on Future Investigation of Burned Rock
Middens. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An
Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester, pp.
1-24. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
1994 Late Archaic Evidence in the Project Area. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the
Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by
R. A. Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 101-189. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of
Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 101-126. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Collins, M. B., B. Ellis, and C. Dodt-Ellis
1990 Excavations at the Camp Pearl Wheat Site
(41KR243): An Early Archaic Campsite on Town
Creek, Kerr County, Texas. Studies in Archeology
6. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Collins, M. B. (editor)
1998 Wilson-Leonard, An 11,000-year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. 5 Vols.
Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
and Archeological Studies Program Report 10, Texas
Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Department. Austin.

Creel, D. G.
1986 A Study of Burned Rock Middens in West Central
Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Arizona, Tucson.
1991 Assessing the Relationship Between Burned Rock
Midden Distribution and Archaic Subsistence in
West Central Texas. In The Burned Rock Middens of
Texas: An Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R.
Hester, pp. 33-43. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory. The University
of Texas at Austin.

1997 Analysis of the Distribution of Burned Rock Midden Sites in the Study Area. In Hot Rock Cooking
on the Greater Edwards Plateau: Four Burned Rock
Midden Sites in West Central Texas, by S. L. Black,
L. W. Ellis, D. G. Creel, and G. T. Goode, pp. 8998. Studies in Archeology 22, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory. The University of Texas at
Austin, and Archeology Studies Program, Report 2,
Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Department, Austin.
de Laguna, F.
1972 Under Mount Saint Elias: The History and Culture
of the Yakutat Tlingit. Smithsonian Contributions
to Anthropology 7. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.
Delpech, F. and J-P. Rigaud
1974 Etude de la fragmentation et de la repartition de
restes osseux dans un niveau d’habitat paleolithique.
In Premier Colloque International sur 1’Industrie
de 1’os dans la Prehistoire, organise par H. CampsFaber, pp. 47-55. Editions de 1’ Universite de
Provence.
Denig, E. T.
1930 Indian Tribes of the Upper Missouri. Forty-sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology,
Washington, D. C.
Dixon, R. B.
1905 The Northern Maidu. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 17(3):119-380.
1907 The Shasta. Bulletin of the American Museum of
Natural History 17(5):381-498.
Driver, H. E. and W. C. Massey
1957 Comparative Studies of North American Indians.
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society
47, part 2. Philadelphia.
DuBois, C.
1935 Wintu Ethnography. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology
36(1):1-148. Berkeley.

Collins—Heated Rocks as Evidence of Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations in Texas
Gifford, E. W.
1932 The Northfork Mono. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology
31(2):15-65.
Gose, W. A.
1999 Palaeomagnetic Studies of Burned Rocks. Journal
of Archaeological Science 27(5):409-421.
Hester, T. R.
1973 The Formation of a “Burned Rock Midden:” A California Example. The Record 29(3):4.
Hester, T. R. (editor)
1991 The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological Symposium. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Hodge, F. W. (editor)
1907 The Narrative of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca. In
Spanish Explorers in the Southern United States,
1528-1543, edited by J. F. Jameson, pp. 12-126.
Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York
Johnson, L. Jr. and G. T Goode
1994 A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene
Climates, as well as Archeological Periods, on the
Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:1-51.
Jones, C. J.
1981 A Further Experiment in Stone Boiling: A Calcining
Process for Acorns. La Tierra 8(2):31-36.
Kroeber, A. L.
1932 The Patwin and their Neighbors. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and
Ethnology 29(4):253-423.
Lowie, R. H.
1909 The Assiniboine. Anthropological Papers 4. American Museum of Natural History, New York.
Masson, M. A and M. W. Holderby
1994 Subsistence Patterns at 41HY209 and 41HY202: An
Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains. In Archaic
and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle
Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A.
Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 403-489. Studies in
Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. The University of Texas at Austin.

191

Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County, Texas. Research Report 49.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Ricklis, R. A. and M. B. Collins
1994 Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the
Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Shott, M. J.
1989 On Tool-Class Use Lives and the Formation of
Archaeological Assemblages. American Antiquity
54(1):9-30.
Stark, R.
1997 Piedras Calientes: Ethnohistory, Experimental Archaeology, and Cooking with Hot Stones. Master’s
Thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas at Austin.
2002 Comidas de la Tierra: an ethnoarchaeology of earth
ovens. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Takac, P. R.
1998 Archeomagnetic Investigations of Burned Rocks. In
Investigation and Experimentation at the Higgins
Site (41BX184), Volume I, Archeology along the
Wurzbach Parkway, Module 3, by S. L. Black, K.
Jolly, C. D. Frederick, J. R. Lucas, J. W. Karbula,
P. R. Takac, and D. R. Potter, pp. 119-162. Studies
in Archeology 27. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Vehik, S. C.
1977 Bone Fragments and Bone Grease Manufacturing: A
Review of Their Archaeological Use and Potential.
Plains Anthropologist 22(77):169-182.
Wallace, E. and E. A. Hoebel
1952 The Comanches, Lords of the South Plains. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Witkind, W. M.
1977 An Experiment in Stone Boiling. In Hop Hill: Culture and Climatic Change in Central Texas, by J.
Gunn and R. Mahula, pp. 205-208. Special Report 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span
Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis:
Interpretation of Surface Artifact Distributions
at the El Arenal Site, El Paso County, Texas
Myles R. Miller

Abstract
Methods of point pattern spatial analysis are applied to surface artifact and feature distributions at the Late Archaic
period site of El Arenal in El Paso County, Texas. Spatial analysis reveals consistent relationships between
artifact classes and features that can be modeled through reference to ethnographic and ethnoarcheological
studies of the organization of space at hunter-gather settlements. Spatial analysis also reveals the distances at
which materials and features demonstrate non-random clustering; these distances are then compared to the
debris scatters resulting from different occupation spans at contemporary hunter-gatherer settlements in order
to estimate the length of the prehistoric occupations of El Arenal.

Introduction
The natural world is a patchy place (Dale 1999:1)
Exchange the words “cultural” for “natural” in
the quote above and the result would be an equally
valid statement. Spatial phenomena, whether observed in the natural or cultural world, are inherently patchy: in other words, they are clustered or
dispersed, aggregated or segregated, clumped or diffused. The opposite of patchiness is randomness, and
randomness implies an absence of behavior (Taylor
et al. 1978:383). Unlike spatial patterning in natural
systems that is primarily responsive to environmental stimuli, cultural spatial patterning is conditioned
through human action and agency and thus entails
further dimensions of complexity and ambiguity.
In this article, methods of point pattern spatial
analysis of surface artifact distributions are brought
to bear on the fundamental problem of evaluating
site structure and site occupation span at a Late
Archaic period (2000 B.C. to A.D. 500) settlement in El Paso County, Texas. The nature of Late
Archaic period settlement and land use within the
basin landforms of the Jornada Mogollon region has
been a constant avenue of inquiry over the past two
decades. Numerous models have been proposed, the
majority of which reference the collector-forager

dichotomy and attempt to identify logistical and
residential site or assemblage attributes that can be
related to one or another organizational strategy.
Differentiating between task-specific sites representing logistically organized settlement organization
and base camps of residentially mobile foragers has
been attempted almost universally through modeling
various aspects of assemblage composition, diversity, and density (Carmichael 1985; Doleman 1992,
1997a, 1997b; Ennes 1999; Hard 1983; Mauldin
1984, 1996; Mauldin et al. 1998; Seaman et al. 1988),
although feature variability and some aspects of site
layout or site structure have occasionally been considered (Church and Sale 2003; Miller 1990; Whalen
1994). The majority of these approaches have been
hampered by a general inability to differentiate various site types on an a priori basis (or even ex post
facto basis) for modeling expectations of assemblage
attributes. In other words, we lack a firm empirical
understanding of the variability among site layouts
and site formation processes representative of different settlement and organizational strategies. Therefore, the analytical strategy of examining assemblage
attributes tends to be removed and disconnected from
the actual site context from which the assemblages
were collected.
To better illustrate this point the following question may be asked: without specific reference to

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

194

Texas Archeological Society
structure and artifact patterning that reflect artifact
cleaning and refuse disposal as well as a patterned
use of space during longer-term use of a location,
as has been documented through numerous ethnographic and ethnoarcheological studies (Binford
1978, 1983; Fisher and Strickland 1989, 1991;
Hitchcock 1987; Kent 1991; O’Connell 1987; Yellen
1977). In contrast, artifact scatters and hearth-artifact scatters representing logistical land use should
not have such attributes, but would rather exhibit a
more random and unsystematic spatial patterning.
To test the utility of this alternative approach,
methods of point pattern spatial analysis were
brought to bear on the Late Archaic site of El Arenal
(41EP3175) in El Paso County, Texas, a few miles
east of the city of El Paso. The El Arenal site is a
large (75,000 m2) site consisting of dozens of hearths,
shallow hut structures, and thousands of flaked and
ground stone artifacts (Miller 2007a). It is situated at
the eastern margin of the Hueco Bolson near the point
where the alluvial fans from the Hueco Mountains to
the east flare out onto the basin floor (Figure 1).
The site is situated among several geomorphic
contexts upon and around the margins of an elevated
terrace (Figure 2). At the western edge of the site,
several massive aeolian coppice dunes and deep
deposits of sheet sands are present on the highest
area of the terrace. Geomorphic investigations (Hall
2007) determined that this terrace existed in prehistoric times and the lower area to the west was part of

Distal
Alluvial
fans

El Arsenal (41EP3175)

Figure 1. Topographic setting of the El Arenal site (41EP3175), El Paso County.

Hueco

Hueco Bolson

Mounta

ins

assemblage characteristics, what exactly constitutes
a Late Archaic period residential site among the lowdensity material culture distributions typical of the
central basins of Trans-Pecos Texas? In some cases,
the presence of one or two house structures may be
used to infer a residential occupation. However, this
belies the fact that many sites had several ephemeral
hut structures that either did not leave identifiable archeological traces or were not discovered during archeological investigations. The presence of multiple
hearth features occasionally has been referenced as
an indictor of more complex residential settlements,
although the potential for multicomponency often
prohibits any firm conclusions in this regard. Often,
the expectations reflect those of agriculturally-based
and relatively sedentary systems, with the result that
residential sites are expected to contain dense artifact deposits, clustered house distributions, multiple
features, and so forth. In an important observation
in opposition to this perspective, Mauldin (1995,
1996) suggests that many of the low-density huntergatherer sites in the Jornada region of far West Texas
are indeed residential in nature and thus will often
defy these expectations.
An alternative approach would be to begin to
identify and characterize spatial patterns of features
and artifacts representative of differing site types
and settlement organization. Sites with hearths
and structural features representing longer-term
residential settlements should have attributes of site

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis
a flat pan leading to a playa lakebed approximately
500 m further to the west in the vicinity of Nations
East Well. The central part of the site consisted of
aeolian sheet sands and coppice dunes, while the
easternmost segment was grass-stabilized sands.
A playa once existed beyond the western margin of the site, and the unusual recovery of charred
Spike Rush (Eleocharis sp.) seeds from hearth
features at El Arenal confirmed the nearby presence
of ponded water during the occupation of the site
(Dering 2007). Spike Rush seeds were recovered
from two hearth features at El Arenal, including
several recovered from a flotation sample and a
large number of seeds collected as a macrobotanical sample. Spike Rush, like most sedges, grows in
moist ground near a relatively stable water source,
usually along the muddy margins and shallow, still,
waters of ponds and lakes. Moreover, an unusually
high proportion of low d13C values was observed
among the radiocarbon samples, indicating the presence of C4 grasses among the samples. These proxy
macrobotanical and isotopic data indicate that a
relatively stable playa lake existed in the vicinity of
El Arenal during one or more intervals when the site
was occupied. The presence of a water-filled playa
would have been a prime attraction for prehistoric
settlement in the area, as well as a contributing factor to relatively longer settlement occupations.
El Arenal presented a worthy test case for the
use of point pattern spatial analyses. Nearly 1,400
artifacts and several dozen features were plotted
and collected across an area measuring over 75,000
m2 in size. Surface artifacts were collected during
two projects that occurred nearly a decade apart:
the Hueco Mountain Archaeological Project in
1992 (Leach 1994) and a mitigation project in 2003
(Miller 2007a). The locational accuracy and consistency of the surface artifact datasets provided an
outstanding opportunity to apply methods of spatial
point pattern analysis to the study of the relationships between artifact distributional patterns and
site structure.
Archeological Spatial
Analysis at El Arenal:
Assumptions, Caveats,
and Corrections
A common assumption or presumption of
archeological spatial studies is that the site or occupation area under examination must represent a

195

relatively intact living surface or otherwise spatially
and temporally discrete occupational episode, as
exemplified by the series of spatial studies using
Binford’s Mask site data (Binford 1978; Graham
1980; Kintigh 1990; Whallon 1984). Meeting this
assumption certainly is one of the factors underlying the reluctance to apply spatial statistics to archeological problems, since the vast majority of archeological data has been conditioned by numerous
cultural and natural transformation processes (Gregg
et al. 1991; Schiffer 1987). However, this perspective can be overstated and, as will be demonstrated
in this study, archeological spatial analysis can be
productively applied to questions of anthropological
significance from sites that do not meet the standard
of Binford’s Mask site.
The primary goal and intent of the spatial
analysis efforts at El Arenal was not to identify
or recover an absolute image of prehistoric site
layout and activity space. Rather, the intent was to
determine whether or not broad, general, and consistent patterning could be detected at one or more
spatial scales and, if so, whether such patterning
was logically interpretable with reference to the
body of ethnographic and prehistoric research on
the spatial arrangement of features, activity areas,
and trash disposal areas at hunter-gatherer settlements. In turn, these observations would provide
an additional corroborative dataset, along with
chronometric and other data, with which to interpret site formation processes and site structure,
and ultimately provide some insights into the occupational history of El Arenal. Two overarching
hypotheses were involved:
(1) If El Arenal represents multiple, individual,
occupations and logistical use over temporal
scales ranging from annual seasonal rounds
to decades and even hundreds of years, it is
expected that much of the spatial patterning
would be obscured and would not be logically interpretable;

(2) If El Arenal contains discrete residential occupational areas, and some areas of multiple
hearths and structures represent extended
family or multi-family social groups, it is
expected that some level of spatial patterning
would remain intact and could be interpreted
using spatial analysis as referenced to ethnographic and ethnoarcheological observations
of the use of site space by hunter-gatherer
groups.

196

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Topographic contour map of El Arenal. Surface artifact plots are superimposed to illustrate areas of prehistoric
occupations centered on the terrace landform above the 1352 m contour. The hatched lines denote the road passing
through the site. Areas to the east of the road were not mapped, resulting in the distortions in contour lines seen in the
upper left portion of the map.

As stated previously, an often unfounded
belief and assumption regarding spatial statistics
is that their application to archeological problems
is restricted to stable and intact living surfaces
representing single occupation episodes. In
opposition to this view, we explicitly designed
the spatial analysis at El Arenal to search for
broad and generalized spatial patterns that may
be interpreted with reference to ethnographic and

ethnoarcheological research on site layouts and
artifact distributions at hunter-gatherer sites (Kintigh
and Ammerman 1982). It is likely that numerous
prehistoric occupations occurred at El Arenal. In
particular, two large excavation blocks contained
multiple features and exceptionally dense artifact
distributions that represent overlapping occupations
of the elevated terrace at the western edge of the site.
Beyond the terrace edge, feature and artifact clusters

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis
tend to be more patterned, and it is likely that several
of these areas represent less intensive occupational
loci with spatially isolated components.
I do not propose that the surface artifact distribution at El Arenal is an in situ, fossilized representation of the exact debris left in the exact locations
upon prehistoric occupation and abandonment.
Overlapping prehistoric occupations disturbed and
relocated the debris of earlier occupations. It is also
likely that artifacts have been collected by amateur
and weekend arrowhead hunters and military personnel, as well as during previous archeological
surveys (e.g., Leach 1994; Whalen 1977). Artifacts
have been displaced by aeolian deflation and translocation (Wandsnider 1988) and the effects of vehicle
traffic are clearly illustrated by the linear distribution
of artifacts along the road traversing the site.
A second and equally important caveat is that
the surface spatial distribution of artifacts at El
Arenal has been affected and conditioned by geomorphological processes. Comparison of the 1992
and 2003 artifact plots clearly illustrates the effects
of erosion on artifact exposure. Many of the surfacevisible artifact clusters were exposed around the
margins of coppice dunes, interdunal deflation areas,
and other eroded contexts. Conversely, as discovered during the backhoe trenching and large block
excavation of the 2003-2004 field season, significant
occupation areas of the site were deeply buried and
nearly devoid of surface artifacts. Thus, it could
be argued that any spatial analyses attempted at El
Arenal will deal only with a partial and potentially
biased picture of the overall artifact distribution. Of
greater importance is the issue that most methods of
spatial point pattern analysis attempt to identify and
quantity various degrees of non-random clustering
or dispersion among point patterns. Since clustered
artifact distributions are clearly evident across the
site, and the clusters tend to be associated with erosional contexts, it could be argued that all apparent
spatial clustering is geomorphically conditioned.
To argue against this view, I consider the probability that the erosional process is a random phenomenon. That is, coppice dunes are randomly patterned
across the site, and accordingly patterns of exposure
and burial associated with the margins or flanks of
dunes are also random. Therefore, it is proposed that
the patterns of artifact exposure provide a random
statistical representation of the total underlying
population distribution. Granted, this requires some
degree of faith, but to ignore the potential spatial
data just because the entire site is not eroded to the

197

Pleistocene-aged substrate would not do justice to its
data potential. In addition, erosion and burial cannot
entirely explain the surface artifact distributions. It
is important to note that several of the relatively
stable and intact grassland areas of the site contain
clustered artifact distributions. Conversely, several
of the most severely eroded surfaces, particularly
those occurring across the northern one-third of the
site, lacked any clustered artifact distributions and
often lacked surface or subsurface artifacts entirely.
The third caveat of the study is that that the
linear artifact distributions exposed along the road
cut are not isotropic (equivalent in all directions),
a pattern that violates the requirements of several
statistical point pattern analysis procedures. These
areas were removed from the analysis.
Correlation and Correspondence
of Data Sets
Finally, we must have confidence that two surface collections that occurred over an interval of 10
years are similar. Point-proveniencing and collection of surface artifacts at El Arenal was conducted
during two projects that occurred over a decade
apart. In 1992 the site was thoroughly surface collected during Phase IIA of the Hueco Mountain
Archaeological Project (HMAP) (Leach 1994). A
total of 2218 geospatial points was documented,
including artifacts, features, fire-cracked rock or
burned caliche cook stone, and miscellaneous items.
Geo-Marine, Inc. (GMI) returned to the site in 2003
in order to conduct data recovery investigations.
Despite the 100 percent surface collection conducted
nearly a decade earlier, numerous surface artifacts
were observed eroding from exposures of aeolian
sands around the margins of dunes and scattered
in other areas of the site. It was immediately apparent that this provided an interesting opportunity
to examine how surface artifact distributions had
been affected and conditioned by erosion and other
geomorphological processes over the intervening
decade. GMI proceeded to plot and collect a total
of 359 artifacts from the site surface. Artifacts were
provenienced using a sub-meter accuracy GPS and
the appropriate UTM coordinate was recorded for
each individual item.
During the HMAP Phase IIA investigations the
surface artifacts and features had been mapped in relation to 25 separate datum points distributed across
the site. Artifacts were mapped with a transit and
assigned individual collection numbers according to

198

Texas Archeological Society

the Fort Bliss catalog procedure being used at that
time. Several calculation and measurement errors
were discovered when GMI reviewed the distributional plots and associated northing and easting grid
provenience numbers in the HMAP provenience and
mapping databases. Fortunately, the original transit
angle and distance measurements were included
in the master database. Through much effort, GMI
produced a corrected grid and provenience assignment for all 2218 HMAP plots (see Miller et al.
[2007] for a summary of the process of correlating
the HMAP and 2003 datasets). Nearly 1200 of the
2218 HMAP plots were found to consist of natural
caliche nodules mistaken for hearth cook stones.
These were removed from the analysis, leaving a
total of 1394 plots in the combined 1992 and 2003
mapping database.
Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of the 1992
and 2003 artifact plots on the relevant digital orthophoto quadrangle (DOQ). The two distributions
show a remarkable degree of correlation and symmetry and the locations of clustered artifact distributions are nearly identical for both collections.
The Spatial Distribution of
Chronometric Dates at El
Arenal
Twenty-eight radiocarbon dates were obtained
from cultural features at El Arenal, making it one of
the most intensively dated Archaic period sites in the
Jornada region. The dates are remarkably consistent
within a 1350 year time period between 790 B.C.
and A.D. 560, with only four dates (14 percent) falling outside this range (Figure 4). Overall, El Arenal
has one of the most consistent series of dates from
the Jornada region.
Figure 4 illustrates the summed probability
distribution of the 28 age estimates and further illustrates the consistency of the dates across the
latter part of the Late Archaic period. However, the
perceived consistency of the age estimates does not
necessarily indicate that a limited range or number
of occupations took place at El Arenal. It is clear that
some occupations occurred before and after this period as indicated by the three Formative period dates
from three hearth features and a Middle Archaic
period date from a small hut structure. Moreover, the
date series spans a period of 1350 years, indicating
some degree of reoccupation and the existence of
multiple components.

A closer examination of the date distributions
reveal significant patterns. Distinct clusters of statistically contemporaneous dates were identified.
Foremost among these patterns is a subtle indication of shifting settlement location from west to
east, with the former containing mostly earlier dates
and the latter having several younger dates. The
youngest age estimates at the eastern margin of the
site are associated with plain brownware ceramics.
Similar patterns in shifting use of site space through
time have been identified at several large sites in
the region that had complex occupation histories
(Carmichael 1985; Miller 1990; Whalen 1994).
Accordingly, the concerns over potential mixing of
occupations were much reduced.
Despite the availability of 28 radiocarbon
dates, the chronometric data from El Arenal for
the most part cannot conclusively identify specific
occupational periods associated with discrete areas
of site space. However, this is not the intended
result of the spatial analysis of chronometric data.
Rather, the intent is to evaluate whether any general
chronometric trends in the use of site space could
be discerned. The chronometric evidence indicates
the presence of various occupations that occurred
over a span of more than 3600 years, although the
distribution of the radiocarbon age estimates also
indicates that the majority of occupations took place
within a relatively limited time period and that many
could be contemporaneous. This is not to claim
that statistical contemporaneity is the equivalent of
absolute occupational contemporaneity, only that
contemporaneous dates have the potential to represent contemporaneous occupations. The analysis
was successful in demonstrating that sequential,
spatially-segregated occupations occurred across
the site. Only through the examination of additional
archeological evidence can we discern patterns of
contemporaneous and reoccupied site space, and for
that I now turn to the spatial point pattern analysis
of archeological data from El Arenal.
Theory and Methods of Point
Pattern Spatial Analysis
The fundamental issue involving the robust
detection and interpretation of archeological point
pattern artifact distributions revolves around whether
or not such patterns represent random distributions, or
what is termed complete spatial randomness (CSR).
Non-random clustered or more evenly distributed

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis

387100

3528400

3528500

3528500

3528500

387000

199

Legend
HMAP Phase IIA
(1992)

387000

387100

3528300

3528300

GMI (2003)

Figure 3. Close-up view of the northeastern portion of the El Arenal site showing correspondence between 1992 and
2003 surface artifact plots. Note the consistent distribution of 1992 and 2003 artifact plots in relation to exposed surfaces
around the margins of coppice dunes and along the road.

200

Texas Archeological Society

El Arenal
Summed Probability Distribution
1? 410 B.C. – 260 A.D. (64.2%)
2? 790 B.C. – 560 A.D. (85.9%)

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

3000 BC
30
00CalBC

22000
000CalBC
BC

11000
000CalBC
BC

BC/AD
CalB
C/CalAD

Calibrated Calendar Age

1000 AD
10
00CalAD

2000 AD
20
00CalAD

Calibrateddate

Figure 4. Summed probability histogram of 28 radiocarbon age estimates from El Arenal, illustrating the concentration
of dates and associated occupations within the period of 790 B.C. to A.D. 560 (2-sigma confidence interval).

distributions potentially represent patterned cultural
behavior. Most spatial studies work from the assumption of a null (random) distribution based on a Poisson
distribution of grid points (a Poisson distribution is
essentially a variation of a normal distribution that is
derived from small sample numbers [after Ord 1972],
such as the distribution of counts of features within
recording cells that usually contain only one to three
features per cell). Distributions that significantly differ from CSR or other forms of random null models
are perceived to represent various levels of non-random clustering that were created through some action
or agency. In the present case, it would be assumed
that the non-random patterning was caused by some
cultural or behavioral factor, although geomorphic
factors must also be considered. Identification of
these different patterns and scales of behavior can
then be linked to higher order inferences regarding
site formation and site structure.

Several methods of archeological spatial analysis
have been developed over the past 30 years. Unfort­
unately, archeological applications have not kept pace
with developments in the fields of ecology, geography,
and geostatistics, although this may be changing with
the advent and increasing sophistication of geographic
information systems (Aldenderfer and Maschner 1996;
Connolly and Lake 2006; Kvamme and Kohler 1988;
Lock 2000; Wheatley and Gillings 2002). Kintigh
(1990), Clarke (1977), and Hodder and Orton (1976)
provide useful, albeit rather dated, overviews of
several spatial measures of distance and association
derived from ecology and geography (Diggle 1983;
Pielou 1969). Most of these have been superseded
by improved methods developed by ecologists and
geostatisticians (see Dale 1999; Dale et al. 2002; and
Perry et al. 2002 for useful summaries). The specific
spatial analysis methods utilized in this study include
those available in Kintigh’s Tools for Quantitative

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis
Archaeology software package as described in his
accompanying manual (Kintigh 2002; see also Kintigh
1990). These include nearest neighbor analysis, Hodder
and Okell’s A, and local density analysis. In addition,
several more recent applications of point pattern
analysis adopted from ecology have been applied to the
dataset from El Arenal. These include Ripley’s K and L
functions (Dixon 2002; Ripley 1976, 1977, 1981) and
Wiegand and Maloney’s O-ring statistic (Wiegand and
Moloney 2004; see also Wiegand et al. 1999).
Three methods of point pattern analysis reviewed by Kintigh (1990) and used in the present
study include Hodder and Okell’s A statistic, nearest
neighbor analysis, and local density analysis. Each
method provides global indications of the relative
degree of clustering and association between multiple data categories such as features and artifact
site types. Nearest neighbor analysis is perhaps the
best known method and has received the widest application among many fields. The nearest neighbor
statistic R is defined as “the ratio of the average over
all points of the distances between a point and nearest other point, divided by the average distance that
would be expected if the same number of objects
were distributed at random over the same area”
(Kintigh 1990:167). Based on the resulting ratio calculations, a random distribution or association between points will result in an R coefficient of around
1.00. Clustered distributions will measure less than
1.00, with lower numbers indicating greater degrees
of clustering; dispersed or segregated artifact distributions will have measures greater than 1.00. One
of the main problems with the nearest neighbor statistic (and many spatial statistics) is that it is highly
dependent on local boundary conditions. That is, the
dimension (area) of the study parcel is an inherent
part of the mathematical calculation, and changing
the area or using other areas of different size will
therefore yield a different R coefficient.
Hodder and Okell’s A statistic (Hodder and
Okell 1978) is essentially a variation of the mathematical principles underlying the nearest neighbor
statistic but that avoids or compensates for some of
the boundary problems associated with the nearest
neighbor analyses (see Kintigh 1990). The A statistic provides a relatively simple global measure of
which artifact classes or features are aggregated and
intermingled (A = 1.0) or segregated (A < .99) across
the landscape or site. Unlike nearest neighbor, the
A statistic is not affected by boundary conditions.
The A statistic may in fact be too simple as it does
not measure or reflect the uneven or asymmetric

201

relationships between artifact classes typical of archeological distributions. For example, all ceramic
artifacts at a site may be associated with lithics, but
all lithic clusters representing other activities or
temporal components may not be associated with
ceramics. The nearest neighbor statistic will reflect
this asymmetric relationship (e.g., R = 0.50 for ceramics and lithics; R = 1.50 for lithics and ceramics),
while the A statistic will measure only the symmetric
global relationship (e.g., A = 0.75 for ceramics and
lithics; A = 0.75 for lithics and ceramics).
Local density analysis (Johnson 1984) can
provide a first order estimate of how various data
classes are associated or segregated at different
spatial scales and thus provides a useful variation on
the A and R statistics. It can be helpful for discovering associations between different combinations of
data classes (artifacts and features) at various spatial
scales. Like nearest neighbor analysis, it is highly
influenced by boundary conditions.
Experience with these methods has found that
they provide a first order approximation of spatial
associations and therefore are most suitable for exploratory data analysis. Additionally, the inter-class
R and A coefficients can be imported into statistical
programs for further analysis and visual identification of partitions among various data classes. While
useful in an exploratory sense, these methods suffer
from the fact that they are only related to a spatial
null model (i.e., complete spatial randomness) at a
global (or site-wide) scale and thus the measures—
and interpretations derived thereof—are somewhat
arbitrary and cannot be applied to smaller scales
within the site. Nearest neighbor and Hodder and
Okell’s A are applicable only at global scales; that
is, the coefficients measure spatial associations at
a single scale: that of the entire site. Local density
analysis provides multi-scalar impressions of artifact associations, but this measure is not compared
against a spatial null model and therefore it cannot
be determined whether the observed patterns are
statistically random, clustered, or dispersed. For
purposes of hypothesis testing and modeling human
behavior it is much more useful to examine spatial
associations at multiple scales.
Fortunately, more recent refinements of point
pattern analysis incorporate spatial null models
and provide information at multiple scales. These
include Ripley’s K-function and its transformation
to the L-function (Dixon 2002; Ripley 1976, 1981)
and the Wiegand-Moloney O-ring statistic (Dale
et al. 2002; Ripley 1981; Wiegand and Moloney

202

Texas Archeological Society

2004). These robust statistical procedures are being
increasingly used by ecologists studying the spatial
distribution of plant species and how such spatial
patterns are correlated with other phenomena across
various ecological zones (Anderson 1992; Perry et
al. 2002; Wiegand et al. 1999, 2006). Ripley’s K and
Wiegand-Moloney O-ring are generically similar
to local density analysis in that they both calculate
densities of points within a radius of a given point.
However, the K and O-ring statistics then calculate
the observed densities within each radius against
the density that would be expected under complete
spatial randomness, thus providing a robust measure
of whether the observed densities are clustered, random, or dispersed at each spatial scale.
These are robust methods for detecting the scale
or scales at which various classes of data exhibit
spatial segregation or aggregation. The application
of these statistical measures to the point pattern data
from El Arenal can determine the distance interval or
scales at which various classes of data exhibit spatial
segregation or aggregation across the landscape. Univariate patterns can be examined, such as the scale or
scales at which a particular artifact class exhibits nonrandom clustering or segregation. Equally important,
the methods allow for bivariate analyses of point patterns. Through this approach it is possible to identify
the scale or scales at which two data classes, such as
hearth features and ground stone, exhibit non-random
clustering in relation to each other.
A prominent issue is that archeological data
are commonly much more clustered than would
be predicted by null models based on complete
spatial randomness. People are not plants, and the
distributions of plant and animal species studied by
ecologists are not necessarily an appropriate model
for the highly clustered artifact scatters created by
human behavior. Human behavior and agency creates point pattern distributions that tend to be much
denser and more localized than commonly observed
among the distributions of plant and animal species
in the natural world. Therefore, it is often advisable
to explore alternative spatial null models that account for highly heterogeneous point distributions
of variable density (Wiegand and Moloney 2004).
In the following analyses the point distributions
are compared against a heterogeneous Poisson null
model that better approximates spatial randomness
in distributions that have multiple, segregated, clusters and broad regions consisting of negative cells
(Diggle 1983; Pelissier and Goreaud 2001; Wiegand
and Moloney 2004), or in other words, a typical

archeological distribution. In the following analyses
the K and O-ring functions are examined against a
heterogeneous Poisson null model. Additionally,
Ripley’s K value is transformed to the L function so
that it may be examined against a standardized score
of 1.0 (Dixon 2002).
Point Pattern Spatial
Analysis at El Arenal
El Arenal provided an outstanding opportunity
to apply methods of spatial point pattern analysis
to the study of the relationships between artifact
distributional patterns, site structure, and occupational history. The 1400 surface artifact plots at
El Arenal were analyzed using several methods of
point pattern analysis. The analysis was deliberately
approached as a sequential and iterative process.
That is, the surface distributions of various artifact
types and classes were subjected to an increasingly
focused series of analyses. At first, the total dataset
is examined in order to identify preliminary patterns
and determine whether generically related artifact
types, such as flakes and angular debitage, exhibited
similar distributional patterns and thus could be
combined into a fewer number of more readily interpretable classes. The spatial model is further refined
on the basis of these exploratory analyses, allowing
for the application of more sophisticated and robust
spatial methods. Another item incorporated into the
present analysis was the use of cultural features as
point plots. The center point UTM coordinates of
hearth and structural features were included as point
plots for comparison with artifact distributions. In
reference to ethnographic and ethnoarcheological
models of site structure and site use, these feature
plots served as the focal points from which to examine various artifact distributional patterns.
First Iteration
The first iteration involves an examination
of the entire surface dataset and all major artifact
codes for various core and tool forms in order to
identify global patterns of spatial aggregation and
segregation. Hodder and Okell’s A statistic (Hodder
and Okell 1978) was selected for the preliminary
data overview because it is a relatively straightforward calculation, the coefficients are readily
interpretable, and the coefficients are not overly
influenced by edge or boundary effects. Table 1

7
24

28
38
8
11
13

72
68

100

50
6

TestCore
PrepCore

Flk Tool
Uni Tool
Maint Tool
BifaceTool
Core Tool

Gstone
Gstone frag

Ceramic

Hearth
Structure

|
|

|

|
|

|
|
|
|
|

|
|

|
|

|

0.96
0.97

0.62

0.57
0.93
0.90

0.97
1.00

0.92
0.96

0.93
0.95
0.97
0.98
0.96

0.70
0.93

0.66
0.88
0.89
0.95
0.93
1.02
0.94

0.99
1.00

AD

1.00
0.99

Fl*

0.82
0.99

1.04

0.84
0.80

0.98
0.76
0.84
0.62
0.60

1.02
1.15

0.86

1.01
0.98

1.01
0.96
1.08
0.90
0.93

0.92
1.00

0.88
0.93

0.66
0.70
1.00
0.92

PC

TC

0.97
1.10

0.84

1.00
0.98

1.00
0.92
1.01
0.84
0.85

0.98
1.01

0.89
0.93

FT

1.00
1.00

0.67

0.93
0.97

0.92
1.00
1.07
1.05
0.96

0.76
0.96

0.95
0.95

UT

1.08
1.20

0.79

1.01
1.01

1.01
1.07
1.00
1.02
1.05

0.84
1.08

0.93
0.97

MT

0.97
0.89

0.55

0.89
0.96

0.84
1.05
1.02
1.00
1.00

0.62
0.90

1.02
0.98

BT

0.97
1.02

0.56

0.94
0.95

0.85
0.96
1.05
1.00
1.00

0.60
0.93

0.94
0.96

CT

1.00
1.09

0.75

1.00
1.00

1.00
0.93
1.01
0.89
0.94

0.84
1.01

0.92
0.97

GS

1.00
1.03

0.70

1.00
1.00

0.98
0.97
1.01
0.96
0.95

0.80
0.98

0.96
1.00

GSf

0.74
0.94

1.00

0.75
0.70

0.84
0.67
0.79
0.55
0.56

1.04
0.86

0.57
0.62

Cer

1.00
1.09

0.74

1.00
1.00

0.97
1.00
1.08
0.97
0.97

0.82
1.02

0.93
0.96

Hea

1.09
1.00

0.94

1.09
1.03

1.10
1.00
1.20
0.89
1.02

0.99
1.15

0.90
0.97

Str

*Codes in table heading match descriptive terms in column to the left: FL = Flake; AD = Angular Debris; TC = Tested Core; PC= Prepared Core; FT = Flake Tool; UT = Unifacial Tool; MT = Maintenance Tool (denticulate, graver, etc.); BT = Bifacial Tool; CT = Core Tool; GS = Ground Stone; GSf = Ground Stone Fragment; Cer = Ceramic; Hea =
Hearth; Str = Structure

<1.00 = spatially segregated (values of .70 or less are denoted in bold type)
1.00 = spatially intermingled

926
83

Count

Flake
Ang Deb

Type

Table 1. Hodder and Okell’s A statistic for surface artifact distribution at El Arenal.

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis
203

204

Texas Archeological Society

provides the Hodder and Okell A coefficients for
the global dataset.
Some aspects of the A coefficient must be taken
into account. First, as noted by Kintigh (1990), the
coefficients are symmetric. That is, the column and
row values between two artifacts classes are the
same. For example, the A coefficient for spatial association between flakes (row) and structures (column) is 0.90, while the statistic for the relationship
between structures (row) and flakes (column) is also
0.90. Second, the A coefficients are rather subtle and
a cursory review finds few major patterns; the small
number of coefficients less than 0.70 are indicated
in boldface in Table 1. Ceramic artifacts (illustrated
in Figure 5 below) and tested/nodular cores clearly
show the greatest degree of global segregation from

other artifact types. Other intra-class coefficients
are less pronounced, although the four classes of
formal tools generally have values greater than 1.0,
indicating that there is some spatial regularity in
their distribution and association. In addition, there
is a high degree of correspondence among A values
for flakes and angular debitage across all artifact
classes. A similar pattern is evident for ground stone
and ground stone fragment classes.1
In addition to the A coefficient, Hodder and
Okell’s procedure provides global intra-type distance measures: the average distance between each
data category at the site-wide (global) scale. For example, the mean distance between flakes and angular
debitage is 105.63, while that of ceramics and flakes
is 173.91. These values effectively serve as distance

3 5 28 7 0 0

3 5 28 6 5 0

3 5 28 6 0 0

3 5 28 5 5 0

3 5 28 5 0 0

3 5 28 4 5 0

C e r a m ic

3 5 28 4 0 0

O th e r A r tifa c t

0 m

50 m

10 0 m

38 6 8 00

3 8 68 5 0

3 8 69 0 0

3 8 69 5 0

3 87 0 0 0

3 87 0 5 0

3 87 1 00

38 7 1 50

Figure 5. Distribution of ceramic artifacts at El Arenal showing the spatial segregation of ceramic artifacts from major
artifact concentrations (Hodder and Okell’s A = 0.55 to 1.94)

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis
and similarity measures that can be incorporated
into other statistical procedures. In the present case,
a multidimensional scaling (MDS) analysis was
conducted on the global intra-type distances. MDS
is a method of data reduction that allows for a relatively simple two or three dimensional analysis of
multivariate distance or similarity measures. MDS
attempts to detect the structure, or meaningful underlying dimensions, in a set of distance measures
between objects or cases. This is accomplished by
assigning observations to specific locations in a
conceptual space, such that the distances between
points in the space match the given dissimilarities as
closely as possible. In many cases, the dimensions
of this conceptual space can be plotted on a graph
for further analysis and interpretation. The MDS
dimensional plot of the distance measures obtained
from the analysis of Hodder and Okell’s A statistic
is provided in Figure 6.
Upon examination of the A statistic and the
MDS plot, several patterns of interest are apparent
at this stage of the analysis:

•

•

Flake and angular debitage artifact classes
show close spatial similarities and may be
combined within a single class of debitage.

Whole and fragmentary ground stone
artifact classes show close spatial similari­
ties and may be combined within a single
class of ground stone. Ground stone,
including both whole and fragmentary
items, tends to be closely associated with
hearth features, although whether this
rep­r esents a functional association or
is the result of the recycling of ground
stone as heating stones (a common pattern
documented throughout the Jornada region
of West Texas) requires further analysis.
The four categories of formal tools show
relatively close spatial associations and
may be combined into a single class of
formal tools.

Ceramics, cores, and informal flake tools
show the greatest degree of spatial segregation from other artifact classes and features, a potentially significant observation
that will be further explored later in this
article. Ceramics appear to have enough
distance from all features and artifact
classes to warrant their consideration as a
separate component, as would be expected

Dimension 2

•

•

205

Dimension 1
Figure 6. Multidimensional Scaling plot of El Arenal distance coefficients from Hodder and Okell’s A.

Texas Archeological Society

206

given the chronometric analysis reviewed
previously.
•

Another significant observation is that struc­
tures and hearth features are spatially segregated from most artifact classes.

This preliminary analysis lends confidence that
consistent and interpretable spatial patterning can be
recovered from the surface artifact distributions at
El Arenal. Thus, the next stage is to shift the focus
from the global (site-wide) to the local and examine
the results of nearest neighbor analysis (Table 2). In
contrast to the A statistic, nearest neighbor values
are asymmetric. As Kintigh (1990) notes, this may
often more accurately reflect the spatial associations
of various artifact classes in archeological circumstances. For example, compare the column values
for ceramics (which are all >1.40) that show high
degrees of spatial segregation from all other artifact
classes. However, the row values for ceramics are
much smaller, indicating relatively high levels of
spatial association. This reflects the fact that, while
most ceramic artifacts have a lithic flake nearby,
the majority of flakes do not have a nearby ceramic.
Thus, the asymmetric and highly variable nearest
neighbor values reflect the asymmetric relationship
between ceramics and lithic flakes at El Arenal.
Due to this relationship, there is quite a bit more
variation, or “noise,” among the nearest neighbor
values in Table 2. Some of this variation is undoubtedly due to statistically random (stochastic)
processes in nature, as well as small sample sizes
among some classes.2 However, again some important patterning can be detected.
As first observed among the A statistic values, the
nearest neighbor coefficients for various types of formal lithic tools, ground stone/ground stone fragments,
and flake/debitage classes show relatively consistent
associations across all categories. This observation
leads to two important conclusions: first, these paired
artifact classes can be combined to simplify subsequent analyses; and second, the two spatial techniques
have identified similar associations, lending credence
to the claim that interpretable spatial patterning can
be recovered from El Arenal.
One of the most striking patterns is that the
series of nearest neighbor coefficients for house
structures are uniformly elevated, indicating that
structures seem to be spatially segregated from
most artifact categories. Confirmation of this pattern is provided in Figure 7. The circular artifact

patterns around some of the structures are important.
While it is apparent that some represent the scatter
of artifacts eroding from the margins of circular
or semi-circular coppice dunes, this does not by
any means explain most of the patterns visible in
Figure 7. Ethnographic studies have observed that
a continual disposal of refuse often creates large,
crescent-shaped, scatters of refuse around living
spaces (DeBoer and Lathrap 1979; O’Connell 1987;
O’Connell et al. 1991), and the similar patterns at El
Arenal are worthy of further consideration. It should
also be noted that many house structures left little
or no visible traces, and therefore additional houses
were undoubtedly present at El Arenal but were not
detected during excavation. Other circular and semicircular artifact patterns may reflect the locations of
such undetected house structures.
Second Iteration—Refinement of the Model
A critical issue in the analyses conducted in the
first iteration involves the potential for bias resulting
from the massive concentration of artifacts situated
on the westward-facing slope of the elevated dune
terrace in the northeastern area of the site. Nearly 50
percent (695 of 1394) of the surface artifacts were
recovered from this 50 x 30 m area and adjacent road
cut (see Figures 2-3, 5, and 7), and subsurface artifact densities in this area were among the highest yet
documented for a prehistoric site in the Hueco basin.
The density of lithic artifacts in this area suggests
the possible location of a disposal area for secondary refuse. A critical issue established in the project
research design—namely whether multiple occupations tend to smear and obscure spatial associations
through the creation of trash dumps (Bamforth et
al. 2005; Kelly et al. 2005; O’Connell et al. 1991;
Stevenson 1991) or overprinting and the creation
of palimpsest artifact distributions (Camilli et al.
1988)—is relevant when viewing this exceptionally
dense artifact scatter. Consequently, the northeastern
area of the site is examined in greater depth to explore these issues. The presence of numerous hearth
features in the excavation blocks clearly suggest
that this area was the focus of several intensive occupation episodes and thus it is likely that clearing
of artifact debris and deposition of secondary refuse
also took place.
To examine the spatial structure of this artifact
concentration, as well as its potential biasing effects
on the overall spatial patterns observed in the first
iteration described above, the database of surface

.51
.41

.34
.25
.68
.64
.29
.63
.74
.43
.73
.66
.64
.63
1.16
3.30

Flake
Angular Debris

Test Core
Prep Core

Flake Tool

Uniface Tool
Maintenance Tool
Biface Tool
Core Tool

Ground stone
Ground stone fragment

Ceramic

Hearth
Structure

.91
1.28

.60

1.08
.98

.86
.97
.66
1.36

.82

.41
.86

.82
.96

Test
Core

.70
1.24

.50

.61
.57

.79
.75
.38
.81

.55

.76
.52

.53
.49

Prep
Core

.79
1.33

.72

.70
.66

.61
.64
.58
.98

.79

.63
.66

.47
.51

Flake
Tool

.91
1.58

.68

.95
1.05

.63
.48
.50
1.17

.58

.76
.86

.67
.83

Uni
Tool

.85
.79

.91

.97
.94

.70
.72
.64
1.02

.69

.72
.81

.77
.79

.68
1.05

.55

.79
.76

.61
.79
.88
.85

.70

.49
.57

.51
.62

Maint Biface
Tool
Tool

.97
1.30

2.06

.86
.80

.92
1.02
.71
.63

1.02

1.74
1.08

.61
.73

Core
Tool

.67
1.23

.71

.52
.50

.96
1.11
.45
.58

.68

.75
.58

.53
.63

Grnd
Stone

.75
1.81

.61

.53
.55

.75
.89
.33
.69

.74

1.02
.50

.48
.48

Gs
Frag

2.12
2.73

.14

2.32
1.80

2.54
3.03
1.58
3.55

2.22

1.40
1.93

2.08
2.21

Ceramic

.60
.59

.64

.62
.52

.86
1.41
.54
1.01

.94

.61
.61

.54
.61

.62
1.36

.92

.67
.73

.74
.69
.58
.69

.66

.68
.65

.60
.67

Hearth Structure

* Ang Deb=Angular Debris; Test Core = Tested Core; Prep Core = Prepared Core; Uni Tool = Unifacial Tool; Maint Tool = Maintenance Tool (denticulate, graver, etc.); Grnd
Stone = Ground Stone; Gs Frag = Ground Stone Fragment

<1.00 = classes have relatively greater degree of spatial aggregation
1.00 = classes are randomly distributed
>1.00 = classes have relatively greater degree of spatial segregation

1.14
2.25

1.33

.83
.68

1.12
1.26
.78
.92

.66

.45
.71

Ang
Deb*

		
Flake

Table 2. Nearest neighbor coefficients for surface spatial distribution at El Arenal.

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis
207

208

Texas Archeological Society

3 5 28 7 0 0

3 5 28 6 5 0

3 5 28 6 0 0

3 5 28 5 5 0

3 5 28 5 0 0

3 5 28 4 5 0

3 5 28 4 0 0
H u t s tr u c tu r e
A r tifa c t
3 5 28 3 5 0

0m

5 0m

38 6 8 0 0

3 8 68 5 0

1 00 m

38 6 9 00

3 8 69 5 0

3 8 7 00 0

38 7 0 50

3 87 1 0 0

3 8 7 15 0

Figure 7. Plot of artifacts and house structures at El Arenal, illustrating the apparent relationship between house structures
and semi-circular artifact clusters.

artifact distributions at El Arenal was partitioned
into two datasets: the northeast artifact concentration
and the remainder of the site (Figure 8). The second
iteration of the analysis examines these two areas as
individual entities.
The two areas under study have radically differing dimensions: the northeastern (NE) concentration
measures approximately 7,000 m2 while the remaining site area is approximately 68,500 m2. Accordingly, Hodder and Okell’s A statistic was selected
as the preliminary method because its is the one of
the various archeological methods of point pattern
analysis that is not subject to boundary and edge

effects. The use of nearest neighbor, local density
analysis, and other global methods of point pattern
analysis (all dependent upon calculating mean artifact densities within a specific area) would result
in biased coefficients because the two sub-areas
differ in size. The results of the Hodder and Okell
A statistics for the two partitions are quite revealing.
For simplicity of presentation the intra-type distance
measurements for both partitions were subjected to
MDS analysis, rather than comparing the dozens of
coefficients (Figure 9).
When the northeast site quadrant is excluded,
the spatial associations of artifact classes across

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis

209

3528700

3528650

3528600

3528550

3528500

3528450

3528400

N E te r r a c e c o n c e n tr a tio n
R e m a in d e r o f s it e

3528350

0m

50m

100m

386800

386850

386900

386950

387000

387050

387100

387150

Figure 8. Plot of artifacts at El Arenal illustrating the division of the surface artifact distribution into two spatial units
for further analysis.

the remainder of the site are even more robust and
interpretable than the previous site-wide patterning
(see Figure 6). Formal tools are situated together
along the Dimension 1 axis; house structures are
also associated with this dimension, although they
are not as closely grouped with the cluster of formal
tools seen at the left side of the graph. Flakes,
angular debris, and whole and fragmentary ground
stone artifacts are situated in close proximity to
hearth features, and all these items are clustered in
the center of the MDS plot (lower chart on Figure
9) and surrounded by other artifact classes. Larger
artifact types such as cores are again situated
some distance from hearths and structures. The
spatial dimensions illustrated in this plot are

strongly reminiscent of the hearth-centered spatial
distributions and peripheral discard of larger objects
that have been documented among numerous
ethnographic and archeological contexts.
This patterning is further confirmed through
local density analysis (LDA) comparing the spatial
clustering of various artifact classes with hearth features (Figure 10). LDA is subject to similar boundary definition and edge effect problems as nearest
neighbor analysis but is useful for identifying basic
associations between paired artifact or feature
classes (Kintigh 1990). As seen in the LDA plot, the
general trends identified through the previous set of
analyses are further supported: debitage and ground
stone are both spatially aggregated with hearth

210

Texas Archeological Society
Euclidean distance model

Dimension 2

Northeast
Artifact
Northeast Artifact
Concentration
Concentration

Dimension 1

Dimension 2

Euclidean distance model

Remaining
Remaining
Site Area
Site
Area
Dimension 1

Figure 9. Multidimensional scaling (MDS) plots of distance coefficients from Hodder and Okell’s A for the partitioned
datasets at El Arenal. Upper chart: MDS plot for the northeastern artifact concentration; Lower chart: MDS plot for
artifact distributions across the remainder of site.

features, tools are much less clustered and tend to be
separated from hearths, and cores are segregated at
distances of 20 m or so from hearth features. Thus,
the LDA analysis again displays spatial associations
at various scales that have broad correlations with
artifact drop, toss, and displacement zones identified
in hunter-gatherer ethnographic and ethnoarcheological research (Binford 1978; Enloe et al. 1994;

Stevenson 1991; Timmins 1996; Vaquero and Pasto
2002).
In stark contrast, the plot of spatial associations
in Figure 9 for the northeastern artifact concentration
has little, if any, interpretable structure. Hearths
are spatially segregated from most other artifact
classes along Dimension 1, a pattern that is clearly
in opposition to the model settlement expectations.

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis

211

Debitage – Hearth
Core – Hearth
Flake tool – Hearth
Formal tool – Hearth
Groundstone – Hearth
Structure – Hearth

L
o
c
a
l
D
e
n
s
i
t
y
Debitage

C
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t

Groundstone

Core

Flake tool

Structure
Formal tool

Local Density ?eighborhood Radius

Figure 10. Local density analysis (LDA) of spatial relationships between hearth features and other data categories.

Other atypical patterns include the segregation
between ground stone items and hearths, the
position of flakes and angular debitage in different
dimensional quadrants, and the fact that there is little
or no consistent association between tool forms. The
overall impression is one of a complete absence of
spatial consistency, supporting the interpretation that
this area served as an artifact dump.
Patterns of Refuse Disposal
at the Terrace Edge
The results of the spatial analysis for the northeastern surface artifact concentration and subsequent
exclusion of this area from further point pattern
analyses indicate that artifact deposition in this area
resulted from different cultural practices than was
the case for the remainder of El Arenal. As noted
earlier, nearly 50 percent of the surface artifacts
were collected from this area. When combined with
the fact that analysis of point pattern distributions
found little or no interpretable spatial structure in
this area (see Figure 9, upper chart), these density

patterns are considered as evidence that the down
slope surface of the dune terrace served as a refuse
dump during several of the main periods of occupation at El Arenal. Granted, occupations did take
place in this area as indicated by the presence of
several hearth features, but as occupations shifted
southwards and eastwards this area was more intensively used as a refuse dump.
The artifact densities along the northeastern
terrace of El Arenal bear a resemblance to some of
the density values for refuse deposits associated with
more intensively-occupied and structurally complex
hunter-gatherer and agriculturalist residential sites in
the Jornada Mogollon region (Miller 1990; Whalen
1994; see comparative data in Miller [2007a]),
although they do not quite match the densities of
intensive and localized trash middens at these sites.
The densities along the northeast terrace edge are
nevertheless much more substantial than those typically associated with hearth features and short-term
camps in the area.
The identification of an incipient midden and
refuse disposal area at a Late Archaic site has additional implications for interpreting the nature and

212

Texas Archeological Society

duration of settlement. Ethnographic studies have
observed that the continual disposal of refuse at
sites occupied for longer periods often creates large,
crescent-shaped scatters of debris around living
spaces (Bartram et al. 1991; DeBoer and Lathrap
1979; O’Connell 1987; O’Connell et al. 1991).
Meehan (1982) notes that debris dumped around
the periphery of clusters of hearths at Australian aborigine camps can form quite dense mounds. There
is a hint of an arc or crescent shape in the terrace
edge dump, but this may be more of an artifice of
geomorphic and topographic factors. It is also likely
that, unlike the dedicated pit house trash deposits
at later Jornada villages, the materials along the
terrace at El Arenal were discarded during several
occupations. Therefore, while the El Arenal deposits
are not quite of the magnitude and density of later
village settlements, they nevertheless are much more
substantial than Late Archaic occupations typical of
the Hueco Bolson.
The Spatial Dimensions of
Settlement at El Arenal
The spatial and density analyses conducted to
this point reveal two findings of interest. First, that
meaningful and interpretable spatial patterning can
be recovered from the surface distributional plots at
El Arenal. Second, the combination of two refuse
disposal patterns—the drop, displacement, and toss
areas identified through point pattern analysis and
the incipient midden or dump at the terrace edge—
strongly suggest that the Late Archaic occupations at
El Arenal were relatively longer-term and residential
in nature than commonly encountered in the central
Hueco Bolson. Having established that interpretable
and meaningful spatial patterning can be discerned
among the artifact and feature distributions at El
Arenal, these patterns can then be analyzed in
greater depth.
The final analysis employs more robust tests of
spatial randomness or association: Ripley’s L (the
standardized transformation of Ripley’s K function)
and the Wiegand-Moloney O-ring statistic. These
are robust methods for detecting the multiple scales
at which non-random clustered or segregated artifact
distributions occur and are less subject to boundary
and edge effects. Ripley’s K and L functions are
cumulative, in that they accumulate point densities
at increasingly larger radii and larger spatial scales
may be somewhat biased by the “memory” of

patterns calculated for smaller scales (Haase 1995;
Wiegand and Moloney 2004). The O-ring statistic
avoids these cumulative effects and provides a
more accurate and unbiased estimate provided that
sufficient sample numbers of points are available.
The O-ring function offers further advantages in
that it measures spatial randomness at each interval
r, while Ripley’s K and L functions only provide
a measure of spatial randomness up to a specified
interval (a multiple of r intervals). In this study, I
consider the L function to be complementary to the
O-ring statistic.
Clustered distributions are clearly visible at
El Arenal. While they have been created and conditioned to some degree by aeolian and erosional
processes, as discussed earlier there is a substantial degree of clustering that cannot be attributed
to natural causes. These clusters are inferred to
represent activity areas. The dimensions of these
activity areas may be analogous to artifact and
debris distributions recorded in numerous modern
hunter-gatherer ethnographic studies (Bartram et
al. 1991; Binford 1978; Enloe et al. 1994; Hayden
and Cannon 1983; Koetje 1994; Murray 1980;
O’Connell 1987; O’Connell et al. 1992; Stevenson
1991; Yellen 1996). If so, the dimensions of these
clusters can be compared against the ethnographic
record to estimate group size and length of occupation at El Arenal.
This comparison begins at the smallest scale—
that of hearth-associated artifact patterns—and then
works up to larger spatial dimensions. Due to the
large areas of blank space surrounding the main site
area, the spatial analysis has been conducted using
a heterogeneous Poisson null model that searches
for statistical clustering within predefined areas of
point densities. This approach defines a homogenous
sub-region (Figure 11a-b) that excludes blank areas,
thus increasing the reliability of the results.
At the smallest scale, the spatial distribution of
the most common artifact type, debitage, is examined
first. As established by the first point pattern iteration,
the spatial distributions of flakes and angular debris
are very highly clustered and thus these two artifact
categories have been combined under the term debitage. Calculation of the Wiegand-Moloney O-ring
statistic was conducted using 1 m intervals and the
results have been graphed against the 95 percent
confidence intervals (Figure 11c-d). The univariate
graph illustrates spatial clustering or segregation
among debitage; the bivariate plot shows clustering
of debitage in relation to hearth features.

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis

213

b
b

a
a

cc

d
d

ElElArenal
Arenal

Figure 11. Definition of spatial scales for lithic debitage at El Arenal using the Wiegand-Moloney O-ring statistic
(Spatial scale r = 1 m): a, graphic illustrating the definition of the homogenous sub-region for the El Arenal point
pattern to eliminate edge effect bias resulting from inclusion of empty cells; b, definition of density regions defined for
the application of a heterogeneous Poisson null model; c, univariate distribution of the O-ring statistic for debitage; d,
bivariate distribution of O-ring statistic for debitage and hearth features.

The univariate graph in Figure 11c indicates that
debitage is very highly clustered at a radius of 1 m,
slightly clustered at scales of 2-5 m, and spatially
segregated at scales of 6-17 m, at which point another scalar dimension is seen with the slight clustering

of debitage distributions at intervals of 17-20 m. The
high degree of clustering evident at scales of 1 m
is highly reminiscent of experimentally-produced
flake scatters. Newcomer and Sieveking (1980; see
also Barton and Bergman 1982) found that 16 core

214

Texas Archeological Society

reduction and stone axe production experiments
produced roughly circular debris distributions with
the greatest densities occurring within a 40-50 cm
area with additional scatters extending to an average
distance of around 1 m.
Thus, the high degree of clustering of lithic
debitage at scales of 1 m may represent the remains
of core reduction and tool production activities conducted near hearth features. It is encouraging that the
bivariate relationship between debitage and hearth
features shows a generally similar distribution (see
Figure 11d). The bimodal peak at 4 m is interesting
and indicates additional toss zones beyond the 1 m
radius of most artifacts. This likely represents the
secondary displacement and toss zone as defined
by Stevenson (1991). In addition, both graphs have

evidence, albeit rather weak, of additional clustering
at the 18-20 m interval. While this pattern is weak
among the debitage, it is stronger in subsequent
studies and suggests that clustering is present at two
spatial scales.
All artifact classes are examined for the next
analysis, to define the global scale or scales at
which all artifacts aggregate or separate across
the entire site area (Figure 12). Again, the spatial
radius is set at 1 m increments. The univariate Oring statistic identifies a strong degree of clustering
at r = 1 m and continued significant clustering at
scales of r = 2, 3, and 4 m. Artifacts are randomly
distributed at scales of 5-12 m, and there is a slight
degree of clustering between 13-16 m, after which
artifacts are weakly segregated for the remaining

Univariate O-ring statistic (W-M)
1.5

a

Oll(r)

1.2
0.9
0.6
0.3
0

1

2 3 4

5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25

Spatial scale r

Univariate L-function (Ripley)
b

Lll(r)

7
5.6
4.2
2.8
1.4
0

1

2 3 4

5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25

Spatial scale r

Figure 12. Definition of global spatial scales at El Arenal: a, distribution of O-ring statistic for all artifacts at spatial
scales r = 1 m; b, distribution of Ripley’s L function at spatial scales r = 1 m. Light lines denote 95 percent confidence
intervals for spatial randomness derived from a heterogeneous Poisson null model.

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis
intervals. The Ripley’s L function shows that some
degree of clustering occurs up to scales of 5-6 m,
with spatial segregation between 8-12 m, and a
very slight clustering at 16 m.
The slight inconsistencies on the order of 1-2
m are not unexpected, given the different sampling
populations underlying the two approaches.3 Based
on these analyses, a strong level of clustering is
present at intervals of between 1 m and up to 4-5
m, with a second weaker trend of clustering at approximately 14-18 m intervals. Translating these
interval (radius) measurements into areas (a = πr2),
major non-random artifact clustering occurs within
individually bounded areas of 50-78.5 m2. These
clusters are often subsumed within larger clusters
measuring between 615-1020 m2.
Relating the El Arenal
Spatial Dimensions
to Ethnographic Studies
of Site Space
The dimensional measures identified through
Ripley’s L function and the O-ring statistic prove
important because they can theoretically be related to the dimensions of debris scatters and hut
or house-centered activity areas documented ethnographically among several contemporary huntergatherer groups. The dimensions of such house and
hearth-centered activity areas have been found to
correlate with the size of the resident household
group and duration of occupation (Bartram et al.
1991; Kent 1991; O’Connell 1987; Stevenson 1991;
Yellen 1977). The dimensions of activity areas
at !Kung San campsites occupied by small social
groups for relatively short periods are significantly
smaller than those occupied for longer periods by
larger Alyawara household groups. This pattern
tends to hold true in the broader cross-cultural
analysis reported by Kent (1991).
Yellen (1977:103-106) develops several terms to
describe debris scatters at !Kung (Dobe San) camps,
and two have been most commonly used for comparative studies: absolute limit of scatter (ALS) and
limited nuclear area (LNA). The ALS is an objective
term describing the total spatial limit of all artifacts
and features at an abandoned settlement. The LNA
comprises the location of a hut or house structure,
exterior hearths, and associated artifact scatter.
O’Connell (1987) uses the LNA to compare his data
on Alyawara household size and occupational span

215

against the !Kung; Bartram et al. (1991) adopt the
ALS to measure Kua (Basarwa) camps.
The two cluster dimensions at El Arenal can
be compared to these size dimensions of Dobe
San, Kua, and Alyawara household areas. A high
degree of non-random clustering was observed
both among debitage and hearths and among all
artifacts at scales of up to 4-5 m in radius, or approximately 50-80 m2 in area. It can be assumed
on relatively strong grounds that these clusters,
consisting of closely associated groups of artifacts
and hearths, are the equivalent of the LNA spatial
dimension. A second spatial dimension consists of
several LNA grouped within larger areas ranging
in size from 620-1000 m2 in area. Although a bit
more subjective, these clusters likely relate to the
ALS in a generic sense.
Figure 13 compares these two spatial dimensions at El Arenal against a plot of area and occupation span for the ethnographic examples of LNA
and ALS. Comparing the LNA data to the regression line for the Dobe San !Kung and Alyawara,
it is evident that the dimensions of occupational
clusters at El Arenal fall within the larger range of
Alyawara settlements occupied for periods ranging
from 35 days to upwards of 60 days. There is little
overlap between the El Arenal dimensions and the
LNA measurements for Dobe San camps occupied
for 1-20 days. Likewise, the ALS measurements
for El Arenal are much greater than those recorded
among temporary and logistical camps of the Kua,
but are relatively close to the dimensions of their dry
season base camps that were occupied for periods of
two to three months.
Based on these comparisons, an estimate of the
occupation span for many of the proveniences at El
Arenal would range from 35-60 days and perhaps
as much as 100 days, but would clearly not meet
the expectations for short-term settlements of less
than 20 days duration. It must be emphasized that
these statements are intended as a heuristic—or
model—estimate of occupation duration for several
of the prominent artifact clusters at El Arenal, a
fact which is evident by the imprecision of the time
estimate (i.e., ranging from one to three months).
Nevertheless, these estimates of occupational span
are a notable improvement over simple guesswork.
Furthermore, having established that many or most
of the areas at El Arenal represent comparatively
long-term residential occupations, an investigation
of other aspects of settlement and material culture
can proceed from a more secure vantage point.

216

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 13. Relationship between occupation span and dimensions of debris scatters in modern hunter-gatherer camps
(data compiled from Bartram et al. 1991; O’Connell 1987; Yellen 1977).

Summary
The identification of spatial patterning is not
an end onto itself, for as stated by Kent (1991:56),
“[o]nly through understanding the principles behind
patterns, rather than simply describing their presence or absence, it is possible to develop realistic
and predictive models of the past.” The spatial associations and dimensions of clustering observed
at El Arenal have been compared to those defined
through actualistic studies at hunter-gatherer settlements throughout the world. Actualistic research,
including ethnographic, ethnoarcheological, and
experimental approaches, offers important observations for the modeling and interpretation of spatial
patterns. Ethnographic studies of contemporary
hunter-gatherer and horticultural groups provide
invaluable insights for modeling the spatial structure of prehistoric sites. Aside from the classic
ethnographic accounts, several ethnoarcheological
studies have examined artifact and material distributions at abandoned hunter-gatherer settlements.
Binford (1978, 1982), Murray (1980), Whitelaw

(1983), Spurling and Hayden (1984), and O’Connell
(1987) conducted influential studies that examined
the behavioral patterns that created repetitive spatial
relationships between features and various classes
of material culture. Additional studies have built
upon these initial efforts and applied them to other
areas of the world (Enloe et al. 1994; Hayden and
Cannon 1983; Koetje 1994; O’Connell et al. 1992;
Yellen 1996), while other studies have expanded
the behavioral perspective to also bring into focus
the specific social contexts that affect the patterning of features and materials, such as kinship and
food sharing (Kent 1991; Kent and Vierech 1991;
Stevenson 1991).
Numerous ethnographic and ethnoarcheological
studies have observed patterns of artifact discard
areas surrounding primary living spaces and activity areas (Binford 1978; Enloe et al. 1994; Hayden
and Cannon 1983; Koetje 1994; Murray 1980;
O’Connell 1987; O’Connell et al. 1992; Stevenson
1991; Whitelaw 1981, 1996; Yellen 1996). The
collective effort of these studies has identified a
consistent ethnographic and archeological signature

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis
at hunter-gatherer camps involving relationships between hearth-centered activity areas, refuse disposal
patterns, and the duration and intensity of occupation. Hearths are typically located in relationship
to shelters and living spaces. Patterns of artifact
discard and loss are associated with hearth-centered
activity areas, including the “drop and toss zones”
defined by Binford (1978) and identified at numerous archeological campsites (Enloe et al. 1994;
Simek and Larick 1983; Stevenson 1991; Timmins
1996; Vaquero and Pasto 2002). Longer-term or
more intensive use of hearth activity areas results
in the accumulation of various classes of debris,
refuse, and discarded items. At camps occupied for
longer durations, these areas are cleaned and debris
is removed to the perimeter of the activity area, or
what Stevenson (1991) terms the “displacement”
zone. There is a selection bias in this process, in that
artifacts removed or tossed tend to be larger or perceived as more hazardous (e.g., cores and lithic tools
with sharp edges, rotted bone scrap, heating stones,
broken ground stone) while smaller items such as
small waste flakes tend to be overlooked and remain
as primary refuse. This creates a clear size sorting
among artifact classes (O’Connell 1987; Stevenson
1991). The ultimate expression of such discard patterns would be the formation of formal trash middens
at intensively occupied residential sites.
In contrast, site maintenance is much less
common at temporary camps (Binford 1978; Jones
1993; Yellen 1977, 1996), and thus it is expected
that lesser degrees of size sorting and differentiation
among artifact classes would occur in this context.
This would also result in little or no distinction
between peripheral displacement zones and the
immediate drop and toss zones surrounding hearth
activity areas.
The dimensions of hearth-centered activity areas have been found to correlate with the size of the
resident household group and duration of occupation
(Kent 1991; O’Connell 1987; Stevenson 1991; Yellen 1977). The dimensions of activity areas at !Kung
San campsites occupied by small social groups for
relatively short periods are significantly smaller than
those occupied for longer periods by larger Alyawara household groups. This pattern tends to hold
true in the broader cross-cultural analysis reported
by Kent (1991).
El Arenal presents a rather robust case where
such patterns can be identified in the archeological

217

record. Clear evidence of size sorting was identified through multiple spatial techniques, with larger
items such as cores found at a distance from hearth
features. Hearth-centered artifact distributions were
present across the site. In addition, the down slope
area of the northern dune terrace was identified as
a dump. The distributional and discard patterns
identified strongly indicate that the occupations at El
Arenal were residential in nature and of longer duration than many of the typical Late Archaic camps in
the Hueco Bolson.
These findings were corroborated by subsequent
analysis of house floor areas (after Binford 1990),
where the floor areas of informal house structures
at El Arenal were found to be larger than the typical Late Archaic houses across the region (Miller
2007a). Additionally, the presence of a prehistoric
playa near the site would have provided incentive
for longer-duration stays at El Arenal and other
nearby sites.
Spatial analyses at El Arenal have been used
to make general inferences regarding the duration
of settlement, the size of a resident social group,
and the systemic function and orientation of the
site (i.e., residential forager, residential collector,
task-specific collector). The term general is used
here because the results presented in this article
are not proposed by any means to reconstruct the
actual group composition and occupational history
of El Arenal. However, spatial patterning provides a
means of differentiating, on a heuristic level, some
fundamental interpretations regarding the nature of
prehistoric settlement at the site. The study of spatial
patterning has contributed valuable insights into
issues of occupation duration, residential mobility,
and group composition, and the overall systemic
function of El Arenal in Late Archaic settlement
systems.
Other spatial analyses conducted at various
scales throughout the Jornada Mogollon region,
ranging from intrasite studies to large survey regions, have identified corroborative and contrastive
patterns in terms of the use of site space (Graves et
al. 2009; Kroulek 2008; Leckman 2009a, 2009b;
Leckman et al. 2009; Miller 2007b, 2007c). Further
applications of methods of point pattern analysis
will continue to differentiate different forms of
prehistoric spatial organization, thus leading to the
development of more robust models of Archaic
period settlement organization and landscape use.

218

Texas Archeological Society
End Notes

1. At this preliminary stage of the analysis, whole and
fragmentary ground stone were maintained as separate
classes because of the potential association of ground
stone fragments with hearth features due to the recycling
of broken ground stone tools as rock heating elements.
2. The small sample sizes of some artifact classes
can result in drastic differences in nearest neighbor (NN)
statistics and elevated degrees of asymmetry among
paired intra-class coefficients. For example, if only two
projectile points were present at the site and both were
recovered from a small concentration of flakes, the intraclass NN statistic for projectiles to flakes would be >1.0,
reflecting the fact that all projectile points are near flakes.
However, the NN statistic for flakes to projectiles would
be very low, since the vast majority of flakes across the
site are distant from the two projectile points.
3. Ripley’s K function tests for complete spatial
randomness for all measured points within a radius r;
the O-ring function tests for spatial randomness for all
points located at a radius r. Accordingly, the underlying
sample population at each interval r will be greater for the
Ripley’s K and L functions.

Acknowledgments
The archeological research and mitigation
program at El Arenal was funded and supported by
the Directorate of Environment, Fort Bliss, Texas.
Credit is due to past and present staff, including
Brett Ruby, Jim Bowman, Sue Sitton, Brian Knight,
Martha Yduarte, and Keith Landreth. The field crew
consisted of Brian Knight, Chris Lowry, Chad Burt,
Tim Graves, and Mike Kirkwood. Mark Willis and
Martin Goetz were instrumental in correcting and
geo-rectifying the original HMAP mapping data
from El Arenal. Phil Dering of Shumla Archaeobotanical Services conducted the flotation analysis.
Steve Hall conducted the geomorphological and
geochronological studies at El Arenal that proved
critical in evaluating the artifact distributions.
References Cited

Bamforth, D. B., M. Becker, and J. Hudson
2005 Intrasite Spatial Analysis, Ethnoarchaeology, and
Paleoindian Land-Use on the Great Plains. American
Antiquity 70:561-580.
Barton, R. N. E. and C. A. Bergman
1982 Hunters and Hengitsbury: Some Evidence from
Experimental Archaeology. World Archaeology
14:237-248.
Bartram, L. E., E. M. Kroll, and H. T. Bunn
1991 Variability in Camp Structure and Bone Food Refuse
Patterning at Kua San Hunter-Gatherer Camps. In
The Interpretation of Archaeological Spatial Patterning, edited by E. M. Knoll and T. D. Price, pp.
77-148. Plenum Press, New York.
Binford, L. R.
1978 Dimensional Analysis of Behavior and Site Structure: Learning from an Eskimo Hunting Stand.
American Antiquity 43:330-361.
1983 In Pursuit of the Past. Thames and Hudson, London.

1990 Mobility, Housing, and Environment: A Comparative Study. Journal of Anthropological Research
406:119-152.
Camilli, E. L., L. Wandsnider, and J. I. Ebert
1988 Distributional Survey and Excavation of Archaeological Landscapes in the Vicinity of El Paso, Texas.
Bureau of Land Management, Las Cruces District,
Las Cruces, New Mexico.
Carmichael, D. L.
1985 Archeological Excavations at Two Prehistoric
Campsites Near Keystone Dam, El Paso, Texas.
Occasional Paper No. 14. University Museum, New
Mexico State University, Las Cruces.
Church, T. and M. Sale
2003 Uncertain Futures: Mesilla Phase Archaeology in
the Tularosa Basin, Data Recovery at FB 16697 (LA
126396) and FB 16698 (LA 126395). Historic and
Natural Resources Report No. 00-03, Conservation
Division, Directorate of Environment, United States
Army Air Defense Artillery Center and Fort Bliss,
Texas, and Lone Mountain Report No. 523, Lone
Mountain Archaeological Services, Inc., El Paso.
Clarke, D. L. (editor)
1977 Spatial Archaeology. Academic Press, London.

Aldenderfer, M. and H. Maschner (editors)
1996 Anthropology, Space, and Geographic Information
Systems. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Connolly, J. and M. Lake
2006 Geographical Information Systems in Archaeology.
Cambridge Manuals in Archaeology, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Andersen, M.
1992 Spatial Analysis of Two-Species Interactions. Oecologia 91:134-140.

Dale, M. R. T.
1999 Spatial Pattern Analysis in Plant Ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis
Dale, M. R. T., P. M. Dixon, M. J. Fortin, P. Legendre, D. E.
Myers, and M. S. Rosenberg
2002 Conceptual and Mathematical Relationships
Among Methods for Spatial Analysis. Ecography
25:558-577.
DeBoer, W. R. and D. W. Lathrap
1979 The Making and Breaking of Shipibo-Conibo
Ceramics. In Ethnoarchaeology: Implications of
Ethnography for Archaeology, edited by C. Kramer,
pp, 102-138. Columbia University Press, New York.
Dering, P.
2007 Plant Remains from 41EP3175, 41EP3259,
41EP3266, and 41EP3326. Appendix D In Excavations at El Arenal and Late Archaic and Early Formative Period Sites in the Hueco Mountain Project
Area of Fort Bliss, Texas, by M. Miller. Historic and
Natural Resources Report No. 02-12. Directorate of
Environment, Fort Bliss, Texas.
Diggle, P. J.
1983 Statistical Analysis of Spatial Point Patterns. Academic Press, London.
Dixon, P. M.
2002 Ripley’s K Function. Encyclopedia of Environmetrics 3:1796-1803.
Doleman, W. H.
1992 Geomorphic and Behavioral Processes Affecting
Site and Assemblage Formation: The EARM Data.
In Landscape Archeology in the Southern Tularosa
Basin, Volume 3: Archeological Distributions and
Prehistoric Human Ecology, edited by W. H. Doleman, R. C. Chapman, R. L. Stauber, and J. Piper, pp.
73-106. Office of Contract Archeology, University
of New Mexico, Albuquerque.
1997a Landscape Oriented Research on White Sands Missile Range: The BorderStar 85 and GBFEL-TIE
Archaeological Projects. In Proceedings of the
Ninth Jornada Mogollon Conference, edited by R.
P. Mauldin, J. D. Leach, and S. Ruth, pp. 29-58.
Publications in Archaeology No. 12. Centro de Investigaciones Arqueologicas, El Paso.

1997b Defining Archaeological Landscapes: An Example
from the Southern Tularosa Basin, New Mexico. In
Proceedings of the Ninth Jornada Mogollon Conference, edited by R. P. Mauldin, J. D. Leach, and S.
Ruth, pp. 59-92. Publications in Archaeology No. 12.
Centro de Investigaciones Arqueologicas, El Paso.
Enloe, J., F. David, and T. Hare
1994 Patterns of Faunal Processing at Section 27 of
Pincevent: The Use of Spatial Analysis and Ethnoarchaeological Data in the Interpretation of Archaeological Site Structure. Journal of Anthropological
Archaeology 13:105-124.

219

Ennes, M. J.
1999 An Investigation of Archaic and Formative Period
Settlement Organization in the Central Tularosa
Basin, South-Central New Mexico. In Archaeology
of the Jornada Mogollon: Proceedings from the 10th
Jornada Mogollon Conference, edited by M. Stowe
and M. Slaughter, pp. 15-37. Geo-Marine Incorporated, El Paso.
Fisher, J. W. , Jr. and H. C. Strickland
1989 Ethnoarchaeology Among the Efe Pygmies, Zaire:
Spatial Organization of Campsites. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 78:473-484.
1991 Dwellings and Fireplaces: Keys to Efe Pygmy Campsite Structure. In Ethno-archaeological Approaches
to Mobile Campsites, edited by C. S. Gamble and
W. A. Boismer, pp. 215-236. Ethnoarchaeological
Series 1. International Monographs in Prehistory,
Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Graham, I.
1980 Spectral Analysis and Distance Methods in the Study
of Archaeological Distributions. Journal of Archaeological Science 7:105-129.
Graves, T. , N. Kenmotsu, T. Griffith, M. Landreth, M. Miller,
and O. Kroulek
2009 Archaeological Data Recovery at 10 Sites in Maneuver Area 1B on Fort Bliss, El Paso County, Texas.
Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 08-08.
Environmental Division, Directorate of Public
Works, Conservation Branch, Garrison Command,
Fort Bliss, Texas.
Gregg, S. A., K. W. Kintigh, and R. Whallon
1991 Linking Ethnographical Interpretation and Archaeological Data: The Sensitivity of Spatial Analytical
Methods to Postdepositional Disturbance. In The
Interpretation of Archaeological Spatial Pattering,
edited by E. M. Kroll and T. D. Price, pp. 149-198.
Plenum Press, New York.
Haase, P.
1995 Spatial Pattern Analysis in Ecology Based on
Ripley’s K-function: Introduction and Methods of
Edge Correction. Journal of Vegetation Science
6:575-582.
Hall, S. A.
2007 Stratigraphy and Geochronology of the El Arenal
Site: Implications to Regional Archaeological Geology and Geomorphic History. In Excavations at
El Arenal and Late Archaic and Early Formative
Period Sites in the Hueco Mountain Project Area
of Fort Bliss, Texas, by M. Miller, pp. 9-1 to 9-14.
Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 02-12.
Directorate of Environment, Fort Bliss, Texas.

220

Texas Archeological Society

Hard, R. J.
1983 A Model for Prehistoric Land Use, Fort Bliss, Texas.
American Society for Conservation Archaeology
Proceedings 1983: 41-51.
Hayden, B. and A. Cannon
1983 Where the Garbage Goes: Refuse Disposal in the
Maya Highlands. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 2:117-163.
Hitchcock, R. K.
1987 Sedentism and Site Structure: Organizational
Changes in Kalahari Basarwa Residential Locations.
In Method and Theory for Activity Area Research,
edited by S. Kent, pp. 374-423. Columbia University
Press, New York.
Hodder, I. and E. Okell
1978 A New Method for Assessing the Association Between
Distributions of Points in Archaeology. In Simulation
Studies in Archaeology, edited by I. Hodder, pp. 97107. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hodder, I. and C. Orton
1976 Spatial Analysis in Archaeology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

2002 Tools for Quantitative Archaeology: Programs for
Quantitative Spatial Analysis in Archeology. User
manual for TFQA software programs,
Kintigh, K. W., and A. J. Ammerman
1982 Heuristic Approaches to Spatial Analysis in Archaeology. American Antiquity 47: 31-63.
Koetje, T.
1994 Intrasite Spatial Structure in the European Paleolithic: Evidence and Patterning from the Southwest
of France. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
13:161-169.
Kroulek, O. S.
2008 Ceramic Artifact Distribution Analysis of LA 91210
(FB 219). In The National Register of Historic
Places Eligibility Evaluation of 20 Prehistoric Sites
in Dona Ana Firing Ranges C and D, Otero County,
New Mexico. Historic and Natural Resources Report
No. 07-52. Environmental Division, Directorate of
Public Works, Conservation Branch, Garrison Command, Fort Bliss, Texas.

Johnson, I.
1984 Cell Frequency Recording and Analysis of Artifact Distributions. In Intrasite Spatial Analysis in
Archaeology, edited by H. J. Hietala, pp. 75-96.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Kvamme, K. L. and T. A. Kohler
1988 Geographic Information Systems: Technical Aids for
Data Collection, Analysis, and Display. In Quantifying the Present and Predicting the Past: Theory,
Method, and Application of Archaeological Predictive Modeling, edited by W. J. Judge and L. Sebastian, pp. 493-548. U.S. Department of the Interior,
Bureau of Land Management, Denver, Colorado.

Jones, K. T.
1993 Archaeological Structure of a Short-Term Camp. In
From Bones to Behavior: Ethnoarchaeological and
Experimental Contributions to the Interpretation
of Faunal Remains, edited by J. Hudson, pp. 101114. Occasional Paper No. 21. Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University,
Carbondale.

Leach, J. D.
1994 Archaeological Investigations in the Eastern Hueco
Bolson: Preliminary Findings from the Hueco Mountain Archaeological Project. In Mogollon VII: The
Collected Papers of the 1992 Mogollon Conference
Held in Las Cruces, New Mexico, edited by P. Beckett, pp. 115-128. COAS Publishing and Research,
Inc., Las Cruces.

Kelly, R. L., L. Poyer, and B. Tucker
2005 An Ethnoarchaeological Study of Mobility, Architectural Investment, and Food Sharing among
Madagascar’s Mikea. American Anthropologist
107(3):403-416.

Leckman, P. O.
2009a Spatial Analysis of Site Structure at FB 9122. In
Archaeological Mitigation at FB 17 (LA 91017) and
FB 9122 (FB 30016) on the Dona Ana Range, Fort
Bliss, Dona Ana County, New Mexico, edited by A.
C. MacWilliams, B. J. Vierra, and K. M. Schmidt,
pp. 229-250. Historic and Natural Resources Report
No. 07-49. Environmental Division, Directorate of
Public Works, Conservation Branch, Garrison Command, Fort Bliss, Texas.

Kent, S.
1991 The Relationship Between Mobility Strategies and
Site Structure. In The Interpretation of Archaeological Spatial Patterning, edited by E. Kroll and T. D.
Price, pp. 33-59. Plenum Press, New York.
Kintigh, K. W.
1990 Intrasite Spatial Analysis: A Commentary on Major
Methods. In Mathematics and Information Science
in Archaeology: A Flexible Framework, edited by A.
Voorhips, pp. 165-200. Studies in Modern Archaeology 3. Holos, Berlin.

2009b Spatial Analysis. In Mitigation at Four Prehistoric
Archaeological Sites near FAW-9, Fort Bliss, Otero
County, New Mexico, edited by B. J. Vierra and A.
C. MacWilliams, pp. 163-189. Historic and Natural
Resources Report No. 08-48. Environmental Division, Directorate of Public Works, Conservation
Branch, Garrison Command, Fort Bliss, Texas.

Miller—Estimating Site Structure and Site Occupation Span Using Point Pattern Spatial Analysis
Leckman, P. O., W. H. Doleman, B. J. Vierra, M. L. Murrell,
and S. L. Phillips
2009 Spatial and Aspatial Patterning within Identified
Archaeological Assemblages. In Results of a 10,000
Acres Cultural Resource Survey on Northern McGregor Range, Fort Bliss Military Reservation,
Otero County, New Mexico, edited by C. G. Ward,
B. J. Vierra, and K. M. Schmidt, pp. 241-300.
Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 08-09.
Environmental Division, Directorate of Public
Works, Conservation Branch, Garrison Command,
Fort Bliss, Texas.
Lock, G.
2000 Beyond the Map: Archaeology and Spatial
Technologies. NATO Science Series, IOS Press,
Amsterdam.
Mauldin, R. P.
1984 An Initial Report on the DIVAD Archaeological
Project. In “Proceedings of the Third Jornada Mogollon Conference,” edited by M. S. Foster and T.
C. O’Laughlin, pp. 79-96. The Artifact 23(1-2). El
Paso Archaeological Society.

1995 Groping for the Past: Investigating Archaeological
Patterns Across Space and Time in the Southern
Southwestern United States. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque.

1996 Exploring Patterns in Late Archaic and Early
Ceramic Residential Occupation in the Northern
Chihuahuan Desert. In Early Formative Adaptations
in the Southern Southwest, edited by B. J. Roth, pp.
85-97. Monographs in World Archeology No. 25.
Prehistory Press, Madison, Wisconsin.
Mauldin, R. P., T. B. Graves, and M. T. Bentley
1998 Small Sites in the Central Hueco Bolson: A Final
Report on Project 90-11. Directorate of Environment, Fort Bliss, Texas.
Meehan, B.
1982 Shell Bed to Shell Midden. Australian Institute of
Aboriginal Studies, Canberra.
Miller, M. R.
1990 The Transitional Period in the Southern Jornada
Mogollon: Archaeological Investigations in the
North Hills Subdivision, Northeast El Paso, Texas.
Research Report No. 1. Batcho & Kauffman Associates, El Paso.

2007a Excavations at El Arenal and Late Archaic and
Early Formative Period Sites in the Hueco Mountain Project Area of Fort Bliss, Texas. Historic and
Natural Resources Report No. 02-12. Directorate of
Environment, Fort Bliss, El Paso.

221

2007b Spatial Point Pattern Analysis of a Transect Recording Unit Dataset from McGregor Range. In A
Cultural Resource Survey of 10,500 Acres, Fort Bliss
Military Reservation, Otero County, New Mexico, by
M. Stowe, A. Martinez, and M. R. Miller, pp. 6-1 to
6-20. Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 0513, Directorate of Environment, Fort Bliss Garrison
Command, Fort Bliss, and GMI Report No. 698EP,
Geo-Marine, Inc., El Paso.
2007c Spatial Analysis of TRU-Recorded Ceramic Landscape Distributions in the CACTF Survey Area. In
A Cultural Resource Survey of 11,500 Acres to the
Combined Arms Combat Test Facility Part I, Fort
Bliss Military Reservation, Otero County, New Mexico, by M. Stowe, K. Arford, C. Mears, M. Swanson,
M. Goetz, and M. Miller, pp. 6-1 to 6-20. Historic
and Natural Resources Report No. 05-35, Directorate
of Environment, Fort Bliss Garrison Command, Fort
Bliss, and GMI Report No. 707EP, Geo-Marine, Inc.,
El Paso.

Miller, M. R., M. Goetz, and M. Willis
2007 Correction and Correlation of HMAP Phase IIA
and IIB Mapping Data for FB 12650 (41EP3175/El
Arenal Site). Appendix A In Excavations at El Arenal
and Late Archaic and Early Formative Period Sites
in the Hueco Mountain Project Area of Fort Bliss,
Texas, by M. Miller. Historic and Natural Resources
Report No. 02-12. Directorate of Environment, Fort
Bliss, Texas.
Murray, P.
1980 Discard Location: The Ethnographic Evidence.
American Antiquity 45:490-502.
Newcomer, M. H. and G. de G. Sieveking
1980 Experimental Flake Scatter Patterns: A New Interpretive Technique. Journal of Field Archaeology
7:345-352.
O’Connell, J. F.
1987 Alyawara Site Structure and Its Archaeological Implications. American Antiquity 52:74-108.
O’Connell, J. F., K. Hawkes and N. Blurton-Jones
1991 Distribution of Refuse-Producing Activities at Hadza
Residential Base Camps: Implications for Analyses
of Archaeological Site Structure. In The Interpretation of Archaeological Spatial Patterning, edited
by E. M. Knoll and T. D. Price, pp. 61-76. Plenum
Press, New York.
1992 Patterns in the Distribution, Site Structure, and Assemblage Composition of Hadza Kill-Butchering
Sites. Journal of Archaeological Science 19:319-345.
Ord, J. K.
1972 Families of Frequency Distributions. Methuen,
London.

222

Texas Archeological Society

Pelissier, R. and F. Goreaud
2001 A Practical Approach to the Study of Spatial Structure in Simple Cases of Heterogeneous Vegetation.
Journal of Vegetation Science 12:99-108.

Wandsnider, L.
1988 Experimental Investigation of the Effect of Dune
Processes on Archaeological Remains. American
Archeology 7:18–29.

Perry, J. N., A. M. Liebold, M. S. Rosenberg, J. Dungan, M.
Miriti, A. Jakomulska, and S. Citron-Pousty
2002 Illustrations and Guidelines for Selecting Statistical
Methods for Quantifying Spatial Patterns in Ecological Data. Ecography 25:578-600.

Whalen, M. E.
1977 Settlement Patterns in the Eastern Hueco Bolson.
Publications in Anthropology No. 4. El Paso Centennial Museum, The University of Texas at El Paso.

Pielou, E.C.
1969 An Introduction to Mathematical Ecology. Methuen,
London.

1994 Turquoise Ridge and Late Prehistoric Residential
Mobility in the Desert Mogollon Region. Anthropological Papers No. 118. University of Utah Press,
Salt Lake City.

Ripley, B.D.
1976 The Second-Order Analysis of Stationary Processes.
Journal of Applied Probability 13: 255-266.

Whallon, R.
1984 Unconstrained Clustering for the Analysis of Spatial
Distributions in Archaeology. In Intrasite Spatial
Analysis in Archaeology, edited by H. J. Hietala, pp.
242-277. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

1981 Spatial Statistics. John Wiley, New York.

Wheatley, D. and M. Gillings
2002 Spatial Technology and Archaeology: The Archaeological Applications of GIS. Taylor and Francis,
London.

1977 Tests of ‘Randomness’ for Spatial Point Patterns.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B
41:368-374.
Schiffer, M. B
1987 Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Seaman, T. J., W. H. Doleman, and R. C. Chapman
1988 Toward an Archeology of Landscapes: The BorderStar 85 Project. Office of Contract Archaeology,
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.
Simek, J. F. and R. R. Larick
1983 The Recognition of Multiple Spatial Patterns: A Case
Study from the French Upper Paleolithic. Journal of
Archaeological Science 10:165-180.
Stevenson, M. G
1991 Beyond the Formation of Hearth Associated Artifact
Assemblages. In The Interpretation of Archaeological Spatial Patterning, edited by E. Kroll and T. D.
Price, pp. 269-300. Plenum Press, New York.
Taylor, L. R., I. P. Woiwod, and J. N. Perry
1978 The Density-Dependence of Spatial Behavior and the
Rarity of Randomness. Journal of Animal Ecology
47:383-406.
Timmins, P. A.
1996 The Little Shaver Site: Exploring Site Structure and
Excavation Methodology on an Unploughed Site
in the Region of Hamilton-Wentworth, Ontario.
Ontario Archaeology 61:45-81.
Vaquero, M. and I. Pasto
2002 The Definition of Spatial Units in Middle Paleolithic
Sites: The Hearth-Related Assemblages. Journal of
Archeological Science 28:1209-1220.

Whitelaw, T.
1983 People and Space in Hunter-Gatherer Camps: A
Generalizing Approach in Ethnoarchaeology. Archaeological Review from Cambridge 2(2):48-66.

1991 Some Dimensions of Variability in the Social Organization of Community Space Among Foragers.
In Ethnoarchaeological Approaches to Mobile
Campsites: Hunter-Gatherer and Pastoralist Case
Studies, edited by C. Gamble and W. A Boismier, pp.
139-188. Ethnoarchaeological Series 1. International
Monographs in Prehistory, Ann Arbor.
Wiegand, T., and K. Moloney
2004 Rings, Circles, and Null-Models for Point Pattern
Analysis in Ecology. Oikos 104:209-229.
Wiegand, T., W. D. Kissling, P. A. Cipriotti, and M A. Aguiar
2006 Extending Point Pattern Analysis for Objects of
Finite Size and Irregular Shape. Journal of Ecology
94(4):825-837.
Wiegand, T., K. Moloney, J. Naves, and F. Knauer
1999 Finding the Missing Link Between Landscape Structure and Population Dynamics: A Spatially Explicit
Perspective. American Naturalist 154: 605-627.
Yellen, J.
1977 Archaeological Approaches to the Present: Models
for Reconstructing the Past. Academic Press, New
York.
1996 Behavioral and Taphonomic Patterning at Katanda
9: A Middle Stone Age Site, Kivu Province, Zaire.
Journal of Archeological Science 23:915-932.

Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres:
A Case Study from Fort Hood, Central Texas
Steve Carpenter and Christian T. Hartnett

Abstract
The Archaic, as a division of North American prehistory, has long been a mainstay in cultural chronologies.
However, although it has been defined in many ways, often according to one facet or another, upon close inspection the Archaic eludes clear definition. In Texas, the term has quite often been considered a techno-complex,
in large part because the archeological dataset largely comprises just that, technology of various sorts. Yet, the
cumulative lines of archeological evidence, considered in the light of modern economic theories and older broadscale perspectives, suggest a more comprehensive view offers viable interpretive avenues. The preponderant
emphasis on immediate material conditions of Archaic societies has forsaken the promise of past approaches
that looked to broader macroeconomic networks and influences that originated beyond local and regional contexts. Using data from Fort Hood and its vicinity, the final millennia of the Archaic in eastern Central Texas
are assessed in light of economic and political organization. The perspective offers alternate frameworks that
contribute to the interpretation of the material record, as well as a broader approach to the Archaic.

Introduction
If the Paleoindian period is defined as fundamentally a peopling phase in which societies
originating from elsewhere brought in old ways,
then the Archaic can be said to be the first verified
indigenous adaptations to any given region. Archaic
groups developed specific toolkits and lifeways
designed in accordance with particular ecological
settings, likely developing territorial identities as
they mapped onto regional landscapes. In Texas
archeology, the Archaic techno-complexes and the
long-term changes therein have long been interpreted as a direct response to changing environmental
conditions. This article is a case study, drawing primarily from the Fort Hood archeological database,
that argues an alternative, but perhaps ultimately
complementary, perspective that the technological
assemblages are not necessarily responses to immediate circumstances, but rather macroeconomic
spheres of truly stunning geographical scope and
origins far, far away.
This study draws, at least initially, from the relatively scant remains from one site that revealed suggestive trends and faint patterns that could then be
assessed in light of the vast arsenal of archeological
data from Fort Hood and thereabouts. The Cowdog

Crossing site (41CV389) is a stratified prehistoric
campsite located within the Fort Hood Army Post
in Coryell County, Texas. The site contains archeological remains deposited intermittently throughout
the final millennium of the long Archaic period, the
most substantial chronological division in Texas
prehistory. In the course of analyzing the materials recovered from excavations in 2009 and 2010,
the very notion of “Archaic” became an analytical
focus. The study of an era’s demise mandates a characterization of the entirety of the times. The answer,
in the final analysis, is that if it is a viable construct
at all, the Archaic is much more faceted than commonly construed. This is the examination of one
facet, one that contributes to a broader view and
the expectation of many yet undiscovered aspects.
What, If Anything, is
the Archaic?
As this study is focused on the developments at
the end of the Archaic, it begs the question of what
is meant by the term. As reviewed by Shafer (1976)
and many others over the years, “Archaic” has been
used in any number of ways, whether referring to
an evolutionary “stage,” an adaptive strategy, a

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

224

Texas Archeological Society

technological assemblage, or a chronological period.
A brief survey of the history of the term provides
some clarity on the traditional usage, as well as the
deviation from that norm that will be employed here.
As first used well over a century ago, Archaic
mainly referred to pre-Classic Mesoamerican cultures, but the so-called Ford-Willey synthesis (Ford
and Willey 1941) largely established its modern
usage. Ford and Willey formally defined Archaic to
refer to pre-ceramic cultures in the eastern United
States. This usage was later more explicitly defined
as Willey and Phillips (1958) firmly fixed its prevailing usage when they defined five basic stages
of North American prehistory: Lithic, Archaic, Formative, Classic, and post-Classic. Lithic describes
primarily the highly mobile Paleoindian societies.
By contrast, Archaic referred to “the stage of migratory hunting and gathering cultures continuing into
environmental conditions approximating those of the
present” (Willey and Phillips 1958:107). This usage
is quite different from how it is employed in studies
of many other parts of the world (e.g., Service 1975).
The usage by Suhm et al. (1954) of the Archaic
generally parallels Willey and Phillips’ later definition, although Suhm et al. (1954:18) define the stage
as that which “bridges the time between the PaleoAmerican nomadic hunting people on the one hand,
and the settled agricultural, pottery-making Indians
on the other.” So, the Archaic was as much defined
by what it was not (neither a settled agricultural society nor a highly mobile Paleoindian society), as by
what it was (an intervening “bridge” of development
from one stage to another).
In 1975, a group of archeologists held a symposium on the “Texas Archaic” at the annual Texas
Archeological Society meeting in San Antonio. The
published papers largely defined for each region of
Texas precisely what was meant by the term “Archaic,” but also many of the problems and misunderstandings of its usage (Hester 1976). Shafer (1976:6)
defined it for the Lower Pecos as an “extractive
technological continuum.” Throughout the papers
comprising the Texas Archaic symposium, this
seems to have been the prevailing usage, although
Prewitt (1976a) and Corbin (1976) address it more
as an adaptive ecological strategy, but largely from
the assemblage standpoint.
If a review of the 1995 Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, which provides culture histories
of regions throughout the state, is a true representation, most researchers 20 years later approached the
Archaic as an ecological adaptive strategy, although

Turpin (1995) and Perttula (1995) address social
developments in the Lower Pecos and Caddo areas,
respectively. There is wide variation within the overall approach, but ecological views tend to interpret
technological assemblages in terms of adaptation to
changing environmental conditions (Flannery 1972).
Environment, in the ecological sense, can equally
refer to the human setting as well as the physical
one, but quite often focuses more on the latter.
Rapid advances in the understanding of the
past environments over the past four decades or so
contributed to the approach. Analytical technical
advances (such as in use wear, organic residues, etc.)
coupled with a burgeoning body of data on palynology, climate change, bison presence and absence,
changing prehistoric faunal and floral assemblages,
and other factors offered a wealth of information
that illuminated the functions of various technologies such as burned rock middens, other features,
and forms of lithic tools.
Accordingly, a prominent thrust in Texas archeology has long been the search for correlations
between the environmental conditions and the
archeological record: cultural ecology provided a
robust theoretical toolkit to infer a relational nexus
between the corresponding datasets. Chronologies
are now commonly juxtaposed with graphical representations of environmental trends. A review of
The Prehistory of Texas (Perttula 2004a) reveals
continuity of the earlier (1995) trends. The point of
all this is that the “Archaic” term, as employed in
Texas archeology according to most self-ascribed
definitions, has primarily been used in technological
and ecological adaptation terms.
A Different, But well-trod,
Approach
One of the objectives in this study is to push
in a slightly different direction from recent trends,
defining the Archaic more as a socio-political and
economic structure rather than a technological
complex or ecological adaptive mode. This is not
a new direction: from the beginning, these aspects
(i.e., band level of organization and hunter-gatherer
economy) have been an inherent aspect of the Archaic definition. Nor is it contradictory to prevailing
approaches, but rather complementary, by focusing instead on a different facet of the same entity.
Prewitt (1981, 1985), Johnson and Goode (1994),
and others have included these aspects as central

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 225
considerations in the Central Texas cultural chronology. However, the divergent point here is that in
the final millennium of the Archaic the immediate
ecological context may have been of secondary consequence relative to the nature of an macroeconomic
sphere across a relatively enormous area.
To address these issues and adopt this approach,
the Archaic needs to be defined in those terms,
namely the socio-political and economic. Accordingly, at a general level, the hallmark of Archaic society is the lack of regional integration, and the lack
of large-scale macroeconomic and religious spheres
that created an integrated system of interrelated
societies, a so-called “world system.” This world
system idea was originally defined by Wallerstein
(1974), but is used here in an unhyphenated form as
modified and employed by authors such as Baugh
(1998) or Peregrine (1992) for Caddo or Mississippian societies. Archaic societies were band groups
with weakly developed tribal networks, and economies were based primarily on localized adaptation
to regionally specific ecological niches. Trade was
undoubtedly important since Paleoindian times, but
it was not the primary engine of Archaic economies:
that is the distinction between Archaic and later
phases or stages of aboriginal life. The economic
basis of Archaic society was domestic subsistence
production. In studying the end of the Archaic,
the archeological record should reveal the gradual
emergence of tribal social networks (as defined by
Braun and Plog [1982]), a macroeconomic sphere,
and economic shifts towards a regional integration,
signaling the beginning of the end of the Archaic.
The Macroeconomic Sphere
at the End of the Archaic:
A Revitalization of
Krieger’s Vision
Texas archeologists in the early to mid-20th
century commonly addressed big picture scenarios,
such as the relationships among the Mississippian,
Puebloan, Plains, and other cultures that contributed to the Texas archeological record. J. Charles
Kelley and Alex D. Krieger are notable examples
in this regard. In part, such a grand purview was
fostered, rather ironically, by the limitations of the
data, as precise data were few and far between, engendering comparisons across broader areas. Their
recommendations were quite often to flesh out local and regional chronologies, filling in the gaps.

Accordingly, a general trend in research objectives
has long been an increasingly regionalized, provincial, and atomistic look at the archeological record.
While the trend is much needed, at risk in this approach is the loss of larger perspectives, particularly
regarding the many influences that strongly affected
the cultural trajectory of a given area. As Butzer
(1982) noted, adaptive systems operate at various
scales, and the behavioral patterns at each affected
the archeological record in some way. To a degree,
the trends over the last half-century have neglected
the contributions of the macro-scale processes that
were strong subject matters to Krieger, Kelley and
others some time ago.
Krieger (1946) conducted a sustained study of
the emergence of interrelated culture complexes in
Texas, tying the developments of Southern Plains
cultures, the Woodland/Caddo of eastern Texas,
and the Puebloan groups in western Texas and beyond. The Austin focus, defined by Kelley (1947),
which includes the Fort Hood area, was located at
the confluence of each of these spheres (Figure 1).
Krieger’s map shows the distribution of complexes
in the Late Prehistoric, roughly post-1200 years
B.P. Of interest in the current study are the events
just prior to this configuration. By most accounts,
the later cultural manifestations were largely in
place by roughly 1800 B.P. The early Basketmaker
in the Southwest, or more specifically the Mesilla
phase in western Texas, was emerging at this time
(see Miller and Kenmotsu 2004:236-238). Mound
sites such as Coral Snake mound and Jonas Short
in eastern Texas are clear evidence of Lower Mississippi Valley groups or influences between 17001900 B.P. in eastern Texas. The Woodland tradition
across the Plains in northern Texas and Oklahoma
began at nearly the same time (Hofman and Brooks
1989:67). Likewise, the Mossy Grove Woodland tradition developed in eastern Texas at this time (Story
1990:256-258). By about 2000 B.P., Early Ceramic
and Woodland traditions or periods were in place in
the upper Texas coast, East Texas, and East Central
Texas according to specific regional chronologies
(Perttula 2004b:9).
Within the main block of the Cowdog Crossing
site, the earliest component in the data recovery
investigations dated to about 1750 B.P. At precisely
this time, Central Texas and Fort Hood were ringed
by these developments, which define the macroeconomic sphere of the times. Hall (1981:303), based
on a synthesis of findings in the Allens Creek area,
noted:

_
^

_
^
_
^

41CV389 Location
41CV389 Location

Figure 1. Krieger’s map of Central Texas and the larger archeological context. Adapted from Krieger (1946).

41CV389 Location

Location

Location
_^
^
41CV389 Location
_ 41CV389

_
^

^
_
_^
^
_

_
^

226
Texas Archeological Society

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 227
Sometime in the period between 50 B.C.
and A.D. 200 along the western periphery
of the import-export sphere in Texas [he
places this western periphery just east
of the Nueces River], pressures were
exerted on local populations which triggered the gradual inexorable retraction of
the sphere north-eastward across central
Texas and the coastal plain to eventually
reach the much reduced area of east Texas
where participation continued on into
Late Prehistoric (Caddoan) times. The
retreating westerly margin of the sphere
reached the Allens Creek area between
A.D. 200 and A.D. 400, its passage
marked a shift in burial orientation, and
the interment of at least five individuals
who died violently.

Hall, therefore, suggests a far-reaching economic sphere throughout Central Texas which began
to fall apart around 1800 B.P. Developments elsewhere seemed to show gradual regional integration,
although there are gaps in the archeological record
that may indicate the disintegration of the regional
structures took several centuries.
The primary research question in the study
of Fort Hood data, then, regards what occurred in
Central Texas in response to these developments.
Was there heavy involvement or relative insularity?
An Overview of the Cowdog
Crossing Site and the
Objectives of its Study
The details of the Cowdog Crossing site
(41CV389), its history of investigations, and the
many findings and interpretations are reported elsewhere (Abbott et al. 1996; Carpenter et al. 2010;
Trierweiler 1996:306–318), and so only a few
salient points will be presented here. The site lies
on semi-open, grassy terraces ringed by a rather
densely-forested riparian zone on the northern and
western site margins. The southern part of the site
gradually rises into eroded Cretaceous limestone
uplands that support a scrubby, juniper-mesquite
assemblage. The setting is a very discrete ecotonal
niche, not only at the micro-scale, but on an everwidening regional level.
Although formally on the Edwards Plateau, the
site area is in a transitional zone that grades into
the western limits of the Blackland Prairie, which

lies a short distance east and north of Fort Hood
(Figure 2). The Blackland Prairie is characterized as
a typically humid, low-lying grassland that formed a
biotic corridor for large game. Thus, the liminal zone
of the eastern Edwards Plateau and adjacent prairies,
periodically intersected by waterways draining the
plateau, offered a broad spectrum of resources for
prehistoric and historic inhabitants.
In this setting, great and small, several burned
rock middens are concentrated along the edge of the
bedrock outcrops on the southern and eastern part
of the site, but substantial fine-sediment terraces fan
out across its northern and western portions. This
juxtaposition of middens in a non-aggrading setting,
on the one hand, and the adjacent aggradational
setting, is one of the highly significant aspects of
the site, because it affords an opportunity to isolate
discrete occupational surfaces surrounding burned
rock middens, features that typically form over long
periods of repetitive use, a formation process which
obscures behaviors that contribute to the site assemblage. Within the terraces of the site, components
dating from as early as 2500 B.P. to about 650 B.P.
(in conventional radiocarbon years B.P.) were identified, but the main investigated components were
associated with Darl points and dated from roughly
1250-1750 B.P., a span of time typically designated
the Transitional Archaic. So, the primary research
potential in the Cowdog Crossing site lies in its
stratified deposits that present a rather rare view of
the successive changes in prehistoric society at the
end of the long Archaic period, the longest stage in
the regional prehistory.
However, the materials from the Cowdog Crossing site were fairly sparse, and only suggestive
trends could be discerned. Given the substantial
Fort Hood database, fortunately, these trends were
testable hypotheses that could be considered in a
larger context.
What was the Question?
The chronological components on the site
represent a rather narrow segment of the regional
cultural chronology, namely the final millennium
of the 7000 year-long Archaic period. According
to most views, the final phases of the Archaic are
rather enigmatic, representing changes in the larger
evolutionary trends of prehistory.
Much of the Archaic and Late Prehistoric
reveals a gradual trend towards increasingly

228

Texas Archeological Society

in
Tr

Sa
bin
eR

ity

ive
r

r
ve
Ri

Waco Lake
Ri
ve
r

r
ive

ad
o

R
es
ch
Ne

Co
lo
r

Cowdog Crossing
Bra
zos
Riv
er

Allen's Creek Area

BLACKLAND PRAIRIE
EDWARDS PLATEAU
GULF COAST PRAIRIES & MARSHES
LLANO UPLIFT

Guadalu
pe River

OAK WOODS & PRAIRIES

ca
va
La

PINEY WOODS

SOUTH TEXAS BRUSH COUNTRY

0
0

±

50

75

r
ve
Ri

ROLLING PLAINS

Background: Digital map aquired from Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, GIS Lab.
SWCA PN. 15887, Production: January 25, 2011, CAC.

100
Miles
Kilometers
150

Figure 2. Cowdog Crossing site and relevant comparative sites.

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 229
intensive occupation and exploitation of resources
and the increase of broad regional trade and social
networks as evident in the increasing presence
of exotic goods through time (see Thoms [1993]
for example). However, in the final phase of the
Archaic, Prewitt (1985:82) notes an apparent
absence of widespread trade networks, isolated
burials rather than formal cemeteries, and a shift
towards the foraging side of the spectrum, or at
least a distinct emphasis on the gathering aspect
of the hunter-gatherer system. These traits could
be interpreted as indicative of devolution in the
overall evolutionary trajectory: a decline in population density and reversion to smaller highly mobile
groups, less regional political integration, and the
loss of well-defined territoriality. However, these
interpretations remain rather speculative.
Following this period of seeming decline, the
Late Prehistoric is distinguished by technological change, but more importantly, social changes
evidenced by the reemergence of cemeteries, exotic
trade goods suggestive of more developed economic
networks, and warfare, as revealed by “quite a
few people found in Scallorn-period cemeteries…
[with] a peppering of arrows” (Johnson and Goode
1994:40, see also Prewitt [1985]). And so the objectives in the study of the Cowdog Crossing site
were to investigate what happened at the end of the
Archaic: was there, in fact, a decline in regional integration? Did climatic conditions trigger a collapse
in the ecological system? Or did the environment
ameliorate, relieving stress that was the impetus
behind intensification, thereby allowing a more
ubiquitous exploitation of the resource structure?
Alternatively, rather than environmental causal
circumstances, were macro-scale social and economic conditions the driving force in the perceived
changes in the archeological record? These are the
primary research objectives, that being to determine
the context and address some of the changes at the
end of the Archaic.
The Data Part I, Technology:
Long-term Change in Stone
Tool Assemblages and
Burned Rock Features
at the End of the Archaic
In considering the prehistoric technology at
Fort Hood, the objective is to define changes, if
any, during the final millennium or so of the Archaic

period. The primary data used to address this issue
are (1) stone tool assemblages and (2) burned rock
technology. The history of archeological studies
in Fort Hood and the wider region have shown
that there are significant changes in each of these
categories through time, although there remains a
fair amount of contention regarding the meaning of
these changes. The data from the Cowdog Crossing site are compared to information from the base
and region to discern patterns, which will provide
the basis for clarifying long-term adaptive patterns.
These patterns, in turn, which have commonly been
interpreted as responses to environmental and subsistence changes, are interpreted in light of macroeconomic spheres.
Assemblages
The identification of shared attributes among
formal characteristics contributes to the definition
of structural components of archeological assemblages and societies. The basic objective is to
define variation in accordance with the following
reasoning: “Variation in the structure and content
of an archaeological assemblage is directly related
to the form, nature, and spatial arrangement of
human activities… we are forced to seek explanations for the composition of assemblages in terms
of variations in human activities” (Binford and
Binford 1966:241).
The objective in assemblage studies is to identify differences in organization of technology and
strategies. The question draws a distinction between
an archeological culture and a techno-complex. An
assemblage analysis should reveal “structural” (what
remains the same under a series of permutations)
components of a techno-complex.
Fort Hood Patterns
There have been few assemblage-based analyses conducted of the Fort Hood archeological record. Kleinbach et al. (1999:222–227), however,
provide a notable exception, and their study, based
on the testing data of 19 sites in Fort Hood, constitutes the primary comparative information for
the Cowdog Crossing site. In looking at diachronic
change in assemblages, Kleinbach et al. (1999:225)
use adjusted standard residuals to compare the relative frequencies of different tool types from the Late
Archaic, the Late Prehistoric Austin phase, and the
Late Prehistoric Toyah phase (Table 1). While their

230

Texas Archeological Society

use of the Late Archaic, which covers roughly the
period from 4000-1200 B.P. (based on the definition
by Collins [2004:121]), offers only a very broad
characterization that overlooks finer distinctions
within this time period, such were the limitations
of their data. Nevertheless, comparison identified
notable trends. “The combined Late Archaic sample
is characterized by an underrepresentation of projectile points and hammerstones, while knives are
overrepresented. The data also show a tendency
(although not statistically significant) for the overrepresentation of adzes and miscellaneous unifaces
and underrepresentation of cores.” (Kleinbach et al.
1999:224) “The combined Late Prehistoric Austin
phase sample...is characterized by overrepresentation of projectile points and hammerstones and
underrepresentation of knives. In addition, cores
tend to be overrepresented while gravers and adzes
tend to be underrepresented, although none of these
trends is statistically significant” (Kleinbach et al.
1999:224). The Toyah sample was very small and
revealed no strong patterns in either direction.
In summary, the study identified highly contrastive patterns between the Late Archaic and Late
Prehistoric (at least in the Austin phase) stone tool
assemblages. What is statistically overrepresented in
one assemblage is consistently underrepresented in
the other. Kleinbach et al. (1999:225–226) suggest
the differences may not necessarily reflect change
through time, but rather may correlate with variation
in site settings, namely different types of activities
performed in different parts of the landscape. As the
authors noted, a substantial caveat in the assemblage
patterns noted above regards site locations. Seventy
percent of the Austin phase artifacts came from a
rock shelter, whereas a large portion of the Late
Archaic collection came from one site (41BL155),
situated on an open alluvial terrace. Such differences
could affect the range of behaviors and therefore
the toolkit.
Of interest in the study of the Cowdog Crossing
site, however, is the search for diachronic patterns
that reflect true technological change in adaptive
strategies. The assemblage-based comparisons beg
the question of whether these are shifts through time
or more reflective of site distribution patterns that are
not temporally significant. Consideration of the Cowdog Crossing data is designed to, on one hand, search
for finer patterns within the monolithic Late Archaic
period, and on the other hand, ascertain whether there
might be a transition between the highly contrastive
Archaic and Late Prehistoric patterns.

The Cowdog Crossing Assemblages and
Those of Other Transitional Archaic
Components
The data recovery information includes a series
of components that date to several times within the
Transitional Archaic, and therefore it provides a
means of isolating this time period. The recovered
artifact counts do not provide a statistically viable
population for each component, and so for comparative purposes, the assemblages are combined to collectively represent the timeframe from around 1750
B.P. through Darl times.
The artifacts from the Cowdog Crossing site
were sorted into the same analytical categories used
by Kleinbach et al. (1999), which were defined by
Tomka et al. (1999) in the same report. While the
data are not strong for lack of robust numbers, Table
2 shows the collective data of the site’s Transitional
Archaic stone tool assemblage. The results show
an over-representation of projectile points and an
under-representation of adzes, gravers, choppers,
and miscellaneous unifaces. Knives are over-represented, but not significantly so.
Given the fairly low numbers, to assess these
trends in the Cowdog Crossing site, the assemblages
of two other sites, the Britton and McMillan sites,
with similarly aged Transitional Archaic components (c. 2000 to 1000 B.P.) from nearby Waco Lake
were compared (Kibler and Mehalchick 2010:107,
109). The assemblages of these sites likewise reveal
an over-representation of projectile points and an
under-representation of adzes, choppers, and gravers (see Table 2). The data from Waco Lake differs
on the prominence of the miscellaneous biface category, but for the most part, the Transitional Archaic
components at the Cowdog Crossing site and the
two Waco Lake sites are comparable, offering some
degree of validation of the patterns.
Interpretations of the Assemblages
The data from the 19 tested sites showed a
strong contrast between the Late Archaic and Late
Prehistoric assemblages. In isolating the Transitional
Archaic components from the overarching time
frame, the findings indicate rather notable similarities between the Transitional Archaic and the Late
Prehistoric Austin phase, both of which are contrastive with the Late Archaic. The prominence of
formal tools such as projectile points and the relative
infrequency of informal tools such as miscellaneous

16

Totals

-1.52
-0.51
-0.73
-0.51
1.37
1.00
1.74
-0.33
1.62
-1.54
0.59
-0.55
-0.33
79

19
2
1
3
19
1
0
0
8
16
5
2
3

Adjusted 		
Standardized
No. of
Residuals
Artifacts
3.51
0.77
-1.05
-2.04
-0.98
-0.75
-1.14
-0.80
-0.58
-0.38
1.46
0.55
3.76

353

36
5
13
41
102
9
5
3
42
81
10
6
0

-2.58
-0.48
1.31
2.13
0.29
0.25
0.27
0.90
-0.19
1.06
-1.62
-0.26
-3.35

Adjusted
Standardized
Residuals

Late
Archaic

Adjusted		
Standardized
No. of
Residuals
Artifacts

Late Prehistoric
Austin phase

Note: Boldface type notes statistically significant residuals at the 0.05 level of significance

0
0
0
1
7
1
1
0
4
1
1
0
0

Projectile Points
Perforators
Adzes
Knives
Scrapers
Choppers
Gravers
Multifunctional Tools
Miscellaneous Bifaces
Miscellaneous Unifaces
Cores
Ground Stones
Hammerstones

		
Artifacts
No. of
Artifacts

Late Prehistoric
Toyah phase

Table 1. Comparisons of non-debitage artifact categories and adjusted standardized residuals
by temporal/cultural period (from Kleinbach et al. 1999:225).

448

55
7
14
45
128
11
6
3
54
98
16
8
3

N

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 231

353

Total

10.20
1.42
3.68
11.61
28.9
2.55
1.42
0.85
11.90
22.95
2.83
1.70
–

*Data source: Kleinbach, et al. (1999:224)
**Data source: Kibler and Mehalchick (2010)
***Data source: Carpenter et al. (2010)

36
5
13
41
102
9
5
3
42
81
10
6
0

Projectile Points
Perforators
Adzes
Knives
Scrapers
Choppers
Gravers
Multifunc-tional Tools
Miscellaneous Bifaces
Miscellaneous Unifaces
Cores
Ground Stones
Hammerstone
21

7
0
0
3
6
0
0
2
0
0
1
2
0

33.33
–
–
14.29
28.57
–
–
9.52
–
–
4.76
9.52
–

			
		
Cowdog
Type
Late
Crossing
of Artifact
Archaic*
Component***
#
%
#
%

344

96
4
2
22
56
2
0
3
102
17
16
24
0

27.91
1.16
0.58
6.40
16.28
0.58
–
0.87
29.65
4.94
4.65
6.98
–

McMillan and
Britton Sites,
Transitional
Archaic Components **
#
%

79

19
2
1
3
19
1
0
0
8
16
5
2
3

24.05
2.53
1.27
3.80
24.05
1.27
–
–
10.13
20.25
6.33
2.53
3.80

Late
Prehistoric,
Austin phase*
#
%
–
–
–
6.25
43.75
6.25
6.25
–
25.00
6.25
6.25
–
–
16		

0
0
0
1
7
1
1
0
4
1
1
0
0

812

158
11
16
70
190
13
6
8
156
114
33
34
3

Late
Prehistoric, 		
Toyah phase*
N
#
%

Table 2. Summary of lithic assemblage from select components.

19.46
1.35
1.97
8.62
23.40
1.60
0.74
0.99
19.21
14.04
4.06
4.19
0.37

Relative
Assemblage %

232
Texas Archeological Society

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 233
unifaces and adzes are common to both phases (or
periods) and distinguish both from the Late Archaic
in general.
The meaning of these patterns is not readily
apparent since other factors that are not captured in
the data could significantly affect the interpretations.
For example, the categories often cross-cut vital distinctions needed for determining overall technological strategies. The distinction of whether a core is
bifacial or otherwise has been used to infer mobility
(Bamforth and Becker 2000; Parry and Kelly 1987),
but such a distinction is poorly captured in the classification for the Fort Hood data. Additionally, the
distinction between informal and formal technology
is likewise of interpretive interest, but categories
such as knives and scrapers cover a wide range of
design formality. Nevertheless, there is often considered to be a relationship between mobility and the
organization of technology, meaning the strategies
employed in the production, use, and discard of
tools and materials (see discussion by Kelly [1992]).
While there is a general agreement that many aspects, such as raw material availability, affect the
relationships between mobility and technology, it
has been noted that expedient technology (such as
informal tools) often correlate with low residential
mobility or highly repetitive occupations of the same
locale (Parry and Kelly 1987). Conversely, highly
mobile groups use a more formal curated technology
(Binford 1979; Kelly 1988; Kelly and Todd 1988).
So said, a Transitional Archaic toolkit, characterized by a greater emphasis on discarded, usually
exhausted, or broken formal tools and a fairly low
emphasis on expedient technology, is suggestive of
a more mobile strategy in the Transitional Archaic,
continuing through the Late Prehistoric.
To return to Kleinbach et al.’s (1999) consideration of differential use of the landscape as
a contributing factor of assemblage variation, the
Bordes-Binford debates of the 1960s have some
bearing. In arguing the implications of assemblage
variation, Bordes (1953, 1978, 1984) inferred that
the differences indicate different social groupings,
while Binford and Binford (1966) argued that they
were perhaps differing toolkits adapted to differing
situations and were unreflective of social identities. Rolland and Dibble (1990), in a synthesis of
Paleolithic variability, lay out the variables that
affect assemblages, showing that much of Bordes’s
typological distinctions are the effects of factors
such as raw material availability, different reduction intensity, seasonal differences, and a variable

availability of game, rather than “ethnic traditions.”
With that caveat in mind, the perceived differences
in toolkits between the chronological periods and
phases could reflect changes in foraging strategies,
organization and mobility, or other factors. Burned
rock technology and site distribution patterns provide views of the other aspects that contribute to the
overall picture.
Burned Rock Technology
Despite their numerous contextual problems,
burned rock features provide one of the few
structural components of the Cowdog Crossing archeological record, and consequently a potentially
significant avenue of research. While burned rock
middens are the dominant features on the site, as
stated, these were not the focus of investigations
because of the difficulties in isolating occupationally distinct components within them. Hearths in
stratified contexts were more suitable in this regard.
Seven such hearth features can clearly be assigned to
a chronological period either by direct radiocarbon
dating or stratigraphic context. An overview of the
data on Fort Hood features provides a context for
the Cowdog Crossing site features, and a basis for
inferring behavioral changes in the final portion of
the Archaic.
Fort Hood Burned Rock Patterns
The burned rock features identified in Fort Hood
sites can loosely be divided into five formal or functional categories: middens, mounds, hearths, pavements, and concentrations (Kleinbach et al. 1995).
Based on the 1994-1995 testing of 119 sites, which
plausibly provides a representative cross-section of
the burned rock feature populations on Fort Hood, a
total of 73 mounds/middens, 47 concentrations, four
pavements, and 70 hearths were studied (Abbott et
al. 1996:577). In the data recovery investigations on
the Cowdog Crossing site, nearly all of the clearly
definable features, with one exception, would likely
fall within the hearth category, and so the focus here
is on those features. Of interest is looking for change
in hearth technology, and so variation in the types
of this class of feature provides the basic data for
discerning patterns.
Within the hearth category, Abbott et al.
(1996:586) define six categories for the Fort Hood
data (Table 3), which range from small informal

234

Texas Archeological Society

scatters to highly formal slab-lined basin-shaped
hearths. Abbott et al. (1996) did not provide chronological information on the hearths, but in mining
the data, radiocarbon dates were found for 22 of
these 70 features. The reported chronological data
and average maximum diameter form the basis for
the following discussion of chronological trends in
hearth technology. No chronological data could be
identified for Type 2 and Type 6 hearths, but the
other categories are reasonably well represented.
The data indicate Type 5 hearths, which have
the largest maximum diameters and are the most
technologically formal of the types, range in age
from 1650-1874 B.P., although the sample size of
three hearths is small (see Table 3). Conversely,
the smallest of features and the most informal
hearth technology with little or no rock (Type 3),
has a sole date of 690 B.P. The second smallest in
terms of average maximum diameter are the flat
hearths with layered rock (Type 1), which have a
date range from 810-1460 B.P., falling between the
most informal and most formal. The basin-shaped
hearths lined with rock but not slab-lined (Type 4),
which represent a modest formality in construction, have the most diverse temporal range with
three clusters that extend from 510-2140 B.P. (see
Table 3). If any trends in the data can be discerned,
it is that the more formal hearth technology falls
within the Late Archaic, followed by a gradual
decrease in the investment of energy in hearth
construction through the Transitional Archaic
into the Late Prehistoric. The average maximum
diameter of the hearths supports an inference of
the degree of labor in each feature type, from the
largest diameter in the formal slab-lined hearths
(Type 5, with an average diameter of 190 cm) to
the small basin with little or no rock (Type 3, with
an average diameter of 61 cm).
The larger population of Fort Hood data
provides some basis for assessing these trends,
although most of the hearths from the larger database could not be categorized by type since such
descriptive information is often lacking. Nevertheless, Table 4 shows the tabulated data of hearths
on the base that have both total weights of the
burned rock but also have radiocarbon dates. The
65 hearths are categorized by 500 year periods to
determine if there are general trends using weights.
The median is used rather than averages since
extreme outliers skew the statistics. Accordingly,
the population of hearths shows a decrease in the
median weight of burned rock in the successive

500 year periods from the Late Archaic through
the Transitional Archaic and then a slight upward
swing in the Late Prehistoric.
If formal hearth design, as well as the diameters
and median burned rock weights, are indicators of
energy investment in hearth features, then the data
suggest a general decrease of such an investment
over time. What is unknown is the degree to which
other burned rock feature types, such as middens,
influenced hearth design. In other words, are there
any relationships between midden use and hearth
construction?
Cowdog Crossing Site Burned
Rock Features
The seven prehistoric burned rock hearths documented on the Cowdog Crossing site were in various
states of integrity, several being scattered, perhaps
as secondary discard, so the original form may have
been obscured. Of note, no extensive midden-like
accumulations were identified in the data recovery
excavations, though these are prominent features
on the site. Those within the excavations all appear to have been single or limited use cooking or
heating facilities. Chronological data was obtained
from four of the seven features and stratigraphic
context provides fairly good temporal placement of
the undated ones, revealing a range of occupational
periods from about 2500 B.P. to roughly 1000 B.P.
While for various reasons complete data on
weight and dimensions for the site features is lacking, most can be categorized by type and compared
to Abbott et al. (1996) data (Table 5). A few salient
points are notable. The most formal hearth, Feature
5, dates to the Late Archaic. The next most substantial hearths, Features 4 and 8, are nearly contemporaneous and date to the very beginning of the
Transitional Archaic. The Type 1 hearths (Features
2, 3, 6, and 7), which are all rather insubstantial
concentrations, date from the Transitional Archaic
(around 1400 B.P.) to the Late Prehistoric (associated with the 1994 testing feature that yielded a
date of 650 B.P.). The trend is consistent with the
overall patterns seen in the Fort Hood data. Namely,
the record is one of small features, little more than
centralized clusters of burned rock inferred to be
short-duration cooking features, during the Transitional Archaic. The earlier features, dating from
2500-1750 B.P. are more formal and represent a
more significant investment of labor, and suggest
perhaps a more substantial duration of use.

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 235
Table 3. Hearths with absolute dates, arranged by type as defined in Abbott et al. (1996:587-588).
		
Site
Feature #

Estimated
Dimensions (cm)

Temporal Data*
(B.P.)

Citation

Type 1: Flat, Angular Rock/Cobble Layered
41BL339
1
41CV95
3
41CV95
4
41CV98
5
41CV317
1
41CV1166
1
Avg. Max Diameter		

58
60
88
100
73
55
72.3

1460 ± 60
1410 ± 60
1080 ± 60
1220 ± 60
920 ± 70
810 ± 60

Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996

Type 3: Basin, Very Little or No Rock
41CV97
4
Avg. Max Diameter		

61
61

690 ± 70

Abbott and Trierweiler 1995

Type 4: Basin, Angular Rock/Cobble Layered
41BL339
4A
80
41CV98
4
150
41CV98
6
80
41CV115
1
90
41CV174
4
80
41CV317
2
200
41CV317
3
80
41CV0389
2
60
41CV1129
2
60
41CV1129
3
108
41CV1200
2
130
			
41CV1471
1
125
Avg. Max Diameter		
103.6

1270 ± 120
1430 ± 70
1060 ± 60
820 ± 40
510 ± 50
1300 ± 60
1940 ± 60
640 ± 130
1400 ± 60
2140 ± 70
740 ± 60, 1240 ± 40,
and 1260 ± 50
1360 ± 40

Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Trierweiler 1996

Type 5: Basin, Slab Lined
41CV174
3
41CV174
5
41CV174
7
Avg. Max Diameter		

170
200
200
190.0

1874 ± 87
1910 ± 60
1650 ± 60

Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995

Summary Data on Hearth Types
Type 1
Type 3
Type 4
Type 5

Temporal Ranges
810 to 1460 B.P.
690 B.P.
510 to 820 B.P.; 1060 to 1430 B.P.; and 1940 to 2140 B.P.
1650 to 1874 B.P.

Average Maximum Diameter (cm)
72.3
61
103.6
190

*All dates obtained from Fort Hood radiocarbon database; reference includes site published reference and in
most cases specific radiocarbon data.

236

Texas Archeological Society
Table 4. Fort Hood hearths with chronological information and weight of burned rocks.

Site

Feature

Total (kg)

Temporal Data*

Citation

3000 to 2500 B.P.
41CV1378
41CV0088

1
1

472.2
44.8

2960 ± 50
2660 ± 50

Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996

2500 to 2000 B.P.
41CV41
5
16.5
41CV1138
1
11.5
41CV88
5
1
41CV1143
6
19
41CV1129
3
1.7
41CV1482
4
12
			
41CV389
1
52.4
41BL155
2
76

2340 ± 50
2460 ± 40
2230 ± 60
2210 ± 40
2140 ± 70
2140 ± 70;
2970 ± 60
2490 ± 60
2400 ± 60

Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Trierweiler 1996
Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Trierweiler 1996
Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Trierweiler 1996
Mehalchick et al. 1999

2000 to 1500 B.P.
41CV1049
41CV174
41CV1478
41CV1191
41CV317
41CV722
41CV174
41CV1049
41CV174
41CV46
41CV389
41BL755
41CV88
41CV481

1A
7
1
2
3
1
3
7
5
1
5
1
1
1

79.5
14
8
16
8
57
45
78.5
46
60.3
19.5
~45
44.8
30

1600 ± 100
1650 ± 60
1830 ± 60
1630 ± 40
1940 ± 60
1680 ± 100
1874 ± 87
1590 ± 50
1910 ± 60
1720 ± 50
1620 ± 60
1580 ± 90
1740 ± 60
1580 ± 60

Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Mehalchick et al. 1999
Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Trierweiler 1996
Mehalchick et al. 1999
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996

1500 to 1000 B.P.
41CV1471
1
92
41CV95
3
2.5
41CV988
4
27
41BL339
4A
28
41CV98
6
20
41CV95
4
19
41CV578
9
32
41CV1482
1
33
			
41BL0844
1
6.2
41CV317
2
10.5
41CV380
1
118.5

1360 ± 40
1410 ± 60
1230 ± 40
1270 ± 120
1060 ± 60
1080 ± 60
1480 ± 40
1060 ± 60;
1340 ± 60
1070 ± 50
1300 ± 60
1250 ± 50

Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Trierweiler 1996
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 237
Table 4. (Continued)
Site

Feature

Total (kg)

Temporal Data*

41CV1250
5
56
1210 ± 40
41CV1443
2
98
1460 ± 50
41CV1329
2
10
1140 ± 50
41CV988
2A
172.25
1280 ± 40
41CV722
3
35
1460 ± 60
41CV115
2
43.3
1240 ± 40;
			
1260 ± 50
41BL0743
1
105
1030 ± 70
				
41CV1410
2
112.5
1290 ± 60
41CV184
1
21.9
1280 ± 60
41CV1310
5
83.5
1280 ± 50
41CV98
5
29
1220 ± 60
41CV98
4
52.3
1430 ± 70

Citation
Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Mehalchick et al. 2000
Fort Hood radiocarbon database
Mehalchick et al. 1999
Trierweiler 1996
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995;
Trierweiler et al. 1994
Mehalchick et al. 2000
Trierweiler 1996
Mehalchick et al. 2000
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996

1000 to 500 B.P.
41CV1166
1
12
810 ± 60
41CV389
2
1.9
640 ± 130
41CV1479
1
2.9
870 ± 60
41CV317
1
7
920 ± 70
41CV115
1
50.7
820 ± 40
41CV1432
2
18.75
700 ± 70
41CV1200
2
314.9
740 ± 60;
			
1240 ± 40;
			
1260 ± 50
41CV174
4
2
510 ± 50
41CV1430
2
10
810 ± 60
41CV936
1
22
770 ± 60
41CV722
4
3
580 ± 60
41BL743
1
105
640 ± 60
				
41BL564
1
598
690 ± 50
41BL827
2
59
730 ± 70
41CV1365
3
184.5
590 ± 60
41CV1410
2
112.5
990 ± 50
41CV47
1
73.1
700 ± 50
41CV44
1
35.8
930 ± 50
41CV1310
5
83.5
910 ± 50
41BL154
1
196.5
1680 ± 60

Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Mehalchick et al. 1999
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Mehalchick et al. 2000
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Mehalchick et al. 2000
Trierweiler 1996
Mehalchick et al. 1999
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995;
Trierweiler et al. 1994
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995
Mehalchick et al. 1999
Mehalchick et al. 2000
Mehalchick et al. 2000
Trierweiler 1996
Trierweiler 1996
Mehalchick et al. 2000
Abbott and Trierweiler 1995

*All dates obtained from Fort Hood radiocarbon database; reference includes site published reference and in
most cases specific radiocarbon data.

238

Texas Archeological Society
Table 5. Cowdog Crossing data recovery features by hearth type.

Feature Number

Inferred Functional Type*

2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Flat, Angular Rock Layered Hearth
Flat, Angular Rock Layered Hearth
Basin with rock layer
Slab-lined basin
Flat, Angular Rock Layered Hearth
Flat, Angular Rock Layered Hearth
Slab-lined basin

Feature Type*

Radiocarbon Date

Type 1
Type 1
Type 4
Type 5
Type 1
Type 1
Type 4/5

650 B.P.
650 B.P.
1730 B.P.
2590 B.P.
1400 B.P.
ca. 1400 B.P.
1750 B.P.

* based on Kleinbach et al.'s (1995) burned rock feature typology

Interpretations of Burned Rock Technology
As noted, Ellis (1997) indicates burned rock
technology offers insights into the many variables
that went into its design, from functional attributes
to social aspects. Binford (1979:261) noted that
site furniture, such as formal and substantial cooking features, are “anticipatory” and reflect a certain
degree of planning. Additionally, feature technology,
specifically the investment of energy into construction and use, is often related to intensification of
resource exploitation. In their study of slab-lined
cylindrical cooking basins in southeast Wyoming,
Smith and McNees (1999) found that the basins
served as enhancements to the landscape, prompting
hunter-gatherers to return to the same location over
long periods, using the space in the same manner
to exploit seasonally available plant resources. The
study of the substantial features considered the influence that the presence of relatively costly, enduring
facilities had on long-term patterns of location. The
construction of these costly features for anticipated
future reuse suggests a multi-season planning depth
(Smith and McNees 1999).
If true, several inferences can be drawn to the
case at hand. The data on the Cowdog Crossing site
and other Fort Hood sites suggests a more formal
investment of energy in cooking technology during the Late Archaic and a gradual but inconsistent
decline during the subsequent Transitional Archaic
and at least the early part of the Late Prehistoric.
Formal basin-shaped rock-lined hearths date from
2500 B.P. and as late as 1650 B.P., or so. The later
hearths in the data recovery investigations, as well as
in the broader data, are more expedient, less formal,
perhaps indicating either a decreased occupational
intensity, or perhaps a functional shift.

Regarding function, within the hearth category,
a further characterization can be made following
Johnson’s (2000) distinction between fire-places,
hearths, and ovens. This distinction can be imposed
on the hearth types defined by Abbott et al. (1996).
An oven, distinct from a hearth, is:
…a facility used for covered roasting or
baking. Hot rocks ordinarily placed within
a shallow basin or deeper pit and heated
there, or nearby, forming a basal heating
element. In larger ovens, baking is usually
done when food that needs considerable,
even lengthy, cooking (e.g., agave and sotol bases, called “hearts”) is placed above
or among the warmed up rocks of the
heating element. Then the whole is covered over with soft plant parts and earth,
or even by another layer of heated rocks
or cold “lid” rock, effectively sealing in
the heat for periods of up to several days.
Shallow basin-shaped ovens were used for
shorter baking episodes, such as overnight
(Johnson 2000:73).

Hearths, on the other hand, are a pavement of
heated rocks, a portion of which is heated by fire,
and the remainder utilized as a cooking surface or
platform. The archeological distinction between the
two is that ovens comprise a relatively dense concentration of stacked rock, whereas hearths are typically a single layer of rocks (Johnson 2000:72–73).
Hearths and ovens can often be difficult to distinguish, although sometimes ovens are relatively
massive features. Fireplaces are typically represented in the archeological record by a sparse scattering of rock, not a formal layer of rock. Most often

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 239
fireplaces are identifiable by the burned soil and ash
residue. Ellis (1997:63) notes that “stone-boiling
stones would probably appear in small isolated piles
or scatters of fire-cracked rocks,” but nothing of this
sort was found in the data recovery investigations.
During the Transitional Archaic, the features appear more consistent with fireplaces and short-term
baking or open parching. The more formal lined
basin features of the earlier Late Archaic era are
more consistent with ovens. It could indicate a shift
in subsistence. For example, Black et al. (1997) and
Prewitt (1976b) see burned rock oven technology as
primarily focused on the baking of vegetal materials
(‘veggie-baking’ as Prewitt states) as the main focus
of oven cookery. Certain plants, based on what little
evidence remains, appear to have been the primary
cooked resources, namely acorns, sotol, several of
the bulbous plants in the lily family, prickly pear, and
various geophytes (perennials and underground storage bulbs/roots) including the prairie turnip (Black et
al. 1997:297). These resources are defined as “lowranked resources,” a term commonly used in optimum
foraging theory, diet-breadth studies, and general
behavioral ecology that refers to caloric return rates
relative to the investment of labor in procurement.
Resource ranking has been a useful consideration
in many hunter-gatherer models as an indicator of
foraging versus collecting or traveler versus processor (see Bettinger and Baumhoff 1982; Kelly 1995).
Dering (1999) has utilized resource ranking, in conjunction with burned rock features, to infer Archaic
hunter-gatherer economies and mobility in the Lower
Pecos region of Texas. Importantly, Dering’s work
presents data on caloric input and yield of plant resources, such as sotol and lechuguilla, which are found
during certain prehistoric times in the Fort Hood area.
In summary, the Fort Hood data shows a decline
in the formality and energy investment in cooking
feature technology from the Late Archaic to the
Transitional Archaic, a transition occurring at approximately 1750-1800 B.P. Something happened
at this time that affected burned rock technology.
The initial implication is that variable investment
of labor into feature technology is correlated with
decreased bulk processing of low ranked resources,
such as “veggies,” decrease in “site furniture,” and
perhaps occupational intensity or redundancy. In
part, these are signatures of a shift from collector/
processor strategies during the Late Archaic to a
more highly mobile foraging strategy in the later
time periods when there was a decrease in the intensity of processing of low-ranked resources. To

reiterate a salient point, any one line of evidence,
such as assemblages or burned rock technology, offers only suggestive trends: it is the correspondence
and correlation of the multiple different trends that
form the basis for a more concrete picture of the
changes at the end of the Archaic.
The Data Part II:
Site Distribution Patterns
In an informal discussion during a conference
a while back, Binford asked why Central Texas
cultures never developed a higher level of social
organization when the environmental circumstances,
by global standards, were conducive to such development (see Collins [1995:387]; Kroeber [1939:71];
and Story [1985:55] for similar musings on the
larger region and Boyd et al. [2004:222] for discussion of Fort Hood patterns). Krieger, as previously
discussed, noted that areas all around Central Texas
(the American Southwest, Eastern Woodlands, and
Plains) with the exclusion of South Texas, were
seeing the emergence of tribal organization and
sedentism. Influences of these peripheral societies
are evident in the Central Texas archeological record, but there was apparently never such an in situ
development in the region.
Under the assumption that there should have
been continuous development along these lines,
Thoms and Olive (1993:47) proposed a predictive
model for Fort Hood and the surrounding areas
that postulated a series of expectations for the Late
Archaic to the Transitional Archaic (3000 to 1200
B.P.). These include increases in population density,
increasing collector-like strategies, village or quasivillage sites with more substantial residential structures, middens, cemeteries, increase and diversity of
tool types, bulk processing features such as ovens
and middens, and increased evidence of trade. The
data presented in that report indicates that trajectory
was followed until about 2000 to 1800 years ago,
and then the data from this article appears to almost
entirely contradict these predictions, at least for the
final Archaic millennium.
Fort Hood Site Frequency and
Distribution Patterns
As one line of evidence to assess the long term
developmental trends, Thoms and Olive (1993) analyzed diachronic changes in component frequency

240

Texas Archeological Society

and distribution using Fort Hood projectile points
as chronologic identifiers (Table 6). Their results
suggested that distributional changes of projectile
point types across the landscape reflected diachronic changes in hunting practices. Thoms and Olive
(1993) found that during the Transitional Archaic
(which they defined as extending from 1800 to
1250 B.P.), groups were moving up the landscape
to occupy transitional zones between the uplands
and lowlands. Complementary to this trend is the
decline in overall percentage of lowland as well as
upland sites during the Transitional Archaic. The
implication is that groups during this time were
situating themselves in an ecotonal position on
the landscape, a distinct difference from both the
previous and later periods.
To further analyze the trends in Thoms and
Olive’s data, the Fort Hood database of radiocarbon
dates, which could be linked to spatial data, provides
a view of the distribution patterns of dated sites
rather than merely projectile point distributions. The
objective is to determine if the trends in the projectile
point distributions can also be seen in the dated sites.
Projectile points could merely reflect the discard patterns of the artifact type rather than residential site
patterns. Radiocarbon dates typically derive from
cooking features, and are therefore inferred to be a
better indicator of occupational distributions.
To conduct the study, data on site location was
obtained for all sites recorded within Fort Hood that
contained corrected or conventional radiocarbon
dates within range of those found at Cowdog Crossing, namely between 3000 and 500 B.P., to more
than cover the range. The locational data was then
correlated with the Fort Hood soil types to obtain
landscape position (upland, intermediate upland,
and lowland) using the same criteria employed by
Thoms and Olive (1993) so that the results would be
comparable. Figure 3 shows the frequency of components in 100 year periods from 3000 to 500 B.P. to
illustrate the variation in the total population of the
dataset. There is a gradual but intermittent increase
in dated components until about 1300 to 1200 B.P.,
and then a gradual decrease thereafter.
The distribution of dated components shows
slightly different trends than those observed by
Thoms and Olive (1993), but agrees on some aspects. Using arbitrary 500 year divisions rather than
the predetermined temporal periods in the previous
study is an effort to impose more objective parameters on the trends. The data shows a gradual increase in the use of uplands from 3000 to 1500 B.P.,

and then a drop in upland occupation from 1500 to
1000 B.P. (Table 7). Concurrently, there was a sharp
decline in occupation of the intermediate uplands
between 2500 and 2000 B.P., followed by a rather
consistent increase afterwards. That decrease in
intermediate upland use directly correlates with the
highest occupational rates of lowland settings during
the same period, from 2500 to 2000 B.P. To summarize the data, there was a rather intensive focus
on lowland riparian zones until around 2000 B.P.,
followed by a move up the landscape into either
an ecotonal position or into the uplands. In general
terms, this pattern is somewhat consistent with those
observed in the projectile point data, and in conjunction with the technological information provides a
basis for addressing shifts in cultural patterns.
Interpretations and World
Systems Theory
To address diachronic change in the final millennium of the Archaic, why Central Texas did
not develop a higher level of organization, and the
macroeconomic sphere, the intent here is to draw on
a wider perspective, such as Krieger’s, to interconnect the issues. The position is that in the latter part
of the Archaic the changes are not simply explained
by the “techno-environmental” factors (as defined
by Harris [1991]) of the cultural ecological model.
Specifically, the patterns observed in the archeological record are in part to be understood by the
cyclical emergence and declines in regional “tribal”
networks as defined by Braun and Plog (1982), and
by macroeconomic exchange spheres that had preponderant effects on adaptive patterns.
To clarify the approach, the limitations of the
past and prevailing approaches warrant brief mention. The standard cultural ecological approach, at
least the way it has been commonly employed, does
not address the issue of macroeconomic spheres and
tribal networks well. Although the data that have
been presented in this article are largely technological and environmental, for good reason, since that
is the nature of most of the archeological data that
tends to survive, the synthesis of that data needs to
be considered in a different light to avoid foregone
conclusions that these folks ate deer and lived along
riparian zones. As Flannery (1972) pointed out,
the environment in cultural ecology was always
intended to refer to both the human as well as the
natural setting, but at times it has not been given

54		

Total

55.6
3.7
40.7

30
2
22
189

73
72
44

38.6
38.1
23.3
306

127
110
69

41.5
35.9
22.5

Paleoindian
Early-Middle
Middle Archaic
(12,500-8500 B.P.) Archaic (8500-5100 BP)
(5100-2600 BP)
# of Sites
%
# of Sites
%
# of Sites
%

Upland
Intermediate Upland
Lowland

Env. Zone

44.7
30.7
24.6
179		

80
55
44

Late Archaic
(2600-1800 BP)
# of Sites
%

240

87
103
50

36.3
42.9
20.8

Transitional Archaic
(1800-1250 BP)
# of Sites
%

Table 6. Thoms and Olive (1993:49) statistics for site distribution patterns by landscape position in Fort Hood.

149

53
54
42

35.6
36.2
28.2

Late Prehistoric
(1250-200 BP)
# of Sites %

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 241

242

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Number of sites per 100 year period.

Table 7. Percentage of Upland sites in Fort Hood during successive 500-year periods.
Age in Years
Before Present
(B.P.)
3000–2500
2500–2000
2000–1500
1500–1000
1000–500

Sites in
Upland Soils
(%)

Sites in
Intermediate Uplands
(%)

Sites in
Lowland
Riparian Zones

38
41
51
39
45

29
9
20
27
32

33
50
29
34
23

equal consideration in actual practice. To read what
cultural ecologists actually conclude, “one would
often think that civilized peoples only ate, excreted,
and reproduced” (Flannery 1972:400). That is
perhaps an overstatement, but the point is that the
nature of the change at the end of the Archaic is one
in which the laws of “physics” changed and need to
be explained by a different paradigm.
For the purposes at hand, the different paradigm
is world systems theory, which has been applied to
the analysis of Mississippian, including the Caddo,

long-term cultural developments (e.g., Cobb 1991;
Baugh 1998), but is rarely used to explain the
developments of peripheral societies such as in
Central Texas. According to the theory, any group
can only be understood in the context of the bigger
system of which it is a part, and over a long historical development (longue durée). This is essentially
consistent with the larger perspective espoused by
Krieger (1946). Over the long term, there is a
cyclical emergence and decline of regional trade
networks, which can be remarkably extensive. In

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 243
this process, there are core and peripheral societies,
and the flow of goods usually goes from periphery to
core. For example, historical sources mention wide
trade networks in early history (Swanton 1996:192)
and a substantial focus on uses of all parts of bison,
from hide to horn (Swanton 1946:249). To interpret
Late Prehistoric bison hunting strictly in terms of
subsistence is to misunderstand a vital aspect of
the intensification of the resource. The important
point here is that these economic systems become
highly integrated, and once a group of people become tapped into the system, it can quickly become
the driving force in all aspects of their society. The
question for Central Texas is when such a system
fell into place.
To define the temporal framework of regional
systems in and around Central Texas, the chronology
of large regional complexes is noteworthy since the
rise of trade and cultural spheres is often driven by
population centers that rise to prominence, then collapse, a process that has been compared to bubbles
rising to the surface and popping. In eastern Texas,
several major exchange networks came and went.
As discussed by Johnson and Goode (1994:38), one
was the Middle Woodland-Hopewell-Marksville
network which they date from ca. 2200 B.P. to about
1550 B.P, represented archeologically in eastern
Texas by the Jonas Short mound on the Angelina
River and the Coral Snake mound on the Sabine
River. Afterwards there appeared to be a period of
decline in regional integration and exchange from
roughly 1700 or 1800 B.P. to perhaps 1200 B.P.
(Hall 1981:303; Prewitt 1981; Story 1990:273–274).
The next major exchange network was the Mississippian, represented in northeast and eastern Texas
by the Caddo. Most say this network was firmly in
place by 1000 B.P., though the Early Caddo components of the George C. Davis site date to around
1150-1100 B.P. (Story 1990:277). The primary components at the Cowdog Crossing site fall between
these two regional interaction spheres. During this
time, areas all around eastern and Central Texas
were in the midst of Woodland-style adaptive patterns, whether this was the Fourche Maline to the
north and east or Mossy Grove to the south and east.
The mechanisms of the core-periphery processes
are in part caused by ecological factors. Sedentary
groups, like those all around Central Texas in late
prehistoric times, tend to exhaust the carrying
capacity of the land and become increasingly reliant
on agriculture to intensify the exploitation of local
resources. Agriculture, however, is inherently

risky as a mainstay and the need to diversify the
subsistence base, in part through the development
of trade alliances, become important to offset risk.
Cobb (1991:180) states the largely consensual view
that “increased dependence on horticultural and
agricultural economies entails increased subsistence
risks brought about by an artificial simplification
of the landscape and reduced mobility.” Central
Texas has always been fairly resource rich and a
source of various resources (such as bison or lithic
raw materials) that are difficult to find in adjacent
areas. The rise of sedentism and higher levels of
organization in Central Texas may to some degree
have been offset by fundamentally peripheral
economic patterns that were entirely complementary
to agricultural subsistence.
By at least 1000 B.P., there appears to be a pattern of the groups to the east moving into and utilizing portions of Central Texas, very likely to exploit
the economic resources of the area. Shafer (2006)
proposed the Prairie Caddo emerged around 1000
B.P, and moved westward to form a “buffer” zone
around the George C. Davis site before the complex
dissipated around 650 B.P. This buffer encompassed
what is now Fort Hood (Shafer 2006:6). Archeologically, we know there were strong ties between
Shafer’s Prairie Caddo complex and the emergence
of Toyah assemblages and all the way into historical
times. So essentially, Fort Hood formed the periphery
in a macroeconomic sphere by 1000 B.P., lasting for
the remainder of prehistory. The question is whether
this pattern perhaps emerged much earlier during
Woodland or Hopewellian times, and whether the
changes around 1800 B.P. were part of the development of a low-level tribal network as defined by
Braun and Plog (1982:504) as a non-hierarchical or
relatively undifferentiated social network. In other
word, did Central Texas constitute the “bread basket”
for the surrounding areas? Conversely, was the Transitional Archaic a dark age of sorts with the decline
of regional integration following the collapse of East
Texas Woodland-Marksville groups on sites such as
the Jonas Short and Corral Snake mounds.
If we overlay the regional chronology atop the
rise and fall of regional interaction spheres, there
seems to be a rather close correlation in both the
timing and nature of the archeological patterns. In
the intervening time frame between the collapse of
the Woodland-Marksville sphere and the emergence
of the Caddo, the archeological record shows a distinct break in the standard trajectory of decreased
residential mobility through time and increasing

244

Texas Archeological Society

regional integration. The climate is thought to have
become more mesic and one interpretation is that
“the human response to the new, moister conditions
would have been a return to an adaptive pattern that
was closer to the mobile forager type” (Collins and
Ricklis 1994:324). Conversely, the changes of the
time may have been not simply a direct response
to environmental conditions but to the human environment. Hall (1981) hypothesized a contracting
economic sphere during this period; his observations
are perhaps consistent with Prewitt’s (1981) interpretations of the Central Texas chronology. Regarding his Twin Sisters phase, denoted in part by Ensor
points, he notes “the existence of an extensive trade
network is evidenced by the occurrence of marine
shell artifacts and various stone objects fashioned
from materials which are relatively limited in distribution” (Prewitt 1981:81). However, during the
following Driftwood phase, marked by Darl points,
Prewitt (1981:82) notes that “there seems to be a
lack of exotic materials which suggests an absence
of any widespread trade networks.” His dates have
been subject to quite a bit of scrutiny, but his general patterns seem to hold up in the Fort Hood and
Central Texas archeological records.
Very similar patterns have been observed elsewhere at the same time along the northern margin
of the Mississippian world. Braun and Plog (1982),
writing about the Illinois archeological record, note
that an abrupt decline in exotic grave goods and a
move up the landscape away from major riparian
zones is noted right around 1800 B.P., and is commonly thought to represent “a widespread decline in
supralocal cooperation” and integration. They argue,
however, that the patterns can equally be explained
by the development of a non-hierarchical network
that offset ecological unpredictability and risk. Such
a network would distribute environmental risk and
alleviate the need for such an intensive exploitation
of resources.
In light of these considerations, looking at the
longue durée of the Central Texas, and more specifically Fort Hood, chronology, there appears to have
been a long term trend of continued subsistence
intensification until about 1800-1600 B.P., followed
by an apparent decline in subsistence intensification,
until a subsequent cycle of regional integration. The
decline, which correlates with the Darl components
on the site, may not have been a dark ages of sorts,
marked by declining regional networks, but rather a
fundamental shift similar to that proposed by Braun
and Plog (1982) in which the development of tribal

networks provided a social response to environmental risk and alleviated the need to intensively exploit
low-ranked resources.
Story (1985) considered one of the defining
attributes of the Archaic to be the adaptation to
local environments. In other words, it refers to the
period of time in which groups devised toolkits,
technologies, and behaviors to specifically adapt
to a particular region. Perhaps the hallmark of the
end of the Archaic is the rise of regional networks
in which subsistence and socio-economic systems
are increasingly integrally-related. As stated, the
“Archaic” is defined by a band-level social organization, and consequently, the rise of tribal networks
is perhaps the defining criteria for the end of the
Archaic. Social adaptation, primarily in the form of
regional exchange networks, becomes paramount
over ecological adaptation at some point. As Flannery noted, the environment in cultural ecology
comprises both the human as well as natural setting, but the former likely becomes an increasingly
important consideration over time. In the final
phase of the Archaic this distinction is perhaps vital
to understanding the changes of the times. Krieger
was interested in the relationships among cultures,
and used the affinities among assemblages as a
central line of evidence. That approach is required
to unravel the changes. The Cowdog Crossing site
provides a narrow vantage point, but sometimes
the tail wags the dog.
Patterns Writ Large
As stated from the outset, the intent in the
analysis and interpretation of the Cowdog Crossing
site was to take a fairly unconventional approach
to avoid foregone conclusions. Fort Hood has a
substantial database that makes it conducive to the
exploration of rather broad scale patterns in both
time and space. The Cowdog Crossing site produced
rather limited data in many regards, but by tying the
perceived patterns, however slight, into the larger
Fort Hood database, and, in turn, placing the patterns
into a truly expansive context, the site contributes to
an understanding of the broad patterns of prehistory.
Willey (1985:353-354) laid out what he perceived as the outstanding issues in New World
archeology. One was:
A problem of continuing interest for Eastern United States archaeologists has been

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 245
the nature of the “gap” or the “transition”
between the Hopewellian ceremonial climax (ca. A.D. 200-400) and the rise and
climax of Mississippian ceremonialism
(ca. A.D. 1000-1400). What happened in
the time between? Was there a “decline,”
a definite “break,” or was there some kind
of transitional continuity between the two
climaxes? The problem has been around
for some time.

Willey goes on to note that the problem has long
been addressed by environmental or ecological
changes, but these inadequately address all of the
data.
Fort Hood lies on the margin of the Hopewellian
and Mississippian spheres, but was likely strongly
affected by eastern influences and the mechanisms
of a core-periphery relationship as modeled in world
systems theory. Shafer (2006) hypothesizes that the
Fort Hood area was within the realm of the Prairie
Caddo in Late Prehistoric times, and so one question
is how far back into prehistory was the area affected
by the macroeconomic and cultural spheres of the
core societies? What is clearly evident is that there
were concurrent changes in the archeological record
of Fort Hood and the eastern flank of Central Texas
that very closely resemble trends seen in the much
broader area. There does seem to be a “decline” in
the evolutionary trajectory post-1800-1600 B.P.,
until the reemergence of more complex regional
integration around 1200-1000 b.p.
Regarding the juxtaposition of environmental
and technological data to infer responses to changing conditions, any such direct comparisons warrant
consideration of macroeconomics as a mediating
force. The cultural ecological model, which accounts for economic and other human components
of the environment, is an undercurrent of the prevailing definition of the “Archaic” as an adaptive mode,
but as often employed it has limitations. Such an
approach is not necessarily denied here, but other
aspects may trump the immediacy of environmental
conditions as prime movers in change, technological
or otherwise, during the Archaic.
The definition of the Archaic has always entailed
socio-economic and political organizational aspects.
From such a perspective, the data on exotic goods,
warfare (or at least violent death), cemeteries, grave
goods, and even perhaps dog sacrifice, may indicate
rising and falling macroeconomic spheres that can
equally be cited as contributing causal factors to the

long-term adaptive strategies in the Fort Hood area
during the final phases of the Archaic. Specifically,
the retreat of the widespread economic network to
the east as noted by Hall (1981) may have coincided
with more mesic environmental conditions that
relieved some of the environmental constraints,
factors that had previously pushed intensification
of riparian zones and a collector-like strategy.
Following the “collapse” of the Middle Woodland
macroeconomic sphere, there does appear to be a
decline in regional integration and a move towards
the forager strategy, but it is not simply a direct
response to natural environmental change, but also
a response to the cultural environmental.
A century from now, if we could see what the
understanding of prehistory might hold, we would
likely be rather surprised at the vast interconnectedness of prehistoric developments on a continental
scale. If the prevailing economic theories are applied to the Archaic, then a study of Poverty Point
(Marshall points found there have commonly been
inferred to be part of the indigenous Central Texas
technological continuum) and Watson Brake, of
Southwestern and Mesoamerican developments,
and many farflung places in between, may well illuminate trends and causal forces, but also reveal
what the territory we now know as Texas had to
offer. John Donne a long time ago wrote of the
interconnectedness of human society, remarkably
presaging modern economics: to borrow a turn of
phrase, no society was ever an island, and in the
study of the past, it might be worth pondering for
whom the bell tolls.
Acknowledgments
This article derives from investigations conducted on behalf of Fort Hood. The project involved
a cast of many, most unseen and far removed from
the center stage. To those, the authors extend their
gratitude. A few of the more prominent participants
warrant mention. Fort Hood archeologists Rich
Jones and Sunny Wood led the way. Karl Kleinbach,
once at Fort Hood but now at Fort Sam Houston,
gave us the opportunity. Kevin Miller offered insights throughout the process. Carole Carpenter
drafted the maps and figures. Dr. Timothy K. Perttula provided editorial comments, several of which
were rather crucial in clarifying what precisely was
being said. For what good may come of the effort,
these and many others share the credit.

246

Texas Archeological Society
References Cited

Abbott, J., G. Mehalchick, J. Peck, and W. N. Trierweiler
1996 Preliminary Report of National Register Testing on
Site 41CV389 at Fort Hood, Texas. TRC Mariah
Associates, Austin, Texas.
Abbott, J. T., K. Kleinbach, and G. Mehalchick
1996 Features. In Archeological Testing at Fort Hood:
1994–1995, Volume 2, edited by W. N. Trierweiler,
pp. 577-618. Archeological Resource Management
Series Research Report 35. United States Army Fort
Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.
Abbott, J. T. and W. N. Trierweiler (editors)
1995 NRHP Significance Testing of 57 Prehistoric Archeological Sites on Fort Hood, Texas. Archeological
Resource Management Series Research Report 34.
United States Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.
Bamforth, D. B. and M. S. Becker
2000 Core/Biface Ratios, Mobility, Refitting, and Artifact
Use-Lives: A Paleoindian Example. Plains Anthropologist 45:273–290.
Baugh, T. G.
1998 Regional Polities and Socioeconomic Exchange:
Caddoan and Puebloan Interaction. In The Native
History of the Caddo. Their Place in Southeastern Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T. K.
Perttula and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 145–158. Studies
in Archeology 30. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bettinger, R. L. and M. A. Baumhoff
1982 The Numic Spread: Great Basin Cultures in Competition. American Antiquity 47(3):485-503.
Binford, L.
1979 Organization and Formation Processes: Looking at
Curated Technologies. Journal of Anthropological
Research 35:255–73.
Binford, L. and S. Binford
1966 A preliminary analysis of functional variability in
the Mousterian of Levallois facies. American Anthropologist 68(2):238–295.
Black, S. L., L. W. Ellis, D. G. Creel, and G. T. Goode
1997 Hot Rock Cooking on the Greater Edwards Plateau:
Four Burned Rock Midden Sites in West Central
Texas, Volumes 1 and 2. Studies in Archeology 22,
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, and Archeology Studies
Program, Report 2, Environmental Affairs Department, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.

Bordes, F.
1953 Les limons quaternaires du Bassin de la Seine. Les
limons quaternaires du Bassin de la Seine: stratigraphie et archéologie paléolithique. Archives de
l’Institut de Paléontologie humaine, Paris.
1978 Typological Variability in the Mousterian Layers
atPech de l’Aze I, II, and IV. Journal of Anthropological Research 34:181–193.

1984 Le Paleolithique en Europe. Lecons sur le Paleolithique. Editions de Centre National de la Recherche
Scientfique, Paris.
Boyd, D. K., G. Mehalchick, and K. W. Kibler
2004 Rethinking Paluxy Site Archeology. In Shifting
Sands and Geophytes: Geoarcheological Investigations at Paluxy Sites on Fort Hood, by G. Mehalchick, D. K. Boyd, K. W. Kibler, and C. Ringstaff,
pp. 199-224. Archeological Resources Management
Series Research Report 48. United States Army Fort
Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.
Braun, D. P. and S. Plog
1982 Evolution of “Tribal” Social Networks: Theory and
Prehistoric North American Evidence. American
Antiquity 47(3):504–525.
Butzer, K. W.
1982 Archaeology as Human Ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Carpenter, S., C. T. Hartnett, J. Lowe, and K. Miller
2010 Data Recovery Investigations on the Cowdog Crossing Site: A Study of the End of the Archaic. SWCA
Cultural Resources Report 1-356 and Archeological
Management Series Research Report 56. United
States Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.
Cobb, C. R.
1991 Social Reproduction and the Longue Duree in the
Prehistory of the Midcontinental United States.
In Processual and Postprocessual Archaeologies,
Multiple Ways of Knowing the Past, edited by R. W.
Preucel, pp. 168–182. Occasional Paper 10. Center
for Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 66:361-400.
Collins, M. B. and R. A. Ricklis
1994 Conclusions. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human
Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays
County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and M. B. Collins,
pp. 317–328. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 247
Corbin, J.
1976 The Archaic of the Texas Coast. In The Texas Archaic: A Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester, pp.
91–97. Special Report 2. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Johnson, L., Jr. and G. T. Goode
1994 A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene
Climates, As Well As Archeological Periods On
the Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 65:1–54.

Dering, J. P.
1999 Earth-Oven Plant Processing in Archaic Period
Economies: An Example from a Semi-arid Savannah
in South-Central North America. American Antiquity
64(4):659–674.

Kelley, J. C.
1947 The Lehmann Rockshelter: A Stratified Site of the
Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
18:115–128.

Ellis, L. W.
1997 Hot Rock Technology. In Hot Rock Cooking on the
Greater Edwards Plateau: Four Burned Rock Midden Sites in West Central Texas, Volume 1, by S. L.
Black, L. W. Ellis, D. G. Creel, and G. T. Goode, pp.
1-43. Studies in Archaeology 22, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin, and Archeology Studies Program, Report 2,
Environmental Affairs Department, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Flannery, K. V.
1972 The Cultural Evolution of Civilizations. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics 3:399–426.
Ford, J. A. and G. R. Willey
1941 An Interpretation of the Prehistory of the Eastern United States. American Anthropologist 43(3):325–363.
Hall, G. D.
1981 Allen’s Creek: A Study in the Prehistory of the
Lower Brazos River Valley, Texas. Research Report
61. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Harris, M.
1991 Cultural Anthropology. 3rd Edition. Harper & Collins, New York.
Hester, T. R. (editor)
1976 The Texas Archaic: A Symposium. Special Report 2.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.
Hofman, J. L., and R. Brooks
1989 Prehistoric Culture History of Woodland Complexes
in the Southern Great Plains. In From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern
Great Plains, by J. L. Hofman, R. B. Brooks, J. S.
Hays, D. W. Owsley, R. L. Jantz, M. K. Marks, and
M. H. Manhein, pp. 61-70. Research Series No. 35.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Johnson, L.
2000 Life and Death at the Bessie Kruze Site (41WM13) on
the Blackland Prairie of Williamson County, Texas.
Archeology Studies Program, Report 22. Texas
Department of Transportation, Enviromental Affairs
Division, Austin.

Kelly, R. L.
1988 Three sides of a biface. American Antiquity
53:717–734.

1992 Mobility/Sedentism: Concepts, Archaeological Measures, and Effects. Annual Review of Anthropology
21:43–66.
1995 The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in HunterGatherer Lifeways. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington D. C. and London.

Kelly, R. L. and L.C. Todd
1988 Coming into the country: early Paleoindian mobility
and hunting. American Antiquity 53:231–244.
Kibler, K. W. and G. Mehalchick
2010 Hunter-gatherer Resource Acquisition and Use in
the Lower Bosque River Basin during the Late Archaic. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
81:103–126.
Kleinbach, K., G. Mehalchick, J. T. Abbott, and M. J. Quigg
1995 Burned Rock Mounds, Middens, Concentrations,
and Pavements. In NRHP Significance Testing of
57 Prehistoric Archeological Sites on Fort Hood,
Texas, Volume II, edited by J. T. Abbott and W. N.
Trierweiler, pp. 765–801. Archeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report No. 34. United
States Army, Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas
Kleinbach, K., G. Mehalchick, S. A. Tomka, D. K. Boyd,
and K. W. Kibler
1999 Interpretations of Archeological and Geoarcheological Data. In National Register Testing of 19 Prehistoric Archeological Sites at Fort Hood, Texas: The
1995 Season, by G. Mehalchick, K. Kleinbach, D.
K. Boyd, S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler, pp. 203242. Archeological Resource Management Series,
Research Report No. 37. United States Army Fort
Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.
Krieger, A. D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas, with Extensions of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640, The University of Texas, Austin.

248

Texas Archeological Society

Kroeber, A. L.
1939 Cultural and natural areas of native North America.
University of California Press, Berkeley.
Mehalchick, G., K. Kleinbach, D. K. Boyd, S. A. Tomka,
and K. W. Kibler
1999 National Register Testing of 19 Prehistoric Archeological Sites at Fort Hood, Texas: The 1995
Season. Archeological Resource Management Series
Research Report 37. United States Army Fort Hood,
Fort Hood, Texas
Mehalchick, G., K. Kleinbach, D. K. Boyd, and K. W. Kibler
2000 Geoarcheological Investigations and National Register Testing of 52 Prehistoric Archeological Sites at
Fort Hood, Texas: The 1997 Season. Archeological
Resource Management Series Research Report 39.
United States Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas
Miller, M. R. and N. A. Kenmotsu
2004 Prehistory of the Jornada Mogollon and Eastern
Trans-Pecos Regions of West Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 205-265.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Parry, W. J. and R. L. Kelly
1987 Expedient core technology and sedentism. In The
Organization of Core Technology, edited by J. K.
Johnson and C. A. Morrow, pp. 285–304, Westview
Press, Boulder.
Peregrine, P. N.
1992 Mississippian Evolution: A World-System Perspective. Monographs in World Prehistory No. 9. Prehistory Press, Madison, Wisconsin.
Perttula, T. K.
1995 The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak
Savannah of Northeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:331–360.

2004b An Introduction to Texas Prehistoric Archeology. In
The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp.
5-14. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Perttula, T. K. (editor)
2004a The Prehistory of Texas. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.
Prewitt, E. R.
1976a Late Archaic Occupations at the Loeve-Fox Site: The
San Marcos and Twin Sisters Phases. In The Texas
Archaic: A Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester, pp.
67-82. Special Report 2. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1976b Late Archaic Occupations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County, Texas. Research Report No. 49.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.

1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 52: 65-89.

1985 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central
Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201–238.
Rolland, N., and H. L. Dibble
1990 A New Synthesis of Middle Paleolithic Variability.
American Antiquity 55(3):480–499.
Service, E.
1975 Origins of the State and Civilization: The Process of
Cultural Evolution. W. W. Norton, New York.
Shafer, H. J.
1976 Defining the Archaic: An Example from the Lower
Pecos. In The Texas Archaic: A Symposium, edited
by T. R. Hester, pp. 1–9. Special Report 2. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.
2006 People of the Prairie: A Possible Connection to the
Davis Site Caddo. Texas Department of Transportation and Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Smith, C. S. and L. M. McNees
1999 Facilities and Hunter-Gatherer Long-Term Land Use
Patterns: An Example from Southwest Wyoming.
American Antiquity 64 (1):117–136.
Story, D. A.
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West
Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Food Production
in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19–56.
Anthropological Papers 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

1990 Culture History of Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain:
Volume 1, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett,
M. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Research Series No.
38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25:1-562.
Swanton, J. R.
1946 The Indians of the Southeastern United States. Bulletin 137. Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, D.C.
1996 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of
the Caddo Indians. University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.

Thoms, A. V. (editor)
1993 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal
Years 1991 and 1992, The Cantonment and Belton
Lake Periphery Areas. Archeological Resource
Management Series Research Report No. 27.United
Stated Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.

Carpenter and Hartnett—Archaic Macroeconomic Spheres 249
Thoms, A. V. and B. W. Olive
1993 Archaeological Data and Late Prehistoric Period
Population Dynamics. In Archaeological Survey
at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Years 1991 and 1992,
The Cantonment and Belton Lake Periphery Areas,
edited by A. V. Thoms, pp. 43-68. Archeological Resource Management Series Research Report No. 27.
United Stated Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.

Turpin, S. A.
1995 Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern
Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:541–560.

Tomka, S. A., G Mehalchick, K. Kleinbach, and D. K. Boyd
1999 Methods of Investigation. In National Register Testing of 19 Prehistoric Archeological Sites at Fort
Hood, Texas: The 1995 Season, by G. Mehalchick,
K. Kleinbach, D. K. Boyd, S. A. Tomka, and K. W.
Kibler, pp. 21–40. Archeological Resource Management Series Research Report No. 37. United States
Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.

Willey, G. R.
1985 Some Continuing Problems in New World Culture
History. American Antiquity 50(2):351–363.

Trierweiler, W. N. (editor)
1996 Archeological Testing at Fort Hood: 1994–1995.
Volume I. Archeological Resource Management
Series Research Report 35. United States Army Fort
Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.

Wallerstein, I.
1974 The Modern World-System. Academic Books, New
York.

Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado
River Basin, Travis County, Texas
Andrew F. Malof and Matthew S. Taylor

Abstract
In the summer of 2006, a single Terminal Archaic period Native American burial was discovered eroding from
the shores of Lake Travis during a period of drought and lowered lake levels. An emergency recovery resulted
in the analysis of a relatively old, robust, and healthy male who had been buried in a fashion consistent with
regional mortuary practices. Aspects of the natural environment are examined to more fully compare the
burial site and the immediate area within a broader regional context. The individual at the Carpenter Bend site
(41TV2242) appears to represent a successful adaptation on both individual and group levels.

Introduction
During the summer of 2006, David Houston, an
avocational archeologist and longtime resident of
Spicewood, Texas, which is located in Central Texas
near the confluence of the Pedernales and Colorado
rivers, was touring Lake Travis on his jet ski when
he spotted bones eroding from the lakeshore (Figure
1). Looking closer, he saw what appeared to be a
portion of a human skull. Using water, he carefully
washed away enough of the surrounding soil to see
well-worn teeth, at which point he covered the remains and contacted Travis County parks employee
Bill Grace. Houston and Grace revisited the site, at
which time they determined it was not on Travis
County property, but might be owned by the Lower
Colorado River Authority (LCRA). Grace contacted
LCRA. and on August 18, 2006, Andrew Malof of
LCRA, Houston, and Grace, along with Charles
Hixson of LCRA and Patrick Hatten of the Llano
Uplift Archeological Society (LUAS), were shuttled
by LCRA Ranger Arturo Ordonez to the burial location in order to confirm the location and to evaluate
the remains. It was determined that the property
was not owned by LCRA, and that the remains were
almost certainly prehistoric.
Travis County law enforcement was then contacted and the discovery was described to them.
They were confident, based on the information
provided, that the remains were prehistoric and fell
outside their jurisdiction. Meanwhile, the landowners were informed about the discovery and asked

about the possibility of burial recovery. The owners
were agreeable, and on August 27, 2006, salvage
operations at the Carpenter Bend site (41TV2242)
were conducted. The burial was that of a tightly
flexed male, apparently interred below several rock
slabs. No directly associated artifacts were found.
The recovered remains were analyzed by Dr.
Matthew Taylor and Kerri Wilhelm of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin (TARL). Taylor summarizes
the analysis of the remains in this article. Skeletal
pathology indicated that the tall-statured individual
had died at a relatively old age while suffering from a
number of unpleasant, but not unexpected, maladies.
Accelerated Mass Spectrometry (AMS) radiocarbon
assay of a piece of human remains placed the burial
at 1350 ± 40 years B.P. or A.D. 560-640. Utilizing
IntCal09 (Reimer et al. 2009) to calibrate the AMS
date produces a 1 sigma age range of cal AD 651-676
and a 2 sigma age range of cal AD 638-706. These
age ranges are consistent with two Darl points found
at the site, indicating a terminal Late Archaic date
for the site and the burial. Collins (1995) ends the
Late Archaic period between A.D. 650-750, Collins
et. al (1998) end it at 1300 B.P. (A.D. 650) or perhaps 1250 B.P. (A.D. 700) (Collins 1998:271), while
Johnson and Goode (1994) end what they refer to
as the Late Archaic II period at A.D. 600. Prewitt
(1981) places it at 1250 B.P. (AD 700). Darl points
are commonly placed in time just prior to the introduction of arrow points (Sorrow et al. 1967; Turner
and Hester 1993; Collins 1995:Table 2). There are

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

252

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Location of the Carpenter Bend site (41TV2242).

Figure 1. Location of the Carpenter Bend site (41TV2242).

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 253
suggestions that small-bodied dart points such as
the Darl type may actually have been the first arrow
points (Johnson and Goode 1994:40) with potential
temporal overlaps seen at locations such as Evoe
Terrace (Sorrow et al. 1967) and others (Suhm and
Jelks 1962).
The burial is representative of practices seen
along the central portion of the Edwards Plateau.
Suggestions by Powell (1987) and Perttula (2001)
that primary plant productivity to some extent determines the adaptive success and territoriality of
human populations are tested using fine-grained
environmental data (Owen and Schmidly 1986) and
analytical methods outlined in Kelly (1983, 1995).
Productivity values are useful measures for broad
comparative purposes, but may mask environmental
diversity and the amount of resources actually available to humans.
Background
Lake Travis is one of a chain of six lakes formed
by dams constructed by LCRA along the Colorado
River between the late 1930s and the 1950s. Designed to control catastrophic flooding and provide
electricity to rural Central Texas, the lakes are now
a major source of recreation. Lake Travis has historically been a fluctuating reservoir, acting to absorb
floods and discharge reservoir waters to downstream
concerns.
The lake is considered full at 681 ft. above mean
sea level (amsl) and reaches maximum flood stage
(tops Mansfield Dam) at 721 ft. amsl. The ancestral
river bank ranges from very near 680 ft. amsl at
the upstream end near Marble Falls to about 490 ft.
amsl at the downstream end. The river channel at the
Carpenter Bend site is about 640 ft. amsl.
Because of the buffering factor of Lake Travis,
its elevation can vary drastically, from an historic
low of 614 ft. amsl in 1951 to a high of 707 ft.
amsl in 1991. Draw-downs are typically slow and
gradual, but floods can raise the lake several feet in
a day or two, and turn normally placid waters into a
rapidly moving torrent. Between 1948 and 2008 the
lake has been at or below the 650 ft. amsl elevation
seven times during the month of January, each time
exposing the landform containing the burial.
In January 2005 the lake was at full elevation.
A prolonged lack of rainfall caused the lake to start
falling, and by the time of discovery of the burial
in August 2006, it was at a seldom-seen elevation

of 651 ft. amsl. It reached a low of 643 ft. amsl in
December. The spring of 2007 brought abundant
rain, and between March and April the lake rose 17
feet from 651 ft. amsl to 668 ft. amsl, and by June
2007 it was at 683 ft. amsl, fully covering the site.
Site Distributions
To date, there are approximately 1000 recorded
archeological sites of all types located in near proximity to the Colorado River channel between Mansfield Dam and the upper end of Lake Buchanan,
including along the river near Bend at Colorado
Bend State Park, a distance of about 90 river miles.
The vast majority of these, around 650 sites, are located between the lower end of Lake Travis and the
city of Marble Falls in Travis and Burnet counties.
In the Burnet County area, between the upper end of
Lake Travis and Buchanan Dam, which forms Lake
Buchanan, only 95 sites have been recorded, which
includes several at Inks Lake State Park. There are
165 sites near Lake Buchanan and another 60 or so
in the Bend area (McNatt et al. 2001; Lawrence et
al. 2009), which includes portions of Burnet, Llano
and San Saba counties.
This seeming uneven distribution of sites can
be explained rather easily through geography and
expedience. The Marshall Ford Reservoir (Lake
Travis) is perched near the edge of the Balcones escarpment. The main basin, defined here as between
Mansfield Dam and Starnes Island, a distance of
about five river miles, is deep but relatively small,
about four square miles in size. Lake Buchanan, on
the other hand, located near the eastern edge of the
Llano Uplift, is fairly shallow, and covers about 40
square miles. Here, the lake edge can be as much as
2 miles from the original river channel. In between
these two lakes are Lake Marble Falls, Lake LBJ,
and Inks Lake, each considered a pass-through reservoir, with only Lake LBJ having any substantial
basin, at between 3-6 square miles.
When construction on the reservoirs that would
become the Highland Lakes began in the late 1930s,
the University of Texas and the Works Progress
Administration (WPA) collaborated in a series
of surveys and salvage excavations. Led by J. E.
Pearce, A. M. Woolsey, A. T. Jackson, and J. Charles
Kelley, among others, a systematic evaluation of
soon-to-be-inundated lands was initiated (Jackson
1938; Jackson et. al 1940; Kelley 1941; Pearce
1938; Woolsey 1938).

254

Texas Archeological Society

At Marshall Ford, surveys were able to capture
much of the land below the 720 ft. amsl (flood full)
level elevation, with 69 sites recorded between 1937
and 1940 (TARL files, Burnet and Travis counties).
At Lake Buchanan, attempts to survey the entirety
of the 1021 ft. amsl floodplain were stymied by dam
completion and subsequent reservoir filling. Survey
crews were able to largely complete the west side
of the reservoir, but the east side was only partially
finished prior to completion of the dam, although
73 sites were recorded prior to 1938 (Pearce 1938).
Areas not slated for broad inundation—the “pass
through” lakes—received little attention. It was not
until the 1950s that some brief attempts at survey
in the Lake LBJ/Marble Falls/Inks areas were conducted (Humphreys 1951), with very little in the
way of results.
As the LCRA began acquiring properties for
the eminent construction of the reservoirs, the Lake
Buchanan basin was purchased mostly to full pool
level. Along Lake Travis, however, there were
several instances where landowners decided to sell
only portions of their property (Malof 2008), and
LCRA ended up buying out certain other landowners
completely, resulting in substantial sections of land
becoming LCRA-owned, including around 8,700
acres above normal pool.
Ultimately, Lake Buchanan has historically
fluctuated little, and when it does, the lake edge
remains far distant from the junctions of streams
and the river, where more substantial camp sites
would be expected. The main portion of Lake Travis, meanwhile, is in deeply dissected canyon lands,
and differences in lake levels more drastically affect
horizontal exposures, and once river-edge locations
are more commonly exposed, especially in the
more upstream sections. And importantly, most of
Lake Buchanan is privately owned above normal
pool level, compared to the large-acreage tracts
controlled by LCRA around Lake Travis. Once used
primarily for grazing leases, these lands became
increasingly managed beginning in the 1980s, with
park development beginning about the same time.
Various archeological surveys over the past thirty
years have resulted in well over 300 sites being
recorded on Lake Travis area properties.
The Carpenter Bend site, while on private land,
is in a typical Lake Travis setting. While there is
some room here for channel migration over time, the
outer limits are fairly well defined, at least within
the recent geologic past. Topographically, there is
little difference between the shape of the channel

between now and 1936 (Figure 2), prior to lake
impoundment, while the depth of soil and cultural
deposits at the site indicates that this specific location has been fairly stable since Terminal Archaic
times (ca. 1200-1300 B.P.), and given the apparent
single, surficial component, likely developed then.
The river channel at most would have been 250 m
northward, the distance to the corresponding elevation on the opposite bank of the river.
Burial Sites
Despite the overall high number of recorded
sites in the Colorado River basin, recorded burials
seem rare. Only two sites with what might be considered cemeteries—the Grelle site (41BT1) and the
Fall Creek sites (41LL4 and 41SS2)—are officially
known and professionally excavated. The Chism site
(41BT10, Johnson 1997:27) potentially raises this
figure to three. And these are all fairly small burial
sites. However, an examination of files from TARL
and keyword searches in the Texas Historic Sites
Atlas suggests that formal interments along or near
the central Colorado River basin are not uncommon,
with 33 burial sites (34 burial sites if 41BT4, with six
reported dog burials, is included). And if Perttula’s
(2001) categorization of a cemetery as more than
two burials is applied, then fully 40 percent of those
could be called cemeteries (Figure 3 and Table 1).
At the Grelle site, a large terrace camp with
burned rock middens located about six river miles
upstream from the Carpenter Bend site (see Figure
3), six burials were recovered during excavations in
1940 and 1941 (Kelley 1941). These were all flexed
or semi-flexed and each had been apparently placed
on his or her back and covered with large rock slabs,
including metates. An isolated adolescent female
had been buried under three overturned metates and
other large stones, which were partially upturned,
leading Kelley to suggest they were monumental
in nature. (They may have also collapsed into a
deteriorating burial space.) Four associated beadlike amulets were at the neck, chest, and waist.
Another group of five burials (three infants and two
juveniles), one with tortoise shell rattles at each arm
and leg, once filled with smooth white pebbles, was
found nearby in the same excavation level. These
are probably all Archaic in age.
The Fall Creek sites were excavated in 1937 by
A. T. Jackson (Pearce 1938). Fall Creek, between
Lake Buchanan and Bend, is a left bank tributary

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 255

Figure 2. Location of the Carpenter Bend site on pre-reservoir 1936 topographic map of the Marshall Ford basin.

of the Colorado River that once fell impressively
over a high of
bluff
a relatively narrow
Figure 2. Location
theto Carpenter
Bend terrace
site on
below. Three adults were found within shelters
the Marshall
basin.
andFord
crevices,
and one adult and seven infants
were within burned rock middens. The presumed
earliest burial was semi-flexed and reportedly was
interred with a bone awl, a portion of a deer antler,
projectile points, scrapers, knives, a metate, manos,
and about 50 mussel shells. It rested on a layer of
hard-packed ash. A second burial appeared to be a
secondary cremation, although associated burned
and split animal bones led Jackson to suggest a
possible “cannibal feast.” Two stone knives and a
stone pestle were near the bones. Within a crevice
was an extended burial covered by small rocks.
Portions of the well-preserved skeleton, in particular the feet and lower limbs, were missing. The
soil was described as mixed around the remains,

and included a mano, an abrading stone, two large
points, an arrow point,
knife, a “hacked”map
bisonof
pre-reservoir
1936a topographic
bone, and three mussel shells. These were considered to have been probably included with soil that
had been used to fill (prepare) the crevice prior to
interment. A later analysis concluded it was likely
a female about 25 years of age. The fourth adult
was within a burned rock midden and had been
carefully placed under a substantial rock covering,
and rested upon rock slabs as well. It was in an
excellent state of preservation and was semi-flexed.
The only two artifacts were “bird points” that
had been found near a rib and within the chest
cavity. Burial fill was dense with charcoal and ash,
perhaps from the surrounding midden deposits.
The skull had a leaf-shaped spot of asphaltum or
tar above the right eye orbit. The skull and jaw
showed evidence of several old injuries and it

256

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Burial sites in the general vicinity of the Carpenter Bend site (41TV2242).

Site*

>1

BT1 Grelle
BT10
BT14
BT236
BT260
BT4 (six dogs)
BT44
BT48
BT53
BT55
BT56
LL T-319
LL T-1024
LL T-1207
LL T-320
LL T-329
LL T-332
LL T-337
LL24
LL356
LL373
LL4 SS2
(Fall Creek)
LL423
LL8 ? T-327
LM Fields-Dumas
Shelter
LM Fields-Indian
Bluff
LM16
LM2 Fields-Lynch's
Creek
LM3
SS48
TV163
TV1794
TV1853
TV2337
TV36

x
x
x
x
x

Flexed

Extended

Ornaments

x
x
x			

x
x

x
x

x

Slabs

x
x		

x
x

x

x

Violence

x

Age
A

LP?
x

LP

?

H
LP
H

x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x

H?

x
x
x

x
x

x
x

x

x
x

x

* all numbers preceded by “41;” “T” denotes sites derived from TARL files; x=present
A=Archaic; LP=Late Prehistoric; H=Historic.

H?
A

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 257

Figure 3. Location of the Carpenter Bend site in relationship to other reported burial sites in the area.

Figure 3. Location of the Carpenter Bend site in relationship to other reported burial sites in the
area.

258

Texas Archeological Society

was determined that the burial was that of a male
that was 50-60 years of age. A ruminant tooth was
thought to perhaps be a portion of a necklace. Six
infants were also recovered in both burned rock
and non-burned rock contexts. All were poorly preserved, and some were possibly cremated. One may
have had associated projectile points, and probably
was buried with a perforated stone; another had
six mussel shells carefully placed above the skull.
The last adult and the seven infants were all north
of Fall Creek at 41SS2, while the first three adults
were all south of Fall Creek at 41LL4.
The Chism site was summarized briefly by
Johnson (1997:27), who mentioned seven burials,
all covered with slabs, or “canopies of rocks,” four
of which were semi-flexed and one of which was a
cremation. This poorly known campsite, located in
what is now the main basin of Lake Buchanan, had
over 50 hearths. It was excavated by WPA crews
under the direction of A. M. Woolsey.
Of the 33 sites with reported human remains, 14
were reported with more than one burial. (It should
be noted that many of these sites have minimal information, with several derived from notes on file
at TARL that describe sites reported in the 1930s,
some of which never received trinomials.) Nine were
flexed (only one extended), seven contained ornaments of some type, six were with rock slabs, and
three or four were found with evidence of violence. A
number were clearly historic in age, found with glass
and ceramic beads and various metal ornaments.
Most were in crevices and rock shelters.
There are suggestions of disarticulation, such as
at 41TV36, where missing legs, hands, or feet did
not seem to be adequately explained by post-burial
preservation processes. At the Grelle site, a possible extra human radius was noted with Burial 6,
that of an adult or subadult. Recently recorded site
41TV2337 consisted of two skulls within a crevice
along a creek near the Levi Rockshelter (41TV49).
One of the authors (Malof) was able to partially
examine the interior of the crevice, and the potential
for additional remains seems slim.
Other sites include the Goodrich Shelter
(41BT48), which contained the remains of a single
infant that had been carefully interred within a vault
accompanied by two painted pebbles and covered by
a metate (Field 1956). Perhaps the site most directly
comparable in age to the Carpenter Bend site is the
Millican Bench site (41TV163), located on the Bull
Creek drainage in northwest Austin. Apparently a
cairn burial, this single interment was associated

with a Darl point, and was located near what was
felt to be a possible house feature (Mauldin et al.
2004). This feature, however, had associated charcoal that produced a 2 sigma calibrated age range
of AD 380-570 (Mauldin et al. 2004:61, 163 and
Table 5-4), somewhat earlier than the remains at the
Carpenter Bend site.
In summary, burials and crevice interments are
not uncommon along the Edwards Plateau in the
central Colorado River basin, but they appear to be
distributed incidentally and are unlikely to represent
the type of territorial signatures described by Perttula (2001:45). They fall closer, perhaps, to locations
where the ranges of differing resource exploiting
groups overlapped (Bousman and Quigg 2006).
There are possible exceptions. The Fall Creek
sites show some indication of repetitive and patterned interment through time, and may represent
a ritualized demarcation of space. The evidence
of such behavior at the Grelle site is less compelling, with the cluster of five subadults or juveniles,
from apparently the same surface, suggesting a
catastrophic event requiring an immediate response
rather than a local, standardized, mortuary practice.
The burial at the Carpenter Bend site, however, is
consistent with suggestions that slab-covered burials are more common in the Late Archaic through
Late Prehistoric periods in Central Texas (Perttula
2001:34; Smith 1994:248).
An open question remains regarding how much
site preservation and sampling error has affected
the known distribution of burial sites. Although
the remains at the Carpenter Bend site were wellpreserved, those at other sites in the region were
much less so. Investigators at Grelle, Fall Creek,
Millican Bench, and the Greenhaw site (Weir 1979),
for example, all commented on the poor preservation
of some skeletal material. Preservation is almost certainly reflected in the generally late dates for Lake
Travis area burials, as there is no good reason to believe that the apparent establishment of systematic,
ritualized interments that begins elsewhere around
4500 B.P. (Perttula 2001:3) on the coastal and Rio
Grande Plain did not also occur along the central
part of the Balcones Escarpment.
An explanation may rest in certain downstream
sedimentation seen on the gulf coastal plain as
distinct erosional sequences originating from the
Edwards Plateau between ca. 12,000-5000 B.P. and
5000-1000 B.P (Columbus Alloform members 1 and
2 [Blum and Valastro 1994]). Other studies, while
not necessarily temporally conclusive or consistent,

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 259
suggest a general depletion of soils from the plateau,
with as much as 1.8 m removed by 5000 B.P., and
the present regime of shallow rocky soils well-established in some areas by 2000 B.P. (Frederick 2006).
Long-term erosion and concomitant site deflation
obviously affects the preservation of sites, many of
which are now certainly redistributed downstream.
Shallow soils (at least in relatively recent times) and
a relative lack of sinkholes, such as are seen west of
the central Colorado River basin, probably forced
burial practices into forms that were less durable but
may have been as visible, if not more so, than those
seen on the coastal plains, where cemeteries are often removed from habitation areas (Perttula 2001:8).
Carpenter Bend Site (41TV2242)
The Carpenter Bend site is located in western
Travis County at the lobed intersection of a short,
steep, drainage and the left bank of the Colorado
River, about 55 river miles west of Austin and about
four miles west of the juncture of the Colorado and
Pedernales rivers (see Figure 1). The unmapped soils
consist of brown silty loams over a reddish-brown

sandy clay, a situation that is common along this part
of the lakeshore. The site faces generally north, and
is at the base of a rugged, limestone bluff (Figure
4). It appears to be almost entirely surficial, with
exposed artifacts extending for a distance of about
50 m along the lakeshore and perhaps 20 m along
the inlet on the east side of the site (Figure 5). To the
west the soils give way to exposed gravel deposits,
while to the south the soils pinch out to expose
limestone bedrock. The site is only about 20 m wide.
Human skeletal material became exposed at
the edge of a steep embankment that drops quickly
into the deeper river channel. Within the site was a
burned rock scatter near the tip of the lobe, about
15 m east of the burial, and two fairly intact hearths,
one just south of the burned rock scatter and one
about 10 m southwest of the burial. Two well-made
pecked limestone metates were on either side of a
Darl point (see Figure 5). One of the metates was
within the primary burned rock scatter, and the
other very near the water’s edge on the inlet side
of the lake. Other observed items included chert,
mussel shell, and scattered fire-cracked rock. In
addition, there were two Darl points found on the
surface about 50 m apart. They were noted during

Figure 4. The Carpenter Bend site is located on the lobe behind the boat. The burial is at the smaller of the two dark
spots nearer the lobe tip.

260

Texas Archeological Society

5. Contour map of the Carpenter Bend site in 20 cm intervals. The lake was at approximately 98.8 m. North is
Figure 5.Figure
Contour45map
ofacross
thetheCarpenter
Bend site in 20 cm intervals. The lake was at
approximately
degrees
grid.
approximately 98.8 m.

the original reconnaissance visit, but only one was
subsequently relocated and collected.
Two shovel tests were placed on either side of the
burned rock scatter; one very near the tip of the lobe,
and the other one near the divide between the deep
alluvium and increasingly pinched soils between the
terrace and bluff face (see Figure 5). The two shovel
tests were excavated to 1 m in depth, but artifact
recovery in both was minimal and limited to a few
flakes, mussel shell fragments, and snails. There was
no suggestion of buried occupational zones.
An enigmatic erosional feature was present about
20 m to the east of the burial, very near the creek-side

edge of the terrace. This is seen in Figure 4 as the
larger of the two dark spots near the lobe tip. At about
the same elevation as the burial, and also facing the
lake, it was an interconnected series of small gullies,
each with a shore-facing slip face. No artifacts or other cultural items were seen in this erosional feature.
This feature is likely the result of animal burrowing
or perhaps a tree root system. However, it cannot be
disproved that it held another burial.
If the site once extended further north—at most
250 m—prior to impoundment of the Colorado
River, then fluctuating lake levels and associated
wave action are likely culprits for site erosion and

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 261
deflation. However, natural river events prior to the
construction of the Highland Lakes may well have
set deflation processes in motion.
To summarize, the burial at the Carpenter Bend
site was within an open prehistoric campsite where
both hunting and gathering activities took place. The
site was possibly once much more extensive, and
may have been seasonally or otherwise linked to a
long-term settlement pattern that shared similarities
in regional location and internal site structure with
the Grelle and Fall Creek sites. The data at hand indicates the site was of Terminal Archaic age (based
on the Darl points and the one radiocarbon date on
the human remains), and its somewhat curious positioning in the Colorado River valley (i.e., it provided
neither shelter from cold north winds nor much in
the way of cooling breezes during the summer) suggests that there was a local packing of space, if not
territory, during Terminal Archaic times.
Research Design and
Methods
Once it was determined that the burial was
threatened by exposure, drying out and/or later
removal by eventual rising lake levels, and quite
likely disturbance by the public, it was decided
to conduct an emergency salvage recovery. The
recovery team included two osteologists, Matt Taylor and Kerri Wilhelm, then-employees of TARL.
Other volunteers included David Houston, Bill
Grace, Bob Wishoff, and LUAS members Pat Hatten, Chuck Hixson, and J. L. “Michael” Williams.
Austin American-Statesman reporter Marty Toohey
and photographer Andrew Loehman also spent most
of the long, sunny day at the site. Later, members of
the landowner’s family participated as well.
There were a number of difficulties to overcome
in completing the burial recovery, the most challenging of which was reaching the site. This required
arranging to have a boat available to cross the lake,
and all equipment and personnel had to be ferried
this way. Because of the highly visible nature of
the site, it was also decided that the removal should
be done in a single day. Additionally, the Austin
newspaper had become aware of the discovery, and
had requested permission to be included. After some
debate, it was decided that a newspaper reporter and
a photographer would be allowed to accompany
the crew (Toohey 2006). It was felt this would be
preferable to creating a sense of secrecy, leading to

heightened sensationalism. Unfortunately, the former did not preclude the latter, and a minor media
frenzy ensued for some days afterward.
At 7:00 a.m. on August 28, 2006, the party
converged at a local boat ramp and began shuttling
crew and equipment across the lake. Upon arrival
a preliminary grid tied to an arbitrary datum was
established. Unfortunately, the grid did not fully
anticipate the burial position, and quickly became
irrelevant, especially given the almost total lack of
artifacts. The datum, however, was maintained to
allow continued vertical control.
The site was recorded through both a pace and
compass sketch map and Total Data Station (TDS)
recording. The sketch map was a useful ground
truthing tool and depicted the distribution of features and specific artifacts across the site. The TDS
map placed these items and the burial within tightly
constrained topographic boundaries (see Figure 5).
For the TDS map, a grid was established with a
Y axis (northing) at 45 degrees west of magnetic
north (315 degrees). Shots were taken from an instrument position based on an arbitrary datum with
an arbitrary Z coordinate of 100 m established near
the burial. Approximately 50 TDS shots were used
to compile the topographic lines, and another 15 to
mark specific artifacts, features, and the floor of the
burial pit (see Figure 5). Additional documentation
was accomplished primarily through video and
photographic recording.
The lakeside location created an opportunity to
easily water screen all soil matrix. A window screen
was placed over standard ¼-inch screen mesh. It was
set on stands at the lake edge, and water was bucketed from the lake into the screen. The silty loams
were easily dissipated, and all skeletal, cultural, and
other materials were collected. Two approximate
one gallon soil samples were collected from the
pelvic area and from below the remains once they
were fully removed. These were later subjected to
flotation, with both light and heavy fractions being
collected and a small sample of the soil kept aside.
None of this material has been analyzed.
The majority of the excavating was done by
Taylor and Wilhelm. Overburden was removed by
trowel. Once skeletal material was encountered,
bamboo splints and brushes were the primary excavation tools Although the exposed bone (primarily
the skull), appeared to be in a good state of preservation, the state of the remainder of the skeleton was
unknown, as was the potential effect of rapid drying in the August heat. For this reason, the various

262

Texas Archeological Society

elements were removed individually as they were
fully exposed. Each was placed within a paper bag
and labeled appropriately. Larger and more fragile
pieces were stabilized by wrapping them in paper
towels. Larger bones were drawn to scale prior
to removal, creating a composite plan view of the
burial. A detailed profile drawing was not possible,
although a rough sketch was made and elevations
were recorded.
Recovery
The burial was aligned northwest at about a 45
degree angle to the present riverfront, with the upper
body closer to the river (Figure 6). The individual
was tightly flexed, had probably been laid on its
back, with the legs slightly to the left (upslope)
and the arms to the right (down slope). Discounting probable bone displacement, the body had been
tucked to fill an 80 x 45 cm space and a very tight
and probably compressed thickness of about 30 cm,
with the top of the hip among the highest portions,
the legs somewhat above the level of the arms, and
the skull resting near the bottom but above the arms
and shoulders.
Five limestone slabs were present around the
burial. Three were relatively large, some 30-40 cm

in diameter. One was resting over the hip area, one
over the shoulder area, and one 25 cm north (shoreward) of the skull. This was laying upon another
20 cm diameter slab. Both of these rocks appeared
to have drifted down slope, apparently twisting the
once upward-facing skull to a near right angle with
the body’s main axis, partially breaking the skull
and displacing the lower jaw. The lower of these
two rocks had unspecified bone material under
it, some 13 cm below the deepest portion of the
skull. The farthest rock was a 15 cm diameter slab
located about 40 cm west of the skull (see Figure
6). Although it cannot be confirmed if all, or any, of
these rocks were an intended part of the burial, the
simplest explanation is that a cluster of large rocks
had been placed around the upper torso and head,
and a single rock anchored the lower abdomen and
hips, marking the distal end of the flexed body.
These rocks were set aside during recovery and then
placed within the burial cavity upon conclusion of
the excavation.
As the skeleton was removed, informal field
analyses were conducted. It was first thought the sciatic notch was indicative of a female. Other elements
were inconclusive, such as the relative robusticity of
limbs and skull features. This led to the hypothesis
(later proved incorrect) that the remains were those
of a female, and as recovery was wrapping up, the

Figure 6. Sketch of recovered remains, drawn by Chuck Hixson. Scale in 10 cm increments. Arrow indicates approximate
magnetic north.

Figure 6. Sketch of recovered remains, drawn by Chuck Hixson. Scale in 10 cm increments.
Arrow indicate approximate magnetic north.

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 263
name “Lady of the Lake” was proposed and soundly
approved. Later confirmation of the remains as male
did not lead to an enthusiastic renaming to “Lake
Dude” or even “Gentleman of the Lake.”
Upon conclusion of the excavation, some 10
hours after it began, the bagged and boxed remains
were transported across the river and then to TARL for
stabilization and analysis. All equipment and supplies
were removed and the excavation pit was refilled. Two
limestone metates and one of the Darl points were also
collected and removed for eventual curation.
Analysis of the Skeletal
Remains
The individual excavated at 41TV2242 provides
an opportunity to expand knowledge of the paleopathology of the hunter-gatherers of early Central
Texas. Health research of twentieth century huntergatherers has provided a model for understanding
the paleopathology of ancient foragers. Based upon
these studies, and various bioarcheological data, a
basic disease pattern among past hunter-gatherers
has been determined.
Since hunter-gatherers have a low population
density, epidemics of contagious viral diseases are
rare. A broad food base prevents chronic episodes
of under-nutrition or malnutrition. Hunter-gatherers
consume a diet that is low in carbohydrates, high in
protein, low in salt, low in sugar, and high in fiber
(Eaton and Konner 1985). Due to the demands of
a hunter-gatherer lifestyle, individuals experience
a high level of physical activity. The basic forager
diet and high levels of physical activity limits the
development of modern chronic ailments, such as
diabetes, hypertension, and obesity (Eaton and Eaton 2003). Studies of recent forager populations also
suggest that heart disease and cancer are uncommon
(Dunn 1968).
However, hunter-gatherers suffer from a variety
of health challenges. Chronic bacterial infections
from Streptococcus and Staphylococcus periodically
occur. Foragers may also suffer from parasite
infection, trauma, osteoarthritis, food poisoning,
and zoonoses (animal diseases) from eating infected
meat (Armelagos 1990). Hunting and gathering
people also suffer from interpersonal violence
(Baker 2001), predation, climatic challenges, and
high subadult mortality (Hill et. al 2006). Generally,
hunter-gatherers experience an endemic disease
pattern characterized by low occurrence, low

frequency episodes (Armelagos 1990).
There are relatively few published paleopathological studies of early Central Texas populations.
Various reports, for either Cultural Resource
Management or academic purposes, have been
written for the largest skeletal collections, including the Loeve-Fox (41WM230), McClure Mound
(41WM8), and Pat Parker (41TV88) sites (see Butler
1974, 1981; Tarpley 1970s; Greer and Benfer 1975).
However, most of the reports are descriptive in nature and site specific.
Baker (2001) included some Central Texas samples in a study of prehistoric trauma and violence.
Evidence from the Loeve-Fox site (41WM230) and
others demonstrate that violence peaked in the Late
Prehistoric period in the interior regions of the Gulf
Coastal Plain (Baker 2001:443). Baker also included
research concerning metabolic and infectious diseases. Her results indicate that the frequency of these
disorders peaked during the Late Archaic period on
the Coastal Plain (Baker 2001:438), roughly between 1500 B.C. and A.D. 600. Taylor (2006) studied the prevalence of dental disease on Gulf Coastal
Plain populations and found that rates of abscesses,
antemortem tooth loss, and enamel hypoplasias also
peaked in the Late Archaic.
Baker (2001:451) attributed the relatively high
frequency of trauma and infectious lesions in the
Late Archaic to environmental stress. A rising population led to a restriction of group territories, which
then led to increased competition over resources.
In a recent study, Taylor (2010) found evidence of
declining adult stature among Gulf Coastal Plain
populations from the Middle to the Late Archaic.
Declining adult statures were interpreted as evidence
of a lack of nutrition during key periods of growth
and development. However, adult statures increased
greatly during the Late Prehistoric period, indicating improving nutrition. This may be attributed to
technological innovation in resource procurement
and storage (for example, the introduction of pottery
and the bow and arrow). These changes may have
led to the employment of more efficient hunting and
gathering strategies.
Important information about local diet can be
inferred from stable isotopes found in human bone.
Johnson and Hard (2008) evaluated stable isotopes
of various Gulf Coastal Plain populations, included
several on the edges of the Edwards Plateau. Plants
have a certain ratio of stable carbon isotopes (13C
vs. 12C) depending on their photosynthetic pathway
(O’Leary 1988). Many plants on the eastern portion

264

Texas Archeological Society

of the Edwards Plateau have an isotopic signature
marked by a depletion of 13C, and are referred to as C3
plants. Corn and some native grasses are considered
C4 plants, which indicate they have less depletion of
13C. C plants have an isotopic signature (δ13C values)
3
of around -28‰, while C4 plants register about -12‰
(Habicht-Mauche et al. 1994).
Given the information provided by studies of
historic hunter-gatherers and paleopathological reports on similar past skeletal populations, a series of
expectations may be formulated for interpreting the
remains from the Carpenter Bend site. This individual should be adequately nourished and display few
skeletal lesions. However, certain pathological conditions should be expected and interpreted in light
of the basic hunter-gatherer subsistence strategy.
Skeletal analysis was completed by Taylor and
Wilhelm at TARL. Data was collected from the
human skeletal remains following the procedures
outlined by Buikstra and Ubelaker (1994). Assessment of sex was based upon visual inspection of the
pelvis and skull (see Buikstra and Ubelaker 1994).
Additional sexing criteria were drawn from osteometric data of selected post-cranial elements (see
Bass 1995). Estimation of age was based upon visual
examination of the auricular surface, ectocranial suture closure (see Buikstra and Ubelaker 1994), and
the severity of dental wear (Taylor 2006).
Stature was calculated following the regression
formulas published in Bass (1995) and Steele and
Bramblett (1988). Metric and non-metric observations were recorded for the cranium and post-cranial
skeleton. The human remains were examined macroscopically for lesions and other alterations to
skeletal tissues. A small sample of bone (2.0 grams)
from a thoracic vertebra was submitted to Beta Analytic (Miami, Florida) for AMS radiocarbon dating.
AMS dating included a stable carbon isotope assay
on bone collagen.

Description of Findings
Skeletal preservation was good, but had been
affected by exposure to the elements and wave action from Lake Travis. Some remains may have been
carried away by movement of the water, especially
the small bones of the hands and feet. The human
remains represent an adult male at least 50 years of
age at death, based on a variety of aging indicators
(Table 2). Stature was calculated from measurement from the right radius. Regression formulas
for Mexican males was employed and resulted in an
estimated stature of 182.59 ± 4.04 cm (6 ft. 1 inch
± 1.6 inches). Since stature estimations are affected
more by nutrition than ethnicity (Tanner 1990:133),
the Mexican Male formula was selected because it
produces a median value compared to other formulas for the radius. A complete list of metrics can be
found in Table 3 (cranial) and Table 4 (post-cranial).
Pathological conditions included slight degenerative joint disease (DJD) in the right shoulder,
elbow, knee, ankle, and left elbow. The surviving
sacrum and lumbar vertebrae displayed curved
spicules on the bodies, indicating severe osteoarthritis. Lesser expressions of osteoarthritis were also
observed on the 11th thoracic vertebra and the 5th
cervical vertebra.
Unusual skeletal lesions were found in the
interior surface of the frontal bone (interior cranial
vault). Several irregular “moth eaten” lesions were
found above each eye orbit (Figure 7). The lesions
showed no evidence of remodeling and their smooth
walls are very dissimilar from Pacchonian pits,
which are normal depressions on the interior cranial
vault (Mann and Murphy 1990).
There were no skeletal lesions associated
with metabolic bone disease or nutritional stress.
Evidence of chronic under-nutrition or malnutrition,
such as enamel hypoplasias, criba orbitalia, and porotic hyperostosis, was absent. There were also no

Table 2. Age estimation methods and results for the individual recovered from the Carpenter Bend site.
Feature

Element

Method

Age Estimation

Pubic Symphysis
Pubic Symphysis
Auricular Surface
External Cranial Sutures
Internal Cranial Sutures
Dental Wear

Innominate
Innominate
Innominate
Skull
Skull
Mandibular Molars

Todd (1921)
Brooks and Suchey (1990)
Lovejoy et al. (1985)
Buikstra and Ubelaker (1994)
Buikstra and Ubelaker (1994)
Taylor (2006)

45-49
30+
40-44
30+
50+
50-64

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 265
Table 3. Cranial measurements for the individual
excavated from the Carpenter Bend site.

Table 4. Post-cranial measurements for the
individual excavated from the Carpenter Bend site.

Measurement

Measurement

in mm

Cranium
Maximum Cranial Length
Opisthocranion-Nasion Length
Biasterion Breadth
Porion-Bregma Chord
Maximum Frontal Breadth
Bistephanic Breadth
Frontal Chord
Parietal Chord
Occipital Chord
Mastoid Length
Mastoid Breadth
Mandible
Chin Height
Body Height
Minimum Ramus Breadth
Mandibular Length

191*
187*
109
134*
118
91
113
120
103
24
13
35*
34
34
86*

Measurements marked with an asterisk (*) are based upon
reconstructed elements. Bilateral measurements were taken
from the left side.

observed lesions associated with chronic infections.
Observations of the dentition revealed severe
occlusal tooth wear (Figure 8). A slight amount of
dental calculus was present on the left maxillary
third molar. A large dental abscess was found above
the maxillary left incisor. This abscess was likely the
result of severe wear exposing the underlying pulp
cavity to bacterial infection. The left third mandibular molar was missing. Based upon the morphology
of the mandible, it was determined that this absence
was likely congenital.
Results and Interpretations
Skeletal analysis of the individual from the Carpenter Bend site indicates that it was an adult male
who suffered from chronic conditions associated with
old age. This person was tall in stature, indicating that
he was well nourished during his sub-adult years.
According to the Centers for Disease Control Growth
Charts (National Center for Health Statistics 2000)
the average stature of a modern American male at 20
years of age is 177 cm (approximately 5 ft. 9 inches).

in mm

Scapula
Glenoid Fossa Heigth
38 (R)
Glenoid Fossa Width
26 (R)
Humerus
Epicondylar Breadth
64
Maximum Diameter at Midshaft
20
Minimum Diameter at Midshaft
15
Radius
Maximum Length
287 (R)
Anterior-Posterior Diameter at Midshaft
11
Medial-Lateral Diameter at Midshaft
14
Ulna
Anterior-Posterior Diameter at Midshaft
13
Medial-Lateral Diameter at Midshaft
15
Physiological Length
272
Minimum Circumference
40
Innominate
Height
214
Iliac Breadth
159
Ischium Length
64
Femur
Maximum Head Diameter
50
Femoral Neck Diameter
34
Anterior-Posterior Subtrochanteric Diameter
28
Medial-Lateral Subtrochanteric Diameter
33
Anterior-Posterior Diameter at Midshaft
33
Medial-Lateral Diameter at Midshaft
26
Midshaft Circumference
96
Tibia
Maximum Diameter at Nutrient Foramen
38
Minimum Diameter at Nutrient Foramen
24
Circumference at Nutrient Foramen
98
Fibula
Maximum Diameter at Midshaft
12
Calcaneus
Maximum Length
81
Middle Breadth
42
Talus
Maximum Length
59
Maximum Width
45

Unless noted with an (R), all bilateral measurements were
taken from the left side.

266

Texas Archeological Society

Figure
Possible
metastic
carcinoma
on vault
the interior
vault
of (arrows)
the frontal bone
Figure 7.7.Possible
metastic
carcinoma
lesions onlesions
the interior
of the frontal
bone
(arrows).
In comparison, the individual from Carpenter Bend
attained a stature of almost 183 cm (approximately
6 ft. 1 inch). This places him in the 75th centile for
modern growth standards, indicating that he faced
few nutritional obstacles to normal growth and development. Additional evidence for good nutrition is
found in the lack of skeletal and dental lesions associated with under-nutrition or malnutrition.
The presence of osteoarthritis and DJD is not
uncommon for someone of his age and physically
active lifestyle. The level of joint disease probably
did not impede normal locomotion. The dental abscess is also evidence of old age, since it resulted
from severe occlusal wear that exposed the pulp
cavity of the tooth to bacterial infection.
The most unusual aspects of the skeletal
remains are the lesions found on the interior cranial
vault. Their smooth-walled appearance is consistent
with lesions associated with malignant neoplasms
(cancers), such as metastic carcinoma. Lesions

representing metastic carcinoma indicate a cancer
that has metastisized to bone. The origin of the
cancer cannot be readily determined from skeletal
lesions, but osteolytic (bone destroying) lesions
are characteristic of the lung, thyroid, kidney, and
gastrointestinal tract. The presence of these lesions
may also support the finding that this individual
is over 50, since metastic carcinoma is largely a
disorder of the elderly (Aufderheide and RodriguezMartin 1998:388). Similar lesions have been
observed on skeletal remains from other parts of
Texas, including the Middle Archaic portion of the
Ernest Witte site in Austin County (Taylor 2001), the
Late Prehistoric Hog Island site in Nueces County
(TARL files 2004), and a Historic burial (A1652) in
Briscoe County (PPHM files 2008). While cancers
have not been widely reported among recent
hunter-gatherer groups (Dunn 1968), the multiple
cases found in Texas document that it was at least
infrequently present in early foragers.

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 267

Figure
8.8.The
mandibular
dentition
displays
the high
leveltooth
of occlusal
tooth
Figure
The mandibular
dentition
displays
the high level
of occlusal
wear observed
for wear
this individual.
observed for this individual.
The C13/C12 ratio of the bones was -18.3‰. In
the Central Texas area, the closest isotope ratio match
is from a burial analyzed from the Olmos Dam site
(41BX1), which has a C13/C12 value of -18.4‰ (Johnson and Hard 2008). Olmos Dam is located within
the city limits of San Antonio, along Olmos Creek.
Eleven individuals were excavated from a cemetery
that was radiocarbon-dated (uncalibrated) to 400
B.C.-A.D. 260 (Lukowski 1988). The isotope value
is also not distant from the Late Archaic Crestmont
site (41WH39, see Hall 2002; Vernon 1989), which
is located on the Coastal Plain in Wharton County.
Isotopic assays produced a value of -18.9‰. In contrast, coastal samples from Cayo del Oso (41NU2)
had a C13/C12 value of only -9.7‰ (Johnson and
Hard 2008). Cayo del Oso is a very large prehistoric
cemetery located near the junction of Oso Creek and
Corpus Christi Bay (Jackson et al. 2004). Samples
tested for stable isotopes were radiocarbon dated

(calibrated) to AD 650-1000 (Johnson and Hard
2008). The stable carbon isotope data strongly suggests that the individual from the Carpenter Bend site
was eating a diet of inland plant and animal resources,
rather than coastal resources, or cultivated tropical
plants (such as maize). This finding is not surprising
given recent isotope analyses of prehistoric remains
in the region (Johnson and Hard 2008).
The individual from the Carpenter Bend site
meets most of the expectations regarding huntergatherer health and disease. His stature and lack
of skeletal lesions associated with dietary stress
indicate that he was adequately nourished during
his life. He suffered from chronic degenerative
conditions, such as osteoarthritis, DJD, and complications resulting from extreme dental wear. These
disorders should be expected for an individual of
his age and high level of physical activity. The only
unusual lesion is a possible expression of metatistic

268

Texas Archeological Society

carcinoma. While malignant neoplasms (cancers)
are rare among forager groups, there is ample archeological evidence that it was occasionally present
among early hunter-gatherers.
Given the available evidence, this individual
was likely healthy and well-adapted to his environment. The pathological lesions observed on his
remains are associated with old age and would have
manifested relatively late in life. For this individual,
the hunting and gathering subsistence strategies employed during the Terminal Archaic in what is now
Central Texas were successful.
Discussion
Powell (1988) suggested that primary productivity (discussed below) can be used to understand
adaptive responses to resource stress in the central
part of the Texas coastal plain and into the Edwards
Plateau. Powell’s Edwards Plateau bioarcheological
sample consisted of three sites in the Brazos River
drainage and the Blackland Prairie Loeve-Fox site.
His study concerned primarily Late Prehistoric
populations, but Late Archaic populations were
also under consideration. Using global models, he
demonstrated that plant productivity decreases with
distance from the coast, while rates of physical stress
seen in certain skeletal remains increased (Powell
1988:256). Assuming that all physiographic regions
were capable of supporting human populations, he
hypothesized that people of the Edwards Plateau
were possibly maladapted to dealing with competitive pressures from neighboring or intrusive groups
(Powell 1988:262), perhaps as a form of competitive
exclusion (Headland and Headland 1997).
Perttula (2001) argues that cemeteries in
prehistoric Texas may have been associated with
productive subsistence locales, and were a means
of marking favorable territories during times of
resource stress (Perttula 2001:45), resulting from
environmental conditions and/or because of population pressures. Burial practices can therefore provide
insight into “resource structure,” with an expectation
that cemeteries will be found in areas with predictable, high value food and water systems, especially
in heterogeneous habitats. In short, a better habitat
invites denser settlement with increased group
protection of resources that can be marked, in part,
by placement of cemeteries (Perttula 2001:45, 47).
Primary productivity is one way of predicting such
locations and is a highly testable premise.

Primary productivity (PP) can be expressed at
various levels and using various terms, including
productivity, net annual above-ground productivity,
net primary productivity, and others. Such production is the amount of energy left in vegetation after
respiration (Kelly 1983:283). What these terms typically have in common is the above-ground portion
of plants, and thus this productivity can be an indicator of food readily available to herbivores (Kelly
1995:69). Production is to some extent determined
by effective temperature (ET), essentially a normalized value which is an average measure of annual
distribution and intensity of solar radiation, with
means of 8 degrees C at the poles and 26 degrees C
at the equator (Kelly 1983:280, 282, 1995:66, 69).
Primary productivity and evapotransipration rates
have been factored into explanations of the distributions of aboriginal groups on a global scale (Kelly
1983:283, 1995).
Kelly (1983:283), however, states that because
primary production reflects energy potentially available to herbivores, it may not be the best measure for
that available to humans. Kelly illustrates that 100
g of primary production can vary wildly, between,
for example, inedible moss in the Arctic, edible nuts
and fruits in temperate zones, and inedible leaves in
tropical areas (Kelly 1995:70). (Confounding variables, when looking at a continuum between hunting
and gathering, include fish and shellfish, and trade.)
The concept of primary biomass (PB) then
becomes important. Primary biomass is the “total
amount of standing plant matter in an environment” (Kelly 1995:121), much of which is inedible
for humans, because in areas of high PB, much of
the plant energy has been stored in structure and
energy capture (woody and leafy tissue) rather than
reproductive tissues (nuts, seeds and the like, as well
as energy stored in tubers or other below-ground
mechanisms). Kelly suggests that high PB rates are
inversely correlated with plant foods easily available
to humans, and that secondary production, in the
form of animals feeding in high PB environments,
will be either of small body size or widely dispersed
(Kelly 1995:121).
Owen (1990a, 1990b), following up on work
and data summarized in Owen and Schmidly (1983),
looked at mammalian distribution, richness, and
diversity (the last two terms are used more or less
interchangeably) across Texas based on primary
productivity and several other factors. In general,
species richness decreased from east to west along
decreasing moisture and productivity clines, and

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 269

Increasing productivity

from south to north, following zones of increasing
temperature variation (Owen 1990a:1823). There
was no evidence of ecotonal punctuation in either
direction, and production seemed a more relevant
predictor than seasonality or temperature (Owen
1990a:1827).
He examined two competing hypotheses:
one, that climatic stability creates opportunities
for specialized niches to develop, thus increasing
diversity; and two, that climatic irregularity encourages competition-averse species to persist due to
stochastic disruptions in equilibrium-based systems.
Owen seems to favor the first hypothesis (Owen
1990a:1824).
However, geography may be a more approachable method of understanding mammalian distributions, given the complexity of the underlying data
(Owen 1990b:8). When looking strictly at mammal
species richness (the numbers of species within a
specific area), West Texas (including the Lower
Pecos area) had the highest values (Owen 1990b:5),
although carnivores represent a variance, basically
cross-cutting the distributions of all mammals, with
carnivores actually increasing in diversity as other
species decrease (Owen 1990b:5). Owen (1990b:1,
8) suggested a “hump-shaped curve” to represent
overall richness, where there is a positive response
to intermediate levels of primary productivity,
indicating, perhaps, a connection to Kelly’s primary biomass figures. Interestingly, carnivores had

a positive correlation with PP figures, suggesting
to Owen (1990b:8) that predators may segregate
more on food choices than on habitat (Figure 9).
Distributional maps generally show carnivore richness greatest within the Edwards Plateau and south
central Texas (Owen 1990b:Figure 2).
The Owen and Schmidly (1983) published data
is of great utility for Texas ecological studies. By
placing 189 equally-sized quadrats over the state,
and associating these with meteorological and other
data, they developed a set of 15 variables that include primary productivity values, temperature and
rainfall means, elevation, and other information. For
the present purposes, these quadrats were overlaid
on the regions discussed by Perttula (2001, see below) creating 57 data points. Larger physio-cultural
regions used by Perttula (from Mercado-Allinger
et al. 1996) were further (somewhat arbitrarily)
subdivided: the Central Texas region was split into
east and west sections, as was the Southern Coastal
Corridor. The Rio Grande Plain was split into north
and south sections. The Central Coastal plain and
small Lower Pecos and Southeast regions were left
as is (Figure 10).
When given primary productivity (Prod) in g/
m2, primary biomass (PB) was derived for each
point (Table 5) using the formula developed by
Kelly1 (1983:286, 1995:121) for arid environments,
defined as those with evapotransipration (ET) rates
between 12.5 and 19.5 degrees C. The ET values

All Mammals
Carnivores

Increasing richness

Figure 9. Generalized graph illustrating “hump-shaped curve” of mammal richness in response to increasing primary
productivity, compared to that of carnivores.

270

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 10. Cultural regions discussed by Perttula (2001), with added subdivisions discussed in text.

portion of the Southern Coastal Corridor is less
were derived from the equation provided by Kelly2
productive than the eastern portion of the Central
(1995:66), using the hot and cold means (Hot_M,
Figure 10. Cold_M)
Cultural
byAlso
Perttula
subdivisions
Texas(2001),
region, and with
the Rio added
Grande Plain
is not much
fromregions
Owen anddiscussed
Schmidly (1983).
more
productive
than
the
Lower
Pecos.
Table 6
included
in
Table
5
are
the
station
numbers
and
discussed inlocations
text. for each of the quadrats.
illustrates productivity values averaged across the
various regions.
Primary productivity was highest in the SouthPrimary biomass (PB) was divided into primary
east region, and lowest in the Lower Pecos. There
productivity figures to create an index value (some
were substantial differences between primary proportion of 1). Lower index values represent greater
ductivity in the eastern and western portions of the
PB, the total amount of plant energy placed in some
Southern Coastal Corridor and the Central Texas
sort of storage, often structural in nature (woody and
regions, but very little difference between the northleafy material). Higher indices suggest more energy
ern and southern Rio Grande Plains.
is invested in tissue potentially edible by humans
Primary productivity steadily decreases up the
(nuts, seeds, roots, and tubers). Looking at the excentral portion of the study area, that area bisected,
tremes, namely the Lower Pecos and the Southeast
more or less, by the Colorado River. The southern

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 271
Table 5. Environmental factors considered in this study (see text for explanation of columns).
Region Stn
Loc
Prod HotM_C ColdM_C PrecMM ET_
PB PP divided by
								
(g)
PB (g):
									
Index Value
CCP
159
CCP
146
CCP
160
CCP
147
CCP
130
CCP
148
CCP
131
CR
110
CR
111
CR
128
CT_E
110
CT_E
111
CT_E
128
CT_E
145
CT_E
113
CT_E
112
CT_E
129
CT_W
124
CT_W
141
CT_W
125
CT_W
142
CT_W
127
CT_W
144
CT_W
126
CT_W
143
LP
140
LP
123
RGP_N 155
RGP_N 166
RGP_N 156
RGP_N 165
RGP_N 168
RGP_N 167
RGP_N 158
RGP_N 157
RGP_S 187
RGP_S 179
RGP_S 178
RGP_S 172
		
RGP_S 173
RGP_S 183
RGP_S 182
RGP_S 180

Floresville
Gonzales
Cuero
Hallettsville
Brenham
Sealy
Hempstead
Llano
Burnet
Austin
Llano
Burnet
Austin
New Braunfels
Cameron
Temple
Smithville
Sonora
Carta Valley
Junction
Prade Ranch
Fredericksburg
Boerne
Kerrville
Medina
Langtry
Pandale
Del Rio
Cotulla
Brackettville
Carizzo Springs
Tilden
Fowlerton
Poteet
Hondo
McAllen
Hebbronville
Laredo AFB
Carrizo Springs/
Laredo AFB
Encinal
Falcon Dam
Zapata
Falfurrias

1255
1414
1572
1794
2053
2185
2183
1060
1345
1519
1060
1345
1519
1528
1589
1627
1900
639
896
1022
1107
1147
1359
1386
1883
441
661
512
626
727
734
861
873
1061
1219
579
605
650
692

29.30
29.75
29.47
29.13
28.91
28.97
28.47
29.69
28.24
29.25
29.69
28.24
29.25
29.47
29.25
29.19
29.75
27.97
27.91
27.74
27.02
27.80
27.08
27.02
27.02
29.52
29.19
30.02
30.75
29.41
30.52
30.02
30.25
29.69
29.36
29.47
29.75
30.75
30.64

10.84
11.23
10.95
11.68
9.84
11.95
9.01
8.40
8.84
10.12
8.40
8.84
10.12
11.51
10.06
8.90
10.68
8.73
9.29
8.12
7.84
9.17
9.56
8.12
7.67
8.12
8.28
11.01
12.45
9.40
12.40
10.62
11.56
11.95
10.90
15.57
11.79
14.01
13.23

736
790
843
912
990
1027
1243
664
767
825
664
767
825
828
848
860
944
490
597
658
682
697
772
781
939
393
504
429
484
529
532
586
591
665
723
462
474
495
514

15.84
15.96
15.87
16.01
15.59
16.07
15.38
15.38
15.33
15.68
15.38
15.33
15.68
16.00
15.66
15.43
15.84
15.28
15.38
15.14
15.01
15.35
15.35
15.06
14.98
15.31
15.31
15.93
16.31
15.54
16.28
15.85
16.07
16.12
15.85
17.11
16.09
16.71
16.50

6159
8562
11880
18819
32188
42316
42141
4111
7422
10644
4111
7422
10644
10844
12306
13314
23442
1718
2927
3800
4532
4924
7640
8080
22631
1140
1798
1321
1673
2062
2092
2722
2791
4120
5716
1517
1601
1758
1918

0.2038
0.1651
0.1323
0.0953
0.0638
0.0516
0.0518
0.2578
0.1812
0.1427
0.2578
0.1812
0.1427
0.1409
0.1291
0.1222
0.0811
0.3719
0.3061
0.2689
0.2443
0.2330
0.1779
0.1715
0.0832
0.3868
0.3675
0.3877
0.3743
0.3526
0.3508
0.3163
0.3128
0.2575
0.2133
0.3816
0.3778
0.3698
0.3608

745
800
859
928

30.58
29.86
30.02
30.52

12.40
12.73
13.96
14.06

537
561
585
613

16.29
16.32
16.66
16.71

2140
2399
2711
3128

0.3481
0.3335
0.3169
0.2967

272

Texas Archeological Society
Table 5. (Continued)

									
								
PB
Region Stn
Loc
Prod HotM_C ColdM_C PrecMM ET_
(g)
RGP_S
RGP_S
RGP_S
RGP_S
SCC_N
SCC_N
SCC_N
SCC_S
SCC_S
SCC_S
SCC_S
SCC_S
SE
SE

186
184
175
174
169
170
162
181
188
176
185
177
149
163

Rio Grande City
McCook
Alice
Freer
Beeville
Port Lavaca
Bay City
Kingsville
Harlingen
Robstown
Raymondville
Rockport
Sugar Land
Angleton

933
958
1078
1173
1264
2018
2459
1001
1039
1200
1456
2139
2500
2359

29.69
28.75
29.97
28.58
29.30
29.19
28.58
29.58
29.47
29.36
29.13
28.58
28.63
27.91

13.01
13.01
14.29
12.18
12.57
12.07
12.45
14.68
16.12
12.45
13.96
12.12
11.68
12.90

615
625
671
703
739
979
1103
642
657
716
804
1014
1116
1270

16.38
16.32
16.75
16.09
16.24
16.11
16.16
16.84
17.30
16.22
16.60
16.08
15.97
16.23

3160
3328
4268
5196
6275
29936
74662
3638
3936
5495
9341
38468
81283
60688

PP divided
by PB (g):
Index Value
0.2952
0.2878
0.2526
0.2257
0.2014
0.0674
0.0329
0.2751
0.2639
0.2184
0.1559
0.0556
0.0308
0.0389

CCP: Central Coastal Plain; CR: Colorado River subdivision; CT_E: Central Texas, eastern portion, CT_W: Central Texas,
western portion; LP: Lower Pecos; RGP_N: Rio Grande Plains, northern section; RGP_S: Rio Grande Plains, southern
section; SCC_N: Southern Coastal Corridor, northern portion; SCC_S: Southern Coastal Corridor, southern portion; SE:
Southeast Texas.

Table 6. Average productivity figures
for the study area.
Region

Average

CCP
CR
CT_E
CT_W
LP
RGP_N
RGP_S
SCC_N
SCC_S
SE
Overall average

1779
1308
1510
1180
551
827
833
1914
1367
2430
1255

CCP: Central Coastal Plain; CR: Colorado River
subdivision; CT_E: Central Texas, eastern portion, CT_W:
Central Texas, western portion; LP: Lower Pecos; RGP_N:
Rio Grande Plains, northern section; RGP_S: Rio Grande
Plains, southern section; SCC_N: Southern Coastal
Corridor, northern portion; SCC_S: Southern Coastal
Corridor, southern portion; SE: Southeast Texas.

region, the Lower Pecos would possibly have more
available plant resources available for human consumption than would the more lushly vegetated
Southeast Texas region. The western portion of the
Central Texas region had more available resources
than the northern section of the Southern Coastal
Corridor (Figure 11; see also Table 5).
Kelly (1995:121) states that interpretations
such as these are generalizations, and are useful
within limits. For example, it seems doubtful that
the largely homogeneous Rio Grande Plain is a
kinder environment than more central and coastal
areas. Further, these figures do not necessarily take
into account resources that are patchily structured,
dependent on micro-environmental conditions, or
associated with stream channels or riparian habitats.
They also do not reflect other types of gathered
resources, such as the ubiquitous mussels seen at
sites along the Colorado River and elsewhere, nor
the possibility of land snails as a food source (Malof
2001; Brown 2001). They do, however, add a layer
of complexity to understanding the diversity of human behavior in prehistoric Texas.

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 273
Average of P_div_PB
0.4000

0.3500

0.3000

0.2500

0.2000

0.1500

0.1000

0.0500

0.0000
CCP

CR

CT_E

CT_W

LP

RGP_N

RGP_S

SCC_N

SCC_S

SE

Region
Figure 11. Index values for primary biomass and primary productivity. CCP: Central Coastal Plain; CR: Colorado River
subdivision; CT_E: Central Texas, eastern portion, CT_W: Central Texas, western portion; LP: Lower Pecos; RGP_N:
Rio Grande Plains, northern section; RGP_S: Rio Grande Plains, southern section; SCC_N: Southern Coastal Corridor,
northern portion; SCC_S: Southern Coastal Corridor, southern portion; SE: Southeast Texas.

Perttula’s (2001) much larger burial sample
adds subtlety to Powell’s (1988) equation. Predictable water resources and heterogeneous resources
are as important as productivity rates. Within Perttula’s immediate study area, the Central Coastal Plain
and the relatively well-watered western and northern
Rio Grande Plain are ranked more highly for overall
resources than the more productive Southern Coastal
Corridor (Perttula 201:45). Putting a finer point on
it, riverine settings are more productive (and more
predictable) in a north to south descending sequence, followed by mixed woodlands and prairies
in the central and eastern Central Coastal Plain, then
lastly by inland and upland areas of the Rio Grande
Plain (Perttula 2001:47).
Generally, clusters of burial sites and cemetery
locations appear to be situated near high to very
high resource areas, with the larger cemeteries in
the Central Coastal Plain and the central Southern
Coastal Corridor, and are uncommon along the
southern Edwards Plateau (Perttula 2001:48). The
greatest density of burial numbers, meanwhile, is

in the Lower Pecos, the Central Texas plateau edge
and Backland Prairie (apparently weighted by the
Loeve-Fox site), and the north/south transitional
portion of the Southern Coastal Corridor (Perttula
2001:Figure 5).
It was noted earlier that Owen (1990a, 1990b)
identified the greatest species richness of carnivores
in Central and south-central Texas. Owen’s classes
in both studies were rodents, bats, carnivores and
“all mammals,” (rats, bats, cats, and everything
combined). Rodents and bats weighted richness
distributions westward (Owen 1990b:9). Unfortunately, the data are not available that would allow
filtering to more specific species distributions (i.e.,
prey choices attractive to humans).
Carnivores generally have larger territories and
exploit more habitats than, at minimum, rodents do
(Owen 1990b:6). Here it is suggested that resource
structure (in the form of both primary and secondary
production) is variable to the point that humans,
as carnivorous omnivores, exploited either to the
greatest extent possible. People of the Edwards

274

Texas Archeological Society

Plateau may have ranged further and in a greater
array of habitats than their counterparts on the
coastal plains. They led lives that certainly involved
stress, but were well-adapted to the circumstances.
People in regions where the gathering of resources
from more predictable and highly productive patches
rep­re­sented rational subsistence choices would be
deterministically encouraged to demarcate resource
zones through monuments, such as cemeteries.
Conclusions
Additional research domains identified by
Perttula (2001) for the study of hunter-gatherer
mortuary practices include paleodemography and
paleopathology, health, subsistence, biological and
ethic affiliations, personal and ritual technology,
population dynamics and territoriality, intra- and
inter- regional interaction and contact, and violence
and group conflicts. Comments are offered for each
of these relative to the burial findings at the Carpenter Bend site.
Paleodemography, Paleopathology,
and Health
Perttula (2001) cites studies showing higher
rates of disease and poor health indicators in the
south Coastal Plain and the lowest such rates in the
upper Texas Coast and the Lower Pecos. Changes
in group size and structure affect overall health, particularly in times of cultural flux. The Lower Pecos
figures factor in well with the concept of primary
biomass as a valid resource measure. At the Carpenter Bend site, the relatively good health, age, and
stature of the individual buried there indicate that his
primary environment was well-suited to support his
activities. If his home range was the central part of
the Edwards Plateau, the adaptive success of huntergatherer populations in this region is indicated.
Subsistence
Aspects of diet can be found from various
chemical and other tests on skeletal remains, including both apatite and collagen analyses of stable
carbon and nitrogen. Stable nitrogen isotope levels
allow interpretive differentiation between marine
and terrestrial diets (Schoeninger et al. 1983). None
of these were attempted on the individual in question, other than a standard C13/C12 ratio obtained

as part of the radiocarbon dating of the skeletal
remains. The stable carbon isotope results suggested
an inland terrestrial food base. Additional studies
could provide more information on this individual’s
reliance on C3, C4, and CAM-pathway plants and
the animals that feed upon them, which would aid in
reconstructing past dietary practices, lifeways, and
environments. Alvarez (2005) provides a succinct
overview of stable carbon isotope analyses.
Biological and Ethnic Affiliations
If the phenotype is a reflection of the genotype,
then the morphology of an individual can be used
to compare elements of the physical being with
other individuals or populations. If such traits
are found mixed within burial assemblages, some
aspect of group fusion may be occurring. DNA
studies could, of course, add great levels of detail
to the distribution of related individuals as well as
the genetic relationships between the Carpenter
Bend individual and other individuals from burial
sites and cemeteries in the broader Colorado River
region. At the Carpenter Bend site, the individual’s
missing mandibular molar may have been genetically predetermined, while the height of the individual may have more to do with general health
than genetics. Without additional studies, little
can be said about the physical relationship of the
individual to other populations.
Personal and Ritual Technology
The presence or absence of durable grave goods
with deceased individuals and the different kinds of
burial practices manifested in a specific grave or set
of graves can help determine the different treatments
of individuals based on sex, social status, beliefs, and
socio-political systems. For example, the rock slabs
associated with the flexed interment at the Carpenter
Bend site represent a mortuary practice that is not
uncommon on the central Edwards Plateau, and may
represent a regionally distinctive mortuary practice.
Population Dynamics and Territoriality
Prehistoric cemeteries seem to clearly show
where humans have mapped themselves on to a specific location, possibly as a response to favorable resource patches. The lack of cemeteries may represent
a lower level of territorial competition coupled with
higher mobility, thereby resulting in less need for the

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 275
marking of territories. This latter pattern seems to fit
the central Edwards Plateau well, although the larger
river sites at Grelle and Fall Creek may be exceptions.
Levels of individual movement through various environments on a lifetime scale can be tracked through a
study of strontium isotopes (Perttula 2001:66, Bentley
2006). This type of study could provide useful information on the life history and mobility range of the
deceased individual at the Carpenter Bend site.
Interaction, Contact, and Conflict
Exotic, rare, or non-local grave goods can
be informative about contact between aboriginal
peoples within and between regions or regionally
distinctive environments. Marine shell in Central
Texas and Edwards chert along the coastal plains
are clear examples of exchange. Violence between
peoples certainly occurred in prehistoric times, but
it was not on at the level of massive warfare, and
was intermittent across space and time (see Baker
2001). Less than 10 percent of the mentioned sites
have evidence of violence, and one of those was at
Fall Creek. The central Edwards Plateau warrants
additional study of the burial sites that occur there
to determine how interaction, contact, and conflict
compare in frequency and breadth to broader and/
or adjacent regions.
Summary
The emergency recovery of a Terminal Archaic
burial provided an opportunity to explore aspects
of prehistoric settlement along the central Colorado
River of Central Texas, as well as compare mortuary practices from this past incident with others in
the same portion of the river basin and in South
and south-central Texas. At the Carpenter Bend site
(41TV2242), the remains of a relatively healthy and
mature individual suggests a successful response to
conditions that person had been exposed to in his life
time. That he had been purposefully buried indicates
he was associated with a group that in all likelihood
shared many of his behavioral attributes. There is no
evidence of regional maladaptive behavior, such as
discussed by Powell (1988).
Concepts of primary productivity and primary
biomass were applied in an effort to explore aspects of environmental diversity in regards to human settlement and certain behavioral attributes
of burial practices. The Colorado River portion of

the Edwards Plateau represents a transitional zone
between higher productivity to the east and lower
productivity to the west. Primary biomass figures,
however, indicate that the Colorado River basin
had more available plant resources than areas to the
north and east (i.e., Lampasas Cut Plains). Figure 12,
meanwhile, provides data suggestive of a reasonably high level of available plant resources, which
is echoed in the high number of burial sites seen in
Travis and Williamson counties, and secondarily in
Burnet and Bell counties, with a seeming outlier in
the Lower Pecos (Perttula 2001:Figure 5).
The various data are complex and in some cases
contradictory. But, when cemeteries are defined as a
location with more than one interred person, and if
cemeteries are considered to be nodes of communally
organized space, then the Edwards Plateau portion
of the Colorado River basin can be regarded as intermediate in the ritual or systematic demarcation of
valuable resource procurement zones.
Belovsky (1988:343) argues that “stable limit
cycles” affect hunter-gatherer populations as resources vary in abundance (often the result of
human exploitation), but ultimately allow populations to return to whatever trajectory (increasing or
decreasing) was being followed prior to a perturbation. Interestingly, his model indicates the greatest
population stability, approaching the classic “K” or
carrying capacity curve, at intermediate levels of
productivity. Populations are less stable in either
very high or very low food resource areas. This
decidedly deterministic outlook nests well with
the “hump-shaped curve” of Owen, and may be
supportive of the concept of episodic climatic and
environmental equilibrium—when humans effectively manage (or are managed by) local niches—
alternating with punctuated adjustments to internal
and external population dynamics.
Finally, to reiterate, the emergency recovery
of a single prehistoric aboriginal individual from
the receding waters of Lake Travis does not, by
itself, add a significant amount of information to
questions of prehistoric life in this part of Texas.
It does, however, create an opportunity to explore
various research avenues and suggest ways by
which more information can be gained about that
individual’s life history, and how the site can be
viewed locally and from a multi-regional perspective. At the Carpenter Bend site, the burial and
burial practices are indicative of consistency with
a local tradition, one apparently well-adapted to
the environment.

276

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 12. Distribution of primary biomass index figures for areas discussed in text (see also Figure 10). Larger symbols
represent a potential for greater primary-level food availability.

End Notes

Acknowledgments

1. The formula for determining primary biomass
(PB) in arid environments (defined as ET values between
12.5 and 19.5 degrees C) is:

The authors wish to thank the numerous volunteers that assisted with the excavation, and especially the Llano Uplift Archeological Society for
funding the radiocarbon date. Chuck Hixson pointed
out the Chism site, and Tim Perttula provided the
IntCal09 calibrated radiocarbon date from the skeletal material.

log10 Primary Biomass (in g/m2) = 2.66 +.ooo9X

where X = net aboveground primary production in g/m2/
year. Developed by Kelly (1983), this regression formula
rely on a small sample
size; however,
Kelly (1995)
12.may
Distribution
of primary
biomass
index
still uses it more than a decade later.

Figure
figures for areas discussed in text (see
also Figure 10). Larger symbols represent a potential for greater primary-level food
References Cited
availability. 2. The formula for determining evapotransipration
rates (ET) is presented in Kelly (1995) as:

ET=(18W-10C)/[(W-C) +8]

Where W and C are the average high and low temperature
means in degrees centigrade.

Alvarez, C.
2005 Stable Carbon Isotopes from the Stiver Ranch Burial
Sinkhole (41KM140. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76:165-172.

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 277
Armelagos, G. J.
1990 Health and Disease in Prehistoric Populations in
Transition. In Disease in Populations in Transition:
Anthropological and Epidemiological Perspectives,
edited by A. C. Swedlund and G. J. Armelagos, pp.
127-144. Bergin and Garvey, New York.
Aufderheide, A. C. and C. Rodríguez-Martín
1998 The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human Paleopathology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Baker, J. E.
2001 No Golden Age of Peace: A Bioarchaeological Investigation of Interpersonal Violence on the West Gulf
Coastal Plain. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Bass, W. M.
1995 Human Osteology: A Laboratory and Field Manual,
Fourth Edition. Special Publication No. 2. Missouri
Archaeological Society, Columbia.
Bentley, R. A.
2006 Strontium Isotopes from the Earth to the Archaeological Skeleton: A Review. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 13(3):135-187.
Bement, L. C.
1993 A Flexed Burial from Llano County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 61:281-287.
Belovsky, G. E.
1988 An Optimal Foraging-Based Model of Huntergatherer Population Dynamics. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 7:329-372.
Blum M. D. and S. Valastro
1996 Late Quaternary Sedimentation, Lower Colorado
River, Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas. Geological Society of America 106:1002-1016.
Bousman, C. B. and M. Quigg
2006 Stable Carbon Isotopes from Archaic Human Remains in the Chihuahuan Desert and Central Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 51(198):123-139.
Brooks, S. T. and J. M. Suchey
1990 Skeletal Age Determination Based on the Os Pubis:
A Comparison of the Acsádi-Nemeskéri and SucheyBrooks Methods. Human Evolution 5:227-238.
Brown, K. M.
2001 Snails from the Quarter-Inch and Eighth-Inch
Screens. In The Smith Creek Bridge Site (41DW270):
A Terrace Site in DeWitt County, Texas, by D.
Hudler, K. Prilliman, and T. Gustavson, pp. 213-275.
Studies in Archeology 35, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, and Report 17, Archeological Studies Program,
Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department
of Transportation, Austin.

Buikstra, J. E. and D. Ubelaker (editors)
1994 Standards for Data Collection from Human Skeletal
Remains. Research Series No. 44. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Butler, B. H.
1974 Appendix I: Human Skeletal Material from the Loeve-Fox Site: A Preliminary Report. In Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson
County, Texas, edited by E. R. Prewitt, pp. 107-115.
Research Report No. 49. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
1981 Appendix: Human Skeletal Material from the Loeve-Fox Site (41WM230). In Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox, Loeve, and Tombstone
Bluff Sites in the Granger Lake District of Central
Texas, edited by E. R. Prewitt, pp. 309-369. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 66:361-400.

1998 Late Prehistoric Components. In Wilson Leonard:
An 11,000-year Archeological Record of HunterGatherer’s in Central Texas, Volume 1: Introduction,
Background and Synthesis, assembled and compiled
by M. B. Collins, pp. 271-276. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin, and Report 10,
Archeology Studies Program, Environmental Affairs
Division, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Collins, M. B., J. Guy, and S. W. Dial
1998 The Archaic Period, 8800 to 1300 B. P. In Wilson
Leonard: An 11,000-year Archeological Record of
Hunter-Gatherer’s in Central Texas, Volume 1: Introduction, Background and Synthesis, assembled and
compiled by M. B. Collins, pp. 211-270. Studies in
Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, and Report
10, Archeology Studies Program, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation,
Austin.
Dunn, F. L.
1968 Epidemiological Factors: Heath and Disease in
Hunter-Gatherers. In Man the Hunter, edited by R.
B. Lee and I. DeVore, pp. 221-228. Aldine, Chicago.
Eaton, S. B. and S. B. Eaton
2003 An Evolutionary Perspective on Human Physical
Activity: Implications for Health. Comparative
Biochemistry and Physiology (Part A) 136:153-159.
Eaton, S. B. and M. Konner
1985 Paleolithic Nutrition: A Consideration of its Nature
and Current Implications. New England Journal of
Medicine 312:283-289.

278

Texas Archeological Society

Field, A.
1956 Archeological Investigations in Lampasas, Burnet,
Llano and San Saba Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 27:161-184.
Frederick, C.
2006 Data Recovery Investigations, Geomorphology and
Geoarchaeology. In The McKinney Roughs Site
41BP627: A Stratified Late Archaic II Site on the
Colorado River Terraces, Bastrop County, Texas,
by S. Carpenter, M. Chavez, K. Miller, and K. Lawrence, pp. 54-64. SWCA Cultural Resources Report
No. 02-313. SWCA Environmental Consultants,
Austin.
Greer, J. W. and R. A. Benfer
1975 Austin Phase Burials at the Pat Parker Site, Travis
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 46:189-216.
Habicht-Mauche, J. A., A. A. Levendosky, and M. J.
Schoeninger
1994 Antelope Creek Phase Subsistence: The Bone
Chemistry Evidence. In Skeletal Biology in the Great
Plains: Migration, Warfare, Health, and Subsistence,
edited by D. W. Owsley and R. L. Jantz, pp. 291-304.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington D.C.
Hall, G. D.
2002 Archaeology at the Crestmont Site. General Investigations Report 1. Archaeology Laboratory, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock.
Headland, T. N. and J. D. Headland
1997 Limitation of Human Rights, Land Exclusion and
Tribal Extinction: The Agta Negritos of the Philippines. Human Organization 56:1:79-89.
Hill, K., A. M. Hurtado, and R. S. Walker
2006 High Adult Mortality among Hiwi Hunter-Gatherers:
Implications for Human Evolution. Journal of Human Evolution 52:443-454.
Humphreys, R. H.
1951 Archeological Survey of Granite Shoals Reservoir,
Burnet and Llano Counties, Texas. River Basins
Survey, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Jackson, A. T.
1937 Surface Survey, Lake Buchanan Basin. Report on
Work Performed, WPA Archaeological Project
No. 6020-5272. Sponsored by the Anthropology
Department, The University of Texas. MS on file at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Jackson, A.T., A. M. Woolsey, and G.R. Fox
1940 Surface Survey, Basin of Marshall Ford Lake,
Colorado River and Tributaries, Burnet and Travis
County, Texas. WPA Archaeological Project Sponsored by the Anthropology Department, the University of Texas. MS on file at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Jackson, A.T., S. A. Tomka, R. B. Mahoney, and B. A. Meissner
2004 A Historical Summary of Explorations of a Prehistoric Cemetery on the Coast of False Oso Bay,
Nueces County, Texas, Vol. I, The Cayo del Oso Site
(41NU2). Archaeological Survey Report 350. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Johnson, A. L. and R. J. Hard
2008 Exploring Texas Archeology with a Model of Intensification. Plains Anthropologist 53:137-153.
Johnson, L.
1997 The Lion Creek Site (41BT105), Aboriginal Houses
and Other Remains at a Prehistoric Rancheria in
the Texas Hill Country (Burnet County). Report 1,
Environmental Affairs Division, Archeology Studies
Program, Texas Department of Transportation, and
Report 41, Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Johnson, L. and G.T. Goode
1994 A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene
Climates, as Well as Archeological Periods, on the
Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 65:1-51.
Kelley, J. C.
1941 51D3-2 Grelle Site. Unpublished MS on file at Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Kelly, R. L.
1983 Hunter-Gatherer Mobility Strategies. Journal of
Anthropological Research 39(3):277-306.
1995 The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in HunterGatherer Lifeways. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Lawence, K., J. E. Garrera, K. A. Miller, M. C. Stotts, and
D. Culotta
2009 Cultural Resources Survey of 1,125 Acres of Colorado
Bend State Park, San Saba and Lampasas Counties,
Texas. SWCA Cultural Resources Report No. 07-183.
SWCA Environmental Consultants, Austin.
Lovejoy, C. O., R. S. Meindl, T. R. Pryzbeck, and R. P. Mensforth
1985 Chronological Metamorphosis of the Auricular Surface of the Ilium: A New Method for the Determination of Age at Death. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 68:15-28.

Malof and Taylor—A Terminal Archaic Burial from the Central Colorado River Basin 279
Lukowski, P.
1988 Archaeological Investigations at 41BX1, Bexar
County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report No.
135. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Malof, A. F.
2001 Feast or Famine: The Dietary Role of Rabdotus
Species Snails in Prehistoric Central Texas. Master’s
Thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

2008 Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of LCRA’s
Proposed Gloster Bend Resource Area Development
Project, Investigations in the Primary and Initial
Development Areas. In LCRA Annual Report of Cultural Resource Investigations for 2007, compiled by
A. F. Malof and D. J. Prikryl, pp. 203-283. Parks and
Resource Conservation Services, Lower Colorado
River Authority, Austin.
Mann, R. W. and S. P. Murphy
1990 Regional Atlas of Bone Disease. Charles C. Thomas,
Springfield, Illinois.
Mauldin, R. P., S. A. Tomka, and H. J. Shafer
2004 Millican Bench (41TV163), A Multicomponent Site in
Travis County, Texas. Report No. 66, Archeological
Studies Program, Environmental Affairs Division,
Texas Department of Transportation, and Archaeological Survey Report No. 351, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
McNatt, L., M. D. Freeman, P. Schuchert, M. Howard, S. A.
Tomka, C. G. Ward, and C. Beceiro
2001 Archeological Survey and History of Colorado Bend
State Park, San Saba and Lampasas Counties, Texas.
Cultural Resources Program, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Mercado-Allinger, P. A., N. A. Kenmotsu, and T. K. Perttula
(editors)
1996 Archeology in the Central and Southern Planning
Region, Texas: A Planning Document. Special
Report 34, Office of the State Archeologist, and
Cultural Resource Management Report 7, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
National Center for Health Statistics
2000 CDC Growth Charts. The National Center for
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion,
Centers for Disease Control, Atlanta.
O’Leary, M.
1988 Carbon Isotopes in Photosynthesis. BioScience
38:328-336.

Owen, J. G.
1990a An Analysis of the Spatial Structure of Mammalian Distribution Patterns in Texas. Ecology
71(5):1823-1832.
1990b Patterns of Mammalian Species Richness in Relation
to Temperature, Productivity and Variance in Elevation. Journal of Mammalogy 71(1):1-13.
Owen, J. G. and D. J. Schmidly
1986 Environmental Variables of Biological Importance
in Texas. Texas Journal of Science 38(2):99-119.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
2008 Human Osteology files. Archeology Department,
Canyon, Texas.
Pearce, J. E.
1938 Annual Report of WPA and University of Texas Archaeological Research, Lake Buchanan 1936-1937.
Anthropological Papers III(1). The University of
Texas at Austin.
Perttula, T. K.
2001 Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices in the Rio
Grande Plains and Central Coastal Plains Archeological Regions of Texas. La Tierra 28(3-4)2-83.
Powell, J. F.
1988 Stress and Survival: Models of Adaptive Success
in the Texas Late Prehistoric. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 58:249-266.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 52:65-90.
Reimer, P. J., M. G. L. Baillie, E. Bard, A. Bayliss, J. W. Beck,
P. G. Blackwell, C. Bronk Ramsey, C. E. Buck, G. S. Burr,
R. L. Edwards, M. Friedrich, P. M. Grootes, T. P. Guilderson, I. Hajdas, T. J. Heaton, A. G. Hogg, K. A. Hughen, B.
Kromer, F. G. McCormac, S. W. Manning, R. W. Reimer,
D. A. Richards, J. R. Southon, S. Talamo, C. S. M. Turney,
J. van der Plicht, and C. E. Weyhenmeyer
2009 IntCal09 and Marine09 Radiocarbon Age Calibration Curves, 0-50,000 cal BP. Radiocarbon
51:1111-1150.
Schoeninger, M. J., M. J. DeNiro, and H. Tauber
1983 Stable Nitrogen Isotope Ratios of Bone Collagen
Reflect Marine and Terrestrial Components of Prehistoric Human Diet. Science 222(4604):1381-1383.
Smith, J. E., II
1994 Lemens Rockshelter (41SV60), a Late Prehistoric
Site in Somervell County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 65:207-256.

280

Texas Archeological Society

Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer, and R. E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers
No. 11. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Steele, D. G. and C. A. Bramblett
1988 The Anatomy and Biology of the Human Skeleton.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Suhm, D. A., and E. B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Type Descriptions. Special Publication No. 1, The Texas Archeological Society and
Bulletin No. 4, The Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.
Tanner, J. M.
1990 Fetus into Man: Physical Growth from Conception
to Maturity. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Tarpley, J. M.
n.d. 1970s Observations on the Skeletal Material from
McClure Mound (41WM8). Unpublished MS on
file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Taylor, M. S.
2001 Paleopathology of the Ernest Witte Site. Master’s
Thesis, Department of Sociology, Anthropology, and
Social Work. Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

2006 Diachronic Changes in Hunter-Gatherer Dental
Health and Disease on the Texas Central Gulf
Coastal Plain. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, the University at Albany, State University of New York.
2010 Adult Stature and Health among Early Foragers of
the Western Gulf Coastal Plain. Plains Anthropologist 55:55-66.

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
2004 Human Osteology files for Nueces County. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Todd, T. W.
1921 Age Changes in the Pubic Bone. I: The White Male
Pubis. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
3:285-334.
Toohey, M
2006 Running Low, Lake Gives up a Ghost. Austin
American-Statesman, August 28, 2006, p. 1, Austin.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Second Edition. Gulf Publishing, Houston.
Vernon, C. R.
1989 The Prehistoric Skeletal Remains from the Crestmont
Site, Wharton County, Texas. Studies in Archeology
1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Weir, F. A.
1979 Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 50:5-67.
Woolsey, A. M.
1938 Site No. 8, Marshall Ford Basin, Percy Hancock
Place, Travis County, Texas. Field Notes: WPA Archaeological Project Sponsored by the Anthropology
Department, The University of Texas. MS on file at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Clovis, Folsom, and Midland Artifacts Between
Dallas and The Navasota River
William L. Young

Abstract
A short archeological report about an insignificant site located near the Navasota River alluded to the fact that
few Paleoindian artifacts are known to occur in the surrounding area. As a result, this article reports Clovis,
Folsom, and Midland artifacts held in private collections within the general area from Dallas to the Navasota
River, and reviews related published reports. Even though most of the artifacts have been found on the surface
mixed with later material, their presence shows that a larger population of both Clovis and Folsom people
occupied or visited the area. Since sites are disappearing at an alarming rate, especially in the Trinity River
basin near Dallas due to the expansion of the Metroplex, articles like this add to our knowledge of prehistory.

Introduction
The collections discussed here were found in
an area bounded on the west by the Brazos River
and includes most of the upper Trinity River basin
to the east. Counties (Figure 1) included are Tarrant
County on the West Fork of the Trinity River and the
southern region of Dallas County below the junction with the Elm Fork. Two other counties are both
situated on the east side of the Trinity: Kaufman and
Henderson; Cedar Creek and Kings Creek serve
as major tributaries of the Trinity River in these
counties. Other counties in the mid-section of this
area are Ellis and Navarro. Chambers and Richland
creeks are the two main drainage basins crossing
them. Sites along Aquilla Creek, a tributary of the
Brazos River, in Hill County are also included, as
are Limestone County, where Pin Oak Creek, a
large tributary of Richland Creek, runs southwest
to northeast at the base of the Tehuacana limestone
uplift, and Freestone County, with several feeder
creeks joining the Trinity River. Basically this is an
environmental region with considerable variation
both in the soils and vegetation zones that is located
along and between two major rivers.
Many collections held in private hands are not
well documented as to the location where individual
artifacts were found. In addition, many private collections are biased towards complete projectile
points and recognizable tools. Some collectors
discard the broken pieces since broken pieces are

not aesthetically pleasing to look at. The late R. K.
“King” Harris dumped numerous broken projectile
points in his backyard. On several visits to his house,
I saw pieces lying on the ground near his storage
building. However, if the broken piece happened to
be a basal section of a Paleoindian point, he did not
discard it. A collector who lives near Corsicana and
has roamed many sites in the southwestern part of
Navarro County places all of his broken pieces in
an old bathtub in his backyard. It would be interesting to go through this material to see what he has
discarded, but on the other hand, the knowledge
gained would be severely restricted because even
the whole objects he collected have not been related
to a specific site.
On the other hand, a huge collection known as
the Reading Arrowhead Collection is housed at Navarro College. This collection contains approximately
48,000 artifacts from many areas. Mr. Reading lived
in West Texas for a number of years before moving to
Corsicana and collecting from a large number of sites
in Navarro County and surrounding counties. Mr.
Reading’s original record books were ruined when
a squirrel chewed a hole in his roof and rainwater
poured in. However, the Reading’s manufactured
many shadow boxes in which they displayed their artifacts. Within each shadow box there are typewritten
notes stating where most of the material came from
either by landowner names or general location along a
certain stream. No Clovis, Folsom, or Midland points
are in the Reading collection.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

282

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Study area outlined on a map of north central Texas.

The rest of this article is not a complete list of
all Paleoindian artifacts from this region since I have
not looked at every collection. However, I am aware
of a number of Paleoindian artifacts held in private
collections that are worthy of mention herein. Although there are several recently excavated sites in
Texas where direct evidence of pre-Clovis artifacts
have been found, we still do not recognize the tools
and projectile points produced by these early people.
Thus, I begin by listing the Clovis artifacts of which
I am aware.
Clovis
Starting in the south, an anonymous collector
who lived in Limestone County found a cache of

seven Clovis points at a site situated on a large
hillside overlooking Pin Oak Creek in northwestern
Limestone County. This collector, who spent thousands of hours walking up and down the creek beds
in both Limestone and Navarro counties, amassed
a huge artifact collection. One of the Clovis points,
about 75 mm in length, is very unusual because it
had small ears protruding out where the stem grinding stopped, about halfway to the tip. The entire
group of Clovis points was made of Edwards chert;
the eared point was made out of a dark, dense,
brown material similar to high-grade chert from the
Georgetown area. Meltzer (1987) confirmed the fact
that there have been a few Clovis points found with
protruding ears but they are not common. I remember that at the time I saw the collection he had 870
Waco Sinkers; this was by far the largest collection

Young—Clovis, Folsom, and Midland Artifacts Between Dallas and the Navasota River
of sinkers that I am aware of. Whether anyone can
gain access to his collection is unknown since he
passed away in 2006 and his wife sold part of his
collection to help cover medical expenses. I understand she still has all the Clovis material.
Three years before archeologists with Southern
Methodist University (SMU) made their initial survey (Skinner and Henderson 1972) for the proposed
Aquilla Lake, I started looking for sites on Aquilla
Creek. A lot of the creek basin was under cultivation
and if one happened to go at the right time after a
major rain, a lot of archeological material could be
found on the surface. It was possible on occasions
to start walking in one direction in those plowed
locations and within a mile, find three to four sites.
All artifacts collected were assigned field site numbers. When SMU performed their first archeological
survey, it became apparent to me that there were
better seasons to do survey than the middle of the
summer, especially in areas where crops were in
cultivation. Most agricultural crops were planted in
the spring shortly after the ground had been broken.
Then during the growing season, only minor cultivation occurred in these fields to remove some of the
volunteer weeds or break open the ground to allow
water penetration. Only after the crops have been
harvested and the stalks shredded and plowed under
does someone surveying have a decent opportunity
to locate sites.
Several years into the project, I met with Dr.
Alan Skinner to look at some of my material from
Aquilla Lake and compare my site numbers to their
locations. I realized that they had missed several
sites due to some of the sites being completely covered in crops or weeds at the time. In retrospect, it is
my opinion the best time to try to survey in this part
of North Central Texas is during the last two months
of winter, January and February, and into the first
part of spring. Leaves are down but hopefully have
partially decomposed and very little is tall or green,
allowing someone to see the ground better.
Over the years of walking in the floodplain and
terraces along Aquilla Creek, I found two Clovis
points, one complete and one basal section. Site
41HI57 is a floodplain rise on Aquilla Creek and the
site was not excavated during the lake project but
it was by far one of the most artifact-prolific sites
in the area. Near the crown of the rise, there was a
small shack, which looked to be either an old garage
or storage shed. Surrounding this old structure was
a huge entanglement of grapevine. Living in the soil
around the roots of these grapevines was a colony of

283

pocket gophers. During the years when the site was
not plowed, the pocket gophers converged on the
site and churned the sandy soils. The gophers were
extremely aggressive and constantly brought up
both large and small artifacts. While visiting the site
one year, I found a Clovis point resting on a gopher
mound (Figure 2a). This point measures 22.7 mm in
width, 40.5 mm in length, and 7.21 mm in thickness
in the mid-section. Both basal ears are missing and
on the right hand face of the blade portion, there is
direct evidence of several resharpening episodes
as this side of the blade is beveled. The chert has
an off-white patina and is slightly grainy. The second Clovis point from Aquilla Creek came from
41HI74/41HI114. This was another site that had a
huge population of gophers constantly bringing up
objects. On the same day, I found a Clovis base (Figure 2b), a Pelican, and a beveled Late Paleoindian
point, probably a St. Mary’s Hall, resting on gopher
mounds. Even though only a basal section, it is obvious that this Clovis would have been a larger point
based on the width of the piece. It measures 26.7 mm
in width and 29.8 mm in length in its broken state.
The maximum thickness is 6.75 mm, while the flute
measures 6.62 mm thick near the break. The stone
was probably a high-grade dark brown chert found
around Georgetown but the piece is now patinated.
A third Clovis point, another basal section from the
Aquilla Lake area, was found several years ago by
another collector from Corsicana. This was from a
tributary creek that drains into the Aquilla Creek
drainage from the northwest. This collector, who
has studied many of the chert sources, stated that
this Clovis was made out of La Grange area gravel.
The broken point was reputably about 25.0 mm in
width and more than 30 mm in length.
Lynott and Peter (1977) mention that Paleoindian points had been found at X41HI111, which
eventually was assigned the trinomial 41HI117.
Known as the Sullivan site and named for the landowner, Clovis, Folsom, Eden, and Meserve points
had been found by the landowner. Brown (1987:3342 to 33-43) provided photographs of all or part of
the Sullivan collection from 41HI117. Even though
the photographs are dark, it looks to be as if there
are at least six Clovis bases represented in the collection along with a number of Late Paleoindian
dart points. Lynott and Peter’s crew put in five test
pits and nine post hole tests at the Sullivan site and
concluded that the site was a multiple component
deflated occupation and one of the few seasonally
reoccupation sites in the upper Aquilla drainage.

284

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

Figure 2. Clovis points from Hill County: a, Clovis point from 41HI57; b, Clovis point base from the surface of 41HI174.

Then in 1982, the University of Texas crew under
David O. Brown went back to the Sullivan site
once more to see if any buried features or cultural
levels could be discovered. They put in 20 backhoe
trenches, three 2 × 2 m test pits, and three shovel
tests. They determined that the majority of the site
had been mined for the sandy loam and artifacts and
little archeologically remained.

Navarro County has its share of Clovis material.
First is the Kevin Davis Clovis blade cache (Young
and Collins 1989). I recently read where we had
excavated 24 blades but we only found 16 in the
excavation. A couple of these were fragmentary,
missing the mid-section or one end. It is possible
we had the platform of one blade and the base of
the same blade but we did not find the connecting

Young—Clovis, Folsom, and Midland Artifacts Between Dallas and the Navasota River
mid-section. This means there might actually be less
blades than the original count.
In Navarro County, Mrs. Aubrey Drain of
Dawson had a complete Clovis measuring about
120 mm in length. This point was found years ago
by her father at an unrecorded site in a plowed
field about halfway between the communities of
Barry and Blooming Grove. The site, according to
Mrs. Drain, was a multiple component prehistoric
site with mostly Archaic material. Mrs. Drain kept
a complete record of every artifact she found by
numbering each piece with consecutive numbers.
Then she listed each number in her record book as to
where each piece was found. It was her hope to donate her collection to the Navarro College but when
she went into a nursing home a couple of years ago,
her collection was gathered up by a daughter-in-law.
Dr. Frank Autry was a Corsicana dentist for
many years. He lived in Mississippi before moving to Navarro County. Dr. Frank went about this
area during the 1940s and 1950s when much of the
county was in cultivation. He had his own numbering system, and with access to his record book, one
could figure out the site where each piece came
from, within reason. Back in those days, the thinking
locally was if you were on someone’s farm picking
up artifacts from this knoll or a nearby knoll on the
same farm, all of the sites on the farm constituted
a single site. I recently found out where Dr. Fred
Wendorf, back about the same time, did the same
thing with three artifact-bearing knolls on King’s
Creek in Kaufman County. With this in mind, it
is hard in some cases to tie a specific artifact to
a specific site. Dr. Autry and Bob Reading were
good friends and on some occasions, they hunted
artifacts together. Dr. Autry had two Clovis points
from Navarro County. One came from a huge site,
41NV340/41NV342, located on the south bank of
the Trinity River. This site was heavily modified by
construction of a fertilizer plant. Long before construction of the fertilizer plant, he found the point
eroding out of the side of the terrace and about ready
to fall into the river. This point was approximately
125 mm long and made of Edwards chert. The second Clovis was almost identical to the first. The site,
41NV607, where the point was found is in northern
Navarro County on the west side of the Trinity
River. This site is on a floodplain rise and when the
Trinity River is at flood stage, the site becomes an
island. Dr. Autry told me that the site was regularly
cultivated during the years he went out there. He
also said he had made many trips to this site when

285

the river was flooding and he would have to wade
through the floodwaters to get to the rise. Both sites
where he found the Clovis points would have been
included in the Tennessee Colony Lake and the Trinity Canal Project if they had been built.
A basal section of a Clovis point was found by
John Kormas on 41NV81. It was a medium size
Clovis and made of Edwards chert. This site is now
under Richland/Chambers Lake and at one time,
it contained many artifacts. During the 1950s, this
region experienced a severe drought, which lasted
for about five years. In 1956, the drought was broken by a huge rain event, with some areas receiving
as much as 13 inches of rain in a short time. The
site had been deeply plowed before the rain started
and once the rain ceased, nearly all of the loosely
plowed soil had washed to the bottom of the slope.
Over 4000 points were picked up in a matter of two
weeks by several collectors. Some of the Reading
collection came from this site.
The archeologists with SMU recorded a basal
section of a Clovis point during the initial survey
for the Richland/Chambers Lake (Raab 1982). This
fragment was found in the channel of Crab Creek,
a tributary of Richland Creek near the small community of Navarro. The archeologists assigned a
number to the location since there was not any other
associated artifactual material. Locality numbers
were assigned to many sites, especially creek sites,
where random artifacts, bone, or shell were found
without a buried occupation horizon being recognized in the creek banks. These locality sites were
not recorded on official site forms and the only way
one might ever relocate these is to physically look
at the quad maps on file at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin (TARL).
The collector from Corsicana who I mentioned
above as having a broken Clovis point from Aquilla
Creek also has a Clovis from Navarro County. A
small portion of the distal end is missing. The collector identified the chert used to make this point as
Guadalupe River chert but he stated that the chert
had turned black from being immersed in the water
for many years. This same collector told me of a
large Clovis point found by his father in the early
1930s. His father and uncle were working on a
Works Progress Administration project at the end of
the Great Depression digging pit-run material out of
a sand and gravel pit located on a hill overlooking
the Chambers Creek floodplain north of Emhouse,
Texas. The land where the pit was located was

286

Texas Archeological Society

owned by a Mr. Roney, who spent most of each day
watching the workers mine the pit-run with picks
and shovels so he could tabulate how much he was
going to be paid for the material. According to the
collector, his father and uncle had already found
several projectile points at the quarry but the owner
took each one. One day, his father swung his pick
into the overburden soil and struck a Clovis point,
breaking it into two pieces. The point measured approximately 225 mm in length. Mr. Roney took the
point and it has not been seen since.
Frank Bryan recorded numerous sites in Hill,
Limestone, and Navarro counties (Bryan 1938). On
one of these sites, 41NV25, he mentioned a complete
Clovis had been found there. Much of this site was
destroyed years ago by a sand and gravel company,
that also sold sandy loam soil for house foundations;
41NV25 was one of those sandy loam quarries. In
later years, the Texas Highway Department used the
old quarry as a place to dispose of trash collected
from the highways. Today, only a small portion of
the lower sediments of the site remains on the bank
of Richland Creek; an unknown portion of the site
remains across the road in a pasture.
A few years ago and approximately 1.6 km
downstream on the opposite side of Richland Creek
from 41NV25, the remains of a mammoth were discovered by H. M. Davenport, who was constructing
a stock pond with his bulldozer. The landowner, Mr.
Franks, wanted a new stock pond built near the head
of a shallow draw. Mr. Davenport (1992 personal
communication) happened to notice a mammoth
tusk protruding from the soil. Construction of the
pond was stopped and eventually the Dallas Museum of Natural History came and started removing the bones with the help of several local people,
including Tom Vance, a biology teacher at Navarro
College. The museum personnel’s opinion was that
the mammoth had washed into the location since
it was not completely articulated. I visited the site
one day and there was no evidence of a small gravel
lenses around the bones, which might have indicated
it had been flood-deposited. The entire skeleton was
not removed and this left the lower rib cage lying on
the bottom of the excavation because the landowner
wanted to get his stock tank completed. If there had
been one or more projectile points used to kill this
animal, the points might have been found around the
lower rib bones or below them. We will never know.
A second mammoth was found shortly after
the first in a different location, this time in northwestern Limestone County on Pin Oak Creek. This

mammoth was discovered by two fossil and arrowhead collectors who notified Tom Vance about their
discovery. A number of years were spent plastering
and removing individual bones. Mr. Vance (2004
personal communication) told me that the bones
were not articulated and had been buried in an old
channel of Pin Oak Creek. After a couple of seasons
of working on the bones, Mr. Vance told me about
the find. I asked him to be on the watch for anything
which might indicate if the animal met its demise
with the help of man. Even though they still have
not finished removing the bones, they did find two
small flakes near the remains. However, these flakes
are not diagnostic and may lend credence to the fact
that the mammoth was washed into this location.
About 200 m downstream from the mammoth, the
same two collectors discovered a rock-lined hearth
eroding out of the bank at approximately 5 m bs.
This hearth was located in the same soil horizon
as the mammoth but whether they were related is
unknown. The collectors in their zeal completely
excavated the soil above the hearth, totally exposing all of the stones and a tremendous amount of
charcoal. They made photographs of their discovery
while it was exposed. When they realized nothing
was associated with the hearth, they covered it with
the excavated soil. Needless to say, when the next
flooding episode hit the site, most of the soil was
washed away along with some of the hearth stones.
I eventually heard about the hearth and have some of
the photographs. I contacted Dan Potter of the Texas
Historical Commission, who came to Corsicana
to view both the mammoth and what remained of
the hearth. There were still a few stones and some
charcoal in the creek wall, so we photographed the
hearth and excavated most of what remained. The
charcoal sample was given to Mr. Vance to take back
to the college.
The next Clovis from Navarro County is one I
found within the first six months of getting out and
looking for sites. This point (Figure 3) measures
22.5 mm in width and 47.6 mm in length. The maximum thickness is 7.23 mm and it probably is made
of Edwards chert. It was found embedded in the side
of a small ravine that was constantly being washed
by water exiting the bar ditch on the side of a state
highway. I happened to walk into the ditch one day
and at the discharge end of the ditch, the point was
protruding from the bank. Rather than immediately
removing the point, I went back to the house and got
a tape and a Polaroid camera and came back to the
locality. I measured the point’s location from several

Young—Clovis, Folsom, and Midland Artifacts Between Dallas and the Navasota River

287

had obviously been resharpened one
or more times. This Clovis point
was found in a pile of backdirt at
41NV656, a site I had recorded
and which has been more or less
destroyed over the years by sand
mining. Occasionally a Paleoindian
point/fragment or a Waco sinker can
be found in some of the back dirt
piles where the topsoil was washed
off the site, exposing the sandy loam.
The last Clovis point from
Navarro County was identified by
Dr. Michael Collins as an unfluted
Clovis. It was a surface find at
41NV658, another site I recorded
several years ago located on the hill
west of 41NV656. This site is approximately 400 m from 41NV25,
where Frank Bryan found a complete
Clovis. The situation at 41NV658
is identical to 41NV25 in that the
topsoil has been systematically reFigure 3. An isolated Clovis fluted point from Navarro County.
moved. The substrate was identified
by Dr. Collins as a marine material
dating back to when this area was
different trees, which I thought might serve as referunder the Gulf of Mexico. Occasionally embedence points. Then I made several photographs before
ded within this sand are large siltstones containing
finally removing the point, but before realizing that
various marine fossils (oyster shells and small
it was a Clovis point. I first carried the point to Dr.
shark’s teeth). The four sites, 41NV25, 41NV656,
Alan Skinner, who I had recently met, but he recom41NV657, and 41NV658, are clustered together
mended I take the point to R. K. Harris. I went to the
where a long ridge of sandy soil forces Richland
next meeting of the Dallas Archeological Society,
Creek around its perimeter. Pin Oak Creek flows
where I met Mr. Harris and he identified it as a Cloalong the southern boundary of this same ridge.
vis. For nearly 20 years, I occasionally went back
This ridge represents the easternmost tip of a wide
into the ravine to see if anything else was eroding
expanse of both Blackland Prairie and Eastern Cross
out but it was always barren. A few undiagnostic
Timbers that stretches for miles towards the Brazos
quartzite and chert flakes were found on the surface.
River valley and the eastern end of the ridge must
The chert flakes did not exhibit any patina, which
have served as a major crossing of Richland Creek.
might have indicated an older age for them. Since
Obviously this area was appealing to Clovis peoples
I never could prove this point to be associated with
since three Clovis points have been found here. The
a site, I never recorded the location on a site form.
unfluted Clovis I found at 41NV658 (Figure 4) has
However, Meltzer (1987:Table 1) was aware of
part of the tip missing. It is made on a piece of dark
the point and the other two in my possession from
gray high quality chert and there is a slight twist of
Aquilla Creek, plus the location where each was
the blade portion about mid-point. The maximum
found, when he did his first work on the distribution
width is 23.1 mm, the length is 60.4 mm, and the
of Clovis points in Texas.
maximum thickness is 6.0 mm. Both right hand
I recently met with another local collector,
edges of the blade are slightly beveled from one or
Bill Owens (2007 personal communication), who
more episodes of re-sharpening. Grinding is present
informed me he had a Clovis point from Navarro
on the base and both sides of the stem for 26 mm.
County. He described the point as being 62 mm
I am not going to list the three Clovis points
long and made of yellowish chert. He said the blade
C. K. Chandler had found in Ellis County (Tomka

288

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Clovis point from 41NV658.

1998) other than to mention one location. Mr. Chandler and I compared notes one time and we found
that I was walking areas he had previously covered
years before when he lived in Ennis. One of those
sites, referred to as the Chambers Creek Locality in
the Superconducting Supercollider report (Yedlowski
et al. 1998), is actually a portion of the Chambers
Creek channel. Many years ago during a flooding
episode, the banks on both sides of Chambers Creek
started eroding very rapidly. All of the vegetation,
which was helping to stabilize the banks, disappeared
at the same time. This wide-open channel is now
several miles long and is still eroding. After each
flood, a new site may be exposed briefly while an
exposed site disappears in the floodwaters, depositing artifacts in the murky water and occasionally
on gravel and silt bars. If one has the stamina and a
partner, an absolute necessity, they might be able to
occasionally find artifacts in this area. The sites exposed in the creek banks are primarily shell or bone
lenses and it is extremely rare to see an artifact in
situ. However, artifacts are washing out from somewhere, perhaps further upstream than in this eroded

area. The lenses range in depth below
the surface from 3 m to as much as
8-9 m, depending upon the height of
the bank. Over the years, I walked
sections of the creek, but not finding
much in the way of artifacts on any
trip. However, a young man, Steve
Huffman of Brushie Prairie, who was
dating my older daughter, Julie, also
tried his hand at creek walking. On
one trip, he found a basal section of
a Clovis in the same area where C.
K. Chandler found his years earlier.
There must be some very early sites
deeply buried along Chambers Creek.
Before I write about the unrecorded Clovis points from Dallas
County, I want to explain how many
recorded sites were discovered in the
upper Trinity River basin. Most sites
were discovered because of cultivation, construction, land clearing, or
sand and gravel mining. Since 1900,
Dallas, and for that matter the entire
Metroplex, has grown into a huge
commercial and residential region.
Needless to say, the demand for
concrete created a huge demand for
cement, sand, and gravel. It was this
demand for sand and gravel that ultimately brought
about the discovery of many sites. While I spent
more than 40 years in the concrete business, about
half in the Dallas area, I watched the sand, gravel,
and ultimately the stone business continuously grow
into a huge operation. In the early 1920s, contractors
needed shallow deposits of primarily gravel interlaced with sand. The draglines were small and could
not dig very deep. The coring equipment used to define the presence of gravel and sand was also limited
on how deep they could test. The operators started
out testing for deposits along the Trinity River near
downtown. Needless to say, it did not take long for
them to notice that every first terrace associated
with the Trinity River had sand and gravel deposited under the clay and sandy soil cap. It was only a
matter of how much overburden had to be removed
to get to the deposits. Ten to 15 ft. of overburden
was considered the maximum. The early operators
did not have the washing and screening facilities
available today to remove the oversized rocks and
the impervious clay balls, which fell into the material, so the earliest concrete was made of what was

Young—Clovis, Folsom, and Midland Artifacts Between Dallas and the Navasota River
referred to as “pit run.” It was literally dipped out of
the pit, loaded onto a small truck, and transported to
the site where the concrete was being mixed by hand
in a small stationary mixer. Those early draglines
had 30-35 ft. of boom, which not only limited how
deep they could dig but also how far out from the
machine the overburden could be cast to get it out
of a bucket that could hold 0.5-0.75 yards of overburden. Most of the operators had a single dragline
working in a quarry, so part of the day the machine
removed overburden and the remainder of the day
it dug pit run and loaded trucks.
According to King Harris, sites such as Wheeler
and Pemberton Hill were discovered by members of
the Dallas Archeological Society (DAS) who rode
around the Trinity River basin looking for the dragline booms sticking up in the air. The Obshner site
was slightly different in that it was a surface quarry
for sandy loam. Since the draglines were small in the
1920s-1940s, DAS members had time to investigate
sites exposed in pit profiles. However, artifacts were
also found lying on the clay strata below the sandy
loam horizon. King Harris and J. B. Sollberger told
me this on several occasions while we were discussing
sites along the Trinity River in Dallas County. A resurvey of the original sites recorded in Dallas County
was performed by some of DAS members in the early
1990s. As feared, 89 percent of all the sites were gone
while most of the remaining 11 percent had been
modified to some degree by development activities.
I recorded a pair of sites, 41DL313 and
41DL314, as they were being systematically mined.
There was nothing one could do but try to get permission to look and try to salvage whatever could
be found before the site became an 80 ft. deep hole
in the ground. Both sites had been partially mined
for the shallow deposits many years ago and then
abandoned. Another operator discovered that there
were deeper buried deposits and he opened up a new
operation. Pockets of the original sandy loam topsoil
underlain by a reddish clay cap remained in several
places. The operator took a bulldozer and pushed
most of the topsoil off to one side or down slope near
the floodplain of the Trinity River, where the current
channel is located over 1.6 km away.
Every time it rained heavily, I tried to visit
these two sites. The road into the two knolls had
been stripped of the loam down to the clay subsoil.
I quickly discovered that other people were looking
at the sites because I could see their footprints in the
slick clay. Eventually I met one of the collectors. He
told me he had found a complete Clovis on a dirt pile

289

on the slope of 41DL314. I asked him to bring it to
the next meeting of the DAS. The point was about
70 mm in length and I thought the material might
be from an eastern Oklahoma source.
Another complete Clovis was found by a Dallas County Deputy Sheriff in a load of road gravel
delivered to his house for a driveway. The site where
this point came from is 41DL79, located in a gravel
pit on Simpson Stuart Road. I heard about the point
from a couple of sources and eventually contacted
the deputy to see if I could view the artifact. He told
me anytime I could catch him off duty, but before I
saw the artifact, my job situation changed and I no
longer worked in Dallas.
41DL145 is another site destroyed by quarrying. The site was on the west bank of the main
Trinity River channel south of Dowdy Ferry Road
in Hutchins, Texas. About 20 years ago while I
was working in Dallas, I regularly traveled up and
down the roads crossing the river to see what new
construction or quarry areas were being opened
up. 41DL145 is one of the sites recorded in 1941
by Forrest Kirkland, a DAS member. Just like so
many others, the site was quarried back then for the
shallower deposits of sand and gravel. When I drove
by the old terrace, another operator had moved into
the location and was removing everything down
to bedrock. On one occasion, I walked across the
bottom of the quarry after the new operator had
completed the excavation. Lying on the limestone
was a Clovis scraper made on the proximal end of a
blade (Figure 5). The patina is a dull thick off-white.
The measurements of this scraper are 18.5 mm in
width, 40.5 mm in length, and 8.8 mm in thickness
near the working end. There is not an eraillure on
the reverse and the tiny platform measures 3.4 mm
thick by 5.8 mm wide. No other diagnostic artifacts
were found on the bottom of the old quarry. The
landform where this site used to be located is where
the Trinity River is severely confined between two
outcrops of limestone.
Prior to the construction of Cedar Creek Lake,
an archeological survey was done (Davis 1961).
This was prior to any archeological preservation acts
and regulations and funds were very limited; not a
lot of sites were recorded. Most of the recorded sites
were either floodplain rises or terraces extending
into the Cedar Creek floodplain. Over the years, I
have met several collectors who looked for artifacts
at Cedar Creek Lake. It was the general consensus
that there had been at least 300 sites either out of
the water or along the shoreline. I have seen several

290

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Clovis end scraper made on a blade and found at 41DL145.

extensive collections over the years. One collector
named Bart Whatley, who was a homebuilder, lived
north of Mabank, Texas. We met each other one
day on a site overlooking the Trinity River floodplain where the landowner was stripping all of the
sandy loam to sell to builders as cushion sand or to
homeowners for leveling their yards. Mr. Whatley
invited me to his home to look at his collection. In
that collection was a complete Clovis, which he
found in the water at Cedar Creek Lake. He told me
the site was the last piece of high ground between
Kings Creek and Cedar Creek in Kaufman County.
There is not a TARL number assigned to this site.
Every time a Paleoindian point is recovered in
a site that was occupied on multiple occasions in
prehistoric times, there is always the chance the point
was found by later people who brought the projectile
to the site, especially when it is a complete projectile.
Overlooking the Trinity floodplain are several sites
I found years ago. Each site is on a T-3 terrace using Ferring’s (1990) analysis of the terraces of the
Trinity River. When the archeologists started their
preliminary survey for the Tennessee Colony Reservoir back in the mid-1970s (Richner and Lee 1977),

I reported all of these sites to them, which they then
filed site reports with TARL. One site, 41HE265,
is located about 15 m above the level of the Trinity
floodplain but the current channel is more than 1.6
km away. However, one of the headwater branches of
a small creek starts next to the site. This site, like so
many others, originally had a thick deposit of sandy
loam overlying reddish clay. After the land had been
cleared many years ago in preparation for cultivation,
the sandy loam started to erode down slope on both
sides of the clay ridge. When I found the site, there
was less than 10 cm of sandy loam left on top of the
ridge, but on each side, loam was marketable and
the landowners sold truckloads daily. Mr. Whatley
was one of the buyers of some of this material and
he told me he would not let anyone go through each
truckload delivered to his job site until he had gone
over it looking for artifacts.
On one trip to the site, I found a Clovis point
(Figure 6) lying in an exposed area on the eastern
terrace slope. The point is 21.5 mm in width, 51.2
mm in length, and 6.7 mm thick. It is made of a dark
black material, which I first thought to be a chert
found in the region around Stringtown, Oklahoma.

Young—Clovis, Folsom, and Midland Artifacts Between Dallas and the Navasota River

291

The preceding discussion of Clovis artifacts total 34 Clovis broken or
whole points, a blade, and a scraper.
This list should significantly add to the
total number of Clovis artifacts for this
part of North Central Texas.
Folsom

Figure 6. Clovis point from 41HE265.

However, I understand there are some deposits of
chert in the Edwards formation that turn black when
heat-treated.
Eventually the loam deposits played out and
the quarrying ceased. Coastal bermuda grass had
been planted nearby and spread rapidly into the old
quarry, covering any of the remaining sandy area
and leaving only a few bare areas. Every once in a
while, something would fall out of the old quarry
banks. More than 10 years after I found this site, I
happened to go by and decided to walk along the
eastern slope checking the few remaining bare areas.
Lying on the surface within about 2 m of where I
found the Clovis point was a Clovis blade (Figure
7). The blade is thin, measuring only 25.3 mm wide
and 67.6 mm in length, and the distal end is missing. The maximum width is 8.85 mm with a small
striking platform measuring 3.3 mm thick by 6.1
mm wide. The curvature is flatter than most of the
Kevin Davis blades (Young and Collins 1989) and
this Clovis blade has a thin area of cortex remaining
on the dorsal surface.

When I first became interested in
archeology, one of the first books I
acquired was Wormington’s Ancient
Man in North America (1957). After
reading the book, I assumed that the
Folsom Culture was confined to the
High Plains and up into Canada, with
a single find near Uvalde, Texas.
Fifty years later, it is now known that
Folsom is more widespread than originally thought.
The only Folsom I am aware of
from Limestone County was listed in
a report by Michael Mallouf (1983) on
work at Lake Limestone. However, I
am aware of some Folsom stone tools
from Hill County. Besides the one I
mentioned being found and ultimately
sold by a landowner near the town
of Peoria, I found a Folsom preform
(Figure 8) on 41HI57. Sitting on another gopher
mound less than 20 cm away was a small teardropshaped arrow point made of obsidian. This is a
good illustration of just how bad the gophers were
disturbing this site. The Folsom preform was broken
when the second flute was struck and this effectively
destroyed the point. It measures 23.5 mm wide and
2.0 mm thick in the flute channel and is made of
Edwards chert. The maximum thickness is 2.7 mm.
One Folsom point was reported by Meade
(1977) in work done for Dow Chemical in preparation for a lignite mining operation. The site,
41FT17, where this Folsom was found, is on a high
bluff overlooking the Trinity River. Several other
sites are along the same ridge, situated between
Edwards Branch and the river. I was told of these
sites by two brothers, Charles and James Myers of
Fairfield, in 1970. When SMU got the contract to
do the preliminary archeological survey for the proposed Tennessee Colony Lake in 1974, I informed
them about these sites because each site would be
totally destroyed by the construction for the dam. I

292

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Clovis blade found on the surface at 41HE265.

Figure 8. Folsom preform from 41HI57 that was broken during manufacture.

Young—Clovis, Folsom, and Midland Artifacts Between Dallas and the Navasota River

Figure 9. Un-fluted Folsom point from 41TR128.

293

until much later. At that time, I was
not qualified to recognize early 19th
century historical material, and may
have missed something significant.
During one of my visits with R.
K. “King” Harris, he told me about
two Folsom points he had found in
Kaufman County. One came from
41KF11, a site originally recorded
by Fred Wendorf on Kings Creek,
a tributary of Cedar Creek. The site
also has a second trinomial number
(41KF55) that was assigned when
King Harris re-recorded the site. It is
interesting to note on Fred Wendorf’s
site report that he stated there were
three knolls at the site, which he
recorded as one location. The second Folsom came
from a hillside site located on the east side of the
East Fork of the Trinity River several miles below
Crandall, Texas. Mr. Harris told me he found this
point many years ago when someone was repairing
the levee system that ran parallel to the East Fork.
Both points are now housed in the collections section at the National Museum of Natural History at
the Smithsonian Institution.
In Dallas County at 41DL313, which is the hill
near 41DL314 where one of the previously mentioned Clovis points came from, I found the midsection of a fluted Folsom (Figure 10). It measures
2.5 mm thick in the flute channel, 20.8 mm in width,
and is probably made of Edwards chert. None of the
base remains.

was told of a second Folsom being found in the area
where several other sites (41FT154, 41FT170, and
41FT172) were recorded by SMU during the survey
for the Richland/Chambers Lake.
In Tarrant County, I found the basal half of an
un-fluted Folsom. Jay Blaine (1982 personal communication) identified it as an un-fluted Folsom
and not a Midland point. This Folsom is made of
Alibates chert and it was too thin to remove any
flute without breaking the point (Figure 9). The
point is 19.3 mm in width, 22.1 mm in length, and
3.8 mm thick in the center. One of the basal ears is
missing. The site, 41TR128, was recorded by Jan
and Paul Lorrain and me. The first time I went to
the site, I was standing at a locked gate looking at a
very deep quarry on the opposite side of the gate. To
my right, closer to the West Fork of
the Trinity, was a high hill covered
in sandy loam, which had not been
mined. Most of the hill had recently
been cleared of timber and grass
by a bulldozer. A man drove up in
a pickup and got out to unlock the
gate. I asked if I could go in to the
hill to look for artifacts. He replied
that I would have to leave my truck
at the gate and walk in, and if I
should find anything significant, he
instructed me not to tell anyone if I
ever wanted to come back. What I
did not know during the months I
occasionally visited the site while
it was being mined is the fact that
this was supposed to be the location
of Bird’s Fort; I did not find this out Figure 10. Mid-section of a Folsom point from 41DL313.

294

Texas Archeological Society

is a group of collectors who call themselves SHOT
In Henderson County, I earlier mentioned the
(Surface Hunters of Texas). While working at Cooper
Clovis point Bart Whatley found on an unrecorded
Lake running a backhoe and doing archeology for
site near the junction of Kings Creek and Cedar
SMU some years ago, I met some of the members
Creek. Mr. Whatley had a carpenter friend who went
of this group. They invited me to one of their semiwith him on many occasions to look for artifacts
annual gatherings where each member brings his
around Cedar Creek and on one of these trips at the
current findings. Some of them also brought artifacts
same site where the Clovis was found, the carpenter
found in previous years. I have never seen so much
found a complete Folsom, except that the basal ears
Paleoindian material! When they invited me back to
were snapped off. This point was nearly 76 mm in
their second meeting of the year, I asked if I could
length and made of an unknown chert.
bring several professional archeologists with me, to
Collins et al. (2003:107-109) reported and ilwhich they agreed. Drs. Meltzer, Ferring, and Collins
lustrated four miniature points from the Pavo Real
accompanied me to the meeting. What became apparsite in Bexar County, Texas. None conformed to
ent during the “show and tell” was the fact that only
what is thought of as a classic Folsom or Clovis, yet
a single Folsom point had been found in the Sulphur
three of the four illustrated by Collins et al. (2003)
River by SHOT members. Is this another indication
are fluted. I found a point (Figure 11) at 41NV658
that the Folsom people did not venture farther to
that is almost identical to one of the specimens in
the east? Is it possible that San Patrice makers were
the Pavo Real report. On the reverse side, the point
already living in the different environmental area of
almost looks as if it was on a flat flake, except for
Northeast Texas? Since Folsom points are extremely
the removal of a single, narrow horizontal flake rethin and therefore delicate, the odds of finding a commoved almost completely from one side to the other.
plete specimen has to be greatly reduced compared
Otherwise, the only flaking done on the reverse side
to finding a more robust Clovis, especially in the
is at the tip and a small amount of tiny retouching
bottom of a stream channel. Fragmentary pieces will
along both blade and stem edges. On the obverse
settle into the bottom layers of a gravel bar while the
side, the trimming along the blade edges is similar
larger artifacts will be near the surface. This concept
to the tiny retouch found on classic Folsom points.
was borne out by the fact that those members of
This point measures 16.7 mm in width, 23.2 mm in
SHOT found very few arrow points in the Sulphur
length, and is 4.1 mm thick. The material looks to
River channel. At the Kaufman County Archeology &
be light blond-colored Alibates dolomite.
Living History Fair 2007, Lewis Smith, a member of
I have listed eight Folsom points or preforms
SHOT, told me one of his friends found three Folsom
not previously mentioned in the archeological
points at Toledo Bend Reservoir over the years. Mr.
literature. If the eight Folsom points listed in the
Super Collider report (Yedlowski et
al. 1998:47), the three Folsom points
from Horn Rock Shelter #2 (Redder 1985:Figure 2), and one Folsom
point each from 41NV6, 41DL148,
41HE61, 41HE134, and 41KF47,
and the other one reported from Lake
Limestone are combined, there is a
total of 17 Folsom points known to
have been found in the North Central Texas region. Even though the
Folsom numbers are less than what
has been reported for Clovis, there is
ample proof they were utilizing this
region on a regular basis. I have yet
to see a Folsom point from the Pineywoods of East Texas but there may be
some unreported specimens.
In Northeast Texas, in the area of
Figure 11. Folsom point from 41NV658.
the forks of the Sulphur River, there

Young—Clovis, Folsom, and Midland Artifacts Between Dallas and the Navasota River
Smith also confirmed the fact that Folsom points are
extremely rare in the Sulphur River drainage (Lewis
Smith, 2007 personal communication).
Midland
The last two points I want to mention are both
fragments of Midland points. Like Folsom, Midland
points from this region are rare and there are only a
few known examples. Also like Folsom, the odds of
a complete Midland being recovered from a surface
site is almost non-existent due to the fact that both
Folsom and Midland points are delicate and easily
broken. Both of the Midland points I am reporting
in this article are very fragmentary, with only the
bases remaining.
The first Midland point (Figure 12a) was found
on a gopher mound at 41HI57, the same site where
I found a Clovis point and a Folsom preform. The
base is 16.3 mm in width and 5.0 mm thick. Grinding is present along the entire stem. The other

295

Midland base (Figure 12b) came from 41NV658,
which is the same site where I found an unfluted
Clovis. This site at one time had evidence of multicomponent prehistoric use, but most of the surface
artifacts have been hauled off. This Midland base is
16.7 mm wide and 3.5 mm thick. Both bases have
fine retouch along the length of each piece, as is
typically seen on Folsom and Midland points; both
bases are made of high quality Edwards chert.
Conclusions

It is becoming obvious that major occupation
sites of Clovis, Folsom, and Midland peoples are
for the most part still eluding archeologists. A fair
sample of each projectile point type has been found
in this region, but almost invariably found mixed
with later artifacts on terraces associated with major
streams such as the Brazos River, the Trinity River,
and smaller tributaries. But where are the bigger sites
that contain stratified lenses of Clovis and Folsom
materials? I am convinced we will
not find these sites on terraces.
The available evidence indicates
that these sites are deeply buried
somewhere in the floodplain of
streams or under sediments in the
headwaters of permanent flowing
springs. For instance, the Kevin
Davis Blade Cache, the Lewisville
site (Crook and Harris 1957), and
the Aubrey site (Ferring 2001) were
deeply buried. The Wilson-Leonard
a
site (Collins 1998), Horn Rock
Shelter #2, the Gault site (Collins
2002), and Pavo Real also fit this
notion, although Pavo Real was not
a deeply buried site, but the Clovis
and Folsom materials were found
in the deeper strata just above
bedrock.
One site I want to mention in
this respect, with the hope someone may obtain funding and do
some archeological investigations,
is a site I discovered on Aquilla
b
Creek. On the east side of Aquilla
Creek, below the Aquilla Lake
dam, the construction company
excavated a deep channel to serve
Figure 12. Midland points: a, Midland point base from 41HI57; b, Midland
point base from 41NV658.
as the spillway for the lake. On

296

Texas Archeological Society

numerous trips to Aquilla, I would cut across this
spillway to get to several sites south of the lake.
On one trip shortly after the spillway was cut, I
noticed three chert cobbles lying near the surface.
Each cobble was as large as a cantaloupe and all
the cortex had been removed from them. At that
time, I was not versed on cores and deeply buried
sites nor did I have at least a limited knowledge of
some of the various cherts and where they came
from. Years later, I realized I had found something
significant that needed to be investigated. The three
chert cobbles were made out of Leon River chert,
the classic bluish-gray material. The cores were in a
more or less straight line horizontally, but were not
evenly spaced. Having been around earth moving
equipment all of my life I knew these had originally
been in one location and two or all three had been
strung out by a dirt-moving machine. The contractor
planted coastal bermuda grass on the slope shortly
after completion of the channel and the cobbles soon
disappeared under vegetation. Willow trees also
came up along the discharge outlet, further hiding
evidence of this buried and possible Paleoindian
site. Since these cores were exposed at approximately 6-7 m bs, I have to think they were associated
with one of the Paleoindian cultures.
Over the years, we have put most of the archeological work and money spent on large Cultural
Resource Management (CRM) contracts into sites
located on terraces or floodplain rises, especially on
proposed lake construction projects. The reason for
this is the fact that these sites could be located during the initial surveys and typically produced a fair
amount of temporally diagnostic material, mostly
Archaic, Late Prehistoric, or Historic in age. This
has been far more prevalent in East Texas than in
North Central Texas or other parts of the state, because the majority of the recognized sites are Late
Prehistoric in age and are easily identified due to
the presence of pottery sherds, but our grasp of the
Paleoindian archeological record for East Texas is
extremely poor.
On every CRM project I have been involved
in, or have read the final report of, there is never
any mention of deep backhoe or trackhoe testing
having been performed in an effort to locate one
of these elusive Paleoindian sites. I think those
sites exist but how do we convince project managers and clients that we need to dig deep? I do not
believe it is written anywhere in the preliminary
specifications for a lake project that there be a
requirement to test deeply for buried occupation

horizons when there is not going to be any modification to these deeply buried soils other than to
be inundated by lake waters. Surveys along stream
banks and cut banks may be our only chance to
find these kinds of sites. I have some thoughts
about how we might find some of them, but that
will require another paper!
Acknowledgements
The first archeologist I met was Dr. S. Alan
Skinner. One of the first requests he made to me was
“If you are bound and determined to collect, keep a
record of all the sites you find and put a number on
each artifact tying each item back to the site from
where it came!” For 38 years I have tried to adhere
to this sound advice. If not, I surely would not have
become an archeological steward for the Texas
Historical Commission. Alan and I have been good
friends ever since, working on a number of projects
together, and it is with great pride that I have asked
him to serve as my mentor on this article.
There are several other archeologists I want
to recognize. Dr. Michael Collins and Dr. David
Meltzer have offered help over the years. The list of
archeologists who have helped me through the years
is endless, because I have gained some knowledge
from everyone I met. Members of the Texas Archeological Society, the Dallas Archeological Society,
and the Tarrant County Archeological Society all
have contributed to my knowledge of archeology,
and without their help, my understanding of archeology would have been severely limited.
Lance Trask drew the artifact figures included
in this article.
References Cited
Bousman, C. B., B. W. Baker, and A. C. Kerr
2004 Paleoindian Archeology in Texas. In The Prehistory
of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 15-97. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Brown, D. O.
1987 Archeology at Aquilla Lake, 1978-1982 Investigations, Volumes 1-3. Research Report 81. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bryan, F.
1938 A Preliminary Report on the Archeology of Western Navarro County. Central Texas Archeologist
3:70-79.

Young—Clovis, Folsom, and Midland Artifacts Between Dallas and the Navasota River
Collins, M. B.
2002 The Gault Site, Texas, and Clovis Research. Athena
Review 3(2):31-41, 100-101.
Collins, M. B. (assembler and editor)
1998 Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas, Volumes
I-V. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Collins, M. B., D. B. Hudler, and S. L. Black
2003 Pavo Real (41BX52): A Paleoindian and Archaic
Camp and Workshop on the Balcones Escarpment,
South-Central Texas. Studies in Archeology 41.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, and Archeology Studies
Program, Report 10, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.
Crook, W. W., Jr. and R. K. Harris
1957 Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man near Lewisville,
Texas and Associated Faunal Material. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 28:7-79.
Davis, W. A.
1961 Archeological Survey and Appraisal of Cedar Creek
Reservoir, Henderson and Kaufman Counties, Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park Service by the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Ferring, C. R.
1990 Late Quaternary Geology and Geoarchaeology of
the Upper Trinity River Drainage Basin, Texas.
GSA Field Trip #11, Geological Society of America,
Dallas.
2001 The Archaeology and Paleoecology of the Aubrey
Clovis Site (41DN479), Denton County, Texas. Center for Environmental Archaeology, Department of
Geography, University of North Texas, Denton.
Lynott, M. J. and D. E. Peter
1977 1975 Archaeological Investigations at Aquilla Lake,
Texas. Research Report 100. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Mallouf, M. G.
1977 Archeological Investigations at Lake Limestone:
Fall and Winter 1977. Research Report 71. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Mallouf, R. J.
1981 A Case Study of Plow Damage to Chert Artifacts, The
Brookeen Creek Cache, Hill County, Texas. Report
33. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.

297

Meade, C. W.
1977 An Archaeological and Historical Survey of Turlington Field, Freestone County, Texas. Manuscript on
file with the author.
Meltzer, D.
1987 The Clovis Paleoindian Occupation of Texas: Results
of the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 57:27-68.
Raab, L. M. (editor)
1982 Settlement of the Prairie Margin: Archaeology of
the Richland Creek Reservoir, Navarro and Freestone Counties, Texas, 1980-1981. Archaeological
Monographs, No. 1. Archaeology Research Program,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Redder, A. J.
1985 Horn Shelter Number 2: The South End. Central
Texas Archeologist 10:37-65.
Richner, J. J. and R. Lee
1977 Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Survey at Tennessee Colony Lake, 1975. Research Report 104.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Skinner, S. A. and M. S. Henderson
1972 Archaeological Resources of the Aquilla Creek
Watershed, Texas. In The Natural and Cultural
Environmental Resources of the Aquilla Creek Watershed, Hill County, Texas, by S. A. Skinner, pp.
3-62. Research Report 17. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Tomka, S. A.
1998 Appendix A, The Chandler Collection, Prehistoric
Artifacts from Ellis and Navarro Counties, Texas.
In Archaeological Investigations in Support of the
Superconducting Super Collider, Ellis County, Texas,
by J. L. Yedlowski, K. J. Shaunessy, D. H. Jurney,
and J. M. Adovasio. Archaeology Research Program,
Mercyhurst College, Erie, Pennsylvania.
Wormington, H. M.
1957 Ancient Man in North American. Popular Series No.
4. The Denver Museum of Natural History.
Yedlowski, J. L., K. J. Shaunessy, D. H. Jurney, and J. M.
Adovasio
1998 Archaeological Investigations in Support of the Superconducting Super Collider, Ellis County, Texas.
Archaeology Research Program, Mercyhurst College, Erie, Pennsylvania.
Young, B. and M. B. Collins
1989 A Cache of Blades with Clovis Affinities from Northeastern Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
6:26-28.

The Shifting Sands Site:
A Southern Plains Folsom-Midland Assemblage
Richard O. Rose

ABSTRACT
The Shifting Sands site is a Folsom-Midland assemblage located in the Monahans Dune System of Western
Texas. More than 1000 Folsom stone tools and over 20,400 pieces of chipping debris have been collected
from this site during the past 29 years. Folsom artifacts and fragmentary weathered bone are eroding from a
distinct 1 meter thick sandy unit, with a high degree of artifact integrity. A bison kill/butchery event appears to
be represented in at least one area of the site. This bone bed feature, evidenced by weathered bone and tooth
enamel, contains fluted Folsom points and unfluted points (Midland), many of which exhibit impact damage.
Large scale spatial patterning is evident, which indicates that different areas of the site were also used for tool
maintenance and manufacturing, hide scraping, hearth-centered activities, and other campsite functions. The
high frequency of scrapers, gravers, point preforms, informal flake tools, knives, debitage, and a few burned
tools may represent evidence of a short-term campsite. Folsom groups are believed to have been highly mobile
hunters focused on bison hunting and moved over areas of considerable size during their hunting and tool stone
procurement activities.

Introduction and Setting
This article is an overview of the FolsomMidland assemblage from the Shifting Sands site
(41WK21) in West Texas, and it also summarizes
information on how mobility and risk reduction may
have affected the makeup of this and other Southern
Plains Folsom site assemblages. The artifact collection from this site has provided clues about the
nature of Folsom assemblage variability across the
Southern Plains region. One demonstrated aspect of
this variability is the economical use of tool stone
through tool reduction techniques and the contradictory abandonment of several large tools at the
site. At Shifting Sands and other reported kill sites
or campsites on the Southern Plains, the distances
to quality tool stone sources for the manufacture of
Folsom points were commonly 200-400 km. The
decision to not flute a point may have been Folsom
lithic technology responding to the tool stone needs
of groups who spent weeks and maybe months away
from quality tool stone sources.
The Shifting Sands site is located on the Pecos
Plain along the southern margin of the Llano Estacado in West Texas (Figure 1). Folsom-Midland
artifacts and weathered bone fragments have been

found in a series of 5-8 m deep blowouts in an active dune field that is part of the greater Monahans
Dune system. In a similar setting, approximately
80 km east of Shifting Sands are the well-known
Scharbauer site (Wendorf et al. 1955) near Midland,
Texas, and the Winkler 1 site (Blaine and Wendorf
1972), located in a dune field approximately 12 km
to the southwest of Shifting Sands.
Stratigraphy
Three major stratigraphic units are evident
at the Shifting Sands site. The basal unit has
Pleistocene age lacustrine deposits exposed in the
bottoms of some blowouts. These old lakebeds
contain extinct Pleistocene fauna, but no archeological evidence has been found in the lakebed
deposits. Overlying the old lakebed deposits is a
light brownish-red sandy deposit that is up to 1 m
thick in some locations. On most of the site this
light brownish-red sandy unit is distinctly layered
with sandy reddish clay laminations. This deposit is
generally found lining or ringing the bottom of the
blowouts, but a few small erosion hummocks of the
laminated sands are also present in the blowouts.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

300

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. The Southern High Plains region, showing the location of Shifting Sands and other Folsom-Midland sites.

In some areas, light brown silty sand underlies
the light brownish-red sandy unit. Folsom and
Midland artifacts are found eroding from this light
brownish-red sandy and brownish-red laminated
deposit. Sand samples taken in June 2000 from
this deposit in Area 2 by Vance Holliday have been
dated by optically stimulated luminescence (central
age model) to be 10,600 ± 1200 years old (Feathers

et al. 2006). The vertical distribution of Folsom and
Midland artifacts throughout much of this sandy
deposit is consistent with current expectations
about vertical movement of artifacts within such
sediments during a 10,000 year time frame (Hofman et al. 1990). Mineralized bison bone, much
of which is extremely fragmentary, is also eroding
from this deposit. Most of this bone is restricted

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site
to an area of about 70 × 30 m in Area 3 of the site;
small amounts of the bone have been burned.
Overlying the light brownish-red sandy deposit
is an active dune deposit more than 5 m thick. These
sands are part of the upper portion of the Monahans
Formation (Wendorf et al. 1955). Complex patterns
of parallel wavy crests are generally oriented perpendicular to the summer southeasterly winds. The
dunes and exposed blowout areas are moving to the
northeast due to the usually stronger westerly winds
during late winter and early spring. A very low density of Late Prehistoric artifacts (five arrow points)
was found eroding from the active overlying dune
sands. No arrow points or other Late Prehistoric diagnostic materials have been collected from the light
brownish-red laminated sands at this site or elsewhere
in the dunes of West Texas. Also, none of the Late
Prehistoric material from the region exhibits the patination that has been found on some of the Paleoindian
material from other areas in the region. A Plainviewlike point, two San Patrice-like points with recurved
side-hollowed edges, a large uniface tool, and a small
number of flakes were recovered several years ago
from a small area on the far southern periphery of
Area 2. Careful stratigraphic observation and collection of eroding artifacts from the light brownish-red
laminated sandy deposit has demonstrated that this
distinct stratum was deposited during the FolsomMidland occupation(s) of the site.
Assemblage Collection
Methods
Since finding the site in June 1981, I have made
358 trips to the Shifting Sands site. I have consistently
and systematically collected the exposed artifacts and
debris from the fresh blowout surfaces after erosional
occurrences. By recording the exposed artifact positions found on and in the distinct sandy stratum (some
are found in situ), a reasonable measure of stratigraphic control of the assemblage has been insured.
Due to the strategy of collecting distinctive blowouts
separately, large-scale spatial control is available
for analysis of the assemblage, even though using
blowouts in large dunes as analytical units probably
does not reflect the full degree of artifact and assemblage patterning at the site (Amick and Rose 1990).
It should not be surprising that there is not a direct
correlation between modern blowout areas that are
constantly changing and prehistoric activities on the
site’s landscape. The spatial control is opportunistic

301

and relies on geologic processes (mainly wind erosion) that have conditioned the sizes, shapes, and spatial relationships of the collection areas. The blowouts
have unstable boundaries because the overlying dunes
remain active and the total spatial extent of the site
is unknown. The site’s presently documented size is
approximately 200 x 280 m. With independent datum
points established within each blowout area, many
artifacts have been piece-plotted using a compass and
tape (Figure 2). Since June 2006, a Magellan GPS
receiver has been used to record the horizontal locations of artifacts found at the site, and piece plotting
of the artifacts is needed to better understand the site’s
spatial patterning.
A considerable degree of integrity exists for
this Folsom-Midland assemblage because of the
collection technique, careful observation of stratigraphic provenience, and the frequency of visits
(important in active dunes) to the site. Supporting
the interpretation that this is a relatively high integrity Folsom-Midland assemblage are several other
lines of evidence. First, there is a predominance
of Folsom-Midland diagnostics, including 196
projectile points, 35 point preforms, 121 channel
flake fragments, and nine ultrathin bifaces (one of
which is complete). Secondly, 86 refits have been
demonstrated both within blowout areas (n=76)
and between blowouts (n=10). Third, there exists a
high degree of homogeneity in the technology and
the raw materials being utilized, and the lithic techniques and tools in the Shifting Sands assemblage
are much like those reported at other Folsom sites
on the Great Plains (Frison and Bradley 1980). Raw
materials used in the manufacture of their toolkit are
almost exclusively non-local Edwards Formation
chert, a pattern that contrasts with the Archaic and
later prehistoric use of local cherts in this region.
Finally, although differential patination is evident in
the artifact assemblage (some pieces are patinated
and some are not), several refit artifacts exhibit
variation in the patina of their refitted fragments,
demonstrating patina is not an indication of different
artifact ages or different times of site occupation.
Lithic Tool Assemblage
To date, 1019 stone tools and over 20,400 pieces
of chipping debris (including pieces of shatter) have
been collected from this Folsom-Midland site. A
general summary of the number and distribution
of artifact types by areas is provided in Table 1.

302

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. 1986 Plan Map by Meltzer and Sorohan of the Shifting Sands site with datum points. Area 7 is ca. 16-21 m
west-southwest of Area 2.

Over 99 percent of the assemblage is made from a
vitreous semi-translucent tan to brown to gray variety
of Edwards chert, which is available approximately
170 km to the east near Sterling City. Local sources
of raw material are rare, but a less vitreous local
chert and a variety of quartzite are available about
25 km to the southeast near Notrees. There were
also a few distinctive purple quartzite choppers and
hammerstones found at the site. The source of this

quartzite is probably the gravels of the Pecos River
valley, about 60 km to the west. Also recovered was a
hammerstone made of a milky-blue quartzite and two
made on Edwards chert nodules. One of the latter is a
cortex-covered fist-sized nodule (9.2 x 8.7 x 7.2 cm in
length, width, and thickness) with minimal pecking,
and the other was a larger (13.41 x 10.95 x 4.85 cm)
platter-shaped nodule with cortex on both sides;
this nodule is bifaced with numerous compression

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site

303

Table 1. Shifting Sands site (41WK21) artifact distribution by areas through June 2010.
Artifact Types

0

2

Blowout Areas
3
3A

Point and Point Fragment
Preform
Channel Flake, used
Channel Flake, not used*
Biface
Ultrathin Biface Knife
End Scraper, spurred
End Scraper
Thin End Scraper
Side Scraper
End/Side Scraper
Miscellaneous Scraper
and fragment
Convergent Tool
Informal Flake Tool
Bend Break/Snapped Tool
Graver
Perforator (Tip)
Spokeshave
Denticulate
Notch
Hinge Flake Tool
Adze
Drill
Micro-drill
Chopper
Hammerstone
Abrader
Hematite Lumps*
Burin
Radial Break Tool Form
Ground stone
Bead*

0
0
2
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

48
18
10
39
7
3
17
8
7
13
4

59
4
9
11
0
1
16
5
1
8
4

0
0
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0

19
4
88
8
22
2
3
2
3
0
0
1
1
0
3
2
7
2
6
1
0

Totals by Areas

11

302

*Artifacts not included in totals by areas
Area 0 is non-provenienced artifacts

3B

4

5

6

7

N

30
2
1
2
0
0
4
2
0
2
0

6
3
2
2
0
0
1
4
0
3
1

12
3
5
5
2
1
4
0
2
3
0

11
5
8
11
5
1
14
7
2
2
6

21
0
4
5
0
3
8
0
0
12
3

9
0
0
1
0
0
6
0
0
0
0

196
35
41
80
14
9
70
26
12
43
18

9
0
49
1
25
3
1
1
1
2
0
0
0
2
1
0
1
2
4
2
0

0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0

2
0
36
2
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0

5
1
25
2
8
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

4
2
47
1
13
3
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
5
1
0

5
0
35
2
9
0
1
1
2
2
1
0
0
0
3
0
1
0
6
4
1

5
0
5
1
9
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
6
0
0

49
7
298
17
86
8
7
4
13
5
1
3
2
3
8
3
13
6
27
8
1

210

48

64

77

141

122

44

1019

fractures on all edges. Both of these hammerstones
could have been carried in to the Shifting Sands site
as a potential source of tool stone.
There are a total of 196 identifiable points and
point fragments in the artifact assemblage. This includes 48 Folsom points (seven are pseudo-fluted),

133 Midland points, and 15 Folsom or Midland
indeterminate points (partial pieces). Proximal and
distal fragments that lack evidence of fluting were
included in the Midland point count. In general,
there is one Folsom point for every three Midland
points in this assemblage.

304

Texas Archeological Society

There are 102 points with bases, of which 24
(among them, eight diminutive points) are complete or nearly complete, 26 are bases with part
of the blade, and 52 are point bases. A total of 49
point fragments have been refitted that represent 9
Folsom points and 14 Midland points (Figure 3). In
the 24 complete or nearly complete points, there are

10 Folsom points (three are refits) and 14 Midland
points (nine are refits). In the remaining 78 point
fragments with bases, there are 20 Folsom point
bases (five are refits) and 58 Midland bases (five are
refits). There is also one Folsom point tip refit. These
102 points and point fragments with bases represent
53 percent of the total number of points and point

Figure 3. Folsom and Midland points from the Shifting Sands site. Specimen numbers are from left to right. Top row:
Midland #463, #3A28/325, #262, #3A7/3157, #35/3. Middle row: Folsom #34, #3215/3117/323, #2435/2415/2377,
#21/2205 #62/03. Bottom row: diminutive #227, #611, #269, #36, #33.

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site

305

and Midland points, the Shifting Sands points have
gone through cycles of use and repair, and thus a few
of them have some distal/tip impact damage present.
The Folsom (n=4) and Midland (n=3) diminutive
point lengths were combined for a single average.
Two common types of point breakage are snap/
bend breaks and impact breaks. Snap/bend breaks
can result from a number of causes: use as a projectile point (end shock), use as a butchering tool
or knife (rarely), failure during manufacture, and in
the repairing of damaged points (Frison and Bradley 1980). Impact breaks are clearly related to use
as a projectile point. Almost all of the points in the
collection exhibit these two types of breakage, but
with a higher incidence of impact breaks relative to
snap/bend breaks. Perverse breakage is represented
in a smaller proportion of the points, and most likely
occurred during manufacture (Frison and Bradley
1980).
There are 121 channel flake fragments from
the site, among them 44 proximal, 65 medial, and
12 distal end fragments. Dimensions were taken on
channel flakes with measurable attributes (Tables
5-7). Width measurements were not used to obtain
averages if edges were damaged or modified for
use. Medial thickness (n=52 measured specimens) is
1.74 mm; medial width (n=27) is 15.17 mm; proximal thickness (n=42) is 1.88 mm; proximal width
(n=43) is 13.41 mm; distal thickness (n=11) is 1.62
mm; and distal width (n=9) is 13.93 mm. Forty-one
of these channel flakes have evidence of being utilized for light duty tasks. One of the utilized channel

fragments in the collection: 29 percent are Folsom
and 71 percent are Midland. These percentages are
close to the overall percentages for the 196 points
in the collection: 26 percent for Folsom points and
74 percent for Midland points.
Present in the Shifting Sands collection is a
considerable variety of point forms: fluted on both
faces (classic Folsom); fluted multiple times on one
face; fluted on one face only; pseudo-fluted (use of
a flake blank surface for the flute); and unfluted (or
a Midland point). As noted previously there are 48
fluted points: 30 that have been fluted on both faces,
11 fluted on one face, and seven pseudo-fluted,
including one point made on a channel flake. Also
present are eight diminutive Folsom and Midland
points. All of these different point morphologies
(see Figure 3) suggest that the production of classic fluted Folsom points was not always the goal of
Folsom toolmakers (Amick and Rose 1990). The
recorded distribution of these different point morphologies (Table 2) across the site indicates there are
no discrete concentrations and that these points were
being made and used within the same technological
system, as well as the same occupation.
Even though there are differences between Folsom and Midland points (primarily the flute), they
are still very similar in their physical dimensions
of length, width, and thickness (Table 3). Table 4
provides a comparison of these dimensions taken
from points and point fragments that had measurable
attributes. Length was taken only on points that were
complete or nearly complete, but like most Folsom

Table 2. Distribution of Folsom and Midland points by areas at Shifting Sands.

Blowout Areas

2

3

3A

3B

4

5

6

7

Totals

Complete or nearly complete
Bases with blades
Bases
Blades
Blades with tips
Tips
Edges
Unassigned fragments

6
7
9
1
5
6
13
0

9
7
12
4
3
8
12
4

2
5
12
3
3
3
3
0

0
1
1
0
0
1
3
0

1
1
4
0
1
2
3
0

2
2
3
1
0
1
2
0

4
1
7
3
0
3
3
0

0
2
4
0
0
0
3
0

24
26
52
12
12
24
42
4

Point Totals

47

59

31

6

12

11

21

9

196

Folsom points in area
Midland points in area

11
36

10
49

8
23

3
3

7
5

2
9

6
15

1
8

48
148

4.48
1.55
2.08
2.72
1.93
(5.56)
3.10
2.29
3.16
3.57
3.60
3.52
4.23
(5.10)
2.05
5.41
2.83
3.50
3.49
3.97
4.91
1.92
(4.45)
2.61
4.95
4.63
2.54
6.17
2.08

base/blade
base
base
complete
base
base/blade
complete
blade
base/blade
base/blade
base/blade
complete
complete
complete
base
blade/tip
blade/tip
base/blade
base/blade
blade/tip
base/blade
base
complete
base/blade
complete
complete
complete
complete
tip

21/2205
213
219/2206
227
242
262
269
2186
2208
2231
2234
2245
2263
2266/3279
2268
2283
2402
2416
2419
2434
2377/2415/2435
31
32
33
34
3/35
36
37/060
311

F*
M
F*
F
M
M
F **
M
M
M
M
M
F **
M
M
M
M
F
M
M
F
M
M
F **
F
M
F **
M
M

Length
(cm)

Specimen 			
Number
Type
Portion
2.35
1.80
1.88
1.46
2.14
1.92
1.58
2.09
2.04
2.14
1.91
1.54
2.21
2.11
1.87
2.56
1.85
1.89
1.75
2.07
2.17
1.91
2.13
1.27
1.99
1.79
1.08
1.94
1.28

Width
(cm)
0.34
0.32
0.35
0.29
0.35
0.40
0.32
0.40
0.33
0.35
0.37
0.36
0.41
0.34
0.35
0.41
0.40
0.43
0.48
0.41
0.38
0.40
0.36
0.26
0.41
0.28
0.25
0.43
0.25

Thickness
(cm)
1.51
1.57
1.65
1.46
1.59
1.58
0.98
—
1.58
1.90
1.61
1.09
1.71
1.88
1.61
—
—
1.62
1.46
—
1.81
1.61
1.80
.91
1.77
1.67
1.08
1.67
—

Basal
Width (cm)
1.85
1.68
1.76
1.43
1.79
1.65
1.32
—
1.90
2.01
1.72
1.41
1.96
1.93
1.72
—
—
1.71
1.66
—
1.82
1.73
2.00
1.23
1.86
1.70
0.94
1.64
—

Basal Width
at 1cm

Table 3. Dimensions of Folsom and Midland points at the Shifting Sands site.

0.29
0.01
0.13
0.10
0.19
0.13
0.02
—
0.21
0.18
0.20
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.05
—
—
0.07
0.08
—
0.09
0.18
0.17
0.14
0.33
0.10
—
0.07
—

Basal Depth
(cm)
0 .31
—
0.35
0.20
—
—
0.32
—
—
—
—
—
0.41
—
—
—
—
0.34
—
—
0 .29
—
—
0.26
0.28
—
0.25
—
—

Fluted
Thickness (cm)

306
Texas Archeological Society

4.68
1.75
3.89
3.22
3.55
(5.23)
3.18
1.97
4.29
3.42
1.98
3.95
(4.95)
5.13
3.66
(3.93)
5.44
2.85
3.41
5.75
1.88
1.73
2.46
2.01
1.79
4.92
4.21
4.67
1.63
2.35

complete
base
blade/tip
base/blade
base/blade
complete
base/blade
base
base/blade
base/blade
base
blade/tip
complete
base/blade
blade/tip
base/blade
complete
base/blade
base/blade
complete
base
base
base
base
base
base/blade
complete
blade
complete
base

316/3
317
324
344
391
397/3127
3130
3141
3156
3158
3161
3202
3215/3117/323
3A1/2381
3A2
3A3
3A7/3157
3A9
3A21
3A28/325
3A38
3A41
3A45
3A46
3A49
3A52
3A53/3A58
3A61
3B2
42

F **
M
M
M
M
M
M
F*
M
M
M
M
F
M
M
M
M
M
F
M
M
M
F
M
M
M
M
M
F*
F

Length
(cm)

Specimen 			
Number
Type
Portion
2.07
1.71
2.16
2.18
2.15
2.22
1.97
1.80
2.15
2.07
1.99
1.93
1.96
1.95
2.15
1.88
2.10
1.83
2.08
2.05
1.85
1.86
1.99
1.92
1.95
2.11
1.90
1.94
1.31
1.83

Width
(cm)
0.36
0.32
0.42
0.44
0.38
0.45
0.39
0.32
0.48
0.33
0.37
0.34
0.35
0.39
0.43
0.38
0.44
0.38
0.48
0.35
0.31
0.37
0.41
0.37
0.32
0.44
0.41
0.36
0.30
0.37

Thickness
(cm)
1.68
1.55
—
1.56
1.60
1.52
1.76
1.56
1.75?
1.50
1.76
—
1.50
1.50
—
1.75
1.67
1.67
2.06
1.64
1.61
1.46
1.78
1.70
1.95
1.81
1.63
—
1.25
1.70

Basal
Width (cm)

Table 3. (Continued)

1.88
1.66
—
1.88
1.88
1.72
1.88
1.70
1.78
1.73
1.86
—
1.55
1.65
—
1.84
1.82
1.74
2.07
1.67
1.71
1.80
1.86
1.74
1.82
1.79
1.77
—
1.30
1.62

Basal Width
at 1cm
0.20
0.20
—
0.13
0.12
—
—
0.29
0.14
0.23
0.14
—
0.29
0.21
—
0.13
0.18
0.28
0.20
0.32
0.12
0.17
0.16
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.13
—
0.05
0.26

Basal Depth
(cm)
0.31
—
—
—
—
—
—
0.26
—
—
—
—
0.26
—
—
—
—
—
0.34
—
—
—
0.28
—
—
—
—
—
0.26
0.24

Fluted
Thickness (cm)

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site
307

3.40
6.74
1.73
2.10
4.02
2.95
2.23
1.84
5.04
(4.64)
2.73
2.87
2.66
4.47
2.56
3.56

1.93
2.10
1.80
1.18
1.82
1.89
1.55
1.86
2.06
1.44
1.23
1.12
1.86
1.87
1.97
2.01

Width
(cm)

F=Folsom; M=Midland
* Folsom point fluted on one side
** Pseudo-fluted Folsom point
# Folsom point made on a channel flake
+ Midland point made on quartz crystal
Refit points are indicated by number / number
Numbers in parentheses indicate a nearly complete point measurement

base/blade
complete
base
complete
complete
base/blade
base
base
base/blade
complete
complete
complete
base
complete
base
base/blade

437
463
480
510
512/5
561
564
579
5104/5106
62/03
64
611
614/3B
620/343
684
749

F
M
F*
F#
M
M
M
M
M
F
M+
M
F
M
F
M

Length
(cm)

Specimen 			
Number
Type
Portion
0.34
0.40
0.34
0.24
0.30
0.39
0.44
0.29
0.44
0.34
0.37
0.27
0.39
0.40
0.38
0.39

Thickness
(cm)
1.77
1.78
1.62
1.11
1.61
1.57
1.47
1.43
1.62
1.28
1.23
0.91
1.64
1.70
1.75
1.85

Basal
Width (cm)

Table 3. (Continued)

1.85
1.87
1.78
1.17
1.65
1.61
1.49
1.76
1.77
1.30
1.15
1.11
1.64
1.80
1.82
1.94

Basal Width
at 1cm
0.28
0.34
0.14
0.02
0.17
0.12
0.17
—
0.20
0.14
0.07
0.04
0.14
0.12
0.26
0.25

Basal Depth
(cm)

0.26
—
0.33
0.24
—
—
—
—
—
0.31
—
—
0.26
—
0.35
—

Fluted
Thickness (cm)

308
Texas Archeological Society

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site

309

Table 4. Average dimensions of Shifting Sands Folsom, Midland, and diminutive points.
Average Dimensions in cm

Folsom

Midland

Diminutive

Basal width at ears
Basal width at 1 cm
Basal depth
Maximum width
Maximum thickness
Fluted 2 faces thickness
Fluted 1 face thickness
Pseudo-fluted thickness
Complete (or nearly) length

1.67 (n=17)
1.77 (n=17)
0.20 (n=17)
1.96 (n=18)
0.35 (n=24)
0.28 (n=12)
0.30 (n=5)
0.29 (n=6)
4.69 (n=5)

1.61 (n=40)
1.76 (n=40)
0.14 (n=40)
1.95 (n=51)
0.37 (n=51)
—
—
—
4.68 (n=12)

1.12 (n=8)
1.21 (n=8)
0.06 (n=8)
1.28 (n=8)
0.29 (n=8)
0.20 (n=1)
0.26 (n=1)
0.25 (n=4)
2.53 (n=7)

flakes (artifact #5174) may possibly be of Niobrara
jasper or a Hartville Uplift material (LeTourneau
2000; Jack Hofman, personal communication
2010). Niobrara jasper is found in the border area
of northwest Kansas and Nebraska, approximately
850 km north of the Shifting Sands site. Hartville
Uplift material is found near the southeast corner of
Wyoming, approximately 1000 km in distance; this
is a tentative source identification that remains to be
confirmed. The other 120 channel flakes are made
of Edwards chert and 31 of these channel fragments
refit back to each other, representing a total of 12
channel flakes.
There are 35 preforms (Table 8) in the collection and several types of manufacturing failures
(Frison and Bradley 1980) are present. Failures that
occurred during fluting are: bend breaks; channel
flake hinges through the preform near the proximal
end, removing the medial and distal end; channel
flake hinges through the preform, removing the far
distal end; preform ear splits off (typically during a
second flute attempt); the preform is split longitudinally; and perverse fractures. Also included in nonfluting manufacturing failures are perverse and bend
breaks, which generally occur during pressure thinning or shaping of the preform (Frison and Bradley
1980). Preform #2296 is four refitted pieces (Figure
4) from a preform that was fluted successfully on
both sides, but then may have been broken during
the marginal retouch of a lateral edge on the side not
shown in the drawing. This preform was fluted three
times and possibly a fourth time. There is also the
possibility that this preform failed during fluting of
the second side. The first channel flake removed was
too narrow, so a second channel flake was removed

that almost resulted in an overshot break through
the preform base. This could have produced shock
and bending loads that caused the preform to fail
into four pieces. The larger channel flake set (five
fragments) refits the preform side (first side to be
fluted) not shown in the drawing and the other two
sets of channel flakes (seven fragments) refit back to
each other and then to the preform side shown in the
drawing. There are three other point preform bases
that have channel flakes that refit them.
Ultrathin bifaces (Jodry 1998; Root et al.
1999) apparently were specialized butchering tools
(knives) that have only recently been recognized as a
distinct tool type in Folsom lithic assemblages found
at sites from Texas to North Dakota. The manufacture of these remarkable knives required a high level
of specialized knapping skill comparable to that
required in making a fluted Folsom point. Root et
al. (1999:152) have hypothesized: “Ultrathin bifaces
may represent a dual strategy in which early stage
reduction was designed to produce flake blanks,
and later stage reduction was designed to produce
extremely thin and sharp cutting tools.” Some of the
exhausted ultrathins may have been reworked into
Midland or even Folsom points. During 2001 at the
Barger Gulch site in Middle Park, Colorado, the
distal margin of a failed Folsom preform was recovered that refit to the distal end fragment of a Folsom
ultrathin biface; also, a channel flake and several
marginal pressure flakes were recovered that refit to
the preform. Surovell et al. (2003) have suggested
that Folsom ultrathins were intentionally broken by
bend break and possibly radial fracture to serve as
cores for Folsom point production since an ultrathin
fragment would require minimal preparation for

310

Texas Archeological Society
Table 5. Channel flake proximal dimensions (in mm).

Specimen
Number

Platform
Width

Platform
Length

Bulbar
Thickness

Proximal
Width

Proximal
Length

Proximal
Thickness

222P
1.47
4.94
2.06
12.62
17.07
1.83
229
1.85
4.90
2.06
14.92
22.37
1.80
							
2152
1.21
3.82
1.62
11.71
11.50
1.53
2333
1.86
4.58
2.00
14.47
12.32
1.91
2353
2.02
5.80
2.23
13.44
17.45
2.29
2356
1.95
5.53
2.50
16.54
13.60
2.58
2357
1.64
4.69
2.19
12.54
13.09
1.71
2358
1.55
4.52
2.15
14.44
15.33
2.02
2383
1.52
4.61
2.02
12.93
18.43
1.96
							
2401
1.61
5.09
2.41
17.09
15.96
2.23
							
2411
1.43
3.45
1.57
10.04
15.47
1.73
							
2413
1.62
4.60
2.10
13.91
22.32
1.54
2424
2.07
5.02
2.40
13.79
11.21
2.30
2446
2.43
6.42
2.20
12.22
19.66
1.91
377
1.17
4.95
1.54
11.81
10.63
1.37
378
1.61
4.43
2.13
11.92
12.56
1.60
3119
1.96
5.56
2.54
13.75
31.47
1.98
3159
2.23
4.60
1.89
12.81
15.80
2.12
3188
2.34
6.45
2.16
15.15
19.83
2.03
3189
1.34
4.20
1.69
14.19
18.13
1.92
3203
1.66
5.17
2.09
13.32
20.52
2.37
3258
1.15
4.17
2.36
13.82
11.21
1.67
3259
1.48
3.30
2.06
11.88
10.24
1.62
3A22
1.66
4.09
1.98
12.27
17.23
1.76
3B45
1.19
2.88
1.61
12.71
18.69
1.40
3B87
2.31
5.74
2.14
15.33
19.82
2.34
443
2.02
5.13
2.54
13.42
9.92
2.24
444
1.41
3.69
2.40
13.26
16.87
2.11
449
1.58
5.03
2.21
14.97
19.84
2.26
472
2.11
6.69
–
15.42
12.38
–
							
588
1.53
4.94
1.68
12.87
15.45
1.55
5111
1.41
5.15
1.65
13.88
26.15
1.90
5136
1.62
4.52
1.84
13.38
21.43
1.95
5165
1.55
4.24
2.03
15.03
13.23
1.75
679
1.51
4.69
2.21
14.52
13.90
2.06
6132
1.54
3.44
2.00
12.15
18.75
1.81
6157
1.33
5.27
2.16
15.58
13.15
2.10
Note: Dimensions taken on proximals with intact platforms

Notes
refit #222
refit #228,
utilized
small eraillure
small eraillure
refit #2297,
utilized
refit #2296
preform
refit #2296
preform
lipped platform
utilized
utilized
refit #3106
refit #240
small eraillure
refit #461
potlidded,
utilized
utilized
utilized
eraillure
utilized
utilized

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site
Table 6. Channel flake medial dimensions (in mm).
Specimen
Number

Medial
Width

Medial
Length

Medial
Thickness

0101*
0103*
0105*
222
233
240
2144
2145
2179
2200
2290
2312
2327
2328
2380
2386
2301
2405/2418
3106
3166
3181
3274
3A32
3B43
3B86
447
517/557
549
551
553
554
571
586
5148
5152
647
6114

13.37
(13.89)
(15.93)
14.83
15.07
18.59
(15.65)
13.75
16.09
15.36
14.00
14.64
13.98
12.31
14.70
10.67
11.16
21.00
14.65
(15.61)
14.28
(10.59)
(9.94)
14.73
16.20
(20.89)
19.78
16.58
14.74
(16.54)
12.39
13.18
(15.37)
17.63
19.34
16.68
(12.30)

18.72
20.48
13.68
30.73
18.45
29.70
24.33
24.93
12.18
19.74
18.48
10.60
8.15
23.00
17.90
13.21
17.17
24.26
25.16
16.54
8.35
18.16
15.97
21.54
6.87
26.58
29.83
13.01
9.80
25.04
17.77
16.69
18.64
8.60
15.61
24.92
16.84

1.62
2.04
1.86
2.26
1.52
1.88
2.21
1.69
1.50
1.49
1.47
2.09
1.72
1.56
2.06
1.68
1.61
1.90
2.01
1.88
1.60
2.07
1.27
2.08
1.75
2.21
2.23
1.56
2.04
2.35
1.68
1.63
1.53
1.30
2.13
2.41
1.69

* Non-provenienced channel flakes
Medials with lateral edge damage not included in table
( ) denotes width with lateral edge(s) being utilized

Notes
snapped edges, utilized
utilized lateral
refit #222p, utilized distal end
refit #3A22
utilized both lateral edges
refit #2200, utilized proximal end
utilized proximal end
refit #2145, 2200 is two pieces
utilized distal end

utilized
refit # 2411/548 and preform #2296
refit #2302 and preform #2296
refit #3258, utilized distal end
snapped laterals, utilized
utilized
utilized distal end
utilized lateral
utilized distal end
utilized
utilized lateral edge
refit, utilized lateral edge
refit #647
snapped laterals, distal end utilized
utilized lateral edges
refit #551, utilized lateral edge
utilized lateral edge

311

312

Texas Archeological Society
Table 7. Channel flake distal dimensions (in mm).

Specimen
Number

Distal
Width

Distal
Length

Distal
Thickness

0104*
0106*
235
2275
2302
2324
23.95
452/456
460
548
6127

12.71
9.92
17.85
(13.65)
19.24
(13.51)
15.50
14.64
11.27
11.06
13.18

11.98
14.31
16.50
16.29
16.00
26.94
20.18
22.78
24.03
14.75
15.75

0.98
1.17
1.48
1.62
1.61
2.56
2.00
2.30
1.60
1.41
1.13

Notes

utilized lateral edge
refit to #2405 and #2296 preform
split, utilized lateral, hinged distal
refit, hinged termination?
utilized distal, channel distal?
utilized distal, refit #2301 and #2296

* Non-provenienced channel flakes
( ) denotes width with lateral edge(s) being utilized

fluting. Jodry (1998:76) has proposed “that the design of ultrathins is activity related and largely constrained by the need for an efficient filleting knife
with which to process large quantities of bison meat
for drying.” Jodry’s experimental use of hand-held,
replicated, ultrathin bifaces has demonstrated their
remarkable suitability for such precision cutting
tasks. Folsom ultrathin bifaces (Figure 5 and Table
9) are relatively large, very thin, very often exhibit
a biconcave cross-section, are ovate and pointed
to bipointed in outline, and generally their central
thickness near the midline is less than the thickness
at their cutting edges (Root et al. 1999). As these
tools progressed through cycles of resharpening,
the edges are often alternately beveled, the distal
ends become more pointed, and they retain their thin
cross-section during their use lives. Early in their
life history, finished ultrathins are wide and thin with
width/thickness ratios usually exceeding 10:1, and
reaching as high as 20:1 (Root et al. 1999). Central
thickness is measured at the thinnest point near
the junction of the width and length axes. Central
thickness of finished ultrathins from the Big Black
site in North Dakota ranges from 2.9-5.8 mm for
11 specimens (William 2000). The Shifting Sands
ultrathin #3160 has a minimum central thickness of
3.2 mm and a width of 53.9 mm: a width/thickness
ratio of 17:1. The ultrathin from the Wyche Ranch
site (Figure 5) has a minimum central thickness of
3.7 mm, and a width of 48.9 mm: a width/thickness
ratio of 13:1; it is also 159.3 mm in length.

Several large biface thinning flakes and blades
(Figures 6-7 and Table 10) in the collection are
from Areas 2, 3, 3B, and 6. The largest measures
14.6 cm in length and 7.8 cm in width. The dorsal
sides have shallow retouch along the margins, which
could represent modification for their use as scrapers
or knives. In Figure 7, specimens #24 and #3B77
exhibit characteristics that are common of blades,
including noticeably more ventral curvature than
the large biface thinning flakes. Several of the large
uniface flakes from Shifting Sands, most with little
longitudinal curvature, appear to have been removed
from very large biface cores (Hofman 1992) like
the one reported by Stanford and Broilo (1981) at
Frank’s Folsom site (now known as the Mitchell Locality at the Blackwater Draw site). This very large
biface core was recovered from a surface campsite,
along with a Folsom-Midland artifact assemblage,
during intensive collecting of more than a decade
at the locality. This very large (26.8 cm long, 17.2
cm wide, and 3.8 cm thick), ovate, bifacially-flaked
core is made from an Edwards Plateau chert nodule
and is known as “Frank’s Biface.” The large flakes
removed from these biface cores are much more
common and better documented at Folsom sites
than the large biface cores, were part of a Folsom
curated system of complex tools, and apparently
had a variety of functions during their life histories
(Hofman 2003). It seems somewhat inconsistent
and hard to understand, given the Folsom curated
system of complex tools, why these large flakes

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site

313

Table 8. Dimensions of Folsom point preforms at the Shifting Sands site.
		
Specimen
Portion
02
29
210
228
234
261
289
2100
2101
2106/2235
2281
2296
2297
2309
2384
2394
2412
2423
385
3107
3182
3222
3A4
3A27
3B23
3B30
3B82
461
470
476
565
570
585/5130
589
5134

base
base
base
base
base
base
base
tip
blade
prox./blade
tip
complete
base
tip
tip
base
tip
base
base
base
blade
complete?
complete
base
tip
base
tip
base
base
base
base
tip
complete
tip
base

Length
(cm)

Width
(cm)

3.28
4.70
2.60
1.48
1.18
2.01
1.47
2.13
1.11
5.60
1.06
6.10
3.92
2.47
3.80
2.55
2.00
0.91
1.45
1.26
1.38
3.65
3.67
1.89
1.79
1.64
1.12
2.06
0.94
3.66
2.56
2.02
4.58
4.97
1.50

3.85
3.89
2.30
2.15
1.12
1.73
1.59
2.29
2.82
3.08
2.04
2.54
1.18
2.82
2.91
2.33
2.34
1.07
0.76
1.19
1.84
2.19
2.77
2.16
2.64
1.93
1.16
1.17
1.32
2.88
0.92
1.81
2.64
2.69
1.02

Basal Thickness Fluted
Width
(cm)
Thick

were abandoned at Shifting Sands and at the same
time the Folsom people at the site were recycling
broken tools (Figure 8) and also utilizing small
marginal pieces.
Informal flake tools, also known as utilized
flakes, are marginally retouched flakes that retain
much of the original flake shape. Many of these
informal flake tools (including some gravers, Figure

2.30
–
1.71
1.55
–
1.37
–
–
–
1.35
–
1.94
–
–
–
1.94
–
–
–
–
–
1.96
2.30
–
–
1.65
–
–
–
2.10
–
–
1.90
–
–

0.54
0.93
0.32
0.32
0.24
0.32
0.29
0.27
0.32
0.54
0.30
0.34
0.40
0.48
0.35
0.39
0.42
0.23
0.17
0.27
0.28
0.37
0.53
0.37
0.41
0.34
0.17
0.33
0.31
0.39
0.31
0.41
0.46
0.57
0.35

0.28
–
–
0.25
–
0.27
–
–
–
–
–
0.27
0.40
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
0.26
–
–
–
0.26

Notes
base corners ground
early stage biface
edges not finished
modified edge, tool?
ear split and snapped
irregular parallel flaking
ear split on 1st flute
thin cortex, flake blank
perverse and snap break
flake blank on two sides
perverse break
refit 2305/2414/2433
split on 2nd flute
snap, beveled distal
pseudo fluted
perverse break
removed by overshot
ear split on 2nd flute
ear split
fluting ear split
perverse break
lateral edge snapped
flake scar islands
hinge & perverse
snap, end shock
irregular flaking
pseudo fluted
ear split, channel refit
ear snap or split
steep edge flaking
ear split on 2nd flute
ground & blunted
blade perverse break
blade perverse break
ear split on 2nd flute

9A) have been deliberately modified by delicate
pressure flaking, with snap and burination techniques also being employed, but less often (Frison
and Bradley 1980). Hofman et al. (1990:231), when
referring to the Shifting Sands collection, stated:
“The number and diversity of utilized flakes in
the assemblage appears to represent many systematic manufacturing techniques and standardized

314

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Examples of Folsom preform failures. Preform numbers are clockwise from top left: #2296 and refitted channel
flakes, #2394, #2309, #585/5130, #02.

Figure 5. Folsom ultrathin bifaces. Smaller biface (#3160) is from the Shifting Sands site and the larger biface is from
the Wyche Ranch site in Andrews County, Texas.

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site

315

Table 9. Folsom ultrathin biface knife dimensions.
Specimen		
Number
Condition
2216
2269
2378
3160
482
5145
5180
69
6121

distal end
distal end
distal end
complete
distal end
distal end
medial
distal end
medial

Beveled
Edge

Width
(mm)

Length
Maximum
Edge
(mm) Thickness (mm) Angle

yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
yes

44.01
27.24
32.00
53.90
53.90
29.44
28.56
25.72
34.24

50.22
22.00
43.00
110.00
59.80
33.50
36.47
25.24
23.01

5.75
3.02
5.70
5.45
6.45
5.93
4.66
3.06
4.33

30/36
24/31
24/43
24/48
24/26
25/32
51/52
26/29
22/28

Weight
(g)
11.7
1.7
8.3
37.6
15.7
5.7
5.4
2.2
4.3

Figure 6. Examples of large biface thinning flakes with retouched edges. Specimen numbers are clockwise from top
left: #618, #65, #610.

316

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Examples of large thinning flakes and blades with retouched edges. Specimen numbers are from left to right:
#3877, #24, #697, and #253.

Table 10. Dimensions of large thinning flakes and blades with retouched edges.
Specimen 		
Length
Width
Thickness
Edge
Number
Condition
(cm)
(cm)
(cm)
Angles
						
24
complete
10.51
3.67
1.13
40/43
212
complete
8.20
2.84
0.94
44/61
253
complete
12.63
3.54
1.08
32/52
2260
complete
8.53
5.07
0.73
57/62
3169/3210
complete
13.10
4.66
1.03
46/58
3211
complete
8.65
4.42
0.72
48/65
3B77
complete
14.03
3.58
0.96
57
3B96
complete
10.44
4.18
1.28
37/64
488
complete
10.22
4.78
0.78
34
65
complete
14.62
7.80
0.95
42/48
610
complete
9.79
5.52
0.80
40/54
618
complete
10.54
6.18
1.08
46/39
621
complete
8.94
4.84
1.07
28
622
proximal
(8.60)
5.46
1.08
39/58
637
nearly complete
(11.07)
4.64
0.91
54/57
697
nearly complete
(10.15)
4.98
0.82
37/48

Weight
(g)
44.1
22.3
47.1
34.3
76.7
29.2
47.7
60.1
39.0
148.4
33.8
64.9
29.8
51.7
59.2
36.2

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site

317

Figure 8. Examples of refitted flake tools with evidence of post-breakage retouch (actual size).

morphologies.” Some of the flake edges are simply
modified by light duty use and can be difficult to
identify and separate from flake edges modified
accidentally. After very careful inspection of the
collection on multiple occasions, aided by a 10X
magnifying glass, 298 informal flake tools have
been identified at Shifting Sands (Table 11).
Radial break, hinged flake, bend break, and
perforator tools (Frison and Bradley 1980) also have
been identified in the site’s collection (see Figure 9).
Radial break tools are pie-shaped and are created by
deliberate or accidental radial fracturing of a tool
or flake. The use-wear is usually very slight and
difficult to detect. The most common tool form is
the point formed where the two edges of the radial
fracture meet. The edges, being close to 90 degree
angles from each other, are ideal for use as shaving
tools while the points could be used for grooving.
Hinge flake tools are the result of utilizing hinged

biface thinning and core reduction flakes for different tasks. One of the uses would be as scraping
edges, which produce fine abraded patterns of wear
or lightly polished areas on the working edge; this
is easy to overlook. Bend break tools (see Figure
9C) are made on flakes or tools that were broken
by accident or on purpose. Flaking a small, narrow,
notch in the edge of the flake or tool at the break
would modify that point’s edge for use. These sharp
points are easy to make, they are robust, and burins
can also be easily made on this break. Uniface
perforators (see Figure 9B) apparently were highly
specialized tools that were probably handheld. They
are more robust and larger than the average Folsom
graver. These types of perforators are not common
in Folsom assemblages and only eight have been
found at the Shifting Sands site.
A total of 217 scrapers have been recovered
at the Shifting Sands site (Figure 10 and Table 1).

Figure 9. Examples of uniface flake tools (actual size): A, gravers; B, uniface perforators; C, bend break.

318

Texas Archeological Society
Table 11. Summary of informal flake tools by size in each area.

Blowout Areas

0*

2

3

3A

3B

4

5

6

7

N

Tool Size										
Less than 1.5 cm2
2
16
7
–
3
2
10
12
2

54

1.5-3 cm2

6

46

27

3

27

19

27

15

2

172

Greater than 3 cm2

–

26

15

2

6

4

10

8

1

72

Totals

8

88

49

5

36

25

47

35

5

298

*Non-provenienced informal flake tools

The scrapers are predominately made on thick flat
flakes with others made on blade-like flakes. In this
collection of scrapers are 95 thick transverse end
scrapers with attributes that are also commonly
found in Folsom scraper assemblages (Frison and
Bradley 1980); 69 of these have spurs adjacent to
the bit. Many of these thick end scrapers have been
retouched at the bit end as well as the haft end, and
this may represent resharpening as well as hafting
and rehafting adjustments (Amick and Rose 1990).
The stubby end scrapers, common in the scraper
assemblage, are the result of their having gone
through cycles of use and resharpening. Several of

the scrapers have isolated projections that clearly
functioned as graver spurs; some have spokeshaves
or small notches on their lateral edges. Recovered
scraper types also include 12 thin end scrapers, 18
end/side scraper combinations, 49 miscellaneous
scrapers and scraper fragments, and 43 side scrapers,
of which several are large in size (see Figures 6-7
and Table 10) and suitable blanks for manufacture
of points or other tools as needed.
One end/side scraper is possibly made of either
Chuska (also known as paleo pink) or Pedernal
chert (Figure 11). The lithic material is a translucent
glossy light pinkish-yellow with a light purplish tint

Figure 10. Scrapers from the Shifting Sands site: A, thick end scraper; B, thin end scraper; C, side/end scraper.

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site

319

edges and on the surfaces of the hole (Hofman et al.
2000). The hole was likely made with a fine engraving tool or perforating tool (graver, snapped flake, or
an end scraper spur?). The diameter of the Shifting
Sands bead is comparable to the width of a small
eyed bone needle recovered during fine screening
of a control area at the Winkler 1 (Midland) site.
This bone needle, which is missing the tip, measures
13.34 mm long, 1.72 mm wide, and has an 0.75 mm
eye diameter (Blaine and Wendorf 1972).
Responding to Mobility and
Risk on the Southern Plains

Figure 11. Artifact #3A5 from Area 3A.

and a few small white inclusions. The dorsal surface
has two narrow and parallel flutes removed and the
patinated ventral surface is flat and uniform. The
dimensions of the scraper are: 7.5 x 2.77 x 0.76 cm
in length, width, and thickness. Pedernal chert has
a known source at Cerro Pedernal, near Abiquiu,
New Mexico, which is about 550 km northwest of
the Shifting Sands site (LeTourneau 2000; Jack Hofman, personal communication 2010).
Bone Bead
A tiny disk-shaped bone bead was recovered in
Area 6 on June 30, 1991. The bead was unknowingly
collected and put into the Area 6 artifact bag along
with 75 small flakes and three small scrapers. The
bead had apparently been loosely cemented along
with particles of moist sand to the underneath side
of a flake and was discovered in the small amount
of sand found in the artifact bag. A single grain of
reddish-brown sand was wedged into the bead’s hole.
The circular bead measures 1.84 mm in diameter, 0.61 mm in thickness, and has a hole diameter
of 0.38 mm. It probably was used, along with similar
beads, for decorating some garment or object. Under
high magnification (SEM), the bead’s hole exhibits
no evidence of drilling, and shows polish around the

Hofman et al. (1990), in an earlier publication
on the Shifting Sands Folsom-Midland site assemblage, suggested that the manufacture and use
of non-classic Folsom points (such as unfluted and
pseudo-fluted) resulted from Folsom hunters needing to retool in circumstances where sources of raw
lithic material were severely limited. These limits on
raw lithic material would not be determined solely
by the linear distance from the nearest preferred
lithic source. They have pointed out that the critical issue was the number of kill-butchery-retooling
events that would have occurred since their last visit
to a quarry or the gearing-up of their hunting equipment. As the reserve supply of lithic materials became depleted, retooling would have been ongoing
and often must have been done using less than ideal
tool blanks for manufacture of replacements for
lost or damaged tools. Also, when tool stone was in
this depleted state and at a premium, a toolmaker’s
decision about whether to flute or laterally thin a
projectile point during manufacture may have been
influenced by the risk of point breakage (Hofman
et al. 1990). There are 35 point preforms recovered
from the Shifting Sands site that were broken during
the manufacture of fluted and unfluted points. The
availability of replacement tool stone and preform
breakage may have resulted in a Shifting Sands
toolmaker making choices during point manufacturing that favored laterally thinning a point over the
more risky fluting process. Laterally thinned points
dominate the site’s collection of points. The reserve
supply of stone, and the toolkit’s appearance after a
number of kill-butchery events, may appear very different when compared to the same Folsom groups’
toolkit at the time they left a primary lithic source
area (Hofman 1992). Folsom people may have lived
from a relatively steady series of kills throughout the

320

Texas Archeological Society

year and needed to be prepared to make a kill when
presented with the opportunity. If Folsom groups
could not plan the specific time when a kill would
occur, they had to keep the toolkit flexible enough
to make a kill and be able to refurbish it at any time
or at any distance from a good lithic source (Hofman 1992).
Transported Folsom toolkits were probably not
depleted on a regular basis, but went through periods
of intense tool-depleting events (Hofman 2003).
Components of the transported toolkit must have
been staged (Ingbar and Hofman 1999) in order to
ensure that a full complement of tools and production stages were available when needed. When these
tools lost their utility for specific tasks they could
be modified to perform other tasks. Thus, material
needed to make replacement tools was always a
part of the toolkit whose functional capabilities
remained constant. This staging strategy was part
of a Folsom curated system of complex tools that
had relatively long use lives and were frequently
transported for use at other locations. There were
three kinds of bifaces and biface reduction strategies used by Folsom people: bifacial cores (Stanford
and Broilo 1981; Hofman 1992); ultrathin bifacial
knives (Root et al. 1999; Jodry 1998); and bifacial
point preforms and projectile points (Frison and
Bradley 1980). Many of the unifacial tools were
made from flakes produced by these three bifacial
reduction systems. It is generally accepted that
Folsom people used large bifacial cores as a mobile
source of tool stone. These large bifacial cores are
quite rare (Hofman 2003), however, perhaps because
they were completely consumed or cached at off-site
locations. There are several large retouched bifacial
thinning flakes at Shifting Sands that appear to have
been removed from very large biface cores. Some of
these large uniface flakes closely match in size and
proportions the flake scars on the very large biface
from the Mitchell Locality. Uniface flakes removed
from these cores could have served as the primary
source of tool blanks for the manufacture and maintenance of transported toolkits. These large flakes,
usually with minimal curvature, are more common
and better documented at Folsom sites than the
large biface cores, and apparently had a variety of
functions during their life histories (Hofman 2003;
Ingbar and Hofman 1999).
Ingbar and Hofman (1999) see evidence that
much of the final stage of fluted point production
apparently did not occur at quarries or even close
to them. It seems the overriding reason not to flute

at the tool stone source was because the intermediate form (core, biface, or flake) was considered to
be valuable in its own right. When fluting did occur
at the tool stone source, the toolkits would apparently then be lacking the intermediate forms. An
exceptions to this pattern is the Adair-Steadman
site, which was near an Edwards chert source. At
other Folsom sites near or at quarry areas, often the
majority of channel flakes are made of non-local
(transported) tool stone. The more expendable tool
forms such as scrapers and informal flake tools
were often made of the local tool stone (Frison and
Bradley 1980; Ingbar and Hofman 1999).
Folsom people, who were generally highly
selective in their use of lithic materials, usually
did not encounter other high quality lithic sources
once they moved west from the Edwards Formation chert sources onto the Southern High Plains
(Hofman 2003). Their hunting excursions into this
region would have required that they carry an ample
supply of lithic materials with them, because many
bison kills were likely to occur in areas distant
from known quality lithic sources. Hofman (1991)
argues that the key concern of Folsom hunters was
not simply the distance from the stone tool source,
but the direction of their movement in relation to
the source areas along with the anticipated use and
need for refurbishing the toolkit before another
quarry visit. Folsom hunters may not have thought
of Edwards chert sources as being a certain distance
away, but as a stone tool source in an area several
months into the future before they were in the source
area again. This perception of distance, as the group
was moving away from the lithic source area and
not expecting to return soon, may have resulted in
stone conservation while still near the stone tool
source. The tool stone selected almost always was
a high-grade chert, flint, or chalcedony because it
allowed for reliable production, staging, and maintenance of tools with durable edges. Also, this tool
stone needed to occur in ways sufficient to produce
a flake or a core that would be large enough for the
complex fluting process to be successful. Edwards
Formation chert was the preferred and predominant
stone tool source for Folsom groups on the Southern
Plains (Hofman 1991).
Edwards Formation chert accounts for 82
percent of the Folsom point assemblages on the
Southern Plains (Amick 1994), and more than 50
percent (Hofman 2003) of the chipped stone tool
assemblages from Folsom sites within 400 km of the
Edwards source area or on its margins. The chipped

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site
stone tool assemblage at the Shifting Sands site is almost exclusively Edwards chert, which is available
at sources approximately 170 km to the east. In the
Edwards source areas or its margins it is rare to find
Folsom artifacts made of non-local materials (i.e.,
Alibates) (Hofman 2003). Hofman (1991, 1992;
Ingbar and Hofman 1999) has suggested a redundant
pattern of unidirectional or outward movement of
Edwards chert in Folsom assemblages to the west
and north of the Edwards source areas. This pattern
is based on site assemblages and many documented
isolated point finds, and may reflect long-term lithic
and land use patterns on the Southern Plains by
Folsom groups. This probably represents their longterm unidirectional movement from the Edwards
lithic source areas toward bison hunting areas.
The Cooper site (Bement 1999) is a Folsom
age bison kill site in northwestern Oklahoma where
32 complete or fragmented Folsom points were
excavated from three discrete bison bone deposits
and a eroded slump deposit. Evidence of mobility
is represented in the makeup of the lithic materials
used to manufacture the recovered points. Fifty percent of the points are made from sources of Edwards
Plateau chert approximately 350 km to the south, 47
percent are made from Alibates found approximately
160 km to the southwest, and three percent are made
from Niobrara that occurs approximately 330 km
north of the site.
Amick (1994) has reported that the frequency of
projectile point fluting is much lower on the Southern Plains where sources of high quality chert are
almost completely absent than along the Rio Grande
valley of New Mexico, where lithic sources are generally abundant. He reports fluting is about 10 times
higher in the Albuquerque Basin and five times
higher in the Tularosa Basin and the Jornado del
Muerto than on the Southern Plains. Amick viewed
the reduction in the frequency of projectile fluting
as an expected outcome of risk reduction behavior
being practiced by highly mobile Folsom hunters
on the Southern Plains: this Folsom reduction technology was developed in response to the available
tool stone resources on the Southern Plains, which
were limited in quality. Approximately 77 percent
of the points in the Shifting Sands collection are not
fluted but are laterally thinned. This appears to be
the response of flint knappers at the site practicing
risk reduction behavior because of the scarcity of
quality tool stone sources on the Southern Plains of
West Texas. Manufacturing a classic fluted Folsom
point would normally require more stone than an

321

unfluted (Midland) point. The considerable variability in Folsom point assemblages suggests a classic
Folsom point may not always have been the goal of a
flint knapper who was confronted with various situational problems to solve (Amick and Rose 1990).
It normally requires a larger and thicker flake
to manufacture a fluted Folsom point than it does
to laterally thin a Midland point. Flakes that were
removed from large biface cores had extremely flat
cross-sections that sometimes resulted in the manufacture of points with some of the original ventral
surface visible (Hofman 1992). The number of suitable flake blanks for projectile point replacement
would have decreased as the bifacial cores were
expended. When confronted with a shortage of a
preferred tool stone and replacement supplies being
some distance or amount of time away, less than
ideal flakes would then have to be used to manufacture replacement points, which could retain part of
the original flake blank surface. An examination of
212 completed Midland points and point fragments
(including 90 points from the Shifting Sands site) for
flake blank surfaces was taken on points with both
lateral edges (medial and tips) being over 1 cm in
length or 2 cm if missing a lateral edge. Bases had
to have a 1 cm length or more on both lateral edges.
The result was that 38 percent (this same percent
was documented in the Shifting Sand sample) had
original flake blank surfaces.
Reasons Offered on the
Fluting Process
Reasons for fluting lanceolate points remain
unclear. Some of the reasons proposed for fluting
Folsom points are: a reduction in weight; improved
penetration; enhanced bleeding; an art form; part of
a pre-hunt ritual; a hafting strategy; and it served
as a cognitive marker (Ahler and Geib 2000; Frison and Bradley 1982; Ingbar and Hofman 1999).
Frison and Stanford (1982) have called attention to
the wastefulness of the fluting process (the numbers of preforms broken during different stages of
manufacture), the unconvincing evidence of the
functional superiority in the fluted point, and the
co-occurrence of fluted and unfluted points. They
suggest that fluting was either an art form or was
performed in the context of ritual. Bradley (1991)
has proposed that the complex, risky, fluting process
of an already thin preform may originally have been
an expedient way of thinning the base of a point, but

322

Texas Archeological Society

that it eventually took on another meaning. He suggests that the process of fluting was an integral part
of the pre-hunt ritual and that the success or failure
of the upcoming event, such as a hunt, depended on
the fluting process; the actual production of a usable
projectile point and the fluting event were perhaps
equally important. Representing this process are the
intentionally broken and discarded fluted preforms.
Bradley (1991:379) “also considers the extreme
care and artistry that is expressed in many Paleoindian points to be symbolic of the power invested
in them.” Frison and Bradley (1982) have noted the
argument that flutes were done as a superior means
of hafting. However, not all Folsom points were
fluted and the unfluted points were hafted successfully. They also noted that there was no evidence
that indicated fluting of the points improved their
lethal qualities.
Ahler and Geib (2000) proposed that the fluting
of Folsom points was a purely techno-functional
solution for a hafting arrangement and a strategy
for lithic material conservation. Their proposed
techno-functional solution is based on having a
very thin projectile point, which was designed to fit
a two-piece, or split, forwardly adjustable friction
haft. The desired thinness was achieved by the fluting process or, in the case of the unfluted Midland
point, by lateral thinning. They contend that both the
unfluted Midland point and the pseudo-fluted forms
that are common in Folsom sites could be used in
the same hafting design as that used for the fluted
Folsom point. Ahler and Geib (2000) also offer the
notion that both the unfluted Midland and the pseudo-fluted point forms are understandable as technofunctional equivalents of the fluted forms. They do
not maintain that Folsom point manufacture and use
was devoid of elements of art, style, or ritual, but
that techno-functional elements of the point and the
haft were the primary reasons for its specific design.
The fluting process must have had a stronger force
driving it, more than increased projectile penetration or strengthening the haft bonding: “A Folsom
knapper clearly pushed the technological envelope
and knowingly risked good stone and substantial
knapping time” (Ahler and Geib 2000:800).
Concluding Remarks
Why are Folsom and Midland points ending up
at the same exact sites and localities on the Southern
Plains if Folsom and Midland point forms are not

contemporaneous? There is a general co-occurrence
of Folsom and Midland point forms in sites on the
Southern Plains. Folsom-Midland site locations
in the Northern Plains have lower percentages of
unfluted points in artifact assemblages and there
is a reduction in the number of sites with unfluted
Folsom points. Unfluted Folsom points are unquestionably part of the Folsom assemblage, but they
have not been consistently acknowledged to be part
of the Folsom complex (Hofman 1992). Compelling evidence that Midland points were part of the
Folsom complex is that some points at the same sites
have classic fluted Folsom treatment on one side of a
point and the classic unfluted Midland treatment on
the other side. When replacement quality tool stone
was not readily available after several kill-butchery
and retooling events, the use of thin or irregular flake
blanks would have been expected to have occurred
during the conservative and less risky production of
a Midland point, which would account in part for the
common occurrence of fluted and unfluted Folsom
points in the lower Southern Plains. Folsom huntergatherers on the Great Plains adapted to the demands
of a highly mobile lifestyle with a strategy of maintaining components of their transported toolkits by
constantly replenishing stone tool functions, not
stone tool forms. Hofman (2003:234) wrote that the:
organization of Folsom technology liberated Folsom groups from concern for
locating or using alternative lithic sources
during their pursuit of bison, their key
economic and technological resource.
They gained the freedom to move or
hunt bison without concern for lithics
because of the created, conservative, and
focused use of a highly curated and flexible techno-complex. This technological
flexibility or freedom was enabled by
use of high-quality fixed lithic sources to
which the groups consistently returned,
just as they had to return to other critical
resources, including water and wood.

There are several reported Folsom sites that
have a variety of projectile point morphologies
within the same assemblage of points. The forms
are: fluted on both faces (classic Folsom); fluted
multiple times on one or both faces; fluted on one
face only; pseudo-fluted (utilizing a flake blank surface); and unfluted (Midland). The Shifting Sands
collection has all of these different Folsom projectile
point morphologies, and they apparently represent

Rose—The Shifting Sands Site
some of the activities of a single cultural group during a relatively limited time span.
Acknowledgments
A sincere thank you goes to the YT Ranch family for allowing access to the site during these many
years. The information gathered and published was
made possible with their support and interest in the
project. I am indebted to Jack Hofman for sharing
his extensive knowledge of the Folsom culture, the
time he has spent helping analyze the collection, and
also for spreading the word. Thanks to Dan Amick,
David Meltzer, and Vance Holliday for their contributions over many years. I am grateful to Richard
McReynolds for the drawings of the Folsom and
Midland points, point preforms, the ultrathin biface,
scrapers, and the large uniface tools. Shannon Ryan
provided the location map, which is much appreciated. The information in this article is the result of
avocational and professional archeologists working
and sharing together.
References Cited
Ahler, S. A. and P. R. Geib
2000 Why Flute? Folsom Point Design and Adaptation.
Journal of Archaeological Science 27:799-820.
Amick, D. S.
1994 Technological Organization and the Structure of
Inference in Lithic Analysis: An Examination of Folsom Hunting Behavior in the American Southwest.
In The Organization of North American Prehistoric
Chipped Stone Tool Technologies, edited by P. J.
Carr, pp. 9-34. Archaeological Series 7. International
Monographs in Prehistory, Ann Arbor.
Amick, D. S. and R. O. Rose
1990 Dimensioning Folsom Variably: Lessons from the
Shifting Sands Site. Transactions of the Regional
Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New
Mexico and Western Texas, edited by P. Brothers,
pp. 1-24. Midland Archeological Society, Midland,
Texas.
Bement, L. C.
1999 The Cooper Site Folsom Lithic Assemblage. In
Folsom Lithic Technology: Explorations in Structure
and Variation, edited by D. S. Amick, pp. 111-121.
Archaeological Series 12. International Monographs
in Prehistory, Ann Arbor.

323

Blaine, J. C. and F. Wendorf
1972 A Bone Needle from a Midland Site. Plains Anthropologist 17(55):50-51.
Bradley, B. A.
1991 Flaked Stone Technology in the Northern High
Plains. In Prehistoric Hunters of the High Plains,
Second Edition, edited by G. C. Frison, pp. 369-395.
Academic Press, Inc., San Diego.
Feathers, J. K., V. T. Holliday, and D. J. Meltzer
2006 Optically stimulated luminescence dating of Southern High Plains archaeological sites. Journal of
Archaeological Science 33:1651-1665.
Frison, G. C. and B. A. Bradley
1980 Folsom Tools and Technology at the Hanson
Site, Wyoming. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.

1982 Fluting of Folsom Projectile Points. In The Agate
Basin Site: A Record of the Paleoindian Occupation
of the Northwestern High Plains, edited by G. C.
Frison and D. J. Stanford, pp. 209-212. Academic
Press, Inc., New York.
Frison, G. C. and D. J. Stanford
1982 Summary and Conclusions. In The Agate Basin
Site: A Record of the Paleoindian Occupation of the
Northwestern High Plains, edited by G. C. Frison
and D. J. Stanford, pp. 361-370. Academic Press,
Inc., New York.
Hofman, J. L.
1991 Folsom Land Use: Projectile Point Variability as a
Key to Mobility. In Raw Material Economies Among
Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers, edited by A. MontetWhite and S. Holen, pp. 335-355. Publications in
Anthropology 19. University of Kansas, Lawrence.

1992 Recognition and Interpretation of Folsom Technological Variability on the Southern Plains. In Ice Age
Hunters of the Rockies, edited by D. J. Stanford and
J. S. Day, pp. 193-224. Denver Museum of Natural
History and the University Press of Colorado, Niwot.
2003 Tethered to Stone or Freedom to Move: Folsom Biface Technology in Regional Perspective. In Multiple
Approaches to the Study of Bifacial Technologies,
edited by M. Soressi and H. Dibble, pp. 229-249.
University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology
and Anthropology, Philadelphia.

Hofman, J. L., D. S. Amick and R. O. Rose
1990 Shifting Sands: A Folsom-Midland Assemblage from
a Campsite in Western Texas. Plains Anthropologist
35(129):221-253.
Hofman, J. L., R. O. Rose, L. D. Martin, and D. S. Amick
2000 Folsom Adornment and Bone Technology. Current
Research in the Pleistocene 17:42-45.

324

Texas Archeological Society

Ingbar, E. E. and J. L. Hofman
1999 Folsom Fluting Fallacies. In Folsom Lithic Technology: Explorations in Structure and Variation, edited
by D. S. Amick, pp. 98-110. Archaeological Series
12. International Monographs in Prehistory, Ann
Arbor.
Jodry, M. A.
1998 The Possible Design of Folsom Ultrathin Bifaces as
Fillet Knives for Jerky Production. Current Research
in the Pleistocene15:75-77.
LeTourneau, P. D.
2000 Folsom Toolstone Procurement in the Southwest
and Southern Plains. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque.
Root, M. J., J. D. William, M. Kay and L. K. Shifrin
1999 Folsom Ultrathin Biface and Radial Break Tools in
the Knife River Flint Quarry Area. In Folsom Lithic
Technology: Explorations in Structure and Variation,
edited by D. S. Amick, pp. 144-168. Archaeological
Series 12. International Monographs in Prehistory,
Ann Arbor.

Stanford, D. J. and F. Broilo
1981 Frank’s Folsom Campsite. The Artifact 19:1-11. El
Paso Archeological Society.
Surovell, T. A., N. M. Waguespack, and M. Kornfeld
2003 A Note on the Functions of Folsom Ultrathin Bifaces. Current Research in the Pleistocene 20:75-77.
Wendorf, F., A. D. Krieger, and C. C. Albritton
1955 Midland Discovery. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
William, J. D.
2000 Folsom Stone Tools. In The Big Black Site (32DU955C):
A Folsom Complex Workshop in the Knife River Flint
Quarry Area, North Dakota, edited by J. D. William,
pp. 169-230. Washington State University Press,
Pullman.

Jensen Biface Cache (41HE366), Henderson County, Texas
Harry J. Shafer and Mark Walters

Abstract
A cache of three bifaces from Henderson County, Texas, is described in this article. The bifaces are all made of
starch-fractured nodules of Woodford chert from the Johns Valley Shale in the Ouachita Mountains of eastern
Oklahoma. None of the bifaces appear to be extensively used tools, although all could have been narrow adze
blades. All have lateral and distal smoothing which does not appear to have been the result of use. It is suggested that the edge and surface wear is due to extensive handling, possibly associated with a medicine bundle
or some other ritual use.

Introduction
The discovery of the Jensen Biface cache was
made in 1958 by Tom Jensen while hunting on the
family farm in central Henderson County, Texas. He
noted and collected three bifaces on a back dirt pile
while crawling under a newly constructed fence. In
2009, Mr. Jensen contacted Dr. Darrell Creel at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at The
University of Texas at Austin, in an effort to learn
more about the bifaces and make the information
public. Dr. Creel contacted the junior author, Mark
Walters, who is a Steward for the Texas Archeological Stewards Network and resides in Smith County,
Texas. Mr. Walters then visited Mr. Jensen and subsequently filed a site form describing the artifacts
and their location. The State of Texas designated the
site as 41HE366. With Mr. Jensen’s permission, Mr.
Walters contacted the senior author, who agreed to
study the artifacts.
Henderson County is located in the eastern part
of Texas. The study area is located in the central
portion of the county (Figure 1), on the boundary
between the western edge of the East Texas Timberlands Resource Area and the Texas Claypan Land
Resource Area. Soils in the study area are described
as forested soils on uplands (Hatherly 1977:1-4).
They are gently sloping to steep soils with a sandy
or loamy surface layer and loamy or clayey subsoils.
Native vegetation consists of pine and hardwood
trees and mid- and tall grasses. Although extensively
farmed earlier in the 19th and 20th centuries, most

of the area is currently in pasture or woodlands.
Hot, muggy summers, with an average temperature
of 82 degrees F, and cool winters with an average
temperature of 50 degrees F, characterize the climate
in Henderson County. Annual average precipitation
is 40.5 inches, which is adequate for the production
of most crops.
The Jensen farm is located on the Murchison
West 7.5' topographic quadrangle, which before
the current work, had only two recorded sites listed
in the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas. One of the
previously recorded sites, 41HE235, is north of the
Jensen farm on Kickapoo Creek, which drains east
into the Neches River. 41HE235 was investigated
in the 1940s by A. T. Jackson of the University of
Texas and is described on the Sites Atlas as an Alto
phase (ca. A.D. 850-1300) Caddo site. The other
previously recorded site in the area, 41HE333, is
located west of the Jensen sites. A single Edgewood
dart point fragment was found at this location.
Jensen Biface Cache (41HE366)
The Jensen Biface Cache site (41HE366), the
main focus of this article, is located on an unnamed
intermittent tributary of Caney Creek that flows
westward to the Trinity River. Streams in the eastern
portion of Henderson County flow eastward to the
Neches River. The site is along the edge of a small
sandy rise that is bordered by a county road on one
side and a small unnamed drainage on the other. It

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

326

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Relative location of the Jensen Cache in Henderson County, and Woodford chert outcrop in the western
Ouachita Mountains of eastern Oklahoma.

Shafer and Walters—Jensen Biface Cache (41HE366), Henderson County, Texas
is currently in pasture with scattered hardwoods,
mostly along drainages.
Mr. Jensen and Mr. Walters visited the location
of the Jensen Biface Cache in the fall of 2009 and
conducted a non-controlled surface examination of
the area where Mr. Jensen originally found the three
bifaces. This failed to reveal any additional artifacts.
Future work should include shovel tests in the area
where the three bifaces were located to determine
if there might be additional artifacts or remaining
archeological deposits.
Since 1958, Mr. Jensen has continued to surface
collect on his farm, resulting in a small collection
of Middle to Late Archaic period points. At present, no ceramic sites have been identified on the
Jensen farm. One location on a sandy upland has
been recorded as 41HE367. Here, Mr. Jensen noted
lithic flakes on the surface and collected several dart
points. One dart point (Figure 2) from 41HE367
compares favorably with the Yarbrough type (Suhm
and Jelks 1962:261). The point is 53.4 mm in length
and 27.5 mm wide at its widest point. The maximum thickness is 6.8 mm. The stem is somewhat
expanded and the base slightly convex. The material is a pinkish-gray (7.5YR 7/2) chert and may be
heat-treated. There is a small portion of cortex on the
base that is a strong brown (7.5YR 5/8) in color. The
tip is missing from an impact fracture (Figure 2).
The Jensen Biface cache consists of three
elongated bifaces of Woodford chert from the

327

Johns Valley Shale in the Ouachita Mountains of
Oklahoma (Banks 1990; personal communication
2010) (Figure 3). At least two of the items (Figure
3a, c), if not all, were reduced from patinated starchfractured chert nodules (see discussion of starch
fractures below). The material for all three bifaces
is identical: it is a dark gray fine chert, almost black,
with a light tan patinated surface, and with streaks
of tan within the dark gray matrix.

b
c
a

Figure 3. The Jensen cache bifaces of Woodford chert
showing sizes relative to each other.

Description of the Jensen
Biface Cache Artifacts
Specimen A

Figure 2. Yarbrough dart point from 41HE367.

This long, narrow, thick, plano-convex biface
is made of an elongated starch-fractured nodule.
The original nodule was columnar as evidenced
from the efforts to shape it, as well as the traces of
the surface patination color along both faces and
the lateral edges. The cross-section is nearly planoconvex. Traces of the starch fracture facets occur on
both faces but are particularly evident on the convex
face (Figure 4a). The surfaces of the original nodule
were patinated to a light yellowish-tan. The artifact
is shaped by bifacial flaking; flake scars along the
flatter face meet in the approximate center, creating

Texas Archeological Society

328

a slight ridge down the longitudinal axis. The flakes
on both faces have narrow platforms and relatively
deep bulbar scars, indicating removal by indirect
percussion using a punch (Figure 4a-b). The narrow end is unworked, while the wider end tapers
to a bit angle of about 23 degrees, and exhibits a
moderate amount of edge-rounding and smoothing. Slight smoothing (edge rounding) and minute
crushing along both lateral edges can be seen under
10X magnification; this type of edge damage usually results from intentional dulling of the edges for
hafting chipped stone celts and adzes (Brown 1985).
While there is no clear indication that this specimen
was extensively used or if it was a functional tool,
its form, bit smoothing, and slight edge wear are
consistent with that of an adze blade. Length: 119
mm; width: 30 mm; thickness: 19 mm.

broken by an impact fracture, possibly at the time
of discovery. The complete end has slight smoothing and edge rounding, like Specimen A, with an
edge angle of about 34 degrees. The lateral edges
show the same technology described for Specimen
A, and this specimen also has the slight edge dulling as well. The cross-section is more lenticular, but
it is obvious that this artifact was also made from
a columnar nodule, although traces of starch fractures, if once present, have been removed through
reduction. The reduction technology was the same
as for Specimen A, namely deep flake scars along
the edges that indicate flake removal using a punch.
Length: 67 mm; width: 31.5 mm; thickness: 14 mm.

Specimen B
This specimen (Figure 5a-b), made from the
identical material used for Specimens A and C, is

a

a

Figure 5. Specimen B.

Specimen C

a

b

Figure 4. Specimen A: a, convex side, note starch fracture
facet on medial crest; b, reverse side.

This artifact is also made on a starch fractured
nodule and retains traces of the natural facets on
both faces near the narrow end (Figure 6a-b). The
flaking technology is similar to that described for
the other two pieces, but this specimen is thinner
in relation to the width. It too was probably made
using a punch, but the deep flake scars seen on
Specimens A and B are not as prevalent. The narrow
end is unworked, but at the wider end the worked
surface intersects with a natural, patinated facet,

Shafer and Walters—Jensen Biface Cache (41HE366), Henderson County, Texas

a

b

Figure 6. Specimen C; note starch fracture facet on side
shown in b.

creating an edge angle of 55 degrees. This wider
end, presumably the bit, is smoothed like the above
specimens, and the lateral edge are intentionally
dulled. The wider end also exhibits a slight amount
of crushing, perhaps suggesting use as an adze. The
bit angle is consistent with the expected bit angle
for adzes (Brown 1985). Length: 83 mm; width: 35
mm; thickness: 15mm.
Discussion
The age of the Jensen Biface cache is unknown,
and could range temporally from Paleoindian to
Caddo. Also, it is currently unknown if only part
of the cache was found when the fence was constructed in 1958, and that other bifaces remain
undiscovered. Also, we do not know if the cache
was an isolated feature or associated with a burial.
What is interesting about this particular cache is the
raw material of the bifaces and overall patterning in
the technology, form, and edge modification. They
were all made of identical material, using the same
methods of reduction—probably a punch—and very
likely made by the same person. The distance from
the source outcrop in the Ouachita Mountains of

329

eastern Oklahoma to 41HE366 is about 320 km in
a straight line. The overall distance was probably
much more once these specimens traveled through
hand to hand exchange.
The starch-fractured pieces from which these
artifacts were made probably litter the ground in the
Ouachita Mountains of Oklahoma today. Predictably, the locale consists of a ground surface littered
with naturally fractured chert nodules. These will
be linear or columnar in shape. Starch or columnar
fractures are natural and are the result of freeze-thaw
action. Water contained within cracks will freeze
and expand, causing a natural fracture to occur along
the planes, creating blade-like fracture scars, often
resulting in an elongated polyhedral form (Figure
7). Archeologists not familiar with this natural process often mistake starch fractures for very ancient
human-made artifacts. Perhaps the most unfortunate
case is at the Topper site in South Carolina where
starch-fractured pieces are consistently claimed to
be human-made blades or blade cores (e.g., Goodyear 2005:Figure 8f, h, j).
Working the columnar pieces was not difficult
as the material is very fine-textured, almost waxy
in appearance. Flake scar patterns indicate that a
punch was used to shape the pieces, and there was
no effort to create a thin biface; in fact, long, narrow, and relatively thick forms apparently were
the desired end product. The form is suggestive
of a narrow celt-like or adze implement, more
likely the latter. The lateral edge modification in
the form of edge smoothing and light abrasion is a

frost fracture
planes that
resemble
blade removals

Figure 7. Examples of starch fractured chert (from http://
www.hf.uio.no/iakh/forskning/sarc/iakh/lithic/natalt.
html#anchor377944).

330

Texas Archeological Society

characteristic feature on hafted chipped stone celts
and adze blades. None of the specimens appear to
have been used extensively, although all have some
slight smoothing on the presumably distal ends and
lateral edges. It is possible that the smoothing is the
result of extensive handling rather that use as tools.
Caches are most commonly associated with
banking partially reduced raw materials (Miller
2007; Shafer and Green 2008). Tool caches are less
common but they do occur in areas rich in good
lithic raw material such as the Balcones Canyonlands and South Texas (Brown 1985). One possible
explanation is that the Jensen bifaces represent a
tool cache, or, less likely, a raw material cache such
as the Tuinier cache (Shafer and Green 2008) and
the George C. Davis cache (Shafer 1973:235-237).
Alternatively, it may be a ritual cache.
Ritual caches are almost unheard of in Texas
except in Woodland and Caddo mortuary contexts.
Ritual caches, which may include votive offerings,
were recovered from Woodland mortuary contexts
at Jonas Short Mound (Jelks 1965) and Coral Snake
Mound (McClurkan et al. 1966; Jensen 1968).
Examples of ritual caches on Caddo sites include
Alba arrow points and Gahagan knives recovered
from early Caddo tombs at the George C. Davis site
(Shafer 1973:193-196, 224-231) (Figure 8), as well
as Protohistoric Caddo contexts at the Jowell Farm

(41AN13) in Anderson County (Jackson and Woolsey n.d., cited in Miller 2007). Shafer has examined
the Jowell “knives” in the collections at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (Figure 9).
These are expertly made, narrow, bi-pointed bifaces
that are extensively smoothed and polished on the
edges and surfaces. They do not appear to have been
used as knives although they are often described as
such (Miller 2007:Appendix I). The dullness and
polish is over all the edges and not restricted to just
the functional cutting edges; therefore, the alteration does not appear to be the result of use-wear as
cutting tools, but rather may have been intentionally
done to dull the edges. Although not viewed under
magnification, the flake scar ridges also appear to
have been lightly smoothed.

Figure 9. Four examples of 26 expertly made lenticular
bifaces or “Jowell knives” from a mortuary feature at
the R. L. Jowell farm in Anderson County. Photograph
by Milton Bell, courtesy of Texas Beyond History.net
and the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, http://
www.texasbeyondhistory.net/theme/tools/images/LithicsMB24.html.).

Figure 8. Ritual caches of Alba arrow points and Gahagan
knives in Feature 134, George C. Davis site. Image
courtesy of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

In summary, all interpretations regarding the
type of cache represented by the Jensen bifaces is
problematic because of the unknown circumstances
surrounding the cache, and the lack of context and
association. It could be a tool cache, a raw material
cache, or a ritual cache—mortuary or votive. None
of these functions can be ruled out, but the condition
of the artifacts raises the suspicion that the cache
could be ritual in nature. It is possible that the Jensen

Shafer and Walters—Jensen Biface Cache (41HE366), Henderson County, Texas
cache was part of a medicine bundle interred with a
medicine man or shaman, or simply ritually interred,
possibly as a votive offering. This interpretation,
based on the close examination of these artifacts, is
that they could have been used as adze blades, but
some of the smoothing and generally glossy feel
may be the result of extensive handling. In other
words, given what we do not know about the context
and association, ritual caching cannot be ruled out.
If the specimens were indeed extensively handled,
then the items may have been part of a shaman’s
medicine bundle. Shamans often used an array of
exotic items, quartz crystals and other exotic stones,
in their curing practices (Furst 1986:220).
References Cited
Banks, L. D.
1990 From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Review of the Lithic Sources in the Trans-Mississippi
South, the Southern Plains, and Adjacent Southwest.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Memoir #4.
Norman.
Brown, K.
1985 Three Caches of Guadalupe Tools from South
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
56:75-126.
Furst, P. T.
1986 Shamanism, The Ecstatic Experience, and Lower
Pecos Art: Reflections on Some Transcultural Phenomena. In Ancient Texans: Rock Art and Lifeways
of the Lower Pecos, by H. J. Shafer, pp. 210-225.
Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Goodyear, A. C.
2005 Evidence of Pre-Clovis Sites in the Eastern United
states. In Paleoamerican Origins: Beyond Clovis,
edited by R. Bonnichsen, B. Lepper, D. Stanford,
and M. Waters, pp. 103-112. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.

331

Hatherly, D. T.
1977 Soil Survey of Henderson County, Texas. United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural
Experiment and the Texas State Soil and Water Conservation Board, Washington D.C.
Jelks, E. B.
1965 The Archeology of McGee Bend Reservoir, Texas.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Jensen, H. P.
1968 Coral Snake Mound, X16SA48. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 39: 9-44.
McClurkan, B. B., W. T. Field, and J. N. Woodall
1966 Excavations in Toledo Bend Reservoir, 1964-65.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project
No. 8. The University of Texas at Austin.
Miller, K.A.
2007 A Study of Prehistoric Biface Caches from Texas.
La Tierra 34 (Nos. 1 and 2):1-88.
Shafer, H.
1973 Lithic Technology at the George C. Davis Site,
Cherokee County, Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Shafer, H. J. and L. Green
2008 Tuinier Borrow Pit Biface Cache, Hopkins County,
Texas. Caddo Archeology Journal 18:26-39.
Suhm, D.A. and E.B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Special Publication No. 1, Texas Archeological Society, and Bulletin No. 4, Texas Memorial Museum,
Austin.

The Harris Ranch Petroglyphs of the Eastern Trans-Pecos
Solveig A. Turpin

Abstract
The Harris Ranch petroglyphs, recorded as part of 41CX110, are a series of geometric designs pecked into the
flat limestone bedrock adjacent to an intermittent creek in Crockett County, Texas. Site features include burned
rock mounds, hearths, rock rings, cairns, mortar holes, and cupules, set on and adjacent to a huge outcrop of
fine quality chert. The glyphs are primarily meandering lines and abstract designs with animal tracks, weaponry,
and humans notable for their absence. The remarkable feature of the site is a series of 35 cm diameter cylindrical and conical holes around a low cairn that was laid between two deeper holes that now support large trees.
Rectangular rocks were placed in, not on, several of these holes in prehistory, perhaps to support poles used in
some ritual associated with glyph production or mortuary behavior.

INTRODUCTION
Harris Ranch (41CX110) is one of seven bedrock petroglyph sites recorded on the Eldorado
Divide (Figure 1), the arid crest of the Edwards
Plateau that sheds water southwest into the Pecos
drainage, south into the Devils River, north to the
branches of the Concho, and east to the Llano and
San Saba drainage system (Ferguson 1986; Turpin
1993). Although the site has been known for over
30 years, the petroglyphs and their context had
never been adequately recorded, so when the area
was opened to gas and oil exploration, University
Lands-West Texas Operations sponsored archeological survey and more exacting definition of known
sites. The site was mapped, brush was removed from
the petroglyph area, and the surface was cleared of
leaf litter and modern sediment that had washed
or blown in to be trapped by rocks and vegetation
(Figure 2). The cleared area was photographed by
Terry Burgess, who used the same equipment and
methods he developed to document the Lewis Canyon petroglyphs (Turpin 2005). The camera is held
parallel to the bedrock plane by a frame that also
outlines a meter grid so that the digital photographs
can be stitched together into a composite map of the
glyphs and their associated features.
The unique feature of the Harris Ranch petroglyph area is the number of cylindrical, conical, and
bowl-shaped holes that encircle and underlay a low

cairn that was largely disguised by trees and brush
(Figure 3). Water-containment features, like these
holes, are one of the key characteristics of bedrock
petroglyphs on the Eldorado Divide, but here many
of the holes hold rectangular blocks of local limestone, long enough to protrude above the surface a
few centimeters but not large enough to cover or fill
the hole (Figure 4). It is assumed these rectangular
blocks of limestone are of prehistoric origin, since at
least one was completely covered by the cairn, and
local ranchers who have been on the land for over
60 years are adamant that they were not emplaced
by them or their workers. Thus, the function of the
rocks protruding from the holes remains a matter for
much speculation.
History of Site Investigations
41CX110 was first recorded by Opal Hail of
the Iraan Archeological Society (IAS), who thought
she was visiting property owned by lessee Wayne
Harris, hence the name given to the site. The abbreviated data form, filed in 1974, places the site on a
slab of limestone in a saddle between two hills and
comments that pale cactus is emerging from holes
and small trees grow wherever there is dirt. The only
artifacts listed are ceramic sherds, but Hail mentioned to another member of the IAS that the pottery
was not actually found on 41CX110 but rather at a

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

334

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Location of 41CX110 and other bedrock petroglyph sites on the Eldorado Divide of Texas.

Turpin—The Harris Ranch Petroglyphs of the Eastern Trans-Pecos

335

petroglyphs
midden
hearth
tipiring
mortar hole
site boundary
creek
road
fence

Figure 2. Site map showing relationship between glyphs and other features.

nearby location (Rose Mary Rogers, personal communication, 2006). If Hail’s visit was in the early
1970s, hard upon the heels of a significant drought,
visibility would have been much better than it is
today. Pottery is relatively rare in this area but its
occurrence is not inconsistent with the stone rings on
the barren limestone bench below the petroglyphs.
However, no sherds were found during this intensive
documentation of the site.
In 1975, a revisit form was filed by Rose Mary
Rogers, who was part of an IAS group that had obtained permission from Ted Harris to document the
site. She noted:
The glyphs are pecked into solid limestone ledge on a small rise of a hill.
Besides the glyphs, there is a large ring
midden, and fire hearth sites. The Indians
had a good source of chert, as there is an
abundant supply in the rock ledges in the
immediate area. There are twenty or more
mortar holes, most filled with dirt, rock,
etc, with grass growing in the top of them.
There is an area in the glyph-area which

appears to have been a cairn, there are
stones in this area where small trees and
shrubs are growing. The glyphs run into
this area on the rock, the I.A.S. did not
disturb this in any way, there fore we do
not know how far the glyphs go back under this area (Texas Historic Sites Atlas).

The society members collected artifacts and
made acetate-magic marker drawings of some of the
glyphs, but none was curated in a public repository.
Members of the IAS excavated three of the conical
holes, apparently on two occasions, although the sequence is difficult to determine from the field notes.
Only one was documented with sketch maps and an
inventory that included what the recorder considered
to be a possible infant cremation. Although the site
map is somewhat confusing, it appears that the infant bones—two small ribs, a cranial fragment with
suture, the proximal end of a fibula, and many small
fragments—came from a conical hole that is now almost completely obscured by tree growth. A second
excavated hole, labeled Pit II on a rough sketch map,
may also now be filled by a larger tree stump, and a

336

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Petroglyph Cluster 4 showing holes with and without rocks protruding above the bedrock, and its relationship
to the ponded water. Recall that other holes once may have held rocks that were removed by previous visitors to the
site. Drawn by Terry Burgess from parallel-plane photographs.

third pit is labeled “excavated mortar.” Rough notes
also indicate that two “previously excavated mortar
holes” also contained bone but the specifics are not
provided. The members responsible for digging out
two of the holes state that only dirt was found and
it was bagged and sent to the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory at the University of Texas at
Austin. That matrix was still stored at the University,
where it could be screened and further examined,
confirming that there were no artifacts or bone of
any kind.
The author of one set of field notes, Larry
Baron, described the material he removed from a
cone-shaped mortar. A flat rock that he thought was
a cap stone covered the hole, but its dimensions—8
x 8.5 x 3.5 inches—are much smaller than those of

the cone, which sloped from a maximum diameter
of ca. 2.1 ft. to a minimum diameter of 0.5 ft. Flint
chips, scrapers, and side-flaked tools were also dug
out in association with the bone. Baron went on to
describe the skeletal material, mentioning ash and
reddish bone, which probably led to the suggestion
that a cremated infant had been buried in the hold.
He then noted “two other mortar holes, dug previously with bone material?” and commented that this
was possibly a large burial site. It is simply no longer possible to determine if the skeletal material was
that of an infant, cremated or not. The only bones
found in the recent clean-up were rabbit and deer.
A few months later, John Clark (Texas Historical Commission) filed yet another revisit form
in which he stated:

Turpin—The Harris Ranch Petroglyphs of the Eastern Trans-Pecos

337

Figure 4. Rocks protruding from natural cavities on the northern end of the petroglyph cluster. The tree stump marks
another, deeper hole. Note the circled spiral, the dumbbell, and meandering line petroglyphs.

The site is a flat limestone ledge out crop
having two low places that hold water
after rains. Around the principal tinaja
are several features including two burned
rock middens… a wicky-up [sic], extensive petroglyphs and bedrock mortar
holes (Texas Historic Sites Atlas).

He attributed ownership of the site to the lessee, Wayne Harris of San Angelo and, on behalf of
the Texas Historical Commission, nominated the
petroglyphs to the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) under the presumption that the site
was privately owned. University Lands-West Texas
Operations, which manages several thousand acres
in this area, including 41CX110, was unaware of any
of these proceedings. The justification for listing the
site on the NRHP was that it is the largest petroglyph
site in western Crockett County, while a similar but
larger site, Turkey Roost, was nominated as the

largest petroglyph site in eastern Crockett County.
41CX110 was described as:
The site occupies a flat Cretaceous limestone ledge on the flank of a low limestone
terrace adjacent to the wall of the Live Oak
Creek Canyon on the right side of the canyon. On the site there are two low areas in
the limestone that act as tinajas to collect
water after rains. The tinajas are located
on the east edge of the limestone near the
larger of the two tinajas. To the west and
north are 4 small groups of petroglyphs,
three near the larger of the two tinajas.
With these three groups are five bedrock
mortar holes. Between the two tinajas are
the stones used as the base or as weights
for a wicki-up. Below the ledge on the
east edge of the site are a minimum of
two burned rock middens and extensive

338

Texas Archeological Society
midden debris. The petroglyphs consist
principally of connected linear motifs.
These motifs include sinuous lines, ovals,
a human-like motif, a daisy-like motif and
an oval with hatchures (Texas Historical
Commission 1975).

In 1990, I first visited the site while looking for
analogs for Lewis Canyon, a large petroglyph site
on the Pecos River, some 160 km to the south (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967; Turpin and Bass 1997;
Turpin 2005). At the time, it was just one of several
sites, all smaller and farther from permanent water,
that shared two very important characteristics with
Lewis Canyon (Turpin 1993). All are petroglyphs
dinted into flat bedrock rather than cave walls or
boulders and all are clustered around natural cavities
(tinajas) that were capable of holding water for relatively long periods. Other previously recorded sites
visited at that time were Turkey Roost (41CX233),
Flat Rock (41UT2 and 41UT3), and Watkins Ranch
(41RG4). Two new recordings of bedrock petroglyphs were made based on information and access provided by local landowners: Shurley Ranch
(41SU55) and Cauthorn Draw (41SU56). This
brought the bedrock petroglyph site total to seven,
including Lewis Canyon far to the south (Turpin
1993). Subsequently, another bedrock petroglyph
site has been located in the Big Bend region. The
Graef site (41RV50) is still being documented by
volunteers, but Reeda Peel, the site supervisor, says
there is a small tinaja near the petroglyphs so this
site may be part of this complex as well.
Several blocks of publicly owned land, including
41CX110, were opened for oil and gas exploration
in 2005, mandating archeological survey of several
thousand acres in Crockett County. The Harris Ranch
site was revisited and a map made showing some of
the more salient features, such as the burned rock
middens, hearths, mortar holes, stone circles, and
tinajas (see Figure 2). Leaf litter and recent sediment
were cleared from the surface where a few petroglyphs could still be detected, intrusive vegetation
was cut back, the purported cairn was uncovered, and
the glyphs were mapped, photographed, and placed
in the larger context of the site itself.
Site Setting
The site occupies a series of stepped limestone benches that parallel the broad floodplain of

intermittent Noelke Creek, 4.5 km above its confluence with Live Oak Creek, a tributary to the Pecos
River. Both water courses are lined with important
prehistoric and historic sites. The 1878 government
road and telegraph line from Camp Grierson (Turpin
and Riemenschneider 1998, 2001a) to Camp Melvin
on the Pecos River (41CX953) passed slightly north
of 41CX110, crossing the chert-covered ridge at a
shallow saddle. Downstream, the road leads to the
Million Mortar site (41CX880), a huge complex
of burned rock middens, hearths, tipi rings, quarry
debris, mortar holes, and cupules that shares a
rock-bottomed water hole in Noelke Creek with the
remnants of a stage stop, now reduced to low stone
walls and rubble (Turpin 2000; Turpin and Riemenschneider 2001b). Somewhat further south and west
of the Government Road, Los Charcos (41CX860)
occupies the same setting with burned rock features
on the ridge and in the floodplain, stone circles
on the lower benches, along with mortar holes
and linked tinajas with ritual implications, but no
petroglyphs. Although each of these sites has some
unique attribute, all three clearly played a significant
role in the local settlement pattern.
The features that make up 41CX110 are on the
southeastern end of an elongated limestone ridge
that is covered with chert cobbles, cores, flakes,
and rudimentary tools for a distance of over 2 km,
terminating at the confluence of an unnamed right
bank tributary with Noelke Creek. The benches that
step down the eastern side of the ridge are littered
with chert artifacts in various stages of the reduction process as well as massive amounts of debitage.
Based on radiocarbon dates from the nearby Lower
Pecos region, temporally diagnostic artifacts noted
during the resurvey are Late Archaic Frio and Fairland (2300-1300 B.P.) and Middle Archaic (41003200 B.P.) Jora and Langtry dart points (Turpin
1991). The IAS notes from their investigations at
the site show the outline of a Perdiz arrow point and
a Shumla dart point (as well as three unidentifiable
dart point fragments) extending the range of occupation to the Late Prehistoric period and adding
an earlier Late Archaic component. No pottery was
observed and the 1970s report of ceramic sherds
could not be verified. However, the tipi rings and, if
correctly attributed, the ceramics would extend the
site occupation from the end of the Late Prehistoric
to the Protohistoric or early historic times. Since
the site was situated to exploit a wide variety of
resources, occupation throughout prehistoric times
is to be expected.

Turpin—The Harris Ranch Petroglyphs of the Eastern Trans-Pecos
The petroglyphs are but one of a variety of
features on this site. Four burned rock mounds, the
residue of earth ovens, follow the top of the ridge;
this same preference is seen at 41CX860, the site
complex discussed above. Three other large burned
rock accumulations lie at the southern end of the
site. Hearths fringe the eastern side and southeastern
tip of the ridge, extending out into the floodplain of
Noelke Creek where they have been detrimentally
affected by intermittent high water and rapid discharge typical of this arid region. At the south end
of the ridge, on a point overlooking the confluence
of the tributary and the main stem of the creek, are
one oval (15 x 30 cm) and two round (28 and 32 cm
diameter) bedrock mortars and a boulder pocked by
two 10 cm diameter cupules. On either side of the
petroglyphs, but on a lower ledge, there are at least
three stone circles that are the remains of the wikiup
rings (Figure 5) mentioned by Clark in his site form
and his NRHP nomination. The most likely place to

339

find pottery would be in the vicinity of these stone
circles, which are generally acknowledged to be late
in the cultural sequence in this region. Finally, the
largest group of petroglyphs (Glyph 4) surrounds
and underlies a rock cairn about 30 cm high, 3 m
long, and 2 m wide. Mature trees were growing
from natural holes in the bedrock at either end of
the cairn—possibly two of the pits excavated by
the IAS—and the entire pile was obscured by dense
thorny brush that flourished on the moisture trapped
in the sediment that filled the interstices.
East of this same group of petroglyphs, but at a
slightly lower elevation, a shallow depression holds
a broad expanse of water for a short period after
heavy rains (Figure 6). One of the lowest petroglyphs was inundated immediately after the rain
fell (Figure 7), but the pond receded rapidly in the
dry air of this semi-desert, evaporating completely
in about four or five days. However, a deeper tinaja
on the same level as the glyphs but about 20 m to

Figure 5. Rock ring (3 m in diameter) on ledge east of Glyph 2. The paired rocks were probably pole supports rather
than cover weights.

340

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Looking west across ponded water shortly after heavy rainfall. The petroglyphs surround the cairn marked
by the lone tree in frame left of center.

the south, when filled to its brim, holds 40 gallons
of water. The water in this hole is shaded by an
overhanging lip and undoubtedly would last much
longer since it is not easily accessible to animals
once it is partially depleted.
This particular section of bedrock ledge is
pocked with dozens of small cupules and at least 30
larger natural concavities that have been mistaken
for mortar holes (see Figure 3). Slightly downstream, similar holes still contain fractured chert,
illustrating the natural formation processes that produced them. Two of the cylinders that are only a few
cm apart have been joined by an artificial channel, a
feat seen in much grander proportions at 41CX860.
One and possibly two of the depressions are shaped
like nippled bowls, as though a baby bottle nipple
had been impressed into the rock, forming a basin
with a deeper concavity at the bottom. One on the
open flat was cleared of washed-in sediment to
measure a holding capacity of 22 gallons of water

(Figure 8). The other, also possibly dug out some
30 years ago, is obscured by a large tree that grows
from it but its smooth and gently concave outline
can be detected on one side. The various cylindrical and conical holes range in volume from 5 to 10
gallons, but with respect to its use, factors other than
water containment are suggested by the rocks placed
in the ones surrounding and under the cairn.
The petroglyphs are strung out along the second
bedrock ledge in a subtle saddle of the lower ridge
in the area of concentrated tinajas, holes, and bowls.
All of the glyphs are very shallow and eroded, thus
visible only under specific lighting conditions that
vary throughout the day. The isolated glyphs were
photographed but the sketches made on site are
much more informative. The northernmost, labeled
Glyph 1 for convenience, is just opposite and 3 m
upslope of one of the three tipi rings. A combination of curved and parallel straight lines (Figure 9a)
fringes a depression filled with dirt. Some 30 cm to

Turpin—The Harris Ranch Petroglyphs of the Eastern Trans-Pecos

341

Figure. 7. This glyph was on the downslope end of Cluster 4 and was inundated by ponded water for about 2 days after
a downpour.

the south is a turtle-like oval pecked over a vertical
line. Glyph 1a was discovered late in the recording
process, some 7 m south of Glyph 1. It is a bifurcated meandering line that attaches to a 10 cm wide
cupule (Figure 9b). Further to the south, Glyph 2
consists of 13 parallel vertical lines contained within
an oval outline (Figure 9c). A faint sinuous line is
offset from the northern end and an equally shallow
irregular line-and-circle bound it to the south. Next,
Glyph 3 is a sinuous line backed by four parallel
vertical lines (Figure 9d), the first of which has a
perpendicular hook at the upper end.
The large conglomeration of glyphs that make
up the fourth location is composed largely of shallow meandering lines interspersed with geometric
motifs (see Figure 3). The sinuous lines, which are
found at every site of this type, often run to the edge

of a hole, giving the obvious impression of water
conduits (Figure 10). The glyphs that can be given
any sort of descriptive name are a well-executed
spiral contained within a larger circle, concentric
circles, a daisy-like flower or star burst, nested
horseshoes, and a dumbbell. Two areas contain
the ubiquitous line-and-circle motif, so named by
Kirkland for series of circles connected by straight
or curved lines at Lewis Canyon (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967:99). This combination is one of the
universal designs found throughout the Southwest
and northern Mexico as well as every other site
of this type. However, unlike all the other sites on
the Eldorado Divide, there are no animal tracks or
human representations. The lack of any temporally
diagnostic elements or motifs renders fruitless any
speculation on the age of the glyphs but it is perhaps

342

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Smooth-sided bowl-shaped hole with indentation in the bottom. The hole’s volume is approximately 22 gallons.

worth noting that most of them are eroded and
shallow, as though exposed to the elements for a
considerable period of time. In fact, it is no longer
possible to detect the dints that first defined the
shape of the glyphs, if in fact that traditional method
of manufacture was used.
Finally, Glyph 5 is a curling line that ends in a
circle (see Figure 9e). This shallow glyph is south
of the main body of petroglyphs and is very difficult
to see. Certainly, Glyphs 1, 1a, 2, 3, and 5 appear to
be the work of individuals, set apart for some reason
known only to them, while Group 4 is an amalgamation of many glyphs showing some variation in skill
and design concepts, leading to the suspicion that
more than one artist was involved.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The uniqueness of 41CX110 lies not in its petroglyphs or in the tinajas which are typical of these
sites, but in the number of natural cavities containing

vertical or slanting rectangular rocks. Although it
is clear that the holes, when emptied of rocks and
sediment, would have held anywhere from 5 to 22
gallons of water, the petroglyphs add a ritual dimension. Two adjacent holes of equal size, separated by
only 5 cm, were joined by an artificial channel whose
function is unclear (see Figure 3). A much larger
channel cut between two tinajas at nearby 41CX880
drained overflow from the broader, shallower, pond
to a deeper, more restricted hole, thus capturing more
water and lowering the loss to evaporation (see Turpin 2005:Figure 11). However, there too, the tinajas
were encircled by a ring of rocks that seems to have
set them aside as sacred space.
The purpose of the cairn at 41CX110 is equally
problematic. The limestone blocks in it retained
considerable soil and hundreds of large flakes and
roughed out tools but no projectile points or finely
finished artifacts. Since the entire surface of the
ridge is littered with natural and modified chert,
the presence of flakes and rudimentary tools in the
cairn and in the filled holes is most likely accidental.

Turpin—The Harris Ranch Petroglyphs of the Eastern Trans-Pecos

a

b

c

d

e
Figure 9. Isolated glyphs: a, 1; b, 1a; c, 2; d, 3; and e, 5. Drawn by Billy Turner.

343

344

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 10. Meandering lines leading to (or extending from) a natural cavity of considerable depth.

There are artificial arrangements of limestone blocks
in other areas on the periphery of the petroglyphs
but one must suspect modern clearing and piling to
better see the glyphs. Screening of the cairn matrix
produced a few fragments of deer and rabbit bone
and teeth but no human remains or artifacts made of
material other than chert.
Although the IAS described covering slabs, the
rocks inserted in the natural cavities are not the thin
flat slabs used to cover such holes at other sites,
where the objective is conservation of water that
accumulated in them after heavy rains, although
such slabs are seen, still in place, at nearby Turkey
Roost (41CX233) and Grierson Springs (41RG3).
The function of those slabs is attested by scouting
reports on file at Fort Concho wherein troopers describe coming across holes in the bedrock capped
by rock lids (Kennedy 1878), and Walter Taylor
observed the same form and function in Coahuila

(González 1990). However, the rocks that remain
in situ at Harris Ranch were inserted vertically
into the holes and apparently selected for lengths
that would protrude above the bedrock surface. A
most sensible suggestion, offered by Ron Ralph, is
that the rocks could have been wedges that helped
support poles. Poles serve many purposes, ranging
from the practical framing of lodges, tipis, and drying racks to the more esoteric display of trophies.
The distribution of the holes around the cairn may
imply that some sort of fiber cover was placed over
it during construction or an ensuing ritual. The cairn
was contained between a large smooth bowl-shaped
hole and an irregular depression, both of which
support mature trees that have obviously sent their
roots down to great depths. If in fact these holes
contained infant skeletal material, the ritual implications become even more obvious. Ample proof
of Native American reverence for the subterranean

Turpin—The Harris Ranch Petroglyphs of the Eastern Trans-Pecos
world, which they considered to be the living interior of the rock, exists in ethnography, folklore, and
archeological remains (Heyden 1981). Any portal
that afforded access to the chthonian spirits would
command great respect in most Native American
and Mesoamerican belief systems and provide a
context for ritual or mortuary performances that
may have included the erection of some temporary
structure, fetish, or trophy.
The documentation of 41CX110 has left more
questions than answers. The connection between
bedrock petroglyphs, water retention, and access to
the subterranean world, so amply demonstrated at
Lewis Canyon, is reaffirmed but some of the new
dimensions are not easily explained. If the holes
once served as tiny sepulchers for infant burials, the
ritual aspect of the site is greatly enhanced, but in the
absence of clear documentation of the material removed from the holes, the presumption of mortuary
use cannot be confirmed. Neither petroglyphs nor
burials explain the insertion of the vertical blocks
in natural cavities. These ambiguities can only be
resolved by controlled excavation of similar features
that have not been disrupted by relic hunters.
References Cited
Ferguson, W. K.
1986 The Texas Landscape: The Geographic Provinces of
Texas. Texas Mosaics, Austin.
Gonzaléz Rul, F.
1990 Reconocimiento arqueológico en la parte mexicana de
la Presa de la Amistad. Instituto Nacional de Antro­
pología e Histroria, México.
Heyden, D.
1981 Caves, Gods, and Myths: World-View and Planning
in Teotihuacan. In Mesoamerican Sites and World
Views, edited by E. Benson, pp. 1-40. Dumbarton
Oaks Research Library and Collections, Washington, D.C.

345

Kennedy, W.
1878 Fort Concho Scout Reports 1871-1881, Microfilm
75, Research Library and Archives, Fort Concho
National Historic Landmark, San Angelo, Texas.
Kirkland, F. and W.W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967 The Rock Art of Texas Indians. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Texas Historic Sites Atlas, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin
1975 National Register of Historic Places files, 41CX110.
http://www.nueces.thc.state.tx.us. Accessed on line,
May 2006.
Turpin, S. A.
1991 Time Out of Mind: The Radiocarbon Chronology
of the Lower Pecos River Region. In Papers on
Lower Pecos Prehistory, edited by S. A. Turpin, pp.
1-50. Studies in Archeology 8. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

1993 Hunting Camps and Hunting Magic: Petroglyphs of
the Eldorado Divide, West Texas. North American
Archaeologist 13(4):295-316.
2000 Block 13: Archeological Survey on University Lands,
Crockett County, Texas. Cultural Resource Report
5. Borderland Archeological Research Unit, The
University of Texas at Austin.

2005 Location, Location, Location: The Lew is Canyon Petroglyphs. Plains Anthropologist
50(195):307-328.
Turpin, S. and J. Bass
1997 The Lewis Canyon Petroglyphs. Special Publication
3. Rock Art Foundation, San Antonio, Texas.
Turpin, S. and L. Riemenschneider
1998 Grierson Springs: A Military Outpost of Fort Concho
1878-1882. Journal of Big Bend Studies 10:89-143.

2001a Firing at Blank Range: Cavalry Maneuvers at Grierson’s Gulch, 41RG77. Journal of Big Bend Studies
13:107-120.

2001b Mortar Holes in Crockett County: The Case for
Functional and Ritual Variability. The Steward 6:4158. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Notes on Archaic Environments at Los Remotos,
Nuevo León, Mexico
Solveig A. Turpin and Linda Scott Cummings

Abstract
Four hearths exposed by erosion and arroyo downcutting at Los Remotos, Nuevo León, produced radiocarbon
dates ranging from cal 4217 to 1864 B.P. Two surface features show the rapid progression of headward erosion,
stripping, and the dispersing of 2000 to 3000 years of deposits. Pollen samples from the two buried features
indicate that this now-barren desiccated plain was a yucca grassland fringed by oak and pine forest at higher
elevations ca. 4200 and 2500 years ago. Economic plants that may have been processed in the hearths include
nettles, granadilla, yucca, sunflowers, grasses, and cheno-ams. In the late 19th and early 20th century, Los
Remotos was the site of a large mescal distillery which may have contributed to local deforestation to fuel the
ovens still visible near the hacienda ruins. Environmental degradation can be attributed in part to ill-advised
agricultural practices and increased aridity, but a significant factor is draw-down of the water table to supply
the burgeoning population of Monterrey.

During the Boca de Potrerillos (Boca) project,
some similar but smaller outlying sites were visited
to help construct a broader ecological context for
this huge petroglyph site and now-designated archeological zone near Monterrey in Nuevo León,
Mexico (Turpin et al. 1993, 1994). Two radiocarbon
dates and associated pollen analyses from one of
those sites, Los Remotos (Figure 1), support the
assumption that the Archaic environment differed
significantly from that of today. The pollen spectra
provide some insight into the plant communities
utilized by the prehistoric people at two points in
time, one about 4200 and the other around 2500
years ago. Los Remotos is 165 km due west of the
Rio Grande so this environmental data, taken with
that from other sites in Nuevo León, are relevant to
both South Texas and Northern Mexico prehistory.
To date, with the exception of Boca de Potrerillos, the pollen record of northeastern Mexico
has come almost exclusively from rock shelters
where the spectra are more likely to be the result of
procurement and exploitation patterns rather than
the general environment (Bryant 1975; Bryant and
Riskind 1980). With the exception of Cueva de la
Zona de los Derrumbes (Bryant and Riskind 1980),
the source of the pollen has been coprolites, thus
clearly associated with human consumption, either
deliberate or accidental. The paucity of research has

forced some rather unlikely comparisons between
cultural and natural resource zones as diverse as
Cuatro Ciénagas (Frightful Cave, Bryant 1975),
the Eastern Trans-Pecos (Granado Cave, Hamilton
2001), and the Lower Pecos (Hinds and Baker caves
among others; Williams-Dean 1978; Sobolik 1988).
Not surprisingly, significant differences were found.
Los Remotos and Boca are open sites where both
ambient and economic pollen will be represented
in feature matrices. In both cases, samples were
taken from buried hearths that provided charcoal
for radiocarbon assay, thus demonstrating contextual
integrity as well as a chronological context.
Los Remotos is about 22 straight-line km north
of Boca de Potrerillos, between Monterrey and Monclova and west of Highway 53 which connects those
two metropolitan areas. The surface of both sites is
barren, sun-hardened alluvium mantled by centuries
worth of dispersed burned rock and lithic debris
(Figure 2). Although the intact hearths at both sites
were buried by the same processes—gentle transportation of sediment from the slopes that surround
them—everything at Los Remotos is at a smaller
scale. The tiny hamlet lies in a long, narrow alluvial
basin northeast of the massive boat-shaped mountain
named La Popa and west of the aptly named Sierra
Rincón del Arco. The site is at the headwaters of
a down-cutting arroyo system that drains a much

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

348

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Location map, Los Remotos.

Figure 2. The eroded Los Remotos valley, dissected by arroyos.

Turpin and Cummings—Notes on Archaic Environments at Los Remotos, Nuevo León, Mexico
smaller watershed, thus the potential for cataclysmic
flooding is less than that experienced at Boca.
Although the official population of Los Remotos is now 27, burned rock and stone tools are strewn
across acres of eroded surface, large circular wheels
of fire-cracked rock are the remains of a flourishing
19th-century distillery, and a most desolate cemetery
contains more people than the town. The sparse
vegetation is dominated by creosote bush (Larrea)
with a slight admixture of prickly pear (Opuntia).
At the time of the Boca project, in 1993, deflation
and headward erosion of arroyo Las Azuelitas had
recently exposed several burned rock features, or
fogóns, that retained enough charcoal for standard
radiocarbon assay. Four samples were dated (Table
1); pollen samples from the two buried hearths were
analyzed (Cummings 1994).
Fogón 1 was 135 cm long, 10 rocks thick, and
visible in profile at a depth of 1.1 m bs and 60 cm
above the bottom of the arroyo. Fogón 2 was a long
linear exposure of burned rock that stretched across
a sloping surface, 42 cm bs and 150 cm above the
bottom of the erosional cut. A central core composed of about 50 rocks measured 120 cm long but
burned rocks were trailing up and down the arroyo
for almost 7 m. In both cases, the surface of the
cutbank was cleaned back with a trowel and charcoal collected from the interstices of the basal rock.
Features 3 and 4 were both surface features. Feature
3 was a basin-shaped hearth that had emerged from
its sediment cover such a short time before that the
component rocks were still tightly clustered in a
basin of fire-hardened earth. Charcoal was collected
from the base of the feature, under large fractured
pieces of rock and above the reddened earth. Feature
4 was a cluster of burned rock precariously perched
above the juncture of two branches of the arroyo,
downstream of the other dated features. Its basin

shape was still discernible but the dimensions of
the original hearth are unknown. Again, charcoal
was trapped beneath the large rocks at the bottom
of the basin.
Three of the four radiocarbon dates from Los
Remotos fall into gaps in the chronological sequence
obtained from 14 assays at Boca. Only the sample
from Feature 2 approximates a humate date of ca.
2600 B.P. from the bottom of the large arroyo at
Boca. This arroyo was one of three areas used to
reconstruct a cut-and-fill sequence that showed older
features at higher elevations than those exposed in
the vertical profiles of the main stem (Turpin et al.
1994:335). Based on the series as a whole, this date
may have been as much as 500 years too old, so the
only conclusion drawn from it was that some time
well before 2000 years ago, a major erosional event
scoured the lower basin, eradicating any evidence
of earlier occupations. Older dates from features at
slightly higher elevations on the fringes of the valley
indicate yet another such flushing of a larger area
sometime after 5000 B.P. Corroboration of the latter
event comes from excavations carried out at Cueva
de la Zona de Derrumbes (McClurkan 1966), Cueva
Ahumada (Epstein 1972), and, to some degree, La
Calsada (Nance 1992). The subsurface features at
Los Remotos then fall between these two postulated
environmental crises and during the time that cultural deposits accreted at Boca, Cueva Ahumada, and
Cueva de la Zona. The Remotos surface features,
dated to around 1900 and 3200 years ago (see Table
1), demonstrate the extent of modern headward erosion and the eradication of centuries of occupational
detritus that has been flushed down the arroyo.
Initially, five sediment samples and a grinding
stone wash from the cutbank of the main arroyo at
Boca identified the pollen spectra between 680-1300
B.P. (Turpin et al. 1993). Subsequently, two samples

Table 1. Radiocarbon series from Los Remotos, Nuevo León.
				
Lab (TX)			
Corrected Age
Age (B.P.)
Feat.
Age (B.P.)
(B.P.)
8052
8053
8054
8120

1
2
3
4

3720 ± 60
2440 ± 50
1920 ± 50
2930 ± 60

* Calpal Online Radiocarbon Calibration

349

3760 ± 80
2470 ± 50
1960 ± 50
3010 ± 60

Cal. Age
B.P.*, 2 sigma
(95% probability)

Depth/
Provenience

4035-4217
2438-2673
1864-1973
3108-3305

1.1 m bs
40 cm bs
surface
surface

350

Texas Archeological Society

from the Coconos subarea provided the first pollen
record for the period between 4000-7000 B.P. in
this part of northern Mexico. The oldest feature
at Los Remotos, Feature 1 (cal 4035-4217 B.P.).
falls at the near end of this span. Feature 2, at cal
2438-2673 B.P., is the only local evidence of past

environments during this critical transition from
Middle to Late Archaic times in a chronology that is
largely dependant on Texas data. The plants listed in
Table 2 represent the floral communities available to
the prehistoric people of the Remotos valley at two
intervals, ca. 1700 years apart (Figure 3).

Table 2. Pollen Types Observed in Samples From Los Remotos (from Cummings 1994).
Scientific Name

Common Name

ARBOREAL POLLEN
Celtis
Juniperus
Pinus
Quercus

Hackberry
Juniper
Pine
Oak

NON-ARBOREAL POLLEN
Asteraceae:
Artemisia
Low-spine
High-spine
Tubuliflorae
Cheno-ams
Ephedra torreyena-type
Euphorbia
Kallstroemia
Lamiaceae
Passiflora
Poaceae
Polemoniaceae
Ranunculaceae
Rosaceae
Cercocarpus
Sphaeralcea
Urtica
Yucca
Zea
Tetrad
Tetrad rugulate cf. Annona
Indeterminate

Sunflower family
Sagebrush
Includes ragweed, cocklebur, etc.
Includes aster, rabbitbrush, snakeweed,
sunflower, etc.
Includes eroded Low- and High-spine
Includes amaranth and pigweed family
Mormon tea
Spurge
Kallstroemia
Mint family
Passion flower, granadilla
Grass family
Phlox family
Buttercup family
Rose family
Mountain mahogany
Globe mallow
Nettle
Yucca
Maize, corn
cf. Custard-apple

STARCHES
Solid Starches
Starches with Hilum
SPORES
Monolete
Selaginella densa
Trilete smooth

Little clubmoss

2

2438-2673

20

20

20

A A

A

20

A

A

A

20

FIGURE 1. POLLEN DIAGRAM FOR SAMPLES FROM LOS REMOTOS.

20

A

Figure 3. Pollen diagram from Los Remotos.

1

4035-4217

E
EN
AT
LL
D
. O
O P
ED N L
AT RE EA
us
R
R
er
IB ATU BO
tis nip nus
L
l
A
e
C
FE AR
C Ju Pi

P)
(B

ROSACEAE

N

STARCH SPORES

18000 200

957 202

IO
AT
R
T
a
EN
on
e
C
n
p
N
n
-ty
H CO
M
.A
AE
AE E
na
cf
TE H ILU nsa OT N
E
a
E
A
D
A
e
AE
t
C
C
O E
M
R S rrey
la IE IN AR /H de M LL
E
AC CE
IA
E
a E
E s a
N
SU
LO -AM to ia mi EA AE IN RA ra AE ON lus EA rpu lce
gu TIF RM
T H W ella E S PO
s
a PIN PI
F
a
u
i
G
y
e
I
S
s
a
N
b
a
a
r
a d d EN TE D C in ET L
u is S
L NO dr or tro IAC CE TA AG iflo CE
M n c A C oc er a a
E
-S
rc m H
LL
BU HE phe uph alls M LIA YC NO ass OA OLE anu OS erc pha rtic ucc a m tra tra NID DE OLI TAR elag IL TA
ue rte OW IG
O
O
U
e
e
e
R
A
I
N
Q A L
H
P R R C S U Y Z T T U I
S S S T T
P
T C E E K L L N O P P

ASTERACEAE

Turpin and Cummings—Notes on Archaic Environments at Los Remotos, Nuevo León, Mexico
351

352

Texas Archeological Society

The pollen record from the two hearths at Los
Remotos is consistent with the assumption that
prehistoric vegetation differed significantly from
the sparse creosote bushes and bare ground evident
today (see Figure 2). Local mountains supported at
a minimum a tree population that included juniper,
pine, and oak. These forests are still found higher
in the mountains but fairly far from Los Remotos.
During our field work, a horse-drawn two-wheel
cart left the hamlet in mid-morning and returned in
late afternoon with a load of fire wood, implying
that fuel had to be acquired at some distance from
the point of use. The near slopes were probably
deforested when the distillery was operating at its
peak in the late 19th century, based on the size of the
now-destroyed ovens where the maguey was baked
before it was mashed in the great stone wheels on
the north side of the hacienda.
Recovery of Rosaceae and Cercocarpus pollen
from both samples indicates the rose family, specifically mountain mahogany, was growing in the vegetation zones of the nearby mountains. The valley
appears to have supported sagebrush, a variety of
composites, hackberry, members of the Cheno-am
group, a variety of herbaceous plants, and grasses.
Liliaceae and Yucca pollen are common members of
desert plant communities, as are Celtis (hackberry),
Euphorbia (spurge), Kallstroemia (caltrop), and
Sphaeralcea (globe mallow). Recovery of Urtica
(nettle) pollen, in both samples, however, indicates
the presence of a riparian community along a stream,
or wet wooded areas in the nearby mountains, since
nettles require relatively moist soils.
Local non-arboreal vegetation included a variety of members of the Asteraceae (Compositae or
sunflower family), including both those that produce
Low-spine and High-spine pollen. Artemisia pollen
indicates the presence of sagebrush in limited quantities or farther from the site. Cheno-ams, which are
drought tolerant, and some of which grow in alkaline
soils, appear to have been present, although not
abundant in the local vegetation. The small quantity
of Ephedra pollen may be the product of long distance transport, since this pollen is aerodynamic and
capable of traveling for hundreds of miles.
Euphorbia pollen represents a local spurge,
while Kallstroemia pollen comes from the local
growth of this common herbaceous plant (caltrop) in
disturbed soils. The Lamiaceae pollen type was not
identified beyond the family level, but members of
the mint family may grow in the more mesic habitats
along drainages, or in the drier habitats of terraces.

Marrubium (horehound) prefers relatively dry sediments. The Liliaceae family includes such typical
dryland vegetation as beargrass (Nolina). Recovery
of Passiflora (passion flower) pollen suggests processing of granadilla fruit in Feature 1.
The Polemoniaceae family includes members
that are common in desert as well as upland habitats. Ranunculus (buttercup) prefers riparian conditions, and indicates a more reliable source of water
between cal 4035-4217 B.P. than is present today.
Sphaeralcea pollen results from the local growth
of globe mallow, which is often found in dry soils
and prefers disturbed habitats, such as those created
when people aggregate or with agriculture. Urtica
or nettles prefer the moist habitat commonly found
along stream sides. Yucca is a common desert plant,
and its exploitation by people utilizing Feature 2 is
predictable.
Recovery of Zea mays pollen from Feature 1
probably represents contamination from the 1800s.
Mescal production was an economic mainstay of the
hacienda during the 19th century and the workers
undoubtedly practiced subsistence agriculture. Two
pollen types remain ambiguous. The tetrad rugulate
is tentatively identified as Annona. Starch granules
with hila were noted in both samples and probably
resulted from spilling grass seeds or ground grass
seed meal that were being processed in the hearths.
Uses of Economic Plants
Found in the Features
The pollen record points to the availability and
probable exploitation of a variety of native plants at
Los Remotos. Grasses (Poaceae), nettles (Urtica),
sunflowers (High-spine Asteracae) and granadilla
(Passiflora) were probably processed in Feature
1, between cal 4035-4217 B.P. Feature 2, dated
to cal 2438-2673 B.P., showed a greater variety
of economic plant pollen: hackberries (Celtis),
Cheno-am greens or seeds, a member of the mint
family (Lamiaceae), yucca, grasses (Poaceae), and
Liliaceae, possibly mariposa lily (Calochortus) or
bear grass (Nolina).
Celtis (hackberry) fruits may be eaten raw,
cooked, or dried. The thin pulp is tasty and sweet
and attracts birds and small animals (Angell
1981:162‑164). Mashed berries were often mixed
with fat and other foods, molded into cakes or onto
a stick and roasted. They were made into porridge,

Turpin and Cummings—Notes on Archaic Environments at Los Remotos, Nuevo León, Mexico
jelly, and condiments (Moerman 2010); Celtis pallida is also valued as a honey plant (Kearney and
Peebles (1960:220). Medicinally, the cooked and
mashed berries were used as an antidote for diarrhea
in South America (Soukup 1970). Reportedly, the
bark was decocted to make a tonic for sore throats,
to regulate menses, and, when mixed with powdered
shells, to treat venereal disease (Moerman 2009).
The leaves and branches produce dark brown or red
dye (Moerman 1998:147).
Cheno‑ams refer to a morphologically similar
group of pollen from the Chenopodiaceae family
and the genus Amaranthus. Cheno‑ams, including
a variety of plants such as Chenopodium, Amaranthus, Suaeda, and Atriplex, have been used as food
and for processing other foods throughout human
history. Various parts of the Cheno‑am plants were
gathered from early spring through the fall (Castetter
and Bell 1942:61; Curtin 1984:47‑71; Greenhouse
et al. 1981:238; Kearney and Peebles 1960:251,
255, 263, 265).
The greens may be harvested and cooked either
alone or in combination with other foods, or be
packed around cholla buds when they are roasted.
The seeds are parched, ground, and made into cakes,
pinole, or added to other dishes. Desert amaranths
are exceptionally efficient solar collectors that grow
rapidly. Rich in iron, calcium, niacin, riboflavin,
and vitamins A and C, amaranth has been called
the meat of the poor people (Nabhan 1997:97.)
Spanish explorers remarked on the sight of Baja
California natives grazing, nipping the tops of the
young amaranth plants (Nabhan 1997:93). Greens
were also collected in the spring with cholla buds,
then dried and stored for later use. The seeds were
ground into meal and often mixed with other foods.
These small seeds were collected by knocking the
seed heads into a basket. This releases pollen from
the younger flowers on the same plant that have not
yet matured and introduced Cheno‑am pollen into
the archeological record via the seeds.
The relatively high levels of High-spine Asteracae in Feature 1 suggest that sunflowers were
processed there between cal 4035-4217 B.P. The
medicinal values of sunflower seeds and oil range
from the treatment of snake and spider bites to
wart removal, rheumatism, open sores, swellings,
worms, fevers, chest pains, prenatal infections, and
gas (Moerman 2009). The seeds ground into a paste
and formed into cakes were considered to reduce
fatigue, thus the equivalent of a modern power bar.
The seeds could be stored whole or as ground meal,

353

mixed with other foods, or eaten raw. Bryant (1975)
demonstrated a correlation between sunflower pollen and seeds in his analysis of coprolites from
Frightful Cave and elsewhere, attributing it to the
method of collection wherein the seeds are knocked
into a basket, carrying pollen with them. The Frightful Cave coprolites with significant amounts of
sunflower pollen were all in the upper zone, dated
from 2000 B.C. to A.D. 300.
The Labiatae (mint) family includes Salvia
(chia), which produces a root that was exploited
(Castetter and Bell 1942:62). The seeds were
parched, ground, and mixed with other meal, boiled
into mush, or decocted into a beverage (Moerman
2010). Chia has been credited with insuring the
stamina of Tarahumara, Hopi, and Aztec long distance runners and warriors (McDougal 2009:44)
Purportedly, chia was one of the main crops of the
Aztecs (Ayerza and Coates 2005), prized for its high
level of omega oils, protein, and minerals. Chia
seeds are currently being marketed in organic and
health food markets.
Beargrass (Nolina), sotol (Dasilyrion), and
mariposa lily (Calochortus) fall within the approximate size range of Liliaceae pollen recovered at this
site. Several parts of the lily are edible, including the
greens, seeds, bulbs, and flowers. The bulbs constitute
the most usable portion of the plant, and were frequently boiled or roasted in hot ashes as well as eaten
raw (Moerman 2009). They may also be stored for
future use (Harrington 1967:159‑161). Sotol crowns
were baked and crushed into flour which was eaten,
stored, or fermented. Similarly, Nolina stalks were
roasted, boiled, dried for later use, or eaten raw. Seeds
were ground for mush or bread and the fruits were
eaten raw or preserved (Moerman 2010:161).
The fruit of the passionflower, commonly called
granadilla, was eaten raw or crushed and strained
to make a beverage. The unripe fruit, however, is
poisonous and sometimes is used to induce vomiting (Ulmer and McDougal 2004). The new shoots
and leaves were boiled, fried, or mixed with other
greens (Moerman 2010:173) Medicinally, an infusion of the roots was used to treat boils, inflamed
wounds, earaches, aid in weaning infants, and drunk
as a liver or blood tonic (Moerman 2009:337). In
South America, the flesh is prescribed as a sedative
to relieve nervous headache, asthma, diarrhea, dysentery, neurasthenia, insomnia, kidney stones, and
to prevent yellow fever (Soukup 1970). The leaf
decoction is used to reduce fever, eliminate worms,
and soothe skin afflictions. The roots are thought

354

Texas Archeological Society

to counteract pneumonia, urinary infections, and
worms. Today, the plants are mainly valued as a
sedative (Ulmer and McDougal 2004:67). In modern
alternative medicine, the mild narcotic properties of
the leaves and stems are recommended for a wide
variety of illnesses, ranging from irritable bowel
syndrome, insomnia, back pain, neuralgia, nervous
tension and irritability, to more serious ailments
such as epilepsy.
The seeds of several genera of the Poaceae
(grass) family were available during the summer and
fall months. Those eaten by Southwestern Indians
were primarily Sporobolus, Oryzopsis, Panicum, and
Sorghum (Kearney and Peebles 1960:112‑115, 119,
142). The oldest coiled baskets from adjacent Coahuila and the Lower Pecos, predating Feature 1 at Los
Remotos by thousands of years, are parching trays
(Andrews and Adovasio 1980:368), which led Adovasio to conclude that small seeds had been processed
since the dawn of the Archaic. Hamilton (2001:259)
compared the high percentages of grass pollen in
coprolites from Granado Cave, in the Eastern TransPecos region, and Hinds Cave (Williams-Dean 1978),
in the Lower Pecos region north of the Rio Grande,
with the relatively low levels in Frightful Cave (Bryant 1975), in the Cuatro Ciénagas basin of Coahuila.
Williams-Dean (1978) and others (e.g., Reinhard et
al. 2008) attribute the quantities of grass pollen in
Hinds Cave coprolites to secondary ingestion via
the consumption of small animals. Such would not
be the case in the features from Los Remotos, where
a grassland context would have provided ambient
pollen. However, the presence of starch grains typical of those produced by grass seeds in the matrix
suggests processing and consumption. Since the net
caloric contribution of small seeds is low, their presence is considered to be the sign of a broad resource
procurement system (Geib and Jolie 2008), such as
those typical of arid lands hunters and gatherers like
the people who lived at Los Remotos.
Yucca is and has been exploited by the native
people of Mexico and the American Southwest for
thousands of years (Irish and Irish 2000). Every part
of the plant was put to good use. “The buds, flowers,
and emerging flower stalks are eaten raw or boiled,
or the flower stalks roasted like mescal” (Kearney
and Peebles 1960:185). Yucca baccata produces
large pulpy fruits, which may be eaten “raw or roasted, dried for winter use, or ground into meal, and the
seeds also are used for food” (Kearney and Peebles
1960:185). In Chihuahua, a fermented beverage was
made from the fruits of many species (Irish and Irish

2000:60). Fiber from the leaves furnished material
for rope, mats, sandals, baskets, and cloth. The roots
have saponifying properties and were used as soap
(amole), as a laxative, and to expedite birth (Kearney and Peebles 1960:185; Moerman 2009: 517).
The suds were thought to promote hair growth, kill
vermin, and ameliorate dandruff, baldness, and skin
irritations (Moerman 2009).
Urtica (nettle) is equally as versatile as yucca
(see Moerman 2009:496-498, 2010:262-263). Many
of the benefits are due to the plant’s very high levels
of minerals, especially calcium, magnesium, iron,
potassium, phosphorous, manganese, silica, iodine,
silicon, sodium, and sulfur. They also provide chlorophyll and tannin, and they are a good source of
vitamin C, beta-carotene, and B complex vitamins.
Nettles also have high levels of easily absorbable
amino acids, since they are 10 percent protein,
which is more than any other vegetable. All the parts
of the plant are medicinal. The roots may be boiled
in conjunction with other plants, or the leaves boiled
to make a liquid tonic. In addition, nettles were
probably used in sweat baths, as inhaling the fumes
appeared to be beneficial (Train et al. 1957:81, 97).
As an expectorant, it is recommended for asthma,
mucus conditions of the lungs, and chronic coughs.
Nettle tincture is also used for flu, colds, bronchitis,
and pneumonia. Nettle infusion is a safe, gentle diuretic that is considered a restorative for the kidneys
and bladder, and used for cystitis and nephritis. A
nettle tea compress or finely powdered dried nettles
are also good for wounds, cuts, stings, and burns.
The infusion was also used internally to stop excessive menstruation, bleeding from hemorrhages,
bloody coughs, nose bleeds, and bloody urine. Other
uses include treating gout, glandular diseases, poor
circulation, enlarged spleen, diarrhea, and dysentery,
worms, intestinal and colon disorders, and hemorrhoids (Moerman 2009).
Commercial hair and skin care products in health
food stores often list stinging nettle as an ingredient.
Their cleansing and antiseptic properties are used in
facial steams and rinses to treat eczema and other
skin conditions. Nettle tea is thought to also promote
the growth of house plants. Dried stalks may also be
crumpled in the hands or pounded with a stone to free
the fiber, which was then used for spinning twine and
cordage (Gilmore 1977:25). The long, fibrous stems
were important in Europe for weaving, cloth-making,
cordage, and even paper. Native Americans used them
for embroidery, fish nets, and other crafts. The roots
produce a yellow dye.

Turpin and Cummings—Notes on Archaic Environments at Los Remotos, Nuevo León, Mexico

355

Summary

Acknowledgements

The pollen record from two hearths at Los
Remotos, dated to 4035-4217 and 2438-2673 years
ago, demonstrates that the Archaic environment
differed greatly from the sparse vegetation, bare
ground, and severe erosion evident today. Locally,
the mountains supported at a minimum a tree population that included juniper, pine, and oak. Members
of the rose family, including mountain mahogany,
were part of the shrub community. Sagebrush, a
variety of composites, and hackberry, members of
the Cheno-am group, a variety of herbaceous plants,
and grasses grew in the valley. The desert vegetation communities are represented by Liliaceae and
Yucca pollen, as well as Celtis, Euphorbia, Kallstroemia, and Sphaeralcea. Recovery of Urtica
pollen, however, indicates the presence of a riparian
community along a stream or in wet wooded areas
in the mountains.
The pollen of economic plants such as yucca,
grenadilla, nettles, sunflowers, salvia, cheno-ams,
hackberry, beargrass, sotol or mariposa lily, and
grass in the hearth matrix suggests processing or
at least availability of various foods. Given that
the people of Remotos must have exploited the
full range of food resources available to them, the
presence of these plants in the vicinity implies their
consumption or medicinal use.
In general, a probable reconstruction of the
environment at these two points in time is very
like that suggested for Boca de Potrerillos during
earlier and later periods. In both cases, the valley
floor was probably grassland dotted with desert
succulents and fringed by woodlands. The more
mesic plants at Boca were supported by water
ponding behind the boca or mouth of the canyon.
The nettles in the hearths at Los Remotos testify
to moister soils that may have been found along
the now-dry arroyo, at the base of the mountains
where modern tanks have been constructed to trap
runoff, or in the area now terraced for agricultural
production. The differences between the prehistoric
environment suggested by the pollen spectra and
the modern-day eroded and barren countryside are
not an accurate measure of climate change since
desertification is one of the disastrous results of
urbanization (Murray 1991). However, sites like
Los Remotos can fill in the gaps in the prehistoric
sequence if they can be analyzed before they are
completely eradicated.

The field work at Los Remotos was carried out
by a team from The University of Texas at Austin in
collaboration with Moisés Valadez Moreno, INAH,
Nuevo León. The Boca project was authorized by a
permit issued by the Consejo de Arqueología to Dr.
Herbert H. Eling, Jr. Participants at Los Remotos
included Kelly Scott, Frank Garcia, Steve Carpenter, Carole Medlar, Christine Ward, Doug Drake,
and Larry Riemenschneider. The location map was
drawn by Brenda Cristán.
References Cited
Andrews, R. L. and J. M. Adovasio
1980 Prehistoric Industries from Hinds Cave, Val Verde
County, Texas. Ethnology Monographs 5. University
of Pittsburgh.
Angell, M.
1981 A Field Guide to Berries and Berrylike Fruits. The
Bobbs‑Merrill Company, Inc., New York.
Ayerza, R. and W. Coates
2005 Chia: Rediscovering a Forgotten Crop of the Aztecs.
University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Bryant, V. M. Jr.
1975 Pollen as an Indicator of Diets in Coahuila, Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
46:89-106.
Bryant, V. M. and D. H. Riskind
1980 The Paleoenvironmental Record for Northeastern
Mexico: A Review of the Pollen Evidence. In Papers on the Prehistory of Northeastern Mexico and
Adjacent Texas, edited by J. F. Epstein, T. R. Hester,
and C. Graves, pp.7-32. Special Report 9. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.
Castetter, E. F. and W. H. Bell
1942 Pima and Papago Indian Agriculture. University of
New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Cummings, L. S.
1994 Exploratory Pollen Analysis at Los Remotos, Mexico.
Report 94-47. Paleo Research Laboratory, Denver.
Curtin, L.
1984 By the Prophet of the Earth: Ethnobotany of the
Pima. Reprint of book published in 1949 by San
Vicente Foundation. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson.

356

Texas Archeological Society

Epstein, J.
1972 Some Implications of Recent Excavations and Surveys in Nuevo León and Coahuila, Mexico. Texas
Journal of Science 24(1):45-46.

Murray, W. B.
1991 Environmental Impacts of Hyper-Utilization in a
Semi-Arid Region: Monterrey’s Search for Water.
El Norte, July 7, 1991, Monterrey, Mexico.

Geib, P. R. and E. A. Jolie
2008 The Role of Basketry in Early Holocene Small Seed
Exploitation: Implications of a ca. 9,000 Year-old
Basket from Cowboy Cave, Utah. American Antiquity 73(1):83-102.

Nabhan, G. P.
1997 Gathering the Desert. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson.

Gilmore, M. R.
1977 Uses of Plants by the Indians of the Missouri River
Region. Reprinted. University of Nebraska Press,
Lincoln. Originally published 1919, Bureau of
American Ethnology, Washington, D.C.
Greenhouse, R., R. E. Gasser, and J. W. Gish
1981 Cholla Bud Roasting Pits: An Ethnoarchaeological
Example. The Kiva 46(4):227‑242.
Hamilton, D. L.
2001 Prehistory of the Rustler Hills. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Harrington, H. D.
1967 Edible Native Plants of the Rocky Mountains. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Irish, M. and G. Irish
2000 Agaves, Yuccas and Related Plants. Timber Press,
Portland, Oregon.
Kearney, T. H. and R. H Peebles
1960 Arizona Flora. University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles.
McClurkan, B. B.
1966 The Archeology of Cueva de las Zonas de Derrumbes, A Rockshelter in Nuevo León, Mexico.
Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
McDougal, C.
2009 Born to Run. Alfred A. Knopf, New York City
Moerman, D. E.
1998 Native American Ethnobotany. Timber Press,
Portland.
2009 Native American Medicinal Plants. Timber Press,
Portland.
2010 Native American Food Plants: an Ethnobotanical
Dictionary. Timber Press, Portland.

Nance, C. R.
1992 The Archaeology of La Calsada. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Reinhard, K. J., S. M. Chaves, J. G. Jones, and A. M. Iñiguez
2008 Evaluating chloroplast DNA in prehistoric Texas
coprolites: medicinal, dietary, or ambient ancient DNA? Journal of Archaeological Science
35(6):1748-1755.
Sobolik, K. D.
1988 Diet Change in the Lower Pecos: Analysis of Baker
Cave Coprolites. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 59:111-127.
Soukup, J.
1970 Vocabulario de los Nombres vulgares de la Flora
Peruana. Colegio Salesiano, Lima.
Train, P., J. R. Henrichs, and W. A. Archer
1957 Medicinal Uses of Plants by Indian Tribes of Nevada.
U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Plant Industry Station,
Beltsville, Maryland.
Turpin, S. A., H. H. Eling, Jr., and M. V. Moreno
1993 From Marshland to Desert: The Late Prehistoric Environment of Boca de Potreillos, Nuevo León, Mexico. North American Archaeologist 14(4):305-323.
1994 The Archaic Environment of Boca de Potrerillos, Nuevo León. North American Archaeologist
15(4):331-357.
Ulmer, T. and J. McDougal
2004 Passiflora: passionflowers of the world. Timber Press,
Portland.
Williams-Dean, G.
1978 Ethnobotany and Cultural Ecology of Prehistoric
Man in Southwest Texas. Ph.D. Dissertation, Texas
A&M University, College Station.

Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at
the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House
Jim Bruseth, Pat Mercado-Allinger, James Woodrick, Tiffany Osburn, Jeff Durst,
Brad Jones, Bill Pierson, Charles Gordy, and Robert Marcom
Abstract
During 2009 and 2010 remote sensing survey and field testing were conducted at the site of the Bernardo
Plantation (41WL28), located in Waller County, Texas. Historical documents indicate the plantation consisted
of a main house, outbuildings, a cemetery, and slave quarters. Remote sensing survey was successful in identifying several anomalies associated with the main house and associated support structures. Field testing on
the anomalies uncovered three of the house’s four chimney bases, portions of a brick skirting that enclosed the
crawl space under the house, and more than 7000 artifacts dating to the occupation of the site.

Introduction
The Bernardo Plantation was the location chosen by Jared Ellison Groce II, one of the Old Three
Hundred settlers in Stephen F. Austin’s early 19th
Century colony, for the founding of a new plantation
in 1822. As the first cotton plantation in what would
ultimately become the modern state of Texas, Bernardo was important not only in the history of Waller
County, but also in the history of the Texas revolution
and the early Republic. Though dismantled in 1865,
archival research by Texas avocational historians Greg
Dimmick, M. D. and James Woodrick resulted in findings that shed important light on the location of the
Bernardo Plantation. They reported these discoveries
to the Texas Historical Commission (THC) and the
decision was made to survey identified areas with the
agency’s magnetometer and ground-penetrating radar
instruments in the hopes of detecting buried architectural remains (Mercado-Allinger and Bruseth 2010:1).
With the consent and support of the current
landowner of the Bernardo and Pleasant Hill Plantations, Mr. Greg Brown, whose unwavering interest
and cooperation made the work reported in this article possible, the THC, together with the Community
Archaeology Research Institute (CARI) of Houston,
conducted remote sensing survey and field testing
at the archeological site of Bernardo Plantation
(41WL28) in Waller County, Texas, during August
and December 2009 and January 2010. This fieldwork resulted not only in the identification of the

location of the original Bernardo plantation home,
but important data on the location of other elements
of the plantation as well as the site of a later house
known as Pleasant Hill (41WL29). These additional
investigations are presented in Bruseth et al. (2009)
and are to be more fully reported by CARI.
The scope of this article is limited to a summary
of the archival, field, and laboratory work conducted
at the Bernardo Plantation’s main house, hereafter
referred to as the “Main House” (Figure 1), and consideration of its significance for both future work at
the site and for better elucidating this early history
of American settlement. This includes an overview
of the history of the plantation, an overview of methods and results, an accounting of the architectural
features recorded during the fieldwork, and an initial
analysis of the associated artifact assemblage. The
results of the fieldwork support the identification
of the site as the location of the Main House, help
to clarify the architectural history of the structure,
and demonstrate the high potential for additional
archeological research at the site.
As a final note, the measurements used in this
article are in standard, English feet. Although the metric system is today most commonly used by archeologists in Texas and in this journal, the reason for its not
being used in this instance is due to the fact that the
structures that make up the Bernardo site were built
using the English system of measurement. Use of this
system for archeological fieldwork provided optimum
comparability with structures and features found.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

358

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Map of Bernardo Plantation site.

Historical Background
In the spring of 1836, Bernardo was the center
of a beehive of activity as preparations were made
in anticipation of the approaching Mexican army.

Sam Houston was camped across the river with
his Texian army, training in preparation for a battle
for the freedom of Texas. Two units of cavalry
were housed in the cabins of the more than 100
slaves who had been temporarily moved to another

Bruseth, et al.—Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House 359
plantation. The steamboat Yellow Stone was tied up
at the river landing, awaiting Houston’s orders to
transport his men across the Brazos. Newly elected
Texas Secretary of War Thomas Rusk had arrived
to confer with General Houston. Men in the blacksmith shop were busy forging iron and melting lead
to make bullets for the army. Women were making
bags for sand in case of an attack and helping to
nurse sick soldiers in the temporary hospital by the
main house. This was the scene at Bernardo Plantation, then the largest in Texas, as preparations were
made for fighting what was to become known as the
Battle of San Jacinto.
Some 14 years earlier, Bernardo Plantation had
been built by Jared Ellison Groce II, a Virginian by
birth who had built a large plantation in Alabama.
He was already a wealthy planter and merchant
when he learned of Stephen F. Austin’s plans for a
new colony in Texas. He decided to move to join
Austin’s colony, and departed Alabama around the
first of November 1821, with a caravan of some
50 wagons, 100 enslaved workers, and numerous
cattle, horses, mules, and other livestock. In early
January he arrived at the Coushatta Trace crossing
of the Brazos River. Here, on the river’s east bank,
he found attractive land for farming and decided to
stake his claim. Because of his extensive assets he
was awarded 10 leagues (44,280 acres) of land by
the Mexican government, two of which were chosen
at this location on the Brazos that he named Bernardo (Berlet n.d.a; Berleth 1917). This began the
plantation economy that flourished along the lower
Brazos River for the next four decades (Lowe and
Campbell 1987:9-35).
The Coushatta Trace crossing of the Brazos
River was a natural rock ford that had been used
by Spanish colonizers of Texas for about a hundred
years and doubtlessly by Native Americans for
untold centuries before that. During low water, an
outcropping of sandstone allowed a rider to cross
without dismounting his horse. At times of higher
water, dugout canoes and crude rafts were used to
cross the river. Spaniards had used this crossing between 1746 and 1771 to locate and then to supply a
mission and presidio complex on the lower Trinity
River. In the 1780s, large herds of cattle were trailed
through here from the San Antonio River ranches to
Louisiana for use by Spanish Governor Bernardo
de Galvez1 to feed his army, who were engaged in
fighting the British along the Mississippi River during the American Revolutionary War. From 1805
onward the Coushatta Indians, then newly arrived

in Texas, used this crossing as they passed from
their villages in eastern Texas to trade at La Bahía
(Woodrick 2009).
A log cabin was promptly constructed to provide temporary shelter for Groce while his slaves
built a larger permanent residence. The main house
was completed by the end of 1822, and a complex
of cabins, overseer’s house, communal kitchen,
and day nursery for the slaves was constructed on
a small lake about 0.75 mile away. In 1825 the first
cotton gin in Austin’s colony was constructed at
Bernardo, near the slave quarters. William Wharton
Groce, son of Leonard Groce and grandson of Jared
Groce II, was born and raised in this house, and
described it as follows:
Bernardo was a large, rambling log
house. There were many expert carpenters and brick masons among the
slaves, and the house when finished was
comfortable and had not the appearance
of having been built with logs. The logs
were cottonwood hewed and counter
hewed, smooth as glass, about a foot
thick; the edges were perfectly square.
There was a broad hall fifteen feet wide,
with two large rooms on each side,
twenty by twenty feet, which made the
front of the house fifty-five feet across. A
broad porch ran the full length supported
by huge posts of solid walnut, beautifully polished. There was a broad staircase
in the hall, which led to two bedrooms
above, situated in the two gable ends.
There was an old-fashioned fireplace
in each room, built of sandstone, taken
from the Brazos River. Shingles were of
post oak, made with the drawing knife.
The floors were of ash, sawed by hand
and planed. As was the custom in those
days, the kitchen was built a few feet
away from the house. A fireplace occupied one whole end of this kitchen, on
which was done the cooking. Next to this
was the dairy, ten by twelve feet, built
of cedar. Two other rooms were in the
back yard, one for the doctor who cared
for the negroes when sick, and the other
a room thirty by thirty feet, with a rock
fireplace in each end called ‘Bachelor’s
Hall’. There were six beds in this room,
and seldom were they unoccupied by
travelers, friends and relatives (Berleth
1917:360).

360

Texas Archeological Society

Bachelor’s Hall was the original log cabin built
in early 1822. The doctor’s room is believed to be
the first physician’s residence and office in Austin’s
Colony. Other accounts indicate that a commissary
or storeroom and a small school for the Groce
children and relatives were also built among the
nearby outbuildings behind the main house (Berlet
n.d.b). A commercial ferry was established in 1836
at Groce’s landing and operated until about 1860.
Prior to 1836, Groce had provided transportation
across the river for travelers using flatboats built
to transport cotton downriver to be shipped to
markets in Mexico and New Orleans. Bernardo
was a listed stop for the steamboats that ran (river
level permitting) between Washington-on-the
Brazos and Velasco from approximately 1840 to
1860. Bernardo enjoyed some 40 years as the most
extensive plantation in Texas. The main house was
torn down in 1865 and the logs and chimney stones
were removed to be reused on a nearby plantation,
Bonnie Nook.
Sketches of Bernardo Plantation were made by
Sarah Groce Berlet (n.d.b) in the years around 1930.
Berlet, an avid Texas historian, was the daughter of
William Wharton Groce, grandson of Jared Groce II.
Figure 2 is a map of the Bernardo Plantation showing the main house, outbuildings, enslaved worker’s
quarters, and cotton fields. Figure 3 is a plan sketch
of the main house, showing the layout of the downstairs rooms, each with a fireplace (Berlet n.d.b).
Both sketches provide important clues of what is to
be expected archeologically at the site.
Remote Sensing Survey
Remote sensing surveys were conducted at Bernardo Plantation (41WL28) in August 2009. Two
types of remote sensing were conducted: magnetic
survey and ground-penetrating radar (GPR). The
magnetometer was used to conduct the magnetic
survey of an area of about five acres, consisting of
the higher elevations of a terrace knoll where local
informants thought the main plantation house had
been located (see Figure 1). Once the magnetic survey
was completed, the GPR was used to provide further
remote sensing detail on specific magnetic anomalies.
Magnetic Survey
The magnetic survey was conducted with a
hand-pulled aluminum cart holding two Geometrics

cesium sensors (Figure 4). The sensors were mounted on the axle of the cart and spaced 50 cm apart and
25 cm above the ground. The cart was pulled by an
operator carrying a Geometrics G-858 data-logger
console attached by cable to the sensors on the cart.
This resulted in two rows of readings, 50 cm apart,
being collected at 10 cm intervals, for a density of
about 20 readings per m2.
The area to be surveyed was laid out in a general
north-south by east-west grid of 10 m quadrants,
and the overall grid size was entered into the console attached to the cart. Magnetic data were then
collected by pulling the cart along the north axis of
the grid. Plastic traffic cones were placed at 20 m
intervals along the survey transects to serve as fiducial marks, or known points on the grid to track the
position of the magnetometer. To record when the
sensors crossed a known grid point, a small plastic
flapper was placed on the cart axle to flap when it
encountered a cone, providing a visual and auditory
marker for the operator, who registered the point
with a switch connected to the console.
A base station was placed away from the survey
area, where it was unaffected by intrusive sources of
magnetism such as passing cars or the movements
of people. The console was set to the “base station”
mode and continuously collected data for eventual
downloading and diurnal correction of the moving
sensors’ data.
The data collected by the mobile magnetometer
and the base station were downloaded using Geometrics Magmap 2000, Version 4. This program
retrieves the data from the consoles and allows processing to remove dropouts, eliminate value spikes,
and make corrections for diurnal fluctuations in the
earth’s magnetic field. The program also contains
a de-stripping algorithm to remove heading errors
potentially introduced with bidirectional surveys.
After processing in Magmap 2000, the magnetic
data were exported into Surfer, Version 8 for contouring into two-dimensional spatial maps (Golden
Software, Inc. 2003). A Kriging gridding algorithm
was employed and the final maps were produced
using the Shaded Relief Map options, and in one
instance the Surface option. These map options were
used instead of line-contour or color maps, since the
human eye can more readily observe subtle changes
in shades of gray than from multitudes of contour
lines or highly varying colors.
The result of the magnetic survey search for the
Main House is shown in Figure 5a. The map shows a
very complex magnetic image for much of the area,

Bruseth, et al.—Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House 361

Figure 2. Drawing of Bernardo by Sarah Berlet in the 1930s. Austin Colony Old 300, Col. Jared Ellison Groce II
Genealogical Report “Forefathers & Descendants,” Brazoria County Historical Museum.

362

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Drawing of the Bernardo Main House by Sarah Berlet in the 1930s. Austin Colony Old 300, Col. Jared Ellison
Groce II Genealogical Report “Forefathers & Descendants,” Brazoria County Historical Museum.

Bruseth, et al.—Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House 363

Figure 4. Texas Historical Commission magnetometer survey.

especially to the northeastern part of the map. The
uniformly light gray-shaded areas on Figure 5a-b
represent unsurveyed zones. Within the surveyed
area, the shades of gray range from nearly white
to almost black and reflect the relative magnetic
intensity of the soil with black being the highest.
Most of the anomalies on the map, especially those
that represent dipoles with a low intensity or light
gray area immediately adjacent to a high intensity or
dark gray area, represent individual ferrous artifacts.
The magnetic anomalies of most archeological
interest are labeled on the magnetometer map (see
Figure 5b). The area labeled “Cistern” is the magnetic signature of the remains of the cistern, observable
on the site surface today as a shallow depression
about 15 ft. in diameter and three ft. deep. The highest intensity magnetic levels of any part of the site
are registered here. The cistern is almost certainly
filled with a great quantity of ferrous artifacts, many
of which were likely deposited into the cistern after
the cessation of its use for water storage, sometime
after 1865 when the house was dismantled.
Another possible cistern is shown on Figure 5b
(denoted “Cistern?”). This feature has a very similar

magnetic signature to the other cistern, but is less
magnetically intense and smaller in diameter. Our
suggestion that it represents a cistern is simply an
educated guess, as it could represent a large ferrous
object in the ground or even an intensely burned area.
Possible wall alignments are present in the magnetic map (see Figure 5a-b). The most prominent is
a rectangle, measuring about 46 ft. northeast-southwest by 52 ft. northwest-southeast, located to the
southwest of the cistern, and labeled “Structure 1”
on Figure 5b. Another portion of a possible structure
is located to the northeast and is labeled “Structure
2.” Other features shown on the magnetometer map
include parts of roads and a linear feature extending
to the southeast from Structure 1, labeled as “Walkway?” on Figure 5b.
Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) Survey
GPR data are acquired by transmitting pulses
of radar energy into the ground from a surface antenna. These pulses are reflected off buried objects,
features, or bedding planes and then detected back
at the ground surface with a receiving antenna.

364

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

Figure 5. Magnetometer map of the Bernardo Main House area: a, base magnetic map; note: the uniformly light
gray shaded areas on the north and south edges represent zones not surveyed; b, base magnetic map with annotations
suggesting interpretation of key features.

The greater the contrast in electrical, magnetic,
and physical properties between two materials at
a buried interface, the stronger the reflected signal
will be, and therefore the greater the amplitude of
reflected waves. When collecting radar reflection
data, the surveyor moves surface radar antennas
along the ground in transects within surveyed grids.
The resulting series of reflections from each transect
are then plotted, resulting in the creation of a twodimensional profile, which is a representation of a
vertical face along that transect (Figure 6).
The success of GPR surveys in archeology is
largely dependent on soil and sediment mineralogy;
ground moisture; depth of burial of artifacts and
features; and surface topography and vegetation.
Additionally, electrically conductive or highly
magnetic materials in the ground will quickly

dissipate radar energy and prevent its transmission
to depth. Surface conditions at Bernardo Plantation
were a complicating factor for the GPR survey. Gopher burrows, ant mounds, a hummocky surface,
and tall grass prevented the collection of clean
radar profiles in many cases. The best conditions
for energy propagation are usually relatively dry
sediments and soils. The sediment at the Bernardo
Plantation, however, was extremely dry, with little
moisture to optimally differentiate features from
the surrounding matrix.
When reflections from buried objects are
viewed in two dimensions they often appear as hyperbolic reflections. These reflections are produced
from buried “point sources” such as pipes or large
rocks as opposed to planar surfaces such as buried
pathways or floors. The wide angle or “footprint”

Bruseth, et al.—Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House 365

Figure 6. Example of GPR profile showing a “ringing” hyperbolic reflection from a buried point source and an undulating
subsoil (meters increase to the south).

of the radar beam causes the antenna to “see” the
object as it moves toward it and continues to “see”
it as it moves away from the buried object, resulting in a hyperbolic reflection along the transect (see
Figure 6).
The GPR system used for the project was a Geophysical Survey Systems Inc. Subsurface Interface
Radar 3000 model. The GPR antenna used for the
survey was a dual 400 MHz antenna that produces
a radar pulse of about 25 cm in wavelength. Several
GPR grids were surveyed at Bernardo Plantation
(Bruseth et al. 2009), but only the one placed southwest of the cistern is discussed here as it directly
relates to the search for the plantation’s Main House.
The resulting data is very noisy and shows a
number of gopher burrows and non-archeological
features. However, the area has two primary features of interest, noted as oval anomalies in Figure
7. Evidence about the origin of these features can
be gained by overlaying the GPR data for this area
with the magnetic map. On the GPR map the two
significant anomalies appear along the east and west
walls of the rectangular feature (Structure 1) observed on the magnetic map (see Figure 5b). These
features were probed with a metal chaining pin,
found to be made up of bricks, and almost certainly
were the bases of brick chimneys. They are labeled
“Possible brick chimney foundations” on Figure
7. The position of the features is directly over the
east and west sides, respectively, of the rectangular
magnetic anomaly.

Model for Archeological
Testing
Using the information obtained from the remote
sensing surveys and combined with the archival
documentation, a model can be developed of what
might be expected archeologically. Important clues
about what the rectangular alignment (Structure
1) represented comes from the sketch of Bernardo
Plantation by Berlet (see Figure 3). This image is
of the Bernardo Main House and associated outbuildings and provides important details about the
size and layout of the structure. The Main House is
estimated, based on information given by Berleth
(1917:360), to have been 40 x 55 ft.—close to the
46 x 52 ft. size of Structure 1 on the magnetic map.
Berlet’s house floor plan shows that the outbuildings and major site activity areas are behind
and to the west of the Main House, according to
her cardinal directions. The magnetic map of the
site clearly shows that major outside activity areas
occurred to the north and east of the rectangular
Structure 1, thought to be the Main House (see Figure 5a-b), supporting Berlet’s drawing. Therefore,
to fully reconcile Berlet’s map with the rectangular
structure feature, her image has to be rotated clockwise 65 degrees to the east. Overlaying the GPR
map and the rectangular magnetic map over the
Berlet floor plan shows an overall close relationship among the GPR chimneys, Structure 1, and the
house floor plan. Most notably, the chimney bases

366

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Surface relief magnetic map of a portion of the Bernardo Main House overlain with the GPR color map; note
possible brick fireplace foundations and house layout drawn by Sarah Berlet.

found by the GPR are situated about where two of
the four chimneys are shown on Berlet’s map (see
Figure 7). Structure 1 looks to be a good candidate
for the plantation’s Main House. Moreover, this
orientation for the Main House places the structure
pointing southeast, an optimum direction for taking
advantage of the prevailing summer winds.

Such an orientation for the Main House at Bernardo also makes sense from the standpoint that in
the 1820s when the structure was built, the main
focus of interest would have been the Brazos River,
particularly the river crossing, the ferry landing, and
the roads leading to and from these river features. It
seems quite possible that in 1822 the Main House of

Bruseth, et al.—Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House 367
Bernardo would have been built facing to the southeast to catch the summer breezes and to monitor
activity along the road leading to the river crossing
and ferry landing.
One last feature on the magnetic map of the
Bernardo site is a linear area of higher magnetism
that starts at the southern end of Structure 1 and extends to the south. This has the appearance of being
a walkway, perhaps made of brick. Berlet (n.d.b)
describes such a walkway leading from the Main
House to a road that ran in front of the structure.

a

c

Archeological Testing
Using the results of the remote sensing and
archival research, field testing of anomalies was
conducted in December 2009 and January 2010.
Thirty-five 3 x 3 ft. units were placed over portions
of the rectangular magnetic anomaly, proposed to
be the walls of the Main House (Figure 8a).2 For
purposes of discussion, the units are lumped into
four analytical groups.
Group I consists of 18 units placed over and

b

d

Figure 8. Close-up of magnetometer map at the Main House area: a, Berlet Map and site excavation units (hachured
squares); b, Berlet map of the Main House layout; c, site topography; d, excavation unit groupings.

368

Texas Archeological Society

next to five sandstone blocks partially visible on
the surface and immediately adjacent to the cistern
(Figure 8d). Originally, these blocks were thought
to be part of the cistern, but were noticed to only
be present on the western side of the cistern and in
straight alignment. Excavation, however, showed
clearly that they formed the base of a sandstone
chimney labeled Feature 1 (Figure 9). Today, some
of the sandstone blocks are slightly askew. Adjusting
for this, the base of the chimney would have been
about 6 ft. square. The sandstone is tan in color and
is the same as the rock that outcrops at the Coushatta Trace crossing of the Brazos River, 0.5 miles to
the west (see Figure 1). The blocks on the western
house interior are reddened from contact with fire
from use of the chimney. Ashy soil and sandstone
rubble occur between the blocks of the chimney.
Probing under the blocks indicated another course
of sandstone blocks is present.
Group II consists of eight units placed over the
largest and easternmost GPR anomaly, thought to
be a brick fireplace foundation (see Figures 7 and
8d). Excavation confirmed that the base of a brick
chimney, Feature 2, is present below the ground

Figure 9. Feature 1, the base of a sandstone fireplace.

surface, measuring 5.4 ft. square (Figure 10). The
bricks are hand-made, most likely manufactured
locally on the plantation. The base consists of brick
step-outs on three sides: five courses of step-outs on
the eastern side and two courses on the north and
south sides. No brick step-outs were noticed on the
western edge of the chimney base. Their absence is
tentatively noted since excavations on what would
have been the interior face of the chimney were
limited, and their absence may be a factor of limited investigations, interior architectural design, or
perhaps a result of salvaging bricks when the Main
House was dismantled. The step-outs are similar
to ones noted at the Lake Jackson Plantation (Few
1999:500-501) and Levi Jordan Plantation House by
Leezer (2006:81-82) and would have added stability
to the chimney base. There is also a single layer of
bricks from possible walkways on the northeast and
southeast corners of the chimney base.
A linear brick feature (Feature 3), consisting
of a double row of bricks, was found between
Features 1 and 2 and extends to the north and
south beyond each feature. This represents a brick
skirting that covered a crawl space under the Main

Bruseth, et al.—Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House 369

Figure 10. Feature 2, the base of a brick fireplace.

House. Only two to three courses of bricks remain
today from this skirting. The outline corresponds
closely with the rectangular magnetic alignment,
Structure 1, shown in Figure 5a-b. Because the
bricks are slightly magnetic from firing, they appeared as a clearly distinguishable anomaly during
the magnetometer survey.
Group III units (see Figure 8d) represent an
effort to find the brick skirting (Feature 3) on the
western edge of the house in order to clearly define
the size and orientation of the house. Using the
magnetic map of the site as a guide, three units
were placed across the area where the brick skirting
should be present. It was found where predicted,
and this brick skirting is similar in overall dimension to the skirting on the eastern side of the house.
However, the bricks in this part of the skirting are
placed in a single row and side-by-side to form the
wall (Figure 11), unlike the skirting on the eastern
side, where the bricks were placed in a double row,
end-to-end. A post hole measuring 1 ft. in diameter
was found just to the east of the wall. Its purpose
is unknown, but it may represent the location of a
foundation pier for the house. The brick skirting

would not have been a weight-bearing feature but a
decorative one, to conceal the crawl space under the
structure, and foundation piers, probably of brick,
stone, or wood, would have been used for support
of the house.
Group IV units were placed to the north of the
cistern to investigate an area suspected of being the
location of the kitchen (see Figure 8d). These three
units were excavated and uncovered a dense mass
of broken bricks, many in a friable condition from
intense burning. More excavation is needed to confirm this area as the kitchen, however.
Artifacts
A total of 7,113 artifacts was found during the
excavations. They are divided into functional categories in Table 1.3 Numerically, architectural items are
the most common. Of this category, window glass is
most frequent, accounting for more than 36 percent
of all the artifacts from the site. The high frequency
of this material is no doubt due to the concentration
of units along the walls of the Main House.

370

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Artifacts from the Bernardo Main House.

Functional Category
Architecture

Artifact

Count

Total

Brick, glazed
155
Brick, plain
256
escutcheon
1
Mortar
12
Nail, common cut
1,274
Nail, forged
1
Nail, framing
112
Nail, unidentified
545
Nail, wire
6
Plaster
70
Spike
2
Staple
6
Tack
2
Whitewash
2
Window pane
2,556
Yellow tile
1
Total Architecture
		
5,001
			
Arms
		
Rifle cartridge
2
shotgun case
1
Lead sprue
1
Buckshot
1
Total Arms
		
5
			
Clothing
		
Button cover
1
Button, brass
1
Button, milk glass
5
Button, shell
1
Iron buckle
5
Total Clothing
		
13
			
Dietary
			
Bone
99		
Oyster shell
14		
Egg shell
6		
Total Dietary
		
119
				
Economic
			
Coin 1888
1		
Total Economic
		
1
				
Education
			
Slate
3		
Total Education
		
3
				

Bruseth, et al.—Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House 371
Table 1. (Continued)
Functional Category

Artifact

Count

Total

			
Clinker
43		
Total Fuel
		
43
				
Household Furnishing
			
Figurine
1		
Lamp reservoir
1		
Lamp chimney
104		
Terracotta
2		
Total Household Furnishing		
108
				
Kitchen
			
20th century glass
18		
Amber glass
43		
Black transfer print
3		
Blue edge molded
2		
Blue transfer print
3		
Clear embossed glass
1		
Clear glass bottle
155		
Clear pressed
1
Flow blue
1
Green edge molded
1
Green glass
85
Green glass lip
1
Porcelain, plain
3		
Stoneware
8		
Yellowware Bennington
1		
Yellowware, plain
1		
Total Kitchen
		
327
				
Misc./Unidentified
			
Calcareous cylinder
1		
Melted glass
446		
Unidentified
1		
Brass hat shaped cap
1		
Plate iron (Stove?)
12		
Iron sheet (Tin cans?)
953		
Total Misc/Unidentified
		
1,414
				
Personal
			
Bone fan blade
1		
Total Personal
		
1
				
Recreation
			
Porcelain miniature bowl
2		
Porcelain miniature handle
1		

Fuel

Texas Archeological Society

372

Table 1. (Continued)
Functional Category

Artifact

Count

Total

Porcelain miniature saucer
1		
Porcelain miniature teapot
1		
Marble
1		
Total Recreation
		
6
				

Recreation, continued

Tobacco
Total Tobacco

			
Snuff bottle
1		
Kaolin pipe stem
2		
		
3

			
Brass sheet
5		
Brass washer
1		
Clevis
1		
Copper clip
1		
Copper wire
1		
File
1		
Iron Bar
4		
Latch hook
1		
Screw
9		
Strap
3		
Strap hinge
2		
Wire
12		
Total Tools
		
41
				
Transportation
			
Wagon box strap
1		
Total Transportation
		
1
				
Prehistoric
			
Lithic
19		
Ceramic
8		
Total prehistoric
		
27

Tools

Total Artifacts			

The next most frequent architectural item is
nails (Figure 12a). Most are common cut nails including sheathing, flooring, and shingle nails (John
Clark, personal communication, 2010). A number of
framing nails were also recovered.
Several hundred brick fragments were excavated and are ubiquitous across much of the tested
portions of the Main House. All of the bricks were

7,113

hand-made, likely from the plantation’s brick kiln.
A number of fragments have glazing on one or more
sides and may represent bricks that were part of the
chimney firebox in contact with fire.
Other architectural items include plaster, most
with whitewash on one side, from the interior treatment of the walls of the structure, mortar used to
cement bricks together, iron fasteners such as spikes,

Bruseth, et al.—Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House 373

Figure 11. Feature 3, the brick skirting on the western side of the Main House, and the darkly-stained post hole just
east of the skirting.

staples (probably post dating Bernardo), tacks, and
a yellow tile fragment.
Five arms-related objects were found. Three
rifle cartridges are modern center-fire and a shotgun
case is also modern. Lead sprue and buckshot may
be from the 19th century occupation of Bernardo,
but this association has not been established. Thirteen clothing items were found: eight buttons and
five buckles.
Several artifacts are the remains of food
resources, food preparation, and food service activities. These include 99 pieces of bone, most from
large mammals (likely cow), oyster shells, and egg
shells. Kitchen and food service items (n=414) represent iron stove parts, iron sheet metal (possible
tin can) fragments, bottles and jars, table glass, and
ceramics. Eighteen pieces of modern bottle glass
were found, but the remainder of the glass likely
dates to the occupation of the Bernardo Plantation.
The 28 ceramic sherd total is a remarkably small

number when one considers the intense and long occupation of the Main House. Broken ceramics must
have been discarded in a nearby trash dump that has
yet to be found. Plain pearlware is the most common
ceramic type, followed by stoneware and porcelain
(see Figure 12b-d). Five miniature porcelain pieces
represent a toy tea set (see Figure 12e).
Other artifacts recovered in the excavations
include a bone fan blade, pieces of a snuff bottle,
part of two “churchwarden type” kaolin smoking pipes (John Clark, personal communication,
2010), a wagon box strap, and melted glass from
apparent burning of the Main House after it had
been dismantled. Only one coin was found, a U.S.
nickel dating to 1888 (see Figure 12f); obviously
this was lost at the site after the occupation of the
Main House. Three pieces of slate are likely parts
of writing tablets related to educating the plantation owner’s grandchildren. The clinkers are from
burning activity in the chimney fireboxes. Artifacts

374

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

c

d

e

f
Figure 12. Artifacts from Bernardo Plantation, Main House: a, nails; b, blue enamel pearlware ceramic; c hand-painted
pearlware ceramic; d, Bennington yellowware; e, figurine; f, 1888 U.S. Liberty Head V Nickel Coin.

Bruseth, et al.—Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House 375
related to household furnishings include a ceramic
figurine, lamp chimney glass (n=104 sherds), one
piece from a kerosene lamp, and two pieces of terracotta of unknown function.
Likely predating the occupation of Bernardo
are 19 prehistoric lithic flakes and eight ceramic
sherds from Native American occupations. These
types of materials are common along the terraces
of the Brazos River and reflect thousands of years
of prehistoric use of the area.
Conclusions
The remote sensing survey and test excavations
were successful in finding the exact location of the
Main House at Bernardo Plantation. The magnetic
survey was effective in isolating the most promising part of about a five acre area. GPR survey was
conducted on an area suspected of being the location
of a structure and was successful in identifying two
dense subsurface anomalies that aligned with the
east and west walls of a structure observed in the
magnetic map. Subsequent testing showed that the
GPR had detected the foundations of brick chimney
bases present under the soil. Further testing located
two sandstone chimney bases to the north of the
brick features. A brick wall skirting was found to
connect the chimneys and enclosed the crawl space
under the structure.
Comparing excavation results to the plan of
the Bernardo Main House based on Berlet (n.d.a),
a close correspondence is seen in the overall size
of the structure and the location of the chimneys
on the northeastern side of the house (see Figure
8b). This close correspondence demonstrates that
the Main House has been located, and thus its location provides an approximate guide to where other
outbuildings associated with the Main House should
be located.
The testing recovered many artifacts associated
with the Main House. They reflect a variety of activities related to the structure, including materials
used in the construction of the building and items
lost during domestic use of the structure’s rooms.
Aside from a small number of artifacts that clearly
pre- or post-date the occupation of the plantation,
the vast majority of the recovered items is consistent with an occupation from 1822 to 1865. This
shows that future work at the site should continue to
recover objects reflecting occupation at Texas’ first
antebellum plantation.

Work at the Main House offers important
additional details about the construction of the
structure. According to Berleth (1917:360), Bernardo
was constructed as a four-pen structure with four
sandstone chimneys. The archeological record
provides a different interpretation. The original
structure was a double pen building, almost certainly
of logs with two sandstone chimneys and a central
breezeway. There would have been two rooms
upstairs. This would have been the type of building
that Groce could construct in what was in reality the
wilderness of early 19th century Texas. Sometime,
perhaps as early as the mid-1830s, based on the larger
number of square cut nails, the original double pen
was enlarged into a four-pen building with a central
breezeway. This addition was built of sawn lumber,
based on the large number of cut nails. Sawn lumber
encased the original log structure, again based on the
presence of cut sheathing nails. At this time, a brick
kiln was evidently operating at the plantation, and
two brick chimneys were added to the two new rooms
and a brick skirting was placed to enclose the crawl
space under the house. We cannot tell if all of the
improvements were made at one time or took place
over a period of time. The addition of the two rooms,
though, would have had to occur simultaneously
with the building of the brick chimneys. The reason
for this is that the walls would have to be built with
structural cut-outs to accommodate the fireplaces. An
important clue about the date of the addition comes
from a recently found new drawing by Berlet (n.d.b)
of the layout of the Main House with a marginal
note: “additions and improvements were added in
1836 [this date is unclear and may be 1838] after the
marriage of Leonard Waller Groce.”
Finally, the artifacts from the site support the
archival evidence that the Main House was built in
the 1820s and dismantled in 1865. Useable materials
were salvaged to build a new plantation home to the
south, called Bonnie Nook.
Endnotes
1. For whom Bernardo Plantation was named.
2. The units described in this article are those excavated
under the direction of the THC. Additional units, not reported here, have been excavated by the CARI and will
be reported on separately.
3. The artifacts described in this article are those excavated under the direction of the THC. Additional artifacts,
not reported here, have been recovered by the CARI and
will be reported on separately.

376

Texas Archeological Society
Acknowledgements

A great number of people have helped make
the fieldwork conducted at Bernardo and Pleasant
Hill Plantations successful. First and foremost, we
cannot thank enough Greg Brown, the owner of the
ranch with the sites, for his willingness to allow
the field archeological investigations. Mr. Brown
has shown constant and wonderful support for, and
interest in, the archeological and historical work
being conducted on his ranch.
Gregg Dimmick, M.D. and James Woodrick
are thanked for their great efforts to identify the
location of Bernardo and Pleasant Hill Plantations
and to make the arrangements for the fieldwork. In
addition, Mr. Woodrick’s archival work has been
invaluable for the archeological fieldwork. Thanks
are also due to Dr. Carol McDavid and Robert Marcom for helping with the archeological work and for
agreeing to take on future work at the site.
Generous financial contributions were received
from several people and one organization to help
make the project a success. These include Al Davis,
Sue Gross, Jim Woodrick, and the Houston Endowment Inc.
Carlos Cotton and Marty Hicks of Cotton
Surveying Company set highly accurate GPS data
across the sites that enabled fieldwork to be conducted on a UTM grid. The benefits of this are great
and will allow the project to have a single, precise
grid for all fieldwork.
Charlie Gordy is commended for his great efforts to coordinate the volunteers affiliated with the
THC’s Texas Archeological Stewardship Network
as well as members of the Brazosport, Fort Bend,
Houston, and Texas archeological societies that
came to the site each day. His efforts enabled us to
always have enough workers to help with remote
sensing, survey work, and excavations.
Finally, thanks are due to the many volunteers
that visited the project and contributed to its success: Sandy Arrant, Louis Aubach, Beth Aucoin,
Pat Aucoin, Karl Baumgartner, Kevin Bradley,
Denton Bryant, Naomi Carrier, Kay Choate,
Stephanie Cole, Glen Collins, Tracy Connell, John
Crain, Bob Crosser, Katherine Cummins, Leslie
Cummins, Light Cummins, Raymond Cruz, Gregg
Dimmick, Sharon Ferguson, Dick Gregg, Linda
Gorski, Sue Gross, John Harris, Geneva Highlander,
Steven Highlander, Tamzin Howerton, Debbi Head,
Randy Hert, Kathleen Hughes, Gina Isley, Melanie
Johnson, Mike Johnston, Fred Kelly, Don Keyes,

Sheldon Kendall, Doug Kubicek, Clint Lacy, Ruth
Marcom, John Meredith, Cecil Jones, Carol McDavid, Tom Nuckols, Sabrina Ong, Sharon Menegaz,
Suzanne Patrick, Lloyd Prince, Lenore Psencik,
Rick Range, John Rich, Juan Reyes, Sandy Rogers,
Gary Ryman, Orville Shelburn, Bob Sewell, Mike
Siviglia, James Smith, Charles Snider, Bob Rhea
Wallace, Ward, Derry Webb, Tom Williams, and
Jim Woodrick.
References Cited
Berleth, R. G.
1917 Jared Ellison Groce. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 20 (No. 4):358-368.
Bertlet, R. G.
n.d.a “Groce and Kindred Families.” Unpublished manuscript in the Briscoe Center for American History,
Archival Box 2Q428, and at Texas State Library and
Archives, Box 2-23/747, Austin.
n.d.b Sarah Berlet Sketches in the “Austin Colony, Old
300, Col. Jared Ellison Groce II Genealogical Report, Forefathers & Descendants,” Brazoria County
Museum Library, Angleton.
Bruseth, J., T. Osburn, B. Pierson, P. Mercado-Allinger, and
J. Durst
2009 2009 Archeological Fieldwork at the Bernardo and
Pleasant Hill Plantation Sites. Unpublished manuscript on file at the Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Few, J.
1999 Lake Jackson State Archeological Landmark
(41BO172): Report of the 1994 and 1995 Texas
Archeological Society Field Schools and Additional
1996-1998 Excavations. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 70:489-510.
Golden Software, Inc.
2003 Surfer 8 User’s Guide: Contouring and 3D Surface
Mapping for Scientists and Engineers. Golden Software, Inc., Golden, Colorado.
Leezer, C.
2006 Archaeological Investigations at the Levi Jordan
Plantation State Historic Site, Brazoria County,
Texas. Archaeological Studies Report No. 7. Center
for Archaeological Studies, Texas State UniversitySan Marcos.
Lowe, R. G. and R. B. Campbell
1987 Planters and Plain Folk, Agriculture in Antebellum
Texas. Southern Methodist University Press, Dallas.

Bruseth, et al.—Remote Sensing and Archeological Testing at the Bernardo Plantation’s Main House 377
Mercado-Allinger, P. and J. Bruseth
2010 Collaboration for Discovery: Bernardo and Pleasant
Hill Plantations, Waller County. Current Archeology
in Texas 12(1):1-4.

Woodrick, J. V.
2009 Bernardo: Crossroads, Social Center and Agricultural
Showcase of Early Texas. Unpublished manuscript
on file at the Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Archeological Activities at 41AU82, Houston’s
“Camp West of Brazos”
James Woodrick
Abstract
The site where Sam Houston and his Texian army camped from March 31 to April 13, 1836, has been known
for years. Over nearly a century a large collection of artifacts from this site has been assembled, first by surface collection and, since 1989, by the use of metal detectors. Most of the known artifacts from this site are
lead bullets and fragments from the bullet molding process. Also present are other items believed related to
the Texian army, including gunflints, uniform buttons, an 1829 penny, and ceramic sherds. This site is unique
in that these artifacts are solely related to the Texian army of 1836. Other sites such as the Alamo and San
Jacinto also contain Texian artifacts mixed with those of the Mexican army. The wide variety of sizes of bullets found here confirms historical accounts that indicated that numerous types of firearms were used by this
largely volunteer army.

Introduction
Collecting artifacts from the site where Sam
Houston and his Texian army camped from March
31 to April 13, 1836, began around 1915 when a
local resident and history buff started routinely
walking the site, collecting artifacts exposed on the
surface of a cultivated field. This activity continued
until about 1955 when cultivation ceased and the
field was converted to a cattle pasture. In 1989, a
group of avocational archeologists from the Houston
Archeological Society led a survey of the site using metal detectors. During a two-day search they
discovered a sufficient number of period artifacts
to positively identify this location as the Houston
camp. The site was recorded as 41AU82.
In 2009 two avocational archeologists with a
passion for Texas history, Gregg Dimmick and the
author, were involved in the initial evaluation and
founding of the Bernardo Archaeological Project
(http://wiki.bernardoplantation.org/), an investigation of the first and largest plantation in early
Texas. Aware that the Houston army camp “West
of the Brazos” was located just across the river
from Bernardo, as well as the earlier archeological
work at the Houston camp, they decided to contact
the landowner and request permission to conduct a
limited reexamination of the site to determine if any
significant artifacts remained that could be located
with higher sensitivity modern metal detectors.

Permission was secured, the site was visited by
Texas Historical Commission (THC) personnel,
surveyors established datum points, and on October
11, 2009, 24 individuals participated in a day-long
archeological project at the site. The purpose of
this article is to present the history of the site, its
fascinating role in Texas history, and its associated
artifacts found during the work to a broad audience
of archeological enthusiasts.
Site History
The site is located approximately four miles
south of Hempstead on the west bank of the Brazos River, about 1.5 direct miles downstream of
the Hwy. 159 bridge. A unique geological feature
forms the basis for centuries-long human use at
this place. An outcropping of sandstone in the river
nearby forms a natural low-water ford (Figure 1)
across which one can walk nearly the entire width
of the river, having only to enter shallow water for
a brief distance to complete the crossing. Used by
Native Americans for centuries, this site provided
the best ford on the lower Brazos, and was a focal
point for hunting and trade trails. The trail heading
west emerges from the ford out of the river floodplain and along the southern edge of an oxbow lake
(Stone Lake) on a ridge some 5-10 feet higher than
the surrounding land. The Houston camp is located

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

380

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Topographical Map Showing Approximate Location of 41AU82.

on this ridge of elevated ground adjacent to the road,
about 1 mile from the ford.
The first recorded description of this area on the
lower Brazos was in 1746 by a group of Spaniards
led by Joaquín de Orobio Basterra, captain of the
La Bahía presidio (then on the Guadalupe River
north of Victoria). His mission was to explore the
region that was at that time virtually unknown to the
Spanish to investigate reports that French traders
were operating among the Akokisa Indians on the
lower Trinity River. On his return from the Akokisa
villages, Orobio selected a new, more direct route
nearly due west from the San Jacinto River at modern Atascosito to intersect the La Bahía road some 2
miles northeast of modern Round Top, from which
point he returned along this well known road to his
presidio. This route became the Orcoquisac road
used by the Spanish to supply the presidio and mission of that name on the lower Trinity from 1756 to
1771. Marquis de Rubí used the route in 1768 on his
military inspection tour of Spain’s northern frontier.
Accompanying Rubí was an engineer named Nicolas de Lafora. Both men left diaries describing their
trip past this location, noting that some 10 miles east

of the Brazos at this point was the location selected
(but never materialized) for Santa Rosa del Alcazar,
a large military and civilian complex planned to reinforce Spanish hegemony on the upper Texas coast
(Woodrick 2007:19-41).
During the 1780s large herds of Spanish cattle
from the San Antonio River region were trailed to
Louisiana for use by Governor Bernardo de Galvez
to feed his army then engaged along the lower Mississippi River in fighting the British in the American
Revolution. No records are known that describe the
exact route used for these cattle drives, but the most
likely route would have been along the well-known
Orcoquisac road.
A large contingent of the Coushatta Indian tribe
migrated from Louisiana to Texas in 1805, joining
a few of their tribe who had earlier made this move.
They promptly established a route connecting their
villages along the middle Trinity River to La Bahia,
where they visited to trade. Their route, called the
Coushatta Trace, crossed the Brazos at the same ford
utilized on the Orcoquisac road (Figure 2). Both
the Orcoquisac road and the Coushatta trace passed
directly over the later location of 41AU82.

Woodrick—Archeological Activities at 41AU82, Houston’s “Camp West of Brazos”

381

Figure 2. Map Showing Roads Prior to 1821.

More frequent use of the area began in 1822
with the arrival of immigrants from the United
States that were responding to Steven F. Austin’s
first colonization grant. In January 1822, Jared Ellison Groce II selected the land on the east bank of
the Brazos River at the crossing of the Coushatta
Trace to settle and establish a plantation he named
Bernardo. The years 1822 and 1823 were very
dry, and Groce utilized the moist lakebed of Stone
Lake adjacent to 41AU82 to successfully plant
and harvest the first corn crop in Austin’s Colony.
Between 1823 and 1836, Groce used his flatboats,
built to transport cotton, as a ferry to move travelers across the river during periods of higher water
when the ford could not be utilized. He gave
400 acres of the land immediately southwest of
41AU82 to Julia Bracey (his niece) in 1835. She
and her husband McLin Bracey settled here in late
1836 and established a commercial ferry near the

site which operated until about 1858 (Woodrick
2007:105, 2010a).
Sam Houston and the Texian army had departed
San Felipe on March 28, 1836, after ordering all
buildings in that village burned so they could not be
utilized by the enemy. On March 30, they arrived at
the edge of the Brazos River woods at a plantation
near the modern community of Cochran owned by
Pamela Foster, a sister-in-law of Jared Groce. By the
next evening the Coushatta Trace had been widened
through the woods and an elevated ridge next to
the road on Groce property (originally the Wm. C.
White grant) was cleared of saplings in preparation
for the army, which arrived that afternoon to set up
camp (Zuber 1971:71-77). Here they remained for
two weeks, during which Houston provided some
sorely-needed training for his army. Most historians
believe that around 900 men were at this camp for
the two week training period.

382

Texas Archeological Society

The accounts of several individuals at the
41AU82 training camp leave a vivid impression
of that period. Dr. Nicholas Labadie found that the
new camp was pitched “near a deep ravine, which
had the appearance of having once been the bed of
the river, and which miserable hole was our hidingplace for about two weeks… While our army lay
thus encamped in the Brazos Swamp, using stagnant
water from the old bed of the river, a great deal of
sickness prevailed among the men, which caused
serious alarm...” (Day 1967:148-151). Labadie was
appointed a surgeon when the Medical Corps was
established on April 6. He was placed in charge of
a medicine chest at the camp, and twice crossed the
river to visit the hospital that had been established
by Groce’s house (Day 1967:148-151).
According to George Hockley, the new permanent encampment was:
in a secure and effective position with
excellent water from a lake immediately
ahead, and one of the most beautiful parts
of the timber of the Brazos River which
is ahead about ¾ of a mile off in the road
leading to Col. Groce’s ferry. The weather
for the last four days has been wet, and
the men have undergone great fatigue
from that circumstance and the road being in many places almost impassable for
our wagons—so as soon as they can wash
their clothing and arrange their arms an
entire organization of camp duty & discipline will be established… The troops
are in good health… P.S. a few cases of
measles have been reported and a Hospital has been established on the other side
of the Brasos and the men sent over to it
(Jenkins 1973:286).

After Hockley’s letter, health conditions deteriorated. Joseph Kuykendall wrote:
Early in the evening (after marching 7 or
8 miles) the army encamped at Bracey’s,
near the edge of the Brazos bottom, and
March 31st, sufficient space having been
cleared in the bottom, near the margin of
a large pond, we pitched our tents there.
During the 12 or 13 days we remained
in the bottom, it rained almost daily, in
consequence of which our camp became
extremely muddy and disagreeable. This
added greatly to the discomfort of the
sick, of whom there were many—nearly

every tenth man, myself included, had the
measles (Barker 1901:301).

Private George Erath wrote:
Their supplies were beef principally,
scant of salt, an ear of corn for a man a
day, which had to be ground on a steel
mill. Generally every company had one,
which, after marching the whole day, was
fastened to a tree for each man to grind
on, and then cooked into what is called
mush, as there were no facilities for baking bread, frying pans and drinking cups
being the only cooking utensils. Many
were sick, and the discipline exacted by
General Houston severe, often half at
a time on guard, those not permitted to
leave the guard fire for twenty-four hours;
all this was to do when the men spent the
greater part of the day in knee-deep water
(Moore 2004:168).

Major James Perry wrote a letter from the camp
on April 9:
I found the army encamped upon the
western shore of the Brazos opposite
Groce’s plantation about 20 miles above
San Felipe; we continue to occupy the
same ground, but should the river rise
much higher we shall be compelled to
seek some more elevated position. Even
now we are under the necessity of swimming to reach the prairie, and are almost
flooded in our encampment. The camp is
situated on a small lake or pool of stagnant
water which serves as the general washing and watering place for men, animals
and clothes, and as the ground we occupy
gradually descends towards the lake it
naturally becomes the receptical [sic] of
offals [entrails] and filth [raw sewage],
which necessarily collects in large quantities around the tents &c in the vicinity
of an army—we have now about 300
men sick and not more than twice that
number reported for duty…Some of the
men have no arms at all, but the majority
are armed with rifles usually (in the hands
of inexperienced men a very inefficient
weapon, when opposed by the musket and
bayonet of a disciplined Soldier) we have
not I think more than 100 muskets and
bayonets in the army...We are very badly

Woodrick—Archeological Activities at 41AU82, Houston’s “Camp West of Brazos”
provided with breadstuffs, not a barrel of
flour in the army (Jenkins 1973:406).

Thomas J. Rusk had been appointed Secretary
of War by the new Texas cabinet at the Washington
Convention in March 1836. He arrived at the army
camp on April 4, having been sent by President Burnet to monitor the operations and to urge Houston to
engage the Mexican army as soon as possible. Rusk
and Houston were friends and his presence encouraged the increasingly rebellious troops who wanted
immediate action. Rusk wrote President Burnet on
April 6 that “the army was in fine spirits, ready and
anxious to meet the enemy” (Clarke 1991:44-49).
Among the visitors in the training camp was
Pamelia Dickinson Mann, an innkeeper at San Felipe, Washington, and later Houston, and one of the
more colorful and notorious characters of Austin’s
Colony. An 1837 publication discrediting Houston’s
role in the revolution states that the General was in
his tent resting with his head in Pamelia’s lap when
he received word of the massacre of Fannin’s men.
He reportedly was startled at this information and
jumped up, causing Mrs. Mann to state that she
nearly stuck her comb in his head. As the army
departed their Brazos camp, Houston borrowed her
oxen to pull the Twin Sisters, two cannons that had
been delivered to Bernardo for his use. Pamelia later
demanded her oxen back when she realized Houston
was going to fight and not retreat after he made a
right turn towards Harrisburg at the famous “fork in
the road” (Anonymous 1837:20).
Sam Houston issued a series of orders and wrote
several letters during the period he was camped here.
These include a letter to “the people” explaining
his reasons for retreat to this point and asserting
his intention to engage the Mexican army soon; a
letter to Secretary of War Thomas Rusk describing
his situation at the camp; an order to Jared Groce
III to take charge of his grey stallion (Saracen) at
Bernardo; orders to two units of his army that were
stationed across the river at Bernardo; and several
orders to I. E. Ross, captain of the steamboat Yellow Stone that was docked at Groce’s landing when
Houston arrived. He ordered Ross to keep the boat at
his disposal, ready to move in short order. On April
13, Houston wrote from Bernardo: “At ten o’clock,
A.M. yesterday, I commenced crossing the river, and
from that time until the present (noon) the steamboat
and yawl (having no ferry-boat) have been engaged.
We have eight or ten wagons, ox-teams, and about
two hundred horses, belonging to the army; and

383

these have to pass on board the steamboat, besides
the troops, baggage, &c.” (Jenkins 1973:456).
As previously mentioned, Bracey’s ferry began
operations around the end of 1836 and continued
until about 1858, and many travelers continued to
pass by and perhaps camp on the site of Houston’s
training site during this period. This is evidenced by
a 1851 eagle style Civil War-era belt buckle found
nearby. The area comprising the camp has been
tilled repeatedly for many years since that time, and
today is devoted to pasturage for cattle.
Archeological Investigations
and Findings
A large group of artifacts were surface collected
by a local history buff over about fifty years beginning about 1915. During this period the site was
annually cultivated for cotton and corn, and after
a rainfall, following plowing, the collector walked
the field searching for artifacts. One photograph of
the site and one of artifacts from this site, known
as the Jennings Collection, showing 10 lead balls,
three gunflints, one small button, and a large piece
of lead bar stock, were published in a book about
Sam Houston (Flanagan 1964:36-37).
A member of the Austin County Historical Commission contacted the THC in 1988 to advise them of
the Jennings Collection and the probable location of
the then-unrecorded Houston campsite as part of a local effort to obtain a state historical marker for the site.
At the request of the THC, a number of members of the
Houston (HAS) and Brazosport Archeological Societies visited the site on March 18-19, 1989, and with the
aid of metal detectors, unearthed some 46 artifacts to
positively affirm this as the Houston camp location.
Included in these artifacts was an 1829 U.S. penny, 18
lead balls, and a U.S army button subsequently dated
between 1820 and 1854. Also found were a large number of lead droppings and sprue, indicating that bullets
were being molded by soldiers at the camp (Table 1).
Having accomplished the objective of locating and
evaluating the site (Figure 3), the group concluded their
activities with a report to THC (Kindall 1989).
The artifacts in the Jennings Collection and
those found in 1989 were photographed by HAS
members after their survey. Nine color slides made
from these photographs from the HAS survey, along
with 18 of the Jennings Collection (Figures 4 and
5) are stored at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory under the site number 41AU82.

384

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Sketch of Artifact Locations from the 1989 Survey.

Table 1. Catalog of Artifacts found in 1989 Survey.
No.

Artifact Description

1
2
3
4
5
6
7a
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
13a
14

bullet, 13 mm, possible 50 cal rifle ball
tea kettle spout (?), copper
bridle hardware (?), iron
utensil, possible fork, iron core, bone handle
lead dropping from molding
bullet, 9 mm, possible 45 cal rifle ball
bullet, 6 mm, buckshot
lead dropping from molding
cast iron fragment
bullet, 7 mm, buckshot
thin copper sheet
lead dropping from molding
lead dropping from molding
button, possible gilt-covered iron button
ceramic, blue feather or shell-edge
bullet, 7 mm, possible 31-36 cal molded ball

Woodrick—Archeological Activities at 41AU82, Houston’s “Camp West of Brazos”

385

Table 1. (Continued)
No.

Artifact Description

15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46

bullet, 7 mm, possible 31-36 cal molded ball
lead sheet
bullet, 5 mm, buckshot
1829 coin (penny)
bullet, 6 mm, buckshot
lead sheet
bullet, 5 mm, buckshot
lead dropping from molding
utensil, knife, iron
button, U.S. Army pewter fatigue button, 1820-1852/54
lead chunk
button, metal (maybe the same as No. 24)
harness hardware (?)
metal bar, unknown use
buckle, iron, very large
lead dropping from molding
bullet, 5 mm, buckshot
lead dropping from molding
bullet, 5 mm, buckshot
lead trimming from mold, possible 69 cal
bullet, 5 mm, buckshot
lead dropping from molding
bullet, 6 mm, buckshot
bullet, 6 mm, buckshot
utensil, knife/fork handle
lead sprue from molding
bullet, 6 mm, buckshot
bullet, 6 mm, buckshot
lead sprue with attached lead sheet
lead dropping from molding
bullet, 15 mm, possible 69 cal musket ball
bullet, 6 mm, buckshot

The large lead bar in the Jennings Collection
appears to be bar stock used for molding bullets, an
activity obviously conducted during this camp as
evidenced by the lead mold droppings and bullets
with sprue still attached found here. The Texian
army is known to have loaded lead bars from stores
into wagons in Gonzales before departing there on
March 13. The lead bar in the Jennings Collection
may well have been one of those originating in
Gonzales, obtained from Bernardo, or brought in
with other supplies sent to the army at this location.

Groce family lore also indicates that all available
lead on the plantation, including water pipes and
clock weights, was used to make bullets. Perhaps
some of this lead was carried across the river for
molding bullets by the Texian soldiers.
On October 11, 2009, 24 individuals participated in a day-long archeological investigation at
41AU82. Most of these individuals were associated
with the Houston and Brazoria County archeological
societies and/or the Texas Archeological Society.
Five THC Stewards were among the group. The

386

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Lead balls from the Jennings Collection, 41AU82.

Figure 5. Gunflints from the Jennings Collection, 41AU82.

Woodrick—Archeological Activities at 41AU82, Houston’s “Camp West of Brazos”
purpose of the project was to locate, recover, record,
and conserve artifacts from the site. The alluvial
loam soil was moist to a depth of about 0.8 feet from
rains of some 4 inches in the previous week. Excavations with a shovel and trowel was relatively easy.
The surveyors who had earlier established the site
datum points provided accurate location information on the artifacts as they were recovered. Several
groups of 2-3 individuals were assigned to search
in predetermined quadrants encompassing the site.
Each of these groups consisted on one person with a
metal detector and one or two others who excavated
the metal detector find spot, recovered the artifact,
and recorded it. THC Stewards typically served as
excavators and recorders. When an artifact of interest
was found, it was designated as either “HC” (meaning
likely Houston Campsite related), or “HM” (meaning
Historical Metal, perhaps but not necessarily related
to Houston’s camp). Any obviously modern metal
such as baling wire fragments and staples were removed but not recorded. The location of the artifact
was determined by the surveyors and recorded with a
unique four digit location number beginning with the
number of the quadrant within which it was found.
The artifact was then placed in a sealed plastic bag
along with a project identification sheet that included
a description of the artifact, the names of those who
found and excavated it, the artifact number, and the
approximate depth at which it was found. In addition,
the recorders maintained a “Metal Detector Survey
Location Form” that summarized the information
detailed on each project identification sheet. At the
end of the day all the bags of artifacts and filed notes
were gathered together for conservation, photography, and preparation of the project report. After
conservation, all of the artifacts recorded in this work
were returned to the landowner. A total of 26 artifacts
were recovered, including nine lead balls of various
caliber, six fragments of lead, one brass ball button,
and one quarter-section of a circular metal alloy disc
appearing to be a “two-bit” token (Woodrick 2010b)
(Table 2 and Figure 6).
Table 3 summarizes the complete array of bullets
found at this site, reinforcing the accounts that the
Texian army at this time did not have uniformly issued firearms but that instead the soldiers had a wide
variety of personally owned pistols, muskets, and
rifles. The size distribution of the bullets is plotted
in Figure 7. Most of the bullets are round lead balls;
however, some are of the round-nosed cylindrical
style initially known as Minie’ balls. The inventor
of this type of bullet was a Captain Norton of the

387

British army in 1832. The revolutionary concept was
to have a bullet that would conform to the diameter
of the barrel when loaded with a ramrod, thus being
easier loaded and that better engaged the rifling when
fired. French Army Captain Claude Etienne Minie’
adopted this bullet design in 1849, and it quickly
became the preferred shape for rifle bullets. It was
commonly used in the Civil War. This type of a bullet
at Houston’s Camp may represent an early adoption
of Norton’s design used by a Texian soldier in 1836.
It is possible that a Minie’ ball was dropped here at a
later date, or the round-nosed cylindrical bullets are
relatively modern losses (O’Connell 1989:191).
The early 19th century was a time of transition
for firearms. Those used by the soldiers in the Texian
army of 1836 were a mixture of sizes, types, and ignition systems. Prior to that period most personal arms
were hand-made and very individualistic. A person
might order a .50 caliber weapon from a gunsmith and
receive a .49 or .52 caliber weapon as a finished product. The gunsmith would also make the bullet mold
to fit the finished rifle. Standardization of bullet sizes
had not yet been adopted by individual manufacturers of personal weapons. Many of the firearms used
by the resident Texian soldiers were not new, having
been purchased used, bought earlier before migrating
to Texas, or passed down from older relatives. Some
were muskets that were stocked by local governments
in the United States and given to volunteers going to
Texas to fight in the revolution. Fowlers (shotguns)
were also commonly used at that time. These were
smoothbore weapons that could fire nearly anything
that could be stuffed down the barrel, from bird shot
to buckshot to slugs, or a mixture thereof.
Military firearms of the time were much more
standardized. The Mexican army used primarily muskets of .75 caliber made in Britain and called an India
Pattern Brown Bess. Another popular smoothbore
military musket came in .69 caliber. Only a few of
the lead balls found at this site would have been for
a musket of this type. Most of the smaller balls were
for rifles or pistols and not military muskets. Muskets
also quickly fouled with powder residue after a few
firings, making them hard to reload. Thus, an individual using a .75 caliber Brown Bess might elect
to fire .69 caliber balls to allow for quicker loading
and longer sustained firing. The first few shots with a
clean barrel would be less effective due to “blow-by”
around the edges of the bullet as it emerged from the
barrel. However, as the barrel fouled with powder
residue from repeated firings the performance would
improve as the blow-by was reduced.

388

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Catalog of Artifacts from the October 16, 2009 Survey.

No.

Artifact Description

1.

lead ball 0.5 inches in diameter, 5 cm deep (3324143.989, 779469.433)*

3.

lead ball 0.66 inches in diameter, 22 cm deep (3324200.620, 779238.828)

2.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.
23.
24.

25.

lead ball 0.5 inches in diameter, 17 cm deep (3324234.298, 779335.667)
lead ball 0.41 inches in diameter (3324299.595, 779590.118)

lead fragment 2.5 x 1.5 cm, 20 cm deep (3324230.080, 779328.731)

lead ball 0.34 inches in diameter, 5 cm. deep (3324148.896, 779508.464)
lead ball 0.41 inches in diameter, 15 cm deep (undetermined location)

lead ball 0.47 inches in diameter, 10 cm deep (3324232.352, 779414.799)

lead ball with intact sprue, 0.5 inches in diameter, 6 cm deep (3324222.332, 779342.760)

Historic metal 2.75 x 2 inches, possible iron harness connector, 5 cm deep (3324170.216,
779193.933)
lead ball 0.28 inches in diameter, 22 cm deep (3324231.719, 779308.624)

Historic metal, one-quarter section of a flat alloy disk with a design along the edge of one side,
plain on the other. The original disk had apparently been hammered flat, then cut with large
shears in four pieces. It does not appear to have been a coin. The metal is non-magnetic, nor is
it silver or copper but some other alloy; 12 cm deep (3324415.555, 779774.888). The purpose
of this artifact is unknown. One possible use is as a faked “poker chip” known to have been
used during this period, or it may have been a ferry token, as two bits was the published fare
for a one-horse wagon. Probable road drop from another time as it was found outside the predominant artifact scatter on the road to the river.
“chunky nickel-sized” lead fragment 1.25 x 2 x 1 cm, 16 cm deep (3324225.226, 779305.449)
brass covered ball button, 0.75 inches in diameter, 25 cm deep (3324211.284, 779332.765)

silver crucifix necklace ornament. Apparently modern based on purity stamp of 0.825. Found
near river by metal electrical highline pole. (location not recorded) Dimensions: 2.5 x 1 3.75
inches.
lead sprue 1.2 x 1.9 cm, 20 cm deep (3324245.018, 779583.040)
lead fragment 1.4 x 2.5 cm (3324263.412, 779402.907)

Historic metal, folded sheet brass 1.7 x 2.1 cm, 5 cm deep (3324389.390, 779737.505)
lead fragment 1 x 1.3 cm, 5 cm deep (3324230.740, 779292.573)

Historic metal, bent brass wire 2.6 cm long, 0.32 cm in diameter, 15 cm deep (3324142.158,
779465.180)
lead fragment 1.4 x 1.8 cm, 15 cm deep (3324233.416, 779332.593)

historic metal, large cast iron object, apparently bolts to wood; top broken. 10 cm deep
(location not recorded). Identified by Tom Nuckols as the lower portion of a cobbler’s shoe last.
Dimensions: Foot is 4.5 x 2.25 inches, 5.5 inches high.

historic metal iron plate with square rivet holes 7.5 x 4.75 inches, 6 cm deep (3324345.333,
779620.520)
lead ball, 0.67 inches in diameter (GPS 30 01.032N 96 06.253W)
lead ball, 0.25 inches in diameter (location unrecorded)

*location coordinates (Northing (Y), in meters, Easting (X, in meters) as provided by surveyors.
Note: Items 24 and 25 were found on June 30, 2009, in a preliminary site visit to determine if a more extensive
survey was warranted.

Woodrick—Archeological Activities at 41AU82, Houston’s “Camp West of Brazos”

Figure 6. Artifacts from the 2009 Survey at 41AU82: 1-4, 6-9, 11, lead balls; 5, 13, 16-17, 19, 21,
lead fragment; 12, a “two-bit” token; 14, ball button; 18, brass sheet; and 20, brass wire. The artifact
numbers on this figure correspond to the numbers on Table 2.

389

390

Texas Archeological Society

30
Rifle
Balls

Buck Shot

Number

24

Musket
Balls

18
12
6
0

0

10

5

15

20

mm diameter
Figure 7. Distribution of Bullet Sizes.

The grouping of bullets in the 9 to 12.5 mm
range (see Figure 7) were likely used in .40 to .50
caliber rifles that were popular during this period.
The bullets measuring 15.0 mm and larger probably
were used in muskets, and those smaller than 9 mm
were either used in fowlers or as “buck and ball” in
muskets (Charles M. Yates, Jerry Tubbs, and Douglas Scott, July 1, 2010 personal communications).
Figure 8 depicts the spatial distribution of bullets as accurately determined in the 2009 survey
and the artifact field as estimated from a sketch
made of the 1989 survey. Significant time was spent
detecting outside of the artifact field line shown in
this map. No historic metal was found outside the
indicated area, suggesting the camp was confined to
the approximate 15 acres of elevated ground.
Summary and Conclusions
The recovery of such a large array of artifacts
dating to the 1836 period positively identifies this
site as that used by Houston’s army prior to San

Jacinto. The location next to Stone Lake (an ancient
channel of the Brazos River) matches the descriptions left by several individuals who were at the
camp in 1836. The bullets recovered from this site—
pristine to the Texian army—demonstrate the fact
that a wide variety of firearms were used by these
soldiers, with very little official military issue. The
campsite covers approximately 15 acres and appears
to be narrowly confined, reinforcing period accounts
that an open space on high ground was cleared of
small trees in preparation for the army camp.
The use of metal detectors proved to be invaluable in investigating a site of this type with widely
scattered metal artifacts. Traditional archeological
methods in which small units are hand-dug and
screened could not practically have been employed
over such a large area. Coupling the use of metal
detectors with an accurate locating device (either
by precise surveying equipment as employed in this
survey, or with hand-held GPS instruments) provided
the spatial data necessary for an accurate determination of the extent of the site. Including trained
avocational or professional archeologists along with

Woodrick—Archeological Activities at 41AU82, Houston’s “Camp West of Brazos”

391

Table 3. Lead Bullets found at 41AU82.
Diameter
(mm)

Jennings
Collection

1989 Survey
Survey

2009
Survey

Caliber

3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
10.5
11.0
11.5
12.0
12.5
13.0
13.5
14.0
14.5
15.0
15.5
16.0
16.5

5
3
1
6
8
11
16
7
8
8
7
17
15
18
19
10
6
16
6
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
–

–
–
–
5
–
7
–
3
–
–
–
1
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
1
–
–
–
1
–
–
–

–
–
–
–
–
–
1
1
–
–
1
–
–
–
2
–
–
1
3
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
2

12
14
16
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
35
37
39
41
42
45
47
49, 50
51
53
55
57
59
61
63
65

Totals

201

18

11

N=230

metal detectorists assured accurate and complete information regarding the provenance of each artifact.
Acknowledgements
Ronny Woodley and his wife Carolyn have
been outstanding stewards of the land containing
41AU82. Their willingness to allow access to the
property by avocational archeologists, and their
protection of the site from casual collectors, has
made this work possible.
The volunteer efforts of members of the Houston
(HAS) and Brazosport Archeological Societies who
participated in the 1989 survey under the direction

of THC Steward Sheldon Kindall paved the way
for this important site to be recorded. Gregg Dimmick’s brigade of metal detectorists and avocational
archeologists who surveyed the site in 2009 are commended for their efforts to locate, identify, conserve,
and record the archeological information from this
important site. They include Beth Aucoin, Kenneth Blezinger, Johnny Bubenik, Glen Collins, Bob
Crosser, Charlie Gordy, Richard Gregg, Sue Gross,
Joe Hudgins, Dee Ann Jones, Kyle Jones, Bobby
Mckinney, Aaron Monaghen, Cathy McCool, Tom
Nuckols, Matt Pekar, Gary Ralston, Sandy Rogers,
Gary Ryman, John Sauer, and the author.
Special thanks go to Carlos Cotton, Marty
Hicks, and Mark Conlon of Cotton Surveying Co.,

392

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Map Showing Locations of Bullets at 41AU82.

a Division of Jones & Carter, Inc., for their time and
expertise in establishing the datums and locating the
artifacts as uncovered in the 2009 survey.
Jim Bruseth, Director of the Archeology Division of the Texas Historic Commission, provided
counsel, support, and encouragement for the efforts
in 2009 and for this article.
Thanks to Carolyn Spock, Head of Records at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, and
to Dick Gregg of HAS, for providing scans of the
1989 photos of the Jennings Collection and the HAS
survey of that year.
The input from Charlie Yates, Jerry Tubb, and
Doug Scott, each well-known experts in the field

of early American firearms, is appreciated and
forms the basis for most of the bullet analysis comments in this article. Bobby Mckinney provided
the identification of a Civil War era belt buckle
found nearby.
And last but certainly not least goes recognition to my friend Dr. Gregg Dimmick of Wharton
for his leadership in building recognition that metal
detectors can be a useful and legitimate tool in archeological investigations. His book “Sea of Mud”
describes the discovery, using metal detectors, of
the route of the retreating Mexican army after San
Jacinto. His expertise on the Texian and Mexican
armies of 1836 is unparalleled.

Woodrick—Archeological Activities at 41AU82, Houston’s “Camp West of Brazos”
References Cited
Anonymous (believed to have been written by Algernon P.
Thompson)
1837 Houston Displayed, or, Who Won the Battle of San
Jacinto, by a Farmer in the Army. Printed in Velasco.
Barker, E. C.
1901 Recollections of the Campaign. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 4(4): 237-345.
Clarke, M. W.
1991 Thomas J. Rusk. Jenkins, Austin and New York.
Day, J. M. (compiler)
1967 The Texas Almanac 1857–1873. Texian Press, Waco.
Flanagan, S.
1964 Sam Houston’s Texas. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Jenkins, J. H. (Editor)
1973 The Papers of the Texas Revolution, 1835–1836,
Volume 5. Presidial Press, Austin.
Kindall, S. M.
1989 Sam Houston’s Camp West of the Brazos, Report
submitted to Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

393

Moore, S. L.
2004 Eighteen Minutes—The Battle of San Jacinto and the
Texas Independence Campaign. Republic of Texas
Press, Dallas.
O’Connell, R. L.
1989 Of Arms and Men, A History of War, Weapons and
Aggression. Oxford University Press, New York.
Woodrick, J. V.
2007 Austin County—Colonial Capital of Texas.
Self-published.
2009 Elusive Dreams—Early Exploration and Colonization of the Upper Texas Coast. Kemp & Co.,
Houston.
2010a Bernardo—Crossroads, Social Center and Agricultural Showcase of Early Texas. MS in preparation.

2010b Archaeological Activities at the 1836 Texian Army
Camp—41AU 82. Report submitted to Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.

Zuber, W. P.
1971 My Eighty Years in Texas. University of Texas Press,
Austin.

Flickr to Flakes and Blogs to Bifaces: Utilizing the Web to
Enhance and Encourage Public Involvement in
Archeology in a Case Study from the Excavations at the
Vara Daniel Site (41TV1364) in Austin, Texas
Mason D. Miller
Abstract
This article summarizes the World Wide Web page archeologyatzilker.com that was created as a component of
an intensive public involvement and information campaign associated with 2009 excavations of Paleoindian
components of the Vara Daniel site (41TV1364) in Zilker Park, in Austin, Texas. Discussed are summaries of the
access and use of primarily free web tools utilized in developing the web page along with a discussion of what
worked well in the public involvement context and what needed improvement. I conclude with a consideration
of other tools and ideas that could be useful for future web development for public involvement in archeology.

Introduction
During the spring of 2009, archeologists from
Ecological Communications Corporation (EComm)
and Hicks & Company Archeological, Environmental, and Planning Consultants (Hicks & Company),
working on behalf of the City of Austin’s Public
Works Department, conducted mitigation excavations
of a small segment of the Paleoindian components
of the Vara Daniel site (41TV1364) in the middle of
Zilker Park in downtown Austin (Figure 1). Completed as compensatory excavations resulting from
inadvertent impacts to the site’s Paleoindian components from earlier installation of a nearby wastewater
line, the team focused excavations within a 4 x 4
m excavation block, from 3-5 m below the ground
surface, placed at a portion of the site determined to
have the highest potential for containing significant
deposits (Figure 2). While the results of those excavations are discussed in detail in Nickels et al. (2010), as
a brief summary, the team unearthed several discrete
features, an assortment of chipped stone tools and
debitage, and a variety of paleoenvironmental data
sets, all providing valuable insights into the early
Paleoindian occupation of Central Texas.
The excavation target area was located within
the rugby fields of Zilker Park, immediately south of
Barton Springs Road, a prominent portion of one of
the most popular components of Austin’s downtown,
often considered the City’s crown jewel (Figure 3).

The archeological excavations posed an interesting
public involvement dilemma for the City of Austin.
On one hand, the City is charged with protecting archeological resources on city-owned property to the
best of its ability, but on the other, with large-scale
excavations in such an open and visible location,
minimizing public exposure was impossible. The City
also faced a potential public relations problem with
the completion of such extensive excavations coinciding with reports of City-wide budgetary shortfalls.
With such a conundrum, Austin took a proactive approach and not only welcomed visitors to the site, but
also encouraged direct involvement. The excavations
were not just a regulatory problem to solve; they were
viewed as a unique opportunity for Austin’s citizens
and visitors: a chance to see an archeological excavation up close and even participate in aspects of the
data recovery work. A portion of the overall project
budget was specifically set aside to enhance the public’s experience when observing the excavations and
ensure opportunities for learning.
Using a multi-pronged approach to public participation, the City, in conjunction with the Texas Historical
Commission (THC) and the excavation team (EComm
and Hicks & Company), utilized a public information booth at the site, on-site prehistoric technology
demonstrations, public screening of the back dirt from
contexts above the targeted Paleoindian components,
and a dedicated world wide web (www) page to connect with Austin’s citizens and visitors (Figures 4a-d

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

396

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Approximate location of excavations at the Vara Daniel Site (41TV1364; source: 1988 Austin West US
Geological Survey 1:24,000 Topographic Quadrangle)

and 5). The resulting public experience was almost
universally positive, with the City’s administrative and
public works offices receiving many thanks and praises
from citizens and visitors alike. Ultimately, EComm
and Hicks & Company received the 2010 Award of
Merit in Archeology from the THC and the E. Mott
Davis Award from the Council of Texas Archeologists
for their public involvement efforts on this project.
Excavation Web Page
In this information age, the fastest, most
direct, and often most cost effective means of

disseminating information to the public is through
the web. With so many people able to access the
internet, dedicated content can be quickly and easily generated and presented to a curious audience. A
web page was an obvious necessity to the project’s
public involvement component. The City required
a web page that would, at a minimum, give a brief
history of the project, a summary of Central Texas’
prehistory, and instructions and maps for visiting the
site. Initial plans called for the site to be relatively
static, with occasional images and email links to
contact various representatives of the City and the
archeologists themselves. This basic site plan would
have sufficed, but modern web development tools

Miller—Flickr to Flakes and Blogs to Bifaces

397

Figure 2. Block excavations under way at the Vara Daniel Site.

Figure 3. Aerial photograph of the block excavations at the Vara Daniel Site facing east. Note the proximity to Barton
Springs Road (photo courtesy Andrew W. Poth)

398

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

d

c
Figure 4. Assortment of public involvement opportunities at the Zilker Park excavations: (a) a small information booth
was set up in an alcove in the project barrier fencing. This information booth was staffed by archeologists seven days
a week from 8 A.M. to 5 P.M. to answer questions from park visitors and provide brief guided tours of the excavations
from outside the safety fence; (b) with an appointment, members of the public could come and, under the guidance of
a staff archeologist, screen through sediments from the upper 3 m of the excavation block. Artifacts recovered were
catalogued and documented with the final report and are slated to be part of a future exhibit at the park; (c) school
children on a field trip to the excavation site attend a demonstration of flint knapping conducted by Texas Department
of Transportation Staff Archeologist Christopher Ringstaff; (d) a small platform was added to the information booth to
allow visitors to climb up and look over the shoring system at the excavators working below.

Miller—Flickr to Flakes and Blogs to Bifaces

399

Figure 5. The main page of archeologyatzilker.com exhibiting general site layout, look, and content. Following the
conclusion of excavations, the site has been transferred to the City of Austin’s Public Works Department web servers.
While it maintains much of the original functionality, it has been altered from that depicted above.

and integration of Web 2.0 concepts allowed for a
web page that provided a much more dynamic and
immersive experience for visitors. It also provided
an easier means of updating content than more standard pages and a more direct personal connection
with site explorers. The site was intended to keep
the public involved and interested by giving them
a reason to continue revisiting the page. The tools
and resources used for website production made the
development process very easy.

The excavation website http://archeologyatzilker.com (hereafter all url prefixes are omitted to allow
for better page clarity, i.e., http://archeologyatzilker.
com will be referred to as archeologyatzilker.com,
etc.) proved to be a much greater contribution to the
overall project than initially anticipated (see Figure
5). Thanks to the ease of many of the development
tools available, the web site was approachable and
relatively user-friendly. Table 1 lists some of the
useful websites consulted in creating the excavation

400

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. World Wide Web Pages Accessed and Utilized in the Creation
and Maintenance of Archeologyatzilker.com.

Page Title

Web URL

Description

Archeologyatzilker.com

http://archeologyatzilker.com

Wordpress

http://wordpress.com/

Main Vara Daniel Site Excavation
Web Page.

Wordpress

http://wordpress.org/

Flickr

http://flickr.com

YouTube

http://youtube.com

Gmail

http://gmail.com

Gmail/Google Calendar

http://www.google.com/calendar/

Texas Beyond History

http://www.texasbeyondhistory.net/
index.html

Twitter

http://twitter.com/

Facebook

http://facebook.com

Google Docs

http://docs.google.com/

page. The site went so well, and I learned so much
during development, that the process is worth briefly
describing. Throughout this discussion, it is important to stress that nearly all of these resources are
free and, since they are web-based, in most instances, they do not require specific hardware or software
beyond a computer connected to the internet with a
current web browser (Internet Explorer®, Firefox™,
or Safari®, for example). It is also important to note
that the web tool examples that are provided in the

Primary page for downloading
Wordpress software and signing up
for free Wordpress blog.

Wordpress support community page
with tutorials and user support forums
for technical issues and ideas.
Free (limited) and paid (unlimited)
photo and video storage and hosting
website that housed photos for the
excavation web page.

Video hosting page used for embedded
video content source for excavation
web page.

Google email account and access point
for other Google materials.

Google calendar utilized for organizing
and updating public involvement
schedule.
Offsite reference for Texas prehistory
discussion topics.
Personal status page that is updated
with brief “Tweets” with the user’s
latest goings-on.
Social networking web page with
“Friends” and “Fans.”

Web-based office software suite
that includes (among others)
word processing, spreadsheet, and
presentation tools.

following discussion are simply those chosen by
the design team and me for this project. There are
numerous analogs for each of these components
that would likely produce similar results and similar
compatibilities.
Web 2.0
Concepts and tools of Web 2.0 development were the key components of producing

Miller—Flickr to Flakes and Blogs to Bifaces
archeologyatzilker.com. According to Wikipedia
(2010), Web 2.0 can be described as the tenet of
modern web design and development that relies
on shared content, inter-related data sources, usercentered design, and collaboration. When the web
first exploded in the 1990s, sites were relatively
static entities with single pages that would load
when prompted; they were little more than a digital
book or magazine. The internet itself was considered a large digital library of data that was already
formatted and packaged for consumption and the
site visitor had very little input on content. Web
2.0 concepts focus on tying multiple data sources
together to bring all content to a single site, making
their union a simple task for any user to complete.
More importantly, web content is much more of a
two-way street where site visitors are generators of
content almost as much as they are consumers of it.
The page itself serves as a shell or basic framework
that is populated by varying internal and external
data sources, resulting in a site that is more of a community resource. Although essentially none of the
root tools for web developing have changed (code
and graphic standards, servers, etc.), the intent and
process of web development have evolved. Fruits of
Web 2.0 development include social websites like
Myspace.com and Facebook.com, image and video
hosting sites like Flickr.com and YouTube.com, mapping/navigation pages like Google Earth, and information sources like Wikipedia.com.
For the purpose of developing archeologyatzilker.com, utilized Web 2.0 tools focused primarily
on site coding and content sharing, whereas public
content provision was less of a goal of the page (Figure 6). Although certain tools used require a higher
degree of technical expertise than this relative design novice could provide, once the framework was
completed by a professional web designer, widelyavailable information and easy access became the
key components to developing archeologyatzilker.
com. The subsequent work was completed relatively
easily and autonomously.
Wordpress—the Framework
Wordpress™ was the primary software used
in developing archeologyatzilker.com (see Figure
6). Available through Wordpress.com, the program is an open-source (a term used for software
that is designed with an intentionally open coding structure allowing for user customization and
community contribution) web coding tool that

401

makes web design and updates fast and easy, and
it is free.
At its most basic level, Wordpress is a web page
that designs other web pages. Wordpress’s software
coding and content are loaded onto a web server,
and content for the web site is added and changed
through it. Wordpress creates, edits, and adds to
all of the complex, specific, and challenging code
and does so in the background, leaving the website
developer with a graphic interface that looks and
operates in a manner very similar to more common
word processing programs (Figures 7-8). Most importantly, since Wordpress is a web page interface
for editing web pages, the only dedicated software
that is required is loaded onto the site’s web server.
All other access to the program and web content
creation and editing is done through a web browser,
with no other software required.
While there are literally hundreds of Wordpress tutorials available through the Wordpress
website (wordpress.org, Wordpress’s online tutorial and community site), and on other sites, that
go into great detail about exactly what to do and
how to do it, for archeologyatzilker.com, developers relied on the expertise of a web development
studio (Nathan Hanners of Really Really Big
Industries, Inc. [RRBI]) to set up the basic site
skeleton and host it during excavations. A small
stipend was set aside to allow RRBI to assist with
site programming and troubleshooting during the
period of most intense use. After the excavations
were completed, the web page was transferred to
servers maintained by the City of Austin, where it
continues to reside to this day. Nathan proved to be
an invaluable addition to the design team, solving a
variety of glitches much more quickly than relative
novices with trowels could.
At RRBI’s offices, Nathan set aside server space
and built the basic template for the site, which included simplified banner graphics, a web page title,
typefaces, and link formatting, etc. Through Adobe®
Photoshop® and Illustrator®, the archeology team
was able to provide graphic alterations to the basic
template by designing new headers and footers to
make the site unique. For archeologyatzilker.com, I
simply went to Zilker Park and took digital photos
of various familiar elements of the park and used
those photos, along with an image from a previous
excavation, for each of the page’s banners. While the
header mostly performed descriptive tasks (naming
the website and the current page), the footer provided a variety of quick links to relevant agencies

402

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Diagram of the different Web 2.0 tools utilized in designing and updating archeologyatzilker.com.

at the City of Austin (the City’s main web page, the
Parks and Recreation Department, Austin Public
Works, etc.) as well as the project’s two main contractors (EComm and Hicks & Company). The site’s
basic look (formatting, color scheme, background,
etc.) was adjusted to fit the theme desired, and an
introduction page was created to test the overall appearance. Once everything was approved by the City
and other contractors, the page went live.
Through Wordpress, a website is set up as a series of posts and pages (see Figure 7). Pages are primarily static, permanent, documents on a site, while
posts are updated regularly (as often as the designer
wishes) and are visible as multiple entries on a
single page. The common term “blog” most closely
matches the “post” format. Archeologyatzilker.com
contained a variety of pages discussing everything
from the project background and schedule to Central
Texas prehistory, while the posts formed the Excavation Blog, which was updated regularly (usually

every day or so) with the latest excavation news.
Once a page or a post was completed, the editor
would preview it for formatting and spacing, click
“Publish,” and the page/post was up and active on
the site, accessible to any visitor (see Figure 8).
Primary Visual Content
Graphics are the key component of any modern web page. Archeologyatzilker.com was no
different. Photos and videos were frequently used
to accompany text within the site to great effect.
Wordpress’ design tools allowed these graphics to
be added to pages easily through handy icons that
walk the user through the uploading process. For
most graphics, we used a stable of photographs
and dedicated graphics prepared for the website
that were uploaded to the site’s Media library.
Other images were embedded from other websites.
Photos from the excavations were updated through

Miller—Flickr to Flakes and Blogs to Bifaces

403

Figure 7. Wordpress’s main site dashboard. From here, the user can access site tools for creating and editing content,
incorporating new plugins, changing the design and theme of the site, and review and address visitor comments.

integration of the project’s Flickr® page through
Hicks & Company’s premium Flickr account (flickr.
com/photos/hicksandcompany; see below; Figure
9). While there is a free account that can be created
on Flickr, this account has a cap on the number of
images it will host and the frequency at which those
images can be uploaded; a premium account, created by paying a small annual fee, allows unlimited
photo uploading and also includes video uploads as
well. Free Wordpress add-ons, called plugins, were
loaded into archeologyatzilker.com that allowed the
site to access the Flickr page and download the latest
photos from that site and place them automatically
on the main page. Table 2 provides a list of Wordpress plugins used in creating archeologyatzilker.
com. Updates to the excavation’s complement of
photos were automatically visible on the archeology
website with no need to direct visitors away or for
complex, repetitive coding.
To assist with providing modern, dynamic
content on the page, archeologyatzilker.com also
utilized the wealth of online videos available by

embedding clips from YouTube® directly into a
given page or post by copying the video’s embedding code from the YouTube site (easily visible on
the video page) and pasting it directly into the post
itself (Figure 10). The benefit of YouTube cannot be
overstated. If, as the saying goes, “a picture is worth
a thousand words,” a video is worth much more,
particularly when the goal is to capture someone’s
attention and garner interest. As an example, typing
“atlatl” into the YouTube search bar returns nearly
500 videos. While some are clearly better than
others, a very large proportion of those videos can
define what an atlatl is much more effectively than
a textual description.
Other Tools and Page Components
Beyond relatively simple pages and posts, archeologyatzilker.com also included more dedicated
content. This consisted of a project schedule page,
Texas Beyond History, and an excavation webcam.
Using an excavation-specific Gmail™ email account

404

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Simplified graphic user interface for creating and editing web content within Wordpress.

through Google® (paleodigger@gmail.com), the
team could access a suite of Gmail organizing tools,
most notably a calendar (Figure 11). The excavation
email account became a convenient non-companyspecific means for the public to contact the archeologists that could be accessed with a simple web
browser through the park’s free Wi-Fi network operated by the City of Austin. As the project proceeded,
updates to the schedule, noteworthy project milestones, public involvement opportunities, etc., were
periodically updated through the Gmail account calendar and, through Wordpress plugins, were simultaneously updated on the archeologyatzilker.com
site. Site visitors who had arranged for a screening
opportunity found the calendar particularly helpful,
because they could view the scheduled screenings
and find their appointment, serving as a convenient
reminder while cutting down the need for repeated
“What time was my appointment?” inquiries to the
busy archeology staff.
For many of the glossary and background sections, archeologyatzilker.com referred offsite to Texas

Beyond History (texasbeyondhistory.org; TBH). This
site, maintained by the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin, provided ample information for the site visitor to learn
more about a given topic. Within the cultural background section, TBH was used to provide examples
of sites attributed to a specific discussion topic. For
example, within the discussion of the Paleoindian
period, archeologyatzilker.com included links to the
TBH discussion of Kincaid Rockshelter.
Given the depth of excavation and the City’s
prohibition of any member of the general public
entering the excavation pit, the excavations themselves needed to be easily visible by onlookers. In
addition to an on-site viewing platform within the
information booth area (see Figure 4d), curious
members of the public were able to watch the excavations in real time from anywhere in the world
through a dedicated excavation web cam. The team
installed a simple internet web cam connected to
a laptop and mounted it to the excavation shoring
(Figure 12). Using the park’s free Wi-Fi network, a

Miller—Flickr to Flakes and Blogs to Bifaces

Figure 9. The archeologyatzilker.com Flickr photo set that houses uploaded photos from the excavation.

405

406

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Wordpress Plugins Used (or Referenced) in Archeologyatzilker.com.

Plugin Name

Description

Address

Aksimet

Spam Filtering Software for Comment Section

http://akismet.com/

Flickr Photo Album

Photo Album-creating tool that accesses Flickr
account and updates with the latest images

http://tantannoodles.com/
toolkit/photo-album/

Flickr RSS

Updates the host page with the latest
images available on a target Flickr page. On
archeologyatzilker.com, it displays the latest six
photos from the excavation.

http://eightface.com/
wordpress/flickrrss/

Page Links To

Redirects Wordpress page content to off-site data
source. On archeologyatzilker.com it was used to
redirect the javascript feed of the excavation web cam.

http://txfx.net/
wordpress-plugins/
page-links-to/

Wordpress Google
Calendar

Automatically directs host page to Google Calendar
for publication on host page.

http://code.google.com/p/
wpng-calendar/

live video stream of the excavation was integrated
into the website through html and JavaScript code
produced by the web cam. The process of capturing
the webcam data and placing that into Wordpress
was more technically advanced than other website
components and was left to Nathan Hanners of
RRBI and Dan Rose of EComm to complete; however, according to Mr. Hanners, it is still considered
to be relatively straightforward and approachable
with a little know-how.
What Worked
Archeologyatzilker.com worked well as a public involvement tool because the website changed
as the excavations progressed. The public had a
reason to revisit the website (either through regular
blog posts, new photos, or webcam video), and
their interest was generally maintained throughout
the course of the excavations. Whether it was a
visitor who wanted to see coverage from Austin’s
various news stations that were hyperlinked in the
website, or a representative of the City who wanted
to see how the excavations were going through the
webcam, or (as is my case) someone’s grandmother
who wanted to see their grandson working, the site
provided those resources.

Wordpress worked particularly well. The simple
visual interface and accessibility through the internet
allowed for archeologyatzilker.com to be updated
repeatedly and quickly and, in many instances,
from the excavation site itself. With individual user
logins, the site could be updated and improved by
a number of individuals with their contributions
tracked through a username. Wordpress’ built-in
tools for integration with other resources like Flickr,
Google Calendar, and YouTube allowed for site authors to update archeologyatzilker.com very quickly
with little training. The Wordpress community’s
thousands of added plug-ins allowed for unique
customization of the page, creating a big impact
with minimal effort.
The Gmail/Google Calendar account was also
particularly helpful. With the simple, free, and nonproprietary email account, members of the public
were able to contact the archeologists directly and
receive direct responses. Paleodigger@gmail.com
was a very popular email account that received more
than 250 emails over the course of the two month
excavation. The associated Google Calendar proved
indispensable for the archeologists juggling many
public screening appointments and tours. With WiFi access, the calendar could be adjusted on-site and
those changes, through Wordpress plug-ins, were visible on the web page immediately and automatically.

Miller—Flickr to Flakes and Blogs to Bifaces

407

Figure 10. YouTube’s main video viewing page, in this instance depicting a video of some young Zilker Park archeologists’
visit to the public screening area.

Hicks & Company’s premium Flickr account
proved very valuable in simply keeping the site
visually interesting. With Wordpress plug-ins, the
images hosted by Flickr were presented directly
on archeologyatzilker.com and embedded into the
site seamlessly. As new photos were uploaded onto
Flickr, they were automatically visible on the main
excavation web page as well. Flickr’s free “Uploadr” tool allowed multiple users to load photos
onto the company account without actually having
to log into it, maintaining some level of security
for the images that were hosted. While archeologyatzilker.com’s servers were not subject to storage
limitations, and the content that was loaded onto it
was far from substantial, utilizing an offsite photo

storage resource like Flickr allowed for virtually
limitless photo storage. If servers for other pages
have limits on the amount of storage space available, embedded photos can provide an easy way to
keep the graphic content rich without being inhibited
by storage concerns. Also, those photos are stored
securely and in relative perpetuity.
What Did Not Work, or
“Learning Opportunities”
While most would consider the archeologyatzilker.com website to be a successful and beneficial component of the project’s public involvement

408

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. View of the Gmail calendar depicting a typical month during the peak period of excavations. Each
“appointment” shown can be individually or collectively edited and updated.

Figure 12. Excavation webcam mounted to the shoring system at the excavation site, immediately adjacent to the public
viewing area.

Miller—Flickr to Flakes and Blogs to Bifaces
effort, developing and maintaining the site was an
unfamiliar process for most of those involved. Along
the way, the archeologists and site authors learned a
few things through problems faced while working
on the website. None of these problems were considered particularly calamitous or difficult to surpass,
but they are lessons learned nonetheless.
The first problem encountered was the amount
of effort that was involved in keeping the site upto-date. While committing to keep the site dynamic
up front was a good decision, it was more laborious
than initially anticipated. The work is very simple
and straightforward, but it does take time. At the
end of a long day of excavating, it is somewhat
difficult to muster the interest to upload the latest
photos, write about findings, and integrate additional
content into the site. In future projects with a similar
public involvement component, it would be wise
to consider enlisting someone who is exclusively
dedicated to maintaining the website and keeping it
updated with the latest information.
Similarly, it is important to bear in mind that
if the site is initially presented as an interesting
and ever-changing web page, it should remain so
throughout the duration of the project. With the
Zilker Park excavations, the web page was built
and presented initially with a great deal of information and dynamism. The excavation blog had
numerous pictures and a large amount of text, with
updates provided almost every day. As the excavation progressed, available time was reduced, and
unique, noteworthy excavation findings became less
frequent. In turn, the site was updated less often and
occasionally with less content.
While archeologists simply felt there was not
enough “going on” to warrant discussion on the
blog, members of the public were anxious to read
about the latest happenings and see the latest photos.
The City fielded occasional complaints from the
general public about the apparent lack of website updates, and the complaints were forwarded on to the
excavators. To appease the public and the City, the
site was updated more frequently with archeologists
devising other topics to discuss (i.e., radiocarbon
dating, what an archeologist does, etc.). In future
projects, it is advisable to consider an appropriate
level of effort for the site (the amount of updates,
the number of photos, etc.) beforehand relative to
the projected amount of actual site updates and the
amount of time that can be devoted to the page, and
then stick to it. While an excavation may have weeks
with numerous update opportunities, there may be

409

weeks with much less in the way of needed updates.
Trying to find a middle ground between those two
extremes in the beginning keeps everyone happy:
for example, instead of having a daily blog, maybe
have a weekly or semi-weekly one.
Finally, once a site is on the web, it is open
to the inevitable influx of electronic junk mail, or
“spam.” This was a particular problem in managing page and post comments from the public within
Wordpress. At the beginning of the project, the
visitor comments were easy to find and directly
responded to, being often posted on the site directly. As time progressed and the number of posts
increased, the site administrator’s “Comments” box
filled rapidly with gibberish that was meant to bypass various spam filters built into many programs.
I acknowledge that I may have invited the influx
by eagerly replying to one of the generic “What
a fantastic site! I’d love to learn more about what
you are doing…” messages that I thought was from
a site visitor but was actually a spam “bot” scouring blogs for replies from people like me. Within a
few days, archeologyatzilker.com had thousands of
spam comments for every one legitimate comment.
It was impossible to manually wade through all of
the comments to find legitimate ones and address
them. After the page was developed and excavations
eventually ceased, I learned that Wordpress has an
effective spam filter that removes most of the junk
content built in called Aksimet; however, it was
not turned on. In the future, spam filtering software
should be activated immediately. It may not filter
everything out, but it will help tremendously.
Ideas for the Future
While the excavation and web development
team utilized a variety of tools in creating archeologyatzilker.com, I also thought of several ideas for
future sites that could, under the right conditions,
improve the public experience even more. Utilizing social networking websites like Twitter (twitter.
com) and Facebook (facebook.com), and opensource, web-based word processing and spreadsheet
software, such as Google Docs (docs.google.com),
an excavation’s web component could be a substantial and lasting contribution to the public’s perception of archeology.
Twitter is a free personal blogging service that
allows a user to post a number of short (125-character) statements, called “Tweets,” that other visitors,

410

Texas Archeological Society

called “Followers,” can see in real time. Tweets can
be updated directly through the Twitter webpage or
through a variety of third-party programs and applications, including a cell phone text message. Most
Twitter Tweets discuss a person’s daily activities
or thoughts they may have. Creating an excavation
Twitter account could prove to be an interesting addition to the project’s web presence in particularly
artifact- or feature-rich sites by allowing archeologists to use their cell phone or an on-site computer
to tweet about what they are finding at that moment:
i.e., “I am bisecting a small hearth…” or “we have
found a cache of dart points…” Tweets could also
be tied to entries in an artifact catalog, allowing
members of the public to follow the goings-on and
finds in real time. When used as an artifact catalog,
the archived tweets also provide a convenient,
time-stamped, record of the course of excavations.
Furthermore, with various Wordpress plug-ins, those
Tweets can be presented and updated on the site’s
main page automatically without sending the site
visitor away.
Along with Twitter, Facebook has become a
juggernaut in the world of social networking and
advertising. If harnessed in the right ways, Facebook
could also prove to be an excellent way to add to
a project’s web presence (Figure 13). By creating
a free Facebook account for the excavation and
periodically updating that account, the public can
follow the excavation as a “Fan” or “Friend.” Public
visitors could add their own comments to these posts
just as easily, although there is less control of the
comment contents on the part of the archeologists.
Again, with Wordpress plug-ins, updates on one site
(the main excavation web page or Facebook) can be
updated on the other, keeping the process as direct
and simple as possible. As many readers know,
people are much more often (too often, maybe?)
going to check up on their Facebook account than
navigate to an excavation page. If the excavation has
a Facebook presence, there is a greater opportunity
to keep those members of the public interested in
the site.
Finally, the free, online office suite provided by
Google, called Google Docs™, may also prove very
useful in the right contexts. With a Gmail account,
a user has access to a free assortment of web-based
word processing, spreadsheet, and presentation
programs stored online. These programs are accessed and utilized through a user’s web browser,
although they behave in a manner that is similar
to more familiar word processing office suites.

Archeologists may wish to consider providing a
secure, unalterable, copy of an excavation’s artifact
catalog on Google Docs’ spreadsheet program and
make that spreadsheet accessible to site visitors, or
upload the site map as a single slide in a Presentation
file (Figure 14). The catalog could be made available to school children as a supplement to a lesson
explaining how archeologists use data (patterning,
mathematics, etc.) to learn about past cultures, potentially for use as a science project. Students and
visitors could be encouraged to download the data,
manipulate it as they see fit, and create their own
interpretations of the site and its occupants.
Conclusions
Overall, the latest tools and content that are
available on the internet are a far cry from what
was available a short time ago. I was surprised by
the breadth and depth of this content and impressed
with the ease at which much of that content could
be used. Archeologyatzilker.com was a significant
contribution to the Zilker excavation’s public involvement component because the tools that were
used were so accessible, both from the archeologists’
standpoint as well as that of the general public. A
changing page gave visitors a reason to come back,
and making those changes was much easier than
initially anticipated. As long as proper preparations
are made, archeologists should look to the web and
all of the great techniques and tricks that are readily
available to bring the public into the excavation. It
is a lot easier than it seems, so get in there and give
it a try!
Acknowledgements
The excavations at Zilker Park and the public
involvement experience that went along with it
were such a success due in no small part to many
people at the City of Austin, the Texas Historical
Commission (THC), and the primary archeological contracting firms. Many thanks go out to Jules
Parrish, the project manager at the City of Austin’s
Public Works Department, for not only overseeing
such a massive undertaking, but for being such an
enthusiastic proponent of the public involvement
effort, including the website. Her interest in the
project, and what the public got out of it, proved
invaluable. I would like to thank James Bruseth and

Miller—Flickr to Flakes and Blogs to Bifaces

Figure 13. An example of an archeology-themed Facebook account: the Institute of Nautical Archaeology.

411

412

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 14. Sample data (from excavations at another site) uploaded into a Google Docs spreadsheet that could be made
available to site visitors for interpretation.

Mark Denton (along with the rest of the THC staff)
for realizing the opportunity that this excavation
could provide for getting the public interested in
archeology: it clearly paid off. Additionally, Nathan
Hanners, web designer from Really Really Big Industries, made a lot of my job in developing the site
much easier by taking over the more challenging
nuts and bolts of web development. I would also
like to thank the site’s contributors (Rich Jones and
David Nickels) for keeping things going at the end
of a long day. Finally, I would like to thank Rachel
Feit and Nick Trierweiler of EComm for bringing
my Hicks & Company team along on this exciting
project, encouraging me to develop this site, and
devising such an enriching public experience to

begin with. So many park visitors’ smiling faces
and curious questions are a testament to their efforts.
References Cited
Nickels, D. L., M. D. Miller, and W. N. Trierweiler
2010 Archaeological Excavation of a Deeply Buried
Paleoindian Component at the Vara Daniel Site
(41TV1364), Travis County, Texas. Ecological Communications Corporation, Austin, Texas.
Wikipedia
2010 “Web 2.0”. Electronic Document. Accessed November 11, 2010. Available URL: http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Web_2.0.

Authors

Robson Bonnichsen, Center for the Study of the First Americans, Department of Anthropology, Texas
A&M University, College Station (deceased)
C. Britt Bousman, Department of Anthropology, Texas State University, San Marcos
Jim Bruseth, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
John A. Campbell, Department of Anthropology, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State
University, San Marcos
Steve Carpenter, SWCA Environmental Consultants, Inc., Austin
Patricia A. Clabaugh, Texas A&M University Press, College Station
Michael B. Collins, Department of Anthropology, Texas State University, San Marcos
Linda Scott Cummings, PaleoResearch Institute, Inc., Golden, Colorado
Shanna Daniel, North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources, Greenville, North Carolina
Jeff Durst, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Charles Gordy, Houston Archeological Society, Houston
Christian T. Hartnett, SWCA Environmental Consultants, Inc., Austin
Bradford M. Jones, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
James W. Karbula, William Self Associates, Inc., Austin
Andrew L. Malof, Lower Colorado River Authority, Austin
Robert Marcom, Community Archaeology Research Institute, Houston
Pat Mercado-Allinger, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Mason D. Miller, Ecological Communications Corporation, Austin
Myles R. Miller, Geo-Marine, Inc., Austin
Tiffany Osburn, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82 (2011)

414

Texas Archeological Society

Timothy K. Perttula, Archeological & Environmental Consultants, LLC, Austin
Bill Pierson, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Robert A. Ricklis, TRC, Corpus Christi
Richard O. Rose, Midland Archeological Society, Midland
Eric A. Schroeder, Applied Archeological Services, Inc., Cedar Creek, Texas
Harry J. Shafer, San Antonio
Matthew S. Taylor, Premier Exhibitions, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia
Alston V. Thoms, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station
Solveig A. Turpin, Institute of Latin American Studies, The University of Texas at Austin
Juan Urista, Department of Anthropological Sciences, Radford University, Radford, Virginia
Mark A. Walters, Kilgore
Michael R. Waters, Center for the Study of the First Americans, Departments of Anthropology and
Geography, Texas A&M University, College Station
James Woodrick, Texas Archeological Society Member, Houston
David M. Yelacic, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University, San Marcos
William L. Young, Texas Archeological Stewards Network, Corsicana (deceased)

