!

Bulletin of the

TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY Volume 80/2009
Timothy K. Perttula, Editor

Published by

TE
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
at Austin

2009

CONTENTS
The Legacy of William Curry Holden: Texas Archeological Society Founder
and Texas Tech Renaissance Man
Jane Holden Kelley ......................... . ................. ... .. .......... . . 1
An 18,000 Year Old Occupation along Petronila Creek in Texas
C.R. Lewis . ......... . . ... ..... . .. . ... . .... .. .... . .. . ... ... . ... ..... ......... 15
The Gatlin Site and the Early-to-Middle Archaic Chronology of the Southern
Edwards Plateau, Texas
Brett A. Houk, Kevin A. Miller, and Eric R. Oksanen . .... . .... ....... .. . ... .. ... .. ... 51
Geochemical Evidence for a Mexican Source of Origin for an Obsidian Artifact
from South Central Texas
Richard E. Hughes and Thomas R. Hester .. .. ... ... .. .. ... ....... .. . .. .. .... .. ... . 77
I

Avian Procurement and Use by Middle Ceramic Period People on the Southern
High Plains: A Design for Investigations
Christopher Lintz . ............. . .. .. . . .. ... .... .. .. .... ......... . ....... . ..... 85
Stable Isotope Analysis of Diet of the Mexican War Dead from the Battle
of Resaca de la Palma
Christine A. Jones ... ... ....... .... . ... ...... ............... . ............ .. .. 133
Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site (41NA49)
in Nacogdoches County, Texas: 1985 Texas Archeological Field School Investigations
Timothy K. Perttula, with the contributions of Bo Nelson and Mark Walters .............. 145
Investigations at the Gene and Ruth Ann Stallings Ranch Site (41LR297)
Jim Bruseth, Jeff Durst, Richard Proctor, Larry Banks, Gary Sykes, and Bill Pierson . ...... 195
List of Authors .. . ........ .... .. .. .. . . ...... . . . . ... . .. ... .. .... .. .. ... .... .... .... 207

iii

The Legacy of William Curry Holden: Texas Archeological
Society Founder and Texas Tech Renaissance Man 1
Jane Holden Kelley

Archeology has changed markedly over the
last 80 or 90 years_:_as has the cultural context in
which it was embedded. From the 1920s until World
War II, disciplinary boundaries were lower and the
distinctions between avocational and vocational
archeologists were sometimes blurred. More than
a decade ago, the late Mott Davis wrote about the
early history of archeology in Texas in which enthusiastic individuals not trained in anthropology
and/or archeology played key roles (Davis 1992).
He noted that this kind of history of the emergence
of archeology was not atypical for other parts of the
United States in the 1920s and 1930s. He recognized James E. Pearce and Cyrus N. Ray as the two
primary founding pioneers, listing my dad, William
Curry Holden (Figure 1), as a third pioneer, while
noting that his influence was not as great as that of
either Pearce or Ray. Whether or not Curry should
be regarded as a founding pioneer for the entire

Figure 1. Curry Holden.

state, he certainly played a . significant role in the
development of West Texas archeology between the
late 1920s and the 1950s.
I want to set the stage with something about the
background of my dad and his family because he was
definitely a product of that background. He was born
in Limestone County, in East Texas, to Robert Lee
Holden and Grace Davis Holden in 1896 (Figure 2).
Both of his parents were born in Arkansas. Robert
E. Lee Holden was the first of his immediate family
to ride into Texas (on a horse named Rowdy) in the
early 1890s. After a year, he returned to Arkansas to
tell the family he was moving south. His parents and
siblings soon followed. Grace Davis was already in
Limestone County, having been taken from Arkansas
to Texas as a small child in the 1870s.
The saga of the Holden family nicely illustrates
one pattern of settlement of Texas. In this case,
related families moved across the southern states

Figure 2. Curry about 1896 or 1897.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 80 (2009)

2

Texas Archeological Society

to Arkansas and thence to Texas.
Within Texas, they progressively
headed roughly west and southwest in clusters that broke up and
reformed in different places. The
first big family move within Texas
was a jump from Limestone County to Colorado City in Mitchell
County-a trip made on the train.
Grandpa Davis is said to have had
itchy feet, and was always wanting to move. So Robert and Grace
regretfully sold a section of good
farmland and moved back east to
Macauley, and from there to Rotan
(Figure 3).
Figure 3. The Holden clan about 1907. Grandma and Grandpa Holden are
The three Holden brothers of
seated center front, with their sons and one daughter and their spouses and
Harral, Curry, and Tom did most
children.
Curry is to the right of Grandma Holden and in front of his mother,
of their growing up on a farm in
Grace
Davis
Holden. Robert Lee Holden, Curry's father, is to Grace's right.
the community of Pleasant Valley near Rotan. Their dad was a
but they owned the dirt (T. Holden n.d.). And they
carpenter, builder, and farmer. The lure that took
were not a lot poorer than some of the other farmers
them to Rotan was the idea that the railroad would
around them. Pleasant Valley, although small, had a
go through the town. In anticipation, there was a
very strong sense of community, as is suggested in
spurt of building, and Curry's father built many of
a photograph of a community cotton picking for the
the buildings on Main Street. He also bought some
Pleasant Valley Church (Figure 4 ).
land in shinnery country that he and his sons broke
Grace had been a teacher, and Robert was self
for plowing. After the railroad bypassed Rotan, and
taught, and one of the most informed citizens in his
the building boom collapsed, Robert turned more of
community. They both had a high respect for readhis attention to farming, although he continued to
ing and education that was passed on to their chiluse his carpentry and building skills for the family
dren. Harral and Curry, being just two years apart,
and others. The family was dirt poor, as Tom said,
made a pact to get educated. One would
work and support the other, and then they
would change places. Unfortunately, Harral
died young and Curry had to provide the
resources for his education alone. He did
this by getting qualifications to teach at
Stamford College, and teaching locally for
a couple of years. In 1920, when he was 24,
he went to the University of Texas, where
he worked his way through joint majors in
Government and History in three years, and
completed his Ph.D. in another four-all
the while holding various kinds of jobs.
His interest in politics and government was
initially stronger than his commitment to
history, but he tilted toward history, with
Eugene Barker as his doctoral supervisor.
This part of his life story is not unlike that
of J. M. Pearce, one of Mott Davis' two
Figure 4. Communal cotton picking for the church in Pleasant
pioneers, except Pearce was never able to
Valley.

Kelley-The Legacy of William Curry Holden 3

\

finish his Ph.D. Like Pearce, my dad put in time at
other universities, with summer schools at the University of Chicago and University of Colorado.
The three historians who influenced Curry most
were W. E. Dodd at the University of Chicago during
a summer course there, Eugene C. Barker, his supervisor and mentor, and, interestingly, Walter P. Webb
of The Great Plains fame (Webb 1931)-a book
that was itself a product of much the same factors
as those that influenced Curry (Holden 1967-1968).
Curry actually participated in a series of seminars
with Webb at the University of Texas, and noted that
Webb's chapter on the buffalo was essentially his
own term paper from one of the seminars, a paper
that he himself later used in his own Ph.D. thesis,
Alkali Trails.
I have no idea if my dad knew Pearce in Austin.
I never heard him talk about him. Pearce was sometimes identified as a historian, or an institutional
historian, a,nd he oversaw the shift from a department of lnsti,tutional History to the founding of an
Anthropology department. Mott Davis sees "real"
archeology as beginning when Pearce hired the
University of Chicago-trained Gilbert McAllister for
the anthropology department in the late 1930s. I had
courses with McAllister in the early 1950s, and he
definitely had a negative attitude about the quality

of anthropology at Texas Tech, which, of course,
meant my dad. Although I was entering the Master's
program, McAlli,ster insisted I take his beginning
anthropology course, and this was the beginning of
a distant but _lasting friendship.
·
Pearce was at the University of Texas the entire time my dad wa,s attending university, but I
do not think my dad took any courses in that other
c;.iepartment. Credit for the Holden family entry into
anthropology must be given to my mother, Ira Olive
Price Holden. It was my mother who took courses
from George C. Engerrand in the mid-1920s, presumably in the department Pearce headed. I later
took courses from Engerrand in the early 1950s
when he was certainly in his 80s. (It was said that
he never put his birth date on any document, and so
the university had no legal grounds to retire him).
Engerrand, . incidentally, served on the founding
board of the Texas Archeological and Pale~ntological Society (TAPS}.
,.
Partly through her courses with I;:ngerrand,
and partly through her training as a librarian, she
developed a passionate and rather romantic interest
in American Indians. This showed in the pueblo
architecture of the house she designed on 20th St.
in Lubbock, now a designated historical building
by the state of Texas (Figure 5) . When she and my

Figure 5. Curry and Olive Holden about, 1933 .in the Puebloan style house that Olive designed.

4

Texas Archeological Society

dad spent a summer in Chicago, she dedicated her
time to copying out large sections of Schoolcraft
(1884) by hand-that being in the pre-copier era.
She read widely in the anthropological literature of
the 1920s and 1930s, being especially fascinated
by Southwestern groups and what she regarded as
the beautiful poetry of translated Navaho myths and
rituals. As a librarian, she did much of the search/
find/annotate/copy/and show-to-my-dad of the relevant literature of the era.
Even before he finished his Ph.D., Curry
was teaching history full time at McMurray College in Abilene, where he met the second pioneer
chronicled by Mott Davis: Cyrus N. Ray. Dr. Ray
was an Abilene osteopath with wide interests that
ranged from mineralogy, to breeding irises, and to
phosphorescence in earthworms (Davis 1992:208).
As Mott notes, "he rode his hobbies hard," and he
was "energetic, forceful, opinionated, courteous,
upright and stubborn." Curry called him "a pack-rat
with an inquiring mind" (Holden 1967-1968). I can
remember enough about him to verify that he was
indeed opinionated and stubborn, and to this list I
can add: he was loud. Since my dad was one of the
founders with Ray of the TAPS in 1929, and since
we moved to Lubbock in the fall of 1929 when my
dad accepted a job in the history department at Texas
Tech, I assume that my dad knew Ray from Abilene,
and had worked with him there.
Curry remembered that the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society had been founded
by Cyrus Ray, Ted Sayles, and himself (Holden
1967-1968). He mentioned that they got a number
of West Texans to support the venture who had no
interest in archeology per se, but who felt that it was
worthwhile to support such ventures, presumably
as part of the overall advancement of West Texas
from frontier status to a more 'cultured' state. He
mentioned a McMurray College faculty member and
several men from Hardin Simmons, both in Abilene,
as showing such support (Holden 1967-1968). In
the same vein, Curry was one of those who were
instrumental in creating the West Texas Historical
Society in the same year that TAPS was founded,
and he worked with that Society as much as he did
with TAPS.
Ted Sayles worked with Ray in Abilene,
published in the TAPS bulletin and served as the
first vice president of the society. He later got a job
with Harold Gladwin at Gila Pueblo (from whence
he conducted the 1933 survey of Chihuahua-a
marathon veriture of great interest to me in my present

work). The Ray/Sayles relationship deteriorated (as,
seemingly most of Ray's relationships did sooner
or later), with Ray later referring to Sayles as "that
professional bushwacker and credit stealer" (Letter
from Ray to W. C. Holden, quoted in Tunnell
[2000:47]).
Mott Davis noted that Ray wrote to Hooton and
other notables about his beliefs that his Clear Fork
Culture was very old (as old as Folsom) and that
the people were physically primitive. My dad told a
related story in which Ray attended a meeting of the
American Anthropological Association (AAA), setting up a table outside of a session he knew Hooton
would attend. At the end of the session, he stood at
the table beating together two femurs from a deeply
buried site to attract Hooten's attention, which he
did. Whether it was the letters, or the side-show at
the AAA, Hooton (1933) published an article in the
TAPS bulletin on five of the crania.
I remember Dr. Ray attending a TAPS meeting
in Alpine in the early 1950s. The entire group was
taken across the border to Ojinaga for supper. Ray
strode around the place (and I use that verb advisedly) announcing that he could read Spanish-and
fluently reading out the words Coca Cola, Ford, and
the like.
Mott gave Ray credit for being more than a curio collector, as having a sense of the importance of
cultural context, and~most importantly-as having
a firm enough appreciation of science to establish a
respectable journal that was rapidly accepted across
the United States by high status anthropologists.
However, Ray's own archeological work was so
chaotically organized that Marie Wormington said
·that "the only way to approach the publications dealing with this area is with a large bottle of aspirin in
either hand" (Wormington 1944:39-40, quoted in
Davis [1992:209]).
I wonder, with no real knowledge, if one of my
dad's contributions to the development of Texas
archeology was to keep Cyrus Ray from self destructing. Judging by the correspondence published
by Curtis Tunnell (2000), and the fact that Ray put
his precious collections into the Museum at Texas
Tech, it seems as if Ray never came to blows with
Curry. Perhaps Curry provided a balancing factor
that allowed that portion of the fragile boat of early
Texas archeology represented in the structure of the
TAPS to continue to function.
As one of the founding members of TAPS,
my dad was quite active in the society from 1929
until at least 195011951. He was on the board for

Kelley-The Legacy of William Curry Holden 5

two decades, and was Editor of Publications for
1948/1949 and 1950/1951, taking over directly from
Cyrus Ray who had been Editor from 1929 to 1948.
I have the feeling that the division of labor was not
as well defined as position titles published in the
Bulletin might lead one to believe. Curry told the
story of the way in which he managed to get out an
issue of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society during the depression, when
membership in the society fell and their finances
could not cover the production of a volume, this at
a time when he was not the official editor. As Head
of the Department of History at Texas Tech, he had
left-over funds of $120. He requisitioned enough
"files" to account for the $120, and used the money
for the Bulletin. This sort of expedient problem solving was entirely characteristic of him.
He published four articles in the Bulletin
and attended many of the annual meetings during those years. My dad's account of early TAPS
meetings in Curtis Tunnell's interview brought
back memories to me of all the people mentioned,
from Judge Simms to Colonel Crimmins (Tunnell
2000). However, as a child I was not privy to the
Lasso tequila at Judge Simms open bar, or to my
dad's own Baptist (non-alcoholic) and Episcopalian
(alcoholic) punches served when the TAPS met at
the Museum in Lubbock.
It is interesting that in the years between leaving Rotan/Pleasant Valley for Austin, and the early
days in Lubbock, my dad had not only left the farm
behind, but he had abandoned the total abstinence
patterns of his upbringing. In fact, he came to delight in bringing back tequila and other libations
across the Mexican border, and I once counted a
large number of bottles of tequila in a locked room
in our basement. He specialized in frozen daiquiris
during the 1950s, turning to margaritas for subsequent decades.
Not only does Curry's involvement in archeology date back to his McMurray days, but his entry
into the museum field can be traced to this period.
There was a problem of boys at McMurray stealing
chickens and the like. The college president asked
Curry to do something about this. He got the chicken
stealers interested in local history and collecting
local historical objects, taking over a small stone
building that had been a dressing room for a sports
team for a museum.
Dr. John C. Granberry, head of the history department at Texas Tech, invited Curry to leave McMurray and come to Texas Technological College,

as it was then called, in 1929. Granberry is listed as
a Regional Vice-President of TAPS from Lubbock
in the first volume of the Bulletin, and I wonder if
he and my dad were already interacting. Perhaps
Granberry was one of those West Texas scholars
who supported a range of cultural societies for the
greater good of West Texas. In Curry's Southwest
Collection interview, he credits a former McMurray
student, who moved on to Tech to further his education, in interesting Granberry to hire him.
Upon arrival in Lubbock, Curry was put in
charge of the collections that had gravitated to the
young university on the basis of his McMurray
"museum" experience. The collections were then
housed in the ill-lit attic of the Chemistry building in
a chicken wire enclosure. The thing I best remember
was a stuffed two-headed calf.
From this beginning, Curry slowly built a
museum from a hole in the ground, through the
give-a-brick campaign, to the basement plus two
stories-plus-attic building that filled out two sides
of an proposed square that was finally completed
many years later. Along the way he master-minded
a great pageant based on Coronado's entry into
Texas-complete with horses-at the Lubbock fair
grounds for the 1936 Texas Centennial.
In my dad's credo, things had TO GET DONE.
You did that by identifying needs and opportunities,
and then by bulldogging through whatever seemed
the best path at the time, as was illustrated by the
way in which he got out a depression era issue of the
TAPS Bulletin. You made opportunities, and you did
not have to be an expert in a field to get involved.
This is nowhere better illustrated in my dad's case
than in the story of how Texas Tech got into the business of offering Ph.Ds, a story I take from a Texas
Tech Ph.D. dissertation by Betsy Goebel Jones
(1983). My multi-purpose dad was Graduate Dean
at the time (as well as Museum director and head of
the History department), under President Wiggins.
In that role, he had been attending the Southern
Conference of Graduate Deans for some years and
observing how they operated and the standards that
applied. He and Wiggins decided that nothing succeeds like a fait accompli. They agreed that four
departments met the standards required for offering
a Ph.D. They decided to go for it-without legislative approval, without approval from the Board of
Governors, without approval from the Southern
Conference of Graduate Deans, and without consulting the four departments selected. The latter
discovered their new degree granting status when

6

Texas Archeological Society

the annual calendar was put into their hands. My
dad was later quoted as saying, with regard to the
Southern Conference response, that they "appointed
a committee to come out here and they toured and
read and ripped and roared ... But it didn' t make any
difference. It was done and done as well as if we'd
had 400 committee meetings about it. It was time to
do it, and we did it" (Jones 1983:114-115).
Curry jumped into field archeology with brashness equaling his becoming a Museum person, or
hisfait accompli of moving Tech into Ph.D. granting
statue. His first field work was a disastrous affair that
I never heard him discuss, but it is rather gleefully
related in the Tunnell (2000) interview, and written
up as his first article in TAPS. It seems that while
he was still at McMurray, one of his "boys" (possibly one of the chicken stealers) had graduated and
taken a job in Perryton. He wrote to my dad to say
he had found a "buried city" at Wolf Creek, in the
Panhandle, and that his old professor ought to get
some of the "boys" and come up at Easter, 1929,
and they would dig it out. Curry got three or four
"boys" (judging by the photo in Tunnell [2000: 12],
which does not include my dad, contrary to the
caption) and they proceeded to throw the dirt out of
two slab-outlined rooms. One of the boys let people
in Abilene know about the lost city, and this news
hit both the Associated Press and the United Press.
However, it turned out that the city was not lost at
all, and was just one of many sites Floyd Studer of
Canyon had recorded along the Canadian River between the New Mexico and Oklahoma lines. Studer
was not pleased with the publicity about a site he
knew well, and whose location he had been trying to
keep secret to avoid such looting episodes. In time,
Studer and Curry became good friends and fellow
promoters of archeology, and it was Studer who
encouraged Curry to dig at Saddleback Ruin .
The following year, after the move to Texas
Tech, Curry ran a summer course that established
a pattern for some of his anthropology and/or archeology summer courses for the next decade or
more. This first group of students headquartered in
an abandoned Forestry house at the San Geronimo
Ranger Station near Las Vegas, New Mexico. Armed
with nutritional advice from the Department of
Home Economics, and food purchased in bulk, the
group did their own cooking, had lectures, and, using the many boxes of books taken along, wrote term
papers on some topic. Tecolote was nearby, and they
visited the site and must have excavated there since
there are collections from Tecolote in the Texas Tech

Museum. The last week they did a camping tour of
Santa Fe and Chaco Canyon (T. Holden n.d.).
In 1931 , Curry moved into active fieldwork in
the Canadian valley at Saddleback ruin (Holden
1933)-work that later formed the basis for Alex
Krieger's (1946) Panhandle Aspect. After the Wolf
Creek episode, this was his first "real" excavation,
and- according to his brother Tom (who accompanied Curry on many of these 1930s excursions)Curry was determined to do it "by the book." He
seems to have gained some idea of excavation techniques from reading Moorehead' s ( 1931) accounts
of digging along the Arkansas River.
In 1932, Curry began work at Arrowhead Ruin,
near Pecos. Again his brother Tom went along. They
lived at the Arrowhead tourist court, then owned by
the Slaughters. One of the students, J. M. Kayser,
was chief cook and truck driver. The site was located
on a mesa with a view of the mission at Pecos Pueblo several miles to the east. It was one of the several
sites that grew up around Pecos in late prehistoric
times. The squarish eastern room block contained a
central plaza and an unusual D-shaped kiva. Several
rooms and the kiva were excavated over the next 15
or so years. My dad, who had inherited his father's
carpentry and building skills, reconstructed the
kiva and a two-storied portion of the room block
(Figure 6). At least one Master's thesis was written
on Arrowhead Ruin, and I eventually wrote a short
summary of it (J. Holden 1955).
The Arrowhead field seasons always included
lectures on Rio Grande pueblo ethnography, attendance at rain dances (often at Santo Domingo),
visits to San Ildefonso and Maria Martinez, visits
to other pueblos, Saturday trips to Santa Fe, and a
camping trip to major sites around the Southwest,
always including Chaco, Mesa Verde, and Canyon
de Chelly. In those days, we camped inside Pueblo
Bonito! At least once, we attended a Hopi snake
dance. My childhood memory of that event concerns
not the Snake dance itself, but the fear of the Texas
Tech group at their camp at the base of the mesa that
night. The atmosphere of fear, that must have been
quite pervasive for it to have entered my memory as
it did, arose from the fact that so many rattlesnakes
had just been turned loose in the vicinity.
My dad said that he and some of his students
went to the first Pecos Conference-at Pecos-and
they were snubbed and made to feel unwelcome
by the "real" professionals like A. V. Kidder. This
does not square at all with the account in Richard
Woodbury's (1993) book on the History of the Pecos

Kelley-The Legacy of William Curry Holden 7
my dad insisted that we be the
ones to write it up, thereby giving
me my first publication (Holden
and Quinn 1949). One of his favorite stories concerned a Clovis
point that someone had brought
to him in the early 1930s. It was
left on his desk as home, and, as
the story went, I found it, took
it outside, and promptly lost it.
It is believed to reside under the
pavement of 20th Street. My dad
always ended the story by saying
that because of my guilt in losing
the Clovis point, I was forced to
become an archeologist to expiate
that particular sin.
My dad's teaching ability
formed another aspect of his imFigure 6. Curry reconstructing the kiva at Arrowhead Ruin, 1930s.
pact on West Texans. There was
already an anthropology course
on the books at Texas Tech when he arrived there
Conference, where there is a list of all attendees
in the fall of 1929, and he was assigned that course
from all conferences, and my dad's name does
not appear. Nor do I feel that Kidder would have
as part of his teaching duties. He wrote away for
behaved in such a superior way, since he always
Kroeber's textbook and stayed one lecture ahead
seemed to me (and to others) to be such a nice
of his students. The course proved popular, and, in
gentleman. I can hardly conceive of Kidder being
time, more courses were offered and more students
anything but polite.2 On the other hand, I do not
took them. By 1936, a Master's degree was offered
think my dad would have made up a story of that
at Texas Tech in anthropology, which, insofar as I
sort. So, who knows what happened? If nothing
know, only involved archeology from its inception
else, the story indicates the degree of isolation that
until well after World War II. I once heard Clyde
my dad felt in his archeological work from "real"
Kluckhohn at Harvard discuss a survey he had done
professionals during those early days.
of graduate programs in anthropology at different
Throughout the 1930s, my dad mostly alterdates, and in 1936, there were, as I recall, only 13
nated summer seasons between Arrowhead Ruin and
universities in the entire U.S. offering graduate protaking groups of students to Mexico City, where they
grams, and one of these was the Master's program
stayed in the Hotel Monte Carlo (with its drive-in
at Texas Tech set up by my Dad, the sole person
lobby), and had lectures on all manners of topics
doing or teaching anthropology from 1929 to after
dealing with Mexican history and prehistory, wrote
World War II.
papers on selected topics using the transported liI took all of the Anthropology courses offered
brary, toured accessible sites and museums, visited
at Texas Tech between 1945 and 1949 from him. He
the buildings with the Diego Rivera murals, ate at
was a superb storyteller, and he made every lecture
Sanborn's, thereby providing a rich cultural experia story. He would get the entire class so wrapped up
ence for West Texans. I went along in 1934 and 1938
in the story of the day that if he ran 15 minutes or
(Kelley 2008).
even half an hour over time, no one started packing
Curry also found time to excavate Murrah Cave,
up their books to leave at the designated hour.
a dry cave in the Big Bend area, which is one of the
He was teaching Evolution in the Bible Belt,
few actual cave sites in that region, as opposed to
and he was teaching anthropology of race in a racrock shelters. He routinely responded to requests for
ist area. There were occasional knee jerk responses
an archeologist to come look at sites and artifacts.
to the evolutionary teaching and museum displays.
For example, Jean Quinn and I went along on the
I can remember such a time in the early 1940s. The
Finger Cave exploration just off the Caprock, and
West Texas Museum was just a basement containing

8

Texas Archeological Society

a few cases depicting human and faunal evolutionas well as a very popular shrunken head exhibit and
the durable two headed-calf. A fundamentalist minister stood just off campus on Broadway and College
Ave. (as it was then), and handed out pamphlets
about the heresy in the subterranean den of iniquity.
Of course, all of us who volunteered or worked in
the museum had to go by and pick up copies.
Later when I taught introductory anthropology
at Texas Tech, I too received a series of reactions
from fundamentalists . My favorite concerned the
man who refused to believe in Clovis age mammoths. At the time of that particular class, the Clovis
site was actively being investigated by individuals from different institutions, and five mammoth
skeletons were exposed at the same time. I told my
class that this was the chance of a lifetime to see so
many exposed Clovis mammoths, suggesting that
if they could arrange it, they ought to pay a visit
that weekend because the mammoths would soon
be removed. One man simply couldn't believe that
there were "elephants" of that age. They were, if I
would but admit it, circus elephants. He said, very
sincerely, that he knew that I was such a nice "girl"
that I couldn't possibly believe that, and if I would
tell him who was forcing me to tell such lies, he
would set them straight.
On the subject of race, I suppose you could
call my dad an enlightened racist. He grew up in a
rather pure white environment where there was a
single Lebanese shopkeeper and one Jew in town.
He may not have seen a black person until he was
in his late teens in 1914 when blacks were brought
into the Rotan community from the Dallas area
to pick cotton for the first time. Earlier, there was
a black cook at the Rotan hotel whose presence
was known, but he was virtually invisible to local
inhabitants. Curry knew that his mother's family,
the Davises and/or the Trammels, had owned
slaves in Arkansas before the Civil War (although
the Holdens ' had not), and both his maternal and
paternal grandfather's had been in the Confederate
army. Indeed, Curry's own father was named for
General Robert E. Lee. I suspect that stories of
the Indian wars (also embodying a strong dose of
racism) were probably of greater interest to boys of
his era in West Texas than stories of slavery, since
the Indian frontier involved their own geographical
area and was quite fresh in living memories (Figure
7). I can remember Saturday evenings in the 1930s
when the Indian Wars dominated the story telling of
get-togethers of the Horsethieves (see below), with

at least one person, K. N. Klapp, giving what seemed
to me, as a child, to be first-hand accounts of battles
(but that I now suspect were second-hand), with all
participants well informed on this topic.
When discussing race in anthropology classes,
my dad would say that his own views had been
formed by the time and place he had been raised,
and he knew his views were not in line with anthropological views. However, what the class had
to know was what the textbook said, and the main
texts, year after year, tended to be by Kroeber, Hooten, and Linton.
Insofar as I can remember, he had relatively few
students go on to become professional archeologists.
Although several Master's theses were written on the
Texas Tech summer school archeology projectsnone were by people who went on to become
archeologists. Joe Ben Wheat was, of course, the
first of those from Texas Tech who made a name for
himself in professional archeology. Earl Green did
important work in Early Man studies. I suppose I
should include myself since I became a professional
archeologist-more or less in spite of myself. A
number of people associated with the 1950s Sierra
Blanca field schools went on to become archeologists, but by then my dad was not very involved in
the actual operation of the field schools.

Figure 7. Curry dressed up with guns and
knives, 1920s, perhaps illustrating his
fascination with the "Wild West."

Kelley-The Legacy of William Curry Holden 9

Joe Ben Wheat, a young man from Van Horn,
was at Texas Tech when a high school student
bought the first Folsom point from the Lubbock
Lake site to my dad's office in the museum. Joe
Ben undertook the initial work at the site, under the
auspices of my dad and the museum. He went on to
become the first Ph.D. out of the brand new Ph.D.
program at the University of Arizona, beating out
Charles Di Peso by a nose. He distinguished himself
first with the monograph on the Mogollon culture
(Wheat 1955), subsequently carving out other large
niches for himself in Early Man studies as well as
becoming a noted authority on Navaho weaving.
Earl Green was a crucial part of the 1950s Texas
Tech field schools. He received his Ph.D. in geology
and paleontology from Texas Tech, and worked at
the Lubbock Lake and Blackwater Draw sites, and
was, briefly, the director of the Museum here, before
moving to Texas Parks and Wildlife.
I cannot say that either Joe Ben or Earl were
really trained by my dad. Joe Ben was already interested in archeology by the time he got to Texas Tech.
He had roamed the country around his hometown of
Van Horn as a boy collecting arrowheads. However,
it is fair to say that both Joe Ben and Earl got their
first opportunity to do "real" archeology under the
auspices of my dad, as I did. Personally, I have always felt the lack of having attended a field school
like Point of Pines. Instead I carried out seven field
seasons with the Sierra Blanca field schools on a
shoe-string budget and learn-as-you-go basis: with
the result that there was much that I never learned
that I would have had the opportunity to learn in a
more structured field school. When faced with the
two tons of collected materials from which to extract
a Harvard dissertation (rather than the settlement
pattern study of Tula I had envisioned), I had to perform a large-scale salvage operation (Kelley 1984).
My dad provided a major assist to my dissertation
by acquiring the use of the hayloft of the old dairy
barn on campus and setting up three rows of trestle
tables running the length of the hayloft that allowed
me to lay out two tons of collections. This kind of
space providing visibility of the entire collection
was a luxury I never again experienced.
After World War II, Curry handed off much of the
summer teaching to another ranching historian, Bill
Pearce. I dug at Arrowhead under Bill Pearce's direction in 1948, and Bill took the Mexico City summer
course in 1949, and I was along on that one as well.
My dad's ethnographic and historical forays
into Sonora were perhaps less stimulated by his

anthropological interests than they were by the allure
of stories about the Yaqui wars. These stories shared
much with the stories of the Wild West that were
common at the weekly Saturday night gatherings
of an unchronicled group called the Horsethieves
during the 1930s and later. 3
In 1932, or thereabouts, Curry met a retired
Border Patrolman named Williams who had worked
for years along the Arizona border out of Nogales.
He had seen a lot of Yaquis and gotten interested
in their history; he told Curry about them. I do not
know where Curry met Mr. Williams (perhaps in
Van Horn), but their conversations captured Curry's
attention. In 1934, Curry put together the first Yaqui
expedition.
Curry had known a Mexican named Ramon
Beteta at the University of Texas. Ramon Beteta
(who moved up in Mexican politics through the PRI,
and eventually became the Secretary of Hacienda,
or Secretary of the Treasury, under President Miguel
Aleman) was an asset in the dealings with both
Mexicans and Yaquis and in arranging the trip. Rosalio Moises (whose life story was later published as
The Tall Candle, Moises et al. 1971) was the Yaqui
interpreter for the group, thereby beginning a 40
year relationship between Moises and the Holdens.
The two Yaqui expeditions of 1934 and 1936
occurred within a very few years of the last major
Yaqui uprising, and there was still a strong Mexican
military presence in the Yaqui towns. These trips had
a great deal of public support and attention since
notable local citizens went along, including: Charlie
Guy, the editor of the Lubbock Avalanche Journal,
who sent back regular columns to his newspaper;
Dr. Charles Wagner, who excised Mexican bullets
dating from the Yaqui wars out of Yaqui men in a
surgery set up under mesquite trees; Dr. Armstrong,
who treated chronic eye problems among the Yaqui
in Torim; Dr. Studehalter, a Texas Tech biologist,
who recorded Sonoran flora and fauna; and Bill
McMillan, a local builder and contractor, who studied the jacal style houses in the Yaqui villages and
filmed the Yaqui Easter ceremony. A truck driver, a
Harvard physical anthropologist named Frank Seltzer, and my dad, as chief honcho, rounded out the
intrepid group (Figure 8).
A slim and rather odd ethnography published by
Texas Tech was based on these trips, with chapters
by the different expedition members (Holden et
al. 1936). By the standards of today's anthropology, that slim volume makes rather strange reading
when it describes women "screeching" at a funeral.

10

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Frank Seltzer and Curry on the
1934 Yaqui Expedition. Photo courtesy
of the Southwest Collection, Texas Tech
University.

It demonstrates the isolation of West Texas from
mainstream anthropology of that era, and it fails to
demonstrate any in-depth understanding of the rituals
they observed. Nonetheless, the results of that expedition provide a unique record of that time and place,
in addition to offering practical medical, optical, and
political assistance to the Yaqui. Bill McMillan's film
of the Easter ceremony in Tarim may represent the
first visual documentation of that ritual.
The Yaqui experiences opened up other avenues
for Curry to explore, and he eventually wrote a
novel about the 1929 Hill of the Rooster massacre
that a prominent Yaqui, Anselmo Valencia, once
described to me as the best thing ever written about
the Yaqui since it made them real people with real
emotions who fell in love and otherwise acted like
actual human beings (W.C. Holden 1956). This
same individual later exercised what might be called
reverse appropriation. Long annoyed at the way anthropologists intruded on and presented the Yaqui,
he retaliated by taking the Hill of the Rooster and
"publishing" it "As told by Rosario Moises Valencia Tori". Everything (including Pat Allgood's end
map of the Yaqui valley) is simply xeroxed from the
original, with the exception of the pages giving the
original authorship. Curry also wrote a second book

related to his Yaqui experiences---this one dealing
with Teresita, a folk healer (W. C. Holden 1978).
Helping to found TAPS, doing archeology,
teaching anthropology, and conducting expeditions
to Sonora were not the only avenues through which
the Holdens' helped to introduce West Texans to the
broader world. Another tentacle of influence that
grew from my mother's interest in the Southwest
was the Ko Shari social club at Texas Tech. At least
five female social clubs were organized at Texas
Tech in the 1930s, and all of them had rush week,
pledging, initiation, a series of formal dances, and
other lady-like events such as afternoon teas. The
Ko Shari was different from the others in having a
Southwestern theme provided by my mother. She
used translated Navaho chants as a basis for the club
ritual, the initiation was held in Santa Fe at Easter
(and after the kiva at Arrowhead was reconstructed,
in that kiva by firelight), and all pledges had to read
and report on two books: Death Comes for the Archbishop, and The Delight Makers. Later, during the
1950s, these social clubs were taken over by national
sororities and that local touch was lost.
My mother's deep interests in Southwestern
art, architecture, literature, and her involvement
with college students set the course for the Holdens '
involvement in many outreach activities. After her
death, Curry married Frances Mayhugh Holden. My
stepmother's interest in the museum and art worlds
continued the family's involvement in the New
Mexico art scene, as well as in the archeological
scene. Some 20 to 40 Ko Sharis on their annual Easter trip routinely visited artist's homes and galleries
and museums in Santa Fe and sometimes Taos. Over
the years, a large number of women were impacted
by this exposure. The summer archeological courses
of the 1930s served as serious introductions to the
art and archeology of northern New Mexico. I remember visits to Ernest Thompson Seton's home in
Santa Fe, and visits to several artists' homes in Taos.
Freda, the widow ofD. H. Lawrence, once gave my
dad a handwritten manuscript of her husband's . Art
and archeology overlapped in several ways.
I do not know how my dad met Peter Hurd, an
artist who lived in the Hondo valley. I assume it was
part of the ongoing artistic outreach of the Holden's
from Lubbock. Certainly Pete and Curry got along
together famously, and later Pete came to Lubbock
to paint the mural in the rotunda of the old museum,
now Holden Hall (Figure 9). Peter Hurd told my dad
of archeological sites in the Sierra Blanca region of
New Mexico, and put him in contact with the Bon-

Kelley-The Legacy of William Curry Holden 11

Figure 9. Curry and Peter Hurd at the dedication of
the Peter Hurd mural in Holden Hall.

nell family just up the Ruidosa valley from the Hurd
ranch at San Patricio. In 1950, my dad decided to
transfer Texas Tech's archeological field school from
Arrowhead Ruin to the Bonnell site. He was, for all
seven field seasons from 1950-1956, the instructor
of record. However, in terms of day-to-day operations, he relied on J. Merrill Kayser, his old cook
and truck driver from the 1930s, Earl Green, Rex
and Gini Gerald, and me.
By the late 1940s, and certainly after the
Sierra Blanca era, my dad's attention was not again
seriously devoted to archeology. The museum and
other parts of his multi-faceted professional life took
precedence: building the Southwest Collections and
the Ranching Heritage Center, being department
head or ·dean, and working on his manuscript of
water as a scarce resource in the world. But he never
lost his love of walking over a site and planning how
he would excavate it. In 1983, my Dad, Fran, and
Tom visited us while we were on sabbatical in Spain.
I went with them on a short trip to Morocco, where
we visited a Roman site near Ceuta (Figure 10).
My Dad walked around "sniffing the air like an old
war horse," as Fran said, laying out in some detail
how he would approach that site, how it should be
mapped, and where he would put his excavations.
And then, like the museum person he was, he

envisioned a small interpretive on-site museum for
local school children. Even then, his dream of a local
museum was fairly avant garde.
Many people came through our home and the
museum in Lubbock, and I probably saw only a few
of them. Two stick in my memory as exceptionally
fascinating people: Glen Evans and Carl Chelf. Both
were old-fashioned naturalists, as well as talented
geologists/paleontologists. Glen Evans, who did
major work at the Lubbock Lake, Blackwater Draw,
and Plainview sites before he became an oil executive, could turn a drive from Midland to Lubbock
into the most fascinating bit of landscape on earth
as he talked about the geology, what grew in ponds,
and the speed with which sand buried fence lines
during the dust bowl. He had eyes that saw more
than those of other people.
Glen and Carl were targets of some of the colorful disputes involving Cyrus Ray, as is indicated
in Ray's description of them in a 1945 letter to my
dad. He wrote: the "two Texas University noncooperators who bushwhacked over my territory in
1940, and dug up mastodon and mammoth skeletons
which I pointed out to them and never gave me any
chance to see them in place. In fact after solemnly
promising to notify me when excavation began, they
got me to get owners' permission and then dug them
out secretly and shipped the stuff all off to Austin
without letting me see it. One of the worst offenders
of all was this Glen fellow" (Tunnell 2000:47).
When we look back at archeological pioneers,
we must acknowledge that the archeology of the
1920s and the 1930s was a far different beast than
that of today. Curry was a product of growing up on
a hardscrabble farm. He determined from an early
age to leave farming and seek a different kind of life.
He was encouraged by his unusually liberal parents
and willing to undertake the hard and focused
work that it took to get him to the university and
a Ph.D. He began his professional life even before
the dust bowl and depression, and these in turn also
impacted his approach to life, although his family
had always been so poor that the depression did not
make as large an impact on him or his family as it
did on urban dwellers, since they could raise their
own food. 4
These untrained archeologists of the 1920s and
1930s lived and worked in an era when disciplinary
boundaries were lower, and, at the same time, individuality and personal initiative were valued. This
era was also a time when West Texas was trying to
upgrade itself into a more "cultured" status. Curry

12

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 10. Jane and Curry at a Roman site near Ceuta, Morocco, 1983.

parleyed his background into a multi-disciplinary
career, mostly carried out at Texas Tech. He was
more removed from state resources than was Pearce
at the University of Texas. He fostered archeological fieldwork to the best of his ability by reading,
visiting sites, and using his own practical background from house building and farm work. He was
deprived of geographic proximity to other relevant
professionals, with Floyd Studer in Canyon and
Cyrus Ray being the closest. None of the people he
interacted with archeologically in West Texas had
any more official training than he did. The isolation
of Lubbock vis a vis other archeologists was still
true when my husband and I taught at Texas Tech
in the late 1950s and early 1960s. In any direction,
it was well over 300 miles to a fellow archeologist.
I wish I had a dollar for every time I heard
ex-students return-years later-and tell my dad
that they thought, when they were in Texas Tech,
that anthropology was an easy and interesting, but
essentially a useless, course. However, they discovered as a result of living their own lives that it had

turned out to be the most valuable thing they did in
college. It opened their eyes to the native people of
the American Southwest, in particular, as well as
art and artists, history, and many other topics. Curry
was one of the people in Lubbock who, with a great
deal of help from others over the decades, did two
important things: First, he introduced local residents
to the world and put other parts of the world in a
favorable and approachable light. The Ko Shari
Easter trips and the Navaho chants that formed the
basis of their ritual, the archeological field schools,
involvement with art and artists, many aspects of
The Museum, the well publicized Yaqui expeditions
of the 1930s, the books inspired by his interest in
the Yaquis (Holden et al. 1936; W. C. Holden 1956,
1978) were all part of his contribution to opening
up the world to West Texans. His second contribution, in my opinion, was turning local people on
to the value of what they had and what they had
experienced. West Texas history was important and
legitimate. The Museum played a role here as well,
as did the Southwest Collections and the Ranching

Kelley-The Legacy of William Curry Holden 13
Heritage Center. Perhaps he would have made a
good politician; he certainly attracted substantial
moral and practical support for his many endeavors.
However, his one early attempt to run for public office ended in failure.
In evaluating Curry's place in the history of
archeology, it may be that, as Mott Davis argued,
his greatest contribution to archeology came with
his co-founding of the Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society, and his attention to this
organization throughout the 1930s, and' even later.
However, his early introduction of anthropology into
the curriculum at Tech deserves mention, as well as
the early introduction of a Master's program within
anthropology/archeology. I leave others to decide on
his place in the history of archeology of the entire
state of Texas. From the perspective of West Texas?
he must be seen as a pioneer. For my part, I will say
he was a cool dad.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I want to thank the organizing committee for
the 2008 Annual meeting of the Texas Archeological
Society for inviting me to return home and give this
self-indulgent talk. Brett Houk was exceptionally
helpful in providing information and pictures. Alice
Kehoe, Christine VanPool, Brett Houk, and Grant
Hall read earlier versions of this article and provided
useful comments.

ENDNOTES
1. The Banquet Address of the Texas Archeological Society annual meeting, October, 2008, in Lubbock, Texas.
2 . With regard to Kidder, I would argue that when
Walter Taylor (1948) harshly criticized Kidder in his A
Study of Archeology, much of the negative response arose
from the perception of Kidder as a nice man who did not
deserve such negativity. That may be one reason why the
shifts that culminated in the New Archeology had to wait
for, first, Caldwell, and then Binford, instead of starting off
with Taylor-leading him to write an article entitled "New
Wine in Old Skins" (Taylor 1972).
3 . The Horsethieves were an interesting, selfselecting social group consisting, initially in the 1930s,
of the husband/wife duos of a couple of bankers, a judge,
a pioneer farmer or two, and my dad and mother. Indian
wars and the settlement of the West were topics of which
they never tired, and all the men were consummate story
tellers. The Horsethieves evolved in ' membership' and

lasted into the 1980s, always with a core of good food
and story telling on Saturday nights.
4. He told stories about times during the depression
when the state of Texas could not honor its payroll. The
First National Bank in Lubbock would take the slips of paper that indicated that the professors would eventually be
paid, and, while discounting them, nonetheless provided
much needed cash.

REFERENCES CITED
Davis, E. M.
1992 Effects of Pioneers on Regional Archaeology: The
Texas Example. In Rediscovering Our Past: Essays
on the History of American Archaeology, edited by
J.E. Reyman, pp. 203-215. Avebury, Aldershot.
Holden, J. and J. Quinn
1949 Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties .
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Sor;iety 23:78-132.
Holden, J.
1955 A Preliminary Report on Arrowhead Ruin. El Palacio
62: 102-109.
Holden, T. C.
n.d.
My Story: Memories of Tom Calloway Holden as
told to Jane H. Kelley between 1996 and 2006. Ms.
on file at the Southwest Collection, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Holden, W. C.
1933 Excavation of Saddleback Ruin. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 5:3952.
1956

Hill of the Roosta Henry Holt and Company, New
York.

1967-1968 Interviews with W. C. Holden conducted by
Southwest Collection personnel, Texas Tech University. Tapes on file at the Southwest Collection, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock.
1978

Teresita. Stemmer House Publishers, Ind., Owings
Mill, Maryland.

Holden, W. C. et al.
1936 Studies of the Yaqui Indians of Sonora, Mexico . Bulletin 12. Texas Technological College, Lubbock.
Hooton, E. A.
1933 Notes on Five Texas Crania. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 5:25-38.
Jones, D. E.G.
1983 Toward Reaching the First Class: Graduate Education at Texas Tech University, 1930-1980. Ph.D.

14

Texas Archeological Society
Dissertation, College of Education, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.

Kelley, J. H.
1984 The Archaeology of the Sierra Blanca Region of
New Mexico. Anthropological Papers 74. Museum of
Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
2008

Serendipity: Mexico and Me. Paper delivered at the
J ornada Mogollon Conference, El Paso, October 11 ,
2007.

Krieger, A. D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas, with Extensions of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. The University of Texas at Austin.
Moises, R., J. H. Kelley, and W. C. Holden
1971 The Tall Candle: The Personal Chronicle of a Yaqui
Indian. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Moorehead, W. K.
1931 Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley. Yale University Press, New Haven. Published for the Department of Archaeology, Phillips Academy, Andover,
Massachusetts.
Schoolcraft, Henry Rowe
1884 The Indian Tribes of the United States: their history, antiquities, customs, religion, arts, language,
traditions, oral legends and myths. Lipppincott,
Philadelphia.

Taylor, W.
1948· A Study of Archeology. Memoir 69 . Memoirs of the
American Anthropological Association, Washington,
D. C.
1972

Old Wine and New Skins: A Contemporary Parable.
In Contemporary Archaeology: A Guide to Theory
and Contributions, edited by M . P. Leone, pp. 2833 . Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale,
Illinois .

Tunnell, C.
2000 In Their Own Words : Stories from Some Pioneer
Texas Archeologists. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 71 :1-146.
Webb, W.
1931 The Great Plains. Ginn and Company, Boston.
Wheat, J.B.
1955 Mogollon Culture Prior to A. D. 1000. Memoirs
of the Society for American Archaeology 10, and
Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association 82.
Woodbury, R.
1993 Sixty Years of Southwestern Archaeology: A History of the Pecos Conference. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Wormington, H. M.
1944 Ancient Man in North America. 2nd Edition. Popular
Series No. 4. Denver Museum of Natural History,
Denver.

An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas

C.R. Lewis

ABSTRACT

\

I

I
t

l

In 1985 large bones were found eroding from the bed of Petronila Creek in Nueces County, Texas, near
the town of Driscoll, 30 km from the coastal city of Corpus Christi. Investigations over the ensuing years have
established that these bones were part of a major accumulation of Late Pleistocene mammal, bird, reptile,
amphibian, fish, mollusc, arthropod, and plant remains. A human association with the deposit is indicated by
mammoth molar tools, other bone tools, worked stone, evidence of fire, and cut marked bones. The bone deposit
itself represents campsite litter. Radiocarbon dating of the bone and the overlying clay sediments place the
age of the site at 18,000 years ago, during the Last Glacial Maximum. This age is supported by stratigraphic,
climatological, and fauna! evidence.

INTRODUCTION
The two central arguments of this article are
that mammoth tooth and bone fragments have been
found at a site in southern Texas that have been
fabricated into tools, and that bones of the same
mammoth have been radiocarbon dated at 18,000
years before present (B.P.). 1 These findings do not
conform to the present expectations for the time
period in which humans should be present in this region. The oldest generally accepted human presence
in North America is the Clovis culture, which spans
the time frame from 11,050-10,800 B.P. (Waters
and Stafford 2007). Clovis sites are characterized by
distinctive fluted projectile points believed to have
been used to kill mammoths, whose remains are
commonly associated with these points.
Many proposed earlier sites in North America
have been challenged on various grounds. The Clovis-first paradigm is based on the assumption that
northern ice sheets prevented the entry of Old World
human populations until the ice breakup at the end
of the Wisconsin glaciation, which coincides in time
with the appearance of people using Clovis points.
A widely accepted chronology of human occupation
has these people contemporary with, and preying
upon, the last mammoths, then their descendants using similar but smaller Folsom points to hunt the last
giant bison. In tum, their Late Paleoindian and Archaic descendants used a varied arsenal to hunt the

surviving Holocene fauna. There is one pre-Clovis
site, however, that has withstood close scrutiny and
is now generally regarded as being at least 1000
years older than the earliest North American Clovis
sites, and that is the Monte Verde site in southern
Chile (Dillehay 1989, 1997). It is about as far from
the Bering land bridge as the globe allows.
The subject of this article, the Petronila Creek
site (41NU246), as excavated to this point, is characterized by artifacts of mammoth bone and mammoth molar teeth. There are also several stone tools
in good association with the mammoth remains, as
well as others in suggestive but insecure association.
None of these artifacts appear to have any connection to the distinctive Clovis stone tool technology.

SITE HISTORY AND GEOLOGIC
SETTING
The site was discovered in 1985, when a nearby
landowner reported large bones exposed in the bed
of Petronila Creek, near the town of Driscoll on the
Texas coastal plain (Figure 1). By the following year
excavations had established that the source of the
bones was a thin sand layer exposed in the deepest
part of the creek some 5 m below the modem ground
surface (Lewis 1988). By 1990, fieldwork had opened
almost 18 m 2 of the deposits, and the sand layer had
yielded 36,644 bones and other specimens.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 80 (2009)

16

Texas Archeological Society

.....:
....

.·· '·
.:"::·~

:.·.

~

.:.:. 0

"

:::· (j "
:·· (;j ~

:·;·
•

~

~

• .:::;;;'

,.9

'-J

Figure 1. Petronila Creek site location, in glacial North America, with an inset of the Texas coastline at Last Glacial
Maximum, after Brown (2006:Figure 2.8).

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 17
The bone deposit is thought to lie within the
confines of the Sangamon delta of the Nueces
River (Groat 1975) that was deposited during the
high-water stand of 100,000 years ago (Aronow
1971). This delta was abandoned at the onset of the
Wisconsin glaciation when sea levels fell some 100
m, causing the Nueces discharge to move 150 km
gulfward. The following events are inferred from the
geology of the site:
1.

The wetter climate of the Wisconsin glacial
period caused sizable rivers to form south of
the Nueces (Suhm 1980), and one of these, the
Petronila, drained an area that included parts
of the old delta. This sluggish river incised a
shallow channel in the old delta and meandered to some extent;

2.

at roughly 18,000 years ago the river apparently moved east, forming a sand bar on its
west bank. On this sand bar a hunting and fishing camp was established, and accumulating
camp refuse built up a significant deposit of
bones;

indicated by the types of fish and reptiles present
in the bone deposit, and stream size is shown by
bones from a gar's head that indicate a 2.3 m fish, an
alligator tooth from an individual of about 3.2 min
length, and remains of other large fish and turtles. The
wooded banks are indicated by the recovery of stag
beetle remains and by such presumed browsers as the
camel, ground sloth, and deer. Adjoining grasslands
would be necessary for the horse, mammoth, bison,
antelope, prairie dog, and other animals whose
remains have been found in the bone deposit. Mild
winter temperatures are suggested by two weevils
now found restricted to the neotropics (Scott A.
Elias, personal communication, 1989), and by the
large tortoise.

METHODS OF INVESTIGATION

3.

later, as the river moved farther from the sand
bar, overbank waters that reached it covered
it with clay; and

4.

the Petronila did not again meander back over
the site before the onset of the Holocene, after which it shrank to its present status as an
intermittent creek. In recent years, salt water
injection from oilfield operations caused the
loss of vegetation, and gullying began. The
gully has within the past few years cut deep
enough to expose the old sand bar and bone
deposit, which is now undergoing reworking
for the first time.

Petronila Creek today typically floods for brief
periods in the spring and fall, and otherwise sustains
an insignificant trickle of water that flows between
permanent pools dotted along the creek bed. The
surrounding countryside is semi-arid with mixed
grass and brush, and sizable trees grow along the
creek. Large herds of grazing animals can be supported by the present environment, as attested by the
King Ranch, some 30 km to the southwest.
The reconstructed ecosystem at ca. 18,000 years
ago centers on a sluggish, good-sized permanent
stream with wooded banks flowing through grassland
150 km from the sea. Stream characteristics are

The site has two principal components: the
late Wisconsin bone bed at the deepest level of the
Petronila Creek gully, and an Archaic occupation
on the immediately adjacent banks. In the creek
bed lag there is a mixture of remains from these
two components.
An initial grid 100 x 50 min size was established
to cover the immediate site area. Many Archaic points,
tools, and bones were mapped and recovered on the
banks. In the lower banks of the gully, in a region
of Holocene channel fill, there were also extensive
Archaic hearth zones containing many lithic artifacts
that were being lost to erosion. These were mapped
and tested in several controlled excavations.
Attention then turned to the loose material in the
creek bed. It was felt that this material might contain important artifacts, and floods could disperse it
down stream. Essentially all of this loose material
was screened ( 11 mm mesh size) over a 17 m stretch
of the stream bed downstream of the eroding Pleistocene bone deposit; significant bones and artifacts
were mapped and recovered.
Excavations started in the Pleistocene bone bed
after mapping the topography of the immediately
surrounding area (with surveying instruments), and
taking numerous photographs. The subsequent excavations were meticulous and exacting. Units 1 x 1 m
in size were opened one at a time inside cofferdams
to hold back the water. Excavations advanced in 5
cm levels. The surface of each level was drawn to
scale, showing the distribution of sediment types.
Burrows (by crayfish, probably) were noted and
all larger hard objects were mapped individually,

18

Texas Archeological Society

to the nearest 1 cm, with depth to the nearest 1 cm.
Orientation was noted and a sketch of the object,
with scale, was drawn in field notebooks. The sediments were lifted out in trowel-size scoops about 1
cm thick. This technique was used because delicate
remains such as fish gill covers, fish scales, small
bones, fish spines, etc. were very numerous and
shattered if scraped with a trowel. When the sediments were carefully lifted out this material could
be recovered on the screens.
Everything was water-screened through nested
screens of 6 mm mesh hardware cloth over 1.5 mm
mesh window screen. All objects, except caliche
and clay clods, that stopped on the upper screen
were collected. Only potentially identifiable bones
and rocks were collected from the window screen.
A lizard limb bone without either articular end and
any small fragment of tooth was, for example, considered identifiable. All remains were counted and
placed unsorted in labeled ziplock bags for eventual
sorting and examination. In the later units it was
customary to bag a sample of unwashed matrix from
each level as well as a sample of the picked-over
residue from the bottom screen.
Later, each bag was sorted according to the
following categories: bone chunks (for large animal bones with no provenience and no diagnostic
features), gar scales, fish parts, turtle shell parts,
identifiable bones, teeth (including mammoth molar
fragments, rodent teeth, fish teeth, lizard jaws with
teeth, etc.), and miscellaneous (otoliths, burned clay,
stone objects, sloth skin ossicles, snails, etc.). Each
category of each 5 cm layer went in a separate bag.
Every object was again examined, generally under
magnification. The bags of teeth were sorted a third
time, with micro-mammal teeth removed, mounted
on pins, and labeled. Some preservation is remarkable: for instance, the pupa of a parasitic fly is attached to a prairie dog molar; the pupa is ruptured
and parts of the fly are visible. Remains of an ant
are wedged into a crack in a bone chunk.
Friable objects such as fish gill covers were removed from the wet sediments on blocks of matrix,
dried, consolidated, and mounted in cases. Intermediate size bones were rebuilt with glue if needed and
placed in cabinet drawers. Large bones, as of the
mammoth, are separately housed in custom-made
boxes. All are kept in an air-conditioned room.
Faunal and floral remains were either sent to
appropriate specialists for identification or identified
from reference material in consultation with specialists. Standard methods for establishing Minimum

Number of Individuals (MNI) were employed. In
the case of turtles, groupings by thickness of shell
fragments separated individuals by size. Scale size
and morphology separated the gars. The bowfin and
bigmouth buffalo were separated by gill covers,
and the catfish by dorsal and pectoral spines. The
micro-mammals were separated by teeth. The sloth
remains include teeth from animals of two sizes, and
the mammoth remains include bones of a large adult
and a small juvenile.

EXCAVATIONS AND GEOLOGIC
OBSERVATIONS

Eighteen entire or partial units have been excavated (Figures 2 and 3). Excavations along the south
bank determined that the deposit extends beneath
a 4 m-high cutbank of Pleistocene sediments, and
excavations at right angles demonstrate that the
deposit extends across the creek and under the bank
on the far side. No limits to the deposit have been
established.
Of particular note is the stratified nature of the
deposits, with distinct sand and clay layers (Figure
4). The sand laminations grow progressively thinner with increasing height in the section. Sheets of
calcium carbonate (caliche) are developed within the
bone-bearing sand, and seams and nodules of caliche
are present in the overlying clays. In some places,
the bone-bearing sand, white and fine-grained, is
underlain by a much coarser brownish sand that is
barren of bones. On the north end of the excavation,
the bone-bearing sand is, in places, intimately mixed
with pea-size caliche nodules that may be developing in situ, but give the appearance of being a gravel.
Where the modem creek channel has cut through
the bone-bearing sand, 30 cm of green-yellow-white
clay with caliche inclusions is exposed below it. The
irregular upper surface of the bone-bearing sand is
probably not an erosional feature, since it appears
that the depressions are not connected by drainage
channels (see Figure 4b, south wall at 100 cm).

THE BONE BED

The site is a species-rich paleontological locality, with at least 44 vertebrates present, 16 invertebrates, and five kinds of plant seeds (Table 1). Detailed identification work is expected to significantly
increase the present count. Of the 36,644 recovered

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 19

Figure 2. Plan view of excavations. Units are 1 m2 . Petronila Creek flows through from the west; the sand bar on the
north bank is active. The south bank is Pleistocene clay with sand layers; clay shelves develop below eroding sand
layers. Clay Shelf 1 overlies the bone bed. Numbers in excavation units denote the quantity of bones recovered, mostly
small, and a few other objects.

objects, representing a minimum number of 265
individual animals, about 132 are large enough to
be given a provenience. The distribution of the most
significant of these is shown in Figure 3. Of the remainder, mostly recovered from the screens, a count
by categories is provided in Table 2.
The bone bed appears to be a primary deposit
and not a secondary accumulation of stream-transported bones. The distribution of bones is patchy,
both vertically and horizontally, rather than uniformly mixed; multiple elements of individual animals
are present (e.g. the adult mammoth, the large gar,
and the large turtle); the mylodont sloth arrived with
the skin intact, as indicated by numerous sloth skin
ossicles; many bones are crushed and crumbling, yet
intact; the bones show no stream tumbling wear; and
elements such as the mammoth tusk could scarcely
have been transported by the low-energy rivers of

this fiat coastal plain. Also, heavy mammoth bones
are mingled with fish scales and insect parts, showing complete lack of sorting by transportability.
In her study of the micro-mammal teeth, Johnson
(1993: 106) concluded that "the teeth are not waterworn, indicating little movement and a primary
context for the remains."
The molluscan fauna, representing snails that
apparently came to the site of their own volition, is
for the most part terrestrial and consists of funguseating species that might inhabit a refuse heap (Jane
Deisler, personal communication, 1992). This tends
to confirm that the bone deposit formed above water,
and was the attraction for the snails. Indeed, one tiny
specimen, a terrestrial fungivore, was found in situ
on the underside of a large bone fragment.
The bones are principally contained within the
top 20 cm of the sand layer, as though they had been

20

Texas Archeological Society

~--,•

NS

NS

N4

();o

~

·.. ·: : _- .,:.

·-

N4

•

:-:----~. .--.;.-::.-:--_:'.-~ N3

.

-

.

0

~

0

() -.. ·

00

. • ·.

N2/"~~ ~·

......... .. :.

·, NI

..

e::::?
c::l

NO

,;>

0

Figure 3. Plan view of larger bones and bone fragments from the principal bone bed, with identification key (insert):
A, mammoth femurs; B, mammoth pelvis; C, mammoth tusk; D, mammoth molars; E, mammoth palate (juvenile) ; F,
mammoth rib ; G, mammoth molar tools; H, mammoth bone tools; J, ground sloth rib; K, horse jaw fragment; L, horse
foot bone; M, horse splint bone; N, horse molars ; 0 , horse incisor; P, camel incisors; Q, bison incisor; R, antelope
molar; S, alligator tooth; T, land tortoise shell part; U, pond turtle shell part; V, fish gill covers; W, catfish spines; X,
alligator gar skull bone; Y, broken stones.

deposited on its surface and worked into the sand by
trampling or some form of bioturbation (laminations
within the sand are largely absent). A minor scatter
of small bones extends upward into the finely stratified overlying clay and probably represents localized
redeposition of bones when the sandbar was being
covered by silt and clay from intermittent inundations: the upstream edges of the bone-bearing sand
would be locally eroded and their lighter contents
carried a few meters out over the top of the sandbar to
be redeposited as inclusions in the capping clays.
The lateral distribution of the bones is fairly
uniform, but with some striking patchiness of certain

elements. Near the surface of the sand, there are
scattered lenses of very small bones that typically
cover an area of 0.5 m2 and are 2-3 cm thick. The
concentration of tiny bones and bone fragments account for about half of the bulk sediment volume.
These lenses have a characteristic orange color, imparted by the organic material, and have quite sharp
vertical and lateral boundaries, as though they have
experienced no significant bioturbation. One typical
lens had lateral edges that graded into the surrounding matrix within a distance of 1 cm, and the upper
and lower surfaces graded into the enclosing matrix
within 0.1 cm. There was a parting line between

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 21

i

SOUTH WALL ALONG 52

I

i

I

~---=----1 ·-·· - · - - - Shelf 5 Sholl 3 ____ 1_ ........._ J _ _ _ __ _

0

- £Q_OJ=_.!1!__1

i
-200cm

w5

w6

w7

w 8

w9

w

10

w 12.

w

13

LENS OF DENSE ORGANICS

B

SAND WITH CAL/CHE PEBBLES
COARSE BROWN SAND

Shelf 5

bone
bearing

bone
bcarin9

sand

sand

-200cm
N 3

N 2.

Figure 4. Stratigraphy of the Petronila Creek site: A, south wall after high water episode, author pointing to undercut
sand layers; weed-filled clay extraction pit is in the background; B, profile drawings of the south and east walls of the
excavations, each grid is 1 m. Note the surface of the present-day alluvium and the surface of undisturbed Pleistocene
material in creek bed. Units were excavated inside cofferdams to exclude water.

22

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Provisional Faunal and Floral List from Petronila Creek Site, Nueces County, Texas,
with Minimum Number of Individuals (MNI).
Faunal or Floral Species
Mammals
Mammuthus jeffersonii (mammoth)
Glossotherium harlani (ground sloth)
Bison antiquus (bison)
Camelops hesternus (camel)
Equus sp. (large horse)
Equus sp. (small horse)
Odocoileus sp. (deer)
Platygonus compressus (peccary)
Capromeryx minor (small antelope)
Canis latrans (coyote)
A mustelid
Lepus cf californicus Gack rabbit)
Sylvilagus sp. (cottontail)
cf Ondatra zibethicus (muskrat)
Cynomys ludovicianus (prairie dog)
Geomys cf attwateri (pocket gopher)
Geomys cf personatus (Texas pocket gopher )
Neotoma micropus (woodrat)
Neotomafioridana (eastern woodrat)
Spermophilus cf variegatus (rock squirrel)
Spermophilus mexicanus (Mexican ground squirrel)
Reithrodontomys fulvescens (western harvest mouse)
Sigmodon hispidus (cotton rat)
cf Perognathus sp. (pocket mouse)

MNI

2
2
1

1

86
2

5

Birds
Duck size
Songbird size
Reptiles
Alligator mississippiensis
Snakes, probably several types
Lizards, at least two types
Gopherus hexagonatus (large land tortoise)
Trachemys ( Chrysemys) scrip ta (pond turtle)
Apalone (Trionyx) sp. (softshell turtle)
Terepene sp. (box turtle)

Amphibians
Frogs

1
17
5
8
5

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 23
Table 1. (Continued)
Faunal or Floral Species
Fish
Lepisosteus spatula (alligator gar)
Lepisosteus cf osseus
Lepisosteus sp. (a third gar)
Lepisosteus sp. (a forth gar)
Amia calva (bowfin)
Ictalurus cf melas (black bull head)
lctalurus punctatus (channel catfish)
lctalurus sp. (a large catfish)
Ictiobus cyprinellus (bigmouth buffalo)
Unidentified small fish
Molluscs
Unionidae Gen. sp. (freshwater clam)
Planorbella cf scalaris (freshwater snail)
Rabdotus sp. (land snail)
Zonitoides cf arboreus (land snail)
Polygyra sp. (land snail)
Olygyra orbiculata (land snail)
Praticolella cf berlandieriana (land snail)

MNI

3
6
5
6
9

42
3
3
6
Several individuals

1
5
1
4
4

3

Crustaceans
cf Palaemonetes sp. (freshwater shrimp)
A second crustacean
Insects
Cylindrocopturus armatus (weevil)
Compsus auricephalus (weevil)
cf Pseudolucanus sp. (stag beetle)
Lygaeidae Gen. sp. (seed bug)
A parasitic wasp
An ant
Agrub
Plant Seeds
Celtis (Hackberry)
Artiplex (Salt bush)
Sapindus sp. (cf. Soapberry)
Convolvulaceae - cf Ipomea (Morning Glory)
Unknown (has Chenopodium characteristics)

1

1

1

24

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. Categories, counts, and percentages of material recovered from screening of deposits at the
Petronila Creek site.
Category

No.

Percentage

Gar scales
Fish parts (bones, spines, scales)
Bone chunks (from megafauna)
Identifiable small bones (from micro-fauna)
Tooth fragments (mammoth enamel)
Tooth fragments (other mega-mammal)
Teeth (micro-mammals)
Gar teeth
Miscellaneous teeth
Turtle shell fragments
Pebbles and lithic flakes
Miscellaneous objects

11,546
6,415
5,681
5,607
1,092
1,873
1,352
572
51
1,099
623
733

31.5
17.5
15.5
15.3
3.0
5.1
3.7
1.6
0.1
3.0
1.7
2.0

Totals

36,644

100.0

the orange-tinted organics and the overlying gray/
white soft sand, with a mesh of thin rootlets in this
parting line. The underlying sand was harder and
more consolidated than the organic lens. Most of
the rodent teeth from these lenses are acid-etched,
and the working hypothesis is that these lenses are
latrine deposits.
Obvious bone clusters are present. Sixteen
lizard jaws came from a single 1 x 1 m unit; only
18 came from all the other units combined. Seventy
catfish spines are clustered in the four western units,
while the eight eastern units have a combined total
of 10 spines. Johnson (1993:106) identified additional clustering among the micro-mammal teeth,
with prairie dog teeth "particularly concentrated in
one unit."
If the bone bed was not carried in and deposited by the river, as the above observations seem to
demonstrate, one must look elsewhere to explain
its origin. In the inanimate world, there are several
agents other than rivers that act to concentrate bones.
These are natural traps like sinkholes, fissures,
caves, and boggy ground, and gathering places such
as waterholes, springs, and ponds where animals
die or are killed over a period of time. The sand
bar is not a natural trap. Neither is it a component
of a spring or pond deposit, but is "clearly fluvial
in origin" (Michael D. Blum, personal communication, 1990). Nor would the sand bar have been

expected to accumulate bones from the natural
death of animals that merely crossed it to drink at
the river. The possibility remains that some sort of
freak incident in nature, such as an intense episode
of cold, drought, or flood may have killed and
concentrated the animals quickly, but the bone pile
does not fit the patterns reported from any of these
agents (Weigelt 1989; G. Haynes 1991:103, 166).
After examining the age-at-death distribution of 474
micro-mammal teeth from the site, representing at
least 86 individual prairie dogs, Johnson (1993: 106)
concluded that the distribution profile "fits neither
an attritional nor a catastrophic mortality pattern,
although it is closer to a catastrophic mode. Adult
prairie dogs are being targeted." She concluded that
a predator was involved.
When non-human animals are considered as a
possible cause of the bone bed, such small animals
as packrats or porcupines can be quickly ruled out
by the size of certain bones, notably the mammoth
femur. Likewise, large terrestrial predators such as
wolves or lions would not have been expected to prey
upon fish, birds, and mice, and alligators would not
have been able to capture mammoths. Only humans
would have preyed upon every animal present.
It seems then, upon preliminary examination,
that the bone bed itself may be a unique product
of human activity. A closer study of its attributes
is worthwhile. Particularly germane is a study by

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 25

Brain (1981) of bone accumulations in southern
Africa where his explicit purpose was to establish
criteria for distinguishing hominid-derived bone
deposits from those of other animals. It is reasonable
to assume that his African work can be applied to
Pleistocene North America where the fauna and
megafauna were closely analogous, with such
pairings as elephant-mammoth, giraffe-camel, Cape
buffalo-giant bison, zebra-horse, antelope speciesdeer species, lion-lion, hyena-dire wolf, jackalcoyote, and so forth.
Brain and other workers considered that the
only extant animals that regularly accumulate bones
are humans, hyenas, certain other carnivores (particularly leopards), African porcupines, and birds
of prey (Brain 1981; Klein and Cruz-Uribe 1984:6;
Schick and Toth 1994:211). Brain's study examined a number of bone accumulations where the
dominant collecting agent could be identified and
he concluded that three independent criteria were
useful for setting apart human accumulations from
all others: first, the ratio of carnivore to ungulate
bones in the deposit; second, the size distribution
of bone flakes; and third, the relative abundance of
broken tortoise shells.
A scarcity of carnivore bones is characteristic
of human-made bone deposits and is thought to
be the result of mutual avoidance by humans and
large mammalian predators (Klein and Cruz-Uribe
1984:82). Brain summarizes his own results as follows: "One point that has emerged from the analyses
is that remains of carnivores are not abundant in the
human food refuse" (Brain 1981: 140).2 At Petronila
Creek, carnivores that would have been a threat to
humans are not represented in the bone deposit.
Only a coyote-size canid is present. Wolves, dire
wolves, lions, saber toothed cats, pumas, and the
various bears that may have lived in the area are not
found among the bones. The Petronila Creek deposit
is similar in this respect to a human-made deposit.
Bone flake size is Brain's second discriminator. Humans break up long bones to obtain marrow
and bone grease, and in so doing produce bone
flakes that are characteristically smaller than those
produced by hyenas. These broken pieces may accumulate in large numbers in human habitation areas.
Hyenas break bones not only to obtain marrow but
also to eat the bone itself. Brain was in fact unable
to obtain a satisfactory sample of hyena-broken bone
flakes because besides being eaten, they were also so
thoroughly digested by hyenas that preserved flakes
were scarce. Other animals are not considered to be

significant bone-flake producers. Figure 5 illustrates
the size distribution of bone flakes from Petronila
Creek in comparison with Brain's data for humanmade flakes and hyena-made flakes. The Petronila
Creek flakes are consistent with the human-made
type. Klein and Cruz-Uribe (1984:69-71) felt that
post-depositional forces such as trampling, leaching, and compaction also act to break bones into
smaller pieces, but the fine preservation of delicate
objects would indicate that such processes were not
an important factor at Petronila Creek.
The third criterion Brain identifies is tortoise
shell parts as a share of the overall deposit. He
dealt primarily with land tortoises, but mentioned
freshwater turtles as well. It seems that animals other
than humans do not incorporate tortoise parts in their
bone deposits. His conclusion was: "In fact, I would
go so far as to say that abundant fragmented remains
of tortoises in a bone accumulation strongly suggest
human involvement" (Brain 1981 :51). At Petronila
Creek, there are 882 turtle shell fragments in the
portion of the collection that has been fully sorted.
Most of these cannot be identified to genus. Of those
94 parts identified to the genus level, 30 are from
tortoises, representing (on the basis of shell thickness) a minimum of five individuals. Pond turtles
are represented by 49 parts from a minimum of eight
individuals; softshells contribute 14 fragments from
five individuals; and at least one box turtle contributed one fragment. Table 3 sets out comparisons
between the Petronila Creek animal representations
and Brain's comparable data for human, hyena, and
leopard bone collections. The significance of the
tortoise remains can be readily seen, and it is plain
that the Petronila Creek bone deposit resembles the
human collection.
The bone bed is compelling evidence for a human
presence at Petronila Creek. Its attributes are readily
presented in drawings, tables, and written descriptions. The material that follows describes artifacts of
a non-standardized sort that do not photograph well,
are difficult to draw, and embody elusive concepts
such as "battered," "polished," and "faceted."
Taphonomic Observations
The bones from the Petronila Creek site are
preserved and altered in different ways. The rodent
teeth (an estimated 1,352 teeth), generally from
ground squirrels (mostly prairie dogs), are often
broken and at least 35 percent are etched by stomach
acids (Johnson 1993:106). The calcareous nature

26

Texas Archeological Society

PETRONILA
CREEK

AFRICAN
HOMO

cm

inch
0

0 ...-----------.

cm
0-

91.19

2

HYENA

56.3

-+-....-----------'

0.5

2·'-I

8.17

/6.8
37.8

4-...-

4---''-

2

0.56

23.2

6-

6-i--...

5.0
0.08

3

8-<

2/.4

0.8

10-

4 ...,
T

0

T

20 40 60 80

Percent
(5,362 bone
flakes)

0

~

!

17.7

.

/O+--r-

T

20 40 60

Percent
(1,588 bone
flakes)

12.7
12 -h--'
5.4

14 ..................__.........._.....__.
0 20 40 60

Percent
(220 bone
flakes)
Figure 5. Size distribution of bone flakes from Petronila Creek in comparison with Brain's (1981) data for human-made
flakes from Fackeltrager Shelter (Africa) and for hyena-made flakes (Brain's combined example).

of the sediments rules out acidic ground waters in
recent times as the cause of the etching. The degree
of etching varies, but some are deeply pitted and
highly degraded. The enamel is attacked more than
the dentine. Strangely, none of the fragments of large
mammal teeth (an estimated 1,873 fragments) seem
to exhibit the etching, even though they are more
numerous and often about the same size. Only three
or four of the additional 1,092 (estimated) mammoth

molar enamel fragments are etched. Possibly related
to the differential frequency of etched teeth is the
abundance of rodent toe bones. They number in the
hundreds, and include the claw-bearing bone and
those just behind it. They are in perfect condition,
and they are virtually the only part of the rodent
skeleton that is found at Petronila Creek.
This pattern of etched teeth and uniquely
abundant toe bones suggests one of the possible

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 27
Table 3. Animals represented in the Petronila Creek bone deposit as compared to other deposits of
various known origin, with an emphasis on tortoises.
PETRONILA CREEK

HUMAN

Mammals, Reptiles,
Birds (fish excluded)

From Fackeltrager
rock shelter

From droppings,
regurgitations,

Type

Type

Type
Prairie dog
Tortoise, etc.
Lizard
Rats, Mice
Rabbit, Hare
Mammoth
Sloth
Horse
Bison
Camel
Deer
Peccary
Sm. Ant.
Med. Cam.
Sm. Carn.
Alligator
Snake
Ind. Birds

MNI

%

86
19
17
14
2
2
2
2

55.5
12.3
11.0
9.0
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6

1
1

2

Hyrax
Tortoise
Sm. Ant.
Hare
Monitor
Med. Ant.
Pigeon
Rock Rat
Shrew
Lg. Ant.
Sm. Carn.
Lizard
Snake
Lg. Carn.
Rhino
Ind. Birds

HYENA

MNI

%

18
17
15
10
10
9
8
6
3
2
2
2
2

15.9
15.0
13.3
8.8
8.8
8.0
7.1
5.3
2.7
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
0.9
0.9
1 6.2
113 100.l

Ll

LEOPARD

No.

From droppings
bone collections
%

Med. Ant. 510 41.6
Giraffe
430 35.0
Lg. Ant.
154 12.6
Zebra
63 5.1
Sm. Ant.
30 2.4
Baboon
0.7
9
Hare
0.5
6
Bird
6
0.5
Tortoise
5
0.4
Porcupine 2
0.2
Snake
2
0.2
Sm. Carn. 1 0.1
Uni dent.
2 0.7
1227 100.0

Type
Hyrax
Sm. Ant.
Hare
Rats, Mice
Lg. Ant.
Med. Ant.
Bird
Baboon
Porcupine
Sm.Cam
V. Lg. Ant.
Lg. Carn.
Snake
Bush pig
Hedgehog
Scorpion
Unident.

%

46.1
18.1
9.7
8.0
4.5
3.6
2.8
1.9
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3

ti
99.8

155 99.7
Data from Brain (1981 :Tables 31, 36, and 50); MNl=Minimum Number oflndividuals;
Sm. Ant.=Small Antelope; Med. Ant.=Medium Antelope; Lg. Ant.=Large Antelope; V. Lg. Ant.= Very Large Antelope;
Sm. Carn=Small Carnivore; Med. Cam=Medium Carnivore; Lg. Cam=Large Carnivore; Ind. Birds=lndeterminate Birds;
Unident.=Unidentified; Tortoise, etc.=Tortoise plus turtle

functions of the large pounders made of mammoth
molar (see below). A possible scenario, supported
by ethnographic accounts of similar practices (e.g. ,
Bean 1972:66), would have aboriginal camp dwellers eating rodents after first skinning and cooking
them, and then pounding the bones into a mush to
be consumed in their entirety. The claw and toe
bones would have remained attached to the pelt,
and thus have escaped pounding; many teeth would
have been broken by the pounding; and a number
of teeth would have been inadvertently, or carelessly, swallowed. Occasionally, a bit of enamel
would break off of the mammoth molar pounder,
and this too would be swallowed with the meal
of bone mush. Thus, someone rooting through the
refuse of the camp would find intact toe bones,

often-broken, often-etched rodent teeth, nothing
else of the rodent, and the occasional etched flake
of mammoth molar.
The differential preservation of the bones also
shows some odd features . The smallest bones, such
as the vertebrae of snakes, are always in perfect
condition, yet most of the large mammal bones are
preserved only as fragments. The only intact large
bones are ribs and foot bones, which may have
been spared destruction because of their low marrow and grease content. Long bones may have been
broken for marrow extraction, then pounded up and
boiled (for a modern analog, see Davis and Fisher
[1990:258, 262-265]) or otherwise processed. The
principal function of the mammoth molar pounders
may have been to break up these bones.

28 Texas Archeological Society
The only reasonably intact long bone of a large
mammal yet excavated at Petronila Creek is the
femur of a mammoth (41NU246-1529). This femur
has a large hole at one end where the spongy bone is
missing, opening a passage into the marrow cavity.
Opening from the knee-joint end, this hole is on the
upper surface of the bone as it was found. (There are
also numerous cut marks on its shaft surface, and a
possible artifact made of turtle shell was recovered
from inside the bone in the matrix filling the hole.)
Compaction of the sediment has badly fractured
this bone, with the hollow central shaft being collapsed. A second intact mammoth femur was seen
at the site, and after a major flood one-half of what
was probably this bone was recovered. The rest had
disintegrated and washed away. The recovered half
(41NU246-1531) preserves a crushed knee joint that
also appears to have been breached.
These breached mammoth femora would seem
to be consistent with marrow-extracting activity,
since the technique of cutting into the bone through
the soft spongy material at the end is practiced by
modern elephant hunters as well as Clovis-age
mammoth/mastodon hunters. Two butchered proboscidean skeletons from Wisconsin dating to the
terminal Pleistocene both have leg bones cut open
at the joint ends, reportedly to extract marrow (Allison 1991). Bailey (1989) photographed a modern
Pygmy standing astride a fresh elephant leg bone,
chopping at the joint end with an iron axe to gain
access to the marrow cavity. G. Haynes (1991:292)
noted that when the Ba-Mbuti Pygmy people killed
an elephant they "chopped open leg bones to eat the
oil-rich cancellous interiors," and he further noted
that elephant limb bones contain extensive deposits
of marrow in a boney internal latticework that is of
high nutritional value.

BONE TOOLS
Abrading Tools

In Late Pleistocene North America there existed
a tool-making industry based on the thick cortical
shaft bone of proboscideans, generally broken into
manageable pieces by percussion flaking (Johnson
1985:202). One manifestation of this industry is
an undated Late Pleistocene tool from Florida
that consists of the central shaft of the radius of
a mastodon that has been wear-modified during
abrading or milling activity, resulting in the removal

of massive amounts of bone (Dunbar and Webb
1996). Intriguingly similar tools have been identified
at Petronila Creek that display flat wear facets.
Wear facets, caused by back-and-forth rubbing, are
almost never caused by inanimate forces (although
unidirectional sliding wear caused by slipping faults
or flowing glaciers can produce similar surfaces),
and are only infrequently caused by animals (facets
on the tusks of wild hogs, for example), but are
abundantly caused by human hands at work (any
eraser will illustrate the point).
There are three notable examples of faceted
bone tools from the bone bed at Petronila Creek.
The best specimen is a large chunk of solid bone
(41NU246-1542) from the central shaft of a mammoth-size leg bone (Figure 6). It measures 18 x 8
x 3.5 cm in length, width, and thickness and has a
large polished facet on that surface which would be
toward the hollow interior of the intact bone. This
facet covers 32 cm2 (8 x 4 cm) and has parallel
striations on its surface. As much as 1 cm of bone
has been worn away. A second massive bone chunk
(41NU246-1543) has a smaller facet, but similar
enough to the one on the first tool to suggest they
both are the result of the same distinct type of
tool use. A third chunk, also from solid shaft bone
(41NU246-1558), measures 11x6 x 2.5 cm and has
a pronounced 15 cm 2 facet along one edge.
A faceted tooth tool (41NU246-1540) made
from a chunk of mammoth molar also appears to be
a grinder. A mammoth molar (Figure 7a-c) is made
up of a series of disks bound together by cement.
Each disk is composed of an inner core of dentine
encased in a layer of enamel. These teeth can be split
up into chunks suitable for use as tools. The tooth
tool (Figures 8a and 9) has a massive wear facet on
one side that may be the result of back-and-forth
rubbing or grinding during the milling of plant parts
or seeds. The facet exposes regions of enamel, dentine, and cement where the hard enamel defines the
basic contours of the surface. Within the enclosing
loops of enamel, the dentine is worn to the same
level as the enamel, but outside the enamel loops the
cement is more deeply worn into channels (Figures
8a and 9). These channels may have developed as
gutters for the flow of ground-up plant material between the grinder and whatever milling platform was
employed. It should be noted that this wear facet,
with material worn away to a depth of at least 2 cm
and covering an area of 12 cm 2 , is located on what
would have been the side of the tooth in the living
mammoth, and thus could not be some abnormal

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 29

41NU246-:2

'

------==~ POLISHE~
~'~

FACET

--------

--

-=~

---

...-~.....

-

·""""

-

-- -- ..-

U,t

~1
I

STRIATIONS

-::::::::::._--__.::::::~-

- _-

---

~

-··-

-- -:---

'"~!'j//
!

!-n
l

FACET

=-

-------r---____

5cm

Figure 6. Bone tool showing large facet; striations and polish appear on the facet. The key locates the approximate origin
of the object within the shaft of elephantine limb bone.

4()•_.
~
V t.--/ •
/

;

s!LL
AND
MANDIBLE

CROWN

~

<(~

~

FRONT

10 cm

SIDE

Figure 7. Structure of a mammoth molar: a, skull and mandible to show position of the molars; b, intact molar 41NU246-2;
c, generalized molar in cutaway view to show enamel (hatched), dentine (stippled), and cement (white) . Hatch orientation
indicates prism orientation within the enamel.

30

Texas Archeological Society

A
"GRINDER"
(41 NU246-1540)

~

>
a

z

w

GROUND-DOWN
SURFACE

s:w

>
z

s:

0

0::

(.)

B

INCISED CUTS ON
SMOOTHED
SURFACE

"POUNDER"
(41 NU246-1538)

s:UJ

>
Cl

w
en

z
w

Cl

s:UJ

>
w
Cl

ii)

s:

w

>
Cl
z
w

I
'

I !;:w

>

I-

0
0

0::

c
"ATLATL
HOOK"

5cm

Figure 8. Mammoth tooth tools. There are three types of tools illustrated with their original position in the molar, showing
hypothetical wedge-and-punch technique of splitting up molar: a, "grinder;" b, "pounder;" c, "atlatl hook."

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 31

t

{
)
I

I

II

Figure 9. "Grinder" made from a mammoth molar. View (left) is of the ground-down side of a molar chunk, effectively
creating a sectioned view of the interior structure of the molar. Compare this to an unrelated gravel pit specimen (right),
sectioned with a hacksaw to reveal identical internal structure. Note the polished cement and sand-papered texture of
the enamel in the "grinder."

form of chewing surface. A normal chewing surface
has rounded and polished enamel ridges protruding
above valleys of polished dentine and cement. Such
surfaces are located on the crown of the tooth and
are unmistakable.
Pounding Tools
A second tool type from the Petronila Creek
site is provisionally classified as a kind of pounder.
These tools are made of chunks of mammoth molar,
and although they often have rubbed and polished
areas on their surfaces, they are primarily characterized by extensively battered surfaces that apparently
were formed by pounding.
In inanimate nature, the erosion of a surface
by impact processes is common. Wind-exposed
surfaces erode from the impact of sand and dust
grains, river bed rocks erode from water-driven
impact, and rockslides in mountainous areas break

up large boulders. An impact-battered surface, then,
is nothing remarkable unless it is out of its natural
context: an object battered by heavy blows is conspicuous only if it is found in an environment where
heavy blows do not naturally occur. In a low-energy
setting, such as the coastal plain of Texas, an object
with a surface eroded by heavy impacts is conspicuously out of place.
In the animate world, very few species regularly
employ pounding action, about the only examples
being woodpeckers and humans. Thus, a heavilypounded fragment of mammoth molar found on
the Texas coastal plain probably was produced at
the hand of a human. Seven such tools have been
recovered from the Petronila Creek site.
The first pounding tool (41NU246-1538) is fistsize, hard and durable, and completely untouched
by micro -impacts such as would result from
stream rounding (Figure 10; see also Figure 8b). It
represents a piece of the core region of a mammoth

32

Texas A rcheological Society

pears to have been large breaks
that detached it from the rest of the
molar. However, the subsequent
battering around the edges has
spared a small part of the original
chewing surface of the tooth. This
portion of chewing surface is absolutely pristine, with the characteristic wear and polish of the enamel,
dentine, and cement preserved as in
the living animal. An explanation of
the surface battering must provide
a mechanism not only capable of
heavy blows in a geologically quiet
region, but also a mechanism capable of leaving a portion untouched.
No agents other than the human
hand come to mind.
1 cm
A third similar specimen
(41NU246-1537) also has a portion of the chewing surface intact;
one flat surface has a large region
Figure 10. Cut mark on the mammoth molar "pounder." This arc-shaped
of polish, and much of one side is
gouge is crossed by an indistinct second cut of about the same size, oriented
worn away to form a facet of 10
from upper right to lower left.
cm2 . Several corners are rubbed
off, leaving striated and polished
surfaces.
A fourth specimen (41NU246-1533), also
molar, with virtually none of the natural surfaces
composed of two plates and the same size as the
remaining. The sequence of breakage may have
others, has one corner rounded off, with dentine surstarted with a large break on each of the two flat
faces showing striations and polish. A fifth example
surfaces that detached this section of two plates from
(41NU246-1534), somewhat smaller than the others,
the rest of the molar. The peripheral edges then have
also has a large rubbing-wear surface and polish, and
been beaten away by heavy blows; over 1,000 chips
two more fragmentary specimens (41NU246-1535
and flakes of mammoth molar enamel have been
and 41NU246-1536) retain abraded, polished facets .
recovered from the Petronila Creek site, possibly
These battered, fist-size chunks of mammoth
representing the debitage from such battering. There
molar conform to the notion of a tool as being
is also a pronounced facet of 15 cm2 on one side,
something deliberately made to a preconceived patas well as a large, deep, multi-grooved, arc-shaped
tern and intended for a specific use or set of uses.
gouge on one of the flat surfaces (see Figure 8b).
Their similarity in size and form suggests that they
This gouge has the peculiar characteristic that it does
represent a fully evolved tool type.
not follow the undulating surface of the break, but
glides over low spots and digs into high spots. The
molar chunk must have been firmly immobilized
Atlatl Hook
when this gouge was made, and the gouging object
was constrained in its motion. The gouge may have
A third type of tool made from a mammoth
been caused by a wedge being forced into a crack
molar was suggested by Joe Ben Wheat (personal
in the intact tooth, possibly while the tooth was still
communication, 1990) as being a possible atlatl
anchored in the bone of the jaw, so as to split off and
hook. This object (see Figure 8c) is fashioned from
extract a chunk of molar.
an aberrant spur of a type often developed within a
The second specimen (41NU246-1539) is very
mammoth molar. Wheat (1979:136 and Figure 73)
similar to the first pounding tool. It, too, is composed
described and illustrated similar atlatl hooks from
of two plates, and the first stage of its reduction apthe Paleoindian Jurgens site:

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 33
These hooks were made by breaking a
bison molar and extracting the central
core. The core was then flattened on the
bottom by grinding, smoothed on the
sides and top, and the naturally conical
root converted into the hook by grinding
and polishing it to a finished point.
The finished hook was then bound to the flattened end of the atlatl. This description precisely fits
the mammoth molar object from Petronila Creek,
which also has a pronounced "X" incised on the
flattened attachment surface.
Digging Tools
Three bone objects may be digging tools,
because of their size, shape, chisel-shaped cutting
edges, and heavy wear on the chisel edge. This
wear has resulted in the rounding off of the edge
from the bottom face of the chisel as though each
chisel was used with a scooping motion in hard,
abrasive dirt. The first (41NU246-1543) is 24 x 7 x
4 cm in length, width, and thickness and is a chunk
of solid shaft bone from an elephant-sized leg bone
(Figure 11); this object also has a large polished

use facet elsewhere on its surface. The second tool
(41NU246-1544) is much smaller (14 x 3 x 1.5 cm);
is also solid shaft material; is not as heavily worn on
the chisel edge (but does have some chipping of the
edge); and has a small but pronounced striated facet
on the other end. The third (41NU246-1559) bone
tool is similar to the first, but shorter and broader
(15 x 9 x 2.5 cm), and is heavily rounded on the
bottom edge of the scoop-shaped end, with several
cut marks near the opposite end.
Work Benches
Three major bones were recovered lying in their
original positions (see Figure 3) that are liberally covered with cuts, scrapes, and scratches on their upward
facing surfaces, with no marks on the bottom side.
These bones are the femora of an adult mammoth
(41NU246-1529 and 41NU246-1531) and a partial
mammoth pelvis (41NU246-1532). Calcareous
crusts partly cover some cuts, and other cuts cross
major cracks onto collapsed surfaces, which suggests
that the cuts were made when the bones were new.
Their surfaces may have been used as work benches.
Gruhn and Bryan (1984:132) report similar use of
mastodont femora at the Taima-taima site.

-- - - ------..... ,

'\
I

\

41NU246-1543

Figure 11. Bone tool that is suggestive of a digging tool. A facet and regions of wear and polish are indicated as well as
a pattern of cuts. Key locates the object in the approximate region of origin in the shaft of elephantine limb bone.

34

Texas Archeological Society
MARKS ON BONE
Cut Marks

Marks on bones have been studied by numerous researchers, generally for the explicit purpose
of developing criteria to separate human-made cut
marks from those made by teeth, trampling, or other
agencies. Lyman (1987:Table 5.4) has summarized
the results of 11 significant studies that provide
the attributes of tooth scratches, tooth punctures,
gnawing by rodents, slicing marks resulting from
stone, bone, and metal tools, chopping marks from
stone or metal tools, scraping marks, sawing marks,
flake scars produced by tools and by carnivores,
and preparator's marks. In separate works, Behrensmeyer et al. (1986) and G. Haynes (1991) have
examined trampling marks caused by large to very
large animals.
Lyman's criteria for slicing and/or chopping
marks produced by stone tools are that the marks be
elongated, V-shaped in cross section, often multiple,

not always following the bone contour, deeper in
the middle, and commonly divided into multiple,
discrete striae at one end. Brain (1981 :53) is less
analytical, but powerful in his appeal to common
sense when he states that "chopping and cutting
with sharp stone tools produce occasional marks on
bones that could not have been caused by the teeth
of carnivores or by other agencies. When these are
found, human involvement is confirmed."
In the following consideration of the cut marks
at Petronila Creek it is well to keep in mind that
these are big, forceful cuts in very hard material. Cut
marks on bones from the bone bed are numerous. A
tally of bones with at least one mark runs to 36, and
many of these have multiple marks; many are very
large and obvious.
The largest and most obvious cut mark (Figure
12) is oriented lengthwise down the shaft of the mammoth femur (41NU246-1529). Itis 100 mm in length,
3 mm wide, and 0.15 mm deep. This cut meets most
of Lyman's criteria, and is probably what Brain would
consider to be a self-evident stone tool cut mark.

Figure 12. Cut mark on the shaft of a mammoth femur; note the carbonate crust covering the cut. Other less distinct
cuts can also be seen.

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 35
Three main grooves comprise the cut mark, each
composed of a double channel, and they run parallel to each other. The deepest groove is the longest,
the second longest is the second deepest, and the
shortest is the shallowest. On all three, the deepest
area of the cut mark is at the same place: midway
down the length of the cut. This cut structure would
result from the action of a single cutting surface that
has three projections (teeth) of unequal length that
passed once across the bone with the maximum contact pressure occurring at the middle of the stroke.
The orientation of the three principal cutting teeth
does not vary down the length of the cut, indicating
that the cutting object was firmly held and did not
roll or twist from the force of the teeth dragging
through the bone. The overall cut follows a gentle
arc of decreasing radius except at the straightest end,
where a little "skip" is observed. This corresponds to
a small irregularity in the force and direction of the
stroke, which otherwise exhibits smoothly varying
force and smoothly varying direction. The bone was
recovered from undisturbed Pleistocene matrix, and
a firmly cemented carbonate crust covers part of the
cut, so most likely the cut dates from the time the
bone was fresh.
The second largest cut mark (see Figure 10) is
the large arc-shaped gouge on the split-off surface of
a chunk of mammoth molar (41NU246-1538). It is
40 mm long, 6 mm wide, and 0.3 mm deep. Again,
three principal grooves comprise the cut, with one
being broad and rather flat-bottomed, and the other
two being narrow. The projections on the cutting tool
must have been of about equal length since all three
grooves make contact with the surface at about the
same point and all break contact at about the same
place. The cut follows a pronounced arc of constant
radius. It is a very forceful cut, the object being cut
did not move, and the cutting object did not roll,
twist, or follow the surface undulations of the molar chunk. This indicates that the molar chunk was
immobilized and the cutting object was constrained
to follow its path; the molar chunk may have been
attached to the molar proper, which was quite possibly still rooted in the jaw bone of the mammoth.
The object doing the cutting must then have been
massive and moving fast (so that inertia can account
for its failure to follow the irregular surface contour)
or it was mechanically constrained in its motion,
as a wedge would be. Judging by the shape of the
grooves, the cutting object was probably stone. The
resulting cut satisfies both Lyman's and Brain's
definition of a human-made cut mark.

The third cut mark discussed herein is really a
pattern of cuts. These are on the inside surface of a
piece (41 NU246-1546) from the top shell of a pond
turtle, and these cuts deliberately removed a buttress
that strengthens the shell (Figure 13). This buttress
would be an impediment to utilizing the shell as a
bowl, so there is good reason for its removal. The
series of cuts form a complex pattern of crisscrossing grooves and ridges reminiscent of the surface
left by a coarse-toothed steel file. It may be that
the buttress was scraped away by a piece of broken
mammoth molar enamel, since the individual coarse
prisms of enamel exposed along a broken edge
provide jagged points capable of creating patterned
cuts of this sort. Several other bits of turtle shell
have a similar scraped area on their inside surfaces
that removed a projection. Brain's less formalized
definition would find that this filed surface "could
not have been caused by the teeth of carnivores or
by other agencies."

\

\

•'»i
\

l

~

i

1cm

Figure 13. Patterned cuts on the interior surface of a pond
turtle shell segment. The cuts removed an internal buttress
of the shell, as though to clean it for use as a bowl.

36

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 14. Scuff mark on the surface of a mammoth pelvis; other marks can be seen. The surface is liberally marked,
as though from service as a work bench (photograph by Kenneth M. Brown).

The fourth cut mark represents an impact mark
(Figure 14). This mark is found on the upwardfacing surface of the large fragment of mammoth
pelvis (41NU246-1530) (see Figure 3, bone B) that
may have been used as a general workbench; it is
liberally covered with various cuts and scrapes.
One, a crater (20 x 7 mm in length and width and
1.5 mm deep), illustrates a class of cuts caused by
a sharp blow where the impactor rebounded rather
than scraped along the surface.
A fifth cut pattern (Figure 15) is the incised "X"
on the previously described possible atlatl hook.
Here, the cuts may have been intended to keep the
hook from slipping when bound onto the atlatl.
Among the hundreds of cuts on bones that are
not individually described are all manner of scrapes,
scratches, gouges, nicks, and dents interpreted as
resulting from human activity. There are no cuts and
no context that would seem to imply any other agent.

When rodents or carnivores gnaw on bones, they
work around corners and edges where they can get
the bone between teeth of the upper and lower jaws.
They are incapable of making tooth marks on flat
surfaces. Diligent searches have failed to find any
examples of gnawing. Because the sediments are
free of sharp stones, trampling would not produce
anything but microscopic scratches.
Scuffed Surfaces
Gar scales are thick, boney, diamond-shaped
plates that in the living fish are connected together
edge-to-edge like bricks in a wall, so that the hide
of a gar is a sheet of tough armor. There is a type
of scuff found on about 30 percent of the extremely
abundant gar scales found at the site. The scuffing
typically consists of parallel microscopic scratches
on the enamel-like outer surface of the scale, but on

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 37
that the thousands of gar scales at the site represent
remains of gar hides that were used in some fashion,
perhaps as slips to drag objects over the ground.

Polished Surfaces
"Polish" is a surface condition where a sufficient
portion of a surface is sufficiently smooth to begin to
reflect a coherent image. This is generally a subjective
visual determination based upon observing a glint of
reflected light from the affected surface. 3
Of the objects recovered from the Petronila
Creek site, many are obviously polished. The abovedescribed faceted bone chunks have slight polish
on parts of their facets; the grinder made from
mammoth molar has slight polish on the cement
portion of its facet; and five of the seven specimens
of pounded mammoth molar have polish on one or
more of their surfaces. An eighth chunk of mammoth
molar (41NU246-1541), composed of a single plate,
has polish along one edge. An intact mammoth molar (41NU246-2) also has heavy wear on the side of
the tooth along the edge where the crown meets the
side and forms a right angle. This right-angle edge
seems to have been employed as a scraping edge, for
the cement and enamel are extensively worn away,
exposing the inner disks of dentine. These exposed
dentine surfaces are polished (as well as having
striations). Thus, a number of surfaces can be said to
exhibit some polish, and in every case the polished
region is on an appropriate surface: one that is either
a clear wear facet or a surface that is a part of an
edge that may have formed a functional cutting or
abrading surface. No polish is seen on inappropriate
surfaces such as the bottoms of depressions or pits.

CHERT FLAKES AND OTHER
STONE OBJECTS

1cm
Figure 15 . Incised "X" on smoothed surface of mammoth
molar fragment that may have served as an atlatl hook.

about 30 percent of the examples, the scuff is on the
inner surface of the scale (the side toward the fish in
the living animal). These scuffs have a preferred orientation parallel to the long axis of the scale, which
would also be the long axis of the hide, suggesting

A number of small pebbles have been recovered
in situ in the excavations at the Petronila Creek site.
The distribution of these pebbles directly tracks
the distribution of the bones, and the overlying and
underlying clays and fine sands are essentially free
of pebbles. Those pebbles found with the bones
range from pigeon-egg size on down. Some of
the larger pebbles were found close together, and
some are broken. One (41NU246-1204) appears to
have been tested, for several small flakes have been
knocked off its perimeter to expose a red core under
a white cortex.

38

Texas Archeological Society

end (see Figure 16b, right). It is
only 1.3 cm long. Its companion
(41NU246-1120) is of the same
material and same size and has a
chisel-shaped point (see Figure
16b, left). The edge may have usewear damage. These tools might
have served as wedges to split off
the chunks of mammoth molar
used as pounders (see Figure 8).
Three other stone objects are
also noted at the site, although
1 cm
their associations with the bone
deposit are varied. The first is a
"chopper" (tool A-61) (7.5 x 4 x
4 cm), made of a low quality chert
and retaining much cortex, that has
B
an obvious denticulated bit worked
into one end (Figure 17a). This
object was found directly above
the bones, embedded in the clay
layer (dated at 18,560 ± 280 B.P.)
that caps the bone-bearing sand,
and was exposed by flood waters.
It is encrusted with the same carbonate material that coats many of
the bones, and was clearly in situ.
1 cm
It was about 30 cm higher in the 4
m sequence of Pleistocene sands
and clays, and would be roughly
Figure 16. Chert flakes and chipped stone tools, unquestionably in situ in
the same age as the bone deposit.
the bone-bearing sand: a, flakes 41NU246-1330 (top) and 41NU246-1013
It was in close proximity to, and is
(bottom); b, tools 41NU246-1120 (left) and 41NU246-1364 (right).
from the same stratum as, a nearly
complete scattered skeleton of a
large male Bison antiquus.
Two broken projectile points (Figure 17b)
There are several convincing examples of manwere loose in the creek bed sediments, but within
made flakes recovered from the bone-bed sand. Two
the scatter of mammoth bones. Because the creek
of the best (41NU246-1330 and 41NU246-1013) are
thin, sharp flakes from high-quality stone that have
bed sediments at this point are heavily laden with
Pleistocene bone fragments that clearly derive from
numerous flake removal scars on one surface and a
the bone deposit and because stone points of some
single detachment scar on the other (Figure 16a).
sort would probably have been needed to bring
The larger flake is of translucent dark chert with
feathery inclusions and extensive white patination.
down the Pleistocene animals, it is reasonable to
suspect that these two points also came from the
The smaller is translucent amber chert. Both flakes
bone bed. 4
seem to derive from the manufacture of relatively
One of the points (see Figure l 7b, left) is the
larger, better made tools than any yet recovered in
mid-section of a large spear/dart point of white chert
situ from the site.
(from grid N5E3). This unfluted lanceolate point is
Two little "wedges" made of stone were also
heavily ground on the entire length of the edges.
found in the bone-bed sand. The first (41NU246The breaks, however, are sharp edged, indicating no
1364), of red chert (the same material as the tested
significant stream transport. The second represents
pebble), has had pieces broken away to form a
the stem of a small fish-tailed dart point (see Figure
point, backed by a knob of white cortex on the other

A

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 39
17b, right) , thick, unftuted, and
with grinding on all edges (from
grid N5E2) . Where the stem is
broken, the point flares, suggesting
it is a shouldered or barbed form.
It has a small patch of carbonate
encrustation, indicating that it too
has experienced no significant
stream transport.

A

-

1cm

FIRE-ALTERED
MATERIAL
Fires were present at the site.
About a dozen small (pea-sized)
nodules of burned clay have been
recovered in the bone-bearing
sand layer. Nodules like these
are commonly found in coastal
Texas Indian campsites, and result
from campfires baking the ground
8
beneath them into a layer of lowgrade brick. The raw white sandy
clay is altered to a bed of hard
clods ranging in color from dark
gray to brick red. They are quite
unmistakable. The nodules from
the site have a brick red color.
About an equal number of
1 cm
what appear to be burned bones,
teeth, and scales have been recovered. All of these are small,
Figure 17. Stone artifacts in close association with the bone bed: a, chopper
but they display the distinctive
of coarse-grained chert. Note denticulated bit, patches of carbonate crust, and
wear along lateral right-angle edge. Recovered in situ from clay capping the
silvery color of burned bone, and
bone bed; b, Projectile point fragments: left, mid-section of opaque white chert
are very distinct from the unaltered
with heavily ground edges and indistinct flake scars, sharp broken edges; found
specimens. The apparently burned
loose amid mammoth bones; right, opaque brown chert stem with ground edges
material includes gar scales, fish
and a patch of carbonate crust, also loose amid Pleistocene bones.
spines, rodent bones, rodent teeth,
and possibly small pieces of mammoth molar enamel.
be safely fixed around 600°-650° C" (Robert C. DunRobert C. Dunnell has studied the burned clay
nell, personal communication, 1992).
and certain teeth. Of the clay nodules, he states "the
specimens are burned." He could not establish a thermoluminescence date for the burned clay nodules beDATING
cause of their small size, and because they had been
There are a variety of absolute and relative
exposed to strong sunlight while being excavated.
dating techniques available to determine the age of
He was provided a silver-colored rodent incisor for
the Petronila Creek site. It should be noted that the
examination under a scanning electron microscope,
time of site formation has not been conclusively esand stated: "We have examined the burned tooth.
tablished. The most likely date is at the time of the
There is no doubt that the tooth is actually burned;
glacial maximum of the Wisconsin glaciation, some
the temperature, given its structure and its color, can

-

40

Texas Archeological Society

generalized stratigraphy of the site, with radiocarbon
and thermoluminescence dates, projectile point
types, and faunal remains is shown in Figure 18.
The sedimentary matrix is a white Pleistocene
river deposit with a black Holocene soil forming
on a regionally eroding surface. An abandoned
channel is filled with Holocene sediments. The only
inconsistencies revealed in the stratigraphy are a
Bulverde point found above the level of the Catan
point, 6 and the elephantine bone fragment at a level
dated to 4,600 ± 180 B.P. (Column 3). The bone
is either reworked or, more likely, the date reflects
contamination by new carbon. An undisturbed
biostratigraphic boundary is seen in Column 1,
with elephantine bone found immediately below
Holocene fauna. The projectile points are considered
to have the following approximate time ranges:
Catan, 3000-400 B.P.; Matamoros, 3000-400 B.P.;
Tortugas, 3500-2600 B.P.; and Bulverde, 5000-4500
B.P. (after Turner and Hester 1999:82, 89, 188).
The uncalibrated radiocarbon dates from the
Holocene deposits are 700 ± 60 B.P. (Tx-5417); 770
± 60 B.P. (Tx-5416); 1350 ± 240 B.P. (Tx-5415);

18,000 years before present. However, a case can be
made for the Sangamon interglacial of 100,000 years
ago, and the terminal Wisconsin period near 11,000
B.P. is also supported by certain evidence. These three
possibilities will be considered in what follows.
One can begin the dating discussion by concluding that the site dates to the terminal Pleistocene or
earlier because of the megafauna that are present.
The Wisconsin glacial maximum age is indicated
by a radiocarbon date on bone apatite from the
adult mammoth of 18,180 ± 330 B.P. (Tx-5835) and
a sediment radiocarbon date of 18,560 ± 280 B.P.
(Tx-7850) on the clay layer immediately overlying
the bone. Within the error limits, these dates are
indistinguishable, but the most likely case is that
the capping clay is dating a bit older than the bone,
as it should. 5
Additional sediment, soil, and thermoluminescence dates in the overlying stratigraphic
sequence are progressively younger than these
glacial maximum dates, and are also consistent with
the faunal remains (bison) and cultural material (dart
points) contained in each shallower stratum. The

COLUMN 1

COLUMN 2
Regional Surface

Regional Surface

COLUMN 3
Reg ional Surface
I

Eroded

1 Eroded
' ~
y 1'l"

..., ""'" !S'll }
6 .• fJ

"400

Eroded

8. bison, Rabdotus Sp., Homo
Matamoros , Tortugas, Abasolo Points,
Hearths in Black Clay

~EISTOCENEIHOLOCENE
Elephantine

+.300

Rabdotus sp.
Archaic Point
Burned Clay

UNDISTURBED BIOSTRATIGRAPHIC
BOUNDARY, Ca. 10,000 BP
SOIL 700 ± 61()

BP~

Dark

r

Lam. =-Bison bison

Bone

Clay

Bones

+200

White
Clay

. : .•.1.-.·- Hearth Zone
SEDIMENT
SOIL 770 ± 60 BP -

White

Black
Clay

Clay

Y

ro0

HOLOCENE
CHANNEL
FILL

Elephantine
Ve rtebra ,

/ I Mussels
tff. ~SEDIMENT

17.190 ± 400 BP

TOP PRINCIPAL

SOIL 1350 ± 240 Bf'
CARBONACEOUS CLAY
1920±100

I

4,600 ± 180BP\

Elephantine

~

14,470±100BP"1.,_.===t--ZERO

BURNED CLAY ~y Clar,'./v
TL 2840 ±~---!..

BON~~~l~ENT

SEDIMENT
18,560 ± 280 BP

0J

16,880 ± 380

While
Clay

SEDIMENT

BP""- L~~~t1::~~i~\

BP~ ~antiquus

+100

Bone~

Tortugas Point

Tan

=

"'J_

Jaws, bones .. and Skull

r--~-r.::::-t=
--'-'""-'-'-"'-'=-"""-"'-"'""-'"=-"'"""'------f-'<~~"t=-~=-·~.~..~:
.. ~A~PA~T~IT~E~1~8.~18~0::::±~33~0~B~P.-.,..,
.:~
. .~
..~,~..~.. ~
... ~
...~
. ::::.~.~ -wo

~~··

Mamm=-u""lh""u""sJ'-'a::::w-----------t=r;o~
Green Clay Prairie Dog Molar
Generalized
Column
Near E45

Green Clay
Generalized
Column
NearE6

.. ·

MammuthusBone

· .:
·

· ·

· ·

~~
·

·y

Mammuthus jeffersonii
Prairie Dog Teeth, etc.

:lf;..,G~; -1

CS

rGreen cray

i:;"

j

Generalized
Column
NearW10

!t
.......

Figure 18. Generalized stratigraphy along 55 m of cutbank with radiocarbon and thermoluminescence dates, projectile
point types, and fauna! remains. Locations identified at base of each column. The upper two sediment dates in Column
3 are probably too young due to prolonged exposure on the cutbank and contamination with new carbon. The sediment
date in Column 2 may be too young due to contamination from the Holocene channel material.

Lewis-An 18, 000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 41
and 1920 ± 100 B.P. (Beta-15995) (see Figure 18).
Dates from Pleistocene contexts in Columns 1-3
are: 14,470 ± 100 B.P. (Tx-7852); 16,880 ± 380 B.P.
(Tx-5373); 17, 190 ± 400 B.P. (Tx-5372); and the
aforementioned dates of 18,180 ± 330 B.P. (Tx-5835)
andl8,560 ± 280 B.P. (Tx-7850). The thermoluminescence date on burned clay from Holocene channel
fill is 2,840 ± 330 B.P. (Alpha-3015). Although the
materials dated are not as reliable as charcoal (none
of which is available) or bone amino acid (none
remaining; Thomas W. Stafford Jr., personal communication, 1990, 1994), they generally have yielded
acceptable dates. David Meltzer has advised that
both bone apatite and soil dates needed to be given
higher ratings on the Mead-Meltzer rating scale because of improvements in the dating techniques in
recent years (personal communication, 1991). 7
Besides the radiocarbon dates, additional
evidence for a Wisconsin glacial maximum age
comes from several sources. First, the assemblage is
physically "deep" in the Pleistocene, well below the
Pleistocene/Holocene biostratigraphic boundary, being some 5 m deep in sediments that contain isolated
mega-mammal bones almost to the surface. Second,
the degree of physical diagenesis of the overlying
clays is consistent with an 18,000 year age (Michael
D. Blum, personal communication, 1990). Third, the
inferred hydrological regime-high effective rainfall, giving rise to a perennial stream large enough to
support large fish, turtles, and alligators-fits the full
glacial Tahoka Pluvial period of22,500-14,000 B.P.
(Bryant and Holloway 1985:44-50). At that time the
lake basins of West Texas were full, and increased
rainfall may have extended into South Texas to swell
the Petronila Creek into a river. Suhm (1980) established that the now-dry Palo Blanco, farther south
than Petronila Creek and farther into the present arid
zone, was a broad meandering river during "pluvial
times" of the "humid Wisconsin glacial stage."
Finally, the faunal assemblage-the types of
animals present-is what would be expected from
an assemblage dating to the middle Wisconsin period. Mead and Meltzer (1984:Figure 19.3) reviewed
the extinction record and concluded that the terminal
Pleistocene extinctions had not yet begun at 18,000
B.P. The Petronila Creek deposit contains at least
nine species (in seven genera) of large mammals
and reptiles that later became extinct.
On the negative side, a full glacial time period
seems inappropriate for the insect fauna, and
possibly for parts of the reptile fauna, found at
the site. The weevils Compsus auricephalus and

Cylindrocopturus armatus are now confined to
southern Mexico and parts of Central America (Scott
A. Elias, personal communication, 1989), which
would indicate that they are warm-weather species.
Also, the large tortoise (Gopherus hexagonatus)
has generally been considered intolerant of freezing
weather (e.g., Lundelius 1972:5). But counter
arguments can in tum be made: the weevils, being
plant feeders, may have followed their food source
south rather than their climate niche (Elias 1994:75).
Pleistocene species assemblages often included
mixtures of tropical and temperate species that have
no modem analog (Guthrie 1984:263-267). Of six
beetles studied by Elias that lived in or near Texas
during the Wisconsin period, four moved north when
the climate warmed and one moved east, but one also
moved south (Elias 1994: 104-105). So a southward
migration of the Petronila Creek weevils may not
be a chronological problem. As to the big tortoises,
Westgate (1987) has provided convincing evidence,
in the form of tortoise remains found inside apparent
burrows, that Gopherus hexagonatus was able to
burrow (and thus escape freezing weather). Further,
while climatological reconstructions for the period
of the Wisconsin glacial maximum are fairly certain
for the reduction of mean July temperature, with
southwest Texas and Central Texas being 5° C to
5.5° C (about 10° F) cooler in midsummer (Bryant
and Holloway 1985:47, 49), the pollen records say
little about winter temperature. Elias (1994:85-87)
offers evidence from beetle fossils that the central
U.S . and Rocky Mountain regions were indeed
much colder during the glacial maximum, but the
Chihuahuan Desert of northern Mexico and the
southwestern U.S. experienced little temperature
change. Thus, the presence of tropical beetles and
giant tortoises at Petronila Creek during the glacial
maximum may not be climatically inappropriate.
In the absence of any radiocarbon dates one
might well conclude that the Petronila Creek site
dates from the Sangamon interglacial of roughly
100,000 years ago. Both the Sangamon and Wisconsin periods fall within the Rancholabrean Land
Mammal Age, which means that there are no obvious index species to separate the two periods. Both
Bison latifrons and Bison antiquus are reported from
the Sangamon (McDonald 1981:75, 82; Kurten and
Anderson 1980:337-338), so the presence of B. antiquus would not be an anomaly. In fact, the Bison
at Petronila Creek, as seen from a semi-complete
skeleton obtained from the layer just above the main
bone deposit, while clearly a B. antiquus based upon

Texas Archeological Society

42

Rancholabrean" (i.e. , Sangamon) and M. jeffersonii
being the Wisconsinan form (Kurten and Anderson
1980:351-352). Anderson (1984:86) refers to M.
jeffersonii as being "the Sangamonian-Wisconsinan
species." Thus, the situation for the Mammuthus
is the same as for the Bison: the Petronila Creek
specimen fits best as a Sangamonian intermediate
between M. columbi and M. jeffersonii.
Among the rest of the mammalian fauna, only
the rodents are well represented and well studied
(Johnson 1993). They are for the most part grassland species that have a temporal range from the
Sangamon to recent times. The Petronila Creek area
may have been grassland during the Sangamon (an
interglacial) because it is presently (an interglacial
period).at the edge of a grassland; however, the glacial maximum also produced probable grasslands in
the area (Bryant and Holloway 1985:50). Therefore,
so far as can be seen, the small mammals could be
of Sangamon age.
As noted earlier, the two weevils and the giant tortoise present at
Petronila Creek are most readily in12terpreted as species that should have
inhabited
the region at a time when the
11 climate was warmer than at present,
not when it was colder. The Sangamon
E 10()
probably was such a warmer period. It
90
can be deduced from the Sangamon sea
"t"level stand (some 25 ft. higher than at
Q!
present) (e.g., Lundelius 1972:6), that
more of the Earth's polar ice was melta.. 7CJ)
ed then than now, and Elias (1994: 144,
148, 150, 156, 164, 183, 187; 196-197)
I- 6has established that at least the north5ern hemisphere was warmer during the
a..
Sangamon than at present.
4Finally, the entire deposit is emplaced within the Sangamon delta of
more progressive-----::>,.
3the Nueces River (Aronow 1971). To
argue a glacial maximum age for the
2
archeological deposit at the Petronila
4
3
2
Creek site, it has been necessary to
assert that the Petronila Creek of that
ENAMEL THICKNESS, mm
time was a substantial river flowing
across, and reworking, the abandoned
Figure 19. Two-variable plot of dental characteristics of New World
Sangamon delta of the Nueces. This
mammoths , showing the developmental position of the Petronila
"Petronila River" is needed to account
Creek mammoth (after Kurten and Anderson 1980): Mm=Mammuthus
for
the large catfish, giant garfish,
meridionalis (1 .5-1 million years B.P.); Mc=Mammuthu s columbi (1.0
large aquatic turtles, large alligators,
to 0.1 million years B.P.); Mje=early Mammuthusjeffersonii (100,000 to
and other evidence of a big, perma50,000 years B.P.); Mjl=late Mammuthus jeffersonii (50,000 to 10,000
years B.P.); Mp= Mammuthus primigenius (to 10,000 years B.P.).
nently flowing river. But a simpler

horn core measurements, has some decidedly B.
latifrons features in other parts of the skeleton: all
of the skull measurements overlap with B. latifrons
and most of the limb measurements are too large for
B. antiquus but fall within the range of B. latifrons
(Lewis 1994). 8 If B. antiquus arose from latifrons
stock during the Sangamon, as seems plausible
based upon McDonald's work (1981), such a mixture of characteristics as seen in the Petronila Creek
specimen could be expected in Sangamon stock.
The Mammuthus dentition, based on one intact
molar and several fragments, is relatively primitive
when measured according to the criteria set forth by
Maglio (1973). It fits within Kmten and Anderson's
(1980:352) "early jeffersonii" group (Figure 19),
which as they define it is really the transition group
from M. columbi to M. jeffersonii. They imply that
this transition took place during the Sangamon,
with M. columbi terminating in the "middle

r

w

a-

w

:3

~

T

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 43
explanation for the presence of a big river is to conclude that this river was the Nueces itself, and that
it was occupying and building its Sangamon delta
at the time these large aquatic animals were taken
from it and incorporated into the bone deposit that
is now 41NU246.
The only evidence contradicting a Sangamon
age is the series of radiocarbon dates. They get progressively older with stratigraphic depth and reach
only 18,000 B.P. at the level of the bone deposit (see
Figure 18). If a Sangamon age is correct, and the
radiocarbon dates are too young, this by itself would
not be too surprising. Bone apatite and sediments are
subject to contamination by modem carbon and their
dates should be taken as minimum ages (Salvatore
Valastro, Jr., personal communication, 1994).
A final possibility is that the site dates from the
terminal Wisconsin period, about 11,000 B.P. The
reason to consider this date is the presence of man,
for until quite recently, the entrance of humans into
the region was almost universally taken to have occurred at the end of the Pleistocene and just prior to
the start of the Holocene period. If this view is correct, and if it is accepted that humans are present at
the site, then humans in conjunction with Mammuthus and other Pleistocene species found at Petronila
Creek makes the site contemporary with Clovis, if
not in fact a Clovis site, and narrowly confines the
date to near 11,000 B.P.
The counter argument to a terminal Wisconsin
date must start with the radiocarbon time series
from the Petronila Creek site (see Figure 18). In the
shallower strata of the Holocene channel fill the soil
dates appear to be too young, with 700 B.P. and 770
B .P. radiocarbon dates for strata beneath Matamoros
dart points (with a temporal range of 3000-400 B.P.)
in the younger overlying stratum, and a 1920 B.P.
radiocarbon date for a stratum dated at 2840 B .P.
by thermoluminescence and containing Bulverde
points (dating ca. 5000-4500 B.P.) (Lewis 1994). In
the deeper stratum, clay sediments have been dated
at 18,560 B.P. when freshly exposed, but after a few
years of exposure have acquired enough modern
carbon to date at only 3040 B.P. 9 Thus, it seems
that the soil/sediment dates at this site tend to be
erroneously young, not old. The case for the bone
apatite date is similar. The tendency of bone apatite
is to date too young, despite the infamous case of
the Old Crow "flesher" (Nelson et al. 1986). In
studies of the various bone extracts from the Clovis
age Domebo mammoth, for instance, Stafford et
al. (1987) found that untreated apatite dated 36.4

percent younger than the true age (from bone amino
acid and associated wood), and treated apatite still
dated 18.9 percent too young. One is therefore hardpressed to explain why bone and sediment dates of
18,000 B.P. should be "corrected" to 11,000 B.P.
A second objection to a terminal Wisconsin
date may be the implied wetness of the Petronila
Creek region at the time of deposition of the bone
bed. A Sangamon date is conceivable, because the
river in question would have been the Nueces. A
glacial maximum age is also plausible, because it
corresponds to the Tahoka Pluvial period when high
rainfall filled the lake basins of West Texas and created rivers in now-arid regions of South Texas. A
terminal Wisconsin date, however, seems less likely.
A long term trend toward increased aridity (since
the Glacial Maximum) had by that time caused the
West Texas lakes to dry up (Bryant and Holloway
1985:52). C. Haynes (1984:345-351, 1991:438-450)
provided evidence that the Clovis period coincided
with a drought-caused erosional episode well documented in western North America and seen as far
east as New York. He felt that this dry period lasted
about 500 years before wetter conditions returned.
Considering that the Petronila Creek catchment upstream of 41NU246 is both small and semi-arid (at
present), being composed of the northern part of Jim
Wells County and a bit of Duval County, it may be
that a substantial river could not have been sustained
during the Clovis drought.
Additionally, the diversity of now-extinct animals also argues against a terminal Wisconsin age.
Grayson (1991) pointed out that of the 35 genera of
mammals that became extinct in North America toward the end of the Pleistocene, only two, Mammut
and Mammuthus, have convincingly been found in
Clovis (or later) kill sites (note that the genus Bison
did not become extinct.) Of the remainder, Grayson
(1991:220) found "strong hints that many of the
taxa involved may have been on their way to extinction, if not already gone, by 12,000 years ago." The
Petronila Creek site contains five of these missing
genera (in addition to mammoth), which tends to
indicate that they were still abundant during the time
when the Petronila Creek site was being formed.
Approaching the problem from a different angle,
Grayson further noted that "good" radiocarbon
dates for the last occurrence of these 35 genera place
only eight in the last 2,000 years of the Pleistocene
(12,000 to 10,000 years ago). He contended that
there is no good evidence that three of the genera
found at Petronila Creek survived into this terminal

44

Texas Archeological Society

Wisconsin period (Glossotherium, Platygonus, and
Capromeryx) . Grayson's work is conservative, and
future work will no doubt alter the placement of genera in the above lists, but the conclusion is probably
solid that several genera at Petronila Creek were
scarce or absent by Clovis time.
Further, a general dwarfing of the terminal
Wisconsin megamammals may have taken place on
a worldwide basis (Guthrie 1984:269-271), which
does not square with the Bison antiquus at Petronila
Creek, which was for the most part beyond the size
range of B. antiquus and within the size range of the
larger B. latifrons. The Mammuthus jejfersonii femur
from Petronila Creek is also that of a very large
specimen, possibly the largest mammoth known
from the New World (Table 4). 10
Intact femora of Southern mammoths are not
abundant. Osborn (1942) and his associates almost
certainly published the largest known to them. No
larger specimen appears to have been published
since 1942, other than the Petronila Creek specimen.
The width/length ratio indicates that the Petronila
Creek femur is bulkier than average despite its great
length. As to available forelimb material, the largest
known to Osborn (1942: 1022-1023) was that designated A. imperator maibeni (University of Nebraska
Museum 5-9-22). This was estimated to represent a
living animal more than 4 m high at the shoulder.
The incomplete femur associated with these forelimbs has a transverse diameter of the shaft of 157
mm; the Petronila Creek femur measures 165 mm
at this point. The tusk fragment associated with the
Petronila Creek mammoth, from near the tip of the
tusk, is also large and bulky, being 1.8 m long with
a circumference of 56 cm. Guthrie (1984:270) states
that "virtually all mammoths associated with Clovis
points in the New World are diminutive and have
reduced tusks." Gary Haynes (1991:26-27,53) noted
that "toward the end of the last glacial advance in
the Pleistocene, mammoth body size and stature apparently decreased." This was "possibly in response
to climatic deterioration after 18,000 years ago." He
expected to see size reduction in a specimen dated
at 11,450 B .P., declaring that "if that date is correct,
perhaps the animal is a small male whose stature
reflects the overall trend toward body size reduction
in late Pleistocene Mammuthus." Thus, the outsized
Petronila Creek mammoth, with relatively primitive
dentition, does not appear to be the sort expected
to have been present at the terminal Wisconsin, but
would not seem out of context 7000 years earlier at
the glacial maximum.

After considering the evidence bearing on the
age of the Petronila Creek site, it is reasonable to
conclude that the site dates from the Wisconsin glacial maximum. The radiocarbon dates indicate this,
and stratigraphic, hydrological, and faunal evidence
also support this conclusion. Most persuasive is the
fact that two different dated materials, bone and
sediment, have provided radiocarbon ages that are
in such close agreement. Also persuasive is the orderly stacking of radiocarbon dates in the obviously
stratified sedimentary sequence, corroborated by a
thermoluminescence date, adequately correlated with
the assumed age of dart points in the younger zones,
and always consistent with the fauna of each level.

DISCUSSION

The Petronila Creek site is of more than ordinary importance because there appears to have been
human activity there roughly 7000 years before the
advent of the Clovis culture in North America. The
first question that presents itself is: is this reasonably possible in the context of what we presently
know? A recent review of the status of our knowledge of archeological sites, genetic material, and
the timing of northern ice barriers (Goebel et al.
2008) concludes that it was modem humans who
first colonized the Americas. The authors find that
these people dispersed from Africa across Eurasia
beginning about 50,000 years ago, and had occupied
western Beringia by 32,000 years ago, a relatively
warm time when no glacial ice sheets would have
blocked their movement into the interior of North
America. Based on these observations, and accepting other evidence that people reached the interior of
the continent before the Clovis period, Goebel et al.
conclude that humans possibly colonized the Americas before the Last Glacial Maximum. Therefore, a
human occupation at Petronila Creek 18,000 years
ago should be considered to be reasonable. The data
that have been presented above in this article will
now be discussed with the objective of evaluating
the strength of the evidence.
Evidence becomes more convincing as various
independent lines of investigation point to the same
result; this has a statistical foundation but is also
a product of common sense. At Petronila Creek it
would not be correct to say that the burned clay
nodules and the fire-altered animal parts both point
to human activity, because they are not independent
indicators of human activity: what they do point to is

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 45
Table 4. Femur Measurements of Southern Mammoths of North America.
Greatest
length,
mm

Greatest
width,
mm

Width/
Length
ratio

Petronila Creek (41NU246- l 529)
Reynolds (Neb. Mus. 13-24-10-14)
Bradenton (Amer. Mus. 26821)
Denver Museum (1359)
Lange-Ferguson (SDSM 12468)
Amherst Museum 25-1
Crawford (UNSM 2448)

1429
1422
1393
1390
1372
1340
1325

400

0.28

Hot Springs 86-076/093
Hot Springs "V"
Ft. Robinson (NSM 1597-62-2)(left)
Hot Springs 83-105/008
Hot Springs 86-076/439
Huntington Reservoir (Utah)
Type (M. jejfersonii)(Am. Mus. 9950)
Bradenton (Amer. Mus. 26820)
Ft. Robinson (NSM 1597-62-2)(right)
Hot Springs /221

1317
1308
1281
1274
1260
1255
1250
1230
1228
1147

319
372

0.24
0.28

370

0.29

295

0.26

Name

fire, because they are independent indicators of fire.
One can look at the fire in isolation and see that it
affected the sediments, creating low-grade brick (a
hot fire), and burned a rodent incisor and other animal remains. A typical grassland/woodland fire does
not burn hot enough to bake the soil into brick, and
would char, but not incinerate, a rodent caught in it
(the rodent tooth reached a temperature at which iron
begins to glow red). Nor would a natural fire catch
multiple animals, including fish, at the same spot. A
human campfire, on the other hand, fed a supply of
wood, can achieve the sustained high temperature
needed to fire brick and incinerate any animal remains cast into it. On the subject of fire, then, one
can say that it was present, hot, and involved the bone
bed, and one can say, therefore, that this particular
fire is evidence of human activity at the site.
The bone bed itself is an independent indication
of human activity, all things being considered. First,
bone piles of this sort are not common. Most physical agents act to disperse bones. Those few inanimate agents that work to build a bone deposit have
been found not to be a factor at Petronila Creek. The
only well-studied animals that may have gathered at

Reference
This article
Osborn 1942:1018
Osborn 1942: 1113
Osborn 1942: 1036
Mo! and Agenbroad 1994:243
Osborn 1942: 1080
R. George Corner, personal
communication, 1997
Agenbroad l 994b:206
Agenbroad 1994b:206
Mo! and Agenbroad 1994:241
Agenbroad 1994b:206
Agenbroad l 994b:206
Haynes 1991:16
Osborn 1942: 1095
Osborn 1942: 1113
Mo! and Agenbroad 1994:241
Agenbroad 1994b:206

least some of the bones are for the most part recent
species of the Old World-leopards, hyenas, and
African porcupines-none of which were present
in Late Pleistocene North America. Nevertheless,
because certain extinct American mammals might
have mimicked their behavior-namely the dire
wolf (Canis dirus), which may have behaved somewhat like a hyena (Kurten and Anderson 1980: 171 ),
and the scimitar cat (Homotherium serum), considered responsible for a collection of proboscidean
remains in Friesenhahn Cave (Kurten and Anderson
1980: 190)-these recent animal species have been
employed as proxies and found to be unlikely accumulators of the bones. Bone-eating mammals
seem to produce bone flakes of a different size, and
produce them to be eaten, not to be left laying about
by the thousands. Predators seem also not to leave
many tortoise fragments in their bone accumulations, and for that matter tend to create bone piles in
their dens or lairs (Brain 1981), not on an exposed
sand bar. As to raptors, it is conceivable that certain
elements of the Petronila Creek bone pile could have
formed beneath a nest or favorite perch of an eagle
or hawk (Brain 1981), but this seems contrived.

46

Texas Archeological Society

But it is not only by a process of elimination that
one arrives at humans as the causative agent of the
bone pile. The heavy utilization of long bones, the
considerable reliance on turtles and tortoises, the
use of animals from every part of the ecosystem,
and the open-air location of the deposit all seem to
be characteristic of human activity. Therefore, it is
reasonable to consider the bone pile to be separate
and independent evidence of a human presence at
Petronila Creek.
Cut marks on bones caused by sharp stone edges
are not to be naturally expected in regions where there
are no sharp stones. The cut marks found at Petronila
Creek are not mere scratches. They are large, deep,
gouges in hard bone. Anyone who has not used hand
tools to work bone may not appreciate how hard it is
to produce cuts of this sort. Some of these cuts are
on surfaces that are hard to get at, and on objects that
are hard to hold while being worked. A great deal of
deliberate effort would have been needed to make
them, even if they are themselves incidental to some
other purpose. They appear to be good examples
of what Brain (1981:53) meant when he wrote that
humans using stone tools "produce occasional marks
on bones that could not have been caused by the teeth
of carnivores or by other agencies. When these are
found, human involvement is confirmed."
Probably independent of the cut marksbecause one does not necessarily occur with the
other-is the class of large, often polished, facets
seen on the bone tools and mammoth molar chunks.
It must again be emphasized that these are not casual by-products of a little rubbing. If one set out to
replicate the facet on 41NU246-1542 (see Figure 6)
by rubbing elephant bone on sandstone, one would
be tired and frustrated before one gave up trying.
Since this facet was almost certainly not made for
its own sake, but probably was the result of milling
something like nuts or seeds (see Dunbar and Webb
1996), and as the milling table would not have been
sandstone (none is available in the area) but may
have been wood, it becomes clear that a lot of time
and effort went into the incidental creation of this
facet. Because similar facets are seen on similar
bone chunks, and on mammoth molar chunks, and
all are of a handy size for tools, it seems inescapable
that they are the product of some rubbing task at
which humans were willing to work very hard.
The pounding tools made of mammoth molar,
although they too have some faceted surfaces, seem
to have had a different, independent, purpose from
the faceted bone tools. A ready explanation for their

existence can be found in the lack of suitable rocks
and the need to pound up bones for marrow and
grease extraction. Evidence of their use as pounders is provided by the hundreds of chips of molar
enamel and the thousands of bone fragments found
at Petronila Creek. Is there any explanation for
them except as human tools? Petronila Creek does
experience some impressive out-of-bank floods, but
the low gradient permits only low water velocity,
and the stream bed "gravels," mostly small caliche
nodules, often do not move much. Experimental
pieces of bricks placed in the stream bed move only
a short distance when they move at all. So clashing
rocks, which do not exist in the first place, would
not do much clashing if they did exist. The battered
chunks of mammoth molar, therefore, are reasonably
interpreted to be human tools, used as pounders.
The stone flakes and tools are clearly independent evidence of human activity except insofar as
tools like them were apparently used to make the
bone cut marks and possibly split off the mammoth
molar pounders. For our purposes these stone objects fall into two classes: those clearly associated
with the bones but not good examples of formally
recognized tools, and those loosely associated with
the bone bed but certainly conventional tools. One
would prefer that the associations were reversed.
The rough stone "chopper" and the two small
"wedges" are unlikely to be geofacts because,
again, there were no clashing rocks in the bed of
the ancient Petronila River. They are also securely
associated with 18,000 year old radiocarbon dates.
As to the fragments of two dart points, it seems an
improbable coincidence that even one such point
with characteristics of Late Pleistocene manufacturing techniques (e.g., a lanceolate form and ground
edges) should have been found loose amid the
scatter of bone bed material. Yet two such points
were found, neither exhibiting evidence of stream
transport, and one still having patches of the same
type of carbonate crust seen on the larger bones
from the bone bed.
One can reach solid conclusions from the
evidence discussed above. Recognizing that the
word "proof' is best confined to mathematics, it is
only possible to establish a certain probability that
humans were responsible for the formation of the
Petronila Creek site. One should consider that each
of the site attributes discussed above is, by itself,
evidence of human involvement: the fire, the bone
bed, the cut marks, the faceted bones, the mammoth
molar pounders, and the stone tools. If humans were

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 47
indeed present at the site, all of these artifacts and
indications are to be expected. On the other hand, it
is almost impossible to expect that the chance vagaries of nature created each of these as false artifacts
and did so all at the same time and place. To state the
concept more poetically, the laws of physics allow
Nature to create an assemblage of this sort, but the
laws of probability do not allow that the one found
will be her handiwork. Thus, it is highly probable
that people were present at Petronila Creek.
The evidence for the 18,000 year old age of the
site can be considered in the same way. Starting with
the radiocarbon dates, it should be noted that in most
contexts both bone apatite and sediment dates are
accepted as reasonably accurate (e.g., Agenbroad
1994a:26-27). If they were not, they would never
be used. The dates are certainly accurate at Petronila
Creek in indicating that the site is Pleistocene in age,
because the fauna is Pleistocene in character. And,
the dates are not being used to argue that the site was
occupied only a few hundred years before Clovis,
but rather a full 7000 years before the Clovis era.
The half-life for a carbon 14 atom is about 5,000
years, so a 10,000 year old bone must lose half of
its radiocarbon content to date at 15,000 years, and
about as much again to date at 18,000 years ago. If
this loss is not due to radioactive decay of the atoms,
but is a product of replacement by ancient carbon
that is devoid of carbon 14 atoms, then well over half
of the bulk carbon must be replaced by geological
and chemical processes. 11 The same, of course, is
true of sediment dates, except in bone the carbon is
contained in crystals of apatite while in sediment it
is in the form of organic remains . It seems highly
unlikely that the different geological and chemical
processes that would need to act to replace original
carbon with such great amounts of old and depleted
carbon in bone, on the one hand, and sediment on
the other, would act in such perfect concert that
both "contaminated" materials would date to the
same 18,000 year old time period, indistinguishable within the measurement errors. Such gross and
unlikely contamination by "old" carbon is even less
likely in view of the evidence that such contamination as has taken place has been by "new" carbon,
producing dates that are in fact too recent.
When the data from Petronila Creek are
examined to determine if there is independent
evidence that would support or refute the 18,000 year
old radiocarbon dates, it is found that two additional
lines of evidence point to a glacial maximum or
earlier date for the occupation: the climate and

the fauna. Here we find that a large river was
sustained by pluvial conditions, and an undepleted
Pleistocene fauna contained exceptionally large
bison and mammoths, both with relatively primitive
features . This supports a glacial maximum age but
not a terminal Wisconsin age, at which time there is
evidence of drought, extinction, and dwarfing of the
surviving megafauna.
Thus, if Nature is not being exceptionally capricious with the evidence, people were present in
southern Texas at the Last Glacial Maximum.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I have received aid and comfort from many individuals while establishing the facts and formulating
the conclusions presented herein. Thomas R. Hester
has provided overall guidance as unerring as it has
been unobtrusive. Kenneth M. Brown has been of
indispensable help with suggestions, discussions,
obscure information, supporting references, and help
with the illustrations. Those who have helped with
various kinds of identifications are Jon A. Baskin,
Robson Bonnichsen, Jane Deisler-Seno (snails),
Gordon Edmund, Scott A. Elias (insects), Richard
G. Holloway (seeds), Eileen Johnson (micro-mammals), Ernest L. Lundelius Jr., (mega-mammals),
Leland W. Patterson, Kevin Seymour, D .Gentry
Steele, S. David Webb, and Joe Ben Wheat. Geologic aspects of the site were examined by Michael D .
Blum, Michael B. Collins, and Michael R. Waters.
The mammoth bone and molar tools were examined
by Robson Bonnichsen and many others. Lab work
has been performed by Beta Analytic, Inc., Robert
C. Dunnell, Thomas W. Stafford, Jr., and Salvatore
Valastro, Jr. Discussions have been had with Robson
Bonnichsen, Michael B . Collins, Tom D. Dillehay,
Jeremiah F. Epstein, C. Vance Haynes Jr., Eileen
Johnson, Robert J. Mallouf, Paul S. Martin, Jim I.
Mead, David J. Meltzer, Edward Mokry, Leland W.
Patterson, Elton R. Prewitt, Robert A . Ricklis, Jeffrey J. Saunders, Thomas W. Stafford, Jr. , Dennis
Stanford, D . Gentry Steele, and James E. Warren.
Many people have examined the artifacts , and an
invitation is extended to the reader. Kaye C. Hass,
Claudette Morgan, Beth Bee, and Tamara Brennan
helped with the manuscript preparation. Special
thanks go to Kenneth M. Brown, Tom D. Dillehay,
and Michael R. Waters for their reviews of the manuscript and insightful suggestions, and to Timothy K.
Perttula for extensive editing.

48

Texas Archeological Society
ENDNOTES

1. The abbreviation B.P. means radiocarbon years
before present. Some numbers quoted from source material could not be identified as being in calendar years or
radiocarbon years, but for the purposes of this article the
difference is immaterial.
2. Carnivore bones were also scarce in the leopard
droppings studied by Brain (1981), since carnivores
ordinarily do not eat other carnivores. But in carnivore
dens where bone deposits build up, bones of the carnivore
itself also accumulate. In Friesenhahn Cave (Kurten and
Anderson 1980:190), numerous skeletons of the scimitar
cat Homotherium serum were found with remains of its
prey: baby mammoths.
3. The test employed to establish polish was that
the metallic part of a pencil eraser, when held against
the surface, showed some degree of reflected image. The
metallic nature of the pencil eraser helped discriminate
between a shadow, which would be dark, and a reflection,
which was metallic.
4. Site41NU110 lies 0.75 km upstreamfrom41NU246.
This surface site, on a bend in the creek, about 50 m from
the creek channel, has produced three Late Paleoindian
dart points. The surface is a well vegetated black soil with
large trees, a thicket of brush, weeds, vines, and grass. No
discernable erosion is taking place, and thus the erosion of
archeological materials into the creek is probably nil.
5. A sediment date is derived from detrital water-borne
carbon deposited with the mineral fraction. This carbon
originates upstream as decomposing vegetable matter and
eroding surface soils, and is on the order of a few hundred
years old at the time of its reincorporation in sediment. A
soil, on the other hand, derives most of its carbon from plant
and animal material emplaced in the sediment after deposition and will thus date younger than the deposition time
(Kenneth M. Brown, personal communication, 1993).
6. Stratigraphy within the Holocene channel fill is not
fully established. Bulverde points come from the west side
of the channel, a Tortugas point comes from the east side,
and a Catan has been found in the center of the channel. All
are from unreworked hearth zones. Following Turner and
Hester (1999) , Bulverde and Tortugas points are expected
to be older than Catan points. They may be buried on the
"higher terraces" of the channel, and thus predate the Catan, which is the youngest, and associated with the deepest
channel incision. Alternatively, the Catan point may be
misidentified, or its time range imperfectly understood.
7. The Mead-Meltzer scale rates the suitability
of various substances for radiocarbon dating. As
formalized by Meltzer and Mead (1985), it ranks
substances according to the reliability of the dates they
yield. Charcoal is among those rated highest, amino
acids are in the next group, collagen in the third group,
followed by apatite and soil (of equal rank), and shell,
then finally a group including terrestrial carbonate and
whole bone. This scale actually rates susceptibility to

contamination, since all of the materials yield good dates
if uncontaminated.
8. For the front limb (humerus, radius, and metacarpal), eight of nine measurements are larger than the upper
limit seen for B. antiquus males, but seven of nine are
within the range for B. latifrons males (five of nine are
too large for B. latifrons females). For the horn cores, of
six measurements, all are within the range of B. antiquus
males (most in the upper range), but only one is in the
range of B. latifrons males (three of six are in the range
of female B. latifrons, but the core morphology is clearly
that of a male) . For the skull, of four available measurements, all are in the upper range for B. antiquus males;
relative to B. latifrons males, three are in the lower range,
and one is in the upper range (three of four are too large
for female B. latifrons) (Lewis 1994).
9. Accepted practice to obtain accurate sediment
radiocarbon dates is to date only freshly exposed material. Exposed sediments are promptly colonized by
carbon-capturing organisms. The clay shelves capping
the bone bed dated 16,880 and 18,560 B.P. at two fresh
exposures. After approximately four years of exposure,
this clay dated at 5560 ± 60 B.P. (Beta-74184) and 3040
± 60 B.P. (Beta-72308).
10. Femur length measurements can be taken in two
ways. Agenbroad (1994b:206) illustrates a measurement
parallel with the shaft, while Averianov (1996:264) illustrates a diagonal length "from caput to distal epiphysis lateral edge" which in most bones is probably slightly greater.
Osborn (1942: 1112) appears to use the potentially greater
diagonal length, since his measurement of the Type M. jeffersonii is 1250 mm whereas Haynes (1991:16) measures
the same femur at 1230 mm (apparently using the parallel
method). Also Osborn has measured the Denver Museum
specimen at 1390 mm, while Logan Ivy (personal communication 1997) measures the largest of these two femora at
1372 mm. Osborn's Figure 988 showing the "new standard
method (1930) of skeletal measurement" is ambiguous as
it is a side view but appears to show the diagonal. Using
the diagonal measure, the Petronila Creek femur, at 1429
mm, is larger than any other; using the parallel measure
of 1422 mm, it is equaled by Osborn's measurements,
probably diagonal, of the Reynolds femur.
11 . The caliche associated with the bones dates to
7450 ± 50 B.P. (Beta-226546) and is the only apparent
source of bulk extraneous carbon. Any contamination from
this source would cause the bones to date too young.

REFERENCES CITED
Agenbroad, L. D.
l 994a Geology, Hydrology, and Excavation of the Site.
In The Hot Springs Mammoth Site , edited by L.
D. Agenbroad and J. I. Mead, pp. 15-27. Fenske
Printing, Inc., Rapid City, South Dakota.

Lewis-An 18,000 Year Old Occupation Along Petronila Creek in Texas 49
l 994b Taxonomy of North American Mammuthus and Biometrics of the Hot Springs Mammoths. In The Hot
Springs Mammoth Site, edited by L. D. Agenbroad
and J. I. Mead, pp. 158-207. Fenske Printing, Inc.,
Rapid City, South Dakota.
Allison, N.
1991 Accidental Discovery Offers Evidence of Mastodont
Butchering. Mammoth Trumpet 6 (4):3 , 7-8.
Anderson, E.
1984 Who's Who in the Pleistocene: A Mammalian Bestiary. In Quaternary Extinctions, edited by P. S. Martin
and R. G. Klein, pp. 40-89. The University of Arizona
Press, Tucson.
Aronow, S.
1971 Nueces River Delta Plain of Pleistocene Beaumont
Formation, Corpus Christi Region, Texas. The
American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 55 (8) :1231-1248.
Averianov, A. 0 .
1996 Sexual Dimorphism in the Mammoth Skull, Teeth,
and Long Bones. In The Proboscidea, edited by J.
Shoshani and P. Tassy, pp. 260-267 . Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bailey, R. C.
1989 The Efe, Archers of the African Rain Forests. National Geographic 176(5):664-686 .
Bean, L. J.
1972 Mukat's People, the Cahuilla Indians of Southern
California. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Behrensmeyer, A. K., K. D. Gordon, and G. T. Yanagi
1986 Trampling as a Cause of Bone Surface Damage and
Pseudo-Cutmarks. Nature 319:768-771.
Brain, C. K.
1981 The Hunters or the Hunted? The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Brown, K. M.
2006 The Bench Deposits at Berger Bluff: Early HoloceneLate Pleistocene Depositional and Climatic History.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985 A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record
of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen Evidence. In
Pollen Records of Late Quaternary North American Sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant, Jr. and R.
G. Holloway, pp . 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas.
Davis, L.B. and J. W. Fisher, Jr.
1990 A Late Prehistoric Model for Communal Utilization
of Pronghorn Antelope in the Northwest Plains

Region, North America. In Hunters of the Recent
Past, edited by L.B . Davis and B. 0. K. Reeves, pp.
242-276. Unwin Hyman, London.
Dillehay, T. D.
1989 Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile,
Volume I . Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile,
Volume 2. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Dunbar, J. S. and S. D. Webb
1996 Bone and Ivory Tools from Submerged Paleoindian
Sites In Florida. In The Paleoindian and Early Archaic Southeast, edited by D. G. Anderson and K.
E. Sassaman, pp. 331-353. University of Alabama
Press, Tuscaloosa.
Elias, S. A.
1994 Quaternary Insects and Their Environments. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Goebel, T., M. R. Waters, and D. H. O' Rourke
2008 The Late Pleistocene Dispersal of Modem Humans
in the Americas . Science 319: 1497-1502.
Grayson, D. K.
1991 Late Pleistocene Mammalian Extinctions in North
America: Taxonomy, Chronology, and Explanations.
Journal of World Prehistory 5(3): 193-231.
Groat, C. G.
1975 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Corpus Christi Sheet. Bureau
of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Gruhn, R. and A. L. Bryan
1984 The Record of Pleistocene Megafaunal Extinctions
at Taima-taima, Northern Venezuela. In Quaternary
Extinctions, edited by P. S. Martin and R. G. Klein, pp.
128-137. The University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Guthrie, R. D.
1984 Mosaics, Allelochemics, and Nutrients: An Ecological Theory of Late Pleistocene Megafaunal Extinctions . In Quaternary Extinctions, edited by P. S.
Martin and R. G. Klein, pp. 259-298. The University
of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Haynes, C. V.
1984 Stratigraphy and Late Pleistocene Extinction in the
United States. In Quaternary Extinctions, edited
by P. S. Martin and R. G. Klein, pp. 345-353. The
University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
1991

Geoarchaeological and Paleohydrological Evidence
for a Clovis-Age Drought in North America and Its
Bearing on Extinction. Quaternary Research 35:438450.

50

Texas Archeological Society

Haynes, G.
1991 Mammoths, Mastodonts, and Elephants. Cambridge
University Press, New York.
Johnson, E.
1985 Current Developments in Bone Technology. In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol.
8, edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp. 157-235. Academic
Press, Inc., New York.
1993

A Late Pleistocene Small Mammal Fauna from South
Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 10: 105107.

Klein, R. G. and K. Cruz-Uribe
1984 The Analysis of Animal Bones from Archeological
Sites. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Kurten, B. and E. Anderson
1980 Pleistocene Mammals of North America. Columbia
University Press, New York.
Lewis, C.R.
1988 A Possible 18,000 Year Old Hunting and Fishing
Camp on the Texas Coastal Plain. Current Research
in the Pleistocene 5:15-16.
1994

Pleistocene and Holocene Bison with Associated
Artifacts from the Petronila Creek Site in South
Texas . La Tierra 21(4):6-16.

Lundelius, E. L., Jr.
1972 Fossil Vertebrates from the Late Pleistocene Ingleside Fauna, San Patricio County, Texas. Report of
Investigations No. 77. Bureau of Economic Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Lyman, R. L.
1987 Archaeofaunas and Butchery Studies: A Taphonomic
Perspective. In Advances in Archaeological Method
and Theory, Vol. 10, edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp.
249-337. Academic Press, Inc., New York.
Maglio, V. J.
1973 Origin and Evolution of the Elephantidae. The
American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia.
McDonald, J. N.
1981 North American Bison, Their Classification and
Evolution. University of California Press, Berkeley
and Los Angeles.
Mead, J. I. and D. J. Meltzer
1984 North American Late Quaternary Extinctions and
the Radiocarbon Record. In Quaternary Extinctions,
edited by P. S. Martin and R. G. Klein, pp. 440-450.
The University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Mo!, D . and L. Agenbroad
1994 Metapodials and Shoulder Height of Mammuthus
columbi Compared with Eurasian Mammuthus Species . In The Hot Springs Mammoth Site , edited by L.

D. Agenbroad and ,J. I. Mead, pp. 224-252. Fenske
Printing, Inc., Rapid City, South Dakota.
Nelson, D. E., R. E. Morlan,J. S. Vogel, J. R. Southon, and
C. R. Harington
1986 New Dates on Northern Yukon Artifacts: Holocene
Not Upper Pleistocene. Science 232:749-751.
Osborn, H. F.
1942 Proboscidea: A Monograph of the Discovery, Evolution, Migration and Extinction of the Mastodonts
and Elephants of the World, Vol. II: Stegodontoidea,
Elephantoidea . The American Museum Press ,
American Museum of Natural History, New York.
Schick, K. D. and N. Toth
1994 Making Silent Stones Speak. Simon & Schuster, New
York.
Stafford, T. W., Jr., A: J.T. Jull, K. Brendel, R. C. Duhamel,
and D. Donahue
1987 Study of Bone Radiocarbon Dating Accuracy at the
University of Arizona NSF Accelerator Facility for
Radioisotope Analysis. Radiocarbon 29(1):24-44.
Suhm, R. W.
1980 The La Paloma Mammoth Site, Kenedy County,
Texas. In Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas
Coast, edited by L. Highley and T. R. Hester, pp.
79-103. Special Report No. 11. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1999 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Gulf Publishing, Lanham, Maryland.
Waters, M. R. and T. W. Stafford, Jr.
2007 Redefining the Age of Clovis: Implications for the
Peopling of the Americas . Science 315: 1122-1126.
Weigelt, J.
1989 Recent Vertebrate Carcasses and their Paleobiological Implications. The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Westgate, J. W.
1987 A Preliminary Report on a Large Concentration of
the Remains of the Giant Gopher Tortoise, Gopherus
hexagonatus, in the Late Pleistocene Beaumont
Formation of Willacy County, Texas. In Cultural
Resources Investigations Along Drainage Improvements, Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas: 1986
Investigations , by G. D. Hall, M. B. Collins, and E.
R. Prewitt, pp. 201-217 . Report oflnvestigations No.
59. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Wheat, J.B.
1979 The Jurgens Site. Plains Anthropologist Memoir
15:1-153.

The Gatlin Site and the Early-to-Middle Archaic Chronology
of the Southern Edwards Plateau, Texas
Brett A. Houk, Kevin A. Miller, and Eric R. Oksanen

ABSTRACT
Recent excavations at the Gatlin site (41KR621) in Kerr County, Texas, yielded one of the most robust
assemblages thus far recovered from a stratified Early Archaic to Middle Archaic site on the southern margins
of the Edwards Plateau. The radiometric dates from the Gatlin site contribute greatly to our understanding of
the chronology and culture history of the region and are important anchors for evaluating existing chronologies
with temporally poorly anchored style intervals. This article reconsiders the chronology for southern Central
Texas during the latter half of the Early Archaic through the transition into the Middle Archaic based on new
data from the Gatlin site, and proposes calendrical ages for several major Central Texas projectile point styles,
including Gower, Martindale, Early Triangular, Nolan, and La Jita.

INTRODUCTION

In the most recent synthesis of the archeology
in the region, Michael B. Collins (2004:109) lists
"chronology" as one of the accomplishments in Central Texas archeology at the end of the last century.
While it is certainly true that tremendous advancements in establishing the general chronological
framework have been made in the past 60 years,
for a variety of reasons there still remain significant
issues with the chronometric dating of many time
periods in Central Texas prehistory. As is the case in
many parts of North America, diagnostic projectile
points are the primary technological indicator of the
age of cultural components at sites in Central Texas.
Although the relative sequence of projectile points
has been fairly well established for the region as a
whole, the actual calendar ages of many diagnostic
"projectile point style intervals," to borrow a term
from Collins (2004: 102), are not well known, particularly at sub-regional spatial and temporal scales.
In many cases, cross-dating of sites and features
using projectile point styles is the only available
means of determining the age of cultural remains
in Central Texas. Therefore, poorly documented
absolute ages for diagnostic artifacts in a given area
often result in the application of temporal ranges
for projectile points based on dates-or all too
frequently, based on relative age estimates-from
adjacent sub-regions or even outside of the Central

Texas archeological region altogether. The span of
the Early Archaic through Middle Archaic period is
particularly deficient in absolute dates from secure
contexts. In fact, of the sites often cited as representative of the Early Archaic in southern Central Texas
(see Collins 2004:Figure 3.9a and Table 3.2), only
Hall's Cave in Kerr County has chronometric dates
associated with Early Archaic diagnostic artifacts.
As a result of recent excavations, the Gatlin site
(41KR621) in Kerr County, Texas, has yielded one
of the most robust assemblages thus far recovered
from an Early Archaic to Middle Archaic site on
the southern margins of the Edwards Plateau and,
as such, contributes greatly to our understanding
of the chronology and culture history of the region
(Figure 1). The radiometric dates from the Gatlin
site, therefore, are important anchors for evaluating
existing chronologies with temporally "floating"
style intervals. In this article, we reconsider the
chronology for southern Central Texas during the
latter half of the Early Archaic through the transition
into the Middle Archaic based on new data from the
Gatlin site.

BACKGROUND ON THE
GATLIN SITE

The Gatlin site represents one of the largest
excavated samples of Early Archaic deposits in the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 80 (2009)

52

Texas Archeological Society

,

'

........

--

,

\

Approximate Limits of Edwards Plateau
and Central Texas Archaeological Region

100

0

100

200

300

400

kilometers

Figure 1. The Gatlin site (41KR621) location map.

Central Texas archeological region (Houk et al.
2008). The extension of Spur 98 and the construction of a new bridge across the Guadalupe River
provided the impetus for the archeological investigations. SWCA, Inc. performed survey, testing, and
data recovery investigations at the site on behalf of
the Texas Department of Transportation in 2004, the
full results of which have recently been published
by Houk et al. (2008).
The site is in the Central Texas archeological
region, an area generally corresponding to the limits
of the Edwards Plateau, an uplifted limestone plateau fronted on the south and east by the Balcones
Escarpment, the dominant expression in Central
Texas of the Balcones fault zone that originates in
the Ouachita Mountains in Southeast Oklahoma and

extends southwards through Texas to the Rio Grande
(Abbott and Woodruff 1986). The eastern and
southern margins of the Edwards Plateau contain
deeply dissected stream valleys that formed through
erosion. The southern margin of the plateau, west
of San Antonio, is sometimes called the Balcones
Canyonlands because of its rugged appearance. The
rivers in the region, including the Guadalupe River,
are supplemented by spring flow, and several large
springs emerge along the margins of the escarpment.
The Edwards Plateau is the southern extension of the
Great Plains (Riskind and Diamond 1986), and the
Balcones Escarpment marks the boundary between
the Edwards Plateau to the north and west and the
Blackland Prairie to the east and Coastal Plains to
the south.

Houk, et al.-The Gatlin Site and the Early-to-Middle Archaic Chronology 53
The Gatlin site occupies the right descending
bank of the Guadalupe River on wide, nearly level,
alluvial terraces. SWCA's investigations determined
that the site is spatially extensive, presumably continuing well beyond the 30.5 to 61 m wide (100 to

220 ft. wide) right-of-way (ROW). Archeological
deposits extend from the base of an upland toeslope
at the southern end of the site to the scarp of the
terrace above the river, a distance of approximately
200 m (Figure 2).

I~

I

117011601150Northern site boundaryy
1140)I
1130-

BHT7

BHT61

c

1 ·~

~ I

rn

I

1120-

I

BHT5

IE
~

BHT 201

-~1

I~

rn

1110-

El 10

51
a::

1100-

I
I

1090-

\

1080-

1o

0

20

30

40

!'!!!liiiiiiiiil!'!!!~iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiil!~~iiiiiiiiii•

t
me ers

I
I

91

BHT

I

\

BHT2
BHT 8

1070- - - - - - " 1 9 7.00 m

1060105010401030102010101000I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

1000 1010 1020 1030 1040 1050 1060 1070 1080

D Data recovery excavation areas
Figure 2. Map showing known limits of the Gatlin site, backhoe trenches (BHT), control trenches (CT), and data recovery
excavation areas within the Spur 98 ROW.

54

Texas Archeological Society

Subsurface survey using backhoe trenching and
power-auguring initially discovered the Gatlin site
within the Spur 98 ROW and determined that the
greatest density of cultural materials was concentrated at the southern end of the terrace at the base
of the toeslope, although diffuse occupational debris
extends as far north as the scarp above the river.
Notable was a buried burned rock midden, which
had no visible surface expression, near the western
edge of the ROW. This large feature formed during the Late Archaic and was buried under alluvial
and colluvial deposits. Beneath the midden-related
component, testing documented an extensive Early
Archaic component that covered over 1,650 m2 , as
well as a Middle Archaic component.
Based on the results of the testing excavations
and preliminary radiocarbon assays, the subsequent
data recovery excavations were designed to focus on
the Early Archaic deposits, which were recognized
as a rare, fairly well-preserved record of a poorly understood cultural period in the region. As such, only
approximately one-third of the excavations targeted
the Late Archaic component. Ultimately, however,
the excavations recovered significant data from not
only the Early Archaic period, but also the Middle
Archaic period. The latter is also a relatively poorly
documented period due to site compression in archeological deposits and the concomitant mixing often
found at Middle Archaic sites in Central Texas.
The data recovery field methods were designed
as a compromise between the assessment of broad,
horizontally extensive spatial patterns on one hand,
and, on the other, the intensive recovery of archeological data from the successive occupations through
time moving downward through the vertical profile.
To address these objectives, SWCA employed both
machine and hand excavations to assess the vertical
stratigraphy and correlate spatially distinct depositional and cultural zones. Data recovery methods
also utilized a Gradall to strip portions of the site in
preparation for large-scale block excavations. Two
excavation areas were opened: Area A and Area B
(Figure 3). Area A was further subdivided into four
quadrants: NE, NW, SE, and SW. Hand excavations
were generally conducted in 2 x 2 m squares using
two different approaches: a traditional one in which
units were excavated in 1 x 1 m quadrants using 10
cm arbitrary levels and the resulting matrix screened
through IA-inch mesh, and a "feature focused"
approach in which 2 x 2 m units were excavated
without screening unless a feature was discovered.
The latter approach was employed to expose a larger

area then could be accomplished by traditional hand
excavations alone within the time and budget allotted (Houk, Oksanen, and Miller 2008).

CULTURAL COMPONENTS
AT THE GATLIN SITE

The excavations documented 37 features, primarily concentrations of burned rock representing
hearths and earth ovens. The recovered artifacts
included over 150,000 pieces of lithic debitage, 409
projectile points, 1,085 bifaces, 343 cores, 380 modified and utilized flakes, 15 ground or pecked stone
tools, as well as 3,835 fragments of bone weighing
2,218 grams, representing primarily bison, whitetailed deer, and eastern cottontail rabbit remains.
Analysis of the radiocarbon dates, temporally
diagnostic artifacts, and stratigraphy resulted in the
identification of four Occupation Zones (OZs). The
two oldest zones, OZ 1 and OZ 2, date to the Early
Archaic period and were the main focus of the data
recovery investigations. OZ 3 represents the Middle
Archaic occupation at the site, and OZ 4 dates to the
Late Archaic, the period of time when the burned
rock .midden was forming. Of the approximately
160 m3 of matrix excavated at the Gatlin site, 14.5
m3 were from OZ 1 deposits, 33.2 m3 were from
OZ 2, and 68.5 m3 were from OZ 3. The remaining
matrix (approximately 44 m 3) was associated with
OZ 4, the Late Archaic occupation at the site. In
sum, SWCA excavated over 47 m3 of Early Archaic
deposits at the Gatlin site, representing one of the
largest and most extensive Early Archaic excavations in Central Texas.
The Gatlin site, while containing a remarkable
record of human occupation in the region, is not
deeply stratified, and in some cases there is little
vertical separation between the occupation zones,
due in large part to the sedimentation rates at the
site. During the transition from the Pleistocene to
the Holocene ca. 10,000 years ago, streams on the
Edwards Plateau abandoned their old channels, and
created new, lower elevation floodplains as they
began to incise their new channels. The warming
of the climate during this period is correlated with
increased erosion on the Edwards Plateau, and it is
this erosion that provided the material that formed the
Tl terrace at the site, what Abbott (2008) identified
as allostratigraphic Unit 3. The development of
Unit 3, which contains the occupation zones, was
a combination of lateral accretion and vertical

Houk, et al.-The Gatlin Site and the Early-to-Middle Archaic Chronology 55

I

1050 _..._96.Bsm

/

-------r~,.,---Approximate

limits of Feature 1
(burned rock midden)
BHT3

1040 - -97.90 m

1030 - -gS.15 rn
-98.40 rn
1020 ,....--9s.65 rn
1010 -

1000 sf(\,---------99.'\
~-----------

9 AO'(('.
990/9 ·

V:;,'0~

~~·

/

I

1000

I

I

1010
10

1020
0

I

I

1030

10

- --

1040

20

-

I

I

1050

30

1060

40

-

I

~

1070

I

1080

SO meters

Figure 3. Map of the Gatlin site showing area investigated by data recovery excavations. Test units and column sample
locations not shown at this scale.

accretion, with lateral accretion having been the
dominant process during its initial formation.
The rate of alluvial accumulation was greatest
during the Late Pleistocene, beginning at ca. 12,400
B.P., and decreased during the Holocene, ca. 10,000
B.P. By ca. 5000 B.P., or even earlier, the Guadalupe
River channel was fully entrenched, and alluviation
decreased dramatically. By the time of the occupations represented in OZ 1, alluviation rates had
declined from the Late Pleistocene/Early Holocene
rate of 0.95 mm/yr to approximately 0.42 mm/yr.
This further decreased during the times of OZ 3
and OZ 4 to half as much, 0.21 mm/yr (Frederick
2008:6-16). It is worth noting that the sedimentation
rates observed within Unit 3, the culture-bearing

unit, at the Gatlin site are similar to other alluvial
terrace deposits in Central Texas in that it was fairly
rapid during the early phases (0.95 mm/year) and
gradually became slower (0.21 mm/year in the block
excavations, i.e., during the period of occupation)
through time as the floodplain became progressively
higher (Frederick 2008).
This is not to imply, however, that the various
occupation zones at the Gatlin site are of poor
integrity. On the contrary, when compared to other
Early Archaic-Middle Archaic sequences from
Central Texas sites, the Gatlin site deposits offer
relatively good integrity, abundant chronometric
dates, and a large assemblage of diagnostic
artifacts. Therefore, despite limitations imposed

56

Texas Archeological Society

by the excavation methodology and compression
of some of the deposits at the Gatlin site, the data
aid tremendously in refining the chronology of the
southern Edwards Plateau.

ASSESSING THE INTEGRITY OF
THE DEPOSITS AND THE GATLIN
EARLY-MIDDLE ARCHAIC
SEQUENCE
Of the four occupation zones documented at the
site, this discussion focuses on the first three, which
span the Early Archaic through Middle Archaic
periods. The most recent zone, OZ 4, is associated
with the period of time when the burned rock midden was in use at the Gatlin site. Cultural processes
associated with the midden formation (for instance,
the repeated construction of earth ovens that formed
its matrices) and related activities have mixed the
cultural material from OZ 4, and our data do little
to address the chronological sequence of the Late
Archaic.
The oldest occupation, OZ 1, was the least well
documented, and its age estimates should be considered less precise than those of the later components
(Figure 4 and Tables 1 and 2). Two radiocarbon
assays bracket the component: Beta-206155 from
Feature 14 with a corrected radiocarbon age of
6570 ± 50 B.P. and a calibrated 2-sigma date range
of 7570-7420 cal. B.P., and Beta-206122 from
Feature 26 with a corrected radiocarbon age of 6100
± 40 B.P. and a calibrated 2-sigma date range of
7160-6860 cal. B .P. The older sample is considered
to represent the stratigraphic and temporal lower
boundary for the occupation of the site.
The diagnostic point types associated with OZ
1 include a Gower point, two Early Barbed Devils
River variant, a Martindale point, and a Pandale
point (Figure 5). The Early Barbed specimens are
the only two examples of the type found during the
excavations, and it is likely that they are associated
with the earliest occupation, represented by Feature
14. Both the Gower and Martindale points could be
associated with the Feature 26 period of use of the
site, although it is our impression-based on the seriation of projectile point types and their frequencies
within the occupation zones-that the Gower type
appeared first at the Gatlin site and was followed
several centuries later by the Martindale type (Figure
6). If accurate, it is likely that the Martindale and
Pandale specimens were incorporated into the older

OZ 1 deposits from younger deposits above through
either natural or cultural transformation processes.
This impression of the Gower point being
an earlier point type than the Martindale point is
supported by the artifact assemblage, including 77
typed projectile points, and the 12 chronometric
dates from OZ 2. Excluding the two youngest dates
attributed to the occupation zone and the oldest,
which is the temporal boundary between OZs 1 and
2, the radiocarbon dates from OZ 2 provide an estimated age range from 5570 ± 40 B.P. (Beta-207384;
calibrated, 2-sigma range of 6440-6290 cal. B.P.) to
4970 ± 40 B.P. (Beta-206124; calibrated, 2-sigma
range of 5880-5600 cal. B.P.). The dates from the
zone generally cluster into two ranges: five fall
within 5570 ± 40 B.P. to 5280 ± 50 B.P. (2-sigma
range of 6440-5920 cal. B.P.), and four fall within
4990 ± 40 B.P. to 4950 ± 40 B.P. (2-sigma range of
5900-5600 cal. B.P.). Gower points (n=21), Martindale/Martindale-Narrow Stem points (n=37), and
Bandy points (n=5) account for 82 percent of the
typed points from the zone. The remaining typed
points, which include Early Triangular, Andice,
Bell, and Marcos examples, are younger points
mixed in the sample and therefore not indicative of
the true projectile point assemblage. The Marcos
specimen is clearly intrusive, and the other types
are representative of the blurred zone boundary
discussed above. We speculate that in general the
Gower points are associated with the older date
cluster, while the Martindale/Bandy points relate
to the younger date cluster.
OZ 3 is perhaps the most problematic of the
four occupation zones at the Gatlin site because
it has the most compressed stratigraphy. Four radiocarbon dates from features provide a range of
4530 ± 40 B.P. (Beta-206131 ; calibrated 2-sigma
range of 5320 to 5040 cal. B.P.) to 4110 ± 40 B.P.
(Beta-206116; calibrated 2-sigma range of 4830
to 4440 cal. B.P.). Three dates all cluster between
4110 ± 40 B.P. to 4210 ± 40 B.P. (2-sigma range
of 4850-4440 cal. B.P.), a much tighter interval of
time. The projectile point assemblage shows some
blurring of the boundaries of the occupation zones
above and below OZ 2, or perhaps the persistent use
of projectile point styles at the site through time. The
Early Archaic point types in the OZ 3 assemblage
include a handful of Gower points (n=5) and over
a dozen Bandy/Martindale points (n=l 7). The bulk
of the assemblage includes the traditional early
Middle Archaic Early Triangular (n=38), Andice
(n=5), and Bell (n=4) point types (Figure 7). The

Houk, et al.-The Gatlin Site and the Early-to-Middle Archaic Chronology 57

Beta - 206114

: ___....___
__

Beta - 207381

Beta - 206132

.......

.....

Beta - 207386

................... I
I
I

Beta - 206116

......_____.

•'I

.....___:

Beta - 206117

...._____..

....

Beta - 207377

Beta-206131

Beta - 206124

I

.......

• .._J

Beta - 207385

oz 1

OZ2

Beta - 206123

.. a.:
~

OZ3

OZ4--)lii---

'--1

•&· _
I

Beta - 206128

I

~

I

Beta - 206119

Beta - 206125

•••

UGA-13916

Beta - 206126

Beta - 207384

•••

Beta - 206122

Beta - 206115

8000

7000

6000

5000

4000

Calibrated date (calBP)
Figure 4. Proposed chronological divisions of Gatlin site Occupation Zones (OZs) based on C-14 dates.

3000

Ul
00

Table 1. Radiocarbon Dates from the Gatlin Site.
Lab No.

Beta206118

Area

A-NE

SWCA
Sample#

Unit

190 ± 40

200 ± 40

-27.4 %0

160 ± 40

290-0 cal B .P.

1170 ± 60

-17.8 %0

1290 ± 60

1300-1070
cal B.P.

1690 ± 60

-17.7 %0

1810 ± 60

1880-1570
cal B.P.

-26.6 %0

2120 ± 50

2310-2240
cal B.P. and
2180-1980
cal B.P.

97.72

No feature
association

98.3-98.2

Associated with
Late Archaic
Feature 10 and
midden use

98.3-98.2

Associated with
Late Archaic
Feature 9 and
Midden Use

2150 ± 50

N1025
E1042

S-13t

N1018
El036

S-12t

N1016
El032

Feature 9

In south wall
22 cm west
of SE corner

97.62

Feature 1 middle
profile

Feature 10

:

Midden

C-71

Beta206114

A-NE

C-5

Grad all
Stripping

Within Feature 7

97.19

Feature 7

3390 ± 40

-24.5 %0

3400 ± 40

3720-3560
cal B.P

VGA13820*

Midden

3

TU 1-A

Level 12

97.38

Upslope of and
below Feature 1,
within B horizon

3480 ± 60

-26.03 %0

3460 ± 60

3890-3560
cal B.P.

C-3

BHT 18,
CS3

3680 ± 40

4140-4120
cal B.P. and
4100-3900
cal B.P.

SE Section

97.54

Middle Feature
1 date

-~
~r
~­

CT3,
CS3

Midden

~

c

~

Beta206127

Beta207376

~

~

150 ± 40

-25.3 %0

~

;:::;
;:::--

-27.7 %0

N1026.42
E1042.30El042.80

C-85

Calibrated Age
Estimates (2<J)

290-0 cal
B.P.

97.61

A-NW

Conventional Date
(YBP±l<J)

See note**

In same level as
Feature 16

Beta207388

~13C

113.6 ± 0.6
pMC

113.5 ± 0.6
pMC

Nl019.20
El047.8

C-55

B

97.27

Feature 19
(Northern
Portion)

N1029.90
E1056.85

A-SW

Beta207391

Context and
Associations

N1029
E1056
Nl019
E1046

B

Measured
Age (YBP
±lo')

Elevation
(m)

C-17

Beta207383

Beta207392

Provenience

3690 ± 40
I

-25.9 %0

q

Table 1. (Continued)
Lab No.

UGA13826*

Area

Midden

SWCA
Sample#

20

Unit

TU 1-B

Provenience

TU 1-B,
Level 8

Elevation
(m)

97.6097 .50

Context and
Associations

Base of Feature l

Measured
Age (YBP
±lo')

3760 ± 70

()13C

-26.40 %0

Conventional Date
(YBP±lcr)

Calibrated Age
Estimates (2cr)

3740 ± 70

4350-4320
cal B.P. (p =
0.014) and
4300-3880
cal B.P. (p =
0.94)

~

i:::

~~
~

Beta207381

B

C-38

N1016
E1030

Nl016.20
El031.80
N1032.49
E1059.69

97.20

None

3740 ± 40

N1015.58
E1038.10

97.94

Feature 37

3830 ± 40

Beta207379

A-NE

C-16

N1031
E1058

Beta206132

B

C-94

N1014
E1038

Beta206133

Beta207386

A-NW

A-SW

Beta206116

A-NE

Beta206117

A-SW

C-101

C-73

N1023
El042

Feature
34-C

N1023.94
E1042.71

Nl020.20
E1049.60

97.86

97.50

97.50

Below Feature 11

Excavation Base
Area A-NW

Direct Date
Feature 34

C-12

Nl027
El056

N1028.12
E1057.06

97.40

Feature 19
(Southern
Portion)

C-13

Nl021
El044

Feature 16

97.65

Direct Date of
Feature 16

3750 ± 40

3930 ± 40

4080 ± 40

3750 ± 40

4240-3980
cal B.P.

-19.4 %0

3830 ± 40

4400-4100
cal B.P.

-24.0 %0

3850 ± 40

4410-4150 '
cal B.P.

3930 ± 40

4500-4480
cal B.P. and
4440-4250
cal B.P.

-24.9 %0

-25 .2 %0

-24.1 %0

4090 ± 40

4810-4750
cal B.P.,
4710-4500
cal B.P., and
4480-4440
cal B.P.

.....
~

I

~
~

~
.....
§"!
~

~·
~

;:::

~

s.
~
~
~

I

~

~

§:
~

;:i:..

;:i

;:-.

4120 ± 40

-25.7 %0

4 110 ± 40

3720-3560
cal B.P.

4140 ± 40

-25 .2 %0

4140 ± 40

4830-4530
cal B.P.

~

(:;•

g
~

;:::
<::.

S"

~

Vl
\0

°'0

Table 1. (Continued)
Lab No.

Beta207377

Beta206129

Area

A-SW

Midden

Beta207390

A-NW

Beta206131

B

Beta207380

A-NE

SWCA
Sample#

C-13

C-75

Unit

Nl021
El044

CT3,
CS3

Provenience

Nl021.94
El045.0l

Nl031.25
El032.32

Elevation
(m)

97.65

Context and
Associations

Direct Date of
Feature 16

Measured
Age (YBP
±lo')

4200 ± 40

97.45

Feature 1 base

4400 ± 40

4220 ± 40

B13 C

-24.6 %0

Conventional Date
(YBP±lcr)

Calibrated Age
Estimates (20')

4210 ± 40

4850-4800
cal B.P. and
4770-4620
cal B.P.

~

;:i:..

4210 ± 40

4850-4800
cal B.P. and
4770-4620
cal B.P.

-25.2 %0

4400 ± 40

5220-5190
cal B.P. and
5060-4860
cal B.P.

-25.7 %0

~

C-100

N1025
El048

N1025.90
El049.70

97.50

No Feature
association.
However, may
provide Basal date
for Area A-NW

C-93

Nl014
E1036

Nl014.20
El036.50

97.88

Feature 38

4560 ± 40

-27 .0 %0

4530 ± 40

5310-5040
cal B.P.

97.05

Feature 25 direct
date. May be
associated with
Feature 5 from
Testing Phase II

4540 ± 40

-24.4 %0

4550 ± 40

5320-5050
cal B.P.

C-35

N1033
E1058

N1034.53
El059.48

Nl015.19
El036.51

97.91

Above Feature 38

4620 ± 40

-25.9 %0

4610 ± 40

5460-5380
cal B.P. and
5340-5290
cal B.P.

Beta207389

B

C-91

N1014
El036

VGA13828*

Midden

23

TU 1-B

TU 1-B,
Level 10

97.4097.30

Below Feature 1

4670 ± 60

-25.30 %0

4660 ± 60

5590-5280
cal B.P.

VGA13827*

Midden

21

TU 1-B

TU 1-B,
Level 9

97.5097.40

Below or very
base of Feature 1

4700 ± 60

-24.66 %0

4710 ± 60

5590-5310
cal B.P.

~

~

c

~

-

i;r
~

(')

~·

Q'

Table 1. (Continued)
Lab No.

UGA13819*
Beta206121
Beta206124

Area

Midden

B

A-SW

SWCA
Sample#

1

C-41

C-58

Unit

Provenience

TU 1-A

TU 1-A,
Level 10

N1016
E1036
Nl017
E1052

N1017.03
E1037.6
Nl018.4
El052.00

Elevation
(m)

Context and
Associations

Measured
Age (YBP
±lo')

o13C

Conventional Date
(YBP±lo')

97.5597 .50

Upslope of and
below Feature l,
between A and B
horizons

4780 ± 70

-25 .54 %0

4770 ± 70

97.7397.70
97.5597.50

Excavation Base
Area B

Feature 13

4930 ± 40

4950 ± 40

-24.8 %0

-23.6 %0

5730-5600
cal B.P.

4970 ± 40

5860-5830
cal B.P. and
5750-5610
cal B.P.

I

Beta207385

Beta206123

A-SW

B

C-67

C-50

Nl019
El048

Nl018
E1032

N1020.01
E1049.68

N1018.96
El032.60

97.52

97.76

Feature 28

4960 ± 40

-24.5 %0

4970 ± 40

:
I
4980 ± 40

-25 .0 %0

4980 ± 40

I

Beta206128

A-SW

UGA13823*

A-NW

UGA13822*

A-NW

C-74
8
7

Nl019
El048
TU4-C
TU4-C

N1020.90
E1049.95
Level 3
Level 3

97.50
97.43
97.45

Feature 34-c
Feature 2
Feature 2

4990 ± 50
5020 ± 70
5060 ± 60

-25.2 %0
-24.90 %0
-25.93 %0

5620-5320
cal B.P.

4930 ± 40

I

Direct Date Base
of Unit or Bison
Teeth?

Calibrated Age
Estimates (20')

4990 ± 50
5020 ± 70
5040 ± 60

5860-5830
cal B.P. and
5750-5610
cal B.P.
5870-5820
cal B.P. and
5760-5610
cal B.P.
5890-5610
cal B.P.
5920-5610
cal B.P.
5920-5650
cal B.P.

~
;::

~";>:;­

.....
(I:>

+:l

I

~

(I:>

~
~

s·

IJ)

~·
+:l

;::

+:l...

s.

(I:>

~

qC"
i

~

§:
~

;:i....

~

;:+:l

i::;·

g
Cl;::
Cl

6"
~
0\

Table 1. (Continued)

Lab No.

UGA13821 *

Area

A-NW

0\
N

SWCA
Sample#

6

Unit

TU 4-B

Provenience

Level 4

Elevation
(m)

97.41

Context and
Associations

South of Feature
2, probably
associated

Measured
Age (YBP
±lo')

o13C

Conventional Date
(YBP ±10')

Calibrated Age
Estimates (2o')

5190 ± 70

6180-6130
cal B.P.
[p = 0.08]
and 61205740 cal B.P.
[p = 0.88]

I
5190 ± 70

-25.01 %0

I
Beta206119

A-NE

Beta207374*

Midden

UGA13825*

A-NW

C-20

N1027
E10661068

N1028.70
E1067.65

97.2-97.1

Feature 22

5280 ± 50

-26.2 %0

5260 ± 50

6180-5920
cal B.P.

2

BHT 1,
TU 1-A

N38 E88

97.48

Upslope of and
below Feature 1

5250 ± 40

-24.4 %0

5260 ± 40

6270-5920
cal B.P.

5260 ± 70

6270-6240
cal B.P. (p
= 0.02) and
6210-5900
cal B.P.
(p = 0.94)

13

TU4-C

Level 3

97.41

Feature 2

5260 ± 70

-25.04 %0

i

Beta206125

A-SW

C-64

Nl019
E1048

N1020.8
E1048.4

97.49

Bison Teeth

5330 ± 40

-25.4 %0

5320 ± 40

6200-5990
cal B.P.

Beta207378

A-NE

C-14

N1029
E1068

N1029.50
E1068.26

97.20

None

5360 ± 40

-25.3 %0

5360 ± 40

6280-6000
cal B.P.

UGA13824*

A-NW

10

TU4-C

Level 3

97.45

Feature 2

5390 ± 60

-25.03 %0

5390 ± 60

6300-5990
cal B.P.

Beta207387

A-SW

C-77

N1021
E1046

N1022.38
E1047.43

97.47

10 cm Below
Feature 16

5410 ± 40

-24.2 %0

5420 ± 40

6290-6170
cal B.P.

Beta206126

A-SW

C-68

N1019
E1044

N1020.90
E1044.55

97.45

Feature 33

5440 ± 40

-25.2 %0

5440 ± 40

6300-6180
cal B.P.

~

~

;i:..

~

~
C'
l)Q

2·....

~
;;·
q
~

Table 1. (Continued)
Lab No.

Area

SWCA
Sample#

Unit

Provenience

Elevation
(m)

Context and
Associations

Measured
Age (YBP
±l<J)

013c

Conventional Date
(YBP±l<J)

~

I

UGA13916*

A-NE

41

TU3-A

Level 11

96.98

Feature 5

5460 ± 70

-23.61 %0

5480 ± 70
1·
I

'

Beta207384

Beta207375

Beta206122

Beta207382
Beta206115

A-SW

Midden

A-NE

A-NE

A-NE

C-63

C-2

C-44

C-40

C-11

N1019
El044

BHT 18,
CSl

N1020.85
E1044.20

NW Section

97.55

97.23

Above Feature
33 (may be
associated)
Below Feature 1
base and within
yellowish-brown
soil horizon

N1035
E1058

N1035.96 E
1058.47

96.97

Feature 26

N1029
E1056

N1029.20
E1056.15

96.9496.89

Provides basal
date for Area
A-NE

N1027
E1060

Nl027.80
E1060.43

96.97

Feature 14

Calibrated Age
Estimates (2o")
6410-6170
cal B.P. (p =
0.88), 61506110 cal B.P.
(p = 0.05),
and 60806000 cal B.P.
(p = 0.03)

...

(!:>

l:l

I

~

(!:>

5570 ± 40

-25.1 %0

5570 ± 40

6420-6290
cal B.P.

~

:::t.

s·

V:i

~·

5740 ± 40
BP

22.4 %0

5780 ± 40

6670-6470
cal B.P.

l:l

;:::
l:l..

s.

(!:>

6100 ± 40

6480 ± 40

-25.2 %0

-26.6 %0

6100 ± 40

7150-7130
cal B.P. and
7020-6860
cal B.P.

6450 ± 40

7430-7280
cal B.P.

~

~
I

s
~

§:
~

;;i...

;:i

;:s-

l:l

6570 ± 50

-25.1 %0

6570 ± 50

7570-7420
cal B.P.

* Sample from testing investigations. ** The reported result indicates an age of post 0 BP and has been reported as a % of the modern reference standard, indicating the
material was living within the last 50 years. t Bulk matrix sample

~

;::

~~

i=;•

~
;:::

Cl

C'

~

0\

w

°'

Table 2. Radiocarbon Dates Used to Define OZs.

~

Lab No.

Area

Sample Type

Unit

Provenience

Beta-206114

A-NE

Wood Charcoal

Gradall Stripping

Within Feature 7 97.19

Feature 7

3720-3560 cal B.P.

Beta-207381

B

Wood Charcoal

Nl016 El030

Nl016.20
El031.80

97.86

Below Feature 11

4240-3980 cal B.P.

Nl015.58
El038.10

97.94

Beta-206132

B

Wood Charcoal

Nl014 El038

Elevation Context and
(m)
Associations

Calibrated Age Estimate (2 sigma)

~

~

~

g.
~

Q'
<l'Cl

Feature 37

I
I

4410-4150 cal B.P.

-2·
~

(')

Beta-207386

A-SW

Wood Charcoal

Feature 34-C

Nl020.20
El049.60

97.50

Direct Date Feature 34 4810-4750 cal B.P. and 4710-4500 cal
B.P. and 4480-4440 cal B.P.

Beta-206116

A-NE

Wood Charcoal

Nl027 El056

Nl028.12
E1057.06

97.40

Feature 19 (Southern
Portion)

3720-3560 cal B.P.

Beta-206117

A-SW

Wood Charcoal

Nl021 El044

Feature 16

97.65

Direct Date of
Feature 16

4830-4530 cal B.P.

Beta-207377

A-SW

Wood Charcoal

N1021 E1044

N1021.94
E1045.0l

97.65

Direct Date of
Feature 16

4850-4800 cal B.P. and 47704620 cal B.P.

Beta-206131

B

Wood Charcoal

N1014 E1036

Nl014.20
E1036.50

97.88

Feature 38

5310-5040 cal B.P.
;

Beta-206124

A-SW

Wood Charcoal

N1017 E1052

N1018.4
E1052.00

97.5597.50

Feature 13

Beta-207385

A-SW

Wood Charcoal

N1019 E1048

N1020.01
E1049.68

97.52

Direct Date Base of
Unit or Bison Teeth?

5860-5830 cal B.P. and 57505610 cal B.P.

Beta-206123

B

Wood Charcoal

Nl018 El032

Nl018.96
E1032.60

97.76

Feature 28

'

5870-5820 cal B.P. and 57605610 cal B.P.

Beta-206128

A-SW

Wood Charcoal

N1019 E1048

N1020.90
E1049.95

97.50

Feature 34-c

I

5890-5610 cal B.P.

Beta-206119

A-NE

Wood Charcoal

N1027 E10661068

N1028.70
E1067.65

97.2-97.l

Feature 22

Beta-206125

A-SW

Wood Charcoal

N1019 El048

N1020.8
E1048.4

97.49

Bison Teeth

Beta-206126

A-SW

Wood Charcoal

N1019 El044

Nl020.90
E1044.55

97.45

Feature 33

I

5860-5830 cal B.P. and 57505610 cal B.P.

6180-5920 cal B.P.
I

i

6200-5990 cal B.P.
6300-6180 cal B.P.

~·

~

- ..

_...

_-

-- - - - - - - -- -

--.---- ~-----

~
;::::

Table 2. (Continued)

~~

....
~

Lab No.

Area

Sample Type

Unit

Provenience

Elevation Context and
(m)
Associations

Calibrated Age Estimate (2 sigma)

UGA-13916*

A-NE

Wood Charcoal

TU3-A

Level 11

96.98

6410-6170 cal B.P. (p = 0.88) and 61506110 cal B.P. (p = 0.05) and 6080-6000
cal B.P. (p = 0.03)

~

Above Feature 33
(may be associated)

6420-6290 cal B.P.

s·

I

7150-7130 cal B.P. and 70206860 cal B .P.

I

7570-7420 cal B.P.

Beta-207384

A-SW

Wood Charcoal

Nl019 El044

Nl020.85
E1044.20

97.55

Feature 5

Beta-206122

A-NE

Wood Charcoal

N1035 E1058

N1035.96 E
1058.47

96.97

Feature 26

Beta-206115

A-NE

Wood Charcoal

N1027 El060

N1027.80
E1060.43

96.97

Feature 14

I

!:l
:;--..

I

~
~

~

V)

* Sample from testing investigations.
Note: For the Beta samples, 2 sigma calibrations were made with the program INTCAL98 (Stuiver et al. 1998). For the UGA samples, atmospheric data are from Stuiver
et al. (1998); 2 sigma calibrations were made with the program OxCal v. 3.5 (Bronk Ramsey 2000).

~
!:l

;::

~

s.
q~
~

s'
~

~
;;~

;:i

S'

i:;·

g
Cl

;::
Cl

15"

~

0\
Vl

66

Texas Archeological Society

c

b

a

e

d
0

g
3

2

4

5

centimeters

Figure 5. Representative examples of Early Archaic projectile points from the Gatlin
site: a, Bandy; b-c, Martindale; d, Martindale, Narrow Stem; e, Baker; f-g, Gower.

OZ4

OZ3
OZ2

OZ1

c
"'

~

!!2

.,
".,

·;;
0

.0

'"

CJ

Q;

~
0

CJ

>-

"c
"'
(ij
CJ

z

Q;

Qi

"''"

CJ

:;

"c

~

Q;

'6
<{

(ii

"'E
::;;;
"'
c

>-

~

L1J

Figure 6. Seriation diagram of major projectile point types by Occupation Zone (OZ).

c

"'

>-

~

L1J

El

"'"'
--'

c

z"'

0

Houk, et al.-The Gatlin Site and the Early-to-Middle Archaic Chronology 67

A PARTIAL CHRONOLOGY FOR
THE SOUTHERN EDWARDS
PLATEAU

Early Triangular points account for 38 percent of
the 101 typed points in the occupation zone. Late
Middle Archaic points, such as La Jita (n=8) and
Nolan (n=12), account for 20 percent of the points
in the OZ 3 sample. The rest of the assemblage
includes a variety of Late Archaic styles indicative
of the compression or mixing of younger artifactual
material from the overlying OZ 4.
As Figure 6, an admittedly very gross seriation
diagram, shows, the temporal sequence of Early
Archaic to late Middle Archaic point types at the
Gatlin site is as follows, from earliest to latest: Early
Barbed Devils Variant, Gower, Martindale/Bandy,
Early Triangular, Andice/Bell, Nolan, and La Jita.
This sequence fits well with the chronological orderings of points proposed by Johnson and Goode
(1994:Figure 2) and Collins (2004:Figure 3.9a) for
Central Texas, and appears to represent the entire
sequence of projectile points typically expected for
the time periods in question.

The true contribution of the Gatlin site to the
chronology of the southern Edwards Plateau is its
suite of radiocarbon dates, which can be used to provide more refined temporal parameters for the Early
Archaic and Middle Archaic sequences (Figure 8a-c,
see also Table 1). As mentioned above, most of
the sites used to define the archeological style
intervals listed by Collins (2004:Figure 3.9a) lack
radiocarbon dates. Figure 9 represents a proposed
chronology for the region based on the calibrated
Gatlin site radiocarbon assays and the seriation of
projectile points shown in Figure 6. In constructing
this chronology, we have selected samples with
good associations between features, stratigraphy,
and projectile points, and we have opted to present
the chronology in calibrated dates to make it more

a
b

0

2

c

3

4

5

centimeters

d

e

Figure 7. Representative examples of Middle Archaic projectile points from
the Gatlin site: a, Bell; b-c, Early Triangular; d-e, La Jita; f, Nolan.

68

Texas Archeological Society

..

Beta - 207392

...

Beta - 207391

Beta - 206127

..

••

---...A___

Beta - 206114

UGA-13820

.....

Beta - 207376

UGA-13826

'fl.

Beta - 207381

,a.

Beta - 207379

''tM+

Beta - 206132

tt'#

......

Beta - 206133

....

Beta - 207386

Beta - 206116

l!C

Beta - 206117

.......

Beta - 207377

_--1.t.t.___

Beta - 206129

........

Beta - 207390

Beta - 206131

Beta - 207380

.&.J

Beta - 207389

6000

5000

4000

3000

Calibrated date (calBP)
Figure 8a. OxCal 4.0 plot of all prehistoric radiocarbon samples from the Gatlin site.

2000

1000

Houk, et al.-The Gatlin Site and the Early-to-Middle Archaic Chronology 69

...

UGA-13828

• •

7

0

a

UGA-13827

UGA-13819

••

Beta - 20621

--

Beta - 206124

....

-....

Beta - 207385

.

Beta - 206123

Beta - 206128

=.
=.
n

UGA-13823

UGA- 13822

.-

UGA- 13821

SS

Beta - 206119

•Cs rt•

Beta - 20737 4

.. •·d'

-

UGA-13825

UGA-13824

.....
.....

Beta - 207387

m

?Om

Beta - 206125

Beta -207378

..._·--·-·---

__

Beta - 206126

a•· .

UGA-13916

7000

6500

6000

5500

Calibrated date (calBP)
Figure 8b. OxCal 4.0 plot of all prehistoric radiocarbon samples from the Gatlin site.

5000

70

Texas Archeological Society

Beta - 207384

Beta - 207375

•

Beta - 206122

m

Beta - 207382

A

a

Beta - 206115

8000

7800

7600

7400

7200

7000

6800

6600

6400

6200

Calibrated date (calBP)
Figure Sc. OxCal 4.0 plot of all prehistoric radiocarbon samples from the Gatlin site.

comparable to the chronology proposed by Johnson
and Goode (1994:Figure 2).
Occupation of the Gatlin site began during the
Early Archaic and is marked by the appearance of
Early Barbed Devils Variant, Gower, and Martindale
projectile points in OZ 1. The sample of points from
this zone is small and recovered from a large horizontal area, making our conclusions regarding the sequencing of points somewhat tentative for the oldest
components at the site. We propose, however, that the
Early Barbed Devils Variant points are slightly older
than the Gower points, which became very common
in the succeeding occupation zone. Our proposed end
date for the Early Barbed style at the site is ca. 6860
cal. B.P., although it may be somewhat earlier (ca.
7420 cal. B.P.). Either end date for the style compares
favorably with the calibrated radiocarbon age range
for the Early Barbed Series proposed by Johnson and
Goode (1994:Figure 2), who date the point style from
ca. 7650-6150 cal. B.P.
Our data suggest the Gower style probably
overlaps with the final centuries of use of the Early
Barbed points, beginning in our sequence at ca.
7160 cal. B.P. and extending to ca. 6290 cal. B.P.
The Gower type is poorly dated elsewhere, making
the Gatlin site assemblage with its associated dates
unique in the Central Texas region. The longevity
of Gower points in Central Texas is clearly demonstrated if the Gatlin site assemblage represents a
later and terminal use of the point style.
Currently, the best dated Gower assemblage
is at the eastern edge of the Edwards Plateau,
along the Balcones Escarpment in San Marcos,

at the Icehouse site (41HY161, Oksanen 2008).
The Early Archaic component at the site only
contained Gower points. Three of these points
were recovered from deposits dating between ca.
8600-7440 cal. B.P. (Oksanen 2008:Figure 42).
At the Youngsport site in Bell County, where the
type was originally defined, it was stratigraphically isolated beneath Middle Archaic diagnostics,
including Nolan points (Shafer 1963, 1979). At
the Landslide site, Gower points were recovered
together with Martindale specimens, beneath Bell
and Early Triangular points, and stratigraphically
above Wilson points (Sorrow et al. 1967:Table 1,
Miscellaneous Specimen f). At the Wilson-Leonard
site, where there was a considerable intermingling
of the materials from several Early Archaic components, Gower points were generally recovered
stratigraphically above Angostura and Hoxie points
and below Bandy and Martindale points (Collins
et al. 1998:211-291). The Sleeper site (Johnson
1991) has an almost pure Gower component with
a slight admixture of other Early Archaic to Middle
Archaic types (Martindale and Bell/Andice), but
lacks radiocarbon dates. Thus, other chronologies rely on cross-dating and relative stratigraphic
position to assign a temporal range for the Gower
type. Johnson and Goode (1994:Figure 2) place
the Gbwer style, which they call Uvalde, around
6750 cal. B.P. (4800 cal. B.C.), within the range
proposed here.
In teasing out our projectile point sequence
for the oldest occupation, we relied on Johnson
and Goode's (1994:22, 24) research that suggests

Houk, et al.-The Gatlin Site and the Early-to-Middle Archaic Chronology 71

Figure 9. Proposed Gatlin site projectile point chronology for major Early Archaic and Middle Archaic types.

72

Texas Archeological Society

the Early Barbed series preceded the Gower and
Martindale styles. The latter two types they call
"the last Early Archaic dart points of the Edwards
Plateau" (Johnson and Goode 1994:24). Others,
however, would consider the Early Barbed and
Gower types contemporaries, and, with such a
small sample of points from OZ 1, the Gatlin site
data do not conclusively resolve this issue.
There are a number of sites where Gower and
Martindale points occur together in the same components, as is the case at the Gatlin site. At Hall's
Cave, for example, Gower (referred to as Uvalde)
and Martindale points were recovered from approximately 1 m below the surface in association
with an uncalibrated radiocarbon date of 4850 ±
130 B .P. (Tx-6413; Toomey 1993), the equivalent
of 5894-5317 cal. B.P. Our data suggest the Martindale style-which we use broadly to include
Martindale, Martindale Narrow Stem, and Bandy in
this discussion-appeared at the Gatlin site around
ca. 6440 cal. B.P. and remained in use until 5040
cal. B.P. Therefore, it overlapped in use for several
centuries with the Gower point, and perhaps longer.
Martindale points were reported from good stratigraphic context at the Landslide site (Sorrow et al.
1967:Table 1) stratigraphically beneath Bell points
and above Wilson points (described as Untyped
Specimen L by Shafer in Sorrow et al. [1967 :2325]), but there are no chronometric dates associated with that site. The large sample of Martindale
points (n=37) from the Woodrow Heard site comes
from an unclear stratigraphic context (Decker et
al. 2000:263-265). Martindale points also were
recovered at the Smith site in Uvalde County with
a single radiocarbon date of 6280-6410 cal B .P.
(Baker 2003:4), which is within the range proposed
for the Gatlin site specimens.
We propose that the stratigraphic and temporal
break between OZ 2 and OZ 3, which unfortunately
is perhaps the least clear in terms of chronometric
resolution due to compression of the alluvial deposits, marks the transition from the Early Archaic
to the Middle Archaic at the site at ca. 5600 cal.
B.P. Our interpretation is in line with Johnson
and Goode's (1994:24-25) assertion that the first
projectile point styles associated with the Middle
Archaic were the Andice/Bell types, which were
probably related to the Calf Creek phenomenon of
North Texas and Oklahoma (see Collins 2004: 120;
Johnson and Goode 1994:24-25). In the Gatlin site
assemblage, due to the aforementioned compres-

sion in this occupation zone, we are unable to
separate Andice/Bell from Early Triangular in time
(see Figures 5 and 7). While it is possible, based on
other chronologies, that the Early Triangular point
style followed the Andice/Bell types by several
centuries, we cannot confirm it; the types are commingled in the OZ 3 deposits at the Gatlin site. We
propose a time span of ca. 5320 cal. B.P. to 4140
cal. B.P. for the three types, which overlaps with
the last centuries of Martindale point use at the site.
This time range is several centuries younger than
the five calibrated dates (1-sigma) in a component
containing Bell and Early Triangular points at
41MM340: 5600-5480, 5740-5660, 5590-5460,
5590-5470, and 5600-5520 cal. B.P. (Mahoney et
al. 2003:55). It may be that, because of compression of the archeological deposits at the Gatlin site,
which was particularly pronounced in Area A SW
where many of the Early Triangular points were
found, our end date for the use of these point styles
is too recent. We may also have been too conservative in assigning a beginning date for the points of
5320 cal. B.P. , considering that a handful of Early
Triangular and Bell/Andice points were found in
the underlying OZ 2. Our temporal range, however,
partially overlaps with Collins' (2004:Figure 3.9a)
"Taylor" archeological style interval, which, when
converted to calibrated radiocarbon years, extends
from ca. 5875 to 5050 cal. B.P. Collins (2004:Figure 3.9a) considers the Bell-Andice-Calf Creek
style interval (ca. 6780 to 5875 cal. B.P.) to precede
the appearance of Early Triangular points, but our
data do not support that conclusion.
The final Middle Archaic point styles to appear
at the Gatlin site in large numbers were La Jita and
Nolan. In fact, the La Jita assemblage is the largest
ever reported from a single site context. In this case,
we are again unable to separate the two types temporally; both are clearly associated with the end of OZ
3 and carry over in use to OZ 4. We are proposing
a date range of ca. 4820 to 3980 cal. B.P. for these
two types, although that may be too long-lived. An
alternative would be to place the end date of the use
of these point types at ca. 4240 B.P. and consider the
La Jita and Nolan points in OZ 4 to be indicative of
compression or mixing through cultural transformation processes. Calibrating Collins ' (2004:Figure
3.9a) dates for the Nolan archeological style interval
gives an age range of ca. 5040-4875 cal. B.P. to
4523-4420 cal. B.P., which closely corresponds to
the Gatlin site data.

Houk, et al.-The Gatlin Site and the Early-to-Middle Archaic Chronology 73
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE
REGIONAL CHRONOLOGICAL
DATABASE
The Gatlin site represents one of the largest
Early-to-Middle Archaic artifact assemblages associated with radiocarbon dates from an excavated
site in Central Texas. As such it is able to contribute
significantly to the regional chronological database
despite the compression of some of the sequence.
In general, the Gatlin site chronology supports the
relative sequence of point styles presented in both
Collins (2004:Figure 3.9a) and Johnson and Goode
(1994:Figure 2), but provides chronometric ages for ·
the Gower, Martindale, Bell, Andice, Early Triangular, Nolan, and La Jita projectile point styles. Many
of the sites originally used to establish the ages of
most of the point types mentioned here were excavated prior to the widespread use of radiocarbon dating.
There are no dates for sites, for example, from the
contexts in question from the following sites used by
Collins (2004:Fig. 3.9a) in his Central Texas chronology: the Sleeper (Johnson 1991), Youngsport (Shafer
1963), and Jetta Court (Wesolowsky et al. 1976)
sites, high integrity "Early Split Stem" components;
the Camp Pearl Wheat site (Collins et al. 1990), a
high integrity Martindale-Gower component; the
Landslide site (Sorrow et al. 1967), a moderate
integrity Martindale-Gower component and highintegrity Bell-Andice-Calf Creek component; and the
Wounded Eye site (Luke 1980), a moderate integrity
Early Triangular (Taylor) component.
Based on the Gatlin site data, the Middle Archaic projectile point types begin to appear ca. 5600
cal. B .P. in southern Central Texas. Early Triangular
points in great numbers, along with Bell and Andice
points, show up at the Gatlin site around this date,
which corresponds to Johnson's and Goode's (1994)
end date for the Early Archaic. At the Gatlin site, the
Middle Archaic styles fade from the record with the
decrease in La Jita points, about the same time that
the burned rock midden began to form, ca. 4400
cal. B.P. This corresponds well to the Middle Archaic ending dates proposed by Johnson and Goode
(1994) and Collins (2004).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the staff of the
Environmental Affairs Division at the Texas
Department of Transportation, past and present, who

were associated with the survey, testing, and data
recovery investigations conducted on the Spur 98
expansion. Mr. Al McGraw, Dr. Owen Lindauer, and
Dr. James Abbott were instrumental in the success
of the project. Drs. Thomas R. Hester and Harry J.
Shafer analyzed the projectile points for the project.
Although too numerous to name, we thank the field,
laboratory, and office personnel at SWCA, Inc. who
worked on the multi-year Gatlin site project.

REFERENCES CITED
Abbot, J. T.
2008 Stratigraphic and Geoarchaeological Investigations
on the Guadalupe River: Interstate 35, Comal County, and Spur 98, Kerr County, Texas. In The Gatlin
Site (41KR621): Investigating Archaic Lifeways on
the Southern Edwards Plateau of Central Texas, by
B. A. Houk, K. A. Miller, and E. R. Oksanen, pp.
A-l-A-28. SWCA Cultural Resources Report No.
149. SWCA, Inc., Austin, and Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 108. Texas Department of
Transportation, Austin.
Abbott, P. L. and C. M . Woodruff, Jr. (editors)
1986 The Balcones Escarpment: Geology, Hydrology,
Ecology and Social Development in Central Texas .
Geological Society of America, San Antonio.
Baker, E.
2003 1989 and 1990 Excavations at the Smith Site
(41 UV132), Uvalde County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 74:1-30.
Bronk Ramsey, C.
2000 Comment on 'The Use of Bayesian Statistics for
14C Dates of Chronologically Ordered Samples: a
Critical Analysis.' Radiocarbon 42: 199-202.
2007

Deposition Models for Chronological Records. Quaternary Science Reviews 27:42-60.

Collins, M. B.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of
Texas , edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 101-126. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Collins, M. B., B. Ellis, and C. Dodt-Ellis
1990 Excavations at the Camp Pearl Wheat Site
(41KR243): An Early Archaic Campsite on Town
Creek, Kerr County, Texas. Studies in Archeology
6. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Collins, M . B., J. Guy, and S. W. Dial
1998 The Archaic Period, 8800 to 1300 B .P. In WilsonLeonard: An 11,000-Year Archeological Record
of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas, Vol. I: In-

74

Texas Archeological Society
troduction, Background, and Synthesis, assembled
and edited by M. B . Collins, pp. 211-270. Studies
in Archeology 31. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin,
and Archeology Studies Program Report 10. Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of
Transportation, Austin.

Decker, S., S. L. Black, and T. Gustavson
2000 The Woodrow Heard Site, 4I UV88: A Holocene Terrace Site in the Western Balcones Canyon/ands of
Southwestern Texas. Studies in Archeology 33. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin, and Archeology Studies Program
Report 14. Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Frederick, C. D.
2008 Paleoenvironment and Site Formation Processes.
In The Gatlin Site (4IKR621): Investigating Archaic Lifeways on the Southern Edwards Plateau
of Central Texas, by B. A. Houk, K. A. Miller, and
E. R . Oksanen, pp. 6-1-6-20. SWCA Cultural Resources Report No. 149. SWCA, Inc., Austin, and
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 108.
Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department
of Transportation, Austin.
Houk, B . A., K. A. Miller, and E. R. Oksanen
2008 The Gatlin Site (4IKR62I): Investigating Archaic
Lifeways on the Southern Edwards Plateau of Central Texas . SWCA Cultural Resources Report No.
149. SWCA, Inc., Austin, and Archeological Studies
Program, Report No. 108. Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Houk, B. A. , E. R. Oksanen, and K. A. Miller
2008 Appendix K: Evaluation of Project Methodology.
In The Gatlin Site (4IKR62I): Investigating Archaic Lifeways on the Southern Edwards Plateau
of Central Texas , by B. A. Houk, K. A. Miller, and
E. R. Oksanen, pp. K-l-K-9. SWCA Cultural Resources Report No. 149. SWCA, Inc., Austin, and
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 108.
Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department
of Transportation, Austin.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1991 Early Archaic Life at the Sleeper Archeological Site,
4IBC65, of the Texas Hill Country, Blanco County,
Texas . Report 39, Publications in Archeology. Texas
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division, Austin.
Johnson, L., Jr. and G. T. Goode
1994 A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene
Climates, As Well As Archeological Periods On
the Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 65: 1-54.

Luke, C. J.
1980 Continuing Archaeology on Highway I6: The
Shep Site (4IKRI09) and The Wounded Eye Site
(4IKRI07). Publications in Archeology 19. Texas
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.
Mahoney, R. B., S. A. Tomka, R. P. Mauldin, H. J. Shafer, L.
C. Nordt, R. D. Greaves, and R.R. Galdeano
2003 Data Recovery Excavations at 4 I MM340: A Late Archaic Site along Little River in Milam County, Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report No. 340. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, and Archeological Studies Program
Report 54. Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Oksanen, E.R.
2008 Archaeological Investigations at the Icehouse Site,
41HY161 : A Revaluation of Early Archaic Technology, Subsistence and Settlement along the Balcones
Escarpment and Central Texas. Master's Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas State UniversitySan Marcos.
Reimer, P. J., M. G. L. Baillie, E. Bard, A. Bayliss, J. W.
Beck, C. J. H. Bertrand, P. G. Blackwell, C. E . Buck, G.
S. Burr, K. B. Cutler, P. E. Damon, R. L. Edwards, R. G.
Fairbanks, M. Friedrich, T. P. Guilderson, A. G. Hogg, K.
A. Hughen, B. Kromer, G. McCormac, S. Manning, C.
Bronk Ramsey, R. W. Reimer, S. Remmele, J. R. Southon,
M. Stuiver, S. Talamo, F. W. Taylor, J. Van der Plicht, and
C. E. Weyhenmeyer
2004 lntCal04 Terrestrial Radiocarbon Age Calibration,
0-26 cal kyr BP. Radiocarbon 46:1029-1058.
Riskind, D. H. and D. D. Diamond
1986 Communities of the Edwards Plateau of Texas : an
Overview Emphasizing the Balcones Escarpment
Zone Between San Antonio and Austin with Special
Attention to Landscape Contrasts and Natural Diversity. In The Balcones Escarpment: Geology, Hydrology, Ecology and Social Development in Central
Texas, edited by P. L. Abbott and C . M. Woodruff,
pp. 21-32. Geological Society of America, San Antonio.
Shafer, H . J.
1963 Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site in Bell
County, Texas . Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 34:57-81.
1979

Comments on Kelly ' s "Gower Projectile Points"
Article. La Tierra 6(3):9-20.

Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer, and R. E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers
of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 11. The
University of Texas at Austin.

Houk, et al.-The Gatlin Site and the Early-to-Middle Archaic Chronology 75
Stuiver, M., P. J. Reimer, E. Bard, J. W. Beck, G. S. Burr, K.
A. Hughen, B. Kromer, G. McCormac, J. Van der Plicht,
and M. Spurk
1998 INTCAL98 Radiocarbon Age Calibration, 24,000-0
cal BP. Radiocarbon 40:1041-1083 .
Toomey, R. S., III
1993 Late Pleistocene and Holocene Fauna! Changes at
Hall's Cave, Kerr County, Texas. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Wesolowsky, A. B., T. R. Hester, and D. R. Brown
1976 Archeological Investigations at the Jetta Court Site
(41TV151), Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 47:25-87.

~

I

Geochemical Evidence for a Mexican Source of Origin for
an Obsidian Artifact from South Central Texas
Richard E. Hughes and Thomas R. Hester

l
\

ABSTRACT
Energy dispersive x-ray fluorescence (EDXRF) analysis was conducted on an obsidian biface fragment from
the Mangold site (41ME132), located in south central Texas. Trace element data indicate that the specimen was
manufactured from obsidian of the Ojozarco chemical type, located in west central Mexico. These data provide
additional documentation for the importance of Mexican obsidians in Texas prehistoric archeological sites.

For more than 30 years one of us (TRH) has
obtained provenience and chemical data on obsidian artifacts recovered from Texas archeological
sites (Hester et al. 1975, 1985, 199la; Mitchell et
al. 1980; Giauque et al. 1993). This collaborative
project-the Texas Obsidian Project (TOP)-has
as its primary goals the documentation of the use of
different obsidian source materials, and the investigation of time and space continuity and variability in
the use of these obsidians during different periods of
time in Texas prehistory (Hester et al. 1983; Hester
1988, 2004:149-150). Obsidian artifacts analyzed
by the TOP occur rarely in most parts of the state,
and usually not more than a single specimen occurs
at any one site. In recent years, Hester identified an
obsidian artifact from the Mangold site (41ME132)
and secured permission for trace element analysis to
be performed. This article reports the results of nondestructive instrumental analysis of this specimen.

The late H.W. (Buddy) Mangold's excavations
at the Mangold site in the 1990s yielded evidence
of recurring occupations from 10,500 years ago
until the early Historic era, likely the early 1700s.
The early artifacts include projectile points of the
Wilson, Golondrina, and Angostura types, dating
(earliest to latest) 10,500 to 8,800 years ago. Large
numbers of dart points representing the Archaic
(8,500-1,300 years ago) cultures of the region include Calf Creek, Pedernales, Montell, and Darl,
among others (Turner and Hester 1993). Late Prehistoric use of the site is reflected by arrow points
and tools that date between 1300-300 years ago. At
least two arrow points are the Guerrero type, typical
of arrow points found in eighteenth century Spanish
missions in southern Texas and northeastern Mexico
(Hester 1989). Unfortunately the specimen we designate as TOP-209 was excavated from an area of
the deposits containing no associated diagnostic
artifacts and it is not typologically distinct, so its
temporal affiliation is presently unknown.

THE SITE AND THE SPECIMEN

LABORATORY ANALYSIS

The obsidian artifact analyzed here is a biface
tip recovered from excavation at the Buddy Mangold site (41ME132), located near Quihi in eastern
Medina County, Texas (Figure 1). The specimen,
designated as sample TOP-209, is approximately
20 mm long, 12.5 mm wide, and 4.0 mm thick,
and appears to have an impact fracture on one side
(Figure 2).

Non-destructive trace element analysis of the
Mangold site specimen (sample TOP-209) was
conducted by the senior author at Geochemical
Research Laboratory (GRL) using a QuanX-EC™
(Thermo Electron Corporation) energy dispersive
x-ray fluorescence (EDXRF) spectrometer equipped
with a silver (Ag) x-ray tube, a 50 kV x-ray
generator, digital pulse processor with automated

INTRODUCTION

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 80 (2009)

78

Texas Archeological Society

•-Jemez
Mountains

New

Mexico
Texas
Kincaid
Rockshelter

\•

e-41ME13~

"

MEXICO

41WY40

Golfa de
Mexico

Zacualtipan
Queretaro
\
•
Ojozarco .....JJ.. ~

--·

Pachuca JJ..

2
o_K.ilo•mc::et=e=rs=0 0 '

Otumba

Figure 1. The study area, showing general location of archeological sites
(black dots) and obsidian sources (black triangles) mentioned in the text.

0

1

2

3

~CM

Figure 2. Obsidian biface fragment from the Mangold site
(41ME13 2). Length of the specimen is 20 mm.

Hughes and Hester-Evidence for a Mexican Origin for an Artifact from South Central Texas 79
energy calibration, and a Peltier cooled solid state
detector with 145 eV resolution (FWHM) at 5.9 keV.
The x-ray tube was operated at differing voltage
and current settings to optimize excitation of the
elements selected for analysis. In this case analyses
were conducted for the elements rubidium (Rb),
strontium (Sr), yttrium (Y), zirconium (Zr), niobium
(Nb), barium (Ba) , titanium (Ti), manganese
(Mn) and iron (Fe20 31) and to determine iron vs.
manganese (Fe/Mn) ratios. The analyses were
conducted at 120-600 deadtime-corrected seconds,
with tube current scaled to the physical size of
the specimen. Other details involving laboratory
analysis protocol appear elsewhere (Hughes and
Pavesic 2005); the interested reader should consult
this article, and Hughes (1988a, 1994, 2005:249250), for additional information on calibration and
element-specific measurement resolution.

INTERLABORATORY
COMPARISON ISSUES
Prior to evaluating the significance of the trace
element composition data generated for specimen
TOP-209 from the Mangold site, it was deemed important to assess the degree of concordance between
the trace element abundance measurements generated at GRL and those reported for other artifacts
and source samples analyzed as part of the TOP. For
over three decades, the laboratory analyses of TOP
specimens have been conducted at the Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratory (LBL) using a combination of
instrumental neutron activation analysis and x-ray

fluorescence spectrometry (Giauque et al. 1993).
There has been close agreement through the years
between trace and selected minor element data generated at LBL and at GRL, but it seemed advisable at
this time to conduct a more contemporary comparison using a specimen from the TOP (Table 1).
LBL data in Table 1 are from Asaro and Stross
(1994) while GRL data are those generated on the
same sample. As was the case in earlier LBL/GRL
comparisons (Hughes 1988a:Table II; Brown et al.
2004:Table 1), the elements measured in common are
in exceptional agreement, engendering confidence
that the quantitative composition estimates generated
at each laboratory can be directly compared.
LBL researchers devoted considerable attention
to documenting analytical measurement precision
(e.g. Stross et al. 1983; Giauque et al. 1993), so
comparative data were generated for GRL measurements. Table 2 shows the results of the precision
analyses for both the U.S. Geological Survey RGM1 rock standard and archeological artifact TOP-209.
Although one might have expected RGM-1 values to
have lower values (i.e., better precision) than those
generated for TOP-209 because they were generated
on a uniformly flat pressed powder pellet, the data
in Table 2 document that, despite less than optimal
x-ray reflection geometry for the artifact (TOP-209),
the precision determined for the pressed powder
RGM-1 sample and TOP-209 are remarkably similar
(see Hughes 1994:267). The principal differences
between them (Sr in TOP-209 and Nb in RGM-1)
are due largely to low concentrations (approaching
detection limits) of these elements in the respective
samples (Hughes 1993:205). When concentrations

Table 1. Comparison of Quantitative Composition Estimates for Sample TOP-164.
Trace Element Concentrations
Cat.
Number

Ratio
Obsidian Source
(Chemical Type)

Zn

Ga

Rb

Sr

y

Zr

Nb

TOP-164 193
(LBL)
±3

52
±2

170
±4

111
±2

1160
±16

58
±3

< 22 nm

289
±21

nm

nr

Ojozarco

<1

TOP-164 nm
(GRL)

nm

173
±4

7
±3

114
±3

1131
±4

50
±3

0 1139 279
±10 ±21 ±10

2.26
±.02

92

Ojozarco

Ba

Ti

Mn Fe203 1 Fe/Mn

All trace element values (except Fe/Mn ratios) in parts per million (ppm) or weight percent composition (Fe20 3t);
±=estimate of x-ray counting uncertainty and regression fitting error at 120-360 seconds livetime; nm= not
measured; nr = not reported.

80

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. Measurement Precision for Trace and Selected Minor Elements Analyzed at Geochemical
Research Laboratory (GRL).
Elements
Sample
Number

Rb

Sr

y

Zr

Nb

Ba

Ti

Mn

Fe203t

RGM-1

1.2

1.1

2.8

<1

12.7

1.4

< 1

1.5

<1

TOP-209

1.6

6.8

1.4

<1

2.6

nr

< 1

1.3

<1

Values in %, derived from ten analyses at 120-360 seconds livetime. Value not reported (nr) for Ba in
TOP-209 because the concentration value exceeded (was lower than) detection limits.

significantly exceed detection limits (i.e., Sr in
RGM-1 and Nb in TOP-209), precision is practically
identical to other well-measured elements.

ARCHEOLOGICAL RESULTS
Trace and selected minor element data generated by EDXRF analysis for the obsidian biface
fragment (TOP-209) recovered from the Mangold
site appear in Table 3. The resulting elemental data
were compared with values from in-house geologic
obsidian samples and with published data on certain

Mesoamerican and America Southwest volcanic
glasses (e.g., Cobean et al. 1991; Glascock and Cobean 2002; Hughes 1988c; Macdonald et al. 1992;
Nelson 1984; Shackley 1995, 2005; Stross et al.
1976, 1983).
Despite the number of different chemical
varieties of obsidian in these areas, the trace
element chemical composition ofTOP-209 allowed
us to eliminate many known sources and to focus
only on those containing > 500 ppm Zr. Figure 3
illustrates this chemical comparison, plotting the
Zr vs. Rb composition of archeologically significant
obsidian sources from Mesoamerica against values

Table 3. Quantitative Composition Estimates for Sample TOP-209 from 41ME132, Texas.
Ratio

Trace Element Concentrations
Cat.
Number

Zn

Ga

Rb

Sr

y

Zr

Nb

Ba

TOP-209 nm

nm

166

20

109

1102

45

0

±4

±3

±3

±4

Ti

Mn Fe203t Fe/Mn

1213 275

2.35

±3

±12 ±21 ±10

±.02

Obsidian Source
(Chemical Type)

92

Ojozarco

U.S. Geological Survey Reference Standard
nm

148
±4

104
±3

25
±3

224
±4

10
±3

811 1576 274
±10 ±16 ±10

1.85
±.02

65

Glass Mtn., CA

RGM-1 32
15
(recommended)

149

108

25

219

9

807 1600 279

1.86

nr

Glass Mtn., CA

RGM-1 nm
(measured)

Values in parts per million (ppm) except total iron [in weight %] and Fe/Mn intensity ratios; ± = x-ray counting
uncertainty and regression fitting error at 120-600 seconds livetime. nm= not measured. nr= not reported. Recommended
value for RGM-1 from Govindaraju (1994).

Hughes and Hester-Evidence for a Mexican Origin for an Artifact from South Central Texas 81

300
.
El Para1so

250 -

-a:
E

~

Pachuca 1

200--1

.&•

---r> A

/~--,,
I

Pachuca3 ~..

a..
a.. 150
..c

Penjamo 1
and 2

100

---r>

...

El Paraiso, Cadereyta,
and San Martin

(

A

\

0 o~TOP-164

./---6J·ozarco
TOP-209

Pachuca 2
Tulancingo

50

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

Zr (ppm)
Figure 3. Rb vs. Zr composition for major Mesoamerican geologic obsidians (chemical types) with Zr composition>
500 ppm in relation to values for archeological samples TOP-164 and TOP-209, Texas. Filled triangles represent mean
values for geologic obsidian source standards from El Paraiso, Pachuca 1-3, Penjamo 1 and 2, and Tulancingo (from
Glascock and Cobean 2002:Tables A2. 9, A2.12-A2.14, A2. l 8-A2.20); values for El Paraiso, Cadereyta, and San Martin
from Hester et al. (1985:Table 1) and Asaro and Stross (1994). Open circles represent plots for archeological samples
TOP-164 and TOP-209 . Dashed line represents range measured for geologic samples from Ojozarco.

generated for archeological samples TOP-164 and
TOP-209. Only two well-known obsidians from the
American Southwest contained enough Zr to have
been included on Figure 3. A peralkaline glass from
Antelope Wells contains> 1200 ppm Zr, but its Rb
composition (> 320 ppm; Hughes 1988c:Table 3;
Shackley 1995:Table 1) would plot off the scatter
diagram and is therefore much too great for it
to have been the source of origin for TOP-209.
The other Southwest source, San Francisco Peak
(Jack 1971:Table I; Shackley 1995:Table 1), could
have been included on this diagram, but its Rb/Zr
values would appear just slightly above that for
Tulancingo, thus eliminating this source, too, as a
possible parent material for TOP-209. Some of the
peralkaline obsidians from the Sierra La Primavera,

Jalisco, Mexico (Mahood 1988:Table 1) contain
Zr concentrations between 500-550 ppm (with
one at 616 ppm), but all of these are too low to be
correlated with TOP-209. Other newly reported
northern Mexico sources-El (Lago) Barreal
(Shackley 2005 :Table A.11) and Los Jagueyes
(Shackley 2005 :Table A.16)-also are not close
enough in Rb/Zr composition to have been sources
for this archeological artifact.
However, as can be seen from this diagram (see
Figure 3), the Rb/Zr ppm values for TOP-209 fall
squarely within the range generated from a newly
discovered obsidian source (chemical type; sensu
Hughes 1998:104) named Ojozarco (variously rendered as Ojo Zarco or Ojos Arco) located northwest
of Queretaro in Guanajuato, west central Mexico

82

Texas Archeological Society

(Davis et al. n.d.). Asaro and Stross (1994; see also
Hester et al. 1996) obtained a geologic sample of
this material (identified as TOP-164) from Clint
Davis and David 0. Brown and identified it as the
source for two artifacts from 41WY40 in Willacy
County in southernmost Texas. Given how little we
currently know about the presence, and chemical
composition, of archeologically significant obsidians in northern Mexico, it is certainly possible
that an "unknown" source may someday be discovered that possesses a similar chemical signature.
However, the overall agreement between elements
measured in common by LBL and GRL on TOP164 (see Table 1), and the concordance of Rb and
Zr ppm data with Ojozarco source specimens (in
Figure 3), provides strong support for the conclusion that specimen TOP-209 from the Mangold site
was manufactured from obsidian of the Mexican
Ojozarco chemical type.

DISCUSSION

These results add to a small, but growing, body
of evidence documenting the presence of Mesoamerican obsidian in Texas archeological sites. A
basal fragment of a Clovis point made from obsidian from a source in the Queretaro area of Mexico at
Kincaid Rockshelter (Hester et al. 1985) indicates
that the cultural connections between Texas and
Mexico have significant time depth. In addition to
TOP-209 and the Kincaid Clovis fragment there
are several other Mexican sources identified in
Texas obsidian artifacts, including Zacualtipan
(Hester et al. 1992, 1999), Ojozarco (Hester et al.
1996), Sierra de las Navajas (Pachuca), and Otumba
(Hester et al. 1996). Some of these sources are most
common in the Rio Grande Delta, and are linked
to the Brownsville Complex (Hester et al. 1999;
Hester 2004).
Overall, however, relatively few of the artifacts
subjected to trace element analysis by the TOP have
been conclusively linked to Mexican volcanic glass
sources. Results to date indicate that, even from
earliest times (Johnson et al. 1985; Hester 1988;
Hester et al. 2006), obsidian sources in the Jemez
Mountains of New Mexico were most frequently
used. Obsidian artifacts analyzed from later time
periods in Texas (i.e., after A.D. 1000) show even
more dramatic use of New Mexico obsidian source
materials (Mitchell et al. 1980; Hughes 1988b;
Hester et al. 1991 b ), as well as the Malad source in

Idaho (Hester et al. 199la; Giauque et al. 1993).
Temporal issues aside, it is noteworthy that the
specimen we have identified here (TOP-209) as having been manufactured from Ojozarco obsidian was
recovered from an archeological site in south central
Texas located even more distant from the source
than 41WY40 (see Figure 1). The Mangold site is
located over 200 miles northwest from 41WY40,
and is even farther from Ojozarco than the Kincaid
Rockshelter specimen from its Queretaro source in
Mexico. We calculate the approximate linear distance from the Mangold site to Ojozarco to be about
1100 km (675 miles).
Because Mexican obsidian is relatively uncommon in Texas sites, aside from the trade networks of
the Brownsville Complex and the Huasteca (Hester
2004), at present we can do no more than speculate
about how the material got from west central Mexico
to its archeological context. In light of the extremely
rare occurrence of this material (and absence of
other artifacts of Mexican origin), it seems unlikely
that it was obtained via any formal long-range exchange network or exchange system but may have
found its way to the Mangold site through a series
of casual or infrequent encounters between peoples
living in these areas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank David 0. Brown for providing geologic samples from various localities at Ojozarco,
and are grateful to Frank Asaro and the late Fred
Stross (LBL) for use of their unpublished manuscript on the Willacy County artifacts. We also
thank Russell J. Mangold and the late Mrs. Veralyn
Mangold for making this specimen available to
us for non-destructive analysis. Tammara Norton
drafted Figure 1.

REFERENCES CITED
Asaro, Frank and Fred H. Stross
1994 Mexican Provenience of Two Obsidian Artifacts
from Willacy County, Texas. Report submitted to
Thomas R. Hester, June 9, 1994.
Brown, David 0., Meredith L. Dreiss, and Richard E.
Hughes
2004 Preclassic Obsidian Procurement and Utilization
at the Maya Site of Colha, Belize. Latin American
Antiquity 15:222-240.

Hughes and Hester-Evidence for a Mexican Origin for an Artifact from South Central Texas 83
Cobean, Robert H., James R. Vogt, Michael D. Glascock, and
Terrance L. Stocker
1991 High-Precision Trace-Element Characterization of
Major Mesoamerican Obsidian Sources and Further
Analyses of Artifacts from San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan, Mexico. Latin American Antiquity 2:69-91.
Davis, Clint, David 0. Brown, and Thomas R . Hester
n.d.
Ojo Zarco: A New Obsidian Source in the Eastern
Bajio of Guanajuato, Mexico, and its Occurrence in
Southern Texas. Manuscript on file with the junior
author.

Hester, Thomas R ., Frank Asaro, Fred Stross, Helen Michael,
Anne C. Kerr, and Pamela Hedrick
199la An Overview of the Results of the Texas Obsidian
Project. La Tierra 18(1) :4-7.
Hester, Thomas R. , Frank Asaro, Fred Stross, Anne C. Kerr,
and Robert D. Giauque
1991 b Trace Element Analyses and Geologic Source Studies from Arenosa Shelter, Val Verde County, Texas.
In Papers on Lower Pecos Prehistory, edited by S.
Turpin, pp. 191-198. Studies in Archeology 8. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Giauque, RobertD. , Frank Asaro, Fred H. Stross, and Thomas
R. Hester
1993 High-Precision Non-Destructive X-ray Fluorescence
Method Applicable to Establishing the Provenance
of Obsidian Artifacts. X-ray Spectrometry 22:4453.

Hester, Thomas R. , James R. Boyd, Frank Asaro, Fred Stross,
Robert Giauque, Don Kumpe, and Jacob Bourbon
1996 Mesoamerican Obsidian at Sites in the Falcon Reservoir and Lower Rio Grande Area of Southern Texas
and Northeastern Mexico. La Tierra 23(3) :2-6.

Glascock, Michael D . and Robert H. Cobean
2002 A Summary of Elemental Concentration Data for
the Obsidian Source Groups in Mexico. In A World

Hester, Thomas R., David Burrows, Frank Asaro, Fred H.
Stross, and Robert L. Giauque
2006 Trace Element Analysis of an Obsidian Milnesand
Point, Gaines County, Texas. Current Research in
the Pleistocene 23:106-107 .

of Obsidian: The Mining and Trade of a Volcanic
Glass in Ancient Mexico, by Robert H . Cobean, pp.
239-276. Latin American Archaeology Publications,
University of Pittsburgh.
Govindaraju, K.
1994 Compilation of Working Values and Sample Description for 383 Geostandards. Geostandards Newsletter
18 (Special Issue).
Hester, Thomas R.
1988 Paleoindian Obsidian Artifacts in Texas : A Review.
Current Research in the Pleistocene 5:27-29 .
1989

Perspectives on the Material Culture of the Mission
Indians of the Texas-Northeastern Mexico Borderlands. In Columbian Consequences, Volume 1:

Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the
Spanish Borderlands West, edited by D . H . Thomas,
pp. 213-229. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D .C .
2004

Prehistory of South Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas ,
edited by Timothy K. Perttula, pp. 127-154. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station, Texas.

Hester, Thomas R., Glen L. Evans, Frank Asaro, Fred Stross,
T. N . Campbell, and Helen Michel
1985 Trace Element Analysis of an Obsidian Paleo-Indian
Projectile Point from Kincaid Rockshelter, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56: 143-153.
Hester, Thomas R., J.W. House, Robert N. Jack, and Fred
H. Stross
1975 X-ray Fluorescence Analysis of Obsidian Artifacts
from the Rio Grande Plain, Southern Texas . Texas
Journal of Science 26:286-289 .
Hughes, Richard E .
l 988a The Coso Volcanic Field Reexamined: Implications
for Obsidian Sourcing and Hydration Dating Research. Geoarchaeology 3:253-265.
1988b Notes on Obsidian from the Fort Hood Area of
Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 59:193-199.
1988c Archaeological Significance of Geochemical Contrasts Among Southwestern New Mexico Obsidians.
Texas Journal of Science 40:297-307.

Hester, Thomas R., Frank Asaro, Fred Stross, and Robert
D . Giauque
1992 On the Beach: Trace Element Analysis of an Obsidian Artifact from Site 41JF50, Upper Texas Coast.
La Tierra 19(2):2-5 .

1993

Trace Element Geochemistry of Volcanic Glass from
the Obsidian Cliffs Flow, Three Sisters Wilderness,
Oregon. Northwest Science 67:199-207 .

1994

Intrasource Chemical Variability of Artefact-Quality
Obsidians from the Casa Diablo Area, California.
Journal of Archaeological Science 21:263-271.

Hester, Thomas R. , Frank Asaro, Fred Stross, Robert Giauque,
and Mike Krzywonki
1999 Geological Source Analysis of Obsidian Artifacts
from the Rio Grande Delta, Texas and Tamaulipas.
La Tierra 26(4) :1-5 .

1998

On Reliability, Validity, and Scale in Obsidian
Sourcing Research. In Unit Issues in Archaeology:
Measuring Time, Space, and Material , edited by Ann
F. Ramenofsky and Anastasia Steffen, pp. 103-114.
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.

84
2005

Texas Archeological Society
Determination of the Geologic Sources for Obsidian
Artifacts from Camels Back Cave and Trace Element
Analysis of Some Western Utah and Eastern Nevada
Volcanic Glasses. In Camels Back Cave, by Dave N.
Schmitt and David B. Madsen, pp. 249-356. Anthropological Papers No. 125. University of Utah, Salt
Lake City.

Hughes, Richard E., and Max G. Pavesic
2005 Proximity and Provenance: A Lesson from the Sterling Cache, Idaho . Journal of California and Great
Basin Anthropology 25:221-225.
Jack, Robert N.
1971 The Source of Obsidian Artifacts in Northern Arizona. Plateau 43:103-114.
Johnson, Eileen, Vance T. Holliday, Frank Asaro, Fred Stross,
and Helen Michel
1985 Trace Element Analysis of Paleoindian Obsidian
Artifacts from the Southern High Plains . Current
Research in the Pleistocene 2:51-53.
Macdonald, Ray, Robert L. Smith, and John E. Thomas
1992 Chemistry of the Subalkalic Silicic Obsidians.
Professional Paper 1523. U.S . Geological Survey,
Washington, D.C.
Mahood, Gail A.
1988 Obsidian Source Heterogeneity and Uniqueness: An
Example in Western Mexico . In Obsidian Dates IV:
A Compendium of the Obsidian Hydration Determinations made at the UCLA Obsidian Hydration
Laboratory, edited by Clement W. Meighan and
Janet L. Scalise, pp. 105-112. Monograph XXIX.
Institute of Archaeology, University of California,
Los Angeles.

Mitchell, Jimmy L. , Thomas R. Hester, Frank Asaro, and
Fred Stross
1980 Notes on Trace Element Analysis of Obsidian from
Hutchinson and Roberts Counties in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
51 :302-308.
Nelson, Fred W., Jr.
1984 X-ray Fluorescence Analysis of Some Western
North American Obsidians. In Obsidian Studies in
the Great Basin , edited by Richard E. Hughes, pp.
27-62. Contributions of the University of California
Archaeological Research Facility No . 45 , Berkeley.
Shackley, M. Steven
1995 Sources of Archaeological Obsidian in the Greater
American Southwest: An Update and Quantitative
Analysis. American Antiquity 60:531-551 .
2005

Obsidian: Geology and Archaeology in the North
American Southwest. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson.

Stross, Fred H ., Thomas R. Hester, Robert F. Heizer, and
Robert N. Jack
1976 Chemical and Archaeological Studies of Mesoamerican Obsidians. In Advances in Obsidian Glass Studies: Archaeological and Geochemical Perspectives,
edited by R. E. Taylor, pp. 240-258 . Noyes Press,
Park Ridge, New Jersey.
Stross, Fred H. , Payson D. Sheets, Frank Asaro, and Helen
V. Michel
1983 Precise Characterization of Guatemalan Obsidian
Sources and Source Determination of Artifacts from
Quirigua. American Antiquity 48:323-346.
Turner, Ellen S. and Thomas R. Hester
1993 Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. 2nd
edition. Gulf Publishing, Houston.

Avian Procurement and Use by Middle Ceramic Period
People on the Southern High Plains:
A Design for Investigations
Christopher Lintz

ABSTRACT
The prehistoric exploitation of birds on the southern High Plains has been rarely considered by archeologists more interested in bison, deer, and antelope. However, more than 450 avian species presently visit the
region and modern inventories suggests that migrating waterfowl using the Central North American flyways
constitute between 4,070 and 9,000 metric tons of meat annually passing through the region. Historic changes
suggest that many more migrating waterfowl passed through the area during the prehistoric and early historic
periods. Birds clearly have a tremendous economic potential for prehistoric and historic people in the region.
To better understand the behavior of avian resources and the character of possible prehistoric procurement
tactics, I delineate the life cycle of waterfowl along with the ecological differences between playas and riverine habitats. The importance of birds is also demonstrated by summarizing their roles in Plains Indian beliefs,
which mirrors their use on Historic Plains dress and implements. The roles of birds among Plains Indian beliefs
expand insights of avian usage beyond subsistence contributions, and underscores the importance and efforts
in pursuing small fowl with limited meat weight.
The archeological occurrence of bird remains is extracted from 17 faunal records of the more than 50
Middle Ceramic period sites excavated in the Texas and Oklahoma Panhandle. Between 38-45 avian groups or
species have been identified from the Middle Ceramic period sites that have received detailed faunal studies. To
date no procurement strategies or detailed technological studies have been advanced to explore where or how
birds were obtained, and I consulted the ethnographic record of North American Indians to delineate a range
of procurement strategies, methods, and tactics. Finally the archeological record of sites in and surrounding
the Texas and Oklahoma Panhandle region were examined to establish what to look for, and where to look,
on the landscape for evidence of avian procurement, to begin correcting simplistic perceptions about the rich
cultural heritage of the Middle Ceramic period people in the region.

INTRODUCTION

Bison, deer, and antelope are commonly known
to have provided the bulk of meat consumed by
Plains Village people during the Late Prehistoric or
Middle Ceramic period (A.D. 1200 to 1500) on the
southern High Plains (Duffield 1970; DeMarcay
1986; Duncan 2006). Perhaps surprisingly, these
studies of hamlet and village faunal remains indicate
that a great diversity of birds also is represented,
albeit in low frequencies. This article focuses on the
procurement and potential use of birds by prehistoric (Middle Ceramic period), protohistoric (Late
Ceramic period), and historic aboriginal people,
and the ways archeologists can begin to recognize
such activities. The article also serves as a research

design to guide field investigations into the topic of
prehistoric bird procurement. If we ignore the more
ancillary aspects of prehistoric adaptive strategies,
then we risk developing a shallow reconstruction of
these societies, and our knowledge becomes a poor
reflection of the subtle, yet rich complexities of ancient behaviors that undoubtedly once existed.
The life cycles of waterfowl and the relative
habitat importance of playas and rivers are discussed
as a background to understanding bird procurement, since waterfowl constitute nearly half of the
avian species found in the archeological record on
the southern High Plains. I then summarize the
importance of birds in Plains Indian cosmology.
The religious role of birds and their ethnographic
uses provide a possible context for viewing how

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 80 (2009)

86

Texas Archeological Society

they may have been regarded by Middle Ceramic
peoples on the southern High Plains. Next, I discuss
the diversity of bird remains from a series of Middle
Ceramic period sites in the Texas and Oklahoma
panhandles. This is followed by speculations about
various passive and active bird procurement strategies based on North American patterns. Finally, a
series of expected artifacts and features useful for
identifying bird procurement and their distribution
on the southern High Plains landscape are presented
as testable hypotheses of avian hunting behaviors.
Wherever possible, archeological evidence from the
region is used to support contentions for the feasibility of these methods. However, until archeologists
search to confirm the expected evidence, the range
of procurement practices will remain speculative.

BIRDS OF THE SOUTHERN
HIGH PLAINS WITH SPECIAL
REFERENCE TO WATERFOWL

Considerable numbers of diverse birds seasonally reside or pass through the southern Plains. The
list of birds for the high and rolling plains of Texas
include 450 species, of which only 85 are permanent residents. Another 25 species are infrequently
reported, but may be permanent residents (Seyffert
2000, 2001). The other 340 to 365 bird species are
seasonal visitors. Many are migratory birds that
often spend summers in the northern Plains and
Canada and winter in southern latitudes, including
the Texas and Oklahoma panhandles. The "Central
Flyway" through the Plains is a major north-south
migration route for millions of waterfowl and other
birds (Hawkins et al. 1984). The Plains is also the
transitional boundary between eastern and western
avian habitats, and some species from each area can
be found on the southern Plains. The migrating birds
range from ducks and geese to predatory hawks and
eagles, to smaller game birds, and perching birds.
Bird inventories on the southern Plains have identified 25 waterfowl species associated with playa lakes
alone (Flowers 1996; Curtis and Beierman 1980).
Migratory waterfowl using the Central Flyway
are represented by truly impressive numbers. Midwinter waterfowl inventories for the period from
1978-1987 average more than 5 million birds, with
yearly variations ranging from slightly more than 3
million to slightly less than 9 million birds (Table 1).
These recent historic seasonal numbers of waterfowl
potentially offer between an estimated 4,071.5 to

8,996.6 metric tons (4,488 to 9,917 short tons) of
meat. When the meat of other birds is added to that
of waterfowl, it should be clear that birds constitute
a tremendous subsistence resource available for
taking. Although fluctuation in the recent counts
of waterfowl is due to inventory procedures, some
variation in bird abundance undoubtedly is due to
habitat changes, natural predation and diseases,
including avian flu, botulism, enteritis, and fowl
cholera (Jensen and Williams 1964; Pederson et
al. 1989). However, these counts in the millions of
individuals also occurred long after the thinning of
the flocks following the introduction of shotguns and
other technological advances in bird-hunting strategies. It is probably safe to say that the number of
birds was substantially higher in prehistoric times,
when stone-age technologies were in use. Indeed,
historic records indicate that the skies were once
filled with "great clouds of ducks" and "the sound
made by flushing immense flocks of birds was like
thunder" (Linduska 1964:4). By 1950, wetlands and
feeding habitat in the United States decreased from
more than 127 million acres to less than 82 million
acres. These conditions, along with the use of pesticides, diseases, and historic change in weaponry,
are partly responsible for the historic decline in
waterfowl numbers.

THE YEARLY CYCLE OF
WATERFOWL

Before examining the archeological and ethnographic evidence for bird procurement practices
and uses, the life cycle and behavior of migratory
waterfowl are reviewed to provide insights into the
potential tactics used by ancient hunters. Generalizations about migratory waterfowl over-simplify
the situation, since not all species act exactly the
same way or are on the same seasonal schedule.
The following yearly cycle is based on the behaviors
of mallards and Canada geese, since they occur in
abundance in the region (Ducks Unlimited 2007;
Goode 2007).
The southern latitudes, including the TexasOklahoma short grass Plains, are part of the dominant wintering and mating grounds for migrating
mallards and geese, along with the Texas coastal
plain wetlands, as well as Mexico, and stretching to
South America. Ducks and geese have access to food
reserves in the southern regions that are not available
in ice-covered lakes and rivers of their dominant

Table 1. Counts and estimated live and meat weight for waterfowl from playa lakes during mid-winter inventories: Central Flyway, 1978 to 1987.

Mean Count

Percent

Minimum
Count

Maximum
Count

1,431,930
155,860
95,770
482,731
4,380
54,630
713,300
220,080
37,700
71,520
15 ,300
16,030
6,220
11,460
117,750

28.18
3.07
1.88
9.5
0.09
1.08
14.04
4.33
0.74
1.41
0.3
0.32
0.12
0.23
2.32

799,800
101,000
76,000
195 ,000
1,000
33,000
335,600
108,000
16,000
29,000
1,500
9,100
3,300
5,200
45,000

2,220,000
258,200
154,400
1,201,000
13,800
70,300
1,709,000
322,100
82,200
140,300
54,200
33,000
8,000
25 ,200
291 ,300

3,434,661

67.59

1,758,500

6,583,000

642,700
127,830
876,230
1,646,760

12.65
2.52
17.24
32.41

483,000
69,000
801,000
1,353,000

844,700
194,500
1,205,000
2,244,200

5,081,421
Total Ducks and
Geese
Sum of Ducks and Geese

100

3,111 ,500

8,827,200

Single live
bird weight
(ounces)

Total mean live
weight (pounds)

Total mean meat
weight (70% live
weight in pounds)

Estimatea mean
short tons of
annual available
meat

Ducks
Mallard
Gadwall
American widgeon
Green-winged teal
Blue-winged teal
Northern shoveler
Northern pintail
Redhead
Canvasback
Lesser scaup
Ring-necked
Common goldeneye
Bufflehead
Ruddy
Common/
redbreasted
mei:g_anser
Sum
Geese
Canada goose
White-fronted goose
Snow_g_oose
Sum

3,436,632.00
342,892.00
162,809.00
386,184.80
3,942.00
76,482 .00
1,640,590.00
572,208.00
105,560.00
124,266.00
24,480 .00
32,961.69
6,220.00
14,898.00
176,625.00

2,405,642.40
240,024.40
113,966.30
270,329 .36
2,759.40
53,537.40
1,148,413.00
400,545.60
73,892.00
86,986 .20
17,136.00
23,073 .18
4,354.00
10,428.60
123,637.50

7, 106,750.49

4,974,725.34

5,398,680.00
766,980.00
5,065,704 .69
11,231,364.69

3,779,076.00
536,886.00
3,545,993.28
7,861,955 .28

3,930.98

18,338, 115.18

12,836,680.62

6,418 .34

t°""

s·

~

l
"<::

i::;·

;:::

~

c~

i:::

;;
;:!

~

;:::
....
$:l

;:::
$:l..

~
134.4
96.0
92.5

2,487.36

~

~

~

.g

~

c

;:::

~
~

Bird Count
Minimum
Mean
Maximum

38.4
35.2
27.2
12.8
14.4
22.4
36.8
41.6
44.8
27.8
25.6
32.9
16.0
20 .8
24.0

3, 111,500
5,081,421
8,827,200

Total live weight
(pounds)
12,822,540.63
18,338, 115.18
28, 333,424. 75

Yearly counts after Ringleman et al. (1987:Table 5); live weight uses Alsop (2002); meat weight based on Solomon et al. (2006).

Total meat weight
(pounds)
8,975,778.44
12,836,680.62
19,899,396.63
I

Short tons
of meat
4,487.89
6,418.34
9,916 .70

V:i

c

i:::

~
~

~

~;::..
"ti

S'

s·
"'
00

-.l

88

Texas Archeological Society

nesting grounds further north. They spend most of
the winter eating plants and invertebrates to build up
fat reserves for the spring migration north, and for
their breeding, nesting, and molting phases.
Most ducks select mates and form bonded pairs
during the fall and winter, but they typically do
not breed until the next late March or early April.
Most breeding pairs form after the southward late
summer to fall migration, but a few form before
the birds reach the wintering region (Pederson
et al. 1989:292). Among Canada geese that lost
mates, pair bonds can form in a matter of hours
after reaching the wintering site, but for younger
birds, the courtship and bonding can take weeks to
months, and in a few cases, the courtship persists all
fall and winter. Studies have found that birds with
mates tend to weigh more and are dominant over
unpaired birds due to the tendency for waterfowl to
select healthy mates. Also hens metabolically store
reserve calcium in medullary tissue of the hollow
bone cores for producing egg shells a few weeks
before laying begins. 1
Typically the hen of the pair bond selects the
brooding site during the northward spring migration. Often the brooding site is her place of birth or a
prior successful site for brood rearing. Occasionally
bonded pairs nest and raise brood in the southern
latitudes, but most nesting sites are in the northern
Plains and Canada. Nests are built solely by the hen
and are sited close to water, usually in areas hidden
by shrubs, rushes, grass, or reeds, on the ground,
but some nests occur in tree cavities several meters
above ground. Female mallards typically lay four to
14 eggs, with an average of nine, and incubation period takes from 22 to 28 days. If a nest is destroyed
before the eggs hatch, mallards may re-nest three or
four times a season, but they only produce one brood
a year (Goode 2007).
Upon hatching, the hen leads the brood to the
feeding grounds near water. Her job is to keep the
broodlings warm until they can regulate their own
heat and to protect the young from such predators
as turtles, skunks, coyotes, bob cats, weasels, raccoons, herons, and hawks. About 10 weeks after the
ducklings hatch, they lose their soft down and begin
to grow their adult feathers in late summer to fall.
Many kinds of ducks eat day and night. Primary
foods include leaves, seeds, berries, bulrushes,
wild rice, wheat, com, primrose, willow, and seeds
of elm, oak, and hackberry. They also eat many
kinds of water-borne invertebrates and vertebrates,
including worms, insects, crustaceans, tadpoles,

frogs, mollusks, freshwater snails, fish, and fish
eggs. The dappling ducks forage in shallow water,
but they can also dive to deeper depths where they
use their bills to efficiently filter lake-bottom mud
to extract nutrients.
Shortly after the breeding season, mature mallards shed old, worn feathers and replace them with
a less colorful new plumage. Males molt shortly
after the females begin their egg incubation. Researchers disagree on whether males remain in the
general nesting territories during molting or move
to distinctly different molting sites away from the
nesting areas. The latter researchers suggest that the
segregation of the nesting and molting areas eases
the nutritional competition between those molting
male ducks, who are feeding to regrow feathers, from
the hen-duckling groups. Hens molt later than males
and after the ducklings are grown. Because each
duck molts synchronously and loses and replaces
all its feathers over a short span, the bird is rendered
flightless for a few weeks. During this period, mature
waterfowl are literally "sitting ducks" and are susceptible to predation. Often the molting season occurs in preparation for the fall migration southward.
And the yearly cycle is repeated over again. Raptors
and songbirds have different life cycles, behaviors,
and migration patterns (Alsop 2002).

THE ECOLOGY OF RIVER AND
PLAYA RESOURCES OF THE
SOUTHERN PLAINS

For this discussion, the southern High Plains
consists of the mid-continent short grass areas
bounded on the north by the Arkansas River of south
central Kansas-Colorado and the escarpments of the
Llano Estacada on the south, east, and west in New
Mexico, Texas, and Oklahoma. Rivers are relatively
scarce in this area, with only the Cimarron, North
Canadian (Beaver), Canadian, and Prairie Dog Town
Fork of the Red River crossing the plains from west
to east. The Cimarron and Canadian rivers drain
snow melt from the Rocky Mountains in northern
New Mexico, but the North Canadian and Red rivers
do not. The North Canadian River forms a narrow
valley fed by a series of widely spaced, very long
tributaries. In contrast, the Canadian River has a
series of closely spaced, relatively short (20 to 35
km long) lateral drainages, which essentially form
a wide corridor of rolling land. The Red River resembles the North Canadian River in that it forms a

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 89

relatively narrow river valley with few long tributaries. Erosion of the Red River along the eastern edge
of the Llano forms the deeply incised Palo Duro
Canyon. Most rivers and creeks are presently sandchoked, and the channels tend to be braided. Some
creeks seasonally flow underground, providing little
available surface water. Many of the lateral tributaries drain the Ogallala aquifer and provide more reliable surface water than the main river channels.
Much of the vast southern High Plains is
crossed by a few narrow draws, but this physiographic region is not well-drained by creeks or
rivers. Instead, this gently rolling landscape dips
slightly towards the southeast and is dotted with
thousands of closed drainage catchments called
playa lakes (Figure 1). Estimates place the number of playa lakes in the southern Plains at about
25,390 for the 39 counties in the Texas panhandle,
one county in Colorado, seven counties in Kansas,
four counties in New Mexico, and three counties
in the Oklahoma panhandle (Smith 2003: 14-15).
These playa lakes encompass some 410,994 acres,
predominately on the Plains upland surfaces (Smith
2003:14-15). The existence of nearly 16,660 km 2
(6,408 mi 2) of non-riverine wetlands constitutes a

tremendous resource used annually by migratory
waterfowl.
The playas and rivers of the southern High
Plains form an important series of wetlands for
migrating waterfowl and other birds (Figure 2).
But from an ecological and waterfowl subsistence
perspective, playas and rivers are significantly
different in two ways. First, the closed nature of
playa basins means that fish are denied access. 2
Fish compete with waterfowl for consuming more
than 25 orders and 110 genera of water-born and
moisture-favoring invertebrate and insect species.
These resources include a wide range of worms,
crustaceans (shrimp, crayfish, ostracodes, etc.),
and nymphs of dragonflies, mayflies, damselflies,
and c~ddisflies, as well as various other kinds of
insects and bugs (Smith 2003:Appendix). Without
the competition of fish, play a lakes quickly become
protein-rich reserves for waterfowl. Even during
periodic droughts on the Plains when water flow
occurs beneath the sand-choked riverbeds, plunge
pools and other catchments retain sheltered habitat
for fish and mussels. From these sources, rivers and
creeks are quickly repopulated with fish when the
wet seasons restore surface water flow, especially

Figure 1. General view of play a lakes on the High Plains (Courtesy of TPWD).

90

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Ducks and geese wintering-over at Lake Armstrong compartment of Playa Lakes Wildlife
Management Area, Castro County, Texas (Courtesy of TPWD).

after floods. However, recent studies suggest that
invertebrates only constitute about 5 percent of
modem waterfowl's diet; plants are more important.
But the relative importance of invertebrates in the
past is uncertain due to the historic dietary changes
outlined below.
In addition to the rich and abundant diversity of
invertebrates in playas, a concentric series of plant
zones develop around playa basins and provide an
abundance of seed species favored by waterfowl.
The concentric habitats consist of the inner marsh
zone, persistent emergents zone, outer marsh zone,
transition zone, and the surrounding uplands (Smith
2003:64). Each zone is characterized by different degrees of water retention and supports various aquatic
and semi-aquatic plants. Plant height decreases from
the outer marsh zone, where cattails and reeds grow,
to the uplands, which tend to be covered in short
grasses. Some of the indigenous plants favored by
waterfowl at playas include rice grass that flourishes
in the outer marsh zone, and wheat grass, foxtail
barley, and Virginia rye grass in the transition zone.
Thus, invertebrate and plant food resources are factors that draw waterfowl to the playas.
A second contrast between playas and rivers
is that rivers experience seasonal flooding that

transports tree seeds and seedlings to form gallery
forests. The woods along rivers are attractive nesting
and perching sites for predatory raptors, and offer
concealment for carnivores. Rivers and streams are
relatively unsafe places for nesting ducks and geese,
but they are welcome sanctuaries for perching birds
(cardinals, kingfishers, orioles, thrushes, etc.). The
absence of trees around playas allows waterfowl to
monitor approaching predatory animals, including
humans, much more easily than along the wooded
river valleys. Most forms of migratory waterfowl
have a well-developed calling system that alerts
the community to potential dangers, and confounds
skillful predators, including hunters. The concentration of predatory animals near rivers repels many
migratory birds.

HISTORICAL CHANGES IN
WATERFOWL OCCURRENCES

There has probably been little change in
the occurrence of playas, except as related to
climatic changes. Although some new sink holes
break though the surface of the Llano Estacado,
the number of playas probably has not changed

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 91
significantly for thousands of years. Some biotic
changes in playas have coincided with modern
agricultural practices. Farmers sometimes dig deep
slit trenches in playa bottoms to concentrate water
in smaller areas, and seasonal playas have been
plowed over so that domestic crops have replaced
indigenous plant communities.
Evidence also suggests that A.D. 1200 to 1500
was a period of intensifying droughts on the southern
Plains (Lintz 1986; Hall 1982, 1990). Interpolation of
tree ring data on the Palmer Drought Severity Index
for the Canadian River area in the Texas panhandle
suggest that a prolonged, series of moderately intense
droughts occurred ca. A.D. 1200 to 1300 and again
between ca. A.D. 1315 and 1325; some climatic
amelioration occurred during periods of ca. 1300 to
1315 and ca. 1325 to 1415, followed by a period of
extremely intense droughts during the interval ca.
A.D. 1415 to 1480 (NOAA/DESDIS North American
Drought Variability 2008). With decreased rainfall,
some smaller playas probably dried up on a seasonal
or period-long basis. However, other large, deep playas, such as Lake Tahoka south of Lubbock, are
substantial and probably remained a continuous water
resource since the end of the Pleistocene.
Significant changes have likely occurred in the
hydrology of the southern High Plains rivers. Water
flow in the Canadian River was altered with the
construction of Conchas Reservoir in the 1930s, and
Ute and Sanford Reservoirs in the 1960s. The construction of Conchas Reservoir predates the government's maintenance of water flow records, so only
anecdotal observations exist about flow conditions
and flood events. Significant flooding is reported
historically along the Canadian River. Following
water flow regulation by up-stream reservoirs, the
Canadian River is typically characterized as having a sand-choked, braided channel. The shallow
conditions of the river were not attractive to various
cranes, and perhaps other waterfowl. However, recently segments of the river have down cut enough
to form central channels in the undersized floodplain. These shifts in the river conditions may have
altered historic patterns of waterfowl use. Anecdotal
reports suggest that mergansers and goldeneyes prefer to reside along the Canadian River more often
than in the upland playas, so not all duck species
prefer the playa settings (Bill Johnson, personal
communication, 2007).
Other historic changes include alterations in
waterfowl diet and changes in the occurrence of
winter residency in the Panhandle. The flourishing

of cattle feedlots has brought in stockpiles of feed
corn that has become a favorite food of many kinds
of waterfowl. In addition to the corn available in
fields and at feed lots, hunters often use com to draw
waterfowl to hunting blinds. Corn is consumed by
geese and select groups of dabbling ducks, including
Mallards, Northern Pintails, American Widgeons,
- and Green-winged Teals. Recent studies of duck
stomach contents from the southern High Plains
indicate that some bird's diet during the winter
hunting season consists of nearly 90 percent corn
(Smith 2003:94). Other common dabblers, such as
Blue-winged Teals, Gadwall, and Northern Shovelers, and many diving birds (including Ruddy Ducks,
Scaups, Redheads, and Canvasbacks), do not participate in field feeding and likely consume less corn
(Bill Johnson, personal communication 2007). For
those that favor corn, it provides considerably more
energy than native grains and is much more readily
accessible. This ready source of food has allowed
the birds to stay longer in the region during cold
spells. Winter storms typically freeze rivers and
playas and limit waterfowl access to food, which has
historically driven flocks south to warmer climates.
But with the availability of corn, different historical
patterns have emerged. Anecdotal reports indicate
that the food shift has allowed many waterfowl to
_remain throughout the winter; the constant movement of dense waterfowl has prevented some playas
from freezing during short cold events, whereas
adjacent playas without so many birds are frozen
thick enough to support the weight of an adult person (Bill Johnson, personal communication, 2007).
The waterfowl wintering-over that occurs in the Panhandle today may be unprecedented due to the ready
availability of corn. Presumably, corn was grown
prehistorically in insufficient quantities to be used
as bird feed. Furthermore, the climatic conditions of
the Middle Ceramic period were different from that
historically recorded for the colder episodes of the
"little Ice Age" climatic episode of ca. A.D. 1500
to 1800 (Fagan 2002; Grove 2004). The abundance
and diversity of waterfowl in the High Plains region
may have been different 1,000 years ago, but exactly
how and why is not clear.

IMPORTANCE OF BIRDS TO
PLAINS INDIANS

Most historic journals and ethnographies of
Plains groups offer little information about the

92

Texas Archeological Society

procurement, consumption, and use of birds .
Compared to the protein provided by bison and
other large game, birds are assumed to offer little
nutritional value to a Plains Indian diet and hence
have been largely overlooked (Wedel 1986:2325) . However, the seasonal availability of an
estimated 4,071 to 8,996 metric tons of meat from
recent waterfowl counts at playa lakes, along
with additional meat provided by turkeys , prairie
chickens, quail, etc. , suggests that game birds
could be considered an important resource. Many
archeological assemblages report the occurrence
of few bird bones, representing a range of species
in small numbers in the Plains and adjacent areas
(Drass 1997; DeMarcay 1986; Duffield 1970; Kalasz
et al 2007; Meissner 2005). However, the diversity
of bird remains used in historic Plains Indian
ceremonial bundles, and attached to garments, and
other artifacts strongly suggests that birds were
sought with regularity. Waterfowl, chicken-like
birds, and some perching birds were hunted for
food, but many raptors were not preferred food
due to religious or symbolic connotations (Grinnell
1972:256; Fletcher and La Flesche 1972:104-105).
However, just as the sacred status of bison did not
deter them from being a major food source, the
sacredness of birds did not deter their use as food .
Consumption may relate more to preferences,
abundance, availability, and ease of capture than
to strict cultural prohibition. In contrast to Grinnell
(1972), birds, especially waterfowl, may have served
a dual role in being spiritually revered, yet providing
dietary diversity (O'Brien 2000).
Birds figure prominently in the religious views
and cosmological beliefs of many Plains Indian societies (O'Brien 2000; Grinnell 1972). Many birds
were imbued with symbolic meaning that was important to the community's spiritual health and survival. Religions among most historic Plains Indian
groups are nature-oriented with a series of dualistic
contrasts between the earth and sky, day and night,
and summer and winter, etc. Stars and other celestial
bodies were greatly revered as powerful beings that
figured prominently in creation stories and annual
ceremonial cycles for the renewal and continuity of
life (Dorsey 1906; Del Chamberlain 1982). Most
earth-bound plants and animals were viewed as being interconnected and containing various powers
that could help people. So it is not the kind of animal
or bird that was important, but rather the powers they
were perceived to have access to that was important.
Among some Plains Indian societies, particular

kinds of rocks are regarded as "grandfathers" who
could provide human guidance. This tenet is formed
by the belief that rocks have been around since the
beginning of creation and have seen and experienced
everything throughout history (Murie 1989). Many
plants and animals possessed powers due to certain
behavioral traits or sacred colors represented by
their leaf/wood, fur, or feather characteristics.
Often, birds (along with butterflies and dragon
flies) were regarded as the intermediaries that
transcended the boundaries between the people
on earth and the celestial beings. Among the Pawnee, specific kinds of birds were representatives
of a variety of entities, including the Supreme
Being, a multitude of celestial beings, the sacred
semi-cardinal directions, the chiefs of natural phenomena (day-night, earth-water, trees, and birds),
representatives of animals, and personal guardians,
protectors, and advisors to specific people (O'Brien
2000). In addition, other birds served specific roles
as "errand-messengers" that relayed information
between the Supreme and celestial beings above
and humans below, including healers (shaman or
medicine men) and elders (priests). 3 Sometimes,
different kinds of birds worked in tandem to deliver
messages or answer prayers between people and
the heavenly beings. A few birds such as burrowing
owls also bridged the domain between the surface
of the earth and the subterranean world, although
ants and other insects are often regarded as the more
common messengers to the underground helpers
(Quigg 1996:30-31).
The perpetuation and maintenance of the universe for some Plains Indian societies was based
on a yearly ceremonial and ritual cycle tied to the
powers held by the band, community/village, and
society. Priests, shaman, medicine men or healers,
and visionaries or elders were guided in decisions
by natural cues, and even personal guidance powers obtained from individual prayers and vision
quest experiences. Some powers were reinforced
by tangible objects contained in sacred bundles that
were retained by recognized members of societies
on behalf of various bands and specific villages, or
by personal amulets worn by individuals (Gilmore
1932; Uberlaker and Wedel 1975). The sacred bird
objects contained in Pawnee medicine bundles and
amulets, for example, include stuffed bird skins,
feet, talons, wings, tail feathers, and other objects
made from specific kinds of birds associated with
spiritual connections to various celestial beings.
Avian body parts also served as amulets for people

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 93

seeking power and strength to make decisions, assess risks, and accomplish difficult tasks.
Ethnographic studies show that many Native
people do not classify birds in the same manner as
members of western societies. Some are grouped
according to shared color schemes, such as the
inclusion of robins and cardinals together as "red
birds" (Moore 1986); others are grouped together
based on flying or feeding patterns. Additional bird
classifications were developed according to dualistic
oppositions such as day vs. night creatures or flesheating birds (eagles, hawks, vultures, owls, ravens,
crows, jays, etc.) vs. plant and insect-eating birds.
The linkage of supernatural beings with directionality, color schemes, trees, and other animals is often
hard to comprehend by people in cultures not versed
in conceiving that natural objects have inherent or
ascribed powers or of the relationship that natural
objects have to the sacred color and animal symbolism of celestial beings. Such beliefs are not irrational but reflect consistency between the relationships
of natural objects and their ascribed powers.
The following examples draw heavily from
Pawnee myths and tales, which are appropriate
for two reasons. First, the Pawnee (along with the
Wichita, Kichai, and Arikara) are Plains Caddoan
language-speakers, and some or part of the Plains
Middle Ceramic groups were probably related
to peoples speaking that family of languages (cf.
Hughes 1968). Second, one of the origin stories
told by the Pawnee stipulates that they lived in stone
houses located to the southwest of their current residences in Nebraska (Grinnell 1893). Only the Early
and Middle Ceramic period Plains people living in
the Texas-Oklahoma panhandle and adjacent mesa
and canyon lands of southeastern Colorado and
northeastern New Mexico lived in stone masonry
houses and retained a cord-marked ceramic continuity with the ancestral Pawnee.
The Pawnee believe that the Supreme Being,
Tirawa (or Tirawahat, known as the expanse of
the heavens who directs everything), classified the
objects of the world and developed the underlying
symbolic relationships among objects (O'Brien
2000:95; Weltfish 1977:64). Second tier celestial
beings were Morning Star and Evening Star, followed by the Sun, Moon, and other stellar entities,
including the four pillar stars (Parks 200la:536;
Del Chamberlain 1982). Tirawa assigned names to
all objects, and many things carried symbolic connotations tied to the sacred four semi-cardinal directions and the colors black, red, yellow, and white

that served as direct paths that Tirawa provided for
humans to receive personal powers from the four
pillar stars (Table 2).
Qrnithological classification schemes based
on mythological powers have also been ascribed to
birds. For example, O'Brien (2000) believes that
the Pawnee recognized four classes of birds: earth
or ground-dwelling birds, sky birds, water birds,
and tree birds. Ground-dwelling birds include the
turkeys, grouse, prairie chickens, quail, burrowing
owls, and varieties of song birds that typically nest
on the ground (larks, warblers, sparrows, etc.). Sky
birds wnsist of those species that soar very high, and
include various raptors. This taxon encompasses two
kinds of eagles, goshawks, six varieties of hawks,
ospreys, falcons , turkey vultures, and the Great
Blue Heron. Other sky birds that prefer evening
or night activities include owls, nighthawks, and
Whip-poor-wills. Water birds include a wide range
of dl}cks, loons, geese, and swans. Tree birds reside
in wooded areas near springs and along creeks and
rivers; they include jays, woodpeckers, cardinals,
purple martins, and wrens. The powers attributed to
these birds have been compiled by O'Brien (2000)
based on various Pawnee myths (Dorsey 1904, 1906;
Fletcher 1904; Fletcher and Murie 1996; Jipson
1922; Murie 1989) and ethnographic sources (Grinnell 1893; Dunbar 1880). In some cases, O'Brien
argues that a duality exists between day birds and
night birds within the four primary classes. These
birds and their inferred sacred attributes are summarized in Tables 3 and 4.
The inferred powers ascribed to various birds by
O'Brien (2000) provide a context for interpreting the
occurrence and use of plumes and other bird parts
found on many kinds of garments and artifacts used
by historic Plains Indians. In most cases, the use
of feathers is not just decorative or for embellishment but instead carries great significance to those
wearing or using the artifacts. In a few instances
decorations may be indicated, as when cultural
materialists claim that bird feather quills sewn onto
clothing before 1850 were replaced by colored porcupine quills and later glass beads (Feder 1982:64).
Perhaps the feathered quills added color to clothing
as is suggested by rare examples of feathered capes
in the Great Lakes region (Anderson 1985). These
and other colorful decorations may also have had
social significance.
The historic use of birds by Plains Indian
groups is impressive (Table 5). Feathers are the
most common part used on clothing (hats, caps,

94

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. Correlation of Pawnee sacred directions, colors, celestial beings, and animals.
Second Tier Celestial Beings and Cardinal Directions
Name of Celestial
Being

Primary Powers

Cardinal Direction
Birds
Cardinal Directional
Birds from Mud
Lodge Tales

West
Evening Star
(Venus)

North
North Star (North
Star)

Goddess of night/
darkness; female
power; germination
for renewal of com
and bison
Turkey

Crow

East
Morning Star
(Mars with Venus
or Jupiter as
alternatives)
God of sun, light,
fire, and war.
Fights Morning
Star for start of
each day
Hawk

Crane

Owl

Snipe

Animal

South
Death Cyclone
Star (South Star)

Eagle
"Yellow woodknocker" (Flicker)

Buffalo

Correlation of Sacred Colors, Pillar Stars, Trees, and Animals to the Semi-Cardinal Directions
Northwest

Northeast

Southeast

Southwest

Colors

Yellow

Black

Red

White

Pillar Stars (and
modem correlates)

Yellow Star
(Capella)

Red Star (Antares)

White Star (Sirius)

Birds of Pillar Star
Semi-cardinal
directions
Pillar Star Bird traits
and Color
Correlations

Swan (probably
Whistling Swan)

Big Black Meteoric
Star (Vega or
Cassiopeia)
Loon (or
Blackbird)

Kingfisher (or
swan)

Water bird with
yellow spot near
eye

Diving bird, black
color

Weather Condition

Lightning

Thunder

"Gar-pike"
(Probably
Merganser)
Diving bird with
gar-like serrated
teeth and red bill
and eyes
Clouds

Animal

Mountain Lion

Beaver, Bear

Wolf

Tree
Com Varieties*

Cottonwood
Yellow Com

Elm
Black Com

Willow
Red Com

Life Cycle- Season

Youth- Spring

Adult- Autumn

Youth- Summer

Diving bird with
white-spotted blue
colors
Wind
Wildcat
· Box Elder
White Com
Old Age- Winter

Data derived from Weltfish (1977:112), O'Brien (2000), and Del Chamberlain (1982:97, 234).
*Pawnee grew four subspecies of com (flint, flour, sweet, and pop) and perhaps 15 subvarieties; flour com was
classified as blue, speckled, white, yellow, and red (Parks 200la:525).
capes, shirts, and leggings), offensive and defensive
weapons (shields, coup sticks, lances, shields, and
war bonnets 4 ), amulets (necklaces and solitary
feathers in hair), and ceremonial paraphernalia
(medicine bundles, pipes, pipe bags, bison-horn
headdresses, and dance bustles, etc.). Other exploited
bird remains include stuffed bird skins used for
personal amulets, status symbolism, and communal

bundles. Most of these artifacts use perishable parts
of birds (plumes and skins) which would be difficult
to recover in most archeological situations. Bird
bones are rarely fashioned into artifacts, although
bird heads were symbolically attached to shields,
wing bones are used as whistles and flutes, and
talons are sometimes made into necklaces. Amulet
and bundle artifacts may show so little modification

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 95
Table 3. Select cosmological powers ascribed to birds on the plains.
Bird Type

Powers

Symbolism and Artifacts

References

Turkey

Possible bird symbol of Evening Star; protectors of
children and the human race; very prodigious,
caring birds with maternal associations.

O'Brien 2000:
97, 118

Prairie Chicken

Messenger bird-symbol for Mother-Corn, and in
myths is associated with cosmically-important
birds-eagles, hawks, crows, blackbirds, and
magpies.
Evening Star's errand bird conveying messages
from the Four Old Men (Powers) of the West (under
Evening Star's control) to humans.
Lark with horned pattern on side of head is the
symbol for bison. It is believed to have granted
power to humans to procure bison.
Messenger bird to humans for the Four Old Men
(Powers) of the West under Evening Star's control.
Also some build mud nests resembling Pawnee
domed earth lodges. Social birds that often nests
near people.
Associated with Morning Star sacrifice and prefers
nesting near humans . They are very protective of
nests and even drive away crows and hawks .
Associated with the creation of the Crow Lance
Society and Children of lruska (Contraries). Due to
tendency to eat grain from dung, it may be a bison
messenger-bird sent to help people locate bison.
Extremely territorial and protective of area.
Possible errand bird to diverse animals who
communicates in many different languages. In
mythology, they caused bison to live in herds.

Turkey feathers used to
symbolize female in Hako
Ceremony. Tail feathers
used to fletch arrows.
Feathered capes (Fox
Tribe)

Day Birds
Ground Birds

Meadowlark

Horned Lark

Swallows

Purple Martin

Blackbird

Mockingbird

Sky Birds (High-flying Birds)
Unspecific
Respect and reverence paid to "war birds:" birds of
Raptors
prey and flesh-eating birds

Eagles

Chief of the Day. Represent Tirawa's power and
knowledge; wearers of eagle items are visionaries
and know many things; important to Medicine Men.
Eagles represents fire and are associated with the
southern direction; high-flying birds who dive upon
prey like lightning bolts; symbols of war and male
gender. Eagle feathers protect wearer from bullets.
Bald Eagles are regarded as old wise men with
gray hair.

Hawks, General

Symbolizes war and messenger for Morning Star,
the warrior. Kills other birds in flight with their
wings, analogous to killing with war clubs. Symbol
of bravery.

"Swift Hawk"
(Cooper's or
Sharp-shinned)

Works with "skull" and owl to deliver people's
messages to Tirawa. Very aggressive and fast.
Cooper's hawks have red eyes (symbolic color of
Morning Star)
Probable "gray eagle" venerated as sacred.
Possibly Tirawa's messenger bird.

Harrier (Marsh)
Hawk and Kites

O'Brien 2000:
98; Anderson
1985
O'Brien 2000:
97, 99
O'Brien 2000:
100
O'Brien 2000:

100

O'Brien 2000:
101
Feathers of swans and
blackbirds used on war
lances; stuffed skins on
headdresses

O'Brien 2000:
101; Gilbert et
al. 1996:12.
O'Brien 2000:
102

Feathers on coup sticks
and war shields

Skins, talons, feathers,
claws, and wings are
important ceremonial
objects: bone whistles,
wing fans, war bonnet, war
shields; isolated feathers
worn in h.air (feather
movement warnings of
danger); dance bustles;
lances
Stuffed hawk cap worn by
sacrifice victim in Morning
Star ceremony. Hawk
claws painted on warriors.
Claw necklaces; stuffed
bird skin on headdress and
feathers on lances.
Stuffed bird skin on
clothing.

Often stuffed skins in
bundles; plumes of gray
eagle and heron worn in
hair

Grinnell 1972:
Vol. 2:87;
Curtis 1997:
134, 184, 240,
714
O'Brien 2000:
103; Grinnell
1972:105, 108·11 O; Weltfish
1977:283, 344;
Newcomb
2001 :561

O'Brien 2000 :
104; Grinnell
1972:124;
Curtis 1997:
166

O'Brien 2000 :
104; Parks
2001a:526
O'Brien 2000:
103, 105.

96

Texas Archeological Society

Table 3. (Continued)
Bird Type

Powers

Symbolism and Artifacts

References

Sparrow hawks

Protect people during battles due to swiftness

Stuffed skin used in Chaui
medicine bundle

Great Blue
Heron

Possibly represents Tirawa. Associated with the
sky by color and connected to both water and earth.

Feathers are worn

O'Brien 2000:
114; Grinnell
1972:108-110;
Gilbert et al.
1996
O'Brien 2000:
105-106

Buzzards

Represent errand people on the south side (and
opposite magpie) of Waconda Spring Lodge. Eagle
and Buzzard used by Tirawa to send orders to first
High Priest.

Stuffed bird skin caps.

Water Birds
Ducks, General

Mallard

Merganser

Kingfishers
("Fish Hawk")

Loons

Cranes
(Thunderbirds?)

Chief of the Water. Contain great power because
they migrate long distances at low elevations and
know regional geography. They fly, walk, swim,
and dive and have contacts with powers in many
directions. Also associated with sacred springs and
water.
Important bird playing role in Hako or Calumet
Ceremony.
Possible "gar-pike bird" representing the Southeast
direction in the Evening Star bundle, and "Part of a
Village" bundle ritual. Red bill and eyes are sacred
color of the Southeast.
Diving bird associated with underground animal
lodges and water. Errand bird of all animals.
Messenger of the Four Gods of the North. Used to
represent Southwest direction in Evening Star
Bundles. Allows wounds to heal or close quickly
Qust as water closes over diving bird).
One of seven Chiefs of healers and knows their
secrets because they fly close to heaven .
Represents the Northeast direction in Evening Star
Bundle.
One of four chiefs of Nahurac. Helps warriors scare
enemy with whistle sounds. Whooping crane used
in Young Dog Dance (warrior's dance).

Swans
(Thunderbirds?)

Used by several bundle societies. Linked to the
Thunderbird (loud call resembles thunderclaps that
scare enemies and prevents their attack during
storms). Possible errand birds for animals. High
flying migratory bird that connects earth to sky.

Geese

Flying geese wings make sound of drum. Linked to
southern end of lodges, and provides medicine
powers.
Associated with cranes in possessing powers. Skin
hung in east end of "first lodge;" cranes were hung
in the west.

Snipe

Tree Birds
Blue Jays

Woodpeckers

Red-headed
Woodpecker
Northern Flicker

O'Brien 2000:
106; Curtis
1997:185

O'Brien 2000:
107

Head and skin applied to
two sacred wands in Hako
ceremony

O'Brien 2000:
107
O'Brien 2000:
107

Found in some sacred
bundles. "War charm" of
stuffed skin with eagle
down; also skins used in
war bonnets. Stuffed skin
held by Elder in ceremony
of Four Gods.
Evening star bundle; also
used as altars inside earth
lodges.

Grinnell 1972:
120, 122;
O'Brien 2000:
106, 108

Head attached to war
shields. War whistles
made from wing bones.

O'Brien 2000:
109; Gilbert et
al. 1996:12;
Grinnell 1972
O'Brien 2000 :
109; Parks
2001a:528

Feathers of swans and
blackbirds used on war
lances. Swan down
feathers on shirts and used
to renew lances for the
Thunderbird Lance Society

O'Brien 2000:
106, 108

O'Brien 2000:
110
O'Brien 2000 :
111

Carrier of prayers and sacrifices to Tirawa. Blue
feathers symbolize clear skies.

Skins tied to red (sun) pipe
and black (moon) pipe.
Worn by warriors to deliver
prayers before battles.

O'Brien 2000:
111

"Chief of Trees" enjoys and symbolizes protection
from Tirawa. Regarded as fearless because it lives
in dead trees (regarded as lightning rods), and calls
out during thunder storms . An interpreter of the
Thunder Gods. A protector of life and can avert
disasters. General talisman.
Symbolizes scalped warrior and offers protection in
battle

Feathers used on war clubs
and hatchets . Woodpecker
caps protected wearer

O'Brien 2000:
112; Grinnell
1972:108-110

Sacred bird whose yellow feathers can kill.
Behavior is impersonated by Medicine Men . Yellow
is associated with the south side of the lodge.

Yellow feathers worn by
members of secret society

O'Brien 2000 :
112
O'Brien 2000 :
112

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 97
Table 3. (Continued)
Bird Type

Powers

Wrens

Symbol of humility. Small but happy vocal bird who
greets sunrise .
Signal direction of approaching enemies. Also
"errand-man" for all animals and represents the
north side of the Waconda Spring Lodge. Very
adaptable and mimics human voice , but they are
rather destructive birds .
Crows and eagles are visionaries that help people
find lost items, or people who have lost their way.
They fly high and far and see and know many
things. Prominently related to the Ghost dance and
directionally related to the north (eagles are related
to the south).
Follow war parties and attend to certain mysteries
called Kaw-kah
Builds distinctive sack-nests that are so strong that
storms never blow them away and thus offers
protection of the powers of Tirawa to children held
above the nest in the Hako Ceremony.
Redbird (along with robin?) associated with the sun.
It cannot be killed and flies to the west into the sun.
Either the sun's errand bird , or symbol for the sun.
Sacred bird due to unusual appearance and rarity in
the region .

Magpies

Crows

Ravens
Oriole

Cardinal

Scissor-tailed
Fly-catcher
Snowbird
(Junco or
Bunting?)
Night Birds
Sky Birds
Owl, General

Symbolism and Artifacts

References

Stuffed magpie skin amulet
charms

O'Brien 2000:
112-113
Grinnell 1972:
108-110, 124;
O'Brien 2000 :
106, 113

Feathers worn by seers
and visionaries . Dance
Bustles (with crow and
eagle feathers); crow skins
on dance apparel

O'Brien 2000:
103, 113;
Newcomb
2001 ; Gilbert et
al. 1996:12

Nest used in Hako
Ceremony; stuff birds
attached to lances.

O'Brien 2000:
114
O'Brien 2000:
114; Grinnell
1972:108-110
O'Brien 2000:
114

Stuffed skin used in Chaui
medicine bundle; tail
feathers used in fans.

Power to thwart witches; protect people from
witches.

Leading medicine man among birds and Chief of
the Night. Associated with Evening Star and the
Four Powers of the West. A messenger who
teaches people how to worship Tirawa. Linked to
the "four powers that never sleep": Thunder,
Lightning , Wind , and Clouds. Protects people at
night.

O'Brien 2000:
114
O'Brien 2000:
115

Feathers and skins often
worn by Healers and Elder
priests. Part of apparel of
the four Keepers of the
Pillar Star bundles .
Feathers on lances .

O'Brien 2000:
97, 115;
Grinnell 1972:
81

Great Horned
Owl, Screech
Owls, and
Long-eared Owl
Prairie Owl

All three owls have ear luffs reminiscent of bison
horns and provide powers to see at night. Screech
owl is fearless defender of nests.

Barn Owl

Speculated to be "Moon's Bird" based on the night
activity and round white face. Exists in contrast to
the "redbirds," which are the Sun's Bird.

O'Brien 2000:
120

Birds active around twilight. Possibly related to the
powers contained by Blue Heron applied to duality
of night or evening .

O'Brien 2000 :
117

Possibly evening or night equivalent of day hawks
and eagles . Aggressive birds that attack humans.
Steep dive on the wing makes booming sound that
startles hunters and enemy.

O'Brien 2000 :
117

Social birds living in coveys that forage and roost;
defends territories in fall and winter but breaks into
nesting pairs in spring. Arguably symbols of the
Pawnee people and "Chief of People."

O'Brien 2000:
118-119;
O'Brien and
Post 1988;
Ro..Qfil.J.fill4

Water Birds
"Night Raven"
(Crowned Night
Heron or Green
Heron)
Ground Birds
Nighthawk

Other Birds
Quail

Provides powers to see at night. Associated with
death and helped kin connect with deceased.

O'Brien 2000 :
116-117

Feathered caps and
feathers worn on arms

O'Brien's data synthesized from Dorsey (1 904, 1906), Fletcher (1904), Jipson (1922), and Murie (1989).

Grinnell 1972:
Vol. 2:108-110;
155-157

98

Texas Archeological Society

Table 4. Synopsis of the role of birds in Pawnee beliefs.
R~esentation

Errand Bird to
Humans

Errand Bird to
Medicine Men

Errand Bird to
Elders/ Chiefs

Tirawa (Supreme Being)

Great Blue Heron

Marsh Hawk

Buzzard

Eagle

Atira (Tirawa's mate)

"Brown eagle" or
Marsh Hawk

Cosmic Beings and Entities

Symbolic Bird

Supreme Being

Celestial Beings
Morning Star (male power and
warriors)

Hawks (e.g., Cooper
or Sharp-shinned)

Purple Martin

Evening Star (female power)

Turkey

Meadowlark

Four Powers of the West associated
with Evening Star)
Northwest Pillar Star

Owls

Swallows

Whistling Swan

Northeast Pillar Star

Loon

Southwest Pillar Star

Kingfisher

Southeast Pillar Star

Merganser

Sun

Redbirds (Cardinal)

Moon

Barn Owl

Non-Celestial Beings
Nahurac Chief

Sand-hill Crane

Corn Mother

Prairie Chicken

Sacred Semi-Cardinal Directions
North

Crow or Owl

South
East (Morning Star)

Eagle or Flicker
Hawk or Snipes

West (Evening Star)

Turkey or Crane

Center direction

Unknown

Chiefs of Natural Phenomena
Chief of the Day

Eagle

Chief of the Night

Owl

Chief of the Earth

Swans

Chief of the Water

Mallard Duck

Chief of the Trees

Woodpecker

Chief of Birds

Golden Eagle

Representatives of Animals
Pawnee People

Bob-white Quail

Blue Jay

Bison

Horned Lark

Blackbird

Thunderbird

Whooping Crane

Human Guardians, Protectors, Advisors
Human Guardians
Protector from witches

Woodpecker
Junco or Bunting

Bird of Healers

Loon

Teacher of Humility

Wrens

(after O'Brien 2000:119-121)

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 99
Table 5. Bird remains with select Plains ethnographic artifacts.
Artifact Type

Bird Parts

Species

Cultural Affiliation

References

Clothing
Clothing
decorations
(moccasins,
shirts , etc.)

Feather quillwork
(predates porcupine
quills use of ca.
1850s)

Unspecified

General Plains

Feder 1982:64

Feather
cordage robes

Parts of feathers

Turkey

Basket-maker
(Southwestern)

Olson 1968:135

Feathered
capes

Feathers stitched to
woven cape

Prairie Chicken ,
Peafowl , Guinea
fowl, Peacock

Mesquakie (Fox)
Illinois or Iowa
Region

Anderson 1985

Bustles

Feathers

Eagle and Crow

Wichita

Newcomb
2001 :561

Shirts
Cloth shirts
Leggings

Feathers
Downy feathers
Feathers

Unspecified
Swan
Unspecified

General Plains
Pawnee
General Plains

Feder 1982:64
Parks 2001a:528
Feder 1982:73

Medicinal
Shaman 's
Headdress

Stuffed bird skin

Red-wing
Blackbird

Piegan

Gilbert et al.
1996:12

Shaman's
Headdress

Stuffed bird skin

Hawk

Crow (Apsaroke)

Curtis 1997:20,
166

Feather fan

Wing or feathers

Eagle

Most Plains groups

Curtis 1997:155,
722 ; Weltfish
1977:283, 344

Isolated Feather in
hair

Unspecified
Raptors

Most Plains groups

Curtis 1997:123.

Caps
Amulets

Stuffed bird skin
Stuffed bird skin

Vulture
Chickadee

Crow (Apsaroke)
Crow

Curtis 1997:185
Gilbert et al.
1996:12

Necklace

Talons/claws

Hawk and other
raptors

Cheyenne,
Unspecified Plains

Grinnell 1972:124;
Kopper 1986: 183

Unspecified

Sioux

Feder 1982:51

Personal
Amulets

Religious or Ceremonial
Wooden dance
Feathers
sticks
Dance apparel

Bird skins

Crow

Assiniboin

Gilbert et al.
1996:12

Rawhide rattle
Buffalo skin cap

Feathers
Downy feather
attachments

Unspecified
Unspecified

Kiowa
CheyenneArapahoe

Feder 1982:37
Curtis 1997:273

Pipe stems (of
wood)

Decorated with
woodpecker beaks,
and mallard duck
necks and feathers

Unspecified

Unspecified Plains

Feder 1982:74

100

Texas Arch eological Society

Table 5. (Continued)
Artifact Type

Bird Parts

Species

Cultural Affiliation

References

Medicine
Bundles

Stuffed bird skin

Various ,
unspecified

Crow (Absoroka),
Blackfeet, Arikara

Wildschut and
Ewers 1959;
Wissler 1912;
Gilmore 1932

Medicine
Bundles

Bird skins

Sparrow hawk

Omaha

Gilbert et al.
1996:12

Bison skull altar
corner prayer
sticks

Feathers on sticks

Unspecified

Teton Sioux or
Assiniboin

Curtis 1997:123

Pipe bag

Feathers

Unspecified

Curtis 1997:245

Necklace

Feather down

Unspecified

CheyenneArapahoe
CheyenneArapahoe

War bonnet

Feathers

Eagle or Hawk

Most Plains groups

Feder 1982:73
Curtis 1997:125,
183,211

War bonnet

Feathers on skull cap
part

Kingfishers

Cheyenne

Grinnell 1972:120

War Party
leader symbol

Stuffed bird skin

"Swift hawk"

Pawnee

Parks 2001a:528

Beaver fur cap
(Chief Symbol)

Feathers (two)

Eagle

Chawi Band ,
Pawnee

Parks 2001 a:530

Coup sticks

Feathers

Raptors

Most Plains groups

Feder 1982:64;
Curtis 1997:134,
184, passim

Lances

Feathers

Owls, Hawks,
Eagles

Cheyenne

Grinnell 1972:81

Lances

Stuffed bird skin

Orioles or
Tanagers (red)

Cheyenne

Grinnell 1972:81

War shields

Feathers

Raptors

Mandan , Arikara,
Cheyenne ,
Arapahoe

Curtis 1997:240,
714

War shields

Feathers or down
and immature plumes

Unspecified

Sioux, Arikara,
Arapahoe

Feder 1982:14,
25-26, 64

War shield

Preserved head

Crane

Crow (Absoroka)

Gilbert et al.
1996:12

War whistles

Wing bones

Sandh ill Crane ,
Eagles

Cheyenne

Grinnell 1972:108110

War clubs and
hatchets

Feathers

Woodpeckers

Cheyenne

Grinnell 1972:108

War charm
Arrows

Stuffed bird skin
Feather fletching

Kingfishers
Unspecified

Cheyenne
Most Plains groups

Grinnell 1972:1 22
Curtis 1997:173,
passim

Curtis 1997:254

Warfare

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 101
that they would not be recognized as decorative
items in prehistoric faunal assemblages.

AVIAN FAUNA FROM MIDDLE
CERAMIC SITES IN THE TEXASOKLAHOMA PANHANDLES

The extension of ethnographic significance attributed to birds back into prehistoric times is not
an easy or automatic connection. The transition
of Middle Ceramic pedestrian nomads of the 13th
century to Late Ceramic equestrian bison hunters
of the 16th century brought a tremendous influx
of new people from diverse backgrounds onto the
Plains. The transformation in mobility, subsistence
practices, and social organizations likely were accompanied by social changes and alterations in the
structure of fundamental beliefs about the cosmos
(Oliver 1962; Moore 1986; Roper 1994:75). Although religious beliefs tend to be more conservative than other societal aspects, alterations in the
emphasis of symbolic and ceremonial order likely
occurred to validate these social changes. Hence,
there is no assurance that ethnographic records of
bird significance and usage during the Historic and
Late Ceramic periods necessarily provides analogs
for the way Middle Ceramic period people felt about
birds, even though there may have been a general
continuity between Middle Ceramic period groups
and Plains Caddoan-speaking groups, such as the
Arikara, Pawnee, and Wichita (cf. Hughes 1968,
1974; Wedel 1979; Parks 2001b). But if beliefs
changed in response to alterations in other aspects
of a particular culture, it probably was not accompanied by wholesale replacement. The rate, extent,
and degree of change in religious attitudes about
birds are unknown. Nevertheless, an overview of
bird use during the Historic and Late Ceramic periods provides a starting point for considering the
possible context and occurrence of avian remains
in Middle Ceramic period sites. With the possible
exception of Lubbock Lake, which has yielded 34
avian species from Paleoindian contexts and nine
bird species from Historic contexts, few faunal studies of southern High Plains sites have identified birds
from sites pre-dating the past 2000 years (Johnson
1987:Table 7).
Fairly intensive archeological excavations over
the past century have been reported at more than 50
Middle Ceramic period (A.D. 1200-1500) sites in
the drainages of the Prairie Dog Town Fork of the

Red River, the Canadian River of Texas, and the
North Canadian or Beaver River in the Oklahoma
Panhandle (Figure 3 and Table 6). Most sites are
open stone slab and/or pit-house structures attributed to the Antelope Creek phase, the Odessa-Yates
phase, or the Buried City Complex (Lintz 1986;
Hughes 1991; Brosowske 2005). All of these excavated sites contain surface or pit structures, except
the South Ridge site, which is possibly a short term
open camp, and Canyon Country Club Cave, a rock
shelter. The structures at all others conform to simple
or complex forms of sub-homestead, homestead, or
hamlet configurations with surface masonry structures (Lintz 1986) or pit houses (Brosowske 2005).
At most sites modified bone tools are described,
but the scrap food bones are rarely identified. Yet
the faunal remains from most sites represent the
largest quantity of artifacts and consist primarily of
systematically reduced small splinters from larger
herbivores (bison, elk, deer, pronghorn, etc.) derived
from the extraction of bone marrow and grease
(DeMarcay 1986). More than half the excavated
site faunal assemblages have received no formal
examination whatsoever. Of those that have been
studied, less than 10 percent of the bone refuse
is identifiable to specific elements of identifiable
animals. Rigorous and thorough attempts to analyze
bone refuse from 17 sites have found smaller mammals, birds, amphibians, reptiles, and fish (Duffield
1970; DeMarcay 1986; Duncan 2006; Meissner
2005). These studies suggest that bird remains constitute less than 5 percent of identifiable bones in
the faunal assemblages. In addition to the rigorous
studies mentioned above, five bird species have been
identified in limited studies of avian remains from
the Stamper and Roy Smith sites in Oklahoma (Lintz
2003b; Duffield 1970:246).
As many as 45 bird taxa have been attributed
to Middle Ceramic period sites in the Oklahoma
and Texas Panhandle regions by Duffield (1970),
DeMarcay (1986), Duncan (2006), and Meissner
(2005). These birds are listed in Table 7 by common
and up-dated scientific names (AOU 2007; Alsop
2002), live weights, and seasonal movements in
Texas (Shackelford and Lockwood 2000). The list of
birds from archeological sites in the study area describes 18 kinds of waterfowl (ducks, geese, swans,
etc.; 40 percent of the 45 known taxa), four kinds
of small game birds (doves and quail, etc; 8.9 percent), four kinds of shore birds (snipes, coots, etc.;
8.9 percent), 11 kinds of predatory birds (hawks,
owls, crows, etc.; 24.4 percent), seven kinds of

102

Texas Archeological Society

Oklahoma

•••

···.-···
©-...
I ~... ~-... _.r .. ·.

'- ···JV
ti)
~
: ;:;.;;; .......
.
;·'
~ (""'::: 1··
..
:

N-ortb •• ·~~~
I

r'

cold

•'- .••W.:::.'" :;k:'

,1

k)~

@ /...

Texas ,..,.. r

-~·
~''' .,::r' ·'

c...

8

Dwo .. •
Palo

·"V· •• r-

)

.Puna

~

00
Agua

• ..

\

···~

..,~
.. -·.

-t-••

'
...J

-···

."'\ .

Washita

Meredith

... __.......

-..._ North

,,..-' 9

••

................... /

r

'.

N

• ',

Prairie
-"""'

/

·• '
,

Dog

'

1 '"

Town o

, • , .,........... ,

Km

.r

.__,.
Red

Riv"

v'"

.. ~.

...... ~.__,.·-

I

"-. ,•

River

Forl<

,

•

River

-

-···

/

'"'\_ • , ,

,,,....··· , .. '-. ·~·.:~

,,,,,.·

1·:

Lal:.:e
1

...

Creek

r .. , ,,,,,,,-···~ . ' ~anadian
.._ "

River ',

C•~a~,, •

.. • :'

.,,,., • .. ,,,.-

River

"·-...

t.!J

~ _ r."\
~

...(

Inset

·:

,,•, -

r' '\

...

30

r I

·.

miles

FoIX:

..._/''

2!5

''../'

...
Red

Inset

--··-J··-~

I

--. '

i
Figure 3. Map of Middle Ceramic sites with avian faunal remains (numbers reference sites
in Table 6).

small perching or colorful birds (orioles, cardinals,
kingfishers, etc.; 15.6 percent), and one category
for unidentified bird remains (2.2 percent). In addition, fragmentary egg shells were recovered from
prehistoric contexts at the Two Sisters site, but no
attempts have been made to identify these egg shell
fragments (Duncan 2006).
The variety of waterfowl, shore birds, game
birds, and song/perching birds in the prehistoric
assemblages are most likely subsistence-related

game. But many ethnographic accounts of Plains
Indian groups noted that they avoided consuming
flesh-eating birds except in times of famine. The
importance of hawks, eagles, owls, crows, and jays
as well as some of the colorful feathers of many
perching birds may lie in their symbolic significance
if historic cosmological views can be extended back
into prehistoric times.
Many of the identifiable bird remains were
excavated from Canyon Country Club Cave, where

Table 6. Status of faunal and avian studies for Middle Ceramic period sites on the southern High Plains.
Site name or number

Map
Ref.

Site type

Approx.
area dug
J..mJ_

Dates dug

Faunal
study type

Bird
bones
_2!"esent?

Bird types
identified?

Excavation reference
;

Oklahoma Sites

1

McGrath (34TX-31)

Homestead

90

1972

2

Homestead

210.4

1972, 1973

Thorough

3

Two Sisters (34TX32)
Stamper (34TX-1)

Hamlet

662

1932-1934

Anecdotal

4

Roy Smith (34BV-14)

Hamlet

273.5

1965

Anecdotal

5

Odessa Yates (34BV100)

Hamlet

67

1998-2000

1,302.90

Texas Sites: Buried

Cit~

1985, 1986,
1987, 1988

Cursory

Few

No

81

1987, 1988

None

Few

114

1987, 1988

None

Few

1986-1988

None

Few

No

Courson B (41 OC27)

Homestead

142

7

Courson C (41C028)

Homestead

7

Courson D (41 OC29)

Hamlet
Homestead

124

55

578.8

Three Toe Site
(41RB110)
Whistling Squaw
(41RB108)
Jack Allen
Zollars Site

1907,
1917-1920,
1988
1985, 1987,
1988

Duffield 1970; Lintz 2003b
Duffield 1970; Lintz 2003b

I

Brosowske 2005

t"'<

;:·
~

L
i:s·
~

~
~

None

Hughes and Hughes-Jones
1987

Hughes and HughesJones 1987

No

Hughes 1991

None

No

Hughes 1991

None

Hughes 1991

None

2

Approximate Total Area Dug (m )-Buried City/ Wolf Creek Texas

;::::

:;:::

Eyerly 1907, 1912;
Moorehead 1931; Hughes
1991
Hughes 1991
I

Valle~

Indian Springs Site
(41RB81)
Hank Site (41RB109)

Lintz 1976
Duncan 2006

'<::

ThoroughNo
Brosowske 2005
big game
on!Y_
Approximate Total Area Dug (rri2) - Oklahoma Panhandle.

No

7

11
12

Yes

Few

62.8

10

Few (35)
Few(7)

Watson 1950; Lintz 2003a,
2003b, 2003c, 2004
Schneider 1969

None

Homestead

10

Yes

I

r

Courson A (410C26)

10

Lintz 1976
Duncan 2006

No

7

9

No
Yes

ND

Hamlet

Texas Sites: Canadian River

l

None

None

Buried City (410C1)

Kit Courson Ruins
J..410C431

I

Many
(101)
Few (5)

Com[!lex

6

8

Cursory

Faunal reference

~

Homestead

112

2002-2007

None

ND

No

Cruse 2007

Homestead

36

2000-2001

None

ND

No

Homestead

6

2003-2006

None

ND

No

Boyd and Wilkens 2001;
Boyd 2008
Boyd 2008

Homestead

8

2000, 2004

None

ND

No

Boyd 2008

Homestead
Subhomestead

11.2
34.8

1969-1970
1980

None
None

ND
ND

No
No

Lintz 1986; Harrison n.d.;
Smith and Smith 1982;
Smith 1989

I

~
~

;::::
....
t::l

None

;::::

l:l..

~
~

~

~

.§

~
~

;::::

s.
~

None
None
None
None
None
None

~

:;:::

s.
~

::i::

~·

;::-~

S'

;:·

"".......
0

\.>.)

,_.
0
I
I

Table 6. (Continued)

Holden 1929; Lintz 1997

Lintz 1997:65

c

ND

No

Keller 1975

None

None

No

Lintz 1986; Duffield 1970:

Duffield 1970:189

None

No

Lintz 1986; Duffield 1970:

Duffield 1970:211

Thorough

Many (66)

Yes

Duffield 1964; Lintz 1986

Duffield 1970:180

1961-62

Thorough

Few (1)

No

Duffield 1964; Lintz 1986

Duffield 1970:163

76

1957

Few(2)

No

Lintz 1986, nd .

I

Duffield 1970:201

50

1977-1978

Systematic
Cursory

No

No

Etchieson 1979

I

Etchieson 1979

28

1961-62

Thorough

None

No

Duffield 1964; Lintz 1986

Duffield 1970:181

45

1939

None

ND

No

Lintz 1986

None

Rare (1)

Yes

Lintz 1986

ND

No

Lowrey 1932; Lintz 1986

None

Selective
intense
Thorough

Few (1)

Yes

Duffield 1970:127

None

No

Cursory

Hamlet

180

1973

None

Subhomestead
Hamlet

26

1958

80

1953

Systematic
Systemat

Homestead

81

1961-62

Homestead

113

Subhomestead
Campsite
Subhomestead
Hamlet

17

Sanford Ruin (41HC3)

18

Spring Canyon
(41HC20)
Medford Ranch
(41HC10)
Roper (41HC6)

21

No

1920, 1958

16

20

Few (1?)

33.5

Cottonwood Creek
Ruin (41HC141)
Black Dog Village
(41HC30)
Pickett

20

~
;:::-

Hamlet

14

20

None

1929

Tarbox Ruin (41 HC2)

19

Holden 1929; Lintz 1986

56.2

13

15

No

Hamlet

Faunal
study
t e
None

Site type

mz

South Ridge Site
(West end)
Conner Site (41HC7)

Bird
bones
resent?
ND

Bird types
identified?

22

Unknown

340

1939

Thorough

Lookout Ruin

Hamlet

5.6

1931

None

23

Antelope Creek 22
(41HC23)
Antelope Creek 22A

Hamlet

1,135.00
229

1920, 193032, 1938
1939

Hamlet

62+?

1969

Cursory

Maybe

No

Homestead?

102

1969

Cursory

Maybe

No

Hamlet

102

1969

Cursory

Maybe

No

25

Big Blue Ruins
LMRA-145 (41M035)
Big Blue Ruins
LMRA-146 (41M036)
Big Blue Ruins
LMRA-147 (41M037)
Site 41M07

Homestead

109

1963

None

ND

No

Baker and Baker 2000; Lintz
1986
Baker and Baker 2000; Lintz
1986
Couzzourt and SchmidtCouzzourt 1996:74
Couzzourt and SchmidtCouzzourt 1996:57
Couzzourt and SchmidtCouzzourt 1996:37
Green 1967, 1986

26

Turkey Creek (41PT8)

Subhomestead
Hamlet

44

1963

None

ND

No

Green 1967, 1986

318

1940

None

ND

No

Lintz 1986

Hamlet

225

1940

None

ND

No

Lintz 1986

24
24

27

Alibates Ruin 28A

28

Alibates Ruin 30
(41PT31)

(':>

Q'

Homestead

~·

....
V:i
....c
~

(":>

22

24

"';:i..
~

Antelope Creek 23
(41HC25)
Antelope Creek 24

23

~

Faunal reference

Dates dug

Site name or number

""""
~

Excavation reference

Approx.
area dug

Map
Ref.

I

I

I
I

Duffield 1970:147

Duffield 1970:139
Couzzourt
Couzzourt
Couzzourt
Couzzourt
Couzzourt
Couzzourt
None
None
None
None

t

and Schmidt1996
and Schmidt1996
and Schmidt1996

(':>

~

Table 6. (Continued)
Map
Ref.

Site name or number

Site type

Approx.
area dug

Alibates Ruin 28
(41PT11)

Hamlet

5,625.00

30

Coetas Ruins (# 55)

Hamlet

225

31

Footprint (41PT25)

Hamlet

115

32

Chicken Creek

48

33

41PT109(1stseason)

Subhomestead
Homestead

Dates dug

Faunal
study type

1932,
19381941
19321934
1964

Selective
intense

19821983
2003

lm'l_
29

11

34

Marsh

Homestead

42.5

35

Chimney Rock Ruins
51
Chimney Rock Ruins
51A
Saddleback Mesa
(410L1)
Landergin Mesa
(410L2)
Arrowhead Peak
(41HC19)

Hamlet

35
36
37
38

Bird
bones
present?
Many (34)

Bird types
identified?
Yes

Excavation reference

Faunal reference

Baker and Baker 2000; Lintz
1986

Duffield 1970: 100-102

None

ND

No

Studer 1934; Lintz 1986

None

None

ND

No

Green 1967, 1986

None

None

ND

No

Schmidt-Couzzourt 1983

None

Many (71)

Yes

Weinstein 2005

Thorough

I

c~

None

';::""

ND

No

Lintz 1986

533.4

None

ND

No

Lintz 1986

None

(<:>

Hamlet

41

1941

None

ND

No

Lintz 1986

None

$:)

Hamlet

537.5

None

ND

No

88.5

Many (11)

Yes

Holden 1930, Haynes 1932;
Wan 1986
Lintz 1990, 2001

None

Hamlet
Hamlet

140

19301933
1981,
1984
1963

ND

No

Green 1967, 1986

None

Thorough
None

DeMarcay 1986

ND= no data; NA= not available

~

;:
;:::
....

;:::

~

~

(<:>

~

~

-§

Cave

40.5

Various Caves and Rock Shelters {Multi-com~onent}
40 41HF86 and 41HF124
Caves
NA
Kenton Caves,
34Cl50 and 6 other
shelters

'"<:

§"

None

40.5

41

i

Meissner 2005

Approximate Total Area Dug

(m')-- Canadian

~

c

River, Texas

;:::

Texas-- Red River/Palo Duro Creek
Canyon Country Club
Cave

~

19671968
1941

10,993.20
39

~

;;·

Caves

ND

1956

Thorough

Many (21)

Approximate Total Area Dug (m
1991

Thorough

19291934

None

2
)--

Yes

Hughes n.d.; Duffield 1970:
Duffield 1970:Appendix
A_m>_endix D
D
Palo Duro Creek/ Prairie Dog Town Fork of Red River, Texas

No

No

Quigg et al. 1993

Quigg et al. 1993.

Unknown

No

Renaud 1930; Lintz and
Zabawa 1984; Lintz 1981

None

s.
(<:>

~

;::

s.
~

~

;::s-o

~
~·

$:)

......

0

Ul

106

Texas Archeological Society

Table 7. Avian species, live weights, and home ranges of birds from Middle Ceramic sites on the southern
High Plains (after Shackelford and Lockwood 2000; Bryan et. al. 2003).
ai
>
0
E

c:-

.9
Scientific Names
(after Alsop 2002)
Common Name
Aguatic Birds & Waterfowl {Order Anseriformes}
(Order Anseriformes)
1
Unspecified Waterfowl
Geese and Swans {Order Anseriformes)
Anser albifrons
2
Greater White-fronted
goose
Branta canadensis
3
Canada Goose
Cygnus buccinator
4
Trumpeter swan (?)
Olar colmbianus
5
Tundra swan
**
Ducks (Order Anseriformes)
Anas strepera
6
Gadwall

*

7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Shore and

American Widgeon
Mallard
Blue winged Teal
Green-winged Teal
Northern Pintail
Northern Shoveler
Canvasback
Redhead
Ring-neck
Bufflehead
Hooded Merganser
Ruddy
Wading Birds

Anas americana
Anas platyrhynchos
Anas discors
Anas crecca
Anas acuta americana
Anas clypeata
Aythya valisineria
Aythya Americana
Aythya collaris
Bucephala albeola
Lophodytes cucullatus
Oxyura jamaicensis

Shore Birds (Order Charadriiformes)
Numenius americanus
Long-billed Curlew
Wilson's Snipe
Gallinago delicate
Scolopax minor
American Woodcock
Rails and Coots {Order Gruiformes)
Fulica Americana
22
American Coot
Small Game Birds
19
20
21

23
24
25

26

Chicken-like birds--Grouse Quail
Unid. Chicken-like bird
Northern Bobwhite
Sharp-tailed Grouse
**

(Order Galliformes)
(Order Galliformes)
Colinus virginianus
Typanuchus
phasianellus
Pigeons and Doves (Order Columbiformes)
Zenaidura macroura
Mourning Dove

Ra[!tors and Ra[!tor-like Birds
Hawkes, Eagles, Os12rey (Order Falconiformes)
(Family Accipitridae)
Unspec. hawks, eagles ,
27
etc.
28
Halaieetus
Bald Eagle
leucocephalus
Buteo jamaicensis
29
Red-tailed Hawk

*

30

*

American Kestrel

Falco sparverius

Live
ozs .

Weight
grams

~

.!2'

::;;;

96.0

2721 .6

Yes

134.4
401.6
n.d .

3810.2
11385.4
n.d.

Yes
Yes
Unk.

c

Cl

"O

'O

Q)

·u;
Q)

0::

c:

Q)

~

en

c:

'O
Q)

~

en
~

"'

0::

Q)

~

~

0.
(/)

~

2

ro

'-'

0.

"O

Cl

ro

·c.

e
f-

Cl

"'Qj

E
Q)
f-

Q)

c

Q)

·c:;
'-'
<!

x
x

997.9

Yes

771.1
1088.6
408.2
362.9
1043.3
1270.1
1270.1
1179.4
725.8
453.6
680.4
589.7

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

8.9
4.5
6.2

252.3
127.6
175.8

Yes
Yes
Yes

x

25.6

725.8

Yes

x

n.d.
6.3
33.6

n.d .
178.6
952.6

Yes
No
No
No

4.3

121.9

Some

n.d.

n.d.

Yes
Yes

145.6

4127 .8

Yes

X?

36 .8
3.9

1043.3
110.6

Yes
Yes

x
x

x
x

x
x
x

x

x

x

1451.5

Yes
Yes

32
33

Owls {Order Strigiformes)
Great Horned Owl
Short-eared owl

Bubo virginianus
Asio fiammeus

48.0
11.1

1360.8
314.7

No
Some

Athene cunicularia

5.3

150.3

Some

Burrowing Owl

·u; E>
&! E

Q)

0.
(/)

Cl

,,,
·c:;

35.2

51 .2

34

a3
E
Q)

·c:;

c

~

c

27.2
38.4
14.4
12.8
36 .8
22.4
44.8
41.6
25.6
16.0
24.0
20.8

Vultures, Herons & Storks (Order Ciconiiformes)
Cathartes aura
Turkey Vulture

*
*

c
°'

"O

0

~

Q)

Yes

31

*

~~

,,,

x
x

x

x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x

x

x
x

x

x
x

x
x

x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x
x
x

x
x

x
x

x

x

x

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 107
Table 7. (Continued)
ai
>
a
E

£".'

.8
Scientific Names
Common Name
_{_after Als~ 200~
Nighthawks (Order Ca12rimulgiformes)
35
Common Nighthawk
Chordeiles minor
Crows, Ravens, and Jays (Family Corvidae).
36
Unidentified Crow
Corvus (sp)
37
Chihuahuan Raven
Corvus cryptoleucus
Perching, Song and Colorful Birds
38
Uns12ecified Perching Bird (Order Passerifromes)
Kingfisher (Order Coraciiformes)
Belted Kingfisher
Ceryle alcyon
39
Wood12eckers, Flickers, Sa12suckers (Order Piciformes)
40
Unidentified Woodpecker
(Order Piciformes)
Thrushes and Robins (Family Turdidae)
41
American Robin
Turdus migratorius

*

~

Live
ozs.

Weight
_9!'ams

~

2.2

62.4

Yes

n.d.
19.2

n.d.
544.3

No
No

n.d.

n.d.

5.2

147.4

n.d.

n.d.

Unk.

2.7

76.5

Mockingbirds Thrashers (Family Minidae)
Brown Thrasher
Toxostoma rufum
2.4
Cardinals, Grosbecks, Buntings (Family Cardinalidae)
43
Northern Cardinal
Cardinalis cardinalis
1.6
Meadowlarks, Blackbirds, Orioles (Family lcteridae)
44
Baltimore Oriole (more
lcterus galbula (more
1.2
likely Bullock's Oriole)
likely lcterus bullockii)
Unidentified Bird Grou12 (Aves)
45
Unidentified Bird
(Aves)
n.d.
Bird remains are not from Middle Ceramic period contexts.
Birds not presently found in Texas
n.d.=no data; Unk.=Unknown

42

*

Duffield (1970:Appendix D) recognized 135 bone
elements from 25 varieties of birds. Problems exist in using Duffield's temporal context of avian
and other faunal remains from this site. Most bird
remains (n=84; 62.2 percent) were from Stratum 4,
which Duffield erroneously attributed to the Middle
Ceramic period component. A series of radiocarbon
dates obtained after Duffield completed his study
demonstrated that the cave was used from the Archaic through historic periods and only Strata 2 and
3 have Middle Ceramic and Transitional Early to
Middle Ceramic period affiliations, respectively (Table 8; Hughes n.d.:40; Bender et al. 1971:477-478).
Less than 16.3 percent (n=22) of the bird elements
from Canyon Country Club Cave are from these
strata (Table 9). The radiocarbon dates indicate that
the rich Stratum 4 assemblage predates the Middle
Ceramic period materials.
When the avian remains from Stratum 4 and
other non-Middle Ceramic period zones from Canyon
Country Club Cave are removed from consideration,
the diversity of birds from all sites drops from 45 to
38 varieties. The seven kinds of birds removed from
the bird list consist of Gadwall and burrowing owls
found in both Archaic and Early Ceramic period de-

Cl

~-

c ai

°' E
32
Q)
U) >
°'a

er:: E

a
~

c

Q)

-0

·u;
Q)
er::

U)

Q)

·0
Q)
a.
Cf)

Cl

c

15
Q)
Q)

cO

Cl

c

15
Q)
Q)

cO
~

er::"'

x
x

c

~

Cl

~
c;;

(.)

·o_

e
f-

c

~

Cl

~
2

~

Q)

U)

Q)

·0
Q)
a.
Cf)

]§
c

Q)

a.
E

·0

Q)

(.)

f-

-0:

-0

x

x

Unk.

x

x

x

Yes

x

x

x

68.0

Yes

x

x

45.4

No

x

x

34.0

Yes

n.d.

Unk.

SM

x

x

posits (Strata 5 and 4, respectively); short-eared owl
and bald eagle from Early Ceramic period deposits
(Stratum 4); American Kestrel and turkey vulture
from both Early Ceramic and Late Ceramic period deposits (Strata 4 and 1), and American robin from the
historic "trash level" (Duffield 1970:Appendix D).
The distribution of the 38 identified kinds of
avian remains from Middle Ceramic period sites
with the greatest abundance and diversity of bird
remains is presented in Table 10. The six intensively studied fauna! assemblages with identified
bird remains are from Alibates Ruin 28, Spring
Canyon, Canyon Country Club Cave, Landergin
Mesa, 41PT109, and Two Sisters (Duffield 1970;
DeMarcay 1986; Duncan 2006; Meissner 2005). I
have also included the specialized avian identifications from the Stamper and Roy Smith sites even
though the overall fauna! identifications are not as
rigorous as the bone studies from the other sites
(Lintz 2003c; Duffield 1970:246). Duffield (1970)
recognized sparse bird remains at four other sites.
Antelope Creek Ruin 22 had a single great-homed
owl bone, and the same species is at Alibates Ruin
28. The bird remains from Antelope Creek 24 Ruin
(n=l), Medford Ranch site (n=l), and the Roper

Table 8. Radiocarbon dates from Canyon Country Club Cave, Site A251, Randall County, Texas.

>--'

0

00

LevelStratum

P-PHM
Cata log No

Radiocarbon
Lab No .

Uncorrected
Age B.P.

Uncalibrated
Age

One SD Tree Ring
Calibration Age
B.P.

Probability

Late Ceramic_JJ_erio((Protohistoric)_
183
1
N1/W1

WIS 411

300 .±. 50

A.D. 1650

434-352

0.714

333-298
N2/NS

WIS 410

400 .±. 60

A.D. 1550

512-430
362-326

1

Unit

312

Middle Ceramic period JLate Prehistoric)_
196
2
N1/W1
2

N1/NS

53

EW/N1

Early Ceramic_e_eriod
A25/w
4
4

4

N2/W1

EW/W1

Late Archaic period
5
N2/E1

5

5

N1/W1

EW/W1

306

482-282

0.9 83

0.286

168-155

0.017

0.735

524-416

0.600

0.265

413-313

0.400

0.491

0.497
0.503

Charcoal

Comments

~

~

Charcoal

;i..

Charcoal

c

1=;•

660-633
597-562

0.509

682-616
614-549

WIS 421

700 .±. 60

A.D. 1250

687-635
596-563

0.645
0.355

730-618
611-552

0.660
0.340

Charcoal

620 .±. 45

A.D . 1330*

649-621

0.400
0.393

658-543

1.000

Charcoal
Date near

A.D. 690*

606-579
571-555
1266-1168

1287- 1063

1.000

1260 .±. 55

394

WIS 394

Modern*

WIS 4 14

1250 .±. 60

WIS 404

1650,±_55

0.207
0.799

1159-1137
1107-1093

0.130
0.070

1261-1168
1160-1126
1108-1091

0.682

1289-1055

0.985

0.210
0.108

1026-101 3

0.015

1688-1673
1613-1510
1499-1485
1432-1422

0.073
0.793
0.067
0.051

1693-1648
1632-1412

0.886

Level 2 Grol£_
Charcoal
Date near
Level 4 Grol£_
Bison Bone

A.D . 680

A.D . 300

0.114

Charcoal

Charcoal

WIS 41 2

1050 .±. 50

A.D . 900*

1049-1032
990-926

0.169
0.831

1064-906
861-829
811-794

0.94 1
0.036
0.023

Charcoal
Date near
Level 2-3

231

WIS 420

2100 .±. 60

150 B.C.

2148-2135

3057-3051

0.027

2304-2238
2181-2165
2163-1924
3138-3128

0.101
0.021
0.867
0.013

Charcoal

2133- 1992

0.066
0.929

3020-3012
3001-2850

0.030
0.943

3104-3091
3079-2782

0.014
0.968

WIS 430

28 30 .±. 60

* Date rejected by Jack Hughes (n .d.) as being erroneous

Gro~

880 B.C.

Tree ring calibrations use Stuiver and Reimer (2000): Calib.rev 4.3

l:l
....

V:i

440

311

0:.

~

A.D. 1280

WIS402

g.
Q'

670 .±. 50

395

309

Probability

WIS 403

Transitional or Mixed Early_ to Middle Ceramic_JJ_eriod
217
WIS 408
3
N1/W1

3

Two SD Tree Ring
Calibration Age
B.P.

Charcoal

c(">

$

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 109
Table 9. Avian fauna identified from Canyon Country Club Cave (Duffield 1970: Appendix D).
()

·ae ;a"
~

·a....
()

a
a

Common Name
Aguatic Birds & Waterfowl

()

ae

NU

-

a :g
"' ·-~
ti

"'"'
"'·.... :r:

Eu
a"
"' "'
-.... ..-l

NISP

NISP

~u
·c
..c:: .8
r/J

Strata and
Period

~

f-<~

Geese and Swans
Unidentified Geese and
Swans
Ducks
Gadwall
American Widgeon
Mallard
Blue winged Teal
Green-winged Teal
Northern Pintail
Northern Shoveler
Canvasback
Redhead
Ring-neck
Ruddy

cri~

"'
"

a~

cri~

NISP

u";...~·-"""
-;::: 0
"'
~~"'

-

;!..,

-.:::~

"'()
~ ·-

o;

r:rif-<U

":;i
u
a.-::::
a ~ :o"
"' "' """
~~2

NISP

NISP

"'"~
N
.g .~

.s~ ·-e~ "'a~

~

·a....
()

§

"'.9

"'

a"'..c::a

'<t"

.,.,~

cri~

cri~

au
a .Q
"'.... ...."'
-~

NISP

-"'
ti

()

--<....

NISP

"'

~?

~ 5
"""".;,:"

4
I

I

I

I

2
l

2
I

2

I

23
I
I
2
2
6
I
3

I

I
2
3

2

3

2

0

f-<

NISP

4
1

2
I
1

I
I

o;

"

-~
~2
NISP

30
2
2
2
6
8
I
6
1
2
2
6

Small Game Birds
Pigeons and Doves
Mourning Dove

I

Shore Birds
American Woodcock

I

2

I

I

Rails and Coots
American Coot

3

I

9

I

5

Predators and Ral!tors
Hawks, Eagles, Os11rey
Bald Eagle
American Kestrel

I

I

I
4

I
6

Vultures, Herons, Storks
Turkey Vulture

I

2

9

12

Owls
Great Homed Owl
Short-eared Owl
Burrowing Owl

2

8
I
13

Crows, Ravens, and Jays
Unidentified Crow or Raven
Perching, Song, Colorful Birds
Mockingbirds, Thrashers
Brown Thrasher
Thrushes and Robins
American Robin

I

I

I

10
I
14
2

I

I

I

I

Unidentified Bird Groul!
Unidentified Bird
II

5

3

8

II

84

4

9

135

Percent NISP

4.18

9.62

3.75

2.42

3.59

2.75

1.79

5.33

3.01

Total Fauna NISP

263

52

80

330

306

3,056

224

169

4,480

Total bird elements (NISP)

110

Texas Archeological Society

Table 10. Diversity of bird remains identified from Middle Ceramic period sites.
Oklahoma Sites

Texas Sites

c
"'
""'"'

-"
::>

0

2

Uj

1'

*

Uj
0

Common Name
Aguatic Birds and
Waterfowl
1

~

cO
0
0

N

2

Uj

:;;

0
0
N

"'::>g

0

A*

B

Unspecified Waterfowl

a.

E
J1l

(/)

"'Nc:

2

-"
<")

c:

~

!:l
c:
:::;

A

B

1(b)

1

Uj

"'·~
,.,
(/)

0

0:

A

3

Canada Goose
Trumpeter swan (?)
Tundra (Whistling)
swan

5

1(b)
1(b)

1

1(b)

1

~
0
,.._

,.,c:c:
""'

"'

0

0,.._

"'
""'c:

::;;

g;j
~

oc?
('.-N_
EN

~

!:l
c:
:::;

2"'

a;

£!

!E
::>
0

"§.

<(

(/)

!E
::>
0

"'"c:
"'

,.,
le
"' "'
::;;
"' o._>=
0"
-"-

B

A

B

A

B

A

B

A

B

1

1

1

1

6

nd

-"
<")
0
0
N

Geese and Swans
Greater White-fronted
goose
2

4

;::

0

1

~

"'

"'
~

"'

Cl

c:

~

"'a;

·~

__J

American Widgeon

7

Mallard

0

8

Blue winged Teal

g_ ai

1(b)

1

1(b)

1

"'

B

Total
NISP

A

9

1

1

1

1

2

1

1

2

1

1

1

1

11

Northern Shoveler

2

1

Canvasback

3

1

2

2

13

Redhead

6

2

1

1

14

Ring-neck

1

1

15

Bufflehead

2

1

16

Hooded Merganser

1

1

nd

3

17

Ruddy

4

nd

2

nd

5
3

2

3

nd

5

1

1

8

5
1

2
1(a)

2

1

3

Small Game Birds
Chicken-like birds--Grouse,
Quail
Unidentified Chickenlike bird
18
Sharp-tailed Grouse

A

~~
::> a.

0 <(

1

12

20

C"")

C:><:>
"'"'
c:
()
()

0
><

:.0

1

Green-winged Teal

Northern Bobwhite

'O

1

Northern Pintail

19

c:<IJ

1

10

9

~

3
1

b;

o-

Ducks
6

0

::>"'

u.§

1
1

1

1

1

1

1

nd

3

2
1

1

1

Pigeons and Doves
21

2

Mourning Dove

nd

2

Shore Birds
22

Long-billed Curlew

1

1

23

Wilson's Snipe

1

1

24

American Woodcock

1
1
1

1

1

1

1

1

Rails and Coots
25

American Coot

Predators and Ragtors
Hawks, Eagles, Osi;:irey
Unspecif. hawks,
26
falcons etc.
27

Red-tailed Hawk

1(a)

2

1

1

1

1i!?l

1

1

1

1

2
4

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 111
Table 10. (Continued)
Oklahoma Sites

Texas Sites

'2

.c

0

:::>

</)

2
Ui
!!?

E
<D
0
0

2
Ui

Ui

g

a.

*

"'c

0

~

Common Name
Owls
28

Unidentified

29

Great Horned

A

:::>

0

B

~

<X>

.c

8"'

Q;

"'!>c

E
.'11

:::;

en

A

B

2
Ui
£

.c

E

en

>-

0

8"'

"'!>c
:::;

Q'.

A

B

;::

0

"'

....0

c
·5

~

Q'.
</)

"iEa;

c

0
S;

0

c>-

"'
u

c

"
iE

0

en

0

A

B

A

B

1

1

2

"'
<

'9

:::>

a;

O>

·g_

:::>

ill"'

::;;
c

~
~
>-

""'
"§
</)

"'
0
0

$

"'Q;

·e
"-'"c
"'

::;;
0

"'
"

"'
;::
0..
;;:

A

B

A

B

1

1

e"'

0

c

l:l

·;;;

::;;

CJ ci
<'.'"'.
1:'"'
:::>"'
o-

(.)

c

0
x

~

en

'O

g, a)M

c

c >"
"'"' c
uu"'

A

<(

"a.a.

Total
NISP

B

A

1
1

Nighthawks
30

Common Nighthawk

3

1

Crows, Ravens, and Ja:ts
Unidentified Crow or
Raven
31
Perching, Song, and
Colorful Birds

3

1(a)

1

4

1

1
8

2

23

Kingfisher
32

Belted Kingfisher

1

1

1

WoodQeckers, Flickers, etc.
Unidentified
Woodpecker
33
Perching Birds
Unspecified Perching
Bird
34

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

Mockingbirds, Thrashers
Brown Thrasher
Cardinals, Grosbecks,
Buntings

1

35

Northern Cardinal
Meadowlarks, Blackbirds,
Orioles
Baltimore or Bullock's
Oriole
37
36

Unidentified Bird
38

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

76

nd

Grou~

Unidentified Bird
Total bird elements
(NISP)
Percent NISP Target
Sample
Identifiable NISP
Sample
Identifiable NISP Site
Assemblage
Total Analytical NISP
Sample
Total Site NISP
Assembl~e

nd

nd

nd

nd

17

13

46

nd

7

9

62 nd

nd

nd

101

5

5

34

66

11

71

21

0.88

nd

nd

0.66

0.58

0.01

2.16

0.03

11 ,534

nd

nd

3,772

1,353

Nd

796

nd

22,965

nd

nd

3,772

1,353

Nd
121 ,912

796

nd

11,534

nd

nd

nd

nd

3,285

716

121 ,912
89,048

nd

nd

(a) Lintz (2003b)
(b) Duffield (1970)

5,152

11 ,376

3,285
nd
*A/NISP= Number of
Individual Specimens
B/MNI= Minimum Number of
Individuals

210
316

112

Texas A rcheological Society

site (n=2) are all elements from unidentified bird
species. Bird remains were not reported from faunal
assemblages at five other sites: Conner, Pickett, Sanford, Antelope Creek Ruin 22A, and the McGrath
site (Duffield 1970; Lintz 1976).
Three of the eight sites with identified birds
occur along the North Canadian or Beaver River
in the Oklahoma Panhandle. The Two Sisters and
Stamper sites are within a few kilometers of each
other in the middle of Texas County, while Roy
Smith is located along Sharps's Creek in western
Beaver County. Four of the eight sites occur along
the Canadian River in the Texas Panhandle; from
east to west, they consist of the Spring Canyon site
in southwestern Hutchinson County, Alibates Ruin
28 and 41PT109 in Potter County, and Landergin
Mesa in eastern Oldham County. Canyon Country
Club Cave is located along the Prairie Dog Town
Fork of the Red River in Randall County, Texas.
The following trends in avifaunal distribution
are tentatively identified among these sites, as reflected by the current study samples:
1. Geese and swans are present among the site assemblages in the Oklahoma Panhandle; they are
only found atAlibates Ruin 28 among the Canadian River sites, but not in the Middle Ceramic
period strata at Canyon Country Club Cave;
2. A great variety of ducks are associated with
the Oklahoma Panhandle sites, Alibates Ruin
28, and the Canyon County Club Cave assemblages, but they are not identified at other sites
along the Canadian River;
3. Small game birds were not found among the
Oklahoma Panhandle site assemblages, but
they were present at all Texas Panhandle sites
except Spring Canyon;
4. Surprisingly, turkey remains have not been
documented among any of the Middle Ceramic
period site assemblages in the Oklahoma or
Texas Panhandle. The reasons for their absence
are unknown, but very intriguing due to the
potential meat returns from hunting this bird;
5. Shore birds are present in the Two Sisters site
and Canyon Country Club Cave faunal assemblages, but not in bone assemblages from sites
along the Canadian River;
6. Predators and raptors are present in all sites
with identifiable birds along the Beaver and

Canadian rivers, but are not at the Canyon
Country Club Cave along the Prairie Dog Town
Fork of the Red River. If caves were nesting
sites for raptors, then apparently few died inside the shelter; and
7. perching and colorful bird remains are present
in small numbers at a few sites in all three river
basins.
Upon considering the physiography and hydrology of the three river drainages, both the North Canadian/Beaver River and the Prairie Dog Town Fork
of the Red River contrast with the Canadian by having few short lateral tributaries and narrow incised
channels. Playa lakes are found much closer to the
floodplains of these two rivers than they are to the
Canadian, where lateral drainages create a rolling
topography within a broad river valley. In addition,
whereas the Canadian River in Texas drains the eastern slopes of the southern Rocky Mountains, neither
the North Canadian/Beaver River nor the Prairie
Dog Town Fork of the Red River taps the snowmelt from these mountains. If the scarcity of ducks
and shore birds at sites along the Canadian River is
a valid pattern, then it would seem that most duck
procurement methods focused on playas rather than
major river systems. The single exception is Alibates
Ruin 28, which has evidence of duck procurement.
However, this major village site had a substantially
larger population and greater time-depth relative to
other sites along the Canadian River, as well as more
expansive excavations. Perhaps the larger population needed larger hunting catchments, including
the upland playa resources, than the people living
in smaller or less permanent communities in the
Canadian River drainage.
In contrast, the frequent occurrence of small
game bird remains from sites along the Canadian
River may also be related to habitat differences. The
rolling topography of the Canadian River and its numerous short lateral tributaries could have provided
more wooded habitats than the narrow canyons of
the other two rivers.
Due to the few detailed faunal studies, interpretations of bird procurement patterns by Middle
Ceramic period people are tentative. The complete
absence of turkey remains in the reported archeological assemblages is surprising since they are
one of the meatier avian animals indigenous to
the area. The live weight of adult turkeys averages
16.3 lb. (Alsop 2002:265). In the Southwestern
Casas Grandes and the northern Arizona Puebloan

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 113

regions, turkeys were domesticated and raised for
meat; their feathers were also important in various
Kachina apparel (McKusick 1986). However, these
birds apparently had no such valued role to play in
the High Plains region, although turkey remains are
fairly ubiquitous in Washita River and Paoli phase
sites of the Middle Ceramic period in central and
western Oklahoma (Drass 1997:126-129). The size
differences between waterfowl and perching birds
indicate that birds may have been gathered for a
variety of uses. Overall, prehistoric bird use may be
largely invisible in the archeological record due to
poor preservation conditions at open sites as well
as the poor recovery of smaller remains and limited
in-depth faunal analyses. The diversity of birds and
their preferred habitats suggests that a range of procurement methods were likely used.

BIRD PROCUREMENT: A
SUMMARY OF POSSIBLE PASSIVE
AND ACTIVE STRATEGIES
Few archeological studies of prehistoric bird procurement patterns have been conducted and tangible
evidence for such activities has not been rigorously
sought or recognized. Birds were captured by a range
of passive and active methods. The subsequent discussion offers ways to archeologically detect some of
these prehistoric avian procurement methods.

Passive Bird Procurement Strategies
Passive methods utilized snares, traps, deadfalls,
and nets, which were set and periodically checked
for game. Simple loop snares were placed at gaps
in low brush fences about 1 m tall and barriers built
near trails, feeding areas, or springs (Barrett and Gifford 1933; Shaffer et al. 1996). These snares were
effective for quail, grouse, and other ambulatory
chicken-like ground birds, and possibly some types
of ducks (Figure 4). A common type of bird snare
involved a pair of crossed sticks positioned to open
a cordage loop tied with a simple slip knot. One end
of the cord was tied to a peg or twig to ensure that
the bird and snare stayed put. As the bird passed
through the barrier, it tripped the supporting sticks
and the noose tightened around the prey's body or
neck as it struggled to escape.
The "spring-pole noose snare" relied upon the
tension of a bent branch for energy to quickly close
when the trigger was touched. Typically four or

more pegs ensured proper tension to barely hold
open a slip noose that was fixed on the ground.
These snares were placed along runs for quail and
prairie chickens and on open ground for flickers and
other feeding birds (Speck et al. 1946:6). The trigger
mechanism was sometimes baited so that a slight
bump on the trigger released the spring noose snare
from the ground pegs. Some groups in the Great
Basin placed the spring snare noose in a shallow
pit to restrict access to the bait and prevent lateral
escape options (Fowler 1989:59).
The Navajo developed a combination of the
loop snare and spring pole snare for use in com
fields (Franciscan Fathers 1983:323). The main element was a sunflower stalk about 1 m long with a
sharpened base driven into the ground. They would
remove the pithy center of the upper part of the
stalk, and polish the upper cut rim with a stone to
smooth out burrs and rough spots. Small holes were
cut about 7 cm and 50 cm below the top of the stalk.
In the lower hole they inserted a greasewood twig
approximately 15 to 20 cm long and bent it to serve
as a tension spring device. Next, from long strands
of hair, they made a very small loop on one end
and tied a small cross twig just below the loop. The
unlooped end of the hair was passed down the pithy
center, through the upper hole, and tied to the end
of the bent twig. The tension of the bent twig kept
the hair noose open. The small loop and cross twig
were supported by a reed placed across the top of the
polished upper end of the stalk. Birds foraging in the
garden were snared by the extended loop when the
bird bumped the stalk, displacing the upper reed and
loop. The tension of the twig pulled the hair thread
tight against the side of the sunflower stalk, but the
small cross stick kept the hair loop from passing
through the upper hole.
In contrast to snares, a wide range of traps may
have been used to capture one or more birds at a
time. These traps were activated by either bait or
bump mechanisms (Speck et al. 1946). A cage-fall
bird trap used a basket or tied cribbed stick container
propped open by "figure 4" trigger-support sticks.
When the birds pulled on the bait or bumped the
trigger, the support sticks collapsed and the basket
or crib structure fell over the bird.
Another passive method involved the use of
"mash traps" or deadfalls, where heavy logs or
large rock were barely supported with a trigger
mechanism consisting of sticks or rock cylinders
balanced on other rocks or on the hard ground.
Deadfalls were most commonly used for killing

114

Texas Archeological Society

b

Figure 4. Bird Snares and traps: a, Navajo sunflower-stalk snare; b, Spring-pole noose snare;
c, Loop snare and its use with brush fence ; d, Cribbed stick trap with detail of "4-trigger"
mechanism; e, Arch net traps placed along bird runs.

small mammals, but occasionally they were used
to obtain small birds (Speck et al. 1946:6). Some
deadfalls had string trigger mechanisms tied to bait,
and others simply had pressure points that collapsed
when bumped. Other forms had cords tied to the
support element that were manually tripped when
the bird entered the deadfall (Figure 5). When larger
birds such as a turkey, swan, or duck bumped the
trigger stick or rock support, the deadfall elements
killed or pinned the bird.

Grain-feeding birds were drawn to snares, traps,
and deadfalls by sprinkling com or seed in lines
radiating out from the device, and often a pile of
food was placed inside the device to entice birds
to enter. Other kinds of baits included the use of
acorns or strips of meat. Passive devices were efficient, since one hunter could set scores of traps
that were easily checked and maintained on a daily
basis. Minimal hunting skills were needed and birds
could be captured by relatively young children.

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 115

~
.. .:-t ·.

.

. .

'

~

Figure 5. Bird deadfalls and gravity traps. Variations of trigger mechanisms used with
rock and log dead falls. Note: "b" refers to location of bait.

Passive hunting devices along trap lines required
daily monitoring and removal of prey, otherwise the
game was lost to coyotes, foxes, raccoons, skunks, or
raptors. In rare occasions, dry caves have preserved
evidence of snares or trigger mechanisms (Setzler
1935; Lambert and Ambler 1965:36). In contrast,
all evidence of their existence quickly disintegrated
in open air settings.
Active Bird Procurement Strategies

Active hunting strategies required human participation in acquiring prey. Birds were more easily
obtained on the ground, in water, or perched in trees
than when they were in flight.
The simplest active procurement method
involved gathering eggs and fledging birds from

ground nests as an embedded resource collection
with other hunting or gathering activities. Unless the
activities occurred in established nesting grounds,
such as those maintained by some waterfowl, nest
discoveries were probably serendipitous, isolated
events. Children and other family members needed
no specialized equipment to climb trees and rocky
outcrops to harvest immature birds from nesting and
roosting sites.
Hunters sometimes disguised themselves with
an imitation duck cap or tule reed cap and slipped
into the lake from concealed blinds or reeds around
the edge of playas. They slowly swam to the
waterfowl quarry and pulled the birds underwater
by their feet without means of other specialized
equipment (Fowler 1986:87). Another version used
cane breathing tubes to approach the birds from

116

Texas Archeological Society

underwater. Such hunting tactics had to be carefully
conducted to keep cautious ducks from startling
the whole flock. If such tactics were ever used at
playa lakes, then they probably occurred during the
summer or fall when hypothermia would not affect
the submerged swimmers.
Some duck hunters may have used bison or
deer hide disguises to approach flocks of waterfowl
without raising undue alarm. Deer skins were used
as disguises for hunting sage hens with bows and
arrows in the Great Basin (Fowler 1989:58). Also,
bird mimic decoys could have been made by stretching a duck skin over a tule, wood, or reed preform
to entice flying waterfowl flocks to land near hunting blinds around playas or streams. Even though
duck decoys are not known from the Plains region,
historic and prehistoric examples have been found
around lakes in the Great Basin (Fowler 1986:85,
1989:54; Loud and Harrington 1929).
Sometimes birds were killed simply by thrown
stones or wood. A good throwing arm should never
be underestimated as an effective method for killing
ground and perching birds. Cobbles from the Ogallala gravels or wood from creek bottoms provided
an endless supply of objects that needed no fabrication, maintenance time, or energy investments. It is
equally possible that c.urved throwing sticks (usually
called "rabbit clubs") were useful implements for
knocking fledgling birds off perches, or dispatching
flightless waterfowl during their molting period.
Children are well-suited for gathering birds using
these methods.
Some forms of passive snares and traps were
also manually tripped by cords tied to the support
post and leading to hunting blinds that concealed
children. When a number of birds entered the trap,
a swift jerk on the cord collapsed the support stick
on the gravity-fall trap.
Birds were lured towards hunters hiding in
ambush by various calling methods. Often the calls
were chirps made by voice, but sometimes calling
sounds were enhanced by devices made from cane or
wing bones (Speck 1946:13). The form and nature of
these bird call devices are uncertain, so the artifacts
are hard to recognize in prehistoric assemblages.
In the Southeastern United States, birds were
reportedly hunted at night using a torch light and
clubs (Hudson 1976:280; Speck 1946:13). Using a
practice called "bird brushing," the Catawba held
communal night hunts, especially in winter. In these
events, a dozen or so people with torches in one
hand and a branch in the other surrounded heaps of

cut branches and beat down confused small birds
as they attempted to fly away from their roosts in
the glare of the torchlight. Many tree and groundnesting birds, including sparrows, wrens, juncos,
cardinals, mockingbirds, and some waterfowl were
blinded and easily killed in their confusion in these
night hunts. These hunts were not associated with
any distinctive artifacts, but they probably occurred
near woodlands along rivers or nesting locales next
to playas.
Slings and bolos were simple hunting devices
that propelled stone missiles with more force, energy, and greater range than simple throwing stones.
Slings consisted of a leather patch or pocket with
two woven cords or leather laces 60 to 90 cm long;
the end of one cord had a finger loop. A single
pebble was slipped into the patch and the sling
was flung around the head or side to build up momentum. The release of the unlooped cord sent the
stone missile flying in the projected arc. Some skill
and considerable practice was needed to launch the
rocks in the desired direction and distance of the
target, but hunters in some parts of North America
developed great skill with this weapon and used it
to good advantage on waterfowl. The accuracy of
slings depended, in part, on the geometry of the
stones selected as missiles. Spherical stones tended
to fly truer than flattened ones.
Bolos involved two or more stone-filled leather
pouches tied together by long laces or cords. Unlike slings which propel single stones, the whole
bolo device was flung with the intent of tripping
fleeing animals, or in the case of birds, wrapping
up their wings to prevent flight. Bolos required that
the hunter be relatively close to their prey. Bolos
are typically regarded as relics of Central and South
American or Alaskan hunting technologies (Gilbert
et al. 1996), but it remains undetermined whether
or not this prehistoric technology was used on the
southern Plains. Some of the notched pebbles found
in Central Texas prehistoric archeological sites have
been regarded as bolo stones (Weir 1979).
Cast nets were used to snag low-flying ducks
and geese as they lifted off ponds and flew over
blinds or thick reed cover (Gilbert et al. 1996).
Cast nets required either supporting frames or
stone weights along their edges to ensure that they
opened properly. Some net weights were notched on
opposite edges or ends for tying attachments to the
net perimeter, and should be readily identifiable as
artifacts. Notched and ground pebble net weights,
including the "Waco sinkers" found in north central

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 117
Texas archeological sites are sometimes regarded as
parts of fishing technologies, but their use for snagging birds and other game should not be discounted
(Boyd and Shafer 1997:269). In this regard, it is
interesting to note that notched Waco sinkers are
typically recovered as upland isolates, as well as
from sites on alluvial terraces and middens along
gullies and creeks (Boyd and Shafer 1997:264).
The blow gun was a hunting implement possibly used for birds and other animals residing in the
higher branches of trees. They were commonly used
in woodlands and forests of the Southeastern United
States and Central and South America (Hudson
1976:273). The weapons were made of hollow cane
or reed tubes and a series of tight-fitting darts that
were individually propelled by a strong pyff of air.
Blow guns were well adapted for killing squirrels
and birds in the upper branches of trees at distances
up to 20 m. But trees rarely occur on the southern
Plains except along river valleys or the steep escarpment edges of the Llano Estacado, so the ancient use
of blow guns on the Plains is unlikely.
Bows and arrows are mentioned most often
as the preferred bird killing weapons in the Plains
ethnographic literature. Bows were superior to atlatls (spear-throwers), bolos, slings, toss nets, and
simple arm throwing, primarily because the arrows
were launched with minimal body movement and
propelled by relatively quiet energy transference that
did not overly startle the prey. This probably allowed
hunters multiple shots before the animals were aware
of danger. Small animals and birds were wounded or
killed from the arrow's impact, or the puncture and
slicing of muscles by the sharp stone tip.
Poisons were sometimes employed with arrows
to enhance their killing effectiveness on large mammals, but they were not needed for most birds and
small game. Knobby wooden blunt tips or stunners
instead of stone arrowheads were used to disable
birds and other small game. Blunt tips were effective
in hunting waterfowl on lakes, since the blunt-tipped
arrows skipped along the surface of the pond and did
not submerge (Fowler 1989:57).
Grinnell (1972: 115-116) mentioned that birds
were commonly used as targets to teach children
the skills of stealth-stalking prey and shooting
accuracy. Small birds, lizards, and bugs were critical
practice targets for boys to become proficient
hunters of larger game. Grinnell (1972:115-116)
also mentioned that a Cheyenne child's hunting
esteem was validated when the family processed and
consumed even small avian prey as part of the family

meal. Thus, even small birds may be considered to
be subsistence game.
Mudhens (coots) were chased ashore during
molting season, when they could not fly in the Great
Basin, by either men on tule boats or people wading
into the water (Fowler 1989:56). Tule boats were not
used on the Plains, but the practice of driving molting waterfowl from small playa ponds is a distinct
possibility. Women and children hid in the brush on
shore and pounced on the birds, initially breaking
their legs to cripple them. They returned to kill the
birds after the drive was over.
The hunting methods described above do not
employ structures that leave signatures on the archeological landscape. But several other bird hunting
methods have some potentialto be archeologically
detectable under the right conditions . These include
the use of brush hunting blinds, snare and net structures, drive lanes for molting waterfowl, and eagle
or raptor trap pits.
Concealment blinds and disguises allowed hunters to approach game undetected, and by so doing,
increased their chances of success. Blinds were
placed next to watering and feeding areas or near
established game trails. Some hunting blinds were
made by tying together the tops of tall reeds, rushes,
or willows to form a domed blind on the edges
of playa lakes or river banks (Grinnell 1972:260261). In the mesa and canyon lands of southeastern
Colorado, small masonry features no more than
1-2 m in diameter placed along ridges or against
cliff edges were regarded as hunting blind features
(Nowak and Sparr 1989). Sometimes, hunters placed
a small forked stick in the water next to a blind to
draw perching birds, so that they could be shot at
close range.
Other bird hunting features employed spaced
post alignments. On windless days, Paiutes in the
Great Basin used a complex series of hanging loop
snares to capture ducks in shallow water (Fowler
1989:55). A series of notched sticks were driven
into the bottom of a shallow pond that extended
some 20-25 cm above the water. They were spaced
25-30 m apart over a distance of approximately 200
m. A cord was strung between the sticks, and at 1 m
intervals a series of 10 cm diameter slip noose snares
were suspended from the horizontal cord about 3
cm above the water level (Figure 6). Any duck that
inadvertently put his head in a slip noose was caught
in the ever-tightening snare. This complex snare
system had to be continuously watched to prevent
the ducks from tearing it apart.

118

Texas Archeological Society

1

0
a

b

Figure 6. Waterfowl hunting features potentially used at playas: a, Hanging snares; b,
Fixed net; c, Raised net.

In addition to the cast nets mentioned above,
nets about 1.5 m wide were hung along spaced post
alignments positioned at the margins of playas or
other feeding areas. These nets were not usually
tied to the posts, but the upper edges were draped
on the posts about 1 m above the water. Usually the
waterfowl quickly got accustomed to the hanging
nets during the day, but on moonless nights the
hunters returned to spook the feeding ducks by
banging on sticks. Many fleeing ducks flew into the
net, knocking it off the posts and causing it to fall
on top of the frightened birds (Fowler 1989:56). A

variation of this method used by California Indians
was to have a slip net drooping between vertical
poles strung along flight lines; the cord was pulled
taut, and the net would be raised into the flight path
when birds were taking off or landing (Barrett and
Gifford 1933).
Another version adapted to ground birds involved securing a fine mesh net to a series of wooden arches spaced along a bird run. If runs were not
evident, then some traps had drive wings of brush
to concentrate and focus the bird's movements. The
arched net was opened only at the entrance end. The

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 119
trap was effective for catching coveys of quail, since
they tended to scatter outward from the trail when
startled, thereby becoming entangled in the net walls
(Fowler 1989).
A similar drive lane feature was much larger
and used for trapping ducks and waterfowl in shallow water, or in areas adjacent to ponds and nesting
areas. Instead of the arched net, a woven wicker
pen was the focal point of long drive lanes made of
brush, nets, or posts. These features have considerable time depth in Europe and were used historically
in eastern North America to trap molting waterfowl.
Groups of hunters, sometimes assisted by dogs,
would simply drive flightless birds toward two barrier wings of brush or nets. Their prey ultimately
became concentrated in containment pens. Sometimes a third slack net alignment was raised behind
the driven flocks to prevent their escape from the
open air pen. The constructed wicker work tunnels
were called "eende(n)kooi," by the Dutch, which
is the entomology of the English word "decoy,"
namely a "a device intended to conceal or distract
another activity" (Poodle History Project 2007).
Only later was the decoy name applied to animal

models and mimics as hunting decoys. The form of
these bird trapping devices was similar, but smaller
in scale, to the drive lanes used by Plains Indians to
concentrate bison, deer, or antelope into traps. It is
unclear if such bird drives were used prehistorically
in North America or were introduced by Europeans.
Modem wildlife managers still use this drive method
and similar net apparatus to capture hundreds of
waterfowl for banding purposes during single event
episodes (Figure 7).
Eagle pit traps were dug in isolated hilltop or
cliff-edge settings (Grinnell 1972:299-307; Mails
1970; Wilson 1928). Eagle traps constructed by
Puebloan men into the volcanic tuff near escarpment edges on the Pajarito Plateau measured 2 x
1 m in size and 2 m deep, and occasionally had a
single horizontal post placed near their base (Steen
1977:29-30). Eagle hunters covered themselves
with grease to disguise their scent, and hid inside
the pits beneath a brush or reed cover from dawn
to dusk. A rabbit, bird, or bison hide was tied to the
brush roof as bait. When the eagles swooped in for
the kill, their talons would close on the bait and the
men would reach up and safely grab the birds by

Figure 7. Waterfowl drive fences used in Saskatchewan for banding ducks during molting periods. This single
event captured more than 1,100 mallards, plus many blue-winged and green-winged teal and gadwall (after
Hawkins et al. 1984:288).

120

Texas Archeological Society

their legs and pull them into the pit structure. The
pits were so small that the eagles' wings were ineffective as weapons. The eagles were either strangled
with a cord or captured as pets to harvest feathers.
In the latter case, their feet and wings were bound,
and they were tied to the horizontal post. The reed
covering was reset over the pit for additional eagle
trapping activities. Sometimes several eagles were
captured in a single day.
A different form of eagle or buzzard trap was
an enclosure used by sheepherders in the Texas hill
country. This ca. 6 m diameter circular and open-air
enclosure was made by setting six wooden posts
about 2 m above the ground and wrapping it with
netting (Ben Banahan, personal communication,
2007) . Raptors baited by a dead rabbit, small game,
or piece of hide initially landed on the post before
dropping into the enclosure. The fence was too high
for large raptors to fly away from level ground.
Such pen enclosures were often placed in remote
sheep pastures, and human scent was masked by
rubbing the posts with game, fruit, or other odorous
vegetables. The historic sheepherder's trap is within
the range of technology and materials to have been
used by prehistoric people, but no examples are
archeologically documented.

IDENTIFYING THE
ARCHEOLOGICAL SIGNATURES
OF AVIAN PROCUREMENT
DEVICES

The recognition of avian procurement strategies
must address what kinds of birds were potentially
sought and utilized, the preferred bird habitats, and
identifying the archeological evidence for procurement sites. Most birds provided small to moderate
amounts of meat. For example, the live weights of
ducks range from 0.45-1.28 kg; geese and swans
weigh from 2.70-11.36 kg; owls and buzzards weigh
about 1.42 kg; and eagles weigh nearly 4.26 kg
(Alsop 2002). Except for the possible mass drives
of fledglings and flightless birds during molting
season, most birds were secured in small numbers
and required no extensive butchering for their
transport back to campsites and homesteads. Only
in rare instances when large numbers of birds were
captured (perhaps in various drive situations) should
archeologists expect to find specialized bird butchering sites. These should be evident by large numbers
of bones from a limited range of avian species. In

most cases, bird procurement methods yielded few
individuals, and therefore the remains should be
limited to a few unmodified scrap bones at camp or
habitation sites.
The archeological signatures of bird procurement by the various methods discussed in the previous section are provided in Table 11. Evidence for
the use of passive traps and snares in the southern
High Plains is not conclusive. Most of these remains
are perishable and are probably not preserved in
open sites. Indirect evidence of an elaborate cordage technology is provided by cordmarked and
possibly fabric impressed pottery in Antelope Creek
phase sites. But to date distinct impressions of nets
have yet to be identified on Middle Ceramic period
cordmarked pottery from the southern Plains. Furthermore, netting is not reported among the perishable artifact assemblage from the Kenton Caves
at the far western end of the Oklahoma Panhandle
(Lintz 1981; Lintz and Zabawa 1984) or among the
shelters of the Chaquaqua Plateau of southeastern
Colorado (Campbell 1969). However, Loendorf
(personal communication, 2004) has argued that a
distinctive rock art motif found at sites in southeastern Colorado is a symbolic representations of nets
used for capturing deer and other large game. The
context for these symbols at gaps in volcanic dikes
and rock alignment drive lanes is intriguing, but the
symbolism for nets is open to interpretation, especially since no fragments of nets have been found.
If Loendorf is correct, then the concept of nets and
drive lanes to divert game was used on the southern
Plains, and may have been applied to driving molting waterfowl into pens or open net corrals.
Tangible evidence for wooden snare components has been tentatively identified at the Kenton
Caves (Lintz 1981). Thus, components for snare and
net capture are not beyond the technological skills of
the Middle Ceramic people of the region. However,
no snare features have yet been archeologically
identified from open sites. Similarly, no evidence
for the prehistoric use of poisons in the Panhandle
region has been documented.
Many active bird procurement implements
are archeologically unidentifiable, and others are
typically associated with other kinds of animals. For
example, most Antelope Creek village sites contain
abundant small projectile points and arrow shaft
abraders, so clearly a bow and arrow technology
existed. A wooden bow was found in the Kenton
Caves (Lintz 1981). Archeologists know that the
side notched and unnotched forms of Washita and

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 121
Table 11. Expectations of recovering archeological evidence of bird hunting methods.
Dry Cave
(Chance
Preservation)
Bones, eggs,
feathers, skins

Open
Campsites

River Banks

Playa Basin
and Edges

Hill Top or Mesa
Edges

Bone, eggs,
burials

Bones

Bones

Features, bones?

Not
Expected
Not
Expected
Not
Expected

Not
Expected
Not
Expected
Not
Expected

Not
Expected
Not
Expected
Not
Expected

Not Expected

Cage or basket fall trap
with trigger

Cordage
snares
Cordage
snares
Basket and
Trigger parts

Cribbed stick trap with
trigger

Crib cage,
Trigger parts

Not
Expected

Not
Expected

Not
Expected

Not Expected

Log deadfalls

Trigger parts
Trigger parts

Not
Expected
Not
Expected

Not
Expected
Not
Expected

Not Expected

Stone slab deadfalls

Not
Expected
Not
Expected
Egg shells
(rare),
bones?
Not
Expected

Not
Expected

Not
Expected

Not Expected

Not
Expected

Not
Expected

Not Expected

Not
Expected

Not
Expected

Not
Expected

Not Expected

Bone call

Not
Expected

Not
Expected

Not Expected

Evidence of birds
Bird Procurement Methods
Passive
Loop snares
Spring pole snares

Not Expected
Not Expected

Not Expected

Active-No Features
Gathering eggs and
fledging birds

Egg shells,
bones

Swimming after
waterfowl

Decoy or reed
cap, breathing
tube
Waterfowl
decoys,
quadruped
skins?
Bone and reed
call parts

Decoys and disguises

Bird call devices
Throwing rocks/wood

Pebble
anomalies

Pebble
anomalies

Not
Expected

Pebble
anomalies?

Not Anticipated?

"Clubs" and "Rabbit
Sticks"
"Bird Brushing" with
torches and stick
"clubs"
Slings

Rabbit stick
clubs
Not Expected

Not
Expected
Not
Expected

Not
Expected
Not
Expected

Not
Expected
Not
Expected

Not Expected

Slings?,
spherical stone
clusters
Bolo preserved

Spherical
stones

Not
Anticipated

Spherical
stones

Not Expected

Pebble
anomalies

Not
Anticipated

Pebble
anomalies

Not Expected

Darts,
blowgun?
Nets, notched
stone weights

Not
Ex_12_ected
Notched
stone
weights
Arrowheads

Not

Not Expected

Notched
stone
weights
Arrowheads

Not
Ex_Q_ected
Notched
stone
weights
Arrowheads

Not
Expected

Not
Expected

Not
Expected

Bolos
Blowguns
Cast nets

Bow and stone-tipped
arrows
Bow and wood blunt
tipped arrows

Bows, arrows,
fore shafts,
arrowheads
Bows, arrows,
fore shafts,
blunt-heads

E~ected

Not Expected

Notched stone
weights
Arrowheads

Not Expected

122

Texas Archeological Society

Table 11. (Continued)

Evidence of birds
Bird Procurement Methods
Active with Fixed Features
Hunting blinds

Dry Cave
(Chance
Preservation)
Bones, eggs,
feathers, skins

Open
Campsites

River Banks

Playa Basin
and Edges

Hill Top or Mesa
Edges

Bone , eggs,
burials

Bones

Bones

Features, bones?

Not Expected

Not

Not
Antic~ated?

Abundant
bones ,
limited
species
Abundant
bones ,
limited
species
Abundant
bones,
limited
species
Abundant
bones ,
limited
species
Abundant
bones,
limited
species
Abundant
bones from
limited
species

Post hole
alignment

Not
Antici2._ated?
Post hole
alignment

Not Expected

E~ected

Post holes ,
notched
stone
weights
Post holes,
remote
sensed
alignment
Sediment
alignment

Post holes,
notched
stone
weights
Post holes,
remote
sensed
alignment
Sediment
alignments

Not
Anticipated?

Not
Anticipated?

Not Expected

Drive lane
alignments;
aerial and
remote
sensed
Not
Expected

Not Expected

Small pits or
structures

Not
Expected

Postholes in small
circles

Hung noose snares
along post alignment

Noose snares
attached to
rope

Fixed hung nets along
post alignment

Nets, notched
stone weights

Draw nets along fence
posts

Nets, notched
stone weights

Nets on arched frames

Nets, notched
stone weights,
arched frames

Pedestrian Drives of
molting waterfowl

Not Expected

Drive Lanes for molting
waterfowl

Not Expected

Raptor Pit Concealment
(Manual Snatch)

Not Expected

Not
Expected

Drive lane
alignments;
aerial and
remote
sensed
Not
Expected

Raptor pen traps

Not Expected

Not
Expected

Not
Expected

Fresno points (called "bird points" by many collectors), respectively, were used to hunt bison and other
large terrestrial mammals. The ethnographic record
indicates that stone and iron-tipped arrows were
used in avian procurement, and it may have to be
acknowledged that bird hunting occasionally used
chipped stone projectile tips. Recovery of wooden
blunt tips used to stun birds and small game are not
documented from open sites on the southern High
Plains, but examples have been found in the dry
shelters at the Kenton Caves (Lintz 1981).
Some birds may have been dispatched by means
of curved wooden throwing sticks. These so-called
"rabbit sticks" were a common occurrence in the
northern parts of the Southwest, and in the Lower
Pecos region of Texas. The closest documented

Not Expected

Not Expected

Not Expected

Not Expected

recovery of these throwing sticks in the southern
Plains is from 34CI50, which is one of the Kenton
Caves (Lintz 1981; Lintz and Zabawa 1984:169;
Renaud 1930: 125). The age of these hunting implements is usually ascribed to the Archaic or "BasketMaker" period, which predates the Middle Ceramic
period. However, due to the perishable nature of
these kinds of artifacts, the persistence of these
weapons is unknown. Curved throwing sticks would
be ideal implements for knocking perched birds and
those fledging or molting birds into drive nets, or for
use during night hunts with torches.
No tangible evidence exists for the use of
slings, cast nets, or bolos. Net and bolo weights
might be recognized as artifacts by the presence of
lateral notches on pebbles, but little if any cultural

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 123

modification is expected for missile stones. The
best evidence for these technologies may be the
recovery of pebble weights or missiles from the fine
sediments in the bottoms of playa lakes. Disparity in
the size of pebble missiles in playa-bottom silt and
clays would present a geomorphic enigma that could
best be interpreted as the product of human transport
or deposition. Occasional sites found next to playas
recover geologically anomalously large unmodified
rocks, but in lieu of tangible forms of modification,
there has been some hesitance to attribute them
to human activities, much less to specific bird
procurement technologies (Johnson 1995:203).
Insofar as many farmers have dug slit trenches in
the bottom of playa lakes to concentrate water and
increase the agricultural use of their lands, ample
opportunities exist to search for geomorphically
aberrant missile pebbles.
Archeological evidence for the use of bird nets
and drive lanes is unknown for the southern High
Plains. In light of the low number of bird bones and
the great diversity of waterfowl species recovered
from prehistoric villages, it is unlikely that drives
were used for capturing large numbers of molting
birds. Remnants of nets and drive lanes might be
archeologically detectable as post hole alignments or
as anomalous crop-marks in fields. Initially, ground
penetrating radar or other remote sensing tools could
be used to search for buried soil anomalies such as
post holes. Then such anomalies could be groundtruthed by mechanically scraping various playa
bed areas. Since much of the Plains area has been
plowed and cultivated, these approaches should be
tried in playa areas where little or no plowing has
occurred. The playas located within a few kilometers
of prehistoric villages should also be considered,
especially for examining those deposits below
the plow zone. If post hole alignments were to be
found, then sediments corresponding to the original
ground surface contact could be collected and dated
using radiocarbon or optical stimulation lumination
methods. Archeological studies around playa lakes
and streams have relied on collector interviews and/
or on conducting systematic pedestrian surveys to
search for burned rock, chipped stone tools, or pottery (Bement and Brosowske 2001; Brosowske and
Bement 1998; Hughes and Speer 1981; Johnson
1995; Largent 1995; Winchell and Largent 1994).
Such methods are appropriate for finding campsites,
but they are not appropriate for finding evidence of
waterfowl procurement methods. Other approaches
should be considered.

The final kind of specialized bird procurement
site is the eagle trap. The only eagle remains reported so far from the southern High Plains are from
Early Ceramic period contexts at Canyon Country
Club Cave. Eagle trap features may be expected to
occur in remote areas far from village and hamlet
sites. The archeological expression of eagle traps
on open plains expanses may be difficult to identify,
and none are known on the southern High Plains.
The small masonry "hunting blinds" placed along
cliff edges in the mesa and canyon lands of southeastern Colorado may be prehistoric eagle traps
(cf. Nowak and Spurr 1989). However, assigning a
specific function to these kinds of features may be
impossible to prove or disprove.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The foregoing summary has explored the issues
of avian occurrence on the Southern High Plains
and their use by historic ethnographic groups. The
study suggests that birds served a vital role in Pawnee cosmology, and some oral texts hint that some
portions of Pawnee bands may have once lived in
the southern High Plains. The cosmological summary indicate that birds were both economically
and symbolically important, as manifested in oral
traditions and material culture. Although their
subsistence role is easier to objectively evaluate,
archeologists should be mindful that humans are
symbolic beings and that many of the recovered
archeological remains likely carry deep structural
meanings, although these meanings are not easily
discerned or proven.
The archeological faunal evidence from Middle
Ceramic period sites on the southern High Plains
indicates that a variety of birds were captured and
used during a period from 500 to 800 years ago.
A total of 38 of the 45 kinds of birds from archeological sites dating to the past two millennia are
reflected in eight Middle Ceramic period faunal assemblages for the southern Plains. These represent
about 10 percent of the bird species that visit the
region today. The absence of turkey remains from
these assemblages is intriguing due to the quantities of meat these Plains-adapted birds potentially
would have provided.
In terms of diversity, waterfowl accounts for
40 percent of the species and raptors contribute
another 24.4 percent. Orioles, robins, thrashers, and
cardinals may have contributed a relatively small

124

Texas Archeological Society

amount of meat, but their colored feathers or other
parts may have been symbolically valued. Based
on the ethnographic data, eagles, hawks, owls, and
perhaps vultures and crows may have been taken for
symbolic purposes related to achieving power. Thus,
not all birds may have been taken strictly for their
subsistence value.
The bird procurement methods developed by
prehistoric people have rarely been considered.
The diversity and habitat of birds found in the
archeological assemblages suggest that several distinct methods would have been used. The preceding
survey of avian procurement methods and the list of
archeological correlates provide a guide for future
research into exploring how birds were obtained.
Many procurement methods involved technologies that required only the most simple tool kits.
Nonetheless, many of these simplified methods have
the potential to leave tangible evidence from either
perpetually dry or perpetually wet environments.
Rock shelters provide the best chance for the dry
environmental preservation of perishable artifacts.
But, these sites are admittedly rare on the southern
High Plains. Details of the Canyon Country Club
Cave excavations have yet to be published, and
despite the recognition of historic sheep dung and
other humus layers, the manuscript examines only
the standard lithic, ceramic, and faunal remains
(Hughes n.d.). Analyses of the High Plains rock
shelter assemblages from 41HF86 and 41HF124 at
Palo Duro Reservoir did not produced perishable
remains, and the specific sampling of perishable
remains from 10 wood rat nests in the valley did
not identify any wooden artifacts (Quigg et al.
1993:310-331, 351-352, and Appendix K). Although
perishable funerary goods are found with historic
or Late Ceramic period crevice burials, none of the
remains have been interpreted as bird procurement
artifacts (Shafer et al. 1994). Although not common,
the Middle Ceramic people also occasionally placed
their dead in rock crevices. To date, none have
yielded perishable remains (Shaller et al. 1997). The
most robust perishable assemblages reported to date
are from the various Kenton Caves in the Mesa and
Canyon land region at the western end of the Oklahoma panhandle (Renaud 1930; Lintz 1981; Lintz
and Zabawa 1984). Although these sites were dug in
the late 1920s and 1930s, large assemblages of perishable remains were saved. Although stratigraphic
control was lacking in the recovery of the perishable items, their age could be readily obtained by
accelerator mass spectrometer analysis . Using this

method, small artifact pieces can be dated without
destroying the entire specimen.
Few opportunities to recover perishable artifacts from saturated deposits are known to exist in
the High Plains region. The lowering of the Ogallala aquifer by historic well irrigation has dried up
many seeps and springs in the region. Most upland
playas hold water only on a seasonal basis, and
most are dry during moderate to severe droughts.
A few locations along ancient draws (e.g. , Lubbock
Lake) or deep depressions (e.g., Lake Tahoka) have
some potential to contain remnants of perishable
artifacts, but few attempts have been made to search
the saturation zones.
Open air site deposits are subjected to moisture
fluctuations and should not be expected to preserve
wood or feather artifacts. Few implements associated
with avian procurement technology consist of nonperishable remains. Concrete evidence for identifying
hunting technologies in open sites should therefore
be hard to come by. Those few recoverable objects
suitable for killing birds, including projectile points
and sling rocks, are suited for a wide range of game
or are observed in ambiguous functional contexts.
Village sites commonly contain projectile point tips,
but based on the abundance of the large game remains
found at these sites, they are rarely thought to have
played a role in bird procurement. However, the ethnographic literature often cites the bow and arrow as
a preferred weapon for avian procurement.
Most bird procurement sites are located far
from human habitation sites. The three most likely
settings are the forested rivers and creek bottomlands, near playa lakes, and on remote hilltops. The
archeological recovery of unusually large rock clasts
in alluvial deposits cannot confidently be attributed
to cultural behavior, since discrete flood events can
occasionally transport and deposit widely spaced
cobbles on to fine terrace sediments. The recognition
of anomalously large rock clasts in playa bottom
sediments, however, including walls of slit trenches
cut by farmers, may be an excellent place to search
for net weights, sling ammunition, and/or bolo
stones, because high velocity alluvial processes do
not naturally move large rocks in playa basins.
Some kinds of avian procurement methods may
have left tangible feature evidence such as specialized constructed brush barrier walls, drive lanes, net
alignments, fixed snare anchors, and/or pit traps.
Aerial reconnaissance and photographic interpretation, coupled with remote sensing (ground penetrating radar or magnetic gradiometer) and mechanical

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 125
stripping along the margins of play a basins, may be
fruitful approaches for finding these features. Until
field efforts attempt to confirm the potential evidence discussed above, the actual bird procurement
practices used prehistorically must remain in the
realm of speculation. Although archeologists have
provided considerable information about prehistoric
big game hunting, our understanding of the full
range of hunting activities remains shallow, meager,
and biased. The diversity of avian fauna in Middle
Ceramic period sites on the southern High Plains
suggests that these people had a much more robust
range of subsistence and ceremonial activities than
what is usually ascribed to Plains Villagers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Bill Johnson, Mark Lockwood, and David Morrison, bird and waterfowl biologists with the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, for directing a
non-hunter to some of the relevant literature on bird
behavior and waterfowl of the Panhandle. Patricia
O'Brien opened my eyes to the possibility of considering this topic in a different light. Doug Boyd,
Ken Brown, Logan McNatt, and Alan Skinner took
interest in this project and provided references and
comments based on their extensive knowledge of the
archeological record. Mr. Ben Banahan of the Devil's
Sinkhole Society provided information about early
"buzzard traps" found in southwest Texas. I also want
to thank Brad Vierra for directing me to information
on eagle trap features in New Mexico. Stephen Kalasz
provided many very useful comments and kicked me
hard to consider data from southeastern Colorado.
Richard and Mary Ann Drass and Stephen Kalasz
substantially improved the quality of this article. I
thank all these people for their help in improving it.

ENDNOTES
1. The occurrence of stored calcium in the hollow
bone cavities of female birds representing species with
single yearly brooding events can be an important archeological indicator for interpreting the season of prehistoric
site occupation.
2. Some playa lakes have been historically stocked
with fish for private and public recreation, or mosquito
control (Smith 2003:71-72). Local lore claims that fish
eggs can be naturally introduced by birds, either from
eggs attaching to bird's feet or eggs surviving the bird's
digestion. However, the absence of fish in most playas

suggests that this transmission mode is not a realistic
option. Short of collapsing tornadoes and water spouts
periodically dropping river fish into playas, the natural
mechanism for moving live fish into closed drainage
basins is limited.
3. The Native American view of birds serving as messengers between humans and celestial beings is analogous
to many Christian's common acceptance in the existence
of spirits, cherubs, and angels as personal winged messengers, guides, and protectors.
4. The Pawnee name for the traditional feathered
war bonnet was an allegory of a comet, with its trailing
tail (Weltfish 1977:377). Comets were Morning Star's
projectiles and were related to him through the symbolism
of fire, flint, and meteorites (Von Chamberlain 1982: 142).
The eagle and hawk plumage in war bonnet strengthens
the symbolic connective and protective powers given to
earth-bound mortals by various celestial beings.

REFERENCES CITED
Alsop III, F. J.
2002 Birds of North America. DK Publishing, Inc., New
York.
Anderson, D.
1985 Mesquakie Chief Powesheik's Feathered Cape.
Plains Anthropologist 30(108): 161-164.
AOU (American Ornithologist's Union)
2007 Checklist of North American Birds. www.aou.org/
checklist/index.php3
Baker, E. and J. Baker
2000 Archaeological Investigations ofAntelope Creek Ruins andAlibates Ruins Panhandle Aspect 1938-1941.
Publication 8. Panhandle Archaeological Society,
Amarillo.
Barrett, S. and E. Gifford
1933 MiwokMaterial Culture: Indian Life of the Yosemite
Region. Yosemite Natural History Association, California.
Bement, L. and S. Brosowske
2001 Streams in No Man's Land: A Cultural Survey in
Beaver and Texas Counties, Oklahoma. Archeological Resource Survey Report 43. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
Bender, M., R. Bryson, and D. Baerreis
1971 University of Wisconsin Radiocarbon Dates IX.
Radiocarbon 13(2):475-486.
Boyd, C. and H. Shafer
1997 Another Look at the Distribution, Age, and Function
of "Waco Sinkers." Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:263-271.

126

Texas Archeological Society

Boyd, D. K.
2008 Prehistoric Agriculture on the Canadian River of the
Texas Panhandle: New Insights from West Pasture
Sites on the M-Cross Ranch. Plains Anthropologist
53(205):33-57.

Del Chamberlain, V.
1982 When the Stars Came Down to Earth: Cosmology
of the Skidi Pawnee Indians of North America. Anthropological Papers 26. Ballena Press, Los Altos,
California.

Boyd, D. K. and D. Wilkens
2001 Bumin' Down the House: Late Prehistoric Architecture, Abandonment and Agriculture at Hank's House,
41RB109, Roberts County, Texas. Current Archeology in Texas 3(2):1-7. Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.

DeMarcay, G.
1986 Vertebrate Fauna from Landergin Mesa: An Antelope
Creek Village Site. Master's thesis, Department of
Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Brosowske, S.
2005 Appendix II, Odessa Yates (34BV100): The
Fauna! Remains. In The Evolut!on of Exchange in
Small-Scale Societies of the Southern Plains, by
S. Brosowske. Ph.D . dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, University of Oklahoma, Norman.
Brosowske, S. and L. Bement
1998 Archeological Survey of Playa Lake Environments in
Beaver and Texas Counties, Oklahoma. Archeological Resource Survey Report 39. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
Bryan, K., T. Gallucci, G. Lasley, M. Lockwood, and D.
Riskind
2003 A Checklist of Texas Birds. 6th Edition. Texas Parks
and Wildlife Press, Austin .
Campbell, R. G.
1969 Prehistoric Panhandle Culture of the Chaquaqua
Plateau, Southeastern Colorado. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, University of Colorado, Boulder.
Couzzourt, J. and B. Schmidt-Couzzourt
1996 The 1969 Texas Archaeological Society Field School
at Blue Creek, Moore County, in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
67:1-114.
Cruse, J.B.
2007 Architecture Variability of the Late Woodland and
Plains Village Occupations at the Indian Springs
Site (41RB81), Roberts County, Texas. Current
Archeology in Texas 9(1): 11-18. Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Curtis, D. and H. Beierman
1980 Playa Lake Characterization Study. Ecological Services, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services, Fort Worth.
Curtis, E.
1997 Indians of North America: The Complete Portfolios.
Taschen, New York.

Dorsey, G. A.
1904 Traditions of the Skidi Pawnee. Memoir VIII. American Folklore Society, New York.
1906

The Pawnee: Mythology . Publication 59. Carnegie
Institute, Washington D.C.

Drass, R.
1997 Culture Change on the Eastern Margins ofthe Southern
Plains. Studies in Oklahoma's Past 19, Oklahoma
Archeological Survey, and Memoir 7, Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Norman.
Ducks Unlimited
2007 Waterfowl Life Cycles. Electronic document
hppt://www.ducks.org/conservation/ waterfowlbiology/1607/mallardlife cycle.html, accessed February
25, 2007 .
Duffield L. F.
1964 Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir,
Hutchinson County, Texas . Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 31: 19-81.
1970

Some Antelope Creek Sites, Their Vertebrates and
Paleoecology. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, University of Wisconsin, Madison.

Dunbar, J.B.
1880 The Pawnee Indians. Magazine ofAmerican History
5(5):319-345 .
Duncan, M. A.
2002 Adaptation during the Antelope Creek Phase: A
Diet-Breadth and Site Catchment Analysis of the
Subsistence Strategy at the Two Sisters Site. Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma, Norman.
2006

Adaptation during the Antelope Creek Phase: Subsistence Strategies at the Two Sisters Site . Studies
in Oklahoma's Past 20. Oklahoma Archeological
Survey, Norman.

Etchieson, G. M.
1979 Archaeological Testing at South Ridge Site, Lake
Meredith Recreation Area, Hutchinson County,
Texas. Archaeological Research Laboratory, Kilgore Research Center, West Texas State University,
Canyon.

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 127
Eyerly, T. L.
1907 The Buried City of the Panhandle. Transactions of
the Kansas Academy of Science 21(1):219-228
1912

The Buried City of the Panhandle. The Archaeological Bulletin 3(1):1-5.

Fagan, B.
2002 The Little Ice Age: How the Climate Made History
1300-I 500. Basic Books, New York.
Feder, N.
1982 American Indian Art. Harrison House/Barry Afmims,
New York.

Green, F. E.
1967 Archaeological Salvage in the Sanford Reservoir
Area. National Park Service Report #14-10-03331126, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
1986

Report on the Archaeological Salvage in the Sanford
Reservoir Area. Publication 4. Panhandle Archaeological Society, Amarillo

Grinnell, G. B .
1893 Pawnee Mythology. Journal of American Folklore
6:113-130.
1972

The Cheyenne Indians: Their History and Ways of
Life. 2 Vols. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

Fletcher, A.
1904 The Hako: A Pawnee Ceremony. 22nd Annual Report, Part 2. Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington D.C.

Grove, J.
2004 The Little Ice Ages, Ancient and Modern. Routledge,
London.

Fletcher, A. and F. La Flesche
1972 The Omaha Tribe. University of Nebraska Press,
Lincoln.

Hall, S.A.
1982 Late Holocene Paleoecology of the Southern Plains.
Quaternary Research 17:391-407.
1990

Fletcher, A. and J. Murie
1996 The Hako: Song, Pipe and Unity in a Pawnee
Calumet Ceremony. University of Nebraska Press,
Lincoln.
Flowers, T. L.
1996 Classification and Occurrence of the Birds of the
Playa Lakes of Meade County, Kansas. Bulletin of
the Kansas Ornithological Society 47(2) :21-28.
Fowler, C.
1986 Subsistence. In Handbook of North American
Indians: Volume 11, Great Basin, edited by W.
D' Azevedo, pp. 64-97 . Smithsonian Institution,
Washington D.C.
1989

Willard Z. Park's Ethnographic Notes on the Northern
Paiutes of Western Nevada, 1933-1944. Anthropological Papers 114. University of Utah, Salt Lake.

Franciscan Fathers
1983 An Ethnologic Dictionary of the Navajo Language.
AMS Reprint of ca. 1910 book by the Franciscan
Fathers of St. Michaels, Arizona.

Harrison, B .
The Allen Site, A Pit-house in the Texas Panhandle.
n.d.
Manuscript on file at the Panhandle-Plains Historical
Society Museum, Canyon.
Hawkins, A. S., R. C. Hanson, H. K. Nelson, and H. M.
Reeves (editors)
1984 Flyways: Pioneering Waterfowl Management in
North America. United States Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, D.C.
Haynes, G.
1932 A Report on the Excavation of Saddleback Ruin.
Master's Thesis , Texas Technical College, Lubbock.
Holden, W. C.
1929 Some Explorations and Excavations in Northwest
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society 1:23-35.
1930

Gilbert, B. M., L. D. Martin, and H. G. Savage
1996 Avian Osteo-Archaeology. Special Publication of the
Missouri Archaeological Society, Columbia.
Gilmore,M.
1932 ·Sacred Bundles of the Arikara. Papers of the Michi gan Academy of Science; Arts and Letters 16:33-52.
Goode, A.
2007 Mallard Duck Anas platyrhynos. Electronic document hppt://www.northwestwildlife.com/ articles/
nwps%20-%20Mallard%20Duck.pdf. Accessed
February 25, 2007
·

Channel Trenching and Climatic Change in the
Southern U.S. Great Plains. Geology 18:342-345.

The Canadian Valley Expedition of March 1930.
Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society 2:21 -32.

Hudson, C.
1976 The Southeastern Indians. University of Tennessee
Press, Knoxville.
Hughes, D.
1991 Investigations of the Buried City, Ochiltree County,
Texas, With an Emphasis on the Texas Archeological
Society Field Schools of 1987 and 1988. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 60:107-148.

128

Texas Archeological Society

Hughes, D. and A. Hughes-Jones
1987 The Courson Archaeological Projects, 1985 and
1986. A Final Report of the 1985 Investigations and
Preliminary Report of the 1986 Work. Innovative
Publishing, Inc., Perryton.
Hughes, J. T.
The Canyon Country Club Cave in the Panhandle
n.d.
of Texas. Manuscript on file at the Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
1968

1974

Prehistory of Caddoan Speaking Tribes. Ph.D . dissertation, Department of Social Sciences, Columbia
University, New York.

Prehistory of Caddoan Speaking Tribes. Garland
Press, New York.

Hughes, J. and R. Speers
1981 An Archaeological Survey of the Pantex Plant, Carson County, Texas . Report submitted to Mason and
Hanger- Silas Mason Co., Inc. under Purchase Order
F9544000.
Jensen, W. and C. Williams
1964 Botulism and Fowl Cholera. In Waterfowl Tomorrow,
edited by J. Linduska, pp. 333-343. U.S. Department
of the Interior, Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife,
and Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington D.C.
Jipson, N. W.
1922 Bird Lore and Bird Songs of the North American
Indian. The Oologist (June 1 Supplement): l-14.
Johnson, E. (editor)
1987 Lubbock Lake, Late Quaternary Studies on the
Southern High Plains. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
1995

Playa Archaeology-Archaeological Investigations
at Reese Air Force Base and Terry County Auxiliary
Airfield, Lubbock and Terry Counties. Quaternary
Research Center Series No. 9. Lubbock Lake Landmark, Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Kalasz, S., C. Kinneer, C. Anderson, L. Loendorf, B. Gibson,
C. Wands, and J. Kennedy
2007 Archaeological Investigations at Sites 5LA3186,
5LA3188, and 5LA3189 along Burke Arroyo in the
Pinon Canyon Maneuver Site, Las Animas County,
Colorado. Centennial Archaeology, Inc. Fort Collins.

Lambert, Marjorie and Richard Ambler
1965 A Survey and Excavation of Caves in Hidalgo County, New Mexico. The School of American Research
Monograph 25, Santa Fe.
Largent, F.
1995 A Cultural Resources Survey of 2,400 Acres of the
U.S. Department of Energy Pantex Plant, Carson
County, Texas . Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations 87. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Linduska, J. (editor)
1964 Introduction to Waterfowl Tomorrow. U . S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Sport Fisheries and
Wildlife and Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington,
D.C.
Lintz, C.
1976 The McGrath Site of the Panhandle Aspect. Bulletin
of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 25: 1110.
1981

Prehistoric Perishable Hunting Implements from the
Oklahoma Panhandle. Oklahoma Anthropological
Society Newsletter 29(8):6-10.

1986

Architecture and Community of the Antelope Creek
Phase of the Texas Panhandle . Studies in Oklahoma's Past 14. Oklahoma Archeological Survey,
Norman.

1990

Landergin Mesa: The 1984 Phase II Field Results.
Manuscript on file at the Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

1997

The 1959 Norpan Excavations at the Cottonwood
Creek Ruins, 41HC141 (A-119), Hutchinson County,
Texas. Transactions of the 32nd Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico
and Western Texas. 32:27-74.

2001

Architecture and Chronology at Landergin Mesa,
Oldham County, Texas . La Tierra 28(2):10-39.

2003a The Stamper Site, 34TX1 , Texas County, Oklahoma,
Part I: The Historical Context and Excavators .
Oklahoma Archaeology: Journal of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society 51(2):13-35 .
2003b The Stamper Site, 34TX1, Texas County, Oklahoma, Part II: Archaeological Contribution to Plains
Archaeology. Oklahoma Archaeology: Journal of
the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 51(3):1437.

Keller, J. E .
1975 The Black Dog Village Site: A Panhandle Aspect
Manifestation in Hutchinson County, Texas. Publications in Archeology, Report 5. Highway Design
Division, Texas Highway Department, Austin.

2003c The Stamper Site, 34TX1, Texas County, Oklahoma,
Part III: The Architecture and Features Excavated by
C. Stuart Johnston. Oklahoma Archaeology: Journal
of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 51(4):1446.

Kopper, P.
1986 The Smithsonian Book of North American Indians
Before the Coming of the Europeans. Smithsonian
Books, Washington D.C.

2004

The Stamper Site, 34TX1, Texas County, Oklahoma,
Part IV: The Architecture and Features Excavated by
Fred Carder, Jr. Oklahoma Archaeology: Journal of
the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 52( 1):16-52.

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 129
Lintz, C. and G. Zabawa
1984 The Kenton Caves of Western Oklahoma. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by R. Bell, pp. 161-174.
Academic Press, Orlando.

O'Brien, P.
2000 The Role of Birds in Pawnee Cosmology. Acta
Americana: Journal of the Swedish Americanist
Society 8(2):95-123.

Loud, L. and M. Harrington
1929 Lovelock Cave. Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 25(1):1-183 . University of
California, Berkeley.

O'Brien, P. and D. Post
1987 Speculations about Bob White Quail and Pawnee
Religion. Plains Anthropologist 33(122):489-504.

Lowrey, E. J.
1932 The Archaeology of Antelope Creek Ruin. Master's
Thesis, Texas Technical College, Lubbock.
Mails, T.
1970 Mystic Warriors of the Plains. Doubleday and Co..,
Garden City, New York.
McKusick, C.
1986 The Avian Fauna. In Archeological Investigations
at Antelope House, by D. P. Morris, pp. 142-158.
National Park Service, Government Printing Office,
Washington D.C.
Meissner, B.
2005 Appendix C:Vertebrate Fauna! Remains from Cross
Bar Ranch (41PT109). In' Investigations at an Antelope Creek Phase Isolated Homestead (41PT109) ,
by A. Weinstein, Master's Thesis, Department of
Anthropology, Texas State University, San Marcos.
Moore, J.
1986 Ornithology of Cheyenne Religionists. Plains Anthropologist 31(113):177- 192.
Moorehead, W. K.
1931 Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley . Phillips
Academy, Andover, Massachusetts,.
Murie, J.
1989 Ceremonies of the Pawnee: Part I: The Skiri and Part
II: The South Bands, edited by D . Parks. University
of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Newcomb, W.
2001 Wichita. In Handbook of North American Indians:
Plains, Volume 13, Part 2, edited by R . DeMallie,
pp. 548-566 . Smithsonian Institution, Washington,
D.C.
NOANDESDIS North American Drought Variability
2008 PDSI Grid for Drought Reconstructions in Canada,
United States and Mexico (Data for cell site 164 for
East-central Texas Panhandle used). www.ncdc.noaa.
gov/paleo/newpdsi.html.
Nowak, M. and K. Spurr
1989 Archaeological Investigations in Southeastern Colorado, 1988 Field Season. Publications in Archaeology No. 14. Colorado College, Colorado Springs.

Oliver, S. C.
1962 Ecology and Cultural Continuity as Contributing
Factors in. the Social Organization of the Plains
Indian. Publications in American Archaeology and
Ethnology 48(1): 1-90. University of California,
Berkeley.
Olsen, S.
1968 Appendix: The Osteology of the Wild Turkey. In Fish,
Amphibian and Reptile Remains from Archaeological
Sites. Part I: Southeastern and Southwestern United
States , by S. Olsen. Papers of the Peabody Museum
of Archaeology and Ethnology, Volume 56(2). Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts .
Parks, Douglas
2001a Pawnee. In Handbook of North American Indians:
Plains, Volume 13, Part 2, edited by R. DeMallie,
pp. 515-547. Smithsonian Institution, Washington,
D.C.
2001b Caddoan Languages. In: Handbook of North American Indians: Plains, Volume 13, Part 1, edited by
R. DeMallie, pp. 80-93 . Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C .
Pederson, R. , D . Jorde, and G. Simpson
1989 Northern Great Plains. In Habitat Management
for Migrating and Wintering Wateifowl in North
America, edited by L. Smith, R. Pederson, and R .
Kaminski, pp. 281 -310. Texas Tech University Press,
Lubbock.
Poodle History Project
2007 Duck dogs : traps. www.poodlehistory.org/pducktr.
htm, accessed on June 22, 2007.
Quigg, J.M.
1996 The Medicine Wheel Renewal Ceremony and Associated Events. In Archaeology and Native American
Religion at the Leon River Medicine Wheel , by J.M.
Quigg, C. Frederick, and D. Lippert, pp. 27-35. Archeological Resource Management Series Research
Report No. · 35. United States Army, Fort Hood,
Texas.
Quigg, J.M., C. Lintz, F. Oglesby, A. Earls, C. Frederick, W.
N. Trierweiler, D. Owsley and K. Kibler
1993 Historic and Prehistoric Data Recovery at Palo Dura
Reservoir, Hansford County, Texas. Technical Report
485. Mariah Associates Inc., Austin.

130

Texas Archeological Society

Renaud, E. B.
1930 Prehistoric Cultures of the Cimarron Valley, Northeast New Mexico and Western Oklahoma. Colorado
Scientific Society Proceedings 12(5):113-150.
Ringelman, J., W. Eddleman, and H. Miller
1987 High Plains Reservoirs and Sloughs. In Habitat Management for Migrating and Wintering Wateifowl in
North America, edited by L. Smith, R. Pederson, and
R. Kaminski, pp. 311 -340. Texas Tech University
Press, Lubbock.
Roper, D.
1994 A Note on the Quail and the Pawnee. Plains Anthropologist 39(147):73-77.
Schmidt-Couzzourt, B.
1983 The Chicken Creek Site: Archaeological Testing in the
Lake Meredith Recreation Area, Potter County, Texas.
United State Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Reclamation, Southwestern Region, Amarillo.
Schneider, F.
1969 The Roy-Smith Site (Bv-14), Beaver County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological
Society 18:119-179.
Setzler, F.
1935 A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwestern Texas.
American Anthropologist (ns) 37(1): 104-110.
Seyffert, K.
2000 Birds of the Texas Panhandle. Texas A& M University Press, College Station.
2001

Birds of the High Plains and Rolling Plains of Texas:
A Field Checklist. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.

Shackelford, C. and M. Lockwood
2000 The Birds of Texas: Occurrence and Seasonal
Movements . Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Austin.
Shafer, H., J. Dockall, D. Owsley, and T. Ellzey
1994 The Canyon Creek Site (410Cl3) : A Component
of the Southern Plains Equestrian Nomad Archeological Complex. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 62:285-333.
Shaffer, B., K. Gardner, and B. Baker
1996 Prehistoric Small Game Snare Trap Technology,
Deployment Strategy, and Trapper Gender Depicted
in Mimbres Pottery. Journal of Ethnobiology 16(2):
145-155.
Shaller, R., C. Lintz, and D. Owsley
1997 Description and Analysis of the Keith Site Burial,
41RD52, Randall County, Texas. The Steward: Collected Papers on Texas Archeology 4: 15-29. Office
of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Smith, L.
2003 Playas of the Great Plains. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Smith, L., R. Peterson, and R. Kaminski (editors)
1989 Habitat Management for Migrating and Wintering
Wateifowl in North America. Texas Tech University
Press, Lubbock.
Smith G. and R. Smith
1982 The Zollars Site: A Panhandle Aspect Hamlet
in Hutchinson County, Texas . Manuscript of the
Panhandle Archaeological Society on file at the
Panhandle-Plains Historical Society, Canyon.
Smith, R.
1989 Post Holes are for Posts. In the Light of Past Experience: Papers in Honor of Jack T Hughes , edited
by B. Roper, pp. 359-366. Publication 5. Panhandle
Archaeological Society, Amarillo.
Solomon J. K. Q., R. Austin, R. N. Cumberbatch, J. Gonsalves,
and E. Seaforth
2006 A comparison of live weight and carcass gain of Pekin, Kunshan and Muscovy ducks on a commercial
ration. Livestock Research for Rural Development.
Volume 18, Article No. 154. Accessed December 17,
2007, from http://www.cipav.org.co/lrrd/lrrdl8/l l/
solo 18154.htm
Speck, F. G.
1946 Catawba Hunting, Trapping and Fishing. Museum
of the University of Pennsylvania, and Publication 2
of the Philadelphia Anthropological Society, Philadelphia.
Speck, F. G., R. Hassrick, and E. Carpenter
1946 Rappahannock Taking Devices: Traps, Hunting and
Fishing. Museum of the University of Pennsylvania,
and Publication 1 of the Philadelphia Anthropological Society, Philadelphia.
Steen, C. R
1977 Pajarito Plateau Archeological Survey and Excavations. Energy Research and Development Administration Contract W-7405-ENG. 36. Los Alamos
Scientific Laboratory of the University of California,
Los Alamos, New Mexico.
Studer, F.
1934 Texas Panhandle Culture Ruin No. 55. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
6:80-96.
Stuiver, M. and P. J. Reimer
2000 Calib 4.3 Radiocarbon Calibration Program. Quaternary Isotope Laboratory, University of Washington,
Seattle.

Lintz-Avian Procurement and Use by People on the Southern High Plains 131
Uberlaker, D. and W. Wedel
1975 Bird Bones, Burials and Bundles in Plains Archaeology. American Antiquity 40(4):445-452.

Weir, F.

Wan,M.
1986 Room Function Analysis of the Saddleback Ruin,
A Late Prehistoric Site in the Texas Panhandle.
Transactions of the 21st Regional Archeological
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas 21:111-126.

Weltfish, G.

Watson, V.
1950 The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 21 :7-68.

Wilson, G.

Weinstein, A.
2005 Investigations at an Antelope Creek Phase Isolated
Homestead (41PT109). Master's Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas State University, San
Marcos.

Winchell, F. and F. Largent

Wedel, W.

Wissler, C.

1979

Some Reflections on Plains Caddoan Origins. Ne braska History 60(2):272-293 .

1912

1986

Central Plains Prehistory: Holocene Environments
and Culture Change in the Republican River Basin.
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

1979

1977

Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 50:5-68.
The Lost Universe . University of Nebraska Press,
Lincoln.

Wildschut, W. and J.C. Ewers
1959

1928

Crow Indian Beadwork. Museum of the American
Indian, Heye Foundation, New York.
Hidatsa Eagle Trapping. Anthropological Papers 30,
Part 4. The American Museum of Natural History,
New York.

1994 Test Excavations of 23 Archaeological Sites at the
U.S. Department of Energy Pantex Plant Facility,
Carson County, Texas . Miscellaneous Report of
Investigations 73. Geo-Marine Inc., Plano.
Ceremonial Bundles of the Blackfoot Indians.
Anthropological Papers 7, Part 2. The American
Museum of Natural History, New York.

Stable Isotope Analysis of Diet of the Mexican War D ead
from the Battle of Resaca de la Palma
Christine A. Jones

ABSTRACT
The battle of Resaca de la Palma was the second battle fought in the United States-Mexico War, near present
day Brownsville, Texas, on May 9, 1846. U.S. troops were victorious, and hundreds of dead Mexican soldiers were
buried in several mass graves. In 1967, one of these graves was excavated by archeologists at The University of
Texas at Austin and was found to contain at least 30 young to middle-aged adults, including three or more females.
In 1993, carbon and nitrogen stable isotope analyses were conducted on bone collagen and apatite samples from
six adult individuals from Resaca de la Palma, including one definite male, and five of indeterminate sex. The
mean carbon and nitrogen isotopes values are -10.9 ± 3.36%0 and 11.7 ± 1.45%0, respectively.

o

Overall, the 13C values of five individuals fall within the general range of maize-dependent populations.
However, 15 N values of some individuals are more enriched than those found in maize-dependent populations,
suggesting freshwater or marine resources may have been part of the diet. In addition, values are not tightly
clustered, but instead show dietary variability between individuals. The coastal component of the diet is most
likely explained by the fact that soldiers may have been stationed at, or drafted from, coastal locations, which
would have been closest to the battlefield site. The lack of clustering of values also suggests a diverse group of
new soldiers reflecting the diverse isotopic signature of their home diets, and/or the presence of older soldiers
with signatures of dietary variability inherent in a "soldier's" diet, since rations were not issued, and soldiers
(or their soldaderas) had to get food for themselves.

o

INTRODUCTION

Several stable isotope studies (Huebner 1991,
1994; Huebner et al. 1996; Perttula 2001) have
been published in Texas with regards to prehistoric
burial sites in South Texas, since little archeological evidence is available to help narrow down possible dietary choices represented in the regional
archeological record. In contrast, few if any stable
isotope studies have been published of the historical
war dead, possibly because historical documentation, particularly for the United States military, is
exceptionally detailed. During the Mexican war,
U.S. sergeants reported on the provisions given to
soldiers, and soldiers would often write in diaries or
letters about their rations, or lack thereof, and the
large variety of foods they could purchase in Mexico
(Bloom 1956). In contrast, similar documents for
Mexican soldiers are hard to come by, possibly due
to the differences in rationing of Mexican soldiers
and the nature of the Mexican army in general (DePalo 1997).

Lacking sufficient documentary evidence, the
stable isotope study of the Mexican war dead from
the Battle of Resaca de la Palma presented here can
suggest the nature of the adult diet consumed by
Mexican soldiers. However, because of bone collagen turnover rates, it would take at least 10 years
of eating a soldier's diet before isotope values would
be dramatically affected (Libby et al. 1964). Since
the length of service of the soldiers presented in
this study is unknown, the isotope values of some
soldiers may reflect their diets in service to a variable degree, while others represent diet from home
lands prior to service. Specifically, results presented
in this article may be indicative of dietary variability
during the time of military service, or whether or not
these individuals originally came from similar locations, assuming that diets from one particular location were not widely variable at that time. Thus, the
stable isotope results from the Resaca de la Palma
war dead provide a glimpse into the adult diet of the
average Mexican soldier, both prior to and possibly
during service.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 80 (2009)

134

Texas Archeological Society
HISTORICAL CONTEXT

The Battle of Resaca de la Palma was the second battle of the Mexican-American War, and took
place near present day Brownsville, Texas, on May
9m, 1846. The U.S . was victorious, but prior to the
battle and the war itself, the Texas-Mexican border
from Matamoros to San Antonio was not free from
strife. Ten years earlier, in 1836, Texas had not yet
officially joined the United States. These rebellious
Texans were already fighting against the Mexican
army, as the Mexican government still considered
most of Texas part of Mexico and wanted to enforce
its laws. With the majority of its forces still in the
core of Mexico, the Mexican expedition army of
about 6,000 troops that campaigned into Texas was
poorly equipped, undernourished, and exhausted
from the long trek of 600 miles over rough terrain
into South Texas (DePalo 1997). Nevertheless, the
Mexican army's expedition into Texas ended in victory at the Alamo on March 6, 1836.
By 1846, Texas had joined the United States
and the Mexican-American War had begun. At that
time the Mexican Army had (on paper) 18,000
permanent troops, including 10,000 active militia,
scattered about the country in regional garrisons
(DePalo 1997). The average Mexican soldier was
Indian or mestizo and could have come from anywhere in the country (Haecker and Mauck 1997).
Indian soldiers were often unable to speak Spanish,
and were largely unprepared for the sometimes
freezing temperatures they would face in Texas
(DePalo 1997; Haecker and Mauck 1997). If a
soldier was a volunteer, length of service lasted
eight years, while conscripts served 10 years (DePalo 1997). Soldiers to be drafted were chosen in a
lottery at the end of October, and in April of 1846,
men with no place of residence or employment
were arrested, tried, and mustered into the army
(DePalo 1997).
Services provided by the army to soldiers were
inconsistent: pay was erratic, clothes and equipment
were often lacking, and rations were not usually issued (DePalo 1997). The lack of government supply
depots meant supplies were not readily available,
and soldiers were forced to find or buy their own
food. A soldier's wife or girlfriend, and in some
cases her children, would often accompany him;
she was referred to as a soldadera. Soldaderas were
responsible for foraging, cooking, sewing, and the
maintenance of equipment (DePalo 1997). The questionable dedication of drafted soldiers, combined

with inconsistent services, led to a high desertion
rate and an inadequately prepared army.
The overwhelming victory of the U.S. soldiers
at the Battle of Resaca de la Palma in May 1846 resulted in the injury or death of hundreds of Mexican
soldiers. U.S . military forces buried the nearly 200
Mexican War dead in mass graves, while 400 injured
soldiers were left behind by the retreating Mexican
forces that did not have sufficient transportation for
them (DePalo 1997). A recent study of the paleopathology of the skeletal remains of 30 individuals
from one of these mass graves revealed that several
soldiers had healed injuries from past engagements
(Baker et al. 2006). These soldiers also exhibited
indications of arduous physical activity in their
lower limbs, and nearly half had unhealed projectile
or sharp-force trauma.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials

A small portion of the battle site of Resaca de la
Palma was excavated in 1967 by archeologists from
The University of Texas at Austin. Excavation of one
of the mass burials led to the recovery of the skeletal
remains of 30 young to middle-aged adults, including three or more females. Samples were selected for
stable isotope analysis by the late Jeff Huebner, who
sent them to Krueger Enterprises, Inc. (now Geochron
laboratories) in 1993. Stable carbon and nitrogen
isotope analysis was conducted on six individuals
from Resaca de la Palma. Table 1 lists the skeletal
inventory information available for those samples
from the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL) Osteological Database at The University of
Texas at Austin. Unfortunately, an accession number
was not listed for one of the samples (titled RES ?)
and so inventory information for that individual is not
available. Burial type, skeletal elements recorded, and
state of preservation are also listed in Table 1. One
individual was determined to be male, and five individuals were of indeterminate sex. This introduces the
possibility that the stable isotope samples selected of
individuals of unknown sex may be soldaderas.
As the sample was originally analyzed in
1993, and sample records are currently unavailable
(although they may be in the future), the methods
used for sample preparation and analysis are not
known. However, methods used in later studies
by Huebner, where analysis was performed at

Jones-Stable Isotope Analysis of Diet of the Mexican War Dead 135
Table 1. Skeletal Inventory Information for Resaca de la Palma Stable Isotope Samples, TARL
Osteological Database.

Burial# Burial Type

Sex

RES 11
Single
RES 31 Composite
RES 16 Composite
RES?
?
RES 19 Composite
RES 17
Single

Indet
?
?
?
?
Male

Cranial
elements

Teeth

x

x

?

?

x

Long
Bones

Vertebrae

x
x
x

x

x
x

?

?

?

x

x
x

x

x

Innominate

Preservation
FE
FE
WE
?
WE
FG

Key: ?=information unavailable; X=skeletal element(s) present; FE=fragmentary, eroded; WE=whole,
eroded; FG=fragmentary, good condition; Indet = indeterminate

Geochron laboratories (Huebner 1994 ), may be
comparable. Stable isotope analysis by Geochron
of bone collagen at the Mitchell Ridge site followed
these methods: Bone samples were first cleaned
manually, then in Alconox, and given an overnight
bath in lN acetic acid until reaction with carbonates
ceased. Samples were then neutralized and crushed
to a 1 mm powder and given an additional acid
bath to ensure removal of carbonates. One gram of
bone powder was demineralized in IN HCL and
the collagen separated by decantation and filtration.
HCL was added and the mixture dissolved by
boiling. The resulting liquid was filtered through
fine fiberglass and filtrate evaporated and transferred
to crucibles where it was dried in an oven to form a
crystalline gelatin. 20 mg of bone gelatin and excess
CuO were placed in a pyrex tube, evacuated, sealed,
and held in an oven at 500° C overnight. Resulting
C0 2 , N 2 , and H 2 0 were cryogenically separated
into carbon and nitrogen gas for analysis. Analyses
of gases for 813 C and 815 N were performed on a
Micromass 903 triple collecting mass spectrometer.
Results are expressed in 3o as 8 values where:
13

13

12

8 C (3o) = [ C/ C sample -1] x 1000
13 C/ 12C standard
8 15N(3o) = [15N/ 14N sample -1] x 1000
15 N/ 14 N standard
Stable Isotope Analysis
Isotopes are the atoms of an element which
only differ in their number of neutrons. Because

additional neutrons increase the mass of an atom,
the carbon ( 12C) atom is referred to as 'light,'
while its isotope 13 C has an additional neutron,
and is thus referred to as 'heavy.' Heavy isotopes
react more slowly than light isotopes in chemical
reactions (Katzenberg 2000). What results in the
tissue of an organism is a ratio of heavy isotopes
to light isotopes that is the result of the exclusion
of some of the heavier isotopes in the organism's
use of that element, called an isotope effect. Thus,
the isotope effect results in different isotopic ratios
in an organism's tissues which affects fractionation
(Katzenberg 2000). Fractionation is defined as the
difference in the ratio of heavy and light isotopes in
an organism compared to the relative composition of
a known standard (Katzenberg 2000). The standard
for carbon is PeeDee Belemite (PDB), which is no
longer naturally available, so vPDB or a synthetic of
this standard is now used. For nitrogen, the standard
is AIR, the atmospheric standard of nitrogen.
Terrestrial Carbon
Stable carbon isotope values are the expression
of the use of carbon by an organism in its tissues, and
these are dependent on where the carbon is derived,
and in plants, the photosynthetic process. Terrestrial
plants uptake carbon from the atmosphere (value of
-730), and depending on the type of photosynthesis
used, each type will affect fractionation differently
(Katzenberg 2000). There are three different types
of photosynthesis: C 3 pathway, C4 pathway, and
CAM (Crassulacean Acid Metabolism) pathway;
each of the types of plants which use these types

136

Texas Archeological Society

of photosynthesis (C 3 plants, C4 plants, and CAM
plants) will have different fractionation values . C3
plants are the most depleted in 13 C (value -26%0),
while C 4 plants are the most enriched (-12%0)
(Katzenberg 2000). Major classes of plant foods
are defined by the pathway they utilize. C 3 plants
include temperate plant species such as trees , while
C4 plants include tropical grasses, such as maize,
sorghum, millet, and sugar cane (Katzenberg 2000).
Edible CAM plants in the South Texas region, many
of which yield 8C 13 values in the C4 plant range,
include prickly pear and yucca (Huebner 1991).
Animals consume carbon when they consume
plants, and depending on the pathway, the stable carbon isotope values of animals will differ. To measure
carbon in animals , researchers can use collagen or
carbonate (apatite). Collagen is the structural protein
in bone, while carbonate is the mineral component.
Collagen in bone can take 10-30 years to replace
itself (turnover), and therefore it is a better estimate
of lifetime diet (Libby et al. 1964). The effect of
fractionation in the collagen of animals has been
studied experimentally, and in general collagen is
530 more enriched in 8 13 C than the diet food (Ambrose and Norr 1993 ; Tieszen and Fagre 1993). In
addition, there are differences between collagen
and carbonate with respect to the type of dietary
information they provide. Experimental studies
have shown that collagen reflects the carbon from
protein in the diet, while apatite is a better reflection
of carbon in the total diet (Ambrose and Norr 1993;
Tieszen and Fagre 1993).

Freshwater and Marine Carbon
Freshwater aquatic plants have 8 13 C values
similar to terrestrial C 3 plants, but because the
source of carbon for marine organisms is marine
bicarbonate (value of 030) rather than atmospheric
carbon, marine plants are 7%o enriched in 13 C when
compared to terrestrial plants. Thus, the values of C3
plants and marine plants significantly differ, but 13 C
values overlap between CiCAM plants, sea grasses,
and marine algae. Only in terrestrial habitats dominated by C 3 plants can a marine component to the
diet be distinguished using 13 C values alone (Pate
1994; Schoeninger and DeNiro 1984).

Terrestrial Nitrogen
In addition to stable carbon isotopes, stable
nitrogen isotopes are also useful in establishing the

character of the human or animal diet, particularly in
determining the role of protein in the diet. Nitrogen
is taken up by plants from organic matter in the soil,
and plant values range between 330 and 630, with
the exception of nitrogen-fixing plants like legumes
that have values closer to the atmospheric standard
(030). When animals eat the plants, they excrete
light nitrogen isotopes, keeping proportionately
more of the heavy isotopes in their tissues. Thus,
nitrogen values reflect a trophic level effect, where
nitrogen values become more enriched in 15 N as
one moves up the food chain. Specifically, collagen is 330 more enriched in 15 N than the diet food
(Katzenberg 2000) .

Freshwater and Marine Nitrogen
15

N enriched nitrates and ammonia are present
in freshwater and marine environments as atmospheric N 2 dissolves in water. In addition, in both
freshwater and marine environments, an additional
source of available nitrogen is available through nitrogen fixation by bacteria and blue-green algae. As
a result of these differences, 8 15 N values for aquatic
organisms are more enriched than those of terrestrial
organisms (Pate 1994). Since marine food chains
are longer than terrestrial food chains, with more
15 N tropic enrichment steps, and marine plants and
marine herbivores are usually minor portions ofterrestrial animal diets, diets based primarily on marine
foods or terrestrial foods should be distinguishable
based on bone collagen 8 15 N values (Pate 1994;
Schoeninger and DeNiro 1984). Collagen 8 15 N
values for terrestrial mammals range from 1.930
to 1030, while values for marine mammals range
from 11.730 to 22.930 (Pate 1994; Schoeninger and
DeNiro 1984).

RESULTS
Delta 13 C values for bone apatite and collagen,
and 8 15 N values for bone collagen, from the Resaca de la Palma burials are provided in Table 2.
Individuals from Resaca de la Palma have collagen
13 C values that range between -7.430 to -16.130
with a mean of -10.930 and a standard deviation
of 3.330. There is an 8.630 difference between the
most enriched and the most depleted 13 C value in the
sample. Apatite 13 C values range between -2.930 to
-10.730 with a mean of -5.8730 and a standard deviation of 2.93 0. Lastly, 8 15 N values range between

Jones-Stable Isotope Analysis of Diet of the Mexican War Dead 137
Table 2.

o13C and o15N values for Resaca de la Palma Individuals.

Sample

o13C Apatite

o13C Collagen

o15N Collagen

RESll

-10.7

-16.1

10.4

RES31

-7.1

-12.3

11.7

RES16

-6.7

-12.4

14.l

RES?

-2.9

-7.4

. 10.1

RES19

-3.4

-7.5

11.8

RES17

-4.4

-9.7

12.5

MEAN

-5.87

-10.9

11.77

RANGE

-2.9 to
-10.7

-7.4 to
-16.1

10. l to
14.1

10.1%0 to 14.1%0 with a .mean of 11.77%0 and a
standard deviation of 1.45%0.
Experimental studies suggest animals eating a
monotonous diet should have 13 C (and also 815 N)
values that fall within 1%0 of each other (DeNiro
and Schoeninger 1983). Thus, the difference in
8 13 C values for collagen at 8.6%0 suggests that the
diets of the individual Mexican soldiers in the Battle
of Resaca de la Palma sample are highly variable.
Even after removing the highest value of -16. l %0,
the difference of 5%o between the most enriched
and the most depleted 13 C value suggests diets that
are still quite variable in 8 13 C when compared to
a monotonous diet. The range of 15 N values also
suggests diets that were variable in 8 15N. However,
these values are more clustered relative to 8 13 C values, and the difference between the most enriched
and the most depleted 815 N value is only 4%o (see
Table 2).

o

o

INTERPRETATION AND
DISCUSSION
The results are presented in two figures , both
bivariate plots based on data tables included here.
Figure 1 plots 8 13 C collagen along the X axis and

013 C apatite along the Y axis, based on the results
provided in Table 2. Figure 2 plots 813 C collagen
values along the X axis and 8 15 N values along the
Y axis based on data in Table 3.
Figure 1 compares the Resaca de la Palma
sample to a predictive model that outlines a range
of dietary groups developed by Krueger and Sullivan (1984), and later by Huebner (1991), based on
collagen and apatite spacing. The 813 C values show
that the Resaca de la Palma individuals fall into four
general dietary groups: one individual corresponds
with the dietary group that has a C3 plant and marine
food diet, two lie in the overlap between a mixed
maize diet or a CiCAM plant and C3 meat diet, one
individual .corresponds with a mixed food diet of
mainly maize, and two individuals correspond with
a C4 plant and C4 meat diet.
Even though the collagen values show a range
of variability spanning four different diet types,
five of the six individuals have isotopic values
indicative of a diet relying on C4 plants rather than
C3 plants. These values are not unexpected given
the importance of maize in the traditional Mexican
diet, as well as its use historically in South Texas,
such as at the San Juan Capistrano mission in San
Antonio (Cargill and Hard 1999). However, two
other sources may account for the high C4 values.

138

Texas Archeological Society

0

w

.... -5

~Q.
<(

0

....

c,o -10

• Resaca samples

-15

n•6

-20

-15

-10

-5

813

C GELATIN (COLLAGEN)

Human Dietarv Groups
1. c 3 plants
2. C3 plants + C3 meat
3. C4plants

7. C3 plants+ marine
8. C3 plants + C4 meat
9. CAM/C4 plants+
C3meat

4. C4 plants+ C4 meat
5. Marine only
6. Mixed, mainly maize

o

Figure 1. 13C isotopic signatures from the Resaca de la Palma sample, compared
with the model diets from Krueger and Sullivan (1984) and Huebner (1991).

20
18
16
• RES 16

i:14
E
:p 12

• RES17

•Mussels/Crab (riverine)

.s

• Catfish
• Fish (riverine)

~ 10

• RES 31

• MISSIOtl' RES 19

• RESACA 11 ""c~~TifuHsELL

• RES ?

:I

~

z
It)

,..
IO

•

8

S.TEXAS

• sh:eru~::

• Javellna

6

•cow

•

Gar

• PondTurt.le

4
• Deer

2
0
-25

-20

-15
~13C

Figure 2.Collagen
and fauna.

-10

-5

0

Values (per mil)

o13C and o15N values for Resaca de la Palma individuals, selected sites,

Jones-Stable Isotope Analysis of Diet of the Mexican War Dead 139
Table 3. 813 C and 815N Values for Selected Prehistoric and Historic sites, as well as for Fauna.

8 13 C collagen ,

815 N collagen

Reference

Prehistoric Humans
Corpus Christi (Coastal),
mean value
South Texas (Inland)

-13
-16

10.5
8.5

Huebner 1994
Huebner et al. 1996

Mitchell Ridge (Coastal),
mean value

-13 .2

10.4

Huebner 1994

Historic Humans
San Juan Capistrano mission,
mean value

-9.5

11.9

Cargill and Hard 1999

Resaca de la Palma,
mean value

-10.9

11.8

This study

Fauna
Mussels/Crab
(Riverine)
Fish (Riverine)
Gar
Deer

-24
-21
-11.3
-20.7

12
10
6.6
2.4

Huebner
Huebner
Huebner
Huebner

Fauna (historic)
Cow
Javelina
Catfish
Pond Turtle
Turkey
Sheep/Goat

-15
-15 .8
-20.9
-19.2
-16
-17

5.7
7.3
10.6
5
6.1
6.5

Cargill and Hard
Cargill and Hard
.Cargill and Hard
Cargill and Hard
Cargill and Hard
Cargill and Hard

313 C muscle
-8.7
-15.7

315N muscle
8.3
13.3

Marine Fish (Sea Grass)
Marine Fish (Open water)

Plants common to Texas and Mexico such as yucca
and prickly pear have a CAM isotopic signature in
the same range as C4 plants (Huebner 1991). These
plants may also have been part of the diet, depending on cultural preferences, or especially if food
supplies were not available and foraging became a
necessity. Furthermore, sea grasses and marine algae
also have isotopic values that fall into the range of
C4 plants, and if marine organisms eating such plants
were consumed, these values would be passed along
to the Resaca de la Palma individuals. It is difficult

1994
1994
1994
1994

1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999

Huebner 1994
Huebner 1994

to distinguish the types of animals that would have
been consumed by these individuals using 813 C values alone. While deer are known to eat C 3 plants and
have produced values consistent with C 3 consumers
(Land et al. 1980; Huebner 1994), the types of plants
eaten by other animals, especially domesticated
animals for which food is supplemented by humans,
can vary, leading to a range of different values.
Figure 2 compares the Resaca de la Palma
samples (see Table 2) to sample values from selected
prehistoric and historic sites in Texas, as well as

140

Texas Archeological Society

to faunal collagen samples (see Table 3). The only
samples not plotted from Table 3 are the marine
fish, since these are meat values, and Figure 2 only
includes collagen values. The values for marine fish
in Table 3 are more enriched than their collagen
values would be due to fractionation; experimental
studies indicate that muscle (meat) ()BC values are
approximately 2.25%0 more enriched than collagen
(Tieszen and Fagre 1993). Figure 3 demonstrates
that the Resaca de la Palma samples are most similar
to the mean sample value from the San Juan Capistrano mission (discussed in detail below), but are also
similar to coastal Texas prehistoric samples.
As suggested by the values in Figure 1, ()BC
values in Figure 3 indicate a greater proportion of
C 4 plants in the diet than C 3 plants. However, if the
elevated C 4 signature was the result of maize consumption alone, the 815 N values would be expected
to fall near the range of about 8 to 9%o reported for
maize agriculturalists (Schoeninger and DeNiro
1984). Instead, 8 15 N values for four of the Resaca
individuals (RES31, RES16, RES19, and RES17)
deviate from the high end of the maize agriculturalist range by 2.7%o to 5 .1 %0, suggesting consumption
of proteins greater than those provided by maize
alone. The 815 N values for cow, pond turtle, sheep/
goat, and turkey, sampled by Cargill and Hard
(1999) at Mission San Juan Capistrano, are all too

low to account for the 815 N values of the Resaca de
la Palma individuals, once the trophic effect of 3%o
is taken into account (Table 4). However, values for
javelina, catfish, riverine fish, riverine mussel/crab,
and marine fish in open water have sufficiently high
815 N values to account for the Resaca de la Palma
sample values. Interestingly enough, the 8 15 N values
for RES31, RES16, RES19, and RES17 fall within
the range for marine mammals (11.7%0 to 22.9%0,
Schoeninger and DeNiro 1984). Thus, 815 N values
suggest a strong marine or freshwater component
to the diet of at least four of the Resaca de la Palma
individuals.
Comparative Sample:
Mission San Juan Capistrano
Cargill and Hard (1999) reported that the stable
isotope values at Mission San Juan Capistrano
were typical of maize-dependent populations. In
support of these results , historical records also
indicated that maize was an important component
of the diet. However, archeological evidence of beef
consumption at the site did not correspond with the
isotopic evidence. Instead, the stable isotope values
indicated that individuals that died and were buried
at the mission were consuming freshwater or nearshore marine resources. Cargill and Hard (1999)

Table 4. 815N Collagen Values Adjusted to Account for Trophic Level Effect.
Fauna
Mussels/Crab (Riverine)
Fish (Riverine)
Gar
Deer
Cow
Javelina
Catfish
Pond Turtle
Turkey
Sheep/Goat

815N collagen

Adjusted

o15N (+3%0)

12
10
6.6
2.4
5.7
7.3
10.6
5
6.1
6.5

15
13
9.6
5.4
8.7
10.3
13.6
8
9.1
9.5

8.3
13.3

9.05
14.05

o15N muscle*
Marine Fish (Sea Grass)
Marine Fish (Open water)

*Values were first converted into collagen values (-2.2530 to account for enrichment of muscle relative to
collagen), then adjusted for trophic effect.

Jones-Stable Isotope Analysis of Diet of the Mexican War Dead 141

0

6

w

i--5

~Q.
<(

0
('I)
'\""

c.o

-10

+ Resaca samples

-15

n=6
•

~~s~:~a~~n Juan
n=19

-20

-15

813
Human Dietary Groups
1. c 3 plants
2. C3 plants + C3 meat
3. C4plants

-10

-5

C GELATIN (COLLAGEN)

c

4. 4 plants + C4 meat
5. Marine only
6. Mixed, mainly maize

7. c3 plants+ marine
8. C3 plants+ C4 meat
9. CAM/C4 plants +
c 3 meat

o

Figure 3. 13 C isotopic signatures from the Resaca de la Palma sample and the Mission
San Juan Capistrano sample, adapted from Krueger and Sullivan (1984) and Huebner
(1991) . The large diamonds are the Resaca sample values while the smaller dots are
the Mission sample values.

concluded that the isotopic signatures of the mission
inhabitants reflected the diets of their native homes,
rather than the mission diet of maize and beef. Since
the sample mean reported for Mission San Juan
Capistrano is so similar to that of the individuals at
Resaca de la Palma, a more in-depth comparison of
the values at these two sites is presented here.
Mission San Juan Capistrano dates to the 18th
century, and is located in San Antonio. Thus, the
comparison of these two sample sets is rele~ant, as
foods available both historically and in the general
region are comparable. At San Juan Capistrano, stable carbon (both coliagen and apatite) and nitrogen
samples of 19 individuals were analyzed. These val-

ues were plotted along with the Resaca de la Palma
values in Figures 3 and 4. These figures suggest that
while diets overall were similar for these two groups
of individuals, the diets of the Resaca de la Palma
individuals were far more variable, while the Mission San Juan Capistrano values are more clustered.
The majority of the Mission San Juan Capistrano
values fall within the mixed maize dietary group
(see Figure 3), and none indicate a significant C3
component in the diet, while one of the Resaca individuals does fall in ~he C3 plant consumer dietary
group. Without 15N values, however, Figure 3 dQes
not represent the entirety of the dietary differences
between these two samples. Plotting both 13 C and

o

o

142

Texas Archeological Society

20

18

16
--IL

14

•
... • _;_4---..
~·;

Vl

~2
_,

...

~
~10

...
--IL

8

4

2

0
-25

-20

-15

-10

.5

13C VALUES

Figure 4. Collagen 8 13C and 8 15N values for Resaca de la Palma and Mission San Juan Capistrano individuals. The larger
triangles represent the Resaca sample values while the smaller diamonds are the Mission sample values.

8 15 N values shows the clustering in the Mission
San Juan Capistrano sample and the variability in
the Resaca de la Palma sample even more clearly
than using 8 13 C values alone (see Figure 4). Thus,
the stable isotope values for the Resaca de la Palma
individuals, especially when compared with the
Mission San Juan Capistrano values, indicate dietary
variability between these individuals.

CONCLUSIONS

The 8 13 C values of five individuals from the
Resaca de la Palma battlefield fall within the general range of maize-dependent populations. 8 15N
values suggest that freshwater or marine resources
may have been part of the diet of at least four individuals, and terrestrial fauna were almost certainly
part of the diet for all individuals. In addition, the
isotopic values are not tightly clustered, but instead
show dietary variability between individuals. The
fact that individuals from Resaca de la Palma show
such dietary variability is probably due to the fact

that Mexican soldiers could have been drafted from,
or stationed at, any region in the country (DePalo
1997). These values suggest that isotopic signatures may represent older soldiers' diets in military
service, newer soldiers' homeland diets, or a mix
of both; all should be characterized by high levels
of variability. Since older soldiers in service were
not relying on a standard diet of government-issued
rations, variability as a result of the movements
of the soldier into different regions and whatever
foodstuffs were available would have been great,
especially during the time surrounding the MexicanAmerican war, where troops would have been moving about the Texas-Mexican border (DePalo 1997).
Diets of newer soldiers would have been variable as
well, considering that new soldiers may well have
been conscripts, volunteers, or unwilling draftees or
vagrants, with dietary differences as a result of their
region of origin as well as their cultural preferences
(mestizo or Indian).
Unfortunately, stable carbon and nitrogen
values alone cannot satisfactorily distinguish new
soldiers from old, or those that might have hailed

Jones-Stable Isotope Analysis of Diet of the Mexican War Dead 143
from similar or different home lands. One avenue
of research that would help to distinguish the geographic origin of the Resaca de la Palma soldiers
is stable oxygen isotopes. The oxygen isotope
signature in the tissues of an animal will reflect
the signature of its water source, and depending on
climate and rainfall patterns, different geographic
regions have characteristically different oxygen
isotope values (Katzenberg 2000). For example,
White et al. (2002) use oxygen isotopes to determine
the geographic identity of sacrificial victims at the
Feathered Serpent pyramid at the site ofTeotihuacan
in Mexico. Both tooth enamel and bone collagen
oxygen isotope values are used to reflect residence
in childhood and adulthood.
Since tooth enamel is formed during childhood,
while bone values reflect long-term diet, oxygen
isotopes can provide information on the geographic
identity of individuals both as children and adults.
White et al.'s (2002) results indicated that some individuals were "born and raised" in the area, while
others were immigrants from foreign locations who
had lived in the area for their adult life, while others
still were recent immigrants. In addition, an important part of the study was the use of a geographic
baseline to determine local oxygen isotope values,
and in this case a contemporaneous archeological
skeletal sample was taken in Teotihuacan to reflect
the local oxygen isotopic value, and other average
values were available for other relevant locations in
the area to determine local or foreign residence. A
similar study could conceivably be undertaken using
the Resaca de la Palma samples. In that case, oxygen isotope sample values for different regions in
Mexico and Texas would also be needed to establish
geographic baselines to interpret the results.

REFERENCES CITED
Ambrose, S. H. and L. Norr
1993 Experimental evidence for the relationship of the carbon isotope ratios of whole diet and dietary protein
to those of bone collagen and carbonate. In Prehistoric Human Bone: Archaeology at the Molecular
Level, edited by J. Lambert and G. Grupe, pp. 1-37.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Baker, L. E. , D. Wescott, D. C. Wernecke, and M. B. Collins
2006 Skeletal trauma analysis of the Mexican War dead
from the battle of Resaca de la Palma. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology supplement
42:61.

Bloom, J.P.
1956 With the American Army Into Mexico. Ph.D. dissertation, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
Cargill, D. A and R. J. Hard
1999 Assessing Native American Mobility versus Permanency at Mission San Juan de Capistrano through the
Use of Stable Isotope Analysis . Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 70: 197-213 .
DeNiro, M. J. and M. J. Schoeninger
1983 Stable carbon and nitrogenjsotope ratios of bone collagen: Variations within individuals, between sexes,
and within populations raised on monotonous diets .
Journal of Archaeological Science 10: 199-203.
DePalo, W. A.
1997. The Mexican National Army, 1822-1852. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station, Texas.
Haecker, C. M. and J. G. Mauck
1997 On the Prairie of Palo Alto: Historical Archaeology
of the U.S.-Mexican War Battlefield. Texas A&M
University Press , College Station, Texas.
Huebner, J. A.
1991 Cactus for Dinner, Again! An Isotopic Analysis of
Late Archaic Diet in the Lower Pecos Region of
Texas. In Papers on Lower Pecos Prehistory, edited
by S. A. Turpin, pp. 175-190. Studies in Archeology
8. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1994

Stable Carbon and Nitrogen Isotope Analysis of Human Diets at the Mitchell Ridge Site. In Aboriginal
Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell Ridge Site, 41GV66, Galveston Island, by R. A. Ricklis, pp. 406-416. Coastal
Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus Christi.

Huebner, J. A., R. Blackbum, C. K. Chandler, J. L. Mitchell,
and E. H. Schmiedlin
1996 Human Burial Recovery from 41KA89, Karnes
County, Texas. La Tierra 23(1): 16-20.
Katzenberg, M. A.
2000 Stable isotope analysis: A tool for studying past
diet, demography, and life history. In Biological
Anthropology of the Human Skeleton, edited by M.
A. Katzenberg and S. R . Saunders, pp . 305-327.
Wiley-Liss, Inc., New York.
Krueger H.W. and C.H. Sullivan
1984 Models for carbon isotope fractionation between diet
and bone. In Stable isotopes and nutrition, edited by
J. R. Turnland and P. E. Johnson, pp. 205-220. ACS
Symposium Series, No. 258. American Chemical
Society, Washington, D.C.
Land L.S., E. L. Lundelius, and S. Valastro
1980 Isotopic ecology of deer bones. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 32: 143-151.

144

Texas Archeological Society

Libby W.F., R. Berger, J. F. Mead, G. V. Alexander, and J.
F. Ross
1964 Replacement rates for human tissue from atmospheric radiocarbon. Science 146: 1170-1172.
Pate, F. D.
1994 Bone Chemistry and Paleodiet. Journal ofArchaeological Method and Theory 1(2): 161-209.
Perttula, T. K.
2001 Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices in the Rio
Grande Plains and Central Coastal Plains Archeological Regions of Texas. La Tierra 28 (3/4):2-83.
Schoeninger M. J. and M. J. DeNiro
1984 Nitrogen and carbon isotopic composition of bone
collagen from marine and terrestrial animals. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 48:625-639 .

Tieszen L. L. and T. Fagre
1993 Effect of Diet Quality and Composition of the Isotopic Composition of Respiratory C02, Bone Collagen, Bioapatite, and Soft Tissues. In Prehistoric
Human Bone: Archaeology at the Molecular Level,
edited by J. Lambert and G. Grupe, pp. 121-156.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
White C. D., M. W. Spence, F. J. Longstaffe, H. StuartWilliams, and K. R. Law
2002 Geographic identities of the sacrificial victims from
the Feathered Serpent Pyramid, Teotihuacan. Ancient
Mesoamerica 15:1-15.

Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington
Square Mound Site (41NA49) in Nacogdoches
County, Texas: 1985 Texas Archeological
Field School Investigations
Timothy K. Perttula, with the contributions of Bo Nelson and Mark Walters

INTRODUCTION

Field School, synthesize the archeological findings
gained from the study of the artifacts and what
they may tell about the history of Caddo use of
the mound center, and compile an inventory of the
recovered prehistoric artifacts.

In 1985, the Texas Archeological Society (TAS)
held their annual Field School at the Washington
Square Mound Site (41NA49) in Nacogdoches, Texas. The site is a regionally significant multiple mound
center built and occupied by the prehistoric ancestors
of the Caddo Nation of Oklahoma between ca. A.D.
HISTORY OF THE ARCHEOLOGICAL
1250-1425. It is also a formally designated State
INVESTIGATIONS
Archeological Landmark, and the artifacts recovered
The Washington Square Mound site is an imfrom the site during the Field School are considered
portant prehistoric Caddo multiple mound center in
to be held-in-trust collections under the Antiquities
Code of Texas. These artifacts are curated at Stephen
East Texas. The site, most of which is on property
F. Austin State University (SPA) in Nacogdoches.
owned by the Nacogdoches Independent School
The Principal Investigator for the TAS Field
District, is located on an upland interftuve (310 feet
School at Washington Square Mound was Dr.
amsl) between Banita Creek on the west and La
James E. Corbin of SPA. Corbin and Hart (1998)
Nana Creek on the east (Figure 1). Both creeks are
summarized the overall results of the
archeological investigations at the
site, including the 1985 TAS workamidst a summary of the work done ·
there by SPA since the late 1970s during various university field schools
and other investigations (see Corbin
1980, 1982a, 1982b, 1983, 1984,
1985a, 1985b; Corbin et al. 1984;
Hart 1980, 1982; Kisling 1983). The
ceramics and other artifacts recovered
from the site during the course of the
TAS Field School were not analyzed
or reported as part of the Corbin and
Hart (1998:76) article, although they
had mentioned that this work was
intended, and they remained unanalyzed and unreported more than 22
years later. In late 2007, the TAS
agreed to a proposal I submitted to
the Board of Directors to complete
Figure 1. The general setting of the Washington Square Mound site
the analysis of the recovered prebetween Banita and La Nana creeks (from Corbin and Hart 1998:Figure
3). Reproduced with the permission of the Texas Archeological Society.
historic artifacts from the 1985 TAS
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 80 (2009)

146

Texas Archeological Society

relatively large and deep pit dug into, or capped by,
tributaries to the Angelina River. This part of East
a mound ... these burials were embellished by nuTexas is within the Pineywoods vegetational region
merous offerings, many of materials indicating the
(Diggs et al. 2006:Figure 41).
The site appears to have primarily been occuexistence of long distance trade networks possibly
controlled by elites ."
pied by ancestors of the modem-day Caddo Indian
peoples between ca. A.D. 1250-1425 (Corbin and Hart
In addition to the SFA investigations in Mounds
1998:Table 4; Perttula et al. 2008). Based on a pooled
1/2 and Mound 4, significant amounts of excavations
sample of calibrated radiocarbon dates from a number
have been conducted in areas between the mounds
that must have been the scene of important political
of features, Corbin and Hart (1998:74) suggest that
the primary occupation at Washington Square Mound
and religious rituals as well as community feasts.
dates to cal. AD 1268-1302, but this calibrated age
The majority of that work has been completed in
range is unrealistically narrow given the character of
Area A, midway between Mounds 1/2 and Mound
the pooled samples (Corbin and Hart 1998:Table 4). 1
4 (Figure 2), and Area B about 70 m to the south.
During this occupation, the Caddo erected
Corbin (1984) had previously noted that this area,
at least three mounds, the University Mound or
specifically south of N235 and east of Wl 10 in Area
A on the site grid (see Figure 2), had well-preserved
Mounds 1/2, Mound 3, and Mound 4 or the ReavelyHouse Mound (Corbin and Hart 1998:Figure 4).
archeological deposits with concentrations of artiMound 1/2 in Area C of the site was constructed by
facts (especially ceramic sherds) and pit features.
the Caddo over an important building (Corbin and
The 1985 TAS excavations, consisting of 101 m2 of
Hart 1998:71), as was apparently also the case for
hand-excavated units (Corbin and Hart 1998:60),
were confined to Area A (Figure 3a).
Mound 3, the largest of the known mounds at Washington Square (Corbin and Hart 1998:55). Mound 4,
Corbin and Hart (1998:60-68) have noted that
the Reavely-House Mound, is a Caddo burial mound
non-mound features on the Washington Square
with at least six known burial pits, based on archeoMound site consist of post holes, charcoal-filled or
logical investigations by SFA in 1979 and 1981.
smudge pits (filled with charred plant remains, inIn the course of that work in the Reavely-House
cluding wood charcoal, pine cones, and corn cobs),
Mound, initially designed "to obtain a stratigraphic
larger pits (including Feature 115, Figure 3b) with
profile of the mound" (Corbin and Hart 1998:67),
charred plant remains (corn, beans, and nutshell),
two shaft burial features were identified and excavatsherds, and other artifacts, and four distinctive shaled in the mound: Feature 31 and Feature 95 . Based
low sherd-filled pits (Features 45, 120, 134, and
on the richness and diversity of funerary offerings
138, see Figure 3b) with sherds from many vessels
placed with the Caddo individuals in
these two burial features, and their
interment in a specially constructed
burial or mortuary mound, there is no
doubt that the individuals in Features
North Mound Street
31 and 95 were amongst the "highest
ranking individual(s) in the society"
(Story 1990:339) that lived around
the Washington Square Mound, and
used the mound site for both religious
eu11d1n9
Thoma• J.Ru1k Middle School
and political ceremonies. According
to Story (1990:339), the prehistoric
Caddo shaft burials associated with
earthen mounds like those from
Washington Square were lavish and
o
Area C
expensive (in terms of the exotic fu10 20
nerary offerings placed with the burials and the labor expended to excavate
Figure 2. Excavations in Areas A, B, and C (Mounds 112) at the Washington
the shaft burial as well as construct
Square Mound site (from Corbin and Hart 1998:Figure 14) prior to the
the mortuary mound). They also had
TAS Field School in 1985. Reproduced with the permission of the Texas
Archeological Society.
"the distinction of being placed in a

I ~ ~·HoonMound

~·

I

'"'

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 147

N240
W120
+

N240
WllO
+

q

D

SJ
N230
+W130

:J
'---

D
N220
+W120

..

N220
+W120

N230
WlOO+

N230
WllO

D
N220
+W130

D
D
D
D
D

D

N230
+W120

D
D

N240
WlOO+ .

..___.

D

2J

N220
WlOO+

+
N220
WllO

LSD oD
Ln UJ SJ

N220
WlOO+

+

N220
WllO

LEGEND

D

Excavation Unit

2

0

~

[

4

8

r-------i

J

meters

riJ

0

8

16

feet

Figure 3a. Plan of the TAS excavations in 1985: hand-excavated units.

32

148

Texas Archeological Society

N240
W120
+

N240
WllO
+

q

D

Lt]
N230
+Wl30

.........,

D

:J

N220
+W120

c:,

F45

d{I\
,, , \
F115
F120- ( '

.

D
N220
W120
+

N230
WlOO+

N230
WllO

D
N220
+W130

D
D
D
D
D

D

N230
W120
+

D
D

N240
WlOO+

....

'---'

N220
WlOO+

+
N220
WllO

F134

N220
WlOO+

+

N220
WllO

2

0
LEGEND

D

Excavation Unit
~=) Large Pit Feature

4

[

f

0

8

meters
16

8
J

32

feet

Figure 3b. Plan of the TAS excavations in 1985: hand-excavated units and selected large ceramic-filled pits.

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 149
represented in each pit (Cotbin and Hart 1998:64)~
Three of these pits cover at least 2 m 2 in area (see
Corbin and Hart 1998:Figures 23 and 24).

GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE
ARTIFACT ANALYSIS
The goals and objectives of the analysis of the
recovered prehistoric artifacts from the Washington
Square Mound site include (1) completing the analysis and write-up of the artifacts from the 1985 TAS
excavations employing methods of analysis current
in East Texas Caddo ceramic and lithic studies (see
Perttula 2008a, 2008b; Shafer 2007); (2) integrate
the write-up of the analysis of the artifacts into an
overall synthesis of the archeological findings from
the 1985 TAS Field School based on the recovered
artifacts; (3) prepare a final inventory of the 1985
prehistoric artifact collections, with separate inventories for the lithic and ceramic remains; and (4)
deliver the final inventory and completed manuscript
to the TAS for publication in either the Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, a special publication of the Texas Archeological Society, or a joint
publication of the Texas Archeological Society and
Stephen F. Austin State University.

CERAMIC VESSEL SHERDS
Not including the 2715 sherdlets (i.e., sherds
less than 1.5 cm in length and width), there are
3405 plain and decorated sherds in the collections
from the 1985 TAS Field School at the Washington
Square Mound site (Table 1; see also Appendix 1
and 2, on file with the TAS and Stephen F. Austin
State University). The majority of the recovered
sherds are from two clusters in the southern part of
Area A that are associated with a number of large pit
features (Figure 4a, see also Figure 3b ).
Including a few sherds from unknown contexts
in the Area A excavations, the ceramic sherd assemblage comprises 1461 plain sherds (43%) and
1944 decorated sherds (57% ). Earlier excavations in
non-mound areas at the site recovered 6084 sherds,
of which 46% were plain and the remainder had a
decorated exterior surface (Hart 1982).
The plain/decorated sherd ratio (P/DR) of the
1985 TAS collection from the Washington Square
Mound site is 0.75; in the 1979-1981 collections
(Hart 1982), the P/DR is 0.87. The P/DR ratios from

the two collections are not significantly different,
thus suggesting that there is an homogeneous Caddo
ceramic assemblage at the site where much of the
vessel surface of now fragmented pots had been covered with some sort of decoration, most commonly
by the brushing of exterior rim and body surfaces.

Decorated Sherds
The decorated sherds from the Washington
Square Mound site are readily separated into utility
wares or fine wares, following the distinctions discussed by Schambach and Miller (1984) at the Cedar
Grove site in the Great Bend area in southwestern
Arkansas. These distinctions in the kinds of ceramic
vessels manufactured and used by the Caddo at the
site include apparent differences in temper, surface
treatment, vessel forms, and decorative methods.

Utility Ware Sherds
Utility wares generally are jars and simple bowls
used for the cooking and storage of foods, have a
coarse temper, and lack burnishing, polishing, or
slipping on interior and exterior vessel sherd surfaces. Such vessel sherds are decorated with brushing, incising, punctations (tool, cane, or fingernail),
and appliqued elements, either by themselves or in
combination with one or more of these decorative
methods (see Rogers and Perttula 2004; Perttula et
al. 1995; Schambach and Miller 1984; Suhm et al.
1954; Suhm and Jelks 1962). Fine wares, on the other
hand, consist exclusively of engraved and engravedpunctated vessel sherds from carinated bowls, some
simple bowls, and bottles. The fine ware vessels and
vessel sherds more frequently are smoothed, burnished, and/or polished on the exterior vessel surface,
have a finely crushed temper, and were used for the
serving of food stuffs and liquids.
Utility wares comprise 93.7% of the decorated
sherds from the Washington Square site (Table 2).
Engraved fine wares are correspondingly rare, only
accounting for 6.3% of the 1985 decorated sherd assemblage. In the larger assemblage studied by Hart
(1982) from the site, fine ware sherds comprise only
9.3% of the decorated sherds (n=3261).
On the basis of the rim sherds, the utility wares
account for 92.1 % of the decorated sherds from the
site (Table 2). The principal utility wares-solely on
the proportion of rim sherds-include sherds from
incised (27.1 % of the utility ware rims), punctated
(23.8%), brushed (21.2%), brushed-punctated

150

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Provenience of plain and decorated sherds from the Washington Square Mound site, 1985
TAS excavations.
Unit (N-W coordinates)
210-110
211-106
211-109
211-110
211-111
211-112
211-113
211-115
211-116
212-106
212-107
212-109
212-110
212-112
212-113
212-114
212-115
212-116
214-106
214-107
214-109
214-112
214-113
214-115
214-116
215-106
215-107
215-112
215-113
215-116
221-109
221-110
221-111
221-112
221-116
221-125
221-126
222-109
222-111
222-114
222-125
222-126
223-109
223-110
223-116

Decorated sherd

Plain sherd

N

10
4
182
12
5
52
53
70
75
38
88
33
46
46
26
56
58
55
117
124
5
29
24
28
43
57
14
20
24
27
68
35
17

28
19
161
5
2
20
23
40
28
39
61
18
32
33
35
37
30
46
85
108

38
23
343
17
7
72
76
110
103

45
4
6
30

23
35
22
31
25
32
16
21
15
66
29
10
3
44
1
3
29
11

10
2
5
14
3
3

2
2
5
5
3

77

149
51
78
79
61
93
88
101
202
232
5
52
59
50
74
82
46
36
45
42
134
64
27
4
89
5
9
59
11
12
4
10
19
6
3

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 151
Table 1. (Continued)
Unit (N-W coordinates)
224-116
224-117
224-125
224-126
225-116
225-117
225-125
225-126
227-116
227-117
228-116
228-117
230-109
230-110
231-109
231-110
233-116
233-117
234-100
234-116
234-117
234-125
235-102
235-109
236-100
236-110
236-116
236-117
237-110
237-111

Decorated sherd

Plain sherd

N

14
11
7
9
9
3
7
15
3
10
6
8
6
10
5
2
4
1
7
3

9
5

23
16
8
11
15
6
11
28
7

1
2
3
17
4
15

(15.9% ), and incised-punctated (11.3%) vessels.
Those utility ware decorative method categories
without rim sherds are likely from the bodies of jars
with one of the five aforementioned rim decorative
treatments.
Incised
The incised rim and body sherds from the Washington Square Mound site are dominated by simple
straight or geometric decorative elements, including
horizontal, opposed, diagonal, and cross-hatched
incised lines on jars (Table 3 and Figures 5 and 6).
Only 4% of the incised sherds-including 7% of

2
6
3
4
13

4
3
3
3
26
9
3
7
3
5
2

3
3
8
6
2
12
19

13

9
11
32
19
8
9
7
2
12
5
1
1
1
5
3
11
23
3
16
34

the rims-have curvilinear lines as the decorative
element (Figure 7e). The highest densities of incised
sherds occur in three small clusters in the southern
part of Area A, including Features 134 and 13 8 (see
Figure 4b).
The most common decorative elements on the
rims are sets of diagonal lines (see Figure 6b-c)
or horizontal lines (see Figure 6e), probably from
Dunkin Incised and Davis Incised vessels; these
comprise 61 % of the incised rims (see Table 3).
Opposed (see Figures 6a and 7c) and cross-hatched
(see Figures Sa, 6d, and 7d) incised elements from
Dunkin Incised and Maydelle Incised vessels account for another 24% of the rims.

152

Texas Archeological Society

N240

N240

+""'°

+WllO

q

D

c;J
+""'°

N220
+Wl30

N220

N230

N230
WllO

D
D
D

D
D
D
D
D

D

N230

N230
+Wl30

N240

"""'+

C>

D

lie

"""'·

F45

F\15
('

F120

,, " ....
~n,-.

N220

+

+Wl20

"""'+

N220
WllO

a
N210

+Wl20

Tu~4"

N210

WIOO+

+N210

F134

WllO

LEGEND

D

f

Excavation Unit

\,:) large Pit Feature

meters
16

N240

N240
+Wl\0

+Wl20

c;J

N230

N230
WllO

D

N220
+V/1130

D
D
D
D
D

D

N230

+Wl20

l}

D
D

N240

WIOO+

q

D

N230
+Wl30

32

feet

F45

"""'+

C>

-

D

('
"'"
I I \ "'
\

o~''"~

N220

N220

+

+""'°

"""'+

N220

WllO

b
N210

N210

"""'•

+Wl20

LEGEND

D

Excavation Unit

C>LargePitFeature

f

meters
16

32

feet

Figure 4. Distribution of ceramic artifacts in the TAS-excavated portions of Area A at the Washington Square Mound
site, with the hatched areas representing the areas with the highest densities of artifacts for that particular category of
artifacts ; a, total sherds; b, incised sherds.

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 153

N2<()
+Wl20

N2<()
+\1:1110

q

D

~
N230

N230

+W130

+W120

N220

+W130

D
D
D
D
D

D

N230
WlCIO+

N230
W110

D
D
D

N2<0
WlCX)+

F45

C>

D

1lo ~'(-,(:'.
.... 1

N220

+W120

\, .....

_.,.,.

N220
WlCIO+

N220
'-"10

c
N210

+""'°

N210
'-"00+

+
N210
'-"10

LEGEND

D

meters

Excavation Unit

f

L:)LargePitFeature

N2<()
+\:(.1110

N2<0
+Wl20

N2<()
WlOO+

q

D

~
N230
+Wl30

D
D
D
D
D

D

N230

+W120

N230
'-"00+

N230

N220
+W130

N220

c_,

F45

"'"

D

D
D

32

16

feet

D

1lo ci {-,,, \

+Wl20

F120

FllS
('

....

, ....

+
N220

N220
'-"00+

"'"

~mo

d
N210

+Wl20

N210

F134

'-"00+

+

N210

'-"10

LEGEND

D

Excavation Unit

L:) Large Pit Feature

meters

f

16

32

feet

Figure 4. Distribution of ceramic artifacts in the TAS-excavated portions of Area A at the Washington Square Mound
site, with the hatched areas representing the areas with the highest densities of artifacts for that particular category of
artifacts; c, punctated sherds; d, brushed sherds.

154

Texas Archeological Society

N240

N240

+\Vl20

+WllO

q

D

~
N230
_..W 130

N220

C>
~llS

F120

~,-,(
',
..... , , ....

N220

+W120

e

N230
IX/100+

F45

D

ljo

D
D
D

D

N230
IX/110

D
N220
+W130

D

D

N230
+IX/120

D
D

N240
IX/100+

WlOO+

+
N220
IX/110

~~'"'
N210
+W120

N210

F\34

IX/100+

+

N210

WllO

LEGEND

D

meters

Excavation Unit

16

f

C>LargePitFeature

N240
+IX/120

N240
+W110

~

N220
+W130

N220
+IX/120

N230
IX/100+

N230
WllO

D
D
D

D
D
D
D
D

D

N230
+\Vl20

N230

N240
WlOO+

q

D

+Wl30

32

feel

F45

C>

D
F120

F115
('-

....

" ....

,
ljo a(-,,\
+
N220
IX/110

N220
IX/100+

~""

f
N210
+Wl20

F\34

N210
WlOO+

+

N210

IX/110

LEGEND

D

Excavation Unit

C>LargePitfeature

f

meters
16

32

feet

Figure 4. Distribution of ceramic artifacts in the TAS-excavated portions of Area A at the Washington Square Mound
site, with the hatched areas representing the areas with the highest densities of artifacts for that particular category of
artifacts; e, brushed-punctated sherds; f, incised-punctated sherds.

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 155

N240
+W\20

N240
+WllO

~

D

c:;J

N220
+\\:1130

N230
W\00+

N230
W\10

D
D
D

D
D
D
D
D

D

N230
+Wl20

N230

+Wl30

N240
W\00+

lf

F45

C>

D
F\20-

(~115

~{1,\
..._/ , ....

0

N220
+Wl20

N220
W\00+

+

N220

W\10

g
N2\0
+Wl20

~""

N210
W\00+

N210
W\10

LEGE ND

0

meters

Excavation Unit

f

~=) Large Pit Feature

N240

N240
+\X/110

+Wl20

c:;J
N230

N230

+Wl20

N220
+W130

N220
+Wl20

D
D
D
D
D

D

N230

W\00+

N230
W\10

D
D
D

N240
W\00+

~

D

+W130

32

16

feet

lf

o

F45

C>

D
F120

F115
('

~-,,\
.... 1 \,, ....

N220
W\00+

+

N220

Wl\O

h

N210
+Wl20

N210
W\00+

O·
LEGEND

0

Excavation Unit

~) Large Pit Feature

meters

f

16

32

feet

Figure 4. Distribution of ceramic artifacts in the TAS-excavated portions of Area A at the Washington Square Mound
site, with the hatched areas representing the areas with the highest densities of artifacts for that particular category of
artifacts; g, engraved sherds; h, plain sherds.

156

Texas Archeological Society

N240
+Wl20

N240
+WllO

N240

wioo.

DD
DD
D

D

N230

+W13 0

N230
\X/100+

N230
WllO

N220
+IJUl30

F45

C>

D
D
+

N220

\X/110

N210
\X/100+

LEGEND

D Excavation Unit
L >Large Pit Feature

meters

f

16

32

feet

Figure 4. Distribution of ceramic artifacts in the TAS-excavated portions of Area A at the Washington Square Mound
site, with the hatched areas representing the areas with the highest densities of artifacts for that particular category of
artifacts; i, pipe sherds.

A large proportion (47%) of the incised body
sherds from the Washington Square Mound site
have sets of parallel lines (see Figure Sc) , where the
orientation of the lines is uncertain. Opposed sets of
incised lines (21 %) are also well represented among
the body sherds (see Figures 5d and 7a), as are crosshatched incised lines (8.8%, see Figure Sb).
Incised rims are predominantly vertical or direct
in profile, with rounded or flat lips (including those
with exterior folded lips) in equal proportions (Table
4); everted rims comprise 17 .5 % of the incised rim
sample. Two of the incised rims are scalloped and
one has a distinctive Redwine pie-crust lip mode
(Mark Walters, 2008 personal communication).
Direct rims with either rounded or flat lips are
prevalent in each of the major decorative classes at
the Washington Square Mound site, as they are among
the plain wares (see below). Everted rim forms from
jars, however, are restricted to the utility wares, ranging from 14-17% in the incised and incised-punctated
vessel sherds to 33-69% in the punctated and brushedpunctated rim sherds (see Table 4). The engraved
serving vessels have direct rims.

Punctated
The punctated sherds from the Washington
Square Mound site are dominated by the use of
tool or instrument punctates. Almost 78% of the
punctated rims and 86% of the body sherds in the
TAS assemblage have tool punctated decorations
(Table 5 and Figure 8a, c, e). Linear (6.2%), circular
(5 .1%, Figure 8b), circular and tool (0.6%, Figure
8d), fingernail (2.2%), and cane (1.7%) punctated
decorations comprise the remainder of the punctated
utility wares. Sherds from punctated vessels are
concentrated in two clusters in the southern part of
Area A, the largest cluster being associated with the
area of Feature 134 and 138 (see Figure 4c).
In most cases, the sherds with punctated decorations have horizontal rows of punctations on the
rim and/or vessel body. In a few cases (8 %), a row
of punctations were executed along the edge of the
lip (see Figure 8a, e), but generally, punctations
on the rim began under the lip and then were well
spaced on the rim, ending at the rim-body juncture
of the vessel. About 10% of the punctated sherds do

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 157
Table 2. Decorative methods represented in the 1985 sherd assemblage from the Washington Square
Mound site.
Decorative Method

Rim

Body

N

Brushed
Incised
Punctated
Brushed-Punctated
Incised-Punctated
Brushed-Incised
Brushed-Appliqued
Brushed-Incised-Punctated
Pinched
Brushed-Punctated-Appliqued
Appliqued
Incised-Appliqued

32
41
36
24
17

1037
215
142
82
65
68
31
7
10
5
7
2

1069
256
178
106
82
68
31
8
10
5
7
2

Subtotal

151

1671

1822

Engraved
Engraved-Punctated

12

107
2

119
3

Subtotal

13

109

122

Totals

164

1780

1944

Rim

Body

N

4
6

19
46
101
2
1

37

23
52
101
3
3
12
14
1
37

Utility ware

Fine ware

Table 3. Incised decorative elements.
Decorative element
Cross-hatched lines
Opposed lines
Parallel lines
Vertical lines
Horizontal and vertical lines
Horizontal lines
Diagonal lines
Diagonal and cross-hatched lines
Single straight line

1
2
11

14

Curvilinear lines
Concentric lines

2

7

9

Totals

41

215

256

158

Texas Archeological Society

b

c

0

1

2

3

5

4

centimeters

Figure 5. Incised rim and body sherds: a-b, cross-hatched; c, parallel; d, opposed. Provenience: a, N212Wl14, level 2;
b, N230Wl10, level 1; c, N21 l W109, level l; d, N212 W107, fill.

b

a

1
d

2

3

4

5

f

centimeters

Figure 6. Incised rim sherds: a, opposed; b-c, diagonal; d, cross-hatched; e, horizontal; f, horizontal and vertical.
Provenience: a, N212 W107, level 1; b, N227Wl17, level 2; c, general; d, N211 W115, level 3; e, N211 W113, level
2; f, unknown (Lot 1556).

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 159

flL

=

w

II I Il

a

b

NV\

R~

c

e

d

Figure 7. Incised decorative elements: a, c, opposed lines; b, horizontal and vertical lines; d, cross-hatched rim; e,
curvilinear lines on a pie crust rim. Provenience: a, N224Wl17, level 2; b-c, N21 l Wl09, level 3; d, N212Wl14; e,
unknown (Lot 1458).

not have horizontal rows, including punctations in
panels or zones (n=2) or in curvilinear, triangular,
vertical, or diagonal rows (n=l5, see Figures 8c-e
and 9a-c).

Pinched
Nine of the 10 Killough Pinched sherds are
body sherds with two or more pinched ridges. On
four of the sherds, their curvature suggests that the
pinched ridges are in vertical rows; the other five
have two or more straight and parallel ridges. The
other Killough Pinched sherd is part of a pedestal
leg (see below).

Brushed sherds
Jars decorated solely with brushing are abundant
at the Washington Square Mound site, especially in
the southern part of the Area A excavations (see Figure 4d). On the rims of these vessels, most have only
horizontal brushing marks (78%, Figure lOa), but
there are also rims with horizontal and opposed (3 %,
Figure llb), diagonal (6%, Figure lla), vertical
(3%), opposed (3%), and overlapping (3%) brushing
marks. The rims are primarily direct or vertical in
profile (90% ), with only a small number of everted
rim jars; everted rim cooking jars are apparently a
more common rim treatments in certain post-A.D.
1400 utility wares in East Texas, although they are

Table 4. Rim and lip forms for major decorative classes.

Incised

Punctated

IncisedPunctated

BrushedPunctated

Engraved

Direct rim
Everted rim
Subtotal, rim profile

33
7
40

16
8
24

12
2
14

5

10

11

16

10

Rounded lip
Rounded, exterior folded lip
Rounded, scalloped
Rounded, thickened
Flat lip
Flat, exterior folded lip
Pie crust mode
Subtotal, lip treatment

16
3
2

25
4

8
3

15
4

7
1

3

6

2
3
1

35

17

23

Rim and lip form

12
7
1
41

2

10

160

Texas Archeological Society

common in the brushed-punctated vessels at the
site (see Table 4). Lips on the brushed jar rims are
rounded (41 %), rounded and exterior folded (34% ),
fiat (16% ), and fiat and exterior folded (9% ).
The most common brushing decoration on
vessel bodies is parallel brushing marks (86%); on
these, the orientation of the brushing on vessels is
uncertain (Figure 12a-e), but it is probably vertical, extending from the rim-body juncture to near
the vessel base. Most of the brushing is heavy on
these sherds, but there are a few where the brushing resembles a fine combing effect; in a few other
sherds, the brushing has been almost completely
smoothed over to finish the vessel surface treatment.
Other brushed body decorations on body sherds have
overlapping (11 %), opposed (2% ), vertical (<1 %),
horizontal (<1 %), and curvilinear (<1 %) marks.
Brushed-Punctated

The brushed-punctated rim and body sherds
are from Reavely Brushed-Incised jars (see Hart
1982:64-65), a common utility ware at the Washington Square Mound site (Table 6). The principal
attributes of the brushed-punctated sherds are that
they are usually (a) horizontally brushed on the
rim and brushed vertically on the vessel body, and
(b) there are rows of tool punctates on the rim,
beginning under the lip and ending at the rim-body
juncture, as well as rows of punctates on the body;
punctates on the body are most commonly oriented
vertically (Figures 13 and 14m), but horizontal
and vertical rows are also noted (Figure 141). The
brushed-punctated sherds occur in three small
clusters in the southern part of Area A; two of the
clusters are associated with large pit features (see
Figure 4e).
About 96% of the brushed-punctated rim sherds
have horizontal brushing marks (see Table 6); the
one exception has diagonal brushing (see Figure
14j). The brushed-punctated body sherds primarily
have parallel brushing marks (82%); the brushing
is likely vertical in orientation. Other brushing
styles on the body sherds include diagonal (3.7%),
horizontal (3.7%), opposed (4.9%), and overlapping
(4.9%) (see Table 6).
Approximately 75% of the brushed-punctated
sherds from the Washington Square Mound site have
tool punctations on the rim and/or the body (see
Table 6). The remainder have linear (14%, a distinctive form of tool punctate, see Figure 13e), fingernail
(9.4%), and circular (1.9%) punctates.

One distinctive style of Reavely Brushed-Incised
(Reavely Brushed-Incised, var. Raguet) recognized
in the brushed-punctated sherds has horizontal
brushing on the rim and either tool or linear
punctates on the lip (see Figure 13a-b). Almost 46%
of the rims have this combination of brushing and
lip punctation (see Table 6).
Brushed-incised, Brushed-appliqued,
Brushed-punctated-incised, and
Brushed-punctated-appliqued

There are 68 brushed-incised body sherds from
Reavely Brushed-Incised vessels in the TAS collections from the Washington Square Mound site (see
Table 2). Approximately 53% have parallel brushed
and parallel incised line decorations. Another 13%
have parallel brushing marks with straight incised
lines that cut through the brushing (see Figure lOd).
A similar number of sherds have parallel brushing
with either diagonal (n=4), cross-hatched (n=l),
opposed (n=2), or curvilinear (n=l) incised lines
that cut through the brushing (see Figure 14f). One
other sherd has a zone or panel filled with a parallel
brushed-incised decoration.
Approximately 10% of the brushed-incised
sherds have opposed brushed-incised decorative
combinations. Four sherds have opposed brushedincised lines (see Figure 14a); the other three
have opposed incised lines (probably on a jar
rim) bordered by either horizontal (see Figure
14e), overlapping, or parallel brushed zones. The
remaining brushed-incised sherds include two with
overlapping brushing-either within an incised
panel or with straight incised lines cutting across
the brushed marks-a third sherd with curvilinear
brushed-incised lines, a fourth sherd with horizontal
brushing and diagonal incised lines (see Figure 14c),
and a last example with parallel and overlapping
brushed marks and parallel incised lines.
The brushed-appliqued sherds are from Reavely
Brushed-Incised jars. Most (71 %) of them have parallel brushing marks and parallel rows of appliqued
fillets (Figure 15a; see also Figures 9b and lOb).
Three others of the same kind have clear vertical
brushing marks and adjacent vertical appliqued
fillets. Approximately 16% have parallel brushing
marks and an opposed appliqued fillet, and one body
sherd has parallel brushing marks with both parallel
and curvilinear appliqued fillets (Figure 15c; see
also Figure 14h).
The one brushed-punctated-incised rim (direct

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 161
Table 5. Punctated decorative elements.
Decorative element
Vertical tool punctated rows
Horizontal-diagonal tool punctated rows
Diagonal tool punctated rows
Tool punctated row under lip
Tool punctates under lip and on rim
Tool punctates on lip
Tool punctated rows
Small tool punctates in panel or zone
Triangular-shaped tool punctated zone
Curvilinear tool punctated rows
Tool punctates, random
Single tool punctate
Subtotal

Body

N

9
4
2
10

91

1
9
4
2
101

28

5
23
122

1
5
23
150

Rim
1
1
1

Fingernail punctated rows
Single fingernail punctate
Subtotal
Linear punctates on lip
Linear punctated row under lip
Vertical linear punctated rows
Linear punctated row
Horizontal and diagonal linear punctated rows
Linear punctates, random
Subtotal
Large circular punctated rows
Circular and tool punctates in linear,
curvilinear and triangular rows
Circular punctated row under lip
Small circular punctated row under lip
Small circular punctated row
Subtotal

3
4

3
1
4

6

1
6

3

1
8

11

2

3

5

5

2
5

2
10

2
1
3

2
1
3

142

178

1

Cane punctates, random
Cane punctated rows
Subtotal
Totals

with a rounded lip) has horizontal brushed-incised
marks on the rim with a row of tool punctates under
the lip. The brushed-punctated-incised body sherds
have various combinations of brushing marks
and incised lines running in different or common

36

directions, with rows of tool punctates pushed
through or between (see Figure 14k) either the
brushing or the incised lines (Table 7).
The brushed-punctated-appliqued sherds have
appliqued fillets that run either in parallel or opposed

162

Texas Archeological Society

e
c
Figure 8. Punctated sherds from the Washington Square Mound site: a, c, e, tool punctated; b, large circular punctated;
d, circular and tool punctated. Provenience: a, N212 Wl07, level l; b, N21lWl16, level 2; c, N214 Wl06, unknown
level; d, N211 WlOO or W109, fill; e, N214Wl13, level 2.

directions to zones of brushing. In three of the five
body sherds, a row of tool or linear punctations
have been pushed through the brushing (usually
running the same direction as the appliqued fillet,
see Figure 14d, i), a fourth has parallel and opposed
brushed zones on either side of a straight appliqued
fillet and a row of punctates (see Figure 14n), while
the remaining sherd has a row of linear punctations
between zones of parallel brushing and a single
straight appliqued fillet (see Figures 14g and 15b).
Incised-Punctated
The principal decorative elements in the incised-punctated utility wares from the Washington
Square Mound site include sets of incised triangles
(defined by diagonal or opposed diagonal lines on
the rim) filled with tool punctations (Table 8 and
Figure 16; see also Figure lOc). These decorations
are a common feature of both Canton Incised (Suhm
and Jelks 1962:Plate 12d, h) and Maydelle Incised
(Suhm and Jelks 1962:Plate 52e) types. The highest
densities of the incised-punctated sherds are found

in close association with Features 134 and 138 (see
Figure 4f).
About 53% of the incised-punctated rims have
incised triangles filled with tool or circular punctates
(see Figures 9h-i, k, n and 16a, e). Others have a row
of tool punctations under the vessel lip as well as diagonal (n=2), horizontal (n=3), and curvilinear (n=l,
see Figure 9f, j) incised lines on the rim (see Table 8).
One other rim has a circular incised element filled with
tool punctations. Regardless of the specific decorative
element, tool punctates were the preferred stylistic
choice (90% ), with lesser frequencies of circular (7% ),
fingernail (1 %), and linear (1 %) punctates.
The prevalence of triangular incised-punctatefilled elements is also apparent in the body sherds
(see Table 8). Other decorative elements include
rectangular (see Figure 9e) and circular panels filled
with punctations (see Figure 16b-d), circular and
curvilinear zones filled with punctates (see Figure
9m), and various forms of punctates placed between
incised lines (see Figure 9d, 1, o), or in rows below
(and likely at the rim-body juncture) vertical and
diagonal incised lines (see Figure 9g).

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 163

,
I

I
I

,

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I
I

I
\

,

I

f

•
••

••
•
d

__ ,,,,
g

,,

,

..

,

., .

,

~

c

.'.' .
'

'
.,

, , ,,
,
, I
,

e

\\\\

,

. . -.- -. . '

...
, ",

•• •
••

:~I

.... ,

, ,. ,. ,.

b

,,

, ,

.,. ,

~

a

,.

,

,

"

I

I

I

,, ,

,

f

{/Ii/~
h

,,.,.,,,
I

k

n

I

- ---

0

Figure 9. Selected punctated and incised-punctated decorative elements: a-c, punctated rims ; d, f, h-k, n-o, incisedpunctated rims; e, g, 1-m, incised-punctated body sherds. Provenience: a, N230 W109 , level 1; b, N214 W113 , level 2;
c, N211 WlOO orW109, fill; d, N215 W106, level 1; e, h, N221 W109, level 1; f, N211 W112, level 2; g, N214 W106,
level 3; i, N227Wl17, level 1; j, N211 W109, level 2; k, N214 W116, level 2; 1, N212 W113, level 1; m, N212 Wll4,
level 2; n, N211 W106, level 1; o, N211 W109, level 1.

164

Texas Archeological Society

a
b

0

1

2

3

4

5

centimeters

Figure 10. Brushed, brushed-appliqued, incised-punctated, and brushed-incised utility ware sherds: a, horizontal brushed
rim; b, parallel brushed-appliqued fillet; c, incised-punctated rim; d, brushed-incised. Provenience: a, N214Wl16, level
2; b, N214 Wl06, level 2; c, N221 Wl09, level 1; d, N228 W116, level 2.

\

\

0

2

3

4

centrmeteJs

Figure 11 . Brushed rims: a, diagonal; b, horizontal and opposed. Provenience: a, N21lWl12, level 2; b, unknown (Lot
1564).

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts f rom the Washington Square Mound Site 165

1

2

3

4

5

centimeters
Figure 12. Parallel brushed body sherds. Provenience: a, N211 W109, level 1; b, N214 W116, level 2; c, N211 W112,
level 2; d-e, N211Wl12, level 3.

Appliqued and Incised-appliqued
Six of the seven appliqued body sherds have
fillets, either a single straight fillet (n=5) or opposed
fillets (n=l). The straight fillets likely are oriented
vertically on the body of Reavely Brushed-Incised
jars (Hart 1982:Figure 3-9), dividing the jar body
surface into panels that are either left undecorated
or are filled with brushing marks. The opposed fillets
are part of a more complex appliqued decorative element. The last appliqued sherd consists of a single
large appliqued node.
Two incised-appliqued body sherds are also
from Reavely Brushed-Incised jars. These sherds
have parallel and closely-spaced incised lines (i.e. ,
simulating a brushed decoration?) divided by parallel appliqued fillets.

Fine Ware Sherds
Fine ware engraved and engraved-punctated
sherds from the 1985 TAS excavations at the Washington Square mound site represent 7 .9% of the rims

and 6.1% of the body sherds from the decorated
sherd assemblage (see Table 2). Like the decorated
utility wares, the engraved sherds are concentrated
in several clusters in the southern part of Area A,
particularly in spatial association with Features 134
and 138 (see Figure 4g).
These fine wares are principally from carinated
bowls and compound bowls, and only 10% of these
sherds are froin bottles. Rims are direct or vertical in
orientation (see Table 4 ), with rounded (70% ), rounded and exterior folded (20%), or flat (10%) lips.

Engraved
The engraved rims in the Washington Square
Mound sherd collections from the 1985 TAS Field
School have simple straight or geometric decorative
elements, including sets of horizontal lines (n=5),
horizontal and diagonal lines (n= 1), horizontal and
vertical lines (n=l), diagonal (n=3), and diagonal
opposed lines (n=l) (Table 9). One other rim has
a single horizontal line under the lip and a circular
element, probably part of a scroll motif on a

166

Texas Archeological Society

Table 6. Brushed-punctated decorative elements.

Decorative element
Horizontal brushed, tool
punctates on lip*
Horizontal brushed and tool
punctated row under lip
Horizontal brushed below
row/zone of tool punctates
Horizontal brushed with tool
punctated row thru brushing
and under lip
Horizontal brushed with tool
punctated row under lip and
2nd row of punctates
thru brushing on rim
Horizontal brushed with tool
punctates thru brushing
Horizontal brushed, linear
punctates on lip*
Horizontal brushed with linear
punctated row under lip and
above brushing

Rim

Body

N

7

7

5

5
2

2

2

2

4

4

3

3

Horizontal brushed with circular
punctated row thru brushing
Diagonal brushed, tool punctates
on lip and fingernail punctates
on panel between brushing
Diagonal brushed with tool punctated
row above/framing brushing

1

3

3

2

2

3

3

Vertical brushed with tool punctated
row thru brushing
Opposed brushed with tool
punctated row thru brushing
Opposed brushed with opposed
row of tool punctates
Opposed brushed with fingernail
punctates thru brushing
Overlapping brushed with tool
punctated row thru brushing
Overlapping brushed with fingernail
punctated row thru brushing

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 167
Table 6. (Continued)

Decorative element

Rim

Parallel brushed with linear punctated
row thru brushing
Parallel brushed above linear
punctated row
Parallel brushed on either side of a
row of linear punctates
Parallel brushed with tool punctated
row thru brushing
Parallel brushed with random tool
punctates thru brushing
Parallel brushed framed by tool
punctated row
Parallel brushed between two
tool punctated rows
Parallel brushed with parallel and
opposed tool punctated rows
Parallel brushed with tool punctates
in panel

Body

N

6

6

34

34

2

2

11

11

2

2

1

Parallel brushed with fingernail
punctated row thru brushing
Parallel brushed framed by fingernail
punctated zone

6

6

82

106

Parallel brushed with circular
punctates thru brushing
Totals

24

*Reavely Brushed-Incised, var. Raguet

Nacogdoches Engraved vessel (Hart 1982:Figure
3-4). The simplicity of the decorative elements
on the small sample of rims, and the very diverse
character of the engraved elements on the body
sherds (Table 9)-especially the hatched and crosshatched zones on many of them (Figures 17b-d,
18a, d, and 19a-c, h, j), which are likely from scroll
fill elements on Nacogdoches Engraved vessels
(see Hart 1982:Figure 3-4)-suggest that many
of the engraved sherds are from compound bowls
or shouldered bowls with two panels of engraved
decorations on the rims, the lower panel having the
more complex engraved decoration.

The most distinctive of the engraved decorative
elements in the fine wares, as previously mentioned,
are the various hatched and cross-hatched elements
from Nacogdoches Engraved vessels. As defined
by Hart (1982:46-47), these vessels are defined by
scroll and circle elements and several distinctive
scroll fill elements, including hatched triangles,
narrow curvilinear cross-hatched zones, and circles
with central dots (see Figure 19b).
There are also at least three engraved sherds from
Washington Square Paneled vessels (see Table 9 and
Figures 17a and 19c, i). These sherds are from vessels with "a rectangular panel with straight or convex

168

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 13. Brushed-punctated rim and body sherds: a-b, horizontal brushed and linear punctates ~n the lip (Reavely
Brushed-Incised, var. Raguet); c-d, horizontal brushed and tool punctated rows; e, opposed brushed with opposed rows of
·
· a, e, N221 Wl09 , lv. l·, b, N225 W116 ' lv. 2·' c , N211 Wl09, lv. l; d, N211 WllS, lv. 3.
tool punctates. Provernence.

sides," with the space between the "sides of adjacent
rectangles is filled with either punctations or diagonal
incised or engraved lines" (Hart 1982:71). Within
each of the rectangles is a single horizontal line, in
this case an engraved line, that bisects the central part
of the rectangular panel (see Figure 19i).
The engraved bottle sherds from the site have
curvilinear lines on the bottle bodies (see Table 9);
several of these have a red clay pigment rubbed in
the engraved lines. Additionally, there are hatched
triangles and narrow hatched zones (see Figure
19e, m), cross-hatched circles (see Figure 191), and
cross-hatched triangles and zones creating negative
rectangles (see Figure 19f). These are sherds from
Nacogdoches Engraved bottles (see Hart 1982:Figures 3-7c-d and 3-8a-b).
There are a few sherds in the general collections
from the Washington Square Mound site that testify
to a limited post-A.D. 1650 Caddo use of the site,
or at least the limited parts of the site that have been
investigated to date. These include four sherds of
Patton Engraved (Hart 1982:94), Taylor Engraved
(see Figure 18b), and Natchitoches Engraved (see
Figure 18c).

Engraved-punctated

The one distinctive engraved-punctated rim
sherd (direct with a rounded and exterior folded lip)
has widely-spaced horizontal engraved lines on the
rim as well as a row of linear punctates just below
the lip (see Figure 17e). The two body sherds are
from Washington Square Paneled carinated bowls
(see Hart 1982:71-72). They have parts of engraved
rectangular panels with a single row of small
punctations along one of the panel edges.
Plain Sherds

The plain sherds from the 1985 TAS excavations at the Washington Square Mound include 54
rims (Figure 20a-g), 60 base sherds, and 1347 body
sherds. Given that 24.7% of all the rims (n=218)
from these excavations are plain-and plain rims are
the single most common kind in the assemblage of
any of the wares-it is clear that plain wares were
also a significant component of the Caddo ceramics
made and used at the site. The highest densities of
plain sherds are in the same parts of Area A as the
utility ware and fine ware sherds (see Figure 4h).

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 169

!1\\11:'\ ;, \\\\\\
'; \l .1

1111!1 ; /Iii'
a

b

c

@1\
f

e

~~\ < M
I/// I

~

r;

m
Figure 14. Selected brushed-incised, brushed-appliqued, brushed-punctated-appliqued, brushed-punctated, and brushedpunctated-incised decorative elements: a, c, e-f, brushed-incised; b, h, brushed-appliqued; d, g, i, n, brushed-punctatedappliqued; j, 1-m, brushed-punctated; k, brushed-punctated-incised. Provenience: a, unknown (Lot 1458); b-c, N211
Wll5, level 3; d, N214 W107, level 2; e-f, N212 Wll2, level l; g, n, N212 W109, level 1; h, N212 Wll5, 13-23 cm; i,
N221 W126, level l; j, N215 W106, level l; k, N212Wl13, level 3; 1, N221 W109, level l; m, N225 W125, level 3.

More than 91 % of the plain rims have a direct
or vertical profile; these are likely from bowls and
carinated bowls. Another 6%, probably jars, have
an everted profile, and 2%, shallow bowls, have an
inverted rim profile. The lips on these rims are typically rounded (n=26) or rounded and exterior folded
(n=lO). Another 22% (n=l2) have flat lips. One
carinated bowl rim sherd has a sprocket-shaped rim
and lip (an unusual and rare rim and lip treatment in
East Texas, Mark Walters, 2008 personal communication), and another has a peaked rim. Three rims
are interior beveled at the lip, and the remaining rim
has a flat but exterior thickened lip.

CERAMIC MANUFACTURE AND
USE OF DIFFERENT TEMPERS
The widespread use of burned bone as a temper is a notable technological feature of the Caddo
ceramics made and used by the vast majority of the
Caddo groups that lived in the Angelina, Attoyac,
and middle Sabine River (i.e. , Toledo Bend Reservoir area) basins (Perttula 2008a). The ceramics
made and used at the Washington Square Mound
site are part of this Middle, Late, and Historic Caddo
ceramic tradition.
The Feature 31 and Feature 95 vessels from the

170

Texas Archeological Society

0

1

2

3

4

5

centimeters

Figure 15. Brushed-appliqued and brushed-appliqued-punctated body sherds: a, c, brushed-appliqued; b, brushedappliqued-punctated. Provenience: a, N224 Wll6, level l; b, N212 W109, level 1; c, N212 Wll5 , 13-23 cm.

Table 7. Brushed-punctated-incised decora tive elements on body sherds.
Decorative element

No.

parallel brushed-parallel incised lines ; tool punctates through brushing
parallel brushing-opposed incised lines; tool punctates through brushing
parallel brushed-straight incised line thru brushing; tool punctated rows
through the brushing
overlapping brushed, with parallel incised lines overlying brushing;
tool punctates pushed through brushing
opposed brushed-incised lines above tool punctated row
opposed brushed-zigzag incised lines thru brushing; tool punctated row
pushed through the brushing
diagonal incised lines above vertical brushing; tool punctates through incised lines

Washington Square Mound site are primarily tempered with ·grog or crushed sherds, but frequently
with other inclusions (Table 10), including crushed
and burned bone, hematite, or charred organic remains (Perttula et al. 2008). Vessels tempered only

1
1
1
1
1

1

with grog are slightly more common in Feature 31,
while vessels tempered only with bone are more
prevalent in Feature 95 . In general, bone and hematite were more commonly added as aplastics to the
Washington Square Mound vessels interred with the

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 171
Table 8. Incised-punctated decorative elements.
Decorative element
Opposed diagonal lines and
triangular-filled tool punctated zones;
row of tool punctates under lip

Rim

2

Opposed diagonal lines and triangularfilled tool punctated zones
Opposed diagonal lines and triangularfilled circular punctated zones

Body

N

2
6

1

6

1

Opposed diagonal lines opposite
vertical tool punctated row

2

2

Triangle incised zone filled with tool
punctates

5

5

Diagonal lines and tool punctated row
under lip

2

2

Diagonal lines forming triangles filled
with tool punctates

5

5

Diagonal lines and circular punctates
between lines
Diagonal lines above tool punctated row

7

7

Vertical lines above tool punctated row

1

1

Horizontal lines and tool punctated
row under lip

3

3

Parallel lines between zones of circular
punctates
Parallel lines framing circular
punctated row
Parallel lines framing tool punctated
zones/rows

4

4

23

23

Parallel lines intersected by row of
tool punctates
Parallel lines with tool punctated row
between lines
Straight line framing tool punctated
area/rows
Straight line framing fingernail
punctated area/row

1

172

Texas Archeological Society

Table 8. (Continued)

Decorative element
Cross-hatched lines and tool punctatedfilled triangles

Rim

3

1

1

1

1
2

2
1

Curvilinear panel filled with tool
punctates
Circular incised zone filled with
tool punctates
Circular incised zone filled with
linear punctates

two Caddo people in Feature 95 (Table 10).
Less than 10% of these vessels have a sandy
paste, and less than 7% have charred organics present in the paste. Caddo vessels with sandy pastes
tend to be utility wares used in every-day cooking
and heating tasks, and thus the low frequency of
sandy paste wares here is evidence of the fact that
fine wares were preferentially and more commonly
placed in the two burial features compared to jars.
The low occurrence of charred organics in the paste
of the Washington Square Mound vessels suggests
that these vessels were well and evenly fired, and
fired for a sufficient duration that any organics included in the paste were completely combusted.
The sherd assemblages from vessels used in

3
1

Curvilinear line and curvilinear tool
punctate-filled zone
Curvilinear lines and horizontal and
vertical tool punctates between
and below incised lines

Totals

N

1

Rectangular panel filled with tool
punctates
Rectangular panels filled with circular
punctates
Curvilinear line and tool punctated
row under lip
Curvilinear lines and circular-filled tool
punctated zone

Body

17

2

2

2

2

65

82

non-mortuary contexts at the Washington Square
Mound site indicate that grog was also the preferred
temper for vessel manufacture (Hart l 982:Table
4-4). Sherds tempered simply with grog account
for 50.6% of the large sample (over 6000 sherds)
analyzed by Hart (1982) from non-burial contexts,
roughly comparable to the 37.5-46.7% in the feature
burials. In the 1985 TAS ceramic assemblage, 26%
of the sherds have bone temper inclusions, either as
the sole temper or in combination with other aplastics.
The utility wares, dominated by coarse tempers, in
the latter assemblage have the highest proportion of
bone temper (30% ), with lesser amounts of burned
bone found in the plain wares (22.3%) and fine wares
(19.9%).

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 173

Figure 16. Incised-punctated rim and body sherds: a, e, incised triangles filled with tool punctations; b-c, panels filled
with punctations; d, curvilinear panel filled with tool punctations. Provenience: a, N225 W126, level 2; b, N236Wl16,
levels 3 and 4; c, N221 W109, level l; d, N221 Wl16, level 2; e, N227 Wl17, level 1.

Table 9. Engraved decorative elements.
Decorative element
Horizontal engraved line under lip
Horizontal engraved lines
Horizontal engraved line under lip
and circular element on rim
Horizontal line and cross-hatched
hour glass column*

Rim

Body

N

3
2

2

3
4
1

1

Horizontal and diagonal engraved lines
Horizontal, diagonal, and curvilinear
lines

2

Horizontal and vertical engraved lines
within panel
Diagonal engraved lines
Broad diagonal engraved lines
Diagonal opposed engraved lines

2

1
2

3
1
1

174

Texas Archeological Society

Table 9. (Continued)
Decorative element

Rim

Triangular element formed by diagonal
opposed lines

Body

N

5

5

1

Vertical lines, closely-spaced
Cross-hatched curvilinear zone
Cross-hatched curvilinear zone with circle
and central dot
Cross-hatched zone
Cross-hatched zone and negative ovals
Curvilinear cross-hatched zone and negative oval
with straight line in oval*
Cross-hatched hour glass column
Cross-hatched circle and curvilinear lines
Cross-hatched zone and parallel lines
Triangular cross-hatched zones
Cross-hatched and hatched triangle element

2

2

2

2

1

2

2

1
1

Hatched curvilinear zone
Hatched circle and curvilinear lines
Hatched triangle
Hatched triangle and curvilinear lines
Rectangular hatched area and circle element
Hatched panel

2

2

5
2

5
2
10

10
1
2

1
2

Parallel lines
Parallel and curvilinear lines

18

18
1

Opposed lines
Opposed and curvilinear lines

12

12
1

Curvilinear lines (Bottles)

12

12

Meandering line

2

2

Single straight line

14

14

107

119

Totals
*Washington Square Paneled

12

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 175

b

a

d

e
0

1

2

3

4

5

centimeters
Figure 17. Engraved body sherds and engraved-punctated rim: a-d, engraved; e, engraved-punctated rim.
Provenience: a, N211 Wll5 , level 3; b, N225 Wl26, level l; c, N211 Wl09, level 2; d, N221 Wl09, level
3; e, unknown (Lot 1556).

b

a

c

0

1

2

3

4

5

centimeters
Figure 18. Engraved body sherds. Provenience: a, N211 Wl09, level 2; b, general (possible
Taylor Engraved); c, general (possible Natchitoches Engraved); d, N214Wl16, level 1.

176

Texas Archeological Society

a

d

c

b

f

e

g
h

k

~
-----m

Figure 19. Selected engraved decorative elements: a-d, g-j , carinated bowls; e-f, k-m, bottles. Provenience: a, c, N212
Wl 14, level 3; b, N212Wl14, level 2; d, unknown (Lot 1458); e, N221Wl16, level 2; f, N212 W107, level 2; g, N211
Wll3 , level 2; h, N211 W109, level 2; i, N211 Wll5, level 3; j , N224 Wll7, level 2; k, N211 W109, level 1; 1-m,
N215 W107 , level 1.

Sherds from vessels tempered solely with
crushed and burned bone are less common in nonmortuary contexts (3.7%) than they are in either the
Feature 31 (6.7%) or Feature 95 (12.5%) vessels,
however. Conversely, grog-bone-tempered vessels account for 26.7-28.1 % of the Feature 31 and
Feature 95 vessels, respectively, but 45 .6% of the
sherds from non-mortuary contexts are grog and

bone-tempered. From these data, it is reasonable
to conclude that mortuary and non-mortuary vessel
assemblages were not made and tempered the same,
probably heavily influenced by the high numbers
of engraved fine wares in the mortuary vessels
and correspondingly higher amounts of plain and
decorated utility ware vessels in the non-mortuary
vessel sherds.

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 177

e
Figure 20. Plain rims from the Washington Square Mound site. Provenience: a, N212 Wl09, level l; b, N214Wl12, level
3; c, general site area; d, N212 Wll2, level 3; e, N227 Wll6, level 2; f, N211 Wll6, level 2; g, N215 Wll2, level I.

ASSEMBLAGE COMPARISONS
Compositional differences in the Washington
Square Mound site ceramics are also evident in the
comparison of the proportions of different kinds of
decorated fine wares and utility wares in both the funerary vessels and non-mortuary vessel sherds (Table
11). As Table 11 illustrates very well, engraved fine
wares are almost seven times more prevalent in mortuary contexts (55.8%) than they are in non-mortuary
contexts (8.3%) at the site, and clearly these fine
wares were deliberately selected by the Caddo as
a funerary accompaniment more often than any
other kind of ceramic vessel. The engraved designs
on these vessels likely had very specific social and
ritual meanings to the Caddo lineages the deceased
belonged to, as well as to the larger community that
used the Washington Square Mound site for civic and
ceremonial purposes, and thus it was appropriate that
these fine wares were placed with the dead to use on
their journey to the House of the Dead.
Decorated utility wares, especially those with
brushing (either as the sole decorative treatment

or in combination with other decorative methods),
are three times more common in non-mortuary
contexts than they are as funerary offerings. In fact,
almost 63% of all the decorated sherds from nonmortuary contexts have brushing (see Table 11).
Incised, punctated, pinched, and appliqued sherds
and vessels are roughly equivalent in frequency
between mortuary and non-mortuary contexts,
although incised vessel sherds are more common
in the latter and incised-punctated vessels are more
abundant in the former archeological contexts (see
Table 11).
In summary, then, vessels in mortuary contexts at the Washington Square Mound site are
predominantly engraved, brushed-punctated, and
incised-punctated (see Table 11), accounting for
more than 80% of the decorated vessels. In vessel
sherds from non-mortuary contexts, the principal
decorative methods are brushed, incised-punctated,
and punctated on utility wares; these account for
almost 79% of the decorated sherds. Engraved fine
wares were not commonly used or broken in nonmortuary contexts.

178

Texas Archeological Society
Table 10. Temper classes in the Feature 31 and 95 vessels.

Temper class

Feature 31

Feature 95

Grog
Grog-hematite
Grog-bone
Grog-organics
Bone-grog-hematite
Bone
Bone-hematite
Bone-organics

46.7*
20.0
20.0
0.0
6.7
0.0
0.0
6.7

37.5
18.8
12.5
3.1
15.6
9.4
3.1
0.0

% with grog
% with bone
% with hematite
% with organics

86.7
33.4
26.7
6.7

87.5
40.6
37.5
3.1

% with sandy paste

6.7

9.4

Total vessels

15

32

*percentage

In addition to the differences already noted in
vessel composition, proportion of fine wares, utility wares, and plain wares, as well as choices in
temper selection, we know that utility and fine ware
vessels from the site were fired in different ways
(Table 12). This is based on the detailed analysis of
whole vessels from two mortuary features (Perttula
et al. 2008). In the case of the Feature 31 vessels,
50% were fired in a high oxygen environment as
compared to only 10.3% of the Featµre 95 vessels.
Almost 90% of the Feature 95 vessels were fired in
a low oxygen or reducing environment (probably
smothered in the coals), and most of these were
subsequently removed from the fire to cool, leaving
a thin oxidized layer along either interior and/or
exterior vessel surfaces.
The meaning of these vessel firing differences
between vessel offerings placed in the two mortuary
features is presently uncertain. Possibilities that may
account for these differences include (a) temporal
or social changes in the technology of firing; (b)
preferences in the hardness and color of vessels of
different sizes, functions, and decorative style; (c)
a greater learned or developed ability to control
the firing temperature and the duration of firing by
individual potters, or even (d) personal, familial,

or community-wide choices that dictated how fine
wares, utility wares, and plain wares needed to be
fired . Certainly also influencing the differences in
vessel firing detected between the two mortuary features were decisions made by the living descendants
of the deceased about what kinds of pottery vessels
were appropriate to place as funerary offerings in
the mortuary features, and what pottery vessels were
available for mortuary use.

CERAMIC PIPES

A total of seven pipe sherds were recovered
from the 1985 TAS excavations inAreaA (Table 13)
at the Washington Square Mound site. These were
found in the same part of Area A as the plain, utility,
and fine ware ceramic sherds (see Figure 4i).
Four of the pipe sherds are definitely from
elbow pipes (Figure 21b, d), one clearly of the
L-shaped form (Figure 21c), which is the earliest
known form of Caddo elbow pipe made in East
Texas (cf. Rogers and Perttula 2004); one other
pipe sherd is a large pipe bowl, probably also from
an elbow pipe (Figure 21e). One of the elbow pipe
sherds has an engraved line that encircles the base

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 179
Table 11. Decorated fine wares and utility wares in funerary vessels and non-mortuary vessel sherds
from the Washington Square Mound site.
Wares

sherds from non-mortuary contexts*

mortuary contexts

Fine wares
Engraved
Engraved-punctated
Engraved-rocker stamped

8.2**
0.1
0.0

51.2
2.3
2.3

Sub-total

8.3

55.8

Brushed
Brushed-incised-punctated
Brushed-incised
Brushed-punctated-appliqued
Brushed-punctated
Brushed-appliqued

54.7
0.2
3.7
0.1
3.6
0.6

0.0
2.3***
0.0
4.7
14.0
0.0

Sub-total

62.9

21.0

Pinched
Incised
Incised-punctated
Punctated
Appliqued
Incised-appliqued

0.6
14.1
4.0
9.9
0.3
0.1

0.0
2.3
11.6
9.3
0.0
0.0

Sub-total

29.0

23.2

5194 sherds

43 decorated vessels

Utility wares

Total

*from Hart (1982) and this article
**percentage
***brushed-incised-appliqued-punctated (Reavely Brushed-Incised)

of the bowl (Figure 21b). Later elbow pipe forms in
the Neches-Angelina River basin (Perttula 2008b)
commonly have engraved lines on them, either
encircling the rim of the bowl and/or the stem as
well as the bowl base.

assemblage with horizontal rows of pinching that is
worthy of further mention. This particular sherd is a
portion of a pedestal leg from either a 3- or 4-legged
Killough Pinched jar (Figure 22; see also Suhm and
Jelks 1962:Plate 46a-c).

MISCELLANEOUS CERAMIC
ARTIFACTS

CHIPPED STONE TOOLS
AND DEBRIS

Although included in the discussion above of
the decorated utility wares, there is one sherd in the

The chipped stone tools and debris from the
Washington Square Mound site TAS excavations

180

Texas Archeological Society
Table 12. Firing conditions observed in the Feature 31 and 95 vessels.
Feature 31

Feature 95

Oxidizing environment

20.0**

3.4

Incompletely oxidized

30.0

6.9

Reducing environment

10.0

13.8

Fired in a reducing environment,
cooled in the open air

40.0

75.9

10

29

Firing conditions*

Total vessels
*follows Teltser (1993:Figure 2a-h)
**percentage

include eight arrow points, three scrapers, 17 flake
tools, one chipped gouge, 122 pieces oflithic debris,
and nine discarded cores (Appendix 3, on file with
the TAS and Stephen F. Austin State University).
The chipped stone artifacts are found in low numbers throughout the Area A excavations. Tools and
Perdiz arrow points are more widely distributed
across the excavations (Figure 23a-b) than are the
ceramic vessels (see Figure 4), as are cores (Figure
23c) and lithic debris (Figure 23d). This suggests
that multiple and spatially dispersed knapping
events and tool use/discard areas are represented in
the archeological deposits, or that multiple knappers
and/or tool users have contributed to the dispersion
of chipped stone tools and debris in this part of the
mound center.
Arrow points
All eight arrow points from Area A are likely
finely-made contracting stem Perdiz style specimens with finely serrated blades and downwardpointing barbs (Table 14 and Figure 24); these are
concentrated in the southern part of Area A. Similar
contracting stem arrow points have been recovered
from Middle Caddo period sites in the Sabine and
Neches-Angelina river basins in East Texas (see
Rogers and Perttula 2004; Shafer 2007), as well as
in Late Caddo contexts throughout the region.
Six of the eight arrow points are made from
either gray (n=5) or reddish-brown (n=l) chert, with

the other two made from a fine-grained quartzite.
Based on the prevalence of cortex-covered pieces
of gray chert in the lithic debris (see below) from
Washington Square, but the overall dearth of lithic
debris from this site, it is likely that the five arrow
points of this material were made locally, although
not in Area A. The two quartzite Perdiz points (see
Figure 24a, g) and the one unidentified point made
of a reddish-brown chert (see Figure 24c) appear to
have been made from non-local lithic raw material
sources, or obtained from some other Caddo groups
outside of the Angelina River basin.
Scrapers
Three scraping tools with steep and welldefined working edges were found in the southern
part of the Area A excavations (Table 15). All three
side scrapers (Figure 25b-c) are on fine-grained
chert raw materials, including dark gray (n=2) and
light gray (n=l) colors. Two of the three scrapers
are broken, but the area of use on each tool ranged
between at least 13 mm to 72 mm in length along
one side of the tool.
Flake tools
The flake tools from Area A at the Washington
Square Mound site have use-worn and/or marginal
retouching areas (ranging from 4.5-31 mm in
length) along one or multiple edges of finely-grained

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 181
Table 13. Ceramic Pipes.
Provenience

Sherd type

Comments

212-112, Iv. 2

pipe bowl

212-114, Iv. 1

pipe bowl

214-106,lv. l
214-106,lv. l

pipe bowl
pipe stem

221-109, Iv. 3

pipe stem

221-109, Iv. 3

pipe stem

222-109, Iv. 1

pipe bowl
or stem

L-shaped elbow pipe with D-FL rim/lip; 32.0 mm
exterior orifice diameter; 15.0 mm interior orifice
diameter; 10.6 mm thick at lip; stem height is 57.0+ mm
elbow pipe; 4.6 mm thick; single engraved line
encircles the bow 1 base
D-FL rim/lip, with an exterior thickened rim
elbow pipe; no apparent temper; ext. orifice diameter is
36.5 mm; interior stem diameter is 16.0 mm; stem
length is 22.9+ mm; no apparent temper; stem narrows
in the direction of the bowl
long-stemmed pipe; exterior stem diameter, 12.4 mm;
interior stem diameter, 5.2 mm
elbow pipe; thick and fiat lip; 10.3 mm thick; 5.7-9.7 mm
stem diameter in cross-section (interior-exterior)
bone-tempered; 6.3 mm thick

D-FL=direct rim and a fiat lip

a
b

e
0

1

2

3

4

5

centimeters

Figure 21. Pipe sherds: a, long-stemmed Red River pipe; b-d, elbow pipe sherds; e, probable
elbow pipe bowl sherd. Provenience: a, N221 Wl09, level 3; b, N212 Wll4, level l; c, N212
Wll2, level 2; d-e, N214 Wl06, level 1.

182

Texas Archeological Society

0

1

2

3

4

centimeters
Figure 22. Killough Pinched pedestal leg. Provenience:
N21 l Wl 12, level 3.

siliceous raw materials. This includes 13 with one
lateral tool edge (4.5-18.2+ mm in length), three
with two lateral tool edges (18-37 mm in use
length), and one with lateral and distal use-worn
areas totaling 31 mm in length (Table 16; see Figure
25a, e). More than 94% of the flake tools are on
cherts-primarily gray (n=9), dark gray (n=2), and
grayish-brown (n=2) chert colors-and one is on a
local petrified wood.
Gouge

The gouge, made from a local ferruginous
sandstone and probably used for woodworking, has
a steep and unifacially chipped and utilized edge opposite a fiat, polished planar surface that covers one
face of the tool (see Figure 25d). The tool has been
flaked on one surface of the tabular piece, creating a
steep (almost 90°) and convex working edge.
Cores and lithic debris

The recovery of nine cores and a small amount of
lithic debris in the TAS excavations at the Washington
Square Mound site indicate that at best only a
moderate amount of chipped stone knapping took
place during the Caddo use of Area A (see Figure

23c-d). Eight of the nine cores are on chert; the ninth
is a core fragment of a local hematite (Table 17). Most
of the cores were only minimally reduced-including
tested pebbles (n=4) and single platform (n=2)
cores-and only one brown chert pebble core was
reduced to the point of exhaustion (i.e., no more flakes
could be reasonably removed from the piece).
The 122 pieces of lithic debris from Area A at
the Washington Square Mound site are dominated by
cherts (93.5%), with only a limited use of other raw
materials, among them hematite (0.8%), quartzite
(0.8%), novaculite (1.6%), petrified wood (2.5%),
Catahoula Sandstone (0.8% ), and chalcedony
(0.8% ). The most common chert in the lithic debris
is gray in color, often translucent (n=50, 41.0% ),
dark gray (n=17, 13.9%), grayish-brown (n=15,
12.3%), brown (n=ll, 9.2%), brownish-gray (n=4,
3.3%), yellowish-gray (n=4, 3.3%), yellow (n=2,
1.6%), dark brown (n=2, 1.6%), dark grayish-brown
(n=2, 1.6%), light gray (n=2, 1.6%), yellowish-red
(n=l, 0.8%), red (n=l, 0.8%), white (n=l, 0.8%),
and grayish-white (n=l, 0.8%).
The dark gray chert pieces are likely from a
Central Texas source (although such material is
available in closer Trinity River and Neches River
gravels, see Girard 1995; Banks 1990), based on its
color, and one piece of gray chert in the lithic debris
must be from the same area given its limestonecovered cortex. The novaculite originated in the
Ouachita Mountains of southeastern Oklahoma and
southwestern Arkansas, but would also have been
available in Red River gravels more than 150 miles
north of the site. Because of the abundance of cortical flakes and cores with cortical surfaces, the other
lithic raw materials-including the different colors
of cherts, petrified wood, quartzite, etc.-found at
Area A were probably obtained from regional stream
gravel sources.
Most of the lithic debris and cores have
smoothed and stream-rolled cortical remnants (61 %
of the lithic debris is cortical, and 91.9% of that has
a smoothed stream-rolled cortex), and these were
gathered by the Caddo from a stream gravel source,
probably from either the Angelina or Neches rivers
(Girard 1995:68-69) to the south and west of Washington Square, about a day's walk away. Among the
principal raw materials in the lithic debris, cortical
flakes represent 82% of the brown chert, 67% of the
grayish-brown chert, 58% of the gray chert, and 42%
of the dark gray chert.
The chert in these gravels primarily occur as
pebbles, and bipolar flakes are relatively common

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 183

N240

N240

N240

+W120

+WllO

WlOO+

~

D

SJ
N230

N230

+Wl30

+W120

N220

~

~D a

N230

WlOO+

F45

WllO

Ci

D

@
+Wl30

D
D
D
D
D

D

N220
+Wl20

FJl5
Fl20

('

r-,,, ....\
,/

N220
WlOO+

+

N220

WllO

a
N210

~"'"

+Wl20

Fll4

LEGEND

0

f

ExcavationUnit

\.:) Large Pit Feature

32

N240

N240

+WllO

WlOO+

~

D
D
D
D

N230

N230

+~30

+W120

N220
+'W'120

D

D

N230

WlOO+

N230
WllO

D

N220

16
feet

N240

SJ

+W130

meters

+W120

D

D
D

N210
WlOO+

+
N210
WllO

~D a

F45

Ci

D

Fl20

FllS
('

r-,,
\
.... 1 \,, ....

N220
WlOO+

+

N220

WllO

b
N210
+Wl20

~'""
F134

LEGEND

D

Excavation Unit

\:)LargePit Feature

+
N210
Wl lO

N210
WlOO+

meters

f

16

32

feet

Figure 23 . Distribution of lithic artifacts in the TAS-excavated portions of Area A; a, stone tools; b, Perdiz arrow
points.

184

Texas Archeological Society

N240
+W120

N240
+W1 10

~

D

LL]
N230

~

N230
+W120

+Wl30

~
N220

+W130

D
D

N220
+Wl20

N240

' '""'+

WllO

D

llo

D
D
D
D
D
N230

WIOO+

f45

c-'

Fl15
F120- ( '

..... , , ....
~/1,\
N220

WIOO+

+
N220
WllO

~:~,""

c

LL]

N210
+W120

Fll4

N210
WIOO+

+
N210
WllO

LEGEND

0

meters
16

f

Excavation Unit

.. :)Large Pit Feature

N240
+W120

N240
+WllO

LL]
N230

N230

+\X/120

D

N220

N220
+Wl20

+Wl30

F45

c-'

WllO

D

D

crD

D
D
D
D
D
N230
WIOO+

N230

D
D

N240
WIOO+

~

D

+Wl30

32

feet

F115
Fl20- ( '

~/1,\
.... , , ....

N220
WIOO+

+
N220
WllO

d
N210
+W120

N210
WIOO+

+
N210
WllO

LEGEN D

D

Excavation Unit

t: )large Pit Feature

f

meters
16

32

feet

Figure 23 . Distribution of lithic artifacts in the TAS-excavated portions of Area A; c, cores; d, lithic debris.

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 185
Table 14. Ar row points.

Provenience

Raw
Material

Type

211-113, Iv. 1

Perdiz

reddish-brown
chert
gray chert

Perdiz
Perdiz
Perdiz
Perdiz
Perdiz
Perdiz

gray chert
gray chert
quartzite
gray chert
gray chert
quartzite

?

211-115 , Iv. 1/
214-115, Iv. 2?**
212-106, Iv. 2
212-116, Iv. 3
215-107, Iv. 3
215-113 , Iv. 1
224-11 7, Iv. 1
224-117, Iv. 1

w

Th

SW

RS/S

13.0

3.1

3.4

-!+

downward barbs

11.0

10.1

4.0

4.6

+/-

outward barbs

47.4
23.0

18.9
16.6
10.9
15.7
13.9
11.3

3.0
3.0
2.7
3.6
3.6
2.8

5.4
3.8
3.7
4.7
4.2
3.2

+!+
-!+
-!+
-!+
-!+
-!+

downward
downward
downward
downward
downward
downward

L*

30.5
27.0

Comments

barbs
barbs
barbs
barbs
barbs
barbs

L=length (in mm); W=width (in mm); Th=thickness (in mm); SW=stem width; RS/S=resharpened/serrated; +=present;
-=absent; **the lot no. label on the artifact is ambiguous, and may be either Lot 1490 or Lot 1491

a

b

c

,·

h

f

. e

g

d

0

1

2

4

5

centimet:ers
Figure 24. Arrow points from the Washington Square Mound site: a-b, d-h, Perdiz; c, unidentified. Provenience: a, N215
W107, level 3; b, N211Wl15, level 1 or N214Wl15 , level 2; c, N211Wl13 , level l ; d, N212 Wl06, level 2; e, N215
W113, fill; f, N212 W116, 33-43 cm; g-h, N224 Wll7, level 1.

186

Texas Archeological Society
Table 15. Scraping tools.

Raw Material

Utilized Length
(mm)

Tool Type

dark gray chert
dark gray chert
light gray chert

41.0+
13.0+
72.0

side scraper
side scraper
side scraper

Provenience
212-110,lv. 1
212-110, Iv. 2
214-107, Iv. 4

c
b

a

e

0

1

2

3

4

5

centimeters
Figure 25. Side scrapers, flake tool, and gouge: a, e, flake tool; b-c, side
scraper; d, ferruginous sandstone gouge. Provenience: a, general site context;
b, N212Wl10, level l; c, N212Wl10, level 2; d, N214 Wl09, fill; e, N214
Wl07, level 4.
(n=7) in the assemblage, which is to be expected
in chipped lithic assemblages where available raw
materials are small and relatively scarce, especially
among the gray and brown cherts. An occasional
small cobble would have been available for procurement and use as well. As Caddo knappers were
interested in obtaining flakes for tool manufacture
(including flakes for arrow points, other formal
tools, as well as expedient flake tools), rather than
by the direct reduction of cores, the limited knapping
carried out in Area A of the site was for the purpose
of obtaining a small stockpile of usable flakes for
future tool manufacture, or for the testing of small

cores that could be further reduced to obtain other
flakes for tools.

GROUND STONE TOOLS
There are four ground stone tools from the 1985
TAS excavations. Three of the four ground stone
tools are made from ferruginous sandstone, while the
other is on hematite. Both materials are available locally (cf. Girard 1995). One of the ferruginous sandstone tools (N225 Wl 16, level 1) is a fragment of a
grinding slab, another of the same material is a mano

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 187
Table 16. Flake tools . .

Provenience

Raw Material

212-112, lv. 2

reddish-gray-brown
chert
gray chert
grayish-brown chert
petrified wood
gray chert
yellowish-white
chert
dark gray chert
gray chert
gray chert
yellowish-gray chert
gray chert
gray chert
gray chert
dark gray chert
grayish-brown chert
gray chert
gray chert

212-112, lv.
212-115, lv.
212-115,lv.
212-115, lv.
214-107, lv.

2

223-116, lv.
224-126, lv.
227-116, lv.
230-109, lv.
230-110,lv.
235-109, lv.
235-109, lv.
236-110, lv.
236-110, lv.
Lot 1458*
Lot 1458*

2
1
2

1

l
1
4

1

l
1
1
1

2

Utilized Length
(mm)

Tool Type

8.5

unilateral

31.0
4.5
11.0
11.0+
37.0

unilateral and distal
unilateral
unilateral
unilateral
bilateral

7.5+
18.2+
9.0+
7.0+
8.0
18.0
8.5
11.0+
8.0
18.0
12.0+

unilateral
unilateral
unilateral
unilateral
unilateral
bilateral
unilateral
unilateral
unilateral
bilateral
unilateral

*Not listed in the artifact catalog, specimen inventory, on file at Stephen F. Austin State University

Table 17. Cores.
Provenience

Raw Material

Core Type

212-115, lv. 1

yellowish-brown
chert
brown chert
hematite
brown chert
light gray chert
gray chert
dark grayish-brown
chert
reddish-gray chert
red chert

single platform

212-115, lv.
214-116, lv.
215-107, lv.
215-107, lv.
223-109,lv.
223-109, lv.

1

2
1
1
l
1

228-116, lv. ?*
228-117, lv. 1

exhausted core
multiple platform core fragment
tested pebble
tested pebble
core fragment
single platform
tested pebble
tested pebble

*the artifact catalog, specimen inventory, does not list the level for this lot no.

188

Texas Archeological Society

and bi-pitted stone (N224 Wl25, level 3), while the
third such tool is a pitted stone with one pit (N236
Wl 11, level 2). The hematite ground stone tool is a
fragmentary bi-pitted stone (N215 W107, level 2).

FIRE-CRACKED ROCK

The small lithic assemblage from the Washington Square Mound site includes three pieces of firecracked rock (N225 E126) and a single unmodified
piece of Catahoula sandstone (N211 E106).

SUMMARY

The Washington Square Mound site (41NA49),
in the modern city of Nacogdoches, Texas, in the
East Texas Pineywoods, is an important prehistoric
multiple mound center constructed and used by the
Caddo peoples between ca. A.D. 1250-1425, during
the Middle Caddo period. In 1985, the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) held their annual summer field
school at the site, under the direction of Dr. James
E. Corbin of Stephen F. Austin State University. Although the general findings of the field school were
summarized by Corbin and Hart (1998), the large
assemblage of recovered artifacts (primarily Caddo
ceramic vessel sherds) had not been analyzed and a
report prepared on these material culture remains.
As part of the concerted effort by the TAS to see that
the results and archeological findings of past field
schools are fully published (cf. Perttula 2008c), the
TAS supported my proposal to complete the analysis
of the recovered artifacts and prepare a report on the
archeological significance of the ceramic and lithic
artifacts found in the excavations.
The 1985 TAS Field School excavations were
concentrated in non-mound archeological deposits
not far to the east of Mound 1/2 and between that
mound and the Reavely-House Mound (Mound 4),
thus placed betwixt the sacred and civic parts of the
mound center (see Figure 2). Mound 1/2 had been
built over an important public structure "constructed
on the leveled surface of a low, natural sandy rise"
(Corbin and Hart 1998:71). The Reavely-House
Mound is a burial mound that contains the graves of
at least six members of the Caddo elite that lived and
died in the Washington Square Mound community.
In the non-mound areas at Washington Square
examined during several seasons of excavationsincluding that of the TAS Field School-clear

evidence for on-site permanent Caddo habitation
has yet to be identified. Instead, an assortment of
pits and post holes have been documented (Corbin
and Hart 1998:60-67). Certainly the most interesting
of these non-mound features are several large sherdfilled pits (see Figure 3b) in the southern part of the
excavations. These pits and the sherds they contain
from many different vessels-especially cooking
jars (see Figure 4a) but also including a modicum
of fine ware serving vessels--may represent the
deposits from public feasting activities led by
the Caddo elite who used the Washington Square
Mound site as a civic and ceremonial center. The
remains of important public feasting events have
been encountered at a number of mound centers in
the eastern United States (e.g., Dietler and Hayden
2001; Pauketat et al. 2002) as well as the Early
Caddo mound center at the Crenshaw site (Scott
and Jackson 1998).
Not including a few charred plant remains and
animal bones (not analyzed as part of my proposal),
or the several thousand ceramic sherdlets, a total of
3580 prehistoric ceramic artifacts have been recovered in the Area A excavations at the Washington
Square Mound site by the 1985 TAS Field School.
As with many East Texas Caddo sites, this artifact
assemblage from the Washington Square Mound
site is dominated by sherds (95 .1 %) from broken
ceramic cooking, serving, and storage vessels, with
only a few ceramic pipe sherds (0.2%), and a small
assortment of chipped stone (n=29, 0.8%) and
ground stone (n=4, 0.1 %) tools (particularly flake
tools and Perdiz arrow points), the debris and cores
from chipped stone tool manufacture (n=131, 3.7%),
and a few pieces of fire-cracked rock and Catahoula
Sandstone (n=4, 0.1 %).
Based on the rim sherds, the ceramic sherd
collection from the 1985 TAS Field School excavations at the Washington Square Mound site
represent the fragments from at least 200 vessels
used and discarded in Area A. About 25% of these
vessels are from plain wares (typically bowls and
carinated bowls), another 6% are fine ware carinated
bowls and bottles decorated with engraved designs,
and the remainder (69%) are from decorated utility
ware jars (including at least one vessel with a
pedestal base). The diversity of decorative motifs
and elements in both the fine wares and utility wares
is considerable, but defined types recognized in the
decorated sherds includes Nacogdoches Engraved
and Washington Square Paneled types in the fine
wares, as well as a few sherds of the Historic Caddo

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 189
type Patton Engraved, and Dunkin Incised, Davis
Incised, Maydelle or Canton Incised, Killough
Pinched, and Reavely Brushed-Incised types in the
utility wares; there are also vessels that apparently
have brushing (Bullard Brushed?) or punctations
on both the rim and body surfaces. The same
range of ceramic types are present in the Area A
sherd assemblage studied by Hart (1982) and the
mortuary vessels from the Reavely-House Mound,
except in the case of the latter, engraved fine wares
were obviously the preferred burial good (see Hart
1982; Perttula et al. 2008), well out of proportion
to their use in more mundane non-mound contexts
at the site.
Our consideration of the Caddo ceramic technology and decorative styles documented at the
Washington Square Mound site suggests that the
closest affiliations (although not necessarily that
close stylistically speaking) of the Caddo groups
that lived there from the 13th century A.D. onward
are with other Caddo sites and communities not far
to the northeast, east, and southeast in the Angelina
and Attoyac river basins (Perttula 2008a:Figure
12-3). The Washington Square Mound site lies near
the center of this ceramic tradition. This same broad
area of East Texas was occupied in historic times by
numerous Caddo groups that were affiliated with
the Hasinai Caddo (cf. Swanton 1942), including
the Nasoni, Nadaco, Hainai, and Nacogdoche.
The prehistoric Caddo settlers and mound builders
at Washington Square shared a common ceramic
heritage with other prehistoric and historic Caddo
groups living in this part of East Texas.
Some of these other Caddo sites include several 13th to 15th century Caddo settlements at Lake
Naconiche on Naconiche Creek (a tributary to Attoyac Bayou, see Perttula 2008a), Middle and Late
Caddo sites at Lake Sam Rayburn (Jelks 1965), and
contemporaneous sites at Toledo Bend Reservoir
(Woodall 1969). In each of these areas where archeological investigations have been undertaken,
brushed pottery is an important decorative component in the utility wares after ca. A.D. 1250, and the
proportion of brushed pottery appears to increase
through time. Caddo sites in these areas also have
high proportions of burned bone used as temper.
North of the Sabine River, by contrast, grog was the
preferred temper for vessel manufacture by Caddo
potters between ca. A.D. 1300-1700.
Kelley (2005:61-66) has proposed a simple but
effective way of determining cultural and ceramic
stylistic affiliations between contemporaneous

Caddo groups in East Texas and northwestern
Louisiana. He made comparisons using a series of
general decorative classes (i.e., brushed, ridged,
incised, engraved, punctated, appliqued, and redslipped) to "see how much variability occurs in
assemblages from nearby regions." His examination
of Belcher and Titus phase sites from different parts
of the region (well north and east of Washington
Square), the Burnitt site in the Sabine River uplands
in northwestern Louisiana, and sites at Toledo Bend
Reservoir along the Sabine River showed "very
little variation within each region and significant
differences between the regions." These similarities
and differences lie at the heart of any conclusions
about the cultural and ceramic affiliations of local
Caddo groups.
_
I extend these comparisons by utilizing the
ceramic decorative data compiled by Kelley
(2005:Table 6-3) and adding to it decorative class
information from other Middle and Late Caddo sites
in this part of East Texas with well-studied ceramic
assemblages. This includes sites at Lake Naconiche
as well as decorative class data from the Tyson
site in the Attoyac basin (Middlebrook 1994), and
contemporaneous Caddo sites at Lake Sam Rayburn
and Toledo Bend Reservoir (Table 18).
What these data first show are the existence
between the 13th and early 15th centuries A.D.
of some sort of a ceramic stylistic relationship
between the Washington Square Mound site and
contemporaneous Caddo sites at Lake N aconiche
(on Naconiche Creek, about 20 km to the north)
as well as the Caddo occupation at the Tyson site,
located in the uplands on the east side of the Attoyac
Bayou, not many miles to the east (see Table 18).
These sites have considerable amounts of brushed,
incised, and punctated utility wares (82-84% of all
the decorated sherds )-as does Washington Square
(89% )-but proportionally more engraved fine wares
(13-20% for the former and 8% for the latter). More
importantly, Nacogdoches Engraved and Washington
Square Paneled sherds and/or vessels have been
recovered from the Washington Square Mound site,
the Lake Naconiche sites (Perttula 2008a), as well as
at the Tyson site (Tom Middlebrook, 2008 personal
communication), but not from any of the other sites
listed in Table 18.
The Walter Bell site at Lake Sam Rayburn,
some miles southeast of Washington Square, is also
broadly stylistically similar in several respects:
proportions of brushed, punctated, and engraved
wares, although the former site has considerably

190

Texas Archeological Society

Table 18. Ceramic decorative classes from selected East Texas and northwestern Louisiana sites.
Decorative
Class
Brushed
Ridged
Incised
Engraved
Punctated
Appliqued
Red-slipped
Total
decorated
sherds

Titus
50*
15
20
10
2
2

7407

Belcher

Burnitt

Goode

14
55
15
15
1

40
35
12
12
2
2

42
10
10
35
2

10,103

1473

3645

Walter
Bell

Tyson

Lake
Naconiche

Washington
Square

47

38

45

61

40
4
8

20
20
24

18
13
21
2
Trace

18
8
10

4452

1862

3160

5194

*percentage; Belcher phase sites: Belcher, McLelland; Titus phase sites: Pilgrim's Pride, Sam Roberts, Ear Spool,
Turtle Pond; Bumitt (Kelley 2005); Walter Bell (Jelks 1965); Goode (Woodall 1969); Tyson (Middlebrook 1994);
Lake Naconiche, including Tallow Grove, Beech Ridge, and Foggy Fork sites (Perttula 2008a); Washington Square
Mound (this study; Hart 1982)

more incised utility wares (40%, see Table 18) than
does the Washington Square ceramic assemblage
(18%). The absence of Nacogdoches Engraved or
Washington Square Paneled sherds from the site
suggests that there are not close-by comparison
with the Tyson and Lake Naconiche Caddo sitesstylistic affiliations between the Caddo peoples
living in the Lake Sam Rayburn area and the
Washington Square Mound site.
Finally, ridged pottery is an important utility
ware restricted to Caddo sites along the Red River
affiliated with the Belcher phase and in sites in the
middle Sabine River basin (see Table 18); no ridged
pottery has been documented at the Washington
Square Mound, Tyson, or Lake Naconiche sites.
Consequently, these Belcher phase and middle
Sabine River Caddo sites are somewhat farther
removed stylistically from the Washington Square
Mound site within this part of East Texas, particularly contemporaneous sites in the Attoyac and
Angelina river basins in Nacogdoches and Shelby
counties, Texas.
With a broader and regional archeological
perspective on East Texas Caddo native history,
the Washington Square Mound site appears to have
been established, and began to flourish, about the
time (around ca. A.D . 1250) that an earlier multiple
mound Caddo civic and ceremonial center-the
George C. Davis site (41CE19) (Story 1997, 1998,

2000)-was losing power and social authority
among East Texas Caddo groups (Story 1997:64).
Washington Square was situated about 60 km to
the east of the Neches River and the George C.
Davis site at the advantageous nexus of north-south
(later known as the Caddo trace) and east-west (later
known as the Camino Real de los Tejas) aboriginal
trails that bisected Caddo ancestral lands. It seems
likely that the Caddo community that built and used
the Washington Square Mound site achieved preeminence at the expense of the long-lasting polity (400
years) on the Neches River. The George C. Davis
site was eventually abandoned by the early 14th
century A.D. (Story 2000). The Washington Square
Mound site continued to function as an important
Caddo civic and ceremonial center for at least 4-6
more generations, before it also was abandoned in
the first part of the 15th century A.D . This abandonment may be part and parcel of a larger regional
abandonment at that time of Caddo populations in
broad parts of the upper Angelina and middle part
of the Sabine river basins in East Texas (Perttula and
Rogers 2007:91-92).

ENDNOTES
1. Of the seven radiocarbon dates used by Corbin
and Hart (1998 :Table 4), one had a very large standard

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 191
deviation(± 200 years, Tx-3945), and another (Tx-4872)
dated a mixture of charred plant remains with very different rates of isotopic fractionation (i.e., wood, hardwood
nuts, and corn), rendering the resulting dates suspect.
These two radiocarbon samples at 2 sigma (AD 8811478 and AD 1004-1322, respectively) barely fall within
the calibrated age range of the pooled sample cited by
Corbin and Hart (1998), but primarily date well before
cal AD 1268-1302. A third sample (Tx-4873) at 2 sigma
has a calibrated age range of AD 1153-1285, again indicating a date that primarily predates the pooled sample
calibrated age range. I have not included these samples in
my consideration of the estimated age of the Washington
Square Mound site. Rather, I rely on four radiocarbon
samples from Features 8, 9, 18, and 75 that have small
standard deviations, include charred plant remains with
similar isotopic fractionation properties, and are internally
temporally consistent once they have been calibrated. Furthermore, for temporal comparisons I draw upon a large
suite of calibrated radiocarbon dates from sites at Lake
Naconiche with stylistically similar ceramic assemblages
(Perttula 2008a) as well as the extensive prehistoric Caddo
radiocarbon data base (Perttula 1998).
The 2 sigma calibrated age range of the radiocarbon
samples from Features 8, 9, 18, and 75 at Washington
Square are AD 1238-1434, AD 1217-1403, AD 12781436, and AD 1280-1427, respectively (Corbin and Hart
1998:Table 4). The mean calibrated age range of these
four dates is AD 1253-1425.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I appreciate the support of the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) in funding the analysis and
write-up of the artifacts recovered during the 1985
Field School at the Washington Square Mound site.
Ron Ralph was instrumental in encouraging that a
proposal be submitted to the TAS, and he guided it
through the TAS Board and Executive Committee.
Dr. Tom Middlebrook had also strongly encouraged
that the analysis work be done. Dr. Jerry Williams,
Dr. Leslie Cecil, and Dr. George Avery of Stephen F.
Austin State University also supported the work, and
willingly opened the James E. Corbin Archaeology
Laboratory facility to us during the course of our investigations. Dr. John Hart reviewed the draft of this
article, and provided useful comments that improved
the final version. Sandra Hannum prepared several
of the figures used in this article, and Bo Nelson
took all of the artifact photographs. Finally, I want
to acknowledge the considerable efforts of both Bo
Nelson and Mark Walters in helping me complete
the artifact analyses.

REFERENCES CITED
Banks, L. D.
1990 From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Review of Lithic Sources in the Trans-Mississippi South,
the Southern Plains, and Adjacent Southwest. Memoir
No. 4. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Norman.
Corbin, J. E.
1980 Excavations at Washington Square Mound Site 1979.
Paper presented at the Caddo Conference, Texarkana, Texas.
1982a The Washington Square Mound Site, 1981: A Lesson
in Humility. Paper presented at the Caddo Conference, Fayetteville, Arkansas.
1982b Excavations at Washington Square Mound Site.
Paper presented at the Annual meeting of the Texas
Archeological Society.
1983

One, Two, Three, or More: How Many Mounds at
Washington Square? Paper presented at the Caddo
Conference, Texarkana, Texas.

1984

An Archaeological Assessment of a Portion of the
Washington Square Mound Site (41NA49), Nacogdoches County, Texas. MS on file, Stephen F. Austin
State University, Nacogdoches.

1985a Report from the Field School Archeologist. Texas
Archeology 29(3):7 .
1985b A Short History of the Washington Square Mound
Site or How We Know Some of What We Know without Actually Digging. Texas Archeology 29(4):7-8.
Corbin, J.E. and J.P. Hart
1998 The Washington Square Mound Site: A Middle Caddo
Mound Complex in South Central East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69:47-78.
Corbin, J.E., D. C. Kisling, S. Oaks, and J.P. Hart
1984 Archaeological Investigations of the Washington
Square Mound Site (41NA49), Nacogdoches County,
Texas. MS on file, Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches, Texas.
Dietler, M. and B. Hayden (editors)
2001 Feasts: Archaeological and Ethnographic Perspectives.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Diggs, G. M., Jr., B. L. Lipscomb, M. D. Reed, and R. J.
O' Kennon
2006 Illustrated Flora of East Texas, Volume One: Introduction, Pteridophytes, Gymnosperms, and Monocotyledons. Botanical Research Institute of Texas,
Fort Worth.
Girard, J. S.
1995 The Chipped Stone Collection: Technological,
Functional, and Typological Analyses . In The Deshaw Site: Nacogdoches County, Texas, Volume 2:

192

Texas Archeological Society
Artifacts of Native Manufacture, edited by D. A.
Story, pp. 33-156. Studies in Archeology 21. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Hart, J.P.
1980 Cultural Features: Washington Square Mound Site,
1979. Paper presented at the Caddo Conference,
Texarkana, Texas.
1982

An Analysis of the Aboriginal Ceramics from the
Washington Square Mound Site, Nacogdoches
County, Texas. Master's thesis, Northeast Louisiana
University, Monroe.

Hart, J.P. and J.E. Corbin
1984 An Analysis of the Aboriginal Ceramics from the
Washington Square Mound Site, Nacogdoches
County, Texas. MS on file, Stephen F. Austin State
University, Nacogdoches, Texas.
Jelks, E. B.
1965 The Archeology of McGee Bend Reservoir. Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Kelley, D. B.
2005 The Burnitt Site: A Late Caddoan Occupation in
the Uplands of the Sabine River Basin of Louisiana.
Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.
· Kisling, D.
1983 1982 Excavations at Washington Square Mound Site.
Paper presented at the Caddo Conference, Natchitoches, Louisiana.

LLC, Austin, and Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton
Rouge.
2008c (editor) Collected Papers from Past Texas Archeological Society Summer Field Schools. Special Publication No. 5. Texas Archeological Society, San
Antonio.
Perttula, T. K. and R. Rogers
2007 The Evolution of a Caddo Community in Northeastern Texas: The Oak Hill Village Site (41RK214),
Rusk County, Texas. American Antiquity 72(1):7194.
Perttula, T. K., M. Walters, B. Nelson, B. Gonzalez, and R.
Cast, with a contribution by R. G. Franciscus
2008 Documentation of Associated and Unassociated
Funerary Objects in the Stephen F. Austin State
University Collections, Nacogdoches, Texas. Historic
Preservation Program, Caddo Nation of Oklahoma,
Binger, Oklahoma.
Perttula, T. K., M. R. Miller, R. A. Ricklis, D. J. Prikryl, and
C. Lintz
1995 Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society.
66: 175-235 .
Rogers, R. and T. K. Perttula
2004 The Oak Hill Village Site (4IRK2I4), Rusk County,
Texas. Document No. 030083 . PBS & J. Inc., Austin.

Middlebrook, T.
1994 An Update of Archaeological Investigations at the
Tyson Site (41SY92). Journal of Northeast Texas
Archaeology 3:1-36.

Schambach, F. F. and J.E. Miller
1984 A Description and Analysis of the Ceramics. In
Cedar Grove: An Interdisciplinary Investigation of
a Late Caddo Farmstead in the Red River Valley,
edited by N. L. Trubowitz, pp. 109-170. Research
Series No. 23. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Pauketat, T., L. Kelly, G. J. Fritz, N. H. Lopinot, S. Elias,
and E. Hargrove
2002 The Residues of Feasting and Public Ritual at Early
Cahokia. American Antiquity 67:257-280.

Scott, S. L. and H. E. Jackson
1998 Analysis of the Fauna! Remains from the Crenshaw
Site (3MI6), Southwestern Arkansas. The Arkansas
Archeologist 37:1-38.

Perttula, T. K.
1998 A Compendium of Radiocarbon and Oxidizable
Carbon Ratio Dates from Archaeological Sites in
East Texas, with a Discussion of the Age and Dating of Select Components and Phases. Radiocarbon
39(3):305-341.

Shafer, H. J.
2007 Leaning Rock Site (41SM325) Lithics. Caddo Archeology Journal 16:57-70.

2008a (editor) Lake Naconiche Archeology, Nacogdoches
County, Texas: Results of the Data Recovery Excavations at Five Prehistoric Archeological Sites. 2 Vols.
Report of Investigations No. 60. Archeological &
Environmental Consultants, LLC, Austin.
2008b The Ceramic Artifacts from the Lang Pasture Site
(41AN38) and the Place of the Site within an Upper
Neches River Basin Caddo Ceramic Tradition. MS
on file, Archeological & Environmental Consultants,

Story, D. A.
1990 Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M.
D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. 2 Vols. Research
Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
1997

1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the
George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:1-113.

Perttula, et al.-Caddo Ceramic and Lithic Artifacts from the Washington Square Mound Site 193
1998

2000

The George C. Davis Site: Glimpses into Early
Caddoan Symbolism and Ideology. In The Native
History of the Caddo: Their Place in Southeastern
Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T. K. Perttula and J.E. Bruseth, pp. 9-43. Studies in Archeology 30. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Introduction. In The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas , by H. P. Newell and A. D. Krieger,
pp. 1-31. Second edition. Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C.

Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Texas Archeological Society Special Publication 1
and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4, The University of Texas at Austin.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25: 1-562.

Swanton, J. R.
1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the
Caddo Indians. Bulletin 132. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington,
D.C.
Teltser, P. A.
1993 An Analytic Strategy for Studying Assemblage-Scale
Ceramic Variation: A Case Study from Southeast
Missouri. American Antiquity 58(3):530-543 .
Woodall, J. N.
1969 Archaeological Excavations in the Toledo Bend
Reservoir, 1966. Contributions in Anthropology No.
3. Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Investigations at the Gene and Ruth Ann Stallings
Ranch Site (41LR297)
Jim Bruseth, Jeff Durst, Richard Proctor, Larry Banks, Gary Sykes, and Bill Pierson

ABSTRACT
During 2003 and 2004 the Texas Historical Commission conducted preliminary archeological investigations at the Stallings Ranch site in Lamar County, Texas. A magnetometer survey of the site showed
promising evidence of habitation features, and with the help of several members of the Valley of the Caddo
Archeological Society, exploratory excavations were conducted at the site in 2004. Testing recovered artifacts
suggestive of a late Fourche Maline occupation dating to ca. A.D. 700-800, along with tentative evidence for
structural remains.

INTRODUCTION

Ranch is not named on any area maps, including the
U.S.G.S. Slate Shoals 7.5 minute quad sheet.
The soils of the site proper are from the
Annona-Freestone-Woodtell series (Ressel 1979),
which consists of brown to dark grayish-brown,
slightly acidic surface soils (about 10 cm thick)
overlying about 23 cm of light yellowishbrown, medium-acidic fine sandy loam. Between

This article summaries magnetometer survey
and archeological testing conducted during 2003
and 2004 at the Gene and Ruth Ann Stallings site
(41LR297; also known as Stallings Ranch) on a
ranch in Lamar County, Texas, owned by Gene
Stallings of Paris, Texas (Figure 1). Fieldwork was
conducted by members of the Valley of the
Caddo Archeological Society (VOCAS),
with Jim Bruseth, Jeff Durst, and Bill
Pierson of the Texas Historical Commission (THC), and independent archeologist
Larry Banks . Additional assistance was
provided by archeological stewards Lee
Green, Jim Blanton, Glynn Osburn, and
Laurie Moseley. Richard Proctor provided
logistical and moral support for all aspects
of the project. Participants included approximately 30 members of the society, as
well as others who were not members. The
daily crew, including supervisory staff,
numbered between 20 and 40. Ruth Ann
and Gene Stallings, owners of the ranch,
were extremely gracious in allowing the
@Stallings Ranch Site
field investigations of the site, and their
\
support is greatly appreciated.
,5000
0
2000
4000
The Stallings Ranch site encompasses
600-plus acres located within the northmeters
western-most headwaters of the Pine Creek
drainage basin in Lamar County, Texas. The
Figure 1. Location of the Stallings Ranch site (41LR297) on U.S.G.S.
Slate Shoals 7.5' topographic quadrangle.
headwaters creek system on the Stallings

)

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 80 (2009)

196

Texas Archeological Society

approximately 40 and 60 cm below the surface (bs),
the soil (A-horizon) is a yellowish-brown, strongly
acidic, loam that has strong brown mottles. At depths
of about 60 cm to 1 m bs, the soil B-horizon is a light
gray, very strongly acidic clay loam that has dark
red and yellowish-brown mottles. Generally at a
depth greater than 1 m, the soil (C-horizon) is a light
brownish-gray, medium-acidic, clay that has olive
yellow, yellowish-brown, and dark red mottles. This
lowermost "soil" is actually heavily weathered upper
exposures of the Bonham Clay geological formation
(Ressel 1979).
On the basis of the work reported in the article
and through the great generosity and cooperation
of the Stallings family, the site was investigated
by the Texas Archeological Society as part of the
society's annual field school. This effort took place
during June of 2005 and 2006 and the results will
be reported on separately.

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY
The first fieldwork undertaken at the site
consisted of a magnetometer survey conducted
on December 18, 2003, by Jim Bruseth and Bill
Pierson of the THC. This work was assisted by
VOCAS members. The purpose was to identify
areas of the site that might contain features and
other areas of interest for possible later fieldwork
by VOCAS members.
The THC conducted the magnetic survey work
with a Geometrics cesium-magnetometer system.
The equipment for this work consisted of a small
hand-pulled aluminum cart with two cesium sensors cabled to a G-858 data-logger console. The
sensors operate on the principle of self-oscillating,
split-beam cesium-vapor technology with automatic hemisphere switching. The sensors were
mounted on the axle of the cart and spaced 50 cm
apart and 25 cm above the ground. This allowed the
simultaneous collection of 20 readings per m 2 , or
readings taken approximately every 10 cm on four
50 cm transects. During operation, readings were
collected at 0.1 second intervals with a .05-.06 nT
level of sensitivity.
The cart provided a more constant height for the
sensors than hand-held instruments used while walking along a transect. While there still can be some
vertical movement, depending on the smoothness
of the surface, generally it is much less than that
introduced by a normal walking gait.

A base-station magnetometer was used to correct
for diurnal magnetic fluctuations and sun-induced
magnetic storm activity, which affect the earth's
magnetic field. The base-station magnetometer
consisted of a single cesium sensor on a 1 m-long
pole, held upright above the ground by a tripod, and
connected to a data-logging console. The collection
rate was set to a 0.2-second interval and showed a
sensitivity of as much as .03 nT.
The methodology for conducting the survey was
quite simple. The area to be surveyed was laid out
into a north-south and east-west grid of 10 m quadrants, and the overall grid size was entered into the
console attached to the cart. Magnetic data were then
collected by pulling the cart along the north axis
of the grid, collecting two 50 cm transects of data
simultaneously. The readings were stored in a datalogging console set to the "survey" mode. Although
both unidirectional and bidirectional (zigzag) survey
methods were possible, the bidirectional method
was found to be the most efficient, since the operator
did not have to walk back to the beginning of each
survey line to start the next line. Survey rates of up
to 8 ha per day have been achieved employing this
methodology.
Plastic traffic cones were placed at 10 mintervals along the survey transects to serve as fiducial
marks, or known points on the grid entered into the
data logger to track the position of the magnetometer. To record when the sensors crossed a known
grid point, a small plastic flapper was placed on the
cart axle to flap when it encountered a cone, providing a visual and auditory marker for the operator,
who would register the point on a pickle switch
connected to the console.
The base station was placed away from the site
area, where it would not be affected by intrusive
sources of magnetism such as passing cars or the
movements of people. The console was set to the
"base station" mode and continuously collected data
for eventual downloading and diurnal correction of
the moving sensors' data.
The data collected by the mobile magnetometer
and the base station were downloaded using Geometrics Magmap 2000, Version 4. This program
retrieves the data from the consoles and allows
processing to remove dropouts, adjust value spikes,
and make corrections for diurnal fluctuations in the
earth's magnetic field. The program also contains
a destripping algorithm to remove heading errors
potentially introduced with bidirectional surveys.
However, extensive experimentation has showed

Bruseth, et al.-Investigations at the Gene and Ruth Ann Stallings Ranch Site (41LR297) 197
that this algorithm could introduce subtle changes
to data values, especially for linear anomalies that
trended along the orientation of the survey transects,
adversely affecting the interpretability of the data.
Consequently, destripping was not routinely employed in the data processing in order to preserve
data integrity.
After processing in Magmap 2000, the magnetic data were exported into Surfer©, Version 8
for contouring into two-dimensional spatial maps.
A Kriging gridding algorithm was employed and
the final maps produced using the Shaded Relief
Map option. This map option was used instead of
line-contour or color maps, since the human eye
can more easily observe subtle changes in shades
of gray than multitudes of contour lines or highly
varying colors.
The result of the magnetic survey is presented
in Figure 2a. The gradations in grayscale show fluctuations in magnetism of the soils due to inherent
magnetic susceptibility, iron objects deposited onto
the site, and, quite possibly, cultural features related
to prehistoric occupation. The strongly contrasting
black and white anomalies almost certainly are small
dipoles associated with ferrous objects that have
been dropped on the site during the Historic period.
Other than these recent anomalies, there is an overall
trend for smaller-scale anomalies to be clustered into
five areas, each corresponding to small topographic
knolls present at the site (Figure 3). These are likely
related to cultural activities that were concentrated
on the topographic knolls. Also, an old road, today
not visible, is observable on the map as two narrow
and parallel lines running from the northwest (grid
N180/E222) to the southeast (N100/E260). Since
this road consists of two parallel lines, it reflects
modem wheeled vehicles.
Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of the magnetic map is the hint of circular structure patterns.
Figure 2b shows an area that has a circular pattern
that is reminiscent of the outline from a prehistoric
structure. The outline would represent the wall of
the structure where posts were set into the ground.
While the outline shown in Figure 2b is the most
apparent pattern, others, including partial arcs, are
also apparent.

ARCHEOLOGICAL TESTING
From March 25 through March 28, 2004, four
days were spent testing the Stallings Ranch site. The

research goals of the fieldwork were to investigate
the anomalies found on a magnetometer map of the
site and to collect a sample of artifacts to culturally
identify and determine the age of the site. Three
areas were investigated during the test excavation.
One was an area on the magnetometer map in the
central part of the site where a prehistoric structure
may have been present, based on a faint circular
outline on the magnetic map (see Figure 2b). Excavation was planned to look for post holes associated
with a structure.
Another area investigated was located in the
northeastern part of the site, where a knoll is sufficiently high in elevation to suggest that it might
be a man-made mound. The prehistoric Caddo of
East Texas sometimes built earthen mounds, often
to cover burned structures. To investigate this as an
explanation for the rise, two units were excavated
to look for evidence of culturally-filled soil and
for a possible burned structure at the bottom of the
mound. Two backhoe trenches were also dug to investigate the mound. Finally, several units were excavated across the site to obtain a sample of artifacts
to better understand when the site was occupied and
by what cultural group or groups.
The principal methodology employed during
the March 2004 fieldwork was hand excavation
of 1 x 1 m squares to investigate different areas of
the site. All 1 x 1 m units were excavated in 10 cm
levels with all soil screened through 1/4-inch mesh.
All artifacts were bagged by provenience for later
analysis. The units were taken down to Levels 4, 5,
or 6 (40, 50, or 60 cm bs, respectively), depending
on where the soil color changed sufficiently to allow
features to be seen, and at the depth at which artifact
frequencies declined significantly. The upper 40 to
60 cm of soil (the A-horizon) was very disturbed by
bioturbation, and numerous krotovina were observable, suggesting that artifact movement has been
commonplace.
Units were excavated singly or in groups of two
or more, depending on the goal for each unit. Several
single units were systematically placed around a
possible structure location shown on the magnetometer map (see Figures 2b and 3). These units were
placed to obtain a sample of artifacts to assess the
site's age. Other units were combined to form 2 x 2
m or larger groupings of units to investigate features ,
mostly possible post holes.
The results of the fieldwork at the Stallings
Ranch site were very productive in addressing the
research goals. Two block excavations were opened

198

Texas Archeological Society

170 -'

160

j

150

i

140

i

...

i•

130 --i

120 - i

110 --j

200

210

220

230

240

250

260

'
240

250

260

a

160

150

140 --f

130 -

110 -

200

210

220

230

270

b
Figure 2. Magnetometer maps of (a) the Stallings Ranch and (b) possible structure
location. Note that the grid is in meters, and see Figure 3 for orientation of the
survey area on the site map.

Bruseth, et al.-Investigations at the Gene and Ruth Ann Stallings Ranch Site (41LR297) 199

200

180

160

£

t
0

140

z
'D
·;::

CD 120

100

80

60

~

(Contours and grid in meters)

140

160

180

200

220

240

260

280

Grid East

Sta Iii ngs Ranch
Site Map
3-26-04

Backhoe Trench
1 x 1 m excavation unit •

Figure 3. Site map (grid north is also magnetic north) .

to investigate a possible house location identified on
the magnetometer map (see Figures 2b and 3). The
blocks were expanded to include 13 m 2, and several
post holes were found (described below).
The northeastern rise, originally thought to
be a possible man-made mound, was found to
be a natural rise on which prehistoric occupation
had occurred. This was borne out by two 1 x 1 m
units excavated in the top of the rise that showed
midden soil with large quantities of artifacts to a

depth of 60 cm bs. Below this, the soil lightened to
a light tan color and artifact density dropped off.
Two backhoe trenches (labeled Trenches 1 and 2
in Figure 3) were excavated to further investigate
the mound. The backhoe trenches showed a normal, well-developed soil profile for the area with
a sandy A-horizon and a sandy loam B-horizon.
The evidence from both the hand-dug units and the
mechanically excavated trenches shows clearly that
the mound is not man-made.

200

Texas Archeological Society

From the standpoint of an artifact sample, the
fieldwork was very successful in obtaining sufficient
diagnostic artifacts to understand when the Stallings
Ranch site was occupied. Field counts indicted that
nearly 6,200 artifacts were found, including numerous plain sherds, five decorated sherds, ceramic pipe
fragments, dart points, arrow points, other stone
tools, lithic debris and cores, fire-cracked rock, and
burned clay (Table 1 and Figure 4). The sherds are
mostly from grog-tempered Williams Plain vessels, as
defined by the lack of decoration and the occasional
sherd that showed the classic stilted body-base juncture. Only five decorated sherds were found; three
have parallel incised lines, one has possible parallel
engraved lines, and another has parallel pinched rows.
None is large enough to be typed. The decorated
sherds reflect a Caddo occupation of the site.
The pipe fragments are from the stem (see
Figure 4h) and bowl and are of the long-stemmed
Red River type. The pipe sherds have been found
in several contexts and are thought to date to a later
Caddo period.
A relatively large number of points were found,
about one point per 10 cm level of each unit. Most
of the dart points were of the Gary type (see Figure
4d-g), with many showing heavy reworking, resulting in small-size dart points with normal-size stems
and small blades. Arrow point styles were Homan
(see Figure 4b-c), Ray (see Bruseth et al. [2001] for

a description of this type), Alba, and other Woodland
to Early Caddo period types.
Several features were found in the test excavations. The most pronounced features are dark middens
located primarily between N120-140 and E220-240
(see Figure 3). The middens consisted of dark brown
soil with high densities of artifacts, and likely they
reflect household areas where structures existed, domestic activities occurred, and trash was deposited.
In addition, six probable post holes, four possible post holes or pits, and two trash-filled pits were
found. All of these features were visible only after
excavations were carried to about Level 4 (40 cm
bs), where the color of the natural subsoil became a
yellowish-tan that contrasted with the light to dark
brown color of the feature fills. The assignment of
the function to these features at the Stallings Ranch
site here is an educated guess based on similar features from other sites in eastern Texas.
The probable post hole features are shown in
Figures 5 and 6. Three probable post holes were
also identified (Figure 5), but these are not believed
to be cultural. Only one of the post holes was crosssectioned; this was the example straddling Units
N125/E235 and N125/E236 (Figure 6). This showed
a slightly darker soil discoloration with a rounded
bottom that extended to a depth of about 55 cm bs.
No identifiable house or other structural pattern
could be discerned from the distribution of any of

Table 1. Artifacts from the Stallings Ranch site (based on field tabulations).

Artifact Category

No.

Plain Sherds
Decorated Sherds
Pipe Sherds
Burned Clay
Arrow Points
Dart Points
Bifaces
Drills
Lithic Debris
Cores
Mano
Fire-Cracked Rock
Bone and teeth
Mud Dauber Nests

501
5
4
64
24
36
3
3
3,604
6
1
1,838
94
2

Total Artifacts

6,185

Bruseth, et al.-Investigations at the Gene and Ruth Ann Stallings Ranch Site (41LR297) 201

a

c

b

d

h
0

e

f

0

.5

1 inch

2

3 cm

g

Figure 4. Sample of artifacts from the Stallings Ranch site: a, unidentified arrow point; b-c, Homan
arrow points; d-g, Gary dart points; h, Red River pipe stem; i, grooved stone axe.

the post holes.
Four possible post holes or pits were noted
at a depth of about 30 cm bs, and are labeled as
VOCAS Pea. 2 through 5 on Figure 5. The features
contained darker soil (dark brown) fill in contrast
to the surrounding soil. They may be post holes
that have become blurred (less distinctly defined)
by rodent activity in the upper 30 cm, or they may
represent small pits. Only excavation of the features
will determine this.
Two trash-filled pits were also observed (see
Figure 5). The feature labeled VOCAS Pea. 1 was a
trash-filled pit in the central part of the site (mostly
in Unit N136/E235, but also in Units N135/E234,
N136/E234, and N135/E235), measuring about 50
cm in diameter. It became visible in Level 3 (at 20
to 30 cm bs) and consisted of dark brown sandy
loam with charcoal flecks and about one-third of a

large Williams Plain jar. Several pieces of deer bone
were also found. What appear to be four unfired clay
lumps were found at the bottom of the pit. They were
distinctive from the surrounding natural soil matrix,
but their function remains unknown.
Another potential trash filled-pit is labeled as
VOCAS Fea. 6 in Figure 5. This potential pit is similar in appearance to VOCAS Fea. 1, except that it is
larger (slightly more than 1 min diameter) and was
observed deeper (about 40 cm bs) in the deposits
than was VOCAS Pea. 1. Its depth and function can
only be determined by future excavation.

CONCLUSIONS
The results of the March 2004 fieldwork indicate that the major occupation of the Stallings

202

Texas Archeological Society

N137

L

Stallings Ranch Site
41LR297

VOCAS Fea.2

Plan map of features
found during March 2004
Williams Plain
Jar Sherds

v~~~ ~ Ao;mru "°"'

Valley of the Caddo Archeological
Society (VOCAS) field work

J

VOCAS Fea. 5
VOCAS Fea. 1
VOCAS Fea. 4

r

Grid North
One meter

N135

N134

D

Sandy loam with small amount
of clay (sub soil)

c~

Possible posthole

D

Trash-filled pit

•
D

Probable posthole
Pit or posthole

N133

N132

•
•
•

,. ...._
J

N131
E234

E235

E236

E237

E238

Figure 5. Plan view of selected units, at the bottoms of excavation units between 40 and 50 cm below surface, showing
features .

Bruseth, et al.-Investigations at the Gene and Ruth Ann Stallings Ranch Site (41LR297) 203

N126

Stallings Ranch Site
41LR297
Plan map of features
found during March 2004
Valley of the Caddo Archeological
Society (VOCAS) field work

N125

'----~~~~~~~~-"-~~~~~~~~---'

E235

E236

D

Sandy loam with small amount
of clay (sub soil)

II Probable posthole

E237

r

Grid North
One meter

Figure 6. Plan view (60 cm for Unit Nl25/E235 and 40 cm for Unit Nl25/E236) showing post holes.

Ranch site occurred during the Woodland period,
more specifically by people that can be assigned to
the Fourche Maline culture. There are some artifacts
found during the work that can be related to other
temporal periods, such as the bottom portion of a
large, untyped Archaic dart point made of Edwards
chert and five decorated Caddo ceramic sherds, but
the majority of the artifacts found here suggest that
it was occupied by a late Fourche Maline (ca. A.D.
700-800) . culture group. Fourche Maline culture
sites are little known or studied in Texas. For this
reason, the Stallings Ranch site is extremely important to the understanding of the archeological record
of northeast Texas.
At least five other site localities are known to
exist in other portions of the Stallings Ranch that
are not discussed in detail here, but that we believe
will ultimately contribute more information about
the archeology of the Pine Creek basin in general.
Perhaps the most important is on a low natural
mound approximately 670 m north of the Stallings
Ranch site. Ben Faulkner, one of the Stallings Ranch
hands, found artifacts there that include a variety of
Gary and Archaic dart points and sherds of Williams
Plain ceramics. On March 25, 2004, a fragment of a
boatstone, probably made from Colbert Creek diorite, was found on the plowed surface of the site. The
absence of arrow points suggests this is a Fourche
Maline occupation slightly earlier in time than the
Stallings Ranch site.
Beyond the ranch, other sites with Woodland
occupation also exist in this general area. The lower

reaches of the Pine Creek basin have been subject to
one of the most extensive archeological investigations
in this general area ofnortheast Texas (Mallouf 1976).
During that survey, excavations were conducted at
the Alfred Mackin Caddo mound, located on the
Nolan Creek tributary of Pine Creek, but where cultural materials thought to be related to the Woodland
occupation includes plain ceramics with a mediumcoarse paste and ceramic pipes of the Graves Chapel
or Miller's Crossing variety. Additional evidence of
Woodland occupation in the area was recovered in
1991 and 1992 when the Texas Archeological Society field schools were conducted at the J. R. Ray
site (41LR135), in the upper headwaters of Nolan
Creek (Bruseth et al. 2001). Characteristics that support a Woodland component at the Ray site include
Poole pipe fragments, Williams Plain pottery sherds,
French Fork Incised pottery sherds, and the presence
of Homan arrow points. In addition, archeological
investigations associated with construction of Pat
Mayse Dam and reservoir, northwest of the Stallings
Ranch site, were conducted in 1966-1967 (Lorrain
and Hoffrichter 1968), where materials similar to
those recovered from the Mackin site and the Ray site
were recovered. The latest investigation of the general
area prior to those under discussion here were several
extensive surveys and site test excavations conducted
at Camp Maxey, which is only 6 km due west of the
Stallings Ranch. This work has produced further
evidence for Woodland occupation in the area based
primarily on the presence of Late Archaic to Woodland period dart points (Nickels et al. 1999).

204

Texas Archeological Society

Of all the previous investigations cited above,
the cultural manifestations from the J. R. Ray site
most closely correspond to those of the Stallings
Ranch site. From the limited testing at Stallings
Ranch, similarities are presently seen between the
two sites in the dominance of Williams Plain ceramics, numerous Gary points, Ray and Homan type
arrow points, and the presence of numerous post
holes without definable patterns.
Schambach (2001:24), who is one of the foremost authorities-if not the foremost authority-on
Fourche Maline culture, has pointed out critical
issues for further archeological research into the
culture. For example, no conclusive evidence of
house structures has been found at any of the more
than 700 Fourche Maline sites now known. Further,
because of a lack of good datable charcoal samples
and other carbonized remains from Fourche Maline
sites, there is a critical need to better date the culture.
From the testing effort, a few post holes were found
that may be parts of structures. They can be investigated during subsequent work at the site to further
investigate what Fourche Maline structures look
like. Further, charcoal is present in feature contexts,
and can be used to date the age of the Fourche Maline occupation. The Stallings Ranch site provides
the potential to address these issues. For this reason,
the Stallings Ranch site may be one of the more
significant Woodland period sites known in this part
of the Red River basin at this time (personal communication by Don Wyckoff to Larry Banks on April
3, 2004). Many of these issues have been addressed
during the 2005 and 2006 field schools at the site
conducted by the Texas Archeological Society.
Finally, we present some cautionary guidance
on the interpretation of artifacts and features during
future work at the site. The Stallings Ranch site
is situated on a clearly non-aggrading landform.
Artifacts found in the soil have migrated downward
through pedoturbation, and their depths do not reflect
cultural levels or living surfaces. The exception to
this will be those items found in features clearly
defined as pits in the soil, where prehistoric people
placed the items in a pit in the ground. To appreciate
this fact of soil mixing, one only has to look at
nearby historic period sites where artifacts are also
found at depth in the soil, yet clearly were placed
on the modern surface only a few decades ago. Far
too many archeologists working in northeast Texas
have fallen into the trap of interpreting the vertical
distribution of prehistoric artifacts as evidence of
human occupation frozen in time, or of the existence

of stratified archeological deposits where none really
exists. Rather, what the archeological record at the
Stallings Ranch site indicates is a palimpsest of
artifacts from several prehistoric occupations of a
site, mixed by natural churning of the soil.
Further, this same pedoturbation (actually a
series of effects from pocket gophers, insects, tree
roots, and many other organisms) has also affected
the appearance of features at Stallings Ranch. Features are ubiquitously invisible in the upper 30 to
50 cm of the soil because their traces have been
homogenized by soil disturbance. Attempting to
use the depth of feature recognition, as some might
suggest, as evidence for the original surface of a
feature and therefore a living surface, will be fraught
with difficulty because the '.'recognition level" is in
actuality happenstance, dictated by the effects of
pedoturbation.
Moreover, the detection of real and convincing complete house patterns will ultimately prove
elusive at the site, as pedoturbation has left us with
only selective archeological traces of once complete
house structures. Today we find only scattered post
holes forming inconclusive patterns. Many post
holes from former structures simply have not preserved in the soil. Complicating this even further are
the "false" post holes left from decayed plant roots
such as Cnidoscolus texanus. All of this presents
a great challenge for future work at the Stallings
Ranch site that will have to be addressed during
future archeological investigations.

REFERENCES CITED
Bruseth, J.E., L. D. Banks, and J. Smith
2001 The Ray Site (41LR135), Archeological Investigations on the Red River and Tributaries: Summary of
the Findings of the 1991and1992 Texas Archeological Society Field School in Red River and Lamar
Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
SoCiety 72:197-213.
Lorrain, D. and N. Hoffrichter
1968 Archeological Survey and Excavation at Pat Mayse
Reservoir, Texas. Archaeological Salvage Project,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Mallouf, R. J.
1976 Archeological Investigations at Proposed Big Pine
Lake, 1974-1975, Lamar and Red River Counties,
Texas. Archeological Survey Report 18. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.

Bruseth, et al.-Investigations at the Gene and Ruth Ann Stallings Ranch Site (4ILR297) 205
Nickels, D. L., L. C. Nordt, T. K. Perttula, C. B. Bousman,
and K. Miller
1999 Archaeological Survey of Southwest Block and Selected Roads and Firebreaks at Camp Maxey, Lamar
County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report, No.
290. Center for Archaeological Research, University
of Texas at San Antonio.
Ressel, D.
1979 Soil Survey of Lamar and Delta Counties, Texas.
U.S . Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, in cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.

Schambach, F. F.
2001 Fourche Maline and Its Neighbors: Observations
on an Important Woodland Period Culture of the
Trans-Mississippi South. The Arkansas Archeologist
40:21-50.

List of Authors

Larry Banks, Paradise, Texas
Jim Bruseth, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Jeff Durst, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Thomas R. Hester, Professor Emeritus, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin
Brett A. Houk, Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock
Richard E. Hughes, Geochemical Research Laboratory, Portola Valley, California
Christine A. Jones, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station
C. R. Lewis, Borean Oil Company, Corpus Christi
Jane Holden Kelley, Professor Emeritus, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Christopher Lintz, Wildlife Division, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin
Kevin Miller, SWCA Environmental Consultants, Austin
Bo Nelson, Archeological & Environmental Consultants, LLC, Pittsburg
Eric R. Oksanen, SWCA Environmental Consultants, Austin
Timothy K. Perttula, Archeological & Environmental Consultants, LLC, Austin
Bill Pierson, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Richard Proctor, Paris, Texas
Gary Sykes, Paris, Texas
Mark Walters, Texas Archeological Stewardship Network, Kilgore

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 80 (2009)

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPRINTS
www.gustavslibrary.com
Archaeological Survey of Oklahoma (Bell and Bae!Teis) - $12.95
Archaeological Survey of Texas (Sayles) - $26.95
Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley (Moorehead) - Sl 8.95
Baby Cradles of the Ozark Bluff Dwellers (Dellinger) - $3.95
Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas (Harrington) - $27 .95
Classics in TexasArcheology Volume I - Caddo Archeology (Pe1ttula) - $24.95
Corner -Tang FlintA1tifacts of Texas (Patterson) - $12.95
Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas (Krieger) - $26.95
Folsom, The Lindenmeier Site, Collected Papers of Frank H.B. Roberts - $24.95
Geological Aspects of the Findings of Primitive Man, Near Abilene, TX (Leighton) - $8 .95
Introductory Handbook ofTexasArcheology (Suhm & Krieger) - $29.95
Ozark Bluff Dwellers (Harrington) - $18 .95
Picture-Writing of the Texas Indians (Jackson) - $29.95
Pipes and Smoking Customs of the American Aborigines (McGuire) - $24.95
Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County, Texas (Pearce & Jackson) - S 14.95
WPA report 1936-1937 Fall Creek & Lake Buchanan (Jackson & Woolsey) - S 14.95
Over 150 Titles available on our website - New titles added regularly

Texas Archeological Society Members - 10% discount
enter customer code TASDISC on website checkout
credit cards, checks - telephone and mail orders welcome
$3.00 flat rate shipping per order - U.S. Only

GIJS I AVS ~ LIBBABY
PUBLISHING

877-520-9872
1011 E. High St., Davenport, IA 52803

