Bulletin of the

TEXAS

		 ARCHEOLOGICAL
Volume 86/2015
			 SOCIETY
Tamra L. Walter, Editor
Timothy K. Perttula, Assistant Editor

Published by

at Austin
2015

Texas Archeological Society

CONTENTS

The 2000 TAS Field School: Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin,
Presidio County, Texas
Richard W. Walter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas
S. Alan Skinner, C. Britt Bousman, and Jesse Todd . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites: Plains Biographic Rock Art and
the Southern Plains Ethnographic Record
Michael P. Jordan  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley (41WM437) Or Establishing
A New Temporal Context for Subsistence and Site Use at Rowe Valley
Haley E. Rush, Elton R. Prewitt, C. Britt Bousman, and Leslie L. Bush . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas: Consideration
of Late Prehistoric Connections between the Northwestern and Southern Plains
Christopher Lintz and Daniel Prikryl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
Linda W. Ellis, Timothy K. Perttula, and Wilson W. Crook, III  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
The Midland Calvarium and the Early Human Habitation of the Americas
Matthew S. Taylor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard
Catrina Banks Whitley and S. Alan Skinner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
The Discovery and Study of the Mexican War Mass Grave at Resaca de la Palma
Thomas R. Hester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237
List of Authors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249

iii

The 2000 TAS Field School:
Archeological Investigations in the Alamito
Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas
Richard W. Walter

ABSTRACT
The Texas Archeological Society 2000 field school was held in the Alamito Creek basin of the Marfa Plain in
Presidio County, Texas. Seven study areas (Areas A-G) were delineated for purposes of archeological survey,
and test excavations were conducted at selected sites. Findings concerning archeological sites recorded in areas
A-F, along with the results of site testing in areas C and F, are described and discussed. Survey results and largerscale field school excavations carried out along Perdiz Creek in Area G, as well as investigations at the historic
Davis-Herrera homesite on the Chihuahua Trail, have been reported previously by Cason (2005) and Wharton
(2007). Taken together, findings from the 2000 field school constitute virtually the first substantive, scientifically derived, archeological data set for the Marfa Plain, a major physiographic zone in the Texas Big Bend.

INTRODUCTION
In June of 2000, the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) annual field school was held on the
MacGuire Ranch located in northeastern Presidio
County (Figure 1). The field school was held in
cooperation with the Center for Big Bend Studies (CBBS) and the Department of Behavioral
and Social Sciences at Sul Ross State University.
Long-time TAS members and CBBS archeologists
Robert Mallouf and Andy Cloud served as directors for the project. The ranch encompasses ca.
60,000 acres and is situated in the Marfa Plain, a
major physiographic feature of the Big Bend that
was poorly known archeologically prior to the field
school (Mallouf 2000:2, 2001a:14).
The ranch was divided into seven study areas
(Areas A-G) for the purpose of organization and fieldwork logistics (Figure 2). These areas consisted of:
• the high elevated grasslands and drainage
systems of the Marfa Plain (Areas A-E);

• the main stem of the Alamito Creek basin
(Area F);
• the basaltic Frenchman Hills and attendant
drainages such as Perdiz and Julia creeks
(Area G) (see Cason 2005); and

• the Chihuahua Trail roughly parallelling
Alamito Creek (Area F).
Crews were dispersed among each of these areas to conduct archeological survey investigations,
along with limited test excavations at chosen sites.
Also, the “Chihuahua Trail Crew” was assigned
to detect remnants of the Chihuahuan Trail within
Area F and to also investigate the 19th century
Davis-Herrera adobe home site, school, and chapel
located a few miles to the south of the project area
at Alamito (formally called Plata), Texas.
Results from a number of sites investigated
during the 2000 TAS field school have previously
been published. This includes Cason (2005) using
the survey and test excavation results in survey
Area G as comparative data to sites in an environmentally contrasting area in the Glass Mountains
of Brewster County, Texas; McClure (2001) for
faunal analysis from a test excavation at San Esteban rockshelter in Area F; Wharton (2002, 2007)
concerning the work of Fullen and Wharton’s TAS
crew at the historic Davis-Herrera home site that
became part of a preservation effort that included
the ceremonial placement of a Texas Historical
Marker on the site in May 2000 (Cloud 2001) and
the privately funded construction of a protective

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 86 (2015)

2

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Tri-county area showing the location of the TAS field school on the Marfa Plain, Presidio County, Texas.

shed roof over the main adobe ruin in 2002; a
brief discussion of the Chihuahua Trail by Scism
(2002); and a brief article of a Folsom preform
discovered during the field school (Mallouf and

Seebach 2006:141). Additionally, findings from a
test excavation (Mallouf n.d.a.) and documentation of rock art at San Esteban Rockshelter (Boren
n.d.) are currently nearing completion. This article

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

Figure 2. Detail of survey Areas A–G.

3

4

Texas Archeological Society

describes sites recorded and limited subsurface
testing done during the reconnaissance survey
in Areas A-F (excluding work conducted at San
Esteban Rockshelter), test excavations in Areas
C and F, and additional findings of the Chihuahua
Trail survey crew.
The field school attracted over 350 participants, and every attempt was made to maximize
data returns from across the extensive project
area. As is always the case, the TAS membership
provided a very capable and enthusiastic workforce, and their achievements during the project
are noteworthy. As a result of the field school, the
legendary Marfa Plain was for the first time added
to the growing number of eastern Trans-Pecos
physiographic zones that are yielding significant
new archeological data. Long a subject of interest to historians, the Marfa Plain was in contrast
marginalized by archeologists for many years. As
of 2000, this high grassland remained virtually
unknown archeologically. The 2000 field school
findings thus provide the first substantive archeological data set for the area, and a foundation for
future research.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Physiography
The MacGuire Ranch is located in northeastern Presidio County, Texas (see Figure 1).
The 60,000 acre ranch is located on the Marfa
Plateau (often referred to as the Highland Country) within the Basin and Range physiographic
province and the Mexican central plateau of the
northeastern portion of the Chihuahuan Desert
(Blair 1950:105; Wells 1977:67). Elevation ranges
from ca. 4200 to 4700 ft. amsl. The project area is
drained by Alamito Creek and its laterals, including Mimbres, Julia, and Perdiz creeks, as well as
unnamed tributaries. Alamito Creek drains in a
general south-southeast direction, and the floodplain is sometimes over two miles wide. In the
project area this broad floodplain is bordered on
the west by basaltic uplands (Frenchmen Hills)
and on the east by a pronounced linear escarpment
that represents the terminus of an extensive ash
flow. Within the northern portion of the project
area are high-elevated grasslands with limited
topographic relief. Local springs either discharge
along bedding planes and fractures from extrusive

igneous units or from alluvial deposits within the
Alamito Creek basin (Brune 1981). Surface sediments can be characterized generally as silt loam
on fan pediments; clay loam on alluvial flats,
plains, and fan skirts; clay loam on drainage ways
and inset fans; gravelly clay loam to fine sandy
loam on erosional remnants; and very gravelly
loam on fan remnants and ballenas (USDS NRCS
2009).
Flora
The project area is in the Chihuahuan Desert
biotic province (Brown 1982). Vegetation within
the Marfa Plain can be generally classified as
desert grassland, although in some areas the encroachment of desert scrub has occurred. This is
primarily a result of the historic introduction of
livestock.
Desert scrub occurs primarily in marginal
grassland areas and along lower elevations, while
many species such as Catclaw Mimosa, Cane
Cholla, prickly pear, Honey Mesquite, Soaptree
Yucca, Spanish Dagger, and broomweeds occur at
varied elevations within the grassland community
(Powell 1998:7–8). The Alamito Creek drainage
supports some riparian vegetation that includes
Screwbean, Honey Mesquite, Rio Grande Cottonwood, and willows.
Fauna
The faunal diversity of the eastern TransPecos/Big Bend (ETP/BB) region is exceptionally
high (Davis and Schmidly 1994). Mammals that
occur in the region include black-tailed jackrabbit, desert cottontail, collared peccary, mule deer,
squirrels, gophers, mice, porcupines, mountain
lions, coyotes, bobcats, grey fox, kit fox, badgers,
raccoons, ringtail cats, striped skunks, spotted
skunks, and hog-nosed skunks, and 23 species of
bats (Schmidly 1977; Yancey 1997).
Birds common to the area are roadrunners, blue
quail, mourning dove, lesser nighthawks, northern
mockingbird, and a variety of raptors (Wauer
and Fleming 2002). Reptiles include whiptails,
western collared lizards, horned lizards, western
coachwhips, western diamondback rattlesnakes,
Trans-Pecos copperheads, Yellow Mud Turtles,
and Desert Box turtles (Wauer and Fleming 2002).
Amphibians include Leopard frogs and Spadefoot
Toads (Schmidt and Smith 1944).

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

Toolstone Resources
The ETP/BB region is rich in high quality
stone available in a number of settings that include but are not limited to: (1) secondary deposits
within alluvial fans and stream-load deposits that
contain a large variety of cryptocrystalline stones;
(2) exposed limestone beds containing chert and
novaculite; and (3) igneous uplifts that contain
felsite, rhyolite, chalcedony, and agate. It is worth
noting that some of this raw material macroscopically mimics stone from sources outside of the
region, such as Alibates agatized dolomite, Tecovas
Formation jasper, and a wide array of Edwards Unit
chert (Seebach 2011:5–6, 47, 271).
Along the western boundary of the project
area, the Frenchmen Hills consist primarily of
Petan Basalt, which is made up of trachyandesite
porphyry containing an abundant amount of whitecolored chalcedony; this is the result of late stage
remobilization of free silica that has subsequently
recrystallized in gas cavities (Cook 1970:14-15,
22). It was a major source of chalcedony used in
the production of chipped stone tools (Figure 3).

5

The Frenchmen Hills overlie and are bound on the
east by the Tascotal Formation, with upper and
lower layers. The upper layer consists of sandstone,
tuffaceous sandstone, and conglomerate containing
pebble to cobble-size limestone, igneous rocks,
chert, tuff, and sandy tuff. The lower layer consists
of tuff and tuffaceous fine-grained sandstone.
The Tascotal Formation is bordered on the east
by old Quaternary alluvium that contain some chert
and quartzite. The Alamito Creek stream load deposits consist of cryptocrystalline material suitable
for stone tool manufacturing (Barnes 1979). Areas
adjacent to and northeast of San Esteban Lake lie
within the Perdiz Conglomerate Unit and include
conglomeritic sandstone composed of clasts of a wide
variety of both volcanic and Cretaceous rocks (King
and Beikman 1978). Raw material types of the Perdiz
Conglomerate that are suitable for the production of
stone tools include basalt, banded rhyolite, rhyolitic
welded tuff, riebeckite rhyolite, chert, chalcedony,
and agate (Mallouf 1993; Ing et al. 1996). Outcropping east of the Perdiz Conglomerate Unit is Mitchell
Mesa Welded Tuff, the result of a massive, cliffforming, single ash flow (Barnes 1979).

Figure 3. Exposed vein of chalcedony in the Petan Basalt Formation, a major source for toolstone.

6

Texas Archeological Society

Paleoenvironments
Paleoenvironmental data within the region are
mostly based on studies of packrat middens found
at Maravillas Canyon and Rio Grande Village in
the Big Bend. Grasses that were present during the
late Wisconsin period (11,000-22,000 years ago)
are relatively common in woodland assemblages,
some of which indicate a southern expansion of
typical Great Plains species such as Little bluestem
and Big bluestem. Other Big Bend grass species
identified during this time such as Black grama,
Sand dropseed, and Sideoats grama have been
documented as serving as sources of seed grains,
hair brushes, and brooms for prehistoric groups
(Van Devender 1995:80–84 and Table 3.1; Abbott
et al. 1996:Table 3). Between 11,500 and 10,500
B.P., trees and shrubs included papershell piñon,
juniper, hinkley oak, and sotol. The climate during
this time consisted of mild winters, substantially
cooler summers, and higher annual precipitation
that primarily fell during the winter months (Van
Devender 1986, 1990). By 10,300 B.P., the hinkley
oak declined dramatically and shrub oak increased.
Papershell piñon disappeared altogether while junipers persisted for another thousand years. Between
8,000 and 4,000 B.P., the regional vegetation transitioned from a xeric woodland into a desert/scrub
community (Van Devender 1990).
HISTORY OF INVESTIGATIONS
One of the first archeological sites noted in
the ETP/BB region was San Esteban rockshelter.
Peabody (1909:202-216) provided a brief written
description of some of the rock art there. E. B.
Sayles (1920) visited San Esteban shelter. Confusingly, the misinterpretation of Sayles’ field notes
led to the assignment of three additional trinomials (41PS99, 41PS100, and 41PS101), but these
trinomials were later retired in 1995 (Johnathan
H. Jarvis, personal communication, 2014). A. T.
Jackson (1938) recorded San Esteban rockshelter
and designated it as “Site No. 31,” and in 1939
Forest Kirkland meticulously copied the rock imagery at San Esteban using watercolors (Kirkland
and Newcomb 1967:127-129). However, James E.
Corbin (1960) was the first to officially record San
Esteban rockshelter on a State of Texas Archeological Site Data Form, providing supplementary
photographs and drawings of the rock imagery.
San Esteban rockshelter was at that time assigned

the state trinomial of 41PS20. Miriam Lowrance
(1988:98-104) further recorded the rock imagery at
San Esteban in 1967 and 1968. In 1999, Bob Hext,
then the Chairman of the Art Department at Sul
Ross State University (SRSU), carried out a rock
art recording field school at San Esteban Shelter.
That same year, Robert Mallouf instrument mapped
San Esteban Shelter with the help of students from
his SRSU anthropology class (Robert Mallouf,
personal communication, 2013). During the 2000
TAS field school, rock art recording and test excavations were conducted at San Esteban shelter.
Another site, 41PS103, is located directly north
of San Esteban rock shelter (Texas Archeological
Sites Atlas 1999b).
In the early 1920s, V. J. Smith visited “San
Estaban Bluff,” a rockshelter designated as his
Location #74; and “San Eustaven Rock Shelter
Group,” an area of 50+ rockshelters below the bluff
and dam designated as Location #75. He collected
ground stone tools and scraper fragments at the
shelter and a square mano at the rock shelter group
site (Smith 1927). In the 1930s, several other sites
within the study area were visited by Sayles (1935).
Three of these sites are clustered together in a
small, dry side canyon that joins another unnamed
canyon draining into San Esteban Spring. Two
of these sites are small rockshelters (41PS92 and
41PS93) close to tinajas within the bedrock drainage. The other site, 41PS94, is cursorily described
and reportedly consists of several bedrock mortar
holes that are next to the aforementioned tinajas.
Three other sites, 41PS95, 41PS96, and 41PS97,
are tightly clustered on the southwest side of the
canyon that drains directly into San Esteban spring.
All are described as small rockshelters, one with
an associated lithic procurement area, and the other
two with associated refuse middens. 41PS97 was
noted to contain black on white pottery. Two other
sites, 41PS98 and 41PS102, are located within an
archeologically complex area that was assigned the
trinomial 41PS818 by the 2000 TAS field school
survey team. Sayles (1932) described 41PS98 as
a small rock shelter with an associated midden
deposit along with numerous small rock shelters
in the immediate vicinity. Sayles also noted that
many of these rockshelters were used by Mexican
laborers on an irrigation project nearby and that
entrances to some of the shelters were walled-in
by well-laid stone masonry.
In 1938, the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology of Harvard University and Sul

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

Ross State College joined forces to investigate the
association of cultural deposits with geological
deposits. Drs. Kirk Bryan and Claude Albritton
made up the geologic team working with Sul
Ross staff archeologists J. Charles Kelley and T.
N. Campbell. This interdisciplinary research approach was well ahead of its time and was one of
the first geoarcheological investigations conducted
in the United States. The investigations established
a basic stratigraphic sequence for the Big Bend,
and moreover, established the stratigraphic dating
of buried cultural deposits relative to regional alluvial deposits. The resulting cultural units were
defined as the Pecos River, Chisos, and Livermore
foci (roughly correlated with the Middle Archaic,
Late Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods) in
general association with the Neville, Calamity, and
Kokernot alluvial units, respectively (Albritton and
Bryan 1939; Kelley et al. 1940).
Other pioneering investigations occurred at
two sites within the Alamito Creek drainage. Located ca. 35 km south of the study area is the Shiner
site (41PS26), a buried multi-component site where
two pit houses with interior unlined hearths, ceramics, chipped stone tools, and projectile points
were recognized in association with the Calamity
and Kokernot alluvial formations. Another site, the
Williams site (41PS53), is located near the tiny village of Casas Piedras. A human burial and portions
of an indeterminate-type black on white pottery
vessel were discovered while cutting a new diversion ditch. The irrigation ditch exposed a profile
of the Kokernot formation overlying the Calamity
formation—cultural material and features were all
associated with the uppermost Kokernot formation
(Kelley et al. 1940).
Following a long period of sporadic arche­
ological investigations in the ETP/BB region, the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD)
in 1992 initiated a volunteer program coined
as “Texas Adventures.” The program included
research in the Alamito Creek basin and was
led by scientists of various disciplines under
the jurisdiction of the TPWD. This included
archeological reconnaissance of state-owned tracts
of the Cienega Mountains, portions of which are
now part of the northern panhandle section of
Big Bend Ranch State Park. The study area was
divided into seven segments, including one in
which Alamito Creek enters a small canyon system.
Some 24 archeological sites were recorded along
the stream course, often on elevated silt terraces

7

next to the confluences of arroyo systems and in
canyon shelters along Alamito Creek. Findings of
the reconnaissance along Alamito Creek included
buried Late Prehistoric and Late Archaic deposits
on silt terraces and a number of rockshelters. The
Bravo Bluff site (41PS567) was one of the more
important sites found along Alamito Creek. This
tuff shelter contained not only buried and stratified
cultural deposits, but a wide variety of pictographs
and petroglyphs. Based on a combination of
projectile point types and rock imagery, the site
was intermittently occupied from Late Archaic
through Historic times (Mallouf 1993).
Further studies and investigations have been
conducted since the 2000 TAS field school. These
include Cason’s (2005) comparative landscape
study of feature distributions within different environmental contexts, accomplished by comparing
the findings of the 2000 TAS field school survey
and test excavations along Perdiz Creek (Area G)
with findings from survey and test excavations at
Gilliland Canyon in the Glass Mountains, some
69 km east-northeast of the Area G study area. In
2002, Robert Mallouf collaborated with Bill Hubbard, landowner of the property that contains San
Esteban shelter, for its designation as a Texas State
Archeological Landmark (Mallouf 2002).
In 2008 and 2009, CBBS archeologists conducted subsurface investigations at the David
Williams site (41PS1020), an Early Archaic buried
open campsite located along Alamito Creek and
within Area F of the 2000 TAS field school (Boren
2010). In 2011, a linear survey was conducted by
Atkins International Engineering Company for the
Gonzales Transmission Line that transects Area A
of the 2000 TAS field school (Rowe 2011). One
of the more significant sites, 41PS1142, is located
just outside the Marfa city limits. The site is a
historic cemetery and associated artifact scatter
that contains four mechanically-disturbed Mexican
cairn burials with headstones dated between 1896
and 1900. Hundreds of glass, ceramic, and metal
artifacts were present that date as late as the early
1920s. Another site, 41PS144, is an early 20th century historic dump associated with Fort D. A. Russel. Two other sites, 41PS143 and 41PS145, were
considered prehistoric artifact scatters although the
latter site contained a possible hearth.
A brief reconnaissance in August 2006 of the
headwaters of Long Draw, a western tributary of
Alamito Creek, resulted in the preliminary recording of 24 prehistoric sites. Of note was a high

8

Texas Archeological Society

incidence of Middle and Late Archaic occupations
and a contrasting paucity of evidence for Late
Prehistoric use (Mallouf n.d.b). The confluence of
Long Draw with Alamito Creek lies within Area F
of the field school project.
In summary, very few cultural resource
surveys have been conducted within the Marfa
Plateau and highlands proper. In 1991, two previously unknown prehistoric lithic reduction sites
(41JD143 and 41JD144) were recorded just below
the eastern flanks of the Sierra Vieja and near the
mouth of Vieja Pass (Winchell 1992). In 1999,
Texas Department of Transportation archeologists
surveyed a segment of the right-of-way on U.S.
Highway 90. The remnant of a historic masonry
structure (41JD178) was noted along with a possible pre-1920 artifact scatter containing glass
artifacts.
CULTURE HISTORY
The culture history of the ETP/BB region remains poorly defined as compared to most other
regions in Texas. While various datasets that are
vital to understanding the variability and adaptations of prehistoric lifeways through time are
lacking, efforts to correct such deficiencies are
well underway. The chronological framework in
the ETP-BB region is divided into six periods:
Paleoindian (13,500–8,500 B.P. or 11,500–6,500
B.C.), Archaic (6,500 B.C.–A.D. 700), Transitional Late Archaic (ca. 2,950–1,250 B.P. or
1000 B.C.–A.D. 700), Late Prehistoric (A.D.
700–1535) (which includes the Livermore Phase
[A.D. 750-1200], the La Junta Phase [A.D. 12001400], and the Cielo Complex [A.D. 1330-1680]),
Protohistoric (A.D. 1535–1700) (which includes
the Concepción Phase [A.D. 1535–1693]), and
the Historic period (A.D. 1700–1950) which
includes the Spanish Colonial Sub-Period (A.D.
1700-1821), the Conchos Phase (1683-1760), the
Alamito Phase (A.D. 1700-1845), the Mexican
Sub-Period (A.D. 1821-1835), the Republic of
Texas Sub-Period (A.D. 1836-1845), the Texas
Statehood Sub-Period (Post-1845), and the Presidio Phase (Post-1850). A review of these periods
is beyond the scope of this article; however, summaries of each can be found elsewhere (see Kelley
et al. 1940; Mallouf 1985, 1999, 2005; Thompson
1985; Ing and Savage 1996; Alex 1999; Cloud
2004; Seebach 2004; Keller et al. n.d.).

OBJECTIVES AND
METHODOLOGY
The primary objective of the 2000 TAS field
school was to gather base-line data from prehistoric
and historic sites within a physiographic zone not
previously subjected to archeological investigation: the Marfa Plain and associated Alamito Creek
basin. This was accomplished by conducting a
reconnaissance-level survey of the project area
and test excavations at selected sites (Mallouf and
Cloud 2000). The reconnaissance was employed to
maximize the recovery of archeological data across
large areas, targeted to specific landforms:
• terraces and floodplains along the main stem
of tributary drainages;
• the junctures of valleys and valley walls;
• rock shelters or caves;

• elevated landforms within the basin;
• cut bank exposures;

• flat or level benches along sloping portions
of the landscape; and
• high settings overlooking the basin.

Prehistoric sites were designated under the
criterion that they contained one or more of the
following:
• burned or fire-cracked rock;
• features;

• buried cultural deposits; and

• over 15 pieces of debitage and/or several
functionally and/or temporally-diagnostic
tools.
Meager surface scatters of lithic material
and/or less than three tools and buried faunal
materials exposed in cut banks were considered
isolated finds (Mallouf and Cloud 2000). Newly
discovered sites were recorded by completing
a State of Texas Data Form. Sites were plotted
on a photocopy of the appropriate 7.5' USGS
quadrangle map. Sketches of site maps, features,
and rock shelters were also completed for each
site. Features were assigned sequential numbers
for each site. Photographs were taken of site
overviews, features, and artifacts. Temporally

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

diagnostic artifacts and unusual specimens were
plotted, collected, and assigned artifact numbers.
Collected artifacts were bagged and appropriately
labeled (Mallouf and Cloud 2000).
Subsurface excavations were conducted at
varying levels of intensity. This included the
cleaning of arroyo cut banks and shovel tests to
determine the presence of buried cultural deposits
as well as the excavation of one or more 1 x 1 m
test units at selected sites that warranted further
investigations. Shovel testing was conducted at
sites with poor surface visibility and where the
depositional environment warranted the need to
determine the presence/absence and depth of archeological deposits (Mallouf and Cloud 2000).
Sites selected for testing were chosen in large
part prior to the field school. The intent of these test
excavations was to determine the nature, depth, and
integrity of the cultural deposits. Test excavations
were set up on a north/south grid system in 1 x 1
m and/or 1 x 2 m units. An elevation datum was
placed within or adjacent to a site to allow vertical control within excavation units. Test units were
excavated in arbitrary 10 cm levels. All units were
excavated completely through the cultural deposit
and into the underlying sterile deposit. In situ artifacts were recorded relative to the unit and level
through triangulation, and photographs were taken
prior to removal. All artifactual materials and special
samples were bagged and labeled as to unit, level,
and specific elevation relative to the arbitrary datum.
In situ artifacts were assigned a provenience with
numerical designation on the excavation level floor
plan. Charcoal was recovered with a trowel or tweezers and placed in an aluminum bag. Samples were
labeled as to provenience and an assigned number
entered into a sample log. Bags were labeled with the
appropriate information such as name and field number of the site, test unit and level designation, name
of excavator, and date of excavation. Remaining
feature matrix or sediment excavated from arbitrary
levels at test units was screened through 1/8-inch
mesh hardware. Features were mapped using triangulation procedures. Excavation of features involved
the placement of units in such a way as to bisect the
feature. Roughly one half of the feature would be
excavated and a wall would be retained along the
bisectional cut for profiling purposes. The feature
excavation was treated as one unit instead of using
arbitrary 10 cm levels (Mallouf and Cloud 2000).
After being transferred to the TAS field laboratory, all stone and ceramic artifacts were cleaned

9

with brushes and well water. Fresh water mussel
shell fragments were left as is since most were
unstable and easily prone to flaking when cleaned
with water and a soft brush. Metal artifacts were
not washed with water, but merely dry-brushed as
needed. After cleaning, artifacts were cataloged
and enumerated with a lot number consisting of
the site trinomial, and provenience (i.e., unit and
level), and placed into polyethylene zip-lock bags.
Botanical remains were left alone and simply
housed in vials. Sediment samples were stored
in boxes on open shelving in strong polyethylene
bags. Digital images were stored on curation-approved media, and placed in appropriate protective
sleeves. All field notes and forms were copied onto
acid-free paper. All materials collected and archival
data generated will be held eventually at the Museum of the Big Bend, Sul Ross State University,
Alpine, Texas.
RESULTS OF THE SURVEY
As mentioned earlier, the reconnaissance survey of the high-elevated grasslands and drainage
systems of the Marfa Plain entailed seven study
areas (Areas A-G) and the discovery of 31 sites.
Findings within Area G were previously reported
by Cason (2005) and will not be repeated here.
Findings from Areas A–F are presented below.
Area A
Area A is within the northeasternmost portion of
the MacGuire Ranch close to the Marfa city limits.
The area is flat to gently rolling plains, alluvial flats,
and fan outskirts surrounding the Alamito creek
drainage. Vegetation along Alamito Creek is far less
dense within Area A compared to the more robust
riparian zone downstream in Area F. The survey
crew targeted areas adjacent to and on either side
of Alamito Creek and along the more prominent
landforms. Two prehistoric open campsites, one
prehistoric artifact scatter, and one multi-component
(Late Prehistoric/Protohistoric and historic) site
were discovered (Table 1).
41PS806
41PS806 is a 30 x 125 m prehistoric artifact
scatter located on an alluvial terrace fronting the
east side of Alamito Creek. Gravels on the site were

41PS806

41PS807

41PS808

41PS809

41PS810

A-1

A-2

A-6

A-5

A-4

Artifact
Scatter

Open
Campsite

N/A

Open
Campsite

Artifact
Scatter

Site
Type

Unknown
Prehistoric

Unknown
Prehistoric

N/A

Historic

Unknown
Prehistoric

Cultural
Affiliation

Table 1. Summary of sites recorded in Area A.

State
Trinomial

Temp.
Site No.

Unifaces, Bifaces, Mano

Debitage, Bifaces, FCR

Side-notched arrow point
ca. 30 cm below surface;
tested cobbles at ca. 230
cm below surface

Cartridge casings, chain,
military insignia, gun
component

Unifaces, Bifaces, Mano,
FCR

Artifacts/Materials
Observed

None

None

Unknown

Cartridge casings,
chain, military
insignia, gun
component

None

Artifacts/Materials
Collected

Table 1. Summary of sites recorded in Area A.

None

Hearths; two or
three appear
intact

None noted;
buried soil
horizons

Hearth and
stone cairn

None

Features
Observed

Pedestrian
Survey

Pedestrian
survey

Visual
examination of
profile in
cutbank
exposure

Pedestrian
survey

Pedestrian
Survey; Shovel
Testing

Work
Performed

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Negative

Results of
Shovel
Testing

10
Texas Archeological Society

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

thought to be resting on a Pleistocene-age surface.
The site contains a diffuse scatter of debitage (including cores and tested cobbles), chipped stone
tools, and a ground stone tool, including unifacial
and bifacial scrapers, multi-pointed gravers, indeterminate-type biface fragments, and a single mano
fragment. No cultural features were observed.
Because no temporally diagnostic artifacts were
encountered, the site is of unknown prehistoric
cultural affiliation.
Sediment within the site area is typically a
silt loam from the modern ground surface down
to just over 50 cm bs (USDA 2009). Because of
the nature of the depositional environment, two
shovel tests were excavated to a depth of 30 cm bs
that produced negative results. Profiles indicated a
gravel pavement overlying ca. 10 cm of gravelly
fine sandy loam, in turn overlying 20 cm of calcareous fine sandy loam.
41PS807
41PS807 is a 40 x 50 m historic special-use
campsite. The site is situated on an alluvial terrace adjacent to and east of Alamito Creek. Features consist of a large concentration of charcoal
void of rocks, a small rock cairn, and an historic
artifact scatter. The large concentration of charcoal is apparently a hearth feature; the exact
function of the cairn is unknown. Artifacts were

11

undoubtedly related to the long-term military
presence at Marfa. A concentration of horseshoes, horse shoe nails, and .45 cal. cartridge
casings were encountered on the east side of the
site. Also, two sanitary cans were observed. Two
cartridge casings were collected: one, a .45 cal.
cartridge casing with a military head stamp that
indicates that the cartridge was manufactured
by United States Cartridge Co., Lowell, Massachusetts, in 1917 (International Ammunition
Association 2009); the other is a .30-06 cartridge
casing with a military head stamp that was manufactured by the Union Metallic Company, Bridgeport, Connecticut, in November 1905 (Steinhauer
2002). Interestingly, this cartridge was fired without discharge and was later perforated in order to
empty out the gunpowder for disarmament. Also,
two slide components for a Colt single-action,
semi-automatic, .45 cal. M1911 pistol (Wikipedia 2009) were discovered (Figure 4). One slide
indicated a manufacture date of August 1929.
Other military artifacts included insignia for shirt
collars (Steffen 1979:63 and Figure 42) and other
equipment (Figure 5).
In addition, a complete formal biface was collected (Figure 6). The biface has convex lateral
margins toward the proximal end and is alternatively beveled at the distal end and measures 46.2
mm in length, 23.9 mm in width, and is 6.5 mm
thick. This biface is typical of those found at Cielo

Figure 4. Slide component of a Colt .45 caliber M11911 pistol from 41PS807.

12

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Sample of military artifacts found at 41PS807: a, bridle slack chain; b, perforated .30-06 cartridge; c-f,
miscellaneous cavalry buttons and pins.

Figure 6. Two-edge beveled knife found at 41PS807.

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

complex and other Late Prehistoric campsites in
the ETP/BB region. The knife is made of a grayishbrown, fine-grained, opaque chert with fine seams
in the material. The material is vitreous with areas
of a pink hue suggesting that the material was
heat-treated.
41PS807 likely represents a short-term
military encampment or special use site, after
the post leased land from several ranches to use
as maneuver grounds in the early 1920s and
after the post was named Fort D. A. Russell in
1929. Based solely on the beveled knife, the site
contains a Late Prehistoric component. It is not
known if the two-beveled knife is associated
with the aforementioned cairn or is simply an
isolated find.
41PS808
41PS808 is a buried prehistoric campsite. A
side-notched arrow point (Figure 7) was discovered
partially exposed ca. 30 cm bs along the eastern cut
bank of Alamito Creek. Also, a buried soil horizon

13

was observed ca. 1 m below a cumulic A horizon.
Gravelly sandy loam to sandy loam was observed
below the soil horizon to a depth of ca. 2.6 m bs,
and several pieces of fire-cracked rock (FCR) were
noted within this stratum. Possible tested cobbles
and debitage were noted within a lower stratum that
consisted of gravelly (cobble-size) sand. The presence of the arrow point indicates a Late Prehistoric
component. Cultural material observed in two lower
strata as well indicate that older components may
be present.
41PS809
41PS809 is a small, 12 x 16 m, prehistoric
open campsite situated on a small point between
Alamito Creek to the east and an arroyo to the
west. Four hearths, a diffuse scatter of debitage,
and bifacial preforms were noted. Some of the
hearths were partially buried and appeared intact.
Although no temporally diagnostic artifacts were
encountered, the intact features have the potential
to provide chronometric and botanical data.

Figure 7. Late Prehistoric side-notched arrow point found at 41PS808.

14

Texas Archeological Society

41PS810
41PS810 is a 40 x 80 m prehistoric artifact scatter. The site is situated adjacent to and east of Alamito
creek on an alluvial terrace and is ca. 100 m south
of the confluence of Four Mile Draw and Alamito
Creek. Debitage, a tested cobble, early stage bifaces,
a scraper, and a mano were scattered across the site.
No thermal features were observed. Field notes did
not mention any signs of buried deposits.
Isolated Finds
Locality A-3 was revisited on July 23, 2009
by CBBS archeologists to determine if there were
any cultural remains associated with a single bone
that was found eroding out of the eastern cut bank
of Alamito Creek. The bone was discovered within
a weakly developed soil exposed along the cut
bank. Upon inspection, no cultural material was
observed with the exception of a single vitreous,
historic whiteware sherd located ca. 5.0 m away
from where the bone fragment was discovered.
The bone fragment was examined by a faunal
specialist and appeared to be an ilium fragment
of a modern bison. Substantial calcium carbonate
mineralization and manganese staining of the bone
suggested that the bone was of significant antiquity
(Sarah Willett, personal communication, 2009).
The presence of one bison ilium fragment and one
whiteware fragment did not warrant site designation. Nevertheless, the presence of bison bone in
the eastern Trans-Pecos is extremely rare.
Area B
Area B is within a highland setting (see Figure 2) that contains fan piedmonts, alluvial flats,
plains, fan skirts, inset fans, and fan and erosional
remnants. Segments of two ephemeral drainages,
Long Draw and Chambers Draw, transect Area
B in a northeast/southwest direction. The survey
crew reconnoitered targeted areas on either side
of Nopal Road, which truncates Area B in a north/
south direction. Two prehistoric open campsites
were recorded (Table 2).
41PS811
Site 41PS811 is a 50 x 150 m prehistoric open
campsite situated on a flat sandy terrace south/
southeast and adjacent to the upper reaches of

Chambers Draw. The site has two small thermal
features (hearths) and a diffuse scatter of debitage,
chipped stone tools, and ground stone. No dateable
deposits were observed in either of the hearths.
The chipped stone assemblage consists of debitage,
unifacial retouched flakes, indeterminate-type biface
fragments, and projectile points. Raw material types
represented at the site were blue-gray chert, rhyolite,
and chalcedony. The ground stone assemblage consists of an expedient metate and one formal metate.
Three recovered dart points of the Pandale, Langtry,
and Palmillas types indicate that the site was repeatedly occupied throughout the entire Archaic period
(Figure 8) (Turner et al. 2011:128, 145-146).
41PS812
Site 41PS812 is a 100 x 100 m open campsite
located on a grassy flat ca. 200 m southeast of
Long Draw. The site contains a diffuse and light
scatter of FCR, debitage, chipped stone tools, and
ground stone. Although no discrete features were
encountered, there were areas with higher concentrations of FCR. Chipped stone tools consisted of
expediently retouched unifaces and two early stage
bifaces. The one ground stone tool was a mano.
The site is of an unknown prehistoric affiliation.
Area C
Area C is located south of the southeastern and
southwestern corners of Areas A and B, respectively (see Figure 2). The area includes the uplands
and lowlands on either side of the lower reaches of
Chambers Draw and an approximate 4 km swath on
either side of Antelope Draw. The area has alluvial
flats, plains, fan skirts, ephemeral drainages, inset
fans, erosional remnants and mesas, fan remnants,
and ballenas. Seven sites were discovered, six of
which are clustered within a ca. 500 x 500 m area
near Antelope Draw (Table 3). The remaining site
was discovered along Chambers Draw.
41PS813
Site 41PS813 is a 50 x 70 m prehistoric open
campsite situated on a sandy alluvial flat ca. 130
m north of Antelope Draw. A single deflated and
surficial thermal feature was discovered along the
eastern side of the site. The artifact assemblage
consists of a diffuse scatter of FCR, debitage, and
chipped stone tools; much of the debitage was

41PS811

41PS812

B-1

B-2

Open
Campsite

Open
Campsite

Site
Type

Unknown
Prehistoric

Early to
Late
Archaic

Cultural
Affiliation
Artifacts/Materials Observed

Debitage, unifaces, bifaces,
FCR scatter

Debitage, retouched flakes, biface
fragments, hammerstone, expedient
and formal metates, dart points

Table 2. Summary of sites recorded in Area B.

State
Trinomial

Temp.
Site
No.

No discrete
features

Two small
hearths

Palmillas, Pandale,
and Langtry dart
points
None

Features
Observed

Artifacts/Materials
Collected

Table 2. Summary of sites recorded in Area B.

Pedestrian Survey

Pedestrian Survey

Work Performed

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas
15

16

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Early, Middle, and Late Archaic dart points found at 41PS811: a, Pandale; b, Langtry; c, Palmillas.

retouched and/or utilized. One Palmillas type dart
point was discovered that is indicative of Middle to
Late Archaic occupations (Turner et al. 2011:145).
41PS814
Site 41PS814 is a 50 x 70 m prehistoric open
campsite located ca. 100 south of 41PS813 and
only ca. 30 m north of Antelope Draw. The site
contains a deflated hearth and a diffuse scatter of
FCR, debitage, and ground stone. The ground stone
assemblage includes one metate and one mano, both
with only slight usage. The results of two shovel
tests indicated the presence of buried cultural materials (debitage and FCR). The debitage assemblage
(n=18) includes six hard hammer flake fragments,
four indeterminate-type flake fragments, one soft
hammer flake, and seven pieces of shatter. Raw
material is dominated by chalcedony (n=16). Other
material types are rhyolite and hornfels. A profile
drawing of one of the shovel tests (ST-2) indicates
ca. 5 cm of recent unconsolidated sand overlying
ca. 20 cm of unconsolidated sand intermixed with
pebble-sized gravels that in turn overlies ca. 20 cm

of compact sandy clay loam. No carbon remains or
temporally diagnostic artifacts were encountered.
41PS815
Site 41PS815 is a 50 x 70 m prehistoric open
campsite of unknown age that is adjacent to and
south of an unnamed ephemeral drainage associated with Antelope Draw. Low-lying coppice
dunes and inter-dune areas are present. A heavy
concentration of artifacts is exposed on the surface within a ca. 20 x 20 m area. The remaining
area contains a light and diffuse scatter of artifacts. The site contains FCR, debitage, ground
stone (informal metates and manos), and a single
scraper. Three of six shovel tests revealed buried
cultural deposits, including what appeares to be
a buried thermal feature (see Results of Excavations, below).
41PS816
Site 41PS816 is a large 200 x 320 prehistoric
open campsite (see Figure 31, below). The site

41PS813

41PS814

41PS815

41PS816

41PS817

41BS819

41PS820

C-1

C-2

C-3

C-4

C-5

C-6

C-7

Open
Campsite

Open
Campsite
Open
Campsite

Open
campsite

Open
Campsite

Open
Campsite

Open
Campsite

Site
Type

Unknown
Prehistoric

Unknown
Prehistoric
Unknown
Prehistoric

Archaic to
Paleoindian

Unknown
Prehistoric

Unknown
Prehistoric

Probable Late
Archaic

Cultural
Affiliation

Debitage, FCR,
Perforator, Bifaces

FCR, debitage,
Metates, Manos, Biface
Debitage and FCR

Projectile Points,
Bifaces, Debitage,
FCR, Metates, Manos,
Pendant

Debitage, FCR,
Metates, Mano

Debitage, FCR,
Retouched Flakes, Dart
Point
Debitage, FCR, Manos,
Metate

Artifacts/Materials
Observed

Table 3. Summary of sites recorded in Area C.	
  

State
Trinomial

Temp.
Site
No.

Bifaces

None

Biface Fragment

Matrix sample and
charcoal sample from
ST-4; Matrix sample
and charcoal sample
from ST-5; Matrix
sample and charcoal
sample from ST-6.
Collection of
artifactual material
from various levels of
shovel tests
Projectile Points and
Bifaces (14); Debitage
and Matrix from
Feature 2

None

Indeterminate-type
Dart Point

Artifacts/Materials
Collected

Features
Observed

Hearths
(unknown
number)
None

Hearths (7)

Hearths (6)

No defined
features on
surface;
charcoal
staining in ST-4
& 5; Exposure
of hearth
in ST-6

Deflated Hearth

Deflated Hearth

Table 3. Summary of sites recorded in Area C.

Pedestrian
Survey

Pedestrian
Survey
Pedestrian
Survey

Pedestrian
Survey and
Test Units (2)

Pedestrian
Survey and
Shovel Test
Pedestrian
Survey and
Shovel Tests
(6)

Pedestrian
Survey

Work
Performed

N/A

N/A

Positive; two
pieces of
debitage
Positive;
charcoal stain
and debitage in
ST-4; charcoal
and FCR in
ST-5; Exposed
hearth in ST-6,
FCR and
charcoalenriched
sediment
Positive;
debitage and
possible
dateable
deposits
N/A

N/A

Results of
Shovel Testing

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas
17

18

Texas Archeological Society

is situated on a sandy flat that contains small,
localized areas of low-lying coppice dunes.
Antelope Draw is ca. 300 m to the south. An
ephemeral drainage joins with Alamito Creek ca.
100 m west of the site. A mechanically excavated
drainage adjacent to a berm is located along the
western and northern margins of the site. Also, a
fence line, access road, and the Atchison Topeka
and Santa Fe railroad run parallel to each other and
are located adjacent and north of the site.
A small number of hearths, bifaces, projectile
points, manos, metates, and occasional pieces of
FCR and debitage were scattered across most of
the site area. However, two inter-dune areas (A
and B) contain a moderate number of features
and artifacts. Area A measures ca. 65 x 65 m and
had three hearths (F-1, 2, and 4), one mano, three
biface fragments, and five projectile points. In
addition, a pendant fragment made of kaolinite

Figure 9. Kaolinite pendant fragment found at 41PS816.

was discovered within this area (Figure 9). Area B
measures ca. 38 x 42 m and contained one hearth
(F-3), one mano, one projectile point, and a small
concentration of FCR.
The chipped stone assemblage includes debitage, bifaces, and projectile points. Debitage
consists of a variety of raw material types and
represents both hard and soft hammer reduction.
Two bifaces are noted, one an indeterminate type
biface fragment with extensive unifacial retouch
along the dorsal surface and only minimal retouch
along the ventral surface. The lateral margin along
the dorsal surface has a steep-angled bit and was
likely used as a scraper. The artifact is made of a
gray, fine-grained, opaque chert. The other biface
is a small sub-triangular, cursorily made, piece.
The distal tip and one proximal corner are missing.
This latter biface is made of a pale red and white
banded, fine-grained, opaque chert.

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

Projectile point types indicate a wide range
of occupational episodes extending from the Late
Paleoindian to Late Archaic periods, or ca. 12,200–
1250 B.P. Two projectile points were recovered that
are associated with the Late Paleoindian period
(Figure 10a-b). One is a Golondrina (Turner et al.
2011:110–111) that is made of material macroscopically identical to Edwards Formation chert.
The lateral margins of the blade are reworked,
almost to the point of exhaustion. Both stem and
basal margins have been ground.
The second dart point is a contracting stem,
lanceolate-shaped point made of a pinkish to
reddish-gray, fine-grained opaque chert (see Figure
10b). Damage is apparent on the distal and ventral

19

surface along the lateral margin. Both lateral margins of the blade are reworked. A small area of one
side of the stem is lightly ground. The proximal
portion of the stem is more pointed than convex
and biconvex in cross section. The flaking along
both sides of the stem exhibits bilateral symmetry
and has similar attributes to the Hell Gap type
(Turner and Hester 1999:129). The Golondrina dart
point was found ca. 3.5 m from F-3 and the Hell
Gap-like dart point was found ca. 4.5 m from F-2.
Three other dart points from 41PS816 appear
to be a distinct style and are similar to diminutive
versions of the Dalton types (Figure 11a–c) (Justice
2002; Turner et al. 2011). The lateral margins of
the blades were reworked and are alternate beveled

Figure 10. Late Paleoindian projectile points found at 41PS816: a, re-worked Golondrina; b, Hell Gap-like.

20

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. Late Paleoindian and Early Archaic dart points recovered at 41PS816: a–c, Dalton; d, Pandale.

while the stem and basal margins are heavily
ground. Two of the points have faint shoulders, but
the shoulders on one (Figure 11b) appear to be the
result of extensive grinding along both margins of
the stem. These points exhibit impact fractures perpendicular to the transverse fracture on the distal
end. Basal thinning flakes are apparent on all three
specimens and the points are made of variegated
fine-grained opaque chert.
Another dart point (see Figure 11d) has a
minimal amount of retouch flaking on both dorsal
and ventral surfaces of the blade. A single flake
has been alternately removed on either side of
the stem with no further retouch flaking. The dart
point is an expediently made Pandale dart point
associated with the Early Archaic period (Turner
et al. 2011:168–169). Another recovered dart point
has an expanding stem and concave base and is
made of a dark gray chert. The distal end, both
shoulders, and the proximal corner of the stem are
missing. The basal edge is ground. The general
morphology of this dart point is vaguely similar to
the expanding stemmed and corner-notched series
of dart points recovered in both Late Paleoindian
and Early Archaic contexts at the Wilson-Leonard

site, and to the Baker/Bandy series of the Lower
Pecos region (Collins et al. 1998:220–223; Turner
et al. 2011:62–63).
Middle and Late Archaic dart points also
were recovered during the recording of 41PS816.
The Middle Archaic dart point resembles the
Jora type, a dart point considered by some to
be a Langtry variant (Ohl n.d.). This specimen
is made of a light brownish-gray, fine-grained,
opaque chert (Figure 12a). Two probable Late
Archaic corner-notched dart points also were
recovered; one exhibits wide corner notches and
pronounced barbs resembling the San Pedro type
(Justice 2002:202). The stem is short and slightly
expanding with a slightly convex base. It is made
of a striated gray and grayish-white, fine-grained,
opaque chert (Figure 12b). Another indeterminate
type dart point of likely Late Archaic age is highly
fragmented. The lateral margins of the blade are
damaged, the shoulders or barbs are missing, and
the proximal portion of the base is missing. The
only recognizable attribute is that the specimen is
corner-notched and has an expanding stem. This
specimen is made of a brownish-gray and white,
fine-grained, opaque chert.

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

21

Figure 12. Middle and Late Archaic dart points found at 41PS816: a, Jora; b, San Pedro-like.

Six thermal features were observed at 41PS816
and were noted as partially intact. Two of the six
thermal features were chosen for test excavations.
Two 1 x 1 m units were laid out, straddling a portion of two hearths (see Results of Excavations section below). The site was again revisited by CBBS
archeologists in June 2009 in hopes of finding additional early projectile point styles in association
with thermal features that could contain dateable
deposits. Although no additional Paleoindian and
Early Archaic type points were discovered, one
hearth was discovered partially buried at the base
of a small dune hummock. This oval-shaped hearth
was ca. 70 cm in maximum diameter and consisted
of ca. 30 igneous rocks, most of which did not show
definitive attributes of thermal alteration. Heavy
carbonate mineralization was apparent on all of the
cobbles. No dateable deposits were observed.
41PS817
Site 41PS817 is a 45 x 75 m prehistoric open
campsite situated on an alluvial flat that is draped

with small coppice dunes. The site is ca. 50 m
south of Antelope Draw. Seven hearths, debitage,
chipped stone tools, and ground stone were noted
during the survey. No temporally diagnostic artifacts were encountered. Some of the hearths appeared intact and, therefore, they have potential to
provide chronometric and botanical data.
41PS819
Site 41PS819 is a 30 x 45 m prehistoric open
campsite. The site is located on a sandy flat ca.
500 m northwest of an ephemeral drainage in
Antelope Draw, ca. 100 m south of the Atchison,
Topeka, and Santa Fe Railroad, and ca. 80 m
north/northwest of 41PS813. The site has a light
scatter of debitage and FCR, and three deflated
thermal features. No temporally diagnostic artifacts or dateable deposits were encountered. Because of the meager number and surficial nature
of artifacts, coupled with an absence of buried
and dateable deposits, the research potential for
this site is poor.

22

Texas Archeological Society

41PS820
Site 41PS820 is a 45 x 80 m prehistoric open
campsite located on a pronounced, flat-topped
ridge between and at the juncture of an ephemeral
drainage with Chambers Draw to the west, and
an unnamed ephemeral drainage to the south/
southeast. The site contains a light scatter of FCR,
debitage, and chipped and ground stone tools.
No features were observed. The ground surface
at 41PS820 was deflated with no apparent buried
deposits. Based on the absence of intact features
and dateable deposits, coupled with the absence
of temporally diagnostic artifacts, this site has a
limited research potential.
Chipped stone tools consist of a hafted biface
made of yellowish-brown jasper and an indeterminate type biface made of semi-translucent
white chalcedony. Also, a piece of shatter made of
thermally altered chalcedony was collected with
fine unifacial retouch flaking on one end. The one
ground stone tool is a shallow basin-type metate
fragment made of basalt.
Area D
Area D is directly east of Area E and is located
on the eastern side of MacGuire Ranch (see Figure
2). Landforms within this study unit include fan piedmonts, alluvial flats, plains, fan skirts, and erosion
remnants truncated by small drainage ways. Only one
site was discovered within Area D (Table 4).
41PS821
Site 41PS821 is a small prehistoric open campsite that is located on the north side of a small,
remnant playa lake. The site consists of a structural
feature and a minor lithic scatter. The feature is a
ca. 7 x 10 m oval-shaped alignment that consists
of ca. 80 stones. No entryway is apparent, and this
feature is atypical of the stacked-stone structures of
the Cielo complex. No artifacts were found within
or immediately adjacent to the feature. However,
a small artifact scatter is located ca. 2.5 m to the
east and consists of large flakes, a core, and early
stage bifaces.
Isolated Finds
The one isolated find in Area D consists of a
dart point fragment. The distal portion of the blade,

a portion of one lateral margin, the shoulders or
barbs, both margins of the stem, and a portion of
the base are missing. This specimen appears to be
corner-notched with a straight base and is suspected to be of Late Archaic period age. All specimen
fractures are the result of thermal alteration, and it
is made of a semi-translucent, fine-grained, white
chalcedony.
Area E
The northwest corner of Area E is located
ca. 1 km south of San Esteban rock shelter and
extends ca. 4 km to the south. The western boundary is adjacent to and east of the existing Atchison
Topeka and Santa Fe railroad and extends east for
ca. 4 km (see Figure 2). The most pronounced
geographic feature of Area E is a long escarpment
that rises some 90 m above the Alamito Creek
floodplain. This escarpment, or rim, is the terminus of a massive Mitchell Mesa tuff ash flow. A
small area just below this escarpment contains fan
aprons, fan skirts, and inset fans of gravelly loam
derived from the tuff. The slope just below the
escarpment consists of gravelly residuum and colluvium that has weathered from the escarpment.
To the east of the escarpment the geographic setting is a mixture of alluvial flats, plains, fan skirts,
erosional remnants, and low-lying hills truncated
by small drainages.
Special attention was given to surveying the
escarpment for rock shelters that could contain perishable materials. As a result, two small rock shelters were recorded (Table 5), both located along
the base of the escarpment. No other sites were
recorded, either below or east of the escarpment.
41PS823
Site 41PS823 is a small prehistoric rock shelter
(5.5 m deep x 6.6 m wide x 2.7 m high), located in
the face of a bluff overlooking the Alamito Creek
basin. Vegetation obscures the shelter talus. The
ceiling is smoke-blackened at the rear of the shelter, and a very light scatter of debitage is visible
at the entrance. Raw material types represented
are chalcedony and chert. Graffiti was scratched
on the back of the wall that reads “DW99.” A
single decorticate flake with unifacial retouch flaking along one lateral margin was discovered. No
carbon remains or temporally diagnostic artifacts
were noted.

41PS822
State
Trinomial

41PS822

Temp.
D-1
Site
No.

D-1

Unknown
Cultural
Prehistoric
Affiliation

Cultural
Affiliation

Type

41PS823
State
Trinomial

41PS824

41PS823

41PS824

Temp.
E-1
Site
No.

E-2

E-1

E-2

Rockshelter

Rockshelter

Rockshelter

Rockshelter
Site
Type

Unknown

Unknown
Prehistoric
Unknown
Prehistoric

Unknown
Cultural
Prehistoric
Affiliation

	
  	
  

	
  	
  

	
  	
  

Table
5. Summary of sites recorded in Area E
	
  

	
  

Table 5. Summary of sites recorded in
Area E
Prehistoric

Trinomial

No.

FCR, lithic debitage, cores,
early stage bifaces

FCR, lithic debitage, cores,
Artifacts/Materials
early stage bifaces
Observed

Artifacts/Materials
Observed

Projectile Point and
Core

Projectile Point and
Artifacts/Materials
Core
Collected

Artifacts/Materials
Collected

Lithic debitage, bifaciallyretouched scraper

Lithic debitage, bifaciallyretouched scraper
Lithic debitage, uniface

Lithic
debitage, uniface
Artifacts/Materials
Observed

None

None

None

None
Artifacts/Materials
Collected

Artifacts/Materials
Artifacts/Materials
Affiliation
Observed
Collected
Table 5. Summary of sites recorded within Area E.

Short-term
Unknown
Residential
Prehistoric
ofBase
sitesCamp
recorded in Area D.

Short-term
Site
Residential
Type
Base
Camp

Site
Type

Table
recorded inCultural
Area D.
State of sitesSite
Site 4. Summary

Temp.

Table 4. Summary

State
Trinomial

Temp.
Site
No.

Table 4. Summary of sites recorded within Area D.

Small cultural
talus

Small cultural
talus
None

None
Features
Observed

Features
Observed

Structural
Remnant and
Hearth

Structural
Features
Remnant
and
Observed
Hearth

Features
Observed

Pedestrian
Survey

Pedestrian
Survey
Pedestrian
Survey

Pedestrian
Work
Survey
Performed

Work
Performed

Pedestrian
Survey

Pedestrian
Work
Survey
Performed

Work
Performed

N/A

N/A

N/A

Results of
N/A
Shovel
Testing

Results of
Shovel
Testing

N/A

Results
N/A of
Shovel
Testing

Results of
Shovel
Testing

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas
23

24

Texas Archeological Society

41PS824
Site 41PS824 is a small prehistoric rock shelter (2.8 m deep x 4.5 m wide x 2.0 m high), also
located in the face of the bluff. A small, unnamed
ephemeral drainage is located ca. 80 m to the north.
The ceiling is smoke-blackened and debitage is
visible across a minor cultural talus that extends
ca. 4.5 m from the shelter entrance. An oval chert
biface with a steeply beveled dorsal edge was recovered. The dorsal edge exhibits unifacial retouch
flaking and appears to have served as a scraper. No
perishable material, carbon remains, or temporally
diagnostic artifacts were discovered.
The Main Stem of the Alamito
Creek Basin (Area F)
Archeological reconnaissance of the main stem
of the Alamito Creek basin (Area F) resulted in the
identification of five new sites and one extensive
site complex containing virtually hundreds of sites.
The following section provides results of these
investigations.
41PS818
As mentioned earlier, 41PS818 is actually an
archeological complex that consists of many small
rock shelters, small to large midden deposits, a
Cielo complex-like open campsite, and historic
structures and associated artifacts. This area was
separated into sub-areas designated as Kid’s Hill
locality (including the Cielo-like campsite), North
and West Extensions (the rock shelters), and South
Extension (historic structures).
The Rock shelters (West Extension)
An impressive total of 145 mostly small,
natural alcoves were investigated within an extensive, horizontally exposed tuff landform that
is part of the larger Mitchell Mesa formation
(Barnes 1979). Most of the natural alcoves occur
in the West Extension Area (Figure 13). These
small natural alcoves were formed as a result of
large gas pockets within a single-event ash flow.
Out of the 145 rock shelters, 42 contain cultural
remains (Table 6). Not only did prehistoric hunter/
gatherers make use of these small rock shelters,
but historic laborers during the construction of
the San Esteban irrigation system and the Kansas

City, Mexico, and Orient Railroad did as well
(Figure 14). Fourteen rock shelters contain only
debitage or functionally undiagnostic artifacts
and, consequently are of unknown prehistoric
affiliation. Thirteen other rock shelters contain
both prehistoric and historic artifacts. Three have
prehistoric artifacts and stacked-rock alignments
that served as walls; these stone walls most likely
are associated with the historic period. Four rock
shelters have only historic artifacts, while seven
contain stacked-rock walls with neither prehistoric nor historic artifacts.
Surprisingly, the survey team recovered only
two temporally diagnostic prehistoric artifacts. The
first artifact was a Cliffton type arrow point or a
Perdiz arrow point preform (Turner and Hester
1999:208; Turner et al. 2011:206) found at RR-29,
a small rock shelter (Figure 15; see Table 6). The
point is sub-triangular in shape, with minimal retouch flaking along the lateral margins of the blade,
shoulders, and stem. The arrow point has defined
shoulders with a contracting stem, and is made of
a fine-grained, opaque, brown agate.
The second artifact is a tubular stone pipe preform (Turner et al. 2011:280–283) found in a crack
between two boulders that had fallen from the
roof of a rock shelter (Figure 16 and Table 7; see
also Table 6). No cultural deposits were observed;
however, intact deposits may be present under the
fallen debris. The pipe preform is made of a very
pale brown welded tuff containing tiny vesicles.
Part of the exterior portion has been painted with
an iron oxide pigment, perhaps hematite, along
the length of the stem and partially around the
chamber rim. Very faint linear incised lines are
visible both parallel and perpendicular to the long
axis of the preform. It is unclear if these faint incisions represent the early makings of a design or
are a result of shaping the stone. The chamber or
bowl is conical in shape, and measures 29.3 mm in
maximum diameter at the opening, and it is drilled
to a maximum depth of ca. 38.0 mm. The distal
end of the preform gradually contracts towards the
proximal end of the stem. No attempts were made
to drill from the stem end. The overall dimensions
are 154.2 mm in maximum length and 55.6 mm in
maximum diameter.
The Kid’s Hill Locality
The Kid’s Hill Locality is a large cultural talus
deposit that contains a mixture of FCR, debitage,

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

25

Figure 13. Map of 41PS818 showing numerous rock shelters (designated as RR) that contain cultural materials.

chipped stone tools, ceramics (both prehistoric and
historic), glass, and metal artifacts. Located ca.
10 m down slope from a small rock shelter (see
Table 6: RR-37), this talus deposit was chosen for
children to learn the basic methods of survey and
excavation, hence the name “Kid’s Hill Locality”
(see Results of Test Excavations, below). The

survey involved children flagging and identifying
various surface artifacts. A rectangular-shaped
stacked-rock structure remnant is within the midden deposits (Figure 17). Field notes indicated
that the walls were ca. 10. 2 ft. wide and the south
wall was ca. 12.25 ft. long. The north end of the
structure is open and void of stacked rock. The

26

Texas Archeological Society

complex wickiups (Table 8) (Mallouf
1999). Yet the structures are located
on a strategic well-elevated landform
that provided a panoramic view of
the Alamito Creek basin to the south
and the canyon drainage to the west
and north.
A light and diffuse scatter of
debitage and FCR were outside of
the structures while the interior of the
structures had been cleared of rocks
and contained one to three pieces of
debitage. No chipped stone tools or
projectile points were encountered.
The only temporally-diagnostic artifact is a body sherd of red-slipped
El Paso brownware found ca. 30 cm
Figure 14. Example of stacked rock wall associated with rock shelter outside of the westernmost stone of
F-1 (Figure 19). The temper has a
(RR-28) at 41PS818.
“salt and pepper” appearance with
coarse angular granules of granite
typical of the El Paso area. The sherd could be
interior portion contains a significant amount of
from either a El Paso Bichrome or Polychrome
wall fall. Along with some debitage, an unspecivessel found at various sites in the ETP/BB refied type of Winchester shotgun shell and a tin can
gion, but most commonly in the region these types
were observed within the structure and indicate its
are found at village sites in the La Junta area near
historic use. Both prehistoric and historic artifacts
present-day Presidio. Ceramics are very rare at
were observed at this locality. Prehistoric artifacts
Cielo complex sites, so much so that Cielo sites
consisted of debitage (including cores), ground
are considered an aceramic cultural manifestation
stone, a unifacial-flaked chopper tool, and a ham(Mallouf 1985, 1999).
merstone. Field notes indicate that chalcedony was
Two of the features in this area (F-1 and F-2)
the dominant stone type along with chert and rhyohave the potential to contain shallow, but buried,
lite. Historic artifacts included solder-sealed cans,
cultural deposits within their interiors. Six possible
a tobacco tin, sheet metal fragments, an iron leaf
bedrock mortars were recorded at the northern end
spring to a wagon, Mexican and Anglo-American
of the landform. However, after returning to the
ceramics, and various colored glass sherds.
site and re-examining these features, they appear
to be natural, but unusually round and cylindrical,
The Possible Cielo Complex Site
depressions in the Mitchell Mesa tuff. Three other
possible mortar holes were located down slope and
Four oval-to-elongated curvilinear-shaped
east of the landform.
single-course to stacked rock alignments are directly west-northwest and upslope from the Kid’s
Hill excavation area (Figure 18). The features are
The Rock Houses
situated on top of a pronounced hill with outcrops
The ruins of two historic rock houses were reof tuff bedrock surrounding the perimeter of the
corded within the area designated as the “Southern
landform. Three of the features were most likely
Extension” of Area F (41PS818) and are identified
residential and/or shelter-type structures while one
as House No. 1 and House No. 2 (Table 9). Further
appears to be some kind of ramada-like structure.
descriptions of house attributes and artifacts within
Large cobbles to boulder-size rocks of tuff were
collected on the site and/or nearby for construcand adjacent to the houses are provided below.
tion of the dwellings. Stones were placed one
House No. 1 was located ca. 180 m south/
to two courses high. Most of the openings are
southeast of the Kid’s Hill locality and just below
wider compared to the entryways of typical Cielo
the Mitchell Mesa escarpment (Figure 20). The

Stacked-rock wall

Hearth

None

None

None

None

None

Stacked rock wall

None

Placed rocks

Stacked rock wall

Stacked rock wall

None

Stacked-rock wall

RR-15

RR-16

RR-17

RR-18

RR-19

RR-21

RR-23

RR-24

RR-25

RR-26

RR-27

RR-28

RR-29

RR-31

	
  

None

RR-13A

	
  

None

Stacked rock wall, mortar hole

RR-10

Stacked rock wall, Scrape marks (art
or abraded lines?), Mortar hole

None

RR-9

RR-12

Stacked rock wall

RR-7

RR-11

Sub-Features

Field
I.D.

Unknown
Prehistoric/Historic

Late Prehistoric

Perdiz preform or Cliffton type arrow point
Glass, Debitage

Unknown
Prehistoric/Historic

Unknown
Prehistoric/Possible Historic

Unknown
Prehistoric/Historic

Unknown Prehistoric

Unknown
Prehistoric/Historic

Unknown Prehistoric

Unknown Prehistoric

Unknown Prehistoric

Unknown Prehistoric

Unknown Prehistoric

Unknown Prehistoric

Possible Historic

Unknown Prehistoric

Unknown
Prehistoric/Possible Historic

Historic

Unknown
Prehistoric/Historic

Unknown Prehistoric

Possible Historic

Cultural Affiliation

Tin can, Debitage

Debitage

Glass, Unifaces, Tin sardine can, 2 sardine can lids, leather
shoe sole 2 m below entrance

Debitage (chert and chalcedony), Cores (chert)

Debitage, manos, hammer stones, Tools (scrapers), Coke bottle

Debitage

Hammer stones, debitage, FCR

Debitage

Debitage (chert), Worked cobble

Debitage, several manos

Debitage on talus

None

FCR, Modified debitage

None

Tin cans

Three nails driven into face of rock shelter above entrance, one nail on floor,
small-caliber cartridge, burnt wood, debitage, FCR in Talus

Fire cracked rock

None

Cultural Material

Table 6. Rock shelter attributes at 41PS818.

Ashy talus

None

None

Smoke-blackened ceiling

Unifaces made of dark gray
chert and found on talus

Debitage and cores observed
on talus

Looted, backfill pile outside

Debitage noticed on talus

Debitage on Talus

Debitage on talus deposits

Smoke-blackened ceiling

Smoke-blackened ceiling

None

None

None

None

Smoke-blackened ceiling

None

None

None

Comments

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas
27

Stacked-stone wall

Stacked-stone wall

None

None

Stacked-rock wall

RR-74

RR-80

RR-81

RR-93

RR-108

	
  

	
  

	
  

	
  

	
  

Debitage, Bone, Core

Cultural Material

None

Debitage

None

Tin cans, Whiteware shards, Debitage,
Manos, Bones

None

None

None

Debitage

Shoe sole, Glass

Debitage

Debitage, Tin cans

Debitage, Tin cans

Leather boot, Whiteware, Mano, Debitage,
Glass,
Pestle on talus,
talus, Shot
Shot gun
gun
Glass,Broken
Broken mortar,
mortar,Pestle
shell, Utilized debitage

Debitage (chert), Tin cans, Glass

Brown bottle glass, Tin cans, debitage

Debitage

Cloud blower pipe (A5), Metal can

Glass, Debitage (chalcedony, chert, and rhyolite)

Table 6. Rock shelter attributes at 41PS18.

Stacked-stone wall

RR-73

None

RR-65

None

None

RR 51

Stacked-stone wall

None

RR-50

RR-67

Stacked-rock wall

RR-49

RR-66

Stacked-rock wall and pillar; Etched
writing on pillar

RR-47

Rock structure in front of Rock
Shelter, Mortar hole

RR-43

Stacked-rock wall

Mortar holes

RR-42

Stacked-rock wall; bedrock mortar

Stacked-rock wall

RR-33

RR-46

Stacked-rock wall

RR-32

RR-44

Sub-Features

Field
I.D.

Possible Historic

Unknown Prehistoric

Possible Historic

Unknown Prehistoric/Historic

Possible Historic

Possible Historic

Possible Historic

Unknown Prehistoric

Historic

Unknown Prehistoric

Unknown Prehistoric/Historic

Unknown Prehistoric/Historic

Unknown Prehistoric/Historic

Unknown Prehistoric/Historic

Unknown Prehistoric/Historic

Unknown Prehistoric

Unknown Prehistoric/Historic

Unknown Prehistoric/Historic

Unknown Prehistoric/Possible
Historic

Cultural Affiliation

Table 6. Rock shelter attributes at 41PS818. (Continued)

None

None

Blue paint inside door face

None

None

None

None

None

None

Unknown

None

Adjacent and east of Chihuahua Trail; has
partition wall that overlooks trail

Adjacent and east of Chihuahua Trail; has partition wall
that overlooks trail

Adjacent and east of Chihuahua Trail

None

Rock collapse in front/blocking entrance
to Rock Shelter

Collapsed roof; A5, pipe collected from
crevice between boulders

None

None

Comments

28
Texas Archeological Society

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

Figure 15. Perdiz preform or Cliffton type arrow point found at rock shelter RR-29.

Figure 16. Tubular pipe preform found at rock shelter RR-42.

29

30

Texas Archeological Society
Table 7. Dimensional and morphological attributes of stone pipe preform.

Material
Welded
Tuff

Method of
Pipe
Construction

Overall
Length
(mm)

Maximum
Diameter
(mm)

Minimum
Diameter
(mm)

Width Bowl
Opening
(mm)

Depth
of Bowl
(mm)

Shape
of Bowl

Scraping

154.2

55.6

N/A

29.3

38

Conical

Method of
Bowl
Constrution

Type
Design

Drilled after
Gouging

CrossHatched

Table 7. Dimensional and morphological attributes of stone pipe preform.

Feature
Designation

Morphology

Exterior
Dimensions
(m)

Interior
Dimensions
(m)

Width of
Entranceway
(m)

Outward Direction
of Entranceway

Artifacts
within the
Interior

Comments

F1

Elongated
curvilinear

ca. 3.8 x 6.8

ca. 1.8 x 5.0

ca. 5.0

West/Southwest

ca. three
pieces of
debitage

Possible Habitation Shelter

F2

Oval

ca. 4.8 x 4.8

ca. 4.2 x 4.2

ca. 2.8

Southwest

Unknown
number of
debitage

Eight to 10 iron bolts had bee
placed on rock next to
entryway; Possible Habitation
Shelter

F3

Oval

ca. 2.9 x 3.6

ca. 1.7 x 1.8

ca. 1.2

West/Northwest

None
reported

Possible Small Habitation
Shelter or Lookout

F4

Elongated
Curvilinear

ca. 2.2 x 4.6

ca. 1.0 x 3.0

ca. 3.0

South/Southwest

One piece of
debitage

Possible Ramada/Shade
Shelter

Table 8. Structural feature attributes at Cielo-like site at 41PS818.

Figure 17. Historic stacked-rock structure (RR-37) at the Kid’s Hill locality.

house is rectangular in shape with the long axis
orientated ca. 320 degrees north. The portions of
the walls that are still standing are of uncut fieldstone and mud mortar with chinking stones. The
walls average ca. 50 cm thick. The interior contains
mostly collapsed wall fall and vegetation. A portion
of the dirt floor is visible within the northeast corner.
No artifacts were observed inside the structure.
Historic ceramics, glass, and metal artifacts were
collected ca. 30 m east of a two-track road adjacent
to and west of the structure and ca. 15 m north of
the house. Ceramic artifacts (Figure 21) consisted
of: (1) two conjoined porcelain plate fragments with

the Wheeling Pottery Co. maker’s mark, manufacturers of dinnerware from 1879 to ca. 1910 (Kovel
and Kovel 1986:76f); (2) porcelain dinnerware fragments decorated with blue-colored floral designs; (3)
an indeterminate type fragment of vitreous, olivecolored, glazed earthenware (not salt-glazed); and
(4) a hand and forearm component to a china doll
that was produced anytime from 1840 until as late
as the 1930s (Coleman et al. 1986). Glass artifacts
included colorless, amethyst, and green-colored
glass. Both colorless and green-colored glass have
been made from ca. 1860 to the present. Amethystcolored glass, however, is a result of the use of

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

31

Figure 18. Plan view map of the probable Cielo complex locality at 41PS818.

manganese in order to give the glass a clearer color.
Nevertheless, after time, the ultraviolet rays of the
sun turns the glass an amethyst color. Manganese
was used in glass from ca. 1880–1925 (Newman
1970:74). The finish and neck components of three
bottle fragments were collected. Finishes consist
of English Ring (deep lip or packer), prescription,
and crown types (IMACS 1992). Metal artifacts
consist of a large machine-cut nail with the distal
end missing. The nail was at least a 9d pennyweight
and more likely a 20d pennyweight when complete.

Nails that are 20d or longer were commonly used
for large construction such as framing a house, or
the construction of corrals using larger-sized milled
lumber or timber. Machine-cut nails were the most
common type of nail variety made between ca.
1830-1890, although they are still manufactured
today for special projects such as securing wood
to concrete, restorations, and remodeling projects
(Fontana and Greenleaf 1962:54–55).
House No. 2 is located 48.6 m north of House
No. 1. The two-room house is rectangular in shape

Scraping

154.2

Overall
Length
(mm)
55.6

Maximum
Diameter
(mm)
N/A

Minimum
Diameter
(mm)
29.3

Width Bowl
Opening
(mm)

Oval

Oval

Elongated
Curvilinear

F2

F3

F4

ca. 2.2 x 4.6

ca. 2.9 x 3.6

ca. 4.8 x 4.8

ca. 3.8 x 6.8

Exterior
Dimensions
(m)

ca. 1.0 x 3.0

ca. 1.7 x 1.8

ca. 4.2 x 4.2

ca. 1.8 x 5.0

Interior
Dimensions
(m)

ca. 3.0

ca. 1.2

ca. 2.8

ca. 5.0

Width of
Entranceway
(m)

Table 8. Structural feature attributes at Cielo-like site at 41PS818.

Elongated
curvilinear

Morphology

F1

Feature
Designation

Conical

Shape
of Bowl
Drilled after
Gouging

Method of
Bowl
Constrution

South/Southwest

West/Northwest

Southwest

West/Southwest

Outward Direction
of Entranceway

Type
Design

Comments

Possible Ramada/Shade
Shelter

Possible Small Habitation
Shelter or Lookout

Eight to 10 iron bolts had been
placed on rock next to
entryway; Possible Habitation
Shelter

Possible Habitation Shelter

CrossHatched

One piece of
debitage

None
reported

Unknown
number of
debitage

ca. three
pieces of
debitage

Artifacts
within the
Interior

Table 8. Structural feature attributes at Cielo complex-like site at 41PS818.

38

Depth
of Bowl
(mm)

Table 7. Dimensional and morphological attributes of stone pipe preform.

Welded
Tuff

Material

Method of
Pipe
Construction

32
Texas Archeological Society

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

33

Figure 19. Red-slipped brownware sherd found at the Cielo locality.

with the long axis oriented ca. 320 degrees north.
The construction type is the same as House No. 1,
using field stone and mud mortar intermixed with
small angular stones. There are two door openings,
one for each room, along the southwestern wall
and interior corners. No window openings were
observed, possibly because significant portions of
the walls had collapsed. A vertical seam is present
along what was once the northeastern corner of the
northern room (Room No. 1), indicating that the
second, southern room (Room No. 2), was a later
addition. Like House No. 1, the walls are ca. 50 cm
wide. The interior dimensions of Room No. 1 are
ca. 4.2 m long x 3.6 m wide. The interior dimensions for Room No. 2 are ca. 3.6 x 3.6 m. Linear
bulldozed areas are adjacent to and perpendicular
to the northwest and southeast walls. Both bladed
areas are ca. 15–20 m long and 7–10 m wide and
have compromised the integrity of this site.
Various types of historic ceramics, glass, and
metal were noted on the surface; unfortunately,
many of these artifacts were within areas impacted
by the bulldozer. The survey crew noted the presence of whiteware, flow blue ware, and transfer

print ware, along with a fragment of a porcelain
figurine that appears to be a colonial man holding
some type of vessel. Amethyst and brown-colored
glass fragments were noted. Metal artifacts observed were evaporative milk cans, a metal hoe
blade, a .35 caliber Remington cartridge casing,
and a blasting powder can. The presence of the
blasting powder can strongly suggests that the residents of the house were at one time associated with
the construction of the Santa Fe railroad in 1929.
A clay marble and a chipped stone tool are the
only artifacts collected from this house feature. The
undecorated clay marble measures 20.50 mm in
diameter. The marble is unglazed and was probably
made of low-fired kaolin (Figure 22). Clay marbles
were produced as early as the 1700s, but were most
common from ca. 1880 until the 1920s (Randall
and Webb 1988:14–15). The second artifact is a
small biface with the proximal end and the distal
tip missing. Both lateral margins are serrated and
are at a 30˚ angle along dorsal sides of the blade.
The biface is made of fine-grained, semi-translucent, white chalcedony, and measures 37.1 mm in
length, 16.2 mm in width, and 6.2 mm in thickness.

Open campsite

Special Use site

Open campsite

Dam and
irrigation
system

Open campsite

41PS826

41PS827

41PS828

41PS831

Site
Type

41PS825

41PS818

State
Trinomial

Early to Late
Archaic, Late
Prehistoric

Unknown
Prehistoric

Unknown
Prehistoric

Unknown
Prehistoric

Middle to Late
Archaic, Late
Prehistoric

Cultural
Affiliation

Debitage, chipped and ground
stone

Debitage, chipped and ground
stone

Metal artifacts (construction
hardware, sanitary cans)

Debitage

None

Artifacts/Materials
Collected

Dam and
irrigation system,
structure remnants
Hearths

Bandy, Langtry Palmillas,
Shumla, Toyah type
projectile points

Hearths

Two circularshaped rock cairns

Indeterminatetype thermal
features, incipient
ring middens,
refuse middens

Features
Observed

None

None

None

Arenosa, Palmillas, Frio,
Alazan, Perdiz type
projectile points; endscraper, unmodified blade,
beveled knife fragments

See Tables 6–8*

Artifacts/Materials Observed

Table 9. Summary of sites recorded in Area F.

Pedestrian survey

Pedestrian survey

Pedestrian survey

Pedestrian survey

Pedestrian
survey, test
excavations

Work
Performed

Table 9. Summary of sites recorded in Area F

* 41PS818 tentatively represents several different type sites. Also, see 41PS818 in the “Results of Survey” and the “Results of Excavation” sections.

	
  

34
Texas Archeological Society

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

Figure 20. Overview of House No. 1 at 41PS818.

Figure 21. Sample of ceramic artifacts collected just outside of House No. 1.

35

36

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 22. Historic clay marble collected from House No. 2.

Two isolated finds were recovered within
this southern extension of the 41PS818 complex.
The first is a corner-notched, expanding stemmed
dart point. The dimensions of the point are 29.5
mm in length, 18.5 mm in width, and 5.6 mm in
thickness. It is made of an opaque, fine-grained,
white chert. The opposing shoulders are not proportionate and one lateral margin is reworked.
The vitreous luster of the chert suggests that the
material was either heat-treated or simply discarded into a fire. The second isolate was a steel
axe head with the inscription “Mann Edged Tool
Company.” The Mann Edge Tool Company was
established in 1895 and is one of the few American companies still in the business of making axes
(Lammond 2010).
The Alamito Creek Site (41PS825)
The Alamito Creek site is an extensive (ca.
420 x 1400 m) multi-component site (see Figure
34 in “Results of Excavations” section, below).
The long axis and northeastern boundary of
the site area hugs the southwest-facing side of
Alamito Creek. The southernmost portion of

the site extends only a few meters south of the
southern MacGuire Ranch boundary fence line.
An east-west bladed road parallels the boundary
fence line. The northern site boundary is located
where the Alamito Creek channel turns in a more
northerly direction. Another bladed road truncates
the site in a general northwest/southeast direction,
roughly parallel to the creek channel. Other less
traveled roads truncate the site in a general eastwest direction.
The site is situated on and along the margin of
an alluvial terrace. Surface sediments are silty clay
loam to gravelly fine sandy loam (USDS NRCS
2009). A narrow riparian zone borders the northeastern edge of the site while a desert scrubland
floral community is located in the southwestern
portion of the site.
Numerous hearths, incipient ring middens,
refuse middens, burned and fire-cracked rock scatters, chipped and ground stone tools, and debitage
are diffusely scattered across this extensive site.
The northern portion of the site area contains light
to dense scatters of historic artifacts. The surface
recovery of Jora, Hueco, Palmillas, Frio (Turner et
al. 2011:60, 106, 145), and various indeterminate

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

type dart points indicates Middle, Late, and most
likely Transitional Late Archaic occupations
(Figure 23). The presence of Alazan and Perdiz
arrow points (Turner et al. 2011:176, 206; Mallouf
2013:202–205) is also indicative of Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric occupations (Figure 24).
Interestingly, chipped stone tools include an end
scraper (made on a flake), an unmodified blade,

37

and beveled knives (Figure 25), all typical in Cielo
complex and Perdiz-bearing tool assemblages in
the ETP/BB region (Mallouf 1999:69). Although
much of the site’s integrity was compromised by
the construction and maintenance of roads and
erosion, some features remain intact. Areas of
carbon-stained sediment indicate that dateable
deposits are present.

Figure 23. Dart points found at 41PS825: a, Jora; b, Hueco; c, Palmillas; d, Frio; e–f, indeterminate.

38

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 24. Arrow points found at 41PS825: a, Alazan; b–c, Perdiz.

Figure 25. Chipped stone tools recovered from 41PS825: a, end-scraper; b, blade; c–e, beveled knife fragments.

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

41PS826
Site 41PS826 is most likely a special use site
since it only consists of two circular-shaped cairns
located on the south side of a small hill. One cairn
measures 1.65 x 1.70 m and the other 2.30 x 2.50
m. The cairns are located ca. 1.65 m from one
another. The cairns are too big to be early survey
markers, but could be markers for human interments; nevertheless, the exact function of these
cairns is unknown. Although there is no solid evidence to indicate a temporal affiliation, the cairns
are suspected to be prehistoric.
41PS827
Site 41PS827 is a ca. 14 x 17 m prehistoric
open campsite located between an unnamed ephemeral drainage and Antelope Draw located ca. 200
m to the southeast. The site consists of two ringtype hearths that are ca. 12 m apart. Both hearths
measure ca. 1.0 x 1.5 m. Seven pieces of debitage
were encountered near one of the hearths. Because

39

temporally diagnostic artifacts were absent, the site
is of an unknown prehistoric affiliation.
41PS828
Site 41PS828 is an extensive historic dam and
irrigation system associated with San Esteban Lake
(Figure 26). Construction of the lake began in 1910
and was completed in 1912 by the aforementioned
St. Stephan Land and Irrigation Company, some 17
years prior to the completion of the Kansas City,
Mexico and Orient railroad (Thompson 1985, Vol.
II:71-72, 91). The TAS survey crew identified the
dam and a portion of the irrigation system. The
buttressed-type dam does not have a spillway, but
instead has three gate valves under the dam deck.
The segments of the irrigation system consist of
a concrete-lined ditch that meanders in a southsoutheast direction ca. 1,180 ft. where it connects
to a post and beam-supported metal trough that
runs in a south-southeast direction ca. 230 ft. This
trough empties into an earthen irrigation ditch that
continues in a south-southeast direction ca. 650

Figure 26. Women at San Esteban dam ca. 1920. Courtesy of Marfa Public Library, Marfa, Texas.

40

Texas Archeological Society

ft. until it enters a tunnel that runs in a southeast
direction ca. 700 ft. After exiting the tunnel, the
waterway extends another 5,675 ft. before emptying into an open field area to the southwest. In
sum, the system is ca. 1.5 miles in length. The
canal, trough, and tunnel vary from 3-6 ft. wide.
The stone rubble of a number of small buildings is
located on a terrace directly across Alamito Creek
from the tunnel entrance. Sanitation cans and
construction hardware such as nuts and bolts are
scattered along the irrigation system.
The St. Stephan irrigation company planned
to settle between 500 and 800 families on small,
irrigated farm tracts of 10, 20, and 40 acres. The
irrigation system was to provide water for an
area 11 miles long and 2.5 miles wide. Three
years after the dam was completed, the state of
Texas authorized 25,500 acre-feet of water to
irrigate 8,500 acres, but the lake started silting
in after the drought of 1928. By 1962, the lake
was reduced to 400 acre-feet to irrigate only 200
acres of land, and by 1969, the lake was limited
to recreational use only (Texas State Historical
Association 2010).
41PS831
Site 41PS831 is a large (120 x 400 m) prehistoric open campsite that is situated adjacent to and
east of Alamito Creek. An abandoned two-track
road truncates the southern portion of the site in a
general east-west direction while a small unnamed
ephemeral tributary of Alamito Creek crosses
the northernmost portion of the site in a general
north-south direction. The Kansas City, Mexico
and Orient railroad is ca. 80 m east of the western
site boundary. The southernmost portion of the site
extends an unknown distance past the MacGuire
Ranch boundary. The vegetative community is
desert scrub, although the westernmost part of the
site is adjacent to the riparian zone along Alamito
Creek. The site contains numerous hearths, a dense
scatter of debitage, along with a small number of
chipped and ground stone artifacts.
Approximately 52 hearths were noted within
the central portion of the site. Most of the hearths
average ca. 1.5 m in maximum diameter, with some
partially exposed along the walls of shallow gullies. No carbon remains were noted. Chipped stone
artifacts include unifaces, cores, and formal and
informal bifaces, including projectile points. The
presence of Bandy, Langtry, Palmillas, Shumla, and

Durango Notched dart points and a Toyah arrow
point (Figure 27) indicates that the site was occupied from Early Archaic through Late Prehistoric
times (Justice 2002:208-211; Turner et al. 2011).
The distribution of the Durango Notched type dart
points extends well beyond the core area of the
Colorado Plateau (Justice 2002:Map 22).
THE CHIHUAHUA
TRAIL SURVEY
As mentioned earlier, the Chihuahua Trail
was used mostly during the mid-19th century by
freighters traveling between Presidio and Indianola, Texas. A goal of the 2000 TAS field school
was to identify and record physical remnants of the
Chihuahua Trail and associated artifacts within the
MacGuire Ranch property. Moreover, this survey
served as a catalyst for a long-running project with
the goal of identification and reconstruction of the
trail throughout the ETP/BB (Scism 2002:13).
The Chihuahua Trail crew began work at a
previously known segment of the trail in Area F
and near the foot of San Esteban tinaja. The trail
was quite obvious in places since wagon ruts had
worn down into the bedrock (Figure 28). Where
the trail was not physically visible, a metal detector
was used to locate temporally diagnostic artifacts of
the period; the distribution of these artifacts would
hopefully help with the detection of the route of the
Chihuahua Trail. However, many historic artifacts
within this particular part of the survey area could
have been associated with the construction of San
Esteban dam and irrigation canal, the building of
the railroad, or military activities of Camp Marfa.
Consequently, a major problem for the survey crew
was to confidently identify artifacts directly associated with the trail. After the 2000 TAS field school,
members of the Chihuahua Trail Crew attended
seminars to learn more and recognize artifacts used
during this time (Scism 2002:13).
Artifacts directly associated with the trail were
not observed by the survey crew in Areas A, B, and
C, although aerial photographs clearly revealed
segments of the trail in Areas C. A small segment of
the trail may have been relocated as a result of using metal detectors ca. 120 m south of San Esteban
tinaja in Area F. Here, the survey crew detected 32
artifacts within a ca. 100 m long by ca. 20 m-wide
swath that paralleled the railroad for ca. 65 m, then
turned southeast for another 35 m.

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

41

Figure 27. Examples of projectile types from 41PS831: a, Bandy; b, Langtry; c, Shumla; d, Durango Notched; e, Ensor
(?); f, Toyah.

Artifacts found during the trail survey included
cut nails, along with some metal pot fragments,
a horseshoe, a knife, and amethyst, green, and
brown-colored glass fragments. Two other recovered artifacts obviously not associated with the
Chihuahua Trail are discussed below.
Isolated Finds
Two isolated finds were discovered during the
course of the Chihuahua Trail survey. One artifact
was a metal button depicting an oriental runner
drawing a two-wheeled cart called a rickshaw that
seated one person holding an umbrella. This button
likely belonged to a Chinese railroad laborer (Figure 29). The other isolate was a Folsom dart point
preform (see Mallouf and Seebach 2006:Figure 1),

the only artifact found during the field school that
was affiliated with the early Paleoindian sub-period
(ca. 12,900-12,000 B.P. or 10,900-10,000 B.C.)
(Figure 30). The Folsom preform is made of a local, high quality, very pale brown to yellow to dark
yellowish-brown (10YR 7/4-7/6-4/4) streaked and
speckled, fine-grained, opaque chert (Table 10).
The preform is a single-flute preform as described by Tunnell and Johnson (2000:11). The
first fluting was successful along the obverse
face. The base was reworked and beveled for the
second fluting on the reverse face; however, a
platform nipple for the second fluting is absent.
The preparation of a central fluting ridge was
accomplished by the removal of ribbon flakes.
The specimen exhibits a transverse fracture that
occurred either during or subsequent to the first

42

Texas Archeological Society

primarily intended to instruct children
in the fundamentals of excavation and
recording, while excavations at 41PS815,
41PS816, and 41PS825 were to assess
the nature, extent, and integrity of buried
archeological deposits.
41PS815
As mentioned earlier, 41PS815 is a
small prehistoric open campsite with an
artifact concentration within a 20 x 20
m area. Six shovel tests were excavated
at 20 m intervals within the artifact
concentration. Shovel Tests 1-3 were
culturally sterile. Thin gravel lenses
were encountered at 60 cm bs. Shovel
Test 4 (ST-4) was placed within a small
coppice dune just west of the aforementioned artifact concentration. Isolated
pockets of oxidized sediment intermixed
with charcoal were encountered between
Figure 28. Segment of the Chihuahua Trail with ruts worn down into 3–8 cm bs in Level 1. A majority of
FCR in Level 2 were clustered within
the Mitchell Mesa tuff.
the southwest quadrant of the shovel
test from 22-36 cm bs and appeared to
fluting. Although the transverse fracture hints of
be a buried hearth. A large amount of charcoal
a manufacture-break, it is unknown as to the exact
was encountered above the probable hearth. Surcause of the fracture.
prisingly enough, very little charcoal was found
Because of the rarity of this find a latter atwithin the tightly knit concentration of FCR. ST-5
tempt was made to locate buried deposits. Excawas placed adjacent to the south side of ST-4 to
vation and examination of six backhoe trenches
see if FCR continued in that direction. Oxidized
were conducted by Robert Mallouf and CBBS staff
and carbon-stained sediment was encountered ca.
members shortly after the field school. Although
14 cm bs and continued to ca. 38 cm bs within
the backhoe trench exposed Late Pleistocene soils,
this shovel test. The oxidized and carbon-stained
no cultural material was encountered. Several other
anomaly in ST-4 was adjacent to and northeast of
trips to the site were made in hopes of finding addithe FCR exposed in ST-4 and additional FCR extional surface artifacts. The return visits recovered
posed within the northwestern quadrant of ST-5 in
a grand total of two pieces of nondescript debitage
Level 2 (20-40 cm bs). The cluster of FCR in ST-4
(Robert Mallouf, personal communication, 2011).
and ST-5 was resting on a more compact surface.
The carbon-stained anomaly that was void of FCR
may represent the discard of ash from the hearth.
Artifact recovery consisted of only one pressure
RESULTS OF TEST
flake of chalcedony from the upper 20 cm of ST-4.
EXCAVATIONS
Another shovel test (ST-6) was placed within an
Limited test excavations were conducted at
inter-dune location that exhibited carbon-stained
two prehistoric campsites in Area C (41PS815 and
sediment. Fire-cracked rock, oxidized and carbon41PS816). In Area F, more extensive test excavastained sediment, and charcoal were encountered
tions were conducted at the Kid’s Hill locality
within the upper 20 cm of ST-6. The FCR was dif(41PS818) and in two areas of the Alamito Creek
fusely scattered across the unit with no definitive
site (41PS825). As mentioned earlier, the excavamorphology. Light carbon staining and charcoal
tion in talus deposits at the Kid’s Hill locality was
flecks were encountered at varying elevations in

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

43

Figure 29. A brass button depicting a Chinese man drawing a rickshaw.

Level 2. The profile drawing of the south, west,
and north walls demonstrated discontinuous and
isolated pockets of oxidized sediment intermixed
with charcoal and a diffuse scatter of FCR. The
discontinuous nature of cultural materials indicates that subsurface integrity was likely impacted
by a combination of natural agents such as alluvial
deflation/deposition and bioturbation. An undulating and culturally sterile, compact, calcareous
loam was encountered at 29–36 cm bs. The shovel
test profiles indicate that ca. 20 cm of slightly
compact fine sandy loam overlies ca. 10–15 cm
of moderately compact sandy loam, which in turn
overlies a compact, calcareous loam. Although
the surface inspection and shovel tests did not
produce any temporally diagnostic artifacts, the
site does contain buried dateable deposits associated with thermal features and thus has potential
for further archeological research.

41PS816
As mentioned earlier, site 41PS816 is a large
(200 x 320 m) prehistoric open campsite (Figure
31) that contained thermal features, and chipped
stone and ground stone tools. Various projectile
point types indicate multiple occupations from
Late Paleoindian to Late Archaic times. Given
a close proximity of Late Paleoindian projectile
points with two hearths (F-1 and F-3), two 1 x 1 m
test units were placed over half of each feature to
expose a profile and to recover dateable matrices.
In Unit One at F-1, a number of igneous FCR
were clustered within the upper 10 cm of unconsolidated sandy loam (Level 1) in the northern half
of the unit. No carbon remains or other artifacts
were encountered in this upper level. The second level consisted of pockets of unconsolidated
sandy loam overlying an undulating and compact

Texas Archeological Society

44

Figure 30. Dorsal and ventral views of Folsom preform.

	
  

Table 10. Dimensions for the Folsom point preform recovered in Area F.
Medial Width
(mm)

Medial Thickness
in Flute (mm)

Medial Thickness in
Cross Section (mm)

Basal Thickness in
Flute (mm)

Basal Width
(mm)

32.2

4.7

5.3

4.5

24.3

Table 10. Dimensions for the Folsom point preform recovered in Area F.

tuffaceous-like surface. This underlying cemented
surface appeared to be culturally sterile. A single
medial section of an indeterminate type flake made
of fine-grained, opaque, grayish-brown chert was
recovered in the screen. In profile, F-1 had no discrete morphology, and FCR occurred within a loose
sandy loam void of carbon remains, suggesting that
the subsurface integrity of F-1 was compromised
by sheet wash action.
Unit Two in F-2 was excavated in 10 cm levels to
a maximum depth of 20 cm bs. One piece of debitage
was found on the surface and another was found in
screening. No additional FCR were encountered. The
first 9.5 cm of the deposits were a loose sand while
the lower 10.5 cm was of slightly compact sandy
loam. No dateable deposits were encountered.

Results from the excavation indicated an absence of carbon and/or botanical remains. It is noteworthy to mention that the USDA sediment profile
for this area typically consists of 1.5 m of sandy
clay loam that overlies clay loam (United States
Department of Agriculture 2009). The presence
of sand and sandy loam instead of the presence of
sandy clay loam and clay loam may have resulted
from alluvial deflation and may thus explain the
lack of intact deposits.
Kid’s Hill Locality at 41PS818
Journal entry for 15 June, 2000: “We dug
and dug and dug and dug. We are very

45

Figure 31. Sketch map of 41PS816.

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

46

Texas Archeological Society
tired and hungry. We sift and sift and sift
and sift; and we drank water and limeonade. We are very hot and sweaty.”
— Jenna Boyd (age 7 ½ years)

A cultural talus at 41PS818 was chosen for
children to learn excavation, recovery, and recording techniques that was ca. 10 m down slope from
a small rock shelter (Figure 32). The area was appropriately coined the “Kid’s Hill Locality.” The
objective was to teach children basic excavation

techniques and recording of findings. The crew was
divided into two age groups: elementary and middle
school ages. Twelve conjoining 1 x 1 m units were
placed in an L-shaped configuration—five units running north/south and seven running east/west. The
middle school students excavated the units running
north and south (Units A1–A5) while the elementary
school students excavated units running east and
west (Units A–G). With the exception of Units B
and C, Units A–G were excavated as a single level
and terminated at ca. 30 cm bs. All were excavated
to a depth of 30–40 cm bs. By the end of the field

Figure 32. Sketch of the Kid’s Hill Locality, 41PS818. Not to scale.

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

school, midden deposits were still being exposed in
all units and continued to an unknown depth. These
units were perpendicular to and down slope from
Units A1–A5, all but one of which were excavated
to bedrock. Depths of the A1-A5 units ranged from
ca. 35–47 cm bs. Unit A5 was only excavated to 28
cm bs due to time constraints.
Sediment was reported as a gravelly loam from
alluvial and colluvial deposition with an increasing percentage of gravels with depth. The midden deposit was very dark gray to black-colored
carbon-enriched sediment intermixed with large
numbers of debitage and FCR. Subsurface deposits
contained a mix of prehistoric and historic artifacts.
No stratified cultural components or sub-features
were identified. Because of the nature of these
mixed deposits, only a limited and general discussion of the findings is provided.
A total of ca. 2,095 artifacts were recovered
during excavations. Debitage, unsurprisingly, was
the most common artifact class recovered (ca. 78
percent) and represented all phases of reduction,
including both hard and soft hammer technology;
non-cortical hard hammer flakes were dominant.
The high availability of chalcedony within the
nearby Frenchmen Hills likely explains why chalcedony was the dominant raw material. Other tool
stone types consisted of rhyolite, chert, quartzite,
jasper, felsite, mudstone, and obsidian. A single
piece of debitage made of obsidian (a soft hammer tertiary bifacial thinning flake) was submitted
for non-destructive trace element analysis (X-Ray
Fluorescence). Results of the analysis indicate that
the source is from Lago Barreal in central Chihuahua, Mexico. Although its presence is the nearest
known source other than Rio Grande secondary
deposits, it is only one of two specimens known to
occur in an archeological context in the ETP/BB
region (Shackley 2010:4-5 and Figure 1).
Chipped stone artifacts from the excavations consist of retouched and/or utilized flakes,
unifaces, bifaces, projectile points, and a single
bi-perforated, discoidal bead made of kaolinite. A
wide variety of projectile points were recovered
from the Kid’s Hill Locality and include Almagrelike, Van Horn, Livermore, Toyah, and Perdiz types
(Turner et al. 2011:169, 198, 206, 213; Zubieta
1999:24–25, 28–32), indicating that the site was
occupied from Middle Archaic to Protohistoric
times (Figure 33 and Table 11). Ground stone artifacts consist of mano and metate fragments and a
single abrading stone fragment.

47

Historic artifacts consist of solarized and green,
aqua, brown, and amethyst-colored glass. Vessel
forms that were recognized include fragments of
bottles, plates, cups, and windowpane. Ceramic
types were vitreous whiteware and Mexican
earthenware and represented tableware and storage
jars. Metal artifacts include wire nails, washers,
a sheep shear component, and banding. Based on
the presence of a solarized bottle fragment with an
applied lip and amethyst and aqua-colored glass, the
historic artifact assemblage likely dates to the early
20th century (Newman 1970; IMACS 1992).
The Alamito Creek Site (41PS825)
As described in a preceding section, the Alamito Creek site (41PS825) is a large multi-component
open campsite (Figure 34). Four features were
chosen for test excavations.
Feature 1
Feature 1 (F-1) was an incipient midden deposit that measured ca. 9 m in maximum diameter.
The feature was oval-shaped and contained carbonstained sediments. A crescent-shaped mound of
FCR was located within the southern half of the
midden. Three continuous units were placed on a
north/south grid line within the interior portion of
the feature in an area with only a sparse number
of FCR. The units were numbered from south to
north: Units 3, 1, and 2 respectively.
The three units were excavated to culturally
sterile sediment at a depth of ca. 55 cm bs. The
west wall profile indicated that there was ca. 10
cm of recent aeolian fill overlying ca. 30 cm of
carbon-stained sediment, in turn overlying sterile, yellowish-hued, calcareous sediment. Very
few artifacts were recovered from this feature. A
moderate number of FCR were encountered at ca.
20–40 cm bs, but were variable in density. Pieces
of charcoal were scattered within the units between
ca. 10–40 cm bs. Although samples were collected,
radiocarbon assays are considered problematic given their mixed context within the midden deposit.
A small amount of debitage was recovered
and represented mostly hard hammer reduction
technology. Two chipped stone tools were collected
from screening. One was an indeterminate-type,
early-stage biface made of black, fine-grained,
opaque chert that was recovered from excavated
fill within the upper 2 cm of Unit 1. The other

48

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 33. Examples of dart and arrow points recovered from excavations at the Kid’s Hill locality, 41PS818: a, Almagrelike; b–c, Van Horn; d, side-notched dart point-Ensor or San Pedro-like; e, Toyah; f–h, Perdiz.

tool was a unifacial retouched lateral section of an
indeterminate-type flake made of white-colored
chalcedony. This specimen was encountered ca. 10
cm above the culturally sterile sediment (ca. 50 cm
bs). Raw material in the debitage was dominated
by chalcedony with a lesser number of specimens
made of chert, agate, and rhyolite. Extensive
animal burrowing was observed throughout the
excavation, especially in Unit 2.
Feature 2 and Sub-Feature 6
Feature Two (F-2) was an oval-shaped incipient
ring midden that measured ca. 9.5 m in maximum
diameter. The “ring” component was continuous
around the entire feature although vegetation obscured the eastern portion. Excavation began with
the placement of four continuous 1 x 1 m units along
a north/south base line and within the feature’s interior. The units were numbered from south to north:

Units 4, 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Prior to excavation,
an Alazan type arrow point was discovered on the
ground surface 81 cm south of Unit 4 (see Figure 24).
The northwestern quadrant of Unit 3 extended into
the exposed FCR “ring” portion of the midden. A fair
amount of charcoal and bone were recovered from
the upper levels of Unit 3 and newly exposed FCR
appeared to be part of the interior slope of the ring.
After further excavation, the newly exposed rocks
were much larger and had not yet been subjected to
the degree of thermal alteration as those within the
ring. To further complicate interpretations, the rocks
in Unit 3 were clustered within the eastern portion of
Unit 3 while the western portion contained an acacia
stump surrounded by rock-free, carbon-stained sediment intermixed with charcoal and bone.
In Unit 4, bone fragments were collected from
Level 2 (20–30 cm bs) and were identified as bone
scrap (Mammalia), a burned phalange (Aves), and
five pieces of another phalange (Mammalia) that

	
  

287

295-2

289.2

293-2

293-3

288-3

Indeterminatetype dart point

Livermore

Toyah

Perdiz

Perdiz

Perdiz

297-2

289-1

288-2

Paisano-like
Indeterminatetype sidenotched dart
point
Indeterminate
type sidenotched dart
point

Indeterminatetype dart point

A3

293-1

Van Horn

288-1

B

296

Van Horn

Indeterminatetype dart point

D

295-1

Jora-like

B

D

D

C

A5

C

C

B

A2

A5

A3

297-1

Type/Style

Test
Unit

Lot
No.

N/A

Surface
to
bedrock

N/A

Level 1

N/A

20.1

Level 1

Level 1

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Level 1

surface

Surface

Level 1

N/A

N/A

Surface
to
bedrock

Level 1

N/A

N/A

50.7

N/A

Level 1

Level 1

Surface

Surface
to
bedrock

Level

Length
(mm)

17.8

11.8

12.0

N/A

N/A

N/A

18.5

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Maximum
Width
(mm)

3.2

3.3

2.7

3.0

3.6

N/A

7.6

6.6

6.6

5.1

7.7

4.9

6.2

5.4

Maximum
Thickness
(mm)

5.9

7.3

7.2

N/A

N/A

N/A

10.9

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

12.8

13.4

10.8

Stem
Length
(mm)

6.5

5.2

6.3

N/A

6.0

N/A

11.3

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

11.6

13.0

15.8

Neck
Width
(mm)

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

15.6

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

12.8

13.5

10.7

Base
Width
(mm)

0.9

0.5

0.5

0.8

0.8

N/A

3.5

3.6

4.9

1.6

4.2

4.8

6.1

4.9

Weight
(g)

Yellowish-red and
red, graduated
Jasper
Reddish-brown and
gray chert
Pinkish-brown,
yellowish-brown,
and brown, banded
chert
Light brown,
reddish-brown, and
white banded chert

Yellowish-brown
chert

Dark reddish-brown
chert

Reddish-brown to
dark reddish-brown
mottled chert

Light to dark gray
speckled chert

Semi-translucent
white chalcedony

Black, gray, and red
mottled chert

Dark gray, gray, and
light gray banded
chert
Yellowish-brown
and blue-gray moss
agate
Pinkish-red, gray
and white striated
chert
Grayish-brown chert

Material

None

Thermal-altered

None

None

Two deep
serrations alone
one lateral
margin
Vaguely similar
to San Pedro
series
Vaguely similar
to San Pedro
series
Original flake
scar(s) on both
dorsal and
ventral surfaces

None

Thermal-altered

None

None

None

None

Comments

Table 11. Attributes of projectile points recovered from excavations at the Kid’s Hill locality at 41PS818, and at other Field School sites.

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas
49

Figure 34. Sketch map of the Alamito Creek site (41PS825). No scale.

50
Texas Archeological Society

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

were too fragmentary for species identification
(Willett 2010). A small basin-shaped thermal feature
was exposed in the west wall of Unit 4 and labeled
F-6, a sub-feature of F-2. This feature was first
encountered in Level 3 of Unit 4 where a charred
lechugilla leaf was found adjacent to the feature.
The feature was then pedestalled, removing the
surrounding sediment. The feature extended ca. 25
cm below the bottom of the cultural stratum and ca.
35 cm into Unit 4, and was ca. 50–60 cm wide within
the west wall profile (Figure 35). Pieces of FCR
were situated just off the edge of the pit, suggesting
that the feature might have been rock-lined. The
profile view indicates that the feature was basinshaped. A sample of feature fill was collected and the
remaining matrix was screened through 1/14-inch
mesh hardware. A sample of woody charcoal from
the F-6 fill yielded two sigma calibrated age ranges
of 530-420 B.P. (A.D 1420-1530) and 390-320 B.P.
(A.D. 1560-1630) (Beta 280028).
Feature 3
Feature 3 (F-3) is an incipient burned rock midden that measures ca. 8.0 m in maximum diameter.
Three 1 x 1 m units were placed along a north/south

51

base line and numbered from north to south, Units
1, 2, and 3, respectively. Four 10 cm levels were
excavated in Units 1 and 2, while only two levels
were excavated in Unit 3. In Level 1, FCR (n=14)
were diffusely scattered, both vertically and horizontally, across the units. A significant increase in
the number of FCR occurred in Level 2 (ca. 10–20
cm bs), with an amorphous concentration of FCR
occurring within the eastern portion of the units. A
ca. 70 x 80 cm cluster of FCR was encountered in
Level 4 in the south and north halves of Units 1 and
2 and was suspected to be a disarticulated thermal
feature. No oxidized sediment or pit outline was
noted. Two charcoal samples were collected from
within and under the FCR. Fire-cracked rock was
fairly sorted with most averaging ca. 8–12 cm in
maximum diameter. Rodent disturbance was noted
throughout the three units. Only 18 pieces of debitage was recovered in the feature excavations; the
debitage represented hard hammer reduction. Raw
material types were dominated by chalcedony,
along with some rhyolite and chert.
A profile of the east wall of the three units
was drawn, and the stratigraphy was generally described as follows: the upper 3-10 cm consisted of
recent aeolian deposition that consisted of a gray

Figure 35. Feature 6 exposed in west wall of Unit 4 at the Alamito Creek site (41PS825).

52

Texas Archeological Society

silty loam. In Levels 2 and 3 (ca. 15-36 cm bs),
sediment consisted of a dark gray, carbon-enriched,
sandy clay loam intermixed with a small number
of pebble-sized gravels.
Feature 4
Feature 4 is located within the northern portion of the site and adjacent to the west cut bank
of Alamito Creek (see Figure 34). An approximate
50 x 50 m area contained a relatively dense scatter
of FCR, ground stone, hammerstones, and lithic
debitage that consisted of tested cobbles, cores,
flakes, and shatter. Also, discrete clusters of FCR
and carbon-stained sediment were visible at several
locations within this area and likely represented
deflated and disarticulated thermal features—the
area was designated as “Feature 4.”
Three adjoining 1 x 1 m units were originally
placed in a north/south direction (with Test Unit
1 located at the southern end) near the cut bank
of Alamito Creek to assess the presence and the
context of subsurface archeological remains. Two
contiguous units, TU-1 and TU-2, were oriented
in north/south. Although TU-3 was placed at the
northern end, the unit was never excavated. Instead, another 1 x 1 m unit, TU-4, was placed adjacent to and east of TU-1. A datum was set up at an
arbitrary elevation of 100.00 m. Four 10 cm levels
within each unit were excavated to an approximate
depth of 40 cm bs (Jameson 2009).
In TU-1, a single unspecified type of mano (not
collected) was encountered in situ within Level 1
(ca. 0–10 cm bs). Also, debitage and a single indeterminate type biface fragment made of fine-grained,
semi-translucent, white-colored chalcedony were
recovered in this level. A few FCR spalls were diffusely scattered horizontally across the level. In TU2, Level 1 produced a significantly higher number
of debitage along with a few pieces of FCR. Rodent
burrows were evident within the lower portion of the
level containing FCR and debitage. In TU-4, lithic
debitage and two small fragmentary pieces of bone
were recovered. No FCR was encountered. Sediment within Level 1 in all three units was recorded
as light brown sandy clay loam intermixed with
organic materials from the surface.
In TU-1, debitage was recovered and an indeterminate type arrow point fragment of white-colored
chalcedony was recovered in situ from Level 2 (ca.
10–20 cm bs). The specimen is thermally altered
with the distal end, sections of both lateral margins

of the blade, and the lateral margin of the stem missing. The stem is slightly contracting with a slightly
concave base. In TU-2, debitage and one small bone
fragment were recovered. A single biface fragment
and debitage were recovered from TU-4. The debitage count decreased from Level 1. Only a small
number of FCR were sporadically encountered in all
three test units. Also, small rootlets and some rodent
burrows were observed in these units.
In Level 3 (ca. 20–30 cm bs), a slight decrease
in the number of debitage was noted in TU-1 as
compared to that of the overlying level; the frequency of debitage in TU-2 and TU-4 was similar
to that of Level 2. A single burned bone fragment
was recovered from TU-2 while additional small
bone fragments were recovered in TU-4. Also, in
TU-4, one piece of modified debitage and one medial section of an indeterminate type projectile point
were recovered. The number of FCR encountered in
Level 3 for all three units remained low. All artifacts
in Level 3 were found during screen recovery. Small
rootlets and the presence of rodent burrows were
evident in Levels 2 and 3. Sediment was slightly
darker in Levels 2 and 3 and was described as a
brown sandy clay loam with an increase in calcium
carbonate content in parts of Level 3 in TU-2.
In Level 4 (ca. 30–40 cm bs), a significant drop
in debitage was noted for TU-1 and TU-2. Debitage
recovered in TU-4 remained relatively consistent
with those recovered from the overlying levels.
FCR was diffusely scattered, both horizontally and
vertically within the units. Most of the debitage
recovered came from the upper portion of Level
4. The sediment in all three units consisted of a
brown sandy clay loam, with the presence of a
caliche-enriched stratum occurring at the bottom
of the level in TU-2 and TU-4.
In addition, a pit-like feature was discovered
on the western cut bank of Alamito Creek and adjacent to the excavation area. The feature contained
a concentration of charcoal, ash, and fire-cracked
rock located ca. 27 cm above the bottom of the
pit (Figure 36). Jameson (2009) noted that photographs were taken and a macro-botanical sample
was collected for future submittal. Unfortunately,
the macro-botanical sample and profile drawing
were lost or misplaced.
Feature 5
Feature 5 (F-5) was a ca. 36 x 50 m area where
two thermal features and a relatively dense amount

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

53

of FCR, debitage, and chipped stone
tools were exposed along the apron
of a tight-knit series of small coppice
dunes. The area was ca. 15 m west/
northwest of F-3. The southern end
of this area was truncated by a general west to east-trending ranch road.
Another thermal feature was exposed
within this road and appeared to be
relatively intact. Unlike Features
1–4, there was no visible carbonstained sediment with F-5. Given
the substantial amount of artifacts
eroding out of the edge of the dunes,
it was strongly suspected that buried
and intact deposits are present.
Figure 36. A pit-like feature exposed along the cut bank of the Alamito
Three continuous 1 x 1 m units Creek site (41PS825).
were set up in a north/south direction
within the interior portion of the copmade of chalcedony. The biface fragment exhibited
pice dune field. Because of time constraints, only
extensive thermal alteration.
a single test unit was actually excavated to assess
A drastic decrease in artifact frequency and
the potential for intact buried deposits. The unit
change in sediment occurred in Levels 4 and 5.
was excavated to ca. 70 cm bs. The first level was
Only four pieces of debitage were noted (not colexcavated to 20 cm bs and the remaining five levels
lected) in Level 5 (50-60 cm bs). Unconsolidated
were taken down in 10 cm intervals.
loamy sand became more calcareous within the
The first 30 cm consisted of recently deposlower 5 cm of Level 4 (ca. 45-50 cm bs) and the
ited sediments. Two flake fragments made of
frequency of carbonates increased with depth, and
chalcedony were found during screen recovery
extended to the bottom of Level 6 (ca. 70 cm bs).
from the upper 20 cm of the unit. The sediment
The stratigraphy of Unit 1 consisted of ca. 30
within Level 3 (ca. 30–40 cm bs) became more
cm of unconsolidated silty clay loam that overlay
compact and contained a diffuse scatter of FCR,
ca. 8 cm of an anthropogenic clay loam. The clay
debitage (n=64), and a single biface fragment.
loam capped ca. 17 cm of unconsolidated, calcareThe compact clay loam appeared to be a weakly
ous, fine sandy loam intermixed with small pebbledeveloped soil.
sized gravels. The lowest sediments consisted of
A substantial debitage assemblage within Level
slightly compact fine sandy loam intermixed with
3 is overwhelmingly dominated by hard hammer
caliche nodules.
flakes. Shatter and flake fragments are the most
common type of debitage. Raw material is dominated by chalcedony, along with lesser numbers
of rhyolite, chert, orthoquartzite, and agate. Most
SUMMARY
of the chalcedony debitage was localized in the
The 2000 TAS field school was extremely imsoutheastern quadrant of the unit: a significant
portant in that the survey and test excavations were
percentage (48 percent) of this debitage exhibited
the first substantive archeological investigation of
thermal alteration. Stream-worn cortex was evident
the Marfa Plateau. Since the 2000 TAS field school,
on some of the rhyolite and chert debitage, indicatonly a minuscule number of archeological invesing that these raw materials were likely available a
tigations have been conducted in this unique area.
short distance away in the Alamito Creek drainage
The TAS archeological investigations included
system. A rough cortex noted on chalcedony deba reconnaissance survey of the high elevated
itage indicates that source areas were in the nearby
grasslands and drainage systems of the Marfa
outcrops of the Frenchmen Hills. The only chipped
Plain (Areas A-E and G) and the main stem of the
stone tool recovered from Level 3 was a lateral
Alamito Creek basin (Area F). The survey resulted
section of an indeterminate type, early stage biface

54

Texas Archeological Society

in the discovery of 23 previously unrecorded sites.
Seventeen sites were discovered in the Marfa Plain
and associated drainages and six were discovered
within the Alamito Creek drainage (Table 12).
A total of 39 small occupied rock shelters, one
Cielo complex residential camp, and two historic
structures (all within a localized ca. 0.18 km2 area)
were lumped into a single site (41PS818) in the
Alamito Creek area, and another five sites were
recorded along the Alamito Creek drainage. Test
excavations were conducted at two sites in Area C
and two sites in Area F.
The overwhelming majority of prehistoric
open campsites discovered during the survey
were not surprisingly situated near to or adjacent
to Alamito Creek and associated drainages (e.g.,
Antelope, Chambers, Long Draw, and unnamed
drainages). Four of these sites were discovered
within the elevated grasslands adjacent to Alamito
Creek (Area A). One site with significant research
potential consists of a historic encampment and/or
special use site (41PS807) affiliated with military
maneuvers sometime in the 1920s. This site has
the potential to address research questions related
to post-Mexican Revolution defenses in the 1920s.
It is also noteworthy that a single bison ilium fragment was found within the cut bank of Alamito
Creek. To date, it is rare to find bison remains in
the ETP/BB region.
Although cultural remains were surficial,
temporally diagnostic artifacts within the highland
setting (Area B) indicate that resources within
this area were exploited during the entire Archaic
period. Within both upland and lowland environments adjacent to two draws that drain into Alamito
Creek (Area C), six of seven newly discovered sites
are situated within a 500 x 500 m area adjacent to
Chambers Draw. Although buried dateable deposits were encountered at 41PS815, the subsurface
integrity of the site has been impacted by alluvial
agents and bioturbation. Another site, 41PS816,
was repeatedly occupied from Late Paleoindian to
Late Archaic times. Unfortunately, the results of
test excavations indicated that alluvial deflation
had compromised the integrity of features and
artifacts here as well.
Only one site (41PS821) was discovered during the reconnaissance of Area D, an upland setting
that consists of a mix of various landforms, mostly
flats and plains. This site is adjacent to a playa-like
depression and consists of a single structural remnant, atypical of those of the Cielo complex. No

temporally diagnostic artifacts were encountered
at the site. Two rock shelters were recorded along
the 90 m high escarpment of the Mitchell Mesa tuff
(Area E). No buried, stratified, cultural deposits
and/or temporally diagnostic artifacts were noted
in Area E.
A variety of site types were recorded near and
adjacent to Alamito Creek (Area F). This is not
surprising since major tributaries of the Rio Grande
watershed such as Alamito Creek were not only
vital freshwater resources, but supported edible
wild plants and game for people during prehistoric
and historic times. Site types contained in the archeologically complex area designated as 41PS818
consist of numerous small rock shelters, a shortterm residential site, and two historic rock structures. Other site types outside of 41PS818 consist
of open prehistoric campsites, a rock cairn, an
extensive historic dam and irrigation system, and
that portion of the Chihuahua Trail that transected
the MacGuire Ranch and a part of the adjoining
Bar Triangle Ranch.
The numerous small rock shelters at 41PS818
were occupied during prehistoric and historic
times as well. Prehistoric artifacts included FCR,
unmodified and modified debitage, ground stone,
a projectile point, and a tubular stone pipe (cloud
blower) preform. This stone pipe preform is one of
only two tubular pipe finds documented in the ETP/
BB region (Kelley et al. 1940:76; CBBS 2007).
Based on the association of tubular stone pipes
with temporally diagnostic projectile points in
other parts of Texas, the pipes are thought to have
been used from Late Archaic to Late Prehistoric
times (Collins 1969:39 and Table 11; Turner et al.
2011:280). A single Cliffton arrow point (a Perdiz
arrow point preform) was found in one of the small
rock shelters and indicates its Late Prehistoric use.
Historic artifacts found associated with these rock
shelters include sanitary and meat cans, nails, cartridge casings, bottle glass, and a shoe sole. Some
of the rock shelters had crude, dry-stacked walls
that protected laborers from the elements during
the construction of the San Esteban dam and irrigation system between 1910 and 1912, and the
construction of the Kansas City, Mexico and Orient
railroad line between Paisano Pass and Presidio
in 1929. Excavations at the Kid’s Hill locality (a
cultural talus below one of these small rock shelters) provided a substantial inventory of temporally
diagnostic artifacts that indicated occupation as
early as the Middle Archaic period extending into

F

Rockshelter

E

Dam and
irrigation
system
Open campsite

Early to Late Archaic, Late Prehistoric

Alluvial terrace adjacent to Alamito Creek

Alluvial terrace between Alamito Creek and
unnamed ephemeral drainage

Historic

Unknown Prehistoric

Pronounced hill

Special Use
site

Alamito Creek drainage

Unknown Prehistoric

Adjacent to Alamito Creek

Open campsite

Open campsite

Middle Archaic to Late Prehistoric
(possibly Protohistoric)
Middle to Late Archaic, Late Prehistoric to
Protohistoric

Below small rock shelter within an outcrop
of Mitchell Mesa tuff near Alamito Creek

Cultural talus

Possible Late Prehistoric/Protohistoric

Historic
Unknown Prehistoric and Possible Historic
Late Prehistoric

Multi-component; Unknown Prehistoric and
Historic

Possible Historic

Unknown Prehistoric and Historic

Pronounced hill adjacent to Alamito Creek

Outcrop of Mitchell Mesa tuff
near Alamito Creek

Unknown Prehistoric

Unknown Prehistoric

Unknown Prehistoric

Multi-component; Late Paleoindian, Early-Late
Archaic

Unknown Prehistoric

Multi-component; Early to Late Archaic
Unknown Prehistoric
Probable Late Archaic

41PS831

41PS828

41PS827

41PS826

41PS825: Alamito Creek Site

41PS818: Kids Hill Locality

41PS818: Historic structures

41PS818: Possible Cielo site

41PS818: RR-9, RR-13A, RR-16, RR17, RR-18, RR-19, RR-21, RR-23, RR25, RR-43, RR-51, RR-66, RR-93
41PS818: RR-7, RR-15, RR-67, RR-73,
RR-74, RR-81, RR-108
41PS818: RR-10, RR-24, RR-26, RR28, RR-31, RR-33, RR-42, RR-44, RR46, RR-47, RR-49, RR-50, RR-80
41PS818: RR-11, RR-65
41PS818: RR-12, RR-27, RR-32
41PS818:RR-29

41PS823, 41PS824

41PS821

41PS816

41PS811
41PS812
41PS813
41PS814, 41PS815, 41PS817,
41PS819, 41PS820

41PS809

41PS808

Unknown Prehistoric

41PS807

Historic

41PS806, 41PS810

Site I.D.

Late Prehistoric

Unknown Prehistoric

Temporal Period

Adjacent to bluff of Mitchell Mesa

Residential
base camp
Historic
structures

Rockshelter

Open Campsite

Open Campsite

Open Campsite

Open Campsite
Open Campsite
Open Campsite

Open Campsite

Alluvial terrace adjacent to Alamito Creek

Artifact
Scatter
Open
Campsite
Open Campsite
Knoll adjacent to and between Alamito
Creek and arroyo
Alluvial terrace adjacent to Chambers Draw
Alluvial terrace near Long Draw
Alluvial terrace near Antelope Draw
Alluvial terraces near Chambers and
Antelope draws and/or associated drainages
Coppice dune field between Antelope Draw
and unnamed ephemeral drainage of
Alamito Creek
Grassland flat adjacent to playa lake
Escarpment of Mitchell Mesa tuff
overlooking Alamito Creek basin

Geographic Setting

Site Type

D

C

B

A

Area

Table 12. Summary of sites recorded in Areas A–F during the 2000 TAS Field School.

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas
55

56

Texas Archeological Society

the early part of the 20th century. Sourcing of an
obsidian artifact indicated trade/interaction of
prehistoric hunter/gatherers with the Lago Barreal
region in Chihuahua, Mexico, or possibly indirect
trade from the La Junta villagers.
A likely Cielo complex site was discovered on
a promontory at 41PS818 and is the only site that
contains prehistoric habitation structures. The presence of a single decorated El Paso brownware body
sherd suggests its Late Prehistoric affiliation. Other
localities at 41PS818 were related to the construction of the San Esteban dam and associated irrigation system and/or the Kansas City, Mexico and
Orient Railroad. These included the ruins of one
stacked-rock structure and two rock houses. Various glass, ceramic, and metal artifacts indicated an
occupation sometime between the late 1800s and
ca. 1930, coinciding with the aforementioned construction projects. It is recommended that, when
time and resources allow, each of the rock shelters
(with associated cultural materials), historic rock
houses, and the possible Cielo complex locality
should be re-recorded as separate sites and reassigned new state trinomials (including rock shelter
41PS98 recorded by Sayles in the early 1930s).
The San Esteban Dam and irrigation system
(41PS828) is significant in addressing research
domains related to early commercial land development, economic development, dam construction,
and irrigation technology for agriculture during
the early 20th century. While the Chihuahua Trail
as a whole has enormous potential to address even
earlier economic development and trade issues,
problems of identifying artifacts that are directly
associated with the trail offered little, if any, information related to operations performed by freighting endeavors, changes in freighting operations,
and habits of the travelers. The two rock houses,
mentioned above, are likely related to the Kansas
City, Mexico and Orient railroad line, and may
have research value related to the construction, operation, and economic importance of early railroad
systems in the region.
Temporally diagnostic artifacts found during the
survey indicate that the Alamito Creek site was occupied from Middle Archaic period through historic
times. The presence of both large and small thermal
features are consistent with food processing that
occurred at various levels over an extended period.
Findings from excavations at this site also indicate
the use of incipient ring middens during the Late
Prehistoric period.

NOTES
Figures 1-2 were drafted by David Hart and
Letitia Wetterauer, Figures 3, 14, 17, 20, 28, 35,
and 36 were taken by Curt Harrell, Figure 13 was
prepared by Sam Cason and Letitia Wetterauer,
Letitia Wetterauer prepared Figures 18, 31-32, and
34. The other figures were taken by the author.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
As with any project of this magnitude, the
assistance of a great many people was needed to
achieve success. While it is not possible to list
everyone who helped us along the way, I would
like to mention a few people whose contributions
were essential and greatly appreciated.
First and foremost, I extend gratitude to the
owners and manager of the MacGuire Ranch, John
and Betty Macguire and David Williams, who allowed access to their land and provided necessary
facilities, including space for a field laboratory
and a conference hall, for the 375 participants of
the field school. Also allowing access to adjacent
and nearby lands were W. B. Hubbard and Jack
Brown. Without the cooperation of these folks,
the field school could never have materialized. I
would also like to acknowledge the help of Monroe Elms, who, along with David Williams, took
the field school directors to a number of known
sites for a pre-project evaluation of the ranch’s
archeological resources.
As is typically the case, the officers and membership of the Texas Archeological Society (TAS)
very adeptly designed and executed the field camp
for this large group of participants. Joan Few, the
TAS 2000 president, was an active participant and
along with Anne Fox and Margie Fullen, oversaw
field laboratory activities. The field camp supervisors, Jim Blanton and Marvin Glasgow, overcame
all obstacles and kept the camp running smoothly
and efficiently, even when the traditional TAS
deluge of biblical proportions arrived towards the
end of the project. Jerry Grubis and Bob Crosser
comprised the mapping team, and although faced
with an enormous workload, they successfully
mapped a large number of the sites chosen for
excavations.
Field school directors for the project were
Robert Mallouf and Andy Cloud of the Center for
Big Bend Studies at Sul Ross State University.

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas

Dawn Temple served as field assistant to the
directors, and, subsequent to fieldwork, played
a major role in organizing and structuring the
data recovered during the course of the project.
Persons assigned as supervisors of the seven
survey area crews included Johnny Byers (Area
A), Bret Williams (Area B), Jay Hornsby (Area
C), Bill Chaney (Area D), James Smith (Area E),
Margaret Howard and Andie Comini (Area F),
and Bob Shelby (Area G). It fell to Jim Warren’s
determined crew to locate and document the 100+
rock shelters associated with an extensive tuff
exposure in Area F.
Subsurface investigations at selected individual sites were supervised by Joan Few, Pat
Mercado-Allinger, and Doug Boyd (Kid’s Hill
site); Bryan Jameson, Elton Prewitt, and Bill
Parnell (Alamito Creek site); Wayne Clampitt
(Lost Pottery site); Gerald Humphries, Sue Gross,
and Steve Carpenter (Windy Springs site); Jimmy
Smith and Glynn Osburn (Gallie site); Sam Cason
and Art Tawater (Metate site); Tom Alex, Mac
Hibbetts, and Preston McQuarter (Perdiz Creek
site); and Bill Sherman and Joe Nichols (Marfa
Lake Paleontological site). Joe Nichols also
served as soil scientist for the project.
Investigations at the historic Davis-Herrera
home site, located to the south of the main project
area in Plata, were under the direction of Lou Fullen and Brenda Whorton, who were assisted with
technical expertise by Dick Gregg. The historic
Chihuahua Trail crew was led by Vicki Scism,
Elvis Allen, and Smitty Schmiedlin.
Rock art recording was carried out at San
Esteban Rockshelter under the direction of Teddy
Lou Stickney, Reeda Peel, and Bob Hext. The
shelter was instrument-mapped by Robert Mallouf
and his students from Sul Ross State University
in 1999, just prior to the TAS field school in
2000. TAS subsurface testing of the shelter floor
deposit was carried out under the supervision of
Jim Corbin and Debra Beene.
Special evening programs for TAS participants and visitors were provided by Robert Mallouf, Andy Cloud, Dan Potter, David Alloway,
John Yates, Frank Daugherty, Gerald Raun, and
Bob Hext. Special studies of materials recovered
during the field school were carried out by Phil
Dering (macro-botanical), Steve Shackley (obsidian), and Sarah Willet (faunal).

57

REFERENCES CITED
Abbott, J. T., R. Mauldin, P. E. Patterson, W. N. Trierweiler,
R. J. Hard, C. R. Lintz, and C. L. Tennis
1996 Significance Standards for Prehistoric Archeological
Sites at Fort Bliss: A Design for Further Research
and the Management of Cultural Resources. Technical Report No. 01735-18. TRC Mariah Associates
Inc., Austin.
Albritton, C. C., Jr. and K. Bryan
1939 Quaternary Stratigraphy of the Davis Mountains,
Trans-Pecos Texas. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 50:1423-1474.
Alex, T. C.
1999 Archeological Data Recovery at Site 41BS908: A 9,000
Year-old Site in the Chisos Basin, Big Bend National
Park. The Journal of Big Bend Studies 11:1-21.
Amick, D. S.
1995 Patterns of Technological Variation among Folsom
and Midland Projectile Points in the American
Southwest. Plains Anthropologist 40:23–38.
Barnes, V. E.
1979 Geologic Atlas of Texas Marfa Sheet. W. H. Von
Streeruwitz Memorial Edition, Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93–117.
Boren, R.
2010 The David Williams Site. La Vista de la Frontera
21:5.
n.d.

The Rock Art of San Esteban Shelter, Presidio
County, Texas. Manuscript in preparation, Center
for Big Bend Studies, Alpine.

Brown, D. E.
1982 Biotic Communities of the American SouthwestUnited States and Mexico. Desert Plants 4:1–132.
Brune, G.
1981 Springs of Texas. Branch-Smith, Inc., Fort Worth,
Texas.
Cason, S. S.
2005 Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz
Creek. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
76:61-102.

2008 Cultural Resource Inventory for Additions to the City
of Marfa Water and Wastewater System Improvement
Project, Presidio County, Texas. Report of Investigations No. 752 EP. Geo-Marine, Inc., El Paso.

58

Texas Archeological Society

Center for Big Bend Studies (CBBS)
2007 Site form and notes on Site 02-143. Document on file.
Cloud, W. A.
2001 Alamito Historical Marker. La Vista de la Frontera
14(1):3.

2004 The Arroyo de la Presa Site: A Stratified Prehistoric
Campsite Along the Rio Grande, Presidio County,
Trans-Pecos Texas. Reports in Contract Archeology
9, Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University, and Archeological Studies Program Report
56, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.
Coleman, D. S., E. A. Coleman, and E. J. Coleman (editors)
1986 The Collector’s Encyclopedia of Dolls. Crown Publishers, New York.
Collins, M. B.
1969 Text Excavations at Amistad International Reservoir,
Fall, 1967. Papers No. 16. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Collins, M. B., J. Guy, and S. W. Dial
1998 The Archaic Period, 8800 to 1300 B.P. In WilsonLeonard: An 11,000-year Archeological Record of
Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Vol. I: Introduction, Background, and Syntheses, assembled
and edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 211-270. Studies
in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, and
Archeology Studies Program, Report 10, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs
Division, Austin.
Cook, B. G.
1970 Petrochemistry of the Buck Hill Volcanic Series,
Cathedral Mountain Quadrangle, Brewster County,
Texas. Master’s thesis, Rice University, Houston.
Corbin, J. E.
1960 41PS20, Texas Archeological Society – Site Survey
Form, March 5, 1960. Texas Archeological Sites
Atlas Electronic Document accessed July 3, 2014.
Davis, W. and D. Schmidly
1994 The Mammals of Texas. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Fontana, B. L. and J. C. Greenleaf
1962 Johnny Ward’s Ranch: A Study in Historical Archaeology. The Kiva 28:1-2.
IMACS
1992 Intermountain Antiquities Computer System
(IMACS), Department of Anthropology, The University of Utah. Electronic document, http://www.
anthro.utah.edu/labs/imacs.html, accessed August
7, 2009.

International Ammunition Association
2009 http://www.cartridgecollectors.org/headstampcodes_bottom.htm. Electronic document, accessed
June 25, 2009.
Jackson, A. T.
1938 Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. Anthropological
Papers Volume II and Publication No. 3809. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Jameson, B.
2009 MacGuire Ranch, Alamito No. 1, Area F (4). File
document, Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross
State University, Alpine.
Justice, N. D.
2002 Stone Age Spear and Arrow points of the Southwestern United States. Indiana University Press,
Bloomington and Indianapolis.
Keller, D. W., W. A. Cloud, S. S. Cason, R. W. Gray, R. W.
Walter, T. C. Alex, B. L. Alex, R. D. Boren, A. J. Ohl, and
R. J. Mallouf.
n.d. A Sampling of Archeological Resources in Big Bend
National Park, Texas. MS in progress, Center for Big
Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University, Alpine.
Kelley, J. C., T. N. Campbell, and D. J. Lehmer
1940 The Association of Archaeological Materials with
Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of
Texas. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society,
Publication No. 10.
King, P. B. and H. M. Beikman
1978 The Cenozoic Rocks; A Discussion to Accompany
the Geologic Map of the United States. Professional
Paper 904. U. S. Geological Survey, Washington,
D.C.
Kirkland, F. and W. W. Newcomb Jr.
1967 The Rock Art of Texas Indians. Reissued 1996, University of Texas Press, Austin.
Kovel, R. and T. Kovel
1986 Kovel’s New Dictionary of Marks: Pottery and Porcelain, 1850 to the Present. Crown Publishers, New
York.
Lammond, T.
2010 The Lincoln Axe: Some History and Information.
Electronic document. www.yesteryearstools.com/
YesteryearsTools/Lincoln Axe.html, accessed February 21, 2012.
Lowrance, M.
1988 Rock Art of Presidio County. The Artifact Vol. 26,
No. 3. El Paso Archaeological Society, Inc., El Paso.

Walter—Archeological Investigations in the Alamito Creek Basin, Presidio County, Texas
Mallouf, R. J.
1985 A Synthesis of Eastern Trans-Pecos Prehistory. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, University
of Texas at Austin.
1993 Archaeology of the Cienega Mountains of Presidio
County, Texas. The Artifact 31 (1):1–44.

1999 Comments on the Prehistory of Far Northeastern
Chihuahua, the La Junta District, and the Cielo
Complex. Journal of Big Bend Studies 11:49–92.
2000 CBBS to Sponsor Texas Archeological Society Field
School 2000: The View from the Chihuahua Trail.
La Vista de la Frontera 13(1):2-3.

2002 January 17, 2002 Letter to Mr. Mark Denton, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin, Texas concerning attached SAL nomination
for San Esteban Rockshelter, Presidio County, Texas.

2013 Some New and Revised Projectile Point Classifications for the Eastern Trans-Pecos and Big Bend
Region of Texas. In Archaeological Explorations of
the Eastern Trans-Pecos and Big Bend: Collected
Papers, Vol. 1, edited by P. Dasch and R. J. Mallouf,
pp. 191-214. Papers of the Trans-Pecos Archaeological Program, No. 6. Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul
Ross State University, Alpine.
n.d.a

Archaeological Testing of San Esteban Rockshelter,
Presidio County, Texas. Manuscript in preparation,
Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University, Alpine.

n.d.b A Reconnaissance of the Headwaters of Long Draw,
Marfa Plain. Notes on file, Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University, Alpine.

Mallouf, R. J. and W. A. Cloud
2000 Texas Archeological Society Field School 2000:
Project Overview and Procedures Manual, MacGuire
Ranch, Alamito Creek and Marfa Plain, Presidio
County, Texas. Field manual on file at the Center for
Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University, Alpine.
Mallouf, R. J. and J. D. Seebach
2006 Filling in the Blanks: Early Paleoamericans in the
Texas Big Bend. Current Research in the Pleistocene
23:124-127.
McClure, B.
2001 Faunal Remains from the San Esteban Rockshelter,
41PS20: Preliminary Report. Texas Archeology
45(1):12.
Newman, T. S.
1970 A Dating Key for Post-Eighteenth Century Bottles,
Historical Archaeology 4:70-75.
Ohl, A. J.
n.d. The Middle Archaic People of Eastern Trans-Pecos
Texas: Their Life and Times. Manuscript in preparation, Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State
University, Alpine.

59

Peabody, C.
1909 A Reconnaissance Trip in western Texas. American
Anthropologist 11:202–216.
Powell, A. M.
1998 Trees and Shrubs of the Trans-Pecos and Adjacent
Areas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Randall, M. E. and D. Webb
1988 Greenberg’s Guide to Marbles. Greenberg Publishing
Company, Sykesville, Maryland.
Rowe, R. A.
2011 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 138-kV
Alamito Creek Substation to Gonzales Substation
Transmission Line, Presidio County, Texas. Project
No. 100018895, Atkins, Austin.
Sayles, E. B.
1920 41PS99, Unnamed Form, Feb. 19, 1920. The Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas, Electronic File document
accessed July 3, 2014.
1932 41PS98, Unnamed Form, Feb. 19, 1932. The Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas, Electronic File document
accessed July 3, 2014.
1935 An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers, Vol. 27. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.

Schmidly, D.
1977 The Mammals of Trans-Pecos Texas. Texas A & M
University Press, College Station.
Schmidt, K. P. and T. F. Smith
1944 Amphibians and Reptiles of the Big Bend Region of
Texas. Zoological Series of Field Museum of Natural
History, Volume 29, No. 5. Chicago.
Scism, V.
2002 The Long Walk to Presidio. La Vista de la Frontera
15(1):13.
Scobee, B.
1963 Don Milton Faver: Founder of a Kingdom. West
Texas Historical and Scientific Society Publication
19:41-45.
Seebach, J. D.
2004 Past and Present at the Chispa Creek Folsom Site,
Culberson County, Texas. Journal of Big Bend Studies 16:1-30.
2011

El Despoblado: Folsom and Late Paleoindian Occupation of the Trans-Pecos, Texas. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Smith, V. J.
1927 Some Notes on Dry Rock Shelters in Western Texas.
American Anthropologist 29(2):286–290.

60

Texas Archeological Society

Steffen, R.
1979 The Horse Soldier 1776–1943: The United States
Cavalryman: His Uniforms, Arms, Accoutrements,
and Equipments; Vol. IV: World War I, the Peacetime Army, World War II, 1917–1943. University of
Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Steinhauer, C.
2002 Cartridge Headstamp Guide. CD-ROM, Calgary,
Canada.
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas
1999 41PS102, 41PS103, and 41JD103; Site Digitization
Data, Electronic document, http://nueces.thc.state.tx.
Texas State Historical Association
2010 San Esteban Lake. Electronic document, www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/ros05, accessed
July 25, 2014.
Thompson, C.
1985 History of Marfa and Presidio County, Texas 1535–
1946. 2 Vols. Nortex Press, Austin.
Tunnell, C. and L. Johnson
2000 Comparing Dimensions for Folsom Points and Their
By-products from the Adair-Steadman and Lindenmeier Sites and Other Localities. Archeological
Reports Series, No. 1. Archeology Division, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1999 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Gulf Publishing, Houston.
Turner, E. S., T. R. Hester, and R. L. McReynolds
2011 Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Taylor Trade Publishing, Lanham, Maryland.
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (USDS NRCS)
2009 Web Soil Survey. Presidio County, Texas, Electronic
Document, http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/
Web SoilSurvey.aspx. Accessed June 6, 2009.
Van Devender, T. R.
1986 Pleistocene Climates and Endemism in the Chihuahuan Desert Flora. In Papers from the Second
Symposium on Resources of the Chihuahuan Desert
Region, United States and Mexico, October 1983,
edited by J. C. Barlow, A. M. Powell, and B. N. Timmermann, pp. 20-21. Sul Ross University, Alpine.
1990 Late Quaternary vegetation and climate of the
Chihuahuan Desert, United States and Mexico. In
Packrat Middens: The Last 40,000 Years of Biotic
Change, edited by J. L. Betancourt, T. R. Van Devender, and P. S. Martin, pp. 104-133. University of
Arizona Press, Tucson.

1995 Desert Grassland History: Changing Climates, Evolution, Biogeography, and community Dynamics. In
The Desert Grassland, edited by M. P. McClaran and
T. R. Van Devender, pp. 68-99. University of Arizona
Press, Tucson.
Wauer, R. and C. M. Fleming.
2002 Naturalist’s Big Bend: An Introduction to the Trees
and Shrubs, Wildflowers, Cacti, Mammals, Birds,
Reptiles and Amphibians, Fish, and Insects. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Wells, P. V.
1977 Post-Glacial Origin of the Present Chihuahuan
Desert Less than 11,500 Years Ago. In Transactions
of the Symposium on the Biological Resources of
the Chihuahuan Desert Region, United States and
Mexico, edited by R. H. Wauer and D. H. Riskind,
pp. 67–83. Transactions and Proceedings Series 3.
National Park Service, Santa Fe.
Wharton, B. B.
2002 Davis-Herrera Site. Current Archeology in Texas
4(1):20–21.
Wharton, B. B., with contributions by R. L. Gregg and K.
L. Fallwell
2007 The Davis-Herrera Ranch Site (41PS622), Presidio County, Texas. Journal of Big Bend Studies
19:223-250.
Wikipedia
2009 M1911 pistol, Electronic document, http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M1911_Colt_pistol, accessed
June 18, 2009.
Winchell, F.
1992 Cultural Resources Monitoring/Survey of a JTK-6
Action, Van Horn, Texas Sector. Miscellaneous
Report of Investigations, No. 33. Geo-Marine, Inc.,
Plano.
Willet, S.
2010 Analysis of bone from 41PS825, Area 1, Feature 2,
Unit 4, Level 2 (20–30 cm bs). MS on file, Center for
Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University, Alpine.
Yancey, F. D. II
1997 The Mammals of Big Bend Ranch State Park, Texas.
Special Publications 39. Museum of Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.
Zubieta, L. F.
1999 Jora Dart Points from Cueva Encantada, Coahuila,
Mexico. Journal of Big Bend Studies 11:23–36.

Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site
(41DL350), Dallas, Texas
S. Alan Skinner, C. Britt Bousman, and Jesse Todd

ABSTRACT
The Dalbey site (41DL350) is a prehistoric archeological site exposed in the west bank of the Trinity River
in Dallas, Texas. The 6+ m thick floodplain deposit contains four buried paleosols and burned clay surfaces.
Previously a human burial was found eroding out of the base of the bank near the south end of the site and
was radiocarbon-dated to cal A.D. 970-1040. Trenching and testing were carried out by AR Consultants in
2003 and 2005 at the north end of the site prior to construction of the Loop 12 Boat Ramp. A geoarcheological
profile in the middle of the site was recorded in order to define the geological context of the site and compare
the north and the south portions. Trenching the riverbank along the ramp centerline confirmed the presence of
burned clay surfaces reported by Tim Dalbey, who called the site to the attention of the Texas Historical Commission. Testing of 7 m3 of sediment from between 4-6 m below the surface failed to define living surfaces
adjacent to hearth stains. The small artifact assemblage recovered included lithic debris, fire-cracked rock, bone
fragments, mussel and snail shells, and a single Gary dart point. Radiocarbon dating documented occupation
from cal. A.D. 460 to A.D. 1340 with underlying sediments dating older than cal. 135 B.C. The site represents
repeated occupation during the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods for the purpose of acquiring riverine
and floodplain foods.

INTRODUCTION
The site (Figure 1) was first discovered in 1993
during an AR Consultants, Inc. (ARC) survey of
the proposed Little Lemmon Lake Park (Skinner
and Whorton 1993) and is recorded as 41DL350.
The site deposit is exposed in the west bank of the
Trinity River channel and extends downstream
from the Loop 12 bridge. Since 1993, the site has
been visited several times in conjunction with
future projects (Kahl n.d.). In 2001 and 2002,
the site was evaluated by Tim Dalbey (2003) in
anticipation of plans for the construction of a concrete parking lot and boat ramp just downstream
from the Loop 12 bridge. It was Dalbey’s goal to
convince planners of the site’s significance so they
would avoid and preserve it. Because of Dalbey’s
interest in the site and the unexpected discovery of
a human burial downstream from the proposed boat
ramp location, the Texas Historical Commission
(THC) and the City of Dallas agreed to have the
immediate area of the proposed boat ramp tested
to determine if significant cultural resources were
present and would be endangered by the proposed

construction. In recognition of Dalbey’s concern
for and attention to the site, it has been designated
the Dalbey site.
Surface soils at the Dalbey site, in the center of
the Trinity River floodplain, are mapped as Trinity
clay, formed on alluvium (Coffee et al. 1980:6768). Dalbey (2003) documented the alluvial sediments at the site as a 5-6 m deep deposit exposed
in the right river bank. These consisted of an upper
1.5 m thick layer of sandy loam that rested above
a buried paleosol (Dalbey 2003:Figure 2). The
surface of a second paleosol was recorded at 3 m
bs. Parts of a disarticulated buffalo were found at
the base of and in the second paleosol. The second
paleosol is marked by thin layers of charcoal,
burned clay lenses, and accumulations of freshwater mussel shell along with scattered deer bones
eroding out of the bank. Dalbey recovered a bison
skull below the second paleosol and documented
a third paleosol at approximately 4.75 m bs. The
bison bones were noted when the site was first recorded but the river was at a higher level and the
presence of the lower artifact-bearing sediments
was not recognized (Skinner and Whorton 1993).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 86 (2015)

62

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. The Dalbey site extends downstream along the river channel. View is to the south.

A partial human burial was recovered by the Dallas
Police Department approximately 5.5 m below the
floodplain surface and on or in a fourth possible
paleosol. Charcoal from a pit located 72 cm above
the skeleton and 25 cm below Paleosol 3 was radiocarbon dated to 610 ± 70 B.P. [2 sigma calibrated
age range of A.D. 1270-1430] (Beta-161636). This
date appeared too recent in age so subsequently, a
200 g human rib bone sample was processed and
yielded a date of 1020 ± 40 B.P. [2 sigma calibrated
age range of A.D. 970-1040] (Beta-164235).
Between 2001 and 2003, Tim Dalbey monitored the site and in anticipation of the proposed
boat ramp he submitted a letter report to the City
of Dallas describing his observations about the site
(Dalbey 2003). He recommended “excavating the
part of the site that is exposed on the lower bank
bench, and work back (west) into the bank according to the slope of the ramp and other boat ramp
impacts.” Based on the stratigraphic order of the
dates and the position of the human skeleton, it appeared that the skeleton had been found in place. At
the north end of the site (Dalbey’s Location #13),

three features were described in the area of the boat
ramp. The first (Feature B) was an oval organicstain defined by a slight oval surface rise that was
about 100 cm (north-south) x 70 cm (east-west).
Charcoal and gastropods were associated with the
feature. The second feature (Feature C) was larger
in area (183 cm north-south x 125 cm east-west)
and contained charcoal, burned clay, fire-cracked
rock, mussel and snail shells, and animal bone in
a gray matrix. The third feature (D) was a circular
red-stained area that was protruding above the
adjacent eroded surface and contained charcoal
and mussel shells. Similar features were exposed
downstream in the scoured river bank and displaced artifacts were present on the surface of the
bench level along the river at low flow.
At the beginning of the present investigation
(see also Skinner et al. 2005), the Dalbey site was
considered an example of a briefly but repeatedly
occupied prehistoric campsite that was located on
an overbank flood levee along the Trinity River
channel. Based on Dalbey’s dates and surface
artifacts, it was anticipated that the site had been

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas
occupied for less than a thousand years before the
present for the primary purpose of harvesting locally available riverine food resources, and hunting
and gathering animals and plants. It appeared that
the occupied levee banks had flooded regularly and
that artifacts and burned surfaces were sealed in
place by thin silt layers.
METHODOLOGY
The primary purpose of this investigation was to
document the stratigraphy, identify and evaluate the
stratigraphic context of features and artifacts, and
obtain radiocarbon dates to define the chronological extent of the prehistoric occupations. It seemed
likely that the floodplain surface had been disturbed
prior to and during construction of the nearby fourlane Loop 12 bridge. However, the presence of an in
situ buried deposit had not been investigated when
the bridge was constructed and probably would not
have been done in conjunction with boat ramp construction had Dalbey not voiced his concern about
the site. The area to be affected by construction of
the boat ramp (Figure 2) was roughly 130 m eastwest and extending west from the river’s edge and
was a maximum of 30 m north-south. Much of this
area was a parking lot but the remaining area is a 23
m wide and 45 m long boat ramp.
Excavation began in 2003 by first clearing
vegetation from the edge and slope of the river
bank (Figure 3). Subsequently, a trackhoe was
used to excavate trenches (Figure 4). Trenching
revealed loose trash-filled matrix over the surface
and edge of the floodplain that required stepping
the riverbank trench so that it would be possible to
place test units at any prehistoric features exposed
in the trench. After digging two trenches it was
apparent that there was nowhere else to excavate
trenches within the affected area that had archeological potential. Six 1 x 1 m units were positioned
to investigate burned clay features and to secure an
artifact sample. Fill from the six excavation units
was dry-screened through 1/4-inch mesh hardware
cloth. We found no evidence of human burials or
other features. We also had advised the City of
Dallas and the contractor that we had encountered
a perched water table that resulted in slumping
walls. Without THC authorization the boat ramp
contractor then began earthwork to create the
boat ramp cut. This excavation was ceased at the
request of the THC, which determined that further

63

archeological investigations were warranted under
the terms of the Antiquities Permit.
An additional six 1 x 1 m units were approved
by the THC and funded by the City of Dallas. We
planned to begin excavation in March 2004 but at
that time and for the subsequent year and a half the
Trinity repeatedly flooded and inundated the site.
It was not until the end of June 2005 that the river
level reached a point when the site was exposed
long enough to allow excavations to proceed. We
planned to water screen in the field but this would
have slowed excavation, and without clean water,
water screening was impractical and uneconomical.
The day excavation concluded, the site was once
again flooded. In order to expedite excavation, it
was decided to shovel scrape each 10 cm level and
place the matrix into 4 mil plastic bags for immediate removal and subsequent water screening. This
resulted in the collection of nine tons of moist clay
matrix that had to be screened elsewhere. Water
screening was done using 1/8-inch mesh screens.
The matrix from each bag was emptied into a plastic bucket that was then filled with water containing
two cups of baking soda to serve as a deflocculant
to break down the clays. The bucket was stirred
and allowed to percolate before the sediment/water
mixture was placed on the screen for washing.
GEOARCHEOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATIONS
The geological profile (ARC Profile 1 on
Figure 5) was located in the center of the site for
the purpose of relating the boat ramp testing to
Dalbey’s (2003) stratigraphic description further
downstream. Our profile description is presented
in Table 1. A nearby rock-filled basin was recorded
and a radiocarbon sample collected from it. Three
buried organic-stained A horizons are described as
Zones 5, 7, and 9. It is most likely that the prominent soil described in Zone 5 would be termed
the West Fork Paleosol by Ferring (1990:56-57).
Sediments exposed in the 2003/2005 excavations
are below Zone 9 and represent a very heavily
weathered matrix. Weathering likely occurred due
to the regular and repeated inundation by the river.
Matrix in the Test Units (TU) 6-12 described below is similar to that where the burial was found
and similar to Zone 9. Radiocarbon dates from the
geoarcheological Profile 1, the excavations, and
Dalbey’s samples are presented in Table 2.

64

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. River bank contour map of the Dalbey site showing the locations of Dalbey’s burial, the geological profile,
the rock-filled hearth, and the 2005 testing block just down slope from the 2003 units.

Of particular interest is the rock-filled hearth
that appeared to be in Zone 7. Limestone rocks
up to 6 cm in diameter filled the hearth basin,
marked by burned clay and containing small pieces

of charcoal. The hearth was 48 cm long and no
more than 10 cm deep in cross-section. The pit
bottom was not visible, and the hearth was not
excavated. Charred wood from the hearth matrix

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas

Figure 3. Project area looking west from the Loop 12 bridge. The boat ramp area spans the width of the
slope from the saplings on the left to the brush on the right and down to the river bank.

Figure 4. Trackhoe excavating Trench 2. View is to the west.
Crew members are standing on the bench at the base of the
slope. Trench 1 had been backfilled.

65

66

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Profile 1 cut bank on west bank of the Trinity River at 41DL350.

Zone

Depth (cm)

Description

1

0-58

Dark gray (10YR4/1) firm sandy clay loam, medium strong sub-angular blocky
structure, many roots and rootlets, few snail shells and fragments, occasional
thin lenses of small pebbles (≤2 mm in diameter), common insect and earthworm filled burrows and casts, clear smooth lower boundary. A horizon.

2

58-106

Light olive brown (2.5Y5/3) firm (dry) friable (wet) loam with common (40 percent) earth worm and insect burrows filled with dark grayish-brown (2.5Y4.2)
clay loam, medium moderate sub-angular blocky structure, common roots and
rootlets that decrease down profile, clear smooth lower boundary. B horizon.

3

106-258

Light olive brown (2.5Y5/3) firm to friable silt loam, medium moderate sub-angular blocky structure, thin ≤ 1 mm pale yellow (2.5Y8/2) sand lenses, common
insect and earth worm burrows filled with dark grayish-brown (2.5Y4/2) clay
loam, gradual smooth lower boundary. C1 horizon.

4

258-301

Dark gray (10YR4/1) friable clay loam to very pale brown (10YR7/3) sand in
alternating lenses with fine faint brown (7.5YR4/3) redox features (mottles),
weak coarse sub-angular blocky structure, common insect and earth worm burrows in-filled with brown (10YR4/3) clay loam, few rootlets, thin 2 cm thick
oxidized sediment horizon with charcoal 5 cm above lower boundary, abrupt
irregular (bioturbated) to smooth lower boundary. C2 horizon.

5

301-368

Very dark gray (10YR3/1) very firm clay loam, fine to medium
strong angular blocky structure, charcoal snail shell fragment, few rootlets,
insect and earth worm burrows filled with brown (10YR5/3) clay loam and
light yellowish-brown (2.5Y6/3) sand, <1 percent CaCO3 filaments in root
pores, clear smooth lower boundary. 2A horizon. Bulk soil sample was collected from between 328-340 cm that has a conventional age of 1520 ± 50 B.P.
(Beta-208104).

6

368-450

Brown (10YR4/3) firm sandy clay loam, fine to medium moderate sub-angular
blocky structure, common fine to coarse distinct dark yellowish-brown to
yellowish-brown (10YR4/6-5/6) redox features (mottles), common 2-5 percent
CaCO3 filaments along ped faces and root pores, small burrows filled with dark
gray (10YR4/1) clay loam, abrupt smooth lower boundary. 2B horizon.

7

450-486

Brown (10YR4/3) friable clay loam, fine to medium moderate angular to
sub-angular blocky structure, visible clay films on ped faces, 10 percent medium faint gray (5B5/1) redox features (mottles) surrounded by strong brown
(7.5YR5/6) redox features (mottles), 1 percent CaCO3 filaments in root pores,
bone fragment at 467 cm, scattered charcoal throughout, clear smooth lower
boundary. 3A1 horizon. Bulk soil sample was collected between 456-469 cm
and dated 2880 ± 60 B.P. (Beta-208105).

8

486-511

Brown (10YR5/3) friable clay loam, fine moderate sub-angular blocky structure,
10 percent distinct medium gray (10YR6/1 to yellowish-brown (10YR5/6) redox
features (mottles), common charcoal fragments throughout, ≤ 1 percent CaCO3
filaments in root pores, clear smooth lower boundary. 3B1 horizon.

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas
Table 1. (Continued)
Zone

Depth (cm)

Description

9

511-543+

Dark grayish-brown (10YR4/2) friable clay loam with more clay than zone
8, fine moderate sub-angular blocky structure, 10 percent fine to medium
distinct gray (10YR4/1) redox features (mottles), two in situ buried hearths
with very distinct oxidized reddish-brown (5YR4/4) clay loam bodies and
white (10YR8/1) thin ash lenses with charcoal fragments and bone fragments,
lower boundary not observed. 3A2 horizon. Charcoal was collected from the
hearth between 532-543 cm and yielded a conventional age of 2170 ± 40 B.P.
(Beta-208106).

Table 2. Radiocarbon assays collected from 41DL350.
Provenience

Sample No.
(Beta)

hearth

161636

610 ± 70

N/A

charcoal

human burial

164235

1020 ± 40

N/A

human bone

rock hearth, ~450 cm bd

207120

1170 ± 40

-24.5

charcoal

TU 2, 430-440 cm bd

184057

1310 ± 40

-24.2

charcoal

TU 6, 466-476 cm bd

184060

1450 ± 40

-25.0

charcoal

TU 8, 540-550 cm bd

207122

1400 ± 40

-24.9

charcoal

TU 11, 550-560 cm bd

207121

1480 ± 40

-24.0

charcoal

TU 8, 560-570 cm bd

207123

1490 ± 40

-24.0

charcoal

TU 9, 570-580 cm bd

207124

1440 ± 40

-25.4

charcoal

Profile 1, Zone 5,
328-340 cm bs

208104

1520 ± 50

-19.5

organic sediment

Profile 1, Zone 7,
456-469 cm bs

208105

2880 ± 60

-18.7

organic sediment

Profile 1, Zone 9,
532-543 cm bs

208106

2170 ± 40

-22.0

charcoal

cm bd: centimeters below datum

δ13C Corrected Age
(B.P.)

δ13C

Sampled Material

67

68

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Schematic profiles at 41DL350 showing relationship between Dalbey’s and 2005 profiles. Elevations are approximate.

was collected, submitted for AMS-radiocarbon
dating and resulted in an conventional age estimate
of 1170 ± 40 B.P. (see Table 2). A single piece of
quartzite was recorded at the edge of the hearth in
the cut bank. No evidence of a burned clay surface
was noted in the riverbank flanking the hearth

and the radiocarbon sample was the only material
collected. This conventional age is clearly not in
agreement with Beta-208105, also in Zone 7 (see
Table 2). In addition, Dalbey (2003) reports two
conventional radiocarbon assays measured on
charcoal from a feature and on human bone from

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas
a burial more than 50 m downstream from Profile
1. These are 1020 ± 40 B.P. (Beta-164235) and 610
± 70 B.P. (Beta-161636). We could not record their
exact location in relation to Profile 1, but Dalbey
(2003) suggested that these two dates come from
an inset fill that appeared to sit unconformably on
alluvial sediments vertically below Zone 9. If this
is correct, then the radiocarbon assays support Dalbey’s model of deposition. However, the sediments

Figure 6. Calibrated radiocarbon ages using OxCal program.

69

and their depths at Dalbey’s investigations were not
described in detail during the current geoarcheological efforts and direct proof was not collected.
The radiocarbon assays from 41DL350 were
calibrated with OxCal (Bronk Ramsey 2013) to
further investigate the apparent dilemma caused by
the inverse ages between Beta-208105 and Beta208106 in Zones 7 and 9. Figure 6 and Table 3
present the resulting age distributions with the ages

70

Texas Archeological Society

arranged stratigraphically from top to bottom, with
the upper two samples representing the assays from
the inset fill identified by Dalbey (2003).
The results of the calibration plots and materials dated can be used to suggest that sample
Beta-208105 is not an accurate age estimate. This
assay measured bulk sediments from the buried
soil that comprises Zone 7. The most reasonable
explanation for the anomaly is that this sample was
contaminated by older carbon. If this interpretation is correct then this would imply that there is
very little difference in age between Zones 5 and
7. Also, this indicates that the burial documented
by Dalbey is significantly younger that the Zone
5 sediments.
If we inspect the charcoal dates that were
measured in relation to the elevation datum, and
constrain the calibrations by depth, these suggest
that rapid sedimentation occurred in the excavation
area. The OxCal plot of calibrated modeled age and
depth using a 2 sigma error envelope illustrates the
age/depth model (Figure 7). This set of radiocarbon
dates span approximately 115 years when 140 cm
of sediment accumulated. This equates to 1.217
cm/yr. If we fit a linear regression to calculate an
age/depth model using the mean modeled ages in
Table 3 (Age AD = -0.8393  depth+1071.3), the
coefficient of determination is extremely high,
R2=0.9993. These data can be used to suggest that
this was a function of repeated low energy overbank flooding that did not significantly disturb the

archeological materials and the upper portion of
this sequence appears to have accumulated at the
same rate as the lower portion. This model can be
used to suggest that the burial documented by Dalbey and the other associated radiocarbon sample
(Beta-164235) may be significantly younger than
the excavated sediments in TU 2-11 and Dalbey’s
interpretation that the burial was placed in an infilled cut is probably correct.
SITE TESTING
When the site was first visited, a silt fence
near the edge of the channel spanned the width of
the study area but the fence had been silted in and
then run over in various places. Trash in the form
of auto parts, concrete chunks, and plastic bags
was found to be imbedded in the upper part of the
riverbank, but the lower part of the slope appeared
undisturbed and resembled the site area down
river where bison bones and a human burial had
been found below Dalbey’s second paleosol and
where there appeared to be an undisturbed deposit
extending from the floodplain surface down to the
river level.
Due to the depth of the deposit, it was necessary to use a trackhoe rather than a backhoe to
explore the floodplain sediments to the full thickness of the site deposit and to search for features.
Two trenches were excavated and then TU 1-6

Table 3. Calibrated ages and 2 sigma ranges A.D./B.C.
Sample
(Beta)

14C Age
B.P.

sigma

Cal. Age

Cal. lower

Cal. upper

161636
164235
207120
184057
184060
207121
207122
207123
207124
208104
208105
208106

610
1020
1170
1310
1450
1480
1400
1490
1440
1520
2880
2170

70
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
50
60
40

1350 A.D.
1020 A.D.
855 A.D.
710 A.D.
605 A.D.
575 A.D.
635 A.D.
565 A.D.
610 A.D.
525 A.D.
1065 B.C.
250 B.C.

1275 A.D.
895 A.D.
725 A.D.
650 A.D.
545 A.D.
430 A.D.
570 A.D.
430 A.D.
545 A.D.
420 A.D.
1260 B.C.
365 B.C.

1435 A.D.
1155 A.D.
975 A.D.
775 A.D.
660 A.D.
655 A.D.
680 A.D.
650 A.D.
660 A.D.
635 A.D.
905 B.C.
105 B.C.

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas

Figure 7. Stratigraphically constrained calibrated age estimates using depth below datum.

71

72

Texas Archeological Society

were excavated. Trench 1 was set back from the
river bank in the western part of the boat ramp
area where the ramp is now situated at a relatively
shallow depth below the present ground surface.
The trench was 7 m long and 1.35 m wide. It was
excavated to a maximum depth of 2.38 m, which is
lower than the expected depth of the ramp excavation. The south wall of the trench was scraped and a
profile drawn. Excavation revealed that the matrix
exposed in both sides of the trench was recent fill
and contained layers of plastic and other historic
trash to the depth of a dipping silty clay and sand
layer that is present at 111 cm bs near the west end
and 213 cm bs at the east end of the trench. Below
that were laminae of sand and silty clay that did
not contain historic artifacts but were obviously
recently deposited, possibly in conjunction with
construction of the Loop 12 bridge. No evidence
of undisturbed sediments was found in Trench 1,
nor were prehistoric artifacts recovered or features observed. Consequently, there was no reason
to further excavate in this part of the floodplain
deposits as we had dug deeper than the area of
potential effects of the parking lot. This is unfortunate because we do not know if buried cultural
materials are present away from the edge of the
channel. However, the reported but unconfirmed
presence of 41DL78 near the south end of Little
Lemmon Lake in a similar setting may be a hint
that buried sites are present in settings away from
the river bank. Furthermore, floodplain surveys
and test excavations upstream in the vicinity of the
Central Wastewater Treatment Plant (Skinner et al.
1991; Skinner and Whorton 1993; Buysee 2000)
and within the Dallas Floodway (Cliff et al. 1998,
1999; Frederick et al. 2006) have located sites
exposed in the floodplain, but none has a profile
such as that described for the Dalbey site. We do
not know where the river bank was at the time of
occupation, although a sterile zone at 41DL318
separated the two components and may indicate
that the river was close at hand.
Trench 2 was excavated in the cut bank by first
placing the trackhoe at the edge of the bank and
scraping the slope. This revealed that the upper 2
m of the floodplain matrix contained historic fill
like that encountered in Trench 1. Apparently the
floodplain sediments in this area were removed
and then refilled with new sediment and trash.
This is not the case in other parts of the site downstream. The upper 2 m of fill were then removed
and a surface for the trackhoe constructed so that

it could reach to the bench at the river’s edge. By
creating the surface, it was possible to excavate
the trench to approximately the river level and
then move the dirt to the floodplain where it could
be inspected. This excavation revealed that there
was a narrow zone of undisturbed clay loam that
extended upslope to a height of approximately
2 m above the elevation of the bench. Several
apparently burned clay surfaces were exposed
in the trench wall and are discussed below. The
upper portion of the original river bank had been
removed west of the river bank and this created a
depression that had subsequently been filled with
a sandy loam and clay loam matrix. The filled
depression was not recognized before trench excavation and it formed a perched surface on which
water seeped on the floor of Trench 2 and continually flowed to the area of the test units.
Excavation of Trench 2 revealed that the only
area in the boat ramp that contained an undisturbed
geologic deposit was approximately 5 m wide.
The stepping needed to make the trench walls safe
from fill slumping was further aggravated by water
seepage and required that the full width of the area
of potential effects be excavated (see Figure 2).
Therefore, there were no other locations to place
the originally planned third and fourth trenches.
Furthermore, emphasis had been placed on excavating undisturbed deposits near the base of the
slope where Dalbey had previously observed claylined hearths and noted buried artifacts that were
eroding out of undisturbed sediments.
Test Units (TU) 1-6 were excavated in undisturbed sediments near the base of the slope slightly
above the elevation of the human burial reported
by Dalbey; this elevation was reported to have
been 5.58 m below the floodplain surface (Dalbey
2003) near the south end of the site, but we could
not plot its exact location or elevation. TU 1 and
TU 2 were placed at the eastern edge of Trench 2
in the vicinity of an apparent burned surface. TU
4 was excavated into the bank adjacent to TU 1
and TU 2. TU 3 was located to explore below the
bench surface and TU 5 and TU 6 were excavated
to explore apparent burned surfaces exposed in the
walls of Trench 2. Artifacts from these six units
are itemized in Table 4. Charcoal, ash, and firereddened clay were found dispersed throughout
TU 1 and TU 2 and were concentrated within the
4.3-4.4 m below datum (bd) zone that appeared
to be a surface on which burning had occurred.
It was impossible to define the limits of burning

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas
within the test unit. The surface did not present
a resistant and slightly elevated appearance such
as those described by Dalbey because it had not
been scoured by river flooding but rather had been
covered by sediment. Burned shell fragments and
bone along with fire-cracked rock and a piece of
burned sandstone were present. No chipped stone
or ground stone tools were recovered from TU l.
A decomposed three-tined deer antler was found
in the west wall of TU 1 and extended into TU 2
and TU 4. The antler was complete but showed no
evidence of having been modified. It appeared to
be lying on the buried ground surface at the elevation of 4.3 m bd. The two units, TU 1 and 2, were
excavated to 40 cm below the level of the antler
and the burned surface but no additional features
were encountered. A total of 1.8 m3 of in situ sediment from TU 1, 2, and 4 was excavated. An AMS
conventional date on charcoal from level 4.30-4.40
m bd in TU 2 was A.D. 650-775 (see Table 3).

73

TU 3 was placed on the level bench away
from the river bank. This half unit was extended
to a depth of 30 cm below the bench surface. No
cultural materials were recovered from this small
unit. An adjacent 4 inch diameter auger hole was
excavated to a depth of 170 cm below the bench
surface where water was reached. TU 5 and TU 6
(Figure 8) were excavated where burned areas were
exposed in the walls of Trench 2. A possible hearth
was uncovered in TU 5 at approximately 4.48 m
bd but the lateral extent of the feature was not definable within the unit and no evidence was found
below it. The possible hearth consisted of burned
clay with inclusions of charcoal. Mussels, animal
bones, and gastropod shells were recovered from
the same level. A burned clay surface was found
in TU 6 at a depth of 4.66-4.76 m bd that extended
into the south wall of the unit. The projected radius of the exposed hearth was approximately 55
cm and it was approximately 6 cm thick. Only the

Table 4. Artifacts from TU 1-6.
Unit
No.

1

Level
(m bd)*

Lithic
Debris

Fire-Cracked
Rock

Animal
Bone

Mussel
Shell

Snail Shell

Burned
Clay

4.10-4.20

–

–

–

Frags.

Frags.

–

4.0-4.10

4.20-4.30
4.30-4.40
4.40-4.50
4.50-4.60
4.0-4.10

4.10-4.20
2

4.20-4.30
4.30-4.40
4.40-4.50

3
4
5
6
Totals

4.50-4.60
4.0-4.10

4.28-4.38
4.38-4.48
4.48-4.58
4.66-4.76
4.76-4.86

*below datum

–
–
2
2
–
–
–
–
–
1
–
–
–
1
–
1
2
1

10

–
–
–

–
1
6

–

11

–

–

–
–
–
6

–
–
6
2

2

11

–

1

–
–
–
–
–
2
–

10

–
–
8

10

Frags.
–
8
1
–
2
–
–
1

Frags.
2
9
6
3
2
3
8
4

–

13

–

–

–
1
–

7
–
6

2

Frags.

2

13

Frags.

74

35

4

12

1
6

Frags.
Frags.
63

–
–

N

3

3

28

–

3

–
–
–

20
4
3

–

14

–

27

–
–
–
–

13
7
1
1

–

15

–

6

–

12

–

19

3

195

–

19

74

Texas Archeological Society

northeast quarter of the feature was uncovered due
to the compact moist overburden that would have
to have been removed manually. A concentration
of shell was uncovered in the center of the clay
surface and a bone and flake were also recovered.
Charcoal was collected from the same level but just
outside it and the AMS date was A.D. 545-660 (see
Table 3). This was the deepest feature excavated
in 2003. As elsewhere, snail and mussel shell fragments, bone fragments, three pieces of lithic debris,
and two pieces of fire-cracked rock were recovered
from the unit in the two excavated levels. Excavation was discontinued due to the low artifact yield,
lack of features, as well as the absence of plant
remains from meaningful contexts.
A total of 10 pieces of lithic debris was collected from TU 1, 2, 5, and 6; TU 3 and 4 contained
no lithic debris. TU 1 contained a quartzite interior (i.e., non-cortical) and a secondary flake (i.e.,
with some cortex on its outer surface), a quartzite
interior chip (a chip, as the term is used here, is a
flake that is missing its platform or is otherwise the
distal part of a flake) and a small piece of quartzite
shatter. A single quartzite interior flake was recovered from TU 2. TU 5 had two quartzite chips, one
being an interior and the other being a secondary
chip. Three pieces of lithic debris were recovered
from TU 6. Two of these pieces were chert, one an
interior flake and the other an interior chip. The
third piece was a primary (i.e., its outer surface is
completely covered with cortex) quartzite shatter.
TU 2 contained eight of the 10 pieces of firecracked rock recovered in the excavations. Seven
pieces of limestone and one piece of quartzite were
also recovered. One additional piece of fire-cracked
rock from TU 2 at a depth of 4.30-4.40 m bd had
evidence of possible grinding on the surface. One
piece of fire-cracked rock was collected from TU
6 between 4.66-4.76 m bd.
Most of the faunal materials consisted of small
fragments measuring from 4-19 mm in maximum
length. The total number of bones examined was
152, of which 44 were unidentifiable. Eighty six
of the bones were from a fragmented deer antler.
Other species represented include Eastern Cottontail (Sylvilagus floridanus), Eastern Box Turtle
(Terrapine carolina), turtle (Testudinata), and fish
(Teleost sp.). Based on the faunal evidence, the
inhabitants of this site were consuming deer and
various smaller mammals, turtles, and fish.
The gastropod (snail) fauna is indicative of
constant perennial vegetation that consisted of

woods, downed logs, as well as leaf and forest
debris. The bivalve (mussel) fauna indicate a
medium to large-sized stream where the water
was of low to medium quality. The stream has a
mud substrate based upon the abundance of Plectomerus dombeyanus.
At the conclusion of the 2003 investigation,
it was apparent that a vertically stratified deposit
remained preserved near the base of the slope just
above where the boat ramp was to be extended into
the river. This is illustrated as Figure 9, a schematic
cross-section that corresponds to the centerline of
the boat ramp and extends from the present floodplain surface down to the river level. As shown in
the profile, sandy fill mixed with post-World War
II trash extends from the present floodplain surface
down to the now truncated floodplain sediments.
Trench 2 cut into the original floodplain matrix as
had all six TUs and Auger Holes 1 and 2. Based on
the two calibrated radiocarbon dates, it appeared
that occupation in TU 2 occurred between A.D.
650-775 and that the burned surface in TU 6 dated
slightly earlier at A.D. 545-660 (see Table 3).
Occupation of the Dalbey site along the
river bank was apparently regularly repeated but
short-lived based on the numerous ephemeral
and apparently burned clay surfaces and the limited artifact assemblage recovered. The faunal
remains indicate food acquisition and immediate
consumption. The two radiocarbon dates indicate
occupation at the end of the Late Archaic. Unfortunately, the limited artifact assemblage recovered
did not contain any projectile points, ceramics,
or other artifacts with which to evaluate the adequacy of the radiocarbon dates.
Excavation ceased in 2003 due to a variety
of factors but primarily because units had been
excavated to the proposed boat ramp level and no
burials, distinct stratigraphy or features, and few
artifacts had been found. Soon after archeological excavation ceased, the contractor cleared the
floodplain surface for the parking lot and dug the
ramp area by expanding the stepped cut created
by Trench 2. The ramp excavation uncovered additional trash and concrete fill in the upper 2 m and
encountered the perched water table. This work
was ultimately halted by the THC. The contractor
then backfilled the ramp cut to avoid erosion in
anticipation of further archeological investigations.
An additional scope of work was prepared by
ARC and ultimately approved by the THC and
the City of Dallas. When the work began again in

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas

75

Figure 8. Plan map showing TU 7-12 excavated during 2005 and their horizontal relationship to the 2003 units and to
the low water river edge.

July 2005, despite a year and a half of flooding, the
mapping reference point had remained in place on
the bench. This allowed us to relate the 2003 TU
to the 2005 excavation units as shown in Figure 8.
It had been planned to excavate a 2 x 3 m block
that was situated on the bench at the bottom of the
slope and adjacent to the river. Unfortunately the
river edge eroded away part of the level bench and

repeated drainage from upslope continued to soak
the southwest corner of the block. Consequently,
the location of that unit was moved to the northwest
corner of the grid (Figure 10). This extended the
investigation of the river bank deposit more than
1 m below the bottom of TU 6, which is above the
normal low water level. Excavation proceeded by
excavating all six units in the block to 10 cm below

Figure 9. Scaled schematic profile along the boat ramp centerline showing the various sediments, TUs, and trackhoe trench extent, along with the river level on October
2, 2003. Note the grade of the proposed boat ramp cut.

76
Texas Archeological Society

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas

77

the mapping stake and continuing down in
10 cm levels to 100 cm. One unit (TU 11)
was continued to 120 cm below datum.
Because soil was shovel scraped and
then bagged and removed for subsequent
fine screening, our in-field impression was
that artifact densities were low and varied
little per level, except that it was apparent
that a distinct occupation surface occurred
between 5.70-5.80 m bd in each of the six
units. The scraped surfaces were regularly
inspected for features or obvious artifact
concentrations but none were found. Despite
generally clear, hot, and humid weather, the
block was inundated twice; once due to an
upstream water release and the second time
due to an intense localized rainstorm. Within
an hour after finishing excavation, the block
was inundated completely as the result of
several hours of intense rain.
As shown in Figure 11, only a single
zone containing artifacts was encountered.
The matrix in the entire block was described
by Bousman as an olive brown (2.5Y4/4)
clay loam with fine moderate to strong
angular blocky structure, and common
bluish-gray (10B5/1) gleyed redox features
(mottles). The lower boundary of this heavily weathered matrix was not observed.
Figure 10. TU 7-12 during excavation. The block is in the center of
Small pieces of charcoal and charcoal
the ramp and had reached the base of the boat ramp cut. Vegetation
stains were present in the matrix but a disand drainage channels mark the area excavated by the contractor.
tinct living surface littered with artifacts was
Overhead view is from the Loop 12 bridge.
not visible either during scraping or at the
completion of a level or in the wall profiles
except as shown in Figure 11. Artifact densities
far outweigh the number of mussel shells and this
bear out the presence of a recognizable occupation
probably indicates that the river channel near the
surface as shown by reviewing Table 5. Exclusive
site was not a prime source for mussel harvesting.
of snails probably not used for food and thus natuBurnt clay was only recovered from the 5.80-5.90
rally accumulated, and charcoal fragments that may
m bd level in TU 9. Charcoal was recovered from
also not be cultural in origin, almost 50 percent of
throughout the deposit and the variety of trees
the artifacts recovered from excavation are from
represented in the charcoal may indicate that the
the 5.70-5.80 m bd level. Stone artifacts are rare.
charcoal is not cultural in origin. However, the
The Camden variety Gary dart point (Schambach
trees match those in the Trinity River bottomland
1982:60-61) is in the 5.70-5.80 m bd level in TU
forest today.
12. Two pieces of lithic debris are virtually the only
Four radiocarbon samples from TU 8, 9, and
evidence of stone tool manufacture or resharpen11 were submitted for dating (see Table 3). The
ing. Likewise, the number of pieces of fire-cracked
highest sample from within the block is from the
rock is very low but it is also the case that there
5.40-5.50 m bd level in TU 8 and yielded a caliis virtually no rock available in the floodplain so
brated age range of 570-680 A.D. (Beta-207122).
hearth rock in the form of limestone chunks/slabs
The next sample was from 5.50-5.60 m bd in TU
or quartzite gravels may be accessible no closer
11 and the AMS calibrated age range is 430-655
than 4-5 km from the site. Animal bone fragments
A.D. (Beta-207121). The third sample is from

Texas Archeological Society

78

41DL350

Soil Profile-North Wall

Figure 11. Profile of the north wall of TUs 7-9 showing the living surface.

Table 5. Artifacts from TU 7-12.
Unit
No.
7

Level in
m bd

Lithic
Debris

5.30-5.40

-

5.20-5.30
5.40-5.50
5.50-5.60
5.60-5.70
5.70-5.80
5.80-5.90

8

5.90-6.0
5.0-5.20

5.20-5.30
5.30-5.40
5.40-5.50
5.50-5.60
5.60-5.70

1

-

-

-

11

-

3

14

-

-

3

-

12

-

1

-

-

Other

N

1

3

11

-

5

-

8

-

-

10

T

-

5

4
9

T

S=3

2

T

1

14

T

-

-

1
-

-

5

1

-

34

3

-

-

1

-

23

13

-

1

1

-

-

-

Charcoal

-

-

5.90-6.00

Snail
Shell

1

1

1

-

Mussel
Shell

-

-

5.70-5.80
5.80-5.90

Fire-Cracked Animal
Rock
Bone

1
-

1
1
4
4

-

-

T
T
T
-

1

10

S=2

1

-

S=13

13
-

T
T

-

23

-

27

-

20

-

14

-

16

-

1

-

8
9
2
2

41
5

-

14

-

14

-

50
2

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas

79

Table 5. (Continued)
Unit
No.
9

Level in
m bd

Lithic
Debris

5.20-5.30

-

5.0-5.20

5.30-5.40
5.40-5.50
5.50-5.60
5.60-5.70
5.70-5.80
5.80-5.90
10

5.90-6.00
5.20-5.30
5.30-5.40
5.40-5.50
5.50-5.60
5.60-5.70
5.70-5.80
5.80-5.90

11

5.90-6.00
5.20-5.30
5.30-5.40
5.40-5.50
5.50-5.60
5.60-5.70
5.70-5.80
5.80-5.90
5.90-6.00

6.00-6..10
12

6.10-6.20
5.30-5.40
5.40-5.50
5.50-5.60
5.60-5.70
5.70-5.80
5.80-5.90
5.90-6.00

Total

-

Fire-Cracked Animal
Rock
Bone
-

3

-

33

-

6

-

4

-

2

-

7

-

2

-

-

11

2

3

S=11

1

T

-

T

-

13

-

-

-

2

5

2

11

1
-

-

1

1

-

6-BC

20

T

-

2

1

S=18

2

-

-

4
6
4

-

T
-

T

6

T

3

7

3

T

1

2

-

-

-

4

2
1
-

T
-

T
T
T
T
T
-

-

5

1

2

T

-

5

3

-

T

29

-

-

4

-

30

-

1

6

431

-

-

2

3

1

-

75

11

T

1

67

-

1
193

T

-

15

3

T

36

3

40

T

1

1

1

-

7

-

21

-

-

1

-

-

2

-

-

-

13

2

-

-

-

9

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1J

-

-

-

5

T

6

11

-

T

6

14

-

-

-

6

-

2

-

1

-

1

-

1

8

-

-

N

1

-

-

Other

4

11

-

Charcoal

10

1

-

Snail
Shell

-

-

Mussel
Shell

-

23

32
4

-

11

-

18

-

13

-

5

23
5
1

-

12

-

43

-

14

-

70

-

5
1

26
1

-

8

-

8

-

4

T

GP

36

-

-

2

-

S=47

T=Traces of charcoal; S=sample analyzed; BC=Burnt Clay; GP=Gary Point; J=Adult Human Molar.

-

8

30
762

80

Texas Archeological Society

5.60-5.70 m bd level in TU 8 and the calibrated age
range is 430-650 A.D. (Beta-207123). The deepest
sample was from level 5.70-5.80 m bd in TU9 and
it yielded a calibrated age range of 545-660 A.D.
(Beta-207124).
These dates provide a simple sequence that
can be modeled in OxCal using the sequence
function so that the ages are constrained by the
stratigraphic position of the samples (Figure 12).
The estimated start-date for this series is A.D. 568
± 56 and the end-date is A.D. 652 ± 55. All four
dates are from tight contexts and demonstrate that
the sedimentation rate averaged 0.4 cm per year
during this time interval.
Both pieces of lithic debris from the 2005 work
are chert. One is a secondary flake from 5.70-5.80
m bd in TU 8 and the other is a piece of shatter
from TU 7. The Gary dart point (Figure 13) is complete and was resharpened along all edges except
one of the two shoulders where fine retouch from
the original knapping is still preserved. Resharpening exposed the grainy quartzite under the slightly
patinated surface. The point weighs 4.5 grams and

measures 36.4 x 19.0 x 7.9 mm in length, width,
and thickness.
An unthinned biface, probably a rejected
piece, and a bifacial mano of sandstone were
found eroding out of the bank downstream from
the excavation block. The mano weighs 388 grams
and measures 126.0 x 91.6 x 24.6 mm in length,
width, and thickness. The biface is fine-grained
quartzite and is roughly triangular in shape. It
was thinned by percussion and shows no evidence of secondary retouch. It weighs 6.0 g and
measures 30.3 x 21.6 x 9.6 mm in length, width,
and thickness.
Plectomerus dombeyanus, which prefers a
mud substrate, is quite prominent in the upper
levels but almost absent in the lower levels of the
TU, whereas Tritogonia verrucosa, which prefers
moderate to high quality water, is present in the
lower levels. The mollusks demonstrate that the
Trinity River substrate in the vicinity of 41DL350
has become muddier and decreased in quality
over time, and the water was cleaner in the lower
levels. The river environment changed minimally,

Figure 12. OxCal plot of constrained calibrated radiocarbon ages from TU 8, 9, and 11.

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas

Figure 13. Gary dart point recovered in 2005. Illustrated
by Lance K. Trask.

possibly due to the shifting of gravel bars, because
Quadrula nodulata was found only in the 5.70-5.80
m bd level in TU 8.
The sediments found in the 2003/2005 excavations are below Zone 9 and represent a very heavily
weathered matrix. Weathering is likely to have occurred due to regular inundation by the river. The
matrix in the block excavation appears to be similar
to that where Dalbey described the burial.
It appears that the floodplain habitat that included permanent vegetation, trees, downed limbs,
and leaf and forest debris along the Trinity River
adjacent to 41DL350 did not vary over time from
the lower portion of the deposits to the present
day. The river’s substrate may have changed as
well as the quality of the water and the influx of
clay slightly at various times from the lowest level
to the present day. Possibly three stable surfaces
are present, two in the upper portion and one in
the lower portion of the excavated part of the site.
Prehistoric burned clay surfaces are visible in the
river bank and may mark areas that were used to
steam the mussels in the past. Severe burning of
the shell may have resulted from either accidental
or intentional inclusion in fires.
In summary, testing in the boat ramp project
area revealed that the upper sediments are no longer present. It appears that a slightly more intense
prehistoric occupation was present in the zone
investigated in 2003 than in the deeper 2005 block
excavation. Nevertheless, the natural environment

81

based on sediment deposition rates, faunal and
charcoal remains, and the few artifacts and occupation surfaces found appear to have been roughly
unchanged over time and floodplain adaptations
remained constant. Occupation in the boat ramp
area spanned the period from approximately A.D.
570 to A.D. 650. Based on the testing results, it is
predicted that sediments containing scattered cultural materials may continue below the water line.
The radiocarbon dates present an interesting
set of questions with regard to the placement of the
burial in the geologic context of the Dalbey site.
The burial appears to have been in or on the same
matrix uncovered in the 2005 block and it was at approximately the same elevation as the bench surface
adjacent to the block. Consequently, it is logical to
expect that the date of the rock-filled hearth, which
is more than 1 m above the adjacent bench surface,
would be younger than A.D. 930, the burial date,
and possibly younger than the higher pit date of
A.D. 1340. Likewise, if the burial date is associated with the matrix that is lower than Zone 9 (see
Table 1), it is also logical to expect that the block
sediments might date in the A.D. 900s. However, the
four calibrated dates from the block range A.D. 570650. Therefore, it is possible that the burial is out
of primary context, although the sediments do not
support this conclusion, or that the human remains
were placed in a cut-and-fill deposit.
CONCLUSIONS
The Dalbey site is a deeply stratified Late
Archaic to Late Prehistoric site that exhibits
stratigraphic elements more refined than Ferring’s
general Trinity River sequence. Based on his
recalibration, the elevation of the West Fork
Paleosol appears to match Lawrence’s (2010:187189) Synchronous Event IV. These multiple
stacked fining upward deposits from the proposed
level of the boat ramp cut upward are capped
by a paleosol and the site represents a preferred
campsite location. Similar sites have been recorded
upstream but do not present the same deeply
stacked occupation sequence nor have they been as
well dated despite the more extensive vertical and
horizontal testing that has been done.
Trackhoe trenching in the boat ramp project
area discovered that the upper 2-3 m of the
floodplain sequence had been removed and then
backfilled (Figure 14). Dalbey’s description of

82

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 14. The boat ramp and side slopes are shown in this picture as is the initial construction of the coffer dam. The
white layer in the right cut is road rock that is in the mixed overburden attributed to bridge construction and which
extends to the depth that corresponds to the top of the trackhoe motor.

the stratigraphy at the south end of the site and
Profile 1 in the center of the site demonstrates
that evidence of prehistoric occupation begins
about 1 m below the present ground surface and
extends to the river level and possibly below.
The river may have been near at hand during the
sequence of deposition that was preserved above
low river flow but the presence of mussel shells,
gastropods, and flood sediments does not indicate
where the river channel was throughout that time.
An unknown amount of the site was eroded by
Trinity River flooding and during the course of this
investigation more than 0.5 m of the low bench
eroded away and new artifacts were repeatedly
deflated onto the slope of the bench or exposed in
the freshly scoured river bank. Excavation below
the base level of the boat ramp hints at the presence
of further buried deposits but exploration of these
deposits was outside the scope of this investigation
and as shown by testing, the recognition of living

surfaces or artifact associations is likely to be
difficult whenever the site is revisited.
Occupation must have been on a seasonal
basis due to regular inundation that would have
prohibited year round occupation or even permanent
seasonal occupation. The small faunal assemblage
does not pinpoint a season of occupation, but Martin
(1995:244-245) believes that the Trinity River floodplain was generally occupied during the summer and
fall when nuts and various animals would have been
available to be harvested. Todd (2000:93) concurs
with the results of the Joe Pool Lake study and the
faunal remains from the Dalbey site fit his expectations for a site of this type during this time period.
The site is certainly not a “shell lens” site although
shell fragments were found scattered throughout the
matrix along with animal bone and an occasional
stone artifact. If a larger bone sample had been
recovered from an extensive block excavation or
if nut shells or tubers had been recovered, it might

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas
have been possible to more adequately determine
the season or seasons when the site was occupied.
By nature of the site setting, it is possible that there
never was sufficient intensity or duration of occupation to have deposited and preserved seasonally
sensitive plant or animal remains. This situation
is similar to hearth-centered artifact distributions
described by Binford (1978) where the stay was not
long enough for the accumulation of maintenance
debris to have become a nuisance. This contrasts
with the living surface described at the Aiken site
at Lake Granbury (Skinner 1971:208-227), but it is
possible that distinct surfaces may be present at the
Dalbey site and await discovery.
The artifact sample from the Dalbey site
is similar to those assemblages recovered from
41DL318 and other sites in the Central Waste Water
Treatment Plant area just upstream (Buysee 2000).
Lithic artifacts in the form of lithic debris and an
occasional projectile point were found at 41DL318
and 41DL319/357 but none were found in trenches
and test pits at 41DL337, 41DL338, 41DL355, and
41DL356. Four sites had discarded animal bone and
mussel shell fragments in a density similar to the
Dalbey site. It is apparent that chipped stone tool
manufacture and maintenance were not common
activities at the site as has also been shown to be the
case in the tested sites just upstream. The paucity
of chipped stone tools may be an indication that
hunting was not a prominent activity at the site even
though animal bones were present. The chipped
stone and faunal assemblages from the Dalbey
site are similar to that from the Rough Green site
(41TR162) (Skinner et al. 1999) on the West Fork
of the Trinity River except that hearth rock and mussel shells were more readily available on the West
Fork where the floodplain is narrower and where
sandstone is exposed in the valley walls. The Rough
Green site has tentatively been interpreted as a bur
oak collecting site. At the Dalbey site, occupation
must have been brief as it was impossible to define
a living floor within a 1 x 1 m unit although burned
clay was found in the units and burned clay features
were exposed in the river bank.
The Dalbey site is an unusual find in the Trinity
River basin, particularly in Dallas County. Prehistoric sites have been found in floodplain, terrace, and
upland settings but virtually none of the known sites
have revealed deep vertically stratified deposits.
Extensive testing in the Trinity River floodplain in
downtown Dallas, the Elm Fork below Lake Lewisville (Anthony and Brown 1994; Largent et al. 2004;

83

Prikryl 1990), and in the West Fork watershed by
Geo-Marine, AR Consultants, and others has not exposed a similar site deposit. Testing and excavation
as part of the Lake Ray Roberts studies in the Elm
Fork watershed north of Denton (Skinner and Baird
1985; Prikryl and Yates 1987; Ferring and Yates
1997) found several vertically stratified sites as well
as a deeply buried occupation zone at the Aubrey
Clovis site (Ferring 2001). Although apparently occupied between A.D. 570-1350, occupation surfaces
at the Dalbey site are ephemeral and must indicate
brief occupation by small family groups between
repeated flooding episodes. Artifact assemblages
are restricted to almost nothing but faunal remains.
At that, an average of only 136 artifacts was found
in each cubic meter excavated in the archeological
deposits. Plant remains were primarily charcoal,
which came from the sediment matrix but must
also be associated with the clay surfaces. Although
a rock-filled basin hearth was found in the riverbank
near Profile 1, no recognizable living surface was
present adjacent to the top of the basin and the basin
was not distinctly oxidized by firing. As noted at Joe
Pool Lake (Peter and McGregor 1988:351-367) and
elsewhere in Dallas (Skinner et al. 1978:72), sites
such as Dalbey have been under-reported and need
further attention. While excavation of such sites is
a slow process with low artifact yields, even when
large blocks are excavated, these site deposits offer
the opportunity to study brief occupation episodes
when they can be isolated in the field. Consequently,
the dateable and vertically stratified deposits present
at the Dalbey site make the site locally and regionally significant.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to thank Tim Dalbey for calling
attention to the site. Years of experience in the
Trinity River area and more than a year and a half
of monitoring the site led him to produce a report
that describes his site findings along the exposed
bank of the Trinity River. Omega Construction,
in particular Eric Starnes, Office Engineer, and
Tommy Hancock, Project Manager, are thanked
for their help. Also Snow Excavating and Alliance
Area Surveying assisted the project. Mary Ayala of
the City of Dallas’ Trinity River Corridor Project,
Skipper Scott, Fort Worth District office of the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, and Bill Martin, THC,
were also very helpful.

84

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Anthony, D. and D. O. Brown (editors)
1994 Archeological Investigations in the Denton Creek
Floodplain, Data Recovery Excavations at 41DL270,
Denton and Dallas Counties, Texas. Archeology Series 37. Hicks & Company, Austin.
Binford, L. R.
1978 Dimensional Analysis of Behavior and Site Structure: Learning from an Eskimo Hunting Stand.
American Antiquity 43:330-361.
Bronk Ramsey, C.
2013 OxCal 4.2. URL http://c14.arch.ox.ac.uk.
Buysee, J. L.
2000 An Evaluation of Sites within the Proposed Dallas
Floodway Extension Project, Dallas County, Texas.
Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations No. 195.
Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Cliff, M. B., S. M. Hunt, M. Prior, S. Gaither, and W. Autin
1998 Archeological, Architectural, Archival, and Geoarcheological Investigations of the Proposed Dallas
Floodway Extension Project, Dallas County, Texas.
Miscellaneous Report of Investigations No. 152.
Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Cliff, M. B., D. Shanabrook, S. M. Hunt, W. Autin, and M. Prior
1999 Buried Archeological Site Potential in the Dallas
Floodway Project Area. Miscellaneous Reports of
Investigations No. 187. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Coffee, D. R., R. H. Hill, and D. D. Ressel
1980 Soil Survey of Dallas County, Texas. USDA, Soil
Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station.
Dalbey, T. S.
2003 Letter to Mary Ayala dated 18 February, 2003. Letter
on file at AR Consultants, Inc. and the Texas Historical Commission.
Ferring, C. R.
1990 Late Quaternary Geology and Geoarchaeology of
the Upper Trinity River Drainage Basin, Texas. Field
Trip #11 Guidebook. Geological Society of America,
1990 Annual Meeting, Dallas.
2001 The Archaeology and Paleoecology of the Aubrey
Clovis Site (41DN479), Denton County, Texas.
Center for Environmental Archaeology, University
of North Texas, Denton.

Ferring, C. R. and B. C. Yates
1997 Holocene Geoarchaeology and Prehistory of the Ray
Roberts Lake Area, North Central Texas. Institute
of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University,
Denton.

Frederick, C. D., L. K. Trask, and S. A. Skinner
2006 Archaeological Testing for the Trinity River Parkway. Cultural Resources Report 2006-32. AR Consultants, Inc., Dallas.
Kahl, K.
n.d. Loop 12 Boat Ramp Archaeological Assessment.
Manuscript provided by Lopez-Garcia, Dallas.
Largent, F. B., Jr., C. Lintz, and M. H. Huhnke
2004 An Archeological Survey and Geoarcheological
Evaluation of the Huffines Communities Property
at the Intersection of Interstate Highway 35 and the
State Highway 121 Bypass, Denton County, Texas.
Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations No. 314.
Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Lawrence, K.
2010 A Recalibrated Chronological Framework for Texas
Archaeology-Geoarchaeology. Master’s thesis submitted to Department of Anthropology, Texas State
University-San Marcos.
Martin, W. A.
1995 Prehistoric Subsistence Strategies in North-Central
Texas: Evidence from Joe Pool Lake and Richland/
Chambers Reservoir. In Advances in Texas Archeology, Contributions from Cultural Resource Management, edited by J. E. Bruseth and T. K. Perttula, pp.
203-256. Cultural Resource Management Report 5.
Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Peter, D. E. and D. E. McGregor
1988 Late Holocene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek
Drainage. Joe Pool Lake Archaeological Project,
Volume I, Archaeology Research Program, Institute
for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Prikryl, D. J.
1990 Lower Elm Fork Prehistory, A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and Chronologies along the Trinity
River, North-Central Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Report 37. Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Prikryl, D. J. and B. C. Yates
1987 Test Excavations at 41CO141, Ray Roberts Reservoir, Cooke County, Texas. Institute of Applied
Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.
Schambach, F. F.
1982 An Outline of Fourche Maline Culture in Southwest
Arkansas. In Arkansas Archaeology in Review, edited by N. L. Trubowitz and M. D. Jeter, pp. 132-197,
Research Series No. 15. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.

Skinner et al.—Archeological Investigations at the Dalbey Site (41DL350), Dallas, Texas
Skinner, S. A.
1971 Prehistoric Settlement of the De Cordova Bend
Reservoir, Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:149-269.
Skinner, S. A. and L. Baird (assemblers)
1985 The Archaeology and History of Lake Ray Roberts, “Settlement in a Marginal Zone,” Volume III.
Cultural Resources Report 85-11. AR Consultants,
Dallas.
Skinner, S. A., C. B. Bousman, J. Todd, J. Craver, T. A.
Jennings, L. L. Bush, and A. Tawater
2005 Archaeological Investigation at the Dalbey Site
(41DL350), Dallas, Texas. Cultural Resources Report 2005-35. AR Consultants, Inc., Dallas.
Skinner, S. A., S. C. Caran, and L. K. Trask
1999 Archaeological Excavations in River Legacy Park,
Arlington, Texas. Cultural Resources Report 99-41.
AR Consultants, Dallas.

85

Skinner, S. A., J. J. Richner, and M. R. Johnston
1978 Dallas Archaeological Potential, Procedures for
Locating and Evaluating Prehistoric Resources. Research Report 111. Archaeology Research Program,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Skinner, S. A. and B. B. Whorton
1993 Archaeological Survey of the Little Lemmon Lake
Project. Cultural Resources Report 93-3. AR Consultants, Dallas.
Todd, J.
2000 Subsistence Strategies of the Late Prehistoric Inhabitants of the Upper Trinity River Basin. Master’s
thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas at Arlington.

A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites:
Plains Biographic Rock Art and the Southern Plains
Ethnographic Record
Michael Paul Jordan
ABSTRACT
While scholars have incorporated ethnographic data into their analyses of Biographic Tradition rock art sites
on the Northern Plains, studies of Southern Plains rock art have made more limited use of the ethnographic
record. Reanalysis of select scenes and figures from two Southern Plains Biographic tradition rock art sites—
the Hussie Miers (41VV327) and El Caido sites—demonstrates the utility of an ethnographically informed
approach. Comparison of the pictographs and petroglyphs with ethnographic data, including nineteenth century Kiowa and Comanche drawings executed on paper, has facilitated the identification of items of material
culture, as well as the interpretation of several scenes. At the Hussie Miers site, the reinterpretation of items of
material culture has raised questions regarding the dating of the site, as well as the identity of the non-Native
combatants depicted in one of the panels.

INTRODUCTION
In this article, I present a reanalysis of select
scenes and figures from two Southern Plains Biographic Tradition sites: Hussie Miers (41VV327)
and El Caido. The Hussie Miers site is located
along a tributary of the Devils River in southwest
Texas. The site consists entirely of pictographs.
While Late Prehistoric Red Monochrome style
images comprise the majority of the rock art at
the site, a panel consisting of five combat scenes
(Figure 1) belongs to the Plains Biographic style
(Turpin 1989:105). The El Caido site is situated
approximately one mile south of the Rio Grande
in Coahuila, Mexico. Both pictographs and petroglyphs are present, the latter consisting of incised
images with painted elements (Labadie et al.
1997:14-15, 19).
Biographic Tradition rock art is found throughout the Plains region. Documented sites extend
from Alberta, Canada, to northern Mexico (Keyser
2004:65; Keyser and Klassen 2001:Map 14.1).
Previous studies of Plains Biographic Tradition
rock art have focused primarily on sites located
on the Northern Plains (Keyser 1987, 1991, 1996,
2007, 2009; Keyser and Klassen 2003; Keyser and
Cowdrey 2008; Keyser et al. 2004, 2006; Klassen
et al. 2000). However, archeologists have identified

several Biographic Tradition sites on the Southern
Plains, including sites in the Texas Panhandle
(Parsons 1987), southwest Texas (Turpin 1986,
1989), and northern Coahuila, Mexico (Labadie et
al. 1997; Turpin 1988).
While the earlier Ceremonial tradition rock art
is characterized by static figures, Plains Biographic
rock art is marked by the depiction of action sequences. Episodes of warfare, including combat
and horse raiding, figure prominently in this tradition (Keyser 1989:87, 2004:65; Keyser and Klassen 2001:224, 228). Keyser (2004:65) notes that
“[h]umans, horses, weapons, and track sequences
(both horse hoofprints and human footprints) compose more than 90 percent of the art.” Additionally,
tallies or counts recording the number of enemies
killed, horses stolen, and weapons captured also
appear in the art.
Biographic rock art was the “predominant
Plains art tradition from the 1600s on” (Keyser
2004:67). The earliest recorded Biographic rock art
sites are located on the Southern Plains and date to
the 1500s. The tradition experienced a fluorescence
in the eighteenth century and sites dating between
1750 and 1850 are found throughout the Plains
(Keyser 2004:65, 67; Keyser and Cowdrey 2008:20;
Keyser and Klassen 2001:224). After 1880, the
production of Biographic tradition rock art largely

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 86 (2015)

88

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Drawing of a panel at the Hussie Miers site depicting combat scenes (Illustration by David G. Robinson,
reprinted courtesy of Solveig Turpin).

ceased (Keyser and Cowdrey 2008:20).1 Biographic
rock art is characterized by a trend toward increasing realism and later examples often feature detailed
depictions of clothing and accoutrements, including
weapons and horse tack (Keyser 2004:65, 69; Keyser and Cowdrey 2008:20).
Biographic rock art is seen as a precursor to
works on hide and paper and the more general
term Biographic art is used to refer not only to rock
art, but to works in these media as well (Keyser
1989:87; Keyser and Cowdrey 2008:20). Indeed, at
least two books on Plains rock art devote chapters
to drawings executed on hide and paper (Keyser
2004; Keyser and Klassen 2001). The term robe
art has been applied to works on hide and as such
encompasses a variety of objects including robes,
war shirts, tipi covers, and tipi liners (Keyser and
Klassen 2001:257). Similarly, the term ledger art is
used in a generic sense to refer to works on paper
due to the fact that some of these drawings appear
in the pages of repurposed account books (Greene
2004:22; Keyser and Klassen 2001:257; McLaughlin 2013:41; Szabo1994:xiv).2

Ethnographic sources, including robe and ledger
art, have proved especially useful in the identification
of items of material culture depicted in Biographic
tradition rock art. The correct identification of these
items often has implications for the interpretation of
these scenes. As Keyser and Klassen (2003:7) noted
“[c]orrect identification of material culture items is
frequently key to understanding Plains Biographic
art, since such items were used to advance the narrative aspect of this art tradition.” For example,
the identity of a figure may be communicated via
its association with tribally distinctive clothing or
regalia (Keyser 1991; Keyser and Klassen 2001;
Keyser and Cowdrey 2008:23, 25). Material culture
can also be of assistance in dating rock art sites. At
the Joliet site, several Crow figures are depicted with
regalia associated with the Hot Dance, a variant of
the Plains Grass Dance. The Crow obtained the Hot
Dance from the Hidatsa in 1875, indicating that the
panel must have been created sometime thereafter
(Keyser and Cowdrey 2008:27-28).
While archeologists studying Southern Plains
rock art sites have acknowledged the utility of

Jordan—A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites
incorporating the ethnographic record into their
analyses, they have yet to recognize the full potential of this approach. Parsons (1987:257), building
on Keyser’s work on Northern Plains biographic
art, was an early proponent of using what he termed
“Plains Indian portable pictorial art,” i.e., robe and
ledger art, in the interpretation of rock art and he
ably demonstrated the advantages of this approach
in his analysis of the Mujares Creek and Verbena
sites.3 Turpin (1989) and LaBadie et al. (1997) are
to be commended for their efforts in documenting
Biographic tradition rock art sites on the Southern
Plains. However, their analyses and interpretations
of the Hussie Miers and El Caido sites are limited
by a lack of familiarity with the ethnography and
material culture of nineteenth century Southern
Plains tribes, including the Kiowa, Comanche, and
Plains Apache. In reanalyzing figures from these
two sites, I have made extensive use of the ethnographic record. Comparing the rock art images
with nineteenth century ledger drawings and ethnographic specimens in museum collections has led to
the identification of previously unidentified items
of material culture, as well as the reclassification

89

of previously misidentified objects. In addition, the
ethnographic record has provided information on
nineteenth century cultural practices and beliefs
that has served as the basis for new interpretations
of the symbolism and significance of objects and
figures depicted at these sites.
HAIRPLATES:
SOUTHERN PLAINS MEN’S FASHION
Figures at both the Hussie Miers site and the
El Caido site are depicted with long lines accentuated by circles extending from their heads and
hanging down to their feet. Describing the warrior
at the Hussie Miers site (see Figure 1), Turpin
(1989:106) interpreted this feature as representing
the man’s hair, observing that “[t]he protagonist
is distinguished by his long ornamented hair, perhaps braided in the Cheyenne fashion, that reaches
the ground whether he is afoot or mounted.” In
describing one of the mounted figures in Panel
A at the El Caido site (Figure 2), Labadie et al.
(1997:18) were influenced by Turpin’s earlier

Figure 2. Pictograph from Panel A at the El Caido site depicting a mounted figure wearing a set of hairplates (reprinted
courtesy of La Tierra).

90

Texas Archeological Society

identification of the “long braided hair style” worn
by the warrior at the Hussie Miers site. Describing
the figure at the El Caido site, they noted that “[t]
he rider is depicted with a long decorated ponytail
hairdo” (Labadie et al. 1997:18). Indeed, citing
the similarity in the figures’ hairstyles, Labadie
et al. (1997:29-30) posited a possible connection
between the two sites, going so far as to argue that
the warrior who appears in Panel A at El Caido
might be the same individual represented at the
Hussie Miers site.
In their drawings on hide and paper, Plains
Indian artists often employed what Petersen
(1971:54) referred to as a “costume-symbol” to
identify members of enemy tribes. Artists depicted
distinctive elements of tribal dress and adornment
in an effort to convey the tribal affiliation of figures
in their drawings. The depiction of tribally distinctive hairstyles served as a way for artists to identify
the affiliation of enemy combatants. For example,
Crow warriors were frequently rendered wearing a
hair style that combined a pompadour with a long
net-like section extending down their backs (Afton
et al. 1997:246 and Plate 127; Petersen 1971:54,
289). Kiowa artists typically depicted Navajo men
and women wearing their hair tied up in a club
at the back of the head (McCoy 1987:58, 60 and
Plates 4 and 12; Petersen 1971:290). Given that
this practice was widespread amongst nineteenth
century Plains Indian artists, it is conceivable that
the artists responsible for the drawings at the El
Caido and Hussie Miers sites may have employed
hairstyles as markers of ethnic or tribal identity.
However, a comparison of the depictions of
the protagonist at the Hussie Miers site (Jordan
2001:123) and the mounted figure in Panel A at
the El Caido site with nineteenth century drawings
by Southern Plains ledger artists indicates that the
artists responsible for the pictographs were not
depicting a particular hair style, but rather an item
of material culture. What Turpin (1989) and Labadie et al. (1997) have interpreted as the warriors’
braids are actually sets of hairplates. Hairplates
consisted of a “set of metal disks of graduated size
attached to a strap of hide, braided buffalo hair,
or trade cloth, which was worn trailing from the
back of the head” (Greene 2001a:1045). Although
the metal discs were sometimes obtained through
trade, Plains Indian artists also manufactured
them by hammering silver coins into the desired
dimensions (Greene 2001a:1045; Hail 1980:141).
The Kiowa language offers linguistic evidence of

this practice. The Kiowa term for money—â’dalhâñ’gya—literally translates as “hair metal,” a
reference to the use of silver coins in the manufacture of hairplates (Mooney 1979:255).4
It is difficult to determine precisely when
hairplates came into vogue on the Southern Plains.
According to Greene (2001a:1045), coin silver did
not become available until the early nineteenth
century. Kiowa pictographic calendars record an
attack on a party of American traders in the winter
of 1832-1833 in which the Kiowa captured a number of silver coins. According to ethnologist James
Mooney’s Kiowa consultants this was the first time
the tribe had encountered coins and they hammered
the specie into discs to make hairplates. The Kiowa
commemorated the event, referring to this winter as
the “winter that they captured the money” (Mooney
1979:254-255).
In 1834, artist George Catlin painted a portrait
of a Kiowa man wearing hairplates. Catlin accompanied Colonel Henry Dodge’s dragoon expedition,
which visited a Comanche village located near
the Wichita Mountains (Mooney 1979:264-265).
There, Catlin painted a portrait of Little Bluff
(Figure 3), the principal chief of the Kiowa at the
time. The artist carefully rendered the leather strap
on which the metal discs were mounted passing
over Little Bluff’s right shoulder (Catlin 1973:71,
74 and Figure 178). Taken together, the Catlin
painting and the information collected by Mooney
indicates that Southern Plains men were wearing
hairplates as early as the 1830s.
Hairplates remained in fashion among the
Kiowa during the ensuing decades and on into
the reservation era. Both the Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of Natural History, and the
Denver Art Museum hold examples of nineteenth
century Kiowa hairplates in their collections
(Conn 1982:Figures 77 and 144; Merrill et al.
1997:27, 309). Between 1875 and 1878, Kiowa
men imprisoned at Fort Marion in San Augustine,
Florida, created drawings depicting their lives on
the Plains (Berlo 1982:11-12; Szabo 2001:51). In
many of their drawings, the artists rendered Kiowa
men wearing hairplates (Harris 1989:Plates 22,
25, 28, and 30-31; Petersen 1971:Plate 37; Szabo
2011:Plates 2, 4, 6, and 13). A drawing (Figure 4)
by an unidentified Kiowa prisoner depicts five men
standing outside a tipi with its sides rolled up. All
of the men wear hairplates that extend to near the
ground.5 Reservation era Kiowa drawings also document the use of hairplates (Greene 2001b:Plate

Jordan—A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites

91

in widespread use among the tribes
of the Southern and Central Plains
(Conn 1982:144). Both Plains Apache
and Comanche men wore them
(Foster and McCollough 2001:931;
Kavanaugh 2001:891, 2008:459). In
addition, pre-reservation era drawings on paper by Southern Cheyenne
and Southern Arapaho artists document the widespread use of hairplates
by members of these tribes as well. A
book of Cheyenne drawings collected
during the sack of Tall Bull’s Dog
Soldier village in July 1869 included
40 drawings in which Cheyenne
warriors were depicted wearing hairplates (Afton et al. 1997).8 Peter W.
Edwards collected a book of Southern Arapaho drawings between 1870
and 1872 (Afton 1990:cii; Petersen
1990:xi). The book contained 10
drawings of Southern Arapaho men
wearing hairplates (Petersen 1990).9
Given their widespread popularity
amongst the Southern Plains tribes,
hairplates have limited diagnostic
potential and cannot function as indiFigure 3. George Catlin 1834. Detail from Téh-tóot-sah (better known
cators or markers of tribal affiliation.
as Tohausen, Little Bluff), First Chief. Notice the set of hairplates.
Nonetheless, hairplates represent
(Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington D.C., Gift of Mrs.
a
valuable
addition to the Plains bioJoseph Harrison, Jr. 1985.66.62).
graphic rock art lexicon. While they
may not be useful in determining
tribal affiliation, they can be of assistance in dat42 and Figure 10.6; McCoy 1987:Plates 1, 15, and
ing rock art sites. Based on the evidence presented
31-32).
above, Southern Plains men began making and
Plains Indian artists employed certain items
using hairplates in the early 1830s. Depictions of
of dress as ethnic markers. For example, Kiowa,
warriors wearing hairplates therefore suggest a
Cheyenne, and Arapaho ledger artists typically porterminus post quem of 1830 for a rock art site and
trayed their Pawnee enemies wearing distinctive
can be used to distinguish between eighteenth and
black painted or dyed moccasins with elongated or
nineteenth century sites.
flared ankle flaps (Cowdrey 1999:23, 44; McCoy
6
1987: 61 and Plate 21; Petersen 1971:54, 291).
Similarly, Kiowa artists depicted their Navajo
foes wearing certain elements of dress, including
NINETEENTH CENTURY MILITARY
two-piece moccasin leggings painted or dyed red
MATERIAL CULTURE
and mountain lion hide war caps (McCoy 1987:58,
In her analysis of the combat scenes at the
60, 66 and Plates 4, 12, and 49). While it is temptHussie Miers site, Turpin (1989:106) identified
ing to suggest that artists at the Hussie Miers and
three of the protagonist’s adversaries as EuroEl Caido sites may have employed hairplates in
American soldiers on the basis of their headgear
a similar manner, perhaps using them to denote
and narrow waists, which she interpreted as repreKiowa identity, this is unlikely.7
senting “belted jackets.” She identified the headHairplates were not worn exclusively by the
gear worn by the men as European-styled “spiked
Kiowa. By the mid-nineteenth century they were

92

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Unidentified artist (Kiowa) 1875-1878. Drawing depicting five warriors wearing hairplates; the man second
from the right holds a lance with two clusters or whorls of clipped crow feathers (National Anthropological Archives,
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., 98-54_14).

helmets” (Turpin 1989:106). Turpin (1989:106)
based her dating of the site on the U.S. military’s
adoption of the helmet, noting that, “[a]t Hussie
Miers, the style of helmets hints at a very late date
for this panel. Prussian-influenced formal dress
uniforms, including spiked helmets, were not adopted until 1871, suggesting that this pictograph
was painted during the final decade of warfare in
this region.” Based on her interpretation of the
headgear, Turpin identified the figures as U.S.
soldiers and dated the creation of the rock art to
1871 or later. Critically, both the identification
of the Euro-American figures and the date for the
creation of the pictograph hinge on the identification of the headgear.
The plumed helmets in question were introduced in 1872 when the War Department

announced the adoption of new uniform guidelines
for the Army and therefore they would have been
issued during the final years of military campaigning on the Southern Plains (Katcher 1985:43-44;
Steffen 1978:107, 109; Howell 1982:34-35).
However, as Turpin (1989:106) herself noted,
these helmets comprised part of the soldiers’ dress
uniform. Indeed, the new regulations set forth
in General Order No. 76, dated July 27, 1872,
specified that the helmets were part of the full dress
uniform for officers and enlisted men and were not
intended for field service. Instead, the regulations
prescribed a black felt fatigue hat for use by officers and enlisted men while on campaign or on the
march (Steffen 1978:107, 109-110, 115). The very
design of the helmet rendered its use on campaign
impractical. It lacked a wide brim to shield the

Jordan—A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites
wearer from the elements and was festooned with a
variety of ornaments, including tassels, cords, and
a horse-hair plume (Steffen 1978:110 and Figure
161 and Color Plate V). The helmet together with
all of the trimmings weighed a full pound (Howell 1982:47). Describing the helmets, Hallowell
(1982:41) observed that they were “useless for
other than strictly dress wear.”
Given that the plumed helmets were not worn
on campaign, the initial identification of the headgear worn by the Euro-American figures depicted
at the Hussie Miers site appears to be incorrect.
This has implications for both the identification of
the Euro-American figures, as well as the dating of
the rock art panel. If the figures are not wearing the
plumed helmets prescribed in the 1872 regulations,
then there is no basis for identifying them as U.S.
cavalrymen or assigning the rock art a post-1872
date. If the figures do not represent U.S. cavalrymen, who are they? Fortunately, nineteenth century
Kiowa ledger drawings offer a possible clue.
Following the end of the Red River War in
1875, the Kiowa warrior Etahdleuh was imprisoned

93

at Fort Marion in San Augustine, Florida.10 During
his incarceration, Etahdleuh produced a number of
drawings detailing his life on the Plains (Earenfight
2007:109, 111, 113, 134; Greene 2013a; Lookingbill 2007:35-36; Petersen 1971:135 and Plates
31-34). In two of these drawings (Figures 5 and 6),
he documented his participation in engagements
with Mexican military forces. In both drawings,
Etahdleuh depicted his Mexican adversaries wearing shakos adorned with extremely tall pompoms
(Greene 2013a:Figures 5-6). The artist at Hussie
Miers may have been depicting this type of headgear. Given the site’s proximity to the Rio Grande
and the Mexican states of Coahuila and Chihuahua,
a depiction of an encounter with Mexican forces
would not be out of place.11
Both the Kiowa and Comanche conducted
raids into Mexico (Rivaya-Martínez 2014:399400; Turpin 1995:554). The Kiowa pictographic
calendars studied by James Mooney recorded six
such raids (Mooney 1979:276, 282, 293, 296, 300301, 306). These six raids likely represent only
a fraction of the overall number of raids Kiowa

Figure 5. Etahdleuh (Kiowa) 1876-1877. Drawing of a Kiowa warrior attempting to fend off three Mexican soldiers.
Note the exceptionally tall red and yellow pompoms that adorn the soldiers’ shakos (Rice County Historical Society,
Faribault, Minnesota. Cat. No. 247 B-1).

94

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Etahdleuh (Kiowa) 1876-1877. Drawing of two Kiowa warriors being pursued by a Mexican soldier. The
soldier’s shako features a tall pompom (Etnografiska Museet, Stockholm, Sweden. Cat No. 1900.32.254).

warriors conducted in Mexico. The events recorded
in the Kiowa calendars were selected because they
were considered unique and therefore particularly
memorable (Greene 2009:2). With one exception,
the raids recorded in the calendars resulted in the
loss of Kiowa men’s lives. The sole exception
may have been considered noteworthy because
the raiding party was comprised entirely of older
men (Mooney 1979:276, 282, 293, 296, 300-301,
306). Numerous successful Kiowa raids, those in
which the party did not sustain casualties, likely
went unrecorded.
While the identification of the three EuroAmerican figures at the Hussie Miers site as Mexican soldiers is not conclusive, the site’s proximity
to the Mexican border, coupled with Kiowa drawings depicting Mexican soldiers wearing headgear
similar to that depicted at the site, indicate that
this interpretation warrants further investigation.
Research in Mexican archives may reveal records
documenting engagements between the Mexican
military and Southern Plains warriors in the vicinity of the Hussie Miers site.

CLIPPED CROW FEATHERS AND
PROTECTIVE MEDICINE
In each of the combat scenes at the Hussie
Miers site the protagonist is depicted in association
with a lance. In the scene that appears in the upper
left side of the panel (see Figure 1), the lance is
adorned with two circular ornaments. A similarly
decorated lance appears in a sketch by William
Bollaert depicting objects captured from a Comanche raiding party that attacked Corpus Christi,
Texas, in 1844. The lance in Bollaert’s drawing
features three circular ornaments: one near the base
of the blade, another at the midpoint of the shaft,
and one near the butt of the shaft (Ewers 1969:167
and Figure 18). In their drawings on paper, Kiowa
warriors frequently depicted themselves and their
comrades wielding lances with similar circular
ornaments (Greene 2001b:Figures 4.3 and 4.7 and
Plate 7; McCoy 1987:Plates 2-5, 13, 17, 19-20,
25, and 47-49; McCoy 1996:Figure 6; Merrill
et al. 1997:Figures 66-67; Smithsonian Institution 2012a; Szabo 2011:Plates 17 and 27-28). A

Jordan—A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites
drawing (Figure 7) by an unidentified Kiowa artist,
created while he was imprisoned at Fort Marion,
features a mounted warrior carrying such a lance.
A review of the ethnographic literature on the
Kiowa and Comanche indicates that these circular ornaments are feather “whorls” comprised of
clipped crow feathers. In a 1933 interview with
Waldo Wedel and Wallace Hoebel, Comanche consultant Frank Chekovi described lances decorated
with “crow feather pieces,” i.e., clipped crow feathers, arranged in a fringe. These feather ornaments
were typically affixed near where a man would
grasp the lance or at the butt of the lance. Lances
adorned in this manner were called haikorohkO, literally “crow necklace” (Kavanagh 2008:267). The
term may refer to the way in which the feathers,
which were strung on a buckskin cord, encircled
the shaft of the lance.

95

Brevet Major General A. M. McCook collected
a Comanche lance in August 1873 at Fort McKavett,
Texas, that matches the descriptions of a haikorohkO
provided by Frank Chekovi and Quassyah. The
lance (Catalog Number E15697-0), which is part of
the Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of
Natural History’s collection, features an ornament
of crow feathers. The clipped feathers are attached
to a buckskin thong that has been wound around
the shaft near the butt end. A lance bearing similar
clipped feather whorls appears in a photograph of
Red Horned Bull, an Oglala warrior (Figure 8).
In addition, a possible feather whorl is in a
collection of Comanche artifacts assembled by
Jean Louis Berlandier. The objects are part of the
National Museum of Natural History’s collection.
Berlandier collected the Comanche material between 1828 and 1851. Among the objects that he

Figure 7. Unidentified artist (Kiowa) 1875-1878. Drawing of three mounted warriors. The warrior on the right carries
a lance with two black circles representing clusters of clipped crow feathers. The figure in the middle wears a set of
hair plates (National Anthropological Archives, Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C., MS. 392,725 08528219).

96

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Photo of an Red Horned Bull (Oglala) holding a lance with two clusters or whorls of clipped crow feathers
(Anadarko Heritage Museum, Anadarko, Oklahoma).

acquired is a 54 cm long feather ornament, consisting of clipped feathers attached to a buckskin
lace. Based on its length, Ewers (1969:167, 184
and Figure 31) suggests that the object may have
been worn as a headband or a necklace.12 However,
it may instead have been intended to be wrapped
around the shaft of a lance.

As the aforementioned Kiowa ledger drawings
attest, Kiowa warriors also adorned their lances
with clipped crow feather ornaments. Among the
Kiowa, crow feathers were believed to be imbued
with protective medicine or spiritual power. According to Kiowa mythology, Crow stole Thunder’s
wife. The latter attempted to kill Crow by hurling

Jordan—A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites
lightning bolts at him, but Crow successfully
dodged them, escaping with his life. Consequently,
Crow was seen as possessing the quality of being
difficult to hit or strike. Kiowa warriors carried
crow feathers into battle in order to tap into this
source of power. By adorning themselves with
crow feathers they sought to make themselves less
likely to be struck by their enemies’ arrows and
bullets (LaBarre 1935:923-924).
The Comanche also attributed protective properties to crow feathers. Observing crows in nature,
the Comanche noted that they would flock together
to attack and drive off owls. To the Comanche,
owls symbolized death, disease, and enemy warriors. Just as crows stood in opposition to owls,
they also stood in opposition to these negative
forces (Gelo 1986:3). Consequently, the Comanche believed that crows possessed “life-preserving
power” that could be harnessed by humans. This
belief persisted into the reservation period and
beyond and was expressed in the practice of affixing crow feathers to the doors of homes and
children’s bedposts (Gelo 1986:221). The earlier,
pre-reservation Comanche practice of adorning
lances with crow feathers was likely rooted in this
belief in the feathers’ protective medicine.
The artist who created the panel at the Hussie
Miers site was careful to depict the clipped crow
feathers on the protagonist’s lance. His decision to include the feather ornaments may have been motivated
by more than a mere desire to render an accurate representation of his own or his comrade’s armaments. In
Comanche society, the haikorohkO was reserved for
men who had distinguished themselves in combat and
thereby earned the right to wear eagle feather bonnets
(Kavanagh 2008:267). For a Comanche artist, the
lance would have served as a mark of distinction. By
depicting a man with such a lance, the artist could
communicate information regarding the warrior’s
martial prowess and past exploits.
While combat scenes served to commemorate
the protagonist’s brave deeds and celebrate his
courage, the drawings simultaneously functioned
as religious testimonials demonstrating the efficacy of the warrior’s spiritual medicine (Keyser
and Klassen 2001:216-217). As Jordan (2012:29)
observes with regard to works on paper, “drawings
of men overpowering their enemy or emerging
unscathed from showers of bullets or arrows may
be read as ‘religious testimonies’ that index the
efficacy of the protagonist’s personal medicine,
which is often referenced in the drawing through

97

the depiction of his shield.” The artist at the Hussie
Miers site was careful to depict not only the protagonist’s shield, but also the protective medicine
attached to his lance.
Armed only with his lance, the protagonist
charges a dismounted foe armed with a bow and
what appears to be a long gun (Turpin 1989:106).
The protagonist’s choice of a lance contrasts with
his opponent’s preference for long range weapons.
In order to strike the enemy warrior, the protagonist
had to move within the effective range of his opponent’s weapons, exposing himself to enemy fire
as he closed the distance between them. Although
he emerged unharmed, an arrow fired by the enemy
warrior lodged itself in his shield. Viewed against
the backdrop of this narrative action, the feather
whorls take on added significance. Since clipped
crow feather ornaments were viewed as protective
medicine by both the Comanche and Kiowa, perhaps the artist intended to underscore their efficacy
by illustrating the protagonist emerging safely and
triumphantly from his brush with danger.
In the remaining four combat scenes at Hussie
Miers the protagonist’s lance is decorated with triangular shapes. These triangles represent another
variant of the clipped crow feather ornaments. Unlike the globular feather whorls discussed above,
these objects resembled feather cones. Quassyah, a
Comanche, described a lance adorned in this manner
and Hoebel included a sketch of it in his field notes
(Kavanagh 2006:391 and Figure 6). The Kiowa artist Silver Horn illustrated a warrior wielding a lance
with a similar conical ornament (Greene 2001b:Plate
15). The feathers were strung on a cord that was
tied around the lance shaft. A second string, running
approximately halfway up the shaft of the feathers,
served to hold them in place, creating the distinctive
conical shape. Since these ornaments also incorporated clipped crow feathers, they likely carried
the same association with protective medicine as
the feather whorls. Consequently, all of the combat
scenes at Hussie Miers may be understood not only
as accounts of an individual warrior’s bravery and
martial prowess, but also as testimonies to the power
of his protective medicine.
COMMEMORATING THE RESCUE
OF A COMRADE
Ethnographic data can also aid in the interpretation of a pictograph from Panel A at the El

98

Texas Archeological Society

Caido site. The image (Figure 9) consists of two
men mounted on a single horse and is rendered in
red and yellow pigment (Labadie et al. 1997:19 and
Figure 6). Viewed on its own, the significance of
the drawing is not readily apparent. However, nineteenth century drawings on paper by Cheyenne and
Arapaho warriors contain similar depictions of men
riding double (Calloway 2012:Plate 38; Greene
1996:74 and Plate 1; Bates et al. 2003:Figures 4
and 5; Smithsonian Institution 2012b). These drawings include additional narrative details, discussed
below, that enable them to be recognized as rescue
scenes. For example, a book of drawings captured
during the destruction of Tall Bull’s Dog Soldier
village contains Cheyenne warriors’ depictions of
their martial exploits. Four of the drawings depict
mounted men rescuing comrades whose horses
have played-out due to exhaustion or have been
wounded or killed (Afton et al. 1997:xix, 24, 52,
59, 210 and Plates 16, 30, 34, and 103).
These drawings were intended to highlight the
rescuer’s bravery and self-sacrifice by documenting
his willingness to expose himself to danger in an
attempt to save his comrade. To emphasize the risk
involved, artists depicted the strength of the enemy

force. Enemy combatants are shown pursuing and
firing on the men as they make their escape. In
a two page drawing from the McDonald ledger,
an Arapaho warrior rescues a comrade, exposing
himself to the concentrated fire of 22 U.S. soldiers.
The artist depicts the Arapaho warriors engulfed in
a cloud of bullets (Greene 1996:74 and Plate 1).
It was also common for artists to depict the
imperiled warrior’s horse. Some men went so far
as to illustrate the precise nature of the horse’s
wounds. For example, a drawing in the Dog Soldier
ledger book features a horse that is bleeding profusely from a gunshot wound in its side. In another
drawing from the book it is evident that a horse’s
right foreleg has been shattered by a bullet (Afton
et al. 1997:Plates 16 and 103). This level of detail
is more difficult to achieve in the medium of rock
art. It is therefore not surprising that these elements
are missing from the pictograph at the El Caido
site. The artist appears to have employed a form
of pictorial shorthand, trusting that the depiction
of two men riding double would be sufficient to
suggest the act of rescuing a companion.
Both the Kiowa and Comanche considered
it a great honor to save a comrade who had been

Figure 9. Pictograph of two men riding a single horse from Panel A at the El Caido site (Reprinted courtesy of La Tierra).

Jordan—A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites
unhorsed in combat. Among the Kiowa, rescuing
a comrade was considered one of the most heroic
deeds that a man could perform and the act contributed to a man’s prestige and social standing
(Mishkin 1940:39-40). Similarly, a Comanche warrior who rescued a comrade was afforded certain
honors, including the right to wear a war bonnet.
Indeed, ownership of a bonnet, which could be
earned through the performance of a variety of
brave deeds, carried with it an obligation to assist
one’s imperiled companions. If a warrior ignored
the plight of an unhorsed comrade he not only
faced public censure, but also forfeited the right
to wear a bonnet (Kavanagh 2008:57, 263, 316).
In both Kiowa and Comanche society insti­
tutionalized practices existed to ensure that
men received recognition for their martial feats.
When Kiowa warrior societies paraded around
camp, any society member who had rescued a
dismounted comrade was permitted to reenact
and publicize his exploit by riding with another

99

man mounted behind him (LaBarre 1935:1211;
Swan and Jordan 2011:155). The Kiowa warrior
Etahdleuh illustrated this practice in a drawing of a
warrior society parade (Figure 10). The Comanche
observed a similar custom. Prior to departing
on a raid, Comanche warriors would mount and
ride through camp. At this time, a man who had
saved a dismounted comrade in battle might call
attention to his deed by taking up another man
behind him and riding double as the party paraded.
Commenting on this practice, Post Oak Jim, a
Comanche elder, observed that “two riders on one
horse [was] a sign of honor” (Kavanagh 2008:137).
Thus, this rather enigmatic pictograph can
be understood as a depiction of a man performing one of the most celebrated feats a Kiowa or
Comanche warrior could achieve. While narrative
details frequently depicted in rescue scenes drawn
on paper are absent, the ethnographic record and
the testimony of Post Oak Jim suggest that the
image of two men riding double would have been

Figure 10. Etahdleuh (Kiowa) 1876-1877. Drawing of two Kiowa warriors riding double in a warrior society parade
(Etnografiska Museet, Stockholm, Sweden. Cat No. 1900.32.254).

100

Texas Archeological Society

sufficiently evocative on its own.
Members of the artist’s community,
as well as members of neighboring
Plains tribes, would have understood
the pictograph as commemorating an
act of heroism in which a mounted
warrior rescued a comrade.
WARRIOR SOCIETY
REGALIA
Knowledge of Southern Plains
material culture, specifically military
society regalia, can aid in the interpretation of another image the El Caido site. This figure appears in Panel B
(Figure 11) and is one of two incised
and painted pedestrian warriors. The
warrior is rendered in a frontal pose,
with arms outstretched and bent at
the elbow. The individual’s left leg
is turned to the right and bent at the
knee. Narrow incised lines extending
from below the arms and along the
edges of the legs appear to represent
fringe (Labadie et al. 1997:24). On
the Southern Plains, hide clothing,
including men’s shirts and leggings,
was frequently adorned with long,
twisted fringe (Hail 1980:69; Hovens
2010:224). The individual holds a
saber or sword in his left hand and
an object identified as a rifle in his
right.13 In addition, the figure features Figure 11. Image of a warrior wearing a no-retreat sash from Panel B at
a “red-painted cape or sash across the El Caido site (reprinted courtesy of La Tierra).
the shoulders which hangs along the
individual’s right side” (Labadie et al.
1997:24). Two aspects of the figure’s regalia, the
at the El Caido site, these warriors wear sashes
red sash and the sword, warrant further scrutiny.
that pass across their chests and hang down at their
Nineteenth century Kiowa ledger drawings
side. While a few of the sashes that appear in the
depict warriors wearing capes or shawls (Harris
Kiowa drawings are black, most are red (Berlo
1989:Figures 21 and 36; McCoy 1987:Plate 50;
1996:Catalog Number 70; McCoy 1987:Plate 46;
Szabo 2011:Plate 4 and Figures 32-33, 2007:Figure
Smithsonian Institution 2012a). These objects can
91), however the item worn by the figure at the El
be identified as no-retreat sashes (Berlo 1996:146;
Caido site does not appear to be a shawl. It extends
Meadows 2010:222-223; Mooney 1979:284-285
down to a point just above the figure’s knees and is
[1898]). No-retreat sashes are depicted in several
therefore longer than the waist length shawls dedrawings produced by Kiowa artists incarcerated
picted in the drawings. Furthermore, unlike a shawl,
at Fort Marion (Figures 12-14).
the item extends diagonally across the figure’s chest.
No-retreat sashes were associated with cerKiowa artists created drawings on paper depicttain warrior societies and were worn by indiing warriors wearing similar items. Like the figure
viduals who occupied specific offices within these

Jordan—A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites

101

Figure 12. Unidentified artist (Kiowa) 1875-1878. Two page drawing of a dance. The mounted figure on the left and the pedestrian figure on the far right both wear no-retreat sashes. The latter figure has a lance decorated with two clipped crow feather
whorls (National Anthropological Archives, Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. MS 392,725 08528208 and 08528209).

Figure 13. Unidentified artist (Kiowa) 1875-1878. Drawing of three mounted warriors. The figure on the right wears a
no-retreat sash and a distinctive headdress associated with the Sentinel or Scout Dogs Society (National Anthropological
Archives, Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. MS 392,725, 08528220).

102

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 14. Koba (Kiowa) 1875-1878. Drawing of members of the Sentinel or Scout Dogs Society. Six of the men wear
no-retreat sashes (Mandeville Library and Plains Ledger Art Publishing Project, UC San Diego, La Jolla, California,
Koba-Russell Sketchbook, Plate 21. View the complete book at plainsledgerart.org.).

sodalities. A sash owner was under an obligation
to stand his ground in combat. Should the enemy
begin to prevail, he was expected to stake himself
down by driving a lance or arrow through the end
of his sash. Anchored in this manner, the sash
owner could not retreat unless a comrade removed
the arrow or lance pinning him in place. If he was
not freed, he was obligated to remain and fight
even in the face of overwhelming odds (Meadows
1999:213, 2010:222-223).
The use of no-retreat sashes among Southern
Plains tribes is well documented. Two members
of the Kiowa Unafraid of Death or Skunkberry
Society wore red cloth sashes.14 Certain members
of the tribe’s Sentinel or Scout Dogs Society also
owned no-retreat sashes. While the two leaders
of the society shared a black sash, other select
members wore red sashes made of elk hide or cloth
(Meadows 2010:136, 222-223). Among the Quahada Comanche no-retreat sashes made of bison
hide were worn by members of both the Big Horses
and Little Horses societies. In addition, individual
Comanche men occasionally made personal vows
never to retreat in battle. These men also wore noretreat sashes (Kavanagh 2008:267-268; Meadows
1999:278-281, 289). No-retreat sashes were employed by the Plains Apache, as well. Officers in the
Manatidie or Blackfeet Society included four lance
bearers, each of whom wore a sash. Similarly, noretreat sashes served as the emblems of office for the
four leaders of the tribe’s Klintidie or Horsemen’s
Society (Meadows 1999:205-207, 212-213). Given
its widespread distribution on the Southern Plains,

the no-retreat sash has limited diagnostic potential
as far as assigning tribal affiliation is concerned.
Swords and sabers were used as symbols of
authority by the officers of three Kiowa warrior
societies. The leadership of each of these societies
included two whipmen, who were responsible for
recruiting initiates, maintaining order during society
functions, and ensuring that the members participated in the society’s dances (Meadows 1999:50).
One whipman in each society carried a sword or a
saber as his emblem of office (Meadows 2010:28,
37, 222). In the Mountain Sheep and the Horse
Headdresses societies these men carried straight
swords. The term straight sword may refer to the
Model 1840 Noncommissioned Officers Sword or
the Model 1860 Staff and Field Officers Sword,
both of which featured straight blades (McChristian
1995:26, 139-140 and Figures 105 and 106). One
of the whipmen in the Sentinel or Scout Dogs Society carried a weapon described simply as a sword
(Meadows 2010:222), suggesting that it may have
had a curved blade. The weapon wielded by the
figures at the El Caido site has a curved blade and
appears to be a saber.
The warrior is depicted both wearing a noretreat sash and carrying a saber, raising the possibility that he is one of the Kiowa Sentinel or Scout
Dogs Society whipmen. The society’s whipmen
shared a red no-retreat sash, which either man was
free to wear (Meadows 2010:223). However, the
fact that the warrior is depicted in association with
both a no-retreat sash and a saber is not conclusive
evidence of his tribal affiliation or warrior society

Jordan—A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites
membership. The figure is not depicted wearing the
distinctive headdress associated with the Sentinel or
Scout Dogs Society. Members of the society wore
headdresses comprised of red painted owl feathers
(Meadows 2010:227). Drawings of society members
wearing these headdresses occur in Kiowa ledger
art (Harris 1989:Plate 13; McCoy 1997:Plate 46;
Smithsonian Institution 2012c). The fact that the
figure at the El Caido site is not depicted wearing
such a headdress argues against his identification as
a member of the society.
Regardless of his tribal affiliation, the no-retreat
sash serves to delineate the warrior’s stature within
his tribal community, identifying him as either a
member or officer of a warrior society. Individuals
were selected to serve as officers in Plains warrior
societies on the basis of their prior martial accomplishments (Meadows 1999:43, 205, 212; Kroeber
1983:157). Consequently, depictions of men wearing warrior society regalia reference not only the
offices that these men held, but also their war records. These emblems indexed the very exploits that
qualified these men to hold office (Jordan 2012:24).
Analysis of this static figure at the El Caido
site indicates that the artist attempted to convey
information regarding his standing within his tribe.
The figure is depicted with a sword, an item that was
carried as badge of office by the leaders of several
Kiowa warrior societies. In addition, the warrior
wears a no-retreat sash. Regardless of whether the
sash is intended to denote the figure’s membership
in a particular warrior society or his service as an
officer in one of these societies, it marks him as a
man of distinction.
While the drawing represents a departure from
the scenes of combat and horse stealing characteristic of the Biographic tradition, it nonetheless evidences a focus on male martial achievement, rank,
and social status. A corollary for this drawing can be
found in ledger art. Plains Indian artists occasionally created portraits in which warriors are depicted
displaying distinctive lances that identify them as
warrior society officers (Jordan 2012:29). The figure
at the El Caido site suggests that similar portraits
depicting men with their warrior society insignia
may be found in Southern Plains biographic rock art.
CONCLUSIONS
A great deal of ethnographic data on the Southern Plains tribes has emerged since the reports

103

on the Hussie Miers and El Caido sites were first
published in 1989 and 1997. Important sources
include studies of Southern Plains military societies (Meadows 1999, 2010), as well as the edited
and annotated notes of the 1933 ethnographic field
school among the Comanche (Kavanagh 2008). In
addition, the last decade has seen the publication
of a number of studies of Southern Plains drawings
(Calloway 2012; Earenfight 2007; Greene 2013a,
2013b; Szabo 2007, 2011). Online databases,
including the Smithsonian Institution Research
Information Service and the Plains Indian Ledger
Art site maintained by the University of California
San Diego, provide access to images drawn by
nineteenth century Kiowa and Southern Cheyenne
artists. Consequently, there is a growing body of
comparative work available to contemporary scholars interested in exploring Biographic tradition
rock art on the Southern Plains.
The existence of a rich body of data on the ethnography of the Southern Plains tribes eliminates
the need to look for ethnographic analogies and
comparative material in the records of Northern
Plains tribes. Keyser and Klassen (2001:243) noted
that “[t]he wide distribution of Biographic rock art
clearly indicates its pan-Plains cultural affiliations,
with most basic forms, designs, and compositional
expressions being shared among all Plains groups.”
However, an emphasis on these shared properties
has led researchers to propose interpretations of
Southern Plains rock art based on ethnographic
data derived from Northern Plains tribes. Such an
approach can obscure the existence of regional
and tribal variations. For example, Labadie et al.
(1997:19) suggest that the headdresses worn by the
two men depicted riding double in Panel A at the El
Caido site mark the men as members of a warrior
society, noting that “[f]eather and horn bonnets
were badges of membership in warrior or police
societies in many Plains tribes.” The sources cited
in support of this contention reference examples
drawn exclusively from Northern Plains tribes.15 A
review of the ethnographic literature on the Kiowa,
Comanche, and Apache, the tribes most likely affiliated with the El Caido site, indicates that horned
bonnets did not function as emblems of warrior
society membership in these tribes. While Plains
tribes shared many traits, each possessed its own
distinctive sets of beliefs and practices.
The results of the present study suggest the
utility of revisiting previously recorded Southern
Plains biographic rock art sites in light of newly

104

Texas Archeological Society

available ethnographic data on Southern Plains
tribes. Reanalysis of the images at the Hussie
Miers and El Caido sites led to the documentation
of two items of material culture that had not been
identified in previous studies of the sites, as well
as the correct identification of two additional objects which researchers had initially misidentified.
At the Hussie Miers site, Turpin’s identification
of the Euro-American figures’ headgear as U.S.
military dress helmets led her to assign the site a
post-1871 date and to identify the figures as U.S.
troops. However, this identification now appears
incorrect. The artist was more likely representing
a form of headgear worn by Mexican soldiers. This
revelation opens up the range of possible dates for
the petroglyphs.
Furthermore, the identification of hairplates
worn by the protagonist at the Hussie Miers site
and a mounted figure in Panel A at the El Caido
site has implications for the dating of both sites.
While the presence of horses and firearms date
these sites to the Historic period, the presence of
hairplates indicates that the sites date no earlier
than the 1830s. Thus, the recognition of hairplates
as part of the biographic rock art lexicon provides
archeologists with another tool for dating Historic
period rock art.
Incorporating the Southern Plains ethnographic record into the analysis of these sites has
also yielded new interpretations. Identification of
the clusters of clipped crow feathers adorning the
protagonist’s lance at the Hussie Miers site focuses
attention on the role of spiritual power or medicine
in Plains Indian warfare. The depiction of crow
feathers, which the Kiowa and Comanche considered to be a form of protective medicine, suggest
that the combat scenes were intended to function
simultaneously as religious narratives, testifying
to the efficacy of the warrior’s medicine. At the
El Caido site, the no-retreat sash worn by a figure
in Panel B demonstrates how depictions of static
figures can nonetheless reference martial exploits.
While the figure is not shown engaged in combat,
his no-retreat sash testifies to his bravery and martial prowess. The sash serves as an emblem of his
prior exploits, as well as the behavior expected of
him in future engagements.
Comparison of the pictograph of two figures
mounted on a single horse at the El Caido site
with Cheyenne drawings on paper and Kiowa and
Comanche ethnographic accounts has revealed
that the image represents a warrior rescuing

his unhorsed comrade, a deed that the Kiowa
and Comanche recognized and celebrated as a
war honor. While this act is depicted in several
ledger drawings (Calloway 2012:Plate 38; Greene
1996:74 and Plate 1; Bates et al. 2003:Figures 4-5;
Smithsonian Institution 2012b), the image at the El
Caido site is the only portrayal of this war honor
appearing in Plains Biographic rock art.
Several studies of Biographic tradition rock art
sites on the Northern Plains have identified items
of material culture that can serve as ethnic markers
(Keyser 1991; Keyser and Cowdrey 2008; Sundstrom and Keyser 1998). As Keyser and Klassen
(2001:243) note, “the analysis of the material culture depicted in rock art may point to ethnic styles,
since certain objects may be restricted to specific
cultural groups.” Unfortunately, it is not possible
to assign a tribal affiliation to either of the rock
art sites in this study on the basis of the material
culture depicted in the drawings. The Kiowa, Comanche, and Plains Apache shared similar clothing
styles and their warrior societies employed related
regalia. While the analysis of additional Southern
Plains Biographic rock art sites may reveal objects
of material culture that were used exclusively by a
single group and that are therefore capable of serving as ethnic markers, the objects represented at the
El Caido and Hussie Miers sites saw widespread
use among the Southern Plains tribes.
Ultimately, an interdisciplinary approach to the
study of Southern Plains Biographic rock art offers
the best potential for enhancing our understanding
of this art form. Discussing the requisite knowledge required to interpret Plains Indian drawings
on paper, McLaughlin (2013:46) underscores the
necessity of “a deep and sustained engagement
with historical, biographical, and ethnographic
sources on nineteenth-century Plains Indian cultures, U.S. westward expansion, and both Plains
and U.S. military history and material culture.”
The study of historic Biographic rock art demands
similar expertise. And, for scholars studying Southern Plains rock art, one can add to McLaughlin’s
list knowledge of Mexican military history and
uniforms. It is unlikely that a single scholar could
possess the breadth of knowledge described by
McLaughlin. The expertise required to situate
Biographic rock art in its cultural and historical
contexts calls for an interdisciplinary approach.
One can envision a research team comprised of
archeologists, ethnologists specializing in the ethnohistory and material culture of specific tribes,

Jordan—A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites
and nineteenth century military historians. Such
interdisciplinary collaborations appear to point the
way forward.
ENDNOTES
1. The last documented example of Biographic rock
art is a petroglyph at Writing-On-Stone that was created
in 1924 and features an automobile (Keyser 2004:67).
2. Anthropologists have criticized the tendency to apply
the term “ledger art” to all Plains Indian drawings on paper.
They maintain that the uncritical use of the term obscures
important issues of materiality, form, and function. Greene
(2004:22) argues that bound books of drawings differ from
drawings on unbound sheets of paper. An important quality
of the former is their ability to serve as “compendia holding the pictured deeds together, maintaining some essential
sense of connection that would be lost if the images were
separate, unrelated representations.” McLaughlin has proposed a further distinction between pre-reservation books
that Plains Indian warriors captured and subsequently used
to record their martial exploits and reservation era drawing
books. She advocates the use of the term “war books” to
refer to those objects seized as war trophies, arguing that
these objects’ unique biographies warrant a separate classification (McLaughlin 2013:48-49).
3. Parsons offers an analysis of two Plains Indian
rock art sites, the Mujares Creek site, located in Oldham
County, Texas and the Verbena site, located in Garza
County, Texas. He correctly interprets one rock art panel
at the Mujares Creek site as a tally of captured weapons.
Using ethnographic sources, including ledger drawings,
he is able to identify two of the weapons as bow lances.
Bow lances, essentially large bows fitted with metal
blades or points, were carried by the officers and members
of several Plains Indian warrior societies. Based on the
location of the site and the distribution of the bow lance in
Plains Indian tribes, Parsons concludes that the weapons
depicted at Mujares Creek were most likely captured from
the Southern Cheyenne. He posits that the Kiowa captured
the weapons in 1837 when they defeated a large Cheyenne
force and created the petroglyph to commemorate their
victory (Parsons 1987:261-267).
4. The Kiowa first encountered silver coins in the
winter of 1832-1833 when a raiding party under the leadership of Lame Old Man attacked a caravan of Missouri
merchants near the South Canadian River in the Texas
panhandle. According to Josiah Gregg, the party was
returning from Santa Fe and was carrying approximately
ten thousand dollars in specie (Mooney 1979:255 [1898]).
5. The drawing likely depicts men gathering for a
warrior society meeting. The presences of weapons, the

105

face paint worn by the figure on the right, and the painted
horse with a scalp hanging from its bridle, all convey a
martial tone. The covers of tipis were frequently rolled up
during warrior society feasts and dances to accommodate
the large number of attendees and allow spectators to view
the proceedings (Swan and Jordan 2011:156).
6. For a photograph of Pawnee men’s moccasins see
Cowdrey (1999:Figure 13).
7. In an earlier essay (Jordan 2011:123) discussing the
Hussie Miers site, the author posited that “the depiction of
a set of hair plates [sic] strongly suggests a Kiowa origin”
for the pictographs. In light of evidence that members
of several Southern Plains tribes adopted hairplates, the
author no longer sees the objects as markers of tribal
affiliation.
8. See Plates 13, 19, 30, 32- 34, 36-37, 42, 44, 53,
55-57, 59, 61, 65, 68, 70, 81, 86, 90, 95-96, 101-104,
107-108, 110-112, 113, 116, 128, 132, 134, 136, 140.
9. See Plates 38, 44, 52, 70, 92, 94, 98, 106, 110, 116.
10. Etahdleuh was one of 72 Southern Plains prisoners sent east following the end of the Red River War. In
addition to 26 Kiowa compatriots, his fellow prisoners
included members of the Southern Cheyenne, Southern
Arapaho, Comanche, and Caddo tribes (Lookingbill
2006:42). For biographical information on Etahdleuh see
Lookingbill (2007:30-56) and Petersen (1971:135-159).
11. Initially, the author identified the headgear worn
by the non-Native combatants at the Hussie Miers site
as representing “one of the numerous styles of maned or
crested helmets worn by Mexican cavalry units at least as
early as 1835” (Jordan 2001:124). However, the discovery
of the drawings by Etahdleuh depicting Mexican lancers
wearing shakos adorned with tall pompoms, has led the
author to reject this interpretation.
12. Ewers (1969:184) identifies the clipped feathers as turkey vulture feathers. While Ewers may have
misidentified the feathers, it is conceivable that the
Comanche used turkey vulture and crow feathers interchangeably since both birds eat carrion. In Comanche
belief, crows were symbolically associated with warfare
since the birds often visited battlefields to feed on the
slain (Gelo 1986:5, 220).
13. A second pedestrian figure depicted in Panel B
at the El Caido site also carries a sword (LaBadie et. al.
1997:24 and Figure 13).
14. It is possible that one of the two sashes was made
of hide (Meadows 2010:140).
15. Howard (1954:23) notes that among the Dakota
the horned headdress was associated with the Stronghearts
society and suggests that it may have served as an emblem for certain “Plains-Ojibway, Plains-Cree, Mandan,
Hidatsa, and Crow” warrior societies as well. He makes
no reference to its use among Southern Plains tribes.

106

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Afton, J., D. F. Halaas, and A. E. Masich
1990 The Edwards Ledger Book and Its Artists. In The
Edwards Ledger Drawings: Folk Art by Arapaho
Warriors, edited by K. D. Petersen, pp. cii–ciii.
David A. Schorsch, New York.
1997 Cheyenne Dog Soldiers: A Ledgerbook History of
Coups and Combat. Colorado Historical Society,
Denver.
Bates, C. D., B. B. Kahn, B. L. Lanford, and K. E. Kahn

2003 The Cheyenne Arapaho Ledger Book from the Pamplin Collection. Robert B. Pamplin Jr., Portland,
Oregon.
Berlo, J. C.
1982 Wo-Haw’s Notebooks: 19th Century Kiowa Indian
Drawings in the Collections of the Missouri Historical Society. Gateway Heritage 3(2):2-13.
Calloway, C. G. (editor)
2012 Ledger Narratives: The Plains Indian Drawings of
the Lansburgh Collection at Dartmouth College.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Catlin, G.
1973 Letters and Notes on the Manners, Customs, and
Conditions of North American Indians. Dover Publications, New York.
Conn, R.
1982 Circles of the World: Traditional Art of the Plains
Indians. Denver Art Museum, Denver.
Cowdrey, M.
1999 Arrow’s Elk Society Ledger: A Southern Cheyenne
Record of the 1870’s. Morning Star Gallery, Santa
Fe, New Mexico.
Earenfight, P. (editor)
2007 A Kiowa’s Odyssey: A Sketchbook from Fort Marion.
University of Washington Press, Seattle.
Ewers, J. C. (editor)
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830 by Jean Louis Berlandier. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.
Foster, M. W. and M. McCollough
2001 Plains Apache. In Handbook of North American
Indians, Volume 13 Plains, Part 2 of 2, edited by R.
J. DeMallie, pp. 926-940. Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.
Gelo, D. J.
1986 Comanche Belief and Ritual. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, Rutgers University,
New Brunswick, New Jersey.

Greene, C. S.
1996 McDonald Ledger. In Plains Indian Drawings 18651935: Pages from a Visual History, edited by J. C.
Berlo, pp. 74-75. Harry N. Abrams, New York

2001a Art Until 1900. In Handbook of North American
Indians, Volume 13 Plains, Part 2 of 2, edited by R.
J. DeMallie, pp. 1039-1054. Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.
2001b Silver Horn: Master Illustrator of the Kiowa. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

2004 From Bison Robes to Ledgers: Changing Contexts in
Plains Indian Drawings. European Review of Native
American Studies 18(1):21-29.
2009 One Hundred Summers: A Kiowa Calendar Record.
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
2013a Buffalo and Longhorn: A Medicine Complex Revealed. American Indian Art Magazine 38(4):42-53.
2013b Being Indian at Fort Marion: Revisiting Three Drawings. American Indian Quarterly 37(4):289-316.
Hail, B.
1980 Hau, Kola: The Plains Indian Collection of the
Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology. Haffenreffer
Museum of Anthropology, Bristol, Rhode Island.
Harris, M. F.
1989 Between Two Cultures: Kiowa Art from Fort Marion.
Pogo Press, St. Paul, Minneapolis.
Hovens, P.
2010 The Ten Kate Collection 1882-1888: American Indian Material Culture. European Review of Native
American Studies Monographs 4. ZKF Publishers,
Altenstadt, Germany.
Howell, E.
1982 United States Army Headgear 1855-1902: Catalog
of United States Army Uniforms in the Collections
of the Smithsonian Institution. National Museum of
History and Technology, Washington, D.C.
Jordan, M. P.
2001 An Ethnographic Approach to the Reading of Kiowa
Rock Art: An Analysis of the Hussie Miers and Mujares Creek Sites. In Ethnoarchaeology and HunterGatherers: Pictures at an Exhibition, edited by K.J.
Fewster and M. Zvelebil, pp. 121-126. Archaeopress,
Oxford, England.

2012 Striving for Recognition: Ledger Drawings and
the Construction and Maintenance of Social Status
During the Reservation Period. In Ledger Narratives: The Plains Indian Drawings of the Lansburgh
Collection at Dartmouth College, edited by C. G.
Calloway, pp. 20-33. University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.

Jordan—A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites
Katcher, P.
1985 US Cavalry on the Plains 1850-90. Men-at-Arms
168. Osprey, London.
Kavanagh, T. W.
2001 Comanche. In Handbook of North American Indians, Volume 13 Plains, Part 2 of 2, edited by R.
J. DeMallie, pp. 886-906. Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.

2008 Comanche Ethnography: Field Notes of E. Adamson
Hoebel, Waldo R. Wedel, Gustav G. Carlson, and
Robert H. Lowie. University of Nebraska Press,
Lincoln.
Kroeber, A.
1983 The Arapaho. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Keyser, J. D.
1987 A Lexicon for Historic Plains Indian Rock Art:
Increasing Interpretive Potential. Plains Anthropologist 32(115):43-71.

1989 Ledger Book Art: A Key to Understanding Northern
Plains Biographic Rock Art. In Rock Art of the Western Canyons, edited by M. J. Tate, P. D. Friedman,
and J. S. Day, pp. 87–111. Memoir 3. Colorado
Archaeological Society, Denver Museum of Natural
History.
1991 A Thing to Tie on the Halter: An Addition to the
Plains Rock Art Lexicon. Plains Anthropologist
36(136):261-267.

1996 Painted Bison Robes: The Missing Link in the
Biographic Art Style Lexicon. Plains Anthropologist
41(155):29-52.
2004 Art of the Warriors: Rock Art of the American Plains.
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.

2007 Turner Rockshelter: A Blackfeet Redoubt in the
Heart of Crow Country. Plains Anthropologist
52(201):9-27.

2009 A Petroglyph Robe from Atherton Canyon, Montana.
Plains Anthropologist 54(212):347-353.
Keyser, J. D. and M. Cowdrey
2008 Northern Plains Biographic Rock Art: Ethnography Written on Stone. Archaeology in Montana
49(1):19-34.
Keyser, J. D. and M. A. Klassen
2001 Plains Indian Rock Art. University of Washington
Press, Seattle.

2003 Every Detail Counts: More Additions to the Plains
Biographic Rock Art Lexicon. Plains Anthropologist
48(184):7-20.
Keyser, J. D., L. Sundstrom, and G. Poetschat
2006 Women in War: Gender in Plains Biographic Rock
Art. Plains Anthropologist 51(197):51-70.

107

Keyser, J. D., R. L. Tanner, and D. T. Vlcek
2004 Pictures by the Seedskadee: A Preliminary Analysis
of the Biographic Rock Art of the Green River Basin, Southwestern, Wyoming. Plains Anthropologist
49(190):129-151.
Klassen, M. A., J. D. Keyser, and L. L. Loendorf
2000 Bird Rattle’s Petroglyphs at Writing-On-Stone: Continuity in the Biographic Rock Art Tradition. Plains
Anthropologist 45(172):189-201.
Labadie, J., K. Labadie, T. Sayther, and D. Stuart
1997 A First Look at the El Caido Site: A Historic Rock
Art Site in Far Northern Coahuila, Mexico. La Tierra
(Journal of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association) 24(1):14-31.
LaBarre, W.
1935 Typescript of Students’ Notes [Combined Notes of
William Bascom, Donald Collier, Weston LaBarre,
Bernard Mishkin, and Jane Richardson of the 1935
Laboratory of Anthropology Field School, Led
by Alexander Lesser.]. Papers of Weston LaBarre.
National Anthropological Archives, Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, D.C.
Lookingbill, B. D.
2006 War Dance at Fort Marion: Plains Indian War Prisoners. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

2007 “Because I Want to Be a Man”: A Portrait of Etahdleuh Doanmoe. In A Kiowa’s Odyssey: A Sketchbook from Fort Marion, edited by P. Earenfight, pp.
___. University of Washington Press, Seattle.
McChristian, D. C.
1995 The U.S. Army in the West, 1870-1880: Uniforms,
Weapons, and Equipment. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.
McCoy, R.
1987 Kiowa Memories: Images from Indian Territory,
1880. Morning Star Gallery, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
1996 Searching for Clues in Kiowa Ledger Drawings:
Combining James Mooney’s Fieldwork and the
Barber Collection of the Cincinnati Art Museum.
American Indian Art Magazine 21(3):54-61.
McLaughlin, C.
2013 A Lakota War Book from the Little Bighorn: The Pictographic “Autobiography of Half Moon.” Peabody
Museum Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Meadows, W. C.
1999 Kiowa, Apache, and Comanche Military Societies.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
2010 Kiowa Military Societies: Ethnohistory and Ritual.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

108

Texas Archeological Society

Merrill, W. L., M. K. Hansson, C. S. Greene, and F. J. Reuss
1997 A Guide to the Kiowa Collections at the Smithsonian
Institution. Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology 40. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C

2015 Comanche Lance http://collections.nmnh.si.edu/
search/anth/?v=g0, accessed March 5, 2015.

Mishkin, B.
1940 Rank and Warfare among the Plains Indians.
Monograph 3. American Ethnological Society, J. J.
Augustin, New York.

2001 From General Souvenir to Personal Momento: Fort
Marion Drawings and the Significance of Books. In
Painters, Patrons, and Identity: Essays in Native
American Art to Honor J. J. Brody, edited by J. M.
Szabo, pp. 49-70. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.

Mooney, J.
1979 Calendar History of the Kiowa Indians. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Parsons, M. L.
1987 Plains Indian Portable Art as a Key to Two Texas
Historic Rock Art Sites. Plains Anthropologist
32(117):257-274.
Petersen, K. D.
1971 Plains Indian Art from Fort Marion. University of
Oklahoma Press, Norman.
1990 The Edwards Ledger Drawings: Folk Art by Arapaho
Warriors. David A. Schorsch, New York.

Rivaya-Martínez, J.
2014 A Different Look at Native American Depopulation:
Comanche Raiding, Captive Taking, and Population
Decline. Ethnohistory 61(3):391-418.
Smithsonian Institution
2012a Exercise book containing drawings by anonymous
Kiowa artist, 1875-1878. http://siris-archives.si.edu/
ipac20/ipac.jsp?session=R4C548T569719.2333&m
enu=search&aspect=subtab157&npp=50&ipp=20&
spp=20&profile=all&ri=2&source=%7E%21siarchi
ves&index=.GW&term=exercise+book+containing+
drawings+by+anonymous&aspect=subtab157&x=1
5&y=10, accessed March 4, 2015.
2012b Anonymous Cheyenne Drawing of Bald Eagle, Identified by Name Glyph, Rescuing Warrior with Shield,
Ca. 1880s. http://siris-archives.si.edu/ipac20/ipac.js
p?session=142UE0K739180.70760&profile=all&so
urce=~!siarchives&view=subscriptionsummary&uri
=full=3100001~!255699~!71&ri=2&aspect=subtab1
57&menu=search&ipp=20&spp=20&staffonly=&te
rm=NAA+MS+4653&index=.GW&uindex=&aspec
t=subtab157&menu=search&ri=2, accessed January
28, 2015.
2012c Book of drawings by Anonymous Kiowa artist,
1875. http://siris-archives.si.edu/ipac20/ipac.jsp?se
ssion=C425G8629985J.28381&menu=search&asp
ect=subtab157&npp=50&ipp=20&spp=20&profile
=all&ri=&source=%7E%21siarchives&term=MS+
392725&index=.GW&aspect=subtab157&term=&
index=.AW&term=&index=.SW&term=&index=.
TW&term=&index=.FW&x=12&y=11, accessed
March 5, 2015.

Szabo, J. M.
1994 Howling Wolf and the History of Ledger Art. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

2007 Art from Fort Marion: The Silberman Collection.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
2011

Imprisoned Art, Complex Patronage: Plains Drawings by Howling Wolf and Zotom at the Autry National Center. School for Advanced Research Press,
Santa Fe, New Mexico.

Steffen, R.
1978 The Horse Soldier 1776-1943 - The United States
Cavalryman: His Uniforms, Arms, Accoutrements,
and Equipment, Vol. 2: The Frontier, the Mexican
War, the Civil War, the Indian Wars. University of
Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Sundstrom, L. and J. D. Keyser
1998 Tribal Affiliation of Shield Petroglyphs from the
Black Hills and Cave Hills. Plains Anthropologist
43(165):225-238.
Swan, D. C. and M. P. Jordan
2011 Tipis and the Warrior Tradition. In Tipi: Heritage of
the Great Plains, edited by N. B. Rosoff and S. K.
Zeller, pp. 145-164. University of Washington Press,
Seattle.
Turpin, S. A.
1986 Bailando Rock Shelter and Meyer Springs: Iconographic Parallels. La Tierra (Journal of the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association) 13(1):5-8.

1988 Arroyo de Los Indios: A Historic Pictograph in
Northern Coahuila, Mexico. Plains Anthropologist
33(120):279-284.
1989 The End of the Trail: An 1870s Plains Combat Autobiography in Southwest Texas. Plains Anthropologist
34(124):105-110.

1995 The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:541-560.

Jordan—A Reanalysis of the Hussie Miers and El Caido Sites

109

Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley
(41WM437) Or Establishing A New Temporal Context
for Subsistence and Site Use at Rowe Valley
Haley E. Rush, Elton R. Prewitt, C. Britt Bousman, and Leslie L. Bush

ABSTRACT
The Rowe Valley site (41WM437) is a large-scale Toyah phase campsite on the southern bank of the San
Gabriel River in eastern Central Texas. It has an artifact assemblage typical of Toyah sites that includes Perdiz
and other arrow points, unifacial scrapers, bifacial knives, ceramics, and bison remains. Although bison remains can dominate the faunal assemblages of Toyah sites, at Rowe Valley the majority of the faunal remains
examined are deer and antelope. Part of the dominance of the faunal assemblage by these ungulates is likely
due to differential hunting strategies employed for different-sized animals. Charcoal from eight features was
radiocarbon-dated; the results show there were at least two significant occupations pre-dating Spanish movement into Central Texas. These dates and the results of other limited studies combine with observations from
the excavations to support characterization of Toyah people as focused hunter-gatherers who often lived and
hunted in large groups.

INTRODUCTION
The latter part of the Late Prehistoric period of
Central Texas or the Toyah phase is distinguished
from the earlier Austin phase by a distinct set of
artifacts that appear at or near A.D. 1300 or 650
radiocarbon years before present (B.P.) and spread
rapidly across Central and South Texas (Arnn 2012;
Collins 2004; Johnson 1994; Kenmotsu and Boyd
2012a, 2012b; Prewitt 1981, 1985). The Toyah
phase continues until approximately 250 B.P. or
A.D. 1700. A unique lithic toolkit is part of the
distinct set of artifacts; this toolkit includes Perdiz
arrow points, beveled bifacial knives, unifacial
blade end scrapers, and the common use of blade
core technology for the production of flake blade
tools. Ceramics are also included in this distinct
artifact assemblage. Ceramics generally occur in
low numbers compared to other artifact types at
Toyah sites, but this is the first time pottery appears
in the archeological record in Central Texas and
its presence helps to distinguish the Toyah phase
from previous and coeval cultural entities. The
nature of this complete tool kit is believed to reflect
a heavier reliance on hunting than in the preceding Austin phase (Arnn 2012:52-56; Black 1986;

Johnson 1994:241-242; Ricklis and Collins1994:9;
Kenmotsu and Boyd 2012a). A widely held belief is
that the adoption of the Toyah lithic toolkit was due
to a shift in focus from hunting and gathering to a
greater reliance upon hunting. This supposition was
supported by the fact that during early excavations
of Toyah phase sites it was often noted that these
materials occurred with bison remains, which are
unknown in Austin phase contexts. Other notable
characteristics include rare maize remains (Jelks
1962; Harris 1985; Holloway 1988) and evidence
of living surfaces and possible structures (Black
1986; Johnson 1994; Kenmotsu and Boyd 2012a;
Prewitt 1981).
Dillehay (1974) was among the first who
assessed the presence and absence of bison at
archeological sites in Texas over nearly a 12,000
year period. His conclusions placed the Austin
phase in a bison absence period and the Toyah
phase in a bison presence period, thus supporting
the hypothesis that the change in technology from
the Austin phase to the Toyah was a response to
bison. Dillehay attributed the movements of bison
into Central and South Texas to climatic changes.
Others (Baugh 1986; Lynott 1979) found that
bison were present during the parts of the Late

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 86 (2015)

110

Texas Archeological Society

Prehistoric period that Dillehay reported to be an
absence period and, indeed, this is the case from
the Red River valley northward. Huebner’s 1991
study confirmed Dillehay’s original hypothesis that
there was no definitive evidence of bison during the
Austin phase in Central Texas. This has led some
researchers to question whether the lithic tool kit
(and possibly other artifact types) that appears in
Toyah phase sites was indeed a reaction to the reintroduction of bison (Mauldin, et al. 2012).
Mauldin et al. (2012) recently hypothesized that
bison likely never left the Central Texas region, but
that there simply were periods of greater densities in
localized environments. However, if this is the case,
their remains simply are not archeologically visible
(Prewitt 2012). There is evidence that hunting was
becoming more important in the Austin phase than
preceding temporal periods and that, perhaps, the
lithic toolkit and the observation of bison remains
at Toyah sites suggests Toyah hunter-gatherers were
continuing on this trajectory, but their efforts were
even more focused on hunting (Prewitt 1981). In
their study, Mauldin et al. (2012:110) suggest that the
number of bison in Central Texas actually was diminishing during the Toyah phase and that bison would
have occupied patchier environments, and therefore
could not likely have been a resource that was always
counted upon to be available. Their conclusion is that
Toyah adaptations actually reflect a wide diet breadth
as opposed to a narrow one with a bison focus.
The presence and influence of bison on the
Toyah artifact assemblage is often stressed when
examining Toyah sites and the Toyah phase. There
is little doubt when reviewing the literature that
bison are present at many of these sites. There are,
however, many Toyah sites that do not contain bison bone and it has been argued that the importance
of bison has been overstated (Arnn 2012:57; Black
1986; Dering 2008; Gilmore 2007, 2012; Johnson
1994; Rush 2013).
The lithic toolkit particular to Toyah, however,
seems well adapted for aspects of systematic hunting, butchery, and other highly repetitive activities
associated with systematic and frequent, if not
specialized, bison procurement (Ricklis and Collins 1994:14). This toolkit’s appearance coincides
with what appears to be the expansion of the range
of bison, back into Central Texas (Mauldin et al.
2012:106), with some reaching the northern edges
of South Texas.
Although bison may never have been completely absent from Central and South Texas, they

certainly have greater archeological visibility,
and thus a presumed greater population density,
during the Toyah phase than the earlier Austin
phase (Prewitt 2012:188). However, Mauldin et
al. (2012:106-107) hypothesize that the creation
of a highly specialized lithic toolkit was due to the
unpredictable locations of bison during the Toyah
phase in order to maximize the productivity of bison acquisition. Other cross-cultural comparative
studies of technological adaptations suggest that
hunter-gatherers do develop specialized tools when
they undertake frequent, repetitive activities such
as would occur with frequent butchery of bison and
other large ungulates (Bousman 1993; Hayden and
Garrett 1988). We suggest, however, that the Toyah
folk could just as easily have borrowed the toolkit
(other than the Perdiz points) from their neighbors
north of the Red River rather than reinvent identical paraphernalia.
Irrespective of their cultural affiliation it is
likely that people would have added bison to
their diet when possible. Dering’s (2008:72-74)
study indicates that people continued to use flexible mobility strategies that focused on various
resources in the unpredictable environment of
Central and South Texas. Arnn (2012:75) hypothesizes that the reliance on bison as a primary
food source in the Central Texas region seems
unlikely because of the diverse environments
that comprise it, a concept that is supported by
the archeological record.
The importance placed on bison and the significant impact they had on the Toyah people and
their material culture has made understanding
Toyah economic strategies implicitly and explicitly
tied to understanding how bison were exploited.
This focus on bison by archeologists has overshadowed the fact that, although many large Toyah
sites contain bison remains, these sites also contain
significant quantities of deer and antelope remains.
Clearly, bison were utilized at many Central Texas
Toyah sites; however, the extent to which bison
served as a primary food resource is less certain
across the entire geographic region. Alternatively,
the fact remains that white-tailed deer remains are
more common at Toyah sites than bison and it has
been suggested this animal is the real focus of these
hunters (Arnn 2012). In light of these studies and
hypotheses, we undertook a detailed analysis of
the faunal remains at Rowe Valley (41WM437),
but first an overview of the site and excavation
methods is presented.

Rush et al.—Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley (41WM437)
SITE SETTING AND
EXCAVATION CONTROLS

111

Area A (Figure 2) is oriented east-west and
extends from the right bank of a relict overflow chute
to near the mouth of an unnamed small creek. Area B
is adjacent to Area A on the south and southwest; it
is oriented southwest-northeast and situated between
the right bank of the overflow chute and a bend in
the unnamed creek on the east. Area C, oriented eastwest, is adjacent to the river on the left bank of the
overflow chute. At the time excavations began, about
35-40 percent of Area A had been removed by borrow
pit operations. The other two areas were intact.
Horizontal control at the site was imposed by
establishing a baseline oriented magnetic north with
key arbitrary grid reference points defined by rebar
set in concrete. The N1000/W1000 grid reference was
set a little south of the center of Area A. Grid values
increase to the north and to the west. A 60 d nail was
driven into the base of a large pecan tree; the protruding shaft was assigned an arbitrary elevation of 100
m. All elevations are in reference to this datum.
Logistical control was maintained by establishing Excavation Areas (XAs). Ideally, XAs were 10 x
10 m in size, but the ideal could not always prevail.
Eleven XAs (XA 1 through XA 11) were opened in
Area A; XA 9 was placed in the floor of the borrow

The Rowe Valley site (41WM437; Figure 1)
was recorded by Daniel J. Prikryl in 1982 and
subsequently excavated by Texas Archeological
Society (TAS) field schools under the direction
of Elton Prewitt in 1982, 1983, and 1984. It was
initially identified as a multi-component Late Prehistoric site with both Toyah and Austin phase occupations. These determinations were based upon
the visible stratigraphy in borrow pit walls and the
artifacts recovered by the recording party. The field
school excavations focused the majority of effort
upon the Upper Toyah deposits.
Rowe Valley is a large site whose known boundaries were delineated by systematic posthole tests
dug on a 10 m interval grid. Situated within the upper portions of an alluvial terrace approximately 11
m in depth, the site lies on the right (south) bank of
the San Gabriel River 0.9 km downstream from the
Williamson County Road 366 bridge. The cultural
materials were organized into three distinct areas, labeled A-C, of approximately equal extent (50 x 150
m) that constrained the main artifact distributions.

35

Lake Georgetown

Willis
Creek

N

BEL

Littl

L
LIAM COUN
TY
SON
CO
UN

WIL

e Riv

er

TY

Granger Lake

Rockdale

41WM437

Georgetown San Gabriel River

Rowe Valley Site
79

Round
Rock

TY
UN
CO TY
M
N
U
LA
MI E CO
LE

Brushy Creek

TRA
VIS

CO

UN

TY

0
0

Figure 1. Rowe Valley Site location map.

10 mi
15 km

112

Texas Archeological Society

San Gabriel River

No. 3
N1020/W1050

N1020/W970

Area A
Area C

No. 4

N
Borrow pit
No. 1

ut

Ch

e

O
.5

98

ss

Ro
a

d

No. 2

Creek bed

.0

99

ce

.5

99

41WM437
Rowe Valley Site
Contour Map

99.0

.5

r
ve

99
.0

99

w

flo

Ac

Area B

N920/W1050

0

100 ft

0

30 m
Contour interval .25 m

N920/W970

Excavation unit
9.0

9

.5

98

Backhoe trench
Datum pin set in concrete

Figure 2. Rowe Valley Site map.

pit to sample Austin phase deposits and is not addressed in this article. One, XA 12, was placed in
Area B and also is not addressed here. As a rule, excavation areas were divided into 4 x 4 m quadrants,
and these into 2 x 2 m excavation units. Two-meter
wide N-S and E-W walk paths in each XA allowed
control of foot traffic during excavations. The
2 x 2 m units were divided into 1 x 1 m cells designated by their sub-cardinal directions: northwest,
northeast, southeast, and southwest. Notes were
recorded on the basis of the 2 x 2 m units with the
southeast corner taken as the unit designator. Excavation and artifact control, however, was by the 1 x 1
m cells and by level (10 cm) or sub-level (5 cm).
A total of 387 1 x 1 m cells was excavated that
contained Upper Toyah material at Rowe Valley. XAs
1 and 5 had 36 cells each; XAs 2, 3, 6, and 10 had
48 cells each; XA 4 had 69 cells; XA 7 had 26 cells;
XA 8 had 16 cells; and XA 11 had 12 cells. When
excavations began, 10 cm levels were used; field observations led to the distinction of two separate Toyah

components, an Upper and a Lower, during the 1982
field season. After that distinction was made, excavations were adjusted to 5 cm sub-levels and focused on
the Upper component. The smaller vertical excavation
increment was applied for the remainder of the excavations. Most of the data presented and discussed below concerning the artifacts recovered and the features
encountered are from the Upper Toyah stratigraphic
zone. The majority of the excavated matrix was water
screened with traditional 1/4-inch mesh screen. Many
of the artifacts recovered were piece plotted, including tools, large flakes, bones, and cultural materials
excavated in association with features.
SITE FORMATION PROCESS AND
ALLUVIATION FROM THE
SAN GABRIEL RIVER
As noted above, the identified features and
the recovered cultural debris are hosted in a

Rush et al.—Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley (41WM437)
thick alluvial terrace of the San Gabriel River.
Aggradation of the terrace is achieved through over
bank flooding. Such floods are intermittent, and
flood frequency varies through time. Most of them
result in gentle slack-water sediment deposition
as was observed at the nearby Loeve-Fox site
(41WM2330) during excavations conducted
between 1972 and 1978 (Prewitt 1982:16 and
Table 2). These types of over bank floods move
gentle currents across the higher terraces and
result in negligible displacement of either feature
components or artifacts and debris. Indeed,
they introduce small quantities of fine-grained
sediments that, over time, bury and seal the cultural
materials in undisturbed alluvial contexts.
Less frequent are major flood episodes such
as the famous Thrall flood that dumped over 38
inches of rain at Thrall and over 30 inches at other
nearby towns between September 8 and 10, 1921
(Scarbrough 1990; NOAA 2015). The Williamson
County Sun (WCM) reported that the waters of
the San Gabriel River reached the highest mark
known up to that time and reported over 23 inches
of rain in a 24 hour period (WCM 1921). These
types of floods introduce much greater quantities
of fine-to-coarse-grained sediments, and generate
entirely new terrace surfaces in some areas and
erode sediments in others. At Loeve-Fox evidence
of sediments deposited by the 1921 flood event
was easily observed by the quantities of early
20th century farm equipment debris encountered
in fluvial deposits (Prewitt 1982:16). This flood,
which was observed to be about 4.25 km wide
just downstream at Circleville, deposited about
12-15 cm of sediment over the Rowe Valley site.
We consider, then, that the features and materials
excavated at Rowe Valley are in primary association, albeit consideration of turbation generated by
plant roots and burrowing animals of various sorts
must be kept in mind.
CULTURAL MATERIAL SUMMARY
Cultural materials recovered include lithic
tools and debris, ceramic sherds, bone and shell
ornaments, burned rocks, and faunal remains. Most
of the lithic items recovered from Rowe Valley are
consistent with the artifacts normally expected at
a Toyah site. These include Perdiz and Cliffton
arrow points, beveled bifaces, end scrapers made
on flake blades, and unifacial flake drills. A large

113

quantity of non-tool lithic debitage (n=32,133) was
also recovered from Rowe Valley. One chipping
station alone contained over 6,000 pieces (for
distributions and density maps of artifact types see
Prewitt [2012] and Rush [2013]).
Items not necessarily diagnostic of Toyah but
that commonly are found associated with it include
Cuney, Lott, Guerrero, and untyped arrow points.
Cuney usually is associated with the Caddo in East
Texas and the Guerrero point with the Mission-era
Texas coastal plain, but the Lott type is associated
with the Garza Complex on the Southern High
Plains of western Texas. Recently Boyd (2012) has
included the Garza Complex within the umbrella
of a “Northern Toyah” that abuts the northwestern
margin of the “Classic” Toyah cultural area (Johnson 1994).
The ceramic assemblage recovered at Rowe
Valley is consistent with other Toyah assemblages,
both in type and paucity. The sherds appear to represent approximately eight different vessels that are
representative of three different cultural traditions
commonly associated with the Toyah cultural area
(Prewitt 2012:200). Three of the vessels are classified as Leon Plain, a type that is occasionally
created locally but examples have been sourced
to East Texas and the Texas Coast (Perttula et al.
2003; Prewitt 1981; see, however, discussion in
Creel et al. [2013:66-69]). A Patton Engraved jar
and a Bullard Brushed jar are both types generally
associated with the southern Caddo pottery tradition in East Texas. A burnished jar with tenoned
handles similar to Goliad Plain ware is usually
associated with the coastal region of Texas and
provides another link to the coastal Toyah groups.
Several ceramic sherds from Rowe Valley were
included in a petrographic study and Instrumental
Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA) (Perttula et
al. 2003); these were incorporated later into a larger
study reported by Creel et al. (2013). Although the
petrographic analysis was inconclusive, the initial
INAA study placed the Patton Engraved, Bullard
Brushed, and one untyped vessel (“Leon Plain”)
into the Titus Cluster. The Titus Cluster covered
the area of the Titus phase, a post-A.D. 1430 East
Texas Caddo tradition. Only one sherd, from the
Goliad Plain vessel, was sourced to Central Texas;
however, its companions in the group are from
Coryell and McLennan counties to the northwest
(Perttula et al. 2003:Table 6). The study reported
by Creel et al. (2013:65) supports the Caddo
origin of the Bullard Brushed and Patton Engraved

114

Texas Archeological Society

vessels while placing the Goliad Plain vessel more
appropriately on the coastal plains.
FEATURE CONTEXT AND
CULTURAL STRATIGRAPHY
Three general categories of features were encountered: animal processing locations, tool manufacturing locations, and heating features (Prewitt
2012:198). Animal processing features tended to
be clustered on the northwestern outskirts of Area
A (Figure 3). The tool manufacturing features (or
chipping stations) consist of variously sized concentrations of lithic debris. Some appear to indicate
specific classes of tools were being manufactured
at particular locations. Heating features include
eight hot rock cooking stations, three probable
boiling stone dumps, one charcoal- and ash-filled
pit, and three burned clay pits (Figure 3). Two of
the hot rock cooking features are associated with
the Lower Toyah component while all the others
are in the Upper Toyah component.
To put the cooking features and cultural materials into context, it is instructive to look at their
vertical distributions. To do this, the raw waste
flake counts, including those in discrete chipping
stations, from XA 1 through XA7, XA 11, and parts
of XA 10 were collapsed to the W1000 grid line.
The raw counts were assigned density value ranges
and the corresponding cells shaded accordingly.
The distribution of identified projectile points
was then superimposed on the shaded cells. As is
clearly shown in Figure 4, the Upper Toyah component is about 25 cm thick and dips slightly from
north to south; it begins at elevation 99.45-99.20 m
in the north and slopes to elevation 99.40-99.15 m
in the south.
The Lower Toyah component also is about 25
cm thick and follows the same north-south dip;
it begins at elevation 99.20-98.95 m in the north
and slopes to elevation 99.15-98.90 m toward
the south. Some of the flake density variations
can be ascribed to the significantly less excavations carried out in the Lower Toyah as opposed
to the extensive excavations in the Upper Toyah.
However, a Lower Toyah chipping station shows
clearly at the N998-N1000 segment. Further,
the underlying Austin phase component shows
much greater density of flakes than the overlying
Lower Toyah. The Austin component is at least
35 cm thick; it begins at elevation 98.95 m in the

north and slopes to 98.90 m in the south. Whether
the excavations penetrated the full extent of the
Austin component is unknown but the presence
of a single Darl dart point indicates at least a
minor Late Archaic component near the base of
the excavations.
Superimposing the cooking feature locations
on the same vertical flake density chart is also
informative (Figure 5). Eleven of these features
are clearly associated with the Upper Toyah component, although Feature 3.3 does penetrate to
near the top of the Lower Toyah. Feature 3.1 and
Feature 3.3 occupy the same north-south horizontal
space, but Feature 3.3 extends about 5 cm deeper
than Feature 3.1. Two features, Feature 3.6 and
Feature 7.10, are comfortably in the Lower Toyah
component. No cooking features were encountered
in the underlying Austin component.
FAUNAL ANALYSIS
Approximately 33 percent of the over 10,000
specimen faunal assemblage was analyzed by
Rush (2013). All faunal remains analyzed were
from the Upper Toyah component as illustrated
above in Figures 4 and 5. In general, the condition
of the bone at Rowe Valley was poor. As a rule,
the bones were highly fragmented and the cortical
surfaces were quite rough. More detailed analyses
(see Rush 2103) demonstrated that much of the
fragmentation of bone at Rowe Valley was not
related to purposeful human activities (i.e., not
associated with marrow extraction or grease
production) but rather that trampling by humans,
animals, or later site formation processes are
likely the responsible agents. This conclusion
was largely based on assessing the Freshness
Factor Index (FFI) for analyzed faunal materials
following methods developed by Alan Outram
(Outram 1998, 2000, 2005) and then putting
each bone fragment into a size class following
others (see Ricklis and Collins 1994; Gilmore
2012). Generally, large mammal remains (deer
and antelope) dominate the assemblage, but a fair
amount of very large mammal remains (bison) are
included. Based on those faunal remains analyzed
the minimum number of individuals (MNI) for
identifiable large and very large mammals are
five deer and one bison (Table 1). We presume
the actual numbers of each species are higher
based on field observations of diagnostic bones

Rush et al.—Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley (41WM437)

115

41WM437
Rowe Valley Site
Feature Locations
Animal Processing
Area
F-11.1

N

F-4
F-7.10

Borrow pit
F-4.8

F-4.4

F-3.1

F-3.3

F-6.1
F-6.4
F-6.7

F-2.2

F-2.1
F-2.6a
F-2.6b

0

40 ft

0

12 m

Stone-lined hearth
Burned clay pit
Burned clay and
charcoal hearth
Hearth cleanout
Chipping station

Figure 3. Horizontal distribution of features: butchery, thermal, and knapping.

not included in our study and the fact that not all
butchery features or specimens were analyzed.
Field observations will be included below in
discussing patterns for the use of mammals.
Comparisons between bison remains and deer
(and deer-sized animals) demonstrated that there
were different hunting/butchery strategies practiced for large and very large mammals. Large
mammals (i.e., deer) were represented nearly
completely (including portions of the axial and
appendicular elements) in butchery features,
while most elements from very large mammal
remains (i.e., bison) were from appendicular
elements (Tables 2 and 3). More than half of
the identifiable deer bones were from the axial

skeleton. This is much higher than the percentage
of axial skeletal elements that were identified for
bison. The null hypothesis that each skeletal part
(skull, axial, limb) would be equally represented
by deer, bison, and unidentified remains can be
strongly rejected with a chi-square test at a <0.01
level of confidence (Table 4). This dichotomy
suggests that deer were hunted close to camp,
transported as complete carcasses, and butchered
at the site. Bison were apparently hunted at some
distance from camp, field butchered near the kill
location, and selected parts transported to camp
for final butchery.
When adjusted residuals are calculated, there
is further indication that bison and deer skeletal

10

16

P

12

P

S

P

PPP

10
10

Gr

S

P

PPP

P

P

N

P

P

P

N
10
08

10
06

- FEATURE

P

P

N

S

CN

10

LEGEND:

P

T UR

N
04

02

S

Gr

Cf Gu

10

10

PP

N
00

S

SP

S

99

Cf

P

Gu

N

P

PPP P

P

CN

Cf – Cliffton
CN – Untyped Corner Notched
C – Cuney
D – Darl
Gr – Granbury
Gu – Guerrero
L – Lott
P – Perdiz

S

SD

P

L

N

Figure 4. Vertical distribution of flakes and projectile points collapsed to the W1000 grid line.

FLAKE DENSITY:

S

No flakes recovered
0 - 10 flakes
11 - 25 flakes
26 - 50 flakes
51 - 100 flakes
101 - 250 flakes
251 - 500 flakes
501 - 5000+ flakes

Gr

98.60 m

10

PPP P

N

PPP
P
P

98.70 m

UL

14

Gr

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

10

C

N

98.80 m

98.90 m

99.00 m

99.10 m

99.20 m

99.30 m

99.40 m

99.50 m

Elevation, Site Datum:

N

VERTICAL DISTRIBUTION OF PROJECTILE POINT TYPES COLLAPSED TO W 1000 GRID LINE
Grid Coordinates along W1000 line:

8

P

99
6

99

Cf

N
4

P

N
99
2

T – Untyped Triangular
S – Scallorn
UL – Untyped Lozenge
UR – Untyped Rectangular Stemmed
US – Untyped Stemmed

Gu

N
N
99
0

P Cr

98

P

N
8

GU

T

98
6

L US

N
N

P

98

4

Upper Toyah
Lpwer Toyah
Austin Phase

116
Texas Archeological Society

10

16

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

10

14

N
10
12

No flakes recovered
0 - 10 flakes
11 - 25 flakes
26 - 50 flakes
51 - 100 flakes
101 - 250 flakes
251 - 500 flakes
501 - 5000+ flakes

F11.1

N

N
10
10

10
08

10
06

4.2
F-

N
10
04

F7.10

N

F4.4

N
10
02

10
00

F3.6

N
N
99
8

F3.1
F3.3

N
99
6

99
4

F6.1

N

F6.4

99
2

F6.7

N

N
99
0

F2.2

98
8

F2.1

N

N
98
6

NOTES: 1) Feature elevations are rounded to nearest 5 cm; actual elevations may be higher or lower
2) F-4.2 and F-4.8 occupy the same east-west space and cannot be shown seperately
3) F-3.1 and F-3.3 share the same upper limit, but F-3.3 lower limit is 5 cm lower than F-3.1
4) F-6.1 technically is situated at N993.9; it has been shifted to N994 (which it partially occupies) to separate it from F-6.4

N

Figure 5. Vertical distribution of flakes and features collapsed to the W1000 grid line.

FLAKE DENSITY:

98.60 m

98.70 m

98.80 m

98.90 m

99.00 m

99.10 m

99.20 m

99.30 m

99.40 m

99.50 m

Elevation, Site Datum:

N
98
4

FF2.6a 2.6b

N

Upper Toyah
Lower Toyah
Austin Phase

VERTICAL DISTRIBUTION OF THERM AL FEATURES COLLAPSED TO W 1000 GRID LINE
Grid Coordinates along W1000 line:

Rush et al.—Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley (41WM437)
117

118

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Identified mammals by count, percentage, number of individual specimens (NISP),
and MNI of total assemblage.

Identification

Count

Percent

NISP

MNI

Bison
Deer
Cottontail Rabbit
Rabbit
Fox Squirrel
Squirrel
Opossum
Wood Rat
Raccoon
Cotton Rat
Unidentified

93
284
1
5
2
4
2
2
6
17
2164

3.6%
11.0%
0.04%
0.19%
0.08%
0.16%
0.08%
0.08%
0.23%
0.66%
83.9%

22.4%
68.3%
0.2%
1.2%
0.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0.5%
1.4%
4.1%
n/a

1
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
10
n/a

Totals

2580

100%

100%

24

Table 2. Identified elements for bison and deer.
Element

Bison

Deer

Femur
Humerus
Radius
Tibia
Ulna
Metapodial
Phalange
Long Bone Fragment

1
1
3
5
0
15
3
33

4
10
9
11
2
9
32
8

Total

61

85

Table 3. Percentage of skeletal parts of deer and bison.
Element
Skull
Axial
Fore Limb
Hind Limb
Lower Limb
Limb
Non-identifiable

Bison

Deer

11%
19%
4%
8%
19%
35%
4%

10%
58%
7%
7%
15%
2%
1%

Rush et al.—Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley (41WM437)

119

Table 4. Bison, deer, and unidentified element counts, percentages, and chi-square
goodness-of-fit test by skeletal part.

Deer
Bison
Unidentified

Skull
Element

Axial

Limb

Unidentified

Total

27 (10%)
10 (11%)
6 (0%)

166 (58%)
18 (19%)
144 (7%)

91 (32%)
62 (67%)
1164 (54%)

0 (0%)
3 (3%)
850 (39%)

284
93
2164

Total
43
328
1317
853
				
χ2 =866.97
				df=6
				
CVα 0.01=16.812

elements are differentially represented in the assemblage (Table 5). The axial elements are extremely overrepresented for the deer while deer
limb bones are underrepresented. Axial elements
for bison do not deviate from the expected values,
although bison limb bones are overrepresented.
Skull elements are overrepresented for both deer
and bison.
Based on mature deer antler racks and a bison
calf maxilla, the faunal remains analyzed are likely
from a late fall or early winter occupation. Bison
generally begin giving birth in early April or May,
but are known to give birth as late as October or
November (Berger and Cunningham 1999:113118; McHugh 1972; Roe 1951). The seasonality
is further corroborated by the presence of mature
deer antlers still attached to the skull. Although
whitetail deer have highly variable mating seasons
based on environmental factors, mating season is
generally accepted to be from December to January (De Young and Miller 2011:324-331), and they
shed their antlers shortly afterward. During winter,
bison herds would have begun splitting into nursery and male herds (Roe 1951), making large herd
kills unlikely as the herds would tend to be more

2541

fragmented in the winter months. Likewise, deer
would have been hunted in small groups or individually during these seasons.
THE ASSAYED HEATING FEATURES
AND WOOD IDENTIFICATION
Feature designations are a combination of the
XA number and the sequence in which they were
encountered. All things comprised of more than a
single element or were otherwise not transportable
intact were labeled as a potential feature. Feature
2.1, then, is understood to be the first feature encountered in XA 2. Some “features” initially assigned numbers turned out to be rodent burrows or
rotted root strains, so there are gaps in the number
sequence due to the discounted “features.”
The 13 identified hot rock heating features
occur in four forms: stones placed into shallow
basins (seven examples; F-2.1, F-2.2, F-2.6a, F-3.1,
F-4.4, F-4.5, and F-6.7), stones placed on flat surfaces (two examples; F-7-10 and F-11.1), mounded
boiling stone dumps placed on flat surfaces (three
examples; F-2.2b, F-6.4, and F-4.8) and a charcoal

Table 5. Adjusted residuals of bison, deer, and unidentified skeletal part.

Deer
Bison
Unidentified

Skull

Axial

Limb

10.83
6.90
-13.25

24.29
1.89
-22.53

-7.08
2.92
4.74

Unidentified
Element
-12.71
-6.31
14.60

120

Texas Archeological Society

and ash-filled pit (F-3.3). All three of the boiling
stone dumps are located immediately adjacent to
shallow basin hearths. In two of these instances
another basin hearth is located 2-3 m distant. At
least two hearths (Feature 4.4 and Feature 6.7) are
accompanied by immediately adjacent discrete
areas of “clean out” comprised of charcoal, ash,
and small hearthstone fragments. Not all hot rock
cooking features are illustrated herein; Figures 6-8
(below) illustrate typical characteristics of each
form of hot rock cooking feature, basin hearths
with cleanout, and flat hearths.
Lump wood charcoal samples for AMS radiocarbon assay were taken from eight features:
four shallow basin hearths (Feature 2.1, Feature
2.2, Feature 3.1, and Feature 4.4), two flat hearths
(Feature 7.10 and Feature 11.1), one hearth clean
out (Feature 6.1 adjacent to the shallow basin
hearth Feature 6.7), and a charcoal- and ash-filled
pit (Feature 3.3). Charcoal from one lower Toyah
component feature (Feature 7.10) was selected by
Prewitt and submitted for assay before realizing
the error of that sample selection. The laboratory
performing the assays (Direct AMS, Seattle, Washington) requested that the samples be 0.3 g or more,
but not less than 0.1 g. Accordingly, single-lump
samples were selected where possible (D-AMS
5609 and D-AMS 5612), and in all cases the fewest lumps needed to achieve the desired threshold
were selected. Only one sample (D-AMS 5613)
was less than 0.3 g; this sample from F-3.3 was
0.09 g. Charcoal was identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level prior to sending the samples
for assay.
Plants identified in the Rowe Valley samples
are given in Table 6. All plant remains were wood
charcoal. The wood identified as elm is consistent
with the anatomical group that includes cedar
elm (Ulmus crassifolia). Given the site location,
the buckeye (Aesculus sp.) specimen is most
likely Texas buckeye (A. glabra var. arguta) or
red buckeye (A. pavia). Buckeyes, sumacs, and
hollies (yaupons) in Central Texas are shrubs or
small trees in contrast to elms and oaks, which are
taller canopy trees. The trees and shrubs identified
at Rowe Valley would have been available on or
near the floodplain of the San Gabriel River during
Toyah times.
Feature 2.1 is a circular cluster of burned
limestone cobbles situated primarily in the
southeast and northeast 1 x 1 m cells in unit
N988W10002. The tops of the uppermost stones

were encountered at 99.26 m elevation while the
tops of the lower stones were at 99.20 m; the lowest
stones rested at 99.18 m. The core of this feature
(at N988.6W1002.63) is about 75 cm in diameter.
Displaced stones adjacent to the perimeter extends
the diameter to about 1 m. The stones are set in a
shallow basin, and at least two of the cobbles near
the center were fractured in place. All of the component stones exhibit reddish to pinkish-gray color
and angular fractures common to burned limestone
cobbles and pebbles. Abundant burned clay and
charcoal lumps were noted in the gray ashy fill
of the basin. A canine mandible rested adjacent to
the northwest edge of this feature at an elevation
of 99.20 m.
Feature 2.2 is an oval cluster of burned
limestone cobbles in the northwest cell of unit
N988W1008. The uppermost stones were encountered at 99.31 m elevation; the tops of the lower
stones were at 99.19 m and they rested on a surface
at 99.16 m. The oval core of this feature is about 50
cm north-south and 60 cm east-west with the center
located at N989.57W1009.40. Displaced stones
around the perimeter form a larger oval about 65
cm northeast-southwest by 90 cm northwest-southeast. The cobbles were placed in a shallow basin.
The gray ashy fill contained numerous burned clay
lumps, and charcoal was abundant. The component
cobbles are pinkish-gray and exhibit the angular
fractures associated with heating elements.
Feature 3.1 is an oval cluster of burned
limestone cobbles situated primarily in the northwest cell of Unit N996W1006 (Figure 6). The
uppermost cobbles were encountered at 99.34
m elevation, the lower ones at 99.24 m, and
they rested on a surface at 99.18 m. The core of
this feature is about 70 cm northeast-southwest
and 60 cm northwest-southeast. The center is at
N997.70W1007.80. Displaced stones around the
perimeter increase the size of the oval to 80 cm
northeast-southwest and 1.10 m northwest-southeast. The shallow basin containing the cobbles has
gray ashy fill with burned clay and charcoal. Both
burned and unburned small bone fragments and
chert chips were also abundant in the fill. A bone
bead was adjacent to the southwest edge of this
feature, and a small concentration of chert flakes
and chips was adjacent to its northwest edge.
Feature 3.3 is a shallow pit that was only
partially excavated. The 1.60 m north-south axis
is centered at grid coordinate N997W1000 and
extends a maximum of 45 cm west of the W1000

Rush et al.—Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley (41WM437)

121

Table 6. Rowe Valley wood charcoal identification for radiocarbon assays.
Feature
No.*

Catalog Lot
No.*

Botanical
Name

Common
Name

Raw
Count

Radiocarbon
Sample No.

2.1
539
		
2.1
539

Quercus sect.
Lobatae
Ulmus sp.

Red group
oak
Elm

2

D-AMS 5608

1

D-AMS 5608

2.2
586
		
2.2
586
		
2.2
586

Quercus sect.
Lobatae
Quercus sect.
Quercus
Ulmus sp.

Red group
oak
White group
oak
Elm

2

D-AMS 5610

2

D-AMS 5610

1

D-AMS 5610

3.1

540

Ulmus sp.

Elm

1

D-AMS 5609

3.3

774

Ulmus sp.

Elm

6

D-AMS 5613

4.4
945
		
4.4
945

Quercus sect.
Lobatae
Ulmus sp.

Red group
oak
Elm

2

D-AMS 5614

1

D-AMS 5614

6.1
6.1

602
602

Aesculus sp.
Rhus sp.

Buckeye
Sumac

2
1

D-AMS 5611
D-AMS 5611

7.10

1491

Ulmus sp.

Elm

4

D-AMS 5615

Holly/
Yaupon

1

D-AMS 5612

11.1
670
Ilex sp.
			

*Materials are separated by botanical name; multiple species comprise some samples

line. Projected to its estimated size, this shallow
pit or basin is about 1.75 m in diameter and is
centered at N997W995.40. Unique among the
thermal features encountered at this site, this pit
was encountered at 99.26 m elevation and extended
only 10 cm in depth to 99.16 m. The gray ashy
fill contained abundant charcoal flecks and small
lumps of burned clay. There were relatively few
burned rock fragments present, and those observed
were small angular pieces of limestone burned to a
bright reddish cast. Field notes for this feature indicate a small charcoal twig from the fill exhibited
a cut groove around one end. Very few artifacts of
any sort, including chipping debris, were found
in or around this feature, unlike most of the areas
excavated. A notable exception is a Perdiz arrow
point found about 40 cm away from the southwest
edge of the pit.

Feature 4.4 is a large complex hearth that
extends over parts of 4 1 x 1 m cells in the western half of unit N1002W1002 and eastern half of
N1002W1004 (Figure 7). The tops of the uppermost stones encountered were at 99.32 m elevation
and the tops of the lowest stones were at 99.21 m;
they rested on a surface estimated to be at 99.18 m
elevation. The core is a circular cluster of burned
and fractured cobbles placed in a shallow basin.
It extends 75 m north-south and 70 cm east-west,
and is centered at coordinates N1003.42W1004.
While no distinct coloration of the fill was noted,
the matrix contained abundant small soft burned
clay nodules and charcoal flecks, and a fair number
of charcoal lumps. Extending southeast from the
core is an oval area of burned clay lumps and charcoal. This area is 70 cm wide southwest-northeast
and extends 40 cm to the southeast, presumably

122

Texas Archeological Society
41WM437
Rowe Valley Site
Feature 3.1
Stone Hearth

99.31
99.33

99.31
99.25

99.30

99.23
99.29

99.31

N998
W1009

N998
W1007

99.34
99.29

40 cm

0

99.27
99.24
99.31
99.26 99.29
99.28

Burned Rock
Charcoal Fleck or Lump
Burned Clay
Grid Coordinate
Elevations are in meters relative to
arbitrary site datum of 100 m

Figure 6. Feature 3.1 basin hearth (Upper Toyah).
41WM437
Rowe Valley Site
Feature 4.4
Stone Hearth
99.30
N1004
W1005

99.30

N1004
W1003

99.30
99.29

99.28

N1003
W1004

N1003
W1005

N1003
W1003

0

40 cm
N1002
W1003

N1002
W1004

N1002
W1005

Burned Rock
Charcoal Fleck or Lump
Burned Clay
Grid Coordinate
Perdiz Point

Elevations are in meters relative to
arbitrary site datum of 100 m

Figure 7. Feature 4.4 basin hearth with cleanout (Upper Toyah).

Rush et al.—Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley (41WM437)
representing clean out from the hearth proper.
The overall configuration of the two components
is kidney-shaped. A few burned rocks are scattered east-northeast of the hearth core, but greater
quantities are scattered around its west and south
sides. Chert flakes and chips were more common
on the eastern side.
Feature 6.1 is an irregularly shaped area
of clean out materials adjacent to the northwest
sides of the Feature 6.7 hearth and Feature 6.4
boiling stone dump. It is comprised of charcoal
lumps and flecks in gray ashy sediment interspersed with burned limestone cobble fragments
of varying sizes. It extends from coordinates
N994.55W1016.35 to the edge of Feature 6.7 at
coordinates N993.10W1015.35. The lens of burned
rocks and abundant charcoal was first encountered
at 99.32 m elevation. Its variable thickness ranged
from 2-7 cm, and it lapped onto the northwest lip
of Feature 6.7; that basin hearth was encountered
at an elevation of 99.29 m.
Feature 7.10 is a small circular group of
burned rocks centered at coordinates N1004W1014

and extended into four adjacent 1 x 1m cells (Figure 8). The tops of the uppermost stones were
encountered at 99.21 m elevation; they rest on a
flat sloping surface that dips from 99.16 m on the
east to 99.13 m on the west. Scattered charcoal was
present in this flat hearth, but was not abundant.
Small bone fragments, both burned and unburned,
were abundant and distributed in and around the
hearth. A flake blade was adjacent to the north
edge while a core chopper rested on the east edge;
flakes were scattered in and around the hearth, and
a very large cobble hammerstone rested at the same
elevation only 50 cm to the northeast. Over 60
percent of the small cobbles comprising this hearth
are friable conglomerates. The remainder consist
of typical fragments of burned stream-rolled limestone cobbles. The form and composition of this
feature compares well with the single Toyah hearth
reported at the Loeve-Fox site just a few kilometers
downstream (Prewitt 1974:72 and Figure 15c).
Feature 11.1 is a circular cluster of burned
limestone cobbles and fragments located in the two
western cells of unit N1014W996. The tops of the

99.15
99.16
99.15
99.14

N1004
W1014

99.16

99.15
99.16

99.13
99.16
99.13

123

99.13

Burned Rock
Charcoal Fleck or Lump
Grid Coordinate

99.16

0

Elevations are in meters relative to
arbitrary site datum of 100 m
Figure 8. Feature 7.10 flat hearth (Lower Toyah).

40 cm

124

Texas Archeological Society

uppermost cobbles were encountered at 99.42 m
elevation while the lower ones were at 99.35 m. This
is a flat hearth with the stones resting on a surface at
99.33 m elevation. The core of it comprises closelyplaced cobbles extending 70 cm north-south and 60
cm east-west. Many of the cobbles are fractured in
place and indicate no significant displacement subsequent to abandonment. Stones scattered around
the north and west sides of the core area extend
its size to 1.50 m north-south and 1.0 m east-west.
Charcoal lumps and flecks were moderately abundant in and around this hearth. A chert core rested
at the top of its northern edge while a ceramic sherd
rested near its center. Bone scraps, chert flakes, and
artifacts were scattered around this hearth.

missionaries, but the individual calibrations reflect
a wide age span at two standard deviations (95.4
percent probability).
After the initial ages were calibrated in OxCal,
various models were used to refine the calibrated
ages. First, all of the samples were input into OxCal to test whether these represented a single age
estimate for the Upper Toyah occupation. Initially,
the eight assays were summed (calibrated age
frequency distributions totaled). This produced
four modes that span the period from A.D. 1450 to
A.D. 1950 (Figure 9); the younger 200 years of this
range is an unlikely age estimate considering the
prehistoric artifact assemblage and the constrained
feature occurrences and stratigraphy, although this
provides one chronological hypothesis.
In order to more rigorously test the hypothesis
of radiocarbon sample homogeneity, all the assays
were combined (frequency distributions averaged) in OxCal. OxCal uses statistical procedures
known as Acomb and Chi-Square statistics. The
Acomb value (http://c14.arch.ox.ac.uk/oxcal3/
math_ag.htm, accessed August 9, 2014) must be
equal to or greater than the An estimate for these
to be considered the same age. “An” is calculated
through the formula: 1/√(2n), and thus it is dependent on sample size. The combination statistics for
all the assays are: Agreement n=8, Acomb=0.8%
(An=25.0%), and the Chi-Square statistic (χ2)
=36.838, df=1, p value < 0.00001. Both results
suggest that the degree of variability is too great
to consider these assays as coming from a single
occupation. At that point we asked if any samples

DATING THE TOYAH
COMPONENTS AT ROWE VALLEY
The eight radiocarbon samples were selected
because of their clear associations with the various
features (described above) and amount of available
charcoal. The charcoal samples were submitted to
Direct AMS in Bothell, Washington. The δ13C
corrected AMS age estimates are presented in
Table 7. Each of the individual radiocarbon ages
was calibrated in OxCal. A careful analysis of the
calibrated ages for the new Rowe Valley radiocarbon samples is justified, as these are very close in
age to the initial occupation of Central Texas by
a number of immigrant Native American groups
and by the first Spanish explorers and eventually

Table 7. Radiocarbon samples, proveniences, measurement data, and individual calibrations
in OxCal. All samples were lump wood charcoal collected from feature contexts.
Direct AMS

Feature
δ13C‰
No.		

Fraction of
modern

Radiocarbon
age

			

pMC

1 σ error

B.P.±1 sigma

D-AMS 5608
D-AMS 5609*
D-AMS 5610
D-AMS 5611
D-AMS 5612
D-AMS 5613
D-AMS 5614
D-AMS 5615*

97.67
95.86
96.49
97.36
96.98
96.51
96.85
95.58

0.3
0.28
0.29
0.34
0.28
0.29
0.29
0.28

2.1
3.1
2.2
6.1
11.1
3.3
4.3
7.10

-19.5
-19.8
-20.6
-27.2
-25.7
-25.1
-24.3
-23.0

189 + 25
340 + 23
287 + 24
215 + 28
246 + 23
285 + 24
257 + 24
363 + 24

*gray highlighted rows in Figure 10 indicate which samples are in the Older Age Group.

Calibrated age,
2 sigma range, A.D.

1654-1950*
1474-1636
1515-1662
1644-1950*
1529-1950*
1516-1663
1523- 1800
1452-1633

1
Rush et al.—Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley (41WM437)

125

Figure 9. 9.
Summed
Rowe Valley
calibrated
radiocarbon
ages radiocarbon
with 2 sigma age ages
spans. with 2 sigma age spans.
Figure
Summed
Rowe
Valley
calibrated

can be considered coeval, and we began to group
the dates and run combination statistics on all pairs,
building up to larger groupings with the goals of
arriving at the smallest number of temporal groups.
This procedure allows for a minimal age model
hypothesis to be constructed in contrast to the
summed calibration model discussed above and
illustrated in Figure 9. The results are discussed
below and illustrated in Figure 10.
Samples D-AMS 5608, 5610, 5611, 5612,
5613, and 5614 can be combined statistically using
the combination statistics in OxCal (Agreement n=6,
Acomb=40.0% (An=28.9%) and the χ2 = 10.717,
df=5, p value=0.0573), and we called these six
samples the Younger Age Group. When combined
(averaged) in OxCal, the 2 sigma (95.4 percent probability) age range is A.D. 1645-1664. This means

that statistically there is over a 95 percent chance
that all these samples date to this 19 year span in the
middle of the 17th century. While the Chi-Square
statistic is marginal, nevertheless we hypothesize
that these six samples may make up a very precise
age estimate for most of the dated features (Features
2.1, F2.2, F3.3, F4.4, F6.1, and F11.1) in the Upper
Toyah component at Rowe Valley.
Rowe Valley Samples D-AMS 5609 and 5615
should not be combined with the Younger Age
Group. However, these two samples, called the
Older Age Group, statistically can be combined
(averaged) in OxCal and the 2 sigma (95.4 percent
probability) range produced two age modes of
A.D. 1469-1525 (44.3 percent) and A.D. 15561632 (51.1 percent). The combination statistics
indicate that the sample ages are statistically

126

1

Texas Archeological Society

Figure
Combined (averaged)
Rowe Valley
agesradiocarbon
with 2 sigma age
spanswith
(dark 2
frequency
Figure
10.10.Combined
(averaged)
Rowecalibrated
Valleyradiocarbon
calibrated
ages
sigma age
distributions) plotted over unmodeled calibrated sample age estimates (light frequency distributions).

spans (dark frequency distributions) plotted over unmodeled calibrated sample age estimates
indistinguishable from each other (light
(Agreement
n=2,
frequency
Acomb=103.3% (An=50.%) and the χ2=0.390,
df=1, p value = 0.532). These dates from the Older
Age Group are significantly older than the dates in
the Younger Age Group and confirm at a minimum
there are at least two sequential Toyah components
present in the site. It is unclear which of the two
age modes in the Older Age Group is the more accurate age estimate for Features 3.1 and 7.10.
This chronological hypothesis (Younger
and Older Age Groups) is in agreement with the
observed site stratigraphy and the artifacts recovered from Rowe Valley. The Younger Age Group

accords well with the Upper Toyah component and
distributions).

the various “exotic” artifact groups; that is, the imported ceramics and the arrow points from distant
external regions are well within their expected age
ranges. Within the Older Age Group, Feature 7.10
is precisely within the age range expected for the
Lower Toyah component. However, Feature 3.1
requires additional consideration. It is stratigraphically within the Upper Toyah, yet dates to the
Lower Toyah. Whether this anomaly is a function
of old wood being burned, older rings sampled
from the core in a younger sample selected for dating, undetected buried ground surface undulations,

Rush et al.—Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley (41WM437)
or other causes remains undetermined. The patterns
of fire wood selection in Toyah sites have yet to be
studied in detail beyond the identification of tree
species. This could be an important issue, but to
our knowledge fire wood selection has not be analyzed in detail in any region in the South Central
United States.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The calibrated radiocarbon dating results support the observed vertical stratigraphy that shows at
least two separate occupations occurred during the
Toyah phase at Rowe Valley. Both the Younger and
Older Age groups clearly predate the entrance of the
Spanish into Central Texas. The “clean out” of features Feature 4.4 and Feature 6.7 demonstrate that
the site probably was visited at least twice during
the time represented by the Younger Age Group, but
it is likely that additional visits occurred based on
the quantity of materials present and the horizontal
distribution of cultural materials. The six features in
the Younger Age Group date to a 19 year span in the
middle 17th century, a time that appears to predate
the first appearance of Spanish explorers into the
eastern portion of Central Texas (Nickels and Bousman 2010:17-22; Wade 2003) unless one accepts the
possible foray of Luis de Moscoso Alvarado’s men
into Central Texas during his western trip from East
Texas in 1542 (Swanton 1985).
The Younger Age Group date suggests intensive use of the Rowe Valley locale near the end
of the Toyah phase; this is after the Spanish are
documented in more distant parts of Texas. However, the absence of direct Spanish contact at the
Rowe Valley site is supported by the fact that no
historic cultural materials were observed or collected (i.e., glass beads or metal artifacts) and no
European fauna such as horses, pigs, or goats were
identified. However, a complete analysis of faunal
remains would be needed to conclusively confirm
that. The data from the ceramics and arrow points
suggest that although those people who lived at
Rowe Valley did not have contact with the Spanish, they did have contact with peoples that lived
in the adjacent East Texas and Coastal regions as
well as the Southern High Plains to the northwest.
This conclusion is very much in keeping with the
Toyah phase mobility and social interactions discussed at length in Kenmotsu and Boyd (2012a)
and by Arnn (2012).

127

None of the analyzed faunal materials were
from the specific 1 x 1 m units where the dated
features were located. However, the focus on analyzing faunal materials recovered from the Upper
Toyah component of the site makes it possible
to associate the use of Younger Group thermal
features and the hunting and butchery strategies.
Further, the activity areas were covered with low
velocity alluvial deposits from the San Gabriel
River making the associations reasonably secure.
Bison were certainly utilized at Rowe Valley,
like other Toyah sites, but did not serve as the sole
economic pursuit. Deer are and have been ubiquitous in Central Texas and would have been widely
available, especially during the fall and winter
months. Whole deer carcasses can be transported
with relatively little effort and deer are shown to be
a more frequently utilized resource when compared
to bison (Arnn 2012; Black 1986). Bison in the area
surrounding Rowe Valley were possibly occupying specialty patches (Mauldin et al. 2012), and
their movements were focused in the upland black
prairie grasslands as opposed to the bottomlands
(i.e., where Rowe Valley is located). The presence
of bison remains, however, does suggest that bison
were indeed available and that the people that were
living at Rowe Valley utilized them. The ratio of
bison remains to deer remains suggests that bison
hunts occurred away from the main campsite.
Although it is difficult to know the level at which
field butchery takes place, conclusions regarding
which mammal resource was more utilized cannot
be firmly made since bones present in archeological contexts do not equate with meat use or how
intensively a resource was relied upon.
We conclude that Rowe Valley was a large
campsite whose location along the San Gabriel
River provided access to a wide variety of food and
other resources. Those that inhabited and utilized
the site did so intensively and returned to it multiple times. While this might suggest that the Toyah
occupants may have been somewhat more sedentary than those who lived there during the Austin
phase, they were still quite mobile. The presence
of ceramics from eastern and coastal Texas and arrow points from those areas and from the northwest
suggests cultural interactions with groups from
multiple adjacent—yet distant—regions during a
time of looming cultural upheaval. And finally,
it would be fruitful in the future to look at Rowe
Valley in the light of the “trade fairs” as suggested
by Creel et al. (2013:77) and the locations of an

128

Texas Archeological Society

agglomerated village called “Rancheria Grande”
as suggested by Gilmore (1984).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank the Travis County Archelogical Society and the hundreds of Texas Archeological Society members who worked at Rowe Valley
during three consecutive field schools for making
this study possible. We thank the Texas Archeological Society for arranging funding for the radiocarbon assays reported herein, and Kerza A. Prewitt,
who graciously provided the graphics and editorial
support. Ernest L. Lundelius, Jr.’s collegiality and
help in all matters faunal are greatly appreciated.
We appreciate the comments of an anonymous
reviewer, Dan Prikryl, and Tamara Walter.
REFERENCES CITED
Arnn, J. W., III
2012 Land of the Tejas: Native Identity and Interaction in
Texas, A.D. 1300 to 1700. The University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Baugh, S.
1986 Late Prehistoric Bison Distribution in Oklahoma.
In “Current Trends in South Plains Archaeology,” Plains Anthropologist 31 (114, pt 2; Memoir
21):83-110.
Berger, J. and C. Cunningham
1999 Bison: Mating and Conservation in Small Populations. Columbia University Press, New York.
Black, S. L.
1986 The Clemente and Hermina Hinojosa Site, 41JW8: A
Toyah Horizon Campsite in Southern Texas. Special
Report No.18. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Bousman, C. B.
1993 Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations, Economic Risk and
Tool Design. Lithic Technology 18(1&2):59-86.
Boyd, D.K.
2012 What is the Northern Toyah Phase? The Toyah Phenomenon on the Texas Southern Plains. In The Toyah
Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric Economic
and Social Processes, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and
D. K. Boyd, pp. 128-151. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.

Bronk Ramsey, C.
2013 OxCal, v 4.2.3. (https://c14.arch.ox.ac.uk/oxcal/OxCal.html, accessed September 8, 2014).
Collins, M. B.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of
Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 101-126. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Creel, D., J. R. Ferguson, and N. A. Kenmotsu
2013 A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas HunterGatherer Ceramics and its Implications for Mobility,
Ethnic Group Territory, and Interaction. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 84:29-83.
Dering, P.
2008 Late Prehistoric Subsistence Economy on the Edwards Plateau. Plains Anthropologist 53(205):59-77.
DeYoung, R. W. and K. V. Miller
2011 White-tailed Deer Behavior. In Biology and Management of White-tailed Deer, edited by D. G. Hewitt,
pp. 324-331. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
Dillehay, T. D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes
in the Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist
19(65):180-196.
Gilmore, K. K.
1984 Letter to E. R. Prewitt, July 1984. Rowe Valley files,
Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University, San Marcos.
Gilmore, Z.
2007 Large Mammal Utilization and Subsistence Stress
in Late Prehistoric South Texas. Master’s thesis,
Department of Anthropology, University of Southern
Illinois, Carbondale.
2012 Bone Processing and Subsistence Stress in Late
Prehistoric South Texas. In The Toyah Phase of
Central Texas: Late Prehistoric Economic and Social
Processes, edited by N. A Kenmotsu and D. K. Boyd,
pp. 111–127. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.
Harris, E. S.
1985 An Archaeological Study of the Timmeron Rockshelter (41HY95), Hays County, South Central Texas.
Special Publication 4. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, San Antonio.
Hayden, B. and R. Garrett
1988 Specialization in the Paleolithic. Lithic Technology
17(1):12-18.
Holloway, R. G.
1988 Pollen Analysis of 41MI8, Mills County, Texas.
Contribution 4. Laboratory of Quaternary Studies,
Department of Anthropology, Eastern New Mexico
State University, Portales.

Rush et al.—Dating the Upper Toyah Component at Rowe Valley (41WM437)
Huebner, J.A.
1991 Late Prehistoric Bison Population in Central and
South Texas. Plains Anthropologist. 36(137)
343-358.
Jelks, E. B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect in Hill
County, Texas. Archaeology Series No. 5. Department
of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1994 The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk: The Buckhollow Encampment Site 41KM16 Kimble County,
Texas. Report 38. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Kenmotsu, N. A. and D. K. Boyd (editors)
2012a The Toyah Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric
Economic and Social Processes. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Kenmotsu, N. A. and D. K. Boyd
2012b The Toyah Phase in Texas: An Introduction and Retrospective. In The Toyah Phase of Central Texas:
Late Prehistoric Economic and Social Processes,
edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and D. K. Boyd, pp. 1-18.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Lynott, M.
1979 Prehistoric Bison Populations of Northcentral
Texas. Bulletin of The Texas Archeological Society
50:89-101.
Mauldin, R., J. Thompson, and L. Kemp
2012 Reconsidering the Role of Bison in the Terminal Late
Prehistoric (Toyah) Period in Texas. In The Toyah
Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric Economic
and Social Processes, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu
and D. K. Boyd, pp. 90-110. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.
McHugh, T.
1972 The Time of the Buffalo. Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., New
York.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
2015 Major Texas Storms, Thrall Flood, 1921. (http://
www.floodsafety.noaa.gov/states/tx-flood.shtml,
accessed February 15, 2015).
Nickels, D. L. and C. B. Bousman
2010 Archaeological Testing at San Marcos Springs
(41HY160) for the Texas Rivers Center, Hays County,
Texas. Archaeological Studies Report No. 13. Center
for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University,
San Marcos.
Outram, A.K.
1998 The Identification and Paleoeconomic Context of
Prehistoric Bone Marrow and Grease Exploitation.
Dissertation, Department of Archaeology, University
of Durham.

129

2000 A New Approach to Identifying Bone Marrow and
Grease Exploitation: Why the “Indeterminate” Fragments Should not be Ignored. Journal of Archeological Science. 44 (No. 28):401-410.

2002 Identifying Dietary Stress in Marginal Environments: Bone Fats, Optimal Foraging Theory, and
the Seasonal Round. In Colonisation, Migration, and
Marginal Areas, edited by M. Mondini, S. Munoz,
and S. Wickler, pp. 74-85 Oxbow Books, Oxford.
Perttula, T. K., S. A. Iruegas, and H. Neff
2003 Caddoan Pottery in Central Texas: Geochemical
Analyses of Ceramics from Fort Hood and Vicinity.
Archeological Resource Management Series, Research Report No. 51. U. S. Army Fort Hood, Fort
Hood, Texas.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County, Texas. Research Report 49.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

1982 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox, Loeve and Tombstone Bluff Sites in the Granger Lake
District of Central Texas. Archaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central
Texas, Vol. 4, edited and compiled by T. R. Hays.
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State
University, Denton.
1985 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central
Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201–238.
2012 Toyah: Reflections on Evolving Perceptions. In The
Toyah Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric
Economic and Social Processes, edited by N. A.
Kenmotsu and D. K. Boyd, pp. 181-204. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.

Reimer, P. J., E. Bard, A. Bayliss, J. W. Beck, P. G.
Blackwell, C. Bronk Ramsey, P. M. Grootes, T.
P. Guilderson, H. Haflidason, I. Hajdas, C. Hatt,
T. J. Heaton, D. L. Hoffmann, A. G. Hogg, K. A.
Hughen, K. F. Kaiser, B. Kromer, S. W. Manning,
M. Niu, R. W. Reimer, D. A. Richards, E. M. Scott,
J. R. Southon, R. A. Staff, C. S. M. Turney, and J.
van der Plicht.
2013 IntCal13 and Marine13 Radiocarbon Age Calibration Curves 0-50,000 Years cal BP. Radiocarbon
55(4):1869-1887.

Ricklis, R. A. and M. B. Collins (editors)
1994 Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the
Middle Onion Creek Valley. Studies in Archeology
19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

130

Texas Archeological Society

Roe, F. G.
1951 The North American Buffalo: A Critical Study of the
Species in Its Wild State. University of Toronto Press,
Toronto.
Rush, H. E.
2013 The Rowe Valley site (41WM437): A Study of Toyah
Period Subsistence Strategies in Central Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas State
University, San Marcos.
Scarbrough, C. S.
1990 Land of Good Water, Takachue Pouetsu: A Williamson County, Texas History. Williamson County Sun
Publishers, Georgetown.
Swanton, J. R.
1985 Final Report of the United States De Soto Expedition
Commission (originally issued 1939). Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington D.C.

Wade, M. F.
2003 The Native American of the Texas Edwards Plateau:
1582-1799. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Williamson County Sun (WCS
1921 Waters of the San Gabriel Reach Highest Mark
Ever Known: The Floods of Williamson County
1921, 1957, and 2007. The Williamson County
Historical Commission (http://www.williamsoncounty-historical-commission.org/SAN_GABRIEL_flood_of_1921_in_Williamson_County_Texas.
pdf, accessed 24 January 2015).

A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County,
Texas: Consideration of Late Prehistoric Connections
between the Northwestern and Southern Plains
Christopher Lintz and Daniel Prikryl

ABSTRACT
Archeological testing at 41SS178 in San Saba County, Texas, recovered a stone steatite vessel rim sherd from
Late Prehistoric contexts containing diagnostic arrow points from both Austin and Toyah phases and probably
dating between ca. A.D. 1000 and 1600. The scarcity of stone bowl technology and absence of comparable
steatite vessels from Texas suggests that the vessel was probably from a distant source. The inability to geochemically source steatite limits source identifications to vessel form comparisons. Prehistoric steatite vessels
are commonly made in three places in North America: the Appalachian Mountains in the Eastern United States
during Middle-Late Archaic times; the northwestern Plains during the Late Prehistoric through Historic times;
or the West Coast from Archaic through Late Prehistoric times. The vessel form and temporal context of the
San Saba County specimen suggests a closer relationship with the northwestern Plains than other areas. It
is postulated that the vessel arrived in Texas from the northwest as part of the same kinds of interaction that
brought some 115 northwestern Plains obsidian artifacts to the southern Plains.

INTRODUCTION
Recent testing to assess impacts to 41SS178 of
a proposed foot bridge over a tributary creek within
the Lower Colorado River Authority’s San Saba
River Nature Park recovered a small rim sherd of a
ground stone steatite vessel (Hixon et al. 2011:38).
The site is near the confluence of Mill Creek and
the San Saba River within the city limits of San
Saba, Texas. Prehistoric steatite artifacts from
Texas are rare and a soapstone vessel fragment
from Central Texas is unique. Herein we describe
the form and context of the stone vessel fragment
and examine the formation processes and occurrence of steatite. Geochemical sourcing studies of
steatite are in their early stages of development.
The range of geochemical variation of steatite
quarries from the three vessel manufacturing areas
in North America remains unknown. Comparative studies of archeological steatite vessel forms
in North America suggest that this vessel most
closely resembles those from the northwestern
Plains in shape and age. Its presence in a Central
Texas site is postulated to be related to the kinds
of interactions that occurred between aboriginal

groups with the transport of obsidian between the
northwestern and southern Plains during the Late
Prehistoric period.
DESCRIPTION
The vessel fragment is a small (1.80 x 1.62 cm)
piece of soft, silvery-gray steatite or soapstone with
a greasy or slick feel. The specimen measures 0.51
cm thick at the body portion furthest from the lip and
narrows to a thickness of 0.41 cm at a bevel juncture
point some 0.29 cm below the lip. At that point the
exterior edge of the vessel is markedly beveled to
form a nearly pointed rim. Prominent manufacturing striations parallel to the rim axis are present on
the interior surface. The exterior body has striations
perpendicular to the lip, while the exterior rim
bevel has abrasion marks parallel to the rim (Figure
1). The striation orientations suggest that the later
stages of vessel shaping were made with a coarse
abrading stone. A concentric circle chart indicates
that the vessel had a projected orifice diameter of
about 20 cm. This projected diameter suggests that
the sherd is from a bowl or cup, rather than a pipe or

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 86 (2015)

132

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Steatite vessel fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas.

smaller artifact. The vessel height is unknown, but
the rim slope from a plane perpendicular to the lip
axis indicates that the upper vessel body probably
had a relatively deep, conical form.
CONTEXT AND POSSIBLE CULTURAL
AFFILIATION OF THE SAN SABA,
TEXAS SPECIMEN
The specimen was recovered during screening
fill from Unit 2 South, level 2 (99.7-99.6 m below
datum point) at 41SS178 (Hixon et al. 2011:38).
The survey phase placed 17 shovel tests and two
backhoe trenches to delineate site limits of about
105 x 75 m, which is bounded on three sides by the
incised channel of Mill Creek. The testing phase
included two more backhoe trenches and three 1 x
2 m hand-excavated units excavated to depths of
1 m each. The northern half of the northernmost 1
x 2 m unit was subsequently excavated down an
additional 50 cm as was the southern half of the
southernmost 1 x 2 m unit.

Culturally and temporally diagnostic implements recovered during the testing phase include
two contracting stemmed Perdiz points (one each
from levels 1 and 2), three plainware pottery sherds
(one each from levels 1, 2, and 3) and four small,
stemmed or corner-notched arrow points loosely
resembling the corner-notched Scallorn type (two
from level 2, and one each from levels 3 and 7; Figure 2). Considerable morphological variation exists
in the range of point forms assigned to the Scallorn type from this site. They vary from minimally
modified corner-notched flakes to spike-like forms
with only slight shoulders and basal tangs. Based
on the distribution of these diagnostic projectile
points, the steatite vessel fragment was recovered
from the lower portion of a probable Toyah phase
component (ca. A.D. 1250-1600, as indicated by
Perdiz points and Leon Plain pottery) or the upper
portion of a probable Austin phase component (ca.
A.D. 1000-1250, as indicated by Scallorn points).
A charcoal sample from level 3 (20-30 cm
below surface), yielded a conventional age of
870 ± 40 B.P. (Beta-287767) and a calibrated two

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas

133

Figure 2. Composite contexts of the steatite bowl and diagnostic arrow points from 41SS178.

standard deviation age range of A.D. 1040-1260 for
the zone below the fill containing the stone vessel
rim. Thus, the steatite vessel post-dates A.D. 1000
and is unquestionably associated with the Late Prehistoric period at the site (e.g., Collins 1995:385;
Prewitt 1981, 1985).
Although the site is only some 500 m from the
edge of town, less than a half dozen historic artifacts were recovered from 41SS178 from all phases
of the project. The scarcity of historic remains on
site suggests that the steatite stone bowl fragment
is not an intrusive 20th century artifact that has
worked its way into prehistoric subsurface contexts
by bioturbation processes.
STEATITE COMPOSITION
AND FORMATION
Steatite or soapstone is composed mostly of
talc, a hydrated magnesium silicate that naturally formed by one of two ways (Greene 1995:5;

Truncer 2004a:489). The more common manner
of formation involves the metamorphic alteration
of ultramafic rocks, such as periodite or other dark
mantle rocks rich in irons and magnesium but
low in silica. Typically these ultramafic rocks are
chemically altered during bedrock deformation
associated with heating in subduction zones by
plate tectonics. The less common way that steatite
forms is by hydrothermal chemical replacement
changes, or metasomatism, which adds chemicals
and silica and alters carbonate-rich sedimentary
rock, such as dolomite (Greene 1995:5; Truncer
2004a 489). Steatite derived from altered periodite
forming near tectonic boundaries sometimes contain ubiquitous microscopic inclusions of chromite
and nickel sulfides and from one to three percent of
iron oxides; whereas steatite formed from hydrothermic changes of dolomites do not contain these
sulfides, and usually have less than one percent
iron oxide (Jim Burton, personal communication
2011; Greene 1995:10). These differences make it
possible to differentiate between the two forms of

134

Texas Archeological Society

steatite. Steatite is very soft, measuring only 1.0
on the Mohs hardness scale. It is easily cut and
ground into a variety of forms with simple implements. One advantage of the metamorphic kind of
steatite is that it is resistant to thermal shock, and
it functions well as fire-proof cooking containers.
Few geological talc-bearing districts occur in
Arkansas (n=1), Texas (n=2), and New Mexico
(n=1) of the south-central United States (Greene
1995). The closest reported source of steatite to
41SS178 is about 72 km from San Saba near the
southern margin of the Precambrian Llano Uplift or
Central Texas Mineral Belt (Beste 2005:395; Figure 3). As many as 17 soapstone mining prospects
have been geologically mapped for the region, with
most occurring along the southern part of the Llano
Uplift and with serpentine occurrences associated
with Packsaddle schist (Dietrich and Lonsdale
1958; Green 1995:65). These steatite outcrops
are generally small, non-commercial, exposures
of ocean floor serpentine that has been altered by
metamorphism and the heat from intrusive igneous rocks and conform to the ultramarfic type of
steatite formation processes (Barnes et al. 1950).
Modern commercial soapstone and talc mines
are present along the Allamoore Formation exposed
near the south end of the Sierra Diablo Mountains

about 16 km west of Van Horn, in Hudspeth and
Culbertson counties, and some 585 km west of San
Saba, Texas (Bourbon 1982; King 1965; King and
Flawn 1953). Here a series of at least 20 mines
and 23 prospects of steatite and talc outcrop in
a 24 km long segment of the formation derived
from altered sedimentary rocks (Greene 1995:63).
Large-scale commercial mining of these deposits
began in 1952, and by 1994 about 8,880,000 tons
have been mined from the Allamoore Formation
quarries (Greene 1995:65).
The earliest geological survey of Texas reported other occurrences of impure “soapstone
deposits” from Frio, Bandera, and either Bexar
or Kendall counties (Dumble 1889:61). However,
since none are associated with igneous or metamorphic regions or known talc-deposits, their identifications as steatite sources are regarded as unlikely
(Greene 1995; Swanson 1995).
SOAPSTONE ARTIFACTS FROM
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES IN TEXAS

A search of the Texsite Atlas electronic database found a few reported soapstone or steatite
artifacts attributed to two groups (Figure 4). First
are late 19th or early 20th century
historic soapstone utilitarian or
decorative ware artifacts that include a soapstone pencil, a tailor’s
seam-marking bar, and a sherd
from a decorative soapstone urn,
bowl, or ashtray from historic
homesteads in Atascosa, Bell, and
Marion counties.
The second soapstone group
consists of legitimate prehistoric
artifacts that occur as pendants
and pipes. Soapstone pendants are
reported from two sites in Presidio
and Brewster counties south of the
Allamoore Formation deposits in
far West Texas. The rare occurrences
of prehistoric soapstone pipes are
reported from Central and South
Texas. Two steatite elbow pipes
have been reported from Burnet
and Bosque counties northeast of
the Llano Uplift soapstone sources
region of Central Texas (Field
1956:172; Olds 1965:129). The
Figure 3. Steatite occurrences in Texas relative to the location of 41SS178.

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas

135

Figure 4. Distribution of historic and prehistoric artifacts made of steatite listed in the Texsite database.

specimen from Burnet County has an outward facing anthropomorphic head carved in the bowl which
may represent an indigenous copy of European trade
pipes. Two tubular or conical pipes are reported
from Uvalde and Live Oak counties in South Texas
(Brown et al. 1982; Chandler 1995:10; Texas Beyond
History 2005). These kinds of pipes are sometimes
called cloud-blower forms and are commonly found
in northern Mexico and South Texas westward to
El Paso, Southern Arizona, and beyond (Switzer
1969:27-34). The orifice diameters of the two South
Texas steatite pipes range from 2.5-3 cm to 6.4 cm,
which is considerably smaller than the projected 20
cm diameter of the San Saba vessel fragment.
The Texsite files also list four other steatite
or soapstone specimens attributed to prehistoric
contexts. Unfortunately they are not described, but
merely listed as two pieces of worked steatite found
in Jasper and Navarro counties, an unmodified piece
of steatite from Panola County, and a “soapstone
abrader” from Nueces County. Unless the abrader is a
socio-technic item that represents a ritualistic artifact
based on the selection of an overly-soft, non-utilitarian material to absurdly represent a metaphor for
heavy-duty work implements (cf. Brown 1976:148),
the raw material attributed to the abrading stone is
probably misidentified in the database.
A search of the Texsite database for the occurrence of ground stone bowls turned up several
examples of mortar holes, but no reported examples
of portable stone vessels. One shallow stone bowl

not yet in the Texsite database and made from a nonsteatite rock was recovered during the 2013 Texas
Archeological Society field school from a Late Archaic component at the Eagle Bluff site (41ME147)
in Medina County. Illustration of the fragmentary
specimen shows the vessel to be a small (ca. 6.5
cm diameter), shallow, dish-shaped bowl (Hester
2013:12 and Figure 17). The differences in vessel
form, lithic resource material, and age from the San
Saba specimen clearly show that it was not part of the
same stone vessel manufacturing tradition.
In summary, steatite artifacts are rarely recovered
from prehistoric contexts in Texas. Most identifiable
prehistoric steatite implements from Texas are confined to jewelry or pipes. No comparable steatite stone
bowls have been reported from Texas, and indeed, no
sustained stone bowl manufacturing industries were
extant in Texas or the southern Plains. Based on the
absence of comparable kinds of artifacts, the solitary
San Saba steatite vessel was probably not made in
Texas. So the question remains: what is the probable source of the steatite vessel rim sherd found at
41SS178 in San Saba County?
OCCURRENCE OF STEATITE
OUTCROPS IN VESSELS: EASTERN
NORTH AMERICA
The distribution of talc, and related minerals—
steatite/soapstone, and serpentine deposits—in

136

Texas Archeological Society

North America as summarized by Greene (1995)
and Truncer (2004a) reflects high densities of
bedrock exposures in primarily three geographical
areas (Figure 5 a-b). These include:
1.

approximately 135 talc-deposit districts occur in the Appalachian Mountain range extending from east-central
Alabama northeastward through 15
states and the District of Columbia to
southwestern Maine;

2.

approximately 32 main talc districts
across the Sierra Nevada, Coastal, and
Cascade Mountain ranges of California, western Nevada, southwestern
and northeast Oregon, and across
Washington state; and

3.

approximately 14 main talc districts in
the northwestern Great Plains, mostly
in the Yellowstone and surrounding
mountainous areas of Wyoming,
southwestern Montana, and eastcentral Idaho.

Less common are relatively small talc and
related materials districts in the Superior region of
Wisconsin, the Ouachita Mountains of west-central
Arkansas, the Llano Uplift of Central Texas, the
basin and range areas of the Texas Trans-Pecos,
and the San Andrea Mountains of south-central
New Mexico. Of all these outcrop occurrences,
aboriginal stone bowl industries utilizing steatite/
soapstone are present only in the three main areas.
The age and style of vessel morphology differs to
a great degree from one area to another. The following briefly summarizes the steatite stone bowl
manufacturing industries to isolate temporal and
form characteristics that are comparable to the
example found in San Saba County.
Occurrence of Steatite Vessels: Appalachian
Mountains of Eastern North America
Along the East Coast/Appalachian Mountains
area, more than 50 of the 135 geological talcdeposit districts have documented quarries used
for the manufacture of steatite bowls. These prehistoric quarries extend across east-central Alabama,
northern Georgia, the western margins of both
North and South Carolina, western Virginia, central
Maryland, southeast Pennsylvania, as well as Connecticut, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts (Truncer

2004a:489, 2004b, 2006). Other New England
steatite outcrops in Vermont, New Hampshire, and
Maine were not used as vessel quarries. Truncer
(2004a:490) postulates that steatite vessel quarries
correlate to the distribution of nut mast-dominated
woodlands, whereas the steatite outcrops not associated with stone vessels coincide with conifer/
hardwood forests with low mast yields. Truncer
also maintains that vessels made from the metamorphic form of steatite are used to process nuts
due to their superior ability to withstand heat.
Crushed steatite was among the earliest kinds of
pottery tempers used in the Mid-Atlantic states,
and its ability to stand up to high temperatures was
undoubtedly one of its desirable attributes (Griffin
1952:Figure 21).
The range of artifacts made of steatite in the
Eastern United States includes pipes, figurines, and
cooking vessels (Figure 6 a-c). Since most steatite
vessel fragments are small, the range of vessel
forms is uncertain. Some stone vessels are largemouth, rectangular-to-oval bowls with flat bottoms
and occasional lug handles and/or rare surface decorations (Tuck 1978:38; Griffin 1952:Figures 21,
138, 147). Other steatite cooking utensils are perforated flat griddle-like containers (Custer 1989).
In the Eastern United States, steatite vessel
fragments are usually found as isolated fragments
within 550 km of the nearest outcrop source, although some fragments from southern Florida are
about 950 km from the closest bedrock outcrop
(Truncer 2004a:490 and Figure 2). Abundant stone
vessel sherds have been reported from sites in eastern Tennessee, western South Carolina, southern
Virginia, southeast Pennsylvania, and Connecticut
within 125 km of the steatite outcrops. Some of
these sites may contain multiple steatite vessel
fragments found in graves, caches (non-graves),
and in habitation refuse (Truncer 2004a:495).
Caches of steatite vessel fragments are known
to occur only in the lower Mississippi River valley—especially at Claiborne in south Mississippi
(Gagliano and Webb 1970), and Poverty Point in
northeast Louisiana (Gibson 1996, 2001; Webb
1944, 1982). At the latter site, a single oval pit
southwest of the big mound yielded thousands
of soapstone vessel fragments. No complete or
restorable vessels were recovered and only a
few refit sherds were present from this context
(Gibson 1996). However, sherds from the pit conjoined other fragments from ridge-top locales up
to 1.2 km away from the Poverty Point site. Both

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas

137

Figure 5. Distribution of talc deposits (A) and prehistoric steatite quarries (B) in the coterminous United States.

Claiborne and Poverty Point are about 550 km
west and southwest of the nearest steatite outcrop
in east-central Alabama. In contrast, the San Saba

Texas specimen is about 1,150 km from the closest
Eastern United States steatite quarry in Alabama.
A compilation of 95 radiocarbon and five

138

Texas Archeological Society

aa

cc

b

Appalachian Vessel Forms Eastern U.S.

dd

e

h
h

g
g

ff

ii

jj

Northwestern Plains Vessel Forms

nn
k
k

pp

m
m

l

qq

o
o

rr

Southern California Vessel Forms

Figure 6. Variation in steatite vessel forms in the coterminous United States.

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas
thermoluminescence dates from Eastern U.S.
contexts yielding steatite vessel fragments indicate vessel usage from ca. 4300 B.C. to 50 B.C.
during the Middle and Late Archaic periods, with
most fragments dating between 2100 B.C. and
500 B.C. (Truncer 2004a:496-506). The earliest
stone vessels predate the occurrence of pottery,
but considerable temporal overlap exists in the two
technologies (Sassaman 2006). The persistence of
stone and ceramic vessel technologies reinforces
the notion that steatite vessels may have operated
in a different functional or symbolic realm from
that of pottery containers, perhaps due to differences in cooking temperatures, or porosity.
Occurrence of Steatite Vessels:
Northwestern Great Plains
of North America
Geologists have identified at least 14 steatite
or talc-bearing districts in the northwestern Plains,
including 12 ultramarfic sources in Wyoming, one
ultramarfic source from Idaho, and one carbonate source from Montana (Greene 1995). At least
seven steatite vessel quarries have been found in
the Laramie, Big Horn, Wind River, Gros Ventre,
and Teton Mountain ranges of Wyoming (Adams
2006:Figure 1; Frison 1982; Wedel 1954; see Figure 5b). Some steatite vessel quarries have partially
delineated vessel preforms, stubs of successfullyremoved vessel blanks, split vessel fragments,
stone choppers to rough-out container preforms,
and scrapers thought to have been used to hollow
out the bowls (Frison 1982). The final vessel shaping usually occurred at sites away from the quarry
sources. The northwestern Plains steatite vessel
industries are about 1,360 km from the San Saba,
Texas specimen.
Frison (1982:282) documents 11 steatite vessels from Wyoming. The typical northwestern
Plains vessel shapes are dominated by: tall “flower-pot” conical vessels with flat, flanged bases,
hemispherical bowls, and cup-like vessels. Some
conical vessel rims curve inward slightly and lips
range from rounded, flattened, or pointed (Frison
1982:281). Many vessels have a small notch-like
dimple along the rim to facilitate pouring (see
Figure 6). Very few vessels are decorated. Two
Wyoming vessels have a raised collar or band below their rims. The interior surfaces tend to show
more care in manufacture than the rough-scratched
and abraded exterior surfaces. The dimensions

139

of 11 relatively complete vessels range from 7.1
to 25.2 cm tall, 9.5 to 23.8 cm in diameter at the
orifice/rim, and 5.5 by 14.5 cm in diameter at the
base. Although vessel walls often ranged from 8.6
to 10.5 cm thick, on some vessels, the walls may
have areas ground to less the 0.2 cm thick, and
some even have holes worn through their walls.
Rarely drill holes are placed on opposite sides of
the vessel to facilitate carrying; and occasionally
paired drilled holes along a crack allowed damaged
vessels to be sewn and stabilized.
The greatest occurrence of steatite vessel
fragments is from northwestern Wyoming, Idaho,
and Montana (Frison 1982:283, 285). Vessel fragments are occasionally found on the foothills of the
Bighorn, Beartooth, Absaroka, Washakie, Teton,
Gros Ventre, Owl Creek, Wind River, Rattlesnake,
Seminoe, and Salt River Mountain ranges. Some
vessel fragments occur above timberline elevations, but most fragments are from lake shorelines
and mountain passes.
Both Frison (1982) and Wedel (1954) suggest that most steatite vessels probably date to the
early Historic period, for stone pots are mentioned
among early historic descriptions of Shoshonean
groups by Lewis and Clark (Schoolcraft 1851;
Thwaites 1904-05; Lowie 1924). Vessels are
also archeologically associated with bison horn
sheaths and projectile point forms attributed to
the historic period. The morphological similarity
of steatite vessels to conical, flat-bottom ceramic
vessels of the Intermountain Tradition suggests
there may be a cultural connection between them,
if not continuity in form. The conical ceramic
vessel form has been radiocarbon-dated as early
as A.D. 1100-1200 and persisted for perhaps 500
years (Frison 1982:284). Only 22 of 195 recorded
soapstone bowls are from Late Prehistoric contexts
(A.D. 1000-1500), whereas 30 vessels have metal
implement manufacturing marks suggesting that
stone bowl production persisted into the early A.D.
1800s Adams (2006:534).
Occurrence of Steatite Vessels:
Western North America
Steatite bowls are widespread and common
in the far West and extend from the Arctic, the
Northwest Coast, and throughout California (Adams 2006). Geologically, talc-producing districts
in the lower coterminous United States include
18 in California, three in Nevada, one in Oregon,

140

Texas Archeological Society

and 10 in Washington (Greene 1995; see Figure
5). More than two-thirds are ultramarfic forms,
but carbonate forms of steatite are also present,
especially along the Sierra Nevada Mountains
outcrop exposures.
The types of vessels commonly found in the
Arctic consist of small, relatively flat bowls that
served as oil lamps (Fitzhugh and Crowell 1988;
Willey 1966). The Northwest Coast groups historically made elaborately carved vessels of argillite
for the tourist trade. But prehistoric soapstone
manufacturing industries in the Northwest Coast
began as early as 5,000 years ago and produced
lip ornaments, ear spools, pendants, and other
jewelry rather than stone bowls or other containers
(Dahm 1994). Most of these steatite objects are too
far away to be seriously considered as a possible
source of the San Saba, Texas, vessel fragment.
Prehistoric manufacture of steatite ollas,
bowls, and tray-like vessels were common and
widespread across California (Adams 2006; Heizer
and Treganza 1944, 1972; Wlodarski 1979). Flat
tray-like drip pans for collecting cooking grease
were made near the Klamath River basin in northern California, and tall cylindrical jars were made
in the Stockton-Lodi area of the central interior valley (see Figure 6). One of the more famous steatite
olla manufacturing areas is Santa Catalina Island,
located some 1,850 km away from the San Saba
specimen from Central Texas (Wlodarski 1979).
Carved olla technology began about 4,000 years
ago, but the most intensive stone bowl production,
involving trade into the interior San Joaquin valley
and Sierra foothills, occurred during the Late Prehistoric period. Even though basketry was highly
developed, the steatite vessel industry supplied
products primarily used for supplemental cooking.
The common vessel forms are globular ollas,
wide mouth hemispherical bowls, asymmetrical
bowls, and flat griddle plates with low rims and
a drilled hole used to assist dragging the plates
from fires. Steatite was also commonly shaped into
jewelry and effigy charms with inlayed shell beads.
THE STATUS OF STEATITE
GEOCHEMICAL SOURCING STUDIES
The range of parent materials altered by either
thermal subduction or hydrothermal chemical replacements are expected to reflect great chemical
variations within steatite outcrops, so extensive

testing of sources is required to document their
chemical perimeters at any source area (Kenneth Sassman, personal communication, 2011).
Pioneering geochemical studies examined trace
elements (TE) and rare earth elements (REE) to
quantitatively characterize steatite source differences using a variety of methods. Early spectrographic steatite studies lacked precision and robust
sample sizes necessary to yield conclusive results
(Bullen and Howells 1943). Other investigations
tried combined atomic absorption and optical mineralogy techniques (Turnbaugh and Keifer 1979;
Turnbaugh et al. 1984). Still other studies used
Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA)
to measure REE abundances and delineate source
differences (Allen et al. 1975, 1984; Holland et
al. 1981; Luckenbach et al. 1975; Rogers et al.
1983). These studies had hoped that TE and REE
concentrations would remain relatively constant
across lateral occurrences of a steatite outcrop,
even though drastic changes may occur in overall
mineralogy (Allen and Pannell 1978). But the
REE occurrences among metamorphically-altered
mineral components proved to be relatively low
and bordered on the lower levels of instrument
measurements using INAA procedures (Allen et
al. 1984; Frey 1984).
Some outcrops were found to have tremendous
variations within a single source exposure. Other
researchers using radiochemical separation-INAA
on REE and ultramafic complexes found wide
and inconsistent variation in rare earth elements
from intra-source samples (Moffat and Butler
1986). Model mineralogy involving petrographic
studies of bulk steatite samples can yield very
heterogeneous results within a single source area,
reflecting an uneven distribution of TE and REE
concentrations over short distances even within a
quarry. Clearly to overcome these variances, large
bulk samples would have to be ground and well
mixed, resulting in the inevitable destruction of
artifacts to obtain comparative sourcing geochemical results. Thus, alternate avenues of analysis were
needed to overcome this undesirable consequence
of investigations.
One attempt to advance the analysis involved
using INAA combined with microprobe sampling
points on 400 unground steatite samples from eight
Appalachian quarries coupled with multivariate
statistics used to investigate an expanded range of
target elements to include TE, REE, minor trace elements, and transition metals (Truncer et al. 1998).

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas
The results suggested that rare earth elements were
less useful than relying on transitional metals in
differentiating sources at a regional level, but possibly not at the quarry level.
Other researchers explored the use of expanded
elemental lists employing results from INAA and
Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectometry
(ICP-MS) (Jones et al. 2007). The combination of
the two analytical approaches increased the confidence of REE concentration measurements over the
use of INAA alone based on the study of soapstone
source samples from Shetland, England. However,
identification on critical TE, REE, and transitional
metals to differentiate quarries remains elusive.
Other approaches have investigated the use
of basic electron microprobes analysis (EMPA)
to characterize fundamental mineral composition,
chemistry, and textural variations between steatite
sources (Ige and Swanson 2008). The microprobe
application has tremendous advantages over the
mixed bulk chemistry approach by being able to
recognize specific mineral compositions within
samples.
Building on these studies, Radko (2011) used
traditional thin section point counts to characterize
the modal and textural variability from samples
derived from 10 artifacts and three quarries. He
then employed both electron microprobes and xray diffraction methods to examine the constituent
chemical compositional data of the talc, chlorite,
oxide, and amphibole (dark-colored chain silicate
mineral) components of steatite samples from both
quarry and artifact specimens. Applying multivariate statistics to the data resulted in the identification of low calcium amphibole and titanium-iron
oxides (ilmenites) as the specific minerals that
best segregated the quarries and provided strong
correlations with the artifact samples.
Despite these encouraging results, considerably more work needs to be completed on many
more quarries throughout the United State before
the full utility of geochemical methods is developed for identifying steatite quarry sources for
specific artifacts. Unfortunately, the lack of comparable geochemical studies using broad suites of
metals, and REE for the Wyoming, most California, and known Texas steatite sources, hinders the
ability to correlate the San Saba, Texas, sample to
known steatite outcrops. This lack of an existing
comparative steatite database was the primary
reason for not pursuing geochemical studies on the
vessel fragment from San Saba, Texas.

141

DISCUSSIONS:
POSSIBLE NORTHERN-SOUTHERN
PLAINS INTERACTIONS
The foregoing survey suggests that steatite is
a naturally-occurring soft rock used by prehistoric
people to make mostly charms, ornaments, pipes,
and occasionally cooking vessels. Steatite cooking
vessels may have been independently invented
multiple times and places in North America. The
manufacture of stone vessels from the Eastern
United States developed during the Middle Archaic
period but persisted alongside the manufacture and
use of clay ceramic vessels. Stone vessels on the
West coast were also made during the Archaic and
persisted into the Late Prehistoric period. The stone
vessels on the northwest Plains developed during
the Late Prehistoric and persisted into Historic
periods (ca. A.D. 1000 to 1850).
Based on the lip form and projected orifice diameter, the steatite rim sherd from San Saba County,
Texas, appears to be most similar to the shape and
size of soapstone vessels from western Wyoming
(Adams 2006; Frison 1982). While many of the
Wyoming vessels are attributed to Protohistoric Numic and Historic Shoshonean groups, a few steatite
vessel fragments have been found in Late Prehistoric
contexts, and indicate the technology has sufficient
time-depth to have been contemporaneous with the
age of the San Saba County specimen.
The Texas rim form example and temporal
context is unlike the forms and ages of steatite
vessels from Archaic contexts in Eastern United
States (Truncer 2004a) and California/West Coast
regions (Wlodarski 1979). The vessel rim form
most closely resembles the deep flower-pot vessel shapes and general ages of stone vessels from
the northwestern Plains. We postulate that the San
Saba specimen was carried about 1,360 to 1,900
km to Central Texas from some steatite outcrop
sources in central or western Wyoming. These
northwestern Plains steatite sources are about 20
to 66 percent farther from 41SS178 than the closest
Southeastern U.S. Appalachian steatite source in
Alabama. But the distance to Wyoming is comparable to the distance to the nearest reported steatite
sources in southern California.
As discussed above, no geochemical characterization methods have been used to identify the origin
for the stone vessel from 41SS178 due to the lack
of comparative source deposit data, especially from
Texas, the northwestern Plains, and the West Coast.

142

Texas Archeological Society
THE NORTHWEST-SOUTHERN
PLAINS OBSIDIAN CONNECTION

So what is such a rare and exotic stone bowl
doing so far from the northwestern Plains in prehistoric times? The archeological record suggests
that this steatite vessel fragment is not the only
artifact reflecting probable connections between
the northwestern Plains and Texas. An opportunistic compilation of reported sourced obsidian
maintained by the senior author indicates at least
41 artifacts from 25 Texas sites are attributed to
two obsidian sources in the same general area as
the northwestern Plains steatite outcrops (Baugh
and Nelson 1987; Hester et al. 1986; Kibler 2005).
Most Texas obsidian specimens derived from the
northwestern Plains are from the Malad source
in southeast Idaho (n=39 artifacts from 23 Texas
sites), but smaller frequencies are also sourced
to Obsidian Cliff, in northwest Wyoming (n=2
artifacts from two Texas sites). While it may seem
that the two Obsidian Cliff source pieces are occurrence anomalies, when obsidian sourcing studies are expanded to include sourced obsidian from
Oklahoma, Kansas, and Texas, no fewer than five
different northwestern Plains obsidian sources are
present on the southern Plains as represented by
115 artifacts from 71 archeological sites (Tables 1
and 2). The northwestern Plains obsidian sources
are generally located northwest of the Wyoming
steatite quarries, and movements of obsidian from
this region to the southern Plains would have
passed within a few score kilometers of the northwestern Plains steatite quarries (Figure 7).
The northwestern Plains sources represent
between 9.3 and 18.5 percent of the identified
reported sourced obsidian in the database from
Kansas (34 of 285 pieces; 11.9 percent), Oklahoma (40 of 216 pieces; 18.5 percent) and Texas
(41 of 443 pieces; 9.3 percent). Whereas volcanic
glass artifacts from Obsidian Cliff, Wyoming,
are comparatively rare in Texas (n=2), 21 other
pieces from this source area have been found in
greater abundance in Oklahoma and Kansas. The
combined sources from Malad, Idaho (n=85; 73.9
percent), and Obsidian Cliffs, Wyoming (n=27;
23.5 percent), account for 97.4 percent of all the
recorded northwestern Plains obsidian sources in
the three state southern Plains database. Three
other northwestern Plains obsidian sources are
represented by two temporally undiagnostic flakes
and a Late Paleoindian projectile point recovered

from two sites in the Oklahoma panhandle and one
site in western Oklahoma. Single obsidian flakes
from Owyhee, Idaho, and Teton Pass (also known
as Fish Creek), Wyoming, sources are from the
central and eastern counties in the Oklahoma panhandle, and a Scottsbluff point most likely made
from Wright Creek obsidian outcropping near the
Obsidian Cliffs source was recovered from Washita
County in west-central Oklahoma.
The five northwestern Plains obsidian sources
are located about 1850 to 2000 km from the San
Saba, Texas, site, and are generally northwest of the
seven steatite stone vessel quarries found in various
mountain ranges in Wyoming (Adams 2006). Any
direct or indirect movement of obsidian from these
sources would pass close to a number of steatite
outcrops in Wyoming, which range from 1300 to
1800 km from the San Saba, Texas, locality.
The nature of the interaction is indicated by
the kinds of artifacts made of northwestern Plains
obsidians on the southern Plains. Of the 115 obsidian artifacts, only 21 (18.3 percent) are identifiable
tools. These include 12 projectile points, six biface
fragments, one scraper, and two unifaces. The nontool assemblage consists of one core and 72 flakes;
the latter most likely represent tool manufacture or
maintenance activities. An additional 21 artifacts
have not been identified as to type. Overall, the
northwestern Plains artifact assemblage is characteristic of a generalized hunting tool kit and does not
reflect exotic status items, such as eccentrics pieces.
This is not unexpected as the foreign obsidian in
Texas occurs primarily among the relatively mobile
hunter-gatherer band level groups in Central Texas.
These people were probably organized around extended family ties, rather than elite headmen/chiefs
requiring symbols of office and power.
The age of the southern Plains-northwestern
Plains interaction is inferred directly from temporally diagnostic artifacts made from northwestern
Plains obsidian, and indirectly from ascribed cultural affiliation of the sites yielding the obsidian materials based on presumed associations with other kinds
of temporally diagnostic materials. Although the
widths of hydration rims absorbed on the surface of
obsidian was once touted as being a possible direct
dating method, further research has identified issues
making the method problematic (cf. Miller 1996).
Of the dozen projectile points made of northwestern Plains obsidian sources, four (33 percent)
are either unspecified or too fragmentary for identification. One specimen from western Oklahoma

Percent Sites

Sum sites

Percent Items

Sum Items
29.6

34

0

0

Teton Pass/ Fish Ck.

Wright Ck.

11

0

23

Obsidian Cliff

Wyoming:

Malad

Owyhee

Idaho:

Artifacts

Kansas

14

19.7

0

0

5

9

0

Sites

34.8

40

1

1

14

1

23

Artifacts

Oklahoma

32

45.1

1

1

8

1

21

Sites

35.7

41

0

0

2

0

39

Artifacts

Texas

25

35.2

0

0

2

0

23

Sites

100.00

115

1

1

27

1

85

No

0.9

0.9

23.5

0.9

73.9

Percent

Sum Artifacts

Table 1. Count and Percent of northwestern Plains Obsidian Artifacts on southern Plains Sites by State.

71

1

1

15

1

53

No

100.0

1.4

1.4

21.1

1.4

74.7

Percent

Sum Sites

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas
143

County

Bell

Bexar

Bosque

Coryell

Dimmitt

Foard

Garza

Hill

Hill

Hopkins

Johnson

Live Oak

Llano

Medina

Medina

Real

Real

San Saba

Terrell

Travis

Travis

Williamson

Williamson

Bexar

Source

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.-1

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id-2

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Walker Ranch Survey

Williamson County

Williamson County

Unnamed site

Trammel Rock shelter

Terrell Rock shelter

Fall Creek Site

Keystone Patch Site

Real County Artifact (maybe
Keystone Patch)

Jonas Terrace Site

3- Judson Site

Buchannan Reservoir

Chesnutt Site

Ham Creek site

Unnamed site

Hill County

Aquilla Lake

Sam Wahl Site

Crowell Reservoir

Escondido Ranch

Fort Hood

Horn Shelter 2

Bexar County

Evoe Terrace Site

Site Name/Project

41BX184

41WM736

41WM689

41TV1614

41TV133

41TE98

41SS2

41RE69

No number

41ME29

41ME7 or
41ME8

41LL4

41LK51

41JN1

41HP200

41Hi34

41Hi6

41GR291

41FD46/47

No number

41CV137

41BQ46

41BX300

41BL104

Site No.

1 No Data

1 Flake

1 No Data

1 Flake

4 Flakes

1 Stemmed arrow
point

1 Arrow Point, 2
Unifaces, 5 Flakes

1 Flake

1 Flake

1 Corner-notch Arrow Point

1 Side-notch Arrow
Point

1 Flake

1 Core?

1 Biface, 5 Flakes

1 Flake

1 Flake

1 Biface

2 Flakes

1 Flake

1 Stem. Dart Point

1 Flake

1 Flake

1 Flake

1 Flake

Artifact Type

AR

UNK

E/MAR

UNK

UNK

LP-1

LP

UNK

UNK

LP-1

LP-2

LP

LP

TAR - LP

LAR

UNK

UNK

LP-1

UNK

AR

UNK

LAR

LP

LAR

Affiliation

Hester, personal communications, 1995

Hester 1991

Hester, personal communications, 1995

Hester 1998

Hester et al. 1986; Hester n.d. (1986)

Hester et al. 1986 Hester (nd: 1986)

Hester et al. 1986; Hester n.d. (1986); Hester 1991

Hester et al. 1986; Hester n.d. (1986); Hester 1991

Hester et al. 1982

Hester et al. 1986: 520; Hester 1991.

Hester et al. 1986; Hester n.d. (1986); Hester 1991

Hester et al. 1986; Hester n.d. (1986)

Hester et al. 1986; Hester n.d. (1986)

Hester et al. 1986; Hester n.d. (1986)

Rogers 2000:46-49

Hester et al. 1986:520; Hester n.d. (1986).

Hester et al. 1986; Hester n.d. (1986)

Boyd et al. 1994:84, 122

Skinner and Davis 1997

Hester et al. 1986:518; Hester n.d. (1986)

Asaro and Stross 1995

Hester et al. 1986; Hester n.d. (1986)

Hester et al. 1986

Hester et al. 1986:Table 53; Hester n.d. (1986)

Reference

Table 2. List of northwestern Plains sourced obsidian from the southern Plains.

144
Texas Archeological Society

Bowie

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.
25 sites

Bill Brewer

Site Name/Project
41BW35

Site No.
41 Artifacts

1 Modified flake

Artifact Type

County

Texas

Beaver

Beaver

Beaver

Beckham

Blaine

Blaine

Cimarron

Cimarron

Coal

Garvin

Grant

Harper

McClain

Roger Mills

Seminole

Texas

Woods

Unknown

Beaver

Source

Owyhee, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Oklahoma

Roy Smith Site

Unknown Goodner 1

Omey Site

Goff Creek Region

Unknown

Zimms Site

Alcorn Site

No name

No name

Currie Site

Unknown

Unknown

Unknown

Unnamed

Unnamed

Edwards I Site

Fulton Creek

Spangler Site

Coldwater 1

Stamper Site

Site Name/Project

34BV14

No number

34WO43

No number

34SM87

34RM72

34ML1

34HR1

34GT9

34GV22

34CO29

No number

No number

34BL103

No number

34Bk2

34BV-nd

34BV104

34BV93

34Tx1

Site No.

1 Flake

1 Point

1 No Data

1 Flake

1 No Data

2 Flakes

2 No Data

2 No Data

1 No Data

1 No Data

1 Flake

1 Dart Point Tip

1 Corner-notched
Arrow Point

1 Flake

3 No Data

1 No Data

1 No Data

1 Flake

1 Flake

1 Flake

Artifact Type

3 Judson Site, 41ME 7 or 41ME8 (Hester 1991); but was initially reported as site artifact from 41BX229 (Hester 1986, n.d.)

2. Initially reported as Malad Id (Hester 1986, n.d.), but identity changed to Obsidian Cliff Wy. (Hester 1991)

1. Type site for “Escondido Ranch Group” obsidian prior to its identification as Malad (Hester 1986).

County

Source

Table 2. (Continued)

LP-2

LP-1

LP-2

UNK

LP-2

LP-2

LP-2

Unk

Unk

LP-2

LP-1 or 2

AR?

LP-1

LP-2

Unk

Proto

Unk

LP-2

LP-2

LP-2

Affiliation

AR?

Affiliation

Brosowske 2004, 2005:522, 2006

Bement and Brosowske 2001:111

Baugh and Nelson 1987

Bement and Brosowske 2001:111

Bob Brooks, p.c. 11-18-2014

Baugh and Nelson 1987

Bob Brooks, p.c. 11-18-2014

Bob Brooks, p.c. 11-18-2014

Bob Brooks, p.c. 2014 database

Baugh and Nelson 1987

Shackley 2011

Shackley 2002; Jason LaBelle, p.c. 2008

Shackley 2002; Jason LaBelle, p.c. 2008

Bartlett and Powell 1999:36

Bob Brooks, p.c. 11-18-2014

Baugh and Nelson 1987

Bob Brooks, p.c. 11-24-2014

Brosowske 2005:520; 2006

Brosowske 2005:521; 2006

Brosowske 2004;2005:523; 2006

Reference

Hester, personal communications, 1995

Reference

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas
145

Beaver

Cimarron

Grant

Kay

Kay

Mayes

Nowata

Beaver

Washita

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Teton Pass/
Fish Creek, Wy.

Wright Creek Wy.

County

Clay

Jewell

Jewell

Leavenworth

Montgomery

Osage

Ottawa

Pawnee

Rice

Riley

Saline

Sheridan

Jewell

Jewell

Source

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Malad, Id.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Kansas

County

Source

Montana Creek East

No name

Albert Bell Site

No Name

No name

No name

No name

Minneapolis

Unnamed

Infinity Site

Evans Site

Warne Site
(NW ridge lobe)

White Rock Site

Schwab Hill Site

Site Name/Project

29 sites

Flaming Site

Odessa Yates

Lawrence

Pohly Shelter

Hudsonpillar

Hammons

No name

Unknown

Unnamed

Site Name/Project

14JW46

14JW6

14SD305

14SA447

14RY603

14RC301

14PA357

14OT5

14OS365

14MY305

14LV1079

14JW24

14JW1

14CY415

Site No.

34WA1

34Bv100

34NW6

34MY54

34KA73

34KA20

34GT47

No number

34BV171

Site No.

6 Flakes

2 No Data

3 Flakes

1 Flake

1 Flake

1 No Data

1 Flake

1 No Data

1 No Data, 1 Flake

2 Flakes

1 Flake

7 Flakes

1 Flake

1 Biface, 1 Flake

Artifact Type

40 Artifacts

1 Scottsbluff Point

1 Flake

1 Flake

1 Flake

2 Flakes

1 Flake

1 Flake

1 Scraper

3 Points, 3 Bifaces

Artifact Type

Table 2. (Continued)

LP-2

LP-2

LP-2

AR

LP-1

Proto

LP-1

LP-2

LP-2

LP

LAR to LP

LP-1

LP1

LP1

Affiliation

Paleo

LP-2

LP-2

LP-1

LP-1

LP-1

LP-2

UNK

LAR

Affiliation

Ritterbush and Logan 2006:56-57; Logan 2004a;
Hoard et al. 2008

Ritterbush and Logan 2006:56-57; Hoard et al. 2008

Roper 2003; Hoard et al. 2008

Roper 2006; Hoard et al. 2008.

Roper 2000; Hoard et al. 2008

Shackley 2005b; Hoard et al. 2008

Hoard et al. 2008

Shackley 2005b; Hoard et al. 2008

Shackley 2005a; Hoard et al. 2008

Hawley and Hughes 1999; Hoard et al. 2008

Logan 2004b:37; Hoard et al. 2008

Logan and Banks 1993; Logan et al. 2001; Hoard et
al. 2008

Logan 2010; Hughes 2009

Logan 2009

Reference

Hofman and Blackmar 2012

Brosowske 2005:520; 2006

Bob Brooks p.c. 2014 database

Griffin et al. 1969

Bob Brooks p.c. 2014 database

Bob Brooks p.c. 2014 database

Bob Brooks, p.c. 11-18-2014

Shackley 2002; Jason LaBelle, p.c. 2008

Bement and Brosowske 2001:111

Reference

146
Texas Archeological Society

Pratt

Riley

Wyandotte

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Obsidian Cliff, Wy.

Archaic (Pre- A.D./B.C.)

Early or Middle Archaic (6000 - 1500 B.C.)

Late Archaic (1500 B.C .- A.D./B.C.)

Transitional Archaic (Early Woodland in Eastern Kansas B.C./A.D. A.D. 500)

Late Prehistoric general (A.D. 500 - 1500)

Late Prehistoric 1 (Early Ceramic, Woodland Period A.D. 500 - 1000)

Late Prehistoric 2 (Middle Ceramic, Plains Village Period A.D. 1000 - 1500)

E/M AR=

L AR=

T AR=

LP=

LP-1=

LP-2=

34 Artifacts

1 Flake

1 Flake

1 Debitage

Artifact Type

PaleoIndian (pre-6,000 B.C.)

14WY1

14RY601

14PT506- WSU

Site No.

AR=

17 sites

Trowbridge Site

Unknown name

No Name

Site Name/Project

Paleo=

Cultural Affiliation

County

Source

Table 2. (Continued)

Unk=

Hist=

Proto=

LAR-LP-1

LP-1

LP-2

Affiliation

Unknown affiliation

Historic (A.D. 1700-present)

Protohistoric (Late Ceramic Period A.D. 1500-1700)

Hughes 1995; Roper 2000; Hoard et al. 2008

Roper 2000; Hoard et al. 2008

Shackley 2009; Hoard et al. 2008

Reference

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas
147

148

Texas Archeological Society

ago). The high incidence of cornernotched arrow points may reflect
the most intense interaction period
between ca. 1000 and 2000 years ago.
This temporal range of interaction based on only a dozen artifacts
is mirrored by the cultural affiliations ascribed to sites containing the
obsidian artifacts (Table 3). Solitary
northwestern Plains obsidian artifacts
have been reported from single sites
assigned to the Late Paleoindian and
the Early/Middle Archaic periods.
Five obsidian artifacts are from generalized Archaic period sites which
provide little indication of which
millennia are represented. However,
based on assigned site affiliations,
more regular contacts between the
northwestern and southern Plains began in the Late or Transitional Archaic
and intensified throughout the Late
Prehistoric I (Woodland) and II (Village) periods. This pattern is indicated
by 17 obsidian artifacts (14.8 percemt)
attributed to Late Archaic/Transitional
to Late Prehistoric period sites, the 14
artifacts (12.2 period) from general
Late Prehistoric period sites artifacts,
the 23 artifacts (20.0 percent) from
the Late Prehistoric I/early ceramic
period, and the 31 artifacts (27.0
percent) from the Late Prehistoric II/
Figure 7. Locations of steatite and obsidian quarries in the northwestern middle ceramic/Plains Village period
(Table 3). After the Late Prehistoric
plains.
period, the frequency of northwestern
Plains artifacts on the southern Plains
drops off significantly. Only two obsidian artifacts
is a Scottsbluff point attributed to the Late Paleoare from Protohistoric/late ceramic period sites, and
indian period. Two other projectile points are sufnone are from Historic period aboriginal sites.
ficiently large to be classified as dart points, probThe 115 artifacts from northwestern Plains
ably Archaic in age, and one of these is a stemmed
obsidian sources are from 50 of 436 counties (11.6
or corner-notched form, which could reflect a Late
percent) over the three state region. In Kansas, these
Archaic period form. The other five specimens
include 34 artifacts from 17 sites recovered from
are small arrow points. Three are corner-notched
13 counties. Oklahoma reports 40 artifacts from 29
forms, one is a side-notched form, and the other
sites spread across 17 counties, and Texas has 41
is unspecified. The direct evidence based on point
artifacts from 25 sites in 20 counties.
morphology suggests that obsidian from northSixteen sites have multiple obsidian artifacts
western Plains sources was moving to the southern
attributed to northwestern Plains sources (see Table
Plains since late Paleoindian times (ca. 8450 to
2). Twelve of the 50 counties contain multiple
8850 years ago); however, most projectile point
sites with obsidian artifacts from the northwestern
forms probably date to the Late Archaic through
Plains. Half of these counties have multiple sites
Late Prehistoric II periods (ca. 2500 to 500 years

6

4

LP-I

12
41

25

9

0

0

1

3

4

1

3

1

3

0

Site

40

9

0

1

15

6

1

0

6

0

1

1

Artifact

Oklahoma

29

6

0

1

13

5

1

0

1

0

1

1

Site

34

0

0

1

15

13

2

2

0

0

1

0

Artifact

Kansas

17

0

0

1

6

6

1

2

0

0

1

0

Site

UNK = Unknown affiliation (unknown age and period)

Hist = Historic (A.D. 1700-present; 300 - 0 years ago)

Proto = Protohistoric (Late Ceramic Period)(A.D. 1500-1700; 500-300 years ago)

LP-2 = Late Prehistoric 2 (Middle Ceramic, Plains Village Period)(A.D. 1,000 - 1,500; 1,000 to 500 years ago)

LP-1= Late Prehistoric 1 (Early Ceramic, or Woodland Period)(A.D. 500 - 1000; 1,500 - 1,000 years ago)

LP gen = General Late Prehistoric (A.D. 500 - 1500; 1,500 - 500 years ago)

T-AR to LP gen= Transitional Archaic to general Late Prehistoric (A.D. 0 - 1,500; 2,000 - 500 years ago).

LAR = Late Archaic (1,500 B.C. - A.D. 500; 3,500 - 1,500 years ago)

EMAR = Early or Middle Archaic (1,500 - 6,000 B.C.; 3,500 -8000 years ago)

AR gen= General Archaic (ca. 0 - 6,000 B.C.; 2,000- 8,000 years ago)

Paleo= PaleoIndian (pre-6,000 B.C.; pre-8,000 years ago)

Total

0

Unk

Hist

0

1

11

Proto

LP-II

LP gen

3

T-AR to LP gen

L-AR

1

3

0

E/M-AR

AR gen

Paleo

Artifact

Texas

115

21

0

2

31

23

14

8

9

1

5

1

Artifact

Total

100.00

18.26

0.00

1.74

26.96

20.00

12.17

6.96

7.83

0.87

4.35

0.87

Artifact

Percent

Table 3. Frequency of northwestern Plains obsidian by time period on the southern Plains..

71

15

0

2

20

14

6

3

4

1

5

1

Site

Total

100.00

21.13

0.00

2.82

28.17

19.72

8.45

4.23

5.63

1.41

7.04

1.41

Site

Percent

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas
149

150

Texas Archeological Society

with northwestern Plains obsidian from a single
source, and the other six have sites with multiple
northwestern Plains obsidian sources. Not a single
one of the 12 counties with multiple sites have artifacts from different northwestern Plains sources,
even though some, such as Odessa Yates in Oklahoma, have artifacts from New Mexican or other
Southwestern obsidian sources (Brosowske 2004,
2005, 2006). This lack of multi-sourced northwestern obsidian found at single sites suggests
that the obsidian moved as single-source package
units, rather than from the amassing of samples
from northwestern Plains sources before being
transported to the southern Plains, or the meeting
of various northwestern Plains groups with access
to different obsidian sources in rendezvous places
on the southern Plains.
Figure 8 compares the density distribution of
all obsidian in the current data compilation relative

to the frequency and percent per county of the
combined northwestern Plains obsidian across
Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas. A comparison of the
distribution of the entire obsidian database against
either of the two maps showing the northwestern
Plains obsidian frequency and percent shows that the
southern high plains of Texas has been well sampled
for sourced obsidian. Yet, except for the Oklahoma
panhandle region, the northwestern Plains obsidian
rarely occurs on the short grass plains of western
Kansas or Texas. The paucity of obsidian in the
western counties may suggest that northwestern
Plains obsidian found in Central and South Texas
sites does not reflect the kinds of material density
drop-off that might be from down-the-line economic
models of obsidian traded from one group to the
next. Instead, the frequency distribution south of
Kansas shows the northwestern Plains obsidian to
be concentrated along the counties of the Oklahoma

Figure 8. Distribution of obsidian specimens in the current database, frequency and percent of northwestern Plains
obsidian in the southern Plains.

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas
panhandle and along the Balcones Escarpment/
Central Texas Hill country.
In Kansas and Oklahoma, the northwestern
obsidian artifacts are scattered in counties with
low frequencies across the tall grass prairies and
woodlands of central and eastern Kansas and
Oklahoma (see Figure 8). However, when the
percentage of northwestern Plains obsidian per
county is considered, the highest percentage of
northwestern Plains obsidian in Kansas and Oklahoma is perhaps surprisingly located in the eastern
and northeastern counties within these states, rather
than in the northwestern counties closest to the
obsidian outcrop sources. Indeed the counties in
western Oklahoma and Kansas have low to moderate percentages of northwestern Plains obsidians,
which reflect the occurrences of moderate amounts
of obsidian from New Mexican and other Southwestern sources. In light of the periods of obsidian

151

occurrences on the southern Plains, it has been
suggested that the low frequency/high percentage
occurrence in the northeastern parts of Kansas
perhaps reflects the southwestern spread of these
exotic kinds of obsidian from the Hopewellian and
Oneota interaction sphere(s) of Ohio, Illinois, and
Iowa (Griffin et al. 1969; Hatch et al. 1990; Hughes
1992, 1995; Roper 2000). However, due to the
paucity and distribution of counties in Texas with
high percentages of northwestern Plains obsidian,
a different source route may be operating in Texas.
When the distributions of the obsidian from
each northwestern source area are plotted, other
patterns emerge (Figure 9). As previously discussed, Malad and Obsidian Cliffs obsidians dominate the distribution of northwestern Plains types
across the southern Plains. Malad is abundantly
represented across all three states, especially in
Central Texas, the Oklahoma panhandle, and west

Figure 9. Distribution of Malad, Obsidian Cliff, and minor other obsidian sources in the southern Plains.

152

Texas Archeological Society

central Oklahoma proper and across central and
northeastern Kansas. In contrast, Obsidian Cliffs
obsidian occurs across the northern tiers of counties in the Oklahoma panhandle and Oklahoma
proper, and in a few counties in Kansas; it is very
rarely present in Texas.
The most insightful information pertains to
the distribution of minor obsidian sources, where
Owyhee and Teton Pass/Fish Creek obsidian occurs in the Oklahoma panhandle, and the Wright
Creek obsidian occurs in western Oklahoma. The
absence of these minor source obsidians in northeastern Kansas and Oklahoma where low frequencies, but high percentages, of northwestern Plains
obsidians occur suggest that they are not linked
to Malad or Obsidian Cliff obsidian movements
from Idaho and northwestern Wyoming into the
Missouri and Mississippi river valleys.Their
presence in the Oklahoma panhandle and western
Oklahoma is derived from routes and movement
mechanisms other than the spread of materials along the Hopewellian/Oneota interaction
sphere(s). The high incidence of obsidian across
the Oklahoma panhandle and across northern
Oklahoma may reflect routes southward along the
Trapper’s/Cherokee Trial along the eastern side of
the Rocky Mountains and then eastwards along
the Picuris/Taos/Osage trail across the Great Salt
Plain in northwestern Oklahoma (Ferring et al.
1976:36-45; Foreman 1925; Lecompte 1986:67;
McDermott 1940:250, 272).
The correlation of Malad obsidian artifacts
with 10 Central Texas counties along the Balcones
Escarpment has long been recognized (Hester et al.
1986; Kibler 2005). But the significance of these
patterns remains uncertain. Undeniably, the Balcones Escarpment is a region with an abundance
of springs and a tremendous habitat diversity that
is unique for conditions on the Plains (Kay 1998).
The paucity of northwestern Plains obsidian southeast of the Balcones Escarpment might reflect the
extent of northwestern prehistoric Plains people
drawn to this moderately unique habitat within the
Plains region. Alternatively, the obsidian occurrence in Central Texas may reflect the movement
of small parties of nomadic people northwestward
towards the unique resources of the Yellowstone
region. Further examination of northwestern Plains
lithic assemblages for Edwards Plateau or Alibates
chert debris, or studies of Central Texas lithic assemblages for Harteville Uplift, Spanish Diggings,
or Flat-Top cherts documentation may help resolve

the movements of northwestern Plains obsidian to
the Texas region.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This article documents the presence of a
steatite bowl fragment from a Central Texas site
that is attributed to sources from the northwestern
Plains based on the absence of a local steatite bowl
industry, and similarities in vessel age and form between the Texas specimen and steatite vessels made
elsewhere in the coterminous North America. The
current inability to geochemically source steatite
using REE or metals renders as tentative positive
source identification of the steatite. However, the
suggestion of a northwestern Plains connection
with Texas based on the San Saba steatite bowl
sherd is strengthened by examining the occurrence of northwestern Plains obsidian across the
southern Plains. The most intense period of obsidian movement into Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas
occurred during the Late Prehistoric Period I/II
(ca. 500-1500 years B.P.) when an estimated 59.1
percent of northwestern Plains obsidians attributed
to a period are recovered. The Late Prehistoric
context of the San Saba steatite vessel fragment
is also supported by the presence of eight artifacts
of Malad, Idaho, obsidian recovered from the Fall
Creek site (41SS1) located less than 100 river km
(ca 40 straight-line km) from 41SS178 and within
the same county (Hester et al. 1986; Hester 1991).
Our contention is that the projected diameter
of the San Saba bowl makes this artifact substantially larger than other steatite objects from Texas,
and similarities in vessel rim form and Late Prehistoric temporal context all point to a northwestern Plains source of manufacture for the vessel.
The northwestern-southern Plains connection is
strengthened by the occurrence of obsidian from
the same region as the steatite bowl quarries in the
northwestern Plains. Unworked nodules and small
artifacts of steatite have been rarely reported from
sites in Texas and adjacent areas of the southern
Plains (cf. Pillaert 1963). But most, if not all, may
be from steatite sources other than from the northwestern Plains.
The distribution of northwestern Plains obsidian across Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas supports
the absence of neighbor-to-neighbor or downthe-line exchange from the northwestern Plains
sources. Instead, the distribution suggests obsidian

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas

153

movements along two routes. One involves the
connections of obsidian between the northwestern
Plains and the upper Missouri River valley with a
secondary spread along the Hopewellian and later
Oneota interaction spheres toward the southwest
into northeastern Kansas and Oklahoma. The
second route involves the possible movement of
obsidian south along the eastern side of the Rocky
Mountains front range along the Taos/Trapper’s/
Cherokee trail and then eastward across the Oklahoma panhandle towards the Great Salt Plains
resources, and perhaps spreading southeastward
across Texas. This latter route passes close to the
Teton, Gros Ventre, and Wind River, Wyoming,
mountain ranges containing steatite outcrop quarries used by Late Prehistoric and Historic period
people for making stone vessels. Although the
mechanism of steatite and obsidian movements
has yet to be discerned, further efforts to identify
minor “unknown chert” debris in Late Prehistoric
assemblages may provide the insights needed to
refine the connections between these two areas.

Goodwell, Oklahoma. The locations and correlations of obsidian source names used in this paper
are derived from the Northwest Research Obsidian
Studies Laboratory Source Catalog (http://www.
sourcecatalog.com/).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Allen, R. O. and S. E. Pannell
1978 Rare Earth Element Distribution Patterns to Characterize Soapstone Artifacts. In Archaeological
Chemistry II, edited by G. F. Carter, pp. 230-257.
Advances in Chemistry Services 171. American
Chemical Society, Washington D.C.

We would like to thank Dr. Kenneth Sassaman (University of Florida), Dr. Michael Glascock
(University of Missouri), and Rich Adams (Office
of the State Archaeologist, Wyoming) for their
guidance to sources on the steatite literature. The
information provided by Dr. Jim Burton (University of Wisconsin, Madison) was especially helpful
in understanding the geochemical context of the
Wyoming region as it relates to talc deposits across
North America. Dr. Thomas Hester’s help is also
appreciated for sharing some of his unpublished
pioneering sourcing data from his Texas Obsidian Project database. Laura Nightingale provided
access to the steatite vessel sample curated at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. Useful
comments on this manuscript were provided by Dr.
Tim Baugh and Doug Boyd. Helpful comments and
encouragements were obtained from Mr. Nick Macalusco, and Drs. Robert Brooks, Scott Brosowske,
Donna Roper, Robert Hoard, and Brad Logan, who
assisted in up-dating the senior author’s obsidian
database for the Plains areas north of Texas. Dr.
Jason LaBelle also provided access to his unpublished obsidian sourcing data from the Uncle Bill
Baker collection from sites in the western Oklahoma panhandle at the No Man’s Land Museum in

REFERENCES CITED
Adams, R.
2006 The Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, Yellowstone
Bowls and the Mountain Shoshone. World Archaeology 38(3):528-546.
Allen, R. O., A. H. Luckenbach, and C. G. Holland
1975 The Application of Neutron Activation Analysis to
a Study of Prehistoric Steatite Artefacts and Source
Materials. Archaeometry 17:69-83.
Allen, R. O., H. Hamroush, C. Nagle, and W. Fritzhugh
1984 Use of Rare Earth Element Analysis to Study the
Utilization of Soapstone along the Labrador Coast.
In Archaeological Chemistry III, edited by J. B.
Lambert, pp. 3-18. Advances in Chemistry Services
205. American Chemical Society, Washington D.C.

Asaro, F. and F. Stross
1995 Appendix H: Obsidian X-Ray Fluorescence Data.
In NRHP Significance Testing of 57 Prehistorical
Archaeological Sites on Fort Hood, Texas, Volume
II, edited by J. T. Abbott and W. N. Trierweiler, pp.
H1-H3. Archaeological Resource Management Series
Research Report 34. U.S. Army, Fort Hood, Texas.
Barnes, V. E., D. A. Shock, and W. A. Cunningham
1950 Utilization of Texas Serpentinite. Publication No.
5020. The University of Texas, Austin.
Bartlett, R., with contributions by V. Powell
1999 Archaeological Investigations of Three sites in
Blaine County, Oklahoma: Prehistoric Occupations
in the Western Cross Timbers 34BL102, 34BL103
and 34BL104. Report in Highway Archaeology
No. 15. Oklahoma Department of Transportation
Environmental Studies Branch, Planning Division,
Oklahoma City.
Baugh, T. and F. Nelson, Jr.
1987 New Mexico Obsidian Sources and Exchange on the
Southern Plains. Journal of Field Archaeology 14:
313-329.

154

Texas Archeological Society

Bement, L. and S. Brosowske
2001 Appendix B: Results of Obsidian Source Provenience Analysis. In Streams in No Man’s Land: A
Cultural Resource Survey in Beaver and Texas Counties, Oklahoma, by L. Bement and S. Brosowske, pp.
109-112. Archeological Resource Survey Report 43.
Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
Beste, R. C.
2005 A Location Guide for Rock Hounds in the United
States. Hobbit Press, St. Louis.
Bourbon, W. B.
1982 The Origin of Talc in the Allamoore District, Texas.
In Industrial Rocks and Minerals of the Southwest,
pp. 77-84. Circular No. 182. New Mexico Bureau of
Mines and Mineral Resources, Socorro.
Boyd, D., J. Peck, S. Tomka, K. Kibler, and M. D. Freeman
1994 Data Recovery at Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg
Reservoir), Garza and Kent Counties: Phase III,
Season 3. Reports of Investigations No. 93. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Brosowske, S.
2004 Obsidian Procurement and Distribution during the
Middle Ceramic Period of the Southern High Plains:
Evidence for the Emergence of Regional Trade
Centers. Council of Texas Archeologists Newsletter
28(2):16-28.
2005 The Evolution of Exchange in Small Scale Societies
of the Southern High Plains. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma,
Norman.

2006 Interpreting Distributional Patterns of Obsidian on
the Southern Plains. Paper presented at the 64th Annual Plains Anthropological Conference, Topeka,
Kansas.
Brown, J. A.
1976 Spiro 4 Studies: The Artifacts. Second Part of the
Third Annual Report of Caddoan Archaeology-Spiro
Focus Research. The Stovall Museum of Science
and History, the University of Oklahoma and the
University of Oklahoma Research Institute, Norman.
Brown, K. M., D. R. Potter, G. D. Hall, and S. L. Black
1982 Excavations at 41LK67, A Prehistoric Site in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas. Choke Canyon Series, Volume 7. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Bullen, R. P. and D. H. Howells
1943 Spectrographic Analysis of Some New England Steatite. Bulletin of the Massachusetts Archaeological
Society 4(4):62-64.
Chandler, C. K.
1995 Stone Pipes from Bexar County, Texas. La Tierra
22(1):6-11.

Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 66:361-400.
Custer, J.
1989 Prehistoric Cultures of the Delmarva Peninsula:
An Archaeological Study. Associated University
Presses, Cranbury New Jersey.
Dahm, I. R.
1994 Cultural and Social Dimensions of the Prehistoric
Gulf Coast Soapstone Industry. Master’s Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Simon Frazier University,
British Columbia, Vancouver.
Dietrich, J. W. and J. T. Lonsdale
1958 Mineral Resources of the Colorado River Industrial
Development Association Area. Report of Investigations No. 37. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas, Austin.
Dumble, E. T.
1889 Reports of Geologists from Southern Texas. Texas
Geological and Mineralogical Survey, First Report
of Progress. Department of Agriculture, Insurance
Statistics and History. State Printing Office, Austin.
Ferring, C. R., D. Crouch, and T. Spivey
1976 An Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Salt Plains
of Northwestern Oklahoma. Contributions Number
4. Museum of the Great Plains, Lawton.
Frey, F.
1984 Rare Earth Element Abundances in Upper Mantle
Rocks. In Rare Earth Element Geochemistry, edited
by P. Henderson, pp. 153-204. Developments in
Geochemistry 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Field, A.
1956 Archeological Investigations in Lampasas, Burnett,
Llano and San Saba Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 27:161-184.
Fitzhugh W. H. and A. Crowell
1988 Crossroads of Continents: Cultures of Siberia and
Alaska. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington
D.C.
Frison, G.
1982 Sources of Steatite and Methods of Prehistoric Procurement and Use in Wyoming. Plains Anthropologist 27(98):273-286.
Foreman, G.
1925 Early Trails through Oklahoma. Chronicles of Oklahoma 3(2):99-119.
Gagliano, S. M. and C. H. Webb
1970 Archaic-Poverty-Point Transition at the Pearl River
Mouth. Southeastern Archaeological Conference
Bulletin 12:47-72.

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas
Gibson, J.
1996 Poverty Point: A Terminal Archaic Culture of the
Lower Mississippi Valley. http://www.crt.state.la.us/
archaeology/virtualbooks/poverpoi/popo.htm.
2001 The Ancient Mounds of Poverty Point: Place of
Rings. University of Florida Press, Gainesville.

Greene, R. C.
1995 Talc Resources of the Coterminous United States (Preliminary manuscript report). U.S. Geological Survey,
Open File Report OF 95-586 Menlo Park, California.
http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/1995/0586/report.pdf.
Griffin, J. B. (editor)
1952 Archaeology of Eastern United States. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Griffin, J. B., A. Gordus, and G. Wright
1969 Identification of the Sources of Hopewellian Obsidian in the Middle West. American Antiquity
34(1):1-14.
Hatch, J.W., J. W. Michels, C. M. Stevenson, B. E. Scheetz,
and R. A Geidel
1990 Hopewellian Obsidian Studies: Behavioral Implications or Recent Sourcing and Dating Research.
American Antiquity 55(3):461-479.
Hawley, M. F. and R. E. Hughes
1999 A Source Study of Obsidian from the Infinity
Site (14MY305), Kansas. Plains Anthropologist
44(169):297-305.
Heizer, R. F. and A. E. Treganza
1944 Mines and Quarries of the Indians of California. California Journal of Mines and Geology 40:291-359.

1972 Mines and Quarries of the Indians of California.
Ballena Press, Ramona, California.
Hester, T. R.
1991 Notes on South Texas Archaeology: 1991-1. An
Overview of the Results of the Texas Obsidian
Project. La Tierra 18(1):4-7.

1998 Notes on South Texas Archaeology 1998-1. From
Dalton to Perdiz: A Tale of Urban Looting in Travis
County, Texas. La Tierra 25(1):6-10.
n.d.

Texas Obsidian Project. Manuscript developed ca.
1986, provided by the author.

155

Hester, T., F. Asaro, H. Michel, F. Stross, and F. Nelson Jr.
1986 Trace Element and Trace Element Sources Studies
on an Obsidian Artifact from Site 41LK51, Live Oak
County, Texas. In The Prehistoric Sites at Choke
Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: Results of Phase
II Archaeological Investigations, edited by G. Hall,
T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black, pp. 510-522. Choke
Canyon Series Volume 10. Center for Archaeological
Research, University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hixon, C., A., D. J. Prikryl, G. T. Goode, and A. F. Malof
2011 Archaeological Test Excavations at 41SS178, LCRA
San Saba River Nature Park, San Saba County,
Texas. Cultural Resource Report 15. Lower Colorado
River Authority, Austin.
Hoard, R., C. T. Bevitt, and J. McLean
2008 Source Determination of Obsidian from Kansas
Archaeological Sites Using Compositional Analysis. Transactions of the Kansas Academy of Science
111(3/4):219-229.
Hofman, J. and J. Blackmar
2012 A Cody Complex site on the Southern Prairie Plains.
Plains Anthropologist 57(224):393-410
Holland, C. G., S. E. Pannell, and R. O. Allen
1981 Geographical Distribution of Soapstone Artifacts
from 21 Aboriginal Quarries in the Eastern US.
Quarterly Bulletin of the Archaeological Society of
Virginia 35:200-208.
Hughes, R.
1992 Another Look at Hopewell Obsidian Studies. American Antiquity 57(3):515.

1995 Source Identification of Obsidian from the Trowbridge Site (14WY1), A Hopewellian Site in
Kansas. Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology
20(1):105-113.
2009 Appendix 2: Geochemical Analysis of an Obsidian
Flake from Feature 1, White Rock Site. Letter Report 2009-52. Geochemical Research Laboratories,
Portola Valley, California.

Ige, O. A. and S. Swanson
2008 Provenience studies of Esie Sculptural Soapstone
from Southwestern Nigeria. Journal of Archaeological Science 35:1553-1565.

Hester, T. R. (assembler)
2013 Archeology at Eagle Bluff (41ME147) And Other
Studies: the Fall 2013 TAS Field School, Hondo.
Texas Archeology (Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society) 57(4):12.

Jones, R. E., V. Kilikoglou, V. Olive, Y. Bassiakos, R. Ellam,
I. S. J. Bray, and D. C. W. Sanderson
2007 A New Protocol for the Chemical Characterization of
Steatite—Two Case Studies in Europe: The Shetland
Islands and Crete. Journal of Archaeological Science
34:626-641.

Hester, T., F. Asaro, and F. Stross
1982 Results of Some Recent Studies by the Texas Obsidian Project. Journal of the Houston Archaeological
Society 73:8-10.

Kay, M.
1998 The Great Plains Setting. In Archaeology on the
Great Plains, edited by R. Wood, pp 16-47. University Press of Kansas, Lawrence.

156

Texas Archeological Society

Kibler, K.
2005 Broader Continental Connections through the Gulf
Coastal Plain of Texas. In Gulf Coast Archaeology:
The Southeastern United States and Mexico, edited
by N. M. White, pp. 197-204. University Press of
Florida, Gainesville.
King, P. B.
1965 Geology of the Sierra Diablo Region, Texas. Professional Paper 480. U.S. Geological Survey, Washington, D.C.
King, P. B. and P. T. Flawn
1953 Geology and Mineral Deposits of Precambrian
Rocks of the Van Horn Area, Texas. Publication 5301.
University of Texas, Bureau of Economic Geology,
Austin.
Lecompte, J.
1986 Trails. In A Literature Review and Limited Archaeological Reconnaissance of Cultural Resources on
the Banning Lewis Project Area, El Paso County,
Colorado, by J. Anderson, J. Lecompte, and C. Lintz,
pp. 67-69. Pioneer Archaeological Consultants, Inc.
Longmont.
Logan, B.
2004a Lovewell Renaissance: Archaeological Investigations at Lovewell Reservoir, Jewell County, Kansas—2004. Current Archaeology in Kansas 5:53-66.

2004b Archaeological Investigations at the Evans Locality
Stranger Creek Valley, NE Kansas (2003). Report
Submitted to Historic Preservation Office in fulfillment of KSHS Grant 20-03-18216-005. Department
of Sociology, Anthropology and Social Work, Kansas State University, Manhattan.
2009 The Riley Rankin Collection: Artifacts from Prehistoric Sites in Clay County, Kansas. Current Archaeology in Kansas 8:59-65

2010 Archeological Investigations at the White Rock
(14JW1) and Bergstron (14JW17) Sites, Lovewell
Reservoir, Jewell County, Kansas. Department of
Sociology, Anthropology and Social Work, Kansas
State University, Manhattan,
Logan, B. and W. Banks
1993 White Rock Revisited: Archaeological Investigations
of the White Rock and Warne Sites, Lovewell Reservoir, Jewell County, Kansas. Project Report Series
85. University of Kansas, Lawrence.
Logan, B., R. Hughes, and D. Henning
2001 Western Oneota Obsidian: Sources and Implications.
Plains Anthropologist 46(175):55-64.
Lowie, R.
1924 Notes on Shoshonean Ethnography. Anthropological
Papers 20(3):185-314. American Museum of Natural
History, New York.

Luckenbach, A. H., C. G. Holland, and R. O. Allen
1975 Soapstone Artifact: Tracing Prehistoric Trade Patterns in Virginia. Science 187:57-58.
McDermott, J. F.
1940 Tixier’s Travels on the Osage Prairies. University of
Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Miller, M.
1996 The Chronometric and Relative Chronology Project.
Section III: Obsidian Hydration Dating. Archaeological Technical Report No. 5. Anthropology Research
Center and Department of Sociology and Anthropology, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso.
Moffat, D. and S. J. Butler
1986 Rare Earth Element Distribution Patterns in Shetland
Steatite—Consequences for Artefact Provenancing
Studies. Archaeometry 28(1):101-115.
Olds, D.
1965 Report on Materials from Brawley’s Cave, Bosque
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 36:111-152.
Prewitt, E.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

1985 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central
Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.
Pillaert, E. E.
1963 The McLemore Site of the Washita River Focus.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society
11:1-114.
Radko, N. C.
2011 Mineralogy and Mineral Chemistry of Southeastern
Piedmont Soapstones: Implications for Sourcing
Prehistoric Soapstone Artifacts. Masters of Science
Thesis, University of Georgia, Athens.
Ritterbush, L. W. and B. Logan
2006 The Montana Creek Sites, Archeological Investigations at Lovewell Reservoir, Jewell County, Kansas
2004. Submitted to Nebraska-Kansas Area Office
Great Plains Region, Bureau of Reclamation. Department of Sociology, Anthropology, and Social
Work, Kansas State University, Manhattan.
Rogers, M., R. Allen, C. Nagle, and W. Fitzhugh
1983 The Utilization of Rare Earth Elements Concentrations for the Characterization of Soapstone Quarries.
Archaeometry 25(2):186-195.
Rogers, R.
2000 Excavations at Site 41HP200, Hopkins County,
Texas. Document No 000211. PBS&J, Austin.

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas

157

Roper, D. C.
2000 Source Area Analysis of Obsidian from Early
Ceramic Period Context near Manhattan. Current
Archaeology in Kansas 1:8-11.

Swanson, E.
1995 Geo-Texas: A Guide to the Earth Sciences. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

2006 The Central Plains Tradition. In Kansas Archeology,
edited by R. J. Hoard and W. E. Banks, pp. 105-132.
Kansas State Historical Society and University of
Kansas Press, Topeka.

Texas Beyond History
2005 Fragments of the Past: Artifacts from Kincaid Shelter. In Kincaid Shelter: 13,000 Years in the Sabinal
River Valley. http://www.texasbeyondhistory.net/
kincaid/past.html.

2003 100 Degrees West Latitude: Exploring Cultural
Dynamics at the Western Edge of the Central Plains
Tradition. Paper presented at the 61st Plains Anthropological Conference, Fayetteville, Arkansas.

Sassaman, K.
2006 Dating and Explaining Soapstone Vessels: A Comment on Truncer. American Antiquity 71(1):141-156.
Schoolcraft, H. R.
1851 Historical and Statistical Information Respecting
the History, Condition and Prospects of the Indian
Tribes of the United States, Part 1. Lippencott,
Grambo, Philadelphia.
Shackley, S.
2002 Appendix C: Source Provenance of Obsidian Artifacts from Various Prehistoric Contexts in Crosby
County, Texas. In A Cultural Resources Inventory
of the L7 Ranch, Crosby County, Texas, by D. Nickels, pp. 267-276. Archaeological Studies Report 1.
Center for Archaeological Studies, Southwest Texas
State University, San Marcos.

2005a Source Provenience of Obsidian Artifacts form Prehistoric Sites in Kansas. Report on file, Archaeology
Office, Kansas State Historical Society, Lawrence.
2005b Source Provenience of Obsidian Artifacts from Prehistoric Sites in Kansas and Nebraska. Berkley Archaeological XRF Laboratory Report. Report on file
at the Kansas State Archaeologist Office, Lawrence.

2009 Source Provenience of Obsidian Artifacts from Archaeological Sites from Middle Ceramic Contexts in
Pratt County, Kansas. Report submitted to N. Macaluso, Wichita State University, Wichita, Kansas.
2011

An Energy-Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Analysis
of One Obsidian Artifacts (sic) from 35CO29, (sic)
Coal County, Oklahoma. Letter report from the
Archaeological X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry
Laboratory, Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Skinner, C. and K. Davis
1997 Appendix H: X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis of Artifact Obsidian From sites 41FD41 and 41FD46/47,
Foard County, Texas. In Adaptations within the
Lower Rolling Plains of Northcentral Texas, Crowell Reservoir, Foard County, Texas, by D. Peter, R.
Proctor, and M. Green, pp. H1-H15. Miscellaneous
Report 122. Geo-Marine Inc. Plano.

Switzer, R.
1969 Tobacco, Pipes and Cigarettes of the Prehistoric
Southwest. Special Report 8. El Paso Archaeological
Society, El Paso.

Thwaites, R. C. (editor)
1904-05 Original Journals of the Lewis and Clarke Expedition. 8 Volumes. Antiquarian Press, New York.
Truncer, J.
2004a Steatite Vessel Age and Occurrence in Temperate Eastern North America. American Antiquity
69(3):487-513.
2004b Steatite Vessel Manufacture in Eastern North America. BAR International Series 1326. ArcheoPress,
Oxford, England.
2006 Taking Variation Seriously: The Case of Steatite Vessel Manufacture. American Antiquity 71(1):157-163.

Truncer, J., M. D. Glascock, and H. Neff
1998 Steatite Source Characterization of Eastern North
America: New Results Using Instrumental Neutron
Activation Analysis. Archaeometry 40(1):28-44.
Tuck, J.
1978 Regional Cultural Development, 3000 to 300 B.C. In
Handbook of North American Indians, Volume 15:
Northeast, edited by B. Trigger, pp. 28-43. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Turnbaugh, W. A. and T. H. Keifer
1979 Chemical Variation in Selected Soapstone Quarries
of Southern New England. Man in the Northeast
18:32-47.
Turnbaugh, W. A., S. P. Turnbaugh, and T. H. Keifer
1984 Characterizations of Selected Soapstone Sources
in Southern New England. In Prehistoric Quarries
and Lithic Production, edited by J. E. Erickson and
B. Purdy, pp. 129-138. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Webb, C. H.
1944 Stone Vessels from a Northeast Louisiana Site.
American Antiquity 9:386-394.

1982 The Poverty Point Culture. Second edition, revised.
Geoscience and Man 17. School of Geoscience,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge.

158

Texas Archeological Society

Wedel, W. R.
1954 Earthenware and Steatite Vessels from Northwestern
Wyoming. American Antiquity 19:403-409.
Willey, G.
1966 Introduction to American Archaeology: Volume 1.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.

Wlodarski, R.
1979 Catalina Island Soapstone Manufacture. Journal of California and Great Basin Anthropology
1(2):331-355.

Lintz and Prikryl—A Steatite Vessel Fragment from 41SS178, San Saba County, Texas

159

Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central
Region of Texas
Linda W. Ellis, Timothy K. Perttula, and Wilson W. Crook, III

ABSTRACT
Ceramics began to be made and used by the aboriginal populations of North Central Texas possibly as early as
ca. A.D. 200 in the Trinity River basin, but more generally are found in sites dating between ca. A.D. 900-1600
in most other parts of the region. Only among aboriginal populations in the upper Red River, upper Trinity
River, and the East Fork of the Trinity River were ceramic vessels an important technological part of artifact
assemblages; ceramic assemblages are especially sparse in the Brazos and Colorado River basins in the region.
In this article we discuss the diverse character of the aboriginal ceramic assemblages documented to date in
North Central Texas, which primarily feature plain shell-tempered wares of Late Prehistoric Plains Village
age and/or grog-, bone-, and grit-tempered plain wares and decorated wares that strongly resemble East Texas
Caddo ceramics in decorative styles.

INTRODUCTION
North Central Texas is an environmentally
diverse ecoregion with respect to its geology,
physiography, vegetation, climate, soils, wildlife,
and hydrology (Bureau of Economic Geology
1996a, 1996b; Raisz 1957). Its western margins are
bounded by the Rolling Plains (Figure 1). Moving
eastward, the region encompasses the river valleys
of the Oak Woods and Prairies and the grasslands
of the Blackland Prairie. These resource-rich
habitats would have provided a variety of plant
and animal resources for the early inhabitants of
North Central Texas.
Culturally, the North Central Texas archeological region is bounded by the Red River on the north
and extends roughly from the edge of the Blackland Prairie on the east into the eastern portions of
the Rolling Plains on the west (see Figure 1). Its
southern margins are generally seen as encompassing the drainage basins of the upper Trinity River,
the middle and upper Brazos River, the middle
and upper Red River basin, the uppermost part of
the Sabine River basin, and portions of the upper
Colorado River basin (Lynott 1981). However,
these boundaries are relatively fluid and tend to
shift as new information is added to the cumulative
body of archeological knowledge for this region.
Like much of the greater Central Texas region, the

North Central Texas archeological region can be
viewed as a geographic transitional zone whose archeology reflects cultural influences from adjacent
archeological regions and whose margins are often
defined more by what they are not than by what
they are (Fields et al. 2002; Kenmotsu et al. 1993;
Perttula 2004). Much of the region falls within
what is generally believed to be the southernmost
extension of the Plains Village adaptation after ca.
A.D. 1200 and thus the aboriginal communities
living there are part of a frontier margin of cultural
interaction and transmission with many neighboring cultural groups.
Late Prehistoric sites often show marked inter- and intra-regional differences in settlement
patterns, chronology, and artifact assemblages.
Ceramic assemblages, in particular, suggest the
existence of generalized boundaries among the
indigenous groups occupying and interacting in
the region. The aboriginal ceramics found in North
Central Texas often reflect cultural influences
from several directions at different points in time.
Somewhere between A.D. 700 and A.D. 900, for
example, plain sandy paste pottery (common in
East, Southeast, and East Central Texas regions)
appears in the archeological record, but in low
frequencies. By around A.D. 1000, decorated grog,
sand, and bone-tempered pottery begin to dominate
ceramic assemblages. Shell-tempered technology

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 86 (2015)

160

Texas Archeological Society

any of these wares were actually
manufactured in North Central Texas
during the Late Prehistoric period is
an intriguing research question that
remains to be fully addressed, as
does the meaning of the appearance
of Puebloan trade wares from north
central and southern New Mexico in
North Central Texas sites (see Lorrain
and Hoffrichter 1968; Crook 2013).
Ceramic-bearing archeological
sites are relatively scarce in North
Central Texas, and the frequency of
ceramic sites appears to decrease
from east to west. This east/west
gradient may simply be a factor of
the relatively low number of sites
recorded in many of the western
counties; however, this does not appear to be the case if we look at the
results of an intensive survey conducted in the South Bend Reservoir
area in the late 1980s (Saunders et
al. 1992). The survey area included
portions of Throckmorton, Young,
and Stephens counties in the Rolling
Plains (see Figure 1) and followed
the main channels and associated
Figure 1. Map of the North Central Texas region and biotic regions.
tributaries of the Brazos River and
the Clear Fork of the Brazos. In an
area encompassing more than 39,000 acres, 586
may have been present in the region by as early
sites with prehistoric components were identified.
as A.D. 200 (Bruseth and Martin 1987; McGregor
Of those, only seven sites (1.2 percent) yielded preand Bruseth 1987; Reimer et al. 2004), based
historic ceramics, and the total number of ceramics
on a few sherds from four sites in the Richlandrecovered from all seven sites only numbered 46
Chambers creek area of the Trinity River basin.
sherds. Similarly, a survey conducted along the
However, the use of shell temper did not become a
Concho and Colorado rivers in the proposed O. H.
ubiquitous part of ceramic assemblages in parts of
Ivie Reservoir area also identified a proportionately
the region until sometime around A.D. 1200-1300
small number of ceramic-bearing sites (Lintz et al.
(see Lynott 1975; Ross 1966), when a distinctive
1993; Treece et al. 1993; Wooldridge 1981). In an
Southern Plains-related shell-tempered ware aparea encompassing more than 19,000 acres, 369
pears. In general, ceramic assemblages found in
sites with prehistoric components were identified.
the North Central Texas archeological region often
Of those, only seven sites (1.9 percent) had prehisexhibit a range of technological attributes similar
toric ceramics. This suggests that ceramic-bearing
to ceramic traditions found along the Red River
sites are indeed scarce in the western portions of
and the Washita and Canadian rivers in central and
this archeological region. By contrast, prehistoric
western Oklahoma (i.e., Nocona Plain, see Drass
ceramic sherds were abundant at a number of sites
1997, 1998), to the east (i.e., various Caddo types
along Richland and Chambers creeks in the eastern
in East Texas), and the west/northwest (Mogollon
part of the region in the Trinity River basin, as over
and Panhandle types). Much is still unknown about
7600 sherds were recovered from test excavations
the ceramic sequences in this region, or the full
and data recovery alone; the ceramic assemblages
character of different ceramic traditions that may
at five of the sites ranged between 379-4967 sherds
have existed in the region through time. Whether

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
(Bruseth and Martin 1987; McGregor and Bruseth
1987). In 103 studied Late Prehistoric sites along
the East Fork of the Trinity, of all sizes, from major
villages to small campsites, more than 76 percent
have ceramics associated with them (Crook and
Hughston 2008b).
CERAMIC ASSEMBLAGES
ACROSS THE REGION
In the discussion that follows, we begin in the
northern and eastern part of the region, with assemblages in the Red, upper Trinity and upper Sabine River basins (see Figure 1). We then consider
selected sites and assemblages in the western and
southern parts of the region, namely with assemblages in the Brazos and Colorado River basins.
Red River
In the upper Red River basin in the Rolling
Plains, ceramics from prehistoric sites along the
Little Wichita River in Clay County are primarily
plain shell-tempered, and a few are decorated with
cord marks or have a row of appliqued nodes below
the rim (Krieger 1946:131); some rims have an exterior clay strip. The vessels have globular bodies
as well as flat or round bases, as well as handles
and lugs. Krieger (1946:132) also noted thick finger-molded bowl rim sherds. Both shell-tempered
and cord-marked pottery sherds have been found
on sites on the Red and Pease rivers in Wilbarger
County (Krieger 1946:134); Krieger (1946:134)
noted that “Wilbarger County appears to mark
the western limits of shell-tempered pottery,” but

that shell-tempered pottery is found along the Red
River from the Rolling Plains east through the
Western and Eastern Cross-Timbers in Montague,
Cooke, and Grayson counties (see Figure 1).
Excavations in Bryan County, Oklahoma,
sites at Lake Texoma have recovered two different kinds of apparently locally-made aboriginal
ceramic wares. The first is a heavily shell-tempered
ware, with relatively thick walls, either jars or
bowls, and both forms have flat bases (Bell and
Baerreis 1951:47). The shell-tempered ceramics
are generally plain. The other ware is tempered
with grog or bone, with jars and bowls; when they
are decorated, the vessels have horizontal incised
lines or vertical tabs on the rim (Bell and Baerreis
1951:Plate 8). Sherds from possible trade vessels
found in these sites are apparently from ca. A.D.
1100-1300 Red River Caddo decorated vessels.
There are abundant aboriginal ceramics from
Area F at the Haley’s Point site (34Ma15), in the
eastern Cross Timbers on the Red River at the upper end of Lake Texoma (Rohn 1998; Brack 2000).
Approximately 3500 shell-tempered sherds have
been recovered in excavations in several areas of
the site (Brack 2000:126), most notably in Area
F. These occur in association with several house
structures and numerous storage/refuse pits. Calibrated two sigma radiocarbon dates from Area F
range from A.D. 1150-1300, with median calibrated ages between A.D. 1220-1280. The assemblage
(Table 1) represents an early expression of the plain
shell-tempered wares that occur along this part of
the Red River, in the upper Trinity River basin, and
elsewhere in North Central Texas.
More than 98 percent of the ceramic sherds
from the Haley’s Point site are shell-tempered;

Table 1. Ceramic sherd assemblage from Area F at the Haley’s Point site.
Type*

Temper

Woodward Plain, var. Haley’s Point
Sanders Plain
Paris Plain (?)
Type II (plain)
White-slipped
Sand-tempered Plain

shell
grog
grog
grog-bone
grog-bone
sand-bone

Totals		
*based on Rohn (1998)

161

No.

Percent

1887
10
4
14
3
1

98.3
0.5
0.2
0.7
0.2
0.1

1919

100.0

162

Texas Archeological Society

Rohn (1998) notes that about 35 percent also have
crushed limestone and/or bone temper, and Brack
(2000:129) suggests that upwards of 80 percent of
the sherds may have limestone inclusions, likely
because the potters used fossil shell as a temper.
The remainder of the sherds from Area F at the
Haley’s Point site comprise plain or slipped sherds
from grog, bone, and sand-tempered vessels (see
Table 1). The shell-tempered sherds are from
deep bowls and barrel-shaped jars with smoothed
vessel surfaces, direct rims, and flat disk and
stilt-defined bases (Rohn 1998:121-123); about 6
percent of the base sherds are rounded in profile
(Brack 2000:135). Vessel walls have a mean thickness of 6.4 mm, and bases range from 6.0-21.0
mm in thickness. The only form of decoration on
these shell-tempered vessels are appliqued bands
(from one to three bands) or collars on the rim
and smoothed into the lip (Rohn 1998:Figures 45,
47-48; Brack 2000:Figure 17). Comparable plain
shell-tempered wares are present at other Lake
Texoma sites in Grayson and Montague counties
(Brack 2000:155-156).
About 2 percent of the analyzed sherds from
Haley’s Point are considered to be exotic or nonlocally manufactured pottery, primarily pointing to
Caddo sources along the Red River in East Texas
or southeast Oklahoma (Brack 2000:147-155).
These include grog, shell-in-grog, grog-bone, and
grog-grit-bone-tempered plain wares, as well as
several grog-tempered engraved sherds that may be
from Spiro Engraved or Holly Fine Engraved vessels (generally dated between ca. A.D. 900-1200
in Caddo sites in the region), and red-slipped and
grog-tempered Sanders Plain, dating between ca.
A.D. 1100-1300.
Rohn (1998:129) differentiates between the
shell-tempered ceramics found at Haley’s Point,
which he identifies as Woodward Plain, var. Haley’s
Point, and Nocona Plain, found in Plains Village
sites in central and western Oklahoma and northern
Texas (e.g., Drass 1997:195). This differentiation
is based on the suggestion that the shell-tempered
pottery at Haley’s Point has more elaborate rim
treatments than Nocona Plain; limestone was commonly used as a temper; flat bases are predominant,
whereas Nocona Plain has rounded bases; and the
absence at Haley’s Point of “lugs, handles, appliqued nodes, punctation, or incising found in small
numbers” on Nocona Plain (Rohn 1998:129). The
most recent description of Nocona Plain, however,
by Drass (1997:195) indicates that appliqued strips

or bands are sometimes present on the vessel rim
(and Krieger [1946:132] had mentioned appliqued
strips), and bases are flat or round; limestone temper is also present as a non-plastic in other Red
River and upper Trinity River plain shell-tempered
assemblages (see Martin 1994; Prikryl 1990;
Prikryl and Perttula 1995). Brack (2013 personal
communication) also has identified shell-tempered
grog in the Haley’s Point ceramics, and suggests it
was a common technological practice.
It is possible that the distinctions between Nocona Plain and Woodward Plain on the Red River
in the Lake Texoma region, and perhaps in other
parts of the Southern Plains, that Rohn (1998) and
Brack (2000) have identified represent temporal
changes in vessel form and rim treatment of the
locally manufactured shell-tempered wares. That
is, the shell-tempered wares may have changed
primarily from barrel-shaped jars with flat bases
and appliqued bands between ca. A.D. 1200-1300
to post-A.D. 1300 jars in Henrietta and Washita
phase Plains Village sites that have globular bodies, everted rims, and both round and flat bases, as
well as rare decorative elements such as appliqued
nodes, fillets, lip tabs, and trailed, brushed, incised,
punctated, and impressed lines and rows (Brack
2000:210). In fact, Brack (2000:215) states that
“Nocona Plain and Woodward Plain probably represent closely related geographic varieties within a
single type, rather than two exclusive types.”
The Dillard site (41CO174) on Fish Creek at
its confluence with the Red River has an extensive
ceramic sherd assemblage (n=754) in an archeological component that has been dated to A.D. 12601420 (2 sigma calibrated range of two dates, Martin
1994:Table 12). The vast majority (98.5 percent)
of the sherds are from shell, limestone, and shelllimestone-tempered Nocona Plain jars and bowls
made by coiling clay and smoothing the interior and
exterior vessel surfaces. There are also 11 sherds
of grit- and bone-tempered Lindsay Cordmarked
vessels. These may represent a trade ware obtained
from Plains Village, Washita phase, peoples that
lived in south central Oklahoma (Martin 1994:164).
A single sherd from a Caddo water bottle is also in
the assemblage, but it is undecorated. Perttula et al.
(1996) also report on the recovery of East Texas
Caddo Crockett Curvilinear Incised vessel sherds
from a pre-A.D. 1300 context at another site along
this part of the Red River in North Central Texas.
Similar kinds of shell-tempered pottery were
found at the roughly contemporaneous Chicken

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
House site (41CO156) on Fish Creek by Lorrain
(1969). This shell-tempered pottery is from plain
flat-based flowerpot-shaped vessels as well as
bowls (Prikryl and Perttula 1995:191; Brack
2000:175). The rims have appliqued collars similar
to those seen at the Haley’s Point site (Brack
2000:Figure 21), and one body sherd has two
parallel rows of fingernail punctations. The Glass
and Coyote sites on the Red River in Montague
County have ceramic assemblages dominated by
a plain, smoothed, shell-tempered Nocona Plain
ware (Lorrain 1967:198; see also Brack [2000:101107, 112-122]). This ware is primarily in the form
of large jars with flat disk bases and everted rims.
The few decorated sherds have appliqued nodes
on the rim (Brack 2000:Figures 7 and 11a). Other
ceramics in the assemblage include non-tempered,
thick, and hand-molded Redware “mugs” or small
cups from 40-80 mm in diameter, often with corn
cob impressions on their outer surfaces (Prikryl and
Perttula 1995:Figure 11i). This Redware pottery,
probably functioning as paint cups, is also found
in Washita River and Turkey Creek phase sites and
Zimms complex sites in southwestern Oklahoma
Plains Village sites (Brooks and Drass 2005). The
Glass site also has a few sherds of a thin black
(smudged?) shell-tempered ware.
Martin (2005:144-145, 152) reported the
recovery of shell-tempered ceramic sherds from
Nocona Plain vessels at the Sivells Bend site
(41CO159), located on a Red River alluvial terrace, as well as at the Beck site (41CO179) on Fish
Creek, a tributary to the Red River. There were
also sherds with no apparent temper that may have
derived from a water bottle. Another site in the area
(41CO176) had very thick grog and bone-tempered
pottery that may have been cord-marked, perhaps
from a Lindsay Cordmarked vessel.
Just north of the Red River in Cotton County,
Oklahoma, the Burton #1 site (34CT39) has ceramic sherds from archeological deposits that
date (calibrated two sigma age ranges) from A.D.
1165-1310, A.D. 1355-1385, and A.D. 1280-1440
(Stokes 2003:32). The sherds are tempered with
bone and quartz sand, and have a sandy, gritty,
paste. Two of the sherds have rows of tool punctations (Stokes 2003:Figure 9a-b).
In the Kemp Bottoms along the Red River,
in Oklahoma opposite eastern Grayson County
in Texas, Albert (1984:54, 84-85 and Figure 30e)
reported the recovery of grog, grit, limestone,
and shell-tempered pottery in association with

163

a Bonham arrow point at the Steakley #1 site
(34Br161). The body sherds are thick (10-11.7
mm), and one grog-shell-tempered sherd has rows
of tool punctates. Thick grog and grit-tempered
plain wares were also noted at 34Br165, along
with an engraved sherd with a narrow hatched
zone (Albert 1984:Figure 25j). Albert (1984:132133) suggests these sites may have been occupied
by “Caddoan farmers” prior to ca. A.D. 1300, although the occurrence of shell-tempered pottery in
the assemblage suggests it more likely dates after
ca. A.D. 1300 if they were “Caddoan” farmers (see
Perttula et al. 2012).
East Fork of the Trinity River
Harris (1936, 1945) noted that ceramics
stylistically and technologically akin (i.e., grogtempered, with high proportions of decorated
sherds) to East Caddo wares occur on sites on the
East Fork and Elm Fork of the Trinity River, as do
other sites with plain and heavily shell-tempered
ceramics. Krieger (1946:137) considered the latter “very likely identical to Nocona Plain.” The
sites with the shell-tempered pottery—found in
Collin, Dallas, Denton, Kaufman, and Rockwall
counties (see Figure 1)—were initially linked with
the Henrietta focus by Krieger (1946:137). Later,
Stephenson (1952), Lynott (1975), Crook and
Hughston (2008), and others have postulated that
the Late Prehistoric peoples along the East Fork
represent a separate culture that shares material
culture characteristics of both the Henrietta phase
to the west as well as with Caddo cultures to the
east. The stylistic similarities of the grog-, grit-,
and bone-tempered ceramics found in sites along
the East Fork to East Texas Caddo wares have been
suggested by Todd (2014) and Crook (2014a) to
be the result of either: (a) trade wares, (b) locally
manufactured ceramic copies of Caddo pottery; (c)
actual ceramics from Caddo settlements, or (d) a
combination of the above.
Crook and Hughston are in the process of
completing a 42 year re-evaluation of the Late
Prehistoric cultures of the East Fork. As part of
this study, they have documented all the collections from previous excavations in the area plus
those of most local avocational collectors. To
date, this comprises a total of nearly 32,000 artifacts, of which 10,208 are pottery sherds. From
this study, four major areas where ceramic vessels
have been traded or acquired by East Fork groups

4,416
(43 percent)

290
187
4,864
(48 percent)

Gilkey Hill

38 Small Sites

Totals

102

35

Ragland
183

136

160

14

11

784

423

1,592

32

70

25

Mantooth

22

Randle

83

380 Bridge

11

1

65

Enloe

–

Barnes Bridge

–

Bullock Mound

32

36

65

Sister Grove Creek

289

Shortney

691

Upper Farmersville

28

659

29

Campbell Hole

351

Glen Hill

627

Branch

15

396

19

Mouth of Pilot

22

Upper Rockwall

27

Thompson Lake

44

1,281

48

Butler Hole

165

Plain GritClay-Grog
Tempered

Lower Rockwall

230

Hogge Bridge

Site Name

Plain ShellTempered

423
(4 percent)

–

6

4

7

–

4

83

79

99

2

–

–

–

22

39

1

34

2

2

24

15

Incised

274
(3 percent)

7

5

2

2

–

–

28

29

80

3

2

–

–

1

18

2

12

–

1

26

56

Punctated

78
(1 percent)

–

2

1

–

–

–

–

4

38

1

–

6

–

–

16

–

9

–

–

–

1

Engraved

Table 2. East Fork Late Prehistoric pottery sherd totals by site.

125
(1 percent)

–

8

3

–

–

–

6

20

42

1

–

–

–

–

35

–

6

2

1

–

1

Brushed

28
(<1 percent)

12

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

11

–

4

–

–

–

–

Puebloan Trade
Ware

10,208

308

494

181

239

15

51

1,560

951

3,133

64

107

82

-

120

1,099

60

1,043

38

53

142

468

N

164
Texas Archeological Society

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas

165

were identified. These include: (1)
an initial introduction of pottery to
the East Fork region from Woodland
period Fourche Maline cultures to
the northeast along the Red River in
East Texas and southeast Oklahoma,
(2) continuing trade to the northeast
with people of the Sanders phase
centered around Lamar County (see
Figure 1), (3) trade to the west primarily with peoples of the Henrietta
phase, but also a minor amount of
trade wares from the Pueblo peoples
of north central and southeastern
New Mexico, and (4) trade with the
Caddo peoples of the Upper Neches,
Angelina, and Sabine River basins
in East Texas. As noted above, ceramics are common in all manner of Figure 2. Maydelle Incised vessel reconstructed from 34 sherds found by
sites on the East Fork. Larger sites, a local collector in the early 1960s at the Lower Rockwall site (41RW1).
such as Lower Rockwall (41RW1),
Upper Rockwall (41RW2), Glen
In the assemblages from the 58 sites listed
Hill (41RW4), Hogge Bridge (41COL1), Upper
in Table 2, plain shell-tempered sherds (Nocona
Farmersville (41COL34), Branch (41COL9), and
Plain) comprise 48 percent of the overall assemGilkey Hill (41DL406) have large ceramic assemblage sample, while plain grog- and grit-tempered
blages, typically in excess of 500 sherds. Smaller
sherds represent another 44 percent of the sample.
sites have assemblages on the order of 50-250
These sherds are predominantly from Williams
sherds (Table 2).
Plain vessels, suggesting that they are from preThe shell-tempered plain ware listed in Table
A.D. 1200 aboriginal occupations. The remainder
2 is predominantly of the Nocona Plain type. The
of the East Fork of the Trinity sherd assemblages
grit-grog-tempered plain ware is predominantly
are decorated grog- and grit-tempered sherds
Williams Plain with minor amounts of plain grog(n=900, 8.8 percent of the total sherd sample),
tempered wares, including what has been identified
including sherds with incised (n=423), punctated
as Sanders Plain. Incised wares consist of Canton
(n=274), brushed (n=125), and engraved (n=78)
Incised, Crockett Curvilinear Incised, Davis Indecorative elements. These sherds are from East
cised, Dunkin Incised, Maydelle Incised, Haley
Texas Caddo wares. The range of East Texas Caddo
Complicated Incised, and Foster Trailed Incised,
ceramic types are local wares in both pre- and
all Caddo types (Suhm and Jelks 1962). Punctated
post-A.D. 1300 Caddo communities, including
wares are predominantly Monkstown Fingernail
communities on the Red River and Pineywoods
Impressed with lesser amounts of Pennington
Frankston phase Caddo groups in the upper Neches
Punctated-Incised, Weches Fingernail Impressed,
River basin and Titus phase Caddo groups in the
Harleton Appliqued, and Killough Pinched. Enupper Sabine and Big Cypress stream basins (Pertgraved wares are predominantly from Sanders
tula and Selden 2014).
Engraved vessels with minor amounts of Holly
One of the largest ceramic assemblages along
Fine Engraved, Hickory Fine Engraved, Poynor
the East Fork is present at the Lower Rockwall
Engraved, and Hempstead Engraved sherds. Fisite (41RW1). A total of 3133 sherds of all types
nally, Puebloan trade ware sherds included in Table
have been recorded from the site (see Table 2),
2 are from Chupadero Black-on-White, Santa Fe
including 1291 shell-tempered plain sherds (41
Black-on-White, Chaco Black-on-White, Jemez
percent), 1592 grit-grog-tempered plain sherds
Black-on-White, Black Mesa Black-on-White,
(51 percent), and 259 (8 percent) decorated Caddo
Mimbres Black-on-White, Rio Grande Glaze, and
incised, engraved, punctated, and brushed sherds
Zuni Glaze vessels.

166

Texas Archeological Society

from Sanders Plain, Sanders Engraved, Monkstown
A large assemblage of ceramic sherds
Fingernail Impressed, Crockett Curvilinear In(n=1043) has been recovered in Late Prehistoric
cised, Pennington Punctated-Incised, and Maydelle
contexts at the Branch site (41COL9) on the East
Incised vessels. A nearly complete Maydelle InFork of the Trinity River at Lake Lavon. These
cised jar from the site was reconstructed by Crook
include Nocona Plain shell-tempered (60 percent)
(2014c) and is shown in Figure 2.
sherds, two Chupadero Black-on-White sherds
In addition to Caddo wares, a partial stirrupand two Mimbres Black-on-White sherds from the
shaped vessel of the Puebloan type Arboles BlackSouthwest, and the remainder are grog-tempered
on-White was recovered from the Lower Rockwall
plain and decorated sherds (Crook 2007a:Table
site by Lorrain and Hoffricher (1968). A date of
2). The decorated grog-tempered sherds have close
approximately A.D. 900-1050 was assigned to the
stylistic affiliations to East Texas Caddo fine wares
vessel based on similar types from north central
and utility wares, based on identification by Crook,
New Mexico (McIntyre and McGregor 1982).
R. K. Harris, and Robert L. Stephenson of Sanders
The Upper Rockwall site (41RW2) on the East
Plain, Sanders Engraved, Holly Fine Engraved,
Fork has an assemblage of plain (n=396) shell-temMonkstown Fingernail Impressed, and Pennington
pered (42 percent of all the sherds from the site),
Punctated-Incised sherds in the assemblage.
sand-tempered or sandy paste, and grog-tempered
A similar ceramic assemblage is present at the
sherds (n=423, 44 percent of all sherds). There
Mantooth site (41COL167) on the East Fork, with
are also Caddo style incised, engraved, brushed,
plain and incised shell-tempered (37 percent) and
and punctated rim and body sherds (n=132) (Ross
plain and decorated grog-tempered (63 percent)
1966). A possible Sanders Engraved
carinated bowl was recovered by
Ross (1966:Figure 10e). Other identified Caddo ceramic types include
Sanders Plain, Sanders Engraved,
Canton Incised, Monkstown Fingernail Impressed, Crockett Curvilinear
Incised, Pennington PunctatedIncised, Maydelle Incised, Killough
Pinched, Haley Complicated Incised,
and Harleton Appliqued. The occurrence of brushed pottery in the assemblage suggests it dates after ca. A.D.
1250, based on its popularity in East
Texas Caddo sites after that time (see
Perttula 2013).
At the Glen Hill site (41RW4)
site on the East Fork, plain shelltempered sherds similarly comprise
42 percent of the assemblage of 1560
sherds, while the remainder are from
bone- (n=18) and grog- (n=885)
tempered plain and decorated vessels (Ross 1966:38). The decorated
sherds are from East Texas Caddo
style incised, engraved, and punctated vessels of the Sanders Plain,
Sanders Engraved, Monkstown
Fingernail Impressed, Crockett
Curvilinear Incised, Pennington
Punctated-Incised, and Weches Fin- Figure 3. Engraved bottle from the Upper Farmersville site (from Harris
gernail Impressed types.
1948:Plate 5).

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas

167

Figure 4. Killough Pinched vessel from the Upper Farmersville site (41COL34).

pottery. One of the grog-tempered sherds has a
post-A.D. 1300 East Texas ceramic types (Sanders
red slip (Sanders Plain), three others have finPlain, Sanders Engraved, Monkstown Fingergernail punctates, and one is from an East Texas
nail Impressed, Davis Incised, Dunkin Incised,
Caddo vessel that has an engraved design with
Holly Fine Engraved, Hickory Fine Engraved, and
concentric circles and vertical arcing lines that is
Killough Pinched). Of note, a complete engraved
similar to post-A.D. 1400 Poynor Engraved (Crook
water bottle with horizontal and vertical hatched
2007b:Figure 6) vessels from the upper Neches River basin.
At the Upper Farmersville site
(41COL34) there is a significant pottery assemblage (n=1099) (Crook and
Hughston 2009). As noted in other
Late Prehistoric sites along the East
Fork and its tributaries, plain shelltempered sherds (n=691) represent
the majority of the ceramics present
(over 60 percent of the total sherds
recovered from the site). Sherds from
grog-tempered (32 percent) and bonetempered (5 percent) vessels account
for the remainder of the assemblage
(see Table 2). About 20 percent of
the grog- and bone-tempered sherds
are decorated, and Caddo styles of
brushed, incised, engraved, punctated, and red-slipped decorative Figure 5. Weches Fingernail Impressed pottery from the Gilkey Hill site,
methods have been identified, in- Kaufman and Dallas counties (from the R. K. Harris Collection curated at
cluding sherds from both pre- and the National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution).

168

Texas Archeological Society

a 17 cm orifice diameter. The vessel rim is direct (or vertical), with a
rounded lip. The use of grog temper,
the distinctive vessel form, and the
incised-punctated decoration on the
rim (Pennington Punctated-Incised)
are clear technological, functional,
and stylistic attributes that indicate
that Vessel 1 was made by prehistoric
Caddo Indian peoples (cf. Newell
and Krieger 1949; Suhm and Jelks
1962), and that it is almost certainly an example of a vessel likely
traded/exchanged by an ancestral
Caddo group living in East Texas
to the aboriginal peoples that lived
at 41COL172. Both interior and
exterior vessel surfaces of Vessel 1
Figure 6. Foster Trailed-Incised jar from the Sister Grove Creek site are well-smoothed, with vessel wall
(41COL36).
thicknesses that range from 5.6-7.1
mm on the rim, and 6.5 mm on the
body. The sherd cores indicate that
the vessel was not well-fired, as three of the sherds
lines (Figure 3) (Harris 1948) and a small Killough
were incompletely oxidized during firing, and anPinched jar (Figure 4) (Crook 2014b) have been
other portion of the vessel ended up being fired in
recovered from the site.
a reducing environment, but cooled in the open air.
More evidence of Caddo pottery on East Fork
Vessel 1 has opposed and alternating incised
of the Trinity River sites includes a partial Weches
and plain triangles on the rim of the vessel. The
Fingernail Impressed vessel from the Gilkey Hill
apex of the decorated triangles touch the vessel
site (Figure 5) (41DL406) (Crook 2011) and a Foster
carination, while the apex of the plain triangles
Trailed-Incised, var. Foster jar from the Sister Grove
touch the rim. The incised triangles are filled with
Creek site (41COL36) (Figure 6) (Crook 2007c). The
rows of small triangular-shaped tool punctations.
latter grog-tempered jar was made between ca. A.D.
This vessel is a Pennington Punctated-Incised ves1500-1600 by a Red River Caddo potter, probably in
sel (see Newell and Krieger 1949:Figure 39a; Creel
the Great Bend area of southwestern Arkansas, and its
1979:Figure 19e; Stokes and Woodring 1981:Plate
occurrence on an East Fork of the Trinity River site
21f-l; Suhm and Jelks 1962:Plate 61i), a distincis a clear indication of trade between an East Fork
tive East Texas Caddo type first defined at the ca.
aboriginal group and one of the Red River Caddo
A.D. 850-1300 George C. Davis mound center in
groups (Crook and Perttula 2008:24). This evidence
the Neches River basin in East Texas, well southof 16th century trade, and a 2 sigma calibrated date of
east of 41COL172. This type is most common in
A.D. 1469-1614 from the Sister Grove Creek site is
archeological deposits at the George C. Davis site
also evidence that the Late Prehistoric inhabitants of
(41CE19) that date between cal A.D. 988-1276.
the East Fork were in the region at least up to initial
Vessel 2, probably a jar with moderately thick
16th century European contact.
vessel walls (6.9-7.9 mm range) represented by six
Typical of the smaller sites along the East Fork
body sherds, one of which has a series of shallow
is the ceramic assemblage from 41COL172. The
parallel and opposed incised lines on it (and of
16 sherds are probably from four or five different
uncertain orientation), has a very distinctive temper
vessels (Perttula 2010:168-175). The majority of
composition and firing conditions. Temper incluthe occupational deposits at the site have been
sions include small fragments of burned mussel
radiocarbon-dated to between cal A.D. 1180-1390
shell, burned bone, and crushed hematite pieces.
(McKee 2010).
The sherds are from a vessel that has unusual firVessel 1 includes four grog-tempered rim and
ing, namely a brown paste with a thin black band
body sherds from a decorated carinated bowl with

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
visible in the sherd core along the vessel’s interior
surface, suggesting it was smudged during firing.
Vessels 2 and 4 (see below) from 41COL172
are suspected to be of local manufacture, primarily
because of the different kinds of tempers that were
used, as well as the firing conditions exhibited by
Vessel 2, the exterior roughening of Vessel 4, and
the poorly executed incised decoration on Vessel 2.
The five sherds from Vessel 3, a carinated
bowl, are undecorated. It is also probably of Caddo
origin given the occurrence of grog temper in the
paste. The vessel was tempered with grog and
small bits of crushed hematite. Vessel 3 was fired
in a reducing environment, and cooled in the open
air, leaving either one or both vessel surfaces with
thin oxidized surfaces visible in the sherd cores.
The vessel is well smoothed on both interior and
exterior vessel surfaces, and the vessel walls range
only from 6.6-6.9 mm in thickness.
Vessel 4 (one body sherd) has small bits of
what appear to be burned bone added to the paste.
There is no evidence of surface treatment, and in
fact the exterior sherd surface is roughened and
unsmoothed. It is from a vessel fired in a reducing environment, and then cooled in the open air,
leaving a thin oxidized band visible on the exterior
surface of the sherd core. It has moderately thick
body walls (7.4 mm), and may be from a jar.
Finally, 41DL203 along Rowlett Creek in the
East Fork of the Trinity River basin also has shelltempered ceramics. They are from archeological
deposits with a two sigma calibrated age range of
A.D. 1310-1440 (Tinsley and Dayton 2011:68).
The few sherds are from plain shell-tempered vessels made from local clays.
Elm Fork of the Trinity River
Prikryl’s (1990) summary of the archeological record on the lower Elm Fork of the Trinity
River mentions aboriginal ceramic sherds at 37
sites (16 percent of the sample of 238 sites in the
study area), with samples ranging from one to
196 sherds per site. One site (41DN49) had two
Southwestern sherds, and another (41DN260) had a
number of sherds from at least one Bullard Brushed
vessel; this Caddo vessel likely originated in the
upper Neches River basin in East Texas. Prikryl
(1990:77) suggests that aboriginal ceramics began
to be made in the area between 1250-750 B.P.
(A.D. 700-1200), and that they were primarily
grog-tempered wares with incised, punctated, and

169

brushed decorative elements. The ceramics from
lower Elm Fork sites that date from 750-250 B.P.
(A.D. 1200-1700) are tempered with bone, crushed
limestone, and fossil shell, not just shell temper
(i.e., Nocona Plain) (Prikryl 1990:80).
Aboriginal ceramics are abundant on sites
along the Elm Fork of the Trinity River at Lake
Lewisville in contexts dating only between ca.
A.D. 1250-1425. These ceramics are overwhelmingly plain shell-tempered Nocona Plain globularshaped jars and bowls (Brown and Lebo 1991;
Ferring and Yates 1998). These vessels have
smoothed interior and exterior surfaces, and are
relatively thick-walled (mean thickness of 7.5 mm
at 41DN26, Ferring and Yates 1998:71). Shelltempered sherds comprise more than 90 percent
of the assemblages, with a few sherds from grogand bone-tempered vessels. Decorated vessels are
extremely rare in the Elm Fork sites, consisting
of a few sherds with simple incised lines, several
with an interior red slip, and two cord-marked
sherds from 41DN372. These may be from Plains
Village Lindsay Cordmarked vessels (e.g., Drass
1997:192-193).
Upstream at Lake Ray Roberts on the Elm
Fork, only a few of the sites investigated by Ferring and Yates (1997) have aboriginal ceramics.
These occur in contexts dated between 693 ± 70
B.P. (A.D. 1187-1327) and 474 ± 100 B.P. (A.D.
1376-1576), indicating that they are basically
contemporaneous with the ceramic-bearing Late
Prehistoric sites at Lake Lewisville. Ceramic
sherds are almost uniformly from plain, smoothed,
shell-tempered vessels with rounded lips that have
been typed as Nocona Plain (Ferring and Yates
1997:192, 212, 261, 266). At the Calvert site
(41DN102), 299 sherds were recovered in three
block excavations. Only 1.7 percent of the sherds
were not shell-tempered, and they included one
plain sherd with no temper, and four sherds with
grit temper. Two of these sherds were decorated
with fingernail punctations.
West Fork of the Trinity River
The best known aboriginal sites with ceramics
on the West Fork of the Trinity are the Cobb-Pool
(41DL148) and Baggett Branch (41DL149) sites,
as well as 41DL184 (see Raab 1982; Peter and
McGregor 1988), at Joe Pool Lake on Mountain
Creek. Ceramics from the Cobb-Pool site represent wares tempered with grog and decorated with

170

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. Decorative elements in the Cobb-Pool site ceramic assemblage.

Decorative
element
Brushed
Brushed-Incised
Engraved
Incised
Incised-Punctated
Punctation
Slipped
Totals

Vessel
lots

Non-vessel
lots

10
3
15
34
4
60
3

–
1
1
11
2
68
2

10
4
16
45
6
128
5

129

85

214

incised, incised-punctated, and punctated elements
(Raab 1982:17 and Figure IV-8).
There is an extensive and diverse ceramic
sherd assemblage (n=641) from the Cobb-Pool
site. Calibrated radiocarbon dates from features
and Structure 2 range from A.D. 1080 ± 79, A.D.
1247 ± 24, and A.D. 1275 ± 90 (Peter and McGregor 1988:Table 9-27). Peter and McGregor

N

(1988:158) suggests that the ceramics are part of
a single component occupied between A.D. 10001200, although the radiocarbon dates suggest the
occupation probably lasted until ca. A.D. 1300
or later. Approximately 33 percent of the sherd
assemblage at the site is decorated (Table 3) and
the remainder are from plain wares. The plain to
decorated sherd ratio is 2.0.

Figure 7. Selected decorated sherds from the Cobb-Pool site: a, incised; b-d, punctated; e, incised-punctated, Kiam Incised.

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
Almost 60 percent of the decorated sherds
have punctated decorative elements (Figure 7b-d).
Another 21 percent have incised lines (Figure 7a),
7 percent are engraved fine wares; 6.5 percent have
brushed marks; 2.8 percent are incised-punctated
(Figure 7e); and 2 percent have a red slip on one
or both vessel surfaces. The decorated sherds
have close stylistic similarities to pre-A.D. 1300
East Texas Caddo wares—with the exception of
the brushed sherds, which become common only
after ca. A.D. 1250 in East Texas contexts (Perttula 2013)—and pre-ca. A.D. 1300 types such as
Canton Incised, Davis Incised, Crockett Curvilinear Incised, Kiam Incised, and Weches Fingernail
Impressed have been identified in collections obtained by R. King Harris from the site (Peter and
McGregor 1988:131).
The assemblage includes sherds from vessels tempered with shell (10 percent), grog (58
percent), sand-bone (4 percent), sand (5 percent),
sand-shell (4 percent), grog-sand-shell (7 percent),
grog-shell (5 percent), and grog-sand (9 percent)
(Peter and McGregor 1988:Tables 9-13 and 9-16).
The principal tempers—alone or in combination
with other non-plastics—at Cobb-Pool are grog (79
percent), shell (26 percent), and sand (29 percent).
The sherds tempered with shell (as the sole temper or in combination with other non-plastics) are
decorated with either random punctations; incised
lines; engraved lines; an interior/exterior red slip;
and brushing.
At the Baggett Branch site, test excavations
recovered grog- and bone-tempered body and
base sherds; body sherds were decorated with
shallow incised and brushed lines and marks
(Raab 1982:23). This assemblage is thought to be
associated with an uncalibrated radiocarbon date
of A.D. 1200 ± 200. A later occupation was investigated during data recovery work at the site, and
its archeological deposits also had ceramic sherds;
there is a calibrated date of A.D. 1454 ± 65 for this
occupation. The 163 sherds found at the site during
the data recovery were sorted into 12 vessel lots,
but only four of the vessels (Vessels 2-5) are represented by more than three sherds. Two of these
vessels have shell temper (Vessels 3 and 4), and
the other two (Vessels 2 and 5) are grog-tempered.
The shell-tempered vessel lots were a punctated
bowl (Vessel 3) and a plain jar (Vessel 5). Vessel
2, the first of the grog-tempered vessel lots, is a
flat-bottomed jar with brushed and brushed-incised
marks and lines (Peter and McGregor 1988:Figure

171

10-10). Vessel 5 has at least two rows of tool
punctations on the rim panel. The other vessel lots
are identified as follows: shell-tempered incised
(Vessel 1); shell-tempered plain (Vessel 9); grogtempered slipped (Vessel 6); grog-tempered plain
(Vessels 7, 8, and 12); grog-tempered appliqued
(Vessel 11); and sandy paste excised (Vessel 10)
(Peter and McGregor 1988:216-220). Although the
grog-tempered and shell-tempered ceramics are
found together in the same shallow deposits (i.e., all
but one sherd was found from 0-30 cm bs), Peter and
McGregor (1988:241) suggest that they are from at
least two temporally sequent occupations, the most
recent occupation having shell-tempered ceramics as
well as Perdiz and Fresno arrow points. The older
occupation with grog-tempered ceramics dates to the
earlier part of the Late Prehistoric period.
The few ceramic sherds from 41DL184 represent four different vessels. All the vessels are
grog-tempered. One has a brushed exterior surface,
and another has tool punctated elements (Peter and
McGregor 1988:111-112). Peter and McGregor
(1988:125) suggest the site may represent a single
occupation dating from ca. A.D. 1200-1300.
There are a few ceramic sherds from the Fort
Worth Nature Center Gravel Quarry site (41TR113)
in the West Fork of the Trinity River basin. They
consist exclusively of body sherds from relatively
thin-walled vessels tempered, fired, smoothed, and
decorated in several different ways. The analysis of
the prehistoric sherds suggests that they are from
a minimum of five different vessels. At least four
of the vessels from the site are tempered with grog
(or crushed fired clay) and the other has abundant
burned pieces of mussel shell. The sherds from the
grog-tempered vessels are decorated either with
tool punctations or with a red clay wash, while the
shell-tempered sherds are undecorated. The grogtempered pottery from the Fort Worth Nature Center Gravel Quarry may have its origins in pre-A.D.
1300 East Texas Caddo ceramic traditions, as much
of the Caddo ceramics found in East Texas are
also grog-tempered (either before or after ca. A.D.
1300), but instrumental neutron activation analysis
and detailed petrographic analysis of sherds from
the site are needed to definitively establish the
provenience and manufacture locale of the sherds
found at this upper Trinity River basin settlement.
The first possible grog-tempered vessel at
the site appears to be a jar that has a sandy paste,
probably from the use of a naturally sandy clay
in vessel manufacture, smoothed interior vessel

172

Texas Archeological Society

walls, relatively thick body walls (8.0-8.4 mm),
and it was fired in a reducing environment, but
cooled in the open air. This firing left the exterior
surface lighter-colored than the vessel interior
surface. Both sherds have a single tool punctate
on them as decoration, suggesting that the body of
the jar had widely-spaced and probably randomly
placed tool punctations. Similar vessel lots of
sherds have been documented from the Cobb-Pool
site (41DL148) in the upper Trinity River basin in
ca. A.D. 1000-1300 contexts (Peter and McGregor
1988:Table 9-12).
The other three possible grog-tempered vessels
from the Fort Worth Nature Center Gravel Quarry
site have a thin red wash on either interior and/or
exterior surfaces. Two of the vessels were fired in
a reducing environment and cooled in the open air,
while the other was incompletely oxidized during
firing. Vessel walls range between 6.6-7.7 mm in
thickness. Two of the possible vessels have a red
wash on both vessel surfaces, while the third has a
red wash on only the exterior surface. One of the
44 vessel lots (Vessel 25) at the Cobb-Pool site
has sherds with an interior and exterior slip that
was reddish-yellow on the interior and dark brown
on the exterior (Peter and McGregor 1988:1545),
suggesting it was not well-fired. Two of the three
sherds in this vessel lot were tempered with grog
and shell, which probably hints at its manufacture
during the latter part of the occupation in the 13th
century A.D. (Peter and McGregor 1988:194, 198),
given the possible late adoption of shell-tempered
pottery in this part of the upper Trinity River basin around A.D. 1300 (Daniel E. McGregor, 2010
personal communication).
The last vessel in the small sherd assemblage
from 41TR113 is represented by two plain shelltempered body sherds, probably from a Nocona
Plain jar or bowl (Suhm and Jelks 1962:115). These
sherds are from a vessel, again most likely a jar,
with thin body walls (4.8 mm), that was fired and
cooled in a reducing or low oxygen environment.
As we have already noted, shell-tempered pottery (Nocona Plain) is abundant in both Washita
River and Henrietta phase sites on the Southern
Plains in northern Texas and southern Oklahoma,
and is present as well at ca. post-A.D. 1300 sites
in the Dallas-Fort Worth area in the upper Trinity
River basin (Daniel E. McGregor, 2010 personal
communication). Drass (1997:87) notes that by
A.D. 1300, between 71-96 percent of the ceramics at Washita phase sites are shell-tempered,

increasing “dramatically through time” from earlier
Paoli phase (ca. A.D. 900-1300) contexts. These
earlier sites tend to have less than 12 percent shelltempered pottery. “In general, there is an increase
in shell temper from very small amounts at the
early Paoli sites to predominantly shell tempered
ceramics at Washita River phase sites dating between A.D. 1300 and 1450” (Drass 1997:88).
Shell-tempered pottery is also the principal
ceramic ware in post-A.D. 1300 Henrietta phase
sites in the upper Trinity, Brazos, and Red River
basins in northern Texas. At the Harrell site on the
Brazos River, for example, shell-tempered pottery
comprises 97 percent of the sherd assemblage
(n=597) (Krieger 1946). That percentage is 98.6
in post-A.D. 1430 sites (n=292 sherds) on the Elm
Fork of the Trinity (Ferring and Yates 1997), and,
as mentioned above, 79 percent at the 14th century
A.D. Dillard site sherds (n=754) on the Red River
are shell-tempered (Martin 1994). About 20 percent of the sherds from this site are tempered with
limestone instead of shell, and another 30 percent
have both shell and limestone tempers; the only
non-shell or limestone-tempered sherds are grit and
bone-tempered cordmarked Washita River phase
pottery (cf. Drass 1997:Tables 18 and 19).
The shell-tempered pottery from the Fort
Worth Nature Center Gravel Quarry site has affiliations with post-A.D. 1300 Southern Plains cultures on the Red, Brazos, and Washita rivers to the
north and west of here, as well as with Late phase
(ca. A.D. 1300-1600) Late Prehistoric period sites
elsewhere in the upper Trinity River basin (Ferring
and Yates 1997; Peter and McGregor 1988:367).
Another West Fork of the Trinity River site
with ceramics is 41TR198. The few sherds from
the site occur in occupational deposits dated to
ca. A.D. 900 (Peter and Harrison 2011:iv, 231).
The undecorated sherds are from poorly fired and
unsmoothed vessels with a gritty paste and a fine
grit temper. Peter and Harrison (2011:151) argue
that “the limited number of sherds together with
the contexts of the finds suggest that experimentation with ceramic technology was occurring
much earlier in northcentral Texas than previously
thought.” Ferring (1995) reports on the occurrence of shell-tempered ceramic sherds from the
George King site in the headwaters of the Denton
Creek basin in the upper West Fork. The shelltempered sherds are found in a component with
bison remains and an uncalibrated radiocarbon
date of A.D. 1425 ± 60.

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
South Fork of the Trinity River
The Bell Camp site (41PR107) on the South
Fork of the Trinity River has pre-A.D. 1300 Caddo
style pottery sherds (Todd et al. 2009:Figure 3).
Among them are Weches Fingernail Impressed,
var. Weches rim and body sherds, Crockett Curvilinear Incised body sherds, and a slipped Holly
Fine Engraved body sherd.
Trinity River and Major Tributaries
Richner (1982) reports on aboriginal ceramic
sherds from a number of sites in Henderson and
Freestone counties in the proposed Tennessee
Colony Lake area in the mid-Trinity River basin.
The largest samples came from midden deposits
at the Brown’s Creek site (n=237, 41FT5) and
a floodplain rise at the Hound Dog site (n=137,
41HE247). The ceramics from the Brown’s Creek
and Hound Dog sites appear to date primarily
before ca. A.D. 1300, and the decorated sherds
from the Brown’s Creek site are incised (n=24),
punctated (n=13), brushed (n=4), and slipped (n=1)
(Richner 1982:142). Notably, 14 percent of the
sherds are tempered with shell, 2.5 percent have
bone temper, and the remainder have grit-, grog-,
and/or sand non-plastic inclusions. At the Bazette
Bridge site (41HE47) in the project area, with a
corrected radiocarbon date of A.D. 1493 from the
archeological deposits, the relatively thin-walled
(6.3-6.6 mm mean thickness) sherds are grog-,
grit-, and shell-tempered, and a number of sherds

173

also have a sandy paste. Decorated sherds have
incised, brushed, and appliqued elements (Richner
1982:83). Incised-punctated and brushed ceramic
sherds were also recovered from the Winston site
(41HE245) from a context radiocarbon-dated to
between A.D. 1456-1657 (Richner 1982:221).
Investigations in the Richland-Chambers
Reservoir in Freestone and Navarro counties in
the Post Oak Savanna and Blackland Prairie (see
Figure 1) recovered substantial amounts of prehistoric ceramics from sites dating as early as ca.
A.D. 200 to as late as ca. A.D. 1650 (Bruseth and
Martin 1987; McGregor and Bruseth 1987). The
earliest pottery from these sites is reputed to be
a plain shell-tempered ware, including 19 sherds
from Adams Ranch (41NV177), one sherd each
from 41FT158 and 41FT161B, eight sherds from
41FT200, and a handful of shell-tempered sherds
from Bird Point Island (41FT201). In the case of
Bird Point Island, the few shell-tempered sherds
(<1 percent of the assemblage of 4967 sherds) were
found in contexts post-dating A.D. 1000 (Bruseth
and Martin 1987:112-113). This temporal context
for the shell-tempered sherds is consistent with
the post-A.D. 1000 assemblages from the Brown’s
Creek and Bazette Bridge sites in the same general
locale (see Richner 1982). At Adams Ranch, however, six shell-tempered sherds were found in basal
deposits dating from ca. A.D. 200-700 in a large
pit (Feature 1), as well as in ca. A.D. 800-1000
Zone 2 deposits (n=2 sherds) in the same feature.
Bruseth and Martin (1987:261) comment that

Table 4. Decorated sherd assemblages from selected Richland-Chambers Reservoir sites
(from Bruseth and Martin 1987; McGregor and Bruseth 1987).
Decorative Method

41NV173

Engraved
Brushed
Incised
Punctated
Incised-Punctated
Slipped
Other**

23.1*
2.3
59.8
6.5
2.8
–
5.6

Total Decorated Sherds

216

41NV182

41NV203

41NV177

41FT201

11.9
–
26.2
30.0
1.2
2.4
28.6

9.2
22.4
27.6
39.5
1.3
–
–

10.2
9.5
26.0
26.0
8.7
7.9
11.8

6.5
5.1
42.2
24.3
3.4
0.6
17.8

84

76

127

1078

*percentage; **represents sherds apparently with a combination of decorative elements, but no specific decorative
methods are identified by either Bruseth and Martin (1987) or McGregor and Bruseth (1987).

174

Texas Archeological Society

shell-tempered sherds were “limited to this basal
layer and to pits intrusive into this layer from the
subsequent layer (Zone 2).”
Plain sandy paste pottery is thought to characterize ca. A.D. 700-900 ceramic assemblages in
the Richland-Chambers Reservoir (McGregor and
Bruseth 1987:Figure 15-2), but this ware appears
to be contemporary with plain and decorated grog
and bone-tempered wares that are “part of the ceramic tradition of East Texas which began around
A.D. 800” (Bruseth and Martin 1987:229); this
ceramic tradition continued until ca. A.D. 1650 in
this part of the Trinity River basin. The principal
decorative methods in the Richland-Chambers Reservoir assemblages include sherds from engraved
and slipped fine ware vessels and sherds from
brushed, incised, punctated, and incised-punctated
utility ware vessels with East Texas Caddo styles
(Table 4). Fine wares comprise no more than 23.1
percent of the decorated sherds at any one of the
sites. Utility wares are dominated by sherds with
incised and punctated decorative elements, but jars
with brushing marks are relatively common at the
Polecat Hill (41NV203), Adams Ranch, and Bird
Point Island sites.
Post-ca. A.D. 1400 fine wares and utility ware
sherds at sites such as Bird Point Island, Little
Cedar Creek (41NV173), and Polecat Hill stylistically resemble upper Neches River basin Frankston
phase Caddo ceramics (McGregor and Bruseth
1987:116). In particular, Poynor Engraved sherds
are present (Bruseth and Martin 1987:Figures 8-2eg and 8-3c; McGregor and Bruseth 1987:Figures
11-19a-h, 13-5g) in the fine wares, and the utility
wares include Killough Pinched and La Rue Neck
Banded (Bruseth and Martin 1987:Figure 8-2h-j)
jar sherds; these utility wares are also known to be
associated with Poynor Engraved in upper Neches
River basin Caddo assemblages (Perttula 2013).
The Pecan Springs site (41EL11) in Ellis
County, on an eastward-flowing tributary to the
Trinity River, has a small assemblage (n=99
sherds) from shell-tempered (n=21) plain wares
and grog- and bone-tempered sherds (n=78); about
26 percent of the latter have a distinctive paste
with crushed quartz particles (Sorrow 1966:46).
The brushed, engraved, incised, punctated-incised,
and appliqued sherds appear to be from post-A.D.
1400 Late Caddo vessels, including a sherd from a
Poynor Engraved vessel (Sorrow 1966:Figure 23k)
that was very likely from a vessel made in the upper Neches River basin in East Texas.

Story (1965:222-234) described ceramic
assemblages from the Lacy (41HE70), Wild Bull
(41HE61), and Gossett Bottoms (41KF7) sites on
Cedar Creek, a major southward-flowing tributary
to the Trinity River in the Post Oak Savannah. The
ceramics include sherds from a few plain shelltempered (2.4 percent), bone-tempered (27 percent),
grog-tempered (35 percent, including one strap
handle), and sand-tempered (2.7 percent) jars and
bowls. The sandy-tempered sherds may be from
Goose Creek Plain, var. unspecified vessels, and thus
this ware’s occurrence would mark the manufacture
and use of pre-A.D. 900 Woodland period vessels in
this part of the Trinity River basin. The decorated
sherds (e.g., engraved, brushed, incised, trailed,
brushed-incised, punctated, punctated-incised, and
pinched) closely resemble East Texas Caddo styles
(Story 1965:Figures 24 and 25a-h), particularly with
post-A.D. 1400 upper Neches River basin ceramics.
This is evident by the fact that almost 42 percent of
the decorated sherds are from jars with brushed rim
and/or body markings. Such brushed jars become
common in the upper Neches River basin only after
ca. A.D. 1250 (Perttula 2013), and they come to
dominate Caddo utility wares in the basin by the
15th century A.D.
Upper Sabine River Basin
One site in the upper part of the Sabine River
basin in the Blackland Prairie has an interesting
assortment of aboriginal ceramics. The 110 sherds
from 41HU39 are tempered either with grog
(n=21), grog and sand (n=18), sand (n=8), sand
and shell (n=17), grog-sand and shell (n=5), grog
and shell (n=30), and shell (n=9). The proportion of
sherds with shell-temper is 55 percent (Black et al.
1994:Table 4), which would suggest an occupation
of the site well after ca. A.D. 1250. The sherds are
from vessels with a fine paste and relatively thin
vessel walls (an average of 5.73 mm). Only one
grog and sand-tempered sherd is decorated, and it
has several rows of tool punctations.
Brazos River Basin Sites
Ceramic-bearing sites in the Brazos River
Basin are relatively scarce. When they do occur,
ceramic assemblages often exhibit distinct
regional influences, especially to the east towards
East Texas Caddo cultures (e.g., Watt 1953).
However, the dearth of controlled excavations

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
from well-dated contexts has made it difficult to
establish a chronological sequence for a number
of the different kinds of ceramic assemblages
documented in the area. It is widely known that
East Texas Caddo ceramics of both pre-A.D.
1400 and post-A.D. 1400 manufacture are well
distributed in “the area from the Brazos River
valley around Waco south to the Georgetown
area…by contrast, the occurrence of Caddo pottery
in Central Texas after about A.D. 1400 is much
more widespread” (Creel et al. 2013:74). After ca.
A.D. 1400, Caddo ceramics are apparently more
abundant in the “Blackland Prairie just below the
Balcones Escarpment, from about the Colorado
River (maybe as far as the San Marcos River)
north to the Brazos River valley in the vicinity of
Waco” (Creel et al. 2013:75; see also Perttula et al.
2003:Figure 16 and Table 9).
While some of the earliest archeological
investigations in the state occurred in this region,
this early work was often poorly recorded and done
in a non-systematic manner, making it difficult to
interpret the archeological findings (Fox 1939;
Ray 1929, 1938, 1947; Sayles 1935). Several
more systematic surveys were undertaken in the
1960s (Malone and Briggs 1970), 1970s (Etchieson
et al. 1978, 1979), and 1980s (Thurmond et al.
1981; Wulfkuhle 1986). However, few ceramics

175

were recovered during these investigations and
when they were recovered, only limited ceramic
descriptions were provided or the ceramics were
simply classified as unidentifiable (e.g., Wulfkuhle
1986).
One exception is the pottery sherds recovered
at four sites at Lake Whitney on the Brazos River
(Stephenson 1970): the Stansbury, Pictograph
Shelter, Buzzard Shelter (see also Long 1961), and
Sheep Shelter. At Pictograph Shelter, 15 sherds
from six different East Texas Caddo vessels were
recovered in deposits dominated by Scallorn arrow points, and thus they likely predate ca. A.D.
1200. They are grit- and grog-tempered, and have
red slips or washes or engraved lines (Stephenson 1970:129-130). Pre-A.D. 1200 Caddo vessel
sections were recovered from Buzzard Shelter,
including Holly Fine Engraved (sherds from two
different grog-tempered vessels) and grog-gritbone-tempered Dunkin Incised sherds, as well as
bone-tempered engraved sherds, and plain grogand bone-tempered vessels. One sherd has a sandy
paste, and may be from a Goose Creek Plain, var.
unspecified vessel (Stephenson 1970:166-171).
The 39 sherds at the Sheep Shelter are from at
most seven or eight different East Texas Caddo
style vessels of probable ca. A.D. 1200-1400 age,
including an engraved and red-slipped bottle, two

Table 5. Ceramic sherd assemblages identified during the South Bend Reservoir Survey
(Saunders et al. 1992).
Site Number

Location of Site

No. of
Sherds

Paste

Decoration

Type

41YN7

Unnamed Tributary of
the Brazos Clear Fork

1

Grog-tempered

Undecorated

Sanders
Plain*

41YN118

41YN182

Brazos River

Brazos Clear Fork

2

Untempered Clay

Undecorated

Unknown

41YN266

Brazos River

1

Grog-tempered

Undecorated

41YN327

Brazos River

Shell-tempered
Untempered Clay
Calcite-tempered

Undecorated
Undecorated
Undecorated

41YN366

Unnamed Tributary of
the Brazos Clear Fork

14
1
3

Nocona Plain
Sanders
Plain*
Nocona Plain
Unknown
Unknown

1

Shell-tempered

Undecorated

Nocona Plain

41YN425

Brazos Clear Fork

22

Grog-Tempered

Undecorated

Sanders
Plain*

1

Shell-tempered

Undecorated

*unless the sherds have a red-slip on one or both surfaces, they would not be classified as Sanders Plain in the current
Caddo ceramic taxonomy (Brown 1996:401-403 and Figures 2-19l, 2-34g, 2-37a-l, 2-38d, 2-39d, k, n-q, and 2-42b;
Perttula and Selden 2014), but simply as an unidentified plain grog-tempered ware

176

Texas Archeological Society

Canton Incised jars, a plain carinated bowl, a plain
grog-bone-tempered bottle, a grog-grit-tempered
brushed jar, and a cross-hatched incised bonetempered vessel (Stephenson 1970:199-201). Late
18th to early 19th century Caddo ceramics (n=18
sherds from 11 different vessels) were recovered
in excavations in several parts of the Stansbury site
(Stephenson 1970:76-79). They included sherds
from Womack Engraved and Patton Engraved,
Historic Caddo ceramic types manufactured and
used by Caddo peoples in either the upper Red and
Sabine River basins or the Neches-Angelina River
basins in East Texas.
One intensive survey conducted in the South
Bend Reservoir area in the late 1980s (Saunders et
al. 1992) provided more detailed descriptions of
the recovered ceramic sherds. The survey included
portions of Throckmorton, Young, and Stephens
counties (see Figure 1) and followed the main
channels and associated tributaries of the Brazos
and the Clear Fork of the Brazos Rivers. Only seven of the 586 sites with prehistoric components had
aboriginal ceramics, but the total number recovered
from all seven sites numbered only 46 sherds. All
of the prehistoric ceramic-bearing sites were found
in Young County (Table 5).
Two pottery types were identified, including
Nocona Plain and Sanders Plain, as defined by
Krieger (1946) and Suhm and Jelks (1962). While
fairly detailed descriptions of the ceramic attributes were provided, the data was presented as a
group summary, thus making it difficult to relate
the attributes to specific sites. Further, no specific
chronological relationships could be established
because the sherds came from surface collections.
Nocona Plain sherds were recovered from
41YN182, 41YN327, and 41YN366. The majority
of the recovered ceramics were small body fragments that provided little indication of vessel shape
and size. However, two rim sherds from 41YN327
suggest that at least two vessels were represented
at this site. Both rim sherds were from Nocona
Plain vessels that had rounded and undecorated
lip edges. One rim was direct in profile and one
was thinned. One of the rim sherds appears to be
from a restricted bottle with an orifice diameter of
approximately 11 cm.
Pastes were relatively homogenous, with a
dense compact appearance. Crushed shell had been
added, representing less than 30 percent of the total
paste volume. Paste colors varied from light gray to
dark gray. Exterior and interior surfaces had been

either smoothed or lightly burnished and uniformly
finished. Vessel wall thicknesses ranged from 4-8
mm, with a mean thickness of 6.1 ± 1.1 mm.
The 24 sherds typologically classified as Sanders Plain were recovered from 41YN7, 41YN266,
and 41YN425. The sherds had been tempered with
crushed sherds or grog that represented less than
20 percent of the total paste volume. Their exterior
surfaces had been finished in a consistent manner
and the majority had lightly burnished exterior
surfaces; without slips on either one or both sherd
surfaces, these sherds would not be classified as
Sanders Plain in the current Caddo ceramic taxonomy (see Perttula and Selden 2014). The majority
of the interior surfaces had been smoothed. None of
the sherds were large enough to assess vessel size
or shape; however, the vessel walls appear to have
been relatively thick, averaging between 7-9 mm,
with a mean thickness of 8.3 ± 0.1 mm.
Coloration varied in the sherd assemblages.
The one sherd recovered from 41YN7 had a
white exterior surface and the sherd recovered at
41YN266 had a brown exterior surface. The exterior surface color of the 22 sherds from 41YN425
was most often tan, but in a few cases gray or
brown. Interior coloration is predominately gray or
tan, and the majority of the paste cores were black.
Since 41YN425 included both transitional
Archaic and Late Prehistoric lithic artifacts, the ceramic assemblage at this site may be representative
of more than one time period. Given their overall
thickness and coloration, it is possible that some
of the grog-tempered ceramics at this site may well
have been from Williams Plain vessels, dated to the
Woodland period in East Texas, and contemporaneous at least in part with the Transitional Archaic
period in North Central Texas.
Six sherds were not typologically identifiable.
Three undecorated body sherds recovered from
41YN327 had calcite inclusions embedded in a
homogenous paste matrix. The small mineral inclusions were angular and appear to have been crushed
into fine to silt-sized grains before being added to
the paste. The tiny parallel striations observed on
several of the inclusions, and the fact that these
inclusions reacted strongly to hydrochloric acid,
suggest that they may have come from fossiliferous rock.
Two of the sherds had been smoothed on both
their exterior and interior surfaces, while one sherd
had burnished exterior and interior surfaces. The
sherds ranged from 4-8 mm in thickness.

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
Ceramics with similar paste inclusions have
a wide distribution. Matson (1935) identified
similar aplastics in sherds recovered from five
sites in the Abilene area (discussed below). Similarly, limestone-calcite-tempered pottery has been
found in sites in the upper Trinity River Basin
(Rohn 1998; Brack 2000) and the upper Red River
basin (Drass 1997).
Three plain body sherds with no apparent temper were recovered from two of the sites, 41YN118
and 41YN327. While microscopic examination of
the paste detected a few isolated mineral inclusions, the well-consolidated paste matrix was composed almost entirely of pure clay. All three sherds
were relatively thick, ranging from 8-10 mm.
The surfaces of these three non-tempered
sherds were somewhat irregular and uneven. The
exterior and interior surfaces of the two sherds recovered from 41YN118 were burnished and brown
in color. The sherd recovered from 41YN327 has a
brown, burnished exterior surface, but its interior
had been smoothed and is light red in color.
Based on their association with time diagnostic
lithic artifacts (e.g., Fresno and Clifton projectile
points), the Nocona Plain ceramics most likely
date after ca. A.D. 1200-1500. At 41YN425, the
presence of an untyped dart point among the
surface-collected grog-tempered wares may also
suggest the presence of Woodland period pottery.
In summary, the occurrence of technologically
variable pottery at these seven sites point to occupations at different times by aboriginal groups with
contacts and affiliations to the north/northeast and
the west, with occupations occurring at different
points in time.
Forrester (1988:39, 42) described sherds from
two different Nocona Plain shell-tempered vessels from the Bee Mountain Shelter No. 2 on the
Brazos River in Bosque County, Texas, one a jar
and the other a possible water bottle. The jar had
a very thick base (14-15 mm). The vessel sherds
were probably associated with a post-A.D. 1200
occupation in the rock shelter that also had Perdiz
and Cliffton arrow points.
Five ceramics were recovered in archeological
investigations at 41BQ285 on the North Bosque
River in a component that dates from the late 13th
to the mid-17th century A.D. (Griffith et al. 2010).
Technological, stylistic, petrographic, and instrumental neutron activation analysis of the sherds
indicated that four of the sherds were manufactured
from Central Texas clays; two were plain and two

177

had simple fingernail punctated designs. The fifth
sherd is a grog-tempered carinated engraved bowl
(Perttula et al. 2010). Taking all ceramic analyses
into account, Perttula et al. (2010) concluded that
this engraved sherd was from a vessel made from a
Central Texas clay source. What prehistoric aboriginal group made this sherd remains to be determined.
The Blum Rockshelter on the Nolands River
in Hill County had 88 sherds from probably five
different vessels, all recovered from post-A.D.
1200 contexts with Perdiz arrow points. One grogtempered vessel section may be from a Poynor
Engraved bottle (see Jelks 1953:Plate 19u), Vessel
2 is a plain grog-grit-tempered bowl with charred
residue on its exterior surface, while Vessel 3 is
a grog- and bone-tempered bowl with diagonal
incised lines and punctations (Jelks 1953:205).
Vessel 4 is a bone-tempered jar with rows of fingernail impressions, and Vessel 5 is a grog- and
bone-tempered bottle with engraved pendant triangles (Jelks 1953:Plate 19y). Jelks (1953:206)
concluded that these vessels “seem to be Caddoan
ware. It is safe to assume that all are trade items
from the east.”
Other sites in the Brazos River basin in North
Central Texas have been excavated where primarily pre-A.D. 1200/1300 Caddo sherds were
recovered, including sherds from a section of a
Hickory Engraved bottle from Kyle Rockshelter,
along with two plain bone-tempered sherds and a
plain sandy paste body sherd (Jelks 1962:60-61).
Several sites at Aquilla Lake, including the McDonald site (41HI105, with n=127 sherds, most of
them plain or from the undecorated lower portions
of vessels), has Caddo style ceramics of the types
Kiam Incised, Canton Incised, Maydelle Incised,
and Bullard Brushed (Brown 1987:48-14).
There were a few plain ceramic rim and body
sherds from ca. A.D. 900-1200 and post-A.D. 1200
zones at Bear Creek Shelter (41HI17) on the Brazos River at Lake Whitney (Lynott 1978:43). One
sherd from the older deposits was tempered with
grog, and another was tempered with limestone.
The sherd from a Toyah phase zone had a fine
sandy temper.
One of the earliest ceramic-bearing sites excavated in North Central Texas was the Harrell
site (41YN1) (Fox 1939; Hughes 1942; Krieger
1946; Texas Beyond History 2013). Located on
the floodplain of the Brazos River in south central
Young County, the Harrell site assemblage included roughly 597 sherds, all of which occurred

178

Texas Archeological Society

in the upper stratigraphic levels. Approximately 80
percent of the ceramics were shell-tempered wares
which were classified as Nocona Plain. The paste
matrix of the remaining sherds included those that
exhibited no apparent temper and those with white
clay lumps as probable grog temper. Two sherds
were considered “trade pieces”: one was an apparent southeastern New Mexico ceramic ware and
one was a Poynor Engraved sherd from a Caddo
group living in the upper Neches River basin in
East Texas.
Krieger (1946) noted the similarities between
the sherds found at the Harrell site and whole
ceramic vessels found in graves in East Central
Oklahoma and Northeast Texas. Thus, Krieger
(1946) believed the Harrell site to be the southernmost expression of the Plains Village tradition
and considered the site to be the “type site” of the
Henrietta Focus. Subsequent investigations at the
Harrell site point to intermittent occupations that
date between ca. A.D. 800 and A.D. 1500.
The ceramics from the Harrell site were later
reexamined by Brack (2000; see also Brayshaw
[1970]), who determined that between 25 and 30
separate vessels are represented in the assemblage.
He concluded that most of the vessels were roundbottomed jars with restricted necks averaging 15
cm in diameter, many of which flared out at the
rims. At least four bowls were also represented in
the collection. The vast majority of the sherds (98
percent) are plain shell-tempered wares; however,
a few exhibit simple decorations, primarily rows
of appliqued nodes. Other decorative techniques
appearing on the vessel body were vertical fingernail marks, incised diagonal lines, and stamped
impressions. From Brack’s (2000) comparative
study of shell-tempered pottery from North Texas
and Oklahoma, the pottery found at the Harrell site
was believed to be the most technologically varied,
but Brack agreed with Krieger’s earlier conclusion
that the pottery found at the Harrell site closely resembled pottery found at Plains Village sites along
the Red River and the Washita/Canadian River
drainages in southern and western Oklahoma.
Interestingly, the Harrell site assemblage
displayed a rather heterogeneous mix of culturally
distinct artifacts, including both Southwest and
Caddo pottery types. Also recovered were marine
shells from the Pacific and the Gulf of Mexico,
sandstone pipes, and obsidian from the Rocky
Mountains. The presence of exotic goods and
an admixture of ceramic types suggest contacts

with, and/or occupation of the site by, a variety of
cultural groups.
The geographic location of the Harrell site
places it in a boundary zone bordered by different ecoregions and cultural zones. Situated on the
eastern flank of the Rolling Plains in the Western
Cross Timbers ecoregion of southern Young
County (see Figure 1), approximately 15 km west
of the Cross Timbers and 15 km east of the Broken
Red Plains at the confluence of the Salt and Clear
Forks of the Brazos River, the site would have
been a favorable place on the landscape. If one assumes that different artifact styles (i.e., projectile
points and pottery types) and exotic goods (i.e.,
marine shell) reflect culturally (linguistically,
economically, politically, and socially) distinct
peoples, then the artifact assemblages recovered
at the Harrell site suggest that different cultural
groups occupied and/or interacted at this location
over a substantial period of time.
The O. W. Hill site (41YN2) is located approximately 2.5 km northeast of the Harrell site.
Originally identified and excavated by the Works
Progress Administration (Fox 1939), this relatively large site included 21 hearth features, a large
lithic assemblage, ceramics, worked bone, and a
sizable quantity of faunal material. The archeological data suggest multiple occupations at the
site over a fairly long period of time (Brayshaw
1970; Denton 1984).
Eleven sherds were recovered at 41YN2, and
five of the 11 had been tempered with mussel
shell. A smoothly polished bead measuring 2 cm in
length was also recovered and was believed to be
shell-tempered. The paste matrix of the remaining
sherds was not noted; however, this group of sherds
was described as being thinner than the mussel
shell-tempered group. One sherd was decorated
with punctations, and two sherds that appeared to
be from the same vessel had shallow incised parallel lines (Brayshaw 1970; Denton 1984). While
overall vessel size and shape was difficult to determine, the three rim sherds found in the collection
were relatively thin, ranging from 3.6-4.8 mm in
thickness. One of the rims had an outward flaring
lip. Despite their sketchy descriptions, this small
assemblage seems to represent different ceramic
types. One interesting observation is that among
the diverse faunal assemblage from the site, mussel
shell was negligible. This suggests that the shelltempered wares found at the O.W. Hill site were
probably manufactured elsewhere.

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
Perhaps some of the earliest work done in the
Upper Brazos River basin was done by Cyrus Ray.
Ray (1935:75) recorded numerous Late Prehistoric
sites in the Abilene area; however, many were surface scatters that he observed in plowed fields. In
1935, Ray published a general article on what he
termed the “pottery complex artifacts” of the region,
providing rough counts and a cursory description
of 20 sites in the Abilene area from which pottery
sherds had been recovered. Most of the pottery-bearing sites described by Ray (1935) contained all or
most of the Toyah lithic assemblage and the ceramics included a wide variety of wares, including Rio
Grande glaze ware from New Mexico (confirmed
by H. P. Mera [Ray 1935: 84]). Unfortunately, documentation for many site locations is unclear and with
the exception of an article by Griffin (1935), little

179

or no detailed analyses were ever conducted on the
recovered ceramics.
The only detailed data on pottery recovered at the
ceramic-bearing sites described by Ray (1935) comes
from an analysis done by James B. Griffin (1935) and
Frederick Matson 1935). Griffin (1935) looked at a
sample of the pottery recovered from 13 sites near
Abilene, Texas. His analysis in most cases included
descriptions of the type of tempering material, texture
of the paste and aplastics, surface finish, color, and
any rims present in the assemblage (Table 6).
Roughly 55 percent of the analyzed sherds
were described as having “calcium phosphate”
inclusions that were uniformly white in color (Matson 1935). Analyses indicate that this tempering
material has optical properties resembling those of
the mineral Collophanite. This amorphous mineral

Table 6. Attributes recorded for pottery sherds recovered from 13 sites in Abilene, Texas.
Site
No.*

No. of
Sherds
39

Nine sherds are
grit-tempered;
27 sherds have
calcium phosphate
inclusions.

Surfaces are
predominantly
smoothed, but five
sherds have brushed
surfaces.

Colors range
from a light
red to a light
tan to brown to
dark gray and
grayish-black.

3

1

Grit-tempered with
a medium fine
texture.

Roughly smoothed
exterior surface with a
number of deep incised
gouges. Smoothed
interior surface.

Smoked
discolored
exterior and a
black interior.

5

7

All are tempered
with very fine grit
and their paste is
fine.

Three rims are
smoothed and
decorated with
horizontal incised
lines; two body sherds
have narrow, shallow
striations; two body
sherds are smoothed.

Paste core is
black; surfaces
are smoked
discolored.

Three rims are
included in the
sample: two rims
are straight; one rim
is slightly everted.

8

1

Both exterior and
interior surfaces are
smoothed.

1

Paste core is
bluish-gray and
its surfaces are
tan.

No rims.

9

Has calcium
phosphate inclusions
and the texture is
fine.

1

Paste

Has calcium
phosphate inclusions
and the texture is
fine.

Surface Finish

Both exterior and
interior surfaces are
smoothed.

Color

Exterior surface
is tan to buff in
color; interior
is tan.

Rim Attributes

Four rims are
included in the
sample. Their rim
form is straight, and
thinned in profile
with rounded lip
edges.
No rims.

No rims.

180

Texas Archeological Society
Table 6. (Continued)

Site
No.*

No. of
Sherds
2

Both are grittempered with a
medium fine texture.

Roughened exterior
surfaces, one sherd
having narrow
striations. Interior
surfaces are smoothed.

11

1

Has calcium
phosphate inclusions
and the texture is
fine.

Both exterior and
interior surfaces are
smoothed.

13

9

Three have fine grit
pastes; one is nontempered; five have
calcium phosphate
inclusions.

14

25

15

17

10

Paste

Surface Finish

Color

Rim Attributes

Exterior
and interior
surfaces
are brown
but heavily
blackened from
cooking.

No rims.

Paste core is
bluish-gray and
its surfaces are
grayish-tan.

No rims.

All are undecorated
and have smoothed
surfaces.

Not provided.

One rim sherd
has a pronounced
shoulder and a short
contracting rim
with a thinned lip
edge.

Two temper types.
Group 1 (n=6) has
calcium phosphate
inclusions, with a
fine texture. Group 2
(n=19) contains fine
grit temper, and a
medium texture.

17 sherds have a
smooth finish, and four
sherds have a rough
finish. Three sherds
have a striated surface.

The
predominant
color is tan.

One rim sherd is
rounded in profile
and slopes outward.

25

All are tempered
with white calcium
phosphate inclusions
that make up around
33 percent of the
paste matrix. Their
paste texture is fine
and compact.

All are undecorated
and their exterior
and interior surfaces
had been smoothed.
Narrow horizontal
striations that occur on
some sherds resulted
from use of a specific
smoothing tool.

Paste cores are
light bluishgray; exterior
surfaces are a
light tan.

No rims.

27

Three distinct
temper types. Group
1 (n=14) is grittempered, with a fine
to medium texture.
Group 2 (n=11) has
calcium phosphate
inclusions, with a
fine texture. Group 3
(n=2) includes both
calcium phosphate
and crushed shell
inclusions, with a
fine texture.

Group 1 sherds have
smoothed surfaces;
Groups 2 and 3
also have smoothed
surfaces, but are not
nearly as hard as the
sherds in Group 1.

Group 1 sherds
are grayishblack or
grayish-tan, but
are distinctly
darker than
the sherds in
Groups 2 and
3 whose colors
are brown and
tan.

Three rim sherds
are present in
Group 1. All three
rims are straight in
profile. Two have
rounded lip edges
and the third rim
has a flat lip.

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas

181

Table 6. (Continued)
Site
No.*

No. of
Sherds
16

Predominantly
grit-tempered
(n=13), but three
sherds have
calcium phosphate
inclusions. Twelve
sherds have a
medium fine texture
and four sherds have
a fine texture.

The surface finishes
are mostly striated or
roughened (possibly
by brushing). Nine
sherds were decorated.
Decorative elements
include fingernail
punctations, narrow
parallel incised lines,
intersecting diagonal
incised lines, incised
chevron, and fingernail
“gashes.”

Colors range
from black to
grayish-brown
to gray.

One rim sherd had
an inward curving
lip and shallow
diagonal incised
lines.

19

7

All are tempered
with very fine grit
and white calcium
phosphate. Their
paste texture is fine.

All are undecorated
and their exterior and
interior surfaces had
been smoothed.

Exterior
and interior
surfaces are
light bluishgray and paste
cores are most
often the same.

No rims.

18

Paste

Surface Finish

Color

Rim Attributes

*No Texas site trinomials could be correlated

occurs in sedimentary phosphatic limestones and
is the dominant material in fossil bone in which
the microstructure of the original bone is usually
preserved. This microstructure was noted on fragments of the aplastic inclusions in several of the
analyzed sherds. Amorphous deposits of “bone
phosphate” are known to occur in a number of
states outside Texas (Matson 1935).
The paste fabric of several of the analyzed
sherds also contained calcite, identifiable because it
effervesced upon the addition of Hydrochloric acid.
Calcite is a polymorphous mineral that occurs in
almost every type of environment. It is a crystalline
form that often binds with other compounds (such as
limestone). Thus, the white aplastics that appears in
many of the ceramics in North Central Texas appear
to be at least two different mineral types that can occur separately or they co-occur in the same formation.
Petrographic analysis of those ceramics containing
white mineral aplastics would aid in characterizing
the various types of “white” inclusions in ceramic
sherd pastes, and could eventually enable the identification of potential source deposits.
As can be seen from the preceding discussion,
Brazos River basin sites with aboriginal ceramic

assemblages are not especially prevalent in the
prehistoric archeological record and are technologically variable. While shell-tempered wares
are heavily represented, other potentially informative temper types are also found. Unfortunately,
most of the recovered ceramics are from surface
collections that are often poorly or inconsistently
described. Even among those ceramic-bearing
sites, such as the Harrell site, that have been more
extensively excavated, the recovered assemblages
have never been critically evaluated and are lacking in securely dated components. Thus, it is difficult to make more than general statements about
the spatial distribution of the ceramics found in the
Brazos River basin or to date their occurrence in
time with any degree of confidence.
Colorado River Basin Sites
Some of the earliest archeological work in the
state was done in the Colorado River basin area
by Cyrus Ray and E. B. Sayles. Unfortunately,
the results of many of these investigations have
never been fully reported and aboriginal ceramics

182

Texas Archeological Society

are rarely mentioned. Much of our information
on pottery in this portion of North Central Texas
comes from a survey (Wooldridge 1981) and later
excavations (Lintz et al. 1993) conducted along the
Concho and Colorado rivers in the proposed O. H.
Ivie (formerly Stacy) Reservoir area. Similar to
the archeological record in the Brazos River basin,
only a proportionately small number of ceramicbearing sites were identified during these investigations (Treece et al. 1993; Wooldridge 1981). In
an area encompassing more than 19,000 acres, 369
sites having prehistoric components were identified. Of those, only seven sites (1.9 percent) had
aboriginal ceramic sherds. However, two of the
seven sites (41CC 131 and 41RN169 yielded fairly
large numbers of ceramics (Table 7).

Data recovery investigations were undertaken
at the Currie site (41CC131), located on and within
an alluvial terrace of the Concho River 3.4 km
upstream from its confluence with the Colorado
River. Three stratified components were identified during the investigation. Radiocarbon dates
indicate that the site was intermittently occupied
between A.D. 756 and A.D. 1790, with a large
number of dates clustering around A.D. 1500
(Lintz et al. 1993:126-127).
A total of 731 sherds were recovered from
41CC131, all of which were typologically classified as Leon Plain. While the basic ceramic attributes were provided in table format (Treece et al.
1993:Table C-6), some key attribute data was only
presented in summary form, thus making it difficult

Table 7. Ceramic attributes for aboriginal pottery recovered from seven sites in
the O. H. Ivie Reservoir area.
Site No.*

No. of
Sherds

41CC222

2
(same
vessel)

41CC131

731

41CN19

1

41CN64

6

Paste

Texture

Surface/
Decoration

Thickness

Reference

The paste
matrix of
both sherds
consists of
clay with
small bone
inclusions.

Fine -grained

Undecorated
exterior and
Interior surfaces
that had been
well-smoothed.

4.5 mm and
5.0 mm

Recovered
during survey (Woolridge 1981)

714 had been
tempered
with bone,
and some also
included hematite, sand,
and/or calcite.
Seventeen
had undefined
pastes.

Predominantly
fine-grained
(n=729); 2
were mediumgrained.

Eleven exterior and interior
surface finishing
and decorative
techniques were
observed.

Ranged from
3 mm to 7
mm

Recovered
during data
recovery
(Treece et
al. 1993)

Sandtempered

Fine-grained

8 mm

Recovered
during data
recovery
(Treece et
al. 1993)

Paste matrix
of all six
sherds consists of clay
with bone
and calcite
inclusions.

Texture ranged
from coarsegrained (n=2)
to fine to medium-grained
(n=4)

Sherd is from
a Polychrome
vessel. Painted/
burnished exterior and painted
interior.

Ranged from
4- 9.5 mm

Recovered
during survey (Woolridge 1981)

Exterior surfaces
are smoothed;
interior surfaces are rough
smoothed.

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas

183

Table 7. (Continued)
Site No.*

No. of
Sherds

Paste

Texture

41CN95

48

All had bone
temper. Some
sherds also
included hematite, sand,
and/or calcite
inclusions.

Texture ranged
from medium
(n=3) to finegrained (n=45)

41RN3

3

All had bone
temper.

Fine-grained

41RN169

319

All had bone
temper. Some
sherds also
included hematite, sand,
and/or calcite
inclusions.

Texture ranged
from medium
(n=300) to
fine-grained
(n=19)

to estimate the total number of sherds with specific
combinations of attributes. For example, pastes in
the table were identified as bone-tempered; however,
in the report discussions, it was also noted that hematite, sand, and calcite were also observed in the
paste matrix of a large number of the sherds. This is
significant because not all ceramics with bone inclusions belong to the Leon Plain type and the various
combinations of tempering agents in a paste matrix
can be better characteristic of specific ceramic types.

Surface/
Decoration

Thickness

Reference

Two incised
sherds with
smoothed interior
surfaces, and one
sherd with a
polished exterior
and a roughly
smoothed interior. The remainder
had burnished,
smoothed, or
irregular surface
finishes.

Ranged from
4-9 mm

47 recovered during
data recovery (Treece
et al. 1993);
one sherd
recovered
during survey (Woolridge 1981)

Two Doss
Redware sherds.
Exterior surfaces
were smoothed
(n=1) and burnished (n=2).
Interior surfaces
were smoothed.

Ranged from
3-5 mm

Recovered
during data
recovery
(Treece et
al. 1993)

Exterior surfaces
were smoothed
(n=301),
burnished (5),
irregular (6),
and seven sherds
were described
only as being
incised. Interior
surfaces were
smoothed
(n=310),
irregular (n=6),
or brushed (n=3).

Ranged from
3-7 mm

Recovered
during data
recovery
(Treece et
al. 1993)

Vessel form was largely indeterminate in the
41CC131 sherds, but the assemblage includes
sherds from four jars and five bowls. Unfortunately, the sherds were listed separately in the table
and no notations were made as to whether they
could have been part of the same vessel (Treece
et al. 1993:Table C-6). Furthermore, 11 different
surface finishing and/or decorative techniques were
observed on the ceramics from this site. While
the majority were classified as having smoothed

184

Texas Archeological Society

or burnished exterior and/or interior surfaces, 43
sherds had been enhanced with some form of decorative treatment. These included: painted/burnished
(n=17); painted/smoothed (n=5); painted/brushed
(n=1); brushed (n=15); incised (n=1); incised/
burnished (n=1); incised/painted (n=2); or slipped
(n=1). Since Leon Plain, by definition, does not
include decorated ceramics, these 43 sherds would
be from typologically distinct wares. At least three
of the painted ceramics were from either bowls or
jars. Attributes such as paste and thickness would
be critical to making typological distinctions, but
unfortunately, there is no way to correlate paste,
decorative treatment, and/or thickness because a
significant level of detail is not provided in the
Treece et al. (1993) report.
The Rocky Branch site (41RN169) is located
on a terrace at the confluence of Rocky Branch and
the Colorado River. The site was described as having three occupation zones that included a Toyah
phase zone dating to ca. A.D. 1450. A total of 319
sherds were recovered during investigations. As
with the 41CC131 ceramics, the ceramic data for
this site was presented in table format. Seven incised sherds were recovered at this site.
Sites 41CC222, 41CN19, 41CN64, 41CN95,
and 41RN3 also contained small numbers of
technologically variable prehistoric ceramics (see
Table 7). For example, only one sherd from a
sand-tempered Polychrome vessel was recovered at
41CN19. Among the three sherds found at 41RN3
were two sherds classified as Doss Redware. At
41CN95, 48 sherds were recovered. Among those
were two incised sherds.
The analyses of sherds from these seven sites
illustrate a common problem encountered when
trying to interpret ceramic data from some published reports. The sherds at these sites appear to
have been classified as Leon Plain simply because
they contained crushed bone temper. However,
the paste often included other tempering agents in
addition to the crushed bone and no attempt was
made to account for the various combinations and
correlate them with the technological variations in
surface treatment and thickness. Since bone inclusions are also regularly found in Caddo ceramics,
it may be that some of the sherds that were characterized as incised or brushed are in fact Caddo
ceramics, or ceramics from some non-Toyah phase
ceramic tradition. This may be especially the case
with regard to 41CC131 given the radiocarbon
dates obtained from this site that range from A.D

756 to A.D. 1790. Given the presence of three
stratified components at the site, a reanalysis of
these sherds could provide new information on the
character of ceramic wares in the upper Colorado
River basin in North Central Texas.
Finally, in a recent study by Creel et al. (2013),
a large scale compositional analysis of Central
Texas ceramics from Late Prehistoric Toyah phase
hunter-gatherer assemblages was undertaken.
Among the many ceramic samples were several
samples from Brown, Coleman, Jones, Runnels,
and Taylor counties, including six samples from
41CC131 and several from the E. B Sayles collections. The data suggests that the Concho/Colorado River confluence is a relatively significant
area where several of the observed compositional
clusters overlap (Creel et al. 2013:71). This study
adds greatly to our understanding of some of the
definitional issues involving the Leon Plain type.
It also illustrates that more detailed analyses, and
in some cases reanalysis, of ceramic assemblages
need to be done in order to fully understand the
aboriginal ceramics from this area.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Like many other regions across Texas, ceramics are a key component of the artifact assemblage
present in aboriginal sites in North Central Texas.
The ceramics found in these sites in North Central
Texas have a complex history. Ceramics in North
Central Texas demonstrate a long period of use,
possibly being introduced as early as A.D. 200
in some parts of the Trinity River basin but are
more prolific in sites dating from A.D. 900-1600.
However, ceramic usage is not homogeneous
across the region. In the aboriginal populations
of the upper Red River, the upper Trinity River,
and the East Fork of the Trinity, ceramic vessels
were an important part of the overall toolkit.
Conversely, to the west in the upper Brazos
and Colorado basins, ceramic usage was fairly
sparse. Furthermore, in the western portions of
North Central Texas, particularly in sites in the
upper Brazos and upper Colorado River basins,
the technological and stylistic character of the
ceramic assemblages have never been critically
evaluated and they lack secure radiocarbon-based
temporal ranges.
Across North Central Texas sherds from plain
ware vessels dominate ceramic assemblages, often

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
comprising 90-100 percent of the total ceramics
present in a site. This plain ware is typically represented by shell-tempered wares of Late Prehistoric
Plains Village age and/or grog-, bone-, and grittempered wares that strongly resemble East Texas
Caddo ceramics in style. As would be expected,
shell-tempered wares dominate the ceramics in the
Red River basin portion of North Central Texas and
decrease in abundance in sites in the upper Sabine,
Trinity, and Brazos River basins; bone-tempered
ceramics are particularly abundant in Colorado
River basin sites in the region. Grog-tempered
ceramics are more abundant in the eastern part
of the region, most notably in the Trinity River
basin and its major tributaries, and decreases in
abundance moving west toward the plains. Locales
in the middle of these two ceramic manufacturing
centers, such as the upper Trinity River basin and
the East Fork of the Trinity, have ceramic assemblages with nearly equal amounts of shell or grogtempered ceramic wares.
Much of the shell-tempered pottery present
in North Central Texas, both in appearance and
vessel type, is similar to the defined type Nocona
Plain from the southern Plains and the upper Red
River basin; Brack (2000) labels the same ware as
Woodward Plain for shell-tempered assemblages
at Lake Texoma on the Red River. The grog-,
bone-, and grit-tempered plain ware sherds dating before ca. A.D. 1200 found in North Central
Texas sites has been considered similar to that
described as the thick-walled Williams Plain from
Northeast Texas and southeastern Oklahoma sites,
although Williams Plain sherds are common only
in East Texas Caddo sites in the Red and Sulphur
River basins. Thinner-walled grog-, bone-, and
grit-tempered plain wares in North Central Texas
and East Texas are from currently typologically
unidentified ceramics.
How much of this plain ware pottery is the
result of local manufacture and how much of it is
due to trade? In general, assemblages with large
sherd sample sizes (ca. 1000+ sherds) are likely
from vessels that were made on the site or are
from vessels made in a local community, even if
there is no direct evidence of manufacture (i.e.,
pits used for firing pottery; preserved clay coils;
firing discards). For example, a small hint of local
manufacture was found at the Upper Farmersville
site in Collin County in the East Fork of the
Trinity River where a Nocona Plain-like vessel
was found to have fallen apart during firing and

185

was discarded in a trash pit. However, as has been
observed in East Texas (Perttula 2013), direct
evidence of pottery manufacture even in areas
known to be large ceramic production centers
is extremely rare; typically preserved clay coils
are the only archeological evidence for on site
manufacture.
One thing is clear: temporal and spatial differences in the character of aboriginal ceramic
assemblages in North Central Texas indicate the
existence of different manufacturing traditions
and/or broad scale interactions with neighboring
groups with different ceramic traditions. To assess
the various technological traditions evidenced
in ceramic assemblages in North Central Texas
will require consistent evaluation of the ceramic
attributes associated with ceramic manufacturing
behavior (see Ellis et al. 2010). When enhanced
with petrographic and trace element geochemical
studies (Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis), we will hopefully clarify the origin of the
region’s ceramics.
In addition to plain ware vessels and vessel
sherds, a number of decorated wares (both utility ware and fine ware) have been recovered in
North Central Texas sites (especially in the upper
Trinity and Brazos River basins) that in both type
and style resemble ceramic types made by Caddo
peoples throughout East Texas. While a number
of individual types can be identified in sherd assemblages, they are never present in any great
abundance, typically comprising only a few percent
of the total ceramic assemblage at any given site.
Moreover, when whole vessels have been found,
they tend to show extensive repair and preservation to extend their life after accidental breakage.
This observation, coupled with their rarity, supports the hypothesis that unlike the plain ware, the
decorated vessels are imported trade ware and, as
such, are highly valued objects in North Central
Texas communities.
Concurrent with trade between Caddo peoples
and the aboriginal communities living in the
Southern Plains of North Central Texas is a further link between North Central Texas aboriginal
groups and the Puebloan peoples of northern and
southeastern New Mexico. While not abundant,
Pueblo pottery, obsidian artifacts, turquoise, red
coral, and Olivella sp. shell from Baja California
have all been found in East Fork of the Trinity River sites (Crook 2013). Similarly, marine
shells from the Pacific and the Gulf of Mexico,

186

Texas Archeological Society

sandstone pipes, and obsidian from the Rocky
Mountains have been recovered at the Harrell site
in the Brazos River basin (Brack 2000; Krieger
1946). Moreover, based on the pottery types present, this trade persisted from at least A.D. 1000 to
as late as A.D. 1400-1500 (Crook 2013).
The general abundance of trade activities
that can be documented in the occurrence of ceramic vessels and other goods in North Central
Texas sites then begs the question: what did the
inhabitants of North Central Texas have to trade
in exchange for these ceramics and other goods?
A number of natural resources are abundant in the
region but items like white-tailed deer and various
kinds of toolstone, etc. were not unique enough to
have been valued as a trade item with other aboriginal peoples living in other parts of the Southern
Plains, East Texas, or the Puebloan world. Instead,
the key trade items likely included access to buffalo (for meat and hides) on the western edge of
the region and large stands of bois d’arc wood in
the eastern part of North Central Texas, especially
along the East Fork of the Trinity and in a few
locales in the upper Red River basin. The latter,
along with the English yew tree, is the finest wood
for the construction of bows in the world (Bush
2014). As such, bois d’arc was in continual demand
by those people who lived outside its natural range.
This would have included the aboriginal peoples of
the Southern Plain, the Puebloan peoples of New
Mexico, the Spiroan trade centers of eastern Oklahoma and their extensive trade partners, and even
some of the more southern Caddo groups.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Daniel E. McGregor provided insights into the
use of shell-tempered pottery in the upper Trinity River basin, as well as information about the
ceramics from the Cobb-Pool site. Lance Trask
prepared several figures for this article. We are also
grateful to Dr. James Krakker of the Smithsonian
Institution (Museum Support Center) for allowing
Wilson Crook access to the R. K. Harris collection,
and to Ms. Laura Nightengale who offered us unlimited access to the East Fork collections present
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
in Austin. Finally, we would also like to thank the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory Library
staff for their assistance in locating unpublished
archival materials.

REFERENCES CITED
Albert, L. E.
1984 An Archeological Survey along the Red River: The
Kemp Bottoms Area, Bryan County, Oklahoma.
Archeological Resource Survey Report No. 19.
Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
Bell, R. E. and D. A. Baerreis
1951 A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
22:7-100.
Black, A., C. Brandimarte, and M. S. F. Tomka
1994 Archeological Investigations at Lake Tawakoni State
Park, Hunt County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, Public Lands Division, Cultural Resources Program, Austin.
Brack, M. L.
2000 Shell Tempered Ceramics of the Late Prehistoric
Southern Plains: Toward a Cultural Understanding
of Nocona Plain. Master’s thesis, Department of
Anthropology, Wichita State University, Wichita.
Brayshaw, T. C., Jr.
1970 The Henrietta Focus of the Possum Kingdom Basin.
Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.
Brooks, R. L. and R. R. Drass
2005 Ceramic Paint Cups and Lids Among the Southern
Plains Villagers of Western and Central Oklahoma.
Plains Anthropologist 50(194):143-157.
Brown, D. O. (compiler)
1987 Archeology at Aquilla Lake, 1978-1982 Investigations. 3 Vols. Research Report 81. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Brown, J. A.
1996 The Spiro Ceremonial Center. The Archaeology of
Arkansas Valley Caddoan Culture in Eastern Oklahoma. 2 Vols. Memoir No. 29. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Brown, K. L. and S. A. Lebo
1991 Archaeological Testing of the Lewisville Lake Shoreline, Denton County, Texas. Institute of Applied
Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton.
Bruseth, J. E. and W. A. Martin (editors)
1987 The Bird Point Island and Adams Ranch Sites:
Methodological and Theoretical Contributions to
North Central Texas Archaeology. Richland Creek
Technical Series, Volume II. Archaeology Research
Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
Bureau of Economic Geology
1996a Physiographic Map of Texas. Bureau of Economic
geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
1996b River Basin Map of Texas. Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin

Bush, L. L.
2014 Evidence for a Long-Distance Trade in Bois d’Arc
Bows in 16th Century Texas (Maclura pomifera,
Moraceae). Journal of Texas Archeology and History
1:51-69.
Creel, D. G.
1979 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis
Site, Cherokee County, Texas, Summer 1978. Texas
Antiquities Permit Series, Report No. 1. Texas A&M
University and Texas Antiquities Committee, College Station and Austin.
Creel, D. G., J. R. Ferguson, and N. A. Kenmotsu
2013 A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas HunterGatherer Ceramics and Its Implications for Mobility,
Ethnic Group Territory, and Interaction. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 84:29-84.
Crook, W. W., III
2007a The Branch Site (41COL9): A Large, Diagnostic Late
Prehistoric Occupation in Collin County, Texas. The
Record 55(2):30-44.

2007b The Mantooth Site (41COL167: A Mid-Size Late
Prehistoric Occupation in Collin County, Texas. The
Record 55(2):45-57.
2007c An Unusual Ceramic Vessel from the Sister Grove
Creek Site, Collin County, Texas. The Record
55(2):69-73.
2011

The Gilkey Hill Site (41KF42/41DL406): A Large
Late Prehistoric Occupation in Dallas County,
Texas. Archeological Journal of the Texas PrairieSavannah 1(1):9-17.

2013 Puebloan Intrusive Artifacts in Archeological Sites
Along the East Fork. Archeological Journal of the
Texas Prairie Savannah 3:36-43.

2014a New Evidence for Ceramic Trade Between the Late
Prehistoric Occupants of the East Fork and the
Caddo Peoples. Paper presented at the 56th Caddo
Conference, Tyler, Texas.
2014b A Small Killough Pinched Vessel from the Upper Farmersville Site (41COL34), Collin County,
Texas. Archeological Journal of the Texas PrairieSavannah 4:44-50.

2014c A Maydelle Incised Jar from the Lower Rockwall
Site (41RW1), Rockwall County, Texas. Archeological Journal of the Texas Prairie-Savannah 4:50-56.
Crook, W. W., III and M. D. Hughston
2008 The Late Prehistoric of the East Fork of the Trinity
River: A Redefinition of the Wylie Focus. Paper
presented at the Texas Archeological Society 79th
Annual Meeting, Lubbock.

187

2009 The Upper Farmersville Site (41COL34): A Large
Diagnostic Late Prehistoric Occupation in Collin
County, Texas. The Record 56(1):25-46.
Crook, W. W., III and T. K. Perttula
2008 A Foster Trailed-Incised Vessel from the Sister Grove
Creek Site (41COL36, Collin County, Texas). Caddo
Archeology Journal 18:22-25.
Denton, J. T.
1984 Archeological Testing at Site 41YN2, Young County.
Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.
Drass, R. R.
1997 Cultural Change on the Eastern Margins of the
Southern Plains. Studies in Oklahoma’s Past No. 19,
Oklahoma Archeological Survey, and Memoir No. 7,
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Norman.

1998 The Southern Plains Villagers. In Archaeology on the
Great Plains, edited by W. R. Wood, pp. 415-455.
University Press of Kansas, Lawrence.
Ellis, L.W., T. K. Perttula, S. Tomka, C. Lintz, R. Shelton,
H. Shafer, J. Arnn, W. Troell, C. Frederick, and D. Creel
2010 Summary Report of the CTA Ceramics Protocol
Committee. Council of Texas Archeologists, Austin.
http://counciloftexasarcheologists.org/wordpress/
wp-content/uploads/CTA-Ceramic-SummaryReport.pdf, accessed July, 2014.
Etchieson, G. M., R. D. Speer, and J. T. Hughes
1978 Archeological Investigations in the Truscott Reservoir Area, King and Knox Counties, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, West Texas State
University, Canyon.

1979 Archeological Investigations in the Crowell Reservoir Area, Foard, King, and Knox Counties, Texas.
Archeological Research Laboratory, West Texas
State University, Canyon
Ferring, C. R.
1995 Middle Holocene Environments, Geology, and Archaeology in the Southern Plains. In Archaeological
Geology of the Archaic Period in North America,
edited by E. A. Bettis III, pp. 21-35. Special Paper
297. Geological Society of America, Boulder.
Ferring, C. R. and B. C. Yates
1997 The Archaeology and Geoarchaeology at Lake Ray
Roberts, Cooke and Denton Counties, Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, University of North Texas,
Denton.

1998 Archaeological Investigations at Five Prehistoric
Sites at Lewisville Lake, Denton County, Texas.
Center for Environmental Archaeology, University
of North Texas, Denton.

188

Texas Archeological Society

Fields, R. C., L. W. Klement, C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka,
E. F. Gadus, and M. A. Howard
2002 Archeological Impact Evaluations and Surveys in the
Texas Department of Transportation’s Bryan, Corpus
Christi, San Antonio, and Yoakum Districts, 20002001. Archeological Studies Program, Report 35,
Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Division, and Reports of Investigations No.
33, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Forrester, R. E.
1988 Analysis of Non-Perishable Remains from Two
Adjacent Rock Shelters in Northern Bosque County,
Texas. In The Record, Fiftieth Anniversary Edition,
edited by B. McKee, pp. 36-53. Dallas Archeological
Society, Dallas.
Fox, G.
1939 Field Data and Reports on the Harrell Site (N-5).
Manuscripts on file, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Griffin, J. B.
1935 Report on Pottery Sherds from Near Abilene, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 7:57-67.
Griffith, T. B., K. W. Kibler, and D. K. Boyd
2010 National Register Testing at 41BQ285, Bosque County,
Texas: FM 56 Bridge Replacement at the North Bosque
River. Archeological Studies Program Report No. 101,
Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Division, and Reports of Investigations No.
160, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Harris, R. K.
1936 Indian Campsites of the Upper Trinity River Drainage. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 8:113-133.

1945 Bone Implement Burial, Collin County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 16:84-89.

1948 A Pottery Site Near Farmersville, Texas. The Record
6(10):38-45.
Hughes, J. T.
1942 An Archeological Report on the Harrell Site of
North-Central Texas. Master’s thesis, Department
of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Jelks, E. B.
1953 Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
24:189-207.

1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect
Site in Hill County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No.
5. Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Kenmotsu, N. A. and T. K. Perttula (editors)
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas:
A Planning Document. Cultural Resource Management Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Krieger, A. D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas With Extensions of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. The University of Texas at Austin.
Lintz, C., W. N. Trierweiler, A. C. Earls, F. M. Oglesby,
M. Blum, P. L. O’Neill, J. Kuhl, R. Holloway, L. ScottCummings, and D. Scurlock
1993 Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties,
Texas. Volume I: Project Introduction, Setting and
Methods. Technical Report 346-1. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.
Long, J. K. III
1961 Three Central Texas Aspect Sites in Hill County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
30:223-252.
Lorrain, D.
1967 Artifacts from Prehistoric Sites. In A Pilot Study
of Wichita Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory,
assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 197-203. Final report for Grant GS964. National Science Foundation, Washington, DC.

1969 Archaeological Excavations in the Fish Creek
Reservoir. Contributions in Anthropology No. 4.
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Lorrain, D. and N. Hoffrichter
1968 The Lower Rockwall Site, Rockwall County, Texas.
Report to the National Park Service by the Salvage
Project of Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Lynott, M. J.
1975 Archeological Investigations at Lake Lavon, 1974.
Contributions in Anthropology 16. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

1978 An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear Creek
Shelter, Lake Whitney, Texas. Research Report 115.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

1981 A Model of Prehistoric Adaptation in Northern
Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26:97-110.
Malone, J. M. and A. K. Briggs
1970 Archeological Reconnaissance in the Miller Creek
Reservoir Area. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, and Texas Water
Development Board, Austin.

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
Martin, E. R.
1994 The Dillard Site: A Late Prehistoric Plains Village
Site in Cooke County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 62:105-200.
Martin, W. A.
2005 Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and
Grayson Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76:123-163.
Matson, F. R.
1935 Identification of Aplastic Present in Pottery Sherds
From Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 7:68-69.
McGregor, D. E. and J. E. Bruseth (editors)
1987 Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations along the Prairie Margin: Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric
Archaeology. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume III. Archaeology Research Program, Institute
for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
McIntyre, A. J. and D. E. McGregor
1982 A Petrographic Analysis of Southwestern Trade Vessel Recovered in Rockwall County, Texas. In Season
One (1982) Mitigation of Prehistoric Archeology
in the Richland/Chambers Reservoir, Navarro and
Freestone Counties, Texas: Interim Report, edited by
A. J. McIntyre, pp. 513-520. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
McKee, A.
2010 Archaeological Testing and Data Recovery Excavations at Site 41COL172, Collin County, Texas.
Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations No. 513.
Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Newell, H. P. and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoirs No. 5. Society for American Archaeology,
Menasha, Wisconsin.
Perttula, T. K.
2004 The Prehistoric and Caddoan Archeology of the
Northeast Texas Pineywoods. In The Prehistory of
Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 370-407. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

2010 Ceramic Analysis. In Archaeological Testing and
Data Recovery Excavations at Site 41COL172,
Collin County, Texas, by A. McKee, pp. 168-175.
Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations No. 513.
Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
2013 Caddo Ceramics in East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 84:181-212.
Perttula, T. K. and R. Z. Selden Jr.
2014 Ancestral Caddo Ceramics in East Texas. Journal of
Northeast Texas Archaeology 48:9-58.

189

Perttula, T. K., S. A. Iruegas, and H. Neff
2003 Caddoan Pottery in Central Texas: Geochemical
Analyses of Ceramics from Fort Hood and Vicinity. Archeological Resource Management Series,
Research Report No. 51. United States Army Fort
Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.
Perttula, T. K., E. R. Martin, and B. Nelson
1996 Caddo Ceramics on the Red River in North Central
Texas. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology
8:51-57.
Perttula, T. K., D. G. Robinson, J. Ferguson, and M. D. Glascock
2010 Analysis of Aboriginal Ceramic Sherds. In National
Register Testing at 41BQ285, Bosque County, Texas:
FM 56 Bridge Replacement at the North Bosque River,
by T. B. Griffith, K. W. Kibler, and D. K. Boyd, pp. 85104, Archeological Studies Program Report No. 101,
Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Division, and Reports of Investigations No.
160, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Perttula, T. K., M. B. Trubitt, and J. S. Girard
2012 The Use of Shell-Tempered Pottery in the Caddo
Area of the Southeastern United States. Southeastern
Archaeology 30(2):242-267.
Peter, D. E. and J. Harrison
2011 Archaeological Data Recovery (41TR198) and
Survey within the Riverside Oxbow Project, Tarrant
County, Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations No. 467. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Peter, D. E. and D. E. McGregor (editors)
1988 Late Holocene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek
Drainage. Joe Pool Lake Archaeological Project,
Volume I. Archaeology Research Program, Institute
for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Prikryl, D. J.
1990 Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and Chronologies along the Trinity
River, North-Central Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Report 37. Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Prikryl, D. J. and T. K. Perttula
1995 North Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:189-195.
Raab, L. M.
1982 Archaeological Investigations at Lakeview Lake:
1979 and 1980. Archaeological Monographs No. 2.
Archaeology Research Program, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Raisz, E.
1957 Landforms of the United States. Sixth edition. Cambridge, Massachusetts.

190

Texas Archeological Society

Ray, C. N.
1929 A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the
Abilene Section. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 1:7-22.
1932 Archeological Research in Central West Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 4:63-70.

Stokes, J. and J. Woodring
1981 Native-Made Artifacts of Clay. In Archeological
Investigations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas: Summers of 1979 and 1980, edited
by D. A. Story, pp. 135-238. Occasional Papers No.
1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

1935 The Pottery Complex Artifacts of the Abilene
Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society. 7:70-88.
1938 The Clear Fork Complex. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 10:193-247.

Stokes, R. J.
2003 Variation in Southern Plains Village Subsistence and
Material Culture Patterns in Cotton County, Oklahoma: Archaeological Investigations at the Burton
#1 Site (34CT39). Oklahoma Archeology 51(1):9-46.

Richner, J. J.
1982 Tennessee Colony III. Archaeology Research
Program, Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Rohn, A.
1998 Haley’s Point on the Red River, Marshall County,
Oklahoma (Area F). Publications in Anthropology Number 4. Wichita State University, Wichita,
Kansas.
Ross, R. E.
1966 The Upper Rockwall and Glen Hill Sites, Forney
Reservoir, Texas. Papers No. 9. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Saunders, J. W., C. S. Mueller-Wille, and D. L. Carson (editors)
1992 An Archeological Survey of the Proposed South Bend
Reservoir Area: Young, Stephens, and Throckmorton Counties, Texas. Archeological Surveys No. 6.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion
Papers XVII. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
Smith, V. J.
1936 Pottery Horizons of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 8:94-112.
Sorrow, W. M.
1966 The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas.
Papers No. 10. Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Stephenson, R. L.
1952 The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. American Antiquity 17(4):299-312.

1970 Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 41:37-277.

Story, D. A.
1965 The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson and Kaufman Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 36:163-257.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Special Publication No. 1, Texas Archeological Society, and Bulletin No. 4, Texas Memorial Museum,
Austin.
Texas Beyond History
2013 The Harrell Site. http://www.texasbeyondhistory.net/
harrell/index.html, accessed March 2013.
Thurmond, J. P., M. D. Freeman, and S. L. Andrews
1981 A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources
in the Brazos Natural Salt Pollution Control Project,
Kent, King, and Stonewall Counties, Texas. Reports
of Investigations No. 18. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Tinsley, C. M. and C. Dayton (editors)
2011 Archaeological Testing and Data Recovery Excavations at Site 41DL203, President George Bush
Turnpike-Eastern Extension from SH 78 to IH 30,
Dallas County, Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of
Investigations No. 484. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Todd, J.
2014 The Prehistoric Archaeology of the Upper Trinity
River Basin, Eastern North Central Texas. Archeological Journal of the Texas Prairie-Savannah 4:1-43.
Todd, J., M. Glasgow, H. Norris, and B. Lang
2009 Prehistoric Archeology along a portion of the Clear
and South Forks of the Trinity River, Parker County,
Texas. The Record 56(1):47-57.
Treece, A. C., C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and
K. A. Miller
1993 Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas. Volume IV: Data Recovery Results from
Ceramic Sites. Technical Report 346-IV. Mariah
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Ellis et al.—Aboriginal Ceramics from the North Central Region of Texas
Watt, F. H.
1953 Pottery Diffusions of Central Brazos Valley. Central
Texas Archeologist 6:57-85.
Wooldridge, H. G.
1981 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of
the Proposed Stacy Reservoir, Concho, Coleman,
and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume III, Prehistoric
Cultural Resources. Document No. 81052. Espey,
Huston, and Associates, Inc., Austin.

191

Wulfkuhle, V. A.
1986 Investigations into the Prehistory of the Upper Clear
Fork of the Brazos River: Fisher and Jones Counties,
Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.

The Midland Calvarium and the Early Human
Habitation of the Americas
Matthew S. Taylor

ABSTRACT
Craniometric analysis of Paleoindian human crania from North and South America has raised vital questions
concerning the initial human settlement of the New World. Most researchers have reported a cranial morphology
distinct from that of more recent American Indian populations. Paleoindian crania exhibit a generalized morphology that some researchers have likened to recent Melanesians, Australians, and other Pacific populations.
In this report, the calvarium from the Midland site (dated to 11,600 B.P.) is remeasured and compared with data
from South American Paleoindians and world-wide cranial data collected by W.W. Howells. Morphometric
analysis reveals that the Midland calvarium is most similar to modern Japanese and several prehistoric Pacific
Rim populations. This finding is consistent with recent DNA analysis and previous work on Paleoindian morphometrics. The evidence from the Midland calavarium also lends support to the hypothesis that the Americas
were originally settled by at least two morphologically diverse populations.

INTRODUCTION
The initial human habitation of the Americas
is one of the major issues in American archeology
(Dillehay 2009). The traditional interpretation for
early human settlement is that a relatively small
population of hunter-gatherers migrated over
land across the Bering Strait from northeast Asia
(Haynes 2005). Other hypotheses have suggested
maritime migrations along the coastlines (Fladmark 1979). The timing and speed of these migrations has been debated (Hamilton and Buchanan
2007), but the best evidence suggests humans
inhabited North America by at least 13,500 years
ago (Pitblado 2011; Lepper 2014).
The physical remains of Paleodindians have
helped to shed light on human migration to the
Americas. Craniometrics, DNA analysis, dental
nonmetrics, and biological surveys of extant Native American populations have been employed to
decipher the origins and migration patterns of the
earliest Americans. However, the number of human
remains that date to the Paleoindian period is quite
small (Lepper 2014). Data from every individual
is an invaluable resource and as much information
as possible should be reported.
The purpose of this article is to present new
information for craniometric studies of the first

Americans. Previously unpublished data from a
Paleoindian individual from the Scharbauer (Midland) site is compared with individuals of Paleoindian date. This data is also compared to W.W.
Howells’ collection of world-wide craniometric
variation. The results of this analysis are then
evaluated in light of current theories regarding the
first human habitation of the New World.
BACKGROUND
According to various studies (Hubbe et al.
2007; Jantz and Spradley 2014; Neves et al. 2005;
Powell and Steele 1992; Steele and Powell 1992,
1999), cranial remains of Paleoindian date exhibit morphology somewhat divergent from what
is typical for late prehistoric and modern Native
Americans. Neves and coworkers (2003) have
observed that recent Native Americans resemble
northeastern Asians, while Paleoindians have a
generalized morphology more similar with Australians, Melanesians, and Africans. Other researchers
have drawn comparisons between Paleoindians and
the prehistoric Jomon of Japan (Brace et al. 2014).
Although the meaning of these differences is a
source of discussion (see Gill 2014; Owsley and
Jantz 2001; Swedlund and Anderson 1999, 2003),

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 86 (2015)

194

Texas Archeological Society

craniometric analysis can provide useful information on the population history of the Americas.
In both North and South America, the number of
human remains that date to the Paleoindian time
period is relatively small (Neves et al. 2005).
Therefore, detailed data from each available specimen is important for increasing the sample size and
improving the statistical power of analyses.
Recently, DNA was extracted from a Clovisera individual (Anzick-1) from Montana. Researchers determined that the genome of this individual
is closely related to modern American Indians
(Rasmussen et al. 2014). This interpretation is
consistent with genetic studies of recent Native
Americans (Kemp and Schurr 2010) and DNA
analysis of coprolites dating to the Paleoindian
period (Gilbert et al. 2008). However, Rasmussen and coworkers (2014) found evidence that an
ancient population split had occurred before the
Clovis period. One of these lineages remained in
the northern part of the Americas while the other is
found in South America (Rasmussen et al. 2014).
Skeletal evidence for this proposed split was documented by Stojanowski and coworkers (2013), who
noticed a clear morphological distinction between
North and South American Paleoindians.
To explain the dichotomy between North and
South American samples, Neves and coworkers
(2005) have suggested a “two-main biological
components model.” They hypothesize that two
early populations with different cranial morphologies settled the Americas. This idea has been discussed by Gill (2014), who postulated that the two
components came to the Americas by different
routes. One, featuring a cranial morphology similar to the modern Ainu and Polynesians, migrated
by boat and entered the continents from the sea.
The second population, which reflected a more
“typical” Native American morphology, crossed
over Beringia by land and into the Americas. The
similarity between Ainu and Polynesian crania with
the earliest Paleoindians does not mean they have a
direct connection to either group. Rather, the Ainu,
Polynesians, and Paleoindians may share a common ancestry (Jantz and Spradley 2014).
ARCHEOLOGICAL CONTEXT
In 1953, vocational archeologist Keith Glasscock found human skeletal remains exposed by
wind erosion near Monahans Draw (Wendorf et

al. 1955:4) south of the city of Midland, Texas
(Figure 1). Archeological salvage excavations were
conducted by Fred Wendorf (Museum of New
Mexico), Alex Krieger (University of Texas), and
Jack Hughes (Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum). Artifacts included Paleoindian stone tools,
Early Holocene faunal remains, and the fragmentary
bones of a single human (Wendorf et al. 1955). The
artifacts from the Midland site were scattered across
five localities over a small dunefield. The human
remains were found in Locality 1, a “blowout” or
deflation basin, along Monahans Draw (Wendorf et
al. 1955). Among the artifacts recovered at the site
was a new type of dart point subsequently classified as a Midland point. These points, essentially
unfluted Folsom points, have generated considerable
interest and debate among archeologists (Agogino
1969; Bousman et al. 2004).
The site location is near the southern edge of
the Llano Estacado, a semi-arid, flat, nearly featureless plain that is found in northwestern Texas
and eastern New Mexico (Wendorf 1961). The surface geology of the Midland site is the Blackwater
Draw Formation, which is characterized by Pleistocene eolian deposits. The local area is heavily
modified by dunes, eastward flowing intermittent
streams, and by occasional seasonal lakes, known
locally as “playas” (Holliday 1989, 1995).
Based upon site stratigraphy and uranium
series dating, Wendorf and Krieger (1959:77-78)
suggested that the skeleton may date to as early as
20,000 years Before Present (B.P.), but probably
between 13,400 and 10,000 B.P. After a reanalysis
of the Midland site and a new geoarcheological
survey of the locality, Holiday and Meltzer (1996;
see also Holiday 1997:102) suggested that the
skeleton dated (at the eldest) to the Folsom period.
Direct dating of the remains by U-series methods
produced an average date of 11,600 ± 800 years
B.P. (McKinney 1992).
The human remains from the Midland site
were first examined by T. Dale Stewart (1955) of
the Smithsonian Institution. Stewart reconstructed
the skull and completed a standard osteological
analysis. He concluded that the remains represented an adult female around 30 years of age at death.
Stewart reported that the cranium was notably long
and narrow, unlike those observed from later periods of North American prehistory. However, he
pointed out that the dilochocrany of the Midland
cranium was morphologically similar to Archaic
and Late Prehistoric remains found in other parts

Taylor—The Midland Calvarium and the Early Human Habitation of the Americas 195

Figure 1. The location of the Scharbauer, or Midland, site (41MD1) on the southern edge of the Llano Estacado in
western Texas.

of Texas, particularly those from the Lower Pecos
(near the junction of the Pecos and Devils Rivers
with the Rio Grande) and Big Bend regions (Stewart 1935, 1955). The “Paleoindian” morphology of
later Texas hunter-gatherer populations was also
commented on by Neumann (1952), who suggested
it was evidence of biological continuity from the
first human inhabitants of the Americas.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The state of preservation of the Midland individual restricts the number of observable measurements. The cranial remains consist of a calvarium,
with the base and face missing or represented
by small fragments. Measurements were taken
from the Midland calvarium (Figure 2) following
Howells (1973, 1989). The calvarium displayed

no evidence of artificial modeling or post-mortem
taphonomic deformation. A total of 20 measurements was taken from the remains. Some of these
measurements had previously been recorded by
Stewart (1955), but new, previously unreported
data is presented in Table 1.
Midland can only be compared statistically
with other females because of sexual dimorphism.
Craniometric measurements between females and
males are significantly different (Franklin et al.
2005; Giles and Elliot 1963). Inclusion of males
in the sample would fatally skew the results.
Therefore, well-documented male crania, such as
Kennewick Man, are excluded from this analysis.
Midland was compared to a data set of female
Paleoindian crania from North and South America.
In the North American sample, only data from
Midland and a female individual found at Pelican
Rapids, Minnesota, could be employed. Pelican

196

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Right lateral view of the Midland calvarium.

Table 1. Measurements recorded from the Midland cranial remains. Values marked with an asterisk (*)
were originally published by Stewart (1955).
Measurement
Maximum Cranial Length
Maximum Cranial Breadth
Maximum Frontal Breadth
Minimum Frontal Breadth
Bistephanic Breadth
Frontal Chord
Frontal Arc
Frontal Fraction
Frontal Subtense
Parietal Chord
Parietal Arc
Parietal Fraction
Parietal Subtense
Bregma-Opisthocranion Chord
Porion-Bregma Chord

Value (mm)
183*
126*
101
90*
87
107*
120*
55
18
116*
128*
52
26
151
116*

Measurement
Porion-Bregma Arc
Porion-Lambda Chord
Porion-Apex Chord
Biasterion Breadth
Mastoid Length
Mastoid Breadth
Parietal thickness
Cranial Index
Porion-Height Index
Fronto-Parietal Index
Frontal Angle
Parietal Angle

Value (mm)
150*
108
120*
97
22
10
7*
68.85*
75.08
71.43
143°
132°

Taylor—The Midland Calvarium and the Early Human Habitation of the Americas 197
Rapids was selected because the published raw
data contained enough variables to compare with
Midland. The number of female Paleoindians in
North America is tiny and, often, published reports
do not include every possible observable measurement. The South American sample was much larger
and included individuals found at several sites in
Brazil (Table 2).
The data from Midland was then compared
with W.W. Howells data representing world-wide
craniometric variation (1989). Howells’ samples
and their geographic origin are listed in Table 3.
Average cranial measurements from early South
American crania employed in the first round of
analysis were added to Howells’ database for
comparative purposes. Only female crania were selected for analysis. Craniometric data was analyzed
via Mahalanobis distance analysis using SPSS
version 22. Mahalanobis distance (Mahalanobis
1936) is a robust statistic for evaluating biological
distance. Raw data is transformed into standardized
uncorrelated scores, which takes into account the
scale of the data. It neutralizes any potential bias
of correlated traits by using the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of cranial measurements.
(De Maesschalck et al. 2000). Results were illustrated with dendrograms using hierarchical cluster
analysis with average linkage between groups.
Average linkage between groups is expressed in a
dendrogram by determining the average similarity
between cases (via squared Euclidean distance).
RESULTS
The measurements taken from the Midland
cranium are listed in Table 1. These measurements
include those previously published by Stewart
(1955) and new ones recorded by the author. A total
of 10 variables were selected for comparison with

Paleoindian female crania (Table 4) and Howell’s
data for world-wide female cranial variation (see
Table 3). Table 5 contains the Mahalanobis matrix
calculated from the Paleoindian sample. Tables 6a
and b show the Mahalanobis matrix for the Howells
data set.
Figure 3 illustrates the results of the Mahalanobis calculations comparing Midland with female
Paleoindians. Not surprisingly, the two North
American individuals are most similar to each
other. However, there is close affinity with several
of the South American individuals.
Figure 4 is a dendrogram comparing the Midland and South American crania with Howells’
world-wide data. Midland and the South American Paleoindians (PaleoSA) are broadly grouped
with other North American samples (Santa Cruz,
Eskimo) but also show affinity with some African
(Bushmen) and East Asian (Atayal, South Japan)
samples.
DISCUSSION
One of the major problems of Paleoindian
skeletal research is that low sample sizes may
fatally bias statistical analysis. Small samples
are inherently problematic for scientific research
(Hoyle 1999). Neves et al. (2005) have advocated
a strategy of comparing several isolated individuals
from different geographic areas in order to mitigate
any potential error. Analysis of the Midland individual adds another source of data for the shallow
pool that represents the Paleoindian sample. Based
upon various studies of Paleoindian remains from
across the Americas, the original human settlers
possessed a generalized cranial morphology distinct from later generations of Native Americans
(Hubbe et al. 2004; Jantz and Spradley 2014). The
measurements from Midland are consistent with

Table 2. Dates of the samples included in the analysis.
Specimen/Sample
Midland, Texas
Pelican Rapids, Minnesota
Sumidouro, Brazil
Santana do Riacho, Brazil
Cerca Grande, Brazil
Capelinha, Brazil

Date (B.P.)
11600 ± 800
7840
>8000
8200-9500
8000-11000
8860 ± 60

Source
McKinney 1992
Owsley and Jantz 1999
Neves et al. 2007
Neves et al. 2003
Neves et al. 2004
Neves et al. 2005

198

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. W.W. Howells data for world-wide cranial variation in female samples. Only those
measurements comparable to the Midland calvarium are listed.
N

GOL

XCB

XFB

ASB

Norse

55

180.0

136.3

114.3

106.7

Zalavar

45

176.4

136.9

115.7

Berg

53

170.5

140.4

Egypt

53

175.6

Teita

50

Dogon

MDB

STB

FRC

FRS

PAC

PAS

11.7

111.7

108.0

25.5

109.5

23.1

107.8

11.8

113.6

107.5

26.5

110.6

23.7

118.7

108.2

11.5

117.7

106.2

26.5

105.2

23.3

135.6

111.4

104.4

10.8

109.8

108.1

26.0

110.5

23.8

174.7

126.5

108.1

100.9

10.3

103.4

105.7

27.0

109.7

23.7

53

169.8

132.2

109.1

100.5

10.4

106.6

105.7

25.6

107.7

22.2

Zulu

46

179.0

131.7

113.7

103.3

11.0

112.3

109.4

27.7

112.0

23.2

Bushman

49

171.7

128.6

106.7

102.0

9.2

104.0

105.1

28.2

105.3

21.0

Australia

49

181.1

127.5

106.2

104.5

10.8

100.2

105.9

25.3

110.3

22.6

Tasmania

42

185.4

138.4

113.0

109.3

13.2

106.2

110.3

25.0

115.8

24.7

Tolai

54

174.6

127.9

106.7

103.2

11.6

100.6

103.0

23.5

112.6

25.2

Mokapu

49

175.4

138.7

112.0

102.7

12.3

109.6

111.3

24.4

105.6

22.4

Buriat

54

171.8

148.4

121.8

112.1

11.3

118.6

110.0

25.7

102.7

21.0

Eskimo

55

180.9

131.0

108.8

105.5

11.5

100.8

109.6

26.7

111.6

23.7

Peru

55

169.0

134.9

112.1

105.3

10.7

109.2

105.1

23.3

104.1

22.6

Andaman

35

160.1

131.1

106.1

95.7

10.3

103.5

101.6

23.7

102.3

22.9

Arikara

27

171.1

136.5

112.8

105.4

11.1

107.9

105.6

23.4

104.1

22.6

Ainu

38

178.7

137.1

114.9

106.7

11.3

111.9

108.7

26.7

110.7

22.8

N Japan

32

171.1

133.5

110.6

104.1

10.8

108.4

105.1

25.3

106.8

21.5

S Japan

41

172.5

133.7

110.6

103.7

10.6

107.7

106.4

25.6

109.6

23.5

Hainan

38

170.6

135.0

111.8

101.6

10.6

109.9

108.3

25.3

109.0

24.2

Atayal

18

168.1

131.9

109.1

105.4

10.3

106.3

104.6

25.8

108.8

24.1

Guam

27

175.3

136.4

112.0

105.3

11.6

110.6

110.6

27.2

109.5

23.8

Easter I

36

180.6

128.4

106.2

101.4

12.8

103.4

109.7

26.5

109.3

23.1

Moriori

51

178.1

137.7

110.0

104.9

12.2

104.9

108.1

22.5

106.5

22.6

Santa Cruz

51

172.2

135.0

108.7

106.5

12.2

104.3

104.9

23.1

101.8

21.3

*GOL: Maximum Cranial Length; XCB: Maximum Cranial Breadth; XFB: Maximum Frontal Breadth; ASB: Biasterion
Breadth; MDB: Mastoid Breadth; STB: Bistephanic Breadth; FRC: Frontal Cord; FRS: Frontal Subtense; PAC: Parietal
Chord; PAS Parietal Subtense.

SH07

SH10

SH15

Sumidouro 7

Sumidouro 10

Sumidouro 15

CG1388
4.7

107.3

108

111

101

101

110

107

106

110

116

105

111

101

XFB

6.9

104.1

107

105

98

98

110

107

105

108

113

105

106

87

STB

25.2

114.8

108

108

106

104

104

106

107

115

113

194

105

107

FRC

2.5

23.8

26

27

22

25

23

26

24

23

26

24

22

18

FRS

6.2

111.3

111

105

115

111

100

116

108

124

113

107

109

116

PAC

3.2

23.9

26

20

28

22

21

27

24

29

22

22

20

26

PAS

6.1

105.3

104

103

105

102

104

94

110

111

113

106

114

97

ASB

2.3

11.2

12

10

10

11

13

8

14

17

13

8

8

10

MDB

Neves et al. 2004

Neves et al. 2004

Neves et al. 2003

Neves et al. 2003

Neves et al. 2007

Neves et al. 2007

Neves et al. 2007

Neves et al. 2007

Neves et al. 2007

Neves et al. 2007

Owsley and Jantz,
1999

This article

Source

*GOL: Maximum Cranial Length; XCB: Maximum Cranial Breadth; XFB: Maximum Frontal Breadth; ASB: Biasterion Breadth; MDB: Mastoid Breadth; STB: Bistephanic
Breadth; FRC: Frontal Cord; FRS: Frontal Subtense; PAC: Parietal Chord; PAS Parietal Subtense.

6.1

5.4

σ

130

134

118

122

136

124

127

132

131

123

138

126

XCB

128.4

174

181

171

177

166

172

174

179

185

176

179

183

GOL

176.4

Female

Female

Female

Female

Female

Female

Female

Female

Female

Female

Female

Female

Sex

µ

CG1353

Cerca Grande 1388

Cerca Grande 1353

SR12

SR5A

SH17

SH14

Santana do Riacho 12

Santana do Riacho 5a

Sumidouro 17

Sumidouro 14

Sumidouro 8

SH08

PELICANR

MIDLAND

Pelican Rapids

Midland

Code

Individual

Table 4. Individual measurements of Paleoindian crania included in the comparative analysis.

Taylor—The Midland Calvarium and the Early Human Habitation of the Americas 199

CG1388

CG1353

SR12

SR5A

SH17

SH15

SH14

SH10

SH08

SH07

Pelicanr

Midland
254.140

0.000
838.322
962.012
1773.152
2541.379
1599.040
1756.419
887.357
2764.639
3716.310
3625.952

254.140

662.250

991.603

1633.107

2505.297

1528.663

1554.928

687.616

2574.338

3580.005

3706.377

Pelicanr

0.000

Midland

4305.789

2922.169

1939.098

879.072

1065.230

989.642

1968.101

991.146

1620.984

0.000

838.322

662.250

SH07

2779.331

4528.740

3449.156

1165.563

2358.050

2517.144

3480.932

2574.977

0.000

1620.984

962.012

991.603

SH08

5146.367

1969.910

1292.005

1790.879

1203.591

786.608

1264.239

0.000

2574.977

991.146

1773.152

1633.107

SH10

6015.146

1702.841

1866.225

2777.091

2121.283

1104.678

0.000

1264.239

3480.932

1968.101

2541.379

2505.297

SH14

5200.057

2269.512

1588.897

1703.105

1185.200

0.000

1104.678

786.608

2517.144

989.642

1599.040

1528.663

SH15

5087.618

2551.958

1228.279

1223.228

0.000

1185.200

2121.283

1203.591

2358.050

1065.230

1756.419

1554.928

SH17

3906.705

3609.061

2391.685

0.000

1223.228

1703.105

2777.091

1790.879

1165.563

879.072

887.357

687.616

SR5A

6098.861

1454.056

0.000

2391.685

1228.279

1588.897

1866.225

1292.005

3449.156

1939.098

2764.639

2574.338

SR12

Table 5. Mahalanobis matrix for Midland, Pelican Rapids, and South American Paleoindians.

7086.442

0.000

1454.056

3609.061

2551.958

2269.512

1702.841

1969.910

4528.740

2922.169

3716.310

3580.005

CG1353

0.000

7086.442

6098.861

3906.705

5087.618

5200.057

6015.146

5146.367

2779.331

4305.789

3625.952

3706.377

CG1388

200
Texas Archeological Society

1.42

AINU

1.64

2.17

1.47

SANTACRUZ

MIDLAND

PALEOSA

12.38

0.03

ARIKARA

MORIORI

2.66

ANDAMAN

0.46

5.51

PERU

7.81

0.41

ESKIMO

EASTER

1.12

BURIAT

GUAM

13.76

MOKAPU

0.21

13.67

TOLAI

12.21

10.10

TASMANIA

ATAYAL

41.82

AUSTRALIA

HAINAN

9.14

BUSHMAN

0.56

1.55

ZULU

33.08

4.83

DOGON

SJAPAN

90.74

TEITA

NJAPAN

1.90

22.03

EGYPT

4.52

ZALAVAR

BERG

0.00

NORSE

NORSE

11.15

12.94

11.61

31.86

2.10

24.22

6.67

1.87

8.27

62.05

11.00

5.26

0.24

20.01

2.21

10.14

34.05

33.90

28.12

18.84

26.50

11.37

0.01

135.75

46.50

12.27

0.00

4.52

ZALAVAR

0.03

0.01

0.01

4.58

4.22

2.01

0.85

23.74

0.39

19.13

0.03

1.46

9.05

0.94

4.07

0.10

5.44

5.38

3.24

61.53

2.71

0.02

12.78

66.39

10.99

0.00

12.27

1.90

BERG

12.11

10.38

11.64

1.38

28.83

3.60

17.94

67.05

15.55

1.12

12.27

20.48

40.00

5.50

28.43

13.21

0.97

0.99

2.30

124.55

2.79

11.88

47.47

23.35

0.00

10.99

46.50

22.03

EGYPT

69.09

64.86

67.97

36.08

104.06

45.29

82.22

169.53

77.01

14.24

69.47

87.57

124.47

51.52

103.31

71.68

33.83

33.97

40.30

255.75

42.29

68.55

137.41

0.00

23.35

66.39

135.75

90.74

TEITA

11.63

13.46

12.10

32.67

2.31

24.92

7.05

1.69

8.68

63.17

11.48

5.59

0.32

20.65

2.43

10.60

34.88

34.74

28.88

18.23

27.24

11.85

0.00

137.41

47.47

12.78

0.01

4.83

DOGON

0.00

0.05

0.00

5.17

3.69

2.40

0.62

22.48

0.25

20.30

0.00

1.16

8.28

1.21

3.55

0.03

6.07

6.01

3.73

59.48

3.16

0.00

11.85

68.55

11.88

0.02

11.37

1.55

ZULU

3.27

2.40

3.03

0.25

13.68

0.05

6.58

42.48

5.16

7.45

3.36

8.15

21.66

0.46

13.41

3.86

0.47

0.45

0.02

90.05

0.00

3.16

27.24

42.29

2.79

2.71

26.50

9.14

BUSHMAN

58.98

63.03

60.03

99.71

33.54

85.79

47.95

8.83

52.08

149.28

58.64

44.01

23.38

77.70

33.96

56.63

103.55

103.30

93.01

0.00

90.05

59.48

18.23

255.75

124.55

61.53

18.84

41.82

AUSTRALIA

3.86

2.91

3.59

0.12

14.85

0.15

7.40

44.52

5.89

6.63

3.95

9.06

23.12

0.69

14.56

4.49

0.28

0.27

0.00

93.01

0.02

3.73

28.88

40.30

2.30

3.24

28.12

10.10

TASMANIA

6.17

4.95

5.84

0.03

19.12

0.81

10.49

51.72

8.68

4.22

6.28

12.46

28.39

1.82

18.80

6.96

0.00

0.00

0.27

103.30

0.45

6.01

34.74

33.97

0.99

5.38

33.90

13.67

TOLAI

6.23

5.01

5.90

0.04

19.23

0.84

10.57

51.90

8.76

4.17

6.34

12.55

28.52

1.85

18.91

7.03

0.00

0.00

0.28

103.55

0.47

6.07

34.88

33.83

0.97

5.44

34.05

13.76

MOKAPU

0.02

0.17

0.05

6.05

3.01

3.02

0.36

20.74

0.10

22.02

0.02

0.79

7.24

1.66

2.88

0.00

7.03

6.96

4.49

56.63

3.86

0.03

10.60

71.68

13.21

0.10

10.14

1.12

BURIAT

3.43

4.46

3.69

17.28

0.00

11.79

1.20

8.16

1.93

40.83

3.35

0.65

0.98

8.92

0.00

2.88

18.91

18.80

14.56

33.96

13.41

3.55

2.43

103.31

28.43

4.07

2.21

0.41

ESKIMO

Table 6a: Mahalanobis	
  matrix	
  for	
  Midland	
  (MIDLAND),	
  the	
  pooled	
  South	
  American	
  sample	
  of	
  Paleoindians	
  (PALEOSA)	
  and	
  
Table 6a: Mahalanobis matrix for Midland (MIDLAND), the pooled South American sample of Paleoindians (PALEOSA) and
Howell’s	
  data	
  for	
  world-­‐wide	
  female	
  cranial	
  
variation.
Howell’s data for world-wide female cranial variation.

Taylor—The Midland Calvarium and the Early Human Habitation of the Americas 201

1.82

1.85

1.66

8.92

0.00

TASMANIA

TOLAI

MOKAPU

BURIAT

ESKIMO

PERU

11.58

2.55

34.14

3.57

0.20

9.14

1.37

1.14

0.77

1.29

NJAPAN

SJAPAN

HAINAN

ATAYAL

GUAM

EASTER

MORIORI

SANTACRUZ

MIDLAND

PALEOSA

1.34

0.69

AUSTRALIA

AINU

77.70

BUSHMAN

4.75

0.46

ZULU

15.83

1.21

DOGON

ARIKARA

20.65

TEITA

ANDAMAN

5.50

51.52

EGYPT

0.94

20.01

5.51

PERU

BERG

ZALAVAR

NORSE

8.09

9.63

8.48

26.52

0.91

19.59

4.36

3.47

5.67

54.50

7.96

3.23

0.00

15.83

0.98

7.24

28.52

28.39

23.12

23.38

21.66

8.28

0.32

124.47

40.00

9.05

0.24

2.66

ANDAMAN

1.09

1.70

1.24

11.23

0.71

6.91

0.08

13.41

0.34

31.18

1.05

0.00

3.23

4.75

0.65

0.79

12.55

12.46

9.06

44.01

8.15

1.16

5.59

87.57

20.48

1.46

5.26

0.03

ARIKARA

0.00

0.08

0.01

5.42

3.48

2.57

0.54

21.96

0.19

20.80

0.00

1.05

7.96

1.34

3.35

0.02

6.34

6.28

3.95

58.64

3.36

0.00

11.48

69.47

12.27

0.03

11.00

1.42

AINU

20.59

18.31

19.98

4.98

41.31

8.74

28.02

85.49

25.01

0.00

20.80

31.18

54.50

11.58

40.83

22.02

4.17

4.22

6.63

149.28

7.45

20.30

63.17

14.24

1.12

19.13

62.05

33.08

NJAPAN

0.21

0.52

0.28

7.67

2.03

4.18

0.09

18.02

0.00

25.01

0.19

0.34

5.67

2.55

1.93

0.10

8.76

8.68

5.89

52.08

5.16

0.25

8.68

77.01

15.55

0.39

8.27

0.56

SJAPAN

22.17

24.67

22.81

49.19

7.95

39.57

15.62

0.00

18.02

85.49

21.96

13.41

3.47

34.14

8.16

20.74

51.90

51.72

44.52

8.83

42.48

22.48

1.69

169.53

67.05

23.74

1.87

12.21

HAINAN

0.57

1.03

0.68

9.37

1.28

5.46

0.00

15.62

0.09

28.02

0.54

0.08

4.36

3.57

1.20

0.36

10.57

10.49

7.40

47.95

6.58

0.62

7.05

82.22

17.94

0.85

6.67

0.21

ATAYAL

2.50

1.75

2.29

0.52

12.05

0.00

5.46

39.57

4.18

8.74

2.57

6.91

19.59

0.20

11.79

3.02

0.84

0.81

0.15

85.79

0.05

2.40

24.92

45.29

3.60

2.01

24.22

7.81

GUAM

3.57

4.61

3.83

17.59

0.00

12.05

1.28

7.95

2.03

41.31

3.48

0.71

0.91

9.14

0.00

3.01

19.23

19.12

14.85

33.54

13.68

3.69

2.31

104.06

28.83

4.22

2.10

0.46

EASTER

Howell’s data for world-wide female cranial variation.

5.31

4.19

5.01

0.00

17.59

0.52

9.37

49.19

7.67

4.98

5.42

11.23

26.52

1.37

17.28

6.05

0.04

0.03

0.12

99.71

0.25

5.17

32.67

36.08

1.38

4.58

31.86

12.38

MORIORI

0.00

0.04

0.00

5.01

3.83

2.29

0.68

22.81

0.28

19.98

0.01

1.24

8.48

1.14

3.69

0.05

5.90

5.84

3.59

60.03

3.03

0.00

12.10

67.97

11.64

0.01

11.61

1.64

SANTACRUZ

0.07

0.00

0.04

4.19

4.61

1.75

1.03

24.67

0.52

18.31

0.08

1.70

9.63

0.77

4.46

0.17

5.01

4.95

2.91

63.03

2.40

0.05

13.46

64.86

10.38

0.01

12.94

2.17

MIDLAND

0.00

0.07

0.00

5.31

3.57

2.50

0.57

22.17

0.21

20.59

0.00

1.09

8.09

1.29

3.43

0.02

6.23

6.17

3.86

58.98

3.27

0.00

11.63

69.09

12.11

0.03

11.15

1.47

PALEOSA

Table 6b:	
  Mahalanobis	
  matrix	
  for	
  Midland	
  (MIDLAND),	
  the	
  pooled	
  South	
  American	
  sample	
  of	
  Paleoindians	
  (PALEOSA)	
  and	
  
Table 6b: Mahalanobis matrix for Midland (MIDLAND), the pooled South American sample of Paleoindians (PALEOSA) and
Howell’s	
  data	
  for	
  world-­‐wide	
  female	
  cranial	
  variation.

202
Texas Archeological Society

Taylor—The Midland Calvarium and the Early Human Habitation of the Americas 203

Dendogram using Average Linkage (Between Groups)
0
MIDLAND

1

PELICANR

2

SH07

3

SR5A

9

SH08

4

SH10

5

SH15

7

SH14

6

SH17

8

SR12

10

CG1353

11

CG1388

12

5

Rescaled Distance Cluster Combine
10
15

20

25

Figure 3. Dendrogram illustrating the Mahalanobis results comparing Midland, Pelican Rapids, and South American
Paleoindians.

the hypothesis that Paleoindians possessed a morphology representing a real biological entity, rather
than statistical error due to small sample size.
Previously, Neves et al. (2005) had proposed a
“two main biological components model” to explain
early migrations to the Americas. This model has
some merit, even though their two components were
likely made up of multiple small migrations over
generations. Genetic evidence from the Anzick-1
individual is consistent with a proposed early split
between Paleoindian populations in North and South
America (Rasmussen et al. 2014).
Therefore, the morphological similarity between Midland and the Pelican Rapids individual
is expected. Since they are both North American
crania, they should be the most similar since they are

the most geographically proximate (Wright 1943).
It may also be evidence of geographic restrictions
on the migration of peoples (and by extension, their
genes). Ramachandran and Rosenberg (2011) have
hypothesized that the geographic orientation of the
Americans inhibited north-south gene flow. While
North and South American Paleoindians shared a
common ancestry, later migrations from northeast
Asia may not have contributed much to the genome
of South American populations.
Like other Paleoindian crania, Midland shares
some morphological similarities with Pacific
populations. Statistical comparisons in this study
between Midland and Howells world-wide craniometric sample produce some intriguing, but not
unexpected results. She most closely resembles

204

Texas Archeological Society

Dendogram using Average Linkage (Between Groups)
0
BUSHMAN

8

PALEOSA

28

BERG

26

ESKIMO

14

ATAYAL

22

SJAPAN

20

MIDLAND

27

TASMANIA

10

20

25

1

HAINMAN

21

EASTER

24

ANDAMAN

16

AINU

18

ZALAVAR

2

ARIKARA

17

DOGON

6

ZULU

7

PERU

15

AUSTRALIA

Rescaled Distance Cluster Combine
10
15

3

SANTACR

NORSE

5

9

MOKAPU

12

GUAM

23

EGYPT

4

MORIORI

25

BURAT

13

NJAPAN

19

TEITA

5

TOLAI

11

Figure 4. Dendrogram illustrating the Mahalanobis matrix comparing Midland, South American Paleoindians
(PALEOSA), and Howell’s world-wide female cranial variation.

modern Japanese and prehistoric Tasmanians.
There is a slightly more distant relationship with
prehistoric Atayals (the aboriginal tribe of Taiwan) and Eskimos. It should be noted that the
lack of a face on the Midland calvarium prevents
a more refined statistical analysis, but the present
results are intriguing. The Mahalanobis calculations demonstrate that there is little morphological

similarity with recent Native Americans. This has
been previously observed among other Paleoindian
crania. Her similarity to prehistoric Atayals and
Tasmanians fits with previous research linking
Paleoindians (particularly South American individuals) with early Pacific populations.
The craniometric data from Midland and other
Paleoindians reflect considerable morphological

Taylor—The Midland Calvarium and the Early Human Habitation of the Americas 205
diversity. How this fits in with DNA research and
later descendant groups is still an open question.
The DNA evidence from Anzick-1 strongly suggests that Paleoindians are ancestral to modern
American Indians. Paleoindians may have a somewhat different cranial morphology, this should not
be taken as an implication that they are not the
ancestors of Native Americans. As mentioned by
Stewart (1955), Midland does exhibit morphological similarity to later Archaic populations in Texas.
Given that cranial morphometrics are not static
through time (Weisensee and Jantz 2014), one cannot rule out the lineal descent of Paleoindians to
modern Native Americans by measurements alone.
In addition, one should also realize that Native American populations were not genetically
isolated. Once the pathway to the continent was
established (by land, sea, or both), nothing would
have prevented later populations from migrating
from Asia to the Americas. Indeed, gene flow likely
went the other way as well: from the Americas to
Asia (Jantz and Spradley 2014).
One should not discount the possibility that
human migration from other regions had an effect on the modern Native American genome. For
example, there is compelling evidence that groups
of Polynesians landed on the coasts of North and
South America after A.D. 1300 (see chapters in
Jones et al. 2011). This migration would have resulted in gene flow between populations. Indeed,
Gonçalves et al. (2013) reported that two mtDNA
haplogroups associated with Polynesians was
found among Botocudo Indians from Brazil. Paleoindians may have been the first people to migrate
to the Americas, but they were not the last.
Employing a combination of DNA and craniometric research, a clearer picture of the initial human
settlement of the Americas emerges. There was an
initial, early population stratum that occupied both
continents, followed closely by a second (and closely
related) group that inhabited mostly North America.
The data from the Midland site are consistent with
this model. The affinity that Midland exhibits with
some South American crania should not be surprising, since they both share a common ancestry with
the earliest inhabitants of the Americas.
CONCLUSIONS
The new data provided from Midland is
consistent with previous findings about the

craniometric diversity of the earliest Americans.
These populations had a generalized morphology
that was just as diverse as modern American Indians.
While Paleoindian morphology was different from
their modern descendants, there is ample evidence
they are the direct ancestors of Native Americans.
The passage of time and continued gene flow from
other parts of the world has had an effect on cranial
shape and morphometrics.
The new measurements from the Midland
crania provide vital information that quantifies
the craniometric diversity of the Paleoindians.
Although the sample size is low, it is apparent that
morphological variation was considerable. This
implies that the earliest inhabitants of the Americas did not originate from a single migration or
a single population. While our understanding of
early migrations is incomplete at best, future discoveries and advances in research methods will
undoubtedly refine current hypotheses. It is the
hope of the author that the data from the Midland
site will inform future research and refine our
understanding of the earliest Americans.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author wishes to thank the following
individuals for their assistance with this report:
Dr. Michael Collins, Laura Nightengale, and the
Scharbauer family. Gratitude is also due to the staff
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(The University of Texas at Austin) for providing
research space and equipment.
REFERENCES CITED
Agogino, G. A.
1969 The Midland Complex–Is it Valid? American Anthropologist 71:1117-1118.
Bousman, C. B., B. W. Baker, and A. C. Kerr
2004 Paleoindian Archeology in Texas. In The Prehistory
of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 15-97. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Brace, C. L., A. R. Nelson, and P. Qifeng
2004 Peopling of the New World: A Comparative Craniofacial View. In The Settlement of the American
Continents: A Multidisciplinary Approach to Human
Biogeography, edited by C. M. Barton, G. A. Clark,
D. Yesner, and G. A. Pearson, pp. 28-38. University
of Arizona Press, Tucson.

206

Texas Archeological Society

Brace, C. L., N. Seguchi, A. R. Nelson, P. Qifeng, H. Umeda,
M. Wilson, and M. L. Brace
2014 The Ainu and Jomon Connection. In Kennewick
Man: The Scientific Investigation of an Ancient
American Skeleton, edited by D. W. Owsley and R.
L. Jantz, pp. 463-471. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
Bradley, B. and D. Stanford
2004 The North Atlantic Ice-Edge Corridor: a Possible
Palaeolithic Route to the New World. World Archaeology 36:459-478.
Dillehay, T. D.
2009 Probing Deeper into First American Studies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
106:971-978.
Fladmark, K. R.
1979 Routes: Alternate Migration Corridors for Early Man
in North America. American Antiquity 44:55-69.
Gilbert, M., P. Thomas, D. L. Jenkins, A. Götherstrom, N.
Naveran, J. L. Sanches, M. Hofreiter, P. F. Thomsen, J.
Binladen, T. F.G. Higham, R. M. Yohe II, R. Parr, L. S.
Cummings, and E. Willerslev.
2008 DNA from Pre-Clovis Human Coprolites in Oregon,
North America. Science 320:786-789.
Giles, E. and O. Elliot
1963 Sex Determination by Discriminant Function
Analysis of Crania. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 21:53-68.
Gill, G. W.
2014 Morphological Features that Reflect Population
Affinities. In Kennewick Man: The Scientific Investigation of an Ancien American Skeleton, edited by
D. W. Owsley and R. L. Jantz, pp. 503-518. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Gonçalves, V. F., J. Stenderup, C. Rodrigues-Carvalho, H.
P. Silva, H. Gonçalves-Dornelas, A. Líro, T. Kivisild,
A.-Sapfo Malaspinas, P. F. Campos, M. Rasmussen, E.
Willerslev, and S. D. J. Pena
2013 Identification of Polynesian mtDNA haplogroups
in remains of Botocudo Amerindians from Brazil.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
110:6465-6469.
Hamilton, M. J. and B. Buchanan
2007 Spatial Gradients in Clovis-Age Radiocarbon Dates
Across North America Suggest Rapid Colonization
from the North. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104:15625-15630.
Haynes Jr., C. V.
2005 Clovis, Pre-Clovis, Climate Change, and Extinction.
In Paleoamerican Origins: Beyond Clovis, edited by
R. Bonnichson, B. T. Lepper, D. Stanford, and M.
R. Waters, pp. 113-132. Center for the Study of the
First Americans, College Station.

Holliday, V. T.
1989 The Blackwater Draw Formation (Quaternary): A 1.4
Plus M.Y. Record of Eolian Sedimentation and Soil
Formation on the Southern High Plains. Geological
Society of America Bulletin 101:1598-1607.

1995 Late Quaternary Stratigraphy of the Southern High
Plains. In Ancient Peoples and Landscapes, edited
by E. Johnson, pp. 289-313. Museum of Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.
1997 Paleoindian Geoarchaeology of the Southern High
Plains. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Holliday, V. T. and D. J. Meltzer
1996 Geoarchaeology of the Midland (Paleoindian) Site,
Texas. American Antiquity 61:755-771.
Howells, W. W.
1973 Cranial Variation in Man: a Study by Multivariate
Analysis of Patterns of Difference Among Recent
Human Populations. Papers of the Peabody Museum
of Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 67. Harvard
University, Cambridge.
1989 Skull shapes and the map. Papers of the Peabody
Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 79.
Harvard University, Cambridge.

Hoyle, R. H.
1999 Preface. In Statistical Strategies for Small Research
Samples, edited by R. H. Hoyle, pp. xv-xxi. Sage
Publications, Thousand Oaks, California.
Hubbe, M., W. A. Neves, H. L. do Amaral, and N. Guidon.
2007 Brief Communication: “Zuzu” Strikes Again –
Morphological Affinities of the Early Holocene
Human Skeleton from Toca dos Coqueiros, Piaui,
Brazil. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
13:285-291.
Hubbe, M., W. A. Neves, J. P.V. Atui, C. Cartelle, and M.A.
Perereira da Silva
2004 A New Early Human Skeleton from Brazil: Support
for the “Two Main Biological Components Model”
for the Settlement of the Americas. Current Research
in the Pleistocene 21:77-81.
Jantz, R. L. and M. K. Spradley
2014 Cranial Morphometric Evidence for Early Holocene
Relationships and Population Structure. In Kennewick Man: The Scientific Investigation of an Ancient
American Skeleton, edited by D. W. Owsley and R.
L. Jantz, pp. 472-491. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
Jones, T. L., A. A. Story, E. A. Matisoo-Smith, and J. M.
Ramírez-Aliaga
2011 Polynesians in America: Pre-Columbian Contacts
with the New World. Altamira Press, Lanham,
Maryland.

Taylor—The Midland Calvarium and the Early Human Habitation of the Americas 207
Kemp, B. M. and T. G. Schurr
2010 Ancient and Modern Genetic Variation in the Americas. In Human Variation in the Americas, edited by
B. M. Auerbach, pp. 12-50. Center for Archaeological Investigations Occasional Paper No. 38. Southern
Illinois University, Carbondale.
Lepper, B. T.
2014 The People Who Peopled America. In Kennewick
Man: The Scientific Investigation of an Ancient
American Skeleton, edited by D. W. Owsley and R.
L. Jantz, pp. 7-29. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
McKinney, C. R.
1992 Midland Woman: the Oldest American. Geological
Society of America Abstracts with Programs 24:A26.
Neumann, G. K.
1952 Archeology and Race in the American Indian. In
Archeology of Eastern United States, edited by J.
B. Griffin, pp. 13-34. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Neves, W. A., R. Gonzalez-Jose, M. Hubbe, R. Kipnis, A. G.
M. Araujo, and O. Blasi
2004 Early Holocene Human Skeletal Remains from
Cerca Grande, Lagoa Santa, Central Brazil, and the
Origins of the First Americans. World Archaeology
36:479-501.
Neves, W. A., M. Hubbe, M. M. M. Okumura, R. GonzalezJose, L. Figuti, S. Eggers, and P. A. Dantas de Blasis
2005 A New Early Holocene Human Skeleton from Brazil:
Implications for the Settlement of the New World.
Journal of Human Evolution 48:403-414.
Neves W. A., A. Prous, R. González-José, R. Kipnis, and J.
Powell
2003 Early Holocene Human Skeletal Remains from Santana do Riacho, Brazil: Implications for the Settlement of the New World. Journal of Human Evolution
45:19-42.
Neves, W. A., M. Hubbe, and L. B. Pilό
2007 Early Holocene Human Skeletal Remains from
Sumidouro Cave, Lagoa Santa, Brazil: History of
Discoveries, Geological and Chronological Context,
and Comparative Cranial Morphology. Journal of
Human Evolution 52:16-30.
Owsley, D. W. and R. L. Jantz
1999 Databases for Paleo-american Skeletal Biology Research. In Who Were the First Americans?, edited by
R. Bonnichsen, pp. 79-96. Center for the Study of the
First Americans, Oregon State University, Corvalis.
2001 Archaeological Politics and the Public Interest in
Paleoamerican Studies: Lessons from Gordon Creek
Woman and Kennewick Man. American Antiquity
66:565-575.

Pitblado, B. L.
2011 A Tale of Two Migrations: Reconciling Recent
Biological and Archaeological Evidence for the
Pleistocene Peopling of the Americas. Journal of
Archaeological Research 19:327-375.
Powell, J. F. and J. C. Rose
1999 Report on the Osteological Assessment of the “Kennewick Man” Skeleton. National Park Service Archeology and Ethnography Program, Washington D.C.
Powell, J. F. and D. G. Steele
1992 A Multivariate Craniometric Analysis of North
American Paleoindian Remains. Current Research
in the Pleistocene 9:59-62.
Rachmandan, S. and N. A. Rosenberg
2011 A Test of the Influence of Continental Axes of Orientation on Patterns of Human Gene Flow. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 146:515-529.
Rasmussen, M., S. L. Anzick, M. R. Waters, P. Skoglund, M.
DeGiorgio, T. W. Stafford Jr., S. Rasmussen, I. Moltke, A.
Albrechtsen, S. M. Doyle, G. D. Poznik, V. Gudmundsdottir,
R. Yadav, A.-Sapfo Malaspinas, S. S. White V, M. E. Allentoft,
O. E. Cornejo, K. Tambets, A. Eriksson, P. D. Heintzman,
M. Karmin, T. S. Korneliussen, D. J. Meltzer, T. L. Pierre,
J. Stenderup, L. Saag, V. M. Warmuth, M. C. Lopes, R. S.
Malhi, S. Brunak, T. Sicheritz-Ponten, I. Barnes, M. Collins,
L. Orlando, F. Balloux, A. Manica, R. Gupta, M. Metspalu, C.
D. Bustamante, M. Jakobsson, R. Nielsen, and E. Willerslev
2014 The Genome of a Late Pleistocene Human from
a Clovis Burial Site in Western Montana. Nature
506:225-229.
Steele, D. G. and J. F. Powell
1992 The Peopling of the Americas: the Paleobiological
Evidence. Human Biology 63:301-336.

1999 Peopling of the Americas: a Historical and Comparative Perspective. In Who Were the First Americans?,
edited by R. Bonnichsen, pp. 97-126. Center for the
Study of the First Americans, Oregon State University, Corvalis.
Stewart, T. D.
1935 Skeletal Remains from Southwestern Texas. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 20:213-231.

1955 Description of the Human Skeletal Remains. In The
Midland Discovery, by F. Wendorf, A. D. Krieger, C.
C. Albritton, and T. D. Stewart, pp. 77-90. University
of Texas Press, Austin.
Stojanowski, C. M., K. M. Johnson, and W. N. Duncan
2013 Sinodonty and Beyond: Hemispheric, Regional,
and Intracemetery Approaches to Studying Dental
Morphological Variation in the New World. In Anthropological Perspectives on Tooth Morphology:
Genetics, Evolution, Variation, edited by G. R. Scott
and J. D. Irish, pp. 408-452. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

208

Texas Archeological Society

Swedlund, A. C. and D. Anderson
1999 Gordon Creek Woman Meets Spirit Cave Man: New
Interpretations and Protocols Regarding the Peopling
of the Americas. American Antiquity 64:569-576.
2003 Gordon Creek Woman Meets Spirit Cave Man: a Response to Comment by Owsley and Jantz. American
Antiquity 68:161-167.

Weisensee, K. E. and R. L. Jantz
2014 Secular Changes in Craniofacial Morphology of the
Portuguese Using Geometric Morphometrics. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 145:548-559.
Wendorf, F.
1961 A General Introduction to the Ecology of the Llano
Estacado. In Paleoecology of the Llano Estacado,
edited by F. Wendorf, pp. 12-21. Museum of New
Mexico Press, Santa Fe.

Wendorf, F. and A. D. Krieger
1959 New Light on the Midland Discovery. American
Antiquity 25:66-78.
Wendorf, F., A. D. Krieger, C. C. Albritton, and T. D. Stewart
1955 The Midland Discovery: a Report on the Pleistocene
Human Remains from Midland, Texas. University of
Texas Press, Austin.
Wright, S.
1943 Isolation by Distance. Genetics 28:114-138.

A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard
Catrina Banks Whitley and S. Alan Skinner

ABSTRACT
Human skeletal remains were found eroding from the lake bed of Lake Ray Hubbard in September 2011 in the
area of 41DL8. The fisherman that found the remains reported their presence to the local police department.
The Dallas Homicide Squad and a representative from the Dallas Medical Examiner’s Office exhumed some
of the remains. The exhumed skeletal elements were taken to the Medical Examiner’s Office for identification, where they were determined to be human. The following day, Dallas Homicide, a Dallas County Medical
Examiner’s representative, and researchers from the University of North Texas removed additional skeletal
remains. Ultimately, Dallas Water Utilities contracted with AR Consultants, Inc., (ARC) to complete the recovery of all bone fragments from the discovery site and to insure that no further burials were in the immediate vicinity. ARC completed excavations and surveyed the shoreline to explore for the presence of additional
human skeletal remains or burials.
Analysis of the remains and associated artifacts indicates that they are of Native American ancestry and radiocarbon dating of two bone samples, with permission of the Wichita and Affiliated Tribes, attributes the burials
to the Late Archaic period: cal. 1380-1130 B.C. and cal. 1120-930 B.C. Four adult males were found to have
been interred in a single burial pit; one had a developmental defect resulting in complete external auditory
atresia. All the individuals were middle-aged adults, between 35-45 years-at-death. Seven Late Archaic dart
points were found in association with the remains. The remains and associated artifacts were repatriated to the
Wichita and Affiliated Tribes.

INTRODUCTION
Archeological site 41DL8 was first reported
in 1941 by Robert C. Hatzenbuehler of the Dallas Archeological Society (DAS) during survey
of plowed fields located south of Rowlett Creek,
just upstream from its junction with the East Fork
of the Trinity River (Figure 1). At the time, the
site was described as being 900 ft. from Rowlett
Creek and resting on yellow clay that probably
corresponds to Altoga silty clay (Coffee et al.
1980:Sheet 21). Artifacts on the farmed site
surface included arrow points, blades, scrapers,
flakes, pottery sherds, and mussel shells (Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas 2011). The site was
revisited in the summer of 1963 in conjunction
with the anticipated construction of Forney Reservoir, now known as Lake Ray Hubbard (Harris
and Suhm 1963:17). The site was reported to be a
small Wylie Focus campsite that was badly eroded
and had occupational debris exposed over an area

roughly 300 x 225 ft. in size. No investigation was
recommended at the site. The site was apparently
inundated by the lake and was not visible when
the City of Garland, Texas, was planning to construct John Paul Jones Park (Nunley 1984). The
site was not visited again until the late summer of
2011 when the lake level dropped due to a major
drought. The drought exposed a section of the
lake bed near the John Paul Jones Park boat ramp.
A local fisherman noticed bones and teeth
eroding from the lakeshore near his chosen fishing spot. He discovered the remains around 7:30
p.m. on September 22, 2011, and reported the
location to the Garland Police Department around
6:30 a.m. the following morning. The Garland
Police Department then notified the Dallas Police Department (DPD) as they have jurisdiction
over the land that underlies the city-owned lake.
Thinking that this might be a modern burial site,
the Dallas Homicide Unit (DHU) was notified of
the discovery. Ultimately, an officer with the DHU

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 86 (2015)

210

Texas Archeological Society

and a representative from the Dallas
Medical Examiner’s Office (DMEO)
responded to the scene.
Once on the scene, exploratory
digging by the DHU officer and the
DMEO representative commenced.
The recovered remains were then
taken to the DMEO, where they
were determined to be human in
origin. The DHU and DMEO representative returned to the scene to
complete recovery of the remains
Saturday morning. The DHU detectives set a grid of unknown size that
divided the excavation area into four
quadrants, with the center of the grid
approximately in the middle of the
location of the remains.
Shovels and rakes were utilized
in the recovery process and the remains were collected by quadrant.
Since the quadrants were not established until after the exploratory
digging, the exact provenience of the
bones was not obtained during the
DHU work. Notes or an excavation
map were also not available; however, some excavation pictures were
available. Detective Edgar J. Quirk
(personal communication 2011) saw
the orientation of the remains during
recovery and he indicated that the
exposed body was lying on its side
in a fetal position. Figure 2 shows
Figure 1. Site location from the Forney Reservoir Survey report.
the skeletal elements in situ while
Mr. Ingraham, with the University
Anthropology (UNTLFA) and UNTLFA completed
of North Texas Laboratory of Forensic Anthropolthe excavation (Figure 3) of the remaining in situ
ogy, was excavating, but the photographs do not
skeletal elements (mainly the lower limbs). Two
show element portions that would have been useadditional dart points were encountered during the
ful in determining the orientation of the remains;
excavations; back dirt was not screened for addisubsequent analysis indicates four individuals were
tional remains or points. It is unclear when three
buried in the same pit. The photographs did allow
more points were uncovered because only three
some reconstruction of the leg flexure. From these
dart points were photographed in the field (Figure
photographs, Detective Quirk’s assessment that the
4). At least two points, B and C (Figure 4b-c), were
individual was in a “fetal position” was confirmed
excavated by UNTLFA.
in that at least one individual was buried in a flexed
Once excavations were complete and Dallas
or semi-flexed position. The size and shape of the
Water Utilities (DWU) was determined to be the
excavated pit also indicate that all four individuals
party responsible for this portion of the lake, the
were buried in a flexed or semi-flexed position.
scene was barricaded and patrolled by the DPD
Excavations ceased when a dart point was
and DWU until the recovery of the human remains
found. At this time, the detectives contacted the
was completed. DWU asked AR Consultants, Inc.
University of North Texas Laboratory of Forensic

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard

211

Figure 2. In situ skeletal elements. The elements were exposed during UNTLFA
excavations.

Figure 3. DHU, DMEO, and UNTLFA excavation photograph to emphasize back dirt piles visible on the site. Not all
piles are visible in this photograph.

212

Texas Archeological Society

a
b

c

Figure 4. Dart points photographed in the field by DHU.

(ARC) to gather the bones, records, and other
information and then to conduct additional excavations at the site of the apparent burial in order
to retrieve any remaining bones and artifacts and
to explore the site area from which the bones had
been recovered. The Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division, issued an Antiquities
Permit (#6112) to recover the remaining skeletal
remains and associated artifacts from the discovery area.
In September 2011, the location was relatively
dry and photographs of the scene and personal
communication with UNTLFA staff indicated that
the matrix was easily excavated. The lake level at
the time of discovery on September 22, 2011, was
429.93 feet. ARCs excavations were postponed
by several days due to precipitation. The lake
level remained constant in October and November;
however, precipitation in early December resulted
in the gain of 1.01 feet (Lakes On-Line, http://rayhubbard.uslakes.info/Level.asp, accessed January
30, 2012). This resulted in extremely sticky, wet
clay at the site during ARC excavations that commenced on December 8, 2011, and were completed
on December 12, 2011.

A thin layer of ice coated the lake bed surface
and the weather was cloudy and 31 degrees on the
morning of December 8. Upon arrival, it was apparent that the excavated pit had been filled with
some of the back dirt from the previous excavation. Fragments of human skeletal remains were
scattered across the site, although all collected
fragments were found within the barricaded area.
Dense bone fragments were concentrated near the
DHU pit; these were not individually point plotted.
A grid was set using a retaining wall as a baseline
and the northeast corner of the retaining wall as the
main datum point.
All human remains and lithic artifacts outside
the bone concentrations were point-plotted. Several
quartzite flakes were also piece-plotted and may
have been scattered with the bone elements. Most
of the point-plotted items were skeletal fragments
and included small pieces of long bone, crania,
mandible, femur, and possibly the acetabulum.
A 5 x 6 m area was gridded for scraping and
recovery within the dense bone concentrations
(Figure 5). Our initial research design designated
a 3 x 3 m grid for horizontal control, but the extensive bone scatter required the larger grid. Setting

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard

213

method of removing back dirt left by
the DHU and UNTLFA excavations,
but the clay was too thick and sticky.
Each unit was hand-troweled to 10
cm bs.
Field screening was impossible,
and thus all sediment was bagged
and brought to the laboratory for water screening. The crew collected approximately four 30-40 pound bags
of sediment per 1 x 1 m unit. The
number of bags collected depended
upon the thickness of piled backdirt
left after the previous excavations.
In unit N2E2, numerous teeth
and several small mandibular fragments were found in a concentrated
pile on the surface. The concentration included molars, incisors, and
pre-molars. Two additional teeth
Figure 5. 41DL8 site map showing the pit defined by DHU as well as the
were found within the first 2 cm in
area gridded and scraped by ARC.
the unit’s southeast corner. This unit
was chosen to excavate to 20 cm bs
to
look
for
additional
remains as the original DHU
up the grid proved difficult due to the wet clay and
pit had not yet been located and the concentration
shoes quickly became coated with large amounts
resembled the original find. Accordingly, three
of sticky clay. Only one individual was allowed
quadrants of this unit were excavated to 20 cm bs
inside the grid area while staking the site. In order
to search for additional in situ remains and also garto prevent loss of bone or tracking bone across the
ner an understanding of the sterile sediment depth
site, boots were scraped clean of adhering mud in
and appearance. Sterile sediment was encountered
each unit. Removal of sediment from the boots
at approximately 8-10 cm bs, depending upon the
limited further site disturbance, since clay adheramount of back dirt present. All bones and teeth
ence to footwear was significant and the excavator
were found in the first 10 cm. The sterile sediment
tended to sink several inches in some locations
was mottled clay (33 percent each pale red, reddishwhile trying to stake the grid. Two by two m secyellow, and pale brown). The back dirt was clay
tions were initially gridded and then divided into 1
(light yellowish-brown and brown), depending upon
x 1 m units as excavation progressed. This allowed
the amount of drying of the clay before the Munsell
the excavators to quarter each 2 x 2 m section. All
color was recorded. The sediments below 10 cm
units were identified by their northeast corner and
were extremely waterlogged and excavation was
consisted of 1 x 1 m units.
difficult and slow. Within 10 minutes of excavating
Surface troweling of the sediments to collect
to 15-20 cm bs, groundwater began seeping into the
the numerous bone fragments commenced in
excavation pit (Figure 6). The image in Figure 6 was
N5E6. The crew worked in a counter-clockwise
taken a few hours after excavation of that unit on
direction, scraping N5E6, then N5E5 and N5E4,
December 9, 2011.
until the shoreline was reached, and then moving
A 6 x 6 cm pocket of skeletal elements was in
to the south. Sediment troweling continued until
the northwest corner of Unit N3E2 and the southa hard-packed sterile sediment was reached,
west corner of Unit N4E2. Depth to the top of the
approximately 10 cm below the lake bed surface.
remains was 11 cm and the base of the feature was
No bones were evident on the cleared surfaces.
18 cm. Reconstruction from DHU photographs
The outermost area was troweled first, and then the
indicates a back dirt pile was located in this vicincrew moved in 1 m intervals toward the location of
ity and the stake for the DHU grid located in this
the DHU pit. All units were hand troweled. Shovel
general area. The feature contained two upended
scraping to 5 cm bs was attempted in N5E6 as a

214

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. View of site showing excavation unit and water line.

long bone shafts and a mixture of rib and cranial
fragments. Since the photograph showed a stake in
the general area of the feature and that the feature
was of similar size as the wooden stake used by
DHU, it is highly probable the remains washed
into the hole that remained after DHU collected the
stakes from their grid. No definitive feature outline
could be determined.
Troweling in the center of the gridded area
resulted in the discovery of the pit excavated by
DHU, DMEO, and UNTLFA. The area was delineated and all sediments collected. The pit contained back dirt from prior excavation with bone
fragments mixed throughout the pit fill. The pit
continually filled with water once a depth of 15 cm
was reached; however, sediment removal continued
to 25 cm, at which point a distinct change in the
texture of the sterile soil had been reached. No
additional remains were found at the level of the
sterile sediments or in the pit walls. Remains were
not piece plotted within each unit due to the small
fragment sizes and since skeletal elements were

not in situ but were scattered across the site. Additionally, it was unclear if certain back dirt piles
corresponded with the DHU and DMEO quadrants
since their excavations occurred over several days,
and their grid had only been employed on the second day of excavation.
Between Thursday, December 8, 2011 and
Friday, December 9, 2011, the water level rose
approximately 10-20 cm and encroached upon the
excavation units. Excavation proved difficult due
to the water-logged conditions and texture of the
wet clay and units excavated to 10 cm bs had standing water at the base within 30 minutes.
All excavated sediment was water screened in
the ARC laboratory. An estimated 2,340 pounds
of sediment were brought to the lab for water
screening and, due to the amount of clay, water
screening took two weeks to complete. The collected sediment was mixed with baking soda and
water to dissolve the clay so the slurry could be
easily screened. All material was screened through
1/8-inch mesh in order to recover small bone

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard
fragments. The process was highly successful,
recovering over 12,900 countable bone fragments,
including a malleus, a middle ear ossicles.
Once the sediment was water screened, the
screened material was dried and re-bagged, according to original unit. Large amounts of calcium
carbonate nodules were present in all screened
material. The skeletal fragments were hand sorted
from the calcium carbonate. Any remains larger
than 1 mm were separated from the debris, trash,
and calcium carbonate. Identifiable fragments that
could be assigned to a skeletal element or category
of skeletal element were then sorted and stored by
unit separate from the remaining unidentifiable
bone fragments. Both identifiable and unidentifiable bone fragments collected via the screening
process were counted and cataloged per collection
bag and the total gram weight per bag tallied: 998
total identifiable fragments and 11,298 unidentifiable fragments collected during screening. Bone
fragments less than 1 mm were not sorted or
counted and the matrix, consisting of small bone
fragments and calcium carbonate nodules, was
combined and saved for repatriation. A total of
12,913 fragments were collected in the ARC, DHU,
DMEO, and UNTLFA work.
All remains collected by ARC were bagged,
counted, and weighed by unit. Due to the disturbed
context, fragments identifiable to a specific element
were matched as best as possible with the bones
collected by DHU, DCME, and UNTLFA. Horizontal control of the identifiable fragments provided no clear indication of body position or orientation, but did provide evidence that the remains
were not in situ and had been highly disturbed.
Without the possibility of identifying individuals,
all remains were analyzed as a co-mingled burial.
Bone fragments were sorted and reconstructed as
best as possible. Minimum number of individuals
was calculated per element: i.e., femora, tibiae,
talus, humerus, etc.

HUMAN REMAINS ANALYSIS
Methods, Reconstruction and MNI
Laboratory methods followed Stodder et al.’s
(2010) recommendation for working with commingled remains. All fragments were sorted according to element, when possible, and counted.
Long bone sorting included categories for bone that

215

could not be identified by element and were sorted
as large long bone fragments (tibia, femur, and
humeral fragments) and small long bone fragments
(radius, ulna, and fibula). Fragments were matched,
when possible, to larger elements. Reconstruction
efforts focused on the bones that would yield the
most information, such as the femur, tibia, and
humerus. Only a few refits were possible on the
crania and very few identifiable cranial fragments
were present.
Minimum number of individuals (MNI) was
calculated after refitting was complete. Non-repeatable skeletal elements for features were counted.
Only one element or feature could be identified
in several cases, but several elements, including
the talus, anterior crest of the tibia, medial deltoid
attachment on the humerus, complete patella, and
right radial notch on the ulna, all indicate a MNI
of four individuals (Table 1). Skeletal elements
could not be matched between individuals; however, skeletal elements could be paired within the
element in many cases. For example, two femora
could be identified as belonging to the same individual, but reconstructing which set of femora
belonged with which set of humeri or tibiae was
not possible.
Reconstruction of most skeletal elements was
also impossible due to the highly fragmented condition of the skeletal elements and trabecular bone.
The bone fragmentation was due to a combination
of the age of the skeleton and the use of shovels
and rakes by DHU and the DMEO. Auricular surfaces were present on some fragments of ilium,
but the surface was either too highly eroded or had
evidence of fresh breaks that precluded analysis.
The extreme fragmentary condition of the ilium,
ischium, and pubis prevented using these bones for
sex or age estimation.
Sex Estimation
The innominates and skull were too highly
fragmented to be reconstructed. Although some
fragments were large, the portions needed for sex
assessment were damaged. The greater sciatic notch
was visible on several ilia fragments, but most were
too small for an accurate identification. On the skull,
only six supra orbital edges were available for analysis, but none were larger than 10 mm in width. Of
the three temporal bones identifiable, two had fresh
breaks through the mastoid processes.
Individual sex was determined using talus

216

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Minimum Number of Individuals (MNI) per Skeletal Element.

Element

Portion

Count

Temporal

Mastoid Process

2 right, 1 left

2

C2

Dens

1 - single

1

C1

Clavicle
Scapula
Ilium

Ischium
Pubis

Humerus

Dens facet

Based on deltoid attachment
Right Glenoid Fossa

Right greater sciatic notch
Ischial Tuberosity
Superior Ramus
Trochlea

Capitulum

Olecranon Fossa
Radius
Ulna

Femur
Patella
Tibia

Fibula
MT1
MT5

Hamate

Medial Deltoid Attachment
Right Neck

Right Radial Tuberosity
Radial Notch

Left Gleuteal Attachment
Femoral Neck/Head
Whole Element
Anterior Crest

Tibial Tuberosity
Malleolus

Right Base/Right Head
Right Base

Lunate

2 right, 3 left
2 right, 3 left

2 right, 3 left, 1 unsided
3 right, 4 left
2 right

2 left, 2 right
1 left, 2 right
2 left, 2 right
4 left, 4 right
1 unsided
1 (1 left)

4 left, 2 right
4 left, 3 right
3 right, 2 left
3 left, 4 right
4 right, 4 left
3 unsided

1 right

2 left, 2 right

Calcaneus

Right Posterior Talar Surface

Talus

Posterior Calcaneal Surface

Calcaneal Tuberosity

Right Navicular Articular Surface

measurements. Measurements followed the protocols set in Steele (1976) and Barrett et al. (2001).
Barrett et al. (2001) used the talus to estimate the
sex of individuals in an Archaic Native American

3
4
2
2
2
2
4
1
1
4
4
3
4
4

2

2 left, 1 right

Foot Navicular

3

2 left, 1 right

1 left

1 right, 1 left

Triquetral

3

2

2 right

Capitate

1

2 left, 2 right

2 right

Scaphoid

Cuboid

1 - single

MNI

1 left, 1 right
3 right, 2 left
1 left, 2 right
4 left, 2 right
3 left, 4 right

1
1
2
2
1
2
2
1
3
1
4
4

population. Their sex determinations were based
upon volume of the talus, calculated by obtaining the product of the talus length, width, and
height. Only two tali from 41DL8 were complete

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard
enough for volume measurements (Table 2) and
both indicate the individuals were male. Wilbur
(1998) utilized talus dimension to estimate sex in
prehistoric Native American remains from West
Central Illinois and tested the results against additional populations. Comparisons with Wilbur’s
(1998:185) talus breadth section points indicate
that all tali trochlea breadth measurements are
consistent with males.
One temporal bone had a complete mastoid
process. This mastoid process size is consistent
with a male/probable male, with a score of 4/5.
Scoring was based upon criteria in Buikstra and
Ubelaker (1994). A developmental defect of the
external auditory meatus is present on this bone
and it is unclear if this condition affects the size of
the mastoid process.
Age
The fragmented nature of the remains precluded
the use of typical aging methods. Of the skeletal
elements that could be assessed, the most accurate
post-cranial age that could be identified was “adult.”
The best preserved skeletal elements of these individuals were the teeth. Wear patterns were significant
and the amount of wear on the molars indicated the
individuals were at least in their mid-30s, based upon
Lovejoy’s (1985) criteria. However, using wear patterns for aging is difficult because cultural factors,
such as types of food consumed, texture of the foods,
and tool use of the teeth, can alter the rate at which
teeth wear. Sciulli (1997:231) indicates that Ohio

217

Valley Late Archaic populations had extreme rates
of wear with low frequencies of pathologies. Root
transparency is a more accurate method for aging individuals than tooth wear. Lamendin et al. (1992) and
Prince and Ubelaker (2002) used root transparency
for dental aging and Prince and Ubelaker (2002:114)
found the technique is most accurate for individuals
30 to 69 years of age. Prince and Ubelaker (2002)
also indicated that sex should be taken into account
when employing this method and may result in an
over-estimation of age. Unfortunately, their formulae
correcting for ancestry and sex did not include Native
American root transparency calculations, and therefore Lamendin et al. (1992) calculations are utilized.
Due to the lack of bone preservation, this method of
aging was the best option.
Before age could be estimated, teeth were sorted
by “individual” based upon wear patterns, presence
of alveolar bone in which teeth could be refitted after
being sorted by tooth type, and color. Maxillary and
mandibular molars were also checked for fit, ensuring wear patterns matched. Lamendin et al. (1992)
methods were used on single rooted teeth. Only a
few teeth could be measured for root transparency
since many of the teeth had taphonomic changes in
which calcium carbonate infiltrated the root of the
tooth, starting at the apex. Tooth root transparency
was measured using Mituyoto Digital calipers to the
0.01 mm level. Teeth were placed on a light board
and tooth root transparency was measured on the
labial side of the tooth.
Root height was measured from the apex
to the crown on the labial side of the tooth and

Table 2. Talus Measurements and Sex Estimation.
Bone ID

Talus

Trochlea

Sex Estimate

Length

Width

Height

Volumea

Breadth

Length

Talus
Volumeb

Trochlea
Breadthc

1

60.0

49.5

35.5

105.44

34.44

36.4

M

M

3

–

–

–

–

30.64

–

–

M

2
4
5
6

aUnits

53.5

45.0

–

–

–
–

–
–

–
–
–

77.04
–
–
–

31.19
31.19
33.19
34.14

for column are
All other measurements are mm.
rule = if volume>73 sex = male (Barrett et al. 2001)
c Allocation section point = if trochlea breadth > 30.5 mm (Wilbur 1998)
M = male
bAllocation

cm3.

32.0

–
–
–
–

M
–
–
–

M
M
M
M

218

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. Age Estimation Based Upon Root Transparency.

Individual

Tooth

Root
Height

Periodontosis
Height

Transparency
Height

P

T

Age
Estimate

3

UI1

14.47

2.8

3.81

19.35

26.33

40.1

4

LI2

14.81

2.50

3.08

16.88

20.80

37.3

3
4
2

LI2
C

I2

15.66

1.91

14.44

2.51

13.21

1.59

3.91
4.23
3.73

12.20
17.38
12.04

24.97
29.29
28.24

38.2
41.0
39.6

*All measurements in mm
P=(Periodontosis Height x 100)/Root Height; T=(Transparency Height x 100)/Root Height

periodontosis height was also measured on the
labial portion. The formula used to calculate age was
(0.18xP)+(0.42xT)+25.53=age estimation. All age estimates fell in the middle adult range, with individuals
in the late 30s (Table 3); they can be categorized as
Middle Adult (30-50 years of age-at-death).
Stature
Stature estimates were calculated on long
bones in which segments of reconstructed bone
could be measured. Complete reconstruction was
impossible on the tibia, femora, and humeri, as
most epiphyses were missing. Femoral heads had
the greatest survival rate of the epiphyses of the
tibia, femora, and humeri, although only two could
be refit. Long bone lengths were reconstructed
from segment analysis, and segment analysis calculations were based on formula found in Steele and
McKern (1969). Their regression formulae were
based upon prehistoric American Indian populations of Mississippian period cultural affinities.
Genovés (1967) stature formulae were used
because the Genovés sample probably most closely
resembles the population under study. Sciulli et al.
(1990:276) also designed stature regression formulae that included Late Archaic skeletal remains and
represented almost half of the skeletal sample. The
stature estimates were similar to those calculated
utilizing Genovés (1967) formulae (Table 4). Bone
numbers for each skeletal element were generated
randomly and do not correlate to each other across
elements. Thus, the humerus under “Bone No. 1”
is not from the same individual listed as “Bone No.
1” femur. No stature estimates could be calculated
for bones 4, 5, 6, and 8 for all elements.

Stature reconstructions from the Genovés
(1967) formula indicate that the males range in
height from 156.77 cm to 172.04 cm. Average
stature of the individuals, including results of all
the tibiae and femora from the Genovés formula,
is 163.81 cm and the use of the Sciulli et al.
(1990) formulae resulted in an average 163.70
cm; stature estimates did not include results from
the humerus as this bone is less reliable for indicating stature. Femora 3 and 7 were matched and
resulted in similar stature reconstructions. Stature
estimates that were based upon more segments
have greater accuracy than those based upon one
segment; thus, there is the potential that some of
the calculations have underestimated the height
of the individuals.
The average stature of the four males at 41DL8
is 164.23 cm using Genové’s formulae; the stature
estimate derived from femur #3 was excluded from
the final average stature since it was determined
femora #3 and #7 were from the same individual.
This average is slightly less than that for other stature estimates for Native American in Texas (Table
5). However, stature ranges indicate that at least
one stature estimate from 41DL8 (158.96 cm) was
less than the shortest stature listed in the ranges
of the other reports, with 41AU36 and 41AU37
reporting the lowest male stature at 163.3 cm. It is
unclear to what degree the use of segment analysis
influenced the stature estimates at 41DL8. It is also
unclear whether the short statured individual was
also the same individual with the external auditory
atresia, and, as a result, was malnourished during childhood due to the developmental defect or
whether there was a condition associated with the
disease that resulted in stunting (see below).

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard

219

Table 4. Stature Estimations (in cm).
Bone No.

Humerus
Staturea

1

161.75

2

161.75

3
4

–

6

–

5

Femur
Statureb
–

–

7

–

8

–

164.74
156.77
–
–
–

158.96
–

SD
–

5.88
6.38
–
–
–

6.38
–

Tibia

Staturec
–

166.39
157.74
–
–
–

160.12
–

Statured

SD

SD

Staturee

SD

–

169.04

5.91

168.30

6.46

6.30

172.04

4.87

172.46

5.42

6.30
–

161.34

–
–

6.30
–

–
–
–
–
–

5.52
–
–
–
–
–

157.16
–
–
–
–
–

6.06
–
–
–
–
–

Staturea = From table in Genovés (1967)
Statureb = From Genovés (1967) = (2.26*Femur)+66.379)-2.5 = stature ± 3.417
Statured = From Genovés (1967) = (1.96*Tibia)+93.752)-2.5 = stature ± 2.812
SD Femur Genovés (1967) = (2.26*SD from segment analysis)+3.417
SD Tibia Genovés (1967) = (1.96*SD from segment analysis)+2.812
Staturec = From Scuilli et al. (1990) = (2.45*Femur)+43.56)-10.5 = stature ±3.34
Staturee = From Scuilli et al. (1990) = (2.71*Tibia)+50.25)-10.5 = stature ± 3.36
SD Femur Scuilli et al. (1990) = (2.26*SD from segment analysis)+3.34
SD Tibia Scuilli et al. (1990) = (1.96*SD from segment analysis)+3.36
*Tibia calculation for Bone #2 - added 10 cm per Scuilli et al. (1990) due to formula resulting in measurement less than
153.5 cm.
Bone numbers for the elements are independent of other elements. They do not correspond to individuals but are randomly
assigned by skeletal element.

Table 5. Estimated Stature of Individuals (in cm) at 41DL8 with Comparative
Data for Other Texas Native Americans.

Population

Males

Range

41DL8a

164.23

158.96-172.04

East Fork of Trinity Riverd

167.82

166.26-168.97

41AU36 and 41AU37b
41RW4c
Texas

Indiansb

a Average

167.90
167.91
165.40

163.30-175.50
167.61-168.07
164.00-166.50

values were calculated using the long bone stature from Table 4, excluding bone 3. Bone 3 was excluded because
bones 3 and 7 of the femur represent the same individual.
b Malina and Bramblett (1981:336).
c Recalculated from Ellzey et al. (1966). Only males were included (n=3) and stature was reconstructed from femoral length.
d Recalculated from Navey (1974). Average includes males only (n=5).

220

Texas Archeological Society
Pathology

to develop. As a result, only a bifurcated slight
depression was present at the location where the
external auditory canal should have developed
(Figure 7). This condition is known as external
auditory atresia and this case is the most severe
expression of the condition. Complete atresia results in a tympanic plate that does not develop and
the styloid process is usually missing or is not fully
formed (Barnes 1994:198). Aplasia of the external
auditory meatus can also result in malformation of
the external ear. Although auditory atresia can be
acquired, complete atresia is generally the result of
congenital defects (Hodges et al. 1990).
Atresia can be associated with many different syndromes and congenital defects, such as
Treacher Collins syndrome. However, the condition can also occur as an isolated phenomenon.
Isolated incidences of the defect are more common
in males than females (2:1) and more commonly
occur on the right (65 percent) than the left ear
(Gorlin et al. 1995). Due to destruction of the
internal structure of the ear, the presence or malformation of the ossicles could not be observed
but the breakage revealed a pneumaticized area
in the location where the internal acoustic meatus
should have been present. The sulcus sigmoideus
was also absent. Atresia of the auditory meatus is

Little pathology was present on the skeletal
remains. There was no evidence of porotic hyperostosis or any changes associated with malnutrition
or nutritional deficiencies. Dental caries were minimal and were present on six of the 54 teeth. Caries
included occlusal and mesial dental caries and were
small, between 1-2 mm in size. One ante-mortem
loss was recorded. Periodontal degeneration was
minimal and could be observed on several molars.
Use of the dental aging technique by Lamendin et
al. (1992) required recording periodontal degeneration. The measurements all indicate minor to
moderate periodontosis. Periodontal disease was
not present on the few fragments of alveolar bone
available for analysis.
Dental wear was moderate to severe on all
teeth. Dental wear patterns were recorded according to the scoring in Buikstra and Ubelaker (1994).
Most first and second maxillary and mandibular
molars were worn until dentin was exposed across
the surface of the tooth. Wear was greatest in
individual 3’s teeth and all had dentin exposure
across the entire surface. Although attrition was
significant on the Molar 1 and Molar 2, secondary
dentin formation was not present and wear had not
exposed the pulp cavity.
Polishing indicative of occupational use was present on the incisors
of individuals 3 and 4. The lingual
portion of the upper incisors was
worn smooth on the lingual surface
and almost obliterated the presence of
shoveling. In individual 4, polishing
was also present on the lingual side of
the maxillary incisors. The maxillary
left canine and right second incisor
also had evidence of wear on the labial surface of the teeth. A flattened
location was evident across the labial
surface, consistent with material being pulled across the surface or filing.
The flattened area was oriented in a
mesial/distal pattern and was present
only on inferior portions of the teeth
closest to the occlusal plane.
The only temporal bone with an
undamaged external auditory meatus
exhibited a developmental defect.
In this case, the external auditory Figure 7. Right temporal bone with a developmental defect of the external
meatus and the tympanic bone failed auditory meatus.

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard
classified into three conditions, ranked by severity,
with Type III most closely associated with Treacher
Collins Syndrome. This individual must be ranked
a Type II since the deformity of a tympanic cavity
is not able to be observed and radiographs are not
present to evaluate the degree of pneumatization
of the mastoid process (typology defined in Gorlin
et al. [1995:92]). The condition affects Native
Americans at a much higher rate than in the general
population, with a rate at 1:2000 Native American
births as compared to 1:15,000 white births.
With the severe form present in this case, this
individual likely suffered from complete hearing
loss in this ear, which would have made life challenging. Unilateral hearing loss can result in an
inability to localize sound on a horizontal plane
(Humes et al. 1980), as well as communication
issues associated with speech and language delays
(Lieu 2004). There is the potential that this individual suffered from associated syndromes that
could have resulted in further life complications
and challenges; such information would require
DNA analysis since the fragmentary nature of the
bones prevented observations for additional bone
developmental defects. Only a few accounts of
this condition are reported in the archeological
literature and are from seven cases found in Peru,
a cave in New Mexico, and a mound in Arkansas
(Hrdlicka 1933), historic Canada (Swanston et al.
2011), the Late Woodland in Iowa (Hodges et al.
1990), Anglo-Saxon England (Wells 1962), and a
historic case from Slovakia (Masnicova and Benus
2001). The 41DL8 case is the oldest radiocarbondated example of this developmental defect and
possibly the oldest known archeological case. The
only additional case that may date to a similar
period and be from an individual with a huntergatherer subsistence pattern is the New Mexico
case. It is listed by Hrdlicka (1933) as being “collected by Edgar B. Howard” and was found in a
cave west of Carlsbad, New Mexico. Howard did
excavate several Basketmaker Period (2000 B.C.A.D. 500) burials in Burnett Cave (Heffner 1932)
before Hrdlicka’s report was published in 1933.
Radiocarbon Dates and Isotope Results
Five Native American tribes were contacted
about the remains in order to alert them of the remains and potential cultural affiliation. After analysis of the associated dart points, the preponderance
of the evidence indicated the Wichita and Affiliated

221

Tribes and the Caddo Nation of Oklahoma were
culturally affiliated with the human remains and
NAGPRA consultation occurred. The Caddo Nation deferred any decisions regarding the remains
to the Wichita and Affiliated Tribes.
With the permission of the Wichita and Affiliated Tribes, cortical bone from the femora of two
individuals was submitted to Beta Analytic, Inc.
for radiocarbon dating. These bone segments were
chosen due to the good cortical bone preservation
and the fact that the fragments could be specified
as belonging to two different individuals. Beta
Analytic, Inc. reported that bone collagen was
well preserved and each sample provided adequate
amounts of carbon for the analysis and measurements to proceed normally.
Segments of bone were randomly chosen from
two individuals, with samples taken from Femur
No. 5 and No. 7. Each bone sample was washed
with deionized water, the surface was scraped free
of the outer layers, a small portion was crushed
gently, and a cold and dilute hydrochloric acid was
applied until the apatite was removed. Any rootlets
present among the collagen were removed. A sodium hydroxide (NaOH) pretreatment was applied
to be certain no secondary organic acids were present (Beta Analytic collagen extraction protocols,
http://www.radiocarbon.com/pretreatment-carbondating.htm, accessed August 22, 2012).
Radiocarbon analysis results indicate the
remains date to the Late Archaic period (1500
B.C. to A.D. 600; Table 6). The conventional
radiocarbon age on Femur No. 5 was 3010 ± 30
B.P. (Beta-327106), with a two sigma calibration of 1130-1380 B.C. The Femur No. 7 has a
conventional radiocarbon age of 2860 ± 30 B.P.
(Beta-327107), and a two sigma calibrated age
range of 930-1120 B.C.
The lack of overlap in the dates indicates that
these two individuals had not been alive at the
same time. The insufficient contextual data associated with the excavation prevents evaluating
the depositional relationship of the remains. Since
we are unsure of the exact association of the remains and whether the remains were articulated or
disturbed, we offer three scenarios that may have
resulted in the differing radiocarbon ages. One,
the burial pit could have been re-opened for subsequent burial of individuals on multiple occasions.
Due to the good preservation of the cortical bone,
it is more likely that the remains were covered
between burial events if this scenario occurred.

222

Texas Archeological Society
Table 6. Radiocarbon δ13C and δ15N results from 41DL8.

Sample

Conventional
RadiocarbonAge

Intercept

2 Sigma Calibration

1 Sigma Calibration

13C/12C

15N/14N

Femur 5

3010 ± 30 B.P.

B.C. 1260

B.C. 1310 to 1260
B.C. 1240 to 1210

- 19.6

+ 9.6

Femur 7

2860 ± 30 B.P.

B.C. 1010

B.C. 1380 to 1340
B.C. 1320 to 1190
B.C. 1180 to 1160
B.C. 1140 to 1130

B.C. 1050 to 1000

- 18.4

+ 9.5

B.C. 1120 to 970
B.C. 960 to 930

Two, at least one of the individuals, represented by
Femur No. 5, was bundled and retained until being
interred with the individual represented by Femur
No. 7 and the additional two undated individuals.
Since radiocarbon dates were not obtained for the
other two individuals due to financial constraints,
it is unknown if they had been bundled or died at
the same time as the Femur No. 7 individual, and
three, a minor discrepancy in the preservation of
the collagen could have resulted in the 10 year gap
between the beginning and ending of the two sigma
age ranges. It would have been difficult to dig into
a grave without disturbing the original burial. Due
to the dearth of contextual evidence, it is difficult
to assess whether the burials had been disturbed by
multiple interments.
When obtaining radiocarbon dates on bone, it
is important that nitrogen isotope values are also
obtained. This is due to the fact that the consumption of fish can result in a reservoir affect requiring
a correction to radiocarbon dates in individuals with
an aquatic component to the diet (Cook et al. 2001).
Although archeological evidence did not support
an interpretation that fishing was a component of
the Late Archaic diet, little is known regarding the
diet during this period in the North Texas area. Additionally, with the proximity of the burials to the
riverine environment, it is logical to conclude that
there was the possibility that the inhabitants relied
on fish for a portion of their diet and exploited the
aquatic resources near the burial site. Nitrogen isotope analysis was performed on the same portion of
bone removed and treated, as described above, for
radiocarbon dating. Results from δ13C were calculated during the radiocarbon dating analyses.
Nitrogen isotope analysis not only provides
important information needed for the proper

correction of radiocarbon dates on bone, but also
provides significant information on protein consumption and the type of protein being consumed,
whether terrestrial or aquatic. The carbon isotope
δ13C also provides information regarding the types
of plant material being consumed, whether C3
plants (grasses, trees, shrubs, tubers, or walnuts)
or C4 plants (maize, amaranth, and chenopodia).
Consumption of CAM plants (cacti and succulents)
have values that overlap with C3 and C4 plants
and their consumption can be identified as well
(Bousman and Quigg 2006). Ratios of δ13C can be
affected by the type of plants consumed by animals
used as protein sources in humans. For example,
bison and marine animals may consume a diet with
more C4 than C3 plants, resulting in a less negative
δ13C value than animals feeding on a C3 based diet.
This can alter the δ13C values of humans who have
a diet high in these types of protein sources.
Due to the lack of research on faunal isotope
values for North Texas, comparisons and interpretations are based on general published averages of
δ13C values (Larsen 1997; Schoeninger and Moore
1992), δ15N values (Schoeninger and Moore 1992;
Bousman and Quigg 2006; Cook et al. 2001), and
interpretations of values reported from other Archaic
and Woodland burials in Texas (Bousman and Quigg
2006). Enrichment values, differences in the preypredator values of carbon and nitrogen in the bone
collagen, are based on the case studies of Bocherens
and Drucker (2003), indicating δ13C values will
increase 0-2% and δ15N will increase 3-5%.
Isotope values of consumers of a diet based on
C3 plants will generally have δ13C values ranging
from -22% to -38% (Larsen 1997), or -20% to -24%,
averaging approximately -26% (Schoeninger and
Moore 1992). Those with a diet mostly comprised

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard
of C4 foods will have stable carbon isotope values
that range from -9% to -21% (Larsen 1997) or -9%
to -16%, with a mode of -12% (Schoeninger and
Moore 1992). Consumers of cactus and succulents
will have a range falling somewhere between the
two, with rates closer to C4 (Schoeninger and Moore
1992). Bousman and Quigg (2006) place the division between C3 and CAM/ C4 diets at -14% δ13C.
Nitrogen values for terrestrial diets generally fall
between +8% to +10% δ15N. Evidence of fish or marine protein sources generally results in higher δ15N
values, above +12% (calculated from Schoeninger
and Moore [1992] data). However, data from Katzenberg and Weber (1999) indicates some fish may
have lower δ15N, with one reported as +7.3%, and
that fish δ15N can widely vary (Cook et al. 2001).
Thus, future studies in the isotope values of terrestrial and freshwater resources in the North Texas
region would be extremely useful in interpreting
subsistence patterns since a baseline from the local
animals is needed to accurately calculate enrichment values.
The δ15N values at +9.5% and +9.6% from
Femora No. 5 and No. 7 indicate the neither of the
individuals consumed freshwater fish (Table 7). The
values fall within the typical values of a terrestrialbased diet, in which individuals consumed mammals such as deer and elk. Therefore, although they
resided, or were buried, next to a riverine environment, fish were not exploited by these individuals
for protein resources. If we compare these values to
results found in Shoeninger and Moore (1992), the
meat consumption is consistent with mule deer at
Pecos Pueblo (δ15N between 9-11%). The protein
consumption was likely focused on browsing mammals such as deer and on nuts, both of which were
likely in abundance in the area.
The δ13C data, at -19.6% and -18.4% (see Tables
6 and 7), indicate a dietary concentration on C3
plants and consumption of protein sources that relied
more heavily on C3 plants for their diet. Although
slightly outside the range stated by Schoeninger and
Moore (1992) of -20% to -34%, the values represent
a diet almost purely based on C3 plants with the
individuals from Lake Ray Hubbard probably
consuming some C4 plant materials, CAM (cactus
or succulents), or an occasional bison, resulting in
the slightly higher δ13C values. When compared
to the CAM-based diets reported in Bousman and
Quigg (2006), it is easily discerned that the values
reflect a greater C3 component in their diet. Only
a few individuals from Seminole Sink have δ13C

223

values comparable to the individuals from Lake
Ray Hubbard. Thus, the δ13C and δ15N values for
both individuals indicate they had a hunter-gatherer
subsistence pattern focused on browsing mammals
and wild plant foods.
These results are consistent with the overall
subsistence patterns reported for Cooper Lake sites
in the upper Sulphur River basin dating to the same
time period (Fields 2004). Late Archaic subsistence
patterns from this East Texas area entailed hunting
of animals found in woodland and woodland-edge
areas, with gathering of wild plant foods, including
nuts, tubers, and seeds. Fields (2004) reports use
of aquatic environments within the hunting zone;
however, the isotope values from Lake Ray Hubbard do not suggest the use of freshwater resources.
ASSOCIATED FUNERARY OBJECTS
Besides the presence of several pieces of finegrained quartzite lithic debris, the only artifacts
found directly associated with the grave were seven
dart points (Figure 8 and Table 8). Each point is
almost complete and the tip of dart point 1 was
found during matrix washing. The three incomplete points are missing the tip or the base. The
points were inspected by a variety of authorities
and their consensus is that the points are probably
early Late Archaic in age (Elton Prewitt, personal
communication 2012; Karl Kibler, personal communication 2012; and Dan McGregor, personal
communication 2012). All three reviewers stated
that the points are similar to Untyped Group 1 dart
points described from the Higginbotham site at
Lake Waco (Mehalchick and Kibler 2008:300-307)
that have been dated between 380-1270 B.C. at that
site. However, all three authorities agree that the
stems of the specimens from 41DL8 are too short
for the points to fit into that group of dart points.
Several of the dart points have evidence of
having been reworked. There is no evidence that
the raw materials were heat-treated before they
were manufactured. The raw materials listed in
Table 8 were identified by Larry Banks of Paradise, Texas (personal communication 2012) and
Don Wyckoff of Norman, Oklahoma (personal
communication 2012). Detailed descriptions of the
three raw materials are provided by Banks (1990).
The Edwards chert is from Central Texas and is
distinct from the Uvalde or Ogallala gravel cherts
that are found in the Dallas/Fort Worth area (Banks

224

Texas Archeological Society
Table 7. Human δ13C and δ15N Values from 41DL8 and other Texas Archaic sites.

Site

Trinomial

Sample

Lake Ray Hubbard
Lake Ray Hubbard
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Bering Sinkhole
Conejo shelter
Conejo shelter
Conejo shelter
Conejo shelter
Skyline Shelter

41DL8
41DL8
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41KR241
41VV162
41VV162
41VV162
41VV162
41VV930

RHB#5FEMUR
RHB#7FEMUR
CCNR-68032
CCNR-38033
CCNR-38034
CCNR-38035
CCNR-38036
CCNR-38037
CCNR-38038
CCNR-38039
CCNR-38040
CCNR-38041
CCNR-38042
CCNR-38043
CCNR-38044
CCNR-38045
CCNR-38046
CCNR-38047
1
2
3
4
1

Seminole Sink

41VV620

1755

Seminole Sink
Seminole Sink
Seminole Sink
Seminole Sink
Seminole Sink
Seminole Sink
Seminole Sink
ELCOR Cave
ELCOR Cave

41VV620

541

41VV620

798.1

41VV620

70

41VV620

571

41VV620

1527.9

41VV620

1450

41VV620
X41CV12
X41CV12

171

Skull 1
Skull 5

Component

δ13C

δ15N

Early Late Archaic
Early Late Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Archaic
Middle Archaic
Middle Archaic
Middle Archaic
Middle Archaic
Early Archaic
Early Archaic
Early Archaic
Early Archaic
Early Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Archaic

-19.6
-18.4
-16.7
-16.5
-17.5
-15.9
-16.1
-16.5
-15.8
-16.2
-16.0
-15.2
-16.6
-15.2
-15.2
-14.3
-14.9
-13.7
-12.6
-13.9
-12.6
-14.6
-15.7

9.6
9.5
8.1
9.7
8.2
7.5
7.1
7.7
7.8
6.9
7.3
7.5
8.3
9.0
7.4
8.5
9.6
8.8
10.2
12.6
10.5
16.6
5.3

Early Archaic

-15.5

Early Archaic
Early Archaic
Early Archaic
Early Archaic
Early Archaic
Early Archaic
Early Archaic
Late Archaic
Late Archaic

-13.2
-18.1
-18.4
-13.7
-22.1
-12.0
-11.4

-13.0
-12.3

Adapted from Bousman and Quigg (2006:Table 1) and Skinner (1978:Table 1) with Lake Ray Hubbard data added.

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard

225

Figure 8. Dart points 1-7 from 41DL8.

Table 8. Description of Dart Points from Site 41DL8.
Dart
Point

LxWxTh
(mm)

Grams

Raw
Matl*

1

53.39x29.54x7.43

9.6

OQ

2

79.11x33.87x6.86

19.1+

ED

3

63.59x30.02x7.98

12.4

ED

4

60.93+x38.13x6.27

15.1+

ED

5

47.26x30.72x6.27

6.6

OQ

6

53.51+x29.47x7.28

10.3+

ED

7

48.03+x30.91x6.97

8.6+

JV

Description
Straight blade edges, barbed shoulders, corner notched,
straight stem edges and base

Straight and convex blade edges, barbed shoulders, corner
notched, straight stem edges, base missing
Straight blade edges, barbed shoulders, corner notched,
convex stem edges and straight base

Slightly convex blade edges, pronounced barbed shoulders,
corner notched, and base missing
Straight blade edges, strong barbed shoulders, corner
notched, straight stem edges, slightly convex base

Tip missing, slightly convex blade edges, barbed shoulders,
corner notched, straight stem edges and base
Slightly convex blade edges, barbed shoulders, corner
notched, slightly expanding stem edges, base uncertain

*OQ=Ogalalla quartzite, ED=Edwards chert, JV=Johns Valley chert

226

Texas Archeological Society

1990:60-61). Ogallala quartzite (Banks 1990:5657) is found in the upland gravel fields in North
Central Texas (Byrd 1971; Menzer and Slaughter
1971; Trask 2005). The Johns Valley chert is from
southern Oklahoma but actually contains older Arkansas River gravels that were mixed in the more
recent Johns Valley formation (Banks 1990:45-47).
CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
The discovery of four prehistoric Native
American skeletons associated in a single pit at
41DL8 presents the opportunity to review a wealth
of information about prehistoric burials from sites
in the well-studied East Fork watershed. Burials from 14 sites (Figure 9) in the watershed are
tabulated below (Table 9) based on a compilation
provided by W.W. Crook, III (personal communication 2012) and with the addition of more recent
information from sites along Spring Creek (Peter
and Clow 2000; Linder-Linsley 1996) and Rowlett
Creek (Cliff et al. 1996; Hibbs and Hibbs 2006)
above where it empties into Lake Ray Hubbard.
This sample represents the results of extensive archeological investigations by various professionals
and avocationals of this North Central Texas watershed; all of the sites except 41DL8 and 41DL396
date to the Late Prehistoric (ca. A.D. 800-1400).
Comparable data are not presently available from
other watersheds in the Trinity River basin, such as
the Elm Fork, West Fork, Mountain Creek, White
Rock Creek, Richland/Chambers Creeks, and
Cedar Creek, although major investigations have
been done in each of these areas. In addition, no
comparable mass of information is available from
the upper parts of the Neches, Sabine, Sulphur, or
Brazos River watersheds.
In part, this opportunity is due to the foresight
of the members of the DAS to get permission to
conduct excavations before lake construction began after World War II throughout the East Fork
valley. Subsequent studies at Lake Lavon and Lake
Ray Hubbard were further facilitated because DAS
members had published the results of their studies
in their journal, The Record. This publication highlighted the presence of sites containing features,
such as Wylie Focus pits and house floors, as well
as site locations that are near the margin of the
Caddo archeological area, and emphasized that site
and artifact preservation was excellent.

Site 41DL8 stands out from the other sites
listed in Table 9 because it is the only site that dates
to the Late Archaic and where seven dart points
are associated with the four adult male skeletons
that were discovered. While evidence of Late Prehistoric occupation was implied for the site when
it was first recorded and again when Lake Ray
Hubbard was surveyed for archeological sites, the
presence of the seven dart points in association
with the radiocarbon-dated remains indicates that
these remains represent the oldest known burial
along the East Fork.
The summary of burials within the Lake Lavon
and East Fork watershed in Table 9 also reveals a
pattern unusual to North Texas. An apparent Late
Prehistoric pattern of interring multiple individuals
within a single pit is demonstrated by the reported
findings of 95 burials at 13 other sites that occur
in the middle reaches of the East Fork watershed
between Interstate Highway 20 and the upper end
of Lake Lavon. The burials contain a combination
of adults or adults and children in flexed positions.
On the East Fork, including 41DL8, 57 individuals were buried individually in flexed positions,
while the remaining 42 individuals were buried in
a total of 12 pits in multiples of from two to seven.
The majority of skeletons were adults and it is
expected that infants are under-represented since
their remains are more friable and do not survive
well and/or may be buried in a separate location
from adults.In rare cases decapitated bodies were
apparently placed in pits but with no grave goods
except that Burial 40 at the Lower Rockwall site
had three dart points in it.
A review of the literature reveals that sites
with burials are not reported for the area upstream
from Lake Lavon nor are any reported at sites south
from Interstate 20 to the Trinity River junction.
Upstream in Dallas County, burials are reported
from the White Rock Spillway site (Kirkland
and Harris 1941; Harris 1949; Hatzenbuehler and
Harris 1949), from the Dalbey site (Skinner et
al. 2005), and from Mountain Creek (Peter and
McGregor 1988:113-115; Skinner et al. 2007:1).
Of these burials, no confirmed multiple burials are
reported; however Feature 1 at the Baggett Branch
site (41DL149) at Joe Pool Lake could have been
a grave with two individuals but the description
is inconclusive (Peter and McGregor 1988). Otherwise, all the reported burials from these areas
are single interments, had few or no artifacts, and
appear to be Late Prehistoric in age. Almost no

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard

227

Figure 9. Sites with multiple burials shown on a map of major watersheds in North Texas.

Table 9. East Fork Watershed Burial Descriptions.
Site
Hogge Bridge
(41COL1)

Bur#*

Offerings

1

1

None

2

1

None

3

5

None

4

2

None

5

1

None

7

2

None

8

1

8” bone awl

6

Butler Hole
(41COL2)

Bodies

1

None

Description

Reference

Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; in pit rim

Stephenson 1952

Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; in pit rim
2 males, infant, female,
adolescent; flexed and
superimposed; in pit rim

2 adults undetermined sex;
both flexed; in pit rim

Adult male; flexed; in pit rim
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; in pit rim

2 adults undetermined sex;
both flexed; in pit rim

Child undetermined sex;
flexed on left side; outside pit

Housewright and
Wilson 1942

228

Texas Archeological Society
Table 9. (Continued)

Site

Bur#*

Bodies

Offerings

Description

9

1

13 bone flaking tools

10

1

None

Adult undetermined sex;
flexed on left side facing west;
outside pit

11

2

12

1

Conch shell
gorget, bone
flaking tool

Branch
(41COL9)

13

1

None

14

1

None

Upper
Farmersville
(41COL34)

15

1

8 Bison
scapula hoes

16

2

17

1

Sanders Engraved water
bottle

18

1

Boatstone

19

1

None

20

1

None

21

1

22

6

3 bone beads,
mano, bone
awl, 6 polished stones,
mussel shell
paint pot

23

3

None

24

1

25

1

Gary dart
point

Sister Grove
(41COL36)

None

11 bone beads

None

None

Reference

Adult undetermined sex;
cremated; outside pit

Adult male and child; flexed
with adult holding child;
outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit

Crook, personal
communication

Adolescent undetermined sex;
flexed with left side facing
east; outside pit
Adult male and female; flexed
facing each other; outside pit
Child undetermined sex;
flexed on left side facing west;
outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
cremation; outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit

Child undetermined sex;
flexed on left side facing west;
in pit rim

Adults undetermined sex;
unflexed no orientation; in pit
rim
Adults undetermined sex; no
orientation, decapitated; in
pit rim
Adult female; flexed on left
side facing east; in pit rim
Adult female; flexed on left
side facing east; in pit rim

Lynott 1975;
Hanna 1940

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard

229

Table 9. (Continued)
Site

Lower
Rockwall
(41RW1)

Bur#*

Bodies

Offerings

Description

26

1

None

27

1

None

Adult male; flexed on left side
with 3 arrow points in ribs;
outside pit

28

1

None

29

1

Bone tools
nearby

30

1

31

1

Bone tools
nearby

Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit

32

1

33

1

Bone tools
nearby

Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit

34

1

35

1

36

1

37

1

38

1

39

1

40

1

41

1

None

42

1

Calcite crystals

Bone tools
nearby

Bone tools
nearby
Bone tools
nearby
Bone tools
nearby
Bone tools
nearby
Boatstone,
knife
None

Dart point,
scraper, round
stone
None

Reference

Adult undetermined sex;
flexed on left side facing east;
outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed on left side facing east;
outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit

Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit

Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed; outside pit

Adult male; flexed on left side
facing north; outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
badly disturbed; outside pit

Adult undetermined sex;
flexed on left side facing west;
outside pit
Adult male; decapitated with
3 embedded dart points; in
pit rim

Adult female (skull only); facing west; in pit rim
Adult female; flexed on left
side facing west; inside pit

Blair 1960; Lorrain
et al. 1968

230

Texas Archeological Society
Table 9. (Continued)

Site

Bur#*

Bodies

Offerings

Description

Reference

Upper Rockwall (41RW2)

43

7

Adults undetermined sex; no
orientation; outside pit

44

1

Bone needles,
awls, arrow
points nearby

Ross 1966; Harris
1948, 1960; Harris, Perkins, and
Sollberger 1957;
Sollberger and Harris 1949

45

1

None

46

Adult undetermined sex;
cremation; outside pit

Glen Hill
(41RW4)

Dart point;
208 conch
shell beads

Adult undetermined sex;
cremation with red ochre;
outside pit

1

None

47

1

None

Adult undetermined sex;
flexed on left side facing west;
outside pit

48

1

None

49

1

None

50

1

None

51

1

52

1

13 conch shell Adult undetermined sex;
beads
bundle burial facing west;
outside pit

53

1

54

1

55

1

56

None

Shell beads,
Sanders Engraved vessel,
worked shell

Adult undetermined sex;
cremation; outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
flexed on left side facing
north; outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
cremation; outside pit
Child undetermined sex;
flexed on left side facing
south; outside pit

Adult undetermined sex;
bundle burial disarticulated;
outside pit
Adult female; flexed on left
side facing south; inside pit

Conch shell
beads

Adult female; flexed on back
facing east; inside pit

1

None

57

1

None

Adult male; flexed on right
side facing west; in pit rim

58

1

None

59

1

None

None

Adult male; flexed on right
side facing east; in pit rim

Adult male; flexed on left side
facing north; dart point in
chest; in pit
Adult male; flexed on left side
facing north; inside pit
Child undetermined sex;
flexed on left side facing
north; inside pit

Ross 1966

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard

231

Table 9. (Continued)
Site

Bur#*

Bodies

Offerings

60

1

61

1

Dart point, red Adult female; flexed on left
ochre
side facing east; in pit rim

62

1

None

63

1

None

64

1

None

Ragland
(41KF4)

65

2

None

Spring Creek
(41DL373)

66

1

None

Harbor Pointe
(41DL369)

67

4

Shell gorget
and 16 shell
beads

41DL396

68

3

None

41DL8

69

4

TOTAL
14 sites

69
burials

99
skeletons

7 early Late
Archaic dart
points

Gilkey Hill
(41DL406)

None

Description

Reference

Adult female; flexed on back
facing south; inside pit
Adult female; flexed on left
side facing east; outside pit

Child undetermined sex;
flexed on left side facing east;
outside pit
Adult undetermined sex;
cremation; outside pit

Adult female and child; unflexed on left side facing east;
outside pit

Approximately 50 year old fe- Linder-Linsley
male; dated A.D. 1155-1275. 1996; Peter and
Clow 2000
2 adult males, adult female,
and sub-adult less than 12
years old; dated A.D. 10101165.

Cliff et al. 1996

4 adult males; flexed in a pit,
dated early Late Archaic

This article

3 males, 2 adults and a 12
year old child; semi-flexed in
a pit

Hibbs and Hibbs
2006

57 single interments
12 multiple interments
41 burials without artifacts
28 burials with artifacts

*Burial numbers are arbitrarily assigned.

burials were found and reported at excavations in
the West Fork and the Elm Fork watersheds and
the few found were also single interments with no
associated grave goods. A burial containing two
flexed females and an expanding stem dart point
is reported from the Pecan Springs site (Sorrow
1966:8) at Lake Bardwell, in Ellis County.
To the east, no multiple burials were found
in the Sulphur River watershed despite years of
excavation at nearby Cooper Lake and only single
interments are reported from Lake Fork Reservoir
(Bruseth and Perttula 1981) and the Yarbrough site

(Johnson 1962:220-224) in the upper Sabine River
watershed. No burials were found at the Limerick
site at Lake Tawakoni (Duffield 1961), but it was
noted that artifacts from the site do not show any
affinity to those described from Wylie focus sites
in the adjacent East Fork watershed (Duffield
1961:111-112). Certainly, Late Prehistoric sites in
the East Fork watershed are not considered to be
Caddo by the Caddo Nation or by most authors.
The only comparable data come from the Sanders
site (41LR2) in Lamar County (Krieger 1946:175;
Jackson et al. 2000) where 60 individuals were

232

Texas Archeological Society

uncovered and 12 were in individual graves and the
remaining 48 were in nine graves each containing
from three to eight bodies. Other Red River Caddo
sites and multiple burial graves have been reported
downstream at the Sam Kaufman (Roitsch) site
(Skinner et al. 1969:26-36) and the Belcher Mound
site (Webb 1959:66-116).
In the East Fork, grave goods were found in
less than half of the graves and the common artifact
types are bone tools and marine shell ornaments. No
locally made pottery is reported to have been found
with any of the burials and Caddo Sanders Engraved
pottery (a water bottle and another vessel) is the only
pottery type reported as funerary offerings. Miscellaneous artifacts include dart points but not arrow
points, a boatstone, a mano, a mussel shell paint pot,
a chipped stone knife, calcite crystals, a round stone,
and red ochre. Grave goods are not as prominent as
they are in the Caddo area to the east and northeast.
In summary, the discovery of an early Late Archaic burial pit containing four adult male Native
Americans is consistent with a Late Prehistoric pattern in parts of the Upper Trinity River watershed of
burying multiple individuals in a single burial pit. This
pattern appears to be primarily unique to the East Fork
basin within the Trinity River watershed. Elsewhere,
single interment is the primary burial pattern. However, the grave at 41DL8 appears to be an exception
since the associated dart points and the radiocarbon
dates indicate that at least two of the individuals had
been placed in the ground more than 1500 years before the Late Prehistoric sites (Wylie Focus) listed in
Table 9. This lends support to the argument that the
Wylie Focus is a concept (Bruseth and Martin 1987)
that needs further exploration (Crook and Hughston
2015:158-160). The investigation at 41DL8 supports
an interpretation that Late Prehistoric occupants of the
East Fork valley were linear descendants of earlier Late
Archaic Native Americans
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to thank the following people and
groups for their assistance during this investigation. First we want to thank Steve Wallace for
discovering the bones, recognizing their importance, and notifying the responsible authorities.
The Dallas Police Department (DPD) Homicide
Division is to be thanked for stepping forward in
evaluating the discovery site and contacting the
office of the Dallas Medical Examiner. DPD also
provided security for the discovery location before

and through the excavations done by ARC. The
University of North Texas Forensic Laboratory
conducted preliminary exposure and demonstrated
that the bones were prehistoric and archeological.
Terry Holmes and Bertram Vanderberg of Dallas
Water Utilities arranged to get the discovery site
investigated and assisted with coordination with
the Wichita and Affiliated Tribes. Excavation was
done by the senior author who was assisted by
Katy Pocklington. The soil matrix was processed
by the ARC office staff including Rachel Hearn and
Molly Hall. W.W. “Dub” Crook, Jr. of the Houston
Archeological Society provided us with burial
information from a manuscript on Collin County
archeology that he and Mark Hughston have now
published. Terri Parton, President, and Gary McAdams, Cultural Planner, of the Wichita and Affiliated Tribes, facilitated approval of radiocarbon
dating of two femur fragments and the repatriation
of the bones and funerary artifacts. Radiocarbon
dates were processed at Beta Analytic, Inc. and the
cost was underwritten by ARC. A cedar box for the
remains was made by Justin Boxwell.
REFERENCES CITED
Banks, L. D.
1990 From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A
Review of Lithic Sources in the Trans-Mississippi
South, the Southern Plains, and Adjacent Southwest.
Memoir #4. Oklahoma Anthropological Society,
Norman.
Barnes, E.
1994 Development Defects of the Axial Skeleton in Paleopathology. University Press of Colorado, Niwot,
Colorado.
Barrett, C., W. Cavallari, and P. W. Sciulli
2001 Estimation of Sex from the Talus in Prehistoric Native Americans. Collegium Antropolicum
25(1):13-19.
Blair, B.
1960 A Burial at Lower Rockwall. The Record 15(1):5-6.
Bocherens, H. and D. Drucker
2003 Trophic Level Isotopic Enrichment of Carbon and
Nitrogen in Bone Collagen: Case Studies from
Recent and Ancient Terrestrial Ecosystems. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology 13:46-53.
Bousman, C. B. and M. Quigg
2006 Stable Carbon Isotopes from Archaic Human Remains in the Chihuahuan Desert and Central Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 51(198):123-139.

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard

233

Bruseth, J. E. and W. A. Martin
1987 The Wylie Focus: Cultural Reality or Archaeological Myth? In The Bird Point Island and Adams
Ranch Sites, Methodological and Theoretical
Contributions to North Central Texas Archaeology, edited by J. E. Bruseth and W. A. Martin, pp.
267-284. Richland Creek Technical Series Volume
II. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for
the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Duffield, L. F.
1961 The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 30:51-116.

Bruseth, J. E. and T. K. Perttula
1981 Prehistoric Settlement Patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir. Report No. 2. Texas Antiquities Permit Series,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Genovés, Santiago
1967 Proportionality of the Long Bones and their Relation
to Stature among Mesoamericans. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology 26:67-78.

Buikstra, J. and D. Ubelaker (editors)
1994 Standards for Data Collection from Human Skeletal
Remains. Research Series No. 44. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Gorlin, R. J., H. V. Toriello, and M. M. Cohen, Jr.
1995 Hereditary Hearing Loss and Its Syndromes. Oxford
Monographs on Medical Genetics No. 28. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

Byrd, C.L.
1971 Origin and History of the Uvalde Gravels of Central
Texas. Baylor Geological Studies Bulletin 20, Waco.

Hanna, H., Jr.
1940 A Burial in Collin County. The Record 1(9):37-38.

Capasso, L., K. A. R. Kennedy, and C. A. Wilczak
1999 Atlas of Occupational Markers on Human Remains.
1st Edition. Journal of Paleontology Monographic
Publication Edigrafital S.p.A., Teramo, Italy.
Cliff, M. B., D. E. Peter, S. M. Hunt, D. Shannabrook, T.
Carter, and V. Green
1996 Archeological Evaluation of the Harbor Point Site
(41DL369), Dallas County, Texas. Miscellaneous
Report of Investigations No. 120. Geo-Marine, Inc.,
Plano.
Coffee, D. R., R. H. Hill, and D. D. Ressel
1980 Soil Survey of Dallas County, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station, Washington, D.C.
Cook, G. T., C. Bonsall, R. E. M. Hedges, K. McSweeney,
V. Boronean, and P. B. Pettitt
2001 A Freshwater Diet Derived 14C Reservoir Effect at
the Stone Age. Radiocarbon 43(2A):453-460.
Crook, W. W. III and M. D. Hughston
2015 The Late Prehistoric of the East Fork. A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts Along the East Fork of
the Trinity River, North Central Texas. CreateSpace,
Charleston, SC.
Doehner, K. and R. E. Larson
1978 Archaeological Research at the Proposed Cooper
Lake, Northeast Texas, 1974-1975. Research Report 108. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

Fields, R. C.
2004 The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of EastCentral Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by
T. K. Perttula, pp. 347-369. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.

Hanna, H., Jr. and R. K. Harris
1948 Burial 5, Site 27B1-1. The Record 7(2):35-37.
Harris, R. K.
1945 Bone Implement Burial, Collin County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 16:84-89.
1947 An Infant Burial. The Record 6(4):18-19.

1948 Two Cremated Burials: Site 27B1-1 (RW1). The
Record 7(2):7-9.
1949 Burial 7, Site 27A5-19. The Record 7(7):24-25.

1960 Burial 1, Site 27BI-2 Rockwall County and Burial 5,
Site 18D4-1, Collin County. The Record 15(2):8-10.
Harris, R. K., J. Perkins, and J. B. Sollberger
1957 Burials 6, 7, 8 and 9. Site 27B1-1. The Record
14(3):12-15.
Harris, R. K. and D. A. Suhm (editors)
1963 An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of
Forney Reservoir, Collin, Dallas, Kaufman, and
Rockwall Counties, Texas. Report submitted to the
National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project. The University of Texas, Austin.
Hatzenbuehler, R. and R. K. Harris
1949 Burial 5, Site 27A5-19. The Record 7(6):21-22.
Hawkey D. and C. F. Merbs
1995 Activity-Induced Musculoskeletal Stress Markers
(MSM) and Subsistence Strategy Changes Among
Ancient Hudson Bay Eskimos. International Journal
of Osteoarchaeology 5:324-338.

234

Texas Archeological Society

Heffner, E. H.
1932 Archaeological News: Notes on Recent Archaeological Excavations and Discoveries, Other News.
American Journal of Archaeology 36(1):43-73.

Larsen, C. S.
1997 Bioarchaeology: Interpreting Behavior from the
Human Skeleton. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Hibbs, T. and M. Hibbs
2006 Ray Hubbard Reservoir Burial Site (41DL396). The
Record 54:12-15.

Lieu, J. E.
2004 Speech-language and educational consequences of
unilateral hearing loss in children. Arch Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg. 130(5):524-30.

Hodges, D. C., L. A. Harker, and S. J. Schermer
1990 Atresia of the External Acustic Meatus in Prehistoric
Populations. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 83:77-81.
Housewright, R. and L. Wilson
1942 A Flaking Tool Burial at Butler Hole, Collin County,
Texas. The Record 3(7):40-44.
Hrdlicka, A.
1933 Seven Prehistoric American Skulls with Complete
Absence of External Auditory Meatus. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 17:355-377.
Humes, L. E., S. K. Allen, and F. H. Bass
1980 Horizontal Sound Localization Skills of Unilaterally
Hearing-Impaired Children. Audiology 19:508-518.
Jackson, A. T., M. S. Goldstein, and A. D. Krieger
2000 The 1931 Excavations at the Sanders Site, Lamar
County, Texas, Notes on the Fieldwork, Human
Osteology, and Ceramics. Archival Series 2. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1962 The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern
Texas, With a Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe
Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32:141-284.
Katzenberg, M. A. and A. Weber
1999 Stable Isotope Ecology and Palaeodiet in the Lake
Baikal Region of Siberia. Journal of Archaeological
Science 26:651-659.
Kirkland, F. and R. K. Harris
1941 Two Burials Below the White Rock Lake Spillway.
The Record 2(10):49-54.
Krieger, A. D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas with Extension of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. The University of Texas, Austin.
Lamendin, H., E. Baccino, J. F. Humbert, J.C. Tavernier, R.
M. Nossintchouk, and A. Zerilli
1992 A Simple Technique for Age Estimation in Adult
Corpses: The Two Criteria Dental Method. Journal
of Forensic Sciences 37(5):1373-1379.

Linder-Linsley, S. E.
1996 Spring Creek Park Preserve: Excavation of Human
Remains: Site 41DL373, Dallas County, Texas. Draft
Report on file, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Lorrain, D., N. Hoffrichter, and B. Butler
1968 The Lower Rockwall Site, Rockwall County, Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park Service by the
Salvage Project. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Lovejoy, O.
1985 Dental Wear in the Libben Population: Its Functional
Pattern and Role in the Determination of Adult Skeletal Age at Death. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 68:47-56.
Lynott, M. J.
1975 Archaeological Excavations at Lake Lavon 1974.
Contribution in Anthropology No. 16. Department
of Anthropology, Institute for the Study of Earth and
Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Malina, R. M. and C. A. Bramblett
1981 Skeletal and Dental Materials from the Ernest Witte
(41AU36) and LeonardK (41AU37) Sites. In Aliens
Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the
Lower Brazos River Valley, Texas, by G. D. Hall, pp.
325-352. Research Report No. 61. Texas Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at Austin.
Martin, W. A.
1987 The Adams Ranch Site. In The Bird Point Island and
Adams Ranch Sites, Methodological and Theoretical
Contributions to North Central Texas Archaeology,
edited by J. E. Bruseth and W. A. Martin, pp. 199264. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume II.
Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the
Study of Earth and Man. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Masnicova, S. and R. Benus
2001 Atresia of an External Acoustic Meatus in an Individual from Historical Bratislava (Slovakia). Anthropological Science 109(4):315-323.
Mehalchick, G. and K. W. Kibler
2008 Hunters and Gatherers of the North Bosque River
Valley: Excavations at the Baylor, Britton, McMillan, and Higginbotham Sites, Waco Lake, McLennan
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 156.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Whitley and Skinner—A Late Archaic Multiple Burial at Lake Ray Hubbard
Menzer, F. J. and B. H. Slaughter
1971 Upland Gravels in Dallas County and Their Bearing
on the Former Extent of the High Plains Physiographic
Province. Texas Journal of Science 22(2-3):217-222.
Navey, L.
1975 Human Skeletal Remains from the East Fork of
the Trinity River. In Archaeological Excavations
at Lake Lavon 1974, by M. J. Lynott, pp. 89-115.
Contributions in Anthropology No. 16. Department
of Anthropology, Institute for the Study of Earth and
Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Nunley, P.

1984 Letter Report: Preliminary Cultural Resources Survey of Portions of 111 Ranch Park, John Paul Jones
Expansion, and the Rowlett Creek Natural Area
Development, with addenda. Cultural Resources
Consultants, Dallas.
Peter, D. E. and V. G. Clow (editors)
2000 An Archeological and Osteological Investigation
of 41DL373, Spring Creek Park Preserve, Dallas
County, Texas. Miscellaneous Report of Investigations No. 186. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Peter, D. E. and D. E. McGregor
1988 Site 41DL184. In Late Holocene Prehistory of the
Mountain Creek Drainage, edited by D. E. Peter
and D. E. McGregor, pp. 199-244. Joe Pool Lake
Archaeological Project, Volume I. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth
and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Prince, D. and D. H. Ubelaker
2002 Application of Lamendin’s Adult Dental Aging
Technique to a Diverse Skeletal Sample. Journal of
Forensic Sciences 47(1):107-116.
Ross, R. E.
1966 The Upper Rockwall and Glen Hill Sites, Forney Reservoir, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project No. 9. The University of Texas at Austin.
Schoeninger, M. J. and K. Moore
1992 Bone Stable Isotope Studies in Archaeology. Journal
of World Prehistory 6(2):247-296.
Sciulli, P. W.
1997 Dental Evolution in Prehistoric Native Americans
of the Ohio Valley Area. I. Wear and Pathology. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology
7:507-524.
Skinner, S. A.
1978 A Secondary Burial Cache from West Texas. Journal
of Field Archaeology 5(4):484-489.

1980 Preadaptation for the Southern Cult in the Caddoan
Heartland. Louisiana Archaeology 6:207-221.

235

Skinner, S. A., R. K. Harris, and K. M. Anderson
1969 Archaeological Investigations at the Sam Kaufman
Site, Red River County, Texas. Contributions in
Anthropology No. 5. Department of Anthropology,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Skinner, S. A., J. Todd, and A. Todd
2007 The Ubil Site and the White Rock Escarpment. The
Record 55(1):1-47.
Skinner, S. A., C. B. Bousman, J. Todd, J. Craver, T. A. Jennings, L. Bush, and A. Tawater
2005 Archaeological Investigation at the Dalbey Site
(41DL350), Dallas, Texas. Cultural Resources Report 2005-35. AR Consultants, Inc., Dallas.
Sollberger, J. B. and R. K. Harris
1949 Burials 6 and 7, Site 27B1-1. The Record 7(8):27-28.
Sorrow, W. M.
1966 The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project
No. 10. The University of Texas at Austin.
Steele, D. G.
1976 The Estimation of Sex on the Basis of the Talus and
Calcaneus. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 45:581-588.
Steele, D. G. and C. A. Bramblett
1988 Anatomy and Biology of the Human Skeleton. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Steele, D. G. and T. W. McKern
1969 A Method for Assessment of Maximum Long Bone
Length and Living Stature from Fragmentary Long
Bones. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
31:215-28.
Stephenson, R. L.
1952 The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. American Antiquity 17:299-312.
Stodder, A. L.W. and A. J. Osterholtz
2010 Analysis of the Processed Human Remains from
the Sacred Ridge Site: Methods and Data collection
Protocol. In Animas-LaPlata Project Volume XV –
Bioarchaeology, edited by E. M. Perry, A. L.W. Stodder, and C. A. Bollong, pp. 243-278. Anthropological
Research Paper No. 10. Southwest Environmental
Consultants, Phoenix.
Swanston, T., Y. Carter, C. Hopkins, E. G. Walker, and D.
M. L. Cooper
2011 Developmental Fusion of the Malleus and Incus in
a Late 19th-Century Case of Aural Atresia. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology doi:10.1002/
oa.1286.

236

Texas Archeological Society

Trask, L. K.
2005 The Tealwood Uvalde Gravel Quarries of Mesquite,
Texas. The Record 52(October):1-3.
Trotter, M. and G. C. Gleser
1952 Estimation of Stature from Long Bones of American Whites and Negros Born Between 1840 and
1924. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
10:463-514.

1958 A Re-Evaluation of Estimation of Stature Based on
Measurements of Stature Taken During life and of
Long Bones After Death. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 47:355-356.
Webb, C. H.
1959 The Belcher Mound, A Stratified Caddoan Site in
Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Memoir 16. Society for
American Archaeology, Salt Lake City.

Wells, C
1962 Three Cases of Aural Pathology of Anglo-Saxon Date. Journal of Laryngology and Otology
76:931-933.
Wilbur, A. K.
1998 The Utility of Hand and Foot Bones for the Determination of Sex and the Estimation of Stature
in a Prehistoric Population from West-Central Illinois. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology
8:180-191.

The Discovery and Study of the Mexican War Mass Grave
at Resaca de la Palma
Thomas R. Hester

ABSTRACT
In early April 1967, a mass grave of Mexican soldiers war dead was excavated at Resaca de la Palma, the site
of the second battle of the Mexican War. The human remains, found accidentally during construction activities,
were reported to the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at The University of Texas and three students
who worked at the laboratory were sent to the locale near Brownsville. The mass grave was excavated and
documented, and the skeletal materials and associated artifacts were returned to Austin. Over a number of
years, the human remains, along with the artifacts, were analyzed, and results appeared in a Master’s thesis
and several scientific publications. In September 2008, the soldiers’ remains and artifacts were returned to the
Mexican Government for reinterment.

INTRODUCTION
In late March 1967, Dr. Dee Ann Story, Director of The University of Texas’ Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), received a
telephone call describing the discovery of human
bones at a housing subdivision constructed by
Alton Gloor of Brownsville (Figure 1). Dredging to develop a man-made, or artificial, lake
off the south side of the Resaca de la Palma had
exposed a mass grave. Dr. Story asked three of her
students, Michael B. Collins, Thomas R. Hester,
and Thomas Ellzey, to go from Austin to Brownsville to check out the reported discovery (Hester
1978:71; Westcott et al. 2012:19). She offered a
vehicle, and a little travel and gasoline money!
This three-person team arrived at Resaca de la
Palma on April 1. The following article chronicles
the excavation, study, and subsequent reinterment
of the remains.
BRIEF HISTORY OF THE BATTLE
The Battle of Resaca de la Palma (known to
the Mexican Army as the Resaca de la Guerrero
[DePalo 1997]) was the second military encounter
of the Mexican War, occurring on May 9, 1846,
the day after the Battle of Palo Alto on May 8
(Figure 2).

Ratliff (1994) states that 5000-6000 Mexican
troops fought under General Mariano Arista, with
about 2200 American soldiers commanded by
Brigadier General Zachary Taylor. The fighting
was fierce, described as hand-to-hand combat as
the Mexican soldiers were in thick brush (chaparral) near the Rio Grande, requiring that U.S. infantry and cavalry regiments break into groups to
fight their way through the thorn brush (Figure 3).
General Zachary Taylor, in his formal report to
the Army’s adjutant general, noted that his forces
buried 200 Mexican soldiers “on the day succeeding the battle.” According to official American government documents, the troops buried 262 Mexican
dead on the battlefield. The Mexican army, however, reported 160 deaths and 228 wounded (NPS
1997:61, 63). Some citizens of Brownsville wrote
of seeing scattered bones from unburied bodies in
the battlefield area as late as 1848.
A late 20th century study of the condition
of the battlefield was done by Neil C. Mangum,
regional historian for the National Park Service.
He assembled numerous maps from the time of
the battle and located various reference points.
However, he reported that Resaca de la Palma
had been destroyed as a battlefield, with modern
houses lining the Resaca, the channel of which
has been deepened, as well as at least two ponds
that have been created in recent years (see also
Perttula 1996).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 86 (2015)

238

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Landscape around the man-made lake off the Resaca de la Palma in April
1967. In the center of the photograph, note the white university vehicle and two
archaeologists examining the exposed mass grave. This waterway had been highly
Figure
1. Landscape
around
man-made
offsubdivision.
the
Resaca
de laofPalma
modified,
dredged
and
widened
inthe
preparation
for alake
housing
Looking
Figure
1. Landscape
around
the man-made
lake
off the Resaca
de la Palma
in April
1967 (Courtesy
TARL). Inin
the April
center
of thecenter
photograph,
white
university
vehicle
two archeologists
examining thevehicle
exposed mass
grave.
approximately
west-northwest.
TARL
archives.
1967.
In the
ofnote
thethephotograph,
noteandthe
white university
and
two
This waterway had been highly modified, dredged, and widened in preparation for a housing subdivision. Looking

archaeologists
approximately examining
west-northwest. the exposed mass grave. This waterway had been highly
modified, dredged and widened in preparation for a housing subdivision. Looking
approximately west-northwest. TARL archives.

Figure 2. Map of the Lower Rio Grande Valley, 1846. Location of Resaca de la Palma is indicated (Haecker 1994:Figure 9).

Figure 2. Map of the Lower Rio Grande Valley, 1846. Location of Resaca de la
Palma is indicated. From Haecker (1994: Fig. 9).

Hester—The Discovery and Study of the Mexican War Mass Grave at Resaca de la Palma 239
Figure 2. Map of the Lower Rio Grande Valley, 1846. Location of Resaca de la
Palma is indicated. From Haecker (1994: Fig. 9).

Figure 3. A Scene at the Battle of Resaca de la Palma: The Charge of Captain Mays’

From
Coffin
(1883:315).
Figure
3.Scene
A Scene
at the
Battle
of
Resaca
de
la Palma:
The
of Captain
Mays’
Figure 3. A
at the Battle
of Resaca
deCavalry.
la Palma:
The
Charge
of Captain
Mays’Charge
Cavalry (Coffin
1883).
Cavalry. From Coffin (1883:315).

FIELDWORK: EXCAVATION
OF THE MASS GRAVE
Upon arrival at the site of the mass grave, we
met with those responsible for the construction, and
they took steps to limit access to the area. There
were a number of interested people (a view of the
daily gallery is seen in Figure 15) and at least a few
who had dug into the skeletal remains exposed in
the cut bank of the man-made lake. We were able
to photograph some of the finds that were dug up
Figure 4. Crossbelt Insignia of the 10th Infantry, Mexican
before we got to the site. These includeFigure
a crossbelt
4. Crossbelt Insignia of the 10th Infantry, Mexican Army. Though removed
Army. Though removed before the archeologists arrived,
insignia (Westcott et al. 2012), with a cutout
“10”
before the archaeologists arrived, an observer believes it may have been
observer believes it may have been associated with
dominating it (Figure 4). This evidently
related towith an
associated
Burial 19.
Burial 19.
the Mexican 10th Infantry, major participants in
the battle.
The creation of a man-made lake off a resaca
of the burial
pit (see
Figure Though
6). North removed
and south
Mexican
Army.
Figure
4. Crossbelt Insignia of the 10th Infantry,
channel, using a dredge (see Figure 5), exposed
datum stakes, used for measuring within the pit
before
theremains.
archaeologists
anbest
observer
it mayalong
havethe
been
the human
The burial arrived,
pit was seen
area,believes
were established
lake’s edge. The
associated
19.
from the edgewith
of theBurial
water. We
cleared the area just
area was roughly 10 x 14 feet. As we began to
below the surface adjacent to the observed skeletal
trowel on the edges of the darkened area, more
deposit. We were aided by Louis Oden, Jr. who
and more skeletal materials were exposed (Figures
used his dragline to help scrape the locale (Figure
7-11). Collins directed the overall excavations and
6), removing sterile fill above the mass grave.
assignment of burial designations. This was a difAn area of darkened soil, with some bones
ficult task, as it was immediately clear that there
visible, made it possible for us to mark the extent
were multiple individuals, many overlapping, or

240

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Area of the Mass Grave. Man-made lake in the background, w
remaining portion of the mass graves staked out and the area cleared bef
excavation. Looking to the east. TARL archives.

Figure 5. Area of the mass grave (Courtesy of TARL). Man-made lake in the background, with the remaining portion
of the mass graves staked out and the area cleared before excavation. Looking to the east.

Figure 5. Area of the Mass Grave. Man-made lake in the background, with the
remaining portion of the mass graves staked out and the area cleared before
excavation. Looking to the east. TARL archives.

Figure 6. Establishing the size of the burial pit (Courtesy of TARL). Author at left. View looking south.

Figure 6. Establishing the Size of the Burial Pit. Author at left. View look
TARL archives.

Hester—The Discovery and Study of the Mexican War Mass Grave at Resaca de la Palma 241

Figure 7. Close-up view of artifacts in place. These include a metal button and a
stain
from
a decayed
item.
The
latter,
darkened
Figure
Close-up
of inartifacts
in place.
These
include
metal
button
a a here, may have
Figure 7. 7.
Close-up
view ofview
artifacts
place (Courtesy
of TARL).
These
include the
aa metal
button
andarea,
a and
stainshown
from
decayedfrom
item. The
latter, the darkened
area,
shown here,
may
have
been
aarea,
cartridge
the has
long
pin athave
the
top has as a “flintlock
beenThe
a cartridge
box,
as
the
long
pin shown
atbox,
theastop
been
identified
stain
a decayed
item.
latter,
the
darkened
here,
may
been identified as a “flintlock vent
pick.”
LengthLength
of the “vent
pick”
is aboutpick”
8 cm. is about 8 cm. TARL archives.
vent
pick”.
of
the
“vent
been a cartridge box, as the long pin at the top has been identified as a “flintlock

vent pick”. Length of the “vent pick” is about 8 cm. TARL archives.
lying atop or under other remains. And, as
we exposed the remains, it was also obvious that partial skeletons represented some
individuals. As these observations were
confirmed, we realized that the victims
from the battle had been dropped or thrown
into a large grave pit. Among the bones
were a number of bone and shell buttons,
wire collar clasps, and other items that were
part of the clothing on the bodies at the
time of burial (e.g., Figure 7). Further, we
exposed the crumbling remnants of at least
two “canteens,” and perhaps a cartridge box
of wood and metal.
For a bit of flavor of the hectic pace of
the excavations, some excerpts from my
field notes follow:

“…canteen and objects are below back Figure 8. Human crania exposed, along with some additional human
of #8 [Burial 8]. Above
the canteen,
Figure
8. Human
crania
exposed,
along
with some
human remains. T
remains
(Courtesy
of TARL).
The jumbled
array ofadditional
crania indicates
near spout, was a box-like object nearly the complexity of the situation.
jumbled array of crania indicates the complexity of the situation. TARL archive
¾ as wide as canteen; went to pieces;
Figure
8. Human
crania
human
heavy
box—probably
an exposed,
ammo box;along with some
ton additional
at spot where legs
cross.remains. The
object
on
top.
jumbled array of crania indicates the complexity of the situation. TARL archives.
...ca. .5’ N of #12 skull were humerus
frag, and ulna and radius…#31.
…under chest of #21, remains of legs of
#24 were found, crossed at the feet; but-

…below #’s 14 & 14 is a partial burial
(#23); the legs of #23 are under chest of
#15; 2 buttons are N of n. tibia.

242

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9. Field photograph of a cluster of skeletal remains. From left top and
moving
right,
burials
8, 13,
10,(Courtesy
2. At of
bottom,
Burial
archives.
Figure 9. Field
photograph
of a cluster
of skeletal
remains
TARL). From
left top 5.
and TARL
moving right,
burials
8, 13, 10, 2. At bottom, Burial 5.

Figure 9. Field photograph of a cluster of skeletal remains. From left top and
moving right, burials 8, 13, 10, 2. At bottom, Burial 5. TARL archives.

Figure 10. Field photograph of Burial 3 (Courtesy of TARL).

Figure 10. Field photograph of Burial 3. TARL archives

Figure 10. Field photograph of Burial 3. TARL archives

Hester—The Discovery and Study of the Mexican War Mass Grave at Resaca de la Palma 243
We also noticed that the bones
and skulls bore signs indicative of
battle wounds (impacted musket balls,
and cuts made by sabers and knives).
Westcott et al. (2012:18) claims that
58 percent of the Mexican soldiers
had “unhealed, battle-related injuries.”
ARTIFACTS WITH
THE BURIALS

Certainly the most comprehensive
list of artifacts discovered among the
burials is found in Ratliff (1993:Appendix 3). Some of the decayed objects observed in the field could not
be collected (canteen; cartridge box).
The most numerous of the artifacts
were, of course, bone buttons from
clothing and uniforms. Most are of
bone (124 specimens, with four or
five holes), some of metal (n=9), and
even a few of shell (n=7). Copper eyehooks, typically found at the collars
of shirts, numbered about 18, and the
clasps that fit into the hooks included
14 specimens. There were small metal
buckles of the type that might have
been on straps for canteens or for
cartridge boxes. The badly decayed
Figure
Plan of
of Burials
Burials Excavated
at theat
Resaca
de la Palma
Figure
11.11.Plan
Excavated
the Resaca
de Mass
la Palma Mass Grav
remnants of a wooden canteen were Grave (Courtesy of the Texas Archeological Society from Wescott et
Based on field drawings by Thomas R. Hester. (from Wescott et al. 2012:F
found near Burial 12. Two metal scab- al. 2012:Figure 1; they have divided the burials into North, Central and
they have divided the burials into North, Central and Southern groupings
bard tips were also found. Adhering to
Southern groupings). Based on field drawings by Hester. The original
original
cut
that the
exposed
theismass
grave
along
the
right;
the scabbard tips were small remnants
cut that
exposed
mass grave
along the
rightis
(see
Figures
5 and
6). see Figures 5, 6
(Courtesy
of
the
Texas
Archeological
Society)
of leather and cloth. At least 13 cloth
fragments were documented, scattered
among the burials. Metal fragments, corroded
in a tibia). Some of these, along with three other
unidentifiable pieces, were also scattered, with 14
potentially diagnostic artifacts, were taken from
specimens recorded. A small metal “nib” was apthe partly exposed remains after the discovery
parently part of an ornament or weapon. A small
of the mass grave, and prior to our arrival. The
rusted crucifix is recorded in the field notes but was
specimens were briefly made available at the site
not later found in the collections.
for photography, but were not donated to the site
With Burial 16 was one of the knife scabbard
collection. Of the three artifacts discussed here,
tips (and maybe a second; the records are unclear),
one is an oval crossbelt insignia, about 7 cm long,
along with three metal buckles, and two eyehooks
with the number “10” cut into and through the
and one clasp. Details of specific buttons or other
metal (see Figure 4). The artifact had a small hook
artifacts with the burials are found in Ratliff (1993:
at one end on the opposite side. The association
Appendix 3). Seventeen of the skeletons had one
of the item with one of the burials identified the
or more associated artifacts.
occupant as a member of the 10th Light InfanThere are several distinctive artifacts, includtry of the Mexican Army. Though the crossbelt
ing numerous musket balls (one still embedded
insignia was found before excavations started,

244

Figure 13. Hunting Horn Insignia from One Burial, Possibly of the 7th Lig
Infantry.

Texas Archeological Society

the finder told Collins that it occurred with the
remains we subsequently labeled as Burial 19
(Ratliff 1994:204).
Another metal artifact is rectangular, with
angled corners (Figure 12). It has a small protrusion in the center of the back surface. The artifact
Figure 14. Hunting horn insignia. Item bears the number

of the Mexican
6th Light
Infantry.
of two foundof
by the Mexican
Figure 14. Hunting horn insignia.
Item
bears
theOnenumber
Norman Bateman on the Battlefield, and not from the mass
Infantry. One of two found grave
by Norman
on the Battlefield, and no
(Bateman notesBateman
housed at TARL).
the mass grave. (Bateman notes housed at TARL).

Hefter (2008:63) states that the 7th Light
Infantry was not present at Resaca de la Palma,
though this insignia suggests differently. Based on
the illustrations in Hefter (2008:Plate XVI A), the
specimen seems much too small for the prominent
Figure 12. Both Sides of a Mexican cartridge box belt
hunting horn emblem as they have been portrayed
plate. See Haecker (1994:Figure 57m, n) for an example
on theSee
of a shako.
However, specimens of
from
the
Battle
of
Palo
Alto.
Figure12.
12.Both
BothSides
Sidesofofa aMexican
Mexicancartridge
cartridgebox
boxbelt
beltplate.
plate.
Haecker
(1994,
Figure
Seefront
Haecker
(1994,
this
size
may
well
have
adorned
cartridge boxes.
Figure 57 m, n) for an example from of the Battle of Palo Alto.

Figure 57 m, n) for an example from of the Battle of Palo Alto.

is likely a belt plate from a Mexican cartridge box.
The piece measures about 6 cm long and 4.5 mm
ANALYSIS: STUDYING
wide and cannot be linked to a specific burial.
THE HUMAN REMAINS
There is also a hunting horn emblem with
either the number 7 or a fragmentary 4 in the enAl B. Wesolowsky, a physical anthropology
circled area (Figure 13). It is about 6 cm long, has
student at The University of Texas, took on the
two protruding spikes on the back, and has been
task, beginning in June 1967, of processing the huattributed by Ratliff (1993:116 and Figure 39) to a
man remains from Resaca de la Palma. He washed
shako insignia typical of the Mexican 4th Light Inand boxed the skeletal materials and over the
fantry. Westcott et al. (2012:5) describe the insignia
coming months, and off and on for several years,
as a “shako
badge” from
Mexican
Infantry.
Both Sides of a Mexican
cartridge
boxthe
belt
plate.7thSee
HaeckerWesolowky
(1994,
studied the skeletal remains, with
They record this object as having been associated
his analysis consisting of taking measurements,
m, n) for an example
from of the Battle of Palo Alto.
with Burial 8 from the mass grave.
noting pathological abnormalities, and obtaining
information on sex and age. His work resulted in a
th
Light of notes and records filed
Figure13.
13.Hunting
HuntingHorn
HornInsignia
Insigniafrom
fromOne
OneBurial,
Burial,Possibly
Possibly
the
substantial
compilation
Figure
ofofthe
7th7 Light
at
the
Texas
Archeological
Research Laboratory.
Infantry.
Infantry.
Ratliff (1993, 1994) carried out a comprehensive analysis of the Resaca de la Palma burials for
his Master’s thesis at The University of Texas at
Austin. He first re-inventoried the remains, and
then proceeded to try to determine the age of each
individual at the time of death. He also looked
closely at the sex of each individual, and estimated
the range in stature. Ratliff went further in depth
with his osteological studies: disease, injury (beth
fore
the battle),
pathologies associated
Figure14.
14.Hunting
Huntinghorn
horninsignia.
insignia.Item
Itembears
bearsthe
thenumber
number
theat
Mexican
Light
Figure
ofofand
the
Mexican
6th6 and
Light
Figure
13.
Hunting
horn
insignia
from
one
burial,
possibly
with
the
age
of
each
person.
Infantry.
Oneofoftwo
twofound
found
byNorman
NormanBateman
Bateman
on
the
Battlefield,and
andnot
notfrom
from
Infantry.
One
on
Battlefield,
Hunting
Horn Insignia
Oneby
Burial,
ofwas
the
7ththe
Light
of the 7thfrom
Light Infantry.
AnotherPossibly
such artifact
later
Ratliff (1994:195) stated that he found 31
the
mass
grave.
(Bateman
notes
housed
at
TARL).
the mass grave.
(Bateman
notes
housed
TARL).
discovered
as a surface
find (see
Figureat
14).
“primary burials” that he could document through
the field notes and his analysis. As noted earlier

Hester—The Discovery and Study of the Mexican War Mass Grave at Resaca de la Palma 245
in this article, most of the burials were partial or
incomplete and/or commingled with the remains of
other soldiers. He felt that at least four individuals
were women (soldaderas).
Subsequently, Diane Wilson re-examined the
possible female burials at Resaca de la Palma. Her
conclusions (notes to Hester) were that these determinations of sex were in error. She identified one of
the burials (later shown to be unrelated to the collection) to be “probable male,” another (Burial 3)
as “probable male,” one definitely as male (Burial
11), and Burial 10 as “sex indeterminate.”
Ratliff (1994:201) also noted the “lack of
combat trauma,” but see Wescott et al. (2012) for
a very different view. He did note the frequency
of fractures, torn ligaments, and generally rough
condition of the feet. Much of the latter is probably
related to pre-Army farm or ranch life of soldiers,
perhaps aggravated by military service. Examples
of knee injuries, a fractured (healed) mandible, and
miscellaneous pre-Battle pathologies may derive
from horse kicks, personal disputes, or simply accidents (Ratliff 1994:203).
In 2012, Wescott and colleagues published a
detailed study of the battle-related injuries observed
on the remains from the mass grave. Their analysis
pointed to the presence of 27-36 individuals (in
contrast to Wesolowsky’s estimate of 30, and
Ratliff’s 31). A burial identified as possibly female
by Ratliff (1993) was found to be from a different

archeological site and had been placed in error with
the Resaca de la Palma group. It was determined
that projectiles (musket balls) were the most
common cause of death, as seen for possibly 12 of
the individuals. Cuts or “sharp-edged trauma” was
seen on some skeletons (Wescott et al. 2012:11), and
impact of blunt objects was noted on two. Overall,
58 percent of the individuals analyzed exhibited
battle-linked wounds. The wounds related to sword
and saber cuts reflect the hand-to-hand combat that
typified the battle.
STABLE CARBON ISOTOPE ANALYSIS:
GLIMPSES AT DIET
In the early 1990s, the late Jeffrey A. Huebner
(a doctoral student who worked with the author at
The University of Texas at Austin) began a program
of research involving stable carbon isotope ratio
analysis to study human and animal diets. Numerous
publications resulted. As part of his project, Huebner
sampled small pieces of bones from six Resaca de la
Palma burials. The actual laboratory work was done
by Krueger Enterprises, Inc., a division of Geochron
Laboratories, in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Results
were reported to Huebner in November 1993. The
studies were funded by a grant to Hester from the
Advanced Research Program of the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board.

Figure 15. Daily crowd watches the archeological team excavate and document the mass grave (Courtesy of TARL).

Figure 15 . Daily crowd watches the archeological team excavate and document
the mass grave. Looking south. TARL archives

246

Texas Archeological Society

Jones (2009) published a stable carbon isotope
study on the Resaca de la Palma remains—a study
that could not have been done without her use of
Huebner’s data, with curiously slight attribution,
found in the TARL records. Data for one sample
of skeletal remains could not be confirmed, and so
the results for five individuals were used. Similar
to Huebner’s original interpretations of the mass
grave stable isotope data, Jones (2009:142) reported that each of the five soldiers represent “maize
dependent populations” and that four of these had
“freshwater or marines resources” also represented
in terms of diet.
WHAT IS TO BE DONE WITH
THE BONES?: 1970-2008
According to the late Curtis Tunnell, longtime
state archeologist and executive director of the Texas
Historical Commission, an official letter was sent in
the 1970s by the Commission (or the associated Texas
Antiquities Committee) to persons at the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia (INAH) in Mexico
City with an offer to return the human remains and
artifacts to Mexico. The reply was that the materials
were not wanted in Mexico and that they could be
disposed of in any way they chose.
While Director of TARL at The University of
Texas at Austin, I began receiving letters related
to the reburial of the Mexican soldiers from the
mass grave at Resaca de la Palma. The requests
came from different individuals or groups, with
different goals for proposed reburial. In April
1996, Kevin R. Young, of Forest View Historical
Services (San Antonio, Texas) wrote letters to both
the Consulate General of Mexico in San Antonio
and to Governor George W. Bush. In these letters, he suggested that the “Mexican soldados and
soldaderas” found in 1967 and “still in the hands
of the University of Texas at Austin,” be returned
to the Mexican Government. In July 1996, Ruben
Arvizu of Hollywood, California, inquired about
the remains. At that time, and since, Mr. Arvizu
has been concerned about American soldiers from
the Mexican War buried in Mexico, and while he
was not asking for any sort of direct exchange (for
the Resaca de la Palma remains), he continued to
follow the matter. It was at this time that the legal
counsel for the University of Texas System (then,
Dudley Dobie, and later, Patti Ohlendorf) consulted
with me, and it was their opinion that the remains

be returned only through an official request from
the Government of Mexico.
In August 1996, the Casamata Museum of Regional History in Matamoros, Mexico, contacted
Bruce Aiken of Brownsville, then a commissioner
on the Texas Historical Commission, to request
the return of the Resaca de la Palma remains for
reinterment in Matamoros, in association with a
monument dedicated to them. Mr. Aiken brought
the request to the attention of the Texas Historical Commission; he was advised of the need for
official Mexican government involvement for the
return of the burials.
In the late 1990s, Roberto Gamboa Mascarenas, Consul General of Mexico in Austin, contacted
the author and we had numerous useful discussions
about a way in which the Resaca de la Palma skeletal material could be formally returned to Mexico.
In August 1997, he wrote to me, making a formal
request on behalf of the Republic of Mexico, for
the return of the soldiers from the mass grave.
They were to be buried with full military honors
in Mexico City. The University of Texas at Austin
legal counsel’s office felt that the letter should
come, formally, from the Government of Mexico.
Mr. Gamboa later moved to another Consulate post
in another city, and no further progress was made
on the matter.
In a summary provided by Darrell Creel in
2013, he related what transpired while he was
Director of TARL:
In the first part of 2008, the Mexican
Consul General’s Austin, Texas office contacted the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) at The University of
Texas at Austin regarding the remains of
Mexican Army soldiers from the battle of
Resaca de la Palma. The Consul General,
Rosalba Ojeda, and staff subsequently
visited TARL to view and discuss repatriation of these remains. As a result, on
July 17, 2008, the Consul General sent a
formal request to the Vice President for
Legal Affairs at the University of Texas
at Austin for repatriation of the soldiers’
remains to Mexico.
According to standard policy and procedure at TARL, the Deaccessions Committee met on September 9, 2008, to discuss
the request and voted unanimously to
deacession the remains and transfer

Hester—The Discovery and Study of the Mexican War Mass Grave at Resaca de la Palma 247
them to the Mexican Government. This
deaccession was also approved by the
Vice President for Legal Affairs at the
University of Texas at Austin. The Consul
General was promptly notified and then
began arranging for the transfer of the remains. On December 3, 2008, the Consul
General on behalf of the Mexican Government took possession of the soldiers’
remains and transferred them to Mexico
City for reinterment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Special thanks are due to Michael Collins for
supervising the excavations and staying involved
with project research over these many years. The
late Tom Ellzey worked with us at the site, and
guarded it at night to keep away possible looters. Al
B. Wesolowsky did yeoman’s work on the processing and continuing analysis of the remains from the
mass grave, beginning in June 1967, and compiled
a vast amount of data on the physical anthropology,
now filed at TARL. Many other archeologists and
physical anthropologists worked with the human
and cultural materials, in terms of analysis and
curation; these included Dee Ann Story, Curtis
Tunnell, Darrell Creel, Laura Nightengale, Norman Bateman, Carolyn Spock, Rosario Casarez,
Eric Ratliff, Diane Wilson, Timothy K. Perttula,
and Tom Fort (Museum of South Texas, Edinburg).
I am particularly grateful to Ruben Arvizu, of
Atlanta, Georgia, for encouraging me to write this
“first hand” account of Resaca de la Palma. His
concern for the history of the Mexican War has
impressed me since he first contacted me in the
mid-1990s.
REFERENCES CITED
Coffin, C. C.
1883 Building the Nation. Harper and Brothers, New York.
DePalo, W. A., Jr.
1997 The Mexican National Army, 1822-1852. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Haecker, C. M.
1994 A Thunder of Cannon: Archeology of the MexicanAmerican War Battlefield of Palo Alto. Professional
Papers 52. Southwest Cultural Resources Center.
National Park Service, Santa Fe.
Hefter, J.
2008 The Mexican Soldier 1837-1847: Organization,
Dress & Equipment. Edited and expanded by P. R.
Wilson. The Virtual Armchair General, Oklahoma
City.
Hester, T. R.
1978 The Archaeology of the Lower Rio Grande Valley
of Texas, In The Proceedings, An Exploration of a
Common Legacy, pp. 66-79. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Jones, C. A.
2009 Stable Isotope Analysis of the Diet of the Mexican War Dead from the Battle of Resaca de la
Palma. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
80:133-144.
National Park Service
1997 Draft General Management Plan Environmental
Assessment. Palo Alto Battlefield National Historic
Site—Texas. National Park Service, Brownsville,
Texas. Cultural Resources Center, National Park
Service, Santa Fe.
Perttula, T. K.
1996 Archeological Investigation of Mexican-American
War Battlefields in Texas. CRM News and Views
8(1):6-8. Department of Antiquities Protection,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Ratliff, E. A.
1993 Life and Death in the Mexican Army: An Analysis of
Skeletal Remains From the Battle of the Resaca de
la Palma, May 1, 1846. Master’s Thesis, Department
of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
1994 Human Skeletal Remains from the Battle of Resaca
de la Palma. Appendix B, pp. 189-208. In A Thunder
of Cannon: Archeology of the Mexican-American
WarBattlefield of Palo Alto, by C. M. Haecker, pp.
189-208. Professional Papers 52. Southwest Cultural
Resources Center. National Park Service, Santa Fe.
Wescott, D. J., L. E. Baker, D. C. Wernecke, and M. B. Collins
2012 A Mass Grave of Mexican Soldiers from the Resaca
de la Palma Battlefield (41CF3): Demography and
Battle-Related Injuries. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 83:1-22.

List of Authors

C. Britt Bousman, Texas State University, San Marcos and GAES, University of Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg
Leslie L. Bush, Microbotanical Analysis, Manchaca
Wilson W. Crook, Houston Archeological Society, Kingwood
Linda W. Ellis, ACS: Archeological Consulting Services, Lago Vista
Thomas R. Hester, University of Texas, Professor Emeritus, Marble Falls
Michael P. Jordan, Texas Tech University, Lubbock and Research Associate with the National
Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institute, Washington, D.C.
Christopher Lintz, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Wildlife Division, Austin
Timothy K. Perttula, Archeological & Environmental Consultants, LLC, Austin
Elton R. Prewitt, Texas State University, San Marcos and SHUMLA School, Inc., Comstock
Daniel Prikryl, LCRA Cultural Resources, Lower Colorado River Authority, Austin
Haley E. Rush, Cox McClain Environmental, Austin and Texas State University, San Marcos
S. Alan Skinner, AR Consultants, Inc., Richardson
Matthew S. Taylor, University of Washington, Seattle
Jesse Todd, AJC Environmental, LLC, Carrollton
Richard W. Walter, Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University, Alpine
Catrina Banks Whitley, Office of Archaeological Studies, Museum of New Mexico, Santa Fe

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 86 (2015)

