Bulletin of the

TEXAS

		 ARCHEOLOGICAL
Volume 85/2014
			 SOCIETY
Tamra L. Walter, Editor
Timothy K. Perttula, Assistant Editor
Nancy A. Kenmotsu, Assistant Editor

Published by

at Austin
2014

Texas Archeological Society

CONTENTS

Prologue
Edward B. Jelks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Critical Thinking in Archeology: Papers in Memory of Dee Ann Story
Compiled by Nancy A. Kenmotsu and Timothy K. Perttula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
The Legacy of Dee Ann Story
Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Publications of Dee Ann Suhm Story
Compiled by Harry J. Shafer with assistance of Nancy A. Kenmotsu
and Timothy K. Perttula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
The Construction and Eventual Burning of the Experimental Caddo House Structure
at the George C. Davis Site (41CE19) in East Texas
Timothy K. Perttula and Bob D. Skiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
What Does ‘Long Hat’s Camp’ Really Tell Us?
A Consideration of the Meaning of Two Popular Photographs to Caddo Studies
Ann M. Early  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo Developments Along the Upper Sabine River
Jeffrey S. Girard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites and Understanding Prehistoric Caddo Mortuary
Practices in Shelby County, Texas
Tom Middlebrook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom: Looking at Sociopolitical Organization through
the Pine Tree Mound and U.S. Highway 271 Mount Pleasant Relief Route Projects
Ross C. Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
At the Confluence of GIS and Geochemistry: Identifying Geochemical Correlates of Ripley
Engraved Caddo Ceramics
Robert Z. Selden, Jr. and Timothy K. Perttula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
Corn is Life: Temporal Trends in the Use of Corn (Zea mays) by Caddo Peoples from
Radiocarbon-dated Samples and Stable Isotope Analyses
Timothy K. Perttula, Robert Z. Selden, Jr., and Diane Wilson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities: Excavations at Columbus Pueblo (LA 85774),
Luna County, New Mexico
Nancy A. Kenmotsu, Tabitha G. Burgess, Lora Jackson Legare, and Myles R. Miller  . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
Identifying Causes of the Thirteenth Century Depopulation of the Northern Southwest
Kristin A. Kuckelman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205
Defining and Using Households in Archeological Analysis
Ricky R. Lightfoot, Richard H. Wilshusen, and Mark D. Varien  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
Revisiting the Stylistic Classification of a Charcoal Pictograph in the Lower Pecos
Carolyn E. Boyd, Marvin W. Rowe, and Karen L. Steelman  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235

iii

Texas Archeological Society
The Knox Biface: An Incised Stone Artifact from Central Texas
James D. Keyser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas
Jon C. Lohse, Stephen L. Black, and Laly M. Cholak  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
Chemical Characterization of Two Primary Igneous Metamorphic Glass Sources from
the Big Bend Ranch State Park, Presidio County, Texas
Christopher Lintz, Richard E. Hughes, and Tim Roberts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 281
List of Authors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 295

iv

Prologue
Edward B. Jelks

ABSTRACT
The other articles in this tribute to Dee Ann focus on her role as teacher—in the classroom, in the laboratory, and
in the field—after about 1970. This prologue traces the high points of her earlier development as an archeologist,
from her days as an undergraduate student in 1952 to her becoming the Director of the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory at The University of Texas in 1968.

The participants in this tribute to Dee Ann
Story have faithfully measured Dee Ann’s stature
as teacher, researcher, administrator, and curator,
based largely on their own personal experiences.
Her former students have recalled her genius as a
teacher and a mentor, which is reflected in Harry
Shafer’s lengthy discussions of her students who
made their marks as archeologists. Descriptions
of Dee Ann’s exacting fieldwork at the George C.
Davis and Deshazo sites by others give us a good
vision of Dee Ann in the field, and other tribute
participants have described her skill in synthesizing and interpreting large data sets related to the
Caddo and Southwestern peoples, and in how Dee
Ann went out of her way to teach avocational
archeologists how to conduct thoughtful research.
Other participants to this tribute have related how
Dee Ann was instrumental in training them in the
basics of archeological research. A common thread
through all these tributes is how the participants
were influenced by Dee Ann’s insistence on critical thinking in addressing archeological problems.
All these archeologists knew Dee Ann during
the height of her career from 1970 on. My perspective is a little different, as I knew her at the
beginning of her professional development, so I
will dwell mainly on the early days of her remarkable career.
One day in the fall of 1951 a shy young woman
stepped into the office of the Smithsonian’s River
Basin Surveys (RBS) in Austin that I was then directing and introduced herself as Dee Ann Suhm.
She said that her anthropology professor, Dr. Tom

Campbell, told her I was looking for a typist, and
that she would like to apply for the job. I had to
turn her down because I had hired a federal civil
service stenographer the day before. However, it
was only two or three weeks later that two policemen came to the office, arrested the stenographer
for some serious crime (I never knew exactly
what), and hauled her away to be incarcerated. I
called Dee Ann and asked if she was still interested
in the job, she said yes, I hired her, and thus began
a collegial relationship and a close personal friendship that endured for 60 years.
I had never before seen such a quick learner
or intensely dedicated worker. Ostensibly her job
was to type correspondence, field notes, monthly
reports and the like, but she showed such an enthusiastic curiosity about the workings of the lab that
before long I had her processing artifacts coming in
from the field and performing other routine lab and
office chores. In early childhood she had developed
a strong interest in classical Old World archeology,
and at first she showed little interest in Texas archeology. Discussions about how to conduct surveys,
how to dig a particular site, how to interpret findings in the field, and such went on constantly in
the lab between our field archeologists, sometimes
with input from such stimulating colleagues as
Alex Krieger and geologist Glen Evans. Dee Ann
began listening in on these discussions and soon
recognized that Texas archeology was an exciting
field that offered all the intellectual challenges that
one could wish for. Then she began asking a question or throwing a comment into our discussions,

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

2

Texas Archeological Society

a bit tentatively at first, then with confidence.
Eventually her observations became incisive and
consequential. Dee Ann worked at the RBS office
until it was closed temporarily in October 1954.
One day in the spring of 1953 Dee Ann told me
that she had to write a term paper for Dr. Campbell
and asked me to suggest possible topics. A number of archeological foci (now called phases) for
classifying Texas native cultures had been defined
by various researchers over the years, but their
published descriptions were widely scattered in
the literature. Having a brief description of each
focus—including estimated dates, major sites, geographical distribution, culture traits, and relevant
publications—altogether in one place, would be a
useful reference for researchers including the RBS
archeologists. I suggested this would be a good
topic for her paper. Although an exceedingly ambitious undertaking for an undergraduate student,
Dee Ann, undaunted, jumped on it with unflagging enthusiasm and produced a superb product
which so impressed Campbell that he suggested
she publish an expanded version in the Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society. Dee Ann asked
me to help expand her paper, which I did. When
Texas Archeological Society editor Alex Krieger
saw our completed manuscript about a year later,
he insisted that a section describing recognized
artifact types be added, and he joined us in writing
a typology section. The end product was “An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology” (Suhm
et al. 1954), the typology section of which remains
a standard reference after more than 50 years and
through four reprinted editions
After earning a B.A. and an M.A. in anthropology at The University of Texas, Dee Ann entered
graduate school at the University of California at
Los Angeles (UCLA) in the fall of 1956. While
she was still a graduate student, Jesse Jennings at
the University of Utah hired her as an archeologist
to work on the Glen Canyon Reservoir project,
where she conducted fieldwork as a crew chief,
but primarily supervised the lab where the artifacts
were processed.
In 1960 Dee Ann returned to Austin to take a
position as Curator of Anthropology at the Texas
Memorial Museum. One of her assignments was to
curate The University of Texas’ archeological collections, then stored at the Little Campus facility
near the main university campus. When she and
Hal Story, the museum’s illustrator and exhibit preparator, married in 1961, they ran afoul of a rather

strict state nepotism regulation in force at the time
that barred husband and wife from both working at
the same state agency. So one of them had to leave
the museum, and I hired Dee Ann as my assistant
at the Texas Archeological Salvage Project (TASP)
at The University of Texas, which had taken over
administration of the Texas RBS program. She continued working on the curation of The University
of Texas archeological collections, which, over the
next few years, were moved from Little Campus to
the Balcones Research Center (now the Jake Pickle
Research Center) several miles northwest of Austin
where TASP was located.
While still an undergraduate, Dee Ann had
become close friends with my wife, Judy, and me.
The three of us traveled on vacations together,
hosted parties together, and carried out a couple of
archeological field surveys together. After moving
to Illinois in 1968, Judy and I kept in close touch
with Dee Ann and Hal, visiting their place in Wimberley several times, and they visited us in Illinois.
In 2009, together Dee Ann and I wrote a foreword
to the 4th reprinting of the type description section
of the “Handbook” (Suhm and Jelks 2009).
Dee Ann had left UCLA with everything completed for her Ph.D. except a dissertation. I would
ask her every now and then how the dissertation was
progressing but her answers were evasive. After several months it became clear that she had become so
involved with her duties at TASP and with working
on the curation of The University of Texas collections that she had found little time to devote to the
dissertation. I told her to slack off some from her
day job and concentrate on the dissertation—that
if she got behind a little with her duties, she could
play catch-up once she had her degree in hand. My
admonishments did not do much good. But then
Judy got on her case and that did the trick. Judy, who
can be very forceful, put the screws to her, and in
1963 Dee Ann turned in her completed dissertation
and became one of the first women to be awarded a
Ph.D. in anthropology at UCLA.
In 1964 I assigned Dee Ann to direct field
excavations at Waco Reservoir, despite reservations
expressed by some that no woman should be given a
job supervising a bunch of male shovel hands, whose
crude language and off-color witticisms would be
sure to offend her. But her unfailing enthusiasm
and good humor won over the all male crew, mostly
University of Texas students, and by the end of the
season she had earned their unanimous respect. Her
work at Waco Reservoir demonstrated that she was

Jelks—Prologue

both a skilled field archeologist and an effective field
crew supervisor.
I left The University of Texas to join the faculty
at Southern Methodist University in 1965, about the
time that Dee Ann took over as director of the newly
created Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
and our professional paths diverged. Even so, we
kept in close touch over the following years.
Dee Ann’s field research in eastern, Central,
southern, and western Texas contributed substantially to our knowledge and understanding
of the prehistoric and historic Indian cultures of
the region. As a professor she played a major role
in educating a couple of generations of students,
many of whom became professional archeologists,
including most of those contributing to this tribute.
She was an exacting, no-nonsense teacher whose
infectious enthusiasm and insistence on professionalism among her students became legendary.
Over the years she gained wide recognition as one
of the major authorities on Texas archeology. The
contributors to this tribute in the Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society have attested clearly
how much Dee Ann’s students and colleagues
respected her as a scholar, as well as the affection
they held for her as a person.

3

In 1950 I attended my first annual meeting of
the Society for American Archaeology. There was
only a single slate of papers—no concurrent sessions—and everybody listened attentively to each
paper. There were perhaps 100 archeologists in
attendance, including one woman: Marie Wormington of the Denver Museum of Natural History.
Surely, one of Dee Ann’s proudest achievements was to play a major role, along with a few
others like Marie Wormington, in paving the way
for the integration of women as equals in a discipline that traditionally had been almost exclusively
the domain of men.
REFERENCES CITED
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25:1-562.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks (editors)
2009 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Reprint edition. Texas Archeological Society, San
Antonio and Gustav’s Library, Davenport, Iowa.

Critical Thinking in Archeology:
Papers in Memory of Dee Ann Story
Nancy A. Kenmotsu and Timothy K. Perttula

ABSTRACT
We introduce the papers in this section of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society that honor the memory
of Dr. Dee Ann Suhm Story, a long time and well-respected Texas archeologist. The papers are written by colleagues, students, and friends of Dee Ann, and all share her perspective that consistently urged archeologists
to critically evaluate their data through analyses of the strength of a given data set, employ contextual studies
to better understand past human choices, and use thoughtful field and analytical approaches in combination
with careful critiques of the results of those approaches.

The following sets of papers are published to
honor the memory of Dee Ann Suhm Story who
passed away in December 2010. Most of the papers were first presented in a symposium in 2012
at the annual meeting of the Society for American
Archaeology in Memphis, Tennessee, and others by colleagues and friends have been added to
this tribute. Dee Ann was a formidable force in
Texas archeology, but also she had a delightful
and engaging personality with a dry wit (Figure
1). Because of her deep roots in Texas and her long
association with the Texas Archeological Society,
we feel that it is fitting to publish these papers in
the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society.
For more than four decades Dee Ann significantly influenced the nature of the archeological
research carried out by students and colleagues as
she urged them to critically assess biases, methods,
and alternative explanations of their data. In general,
the papers approach a subject—the critical assessment of the archeological record—that has been at
the heart of the discipline nearly since its inception.
Dee Ann is best recognized for her archeological research on the Caddo Indian peoples of
Southwest Arkansas, Northwest Louisiana, eastern
Oklahoma, and East Texas, and carried out a number of field schools for the University of Texas at
Austin in this region (Figure 2). She was a friend
of the modern Caddo Indian peoples, namely the
Caddo Nation of Oklahoma, and she recognized the
importance of collaboration and consultation between the Caddo and the archeological community

on historical and archeological research problems
of mutual interest. Yet, that was only part of her
contribution to the discipline. She had a significant
influence on archeological studies in the Texas
Gulf Coastal Plain where she was reared, as well
as Central Texas, where she carried out a number
of important early excavations while she was an
undergraduate and graduate student at The University of Texas at Austin, and in the Trans-Pecos,
where she also worked and shaped the research
agenda there (see Dee Ann Story’s bibliography of
published works in the paper compiled by Harry J.
Shafer, Nancy A. Kenmotsu, and Timothy K. Perttula, this volume). She also influenced the research
trajectories of students she mentored who have
pursued careers in the American Southwest.
The papers cover archeological inquiries in
Texas and the American Southwest that exemplify
the research that she fostered during her long career
at the University of Texas at Austin. She consistently urged the critical evaluation of archeological
data through analyses of the strengths and weaknesses of a given data set, employing contextual
studies to better understand past human choices
reflected in the archeological record, and implementing thoughtful field and analytical approaches
that were followed up with careful critiques of
the results of those approaches. Here, some of her
former students and colleagues discuss archeological topics inspired by Dee Ann’s broad and topical
interests in North American archeology, ranging
from hunter-gatherer economics, households and

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

6

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Dee Ann with colleagues and friends in November 1995 at the reconstructed Caddo house at Caddo Mounds State
Historic Site (left to right: A. J. Taylor, Jeri Redcorn [of the Caddo Nation of Oklahoma], Harry Shafer, Dee Ann Story,
Jim Corbin, Carolyn Spock, Darrell Creel, and Jan Guy). Photograph courtesy of Velicia Bergstrom and Bob D. Skiles.

Figure 2. Participants of the 1976 University of Texas at Austin field school held at the Deshazo site (41NA27) in
Nacogdoches County. Front row, left to right: Molly Godwin, Dee Ann Story, Deniese Palmer, Wessley Robinson, Lynda
Robinson, Ulrich Kleinschmidt; 2nd row, left to right: Richard Wilshusen, Mike Krol, Lucye Enriques, Jeff Girard, Dale
Vinson; 3rd row, left to right: Ricky Lightfoot, Terry Owen, Sue Amini-Minor, Mark Varien, Mary Williams, Harrison
Kinney; Back row (standing, left to right: Charlie Locke, Margaret McDonald.

Kenmotsu and Perttula—Pritical Thinking in Archeology
community structure, mortuary practices, social
networks and interaction, subsistence and bioarcheological variation, human agency, and methodological advances in the disciple. The papers also
provide insights into how she aided and shaped
their own research over the years.
These papers are by archeologists who work in
three primary culture areas—the American Southwest, the Caddo area of Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana, and Central Texas. The first

7

paper, by Dr. Edward B. Jelks, who was Dee Ann’s
mentor when she was an undergraduate at the University of Texas as well as a life-long friend and
colleague, describes the early part of Dee Ann’s
career from the perspective of a close friend. The
remainder of the papers honors Dee Ann by demonstrating how her perspective of critical thinking
influenced their research and how her approach to
understanding and interpreting archeological data
continues to resonate in the discipline.

The Legacy of Dee Ann Story
Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester

ABSTRACT
Dee Ann Story (1931-2010) taught two generations of professional archeologists and made lasting contributions
in Central Texas and Caddo archeology. She teamed with Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks in producing the
classic volume An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Much of her early work was in Central Texas,
and she later added the Caddo area as a major research focus. Her most important archeological contributions
were the excavations at the George C. Davis and Deshazo sites. Her lasting legacy is the number of professional archeologists she trained and mentored and opening the door for women in Texas archeology, and in her
curation efforts in organizing and establishing the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. We discuss and
review her early contributions to Central Texas archeology at the Collins, Smith Rockshelter, and Williams
sites and sites at Canyon Reservoir, and her efforts to establish the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
as part of her lasting legacy in Texas archeology.

INTRODUCTION
Dee Ann Story (1931-2010), renowned Texas
archeologist and former Director of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin (TARL), passed away on
December 26, 2010, at the age of 79 in Wimberley,
Texas, after a lengthy and courageous battle with
cancer. She was born to Emma and Eugene Suhm
in Houston on December 12, 1931, and was preceded in death by her husband Hal Story, whom
she married in October 1961, her parents, and her
sister Beverly Morgan. Four nephews survive her:
Clayton Morgan, Tim Morgan, and Matt Morgan of
Austin, and Russell Morgan of Houston. Her pets
were like her children. Creature, a rescued blue jay,
and dogs—Humphrey, Ginger, a Doberman Pincher
named Bridget, and her surviving pet Callie—were
all constant companions. She lived most of her adult
life in Austin and retired to Wimberley in 1987.
Dee Ann attended Texas Women’s University
in Denton and completed her undergraduate degree in anthropology at The University of Texas
at Austin in 1953. She was awarded her Master’s
degree from the same institution in 1956. Dee
Ann received her doctoral degree in anthropology
from the University of California at Los Angeles
in 1963. While at the University of California, she

worked with Jesse Jennings at the Glen Canyon
Archeological Project; at Glen Canyon she served
as an assistant director doing fieldwork and directing the laboratory. Dee Ann’s place among the first
professional female archeologists of the 1960s has
been noted and is summarized in a book by Lister
(1997). One excerpt is particularly important here
regarding her early career, just after earning her
Ph.D. from UCLA:
[Dee Ann] was hired to set up and direct
the archaeological laboratory for the
University of Utah’s portion of the Glen
Canyon Project… efficient, knowledgeable, and comfortable in the traditional
woman’s role of bringing order to the
masses of artifacts, photos and notes
pouring in from surveys and excavations
(Lister 1997:57; emphasis added).

She became assistant director of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project at The University of
Texas at Austin (UT) in 1962, where she became
the first female archeologist in Texas, not the first
to actually work, but the first to be employed in that
capacity. She was also a lecturer in the Anthropology Department at UT from 1963 to 1965, Assistant
Professor from 1965 to 1972, Associate Professor
from 1972 to 1978, and became Full Professor in

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

10

Texas Archeological Society

1978. In 1987, she became Professor Emeritus. She
was the Director of TARL from 1965 to 1987. Dee
Ann, as she was known among her friends and colleagues, and Dr. Story among her many students,
had an accomplished career in archeology, teaching
and publishing many articles and monographs on
Texas archeology. She also directed many major
archeological and research projects in Texas for
which she received numerous honors of recognition.
Her main archeological interests were the
ancestral Caddo culture of East Texas and later
the Archaeological Conservancy. She also made
significant contributions in Central Texas archeology. She was a member of national and regional
professional societies, among them the American
Anthropological Association, Society for American
Archaeology, Society for Historical Archaeology,
Plains Anthropological Society, Arkansas Archeological Society, and the Texas Archeological Society. She served on the board of the Archaeological
Conservancy. She was awarded the Curtis D. Tunnell Lifetime Achievement Award, the Excellence
in Archeology Award, and the Award for Historic
Preservation, all from the Texas Historical Commission. She was a past president and a Fellow in
the Texas Archeological Society, where she was the
first recipient of the society’s Lifetime Achievement Award. Other awards of recognition came
from the Archaeological Conservancy, the Betty
Lee Wright Award for Democratic Leadership
from the Wimberley Democrats, the Houston Archeological Society, and the Society for American
Archaeology for Outstanding Contributions.
As a teacher and mentor, Dee Ann made profound impacts on the lives and careers of her masters
and doctoral students. She chaired the committees
of many of Texas’ leading archeologists, taught
courses in basic anthropology and archeology, and
taught field methods in archeology. In addition to her
teaching and mentoring, Dee Ann created TARL as
we know it today, a facility that benefited all of her
students and at least two generations of researchers. It was through her efforts that the archeological collections and archives from all over the state
have been compiled in a single location for research
purposes. There are indeed few such facilities in the
country. Like any outstanding teacher, mentor, and
educator, her guidance and influence changed the
lives and career directions for many of her students,
who have gone on to other universities and agencies
across the country continuing her remarkable legacy.
Dee Ann moved to Wimberley upon retirement

and became active in the Wimberley Institute of
Cultures, Wimberley Players, and Wimberley
Democrats. A visit with her after retirement would
invite stories of her worldwide travels accompanied
by dear friends Lila Knight and Ann Dibble that
took her to every continent. She visited Antarctica,
Greenland, Peru, Chile, Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa, China, Greece, Italy, Mexico, the
Galapagos Islands, India, Bhutan, Tanzania, and
Kenya, where she pointed out archeological sites to
friends at the tent camps.
At the time Dee Ann entered the field of archeology, men dominated it; very few women entered the
profession. Despite this imbalance, she not only persevered but also became a distinguished archeologist
and scholar, and she opened the door for many more
young women to get in the field and become professional archeologists. As Mike Collins stated at her
memorial on February 5th, 2011, at Wimberley, she
was one of the guys. When working in the field, Dee
Ann worked in the pits, becoming saturated with
red clay like everyone else, and she stretched the
work time from daylight until late afternoon. Then,
she would lean back, drink beer, and laugh with all
the others in the evenings. As Margaret Jodry said
at the same memorial gathering, she was one of the
gals too. Dee Ann’s work ethic was legendary and it
rubbed off on all of her students. Her students gained
a sense of pride and discipline, and she taught us
all how to present ourselves as professional archeologists. She connected with her students in a way
that gained her their utmost respect and admiration,
truly a teacher’s teacher. Her contributions to Texas
archeology, the Texas Archeological Society, The
Archaeological Conservancy, and to the lives of her
former students and friends in Wimberley will stand
as her lasting legacy.
Her legacy includes two generations of trained
professional archeologists and major contributions
in Central Texas and Caddo archeology. Her mentors were Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks, with
whom she teamed while she as a graduate student
in producing the classic volume An Introductory
Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks 1954; see also Shafer 2010, Tunnell 2000).
Much of her early work was in Central Texas, but
she later added the Caddo area as a major research
focus. Perhaps her most important archeological
contributions were the excavations at the George
C. Davis and Deshazo sites in East Texas, but she
also made significant contributions in Central Texas
archeology, and established the research facility

Shafer and Hester—The Legacy of Dee Ann Story
known as TARL; the latter two are discussed below.
The Davis site has three mounds, one of which had
been explored in the 1930s; she opened the two remaining mounds, Mounds B and C, and explored a
large portion of the village. At Deshazo, she directed
excavations of an historic Hasinai Caddo village.
When combined, her lasting legacy was the foundation she helped to lay for Texas archeology and the
number of professional archeologists she trained.
PIONEER OF CENTRAL TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGY
Dee Ann was a pioneer in the archeology of
Central Texas. Prior to the 1950s little archeological work had been published in Central Texas
(see Suhm [1960] for an inventory of investigated
archeological sites in the region). Despite the
accumulation of large artifact collections from
the Lake Buchanan and Fall Creek sites by J. E.
Pearce (1932), A. T. Jackson (1938), and Woolsey
(1938) and other investigations such as that of
Vane Huseky (1935) in Nueces Canyon, especially
the much more extensive and more sophisticated
excavations at sites in what became Lake Travis
near Austin, little was actually understood about
site types, chronology, stratigraphy, artifact classification, or function. The most substantial previous contribution was by J. Charles Kelley with
his work with the Cyrus Ray and E. B. Sayles
collections and the Works Progress Administration (WPA) collections along the Colorado River
establishing the foundation for the first systematics and projectile point typology (see Story 1960
for a review of Kelley’s contributions; also Kelley
1947a; Kelley and Campbell 1942).
This was the setting that confronted Dee Ann
as a graduate student at UT where she directed
three archeological excavations in Travis County
whose results she then had to interpret and publish.
The three were the Collins site on Onion Creek,
Smith Rockshelter, also on Onion Creek, and the
Williams site on Bull Creek. Interestingly, each
was a different type of site, and each provided new
and significant data on Central Texas site types
and chronology. The Collins site was a large open
campsite with extensive Archaic and Late Prehistoric deposits on Onion Creek south of Austin;
Smith Rockshelter was a well stratified Late Prehistoric site with predominantly Austin and Toyah
phase components; and the Williams site was a

11

burned rock midden site on Bull Creek near Austin.
These projects illustrate her insightful understanding and imagination in approaching the data recovered from each of these types of sites. She did not
hesitate to question conventional thinking at the
time and to pose new questions and methods. Questioning conventional thinking was a character trait
of Dee Ann’s that she passed on to her students;
she challenged us to do the same. A brief review of
each of these early projects will show her devotion
to critical thinking and foresight.
To understand Dee Ann’s pioneering work in
Central Texas, it is appropriate to put it within the
context of her time: how archeologists viewed the
prehistory and classification of material culture in
the early and mid-1950s. The emphasis was on classification, typology, and chronology that were built
on the efforts of J. Charles Kelley (1947a), Alex D.
Krieger (1946), Newell and Krieger (1949), and
Thomas N. Campbell (1948; Kelly and Campbell
1942) (Figure 1). Texas was in step with some areas of the country in applying archeological theory,
and the theoretical frameworks used by J. Charles
Kelley, Alex D. Krieger, and others remained in
the Classificatory-Historical Period in American
archeology as defined by Willey and Sabloff (1993).
Dee Ann’s analysis of the material culture
from each of these sites was conducted within
the paradigm and systematics that were just being introduced and published in Texas; this was
the Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology
of which she was the senior author (Suhm et al.
1954). The chronology was divided into broad “developmental periods:” Paleo-American, Archaic,
Neo-American, and Historic. The systematics followed a modified Midwestern Taxonomic System
where assemblages within a site were labeled
components, sites with similar components were
grouped under foci, and similar foci were grouped
under aspects. For Central Texas, the Archaic was
defined as the Edwards Plateau Aspect with three
defined foci, Clear Fork, Round Rock, and Uvalde.
The Central Texas Aspect of the Neo-American
Stage was divided into two foci, Austin and Toyah.
The Sites
Collins Site
The Collins Site (41TV40) is located on a
south bank terrace of Onion Creek about 10 km
from downtown Austin (Figure 2). Students from

Figure	
  	
  1A	
  
	
  
12
TexasaArcheological
Shafer	
  
nd	
  Hester	
  	
  Society
Dee	
  Ann	
  Legacy	
  BTAS	
  Figures	
  
	
  
a

	
  

b

	
  
Figure	
  
	
  
1
A	
  
Figure 1. Drs. Thomas N. Campbell and Alex D. Krieger conversing as Dee Ann moves closer to hear their conversation 	
  
Figure	
  
1B	
   b, she takes notes closer to them. Photos
	
   the Collins site ca. 1953: a, Dee Ann stands behind the back
at
dirt pile;
courtesy of TARL.

Figure 2. View of the University of Texas excavations at the 	
  Collins site ca. 1953. Photo courtesy of TARL.

Figure	
  1B	
  

Shafer and Hester—The Legacy of Dee Ann Story

13

that exhibited unifacial flaking. The
legitimacy of these assumed functional terms would be challenged
in later years, although the dart
point-arrow point division holds
true in Central Texas today. The
term knife, however, was based on
the assumption that any unstemmed
biface could have functioned as a
knife. It was not until a decade later
when the accomplished flint knapper Don Crabtree demonstrated to
us at a Texas Archeological Society meeting in Dallas that many of
these bifacial artifacts were in fact
failures in a manufacturing process,
and not knives at all (Figure 5).
Dee Ann’s discussion of the
Collins site is worth reading to understand the historical development
of her interpretations. She aptly observed that while the Central Texas
	
   Aspect materials that contained
Figure	
  
3Ann
	
   with fellow graduate students at the Collins site ca. 1953. Scallorn and Perdiz points (and
Figure 3. Dee
bone artifacts—Figure 6) occurred
	
  Photo courtesy of TARL.
in the upper 18 inches, there was
considerable mixing with Archaic
point types (Figure 7). Because of
her observations, she questioned the separation beUT under Dee Ann’s direction excavated it in
tween the Edwards Plateau and Central Texas As1953-1954. The excavation consisted of 30 5 x 5 ft.
pects that J. Charles Kelley (1947b) had proposed,
squares excavated to depths varying from 18 to 88
and she further noted that many sites in Central
inches (Figures 3-4). The site contained an extenTexas had both dart points and arrow points mixed
sive Neo-American (Late Prehistoric) occupation
together. In fact, she hinted of a continuity from
overlying Late and Middle Archaic components. A
one arrow point type to the other. She speculated
significant sample of pottery was recovered from
on the size of the social group that occupied the
the UT investigations (849 sherds) that have prosite as well by inserting a bit of anthropology into
vided an important reference collection (see Creel
the archeological discussion, something that was
et al. 2013). The thick midden deposits at Collins
almost unheard of in the mid-1950s in Texas. She
were tested to a depth of five feet and were not
had begun excavations at the Smith Rockshelter
clearly stratified although the artifact provenience
at the time she wrote the Collins site report, and
charts show some hint of temporal trends. These
made reference to the preliminary findings at the
findings were significant at the time in Texas archeSmith site of Layer I, the deepest component that
ology and provided a baby step toward building a
contained mainly Darl points, stating that the same
regional chronology and confirming that changes
component was also present at Collins.
in projectile point types could signal chronological
Dee Ann was able to tease out a very rough
changes (Suhm 1955).
chronology for the distribution of dart points,
Artifacts were labeled with conventional
noting that Pedernales, Bulverde, and Nolan octerminology such as dart points, arrow points,
curred at the deeper levels whereas Ensor, Darl,
knives, scrapers, drills, and choppers—all labels
Marcos, Williams, Marshall, and Edgewood were
that implied an assumed use. The term “knife”
the predominant types in the middle level, and the
was applied to any unstemmed biface regardless of
upper 18 inches yielded a mixture of arrow points
stage of reduction, and “scraper” was any artifact

Figure	
  4.	
  

	
  

	
  

14 Texas
Figure	
  
3	
   Archeological Society
	
  

archeologist that has excavated Archaic period sites
in Central Texas.
Her Collins site report, while descriptive and
lacking in detail based on today’s standards, is full
of insight and illustrates Dee Ann’s forward and
anthropological thinking at the time. The material
culture she recovered has provided an important
body of comparative data for others working in
the region, especially with regards to the large ceramic sample (Figure 8). Creel (Creel et al. 2013)
analyzed 10 of these sherds in his broad study of
Central Texas ceramics.
Smith Rockshelter
Smith Rockshelter (41TV42) was excavated
by students from UT under Dee Ann’s direction
in 1954 and 1955 (Figure 9a-b). Its location along
Onion Creek is on the boundary between the
Blackland Prairie and the Edwards Plateau in what
is now McKinney Falls State Park. The shelter is
about 130 ft. (40 m) long, and some 18 ft. (5.5 m)
deep, and 40 ft. (12.2 m) above Onion Creek. It had
been subjected to intermittent overbank flooding

Figure	
  
.	
   deep excavation at the Collins site ca.
Figure 4. 4
The
	
  1953, which was the subject of discussion among Drs.
	
  Campbell and Krieger and Dee Ann in Figure 1. Photo

	
  

courtesy of TARL.

and dart points. She noted that this projectile point
distribution more closely matched that of Pearce’s
(1932) scheme.
Her observations regarding the mixing of the
Central Texas Aspect and Edwards Plateau Aspect
materials in the upper level at Collins are also
worth noting because the processes that led to the
mixing of components in deep midden sites are
still a matter of conjecture among archeologists
today. She gave only a single sentence comment
on the excellent stratigraphy at Smith Rockshelter
and how that showed a separation of Austin and
Toyah components, but made reference to Jelks’
(1953) observation of the separation between
the two at Blum Rockshelter. She did not discuss
the stratigraphic separation between these two
components in her Collins site report. However,
she did report that burned rock hearth features occurred throughout the deposits below 18 inches,
an observation that will not be a surprise to any

Figure	
  
5	
  
Figure 5. Artifacts
originally classified as “knives” but
	
  are currently interpreted as discarded blanks and broken
	
  biface preforms. Photo courtesy of TARL.

	
  

Figure	
  5	
  
	
  
	
  

	
  
Figure	
  6	
  	
  
	
  

Shafer and Hester—The Legacy of Dee Ann Story

Figure 6. One of two bone fishhooks from the Collins site that
were recovered from the 12-18 inch level probably associated
with either the Austin or Toyah components. Photo courtesy
of TARL.

	
  
Figure	
  7.	
  
	
  

	
  

	
  

15

resulting in frequent deposits of silt that
provide excellent stratigraphic separation
of the occupation middens. The shelter
deposits reached a depth of about 8 to 9
ft. (2.4-2.8 m) and contained six distinct
occupation zones dating from the Late, or
Transitional, Archaic to the Toyah phase in
the uppermost cultural layer. One significant
factor in assessing the site’s chronology was
the stratigraphic separation of occupational
zones with alluvial deposits.
A grid system of 5 ft. squares was
superimposed over the site; initially the
excavation strategy was to use 6 inch levels, but once the natural stratigraphy was
recognized the procedure was to follow the
occupation layers. All material was passed
through a 1/4-inch hardware screen, and all
lithics, “identifiable” bone fragments, and
shell samples were collected for each level.

Figure 7. A selection of dart points including Pedernales, Martindale, Bandy, Edgewood, unnamed types, and a drill
from the Collins site showing a mixture of Early, Middle, and Late Archaic types. Photo courtesy of TARL.

	
  

16

Texas Archeological Society

Figure	
  8B	
  
	
  
Figure	
  8A	
  
	
  

	
  

	
  

a

	
  

	
  

Figure	
  8B	
  
	
  

b

	
  

c

	
  
Figure	
  8C	
  

	
  Figure 8. Examples of the ceramics recovered from the Collins Site: a-b, original photographs of Boothe Brushed used
in the Introductory
Handbook of Texas Archeology; c, Leon Plain bone-tempered sherds. Photos courtesy of TARL.
Figure	
  
8C	
  

	
  

	
  
	
  

Figure	
  9a	
  
	
  

Shafer and Hester—The Legacy of Dee Ann Story

a

17

	
  

b
Figure 9. Smith
Figure	
  
9b	
   Rockshelter excavations by University of Texas graduate students in progress ca. 1955: a, note
the depth of the shelter; b, the width of the excavations. Photos courtesy of TARL.
	
  

	
  

18

Texas Archeological Society

Included in the sampling were 46 radiocarbon
samples and 19 snail shell samples. Dee Ann’s
recognition of the value of charcoal for radiocarbon
dating is notable, as the method was just coming
into vogue in the mid-1950s, only a few years after Willard Libby was awarded his Nobel Prize in
Physics in 1949 for developing the technique. Also,
Smith Rockshelter was among the first archeological investigations in Central Texas in which snail
shells were systematically collected and analyzed.
Perhaps also forgotten by scholars was her assertion that Bulimulus dealbatus (now identified as
Rabdotus) were utilized for food.
As noted above, the entire Archaic period as
it was known in the 1950s was included in the
Edwards Plateau Aspect, and the Neo-American
(Late Prehistoric) period included the Austin and
Toyah foci and was labeled the Central Texas Aspect. A full definition of the latter was yet to come
(Jelks 1962) and it was over a decade later that
a much better understanding of the long Archaic
sequence in Central Texas was gained (see Sorrow
et al. 1967:Figure 72). The Midwestern Taxonomic
System has long been abandoned and now occupies
only an interval in the theoretical history of Texas
archeology. Vestiges of it remain with the retention
of the Austin and Toyah phases.
The stratigraphy in Smith Rockshelter taken
from Dee Ann’s 1957 article is reviewed in some
depth here because it shows the unequivocal separation between the Darl, Scallorn (Austin), and Perdiz
(Toyah) components. First, it should be noted that
the geological stratum forming the bedrock was
montmorillonite or serpentine originating from the
late Cretaceous volcano Pilot Knob several miles to
the southeast. The overlying shelter deposits varied
in thickness from several feet along the back wall
to 8.5 ft. (2.6 m) in the front and middle sections.
Eleven separate stratigraphic layers (I-XI) numbered
from bottom to top were identified in the shelter deposits. The following stratigraphic descriptions are
quoted verbatim from Suhm (1957:29-30):

Layer II (60”-66”). Soil was sandy, buff
in color and comparatively sterile of
cultural debris. Several small lenses of
gravel occurred in this zone.

Layer I (66”-103”). Basal occupation
zone. Very ashy with innumerable snail
shells. Flint chips and bone scrap present
throughout, but not very common. In a
few squares hearthstones were particularly numerous. Soil loose, gray in color,
and contained limestone spalls from the
back of the shelter and serpentine fragments from the floor.

Layer XI (0”-10”). A concentrated occupation layer, consisting of a loose to
fairly well consolidated, light gray silt.
The upper two-three inches had been
reworked by wind action, making this
soil much finer. Charcoal, flint chips,
snail and mussel shells, and animal bones
were very abundant. Largest number of
artifacts came from these layers.

Layer III (53”-60”). A light occupation
zone, with notable concentration of snail
shells. Soil gray in color. Flint chips present, but not abundant.
Layer IV (49”-53”). A thin, sandy layer,
buff in color, almost no artifacts were
found in this level.
Layer V (41”-49”). Concentrated occupation zone, with numerous hearthstones.
Charcoal, ash, flint chips, and bone fragments found throughout.
Layer VI (36”-41”). Contained very little
evidence of occupation. Soil buff in color
and somewhat sandy in texture.
Layer VII (30”-36”). An occupation
zone containing numerous flint chips,
hearthstones, bone fragments, and lenses
of charcoal. Soil gray in color, with considerable ash throughout.
Layer VIII (24”-30”). A relatively sterile
zone of coarse gray alluvium. At a depth
of about 30 inches a thick band of small
gravel was present in most squares. Bone
scrap, flint chips, and charcoal absent.
Layer IX (19”-24”). This layer was very
irregular and, in several squares, was difficult to distinguish from Layer X. The
soil was light gray silt, and well consolidated. Cultural material found throughout, although not nearly so frequently as
in Layer XI.
Layer X (10”-19”). Soil similar to above
layer, but lacked evidence of occupation.

Shafer and Hester—The Legacy of Dee Ann Story
Dee Ann identified three cultural zones within
this stratigraphic profile based on her artifact
analysis (Figure 10). These were: Edwards Plateau
Aspect, Zone I, in Layer I; Austin Focus, Zone II,
in upper part of Layer I through Layer IX; and
Toyah Focus, Zone III, in Layer XI.
The Smith Rockshelter report exemplifies Dee
Ann’s insightfulness and creative thinking with
regards to new interpretive trends in American
archeology. Her realization that radiocarbon dating, as elementary as it was at the time, was to be
a major player in dating and structuring prehistoric
assemblages was insightful. She systematically
collected radiocarbon and snail samples for future
dating although she had no means to date them
at the time. Subsequently two radiocarbon dates
have been run on charcoal from the Toyah component at Smith Rockshelter. These are Tx-504 and
Tx-510 (Valastro and Davis 1970:271). Johnson
(1994:258) recalculated these two dates at A.D.

19

1739-1820 and A.D. 1626-1813, respectively.
Assuming the date ranges are accurate, these are
among the youngest dates thus far obtained on a
Toyah assemblage.
Based on her work at Smith, for the first time
the distribution of projectile points from the site
firmly established the distinctive stratigraphic sequence and position of Darl (Figure 11) and Ensor
(Layer I), Scallorn (upper Layer I to Layer IX)
(Figure 12), and Perdiz (Layer XI) (Figure 13).
Bison bone tools were also identified in the Perdiz
level (Figure 14). Mixed throughout the deposit
were various Late Paleoindian and Archaic points
(Figure 15). Plainview and Angostura were identified as the Paleoindian types although the specimen
she identified as Plainview would be classified
today as Golondrina. Other recognized Archaic
types include Bulverde, Pedernales (Figure 16),
Castroville, Uvalde, Pandora, Palmillas, and unclassified examples.

	
  

Figure 10.
Fig.	
  
1Smith
0	
   Rockshelter stratigraphy (from Story 1957).
	
  

	
  

Fig.	
  10	
  
	
  
20

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. Darl points from Layer I at Smith Rockshelter. Photo courtesy of TARL.

	
  

Figure	
  11.	
  

Figure	
  
2	
  
Figure 12.1Scallorn
and Edwards points from Layers II-IX at Smith Rockshelter: top row: Scallorn; bottom row: Edwards,
	
  two Alba-like, and two Scallorn. Photo courtesy of TARL.
	
  
Dee Ann recognized that these artifacts were
not in their proper stratigraphic context, especially
the Paleoindian types which came from Layer V.
She observed that several of these Archaic and

Paleoindian points had been collected from gravels
and introduced into the deposits by Late Prehistoric
artifact collectors. Dee Ann’s reasoning for the reuse of ancient tools was that the cultural landscape

	
  

	
  
	
  

Shafer and Hester—The Legacy of Dee Ann Story

21

Figure 13. Perdiz points from Layer XI at Smith Rockshelter. Photo courtesy of TARL.

	
  

Figure	
  13	
  

Figure	
  
14	
  Bison bone tools from Layer XI (Toyah phase) at Smith Rockshelter. Photo courtesy of TARL.
Figure 14.
	
  

	
  

	
  

Figure	
  14	
  
22 Texas Archeological Society
	
  

	
  

Figure	
  
5	
  
Figure 15.1Paleoindian
points from various levels at Smith Rockshelter. All are Angostura except for the specimen on
the far right which is Golondrina. Photo courtesy of TARL.

	
  Figure 16. Pedernales points from various levels at Smith Rockshelter. Photo courtesy of TARL.
	
  
Figure	
  16	
  
	
  

	
  

Shafer and Hester—The Legacy of Dee Ann Story
of Central Texas of 1,000 years ago was littered
with artifacts from 10,000 years of hunter-gatherer
occupation and utilization. Projectile points and
other tools were abundant on the surface and in
stream gravels, and anyone at that time could
easily find artifacts of any age by walking across
the surface. Dee Ann recognized this possibility.
Surely the Austin phase or Toyah phase people
could recognize these ancient artifacts and pick
them up as curios or as sacred objects of their
ancestors. Those of us who have adventured into
any site or region not previously visited by a collector and seen the surface littered with projectile
points and other artifacts can only imagine how
abundant surface artifacts were during Austin
phase times. Archeologists should not be surprised
to find Archaic or Paleoindian artifacts intermixed
with later components, but this does not mean that
the two weapon systems were used at the same
time as some argue (Tomka 2013; Van Pool 2006).
The stream-rolled Paleoindian and Archaic points,
probably picked up in the Onion Creek gravels by
the children or other occupants of Smith Rockshelter, attest to the curiosity of human behavior
in recognizing and collecting something indicative
of the past. The drill illustrated by Dee Ann (Suhm
1957:Figure 7K) is an example of an Archaic point
as a recycled resource that was made into a Toyah
drill or perforator.
Smith Rockshelter remains one of the most
important sites in Central Texas because of its
clear stratigraphic separation between the Austin
and Toyah components. There was a question at
the time whether or not these two components
were contemporaneous. Kelley (1947b) thought
they were, but the Belton Reservoir excavations
conducted by E. O. Miller did not clarify that issue (Miller and Jelks 1952). However, the later
work at Belton Reservoir at the Penny Winkle site
substantiated the stratigraphic separation of the two
components (Shafer et al. 1964:Table 2). Dee Ann
was cautious in her approach to the real significance of the Smith site chronology. She provides
only a brief mention of the stratigraphic separation
in her 1960 review of Central Texas archeology
and did not highlight the significance at that time
(Suhm 1960). Nonetheless, the Smith Rockshelter
chronology provided a major confirmation to Jelks’
(1962) argument for separation based on his own
work at the Blum Rockshelter (Jelks 1953) and the
Kyle site (Jelks 1962). Furthermore, the distribution of bison bone confined to Layer XI (with one

23

exception in Layer I) at Smith substantiates the
argument that bison were not present in Central
Texas during the Austin phase times but were present during the Toyah phase.
Williams Site
The Williams site (41TV75) is a burned rock
midden site located on the third terrace of Bull
Creek and is now within Austin city limits (Figure
17). There were two distinct middens and a scattered campsite area when investigated by UT students from October 1955 to May 1956 under Dee
Ann’s direction. The site report was published in
1959 (Suhm 1959).
The Williams site was one of only a few
burned rock middens that were systematically
excavated in the mid- 20th century. The main references available on previous work at burned rock
midden sites throughout Central Texas at that time
were: Huskey’s (1935) survey in Nueces County;
Jackson’s (1938) Fall Creek sites; Woolsey’s
(1938) Lake Buchanan sites; the WPA excavations
in Travis County (Kelley and Campbell 1942);
Jelks’ (1951) Master’s thesis at UT; and Schuetz’
(1957) and Sturgis’ (1956) descriptions of artifact
assemblages from burned rock middens. Dee Ann
(Suhm 1959:218-220) provides a good review of
Central Texas archeology and systematics in the
article’s introduction that sets the stage for her
interpretations. This site report provides another
example of her progressive and intuitive thinking
in efforts to squeeze as much information out of the
data and to find some relevance to the patterning,
or lack thereof, that she defined. Anyone who has
ever excavated a burned rock midden is aware of
the jumbled nature of their deposits. The mystery
of the burned rock midden had not been totally
resolved in the mid-1950s, and the perplexing
distribution of diagnostics is evident in Dee Ann’s
discussions. These were difficult sites to deal with
as she clearly recognized: “[t]he basic problem
lies in the homogenous content of the midden deposit, and in the frequent absence of clear cultural
artifact stratigraphy” (Suhm 1959:219). However,
she recognized that the diversity of projectile point
types suggested repeated occupation, and that the
point diversity could perhaps provide the best clues
to factoring out possible geographic and temporal
differences within the Archaic period.
The midden UT excavated extended over a
relatively large area measuring approximately 140

24

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 17. View of the Williams site excavations looking west across the Bull Creek valley in Travis County. Photo
courtesy of TARL.

Figure	
  17.	
  	
  View	
  of	
  the	
  Williams	
  Site	
  excavations.	
  
	
   x 70 ft., and reached a maximum depth of 3.4 ft. showed that Scallorn and Eddy arrow points were
The site was gridded in 5 ft. squares and excavated
in 6 inch levels, the standard procedure at the time
for site investigations (Figure 18). This excavation control provided the horizontal and vertical
structure for her analysis. She used the horizontal
and vertical distribution of projectile points to
posit at least four distinct occupations (or components) at the site based on systematics current
at that time. The systematics she used in the Williams site analysis were the same she previously
used, and followed Suhm et al.’s (1954) use of the
Midwestern Taxonomic System (i.e., the Archaic
Edwards Plateau Aspect and the post-Archaic Central Texas Aspect). The sample of 94 arrow points
was dominated by Scallorn and Eddy types, which
were confined to the upper 6 inches of the deposits.
The large dart point sample (402 specimens) came
from all levels.
Dee Ann attempted to verify the current classification of dart points versus arrow points by
weighing each of the complete projectile points.
This was a first for Texas archeology and was based
on Fenenga’s (1953) efforts in California, and is
another example of her efforts to bring new ideas
from other regions to Texas archeology. Her data

	
  

the lightest in the sample and that weights of Darl
and Ensor were transitional between the other dart
point categories of Bulverde, Castroville, Pedernales, Frio, Martindale, Nolan, Tortugas, Travis, and
Williams; she posited that perhaps Darl and Ensor
were transitional arrow points. Weight rather than
technology was the criteria used in this separation.
Dee Ann also collected land snails as she did
at Smith Rockshelter and noted that Bulimulus or
Rabdotus occurred in all levels. She again posited
that they were a food source, and saved a sample
for radiocarbon dating. This is significant in that
charcoal is rarely preserved in Central Texas
burned rock middens.
Edward Jelks’ (1951) Master’s thesis at UT
dealt with the perplexing distribution of diagnostic
projectile points excavated from burned rock middens in the Marshall Ford basin excavated by the
WPA. Dee Ann tested Jelks’ thesis model in her
distributional study of projectile points. She found
the point distribution within burned rock middens
as perplexing as Jelks did, but tried every effort
through vertical, horizontal, and chi-square analysis to factor out some type of significant patterning.
Her efforts to glean patterning from the vertical

	
  

	
  

Figure	
  17.	
  	
  View	
  of	
  the	
  Williams	
  Site	
  excavations.	
  
Shafer and Hester—The Legacy of Dee Ann Story
	
  

	
  

25

Figure 18. The Williams site excavations ca. 1956 in Travis County. Photo courtesy of TARL.

	
  
Figure	
  18.	
  	
  Excavations	
  at	
  the	
  Williams	
  Site	
  in	
  progress.	
  
distribution proved only slightly successful in that
arrow points were noted to occur in the uppermost
levels with little admixture with dart points, but
that dart points tended to show a more mixed distribution. Not to be defeated by the vertical data,
Dee Ann divided the site into three horizontal units
and examined the horizontal distribution of projectile points. She noted that various types occurred
in all three units but differed in percentages. To
test if the relative abundance of each type was significant, she applied chi-square statistics, a rather
pioneering approach for the time. She formally
stated her basic assumptions that: (1) the typology
was accurate; (2) each type represented a cultural
entity; and (3) “any two of the six dart point types
analyzed differed with respect to the relative frequency with which group members fall into Units
I and II” (Suhm 1959:233). Still, she struggled to
make sense of the patterning, or lack thereof, in her
horizontal analysis. In the end, the distributional
trends of the projectile point types Pedernales,
Nolan, Bulverde, Travis, and Ensor within the
horizontal units were not clear cut, but she favored
the conclusion that the point distribution reflected

“several different occupations, each characterized
by a slightly different assemblage of projectile
points” (Suhm 1959:233). Readers should recall
that the stratigraphic separation of dart point types
had not been established in 1959; this did not occur until the analysis and synthesis of the Canyon
Reservoir investigations (Johnson et al. 1962).
She apparently started her analysis with the
assumption that the three Edwards Plateau Aspect
foci (Clear Fork, Round Rock, and Uvalde as
defined by Kelley [1947a]) were valid constructs
as she attempted to relate the Williams site assemblages to these analytical units. However, she
simply could not validate them with the Williams
site data and lamented the fact that since pure components were unreported, the status of these foci
was uncertain. In short, she could not find evidence
to confirm their validity, and urged others to seek
such confirmation or define other constructs.
Her discussion of burned rock middens origin
and accumulation is also worth noting as it was
well ahead of its time. Kelley and Campbell
(1942:320) correctly identified the formation process for burned rock middens—specifically that

	
  

26

Texas Archeological Society

they formed around stone hearths. But, the issue
of why the middens contained such an admixture
of projectile points had not yet been explained; it
would take another 50 years before the formation
processes of burned rock middens would be understood (Black et al. 1997; Nickels et al. 2000).
Thus, Dee Ann (Suhm 1959:247) explained the occurrence of burned rock middens in the following
way: (1) The abundance of native stone, especially
limestone; (2) the extensive use of stone-lined and/
or stone-encircled hearths; (3) repeated use of favored camping locations; and (4) slow deposition
of alluvium.
Canyon Reservoir, Building a Chronology
The advances in projectile point typology
and steps toward securing a cultural chronology taken by Dee Ann in her three student-led
investigations became more solidified with the
combined analysis of the data from three sites
in Canyon Reservoir (Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate), which she co-authored with LeRoy
Johnson, Jr. and Curtis D. Tunnell (Johnson et al.
1962). The chronological trends Johnson noted
at Wunderlich, combined with the stratigraphic
information from Oblate, provided the necessary
information to construct a chronology and periodic scale for certain projectile point types. This
chronology, however, covered only the upper half
of the long Central Texas archeological Archaic
sequence and had Nolan and Bulverde types as the
earliest in the sequence. Discoveries at the Youngsport site (Shafer 1963), and four years later with
the combined chronologies at the Landslide and
Evoe Terrace sites along the Lampasas River in
Bell County (Sorrow et al. 1967), not only substantiated the Canyon Reservoir chronology but
extended it by defining two earlier components
not previously recognized. Campbell (1948) had
indeed found evidence for Archaic components
below Nolan dart points along Brushy Creek
in Williamson County. Unfortunately, since his
results had not been reported previously, it went
largely unrecognized until the Stillhouse Hollow
work. The Central Texas chronology was later
expanded by Prewitt (1981), and more recently
by Collins (1998). Nonetheless, the Canyon Reservoir excavations and its report proved to be the
initial foundation for a chronological sequence for
the Archaic period in Central Texas that built on
the one proposed by J. Charles Kelley (1947a).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL
RESEARCH LABORATORY
One of Dee Ann’s most important legacies
was the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL). UT had been massing archeological collections and archives since 1919, and they were
significantly bolstered by the many WPA projects
during the Great Depression. These combined collections had been housed in various places over
time including “Little Campus” and the Texas Memorial Museum. The Little Campus was an historic
complex of buildings constructed in 1858 along
19th street (now Martin Luther King Boulevard)
that variously served as the Texas Asylum for the
Blind, State Hospital for the Senile, men’s dormitory, and, in one building, artifact collections storage after World War II. The Texas Archeological
Salvage Project housed at the Balcones Research
Center also was accumulating collections. The
need for a consolidated research and collections
facility was paramount for the Department of Anthropology and associated research projects. This
task was formulated in 1961 as a joint venture of
the Department of Anthropology and the Texas
Memorial Museum (Story 1996).
Dee Ann returned to Austin in 1961, and
worked first as a Curator at the Texas Memorial
Museum. In 1962, she started her teaching role at
UT. Although she was an active faculty member
in anthropology, she had a special mission to get
the scattered and poorly-kept collections of the
University, accumulating since 1919, together
in one place. The daunting task began under her
supervision in 1961. In 1963, the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (briefly, Center) was
established at the University’s Balcones Research
Center. This is in north Austin and was initially
based in about 100 buildings of various sizes,
dating from a World War II federal magnesium
plant (Kleiner 1996). TARL moved around some,
but settled in Building 5 (where it is still situated,
albeit in a greatly modified and upgraded status!).
Offices were spare, staff were few, the floors
polished concrete, and there was an area in which
collections were being assembled, inventoried,
and stored: initially in wooden shelving, then
with steel framed cabinets with wooden drawers.
Dee Ann was always working on ways to improve
the collections, access to them, details of storage,
and inventory of new (and many old) collections.
To be assigned to work on collections in the

Shafer and Hester—The Legacy of Dee Ann Story

27

winter, with a few heaters and that cold
concrete floor, or in the hot summer with
the stifling heat, was a test of a student’s
commitment to archeology! But oh what
learning experience we all had working
with those collections. Later, before her
retirement in 1987, she obtained the first
of several National Science Foundation
(NSF) grants to construct a temperatureenvironment controlled building (Figure
19), fitting easily within the high roofs of
the Building 5 warehouse. Later, TARL
directors Thomas Hester and Darrel Creel
obtained additional NSF funding for
expansion and greater storage capacity.
The enormity of the task of making
the University’s collections accessible for
research cannot be overstated. Some students participated in the work of moving
old, poorly boxed, dirty, dusty, and disorganized collections from storage rooms at
the University’s Little Campus adjacent to
the main campus. These were loaded into
the “Blue Goose,” an early 1950s International travelall, for the trip out to TARL.
The collections derived from Professor J.
E. Pearce’s exploratory digging in Central
Texas, later continued by A. T. Jackson
	
  
and others (using Rockefeller Foundation Fig.	
  
19	
  19. Darrell Creel, former director of TARL, conducting
Figure
grants). Then, there was the vast amount 	
  research in the climate-controlled building within Building 5 at the
of material from the WPA excavations dur- 	
  J. J. Pickle Research Center.
ing the Great Depression. Dee Ann had to
	
  
assemble the chaos from the 1950s, when
state). The work also required establishing a system
she, Alex Krieger, and Edward Jelks had 	
  pulled
for organizing and properly storing black and white
together thousands of projectile points and other
photos and the later color slides. Indeed, many of
artifacts for the 1954 Handbook. In the late 1940sthe archived WPA photos were developed as nitrate
1960s, River Basin reservoir salvage efforts were
negatives, and they had to be constantly stored in a
carried out, adding yet another layer of assemblages
freezer to retard decomposition which would lead
that needed to be processed for curation. Afterwards,
to the accumulation of explosive gases! In these,
the federal effort for reservoir salvage was assumed
and many other tasks, she was greatly aided in the
by the University’s Texas Archeological Salvage
1960s-1970s, and in certain cases, the 1980s, by
Project that was housed at TARL.
Dorris L. (Dodie) Olds, Terrisa Lazicki, Carolyn
Part of Dee Ann’s goal for proper curation was,
Spock, and numerous undergraduate and graduate
of course, the “clerical” work of compiling the
students who worked part-time at TARL.
cabinet-and-drawer numbers in which specific colMuch of the record of work by Dee Ann in
lections could be found, issuing trinomial numbers
terms of curation, collections, and the development
for new sites—and the old ones that had utilized
of TARL is well-summarized by Bailey (1997).
different numbering systems—and setting up map
Many details can be found in that volume (see also
files for all topographic maps of Texas (with each
Story 1996).
site plotted; sometimes in the 1960s, Texas County
As part of her work at TARL, Dee Ann played
Highway maps had to suffice because topographic
a large role in the salvage, restoration, and curation
maps had not yet been published for all of the

28

Texas Archeological Society

of the 16th century shipwrecks found on the lower
Texas coast in 1967 by a private out-of-state salvage company. The State of Texas filed suit and
eventually acquired title to all of the salvage company finds. In 1969, before the final judgment, a
judge placed the artifacts in the temporary custody
of TARL. This began a multi-year inventory, cleaning, restoration, and study of the vast number of
Spanish artifacts. With Dee Ann’s key influence, in
1971 the UT Board of Regents awarded funds for
the Antiquities Conservation Laboratory at TARL
in the Balcones Research Center (now the J. J.
Pickle Research Center) (Olds 1976; Davis 1977).
Dee Ann’s role as a preservationist is well
known. She served for several years on the board
of The Archaeological Conservancy. She even gave
the acreage occupied by a burned rock midden at
her Wimberley property to the Conservancy. Perhaps, though, her greatest contribution to archeological preservation was the incredible effort she
put into the curation of Texas artifact collections
and archives. As Darrell Creel (2011) wrote in the
Friends of TARL Newsletter, Dee Ann’s “support
of TARL continued even after her passing; she provided a substantial bequest to TARL’s Excellence
Endowment Fund that will help with funding needs
for years to come. Her contributions to TARL, the
University, and to archeology in general are prodigious and cannot be overstated.”
TARL has become the premier archeological
research facility in Texas. The century of archival
data that it holds contains most of the history of
Texas archeology and TARL continues to be used
by most researchers today (see Figure 19). The
lithic and ceramic collections from across the state
provide an enormously important comparative
resource tool for research and study.
SUMMARY
All the excavations Dee Ann directed and reported at the Collins, Smith, and Williams sites were
done by volunteer labor provided by student colleagues using UT Anthropology Department equipment and supplies. There were no grants involved,
only the support of the Anthropology Department.
She undertook these projects to advance her own
learning experience and in so doing provided lasting
contributions to the on-going discussions regarding
the validity of the systematics in vogue at the time
and added important building blocks for a secure

projectile point chronology for Central Texas. At
the same time, she provided invaluable experience
for the students who assisted her.
One of the main reasons that Dee Ann’s contributions have stood the test of time is that she had
the discipline to base her interpretations on empirical data and not rely on speculations or outdated
assumptions. In fact, she continuously questioned
the very systematics she helped to establish in the
Handbook. If there was one character trait that
best describes Dee Ann as an archeologist it was
discipline in her research. We have all benefited
from that legacy.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The writers would like to thank Nancy Kenmotsu and Timothy K. Perttula for organizing the
symposium at the Society for American Archaeology annual meeting in 2012 to honor Dee Ann’s
contribution and legacy. Laura Nightengale and
Darrell Creel at TARL provided the photographs
used in this article. We are very grateful for their
assistance and cooperation. Colleagues who read
and commented on drafts of this article were Nancy
Kenmotsu, Edward B. Jelks, and Darrell Creel.
Their comments and suggestions were most helpful
in filling in the historic details of Dee Ann’s Central
Texas contributions.
REFERENCES CITED
Bailey, G. L.
1997 A Guide to the Historic Materials of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. Archival Series
1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Black, S., L. W. Ellis, D. G. Creel, and G. T. Goode
1997 Hot Rock Cooking on the Greater Edwards Plateau:
Four Burned Rock Midden Sites in West Central
Texas. Studies in Archeology 22, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin, Archeology Studies Program, Report 2,
Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Division, Austin.
Campbell, T. N.
1948 The Merrill Site: Archeological Remains Associated
with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 19:7-35.

Shafer and Hester—The Legacy of Dee Ann Story
Collins, M. B.
1998 Background to the Archeological Excavations.
In Wilson Leonard: An 11,000-year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas,
Volume I: Introduction, Background, and Synthesis,
assembled and edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 55-76.
Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin, Archeology Studies Program, Report 10,
Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Division, Austin.
Creel, D.
2011 Director’s Notes. Friends of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory Newsletter, December, p.
1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Creel, D., J. R. Ferguson, and N. A. Kenmotsu
2013 A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas HunterGatherer Ceramics and Its Implications for Mobility,
Ethnic Group Territory, and Interaction. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 84:29-83.
Davis, J. L.
1977 Treasure, People, Ships and Dreams. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.
Fennenga, F.
1953 The Weights of Chipped Stone Points: A Clue to their
Functions. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 9:
309-323.
Huskey, V.
1935 An Archeological Survey of the Nueces Canyon.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 7:105-114.
Jackson, A. T.
1938 The Fall Creek Sites. University of Texas Publication
No. 3802, Austin.
Jelks, E. B.
1951 Relationships between Foci of the Edwards Plateau
Aspect: A Distributional Analysis of Diagnostic
Projectile Point Types from Archaeological Sites in
the Marshall Ford Dam Reservoir, Travis County,
Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
1953 Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 24:189-207.

1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect
Site in Hill County, Texas. Archeology Series No.
5. Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas.

29

Johnson, L., Jr.
1994 The Life and Times of the Toyah-Culture Folk: The
Buckhollow Encampment Site 41KM16, Kimble
County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist
Report 38, Texas Department of Transportation and
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Johnson, L., Jr., D. A. Suhm, and C. D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites. Bulletin 5.
Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Kelley, J. C.
1947a The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity
8:97-109.

1947b The Lehmann Rockshelter: A Stratified Site of the
Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
18:115-128.
Kelley, J. C. and T. N. Campbell
1942 What are the Burnt Rock Mounds of Texas? American Antiquity 7:319-322.
Kleiner, D.
1996 J. J. Pickle Research Campus. In The New Handbook
of Texas, Volume 3, edited by R. Tyler, pp. 886-888.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Krieger, A. D.
1946 Cultural Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. University of Texas Publication No. 4640,
Austin.
Lister, F. C.
1997 Pot Luck: Adventures in Archaeology. University of
New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Miller, E. O. and E. B. Jelks
1952 Archaeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir,
Coryell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 23:168-217.
Nickels, D. L., C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach, and D. A. Cargill
2000 Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site, 41BX126,
Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report
265, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, and Archeological
Studies Program, Report 3, Environmental Affairs
Division, Texas Department of Transportation,
Austin.
Newell, H. P., and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoirs 5. Society for American Archaeology,
Menasha, Wisconsin.

30

Texas Archeological Society

Olds, D. L.
1976 Texas Legacy from the Gulf. Miscellaneous Papers 3.
Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Pearce, J. E.
1932 The Present Status of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
4:44-54.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.
Story, D. A.
1996 Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. In The
New Handbook of Texas, Volume 6, edited by R.
Tyler, pp. 286-287. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Schuetz, M. K.
1957 A Report on Williamson County Mound Material. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
28:135-168.
Shafer, H. J.
1963 Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified
Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 34:57-81.

2010 Review of An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology, by Dee Ann Suhm and Alex D. Krieger
with the collaboration of Edward B. Jelks. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 81:227-234.
Shafer, H. J., D. A. Suhm, and J. D. Scurlock
1964 An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Belton Reservoir, Bell and Coryell
Counties, Texas, 1962. Miscellaneous Papers No. 1.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer, and R. E. Ross
1967 Archeological Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project 11. The University of Texas, Austin.
Sturgis, H. F.
1956 A Burnt-Rock Midden Site in Travis County. Bulletin

of the Texas Archeological Society 27:111-128.
Suhm, D. A.
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
26:7-54.

1957 Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 9:7-58.
1959 The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology.
The Texas Journal of Science 11(2):218-249.
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 29:63-107.

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25:1-562.
Tomka, S.
2013 The Adoption of the Bow and Arrow: A Model
Based on Experimental Performance Characteristics.
American Antiquity 78(3):553-569.
Tunnell, C. D.
2000 In Their Own Words: Stories from Some Pioneer
Archeologists. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 71:1-146.
Valastro, S. and E. M. Davis
1970 University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates XI.
Radiocarbon 12(1):249-280.
Van Pool, T. L.
2006 The Survival of Archaic Technology in an Agricultural World: How the Atlatl and Dart Endured in the
North American Southwest. Kiva 71:429-452.
Willey, G. R. and J. A. Sabloff
1993 A History of American Archaeology. 2nd Edition. W.
H. Freeman and Co., New York.
Woolsey, A. M.
1938 Additional Buchanan Lake Sites. In Annual Report
of the WPA and The University of Texas Archaeological Research, Lake Buchanan, 1936-1937. University of Texas Publication 3802:119-145, Austin.

Shafer and Hester—The Legacy of Dee Ann Story

31

Publications of Dee Ann Suhm Story
Compiled by Harry J. Shafer, Nancy A. Kenmotsu
and Timothy K. Perttula

1954 (with Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks) Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 25:1-562.

1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
26:7-54.

1956 Archeological Excavations at the Collins and Smith
Sites, Travis County, Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

1957 Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 9:26-58.
1959 The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology.
The Texas Journal of Science 11:218-250.

1960 Extended Survey of the Right on the Glen Canyon.
In 1959 Excavations in the Glen Canyon Area, edited by William Lipe, pp. 139-284. Anthropological
Papers 39. University of Utah, Salt Lake City.
1960 Cataloguing Archeological Collections. Utah Archaeology 6:5-10.

1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 29:63-107
1961 The Beidleman Ranch Site: An Early Man Kill Site
in Stonewall County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 31:207-212.

1962 The White Site: An Historic Indian Burial in Yoakum
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 32:85-119.

1962 (with LeRoy Johnson, Jr. and Curtis D. Tunnell)
Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The
Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites. Bulletin
5. Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.
1962 (editor with Edward B. Jelks) Handbook of Texas
Archeology: Type Descriptions: A Cumulative Compendium of Type Descriptions. Special Publication
No. 1, Texas Archeological Society, and Bulletin No.
4, Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

1963 (editor with R. King Harris) An Appraisal of the
Archeological Resources of Forney Reservoir, Collin, Dallas, Kaufman, and Rockwall Counties, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project and the Dallas
Archeological Society, Austin and Dallas.

1964 (with Harry J. Shafer and J. Dan Scurlock) An
Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological
Resources of Belton Reservoir, Bell and Coryell
Counties, Texas: 1962. Miscellaneous Papers No.
1. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Austin.
1965 The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson and Kaufman Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 36:163-257.

1966 Introduction and Archeological Background. In Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad
Reservoir Area, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 1-30.
Report submitted to the National Science Foundation
by the Texas Archaeological Salvage Project, Austin.
1967 (with Byron Barber and others) Indian Artifacts: Pottery Vessels. In “The Gilbert Site: A Norteno Focus
Site in Northeastern Texas,” edited by Edward B.
Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
37:112-187.

1968 Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas
Gulf Coast Sites. Archeological Program Report No.
13. State Building Commission, Austin.
1969 1968-1969 Field Work at George C. Davis. Newsletter of the Southeast Archaeological Conference
13:25-32.

1976 The Archaic of East Texas. In The Texas Archaic: A
Symposium, edited by Thomas R. Hester, pp. 46-59.
Special Report No. 2. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
1977 (with Salvatore Valastro, Jr.) Radiocarbon Dating and
the George C. Davis Site, Texas. Journal of Field
Archaeology 4:63-89.
1978 Some Comments on Anthropological Studies Concerning the Caddo. In Essays in Honor of R. K.
Harris, edited by Kurt House, pp. 46-68. Report of
Investigations 3. Institute for the Study of Earth and
Man, Southern Methodist University Press, Dallas.

1981 An Overview of the Archeology of East Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 26:139-156.
1981 (Editor) Archeological Investigations at the George
C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas, Summers
of 1979 and 1980. Occasional Papers No. 1. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

32

Texas Archeological Society

1982 (Editor) The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County,
Texas, Vol. 1: The Site, Its Setting, Investigations,
Cultural Features, Artifacts of Non-Native Manufacture, and Subsistence Remains. Texas Antiquities
Permit Series No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee,
Austin.
1982 (with Darrell G. Creel) The Cultural Setting. In The
Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Vol. 1,
edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 20-34. Texas Antiquities Permit Series No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

1984 A Review of the Investigations at Cedar Grove. In
Cedar Grove: An Interdisciplinary Investigation of
a Late Caddo Farmstead in the Red River Valley,
edited by Neal L. Trubowitz, pp. 278-280. Research
Series No. 23. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West
Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Food Production
in North America, edited by Richard I. Ford, pp.
19-56. Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of
Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

1985 The Walton Site: An Historic Burial in McLennan
County, Texas. Central Texas Archeologist 10:66-96.

1990 (with Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha D.
Freeman, Jerome C. Rose, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W.
Olive, and Kurt J. Reinhard) The Archeology and
Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain. 2 Vols.
Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.
1990 Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, by Dee Ann Story, Janice A. Guy, Barbara A.
Burnett, Martha D. Freeman, Jerome C. Rose, D.
Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Kurt J. Reinhard,
pp. 163-366. 2 Vols. Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

1990 Excavated Caddoan Sites with Coles Creek Style Ceramics. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, by Dee Ann Story, Janice A Guy,
Barbara A. Burnett, Martha D. Freeman, Jerome C.
Rose, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Kurt J.
Reinhard, pp. 736-748. Research Series No. 38. 2
Vols. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
1993 Riddles of the Past: the Archeology of Hays County.
Hays County Historical Commission, Wimberley,
Texas.
1993 Alex D. Krieger. American Antiquity 58(4):614-621.

1995 (editor) The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County,
Texas, Volume 2: Artifacts of Native Manufacture.
Studies in Archeology 21. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
1996 Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. The New
Handbook of Texas, Volume 6:286-287. Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.

1997 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis
Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 68:1-103.
1998 The George C. Davis Site: Glimpses into Early
Caddoan Symbolism and Ideology. In The Native
History of the Caddo: Their Place in Southeastern
Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by Timothy
K. Perttula and James E. Bruseth, pp. 9-46. Studies
in Archeology 30. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
2000 Introduction. In The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas, by H. Perry Newell and Alex D.
Krieger, pp. 1-31. 2nd Edition. Society for American
Archaeology, Washington, D.C.

2009 (with Edward B. Jelks). Foreword. In Handbook of
Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions: 2009 Reprint
Edition, edited by Dee Ann Story and Edward B.
Jelks, pp. 1-5. Gustav’s Library, Davenport, Iowa.

The Construction and Eventual Burning of the Experimental
Caddo House Structure at the George C. Davis Site
(41CE19) in East Texas
Timothy K. Perttula and Bob D. Skiles

ABSTRACT
Because of the research foresight of Dee Ann Story, an experimental Caddo grass-thatched house was constructed at the George C. Davis site in 1981, and then was burned down in a spectacular conflagration in the
fall of 1995. The house was built as an interpretive exhibit for Texas Parks and Wildlife, who managed the site
at the time. The completed cane thatch-covered Caddo house reconstruction was 7.6 m in diameter and 9.2 m
in height. The later burning of the experimental house and an array of artifacts and organic remains placed in
known positions within the house provide an excellent opportunity for future Caddo archeologists to observe
the consequences of the burning of a grass-covered Caddo house on its structural materials and the material
culture assemblage it contained.

INTRODUCTION
The George C. Davis site in Cherokee County
is one of the best-known ancestral Caddo sites in
East Texas, if not in the Caddo archeological area
as a whole. The archeological deposits preserved
here—in its three mounds, extensive habitation
areas and structures, and borrow pits—have been
under study by archeologists, including Dee Ann
Story, for more than 70 years (Newell 1940; Newell and Krieger 1949; Story 1981, 1997, 1998,
2000; Walker 2009). The site was primarily occupied by ancestral Caddo peoples between ca.
A.D. 850 and the early A.D. 1300s (based on an
extensive suite of calibrated radiocarbon dates) on
a large alluvial terrace of the Neches River (Figure
1). The site was a planned civic-ceremonial center
that has three earthen mounds—Mound A, a large
platform mound with elite residences and special
purpose structures; Mound B, a second platform
mound; and Mound C, a burial mound used as a
cemetery for the elite or ranked members of the society—a borrow pit, and a large associated village
(estimated at more than 110 acres) with more than
100 known or suspected structures. The structures
include the domestic residences of the commoners
that lived at the site as well as residences for the
elites (chiefs and religious leaders) and special

structures used for ritual and ceremonial purposes.
Archeological investigations at the George C.
Davis site have yielded information of major scientific importance concerning the origins and development of the Caddo people, a still little-known
but significant stratified and complex society that
lived in the far western reaches of the Southeastern United States (i.e., southwestern Arkansas,
northwest Louisiana, eastern Oklahoma, and East
Texas) and whose cultural traditions have lasted for
more than 1000 years. The expansive nature of the
archeological and geophysical investigations at the
George C. Davis site since WPA archeological investigations that began in 1939 has obtained unique
information on Caddo community organization and
social logic, the nature of Caddo symbolism and
ideology, as well as the early existence of important
community political, social, and religious activities
within special precincts near Mounds A and B. The
archeological work has also obtained key insights
into the domestic nature of the community, with
residential domiciles dated as early as ca. A.D. 850
organized into compounds with small courtyards;
this was not a vacant mound center.
A particularly important part of the archeological record preserved at the George C. Davis is the
deposits and features associated with the construction and destruction of the grass-thatched wood

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

34

Texas Archeological Society

structures occupied by the Caddo
elite and domestic commoners (see
Schultz 2010; Spock 1977; Story
1998:26-38). In particular, Story
(1998:14, 28, 31, 39) has noted that
the destruction and rebuilding of
certain structures at the site appears
to relate to major ceremonies and
rituals carried out during the life of
the Caddo community; important
structures were regularly and purposefully destroyed by fire.
The use of fire, and its associated smoke and steam, in destroying important buildings has been
a characteristic feature of Caddo
societies since the 10th century
A.D. (Schambach 1996:41; Trubitt 2009:233). Trubitt (2009:233,
243-244) notes that “the cleansing
properties of smoke continued to
be important to Caddo Indians into
the twentieth century” for life/renewal ceremonies associated with
mortuary rites and the burning of
temples. Perhaps structures were
burned after the mortuary rites of Figure 1. Location of the George C. Davis site in East Texas and the Southern
Caddo Area.
important individuals “as a way
of conveying souls to the world of
the dead along an axis mundi of
smoke…” and temples or the residences of imporor will be, conducted at the George C. Davis site
tant persons were burned as “a way of terminating
are viewed as ways to better understand or test
the use of it and cleansing the location” (Trubitt
hypotheses about the nature of the Caddo archeo2009:244).
logical record that have arisen through a concerted
study of the material remains and features (i.e.,
structures, mound constructions, burials, etc.)
found preserved in archeological deposits.
EXPERIMENTAL ARCHEOLOGY
An experimental archeology effort was carried
AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR
out
at
a reconstructed house at the Caddo Mounds
CADDO ARCHEOLOGY
State Historic Site. Although the effort was ad hoc,
Experimental archeology has been a significant
and was done in the absence of the development
component of the archeological discipline since
of a specific research design or the formulation of
the 1960s (see Ascher 1961; Coles 1979; Ferguson
research expectations about what could be learned
2010; Ingersoll et al. 1977; Mathieu 2002; Millson
from the experiment, as recommended by Marsh
2013; Schiffer and Skibo 1987; Shimada 1978;
and Ferguson (2010:2-9), nevertheless the burning
Skibo 1992; Schiffer et al. 1994; Stone and Planel
of the experimental house and an array of artifacts
1999; for a comprehensive list of experimental arand organic remains placed in known positions
cheology publications world-wide, see also http://
within the house provides an excellent opportunity
exarc.net/bibliography) because it “is a method of
for future Caddo archeologists to observe the contesting our ideas about and discovering the past
sequences of the burning of a grass-covered Caddo
through experiments” (Shimada 2005:603). The
house on its structural materials and the material
experimental archaeology projects that have been,
culture assemblage it contained. In particular, the

Perttula and Skiles—Experimental Caddo House Structure at the George C. Davis Site
plan as discussed by Dr. Dee Ann Story in the fall
of 1995 with Bob D. Skiles, who led the house
burning experiment, was to concentrate on what the
effects of burning would be on the wood posts as
well as the organic remains (which included mats,
plant remains, and bone ornaments) that were to be
placed at various locations inside the house.
The experimental archeological investigations
of the burned Caddo house reconstruction were
also intended to provide information regarding
preservation of the archeological record at habitation sites, particularly those occupied for only a
few years before they were abandoned, through
documentation of the degradation of material
culture items over a known span of years. This is
particularly relevant for the short- and long-term
preservation of organic remains on Caddo sites,
as several kinds of organic remains (i.e., plant
foods, bone, basketry, mats) were placed in the
house reconstruction before it was intentionally
burned. Furthermore, the experimental archeological record created with the known placement of a
range of artifact types of different material types
within the house before it was burned lends itself
to the study of the post-occupational movement of
material culture items and a better understanding of
formation processes (cf. Schiffer 1987) on Caddo
habitation sites.
Finally, the archeo-geophysical record of the
9th-14th century Caddo occupation of the George
C. Davis site is spatially extensive and well studied
(see Walker 2009, 2011; Walker and McKinnon
2012). There are numerous geophysical signatures of different structures, these being primarily
circular in shape, although there are a few that
are sub-square with rounded to diagonal corners
(see Schultz 2010:71-85 and Figures 132-187),
and there is also geophysical evidence for plazas
and community areas within the village (Walker
2009; Walker and McKinnon 2012). Geophysical
survey investigations that can be conducted over
the area of the burned Caddo house reconstruction
should provide a data set on the preservation and
interpretation of those components of the burned
house (i.e., post holes, pit features, and concentrations of burned material remains), whose internal
structural plan is known, that are visible to geophysical instruments after 30+ years compared to
what is seen of Caddo architectural features after
hundreds of years since they were abandoned and/
or burned (e.g., Hammerstedt et al. 2010; Lockhart
2010; McKinnon 2013; Walker and Perttula 2010).

35

CONSTRUCTION OF THE
CADDO EXPERIMENTAL HOUSE
STRUCTURE
It was appropriate that on an archeological
site so well known for its architectural features
that a grass-covered wood post structure was built
in the fall of 1981 by Scooter Cheatham and assistants at the George C. Davis site1, now known
as Caddo Mounds State Historic Site. The house
was built as an interpretive exhibit for Texas Parks
and Wildlife, who managed the site at the time (cf.
Scott 1984). The house reconstruction followed the
model of Feature 125, a 7.6 m diameter circular
Caddo house about 1000 years old that had been
excavated nearby a few years before (Figure 2a) by
Dee Ann Story of The University of Texas at Austin
(UT), although it was actually built over Excavation Unit 11 (Figure 2b), not far from Feature 125.
Feature 125 had 88 wall posts, a central hearth,
and four large interior posts (see Figure 2a). The
wall posts were vertically set and equally-spaced
around the wall, and averaged 20 cm in diameter;
they had been set in holes between 16-48 cm in
depth (Story 1997:83). The house walls had no
clearly defined entrance, although there were
several 40 cm gaps between posts along the north,
south, and east walls. The four interior support
posts formed a rectangle around the central hearth.
These post holes were about 70 cm in diameter,
although the posts within them were estimated
to be only between 15-20 cm in diameter (Story
1997:86). The support posts were placed in deeper
holes: between 34-66 cm in depth.
The Caddo house reconstruction took shape in
three phases. The first phase was the manufacture
of traditional tools that would have been used
in house construction, including ground stone
celts made from Ouachita Mountains greenstone,
chipped stone bifaces and flake cutting tools,
bone awls (made from metatarsals or ulnas) and
hafted deer mandible sickles, hardwood digging
sticks, as well as wood handles and mallets.2 The
handles and mallets were made of white oak and
post oak (for the celt) and persimmon was used
for the digging sticks (Cheatham 1992:23). Deer
hide work belts with scabbards and pouches made
with leather and sewn with gut or sinew were also
made to hold the basic tools, and rabbit skin glue
was used for tool hafting.
The second phase of the house reconstruction consisted of the gathering of construction

36

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Plan of excavations at the George
C. Davis site used as the framework for the
Caddo house reconstruction: a, Structure
Feature 125 as the model for the house plan
(after Story 1997:Figure 42); b, house reconstruction built over Excavation Unit 11 (after
Story 1997:Figure 43).

a

b

Perttula and Skiles—Experimental Caddo House Structure at the George C. Davis Site
materials, including cane thatch (Phragmites
australis) bundles3, as well as the cutting of wood
structural members.4 The wall posts were short leaf
pine (Pinus echinata) that were 10.7 m tall and 10
cm in diameter, and oak and hickory were used for
interior structural members; the pine poles were
debarked with traditional knives and hoes. Also
prepared were deer and cow rawhide and leather
lashings for the thatch as well as plant lashings
(grape vines) (Cheatham 1992:23-24).
The third and final phase of the house reconstruction was the construction of the house itself.
The house was laid out in the area of Unit 11 after
a 15 cm thick sterile dirt layer was placed on the
ground surface over the excavation area. After the
radius of the house was laid out from its center
point, the wall posts were marked and excavated,
either with a stake and mallet or by tractor auger. A
total of 48 pine posts marked the walls (Cheatham
1992:24). The first set of 16 poles was set individually, with attached ropes at the top of each pole.
Once the poles were set in the holes and tamped
down, they were bent and then lashed together.
The second and third sets of poles, shorter than
the primary wall poles at 7.0-8.5 m in length, were
attached and lashed to the primary poles below the
main crotch of the walls. Next, the four interior

37

support poles were installed and bent to attach to
the external house framework (Cheatham 1992:24).
A series of horizontal oak members were then fit to
the walls to create several internal decks and racks
made of oak and pine.
Once the wood walls and internal wood features had been constructed, the house was finished
by adding bundles of cane thatching from the
bottom to the top of the structure. Wood needles,
awls, and paddles were employed to hang, clamp
and sew, and paddle the thatch into horizontal rows
around the walls (Cheatham 1992:24).
The completed cane thatch-covered Caddo
house reconstruction was 7.6 m in diameter and
9.2 m in height (Figure 3). An entrance was created to face to the south-southeast towards Mound
A, the principal temple mound at the George C.
Davis site.
EXPERIMENTAL PLAN AND THE
BURNING OF THE HOUSE
Over the years, the Caddo house reconstruction at the George C. Davis site became an iconic
feature of the state park and a visible symbol of
the significant ancestral Caddo occupation that

Figure 3. Completed 1981 Caddo house reconstruction. Mound B is in the background.

38

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Caddo house shortly before it was burned; note the range of artifacts that were to be put inside the house
before it was set on fire.

occurred there. The house had deteriorated over
the years and became a safety hazard, especially
after it had been vandalized in 1990, and then a
tornado damaged it a few years later, after which
it had started to lean to one side (Figure 4). When
it was decided that the structure needed to be
removed, due to a variety of circumstances, the
Caddo house that had been built in 1981 was intentionally burned down on November 5, 1995, as
the culmination of the 1995 annual meeting of the
Texas Archeological Society held in Nacogdoches,
Texas. What better way to commemorate this important structure than to destroy it by fire in the
Caddo’s traditional manner?
Under the guidance and direction of Dr. Dee
Ann Story (professor emeritus, of UT) and Bob D.
Skiles (then staff archeologist of the Texas General Land Office), before the house was burned a
variety of artifacts, organic materials, and a dog
burial were placed inside it (Figure 5). The dog
was placed in a steep-walled pit approximately
1.5 m in length (north-south) and 80 cm in width

(east-west) in the northwestern quadrant of the
house, but near the center of the house, and the pit
reached to a maximum of 72 cm bs. Placed with
the dog burial were a variety of artifacts—as this
was meant to simulate an ancestral Caddo burial—
including: four dried palmetto stalks (simulating
arrow shafts); two conch shell columellae under the
body; two large mussel shell valves; 50 shell beads;
400 turquoise beads and 15 turquoise stones; 10
buffalo bone beads; leather thong necklaces; two
bone pendants; freshwater pearls on a filament
string; a woven mat underneath the body and another covering the head and neck; a deliberately
broken or “killed” Gahagan biface placed under a
wicker basket; a wicker basket containing several
lithic artifacts; and two modern ceramic vessels, a
plain bottle and a Southwestern style bowl. Three
modern ceramic vessels were also placed north to
south atop the slightly mounded dog burial pit fill.
From north to south across the house floor
were placed a series of modern artifacts and organic materials. This includes three small pits (ca. 30

Perttula and Skiles—Experimental Caddo House Structure at the George C. Davis Site

39

Figure 5. 1995 Map of the interior of the 1981 Caddo House Reconstruction, showing layout of features and artifacts.

40

Texas Archeological Society

cm in diameter) filled with burned
corn cobs (Figure 6) and a series of
six mats where two modern baskets
and two ceramic vessels filled with
food stuffs were arranged as “offerings” (Figure 7). Along the west
wall of the house, on the dirt floor,
were two piles of plant foods: 35
kg of small pumpkins and 30 kg
of shell corn (see Figures 5 and 7).
Table 1 lists the range and number of modern artifacts that were
placed in various locations within
the reconstructed house.
A ca. 1 m diameter rock-lined
hearth had previously been constructed on the house floor ca.
1993, as an exhibit added by Texas
Parks & Wildlife, just east of two
of the mats (see Figures 5 and 7).
Although this feature had to be temporarily removed to provide space
to excavate the dog burial pit, it was
replaced in its original condition
and position prior to the burning.
Several chainsaw-cut and unburned
oak log sections were within the
ring of hearth stones. The feature
sat upon the compact surface of the
house floor without any pit or other
preparation beneath it.
Figure 6. Burned corn cobs in one of the small pits in the house floor.
Before the house was set on
fire, Rufus Davis of the Adai tribe
led a prayer for all those in attendance (Figure 8); the crowd numbered in excess
Unfortunately, the area with the burned house
of 100 people. Dr. Dee Ann Story, Cecile Carter,
and material remains was not off-limits to visitors,
Jeri Redcorn, and Rufus Davis simultaneously lit
and within a year, most of the visible modern artifires at the four cardinal points, and it burned with
facts had been removed, and the area was becomgreat ferocity, sending up walls of fire and plumes
ing overgrown with grass (Figure 10b). By 2013,
of smoke, until the structure had collapsed into
there were no visible surface traces of the burned
a considerable mass of charred grass thatch and
house or its associated debris.
wood within only a few minutes (Figure 9a-e).
A second house reconstruction at a different
The house area had been enclosed by metal
location at the George C. Davis site was begun in
posts and fencing to leave the burned area pro1997 by a group of volunteers led by Bob D. Skiles
tected as much as possible. About a month after
and the Friends of Caddoan Mounds State Historic
the fire, the area was marked by considerable
Site. However, it was only partially completed
burned debris, exposed dirt fill (that had been put
before a hiatus and changes in park personnel led
down over the modern surface in 1981 before the
to its abandonment, and in 2000, Texas Parks &
house reconstruction was built), and an assortment
Wildlife personnel dismantled, but did not burn,
of burned whole and broken artifacts, principally
the partially completed house.
ceramic vessels (Figure 10a).

Perttula and Skiles—Experimental Caddo House Structure at the George C. Davis Site

41

Figure 7. Array of modern ceramic vessels, mats, and baskets on the house floor. Note the piles of small pumpkins and
shell corn against the west wall of the house, and one of the small pits filled with burned corn cobs on the right side of
the image. The slightly mounded dog burial pit is visible just above two of the mats.

Table 1. Modern artifacts placed in the reconstructed Caddo house before it was burned.
No.

Description

16
6
2
10
400
15
30
20
20
5
9
4
2
1
4
4
2

multi-colored glass beads, ca. 18 mm in diameter
shell buttons, 28 mm
conch shell sections, including columellae
buffalo bone beads, 8 mm
turquoise beads, ca. 2 mm in diameter
turquoise stones, 4 x 7 mm
dentalium shell wampum beads, 7 mm
sea shell fragments (ca. 10 x 10 mm)
fresh water pearls, 5 mm
bone disks, 29-42 mm
3-holed shells on cotton string, 20 x 25 mm
bone pendants, 32-50 x 32-43 mm
moon-shaped buffalo bones, 50 x 20 mm
turtle-shaped engraved bone figurine, 50 x 23 mm
bone fragments, 23 x 18 mm
bone hair tubes, 51 mm in length, 4 mm in diameter
bone picks, 53 mm in length, 4 mm in diameter

42

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. (Continued)
No.

Description

10
11
1
2
1
Lots 5-10
Lots 11-12
2
5
1
1
1
1
8-9
6-7
6-7

red coral beans, 10 mm
beads, 5 mm
modern knapped Gahagan biface5
modern knapped Hayes and Alba points
modern knapped and “killed” Gahagan biface
lithic flakes
antler and mussel shell
turtle shells
white egret feathers
large mussel shell with blue paint
unifacial stone tool
Southwestern style bowl with polychrome interior
plain ceramic bottle
terra cotta ceramic vessels
mats
baskets

Figure 8. Ceremony before the Caddo House was burned in November 1995. Cecile Carter, noted Caddo historian, is
in the center of the photograph and Rufus Davis is to her left.

Perttula and Skiles—Experimental Caddo House Structure at the George C. Davis Site

b

a

c

d

Figure 9. The Caddo house on fire: a, the walls begin to burn; b, fire
and smoke billowing from the walls; c, conflagration; d, mass of
charred grass thatch and wood posts; e, charred grass thatch, wood
poles, and visible charred modern artifacts.

e

43

44

Texas Archeological Society

a

b
Figure 10. Remains of the burned house and its contents: a, about a month after it was burned. The metal pipes mark
the periphery of the house wall; b, about a year after it was burned. Note that most of the larger items that were exposed
on the surface a year earlier have been carried off by visitors.

Perttula and Skiles—Experimental Caddo House Structure at the George C. Davis Site
CONCLUSIONS
The construction and eventual destruction by
burning of the reconstructed Caddo house at the
George C. Davis site, now Caddo Mounds State Historic Site, is an ad hoc experimental archeological
project now more than 30 years in the making. The
time seems right to begin the next stage in the project, namely the archeological and geophysical investigation of the archeological deposits associated
with the burning of the Caddo house in November
1995. If such work can be done, it should provide an
excellent opportunity to observe the consequences
of the burning of a grass-covered Caddo house on
its structural materials and the material culture assemblage contained within it. The experimental
archeological investigations of the burned Caddo
house reconstruction should also provide information regarding preservation of the archeological
deposits on habitation sites through documentation
of the degradation of material culture items over
a known span of years, particularly the short- and
long-term preservation of organic remains on Caddo
sites. The experimental archeological record created
with the known placement of a range of artifact
types of different material types within the house
before it was burned also lends itself to the study of
the post-occupational movement of material culture
items on Caddo habitation sites.
Future geophysical survey investigations that
can be conducted over the area of the burned Caddo
house reconstruction should provide a data set on
the preservation and interpretation of post holes,
pit features, and concentrations of burned material
remains whose internal structural plan is known
within the house. Those features that are visible to
geophysical instruments after 30+ years can then
be compared to what is seen of Caddo architectural
features after hundreds of years since they were
abandoned and/or burned.
END NOTES
1. The Caddo house reconstruction crew included
Scooter Cheatham, Norma Dean Jefferson, Lynn Marshall, Tom Hodges, Logan Wagner, Diane Young, and
A. J. Taylor.
2. During the manufacture and use of the traditional
tools, forms were filled out on who made the tool, how
it was made, what material it was made from, and how
much time it took for each stage of manufacture. Each
member of the house reconstruction crew was required

45

to make and maintain their own tool kit. It is our
understanding that the tools and forms remain on file at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at UT.
3. The cane thatch was cut along the side of the road
and in fields near Winnie, Texas, with deer sickle mandibles as well as machetes; the machetes worked better.
4. The trees acquired for the poles were cut in nearby
Davy Crockett National Forest using the stone celts. One
participant who wielded the stone celts described the
process as having been more like “beating the trees in
two” rather than like “cutting” (Glenn T. Goode to Skiles,
personal communication, November 5, 1995).
5. The stone tools placed inside the house before it
was burned (see Table 1) were knapped from Georgetown
chert by Glenn T. Goode, an Austin archeologist and wellknown knapper.

REFERENCES CITED
Ascher, R.
1961 Experimental Archaeology. American Anthropologist
63:793-816.
Cheatham, S.
1992 The Caddo House Reconstruction. Bulletin of Primitive Technology 1(3):22-24.
Coles, J. M.
1979 Experimental Archaeology. Academic Press, London.
Ferguson, J. R. (editor)
2010 Designing Experimental Research in Archaeology:
Examining Technology Through Production. University Press of Colorado, Boulder.
Hammerstedt, S. W., A. L. Regnier, and P. C. Livingood
2010 Geophysical and Archaeological Investigations
at the Clement Site, A Caddo Mound Complex in
Southeastern Oklahoma. Southeastern Archaeology
29(2):279-291.
Ingersoll, D. W., J. E. Yellen, and W. MacDonald (editors)
1977 Experimental Archaeology. Columbia University
Press, New York.
Lockhart, J. J.
2010 Tom Jones (3HE40): Geophysical Survey and
Spatial Organization at a Caddo Mound Site in
Southwest Arkansas. Southeastern Archaeology
29(2):236-249.
Marsh, E. J. and J. R. Ferguson
2010 Introduction. In Designing Experimental Research
in Archaeology: Examining Technology Through
Production, edited by J. R. Ferguson, pp. 1-12.
University Press of Colorado, Boulder.

46

Texas Archeological Society

Mathieu, J. R. (editor)
2002 Experimental Archaeology: Replicating Past Objects, Behaviors and Processes. BAR International
Series, Volume 1035. Archaeopress, Oxford.
McKinnon, D. P.
2013 Battle Mound: Exploring Space, Place, and History
of a Red River Caddo Community in Southwest
Arkansas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville.
Millson, D. C. E. (editor)
2013 Experimentation and Interpretation: The Use of
Experimental Archaeology in the Study of the Past.
Theoretical Archaeological Group, Southampton,
England.

Shimada, I.
1978 Behavioral Variability and Organization in Ancient
Constructions: An Experimental Approach. In Papers on the Economy and Architecture of the Ancient
Maya, edited by R. Sidrys, pp. 209-235. Institute of
Archaeology, UCLA, Los Angeles.
2005 Experimental Archaeology. In Handbook of Archaeological Methods, Volume I, edited by H. D. G. Maschner and C. Chippendale, pp. 603-642. AltaMira
Press, Lanham, Maryland.
Skibo, J. M.
1992 Ethnoarchaeology, Experimental Archaeology and
Inference Building in Ceramic Research. Archaeologia Polona 30:27-38.

Newell, H. P.
1940 Alto Mound. Texas Archaeological News, An Occasional Report issued by The Council of Texas
Archaeologists 2:22-23.

Spock, C.
1977 An Analysis of the Architectural and Related Features at the George C. Davis Site. Master’s thesis,
Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Newell, H. P and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoir No. 5. Society for American Archaeology,
Menasha, Wisconsin.

Stone, P. and P. Planel (editors)
1999 The Constructed Past: Experimental Archaeology,
Education, and the Public. Routledge, New York.

Schambach, F. F.
1996 Mounds, Embankments, and Ceremonialism in the
Trans-Mississippi South. In Mounds, Embankments,
and Ceremonialism in the Midsouth, edited by R. C.
Mainfort and R. Walling, pp. 36-43. Research Series
No. 46. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Schiffer, M. B.
1987 Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Schiffer, M. B. and J. M. Skibo
1987 Theory and Experiment in the Study of Technological Change. Current Anthropology 28:595-622.
Schiffer, M. B., J. M. Skibo, T. C. Boelke, M. A. Neupert,
and M. Aronson
1994 New Perspectives on Experimental Archaeology: Surface Treatments and Thermal Response
of the Clay Cooking Pot. American Antiquity
59(2):197-217.
Scott, K. W.
1984 An Interpretive Plan for Caddoan Mounds State
Historic Site (The George C. Davis Site), Cherokee
County, Texas. Master of Science thesis in Forestry,
Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches.
Schultz, T. C.

2010 Architectural Variability in the Caddo Area of Eastern Texas. Special Publication No. 16. Friends of
Northeast Texas Archaeology, Pittsburg and Austin.

Story, D. A.
1997 1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the
George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:1-113.

1998 The George C. Davis Site: Glimpses into Early Caddoan Symbolism and Ideology. In The Native History
of the Caddo: Their Place in Southeastern Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T. K. Perttula and
J. E. Bruseth, pp. 9-43. Studies in Archeology 30.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory The University of Texas at Austin.

2000 Introduction. In The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas, by H. P. Newell and A. D. Krieger, pp.
1-31. 2nd Edition. Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C.
Story, D. A. (editor)
1981 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis
Site, Cherokee County, Texas: Summers 1979 and
1980. Occasional Papers, Vol. 1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory The University of Texas at
Austin.
Trubitt, M. B.
2009 Burning and Burying Buildings: Exploring Variation in Caddo Architecture in Southwest Arkansas.
Southeastern Archaeology 28(2):233-247.

Perttula and Skiles—Experimental Caddo House Structure at the George C. Davis Site
Walker, C. P.
2009 Landscape Archaeogeophysics: A Study of Magnetometer Surveys from Etowah (9BW1), The George
C. Davis Site (41CE19), and the Hill Farm Site
(41BW169). Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
2011

Geophysical Survey at the George C. Davis Site
(41CE19) South of Highway 21, Cherokee County,
Texas. AGA Report 2011-6. Archaeo-Geophysical
Associates, LLC, Austin.

47

Walker, C. P. and D. P. McKinnon
2012 Exploring Prehistoric Caddo Communities through
Archaeogeophysics. In The Archaeology of the
Caddo, edited by T. K. Perttula and C. P. Walker, pp.
177-208. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Walker, C. P. and T. K. Perttula
2010 Archaeogeophysical Investigations at an EighteenthCentury Caddo Site in Nacogdoches County, Texas.
Southeastern Archaeology 29(2):310-322.

What Does “Long Hat’s Camp” Really Tell Us?
A Consideration of the Meaning of Two Popular
Photographs to Caddo Studies
Ann M. Early

ABSTRACT
Will Soule’s photographs of a Caddo family taken in western Oklahoma have been iconic images used in
many situations by historians and archeologists. Although they sometimes are not even aware of the location or circumstances of the pictures, many archeologists treat them as a ‘living fossil’ that present images of
ancient Caddo life and offer them as a ‘model’ to interpret excavation discoveries. A critical evaluation of the
photographer and his subjects, in the spirit of Dee Ann Story’s approach to her own research, suggests that the
meaning may not be what everyone has assumed.

INTRODUCTION
This article is about two photographs that are
familiar to anyone who is interested in Caddo
Indian archeology or history. They are used as
backdrops and visual features in exhibits, one or
both images frequent power point presentations
at professional and public events, and they are
incorporated into research plans and academic
studies. The two images were created by photographer Will Soule in the mid-19th century in
southwest Indian Territory and identified by him
as Long Hat’s Camp. They consist of two views of
a single encampment, one showing only buildings
and other facilities, and the other with a group of
people present that one presumes to be the residents of the camp. The images were attributed to
the Caddo by scattered notations on photographic
prints, and by the surname Longhat. Several generations have borne the surname Longhat in the
Caddo Tribe.
These photographs are commonly offered
up, usually implicitly and rarely with contextual
discussion, as views of Caddo life in the mid19th century. They are readily available through
a variety of sources, they are free, and they are
clear, technically well composed, and rare 19th
century images. Archeologists can use them as
graphic representations of features that they believe
they have found in excavations. Historians and

anthropologists can offer them as ‘real’ images of
traditional cultural practitioners. Book editors can
use them as interesting images of Native people
‘other’ than contemporary American schoolchildren.
Over the years I have seen these photographs
in all the above contexts. Some times the images
are never identified or provenienced. Captions vary
widely, particularly with respect to the location
where the photographs were taken and the subject
matter. This is true for publications, and for live
and written presentations offered by scholars. The
lasting impression is that people are using the images in ways that suit their immediate research or
public outreach needs, and in ways that support
their own quick interpretations. The captions are
frequently inaccurate. I have used the images
myself dozens of times over many years and infrequently thought deeply about what they conveyed.
In the last few decades, as historical and archeological research has blossomed and the Longhat images appear more frequently, they have been
paired with another image from the Caddo past, the
ca. 1691 illustration of a Native community on Red
River created by an unknown scribe accompanying
the Spanish expedition through Northeast Texas led
by Don Domingo Teran de los Rios. Commonly
referred to as the Teran Map, scholars situate the
subject as a community upstream from the Great
Bend, perhaps a Nasoni community in the general
location of the modern day Hatchel, Mitchell, and

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

50

Texas Archeological Society

Moores sites in Bowie County, Texas (cf. Wedel
1978; Sabo 2012).
The Soule photographs and the Teran map have
been referred to as the Teran-Soule model, and
they are proffered as a two level visualization of
historic (and prehistoric) Caddo social and settlement organization. (cf. Schambach 1982a:120-122,
1982b). This proffer relates that the images show
how Caddo communities were organized. Discussions tend to go further to assert that the Teran
illustration depicts a community center featuring
a mound that is devoid of accompanying features
and facilities, a vacant ceremonial precinct, with
widely dispersed domestic residential units. The
Soule photographs are offered, often implicitly, as
a sort of close up view of a residential unit within
the larger community.
The Teran-Soule images do not actually constitute a model, singly or together, however representational or accurate their depiction of some
observer’s experience with Caddo society may be,
because the images do not actually identify the
component properties of communities and explain
their relationships. They further do not actually
constitute a linked pair. Time, distance, and an
unknown amount of diverse cultural tradition
among the Caddo separate the two, as do the cultural backgrounds, worldviews, life experiences,
and motivations of their creators. As they are used
today, however, they are a meme, asserting a reality
and an interpretation through repetition. Their common use should raise several questions about the
content of the images themselves, the reasons for
their creation, the intent and rationale behind their
creators, and the various meanings that observers
invest in these artifacts. These are the kinds of critical questions that Dee Ann Story encouraged, and
it is the spirit of her persistent critical approach to
research that I want to focus on one of these images
in the remainder of this article.
Photographs, paintings, video images, and
even live scenes do not speak for themselves.
This is hardly news because we all experience
internal processes of observation, evaluation, and
interpretation of scenes throughout our lives. We
rarely pause to consciously deconstruct familiar
images, though, and instead recall a familiar set
of meanings that may actually be external to the
images themselves. Film and art historians, ethnohistorians, and visual anthropologists are among
the people who undertake critical analyses of individual images or the work of selected creators, and

demonstrate the complexities that can lie between
image creation and the observer’s interpretation.
One set of Soule’s images has been the subject
of such an analysis already. Thomas W. Kavanaugh
recounts a painstaking analysis of 11 photographs
taken of a large Indian encampment featuring
Plains style tipis. Over the years, members of this
set of images were published in numerous venues
with a variety of tribal identifications and situations. Kavanaugh’s methodology and analysis in
contextualizing the images, and his informative results testify to the challenge and the fruits of careful photo interpretation (Kavanaugh 1999:1-24).
Further afield, Errol Morris (2011) provides
a detailed conversational expedition into a group
of case studies that ‘excavate’ the sources and
contexts of several famous images and the consequences of their creation. “Believing is Seeing
(Observations on the Mysteries of Photography)”
integrates the background of both the photographers and the events that precipitated the images,
and recounts the impact the images have had on
the subjects and on the creation of social memory.
In reviewing the creation of some powerful and
controversial photographs purporting to depict the
environmental and social catastrophes of drought
and poverty in early 20th century America, Morris (2011:185) observes “[t]heir views show the
many different ways that a photograph can be seen
and the different functions it can serve as staged
propaganda, documentary evidence, and fine art. A
photograph can capture a patch of reality, but it can
also leave a strange footprint: an impression of an
instantly lost past around which memories collect.”
In the remainder of this article I will consider
some contextual information about the photographer, the subjects, and the situation in which the
photographs were taken. Finally, I offer an alternative interpretation of what we are seeing when we
look at Long Hat’s Camp.
THE PHOTOGRAPHER
William Stinson Soule was one of the first photographers to work in the southern Plains. Some of
his photos, like the image of the scalped corpse of
buffalo hunter Ralph Morrison lying on the prairie
outside Fort Dodge, Kansas, were widely circulated
in the 19th century and contributed significantly to
Soule’s reputation as a western photographer. That
particular image was converted to an engraving and

Early—What Does “Long Hat’s Camp” Really Tell Us?
appeared less than a month after the killing in the
Harper’s Weekly political magazine, no doubt to
the fascination of many of the magazine’s 200,000
or so readers. Soule had very recently arrived in
western Kansas when he took this photograph. The
notoriety that resulted from the image must have
given his ambitions to take and sell photographs in
this setting a huge boost.
Today the Soule images are frequently used
to illustrate books, websites, and other products
that tell stories about American Indians or Great
Plains history. Most of us have seen some of his
photographs more than a hundred times without
realizing who the photographer was.
Most of Soule’s photographs are virtually mute
with regard to the photographer’s intent, because
no journals, diaries, or extended narratives about
the images by him, or anyone who knew him, have
been located. Despite Soule’s six year sojourn in
the region, Belous and Weinstein (1969:18), who
have published the only book length study of
Soule’s work, estimate that only 166 paper prints
and 69 glass plate negatives are known to have
survived. Kavanaugh (1999) believes that the
surviving body of work is 240 photographs. There
is no record of how many photographs were originally made. Soule and his brother John sold prints
individually and put together albums of his prints
for sale. Many of those albums were marketed from
his studio in the Evans trading post near Fort Sill
(Nye 1968:x). John Soule received and copyrighted
nine of Soule’s Indian photos in 1873 even before
Will left the southern Plains in 1874 (Kavanaugh
1999:2). Will Soule likely continued to sell his
western Indian images throughout his career, in
the later years from his photographic business
in Boston, until his retirement. Cabinet cards of
Indian subjects taken by Soule continue to sell in
auctions today (Cowan Auctions 2013)
There are several groups of Soule images
housed in archives across the country, including at
Kansas State University, the Huntington Library
and Los Angeles County Museum of Natural
History, the Bureau of American Ethnology, the
Smithsonian Institution, the Dolph Briscoe Center
for American History at The University of Texas,
and at the Fort Sill Museum. Many have the briefest of captions, and many have no identification at
all. Soule himself wrote some of the captions, but
others may have been additions placed there by
the photographs’ subsequent owners and collectors. More troubling is the fact that notations on

51

some photos are inconsistent from one source to
another, so that a tedious and not always rewarding
research program is required to identify the actual
subject of a photo and the place where it was taken.
Taking the confusion a step further, Soule prints
frequently come up for sale and the accompanying
catalog information varies wildly in subject matter,
photograph location, and photographer biography.
Soule took both portraits and landscape photographs. Many of his portraits were of well-known
tribal figures residing near Fort Dodge, Kansas,
Camp Supply, or Fort Sill, the latter two in Indian
Territory. His landscapes typically show Native
settlements that infrequently include Western style
houses and other facilities. The subjects in his
portrait photographs display a mix of American
commercial clothing and gear and objects that we
take to be traditional attire. We do not know if these
surviving images are typical of his body of work in
the region, or if they have survived because they
represent that portion of his archive that most captured the interest of the buying public. Pictures of
Indians in skins and silver jewelry, partially clothed
women, and panoramas showing fields filled with
tipis, were popular and highly marketable subjects.
Few records disclosing Will Soule’s life and
work have been unearthed, but it is possible to gain
some insights into his career in photography. He
was born in Maine in 1836. At some time before
the Civil War, he and his elder brother John (18281904) were living in Boston where the latter had
a photographic shop. Will seems to have lived in
his brother’s household in Boston and worked as
a clerk in his shop (www.familystacks.com). In the
mid-19th century, photographic shops marketed
prints and photographic supplies. Proprietors may
have been photographers themselves, and/or they
may have purchased exposed negatives produced
by other individuals, then marketed the prints as
their own product.
Will Soule enlisted with the Massachusetts
Volunteer Infantry early in the Civil War. He was
a Private in Company A, 13th regiment, and was
seriously wounded in the hip in the battle of Antietam in 1862. He finished his enlistment in 1864, but
Nye reports that he reenlisted in the Invalid Corps
(later known as the Veterans Reserve Corps) with
a desk job as a government clerk. It is not clear
whether he continued in this position until the end
of the war.
Soule subsequently operated a photographic
gallery in Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, not far

52

Texas Archeological Society

north of the site of his wartime service, until the
property burned, seemingly in 1867 (Thrapp 1991).
It is unclear where Soule was between this incident
and when he appears in Kansas in late 1868. One
source indicates that he worked in the Philadelphia
area at least part of that time. Another suggests
that he returned to New England. Wherever he was
employed, he made enough money to assemble a
variety of photographic supplies and equipment that
he took west with him, probably traveling to Kansas
in 1868 (Nye 1967; Belous and Weinstein 1969).
This destination may have been related to the fact
that Soule’s former supervisor in the Invalid Corps,
Major General Wilfred S. Hancock, was based at
Fort Leavenworth as commander of the Military
Department of Missouri. Once at Fort Leavenworth,
Hancock was seconded to General Sherman to assist
in warfare with the Cheyenne and Arapaho, events
that foreshadowed later confrontations that took
place during Soule’s residence in the west.
At Fort Dodge, and later at Fort Sill, Soule
supported himself by clerking in a trading house
and taking pictures as the opportunity arose. Although he has been characterized as an amateur
photographer in some publications, it is clear that
from the outset Soule derived at least part of his income from photography from this point forward. At
Fort Dodge he was chief clerk in John E. Tappin’s
trading post. He may have worked part time in John
Evan’s store outside Fort Sill when he moved there
from Camp Supply, but Soule also acquired funds
for a short time while serving as the official Fort
photographer. Some of his photographs of the Fort
buildings under construction survive.
Soule’s studios were erected inside the stores.
Soule had the equipment and furniture to stage
standing, seated, and reposing portraits, and used
props that included a short architectural column,
a couch, and a bison hide blanket with the hair
attached. He used a custom modified wagon as
a base when taking landscape and village photos
away from his studio.
In addition to the financial benefits of a regular
income, Soule’s association with the post sutler
gave him a prime location to encounter military
personnel, civilian travelers and residents, and
Indians, and to hear news of events with photographic possibilities. Most correspondents believe
that it was at Fort Sill that Soule took most of his
photographs, and compiled photo albums of Indian
subjects for sale. One album was passed down in
the Evans family.

Will Soule returned East in late 1874 or early
1875. This may have coincided with a flare-up of
violence known as the Red River War in which
the U.S. Army subdued and drove on to reservations Comanche, Kiowa, Southern Cheyenne, and
Arapaho bands that had been living in a traditional
manner in southwest Indian Territory and the Texas
Panhandle. With the heavy pressure of U.S. Military and political forces, the free-ranging lifestyle
of the southern Plains tribes and their Native neighbors was in its last days. Unmolested access to
bison and wild horse populations was increasingly
difficult. Raiding into Texas and Mexico generated
retaliatory violence. Quakers with educational
and social welfare interests and a host of White
Americans with philanthropic, materialistic, and
entrepreneurial agendas became common on the
landscape. Annuities to many bands, promised as
part of various treaties, agreements, and understandings, brought increasing amounts of western
goods, clothing, tools, and foods to Tribal people.
Some Indians, including many Caddo, worked as
paid scouts for the soldiers, or at other tasks that
may have given them access to cash. Life was
changing rapidly for the Kiowa, Arapaho, Comanche, and Cheyenne, as well as for the smaller
groups such as the Delaware, Wichita, and Caddo,
and Soule may have seen his photographic subject
matter dwindling rapidly. Retaliatory raiding, the
development of new enemies, and U.S. Military
initiatives to force the tribes into reservations that
periodically included the destruction of entire encampments and imprisonment of some prominent
leaders would have changed the Indian-White
relational dynamic and affected Soule’s access to
willing photographic subjects. And maybe there
was a woman involved.
Nye reports that Soule met Ella Augusta Blackman back East in 1875 while he was helping to
escort some Indian leaders to Washington D.C.
Soule may have undertaken this task for the pay
that probably went along with it, and he may have
been scouting out new job prospects. He had discussed his return East openly at Fort Sill as early
as December of 1874. When he returned to Fort
Sill, Soule found that someone had taken most of
his equipment and photographic prints but left him
the glass negatives for the Indian collection (Nye
1967:ix-xiii).
Will Soule and Ella Blackman were married
on April 29,1875, in Lakewood, New Jersey. Their
whereabouts for the next seven years are unclear, but

Early—What Does “Long Hat’s Camp” Really Tell Us?
they reportedly resided part of the time in Vermont,
and lived in Melrose, Massachusetts, late in life. In
1882 or 1883, Soule bought his brother’s art publishing business in Boston, and with a partner, William
B. Everett, continued in the photography and art print
business until his retirement in 1900 or 1902 (Belous
and Weinstein 1969:19). There is no indication that
Soule returned to the West after early 1875.
It is worth mentioning that the photography
business was a family affair for Will Soule and his
brother, John. The latter was also a photographer,
and a pioneer in the photography and photographic
print business. Except for a stint with the Massachusetts volunteers in the Civil War, John ran a
successful photo and print shop in Boston until the
early 1880s when he sold out to his brother Will
and went to work as a railroad photographer. In
the late 1880s he settled in Seattle, where he continued to take and market photographs of people,
landscapes, and architectural views.
It seems evident from this albeit fragmentary
biography that William S. Soule was trained in the

Figure 1. Photograph 1.

53

emerging field of photography early in life. He
made a living by taking and selling pictures for
much of his adult life, whenever finances and circumstances permitted. He left few personal records
behind, but there is no indication that he went west
to photograph the tumultuous post-Civil War years
on the southern Plains for scholarly or historical
reasons. He was capturing images of the exciting, exotic, and famous people and cultures of the
southern Plains. He knew that these images would
sell well, both in the frontier forts and infant towns
and in the rest of the country hungry for news of
events in the untamed West.
Most of Will Soule’s Indian views were of
people and tribes that played prominent roles in
the events that took place in the southern Plains
in the post-Civil War years. The Caddo were numerically small, and did not participate in most of
the raids and other troublesome actions that took
place in the region, except that the Military forces
recruited several Caddo as scouts. Caddo George
Washington, Showetat (Little Boy), also became

54

Texas Archeological Society

well known to various Fort military and civilian
residents as he famously supplied guns and liquor
to Indians and to some white residents in a bootleg
operation based at his store near Anadarko. Soule’s
portrait of Caddo George survives.
THE PHOTOGRAPHS
The two photographs of Long Hat’s Camp
show a group of buildings in a clearing with
woodland in the background (Figures 1 and 2).
The photographs were certainly taken between
1869 and early 1875, and the camp is probably
within the general Wichita-Caddo reserve that
was situated between Fort Sill and Anadarko. The
exact location of this site is still unknown. It is
also uncertain whether Soule took his pictures of
a Wichita camp on the same trip. There may be
evidence still available to identify the time and
place of these photographs.
One view, that I will call Photograph 1, has
a group of people seated and standing around a
ramada, an open air work and rest facility, facing
the photographer. Five other buildings are visible

Figure 2. Photograph 2.

behind them. The second view, Photograph 2, is
taken apparently after the photographer moved to
his right about 90 degrees. In this view there are
two small figures, presumably children, seated or
crouched beneath a ramada on the left side of the
image, but there are no other people present. This
second view shows four standing buildings in addition to the ramada and a heap of debris that seems
to be the roof of a collapsed building.
One discovery that I made is that not all Long
Hat’s Camp photographs on websites and in publications are equal. The frequently used images
that have been available as slides in the Pictures of
Record Late Caddo slide set since the mid-1970s
are cropped versions of the images obtained from
the Smithsonian Institution. The non-cropped
example of Photograph 2 shows a board fence in
the right background, separating the yard from
the timber beyond. An extension of that fence,
or another architectural feature, is shown in the
distance beyond the ramada on the left side of the
photo and between the children and the standing
building closest to the photographer. The noncropped version of Photograph 1 shows the edge
of the architectural rubble on the left hand side of

Early—What Does “Long Hat’s Camp” Really Tell Us?
the photo, a feature missing in the cropped image.
Although there is little doubt that the two images
were taken at the same place, the rubble and the
group of buildings that appear in both images link
the two together. The question remains, though,
how many prints of these two images survive, and
are they identical? Do the glass negatives of both
images survive? Are we seeing all that we can possibly see in the photos that remain?
Let us look first at the actual composition of
the settlement that is visible to us, assuming that
the two photographs were taken during a single
visit and the two show an overlapping set of features and facilities. Photograph 2 shows the buildings most clearly. To the far left is an open-sided,
shaded facility. This is different from the ramada
where the residents sit, because it is smaller in size;
it has a roof of some sort to block the sun; the horizontal roof poles are not the same size or shape as
those in Photograph 1; there is no seating or working platform visible; and the vertical supports are
smaller and straighter than those in Photograph 1.
The building to the right of this ramada in
Photograph 2 is what we have come to consider
a dwelling. It is square or rectangular, and is
constructed of widely-spaced vertical posts. The
intervening spaces appear to be in-filled with some
mixture of sediment and plant material. The building may have rounded corners. The only opening
visible has a high sill of closely spaced posts—
more closely spaced than the wall spacing—and
has no visible door on the outside. The structure
has a steeply pitched roof, generally hipped in
design, that features a horizontal ridge pole, grasslike sheathing and eaves that extend well away
from the wall line. The interior support architecture
is not visible. The ridgeline is a little swaybacked,
but appears to be clean of soot and other residues
from an interior fireplace. In contrast, two other
similar buildings in these photographs have dark
sooty areas and deeper swayback profiles for their
ridgelines. The roof sheathing of the building in
the foreground looks fresh. This may be a newly
finished structure.
To the right of this structure, and further away
from the photographer, is the pile of debris that
looks like another grass-sheathed roof. There is a
pick-up-sticks spread of debarked saplings extending out from the edge of the grass pile. This appears
to be a structure like the preceding one that has
collapsed. There is no indication of fire, and the
neighboring structures appear undamaged, so this

55

heap is very likely a building that collapsed in on
itself, or was pulled down for some reason. This
may be the predecessor to the already described
first building.
To the right of the grassy heap is an open-sided
structure. It has widely spaced saplings holding up
the roof, an oval to rectangular outline, and a steeply pitched hip-like roof design with a ridge. The
roof is sheathed in bark. Small saplings or more
likely large vines run horizontally around the roof
to hold down the bark sheets. The roof supports
are two to three times more widely spaced than the
vertical load-bearing timbers in the dwelling house.
Inside this open structure is a seating/sleeping or
work platform. Taken together, this structure has
the appearance of a third work area, this one with
a sturdy permanent roof.
To the right of this structure in Photograph 2
is a feature that has been identified as a storage
facility. It has an oval to circular outline, widelyspaced support posts that are closer together than
those in the roofed work facility mentioned above,
and further apart than those visible in the dwelling.
This facility has a dome-shaped roof sheathed in
some kind of grass. The sheathing has an undulating, stacked ring profile that indicates the sheathing
consists of short grass sheaves tied to a series of
horizontally placed saplings that form the framework for the roof in a manner roughly equivalent to
the relationship between rafters and purlins. Soule
photographed a Wichita camp with a grass house
that has a similar construction pattern. Part of the
lowermost of the horizontal braces is visible on the
right hand side of the structure, as is a fuzzy image
that appears to be a horse that may be responsible
for the missing grass.
Behind and to the right of this structure is
another building that matches the first dwelling.
Only a portion of the building is visible in this
photograph, but it appears more clearly in Photograph 1. The structure has an oval to rectangular
outline, with relatively closely placed vertical wall
posts, infilling of some sort of organic matter, a
steeply pitched hipped roof, overhanging eaves,
and a saggy ridgeline. The walls appear to lean
in slightly. The doorway has a high sill of closely
spaced vertically placed timbers. A group of timbers rest against the outside wall adjoining the
doorway and may be firewood. The ridgepole sags
and shows a dark deposit that may be accumulated
soot at its center. The soot and firewood indicate
that this structure is currently in use.

56

Texas Archeological Society

Photograph 1 also shows another structure that
is not visible on Photograph 2. On the far right,
behind the group of three men, is another building
that has the characteristics of a dwelling: a hipped
roof, grass sheathing, overhanging eaves, and apparently a wall line made up of vertical timbers. It
is in the distance, and is out of focus. Nevertheless,
it indicates that the two photographs do not capture
all of the structures and other facilities that made
up this settlement.
What can we learn from these photographs
about this settlement? It has been here for several
years, long enough for one building to collapse or
be torn down. It has at least two and perhaps as
many as four dwellings currently occupied. There
may be more that Soule did not choose to include
in his photograph. Interestingly, there is no sign of
agriculture. If there are fields, or kitchen gardens,
they are not visible, and if the above ground storage
facility is the sole one in the settlement, it does not
seem as if it has very much capacity.
The grass covering the yard area between the
buildings is very short. This may be the result of
grazing by more stock than we see in the photos,
but may be another indicator of the length of time
that the location has been occupied, with frequent
movement in the yard keeping the ground cover
in check. Since most Caddo removed to Kansas
during the Civil War, these photos may have been
taken after the Longhat family established itself
in this spot after the war. If so, it is likely that the
photographs were taken shortly before Soule departed for the East.
THE PEOPLE
Photograph 1 features a group of people that
are assumed to be the residents of the settlement.
There are 12 or 13 people, including at least eight
adults, in view. Four of the adults are men. Three
sit together on the right of the viewer, apart from
the main group, and one sits among the women
and children clustered at the ramada. Both men
and women are wearing a mixture of commercially
available western clothes and items that, acquired
through purchase or annuity, were decorative items
popular among tribal members. The most obvious of the latter are silver brooches worn by the
women. It is not clear whether any members of the
group continue to wear any traditional garments.
Are all these people the local residents? Are some

just visiting and live elsewhere? Are there some
people who declined to be photographed? Who in
the photo are the Longhat’s? Soule does not tell us.
Soule may have named the camp for one or
more of the adult males who were connected to
the place, a decision that would be reasonable for
a White man unfamiliar with the details of kinship and residence customs among the Caddo and
neighboring tribes at that time. The composition
of this group may have been considerably different from that of Victorian White society, however. Elsie Clews Parsons found that as late as the
1920s, Caddo residential groups were frequently
composed of sisters and brothers and their close
kinsmen, or groups of female lineal relatives and
their immediate families (Parsons 1941:20-21, 7175). Residential mobility is also well documented
among the Caddo. Some of the people in the photograph may simply have been visiting relatives
or friends when the photograph was taken, or
they were staying temporarily with relatives who
resided in the compound.
A member of the Longhat family who would
have been an adult in the mid-1870s has not yet
been linked to the photographs. The Longhats are
well represented in early 20th century Caddo affairs, however, and one or more of their immediate
ancestors would likely have been tied to this settlement. Brothers Francis, Joshua, and Amos Longhat
were born between 1870 and 1874 (1915 Caddo
Census), so it is possible that they are one or more
of the children in the photographs, or that they resided in this compound. The adult woman second
from the left in the photo one is holding a toddler
in her lap. One Internet source gives Saw win yin
and Do shin ko as the names of the boys’ parents,
but offers no elaboration or English alternative
(Longhat-Caddo-Family History and Genealogy
Message Boards n.d.).
The Longhat family comes from the southern
Caddo population block that identifies with the
Hasinai of East Texas. Both Francis Longhat and
his brother Amos served as chiefs in the early 20th
century. Frances was chief of the Fort Cobb division and had died before Harry Age (Edge) became
chief in 1922, according to Parsons (1941:10). In
those days, the Caddo had two chiefs, still called
kadhi (caddi), who headed the two population
blocks at the same time, and who were required
to act in tandem for the benefit of the entire tribe.
Parsons reported that after Francis Longhat’s death,
his stepson Harry Edge was eventually named

Early—What Does “Long Hat’s Camp” Really Tell Us?
chief (1920-1922). Amos Longhat succeeded Edge
(1922-1923) and was the next to last man selected
under traditional criteria.
Although Hasinai leadership did not pass directly along matrilineal or patrilineal lines, family
background established the eligibility of some men
for this leadership position (Newkumet and Meredith 1988:53). Men of the Longhat family were
clearly eligible for the most important surviving
leadership positions, and two of them were willing to assume this responsibility when they were
recruited. Eligibility for the position of kadhi was
open to only select families, and traditional leaders
would have been well grounded in tribal traditions
and values.
Should we consider this pair of photographs a
depiction of a ‘typical’ Caddo residence in 1870s
Indian Territory? Perhaps so, but there are several
factors that suggest we should do otherwise. First
involves the photographer’s choice of subject.
Soule’s photographs of Indian settlements are filled
with traditional features that convey images of
lifestyles far removed from post-Civil War American society. At this time, though, Western material
culture and cultural institutions were present and
accessible to Native communities. The large scale
construction projects at Fort Sill were only one of
many developments bringing Western architecture
and institutions into the region in the 1870s. By
1871, the Quaker-led Butler Indian School was
housed in a brick and mortar building at Fort Sill,
and timber frame architecture housing trading
posts, dwellings, and other institutions were present on the landscape.
There are no real indications of Western material culture in the Longhat Camp photographs
beyond personal adornment. Were the residents
unable to acquire Western goods through lack of
capital? Did the residents choose to forego Western
goods for cultural reasons? Were Western goods
deliberately removed from sight for the photograph session? The little we can see of clothing
and personal adornment suggests that the people
in the photograph had the means to acquire both
necessary and luxury items, so it seems likely that
other physical indicators of acculturation were
absent by choice.
A scarcity of Western material culture beyond
personal adornment in the Longhat compound may
have been attractive to Soule because it would
produce an image that he knew from experience
was marketable back East. The style of image was

57

consistent with his preferred style of outdoor photography that also produced the dramatic images of
Wichita grass houses and creek valleys filled with
tipis. It is the style of image that attracts us today.
Another aspect of the Longhat Camp photographs that suggests they are atypical is the style
of domestic architecture. For nearly 200 years,
European explorers, missionaries, and other observers encountered Hasinai settlements and described the buildings and associated activities in
reports, diaries, and memoirs (cf. Swanton 1942;
Bolton 1987; Newkumet and Meredith 1988).
Domestic buildings are consistently described as
circular, dome-shaped, and grass-covered. This
architectural style appears to have been shared
with other regional Caddo populations, including those residing in the Red River valley. Joutel
remarks on these similarities that he encountered
while passing through several Caddo villages in
East Texas and South Arkansas (Foster 1998). The
Teran map, made a few years after Joutel’s visit,
depicts conical or dome-shaped dwellings that are
interpreted to be grass house style constructions
(Sabo 2012:435-436). This is one important difference between the Teran and Soule images. The
latter are not a close up view of the former because,
at the very least, they show a distinctly different
kind of house architecture pattern.
Archeologists commonly encounter circular
post hole outlines at Caddo tradition sites in the
four-state Caddo archeological region. Some are in
or on mounds, and others are at non-mound sites
that are classified as domestic sites. The circular
house style was clearly a commonly known architectural form, and it was made for hundreds of years
across thousands of square miles. Why, then, would
members of a privileged lineage sensitive to Caddo
cultural traditions, residing among the consolidated
Caddo population, and sufficiently respected by
fellow tribal members to produce two important
tribal leaders, build and live in houses that were not
built in the well-known traditional way? Had all
Caddo abandoned grass houses by the time that they
resettled in Indian Territory after the Civil War? Was
the Longhat family in the minority?
There has long been archeological evidence
that from the very beginnings, Caddo tradition
people built more than one type of structure.
Posthole outlines of straight-walled buildings in
square or rectangular configurations are also well
documented in and on mounds, and at non-mound
sites. These buildings are also found across the

58

Texas Archeological Society

Caddo area and were made for hundreds of years.
Archeologists continue to speculate about the reasons for different architectural models. Were some
building styles used for domestic purposes, and
others restricted to ritually infused uses (cf. Early
2001; Perttula 2009; Trubitt 2009)? What clues do
we have of the purpose of buildings from the location where they were built, the contents and interior
facilities present, and the treatment they received
when they were no longer in use?
There is good evidence that some proportion
of straight-walled buildings were constructed for
non-domestic purposes. Straight-walled buildings
are also frequently found buried within multiple
stage flat-topped mounds, and burned and buried
beneath low domed mounds and subsequently used
as elite cemetery locations. Not all straight-walled
buildings belong to these two categories, but there
is a significant association of straight-walled structures with special places and special treatments.
During his discussion of the features found on
the Teran map, Sabo points out that all but one of
the symbols believed to be domestic buildings are
of the same conical-topped form. In the compound
labeled “cadi” there is a conical-topped building,
and there is a solitary symbol of a building with a
ridgeline configuration. Sabo (2012:435-436) suggests that it might represent a short-term structure
built to house the European visitors. That may be
the case, but perhaps it was there before the Europeans arrived, and is a special place associated with
the various activities delegated to and undertaken
by the Cadi who occupied the compound.
I suggest that the architectural style exhibited
in the Longhat camp photographs was a very old
Caddo architectural model that retained powerful
associations with core Caddo traditions and leadership roles. Whether by choice or obligation, the
Longhat family employed this building style at a
time when the Caddo had been uprooted from their
ancestral lands and were facing monumental challenges in adapting to a new social, economic, and
religious landscape.
The Soule photographs have much to tell us,
although what they convey may not be what many
people think they are saying. Further research into
Soule and his subjects may provide us with even
more insights into Caddo history.

REFERENCES CITED
Belous, R. E. and R. A. Weinstein
1969 Will Soule: Indian Photographer at Fort Sill, Oklahoma 1869-74. The Ward Ritchie Press, Pasadena.
Bolton, H. E.
1987 The Hasinais: Southern Caddoans as seen by the
Earliest Europeans. University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.
Caddo Census
1915 Caddo County Census, Caddo Indians at Kiowa
Indian Agency. MF # 2031240 Okla 00810.
Cowan Auctions
2013 Sale item description. Cowanauctions.com/auctions/
item.aspx?ItemId=54542. Accessed December 20,
2013.
Early, A. M.
2001 The Winding Stair Site. In Forest Farmsteads, edited by A. M. Early, pp 69-92. Research Series 57.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Foster, W. C. (editor)
1998 The LaSalle Expedition to Texas. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Kavanaugh, T. W.
1999 Whose village? Photographs by William S. Soule
Winter 1872-1873. Visual Anthropology 4(1):1-24.
Longhat-Caddo-Family History & Genealogy Message Board
n.d. http://boards.ancestry.com/thread.aspx?mv=flat&
m=125&p=localities.northam.usa.states.oklahoma.counties.caddo, Accessed December 28, 2013.
Morris, E.
2011 Believing is Seeing (Observations on the Mysteries
of Photography). The Penguin Press, New York.
Newkumet, V. B. and H. L. Meredith
1988 Hasinai: A Traditional History of the Caddo Confederacy. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.
Nye, W. S.
1968 Plains Indian Raiders. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.
Parsons, E. C.
1941 Notes on the Caddo. Number 57, Memoirs of the
American Anthropological Association and Supplement to American Anthropologist Volume 43, No. 3,
Part 2. Menasha, Wisconsin.
Perttula, T. K.

Early—What Does “Long Hat’s Camp” Really Tell Us?
2009 Extended Entranceway Structures in the Caddo
Archaeological Area. Southeastern Archaeology
28(1):27-42.
Sabo, G. III
2012 The Teran Map and Caddo Cosmology. In The
Archaeology of the Caddo, edited by T. K. Perttula
and C. P. Walker, pp. 431-447. University of
Nebraska Press, Lincoln and London.
Schambach, F. F.
1982a A Research Design for Continued Investigations. In
Contributions to the Archeology of the Great Bend
Region, edited by F. F. Schambach and F. Rackerby,
pp. 118-122. Research Series No. 22. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

1982b The Archeology of the Great Bend Region in
Arkansas. In Contributions to the Archeology of
the Great Bend Region, edited by F. F. Schambach
and F. Rackerby, pp. 1-11. Research Series No. 22.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Swanton, J. R.

59

1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnography of
the Caddo Indians. Bulletin 132. Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, Washington,
D.C.
Thrapp, D. L.
1991 Encyclopedia of Frontier Biography P-Z. University
of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Trubitt, M. B.
2009 Burning and Burying Buildings: Exploring Variations in Caddo Architecture in Southwest Arkansas.
Southeastern Archaeology 28(2):233-247.
Wedel, M. M.
1978 La Harpe’s 1719 Post on Red River and Nearby
Caddo Settlements. Bulletin 30. Texas Memorial
Museum, Austin.

The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo
Developments Along the Upper Sabine River
Jeffrey S. Girard

ABSTRACT
Excavations at the James Pace site (16DS268) in 1967 demonstrated its importance for understanding early
Caddo developments but left questions regarding the time of occupation, the presence of mounds, and relationships to Coles Creek groups of the Lower Mississippi Valley. This article summarizes investigations conducted
between 1992 and 1994 that demonstrated the presence of at least two mounds and yielded radiocarbon dates
indicating that occupation took place from the 9th to the early 11th century. The article discusses the Pace site in
relation to pan-regional ceramic trends and the early development of multiple mound centers in the Caddo Area.

INTRODUCTION
Dee Ann Story’s meticulous research at the
George C. Davis site in East Texas initiated interest
on the part of her and her students in exploring the
origins of the Caddo cultural tradition. A particularly important topic was the relationship between
indigenous Late Woodland period peoples of the
Caddo Area and Coles Creek groups in the Lower
Mississippi Valley.
The James Pace site (16DS268), located along
the Sabine River near the Louisiana-Texas border,
was considered by Story (1990) to be of exceptional
importance due to the apparent dominance of Coles
Creek pottery and a paucity of that traditionally classified as “Caddo.” The Pace site had been identified
and subjected to limited excavation in the 1960s
as a salvage project conducted in association with
construction of Toledo Bend Reservoir, and Story
and student Tineke Van Zandt re-examined the site
collections in the 1980s. In a summary of this work,
Story (1990:315-319) focused on three important
issues raised by the Pace site investigations:
1. Time of occupation. The ceramic assemblage appeared to immediately pre-date, or
to be on the cusp of, what has been considered the beginnings of the Caddo cultural
tradition. Lacking radiocarbon dates, it was
not known how this time related to calendar
years. Story (1990) set out several possible

scenarios regarding how the Pace site might
relate to other contexts thought to be of
similar age.
2. Nature of occupation. Not clear from the
1960s field work was whether the site served
exclusively as a residential area or also
contained mounds likely to be of ceremonial
significance. Scurlock and Davis (1962:4243) initially reported four mounds and an
adjacent village area. Jensen (1968:31) later
reported “four gas or pimple mounds which
are quite numerous in the area...” along with
a larger mound that was thought to be of
cultural origin. A backhoe trench was excavated through one of the rises indicating that
it was natural. Story (1990:317), suggesting
that this probably was the potentially cultural mound, concluded: “Until there is good
evidence to the contrary, the James Pace
site is best regarded as being a habitation
locale without any mounds.” The question
of whether or not mounds were present at
the Pace site is important for understanding
the early development of regional settlement
configurations and possible site hierarchies in
the Caddo Area.
3. Cultural affiliation of the site inhabitants.
Should we consider the Pace site a Coles
Creek or a Caddo site? Story (1990:318319) noted that the site contained an

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

62

Texas Archeological Society
unusually high, if not
uniquely high, percentage of Lower Mississippi
Valley-like sherds in terms
of decoration, but paste
characteristics, particularly
the frequent use of crushed
bone as temper, suggested
local manufacture. What are
the implications of the pottery similarities for how we
construct and interpret cultural taxonomies at regional
spatial levels?

Between 1992 and 1994, I
conducted limited excavations at
the Pace site, the most important
results of which were: (1) demonstration that at least two, and perhaps three, mounds are present; (2)
radiocarbon analysis of charcoal
samples suggesting that occupa- Figure 1. Elevation model of site area constructed from LIDAR elevation data.
tion took place between the 9th LIDAR contour data distributed by “Atlas: The Louisiana Statewide GIS.” LSU
CADGIS Research Laboratory, Baton Rouge, LA, 2006, http://atlas.lsu.edu.
and early 11th centuries A.D.; and,
(3) recovery of additional artifacts
that are within the range of those recovered earlier
uplands, adjacent to Holocene alluvial deposits
that suggested a relatively limited temporal span
associated with the Sabine River, the channel of
of site occupation. A summary report of the mound
which is located 1.5 km to the southwest (Figure
investigations was published (Girard 1994). Since
1). It covers a relatively level landform bordered by
that time, additional radiocarbon dates from the
the floodplain and relatively steep upland drainages
Mounds Plantation (Girard 2012a) and Crenshaw
on the east and north sides.
(Samuelson n.d.) sites have refined our understandIn 1961, the site was described as consisting
ing of regional chronologies; significant research
of four mounds and an adjacent village area. Folhas been conducted in the upper Sabine River
lowing limited test excavations in 1963 (Scurlock
drainage (e.g., Perttula 1994, 2011; Bruseth and
1964:22), a crew from Southern Methodist UniPerttula 2006; Fields and Gadus 2012); and, new
versity (SMU) conducted more intensive work
perspectives on early Caddo developments have
in 1967. Noted at that time were five topographic
been offered (e.g. Girard et al. 2014). This article
rises, only one of which was considered to be a
summarizes the 1992-1994 investigations at Pace
probable cultural feature (Jensen 1968:31). Four
and discusses how the site relates to early Caddo
50 m long backhoe trenches, each 1 m wide and
developments.
50 cm deep, were excavated in the northern part of
the site. A fifth backhoe trench was excavated into
a slight rise in the southern “area of investigation,”
FIELD INVESTIGATIONS
but this rise was interpreted as a natural feature. In
AT THE PACE SITE
addition to the backhoe trenches, 16 test pits were
excavated by hand. One backhoe trench hit a flexed
The Pace site was recorded initially in 1961 by
human burial with no accompanying grave goods.
archeologists from the University of Texas during
The excavations also encountered a clay-lipped
a survey for the proposed Toledo Bend Reservoir
fire basin (without charcoal) and 14 possible post
(Scurlock and Davis 1962). The site is situated
holes, but these did not form patterns that could be
on a Pleistocene terrace remnant flanking Tertiary
interpreted as representing structures.

Girard—The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo Developments
The Pace site remained above the maximum
pool level of Toledo Bend Reservoir and, during
the spring of 1992, I carried out limited investigations to: (1) determine whether or not topographic
rises identified during earlier investigations represented cultural features; (2) recover charcoal
in good context for radiocarbon analysis; and (3)
obtain a more spatially diverse sample of artifacts.
Pine trees planted on the site in the 1970s had
recently been cut resulting in numerous shallow
surface disturbances from heavy equipment, and
surface visibility was poor due to debris from the
timber harvesting.
We first made a topographic map of the site and
attempted, based on information provided by the
landowner, to plot the location of the SMU excavations. Artifacts were collected from portions of logging roads on the site periphery. Mapping indicated
that two well-defined rises were present, one on the
northwest and one on the southeast margin of the
site (Figure 2). Auger tests placed in each suggested that they were constructed earthworks and they
were designated Mounds A and B,
respectively. Several additional
low rises were noted, but augers
indicated that, with one exception,
all were natural. The exception was
located near the head of the eastern
drainage where a low rise appeared
to contain less than 1 m of fill overlying a buried A soil horizon. No
additional work was done in this
area and the cultural status of the
rise remains unconfirmed.

63

series of alternating strata of fine sandy loam and
sandy clay loam (Figure 4). Deposits within the
mound were assigned feature numbers and these
are described in Table 1.
In order to find the extent of Mound A, a 50
x 50 cm unit was excavated on the southeast edge
of the rise. The upper 20-25 cm was a pale brown
fine sandy loam, likely to be slope wash or deposits
pushed off the top of the mound. This material was
underlain by yellowish-brown fine sandy loam representing the upper deposits of the natural Pleistocene terrace landform. Sherds and chipping debris
were recovered beneath the slope wash.
Ten 1 x 1 m units were excavated on the east
side of Mound A in February 1994 (see Figure
3). Unfortunately no features or charcoal in datable contexts were encountered. However, we
did obtain better information concerning the site
deposits, and recovered a collection of artifacts
for comparison with the earlier SMU excavations.
The units revealed that a well-developed soil was
present on the site with artifacts confined to 35-40

Mound A
A 1 x 1 m test unit was excavated near the top of Mound A, a
low dome-shaped rise measuring
a little more than 15 m in diameter (Figure 3). The mound was
constructed on the margin of the
Pleistocene terrace as it slopes
down to the west and is between
1.3 to 1.4 m high at its summit. The
landowners stated that previously
it was taller, and contours suggest
that sediments from the top of the
mound might have been displaced
to the southeast at some time in
the past. The test unit revealed a

Figure 2. 50 cm interval contour map of the Pace site. LIDAR contour data
distributed by “Atlas: The Louisiana Statewide GIS.” LSU CADGIS Research
Laboratory, Baton Rouge, LA, 2006, http://atlas.lsu.edu.

64

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Contour map of the Mound A area.

cm of sandy loam A- and E-horizons that overlay
a sandy clay loam Bt horizon.
Mound B
Mound B (Figure 5) measures approximately
30 x 40 m and rises a little more than 1 m above
the terrace surface to the north. As with Mound
A, it was constructed on a slope and probably is
at least 1.5 m tall at its highest point. In the fall of
1993 we excavated a 1 x 2 m unit on the northwest
edge of the mound in order to confirm its status
as a cultural feature. A single stratum of brown
to yellowish-brown fine sandy loam with clay
bodies, 25-35 cm thick, was encountered in the
upper deposits (Figure 6). Beneath this were the
terrace surface deposits: strong brown fine sandy

loam, about 30 cm thick, over a sandy clay loam
Bt soil horizon. Small chert/quartzite pebbles were
scattered in the mound deposit. Similar pebbles
are exposed on the upper slopes of the landform
suggesting the deposits originated from there. The
pre-mound sediments contained scattered wood
charcoal, a sample of which was radiocarbon dated
to 1080 ± 80 B.P., or cal A.D. 727-1154 at 2 sigma
(Beta-67677). A Homan arrow point was recovered
from the pre-mound deposits.
Discussion
It now is clear that, in addition to an extensive
habitation area, the Pace site contains at least two,
and perhaps three, small mounds. The small scale
of the test excavations limits interpretations of the

Girard—The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo Developments

65

Figure 4. Mound A Profiles.

functions of the mounds, but there is no evidence
that Mound A contains human burials or platforms
for structures. Recovered from the underlying
deposits were stone chipping debris and limited
amounts of pottery indicating that cultural activity took place prior to construction of the mound,
but our spatial sample is too small to determine
whether the mounds cover typical habitation loci,
outdoor activity zones, or perhaps ritual areas. The
presence of substantial amounts of chipping debris
and the absence of faunal remains suggest that it is
unlikely that feasting residue is represented.

The pre-mound surface was intentionally covered by several layers of sediment that alternated in
color and texture. With the exception of the lowest
layer (Feature 13), the finer-grained sandy clay loam
layers were smooth at the top, but wavy, and did not
appear to represent platforms for structures or cultural activities. Although there was some leaching of
finer-grained sediments into underlying sandy strata,
evidence of weathering was minimal and it appears
that the mound was constructed relatively quickly.
Radiocarbon dates help place the mound construction at the James Pace site on a chronological

66

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Descriptions of Features in Mound A.

Feature

Description

Feature 1

thin very dark gray (10YR3/1) humus layer and A
2 flakes, 4 cores/angular
horizon (F1a) underlain by brown (10YR5/3) fine sandy fragments
loam with krotovinas and root casts (F1b); subtle color
change with depth to pale brown (10YR6/3) with fewer
disturbances (F1c, F1d).

Feature 2

(not visible in
profiles)

Artifacts

oval dark gray (10YR3/1) area, approximately 20 x 15
cm, in the western portion of the unit; probable burned
tree stump.

none

(not visible in
profiles)

concentration of charcoal flecks near the base of F1d

none
1 flake and 2 undecorated
sherds

Feature 6

upper stratum of sandy clay loam; well defined upper
boundary, smoothed surface, a few disturbances; strong
brown (7.5YR5/6) to yellowish-brown (10YR5/6) with
laminations visible in places; 15-20 cm thick.
Basin-shaped depression in F5; approximately 35 x
45 cm; pale brown (10YR6/3) fill (F1 material) with
lens of organically stained sediment (grayish-brown
10YR5/2) near center; no sign of in situ burning; intrudes into F7.

None

sandy loam stratum ranging from 10-30 cm thick; light
brownish-gray (10YR6/2) with patches of grayishbrown and pale brown; sediments identical to those of
Features 10 and 11; contained a few scattered flecks of
charcoal but none recovered for dating.

4 stream pebbles in upper
portion, but no artifacts.

disturbance in upper part of profile detected in slumped
area west of the original unit; detected about 15 cm
below surface, but perhaps truncated by plowing and
bioturbation; extended to 55 cm below surface; darkyellowish brown (10YR4/6) fine sandy loam; lenses
within feature appear to be washed in sediment.

none

Feature 3

Feature 4

Feature 5

Feature 7

Feature 8

(not visible in
profiles)

Feature 9

discontinuous series of lenses of mixed sandy loam
none
(10YR6/3, pale brown) and sandy clay loam (yellowishbrown, 10YR5/6) near the base of the Feature 1 deposit;
lenses range from 1-5 cm thick.

stratum of sandy clay loam, strong brown (7.5YR5/8) to none
yellowish-brown (7.5YR4-5/6) with brown, brownishyellow, and reddish-yellow mottles; upper contact with
sandy Feature 7 compact, smooth, but wavy—did not
constitute a flat surface and no sign of weathering; at
base, clay particles had leached into underlying sandy
deposits of Feature 11.

Girard—The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo Developments

67

Table 1. (Continued)
Feature

Description

Feature 10

discontinuous lenses of sandy loam in upper portion of 1 flake
Feature 9; in places merged directly with the overlying
sandy stratum (F7); in the south profile, Features 10 and
7 were not differentiated.

Feature 11

Feature 12

Feature 13

Feature 14

Artifacts

thick (20-30 cm) stratum of sandy loam; pale brown
(10YR6/3) to light brownish-gray (10YR6/2); radiocarbon date on scattered charcoal: 950 ± 30 B.P. (Beta348450, wood charcoal, -26.5‰); cal A.D. 1024-1155

none

thin clay surface or platform at base of mound; compact sandy loam from 4-15 cm thick; yellowish-brown
with gray clay bodies and numerous strong brown to
brownish-yellow mottles; upper boundary very smooth
and wavy; small scattered charcoal lumps; AMS date:
1180 ± 30 B.P. (Beta-348451, wood charcoal, -28.0‰),
cal. A.D. 729-960.

1 undecorated sherd

Grayish-brown (10YR5/2) zone in northeast corner of
none
F11 under F9 and a lens within F9; two dates on scattered charcoal: 2080 ± 190 B.P. (Beta-58870, wood
charcoal, -25.0‰), cal 733 B.C.-A.D. 381 and 1660 ±
60 B.P. (Beta-62511, wood charcoal, -26.4‰), cal A.D.
249-538; probable basket load of sediment consisting of
A horizon from surrounding surface.

pre-mound upper soil horizon; reddish-brown to
yellowish-red with strong brown mottles; radiocarbon
date from scattered flecks of charcoal: 1230 ± 100 B.P.
(Beta-58871, wood charcoal, -25.0‰), cal. A.D. 6441011; excavated 40 cm below contact; gradual increase
in clay marking Bt soil horizon

time scale (see Table 1), but, as is often the case
with a small number of dates, there is considerable
room for interpretation. The charcoal sample from
the deposits beneath Mound A (Feature 14) was
very small and submitted prior to the time that AMS
techniques were routinely available. Calibration
suggests that the sample relates to the 8th or 9th
centuries, perhaps to as late as the early 10th century. It is possible that charcoal recovered from the
initial platform (Feature 13) had been present in the
fill used for construction, and thus also might relate
to activity pre-dating mound construction. With a 1
sigma calibration, the two dates overlap in the 9th
century. The date on scattered charcoal in the first
sandy loam stratum (Feature 11) is considerably

3 undecorated sherds; 81
pieces of chipping debris

later, suggesting that Mound A was not constructed
until the 11th century. Unfortunately, it is not clear
how the charcoal was incorporated into Feature 11.
The two dates from Feature 12, although consistent
with one another, are too early to relate to mound
construction or the primary site occupation, and
likely date charcoal already present in sediments
borrowed from surrounding areas to construct this
stratum. As with Mound A, the date beneath Mound
B suggests 9th or 10th century cultural activity. It
thus is possible that throughout most of the occupation of the Pace site (likely during the 9th and 10th
centuries), no mounds were present. Ceramic data
presented below suggest that the site was abandoned
by the late 11th century.

68

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Contour map of Mound B.

Figure 6. Profiles of test unit, Mound B.

Girard—The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo Developments

69

70

Texas Archeological Society
Artifacts from the 1992-1994 Investigations
Pottery

Most of the recovered 289 sherds have either
grog temper (197 or 68.2%) or crushed bone and
grog temper (82 or 28.4%). The remaining sherds
(all undecorated) have no visible temper. Seven of
these specimens (2.4%) have sandy clay pastes and
appear to relate to the Goose Creek ceramics characteristic of Late Woodland period “Mossy Grove”
culture in the Neches/Angelina River drainage and
Gulf Coast regions. Three specimens (1.0%) have
only sparse fine sand inclusions: two of these are
engraved and one is undecorated.
Although little can be inferred about vessel
forms, simple jars and bowls appear to dominate.
Only 14 rim sherds are present: 11 undecorated,
two incised, and one punctated. One undecorated
rim sherd is polished and black, and appears to
represent a carinated bowl. One possible bottle
rim was recovered, but there are no other specimens suggestive of the presence of bottles. A stem
and leaf plot of sherd thickness shows a unimodal
curve with a median thickness of 7 mm (Figure 7).
Sherds with thickness values above 10 mm appear
to represent flat vessel bases.
By far the most numerous decorated sherds
recovered during the 1992-1994 investigations
have two or more horizontal incised lines spaced
at 1 cm or more (Figure 8a-n and Table 2). These

15 specimens generally are comparable to the
Blakely or Greenhouse varieties of Coles Creek
Incised as described by Phillips (1970:69-76).
However, they also could be classified as Davis
Incised as they have friable, coarse-textured paste,
and tend to be reddish-brown in color, strongly
suggesting local manufacture (Newell and Krieger
1949:116-118; Suhm and Jelks 1962:35). Relatively wide lines on a few specimens (e.g., Figure
8a, l) are suggestive of early Coles Creek varieties, particularly var. Hunt. Seven other sherds
have horizontal incised lines and can be classified
as varieties of Coles Creek Incised. Two sherds
have closely-spaced overhanging lines and two
have triangular punctations underlying horizontal
incised lines characteristic of Coles Creek Incised, var. Coles Creek (Figure 8o-r). Three sherds
(Figure 8s-u) have closely-spaced lines that do not
overhang, and can be classified as Coles Creek
Incised, var. Hardy.
Diagonal incised lines are present on two
specimens. One has a field of diagonal lines underlain by triangular punctations (see Figure 8w)
and seems to relate to the type Mazique Incised,
var. Mazique (Phillips 1970:129). The other (see
Figure 8v) has relatively wide lines and could be
an example of Marksville Incised, but the specimen is too small to classify. One sherd has sloppy
curvilinear incised lines (see Figure 8x) and is
similar to the Leist or Spanish Fort varieties of

Minimum:
3.000
Lower hinge:
6.000
Median:
7.000
Upper hinge:
8.000
Maximum:
15.000
3 00
4 0000000000000000000000
5 000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
6 H 00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000*
7 M 00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
8 H 000000000000000000000000000000000
9 00000000000000000000000000
10 000000000000000000
11 000000000
* * * Outside Values * * *
12 0000
13 0
15 000

7. Stem and leaf plot of sherd thickness
Figure 7. Stem and leaf plot of sherdFigure
thickness.

Girard—The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo Developments

71

Figure 8. Incised sherds from the Pace site.

Marksville Incised (Phillips 1970:113-115). Three
other sherds with incised lines (see Figure 8y-z)
cannot be classified.
Other decorated sherds include five punctated
sherds. One is a rim with a horizontal incised line
beneath the lip with underlying triangular punctations randomly spaced (Figure 9a). Two body
sherds have deep crescent or pinched punctations
(Figure 9b-c), and one large rim sherd (Figure
9d) has cane or reed punctations characteristic of
Evansville Punctated, var. Rhinehart but similar
decorative elements are also present on some

Crockett Curvilinear Incised vessels. The final
specimen has a single incised line with small randomly scattered pointed punctations (Figure 9e).
The only other decorated sherds are engraved.
Two small sherds (see Figure 9f-g) have single,
horizontal engraved straight lines and possibly
relate to the type Hickory Engraved. Another sherd
(see Figure 9h) has parallel curvilinear lines, possibly part of a scroll or concentric circle element
associated with Holly Fine Engraved or Spiro Engraved. Finally, one specimen (see Figure 9i) has
curvilinear lines in an unknown pattern.

72

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Classification of sherds from the Pace Site.
Mound
A fill

Mound A
sub-mound

Test
Units

Mound
B fill

Mound B
sub-mound

surface

Total

Coles Creek Incised,
var. Blakely or
Greenhouse		 2
12			 1
15
Coles Creek Incised,
var. Coles Creek			 2			2
4
Coles Creek Incised,
var. Hardy
1		 1			1
3
incised, unclassified		
2
1				
3
diagonal incised			
1			
1
2
curvilinear incised			
1				
1
engraved			 2			2
4
Evansville Punctated,
var. Rhinehart			 1				 1
punctated, unclassified
1
1
1			
1
4
undecorated
1
15
177
1
3
55
252
Total

3

20

199

Figure 9. Other decorated sherds and ceramic bead from the Pace site.

1

3

63

289

Girard—The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo Developments
An unusual ceramic artifact was recovered
from one of the test units east of Mound A. This
is a barrel-shaped ceramic bead (see Figure 9j)
that measures 1.9 cm long and 1.4 cm in diameter.
It appears to be made from sandy clay (with no
visible temper) that is similar to that of most of
the sherds from the site. Small patches of red pigment are present and it is possible that the entire
surface originally may have had a red slip. Three
additional ceramic beads (and one red jasper bead)
were reported by Jensen from the 1967 excavations. To my knowledge, no examples of similar
ceramic beads have been reported from northwest
Louisiana, nor are any known from the Caddo Area
in Texas or Arkansas (Timothy K. Perttula and Ann
M. Early, personal communication 2013).
The pottery collection does not differ substantively from that reported by Story (1990:Table
77) from the 1967 excavations, except perhaps for
the greater prevalence of close-spaced horizontal
incised line specimens (Coles Creek Incised vars.
Hardy and Mott) in the earlier collection.
Stone
Almost all of the chipped stone artifacts recovered during the 1992-1994 investigations are made
from local materials: small chert pebbles and tabular pieces of silicified wood. Amongst the chipping
debris from the test units, 164 of 1310 artifacts
(12.5%) are silicified wood, with only two flakes
of fine-grained quartzite, a material generally quite
common to the west in East Texas sites. Five flakes
of light gray to white chert and one flake of pink
novaculite probably are from non-local sources.
The remaining specimens are yellowish-brown
to dark red chert, a common component of local
gravels, including those exposed on the slopes of
the site landform.
Eight complete arrow points were recovered.
Two have bulbous stems and can be classified as
Homan (Figure 10a-b). Three have broad stems and
relatively straight bases (Figure 10c-e), similar to
Colbert points as described by Webb (2000). Three
arrow points have rectangular stems and relate to
the widespread Alba type (Figure 10f-h). One unusual specimen has an indented base, an attribute
similar to the Late Caddo/early historic Caddo
Cuney type, but it might just be a variant of Alba
(Figure 10i).
Eight specimens are flake blanks or arrow point
preforms (Figure 10j-q). These represent varying

73

degrees of reduction from slightly retouched flakes
to initial formation of stems and shoulders. All
have obvious breaks or flaws that caused them
to be abandoned prior to completion and their
presence demonstrates that point manufacture was
carried out at the site. Four distal fragments of
arrow points (Figure 10r-u), in complete or nearly
complete states, were recovered.
Other flake tools consist of one perforator
or drill (see Figure 10v) with a broken proximal
end; two cortical flakes with unifacially chipped
margins (see Figure 10w-x); and, one small slab of
petrified wood with bifacial chipping on opposing
margins (see Figure 10y).
A few specimens represent direct reduction
from pebble cores or split pebble cores. Two (see
Figure 10z-aa) are thick broken pebbles with margins partially shaped through bifacial reduction.
One (see Figure 10bb) is the distal end to a dart
point or bifacial knife, and another (see Figure
10cc) is a small (probably frequently re-sharpened)
Gary dart point or knife. The final specimen is a
well-made triangular biface made on a thin slab
of fine-grained silicified wood (see Figure 10dd).
No detailed analysis of the recovered chipping debris has been carried out, but its abundance
probably reflects the site position on a Pleistocene
terrace that contains chert gravels. Silicified wood
was available on nearby Tertiary upland ridges.
The chipping debris can be separated into cortical
flakes, interior flakes, and cores/angular fragments
(Table 3). The latter category consists of angular
fragments of chert and silicified wood for which
distinct flake attributes (striking platforms, dorsal,
and ventral surfaces) are not definable. Many angular fragments appear to have resulted from being
subjected to heat (fire-cracked rock) but it was not
possible to sort and quantify these. The assemblage
lacks formally reduced cores. It appears that small
pebbles were split for production of expedient
flake tools or for production of flakes that could
be reduced further into arrow points or perforators.
The high ratio of cortical to interior flakes reflects
this pattern as well. As noted above, only three
specimens have visible retouch on flake margins.
CERAMIC CHRONOLOGY
In this section, I examine how the Pace site
ceramics relate to pan-regional trends for the Late
Woodland to Early Mississippian periods. The Late

74

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 10. Chipped stone tools from the Pace site.

Table 3. Classification of chipped stone artifacts.
Mound
A fill

Mound A
sub-mound

Test
Units

Mound B
sub-mound

surface

Total

complete arrow points			
5
1
3
9
perforator			 1			1
arrow point fragments			
2		
2
4
blanks and preforms for arrow points			
3		
5
8
edge retouched flakes			
1		
2
3
pebble blanks			
2			
2
biface fragment			
1			
1
dart point					
1
1
triangular biface					
1
1
cortical flakes		
14
534			
548
interior flakes
3
19
477			
499
angular fragments/cores
4
20
299			
323

Girard—The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo Developments
Woodland or Baytown period (ca. A.D. 400-800)
in the Lower Mississippi Valley is represented by
a suite of pottery types often designated Troyville
after the type site (16CT3). The nearest Troyville
site to what would become the Caddo Area is the
Fredericks site along the lower reaches of Black
Lake Bayou near the city of Natchitoches (Figure
11). Although less than 10 percent of the ceramic
collection from Fredericks was decorated, recovered specimens consisted of several varieties (most
commonly Yokena, Leist, and Spanish Fort) of
Marksville Incised (characterized by bold, “U”shaped incised lines generally in curvilinear patterns); Marksville Stamped (primarily the pseudodentated rocker stamped var. Troyville); Churupa
Punctated, a zoned punctated type with bold lines
and punctations; and small numbers of Larto Red
and Coles Creek Incised var. Hunt. The pottery also
exhibits much variation in rim forms, with rims
often thickened in various ways, sometimes including decorations on the lip. In the Lower Mississippi
Valley, cord-marked pottery also was common during the Late Woodland period, but no cord-marked
sherds were recovered from Fredericks. Many of
these types once were considered diagnostic of the
Late Marksville period Issaquena phase (Greengo
1964), but more recent work clearly demonstrates
their continuation into the 8th century (Girard
2000; McGimsey 2004; Lee et al. 2011). Late in
this period, probably during the 8th century, early
varieties of Coles Creek Incised (vars. Hunt, Keo,
Phillips, Wade, Stoner, and Chase) became increasingly common and new types such as French Fork
Incised appeared. This is the time of the Logtown
phase on the lower Ouachita River (Kidder 1990),
which corresponds to the Bayland phase farther
east in the Lower Yazoo region (Phillips 1970).
Sherds relating to these types have been found
along Toledo Bend Reservoir and in the Red River
drainage north of Fredericks, but are sparse and
generally mixed with later pottery. On the upper
Sabine, the Resch (41HS16), Holmes (41SM282),
and possibly the Hadden’s Bend (16DS203) sites
have yielded small amounts of Troyville pottery
(Jensen 1968; Webb et al. 1969; Walters and Perttula 2010). At the Pace site a small number of possible Marksville Incised and Churupa Punctated
sherds have been recovered, but the primary occupation likely postdates the 8th century.
Early Coles Creek varieties continued into
the 9th century, but the Troyville types dropped
out and several new types and varieties appeared

75

including Coles Creek Incised, var. Coles Creek,
Mazique Incised, Avoyelles Punctated, and Chevalier Stamped marking the Crawford phase on
the lower Ouachita (Kidder 1990). The Fredericks
site lacks this suite of types, and radiocarbon dates
suggest that it was abandoned early in the 9th century. Radiocarbon dates and Coles Creek Incised
pottery indicate that occupations took place in the
Red River drainage to the north at sites such as
Festervan (Girard 2012b:251) and Caney Branch
II (Cliff and Peter 1994). This also probably was
the time of the earliest development of aggregated
settlement at sites that later developed into mound
centers such as Mounds Plantation (16CD12) and
Crenshaw (3MI6). The earliest permanent occupation at the Pace site, and perhaps Hudnall-Pirtle
(41RK4) and Boxed Springs (41UR30), appears
to fit here as well.
A broader range of pottery types and varieties
appeared in the A.D. 900 to 1050 interval, including Coles Creek Incised, vars. Blakely, Greenhouse,
and Mott, Beldeau Incised, Evansville Punctated,
and new varieties of French Fork Incised, Avoyelles Punctated Incised, and Mazique Incised. This
period is known as the Pritchard’s Landing phase
in the lower Ouachita drainage and the Greenhouse
phase in the lower Red River region (Belmont
1967; Kidder 1990). Decorations on ceramics in
both the Caddo Area and Lower Mississippi Valley remained similar with only minor differences
evident between types such as Davis Incised and
Coles Creek Incised, vars. Greenhouse or Blakely,
Pennington Punctated-Incised and Avoyelles
Punctated, Kiam Incised and Evansville Punctated,
and Dunkin Incised and late varieties of Mazique
Incised. Coles Creek Incised or Davis Incised appears to have dominated assemblages until late in
this interval along the Red River (Girard 2012a),
but a wider variety of types apparently was used
to the west, particularly at the Davis site along the
Neches River. The first widespread use of polished/
engraved “fine wares” probably took place at this
time. Although the simple type Hickory Engraved
resembles (often finely polished) Coles Creek
Incised, the more elaborately decorated Holly and
Spiro fine engraved types have no counterparts in
the Lower Mississippi Valley.
Assuming widespread contemporaneity of general ceramic trends, the combination of decorated
types present at the Pace site suggests that most
of the occupation there took place in the range of
A.D. 800-1050, and the few available radiocarbon

76

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. Selected Formative and Early Caddo period sites. Squares are sites with mounds; circles are sites without mounds.

dates, as noted previously, corroborate this interpretation. The recovery of a small number of
Marksville Incised and Churupa Punctated sherds
hint that some occupation might have occurred
slightly earlier. The Pace site ceramic collection
is dominated by Coles Creek Incised or Davis
Incised, but also includes small numbers of diagonal incised, punctated, and punctated-incised
specimens. Engraved pottery, although present, is
very sparse. If the Pace site inhabitants followed

the pan-regional trends, I suspect that the site was
abandoned during the middle 11th century, a time
when major construction was being carried out at
places such as Hudnall-Pirtle, Mounds Plantation,
and Crenshaw (see Figure 11).
Although the Pace site was established as a
permanent village before A.D. 1000, the mounds
appear to have been constructed late in the history
of the site, probably during the early 11th century.
At least two other sites (Hudnall-Pirtle and Boxed

Girard—The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo Developments
Springs) in the Sabine River drainage with ceramic
assemblages similar to Pace have multiple mounds
(see Figure 11). Radiocarbon dates from these sites
fall in the 11th century, slightly later than those
from sub-mound contexts at Pace, but similar to
the date (Pace-4) from the Mound A fill (Figure
12). Some pottery from Hudnall-Pirtle and Boxed
Springs appears to relate to the 10th century, but
other aspects of these assemblages (moderately
greater percentages of free punctated and zoned
punctated sherds, and significantly greater percentages of engraved sherds), as well as the radiocarbon dates, suggest that these sites continued to be
inhabited through the 11th century, and likely well
into the 12th century.
MULTIPLE MOUND CENTERS
Between ca. A.D. 400-800 in the Lower
Mississippi Valley several sites contained multiple mounds and evidence of elaborate mortuary

77

programs and other ceremonies. The Troyville site
(16CT3) contained at least 13 mounds, including
the massive Great Mound with its conical upper
stage reported to be about 24 m high. Ceremonial
centers such as Insley (16FR3), Marsden (16RI3),
DePrato (16CO37), and Pritchard’s Landing
(16CT14) were started during this period, and
continued to be occupied after A.D. 800. Bathtubshaped fire pits at Marsden (16RI3), Gold Mine
Plantation (16RI13), and Neely (16WC4), similar
to those first identified by Ford at the Greenhouse
(16AV2) site, are thought to be associated with
large, communal feasts, and perhaps funerary rituals (Lee 2010:138). Cemeteries or ossuaries such
as those at the Old Creek site (Gibson 1984) and
Gold Mine Plantation (McGimsey 2004) contain
a variety of bundle and flexed burials, as well as
unassociated skeletal elements. Although mortuary items (effigy vessels, conch cup) are sparse
and not associated with specific individuals and
no other evidence of social hierarchies exist, it is
likely that ceremonial participants included both

Figure 12. Radiocarbon dates from mound sites in the upper Sabine River drainage.

78

Texas Archeological Society

site populations and residents of smaller peripheral communities. The existence of mound centers
likely represents social integration on regional,
rather than strictly local, spatial scales.
Late Woodland period mound centers extended
upstream along the Red River drainage as far north
as the Fredericks site (16NA2) on a rise overlooking the Black Lake Bayou bottom east of the Red
River near Natchitoches. The site consists of five
mounds along with a dense midden deposit situated
on a ridge along the bluff edge. Eight calibrated radiocarbon dates indicate that occupation took place
in the A.D. 400-800 range. Although investigations
have been limited, it appears that the Fredericks
site represents a ceremonial center where populations congregated for rituals involving feasting and
human burial (Girard 2000).
In the Trans-Mississippi South to the north
and west of Fredericks, several solitary mounds
were constructed and used for burials during the
Middle Woodland period (Fulton and Webb 1953;
Girard 2012c; McClurkan et al. 1980; Schambach
1982; Webb 1984). However, none of these sites
appear to have had substantial residential populations and there is little evidence of ceremonial
activities other than interment of small numbers
of individuals within the mounds. For several
centuries after ca. A.D. 400 no mounds were built
in the Trans-Mississippi South. Late Woodland
period peoples of the Fourche Maline, Mill Creek,
and Mossy Grove cultures varied in the degree to
which they occupied settled villages, but there is
little evidence of social or political integration beyond relatively local spatial levels. This situation
changed in the Red River drainage during the 9th
century as substantial villages developed at places
such as Mounds Plantation and Crenshaw, and
perhaps at the same time or a little later along the
upper Sabine River at Pace, Hudnall-Pirtle, and
perhaps Boxed Springs and Jamestown (41SM54).
The Hudnall-Pirtle site, located approximately 60
km upstream from Pace, eventually consisted of
eight earthen mounds arranged around an extensive
plaza, with middens that probably represent habitation areas on the periphery (Bruseth and Perttula
2006). Boxed Springs includes four mounds, at
least one of which contained a shaft tomb burial,
several habitation areas, and a large cemetery
(Perttula 2011). Although few investigations have
been carried out at Jamestown, as many as seven
mounds might be present along with habitation
areas (Perttula 1994; Perttula and Walker 2008).

Other possible sites with single mounds that date
to the Early to Middle Caddo period were noted by
Perttula (1994:12). Initial construction of mounds
at these places might not have occurred until the
late 10th or early 11th centuries, but I suspect that
with more excavation we will find evidence of ceremonial activities or residences of ritual or political
leaders in contexts pre-dating mound construction.
Based on the relatively regular geographic
spacing, Perttula (1994) suggested that the major
mound centers on the upper Sabine represent nodes
of extensive communities or small polities with
premier centers placed at approximately 50 km intervals. Because so little work has been carried out,
the timing of mound construction and other events
at these centers is not known. Questions regarding social, political, and economic relationships
between centers also cannot be addressed with currently available data. The Pace site appears to have
been a substantial residential community in the 9th
and 10th centuries, and the small mounds suggest
that the site hosted ceremonies or was the residence
of religious or social elites at the time that the other
mound centers also were developing. However, for
unknown reasons, Pace was abandoned prior to the
late 11th century when the major mound centers of
the Early Caddo period were occupied and the full
range of what has been considered Caddo pottery
was in use.
CADDO AND COLES CREEK:
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Caddo archeology developed in terms of the
culture area concept with the assumption that a
discrete group of people left a distinctive archeological record within a specific territory. Recent
theoretical perspectives have emphasized understanding past human networks of ideological, social, and economic interaction that often crosscut
geographical regions, including traditional culture
areas (Girard et al. 2014). The Pace site presented
a dilemma in being located within the Caddo culture area, but exhibited traits, particularly pottery
decoration, that closely resembled those found
on sites classified as Coles Creek in the Lower
Mississippi Valley. It now is apparent that Coles
Creek style pottery was spread over most of the
Caddo Area (see Story 1990:Appendix 4) between
ca. A.D. 800 and 1050. Although almost undoubtedly locally made, pottery decorations reflected

Girard—The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo Developments
pan-regional, not local, decorative ideas. Peoples
in the Caddo Area may have emulated the pottery
styles of the larger and more dynamic polities to
the east. Population dispersal, including movement
of families and larger corporate groups between
the regions, also may have occurred. Connections between Lower Mississippi Valley groups
and those in the Red and Sabine River drainages
undoubtedly were strong, even though we cannot
specify their nature. These connections stimulated
population aggregation and perhaps the formation
of multi-community polities in the Caddo Area that
were similar to those that had longer histories of
development to the east.
Evidence from Pace and other sites in the
Caddo Area suggests that the emergence of the
Caddo cultural tradition was a complex series of
events that occurred over the course of several
centuries. Distinctive traits such as mound construction, fine ware ceramics, and elite mortuary
programs, appeared at different times in different
regions. Our understanding of chronologies is
becoming increasingly precise although dilemmas
remain such as the apparently early appearance at
the George C. Davis site of traits that only occurred
later along the Red River. Stimulus from groups in
the Lower Mississippi Valley who were undergoing both population aggregation and territorial
expansion was important for generating changes
in the Caddo Area. However, the earliest mound
centers in the Caddo Area developed at relatively
large local villages at the end of the Late Woodland
period, and these centers do not represent colonization by Lower Mississippi Valley peoples. Dee
Ann Story liked to compare archeological inquiry
to using a zoom-lens camera: we need to look both
at the broad picture and zoom in for local views,
re-focusing while we do so. Our investigations into
Caddo origins need to involve studies of specific
contexts such as the Pace site, and to examine the
broad pan-regional conditions within which local
events took place.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The 1992-1994 investigations at the James
Pace site were conducted through the State of
Louisiana’s Regional Archaeology program, based
at Northwestern State University of Louisiana.
Funds for two of the radiocarbon dates were
obtained through a grant from the Louisiana

79

Archaeological Conservancy. Mr. James Pace
of Logansport, Louisiana granted permission to
carry out the project on his property. Joe Saunders,
Thurman Allen, and Louis Baker provided valuable
interpretations and assistance in the field.
REFERENCES CITED
Belmont, J. S.
1967 The Cultural Sequence at the Greenhouse Site,
Louisiana. Southeastern Archaeological Conference
Bulletin 6:27-35.
Bruseth, J. E. and T. K. Perttula
2006 Archeological Investigations at the Hudnall-Pirtle
Site (41RK4) An Early Caddo Mound Center in
Northeast Texas. Caddo Archeology Journal
15:59-158.
Cliff, M. B. and D. E. Peter
1994 Test Excavations at the Caney Branch I and Caney
Branch II Sites (16BO198 and 16BO200), Louisiana
Army Ammunition Plant, Bossier Parish, Louisiana.
LAAP Archeological Technical Series Report of
Investigations No. 5. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano, Texas.
Fields, R. C. and E. F. Gadus
2012 The Pine Tree Mound Site and the Archeology of the
Nadaco Caddo. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 83:23-80.
Fulton, R. L. and C. H. Webb
1953 The Bellevue Mound: A Pre-Caddoan Site in Bossier
Parish, Louisiana. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 24:18-42.
Gibson, J.
1984 Old Creek, A Troyville Period Ossuary in LaSalle
Parish, Louisiana:Reflections after a Quarter Century. Louisiana Archaeology 9:127-204.
Girard, J. S.
1994 Investigations at the James Pace Site (16DS268),
DeSoto Parish, Louisiana. Caddoan Archeology
Newsletter 5(1):8-16.

2000 Excavations at the Fredericks Site (16NA2), Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana. Louisiana Archaeology
24:1-106.
2012a Recent Investigations at the Mounds Plantation Site
(16CD12), Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Caddo Archeology Journal 22: 21-62.

2012b Settlement Patterns and Variation in Caddo Pottery
Decoration: A Case Study of the Willow Chute
Bayou Locality. In The Archaeology of the Caddo,
edited by T. K. Perttula and C.P. Walker, pp. 239287. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

80

Texas Archeological Society

2012c The Bellevue Site (16BO4): A Woodland Period
Mound in Northwest Louisiana. Louisiana Archaeology 35:53-78.
Girard, J. S., T. K. Perttula, and M. B. Trubitt
2014 Caddo Connections: Cultural Interactions within
and beyond the Caddo World. Rowman & Littlefield,
Lanham, Maryland.
Greengo, R. E.
1964 Issaquena: An Archaeological Phase in the Yazoo
Basin of the Lower Mississippi Valley. Memoir No.
18. Society for American Archaeology, Salt Lake
City, Utah.
Jensen, H. E.
1968 Archaeological Investigations in the Toledo Bend
Reservoir: 1966-1967. Archaeology Salvage Project,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Kidder, T. R.
1990 Ceramic Chronology and Culture History of the
Southern Ouachita River Basin: Coles Creek to the
Early Historic Period. Midcontinental Journal of
Archaeology 15(1):51-99.
Lee, A.
2010 Troyville and the Baytown Period. In Archaeology
of Louisiana, edited by M. A. Rees, pp. 135-156.
Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge.
Lee, A., J. Biddescombe, D. Bruner, D. Harlan, A. Montana,
J. McKnight, C. Nolan, R. Smith, and J-K. Yakubik
2011 Archaeological Data Recovery and Monitoring at the
Troyville Mounds Site (16CT7), Catahoula Parish,
Louisiana. Earth Search, Inc., New Orleans.
McClurkan, B.B., E.B. Jelks, and H.P. Jensen
1980 Jonas Short and Coral Snake Mounds: A Comparison. Louisiana Archaeology 6:173-206.
McGimsey, C. R.
2004 The Gold Mine Site (16RI13): An AD 825 Ossuary in Northeast Louisiana. Regional Archaeology
Program, Management Unit III, 2003/2004 Annual
Report. Report on file with the Louisiana Division
of Archaeology, Department of Culture, Recreation,
and Tourism, Baton Rouge.
Newell, H. P. and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoirs No. 5. Society for American Archaeology,
Menasha, Wisconsin.
Perttula, T. K.
1994 Caddoan Mound Sites in the Sabine River Basin of
Northeast Texas. Caddoan Archeology Newsletter
4(4):4-19.

2009 Lake Naconiche Archaeology and Caddo Origins
Issues. Journal of Northeast Texas Archeology
31:61-86.

2011

(editor) Archaeological and Archaeogeophysical Investigations at an Early Caddo Mound Center in the
Sabine River Basin of East Texas. Special Publication No. 15. Friends of Northeast Texas Archaeology,
Austin and Pittsburg.

Perttula, T. K. and C. P. Walker
2008 The History of Archaeological Investigations and
Geophysical Survey at the Jamestown Mound Site
(41SM54), an Archaeological Conservancy Preserve
in Smith County, Texas. Archeological & Environmental Consultants, LLC and Archaeo-Geophysical
Associates, LLC, Austin.
Phillips, P.
1970 Archaeological Survey in the Lower Yazoo Basin,
Mississippi, 1949-1955. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology Vol. 60, Pts. 1
and 2. Harvard University, Cambridge.
Samuelsen, J. R.
n.d. AMS and Radiocarbon Dating of the Crenshaw
Site (3MI6). MS submitted for publication to The
Arkansas Archeologist.
Schambach, F. F.
1982 An Outline of Fourche Maline Culture in Southwest
Arkansas. In Arkansas Archeology in Review, edited
by N. L. Trubowitz and M. D. Jeter, pp. 132-197.
Research Series No. 15. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.
Scurlock, J. D.
1964 Archeological Reconnaissance at Toledo Bend
Reservoir, 1962-1963 Season. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Scurlock, J. D. and W. A. Davis
1962 Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Toledo
Bend Reservoir, Pinola, Newton, Sabine, and Shelby
Counties, Texas; Sabine and DeSoto Parishes,
Louisiana. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Story, D. A.
1990 Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain: Volume 1, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A.
Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B.
W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Research
Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.


2000 Introduction. In The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas, by H. P. Newell and A. D. Krieger, pp.
1-31. 2nd Edition. Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C.

Girard—The James Pace Site (16DS268) and Early Caddo Developments
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Special Publication No. 1, Texas Archeological Society, and Bulletin No. 4, Texas Memorial Museum,
Austin.
Walters, M. and T. K. Perttula
2010 The Holmes Site (41SM282): An East Texas Site
with Lower Mississippi Valley Ceramic Sherds.
Louisiana Archaeology 31:34-42.
Webb, C. H.
1984 The Bellevue Focus: A Marksville-Troyville Manifestation in Northwestern Louisiana. Louisiana
Archaeology 9:251-274.

81

2000 Stone Points and Tools of Northwestern Louisiana.
Special Publication No. 1. 2nd Edition. Louisiana
Archaeological Society, Baton Rouge.
Webb, C. H., F. E. Murphey, W. G. Ellis, and H. R. Green
1969 The Resch Site, 41HS16, Harrison County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:3-106.

Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites
and Understanding Prehistoric Caddo Mortuary
Practices in Shelby County, Texas
Tom Middlebrook

ABSTRACT
During late 17th and early 18th century mission-building entradas to the northeastern frontier of Spanish Texas
(the “Kingdom of the Tejas”), several European chroniclers provided descriptions of the socio-political elites
amongst the Hasinai Caddo groups. Civil leadership was centered in a headman referred to as a caddi while
several constituent groups gave principle religious allegiance to a shamanistic figure known as the grand xinesi
who resided with two “heavenly children” or coninesi. Mortuary findings at the prehistoric Tyson site (41SY92)
and the Morse Mound site (41SY27) will be discussed in light of these later descriptions of Hasinai elites.

AN APPRECIATION
The impact of Dee Ann Story’s prodigious
professional career on colleagues and students
is certainly mirrored by the lasting effects of her
tireless encouragement and mentoring of countless
avocational archeologists for well over a half-century. She had been in the middle of Texas archeology for years when she, Ed Jelks, and Mott Davis
gave direction to the Texas Archeological Society’s
first Field School at the Gilbert Site in 1962 (Jelks
1967). Three of the young avocational participants
of that Field School, Jay Blaine, Charlie Bollich,
and Bob Turner, met with Dee Ann during a Caddo
Conference 40 years later at Stephen F. Austin
State University (Figure 1).
I first met Dee Ann in 1978 during an earlier
Caddo Conference. She wrote me a short letter
after the meeting, and her words have inspired my
efforts since. Both at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory and later at her home near Wimberley, Dee Ann patiently listened to the details of
my latest field projects. She pointed out some areas
of strength in my work, but always gently gave
correction to weaknesses and missed opportunities.
She consistently urged me to observe more carefully, think more cogently, and read more broadly.
In 1985 during the Texas Archeological Society’s
Field School in Nacogdoches, Dee Ann visited my

excavation project at the Henry M site (41NA60),
a small Caddo farmstead (Middlebrook and Perttula 2008; Perttula et al. 2010). This site was contemporaneous with the Deshazo site (41NA13/27)
that she had used for the University of Texas Field
School a decade before (Story 1982, 1995). For a
long time that afternoon she had me down in the
block troweling very carefully in order to notice
the subtle changes in soil compaction or the frequency of the smallest rootlets that might signal a
cultural feature. I had the impression that Dee Ann
could treat avocational students with almost the
same intensity as paying students. But for all that
rigor and push for erudition, Dee Ann was one of
the warmest and kindest persons I have known in
archeology or any field. I never met Dee Ann after
the mid-1980s without being the recipient of a big
hug and a kiss on one or both cheeks.
Just a few days before her passing, when I had
called to tell her of the establishment of the Dr. Dee
Ann Story East Texas Archeology Scholarship at
Stephen F. Austin State University, she expressed
her appreciation, but then she really wanted to
know what I had been doing lately and “what
are you finding?” Her concern for others and her
boundless curiosity remained strong to the very
end of her life. It is a privilege to represent, in this
collection of papers, the many avocational archeologists with whom Dee Ann worked.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

FIGURES
84

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Dee Ann Story with Jay Blaine, Charlie Bollich, and Bob Turner in 2002.

EUROPEANS IN EAST TEXAS

Figure 1.

The territorial claim on behalf of the French
sovereign made on April 9, 1682, by René Robert
Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle at the mouth of the
Mississippi River, effectively separated La Florida
from Spain’s other North American holdings. In
response to La Salles’s misadventures establishing
a colony during 1684-1687 along Garcitas Creek
in the Texas mid-coastal region, the Spanish sent
numerous expeditions across the Rio del Norte to
confront the French threat from the east (Weddle
1991, 1999; Bruseth and Turner 2005). The Spanish established their first significant presence in the
northeastern Texas frontier in the form of Mission
San Francisco de los Tejas (May 1690-October
1693). This mission was placed along San Pedro
Creek in Houston County on the westernmost
edge of the renowned “Kingdom of the Tejas,”
the loosely affiliated Hasinai Caddo groups in the
Neches-Angelina River valleys (Chipman and Joseph 2010). The military and political leaders that
established and re-supplied the mission included
Governors Alonso De León and Domingo Terán de
los Ríos. The spiritual work was fostered by Fray

Damián Massanet, Francisco Casañas de Jesús
María, and Francisco Hidalgo. A second mission,
Santisimo Nombre de Maria on the nearby Neches
River, was occupied from September 1690 until
January 1692, when it was destroyed by a flood.
Ultimately, this first Spanish missionary effort
amongst the Caddo was abandoned due to physical
hardships, Caddo epidemics, and ultimately, stiff
Native opposition sparked by desecration of some
holy buildings (Swanton, 1942:218) and molestation of Hasinai women by the European soldiers
(Barr 2007:66).
During the next 20 years, the relationships between the East Texas Caddo and the two European
powers were complex and dynamically evolving
owing to their divergent motivations and agendas.
The implicit dominant power in the region was
the Hasinai Caddo, while the engagement of the
Spaniards in establishing their claim was often
mediated by their French rivals who the Caddo
more comfortably tolerated. The French infiltrated
into native communities, embraced local kinship
traditions, stressed mutually beneficial trade, and
had less need to control, congregate, and convert
(Barr 2007).

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites
Pierre Le Moyne, Sieur d’Iberville, established
settlements at Biloxi in 1699 and Mobile in 1702.
Iberville’s bother, Jean Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur
de Bienville, along with a young French Canadian
named Louis Juchereau de St. Denis, ascended the
Red River in 1700 and succeeded in meeting many
of the Caddo related groups from Louisiana and
Texas (Burton and Smith 2008:4f). This initiated an
intensification of relationships between the French
and friendly indigenous peoples. By 1714, St. Denis was able to establish a post at Natchitoches that
grew to be the earliest European settlement in what
would later be known as the Louisiana Purchase.
Meanwhile, back in Mexico, Fray Francisco
Hidalgo maintained his passion for the spiritual
salvation of the Hasinai. On January 17, 1711,
Hidalgo penned a letter to the French governor
proposing trade and collaboration with missionary
efforts. This letter made its way to Governor Antoine d la Mothe, Sieur de Cadillac, in Mobile who
signed a passport on August 1, 1713 authorizing
St. Denis to travel as far as Coahuila and to establish trade agreements with the Spaniards (Nardini
1963). Over the next year, St. Denis moved in
and out of the Hasinai territory amplifying trade
relationships with the native peoples while also
hoping to find Hidalgo. Ultimately, in the summer
of 1714, St. Denis traversed Texas in six weeks
with three Frenchmen, four Indians, horses, and
merchandise to arrive at Presidio San Juan Bautista
south of the Rio Grande (Byrd 2008). Despite arrest, interrogation, and transport to Mexico City,
St. Denis was eventually successful in ingratiating
himself to the Spaniards: so much so that he married the step-granddaughter of the Commandant at
San Juan Bautista (Lemee 1998, 2003:43f, n. 5).
It is in this context then that the Frenchman, Louis
Juchereau de St. Denis, became the quartermaster
and guide to the Domingo Ramón Expedition of
1716, the first permanent European entrance into
Spanish Texas.
The principal goal of the 1716 entrada was the
establishment of four missions in the “Kingdom
of the Tejas” shoring up the eastern Spanish frontier. Father Félix Isidro Espinosa, President of the
Franciscan Religious College of Querétaro, was
in charge of the missionary effort. He was soon
joined by Fray Antonio Margil de Jesús, President
of the Religious College of Zacatecas. In 1716,
Ramón wrote possession documents to Mission
Nuestra Padre de San Francisco de los Tejas east
of the Neches River, Mission Nuestra Señora de la

85

Purísima Concepción de los Hainai just east of the
Angelina River, Mission San José de los Nasonis
in southern Rusk County, and Mission Nuestra
Señora de Guadalupe de los Nacogdoches (Chipman and Joseph 2010). The next year, in 1717,
with much assistance from St. Denis, Ramón and
Margil founded two other missions further east,
Mission Nuestra Señora de los Dolores de los Ais
at modern San Augustine (Corbin et al. 1980) and
Mission San Miguel de Linares de los Adaes near
Robeline, Louisiana (Gregory 1973). Ramón also
built a small fortification to protect the missions.
A total of 25 soldiers and another 45 or so people
manned Ramón’s Presidio, later named “Dolores,”
in western Nacogdoches County near Mission
Concepción. Over the next five years, the missions
were re-supplied by Governor Martín de Alarcón
(Celiz 1935), but abandoned between 1719-1721
due to fear of the French following the “Chicken
War” (Castaneda 1936), and ultimately re-established by the Marqués de San Miguel de Aguayo
in 1721 (Hackett 1945). The three western Querétaro missions (San Francisco, Concepción, and
San Jose) were removed to the San Antonio area
by 1730 and Presidio Dolores was extinguished.
The eastern three Zacatecan missions (Guadalupe,
Dolores, and San Miguel) and Presidio Los Adaes
were closed in 1772.
In 2010, a team led by Morris K. Jackson,
George Avery, and me discovered the location of
Mission Nuestra Señora de la Purísima Concepción de los Hainai, the original headquarters of
Espinosa’s missionary effort in 1716 (Jackson et
al. 2012:127-194). Our initial investigations of
Mission Concepción, recorded as the Gallant Falls
site (41NA344), indicated that the core mission
was a modest sized compound (approximately 30
x 60 m) with at least three structures situated on
a narrow terrace just above the eastern floodplain
of the Angelina River. Approximately 150 m to
the southwest of the mission is a large Caddo site
(41NA345), which may represent the village of
Cheocas, who was the caddi of the Hainai, the lead
tribe of the Hasinai Caddo. Three hundred m to the
north of the mission is a related site (41NA338)
that has yielded forged nails, colonial gun parts,
glass beads, and a magnetometer signature of a
round Caddo-style house. Later in 2010, our team
relocated the Mayhew site (41NA21) on Lake
Nacogdoches, which we contend is San Denis’s
trading post for supplying the western missions and
the local Hasinai (cf. Jackson et al. 2012:195-217),

86

Texas Archeological Society

not an Hasinai farmstead (Kenmotsu 1992). Those
discoveries led to our renewed interest in ethnohistoric documents pertaining to European and Caddo
interactions.
THE HASINAI AND THEIR ELITES
Records and diaries from many of these early
European figures give us a rich picture of Hasinai
Caddo life (Hatcher 1927; Swanton 1942; Bolton
1987; Perttula 1992). All Caddo groups had a sedentary agricultural lifeway supplemented by the
collecting of nuts and berries as well as local opportunistic hunting and fishing. Planned annual buffalo hunts to the Southern Plains and other ventures
outside their home territory were common. They
hunted with bows and arrows but readily became
proficient with firearms once the French made them
available. In their gardens grew corn, beans, squash,
pumpkins, sunflowers, other native oily seed plants,
and tobacco. They were renowned for their skill as
potters; their ceramic vessels often have beautiful
wet paste and engraved designs. The Caddo were
known to trade in ceramics, salt, bow-wood, animal
hides, Lipan Apache slaves, and horses.
The Hasinai communities were clearly hierarchical in social structure although perhaps less
so compared to Caddo groups from some other
geographical and temporal settings (see Fields,
this volume). Sabo (1998) discussed the ritual
interaction between community hierarchy and
the hierarchical organization of the supernatural
realm. Early chroniclers describe extended Hasinai villages that had socio-political centers at the
residence of a key leader referred to as the caddi.
Wyckoff and Baugh (980:234-235) enumerate the
many functions performed by the caddi, including
such activities as settling inter-village disputes,
calling assemblies, hosting feasts and various ceremonies, organizing house construction, welcoming guests, dividing gifts, conducting war councils,
and holding calumet ceremonies. Near the houses
of these local headmen stood another building for
the meeting of the village elders known as canahas.
Other Hasinai officials included chayas (pages),
tammas (enforcers), connas (medicine men), and
amayxovas (proven warriors). A number of villages, each with their own specific social identity
and led by their own caddi, gave allegiance to a
supreme religious figure or priest referred to as the
grand xinesi. In essence, the caddi operated with

authority within a single community to maintain
cohesion, ceremonial fidelity, and structural integrity, while the grand xinesi’s role led him to be the
communication conduit between all the people and
the supernatural realm.
Reflecting on the early European accounts,
and their research at the Deshazo site in western
Nacogdoches County, Dee Ann Story and Darrel Creel (1982) proposed a synthetic model for
integrating archeological settlement patterns and
ethnohistorically derived socio-political organization. They discussed specific drainage “Constituent
Groups” centered on a lesser center (the residence
of a caddi) as one element within a larger “Affiliated Group” that had an associated major center
(the residence of a grand xinesi).
What do we know about the principal leader
or grand xinesi of the Hasinai who resided at the
major center? The reports of Hidalgo, Casañas,
and Espinosa provide the clearest descriptions
(Hatcher 1927). This personage was revered by
all, had regional religious significance and served
multiple tribes, or “constituent groups.” While he
was primarily a spiritual leader, the grand xinesi had
some final say regarding political and diplomatic
issues. For example, the Nabedache caddi sent for
the xinesi as part of obtaining final approval for
de León and Massanet’s plan to establish the first
Mission San Francisco in 1690 (Letter of Massanet
to Siguenza in Bolton [1908:380f]). The xinesi had
a special relationship with Caddi Ayo Amay, the
“Captain of the Sky” or most high god. Cecile Elkins Carter (1995:73) has speculated that the name
xinesi may have derived from Caddo words meaning
“Mr. Moon” and that this figure is associated with
“Neesh” or Moon of Hasinai oral traditions. There
are stories recorded by George Dorsey over a century ago in which Moon is described as the first created Hasinai man, and he was selected to be the first
caddi or headman of the people (Dorsey 1997:7).
The chroniclers’ description of the xinesi’s
village involved at least three kinds of structures
(Hatcher 1927; Swanton 1942). First, there was a
very large building, akin to a “cathedral,” which
served as a “fire temple.” The xinesi tended the
fire to keep it going, and embers from this eternal
flame were sent around to connect the central
fires of all the villages. Four large logs radiated
from the fire in the cardinal directions. He placed
ash from the fire outside the house in mounds.
Through fire and smoke, the grand xinesi mediated between the cycles of community life that

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites
depended on seed crops, successful hunting, and
warfare, and the supernatural realm that included
the souls of deceased leaders, mythic heroes, and
Caddi Ayo Amay. Ceremonialism around the fire
temple involved dancing, burning of tobacco and
fat from a buffalo’s heart, and drinking of a tea.
This tea may have been a stimulant, purgative,
or hallucinogenic “Black Drink” made from Ilex
vomitoria, or possibly a peyote tea (Hidalgo in
Hatcher 1927:56). In a second structure about 100
paces away from the fire temple, the xinesi had his
residence (Casañas in Hatcher 1927:292). Lastly,
about a gunshot distance away from the temple,
perhaps 50 m, stood one or two smaller houses
for the cononisi, also known as “the little ones”
or the “heavenly children” (see Casañas, Hidalgo,
and Espinosa in Hatcher 1927:50-52, 160-162, and
290-292). These were said to be two little boys,
cared for by the xinesi and used by him to speak
to Caddi Ayo Amay and to the Hasinai people. No
one but the xinesi was allowed to see the children;
the consequence was instant death. Whether or not
these little ones were twins, a concept that figures
large in Southeastern Native American mythology,
is unknown (Lankford 2011:160-175). The children
had spiritual or mystical qualities and had been sent
by the Great Captain in the Sky. The people said
prayers to them at night. Ceremonies that involved
the cononisi consisted of the elders going into the
temple nude, sitting in the dark while the xinesi
burned fat-laden incense, shook a gourd rattle, and
spoke to the children about the needs of the people
and Caddi Ayo Amay’s current feelings about
the Hasinai. According to Spanish witnesses, the
xinesi, using a childlike falsetto voice, conducted
both sides of the conversation.
Perhaps the cononisi were mythical as well.
Outraged by their superstition, two of the Franciscan padres, Fray Casañas and Fray Bordoi,
barged into the temple or the cononisi houses
looking to see the little ones. No children were
seen. Frustrated, or perhaps embarrassed, the xinesi
explained to the Catholic priests that the cononisi
used to be visible but had burned in a fire and
their spirits had risen as smoke. In 1690, Casañas
(Hatcher 1927:293) was told that this had happened
in the distant past shortly after the children were
sent to earth by the Captain of the Sky. Interestingly, a quarter century later, in 1716, a translator
explained to Espinosa (Hatcher 1927:160) that
the children had been burned in a fire set by the
Yojaunes, a Tonkawa band, during an attack on the

87

xinesi village just two years before (Dye and King
2007:160-161). All that was left to represent the
children were two little boxes or chests made of
reeds. One description of these boxes indicated that
they may have been receptacles for offerings such
as tobacco or food (Casañas in Hatcher 1927:292293); another suggested that the chests may have
contained zoomorphic vessels, ornamental feathers, and bird bone flutes (Espinosa in Hatcher
1927:160). Another reference to the boxes implies
that they may be curated sacred bundles of the deceased. Therefore, when Casañas wanted to throw
the boxes into the fire in order to destroy them, the
xinesi resisted and said that all the Hasinai loved
the “little ones” very much.
THE ARCHEOLOGY OF
CADDO ELITES
Given these ethnohistorical descriptions, what
are the expected characteristics of archeological
sites that were once occupied by Caddo elites?
Five attributes will be considered here: (1) presence of one or more earthen mounds, (2) remains
of atypical house structures, (3) evidence of a plaza
area, (4) ceremonial use of fire as suggested by ash
heaps or indications of burned structures, and (5)
presence of elite burials.
Numerous ceremonial sites with large earthen
structural and burial mounds are found throughout
the Caddo region. Caddo elites lived, worshiped,
governed, and conducted diplomacy at these
localities. Four well known prehistoric mound
centers within Hasinai country of the Angelina/
Neches drainages are the George C. Davis site in
Cherokee County (Newell and Krieger 1949; Story
1981, 1997), the Washington Square Mound site in
Nacogdoches County (Corbin 1984; Corbin and
Hart 1998), the A. C. Saunders site (Kleinschmidt
1982) in Anderson County, and the Pace McDonald
site in Anderson County (Perttula, Walters, and
Nelson 2012). Other extensively excavated mound
sites useful for comparison but outside the Hasinai
region include the Belcher site (Webb 1959), the
Pine Tree Mound site (Fields this volume; Fields
and Gadus 2012) and the Hatchel site (Creel 1996;
Perttula 2005). The last mentioned site appears to
represent the mound and “templo” for a xinesi as
seen on the western periphery of the famous map
of the Upper Nasoni village drawn from the Domingo Terán de los Ríos expedition in 1691-1692

88

Texas Archeological Society

(Bolton 1915:Figure 1; Wedel 1978; Schambach
1982; Perttula 1992; Sabo 2012).
Typical non-elite Caddo domiciles in East
Texas were circular in shape and 8 to 12 m in diameter. Schultz’s (2010) review of 215 non-mound
structures found that 86 percent were circular. In
the more than seven decades since Webb (1940)
made some architectural observations regarding
Caddo house types at the Belcher Mound, a number
of researchers have discussed characteristics of
structures at elite sites (Spock 1977; Perttula and
Rogers 2007; Walker 2009; Schultz 2010). While
Schultz (2010) did not find significant differences
in the diameters between mound and non-mound
houses in his study, Webb (1983) described a submound 25 m diameter round atypical structure
(with an inner circle of support postholes 14.4 m
in diameter) at the Werner site in northwestern
Louisiana. Architectural complexity may be a key
marker of elite use of a structure. This is no more
apparent than at the fantastic quadrated, multitrenched Feature 35 under the southern flank of
Mound A at the George C. Davis site (Newell and
Krieger 1949). Extended entranceways on specialized function buildings are discussed in detail by
Perttula (2009:39), and they appear to be associated with “the material manifestations of important
cosmological, ritual, and mortuary beliefs.” Caddo
structures used for specialized ceremonial purposes
or by elite individuals could also be constructed in
pits or with earthen berms or could exhibit a colorful prepared floor (Schultz 2010:322-325).
A maintained open area or plaza for community activities within a site may also suggest
the residence of a personage of elite religious
or political status nearby. Renewal and harvest
ceremonies, festivals, war celebrations, and other
pageants would require space for dancing, formalized outdoor greeting, and participation of a
broader shared community life. A structure for the
council meeting of the canahas would be found
at some place outside the plaza in the caddi’s village, while a fire temple would likely have loomed
large over the plaza at the xinesi’s compound
(Wyckoff and Baugh 1980:246-249). Walker and
McKinnon (2012:186-189) have demonstrated the
use of geophysics in delineating putative plazas
at George C. Davis and other East Texas sites.
Research at Oak Hill Village (41RK214) yielded
a remarkable outline of a large plaza that was
maintained through multiple periods of building
construction around it (Rogers and Perttula 2004;

Perttula and Rogers 2007). Good (1982:98), in her
review of the Deshazo site community structure
that included a plaza, suggested that “Deshazo
could plausibly represent a site where at least some
ceremonial functions were performed by resident
caddi and canahas.” Story (1995:239) was a bit
more cautious, however, stating that identifying
elite residence at this site in the heart of Hasinai
country was “highly tentative.”
Fire with its associated smoke was sacred in
the Hasinai Caddo world. The management and
ceremonial use of the sacred fire was mediated
through priestly elites. The reverence for fire was
rooted in the belief that fire was crucial in the creation of the Hasinai and the items they used (Morfi
1932:26; Swanton 1942:215). At times fire was
employed in acts of renewal, as when important
structures were burned and then capped with earth
as a platform for a new elite structure or site of
veneration. The Hasinai made offerings of meat,
tobacco, and crops to the sacred fire at the priest’s
temple. There was a fear of displeasing that fire
and a strong belief that letting the fire go out would
result in death (Espinosa 1927:161). The perpetual
fire was like a living entity that bound together
the entire community as the flames in houses on
dispersed farmsteads and hamlets were all derived
from the fire in the caddi’s residence, which in turn
came from the fire temple tended by the xinesi.
Smoke arose from the distributed eternal flame in
all parts of the villages. In the fire temple, sacred
incense arising from burning tobacco and fat intensified the mystical connection between the elites
and Caddi Ayo Amay. Smoke was cleansing and
holy. As with many cultures, smoke represented to
the Caddo the nature of spirit as it flows, surrounds,
engulfs, and moves where it will in an unbounded
fashion. It is emblematic of spiritual realities from
the numinous realm impinging upon the phenomenal realm (Sabo 1998).
Hearths, ash deposits, and burned structures
are the archeological remains of the importance
of fire. In the 1930s, A. T. Jackson (1938) noticed
the use of fire in burial rites of Northeast Texas
Caddo. Frank Schambach’s (1972, 2002) work at
the Ferguson mound and the Tom Jones site mound
demonstrated remarkable evidence of structural
burning at elite sites in Southwest Arkansas. Impressive ash beds were discovered in the central
basins, just interior to the peripheral walls and in
the floors of the extended entranceways of several
houses excavated by Clarence Webb (1959) at

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites
the Belcher Mound. In the Hasinai country of the
Neches-Angelina watershed, the A. C. Saunders
site (Kleinschmidt 1982) stands out because of the
presence of a 40 x 50 m oval, 2.3 m high mound
that contained a layer of “hard packed ashes” up
to 1.1 m thick. Nearby was a 0.7 m high “midden mound” overlaying a 14 m diameter circular
house with five hearths. The midden contained an
enormous amount of animal bones, some bone
and shell tools, and much pottery, including effigy
vessels and a large number of pipes. A. T. Jackson
(1936:171), who excavated Saunders in the early to
mid-1930s, proposed that the site was “the location
of a fire house and ash mound such as described by
early Spanish writers,” a place for the keeping of
the “perpetual fire.”
Lastly, sites occupied and used by sociopolitical elites often include burials with evidence
of the elevated standing of the interred. Large shaft
tombs, containing multiple individuals along with
carefully placed objects to intensify veneration or
suggest cosmological information, would easily be
understood as high status graves. Non-elite graves
in the Caddo Area of East Texas are typically seen
as single, extended supine interments with zero to
several associated pottery vessels and perhaps a
few arrow points or other items. At times, there can
be an overlap in the presentation of elite and nonelite in the archeological record. The mere number
of ceramic offerings may not be a reliable indicator
of the status of a grave. For example, at the Belcher
Mound (Webb 1959), Burial 5 with three individuals contained 22 pottery vessels while a larger
Burial 23 with four interred individuals had only
two vessels; many of the non-elite single burials at
the Titus phase Tuck Carpenter cemetery in Camp
County contained 10 to 14 associated ceramic vessels (Turner 1992).
What then does differentiate between common
and elite mortuary presentations? Apart from a
carefully planned spatial arrangement of contents
seen in some elite graves, the most suggestive
indications of high status burials are the presence
of valuable objects and items representative of
sacred activity. Social value often derived from
the rarity of exogenously derived material. Marine
shells from Florida, the Gulf Coast, or California
could be used to manufacture objects of personal
adornment or for ritualistic artistry. Busycon sp.
was the raw material for columella beads as well
as the elaborately engraved shell cups and gorgets
seen in some Caddo sites (Webb 1959; Phillips

89

and Brown 1978-1984, Vol. 1:26-30). Olivella
dama beads from the Gulf of California have been
identified at Spiro’s Craig Mound while Olivella
nivea from the Gulf of Mexico show up at sites
in East Texas (Kozuch 2002). Copper from the
Great Lakes region, turquoise from New Mexico,
and quartz crystals from the Ouachita Mountains
are also present in some elite graves. Conspicuous
ceramic trade items were occasionally included in
the mortuary offerings, perhaps commemorating
key relationships or identification with distant ceremonial sites. Sacred items in elite burials can also
include large chipped stone knives or ceremonial
celts, carved stone pipes, rattles, embossed copper
plates, and sacred bundles (Brown 2012).
Two sites excavated during the past 20 years in
Shelby County, in East Texas, appear to represent
important local Caddo ceremonial centers. Mortuary findings at these sites may hint at the later
Spanish ethnohistoric descriptions of Caddo elites.
THE TYSON SITE (41SY92)
The Tyson site in western Shelby County sits
atop a high second terrace affording it a commanding view of the territory surrounding the confluence of the adjacent Attoyac River with two major
tributaries, Naconiche Creek and West Creek. Its
dominating position on the landscape is unique for
Caddo sites in the area (Figure 2). From 1992 until
2002 a small army of volunteers under the sponsorship of the East Texas Archeological Society
excavated 144 m2 to a typical depth of 40 cm in
sandy loam deposits. Three radiocarbon dates from
a large cooking and trash pit suggest that the site
may have been occupied between A.D. 1390-1440
(Middlebrook 1993).
During a weeklong East Texas Archeological
Field School in July 1993, a 6 x 6 m block and an
attached westward-projecting 12 m long trench
were excavated under the direction of Bob Skiles,
then an archeologist with the U.S. Forest Service
(Middlebrook 1994). Other professional archeologists participating in the field school included Jim
Corbin, Jim Bruseth, Alan Skinner, John Ippolito,
Jack Keller, and Velicia Bergstrom. The block appeared to be placed near the center of a structure
because of the exposure of a well-defined hearth
(Feature 9) and two large associated postholes
(Features 12 and 17) thought to be center posts of
a house (Middlebrook and Middlebrook 1996). In

90

Texas Archeological Society

Figure
2.
Figure 2. Location of the Tyson site east of Attoyac River near its confluence with Naconiche and West creeks.
Figure 2.

Figure 3. 3.
Area of 6 x 6 m block excavation, 1993 East Texas Archeological Field School.
Figure
Figure 3.

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites
addition to these cultural features, the excavation
of the block and the first two units of the trench
yielded 10 more postholes or post molds, three
storage or refuse pits, and two juvenile burials
(Feature 3) (Figure 3).
One of these graves, Burial 1 (Feature 14), was
found to be one of the most richly furnished infant
burials ever excavated in the Caddo region. The
amount and diversity of the material goods placed
in this grave certainly suggests high social status,
and some of the items likely point to their religious/
ceremonial content as well.
After the majority of grave offerings were
mapped and carefully removed, a trench was excavated into the sterile soil outside the expected
limits of the human remains forming a pedestal.
Bement’s Spray Sealant was applied to paper towels
placed over the pedestal and the entire block was
removed intact (Dockall 1995). Helen Danzeiser
Dockall (1994) excavated the human remains at the
Physical Anthropology Laboratory of Texas A&M
University. The most striking finding of the laboratory excavation was the discovery that the interment
contained two individuals in very close proximity.
The remains of the first individual consisted of a
number of cranial elements, six fragmentary teeth,
clavicle, scapula, ribs, and a few long bones. A second individual, apparently lying slightly to the left
of the first, was only represented by two petrosal
ridges of the temporal bones and the glenoid/acromion area of the left scapula. The first individual
was judged by Dockall to have been one to two
years of age, most likely around 18 months. This
individual displayed some evidence of possible
cranial modification. Based on much more limited
evidence, the second individual, also an infant, was
thought to be of approximately the same age at death
or slightly younger. The heads of the children were
placed in the west end of the burial pit.
In total, there were 114 recovered objects
intentionally placed in the grave with the human
remains. Because the burial pit was considerably
larger than required for the recovered material, it
is likely that a considerable amount of perishable
offerings may have also been present originally.
The list of the recovered grave goods includes:
Ceramic vessels
Deer antlers
Deer femur
Deer tibia

n=8 (bottle=1,
bowls=4, jars=3)
n=2
n=1
n=1

Carved bone “ear spools”
Small shell inlays with
“circle and dot”		
Large round shell inlays		
Elongated shell inlays		
Olivella nivea beads		
Columella beads		
Small broken shell beads
Ridged marine bivalve shell
Turtle carapace with
drilled dimples		
Fresh water mussel shells
(4 in cache with rocks)
Ferruginous sandstone rocks
(associated with mussel shells)
Pitted stones		
Tools for knapping (in cache)
(deer ulna tools=6,
beaver teeth=2)
Knapping raw material (in cache)
(lithic=14, shell=6)
Smoothed pebbles
(Burnishing stones?)		

91

n=2
n=4
n=2
n=6
n=30
n=10
n=3
n=1
n=1
n=8
n=3
n=2
n=8
n=20
n=2

The complex placement of grave goods with
the two infants is likely important in understanding their identity and their meaning to the community who buried them (Perttula 2004:Figure
13.17). The most remarkable feature of the grave
was the placement, directly over the crania, of a
large well-made Tyson Engraved carinated bowl
that was itself covered by a carefully placed set of
deer antlers and bordered by a deer ulna and femur
(Figures 4 and 5).
Tyson Engraved refers to a group of carinated
bowls and bottles from the Shelby County area
that display the following elements: (1) a straight
or biconcave “pillar” covered with two semi-circle
lines, alternating with (2) fat negative S-shaped
scrolls (or “SZ” design), and (3) attaching lines
connecting the first two elements (Middlebrook
1994:24). This motif is prominent at the Tyson site
with a second vessel found in Burial 1 (Figure 4g)
and a number of sherds recovered from the midden and large pit. This engraved design has also
been noted at the Morse Mound site (41SY27), the
Buddy Hancock site (41SY45), the Jerald Hughes
Ranch site (documented by the author, April
1994), and a site reported near Shelbyville (Connie Hodges, personal communication, May 1998).
Some vessels from the Buddy Hancock site also
show stylistic simplifications of the core design.

92

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4.

Figure 4. Plan of Burial 1 at the Tyson site.

Figure 5. Tyson Engraved carinated bowl placed over the Burial 1 crania.

Figure 5.

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites
While certainly not the focus of this article, the
combination of design elements in Tyson Engraved
is interesting in light of the emerging discussion
of the representational meaning that engraved
motifs may have vis-á-vis native cosmology and
iconography (Reilly and Garber 2007; Lankford
et al. 2011). Gadus (2013:239) has proposed that
the SZ element may be related to serpent figures
of lower world imagery. The pillars covered by
two semi-circles could reference the sacred pole
(axis mundi) and upper world imagery. The attaching lines may purposefully connect the other
two mythic-cosmological constructs. Regardless of
these speculations, there can be no doubt that the
antlers placed over the Tyson Engraved carinated
bowl resting on the infant crania gives clear focus
to the ceramic vessel and elevates the communication of its design.
The antlers appear to be from a 12 point
whitetail buck with the longest tine being 20 cm in
length (Figure 6). Deer antlers are exceedingly rare
in Caddo mortuary contexts. Careful excavation
did not reveal compelling evidence as to whether
or not the antlers were attached to perishable material as part of a headdress or if the femur and tibia
were physically linked to the deer antlers. The
key observation is that both children’s heads were

nested within the confines of the Caddo vessel, deer
bones, and antlers.
The European chroniclers were relatively
brief in description of deer-related ceremonialism
among the Hasinai. Espinosa (1927:170) does
describe an hour long pre-hunt ceremony during
which the deer hunters would pray to Caddi Ayo
Amay over a dry deer head and antlers placed on a
post. During the ritual, they would throw tobacco
into the fire. For the hunt itself, the Hasinai would
remove theirs clothes, cover themselves with white
dirt, and carry another deer head and antlers with
them. If successful in the hunt, the hunter would
whisper unknown things into the ear of the deer
for a long time.
While reflecting on the 2,042 paired antlers
excavated at the Crenshaw site (3MI6), Jackson
et al. (2012:84) comment that deer “played this
central role in facilitating and reinforcing critical
cosmological relations, defining social, political
and religious inequality, and reinforcing social solidarity. The accumulation of deer remains ...reflects
the preferential access by the politico-religious
elite to certain cuts of meat…and also reflects
the rituals performed to maintain the successful
relationship between this critical species and the
Caddo people.” On an even broader scale, antlered

Figure 6. Deer antlers and long bones placed around the Tyson Engraved carinated bowl and children’s crania.

Figure 6.

93

94

Texas Archeological Society

deer had wide usage in Southeastern Mississippian period iconography by representing aspects
of culture heroes and other mythic entities in the
supernatural realm. At times, antlers were attached
to occupants of the lower world, as in the case of
Horned Water Serpent (Lankford 2007), or from
Spiro shell engravings with Intertwined Snake
Men and Janus-Headed Rattlesnake Crowned with
Antlers (Phillips and Brown 1978-1984:Plates 194
and 307). Antlers were associated with upper world
culture heroes as well. In discussing the unusual
Cat-Man Cup with Warlike Figure Carrying Bow
and Displaying Many Scalps, Phillips and Brown
(1978-1984:Plate 305) note the figure’s “antler
headdress signifying chieftainship.” Birdman
imagery with antlers is prominent in Hightower
anthropomorphic or Big Toco Style shell gorgets
from Etowah and upper Tennessee Valley sites
(Phillips and Brown 1978-1984:126-127; Brain
and Phillips 1996:44-50; Marceaux and Dye
2007:168-175; King 2011:282; Reilly and Garber
2011:296-305). The magnificent carved red cedar
mask with antlers inlayed with marine shell from
Spiro’s Craig Mound is a vivid illustration of
the ceremonial importance of the deer in Caddo
religion (Townsend 2004). The placement of the
impressive deer antlers in a supreme location in
the Tyson site burial, therefore, represented the
highest level of veneration for the little children
commemorated here.
In terms of items of personal adornment, 10
conch shell columella beads with smooth rounded
ends were found in the neck or lower facial area
of the young children’s remains. Marceaux and
Dye (2007:182) comment that: “Shell beads functioned throughout eastern North America as wealth
indicators.” Webb (1959:174) notes at the Belcher
Mound in Caddo Parish, Louisiana that “there were
268 shell beads, made from conch columella, in
21 groups related to 17 individuals in 12 burial
pits.” Most of these beads were worn as necklaces but a few were bracelets. At the Washington
Square Mound site (41NA49) in Nacogdoches, 36
columella beads were recovered from the two elite
burials in the mound; all but four of these were in
clusters around the wrists (Perttula et al. 2010).
Other East Texas sites with reported columella
beads include Womack (Harris et. al. 1965:305),
Sam Kaufman (Skinner et al. 1969:96), Tuck Carpenter (Turner 1978:89), and Clements (Perttula et
al. 2010:38). There are also sites that have yielded
columella beads in the interments of very young

children. Jelks (1965) found a single columella
bead in the grave of a 2 to 4 year old child at the
Walter Bell site in the McGee Bend project area.
Three “large barrel-shaped” beads were found
in Burial 5 of an infant at the McClelland site in
Bossier Parish, Louisiana (Kelley 1994). At the
Tyson site, another infant grave, Burial 2 or Feature 15 (see Figure 3), had two columella beads
in the chest area of a neonate. Unlike the Burial 1
artifacts, these beads were squared off at the ends
rather than rounded (Middlebrook 1994).
Other remarkable shell objects were placed in
the grave. Four small round marine shell objects
with engraved circle and dot design were recovered
in the proximal end of Burial 1 just above the cranial area of the infants and to their upper left. These
discs range from 7.3-13.0 mm in diameter and 1.9
-2.5 mm in thickness. The circles, often crudely
engraved, were 4.7-8.4 mm in diameter (Figure
7a-d). In recent years, Perttula has described Clements style shell ear discs (Perttula and Green
2006; Perttula et. al. 2010), including ones from
the Clements site near the headwaters of Black
Bayou in Cass County, and the Culpepper and Anglin Midden sites along Stouts Creek in Hopkins
County. These shell discs were compared to similar ones from Cedar Grove (Kay 1984), Hardman
(Early 1993:140), and Belcher (Webb 1959). The
central dot can perforate the disc in some cases and
not in others. The Clements style shell discs vary
greatly in size. The four circle and dot shell discs
from Tyson are among the smallest yet described.
They are best compared to a 12.7 mm diameter disc
from the Anglin Midden site (Perttula and Green
2006:Figure 3) and five discs from Belcher’s Burial
25, which were part of a collection of 33 “disc and
cutouts” found next to the right hand and were
13-15 mm in diameter (Webb 1959:Figure 101l).
Perttula et al. (2010:38) appears to follow Perino’s
(1983) proposal that these objects were part of a
compound ear ornaments, but they also mention A.
T. Jackson’s suggestion that they may have been
used as hair ornamentation. Webb (1959:Figure
101L) proposes a third notion when he described
“small circular inlays possibly representing eyes.”
While the fact that the number of discs (four) is
intriguing, the placement of the Tyson circle and
dot discs do not tend to support their use as ear
ornaments because only two were found close to
the crania. Consistent with Webb’s proposal, perhaps these small discs were eye inlays in a mask
or other ceremonial gear. Interestingly, two other

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites

95

Figure 7.

Figure 7. Marine shell artifacts: a-d, small marine shell disc with circle and dot design; e-j, elongated shell inlays; and
k-l, large round shell discs.

larger shell discs (both 23.7 mm in diameter), one
undecorated and the other with a central engraved
dot (Figure 7k-l), were found at the distal end of
the burial 15 to 20 cm away from the bones of the
lower extremities. It is likely that these objects
were being used in some different manner than the
four smaller discs.
Perhaps a stronger case could be made for six
elongated marine shell artifacts being shell inlays.
They were found intimately associated with or underneath the crania of the two infants (see Figure
7e-j). These slightly curved artifacts are typically
narrowed on one end and four showed evidence of
fine striations or engraved lines at 90 degrees to the
long axis. One had 11 serrations on one edge. These
objects are 20.5-28.5 mm in length and 7.3-9.3 mm
in width. Possibly these shell artifacts were decorative inlays in some ceremonial regalia. Given

their roughly petaloid shape, if they were clustered
together, they may have given the impression of the
avian tail feathers in some representations of upper
world winged culture heroes.
Another set of marine shell objects placed in the
grave are 30 Olivella nivea beads that are scattered
widely over the presumed area of the bodies. The
pattern of bead distribution suggests that they were
attached to some fabric, perhaps a blanket or garment.
Just to the right of the infants’ crania were
placed a group of special objects that may have
enhanced the adoration of these deceased children.
Two carved bone ear spools were placed far enough
away from the skulls, however, to indicate that they
were not in use by the infants (Figure 8c-d). Perhaps they were attached through their central holes
to some other perishable regalia. Seven bone ear
spools were reported from Belcher Mound by Webb

96

Texas Archeological Society

Figure
8.
Figure 8. Objects found to the right side of the crania in Burial 1: a, marine bivalve; b, turtle carapace cup; and c-d,
carved bone ear spools.

(1959:168), although none of them were very similar to the Tyson objects. Four of these artifacts from
Belcher were described as “napkin ring” ear spools
(Webb 1959:Figures 31e, 37m, 93a, and 128i), two
others were thought to be made of the bodies of large
fish vertebrae (Webb 1959:Figures 37l and 56h), and
one was cone-shaped (Webb 1959:Figure 37n). The
Hatchel Mound excavations of the 1930s yielded a
bone ear spool as well (Timothy K. Perttula, personal communication, December 2013).
A second type of object in this grouping was an
unmodified cockle shell (family Cardiidae), a ridged
marine bivalve (see Figure 8a). This offering would
have had significance to Tyson inhabitants for its
rarity, its expense to obtain, as well as its probable
reference to trade relationships. Based on its placement with the concave side up, it may have held
important contents as well. The last object of this
group was a box turtle (Terrapene carolina) carapace cup which was positioned with the open side
up as if it may have contained a liquid (see Figure
8b). The carapace had been clearly modified. The
vertebrae and all other bones had been removed.
Two or three small dimples had been drilled on the
exterior of the carapace near the anterior margin

of the third costal scutes bilaterally. These dimples
appear to be result of attaching the carapace to a
handle. Initially, it was thought that this may be a
turtle rattle, but careful excavation did not reveal
any pebbles inside or around the carapace. David
Kelley (1994:153-155) describes three modified box
turtle carapace cups or bowls from the McLelland
site. The largest of these was discovered just to the
right of a one year old infant’s cranium in Burial 5.
Another box turtle carapace cup was found in adult
Burial 4 at the McLelland site, again just right of
the skull but under an inverted plain bowl. There is
no mention of any modifications to the exterior of
these turtle shells.
Four of the eight ceramic offerings in the Tyson site Burial 1 are engraved fine wares. Three of
the engraved items have associated utility wares
adjacent to them. The three clusters of vessels are
under the deer antler, above the right shoulder, and
to the left of the infants’ feet (see Figure 4). The
one item that stands alone is a handsome bottle
with engraved vertical scrolls around a circle and
cross figure and wide horizontal lines on the neck
(Figure 9). This vessel rests well to the left of the
crania. The circle and cross design is a variant that

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites

97

Figure
Figure
9. 9. Bottle with vertical scroll around a circle and cross element.

has excised areas where the lines cross and contact
the outside circle; the net effect of this treatment
is to produce four negative circular or sub-circular
elements. This variant has reminded some recent
researchers of peyote buttons and may reference
the content of the bottle (TXARCH-L discussions
“Black Drink Comments,” August 8-9, 2012). No

residue analysis has yet been performed on this
bottle (or the turtle carapace cup), but it would not
be surprising if it served as a container of some
stimulant, purgative, or hallucinogenic liquid or
Black Drink (Crown et al. 2012).
The remaining contents of Tyson’s Burial 1
consist of five groups of objects that may have been

98

Texas Archeological Society

placed in the grave to signify the importance of the
children’s activity in the afterlife and give material
support to it. Four of the sets of artifacts were arranged on the right side of the bodies (see Figure
4). First, a cache of six vertically standing modified
deer ulna tools and two beaver teeth were found in
a tight arrangement just to the right of the infants’
thorax. These objects were likely placed in a leather
pouch and may represent tools for knapping. Alternatively, Perttula has suggested that the beaver teeth
may have been used in tattooing as well (personal
communication, November 2013). Comparable
mortuary findings have been reported in Burial 11
at Belcher (Webb 1959:71-72 and Figure 74), Burials 4 and 11 at Cedar Grove (Kay 1984:192-193),
Burial 6 at McLelland (Hunter 1994:147-149), and
Feature 8.1092 at Pine Tree Mound (Fields and
Gadus 2012:351, 354). Second, a collection of 14
lithic items and six shell objects appeared to be
nested inside a separate leather pouch immediately
adjacent, and 20 cm proximal, to the collection of
knapping tools. These perhaps represent raw material and preforms for knapping activity. Third, a collection of four mussel shells and three ferruginous
sandstone rocks were located in the far distal end of
the grave and to the infants’ left side. This grouping
may represent a shell inlay construction kit with raw
material and grinding implements stacked together.
Fourth, there were two smooth siliceous pebbles to
the right of the lower extremity that may have been
used as ceramic vessel burnishing stones in fine
ware ceramic production. Fifth and finally, there
were two pitted stones at the most apical aspect of
the burial that could have been useful in nut or dried
corn meal processing.
Perttula (personal communication, November 2013) drew my attention to A. T. Jackson’s
(1932) report on his excavation at the Eli Moores
Plantation (41BW2) and Carolyn Good’s (1977)
thesis prospectus that reviewed the excavation at
this site, now believed to be the residence of the
Upper Nasoni caddi. Burial J-8 in the Moores
mound was a double burial of two children; one
was 7-8 years old, and the other was 4-5 years old
at the time of death. Good (1977) mentions that
this grave was “by far the richest of the burials
in quantity of grave goods.” The artifacts associated with the two juveniles included a “conch
shell bead (beneath chin),” a Barkman Engraved
bowl, another “pot,” three arrow points, two Olivella beads, a terrapin shell rattle with two drilled
holes, a raccoon bacculum, mussel shells, a deer

mandible, and several long bones thought to be
deer. The parallels of this Eli Moores site burial to
the double infant grave at Tyson are striking, but
the offerings in Burial 1 at Tyson are significantly
more numerous and elaborate.
Three other tantalizing facts about the Tyson
site should be mentioned. First, there is little
question that a house surrounding the burial was
burned at some point, based on a nearby charred
postmold (Feature 7) and the fact that the adjacent
pit (Feature 3) was filled with daub that is only
formed from firing. Fire and the burning of sacred
structures are important Caddo practices. Second,
just 20 m from the burial is an enigmatic 2.3 x 1.6
m sub-rectangular dense homogeneous orange-red
clay feature (Feature 1) that lies just beneath the
plow zone. A backhoe trench excavated through
the feature during the 1993 East Texas Archeological Field School demonstrated its depth and atypicality (Middlebrook 1994:6-8). One possibility to
be entertained is that the clay feature is a peyote
altar (Cast 2007). Third, a 2007 magnetometer
survey by the Texas Historical Commission has
suggested the possibility of a very large 24 m
structure not far from the summit of the site. Excavations have not been done to ground truth this
geophysical anomaly.
In summary, the Tyson site is a distinctive late
14th to early 15th century Caddo site situated on
a remarkable prominence with a grand viewscape.
Excavations have uncovered important evidence
concerning the burial of two very young children
who were treated with nearly unparalleled reverence. What do we make of this double juvenile
burial? Is this a burial of coninisi? Is this prominent
site the village of a grand xinesi? Of course, while
speculative, it is nevertheless very reasonable to
conclude that these young interred children were
venerated in a highly specialized manner, and they
were sent on the journey with items, such as deer
antler, suggestive of ritualism associated with supernatural mythical figures. Their passage likely
involved transcendence of cosmological realms.
THE MORSE MOUND SITE (41SY27)
The Morse Mound site is located ca. 29
km to the northeast of Tyson (Figure 10). It
is situated 400 m up a sloping terrace above a
tributary of Chicken Bayou (Figure 11). During
the early months of 2000, members of the Texas

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites

Figure 10. The location of the Tyson site relative to the Morse Mound site in Shelby County, Texas.

Figure 10.

Figure 11. The Morse Mound’s location on the landscape.

Figure 11.

99

100

Texas Archeological Society

Archeological Stewardship Network and archeologists Jim Bruseth and Mark Parsons of the
Texas Historical Commission (THC) excavated
a 1.0 m high mound measuring approximately
15 m in diameter (Bruseth et al. 2000). The site
had originally been recorded by Tom Mayhew in
August 1974, who noted a “4 [ft.] red clay rise.”
Test excavation in October 1999 demonstrated that
the rise was an artificial mound with a few Caddo
sherds in its fill. When intensive investigation
began in January 2000, a north-south and an eastwest backhoe trench were dug to 40 cm below the
original ground surface (bs) and intersected in the
center of the mound (Mound A). Following careful
trowelling of the trench floors that revealed cultural features, a large 5 x 6.5 m block of sediments
was removed by a backhoe from the central area
of the mound. Additional trowelling and mapping
demonstrated that the mound was constructed over
a 5.6 m round house that contained a centrally located 3.6 m round pit (Figure 12). This was a large
shaft tomb dug by the Caddo, while the house was
still standing, to a depth of 1.25 m bs. Some of the

dirt from the pit was placed outside the walls of the
house as a berm. After the burial of the individuals
in the pit and partial filling of the tomb with soil,
the house was burned and the charred timbers were
pushed over onto the central pit. The entire house/
grave site was then capped with clayey soil from a
borrow pit just a few m south of the mound.
While the work in Mound A was ongoing, a
second mound, Mound B, was discovered by Mark
Parsons 150 m to the north. This was a 40 cm rise
situated over a re-built 5 m diameter Caddo house
with a prepared red clay floor and a centrally located basin-shaped hearth containing much charred
nut shell. This structure is believed to have had a
ceremonial purpose. Additional excavations were
conducted in a midden area just north of Mound B.
Based upon two radiocarbon samples obtained
by the THC from Mound A, the site appears to
date approximately 100 years later than Tyson.
The mean calibrated age of two woody charcoal
samples is A.D. 1478 (Beta-140046) and A.D.
1527 (Beta-140047) when calculated using OxCal
4.2 (Bronk Ramsey et al. 2013) and the IntCal 13

1999
Test
Pit

Figure
Figure
12.12.
Large block in central area of Morse Mound A showing the location of the October 1999 test pit, the postholes
for the burned and buried house, and the outline of the shaft tomb placed in the center of the house.

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites
radiocarbon curve (Reimer 2013).
The findings within Mound A’s shaft tomb were
remarkable and perhaps unprecedented in East Texas
archeology. Doubtless, these finding are the result
of local soil chemistry. Although no human skeletal
remains were found in the grave, many perishable
objects were visible, to a degree, by their replacement
with contrasting fine gray silt after their decay. In this
odd ephemeral fossilization of sorts, wood, basketry,
and cordage were visible with careful troweling.
Straight and curved gray lines were observed early
on in the excavations. Some appeared to represent
containers, either wooden boxes or baskets. The
largest container, Container 1, clearly appeared to be
the coffin of an important person (Figure 13). Early
Spanish missionaries described seeing the funeral and
burial of a grand xinesi interred in “a coffin as big as
an ox cart” (Casañas 1927:299).
Inside the container was a large blade, and two
quivers of arrows tipped with Bassett points, or

101

“Bassett/Perdiz hybrids” (Figure 14a-b, d). Careful
excavation of the quivers allowed the investigators
to see the gray silty ghosts of the arrow shafts and
the cordage of the quivers. They were placed near
the chest area of the interred individual. The large
Edwards (Georgetown) chert biface with pumpkin
florescence under UV light was 25.7 cm long, 6.7
cm wide, and 9.3 mm in thickness. It was located in
the area of the interred individual’s right hand and
certainly suggests the high social or religious status
of the deceased. Although somewhat longer at 36.8
cm, C. B. Moore (1912:Figure 92) illustrates a similar
blade recovered from the Foster Place in Arkansas.
Two ear spools were located near the west-northwest
end of the coffin suggesting the orientation of the
body (Figure 15a-b). South of the coffin, or on the
individual’s right side, were placed 11 ceramic vessels. Two of the fine ware vessels were placed in the
grave upside down; both had Tyson Engraved designs
(Figure 16). Two large carinated bowls (Figure 17)

Coffin

Figure 13.
Figure
13.The shaft tomb following complete excavation showing the outline of the coffin.

102

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 14. Lithics found in and around Container 1 or Coffin: A, Group 1 arrow points found in quiver near chest area
of interred individual; B, Group 2 arrow points found in quiver near chest area of interred individual; C, Group 3 arrow
Figure
14.
points found just north and outside of the Coffin at its west-northwest end; D, large Edwards chert biface found in the
area of the interred individual’s right hand.

had a different Tyson Engraved design featuring the
SZ element and attaching lines inside two diamond
elements, informally dubbed “Armata Engaved”
in the field; these were placed upright in the usual

manner. One wonders if the different treatment of the
two sets of bowls communicated something about the
ideological narrative referred to by the contrasting engraved designs, or if there was some meaning to their

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites
placement related to religious fealty to a particular
major center or leader.
Just to the west and north of the proximal
(west-northwest) end of the coffin, there was a distinctive area that contained a large amount of gray
silt material with a third quiver of arrow points (see
Figure 14c), a pipe, and a set of ear spools (see
Figure 15c-d). I believe that these artifacts mark
the associated goods for the interment of a second
individual, perhaps a young boy buried just outside
the principal individual’s coffin.
The most striking feature of the Morse Mound
tomb was the evidence of the perishable materials
that suggested the outlines of boxes and basketry.
Eight containers of various sizes were identified.
These certainly remind one of Espinosa’s (Hatcher
1927) descriptions of looking in “two chests made
of reeds and curiously painted with their lids
measuring about three spans square” in which he
found vessels of black wood, zoomorphic figurines,
feather headdresses, and bird bone flutes. Kent
Riley has discussed (in a PowerPoint presentation

103

shared with the author) “sacred bundles” that
come in many forms, including basketry, which
hold objects of ritual intensification. He states that
these bundles and their contents are animated, are
foci for supplication, are portals to the power of
the natural or other worlds, and can function to
contact ancestors and the voices of deities. George
Sabo and Elizabeth Horton (n.d.) have recently
been working on Double-woven lidded baskets
from the Great Mortuary in Spiro’s Craig Mound
as containers for “regalia associated with mythic
lineage heroes.” The working hypothesis here is
that the ephemeral containers at the Morse Mound
shaft tomb represent sacred bundles, placed to
heighten the veneration given to a fallen grand
xinesi-like individual.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Three centuries ago, Spanish and French soldiers, traders, diplomats, and missionaries made

Figure 15. Ear spools: a-b, found in the west-northwest end of Container 1 or Coffin; c-d, found just north and outside
Figure
15.
of the Coffin at its west-northwest end.

104

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 16.
Figure 16. One of two Tyson Engraved vessels found upside down south of the Coffin.

Figure 16.

Figure 17. One of two “Armata Engraved” carinated bowls [Tyson Engraved] found upright south of Coffin.

Figure
17.
their way for various reasons into the Kingdom

of the Tejas. Some of them wrote diaries, letters,
Figure
17.and, later, memoirs of their initial contact
reports,
with the Hasinai Caddo. In the early decades, the
Spanish were allowed into the Kingdom only so
far, usually being kept at its western periphery.
From the European descriptions, the Hasinai were
in control of their territory and had an organized
and well-ordered society. Even if the Spanish

priests and soldiers had little respect for the Caddo
beliefs, the native groups had an elaborate religious
perspective on their own lives, the powerful spiritual forces in the cosmos, and the methodologies of
integrating their communities with transcendence.
Perhaps nowhere in the archeological record can
people today develop an understanding of the
worldview of ancient societies as they can by
witnessing the treatment of people after death, in

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites
light of contemporaneous accounts and the shared
cultural memories of modern day descendants.
The two prehistoric Shelby County Caddo
sites discussed here yield glimmers of elite mortuary practices and ceremonialism witnessed by
Europeans several centuries later. It is clear that
great care was taken to provide these deceased
people with the materials that would be needed in
their journey on the “path of souls” and to equip
them for encounters with supernatural beings. The
fallen elites were real people, adults and infants,
that the community knew and loved, but they were
also representative of greater forces that resided in
upper and lower tiers of the universe. Their burial
allowed the community to touch and encounter the
unseen. They prayed that their supplications would
be pleasing to Caddi Ayo Amay.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
My first expression of appreciation is to a true
East Texas original, Joe Louis Jones of Center,
Texas. Louis first took me to the Tyson site in
November 1991, and then he pushed the Texas
Historical Commission (THC) to test the Morse
Mound site (then known as the Calvin Davis site)
in October 1999. Both actions led to the remarkable
discoveries discussed in this article. His passion for
archeology has made a lasting contribution to the
history and prehistory of Shelby County.
I remain indebted to the landowners of the
Tyson site, Mary Evelyn Tyson Johnson and the
late E. F. “Foots” Johnson, and to Ronald and
Kay Morse, owners of the Morse Mound site,
for their tremendous support of the field work
on their property and the wonderful access to the
artifacts by researchers in the years since. Members of the East Texas Archeological Society, the
Dallas Archeological Society, students from the
Episcopal School of Dallas, and many others
volunteered their effort at the Tyson site. In 50
days in the field from 1991 until 2002, a remarkable 276 people contributed a total of 4,700 hours
of work! My heartfelt thanks goes out to all the
professional archeologists mentioned herein, especially Bob Skiles and Velicia Bergstrom, and
to several others who came by to visit. Thanks
to Jim Bruseth and Mark Parsons of the THC for
making the Morse Mound excavations possible.
Many stewards of the Texas Archeological Stewardship Network (Patti Haskins, Connie Hodges,

105

Louis Jones, Art Tawater, Alice Stultz, Gladys
Swanson, Mark Walters, Reeda Peel, Charlie
Bollich, and Bryan Boyd) contributed their time
in the field along with many local supporters such
as Tem Morrison, Nelda Robinson, and Richard
Wright. The National Park Service provided the
GPR assessment of the mound. The late Cecile
Elkins Carter graced the excavation for several
days. Thanks to all.
I wish to thank Tim Perttula for giving much
advice regarding the final preparation of this article, and to Lance Trask and George Avery for preparing some of the figures. Thanks to Zac Selden
who helped with radiocarbon dates.
My greatest appreciation of all is for the life and
kindness of Dee Ann Story. She is greatly missed.
REFERENCES CITED
Barr, J.
2007 Peace Came in the Form of a Woman: Indians and
Spaniards in the Texas Borderlands. The University
of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.
Bolton, H. E.
1908 Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706.
Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York.

1915 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies
in Spanish Colonial History and Administration.
University of California Press, Berkeley.

1987 The Hasinais: Southern Caddoans as seen by the
Earliest Europeans. University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.
Brain, J. P. and P. Phillips
1996 Shell Gorgets: Styles of the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric Southeast. Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Cambridge.
Bronk Ramsey C., E. M. Scott, and J. van der Plicht
2013 Calibration for archaeological and environmental
terrestrial samples in the time range 26–50 ka cal
BP. Radiocarbon 55(4):2021-2027.
Brown, J. A.
2012 Spiro Reconsidered: Sacred Economy at the Western
Frontier of the Eastern Woodlands. In The Archaeology of the Caddo, edited by T. K. Perttula and C. P.
Walker, pp. 117-138. University of Nebraska Press,
Lincoln.
Bruseth, J. E. and T. S. Turner
2005 From a Watery Grave: The Discovery and Excavation of La Salle’s Shipwreck, La Belle. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.

106

Texas Archeological Society

Bruseth, J., M. Parsons, T. Middlebrook, and B. Martin

2000 Unprecedented Find Uncovered at the Ronald and
Kay Morse Site (41SY27). Current Archeology in
Texas 2(1):4-7.
Burton, H. S. and F. T. Smith
2008 Colonial Natchitoches: A Creole Community on the
Louisiana-Texas Frontier. Texas A & M University
Press, College Station.
Byrd, K. M.
2008 Colonial Natchitoches: Outpost of Empires. Xlibris
Corporation, United States of America.
Cast, R.
2007 Documentation of a Native American Church Altar
in Caddo County, Oklahoma. Journal of Northeast
Texas Archeology 26:168-178.
Castaneda, C. E.
1936 Our Catholic Heritage. 6 Volumes. V. Von Boeckmann-Jones Co., Austin.
Carter, C. E.
1995 Caddo Indians: Where We Come From. University
of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Celiz, F. de
1935 Diary of the Alarcon Expedition into Texas, 17181719, by Francisco de Celiz. Translated and edited
by F. L. Hoffman. Quivira Society, Los Angeles.
Chipman, D. E. and H. D. Joseph
2010 Spanish Texas: 1519-1821. Revised Edition. The
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Corbin, J. E.
1984 An Archaeological Assessment of a Portion of the
Washington Square Mound Site (41NA49), Nacogdoches County, Texas. Archaeological Investigations No. 1. Stephen F. Austin State University,
Nacogdoches.
Corbin, J. E., T. C. Alex, and A. Kalina
1980 Mission Dolores de los Ais. Papers in Anthropology No. 2. Stephen F. Austin State University,
Nacogdoches.
Corbin, J. E. and J. P. Hart
1998 The Washington Square Mound Site: A Middle
Caddo Mound Complex in Sounth Central East
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
69:47-78.
Creel, D. G.
1996 Hatchel-Mitchell Site. In The New Handbook of
Texas, Vol. 3, edited by R. Tyler, pp. 504-505. Texas
State Historical Association, Austin.

Crown, P. L., T. E. Emerson, J. Gu, W. J. Hurst, T. R. Pauketat,
and T. Ward
2012 Ritual Black Drink consumption at Cahokia.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
109(35):13944-13949.
Dockall, H. D.
1994 Human Skeletal Remains from the Tyson Site
(41SY92). Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology
3:37-50.
1995 Application of Bement’s Spray Sealant Technique to
Infant Skeletal Remains. Journal of Field Archaeology 22(3):385-387.

Dorsey, G. A.
1997 Traditions of the Caddo. University of Nebraska
Press, Linclon.
Dye, D. H. and A. King
2007 Desecrating the Sacred Ancestor Temples: Chiefly
Conflict and Violence in the American Southeast.
In North American Indigenous Warfare and Ritual
Violence, edited by R. J. Chacon and R. G. Mendoza,
pp. 160-181. University of Arizona Press, Tuscon.
Early, A. M. (editor)
1993 Caddoan Saltmakers in the Ouachita Valley: The
Hardman Site. Research Series No. 43. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Fields, R. C. and E. F. Gadus (editors)
2012 Archeology of the Nadaco Caddo: The View from the
Pine Tree Mound Site (41HS15), Harrison County,
Texas. 2 Vol. Report of Investigations No. 164.
Prewill and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Gadus, E. F.
2013 Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds: Structural Variation in Caddo Engraved Ceramic Motifs. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 84:213-245.
Good, C. E.
1977 Moores Plantation: Thesis Prospectus. MS on file,
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1982 Analysis of Structures, Burials and other Cultural
Features. In The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County,
Texas, Volume 1, edited by D. A. Story, pp. 51-112.
Texas Antiquities Permit Series No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.
Gregory, H. F.
1973 Eighteenth Century Caddoan Archaeology: A Study
in Models and Interpretation. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites
Hackett, C. W.
1945 The Marquis of San Miguel de Aguayo and his
Recovery of Texas from the French, 1719-1723.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly 49:193-214.
Harris, R. K., I. M. Harris, J. C. Blaine, and J. Blaine
1965 A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study
of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 36:287-365.
Hatcher, M. A.
1927 Descriptions of the Tejas or Asinai Indians, 16911722. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 30:206218, 283-204, 31:50-62, 150-180.
Hunter, D. G.
1994 Miscellaneous Artifacts. In The McClelland and Joe
Clark Sites: Protohistoric-Historic Caddoan Farmsteads in Southern Bossier Parish, Louisiana, edited
by D. B. Kelley, pp.147-164. Coastal Environments,
Inc., Baton Rouge.
Jackson, A. T.
1932 Exploration of a Burial Site on E. H. Moores Plantation in Bowie County, Texas. MS on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
1936 A Perpetual Fire Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 8:134-174.

1938 Fire in East Texas Burial Sites. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
10:77-113.
Jackson, H. E., S. L. Scott, and F. F. Schambach
2012 At the House of the Priest: Faunal Remains from the
Crenshaw Site (3MI6), Southwest Arkansas. In The
Archaeology of the Caddo, edited by T. K. Perttula
and C. P. Walker, pp. 47-85. University of Nebraska
Press, Lincoln.
Jackson, M. K., T. Middlebrook, G. Avery, H. Shafer, and
B. Meissner.
2012 Trade and Cultural Interaction along El Camino
Real de los Tejas during the Spanish Colonial and
Republic Periods in Nacogdoches County, Texas. 2
Vols. Nine Flags Museum, Nacogdoches.
Jelks, E. B.
1965 The Archeology of McGee Bend Reservoir, Texas.
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Jelks, E. B. (editor)
1967 The Gilbert Site: A Norteño Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 37:1-248.

107

Kay, M.
1984 Late Caddo Subtractive Technology in the Red
River Basin. In Cedar Grove: An Interdisciplinary
Investigation of a Late Caddo Farmstead in the Red
River Valley, edited by N. L. Trubowitz, pp. 174206. Research Series No. 23. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayettville.
Kelley, D. B. (editor)
1994 The McClelland and Joe Clark Sites: ProtohistoricHistoric Caddoan Farmsteads in Southern Bossier
Parish, Louisiana. Coastal Environments, Inc.,
Baton Rouge.
Kenmotsu, N. A.
1992 The Mayhew Site: A Possible Hasinai Farmstead,
Nacogdoches County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 63:135-175.
King, A.
2011 Iconography of the Hightower Region of Eastern
Tennessee and Northern Georgia. In Visualizing the
Sacred: Cosmic Visions, Regionalism, and the Art of
the Mississippian World, edited by G. E. Lankford, F.
K. Reilly, and J. F. Garber, pp. 279-273. University
of Texas Press, Austin.
Kleinschmidt, U. K. W.
1982 Review and Analysis of the A. C. Saunders Site,
41AN19, Anderson County, Texas. Master’s thesis,
Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Kozuck, L.
2002 Olivella Beads from Spiro and the Plains. American
Antiquity 67(4):697-709.
Lankford, G. E.
2007 The “Path of Souls”: Some Death Imagery in the
Southeastern Ceremonial Complex. In Ancient
Objects and Sacred Realms: Interpretations of Mississippian Iconography, edited by F. K. Reilly and
J. F. Garber, pp. 174-212. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
2011

Native American Legends of the Southeast: Tales
from the Natchez, Caddo, Biloxi, Chickasaw, and
Other Nations. The University of Alabama Press,
Tuscaloosa.

Lankford, G. E., F. K. Reilly, and J. F. Garber (editors)
2011 Visualizing the Sacred: Cosmic Visions, Regionalism,
and the Art of the Mississippian World. University
of Texas Press, Austin.
Lemee, P. R.
1998 Tíos and Tantes: Famial and Political Relationships
of Natchitoches and the Spanish Colonial Frontier.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly 101:341-350.

108

Texas Archeological Society

2003 Ambivalent Successes and Successful Failures: St.
Denis, Aguayo, and Juan Rodriquez. In The French
in Texas, edited by F. Lagarde, pp. 35-45. University
of Texas Press, Austin.

2004 The Prehistoric and Caddoan Archeology of the
Northeast Texas Pineywoods. In The Prehistory of
Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 370-407. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Marceaux, S. and D. H. Dye
2007 HightowerAnthropomorphic Marine Shell Gorgets
and Duck River Sword-Form Flint Bifaces: Middle
Mississippian Ritual Regalia in the Southern Appalachians. In Southeastern Ceremonial Complex:
Chronology, Content, Context, edited by A. King,
pp. 165-184. The University of Alabama Press,
Tuscaloosa.

2009 Extended Entranceway Structures in the Caddo
Archaeological Area. Southeastern Archaeology
28(1):27-42.

Middlebrook, T. A.
1993 Radiocarbon Dates from the Tyson Site (41SY92).
Caddoan Archeology Newsletter 3(4):2-8.
1994 An Update on the Archaeological Investigations at
the Tyson Site. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology 3:1-36.
Middlebrook, T. and R. Middlebrook
1996 Of Hearth and House. Caddoan Archeology Newsletter 6(4):11-22.
Middlebrook, T. and T. K. Perttula
2008 Archaeological Investigations at the Henry M. Site
(41NA60): An Early Historic Caddo Farmstead in
Nacogdoches County, Texas. Journal of Northeast
Texas Archaeology 28:13-20.
Moore, C. B.
1912 Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River. Journal of
the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
14(4):526-636.
Morfi, J.
1932 Excerpts from the Memorias for the History of the
Province of Texas. Edited and translated by F. C.
Chabot. Naylor Printing Company, San Antonio.
Nardini, L. R.
1963 My Historic Natchitoches, Louisiana and its Environment. Nardini Publishing Company, Natchitoches.
Newell, H. P. and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoir No. 5. Society for American Archaeology,
Menasha, Wisconsin.
Perino, G.
1983 Archaeological Research at the Bob Williams Site
(41RR16), Red River County, Texas. Museum of the
Red River, Idabel.
Perttula, T. K.
1992 “The Caddo Nation”: Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas Press, Austin.

2005 1938-1939 WPA Excavations at the Hatchel Site
(41BW3) on the Red River in Bowie County. Southeastern Archaeology 24(2):180-198.

Perttula, T. K. and L. Green
2006 Marine Shell Disks from Protohistoric Sites on
Stouts Creek, Hopkins County. Journal of Northeast
Texas Archaeology 25:19-25.
Perttula, T. K. and R. Rogers
2007 The Evolution of a Caddo Community in Northeast
Texas: The Oak Hill Village Site (41RK214), Rusk
County, Texas. American Antiquity 72(1):71-94.
Perttula, T. K., M. Walters, and B. Nelson
2012 Archeological Investigations at the Pace McDonald
Site (41AN51): A Middle Caddo Mound Center in the
Neches River Basin in East Texas. Special Publication No. 21. Friends of Northeast Texas Archaeology,
Pittsburg and Austin.
Perttula, T. K., B. Nelson, R. L. Cast, and B. Gonzalez
2010 The Clements Site (41CS25): A Late 17th- to Early
18th-Century Nasoni Caddo Settlement and Cemetery. Anthropological Papers No. 92. American
Museum of National History, New York.
Perttula, T. K., L. L. Bush, L. Schniebs, T. Middlebrook, and
P. S. Marceaux
2010 An Early Historic Caddo Farmstead at the Henry M.
Site (41NA60) in Nacogdoches County, Texas. Stephen F. Austin State University Press, Nacogdoches.
Perttula, T. K., M. Walters, B. Nelson, B. Gonzalez, and R.
Cast, with a contribution by R. G. Franciscus
2010 Documentation of Associated and Unassociated
Caddo Funerary Objects in the Stephen F. Austin
State University, Nacogdoches, Texas. Stephen F.
Austin State University Press, Nacogdoches.
Phillips, P., and J. A. Brown
1978-1984
Pre-Columbian Shell Engravings from the
Craig Mound at Spiro, Oklahoma. 6 Vols. Peabody
Museum Press, Cambridge.
Reilly, F. K. and J. F. Garber
2011 Dancing in the Otherworld: The Human Figural Art
of the Hightower Style Revisited. In Visualizing the
Sacred: Cosmic Visions, Regionalism, and the Art of
the Mississippian World, edited by G. E. Lankford, F.
K. Reilly, and J. F. Garber, pp. 294-312. University
of Texas Press, Austin.

Middlebrook—Early European Descriptions of Hasinai Elites
Reilly, F. K. and J. F. Garber (editors)
2007 Ancient Objects and Sacred Realms: Interpretations
of Mississippian Iconography. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Reimer, P. J.
2013 IntCal13 and Marine13 Radiocarbon Age Calibration Curves 0-50,000 years Cal BP. Radiocarbon
55(4):1869-1887.
Rogers, R. and T. K. Perttula
2004 The Oak Hill Village (41RK214), Rusk County,
Texas. Document No. 030083. PBS&J, Austin.
Sabo, G., III
1998 The Structure of Caddo Leadership in the Colonial
Era. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their
Place in Southeastern Archeology and Ethnohistory,
edited by T. K. Perttula and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 159174. Studies in Archeology 30. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
2012 The Terán Map and Caddo Cosmology. In The Archaeology of the Caddo, edited by T. K. Perttula and
C. P. Walker, pp. 431-447. University of Nebraska
Press, Lincoln.

109

Spock, C.
1977 An Analysis of the Architectural and Related Features at the George C. Davis Site. Master’s thesis,
Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Story, D. A.
1997 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis
Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 68:1-103.
Story, D. A. (editor)
1981 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis
Site, Cherokee County, Texas: Summers 1979 and
1980. Occasional Papers, Vol 1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

1982 The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Vol.
1: The Site, Its Setting, Investigations, Cultural
Features, Artifacts of Non-Native Manufacture, and
Subsistence Remains. Texas Antiquities Permit Series No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

1995 The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County Texas, Vol.
2: Artifacts of Native Manufacture. Studies in Archeology 21. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Sabo, G., III and E. Horton
n.d. Baskets for the Ancestors: Sacred Bundles in the
Great Mortuary at the Spiro Ceremonial Center. In
Sacred Bundles, edited by D. Dye and K. Reilly.
University of Texas Press, Austin, in press.

Story, D. A. and D. G. Creel
1982 The Cultural Setting. In The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Vol. 1, edited by D. A. Story, pp.
20-34. Texas Antiquities Permit Series No. 7. Texas
Antiquities Committee, Austin.

Schambach, F. F.
1972 Preliminary Report on the 1972 Excavations at the
Ferguson Site (3HE63). The Arkansas Archeologist
13(1-2):1-13.

Swanton, J. R.
1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of
the Caddo Indians. Bulletin 132. Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C.

1982 The Archeology of the Great Bend Region in Arkansas. In Contributions to the Archeology of the
Great Bend Region, edited by F. F. Schambach and
F. Rackerby, pp. 1-11. Research Series No. 22. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
2002 The Grandview Archeological Project: The Arkansas
Archeological Survey/Arkansas Archeological Society’s 2002 Field Season at the Grandview Wildlife
Management Area, Columbus, Arkansas. Field Notes
(Newsletter of the Arkansas Archeological Society)
308:3-8.

Schultz, T. C.
2010 Architectural Variability in the Caddo Area of Eastern Texas. Special Publication No. 16. Friends of
Northeast Texas Archaeology, Pittsburg and Austin.
Skinner, S. A., R. K. Harris, and K. M. Anderson (editors)
1969 Archaeological Investigations at the Sam Kaufman
Site, Red River County, Texas. Contributions in
Anthropology No. 5. Department of Anthropology,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Townsend, R. P. (editor)
2004 Hero, Hawk, and Open Hand: American Indian Art
of the Ancient Midwest and South. Art Institute of
Chicago and Yale University Press, Chicago and
New Haven.
Turner, R. L.
1992 Prehistoric Mortuary Remains at the Tuck Carpenter
Site, Camp County, Texas. Studies in Archeology No.
10. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Walker, C. P.
2009 Landscape Archaeogeophysics: A Study of Magnetometer Surveys from Etowah (9BW1), The George
C. Davis Site (41CE19), and the Hill Farm Site
(41BW169). Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

110

Texas Archeological Society

Walker, C. P. and D. P. McKinnon
2012 Exploring Prehistoric Caddo Communities through
Archaeogeophysics. In The Archaeology of the
Caddo, edited by T. K. Perttula and C. P. Walker, pp.
177-208. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Webb, C. H.
1940 House Types Among the Caddo Indians. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
12:49-75.
1959 The Belcher Mound, a Stratified Caddoan Site in
Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Memoirs No. 16. Society
for American Archaeology, Salt Lake City.

1983 The Bossier Focus Revisited: Montgomery I, Werner,
and other Unicomponent Sites. In Southeastern Natives and Their Pasts, edited by D. G. Wyckoff and J.
L. Hofman, pp. 183-240. Studies in Oklahoma’s Past
No. 11. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.

Wedel, M. M.
1978 LaHarpe’s 1719 Post on the Red River and Nearby
Caddo Settlements. Bulletin No. 30. Texas Memorial
Museum, Austin.
Weddle, R. S.
1991 The French Thorn: Rival Explorers in the Spanish
Sea, 1682-1762. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1999 Wilderness Manhunt: The Spanish Search for La
Salle. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Wyckoff, D. G. and T. G. Baugh
1980 Early Historic Hasinai Elites: A Model for the Material Culture of Governing Elites. Midcontinental
Journal of Archaeological 5:225-283.

The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom: Looking at
Sociopolitical Organization through the Pine Tree Mound
and U.S. Highway 271 Mount Pleasant Relief Route Projects
Ross C. Fields

ABSTRACT
This article explores how two recent excavation projects in Northeast Texas—one at the Pine Tree Mound site
in the middle Sabine River basin and the other on Tankersley Creek in the upper Cypress Creek basin—have
contributed to a better understanding of the people who lived there in Middle–Late Caddo period times, in
particular, how their patterns of settlement relate to sociopolitical complexity. The Pine Tree Mound site
project started with a primary ceremonial center and surrounding village and moved out from there to look at
the community that supported that center. The Tankersley Creek project started at the other end with a set of
rural farmsteads and went in search of their community and ceremonial center. The combined evidence from
the projects indicates that previous models of sociopolitical organization and settlement patterning among the
Caddo do not do justice to the complexity that characterizes the groups who occupied the region. These projects
suggest that at least three Caddo groups occupied the Titus phase area, two centered on Big Cypress Creek
and one centered on Potters Creek on the north side of the Sabine River. These three groups appear to have
been equivalent sociopolitically, although one of them may have been more powerful than the other two. They
maintained their identities over time but were bound together by ideology and the notion that they were more
connected to one another than to their Caddo neighbors. The peoples of these three core communities, and almost
certainly others yet to be identified, were part of something larger though, a cohesive group of Caddo people
that rivaled the ethnohistorically better-known ones to their south and north in terms of power and influence.

INTRODUCTION
I summarize two recent, and very different,
experiences with trying to look at how prehistoric
Caddo sociopolitical organization may have been
expressed through the spatial arrangement of sites.
Both involved large-scale excavations at Middle to
Late Caddo period sites in Northeast Texas. One
was the Pine Tree Mound site project in the middle
Sabine River basin of Harrison County, and the
other was the U.S. Highway 271 Mount Pleasant
relief route project in the upper Cypress Creek basin of Titus County (Figure 1). These areas are at
the opposite ends of the Titus phase area, and each
in its own way was instructive about the challenges
of interpreting that spatio-temporal construct. In
one case, Pine Tree Mound, we started with a
great deal of data about the primary ceremonial
center and its associated village and tried to move
out from there to identify the community that supported that center. In the other, the U.S. Highway

271 Mount Pleasant relief route, we started at the
other end of the spectrum, i.e., a set of rural farmsteads, and went in search of their community and
ceremonial center.
So how is this study relevant to Dee Ann Story
and her insistence that her students and colleagues
think critically? Although Dee Ann was not directly
involved in the work on either project, she had a
role that stemmed from five things: (1) she was one
of the leading scholars on Caddo archeology; (2)
I was a student of hers, and much of my thinking
about how to do archeology, including distinguishing between speculation and conclusions based
on hard data, is based on what I learned from her;
(3) she mentored another student, Pete Thurmond,
who wrote a Master’s thesis in 1981 that brought
together a massive amount of information about
the archeology of the Cypress Creek basin and
that presented ideas and hypotheses about the Titus phase we are still testing today; (4) as a board
member for the Archaeological Conservancy, she

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

Texas Archeological Society

112

Figure 1
Li t
ur R
iv e r

Sa
nd
Bl

re
yC

yt

nd

he

iv e r
S u lp h u r R

ek

h u r R iv e r
S o ut h S u lp

A

er

so

Cr

n

C

ee

re

k

B

ou

ek

k

ve

r

Pine Tree Mound

Cr

er

ee

iv

Ra

bb

it

C
Ti

ou

ke
he ro

ay
eB

re ek
hi C
aw i c

tm i le

Ri

k

ne

y
s Ba

u
s B ay o

ou

Eig h

Cre e k
H a r r is

R

Figure 1. Map showing project area locations.

ay

re

ek

s
PAI/11/slh

³

B

C

re

he
ek

s

y

C

ec
C re

m

nd

rk

N
oo

bi

e

re s
C yp

Ma r

0

5

10

Kilometers

t in C
re

20

ek

u

Sa

Fo

re s
B ig C y p

Sa

kap

re

yo

g

ke

s Cr
ee k

Li tt l

Kic

Ji

Ba

k

Bi

La

eC
yp r e
s

ee

Li tt l

ss

Cr

p re

ly

ek

Cy

re

C

C

r

ss

ck

Li l

Titus
Heartland

ie

re

Bla

yp

az

C

Titus Phase
Fr

ig

Bo ggy Cre ek

kC

U.S. Highway 271
Project Area

k

B ig C
re ek

W

Oa

e
h it

e
re

ek

C re e

h Su
lph

t le

N or t

Mud Creek

ek

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 113
was instrumental in the Conservancy acquiring part
of one of the sites we looked at, Pine Tree Mound,
for long-term preservation; and (5) some of her
earlier work, specifically that on the Deshazo site,
provides a useful model for how Caddo sociopolitical organization might relate to community layout.
This last point bears some elaboration. In
1975–1976, Dee Ann directed field schools at
Deshazo, a protohistoric Caddo hamlet on Bayou
Loco in the Angelina River basin. A few years
later, she and Darrell Creel developed a model
of sociopolitical organization and settlement patterning to help interpret Deshazo within its proper
cultural context, i.e., that of the Hasinai Caddo who
populated the Neches and Angelina River valleys
when the French and Spanish visited East Texas
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (Story
and Creel 1982). The archeological correlates of
the Hasinai Caddo are the Frankston and Allen
phases. This model was based largely on ethnohistoric accounts, but also on actual archeological
evidence, and drew on considerable work by other
researchers, particularly Don Wyckoff, Tim Baugh,
and Kathleen Gilmore (Gilmore 1973; Wyckoff and
Baugh 1980). The model involved two levels of
group identity and weakly hierarchical organization (Figure 2). The larger one, which she called the
affiliated group, consisted of a number of closely
allied and culturally similar groups, which she
called constituent groups. The affiliated group was
considered analogous to what others have called
the Hasinai confederacy, and the constituent groups
were analogous to a number of smaller groups
named in ethnohistoric accounts. A single major
ceremonial center, or temple-residential complex
associated with the grand xinesi (high priest with
primary religious authority), was proposed as the
primary unifier for the affiliated group. Each constituent group consisted of a mix of residential sites
of varying sizes, ranging from single domiciles to
small villages, along with cemeteries, short-term
use sites, and a single lesser ceremonial center
associated with the caddi’s (local chief with both
political and religious authority) residential-ritual
complex and assembly house. The model did not
address other recorded positions of authority
among the Hasinai Caddo—cana­ha, village elder
with mostly political authority; chayah, page or assistant to the canaha; tamma, messenger or errand
man; amayxovas, warrior; and cona, healer or shaman (Wyckoff and Baugh 1980:232–237)—likely
because of the presumption that any relationships

between those positions and settlement patterning
would be invisible archeologically.
This model is relevant to studies of the Titus
phase because that phase was contemporaneous
with the prehistoric Frankston and early historic
Allen phases, and because they were neighbors
(Figure 3). In fact, some have suggested that the
Titus phase represents a set of social groups equivalent to the Hasinai of the Neches-Angelina basin
and the Kadohadacho of the Red River valley, just
one that lacked seventeenth- and eighteenth century ethnohistorical documentation because it was
too fragmented by that time and its territory was
off the beaten path (Perttula and Nelson 2007a:129;
Thurmond 1985). While there is no reason to think
that the people who made up these groups had to
have identical sociopolitical systems, there is reason to suggest that there were commonalities, even
though there are indications of greater complexity
among Titus peoples than their southern neighbors, for example, in the much greater frequency
of mound sites and occurrence of numerous large
cemeteries, some with deep shaft graves, in the
Titus phase area.
The remainder of this article consists of four
sections. The first outlines the state of thinking
about Titus phase sociopolitical organization and
settlement patterning at the inception of our Pine
Tree Mound site and U.S. Highway 271 relief
route projects. The second summarizes how the
work at the first of these contributed to some new
ways of thinking about that subject; this information is somewhat abbreviated, since it reiterates
what Fields and Gadus (2012a) presented in Volume 83 of this bulletin. The third describes the
more-modest and more-sobering contributions
of the second project, drawing from the recent
technical report by Fields et al. (2013). The fourth
summarizes conclusions about what the Titus
phase represents based on the combined evidence
from the two projects.
TITUS PHASE SOCIOPOLITICAL
ORGANIZATION AND
SETTLEMENT PATTERNS
One comprehensive attempt to look at spatial
organization among the Titus phase Caddo was J.
Peter Thurmond’s Master’s thesis (1981, 1990). In
it, he associated the Titus phase with the Cypress
cluster, a group of similar sites that he considered

114

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2

Figure 2. Story’s (Story and Creel 1982) model of sociopolitical organization and settlement patterning for the Hasinai
Caddo of the Neches and Angelina River valleys.

to represent a third Caddo Indian confederacy, or
affiliated group using Story and Creel’s (1982)
terminology. Thurmond (1990:232) saw the Cypress cluster as being “centered geographically on
the upper Cypress Creek, White Oak Bayou, and
Lake Fork Creek basins” and as extending across
a large area from the eastern arm of Lake Fork
Reservoir on the west to Black Cypress Bayou on

the east and from White Oak Creek and the Sulphur
River on the north to the Sabine River on the south
(Figure 4).
Based on burial assemblage variability in
this area, which was ca. 100 km across both eastwest and north-south, Thurmond saw four spatial
subclusters of sites—which he named Three
Basins, Tankersley Creek, Swauano Creek, and

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 115
Figure 3

O k l a h o m a

A r k a n s a s

McCurtain
Mid-Ouachita

Te x a s

Texarkana

Titus

Belcher

L o u i s i a n a

Frankston
Angelina

Late Caddo Phases
PAI/11/slh

³

0

15 30

60

Kilometers

Figure 3. Map showing locations of Late Caddo phases.

Big Cypress Creek—and proposed that they represented contemporaneous sociopolitically integrated
tribes or subtribes (Thurmond 1985:191-196). The

Three Basins subcluster sites were in the western
part in the Lake Fork Creek and Big Sandy Creek
drainages, the upper-middle part of the White Oak

116

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4

Sul phu r Riv er

W

hi

te

Oa

k

Cr

ee

k

Bla

C

re

re

ek

Ba

C

ss

ss

p re

yp

Cy

g

ck

Bi

yo
u

Bi
g
y

ke

nd

La

Sa

Li

ttl

e

C

Fo

re

C

ek

rk
re
ek

Sa

PAI/13/slh

U.S. Highway 271 Project Area
Cypress Cluster
Big Cypress Creek Subcluster
Swauano Creek Subcluster
Tankersley Creek Subcluster
Three Basins Subcluster

bi

ne

Ri

³

ve

Cy

pr

es

s

Ba

yo

r

u

Pine Tree Mound

0

5 10

20

Kilometers

Figure 4. Map of Thurmond’s (1990) Cypress cluster showing extents of hypothesized Titus phase subclusters.

Creek basin and north to the Sulphur River, and
the extreme upper reaches of Big Cypress and
Little Cypress Creeks, extending over an area of
45 km east-west by 90 km north-south (ca. 3,200
km2). The Big Cypress Creek subcluster sites were
at the downstream end of the region, mostly on

Big Cypress Creek itself but also south of there
on Little Cypress Creek and the Sabine River, extending over an area of 30 km east-west by 55 km
north-south (ca. 1,300 km2). The other two much
smaller (ca. 550 km2 each) subclusters overlapped
each other in the area between the Three Basin and

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 117
Big Cypress Creek subclusters. Tankersley Creek
was the western one, and Swauano Creek was the
eastern one.
As Thurmond (1990:214) well knew, the
limitations of the data made his interpretations
speculative, and he was not able to take his analysis
further than just suggesting that the spatial differences in burial assemblages related to different
Titus groups. New data acquired since then have
allowed more synthetic studies that have led to a
better understanding of spatial organization among
the Titus phase Caddo. Foremost among the morerecent studies are those of Timothy K. Perttula
(1992, 2004, 2005; Perttula and Sherman 2009).
While agreeing that the four Titus subclusters
could represent distinct groups that persisted over
time, Perttula (2004:397) concluded that some
of the variability that distinguishes the subclusters might relate to temporal changes rather than
geographic differences, echoing Turner’s (1978)
earlier conclusions. Further, in his analysis of the
mortuary ceramics from the Pilgrim’s Pride site
in Camp County, he could not get the assemblage
to fit well with any of the subclusters, and he concluded that “the Pilgrim’s Pride site, and probably
other Titus phase sites in the immediate vicinity,
apparently represents part of another local but
separate Titus phase community from those subsumed under the subcluster groupings proposed by
Thurmond” (Perttula 2005:280–281). He reached
much the same conclusion in his analysis of the
ceramics from the Mockingbird site (Perttula et
al. 1998:251–253).
The syntheses of the evidence from the
Pilgrim’s Pride and Ear Spool sites (Perttula
2005:357–364; Perttula and Sherman 2009:375–
377) barely mention the four subclusters and instead identify a string of Late Caddo communities
along Big Cypress Creek within the Titus heartland. Three of these communities, in the southeast
part, are within the northern section of Thurmond’s
Big Cypress Creek subcluster, and two crosscut
both the Swauano Creek and Tankersley Creek
subclusters (Figure 5). More recently, a sixth community has been suggested at the upstream end of
the heartland, in the area of the central part of the
Tankersley Creek subcluster (Perttula, Marceaux,
and Nelson 2012:6–7)1. None of these communities
was in the area of the Three Basins subcluster, as it
is almost entirely outside the heartland.
According to Perttula and Sherman (2009:375–
377), these heartland communities consisted

of dispersed farmsteads and villages affiliated
with key sites that contained public architecture
(mounds and ritual buildings) or community cemeteries, i.e., places that were reserved for activities
that integrated the community and bound its parts
together. They propose that the five communities
downstream from Tankersley Creek were anchored
by the following key sites, moving from southeast
to northwest: (1) Whelan (41MR2), with four
mounds, at the confluence of Arms Creek and Big
Cypress Creek, and H. R. Taylor (41HS3) and
Peanut Patch or Patton (41HS825) nearby, with
more than 150 graves at the main cemeteries; (2)
in the vicinity of Meddlin Creek, the four mounds
at the Harroun (41UR10) site and three mounds
at the Chastain/Dalton/Camp Joy (41UR11,
41UR18, and 41UR144) complex, along with community cemeteries at Pleasure Point (41MR63),
Henderson-Southall (41UR3), Big Oaks (41MR4),
and Sandy Creek (41MR122), which probably
contained more than 500 graves; (3) the singlemound Shelby (41CP71), P. S. Cash (41CP2), and
Sam Roberts (41CP8) sites on Greasy and Prairie
Creeks, with community cemeteries at Shelby and
Gold Star Ballroom (41UR107) containing more
than 250 graves; (4) the community cemeteries
at Tuck Carpenter (41CP5) and Harold Williams
(41CP10), with more than 166 graves, on Dry and
Swauano Creeks and maybe the community cemetery at the W-S site with 118 graves not far away,
perhaps accompanied by the single-mound Tom
Hanks site (41CP239); and (5) the single-mound
Pilgrim’s Pride site (41CP304) on Walkers Creek
and perhaps Tiddle Lake (41CP246) with another
mound nearby. The proposed key sites for the
sixth community, on Big Cypress upstream from
Tankersley Creek, are Sandlin Dam (41TT726) and
Lower Peach Orchard (41CP17). The former was a
community cemetery with more than 150 graves.
The latter, with 35+ known graves, apparently was
not large enough to be considered a community
cemetery, but with some of the graves being large
shaft tombs it clearly was an important place to the
Caddo who lived nearby.
All together, there are nine known mound
sites in the Titus heartland (considering Chastain,
Dalton, and Camp Joy as a single complex) in
the list of key sites above (excludes the recently
identified probable mound at the Frank Benson
site in Titus County [Perttula 2012:83], as well
as two others discussed later in this paper). Six
have single mounds, one has three mounds, and

k

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5

Bi

g

Cr

ee

118

Sulphur River

Bi

6 5
4

g

C

yp

re

ss

C

re

ek

3

2
Cr ee k
Li ttl e Cy pr es s

1

B
ig
S
an
dy
C
re
ek

³

Key Site
Titus Heartland
Titus Heartland Community
Cypress Cluster
Big Cypress Creek Subcluster
Swauano Creek Subcluster
Tankersley Creek Subcluster

0

5

10

20

Kilometers

Three Basins Subcluster
PAI/13/slh

Figure 5. Map of the extents of the key sites for the six hypothesized Titus heartland communities and Cypress subclusters
(key site extents do not equate to the likely extents of the communities themselves).

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 119
two have four mounds. Although not all are well
understood, most of the 17 small rounded mounds
apparently were erected to cap burned ceremonial
structures, some of which had extended entryways
(one mound at the Harroun site was put atop a
grave). All three of the known multiple mound
sites (Whelan, Harroun, and the Chastain/Dalton/
Camp Joy complex) are in the southeastern part
of the heartland, which suggests that not all communities along Big Cypress Creek were equivalent
sociopolitically (Perttula and Sherman 2009:391).
The 12 known community cemeteries listed as
key sites above are distributed more equably than
the mounds, with only half being in the southeastern two communities where the multiple mound
sites are and the other half being upstream from
there (Perttula 2004:Figure 13.31). Hence, they
may have served more universally to integrate
communities, sometimes in the absence of ceremonial landscapes defined concretely by mounds and
plazas. The fact that the three Titus heartland cemeteries known to contain large shaft graves, which
surely held elite members of the society—Pleasure
Point, Shelby, and Lower Peach Orchard—are
distributed such that they are in separate groups
of key sites argues that at least some of these truly
were distinct communities occupied by groups of
people who, though related, considered themselves
different than their neighbors.
In terms of hierarchical organization, a case can
be made that these six communities belonged to two
larger core communities with a dichotomy of “belief
and cultural practices” within the heartland, each
covering about 675 km2. The boundary between
them was between where Greasy Creek and Dry
Creek join Big Cypress Creek, meaning that one
encompasses the three downstream groups of key
sites listed above and the other contains the three upstream ones. Perttula and Sherman (2009:397–401)
see a split in ceramic traditions between these core
communities. Trade wares such as Avery Engraved
from McCurtain phase sites on the Red River to the
north are more common in burial assemblages of the
northwestern core community, along with more La
Rue Neck Banded and untyped jars and plain vessels
overall. In the southeastern core community, Taylor
Engraved, Bailey Engraved, and Simms Engraved
appear as important secondary types along with
trade wares from the Belcher phase on the Red River
to the east. Utility wares for the southeastern sites
include more Harleton Appliqué, Bullard Brushed,
and Karnack Brushed-Incised jars. Ripley Engraved

dominates the fine wares of both sub-traditions,
though bowl motifs vary some between them (Perttula and Sherman 2009:400).
This reconstruction of Titus phase spatial organization certainly implies something more complicated than Story and Creel’s (1982) Hasinai model
or Thurmond’s (1985) application of it to the Titus
area. If the Titus phase does represent an affiliated
group, then the presence of two core communities
in the heartland alone, each composed of multiple
constituent communities and distinguished from
one another by differing levels of social complexity, suggests a more-strongly hierarchical system
than the two-part Hasinai model calls for.
THE PINE TREE MOUND
SITE PROJECT
Description and Synopsis
of Work Accomplished
The Pine Tree Mound site (41HS15), in southcentral Harrison County, is on a broad upland
surface between Potters and Starkey Creeks, ca.
7.3 km north of where Potters Creek flows onto the
floodplain of the Sabine River (Figure 6). It is a large
(800 x 720 m) ceremonial and civic complex that the
Caddo occupied from sometime in the A.D. 1300s
to the 1700s, with the most intensive use between
A.D. 1400–1525. Excavations there were sponsored
by the Sabine Mining Company, a subsidiary of
the North American Coal Corporation, and was
prompted by the planned expansion of the Sabine
Mine, a lignite operation that produces fuel for the
H. W. Pirkey Power Plant nearby. The plant is operated by American Electric Power (AEP), which was
the ultimate funding source for the project.
The work was done in two phases, as reported
by Fields and Gadus (2012a, 2012b), with testing over all of the site in 2004 and data recovery
excavations in three possible village areas at the
west edge in 2006–2007. All told, the excavations
covered almost 15,000 m2 and exposed about
3,300 cultural features relating to at least 38 Caddo
houses, their associated ancillary structures and
activity areas, and four cemeteries. The large collection of ceramic vessels and sherds includes ones
typed as Ripley Engraved, Wilder Engraved, Pease
Brushed-Incised, Belcher Ridged, Cass Appliquéd,
Cowhide Stamped, Harleton Appliquéd, Hodges
Engraved, Karnack Brushed-Incised, La Rue Neck

120

Texas Archeological Society
Figure 6

B

C
A

Pine Tree Mound Site

PAI/11/slh

³

0

600 1,200

2,400

Meters
Contour Interval = 10 ft

Figure 6. Topographic map showing the location of the Pine Tree Mound site relative to the Potters and Starkey Creek valleys.

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 121
Banded, Maydelle Incised, Poyner Engraved, and
Taylor Engraved. The predominant arrow point
styles are Perdiz, Perdiz-Bassett, and Bassett.
The 105 radiocarbon dates indicate that the
history of Native American occupation in the excavated parts of the site evolved through five stages.
The first, in the A.D. 1300s, involved a slow start to
residential and ceremonial activities. By the early
1400s and continuing through the early 1500s, residential activities were widespread and intensive, as
was use of the core area for ceremonial activities.
These patterns continued through the 1500s, but
in a less intensive fashion than before. One area
continued to be used for residential activities into
the mid-1600s, but it appears that ritual-associated
construction was no longer taking place in the
core area. The focus of such activities had shifted
elsewhere by then. The final stage, in the 1700s,
may have little to do with what came before. Area
2 saw residential use, but it was not intensive and
may have been by people whose main villages
were elsewhere. Any connections to the Pine Tree
Mound community that thrived there in the 1400s
and 1500s may have been based only on oral traditions and distant memories. It is even possible that
there were no connections at all, with the latest occupations having been short-term stays by Caddo
or non-Caddo people traveling through the area.
The Pine Tree Mound Community
The heart of the community established on
Potters Creek in the A.D. 1300s was, of course,
the ceremonial precinct at Pine Tree Mound. This
area, encompassing 5.7 hectares, is a well-defined
ceremonial landscape that undoubtedly served as
the center for higher-level religious and political
activities for a community that extended far beyond this one location (Figure 7). An open central
plaza covered most of the area, with the largest
mound, Mound A, at its south end. This was a
platform mound that was built rapidly, probably
to support one or more important buildings on its
summit, although other such buildings likely stood
here before the mound was erected. Mound C is a
similar but much smaller platform mound about 60
m northeast of Mound A. About 90 m northwest
of Mound A, on the western side of the plaza, is
Mound B. It accumulated through the construction, destruction, and capping of a sequence of
important buildings. Postholes and other features
indicate that various structures bordered the plaza

between Mounds A and B, north of Mound B, east
of Mound A, and south and north of Mound C;
these probably were buildings with ritual functions
or houses for people critical to those functions.
The plaza may have been defined topographically
on its north side by the slope down to a spring-fed
drainage, but its northwest corner also appears to
have been marked by a large cemetery where important members of the community were buried.
Aboveground poles probably marked some of the
graves in this cemetery.
Combining the testing and data recovery evidence with that from two other adjacent tested sites,
it appears that there may have been 15 or so residential areas on the same landform within 100–370
m of the ceremonial precinct (Figure 8). Based on
the evidence from Areas 2 and 8, it seems that each
area usually consisted of a single circular pole-andthatch house averaging 6.3 m in diameter, although
occasionally two houses may have stood silultaneously in some areas. Auxiliary structures such as
ramadas and granaries were likely present as well
but are not well-defined in the Pine Tree Mound site
data set. The evidence from the excavated ones suggests that most residential areas were not occupied
continuously. A house was built and then rebuilt
once, twice, or three times, spanning perhaps no
more than 40 years, and then that area was abandoned for a period of time before being reoccupied
again and a new house built. These are interpreted as
multi-generational family house compounds. Figure
9 illustrates what one of the excavated ones looks
like archeologically. It was the aggregate of these
residential areas in use at any one time that made
up the Pine Tree Mound village.
With almost 16,000 hectares of land within
the Sabine Mine north of the Sabine River having
been surveyed, about 400 Native American sites
having been documented, and 35 sites having
seen some amount of excavation, it is possible to
look beyond the immediate vicinity of Pine Tree
Mound and identify other places where Caddo
people who probably were members of this community lived. For a small number of sites, this
can be done using radiocarbon dates or sizeable
and well-reported samples of diagnostic artifacts,
especially decorated fine ware ceramics. For most,
though, it hinges on one simple factor: whether a
site contains brushed pottery. This simple piece of
evidence may not constitute proof, since multiple
Caddo groups over a wide area used utility wares
with brushed surfaces over a long time period, but

122

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7

Í̄
B

Í̄

Plaza
Í̄
Í̄

C

A

Í̄
PAI/11/slh

Structure
Cemetery
Mound
2004 Excavations

Í̄

³

Í̄
Í̄
0

20

40

80

Meters

Contour Interval = 2 feet

Figure 7. Layout of the ceremonial precinct at the Pine Tree Mound site.

given the prominence of brushing in the Pine Tree
Mound assemblage, the fact that the site spans all
of the Late Caddo period and parts of the Middle
Caddo and Historic Caddo periods as well, and the
fact that brushed pottery does not occur much in
contexts clearly predating the A.D. 1300s in this
area (e.g., at the Hudnall-Pirtle site), the presence
of brushing at sites in the immediate vicinity seems
like a reasonable indicator that they were occupied
at the same time Pine Tree Mound was.

Forty of the known sites at the mine, or 10
percent, appear to be associated with Pine Tree
Mound. They are heavily concentrated in the Potters Creek valley, with much smaller numbers
on Spring Creek, Hatley Creek, Hardin Creek,
and Clarks Creek to the west and along the valley wall overlooking the Sabine River floodplain
(Figure 10). This suggests that the principal Pine
Tree Mound community village extended for a
distance of about 5.5 km along Potters Creek,

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 123
Figure 8

Í̄
Í̄

Ñ
Ü

!
.

Ñ Í̄
Ü
Í̄
Í̄

Area 2

Ñ
Ü

!
.

Í̄

Í̄

Ñ
Ü

Í̄

Area 8

!
.

Í̄

Spring
Nonresidential Activity Area
Residential Area

Í̄

Í̄
Í̄
Í̄
Í̄

Ñ
Ü

Ñ
Ü

Creek
Starkey

Ñ
Ü

Í̄

!
.

Í̄

Ñ
Ü

³

0

65

130

260

Meters

Contour Interval = 2 feet

Ceremonial Precinct
Mound

PAI/11/slh

Figure 8. Map showing components of the Pine Tree Mound community around the ceremonial precinct.

with the ceremonial precinct at its northern upstream end, mirroring what Terán mapped at the
Nasoni village on the Red River in A.D. 1691
(Perttula 1992:159–161). Although part of the Potters Creek valley above Pine Tree Mound has not
been surveyed systematically, sufficient acreage

has been examined to indicate that associated
sites there are scattered rather than clustered as
they are downstream. For many of the associated
sites, we do not have enough information to know
their function within the community, or even if the
Late Caddo occupation was the major one at that

124

Texas Archeological Society
Figure 9

House
Burial
Feature

0 2 4

8

Meters

Figure 9. Plan of a residential area at the Pine Tree Mound site (Area 8) showing feature locations and identified houses.

location. From the better known ones, though, it
is clear that there is variability among them. At
one end of the spectrum, for example, is the Lane
Mitchell site, which overlooks lower Hatley Creek
just north of the Sabine River floodplain. With four
or five small mounds and perhaps lacking the kind
of surrounding village that Pine Tree Mound had,
it may have been a subsidiary nexus of ceremonial
activities for the community. At the other end are
sites such as Resch on Potters Creek, 41HS231
overlooking Hatley Creek and the Sabine River

floodplain, 41HS74 on Hatley Creek, and 41HS488
and Gray’s Pasture on Clarks Creek that have earlier primary components and apparently were used
in a non-intensive fashion, perhaps as short-term
campsites during procurement or processing forays, by members of the Pine Tree Mound community (Dockall et al. 2008:57–96; Heartfield, Price
and Greene, Inc. 1988:6-1 through 7-20; Keller
1993:43–45, 70–72; Keller and Speir n.d.; Perttula
2000; Webb et al. 1969:96–99). In between these
extremes are sites like 41HS588, on the north wall

Mas o n Cre

k

³

C reek

anch

e

Sp
r in

k

Meters

1,000 2,000

Cr
ee

0

g

Pine Tree Mound Site

4,000

Figure 10. Map showing the distribution of Native American sites at the Sabine Mine that appear to be associated with the Pine Tree Mound site.

Bl
ac

gh
ou
Sl

Associated with Pine Tree Mound
Surveyed Areas

Bayou

reek
din C
Ha r

Ch

kee
er o

#

ek

yC
re
St
ar
k

#

Creek
Dillard

PAI/11/slh

C reek
y Br

Mill C
re
ek

C

rks
la
Creek

in e
Sab

y
Hatle

Lane Mitchell Site
nd
Bra

River

Rod
g
e
r
sC
ree
k

e rs
Pott

ek

Figure 10

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 125

ek
Cre
rs
e
i
l
l
Co

126

Texas Archeological Society

of the Sabine River valley just downstream from
Hatley Creek, near the Lane Mitchell site. This
site was tested extensively and found to be a Late
Caddo residential site with one or more houses
and other features, including at least one burial,
and artifacts and radiocarbon dates demonstrating
contemporaneity with Pine Tree Mound (Dockall et
al. 2008:96–143); it clearly is an outlying hamlet.
Of course, it is highly unlikely that people
who were affiliated with the Pine Tree Mound
community lived solely within the 160 km2 of
land that make up today’s Sabine Mine. There are
no other sites like Pine Tree, with its conspicuous
ceremonial landscape, anywhere nearby, and it is
certain that the religious and political leaders who
lived there exerted influence over an expansive territory. Lacking large numbers of excavated sites, it
is hard to know how far that territory might have
extended, but it is possible to make some educated
guesses (Figure 11).
To the north, it likely went no farther than
the divide between the Sabine River and Cypress
Creek basins. The latter, and particularly Big Cypress Creek, is the heartland of the contemporaneous Titus phase, and there are enough differences
between Pine Tree Mound and the Titus sites to
indicate they represent distinct, though related,
groups. To the west on the north side of the Sabine
River, evidence from a series of looted cemeteries
on Hawkins Creek in Gregg County, northwest of
Longview, suggests that the boundary may have
been somewhere east of there and west of Clarks
Creek. East of Pine Tree Mound north of the river,
it certainly went as far as Eightmile Creek, based
on evidence from C. D. Marsh and other nearby
sites (Griffith et al. 2012:146; Jones 1968:85–97).
East beyond Eightmile and its upper tributary
Quapaw Creek is the divide between the Sabine
and Red River basins, and this would be a logical
place for the boundary of the Pine Tree Mound
territory. There is no way to know if this boundary
should follow the Eightmile Creek valley closely as
it moves south toward the Sabine or encompass the
next two drainages to the east, Caddo and Jackson
creeks. Figure 11 depicts the latter, though, based
on the fact that it is a long distance down river to
the next large north-side tributary, Socagee Creek.
To the south, between the Sabine River and
the upper parts of the Neches basin, sites with
Late Caddo components are present but not frequent. Recent survey and testing efforts in other
areas of the Sabine Mine immediately south of the

river have identified four sites that probably are
connected to Pine Tree Mound both in terms of
function, i.e., as outlying residential sites or camp
sites, and via the Hasinai Trace, an ancient Indian
trail (Dockall et al. 2010:229; Dockall and Fields
2011:82), but there are no large Late Caddo villages or mound sites in this area. This is true as well
for nearby Martin Lake and Martin Lake Mine in
Panola and Rusk counties. There are two sites with
Historic Caddo components (Jones 1968:67–84;
Perttula and Nelson 2007b), and at least 11 other
sites where the ceramics or arrow points imply
that Late Caddo components are present (Clark
and Ivey 1974), but the overall density of sites
that appear to be contemporaneous with Pine Tree
Mound is low. This is even more obvious at Oak
Hill Mine farther to the southwest. Once again,
there are occasional sites that appear to have Late
Caddo components (n=8), but the primary Caddo
occupation of this area, as represented at the Oak
Hill Village site on Mill Creek, occurred during
the Middle Caddo period and mostly predates
Pine Tree Mound. Oak Hill Village did yield some
ceramics, arrow points, and radiocarbon dates indicating use after a.d. 1400, though, and thus people
continued to live there as the ceremonial center at
Pine Tree Mound was starting to reach its zenith
(Rogers and Perttula 2004:96). It’s hard to believe
that the people who remained at Oak Hill Village
were not connected to the leaders of that center just
35 km to the northeast.
In short, this part of the Sabine River basin,
extending probably to the Sabine-Neches drainage divide, appears to have been settled, but only
sparsely so, by people affiliated with the Pine Tree
Mound Caddo. Based on the large surveys done at
the Sabine Mine, Martin Lake Mine, and Oak Hill
Mine (ca. 44,000 acres combined), it appears that
sites contemporaneous with Pine Tree Mound occur here in a density only one-third (1 site per 2,200
acres) that of the part of the Sabine Mine north of
the river (1 site per 740 acres). Deciding where to
draw the Pine Tree territory boundary line moving
east and west on the south side of the Sabine is
more speculative, but placing it beyond Mill and
Tiawichi creeks on the west and Irons Bayou, the
next drainage beyond Martin Creek, on the south,
makes it line up well with the boundaries suggested
above for the north side of the river.
This exercise suggests that the larger Pine Tree
Mound territory extended across an area roughly 50
km north-south by 60 km east-west, encompassing

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 127
Figure 11

B og gy C re
ek

ek

Pine Tree Mound
Territory
Pine Tree
Mound Site

r

ichi

C

ou

M a rt in C
re e k

aw

ne

eC
re e
k

S o ca g

a y ou
Ir o n s B

M

Sh

B o w le s C re
ek

ek
Cr e
ud
st M

e e C re
ek

Ti aw

re ek

ay
eB

Eig h

k
ee
Cr
Ra

bb

it

C

ke
he ro

k

ve

ou

C re e

Ri

B ay

u
s B ay o

tm i le

Cre e k

u

u

re

H a r r is

yo

yo

C
ne

eC

ss
yp r e

#

We

Mud Creek

Ba

Ba

y
Li tt l

PAI/11/slh

s

ss

k

nd

p re s
B ig C y

bi

m

p re

ee

Sa

ss Cr
ee k

Sa

u

Cy

r
yC

g

C yp r e

yo

Ji

k

ek

ck

re

Li ll

Bi

L it t le

a
kB

C

Bla

ss

e
re
rC

re

ie

yp

Titus Heartland
az

C

r

Fr

ig

Rive

ac

B

h ur

Bl

B ig C
re e

k

Su lp

³

o
l Ba y
u rva u

u

va
Mu r

0

5

re
ul C

ek

10

20

Kilometers

Figure 11. Map showing the hypothesized extent of the territory of the Pine Tree Mound community relative to the
Titus phase heartland.

128

Texas Archeological Society

some 2,400 km2 with the Sabine River running
through the middle. People were not distributed
evenly throughout this area, though. The main village was north of the river, stretching for 5.5 km
along the Potters Creek valley and anchored by the
Pine Tree Mound site at its north end. The rest of
the community appears to have been more rural,
although at two different scales. Other north-side
tributary valleys, extending from maybe Mason
Creek on the west to Eightmile, Caddo, or Jackson
Creek on the east, may have supported moderately
scattered settlements. The entire territory south of
the river, accounting for well over half of it, appears to have been sparsely settled.
This largely hypothetical reconstruction is
similar in some ways to Story and Creel’s (1982)
model of sociopolitical organization and settlement
patterning for the Frankston and Allen phases described above. The evidence that is most consistent
with this model is the Pine Tree Mound site itself,
which certainly is a paramount ceremonial center,
and the distribution and variety of associated sites;
together, they make this community look like an affiliated group, using Story and Creel’s terminology.
What is not readily apparent are constituent groups.
While it would be possible to look at Figure 10
and suggest that some clusters of sites represent
constituent groups, we know too little about most
of these sites to begin to address that question,
and the problem becomes even more acute moving away from Potters Creek and adjacent valleys
into areas where less archeological work has been
done. There is some logic to interpreting the Lane
Mitchell site, with four mounds, as a lesser center
for a constituent group in the Hatley Creek valley,
but this seems unlikely because it is so close to
Pine Tree Mound and its associated village along
Potters Creek. Instead, the rituals performed there
may have had a different role, for example, to link
the ritual space at Pine Tree with the earlier one at
the Hudnall-Pirtle site south of the Sabine River.
More important than its relationship to the
Frankston-Allen phase model, though, is what the
evidence from Pine Tree Mound says about the
Titus phase. This evidence indicates that Pine Tree
Mound and its associated sites may represent a third
Titus core community comparable to the two that
Perttula has proposed for the heartland, i.e., a group
of Caddo people who were intimately tied to their
neighbors in the Cypress basin to the north (based
largely on similarities in pottery styles and site
types, i.e., ritual places defined by mounds, plazas,

and high-status cemeteries with large shaft graves)
but who maintained their separateness (based largely on different burial practices). If true, this would
expand the boundaries of the greater Titus phase
beyond what either Thurmond or Perttula suggested. The Pine Tree Mound project emphasizes just
how important it is to look beyond the heartland to
gain a fuller understanding of what the Titus phase
is all about. The maximum extent of the phase as
shown by Perttula (2005:358) encompasses about
6,240 km2 beyond the 1,350-km2 heartland (i.e.,
4.6 times larger), and the Pine Tree Mound project
analysis suggests that in some areas this maximum
boundary should be pushed even farther out. These
other non-heartland areas may contain few or no
communities like that around Pine Tree Mound,
with its well-defined ceremonial space (multiple
mounds around a plaza) and elite community cemetery all in one place, but they surely contain Titus
communities of one sort or another. As appears to
be the case in the heartland itself, these likely varied
in terms of social complexity and connectedness to
other nearby communities.
THE U.S. HIGHWAY 271 MOUNT
PLEASANT RELIEF ROUTE
PROJECT
Description and Synopsis
of Work Accomplished
This project stemmed from the planned construction of a relief route for U.S. Highway 271
around the west side of Mount Pleasant in Titus
County. The early part of the work was done for
the Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, and the later part was
done for PTP, LP, acting on behalf of Titus County.
The project involved work at 11 Native American
archeological sites within a 6 km long stretch along
the east side of Tankersley Creek, 4 km upstream
from where it flows onto the floodplain of Big
Cypress Creek (Figure 12). The work was done
in three phases between 2005 and 2010, with the
final one consisting of data recovery excavations
at three sites: George Richey (41TT851), William
Ford (41TT852), and James Richey (41TT853).
The excavations covered a total of about
7,000 m2 and found 378 cultural features, mostly
postholes and pits with much smaller numbers of
burials, burned rock concentrations, artifact clusters, and middens. Some of the postholes at the

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 129

38 0

38 0

0

0
37 0

41TT854
0
38

32 0

37

39 0

38 0

3

32 0

0

38 0

39 0

60

41TT853

0

41

37 0

41

36 0
0
37

41 0

39 0 39 0

0

41
0

0

0

40
41

40 0
0

40 0

41 0

37 0

Figure 12. Topographic map of the U.S. Highway 271 project area showing site locations.

38

0

38 0

41 0

0

37 0

34 0

32 0
33 0
0

40

35 0
37 0

0

33

39 0

32 0

0

33

31
30

37 0
39 0

34 0
36 0

Meters
0
Contour Interval =3 410 ft

36 0

35 0

39 0
38 0

38 0

41TT866

37 0

0
PAI/12/slh

800

41 0

32 0

34 0

34 0

36 0

0

20

0

35

4003

0

34

03 5 0 200

31 0

38

40 0

33

0

32
Boundary
0
32 0

0

0
3 4 Project

³

31

Site Boundary3 3 0

41 0

0

40 0

k
ee
Cr

32
0
34
0

0

41TT862

30 0

0

32 0

0

38

32 0

37 0

0
32

0

34

ey
sl
er
nk
Ta

35

36 0
37 0

38 0

39

42

0

35 0

33
0
32 0

41TT847

32 0

60

37

40

0

31 0

35 0
3
0 30
35

36

34

41TT846

0

37 0

34 0

0

0
43 0

0

42

35

34

35 0
0
3 3 32 0

36

0

0

40 0

33 0

41TT851
41TT6

38 0

37

0

0

33 0

40

34 0
33 0
36 0

3

0

36

32 0

36 0

38 0

37

41 0

36 0

0
39

37 0

41TT852

37 0

38 0

40 0

41 0

0
35

36 0

33 0

38 0

38 0

0

34 0
36
0

37 0

40 0

37 0

34 0 34 0

32 0
33

0
40 0
41

39 0

33

Cr
ee
k

42 0

0

41TT858

0
o

41 0

34 0

k
ee
Cr

38

36
Dr
ag
o

43 0

0

39 0

0

0

0

4

30

40

34

39 0

0

34

35

41

41 0

0

33

ey
sl
er
nk
Ta

0
34 0

34 0

36

44 0

44 0

41
0
42 0

36

35

35

36 0

39 0
41TT865

0

0

Figure 12

130

Texas Archeological Society

George Richey and William Ford sites represent
single Caddo houses that were rebuilt once or
twice. The sizeable collection of ceramics consists
mostly of items typed as Ripley Engraved, Wilder
Engraved, Harleton Appliquéd, Maydelle Incised,
Pease Brushed-Incised, Killough Pinched, La Rue
Neck Banded, Belcher Ridged, Bullard Brushed,
Mockingbird Punctated, and Sanders Engraved.
Identified arrow point types are Alba, Bassett, Bonham, Catahoula, Colbert, Friley, Homan, Maud,
Steiner, and Talco.
Of the 130 radiocarbon dates obtained (127
from the three excavated sites), 116 entirely postdate A.D. 1200 (at two-sigma) and four others
partially do, accounting for 92 percent of the total.
Combined, these 120 dates form a continuous series spanning the Middle and Late Caddo periods
and even the Historic Caddo period. This data set
provides compelling evidence for dramatically
increased use of the middle part of the Tankersley
Creek valley after the Early Caddo period, reflecting the establishment and florescence of a local
Caddo community there.
Each location investigated archeologically
had its own history, though. The dates indicate
a primary residential occupation at the George
Richey site between A.D. 1250 and 1325; primary
residential occupation at the William Ford site at
1425–1500 and a secondary one at 1650–1700;
and a primary residential occupation at the James
Richey site between 1400 and 1500. All three sites
also have other minor Middle–Late Caddo components that are probably non-residential, or perhaps
very short-term residential. These date to the mid1100s–mid-1200s (George Richey and William
Ford), 1300s (William Ford), early 1400s (George
Richey), 1500s (George Richey, William Ford,
and maybe James Richey), and the 1600s (James
Richey). In addition, dates and diagnostic artifacts
(i.e., gunflints) indicate that both the William Ford
and James Richey sites have minor Historic Caddo
components dating to the 1700s.
Most of the time span indicated by the radiocarbon dates falls squarely within the Titus phase
interval (A.D. 1430–1680), but it starts earlier
(A.D. 1250) and extends later (A.D. 1800). The
late end of the sequence cannot be correlated with
a defined spatio-temporal construct, but there is no
reason to think that these relatively minor occupations were by groups other than the Titus phase
peoples who had lived here for several centuries.
The traditional end date for the Titus phase is based

more on the perception that the Caddo abandoned
most of the Big Cypress Creek basin after 1680–
1700 (Perttula and Sherman 2009:37–38) than on
radiocarbon dating, but recent evidence, such as
that from several cemeteries on Gum Creek in the
Little Cypress Creek basin (Perttula, Walters, and
Nelson 2012:1), indicates that some Titus groups
remained in the region until at least the early 1700s.
This apparently happened in the Tankersley Creek
valley as well.
On the early end, the sequence overlaps
the Whelan phase, which Perttula and Sherman
(2009:26) date to A.D. 1350–1430 and long has
been seen as ancestral to the Titus phase. This
is a construct that probably should be discarded,
however (Davis et al. 2010:45–46, 99–102; Fields
and Gadus 2012b:673; Perttula 1992:106–107),
because it is so poorly defined. Also relevant here
is another poorly defined construct, the Sanders
phase. Its relevance comes from the fact that a
small amount of the pottery from two of the project
area sites appears to be related to it, and this ties
these sites to the mound at the George L. Keith
site not far away (see discussion below). Although
centered on the middle Red River valley well north
of the project area, the people of the Sanders phase,
which Bruseth (1998:58) dates to A.D. 1100–1300
based on limited radiocarbon dating, appear to
have had some effects on early developments in
the Tankersley Creek community.
The Tankersley Creek Community
Local Settlement Patterns
The primary Middle–Late Caddo components
represent use of the three excavated sites as rural, single-family farmsteads within a dispersed
Caddo community. The work at two of them whose
main occupations were separated by a century or
two—George Richey and William Ford—resulted
in a clear picture of what the basic Middle to Late
Caddo habitation unit along middle Tankersley
Creek looked like (Figure 13). It consisted of
a domiciliary area with a single house that was
rebuilt once or twice separated from a main work
area with large pits, small pits, smudge pits, and
scattered postholes. The George Richey site had
the clearest representation of this pattern with a
northern cluster of features marking the main work
area and a southern cluster composed of mostly
postholes representing a house that was 6.0–6.4

Fields—The
Figure 13 Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 131

George Richey Site

William Ford Site

House
Feature

³

0 2 4

8

Meters

PAI/13slh

Figure 13. Plans of the George Richey and William Ford sites showing Tankersley Creek farmstead layout.

m in diameter. The southern feature cluster and its
house patterns were separated from the northern
feature cluster by 23 m. Though there was a scatter
of features marking a work area on the east side of
this space, it was mostly empty and may have been
a plaza. An additional work area represented by
small and large pits, smudge pits, and a few postholes was south of the house. Radiocarbon dates
indicate that this basic layout was extant during
the primary residential occupation, although some
features that make up the feature concentrations are
from earlier and later minor occupations.
The William Ford site also had two main
clusters of features separated by open space
interpreted as a plaza. The southeastern feature
concentration was mainly domiciliary, with a
house that was rebuilt once. This house was 6.3

m in diameter, the same size as that at the George
Richey site. Small pits, smudge pits, postholes,
and a large pit west of the house represent a
nearby work area like that south of the house
at George Richey. Also like George Richey, the
northwestern feature concentration was a work
area with large and small pits, smudge pits, and
scattered postholes probably representing drying
racks or other ancillary structures. Radiocarbon
dates indicate that this basic layout was in place
during the primary residential occupation. On the
northeast side of the possible plaza was a concentration of postholes that could be the remains of
a small rectangular structure such as a ramada,
but it is not certain that this was contemporaneous with the house area to the south. Instead, it
is speculated that the remains in this part of the

132

Texas Archeological Society

site may go with a later residential occupation
centered just outside the project area to the east.
The houses at George Richey and William Ford
were similar in size and construction (e.g., with postholes averaging 15–17 cm in diameter) to those at
the Pine Tree Mound site, which were large enough
to shelter a nuclear family or small extended family
and probably had average use lives of 10 years or so
before decay of support posts made rebuilding necessary (Fields and Gadus 2012b:277–280). Extending
that argument to this project area would mean that
the main occupations of these farmsteads lasted only
20–30 years, i.e., a generation or two, after which the
family moved on to occupy another interfluve along
Tankersley Creek or a stream nearby.
It is hard to address how these sites were used
during the multiple minor occupations that the
radiocarbon dates suggest. The fact that there are
more than a few such dates indicates that these
occupations involved more than just short-term
activities, although short stays with very limited
archeological visibility certainly are likely as well.
Something more substantial seems to be indicated,
for example, campsites at agricultural fields distant
from farmsteads, or locations where quantities
of plant or animal foods were processed, or even
farmsteads that, for whatever reason, were occupied
only very briefly before being abandoned. Such uses
probably explain not only the minor components at
the three sites where data recovery was done, but
also the Caddo components at five sites within the
project area where only testing was done.
The overall picture of local settlement patterns
during the Middle–Late Caddo periods is one of
frequent residential moves and reoccupation of elevated landforms along water courses, but for varied
activity sets (Figure 14). Farmsteads occupied for
a generation or two and family cemeteries are the
parts of this system that are most visible and interpretable archeologically, but shorter domestic and
non-domestic occupations (labeled “Campsite” on
Figure 14) may be even more common. Certainly,
there were no aggregated villages along the middle
reach of Tankersley Creek, but it is likely (and
probably necessary from a biological perspective)
that there were enough occupied farmsteads at any
given time along Tankersley Creek, other tributaries, and Big Cypress Creek that in the aggregate
they formed the kind of dispersed village that was
documented historically for other Caddo groups.
There are three other important points to be
noted about this settlement pattern based on the

work done on the U.S. Highway 271 project.
First, with radiocarbon evidence indicating that
the main feature concentrations at the George
Richey and William Ford sites reflect not just the
main occupations but also some minor earlier and
later ones, it appears that some spatial patterns in
how these sites were used persisted through time
in spite of changes in site function. This implies
that the Middle–Late Caddo people who lived
there retained longstanding cultural memories that
conditioned site layout, or perhaps that there were
landscape features, such as clearings in the woods,
that affected where activities were performed. We
will never know which, but the former explanation
is attractive because it is consistent with a scenario
in which this area was home to a particular group of
people, i.e., a local community, who were intimately familiar with their territory and maintained traditions over centuries about how to use it, even in the
face of needing to move farmsteads frequently. In
other words, the decisions they made about where
to situate their farmsteads, cemeteries, agricultural
fields, field-monitoring camps, and procurement
and processing locations, and when to move them,
were strategic rather than haphazard. This fits well
with the level of sociopolitical complexity that we
presume these people had.
Second, the evidence from these sites and
two known cemetery sites nearby—Thomas B.
Caldwell and A. P. Williams—indicates that the
Tankersley Creek Caddo created farmsteads and
family cemeteries, but usually not in the same
places. The excavations at the three residential sites
were extensive enough to show that no cemeteries were present adjacent to them, and the closest
known residential sites that could be associated
with the Thomas B. Caldwell and A. P. Williams
cemeteries are several hundred meters away. The
Duncan Anderson site in this same area could be
an exception to this pattern, since “abundant habitation refuse” was found there in addition to the
cemetery (Perttula, Marceaux, and Nelson 2012:9),
but too little is known about it to be sure. The fact
that farmstead occupations lasted only a generation
or two, and that those occupations were by single
households, may explain why residential and burial
sites were not closely tethered. In other words,
typical family cemeteries like Thomas B. Caldwell
and A. P. Williams may have been used longer than
individual farmsteads, unlike at longer-occupied
village sites such as Pine Tree Mound and Pilgrim’s
Pride, for example (Fields and Gadus 2012b:313,

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 133
Figure 14

Duncan Anderson

ï

Drag
o

o Cr
eek

ïA. P. Williams

William Ford

"
/

James Richey

"
/
r
Tanke

George Richey

sley C

"
/

reek

Thomas B. Caldwell

ï

ï Cemetery

"
/ Farmstead
Campsite

³

0

250 500

1,000

Meters
Contour Interval = 10 ft

PAI/13/slh

Figure 14. Components of the Middle–Late Caddo period community along middle Tankersley Creek. This map includes
only sites within the U.S. Highway 271 project area and a few cemeteries outside it; since not all of the area has been
investigated archeologically, it is an incomplete picture of this section of the community.

134

Texas Archeological Society

338; Perttula 2005:67). If an individual household
used a cemetery while they were living at successive farmsteads, it stands to reason that there
would not necessarily be close spatial relationships
between them.
The issue of sociopolitical complexity is the
third point highlighted here. One omission from
the discussion of settlement patterns above are
sites that served community integrative functions,
such as mound sites or community cemeteries. The
reason for that is there are no such sites in the U.S.
Highway 271 project area. These kinds of sites
certainly were important to the people who lived
there, though, and they and what they tell us about
complexity must be part of the discussion of their
settlement system. This topic is important enough
that it warrants more extended consideration below.
Potential Integrative Sites
Unlike the Pine Tree Mound site example
discussed earlier, the U.S. Highway 271 analysis
started with rural farmsteads and went looking for
integrative sites to tie them to. Five sites jump out
as candidates based on their proximity: 41TT890,
George L. Keith, Ear Spool, Sandlin Dam, and
Lower Peach Orchard (Figure 15). Site 41TT890 is
closest to the project area, just 0.75 km southwest
of its southern end. It contains a ca. 2 m high, 20
m diameter rise that likely is a constructed mound
(Bo Nelson, personal communication 2011), but
little else is known about it, as it has not been
investigated professionally. Given the ages of the
other Caddo sites nearby and the fact that single
mounds are the rule on Titus phase mound sites
in the upper half of the Big Cypress Creek basin,
there is a good chance it was used by the people
who lived at the George Richey, William Ford, and
James Richey sites.
The George L. Keith site is on Hart Creek ca.
6 km east of the U.S. Highway 271 project area.
Walter Goldschmidt (1934) of the University of
Texas (UT) trenched the mound in 1934, and
Kenneth Brown, then a student at UT, performed
some limited work there in 1971. Thurmond
(1990:183–185) recognized that the site has a
substantial Late Caddo component based on the
presence of a small Titus phase cemetery with at
least seven graves (Perttula, Walters, and Nelson
[2010a:9] report at least 15 graves) containing Ripley Engraved, Wilder Engraved, Cass Appliquéd,
and La Rue Neck Banded vessels and Talco and

Maud arrow points on the upland margin east of
the mound, as well as the presence of a variety of
Middle–Late Caddo sherds from non-burial contexts. He concluded that the most intensive use,
including most or all of the mound construction,
occurred during the Early Caddo period based on
the presence of some early pottery, but others have
argued convincingly that the predominant component at Keith is later than the Early Caddo period
(Fields et al. 2013; Perttula, Walters, and Nelson
2010a:10). Among the evidence supporting this is
a radiocarbon date on charcoal obtained in 1971
from the cleaned wall of the 1934 trench. Although
its context is not the best, its raw one sigma age
(540±70 B.P.) and projected calibrated two sigma
date (A.D. 1285–1464) implies that at least part of
the mound was constructed in the Middle or Late
Caddo period, contemporaneous with occupation
of one or all of the Tankersley Creek sites.
The single mound at Keith was very large, extending 73 m north-south and 49 m east-west and
standing at least 4.6 m tall. Thurmond (1990:183)
noted that the mound was about a meter taller
before it was cleared of vegetation and that it was
“rectangular in plan, with steep sides and a broad,
flat platform on top.” The mound was built in four
major episodes, with each major event probably
associated with the erection of an important building (or maybe more than one, given the size of the
mound), although firm evidence of this was found
only on the pre-mound surface and on top of the
third major fill episode. The structure that preceded
the mound was large, ca. 11 m in diameter, and
apparently was within a rectangular perimeter wall
that was 17 m across. Destruction of this building
and capping of its remains, probably in the Middle
Caddo period, are what started the cycle of events
that over a span of maybe as much as several
hundred years resulted in the impressive platform
mound at Keith.
While the picture is far from complete, the
Keith site may be best interpreted as a ceremonial
site with multiple associated residential areas that
was established during the Middle Caddo period
and continued to be used during the Late Caddo
period. Given its proximity and the impressive
and persistent presence on the landscape that the
mound provided, it is hard to believe that the
rituals performed there did not include family
groups who lived a short distance to the west on
Tankersley Creek. What is intriguing about Keith
is that the mound there is far larger than any other

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 135

Ear Spool

Pin

ey

Cr e

ek

L ic k C re
ek

Figure 15

sle

Cre

Cr

ee

ee

k

William Ford
James Richey

k

George L. Keith

George Richey

ek

H a rt C re
ek

el l

oo

Cr

41TT890

k
Sw au an o Cr ee

nd

k
re e
y C

Blu

ag

s

Eva

ker
Dr

ye

ns C
re ek

Ta n
Ha

Sandlin Dam
B ig C y p
re s s

Lower Peach Orchard

Archeological Site
U.S. Highway 271 Project Area
PAI/13/slh

³

Wa

rs
lk e

Cr

ee

C re e k

k

0

1

2

4

Kilometers

Figure 15. Map showing the locations of tested and excavated sites and important unexcavated sites in and near the
Tankersley Creek drainage that could be associated with the George Richey, William Ford, and James Richey sites. Site
41TT890, George L. Keith, Ear Spool, Sandlin Dam, and Lower Peach Orchard are potential integrative sites.

Titus phase mound. It covers almost 14 times the
area and is 5–6 times taller than the average Titus
heartland mound for which size data are known
(the 15 mounds at the Harroun, Whelan, Chastain,
Dalton, Camp Joy, Shelby, Sam Roberts Pilgrim’s
Pride, and Tiddle Lake sites are 7–35 m long,
7–20 m wide, and 0.6–2.2 m tall, with average

dimensions of 17.1 x 15.3 x 1.2 m). The size difference relates partly to the fact that the mound at
Keith likely served a different function than most
Titus phase mounds, i.e., it was a platform built in
stages to support important buildings rather than a
small tumulus that formed through the destruction
and capping of one or two small ritual-associated

136

Texas Archeological Society

structures. This implies that the ceremonies performed there may have been different than those
at most other mound sites.
Why this happened along the middle reach of
Hart Creek, well up from the Big Cypress Creek
valley, is unknown, but it may have something to
do with the Sanders phase connections seen in the
pottery from Keith and some other sites in the area.
The main reasons to think this are: (1) construction
of the mound at Keith probably began at a time when
Sanders phase people were building mounds on the
Red River and its tributaries to the north; and (2)
some of the Sanders ceremonial centers have large,
probable temple mounds (Bruseth 1998:59–60;
Krieger 1946:172–174, 195; Mallouf 1976:69;
Prikryl 2008:126; Wyckoff and Fisher 1985:25). It
may have been the Keith site’s connection to people
of the Sanders phase that initially made it a center
of political power for this part of the Cypress basin.
Even allowing for this possibility, though, it seems
that at least some of the ideas that led to the mound
being built here persisted among the local Titus
peoples who lived along Hart Creek, since it appears
that at least the upper part of the mound was erected
during Titus times, and Titus peoples certainly were
living and burying their dead nearby.
The third possible mound site that could have
been associated with the middle Tankersley Creek
sites is Ear Spool; it is farther, ca. 9 km, from the
U.S. Highway 271 project area but still within easy
walking distance. The excavations at Ear Spool
revealed that it “was the product primarily of a domestic occupation during the Titus phase, but one
with a special character given the identification of
two distinctive structures built within pits and then
deliberately burned down” (Perttula and Sherman
2009:1). These two special structures both were
associated with occupation between A.D. 1400 and
1480 (Perttula and Sherman 2009:371). One had an
extended entranceway, and both had characteristics,
namely burned structural remains and intentional fill
deposits, very similar to what is seen in constructed
mounds, even though little or no mounding was
evident on the surface. This led Perttula and Sherman (2009:371, 376) to conclude that the “symbolic
treatment of Structures 1 and 3 suggests that these
structures held a cultural significance beyond that of
purely domestic concerns” and that Ear Spool was a
key site in a community centered along Piney Creek
in the White Oak Creek basin.
Two other likely candidates for integrative
sites for this community are two cemeteries on

Big Cypress Creek about 5–8 km southwest of the
project area: the community cemetery at Sandlin
Dam with 150+ graves, and another one at Lower
Peach Orchard that had fewer graves (35+) but
clearly had burials of elite individuals in large shaft
tombs. The Sandlin Dam site was on a prominent
ridge jutting out into the Big Cypress Creek floodplain 1.5 km west of where Tankersley Creek joins
the Big Cypress; this ridge is the first one west of
the Tankersley Creek valley. The graves contained
Titus phase pottery and Bassett arrow points. With
so little information, it is impossible to address the
question of specific ties between this site and those
in the U.S. Highway 271 project area, other than
to say they likely were contemporaneous and that
it would have been an easy trip between the two.
There is a bit more information for Lower
Peach Orchard, even though it too was mostly
removed by looters and dam construction. It was
on a terrace edge above Big Cypress ca. 2.2 km
west-southwest of Sandlin Dam. No mounds were
reported, but it is possible that special buildings had
been erected on the four knolls on the site or elsewhere. The Titus phase cemetery contained mostly
graves of single individuals that were 1.8–2.4 m
deep, but five or six graves were different in that
they were much deeper (3.7–5.5 m) and contained
multiple individuals (Thurmond 1990:149). Grave
offerings included Ripley Engraved pots and vessels of other Titus phase types, Maud and Bassett
arrow points, celts, ceramic pipes, and large Galt
bifaces. The sizes of these graves, the presence of
multiple bodies, and the inclusion of high status offerings such as Galt bifaces clearly mark this as an
important place. The pottery and arrow point styles
indicate that this site was contemporaneous with
those in the U.S. Highway 271 project area, and like
Sandlin Dam, it certainly would have been a short
trip to this cemetery from middle Tankersley Creek.
Fortunately, 20 ceramic vessels reportedly from this
site were in the Margaret Hinton collection that
Perttula, Marceaux, and Nelson (2012:117–136)
analyzed. The 15 that can be typed consist of Ripley
Engraved bowls (varieties Galt, Caldwell, Carpenter, and Gandy), Turner Engraved bowls, a Wilder
Engraved bottle, a Wilder Engraved olla, a Bullard
Brushed jar, a Mockingbird Punctated jar, Harleton
Appliquéd jars, and a Cass Appliquéd jar. All but
two of these types and all four of the Ripley varieties are represented at one or more of the Tankersley
Creek sites, implying connections between them
and Lower Peach Orchard.

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 137
In sum, there are five known sites that could be
candidates for locales where the Caddo who lived
at the George Richey, William Ford, and James
Richey sites participated in rituals and ceremonies
that helped bind them and their neighbors into a
cohesive community. None is more than a half day’s
walk from the middle reach of Tankersley Creek,
and one, 41TT890, is actually on that stretch of the
creek. None of the five is like any of the others,
however, and it is hard to see any patterns in the
data that make it clear how they might fit together
as ritual components of a local settlement system.
The only obvious pattern is that the large cemeteries are on Big Cypress Creek, while the mound and
mound-like sites are on tributaries well away from
the main stem. This would imply spatial segregation
of activities associated with these kinds of sites, but
the significance of this is unclear. Part of this lack of
clarity undoubtedly can be traced to the very fragmentary nature of the archeological record.
Community Extent and Boundaries
Implicit in the discussion of potential integrative sites above is the notion that the local community that the George Richey, William Ford, and
James Richey sites were a part of was larger than
just the Tankersley Creek valley. The people who
lived on Hart Creek to the east, Piney Creek to
the north, and Big Cypress Creek to the south—
extending over an area of about 220 km2—easily
could have been part of the same community, based
largely on geography, the small distances between
the sites, and general similarities in material culture. Given the short-term nature of the farmstead
occupations (a generation or two) and the frequent
residential moves, though, it stands to reason that a
community large enough to be viable would have
been spread out over an even larger area, perhaps
extending farther east to include the Swauano
Creek valley, farther west to include Blundell
Creek, or even farther south to include south side
tributaries of Big Cypress Creek.
The archeological information collected from
the region prior to the U.S. Highway 271 project
was robust enough to show that the ceramic tradition of the northwestern part of the Big Cypress
Creek basin was different in some ways than that
of the southeastern part (Perttula and Sherman
2009:397–404), thus forming the basis for seeing
two core communities there, but those data were
not useful for addressing the extent of any local

communities within the northwestern part of the
basin. Thurmond’s (1990:116–119) maps certainly
indicated widespread and intensive occupation of
the whole upper basin by Late Caddo peoples, but
the data were not fine-grained enough to distinguish
one community from another. Recent testing and
excavation efforts in the vicinity succeeded in identifying a number of Middle–Late Caddo residential
or ephemeral-use sites that could be associated with
the Tankersley Creek sites (see Figure 15): five
sites on Blundell Creek (Brown et al. 1986:151,
182; Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc. 1984:43,
48–51; Kotter et al. 1991:38, 40); two sites in the
Hart Creek drainage (Burden et al. 2012:31; Perttula et al. 1998); 11 sites on Piney Creek (Galan et
al. 1997:39, 54, 65; Nash et al. 1995:46–47, 68, 90,
107–108, 130, 148–149, 201; Perttula and Sherman
2009); and two sites on Tankersley Creek (Barnhart
et al. 1997; Dixon et al. 1995). With a few notable
exceptions, however (e.g., Ear Spool and Mockingbird), the data were too sparse for meaningful
comparisons, and even when comparisons could
be made, they tended to have ambiguous results.
A primary reason for this is that the comparisons
mostly involved samples of sherds rather than vessels and sample sizes often were small.
To try to address this question in a detailed
and systematic way, and following up on the work
of Perttula and Sherman (2009:400), the analysis
of the U.S. Highway 271 data took another look at
the distributions of the various motifs on Ripley
Engraved bowls to assess whether they might be
informative about local community extent, not
just for the vicinity of Tankersley Creek but for
the broader Titus phase area as well. There were
several reasons to think this might be worth doing.
First, there are historical precedents, with motif
variation being an important part of what Thurmond used to define his Cypress subclusters and a
less-important part of what Perttula and Sherman
used to distinguish ceramic sub-traditions. Second,
Perttula and his colleagues have codified some of
the Ripley Engraved bowl variation by assigning
motifs to named varieties of the type, and they
are using this system in their ongoing efforts to
document vessel collections from the region. Third,
there has been a persistent feeling among archeologists familiar with Titus phase pottery that some
of the extensive variability in designs subsumed
under Ripley Engraved must have signified something important, for example, group identity, to the
people who made and used the pots.

138

Texas Archeological Society

The Ripley motif study included vessels from
the three cemeteries in the middle Tankersley
Creek valley (Thomas B. Caldwell, A. P. Williams,
and Duncan Anderson); the three other excavated
cemeteries closest to the project area at the Mockingbird (Perttula et al. 1998), Alex Justiss (Bell
1981; Rogers et al. 2003), and Pilgrim’s Pride
(Perttula 2005) sites; two sites, Tuck Carpenter and
Johns (Perttula, Walters, and Nelson 2010a, 2010b;
Turner 1978), farther south in the Big Cypress
basin; three cemeteries in the middle part of the
basin at the Lone Star Lake, Rumsey, and Keeling sites (Perttula, Walters, and Nelson 2010a);
and four cemeteries at the Henry Williams, Enis
Smith, Henry Spencer, and Frank Smith sites in
the Little Cypress Creek basin (Perttula, Nelson,
and Walters 2012; Perttula, Walters, and Nelson
2012) (Figure 16). Also added were two points of
comparison in the Sabine River drainage. These
are the two family cemeteries at the Pine Tree
Mound site (Fields and Gadus 2012b) and a collection from sites on Caney Creek southwest of
the project area (Perttula, Walters, Marceaux, and
Nelson 2009). Conspicuously missing from this list
are sites in the southeastern part of the Titus phase
heartland; this is a significant limitation because it
means the study included no samples from the two
downstream heartland communities proposed by
Perttula and Sherman (2009:375–377).
Eighteen varieties of Ripley Engraved bowls
were recognized in the analysis based on structural
differences in the engraved motifs. Nine varieties were newly defined (McKinney-Enis Smith,
Gandy-Mockingbird, Gandy-Pine Tree, Richey,
Starkey, Pine Tree, Spencer, Harvard, and Tiddle),
and the others were defined by Perttula and colleagues (Perttula, Nelson, and Walters 2012; Perttula, Walters, and Nelson (2010a, 2010b, 2012)
based on motifs originally illustrated by Thurmond
(1990:Figure 6).
Analysis of the distributions of these varieties
found a great deal of overlap spatially, providing
little support for the idea that variation in Ripley
bowl motifs is a productive way to consistently see
group identity and local community boundaries,
at least not variation as captured by this analytical
scheme. Some varieties are very widely distributed,
and while there are hints that community-level
information might be present in some of the lessubiquitous varieties, this is not consistently the
case. The strongest pattern relates to Titus communities viewed broadly, but not to communities

narrowly defined, and may be part of the same pattern that led Perttula and Sherman (2009:401–410)
to see southeastern and northwestern ceramic subtraditions in the Titus area. It could be seen in the
fact that 12 of the collections could be placed into
two groups, albeit ones that are not very homogeneous, and that most members of these groups have
distinct spatial distributions (see Figure 16).
One group consisted of collections from the
following seven sites: Thomas B. Caldwell, A. P.
Williams, Duncan Anderson, Mockingbird, Tuck
Carpenter, Johns, and Henry Spencer. In all seven,
Carpenter is the predominant Ripley Engraved variety, with variety Spencer being equally dominant at
the Henry Spencer site alone. Beyond this, no two
assemblages look exactly alike. The second group
consisted of the following five collections: Frank
Smith, Enis Smith, Henry Williams, the Middle
Cypress sites, and Alex Justiss. What unites them
is that each is dominated by variety McKinney and/
or variety McKinney-Enis Smith and that variety
Gandy ranks second or third. Three collections were
unlike any of the others and are outliers: Pilgrim’s
Pride, Pine Tree Mound, and the Caney Creek sites.
All of the sites in the first group but one, Henry
Spencer, are in the northwestern part of the basin,
and all of those in the second group, except Alex
Justiss, are in the southeastern part. Not surprisingly, two of the outliers, Pine Tree Mound and the
Caney Creek sites, are geographically separated
from the other sites. The third, Pilgrim’s Pride, is
not. These distributions suggest six main conclusions. First, they support the contention that distinct but related core communities occupied the two
parts of the Titus heartland. Second, they suggest
that Ripley Engraved bowl varieties as used here
are not now, and may never be, useful for seeing
distinctions between smaller communities within
the core ones. Third, they suggest ties between the
southeastern heartland core community and whatever was going on in the Little Cypress basin to the
south. Fourth, with one site in each group being
out of place spatially, they suggest that there was
movement of potters and people between core communities. Fifth, parts of the Titus phase area outside
the Cypress Creek basin supported their own core
communities. And sixth, sites like Pilgrim’s Pride,
which is an outlier ceramically but not spatially,
imply that at certain times and places within the
heartland there were small local communities that
chose to decorate their pottery differently than their
neighbors, presumably reflecting different ideas

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 139
Figure 16

Duncan Anderson
A. P. Williams
Thomas B. Caldwell

/
"

Mockingbird

"
/
/
"
/
"

Alex Justiss
/
"
Bi

/
"

g

C

Pilgrim's Pride

Caney Creek
/
"

yp

re

/
"

Tuck Carpenter

Bi

re ss

g

Cr e

re

ek

Lone Star Lake
/
"

Rumsey

/
"

Keeling
eC
yp

C

/
"

Johns

Li tt l

ss

/
"

Sa

ek

nd
y
C
re

"
/
/
"
/
"
/
"

ek

Henry Spencer

Sa

bi

ne

Ri

ve

Henry Williams
Enis Smith
Frank Smith

Litt le Cy pre ss Ba you

Pine Tree Mound

r

/
"

/
"

Northwestern Group

/
"

Southeastern Group

/
"

Outlier
U.S. Highway 271 Project Area

³

0

5

10

20

Kilometers

PAI/13/slh

Figure 16. Map showing the locations of Titus phase cemeteries used in Ripley Engraved bowl variety comparisons.

about connections between engraved motifs and a
widely held Caddo belief system.
Conclusions
Analysis of the data from the U.S. Highway
271 project area was successful in describing a
basic building block of a Titus phase community,
i.e., the rural farmstead, but it did not make much

headway in understanding the makeup and extent
of the local community of which the Tankersley
Creek sites were a part. Notwithstanding certain
data limitations that apply to more than just that
project area, including too few professionally
excavated sites (especially cemeteries and mound
sites), poor chronological controls that make it hard
to distinguish changes that relate to the passage of
time as opposed to other factors, and the difficulty

140

Texas Archeological Society

of interpreting sherd assemblages from residential
sites, it is true that some of the ceramic vessels in
the Tankersley Creek mortuary assemblages look
different than those from the Alex Justiss and Pilgrim’s Pride sites to the east and south, implying
boundaries between communities. However, the
Tankersley Creek ceramics are decidedly similar to
those from the Tuck Carpenter and Johns sites even
farther south, as well as those from the Mockingbird site to the north, and they are consistent with
assemblages across a large area covering much of
the upper part of the Big Cypress basin. Even if
potters and groups of potters chose motifs and variable expressions of those motifs in part to reflect
social identify, they did that within the context of a
common widespread ideology. Further, Caddo potters could and did innovate in motif construction,
while still using a set number of basic structures
and elements, and these motifs were understood
and accepted by communities across and beyond
the Titus heartland. Thus, vessel trade, shifting
community boundaries and centers of political
power through time, and group coalescence and
splitting would make it extremely difficult to see
community associations in the ceramics.
Of course, just because we cannot use Ripley
Engraved bowls to see boundaries between local
communities does not mean those communities
did not exist. The distributions of mound sites
and large cemeteries and of cemeteries with large
shaft graves continue to provide compelling evidence for long-term settlement by multiple related
Caddo groups distributed throughout the Cypress
Creek basin and adjoining valleys. One thing that
analysis of sites in the Tankersley Creek area tells
us, though, is that there likely are (or were) many
more mound and large cemetery sites out there than
we know about, and that missing information will
hamper efforts to define communities based on the
distributions of these types of sites. Certainly, the
difficulty of deciding how sites such as 41TT890,
George L. Keith, Ear Spool, Sandlin Dam, and
Lower Peach Orchard relate to the farmsteads and
family cemeteries along Tankersley Creek emphasizes how much more there is to know about the
archeology of this one part of the Titus phase area.
CONCLUSIONS
Ultimately, the conclusions of both projects
about Caddo sociopolitical and spatial organization

do not accord very well with Story and Creel’s
(1982) Hasinai model. The suggested reconstruction for the Pine Tree Mound community differs in
that it consists of a single main village tethered to
the sole major ceremonial center, all ringed by a
zone with moderately scattered settlements and a
sparsely settled zone beyond. The size and makeup
of the Pine Tree Mound site itself are consistent
with what one might expect for the ceremonial
center for an affiliated group, and the hypothesized
territory size of 2,400 km2 seems reasonable for
such a group. But there is no good evidence that
this community comprised multiple constituent
groups, each with a lesser ceremonial center, as in
the Hasinai model. Of course, this may be because
we just do not have the kind of data needed to see
this. But the model seems even less appropriate in
light of one of the main higher-level conclusions,
i.e., that Pine Tree Mound is the nexus of a core
Titus phase community comparable to those on
Big Cypress Creek to the northwest. That sets up
a scenario where the Titus phase could consist of
at least three affiliated groups, as opposed to the
Hasinai model’s single one.
In the case of the U.S. Highway 271 Mount
Pleasant relief route project, it would be easy to
see the Tankersley Creek sites as elements of a
constituent group settlement and to speculate that
41TT890, for example, was the lesser ceremonial
center for that settlement. Tying all the evidence
summarized above to the rest of the Hasinai model
is problematical, though. Perttula’s six heartland
communities (or five, as in Perttula [2012:83]),
each containing multiple mound and/or large
cemetery sites distributed over sizeable areas, and
segregated into southeastern and northwestern
groups perhaps characterized by differing levels of
social complexity, present a scenario that is simply
too complicated to fit the Hasinai model. And that
is just for the heartland, ignoring the greater Titus
phase area. Acknowledging that some of this apparent complexity probably is due to poor temporal
controls (i.e., we are seeing agglomerations of human behavior over several hundred years), it still
seems that, whatever the Titus phase represents, it
must have involved more than two levels of organization, and this implies a sociopolitical system that
was more-strongly hierarchical than what Story
and Creel proposed for the Hasinai.
So, what do the combined Pine Tree Mound
and U. S. Highway 271 analyses tell us about
what the Titus phase represents? Consistent with

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 141
previous interpretations, it does appear to reflect
a series of related Caddo groups who controlled
a large area. Its boundary probably should be extended southeast and south of its traditional position to capture the most-rural part of the Pine Tree
Mound territory (Figure 17), but this is a minor
change dealing with a periphery that could have
vacillated over time. The main point here is that Titus phase peoples probably considered some lands
south of the Sabine River as part of their territory,
but they never established large communities there.
The boundary shown in Figure 17 jumps back
northward to follow the north side of the Sabine
River in the western half of the Titus phase area.
This is based on information from archeologist
Mark Walters, who knows a great deal about the
archeology of that area and who reports that there
is not much Late Caddo archeology, either Titus
or Frankston phase, south of the Sabine River in
northern Smith County (Mark Walters, personal
communication 2013). He notes that the Caddo
who lived there abandoned the area around A.D.
1400, perhaps moving northward into the Titus area
proper. If so, it could be appropriate to view that
area as the sparsely settled periphery of the greater
Titus territory, as we have for the area downstream
from there, rather than a no-man’s-land between
the Titus and Frankston phases.
Current data suggest that at least three Caddo
groups occupied the Titus area, two centered on Big
Cypress Creek (Perttula’s two heartland core communities) and one anchored by Pine Tree Mound
on Potters Creek on the north side of the Sabine
River. Figure 17 depicts the likely extents of the
main parts of these communities, exclusive of all
the outlying sections (though these depictions are
partly conceptual rather than fully data-based). It
is improbable that these were the only groups who
lived there, however, and as more work is done,
others almost surely will be identified. The most
obvious places for such communities are on Little
Cypress Creek and on the Sabine River and its
north side tributaries west of the Pine Tree Mound
community. The two Big Cypress groups apparently comprised multiple small local communities,
but these are hard to detect archeologically, except
perhaps through the distribution of key sites, and
thus they are hard to talk about. This difficulty
probably stems from their fluidity. Some undoubtedly were long-term features on the landscape, but
others may not have been, and movement of people
between them, shifts in their boundaries, and group

coalescence and splitting all likely play a role in
making them difficult to deal with archeologically.
The conclusion that the three larger communities represent separate groups hinges partly on
chronology. Although absolute temporal controls
are not good for all parts of the Titus phase area,
both the Pine Tree Mound and the U.S. Highway 271 projects resulted in robust radiocarbon
chronologies demonstrating that these areas were
occupied contemporaneously. Combined with radiocarbon dates from other sites and the ceramic
evidence, it is clear that the three core communities
identified to date do not represent a single group
moving around the region over time (which is not
to say that the multiple apparent local communities within the two on Big Cypress Creek are not
partly a function of this). The dates indicate that
the period of most intensive occupation in both
project areas extended from the early A.D. 1400s
into the 1600s, consistent with the traditional view
of the chronology of the Titus phase, but both also
were occupied earlier and later. The earlier occupations, after ca. A.D. 1250 on Tankersley Creek and
ca. A.D. 1300 on Potters Creek, apparently reflect
the founding of the communities and their early
stages of development. The later occupations, in
the 1700s, represent limited use by historic Native
Americans, presumably descendants of Titus phase
peoples who lived there earlier.
So, both areas, and by extension probably the
three core communities, had separate but parallel histories lasting several hundred years. The
people who made up these communities were
united by a shared ceramic tradition reflecting a
common ideology, which also can be seen in the
kinds of ritual places they created. These ranged
from small family cemeteries, to sites with small
mounds (mostly singly but sometimes in groups)
reflecting the construction and destruction of
important buildings, to plaza-centered groups of
mounds (some of which were platforms for important buildings), to large cemeteries. The most
important of the cemeteries contained large deep
shaft graves where the highest-ranked members of
the groups were buried.
Acknowledging that what we know (or think
we know) about this subject is controlled to some
extent by varying quantities of work in different
parts of the region, it appears that the lower Big
Cypress community may have been more complex
sociopolitically than the other two. It has the largest number of key sites (n=13), both those with

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 17

Sa

r Ri
v er

nd

h Su
lp hu

tl e

Nort

Li t

142

Bl

re
yC

yt
he

iv er
S u lp hu r R

ek

nd

er

Cr

ph ur R iv er
S ou t h S ul

A

so

n

C

ee

re

k

k

Upper Big Cypress

g

B
ay
ou

re

R
iv

Ra

bb

k

it

Cr

er

ee

s

T ia w

Core Community
PAI/11/slh

ou

r

r
Che

Revised Titus Phase Boundary

Ba y

Pine Tree Mound
ve

k

Ri

r e ss

Cre e

Cre ek
H a r r is

ne

Cyp
i ttl e

u
s B ay o

i c hi

Cre e

ok e

ay
eB

k

³

ou

Ma r

0

t m il e

ek

ek

he
ek

s

C

re

Lower Big Cypress

bi

ek

y

C

ec
Cre

m

nd

rk

N
oo

re

u

Sa

Fo

p re s
B ig C y

Sa

k ap

Ji

yo

g

ke

s Cr
ee k

L

Ki c

C

Ba

k

Bi

La

eC
y pre
s

ee

Li ttl

ss

Cr

pre

ly

ek

Cy

Li l

re

r

C

ck

ss

ie

re

Bl a

yp

az

C

Fr

Bi

Ei gh

e

ee

Bog gy Cre ek

hi t

Cr

B ig C
ree k

W

k
Oa

ek

tin C
ree k

5 10

20

Kilometers

Figure 17. Map showing revised greater Titus phase boundary and three known core communities.

mounds and those with large cemeteries. There
are six known mound sites (counting Chastain,
Dalton, and Camp Joy as one), with three of them

containing multiple mounds (three at Chastain/
Dalton/Camp Joy and four at both Whelan and
Harroun). At Whelan, the mounds are positioned

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 143
such that they could be encompassing a large central plaza, i.e., a well-defined ceremonial space.
This could be the case at Chastain/Dalton/Camp
Joy as well, since the three mounds are all within
several hundred meters of each other, but it is
less clear there than at Whelan. The mounds at
the Harroun site appear not to have an associated
plaza, since they are arranged in a roughly linear
fashion over a distance of about 250 m following
a terrace edge. The mounds are generally small
and may have been erected mostly to cap burned
ceremonial structures, though this cannot be confirmed since few have been excavated. The largest
mound, at Camp Joy, measures 35 x 18 m and 2.2
m high and has an unusual shape suggesting that
it could have been built to serve as a platform for
a ceremonial building. If so, it would bolster the
argument for a well-defined ceremonial space at
Chastain/Dalton/Camp Joy.
The eight large cemeteries in the lower Big
Cypress community, only one of which is at a site
with a mound (Shelby), apparently contained more
than 900 graves. Most of these, and probably all or
almost all of those in the small family cemeteries,
were burials of commoners, but two of the large
cemeteries (Pleasure Point and Shelby) contained
large shaft graves for the highest elites. Analysis
of a subset of Titus cemeteries as part of the U.S.
Highway 271 project indicates that high-ranking
individuals also were buried in non-shaft graves
at community cemeteries.
The upper Big Cypress community has fewer
key sites (10, if one includes both George L. Keith
and 41TT890), five of which have single mounds,
and five of which are large cemeteries containing
more than 470 graves. One of the cemeteries (Lower
Peach Orchard) does not qualify as large in terms of
the number of graves, but it is the only one where
shaft graves were present and thus clearly was an
important place. Two of the mounds for which
dimensions are known are smaller than the average
mound in the lower Big Cypress community, and
two are larger, with one of these (George L. Keith)
being the largest known mound by far in the Titus
phase area. It both capped an important pre-mound
building and served as a platform for others.
The Pine Tree Mound community has the
fewest key sites, but both of those have multiple
mounds—three at Pine Tree Mound and four or five
at Lane Mitchell—and at the former the mounds
clearly are part of a very well-defined ritual space
with a plaza at its center and a cemetery containing

high-status members of the community at one end.
We can only speculate about how big this cemetery
is, but it could contain more than 200 graves. One
of the mounds is the second-largest one in the
Titus phase area and probably was a platform for
important buildings. The smallest one also is a platform mound. Lane Mitchell, with its small mounds
arrayed roughly linearly for a distance of about
130 m and no obvious plaza, is reminiscent of the
Harroun site in the lower Big Cypress community.
While each of the other two core communities
has something that argues for social complexity—the very large mound at George L. Keith and
shaft graves at Lower Peach Orchard in the upper
Big Cypress community and the large mound,
shaft graves, and well-defined ritual space in the
Pine Tree Mound community—the concentration
of important sites in the lower Big Cypress community suggests even greater complexity there.
Whether each core community was governed by
elites in all of the highest positions of authority,
i.e., grand xinesi, caddices, and canahas (Sabo
1998:159–162), or just caddices and canahas with
a single grand xinesi for all of the Titus phase area
is unknown, but it appears that those who ruled the
lower Big Cypress community had more power
than those in the other two. Lacking excavation
of the key sites associated with these individuals,
especially cemeteries, we can only speculate about
whether this translated into a strongly hierarchical
relationship between them or something subtler
involving near peers.
These three groups maintained their identities over time, but it seems they were always
bound together by ideology and the notion they
were more connected to one another than to the
Caddo who lived on the Red River to the east and
north and the Neches and Angelina Rivers to the
south. The two Big Cypress groups likely were
more connected to one another than to the Pine
Tree Mound group, partly just because of physical
proximity but also perhaps because they shared a
history that differed from that of their neighbor on
Potters Creek. Regardless of whether they came
from different places or whether their contacts and
influences came from different directions, though,
the peoples of these three core communities, and
almost certainly others yet to be identified, were
part of something larger, a cohesive group of
Caddo people that rivaled the ethnohistorically
better-known ones to their south and north in terms
of power and influence.

144

Texas Archeological Society
ENDNOTES

1. Another recent version combines the fourth and
fifth original communities into one, such that the sixth
community referenced here becomes the fifth one (Perttula 2012:83).

REFERENCES CITED
Barnhart, E., B. Dixon, S. Kotter, M. Nash, K. Reese-Taylor,
E. Skokan, and R. Taylor
1997 Data Recovery Excavations at Site 41TT372 in the
Tankersley Watershed, Monticello B-2 Surface Mine,
Titus County, Texas. Document No. 940608. PBS&J,
Austin.
Bell, M.
1981 The Alex Justiss Site: A Caddoan Cemetery in Titus
County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Highway Design Division Report No. 21. Texas State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
Austin.
Brown, D., L. Jones, J. L. C. Ibanez, K. White, T. Bearden,
S. Victor, C. Green, W. Glander, C. Carruthers, and J. Lara
1986 Cultural Resources Survey and Testing of the Monticello-Winfield Coal Surface Mine, Titus County,
Texas, Volume II, Tract H. Document No. 851200.
Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Dixon, B., E. Skokan, R. Rogers, S. Kotter, M. Nash, and
E. Barnhart
1995 Archeological Testing of Site 41TT672 and Geomorphological Exploration of the Tankersley and Dragoo Creek Drainages, Titus County, Texas. Espey,
Huston and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Dockall, J. E. and R. C. Fields
2011 National Register Testing of Three Sites in the Sabine
Mine’s South Hallsville No. 1 Mine-Rusk Permit,
Rusk County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No.
162. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Dockall, J. E., R. C. Fields, S. L. Katauskas, A. E. Dase, and
K. W. Kibler
2010 Archeological and Historic Resources Surveys of
6,925 Acres in the East Part of the Sabine Mine’s
South Hallsville No. 1 Mine-Rusk Permit, Panola
and Rusk Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations
No. 158. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Dockall, J. E., S. L. Katauskas, and R. C. Fields
2008 National Register Testing of Four Sites in the Sabine
Mine’s Area M, Harrison County, Texas. Reports of
Investigations No. 157. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc.
1984 Archaeological Site Evaluations, MonticelloWinfield Mine, Titus and Franklin Counties, Texas.
Document No. 82532. Espey, Huston and Associates,
Inc., Austin.

Bruseth, J. E.
1998 The Development of Caddoan Polities along the Middle Red River Valley of Eastern Texas and Oklahoma.
In The Native History of the Caddo: Their Place in
Southeastern Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited
by T. K. Perttula and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 47–68. Studies in Archeology 30. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Fields, R. C. and E. F. Gadus
2012a The Pine Tree Mound Site and the Archeology of the
Nadaco Caddo. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 83:23–80.

Burden, D. A., S. L. Katauskas, and R. C. Fields
2012 National Register Testing at 41TT896 and 41TT906
and Archeological Survey of Three Parcels, FM 1000
Realignment Project (CSJ No. 1226-04-001), Titus
County, Texas. Technical Reports No. 91. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Fields, R. C., V. L. Hatfield, D. A. Burden, E. F. Gadus, M.
C. Wilder, and K. W. Kibler
2013 Testing and Data Recovery Excavations at 11 Native American Archeological Sites along the U.S.
Highway 271 Mount Pleasant Relief Route, Titus
County, Texas. Draft, Reports of Investigations No.
168. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Clark, J. W., Jr. and J. E. Ivey
1974 Archeological and Historical Investigations at Martin Lake, Rusk and Panola Counties, Texas. Research
Report No. 32. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Davis E. M., W. A. Davis, J. R. Gipson, and B. Golden
2010 Archeological Investigations at Lake O’ the Pines,
Marion and Upshur Counties, Texas, 1957–1959.
Archival Series 4. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

2012b (Editors) Archeology of the Nadaco Caddo: The View
from the Pine Tree Mound Site (41HS15), Harrison
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 164.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Galan, V., R. Rogers, T. K. Perttula, and E. S. Switek
1997 National Register Testing of Seven Sites in the
Monticello B-2 Surface Mine, Titus County, Texas.
Document No. 971085. Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Gilmore, K.
1973 Caddoan Interaction in the Neches Valley. Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

Fields—The Titus Phase from the Top and Bottom 145
Goldschmidt, W. R.
1934 Field Report of an Excavation Through the George L.
Keith Mound, Titus County, Texas, and Test Trenching on the C. T. Coley Farm, Titus County, Texas.
Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Perttula, T. K.
1992 “The Caddo Nation”: Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Griffith, T. B., R. C. Fields, S. L. Katauskas, and A. E. Dase
2012 Archeological and Historic Resources Surveys on
2,144 Acres in the Proposed Marshall Mine, Harrison and Panola Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 163. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

2004 The Prehistoric and Caddoan Archeology of the
Northeastern Texas Pineywoods. In The Prehistory
of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 370–407.
Anthropology Series No. 9. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.

Heartfield, Price and Greene, Inc.
1988 Data Recovery at Site 41HS74, Harrison County,
Texas. Heartfield, Price and Greene, Inc., Monroe,
Louisiana.
Jones, B. C.
1968 The Kinsloe Focus: A Study of Seven Historic Caddoan Sites in Northeast Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma,
Norman.
Keller, J. E.
1993 Archaeological Survey and Testing at the South
Hallsville No. 1 Mine, Harrison County, Texas, 1992.
Report of Investigations 3-93. Southern Archaeological Consultants, Inc., Harlingen, Texas.
Keller, J. E. and T. E. Speir (compilers)
n.d. Excavations at the Gray’s Pasture Site, 41HS524,
Harrison County, Texas: Northeast Texas Archeological Society 1992 Field School. Unpublished
manuscript on file with the authors.
Kotter, S. M., L. Jones, C. F. Frederick, and W. Glander
1991 An Archaeological Investigation of 41TT182 in
the Monticello-Winfield South Surface Mine, Titus
County, Texas. Document No. 910264. Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Krieger, A. D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas, With Extension of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. The University of Texas, Austin.
Mallouf, R. J.
1976 Archeological Investigations at Proposed Big Pine
Lake, 1974–1975, Lamar and Red River Counties,
Texas. Archeological Survey Report 18. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Nash, M. A., S. M. Kotter, and K. V. Reese-Taylor
1995 National Register Testing of Ten Sites in the Monticello B-2 Surface Mine, Titus County, Texas. Document No. 930529. Espey, Huston and Associates,
Inc., Austin.

2000 The Caddoan Ceramics from the Gray’s Pasture
Site (41HS524), Harrison County, Texas. Journal
of Northeast Texas Archeology 13:1–39.

2005 (Editor) Archeological Investigations at the Pilgrim’s
Pride Site (41CP304), a Titus Phase Community in
the Big Cypress Creek Basin, Camp County, Texas.
Report of Investigations No. 30. Archeological &
Environmental Consultants, LLC, Austin.
2012 Risky Business: Caddo Farmers Living at the Edge
of the Eastern Woodlands. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 83:81–97.
Perttula, T. K., P. S. Marceaux, and B. Nelson
2012 Study of the Margaret Hinton collection of Pottery
Vessels from Northeast Texas Caddo Cemeteries.
Archeological & Environmental Consultants, LLC,
Austin.
Perttula, T. K. and B. Nelson
2007a The Gum Creek Cluster: Protohistoric Caddo Sites in
the Little Cypress Creek Basin, ca. 1670–1720. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology 26:128–135.

2007b Documentation of a Collection of Archaeological Materials from the Millsey Williamson Site
(41RK3), a Historic Nadaco Settlement. Journal of
Northeast Texas Archaeology 26:120-127.
Perttula, T. K., B. Nelson, and M. Walters
2012 Caddo Archaeology at the Henry Spencer Site
(41UR315) in the Little Cypress Creek Basin of
East Texas. Special Publication No. 20. Friends of
Northeast Texas Archaeology, Pittsburg and Austin.
Perttula, T. K. and D. L. Sherman
2009 Data Recovery Investigations at the Ear Spool Site
(41TT653), Titus County, Texas. Document No.
07025. PBS&J, Austin.
Perttula, T. K., M. Tate, H. Neff, J. W. Cogswell, M. D. Glascock,
E. Skokan, S. Mulholland, R. Rogers, and B. Nelson
1998 Analysis of the Titus Phase Mortuary Assemblage
at the Mockingbird Site, “Kahbakayammaahin”
(41TT550). Document No. 970849. Espey, Huston
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Perttula, T. K., M. Walters, S. Marceaux, and B. Nelson
2009 Caddo Pottery Vessels and Pipes from Sites in the
Middle and Upper Sabine and Upper Neches River
Basins, Smith and Wood Counties Texas. Special
Publication No. 7. Friends of Northeast Texas Archaeology, Pittsburg and Austin.

146

Texas Archeological Society

Perttula, T. K., M. Walters, and B. Nelson
2010a Caddo Pottery Vessels and Pipes from Sites in the
Big Cypress, Sulphur, Neches-Angelina, and Middle
Sabine River Basins in the Turner and Johns Collections, Camp, Cass, Cherokee, Harrison, Morris, Titus, and Upsher Counties, Texas and Sabine Parish,
Louisiana. Special Publication No. 10. Friends of
Northeast Texas Archaeology, Pittsburg and Austin.

Story, D. A. and D. G. Creel
1982 The Cultural Setting. In The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Volume 1: The Site, Its Setting,
Investigation, Cultural Features, Artifacts of NonNative Manufacture, and Subsistence Remains, edited
by D. A. Story, pp. 20–34. Texas Antiquities Permit
Series No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

2012 Little Cypress Creek Basin Archeology: Six Late
Caddo Period Cemeteries in Upshur County, Texas.
Special Publication No. 22. Friends of Northeast
Texas Archeology, Pittsburg and Austin.

1985 Late Caddoan Social Group Identifications and
Sociopolitical Organization in the Upper Cypress
Basin and Vicinity, Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 54:185–200.

2010b Caddo Pottery Vessels and Pipes from the Johns
Site (41CP12) in the Big Cypress Creek Basin in the
Turner and Johns Collections, Camp County, Texas.
Special Publication No. 11. Friends of Northeast
Texas Archaeology, Pittsburg and Austin.

Prikryl, D. J.
2008 The 1991 and 1992 Texas Archeological Society Field School Excavations at the Fasken Site
(41RR14), Red River County, Texas. In Collected
Papers from Past Texas Archeological Society
Summer Field Schools, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp.
125–172. Special Publication No. 5. Texas Archeological Society, San Antonio.
Rogers, R., M. B. Cliff, T. K. Perttula, G. Rutenberg, S. Victor,
P. Dering, and M. Malainey
2003 Excavations at the Alex Justiss Site, 41TT13, Titus
County, Texas. Archeological Studies Program Report No. 36. Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin. Document
No. 030089. PBS&J, Austin.
Rogers, R. and T. K. Perttula
2004 The Oak Hill Village Site (41RK214), Rusk County,
Texas. Document No. 030083. PBS&J, Austin.
Sabo, G., III
1998 The Structure of Caddo Leadership in the Colonial
Era. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their Place
in Southeastern Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited
by T. K. Perttula and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 159–174.
Studies in Archeology 30. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Thurmond, J. P.
1981 Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin,
Northeastern Texas and Northwestern Louisiana.
Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

1990 Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin,
Northeastern Texas and Northwestern Louisiana.
Studies in Archeology 5. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Turner, R. L.
1978 The Tuck Carpenter Site and Its Relation to Other
Sites within the Titus Focus. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 49:1–110.
Webb, C. H., F. E. Murphey, W. G. Ellis, and H. R. Green
1969 The Resch Site, 41HS16, Harrison County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:3–107.
Wyckoff, D. G. and T. K. Baugh
1980 Early Historic Hasinai Elites: A Model for the Material Culture of Governing Elites. Midcontinental
Journal of Archaeology 5(2):225–288.
Wyckoff, D. G. and L. R. Fisher
1985 Preliminary Testing and Evaluation of the Grobin
Davis Archeological Site, 34Mc-253, McCurtain
County, Oklahoma. Archeological Resource Survey
Report No. 22. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, The
University of Oklahoma, Norman.

At the Confluence of GIS and Geochemistry:
Identifying Geochemical Correlates of Ripley
Engraved Caddo Ceramics
Robert Z. Selden, Jr. and Timothy K. Perttula

ABSTRACT
We discuss a new approach to the identification and definition of spatial trends in archeologically-recovered
ceramics associated with geochemical results produced using instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA).
Using all of the Ripley Engraved INAA samples, we posit that clays in the Claiborne and Wilcox Groups can
be successfully demarcated by sodium (Na), cerium (Ce), and zinc (Zn). Using a subset of those data from the
Big Cypress Creek basin, we find that ceramics manufactured in three different Caddo political communities
can be successfully demarcated based upon differential concentrations of arsenic (As), iron (Fe), and vanadium
(V) found in the ceramic paste of Ripley Engraved sherds. With the larger dataset, we then identify six spatial
trends associated with the geochemistry of Ripley Engraved Caddo ceramics.

INTRODUCTION
Over the last 17 years, 1308 instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) samples have been
run on Caddo ceramic vessels recovered from 186
archeological sites throughout the ancestral Caddo
region. The Caddo INAA sample was produced
by the University of Missouri Research Reactor
(MURR), and is only surpassed in size by datasets
from the Valley of Mexico and the Mimbres and
Jornada Mogollon regions of the American Southwest. However, the complex nature of this dataset
has created substantive challenges regarding the
interpretation of geochemical results (see Ferguson 2010). Those difficulties have led to a recent
reinterpretation of the Caddo dataset by MURR
(Ferguson et al. 2010), but challenges in determining probable locations of ceramic production have
become increasingly difficult due to a perceived
homogeneity of local alluvial and upland clays
used to manufacture the vessels (Ferguson and
Glascock 2011; Perttula and Ferguson 2010).
Selden (2013:Figures B.2-B.34) created a
series of 33 geochemical maps, one for each
rare earth element in the INAA dataset, that conversely illustrates a high degree of diversity in the

geochemistry of clays used by East Texas Caddo
potters. What follows is a discussion of these
maps, and how unique spatial patterns found to
correlate with local geology and proposed political communities can be further highlighted using
data from the well-known 15th to late 17th century
A.D. Caddo ceramic type of Ripley Engraved (see
Suhm and Jelks 1962).
Ripley Engraved (Figure 1) is the principal
ceramic fine ware in Titus phase settlements and
communities in the Big Cypress Creek and midand upper Sabine River basins. The type was
defined by Suhm et al. (1954:346 and Plate 57)
and Suhm and Jelks (1962:127-129 and Plates 64
and 65). There are a number of distinctive decorative elements and motifs associated with Ripley
Engraved carinated bowls, compound bowls, or
bottles, as recognized by Suhm et al. (1954:Plate
57), Turner (1978), Thurmond (1990:Figure 6), and
Gadus (2013:Figures 5 and 6). In recent years, the
engraved motifs found on Ripley Engraved vessels,
especially carinated bowls, have been identified as
distinctive varieties of the type (Perttula 2013:195
and Figure 12; Perttula et al. 2010a, 2010b; Fields
et al. 2013) that likely have distinctive temporal,
geographic, and social characteristics.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

148

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Ripley Engraved, var. McKinney Caddo vessel.

METHODS
The methods we employ to illustrate geochemical variability in clays from across the ancestral
Caddo region relies first upon the identification
of shell- and bone-tempered sherds in the INAA
dataset (Selden et al. 2013a). Subsequent to this
identification, a calcium correction was applied
only to geochemical results from shell- or bonetempered samples due to the capacity of calciumrich tempers to dilute certain elements associated
with clays (Cogswell et al. 1998; Steponaitis et al.
1996). This deviates from MURR’s current practice
of applying the calcium correction to the entirety
of the Caddo INAA dataset (see Ferguson 2010:6;
Ferguson and Glascock 2006:3, 2007:3, 2009a:3,
2009b:266, 2010:93, 2012:3, Perttula and Ferguson 2010:11). The proportion of shell- and bonetempered sherds in this dataset is small, and we
consider the application of the calcium correction
to the remainder of the sample to be unwarranted
for the grog-tempered sherds since “such correction is unnecessary because the grog itself is made
of clay, presumably the same clay that comprises
the rest of the paste” (Steponaitis et al. 1996:559).
The calcium correction was applied to shelland bone-tempered sherds in version 3.2.2 of R,
after which those data were recombined with the
other-tempered data, where the log-10 for each
element was calculated, after adding a value of one

to each sherd/element in the database, effectively
replacing all missing values with a zero (Selden et
al. 2013a). Subsequently, the dataset was imported
in ArcGIS10.2 where the Getis-Ord Gi* statistic
was employed to calculate a z-score for each log-10
value using the formula:

(1)
where
,

is the attribute value for feature
is the spatial weight between feature
and
is equal to the total number of features and:

(2)

)2

(3)

The
statistic is a z-score so no further calculations are required (ESRI 2013).
Following the calculation of z-scores for each
element, these data were used to calculate the deterministic statistic of inverse distance weighted

Selden, Jr. and Perttula—At the Confluence of GIS and Geochemistry
(IDW) for each element. This statistic illustrates
whether discrete geochemical signatures exist close
to one another, or in the same location.
We begin with a sample of 98 Ripley Engraved
sherds recovered at 24 Caddo sites in East Texas
to establish links between local geology and geochemistry, and include sites in the Big Cypress,
Little Cypress, and Sabine River basins. Then we
employ a sub-sample of the dataset—23 Ripley
Engraved sherds from 12 sites in the Big Cypress
Creek basin—to focus on an analysis of their
chemical composition within previously-defined
political communities. We then return to the larger
dataset from the Big Cypress, Little Cypress, and
Sabine River basins to explore six spatial patterns
identified during the analysis. In all cases, the maps
are used to identify geochemical correlates.

149

RESULTS
Three elements were identified using the resultant geochemical maps that correspond with the
variation in geologic groups across the study area
(cerium [Ce], sodium [Na], and zinc [Zn]) (Figure 3).
Although Na represents a new tool for discriminating
between the Claiborne and Wilcox Groups in East
Texas, its ability to do so appears to be unique to the
Ripley Engraved sample, and further INAA research
in this region may assist in clarifying this distinction.
Earlier studies have pointed to analytical gains in
demarcating between these geologic groups using the
lanthanides (rare earth elements) contrasted with Zn;
Ce and La in particular (Selden et al. 2013b).
Using the current Caddo INAA sample, Caddo
sites located atop the Claiborne Group can be

Figure 2. Counties, archeological sites, and geologic groups mentioned in the text.

150

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

c

d

Figure 3. Claiborne and Wilcox Groups (a) demarcated in a 3D scatterplot using Ce, Na, and Z, and (b) geochemical
maps of Ce, Na, and Zn.

subdivided when Zn is contrasted with tantalum
(Ta) and Ce, pointing to potential geochemical
differences between the Queen City Sand, Weches,
and Sparta Sand Formations that comprise it.
These potential differences could lead to new

developments in ceramic geochemical research
throughout the region. For example, increasing the
number of INAA and petrographic samples could
foster significant gains in further linking ceramic
geochemical data with the local geology. Noting

Selden, Jr. and Perttula—At the Confluence of GIS and Geochemistry
the presence or absence of glauconite—commonly associated with the Weches Formation—in
petrographic samples could also aid in further
delineating between the Weches and Sparta Sand
Formations (Selden et al. 2013b). Additionally,
there are color differences that exist between quartz
sands found in the Sparta Sand Formation (light to
brownish-gray), and those in the Queen City Sand
Formation (grayish-orange to pink) that may prove
useful in future macroscopic and microscopic research (USGS 2007).
Similarly, because the Wilcox Group can be
further subdivided on the basis of Zn, neodymium
(Nd), and dysprosium (Dy), elucidating geochemical differences between the larger undivided Wilcox
Formation and the Carrizo Sand Formation (Selden
et al. 2013b), additional INAA and petrographic
analyses in the area could assist in further parsing
out the geochemical and paste constituents that are
most often associated with ceramics produced from
clays in or near these two formations. Color and
compositional differences also exist between these
formations; the Carrizo Sand Formation is comprised of brown and red quartz sand that may have
ironstone inclusions, while the Wilcox Formation is
comprised of a silty and sandy clay with common
gray ironstone inclusions (USGS 2007).
Local Political Communities and
Geochemistry in the Big Cypress
Creek Basin
In archeological terms, the Titus phase is
marked by several clusters of settlements that
apparently represent parts of contemporaneous
ancestral Caddo communities (see summary in
Fields, this volume; also Perttula 2012). These are
thought of as political communities represented
by concentrations of interrelated settlements and
associated cemeteries that are centered upon a
key site or group of sites distinguished by public
architecture (i.e., earthen mounds) and large domestic village areas (Figure 4). The mounds were
built over wooden structures that probably had a
special religious and ritual purpose to the Caddo
communities and/or with particular leaders, and
the earthen mounds were built atop the structures
after they had been burned. In some political communities, the community cemeteries are not found
in close association with the mound centers, but
instead are situated along the major streams and
tributaries, presumably in general proximity to the

151

many contemporaneous farmsteads that must have
been dispersed across the countryside.
There are a number of key sites within these
Titus phase political communities in the Big Cypress
and mid-Sabine River basin, some of which have had
INAA done on sherds in their ceramic assemblages.
This includes places such as Lower Peach Orchard
(41CP17) on Big Cypress Creek in the vicinity of
the Sandlin Dam community cemetery (political
community [PC] 1 in the Big Cypress Creek basin);
Pilgrim’s Pride (41CP304) on Walkers Creek, and
Tom Hanks (41CP239), Harold Williams (41CP10)
and Tuck Carpenter (41CP5) on Dry Creek (Turner
1978) (PC 2); Sam Roberts (41CP8), P. S. Cash
(41CP2), and the Shelby (41CP71) sites on Greasy
and Prairie creeks (PC 3); Harroun (41UR10),
Dalton (41UR11), Chastain (41UR18), and Camp
Joy Mound (41UR144) on Big Cypress Creek and
Meddlin Creek (PC 4); the Whelan (41MR2), H.
R. Taylor (41HS3), and Patton (41HS825) sites on
Big Cypress Creek and Arms Creek (PC 5); and the
Pine Tree Mound site (41HS15) and community in
the mid-Sabine River basin (Fields and Gadus 2012;
Perttula 2012, 2013).
Using a subset of the Ripley Engraved INAA
data from sites in the Big Cypress Creek basin,
as discussed above, three elements—arsenic (As),
iron (Fe), and vanadium (V)—were found to share
a similar spatial pattern with previously defined
Caddo political communities in the Big Cypress
Creek basin. The results of the analysis indicate that
ceramic sherds from three of the five Caddo political
communities in this drainage basin can be successfully segregated using elements that share similar
spatial patterns (Figure 5 and Table 1), suggesting a
preponderance of ceramic production in these Titus
phase contexts using local clays. While As and Fe
have very similar spatial distributions, the distribution of V is more comparable to chromium (Cr) and
scandium (Sc).
Results of the geochemical analysis tentatively
point to both the local manufacture of ceramics
by Titus phase political communities—using clays
with distinctive chemical constituents (Groups
1-3)—and the movement of vessels between
political communities. Geochemical Group 1 is
represented by PC 2, including Ripley Engraved
sherds from 41CP21; Group 2 by PC 3, including
41CP220 and 41UR2 Ripley Engraved sherds;
and Group 3 by PC 4, including sherds from
41MR178, 41MR219 and 41UR3 (see Figure 4
and Table 1).

152

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Map of local political communities in the Big Cypress Creek basin.

Selden, Jr. and Perttula—At the Confluence of GIS and Geochemistry

153

Figure 5. 3D scatterplot of As, Fe, and V illustrating geochemical variation between Caddo political groups

Seven sherds comprise Group 1/PC 2 (see
Table 1). Group 1 sherds from 41CP220 (Group 2/
PC 3) and Group 3/PC 4 sherds from 41UR2 point
to potential interaction between these three political communities, and the movement of pottery
vessels between communities. Ten sherds comprise
Group 2/PC 3 (see Table 1). The four sherds from
41CP304 (Group 1/PC2) point to interactions between peoples in PC 2 and PC 3. The Group 3/PC4
sherds come only from that political community.
These results are also consistent with the notion that social interaction existed between these
three Caddo political communities (see Perttula
2012). With regard to inter-political community
variability in ceramic chemical composition, the
analysis places sherds from 41MR63, 41MR219,
41MR122, and 41UR3—all in the Lake O’ the
Pines area (see Figure 4)—in Group 3; these sites

are considered to belong to a single PC. However,
even within this group, there appears to be greater
variability that may represent at least two different groups of potters; one group is represented
by sherds from 41MR63 and 41UR3 while the
other is represented by sherds from 41MR219
and 41MR122. The latter subgroup is higher in
As, Fe, and hafnium (Hf), and lower in Ce, cobalt (Co), cesium (Cs), lutetium (Lu), samarium
(Sm), and rubidium (Rb). More INAA samples
could clarify whether two distinct groups of potters were manufacturing Ripley Engraved vessels
within this community. The single outlier from
this analysis (TKP381 from 41MR178) is assumed
to be representative of either intra- (downstream
from the currently-defined political communities
since this sample is higher in both As and Fe) or
inter-drainage basin interaction and ceramic vessel

154

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Sites, samples, elemental values for As, Fe, and V, and group assignments
for Ripley Engraved sherds from the Big Cypress Creek basin.

Site
41CP021
41CP021
41CP071
41CP071
41CP071
41CP220
41CP220
41CP220
41CP220
41CP220
41CP239
41CP304
41CP304
41CP304
41CP304
41CP304
41MR063
41MR122
41MR178
41MR219
41UR002
41UR003

anid

As

Fe

KIT030
KIT023
TKP139
TKP680
TKP678
KIT019
KIT001
KIT018
KIT020
KIT017
TKP135
TKP111
TKP125
TKP114
TKP119
TKP122
TKP373
TKP383
TKP381
TKP386
TKP332

0.729117343
0.764864015
0.695079569
0.779311395
0.689256096
0.667828427
0.688693177
0.681756695
0.778407991
0.749101062
0.820173912
0.696123442
0.784560942
0.62675833
0.671984439
0.636632592
1.027048007
0.9593684
1.265835012
0.960440923
0.814076785

4.389284876
4.292512839
4.402843968
4.481183509
4.428742513
4.365364915
4.458972834
4.39121382
4.429251629
4.39506549
4.450291467
4.423317945
4.385133516
4.409033957
4.450118637
4.447822577
4.63402484
4.591831599
4.692604629
4.505102804
4.532161723

TKP370

1.058717281

exchange between Caddo peoples, but more INAA
samples are needed from a variety of sites in the
Little Cypress and Sabine River drainages before
this assumption can be fully evaluated.
Spatial Patterns in the Geochemistry
of Ripley Engraved
Returning to the larger sample from the Big Cypress, Little Cypress, and Sabine River drainages, six
spatial patterns are identified in the geochemical data
that may be useful in future geochemical investigations. While the first of these (Na, Ce, and Zn) has
been discussed above and found to define geochemical differences in Ripley Engraved Caddo ceramics
made from clays that originated from local geologic
groups in the Big Cypress Creek basin, allusions were
made to two additional patterns (As and Fe, and Cr,
Sc, and V) that warrant clarification. Further, three

4.597009558

V
1.882761956
1.839798858
2.005783887
2.02135384
1.955596747
1.974527462
2.008838674
1.988853041
1.941309574
1.947198766
2.018236853
2.013975173
1.852981125
2.001738139
2.047348771
2.007017087
1.936636611
1.996209048
2.036945281
2.022271662
1.952206284
2.063364531

Group
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
1
3

other spatial patterns exist that have not yet been discussed: Co and manganese (Mn); dysprosium (Dy),
neodymium (Nd), Sm, and terbium (Tb); and Hf, Rb,
and zirconium (Zr). The majority of the spatial trends
in this dataset point to a gradual increase in geochemical values from the northwest to the southeast
(upstream to downstream) within the Big Cypress,
Little Cypress, and Sabine River drainages.
In the case of Cr, Sc, and V, the increase in
geochemical values from the northwest to the
southeast is apparent in the Big Cypress, Little
Cypress, and Sabine River drainages, with the
sole exception of a ceramic sherd from 41CP88
in the Little Cypress Creek basin (Figure 6a). In
a contrasting pattern, Hf, Rb, and Zr values share
similar geospatial patterns, although the pattern
associated with Rb represents the inverse of Hf and
Zr (Figure 6b). This pattern demonstrates an increase
in Hf and Zr from the northwest to the southeast

Selden, Jr. and Perttula—At the Confluence of GIS and Geochemistry
(Rb is inverted) in the Big Cypress Creek basin, but
values remain high in all areas of the Little Cypress
and Sabine River drainages, again with the single
exception of the sherd from 41CP88. This latter
pattern may hold the key to discriminating between
clay compositions in ceramics from these three
drainages as more samples from a greater number
of sites become available.

a

155

Four elements—Dy, Nd, Sm, and Tb—also
increase in value from the northwest to the southeast, with the exception of the single Ripley Engraved sample (TKP318) from 41TT730, which
has elemental values that are higher than sherds
from other nearby sites like 41CP25, 41CP20, and
41TT47 in the northern part of the Big Cypress
basin, which may represent an example of the trade

b

Figure 6. Geochemical distributions of (a) Cr, Sc, and V; and (b) Hf, Rb, and Zr.

156

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

c

Figure 7. Geochemical distributions of (a) Dy, Nd, Sm and Tb; (b) As and Fe; and (c) Co and Mn.

Selden, Jr. and Perttula—At the Confluence of GIS and Geochemistry
of ceramic vessels with Caddo polities located
to the southeast (Figure 7a). The northwest-tosoutheast trend continues with As and Fe, as both
show increases in values downstream, but less so
in the Little Cypress basin (Figure 7b). One of the
more unique geospatial trends is that of Co and
Mn, which have high values in ceramic sherds in
the upper Big Cypress Creek basin, a quick shift to
lower values in the area of 41CP220 and 41CP71
on Prairie and Greasy creeks, and then a return to
high values at 41UR2 (Figure 7c).
CONCLUSIONS
This analysis represents the first ceramic typespecific discussion of INAA results from the ancestral Caddo region, and highlights the successful
application of GIS to the analysis and interpretation
of the Ripley Engraved dataset. In this case, GIS
was used to examine the spatial patterns associated
with geochemical elements produced from archeologically-recovered ceramics in East Texas. Three
different elements (As, Fe, and V) were employed
to demarcate between Ripley Engraved ceramics
from three previously identified political communities along Big Cypress Creek. Additionally,
three chemical elements (Na, Ce, and Zn) were
identified that successfully discriminate between
clays in the Claiborne and Wilcox Groups, and a
total of six spatial patterns were documented in
the geochemical data. While the Ripley Engraved
INAA sample is small, and much remains to be
learned with regard to the chemical constituents of
ceramic pastes in the Caddo region, this analysis
marks a substantive step toward furthering our
understanding of this complex dataset.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to thank Mason Miller, Linda Ellis,
and Ross Fields for access to geochemical data
from their previous and ongoing East Texas projects, and we thank Nancy Kenmotsu for comments
on earlier versions of this paper.

157

REFERENCES CITED
Cogswell, J. W., H. Neff, and M. D. Glascock
1998 Analysis of Shell-Tempered Pottery Replicates:
Implications for Provenance Studies. American
Antiquity 63(1):63-72.
ESRI
2013 How Hot Spot Analysis: Getis-Ord-Gi* (Spatial Statistics) Works. Electronic resource, http://resources.
esri.com/help/9.3/arcgisdesktop/com/gp_toolref/
spatial_statistics_tools/how_hot_spot_analysis_colon_getis_ord_gi_star_spatial_statistics_works.htm,
accessed December 22, 2013.
Ferguson, J. R.
2010 Preliminary Report on the Reanalysis of the Texas
Caddo NAA Database. In Studies on the Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Woodland Period
and Caddo Tradition Ceramics from Eastern Texas,
compiled by T. K. Perttula, Article 1. Special Publication No. 17. Friends of Northeast Texas Archaeology, Austin and Pittsburg.
Ferguson, J. R. and M. D. Glascock
2006 Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Caddoan Pottery and Clay Samples from Texas and
Louisiana. Research Reactor Center, University of
Missouri, Columbia.

2007 Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Caddo
Pottery from Ten Sites in Eastern Texas. Letter
report to Timothy K. Perttula with enclosed figures
and tables, July 16, 2007. Research Reactor Center,
University of Missouri, Columbia.
2009a Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Caddo
Ceramics from the Ear Spool Site, 41TT653, in
Northeastern Texas. In Data Recovery Investigations
at the Ear Spool Site (41TT653), Titus County, Texas,
by T. K. Perttula and D. L. Sherman, pp. 265-277.
Document No. 070205. PBS&J, Austin.
2009b Letter Report to Timothy K. Perttula with enclosed
figures and tables, April 29, 2009. Research Reactor
Center, University of Missouri, Columbia.

2010 Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Ceramic Samples from 41CP28, Camp County, Texas.
In National Register of Historic Places Eligibility
Testing on Three Late Prehistoric Sites (41CP28,
41CP88 and 41CP414) Within the Leesburg Mine,
Camp County, Texas, by D. L. Sherman, L. W. Ellis,
C. Heligenstein, S. Laurence, R. Rogers, H. Rush, J.
Shipp, and C. Wallace. PBS&J, Austin.

158

Texas Archeological Society

2011

Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Caddo
Pottery from Ten Sites in Eastern Texas. In Archeological Investigations at the Lang Pasture Site
(41AN38) in the Upper Neches River Basin of East
Texas, edited and assembled by T. K. Perttula, D. B.
Kelley, and R. A. Ricklis, pp. 591-612. Report 129.
Archeological Studies Program, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation,
Austin.

2012 Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Ceramic and Burned Clay Samples from 41CP220
and 41CP21, Camp County, Texas. Archaeometry
Laboratory, Research Reactor Center, University of
Missouri, Columbia.
Ferguson, J. R., T. K. Perttula, and M. D. Glascock
2010 Dividing Up the Caddo Cultural Landscape: SmallScale Analysis of a Large Ceramic INAA Database.
In Studies on the Instrumental Neutron Activation
Analysis of Woodland Period and Caddo Tradition
Ceramics from Eastern Texas, compiled by T. K.
Perttula. Special Publication No. 17. Friends of
Northeast Texas Archaeology, Austin and Pittsburg.
Fields, R. C. and E. F. Gadus (editors)
2012 Archeology of the Nadaco Caddo: The View from the
Pine Tree Mound Site (41HS15), Harrison County,
Texas. 2 Vols. Reports of Investigations No. 164.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Fields, R. C., V. L. Hatfield, D. A. Burden, E. F. Gadus, M.
C. Wilder, and K. W. Kibler
2013 Testing and Data Recovery Excavations at 11 Native American Archeological Sites along the U.S.
Highway 271 Mount Pleasant Relief Route, Titus
County, Texas. Draft, Reports of Investigations No.
168. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Perttula, T. K., M. Walters, and B. Nelson
2010a Caddo Pottery Vessels and Pipes from Sites in the
Big Cypress, Sulphur, Neches-Angelina, and Middle
Sabine River Basins in the Turner and Johns Collections, Camp, Cass, Cherokee, Harrison, Morris, Titus, and Upshur Counties, Texas and Sabine Parish,
Louisiana. Special Publication No. 10. Friends of
Northeast Texas Archaeology, Pittsburg and Austin.

2010b Caddo Pottery Vessels and Pipes from the Johns
Site (41CP12) in the Big Cypress Creek Basin in the
Turner and Johns Collections, Camp County, Texas.
Special Publication No. 11. Friends of Northeast
Texas Archaeology, Pittsburg and Austin.
Selden, Jr., R.Z.
2013 Consilience: Radiocarbon, Instrumental Neutron
Activation Analysis, and Law in the Ancestral Caddo
Region. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Selden, Jr., R. Z., T. K. Perttula, and D. L. Carlson
2013a INAA and the Provenance of Shell-Tempered Sherds
in the Ancestral Caddo Region. Manuscript on file,
Center for Regional Heritage Research, Stephen F.
Austin State University, Nacogdoches, Texas.
Selden, Jr., R. Z., T. K. Perttula, S. L. Eckert, and D. L. Carlson
2013b Linking Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis
(INAA) with Geology in the Ancestral Caddo Region. Manuscript on file, Center for Regional Heritage Research, Stephen F. Austin State University,
Nacogdoches, Texas.
Steponaitis, V. P., M. J. Blackman, and H. Neff
1996 Large-Scale Patterns in the Chemical Composition of Mississippian Pottery. American Antiquity
61(3):555-572.

Gadus, E. F.
2013 Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds: Structural Variation in Caddo Engraved Ceramic Bottle Motifs. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84:213-245.

Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Special Publication No. 1, Texas Archeological Society
and Bulletin No. 4, Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

Perttula, T. K.
2012 The Character of Fifteenth- to Seventeenth-Century
Caddo Communities in the Big Cypress Creek Basin of Northeast Texas. In The Archaeology of the
Caddo, edited by T. K. Perttula and C. P. Walker, pp.
363-410. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25:1-562.

Perttula, T. K. and J. R. Ferguson
2010 The Chemical Variation in Prehistoric and Early
Historic Caddo Ceramics in Eastern Texas. In Studies on the Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis
of Woodland Period and Caddo Tradition Ceramics
from Eastern Texas, compiled by T. K. Perttula, pp.
3-1 to 3-62. Special Publication No. 17. Friends of
Northeast Texas Archaeology, Austin and Pittsburg.

Turner, R. L.
1978 The Tuck Carpenter Site and Its Relation to Other
Sites within the Titus Focus. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 49:1–110.

2013 Caddo Ceramics in East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 84:181-212.

Thurmond, J. P.
1990 Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin,
Northeastern Texas and Northwestern Louisiana.
Studies in Archeology 5. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

USGS
2007 Geologic Atlas of Texas. Electronic resource, http://
www.tnris.org/get-data, accessed December 22, 2013.

Corn is Life: Temporal Trends in the Use of Corn (Zea mays)
by Caddo Peoples from Radiocarbon-dated Samples
and Stable Isotope Analyses
Timothy K. Perttula, Robert Z. Selden, Jr., and Diane Wilson

ABSTRACT
We examine temporal trends in the use of corn by Caddo peoples based on radiocarbon dates on corn samples
from Caddo sites and from diachronic data on diet reconstructed from stable carbon and nitrogen isotope analyses in Caddo bioarcheological datasets to establish trends in its adoption and use by Caddo peoples. Summed
radiocarbon probabilities of dated corn samples are used as a proxy for the use of corn by Caddo peoples,
primarily in the Southern Caddo area. The majority of the calibrated age ranges on corn fall after A.D. 1300.
There are notable temporal peaks at ca. A.D. 1350 and A.D. 1450, and then a plateau in probability density
after ca. A.D. 1500. Plotting median calibrated ages in 10 year intervals indicates that corn is present in low
numbers of dated samples from as early as ca. A.D. 900 until ca. A.D. 1300, but there are significant increases
in dated corn samples from ca. A.D. 1330-1580.

The stable carbon isotope information from burials in both the Southern and Northern Caddo areas indicates
that only after ca. A.D. 1200 was there a significant increase in the consumption of maize. Apatite signatures,
in particular, indicate that maize consumption significantly increased in the overall diet in both areas, and that
the importance of maize continued to increase in the diet of Caddo peoples after that time, likely peaking after
ca. A.D. 1650.

INTRODUCTION
To better understand the development and florescence of ancestral Caddo societies in the Caddo
area of the Trans-Mississippi South, an accurate
chronology is required. Dee Ann Story knew this,
of course, and she was a pioneer in Caddo chronology building through her efforts in obtaining and
critically assessing radiocarbon dates from Caddo
sites such as George C. Davis (41CE19) in East
Texas (Story 1981, 1997, 2000; Story and Valastro 1977), and in her compilation of radiocarbon
assays from the Gulf Coastal Plain of southwest
Arkansas, southeast Oklahoma, and East Texas
(Story 1990). Since her work in the 1970s-1990s,
and the advent of AMS dating of miniscule samples
of organic remains, a large number of Caddo radiocarbon dates have been obtained from a number
of sites across the Caddo area; several more recent
compilations of Caddo radiocarbon dates have
been prepared since Story’s work (McGimsey and
van der Koogh 2001; Perttula 1998a, 1998b; Perttula and Selden 2011; Selden 2013; Selden and

Perttula 2013). Currently there are, as best as we
can determine as of this writing, 1,387 dates from
274 Caddo sites in the states of Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Texas; about 66 percent are
from Caddo sites in East Texas.
Another significant development in Caddo
archeology since the 1990s has been the study of
stable carbon isotope analyses from human remains
to investigate subsistence patterns and changes in
diet. This is particularly the case in the use of stable
carbon isotope analysis to determine the amount of
corn consumed by Caddo peoples from ca. A.D.
800 to Historic Caddo times (Perttula 2008; Rogers 2011; Rose et al. 1998; Wilson 2012; Wilson
and Perttula 2013), as it is the most direct means
available of determining ancestral diets and what
people ate, especially if they ate certain kinds of
domesticated plant foods (e.g., Greenlee 2006;
Kellner and Schoeninger 2007; Schoeninger 2009).
In this article, our concern is three-fold. First,
we summarize the corpus of radiocarbon dates on
corn (kisi’)1 (also known as maize) samples from
Caddo sites to establish trends in its adoption

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

160

Texas Archeological Society

and use by Caddo peoples. Second, we provide
diachronic data on the Caddo diet that can be
reconstructed from stable carbon and nitrogen
isotope analysis of apatite and/or collagen values
from Caddo datasets, particularly focusing on the
consumption of corn as a dietary staple. Finally,
we employ both the radiocarbon dates on corn and
the stable carbon isotope analyses of Caddo human
remains to identify temporal trends in the use—and
possible intensification in its use—of corn. Corn
was the principal tropical cultigen grown and consumed by Caddo peoples and became their most
important food source, as it was for many New
World Native American cultures (see Bonavia
2013), along with beans (ba:hay) and squash/
pumpkin (k’ unu’ kaki:kasni’). The Caddo believe
that these plants are gifts from the earth that “they
were to hold and use for their benefit. The two gifts
most closely associated with the earth were corn
and pumpkin” (Newkumet and Meredith 1988:30).
RADIOCARBON-DATED CORN
SAMPLES FROM CADDO SITES
The Caddo chronology we use herein is based
on Story (1990). There are five periods that date
from ca. A.D. 800 to post-A.D. 1680:
Formative Caddo
Early Caddo
Middle Caddo
Late Caddo
Historic Caddo

ca. A.D. 800-1000
ca. A.D. 1000-1200
ca. A.D. 1200-1400
ca. A.D. 1400-1680
ca. A.D. 1680-1860+

Currently, there are 114 radiocarbon-dated corn
samples from 33 sites in the Caddo area of southwestern Arkansas, northwestern Louisiana, eastern
Oklahoma, and East Texas; this represents approximately eight percent of the known radiocarbon
dates from all Caddo sites. The samples of Caddo
sites with radiocarbon dates on corn include two
sites in Arkansas, one site in Louisiana, three sites
in Oklahoma, and 27 sites in Texas. Only one date
from Oklahoma (from 34Hs9) is not from the
Southern Caddo area (Figure 1 and Table 1).2
In Arkansas, the two Caddo sites with dated
corn samples have median calibrated ages that
range from A.D. 1446-1664, in the Late Caddo
period, with the highest probabilities for two sigma
age ranges of A.D. 1395-1523, A.D. 1450-1530,
A.D. 1540-1635, and A.D. 1632-1682 (see Table

1). The one dated corn sample from a Louisiana
Caddo site, with an extremely large standard deviation (see Table 1), has a median calibrated age
of A.D. 1406, and appears to be associated with a
substantial Middle Caddo period settlement on the
Red River (Thomas et al. 1980).
The single corn date from a Caddo site in the
Arkansas River basin in eastern Oklahoma has a median calibrated age of A.D. 1480, while Caddo sites
in the Glover and Mountain Fork River drainages in
Southeast Oklahoma have median calibrated ages on
corn that range from A.D. 1354-1526 (see Table 1).
The highest probabilities for two sigma age ranges
for these dated samples of corn are A.D. 1271-1444,
A.D. 1294-1521, A.D. 1392-1443, A.D. 1396-1642,
and A.D. 1424-1646. These median calibrated ages
and two sigma age ranges indicate that corn was being grown and consumed by Caddo peoples in these
areas during the Sanders phase (ca. A.D. 1100-1300)
in parts of the Early and Middle Caddo periods and
the early (ca. A.D. 1300-1500) and late (ca. A.D.
1500-1700) parts of the McCurtain phase (see Dowd
2012; Regnier 2013).
To the south, the much more expansive sample
of corn dates from East Texas Caddo sites has median calibrated ages that range from as early as A.D.
902 at the George C. Davis site on the Neches River
to as late as A.D. 1654 at the Pine Tree Mound site
on a tributary to the Sabine River (Fields and Gadus
2012). Most of the dates on corn are from only a
few sites, including dates from Formative Caddo,
Early Caddo, and Middle Caddo period components
at the George C. Davis mound center and village
site (n=12) (Story 2000), a Late Caddo period Titus
phase (ca. A.D. 1430-1680) component with a single
mound and village areas at the Pilgrim’s Pride site
(n=6, Perttula 2005) in the Big Cypress Creek basin, a Titus phase component at the expansive Pine
Tree Mound site (n=10), a Middle Caddo period
component at the Oak Hill Village site (41RK214)
on a tributary to the Sabine River (n=5, Rogers and
Perttula 2004; Perttula and Rogers 2012), and the
George E. Richey (n=10), William A. Ford (n=22),
and James E. Richey (n=6) sites in the Big Cypress
Creek basin (Fields et al. 2013).
A summed probability distribution of all the
corn dates from the Caddo area was produced using
Version 4.2 of OxCal and IntCal09 (Figure 2). The
majority of the calibrated age ranges at two sigma fall
after A.D. 1300 (see Table 1), with notable temporal
peaks at ca. A.D. 1350 and A.D. 1450, followed by
a plateau in probability density after ca. A.D. 1500.

Perttula, et al.—Corn is Life 161

Figure 1. The Southern Caddo area. Figure prepared by Sandra L. Hannum.

Figure 1. The Southern Caddo area.

Median calibrated ages from Table 1 plotted in
10 year intervals illustrate the same temporal trends
in corn dates from the Caddo sites (Figure 3). Corn
is present in low numbers of dated samples from as
early as ca. A.D. 900 until ca. A.D. 1300, but there
are significant increases in dated corn samples from
ca. A.D. 1330-1580. There are notable peaks in the
median calibrated age of dated samples of corn between A.D. 1341-1350, in the latter part of the Middle
Caddo period, between A.D. 1421-1430 at the beginning of the Late Caddo period, as well as between
A.D. 1561-1570, also in the Late Caddo period.
A few pre-A.D. 800 dates on corn come from
the George C. Davis site (see Story 1990). The
calibrated median ages of these six dates range
from A.D. 222-773. The OxCal data combination
process for these dates indicates that the early
George C. Davis dates occur in one group with a
2 sigma calibrated age range of A.D. 415-606 and
a median calibrated age of A.D. 506. There is also
a single pre-A.D. 800 date on corn from a Southwest Missouri Ozark rock shelter in Barry County

in the Northern Caddo area: Montgomery 4 (Fritz
1986:Tables 4.3 and 9.2), although it has a large (+
232 years) standard deviation and is not considered
particularly reliable. This date (SMU-1578) has a
calibrated two sigma age range of A.D. 55-1021,
with a calibrated median age of A.D. 553.3
It is possible that these pre-A.D. 800 corn dates
indicate that corn was being grown in parts of East
Texas and the western Ozark Highland as early as
ca. A.D. 400, during the latter part of the Woodland
period. Even if these dates are accurate, which
we consider dubious (see End Notes 2 and 3), the
cultivation and consumption of corn was sporadic
at best during those times.
TEMPORAL TRENDS IN CADDO
MAIZE CONSUMPTION FROM STABLE
CARBON ISOTOPE ANALYSES
Ratios of carbon and nitrogen stable 1isotopes
in human bone are used to trace back the food

B-316762

Battle (3LA1)

B-194414

Tx-825*

Tx-820*

Tx-824*

Tx-823B*

Robinson-Solesbee
(34HS9)

Clement (34MC8)

Clement (34MC8)

Clement (34MC8)

Clement (34MC8)

Oklahoma

Hanna (16RR4)

UGA-1770

Tx-579*

Battle (3LA1)

Louisiana

B-306763

Hedges (3HS60)

385 + 70

435 + 70

495 + 70

595 + 80

410 + 40

550 + 220

360 + 30

455 + 30

240 + 30

AD 1299-1370 (0.48),
AD 1380-1410 (0.20)
AD 1320-1351 (0.14),
AD 1391-1465 (0.54)
AD 1414-1518 (0.58),
AD 1594-1619 (0.10)
AD 1445-1523 (0.42),
AD 1573-1629 (0.27)

AD 1437-1495 (0.59),
AD 1602-1616 (0.10)

AD 1226-1531 (0.55),
AD 1538-1635 (0.13)

AD 1466-1522 (0.39),
AD 1575-1584 (0.05),
AD 1590-1625 (0.24)

AD 1412-1477 (0.68)

AD 1644-1668 (0.45),
AD 1783-1797 (0.23)

AD 1424-1646 (0.95)

AD 1396-1642 (0.94)

AD 1294-1521 (0.91)

AD 1271-1444 (0.95)

AD 1427-1524 (0.72),
AD 1558-1632 (0.23)

AD 1020-1697 (0.88)

AD 1526-1556 (0.05),
AD 1632-1682 (0.51),
AD 1762-1803 (0.29)
AD 1395-1523 (0.85),
AD 1574-1627 (0.09)
AD 1450-1530 (0.48),
AD 1540-1635 (0.48)

AD 1526

AD 1480

AD 1422

AD 1354

AD 1480

AD 1406

AD 1536

AD 1446

AD 1664

Conventional
1 Sigma
2 Sigma
Median Calibrated
Conventional
1 Sigma
2 Sigma
Median Calibrated
Radiocarbon Age
Calibrated Age
Calibrated Age
Age
Radiocarbon Age (B.P.) Calibrated Age
Calibrated Age
Age
(B.P.) and SD
Range**
Range**
and SD
Range**
Range**
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Arkansas

Site Name and
Assay
Site Name and
Assay
Trinomial
No.
Trinomial
No.
		

Table 1.
Caddo
radiocarbon
dates on
corn
Southwest
Arkansas,
Northwest
Louisiana,
Eastern
Oklahoma,
and and
EastEast
Texas.
Table
1. Caddo
radiocarbon
dates
onfrom
corn sites
fromin
sites
in Southwest
Arkansas,
Northwest
Louisiana,
Eastern
Oklahoma,
Texas.
Calibrations follow Version
4.2
of
OxCal
(Bronk
Ramsey
2013)
and
IntCal
(Reimer
et
al.
2009).
Calibrations follow Version 4.2 of OxCal (Bronk Ramsey 2013) and IntCal (Reimer et al. 2009).
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

162
Texas Archeological Society

951 + 72
896 + 85
851 + 108

Tx-906a*

M-1168*

Tx-3310*

George C. Davis
(41CE19)
George C. Davis
(41CE19)
George C. Davis
(41CE19)

1031 + 81

Tx-914a*
1011 + 81

1041 + 81

Tx-1308*

Tx-3270*

1061 + 72

Tx-3694*

George C. Davis
(41CE19)

1121 + 117

Tx-3307*

George C. Davis
(41CE19)
George C. Davis
(41CE19)
George C. Davis
(41CE19)
George C. Davis
(41CE19)

610 + 30

600 + 40

B-305694

B-236772

Pace McDonald
(41AN51)

Texas
Lang Pasture
(41AN38)

520 + 30

Ramos Creek
(34MC1030)

B-317796

Conventional
Radiocarbon Age
(B.P.) and SD

Site Name and
Assay
Trinomial
No.
		

AD 1041-1110 (0.28),
AD 1116-1213 (0.40)
AD 1046-1094 (0.16),
AD 1120-1141 (0.06),
AD 1148-1266 (0.45)

AD 892-1045 (0.60),
AD 1095-1120 (0.06)
AD 895-925 (0.10),
AD 937-1048 (0.45),
AD 1088-1122 (0.10)
AD 900-918 (0.05),
AD 966-1058 (0.37),
AD 1075-1155 (0.26)
AD 1020-1160 (0.68)

AD 890-1030 (0.68)

AD 776-1020 (0.68)

AD 1302-1329 (0.28),
AD 1341-1367 (0.27),
AD 1382-1396 (0.13)

AD 1306-1363 (0.54),
AD 1385-1400 (0.14)

AD 1404-1435 (0.68)

1 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

Table 1. (Continued)

AD 979-1309 (0.94)

AD 995-1271 (0.95)

AD 969-1226 (0.94)

AD 868-1216

AD 808-1184 (0.95)

AD 666-1059 (0.88),
AD 1065-1155 (0.10)
AD 800-1058 (0.84),
AD 1076-1155 (0.10)
AD 802-1168 (0.94)

AD 1295-1404 (0.95)

AD 1294-1411 (0.95)

AD 1324-1345 (0.11),
AD 1392-1443 (0.85)

2 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

AD 1163

AD 1131

AD 1096

AD 1028

AD 1004

AD 992

AD 970

AD 902

AD 1348

AD 1349

AD 1416

Median Calibrated
Age

Perttula, et al.—Corn is Life 163

470 + 30
470 + 30
390 + 30
390 + 30

B-319967
B-319967

B-319969
B-319969

B-327614
B-327614

Kitchen Branch
Kitchen Branch
(41CP220)
(41CP220)
Kitchen Branch
Kitchen Branch
(41CP220)
(41CP220)
Kitchen Branch
Kitchen Branch
(41CP220)
(41CP220)

Pilgrim’s Pride
Pilgrim’s Pride
(41CP304)
(41CP304)
Pilgrim’s
Pride
Pilgrim’s Pride
(41CP304)
(41CP304)
Pilgrim’s
Pride
Pilgrim’s
(41CP304)Pride
(41CP304)
Pilgrim’s
Pride
Pilgrim’s Pride
(41CP304)
(41CP304)

470 + 40
470 + 40

B-204251
B-204251

Kitchen Branch
Kitchen Branch
(41CP220)
(41CP220)

650 + 70
650 + 70
450 + 70
450 + 70
420 + 80
420 + 80
380 + 70
380 + 70

B-138860
B-138860

B-138856
B-138856

B-132240
B-132240

B-138863
B-138863

550 + 30
550 + 30

330 + 90
330 + 90

B-144428
B-144428

41CE299
41CE299

761 + 99
761 + 99

Tx-4340*
Tx-4340*
681 + 99
681 + 99

791 + 72
791 + 72

Tx-3276*
Tx-3276*

Tx-3274*
Tx-3274*

801 + 72
801 + 72

Tx-3267*
Tx-3267*

George C. Davis
George C. Davis
(41CE19)
(41CE19)
George
C. Davis
George C. Davis
(41CE19)
(41CE19)
George C. Davis
George
C. Davis
(41CE19)
(41CE19)

George C. Davis
George C. Davis
(41CE19)
(41CE19)

Conventional
Radiocarbon Age
(B.P.) and SD

Site Name and
Assay
Trinomial
No.
		

AD 1281-1325 (0.32),
AD 1344-1394
1281-1325 (0.36)
(0.32),
AD
AD
1344-1394
(0.36)
AD 1406-1515 (0.61),
AD 1406-1515 (0.61),
AD 1599-1618 (0.07)
AD
1599-1618 (0.50),
(0.07)
AD 1422-1522
AD
1422-1522
(0.50),
AD 1589-1625 (0.15)
AD 1447-1523
1589-1625 (0.40),
(0.15)
AD
AD 1447-1523 (0.40),
AD 1572-1630 (0.28)
AD 1572-1630 (0.28)

AD 1447-1496 (0.54),
AD 1602-1616
1447-1496 (0.12)
(0.54),
AD
AD 1602-1616 (0.12)

AD 1425-1446 (0.68)
AD 1425-1446 (0.68)

AD 1415-1450 (0.68)
AD 1415-1450 (0.68)

AD 1325-1344 (0.25),
AD 1394-1421
1325-1344 (0.44)
(0.25),
AD
AD 1394-1421 (0.44)

AD 1469-1644 (0.68)
AD 1469-1644 (0.68)

AD 1258-1399 (0.68)
AD 1258-1399 (0.68)

AD 1159-1306 (0.62),
AD 1364-1385
1159-1306 (0.06)
(0.62),
AD
AD 1364-1385 (0.06)

AD 1174-1281 (0.68)
AD 1174-1281 (0.68)

AD 1166-1278 (0.68)
AD 1166-1278 (0.68)

1 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

Table 1. (Continued)

AD 1425-1649 (0.95)
AD 1425-1649 (0.95)

AD 1320-1350 (0.05),
AD 1320-1350 (0.05),
AD 1391-1637 (0.91)
AD
1391-1637 (0.94)
(0.91)
AD 1394-1649
AD 1394-1649 (0.94)

AD 1252-1425 (0.95)
AD 1252-1425 (0.95)

AD 1441-1524 (0.69),
AD 1571-1631
1441-1524 (0.25)
(0.69),
AD
AD 1571-1631 (0.25)

AD 1409-1457 (0.95)
AD 1409-1457 (0.95)

AD 1396-1489 (0.94)
AD 1396-1489 (0.94)

AD 1310-1360 (0.40),
AD 1386-1435
1310-1360 (0.55)
(0.40),
AD
AD 1386-1435 (0.55)

AD 1418-1684 (0.86),
AD 1733-1807
1418-1684 (0.07)
(0.86),
AD
AD 1733-1807 (0.07)

AD 1041-1109 (0.10),
AD 1116-1302
1041-1109 (0.84)
(0.10),
AD
AD 1116-1302 (0.84)
AD 1040-1110 (0.10),
AD 1116-1332
1040-1110 (0.73),
(0.10),
AD
AD
1116-1332
(0.73),
AD 1337-1398 (0.12)
AD 1337-1398 (0.12)
AD 1155-1441 (0.95)
AD 1155-1441 (0.95)

AD 1040-1297 (0.95)
AD 1040-1297 (0.95)

2 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

AD 1531
AD 1531

AD 1500
AD 1500

AD 1463
AD 1463

AD 1338
AD 1338

AD 1488
AD 1488

AD 1435
AD 1435

AD 1435
AD 1435

AD 1396
AD 1396

AD 1569
AD 1569

AD 1309
AD 1309

AD 1239
AD 1239

AD 1224
AD 1224

AD 1216
AD 1216

Median Calibrated
Age

164
Texas Archeological Society

320 + 60
320 + 60
310 + 60
310 + 60
500 + 40
500 + 40

770 + 30
770 + 30
510 + 40
510 + 40
470 + 40
470 + 40
400 + 40
400 + 40
350 + 40
350 + 40
350 + 40
350 + 40
330 + 40
330 + 40
320 + 40
320 + 40

B-132244
B-132244
B-132245
B-132245

UGA-12888
UGA-12888

UGA-12892
UGA-12892

B-108169
B-108169

B-260380
B-260380
B-260381
B-260381
B-260378
B-260378

B-260365
B-260365
B-260389
B-260389
B-260375
B-260375

B-260397
B-260397

Pilgrim’s Pride
Pilgrim’s Pride
(41CP304)
(41CP304)Pride
Pilgrim’s
Pilgrim’s Pride
(41CP304)
(41CP304)
41HE139
41HE139

41HE343
41HE343

Hurricane Hill
Hurricane Hill
(41HP106)
(41HP106)
Pine Tree Mound
Pine Tree Mound
(41HS15)
(41HS15)
Pine
Tree Mound
Pine Tree Mound
(41HS15)
(41HS15)
Pine
Tree Mound
Pine Tree Mound
(41HS15)
(41HS15)
Pine Tree Mound
Pine Tree Mound
(41HS15)
(41HS15)
Pine
Tree Mound
Pine
Tree Mound
(41HS15)
(41HS15)
Pine Tree Mound
Pine
Tree Mound
(41HS15)
(41HS15)
Pine Tree Mound
Pine
Tree Mound
(41HS15)
(41HS15)

380 + 40
380 + 40

Conventional
Radiocarbon Age
(B.P.) and SD

Site Name and
Assay
Trinomial
No.
		

AD 1403-1441 (0.68)
AD 1403-1441 (0.68)
AD 1415-1450 (0.68)
AD 1415-1450 (0.68)
AD 1442-1513 (0.57),
AD 1601-1617
1442-1513 (0.11)
(0.57),
AD
AD 1601-1617 (0.11)
AD 1475-1524 (0.29),
AD 1570-1631
1475-1524 (0.36)
(0.29),
AD
AD
1570-1631
(0.36)
AD 1475-1524 (0.29),
AD 1570-1631
1475-1524 (0.36)
(0.29),
AD
AD
1570-1631
(0.36)
AD 1495-1530 (0.20),
AD 1538-1602
1495-1530 (0.37),
(0.20),
AD
AD
1538-1602
(0.37),
AD 1616-1635 (0.11)
AD
AD 1616-1635
1515-1600 (0.11)
(0.54),
AD
1515-1600
AD 1618-1641 (0.54),
(0.15)
AD 1618-1641 (0.15)

AD 1448-1521 (0.51),
AD 1592-1620
1448-1521 (0.18)
(0.51),
AD
AD 1592-1620 (0.18)
AD 1225-1275 (0.68)
AD 1225-1275 (0.68)

AD 1495-1602 (0.54),
AD 1615-1642
1495-1602 (0.14)
(0.54),
AD
AD 1495-1602
1615-1642 (0.53),
(0.14)
AD
AD 1616-1646
1495-1602 (0.15)
(0.53),
AD
AD 1616-1646 (0.15)
AD 1408-1442 (0.68)
AD 1408-1442 (0.68)

1 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

Table 1. (Continued)

AD 1468-1649 (0.95)
AD 1468-1649 (0.95)

AD 1318-1353 (0.15),
AD 1390-1450
1318-1353 (0.81)
(0.15),
AD
AD 1396-1489
1390-1450 (0.94)
(0.81)
AD
AD 1396-1489 (0.94)
AD 1432-1527 (0.67),
AD 1556-1633
1432-1527 (0.29)
(0.67),
AD
AD 1556-1633 (0.29)
AD 1455-1637 (0.95)
AD 1455-1637 (0.95)
AD 1455-1637 (0.95)
AD 1455-1637 (0.95)
AD 1465-1645 (0.95)
AD 1465-1645 (0.95)

AD 1320-1351 (0.10),
AD 1390-1455
1320-1351 (0.86)
(0.10),
AD
AD 1390-1455 (0.86)
AD 1441-1530 (0.55),
AD 1540-1635
1441-1530 (0.40)
(0.55),
AD
AD 1540-1635 (0.40)
AD 1217-1282 (0.95)
AD 1217-1282 (0.95)

AD 1447-1665 (0.94)
AD 1447-1665 (0.94)
AD 1448-1668 (0.93)
AD 1448-1668 (0.93)

2 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

AD 1562
AD 1562

AD 1552
AD 1552
AD 1552
AD 1552
AD 1559
AD 1559

AD 1418
AD 1418
AD 1435
AD 1435
AD 1490
AD 1490

AD 1253
AD 1253

AD 1513
AD 1513

AD 1423
AD 1423

AD 1563
AD 1563
AD 1568
AD 1568

Median Calibrated
Age

Perttula, et al.—Corn is Life 165

300 + 40
300 + 40
290 + 40
290 + 40
250 + 40
250 + 40

1081 + 64
1081 + 64
871 + 72
871 + 72
601 + 81
601 + 81
570 + 40
570 + 40
360 + 60
360 + 60

B-260384
B-260384
B-260393
B-260393
B-260383
B-260383

B-88418
B-88418

B-88419
B-88419
B-88423
B-88423

Tx-4873*
Tx-4873*
Tx-4875*
Tx-4875*

Tx-4258*
Tx-4258*

B-201987
B-201987

B-124359
B-124359

Pine Tree Mound
Pine
Tree Mound
(41HS15)
(41HS15)
Pine Tree Mound
Pine
Tree Mound
(41HS15)
(41HS15)
Pine Tree Mound
Pine
Tree Mound
(41HS15)
(41HS15)

Ray (41LR135)
Ray (41LR135)

Ray (41LR135)
Ray (41LR135)
Ray (41LR135)
Ray (41LR135)

Washington Square
Washington Square
(41NA49)
(41NA49) Square
Washington
Washington Square
(41NA49)
(41NA49)
Washington Square
Washington Square
(41NA49)
(41NA49)
Beech Ridge
Beech Ridge
(41NA242)
(41NA242)
Tom Moore
Tom Moore
(41PN149)
(41PN149)

910 + 50
910 + 50
890 + 50
890 + 50

1000 + 50
1000 + 50

Conventional
Radiocarbon Age
(B.P.) and SD

Site Name and
Assay
Trinomial
No.
		

AD 1520-1593 (0.49),
AD 1619-1648
1520-1593 (0.19)
(0.49),
AD 1619-1648
(0.19)
1521-1592 (0.46),
AD 1620-1653
1521-1592 (0.22)
(0.46),
AD 1620-1653
(0.22)
1527-1555 (0.13),
AD 1632-1670
1527-1555 (0.36),
(0.13),
AD 1780-1799
1632-1670 (0.15)
(0.36),
AD 1780-1799 (0.15)
AD 986-1048 (0.44),
AD 986-1048
1087-1123(0.44),
(0.19),
AD 1138-1150
1087-1123 (0.06)
(0.19),
1138-1150 (0.38),
(0.06)
AD 1040-1110
1040-1110 (0.30)
(0.38),
AD 1116-1172
1116-1172 (0.24),
(0.30)
AD 1047-1091
1047-1091 (0.09),
(0.24),
AD 1121-1140
1121-1140 (0.35)
(0.09),
AD 1149-1213
AD 1149-1213 (0.35)
AD 894-1017 (0.68)
AD 894-1017 (0.68)
AD 1045-1095 (0.21),
1045-1095 (0.09),
(0.21),
AD 1120-1141
1120-1141 (0.39)
(0.09),
AD 1147-1225
1147-1225 (0.50),
(0.39)
AD 1299-1370
1299-1370 (0.18)
(0.50),
AD 1380-1407
AD 1380-1407 (0.18)
AD 1315-1356 (0.42),
1315-1356 (0.27)
(0.42),
AD 1389-1414
AD 1389-1414 (0.27)
AD 1459-1524 (0.34),
1459-1524 (0.31)
(0.34),
AD 1570-1631
AD 1570-1631 (0.31)

1 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

Table 1. (Continued)

AD 1298-1370 (0.57),
1298-1370 (0.38)
(0.57),
AD 1380-1429
AD 1380-1429 (0.38)
AD 1442-1646 (0.95)
AD 1442-1646 (0.95)

AD 1268-1444 (0.95)
AD 1268-1444 (0.95)

AD 776-1045 (0.93)
AD 776-1045 (0.93)
AD 1027-1266 (0.95)
AD 1027-1266 (0.95)

AD 1025-1217 (0.95)
AD 1025-1217 (0.95)
AD 1027-1226 (0.95)
AD 1027-1226 (0.95)

AD 1475-1662 (0.95)
AD 1475-1662 (0.95)
AD 1482-1666 (0.94)
AD 1482-1666 (0.94)
AD 1513-1601 (0.24),
AD 1616-1684
1513-1601 (0.42),
(0.24),
AD 1735-1805
1616-1684 (0.23)
(0.42),
AD 1735-1805
1933-1955 (0.23)
(0.06)
AD 1933-1955
(0.06)
952-1162 (0.92)
AD 952-1162 (0.92)

2 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

AD 1545
AD 1545

AD 1354
AD 1354

AD 1352
AD 1352

AD 949
AD 949
AD 1155
AD 1155

AD 1118
AD 1118
AD 1136
AD 1136

AD 1038
AD 1038

AD 1567
AD 1567
AD 1572
AD 1572
AD 1654
AD 1654

Median Calibrated
Age

166
Texas Archeological Society

810 + 100
810 + 100
640 + 40
640 + 40
630 + 40
630 + 40
610 + 80
610 + 80
570 + 40
570 + 40
570 + 40
570 + 40
660 + 90
660 + 90

B-73939
B-73939
B-110061
B-110061
B-110065
B-110065
B-73940
B-73940
B-110067
B-110067
B-110066
B-110066
B-144818
B-144818

950 + 70
950 + 70
890 + 60
890 + 60

B-129983
B-129983
B-129884
B-129884
630 + 80
630 + 80

350 + 30
350 + 30
310 + 30
310 + 30

B-344091
B-344091
B-344087
B-344087

B-166763
B-166763

660 + 30
660 + 30

B-344094
B-344094

Murvaul Creek
Murvaul
Creek
(41PN175)
(41PN175)
Murvaul Creek
Murvaul
Creek
(41PN175)
(41PN175)
Murvaul
Creek
Murvaul
Creek
(41PN175)
(41PN175)
Hudnall-Pirtle
Hudnall-Pirtle
(41RK4)
(41RK4)
Hudnall-Pirtle
Hudnall-Pirtle
(41RK4)
(41RK4)

Nawi haia ina
Nawi
haia ina
(41RK170)
(41RK170)
Oak Hill Village
Oak
Hill Village
(41RK214)
(41RK214)
Oak Hill Village
Oak
Hill Village
(41RK214)
(41RK214)
Oak Hill Village
Oak
Hill Village
(41RK214)
(41RK214)
Oak Hill Village
Oak
Hill Village
(41RK214)
(41RK214)
Oak Hill Village
Oak
Hill Village
(41RK214)
(41RK214)
Oak
Hill Village
Oak
Hill Village
(41RK214)
(41RK214)
41RK243
41RK243

Conventional
Radiocarbon Age
(B.P.) and SD

Site Name and
Assay
Trinomial
No.
		

AD 1285-1306 (0.33),
1285-1306 (0.35)
(0.33),
AD 1363-1385
AD 1363-1385 (0.35)
AD 1481-1523 (0.29),
1481-1523 (0.39)
(0.29),
AD 1572-1630
AD 1572-1630
1521-1591 (0.39)
(0.52),
AD 1521-1591
1620-1643 (0.52),
(0.16)
AD 1620-1643 (0.16)
AD 1022-1159 (0.68)
AD 1022-1159 (0.68)
AD 1045-1095 (0.24),
AD 1045-1095
1120-1141 (0.24),
(0.10),
AD 1120-1141
1148-1214 (0.10),
(0.34)
AD 1148-1214 (0.34)
AD 1288-1330 (0.29),
AD 1288-1330
1339-1397 (0.29),
(0.40)
AD 1339-1397 (0.40)
AD 1051-1082 (0.09),
AD 1051-1082
1152-1284 (0.09),
(0.57)
AD 1152-1284
1290-1319 (0.57)
(0.29),
AD 1290-1319
1352-1390 (0.29),
(0.39)
AD 1352-1390
1295-1320 (0.39)
(0.26),
AD 1295-1320
1350-1391 (0.26),
(0.42)
AD 1350-1391
1297-1402 (0.42)
(0.68)
AD 1297-1402 (0.68)
AD 1315-1356 (0.42),
AD 1315-1356
1389-1414 (0.42),
(0.27)
AD 1389-1414
1315-1356 (0.27)
(0.42),
AD 1315-1356
1389-1414 (0.42),
(0.27)
AD 1389-1414
1279-1320 (0.27)
(0.34),
1279-1320 (0.34)
(0.34),
AD 1350-1391
AD 1350-1391 (0.34)

1 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

Table 1. (Continued)

AD 1020-1315 (0.92)
AD 1020-1315 (0.92)
AD 1281-1400 (0.95)
AD 1281-1400 (0.95)
AD 1285-1401 (0.95)
AD 1285-1401 (0.95)
AD 1266-1441 (0.95)
AD 1266-1441 (0.95)
AD 1298-1370 (0.57),
AD 1298-1370
1380-1429 (0.57),
(0.38)
AD 1380-1429
1298-1370 (0.38)
(0.57),
1298-1370 (0.38)
(0.57),
AD 1380-1429
AD 1380-1429
1260-1412 (0.38)
(0.95)
AD 1260-1412 (0.95)

AD 1253-1439 (0.95)
AD 1253-1439 (0.95)

AD 970-1225 (0.95)
AD 970-1225 (0.95)
AD 1026-1253 (0.95)
AD 1026-1253 (0.95)

AD 1277-1322 (0.48),
1277-1322 (0.48)
(0.48),
AD 1348-1393
AD 1348-1393 (0.48)
AD 1457-1635 (0.95)
AD 1457-1635 (0.95)
AD 1485-1650 (0.95)
AD 1485-1650 (0.95)

2 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

AD 1197
AD 1197
AD 1348
AD 1348
AD 1349
AD 1349
AD 1350
AD 1350
AD 1354
AD 1354
AD 1354
AD 1354
AD 1333
AD 1333

AD 1344
AD 1344

AD 1096
AD 1096
AD 1136
AD 1136

AD 1555
AD 1555
AD 1563
AD 1563

AD 1340
AD 1340

Median Calibrated
Age

Perttula, et al.—Corn is Life 167

620 + 40
500 + 40
500 + 40
680 + 40

420 + 40
50
150
150 + 40

B-173088
B-210925

B-210925
B-289204

B-289204
B-289208

B-289208
B-119006

B-119006
B-229321

B-229321

41SM404

41SM404
Ear Spool (41TT653)

Ear Spool (41TT653)

George E. Richey
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
(41TT851)

620 + 40

B-173088

Broadway
(41SM273)
Broadway
(41SM273)
Leaning
Rock
(41SM325)
Leaning Rock
(41SM325)
41SM404

830 + 30
830
790 + 30
790
770 + 30
770
730 + 30
730
680 + 30
680
620 + 30
620 + 30

B-300034

B-300034
B-300039

B-300039
B-300027

B-300027
B-300038

B-300038
B-300046

B-300046
B-300043

B-300043

600 + 40
420 + 50

680
600 + 40

Conventional
Radiocarbon Age
(B.P.) and SD

Site Name and
Assay
Trinomial
No.
		

AD 1262-1287
1279-1300 (0.68)
(0.46),
AD 1368-1381 (0.22)
AD 1279-1300
1298-1324 (0.46),
(0.27),
AD 1368-1381
1346-1371 (0.22)
(0.27),
AD 1298-1324
1379-1393 (0.27),
(0.14)
AD 1346-1371 (0.27),
AD 1379-1393 (0.14)

AD 1225-1275
1262-1287 (0.68)

AD 1223-1264
1225-1275 (0.68)

AD 1185-1255
1223-1264 (0.68)

AD 1408-1442 (0.68)
AD 1276-1306 (0.42),
AD 1363-1385 (0.27)
AD 1276-1306
1306-1363 (0.42),
(0.54),
AD 1363-1385
1385-1400 (0.27)
(0.14)
AD 1306-1363 (0.54),
AD 1385-1400
1430-1512 (0.14)
(0.60),
AD 1601-1616 (0.08)
1430-1512 (0.12),
(0.60),
AD 1669-1697
1601-1616 (0.24),
(0.08)
AD 1726-1780
1669-1697 (0.07),
(0.12),
AD 1798-1814
1726-1780 (0.10),
(0.24),
AD 1851-1877
1798-1814 (0.12)
(0.07),
AD 1917-1945
AD 1851-1877 (0.10),
AD 1917-1945
1185-1255 (0.12)
(0.68)

AD 1297-1325 (0.26),
AD 1344-1394 (0.42)
AD 1297-1325 (0.26),
1344-1394 (0.68)
(0.42)
AD 1408-1442

1 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

Table 1. (Continued)

AD 1224-1297
1270-1317 (0.95)
(0.60)
AD 1354-1390 (0.36)
AD 1270-1317
1292-1400 (0.60)
(0.95)
AD 1354-1390 (0.36)
AD 1292-1400 (0.95)

AD 1217-1282
1224-1297 (0.95)

AD 1206-1280
1217-1282 (0.93)
(0.95)

AD 1160-1265
1206-1280 (0.95)
(0.93)

AD 1160-1265 (0.95)

AD 1288-1405 (0.95)
AD 1320-1351 (0.10),
AD 1390-1455 (0.86)
AD 1320-1351 (0.10),
AD 1390-1455
1263-1325 (0.86)
(0.57),
AD 1344-1394 (0.39)
AD 1263-1325
1294-1411 (0.57),
(0.95)
AD 1344-1394 (0.39)
AD 1294-1411 (0.95)
AD 1415-1527 (0.71),
AD 1555-1633 (0.25)
1415-1527 (0.46),
(0.71),
AD 1665-1785
1555-1633 (0.33),
(0.25)
AD 1795-1893
1665-1785 (0.17)
(0.46),
AD 1906-1952
AD 1795-1893 (0.33),
AD 1906-1952 (0.17)

AD 1288-1405 (0.95)

2 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

AD 1350

AD 1300
1350

AD 1274
1300

AD 1253
1274

AD 1242
1253

AD 1215
1242

AD 1215

AD 1800

1480
AD 1800

AD 1349
AD 1480

AD 1307
1349

AD 1423
AD 1307

AD 1349
AD 1423

AD 1349

Median Calibrated
Age

168
Texas Archeological Society

William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)

600 + 30
600 + 30
600 + 30
580
580
550 + 30
550
520 + 30
520 + 30
520 + 30
40
520 + 40

B-300094
B-300074

B-300074
B-300092

B-300092
B-300103

B-300103
B-300096

B-300096
B-300082

B-300082
B-300059

B-300059

620 + 30

290 + 30
620 + 30

310 + 30
290

330 + 30
310 + 30

620 + 30
330 + 30

Conventional
Radiocarbon Age
(B.P.) and SD
620 + 30

B-300094

Site Name and
Assay
Trinomial
No.
		
George E. Richey
B-300037
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
B-300037
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
B-300044
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
B-300044
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
B-300048
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
B-300048
B-300035
(41TT851)
George E. Richey
B-300035
(41TT851)
William
A. Ford
B-300090
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
B-300090
(41TT852)

AD 1404-1435
1332-1338 (0.68)
(0.05),
AD 1397-1439 (0.63)
AD 1332-1338 (0.05),
AD 1397-1439 (0.63)

1 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**
AD 1298-1324 (0.27),
AD 1346-1371 (0.27),
AD 1379-1393
1298-1324 (0.14)
(0.27),
AD 1496-1530
1346-1371 (0.18),
(0.27),
AD 1540-1602
1379-1393 (0.39),
(0.14)
AD 1616-1634
1496-1530 (0.12)
(0.18),
AD 1521-1591
1540-1602 (0.52),
(0.39),
AD 1620-1643
1616-1634 (0.16)
(0.12)
AD 1522-1574
1521-1591 (0.46),
(0.52),
1620-1643 (0.23)
(0.16)
AD 1627-1651
AD 1522-1574 (0.46),
1627-1651 (0.27),
(0.23)
AD 1298-1324
AD 1346-1371 (0.27),
1298-1324 (0.14)
(0.27),
AD 1379-1393
AD 1346-1371 (0.27),
AD 1379-1393 (0.14)
AD 1307-1362 (0.55),
AD 1386-1399 (0.13)
AD 1307-1362 (0.55),
AD 1386-1399 (0.13)
1307-1362 (0.46),
(0.55),
AD 1317-1354
AD 1386-1399
1389-1408 (0.13)
(0.22)
AD 1317-1354
1325-1344 (0.46),
(0.25),
AD 1389-1408
1394-1421 (0.22)
(0.44)
AD 1325-1344
1404-1435 (0.25),
(0.68)
AD 1394-1421 (0.44)
AD 1404-1435 (0.68)

Table 1. (Continued)

1297-1409 (0.63),
(0.95)
AD 1300-1369
AD 1381-1419 (0.32)
AD 1300-1369
1310-1360 (0.63),
(0.40),
AD 1381-1419
1386-1435 (0.32)
(0.55)
AD 1310-1360
1324-1345 (0.40),
(0.11),
AD 1386-1435
1392-1443 (0.55)
(0.85)
AD 1324-1345 (0.11),
AD 1392-1443 (0.85)
AD 1324-1345
1316-1356 (0.11),
(0.21),
AD 1392-1443
1388-1448 (0.85)
(0.74)
AD 1316-1356 (0.21),
AD 1388-1448 (0.74)

AD 1297-1409 (0.95)

AD 1297-1409 (0.95)

AD 1292-1400 (0.95)

AD 1492-1603
1485-1650 (0.65),
(0.95)
AD 1615-1663 (0.31)
AD 1492-1603 (0.65),
1615-1663 (0.95)
(0.31)
AD 1292-1400

AD 1477-1643 (0.95)
AD 1485-1650 (0.95)

AD 1292-1400 (0.95)
AD 1477-1643 (0.95)

2 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**
AD 1292-1400 (0.95)

AD 1413

AD 1416
1413

AD 1416

AD 1396
1416

AD 1348
1396

AD 1347
1348

AD 1347

AD 1347

AD 1350

AD 1567
AD 1350

AD 1567
1563

AD 1562
AD 1563

AD 1350
AD 1562

AD 1350

Median Calibrated
Age

Perttula, et al.—Corn is Life 169

Conventional
Radiocarbon Age
(B.P.) and SD

510 + 30
510 + 30
490 + 30
490 + 30
460 + 30
450 + 30
400 + 30
370 + 30
360 + 40
300 + 30
300 + 30
290 + 30
280 + 30
280 + 30

Site Name and
Assay
Trinomial
No.
		

B-300078

B-300089

B-300068

B-300084

B-300087

B-300081

B-300083

B-300073

B-300105

B-300099

B-300080

B-300056

B-300100

B-300088

William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
William A. Ford
(41TT852)
AD 1444-1492 (0.61),
AD 1603-1611 (0.07)
AD 1454-1519 (0.49),
AD 1594-1619 (0.19)
AD 1465-1522 (0.36),
AD 1574-1628 (0.32)
AD 1522-1575 (0.46),
AD 1625-1646 (0.18)
AD 1522-1575 (0.46),
AD 1625-1646 (0.18)
AD 1522-1574 (0.46),
AD 1627-1651 (0.23)
AD 1523-1571 (0.38),
AD 1630-1660 (0.30)
AD 1523-1571 (0.38),
AD 1630-1660 (0.30)

AD 1427-1454 (0.68)

AD 1425-1450 (0.68)

AD 1417-1440 (0.68)

AD 1417-1440 (0.68)

AD 1410-1435 (0.68)

AD 1410-1435 (0.68)

1 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

Table 1. (Continued)

AD 1489-1604 (0.69),
AD 1610-1654 (0.26)
AD 1489-1604 (0.69),
AD 1610-1654 (0.26)
AD 1492-1603 (0.65),
AD 1615-1663 (0.31)
AD 1513-1601 (0.54),
AD 1616-1666 (0.38)
AD 1513-1601 (0.54)
AD 1616-1666 (0.38)

AD 1436-1523 (0.77),
AD 1574-1626 (0.19)
AD 1447-1528 (0.55),
AD 1553-1634 (0.40)
AD 1450-1635 (0.95)

AD 1414-1454 (0.95)

AD 1412-1469 (0.95)

AD 1403-1450 (0.95)

AD 1328-1341 (0.05),
AD 1395-1445 (0.91)
AD 1328-1341 (0.05),
AD 1395-1445 (0.91)
AD 1403-1450 (0.95)

2 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**

AD 1578

AD 1578

AD 1567

AD 1564

AD 1564

AD 1542

AD 1515

AD 1478

AD 1442

AD 1439

AD 1428

AD 1428

AD 1421

AD 1421

Median Calibrated
Age

170
Texas Archeological Society

Conventional
Radiocarbon Age
(B.P.)
380 +and
30 SD

1 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**
AD 1450-1515 (0.54),

2 Sigma
Calibrated Age
Range**
AD 1445-1525 (0.62),

*C13/C12
isotopicInc.;
value
for these samples
assumedTx=University
to be -10.0 o/oo
for purposes of estimating the conventional radiocarbon age
B=Beta
Analytic,
UGA=University
of isGeorgia;
of Texas
**age ranges
with probabilities
of samples
less thanis0.05
are nottolisted
on this
*C13/C12
isotopic
value for these
assumed
be -10.0
o/ootable
for purposes of estimating the conventional radiocarbon age
**age ranges with probabilities of less than 0.05 are not listed on this table

AD 1190
AD 1190

AD 1563
AD
AD 1564
1563
AD 1564
AD
AD 1578
1564
AD 1578
AD 1578
AD 1190

AD 1563

AD 1560
AD 1560

AD 1503
AD
AD 1560
1503
AD 1560
AD 1560
AD 1560

AD 1503

Median Calibrated
Age

(41TT853)
AD 1600-1617 (0.14)
AD 1558-1632 (0.34)
James E. Richey
B-300116
380 + 30
AD 1450-1515 (0.54),
AD 1445-1525 (0.62),
James
E.
Richey
B-300109
340
+
30
AD
1491-1526
(0.23),
AD
(0.95)
James
E. Richey
B-300116
380 + 30
AD 1450-1515
AD 1470-1640
1445-1525
(41TT853)
1600-1617 (0.54),
(0.14)
1558-1632 (0.62),
(0.34)
(41TT853)
AD
1557-1603
(0.31),
(41TT853)
AD 1600-1617
AD 1558-1632
James E. Richey
B-300109
340 + 30
1491-1526 (0.14)
(0.23),
1470-1640 (0.34)
(0.95)
AD
(0.15)
James
E. Richey
B-300109
340 + 30
AD 1610-1632
1491-1526
AD 1470-1640 (0.95)
(41TT853)
1557-1603 (0.23),
(0.31),
James
E. Richey
B-300117
340 + 30
AD
(0.23),
AD 1470-1640 (0.95)
(41TT853)
AD 1491-1526
1557-1603
1610-1632 (0.31),
(0.15)
(41TT853)
AD
1557-1603
(0.31),
AD 1610-1632
James E. Richey
B-300117
340 + 30
1491-1526 (0.15)
(0.23),
AD 1470-1640 (0.95)
AD
(0.15)
James
E. Richey
B-300117
340 + 30
AD 1610-1632
1491-1526
AD 1470-1640 (0.95)
(41TT853)
1557-1603 (0.23),
(0.31),
(41TT853)
AD 1557-1603
1610-1632 (0.31),
(0.15)
James E. Richey
B-300112
320 + 30
AD
AD 1482-1646 (0.95)
AD 1518-1594
1610-1632 (0.54),
(0.15)
(41TT853)
AD 1619-1640 (0.15)
James E. Richey
B-300112
320 + 30
AD 1518-1594 (0.54),
AD 1482-1646 (0.95)
James
E.
B-300113
300
AD
(0.46),
AD
James
E. Richey
Richey
B-300112
320 +
+ 30
30
AD 1522-1575
1518-1594
AD 1489-1604
1482-1646 (0.69),
(0.95)
(41TT853)
1619-1640 (0.54),
(0.15)
(41TT853)
AD
1625-1646
(0.18)
AD
1610-1654
(0.26)
(41TT853)
AD
1619-1640
(0.15)
James E. Richey
B-300113
300 + 30
1522-1575 (0.46),
AD 1489-1604 (0.69),
James
E.
B-300115
280
AD
(0.38),
AD
(0.54),
James
E. Richey
Richey
B-300113
300 +
+ 30
30
AD 1523-1571
1522-1575
AD 1513-1601
1489-1604
(41TT853)
1625-1646 (0.46),
(0.18)
1610-1654 (0.69),
(0.26)
(41TT853)
AD
1630-1660
(0.30)
AD
1616-1666
(0.38)
(41TT853)
AD 1625-1646
AD 1610-1654
James E. Richey
B-300115
280 + 30
1523-1571 (0.18)
(0.38),
1513-1601 (0.26)
(0.54),
James
E. Richey
B-300115
280 + 30
AD 1523-1571
AD 1513-1601
(41TT853)
1630-1660 (0.38),
(0.30)
1616-1666 (0.54),
(0.38)
Boxed
Springs
B-288476
850 + 40
AD
AD
(41TT853)
AD 1158-1252
1630-1660 (0.68)
(0.30)
AD 1046-1093
1616-1666 (0.12),
(0.38)
(41UR30)
AD 1148-1267 (0.79)
Boxed Springs
B-288476
850 + 40
AD 1158-1252 (0.68)
AD 1046-1093 (0.12),
Boxed
Springs
B-288476
850 + 40
AD 1158-1252 (0.68)
AD 1046-1093
(41UR30)
1148-1267 (0.12),
(0.79)
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
(41UR30)
AD 1148-1267 (0.79)
B=Beta Analytic, Inc.; UGA=University of Georgia; Tx=University of Texas
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
*C13/C12
isotopic value for these samples is assumed to be -10.0 o/oo for purposes of estimating the conventional radiocarbon age
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
B=Betaranges
Analytic,
UGA=University
of 0.05
Georgia;
Tx=University
Texas
**age
with Inc.;
probabilities
of less than
are not
listed on thisoftable

Site Name and
Assay
Trinomial
No.
		
James E. Richey
B-300116

Table 1. (Continued)

Perttula, et al.—Corn is Life 171

Texas Archeological Society

Probability density

172

Calendar date (AD)
Figure 2. A summed probability distribution for calibrated dates on corn samples from Caddo sites in Arkansas, Louisiana,
Oklahoma, and Texas.

Figure 3. Median calibrated ages of corn samples, in 10 year intervals, from Caddo sites in Arkansas, Louisiana,
Oklahoma, and Texas. Figure prepared by Lance Trask.

Perttula, et al.—Corn is Life 173
chain a particular person had over their lifetime,
C3 and C4 plant groups utilize distinct photosynthetic pathways that incorporate different amounts
of stable carbon isotopes (C12 and C13) in their
tissues. In C3 plants, photosynthesis discriminates
against C13. This results in lower δ13C values than
in C4 plants, which are adapted to more sunlight
and higher temperatures. These values are carried
through the food chain to consumers. The Gulf
Coastal Plain where the Caddo people lived until
the mid-19th century is a C3 plant environment, but
corn is an introduced C4 species. Thus, once Caddo
peoples began consuming corn, the carbon stable
isotope ratio in their bones increased to reflect the
increased amounts of C4 foods in their diet.
Similarly, nitrogen stable isotopes (N14 and
15
N ) are the ultimate result of how plants obtain
their nitrogen, either symbiotically or through
direct absorption. Nitrogen stable isotope studies
have been most successful in showing the difference between marine and terrestrial food webs and
in examining trophic levels.
In stable carbon isotope studies both collagen
and apatite of bone can be examined to better understand diet. Apatite is the mineral component of
bone and preserves over a greater length of time
than collagen. Animal studies have shown that
apatite represents the whole diet whereas collagen
represents the carbon from protein contribution to
the diet. Collagen is the main protein in the organic
component of bone.
In all, 137 stable isotope results are available
from the bioarcheological study of Caddo individuals in the southern Caddo area (Table 2; see Wilson
and Perttula 2013). Most of these measure C13 in
bone collagen. It is important to note that we used
the 16 individuals for which two samples have been
run to give an idea of the standard of error among
different laboratory facilities. The mean difference
between samples for carbon collagen from the
same individual is 0.71‰; we will return to this
standard of error below.
The samples are from 35 Caddo sites. Nineteen
results from the 16 individuals from the Crenshaw
site (3MI6) on the Red River are included here,
while samples run on individuals represented by
skull and mandible features have been excluded
due to their questionable cultural affiliation
(Schambach et al. 2011). The majority of the
stable isotope testing for the Southern Caddo area
is from East Texas (n=89, 65 percent of the overall
sample), followed by Arkansas (n=33, 24 percent)

and Louisiana (n=15, 11 percent). The individuals
tested are from a range of contexts, including
single and multiple interments, and different types
of sites, including mound centers and settlements.
The 33 samples from Arkansas in the Southern
Caddo area are estimated to range from the Formative Caddo to Historic Caddo (post-A.D. 1680)
periods with the majority of samples (85 percent)
dating to the Formative period (see Table 2). The
C13 collagen samples indicate that there was little
to no C4 contribution to the protein portion of the
diet in the Formative Caddo period, supporting
our conclusion that the pre-A.D. 800 dates on corn
from the George C. Davis site and the Montgomery Farm site in southwest Missouri are suspect.
The two samples from the Middle Caddo period
Ferguson (3HE63) site have nearly identical C13
collagen values to the Historic Caddo samples from
the Cedar Grove (3LA97) site, and samples from
both sites indicate a significant amount of C4 in the
protein portion of the diet. No C13 apatite values
are available from Arkansas and the 10 N15 values
are all from the Crenshaw site. These nitrogen
values (-9.30 + 0.82‰) can be used as a baseline
for later determinations of the impact of corn on
trophic levels.
There are 15 stable isotope results from 14
individuals from Louisiana (see Table 2). These
are from the Hanna (16RR4), Belcher Mound
(16CD13), and McLelland (16BO236) sites. These
burials date from the Early to the Historic Caddo
periods. The C13 collagen samples show a clear and
dramatic increase in the amount of C4 in the protein
portion of the diet, with little to no C4 in the diet at
Hanna, a multi-component Early to Middle Caddo
period site (Thomas et al. 1980). In contrast, the
C13 apatite and N15 stable isotopes available from
the Historic McLelland sample (see Table 2) show
apatite signatures that indicate that approximately
25 percent of the diet originated in C4 sources.
Nitrogen values from McLelland clearly show that
the two infants were nursing and their mothers
were consuming C4 plants (presumably corn). The
remaining five adult values show one outlier with
low protein and little C4 while the others have a
higher quantity of protein in their diet but similar
amount of maize in the diet.
The 89 samples from East Texas Caddo sites
date from the Formative through Historic Caddo
periods (see Table 2). There are 77 results for C13
collagen, 49 for C13 apatite, and 32 for N15. Stable
isotope values indicate that maize consumption

1
13
8

Louisiana
Oklahoma
Texas

2
17
20

Arkansas
Oklahoma
Texas

8
8
38

Louisiana
Oklahoma
Texas

-17.4 ± 2.5
-12.7 ± 3.6
-16.3 ± 3.3

54

Late Caddo period (ca. A.D. 1400-1680)
Mean values
-15.9 ± 3.5

-13.6 ± 1.0
-14.6 ± 3.1
-15.1 ± 2.3

39

Middle Caddo period (ca. A.D. 1200-1400)
Mean values
-14.8 ± 2.6

-19.6
-17.3 ± 2.7
-18.5 ± 2.0

22

Early Caddo period (ca. A.D. 1000-1200)
Mean values
-17.9 ± 2.5

28
20
5

5

14

19
–
–		
-8.0 ± 1.7
19

-8.0 ± 1.7

–
–
–		
-9.8 ± 2.1
14

-9.8 ± 2.1

–
–
–		
-10.4 ± 2.4
5

-10.4 ± 2.4

–		
–		
-9.7 ± 2.0
4

-20.2 ± 1.3
-19.2 ± 1.3
-17.2 ± 3.0

Arkansas
Oklahoma
Texas

4

9.7 ± 0.8		
9.3 ± 3.3		

9.4 ± 2.6		

10.5 ± 0.8		
9.2 ± 2.3		

10.2 ± 1.5		

10.1 ± 0.7		
9.3 ± 1.0		

9.9 ± 0.9		

9.3 ± 0.8		
10.0 ± 0.7		
8.9 ± 0.2		

9.6 ± 0.8		

δ13C ± s.d.
N
δ15N ± s.d.		
apatite		collagen

-9.7 ± 2.0

δ13Ccol ± s.d.
N
collagen		

Late Woodland-Formative Caddo period (ca. A.D. 400-1000)
Mean values
-19.5 ± 1.8
47

Time Period
(A.D.)

7
11

18

17
7

24

9
4

13

10
16
3

29

N

Table 2. Summary of Southern Caddo and Oklahoma’s Arkansas river basin stable isotope means and adjusted standard deviations.

174
Texas Archeological Society

-14.4 ± 0.4
-14.7 ± 2.2
-13.7 ±0.7

3
5
7

–
-9.0 ± 0.8
-7.4 ± 1.4

-8.3 ± 1.4
–
5
7

14

Isotope ratios are expressed in parts per thousand (δ). Stable isotope values are summarized in Wilson and Perttula (2013).

Arkansas
Louisiana
Texas

17

9.1 ± 2.2
6.6 ± 4.3

8.6 ± 4.1

δ13Ccol ± s.d.
N
δ13C ± s.d.
N
δ15N ± s.d.
collagen		
apatite		collagen

Historic Caddo (post-A.D. 1680)
Mean values
-13.9 ± 1.4

Time Period
(A.D.)

Table 2. (Continued)

5
7

14

N

Perttula, et al.—Corn is Life 175

176

Texas Archeological Society

peaked in the Historic Caddo period, with the
largest change in consumption patterns occurring
between the Middle and Late Caddo periods.
Stable isotope results from the Formative Caddo
period are from two sites that have radically different results. Results from the George C. Davis site
(41CE19) indicate little to no maize in the diet at this
time despite its presence in the site’s archeological
record (see Ford 1997; Jones 1949). Conversely,
results from the Hurricane Hill site (41HP106) indicate diets significantly enriched in C4. However,
nitrogen values from this time suggest that some of
the C4 was the result of eating bison in addition to
or rather than from corn. The pattern of limited corn
consumption holds through the Early Caddo period.
From the Early to the Middle Caddo period there is
a small increase in the overall amount of C4 in the
diet, but an apparent increase in the C4 contribution
to protein as shown in the nitrogen isotope values
(see Table 2). Overall in the East Texas part of the
Southern Caddo area for the period from ca. A.D.
800 to after A.D. 1680, the largest increases in mean
collagen values occurred from the Early Caddo period to the Middle Caddo period (Figure 4a). When
nitrogen signatures are factored in, however, at
least along the Red River, it appears that there was
a small increase in the amount of corn coupled with
an increase in the consumption of bison. The highest
δ13C collagen signatures are seen at the Sanders site
(41LR2) on the Red River, a site with bison in the
archeological assemblage (see Jackson et al. 2000;
Krieger 1946).
The largest increase in C4 in the total diet (as
gauged by changes in apatite values) among the
East Texas Caddo, and indeed in the Southern Caddo area as a whole, occurs between the Middle and
Late Caddo periods (Figure 4b). This corresponds
to several of the temporal peaks in radiocarbon data
(see Figures 2 and 3). At this time there is also a
decrease in C4 in the protein portion of the diet,
which indicates that the source of change is maize.
Nitrogen isotope values decrease as carbon isotope
values increase (see Table 2), further supporting
the rise in the importance of maize at the expense
of higher protein food. While there is more corn
in the diet overall during the Late Caddo period,
there is also a high degree of dietary variability,
with some individuals consuming a considerable
amount of corn and others eating little to none. This
diversity likely reflects differences in individual diets because of the relative success through time in
corn production in dispersed family planting plots.

Apatite signatures peak in the Historic Caddo
period (see Table 2), but only seven results are
available, all from the Jim Allen site (41CE12) in
the upper Neches River basin. At this time mean
apatite signatures indicate that an estimated 56
percent of the diet was based in C4 plants. Mean
δ13C collagen values are also at their highest levels
at this time (see Figure 4a). The only significant
decrease in nitrogen isotope values takes place
between the Late and Historic Caddo periods, indicating a lowering of trophic level as corn replaced
the total amount of meat protein in the East Texas
Caddo diet.
In comparing the Southern Caddo area isotope
values to the Northern Caddo area, specifically sites
in the Arkansas River basin in eastern Oklahoma
(see Figure 1), the stable isotope database (57 samples from 21 sites) runs from the latter part of the
Fourche Maline period (dating after ca. A.D. 400)
through the Fort Coffee phase (A.D. 1450-1660)
(Rogers 2011). The stable isotope values document
an increase in C4 in the protein portion of the diet
through time, peaking in the Fort Coffee phase (see
Table 2). As C4 increased, individual variation of
diets also increased. While this pattern is apparent
in the Southern Caddo stable isotope values, the
differences are greater to the north in the Arkansas
River basin. For example, a young adult male from
the Lymon Moore (34Lf31) site has a δ13C collagen signature of -21.6‰ compared to a young
adult female from the same site with a signature of
-10.48‰. Nitrogen values show that trophic level
decreases only during the Fort Coffee phase (see
Table 2), suggesting that the increase in C4 among
the Caddo peoples in the Arkansas River basin at
this time is the result of an increase in maize at the
expense of a higher protein food source.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This article is an examination of temporal
trends in the use of corn by Caddo peoples from
the Late Woodland period to post-A.D. 1680 times.
Corn was the principal tropical cultigen grown and
consumed by ancestral Caddo peoples and became
their most important food source. Our examination
of temporal trends in corn use is based on (a) the
corpus of radiocarbon dates on corn samples from
Caddo sites and from (b) diachronic data on diet
reconstructed from stable carbon and nitrogen
isotope analysis of apatite and/or collagen values

Perttula, et al.—Corn is Life 177

a

b
Figure 4. Mean stable isotope values on individuals from the southern Caddo area: a, collagen; b, apatite.

178

Texas Archeological Society

in Caddo bioarcheological datasets to establish
trends in its adoption and use by Caddo peoples.
Of particular interest is establishing through the
archeological and bioarcheological records when
the consumption of corn by Caddo peoples became
a dietary staple as well as what evidence exists for
possible intensification in its use.
The use of summed radiocarbon probabilities of
dated corn samples from Caddo samples can be used
as a proxy for the use of corn by Caddo peoples, at
the present time primarily in the Southern Caddo
area. There are issues with relying on radiocarbon
dating for such a proxy—including biases in maize
survival in the archeological record, in the intensity
of archeological investigations of Caddo sites in
different regions and in different time periods, and
finally in differential investments in dating programs
across the Caddo area by different investigators.
But as a first order of approximation, given that
a large number of dated samples are available,
“there should be a relationship between the number
of dates falling within a given time interval in a
given region (or their summed probabilities) and
the amount of human activity, which depends on the
population size…the accumulation of the probability
distributions of a large number of dates produces a
high degree of chronological resolution” (Shennan
2013:49). Furthermore, the stable isotope data from
Caddo burials is an independent source of data that
can then be compared with the radiocarbon reconstructions of maize use in the Southern Caddo area.
The summed probability distribution of all the
corn dates from the Caddo area indicates that the
majority of the calibrated ages in the two sigma
range fall after A.D. 1300. There are notable temporal peaks at ca. A.D. 1350 and A.D. 1450 in the
summed probability distribution, and then a plateau
in probability density after ca. A.D. 1500. Plotting
median calibrated ages in 10 year intervals illustrate
the same temporal trends in corn dates from Caddo
sites. That is, corn is present in low numbers of
dated samples from as early as ca. A.D. 900 until
ca. A.D. 1300, but there are significant increases
in dated corn samples from ca. A.D. 1330-1580.
Furthermore, there are notable peaks in the median
calibrated age of dated samples of corn between
A.D. 1341-1350 (in the latter part of the Middle
Caddo period), between A.D. 1421-1430 at the beginning of the Late Caddo period, and between A.D.
1561-1570 in the Late Caddo period.
The stable carbon isotope information from
burials recovered from single and multiple mound

centers, cemeteries, villages, farmsteads, and
hamlets at more than 55 sites in both the Southern
and Northern Caddo areas supports the summed
probability distribution of corn dates. It indicates
that after around A.D. 1200, there was a significant
increase in the consumption of maize, as well as
an increase in diet variability, as marked by C4enriched collagen and apatite samples from sites of
known age. Apatite signatures in particular indicate
that maize consumption remained at a consistent but
low level of consumption from the Formative Caddo
period through the Middle Caddo period. Relying in
particular on stable carbon apatite values, not until
ca. A.D. 1400 in the Late Caddo period is there a
rather significant increase in maize contribution to
the overall diet in both the Southern and Northern
Caddo areas. Isotopic values in these later samples
suggest that the importance of maize continued to
increase in the diet of Caddo peoples after that time,
likely peaking after ca. A.D. 1650 (Wilson 2012).
Based on apatite values, the percentage of C4-based
foods in the diet of Caddo peoples was as much as
66-72 percent after ca. A.D. 1400.
Combined, the radiocarbon and stable isotopic
data from a wide range of Caddo sites in the Southern and Northern Caddo areas provide complementary archeological and bioarcheological evidence
regarding the establishment of temporal trends in
the use of corn by Caddo peoples. It is only after
ca. A.D. 1200/1300, and most notably after ca.
A.D. 1400 that the consumption of corn became the
principal food source in Caddo diets in both areas,
and its use appears to have intensified during the
latter part of the Late Caddo period, namely after
the mid-16th century A.D.
END NOTES
1. For the Caddo words in italics, the apostrophe is
a glottal stop, and the colon indicates that the preceding
vowel is long (Wallace Chafe, personal communication,
July 29, 2013).
2. Table 1 does not include six corn samples from the
George C. Davis site that have calibrated age ranges and
calibrated median ages that date prior to A.D. 800 (see
Perttula 1998a:Table 1, assays C-153, Tx-105, Tx-674,
Tx-3693, Tx-3695, and Tx-4624). Based on the context
of these samples, and other radiocarbon dates on non-corn
organic materials from the site, these dates are suspect.
Table 1 also does not include the 17 radiocarbon dates on
corn from Southwest Missouri and Northwest Arkansas
bluff shelters (Fritz 1986:Table 9.2). In this case, the

Perttula, et al.—Corn is Life 179
cultural affiliation of these samples is ambiguous, and
there is no consensus that late prehistoric occupations in
the Ozarks were by Caddo peoples.
3. Youngblood (2008:Table 1) provides a list of 19
dates in the Caddo area of East Texas that are supposedly early direct dates on corn. Unfortunately, the dates
Youngblood lists have a number of problems and should
be ignored as not being relevant to the issue of pre-A.D.
800 corn because: (1) they are sometimes inaccurate;
i.e., Tx-4624 is listed as 101 B.P., when the correct raw
age is 1010 B.P.; (2) they are all raw ages that have not
been corrected for isotopic fractionation; dates on corn,
when corrected for isotopic fractionation, will typically be
240-250 years older in age than the raw radiocarbon age;
and (3) Youngblood mistook the raw age in years B.P. of
the radiocarbon dates as the A.D. age for all the samples
listed in her Table 1. For example, B-73939 from the Oak
Hill Village site is listed as an early corn date, one that
is supposed to predate A.D. 800. Youngblood apparently
considers the “early date” from this sample to be A.D. 610
+ 100, when in fact the raw age is 610 + 100 B.P. (A.D.
1340). Correcting this sample for isotopic fractionation
produces a conventional age of 810 + 100 B.P., and a two
sigma calibrated age range of A.D. 1020-1315 (see Table
1 in this paper). None of Youngblood’s “early dates,”
which are listed in Youngblood (2008:Table 1) as ranging
from 101-880 C14 Age B.P., predate A.D. 800.

Bronk Ramsey, C.
2013 OxCal 4.2/ORAU. Electronic resource. https://c14.
arch.ox.ac.uk/login/login.php?Location=/oxcal/OxCal.html, accessed July 2013.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Fritz, G. J.
1986 Prehistoric Ozark Agriculture: The University of
Arkansas Rockshelter Collections. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.

Wallace Chafe provided the Caddo words for
corn, beans, and pumpkins. Thanks to Jeff Girard,
Duncan McKinnon, and Mary Beth Trubitt for
providing information on corn dates from sites in
Northwest Louisiana and Southwest Arkansas. We
also thank Scott Pletka, Waldo Troell, Duane Peter,
and Rachel Feit for providing their approval for
us to incorporate in the article the corn dates from
the Kitchen Branch (41CP220) and Murvaul Creek
(41PN175) sites. Linda Ellis tracked down the relevant information on the corn date from 41RK243.
Sandra Hannum prepared Figure 1, and Lance
Trask prepared Figures 3 and 4. We appreciate the
detailed comments provided by Nancy Kenmotsu
on an earlier version of this article.
REFERENCES CITED
Bonavia, D.
2013 Maize: Origin, Domestication, and its Role in the
Development of Culture. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Dowd, E. L.
2012 Alternative Conceptions of Complexity: Sociopolitical Dynamics of the Mountain Fork Caddo. Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma, Norman.
Fields, R. C. and E. F. Gadus (editors)
2012 Archeology of the Nadaco Caddo: The View from the
Pine Tree Mound Site (41HS15), Harrison County,
Texas. 2 Vols. Reports of Investigations No. 164.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Fields, R. C., V. L. Hatfield, D. Burden, E. F. Gadus, M. C.
Wilder, and K. W. Kibler
2013 Testing and Data Recovery Excavations at 11 Native American Archeological Sites along the U.S.
Highway 271 Mount Pleasant Relief Route, Titus
County, Texas. Review draft. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Ford, R. I.
1997 Preliminary Report on the Plant Remains from the
George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas 19681970 Excavations. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:104-107.

Greenlee, D. M.
2006 Dietary Variation and Prehistoric Maize Farming in
the Middle Ohio Valley. In Histories of Maize: Multidisciplinary Approaches to the Prehistory, Linguistics, Biogeography, Domestication, and Evolution of
Maize, edited by J. E. Staller, R. H. Tykot, and B.
F. Benz, pp. 215-235. Academic Press, Burlington,
Vermont.
Jackson, A. T., M. S. Goldstein, and A. D. Krieger
2000 The 1931 Excavations at the Sanders Site, Lamar
County, Texas: Notes on the Fieldwork, Human
Osteology, and Ceramics. Archival Series 2. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Jones, V. H.
1949 Maize from the Davis Site: Its Nature and Interpretation. In The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas, by H. P. Newell and A. D. Krieger,
pp. 241-249. Memoirs No. 5. Society for American
Archaeology, Menasha, Wisconsin.

180

Texas Archeological Society

Kellner, C. M. and M. J. Schoeninger
2007 A Simple Carbon Isotope Model for Reconstructing
Prehistoric Human Diet. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 133:1112-1127.
Krieger, A. D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas, with Extensions of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. The University of Texas, Austin.
McGimsey, C. R. and J. van der Koogh
2001 Louisiana’s Archaeological Radiometric Database.
Special Publication No. 3. Louisiana Archaeological
Society, Baton Rouge.
Newkumet, V. B., and H. L. Meredith
1988 Hasinai: A Traditional History of the Caddo Confederacy. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.
Perttula, T. K.
1998a A Compendium of Radiocarbon and Oxidizable
Carbon Ratio Dates from Archaeological Sites in
East Texas, with a Discussion of the Age and Dating of Select Components and Phases. Radiocarbon
39(3):305-342.
1998b Radiocarbon and Oxidizable Carbon Ratio Dates
from Archaeological Sites in East Texas, Part II.
Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology 11:66-90.

2005 (Editor) Archeological Investigations at the Pilgrim’s
Pride Site (41CP304), a Titus Phase Community in
the Big Cypress Creek Basin, Camp County, Texas. 2
Vols. Report of Investigations No. 30. Archeological
& Environmental Consultants, LLC, Austin.

2008 Caddo Agriculture on the Western Frontier of
the Eastern Woodlands. Plains Anthropologist
53(205):79-105.
Perttula, T. K. and R. Rogers
2012 The Evolution of a Caddo Community in Northeast
Texas. In The Archaeology of the Caddo, edited by T.
K. Perttula and C. P. Walker, pp. 209-238. University
of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Perttula, T. K. and R. Z. Selden, Jr.
2011 East Texas Radiocarbon Database. Electronic resource, http://counciloftexasarcheologists.
org/?page_id=27, accessed July 1, 2013.
Regnier, A. L.
2013 The McDonald Site: An Analysis of WPA Excavations at a Caddo Site in the Glover River Drainage,
McCurtain County, Oklahoma. Caddo Archeology
Journal 23:27-66.

Reimer, P. J., M. G. L. Baillie, E. Bard, A. Bayliss, J. W. Beck,
P. G. Blackwell, C. Bronk Ramsey, C. E. Buck, G. S. Burr,
R. L. Edwards, M. Friedrich, P. M. Grootes, T. P. Guilderson,
I. Hajdas, T. J. Heaton, A. G. Hogg, K. A. Hughen, K. F.
Kaiser, B. Kromer, F. G. McCormac, S. W. Manning, R.
W. Reimer, D. A. Richards, J. R. Southon, S. Talamo, C.
S. M. Turney, J. van der Plicht, and C. E.Weyhenmeyer
2009 IntCal09 and Marine09 radiocarbon age calibration curves, 0-50,000 years cal BP. Radiocarbon
51(4):1111-1150.
Rogers, J. D.
2011 Stable Isotope Analysis and Diet in Eastern Oklahoma. Southeastern Archaeology 30(1):96-107.
Rogers, R. and T. K. Perttula
2004 The Oak Hill Village (41RK214), Rusk County,
Texas. Document No. 030083. PBS&J, Austin.
Rose, J. C., M. P. Hoffman, B. A. Burnett, A. M. Harmon,
and J. E. Barnes
1998 Skeletal Biology of the Prehistoric Caddo. In The
Native History of the Caddo: Their Place in Southeastern Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T.
K. Perttula and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 113-126. Studies
in Archeology 30. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory The University of Texas at Austin.
Schambach, F. F., M. Zabecki, D. G. Akridge, and J. Samuelsen
2011 Determining the Cultural Affiliation of Detached
Crania and Mandibles at the Crenshaw Site, Miller
County, Arkansas. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.
Schoeninger, M. J.
2009 Stable Isotope Evidence for the Adoption of Maize
Agriculture. Current Anthropology 50:633-640.
Selden, R. Z., Jr.
2013 Consilience: Radiocarbon, Instrumental Neutron
Activation Analysis and Litigation in the Ancestral
Caddo Region. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Selden Jr., R. Z. and T. K. Perttula
2013 Radiocarbon Trends and the East Texas Caddo Tradition (ca. A.D. 800-1680). Southeastern Archaeology
32(1):85-96.
Shennan, S.
2013 Cultural Evolution of Neolithic Europe. Archaeology
International 15:45-53.
Story, D. A.
1990 Radiocarbon Assays In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D. A. Story,
J. A Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose,
D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp.
658-735. Research Series No. 38. 2 Vols. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Perttula, et al.—Corn is Life 181
1997 1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the
George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:1-113.

2000 Introduction. In The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas, by H. P. Newell and A. D. Krieger, pp.
1-31. 2nd Edition. Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C.
Story, D. A. (editor)
1981 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis
Site, Cherokee County, Texas: Summers 1979 and
1980. Occasional Papers, Vol. 1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory The University of Texas at
Austin.
Story, D. A. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1977 Radiocarbon Dating and the George C. Davis Site,
Texas. Journal of Field Archaeology 4(1):63-89.
Thomas, P. M., Jr., L. J. Campbell, and S. R. Ahler
1980 The Hanna Site: An Alto Focus Village in Red River
Parish. Louisiana Archaeology 5:1-381.

Wilson, D.
2012 Bioarchaeological Evidence of Subsistence Strategies among the East Texas Caddo. In The Archaeology of the Caddo, edited by T. K. Perttula and C. P.
Walker, pp. 86-116. University of Nebraska Press,
Lincoln.
Wilson, D. and T. K. Perttula
2013 Reconstructing the Paleodiet of the Caddo through
Stable Isotopes. American Antiquity 78(4):702-723.
Youngblood, D.
2008 The Windfall/Shortfall Model: A Seasonal Theory
of Crop Inclusion Based on Analysis of Woodlands
Frontier Plant Remains. Plains Anthropologist
53(205):107-120.

Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities:
Excavations at Columbus Pueblo (LA 85774),
Luna County, New Mexico
Nancy A. Kenmotsu, Tabitha G. Burgess, Lora Jackson Legare, and Myles R. Miller

ABSTRACT
Recent excavations at Columbus Pueblo (LA 85774), a Mimbres settlement on the U.S. border, are used to
explore the issues of settlement intensity as well as ties within Mimbres society in the southern Mimbres area.
We focus on the extent to which site occupants were casual visitors or migrants from Mimbres settlements to
the north, with a critical evaluation of ways they adapted cultural traditions to accommodate an environment
and a social landscape that differed from the north.

INTRODUCTION
In 2009, Geo-Marine, Inc. conducted excavations at LA 85774, a Mimbres site in New Mexico
on the U.S. border, called Columbus Pueblo (Kenmotsu et al. 2010). The site was inadvertently
impacted during construction of the U.S./Mexico
Border Fence (Border Fence) and the efforts at
the site were designed to mitigate that damage by
characterizing the nature of the deposits through
limited excavations and by investigating the nature of its settlement well south of the heartland
of the Mimbres region (Figure 1). While many
heartland Mimbres towns have been investigated
(e.g., Anyon and LeBlanc 1984; Bradfield 1931;
Cosgrove and Cosgrove 1932; Haury 1936; Shafer 2003; Woolsey and McIntyre 1996) and some
smaller settlements also explored (Roth 2007,
2013), few Mimbres sites south of the heartland
have been excavated. The closest is the Hermanas ruin, excavated in 1970 (Fitting 1971) and
located just south of the Cedar Mountains, some
40 km west of Columbus Pueblo. Minnis (Minnis
and Wormser 1984) conducted excavations at the
Florida Mountain site near Deming. However, no
Mimbres sites have been investigated this far south
in the Deming grassland plains where Columbus
Pueblo is located.
From the outset, we had many questions. Was
Columbus Pueblo a settlement of migrants? Or,
had the occupants always resided on the periphery,

partaking of some of the social traditions and
practices of the larger towns to the north but not
others? Did distance preclude strong ties to northern Mimbres sites, and were those ties in the form
of language, ideology, and kinship? How did this
Mimbres settlement maintain its cultural identity,
or did it blend with multiple cultures as many
border communities do? Were these people living
at Columbus Pueblo, in essence, a point on a cultural continuum between several different cultural
groups, more Mimbres than Jornada Mogollon, a
cultural area located around El Paso some 50 miles
east of Columbus, or Casas Grandes, located some
70 miles southwest, but still a hybrid of all three?
These were just the sort of questions that Dee
Ann would have relished: maximize archeological
data in an area where little exists, inflict minimal
impact from excavations, and critically analyze
the results in a broader regional context to better
understand the relationships between this site and
Mimbres towns in the heartland. Evenings with
her were fun, exhilarating, and daunting. While
pondering an issue, she would ask a stream of
thoughtful questions, consider responses, offer
analogies from work in the region and elsewhere,
suggest special studies, and recommend reviewing a plethora of publications. Columbus Pueblo
required this level of pondering, both in the field
and during subsequent analyses.
As mentioned above, our questions centered
on how Columbus Pueblo fit into the broader

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

184

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Columbus Pueblo in relation to the Mimbres heartland.

Kenmotsu, et al.—Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities 185
context of Mimbres society. Mimbres sites have
been recorded in the Cedar Mountains, the Florida
Mountains, and in what is known as the Deming
grassland plain (see Figure 1), all well south of
the heartland. Generally, however, this area is
understudied (Lekson 1992:80, 2001:56; Schriever and Holcomb 2005), and survey coverage has
been spotty (Lekson 2001:55-57), although the
on-going efforts of the University of OklahomaDeming Archaeological Project (now known as the
Southern Mimbres Archaeological Project) under
the direction of Dr. Patricia Gilman (Schriever
and Holcomb 2005) and those reported by Kemrer
(2003) are improving the data base.
Schriever and Holcomb (2005) summarize recent findings in the southern Mimbres area, underscoring both similarities and differences between
this region and the heartland. They note that some
sites in the area have more than 100 rooms, but the
evidence suggests that, unlike the villages along
the Mimbres River that were often built on top of
earlier villages, these appear to be single component sites that were abandoned as the population
dispersed into a number of smaller sites nearby.
Most sites are situated close to streams or springs,
including Hermanas ruin (Fitting 1971). However,
even these water sources were not always reliable,
and the general scarcity of available surface water
in this region, even during non-droughty periods
such as the period from A.D. 1040-1125 (GrissinoMeyer et al. 1997), may have contributed to the
limited length of time sites were occupied (see
Lekson 2001:60). Nonetheless, without intensive
excavations combined with a solid chronological
study of settlement histories, it is not clear if the
corporate society model proposed by Shafer (2006)
for Mimbres groups to the north operated at all or
in the same way in the southern Mimbres area. For
this reason, Schriever and Holcomb (2005) argue
that a cautious interpretive approach should be followed, as they believe that uncritical application of
the Mimbres systematics defined in the heartland
could potentially obscure the ultimate understanding of adaptive strategies in the south.
Mindful of Schriever and Holcomb’s caution,
we first outline the cultural and archeological character of Mimbres society between A.D. 200-1140.
Then we turn to the results of our excavations and
offer tentative conclusions about the relationship
between Columbus Pueblo and the heartland.
In general, we conclude that Columbus Pueblo
was a special-use site with interesting ties to the

heartland but with facets of cultural independence.
Yet, because we have more questions than answers,
the results do not present dramatic new understandings of social organization in the southern Mimbres
area. Rather, the results offer glimpses of the relationships between this site and those to the north
that can be employed as other researchers continue
to explore Mimbres sites outside of the heartland.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
During the period from ca. A.D. 200-1140
(Table 1), archeological sites along the Mimbres
River, its tributaries, and the upper Gila River in
southwestern New Mexico form the heartland of
the Mimbres cultural region (see Figure 1). Within
this area, pithouse villages began to form around
A.D. 200 as hunter-gatherers added agricultural
products to their subsistence commodities (Anyon
and LeBlanc 1984:22; Shafer 2003:25). Typically,
Early Pithouse period sites contained from five to
20 structures, although as many as 80 pithouse depressions have been noted at one site. The smaller
settlements may have been occupied by a single
family group composed of several related nuclear
families; the larger settlements were probably occupied by several extended family groups. Often
one pithouse is larger than the others and presumably it was used for communal or ritual activities
(Shafer 2003:25). Manufacture of ceramics (Alma
Plain) began during this period, and cultivated
foods included corn and squash. The thin midden deposits at Early Pithouse sites indicate these
egalitarian settlements were used only seasonally
and the occupants were highly mobile.
Between A.D. 550 and 900-1010 (the Late
Pithouse period), many of these pithouse villages
grew, and the superimposed structures encountered
in excavations indicate persistent use of the same
site over long periods of time. At Old Town (Creel
2006), the NAN Ranch Ruin (Shafer 2003, 2006),
and the Harris site (Roth 2013), some structures
formed courtyard groups thought to be comprised
of related families. Shafer (2003, 2006) interprets
these courtyard groups at the NAN Ranch as core
households of the community: “[p]rime families,
or more likely those who were there first, may
have laid claim to residential space as shown by a
succession of construction episodes spanning three
phases in the South room block [at NAN]” (Shafer 2006:18). Roth (2007:16) describes a similar

186

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Chronological scheme for the Mimbres (after Shafer 2003:6).

Date

Period

Phase

Ceramics

A.D. 1110-1140
Classic
Terminal Classic
			
			

Late Style III Mimbres
Black-on-white; Fully &
partially corrugated

A.D. 1010-1110
Classic
Classic
			
			

Early & Middle Style III
Mimbres Black-on-white;
Fully & partially corrugated

A.D. 900-1010
Transitional
Late Three Circle
Style II Mimbres Black-on			
white; Three Circle Neck
			 Corrugated
A.D. 750-900
Late Pithouse
Three Circle
			
			
			

Style I Mimbres Black-onwhite; Three Circle Red-onwhite; Three Circle Neck
Corrugated

A.D. 650-750
Late Pithouse
San Francisco
Mogollon Red-on-Brown;
			
San Francisco Red; Alma
			 Plain
A.D. 550-650
Late Pithouse
Georgetown
Unnamed red slipped; Alma
			 Plain
A.D. 200-550

Early Pithouse

process based on her work and that of Haury (1936)
at the Harris site:
Harris began as a small agricultural
village during the Georgetown phase,
but quickly became a large, bustling
village…[L]and-holding family groups
established households at the site by
A.D. 600 and continued to live there
through the A.D. 900s. We can trace the
development of clusters of pithouses that
we think are extended family households
from these initial occupants. I refer to
these as founding households.

Structures of founding households at the Harris site
are large and superimposed over earlier structures;
some have elaborate child burials in their floors.
Combined, Roth argues that the evidence indicates
ancestry and land tenure were important to those
families.
During the same period, however, isolated
pithouses at Harris and other pithouse communities
have been excavated with no evidence of re-use

None designated

Alma Plain

or re-modeling (Roth 2013). Roth concludes that
these residents of Harris were mobile, moving in
and out of the larger community. Similarly, her
work at a smaller, upland pithouse community
(Lake Roberts Vista [Roth 2007]) indicates high
mobility and seasonal re-use of the site by what
were likely the same households through A.D. 900.
Settlement stability and household movement
remain important topics of research throughout
the Mimbres region. Shafer (2006:17) concludes
that while agricultural production was important
to households prior to A.D. 900, storage evidence,
including the lack of granaries and the storage of
shelled corn in baskets, indicates continued mobility. Gilman and Stone (2013:611) concur, rejecting
the notion that “all domestic structures found at
Pithouse period sites in the Mimbres area were
occupied simultaneously,” a view they believe
has long-standing among Southwestern archeologists. Instead, they argue that these villages were
often occupied by a few families at a time, and
suggest that great kivas—large structures used
to perform ritual and communal activities—were

Kenmotsu, et al.—Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities 187
built in nearly all the large towns of the heartland
to attract people from other settlements to attend
rituals where local residents could “construct and
negotiate relationships with families in a number
of adjacent settlements.” The end result of these
activities would be the creation of far flung relationships in order to negotiate such things as
water rights and access to wild resources and raw
materials. Their analysis shows great kivas exhibit
an increasing diversity of construction details over
time. The diversity suggests to them that the people
who built the structures and hosted the rituals were
seeking to differentiate themselves and their ritual
space from rituals held elsewhere as a means to
negotiate social relationships with outsiders.
Recent research by Creel and Shafer (n.d.)
lends some support to the idea that communal activities in or near great kivas were used to attract
outsiders. Creel and Shafer note that the plazas in
front of great kivas contain cremated remains of
“a small number of residents who were treated in
death differently than were the great majority of
people” who were interred in their room blocks
without cremation. Further, they argue that these
plazas “were special places within those communities.” Moreover, noting Hohokam influences
in Mimbres sites during the A.D. 800s-900s, they
conclude that the current evidence suggests some
of the people cremated and interred in the plazas
were Hohokam (see also Creel 2013a).
The tenth century was a time of change and
social reorganization in the Mimbres region, and
Shafer (2006:17; see also Creel [2006]) attributes
it to an increase in population and a concomitant
increase in labor needed to expand irrigation so
that additional lands could become productive agricultural fields. The increase in moisture regimes
noted in tree rings by Grissino-Meyer et al. (1997)
between A.D. 1040-1125 is believed to have promoted this expanded production (Harry Shafer,
personal communication 2013).
Shafer (2003:25) states: “A village composed
of...an extended family usually functions well
simply on the basis of division of labor and
communal reciprocity. When a community is
made up of...more families a higher organization
is needed to bond the families against the outside
world and to broaden the ties with neighboring
communities.” Shafer (see also Creel 2006;
Creel and Anyon 2003) concludes that corporate
strategies were employed for this reorganization.
Under corporate political organizations, economic

resources are distributed by the household, clan, or
other organization; leadership is shared or eventspecific; and rituals are communal and integrative
(Feinman et al. 2000). As extended families
evolved into corporate groups, pithouses gave
way to surface architecture of room blocks that
contained living areas as well as rooms for lineage
cemeteries, communal activities, and storage. This
change “correlates with the demise of the great
kiva, whose functions were presumably taken over
by secret corporate group ceremonies” (Shafer
2006:18). The change also promoted smaller kivas,
built as part of individual room blocks, that were
used to integrate and negotiate relationships within
one’s lineage through ancestral ties until the close
of the Terminal Classic period around A.D. 1140.
Additionally, Shafer (2003:88-89) argues that
each Mimbres village from A.D. 1000-1140 had
within it corporate groups with higher political
prestige who had first-arrival rights to productive
lands and other resources (see Gilman [2006] for
another view). Lineages with rights to productive
lands could exclude other lineages during periods
of drought.
The corporate nature of Mimbres society can
be demonstrated by the independent households
evident in the Classic Mimbres room blocks (Shafer 2003), the broad distribution of rare and exotic
goods among all families, and a general lack of
specialists (Gilman 2006:79). In a recent study of
ceramics to investigate when people in the region
began to establish their identify as “Mimbres,”
Schriever (2008:128) concludes that “an informal
identify may already [have] exist[ed] within the region by the San Francisco phase and...it persist[ed]
through the Classic period.”
Additional support for Shafer’s model of
Mimbres society can be found in recent studies of
the iconography, movement, and trade of Mimbres
Black-on-white ceramics (Creel 2013b; Creel and
Speakman 2012; Powell-Martí and James 2006).
These distinctive and well-recognized ceramics
began to be produced around A.D. 800 and they
continued to be made until around A.D. 1140 (Shafer 2003:182-185; Shafer and Brewington 1995).
Instrumental neutron activation analyses (NAA)
indicate that these vessels were primarily made in
the large villages within the heartland, although a
small number were made in the Rio Grande valley
east of Galaz and Mattocks (Creel and Speakman
2012:11). LeBlanc (2006) argues that the vessels
were made by select potters within those villages.

188

Texas Archeological Society

Building on this data base, Powell-Martí and James
designed a study using the iconography painted
on the vessels to determine the direction of trade
between Galaz, NAN, Old Town, Cameron Creek,
and Saige McFarland. From A.D. 970-1010, they
found that trade of these Mimbres vessels was
fairly unilateral among the five villages. Through
time, however, Galaz exported vessels to some or
all of these villages, but none of those villages sent
their vessels to Galaz (Powell-Martí and James
2006:171). A recent NAA study of 648 whole vessels from the Mimbres River valley—470 of which
are vessels dating between A.D. 1050-1100—has
identified reasons for this unbalanced trade in ceramics (Creel and Speakman 2012; see also Creel
2013b): after A.D. 1000 the vessels were only
produced at villages above 5,400 feet, because of
the lack of available wood resources to fire the
pottery at lower elevations after that date.1 Thus,
after A.D. 1000, pottery production was largely
confined to Swarts and other towns to its north in
the Mimbres River drainage; the NAN Ranch, Old
Town, and Cameron Creek are at lower elevations.
Galaz was probably the largest production center
among these towns. Yet, the vessels continued to
be traded throughout the heartland and beyond.
Creel (2013b:21) notes that this indicates a pervasive “domestic demand for pottery on the part of
non-pottery producing families regardless of where
they lived.” Powell-Martí and James (2006:171)
argue that the Black-on-white vessels from Galaz
were given as part of communal feasting or ritual
events held in that village, but never in exceedingly
large quantities. The vessels were “for cementing
social bonds and conveying messages” serving to
“reinforce group ties” (Powell-Martí and James
2006:172).
Shafer (2006:28) links the collapse of the
Mimbres corporate system after A.D. 1110 to environmental change based on climate data showing
the end of the wet cycle around A.D. 1125 and a
tree-ring date from the NAN Ranch of A.D. 1127,
the most recent from the Mimbres Valley. He argues that the towns, at least along the Mimbres
River, were inter-dependent because they all used
the same water source. Tree-ring evidence suggests
below-level moisture regimes operated in the early
twelfth century (Powell-Martí and James 2006).
“As food surpluses waned, the corporate groups
broke up…Abandonment of even one town would
weaken the system, and of more than one town
probably destroyed it” (Shafer 2006:29).

Based on this archeological background,
Kenmotsu et al. (2010:4-8 to 4-13) proposed two
hypotheses with expectations related to how tied
the residents at Columbus Pueblo were to Mimbres
towns in the heartland:
• If the residents of Columbus Pueblo were recent migrants and closely tied to Mimbres societies in the Mimbres River valley, material
correlates of that association would include
room construction styles mirroring those to
the north. Room blocks, if present, would
contain one larger room representing communal space. Ceramic and lithic artifacts would
mirror those found at the NAN (Shafer 2003),
Galaz (Anyon and LeBlanc 1984), Old Town
(Creel 2006), and other sites. In particular,
NAA analysis of Mimbres Black-on-white
ceramics would indicate a close relationship
with one of the Mimbres towns—likely the
one from which they migrated—and sources
of obsidian would mirror sources found at
that same northern town (Schriever 2008:144,
181). Floral remains should indicate evidence
of domesticated crops.

• Alternatively, residents of Columbus Pueblo
were only loosely tied to the Mimbres towns
to the north. Rooms would exhibit considerable variation from the pithouses and surface
rooms or room blocks in the heartland. Ceramics, including the Mimbres Black-onwhite styles, might indicate manufacture in
the southern area, and obsidian would have
been obtained from sources more convenient
to the Columbus Pueblo area.
COLUMBUS PUEBLO
Columbus Pueblo is located in the Deming
grassland plain, some 90 km south of Old Town.
It is situated in the southeastern portion of the
Mimbres River basin, and lies on a nearly flat,
alluvial plain that is on a slightly elevated linear
ridge flanked on the east and west by slightly lower
grassy floodplain surfaces that represent fluvial
fans of the Mimbres River (Frederick 2010). This
alluvial plain consists of gravel, sand, and mud derived from the adjacent mountains and transported
by streams and sheet wash.
Columbus Pueblo was first recorded in 1994
and described as a large scatter of prehistoric and

Kenmotsu, et al.—Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities 189
historic artifacts (Sechrist 1994). Sechrist (1994)
noted that the site may extend into Mexico, but that
portion of the site remains unexamined. Ceramics
recorded include Mimbres Style III Black-onwhite, Mimbres Corrugated, Playas Red, Casas
Grandes Scored, and Casas Grandes Corrugated.
In 1999, the site was tested using a series of 1 x
1 m units and shovel scrapes (Rieder 1999) that
led to its determination as being eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places by the Bureau
of Land Management (BLM), the federal agency
managing the property. Gibbs (2007) conducted a
damage assessment after the inadvertent impacts
to the site during the construction of the Border
Fence. Our investigations were carried out for the
U.S. Customs and Border Protection through the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District,
and completed in cooperation with the BLM’s Las
Cruces Office.
Several features were recorded at the site during past efforts. One is an historic-era earthen tank
measuring ca. 18 m in diameter and constructed
in what was the core of the site (Tom Holcomb,
personal communication 2013). The damage was
extensive as adobe and stained sediments were
noted in and around the tank, and back dirt from
the tank’s construction contained “thousands of
artifacts, burned adobe, and prehistoric structural
remains” (Gibbs 2007:5). How the core of the site
was different from our findings, if at all, will never
be known. Another feature is a wellhead pipe located a few m east of the tank.
To mitigate the impacts to the site, Myles
Miller and Duane Peter developed strategies to
maximize information about the character of the
deposits for the BLM, who are tasked with managing the site in the future. Excavations were preceded by a geophysical survey of the site that identified several anomalies suspected to be cultural
in origin (Walker 2010) (Figure 2). Following the
geophysical investigations, six backhoe trenches
were excavated, some over the anomalies and others placed at the discretion of the geoarcheologist
(Frederick 2010). While Frederick was conducting
his field study, excavation of 10 shovel-scraped
units, nine hand-dug trenches, two test units, and
two excavation blocks began (Figure 2). Excavated
sediments were passed through 1/8-inch screen.
All cultural features were drawn in plan view and
plotted with a Total Station; flotation samples were
collected from most features; and chronometric
samples were also collected. The investigations

were carried out from May-July 2009. As a result
of these efforts, 37 features were identified, including six rooms, several possible walls, 24 postholes,
three thermal features, and at least one pit house
(Figure 2).
Dating Columbus Pueblo
Radiocarbon and ceramic cross-dating indicate that the site dates between A.D. 870 and 1100
(Table 2). The three radiocarbon dates, taken from
rooms 1 and 2, yielded fairly consistent calibrated
dates that have age ranges between A.D. 870 and
A.D. 1040. The ceramics recovered from Columbus Pueblo have a broader age range from A.D.
200 (Alma Plain and El Paso Brown) to about A.D.
1650 (Chupadero Black-on-white) (Table 3). However, except for the two Chupadero Black-on-white
sherds, any of the 14 decorated El Paso sherds that
may actually be El Paso Polychrome, 2 and the 40
Playas Red sherds, the majority of the sherds have
comparable manufacturing ranges to those of the
calibrated radiocarbon ages.
Assuming the Chupadero, El Paso decorated,
and Playas sherds represent a late, post-Mimbres
use of the site, the ceramic analysis suggests that
its use is by at least two separate Mimbres occupations. The first is the radiocarbon-dated occupation
of A.D. 870-1040 in rooms 1 and 2. A later occupation is suggested by the Mimbres Black-on-white
ceramics from the site. This ceramic style had a
broad production life of over three centuries. Shafer (2003:182-184) and Shafer and Brewington
(1995) defined micro-styles within the sequence
for Mimbres Black-on-white Styles II and III, each
micro-style lasting for approximately 50 years.
Harry Shafer (2010) analyzed the 89 Mimbres
Black-on-white rim sherds from Columbus Pueblo
using color photographs (Figure 3). Nearly all are
from the Middle Style III that dates from A.D.
1060-1100, indicating the site contains at least one
additional occupation after the abandonment of
rooms 1 and 2. This is supported by the identification of a nearly complete Mimbres Black-on-white
vessel that also dates to the Middle Style III.
Site Function and Settlement
Mobility at Columbus
The remainder of the article will focus on
several lines of evidence at Columbus Pueblo
that provide insights into both site function and

190

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Map of Columbus Pueblo showing selected geophysical anomalies, backhoe trenches, excavation blocks,
shovel scrapes, and test units.

Table 2. Radiocarbon dates from Columbus Pueblo (LA85774).
Feature
Lab No.*
		

Measured 14C
δ13C
Age (B.P.)		

Corrected 14C
Age (B.P.)

5 (Room 1)
B-263499
1070 ± 40
-22.3
5.1 (Room 1)
B-263500
880 ± 40
-13.7
6.2 (Room 2)
B-263501
1010 ± 40
-23.4
				

1110 ± 40
1070 ± 40
1040 ± 40

Calibrated
Age, 2 sigma
A.D. 870-1010
A.D. 890-1030
A.D. 900-920
and A.D. 950-1040

*B=Beta Analytic, Inc.

settlement mobility, specifically the evidence
that it served as a special-use site. These include
construction details of rooms, lithic analyses,
sourcing of ceramics and obsidian, and the study
of ornaments. Considering the limited area that
was excavated, individually each line of evidence
is insufficient to demonstrate function or mobility,

but when combined they suggest that Columbus
Pueblo functioned as a special-use site and the
residents remained there for only brief, intermittent
periods. They also provide evidence to suggest that
while the site and its occupants were tied to the
Mimbres system, it remained a southern Mimbres
occupation.

Kenmotsu, et al.—Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities 191
Table 3. Dates of Ceramic Types Recovered by Region at LA 85774.
Ceramic Type

Dates

Number/Percentage of Total

Mimbres Mogollon Region
Mimbres Corrugated
Alma Plain
Mimbres Black-on-white
Alma Textured Varieties
San Francisco Red

A.D. 1000-1135
A.D. 200-950
A.D. 800-1135
A.D. 200-950
A.D. 400-950

1,998/41.5
941/19.5
670/13.9
19/0.4
4/0.1

A.D. 200-1150

718/14.9

A.D. 1000-1150 and
A.D. 1250-1450
A.D. 1150-1550+
A.D. 950-1150

14/0.3

Convento Corrugated and Plain
Playas Redware
Mata Polychrome and
Mata Red-on-brown

A.D. 700-1200
A.D. 1200-1450
A.D. 700/800-1200 and
A.D. 1100-1200

343/7.1
40/0.8
4/0.1

Unidentified Chihuahuan
Polychrome

–

1/Trace

–
–

31/0.6
1/Trace

Jornada Mogollon Region
El Paso Brown
El Paso Bichrome and
El Paso Polychrome
Chupadero Black-on-white
San Andres Red-on-Terracotta

2/Trace
1/Trace

Casas Grandes Region

Other
Unidentified Brownware
Unidentified Textured

Total Ceramics		

Rooms at Columbus
Turning first to the rooms, most were surface
rooms constructed with puddled adobe walls and
plastered floors. The best information comes from
rooms 1 and 2, sub-rectangular, side by side rooms
that received the greatest amount of excavation
(Figure 4). Each of these rooms contained a series
of small postholes just inside exterior walls (Kenmotsu et al. 2010:8-15 to 8-23). The postholes
ranged from 10-15 cm in diameter and were 12-24
cm deep. Large postholes that would have served
to support heavy roof timbers were not found,

4,813/100.0

but conical pits were present in the approximate
center of rooms 1 and 2. One may have served
originally as a hearth but it is suspected to have
later functioned as a place for an interment;3 the
other pit may have served as a cradle for a vessel
as some pithouses and Classic Mimbres rooms at
the NAN Ranch contained whole vessels sitting in
floor pits (Shafer 2003:49, 64) presumably for storage. The other rooms at Columbus Pueblo received
only minimal investigation but were identified as
individual walls and partial floors were encountered during shovel scraping. Two (rooms 3 and

192

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Mimbres rims from Columbus Pueblo. The top three and the bottom right show typical Middle Style III
framing lines.

Figure 4. Looking west at Rooms 1 and 2; note postholes and pits.

Kenmotsu, et al.—Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities 193
3.1) were overlapping and postholes adjacent to
puddled adobe walls were encountered in two other
rooms. Refuse from subsequent use of the site was
found in all rooms as well as in general midden
deposits across the site.
The construction details from rooms 1 and 2
suggest repeated visits of limited duration. The
neat, squared corners identified in rooms in Galaz
(Anyon and LeBlanc 1984) and other Mimbres
sites (see Shafer 2003; Woolsey and McIntyre
1996) are not present in these rooms. In addition,
the use of small posts along the interior walls rather
than large, interior support beams and the lack of
roof fall in room interiors hint that roofs were insubstantial, and that they consisted of only small
poles and brush laid across them. In part, this may
reflect the dearth of wood that would likely have
been encountered in the vicinity of the site at the
time of occupation, forcing the residents to improvise. Nonetheless, 11 of the postholes in Room 2
were excavated through melted adobe from an earlier use of the room, indicating its episodic re-use.
Room 2 also lacked an internal hearth, suggesting
occupation of the site was long enough to warrant
room construction but not long enough to warrant
creation of an interior cooking/heating element.
Use of puddled adobe at Columbus Pueblo
is intriguing because permanent water sources
that would have been used to make the puddle
adobe are not currently present close to the site.
Although a modest channel was noted in Trench
1, it is unknown if it flowed during the time of site
occupation (Frederick 2010:3-13). Summer storm
waters can and do pond in small depressions near
the site. Toward the end of our investigations (July
2009), a significant rain event hit the site. A total
of 0.62 inches of rain was recorded at Columbus,
New Mexico, and it is probable that the same
amount fell at the site. The low-lying, grassy area
west of the site filled with 2-6 inches of water that
was still ponded when we terminated excavations
six days later. This leaves open the possibility that
similar, episodic water ponding occurred in the
Late Holocene. Nonetheless, rainfall playa studies
undertaken in the Chihuahuan and Mojave deserts
indicate that consistent annual ponding is highly
unlikely (Johnson 1997; Lichvar et al. 2004; Patrick and Stephenson 1990).
The limited availability of water at the site
suggests that it was used for fairly brief periods, a
few weeks or a season. Thus, it seems reasonable
to suggest that the rooms were constructed during

seasonal water ponding in the shallow grassy area
next to the site. In the desert, large rain events can
be seen from long distances; people living far away
could watch to see if areas of interest were possibly
being hit by such storms. As Johnson (1989:372)
notes, visitors or travelers through a region often
bring news of weather and, in desert environments,
water availability would be a topic of interest. The
archeological evidence at Columbus Pueblo indicates this place was an area of interest for Mimbres
people living in the region.
While we are uncertain what resource the
residents sought in the Columbus Pueblo area, it
required staying long enough to warrant constructing shelters. To do so, they would have had to work
quickly while water ponded, and perhaps forego
more precise room construction templates used
at sites occupied for longer durations. Hence, the
archeological data suggest that Columbus Pueblo
was visited by one or a few families traveling
quickly to the site following a rain event sufficient
to pond water that could be used to create shelters.
Because of this, it is probable that the average stay
at the site at any one time was also brief, perhaps
only a few weeks.
Lithics at Columbus
Lithic technology at any site is structured by a
number of factors such as settlement intensity, raw
material availability, and subsistence pursuits. Several aspects of Columbus Pueblo’s chipped stone
assemblage provide insights into this structure.
The lithics recovered at Columbus Pueblo
constitute the largest class of material culture recovered from the site (n=5,482). It was anticipated
that this assemblage would exhibit an expedient
core technology since this technology, where stone
is minimally altered to fit a need, used, and then
discarded, has been found at many agriculturallybased sites in the Mimbres (e.g. Dockall 1991; Nelson 1984; Shafer 2003:19) and Jornada Mogollon
(Dockall 1999; Miller 1990, 2007) regions. What
we found, however, was an expedient technology,
but one that differed significantly from agriculturally-based communities in the composition of the
tool assemblage, proportion of raw materials used,
and flake-to-core ratios.
The site contains many of the tool types that
have been associated with residential occupations,
including cores, core tools, projectile points, unifaces, etc. Table 4 compares the flakes, cores, and

194

Texas Archeological Society

tool types recovered from Columbus Pueblo with
those recovered from the Late Pithouse and Classic
Mimbres groups at Galaz (Nelson 1984) and from
Jornada pithouses excavated at 41EP1661 that date
from A.D. 1010-1150 (Kenmotsu et al. 2008:4-20).
Several distinctions can be noted between these
sites and Columbus Pueblo. First, a significant
departure from other residential sites is the ratio
of tools to flakes. Chipped stone tools represent
48 percent of the lithic assemblage. At Galaz,
lithic tools make up 15 percent of the assemblage;
similarly, at 41EP1661, they comprise 14 percent
of the assemblage. The distinction is a result of the
large number of utilized flakes in the lithic assemblage at Columbus Pueblo. A total of 5,148 flakes
were recovered during the investigations. Of these,
2,507 were analyzed. All flakes from lots containing less than 50 flakes were analyzed; 50 flakes
were analyzed from lots containing 50-200 flakes;
and with lots with 200-400 flakes, 100 flakes were
analyzed. Forty-two percent of the analyzed flakes
were utilized. Assuming the number of utilized

flakes (n=1,108) from the sample analyzed is also
representative of the unanalyzed flakes, then there
are approximately 2,270 utilized flakes in the collection from Columbus Pueblo. This is considerably higher than anticipated. Utilized flakes overwhelm all other lithic tools. They also appear to be
ubiquitous across the site, and are not confined to
any one area of investigation.
The proportion of unutilized flakes at Columbus Pueblo (52 percent) is significantly lower than
at Galaz (87.5 and 85 percent, respectively) or at
41EP1661 (88 percent). These simple tools represent over 90 percent of all the tools recovered from
Columbus Pueblo, giving a flake/flake tool ratio
of 1:9. The flake/flake tool ratio at Galaz is 7:6 in
both the Late Pithouse and Classic Mimbres periods, illustrating Columbus Pueblo’s unique lithic
technological and functional position compared to
larger residential sites.
Another attribute of the utilized flakes is their
nearly universal fragmentary condition. Of the
1,108 utilized flakes, only 57 were classified as

Table 4. Counts and Percentages of flakes, cores, and tool types from Columbus
(Kenmotsu et al. 2010), Galaz (Nelson 1984), 41EP1661.

Type

Columbus
(Late Pit
House)

Galaz
(Classic
Mimbres)

Galaz

41EP1661

Flakes*
BTF
PP
Cores
Core tools
Unifaces
Biface
Utilized Flake
Modified flake
End scraper
Side scraper
Agave knife
Drill/perforator
Hammerstone

2962 (52%)**
60 (1%)
25 (0.4%)
16 (0.2%)
9 (0.2%)
7 (0.1%)
6 (0.1%)
2270** (42%)
58 (1%)
1 (Trace%)
5 (Trace%)
–
–
16 (0.2%)

5658 (87%)
32 (0.5%)
43 (0.7%)
Unknown
unknown
unknown
unknown
775 (12%)
unknown
unknown
unknown
unknown
unknown
unknown

1323 (85%)
8 (0.5%)
54 (3%)***
unknown
unknown
unknown
unknown
175 (11.2%)
unknown
unknown
unknown
unknown
unknown
unknown

702 (86%)
–
18 (2.2%)
12 (1.5%)
–
–
2 (0.2%)
41 (5%)
21 (3%)
4 (0.4%)
2 (0.2%)
1 (0.1%)
3 (0.3%)
12 (1.5%)

Totals

5435

6508

1560

818

BTF-biface thinning flake; PP=projectile point
*Includes angular debris. **Reflects assumption discussed that a high portion of the unanalyzed flakes are utilized
flakes. ***Listed in the Galaz report as either Late Pithouse or Classic Mimbres.

Kenmotsu, et al.—Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities 195
whole (Kenmotsu et al. 2010:10-20). Many were
utilized on more than one edge (n=519). Utilized
flakes are expedient tools that tend to be used
quickly and then discarded (Shafer 2003:194). The
fragmentation and multi-edge wear suggest that
the utilized flakes from Columbus Pueblo were
intensely used. In part, this use intensity may be
related to the lack of cobbles or geological bedrock
outcrops at or near the site. People exploiting a
resource at this site would have had to transport
their own tool stone from elsewhere, underscoring
a need to use each flake to its maximum capacity.
The site also differs in a preference for finegrained tool stone, a preference driven by the need
for suitable flakes that could be used in an activity
in the immediate site environment. Fine-grained
cherts are especially suitable when the toolmaker
needs greater control over the final product (i.e.,
the tool) as they fracture more predictably than
many coarse-grained materials, and their thin edges
can cut sharply. Chert, chalcedony, and obsidian
represent 57 percent of the tool stone recovered at
Columbus Pueblo. In contrast, Nelson’s (1984:231)
analysis of the lithics at Galaz indicates a clear
preference for coarse-grained material; only 14
percent of the analyzed lithics in Classic Mimbres
assemblages were fine-grained. Dockall (1991) also
notes a preference for coarse-grained raw material
from the NAN Ranch although this may relate to
a lack of fine-grained materials in the immediate
area of the site. Interestingly, however, the lithic assemblage from the Hermanas ruin, located 25 miles
west of Columbus, was predominantly comprised
of fine-grained materials: 42 percent were Pauley
jasper and another 22 percent were Pauley chert,
a fine-grained rhyolite (Fitting 1971:15). Quarries
for both were nearby. The similarities in tool stone
suggest site residents at Hermanas ruin carried out
activities similar to those carried out at Columbus
Pueblo. Hermanas ruin, however, differs in other
respects from Columbus Pueblo. No rooms were
found in the excavations, but five burials were
excavated and pothunters reported at least 40 other
burials had been found at the site (Fitting 1971:8).
As shown in Table 4, Columbus Pueblo also
lacks a number of tool types that are usually contained in Mimbres domestic tool kits: specifically
axes, mauls, drills, perforators, hoes (i.e., tcamahias), palettes, and preforms. Their absence may
reflect sampling bias, but nonetheless we concluded that at least some should have been recovered
in the investigations. Instead, the absence of these

utilitarian household artifacts appears to be related
to the preponderance of utilized flakes in the tool
assemblage. That is, if the site was occupied for
only a short period and that occupation was tied
to the extraction of a particular resource that required smaller, thinner, implements made from
fine-grained materials that had to be transported to
the site, large knives to cut coarse vegetation along
with drills, awls, and perforators—used in a wide
variety of household activities—may not have been
the kinds of tools needed at the site.
Finally, it is interesting to note that one of the
25 projectile points recovered at Columbus Pueblo
is typed as a Snaketown Triangular Concave Base
(Kenmotsu et al. 2010:10-23, point number CN39), representative of Hohokam occupations in
south-central Arizona. This type is chronologically
compatible for the dates at Columbus Pueblo, but
well outside its recognized distribution area (Justice 2002:279). Several hundred examples were
recovered from Snaketown “and apparently the
entire sample [at that site] is derived from cache associations” (Justice 2002:285). While there is clear
evidence of contact between the Hohokam and
Mimbres settlements based on plaza cremations
and exchange of jewelry and pottery (Creel 2013a;
Parks-Barrett 2001:123), there is little evidence
that this projectile point type was exchanged. Only
a single example is known from the Reserve area of
western New Mexico (Justice 2002:286), and only
a single example (from Old Town) is known from
the Mimbres heartland (Creel, personal communication 2013). Its presence in the Columbus Pueblo
assemblage suggests an additional difference between this site and those to the north.
This lithic assemblage was unexpected, but
it argues that the site represents a locale chosen
for a seasonally exploited resource that could be
extracted via sharp-cutting tools. Given the rooms
and other evidence at the site, it appears that this
resource extraction, and any other site activities,
required a limited residence at this locale when
water was locally available.
Ceramic Production and Obsidian
Procurement at Columbus Pueblo
Examination of the production locales for
ceramics recovered from Columbus Pueblo and
the sources where the obsidian at the site had been
procured provide insight into their place within
the broader Mimbres society. Nineteen sherds

196

Texas Archeological Society

from the site were submitted for NAA studies at
the Archaeometry Laboratory at the University of
Missouri (Glascock and Ferguson 2010); portions
of five of the 19 sherds were also submitted for
petrographic analysis (Robinson 2010). These
samples were dominated by Mimbres Black-onwhite and Corrugated sherds (n=13), but Convento
ware (n=1), an undetermined corrugated ware (n=4),
and El Paso ware (n=1) were also represented in the
sample. The NAA data suggests that all the ceramics
recovered from the site are non-local, a finding
corroborated by the petrographic analysis.
It was not surprising that the El Paso ware
sherd fit within the El Paso core group from the
Tularosa Basin north of El Paso (Glascock and
Ferguson 2010) as nearly all El Paso wares from
outside the region that have been subjected to NAA
or petrographic analysis indicate production in that
region (Burgett 2007; Kenmotsu 2013; Miller 2005;
Robinson 2004; Speakman and Glascock 2005).
However, the Mimbres wares analyzed produced
unexpected results. As noted earlier, the black-onwhite vessels appear to have only been produced
in the large Mimbres towns along the Mimbres and
Gila rivers, and in the Mimbres Valley after A.D.
1000 they were only produced at Swarts and sites to
its north (Creel 2013b). Thus, it was expected that
the occupants of Columbus Pueblo either lived in
one of those towns and traveled south a considerable distance to exploit a local resource, or they
had a long standing affiliation with one town and
acquired their black-on-white vessels through that
affiliation. NAA indicates the vessels did not come
from just one Mimbres town. Rather, they came
from ceramic groups produced at several towns
in the middle and upper Mimbres valley and two
groups produced in the upper Gila (Figure 5).
Some background is needed for Figure 5. Over
30 Mimbres production centers have been identified through NAA sampling and to date over 2,600
Mimbres samples—most from the black-on-white
series—have been analyzed (Creel and Speakman
2012:2). Individual production centers are numbered Mimbres-1, Mimbres-2, and etc. In some
cases these production centers refer to individual
Mimbres towns. In other cases, the production
centers are larger areas. The NAA samples from
Columbus Pueblo indicate they were produced
at Swarts (Mimbres-2a and -2b), Galaz/Perrault
(Mimbres-4), Perrault (Mimbres-11), Upper
Gila (Mimbres-21), and the Wind Mountain area
(Mimbres-24).4

The NAA results suggest two different
explanations for the occurrence of compositionally
distinct Mimbres pottery at the site. First, if the
people using Columbus Pueblo were long time
residents of one of the towns in the heartland, over
time the people came to Columbus Pueblo from
different towns bringing with them their locally
manufactured vessels. The accumulating evidence
of the persistent use of sites by family groups over
generations (Creel and Anyon 2003; Gilman 2006;
Roth 2007; Schriever 2008, 2013; Shafer 2006),
however, weakens the argument that Columbus
Pueblo was intermittently used by people from
a variety of Mimbres towns and instead suggests
that people returning to the site were of the same
family groups. The latter possibility assumes that
the people using Columbus Pueblo resided in the
southern Mimbres area and maintained ties with a
number of Mimbres towns to the north. While we
argue that this explanation better fits the situation
at Columbus Pueblo, the number of towns they
maintained ties with remains uncertain because
the vessels made at Galaz/Perrault, Perrault, and
Swarts may have been obtained at Old Town or
other locales below the 5,400 ft. elevation (see
Creel 2013b). Nonetheless, the presence of samples
from Columbus Pueblo that were produced in the
Wind Mountain area and further north along the
Gila River suggest that the samples are evidence
that ties and interaction with more than one
Mimbres town were maintained.
Gilman and Stone’s (2013) argument that great
kiva ceremonies in the Late Pithouse period vied
for non-local attendees suggests a possible mechanism for the presence of sherds from a variety of
distinct manufacturing locales. Although most of
the Mimbres Black-on-white sherds recovered
from the site date after the fall of the great kivas,
contacts established between core families in
the Mimbres towns and Mimbres families living
outside the heartland may have continued with
repeated visits to the many locales where they had
established relationships in previous centuries.
Over time, the people using Columbus Pueblo
would have brought vessels from several of the
northern towns where they maintained contact.
The type of pottery brought to the site is also
instructive. We opined the residents came here
to exploit a resource of importance to them. Yet,
they did not restrict their vessels to utilitarian pots,
vessels one would expect on a limited use site.
Mimbres Black-on-white vessels were brought

Kenmotsu, et al.—Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities 197

Figure 5. Geographic distribution of Mimbres compositional groups identified at Columbus Pueblo.

198

Texas Archeological Society

as well. The majority are Middle Style III dating
from A.D. 1060-1100. During this period, there appears to have been a reinforcement of “‘Mimbres
consciousness’ toward a stronger sense of community as opposed to loosely associated groups”
(Powell-Martí and James 2006:172-173, emphasis
in original). Creel’s (2013b:21) perspective that
throughout the Classic period there remained a
demand for these vessels by non-pottery producing families supports this reinforcement. Hence,
black-on-white vessels on a site where one would
expect utilitarian ceramics suggests that the move
to reinforce this collective cohesiveness operated
even in the southern Mimbres area.
As a final note on the ceramics, Columbus
Pueblo contains more non-Mimbres wares than
Galaz, the NAN Ranch, and Wind Mountain
combined. Following the argument that blackon-white vessels were used for gifting or feasting
(Powell-Martí and James 2006), the presence of
larger quantities of ceramics from two distant regions could indicate that this limited use site was
a place where people from other regions came
together with Mimbres extended families to trade,
exploit the resource—possibly a grass whose seed
was germinated when waters were sufficient—that
required the use of utilized flakes, feast, or all of
the above.
The results of obsidian and rhyolite artifacts
from Columbus Pueblo submitted to Berkley’s
XRF Laboratory for sourcing (Shackley 2010)
strengthen the conclusion that the residents of the
site were from the southern Mimbres region. Figure
6 shows the locations where the sampled specimens
originated. The rhyolite likely came from the alluvial cobbles in the Rio Grande floodplain located
some 150 km to the east. Seven obsidian samples
are from Sierra Fresnal in Chihuahua, Mexico (90
km south of Columbus), and one each came from
Antelope Wells and Mule Creek (respectively 120
and 210 km from Columbus).
Schriever (2008:140-158) has summarized
obsidian sourcing studies conducted for Mimbres
sites. For sites in the Mimbres River valley, including Galaz, Old Town, Swarts, and Mattocks, Mule
Creek was the principal source. Wind Mountain, on
the Gila River, followed that same pattern. However, for southern Mimbres sites, obsidian from Antelope Wells and Sierra del Fresnal, located south and
southeast of the heartland (see Figure 6), dominate
the assemblages as they do at Columbus Pueblo.
Because the samples from Columbus Pueblo reflect

the sources for sites in the southern Mimbres area,
they suggest that the Mimbres families who came
to this locale did not call the Mimbres Valley their
home. Rather they were residents of Mimbres villages south of that valley.
Jewelry from Columbus Pueblo
Jewelry (i.e., beads, pendants, and bracelet
fragments) was found in the general fill throughout the site (Table 5). The dominant jewelry item
at Columbus Pueblo was small shell disk beads
(n=30). These materials have been found in other
Mimbres sites. The Galaz sample of shell is quite
impressive, with thousands of specimens (Anyon
and LeBlanc 1984:294-306), and copper and quartz
crystals were commonly recovered from structures
(Anyon and LeBlanc 1984:308). Wind Mountain
had a similar array of shell, bone, and crystal (Woosley and McIntyre 1996), as did the NAN Ranch
Ruin (Parks-Barrett 2001; Shafer 2003) and Old
Town (Creel n.d.).
While much smaller, the collection from
Columbus Pueblo is notable, particularly since
the site has been interpreted as a limited use site
that was re-visited episodically. Because the lithic
assemblage at the site is not a full domestic tool
kit, this suggests that the families left their drills,
knives, and other domestic tools at home. Yet, they
brought their Black-on-white ceramic bowls, items
considered to hold “a unique and valued position
in Mimbres society” (Powell-Martí and James
2006:172), and they also brought a relatively robust array of ornaments, jewelry, and special items
such as crystals.
CONCLUSIONS
In summary, the archeological investigation at
Columbus Pueblo is a small step in the characterization of southern Mimbres sites. The site contains
at least six rooms, a pithouse, and possibly other
structures. However, the evidence indicates it was
only occupied episodically when water ponded on
its margins. Its artifactual assemblage is surprisingly rich and offers information on trade and
connections with other groups. The site contains a
remarkably high proportion of utilized flakes that
were intensely used and many highly fragmented
by that use. Other larger, well-studied Mimbres
lithic collections do not have this ratio of flakes to

Kenmotsu, et al.—Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities 199

Figure 6. Map of obsidian sources and a source of a single rhyolite example from Columbus Pueblo.

utilized flakes or lithic tools. The lithics were also
carried to the site as no stone sources are available
at or close to it.
All ceramics are non-local and also had to be
transported. Moreover, the families brought their
special Black-on-white wares with them. Other
Mimbres sites contain evidence of outside contact
with other groups in the form of ornaments, nonlocal pottery, etc. Columbus Pueblo, however, despite its limited assemblage size, has much higher
raw counts of non-local pottery than many of the
large, excavated villages to the north. NAA demonstrates that the people in the southern Mimbres

region had strong ties with people in the Mimbres
River valley and these ties were steadfastly maintained, ensuring that people that lived at Columbus
Pueblo retained connections with their heartland.
Sourced obsidian from Columbus Pueblo also
suggests that these families resided in the southern
Mimbres area, not on the Mimbres River. Ornaments and jewelry are not unusual at Mimbres
sites, but their presence on a limited use site, along
with Black-on-white vessels that were held dear to
Mimbres people, likely indicates that ties between
families from the southern Mimbres region and
groups to the south and east were more strongly

Texas Archeological Society

200

Table 5. Jewelry from Columbus Pueblo.
Item

N

Small shell disk beads
Stone disk beads
Nasa beads
Large shell disk beads
Fossilized bone tube beads
Shell pendants
Stone tube bead
Olivella
Abalone
Glycymeris bracelet fragment
Unknown

30
20
12
6
4
2
1
1
1
1
1

8 quartz crystals from Hermanas (6 may be from one of
the 7 burials at the site), 1 Olivella bead.

maintained, perhaps through the venue of sharing
the exploitation of a sought-after resource.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Tom Holcomb of the Las Cruces BLM office
deserves our gratitude for his many kindnesses
during this investigation, and also for his advice
based on his knowledge of southern Mimbres sites.
He, along with Harry Shafer, Darrell Creel, and
Tim Perttula reviewed an early draft of the article
and we appreciate the comments that aided our
thinking. We also appreciate the support of Duane
Peter of Geo-Marine, Inc. and Nancy Parrish of
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth
District. They were instrumental in handling many
contractual and management issues.

3. The vessel was encountered at the top of Feature 20.
Although it was not clear if this was a burial, the feature
was treated as if it were a primary inhumation and was
not excavated. BLM personnel from the Las Cruces office
took charge of the vessel.
4. At the time our samples were subjected to NAA, the
physical area for the Mimbres-24 production zone spread
from Old Town to Wind Mountain. Subsequent research
by Creel (2013b) and Creel and Speakman (2012) have
demonstrated that Old Town and other areas below the
5400 ft. elevation did not produce black-on-white ceramics. Hence, we conclude that the Mimbres-24 production
center should be reduced to a smaller area around Wind
Mountain.

REFERENCES CITED
Anyon, R. and S. A. LeBlanc
1984 The Galaz Ruin A Prehistoric Mimbres Village in
Southwestern New Mexico. Maxwell Museum of
Anthropology and the University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque.
Bradfield, W.
1931 Cameron Creek Village: A Site in the Mimbres Area
in Grant County, New Mexico. School of American
Research, Santa Fe.
Burgett, J.
2007 Just Like That, but Different: El Paso Polychrome
in the Casas Grandes Region, Chihuahua, Mexico.
In Viva la Jornada! Papers from the 14th Biennial
Jornada Mogollon Conference, edited by J. Jurgena,
L. Jackson, and M. Thompson, pp. 53-59. El Paso
Museum of Archaeology, El Paso.
Cosgrove, H. S. and C. B. Cosgrove
1932 The Swarts Ruin: A Typical Mimbres Site in
Southwestern New Mexico. Papers of the Peabody
Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology
15(1). Harvard University, Cambridge.

END NOTES

Creel, D. C.
n.d. Ornaments at Old Town. Manuscript on file with the
senior author.

1. Creel and Speakman confine their conclusions to
the Mimbres River Valley as they were unable to sample
whole vessels from the upper Gila River.
2. El Paso Polychrome and Bichrome are extremely
recognizable decorated brownwares produced in the
Jornada Mogollon region of Texas and New Mexico.
Bichrome is the earlier of the two, dating from A.D.
1000-1250, while the polychrome type dates from A.D.
1250-1450 (Miller 2005). However, on small sherds, it is
impossible to distinguish between the two.

2013a The Hohokam, the Mimbres, and the Land Between:
a Mimbres Perspective. In Between Mimbres and
Hohokam: Exploring the Archaeology and History
of Southeastern Arizona and Southwestern New
Mexico, edited by H. D. Wallace, pp. 122-140.
Anthropological Papers No. 51. Archaeology Southwest, Tucson.

2006 Evidence for Mimbres Social Differentiation at the
Old Town Site. In Mimbres Society, edited by V. S.
Powell-Marti and P. A. Gilman, pp. 32-44. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Kenmotsu, et al.—Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities 201
2013b The Mimbres Vessel Sourcing Project. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Archeological
Society of New Mexico, May 4, 2013, Albuquerque.
Creel, D. C. and R. Anyon
2003 New Interpretations of Mimbres Public Architecture
and Space: Implications for Cultural Change. American Antiquity 68(1):67-91.
Creel, D.C. and H. J. Shafer
n.d. Mimbres Great Kivas and Plazas during the Three
Circle Phase, ca. A.D. 800-1000. Manuscript on file
with the senior author.
Creel, D. C. and R. Speakman
2012 The Mimbres Vessel Project: An Update on the Neutron Activation Analysis Effort. Paper presented at
the 17th Annual Mogollon Conference, Silver City,
New Mexico.
Dockall, J. E.
1991 Chipped Stone Technology at the NAN Ruin, Grant
County, New Mexico. Master’s thesis, Department
of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College
Station.

1999 Lithic Analysis Research Design. In Archaeology
of Ojasen (41EP289) and Gobernadora (41EP321)
Sites, El Paso County, Texas: The Texas Department
of Transportation Investigations, by H. J. Shafer,
J. E. Dockall, and R. L. Brewington, pp. 199-210.
Texas Department of Transportation, Austin, and
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Feinman, G. M., K. G. Lightfoot, and S. Upham
2000 Political Hierarchies and Organizational Strategies
in the Puebloan Southwest. American Antiquity
65:449-470.
Fitting, J. E.
1971 The Hermanas Ruin, Luna County, New Mexico.
Southwestern New Mexico Research Reports Number 3. Department of Anthropology, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland.
Frederick, C.
2010 Geoarchaeology at the Columbus Pueblo. In Archaeological Investigations at Columbus Pueblo
(LA 85774), a Southern Mimbres Occupation in
Luna County, New Mexico, by N. A. Kenmotsu,
T. L. Griffith, L. J, Legare, W. Russell, and M. R.
Miller, pp. 3-1 to 3-15. GMI Report No. 783EP.
Geo-Marine, Inc., El Paso.
Gibbs, V.
2007 Damage Assessment for Site LA 85774 in Luna
County, New Mexico. Zia Engineering and Environmental Consultants, Inc., Las Cruces, New Mexico.

Gilman, P. A.
2006 Social Differences at the Classic Period Mattocks
Site in the Mimbres Valley. In Mimbres Society,
edited by V. S. Powell-Marti and P. A. Gilman, pp.
66-83. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Gilman, P. A. and T. Stone
2013 The Role of Ritual Variability in Social Negotiations
of Early Communities: Great Kiva Homogeneity
and Heterogeneity in the Mogollon Region of the
North American Southwest. American Antiquity
78:607-623.
Glascock, M. and J. Ferguson
2010 Neutron Activation Analysis. In Archaeological
Investigations at Columbus Pueblo (LA 85774), a
Southern Mimbres Occupation in Luna County, New
Mexico, by N. A. Kenmotsu, T. L. Griffith, L. J. Legare, W. Russell, and M. R. Miller, pp. F-1 to F-18.
GMI Report No. 783EP. Geo-Marine, Inc., El Paso.
Grissino-Mayer, H.D., C.H. Baisan, and T.W. Swetnam
1997 A 1,373 Year Reconstruction of Annual Precipitation
for the Southern Rio Grande Basin. Legacy Program,
Natural Resources Division, Directorate of Environment, Fort Bliss, Texas.
Haury, E.
1936 The Mogollon Culture of Southwestern New Mexico.
Medallion Papers No. 20. Gila Pueblo, Globe,
Arizona.
Johnson, D.
1997 Geomorphological, Geoecological, Geoarchaeological and Surficial Mapping Study of McGregor
Guided Missile Range, Fort Bliss, New Mexico.
Miscellaneous Report of Investigations No. 157.
Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Johnson, G. A.
1989 Dynamics of Southwestern Prehistory: Far Outside
Looking In. In Dynamics of Southwestern Prehistory, edited by L. S. Cordell and G. J. Gumerman, pp.
371-389. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington
D.C.
Justice, N. D.
2002 Stone Age Spear and Arrow Points of the Southwestern United States. Indiana University Press,
Bloomington.
Kemrer, M. F.
2003 Mimbres Expansion into South Central New Mexico.
In Proceedings of the 13th Mogollon Archaeological
Conference (2004), edited by L. C. Ludeman, pp.
164-172. For information on CD publication contact
Dr. Lonnie C. Ludeman, Kipsch School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Mexico State
University, Las Cruces, New Mexico.

202

Texas Archeological Society

Kenmotsu, N. A.
2013 Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 84:5-28.
Kenmotsu, N. A., T. Graves, L. Jackson, C. Burt, and M. R.
Miller
2008 Archaeological Testing and Data Recovery at Seven
Sites, Maneuver Area IB, Fort Bliss Military Reservation, El Paso, Texas. Fort Bliss Historic and
Natural Resources Report No. 04-18, and Report of
Investigations No. 687EP, Geo-Marine, Inc., El Paso.
Kenmotsu, N. A., T. L. Griffith, L. J. Legare, W. Russell, and
M. R. Miller
2010 Archaeological Investigations at Columbus Pueblo
(LA 85774), a Southern Mimbres Occupation in
Luna County, New Mexico. GMI Report No. 783EP.
Geo-Marine, Inc., El Paso.
LeBlanc, S. A.
2006 Who Made the Mimbres Bowls? Implications of
Recognizing Individual Artists for Craft Specialization and Social Networks. In Mimbres Society,
edited by V. S. Powell-Marti and P. A. Gilman, pp.
15-31. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Lekson, S. H.
1992 Scale and Process in the Southwest. In Interpreting
Southwestern Diversity: Underlying Principles and
Overarching Patterns, edited by P. R. Fish and J. .J.
Reid, pp. 15-25. Anthropological Research Papers
No. 48. Arizona State Museum, Tempe.

2001 Archaeology in Southern New Mexico: The Southwest, Synthesis and Status of the Prehistoric Resources. In The Archaeological Record of Southern
New Mexico Sites and Sequence of Prehistory, edited
by S. R. Katz and P. Katz, pp. 1-101. New Mexico
Historic Preservation Division, Santa Fe.
Lichvar, R., G. Gustina, and R. Bolus
2004 Ponding Duration, Ponding Frequency, and Field
Indicators: A Case Study on Three California, USA,
Playas. Wetlands 24(2):406-413.
Miller, M. R.
1990 The Transitional Period in the Southern Jornada
Mogollon: Archaeological Investigations in the
North Hills Subdivision, Northeast El Paso, Texas.
Research Report No. 1. Batcho & Kauffman Associates, Las Cruces.
2005 Revision of the Jornada Mogollon Ceramic Sequence
and Alignment with the Greater South. In Archaeology Between the Borders: Papers from the 13th
Biennial Jornada Mogollon Conference, edited by
M. Thompson, J. Jurgens, and L. Jackson, pp. 59-88.
El Paso Museum of Archaeology, El Paso.

2007 Excavations at El Arenal and Other Late Archaic and
Early Formative Period Sites in the Hueco Mountain
Project Area of Fort Bliss, El Paso County, Texas.
Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 02-13.
Directorate of Environment, Conservation Division,
Garrison Command, Fort Bliss.
Minnis, P. E. and A. J. Wormser
1984 Late Pithouse Occupation in the Deming Region:
Preliminary Report of Excavations at the Florida
Mountain Site (LA 18839). In Recent Research in
Mogollon Archaeology, edited by S. Upham, F. Plog,
D. G. Batcho, and B. E. Kauffman, pp. 229-284.
Occasional Papers No 10. The University Museum,
New Mexico State University, Las Cruces.
Nelson, M. C.
1984 Food Selection at Galaz: Inferences from Chipped
Stone Analysis. In The Galaz Ruin: A Prehistoric
Mimbres Village in Southwestern New Mexico, by
R. Anyon and S. A. LeBlanc, pp. 225-246. Maxwell Museum of Anthropology, University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Parks-Barrett, M. S.
2001 Prehistoric Jewelry of the NAN Ranch Ruin (LA
15049), Grant County, New Mexico. Master’s thesis,
Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Patrick, N. A. and D. Stephenson
1990 Spatial Variation of Rainfall Intensities for Short Duration Storms. Hydrological Sciences 35: 667-680.
Powell-Marti, V.S. and W. D. James
2006 Ceramic Iconography and Social Asymmetry in the
Class Mimbres Heartland, A.D. 970-1140. In Mimbres Society, edited by V. S. Powell-Marti and P. A.
Gilman, pp. 151-175. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson.
Reider, M.
1999 JTF-6 Border Road Improvement Project, Columbus,
New Mexico. Archaeological Report No. 8. Aztlan
Archaeology, Inc., Tucson.
Robinson, D. G.
2004 Petrographic Analysis of Prehistoric Ceramics from
Two Sites in the La Junta Archeological District,
Presidio County, Trans-Pecos Texas. In Arroyo de
la Presa Site: A Stratified Late Prehistoric Campsite
along the Rio Grande, Presidio County, Trans-Pecos
Texas, by W. A. Cloud, pp. 227-236. Reports in Contract Archeology 9. Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul
Ross State University, Alpine.

Kenmotsu, et al.—Maintaining Ties, Seeking Opportunities 203
2010 Ceramic Petrographic Analysis of Five Pottery
Sherds from LA 85774, Luna County, Southern
New Mexico. In Archaeological Investigations at
Columbus Pueblo (LA 85774), a Southern Mimbres
Occupation in Luna County, New Mexico, by N. A.
Kenmotsu, T. L. Griffith, L. J. Legare, W. Russell,
and M. R. Miller, pp. G-1 to G-11. GMI Report No.
783EP. Geo-Marine, Inc., El Paso.

Shafer, H. J.
2003 Mimbres Archaeology at the NAN Ranch Ruin. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Roth, B. J.
2007 The Pithouse Period Occupation at the Lake Roberts
Vista Site. In Exploring Variability in Mogollon
Pithouses, edited by B. J. Roth and R. J. Stokes,
pp. 5-11. Anthropological Research Papers No. 58.
Arizona State University, Tempe.

2010 A Review of Micro-Styles on Mimbres Black-onwhite Rims from Columbus Pueblo. In Archaeological Investigations at Columbus Pueblo (LA 85774),
a Southern Mimbres Occupation in Luna County,
New Mexico, by N. A. Kenmotsu, T. L. Griffith, L.
J. Legare, W. Russell, and M. R. Miller, pp. H-1 to
H-6. GMI Report No. 783EP. Geo-Marine, Inc., El
Paso.

2013 Settlement Stability and Household Movement
during the Pithouse Period in the Mimbres Region of Southwestern New Mexico. NewsMAC
2013-4:16-17.

Schriever, B.
2008 Informal Identity and the Mimbres Phenomenon:
Investigating Regional Identity and Archaeological
Cultures in the Mimbres Mogollon. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of
Oklahoma, Norman
Schriever, B. and T. Holcomb
2005 Remembering the Origins of the Mimbres Phenomenon and Reexamining Its Distribution. In
Proceedings of the 13th Mogollon Archaeological
Conference (2004), edited by L. C. Ludeman, pp.
164-172. CD publication, for information contact
Dr. Lonnie C. Ludeman, Kipsch School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Mexico State
University, Las Cruces, New Mexico.
Sechrist, M.
1994 The Joint Task Force-Six Border Survey, Archaeological Survey along the U.S./Mexico Border Road
from Anapra to Antelope Wells, New Mexico. Report
9114A. Human Systems Research, Tularosa.
Shackley, S.
2010 X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis. In Archaeological
Investigations at Columbus Pueblo (LA 85774),
a Southern Mimbres Occupation in Luna County,
New Mexico, by N. A. Kenmotsu, T. L. Griffith, L.
J. Legare, W. Russell, and M. R. Miller, pp. E-1 to
E-10. GMI Report No. 783EP. Geo-Marine, Inc., El
Paso.

2006 Extended Families to Corporate Groups: Pithouse
to Pueblo Transformation of Mimbres Society. In
Mimbres Society, edited by V. S. Powell-Marti and
P. A. Gilman, pp. 15-31. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson.

Shafer, H. J. and R. L. Brewington
1995 Microstylistic Changes in Mimbres Black-on-White
Pottery: Examples from the NAN Ruin, Grant
County, New Mexico. The Kiva 64(3): 5-29.
Speakman, R. J. and M. D. Glascock
2005 Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Pottery from Presidio and Hudspeth Counties, Texas.
Archaeometry Laboratory, Missouri University Research Reactor, University of Missouri, Columbia,
Missouri.
Walker, C.
2010 Multi-Instrument Geophysical Investigations at
LA 85774. In Archaeological Investigations at
Columbus Pueblo (LA 85774), a Southern Mimbres
Occupation in Luna County, New Mexico, by N. A.
Kenmotsu, T. L. Griffith, L. J. Legare, W. Russell,
and M. R. Miller, pp. 6-1 to 6-35. GMI Report No.
783EP. Geo-Marine, Inc., El Paso.
Woosley, A. J. and A. J. McIntyre
1996 Mimbres Mogollon Archaeology, Charles C. DiPeso’s Excavations at Wind Mountain. An Amerind
Foundation Publication, University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque.

Identifying Causes of the Thirteenth Century
Depopulation of the Northern Southwest
Kristin A. Kuckelman

ABSTRACT
Archeologists have long endeavored to discover the circumstances surrounding the thirteenth century depopulation of the northern Southwest by Pueblo farmers, and researchers have proposed numerous theories
for this population movement. In this article, I synthesize recent research results and review pertinent historic
accounts that illuminate some causes of these pivotal emigrations. Data generated from excavations at Sand
Canyon, Castle Rock, and Goodman Point pueblos—terminal Pueblo III villages in the northern San Juan
region—contain evidence of crop failure and widespread, lethal hostilities as the “great drought” descended
about A.D. 1276. A large body of data yields compelling evidence that famine and warfare were crucial factors
in regional depopulation.

I am pleased with this opportunity to contribute to this issue of the Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society honoring Dee Ann Story.
Dee Ann was a true icon of Texas archeology, and
it would be difficult to overstate her influence on
the archeological profession, especially her role
in the educating, training, and shaping of students
in Texas over the past several decades. Her influence was subtle yet powerful and enduring; she
exemplified what the profession of archeology
should be, how it should work, what it should
be about, and how it should be done. As a young
graduate student, I absorbed and internalized Dee
Ann’s ethical and scientific standards as well as her
approach to archeological interpretation. My first
field experience, excavating at the Loeve-Fox site
on the Granger Lake project in the winter of 1978,
was shared with many alumni of Dee Ann’s various
field schools. Through these experienced excavators, I absorbed her approach to field work and
data recovery. Her influence was precisely what I
needed as I entered the profession: a template after
which to model my own research, excavation projects, values, and professional philosophy.
In the many years that have followed her service
on my Masters committee in the mid-1970s, Dee Ann
held a special place in my relationship with archeology. In a discipline that sometimes pressures researchers to cut corners or refrain from addressing controversial or unpleasant topics, or even to conceal particular

types of findings, Dee Ann’s scientific honesty and
integrity was a model by which I have fashioned my
own projects, research, and publications, and has been
the yardstick by which I have measured the quality of
research and professional conduct of others.
Dee Ann encouraged critical thinking and the
challenging of assumptions, and I think she would
be pleased with the recent critical re-evaluation
and resulting debunking of such long-held assumptions as, for example, that Pueblo peoples did not
engage in violence or warfare, that walled villages
and cliff dwellings were not built for defense, and
that subsistence stress was not a major factor in the
permanent depopulation of the northern San Juan
region by Pueblo peoples. Perhaps most importantly, as a successful, influential, and highly respected
woman in professional archeology, Dee Ann was
a role model for countless women who would follow her footsteps in the archeological profession.
I am grateful to Dee Ann for providing such strong
and capable shoulders on which I and many other
women now stand, and if she thought well of my
research, I ask for no greater compliment.
Thank you, Dee Ann, for generously sharing
your many gifts and preparing so many women and
men to perform successfully in the archeological
profession. Although my career path ultimately
led out of Texas, I carried your influence with me
through many projects in numerous locations and,
ultimately, to the northern Southwest.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

206

Texas Archeological Society
INTRODUCTION

Much of my research for more than two decades at the Crow Canyon Archaeological Center
in southwestern Colorado has focused on various
conditions, forces, and circumstances that prompted the thirteenth century depopulation of the northern Southwest. This long-standing, wide-ranging,
and important issue regarding a particularly crucial
hinge point in Pueblo prehistory has also been a
primary stated focus of the research conducted
by Crow Canyon for much of its 30 year history.
Critical thinking applied to the abundant and varied data generated by Crow Canyon’s long-term
excavation projects has yielded results that have
greatly expanded our understanding of the Pueblo
experience in the northern Southwest just before
the region underwent complete and permanent
depopulation about A.D. 1280.
Crow Canyon was fortunate to have the opportunity to conduct multi-year excavation projects at numerous sites within a major area of study
defined by Crow Canyon as the Sand Canyon
locality (Figure 1). Three of these sites—Sand
Canyon, Castle Rock, and Goodman Point pueblos—were terminal Pueblo III villages that were
constructed and occupied just before the region
was depopulated (Figures 2-7). In the decades
before complete regional depopulation, Sand
Canyon and Goodman Point pueblos, with 500 to
800 residents each, were in all likelihood the two
largest settlements in the northern Southwest, and
Castle Rock Pueblo was a medium-size village of
about 100 residents. Although contemporaneous
with Cliff Palace in nearby Mesa Verde National
Park, both Sand Canyon and Goodman Point
pueblos were about four times the size of that
largest cliff dwelling. Crow Canyon excavated
five percent of Sand Canyon Pueblo from 1984
through 1993, five percent of Castle Rock Pueblo
from 1990 through 1994, and slightly less than
one percent of Goodman Point Pueblo from 2005
through 2008. Those 19 field seasons, totaling approximately 150 months of field work, generated
abundant data from these three single-component
sites that stand as an enduring record of the
Pueblo experience in the final 20 to 30 years of
the occupation of the northern Southwest.
Of primary importance in using data from
these excavations to address the issue of regional
depopulation is the precise dating of the settlements; that is, we must first establish that the

empirical data generated by these excavations
do, in fact, represent conditions and events that
occurred just before the region was depopulated.
Tree-ring dates for the three villages in question suggest that the settlements were founded
between A.D. 1250 and 1260, and the quantity of
refuse deposited in each village indicates that the
pueblos were occupied for a significant length of
time. The latest tree-ring date for Sand Canyon
Pueblo is A.D. 1277vv, for Castle Rock Pueblo
it is 1274vv, and for Goodman Point Pueblo it is
1269vv. The suffix “vv” indicates that analysts at
the Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research in Tucson
could not determine how many years after the
stated year that the tree died. The many thousands
of tree-ring dates for structures across the region
as a whole indicate that few new timbers were obtained for construction in the late A.D. 1270s, and
that the acquisition of new timbers virtually ended
in A.D. 1280; thus, depopulation of the northern
San Juan as a whole was probably complete by
the early A.D. 1280s. The latest dates for Sand
Canyon, Castle Rock, and Goodman Point pueblos indicate that these villages were constructed
in the final decades of regional occupation by
Pueblo peoples, and that the occupations of these
settlements ended during the final depopulation
of the region. In all likelihood, residents departed
from these settlements in order to emigrate from
the region, and they reached decisions to emigrate
while residing in these villages. Therefore, evidence of reasons for these decisions should exist
in the remnants of these pueblos.
Tree-ring data influenced our research on
the depopulation of the northern Southwest in
an additional way. That a serious and prolonged
drought, referred to by archeologists as the “great
drought,” descended on the Southwest by at least
A.D. 1276 and persisted until 1299 has long
been known through tree-ring data (Berry and
Benson 2010:Figures 3.2 and 3.4; Dean and Van
West 2002; Douglass 1929). However, empirical
evidence of the actual effects of this drought on
farming families has historically been challenging
to detect in the archeological record. One result
of this problem is that the effects of the drought
and their possible role in the depopulation of the
region have been minimized or dismissed as environmental determinism by some archeologists,
even though this drought was unquestionably
detrimental to the success of farming in the region
and thus probably played a significant role in the

Kuckelman—Identifying Causes of the Depopulation of the Northern Southwest 207

Figure 1. GIS image of the central portion of the northern San Juan region, showing locations of sites mentioned in text
(courtesy Crow Canyon Archaeological Center).

complete depopulation of the area. The problem
was to design research, using the abundant data
from Sand Canyon, Castle Rock, and Goodman
Point pueblos, that could reveal whether residents
suffered subsistence stress or famine, resulting
from whatever cause, that could have influenced
Pueblo peoples to emigrate from their homeland
of many hundreds of years.
SUBSISTENCE
In the northern San Juan, the success of Pueblo
farming rested predominantly on a very specific
array of environmental conditions that included
a bimodal precipitation pattern: winter precipitation resulting in adequate ground moisture for
seed germination in the spring as well as summer
rainfall at specific times during the growing season
(Cordell et al. 2007; Wright 2010). Survival for

Pueblo farmers meant enduring numerous types
of environmental downturns, including periodic
drought and shifting seasonal precipitation patterns
(Benson et al. 2006; Dean and Van West 2002;
Douglass 1929; Larson et al. 1996; Van West and
Dean 2000; Wright 2010:78). Another specific
requirement was a growing season of adequate
length for the maturation of maize crops. Paleoenvironmental data indicate that climatic shifts to
cooler temperatures, compounded in some areas by
high elevation and by cold-air drainage, no doubt
at times resulted in a growing season too brief
for maize to mature (Adams and Petersen 1999;
Petersen 1988; Salzer 2000; Wright 2010). Thus,
in most years there existed a “dry-farming belt,”
within which climatic conditions were adequate for
growing successful maize crops. Above the upper
boundary of the belt, the growing season was too
brief, and below the lower boundary, precipitation
was insufficient or did not fall at the necessary

?

?

?

900N 950E

500

200

?

?

?

300

900

800

1500

100

?

Cliff

1300

600

?

?

400

Spring

?

Cliff

?

1000

?

KEY

Boulder

20
Meters

10

30

C 2001 by Crow Canyon Archaeological Center
All rights reserved

900N 1150E

0

Excavated area
Kiva
Possible kiva
Site-enclosing wall (inferred)
Walls
Approximate extent of rubble
Architectural block boundary
Drainage

1400

Boulders

1200

Bulldozed seismic road

1100

Figure 2. Plan map of Sand Canyon Pueblo (courtesy Crow Canyon Archaeological Center).

700

T

N

1000N 950E

1600

Site 5MT765, Architectural Blocks and Excavated Areas

208
Texas Archeological Society

Kuckelman—Identifying Causes of the Depopulation of the Northern Southwest 209
Site 5MT604, Major Cultural Units
KEY

770N 740E

Kiva
Extent of rubble
Midden
Slickrock
Inferred wall
Visible wall segment
Excavation unit

Block 100

North villageenclosing wall
Block
300

Block 200

710N 905E
West villageenclosing
wall

Block 500
Rubble

Block 400
East villageenclosing
wall

Block 600

Block
900

Block 800

Block 1100

Kiva
702

Kiva
1103

Block 700

Spring

Spring
Block 1000
West villageenclosing wall

Tower
rubble

Block 1200

600N 905E

N

Block 1300
Great Kiva
1213

T

Rubble

South village-enclosing wall

560N 740E

0

30
Meters

C 2013 by Crow Canyon Archaeological Center
All rights reserved

Figure 3. Plan map of Castle Rock Pueblo (courtesy Crow Canyon Archaeological Center).

times for successful crops. Pueblo families were
thus repeatedly forced to seek out, and re-settle
within, the current “dry-farming belt” (Petersen

1988), the location and width of which shifted erratically across the northern San Juan through time
(Van West and Dean 2000; Wright 2010).

Tru

eN

ort

Meters

h

15

Str 401
Str 402

Midden

Str 207/208
Str 206

Str 309
(alcove)

Str
126

Str
110

Str
109
Str
105

Midden

Midden

100N 134E

Str
Str 113
111

Str 103

Slickrock

Plaza

Str
104

Str
115

Str 114

Str 107

Str 120

Midden

Str

KEY

Str 108

Str 102

100N 162E

Midden

Str 112

Midden

60N 190E

Str 125

Boulders

Structure
Bedrock
Unexcavated
Boulder
Excavated area
Datum (rebar in concrete)
Wall (width mapped)
Inferred wall
Retaining/enclosing wall
(width not mapped)
Drainage
Inferred
Inferred limits of midden
Site boundary

Base of butte

Str 101

Roomblock
103

Str 302
Courtyard
Str 305
Str 306 (alcove at base of butte)
Str 301 (on top of butte)

Str 307/310 (ledge on butte face)

Str 406

Str 404/409/410

Str 204

Str
118

Butte

Str
308

120N 116E

136N 108E

Str 405

Str 403

160N 140E

Figure 4. Plan map of Goodman Point Pueblo (courtesy Crow Canyon Archaeological Center).

100N 100E

Str 205

Str 304

Str 203

108N 96E

116N 106E

Midden

Plaza

Siteenclosing
wall

Stone rectangles

Site 5MT1825, Major Cultural Units
48 meters to reservoir

Str 407

Str 408

Midden

136N 86E

C 1999 by Crow Canyon Archaeological Center
All rights reserved

0

30

160N 60E

Grid North

o

210
Texas Archeological Society

Kuckelman—Identifying Causes of the Depopulation of the Northern Southwest 211

Figure 5. Three-dimensional reconstruction of Sand Canyon Pueblo superimposed on the actual landscape (reconstruction
by Dennis R. Holloway, Architect; aerial photo by Adriel Heisey).

During the dry, cool shift in conditions during
the “great drought” (Dean and Van West 2002:Figures 4.1-4.2; Wright 2010:Figure 4.3), which began
about A.D. 1276, the farming belt might have been
completely eradicated; that is, conditions within
the current farming belt became either too dry or
too cool for farming, and because conditions were
even cooler at higher elevations and even drier
at lower elevations, families had nowhere within
the region to successfully grow crops. In addition,
these environmental conditions coalesced during a
time of high population density (Kohler et al. 2007;
Varien et al. 2007) in the central portion of the
northern San Juan. This “packing” of population
reduced opportunities to relocate fields and settlements (Cordell et al. 2007:385-86) and impacted
wild plant and animal resources that had already
been reduced by over-exploitation and drought. Do
the data from our three settlements reveal any societal impacts of this “perfect storm” of conditions?

Acute Subsistence Stress
For a variety of reasons, evidence of subsistence stress and food shortage have historically
been problematic to detect in the archeological
record. Thus, researching the possibility that families experienced drought-induced famine and the
potential ramifications of severe food shortfalls
posed significant challenges for researchers in the
northern Southwest. Detecting hunger from archeological deposits is difficult, and, as noted by White
(1992:363), even death from starvation cannot be
reliably identified on human remains. Contributing
to this research difficulty in the northern Southwest, until recently, was the lack of robust assemblages of food remains that could be firmly dated to
the period in question—the late A.D. 1200s—just
before final regional depopulation about A.D.
1280. Fortunately, Crow Canyon’s excavations at
Sand Canyon, Castle Rock, and Goodman Point

212

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Three-dimensional reconstruction of Goodman Point Pueblo superimposed on the actual landscape (reconstruction by Dennis R. Holloway, Architect; aerial photo by Adriel Heisey).

Figure 7. Reconstruction of Castle Rock Pueblo (Computer model by Dennis R. Holloway, courtesy Crow Canyon
Archaeological Center).

Kuckelman—Identifying Causes of the Depopulation of the Northern Southwest 213
pueblos yielded abundant archeobotanical and
faunal remains that reflect dietary practices near
the end of regional occupation.
In a series of recent studies, dietary data for these
three single-component settlements were examined
for evidence of subsistence stress and famine by
comparing the food consumed during most of the
time the villages were occupied to the food consumed
just before the villages were depopulated (Hoffman
et al. 2010; Kuckelman 2008, 2010a, 2010b). Dietary
practices of the residents during most of the occupation are reflected in the contents of middens and other
deposits of secondary refuse, whereas evidence of
the final meals consumed by the villagers was left
on living surfaces and in cooking features. Thus, by
comparing food refuse in middens to food refuse left
on surfaces and in hearths, we were able to detect not
only the typical subsistence practices during the 20 to
30 year occupations of these late Pueblo III villages,
but we could detect any divergences from that norm
that occurred when decisions were being reached to
migrate from the area. What did these studies reveal?
Faunal Data
During most of the time that Sand Canyon,
Castle Rock, and Goodman Point pueblos were
occupied, domesticated turkey and cottontail rabbit
constituted the primary sources of animal protein
consumed by the residents. However, the faunal
assemblages from these three settlements reveal
marked shifts in the consumption of key taxa
just before regional depopulation (Hoffman et al.
2010; Kuckelman 2010a, 2010b). Consumption of
domesticated turkey, for example, clearly a dietary
staple during this period, dropped dramatically
just before depopulation. Turkey bones comprise
between 39 and 55 percent of all identified specimens in midden assemblages from these sites, but
only 9 to 19 percent of the identified specimens
from abandonment contexts such as floors, roof
falls, and thermal features that were still in use
when occupation of these villages ended. That is,
the final meals consumed by the residents included
much less turkey than was typical for their subsistence system. In contrast, consumption of the meat
of wild animals increased just before depopulation. Artiodactyls, mostly mule deer, although
considered a key resource, actually contributed
relatively little to the diet during any part of the
occupations of these villages (Hoffman et al. 2010;
Kuckelman 2010a, 2010b), probably as a result of

excessive procurement in earlier time periods. Muir
(2007:Figure 10) found, in a study of the fauna
from Sand Canyon Pueblo, a lower than expected
richness (variety) of taxa in midden deposits and a
greater than expected richness in other contexts, including primarily abandonment contexts. His findings reflect that villagers were overly dependent
on turkey during most of the occupation but that,
just before depopulation, dietary practices shifted
to include an unusually wide variety of wild taxa.
Considered together, these findings in the
faunal record for Sand Canyon, Castle Rock, and
Goodman Point pueblos reveal that, just before
regional depopulation, consumption of the primary
source of animal protein—domesticated turkey—
decreased dramatically, and the consumption of
wild animals increased. Carbon isotope studies
indicate that domesticated turkeys were fed maize
(Katzenberg 1995; Rawlings and Driver 2010). The
faunal data thus indicate that the villagers relied
heavily, too heavily, it seems, on maize-fed turkeys
for animal protein until nearly the end of occupation, when they were compelled instead to procure
and consume the meat of an atypically wide variety
of wild game. Further, these wild animals included
taxa that were non-local, were difficult to procure,
or were non-preferred, including carnivores.
Archeobotanical Data
Although the vagaries of deposition, preservation, sampling, quantification, and analysis of
archeobotanical remains render these remains, in
general, difficult to interpret with confidence for
this type of study, subsistence shifts also appear to
be reflected in the assemblages of midden vs. abandonment contexts of plant foods for Sand Canyon
Pueblo. Plant data for Castle Rock Pueblo are not
robust enough to split along temporal parameters
for comparative purposes, and archeobotanical
analyses have not yet been completed for Goodman
Point Pueblo. At Sand Canyon Pueblo, remains
of domesticated plants (maize, gourd, butternut
squash, and beans) were found almost exclusively
in middens. The ubiquity of maize kernels in secondary refuse (Adams et al. 2007) and the carbon
isotope levels in human remains from the site (Katzenberg 1995, 1999) indicate that the predominant
domesticate was maize. However, a low incidence
of maize kernels in the fills of hearths and on floors
suggests that maize was not being prepared widely
just before occupation ended. A coincident increase

214

Texas Archeological Society

in the overall diversity of wild plant foods from 54
percent in middens to 80 percent in abandonment
contexts was noted in the archeobotanical data
(Adams et al. 2007); as with the faunal remains,
the wider variety of plant taxa included non-local
and non-preferred species. These and other data
too numerous to present here indicate that domesticated crops, especially maize, composed the bulk
of the diet of the villagers during most of the time
the settlement was occupied but that, just before
regional depopulation, villagers had less access
to domesticates and consumed a wider variety of
wild plant foods. Thus, dietary data overall reflect
excessive dependence on domesticated turkeys
and on crop foods, especially maize, during most
of the time these villages were occupied and increased dependence on a wide variety of wild-food
resources just before regional depopulation.
WARFARE
“it is certain that the cliff-builders were deeply
involved in war” stated Gustaf Nordenskiöld
in 1881 (Diamond and Olson 1991:38).

Indirect and direct indicators of warfare among
ancestral Pueblo peoples of the northern Southwest
have been documented historically and archeologically, and the assessment of both types of data is
crucial for gaining the most comprehensive understanding of outbreaks of unrest and for placing
these phenomena within a wider cultural context.
Indirect indicators of violence for the latter half of
the thirteenth century include defensible settlement
locations, defensive architecture, population aggregation, traditional narratives, warfare imagery,
and structural burning. Direct evidence of warfare
can be obtained from the remains of residents who
perished in their villages as the region was undergoing final depopulation by Pueblo peoples.
Indirect Evidence
Evidence of warfare in the northern Southwest in the form of defensive architecture and in
the selection of defensible settlement locations
has been noted for more than a century (Birdsall
1891; Chapin 1892; Holmes 1878; Jackson 1876;
Morley 1908; Morris 1939:43; Newberry 1876;
Nordenskiöld 1979 [1893]). As early as 1859,
geologist John S. Newberry, U.S. Army Corps of

Engineers, observed the following in regard to the
ancestral Pueblo sites in the southwestern corner
of Colorado: “All of these [ruins] … are admirably located for defense, and would be easily
held by a handful of determined men against any
number of assailants armed only with the weapons
of…warfare” (Newberry 1876:88). Photographer
William Henry Jackson (1876:373), after spending the summers of 1874 through1876 surveying
the Four Corners area for the U.S. government as
part of the geographical and geological Hayden
Survey party, wrote of the cliff dwellings, which
were last inhabited just before the region was depopulated: “One little house in particular, at the
extremity of this ledge…was especially unique
in the daring of its site, filling the mind with
amazement at the temerity of the builders and the
extremity to which they must have been pushed.”
And William Henry Holmes (1878:384), geologist
and cartographer for the Hayden Survey, inferred
the following:
During seasons of invasion and war,
families were probably sent to [cliffhouses] for security, while the warriors
defended their property or went forth into
battle; and one can readily imagine that
when the hour of total defeat came, they
served as a last resort for a disheartened
and desperate people.

Gustaf Nordenskiöld (1979:58 [1893]), a
young Swedish scientist who participated in the
excavation of numerous cliff dwellings in 1891
in what later became Mesa Verde National Park,
observed, “Here as in so many of the ruins already
described, it is evident that defence and fortification of the dwelling were uppermost in the mind of
its builders.” Also, a naturally narrow access route
into Balcony House had been constricted into an
easily defended crawlway:
At the south end of the ruin additional
precautions have been taken for the
strengthening of its defences. A very narrow cleft, which forms the only means
of reaching the south part of the ledge,
has been walled up to a height of nearly
five metres. The lower part of the wall
closing the cleft is pierced by a narrow
tunnel… Through this tunnel a man may
creep on hands and knees (Nordenskiöld
1979:66–67 [1893]).

Kuckelman—Identifying Causes of the Depopulation of the Northern Southwest 215
Tree-ring dating of wood in the tunnel roof indicates that this feature was constructed about A.D.
1278 (Fiero 1998:34; Parks and Dean 1998:17),
two years after onset of the “great drought” and
only a few years before the region was completely
depopulated. In the early 1900s, Harvard archeologist Sylvanus Morley conducted excavations at the
site of the terminal Pueblo III village called Cannonball Ruins and observed the following about its
canyon-head location:
This huddling close to the rim insured
impregnability from any attack that might
have been directed against the settlement
from enemies in the canyon itself, while
the watchtower was so placed as to give
ample warning of invasion from that side
and thus afforded an additional element
for safety (Morley1908:597–598).

Such impressions of early explorers and scientists are important historically as observations of
educated and knowledgeable individuals who had
traveled widely. But has subsequent archeological
research corroborated these early impressions and
produced additional data of a concern with defense
among these final Pueblo occupants of the region?
In the past 30 years, Crow Canyon’s excavations
at Sand Canyon, Castle Rock, and Goodman Point
pueblos have yielded additional and compelling
evidence that residents of the region in the midA.D. 1200s invested a great deal of thought and
labor in protecting themselves against attack.
About A.D. 1250, many existing communities
of dispersed farmsteads aggregated into villages
within canyon alcoves, walled canyon-head pueblos, or into settlements in other defensible locations
such as the butte at Castle Rock. Some of these
villages incorporated one or more springs, and its
residents thereby established proprietary access to
these precious permanent water sources. Numerous
alcoves were defensible by virtue of their naturally
difficult access and impregnability from multiple
directions; canyon-rim villages such as Sand Canyon and Goodman Point pueblos were protected
by massive masonry enclosing walls that were a
minimum of one story tall and contained few and
constricted entry features.
Additional defensive features have been
documented at Sand Canyon Pueblo (Kuckelman
2010b:499) and at numerous cliff dwellings at
Mesa Verde (Fiero 1998:124; Palonka 2009; Street
2001:199) and include parapets, tunnels, sealed

doorways, and dividing walls that blocked access
between different areas of particular cliff dwellings, and angled loopholes through masonry walls
that allowed residents to view specific areas of the
landscape outside the village from a concealed vantage point. Three access-restrictive constructions
at Balcony House that have been interpreted as
defensive, including the aforementioned entryway
tunnel, were built in A.D 1278 and 1279 (Fiero
1998:48), just before final regional depopulation.
Many multi-story towers were constructed
during this time and possess clearly defensive attributes: some were strategically located around
the village perimeter and could be accessed only
from the interior of the pueblo (see Figures 5-7).
In many cliff dwellings, a tower was constructed
at each end of the alcove (Fiero 1998:50), which
would have been advantageous defensively. Some
towers were connected by tunnel to a nearby
kiva; this architectural configuration provided a
concealed escape route from a subterranean, residential structure with poor defensible prospects to
the most defensible location in the settlement: a
multi-story structure whose rooftop could have
been perpetually stocked with weapons.
The foregoing data include defensive measures
taken in response to the concerns of Pueblo residents of the region about being attacked that began about A.D. 1250 and continued until regional
depopulation about 1280. Thus, the appearance
of a concern for defense by the final Pueblo occupants of the northern Southwest that was first
documented more than 100 years ago has been
corroborated by modern archeological investigations and documentation at the sites of settlements
constructed and inhabited in the final decades of
occupation by Pueblo peoples.
The effects of the “great drought” were not
experienced until A.D. 1276. What, then, prompted
these defensive precautions as early as the 1250s?
Evidence suggests that violence was escalating
before the onset of the “great drought” (Kuckelman 2010b; Lambert 1999). Street (2001:198), for
example, reports that at Long House, in A.D. 1260
or 1261, partial, disarticulated remains of a total of
five individuals were sealed beneath burned rooffall debris in two kivas. Cattanach (1980:145-146)
describes the deliberately violent treatment exercised on the remains of one of these individuals.
Although the motivations for an elevated concern
with defense and a concomitant increase in violence beginning about A.D. 1250 are not yet clear,

216

Texas Archeological Society

they could have been stimulated by a combination
of factors: deteriorating environmental conditions
including cooling temperatures and a disruption
of the long-standing bimodal precipitation pattern
(Wright 2010), population packing (Kohler et al.
2007; Varien et al. 2007) into a shrinking farming
belt, and increasingly depleted natural resources in
areas that had been heavily populated for hundreds
of years.
Additional indirect evidence of warfare in the
northern Southwest includes a traditional Hopi
account of a massacre related by John Moss, who
served as guide for the Hayden Survey party during their exploration of southwestern Colorado
(Jackson 1876). This narrative, attributed to the
butte and to the associated archeological site
known today as Castle Rock and Castle Rock
Pueblo, respectively, recounted a prolonged attack
that caused the deaths of many individuals, ended
the occupation of the village, and resulted in the
migration of the survivors to new homes on the
Hopi mesas of northeastern Arizona. The Hayden
Survey party promptly dubbed the site “BattleRock” (Jackson 1876:Plate V), and a journalist in
the party, Ernest Ingersoll, published the account
(New York Tribune, November 3, 1874) 1. The data
from Crow Canyon’s excavations at the site corroborate many details contained in this narrative.
Imagery can also serve as a reflection of important cultural events and developments among
non-literate societies. The various non-portable
images created in the northern San Juan region
rock art during this time included some figures that
appear to reflect social upheaval or warfare. Many
panels that depict anthropomorphic figures wielding bows with arrows (Cole 1990:Plate 85; Hurst
and Pachak 1989:16; Schaafsma 1971:Figures 3233 and 121 and Plates 14, 16; 1980:Figure 65) may
be hunting scenes, but others (Hurst and Pachak
1989:10) present a more violent aspect. Crotty
(2001:65) notes, “Militaristic imagery in Anasazi
rock art and kiva murals emerges around the mid
A.D. 1200s.” Images of shields and shield bearers
(Castleton 1979:Figures 7.66-7.67 and 7.75; Crotty
2001:69-71; Schaafsma 1980:171), including those
in a kiva at Cliff Palace (Crotty 2001:71 and Figure
4.4), are inferred to reference warfare, because
such hide or basketry arrow deflectors would have
been used as defensive weapons, and unlike spears,
hafted axes, and bows and arrows, would not also
have been used for hunting or domestic activities.
A panel on the south face of the butte at Castle

Rock Pueblo features a shield and weapons, and the
scene suggests violent human interaction (Kuckelman 2000b:Figure1). This panel depicts three
anthropomorphic figures side by side: the center
figure appears to train an arrow cocked in a bow
on the left figure, who holds a shield in defense
while falling away from the threatening figure.
The figure on the right holds a bow with an arrow
and faces away from the other figures. This scene
might have been created as a record of the fatal attack that ended the occupation of that village or as
a reflection of the climate of warfare at that time.
Numerous researchers have recognized the
presence of burned structure roofs at the sites of
various peoples of the Southwest as evidence of
warfare both in ancient times (Irwin-Williams
1980:154; LeBlanc 1998, 1999, 2001:28; Mackey
and Green 1979; Morris 1939:42; Oliver 2001;
Rice and LeBlanc 2001; Tuggle and Reid 2001:93;
Turner and Turner 1999; Wilcox and Haas 1994)
and historically (Brew 1949:21; James 1974:26,
63; LeBlanc 1998:Table 7.2; Lomatuway’ma et
al. 1993:119, 147, 401; Turner and Turner 1999).
Data indicate that portions of many kiva roofs
burned at Sand Canyon, Castle Rock, and Goodman Point pueblos, and it is likely that these fires
were intentional (Kuckelman 2000c:paragraph 3;
Kuckelman et al. 2007:paragraph 28). However, it
is not likely that most of this burning occurred during attacks on these villages, because kiva roofs,
which were constructed mostly of large timbers
and thick layers of sediment, would not have been
burned quickly or easily (Glennie 1983; Wilshusen
1986). This fact, along with stratigraphic data for
these sites, suggests instead that most burned roofs
were methodically set afire by the occupants themselves or by considerate others in order to ritually
“close” residences being abandoned in preparation
for emigration from the area; the concept of ritual
“closing” has been explored by several researchers
(e.g. Billman et al. 2000:157; Lightfoot 1993:298;
Lipe 1995:157; Wilshusen 1986). Some kivas could
thus have been closed before the final attack on the
village, and others might have been closed after attackers departed. A few exceptions include Kiva 501
at Sand Canyon Pueblo (Kuckelman 2010b:515)
and Kiva 101 at Castle Rock Pueblo (Crow Canyon
2001; Kuckelman et al. 2002:494): the roofs of both
of these kivas had been burned, and human remains
in roof-fall debris and on the floor, respectively,
were thermally altered, suggesting that the burning was not a considerate act. In addition, Street

Kuckelman—Identifying Causes of the Depopulation of the Northern Southwest 217
(2001:198-199) inferred that structural burning was
associated with a village-wide violent event at the
cliff dwelling called Long House.
Direct Evidence
The foregoing data are indirect indicators of
violence and warfare. Do any data confirm that
warfare actually occurred in the late A.D. 1200s
in the northern San Juan region, and that violence
played a role in the permanent depopulation of
the region by Pueblo peoples? The most direct
evidence of violence and warfare in the northern
San Juan is contained in the human remains record. These types of data hold special significance;
Walker (1997:146) observes that human remains
“provide a direct source of evidence regarding
patterns of violence in both prehistoric and historically documented societies.” Because these
data are “free from cultural bias…human remains
are extremely valuable sources of evidence for
reconstructing what actually happened in the past”
(Walker 2008:14-15). Physical remains thus provide an objective and therefore crucially important
perspective that constitutes a powerful weapon
against individuals of any time or place who would
rewrite the past into whatever narrative suits their
purposes (Walker 2008:14).
Published observations by early relic hunters
in the Mesa Verde cliff dwellings provide unique
information regarding the Pueblo depopulation of
the region. The latest deposits at these sites were
the best preserved record anywhere in the region
of the final months, weeks, and even hours of occupation, but were also, unfortunately, the first
materials to be disturbed, churned, and depleted
by relic enthusiasts in the late 1800s. For example,
during an official 1910 excavation of Balcony
House, for example, Edward Moore Nusbaum
(1910:4) lamented, “the building has been gutted
by the Wetherill boys years ago and they left almost
nothing.” And his son, Jesse Nusbaum (1998:102
[ca. 1910]), stated, “It seems that Balcony House
was thoroughly excavated long before our work began… A very small amount of material was found
by us, and no trace can be gained of the collections
that have been reported as excavated at Balcony
House in former years.”
Thus, many human remains were discarded,
lost, sold to collectors or historical societies,
or removed from this country (Diamond and
Olson 1991; McNitt 1966; Nordenskiöld 1979

[1893]). The emphasis, at that time, on complete,
undamaged specimens worthy of museum display
resulted in many human remains found in cliff
dwellings being considered “not worth saving”
(Nordenskiöld 1979:45, 47 [1893]), even though
damaged or incomplete remains on or near the
ground surface might well have been the remains
of individuals who died as a result of enemy
attack. For example, three skeletons were observed
in the rubble during the earliest recorded visit of
Cliff Palace (McNitt 1966:25); warfare is one
of the few types of events or circumstances that
would have resulted in three bodies being left on
the prehistoric ground surface when occupation of
a settlement ended. At Long House, Nordenskiöld
(1979:29 [1893]) noted “ribs, vertebrae, etc.”
strewn about the ruin. On a kiva floor in Ruin 16
were found the remains of a man, partly within the
ventilator tunnel, who had “fallen in defence of his
hearth and home” (Nordenskiöld 1979:35 [1893]).
John Wetherill reported finding five desiccated
bodies, all with fractured skulls, on a kiva floor in
a cliff dwelling that Earl Morris (1939:42) later
dubbed Ruin 6 (see Figure 1). At Spruce Tree
House, Fewkes (1909:24) observed: “In clearing
the kivas several fragments of human bones and
skulls were found by the author. The horizontal
passageways, called ventilators, of four of the
kivas furnished a single broken skull each, which
had not been buried with care.” Nordenskiöld’s
overall impression was that:
The people of the Mesa Verde finally
succumbed to their enemies. The memory
of their last struggles is preserved by
the numerous human bones found in
many places, strewn among the ruined
cliff-dwellings. These human remains
occur in situations where it is impossible
to assume that they have been interred
(1979:170 [1893]).

In addition to violent deaths, Fewkes (1911:3940) described remnants of possible anthropophagous events by stating that calcined human remains
were associated with cliff dwellings. Burned and
fragmented human remains were reported from
a refuse area at the back of Cliff Palace (Fewkes
1909:17; McNitt 1966:41). Fewkes (1911:39)
suggested that these charred and fragmentary human remains might have resulted from cremation,
although he recognized that Pueblo Indians have
no history of cremating their dead.

218

Texas Archeological Society

The foregoing, first-published observations
and descriptions of human remains in Mesa Verde
cliff dwellings form an important record. It is
likely that the remains that were on or near the
ground surface at many of these sites held vital
information, most of which is now irretrievably
lost, regarding violent events associated with the
final depopulation of the region. The common and
popular belief in the late 1800s that warfare events
occurred in the cliff dwellings and played a role in
the thirteenth century depopulation of the northern
Southwest eventually faded, in the estimation of
many archeologists, into “just a theory.”
By the early 1990s, the state of knowledge
changed abruptly as a result of Crow Canyon’s
excavations at Castle Rock and Sand Canyon
pueblos. These villages, occupied during the final
decades of regional occupation, not only revealed
a concern for defense in the selection of defensible
locations and the construction of defensive architecture, but also yielded multiple types of data in
the human remains record that indicate that violence erupted into widespread and lethal warfare
in the final years of regional occupation by Pueblo
peoples. Later research at Goodman Point Pueblo
yielded similar findings. What does the record of
human remains at these sites reveal?
When occupation of these villages ended,
many human remains were left in abandonment
contexts, and some elements display weathering
and carnivore damage. Antemortem and perimortem trauma, especially depression fractures of the
cranium, are also common on these remains, as
are many anthropogenic modifications that reflect
a wide variety of violent actions, including trophy
taking and anthropophagy. The human remains data
for these three sites provide a unique contribution
to our understanding of violence in this region in
the late A.D. 1200s.
More specifically, at Sand Canyon, Castle
Rock, and Goodman Point pueblos, most of the human remains encountered during excavations were
located in abandonment contexts; that is, rather
than being formally interred, the remains had been
left on structure floors, rooftops, or other extramural surfaces, and the deposition of the remains was
simultaneous with the end of village occupation.
The remains were those of men, women, and children, and were either in articulated but sprawled
positions or were disarticulated. Some remains
exhibit antemortem trauma, most of which consist
of healed or healing depression fractures of the

cranium but also include at least one broken nose
and a severely infected wound to a tibia (Kuckelman 2010b; Kuckelman et al. 2002). The presence
of these lesions indicates that residents of multiple
large villages survived one or more non-lethal
physical assaults.
More abundant are indicators of lethal-level
perimortem trauma that in all likelihood caused
death. Most such trauma consisted of depression
fractures of the cranium resulting from blunt
force trauma that had probably been inflicted by
stone axes hafted onto wood handles. Additional
anthropogenic modifications include cut marks,
chop marks, reaming, spiral fractures, crushing,
end polish, thermal alteration, and numerous other
modifications (Kuckelman 2012) indicative of
scalping and other trophy-taking as well as anthropophagy (Kuckelman 2010b). Evidence of scalping
was noted on numerous crania at Sand Canyon
and Castle Rock pueblos. This type of trophy taking was practiced by historic Pueblo peoples, and
such scalps were considered “rain-senders” (Ellis
1979:444-445; Parsons 1929:138, 1939; see also
Allen et al. [1985:31-32]). Scalping—and, by association, warfare—could thus have been culturally sanctioned strategies for promoting increased
precipitation in times of severe drought.
The foregoing evidence, along with additional data too numerous to present here but that
are presented in detail elsewhere (Kuckelman
2010b, 2012; Kuckelman et al. 2002; Kuckelman
and Martin 2007), suggest that near the time of
complete depopulation of the Mesa Verde region, these villages were attacked, many of the
residents of the settlements were killed, and the
attacks ended the occupations of those pueblos.
The wide spatial distribution of remains left in
abandonment contexts at all three sites suggests
that violence occurred in most areas of these villages, which indicates that the settlements were
still widely populated at the time of attack. It is
reasonable to infer, particularly if the evidence
of violence from the cliff dwellings is also considered, that the violence experienced in these
villages was perpetrated on the residents of many
other settlements across the region as well.
CONCLUSIONS
Numerous aspects of the circumstances
that prompted the complete and permanent

Kuckelman—Identifying Causes of the Depopulation of the Northern Southwest 219
depopulation of the northern Southwest by Pueblo
peoples have been revealed as a result of recent
excavations at the sites of three terminal-Pueblo
III villages: Sand Canyon, Castle Rock, and Goodman Point pueblos. The architectural, tree-ring,
subsistence, and bioarcheological data for these
sites, supplemented by observations and descriptions of the earliest visitors of European ancestry
to Mesa Verde cliff dwellings and by traditional
narrative, fixed imagery, and additional environmental and climatic data from related disciplines,
are indicative of previously unknown key aspects
of regional depopulation. These abundant and various data suggest that, amidst increasing social unrest and physical violence in the mid-A.D. 1200s,
previously dispersed communities aggregated to
construct defensive villages in canyon settings on
or near their water sources. Population density in
the central part of the region peaked, and families
were heavily dependent on maize and domesticated
turkey for sustenance.
The onset of the “great drought” by A.D. 1276
resulted in crop failure and a reduction of wild
resources. The size of turkey flocks declined, probably as the availability of maize for feed dwindled.
Farmers turned to a largely hunting and gathering
subsistence strategy. As competition for sparse
wild resources intensified, violence escalated into
warfare as a means to raid concealed food stores
and engage in anthropophagy. Countless men,
women, and children perished, and the occupation of many villages ended. It is likely that other
social, political, economic, environmental, and
religious factors also played roles in permanent
regional depopulation late in the thirteenth century
(Ahlstrom et al. 1995; Benson et al. 2006; Cameron
1995; Cameron and Duff 2008; Cordell 1997:365397; Cordell et al. 2007; Dean et al. 2000; Dean
and Van West 2002; Glowacki 2006, 2010; Kohler
2000, 2010; Kohler et al. 2010; Kohler et al. 2008;
Larson et al. 1996; Lipe 1995; Lipe and Varien
1999:339-343; Petersen 1994; Salzer 2000; Van
West and Dean 2000; Varien et al. 2007; Wright
2006, 2010). Those who survived this grim chapter in Pueblo prehistory fled southward into what
are now New Mexico and Arizona, leaving the
northern San Juan region permanently devoid of
Pueblo peoples.
Who was responsible for the attacks on Sand
Canyon, Castle Rock, and Goodman Point pueblos,
as well as on many cliff dwellings? The lack of
data to suggest the presence of any culture group

other than ancestral Pueblo peoples in the region
during the late A.D. 1200s suggests internecine
warfare (Kuckelman 2010b:520; Linton 1944;
Lipe 1995:161-162; Lipe and Varien 1999:341).
Additional data support this conclusion: (1) the villages destroyed by attacks included Sand Canyon
and Goodman Point pueblos—the two largest, most
populous, and most heavily fortified villages in the
northern Southwest—and it is unlikely that a travelling band of non-Pueblo warriors could defeat
these settlements; (2) no one, such as victorious
warriors and their families, settled in the region
after the residents were killed or expelled; and (3)
no non-Pueblo remains have been identified in the
villages that were attacked. In addition, earlier outbreaks of warfare in the northern San Juan region,
during droughts in the initial decades of the A.D.
800s and in the mid-A.D. 1100s, left archeological
and bioarcheological signatures similar to those
documented at the sites of settlements that were
attacked in the late 1200s, and the aggressors in
those earlier warfare events were almost certainly
Pueblo peoples.
No doubt the depopulation of the northern San
Juan region by Pueblo peoples in the late thirteenth
century was much more complex than presented
here; many additional conditions and circumstances must have also influenced such a major cultural
event. However, this application of a wide variety
of scientific and historical data toward defining factors that stimulated this depopulation has yielded
the most comprehensive picture yet attained of an
enigmatic and pivotal juncture in prehistory, when
the geographical and cultural landscape of Pueblo
peoples changed forever.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Nancy Kenmotsu and
Tim Perttula for inviting me to participate in the
2012 Society for American Archaeology symposium in honor of Dee Ann Story from which
this publication derived. It was a privilege to
contribute.
ENDNOTE
1. The full text of Ingersoll’s article, as presented by
Jackson (1876:380), can be accessed in its entirety online
(Kuckelman 2000a).

220

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Adams, K. R., K. A. Kuckelman, and V. E. Bowyer
2007 Archaeobotanical Remains. In The Archaeology
of Sand Canyon Pueblo: Intensive Excavations at
a Late-Thirteenth-Century Village in Southwestern Colorado [HTML Title], edited by Kristin A.
Kuckelman. Available: http://www.crowcanyon.org/
sandcanyon. Date of use: 30 October 2013.
Adams, K. R. and K. L. Petersen
1999 Environment. In Colorado Prehistory: A Context for
the Southern Colorado River Basin, edited by W. D.
Lipe, M. D. Varien, and R. R. Wilshusen, pp. 14-50.
Colorado Council of Professional Archaeologists,
Denver.
Ahlstrom, R. V. N., C. R. Van West, and J. S. Dean
1995 Environmental and Chronological Factors in the
Mesa Verde-Northern Rio Grande Migration. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 14:125-142.
Allen, W. H., C. F. Merbs, and W. H. Birkby
1985 Evidence for Prehistoric Scalping at Nuvakwewtaqa
(Chavez Pass) and Grasshopper Ruin, Arizona. In
Health and Disease in the Prehistoric Southwest,
edited by C. F. Merbs and R. J. Miller, pp. 23-42.
Anthropological Research Papers No. 34. Arizona
State University, Tempe.
Benson, L., K. Petersen, and J. Stein
2006 Anasazi (Pre-Columbian Native-American) Migrations during the Middle-12th and Late-13th
Centuries—Were They Drought-Induced? Climatic
Change DOI:10.1007/s10584-006-9065-y.
Berry, M. S. and L. V. Benson
2010 Tree-Ring Dates and Demographic Change in the
Southern Colorado Plateau and Rio Grande Regions. In Leaving Mesa Verde: Peril and Change in
the Thirteenth-Century Southwest, edited by T. A.
Kohler, M. D. Varien, and A. M. Wright, pp. 53-74.
University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Billman, B. R., P. M. Lambert, and B. L. Leonard
2000 Cannibalism, Warfare, and Drought in the Mesa
Verde Region During the Twelfth Century A.D.
American Antiquity 65:145-178.
Birdsall, W. R.
1891 The Cliff Dwellings of the Cañons of the Mesa
Verde, Journal of the American Geographical Society of New York (23):584-620.

Brew, J. O.
1949 The History of Awatovi. In Franciscan Awatovi:
The Excavation and Conjectural Reconstruction of
a 17th-Century Spanish Mission Establishment at
a Hopi Indian Town in Northeastern Arizona, by
R. G. Montgomery, W. Smith, and J. O. Brew, pp.
1-43. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American
Archaeology and Ethnology Volume 36. Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Cameron, C. M.
1995 Migration and the Movement of Southwestern
Peoples. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
14:104-124.
Cameron, C. M. and A. I. Duff
2008 History and Process in Village Formation: Context
and Contrasts from the Northern Southwest. American Antiquity 73(1):29-57.
Castleton, K. B.
1979 Petroglyphs and Pictographs of Utah, Volume 2: The
South, Central, West, and Northwest. Utah Museum
of Natural History, Salt Lake City.
Cattanach, G. S., Jr.
1980 Long House, Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado.
Publications in Archeology No. 7H. National Park
Service, Washington, D.C.
Chapin, F. R.
1892 The Land of the Cliff-Dwellers. Appalachian Mountain Club. University Press, Cambridge.
Cole, S. J.
1990 Legacy on Stone: Rock Art of the Colorado Plateau
and Four Corners Region. Johnson Books, Boulder,
Colorado.
Cordell, L.
1997 Archaeology of the Southwest. 2nd Edition. Academic
Press, San Diego.
Cordell, L. S., C. R. Van West, J. S. Dean, and D. A. Muenchrath
2007 Mesa Verde Settlement History and Relocation. Kiva
72(4):379-405.
Crotty, H. K.
2001 Shields, Shield-Bearers, and Warfare Imagery in
Anasazi Art, 1200–1500. In Deadly Landscapes:
Case Studies in Prehistoric Southwestern Warfare,
edited by G. E. Rice and S. A. LeBlanc, pp. 65-83.
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Crow Canyon Archaeological Center
2001 The Castle Rock Pueblo Database [HTML Title].
Available: http://www.crowcanyon.org/castlerockdatabase. Date of use: 8 November 2013.

Kuckelman—Identifying Causes of the Depopulation of the Northern Southwest 221
Dean, J. S., G. J. Gumerman, J. M. Epstein, R. L. Axtell, A.
C. Swedlund, M. T. Parker, and S. McCarroll
2000 Understanding Anasazi Culture Change through
Agent-Based Modeling. In Dynamics in Human and
Primate Societies: Agent-Based Modeling of Social
and Spatial Processes, edited by T. A. Kohler and G.
J. Gumerman, pp. 179-205. Oxford University Press,
New York.
Dean, J. S. and C. R. Van West
2002 Environment-Behavior Relationships in Southwestern Colorado. In Seeking the Center Place: Archaeology and Ancient Communities in the Mesa Verde
Region, edited by M. D. Varien and R. H. Wilshusen,
pp. 81-99. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Diamond, I. L. and D. M. Olson
1991 Letters of Gustaf Nordenskiöld, Written in the Year
1891 and Articles from the Journals Ymer and Photographic Times. Mesa Verde Museum Association,
Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado.
Douglass, A. E.
1929 The Secret of the Southwest Solved by Talkative
Tree Rings. National Geographic 56(6):737-770.
Ellis, F. H.
1979 Laguna Pueblo. In Southwest, edited by A. A. Ortiz,
pp. 438-449. Handbook of North American Indians,
Vol. 9. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Fewkes, J. W.
1909 Antiquities of the Mesa Verde National Park: Spruce
Tree House. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin
No. 41. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
1911

Antiquities of the Mesa Verde National Park: Cliff
Palace. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No.
51. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

Fiero, K.
1998 Balcony House: A History of a Cliff Dwelling,
Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado. Mesa Verde
Museum Association, Mesa Verde National Park,
Colorado.
Glennie, G. D.
1983 Replication of an A.D. 800 Anasazi Pithouse in
Southwestern Colorado. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, Washington State University,
Pullman.
Glowacki, D. M.
2006 The Social Landscape of Depopulation: The Northern San Juan, A.D. 1150–1300. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, Arizona State University, Tempe.

2010 The Social and Cultural Contexts of the ThirteenthCentury Migrations from the Central Mesa Verde
Region. In Time of Peril, Time of Change: Explaining Thirteenth-Century Pueblo Migration, edited by
T. A. Kohler, M. D. Varien, and A. M. Wright, pp.
200-221. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Hoffman, A., K. Kuckelman, L. Nagaoka, and S. Wolverton
2010 Dietary Uses of Animal Resources Prior to the
Pueblo III Depopulation of the Mesa Verde Region.
Poster presented at the 75th Annual Meeting of the
Society for American Archaeology, St. Louis.
Holmes, W. H.
1878 Report on the Ancient Ruins of Southwestern Colorado, Examined During the Summers of 1875 and
1876. In Tenth Annual Report of the U.S. Geological
and Geographical Survey of the Territories for 1876,
pp. 382-408. Geological Survey, Washington, D.C.
Hurst, W. B. and J. Pachak
1989 Spirit Windows: Native American Rock Art of Southeastern Utah. Spirit Windows Project, Blanding,
Utah.
Irwin-Williams, C.
1980 Investigations at Salmon Ruin: Methodology and
Overview. In Investigations at the Salmon Site: The
Structure of Chacoan Society in the Northern Southwest, Vol. 1, part 2, edited by C. Irwin-Williams and
P. H. Shelley, pp. 105-167. Eastern New Mexico
University, Portales.
Jackson, W. H.
1876 Ancient Ruins in Southwestern Colorado. In Annual Report of the United States Geological and
Geographical Survey of the Territories, Embracing
Colorado and Parts of Adjacent Territories, Being
a Report of Progress of the Exploration for the Year
1874, authored by F. V. Hayden, pp. 367-381. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
James, H. C.
1974 Pages from Hopi History. University of Arizona
Press, Tucson.
Katzenberg, M. A.
1995 Report on Bone Chemistry Studies from the Sand
Canyon Locality. Manuscript on file, Crow Canyon
Archaeological Center, Cortez, Colorado.
1999 Human Skeletal Remains. In The Sand Canyon Archaeological Project: Site Testing, edited by M. D.
Varien, Chapter 19. Available: http://www.crowcanyon.org/sitetesting. Date of use: 30 October 2013.

Kohler, T. A.
2000 The Final 400 Years of Prehispanic Agricultural
Society in the Mesa Verde Region. Kiva 66:191-204.

222

Texas Archeological Society

2010 A New Paleoproductivity Reconstruction for
Southwestern Colorado, and its Implications for
Understanding Thirteenth-Century Depopulation. In
Leaving Mesa Verde: Peril and Change in the Thirteenth Century Southwest, edited by T. A. Kohler, M.
D. Varien, and A. M. Wright, pp. 102-127. University
of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Kohler, T. A., C. D. Johnson, M. Varien, S. Ortman, R. Reynolds, Z. Kobti, J. Cowan, K. Kolm, S. Smith, and L. Yap
2007 Settlement Ecodynamics in the Prehispanic Central
Mesa Verde Region. In The Model-Based Archaeology of Socionatural Systems, edited by T. A. Kohler
and S. E. van der Leeuw, pp. 61-104. School for
Advanced Research Press, Santa Fe.
Kohler, T. A., M. D. Varien, and A. M. Wright (editors)
2010 Leaving Mesa Verde: Peril and Change in the
Thirteenth-Century Southwest. University of Arizona
Press, Tucson.
Kohler, T. A., M. D. Varien, A. M. Wright, and K. A. Kuckelman
2008 Mesa Verde Migrations: New Archaeological Research and Computer Simulation Suggest why Ancestral Puebloans Deserted the Northern Southwest
United States. American Scientist 96:146-153.
Kuckelman, K. A.
2000a Oral History. In The Archaeology of Castle Rock
Pueblo: A Thirteenth-Century Village in Southwestern Colorado [HTML Title], edited by K. A.
Kuckelman. Available: http://www.crowcanyon.org/
castlerock. Date of use: 4 November 2013.

2000b Rock Art. In The Archaeology of Castle Rock Pueblo: A Thirteenth-Century Village in Southwestern
Colorado [HTML Title], edited by K. A. Kuckelman.
Available: http://www.crowcanyon.org/castlerock.
Date of use: 7 November 2013.

2000c The Final Days of Castle Rock Pueblo. In The
Archaeology of Castle Rock Pueblo: A ThirteenthCentury Village in Southwestern Colorado [HTML
Title], edited by K. A. Kuckelman. Available: http://
www.crowcanyon.org/castlerock. Date of use: 7
November 2013.
2008 An Agent-Centered Case Study of the Depopulation
of Sand Canyon Pueblo. In The Social Construction
of Communities: Agency, Structure, and Identity in
the Prehispanic Southwest, edited by M. D. Varien
and J. M. Potter, pp. 109-121. AltaMira Press, New
York.

2010a Catalysts of the Thirteenth-Century Depopulation
of Sand Canyon Pueblo and the Central Mesa Verde
Region. In Leaving Mesa Verde: Peril and Change
in the Thirteenth-Century Southwest, edited by T. A.
Kohler, M. D. Varien, and A. M. Wright, pp. 180199. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

2010b The Depopulation of Sand Canyon Pueblo, a Large
Ancestral Pueblo Village in Southwestern Colorado.
American Antiquity 75(3):497-525.

2012 Bioarchaeological Signatures of Strife in Terminal
Pueblo III Settlements in the Northern San Juan. In
The Bioarchaeology of Violence, edited by D. L.
Martin, R. P. Harrod, and V. R. Pérez, pp. 121-138.
University Press of Florida, Gainesville.
Kuckelman, K. A., B. A. Bradley, M. J. Churchill, and J. H.
Kleidon
2007 A Descriptive and Interpretive Summary of Excavation, by Architectural Block. In The Archaeology
of Sand Canyon Pueblo: Intensive Excavations at
a Late-Thirteenth-Century Village in Southwestern
Colorado [HTML Title], edited by K. A. Kuckelman.
Available: http://www.crowcanyon.org/sandcanyon.
Date of use: 8 November 2013.
Kuckelman, K. A., R. R. Lightfoot, and D. L. Martin
2002 The Bioarchaeology and Taphonomy of Violence at
Castle Rock and Sand Canyon Pueblos, Southwestern Colorado. American Antiquity 67(3):486-513.
Kuckelman, K. A. and D. L. Martin
2007 Human Skeletal Remains. In The Archaeology of
Sand Canyon Pueblo: Intensive Excavations at a
Late-Thirteenth-Century Village in Southwestern
Colorado [HTML Title], edited by K. A. Kuckelman.
Available: http://www.crowcanyon.org/sandcanyon.
Date of use: 13 November 2013.
Lambert, P. M.
1999 Human Skeletal Remains. In The Puebloan Occupation of the Ute Mountain Piedmont, vol. 5: Environmental and Bioarchaeological Studies, edited by B.
R. Billman, pp. 111-161. Soil Systems Publications
in Archaeology No. 22. Soil Systems, Phoenix.
Larson, D. O., H. Neff, D. A. Graybill, J. Michaelsen, and
E. Ambos
1996 Risk, Climatic Variability, and the Study of Southwestern Prehistory: An Evolutionary Perspective.
American Antiquity 6(2):217-241.
LeBlanc, S. A.
1998 Settlement Consequences of Warfare during the
Late Pueblo III and Pueblo IV Periods. In Migration and Reorganization: The Pueblo IV Period in
the American Southwest, edited by K. A. Spielmann,
pp. 115-135. Anthropological Papers No. 51. Arizona
State University, Tempe.

1999 Prehistoric Warfare in the American Southwest.
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.

Kuckelman—Identifying Causes of the Depopulation of the Northern Southwest 223
2001 Warfare and Aggregation in the El Morro Valley,
New Mexico. In Deadly Landscapes: Case Studies
in Prehistoric Southwestern Warfare, edited by G.
E. Rice and S. A. LeBlanc, pp. 19-49. University of
Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Lightfoot, R. R.
1993 Synthesis. In The Duckfoot Site, Volume 1: Descriptive Archaeology, edited by R. R. Lightfoot and M.
C. Etzkorn, pp. 297-302. Occasional Papers No.
3. Crow Canyon Archaeological Center, Cortez,
Colorado.
Linton, R.
1944 Nomad Raids and Fortified Pueblos. American Antiquity 10:28-32.
Lipe, W. D.
1995 The Depopulation of the Northern San Juan: Conditions in the Turbulent 1200s. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 14:143-169.
Lipe, W. D. and M. D. Varien
1999 Pueblo III (A.D. 1150–1300). In Colorado Prehistory: A Context for the Southern Colorado River
Basin, edited by W. D. Lipe, M. D. Varien, and R.
H. Wilshusen, pp. 290–352. Colorado Council of
Professional Archaeologists, Denver.
Lomatuway’ma, M., L. Lomatuway’ma, and S. Namingha, Jr.
1993 Hopi Ruin Legends: Kiqötutuwutsi, edited by E.
Malotki. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Mackey, J. and R. C. Green
1979 Largo Gallina Towers: An Explanation. American
Antiquity 44:144-154.
McNitt, F.
1966 Richard Wetherill: Anasazi. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Morley, S. G.
1908 The Excavation of the Cannonball Ruins in
Southwestern Colorado. American Anthropologist
10:596-610.
Morris, E. H.
1939 Archaeological Studies in the La Plata District,
Southwestern Colorado and Northwestern New
Mexico. Publication No. 519. Carnegie Institution
of Washington, Washington, D.C.
Muir, R, J.
2007 Faunal Remains. In The Archaeology of Sand Canyon
Pueblo: Intensive Excavations at a Late-ThirteenthCentury Village in Southwestern Colorado [HTML
Title], edited by K. A. Kuckelman. Available: http://
www.crowcanyon.org/sandcanyon. Date of use: 18
July 2013.

Newberry, J. S.
1876 Report of the Exploring Expedition from Santa Fe,
New Mexico, to the Junction of the Grand and Green
Rivers of the Great Colorado of the West, in 1859,
Under the Command of Capt. J. N. Macomb, Corps
of Topographical Engineers; with Geological Report. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Nordenkiöld, G.
1979 The Cliff Dwellers of the Mesa Verde, Southwestern
Colorado: Their Pottery and Implements. Translated
by D. L. Morgan. Reprinted by Rio Grande Press,
Glorieta, New Mexico. Originally published 1893
by P. A. Norstedt and Söner, Stockholm.
Nusbaum, E. M.
1910 Daily Log of Edward Moore Nusbaum while at
Balcony House, 1910. In Balcony House: A History
of a Cliff Dwelling, Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado, by K. Fiero, Appendix A. Mesa Verde Museum
Association, Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado.
Nusbaum , J. L.
1998 Report on the Repair and Excavation of Balcony
House. In Balcony House: A History of a Cliff
Dwelling, Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado, by
K. Fiero, pp. 81-104. Written ca. 1910. Mesa Verde
Museum Association, Mesa Verde National Park,
Colorado.
Oliver, T. J.
2001 Warfare in the Tonto Basin. In Deadly Landscapes:
Case Studies in Prehistoric Southwestern Warfare,
edited by G. E. Rice and S. A. LeBlanc, pp. 195-217.
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Palonka, R.
2009 Defensive Architecture and the Depopulation of the
Mesa Verde Region, Utah-Colorado, USA in the XIII
Century A.D. Ph.D. dissertation, Institute of Archaeology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.
Parks, J. A. and J. S. Dean
1998 Appendix B: Tree Ring Dating of Balcony House:
A Chronological, Architectural, and Social Interpretation. In Balcony House: A History of a Cliff
Dwelling, Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado, by
K. Fiero. Mesa Verde Museum Association, Mesa
Verde National Park, Colorado.
Parsons, E. C.
1929 The Social Organization of the Tewa of New Mexico.
Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association No. 36. Menasha, Wisconsin.

1939 Pueblo Indian Religion. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

224

Texas Archeological Society

Petersen, K. L.
1988 Climate and the Dolores River Anasazi: A Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction from a 10,000 Year Pollen
Record, La Plata Mountains, Southwestern Colorado. Anthropological Papers No. 113. University
of Utah, Salt Lake City.
1994 A Warm and Wet Little Climatic Optimum and a
Cold and Dry Little Ice Age in the Southern Rocky
Mountains, U.S.A. Climatic Change 26:243-269.

Rawlings, T. A. and J. C. Driver
2010 Paleodiet of Domestic Turkey, Shields Pueblo
(5MT3807), Colorado: Isotopic Analysis and
its Implications for Care of a Household Domesticate. Journal of Archaeological Science
37(10):2433-2441.
Rice, G. E. and S. A. LeBlanc (editors)
2001 Deadly Landscapes: Case Studies in Prehistoric
Southwestern Warfare. University of Utah Press, Salt
Lake City.
Salzer, M. W.
2000 Temperature Variability and the Northern Anasazi:
Possible Implications for Regional Abandonment.
Kiva 65(4):295-318.
Schaafsma, P.
1971 The Rock Art of Utah: A Study from the Donald Scott
Collection, Peabody Museum, Harvard University.
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University, Cambridge.
1980 Indian Rock Art of the Southwest. School of American Research and University of New Mexico Press,
Santa Fe and Albuquerque.
Street, D. J.
2001 The Dendrochronology of Long House, an Anasazi
Cliff Dwelling in the Mesa Verde National Park,
Colorado, U.S.A. Ph.D. thesis, Department of
Archaeology and Prehistory, Research School of
Archaeology & Archaeological Science, University
of Sheffield, United Kingdom.
Tuggle, H. D. and J. J. Reid
2001 Conflict and Defense in the Grasshopper Region of
East-Central Arizona. In Deadly Landscapes: Case
Studies in Prehistoric Southwestern Warfare, edited
by G. E. Rice and S. A. LeBlanc, pp. 85-107. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Turner, C. G., II and J. A. Turner
1999 Man Corn: Cannibalism and Violence in the Prehistoric American Southwest. University of Utah Press,
Salt Lake City.

Van West, C. R. and J. S. Dean
2000 Environmental Characteristics of the A.D. 900–1300
Period in the Central Mesa Verde Region. Kiva
66:19-44.
Varien, M. D., S. G. Ortman, T. A. Kohler, D. M. Glowacki,
and C. D. Johnson
2007 Historical Ecology in the Mesa Verde Region: Results from the Village Ecodynamics Project. American Antiquity 72(2):273-299.
Walker, P. L.
1997 Wife Beating, Boxing, and Broken Noses: Skeletal
Evidence for the Cultural Patterning of Violence. In
Troubled Times: Violence and Warfare in the Past,
edited by D. L. Martin and D. W. Frayer, pp. 145–
179. Gordon and Breach Publishers, Amsterdam.
2008 Bioarchaeological Ethics: A Historical Perspective
on the Value of Human Remains. In Biological Anthropology of the Human Skeleton, edited by M. A.
Katzenberg and S. R. Saunders, pp. 3-40. John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
White, T. D.
1992 Prehistoric Cannibalism at Mancos 5MTUMR-2346.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Wilcox, D. R. and J. Haas
1994 The Scream of the Butterfly: Competition and Conflict
in the Prehistoric Southwest. In Themes in Southwest
Prehistory, edited by G. J. Gumerman, pp. 211-238.
School of American Research Press, Santa Fe.
Wilshusen, R. H.
1986 The Relationship Between Abandonment Mode and
Ritual Use in Pueblo I Anasazi Protokivas. Journal
of Field Archaeology 13:245-254.
Wright, A. M.
2006 A Low-Frequency Paleoclimatic Reconstruction
from the La Plata Mountains, Colorado, and its
Implications for Agricultural Paleoproductivity in
the Mesa Verde Region. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, Washington State University,
Pullman.
2010 The Climate of the Depopulation of the Northern
Southwest. In Leaving Mesa Verde: Peril and
Change in the Thirteenth-Century Southwest, edited
by T. A. Kohler, M. D. Varien, and A. M. Wright, pp.
75-101. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Defining and Using Households in Archeological Analysis
Ricky R. Lightfoot, Richard H. Wilshusen, and Mark D. Varien

ABSTRACT
Since the 1980s many Southwestern archeologists have used the household as the fundamental unit of social
analysis. Evidence from architectural patterns and artifact distributions has been used to identify households.
Archeologically defined, households have been used to reconstruct economic activity, infer changes in social
organization, and estimate population size. Archeologists have used different architectural correlates to define
households, but they have not examined how different correlates affect the larger scale social, economic, and
demographic problems being addressed. We reevaluate the archeological household definitions and analytical
assumptions, with special focus on the Pueblo I period (A.D. 725–900) in the Mesa Verde region of southwestern Colorado.

OUR INTRODUCTION TO
ARCHEOLOGY

OUR INTRODUCTION TO
HOUSEHOLDS

Together we participated in our first archeological field experiences in Dee Ann Story’s 1976
University of Texas field school at the Deshazo
site near Nacogdoches, Texas. Three years later
our paths converged in the American Southwest
when we began working on the massive Dolores
Archaeological Program (DAP) in southwestern
Colorado and then at the Crow Canyon Archaeological Center (Figure 1). After excavating in the
plow- and rodent-disturbed contexts of the Deshazo
site in East Texas, digging in the Southwest seemed
entirely straightforward. The visibility of the human
element amazed us: structures had well-defined
walls, burned roof layers were loaded with charred
and datable timbers, and the well prepared floors
were often littered with whole pots and complete
tools. We were inspired by the clarity of the link
between the archeological record and the actual human beings who once lived at the site. In some cases
it appeared that the ancestral Pueblo Indian residents
had simply walked away and left everything in the
structures exactly as they had been when the structures were in use—almost exactly the way we found
them some 1000 years later. Since our earliest days
in the Southwest, we have shared a common interest in understanding the social groups that occupied
those early Pueblo houses.

Anthropologists since the 1950s have distinguished between the family as a kinship group and
the household as a coresident group that shares in
domestic and economic activities (Bender 1967;
Fortes 1958; Murdock 1949), but it was not until
the 1980s before the distinction made its way into
archeologists’ thinking (Ashmore and Wilk 1988;
Netting et al. 1984; Wilk 1989; Wilk and Ashmore
1988; Wilk and Rathje 1982). Wilshusen (1988a)
connected DAP archeologists with the current thinking around “household archeology,” which defined
a household as “a group of people who shares in a
maximum definable number of activities, including
one or more of the following: production, consumption, pooling of resources, reproduction, coresidence,
and shared ownership” (Ashmore and Wilk 1988:6).
This behaviorally based characterization of the household fit well with the DAP’s emphasis on defining
activity areas and the rigorous focus on spatial and
social systematics. A foundational assumption at the
DAP was that architectural patterns could be used to
define and interpret social organization. For the early
Pueblo period that organization was seen as a nested
hierarchy of social groups that included households,
inter-household groups, and communities (Kane
1983:11-14, 1986:354-359; Lightfoot 1994:13-15;
Wilshusen 1988a:640-645)

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

226

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. The Four Corners region showing the Central Mesa Verde Region and principal research areas mentioned in text.

In the 1970s at the Deshazo site (Figure 2), we
did not talk about households and nested levels of
social organization. In those days, we meticulously
documented features, and if we were lucky enough
to connect post molds to form a complete circle we
knew we had a structure. But the words “house”
and “household” were almost never used in the two
volumes that document the Deshazo site project
(Story 1982, 1995). We were far more focused on
the history of material culture than we were on the
history of social groups.
THE DAP MODEL OF HOUSEHOLD
ORGANIZATION
Houses and households were fundamental
concepts at the DAP (Kane 1983, 1986). Most of
the roughly 1,600 sites in the project area dated between A.D. 650-920, and over most of this period
of time there was substantial population growth

and inferred changes in social organization. The
Mesa Verde region was populated by large numbers of ancestral Pueblo Indian farmers beginning
around A.D. 600, and during the period between
A.D. 600-720, most of these initial residents lived
in scattered settlements that consisted of one or two
household compounds, each composed of a single
pit structure surrounded by a cluster of isolated
storage structures and other extramural features
(Brisbin and Varien 1986). Clearly the single pit
structure served as the dwelling for a household
at these sites.
During the period from A.D. 720 to 880,
population grew rapidly (Schlanger 1986) and
the architectural and community patterns changed
dramatically (Figure 3). Pit structures were excavated much deeper than before, and typically each
pit structure was accompanied by a block of contiguous surface rooms consisting of two or more
large rooms with domestic features and numerous
smaller storage rooms (Wilshusen 1988b). DAP

Lightfoot, et al.—Defining and Using Households in Archeological Analysis 227

Figure 2. Site plan of the Deshazo site (41NA27), Nacogdoches County, Texas, showing the main cultural units exposed
by excavation (adapted from Story 1982:Figure 11).

archeologists interpreted this change in the architectural pattern as representing a shift in household organization. Rather than each pit structure

representing the dwelling of a household, a suite
of surface rooms consisting of one large domestic
room (i.e., a room with the features and sufficient

228

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Typical hamlet site plans in the Mesa Verde region showing changes in architecture and site organization,
A.D. 650-900. Site plans from left to right are 5MT8937, which dates to the mid-A.D. 600s; 5MT1 (Stevenson Area),
which dates to A.D. 675-690; 5MV1676, which dates to A.D. 760-780; and 5MT3868 (Duckfoot site) which dates to
A.D. 850-880 (adapted from Wilshusen et al. 2012:Figure 2.5).

space for daily domestic activities such as cooking)
and one or more storage rooms was seen as the
residence, or dwelling unit, of a household. Following the DAP model for this time period, each pit
structure was interpreted as an “inter-household”
structure because DAP archeologists inferred that
they were shared by multiple households for ritual
and domestic activities (Figure 4).
THE DUCKFOOT MODEL OF
HOUSEHOLD ORGANIZATION
The DAP architectural model was a logical inference, but the behavioral tests to support it were
limited in our investigations at Dolores. After the
conclusion of the DAP, the Crow Canyon Archaeological Center conducted intensive excavations at
the Duckfoot site, which was located 20 km south
of the Dolores River Valley (Lightfoot and Etzkorn
1993). Duckfoot had many structures that burned
at the time of their abandonment, which resulted
in precise tree-ring dating. There were 375 total
tree-ring dates, and 215 of these are cutting dates,
which means the exact year that the timber was
harvested is known (Lightfoot 1994:28). Seventy
percent of the total number of dates cluster between
A.D. 850-876; 181 cutting dates, or 84 percent of
all cutting dates, occur during this same interval.
Based on these dates, Lightfoot (1994:34-36) argued that construction began at Duckfoot at A.D.
850 and the site was occupied less than 30 years
and abandoned by 880. Thus, Duckfoot was contemporary with the period of peak population at
Dolores, which occurred between A.D. 840-880
(Schlanger 1986:508).

In addition to the precise dating, there was
remarkable preservation of floor artifact assemblages, including complete tools made from stone
and bone, pottery vessels, and nonutilitarian items
such as beads, pendants, bracelets, gaming pieces,
and pottery effigies (Lightfoot 1994:57-68). In addition, it appeared that the entire site was depopulated in a very short period of time.
The complete excavation of 20 rooms, four pit
structures, extramural areas, and most of the trash
midden was used to evaluate the DAP model of
household organization (Lightfoot 1994). The analysis of wall construction details confirmed that entire
room suites were built in conjunction with each pit
structure. Inferred doorway locations showed that
there was connectivity between all rooms within
room suites associated with each pit structure, but
there was no indication of connectivity between
architectural suites across the site. Most importantly,
floor artifacts and features were used to identify
activity areas inside the structures. A complete set of
activities was present only when the entire architectural suite—a pit structure and its associated room
suite—was considered. The range of activities was
complementary within a suite and redundant between
architectural suites (Varien and Lightfoot 1989).
Lightfoot (1994:145-162) concluded that the
social group that occupied an architectural suite accounted for the construction of the house, the production, storage, and distribution of food, reproduction as
represented by ritual activities, and likely the transmission of property. On the basis of these behavioral
analyses, it appears that the entire architectural suite is
the best correlate of a single household, an interpretation at odds with the DAP model. In contrast to the
DAP model, Lightfoot concluded that the individual

Lightfoot, et al.—Defining and Using Households in Archeological Analysis 229
domestic room suites represented infra-household
groups rather than separate households, and that
the entire household was comparable to a multigenerational extended family. In essence, the suite of
structures interpreted as housing a single household
using the Duckfoot model (Figure 5) would have been
called an inter-household cluster, inferred as housing
two to four households at DAP. Thus, we have two
distinctly different models for the architectural correlate of the household in early Mesa Verde region
pueblos. It is possible that both models have some
applicability in interpreting social organization in
early Pueblo settlements, based on the fact that two
distinct patterns of village organization emerged in
the A.D. 800s.
THE GROWTH OF VILLAGES
AND THE RISE OF COMMUNITY
CENTERS
Population in the central Mesa Verde region
grew modestly between A.D. 720-800, and then

more than tripled between A.D. 800-880 (Varien et
al. 2007:284). There were at least 14 large villages
by about A.D. 825; in many cases these were built
around large (up to 380 m2) communal structures,
known as great kivas that probably served as
community centers (Wilshusen et al. 2012b). The
residential architecture at these villages was largely
aggregates of the room suites joined into long,
contiguous room blocks and associated rows of pit
structures predominantly to the south of the room
blocks (Figure 6). Grass Mesa Village (5MT23)
and Morris 25 (5LP2164) are both typical of this
village pattern, in which a large great kiva (Lightfoot 1988:253; Lightfoot et al. 1988; Wilshusen et
al. 2012a:27) is accompanied by several long rows
of rooms and pit structures. Villages such as these
could have reasonably housed populations of more
than 20 households (Lipe et al. 1988).
After A.D. 820, population continued to grow
in the Mesa Verde region, and by A.D. 880 the
number of villages increased to at least 25 and
possibly as many as 40 (Wilshusen et al. 2012a).
Villages like Grass Mesa continued to grow, but the

Figure 4. Simplified portrayal of the DAP household model, which identifies the residence of a household as a single
room suite, consisting of a habitation room and associated storage rooms (adapted from Kane 1983).

230

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. The Duckfoot household model, which identifies the residence of a household as a pit structure and two or more
surface room suites, each consisting of a habitation room and associated storage rooms (adapted from Lightfoot 1994).

early great kiva there and great kivas at other early
villages fell into disuse by the mid-800s. During the
A.D. 840-880 time period, there emerged a second
village pattern, as exemplified by McPhee Village,
which included one or more large U-shaped room
blocks that enclosed plazas into which pit structures were built. Wilshusen and others (Wilshusen
and Ortman 1999; Wilshusen et al. 2012a, 2012b;
Windes 2004) argue that these U-shaped architectural units were early great houses that served as
community centers. Contained within the plazas of
these great houses is frequently one oversized pit
structure, which was much larger than the typical
residential pit structures (e.g., 75 m2 versus 20 m2)
and contained elaborate ritual features (Wilshusen
1986, 1989). The U-shaped great houses typically
have coursed sandstone masonry, which contrasts
sharply with the post and adobe walls of the linear
room blocks. And, the U-shaped great houses have
a substantially larger ratio of rooms to pit structures
and a less pronounced spatial association between
room suites and pit structures than do the linear

room blocks at contemporary villages and hamlets
throughout the region. Based on these architectural
differences as well as distinctly different patterns
in pottery and textiles, Wilshusen and others
(Wilshusen and Ortman 1999; Wilshusen et al.
2012b) argue that the population of the Mesa Verde
region consisted of at least two and possibly three
distinct cultural groups that had different histories
and cultural traditions. They further argue that the
U-shaped great houses served both as community
centers and as the residences of emerging socioreligious elite leaders.
Because the U-shaped great houses are so profoundly different from the otherwise standard layout of the linear room blocks of villages and hamlets, it is not surprising that neither the DAP model
nor the Duckfoot model of household organization
fit them very well. If the U-shaped great houses are
community centers that contain community ritual
structures and that also served as elite residences,
then they clearly are not organized and used in
the same way as the household dwelling units of

Lightfoot, et al.—Defining and Using Households in Archeological Analysis 231

Figure 6. Plan map of two distinct village patterns in the Mesa Verde region: Morris 25 (5LP2164) with linear room
blocks, associated pit structures, and a shared great kiva; and McPhee Pueblo (5MT4475) with a U-shaped room block,
associated pit structures, and an oversize pit structure in the center of the enclosed plaza (adapted from Wilshusen et
al. 2012:Figures 2.6 and 2.7).

the linear room blocks. The higher ratio of rooms
to domestic pit structures in the U-shaped great
houses probably reflects the elite residents need
for and access to a larger number of rooms than
a typical household resident. However, domestic
pit structures are such an important and consistent
component of the household dwelling throughout
the eighth and ninth centuries that the number of
households living in these U-shaped great houses
might be best represented by the number of pit
structures rather than by the number of rooms.
Thus, the resident population of the U-shaped great
houses might be lower than one might expect based
on the number of rooms.
USING ARCHITECTURAL
CORRELATES OF HOUSEHOLDS
TO ESTIMATE SITE AND
REGIONAL POPULATION
Family historians have shown that despite differences in family structure and residence rules,
average household size has remained fairly constant, with worldwide averages ranging from 4 to

7 (Laslett 1972). Historically, average household
sizes in the Southwestern pueblos fall within this
range based on census data that have been available since the late nineteenth century (Beaglehole
1935:42; Census Office 1984:183; Eggan 1950;
Hillery and Essene 1963:305; Kroeber 1917:124;
Li 1937:75). While the averages are very consistent
cross-culturally, there can be significant variation
in household size within any society. Even in societies that favor large, multigenerational households, there are typically enough small households
to bring the overall average back down to this average range. Thus, one would expect the number of
rooms in a household suite to vary depending on
the size of the resident group and where it is in the
multigenerational developmental cycle.
The fact that average household size is consistent through time and across cultures provides
a strong basis for using architectural correlates
for estimating human population dynamics on a
regional scale. But, determining which architectural correlate represents a household could make
a significant difference in population estimates.
For example, in the late A.D. 800s each pit structure at DAP typically had two to three room suites

232

Texas Archeological Society

that consisted of domestic rooms and associated
storages rooms per pit structure. Thus, using a pit
structure as a proxy for one household, as in the
Duckfoot model, versus each room suite as the architectural correlate of a household, as in the DAP
model, would produce population estimates that
differ by a factor of two or three. Multiplied across
thousands of sites in the region, the two formulas
would produce significantly different regional
population estimates.
Over the last 15 years the Crow Canyon
Archaeological Center and Washington State
University have partnered with other institutions
in a regional research project called the Village
Ecodynamics Project or VEP (Kohler and Varien
2012). The VEP has occurred in two phases
known as VEP I, which was funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF) between 2001 and
2006, and VEP II, which received NSF funding
between 2008 and 2014. VEP researchers compiled environmental and archeological data for
a northern study area located in the central Mesa
Verde region of southwestern Colorado. This
study area is 4,659 km2 and contains just over
18,000 archeological sites. VEP archeologists
reviewed the records for these sites to determine
which ones were residential sites. Using a variety
of information and following methods developed
by Scott Ortman (Ortman et al. 2007), they assigned each component at these residences to one
of 14 time periods from A.D. 600 to A.D. 1280.
To estimate population, each recorded pit
structure was counted as representing one household of six individuals (Ortman et al. 2007:261).
Where pit structure counts were not available,
the number of pit structures was estimated using both room block area and site area (Ortman
et al. 2007:261-262). Population estimates were
adjusted for inferred length of site occupation and
other factors to produce a model of momentary
population in each of the 14 VEP time periods.
The results show that there were two cycles of
population increase and decline in the study area,
with a population peak between A.D. 840-880
during the first cycle of about 11,000 people and
a population peak of about 25,000 people between
A.D. 1225-1260 during the second cycle. Working independently, Wilshusen (2002) estimated
regional population in the mid-A.D. 800s using
room block metrics and survey data and came up
with results very comparable to those generated
by the VEP.

PATTERN AND VARIATION IN
MESA VERDE HOUSEHOLDS
Pit structures persist at residential sites in Mesa
Verde region from A.D. 600 to A.D. 1280. While
the style of their construction and the nature of their
use changed over time, they appear to remain as the
focal points of habitations for seven centuries. The
architectural suite as defined by a pit structure and
its associated rooms is a robust pattern throughout
the Pueblo occupation of the region, with the exception of the U-shaped great houses in the ninth
century. The Duckfoot case study presents a strong
argument that the architectural suite is the correlate
of the household and that the household was the
building block for larger social groups.
When we look at examples of architectural
suites, we see considerable variation, but we do
not think this variation undermines the Duckfoot
model. Instead, it is consistent with expectations
from historical and ethnoarcheological studies of
household organization that document the many
factors that shape the size and composition of
households without affecting the consistency of average household size. There are bachelors, widows,
commoners, and leaders. And, there are developmental cycles that households go through as young
adults marry and establish new households, expand
as they have children, and contract as residents die
or move away. In cultures where extended family
households are the norm, only a small percentage
of households are at a maximum size at any one
time. While the consistency of average household
size is useful for assessing population dynamics at
a broad regional scale, the variation in household
size is also interesting and important. Both the
pattern and the variation in household size and
configuration merit further study and would likely
tell us a great deal more about early Pueblo Indian
social history.
DEE ANN STORY’S LEGACY
Dee Ann Story was a great inspiration to us as
young students who were contemplating careers in
archeology. She set the bar high in her expectations
of our performance in the field, lab, classroom, and
community. Dee Ann showed great confidence in
our abilities as young professionals, and she inspired us to be confident in ourselves. She always
witnessed great pride in us, as she did in all of her

Lightfoot, et al.—Defining and Using Households in Archeological Analysis 233
students who pursued professional careers in archeology, and her gift to us as a mentor will continue
to shape us for the remainder of our lives.

1986 Prehistory of the Dolores River Valley. In Dolores
Archaeological Program: Final Synthetic Report,
edited by D. A. Breternitz, C. K. Robinson, and
G. T. Gross, pp. 353-435. Bureau of Reclamation,
Engineering and Research Center, Denver.

REFERENCES CITED

Kohler, T. A. and M. D. Varien (editors)
2012 Emergence and Collapse of Early Villages: Models
of Central Mesa Verde Region Archaeology. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Ashmore, W. and R. R. Wilk
1988 Household and Community in the Mesoamerican
Past. In Household and Community in the Mesoamerican Past, edited by R. R. Wilk and W. Ashmore, pp. 1-27. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.
Beaglehole, P.
1935 Census Data from Two Hopi Villages. American
Anthropologist 37:41-54.
Bender, D. R.
1967 A Refinement of the Concept of Household: Families, Co-residence, and Domestic Functions. American Anthropologist 69:493-504
Brisbin, J. M. and M. D. Varien
1986 Excavations at Tres Bobos Hamlet (Site 5MT4545),
a Basketmaker III Habitation. In Dolores Archaeological Program: Anasazi Communities at Dolores:
Early Anasazi Sites in the Sagehen Flats Area, edited
by A. E. Kane and G. T. Gross, pp. 118-210. Bureau
of Reclamation, Engineering and Research Center,
Denver.
Census Office
1894 Eleventh Census of the United States: 1890. Report
on Indians Taxed and Indians Not Taxed in the
United States (Except Alaska). House of Representatives Miscellaneous Document 340(15). Department
of the Interior, Washington, D.C.
Eggan, F. R.
1950 Social Organization of the Western Pueblos. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Fortes, M.
1958 Introduction. In The Developmental Cycle in Domestic Groups, edited by J. Goody, pp. 1-15. Papers in
Social Anthropology No. 1. Cambridge University,
Cambridge.
Hillery, G. A., Jr. and F. J. Essene
1963 Navajo Population: An Analysis of the 1960 Census.
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 19:297-313.
Kane, A. E.
1983 Introduction to Field Investigations and Analysis. In
Dolores Archaeological Program: Field Investigations and Analysis 1978, edited by D. A. Breternitz,
pp. 1-37. Bureau of Reclamation, Engineering and
Research Center, Denver.

Kroeber, A. L.
1917 Zuni Kin and Clan. Anthropological Papers, Vol. 18,
part 2. American Museum of Natural History, New
York.
Laslett, P.
1972 Introduction: History of the Family. In Household
and Family in Past Time, edited by P. Laslett and
R. Wall, pp. 1-89. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Li, A. C.
1937 Zuni: Some Observations and Queries. American
Anthropologist 39:62-76.
Lightfoot, R. R.
1988 Roofing an Early Anasazi Great Kiva: Analysis of
an Architectural Model. Kiva 53:253-272.
1994 The Duckfoot Site, Vol. 2: Archaeology of the House
and Household. Occasional Paper No. 4. Crow Canyon Archaeological Center, Cortez, Colorado.

Lightfoot, R. R., A. M. Emerson, and E. Blinman
1988 Excavations in Area 5, Grass Mesa Village (Site
5MT23). In Dolores Archaeological Program: Anasazi Communities at Dolores: Grass Mesa Village,
edited by W. D. Lipe, J. N. Morris, and T. A. Kohler,
pp. 561-766. Bureau of Reclamation, Engineering
and Research Center, Denver.
Lightfoot, R. R. and M. C. Etzkorn (editors)
1993 The Duckfoot Site: Volume 1: Descriptive Archaeology. Occasional Paper No. 3. Crow Canyon Archaeological Center, Cortez, Colorado.
Lipe, W. D., J. N. Morris, and T. A. Kohler (compilers)
1988 Dolores Archaeological Program: Anasazi Communities at Dolores: Grass Mesa Village. U.S. Department
of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Engineering
and Research Center, Denver.
Murdock, G. P.
1949 Social Structure. Macmillan, New York.
Netting, R. M., R. Wilk, and E. J. Arnould
1984 Households: Comparative and Historical Studies of
the Domestic Group. University of California Press,
Berkeley.

234

Texas Archeological Society

Ortman, S. G., M. D. Varien, and T. L. Gripp
2007 Empirical Bayesian Methods for Archaeological
Survey Data: An Application from the Mesa Verde
Region. American Antiquity 72:241-272.
Schlanger, S. H.
1986 Population Studies. In Dolores Archaeological
Program: Final Synthetic Report, edited by D. A.
Breternitz, C. K. Robinson, and G. T. Gross, pp.
493-524. Bureau of Reclamation, Engineering and
Research Center, Denver.
Story, D. A. (editor)
1982 The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas. Volume 1: The Site, Its Setting, Investigation, Cultural
Features, Artifacts of Non-Native Manufacture, and
Subsistence Remains. Texas Antiquities Permit Series No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.
1995 The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas. Volume 2: Artifacts of Native Manufacture. Studies in
Archeology 21. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin.

Varien, M. D. and R. R. Lightfoot
1989 Ritual and Nonritual Activities in Mesa Verde Region Pit Structures. In The Architecture of Social
Integration in Prehistoric Pueblos, edited by W. D.
Lipe and M. Hegmon, pp. 73-87. Occasional Paper
No. 1. Crow Canyon Archaeological Center, Cortez,
Colorado.
Varien, M. D., S. G. Ortman, T. A. Kohler, D. M. Glowacki,
and C. D. Johnson
2007 Historical Ecology in the Mesa Verde Region: Results from the Village Project. American Antiquity
72:273-300.
Wilk, R. R.
1989 The Household Economy: Reconsidering the Domestic Mode of Production. Westview Press, Boulder,
Colorado.
Wilk, R. R. and W. Ashmore (editors)
1988 Household and Community in the Mesoamerican
Past. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Wilk, R. R. and W. L. Rathje
1982 Archaeology of the Household: Building a Prehistory
of Domestic Life. American Behavioral Scientist
25(6):617-639.
Wilshusen, R. H.
1986 The Relationship between Abandonment Mode and
Ritual Use in Pueblo I Anasazi Protokivas. Journal
of Field Archaeology 13:245-254.

1988a Household Archaeology and Social Systematics. In
Dolores Archaeological Program: Supporting Studies: Additive and Reductive Technologies, edited by
E. Blinman, C. J. Phagan, and R. H. Wilshusen, pp.
635-647. Bureau of Reclamation, Engineering and
Research Center, Denver.
1988b Architectural Trends in Prehistoric Anasazi Sites
During A.D. 600 to 1200. In Dolores Archaeological Program: Supporting Studies: Additive and
Reductive Technologies, edited by E. Blinman, C. J.
Phagan, and R. H. Wilshusen, pp. 599-633. Bureau
of Reclamation, Engineering and Research Center,
Denver.

1989 Unstuffing the Estufa: Ritual Floor Features in Anasazi Pit Structures and Pueblo Kivas. In The Architecture of Social Integration in Prehistoric Pueblos,
edited by W. D. Lipe and M. Hegmon, pp. 89-111.
Occasional Paper No. 1. Crow Canyon Archaeological Center, Cortez, Colorado.

2002 Estimating Population in the Central Mesa Verde
Region. In Seeking the Center Place: Archaeology
and Ancient Communities in the Mesa Verde Region,
edited by M. D. Varien and R. H. Wilshusen, pp.
101-120. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Wilshusen, R. H. and S. G. Ortman
1999 Rethinking the Pueblo I Period in the Northern
Southwest: Aggregation, Migration, and Cultural
Diversity. Kiva 64:369-399.
Wilshusen, R. H., S. G. Ortman, S. Diederichs, D. M. Glowacki,
and G. Coffey
2012a Heartland of the Early Pueblos: The Central Mesa
Verde Region. In Crucible of Pueblos: The Early
Pueblo Period in the Northern Southwest, edited by
R. H. Wilshusen, G. Schachner, and J. R. Allison, pp.
14-34. Monograph 71. Cotsen Institute of Archaeology Press, University of California at Los Angeles.
Wilshusen, R. H., S. G. Ortman, and A. Phillips
2012b Processions, Leaders, and Gathering Places: Changes
in Early Pueblo Community Organization as Seen in
Architecture, Rock Art, and Language. In Crucible
of Pueblos: The Early Pueblo Period in the Northern
Southwest, edited by R. H. Wilshusen, G. Schachner,
and J. R. Allison, pp. 198-218. Monograph 71. Cotsen Institute of Archaeology Press, University of
California at Los Angeles.
Windes, T.
2004 The Rise of Early Chacoan Great Houses. In Search
of Chaco: New Approaches to an Archaeological
Enigma, edited by D. G. Noble, pp. 14-21. School
of American Research, Santa Fe, New Mexico.

Revisiting the Stylistic Classification of a Charcoal
Pictograph in the Lower Pecos
Carolyn E. Boyd, Marvin W. Rowe, and Karen L. Steelman

ABSTRACT
Hyman and Rowe (1997) determined a radiocarbon date of 1280 ± 80 B.P. for a black charcoal drawing of a
quadruped at 41VV75. However, when Rowe (2003) reported the date, he mistakenly published a photograph of
a red Pecos River style deer from Panther Cave (41VV83) rather than the dated charcoal figure from 41VV75.
The description he provided for the dated figure was of the incorrect pictograph. Based on the similarity of the
radiocarbon dates for this charcoal figure and a red painting at Cueva Quebrada (41VV162A), Rowe proposed
that the black deer image was likely Red Linear style. We correct the mistake in the figure choice, provide an
illustration and corrected description for the pictograph that was dated from 41VV75, and reassess its stylistic
assignment as an unclassified drawing style. Further, we report the recent identification of a strikingly similar
black charcoal quadruped documented at 41VV164 (Kelley Cave).

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this article is to correct a
mistake set forth in Rowe (2003), as well as to
re-evaluate the stylistic assignment of a black,
dry-applied pictograph (Figure 1). Rowe (2003)
reported a radiocarbon date of 1280 ± 80 B.P.
(CAMS-29315) for a pictograph from 41VV75 located in Seminole Canyon State Park and Historic
Site, Val Verde County, Texas. A radiocarbon date
of 1280 ± 80 years B.P. calibrates to A.D. 650-870
(1 sigma) or A.D. 610-950 (2 sigma). This calibration was performed using the Bayesian method of
the OxCal computer program version 4.2.3 (Bronk
Ramsey 2009, 2013) with IntCal13 curve data from
Reimer et al. (2013).
Hyman and Rowe (1997) identified charcoal as
the pigment used to produce this drawing based on
the disappearance of coloration when the sample
was oxidized. Manganese pigment remains black,
being unaffected by the oxidizing plasma; whereas
charcoal oxidizes to gaseous carbon dioxide. However, when Rowe (2003) wrote a more detailed
paper about this figure, he mistakenly chose an image not of the dated black quadruped in 41VV75,
but rather a red Pecos River style deer from
Panther Cave (41VV83). Unfortunately, Rowe
(2003) used the photograph from Panther Cave to
write a description for the dated pictograph from

41VV75. He tentatively assigned the image to the
Red Linear style based on the date and his description. We herein correct this mistake and reassess
Rowe’s stylistic assignment of the black charcoal
pictograph at 41VV75.
BLACK CHARCOAL PICTOGRAPHS
AT 41VV75
Site 41VV75 is a large rockshelter with deep
deposits located in Seminole Canyon just north of
its confluence with Presa Canyon. Extreme spalling
and thick accretions have either destroyed or obscured what at one time would have been one of the
most impressive rock art panels in the Lower Pecos. Remnants of Pecos River style rock art extend
the length of the shelter. Along the downstream
end are numerous small Red Linear pictographs
and interspersed throughout are geometric figures
resembling Turpin’s Bold Line Geometric style
(Turpin 1986). Also present are pictographs that
do not fit neatly into any of the currently defined
styles for the region.
The 41VV75 pigment sample was collected
from a poorly preserved, black, dry-applied pictograph of a quadruped located along the back
wall near the center of the shelter. The quadruped
is associated with at least nine dry-applied, black

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

236

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Section from the panel at 41VV75 containing charcoal dry-applied drawings of
deer and geometric figures. The dated pictograph is the small quadruped with short legs
and a large head located in the upper left corner of the illustration.

Boyd, et al.—Revisiting the Stylistic Classification of a Charcoal Pictograph in the Lower Pecos 237
figures resembling deer and two black grid- or
ladder-like geometric forms that may represent
nets (Figure 1). Prior to their execution, this badly
spalled section of the panel contained polychromatic Pecos River style paintings. The black figures were drawn onto the wall after the pre-existing
figures spalled off. The dated quadruped measures
9 cm in length and stands 4.5 cm in height. It is
almost half the size of the other black dry-pigment
drawings of deer associated with it. This figure has
a rectangular-shaped body, short legs, and a large
head with either spike antlers or very tall ears. The
remaining figures have rectangular-shaped bodies
with tall ears or spikes similar to the dated image.
None of the figures are impaled and none are portrayed with hooves or dewclaws.
All of the figures in this composition were
recently analyzed in situ using portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) (Koenig et al. 2104). The pXRF
analysis of the figures demonstrated that the black
paint used in their production was not derived from
an inorganic (manganese) mineral pigment. Charcoal is assumed as the most likely organic source
for the black color. These findings support Hyman
and Rowe’s (1997) identification of charcoal as
the pigment source for the black quadruped. This
is the first documented prehistoric pictograph in
the Lower Pecos shown to be composed of charcoal. Given that all of the dry-applied drawings
in this composition were produced using charcoal
pigment and share many of the same attributes, it
is likely that they were all produced at the same
time and by the same artist. As stated above, when
Rowe (2003) assigned the charcoal figure to the
Red Linear style, he based his classification on the
date obtained for the figure at 41VV75 and a description based on an incorrect photograph. Below
we revisit the date for Red Linear style and provide
a discussion on the attributes of Red Linear deer
according to Boyd et al. (2013).
DISCUSSION
Red Linear is one of four presently defined
prehistoric rock art styles in the Lower Pecos
Canyonlands of southwest Texas and Coahuila,
Mexico: Red Linear, Pecos River, Bold Line
Geometric, and Red Monochrome (Turpin 1995).
Two experimental radiocarbon assays reported
for possible Red Linear imagery have been
widely accepted by archeologists as defining

the temporal span of Red Linear pictographs. At
Cueva Quebrada (41VV162A), a paint sample was
collected from one in a series of 13 red-orange oval
shapes. The ovals are located directly above four
headless quadrupeds identified by Turpin (1984) as
Red Linear bison. This paint sample yielded a date
of 1280 ± 135 B.P. (AA-10549) (Ilger et al. 1994).
The second date was reported by Hyman and
Rowe (1997) for the charcoal figure from 41VV75.
The radiocarbon assay obtained for the charcoal
drawing at 41VV75 (1280 ± 80 B.P.) is virtually
identical to the date obtained for a presumed Red
Linear figure at 41VV162A, Cueva Quebrada.
It is important to note, however, that although
charcoal images, such as the one from 41VV75,
can be more reliably radiocarbon dated than pictographs made from an unidentified organic binder,
such as the dated red-orange figure from Cueva
Quebrada, the date obtained does not indicate the
age of the pictograph, but the date for the death of
a tree. In arid environments with good preservation, such as the Lower Pecos, charcoal used to
produce the paintings may have been made from
old wood, a tree that had been dead for many
years, perhaps even centuries (Schiffer 1986).
Alternatively, old charcoal could be picked up off
the floor and used as a pigment by anyone living
in or simply passing through the shelter (Bednarik
1994). Hence, radiocarbon dating of charcoal pigments can only produce a maximum age for the
creation of an image.
Based on the Cueva Quebrada radiocarbon
assay and interpretation of Red Linear imagery by
Turpin (1984), the style was presumed to have been
brought into the region by intrusive bison hunters
during the terminal Late Archaic around 1280 B.P.
(Turpin 2011). This would place production of the
Red Linear style after the large, polychromatic Pecos River style paintings radiocarbon dated to between 4200 and 2750 B.P. (Rowe 2009). However,
Boyd et al. (2013) recently completed an analysis
of 444 Red Linear figures from 12 sites in the region. Using macro- and microscopic analysis they
identified 38 Red Linear figures overlain by presumed older Pecos River style art and no converse
examples, thus inverting the relative chronologies
for the two styles. They also produced a list of diagnostic attributes for Red Linear anthropomorphs
and zoomorphs. The attributes they identified as
characteristic of 87 Red Linear deer are used here
to reassess Rowe’s (2003) assignment of the black
charcoal figure to the Red Linear style.

238

Texas Archeological Society

Boyd et al. (2013) classify zoomorphic figures
as Red Linear based on the presence of multiple
attributes, including size, body shape, presence
or absence of physical features, subject, and context—in particular, association with Red Linear
style anthropomorphs. Although greater than 60
percent of the documented Red Linear zoomorphs
are red, they also are portrayed in yellow, black,
and white; and all are wet-applied paintings as opposed to dry-applied drawings (Boyd et al. 2013).
Red Linear deer are typically, but not always,
portrayed with crescent and ovoid body shapes. Interestingly, none of the 87 documented Red Linear
figures are impaled. They range in size from 1.6
cm to 14.6 cm in height (μ =5.6 cm, σ =2.9 cm)
to 2.0 cm to 21.5 cm in length (μ =7.7 cm, σ =3.8
cm). Body proportions tend to be exaggerated, in
particular the height to length ratio. Red Linear
style deer average 5.6 cm in height and 7.7 cm in
length, with a height to length ratio of 73 percent.
Hind legs are frequently portrayed even longer
than front legs (Figure 2). Red Linear deer are portrayed with or without antlers and with or without
hooves. Many are portrayed with protruding lips
resembling lip curl or Flehmen response displayed
by bucks during rut (Rue III 1997).

a

A distinctive geometric form associated with
Red Linear artiodactyls is the looped line. This
motif, which resembles a loop snare, is formed by
a series of connecting looped lines attached along
a single straight line. With the exception of looped
lines, no other geometric figures are unique to the
Red Linear style. Ovals, bars, grids, etc. are found
among all rock art styles in the Lower Pecos. Stylistic classification of geometric forms, therefore,
is even more ambiguous than zoomorphs and, like
zoomorphs, must be based on association with
other known Red Linear figures.
Stylistic Analysis of the Charcoal Deer
Classification of zoomorphic figures into stylistic categories is often difficult and this example
is no exception. As stated above, classification
of zoomorphs into the Red Linear style must be
based on the presence of multiple attributes or, in
the absence of multiple attributes, association with
figures readily recognizable as Red Linear, such
as anthropomorphs. The zoomorphs at 41VV75
share only two attributes with documented Red
Linear artiodactyls—their size and their lack of
spear impalement; neither of these attributes alone

b

Figure 2. Red Linear artiodactyls from Mystic Shelter portrayed with exaggeratedly long legs and mouths with protruding
lips similar to the lip curl or Flehmen response exhibited by bucks during rut.

Boyd, et al.—Revisiting the Stylistic Classification of a Charcoal Pictograph in the Lower Pecos 239
or in combination can be used to classify them as
Red Linear (Table 1). The dated charcoal figures
also are dissimilar from Red Linear zoomorphs
in their manner of execution—dry-applied versus
wet-applied. They lack the exaggerated leg length
and distinctive lip curl common to Red Linear
artiodactyls. Most importantly, they are not found
in association with the distinctive looped lines or
with Red Linear anthropomorphs.
Charcoal drawings of deer, however, are not
unique to 41VV75. Recently, during the 2013 Eagle
Nest Canyon Field School, we recorded a similar
dry-applied pictograph at 41VV164 (Kelley Cave)
(Figure 3). Kelley Cave is located in Langtry, Texas,
approximately 20 miles west of Seminole Canyon.
Pecos River style anthropomorphic and enigmatic
figures painted in red and yellow are located along
the downstream-end of this shelter. No Red Linear
style pictographs have been documented at the site;
however, preservation of the paintings is very poor
and we are left with an incomplete record of the
pictograph assemblage. All paintings are heavily
obscured by mineral accretions and badly spalled.
A black, dry-applied deer equal in size and morphology to the charcoal deer at 41VV75 is located
low on the ceiling toward the back of the shelter. Like
the 41VV75 charcoal figures, it was drawn into a preexisting spall. The deer measures 8.4 cm in height
and 17 cm in length. As with those at 41VV75, it has
a rectangular-shaped body in-filled with a series of
roughly executed black lines, tall ears or spike antlers,
and is not impaled. However, in contrast to 41VV75,
this lone deer figure is not found in association with
any other charcoal imagery.
In November 2013, we conducted an elemental
analysis of the dry-applied black deer at Kelley Cave

using pXRF. Both the black pigment and adjacent
unpainted rock (control) contained similar manganese levels of ≤100 ppm Mn, near the pXRF instrumental limit of detection or “zero-level.” As with the
black deer at 41VV75, we determined that the black
pigment used to produce the Kelley Cave pictograph
was not mineral based and, therefore, was derived
from an organic substance, such as charcoal.
CONCLUSION
Although the radiocarbon date for the black
charcoal deer at 41VV75 is the same as the Cueva
Quebrada date for the red-orange oval pictograph,
we maintain that the black pictograph cannot be
confidently categorized as Red Linear. The figure
lacks sufficient diagnostic attributes to classify it
as such. The black charcoal deer does not fit neatly
into any of the currently defined styles for the
region. This leaves us with only one radiocarbon
date for Red Linear style—the date from Cueva
Quebrada. We caution, however, against relying
on this one date to define the temporal span for
Red Linear style.
Additional radiocarbon dating of all rock art
styles is essential to determine absolute rock art
chronologies for the region. This should be coupled
with stratigraphic analyses and further descriptions/recordings of rock art assemblages.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We appreciate the support of Texas A&M
University at Qatar and the Qatar Foundation for

Table 1. Comparison of Red Linear (RLS) Artiodactyl Attributes to Charcoal Pictographs at 41VV75.
RLS Artiodactyl Attributes (Boyd et al. 2013)

41VV75 Black Artiodactyl Attributes

Height (1.6 cm to 14.6 cm)
Length (2.0 cm to 21.5 cm)
Exaggerated Leg Length
Wet Applied Paintings
Ovoid and Crescent Body Shape
Mouth with Lip Curl
Not Spear Impaled
Looped Line Geometric
Associated with RLS Anthropomorphs

Height (4.5 cm to 11.5 cm)
Length (9 cm to 19.2 cm)
No Exaggerated Leg Length
Dry Applied Drawings
Rectangular Body Shape
No mouth present
Not Spear Impaled
Ladder-Like Geometric
Not Associated with RLS Anthropomorphs

240

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Black, dry-applied charcoal deer from 41VV164 (Kelley Cave).

Boyd, et al.—Revisiting the Stylistic Classification of a Charcoal Pictograph in the Lower Pecos 241
supplying us with the pXRF analyzer. We received
permission from park superintendent Randy Rosales
at Seminole Canyon State Park and Historic Site to
conduct the in situ pXRF analysis of the black deer.
We greatly appreciate the continued support from
Texas Parks and Wildlife in our recording and preservation efforts in the Lower Pecos. We also thank
the Skiles family for granting Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center and Texas State
University access to Kelley Cave during the 2013
Eagle Nest Canyon Field School.
REFERENCES CITED
Bednarik, R. G.
1994 Conceptual Pitfalls in Dating of Palaeolithic Rock
Art. Préhistoire Anthropologie Méditerranéennes
3:95-102.
Boyd, C. E., A. M. Castañeda, and C. W. Koenig
2013 A Reassessment of Red Linear Pictographs in the
Lower Pecos Canyonlands of Texas. American Antiquity 78(3):456-482.
Bronk R., C.
2009 Bayesian analysis of radiocarbon dates. Radiocarbon
51:337-360.
2013 On-line OxCal version 4.2.3

Hyman, M. and M. W. Rowe
1997 Plasma extraction and AMS 14C dating of rock paintings. Techne 5:61-70.
Ilger, W. A., M. Hyman, and M. W. Rowe
1994 Radiocarbon Date for a Red Linear Style Pictograph. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
64:337-346.
Koenig, C. W., A. M. Castañeda, C. E. Boyd, M. W. Rowe,
and K. L. Steelman
2014 Portable X-Ray Fluorescence Spectroscopy of
Pictographs: A Case Study from the Lower Pecos
Canyonlands. Archaeometry.

Reimer, P. J., Bard, E., Bayliss, A., Beck, J. W., Blackwell,
P. G., Bronk Ramsey, C., Grootes, P. M., Guilderson, T. P.,
Haflidason, H., Hajdas, I., Hatte, C., Heaton, T. J., Hoffmann,
D. L., Hogg, A. G., Hughen, K. A., Kaiser, K. F., Kromer,
B., Manning, S. W., Niu, M., Reimer, R. W., Richards, D.
A., Scott, E. M., Southon, J. R., Staff, R. A., Turney, C. S.
M., and van der Plicht, J.
2013 IntCal13 and Marine13 Radiocarbon Age Calibration Curves 0-50,000 Years cal BP. Radiocarbon
55:1869-1887.
Schiffer, M. B.
1986 Radiocarbon Dating and the “Old Wood” Problem:
The Case of the Hohokam Chronology. Journal of
Archaeological Science 13:13-30.
Turpin, S. A.
1984 The Red Linear Style Pictographs of the Lower
Pecos River Region, Texas. Plains Anthropologist
29(105):181-198.

1986 Toward a Definition of a Pictograph Style: The
Lower Pecos Bold Line Geometric. Plains Anthropologist 31(112): 153-162.

1995 The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:541-560.
2011

Size Matters: The Transition from Religious to Secular Art in the Lower Pecos. In American Indian Rock
Art, edited by M. Greer, J. Greer, and P. Whitehead,
pp. 1-15. American Rock Art Research Association
37.

Rowe, M. W.
2003 Radiocarbon Dating of a Deer Image from the Lower
Pecos River Region, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 74:83-88.

2009 Radiocarbon Dating of Ancient Rock Paintings.
Analytical Chemistry 81(5):1728-1735.
Rue, L. L., III
1997 The Deer of North America. Lyons Press, Guilford,
Connecticut.

The Knox Biface: An Incised Stone Artifact from Central Texas
James D. Keyser

ABSTRACT
The Knox biface, found in Central Texas in 1961, is a hand-sized biface of Edwards Plateau chert that shows
a very complex and detailed pattern of incising in the relatively soft cortical surface covering one side. Probably of Archaic period age, the biface’s incised surface shows a complex series of geometric compartments
infilled with cross-hatching or parallel lines, and a single plant form with a short barb at the tip of each complete
branch. Based on the desire of the artifact’s owner, it was donated to the curatorial facility of the Center for
Archaeological Studies at Texas State University.

INTRODUCTION
In February 2008, Rich Knox, a member of
the Oregon Archaeological Society (OAS), who
was enrolled in the OAS-sponsored “Basic Training” class for archeological volunteers, asked if I
would be interested in looking at a chipped stone
artifact on which there were “Indian carvings.”
Knowing of my professional interest in rock art
and having just attended my lectures in “Law
and Ethics for the Volunteer” and “Introduction
to Rock Art,” Knox felt that the artifact in his
possession deserved professional evaluation. He
further related that the item was given to him by
his grandfather (L. J. Maxwell), who lived for
many years in Central Texas, just east of where
the artifact was reportedly found. Having been
previously shown more than a dozen stones
in my long career as a federal archeologist on
which interested amateurs claimed to recognize
“Indian designs” in what were obviously natural
markings, I was not overly hopeful, but agreed
to view the artifact at the next class session the
following Saturday.
Nevertheless, what Knox brought in is an intricately detailed incised stone. Once he understood
the artifact’s significance, he readily loaned it to
me so I could make detailed photographs and drawings and show the biface to various Texas archeologists with an interest in such artifacts. He then
agreed that the results of my examination should
be published and that the piece should be donated

to a museum repository in Texas, where it can be
studied by future archeologists and enjoyed by all.
I presented the biface to Wilson “Dub” Crook at
the 2013 Texas Archeological Society meeting in
Del Rio for curation at Texas State University in
the curatorial facility of the Center for Archaeological Studies.
THE KNOX BIFACE
In November 1961, Mr. L. J. Maxwell found
a large Edwards Chert biface with an extensive,
very intricately engraved cortical surface covering about 65% of one face of the artifact. Found in
Kimble County in west central Texas, the artifact
was reportedly recovered from a “campsite” (possibly in a cave) which was located near a spring in a
canyon between the towns of Junction and Menard
(Knox 2008).
Technological Analysis
The large, hand-sized biface (Figure 1) measures just over 14 cm long, 10 cm wide, and almost
exactly 1.5 cm thick at its thickest part where a
small, crude, reverse-L-shaped “island” of weathered chert cortex rises above the broad percussion
flakes that surround it. This cortex island, located
on the reverse face (opposite the incising), has
a hard, lumpy, heavily weathered, unmodified
surface. This “island” survived a knapper’s initial

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

244

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Obverse (“a”) and reverse (“b”) views of the Knox biface. Note cortex “island” on reverse face and incised
pattern on obverse. George Poetschat photographs.

effort to remove it, as evidenced by at least five
very broad flake scars that terminate at its edges.
But analysis shows that the knapper began a series
of small marginal flakes along both edges of the
incised, obverse side of the biface (opposite the
almost completely flaked surface) that produced
two sturdy platforms adequate for the detachment
of broad flakes that would have removed this
cortex with only minimal additional effort (John
Fagan, personal communication 2011).
This remnant-weathered cortex is significantly
different from the relatively thick, soft, smoothly
weathered, intensively incised, limestone cortex on
the obverse side of the artifact. Taken together, however, they indicate that this piece was originally a
weathered slab of Edwards Chert before it was picked
up and modified by a prehistoric artist and knapper.
The almost completely flaked, reverse face of

the artifact has a series of nearly a dozen broad,
shallow, percussion flake scars, most of which
extend almost to the biface’s center. The largest
of these extend from 5 cm to almost 7 cm across
the biface, but there is no evidence of the outrépassé flaking technique that characterizes Clovis
period lithic technology from across the western
United States (Mike Collins, personal communication 2009; John Fagan, personal communication
2008). The longest of these scars appears much
more weathered at its margins and on the tops of
the accentuated ripple marks within it (Figure 2),
suggesting that it likely predates the less weathered
flaking by some unknown period of time. Following initial percussion removal of several flakes, the
reverse face of the artifact was further modified
by a series of small, short flakes that appear to
be preliminary edge-trimming designed to set up

Keyser—The Knox Biface 245
platforms for detachment of flakes
from the obverse (incised) face
(John Fagan, personal communication 2011).
The incised face is dominated
by a large, tan, slightly concave
cortical surface that still covers almost 65% of the biface. This cortex
was trimmed around the margins by
14 short, broad, shallow percussion
flake scars that are considerably
different from the percussion flake
scars on the reverse face. The short
length of the surviving scars is
directly attributable to two factors:
(1) the flakes on the obverse face
did not “carry” any significant distance across the concave surface,
and (2) the removal of a significant
portion of the biface edge around
its entire circumference caused by
the detachment of platforms for
flakes taken from the reverse side
(John Fagan, personal communication 2011).
Figure 2. Close-up of flaking on reverse face shows weathering of margins
These foreshortened, marginal and ripple marks (arrows) of oldest flake in sequence. Scale in centimeters.
flakes created a cortical surface that George Poetschat photograph.
has a crudely zoomorphic shape
(Figure 3b) that may have been recognized by the knapper, although there is no way
left to upper right when viewing the biface so that
to verify this. After these broad percussion flakes
the crude zoomorphic form is in an approximately
were removed the knapper further modified this
pronograde position (see Figure 3c). These shalface with a series of edge-trimming flakes that were
low, carelessly executed lines overlap one another
obviously intended to set up platforms for detachand do not appear to form any recognizable pattern.
ment of additional flakes that would have removed
Likewise, they do not appear to be precursors in
the remnant cortex island on the reverse face (John
any way to the highly patterned and carefully exeFagan, personal communication, 2011). According
cuted lines composing the second phase of incising.
to Fagan, these platforms have the correct angle
Whether these initial scratches were incised millenalready set, and with minimal edge-grinding would
nia or minutes before the second phase cannot be
be ready for flake detachment.
determined, but they certainly seem to have been
intentionally, if somewhat haphazardly, produced.
It is possible that they are simply the result of the
artist’s testing the piece to determine how readily
THE INCISED DECORATION
it could be incised.
Much more impressive than any knapping
The second phase of incised lines forms a
evidence on the biface, however, is the pattern of
complex series of geometric compartments that
incising that covers almost its entire remaining
include rectangles, triangles, crude diamond
cortex. This pattern, consisting of delicate fine
shapes, and crude half circles filled with crosslines, shows two phases of production. The initial
hatching or simple parallel lines (see Figure 3b,
incisions, clearly superimposed by the later, more
d). Interestingly, there are 24 separate compartstructured pattern of lines, are a cluster of about
ments evenly divided between cross-hatched and
a dozen long, oblique lines extending from lower
parallel line infill. Cross-hatching is quite uniform

246

Texas Archeological Society

0

10 cm

Figure 3. Illustration of the Knox biface and incised pattern: a, flaked reverse surface of biface; b, flaked and incised
obverse surface of biface (note earlier scratches are shown in grey); c, earliest scratches; d, later, complex incised pattern.
Drawings and tracings by the author.

and consists of patterns of overlapping parallel
lines oriented primarily at acute angles with 10
of the 12 ranging from 20 to 33 degrees and the
other two being approximately 45 and 90 degrees.
In two of the triangular shapes one set of the lines
composing the cross-hatching roughly parallels
one side of the compartment, but in all others
there seems to have been an effort to avoid doing
this. The close correspondence of these crosshatched patterns suggests that they were done
by a single hand. All but one of the parallel line
patterns are more or less aligned with the inferred
base of the triangle or short sides of the rectangle,
again suggesting a single artist who had a definite
pattern in mind.

These infilled geometric shapes are clearly clustered together rather than randomly scattered across
the decorated field. On the left half of this field, triangles abut other shapes and two meet at their apexes.
Two diamond shapes are also touching at their ends
and three crude rectangles are connected one to the
other by their short sides. A crude half circle abuts
one side of these connected rectangles and spans
all of one and part of another. Cross-hatched lines
infilling two of these rectangles and the half circle
do not span both compartments, indicating that the
infill was done separately for each.
In the right half of the field a series of nine
triangles is oriented side by side so that each one
shares two sides with neighboring examples. For a

Keyser—The Knox Biface 247
sequence of seven of these they alternate between
parallel line infill and cross-hatching, with the
parallel lines all being aligned with the base of the
triangle. The last two disrupt this pattern with one
having parallel lines not aligned with any side of
the compartment and the last one having crosshatch infill that is oriented in an opposite direction
from the others with cross-hatching.
Separating these two distinctive patterns is a
tall, linear, plant-like form consisting of a central
line from which extend 12 shorter, obliquely oriented “branches” on each side (Figure 4). In six
cases—four of which are on the bottom of the
figure—these branch lines are relatively carefully
paired so that they meet on opposite sides of the
main stem at their point of origin, as if the artist
was striving for bilateral symmetry. In the six other
cases, however, the placement of these lines is not
so obviously precise and they do not meet at the
central stem. At the tips of all 17 branches that are
still preserved in their entirety—and another that
has only its extreme tip removed—there is a short
barb produced by carefully incising a short line
backward and downward from the branch (Figure
4). Presumably the other six lines, located at the
top of the image, also had a similar barb, which
is now lost due to flaking that has removed the
cortex. This design, especially as evidenced by
the terminal barbs on the oblique branches, is as
equally carefully crafted, as are the enclosed, infilled geometric forms.
The tiny incisions forming the scratched design on this artifact are carefully controlled, but
irregular enough to show they were drawn freehand
rather than with the aid of a straight edge of some
sort. They are so well done that for more than 350
approximately parallel lines, only two branch or
run together, and for nearly 600 places where interior fill lines intersect compartment boundary lines
there are fewer than 25 instances where the lines
either overshoot or do not quite meet the boundary
lines. The same level of accuracy is evident for corners of the diamond and rectilinear shapes. For the
12 obvious triangles only three have marginal lines
that do not precisely meet at the apex. In contrast,
nearly half of the small barbs on the branches of
the plant-like form are less carefully positioned:
sometimes exactly pendant from the extreme tip
of the branch, but at other times forming a crudely
crossed “T.” In light of the precision of most lines
in the design, this implies that the artist was intentionally imprecise. During my effort to trace these

designs I was constantly awed by the exactness and
accuracy of these incisions, especially considering
that they were drawn freehand with a stone flake
using only the naked eye.
The flaking on the incised face was clearly
done after the piece was incised. Fourteen geometric compartments are partly truncated along one or
sometimes two margins by flake scars (Figure 5).
One of these is a broad, very shallow flake scar
that terminates in a “hinge fracture” exactly at a
straight incised line, demonstrating that the incision served as the hinge fracture point. In addition, remnant incisions from four of the geometric
compartments occur at six places within flake
scars, where they are preserved in the lowest level
of the cortex that was not completely removed by
the shallow, feathered edge of the flake. Finally, the
tips of seven “branches” and the main stem of the
plant-like image end abruptly at flake edges, almost
certainly indicating that the top of this design was
truncated by the flaking in this area of the biface. In
fact, measuring along the margin of the remaining
cortex shows that just more than 50% of the edge

Figure 4. The plant form incised on the Knox biface. Note
the small spur at the end of each complete branch and the
remnant spur on the partially removed branch at extreme
upper right (arrow). Grey areas indicate flake edges where
feathering left behind remnant cortex in which incisions
are still preserved.

248

Texas Archeological Society

evidences parts of the design that were invaded by
the flaking. Taken together, these prove that most
of the design was incised before this face was
flaked, and strongly suggest that the entire pattern
predates the flaking.
INTERPRETATION
Without good provenience it is almost impossible to suggest an ultimate function for the incising on this artifact. Similar incised stones are found

0

throughout the world, both as regoliths of various
sizes and (as in this example) flint or chert cores
whose design was later completely or partially
destroyed by the knapper (Brumm et al. 2006;
Fischer 1974; Clark Wernecke, personal communication 2008). Similar items are found throughout North America, especially in Texas, where
they date from Clovis to Historic times (Jackson
1938:333; Klimowicz 1988; Reid and Caulk 1986;
Clark Wernecke, personal communication 2008;
Wernecke and Collins 2010). In Texas, probably
the best-known, and most renowned, collection of

10 cm

Figure 5. Extent of flaking that has impacted the design incised on the obverse side of the Knox biface. Areas between
arrows are where incised lines terminate at flake edges. Grey indicates flake edges where feathering left behind remnant
cortex. Note incised lines preserved in this remnant cortex at right arrow in 3 and 4, and just to right of left arrow in
2. Lower portion of area 5 shows where a flake has hinged directly along the incised line of the cross-hatched fill in
the triangle.

Keyser—The Knox Biface 249
such artifacts is from the Gault site, where they
date from Clovis through Archaic times (Michael
Collins, personal communication 2009; Wernecke
and Collins 2010).
Clark Wernecke, Gault Site Project Director,
who has devoted more time to studying such artifacts than anyone else, has compiled a list of more
than 60 proposed reasons that such artifacts were
produced. These range from suggestions that the
production of such items could be as simple as the
result of doodling, to identifying ownership of a
flint nodule, to ritual petitioning for a successful
knapping event (Clark Wernecke, personal communication 2008). Unfortunately, Wernecke notes
that even with excellent provenience only a few of
these possible functions can be ruled out. For the
Knox biface we can definitely rule out doodling
based on the extreme care evident in precision of
line and design. However, with only generic geographic location, and no indication of type of site or
specific provenience (e.g., cache, burial, workshop
area) within a site, we cannot support or refute any
other of the myriad possible functions.
The four archeologists familiar with Texas
prehistory who have seen the artifact either in
person or in good photographs (Michael Collins,
John Greer, Elton Prewitt, and Clark Wernecke), all
agree that the biface is probably of Archaic period
age, typical of others found commonly in collections throughout west central Texas.
The elements used in the incised design are
certainly not unique for this particular artifact, but
the overall design is larger and more complex than
most found on similar items. Many such designs,
especially those that are completely or nearly
completely preserved on the larger pieces, are
primarily regular cross-hatched images composed
of straight lines intersecting at various angles
(Jackson 1938:333; Black 2008; Clark Wernecke,
personal communication 2008), but occasional
examples show designs that may depict plant or
animal forms (Wernecke and Collins 2010:3). In
contrast, the Knox biface displays an image of
a probable plant form combined with carefully
drawn geometric elements of at least three different
shapes, all of which are infilled with parallel line
or cross-hatched patterns. Additionally, one part
of this design consists of a very regular pattern of
adjacent, repeated, triangular elements while the
other part of the geometric design consists of scattered elements, each of which touches at least one
other, laid out in no obvious pattern.

Without regard for the incised decoration, the
biface is what Fagan (personal communication
2011) terms a “toolkit in transition.” The flaking
pattern indicates that the biface was the source of
large flakes that were then used as, or modified
into, smaller tools, rather than a finished bifacial
tool itself. Fagan noted that removal of the extant
flakes was not done primarily to thin the piece, but
instead to obtain flakes suitable for smaller tools.
Scars indicate that about a dozen such flakes were
already detached from this piece and that at least
that many more remained for a knapper of reasonable skill to remove. Finally, Fagan observed that
platform preparation and flake detachment for the
flakes already taken from the piece removed at
least 1-2 cm of material around the entire biface
circumference. This is particularly noteworthy
on the reverse surface where several of the larger
flakes are clearly foreshortened, with their point of
origin being as much as 2 cm out from the present
biface edge.
Since we know that the knapper started to destroy the design on this biface by flaking around
its margins, and prepared platforms for removing
two more major flakes from the reverse side, his
reason for stopping is unknown. However, it seems
plausible that the emergence of the incised cortical
surface in the shape of a crude animal form may
have given the knapper pause, and this may be why
the biface was retained in this form.
In summary, this artifact is a remarkable
example of a poorly known class of artifacts for
which we have only limited information. Unfortunately this piece has only general provenience,
but the sophistication of the incised design makes
it worthy of note.
REFERENCES CITED
Black, S.
2008 Clovis Reconsidered. Accessed January 2012, at
http://www.texasbeyondhistory.net/gault/clovis.html.
Brumm, A., N. Boivin, and R. Fullagar
2006 Signs of Life: Engraved Stone Artifacts from
Neolithic South India. Cambridge Archaeological
Journal 16(2):165-190.
Fischer, A.
1974 An Ornamented Flint-Core from Holmegård V, Zealand, Denmark. Acta Archaeologica 45:155-168.

250

Texas Archeological Society

Jackson, A. T.
1938 Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. Anthropological
Papers Vol. II. University of Texas, Austin.
Klimowicz, J.
1988 A Structural Analysis of Prehistoric Incised stones
from Southern Nevada. Master’s Thesis, Department
of Anthropology, University of Nevada, Reno.
Knox, R.
2008 History of the Artifact. Unpublished Typescript
Notes in Possession of Mr. Knox.
Reid, K. and G. Caulk
1986 To Tally or to Dally? An Analysis of Incised Stones
from Two Upland Hunting Camps in Wallowa County,
Oregon. Paper presented at the 39th Annual Northwest
Anthropological Conference, 27-29 March 1986,
Moscow, Idaho. Paper abstract printed in Northwest
Anthropological Research Notes 20(1):60.

Wernecke, D. C. and M. B. Collins
2010 Patterns and Process: Some Thoughts on the Incised
Stones from the Gault Site. Central Texas, United
States. Acts of the IFRAO Congress on Pleistocene
Art of the World, Foix, France. Accessed January
2012, at http://ifrao.sesta.fr/docs/articles/Wernecke_
Collins-Amerique.pdf.

Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon
Chronology for Central Texas
Jon C. Lohse, Stephen L. Black, and Laly M. Cholak

ABSTRACT
In this study we present a revised cultural chronology for Central Texas starting with the beginning of the terminus of the Early Archaic, ca. 5800 cal B.P., and ending with the Late Prehistoric, which we argue should consist
solely of the Toyah interval at A.D. 1300. Our study is based on a careful review of published radiocarbon dates
that are arguably associated with only single point types. We rely on complementary lines of evidence including
a high precision chronology of regional bison exploitation, a geoarcheological model of site formation at the
Spring Lake site in Hays County, and dietary reconstructions using stable carbon and nitrogen isotope data from
the Early Archaic through Toyah to support our interpretations of these data. In addition to relatively precise
dates for the Middle Archaic, our model proposes four Late Archaic periods. In addition to increased precision
in the regional chronology, our study defines some problematic issues that should be addressed in future work.

INTRODUCTION
Building chronologies, or reconstructing sequences of events, patterns, and periods that occurred
in the past, is the “first and often most important
step in archaeological research” (Renfrew and Bahn
2012:166). This has been the case for Central Texas
since Pearce (1932) described crudely stratified
deposits he observed in “kitchen” or burned rock
middens. Subsequent research in this region has led
to thousands of hours and millions of dollars spent
on refining prehistoric events and cultural periods.
Here, we present a revised chronological
model for greater Central Texas spanning the end
of the Early Archaic to the beginning of the Late
Prehistoric Toyah interval, a period encompassing
more than 5,000 years. Our model differs from
previous ones in that it focuses on reevaluating
the existing radiocarbon record to isolate assays
that are apparently associated with only a single
projectile point style. Additionally, we use direct
dates of bison bones and other data to help limit
and interpret this revised chronological model. Our
reconsideration of the available radiocarbon record
highlights the need for greatly improved sample
selection and reporting, for additional targeted
dating, and for alternative approaches to building
and interpreting chronological models.

In terms of associated projectile point types,
our model starts with the Calf Creek horizon (including Bell and Andice types), which we consider
to represent the terminal Early Archaic, and ends
with Scallorn, which we think marks the end of the
Archaic era. This study is part of an ongoing effort
to understand as precisely as possible the timing of
the periods of use of “diagnostic” key index markers (or time markers), most of which are projectile
point styles, as well as the timing of sporadic periods of bison hunting and, to a lesser degree, some
environmental conditions in the region.
We make no attempt to comprehensively
summarize or evaluate previous chronological
schemes or models that have been presented for
the region; we refer readers to a recent article in
the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
for a useful overview of prior efforts (Carpenter
and Houk 2012). Our work builds on a long series
of chronological efforts, and we are strongly and
positively influenced by these previous studies.
Particularly important syntheses were accomplished early by Dee Ann Suhm, Alex Krieger, and
Edward Jelks (Suhm et al. 1954; Suhm and Jelks
1962); and subsequently by Frank Weir (1976),
Elton Prewitt (1981, 1983), LeRoy Johnson and
Glenn Goode (1994), and Michael Collins (1995,
2004). Many recent and useful publications discuss

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

252

Texas Archeological Society

chronology-related semantics and offer detailed
treatments of chronology as a research domain in
the region (e.g., Carpenter et al. 2013; Carpenter
and Houk 2012; Houk et al. 2008, 2009).
Our study is an outgrowth of archeological
research in Hays County, especially at Spring
Lake, the small impoundment at the headwaters of the San Marcos River that includes State
Antiquities Landmarks 41HY147, 41HY160,
41HY161, and 41HY165. Major springs here
have attracted humans at least since the Clovis
horizon and archeological evidence shows that
the immediate area was occupied more or less
continuously throughout prehistoric and historic
times (Lohse 2013). We have recently compiled a
large set of radiocarbon assays on charred plants
and on bison bone recovered from archeological
deposits at Spring Lake. Our dating program has
been aimed at understanding the chronological
sequence of the immediate Spring Lake area and
relating this chronology to broader patterns of
cultural and ecological change through time. We
use some of these data here, specifically dates for
bison exploitation, environmental modeling for
site depositional rates and processes, and isotopic
evidence for dietary behavior, to help interpret
and contextualize our findings.
Spring Lake, like many major springs (including Comal Springs, Barton Springs, and various San
Antonio springs), lies along the Balcones Escarpment on the eastern edge of the Edwards Plateau
within what has long been regarded as the Central
Texas archeological region, the boundaries of which
have been variously defined (e.g., Collins 1995;
Ellis et al. 1995; Prewitt 1981; Suhm 1960). Hays
County lies within the eastern part of Central Texas
in all of these schemes. We have observed that most
of the cultural patterns seen at Spring Lake closely
parallel those in evidence across most of the region
and in immediately adjacent areas as well. Thus,
for present purposes we regard our study area as
“greater” Central Texas and leave it at that.
CHRONOLOGIES AS TOOLS FOR
INTERPRETATION
The purpose of chronologies is to outline
a sequence of events, distinctive artifacts, and
cultural patterns in their proper temporal order.
As models, they are subject to testing and
verification, and are useful to varying degrees

depending on factors like temporal precision and
accuracy, sensitivity to doubt or uncertainty, the
lines of evidence on which they are based, and
the inclusion of additional lines of information
useful for understanding the past. We think that the
Archaic (and Paleoindian) cultural chronology for
Central Texas will always be somewhat imprecise
because it depends so heavily on inferred dates for
changes in projectile point styles. Resolving this
imprecision to some degree is the main focus of
our study. For example, important cultural periods
are frequently presented as 500 or more years long,
and we argue that such periods were likely to have
been in reality much shorter in duration. Another
factor is that stone projectile tips cannot be directly
dated. Consequently, archeologists working in the
region must rely on the quality of the association
between a diagnostic time marker and a nearby
dateable organic material.
With only a few exceptions, almost all of the
time markers used in Central Texas are projectile
points. The degree of separation between what is
referred to as the “target event” (the precise time
when a given point type was made and used) and
the “dated event” (the chronometric age of the
organic sample submitted for radiocarbon dating)
can be misleading, even in the most carefully controlled excavations. Site formation processes (e.g.,
gradual deposition, bioturbation, and deflation)
routinely result in the close physical proximity of
materials that are separated in age by centuries or
even much longer. Excavators can sometimes but
not always detect these processes.
Most prehistoric sites in Central Texas contain
mixed-age deposits for the simple reason that they
commonly formed on slowly aggrading or nonaggrading stable land surfaces that were periodically subject to periods of erosion (Collins 1995).
Human actions, like the digging of pits associated
with shallow earth ovens or other features, contribute to this condition. Unfortunately, over the
history of archeological research in the region,
short-term deposits are often judged as insignificant because they are typically “artifact poor”
relative to the rich deposits found in larger sites
that routinely formed on stable land surfaces. Even
when ideal depositional contexts were encountered
and sampled, for budget reasons archeologists have
often relied on only a few radiocarbon assays to
ascertain the age of the deposits.
Radiocarbon dates can be adversely affected
by sample contamination, processing discrepancies

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 253
among laboratories (e.g., Internal Study Group
1982), sample size, and dating method. In Central Texas, accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)
dating did not become routine until the 1990s;
thus most radiocarbon assays were run using
conventional radiometric techniques that required
at least 10-20 grams of carbonized material. This
meant that archeologists pursued radiocarbon dating infrequently because they lacked samples of
adequate size; or that they had to submit pooled
samples from broad contexts, rather than spot-provenienced samples. In most sites the only carbonized material preserved in such quantities is wood
charcoal. Charred wood may come from long-lived
species (e.g., live oak) and may well include “old
wood” that dates decades or even centuries older
than the dated context. AMS dating allows a far
better strategy: the dating of charred fragments of
short-lived species (e.g., grasses) and plant parts
(such as seeds or twigs) from targeted spots.
As a result of many interrelated problems—
uncertain associations, mixed-age deposits, insufficient sampling, less-than-ideal material selection,
inconsistencies in reporting, and radiocarbon
processing issues—the majority of the radiocarbon
assays that have been obtained from Central Texas
sites over the past half century cannot be regarded
as reliable age estimates for the purpose of constructing chronologies with the degree of precision
we seek. A key distinction here is between accuracy
and precision. We accept that many older assays
(those obtained prior to recent decades, especially
conventional radiometric assays) remain relatively
accurate: that is, the true date of the targeted event
falls within the estimated age span. But the spans
of time that most such assays represent when
calibrated and considered at two standard deviations of confidence (95.4% probability) are very
imprecise compared with what can be achieved by
contemporary dating methods. Precise dates are
those with narrow estimated age spans, and one of
our objectives is to present a chronological model
that is both accurate and precise. While the overall awareness of factors leading to more precise
radiocarbon-based chronologies is improving in
archeology, much remains to be done in the region.
In our view, continued attention to refining
the cultural chronology of greater Central Texas is
worthwhile, and should remain a viable research
priority regardless of changes in theoretical orientation across the larger field of anthropological
archeology. We concur with recent criticisms of the

prioritization of chronology for its own sake (Arnn
2005; Dillehay 2012), insofar as this prioritization
precludes adequate attention given to other issues.
When appropriate opportunities arise, however, we
believe that continued and more rigorous efforts to
refine and improve regional chronologies will pay
off over time. Chronologies strongly influence the
way archeologists understand not only the timing,
but also the nature of culture change.
How Chronologies Influence Interpretations
As approaches to absolute dating improve,
so too should archeologists’ consideration of how
chronological schemes can be presented in ways
that maximize their effectiveness. For example,
chronologies typically portray important time periods as having standard dimensions rounded off
to the nearest millennium or century, often shown
as a succession of boxes neatly arranged into
columns that show no overlap. All archeologists
realize that culture change is not as neat as these
schemes imply, and that this convention is merely
one of convenience. Furthermore, although differences in time periods are said to reflect changes
in artifact types and the products of other cultural
behaviors (e.g., new technologies, feature types,
burial patterns, etc.), most chronologies reveal
little or nothing about the nature of the transitions
from one period to the next. Were culture changes
drawn out or did they happen quickly? Were they
local developments or the result of migration or
other external cultural influences? Were climatic or
ecological changes correlated with the technological changes that chronologies represent?
Another issue for consideration is how chronological models influence expectations concerning
site components and acceptable degrees of mixing. Because they are regional syntheses, existing
chronological schemes depict the full range of
types and time periods in Central Texas with little
emphasis on precision. For instance, many archeologists accept the notion that Montell, Castroville,
and Marcos points co-occurred during the Late
Archaic a little more than 2,000 years ago (see
Carpenter et al. 2013; Carpenter and Houk 2012).
However, actual ages for each of these types and
any degree of separation that might exist are poorly
known, and these types are frequently included in
the same archeological period as a result. Judging from the groupings of projectile point types
portrayed in existing chronologies, the same could

254

Texas Archeological Society

be said about many types: they are thought to cooccur over many centuries. Yet very few published
sites contain dated components or contexts having
only a single point type without others also being
found in association. For example, site components
having only Montell, Castroville, or Marcos points
are scarce (see below). Components containing
all three appear “robust” in terms of volume and
diversity of material content and are often ascribed
considerable research value when it comes to allocating money for data recovery. One unfortunate
result is that some reconstructed Middle or Late
Archaic components span over a thousand years,
a length of time with minimal analytical utility
for understanding any but the broadest patterns of
culture change or social process.
Improvements in how chronologies communicate larger processes involved in culture
change can be seen in schemes that also chart
complementary lines of evidence, such as climate,
at the same temporal scale (e.g., Prewitt 1981). A
good example is the model by Johnson and Goode
(1994:Figure 2) that depicts the temporal relationship between broad patterns of climate change and
equally broad “archeological eras.” Their presentation of a generalized climatic model, based on
an interpretive synthesis of various lines of published evidence, allows readers to contemplate the
co-occurrence of stylistic change with long-term
variation in temperature and precipitation.
The integration of additional data, beyond
only calendar ages and artifact types, indicates
the degree to which researchers intend their chronologies to serve as summaries or even syntheses
of time-ordered regional processes. Following
Prewitt’s (1981) work for Central Texas, perhaps
the best regional example is the chronology
compiled by Collins (1995, 2004). This complex
model builds on and incorporates virtually all
of the information presented by Johnson and
Goode (1994) and by Prewitt (1981), while also
including bison abundance curves (e.g., Dillehay
1974), site components used in the compilation,
assessments of the stratigraphic integrity of those
components, bog pollen and microfaunal data
indicating climate, and regional periods of soil
development. This composite graph is large and
complex enough that its initial publication in
1995 spanned two pages of the 66th Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society.
Collins’ model clearly illustrates several
points. First, although he dropped Prewitt’s phase

names, Collins defined chronological periods by
unnamed “style intervals,” most of which correspond closely with Prewitt’s divisions (12 Archaic
style intervals vs. 11 Archaic phases). The effect of
this organizational decision was to drop problematic time-space concepts (i.e., stages and phases;
cf. Johnson [1986]) while retaining the temporal
resolution that those units imply. The Collins
chronology also suggests that, in many cases, the
“best” data for a given point type, such as Bell and
Andice (stylistic variants of basally notched points
that mark the Calf Creek horizon), come only from
a single site. For other important styles, including
Taylor/Early Triangular, Nolan and Travis, and
Bulverde, we lack any “high integrity” site components whatsoever. By including stratigraphic
integrity as an indication of the degree to which
archeologists should rely on or accept the available chronological data, Collins’ model brought
important attention to how much work remains to
be done in terms of refining regional chronologies.
From these previous models and approaches
we have learned that more dates are needed that
are in reliable association with certain key point
types and, ideally, associated with other lines of
data such as paleoclimatic proxies, bison abundance, or dietary patterns when they can be reconstructed. Additionally, balance between the level of
precision implied by Prewitt and Collins and the
accuracy of the gross temporal units (e.g., Middle
Archaic, Late Archaic 1, Late Archaic 2) used
by Johnson and Goode is needed. Archeologists
should continually strive for more-precise chronological control and regional models featuring intervals lasting 1,000 to 2,000 years are simply not
very useful. The same concerns also apply to how
supporting lines of evidence are developed and
then integrated into chronological models. In our
view, directly-dated complementary evidence is
essential if researchers wish to maintain the highest
degrees of chronological precision. Below, we address this issue with respect to bison and also sediment aggradation during the problematic Holocene
Climatic Optimum (Meltzer 1999), which likely
corresponds with the Edwards Interval defined
by Johnson and Goode (1994) as a period of peak
aridity. Finally, by analyzing the present state of
chronological knowledge and showing where dating gaps exist, we hope to encourage future efforts
that will target poorly known intervals, or at least
to not place undue emphasis and confidence on a
demonstrably uncertain record.

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 255
METHODS FOR THE
PRESENT STUDY
As we conceive it, a major current obstacle to
refining the Central Texas regional chronology is
the dearth of reliable radiocarbon dates in clear or
unmixed stratigraphic association with diagnostic
projectile points. Part of the current predicament
results from the uncritical use of radiocarbon dating
and the incomplete reporting of the results. Both factors make it difficult or impossible to effectively use
or even accept many assays that were run in earlier
decades, or even many recent dates. As noted, the
reliability of radiocarbon dating has improved dramatically in recent years, especially with the widespread use of AMS, improved processing methods,
and the routine identification of the dated materials.
Yet it remains the case that many assays that we
regard as unreliable still provide the basis for much
of our understanding of when certain periods begin
and end (see Arnn 2012:63-64, 146).
Our primary objective in this study is to use
published radiocarbon and associated contextual
data to refine radiocarbon-based understandings
of when certain “key” point types occurred in
time. Our assumption is that, when cleaned up
and viewed with caution, the extant radiocarbon
record approximates the age and duration of the
archeological periods associated with those types.
We interpret this chronological sequence by comparing it against a reliable chronologic record of
bison exploitation and by considering independent
radiocarbon evidence for rates and patterns of
sediment deposition at Spring Lake during certain
problematic time periods, specifically the Middle
Archaic and early part of the Late Archaic. Human
dietary reconstructions based on stable carbon and
nitrogen isotope data are also used to help support
parts of our chronological model.
Using the library of cultural resource management (CRM) reports in the library at the Center for
Archaeological Studies at Texas State UniversitySan Marcos,1 as well as additional publications
from other sources, we searched for radiocarbon
assays that were described as being associated
with certain point types starting from the beginning of the Middle Archaic to the beginning of the
Late Prehistoric, which we limit exclusively to the
Toyah horizon. For this study, we tried to review
every available archeological publication from
Central Texas. We compiled all radiocarbon dates
that we could find that were purportedly associated

with 16 point types from our period of interest.
This period begins with the outset of the Middle
Archaic, just under 6,000 years ago and extends
until the very end of the Archaic, which we argue
did not take place until about 700 years ago. In
approximate chronological order from youngest to
oldest these types include:
Scallorn
Darl
Frio
Fairland
Ensor
Marcos
Castroville
Montell
Marshall
Kinney
Pedernales
Bulverde
Travis
Nolan
Early Triangular (sometimes called Taylor
or Baird)
Bell-Andice-Calf Creek (considered variants
of the same basic style)
Not all types that occur in Central Texas during the latter half of the Archaic are included in
our study. Some, like Edgewood and Ellis, were
omitted because they are less common than other
types, like Ensor, from approximately the same
time period. Such data gaps remain to be filled. For
other types, like Bulverde, Kinney, and Fairland,
no dates could be found from unmixed contexts.
The concept of types is central to our project,
but we do not assume that all projectile point types
in the region are completely defined or that further
analyses are not necessary for some of them. Indeed,
our findings point to a need for typological clarification and we make some suggestions toward that
end. Still, for this study we accept the veracity of the
published type identifications, as most of the types
are commonly encountered in the region and most of
the types are well described in available typologies
(e.g., Suhm and Jelks 1962; Turner et al. 2011). We
also accept the purported associations between the
dated samples and projectile point types, although
we were somewhat more critical in this regard. In
the concluding section of this paper we point to the
need for additional reevaluations of both typology
and of the stratigraphic integrity of dated contexts.

256

Texas Archeological Society

We started our library research with two
assumptions. First, we assume that each projectile
point type had its own chronological history: at
some point in time a particular design was invented
and was emulated over a period of decades or
longer before that distinctive way of making a
projectile point was abandoned. Secondly, we
assume that if more than one type was found in
the same site context, there is a greater likelihood
that the context represents a lengthy span of time
(i.e., it is of mixed age) than if only a single type
is present. We do not assume, however, that only
a single projectile point type was in use at one
point in time in the region or even in one local
area or site. We believe it was the case that certain
types co-existed during certain intervals of time.
Yet, we wanted to examine point type temporal
distributions independently. We discuss viable
alternative dating strategies at the end of the article.
Revaluating the Radiocarbon Record
Central Texas radiocarbon dates are published
in a number of ways, and this variability presents
one of the greatest challenges to this study. In an
effort to improve this situation, we outline what we
consider the minimum radiocarbon and contextual
data that must be reported in order to make those
data useful to current and future researchers. Given
the many ways that dates have been reported, it was
necessary to establish protocols for evaluating what
constitutes a useful date for our purposes. Our protocols involved addressing three simple questions.
1. Was the radiocarbon assay fully published?
We ruled out assays for which we could not
find original publication data with basic critical
numeric and contextual data such as lab/sample
number, raw reported assay, standard deviation,
the material dated, and provenience. In many cases,
this information could only be obtained from the
journal Radiocarbon, where certain labs have published their assays independent from archeological
reports. Although we made use of several publications compiling existing radiocarbon data from the
region (e.g., Prewitt 1983), in all cases we tried to
check the original publications to avoid possible
transcription errors. In some cases when the dated
material was not clearly specified, we accepted the
date if we could safely assume the material was
wood charcoal. We also used certain (older) assays
for which the δ13C corrected age was not provided.

2. Is the radiocarbon assay likely to provide
a reliable age for the dated material?
With the exception of our own high-precision
AMS dates on bison samples, we avoided using
radiocarbon dates from bone or shell samples.
Pre-treatment processes for non-carbon materials
have developed considerably in recent decades
(e.g., Stafford et al. 1988, 1991) making most if
not all older assays on these materials highly problematic. Another reliability factor is the fact that
many radiometric assays from the early decades of
radiocarbon dating, when calibrated to one- or twosigma degrees of confidence, have very large age
range estimates. We established an arbitrary rule
and eliminated from consideration any assay with
a reported standard deviation of more than 100
years, although even this figure is problematic. In
truth, most assays obtained prior to the last couple
of decades should be viewed with a healthy degree
of skepticism. We believe that important contexts
that were dated long ago and those that were dated
only on the basis of a single radiocarbon assay,
merit new dating effort.
3. Is the assay reliably associated with a single
projectile point type?
In addition to the lack of precision associated
with older assays and the potential inaccuracy of
non-carbon dates, most dates that are described
in the literature as being associated with a certain
point type actually proved to be from contexts
containing multiple types. Many published dates
were obtained on materials recovered from depositional “zones” that contained multiple projectile
point types, and large age ranges are commonly
attributed to these zones. While this “zone dating” approach can be useful for some purposes, it
does not yield the kind of temporal precision that
we sought. Therefore, we only used dates reportedly associated with a single point type. We also
rejected assays where excavators recognized obvious contextual problems such as animal burrow
disturbances.
Even after meeting these criteria, some seemingly valid dates fell well outside of a given type’s
plausible age range for reasons we could not identify. For types with less than four reliable assays,
we do not feel there is a solid basis for identifying
“outliers.” But for the types with relatively robust
sets of assays (≥4) we imposed an arbitrary “10
percent rule” to identify likely outliers. In some
cases, there is no obvious contextual or sample

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 257
preparation factor that can explain why a date
should be excluded, yet probability curves suggest
the outliers are likely to be unreliable. Using this
rule we reduced the number of dates under consideration for Darl, Scallorn, and Pedernales. The
rule did not apply to Marshall or Marcos, which
did not meet the threshold of having a suitable
number of assays.
Our 10 percent rule works as follows. After
compiling all assays for a given type, we measured
the difference between the midpoints (corrected
date in radiocarbon years before present, or B.P.)
of all dates for each type. If the midpoint date was
more than 10% younger or older than the next one
in the sequence, we excluded the outlying assay
and assumed that the more closely overlapping
assays represent the “best” (most accurate) age
estimates for that type. Admittedly this is not a
very satisfying way of verifying radiocarbon data,
but it allows us to exclude likely problematic dates
without being too capricious. To illustrate this rule,

Table 1 shows the 20 assays that appeared based on
our initial research to be reliably associated with
Darl points; two of these assays were rejected as
having standard deviations greater than 100 years
and two were rejected as outliers because they
exceeded the 10 percent rule.
Central Texas Radiocarbon Sample
After reviewing several hundred radiocarbon
assays and applying our evaluation protocols, we
identified a total of 67 dates that we consider valid
age estimates for 13 projectile point types. These
dates come from 28 sites, the approximate locations of which are shown in Figure 1. As can be
seen, most of the sites included in our study form
a spatial arc along and paralleling the Balcones
Escarpment. In addition to these published assays
on plant remains, we make use of certain highprecision AMS dates from directly dated bison
bones that are part of a bison-use chronological

Table 1. Listing of dates associated with Darl points, showing which assays are excluded
from study based on our evaluation protocols.
Sample No.

Radiocarbon Dates (BP)

Standard Deviation

Beta 176630

710
Difference = 11.3%
800
850
880
890
930
935
940
960
980
1070
1190
1260
1280
1330
1370
1370
1480
1480
Difference = 12.1%
1660

40

Beta 168468
Beta 169225
Beta 176628
Beta 176627
UGA-12493
UCIAMS-87429
Beta 195847
UCIAMS-87430
Beta 176623
Beta 176621
Beta 175164
Beta 175169
Beta 102094
Beta 182848
UGA-12496
Beta 176582
TX 1767
TX 1927
Beta 182829

60
110
40
40
40
20
70
20
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
170
80
40

258

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Locations of 28 sites that yielded radiocarbon dates that we consider valid age estimates for 13 projectile
point types. Trinomial designations are truncated; all of the sites and are fully expressed by adding the prefix “41”
(e.g., 41HY160).

study that currently includes 57 assays, most from
Spring Lake and nearby 41HY188. Here we use
12 bison dates from Calf Creek contexts as a way
of defining the very end of the Early Archaic, and
other bison dates to interpret changes in the Late
Archaic part of the sequence. In the next section we

discuss the bison dates and justify our use of these.
In addition to these dates, we also use six
charred plant assays from a depositional zone at
Spring Lake that contains Early Triangular, Nolan,
and Travis points in mixed contexts. This exception to our rule is warranted because prior work

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 259
at Spring Lake helps illustrate what the Middle
Archaic deposits at many Central Texas sites
look like in terms of stratigraphic condition. Additionally, this temporal unit, which we call Early
Triangular-Nolan-Travis (ET-N-T), provides a way
to evaluate the published results for Nolan and for
Early Triangular points (no valid dates were found
for Travis points).
Counting these two exceptions to our rules, the
inclusion of Calf Creek bison dates and ET-N-T
dates from Middle Archaic deposits at Spring Lake,
our study includes 85 radiocarbon dates (Table 2).
Several point types in our study are only dated by
one, two, or three assays. This fact alone points to
the need for additional dating work with an eye to
chronological precision.
We calibrated the radiocarbon dates using the
online calibration program OxCal (version 4.1.7).
We then used OxCal’s sum function to look at the
total or summed probability of a point type’s chronometric age, based on the assays associated with
that type. This technique is useful for considering
all radiocarbon data associated with a particular
event, phase, or, in this case, a type that is available from several different contexts or sites. Where
a corrected age was available, we used that figure.
In many cases, especially for older dates, if no
corrected age was listed, we used the measured
radiocarbon age. We acknowledge this decision
introduces additional error, but δ13C correction
typically results in changes of only a few decades.
In the following discussions, most dates are
presented and discussed in calibrated years before
present (cal B.P.). For discussion purposes, these
dates are discussed at two standard deviations. This
convention gives an appropriate combination of
precision and confidence in the age assay. In some
cases, comparative discussions of other dates not
included in our study use uncalibrated radiocarbon
years before present (RCYBP). In our discussions
below, we are clear about which version of the age
estimate we are using.
Bison Dates
As discussed, a useful aspect of some chronologies is that they present time-ordered data
along with climatic/environmental inferences. In
our effort to understand the Central Texas cultural
sequence, we have compiled an extensive record of
precisely dated bison remains from archeological
contexts at Spring Lake (41HY160 and 41HY165)

and at a nearby site, 41HY188 (Bettis 1996), that
was excavated by a Southwest Texas State University field school in the late-1980s. Our bison
record also includes two dates from 41ME147,
the Eagle Bluff site, excavated by the 2010 Texas
Archeological Society (TAS) field school (these
dates are courtesy of the TAS and Harry Shafer).
This record so far includes 57 XAD-purified AMS
dates from the Middle to Late Holocene (Lohse
et al. n.d.). The XAD purification technique was
developed in order to address issues of exogenous
carbon leaching into bone collagen from surrounding depositional matrices (Stafford et al. 1988,
1991). The technique allows individual amino
acid chains to be isolated and purified prior to dating. This technique permits the most reliable bone
radiocarbon dates that can presently be obtained.
Previous chronological models of bison presence in the region have relied on archeological association, and are characterized by varying degrees
of precision (Figure 2). Our work on this issue
represents the most precise and reliable chronology for bison exploitation yet available for any
singe study area in Texas, if not the entire Southern
Plains. Although our sample does not cover the full
historical range or geographic extent of bison in
Central Texas, it provides sound baseline data for
the presence of large-bodied herbivores that would
have represented the top-ranked prey choice for
hunters during times of availability (Figure 3). We
use these data as an interpretive framework for our
chronology of diagnostic point types.
RESULTS
When the probabilities associated with each
point type or period of time are summed and presented together, some patterns are immediately
clear (Figure 4). First, some types seem to show
a strongly bimodal age distribution; this is true
for Darl, Marshall, Nolan, and to a lesser degree
for Marcos and Montell. One reason for this may
be typological problems that have not yet been
resolved. We think this is the case for Darl, which
has 16 assays. Another possibility is unrecognized
mixing of sediments or deposits that results in the
inclusion of poorly-associated assays with each
type. We think this is the case for Nolan, considering the apparent stratigraphic placement of that
type as at least coeval with and perhaps earlier
than Early Triangular. It might also account for the

Reported age in
Radiocarbon Years
660±70
705±95
740±40
760±40
800±70
850±40
870±60
940±60
960±40
1030±70
1080±60
1130±40
1160±40

800±60
880±40
890±40
930±40
935±20
940±70
960±20
980±40
1070±40
1190±40
1260±40
1280±40

Sample No.

TX 687
TX 26
Beta 176631
Beta 176622
TX 2729
Beta 176629
TX 1925
TX 1923
Beta 169079
TX 3854
TX 1764
Beta 175172
Beta 168245

Beta 168468
Beta 176628
Beta 176627
UGA 12493
UCIAMS 87429
Beta 195847
UCIAMS 87430
Beta 176623
Beta 176621
Beta 175164
Beta 175169
Beta 102094

800±60
880±40
890±40
860±40
N/A
950±70
N/A
970±40
1070±40
1220±40
1240±40
N/A

N/A
N/A
740±40
770±40
N/A
850±40
N/A
N/A
980±40
N/A
N/A
1140±40
1150±40

Corrected Date
(RCYBP)

41WM1010
41MM341
41MM341
41MM341
41HY160
41BP627
41HY160
41MM341
41MM341
41WM1010
41WM1010
41CV998

Darl (n=16)

41UV29
41TV42
41MM341
41MM341
41WM130
41MM341
41WM230
41WM230
41WM1010
41BX228
41WM230
41WM1010
41WM1010

Site No.

Scallorn (n=13)

Dixon and Rogers (2006:44, 51, 83, Appendix A, Appendix C)
Gadus et al. (2006:59, 76, 324, 338)
Gadus et al. (2006:59, 76, 324, 337)
Gadus et al. (2006:57, 324, 335)
On file at CAS
Carpenter et al. (2006:86, 98, Appendix C)
On file at CAS
Gadus et al. (2006:57, 76, 324, 334)
Gadus et al. (2006:57, 76, 324, 333)
Dixon and Rogers (2006:44, 51, 99, Appendices A and C)
Dixon and Rogers (2006:44, 51, 93, 95, Appendices A and C)
Kleinbach et al. (1999:77, Appendix A)

Hester (1971), Valastro and Davis (1970a:634)
Tamers et al. (1964:164)
Gadus et al. (2006:59, 76, 320, 333)
Gadus et al. (2006:59, 76, 320, 333)
Bond (1978:78, 122), Valastro et al. (1979:265)
Gadus et al. (2006:60, 76, 320, 333)
Prewitt (1974:22-24), Valastro et al. (1977:302)
Prewitt (1974:22-24), Valastro et al. (1977:302)
Dixon and Rogers (2006:44, 67, 73, Appendices A and C)
Black and McGraw (1985:237)
Prewitt (1974:22-24), Valastro et al. (1977:302)
Dixon and Rogers (2006:44, 57, 73, Appendices A and C)
Dixon and Rogers (2006:44, 67-68, Appendices A and C)

Published References

Table 2. Radiocarbon data for “reliable” assays associated with certain key types used in this study.

260
Texas Archeological Society

Reported age in
Radiocarbon Years
1330±40
1370±40
1370±40
1480±80

1460±80
1580±60

1640±60
1820±70
1840±40
1880±70
1950±60
1960±60
1990±40
2020±40
2030±40
2040±40
2050±60
2050±50
2080±40
2080±40

Sample No.

Beta 182848
UGA 12496
Beta 176582
TX 1927

TX 686
TX 2378

TX 2384
TX 2733
Beta 195849
Beta 87650
Beta 119142
Beta 182859
Beta 275736
Beta 182874
Beta 182842
Beta 182876
Beta 182861
Beta 182883
Beta 169226
Beta 182841

N/A
N/A
1830±40
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
2060±40
N/A

N/A
N/A

N/A
1390±40
1380±40
N/A

41UV21
41UV60

Frio (n=2)

41ML162
41MM341
41WM1010
41WM230

Site No.

Valastro and Davis (1970a:635)
Goode (2002:197, 200), Valastro et al. (1977:306)

Mehalchick and Kibler (2008: 193, 430)
Gadus et al. (2006:59, 76, 324, 336)
Dixon and Rogers (2006:44, 120, Appendices A and C)
Valastro et al. (1977:302)

Published References

41UV60
41VV456
41BP627
41CV1482
41CV1329
41ML37
41BX17
41ML37
41ML162
41ML37
41ML37
41ML37
41BP627
41ML162

Ensor (n=14)
Goode (2002: 197, 200)
Valastro et al. (1979:266)
Carpenter et al. (2006: 86, 99-100, Appendix C)
Mehalchick et al. (1999:138, 140-141)
Mehalchick et al. (2000:146, 280)
Mehalchick and Kibler (2008:133, 431)
Munoz et al. (2011:64, 66, 259)
Mehalchick and Kibler (2008:133, 431)
Mehalchick and Kibler (2008:232, 430)
Mehalchick and Kibler (2008:133, 431)
Mehalchick and Kibler (2008:119, 133, 431)
Mehalchick and Kibler (2008:124)
Carpenter et al. (2006:86, 96, Appendix C)
Mehalchick and Kibler (2008:232, 430)

Fairland – no dates available

Corrected Date
(RCYBP)

Table 2. (Continued)

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 261

Reported age in
Radiocarbon Years
2330±60
2370±70
2480±60
2800±60

2560±50

2520±50
2700±50
2780±50

3060±40
3240±60
3270±60
3275±25
3280±40
3300±50

3080±90
3620±40
3800±40

Sample No.

TX 1999
TX 4758
TX 4761
TX 4763

Beta 102143

TX 1977
NSRL-3520
NSRL-3519

Beta 102116
Beta 94006
Beta 94007
UCIAMS 87433
Beta 102121
Beta 94005

Tx 663
Beta 215739
Beta 215738

N/A
N/A
N/A

N/A
3250±60
3230±60
N/A
N/A
3240±50

N/A
N/A
N/A

N/A

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

41VV99
41BX126
41BX126

Montell (n=3)

41CV170

Castroville (n=1)

41BQ47
41TG91
41TG91
41TG91

Marcos (n=4)

Site No.

Valastro et al. (1977:308)
Nickels et al. (2001:105, 108-109)
Nickels et al. (2001:105, 108-109)

Kleinbach et al. (1999:208-209, Appendix A)

Valastro et al. (1979:264), Watt (1978:121-122)
Creel (1990:40-43)
Creel (1990:40-43)
Creel (1990:40-43)

Published References

Valastro and Davis (1970b (1):271)
Munoz et al. (2011:63, 64, 259)
Munoz et al. (2011:63, 64, 259)

Kleinbach et al. (1999:277, 442, Appendix A)
Johnson (2000:68, 79-83)
Johnson (2000:68, 79-83)
On file at CAS
Kleinbach et al. (1999:284, 288, 442, Appendix A)
Johnson (2000:68, 79-83)

Bulverde – no dates available

41VV263
41BX17
41BX17

Marshall (n=3)

41CV1122
41WM13
41WM13
41HY160
41CV1133
41WM13

Pedernales (n=6)

Kinney – no dates available

Corrected Date
(RCYBP)

Table 2. (Continued)

262
Texas Archeological Society

4630±40
4940±50

4780±40
4820±40
4840±40

3855±15
3865±15
4140±15
4520±20
4615±20
4880±15

5060±40
5110±15
5115±20
5120±20
5120±20
5140±20
5140±20
5145±20
5155±15
5165±15
5180±15
5205±20

NSRL 3698
NSRL 3697

Beta 166718
Beta 166715
Beta 166719

UCIAMS 87172
UCIAMS 87173
UCIAMS 87174
UCIAMS 87175
UCIAMS 87171
UCIAMS 87170

UCIAMS 80999
UCIAMS 95717
UCIAMS 80139
UCIAMS 80136
UCIAMS 80998
UCIAMS 106473
UCIAMS 106468
UCIAMS 106469
UCIAMS 81000
UCIAMS 81001
UCIAMS 80997
UCIAMS-111182

Nickels et al. (2001:108, 113-115)
Nickels et al. (2001:108, 113-115)

Published References

41CM111
41CM111
41CM111

Mahoney et al. (2003:61-63, Appendix B)
Mahoney et al. (2003:61-63, Appendix B)
Mahoney et al. (2003:61-63, Appendix B)

Early Triangular (n=3)

41BX126
41BX126

Nolan (n=2)

Site No.

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41ME147

Calf Creek (n=12)

41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41HY160
41HY160

On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS

On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS
On file at CAS

Early Triangular-Nolan-Travis at Spring Lake (n=6)

N/A
N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A

Corrected Date
(RCYBP)

CAS=Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University

Reported age in
Radiocarbon Years

Sample No.

Table 2. (Continued)

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 263

264

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Existing models for the presence of bison by time period in Central Texas.
Each relies on archeological association with independently dated deposits to identify
periods when bison occur in archeological assemblages. Each also incorporates a
different study area, lending to differences in terms of apparent presence or abundance.

Figure 3. Summed probabilities of 57 XAD-purified AMS dates on bison from Archaic archeological contexts. One Toyah
and one Calf Creek date are from 41ME147 and all others are from three sites, 41HY160, 41HY161, and 41HY188, in
the San Marcos area of Central Texas.

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 265
placement of Marshall before Pedernales; all previous chronologies for Central Texas show Marshall
coming after Pedernales and Bulverde, and we are
skeptical of this particular aspect of our findings.
Alternatively, the types with very few dates that
appear bimodal may simply be inadequately dated.
Another issue involves diffuse probability
distributions. This problem characterizes Montell,
Marcos, and Scallorn. Some of this pattern can
be attributed to the shape of the calibration curve
at these times; the “shape” of the curve depends

partly on the amount of atmospheric carbon that is
present, and this varies significantly over time. As
a result, some parts of the calibration curve appear
relatively flat while other parts include brief reversals. Dates falling along these parts of the calibration curve will simply be difficult to calibrate with
precision, as calibrated probabilities “stack up”
along flat parts of the curve and present extended
age ranges (see our discussion of Late Archaic 2,
below). For older dates (see Table 2), calibrated
probabilities are extended simply as a result of the

Figure 4. Summed radiocarbon probabilities of all point types included in this study. Clearly, the sample size of what
we consider reliable radiocarbon dates for most types is inadequate.

266

Texas Archeological Society

large standard deviations. In both cases, this lack
of precision does not improve the understanding of
Central Texas prehistory and underscores how older
assays and large standard deviations, as well as the
systematics of calibration procedures, potentially
skew chronologies. Another factor that can contribute to this pattern is that dates are included in our
sample that, while meeting our criteria do not necessarily reflect the primary period of use for that type.
That is, while our 10% rule was intended to identify
assays that do not accurately reflect the target event
(the chief period of use), it is likely that not all such
dates were successfully filtered out.
In spite of these issues, once these radiocarbon
results are compiled and compared against additional lines of evidence, such as the bison dates and
the record of sedimentation at Spring Lake, both
of which cover almost exactly the same period of
time as our study, a working regional chronology
starting with the end of the Early Archaic can be
proposed (Figure 5).
Calf Creek Horizon: ca. 5955-5815 cal B.P.
(Terminal Early Archaic)

Many Central Texas chronologies place Calf
Creek in the Middle Archaic, while others show it
at the end of the Early Archaic. This issue is more
than semantic, as the criteria defining how major
periods begin and end should be closely linked
with one or more lines of sound, empirical data. We
use the sharply defined period of bison exploitation
and the lack of confident association between Calf
Creek-related points (Bell, Andice) with typical
Middle Archaic types like Travis, Nolan, and Early
Triangular to define the end of the Early Archaic
(Lohse et al. n.d.). Recent excavations at Spring
Lake (Lohse et al. 2013; Yelacic et al. 2011) extended through a well-constrained deposit containing bison remains along with Bell/Andice material. Other relatively late Early Archaic types like
Bandy, Martindale, and Merrell were recovered
immediately below, and in some cases overlapping
with Spring Lake’s Calf Creek component. Based
on the stratigraphic proximity of these types with
the bison remains and the clear disjunction with
the ensuing Middle Archaic deposits, we consider
the Calf Creek horizon (cf. Thurmond and Wyckoff 1999) to represent the terminal Early Archaic

Figure 5. Proposed radiocarbon-based chronology for certain key point types, plus bison exploitation, for the Central
Texas cultural chronology from the terminal Early Archaic through the end of Late Archaic 4.

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 267
period in Central Texas.
Like Wyckoff (1994; Thurmond and Wyckoff
1999), we use the term “horizon” in the sense of
Willey and Phillips (1958:31-33), who describe
widespread, short-term occurrences of a broadly
shared style or artifact type. Given that all but one
of our 12 Calf Creek dates are from Spring Lake,
it remains possible that this widely occurring, but
seemingly brief period of bison presence may
have begun earlier or lasted later elsewhere in the
region. However, a bison skull with an embedded
Calf Creek point recovered from a gravel bar near
Tulsa, Oklahoma has been AMS dated to 5120 ±
25 RCYBP (Bement et al. 2005), exactly within the
span we document at Spring Lake. Even considering the current limitations on dating Calf Creek,
we do not believe that this horizon extended much
beyond 200 calendar years, and it may have been
even shorter. Importantly, the presence of bison
at this time is in sharp contrast with the ensuing
Middle Archaic period. In our view, this distinction
is marked enough that it can be used to delineate
the end of the Early Archaic.
Middle Archaic: 5800–4200/4100 cal B.P.
The Middle Archaic begins at the end of the
Calf Creek horizon, dated by the 12 available AMS
dates on bison at about 5815 cal B.P.; we simplify
this date by rounding down to 5800 B.P. Dating the
end of the Middle Archaic, however, is problematic
because of a lack of appropriate radiocarbon dates,
which we see as linked to climatic and depositional
circumstances. Additionally, the time-ordering
of diagnostic types within this period is poorly
known, a problem that our data cannot address.
This is clearly illustrated in the broad distribution
of radiocarbon probabilities from the Spring Lake
Early Triangular-Nolan-Travis zone (see Figure 4).
Where these three Middle Archaic point types
co-occur (e.g., Spring Lake), Early Triangular
tends to be found below Nolan and Travis, indicating that the results of our review placing Nolan
coeval with and perhaps before Early Triangular
are inaccurate. For example, an isolated Early
Triangular component has recently been identified
at the Eagle Bluff site (Vega Aquila, 41ME147) beneath a zone with Nolan points during excavations
by the TAS field school in 2010 and 2011 (Osburn
2011). Unfortunately, dates from this component
have not yet been obtained. In the adjacent Coastal
Plains, Early Triangular points in the West Slope

at Buckeye Knoll (41VT98) occur in a zone dated
to ca. 5100-3800 cal B.P. (Ricklis 2012). Closer
to the coast, Ricklis has reported associated dates
of 5900-5300 and 4870-4630 cal B.P. from excavated contexts on Nueces Bay and a probable
association of 5630-5330 cal B.P. from the Means
site (41NU184), although this date is on excavated
Rangia flexuosa, while the Early Triangular points
at that site were collected from the surface (see
Ricklis 2007 for summary).
Very few securely associated radiocarbon dates
are available for Nolan points (n=2) and none for
Travis points. Based on the stratigraphic relationship observed at some sites and on the span of time
unrepresented in our model (see Figure 5), we think
that these styles occur late in the Middle Archaic
sequence. Our work at Spring Lake suggests that
such contexts will be hard to find as a result of
environmental perturbations associated with the
Mid-Holocene Climatic Optimum (Meltzer 1999).
Elsewhere, Johnson and Goode (1994) identified
what they called the Edward’s Interval, at approximately 4200-2800 cal B.P. Global precipitation data
(Haug et al. 2001) suggest that northern hemisphere
rainfall patterns during this period were characterized by increased amplitude between periods of intense and reduced precipitation. These periods may
have been only a few decades in length, and would
be difficult to discern in most open alluvial sites
in Central Texas. Rather than a uniformly hot, dry
period, we see the Middle Archaic as the beginning
of a period in which rainfall fluctuation patterns
became more extreme; this process culminated in
the early Late Archaic. Overall climate may indeed
have warmed, as Johnson and Goode argued, but the
effect of these climate changes on archeological site
formation would have been one of relative instability in landscape surfaces rather than one of uniform
erosion. Human responses to overall warmer, drier
climatic conditions, in the form of increased use of
earth ovens involving shallow pits and fire-heated
rocks, probably exacerbated the climatic effects
on archeological deposits. Indirect evidence of the
more frequent use of shallow earth ovens comes
from recent isotopic analyses of prehistoric burials from the region (Mauldin et al. 2013), showing
increasing reliance on C3 plants consistent with the
increased consumption of geophytes that require
extended cooking. (We return briefly to this issue
below in our discussion of the end of the Archaic
and beginning of the Late Prehistoric.)
The effects of climatic fluctuation and human

268

Texas Archeological Society

activity on regional soils are illustrated in an agedepth model from Spring Lake (Figure 6). This
age-depth model shows calibrated radiocarbon
dates by depth, and can be used to demonstrate
changes in sedimentation rates, as well as depositional processes that characterize certain parts
of a cultural deposit. The model is based on 20
calibrated AMS dates on both bison and charred
plant material, and clearly illustrates three “phases”
of sedimentation at the site. The earliest of these,
which extends until approximately 4200 cal B.P.,
includes both the end of the Early Archaic and the
entire Middle Archaic. The next phase, which dates
from about 4200-2800 cal B.P., is characterized by
dates that are out of stratigraphic order. In addition
to climatic fluctuation, another important cause of
this mixing is the digging of shallow pits for earth
ovens, which is indicated by the increase in frequency in fire-cracked rock. Although this period
begins around 4200 cal B.P., many of the dates
involved are Middle Archaic in age, suggesting
that human activity was responsible for dislocating carbonized remains upwards in stratigraphic
columns. We use this model to confirm our ending
date for the Middle Archaic, and to argue that the
combined effects of increased climatic variation
along with the cultural response of increased usage
of hot rock cooking technology (cf. Thoms 2008,
2009) disturbed archeological sediments dating to
Middle Archaic times.
Based on available data, including bison dates,
a meager sample of suitable radiocarbon dates for
Middle Archaic diagnostics, and the depositional
model from Spring Lake, the Middle Archaic begins at the end of Calf Creek, ca. 5800 cal B.P.,
and concludes sometime around 4200-4100 cal
B.P. Calculating a more precise ending date in the
future for the Middle Archaic will require obtaining good dates for Nolan and Travis points. Secure
dates for early Late Archaic types like Bulverde,
also currently lacking, would also provide evidence
allowing archeologists to precisely date the end of
the Middle Archaic, as well as the beginning of
the complex Late Archaic chronological sequence.
Late Archaic 1: 4200/4100–3100 cal B.P.
Based on the results of our library research,
together with our bison dates and additional evidence that includes human dietary patterns based
on isotopic analyses, we divide the Late Archaic
into four parts. This sequence deviates significantly

from most previously published chronologies that
recognize two or three general periods within the
Late Archaic. Dating the early part of the Late
Archaic is as problematic, since there are relatively few radiocarbon dates securely associated
with specific projectile point types over a span of
~1700 years, between roughly 5200-3500 cal B.P.
As noted, we surmise that Nolan and Travis points
were no longer made by about 4200-4100 cal B.P.,
which we consider the approximate beginning of
the Late Archaic 1. Although dating of the Spring
Lake ET-N-T zone is poorly resolved, it clearly
does not extend beyond this time.
Of the three most common projectile point
types assigned to the Late Archaic 1, Bulverde,
Pedernales, and Marshall, only Pedernales points
are represented by more than three dates in our
study. Less common but morphologically related
styles including Evant also probably fit into the
Late Archaic 1 sequence in ways that are not yet
clear. Although we did not identify any valid dates
for the Bulverde type, we think it spans the transition from the end of the Middle Archaic into the
first half of Late Archaic I. A reasonable estimate
of the ending date for Bulverde, based on the
probabilities for Pedernales, might be around 3600
cal B.P. Nonetheless, the age span of Bulverde is
poorly known and, given that these two types are
often found together, they probably overlap in age.
The dating of Pedernales points is particularly important given that it seems to be the most
common point type for any prehistoric period in
Central Texas. We are intrigued that most of the
radiocarbon age probability curve for the six valid
dates for the Pedernales type is constrained to a
four-century span, from 3600-3200 cal B.P. The
possibility that Pedernales points were only in use
across the region over such a short period would
make this one of the most dynamic intervals in
Central Texas.
In most chronological models, Pedernales is
followed immediately by Marshall. We found only
three dates for Marshall and their probability curve
appears bimodal in nature. Although one of the
three assays for Marshall fits neatly into the temporal space following Pedernales, the other two dates
fall equally neatly immediately before Pedernales
(see Figure 4). We think Marshall’s bimodal pattern can be attributed to the inadequate number of
available dates. Given that Marshall and Pedernales
points are often recovered from the same deposits,
we suspect that their distributions overlap in time.

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 269

Figure 6. Age-depth model based on 20 AMS dates from Spring Lake showing depositional “phases;” Phase 2 is
characterized by severe intrusions, age reversals, and mixed sediments. This phase also corresponds with a sharp
increase in the frequency of fire-cracked rock. Although Phase 2 is dated from approximately 4200-2800 cal B.P., many
Middle Archaic assays occur here as a result of deposit mixing through cultural and environmental processes (graphic
by David M. Yelacic).

We do not argue that Marshall points preceded the
Pedernales style in time; they probably followed
Pedernales, although this remains to be resolved.
In our model, the latter part of the Late Archaic

1 saw a relatively brief period of bison exploitation, dating to approximately 3295-3130 cal B.P.
This is the first of two Late Archaic bison pulses,
and was followed by a hiatus that lasted at least 400

270

Texas Archeological Society

years and that heretofore has not been recognized
(Lohse et al. n.d.). Unfortunately, it is not clear
which point type is most closely associated with
Late Archaic 1 bison hunting. Based on the preponderance of the available dates, the Pedernales type
should be considered the best candidate. That said,
the prevailing wisdom that Marshall points date
immediately after Pedernales may still be correct
and we note that the last of the three Marshallassociated dates overlaps very well with the Late
Archaic 1 bison dates. A conservative hypothesis
based on available data is that the latter part of the
Pedernales use-period co-occurred with bison and
that Marshall points were also used to hunt bison
during Late Archaic 1. Considerably more effort
should be devoted to sampling and dating discrete
Late Archaic 1 deposits, particularly those with
single-point associations and those with bison
remains. In terms of environmental conditions,
this period appears to have been characterized by
the extreme wet-dry fluctuations discussed above.
Late Archaic 2: 3100–2150 cal B.P.
The Late Archaic 2 began with a hiatus in bison exploitation, which started at ca. 3130 cal B.P.
and lasted at least until 2700 cal B.P. We define
the Late Archaic 2 by this hiatus (beginning about
3100 cal B.P. for simplicity) and the following period of bison exploitation, which is closely associated with Montell, Castroville, and Marcos points.
Bison hunting appears again as early as 2700 cal
B.P. and lasts until 2150 cal B.P. What appears
to be a brief hiatus around 2400-2330 cal B.P. is
most likely the result of the shape of the calibration
curve at this period (see Lohse et al. n.d.).
The dating of the three predominant Late Archaic 2 projectile point styles is difficult as they
are often found together. While the periods of use
for these three types almost certainly overlapped,
they are not always found together and we assume
that each type had independent use histories. Yet,
we found only a total of eight secure dates for all
three types (four Montell assays, three for Marcos,
and only one for Castroville). This time period also
includes a particularly problematic area on the radiocarbon calibration curve, defined by a relatively
flat span of time, or “plateau” that is bracketed by
two reversals (Figure 7). Nonetheless, based on our
study we infer that Montell is probably the earliest of
the three, followed by Castroville and then Marcos.
The probable beginning of Montell is around

3100 cal B.P. and the type may have been in use
until about 2650 cal B.P. The type is not tightly
dated and may not have been in use as long as the
probability data indicate. Montell may have been
followed quickly by Castroville, for which we could
only find one useful date, about 2770-2450 cal B.P.
The four Marcos dates seem to show a bimodal distribution, but we are not confident that this reflects
reality. Three of these dates are from 41TG91 (Creel
1990) where a Marcos component containing bison
bone was dated by pooling samples of wood charcoal from multiple contexts to obtain conventional
radiometric assays. As noted, this technique can
skew age estimates through the inclusion of mixedage wood. Rather than accept the bimodal distribution of Marcos, we choose to discount the early part
of the probability distribution for the purposes of
dating this type, and suggest that Marcos follows
Montell and Castroville in rapid sequence. The end
of Marcos corresponds closely with the final Archaic
bison pulse, ending at 2150 cal B.P. Much of the imprecision in Late Archaic 2 chronology is the result
of the plateau in the calibration curve at this time.
Until a larger sample of valid assays is obtained, the
precise ages of these types and the timing from one
to the next will remain poorly known.
Bone Bed 3 at Bonfire Shelter, immediately
adjacent to the Central Texas region, characterizes
the Late Archaic 2 period with its associations and
problems with respect to dating (Dibble and Lorrain
1968). Castroville, Montell, and Marcos were all
found in this massive accumulation of bison remains,
but little internal order could be identified during
the 1963-1964 excavations, and the reported dates
characterize the entire deposit rather than individual
episodes that might have taken place. Dating other
sites that contain any or all three of these point types
in well-stratified deposits or in secure contexts associated with short-lived organic material will be necessary in order to improve the resolution of this interval.
Late Archaic 3: 2150–1270 cal B.P.
In our model, Late Archaic 3 includes Ensor
and Frio point types; we also include Fairland in
this period although no suitable dates could be
found for that type. Other types thought to occur
during this period include Ellis and Edgewood.
We date the beginning of this period at 2150 cal
B.P. with the end of Marcos and the conclusion of
Late Archaic bison hunting. Ensor is one of the
best-dated types in Central Texas. Our group of

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 271

Figure 7. The location of the Late Archaic 2 interval on the radiocarbon calibration curve. The plateau, or relatively
flat area of the curve, presents problems for refining this interval with future dates. Dates that define this interval are
presented in Table 1.

14 assays shows a robust cluster from about 21501750 cal B.P. Soon after Ensor drops off, Frio picks
up and extends from 1550-1270 cal B.P., although
this span is based on only two dates. This seems to
leaves time between Ensor and Frio for some of the
types (e.g., Fairland, Edgewood) that were either
not included in our study or that could not be dated.
In our view, this period warrants its own
designation as Late Archaic 3 because of the typological and technological similarities between the
projectile points in this series, because it is clearly
distinguished from the previous period by the

absence of bison, and because of the technological differences between these types and those that
follow, particularly Darl.
Late Archaic 4: 1270–650 BP cal B.P.
The final period in our model is the Late Archaic 4. This period includes a portion of what
some refer to as the Transitional Archaic as well
as the Austin phase or period. We acknowledge
that proposing a new term for this period may be
confusing to those familiar with traditional labels.

272

Texas Archeological Society

Nevertheless, for reasons discussed below, we
include this period and its key diagnostic markers (Darl and Scallorn) in our discussion of the
Archaic. Moreover, we do not see strong evidence
for any meaningful “transition” out of this period
into the subsequent Late Prehistoric. Rather, our
review of available data indicates that this period
has far more in common with those that preceded
it than with what followed.
Traditionally, the appearance of the bow and
arrow, visible in the record with the introduction of
Scallorn points, is said to mark the beginning of the
Late Prehistoric period and is known as the Austin
phase (see recent summary by Arnn [2012:167168]). For this division to be most useful, however,
the Austin phase should be understood as a distinct
cultural pattern involving more than the appearance
of expanding stem arrow points. Many archeologists have discussed the cultural continuities with
the latest Archaic interval (e.g., Black and Creel
1997, 1998; Collins 1994; Johnson and Goode
1994; Prewitt 1981, 1983; Shafer 1977). Examples
of behavioral continuity from earlier times are seen
in a broad-spectrum diet, the absence of bison, continued plant baking, continued reliance on bifacial
stone tool technologies, mortuary practices, and
site distribution and settlement patterning.
For this period in particular, bison data play
an important role in helping to contextualize and
define our temporal units. A recent paper (Dickens and Weiderhold 2003) has speculated that the
introduction of bow and arrow technology at the
beginning of Austin times resulted in a change in
hunting practices, involving more isolated hunters
or small parties than in previous times. This change
is said to have led to less bison, or less bison bone,
being returned to residential camps, where it can be
encountered in the archeological record. However,
based on our sample of bison dates, we suggest
that a more direct explanation for the paucity of
bison remains in Austin times is that bison were
mostly absent from the Central Texas landscape in
the centuries prior to Toyah. In light of the record
of absolute dates, it is likely that any bison materials that are reported in Austin components, such
as those indicated by Mauldin et al. (2012; see
Figure 2), represent mixed deposits that were not
recognized as such in those original excavations.
Based on our data, not only were bison absent from
the Central Texas landscape in Austin times, none
were present at all for approximately 1,500 years
prior to Toyah.

Additional evidence that supports defining the
end of the Archaic at A.D. 1300 comes from recent
dietary reconstructions based on stable isotope
analyses of human remains from Central Texas
(Mauldin et al. 2013). Maudlin and his colleagues
compile previously reported stable carbon and
nitrogen isotope data for the region and add new
data from the Coleman site (41BX568), a Toyah
cemetery. One important contribution of this study
is that it compiles dietary information for most major time periods dating back to the Early Archaic.
Another is that it adds new Toyah period data to
this record, thereby presenting a model of dietary
behavior from the Early Archaic until the end of
the Late Prehistoric (Figure 8). When viewed over
time, a pronounced trend toward increased reliance
on C3 plants can be seen starting in Early Archaic
times and continuing through the Austin period.
The Toyah sample, however, diverges sharply
from this pattern and shows a clear and dramatic
change in dietary behavior. Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope data directly reflect what foods were
selected throughout the Archaic. From changes in
these consumption patterns, archeologists can surmise that associated procurement and processing
technologies as well as social norms and rules that
accompany food consumption were also markedly
different between the general Archaic trend and
the Toyah period. As such, these data provide an
opportunity to evaluate cultural continuity versus
abrupt change relating to diet and associated cultural behaviors.
With respect to the Late Archaic 4 radiocarbon
record, we looked at two projectile point types,
Darl (n=16) and Scallorn (n=13). As mentioned
above, the probability distribution for Darl-associated dates has a bimodal shape with peaks at
1350-1150 cal B.P. and 900-700 cal B.P. As seen
in Table 1, the same projects have published results
that cover the span of time ascribed to this type.
The lengthy bimodal age distribution therefore
does not seem to be an issue of geographic range,
nor does it seem to be an issue of old or imprecise
dates. Unlike Marshall, there is no obvious reason
to discount the earlier or the later ends of Darl’s
age. Instead, the bimodal patterns suggest to us
that more than one “type” may be indicated and
that more detailed typological analysis of the Darl
type is warranted.
The later Darl age distribution falls squarely
in the middle of the Scallorn probability distribution, which begins at about 1200 cal B.P. and falls

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 273

Figure 8. Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope data for Central Texas burials showing a steady trend from the Early
Archaic to Austin period of increasing reliance on a C3 diet. Toyah data from the Coleman site (41BX568) and Spring
Lake show a dramatic shift in dietary behavior that helps define the Late Prehistoric as beginning after Austin times
(redrawn from Mauldin et al. 2013).

off abruptly at about 650 cal B.P. (or A.D. 1300).
This 550-year spread is one of the longest for any
single point type in our sequence and the overlap
with Darl suggests that the technological shift from
atlatl and dart to the bow and arrow was a lengthy
process. Based on their recent work at the Siren
site, Galindo et al. (2013) suggest this transition
may have lasted 300 years or longer. Importantly,
there is virtually no overlap between Scallorn and
the beginning of Toyah phase bison exploitation at
650 cal B.P. For us the return of bison to the region
after a 1,500 year absence marks the end of the Archaic and signals a major behavioral, subsistence,
and economic shift. We regard the Toyah phase/
interval/horizon as the only true Late Prehistoric
cultural manifestation in Central Texas.
Taken together, the social, technological, and
dietary implications of big game hunting involving
bison are significant enough that the introduction of

the bow and arrow alone does not, in our view, warrant designating a post-Archaic (Late Prehistoric)
period in the regional chronology prior to Toyah.
Rather, our review of available data suggest that
Darl and Scallorn together, along with their associated cultural patterns, comprise a meaningful temporal period, which we designate Late Archaic 4.
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS
FOR FUTURE CHRONOLOGY WORK
Although this study relies on earlier work and
previously recorded radiocarbon data, it enhances
the precision of that body of knowledge in terms
of dating, the chronological sequence of some
important projectile point types, and certain technological and stylistic changes. Supplementary data
that inform our model include high-precision AMS

274

Texas Archeological Society

radiocarbon dates on bison bone, an environmental
model of Middle and Late Archaic site formation at
Spring Lake, and isotopic data concerning diet behavior spanning the Early Archaic to Toyah periods.
We define the end of the Archaic not with the introduction of expanding stem arrow points (Scallorn)
during the Austin interval, but rather by the return
of bison to the landscape and the significant cultural
patterns that were associated with that return. Our
study illustrates how little is actually known about
some time periods and the dating of the time-diagnostic artifacts that help define them. The early facet
of the Late Archaic, with poorly dated Bulverde and
other types, is but one example.
In very broad terms the revised chronology
presented here emphasizes the need for greatly
improved sample selection and reporting, for additional targeted dating, and for complementary
approaches to building and interpreting models.
Our study also highlights unanswered questions
about the timing and nature of some major periods and transitions. For instance, how can archeologists resolve the poorly dated Middle Archaic?
Geomorphologically-informed investigations seem
essential to this issue. Were Pedernales points
really restricted to a narrow time interval as our
model suggests? If so, this period would have been
one of the most dynamic ever in prehistoric Central
Texas. What other social or technological changes
accompanied the distinct bison-use periods in Late
Archaic 2? What factors explain the bimodal distribution of Darl dates? Was the transition from atlatl
to bow and arrow really as drawn out as suggested
by our Late Archaic 4 Scallorn and Darl dates?
Some of these issues may be resolved through future excavation and analysis, but also by revisiting
and redating older collections. From a regulatory
perspective, any site capable of addressing any of
these issues should be considered eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places or
worthy of designation as a State Antiquities Landmark and should receive due attention.
In the future, archeologists can contribute to
this effort by properly publishing all of the technical, contextual, and associational information for
their radiocarbon assays. On the technical side, at
a minimum, archeologists should identify the material that is dated, specify whether conventional
radiometric or AMS methods were used, give the
uncorrected raw reporting date, and provide the
measured δ13C isotopic value (correction factor).
In terms of context and association, researchers

must give precise provenience, specify whether
the sample is point-plotted or from pooled or
screen-recovered context, and carefully describe
the stratigraphic position of the dated sample and
precise spatial relationships with any potentially
associated time-diagnostic artifacts.
Researchers should not be satisfied with only
one or two dates for a stratigraphically discrete
component, but rather should submit as many assays as budgets allow. However, samples should
be selected carefully; prioritizing those with close
associations between datable materials and diagnostic artifacts will help clarify the age ranges for
key types. It is ironic that today Texas archeologists
are in the position of having both too much and too
little radiocarbon data. That is to say that while
there are a great many assays that we consider
essentially useless for reasons we have explained,
there are not nearly enough thoroughly reported
assays from discrete stratigraphic contexts in good
association with diagnostic artifacts. Our study
also shows many of the most useful data for some
key point types come from only one or two sites.
In other words, the geographic coverage is very
uneven and mainly concentrated in the curving arc
along and paralleling the Balcones Escarpment (see
Figure 1), similar to what Johnson (1991) dubbed
the “Crescent” (also McKinney 1981).
We are optimistic that as dating work continues, the expanded record of useful, valid assays
will allow us to refine chronological models.
We hope our study helps point the way, but we
know it needs testing through future research.
Archeologists should question the notions that
prehistoric cultures only changed slowly, and that
chronological precision is unattainable. Based on
our work, we see periods of both rapid and slow
culture change. Periods of rapid change, such as
Calf Creek and the end of Late Archaic 4 may be
defined at some ideal sites by ephemeral, shortterm occupation or activity deposits. These kinds
of components should be studied using the most
rigorous standards in terms of excavation, dating,
and analysis. Radiocarbon processing methods are
continually improving and developing, as are the
statistical models for working with sound radiocarbon data. With these suggestions in mind, we look
forward to seeing a lot of important chronology
work in the next decade.
The strategy taken in this study is not the
only viable approach to more precisely dating
the chronology of the long-lived Archaic era. We

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 275
opted to consider only those radiocarbon assays
that appear to have been associated with a single
projectile point style, a limited number of XADpurified AMS dates on bison bone, and a small
number of samples from the Middle Archaic ETN-T zone at Spring Lake. Radiocarbon assays from
discrete “sealed” deposits that can be shown by
geoarcheological investigation and robust dating
to have formed over a brief interval of time can
and should be used to understand the use periods
of the associated projectile points, even when more
than one style is present. We think that by combining explicitly critical revaluations of extant data
with new finds from well-designed investigations,
archeologists will be able to construct more precise
chronologies for Central Texas that shed light on
the small-scale human societies that flourished
across the region for over 500 generations.
ENDNOTE
1. The research library at CAS and the main Alkek Library at Texas State University have benefited enormously
from generous donations of archeological publications
from individual scholars, especially Dee Ann Story, and
from organizations, especially the Texas Historical Commission. The CAS library is organized by region and
county, making it relatively easy to systematically search
for the present endeavor.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We appreciate helpful comments provided on
an early version of this article by Elton Prewitt,
and on the final draft version by reviewers John
Arnn and Brett Houk. We are also grateful to
Steve Carpenter for making draft versions of the
Siren site manuscript available to us, and to Rich
Weinstein for sharing with us the Early Triangular
data from 41VT98 before they were published. We
also appreciate the editorial work of Tamra Walter
and Tim Perttula.
REFERENCES CITED
Arnn, J. W. III
2005 Chronology, Technology, and Subsistence: Is That
All There Is? CTA Newsletter 29:17-28.

2012

Land of the Tejas: Native American Identity and
Interaction in Texas, A.D. 1300-1700. The University
of Texas Press, Austin.

Bement, L. C., E. L. Lundelius, Jr., and R. A. Ketcham
2005 Hoax or History: A Bison Skull with Embedded
Calf Creek Projectile Point. Plains Anthropologist
50:221-226.
Bettis, A. C., Jr.
1996 Archaeological Investigations at 41HY188, Hays
County, Texas, 1988: A Study of the Archaeological
Remains and Lithic Technology. Master’s thesis,
Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Black, S. L. and D. G. Creel
1997 Central Texas Burned Rock Midden Reconsidered. In
Hot Rock Cooking on the Greater Edwards Plateau:
Four Burned Rock Midden Sites in West Central
Texas by S. L. Black, L. W. Ellis, D. G. Creel, and
G. T. Goode, pp. 269-305. Studies in Archeology 22.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
Black, S. L. and D. G. Creel
1998 Making the Most Out of Clashing Mind-Sets. CRM
News and Views, February: 30-36. Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Black, S. L. and J. A. McGraw
1985 The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change
and Continuity within the Upper Salado Creek Watershed, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey
Report No 100. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Bond, C. L.
1978 Three Archeological Sites at Hoxie Bridge, Williamson County, Texas. Report No. 43. Laboratory, Texas
A&M University, College Station.
Carpenter, S. M., M. Chavez, K. Miller, and K. Lawrence
2006 The McKinney Roughs Site 41BP627: A Stratified
late Archaic II Site on the Colorado River Terraces
Bastrop County, Texas. SWCA Cultural Resources
Report No. 02-313. SWCA Environmental Consultants, Austin.
Carpenter, S. M., and B. A. Houk
2012 Siren Site Chronology: A Reconsideration of the Late
Archaic to Late Prehistoric Temporal Sequence of
Eastern Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 83:99-128.

276

Texas Archeological Society

Carpenter, S. M., K. A. Miller, M. J. Galindo, B. A. Houk, C.
Frederick, M. C. Cody, J. Lowe, K. Lawrence, K. Hanselka,
and A. Peyton
2013 The Siren Site: the Long Transition from Archaic to
Late Prehistoric Lifeways on the Eastern Edwards
Plateau of Central Texas. SWCA Environmental
Consultants Cultural Resources Report 12-93 and
Archeological Studies Program Report No. 142,
Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1994 Cultural Background. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek
Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and
M. B. Collins, pp. 157-166. Studies in Archeology
19, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1995 Forty Years of Archaeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:361-400.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of
Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 101-126. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Creel, D. G.
1990 Excavations at 41TG91, Tom Green County, Texas
1978. Publications in Archaeology Report No. 38.
Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Highway Design Division, Austin.
Dibble, D. S. and D. Lorrain
1968 Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val
Verde, County, Texas. Miscellaneous Papers No. 1.
Texas Memorial Museum. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Dickens, W. A. and J. E. Weiderhold
2003 Some Notes on Bison, the Texas Post Oak Savanna,
and the Late Prehistoric Period of Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 74:31-54.
Dillehay, T. D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the
Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19:180–196.
2012 Foreword. In Land of the Tejas: Native American
Identity and Interaction in Texas, A.D. 1300 to 1700,
by J. W. Arnn, III, pp. ix-xviii. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Dixon, B. and R. Rogers
2006 Prehistoric Encampments at the Sheperd Site: Testing and Data Recovery at 41WM1010 Williamson
County, Texas. PBS&J, Austin.
Ellis, L. W., G. L. Ellis, and C. D. Frederick
1995 Implications of Environmental Diversity in the
Central Texas Archeological Region. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 66:401-423.

Gadus, E. Frances, R. C. Fields, and K. W. Kibler
2006 Data Recovery Excavations at the J.B White Site
(41MM341), Milam County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Galindo, M. J., K. A. Miller, and S. M. Carpenter
2013 Metric Discrimination of Projectile Points from
41WM1126. In The Siren Site: the Long Transition
from Archaic to Late Prehistoric Lifeways on the
Eastern Edwards Plateau of Central Texas, pp. 323338. SWCA Environmental Consultants Cultural
Resources Report 12-93 and Archeological Studies Program Report No. 142, Texas Department of
Transportation, Austin.
Goode, G. T.
2002 The Anthon Site: A Prehistoric Encampment in
Southern Uvalde County, Texas. Archaeological
Studies Program Report 38. Texas Department of
Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division,
Austin.
Haug, G. H., K. A. Hughen, D. M. Sigman, L. C. Peterson,
and U. Röhl
2001 Southward Migration of the Intertropical Convergence Zone Through the Holocene. Science
293:1304-1308.
Hester, T. R.
1971 Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site,
Uvalde County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:51-148.
Houk, B. A., K. A. Miller, and E. R. Oksanen
2008 The Gatlin Site (41KR621): Investigating Archaic
Lifeways on the Southern Edwards Plateau of Central Texas. SWCA Cultural Resources Report No.
149 and Archeological Studies Program Report No.
108, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
2009 The Gatlin Site and the Early-to-Middle Archaic
Chronology of the Southern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 80:51-75.

International Study Group
1982 An Inter-Laboratory Comparison of Radiocarbon
Measurements in Tree Rings. Nature 298:619-623.
Johnson, L. Jr.
1986 A Plague of Phases. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:1-26.

1981 Early Archaic Life at the Sleeper Archaeological
Site, 41BC65, of the Texas Hill Country, Blanco
County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology 39,
Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Highway Design Division, Austin.

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 277
2000 Life and Death as Seen at the Bessie Kruze Site
(41WM13) on the Blackland Prairie of Williamson
County, Texas. Archaeological Studies Program,
Report 22. Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Johnson, L. Jr. and G. T. Goode
1994 A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene
Climates, as Well as Archeological Periods, on the
Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:1-51.
Kleinbach, K., G. Mehalchick, D. K. Boyd, and K. W. Kibler
1999 National Register Testing of 42 Prehistoric Archeological Sites on Fort Hood, Texas. United States
Army Fort Hood Archeological Resource Management Series, Research Report No. 38. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Lohse, J. C., B. J. Culleton, D. J. Kennett, and S. L. Black
n.d. A High Precision Chronology for Middle to Late
Holocene Bison in Central Texas. Journal of Texas
Archeology and History, manuscript in review.
Lohse, J. C., D. J. Kennett, B. J. Culleton, and C. L. Timperley
2012 Middle-to-Late Holocene Bison Chronology and
Ecology in the South-Central United States. Paper
presented at the 77th Annual Meeting of the Society
for American Archaeology, Memphis.

Mauldin, R., R. J. Hard, C. M. Munoz, J. L. Z. Rice, K. Verostick, D. R. Potter, and N. Dollar
2013 Carbon and Nitrogen Stable Isotope Analysis of
Hunter-Gatherers from the Coleman Site, a Late
Prehistoric Cemetery in Central Texas. Journal of
Archaeological Science 40:1369-1381.
Mauldin, R. P., J. Thompson, and L. Kemp
2012 Reconsidering the Role of Bison in the Terminal Late
Prehistoric (Toyah) Period in Texas. In The Toyah
Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric Economic
and Social Processes, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu
and D. K. Boyd, pp. 90-110. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.
Mehalchick. G. and K. W. Kibler
2008 Hunters and Gathers of the North Bosque River
Valley: Excavations of the Baylor, Britton, and Higginbotham Sites, Waco Lake, McLennan County,
Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 156. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Mehalchick, G., T. Myers, K. W. Kibler, and D. K. Boyd
1999 Val Verde on the Sunny Rio Grande, Geoarcheological and Historical Investigations at San Felipe
Springs, Val Verde County, Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 22. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Lohse, J. C., A. E. Reid, D. M. Yelacic, and C. L. Timperley
2013 Data Recovery and Analysis at the Texas State University Ticket Kiosk Project, Located at 41HY160,
Spring Lake, Hays County, Texas. Archaeological
Studies Report No. 32. Center for Archaeological
Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos.

Mehalchick, G., K. Kleinbach, D. K. Boyd, and K. W. Kibler
2000 Geoarcheological Investigations and National Register Testing of 52 Prehistoric Archeological Sites on
Fort Hood, Texas: The 1997 Season. United States
Army Fort Hood Archeological Resource Management Series Research Report No. 39. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Lohse, J. C. (editor)
2013 Underwater Archaeology at 41HY147, the Terrace
Locality at Spring Lake. Archaeological Studies
Report No. 28. Center for Archaeological Studies,
Texas State University-San Marcos.

Meltzer, D. J.
1999 Human Responses to Middle Holocene (Altithermal)
Climates on the North American Great Plains. Quaternary Research 52:404-416.

McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southwest Texas: The Problem of the Paleoindian-Archaic
Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:91-120.
Mahoney, R. B., H. J. Shafer, S. A. Tomka, L. C. Nordt, and
R. P. Mauldin
2003 Royal Coachman (41CM111): An Early Archaic
Site along Cordova Creek in Comal County, Texas.
Archeological Studies Program Report 49, Texas
Department of Transportation and Archaeological
Survey Report 332, Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio.

Munoz, C. M., R. P. Mauldin, J. L. Thompson, and S. C. Caran
2011 Archeological Significance Testing at 41BX17/271,
the Granberg Site: A Multi-Component Site Along
the Salado Creek in Bexar County, Texas. Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs
Division, Archeological Studies Program, Report
No. 140, Austin, and Archaeological Report No. 393,
Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.
Nickels, D. .L., C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach, and D. A. Cargill
2001 Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site, 41BX126,
Bexar County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, and The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265, Archeological Studies Program, Report 3. Environmental Affairs
Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

278

Texas Archeological Society

Osburn, T.
2011 Area 1: A Summary of the 2011 Texas Archeological
Society Field School. Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society 55(4):3.
Pearce, J. E.
1932 The Present Status of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
4:44-54.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County, Texas. Research Report No. 49.
Texas Archeological Survey. The University of Texas
at Austin.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

1983 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central
Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.
Renfrew, C., and P. Bahn
2012 Archaeology: Theories, Methods, and Practice. Sixth
edition. Thames and Hudson, New York.
Ricklis, R. A.
2012 Chronology at Buckeye Knoll. In Archaeology and
Bioarchaeology of the Buckeye Knoll Site (41VT98),
Victoria County, Texas, Volume 1, edited by R. A.
Ricklis, R. A. Weinstein, and D. C. Wells, pp. 147161. Coastal Environments, Inc., Corpus Christi.
Ricklis, R. A. (editor)
2007 Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the Buckeye
Knoll Site, 41VT98: A Major Locus of Hunter-Gatherer Occupation and an Early Archaic Cemetery
near the Lower Guadalupe River, Victoria County,
Texas. 5 vols. Coastal Environments, Inc., Corpus
Christi. Draft report submitted to Galveston District,
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Shafer, H. J.
1977 Late Prehistory of Central Texas, 500 B.C.–1700
A.D. Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological
Society 3:18-27.
Stafford, T. W., Jr., K. Brendel, and R. Duhamel
1988 Radiocarbon, 13C and 15N analysis of fossil bone:
Removal of humates with XAD-2 resin. Geochimica
et Cosmochimica Acta 52:2257-2267.
Stafford, T. W., Jr., P. E. Hare, L. A. Currie, A. J. T. Jull, and
D. Donahue
1991 Accelerator radiocarbon dating at the molecular
level. Journal of Archaeological Science 18:35-72.
Suhm, D. A.
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 29:63-107.

Suhm, D. A., and E. B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Texas Archeological Society, Special Publication No.
1, Texas Archeological Society and Bulletin No. 4,
Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25:1-562.
Tamers, M. A., F. J. Pearson Jr., and E. M. Davis
1964 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates II. Radiocarbon 6:138-159.
Thoms, A. V.
2008 Ancient Savannah Roots of the Carbohydrate
Revolution in South-Central North America. Plains
Anthropologist 53:121-136.

2009 Rocks of Ages: Propagation of Hot-Rock Cookery in
Western North America. Journal of Archaeological
Science 36:573-591.
Thurmond, J. P. and D. G. Wyckoff
1999 The Calf Creek Horizon in Northwestern Oklahoma.
Plains Anthropologist 44:231-250.
Toomey, R. S., III
1993 Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal and Environmental Changes at Hall’s Cave, Kerr County,
Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geography,
University of Texas at Austin.
Turner, E. S., T. R. Hester, and R. L. McReynolds
2011 Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians, 3rd Edition. Taylor
Trade Publishing, Lanham, Maryland.
Valastro, S., Jr. and E. M. Davis
1970a University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates
VIII. Radiocarbon 12(2):617-639.
1970b University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates
VIII. Radiocarbon 12(1):249-280.
Valastro, S., Jr., E. M. Davis, and A. G. Varela
1977 University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates XI.
Radiocarbon 19(2):280-325.
1979 University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates
XIII. Radiocarbon 21(2):257-273.

Watt, F. H.
1978 Radiocarbon Chronology of Sites in the Central
Brazos Valley. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 49:111-138.
Weir, F. A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, Washington State
University, Pullman.

Lohse, et al.—Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas 279
Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American Archaeology, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Wyckoff, D. G.
1994 Introduction to the 1991 Bulletin. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society 60:1-8.
Yelacic, D. M., A. E. Benton, and J. C. Lohse
2011 New Terrestrial Excavations at Spring Lake,
41HY160, San Marcos, Texas. Paper presented at
the 82nd Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological
Society, Fort Worth.

Yelacic, D. M. and J. C. Lohse
2011 Methods and Proveniences. In Prehistoric Life,
Labor, and Residence in Southeast Central Texas:
Results of Data Recovery at 41HY163, the Zatopec
Site, San Marcos, Texas, edited by J. C. Lohse, pp.
77-89. Archaeological Studies Report No. 18. Center
for Archaeological Studies, Texas State UniversitySan Marcos.

Chemical Characterization of Two Primary Igneous
Metamorphic Glass Sources from the Big Bend Ranch
State Park, Presidio County, Texas
Christopher Lintz, Richard E. Hughes, and Tim Roberts
ABSTRACT
Recent studies at Big Bend Ranch State Park (BBRSP) located bedrock exposures of black glassy materials
some 40 km apart in the Cienega and Rancherias Creek drainages. Although resembling obsidian, the rocks are
welded volcanic ash compressed and remelted into glass by subsequent hot lava flows over ash/tuff deposits.
The BBRSP materials contain micro-fissures and break into rough, splintery, or blocky chunks. Some Cienega
Creek samples form 2-4 cm diameter spherical marekanite (Apache tear) nodules. Adjacent lithic workshops
indicate prehistoric attempts to use these poor quality tool stone materials. Geochemical characterization on
12 samples using energy dispersive x-ray fluorescence delineated two geochemical varieties. Geochemical
Variant 1 encompasses samples from both BBRSP source areas, whereas Geochemical Variant 2 is restricted
to the Rancherias Creek exposure. Although the summed elemental intensities of zirconium (Zr), rubidium
(Rb), and strontium (Sr) from both BBRSP sources are virtually indistinguishable from chemical percentages in
common obsidian tool stones from the Jemez Mountains and Rio Grande terraces in New Mexico, the igneous
glasses from BBRSP and the Jemez Mountains are readily distinguished by percentages of Zr and yttrium (Y).

INTRODUCTION
Despite the occurrence of ancient tectonic
geological features paralleling the Balcones escarpment along the eastern and southern edges
of the Edwards Plateau of Central Texas and the
volcanoes and cinder cones of Big Bend and TransPecos regions in far western Texas, obsidian source
studies have neglected chemical characterization of
primary igneous glassy outcrops in Texas (Church
2000; Shackley 1988, 2005). The Balcones fault
zone between Travis and Uvalde counties contains
more than 200 volcanic cones as undersea domes
and rare islands protruding from the Cretaceous
seas and dating around 84 million years ago (mya)
(Spearing 1998; Swanson 1995). No obsidian deposits are known from these ancient Central Texas
tectonic events, and it is unlikely that any would
remain, even if they did exist, due to the instability of natural glass and their tremendous antiquity
(Lonsdale 1927; Shackley 2005:18).
Other porcelain-like and non-igneous glassy
nodules occur along the Eocene age Gulf coastal
plain about 160 km inland from the Gulf of Mexico in Southeast Texas. Manning fused glass is a

volcanic ash or tuff fall-out deposit from West Texas
that, on rare occasions, came in contact with burning
lignite from the Whitsett and Wellborn Formations
within an area between Trinity and Fayette counties and fused into a bubbly form of glass ranging
in color from light bluish gray, to burnt sienna with
streaks of gray, red, or black and white (Banks
1990:53-54; Barnes 1974; Brown 1976). Another
glassy form is found eroding from the Wellborn
Formation between Polk and Karnes counties. These
glassy black, dark brown to green, pea-to-pebble
size nodules generally less than 2.5 cm in diameter
are bediasite tektites that represent melted ejected
debris probably from the 35 mya Chesapeake Bay
meteorite impact crater (Barnes 1951, 1990; Bouska
1993; McCall 2001:20; Vand 1965:47). The colors
and bubbles in Manning fused glass make this material distinct from obsidian. It was sought and used
for knapping by prehistoric people from the Archaic
through Late Prehistoric periods (Brown 1976). Although bediasite tektites macroscopically resemble
obsidian, they are structurally and chemically different and most are generally too small to be flintknapped. No prehistorically-worked samples have
been recognized yet in Texas archeological sites.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

282

Texas Archeological Society

Recently, black glassy cobbles measuring up to
12 cm in diameter have been found by Bill Foster
in the Guadalupe River gravels near Cuero, Texas.
At least four unworked cobbles contain the distinctive lechatelierite (detrital) structures of tektites but
they are of a distinctly different age, size, and ovate
to spherical form from those from the Chesapeake
Bay impact event (Shackley 2006; Charles Frederick, personal communications 2008). Argon40argon39 dating of one specimen indicates that it is
ca. 2.0 mya, which is consistent with the Pliocene
age of the Willis Formation where the cobbles
were recovered. As yet they are not attributed to
any specific impact events. Attempts to knap one
nodule revealed it to be tenaciously harder than
obsidian. No known examples of this material have
been recognized in South Texas archeological sites,
although several geochemical samples from the
Texas Obsidian Project cannot be tied to known
obsidian sources.
NATURAL GLASSES AND THE
TECTONIC ZONES OF WEST TEXAS
The tectonic events in West Texas are part of
the mid-Tertiary age subduction of the Farallon
plate beneath the North American plate that created a volcanic arch extending from the Cascade
Range of the western United States to the Cordilleran range of western Mexico (Henry 1998:33).
In the Big Bend Ranch State Park (BBRSP), most
volcanism relates to three active pulses from (1)
tectonic events forming the Solatario dome around
47 and 34 mya, (2) volcanism from the Chinati and
Cienega Mountains around 35 to 32 mya, and (3)
tectonic activities associated with the Bofecillos
Mountains around 30 to 27 mya (Henry 1998:35,
44; Walton 1985). Minor volcanic activities in far
West Texas persisted during the Miocene with the
addition of igneous materials dating as recently as
18 mya (Henry 1998:32-34, 44, west map; Swanson 1995). Henry (personal communications 2008)
is not aware of true obsidian sources in far West
Texas, but he does acknowledge the existence of
black glassy materials that represent indurated tuff
buried by very hot basaltic lava whose heat and
weight softened, compacted, and baked or welded
the rhyolite tuff-ash shards that then cooled into
hard glassy rocks that look like obsidian. The
lithological distinctions between true obsidians
and glassy welded tuffs are more of a concern for

tectonic geologists than to aboriginal flint knappers
who attempted to use the materials for making
tools (Deal 1976:34).
Obsidian is a glassy igneous material derived
from magma that has cooled so rapidly that it has
an aphanetic or non-crystalline structure. Obsidian is chemically unstable and hydrates or absorbs
water from the surrounding environment. With
sufficient time and hydration, obsidian and other
glassy substances transform into chemically stable
perlite. Another form of glassy igneous material is
pitchstone, which is a glassy obsidian-like material with slightly higher water content and minute
fracture plane structures that affect breakage
(Shackley 2005:14). Both obsidian and pitchstone
are derived from relatively discrete flows and as
such, the geochemistry of individual flows tends to
have relatively unique and location-specific trace
element compositions. In contrast, another form of
glassy igneous substance is welded tuff that forms
either when super-hot magma flows over beds of
volcanic tuff or pumice ash shards, or when ash
beds are breeched by intrusive hot lava dikes. The
extreme heat and weight of the flowing magma
melts and compresses the underlying ash shards
into a dense glassy material. Unlike vent-specific
magma flows, volcanic ash beds can cover hundreds to thousands of hectares and, if derived from
compound cooling units, the chemical signatures
of these volcanic glasses can be quite variable
(Hughes and Smith 1993).
Several primary contexts of welded tuff are
known to occur in the BBRSP. Samples from two
of these primary sources are herein named Cienega
Creek, related to the Chinati/Cienega Mountain
events, and Rancherias Creek, associated with the
Bofecillos events (Figure 1). A third variety, also
related to the Bofecillos event, is reportedly present
in Tapado Canyon (McKnight 1968:50-53; Deal
1976:34). McKnight identifies one source exposure of “black perlitic obsidian” about 30 cm thick
along lower Tapado Creek at the southwest end of
Tapado dome. No recent samples have been collected or chemically characterized from this locale.
Two “obsidian” cobbles were obtained by
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department biologist
Raymond Neck from reworked or secondary
stream gravels northeast of Tapado dome in
the upper portions of Tapado Canyon near Oso
Springs (Caran 1989). The outcrop of materials
from this locale is upstream from that described
by McKnight and probably represents materials

Lintz, et at.—Chemical Characterization of Two Primary Igneous Metamorphic Glass Sources 283

Figure 1. Tectonic/glass-yielding areas in Texas, showing locations of volcanoes and sampled volcanic glasses within
Big Bend Ranch State Park, Texas.

from a fourth distinctly different primary bedrock
exposure which has yet to be located. The two
Tapado Canyon cobbles were reportedly obtained
from stream gravels some 4.75 km west of the
Rancherias Creek welded tuff source discussed
herein. One cobble fragment was submitted to
the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, University
of Berkeley, for geochemical characterization as
part of the Texas Obsidian Project (Table 1). Further efforts are required to locate and sample the
probable volcanic glass sources within the Tapado
Creek basin.
The present study describes and presents the
geochemical characterization of two primary outcrops of nodules, or boulders, embedded in ash and/
or flow exposures beneath lava flows. They are the
Cienega Creek and Rancherias Creek welded tuff
sources, but the inclusion of the term creek in their
names simply denotes the drainage basin for the
two sources, and does not imply that the samples
are from reworked secondary gravel sources. This
article describes the general locations and settings;
the form, condition, and potential knappability of

the samples; and the chemical compositions for
these two glassy welded tuff sources outcropping
in far West Texas.
CIENEGA CREEK WELDED
TUFF SOURCE
This source is about 28.6 km north-northeast
of Presidio, Texas, near the northern panhandle
portion of the BBRSP. The Cienega Creek source
occurs as black glassy nodules embedded within
ashy matrix near the head of a lateral tributary west
of Cienega Creek. The exposure is about 1.9 km
from the unnamed creek’s confluence with Cienega
Creek and about 1 km south of an air strip located
west-northwest of Cienega Mountain.
The rhyolitic welded tuff is exposed within the
Morita Ranch Formation of the early Oligocene
Epoch. Barnes (1979) recognizes four members
of Morita Ranch Formation consisting of olivine
basalt, ash-flow tuff, rhyolite, and basalt porphyry,
but he does not map their individual distributions.

284

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Geochemical results from Texas Obsidian Project sample #125 (TOP #125), the “obsidian”
cobble collected from Tapado Canyon gravels near Oso Springs.
Element
Manganese
Iron
Gallium
Yttrium
Zirconium
Niobium

Abundances (ppm)		
Mn
Fe (%)
Ga
Y
Zr
Nb

981
1.09
70
124
470
303

+ 24
*
+2
*
*
*

Element
Barium
Potassium
Rubidium
Lead
Calcium
Strontium

Abundances (ppm)
Ba
K (%)
Rb
Pb
Ca (%)
Sr

134
2.18
777
57.6
1.03
92

± 11
± 0.07
*
± 1.7
± 0.04
*

Abundances and errors provided as parts per million (ppm) unless otherwise indicated after chemical symbol.
Listed errors are the larger of the estimated precisions or the counting errors.
Errors not listed (*) have counting errors of less than 1 percent.
Data provided by Thomas R. Hester.

Undoubtedly the glassy material represents one of
nodules usually with one naturally broken surface
the successions of rhyolite flows mixed with tuff
that measure 4.0-4.5 cm in diameter and 2.5-3.0
breccia and conglomerates that have a measured
cm perpendicular to the broken surface. One semithickness up to 91 m. Within this formation, the
spherical nodule has whitish carbonate or perlite
rhyolite ranges from banded flows to globular
splotches on the outside and on some facets of the
spherulites. Recent taxonomic revisions to the geobroken surface. The second semi-spherical nodule
logical formations in the BBRSP retain the Morita
has a relatively flat fracture plane with radiating
Ranch Formation terminology for the bedrock
striations from a pressure point, but no bulb of
source exposure (Henry 1998:North Map).
percussion or ripple marks. The fracture surface
The glassy welded tuff from the Cienega Creek
is extremely rough and uneven, and shows several
source occurs near the top of bedded ash deposits
fractures running through the glassy material.
where cobbles (12 x 6 cm in size) are embedded
A third nodule from the Cienega source has a
in ash; blocky boulders (ca. 40 x 30 x 15 cm) proroughly prismatic form with a yellow weathered
trude on the hill side and remnants of glassy flow
rind on a conchoidal facet. It measures 6.0 x 4.7 x
layers ca. 20 cm thick are preserved under more
2.6 cm thick. This old conchoidal surface is pocked
durable basaltic rock layers (Figure 2). The welded tuff exposure
is traceable laterally for more than
100 m. Although this formation is
undated, potassium-argon dating
of the overlying Chinati Mountain
group yielded an age of 31.9 + 0.7
mya, which must be considered a
minimum age for the Morita Ranch
Formation (Barnes 1979). Other
age estimates for the Morita Ranch
Formation are dated to 32.7 mya.
Grab samples collected from
the Cienega Creek source tend to
contain numerous, small (2 to 4
cm diameter), spherical globular
bodies within a black glassy matrix
that shatters into blocky chunks
(Figure 3). Two of three samples
described below are semi-spherical Figure 2. Cienega Creek welded ash bed (next to person’s knee) under lava flow.

Lintz, et at.—Chemical Characterization of Two Primary Igneous Metamorphic Glass Sources 285

Figure 3. Glassy nodules from the Cienega Creek source.

with fissures and depressions where blocky spalls
have broken free from the smooth surface. The
opposite face has relatively recent breaks along a
block surface. Several old fissures are evident in
the stone and many of the broken surfaces have
white carbonate or perlite along the facets. Tiny
blocky splinters readily spall from this specimen.
The collected samples would be difficult to
fashion into stone tools due to their small size
and blocky structure with micro-fissures. Flint
knapping efforts proved to be difficult as the knapping spalls consist of blocky shatter, rather than
controlled flake debris. The range of structural
variability along the length of the exposure has not
been assessed. Because the source materials tend to
erode in small semi-spherical nodules, flint knapping strategies would likely involve split-pebble or
bipolar techniques, similar to the methods used for
working marekanite (Apache tear) nodules.
RANCHERIAS CREEK WELDED
TUFF SOURCE
The Rancherias Creek source area is about
39.5 km east-southeast of Presidio Texas. Revisions to the BBRSP geological formations attribute
the Rancherias Creek source to the Leyva Canyon
Member of the Rawls Formation (Henry 1998).

Potassium-argon dating of the Leyva Canyon Member ranges from
27.04 + 0.09 to 27.3 + 0.10 mya.
The outcrop occurs southeast of
La Iglesia dome in geological units
mapped as rhyolite lava originating from the Bofecillo vent (Henry
1998). Specifically the linear exposure occurs along the lower hill
slopes below a prominent volcanic
dike, which would be intrusive and
date more recent than the Leyva
Canyon Member (Figure 4). A grab
sample of glassy welded tuff was
collected from an exposed alignment of obsidian boulders.
The collected grab samples
from the Rancherias Creek source
consist of blocky, sub-angular and
sub-rounded nodules. The largest
nodule measured 14.8 x 9.5 x 5.5
cm and weighed 797.2 g. None
exhibited the small, sub-rounded
spheres that readily erode into marekanite nodules
that are common in the Cienega Springs locale
(Figure 5). Weathered cortical surfaces range from
splintery with stepped edges, to moderately smooth
with rare fissures and splintery spalls. Several
specimens show pre-existing fracture planes. The
surface colors tend to be dull brown.
The Rancherias Creek samples are of a marginally better knapping quality than the Cienega
Creek materials due to the availability of cobbleto-boulder size chunks. The source area around
the exposure showed some efforts at prehistoric
acquisition and knapping, but those efforts mostly
resulted in shattered fragments and blocky debris.
Some samples collected from the Rancherias
Creek source have rudimentary impact bulbs of
percussions and platform attributes (Crabtree
1982). No flakes with classic dorsal, ventral,
or platform attributes, or recognizable finished
tools, were observed during the brief visit to the
source area.
Modern attempts to knap Rancherias Creek
nodules resulted in the production of blocky
chunks with shiny, opaque black, irregular surfaces
that tended to break along fracture planes and
shiny, opaque black, erratic splintery spalls. The
sub-rounded nodules show a perlitic weathering
rind next to the cortex. In contrast, the specimens
with blocky fractures have perlite formed on old

286

Texas Archeological Society

fractured surfaces. Attempts to
percussion-flake cobbles produced
only blocky debris chunks and
failed to yield flakes with distinctive dorsal or ventral attributes.
Perhaps knapping areas are associated with better quality exposures
elsewhere along the Rancherias
Creek outcrop.
Energy Dispersive X-Ray
Fluorescence (EDXRF)
Analyses
Twelve glassy welded tuff
samples from the BBRSP were
analyzed by Richard E. Hughes
using EDXRF source analyses.
The samples were processed using Figure 4. Rancherias Creek welded tuff bed exposed on lower slope.
a QuanX-EC™ (Thermo Electron
Corporation) edxrf spectrometer
1994, 2008). In this case analyses were conequipped with a silver (Ag) x-ray tube, a 50
ducted for the elements rubidium (Rb), strontium
kV x-ray generator, digital pulse processor with
(Sr), yttrium (Y), zirconium (Zr), niobium (Nb),
automated energy calibration, and a Peltier
barium (Ba), titanium (Ti), manganese (Mn), and
cooled solid state detector with 145 eV resoluiron (as Fe2O3) and to generate iron/manganese
tion (FWHM) at 5.9 keV. The specific techniques
ratios (Fe/Mn). The specimens were analyzed as
used for processing these samples and applying
whole-rock samples (not powdered) and suitably
a matrix correction algorithm to compensate
flat, cortex-free areas of each specimen were
for inter-elemental absorption and enhancement
selected as excitation surfaces.
effects are discussed elsewhere (Hughes 1988,
The resulting trace element
measurements were expressed in
quantitative units (i.e., parts per
million [ppm] by weight). Comparisons between trace element
data generated for the Cienega
Creek and Rancherias Creek samples and known obsidian chemical
groups were made on the basis of
correspondences (at the 2 sigma
level) in diagnostic trace element
concentration values (in this case,
ppm values for Rb, Sr, Y, Zr, Nb,
Ba, Ti, Mn, and Fe2O3) that appear in Anderson et al. (1986),
Baugh and Nelson (1987, 1988),
Glascock et al. (1999), Hughes
(1984, 2005a), Hughes and Nelson
(1987), Jack (1971), Nelson (1984),
Shackley (1995, 1998, 2005), and
unpublished data on New Mexico
obsidians (e.g., Hughes 2005b).
Figure 5. Glassy nodules from the Rancherias Creek source.

Lintz, et at.—Chemical Characterization of Two Primary Igneous Metamorphic Glass Sources 287
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The EDXRF results of 12 samples from
BBRSP yielded two geochemical clusters that do
not completely coincide with the two collection
source areas. Two compositional varieties of glass
(termed Variant #1 and Variant #2) were identified
at the Rancherias Creek source, but Variant #1 also
included all of the specimens from the Cienega
Creek source locality. These geochemical varieties
can be distinguished on the basis of macroscopic
and trace element properties (Table 2 and Figure
6). Variant #1 is the more aphyric or non-crystalline
of the two, although pronounced cracks indicative
of great age can be seen in these samples under
low power magnification. Water analysis would
be required to confirm it, but these samples appear
greatly hydrated, suggesting that they are perlitic,
or nearly so, in composition. Macroscopic and
trace element examination of Variant #2 samples
also suggest that they represent a very extensively
hydrated glass; these may be a pitchstone, but
water analysis would be required for verification.
While the first variant possesses comparatively
uniform trace element composition, the second
variety is much more variable, with significantly
elevated amounts of Rb, Zr, and Nb composition
relative to Variant #1. In both cases elevated Nb
values suggest glasses of peralkaline composition.
Figure 6 illustrates the contrast between these two
chemical variants using Y versus Zr composition,
but Table 2 also shows that these glasses also possess contrasting Rb compositions. Although more
exhaustive field reconnaissance would be required
to make a secure determination, the widespread
areal occurrence of geochemical Variant #1 from
two sources separated by more than 40 km, suggest that the deposits were probably emplaced as a
result of ash flow of finely suspended particles with
enough liquid to form a pasty mass (as opposed to a
dome/flow eruption) and that the glass was formed
through welding of ash in the tuffs (cf. Hughes and
Smith 1993:85-89). If so, the textural differences
observed are a likely consequence of hydration/
glass decomposition processes operating within a
compositionally zoned ash-flow tuff sheet.
Some important observations can be made with
respect to the archeological implications of these
trace element results. Based on the macroscopic
and physical properties of both chemical variants,
it would appear that only one of these (Variant
#1) is nearly aphyric enough to have possibly

served as a tool stone medium. Variant #2 contains
phenocrysts and very few aphyric glass domains,
which would probably have rendered it completely
unsuitable for use in manufacturing a chipped stone
artifact. Even the “best” samples (from an artifact
manufacturing standpoint) of Variant #1 glass are
extensively hydrated, making them of marginal
utility for artifact manufacture. This said, it is possible that better quality volcanic glass may exist in
other places within this geologic unit; and, if so,
this hypothetically higher quality material could
have been used to manufacture artifacts. Limited
evidence of knapping debris from areas proximate
to one of the collection localities suggests at least
some attempts were made by prehistoric people
to use the material (Hughes 2008). But the great
age of the geologic material (as inferred from the
extensive hydration/crack network evident in even
the best Variant #1 specimens, and the potassiumargon dating of the formations) suggests that glassy
materials from these localities would have been
hard to shape and would not have been a major
prehistoric tool stone source.
The chemical makeup of the BBRSP glasses
may carry an archeological significance that supersedes its physical characteristics. Most obsidian
artifacts found in Texas archeological sites that
have been sourced have trace elements attributed to
volcanic glasses derived from the Jemez Volcanic
field of northern New Mexico (Baugh and Nelson
1987; Brosowske 2004; Hester 1991, 1993; Kibler
2005). Some of this Jemez Mountains obsidian
has been redeposited into the Rio Grande gravels,
where river-transported cobbles were exploited
prehistorically far from their primary source
(Church 2000). In this regard it is perhaps noteworthy that the Rb, Sr, Zr, and Nb trace element
signature of BBRSP Variant #1 volcanic glass—the
best of the material analyzed here—is superficially
similar to the chemical signature of Obsidian Ridge
(also called Cerro Toledo Rhyolite) volcanic glass
from the Jemez Mountains (Shackley 2005:Table
A.5; Hughes 2005b). In fact, if only the normalized
percentages of Rb/Sr/Zr are considered (as was
a primary basis for comparison in the very early
days of xrf obsidian sourcing studies [Baugh and
Nelson 1987:Figure 2]), Variant #1 material would
be indistinguishable from two of the most extensively utilized obsidian sources (Cerro del Medio
and Obsidian Ridge) from the Jemez Mountains
(Figure 7).

13
±3
13
±3
12
±3
46
±3
40
±3
60
±3
39
±3
42
±3
17
±3

TC-1
nm
nm
243
			 ±4

TC-3
nm
nm
237
			 ±4

TC-4
nm
nm
241
			 ±4

TC-6b
nm
nm
456
			 ±4

TC-8b
nm
nm
547
			 ±4

TC-9a
nm
nm
495
			 ±4

TC-9b
nm
nm
475
			 ±4

TC-10g
nm
nm
691
			 ±4

CS-1
nm
nm
232
			 ±4

Ga

Sr

Zn

Rb

Cat.

Number

81
±3

123
±3

113
±3

123
±3

122
±3

121
±3

78
±3

79
±3

81
±3

Y

201
±4

442
±4

412
±4

440
±4

456
±4

454
±4

197
±4

189
±4

203
±4

Zr

35
±13

Ba

325
±20

Ti

126
±3

283
±3

264
±3

286
±3

295
±3

287
±3

127
±3

29
±10

119
±13

101
±12

105
±10

nm

99
±10

26
±13

644
±12

469
±24

906
±30

528
±14

nm

697
±14

327
±20

119
nm
328
±3		 ±25

125
±3

Nb

585
±10

798
±10

729
±10

873
±10

nm

1227
±10

577
±10

507
±12

548
±10

Mn

1.51
±.02

1.49
±.02

1.51
±.02

1.60
±.02

nm

1.80
±.02

1.14
±.02

1.15
±.02

1.16
±.02

Fe2O3

Trace Element Concentrations
				
										

23

17

19

18

nm

14

20

11

21

Fe/Mn

Ratio

Variant # 1

Variant # 2

Variant # 2

Variant # 2

Variant # 2

Variant # 2

Variant # 1

Variant # 1

Variant # 1

(Chemical Type)

Obsidian Source

Table 2. Quantitative Composition Estimates for Volcanic Glass Samples from Big Bend Ranch State Park, Texas.

288
Texas Archeological Society

15
±3

CS-100
nm
nm
251
			 ±4

84
±3

82
±3

Y

205
±4

205
±4

Zr

126
±3

124
±3

Nb

Ba

Ti

Mn

Fe2O3

0
±12

6
±10
362
±22

478
±14
701
±10

485
±10

1.18
±.02

1.10
±.02

15

21

Fe/Mn

Ratio

Variant # 1

Variant # 1

(Chemical Type)

Obsidian Source

146
±4
149

108
±3
108

25
±3
25

220
±4
219

7
±3
9

802
±14
807

1619
±23
1600

286
±10
279

1.85
62 Glass Mtn., CA
±.02				
1.86
nr
Glass Mtn., CA

Values in ppm except total iron [in weight %] and Fe/Mn intensity ratios; ± =x-ray counting uncertainty and regression fitting error at 120-360 seconds lifetime. nm=not
measured. nr=not reported. TC=Rancherias Creek; CS=Cienega Creek.

RGM-1
nm
nm
(measured)			
RGM-1
32
15
(recommended)

CS-101
nm
nm
252
15
81
201
127
37
310
589
1.16
20
Variant # 1
			 ±4
±3
±3
±4
±3
±12
±20
±10
±.02
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - -- - - - - - -- - U.S. Geological Survey Comparative Reference Standard

17
±3

CS-2
nm
nm
240
			 ±4

Ga

Sr

Zn

Trace Element Concentrations
				
										
Rb

Number

Cat.

Table 2. (Continued)

Lintz, et at.—Chemical Characterization of Two Primary Igneous Metamorphic Glass Sources 289

290

Texas Archeological Society

in the Southwest tend to be from
sources dating less than 20 mya
(Shackley 2005:18). Insofar as the
BBRSP welded tuff sources are
from formations that date between
27-32.7 mya, their quality as tool
stones would be expected to be
of marginal quality. Nevertheless,
despite the abundance of high
quality jaspers and cherts found
throughout the BBRSP, possible
prehistoric workshops near the two
glassy material exposures show that
prehistoric people tried to use these
marginal-grade materials. Their
success in making usable chipped
stone artifacts is unknown.
The trace element data generFigure 6. Yttrium versus Zirconium composition of volcanic glasses from
ated for specimens from Cienega
Big Bend Ranch State Park, Texas. Dashed lines represent range of variation
Creek and Rancherias Creek commeasured in geologic obsidian source samples. Error bars are two-sigma (95
prise multi-element chemical signapercent confidence interval) estimates for individual samples from Table 2.
tures that can be compared directly
with published values for other
volcanic glasses, and can be used to
help identify the geologic source for volcanic glass
Fortunately, however, the quantitative trace
artifacts found within BBRSP and vicinity. In this
element composition data generated here are suffiregard, the single secondary deposited “obsidian
ciently precise to allow ready separation of the Big
Bend Ranch volcanic glasses from
Jemez Mountains obsidians (Figure
8). Y versus Zr ppm composition
effectively shows this chemical
separation, but Nb contrasts also
could have been used to distinguish
between the BBRSP and Jemez
Mountains sources.
SUMMARY AND
CONCLUSIONS
The identification and chemical characterization of two welded
tuff/ash glassy outcrops from far
West Texas expands the documented range of glassy igneous
materials into Texas. The knapping
quality of material obtained from
both of these sources is relatively
poor, most likely due to higher
levels of perlite in the materials.
Indeed, the most common obsidians used by prehistoric people

Figure 7. Normalized Rb/Sr/Zr composition of Big Bend Ranch State Park
samples in relation to geologic samples from the Jemez Mountains, New
Mexico. Dashed lines represent range of variation measured in geologic
obsidian source samples. Filled triangles represent the plots for samples from
Cienega Creek and Rancherias Creek, Big Bend Ranch State Park.

Lintz, et at.—Chemical Characterization of Two Primary Igneous Metamorphic Glass Sources 291
cobble” collected from the Tapado
Creek coincides with geochemical Variant #2 of the present study
based on the ppm values of Y and
Zr. The geochemical results also
provide information useful to assessing the origin of volcanic glass
artifacts with superficially similar
Rb/Sr/Zr profiles that might have
been mistakenly attributed in early
x-ray fluorescence studies to Jemez
Mountains obsidians rather than
to local glass occurrences. The
chemical characterization of these
sources contributes to the growing
body of source data from North
American glassy materials, and
expands the comparative chemical
basis for determining whether these
obsidians and welded tuffs were
used on a local or regional basis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Figure 8. Composition of volcanic glasses from Big Bend Ranch State Park
Variant #1 in relation to geologic samples from the Jemez Mountains, New
Mexico. Dashed lines represent range of variation measured in geologic
obsidian source samples. Black dots represent the plots for samples from
Cienega Creek and Rancherias Creek (Variant #1), Big Bend Ranch State
Park. Error bars are two-sigma (95 percent confidence interval) estimates
for Variant #1 sample results from Table 2.

We would like to thank Mr.
Michael Strutt, Cultural Resource Program Director, Parks Division of the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, for securing funds to support the
geochemical studies presented here. David Riskind
and David Ing are thanked for sharing information about the geological sources in the BBRSP.
David Riskind, Chris Caran, and Christopher
Henry took an interest in our studies and helped
us avoid many pitfalls. We also thank Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department staff who visited the two
source locations and collected samples, especially
Mark Lockwood, Margaret Howard, Aina Dodge,
Logan McNatt, and Tony Lyle. We especially thank
Thomas R. Hester for sharing his unpublished geochemical results from the Tapado Creek nodule reported by Chris Caran. Any errors in interpretation
and shortcomings reside solely with the authors.
REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, D. C., J. A. Tiffany, and F. W. Nelson

1986 Recent Research on Obsidian from Iowa Archaeological Sites. American Antiquity 51:837-852.

Banks, L.
1990 From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A
Review of Lithic Resources in the Trans-Mississippi
South, the Southern Plains and Adjacent Southwest.
Memoir 4. Oklahoma Anthropological Society,
Norman.
Barnes, V.
1951 Tektite Area in Texas. Abstracts of Papers submitted
to the November Meeting Detroit, Michigan, November 8-11, 1951. Geological Society of America.

1974 Geological Atlas of Texas, Seguin Sheet: 1:250,000.
Bureau of Economic Geology. University of Texas,
Austin.

1979 Geological Atlas of Texas, Emory Peak-Presidio
Sheet: 1:250,000. Bureau of Economic Geology.
University of Texas, Austin.
1990

Tektite Research 1936 to 1990. Meteoritic 25:149-159.

Baugh, T. G. and F. W. Nelson
1987 New Mexico Obsidian Sources and Exchange on
the Southern Plains. Journal of Field Archaeology
14:313-329.

1988 Archaeological Obsidian Recovered from Selected
North Dakota Sites and Its Relationship to Changing
Exchange Systems in the Plains. Journal of the North
Dakota Archaeological Association 3:74-94.

292

Texas Archeological Society

Bouska, V.
1993 Tektites. In. Natural Glasses, edited by V. Bouska,
pp. 186-247. Ellis Horwood Ltd., New York.
Brosowske, S. D.
2004 Obsidian Procurement and Distribution during the
Middle Ceramic Period of the Southern High Plains:
Evidence for the Emergence of Regional Trade
Centers. Council of Texas Archeologists Newsletter
28(2):16-28.
Brown, K. M.
1976 Fused Volcanic Glass from the Manning Formation. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
47:189-208.
Caran, C.
1989 Obsidian at Big Bend Ranch State Natural Area, Presidio County, Texas. Manuscript on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, University of
Texas at Austin.
Church, T.
2000 Distribution and Sources of Obsidian in the Rio
Grande Gravels of New Mexico. Geoarchaeology
15:649-678.
Crabtree, D.
1982 Introduction to Flintworking. Occasional Papers 28.
Idaho Museum of Natural History, Pocatello.
Deal, D.
1976 The Geological Environment of the Bofecillos
Mountains, Southeastern Presidio County, Texas.
In Bofecillos Mountains: A Natural Area Survey,
assembled by D. Kennard, pp. 17-98. Natural Area
Survey Report 12. Lyndon B. Johnson School of
Public Affairs, University of Texas, Austin.
Glascock, M. D., R. Kunselman, and D. Wolfman
1999 Intrasource Chemical Differentiation of Obsidian in
the Jemez Mountains and Taos Plateau, New Mexico. Journal of Archaeological Science 26:861-868.
Henry, C. D.
1998 Geology of the Big Bend Ranch State Park. Guidebook 27. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin. Texas Parks and Wildlife
Press, Austin.
Hester, T. R.
1991 Notes on South Texas Archaeology: 1991-1: An
Overview of the Results of the Texas Obsidian
Project. La Tierra 18(1):4-7.
1993 Obsidian in Texas: Geological Sources and Archaeological Interpretations. Paper presented at the
58th annual meeting of the Society for American
Archaeology, St. Louis

Hughes, R. E.
1984 Obsidian Sourcing Studies in the Great Basin: Problems and Prospects. In Obsidian Studies in the Great
Basin, edited by R. E. Hughes, pp. 1-19. Contributions No. 45. University of California Archaeological
Research Facility, Berkeley.
1988 The Coso Volcanic Field Reexamined: Implications
for Obsidian Sourcing and Hydration Dating Research. Geoarchaeology 3:253-265.

1994 Intrasource Chemical Variability of Artefact-Quality
Obsidians from the Casa Diablo Area, California.
Journal of Archaeological Science 21:263-271.

2005a Determination of the Geologic Sources for Obsidian
Artifacts from Camels Back Cave, and Trace Element Analysis of Some Western Utah and Eastern
Nevada Volcanic Glasses. In Camels Back Cave,
edited by D. N. Schmitt and D. B. Madsen, pp. 249256. Anthropological Papers No. 125, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City.

2005b Appendix D. ED-XRF Analyses: Original Letter
Reports and Data from R. E. Hughes, Geochemical
Research Laboratory. In The Dome Fire Obsidian Study: Investigating the Interaction of Heat,
Hydration, and Glass Chemistry, by A. Steffen, pp.
333-350. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.
2008 Energy Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Analysis of
Volcanic Glass from Two Localities in Big Bend
Ranch State Park, Presidio County, Texas. Letter
Report 2008-73. Geochemical Research Laboratory,
Portola, California.
Hughes, R. E. and F. W. Nelson
1987 New Findings on Obsidian Source Utilization in
Iowa. Plains Anthropologist 32(117):313-316.
Hughes, R. E. and R. L. Smith
1993 Archaeology, Geology, and Geochemistry in Obsidian Provenance Studies. In Effects of Scale on Archaeological and Geoscientific Perspectives, edited
by J. K. Stein and A. R. Linse, pp. 79-91. Special
Paper 283. Geological Society of America.
Jack, R. N.
1971 Source of Obsidian Artifacts in Northern Arizona.
Plateau 43:103-114.
Kibler, K.
2005 Broader Continental Connections through the Gulf
Coastal Plain of Texas. In Gulf Coast Archaeology:
The Southeastern United States and Mexico, edited
by N. M. White, pp. 197-204. University Press of
Florida, Gainesville.

Lintz, et at.—Chemical Characterization of Two Primary Igneous Metamorphic Glass Sources 293
Lonsdale, J. H.
1927 Igneous Rocks of the Balcones Fault Region of Texas.
Bulletin 2744. University of Texas, Austin.
McCall, G. J.
2001 Tektites in the Geological Record: Showers of Glass
from the Sky. The Geological Society of London,
London.
McKnight, J. F.
1968 Geology of Bofecillos Mountain Area, Trans-Pecos
Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas,
Austin.
Nelson, F. W., Jr.
1984 X-ray Fluorescence Analysis of Some Western
North American Obsidians. In Obsidian Studies in
the Great Basin, edited by R. E. Hughes, pp. 27-62.
Contributions No. 45. University of California Archaeological Research Facility, Berkeley.
Shackley, M. S.
1988 Sources of Archaeological Obsidian in the Southwest: An Archaeological, Petrological and GeoChemical Study. American Antiquity 53(4):752-772.

1995 Sources of Archaeological Obsidian in the Greater
American Southwest: An Update and Quantitative
Analysis. American Antiquity 60:531-551.
1998 Geochemical Differentiation and Prehistoric Procurement of Obsidian in the Mount Taylor Volcanic
Field, Northwest New Mexico. Journal of Archaeological Science 25:1073-1082.

2005 Obsidian: Geology and Archaeology in the North
American Southwest. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson.

2006 An Energy-Dispersive X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis of Probable Tektites from South-Central Texas.
Berkeley Archaeological Laboratory XRF Lab Letter
Report, Berkeley, California.
Spearing, D.
1998 Roadside Geology of Texas. Mountain Press Publishing, Missoula.
Swanson, E. R.
1995 Geo-Texas: A Guide to the Earth Sciences. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Vand, V.
1965 Astrogeology: Terrestrial Meteoritic Craters and the
Origins of Tektites. In Advances in Geophysics II,
edited by H. E. Landsberg and J. Van Mieghem, pp.
2-115. Academic Press, New York.
Walton, A. W.
1985 Volcaniclastic-Sedimentary Record of the Chinati
Volcanic Center: The Buck Hill and Vieja Groups. In
Igneous Geology of the Trans-Pecos Texas, edited by
J. G. Price, C. Henry, D. F. Parker, and D. S. Barker,
pp. 251-265. Guidebook 23. Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas, Austin.

List of Authors

Stephen L. Black, Texsa State University, San Marcos
Carolyn E. Boyd, SHUMLA, Comstock, Texas
Tabitha G. Burgess, Versar/Geo-Marine, Inc., Boise, Idaho
Laly M. Cholak, Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas
Ann M. Early, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville, Arkansas
Ross C. Fields, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas
Jeffrey S. Girard, Northwestern State University of Louisiana, Natchitoches, Louisiana
Thomas R. Hester, Professor Emeritus, The University of Texas at Austin, Utopia, Texas
Richard E. Hughes, Geochemical Research Laboratory, Portola Valley, California
Edward B. Jelks, Normal, Illinois
Nancy A. Kenmotsu, Versar/Geo-Marine, Inc., Yakima, Washington
James D. Keyser, Portland, Oregon
Kristin A. Kuckleman, Crow Canyon Archaeological Center, Cortez, Colorado
Lora Jackson Legare, Zia Engineering & Environmental Consultants, Inc., El Paso, Texas
Ricky Lightfoot, Crow Canyon Archaeological Center, Grand Junction, Colorado
Christopher Lintz, Texas Parks and Wildlife, Austin, Texas
Jon C. Lohse, Coastal Environments, Inc., Corpus Christi, Texas
Tom Middlebrook, Texas Archeolgical Steward Network, Nacogdoches, Texas
Myles R. Miller, Versar/Geo-Marine, Inc., El Paso, Texas
Timothy K. Perttula, Archeological & Environmental Consultants, LLC, Austin, Texas
Tim Roberts, Texas Parks and Wildlife, Fort Davis, Texas
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 85 (2014)

296

Texas Archeological Society

Marvin W. Rowe, Conservation Laboratory of the Museum of New Mexico,
Santa Fe, New Mexico
Robert Z. Selden Jr., Center for Regional Heritage Research, Stephen F. Austin State University,
Nacogdoches, Texas
Harry J. Shafer, Curator of Archaeology, Witte Museum, San Antonio, Texas
Bob D. Skiles, Austin, Texas
Karen L. Steelman, Assistant Professor, University of Central Arkansas, Conway, Arkansas
Mark Varien, Crow Canyon Archaeological Center, Cortez, Colorado
Diane Wilson, A. M. Wilson Associates, Inc., Marstons Mills, Massachusetts
Richard Wilshusen, Colorado Historical Society, Denver, Colorado

