-----1

------------

(

·':i'

\,,~- .·~

:_-_,_,;_t

'

'
)', r·, '•,\

'

:,~,c-''~(

lGICAL SOCIETY

rterccl in pursuit of a literary and

;; past in Texas and contiguous areas.
cation of serious research un hislory,
line \Vi th the goals of the society·. it
id publication of arch eologicul data.

r the distribution to the rnen1bers of
are those of the \\Titers and do not
I

Bulletin of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 45/1974

PY 2 I

igical Society

Thomas R. Hester, Senior Editor
Harry J. Shafer, Co-Editor
BOWEN

-------'J ',·r·exar-

Olivia Rodriguez, Cover Design
--ras·follovvs:
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ !Cc~tribut-

1le h'u/letin,
- - - - - - - < ' . - t e e - !!hat is
!blicotions,
~-=-:~ · -------~~~-"'="=~=i\tp to and

- - - - - - - - i ) r $S_oo per

l~l~llll ~111111~1111
110440

:i.nd membership applications to
al Society, Southern Methodist Uni-

DO NOT REMOVE
FROM BUILDING

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT AUSTIN, TEXAS
1974

DO NOT REMOVE
FROM BUILDING

:::HEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

iering Archeological Deposits.
pp. 293-301.

PRELIMINARY ARCHEOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATIONS IN THE
RIO GRANDE DELTA OF TEXAS*

Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites.

No. 13.
ird B. Jelks

Archeology. Bulletin, Texas Ar-

shington

EL TON R. PREWITT

ABSTRACT
The results of a preliminary archeological survey of portions of Cameron County, Texas, are presented in general terms. Information from the
79 Indian sites recorded during the survey is combined with information
derived from the Anderson collection made in the same area. Five types of
sites are recognized on the basis of topographical relationships. Cultural
remains are characterized by an extensive use of marine shells for tools
and ornaments. The evidence presented indicates the archeological materials represent a late prehistoric occupation of the area. Suggestions for
further research are made.

INTRODUCTION
This paper is more a statement of work thus far accomplished
within the Rio Grande Delta region and a reiteration of problems that
need to be investigated rather than a comprehensive report of the
material culture and chronology. The paper is based on a limited
surface survey of Cameron County which I conducted from March
through May, 1970, under the direction of Curtis Tunnell, State Archeologist. Funds were provided by the Texas Historical Survey
Committee (now the Texas Historical Commission). A total of 79
Indian sites was recorded during the survey.
The purpose of the survey was to attempt to determine the archeological potential of the Texas side of the Rio Grande Delta and to
formulate recommendations for further research. Prior to this field
work the bulk of the information available for the area was based on
the extensive collections made by A. E. Anderson of Brownsville.
Specific problems were presented by Anderson's work: 1) could the
sites recorded by him be relocated? 2) if so, what effects are erosion
and agricultural practices having on them? 3) to what extent are the
sites recorded by him representative of the overall archeological picture?
Not all of these aims were accomplished by the survey. The primary
question of archeological potential was answered affirmatively.
Thirty-eight new sites were recorded and tentative patterns of site
distribution were discerned indicating that the potential for inves*Paper presented at the Conference on the Archeology of the Gulf Coast, Beaumont,
Texas, 1971.

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tigating specific problems and refining interpretations is good. Out of
over 60 of Anderson's site locations visited, I was able to confirm the
continued existence of forty one of them. I was not able to pursue the
question of erosional and agricultural effects to the degree necessary
for significant conclusions. It does seem Anderson recorded a representative inventory of sites, but by no means did he record the total
number of existing sites.

ENVIRONMENT
Cameron County is included within the Rio Grande Embayment of
the Western Gulf Coast Physiographic Province as defined by Fenneman (1938:102). Blair (1950:102-105) places it within the Matamoran
District of the Tamaulipan Biotic Province. Blair singles the
Brownsville area out as a district because it is a more luxurient
brushland than the rest of the Tamaulipan Province. Dominant plants
which justify this distinction are: retama, Texas ebony, wild olive,
and knackaway. Large elms dominate the flood plain in some places,
and one species of palm reaches its northern limit at Southmost, just
downstream from Brownsville. In general, Blair characterizes the
Tamaulipan Province as semiarid and megathermal, indicating a
marked deficiency of moisture for plant growth, although there is
plant growth the year around. Predominant vegetation are: mesquite,
various Acacia and Mimosa, granjeno, cenizo, prickly pear, tasajillo,
and other thorny plants. Coastal marshes are dominated by sacahuiste
grass.
Historically, there has been an increase in the brush cover of the Rio
Grande Delta. In early historic times there was dense brush or chaparral along the Rio Grande. However, the plain away from the river was
covered with grass and motts of brush (Inglis 1964:26-27). The period
from about 1850 to 1900 marked the greatest increase in brush density
(Ibid:100). This change in the vegetation has been caused by a complicated series of events including a slight change toward greater
aridity, over-grazing, and clearing of land for agricultural purposes
(Price and Gunter 1942).
The topography of the delta is, of course, essentially flat, rising
gently westward from the Gulf shoreline. It is broken by many abandoned channels of the Rio Grande, locally called "resacas". Some of
these resacas form long narrow lakes bordered by lush tropical
growths. Others sport only occasional pools of water, flooding after
heavy rains. Many of the resacas near the coast support dense growths
of brackish-water weeds and dense brush along the edges, broken
occasionally by sacahuiste grass flats.

Rl

ti:

e1
u
3

l<

CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

RIO GRANDE DELTA

nterpretations is good. Out of
ted, I was able to confirm the
t. I was not able to pursue the
ffects to the degree necessary

Numerous small clay dunes (Price and Kornicker, 1961:245) line
the shore facing Laguna Madre, and are common on the east and north
edges of inland lakes. These clay dunes, locally called "lamas", are
usually about 15-20 feet high, and occasionally reach heights of over
30 feet. Several shallow lakes are scattered over the delta region, the
largest being Laguna Atascosa.
Blair (1950:103) indicates there are at least 61 species of mammals
in the Tamaulipan Biotic Province, as well as 36 species of snakes, 19
lizards, 2 land turtles, 3 urodeles, and 19 anurans. Three hundred
fifteen species of birds have been recorded since 1946 at the Laguna
Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge. An additional 15 species have
been recorded as accidental occurrences [Anonymous 1969). Animals
other than waterfowl common to the region are: dove, quail, whitetail
deer, peccary, raccoon, opossum, cottontail, jackrabbit, skunk,
coyote, bobcat, jaguarundi, ocelot, and the diamondbacked rattlesnake (Anonymous 1970).

m Anderson recorded a rep-

means did he record the total

:NT

he Rio Grande Embayment of
rovince as defined by Fenneaces it within the Matamoran
'rovince. Blair singles the
:ause it is a more luxurient

m Province. Dominant plants

na, Texas ebony, wild olive,
flood plain in some places,
:hem limit at Southmost, just
Lera!, Blair characterizes the
l megathermal, indicating a
rrt growth, although there is

57

ie

tant vegetation are: mesquite,

cenizo, prickly pear, tasajillo,
' are dominated by sacahuiste
e in the brush cover of the Rio

re was dense brush or chapar-

Jlain away from the river was
rrglis 1964:26-27). The period
ltest increase in brush density
n has been caused by a com:light change toward greater
md for agricultural purposes

ourse, essentially flat, rising
e. It is broken by many abanlly called "resacas". Some of
' bordered by lush tropical
pools of water, flooding after
'coast support dense growths
ush along the edges, broken

PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
he bulk of previous archeological research in the Rio Grande Delta
was done by A. E. Anderson, a civil engineer in Brownsville. From
1908 to about 1940, he made extensive systematic surface collections
from 196 sites in Cameron County, and about an equal number of sites
in adjacent Tamaulipas, Mexico. He not only carefully recorded the
exact location of sites and catalogued the specimens accordingly, but
he also made detailed notes of the physical appearance of the sites.
During his 3 0-odd years of collecting in the area, Anderson accumulated and catalogued over 2,000 specimens from the Texas side of the
river alone. I have made no attempt to determine the extent of his
collections from the Mexican side.
In 1932, Anderson published a brief paper listing the types of
artifacts found on the Texas side of the river. His major emphasis was
on the material used in the manufacture of artifacts rather than descriptions of the artifacts. Five pottery vessels found by Anderson
were described by J. Alden Mason (1935). Later, Ekholm (1944:433),
and Campbell (1960:163), identified these vessels as TancoJ
Polychrome, a Huastecan type.
After Anderson's death in the early 1940's, his relatives loaned the
entire collection to the University of Texas. Since that time, Dr. T. N.
Campbell of the University of Texas at Austin has been systematically
describing the artifacts in his spare time, and has been consolidating
Anderson's notes into concise site descriptions.

Richard S. MacNeish (1947:1-15; 1958:186-193) was instrumental

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in securing the loan of Anderson's collection, and used it as the basis
for his definitions of the Brownsville and Barri! complexes in the Rio
Grande Delta. This was done as part of his overall survey of
Tamaulipas. However, MacNeish gave the collection only a cursory
examination, and went into very little detail about the area.
At about the same time, jack T. Hughes [1947:33-39) surveyed the
Victoria-Matamoras highway, and located 11 sites between Padilla
and San Fernando. These sites, though, are along the eastern edge of
the Sierra de Tamaulipas, and differ markedly from the coastal and
deltaic sites.
Further systematic work in the Rio Grande Delta region was lacking
until the 1970 survey. However, various isolated sites, primarily
cemeteries, were reported by a number of workers [see Campbell and
Frizzell 1949; Hester and Ruecking 1969; Collins, Hester and Weir
1969; Hester 1969a; and Hester and Rodgers 1971).

CURRENT RESEARCH

111

Thus far, five types of sites have been recognized on the basis of
geographic location. Some of these sites are superficially very
ephemeral, while others are quite extensive. The 5 types of sites are: 1)
clay dune-laguna, 2) resaca-laguna, 3) clay dune-lake, 4) resaca, and
5) barrier island. I am sure there are more types of sites present, but
they have not yet been recorded.
Clay dune - laguna sites include those sites situated in or on clay
dunes facing Laguna Madre. These are usually at relatively high
elevations, running roughly 25-30 feet above sea level. Often, there
are small "sinks" or waterholes on the landward side atthe base of the
dunes. Much of the debris seems to be concentrated on the landward
slopes of the dunes, suggesting that some of the camping or living
took place where there was protection from the strong gulf breeze.
Resaca - laguna sites are less common. These include those sites
situated on the bank of a resaca where it empties into the Laguna
Madre. They are generally low in elevation, normally about 10 feet
above sea level. There are usually small ponds of water in the resacas,
but these dry rapidly in the summer and would not provide a steady
water supply.
Clay dune - lake sites are those sites in or on clay dunes situated
around inland lakes such as Laguna Atascosa. These are quite similar
in character to clay dune - laguna type sites, but the elevations are
usually about 5-10 feet lower.
Resaca sites are those situated along the various resacas. These are
usually on low knolls or dikes paralleling the resacas. Some of the

.CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ction, and used it as the basis
d Barri! complexes in the Rio
rt of his overall survey of
the collection only a cursory
detail about the area.
LBS (1947:33-39) surveyed the
ted 11 sites between Padilla
are along the eastern edge of
arkedly from the coastal and

mde Delta region was lacking
isolated sites, primarily
Jf workers (see Campbell and
69; Collins, Hester and Weir
dgers 1971).

JUS

\ARCH

m recognized on the basis of
sites are superficially very
jve. The 5 types of sites are: 1)
clay dune-lake, 4) resaca, and
Jre types of sites present, but

:;e sites situated in or on clay
ce usually at relatively high
above sea level. Often, there
ndward side atthe base of the
:oncentrated on the landward
'me of the camping or living
from the strong gulf breeze.
m. These include those sites
e it empties into the Laguna
ition, normally about 10 feet
ponds of water in the resacas,
d would not provide a steady

in or on clay dunes situated
scosa. These are quite similar
' sites, but the elevations are
:he various resacas. These are
.ing the resacas. Some of the

RIO GRANDE DELTA

59

rises are almost imperceptible, and one often finds the knoll by finding the site. In some instances, the rise will have a one to two feet
eroded drop facing (or paralleling) the resaca. In other cases, there is
no erosion, and dense brush makes it almost impossible to definitely
identify a site.
Barrier island sites are those sites on South Padre, Brazos, and Boca
Chica Islands. Such sites have been orally reported by local amateurs,
but systematic work has not been undertaken to document them
precisely in this region (see Campbell 1964, for sites located on the
northern end of Padre Island).
Lithic artifacts are dominated by generally small triangular arrow
points; these have been divided into various types by MacNeish
(1958:68-70, 189). Specific types described by MacNeish are:
Matamoros, Fresno, Starr, and Cameron, the latter being the smallest
and often made of glass. A few stemmed dart points occur, but no
stemmed arrow points have been found. Other distinctive lithic artifacts (described by MacNeish 1958:189) are tiny circular planoconvex scrapers and small chipped flint pin-like drills. A few unifaces, bifaces, andhammerstones occur. Very few flint flakes occur on
any of the sites, and those that are present generally show evidence of
chipping along one or more lateral edges. Anderson noted this in his
collections, and I found the same to be true during the THSC survey.
The final significant type of lithic artifact is the tubular pipe; Anderson collected one stone pipe and numerous pumice pipes. The bowls
of these pipes are blackened from use.
Ceramics occur, but either the vessels were seldom broken or there
were few vessels to break. Anderson collected only about a hundred
sherds (in addition to the Huastecan pots found with burials), and I
found only a handful during the THSC survey. Some of the sherds are
tentatively identified as belonging to the Rockport series (Suhm and
Jelks 1962:131). Fragments of 2 ceramic pipes were found. These are
apparently tubular and similar to the stone pipes.
Shell artifacts and debris d.ominate the materials recovered from
Rio Grande Delta sites. Clam shell scrapers comprise the largest single
artifact class; other shell tools include: conch columella adzes and
gouges, conch hammers, conch whorl scrapers, possible conch cups,
columella awls and coiumella projectile points. Ornamental shell
artifacts include perforated and unperforated shell discs (in all stages
of manufacture), beads of Oliva and MargineJJa shells, gorgets, pendants and bracelets of conch shells, tubular beads, cylinders, and
pendants of conch columella, and a variety of engraved shells.
Species identification of the various shell sources has not been made
at the present time, but will be included in the final report prepared

60

I,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

when the entire county has been surveyed.
Predictably, the miscellaneous shell fragments scattered over most
sites appear to be from the same types of shells from which the tools
and ornaments were made. Oyster shells are conspicuous by their
absence; only one site (41 CF 8) exhibits an appreciable occurrence of
these shells. It seems significant that the only presently existing local
oyster beds are nearby at Brazos Santiago Pass. Rangia shell middens,
commonly found along the central and upper portions of the Texas
Gulf Coast, are absent in the Rio Grande Delta. The general absence of
both these types of shell may be attributed to environmental conditions rather than intentional cultural selection.
Drumfish otoliths occur on nearly all sites; rectangular otoliths are
from freshwater drum, and long narrow otoliths are from saltwater
drum. The saltwater type is predominant in the clay dune - laguna
sites, while the freshwater type is predominant inland. However,
there is much mixture of the two. In addition to otoliths, many spines
and vertebrae of drumfish are found in the sites. The cultural remains
observed at site 41 CF 29 appeared to be composed mainly of drum
spines and vertebrae. Other bone fragments are fairly common, but
most are too fractured for identification. A few of the bones found in
the clay dune - lake and resaca sites appear to be from deer-size
animals.
Early historic European artifacts are found on a few of the Indian
sites. Site 41 CF 12 has yielded wheel made pottery with lead glaze
and fragments of wine bottles. Local legends tell of an old Spanish
ranch being located on this site; it may very well be that this is indeed
one of the outlying ranches established when Escandon settled the
Matamoros area about 1750. Several glass arrow points have been
found, particularly at site 41 CF 8.

DISCUSSION
The most outstanding feature of the archeological sites recorded
thus far is the shell ornament industry. Most often, the ornaments are
generally single finds within a site; they occur in large groups only
when associated with burials. One site, 41 CF 8, may have a
specialized shell disc manufacturing area represented, but such distinct distributions have not been noted in other sites. It may also be
speculated that, based on the amount of manufacturing debris represented, finished shell artifacts may have been a major export item
used in exchange for as yet unidentified materials. The Gulf side of
the barrier islands (Padre and Boca Chica) is the apparent source for
the raw materials used in the manufacture of shell ornaments.

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

RIO GRANDE DELTA

veyed.
ll fragments scattered over most
es of shells from which the tools
shells are conspicuous by their
its an appreciable occurrence of
the only presently existing local
iago Pass. Rangia shell middens,
and upper portions of the Texas
de Delta. The general absence of
ributed to environmental condial selection.
r all sites; rectangular otoliths are
rrow otoli ths are from saltwater
ninant in the clay dune - laguna
predominant inland. However,
addition to otoliths, many spines
in the sites. The cultural remains
to be composed mainly of drum
ragments are fairly common, but
lion. A few of the bones found in
ites appear to be from deer-size

Specialized stone tools (particularly the tiny flint drills) appear to
have been developed to aid in the manufacture of some of the ornaments (specifically disc beads).
Food resources appear to have been diverse; certainly the Gulf, the
laguna, the river, the resacas, and the lakes were heavily exploited for
both fish and shell fish. Deer and other small game were apparently
hunted when possible. Undoubtedly various plant foods were
utilized even though such evidence is not preserved in the archeological record.
Mortuary practices in the Rio Grande Delta area have been variously
documented, particularly by Campbell and Frizzell, and later by
Hester. Basically, cemetery areas appear to be discrete and not associated with habitation areas; the interments often contain large
amounts of grave goods; skeletons are generally flexed, bundled, or
occasionally cremated; and the bones are sometimes covered with red
ochre (Campbell and Frizzell 1949; Hester 1969a). Hester and Rodgers
(1971:370) point out that reported cemetery sites are clustered on or
near the north bank of the Arroyo Colorado and suggest that this
stream may have had some significance in the local mortuary customs. I suspect (as do Hester and Rodgers) that this may simply be a
product of sampling error. At site 41 CF 74 on Rincon de Guajardo, I
observed burials eroding from the bank; at least one skeleton was
covered with red ochre. Anderson's notes indicate the Huastecan-like
pottery associated with burials came from his site 16.6 which is on
Cayo Atascosa. Jim Walker (personal communication) reports flexed
burials with grave goods from 4 sites: 41 CF 8 near Port Isabel, 41 CF
13 on Cross Lake, 41 CF 14 on Sweeny Lake, and 41 CF 17 just
northeast of Rio Hondo. All of these sites are south of the Arroyo
Colorado.
Based on Anderson's extensive collections from the Mexican as
well as the Texas side of the delta, there seems to be little difference in
the archeological picture on both sides of the Rio Grande. The major
discrepancy is the distribution of conical conch columella projectile
points; most of them are found on the. south side of the river, This
appears to be the basis for MacNeish's separation of the delta into two
archeological units, the Barri! and Brownsville complexes
(1958:186-192). In his discussion of these two complexes, MacNeish
compares some of the material with periods V and VI of the Panuco
sequence reported by Ekholm (1944).
It is not surprising that much of the Rio Grande Delta material
compares favorably with that reported from the area around Baffin
Bay to the north (Hester 1969b). A number ofartifacts such as triangular stone projectile points, small circular scrapers, Rockport series

are found on a few of the Indian
.eel made pottery with lead glaze
:al legends tell of an old Spanish
iay very well be that this is indeed
ished when Escandon settled the
:al glass arrow points have been

SION
the archeological sites recorded
ry. Most often, the ornaments are
they occur in large groups only
ne site, 41 CF 8, may have a
g area represented, but such dis1ted in other sites. It may also be
mt of manufacturing debris rep'Y have been a major export item
tified materials. The Gulf side of
Chica) is the apparent source for
anufacture of shell ornaments.

61

,,
!,

\I'

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

pottery, and various shell ornaments and tools are common to both
areas. Toward the Central Texas coast, the similarities decline rapidly
[Campbell 1947, 1952, 1956, 1958, 1960; Corbin 1963; Martin 1930;
Sayles 1935; and Story 1968).

CONCLUSIONS
The most salient archeological characteristic of the Rio Grande
Delta region is the prehistoric shell industry. The array of shell ornaments ranges from tiny circular shell beads to large engraved conch
whorl pendants or gorgets. All stages of manufacture of these ornaments are present, from roughed-out blanks to the finished products.
The same is true for many of the shell tools. It is evident the aboriginal
population depended heavily on the marine resources for both the
shell for ornaments, and shell fish and fish for food. This is probably
the base of the economy, with hunting and gathering rating as sup-

II

plements.
MacN eish believes the cultural remains in the area to be late in time,
and I tend to agree with him, although there are no radiometric dates
to use for specific references. Probably the Brownsville complex is
contemporaneous with late Huastecan (Panuco V and VI) assemblages, and with the Rockport Focus; at least artifacts comparable to
ones found in those two areas would seem to indicate this.
Campbell (1960:155-156) has listed four generalized basic ques"
tions to be answered in the Rio Grande Delta area. Briefly, they are: 1)
involvement in movement of Mesoamerican traits; 2) materials attributable to historic Indian groups; 3) cultural units and their
chronological positions; 4) relationships with adjacent areas. In addition to these general questions, there are several specific features
which merit special attention. They are: 1) relationships of the different kinds of sites; 2) relationships of sites to the environment; 3)
geological changes in the delta area and their effects on the archeological record.
This would entail the completion of the survey of at least Cameron
County, and would require extensive testing of several sites. Were
these sites indeed occupied by the same group of peoples over a given
period of time, or were they occupied by different groups exploiting
different resources at the same time? Are the inferences regarding
different types of sites made in this paper true; i.e.: are the associations of the fauna! remains with specific topographical features valid?
What is the geological relationship of sites with the formation of clay
dunes, evolution of Padre Island, and the meanders of the Rio Grande?

; ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nts and tools are common to both
ast the similarities decline rapidly
:, l~60; Corbin 1963; Martin 1930;

USIONS

1 characteristic of the Rio Grande
11 industry. The array of shell ornahell beads to large engraved conch
ages of manufacture of these ornaJut blanks to the finished products.
tell tools. It is evident the aboriginal
the marine resources for both the
1 and fish for food. This is probably
mting and gathering rating as sup-

remains in the area to be late in time,
ough there are no radiometric dates
obably the Brownsville complex is
tstecan (Panuco V and VI] assem,cus; at least artifacts comparable to
ould seem to indicate this.
listed four generalized basic ques"
·ande Delta area. Briefly, they are: 1)
esoamerican traits; 2) materials at·oups; 3) cultural units and their
mships with adjacent areas. In add1there are several specific features
tey are: 1) relationships of the differips of sites to the environment; 3)
ea and their effects on the archeolog-

ion of the survey of at least Cameron
~nsive testing of several sites. Were
e same group of peoples over a given
ipied by different groups exploiting
time? Are the inferences regardmg
this paper true; i.e.: are the asso~ia;
pecific topographical features valid·
tip of sites with the format10n of clay
and the meanders of the Rio Grande?

RIO GRANDE DELTA

63

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Mr. Curtis Tunnell, Texas State Archeologist, for initiating this
project and securing funds for it through the Texas State Historical Survey Committee.
Thanks are due Mr. A. A. Champion, Dr. T. N. Campbell, Mr. David S. Dibble, Mr. Jim
Walker, and Mr. Jack Bartholomew for their assistance in the completion of this project.
Finally, I would like to thank my wife, Kerza, for her patience and encouragement
during the course of the survey.

REFERENCES CITED

Anderson, A. E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
Anonymous
1969 Birds of the Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge. Refuge Leaflet
125-R4, U.S. Dept. of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of
Sport Fisheries and Wildlife.
1970 Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge. Refuge Leaflet 28-R3, U.S.
Dept of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Sport Fisheries
aod Wildlife.
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces ofTE)xas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2,No.1,
pp. 93-117.
Campbell, T. N.
1947 The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 18,
pp. 40-75.
1952 The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden of the Texas Coast. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 39-77.
1956 Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 7-46.
1958 Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 423-442.
1960 Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin, TexasArcheological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958), pp. 145-175.
1964 Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Padre Island, Texas.
Mimeographed report submitted to the National Park Service by the
University of Texas, Austin.
Campbell, T. N., and jack Q. Frizzell
1949 Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 20, pp. 63-72.
Collins, Michael B., Thomas Roy Hester, and F;rank A. Weir
1969 The Floyd Morris Site (41 CF 2): A Prehistoric Cemetery Site in
Cameron County, Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
40, pp. 119-146.
Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeological Materials from the Northern Shores of Corpus Christi
Bay, Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, pp. 5-30.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

64

Ekholm, Gordon
1944 Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico.
Anthropological Papers of the Museum of Natural History, Vol. 38,
No. 1.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938 Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.,

New York.

11

I

Hester, Thomas Roy
1969a The Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites: A Discussion of Burial Practices in
the Rio Grande Valley and the Lower Texas Coast. Bulletin, Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 157-166.
1969b Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy Counties, Texas,
in August, 1967. State Building Commission Archeological Program,
Report No. 15.
Hester, Thomas Roy and R. W. Rodgers
1971 Additional Data on the Burial Practices of the Brownsville Complex.
Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp. 367-372.
Hester, Thomas Roy and Frederick Ruecking, Jr.
1969 Additional Materials from the Ayala Site, A Prehistoric Cemetery Site
in Hidalgo County, Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
40, pp. 147-157.
Hughes, jack T.
1947 An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Tamaulipas, Mexico.
American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 33-39.
Inglis, jack M.
1964 A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin, No. 45,
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1947 A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. American
Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 1-15.
1958 Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de
Tamaulipas, Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical
Society, n.s., Vol. 48, Pt. 6.
Martin, George C.
1930 Two Sites on the Callo Del Oso, Nueces County, Texas.Bulletin, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 7-17.
Mason, j. Alden
193 5 The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbian Relationships Between the United States and Mexico.Bulletin, TexasArcheological andPaleontological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 29-46.
Price, W. Armstrong, and Gordon Gunter
1942 Certain Recent Geological and Biological Changes in South Texas,
with Consideration of Probable Causes.Proceedings and Transactions
of the Texas Academy of Science for 1942, pp. 2-21.
Price, W. Armstrong, and Louis S. Kornicker
1961 Marine and Lagoonal Deposits in Clay Dunes, Gulf Coast, Texas.
Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 245-255.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Gila Pueblo, Medallion Papers,
No. 17.

S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

l Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico.
Museum of Natural History, Vol. 38,

,d States. McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.,

ltes: A Discussion of Burial Practices in
.e Lower Texas Coast. Bulletin, Texas
), pp. 157-166.
n Kleberg and Kenedy Counties, Texas,
g Commission Archeological Program,

ers
Practices of the Brownsville Complex .
. 22, No. 4, pp. 367-372.
_uecking, Jr.
.
Ayala Site, A Prehistoric Cemetery Site
[etin, TexasArcheologica1 Society, Vol.

iaissance in Tamaulipas, Mexico.
No. 1, pp. 33-39.

Je Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin, No. 45,
Jartment.

Jastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. American

. 1-15.

d

al Investigations in the Sierra e
ctions of the American Philosophical

J, Nueces County, Texas.Bulletin, Texas
Jgical Society, Vol. 2, pp. 7-17.

imbian Relationships Between the UnitTexas Archeologicaland Paleontolog6.
unter
id Biological Changes in South Te.xas,
le Causes.Proceedings and Transactions
ence for 1942, pp. 2-21.
(ornicker
~its in Clay Dunes, Gulf Coast, Texas.
J]ogy, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 245-255.

1,

f Texas. Gila Pueblo, Medallion Papers,

RIO GRANDE DELTA

65

Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites.
State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 13.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. )elks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology; Type Descriptions. Special Publication No. 1, Texas Archeological Society, and Bulletin No. 4, Texas
Memorial Museum.
The University of Texas at Austin

