Bulletin of the

E AS

RCH OLOGICAL
QCIETY Volume 68/1997

Timothy K. Perttula, Editor
Linda W. Ellis, Assistant Editor

Published by the Society at Austin

1997

CONTENTS

1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas
Dee Ann Story .............................................................. 1
Appendix 1: Preliminary Report on the Plant Remains from the George C. Davis Site,
Cherokee County, Texas, 1968-1970 Excavations
Richard I. Ford ........................................................... 104
Appendix 2: Preliminary Study of the Fauna! Remains from the George C. Davis Site,
1968-1970 Excavations
Billy Davidson ............................................................ 108
Observations on Caddoan Burial Practices at the Sanders Site (41LR2)
Donny L. Hamilton ........................................................ 115

CADDOAN BIOARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Foreword for Special Papers on "Caddoan Bioarcheological Research"
Mary Powell ............................................................. 135
Cranial Modeling as an Ethnic Marker among the Prehistoric Caddo
Sharon McCormick Derrick and Diane Wilson .................................. 139
Dental Paleopathology in the Sanders (41LR2) and Mitchell (41BW4) Populations
from the Red River Valley, Northeast Texas
Diane Wilson ............................................................. 147
Paleopathology of the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores Sites
Christine Lee ............................................................. 161
Analysis of Dental Abscess Formation in a Texas Hunter-Gatherer
and a Texas Agricultural Population
Gail R. Colby ............................................................ 179

Sacred Guardians, Profane Practitioners, and Texans without History
Alston V. Thoms .......................................................... 191
The Asa Warner Site (41ML46), McLennan County, Texas
Jodi F. Wright, with contributions by Barbara H. Butler, C.K. Chandler,
Billy Davidson, W.L. McClure, and Robert L. Turner, Jr. .......................... 215

Another Look at the Distribution, Age, and Function of "Waco Sinkers"
Charles L. Boyd and Harry J. Shafer .......................................... 263
Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics: Petrographic Study
of Collared Rirn Sherds from the Texas Panhandle
Christopher Lintz and Kathryn Reese-Taylor .................................... 273
Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado
Luc Litwinionek, Eileen Johnson, and Michael Davis ............................. 301
Test Excavations within the Plow Zone at the Hogue Site (41 TY2), a Playa Site
on the Southern High Plains of Texas
Susan E. Baxevanis, Eileen Johnson, Briggs Buchanan,
and William T. Shannon .................................................... 337
Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site in the Falcon Reservoir, Tamaulipas, Mexico
James Bryan Boyd, Diane E. Wilson, and Thomas R. Hester,
with a contribution by Timothy K. Perttula ..................................... 387

BOOK REVIEWS
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Volume XL/or 1991, edited by Don G. Wyckoff
and Don Shockey, and Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Volume XLll for 1993,
edited by Don G. Wyckoff and Don Shockey
Michael B. Collins ........................................................ 427
Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric Cemetery
and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas, by A. J. Taylor and C. L. Highley
Joan E. Baker ............................................................ 431
Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County,
Texas, by Robert A. Ricklis and Michael B. Collins
Steven W. Ahr ............................................................ 434
Caddo Indians: Where We Come From, by Cecile Elkins Carter
James E. Bruseth .......................................................... 437
Astronomy and Empire in the Ancient Andes, by Brian S. Bauer and David S. P. Dearborn
Carol Hayman ............................................................ 439
Flintknapping: Making and Understanding Stone Tools, by John C. Whittaker
Glenn T. Goode ........................................................... 441

1968-1970 Archeological Investigations
at the George C .. Davis Site,
Cherokee County, Texas
Dee Ann Story

ABSTRACT
The George C. Davis site (41CE19) on the middle Neches River in East Texas is one of the more
intensively investigated sites in the state. Exceptionally competent excavations in 1939-1941 concentrated
in one of the three earthen mounds (Mound A) and adjacent village, and established that the site was once
a major prehistoric Caddoan village and ceremonial center. The other two mounds (B and C) and much of
the village area, however, remained unexplored until 1968-1970 when the excavations described herein
were undertaken. Shortly after those investigations were completed and before all analyses were
underway, a preliminary report was prepared and submitted to the various funding agencies. That report
is published here with only minor changes because it contains information still not available elsewhere and
because this information clarifies the age and culture history of the site, the extent and nature of the Caddoan
village, and the special character of the associated mounds.
INTRODUCTION
Of the many thousands of known prehistoric
sites in Texas few have attracted as much attention
as the George C. Davis site in the central part of
East Texas--one of the largest, continuously occupied (from the late ninth century AD. to the early
fourteenth century) aboriginal settlements in the
state. The site primarily consists of an extensive
village and three obvious man-made earthen
mounds, remains which archeologists have identified as belonging to a distinctive and widespread
cultural pattern known as Caddoan.
Although the size and potential importance of
the site has been recognized by local inhabitants for
over a century and by Texas archeologists since
1919, the first controlled excavations were not
made until 1939-1941 when The University of
Texas-Works Progress Administration (WPA) dug
portions of one mound and adjacent areas of the
village. An outstanding report of this work was prepared by Alex D. Krieger (Newell and Krieger
1949) and is largely responsible for the present
fame of the site. However, the 1939-1941 work left
the bulk of the site unexplored and unexplained.
Because of difficulty in obtaining permission for

further excavations, it was not until the summer of
1968 that archeologists were able to renew their
study of the site.
Funded by the Texas Building Commission
through the Office of the State Archeologist
(Interagency Contract dated July 31, 1968), the 1968
investigations were limited to testing of the
previously unsampled western sector of the site.
They showed this area to be rich in archeological
data and provided the basis for securing additional
funds in the summer of 1969 from the National
Science Foundation (Grant GS-2573) and from the
Texas Building Commission (Interagency Contract
dated June 4, 1969). The NSF funds supported more
extensive excavations in the western part of the site
and the Building Commission funds sustained a
survey of the middle Neches drainage. At the end of
the 1969 season (September 5, 1969) many major
site features were still inadequately investigated and
excavations were again resumed in the summer of
1970, continuing into December of that year. This
third and final season of the current project was
funded by a second grant from the National Science
Foundation (GS-3200) and by two additional
contracts from the Texas Historical Survey
Committee (IAC [70-71]-258 and IAC [70-71]-485).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

2

Texas Archeological Society

Davis
Site

.&.

TEXASA&M
TREE FARM

GEORGE Cs DAVIS SITE .. 41CE19

Magnetic North

Figure 1. Site Location and General Map showing Major Features at the George C. Davis site.

Story -

1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis site

As a part of the 1970 season, a University of Texas
at Austin archeological field course was held at the
site, from June 7 to July 9.

3

The George C. Davis site (41CE19) in central
East Texas lies in the extreme southwestern corner
of Cherokee County, at latitude 31° 35' north and
longitude 95° 10' west (Figure 1). It is on a high
alluvial terrace along the middle reaches of the
Neches River and near the western edge of the
southern pine/hardwood forests. The terrace has long
been in cultivation, and the evidences of aboriginal
occupation are extensive and easily recognized. Indeed, the Davis site stands out as an unusually large,
long-occupied prehistoric settlement.

Village debris, marked by pottery sherds, lithic
tools, and flakes, extends across the central, eastern, and western portions of the terrace, over an
oval-shaped area of about 60 acres. Associated
with the village and looming prominently above
the flat terrace surface are three earthen mounds
(Figures 1 and 2). Mound A is the largest and
southeasternmost of the group. 1 It is on a Stateowned tree farm and was intensively, though not
completely, excavated in 1939-1941 by The University of Texas-WPA (Newell and Krieger
1949:51-121). Prior to these investigations, Mound
A appeared as a high (ca. 5 m), L-shaped, flattopped structure measuring approximately 82 m in
length, and 50 m in width. The remaining undisturbed portion of Mound A, roughly one-third of
the original mound, is now grass-covered and protected by the Antiquities Code of Texas.

a

b

c

d

SITE DESCRIPTION

Figure 2. General Site Photographs: a, 1939, looking northwest from Mound A to Mounds B (on left) and C (on right);
b, 1968, looking northwest from Mound A to Mounds B (on left) and C (on right); c, looking southwest from Mound A
across portion of village to Mounds B (on right) and C (on left); d, looking east from Bowles Creek bottoms to terrace
on which site is located. Arrows point to borrow pit in terrace slope and the mounds.

4

Texas Archeological Society

Approximately 260 m to the northwest of
Mound A and across State Highway 21 is Mound
B. 2 This feature has been much altered by many
decades of cultivation and erosion. It presently
stands about 2 m high and is approximately 50 m
long and 35 m wide. On the same side of the highway and 175 m to the north-northeast of Mound B
is Mound C. Superficially, Mound C appears as a
high, steep-sided conical eminence, roughly 42 m
in diameter.
The only other visible site feature is a depression (see Figure 2d) in the terrace slope just west of
Mound B. Tests have shown this to be a trash-filled
borrow pit. Before excavation it appeared as a rather
deep, oval-shaped pit, 28 m long and 18 m wide.
Despite the obviousness of the archeological
remains, most of the Davis site had been little disturbed by excavations, at least until the 1968-1970
investigations. The only known uncontrolled digging occurred about 1900 when, in hopes of finding
treasure, the landowner, then Col. Fairris, had local
prison farm laborers cut a wide trench well into
Mound C. This trench generally extended to 1 m
above the base of the mound although in two places
it reached about 30 cm below the mound. While
massive, it did surprisingly little damage. The little
information on what might have been uncovered
from the trench is contained in a brief note written
in 1920 by J.E. Pearce of the Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas. Pearce mentions that bones and pottery were found and
discarded. This flimsy statement suggests that
Fairris and his crew may have destroyed a burial. If
correct, it would have to have· been one of the
relatively late, rather small, pits contained in the
margin of the mound.

SITE INVESTIGATIONS
The 1939-1941 Excavations
and Interpretations
The first controlled excavations at the Davis
site were undertaken in 1939-941, when The
University of Texas-WPA, under the supervision
of H. Perry Newell, excavated about 60 percent of
Mound A and a portion of the adjacent village
(Figure 3). The principal area dug was approximately 100 m x 100 m, a very small and confined
sample of the total site. In spite of their limited

extent, these excavations yielded a wealth of data:
34 structures-both domiciles and communal (or
ceremonial) buildings-and 97,845 artifacts. A
justifiably acclaimed report of this work was
prepared by Alex D. Krieger after the untimely
death of Newell (Newell and Krieger 1949).
It is through Krieger's report that the Davis
site has become well known to archeologists.
Krieger believed that the occupation of the site
could be divided into three sequential phases which
represented a continuous development of the same
culture. This culture he termed the Alto focus and
the three phases were designated, from early to
late, 1, 2, and 3. Traces of a later occupation were
recognized and identified with a protohistoric
complex, the Frankston focus. Both foci were
identified as Caddoan; the Alto focus as representative of the Gibson Aspect (Early Caddoan)
and the Frankston focus as representative of the
Fulton Aspect (Late Caddoan).
The occurrence at the Davis site of certain
traits which appear in Formative (or Preclassic)
context in Mesoamerica and in pre-Mississippian
context in the Eastern United States, led Krieger to
believe that the Alto focus (especially his Phase 1)
and another closely related Gibson Aspect complex, the Gahagan focus (Webb and Dodd 1939),
were the earliest known Caddoan sites. Since no
local antecedents could be recognized for these early
Caddoan remains, Krieger suggested several possible hypotheses, the most stimulating being that
they were manifestations of a small, by then acculturated group from Mesoamerica. If this were the
case, he further argued that Davis was possibly one
of the earliest (ca. A.D. 500) known Mississippian
sites and a kind of missing cultural link between
the high cultures of Mexico and the temple mound
builders of North America.
A number of archeologists (for example, Ford
1951:125-129; Griffin 1950:413-415, 1952:104)
rejected Krieger's more bold interpretations. They
believed the site (and all of Caddoan archeology)
to be a fairly late (ca. A.D. 900 or later), marginal
Mississippian development perhaps stemming from
the Coles Creek horizon in the Lower Mississippi
Valley. When this report was originally written in
1972 (Story 1972), 23 years after the publication
of Krieger's report, the cultural position and historical placement of the Davis site was still in dispute (Sears 1964; Griffin 1966; Willey 1966).

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis site 5

I
MmmdC

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE
41CE19
1939-41and1968-70 Excavations

EXCAVATION

0

BUILDING

li!!lllllll

BACKHOETRENCH

FENCE

~nit 11

~

">::::::::::::::::;-·

. . >,, /'

UmtU / '
'

.

/'

../·

'

TEXAS A&M TREE FARM

/

Meiers

WPA EXCAVATIONS

Figure 3. Plan Map showing 1939-1941and1968-1970 Excavations.

6

Texas Archeological Society

The 1968-1970 Excavations
The need for additional work at the Davis site
has long been obvious but the most desirable area
for investigation (i.e., the least disturbed and poorest known) was west of Highway 21 and in the
hands of a landowner adamantly opposed to excavation. The purchase of this property by Walter E.
Gunderman, Jr. in 1964 at long last made this portion of the site available for study.
The 1968-1970 excavations represent a combined total of 11 months in the field. They include
work in Mounds B and C, the borrow pit, and
various, widely separated sections of the village
(see Figure 3). Throughout the period of excavation, surface collections were intermittently made
over the site, and during the 1969 season a three
month reconnaissance was carried out in the middle
Neches drainage, in an area generally within a radius of 40 km of the Davis site (Kegley n.d.). Support for these projects were obtained from the
National Science Foundation (Grants GS-2573 and
GS-3200), the Texas Building Commission, the
Texas Historical Survey Committee, and The University of Texas at Austin.
The major research objectives have been: (1)
an accurate and more complete definition of the
Davis site, its cultural features and interrelationships between these features; (2) interpretation of
the community structure and artifact distributions
in terms of behavioral patterns and a cultural system; (3) search for possible evidence-and, if
present, explanation of--changes within the cultural system represented; (4) the nature and kind
of interaction with contemporary settlements; (5)
definition of the pattern of exploitation and the
effects it and the local environment may have had
on the Davis site settlement, particularly the population density and abandonment of the site; and (6)
a re-evaluation of the historical significance of the
site and the role it may have played in the development of the Caddoan culture and its possible relationships to cultures of Mesoamerica and the
Eastern U.S.
The pages which follow concentrate on a description of the excavations rather than analysis of
the artifacts. They were originally presented as a
technical report to the National Science Foundation
and the Texas Historical Survey Committee (Story
1972), but hopefully with their publication may
now also serve as a useful body of archeological

3
data to those interested in Caddoan
Before turning to the 1968-1970 findings, certain
physical aspects of the site need to be made known
because they temper our interpretations.
One of the most important of these physical
conditions is the height of the terrace above the
Neches River and Bowles Creek. It has long been
above any stream overflow and consequently archeological remains are shallowly buried, usually
less than 30 cm below the modem terrace surface.
Except for certain mound contexts the opportunities for reliable cultural stratigraphy are quite limited-a circumstance particularly unfortunate
because of the long occupation of the site. Additionally, the shallowness of the cultural materials
has exposed them to damage by modem farming.
The soil that has formed on the terrace (Amite fine
sandy loam) is known as one of the best agricultural lands in the middle Neches River region
(Mowery and Oakes 1959: 12). Not surprisingly,
Anglo-American farmers have extensively utilized
all but Mound C since the 1820s, and the tree farm
has been in existence since 1940. No aboriginal
cultural features such as pits or houses can be recognized in the plow zone and the artifacts from this
context, especially the potsherds, have suffered mechanical damage.
In the active soil zone the dirt is
reddish-brown, very gradually becoming more red
in color, blocky in structure, and clayey in texture.
Not until about 4 m beneath the surface are there
varied colored and textured alluvial sediments. The
relative homogeneity of the upper part of the terrace, and the relatively rapid and damaging processes of soil genesis have made the recognition of
aboriginal features often difficult. Thus, despite the
shallowness of the cultural remains, the excavation
of the village proved to be very time consuming.
On the other hand, the diversity of alluvial sediments in the deeper portions of the terrace provided
colorful and contrasting materials for mound construction and facilitated the recognition of stages
of mound building.
Lastly, it should be noted that the soils at the
site are very acid, the pH readings ranging from 4.8
to 7 .1 and most often being about 5.6. The high
acidity appears clearly to have been the significant
factor in the preservation of bone, both the faunal
refuse and human skeletal material. Only in a few
localities, the borrow pit and the deepest Mound C
burial pits, were there bone and shell remains to be

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis site
studied. Since these could well represent biased
samples, any statements on the physical
characteristics of the human population or on the
use of animals must be carefully guarded.
In spite of these problems, much has been recovered from the 1968-1970 excavations. In the
pages which follow the results are summarized,
first, the special burial area, then the platform
mound, the village, and the borrow pit.

MOUND C, THE SPECIAL
CEMETERY AREA
Superficial Appearance and Exploration

When investigation of Mound C was begun in
the late summer of 1968, it was a S.S to 6 m high
earthen rise supporting a healthy growth of grass,
weeds, and, on the summit and western face, small
to medium sized trees. Mapping revealed it to be
slightly oval-shaped at the apparent base, with maximum dimensions of 46 m north-south and 38 m
east-west (Figure 4), and an elevation at the crest of
lOS m. 4 The slopes were moderately steep and probably the reason Mound C, unlike Mounds A and B,
was never plowed. The only visible disturbance
was the ca. 1900 treasure hunter pit, which on the
surface appeared as a 4 m wide depression extending from the western edge to just beyond the center
of the mound (Figure Sa). Backdirt from this excavation flanked the depression and, as our investigations later demonstrated, gave Mound C a fallacious
conical appearance. Probably thinking of an analogy with conical Woodland mounds, Krieger tentatively identified this as a burial mound (Newell and
Krieger 1949:Figure 5 caption).
Clearing the looters' trench to determine the
condition and the possible function of Mound C
were the principal objectives of the 1968 season.
Because of the limited time and personnel available, the disturbed fill was removed with a backhoe
and front-end loader. To minimize loss of information, careful watch was kept of the removal and the
walls were periodically cleaned and studied (see
Figure Sb). Screening of the fill was attempted but
discontinued because it proved to be unproductive.
By the end of the 196.8 season, all but two
deep holes dug by the treasure hunters had been
cleared and the western portion of the excavations
taken down to a maximum of 3S cm below the

7

mound (see Figure Sd). Study ofundisturbed mound
walls revealed seven large pits dug from the surfaces
of superimposed, flat-topped mound additions (see
Figure Sc). The briefness of the season did not
allow exploration of any of the observed cultural
features, but one pit (F106), inadvertently cut into
by the backhoe, did yield a small, engravedpunctated vessel. Clearly much remained of Mound
C; moreover, it seemed to have been used primarily
as Krieger suggested in 1949.
During the three-month 1969 season, the backfilled 1968 excavations were cleared, the stratigraphy of the mound re-examined, and three burial
pits dug. Partial collapse of the south and north
walls slowed clearing of the 1968 excavations but
exposed more easily read walls. The many tree
roots that flourished in the disturbed fill of the
treasure hunters' trench made messy, at time confusing, profiles in 1968. The ca. SO cm slumped
from each of the two walls presented more easily
interpreted profiles.
Two of the pits investigated in 1969 (Fl 07 and
the remaining portion of F106) were completely
excavated; the third (Fll9) was only partially
cleared as it extended beneath sizable mound additions which could not be dug before the end of the
season. Pit fill was removed by hand, shoveling the
fill whenever possible into the backhoe bucket or
front-end loader. Screening was again attempted
but the yield of one or two sherds a day caused it
to be soon abandoned and not resumed the remainder of the Mound C excavations. F106 and Fl07
were rather easily excavated. Fll9 was far more
complex (see feature descriptions below) and, although only partially dug, required six weeks to
expose the skeletal material and offerings. Since
Fl 19 dated early in the mound's history and both
F106 and F107 dated late in its history, it appeared
as if there may have been marked changes in the
burial practices.
Testing this and related hypotheses through
more massive excavations in the center and south
portions of Mound C were major objectives of the
six-month long 1970 season. Two pits (Fll8 and
Fl 61) stratigraphically between Fl 19 and Fl 06/Fl07
were visible in the south wall of the 1968-1969
east-west trench, and it seemed likely that others
would be encountered in this portion of the mound.
To obtain the necessary stratigraphic data as well as
information on pit outlines, it was decided to begin
excavation by removal of a series of ca. 2 m wide

8

Texas Archeological Society

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE~ 41 CE 19
MOUND C EXCAVATIONS AND BURIAL PI S
(Pits Shown as They Appeared at Floor Level)

Approximate I\:1aximum

Extent of Mound C

F152t

~

0

Q
Fl56

4
POSTHOLE
METERS
STAINS FROM
LOGS

Magnetic North
UNEXCAVATED

1

CELT IN SMALL PIT

STAINS FROM
SYMBOLIC
ROOFING
MATERIAL

Figure 4. Plan and Cross-Section of Mound C showing Contours, Excavations, and Burial Pits.

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis site 9

a

b

d
Figure 5. Mound C Excavations: a, looking east-southeast at Mound C before excavation. Depression marks treasure
hunter pit dug about 1900; b, looking east at early stage of work in Mound C. Dark soil visible in east wall is fill in old
pit. Undisturbed mound is light-colored soil on left; c, looking west down portion of south wall of 1968 east-west cut
into Mound C. Note flat-topped mound addition (F144) and three burial pits (Fl 18, F161, and Fl 19); d, profiling south
wall of east-west cut, 1968 season. Arrow indicates humus-stained terrace surface (Zone 1) underlying Mound C.

trenches perpendicular (e.g., N-S oriented) to mound
additions, and moving trench by trench from west to
east. A backhoe was used to clear the fill in the bulk
of the trenches. Profiles were made of each wall
before they were removed in excavation of the next
trench. The first set of trenches (Figure 6b-d) were
taken down to an arbitrary level of approximately
101.90 m. The excavation floor was cleared at this
level and the outlines of two pits (F118 and Fl61)
were exposed (see Figure 6d). Another set of trenches
were then similarly taken down to 100.00 m elevation and the floor again recorded (Figure 7). Six pit
outlines, not apparent in the 101.90 m floor (F152,
F154, F155, Fl56, and portions of Fl60 and Fl58)
were visible at the 100 m floor level (see Figure 7c).
As anticipated, none of the pit floors had been encountered but both stratigraphic information and

much on pit outlines had been recovered at the
fastest rate deemed practical.
The next phase of the 1970 excavations consisted of excavating seven of the pits (Fl 18, F152,
F154, F155, Fl56, F161, and F157) exposed in the
southern portion of the mound. After careful examination revealed no additional burials or unexpected mound additions, attention was finally
directed to exploration of a pre-mound pit (F134)
found in the central portion of the mound by a
trench dug early in the 1970 season. Because of
logistical problems in getting to F134 and removing the fill, power machinery was used to carry
down all of the south side of the mound to at least
the pre-mound surface (Figure 8). Exploration of
F134 was completed about mid-December and the
Mound C excavations backfilled.

10

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

c

d

Figure 6. Mound C Excavations: a, excavations at the end of the 1969 season, looking east. Arrows point to excavated
burial pits: Fl 06 on left, Fl 19 in middle, and Fl 07 on the right; b, looking northwest at south side of Mound C before
1970 excavations. Row of stakes on mound mark the W1019 line; c, looking northeast at first cut into south side of
Mound C; d, south side of mound, looking southwest at excavations to about 101.90 elevation. Burial pits Fl 18 and
Fl 61 show in floor.

Approximately one-third of Mound Chas now
been excavated (see Figure 4) and it can confidently be identified as a very special cemetery area
within the site. It apparently was so delineated early
in the history of the Caddoan occupation, as virtually no refuse was found under or about the mound.
There was, however, a light smattering of possible
Archaic material (three dart points), the large premound burial pit, F134, and one small charcoalfilled pit (F166). It was F134 that christened the
Caddoan use of this portion of the site and set into
motion the alternating periods of mound additions
and burials outlined below.
Sequence of Events
The chronological arrangement of the Mound
C activities is based on the generally good strati-

graphic evidence obtained from study of the mound
walls at all steps of the excavation. Radiocarbon
dating is limited but basically is compatible with
the field evidence. Indeed, Mound C contains some
of the best sequential burial data presently available for the Caddoan area and is probably matched
only by the Belcher site (Webb 1959) in Louisiana
and the Harlan site in Oklahoma (Bell 1966, 1972).
There, nonetheless, are some problems which stem
mainly from disturbances. First, and most disruptive, are the numerous, often massive burial pits
(probably at least 25 to 30 are in the mound; 11
have been dug) that have drastically interrupted the
mound additions and made relationships discontinuous. Figure 9 shows a reconstructed, uninterrupted sequence of mound additions, while Table
1 summarizes both mound additions and burials.
Secondly, burial pits dug from one mound surface

C. Davis site

-1968-1970

a

b

c

d

11

Figure 7. Mound C Excavations: a, extending Mound C excavations to 100 ill elevation, view looking south; b, south
side of Mound C, excavations down to 100 ill elevation, looking north from orchard; c, looking south at floor, JOO m
elevation. Note burial pits (one excavated) and mound additions (underlined). The latter are clearly arched and indicate
former circular shape of mound; d, looking northeast at east wall of south side excavations, floor at 100 m; for details
see cross-section in Figure 4.

are, with few exceptions, so spatially separated that
they cannot be temporally compared. Thirdly, animal and natural disturbances have blurred some
distinctions especially on the mound flanks and uppermost deposits. Erosion and ants have been the
most damaging of these. The latter were unbelievably common (virtually all the holes seen in the
walls in the photographs are either active or old ant
chambers), and seemed to have a special liking for
the areas of crucial stratigraphic contacts.
While the uncertainties which have risen from
these difficulties are important, they do not
significantly detract from the basically good
sequence. In organizing the chronological data an
emphasis is placed on the evidence of discontinuity-a gap in events-to delineate stages, or
perhaps even cultural epochs, in the special burial
area. The earliest event is the pre-mound burial pit,

Fl34, which after several centuries of use lay at the
approximate center of Mound C, beneath a
maximum of 6 m of man-deposited fill. It originated
from the undisturbed terrace surface (Zone 1 in
Figure 9) and was directly overlain by mound fill.
No evidence was found to indicate that the terrace
surface had been specially prepared, although it is
possible that it was cleaned of debris. When
excavated in 1970, Fl34 was found to contain eight
individuals, a number of offerings, and traces of a
low (ca. 1 m high), apparently log, structure (Figures
10-12). Backdirt from the aboriginal excavations
which could not be returned to the burial pit because
of the presence of the structure, was used to form a
low wall or enclosure (Fl33) around the pit (see
Figure 12). One radiocarbon date of 1010 ± 80 BP
(Tx-1206) 5 has been obtained from an unidentified,
possibly bark or wood, offering in Fl34.

12

Texas Archeological Society

b

c
Figure 8. Mound C Excavations: a, burial pits Fl 18, F152, F154, F155, F156, and F161, looking south; b, extending
excavations to below Mound C in order to expose pre-mound burial pit F134, looking northeast; c, Mound C
excavations as they appeared near the close of the 1970 season, looking northeast.

Some time elapsed before there was subsequent activity in the burial area-enough of a temporal gap for the structure in F134 to collapse and
to create a depression in the center of the enclosed
area (see Figure 12). Eventually this depression
and wall enclosure were capped, and a substantial
flat-topped mound constructed. Three rather markedly distinct fills, F132, F128, and F144 (see Figure 9) comprise this second stage (see discussion
under feature descriptions). There is, however, no
evidence of a time lapse between these three fills
and, significantly, burials were dug from only the
surface of the uppermost one, F144. When completed, this first mound was circular, having a diameter at the base of approximately 19 m and a
maximum height of 3.4 m. At least three (perhaps
four) burial pits originated from the top of F144

and others probably exist in still unexcavated portions of the mound. Only two of these, Fl 19 and
F155, have been investigated. A radiocarbon determination of 1150 ± 80 BP (Tx-913) has been obtained from charcoal in the bottom of Fl19 and
organic material from an F155 offering produced
an age of 1260 ± 70 BP (Tx-1294).
The next discernible event is represented by
F142, a basically yellowish-red, loamy fine sand
separated from the first mound construction by a
layer of laminated wash which had accumulated at
the base of the mound (see Figure 9). For a reason
not well understood, this mantle covered only the
slopes of the mound and no burial pit to date can be
traced to it. It is not considered to represent a major
stage (see Table 1) and appears intended only to
modify the flanks of the mound-possibly to protect

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis site

13

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41CE19
SIMPLIFIED AND RECONSTRUCTED
PROFILE (WITHOUT BURIAL PITS)
OF NORTH WALL OF MOUND C

Magoetk:Wezt

Mete~

• • • • ' • • •" • • • •

0

0

0
•

•

"

•"'

'•

•

>>:•:i
. -=·=·>i

•:.·.·:,·:.·:.·:::.·.·:.·::.',',

:::::::!

:urnm:tm:: ::m ::@r2:i:rnn :.I:

::ItILrn::urumrnmrnmwnrn:1:::~111~

Figure 9. Simplified and Reconstructed Profile (without Burial Pits) of North Wall of Mound C.

the Stage II mound and the pits it contained from
erosion. Occasional patches of dense yellow and
red clay separated Fl44 from Fl42 and may be
earlier attempts to check erosion. As a result of
Fl42, Mound C was enlarged to about 22 m in
diameter but remained about 3.4 min height.
Fl41a and the associated burial pits, rather
then Fl42, constitute what is considered as the third
stage. This and Fl4lb are, unfortunately, the two
mound additions clearly distinguishable on the flat
surface and eastern edge of the mound but not on
the southern and western flanks. Hence, the one
feature designation with subletters (a and b), was
used when possible. Where recognizable, F14la
appeared as a brightly-lensed mantle composed
mainly of red sandy clay and yellow to orange fine
sandy loam. On the flat mound surface, it rested
directly on F144; at the base of the east side of the
mound, it was separated from F142 by a layer of
laminated wash. Two burial pits, Fl 61 and Fll 7,
can be linked to Fl41a with confidence. Fl52 may
also be from Fl41a, but the stratigraphic evidence
is not unequivocal. Fl41a increased Mound C to a
height of almost 4.5 m; the areal increase is unclear.
The next stage or epoch in the burial area is
represented by F14lb and pits Fl 18, F154, and
possibly F152. Addition Fl41b is lensed like Fl41a
but not generally as bright in color. It consisted
predominately of red loam with yellow silty loam
and gray loamy sand loads. On the east side of the
mound Fl41b was separated from F141a by a layer
of wash; on the other exposed flanks it cannot be
identified. I suspect that either Fl41a or Fl41bmost probably the former--did not initially cover
the entire mound. With Fl41b, Mound C stood

about 5.2 m high; the diameter is estimated at about
24 m. A Stage IV radiocarbon determination of770
± 80 BP (Tx-1231) has been obtained from an offering in Fl 18.
The fifth stage includes what in the field was
designated as two incremental features, F158 and
F159, but which were almost certainly deposited at
the same time. They are of identical lithology
(mottled yellow and reddish brown loam) and occupy the same stratigraphic position but were discontinuous. F158 formed a bench midway up the
flanks of the mound, while F159 capped the flat
portion of the mound. There is no evidence that this
discontinuity was the result of erosion. Erosion,
however, did separate F158 from F141. With the
addition ofF158 and F159, Mound C was enlarged
to about 28 mat the base and to 5.4 m at the top.
Burial pits F106, Fl07, and F156 were found in the
bench and could be followed up to the top of F158.
No pit could be traced from the flat surface, the
F159 addition. Indeed, it is very probable that after
Stage IV burials were no longer made into the central portion of Mound C, perhaps because it would
have been impossible to do so without severely
cutting into earlier burial pits.
The final addition to Mound C is Fl49, which
was very much disturbed by erosion and root damage. The primary matrix was a red sandy clay with
secondary lenses of yellow loam. With the adding
of Fl49, Mound C stood approximately 6 m high;
its areal extent cannot be determined accurately,
but was probably about 30-32 m. The 12 m discrepancy between this and the ca. 42 m diameter of
Mound C noted in the superficial description is, of
course, due to washed mound deposit. Because of

14

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Major Mound C Events
Stratigraphic
Unit
Stage VI

Main Events
Addition of Stratum Fl49, a final cap sealing
off the burials; no grave may have been dug from
the surface of Fl 49 (but see below)

Mound Addition Sediments
Mainly a red sandy loam with secondary
lenses of yellow loam much disturbed by
erosion and roots. Final mound ca. 6 m high
and 30-32 min diameter

EROSION TO FI 58 AND 159
Stage V

Addition of Strata Fl58 and 159; Burials
F106, 107, 156, 150*, and possibly 157 (less likely
alternative relates Fl57 to Stratum 159 above)-all
from the surface of Fl58

Mottled yellow and reddish brown loam; F158
formed a bench about midway up the flanks
of the mound, while F159 was a relatively
thin layer placed on the flat surface of the
mound

EROSION TO Fl4lb
Stage IV

Capping (or partial capping?) of mound with
Stratum Fl4lb; Burials F154 and 118, possibly
also Fl52

Mostly red loam with yellow silty loam and
gray loamy sand loads; similar to Stratum
Fl41a but not as brightly colored

EROSION TO Fl4Ia
(evident on east flank only)
Stage III

Capping (or partial capping) of mound with Stratum
F141a; Burials F161, Fl 17*, and possibly Fl52
(assignment of this burial is tentative, could be
Stage III or early Stage IV)

EROSION TO Fl42
ADDITION OF F142
EROSION TO Fl44

Stage II

Construction of initial flat-topped mound (Stratum
F128, 132, and 144); Burials Fl 19, 116, and 155

Stratum Fl 41 a appeared as brightly colored
lenses of red sandy clay and yellow to orange
fine sandy loam on the surface and east flank
of the mound but was difficult to distinguish
from Fl4lb on the the southern and western
mound flanks
Mainly a yellowish red loamy fine sand,
Stratum Fl42 was a lateral addition
only, perhaps to increase the diameter
and/or to protect the Stage II mound
and associated burials from erosion
These 3 strata are physically distinct from one
another but no evidence of any time lapse
between them; this first mound was ca. 19 m in
diameter and 3.4 m high

COLLAPSE OF STRUCTURE IN Fl34
Stage I

Berm (ca. 1 m high), Fl33, enclosing Burial Fl34;
low structure erected over burials, then pit filled

*Pits observed in the walls of the excavations but not dug.

Dirt not returned to pit used to make the berm;
different soil horizon kept separate and the berm
capped with bright yellow sediments

Story -

1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis site

the damage to F149, the tracing of pits to this addition is particularly difficult. Only one, Fl57, can
possibly relate to it (or more probably to earlier
stratum Fl58?).
With the addition of F149 and subsequent
burial(s?), Mound C was abandoned and evidently
not significantly disturbed again by man until ca.
1900 and 1968-1970. If Fl32, F128, and F144 are
correctly interpreted, and the somewhat anomalous
F142 addition can be regarded as a minor event (a
repair?), then six major, evidently discontinuous,
periods of burial and mound addition-burial are
represented in the special cemetery area (see Figure
9 and Table 1).

Description of Features: Non-burials
Included in this category are the mound additions and a small charcoal-filled pit (F166). Since
most of the pertinent information on the additions
has already been presented, only the more complex
ones, F133, F132, F128, and F144, will be considered in further detail.

15

of about 30 m 3 of fill--a figure in close agreement
with the tomb volume.
Another curious aspect of Fl 33 is the arrangement of the fill from which it was constructed. The
bulk of the berm consisted of reddish sandy loam,
followed by a layer of orangeish and more compact
material, and capped with a very friable yellow
band of silt-the reverse stratigraphy of the natural
soil changes in the upper ca. 3.5 to 4 m of the
terrace. Since all of the wall could have been built
from the red sandy loam removed from the pit
excavations (at least 37 cubic feet were taken out),
this sequence is significant and even suggests prior
knowledge of the terrace's composition. It must
also represent deliberate, careful handling of the
backdirt. Perhaps the principal effort desired was
the bright color of the yellow capping the berm.
This color would dramatically contrast with the
natural red of the terrace surface and make the
location of the cemetery area-surely a sacrosanct
part of the site-immediately apparent despite the
low height of the enclosure.

F132, F128, and F144
F133
Fl33 is the low wall or berm which surrounded
the pre-mound burial pit, F134, and which was
derived from fill removed by the aboriginal excavation of Fl34 (see Figures 9 and 12). Burial pits
subsequently dug into the central portion of the
mound (Fl 16, Fl 17, Fl 18, Fl 19, and the north end
of Fl55) cut through F133, leaving little to be studied. As best as can be determined, it was sub-rectangular in outline, having outside dimensions of
about 12 x 13 m and inside dimensions of 9 x 8 m.
The berm was 70 cm high and probably once was
about 2 m across at the base.
The original width of the berm is questionable. ·
As observed in the profiles, about half of F133
seemed to have been removed just prior to the addition of F144 (see Figures 9 and 12). A comparison
of the volume occupied by the tomb in F134 with
the amount of earth used to construct Fl33 tends to
confirm this interpretation. Fortunately, the tomb
height can be reasonably well reconstructed from
the maximum depression--ca. 1 m--created by the
slump of its roof, and the tomb volume calculated
at roughly 27 m 3 • The volume of Fl33 as recorded
in the excavations is ca. 15 m3 • If F133 has been
truncated, then it would have originally consisted

In the definition of major stages in the special
burial area (see Table 1), Fl32, Fl28, and F144
were treated as one mound addition. This should be
elaborated as they were visually distinct from one
another and it might be argued that they represent
significantly different events. Fl32, the earliest of
the three, was a strongly lensed layer consisting
primarily of dark reddish brown loamy fine sand
and secondarily of yellowish red fine sandy loam. It
filled the depression formed by the collapse of the
structure in F134 (see Figure lOa-b) and extended
upward to near the top of Fl33 (see Figure 9).
The second stratigraphic layer, F128, rested
directly on top of F132. The contrast between the
two was often irregular and interdigiting (see Figure 9). Fl28 reached a maximum thickness of 1.5
m; in areal extent it was similar to F132 but it, like
Fl33, may have been truncated prior to the addition
of the third layer, F144. In composition, F128 was
similar to Fl32, with the most frequent lenses being yellowish red loam and secondary ones reddish
yellow fine sandy loam. Overall, Fl28 seemed reddish and Fl32 grayish red.
The third layer, Fl 44, is by far the most massive unit in Mound C. It formed the first flat-topped
surface (see Figures 5c and 9), and was composed

16

Texas Archeological Society

b

c

d

Figure 10. Burial Pit Fl34: a, looking east at partially exposed outline of pre-mound burial pit. Note mound addition
Fl32 filling depression caused by collapse of the roofed structure in Fl34; b, looking southeast at partially exposed
F134. Portion of west edge of pit visible in south wall and floor. Again, note Fl32 in depression caused by collapse of
the roofed structure in Fl34; c, looking northeast at Mound C excavations. Several pits visible in walls; arrow points to
location of Fl34; d, looking northeast at outline of F134. Pit originated at top of Zone 1 (terrace surface) and about 80
cm of fill removed before this photograph was taken. Numerous hollow and filled ant chambers are visible in all of
these and some of the other Mound C photographs. Note also that the color differences visible in the north wall in Figure
lOd represent differences in trowelling, not mound and pre-mound fill.

of lenses which ranged in texture from very fine
and sandy to coarse sand. When freshly exposed
and moist, the lenses were bright but became dull
when dry, predominately brownish yellow and
light brown. In the eastern part of the mound yellow lenses predominated while light browns were
more common in the western section. These color
variations were later reflected in the fill of one of
the large burial pits, F117, with the eastern part
being more yellowish than the western part-yet
another interesting example of handling of
backdirt.
Despite the differences in composition, these
three layers have been treated as a single unit. The
bases for this judgment are: ( 1) only the uppermost,
F144, formed a flat surface and contained the top of

the pit outlines, (2) F132 interlensed with F128,
and (3) there was no evidence of erosion or time
gap between F128 and F144. The one frankly bothersome aspect of this grouping is the apparent and
poorly understood modification to Fl33 (the enclosure) and possibly F128, probably just prior to the
addition of F144.

F166

Fl66 was a small, circular (22 x 24 cm)
charcoal-filled pit discovered beneath Mound C
when a machine cut was made to provide access to
the pre-mound burial pit, F134. The upper portion
of the pit was inadvertently removed, but it is believed to have originated from the top portion of

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis site

17

a

c

d

Figure 11. Burial Pit Fl34: a, removing fill from F134, pre-mound burial pit, looking northeast; b, skeletons, offerings,
and post pits in situ in F134, looking north; c, F134 offerings, skeletal remains, and post pit fill removed. Shallow
depressions in floor are scars left after portions of skeletons were jacketed, looking north; d, section of lower portion of
north wall of Mound C excavations. Note sectioned wall (F133) which encircled Fl34, and subsequent mound
additions Fl32, Fl28, and Fl44, looking north.

Zone 1 (the pre-mound surface). Before damage,
Fl66 was perhaps 35-40 cm deep; what remained
was only 6 cm of fill. If it was indeed dug from the
top of Zone 1, then it was covered by wash from
Fl41 and mound additions F158 and F149. The
radiocarbon determination of 910 ± 80 BP
(Tx-1203) obtained from woody charcoal in Fl66
is very compatible with this interpretation and further suggests that Fl66 predates burial pit F118
which originated from Fl4lb and is radiocarbondated to 770 ± 80 BP (Tx-1231).
Other than the pre-mound burial pit no other
feature has been traced to the top of Zone 1 under
Mound C. No artifacts are definitely associated with
Fl 66. Two dart points were found in situ about 1 m
removed and at a greater depth than F166.

Description of Features: Burials
Stage I Burials
F134
Only one burial containing eight individuals
and numerous grave goods, Fl34, is assigned to this
stage. Approximately one-third of Mound C has
been excavated to at least the top of Zone 1 and it
seems unlikely that additional Stage 1 burials will
be found under unexplored portions of Mound C.

Stratigraphic Relationships
and Horizontal Location
Fl34 clearly predates the building of Mound
C. It was directly overlain by mound addition Fl32,

18

Texas Archeological Society

and the center of the pit was at grid point Nl012/
Wl023, or, the approximate center of the
subsequent mound (see Figure 4). The low, subrectangular wall (Fl33) which surrounded Fl34
was probably constructed after the backfilling of
the pit.

Pit Dimensions
Fl 34 was a neatly excavated, rectangular pit
which measured at the top 7 m east-west and 5.5
m north-south. The walls sloped evenly inwards,
so that at the floor level the pit was 6 rn east-west
by 4.3 m north-south. Maximum depth was 3.5 m.
Perhaps significantly, the aboriginal excavations
extended through the natural soil zones and stopped
at the top of the first geologic break in the terrace,
which was marked by the appearance of a gray clay
stratum with numerous red mottles. Gouge marks
made by native diggers evidently using a pointed
digging stick were occasionally seen in the pit
walls, although not as clearly as in Burial Fl07.

Pit Fill
The bulk of the fill in F134 was rather loose,
mottled material (see Figure IOa) derived from the
pit excavations. It formed an interesting contrast
with Fl33 which was from the same source but
well layered. Only toward the bottom of the pit,
about 50 cm above the floor, did F134 fill begin to
change. Here, jumbled lenses of a light, greenish
loam were found in the mottled matrix. The greenish loam could not have been obtained from the pit
excavations and was probably from an as yet undetected borrow pit on the terrace slope, or an even
more distant source. Considerable importance must
have been attached to the greenish material as it
was found in all of the pits excavated thus far in the
central portion of the special burial area (F134,
Fll9, Fl61, and Fl18).
At depths ranging from about 15-25 cm above
the floor, five purplish brown stains, measuring as
much as 1.6 m long, 10 cm wide, and 15 cm thick,
were uncovered (Figures llb and 12). They were
north-south oriented and rested directly over the
skeletal remains and offerings. Apparently they were
stains left by some of the log stringers which formed
the roof of the structure (tomb) within which were
placed the bodies and offerings comprising Burial
F134 (see Figure 12). The greenish loam had been

placed on top of this structure and became jumbled
when it collapsed.
Over parts of the floor and extending under
some skeletal remains and offerings were traces of
a thin, organically stained layer. A simple weave
pattern could be discerned in a few places and this
layer seems to represent split cane matting placed
on the pit floor before the interments. Better preserved floor matting was found in other burials,
particularly Fl 19 and Fl54.
Several specimens were found in F134 fill and
are believed to be accidental inclusions rather than
offerings. These include four pieces of chipping
debris, a dart point, and a plain sherd.

Skeletal Remains
The remains of eight primary, extended
individuals were found on the floor of F134 (see
Figure 12). Each was in extremely poor condition
and incompletely preserved. Indeed, two (Skeletons
5 and 6) consisted only of traces of bone and one
(Skeleton 7) lacked postcranial remains. The poorest
preservation was encountered beneath the main
depression formed by the structure's slump in the
F134 pit. The collapse of this structure, rather than
any difference of original condition or time of burial,
is believed to be the principal factor affecting the
differential condition of the skeletons.
Details of body placement are shown in Figure
12 and most strikingly consist of pairing of
individuals. The heads of the two sets of individuals
(Skeletons 1-4) in the western half of the pit were
rotated to the left (or east); the position of heads of
Skeletons 5 and 6 could not be determined, but the
heads of Skeletons 7 and 8 were rotated to the right
(or west). Other than the seemingly careful layout
of the individuals, no special body treatment was
evident.
Because of the extremely poor condition of
the bones, little osteological data could be obtained.
In situ examination by Al Wesolowsky, then a University of Texas (UT) graduate student in physical
anthropology, yielded the following observations:
Skeleton 1: Adult at time of death based on
dentition and bone development (right M3/3
erupted, functional and slightly worn; I-PM
dentine exposed) with age suggested at 20 to
30 years; very unlikely any older. Sex identification is tenuous; small brow ridges, fair-sized

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis site

Skeleton3

Post2

Skeleton4

Skekton6

~

.

113'

59

Skekton8

62
4o,U

4' 65

~;!ifs+
99.IOm

Gfil

79-82

\•

.

66

o,
q/ \

Shi.ton?

L<>g3
Log5
Log4

......

N1012
W1026

I

.....

A

(

\

~7

PootS

70

l1

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE ~
CE 19
BURIAL
(F134) UNDER MOUND C
1-85

BURIALOFFERINGS

l

STRAIN FROM LOG STR1NGER
LARGE POSTHOLE
UNEXCAVATED

10

Magnetic North

Magnetic North

CROSS SECTION OF
PREMOUND BURIAL AND
RECONSTRUCTED BERM

Met.rs

XBerm
x

PLAN OF PREMOUND BURIAL
AND RECONSTRUCTED BERM

Figure 12. Floor Plan and Cross-Section of Fl34.

Berm
y

19

20

Texas Archeological Society
mastoid processes, greater sciatic notch, and
size of teeth hint at male. Total length of skeleton estimated at 1.81 m. Caries present on
left M2, 3/3, right M 1, 2/2, 313, and right lower
canine.
Skeleton 2: Appeared to be very similar to Skeleton 1, M3 was not observable but dental wear
otherwise similar. Sex even more difficult to
ascertain and only very tentatively suggested as
male. Total length of skeleton estimated at 1.68
m. No pathology observed.
Skeleton 3: Age at time of death very much like

Skeleton 1, right and left M3 had erupted, were
functional, and barely worn. No dentine was
exposed on right PM 1• Skull and pelvis too badly
crushed for examination, so no observations on
sex possible. Total length not estimated. No
pathology observed.
Skeleton 4: Age at time of death about the same

as Skeletons 1-3; both M3 had erupted and exhibited slight wear. Sex difficult to determine
and is tenuously suggested as female. Total
length of skeleton not estimated, but left humerus measured about 31 cm.
Skeleton 5: Little remained to be studied; the

poorly preserved dentition indicated an adult,
possibly about 20 to 30 years of age at time of
death.
Skeleton 6: Only stain and traces of bone re-

mained. No other observations possible.
Skeleton 7: Skull only present and this was
clearly a juvenile. All teeth observable were
deciduous and an age of 6 years at time of death
is suggested. Sex not determinable.
Skeleton 8: An adult with both M3 's erupted
and functional. Lower left arcade seems more
worn than in Skeletons 1-4 and may indicate
Skeleton 8 is slightly older. Skull and pelvis
too crushed for observation but size of teeth
tenuously indicated a female. No bone lengths
taken. Pathologies in the form of caries on left
M2 and M3 were noted.

The lack of good data on the skeletal remains
handicaps interpretation. With caution then, some

general statements are attempted. Most important
is the apparent homogeneity of the adults (Skeletons
1-5, and 8). They appeared to be similar in age at
the time of death and seemed to share such morphological characteristics as robusticity, size, and
possibly even sex. While part of the apparent
homogeneity may stem from the uniformly poor
preservation, the physical anthropologist's
impression was otherwise. Indeed, he suggested that
the adults probably did not represent a random cross
section of a population. The possibility of careful
selection for some ideal type or, less plausible, from
a similar age and genetically close group seems
reasonable. There was, however, no physical
evidence of immolation.

Offerings
The burial goods found in F134 are indicated
by number in Figure 12, which is keyed into the list
below. Detailed analysis has not been completed,
so it must suffice to note only that a number of the
offerings are made from exotic materials, such as
the marine shells, the copper, the stone used to
manufacture the celts, bifaces (or knives),
boatstones, and possibly some pigment minerals.
Comparable specimens were very rarely found in
either the 1968-1970 or 1939-1941 village
excavations.
The majority of the specimens were along the
north wall where they were arranged into apparent
clusters (designated as Concentrations 1-6, moving
west to east). It must, of course be remembered that
perishable goods could have been placed between
concentrations which were mainly composed of
non-organic materials. Artifacts associated with individuals include: Skeleton l, a greenish pigment
(84) on and about the right side of the skeleton;
Skeleton 2, an Alba arrowpoint (67) under the right
humerus; Skeleton 3, two Alba arrowpoints (68,
69) just east of the right humerus; Skeleton 4, a
seed (Lithospermum sp. ?) necklace (58); Skeleton
5, a very large biface (63), a marine shell bead belt
(62), and gray pigment at the right side or the skull
(60); Skeleton 6, a trace of green pigment on the
skull (85), red and green pigment (64 and 65) in the
chest and pelvic areas, and a possible Hayes type
arrow point (66) near the left (?) leg; Skeleton 7,
nothing; and Skeleton 8, a flake (77) near the left
leg and possibly a small piece of green pigment
(59) above the skull. Beneath Log 4 and between

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis site
Skeletons 5 and 6, but difficult to associate with
one individual over the other, were four arrow
points, three Alba and one unidentified. Based on
the number and kinds of offerings, Skeleton 5 call
be ranked as the most important of the eight.
In the floor of Fl34 were six well defined
disturbances (see Figure 11 b-c) which are
interpreted as post pits for the structure support
posts. Three were along the north wall and three at

the south wall (see Figure 12). At floor level,
maximum diameters ranged from 45 to 60 cm;
maximum depths were from 1.08 to 1.51 m. No
offerings were found in the post pit fill but objects
seemed to have been deliberately placed near the
pits. Associated with Pit 1 were four celts (3-6) and
a small flint flake (83); with Pit 2 a small bird
effigy pipe (40) and a possible mano (39); with Pit
3 a large lump of green pigment (54) and two celts

Fl34 OFFERINGS (see Figu:re 12 fo:r placement of objects)
Number

Description

2

Organic material including woody charcoal, nuts,
and corn; possibly in perishable container
Matting, probably split cane

3-6

Four stone celts*

7

Cluster of 151 Alba arrow points,t probably
in a perishable container
Well made (Gahagan) bifaces,* covered with
organic material, probably either wrapping
or remains of container
Gray pigment,t probably wrapped or
placed in perishable container
Conch shell container or dipper*
Bone pin
Fragment of a incisor tooth, possibly beaver;
No evidence of modification
Well made (Gahagan) biface*
Same as No. 17, conch shell*
Fragment of bone pin
Boatstone*
Organic material, largely disintegrated and
object not identifiable
Stone earspool, * with incised chevron design;
companion to Artifact 28
Stone earspool, * with incised chevron design;
companion to Artifact 27
Boatstone*
Well made (Gahagan) biface*
Fragmentary mussel bivalve
Well made (Gahagan) biface*
Part of Artifact 17, conch shell*
Fragment of bone pin

8-15

16
17
18
19-21
22
23
24

25

26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33-35
36

21

Remarks
C assayed to 1010 ± 90 BP
(Tx-1206); Concentration 2
May be part of Artifact 57;
Concentration 2
Concentration 1; may be
symbolically associated
with Post I
Concentration 2
14

Specimens about and under
gray pigment (Artifact 16);
Concentration 2
Concentration 2
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3

22

Texas Archeological Society

OFFERINGS, F134 (Continued)
Number
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45

46
47

48

49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58

59
60

61
62

63
64

65

66
67
68,69

70
71
72-74

75

Description
Fragment of bone, possibly a canine tooth
Boatstone*
Smoothed, rectangular stone (mano?)
Small bird effigy pipe of volcanic asht (?)
Fragment of bone pin
Bone pin
Purple pigment
Incisor tooth, possibly beaver
Well made (Gahagan) biface*
Fragment of mussel shell
Organic stain; object not identifiable
Part of Artifact 17, conch shell*
Organic (wooden?) object with copper* covering
Stone celtt with faint medial groove
Small human effigy pipe, possibly of volcanic ash
Large lump of greenish pigmentt
Stone celt*
Large lump of greenish pigmentt
Stone celt*
Stone celt*
Split cane object, either matting on floor of pit
or part of basket
Lithospermum sp. (?) seed beads about neck of
Skeleton 4
Small piece of green pigmentt; about 30 cm north of
skull of Skeleton 8
Lump of gray pigment*, north of skull of Skeleton
5; organic material, split cane and bark cloth (?)
about pigment
Organic material, possibly matting
Marine gastropod bead waist band,* associated with
Skeleton 5
An exceptionally large, well thinned biface (Gahagan?)
near right leg of Skeleton 5
Red pigment between Skeletons 5 and 6
Small piece of greenish pigment, t probably associated
with Skeleton 6
Probable Hayes arrow point associated with Skeleton 6
Alba arrow point under proximal end of right humerus of
Skeleton 2
Alba arrow points near proximal end of right humerus of
Skeleton 3
Stone celt* near southwest edge of Post 5
Stone celt* near south edge of Post 6
Three fragments of well made, thin (Gahagan)
bifaces*
Badly disintegrated piece of bone

Remarks
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
May be part of Artifact 31
Concentration 3
Concentration 3
Concentration 4
Concentration 5
Concentration 5
Concentration 5
Concentration 6
Concentration 6
Concentration 6
May be same as Artifact 2;
Concentration 2

Possibly part of Concentration 3

Concentration 2
Concentration 3

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis site

23

OFFERINGS, F134 (Continued)
Description

Number

76
77

78
79-82
83

84
85

Remarks

Small flint flake
Small flint flake, near lower left leg of
Skeleton 8
Sherd under Log 5

Possibly accidental inclusion
Possibly accidental inclusion
Not plotted on burial plan;
possibly accidental inclusion

Four arrow points, 3 Alba and 1 unidentified,
near and under Log 4, between Skeletons 5 and 6
Small flint flake

Concentration 1, possibly
accidental inclusion

Greenish pigmentt on skull of Skeleton l
Traces of greenish pigmentt on skull of Skeleton 6

In add~tion to the _85 numbered art~facts recovered from Fl34, four specimens (2 Alba arrow points, I
dart po mt, and a flmt flake) were dislodged from fill just above the floor of the pit and
could not be accurately plotted on a burial plan.
1

*Made of material foreign to the Davis site area.
tMade of material possibly foreign to the Davis site area.

(55 and 56); with Pit 5 a celt (70); and with Pit 6 a
celt (71). Curiously, nothing was found near Pit 4.

Stage JI Burials
FU9
Fl 19 is one of four probable burial pits which
have been traced from the surface of the second
stage mound. It was excavated during the 1969
season with only the northern one-half to two-thirds
of the pit being dug. A portion of Fll9 fill was
removed by the treasure hunter trench, but the damage was not significant.

Pit Dimensions
At the top, F119 measured 5 m east-west and
an estimated 6.5 to 7 m north-south. At the bottom,
it was 3.7 m east-west and an estimated 4 m northsouth. Maximum depth was 5 m. The north and
east walls sloped inward, while the west wall was
essentially vertical and contained numerous digging
stick marks. Having attempted to remove fill from
these deep pits by attaching a rope to a bucket and
lifting backdirt to the surface, I suspect the
straightness of the west wall is intentional. A bucket
cannot be pulled up a sloping wall without
frequently toppling; surely, the same problem would
have plagued aboriginal excavators using a basket
and rope.

Stratigraphic Relationships
and Horizontal Location

Pit Fill

Fl 19 originated from the top of Fl 44 and was
overlain by Fl42. A Stage III burial, F161, cut into
the upper part of the southeast corner of Fl 19. The
center of Fl 19 is estimated at grid point NlOl 1.5/
W1031, which at the time of burial would have
been the extreme top and flank of the west-center
part of the mound (Figure 13).

The fill of Fl 19 was the most complex-at
least in the lower 25 cm--encountered to date in
Mound C. From the point of origin (top at ca. 102.10
m elevation) to about 25 cm above the floor (97.40
m), the fill was loose, and contained numerous
yellow and red mottles as well as gray and red
lenses. Immediately below this clearly disturbed
soil was a layer of greenish loam, which as noted in

24

Texas Archeological Society
x

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE- 41CE19
MOUND C FEATURE 119
CROSS SECTION AND PLAN

C:::J

UNEXCAVATED

0

4

Mi&

y

lii@llll

I

Meters

Figure 13. Plan and Cross-Section of Burial Pit Fl 19.

the discussion of F134, had not been removed from
the pit but rather had to have been obtained from
elsewhere. The surface of this introduced layer was
quite irregular and formed distinct hummocks near
the north, west, and east walls. Apparently these
piles were the last loads dumped into the pit and
not spread evenly across the floor. Along the north
wall, between the introduced layer and the jumbled
pit fill, were numerous offerings (Figure l 4a-b and
Figure 15a). These goods had been arranged with
great care; many were stacked one upon another or
in small niches formed in the wall as well as in
crevices made between the wall and the introduced
layer. Scattered flecks of charcoal recovered from
the introduced fill have yielded a C 14 date of 1150 ±
80 BP (Tx-913).
Beneath this first layer of offerings and
introduced fill was a thin deposit of iron
precipitate. When this crust-like material was
carefully removed (tediously flaked off with a
dental pick), rod-like purple stains, about 2 cm in
diameter and as much as l m long, were exposed
(Figures 16a and 17b). The nature of the
discoloration was similar to that of the presumed
logs in Fl34, but in this case is believed to be cane
or coppice-at least some kind of long, slender
material of uniform diameter. As many as three,
possibly four, layers of material were encountered
and they probably once extended across the entire

pit. However, we did not discover the cane/coppice
until after a good portion had probably been
removed (see Figure 16a).
Beneath the cane was a second (bottom) layer
of offerings, the remains of four individuals, and in
the northwest corner of the grave a small and shallow, circular disturbance (see Figures 14d and 17).
When excavated this small pit was found to contain
a celt, possibly a symbolic survival of the structure
and associated posthole in F134. As with Fl34, the
skeletons and the second layer of offerings rested
on split cane matting which probably extended
across the entire floor. The weave is very difficult
to determine but is tentatively identified as twilled.
In the floor, under the matting, were patches of
clean yellow clay that, like the greenish loam, could
not have come from the burial pit excavations. When
the clay was removed, irregular depressions were
visible in the floor (see Figure 16). They contained
no objects and appeared to be nothing more than
irregularities in the aboriginal excavation that were
later filled with clay to even the floor. If this is
correct, it reveals an interesting technique of
excavation and, if all of Fl 19 were dug, could
possibly indicate the number of persons involved in
the actual aboriginal excavation.
A number of specimens were found scattered
in the fill of Fl 19-more than in any of the other
Mound C pits. Those that seem clearly to be

Story -

1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

a

25

b

d
Figure 14. Burial Pit Fl 19: a, western flank of Mound C, looking west at first (upper) layer of offerings. Only half of pit
excavated; b, detail of first layer offerings. Hummocks are an introduced deposit of greenish sandy loam which covered
a second (bottom) layer of offerings and skeletal remains, looking north; c, looking north at Fl 19 after first layer of
offerings removed. Pit in northwest corner of floor (arrow) contains celt; d, partially exposed second layer of offerings,
cane(?), and skeletal remains in Fl 19, looking east.

accidental inclusions are a plain neck sherd from a
bottle, 13 plain body or base sherds, four punctated
body sherds, two incised body sherds, one probable
Holly Fine Engraved body sherd, a decorated sherd
with a badly damaged surface, a dart point preform,
a knife (?) of petrified wood, a flint flake, and
burned (?) fragments of a mussel shell. In addition,
tiny fragments of bone and bits of copper were
found just above the green loam; these may be
offerings inadvertently dislodged in the
excavations.

Skeletal Remains
Four extended, primary burials, placed supine
with the head at the north, were partially exposed in

Fl 19. Each was in extremely poor state of
preservation with much of the bone disintegrated
and severely crushed by the great weight of earth
on them. Regrettably, no physical anthropologist
examined them in the field and the skulls (or what
was left of the skulls) of only two (Skeletons 1 and
2) were collected and studied in the laboratory,
with the following observations made by Al
Wesolowsky:
Skeleton 1: (The east most of the four) is an
adult, perhaps about 30-35+ years of age at time
of death. Wear facets are visible on the RM3 and
the teeth are fair-sized, while the mandible is
gracile. Sex is probably female. No dental pathology noted, although five teeth were lost
from the lower arcade after death.

N
0\

~
~

"';:i;..
~
~

S'

~

[

~
\"")

$

+N1013

WI032

..,____

Tx~91.~

1150±80~

q;s l

l

@zo

Magnetic North

97.20

_o____o--~
Southern Half of Bunal
. Not Excavated
_ _ TEST

D

UNEXCAVATED

J.O

Cone. I, 2, etc. ARTIFACT
CONCENTRATION

Meters
Contour Interval 5 cm

Figure 15. Mound C Fl 19, First (upper) Layer of Artifacts and Contour Map of Greenish Fill.

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

a

27

b

Figure 16. Burial Pit Fl 19: a, second (bottom) layer of offerings removed and replaced cane(?) exposed. Pits in the.
floor are irregularities in the aboriginal excavations which were filled with sterile yellow clay, looking south; b, skeletal
remains in Fl 19, looking south. Unexcavated pit fill forms the south wall.

Burial Pit Wall
~Pit

w

!

CANE/COPPICE(?) PLACED OVER
BURIALS AND SECOND (BOTTOM)

---

umo'""'"""'

l.O

Southern Half of Burial Not Excavated
l\teters

1

Magnetic North

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41 CE 19
MOUND C FEATURE 119
CANE/COPPICE LAYER

Figure 17. Cane/Coppice Layer in Mound C Burial Pit Fl 19.

C::=J

UNEXCAVATED

28

Texas Archeological Society
and arms partially outstretched. More numerous
offerings accompanied Skeletons 1 and 2 so that
status differences seem even more clearly indicated
than in F134. Also, Skeletons 1 and 2 seem slightly
older at the time of death than the individuals in the
pre-mound pit.

Skeleton 2: Is also an adult and, based on
dentition, an estimated 25-30 years of age at
time of death. The brow ridges are not
pronounced, but the mandible is fairly massive
and suggests male. No dental pathology noted.
Skeleton 3 and 4: Could not be examined in the
same detail; the observation in the field by less
well trained persons is that they were adults,
probably similar in age to Skeletons 1 and 2.

Offerings
Fl 19 has yielded by far the largest number of
offerings. These are listed below by concentration
and separated into a first layer (upper) and a second
(bottom) layer. Again, it must be cautioned that the
definition of concentration is to a degree arbitrary
and represents only clusters of observable material.
Some of these clusters (such as 4, 6, and 7 in the first
layer) may have resulted from placement in perishable containers, while others (such as 1 and 2 in the
first layer) are more arbitrarily divided. Objects in

The placement of the bodies is interesting, especially when compared with the skeletal positions
in Fl34 (see Figures 12 and 18). The two most
westerly skeletons, 3 and 4, were closely spaced
with heads apparently rotated to the east-much
like Skeletons 1-4 in Fl34. By contrast, Skeletons
1 and 2 were more widely separated from one another and from 3 and 4, with faces rotated upward

LO
Meters

m97.I4m

!
\"'-

liil

,,/7 \ 97.l3m
-...._~12

1

Concentration 4

Magnetic Nor!h

21
Concentration 2

tor-r''
'''* 26

Concentration 3

274 '25 +NIOl3
W1032

NI013
+Wl030

90
~
91.
14

~~
15

Southern Half of Burial Not Excavated

[==:J

UNEXCAVATED
PIGMENT

UNIDENTIFIED ORGANIC
(Often with Other Material Adhering)
MATTING

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41 CE 19
MOUND C FEATURE 119
FLOOR OF PIT

Figure 18. Burial Pit Fl 19 and Second (Bottom} Layer of Offerings.

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
the first layer are too numerous and too stacked
upon one another to plot. fostead, photographs are
included and one object from each concentration
plotted on the floor plan. The less numerous second
layer offerings are shown in greater detail (see Figure 18).
In addition to the following artifacts that were
recorded in situ, there were four small flakes that
cannot be plotted in place but which were found
along the north wall of the burial, above the greenish
fill. A number of soil samples were also taken

between Concentrations 3 and 4-an area where
the fill seemed unusually dark in color-and
revealed an abnormally high content of sodium and
chloride, suggesting that salt may have been
included as an offering.

Second (Bottom) Layer Offerings
The second layer of offerings in Fl 19 was
found resting on matting on the floor of the pit,
beneath the introduced layer and cane (?). Included

First Layer Offerings, F119
Number

Description

Remarks
Concentration l

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

11, 12

13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

22
24,25
26
27
28

29

29

Small celt of green chert*
Human effigy pipe of quartz sandstone'
Small stream worn pebble
Probable bear (Ursus americana) canine tooth
Fragment of bone pin
Long-nose gar (Lepisosteus osseus) mandible
Awl or pin from splinter of large mammal bone
Sub-rectangular tablet of sandstone, worn smooth
on both flat surfaces
Basal fragment of well made (Gahagan) biface*
Large celt*
Conch shell*
Small unidentified organic object resting on
Artifact 11
Small stream worn pebble
Alba arrow point
Lump of red ocher
Lump of red ocher
Flint flake
Long rectangular piece of grooved sandstone
Long (ca. 20 cm) slender organic object
Holly Fine Engraved bowl (inverted), rim smeared
with yellow pigment
Lump of purple pigment
Lumps of red pigment
Rectangular piece of petrified wood with chipped
and polished bit
Small fragments of mussel shell
Stone earspool*, no indication of copper covering
Small fragment of sandstone, possibly part of an
abrader

No signs of modification
No signs of modification
In very poor condition and
not obviously modified

Possibly used as containers
When first exposed resembled
a feather

Part of Artifact 124

Copper* covered
Artifacts 245, 246, 247 and
248 inside bowl

Same as Artifact 147

Companion to Artifact 32

30

Texas Archeological Society

First Layer Offerings, F119 (Continued)
Number
30,31

Description
Small stream worn pebbles

32

Stone earspool*, no evidence of copper covering

33

Basal fragment of biface*

108

Grooved tablet of sandstone, covered with
red pigment
Triangular shaped sandstone tablet, worn on
both flat surfaces
Fragment of bone pin(s?)
Grooved sandstone tablet
Two bone pins adhering to conch container,
Artifact 12
Two mussel bivalves, an apparent pair
Fragments of badly deteriorated shell, probably
conch*
Unidentified bone object
Fragments of two possible bone pins
Part of Artifact 20
Fragments of bone pins
Lump of red ocher
Flint flake
Badly deteriorated piece of bone
Medial fragment of biface*
Fragments of bone pin
Possible fragment of bone pin
Deer metapodial

109
110
111
112
113,114
115-117
118
119, 120
121
122, 123
124
125
126
127
128
145
146
147
148
149
198
199
200
201
202
205-208
236
239
240
242
244
245
246
247,248

Part of Artifact 26
Possible brown pigment
Alba arrow point
Fragment of bone pin
Flint flake
Arrow point, stem broken
Large flint flake
Alba arrow point
Flint flakes
Small notched axe, possibly of very fine-grained
sandstonet
Small fragment of shell
Yellow ocher in Holly Fine Engraved bowl,
Artifact 21
Fragment of shell
Stream worn pebble, possibly battered
Fragment of bone
Flint flake
Shell fragments

Remarks
Artifact 31 is battered at one
end; other not modified
Apparent companion to
Artifact 28
Fits onto Artifact 175 found
in Concentration 2
Pigment may be from accidental
contact with Artifact 124

Modification uncertain
Could be from same object

Part of Artifact 16

Too fragmentary to determine
if modified
May be a natural inclusion

Artifacts 245-248 found inside
Holly Fine Engraved bowl
(Artifact 21) but may be
accidental inclusions

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

First

Offerings, F119 (Continued)

Number

Description

Remarks

Concentration 2
23
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45

46
47
48
49
50
51
52
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
150
151
165
166
167, 168
169

Lump of purple pigment
Badly corroded thin sheet copper* over disc-shaped
wooden object
Human effigy pipe of very fine, soft sandstone
Tiny fragment of thin sheet copper
Lump of purple pigment
Holly Fine Engraved bottle, contained yellow
pigment
Large, well made (Gahagan) biface*
Large triangular biface, * hea vi! y patinated and
marginally retouched after patinated
Well made biface*
Flint flake
Small jar with fluted body and engraved stepped
design on rim
Small pieces of green pigmentt
Medial fragment of biface, * heavily patinated; fits
onto 45, 49, 165, 167, 170, 180, 186, 191, 203,
and 243 (Artifact 203 from Concentration 3, rest
from Concentration 2)
Triangular piece of sandstone tablet, worn smooth
Fragment of grooved and smoothed sandstone tablet
Distal end of large novaculite biface, * fits onto
Artifact 133 but break rechipped
Biface fragment*
Distal end of biface, * fits onto Artifacts 52 and
179
Medial fragment of biface*
Basal fragment of biface*
Flint flake
Alba arrow point
Lump of red pigment
Thin, very smooth sub-rectangular tablet of
sandstone
Lower part of large novaculite biface;* fits onto
Artifact 48
Part of Artifact 40
Fragments of beaver tooth
Small pieces of green pigmentt
Medial fragment of arrow point; fits onto
Artifact 181
Not an offering
Medial fragment of biface*
Flint flake
Biface fragments*
Small well made (Gahagan) biface*

Badly eroded

Same as Artifact 134

Biface broken before it was
placed in burial pit

See Artifact 45
Broken before it was
placed in burial pit
Fits onto Artifact 50

Break rechipped

No evidence of modification
Broken before placed in
burial pit
See Artifact 45
See Artifact 45

31

32

Texas Archeological Society

First Layer Offerings, F119 (Continued)
Number
170
171
172

173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
242

Description

Remarks

Biface fragment*
Flint flake
Biface fragment;* fits onto Artifacts 182,
183, 187,189, 193, and 204 (Artifact 204
from Concentration 3, remainder from
Concentration 2)
Biface fragment*
Biface fragment*
Well made (Gahagan) biface*
Fragments of beaver tooth
Large triangular biface, * heavily patinated
Fragment of biface*
Distal fragment of biface*
Fragment of biface*
Distal end of arrow point; fits onto Artifact
150 but not found together
Medial fragment of biface*
Fragment of biface*
Medial fragment of biface; * fits onto Artifact
185
Biface fragment;* fits onto Artifact 184
Biface fragment*
Medial biface fragment*
Biface fragment;* fits onto Artifacts 192
and 194
Small sliver of flint, possibly part of biface*
Flint flake
Biface fragment*
Biface fragment*
Biface fragment*
Biface fragment*
Biface fragment*

See Artifact 45
Broken before placed in
burial pit

See Artifact 45
Fits onto Artifact 33
found in Concentration 1
Evidently not modified
Part of base missing
See Artifact 50
See Artifact 45

See Artifact 172
See Artifact 172
Broken before placed in
burial pit
See Artifact 45
See Artifact 172
Broken before placed in
burial pit
See Artifact 172
See Artifact 45
See Artifact 188
See Artifact 172
See Artifact 188
See Artifact 45

Concentration 3

53
54
55

56
203
204
209
210
211
212
213
214

Large well made (Gahagan) biface*
Flint flake
Flint flake
Bone fragment
Biface fragment*
Biface fragment*
Flint flake
Alba arrow point
Dart point
Arrow point; stem missing
Probable bear canine tooth
Flint flake

Badly deteriorated
See Artifact 45
See Artifact 172

No evidence of modification

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

First IAyer Offerings, Fl19 (Continued)
Number
215
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
237

Remarks

Description
Flint flake
Small fragment of sandstone, possibly part of
a disc
Flint flake
Large, well made (Gahagan) biface*
Distal end of a biface*
Fragment of small sandstone disc
Large, well made (Gahagan) biface*
Flint flake
Probable bear canine tooth
Medial fragment of biface*
Hayes arrow point
Flint flake
Flint flake
Flint flake
Small piece of sandstone
Well made (Gahagan) biface*
Flint flake
Flint flake
Grooved sandstone tablet
Flint flake
Flint flake
Flint flake

No evidence of modification

Concentration 4
57
58
59
60-64

Tortoise shell (Terrapene sp.)
Bone fragment
Possibly a bead
Small disc-shaped piece of copper*
A cluster of badly deteriorated bone and shell objects. Includes fragments of turtle
shell (Terrapene sp.) that may possibly be a rattle; 3 pieces of copper*; 2 bone
pins, one circular piece of conch* with a central perforation; and disc-shaped pieces
made from mussel bivalves with two marginal perforations (these occurred in pairs
and may have been tied together; at least ten pairs are represented)
Concentration 5

65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74, 75
76
77

Rectangular piece of sandstone, all surface worn
Fragment of mussel bivalve
Flint flake
Flint flake, one edge chipped; fits onto Artifact 76
Flint flake
Not an offering
Sub-rectangular piece of hematite, one edge worn
Sandstone tablet, surfaces worn
Flint flake
One bone pin
Modified flint flake; fits onto Artifact 68
Green pigmentt

Modified after broken

Modified after broken

33

34

Texas Archeological Society

First Layer Offerings, F119 (Continued)
Number
78
137
138
152
153

Description

Remarks

Flint flake
Flint flake
Flint flake
Small piece of copper*
Flint flake

Concentration 6
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
238

Stream worn pebble, highly polished
Stream worn pebble, highly polished
Stream worn pebble, highly polished
Stream worn pebble, possibly used as a hammerstone
Flint flake
Flint flake
Stream worn pebble, highly polished
Gray pigment,t with cord impression
Sandstone tablet with four (?) bone pins adhering
Four (?) bone pins on Artifact 90
Unidentified organic material

Concenfration 7
93
94
95
96
97
· 98
99
l 00
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
142
143
144

Not an offering
Flint flake
Flint flake
Sandstone tablet, flat surfaces worn
Sandstone tablet with depression and grooves
Flint flake
Grooved sandstone tablet
Sandstone tablet, flat surfaces worn
Stream worn pebble
Flint flake
Stream worn pebble, portions highly polished
Hematite plummet*
Sandstone pebble, flat surfaces worn
Stream worn pebble, highly polished
Flint flake
Flint flake
Flint flake
Flint flake

Concentration 8
79
80
81
92
139

Flint core
Flint flake
Possible rib of bison*
Flint core
Alba arrow point

Resembles Poverty Point
plummets

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

35

First Layer Offerings, F119 (Continued)
Remarks

Number

Description

140
141
154-161
162
163
164
196
197

Flint flake
Flint flake
Eight flint flakes
Small disc-shaped stone
Stream worn pebble
Badly deteriorated bone fragment
Flint flake
Flint flake

are four clusters (Concentrations 1-4) in the north
part of the pit, a celt in a hole in the northeast corner, a few isolated objects, and goods associated
with the individual burials (see Figure 18).
From the amount of organic stain, fragments
of copper, pins, and the green pigment, the skull of
Skeleton 1 was either elaborately wrapped or wore

a headdress, or both. The poor condition of the
objects, however, defies accurate description.
Additionally, we were not adequately prepared to
extract from the field as much information as might
have been possible. The final (1970) season we
plaster-jacketed skulls and completed excavation in
the lab with far more satisfactory results.

Second (Bottom) Layer Offerings, F119
Number

Remarks

Description

Concentration 1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
20
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

Large well made (Gahagan biface)*
Fragments of turtle shell
Fragments of turtle shell
Gray pigment,t possibly in a container
Mass of very fragmentary turtle shells (Terrapene
sp.) and some small pebbles
Arrow point, type uncertain
Large conch shell* dipper or container
Small fragment of shell, possibly conch*
Rectangular piece of sandstone with grooves
Stream worn pebble, several surfaces worn
Lump of red ocher
Lump of red ocher
Two small pieces of copper* adhering to turtle
(Terrapene sp.) shells (Artifact 37)
Lump of red ocher
Unidentified copper*-covered object
Fragments of four or five bone pins
Same as Artifact 41

Unknown number of rattles
represented; much like Artifact 41

36

Texas Archeological Society

Second (Bottom) Layer Offerings, F119 (Continued)
Number

36
37
41

Description

Remarks

Grayish pigment,t with matting adhering
Turtle (Terrapene sp.) shell fragments and small
pebbles
Turtle (Terrapene sp.) shell fragments, small
pebbles, piece of flint, and small bits of copper*

Probably one or more rattles
Rattle(s)?

Concentration 2
38
39
40
41
43
44-46
47
48

49
50
51

52
53
54
55
56

57
58
59
60
61
62

63
64

65
66
67
68

69
70
71
72

73
74

75
76,77
78

79
80

Two lumps of red pigment
Flint nodule
Flint nodule
Fragment of unidentified shell
Fragment of unidentified shell
Fragments of unidentified shell
Spire of conch shell*
Grooved sandstone tablet
Flint flake
Deer ulna
Flint flake
Small stream worn pebble
Fragments of mussel bivalve
Four fragments of one mussel bivalve
Two flint flakes
Flint flake
Same as Artifact 78
Unfinished siltstone (?) earspoolt
Bone pin
Flint flake
Flint flake
Mussel bivalve
Five fragments of mussel bivalve
Fragment of long, ceramic (Red River) pipe stem
Deer ulna
Alba arrow point*
Unfinished siltstone (?) earspoolt
Small stream worn pebble
Sandstone tablet, flat surfaces worn
Flint flake
Two fragments of mussel bivalve
Red ocher; twilled matting and rod-like pieces of
unidentified organic material adhering
Sandstone tablet, flat surfaces worn
Sandstone tablet, flat surfaces worn
Deer ulna
One sandstone tablet, flat surfaces worn
Seven fragments of mussel bivalve
Twenty bone pins
Gray-green pigment?

Possibly modified

Possible flaking tool

Companion to Artifact 67

No evidence of modification

Possible flaking tool
Companion to Artifact 58

Possible flaking tool
Possibly from one bivalve

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

Second (Bottom) Layer Offerings, F119 (Continued)
Number
81
82
84
85
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118

Description

Remarks

Fragments of two mussel bivalves
Same as Artifact 47
Flint flake
Small engraved sherd, possibly from Holly
Fine Engraved bottle
Very small flint flake
Small fragment of sandstone
Flint flake
Flint flake
Very small flint flake
Possible distal tip of an arrow point
Tiny flint flake
Fragment of unidentified shell

Concentration 3
22
23

Large celt*
Well made (Gahagan) biface*

Concentration 4
9
10
12

Flint flake
Flint flake
Badly deteriorated piece of unidentified bone

Associated with Skeleton 1
16
17
18
88
89
90-94
97
98
121
122
123
124
125
126
127

Well made (Gahagan) biface,* east of skull
Copper-covered stone* earspool
Possible bark cloth
Flint flake, west of skull
Copper-covered stone* earspool
Five flint flakes, west of skull
Small fragments of copper* and unidentified
organic material west of skull
Organic material on underside of skull
Fragments of seven bone pins
Two pearl beads adhering to interior of mandible
Possible fragment of bone or shell bead under
skull, near right side of mandible
Possible fragments of bone or shell beads adhering
to interior, left side of mandible
Organic material, possibly wood or cane
Traces of green pigment intermixed with
organic material under skull
Small section of bone (pin?) associated with
small pieces of sheet copper,* organic material

At left ear
Covered Artifact 17 and part of
skull
At right ear
Probably same as Artifact 98
Possibly includes wooden pins
May be related to Artifact 98

Along with Artifacts 122 and 123,
probably represents a necklace
Perhaps a largely disintegrated
pin

Overlain by fragments of matting

37

38

Texas Archeological Society

Second (Bottom) Layer Offerings, F119 (Continued)
Number

Description

Remarks

128-129

Areas of copper salts* on left frontal to back
portion of parietal; suggest copper ornament
in hair or on headdress
Fragments of possible human skin (or tanned hide?)
with bark cloth (?) on one side and copper stain on other

Other artifacts about skull could
be part of same

130

Associated with Skeleton 2
99
100

101
102
119,120

Large mass of bone pins (not collectible), east of
skull
Unidentified organic material and fragment of
sheet copper,* northwest of skull
Disc-shaped (badge-like) ornament of conch shell,*
wood, and copper*
Possible copper-covered* wooden earspool
Fragments of bone pins, under cervical vertebrae;
Either six different pins or section of three
represented

Despite position appears to be an
earspool
Rested on top of rib cage
Companion to 100?
Not part of 99

Associated with Skeletons 3 and 4
87
108
109

Organic material (bark cloth?) and green staining on
skull of Skeleton 4
Six bone pins between Skeleton 3 and 4
Plain sherd, in abdominal region of Skeleton 3

Probably an accidental
inclusion

Isolated Objects
13
14
15
24
427
21, 26, 27, 86,
95, 104-107,110

Stream worn pebble
Fragment of mammal (deer?) long bone
Fragment of mammal (deer?) long bone
Unidentified organic material
Celt* in pit in northwest comer of burial
Patches of checkerweave, split cane matting

Probably once covered the entire
floor of the burial pit

*Made of material foreign to the Davis site area.
tMade of material possible foreign to the Davis site area.

F155
Fl55 (Figures 19 and 20) is the only other
Stage II burial excavated to date. In terms of the
size of the pit, the number of individuals interred,
and the copiousness of the offerings, F155 was
considerably less elaborate than Fl 19.

Stratigraphic Relationships
and Horizontal Location
Fl55 originated from the top of Fl 44, the first
truncated mound, and was overlain by F142, an
addition made only to the mound flanks. A Stage
IV pit, Fl 18, removed the northwest portion of

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

39

Pit Dimensions
At the top Fl55 measured approximately 3.5
m north-south and 2.5 m east-west. At the floor it
was 2.85 m north-south and 2.10 m east-west.
Maximum depth was 2 m.

Pit Fill

a

The fill of F155 was loose and much mottled.
No green loam layer was recognized but patches
of organic stain, probably remnants of split cane
matting, were observed on the floor and under the
skeletal remains. Abandoned ant chambers undermined much of the floor (see Figure 19b) and made
excavation difficult, but apparently caused relatively little damage to the burial and offerings (see
below). The only object found as an apparent fortuitous inclusion in the pit fill was a small sherd.

Skeletal Remains

b
Figure 19. Burial Pit Fl55: a, Holly Engraved bottle in
Fl55, exposed while excavating Fl 18, which cut into
Fl55. Dotted line indicates outline of F155, looking
east; b, F155 offerings and partially preserved skeletal
remains exposed. Light areas of fill are ant disturbed
areas, looking northeast.

One poorly preserved, very incomplete skeleton was recovered from F155. All that remained
was a badly crushed skull and portions (possibly
part of the tibia and femur) of a lower limb (see
Figures 19 and 20). To judge from the position of
these scanty remains it was a primary burial with
the body extended, placed supine with the head to
the north and the face apparently rotated upward.
Age at time of death is based solely on dentition
and is estimated at ca. 20-25 years. Sex cannot be
determined.

Offerings

F155 (see Figure 20). This was the most severe
case encountered of one pit cutting into another.
Apparently it was at least partially caused by a
slump which occurred during the aboriginal
excavation of F118. Old ant chambers were
numerous in this portion of the mound and may
well have been the cause of the slump. At the time,
burial F155 was in southwestern quadrant of the
mound; the center was at our grid point Nl008/
W1020.75.

The majority of the offerings had been placed
along the north wall on a pedestal in the northwest
part of the pit (see Figure 20). One of the two
vessels, both Holly Fine Engraved, from the grave
was found during the clearing of Fl 18. It was in an
old ant chamber and apparently had been slightly
disturbed from the original placement (see Figure
l 9a). The aboriginal excavation of Fl 18 just missed
the vessel, raising the possibility that some offerings may have actually been lost to Fl 18. The position of the items recovered is shown in Figure 20.
They consist of:

Texas Archeological Society

40

,, ,,
I

l

Slumped Off

I When Fll8
1 WasDug

I

1

I

Magnetic North

UNIDENTIFIED
ORGANIC MATERIAL

~

CANE MATTING

D

UNEXCAVATED

•

PIGMENT

1.0

Meters

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE-41CE19
MOUND C BURIAL F 155

CROSS SECTION OF MOUND C
SHOWING STRATIGRAPHIC RELATIONSHIPS

X-

~

----------~--

y

Meters
Magnetic North

Figure 20. Plan and Cross-Section of Burial Pit Fl55.

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site 41

Offerings, Fl55
Number

2
3
4
5

6
7
8
9
10
11
12

13
14

15
16-19
20
21

22
23-26
27-32
33,34
35
36
37
38
39

40

41
42

Description

Remarks

Holly Fine Engraved bowl with red pigment
rubbed into lines

Was in an old ant chamber and
slightly displaced; aboriginal
excavation of Fl 18 just missed
the vessel

Small stream worn pebble, highly polished on
one surface
Rectangular piece of grooved sandstone
Fragments of mussel bivalve
At least 14 bone pins, one flattened bone pin, 2
fragments of mussel bivalve, and one pin made
from deer metapodial
Mussel bivalve perforated at one end, one edge
smoothed
Nearly complete mussel bivalve
Fragment of mussel bivalve
Celt fashioned from stream worn pebble
Small lump of red ocher
Deer ulna awl
Perforated discoidal (chunky stone)*
Fragments of mussel shell
Holly Fine Engraved bowl

Copper-covered earspool*
Bark cloth (?) over skull, earspool, and area
west of skull
Lump of blue-gray pigment, t covered by bark cloth (?)
Alba arrow point,* found loose near floor of pit,
probably part of Artifact cluster 23-26
Copper-covered earspool*
Four Alba points* near left knee
Cluster of 6 flint flakes and exhausied cores
Two Alba arrow points*
Bone pin with copper-covered* bone ornament
fitted over one end
Fragments of mussel shell
Mussel shell bivalve, one edge possibly modified
Fragment of mussel shell bivalve
Fragment of mussel shell ornament, has one
perforation
Fragment of small wooden object overlaid with a
mosaic of small pieces of cut mussel shell and
copper*
Small fragment of turtle shell
Alba arrow point*

Metapodial pin is intricately
incised

No evidence of modification
Ventral edge possibly burned

Much of the interior and part of
the rim smeared with an
unidentified green pigment and
a small area on the lip is coated
with a dark substance
Companion to Artifact 22
14
C assayed to 1260 ± 70 BP
(Tx-1294)
Location not plotted on plan
Companion to Artifact 15
See Artifacts 43 and 44
Under Holly bowl (Artifact
14)

Probably an imitation of
a carnivore canine tooth

42

Texas Archeological Society

Offerings, F155 (Continued)
Number
43

Description

Remarks

Flint flake

Part of cluster containing
Artifacts 27-32
Associated with Artifacts 27-32
One perforated; others
incomplete

44
45-47

Flint core
Mussel shell ornaments

48-49
50, 51

Small fragments of unidentified bone
Two mussel shell ornaments

52-55, 57
56
58
59
60-64
65
66

67

Tiny pieces of cut mussel shell
Fragments of mussel shell ornament
Mussel shell ornament
Flint flake
Mussel shell ornaments
Fragments of cut mussel shell
Mussel bivalve
String of shell beads which extended from
center of right earspool across back of skull to
left earspool

Each has 3 perforations at one
end
Possibly from Artifact 40
Has 3 perforations at one end
Has 2 perforations
Most perforated at one end
No evidence of modification
Probably served to support
the earspools

*Made of material foreign to the Davis site area.
tMade of material possibly foreign to the Davis site area

Fll 6 and F131
Two additional, though unexcavated, disturbances can be traced to the surface of F144. A
considerable portion of one, Fl 16, was exposed in
the east wall of the excavations (see Figure 10) and
is an unmistakably large pit. As revealed in this
wall, Fl 16 measured 5 m across the top and at least
4 m deep. The fill was mottled but curiously
stratigraphical: a ca. l m thick, predominately red
layer at the top, followed by a thicker yellow zone
(generally 2.5 m), and, in the deepest portion,
patches of greenish loam. The red fill seems to
have been derived from F128, Fl32, Fl33, and
perhaps the upper part of the terrace, while the
yellow closely matches Fl44. To achieve this fill
sequence, the aboriginal backdirt must have been
carefully handled-a situation very much like the
enclosure (Fl33) about the pre-mound pit (F134).
The second pit, Fl31, is known only as a small
V-shaped disturbance in the north wall of the excavation, between F117 and Fll9. Because of its

limited exposure, it is only tentatively classified as
a burial pit.
Stage III Burials
Included in the third stage are burials Fl 17,
F161, and, tentatively, F152. F161 and Fl52 have
been dug, but Fl 17 is known only as a massive
disturbance in the north wall of the excavations.

F161
Stratigraphic Relationships
and Horizontal Location
Fl 61 was dug from the top of Fl 41 a. It cut into
the upper part of the southeast comer of Fl 19 and
the upper part of the southwest edge of F134. The
Stage IV burial, Fll8, in tum cut through the eastern portion of Fl61 (Figure 2la). The center of the
pit was at grid point N1009/W1027.10 (Figure 22)

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site 43

d
Figure 21. Burial Pit Fl61: a, Fl61 as exposed in wall of burial pit Fl18, which cut into the southeast corner of F161,
looking northwest; b, excavations of Fl 61 underway, looking northwest; c, offerings and partially preserved skeleton in
Fl61, looking north; d, detail of some Fl61 offerings, a cluster of Alba points and two celts. Note organic debris
adhering to the celts, looking west.

Pit Dimensions

Skeletal Remains

At the top, Fl61 is estimated to have measured
4 m north-south and 3 m east-west. At the floor it
measured 3.5 m north-south and 2.3 m east-west.
Maximum depth was approximately 4.3 m.

The recovered skeletal data consists of a
severely crushed skull and traces of bone in the
apparent pelvic region. The body was extended and
supine, with the head at the north end of the pit. A
primary inhumation is assumed. Age at time of
burial is based on dental wear, which suggests an
adult at least 25-30 years of age. Sex could not be
determined.

Pit Fill
The fill was more mottled and looser than the
surrounding matrix with some lenses of red and
gray loam to sandy loam. A thin layer (5-6 cm
thick) of greenish loam rested over the skeleton but
did not extend over the entire floor (see Figure 22).
A few traces of probable split cane matting were
found on the floor and apparent bark cloth was
about the skull (see Figure 21d). Two flint flakes
and a dart point were found while removing the fill
from F161 and are probable accidental inclusions.

Offerings
Unlike F134, Fl 19, and F155, the majority of
the offerings were found associated with the
skeletal remains and not along the north wall.
Placement of these items is shown in Figure 22;
they comprise:

44

Texas Archeological Society

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE-41CE19
MOUND C BURIAL 161

\.

.
2

\

=

"~
\

I

3

\•
"

'----------

___ J:

·r

Extent of Greenish Fill
Removed by
Burial Pit F118

i

0

Magnetic North

l.O
Meters

Approximate Extent of Mund C
When Fl 61 Was Placed
into The Mound

CROSS SECTION OF MOUND C
SHOWING STRATIGRAPHIC RELATIONSHIPS

x_ - - - - - - - - ""fhiiiz- : (
Wl027

"f16j } -

y

y

- - -

0

4

m::::liCI

Magnetic North

Meters

Figure 22. Plan and Cross-Section of Mound C Burial Pit Fl 61.

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

45

Offerings, Fl61
Number

1
2
3
4
5
6

7

8
9
10
11

12

Description

Remarks

Spatula-shaped celt of green metamorphic stone;*
probably extended partially under right knee
Chisel-like celt of same material
Cluster of 28 Alba arrow points* near lower
right leg
Cluster of 24 Alba arrow points* near left arm
Alba arrow point*

Wrapped in bark cloth?

Copper-covered* earspool
Copper-covered* earspool
Well made (Gahagan) biface*
137 disc-shaped bead with central perforation
Green pigmentt east side of skull
Green pigmentt west side of skull
Matting or bark cloth from northeast comer of
pit

13
14

Apparent bark cloth beneath skull
Choker-like necklace of pearl and small tubular
bone beads

15

Green pigmenttunder northern part of skull

Also wrapped in bark cloth?
Evidently in a quiver
Evidently in a quiver
Probably displaced from
Artifact 4
Left side of skull
Right side of skull;
companion to Artifact 6
Probable conch shell*

Combined with Artifact 13 and
14
C assayed to 1240 ± 100 BP
(Tx-1295)
Strung on 3-strand cordage;
5 or 6 strings of beads in front,
reduced to 2 strings in back

*Made of material foreign to the Davis site area.
tMade of material possible foreign to the Davis site area.

F152

Pit Dimensions

Di:e to the difficulty in distinguishing Fl4la
from Fl4lb on the south and western margins of
the mound, Fl52 cannot be assigned to Stage III
with confidence. It could conceivably be a Stage
IV pit.

At the top it is estimated at 3.5 to 4 m northsouth and 2.5 to 3 m east-west. At the bottom, the
pit was 3.20 m north-south and 2 m east-west. Maximum depth measured 3.30 m.

Pit Fill

Stratigraphic Relationships
and Horizontal Location
Despite the difficulties in interpreting the stratigraphic position of Fl 52, it definitely postdates the
Stage II burials and was cut by F118 (Figure 23a).
It had been dug into the approximate south-central
margin of the mound with the center of the pit at
grid point Nl 102.75/W1025.

Pit fill was very mottled and loose,
predominately red in color (Figure 24a). Scattered,
large hunks of charcoal were encountered in the pit
and may well have come from a charcoal-filled premound pit (similar to Fl66?) encountered by the
aboriginal excavators. Also found in the fill were a
quartzite pebble, a small fragment of bone, and
three sherds. No introduced green layer was

46

Texas Archeological Society

b
Figure 23. Mound C Excavations: a, looking northeast at wall along Wl024 line. Stratigraphic relationships between
pits F152 (earliest), Fl 18, and F156 (latest) are evident. Underlined features are mound additions; floor of excavations
at 100 m elevation; b, looking west at burial pit F156 after excavations complete. No skeletal remains preserved and
only offering is a late style Holly Engraved bottle. Note bench on north side of pit. Floor of excavations about pit at 100
m elevation.

a

b

c

d

Figure 24. Burial Pits Fl52 and F154: a, Fl52 partially exposed by Mound C excavations, looking north; b, skeletal
remains and offerings in Fl52, looking north; c, Fl54 partially exposed in Mound C excavations, looking north; d,
offerings and cane matting (light areas) in Fl54, looking north.

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
encountered but organic stains, possibly matting,
were present on parts of the floor (Figure 25).

Skeletal Remains
Portions of three, possibly four, skeletons were
uncovered in Fl52 (see Figure 24b). Three certain
individuals are represented by poorly preserved and
incomplete skulls, two of which are identifiable as
adults (Skeletons 1 and 2) and one as a juvenile
(Skeleton 3). The fourth individual is suggested by
the presence of several deciduous teeth found near
the mandible of Skeleton 2 (see Figure 25). The
limb bones and vertebrae were too fragmentary to
be clearly associated with a specific individual, or to
contribute to an interpretation other than to suggest
that the bodies were extended. It is further assumed
that they were primary and supine. The skulls seemed
somewhat displaced but were at the north end of the
pit. Rotation of the faces could not be determined.
Because of the condition of the bones, even
carefully guarded statements concerning age and
sex are either difficult or impossible. Only Skeleton 2 can be tentatively aged at the time of death
(about 25 years) based on occlusal attrition.

Offerings

47

were recognized in the walls of the excavations,
although, as already noted, Fl52 could possibly
belong to Stage IV rather than III.

F154
This burial was similar to F 152 in most respects.
It was relatively small and contained few offerings.

Stratigraphic Relationships
and Horizontal Location
Fl54 originated from the surface of mound
addition Fl4lb and was overlain by mound addition Fl58. Fl 18, which occupied the same stratigraphic position, cut into the upper, north edge of
F154 and, hence, was dug later. Fl54 was placed at
the southeastern edge of Mound C; the center was
at our grid point N1003.20/ W1020.30.

Pit Dimensions
At the top, Fl54 measured about 2.7 m northsouth and 1.7 m east-west, while at floor level it
was 2.25 m north-south and 1.5 m east-west. The
maximum depth below point of origin was 2.30 m.

Pit Fill

Only one item, a small, very crudely made
Hickory Engraved bowl, was found in F152. It had
been placed just northwest of the skull of Skeleton 1.
Organic stains found about and under the bowl probably represent matting placed on the floor of the pit.

Identical to that of F152, it was fairly unconsolidated and mottled, predominately red in color.
No greenish loam was present, but well-preserved
fragments of simple weave matting were found on
the floor of the pit. Two sherds were recovered
from the fill, well above the offerings.

F117
Although it had not been explored, Fl 17 is a
certain Stage III burial pit. The south margin of the
pit was slightly truncated by the ca. 1900 treasure
hunter trench and then by the 1968 and 1969 work.
As exposed in the north wall and east wall of the
Mound C excavations (see Figure lOc), the eastwest dimension of Fl 17 across the top is at least 8
m; the depth cannot be determined except that it is
undoubtedly in excess of 4 m.

Stage IV Burials
Two investigated pits, F154 and Fl 18, are attributable to the fourth stage. No additional ones

Skeletal Remains
None recovered, apparently because of the high
acidity of the soil. Four pH tests on samples taken
from near the floor of F154 yielded readings of 5.0
to 5.4. By comparison, the two pH readings from
Fl52 were 6.2 and 6.3; and one from Fl34 was 5.9.
In hopes of finding better evidence of the former
presence of bone, chemical tests were also run on
the F154 soil samples with negative results.

Offerings
Only three definite offerings had been placed
in F154 (Figure 26 depicts the placement of objects).

48

Texas Archeological Society

CJ

Skeleton 1
c?eton2
\"'

';;:)
Teeth .:r

()

Skeleton 3

\\

(Skel:;/
Limb Bones

+

l

Nl003
Wl024

HICKORY ENGRAVED
BOWL

l:==J

UNEXCAVATED

Magnetic North

CANE MATTING

0

1.0
J\leters

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41 CE 19
MOUND C BURIAL F152

Approximate Extent of Mound C When
Fl52 Was Placed into the Mound ----l!>•'-

Magnetic North

0

4.0

~

·Meters

CROSS SECTION OF MOUND C
SHOWING STRATIGRAPHIC RELATIONSHIPS

x

Figure 25. Plan and Cross-Section of Burial Pit F152.

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

49

1

UNIDENTIFIED
ORGANIC MATERIAL
CANE MATTING

\.fagnetic North

PIGMENT

[::=J

UNEXCAVATED
1.0
Meters

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE- 41CE19
MOUND C BURIAL 154

X-------

y

CROSS SECTION OF MOUND C
SHOWING STRATIGRAPHIC RELATIONSHIPS

y

Figure 26. Plan and Cross-Section of Burial Pit Fl54.

50

Texas Archeological Society

These include a small, crudely made Hickory Fine
Engraved bottle (1) and very small lumps of green
(3) and gray (4) pigment. Less clearly an intentional inclusion is a small, unmodified hematite
concretion (9) found near the pigment (3). Other
designations shown in Figure 26 are a fragment of
unidentifiable bone (2), organic staining (5) in the
northwest portion of the pit, and split cane matting
(7 and 8); number 6 was assigned to an object that
proved to be a natural inclusion.

FUS
Fll8 was a massive pit which contained the
remains of one individual. In placement of offerings and layout of the body, it most closely resembled Fl 61.

Horizontal Location
Fl 18 was dug from the top of F141b. It occupied much of the southern portion of Mound C
(Figure 27a) and cut into the edges of F155, F161,
Fl52, and F154. The center point of the floor of
Fl 18 was at N1007.25/W1023.50.
Pit Dimensions
Fl 18 is by far the largest of the pits excavated
to date in Mound C. Measurements at the point of
origin (103.60 m) were not possible but as exposed
at an elevation of 101.90 m (see Figure 27a), the pit
outline extended 9 m east-west by 7.5 m northsouth. At the floor level, it was reduced to 3.5 m
east-west by 3.5 m north-south. Maximum depth of

b

d
Figure 27. Mound C Burial Pit Fl 18: a, Fl 18 and Fl61 in floor of excavations at elevation 101.90 m, looking south; b,
Fl 18 in floor of excavations at elevation of 100 m. Unexcavated upper edge of Fl 18 visible in wall, looking east; c,
excavations of Fl 18 underway, looking southwest; d, offerings and skeletal remains in Fl 18, looking north.

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
the pit was 7 m. The south wall was straighter than
the other walls, perhaps as noted in Fl 19, to facilitate the removal of pit fill. Much of the east wall
was irregular because of a slump which occurred
during the aboriginal excavations.

Pit Fill
Probably because of the partial collapse of the
east wall, the fill ofFl 18 differed from that of other
pits in that the body was not placed on the floor of
the excavations. Rather, 25 to 30 cm of fill had
been spread over the floor, prior to the interment.
Traces of organic material suggested that the body
was rested on matting. A thin layer of greenish
loam was placed over the body and offerings but
not over the entire pit (Figure 28). The remainder
of the fill consisted of the jumbled earth characteristic of the other Mound C burials. Artifacts found
in the fill during the cleaning of Fl 18 include a
fragment of shell and 23 sherds. All were well

above the offerings and skeletal remains and hence
are regarded as accidental inclusions.

Skeletal Remains
One extended, supine burial with the head to
the north was recovered from F118. The arms and
legs were spread outward and the face rotated upwards. Based on the limited amounts of dental attrition, age is estimated at between ca. 20 and 25
years at time of death. Because of the poor condition of the bones (see Figure 27d) sex cannot be
determined.
Offerings
The offerings recovered from Fl 18 were either objects worn on the body or positioned very
close to it (see Figure 28). The similarity to the
arrangement ofF161 offerings is striking, with both
differing considerably from the layout of burial
goods in F134 and Fl 19. Items found comprise:

Offerings, F 118
Number

2
3
4

5
6
7

8

9
10
11

12

51

Description

Remarks

Copper-covered stone ears pool,* on right side
of skull
Small, unidentifiable fragment of shell
Organic material, possibly bark cloth, placed
over skull and nearby offerings
Bits of copper* about skull

Companion to Artifact 10

Small pieces of green pigmentt
Spatula-shaped celt of green metamorphic rock,*
placed at right knee
Cluster of 31 Alba points,* 1 Alba point base
fragment, 4 possible Perdiz points, and 4 stem
fragments
Cluster of 24 arrow points,* type uncertain
Waist band of tubular conch shell beads*
Copper-covered stone earspool* on left side of skull
Cluster of 3 Alba points* near left shoulder
Cluster of 35 arrow points,* most Alba but
some closely resemble Perdiz; near distal
end of left femur

14

C assayed to 770 ± 80 BP

(Tx-1231)

Probably fragments from
Artifact 1

Probable remains of a quiver;
one of the point stems
fits onto the blade of a
specimen from Artifact 8
Probable remains of a quiver
Companion to Artifact l
Probable remains of a quiver

52

Texas Archeological Society

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41 CE 19
MOUND C BURIAL F118

Extent of Greenish Deposit placed

~ Over Body and Offe:::s___ ....

. . ----··

\'

~

~ ,,,.,,,.-

'

'

\
\
'
\

\
\
l

16

\

..

:

__ 9

\

G2)

\i oJ \\u

',

!
I I Il

~.\

I

\_ _. _

Slump Deposit
from Wall
Collapse When
Pit Originally
Dug

13

\ 14)
"'
•• __ •• -2.M2...!!!.:. _

N1005

+w1024
UNIDENTIFIED ORGANIC
MATERIAL
UNEXCAVATED

0
Meters

1
Magnetic North

Approximate Extent of

Mound C When F1l8
Was Placed into
The Mound

y

CROSS SECTION OF MOUND C
SHOWING STRATIGRAPHIC RELATIONSHIPS
0

Figure 28. Plan and Cross-Section of Burial Pit Fl 18.

4

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site 53

Offerings, F118 (Continued)
Number

13

14
15
16

Description

Remarks

Cluster of 25 arrow points* and I stem fragment,*
stems pointed (Perdiz?) to bulbar; found near left
foot
Small well-made (Gahagan) biface*
Pearl bead choke-like necklacet
Pearl bead hand bandt

Probable remains of a quiver

Distal tip broken
Probably supported the
stone earspools

*Made of material foreign to the Davis site area.
tMade of material possibly foreign to the Davis site area.

The stylistic range of the arrow points and the
materials used to manufacture them are more variable in Fl 18 than in any other Mound C burial. At
least some of this variability probably reflects diversity in the exchange system for raw materials,
perhaps even finished products.

mound fill and not F149 (the Stage VI mound
addition), which is either missing, or
unrecognizable, in this portion of Mound C. F106
had been dug into the west central edge of the
mound, just north of Fl07 (see Figure 30).

Pit Dimension
Stage V Burials
Three burial pits, F106, F107, and Fl50 can be
assigned to Stage V, with each traceable to the
surface of the bench-like mound addition Fl58. A
fourth burial, F156, is only tentatively related to
Stage V. Three of the four, F106, F107, and Fl56,
have been excavated. Significantly, all were dug
from the margins of the mound; burial in large,
centrally-situated graves evidently was abandoned
by Stage V.

F106
This pit was badly damaged by the 1968 backhoe cut into the western edge of Mound C. All that
remained for careful exploration was the north end
of the pit (Figure 29).

Stratigraphic Relationships and
Horizontal Location
Fl06 originated from the top of Fl58 and cut
through mound additions F141 and F142, and wash
from Fl 44 (Figure 30). It was overlain by washed

Since so much of Fl 06 was removed before it
was recognized as a cultural feature, the maximum
north-south dimension could not be measured but
is estimated at 1.5 to 2 m. The east-west measurement across the top was 2.2 m, while across the
bottom it was 1.4 m. Maximum depth below point
of origin was 2.3 m.

Pit Fill
The fill removed from Fl06 was looser than
that of the surrounding matrix, contained
numerous mottles, and was yellowish red in color.
Five specimens were recovered from the pit fill: a
plain body sherd, a small incised body sherd, a
possible incised rim sherd, a neck fragment from a
Holly Fine Engraved vessel, and a rim sherd which
has a Chevalier Stamped design but not a
characteristic Lower Mississippi Valley paste
(Phillips 1970:65).

Skeletal Remains
None were recovered from F106.

54

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

d
Figure 29. Mound C Burial Pit Fl06: a, Fl06 in north wall of excavations; most of pit inadvertently removed by eastwest cut, looking north; b, small vessel on floor ofF106. Scale in decimeters and arrow pointing to the north; c, second
vessel found in F106 while troweling wall. Scale in decimeters and arrow pointing north; d, F106 after excavations
complete. Arrow points to small celt, the third offering found in F106, looking northwest.

Offerings
Two vessels and a small polished stone celt
(see Figures 29b-d and 30) were found at the north
end of the pit. Although much of F106 was
inadvertently removed, it is unlikely that any
offerings were lost.
Neither of the vessels can be identified with an
established type. One (see Figure 29c) is a compound bottle with a sloppily executed engraved
decoration on the lower section. The design consists of diagonal and concentric quarter-circles-a
very simplified and crude Holly motif. The other
vessel is a small jar with five rim peaks. On the
rim, and aligned with the raised portions of the lip,
are five small cross-hatched engraved panels. The
body of the jar is covered with four concentric
circles formed by pinching the clay into ridges.

While both of these vessels are probably locally
made, the jar, in particular, seems to resemble more
the later Caddoan ceramics. Neither is typical Davis
site pottery (Newell and Krieger 1949:81-145).

F107
F107 is the largest of the Stage V burial pits
and, in this respect, it resembles F134, Fl 19, F161,
and Fl 18. However, no skeletal remains were preserved and the offerings were few.

Stratigraphic Relationships
and Horizontal Location
The top ofF107 could be traced to the surface
ofF158, the bench-like mound addition which also

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

Fl06 CROSS SECTION

-

LOCATIO:"i Of fl06AND Fl07 WITHIN !\:IOlJND C

~IagneticWest

--

Magnetic ?'forth

1.0
Meters

0

..i..o

l!llCllilCl
Meters

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41 CE 19
MOUND C BURIALS F106 AND F107

Former Mound
Surface

,
I

I
Remm'ed bv

~

1968 Excavations l

~

Miniature Holly Fine
Engraved Vessel

I

I

Fl07 PIT FILL

QI Pigment

FI07 FLOOR PLAN

-

F107 CROSS SECTION

Magnetic North

[::J

UNEXCAVATED

Figure 30. Plan and Cross-Section of Burial Pits F106 and Fl07.

Backdirt from Looters Excavations

55

56

Texas Archeological Society

contained Fl06, F150, and Fl56. It was directly
overlain by washed mound fill (see Figure 30).
Fl07 was located in the west-central edge of
Mound C, immediately south of Fl06. The center
of the pit was at grid point Nl010/W1036.5.

Pit Dimensions

At the top, F107 was 3.75 m east-west and an
estimated 4.5 to 5 m north-south. At floor level, it
measured 2.6 m east-west and 3.9 m north-south.
Maximum depth was 3.5 m (see Figure 30).

Pit Fill

The fill in Fl 07 was loose and mottled, predominately red in color with gray lenses (Figure
3 la). Neither green loam nor organic stains on the
floor were encountered, but seven plain body sherds,
three punctated body sherds, one punctated rim sherd,
two untyped engraved sherds, one untyped incised
rim sherd, and a piece of petrified wood were recovered from the fill. All probably represent accidental
inclusions. When the fill was removed from the pit,
digging scars from the aboriginal excavations were
readily visible in the walls (see Figure 31).

Skeletal Remains

None recovered, apparently because of the high
acidity (pH reading of 4.8 to 5.4) of the soil placed
as fill in the grave.

Offerings

The positions of the objects recovered from
the floor of F107 are shown in Figure 30. They
include a Holly Fine Engraved bottle, a small green
stone celt, and fragments of a probable marine gastropod which was surrounded by an unidentified
grayish green material and apparently wrapped in
bark cloth, a miniature Holly Fine Engraved cylindrical jar, a lump of blue-gray pigment, and a
punctated body sherd.
The Holly bottle, celt, and shell were in the
northeast corner of the pit, while the Holly miniature vessel and the blue-gray pigment were near the
central portion of the pit, probably placed near the
body (bodies?). The sherd was found near the west

side and is dubiously listed as an offering. It was on
the floor of the pit and sherds were definitely included as offerings in F134 and Fl19; on the other
hand, three very similar punctated sherds were found
in the fill of F107.
Both Holly vessels are unusual. The miniature
measures a mere 6.3 cm in height by 4.3 c·m in
outside diameter, and is perhaps one of the smallest
Holly vessels known. A typical and fairly well executed Holly diagonal line and quarter-circle design, with red pigment rubbed into the engraved
and excised areas, covers its vertical walls. Aberrant Holly is the best description of the bottle. The
body is occupied by seven crudely engraved concentric circles, excised at the center but lacking the
usual diagonal and vertical line dividers. In shape,
the bottle is much like many Late Caddoan forms:
the neck of the bottle is slightly out-flaring and the
body has a slight shoulder. A similar bottle form
was recovered from another Stage V pit, F156.

F156
Fl56 was a small pit just south of Fl52 (see
Figures 4 and 23). It yielded one offering, a Holly
Fine Engraved bottle, and no skeletal remains.
Stratigraphic Relationships and
Horizontal Location

F156 was traced to the top of Fl58. It was
underlain by wash from Fl 41 and overlain by what
also appeared to be mound wash. Fl49, the last
addition to Mound C, could not be clearly recognized on the lower slopes of this portion of the
mound (see Figure 23a). The center ofF156 was at
grid coordinates N998/Wl024, which at the time of
aboriginal excavation was the south-central edge of
the mound.

Pit Dimensions

At the point of origin, Fl56 measured 2.7 m
north-south and an estimated 2.8 to 3 m east-west;
at floor level it was 1. 7 m north-south and 2.20 m
east-west. Maximum depth was 2.48 m. A
bench-like offset, 40 to 50 cm above the floor, was
present along the north wall (see Figure 23b and
Figure 32). A similar offset in the pit outline was
found in Fl57 (Figure 33).

-1968-1970

b

c

d

Figure 31. Mound C Burial Pit F107: a, F107 exposed in south wall and floor of Mound C, looking northwest; b,
excavations complete, looking south; c, late style Holly Engraved bottle and celt in Fl07, looking north; d, lower wall
of Fl 07 showing marks left by aboriginal excavations, looking north.

Pit Fill
The fill of Fl56 was mottled but predominately red in color. No green loam or organic staining on the floor was recognized. Five pottery sherds
and a piece of petrified wood were recovered from
the fill, well above the floor.

Skeletal Remains
None present.

than Early Caddoan ceramics. The engraved motif
on the bottle is more typical of Holly than the
design on a similar vessel from Fl07. However, the
lines are more widely spaced than those on the
Holly vessels from Fl 19 and Fl55, and no red
pigment fills the lines.
The bottle was found near the southwest corner of the pit (see Figures 23b and 32). This placement and the long axis of the pit floor being
east-west suggest that the body (bodies?) could
have been extended east-west rather than the usual
north-south arrangement.

Offerings
The Holly bottle from Fl56 is much like that
recovered from F107. It has a shouldered body and
a very long slightly outflaring neck, which are shape
attributes more characteristic of Late Caddoan rather

F150
F150 is an apparent small, Stage V burial pit
known only as an uninvestigated disturbance in the
west well of the Mound C excavations (see Figure

58

Texas Archeological Society

N998

Wl022

+

1

Magnetic North

~ UNEXCAVATED
Meters

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE-41CE19
MOUND C BURIAL F156

CROSS SECTION OF MOUND C
SHOWING STRATIGRAPHIC RELATIONSHIPS

Magnetic North

0
4.0
lillCJilllCl
Meters

X-

Fl59

y

Figure 32. Plan and Cross-Section of Burial Pit Fl56.

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

59

Stratigraphic Relationships and
Horizontal Location
Fl57 appeared to have originated from the top
of Fl 49 but even careful study in the field could
not make this a certainty. The center of the pit was
at N1000.24/Wl019, which at the time of the aboriginal excavation would have been in the southeastern quadrant of the mound.

Pit Dimensions

a

Since the eastern edge of the pit was removed
by the excavations, the east-west extent must be
estimated: probably 2 to 3 m at the top and 2 to 2.5
m at the bottom. At the top the north-south axis
measured 3.5 m and at the floor 2.5 m. Maximum
depth was 2.40 m. A high offset or bench (1.42 m
above the floor) extended across the north end of
the pit (see Figure 33).

Pit Fill

b
Figure 33. Mound C Excavations, Burial Pit F157: a,
burial pit F157 as exposed in east wall of Mound C
excavations, looking east; b, F157, excavations complete.
Floor of pit at ca. 99.30 rn elevation, looking east.

Virtually identical to that of F156 and Fl 06 in
that neither specially introduced fill nor traces of
floor matting was detected. A pebble and two plain
sherds were found in the fill and are judged to be
accidental inclusions.

Skeletal Remains and Offerings
None recovered.
4). The portion exposed measured 1 min depth and
1.2 min maximum width (north-south).

Stage VI Burials
Because of the root damage and severe erosion to Fl49, the final Mound C mantle, the recognition of Stage VI burials is, at best, difficult.
Indeed, in only one instance, F157, could a pit
outline be even vaguely traced from this addition
(see Figure 33a). Thus, how many, if any, of the
Stage V burials were in reality from the surface of
F149 rather than F158 is impossible to determine.

F157
Fl57 is distinctive in that it yielded neither
skeletal remains nor offerings (see Figure 33b).

Summary
Investigations in Mound C and the underlying
terrace have revealed that this portion of the Davis
site served as a mortuary area. In the approximately
one-third of the mound excavated, 11 burials were
cleared. One of these originated from the premound terrace surface and l 0 from the various
superimposed mound mantles. Roughly 15 to 20
pits are estimated to exist in the unexplored parts
of the mound.
Since village debris was sparse in, under, and
about Mound C, the cemetery was clearly spatially
isolated from the loci of habitation and mundane
activities. While separation of interments from a
habitation area is not an uncommon cultural practice, there are indications that Mound C was not
merely a burial ground for the disposal of deceased

60

Texas Archeological Society

members of the village. Most importantly, there
does not seem to be a sufficient number of individuals represented to account for the features and
refuse at the site. If the skeletal sample preserved in
six of the pits can be projected, an average of 3.1
persons were interred in each burial. Since the estimated total number of pits is between 25 and 30,
roughly 75 to 90 individuals were perhaps buried in
Mound C over a period of about 400 or so yearshardly a reasonable population density for the site.
From this it is inferred that the right to burial in this
portion of the site was not available to all segments
of the population. It was, in sum, a special burial
area for special persons.
Obviously, the question of the location of the
non-mound-deserving interments arises. Unfortunately, this cannot now be well answered as only
two apparent non-specialized burials have been unearthed at the site. One of these, F130, was found
just north of a structure, Fl25, the other, F164, in
the upper part of the borrow pit fill. Both contrasted
markedly with the mound burials; they lacked offerings and were flexed. In view of the still spotty
nature of the excavations at the site (see Figure 3),
it seems most reasonable to suppose that another,
less elaborate cemetery area must exist at or near
the site. The uninhabited area about Mound C is,
for example, one of several likely spots to search.
Repeated, but probably intermittent, use of the
special mortuary area is indicated by the stratigraphic sequence of the burials and mound
additions, and the layers of erosion between the
additions. Six major periods (Stage I-VI) are defined
(see Table 1). Although radiocarbon dating is
limited and not without problems, a total span of
approximately 400 years seems acceptable on the
basis of the six determinations run thus far (Table
2). From this admittedly small and somewhat
contradictory series (cf. Stage I versus Stage II), a
beginning date (for Stage I) of the middle to late
ninth century and a final date (for Stage VI) of the
late thirteenth to early fourteenth century are
suggested. Since the available burial space was not
fully utilized during any one stage, it is very
probable that mound renewal and burial were related
to either a predetermined schedule or cycle, or to a
consistent but periodic event, such as the death of a
prominent person (persons?) or a rite that required
the accumulation of special goods. If the stages are
of roughly equal duration, then each would span
about 60 to 80 years.

Within the special burial area there are marked
differences in the sizes, and locations of the pits,
as well as in the offerings and number of individuals included in each. In terms of pit size, offerings,
and location, two major classes can be defined
(Table 3):
Class 1: Large, deep pits in the central portion
of the cemetery; offerings numerous and include a number made from exotic (non-local)
materials; a layer of greenish loam was placed
over either the skeletal remains or the entire
floor. Excavated examples are F134, Fl19,
F161, and F118. Fll6 and F117 are very probable Class 1 pits visible in the walls of the
excavations but not investigated.
Class 2: Smaller, shallower pits in the margins
of the cemetery with few offerings and no greenish loam fill. Excavated Class 2 pits include
F152, F154, F106, Fl56, and Fl57; F150 is
unexcavated but probably of this class.

Of the 11 pits samples, two, F155 and F107,
deviate from this otherwise consistent pattern. In
size and absence of the greenish loam, F155 aligns
with Class 2; but in terms of the placement of the
grave within the mound and the number and kinds
of offerings it is closer to Class 1. On the other
hand, F107 is Class 1 in size, but Class 2 in lack of
green fill, and in placement and sparseness of
offerings.
All skeletal material recovered appeared to
represent primary, extended inhumations. Also
consistently, the pits extended into the pre-mound
surface (Table 4). The deepest Class 2 pit (F152)
went 1 m into Zone 1, while the shallowest Class 1
pit (Fl61) penetrated 1.9 m into Zone 1. Fl33, the
berm about the pre-mound burial, perhaps formed a
long-lasting boundary for positioning of the burials.
All definite Class 1 pits dating after Stage I cut into
it, and all definite Class 2 pits are beyond it. This
and the limited truncation of one pit by another
suggest that the internal structure of the cemetery
was well known (or well marked?) to the aboriginal
excavators.
Although much of the variability in the Mound
C mortuary practices can be reduced to two major
patterns, there are differences which are less
consistent. The most striking of these is the variation
in the number of individuals included in each pit.

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
Table2. Raw

Radiocarbon Assays f:rom Mound C
Remarks

Sample No.

Raw Libby Age

Fl34, specimen 1,
Stage I burial

Tx 1206

1010 ± 80 BP

Usefulness of assay limited
because it is on a composite of
woody charcoal, nutshell,
and com

Fl 19, green layer,
Stage II burial

Tx-913

1150± 80 BP

Woody charcoal contained in
introduced fill over burials

Fl55, specimens 16-19,
Stage II burial

Tx-1294

1260±70 BP

Decomposed bark?

Fl61, specimens 12 and 13,
Stage III burial

Tx-1295

1240± 100 BP

Unidentified organic material

Charcoal-filled pit (Fl 66)
overlain by wash from
mound additions containing
Stage III and IV burial and by
Stage V mound fill

Tx-1203

910±80BP

Woody charcoal; must
predate Stage V mound and
wash from Stages III and IV

F118, specimen 3,
Stage IV burial

Tx-1231

770 ± 80 BP

Decomposed bark?

Provenience

61

Having skeletal remains from just six pits (four of
Class 1 and two of Class 2) no doubt compounds
the problem. The number of persons included in
each of these pits ranged from one to eight, with no
apparent correlation between offerings, age of the
pit, or size of the pit. The only apparent trend is the
reduction through time in the numher of persons
included in the Class 1 burials (see Table 3), which,
in turn, may be associated with the shift in
placement of the Class l offerings. In Stages I and
II the majority of the burial goods were placed
along the north wall, and in Stages III and IV about
the body. In two of the three multiple burials, F134
and Fl 19, there are obvious differences in the
number of offerings associated with specific
individuals. Skeleton 5 in Fl34 and Skeletons 1
and 2 in Fl 19, on this basis, can be singled out as
more important than the other individuals in the
same pit. The pattern, however, does not obtain in
Fl52, the only other multiple interment. The sample
is too small to allow convincing predication, but

perhaps only Class 1 pits can be said to contain
individuals of different statuses/ranks.
Difficulties in interpretation also stem from
the very poor state of preservation of the skeletal
remains recovered, a condition attributed to the
high acidity of the soil. Postcranial bones were either largely disintegrated or completely missing,
and skulls were at best badly crushed. Determination of sex was impossible or tenuous, and estimation of age at time of death had to be based
exclusively on dental eruption and wear (see Table
4). Of the 19 individuals represented, only seven
could be sexed (Four possible males and three possible females)-scarcely a sample from which to
generate any conclusions. The age data are somewhat better and seem to indicate a bias in favor of
young adults, and not a mortality distribution in a
normal population. Several explanations could be
offered, but I believe the most probable is cultural
selectivity with most-perhaps even all-deaths
caused by immolation.

0\
N

~
~

Table 3. Summary of Mound C Burial Data

"';i;..
Dimensions (in m)
Top
Bottom

Depth

Centrally

Green

Approximate Number

Located

Layer

of Offerings*

No. of
Individuals

~

Class

;:::.
~

<::;:,

~

~

STAGE I
Fl34

7 x 5.5

6x4.3

3.5

yes

yes

250

8

-§'

I

C;".l
<::>
('":>

;;·

I

STAGE II
Fll9
F155

6.5 x 5
3.5 x 2.5

4x 3.7
2.85 x 2.1

STAGE III
F161
Fl52

4x3
3.5 x 2.5

STAGE IV
Fl18
Fl54

4
2

yes
yes

yes
no

290
75

4
1

112

3.5 x 2.3
3.2 x 2

4.3
3.3

yes
no

yes
no

200
1

4

2

9+ x 7.5+
2.7 x 1.7

3.5 x 3.5
2.25 x 1.5

7
2.3

yes
no

yes
no

140
3

1
?

1
2

STAGEV
F106
F107
Fl56

? x 2.2
4.5 x 3.75
2.7 x 3

? x 1.4
3.9 x 2.6
1.7 x 2.2

2.3
3.9
2.48

no
no
no

no
no
no

3
7
1

?
?
?

2
1/2
2

STAGE VI
Fl57

3.5 x 3

2.5 x 2

2.4

no

no

0

?

2

*Represents an individual specimen count (e.g., item number 7 in Fl 18, a cluster of 31 arrow points, is tallied as 31) but largely because of the condition of objects in the Class
I burials, the number is approximate and rounded off.

~

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

63

Table 4. Summary of Mound C Skeletal Remains*
Age

Sex

20-30
20-30
25-30
25-30
25-30

Male?
Male?
Male?
?
?

Skeleton 6

?

?

Skeleton 7
Skeleton 8

6

25-30

?
Female?

Fll9
Skeleton 1

30-35

Female?

Skeleton 2

25-30

Male?

Skeleton 3
Skeleton 4

Adult
Adult

?
?

Skeleton 1

20-25

?

Copper-covered stone earspool, gray
pigment, bark cloth, 4 (or 5?) Alba
arrow points

Skeleton 1

25-30

?

All offerings (see list) except shell
bead necklace and biface near body

Fl52
Skeleton 1
Skeleton 2
Skeleton 3
Skeleton4?

Adult
25
Juvenile
Juvenile

?

?

Hickory Fine Engraved? bowl
None
None
None

Fll8
Skeleton 1

2025

?

All offerings (see list) near body

Fl34
Skeleton 1
Skeleton 2
Skeleton 3
Skeleton 4
Skeleton 5

Directly Associated Offerings

Green pigment
Alba arrow point
2 Alba arrow points
Seed (Lithospermum?) necklace
Large Gahagan biface, gray pigment,
marine shell bead belt, possibly 4
arrow points
Red and green pigment, I Hayes
arrow point
None
Green pigment and a flake

Possible headdress, copper-covered
stone earspools, wooden pins?,
bone and shell bead necklace, a
biface, 7 flakes
Numerous bone pins, copper-covered
wooden earspools, chest ornament
of copper, wood, and conch shell
Plain sherd (accidental inclusion?)
6 bone pins between skeletons 3
and 4

Fl55

Fl61

?

?

*Burial pits Fl06, F107, F154, Fl56, and Fl57 contained no skeletal remains, presumably because they had been dissolved
by the acid soil.

64

Texas Archeological Society
Reflections

Although the analyses of the Mound C data
are incomplete, a preliminary attempt is made to
explain the mortuary practices:
(1) Mound C is a specialized and restricted
cemetery established early in the history of the
settlement and maintained as such for several
centuries.
(2) The additions to Mound C were periodic
and possibly related to the destruction and capping
of one or more communal (temple and related structures?) buildings at the site. Specifically, Stages
I-III may correlate with platform Mound A (Newell
and Krieger 1949) and Stages IV-VI with platform
Mound B (radiometric dating supports the latter
relationship but is ambivalent in uniting Stages I-III
with Mound A).
(3) The behavior linking these mounds is either a major, cyclic (renewal?) ceremony involving
human sacrifices, or the natural death of a high
status individual (individuals?) accompanied by retainer sacrifices. The limited, but apparently skewed,
mortality data and possible long gap (perhaps 60 to
80 years) between Mound C renewals favor the
f?rmer interpretation. In either case, synchronizat1?n of burial in Mound C and the destruction, cappmg, and rebuilding of certain structures most
simply explains the periodic events observable in
the three mounds.
(4) Variations in the size of the pits and in the
distribution of the offerings (see Tables 3 and 4)
sy~bolize differences in either individual or group
social status, or reflect differences in the circumstances surrounding death. The absence, or limited
o~currence, of the more exotic burial goods in the
v1llag~ suggest the existence of a stratified society
and gives strength to the former interpretation. The
possibility of status differentiation derived from role
~ariations in a major ceremony involving immolat10n, however, equally well fits the burial data.
(5) The seeming randomness in multiple versus single interments is probably a function of poor
sample size and does not appear to co-vary with
~ither size of pit or number and kinds of offerings
mcluded. The only observable trend is a decrease in
the number of individuals included in the later Class
l pits (at least in Stages III and IV). If, however, all
burials from any one stage can be proven to be
essentially contemporaneous, then this trend is more
apparent than real. Stage I, the only period probably completely sampled, can be viewed interest-

ingly in this light. It yielded one pit, F134, which
contained more individuals than were found preserved in any other pit. Perhaps both the subsequent increase in number of pits per stage (see
Table 1) and differentiation into two generally well
contrasting classes (see Table 3) is not so much a
formal_ change in mortuary practices as a spatially
spreadmg out of burials.
(6) The flat-topped Stage II addition (F132,
Fl28, and Fl44) and associated burials (F119 and
F155 as well as unexcavated Fl16 and F131) may
represent a climax in the mortuary behavior. At
l~ast in terms of the present sample this stage has
yielded the most copious offerings and the single
most massive addition to Mound C. This stage is
suggested as correlating with primary Mound A
(designated as the end of construction Phase 2 in
Newell and Krieger [1949:57-65]), which significantly is also the first flat-topped phase and the
most massive single addition to Mound A. 6
(7) By the same criteria, Stage V and VI appear to represent a decline in the elaborateness of
the mortuary behavior. Again, hypothesizing within
the severe limits of our small sample, Class 1 pits
are absent, or only pale expressions (i.e., F107),
and mound additions (F158, F159, and F149) are
smaller. A possible corresponding change may be
represented in the suggested equivalent platform
mound, B. Mound B, which clearly dates after A.D.
1150-1200, is notably smaller than Mound A and
would require less manpower to construct. The lack
of mid-fourteenth century radiocarbon dates from
the village is striking and suggests that it was largely
abandoned by this time, and that the changes in the
ceremonial practices are responses to a population
decline.
(8) In Mound C Stages T and II and perhaps
even III, there are hints of what might represent a
duality: the pairing of individuals in F134 and Fl 19
and the two layers of fill in Fl 16 and less clearly i~
Fl 17. It may be fortuitous, but a duality of structures
is suggested in the excavated portion of Mound A:
very large circular buildings F3 l and F45 beneath
the mound, and superimposed structures F39/F40
and F34/F36 in the primary mound (Newell and
Krie~er 1949:Figures 4 and 28). Conversely, a
duality does not seem indicated in later Mound C
or in Mound B (Figure 34).
(9) Finally, the primary functions of the mortuary practices are suggested as being twofold: a
validation of group solidarity, including structural

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
differentiation within the society, and a means of
maintaining an equilibrium in resources. The first
follows the well known theoretical postulates of
Radcliffe-Brown (1952) and need not be elaborated. The second is perhaps less evident and stems
from two constructs: (a) the existence of an exchange system for non-local raw materials (marine
shell, copper, stone for chipping and polishing, and
possibly some pigments), or perhaps even finished
goods, and (b) the apparent lack of an effective
intra-societal redistribution system-other than disposal in burials-for these goods. The interments
in the special burial area provided a vehicle for
both creating a demand for certain resources (or
establishing an equilibrium with the supply of those
resources) and displaying them as symbolic referents of the society.

MOUND B-AN INNER PRECINCT
Superficial Appearance
and Exploration
Mound B initially appeared as a low, sub-rectangular eminence near the western edge of the terrace, between Mounds A and C (see Figure 3).
Prior to excavation, it measured 68 m north-south
and 50 m east-west and was elevated a maximum
of 2 m above the modem terrace surface, with its
margins gently merging into the surrounding field
(see Figures 34 and 35a). The mound surface was
weedy and much modified by many years of plowing and erosion but not disturbed by excavations.
Unlike Mound C, sherds and lithic debris were
fairly abundant on the terrace surface in the vicinity
ofMoundB.
Our exploration of Mound B was begun in the
late summer of 1968 when we mapped it, established a grid, and dug a 2 m wide (N800 to N798)
test trench which extended from near the center of
the mound to beyond the western edge of the mound
wash. This trench revealed the mound to be composed of several construction phases (Figure 36a)
and to be underlain by occupational debris.
Time did not permit investigation of any of
these findings until the 1969 season, when the bulk
of the Mound B excavations were completed. Specifically, the 1968 trench (Unit 3) was cleared and
slightly enlarged; a second trench (Unit 7) was dug
11 m south of, and parallel to, the first; most of the
fill between the two trenches was stripped (Unit 8);

65

several (but not all) pre-mound features were investigated; and backhoe cuts (Nos. 8 and 9) were
made into the north and east sides of the mound
(see Figures 34 and 35). The southern portion of
the mound was not tested because of the proximity
to the peach orchard; however, in the 1970 season,
a backhoe trench (No. 13) was cut across the northern end of the mound.
Throughout the excavations extensive use was
made of a backhoe and front-end loader. Each stratigraphic unit in the mound was hand-tested and spotscreened through 1/4-inch mesh, then the fill was
removed by machinery. The only member which
proved to contain significant amounts of cultural
debris was the earliest (Mound B 1), and all screening concentrated on this unit. Approximately 15
percent of Mound B 1 fill was thusly sampled (because analysis of the artifacts from the Mound B
excavation is incomplete, no attempt has been made
to list specimens associated with the mound fills or
with the pre-mound features).
The pre-mound features were investigated with
greater care, with an emphasis on exposing features
and recording artifacts in situ (see Figure 35d).
Because of the time involved in this phase of the
excavations, only a limited section of the uppermost portion of the pre-mound surface, the top of
Zone 1, was cleared. Several shovel trenches into
Zone 1 revealed that additional features underlay
those exposed immediately below the mound. Unfortunately, they could not be excavated.
Despite the incompleteness of the Mound B
explorations, sufficient data were collected to date
the beginning of the mound and to establish its
major function. It was begun about A.D. 1200, or
less likely A.D. 1250, and most obviously served to
cap several structures. No features were found
within Mound B and whether or not it additionally
served as a platform for one or more buildings
cannot be ascertained. Nonetheless, it is clearly
analogous to Mound A and both are what is usually
called platform or temple mounds. Such a classification, however, tends to obscure what I believe is
more important; namely, the repeated construction
and destruction of certain buildings, which are believed to have been special-purpose structures serving the community as a whole. This pattern is best
revealed by Perry Newell's Mound A excavations,
but it is repeated in the Mound B area. Since the
emphasis on mounds is misleading and the term
temple too narrow, I suggest the designation inner

66

Texas Archeological Society

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE- 41CE19
MOUND B EXCAVATIONS
Tentative Extent of
,.···
Hypothesized
••.-"
Inner Precinct B ,.··

'\.

.....

)···········
•'•'

./......

/
:'

1\-Iagnetic North

.:

:/

.:......

l

.

Fll3.

..

FJ08

•

....

Fll2

.... .....

'\\

.

.
':

'

Fll5

.

'•
I

Fill

·2

( ___,..., .. /
~ ---Ar'-/-~
__
I

•

(

\

'.\78..!/WI090

\

\
' '

..--:'784/\VIO)

\
I
I

llH.lillm

.........

.......

,..,,_

,,;?

...l

..,,................................................................................................··
c::==i

D
1

TRENCH (HAND & BACKHOE)
POSTHOLE

PREPARED CLAY FLOOR

SHERDS (FROM 2 VESSELS) IN
CLEANED OUT POSTHOLE

CELI' IN POSTHOLE FILL

10

20

il!ETERS

Figure 34. Plan of Mound B Excavations and Major Features.

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

67

b

d
Figure 35. Mound B Excavations: a, looking east at Mound B before excavations; b, looking east at an early stage of
Mound B excavations. Trenches (Unit 3 on left and Unit 7 on right) were dug to discern mound stratigraphy; c, looking
southeast at Mound B excavations, crew stripping west face of mound; d, recording artifacts in situ beneath Mound B,
looking east-northeast.

precinct-meaning focal points of the community
in terms of public ceremonies, political and social
activities, and probably even residence of persons
who performed special rites and civic tasks.
Sequence of Events
Evidence of the first use of this portion of the
site comes from the dark midden and humus-stained
terrace underlying the mound fill and mound wash.
Structures were apparently fairly numerous and
probably constructed over a considerable period of
time, although the excavations were too limited to
yield a useful pre-mound sequence. The full range
of the uncorrected and uncalibrated 20 radiocarbon
dates (Table 5) from this context is A.D. 430 to
1240, with the convincing span being about A.D.

980 to 1270 (Valastro and Davis 1970:626-628 and
Table 5 herein).
About A.D. 1200/1250, at least two structures
apparently were deliberately destroyed and then
capped with earth to form a rectangular or subrectangular, truncated mound. Designated as
Mound B 1, this feature measured a maximum of
40 m north-south, 26 m east-west, and 2 m high.
No evidence of a structure was found atop the
resultant platform, although the possibility that one
(or more) did exist cannot be ruled out because
Mound B was so extensively eroded. Radiocarbon
dates have been obtained from three large, but
scattered, hunks of charcoal in Mound B 1 fill:
1100 ± 70 BP (Tx-1227), 910 ± 140 BP (Tx-1225),
and 700 ± 80 BP (Tx-1226). Only the last is
consistent with the numerous pre-mound dates and

68

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

d
Figure 36. Mound B Stratigraphy: a, looking north at section of north wall (N800.50 line), Mound B. Note breaks in
mound construction; floor of excavation to top of Zone l; b, looking east at construction phases visible in west face of
Mound B; c, looking east at hummocks making up first construction phase of Mound B; excavations down to top of
Zone l; d, looking south at eastern portion of ramp on north side of Mound B; floor of excavations to top of Zone 1.

can be said to approximate the age of Mound B 1
construction.
A layer of fine, laminated wash, which generally reached a maximum thickness of about 15 cm,
rested at the base of Mound B 1, and separated it
from the second building phase, Mound B 2. Mound
B 2 was preserved only on the slopes of the mound
and, very curiously, did not extend completely
around the mound-at least it was absent in the
walls of the backhoe trench (No. 8) dug into the
east side of the mound. It was probably during this
construction stage that a ramp was first added to
the north end of the mound. The ramp was approximately 4 m wide and extended in excess of 5 m
beyond the mound. No charcoal was observed in
this mound addition, nor in the one which followed.
The third and evidently final addition to Mound
B, Mound B 3, was separated from the second

addition by a fairly thick (generally 30 cm) layer of
wash. Little remained of this construction phase; it
was badly eroded and very difficult to trace (see
Figure 36a-b ). As best as could be determined, it
followed the same distribution as Mound B 2, being
observable only on the western and northern
margins of the mound and not present in the walls
of the backhoe trench dug into the east side of the
mound. The ramp at the north end of the mound
was possibly added during this phase, but without
more excavation this must remain tentative.
With the third addition, Mound B reached its
maximum horizontal extent: roughly 42 to 44 m
north-south and 28 m east-west. The final maximum height is estimated at 3 m based on the amount
of washed material and disturbed plow zone (Figure 37). The washed fill was predominately yellowish in color and seemed to match the color and

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

69

Table 5. Radiocarbon Assays from Mound B Area
Provenience

Sample No.

Raw Libby Age

Edge covered by Mound B2

Feature 108
Midden on floor
Midden outside structure

Tx-915
Tx-916

830±70BP
900± 70 BP

Tx-917
Tx-911
Tx-912
Tx-918
Tx-905
Tx-921

980±70 BP
870±160 BP
870 ±70 BP
810±70BP
850± 100 BP
950±70 BP

Tx-919
Tx-924
Tx-910

1310 ± 80 BP
940±70BP
830±70 BP

Feature 115
Posts 1 and 2
Midden under floor

Tx-923
Tx-920

1020± 100 BP
1150± 70 BP

Tx-914A
Tx-914B
Tx-925

790±70 BP
1060 ± 60 BP
1150 ±70 BP

Tx- 676

1120± 80 BP

Tx-675

1010 ± 80 BP

woody charcoal
Under Mound B wash

Tx-674

1420 ± 70 BP

Midden, Unit 3D
99.20 to 99.16

woody charcoal
Under Mound B wash

Midden, Unit 3A
99.26 to 99.06 m

charred com
woody charcoal
woody charcoal
Under Mound B 1

Midden, Unit 3C
99.36 to 99.16 m

woody charcoal
woody charcoal
Covered by mound wash

Midden, Unit 3B
99.7 to 99.06 m

woody charcoal
woody charcoal
woody charcoal
Partially capped by Mound B 1

Feature 120
Post? 2
Post? 2
Posts 1-6

woody charcoal
woody charcoal
charred log
charred log
woody charcoal
woody charcoal
Entirely capped by Mound Bl

Feature 112
Post 10
Posts 1-11
Post trench

woody charcoal
woody charcoal
Entirely capped by Mound B 1

Feature 111
Post 3
Post 20
Beam3
Beam3
Midden on floor
Midden on floor

Remarks

woody charcoal
Under Mound B wash

Tx-677

1070 ± 70 BP

Mound B 1 fill

woody charcoal
Scattered in fill

Tx 1225
Tx-1226
Tx-1227

910± 140BP
700 ± 80 BP
1100 ±70 BP

woody charcoal
woody charcoal
woody charcoal

70

Texas Archeological Society

textures of Mound B 2 and Mound B 3 better than
Mound B 1 fill. If this correlation is correct, then it
seems likely that the last two additions did extend
over the top of the mound. Moreover, the estimated
l meter removed from the mound could very well
have destroyed any traces of structures which may
have once existed on the platform. Including wash,
approximately 2,430 m 3 of fill was used to construct Mound B.

Description of the Mound Additions
MoundB 1
The first construction phase is by far the most
massive of the three. It was a very heterogeneous
unit, consisting of reddish fine sandy loam and
reddish clay with numerous yellowish to reddish
mottles and grayish lenses. Occupational debrissherds, chipping residue, and charcoal-was
scattered throughout Mound B 1, with the field
impression being that it was slightly more frequent
in the gray lenses. This combination of materials is
significant and must be considered in explaining
the source of the fill. The possibility that Mound B
1 fill was obtained directly from the village can be
confidently ruled out because of the yellow mottles.

In our excavations, yellow soil was only
encountered deep in the terrace, in the lower walls
of the pre-mound burial pit (F134), at the base of
the deeper backhoe cuts, and in the borrow pit west
of Mound B. Since the borrow pit also contained
trash, it seems most probable that Mound B 1 fill
was derived from a similar situation, perhaps even
the same pit. At any rate, a previously existing
trash-filled borrow area, probably on the terrace
slope, seems the most likely source and the best
explanation for the range of radiocarbon dates from
Mound B l. If the fill is from the one recognizable
borrow pit, which is strategically close to Mound
B, then a long and complex history is obviously
indicated for this pit.
The manner in which Mound B 1 fill was
deposited is also of importance. It was begun by
piling loads of dirt into distinct, haystack-like,
hummocks which were then joined to form one
mound (see Figure 36c). No cultural features or
erosion separated these fills and they must
represent an essentially continuous activity. Our
technique of excavation did not allow us to plot the
full extent of the hummocks, but they appeared
from the walls of the excavation to have outlined
the desired horizontal dimensions of the mound and
to correspond closely with the margins of certain

WEST

EAST
Plow Zone

Mound B2
Mound Bl

STRUCTURE Fl20

STRUCTURE Fl12/Fll4

On FI08

STRUCTURE Fl II

830±70BP(h-915l
Below FI08
1-l~O:::IOO

BPIT-:.-67-1)
BclowF!!l
I l2Jl±80BP(h-676)

Radiocarbo11 Assa)S Arc Uncorrected

0

Raw Uhhy Dates on Wondy Charcoal
lJnle!.s lndk;ited Otherwise

LO

~

Meters

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41CE19
SIMPLIFIED CROSS SECTION OF MOUND B

Figure 37. Simplified Cross-Section of Mound B.

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
underlying structures (see Fl 12 and Fl 11 in Figure
34). An identical mode of construction is indicated
for Mound A, where Zones 2 to 5 formed four
small, separate rises which were then joined to
form a platform mound (Newell and Krieger
1949:58-59). In his discussion of the physical
stratigraphy at the site, Krieger classed these and
the pre-mound occupational remains as a single
chronological unit (Phase 1). However, in light of
our Mound B findings, I am convinced that these
two units should be analytically separated and that
the hummocks are part of the first Mound A
platform stage.

MoundB2
In contrast to Mound B 1, the second addition
was a better ordered unit. It mostly was composed
of two well-lensed deposits, a yellowish brown sandy
clay and a dark red sandy clay. Both fills were very
compact, brightly colored, and free of cultural detritus. Very similar soils composed the bulk of the
ramp encountered in tests at the north end of the
mound and it consequently is believed that the ramp
was added at the same time as Mound B 2.
Mound B 2 was considerably eroded (see Figure 36a-b), and its former extent is difficult to determine. In the excavations into the west side of the
mound it was present only on the flanks of the
mound, where it generally measured about a meter
in thickness. It seemed to thin out across the north
end and to disappear on the east side. From this, it
appears that Mound B 2 did not uniformly extend
about Mound B 1, although I suspect that it once
capped the top of the mound.
While a layer of erosion separated Mound B 1
from Mound B 2, there may not have been a long
time gap between the two. Mound B l seems unfinished (at least probably lacking a ramp), and the
presence of cultural refuse in Mound B 1 but not
Mound B 2 (or Mound B 3) seems more than fortuitous. Perhaps it would be more accurate to regard
Mound B l as a rubble core and Mound B 2 and 3
as facings.

MoundB3
Little can be added to what has already been
said about Mound B 3 as most of it had apparently
eroded away (see Figure 36a-b). What remained
was found only on the western and northern sides

71

of the mound where it reached a maximum thickness
of about 40 cm. It consisted of a rather homogenous
mottled yellow, fine sandy loam which contained
no occupational refuse. There was a notably thicker
layer of wash separating Mound B 2 and Mound B
3 than that between Mound B 1 and B 2. It is
cautiously suggested that this may be indicative of
a greater time gap between the events represented.

Description of Pre-mound Features
When our excavations into the west side and
north end of Mound B reached the pre-mound level,
a number of cultural disturbances were encountered and designated as features. None of these
could be fully cleared and only one, Fl 11, was
reasonably well sampled. From the data collected,
as many as eight buildings may be present under
mound fill and mound wash.
Initially, it seemed that Mound B was simply
an earthen platform erected over a portion of the
village. While in part this may be the case, the
evidence from both Mound B and Mound A investigations strongly supports the deliberate destruction
and careful capping of certain structures (i.e., a very
definite relationship exists between Mound B and
some of what underlies it). Of the eight(?) buildings
found, two, Fl 11 and Fl 12, were completely covered by Mound B (see Figure 34) and are the most
obvious candidates for special-purpose structures.
None of the remainder is fully covered, although
two somewhat anomalous features, Fl 08 and Fl 15,
are partially under mound fill and may be related to
Fl 11 and F112. These four structures are hypothesized to be components of an architectural complex which formed a functional unit-an inner
precinct of rhe community. Their relationship to
other features (Fl09, F120, F121, F122, F124, and
F167) in the Mound B area is speculative, largely
because of the incompleteness of the excavations.

Feature 111
Fl 11 is the most interesting and probably most
significant of the pre-mound structures.
Approximately 25 percent of this feature was
cleared and it is the only building that on the basis
of our excavations can be described in any detail. It
was a quite large, neatly circular building with a
projected diameter of 18 m (see Figures 34 and
38a). Since it had burned and probably been capped

72

Texas Archeological Society

shortly afterwards, Fl 11 was well preserved and
easily traced. Because of Fl 11 's considerable
diameter, almost half of Mound B overlies it.
Several cm of dark soil containing occupational
debris separated the prepared floor of this structure
from the base of the mound. Specimens found in
this layer were recorded in situ (see Figure 35d)
but, since a similar thin, midden-laden deposit
seemed to extend under all of Mound B, there is no
certainty that all of these objects were associated
with Fl 11.
The exposed portion of the outer wall consisted of 28 major posts and 24 minor posts with a
small offset in the north side and a gap, 1.8 m wide
and presumably an entrance, in the west-northwest
section of the wall. Maximum diameters of the

major post molds ranged from 7 to 22 cm (average
14 cm). Each had been deeply set, an average of
89 cm, with the few that were sectioned being in
individual, downward sloping trenches dug perpendicular to the wall. Probably all of the major wall
posts were similarly set, perhaps to facilitate erection of what must have been rather long poles.
The 24 minor post molds (average diameter of
6 cm and depth of 40 cm) formed a second circle
immediately exterior to the first. Since they contained smaller poles it seems probable that they
relate to the wall construction and not to the roof. A
somewhat similar group of wall posts partially encircled one of the two comparable large structures,
F45, under Mound A (Newell and Krieger
1949:47-48 and Figure 24). However, the small

b

d
Figure 38. Mound B Features: a, partially exposed outline of large circular structure, Fl 11, underlying Mound B. Band
C indicate location of posts which yielded a celt (B) and sherds of two vessels ( C), looking south; b, celt found in post
fill, Fl 11. Scale in decimeters and arrow pointing to the north; c, sherds found in post mold, Fl 11. Scale in decimeters
and arrow pointing to the north; d, looking west at partially excavated structure, F120, covered by wash from Mound B.
Numbers indicate posts.

Story -

1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

posts in Fl 11 were set only 10 to 20 cm beyond the
main posts, while in F45 they were separated from
the large posts by slightly more than 2 m.
The floor of Fl 11 consisted of a compact layer
of red sandy clay which reached a maximum thickness of 8 cm and which ranged in elevation at the
surface from 99.28 to 99.24 m. It lapped up against
the major exterior posts and had been clearly laid
after these posts were set into place. Curiously, a
separately laid and somewhat sandier, more
orangeish-colored floor extended 1 m beyond the
outer wall. A shallow depression which contained
the smaller posts as well as several charred horizontal beams (see Figure 38a) separated this external floor from the interior one. Dubbed the
"sidewalk," this exterior clay layer suggests that
there may have been something special about the
area immediately about Fl 11-perhaps comparable
to the partial wall(?) about F45.
Interior features were not numerous but were
more frequent than in most of the village structures
uncovered by our excavations. They include a center hearth and five interior posts. The hearth was
shallow, circular in outline, ca. 1.18 min diameter,
basin-shaped in cross-section, and lined with the
same clay used to construct the interior floor. The
center of the hearth extended a maximum of 6 cm
below the floor level while the margins were flush
with the floor. Some ash and midden debris were
found within the hearth but no charcoal for radiocarbon dating. Archeomagnetic samples were collected and analyzed by Dr. Robert L. DuBois of the
University of Oklahoma. Unfortunately, Dr. Dubois
indicated that he cannot date these samples. Since
the hearth was not sectioned it is not certain whether
or not it overlay a center post. Probing with a metal
rod suggested a disturbed area beneath the hearth,
but since the hearth area was damaged by animal
burrows it was impossible to identify the exact nature of this disturbance.
Four of the interior posts were found in the
north central portion of the structure and, on the
basis of proximity, seemed to bear a possible relationship with the nearby offset in the outer wall
(see Figure 34). Three of these interior posts were
roughly aligned with one another and may have
formed an interior partition. The fifth post was an
isolated feature in the west central portion of the
structure, removed 6.5 m from the hearth. The second of three aligned posts in the northern part of
Fl 11 was also 6.5 m from the hearth. In addition to
being equidistant from the hearth, both posts, 2 and

73

5, were slightly larger in diameter and more deeply
set than the other interior posts. This suggests that
they may have served as roof support posts and that
complete excavation of Fl 11 will yield two more
similarly positioned posts (i.e., reveal a four-post
roof support pattern).
When the fills in the interior posts were
cleared, interesting artifacts were found in two of
them: the first of the three aligned posts and the
fifth post (see Figure 38a-c). The nature and placement of the artifacts leaves little doubt that they
were offerings. The first-mentioned find was a very
small celt fashioned from rhyolite porphyry, a
non-local material. It had been placed in the fill of
the post hole and abutted against the pole (see Figure 38b). The second find consisted of 156 sherds,
carefully positioned concave side up, and 26 flakes
in the post mold. The sherds represent two large
vessels, both of which could be about two-thirds
reconstructed. They include a Davis Incised constricted neck jar and an exceptionally big Holly
Fine Engraved bottle. Six additional sherds from
the Holly bottle were found to the west of the post
mold, in the shallow depression between the exterior and interior flooring. These six pieces were
strongly oxidized from the burning of the structure;
the sherds in the post mold were not. Since the celt
had to be positioned when the post was being set,
it is interpreted as an offering commemorating the
building of the structure. The sherds and the flakes,
on the other hand, had to have been placed after
the post was removed and hence are interpreted as
offerings commemorating the destruction of the
building.
Evidence of burning-baking of the floor and
charring of construction material-was most obvious in the central and western portions of Fl 11. No
wattle-impressed daub was recovered, however, and
the fill of most of the major exterior posts contained surprisingly little charcoal. These findings
suggest that the structure had not been daub-covered and, moreover, that it may have been at least
partially dismantled prior to burning. Regardless, it
is significant that of the 13 probable structures encountered by the 1968-1970 excavations, Fl 11 was
the only one that had clearly been burned. Thus, the
large size of the building, the presence of some
unusual architectural features (mainly the exterior
flooring and wall offset) and post offerings, all
seem to establish its identity as a special-purpose
structure. Its dimensions further suggest a communal or assembly building, which calls to mind an

74

Texas Archeological Society

early eighteenth
Hasinai Caddo "temple"
described by Fray Espinosa and summarized by
Griffith (1954:70) as:
The center of Hasinai ceremonials and religious
observances was the fire temple, of which the
Gran Xinesi was custodian. It was maintained
'like a church, or cathedral,' first in the Hainai
[one of the tribes comprising the Hasinai Confederacy) village, and after 1716, between the
Hainai and the Neches [another tribe in the
confederacy]. It was a circular, thatched structure built like the dwellings, but with larger
dimensions. Here were held the solemn assemblages incident to such functions as tribal consultation, ceremonials for making rain to mature
the crops, and preparation for war.
Six C 14 determinations have been obtained from
Fl 11, four from charred construction materials and
two from scattered charcoal in the house interior
(see Table 5). Within the 1 sigma range, these extend from 980 ± 70 BP to 810 ± 70 BP, with the
most probable time of construction being between
AD. 1050 and AD. 1250. Fl 11, or more probably
its destruction, possibly relates to Stage IV in the
special mortuary area, which is radiocarbon-dated
at AD. 1200-1300.
A small test pit dug through the floor of Fl 11
showed it to rest on top of a midden-stained soil at
least 15 cm thick. Thus, it is clear that the area was
used prior to Fl 11, but it is impossible to define the
nature of this use.

Feature 112
This feature is known only as an arc of 12 post
molds 4.5 m north of Fl 11 (see Figure 34). It apparently represents a circular structure with a probable diameter of 11 m-a size notably smaller than
Fl 11 and much like the presumed village domiciles. If the outline has been correctly projected, all
of Fl 12 is overlain by Mound B 1. The floor was
not prepared and only one possible interior post
was recognized. This post (Fl 12-10), however, was
very close to the outer wall and could be an extra
wall member. The upper part of Fl 12-10 fill yielded
71 pieces of lithic debris, three fragments of bone,
and two plain pottery sherds-an assemblage that
seems to suggest floor sweepings dumped into a
hole created by removal (or rotting?) of a post. That

this deb1is might be something more significant is
not obvious, although the number of specimens
included is striking and not duplicated in the several hundreds of posts we cleared.
The floor of Fl 12, at least the depth at which
post outlines were first detected, was at 99 .20 m,
an elevation slightly below the floor of Fl 11 (99 .28
to 99.24 m). Nonetheless, the two structures are
probably similar in age. An erratic series of three
C14 dates includes: 1310 ± 80 BP (Tx-919), 940 ±
70 BP (Tx-924) and 830 ± 70 BP (Tx-910). The
first of these, the post which yielded the concentration of debris, seems too early while the other
two significantly overlap with the Fl 11 dates.
My assumption that Fl 12 is a component of
the inner precinct is based primarily on its relationship to the mound and secondarily on its apparent
contemporaneity with Fl 11. Our limited exposure
provides no clues as to specific function, other than
the size would seem to indicate something quite
different from Fl 11-perhaps a residence for a religious/civic functionary (or functionaries?). It is
conceivably duplicated by Features 42, 43, and/or
44 under Mound A
Features F108, F109, FUS,
F121, and F122
The remainder of the features covered by
Mound B and Mound B wash were very incompletely exposed and hence difficult to interpret.
Two, F108 and Fl 15, consist of irregularly shaped,
prepared floors of orange clay partially capped by
Mound B and lying west of Fl 11 and Fl 12 (see
Figure 34). The exposed portion of Fl08 formed a
long narrow strip which was oriented
northeast-southwest and measured 4 m wide and 6
m long. Posts were found only across the south
end of the floor, where there were three set into
individual post trenches. The absence of other wall
or roof support numbers along the exposed margins of Fl08 suggest a ramada-like structure. A
thin layer of fill containing flecks of charcoal and
other occupational debris covered the floor and
areas adjacent to Fl08. Two C 14 dates (see Table
5) have been obtained from woody charcoal from
this midden; one of 830 ± 70 BP (Tx-915) from
just above the floor and one of 900 ± 70 BP
(Tx-916) from the same elevation but just beyond
the structure. Contemporaneity with Fl 12, which
lies immediately to the east of F108, is suggested;

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
indeed, it may be that F108 is functionally related
to that structure.
Perhaps significantly, Fl 15 seems to bear a
similar spatial relationship with Fl 11. Like Fl 08, it
consisted of a prepared clay layer with the exposed
floor measuring about 7 x 8 m. The overall shape,
however, is difficult to project from our data-it
may have been sub-rectangular or oval. Five rather
scattered posts were found associated with Fl 15
but removed from the outer edges of the floor. A
clear pattern was not evident except that something
other than an enclosed structure is indicated. Two
of the Fl 15 post molds, both in the eastern portion
of the feature, contained concentrated ash deposits
along with a few flakes and sherds. There was no
evidence of in situ burning and presumably these
deposits represent trash dumped into the holes left
by decayed posts or a dismantled structure. Since
these two posts were clearly overlain by Mound B
fill, it seems possible that Fl 15 may have been
deliberately destroyed, perhaps at the same time as
Fl 11. Unfortunately, for this interpretation, the one
C 14 date pertinent to Fl15, 1020± 100 BP (Tx-923),
is earlier than was predicted.
Fl 15 was underlain by dark, occupation stained
soil which yielded a radiocarbon date of 1150 ± 70
BP (Tx-920) and two disturbances, Fl21 and F122
(not shown in Figure 34), that appeared to represent
posts. Fl 08, on the other hand, was overlain by
Fl09-a reddish brown prepared(?) layer, an apparent floor, and a post exposed in the south wall of
the first cut (Unit 3) into Mound B. The visible
floor was entirely covered by mound wash (as much
as 50 cm), measured 3.55 m across, and was a
maximum of 5 cm in thickness. The one exposed
post hole was at the west edge of the floor. It was
not cleared, but as sectioned by the Unit 3 excavations, it had a diameter of 20 cm. Fl 09 extended for
an undetermined distance to the south where it overlay Fl20.

Feature F120
F120 is known as an arc of six posts found in a
small test trench dug into the top of the terrace after
overlying washed mound deposits had been
removed (see Figure 38d). A small, ca. 5 m in
diameter, circular building is represented. The posts
were rather evenly spaced, about 50 cm apart, and
ranged in diameter from 9 to 13 cm and in depth
from 10 to 62 cm. They were detected at an

75

elevation of 99.0 to 99.03 m, 30-77 cm below the
top of the terrace, making Fl20 the most deeply
buried structure found in the Mound B area. Since
there was no evidence that it had been built in a pit,
it was presumed to be one of the earliest structures
we uncovered in the Mound B area. The two dates
of 1060 ± 60 BP (Tx-914B) and 1150 ± 70 BP
(Tx-925) on woody charcoal recovered from posts
bear out this placement. A third date on corn from
one of the posts was, as expected, later: 790 ± 70
BP (Tx-914A).

Features F113, F123,
F124, F167
The other cultural disturbances found in the
excavations in, under, and about Mound B were too
poorly exposed to permit much discussion. Two,
F124 and F167, are small clusters of apparent posts,
two and three respectively, which may represent a
single structure. They were found beneath mound
wash, in the floors of the two backhoe trenches dug
into the northern portion of the mound. Two more
posts found beneath Mound B, between Fll2 and
F108, were designated F123. These were set about
25 cm apart and may represent some sort of rackat least they now appear as two isolated posts. Finally, Fl 13 consists of three circular (10-20 cm in
diameter), charcoal-filled pits found in the eastern
end of Unit 3, under the edge of mound wash. One
contained charred corn, the other two yielded burned
woody material. Identical pits were common in the
village excavations, where they were most frequently found in clusters, apparently representing
outdoor working areas.

Summary and Reflections
Limited excavations into Mound B, Mound B
wash, and the top of the underlying terrace (Zone
1) uncovered several distinct man-deposited fills
and portions of perhaps eight structures. When combined with the strikingly similar data from the earlier investigations in the Mound A area (Newell
and Krieger 1949), some new interpretations can
be offered for what is generally referred to as temple
or platform mounds:
(1) Both Mound A and Mound B represent
specialized, carefully ordered activity areas.
(2) To emphasize the importance of these
areas to the community as a whole and to imply

76

Texas Archeological Society

that they were probable focal points of major
religious, political, and social activities, I have
suggested the term inner precinct in lieu of the
more traditional temple and temple mound
terminology.
(3) The best evidence for the inner precincts
comes from a complex of structures underlying
Mounds A and B. That nearly identical buildings
occur beneath each is, in fact, the primary basis for
my definition of the inner precinct.
(4) The structures capped by these mounds
can be tentatively grouped into two classes:
Class 1: Very large, circular buildings: Fl 11
under Mound B and F45 and F3 l under Mound
A. These differ from Class 2 structures and
those in the village in being larger (ca. 18 m
versus 10 m) and having distinctive architectural features. Specifically, these features are
the partial double wall about F45, the wall
offset and prepared outer floor of Fl 11, and,
less confidently, the concentric walls and numerous interior features of F31. The last structure Newell (Newell and Krieger 1949:32-35)
interprets as three superimposed buildings
(F31, F37, and F38).
Class 2: Smaller, and architecturally less elaborate, circular structures, including Fl 12 under
Mound B and F42, F43, and F44 under Mound
A. In terms of size and form, these buildings
are indistinguishable from village domiciles.
Their inclusion in the inner precinct is based
solely on their relationships to the mounds.

I suspect that both inner precincts included
other buildings and perhaps even open areas (e.g.,
plazas). On the basis of our present information,
however, these are extremely difficult to define.
For Inner Precinct B, I have suggested that F108
and Fl 15 may be relevant because they are partially capped by the mound and are somewhat aberrant in form. F35, a strange "maze" of walls, and
F9, a sub-circular structure with a raised clay outer
wall "rim" and a probable extended entrance, may
be candidates in the Inner Precinct A area (Newell
and Krieger 1949:26-30, 40-43).
(5) Partially because of the incompleteness of
the excavations in both inner precincts and partially
because of inherent problems in determining associations and functions from archeological data, it is
difficult to link specific activities with either Class

1 or Class 2 structures. The former, nonetheless,
seem to be the most significant constituents of the
complex. Size suggests an assembly place, perhaps
for both ritual and socio-political gatherings. The
offerings in the interior posts of Fl 11 are cited as
collaborating evidence of the special importance
attached to this class of building. Newell d!d not
recover any obvious offerings with the two Class 1
buildings in Precinct A. However, a duality of buildings is maintained through time (Newell and Krieger
1949:Figure 28), with F34/36 and F39/40 being
built on top of primary Mound A. If these structures are indeed Class 1 buildings, they have been
considerably modified in form.
There are presently no apparent clues to the
functions of Class 2 structures and the very tentatively linked ancillary buildings. The size and form
of Class 2 features suggest possibly the residences
of persons with special tasks.
(6) Cyclic destruction and renewal of both inner precincts is clearly evident, although the
chronologic and behavioral details are not precisely
defined. In Precinct B, there are indications of deliberate burning and probably dismantling of at least
Fll l. This event was followed by three superimposed mound cappings separated by layers of erosion. No buildings can be linked to any of the
resultant platforms and whether or not any ever
existed cannot be answered by our present information. Additionally, midden-stained soil underlying
Fl 11 is unexplored. Despite these problems, it is
reasonable to say that four, perhaps three, renewal
stages are present: four, if one pre-mound stage is
represented and each mound addition is counted as
a separate stage; or three, if, as I considered earlier,
Mound B 1 is interpreted as an unfinished rubble
core. The question of precisely how many stages
are defined from Precinct B is not as important as
the validity of the intermittent, repetitious character
of the activities represented. Evidence for this is
good, and permits a working hypothesis which reconstructs four sequential stages and interprets occupation under Fl 11 as possible older village
remains. Possible village remains predating use of
this portion of the site are very poorly sampled but
possibly are represented by F120, the small circular
structure beyond the mound and C 14 dated at about
A.D. 900/950:
Stage 1 includes Fl 11 and F120 and less clearly
Fl08 and Fl 15.

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
Stage 2 is represented only by Mound B 1.
Stage 3 and Stage 4 are represented by Mound
B 2 and Mound B 3, respectively .

(7) The data from Precinct A in some respects
are better, although they also present difficulties in
interpretation. 7 In light of what information is available three major renewal stages are probable. These,
however, are significantly distinct from the three
phases recognized by Krieger (Newell and Krieger
1949:69-70). They differ in particulars of definition and, more importantly, in concept. Krieger regarded his phases as representing " ... a cultural
continuum with occasional changes in tastes and
accretion of new traits ... " (Newell and Krieger
1949:69). I, on the other hand, conceive of my
stages as representing major, periodically scheduled renewals of a highly specialized segment of
the community. I also see less clearly the evidence
for sequential changes in the material culture, particularly in the architecture and ceramics. The three
stages are:
Stage 1 of Inner Precinct A is minimally defined as including the buildings (F31, [37 and
38?], 42, 43, 44, and 45) clearly covered by the
first primary mound. In terms of content, this
differs from Krieger's Phase 1 by excluding
Zone 1-5 and Features 10-18. Structures 10-18
are not considered because: (a) there is no way
to relate them chronologically to Stage 1, and
(b) their form and evidence of rebuilding is
better explained as an intensively utilized segment of the village. The reasons for regarding
Zones 1-5 as part of Stage 2, rather than Stage 1,
have already been discussed.
Stage 2 includes primarily Mound A, at least
two of the four structures (F34, 36, 39, and 40)
atop this platform, and a rather poorly recorded
"bank" (altar?) of green clay (Newell and
Krieger 1949:60-63 and Figure 28). Much
confusion exists in Perry Newell's notes on
this portion of the mound. The exact chronology of these features and the details of
mound construction are impossible to interpret
with certainty. Feature 34, a sub-square
structure, was assumed by Newell to be
superimposed over F36, a rather small circular
building. Feature 39 is also a sub-square
structure. In neither case of "paired" buildings

77

did Newell find definitive field evidence of
sequence. Thus, two unverifiable explanations
exist: (1) there is a sequence but it was not
recognizable in the field, or (2) there are only
two complex buildings represented (compare
with F31, F37, and F38 in Stage 1). Were the
former situation the accurate one, then these
buildings may represent two different stages,
or be evidence of less portentous renovations.
If the latter could be proved correct, then the
question of stage definition would be simpler
but the architectural form stranger.
Krieger's Phase 2 differs from my Stage 2
in that he included only mound zones 6-9 and
suggested that a maximum of eight buildings
may be associated (Newell and Krieger
1949:69-70, 188-190). In addition to the four
structures on the primary mound, he tentatively
lists F3, F6, F9 and F35. Features 3 and 6 were
found east of the mound and are included primarily because they, like F34, F39, and F40, are
sub-square. Features 9 and 35 were closer to the
mound. This and their unusual form seem to be
the basis for his linkage with Phase 2. The
problem of relating features on the mound to
those about the mound, particularly in the absence of accurate dating, was clearly recognized by Krieger. However, that more structures
are under the mound than on top of it does
suggest that some Stage 2 components of the
inner precinct may have not been rebuilt on the
mound.
Stage 3 is defined much the same as Krieger's
Phase 3 (Newell and Krieger 1949:70). Only
one mound addition, Zone 10, can be included
with confidence. No structures are evident, although it is possible that some (F34 and F40?)
linked with Stage 2 belong to this period. Other
possibilities of course exist: (1) no structures
were built on this, the last addition to Mound A,
or (2) they have been destroyed by erosion to
the mound. Although there are no data to prove
or disprove these alternative explanations, I
prefer the interpretation that no structures were
erected on top of Mound A, and suggest as a
corollary that Stage 1 of Precinct B contains the
relevant structure (see discussion below).

(8) Clearly the temporal relationships between
Inner Precincts A and B are crucial to an understanding of the site. They must be either partially or

78

Texas Archeological Society

wholly contemporaneous, or represent entirely different temporal units. The former alternative would
indicate important structural or, less likely, functional differences within the community. The latter
would represent a sequential development and indicate an important change in the location of the
inner precinct.
Since it is impossible to stratigraphically relate these spatially separated areas, they must be
dated by either comparing artifact styles and frequencies, or by some radiometric dating techniques.
The artifact analysis is still too incomplete to be
helpful (moreover, artifacts from mound additions
are in a secondary context and should not be assumed to preserve the primary context sequence
and associations), but 31 relevant C 14 dates have
been obtained. The 23 from Precinct B (see Table
5) indicate that Stage 1 most probably dates to the
late 11th or 12th century A.D. and Stage 2 to sometime between the late 12th or middle part of the
13th century. Stages 3 and 4 are not dated but
presumably date from the late 13th century and
perhaps into the 14th century.
Eight C 14 dates have been obtained from the
Precinct A area, but they form a very erratic and

technically bad series which ranges from 1553 ±
175 BP to 655 ± 75 BP (Table 6). This is by far the
most ambivalent set of dates from the site and the
age of Precinct A, for all practical purposes, remains unclear. While satisfactory explanations can
be offered for all of the discrepancies, it can be
note<l that Newell made no attempt to collect charcoal systematically. What little was saved was intended for botanical study, and details of association
and treatment of the samples were not recorded.
(9) Although the important question of the temporal relationships between the two inner precincts
cannot be directly answered, C 14 dates from other
parts of the site, the Special Burial area (see Table
1) and the village (Table 7), conclusively indicate
that the Caddoan occupation at the site dates back
to the late 9th century A.D. If my basic concept of
the existence and importance of the inner precinct
is correct, then it is difficult to believe that one (or
both) such site area did not exist early in the history
of the settlement. Since the dating of the excavated
portion of Precinct B clearly indicates it came into
being late in the history of the site, Precinct A was
most probably related to the early segment of the
history of the site.

Table 6. Raw Libby Radiocarbon Assays from Mound A Area
Provenience

Sample No.

Raw Libby Age

Feature 31

Building under Mound A

Pit in floor
Unspecified postholes

C-153
M-1186*

1553 ± 175 BP
655 ± 75 BP

Same pit as assayed
by sample C-153
Sec. 13, 21.2 to 22.5 ft
Unspecified postholes

Tx-105

1120 ± 90 BP

Tx-1395
Tx-1399

830 ± 80 BP
1130 ± 60 BP

Feature 35
Above floor

com (Libby 1955:108)
com and wood (Griffin and
Yamell 1963:241)
com and wood (Tamers et al.
1964:155)
charred wood
charred wood
Building under Mound A wash

Tx-1398

1050±70 BP

Feature 9
Sec. 17R13, 21.2 ft
Sec. 20Rl3, 10 to 15 in

Remarks

charred wood
Building under Mound A wash

Tx-1396
Tx-1397

710±70BP
890 ± 60 BP

charred wood
charred wood

*Must be the same as sample listed in Radiocarbon, vol. 5 (Crane and Griffin 1963:241) as M-1168.

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

79

Table 7. Raw Libby Radiocarbon Assays from Village Areas
Provenience

Sample No.

Raw Libby Age

Unit 4, activity area

Feature 103 (Unit 4)
Small midden deposit

Tx-678

1430 ± 160 BP

Tx-906A
Tx-906B
Tx-926
Tx-907
Tx-908
Tx-909

710± 60 BP
1130± 160BP
1000±60 BP
960± 70 BP
1230± 100 BP
1170 ± 120 BP

Tx-1204
Tx-1307
Tx-1308
Tx-1201
Tx-1202

1110± 80 BP
1030± 70 BP
800± 70 BP
920± 80 BP
1080± 80 BP

Tx-1214
Tx-1215

790± 80 BP
850± 90 BP

Tx-1208
Tx-1209

1070± 70 BP
860± 80 BP

Tx-1212
Tx-1211
Tx-1213
Tx-1318

1160± 90 BP
860± 80 BP
950± 80 BP
740± 110 BP

Tx-1221
Tx-1222
Tx-1223
Tx-1224

1000 ± 80 BP
1100± 80 BP
1290± 80 BP
980± 70 BP

Tx-1210

890± 80 BP

woody charcoal
Unit 16 South, activity area

Feature 165 (Unit 16 South)
Charcoal-filled pit l
Posthole 63

woody charcoal
woody charcoal
woody charcoal
woody charcoal
Unit 11, structure and activity area

Feature 160 (Unit 11)
Charcoal-filled pit 54

woody charcoal
woody charcoal
woody charcoal
woody charcoal
Unit 15, structure and activity area

Feature 146 (Unit 15)
Charcoal-filled pit 69
Charcoal-filled pit 71
Posthole 164
Charcoal-filled pit 62

woody charcoal
woody charcoal
Unit 11, structure and activity area

Feature 139 (Unit 11)
Tree mold
Charcoal-filled pit 21
Posthole 83
Charc8al-filkd pit 90

woody charcoal
woody charcoal
Unit 14, activity area

Feature 137 (Unit 14)
Charcoal-filled pit 16B
Charcoal-filled pit 15

woody charcoal
woody charcoal
com/cane stalks?
woody charcoal
woody charcoal
Unit 13, activity area

Feature 126 (Unit 13)
Charcoal-filled pit 13
Charcoal-filled pit 8

charred corn
woody charcoal
charred nutshells
woody charcoal
woody charcoal
woody charcoal
Unit 10 structure (Fire-temple?)

Feature 125 (UnitlO)
Hearth l
Hearth 2
Hearth 2
Hearth 3
Posthole 82

woody charcoal
Unit 6, an activity area

Feature 110 (Unit 6)
Charcoal-filled pit 1
Charcoal-filled pit 1
Charcoal-filled pit 1
Charcoal-filled pit 2
Charcoal-filled pits 7, 17
Charcoal-filled pit 7

Remarks

Tx-1216
Tx-1217

780± 70 BP
1020 ±70 BP

woody charcoal
woody charcoal

80

Texas Archeological Society
(l 0) The findings strongly support a behav-

ioral relationship between the interments in the Special Burial area and destruction and renewal of the
Inner Precinct. This linkage, as noted earlier, is
probably either through the death of a person (persons?) of high status, or the immolation of individuals at a major ceremony. The poorly preserved
and incomplete skeletal data from the burial area
best agrees with the latter.
( 11) The numerous structures about portions
of Precinct A, and the surface debris about Precinct
B, seem to indicate that these were intensively occupied areas-perhaps the most desirable real estate in the community. Very preliminary artifact
analysis further suggests that some of the status
goods (as defined largely from offerings with Class
1 burials in the Special Mortuary area) are significantly more frequent in these two portions of the
village. Both appear to be the residence of individuals having more privileged access to the
society's resources.
Our excavations in the Mound B area have
raised more questions than they have answered.
Fortunately, much of the mound and the surrounding area remain intact. Additional investigations
here and in the remaining undisturbed portions of
Mound A can resolve many of the uncertainties
that unfortunately still exist.

THE VILLAGE
Extent and Exploration
Sherds and lithics attributable to the Caddoan
occupation occur widely over the terrace surface
and are presumed to mark the former extent of the
village. A controlled surface survey was attempted
but was not very successful because of marked
variation in the terrace vegetation cover. Additionally, unscreened backdirt from the Mound A excavations was spread into unrecorded low areas on
the state-owned tree farm (notes and correspondence in the files of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory). With these problems in mind,
the village can be characterized as extending over a
somewhat oval-shaped area of roughly 60 acres
(see Figure 1).
While the efforts to amass a useful body of data
from the surface were disappointing, the excavations into the village have been productive and provided a more balanced view of the site. A total of

approximately 2113 m2 of the village was exposed
in 1968-1970. In general, these investigations attempted: (1) to sample extensively the western section of the village and hence complement the
intensive excavations of Perry Newell. 8 Combined
1939-1941 and 1968-1970 excavations in the village have uncovered approximately 9000 m2 , or
about 10 percent of the estimated extent of the village; (2) to expose cultural features; (3) to plot all
artifacts and activity residue found below the disturbed plow zone; and (4) to make collections for
radiocarbon and archeomagnetic dating, and botanical, soil, and faunal studies. The 1968 and 1969
village investigations consisted of tests; not until the
1970 season were sizable excavations made.
During the first two seasons, the areas sampled
were small sections (see Excavation Units 1, 4, 5,
and 6 in Figure 3) staked off and dug by traditional
shoveling, troweling, and screening. This work revealed that hand removal of the ca. 20 cm of plow
zone was consuming a great deal of time, and yet,
that large horizontal exposures of the undisturbed
terrace surface were necessary to find and relate
cultural features. To adjust to this situation, a frontend loader mounted onto a tractor was used throughout the 1970 season. Most of the plow zone in the
area to be investigated was first stripped and dumped
into a pile at margins of excavations and saved for
screening. Loose soil was then shoveled onto the
backdirt pile and the grid laid out over the exposed
area. Excavations continued primarily by troweling
with each specimen and disturbance being plotted
in by triangulation. Vertical controls were attempted
but the cultural debris was too shallow to permit
any significant vertical distinctions. By and large,
this system worked well and Excavation Units 10,
11, 12, 15, 16 and most of 14 were so dug (a
seventh unit, 13, was hand-excavated because it
was small and overlain by a thin layer of wash from
Mound B). In particular, however, there were some
problems. Most notably, the tractor was too light to
strip the plow zone as uniformly as was hoped. The
front-loader would cut at varying depths and the
wheels would tend to sink into the terrace, especially after a rain. A maintainer would have been
ideal but could not be rented locally. Also, in excavating Units 11, 12, 14, 15, and 16 much of the
saved plow zone was not screened. It was either a
question of not finishing exploring the features that
had been partially uncovered or sampling the plow
zone. I decided in favor of the former.

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
Before turning to the results of our vi11age
explorations, brief mention should also be made of
our methods of recordation. First, the term excavation unit was used throughout our work at the site
to apply to any area where we concentrated our
activities. All of the Special Burial area work was
designated Unit 2, the Inner Precinct B area was
Units 3, 7, and 8, and the borrow pit was Unit 9.
The remainder of the excavation units, 1, 2, 4-6,
and 10-16, were in the village. Secondly, in the
village excavations, a feature designation was assigned rather loosely-a convenience for
note-taking and not necessarily a cultural reality.
All cultural disturbances within an excavation unit
were given one feature number unless relationships
quickly and clearly showed them to be distinct.
Thus in Unit 15, Feature 146 refers to both a structure and activity areas outside this structure as well
as to animal disturbances proved to be of no cultural significance. To individualize the disturbances
in this kind of running notation system, each was
given a separate sub-number (e.g., F146-1 , F1462, etc.). In all cases, the cultural disturbances were
first recognized at or very near the top of Zone 1.
How much, if any, had been removed by plowing is
impossible to determine. Thus, rather than speak of
the point of origin, the level at which a feature was
first discovered is referred to as the "detection
level." Eventually it will be more coherent to translate our field terminology to a House 1, Pit 1, etc.
system, but at this stage of analysis it is decidedly
premature to do so.
In the pages which follow the village excavation units and the cultural disturbances found in
them are briefly described. Backhoe cuts and small
shovel pits (see Figure 3) made into the terrace are
not included. The former proved useful only to
examine the natural terrace stratigraphy and soils,
while the results of the latter are incorporated into
the definition of the site boundaries. Artifacts from
the village are noted only in passing and will not be
described until a later report.

Description of the Excavation Units
and Cultural Features
Unit 1
Unit 1 is a small, L-shaped test dug in 1968
and located approximately 44 m west of Mound C
(see Figure 3). It consists of three sub-units: (1) a
1 x 2 m pit with the long axis north-south, (2) a 2

81

x 4 m south extension of the first pit, and (3) a 2 x
2 m area contiguous with the west side of the
second subunit. Fill in these subunits was removed
in 20 cm levels with all but one 1 x 1 m section
being taken down to a maximum depth of 40 cm.
The meter section was dug deeper, half of the
square to 60 cm, and half to 80 cm. Dirt from the
excavations was passed through 1/4-inch screen.
By a depth of 40 cm below the surface, very few
specimens were recovered.
Sherds, a few arrow points, numerous flakes,
and one cultural feature, FlOl, were uncovered in
Unit 1. Feature 101 was initially detected at the
south end of the first pit dug, at the contact of the
plow zone and Zone 1 (the upper part of the undisturbed terrace), about 20 cm below the surface. Here
it appeared as an oval (60 cm east-west x 45 cm
north-south), charcoal-stained disturbance. When
sectioned, FlOl proved to be basin-shaped (maximum depth of 27 cm), and to overlie a long (80 cm),
tapering disturbance which at the top had a maximum diameter of 22 cm. Although no charcoal had
survived, it seems very likely that FlOl represents a
hearth (or warming pit?), and a tree used as center
post during the construction of a house. After the
discovery of FlOl, excavations were carried 4 m to
the west in hopes of finding an outer edge of the
presumed structure. None was recognized and the
unit was closed for the season with hope of continuing excavations in a future season. Unit 1 has yet to
be re-opened and the identification of FlOl as central hearth of a structure is tentative.

Unit4
Unit 4 was also dug during the 1968 season. It
is situated about 20 m southwest of Mound B and
consists of three sub-units (Figure 39). The first unit
excavated was 1 x 2 m with the long axis oriented
east-west; the second was a 2 x 2 m pit joining the
east end of the first; and the third was a 1 x 4 m area
continuous with the east end of the second and
oriented with the long axis east-west. Artifacts were
particularly concentrated in the eastern portion of
the unit where a ca. 20 cm thick, dark, midden stain
layer could be defined. Designated F103, this layer
was first recognized just beneath the plow zone. No
cultural disturbances were associated and the excavations were too limited to speculate on possible
relationships with an activity area or structure. A
radiocarbon date of 1430 ± 160 BP (Tx-678) has

82

Texas Archeological Society

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE=

CE 19

EXCAVATION UNIT 4

Concentration of Refuse

Tx-678
1430±160 BP

Lense of Mottled Yellow Clay
(Basket Load of Mound Fill?)

0

2

Meters

Magnetic North
N951

Wl087

D

UNEXCAVATED

Figure 39. Plan Map of Excavation Unit 4.

been obtained on a small sample of scattered flecks
of charcoal from Fl 03. It is one of the oldest dates
from the western part of the site and is clearly out of
line with the majority of the C14 determinations
(see Table 7) from the village.
The only other feature, F102, in Unit 4 was a
thin, roughly circular (maximum of 25 cm in diameter) deposit of mottled yellow, sandy clay. Similar
material comprised the Mound B 2 (possibly even
Mound B 3) addition. This suggests that F102 may
represent a load of mound fill spilled in transit from
a borrow area to the mound.

Units
This is a small, 2 x 2 m, test pit dug in 1968
and located about midway between Mounds B and
C (see Figure 3). It yielded very few specimens and
no cultural disturbances.
Unit6
Situated ca. 120 m south of Mound B and near
the western edge of the terrace, Unit 6 is a 6 x 6 m
area excavated during the 1969 season (Figure 40).
Sherds and lithic debris were fairly abundant on the
surface and in the plow zone. Artifacts decreased in

Story - 1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

more circular in outline, and to have
been dug slightly deeper. These may
be postholes of such things as racks,
benches, or above the ground storage
bins. They formed no clear pattern and
certainly no substantial structure is represented.
Several radiocarbon samples from
four of the charcoal-filled pits have
been dated (Valastro and Davis
1970:629; see Table 7 herein). These
ranged from 1230 ± 100 BP to 710 ±
60 BP.

Tll-909
117\C.120BP

Tx-907
960±70 BP

Tx-906A{corn)
7!0±60 BP

• T1~g~~~o(~~d 1
Tx-926(nut;.bellsJ
10fi0±60BP

Tx-908
1230±!00BP

./
0

83

0
0

Unit 10
Unit 10 is a roughly 330 m2 area
at the western edge of the terrace, between Mounds B and C and 3.5 m
NM-I
-.._,_..._,_,,,,_..._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _.,_w
south of the southern extension of Unit
16 (Figures 41 and 42). It was excavated
by the 1970 UT field school and
(~
l\.IISCELLA?\EOUS PlT
Q POSTHOLE
was the first unit bladed with a
'9 CHARCOAL-FILLED PIT
front-end loader. As with Units 1 and
c::J VNEXCAVATED
4-6, the plow zone was screened using
GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41 CE 19
a 1/4-inch mesh screen. Specimens
EXCAVATION UNIT 6
beneath this zone were plotted in situ
but were not very frequent.
Cultural disturbances, conversely,
were
numerous in Zone 1 and include
Figure 40. Plan Map of Excavation Unit 6.
a circular building, a burial, and probable extra-mural activity areas. The
burial (see Figure 4ld) was designated
frequency as Zone 1 was encountered, but 18 disFl30 and the other features Fl25-l, etc. The structurbances were detected in this zone. Each of the
ture measured 7.6 min diameter and consisted of
88 wall posts, a carefully prepared central hearth,
disturbances were first recognized at the top of
Zone 1 and assigned a feature number (Fl 10-1, 2,
and four large interior posts. No prepared floor was
etc.). When further investigated, seven of these
evident and it is most likely that the easily com(Fll0-3, 11, 12, 14-16, 18) proved to be either
pacted terrace surface served as such. Most house
vague, superficial stains, or animal burrows. The
features were first detected immediately beneath
remainder were deemed cultural disturbances assothe plow zone, generally at an elevation of 99.0 m.
Plow marks were particularly clear in the central
ciated with the Caddoan occupation. Initially it was
thought that one or more structures had been unhearth but were shallow and suggest that little of
covered, but it is far more probable that an activity
the structure had been removed.
The postholes forming the outer wall were verarea, similar to that found in Unit 11, is represented. Nonetheless, the exact activities responsible
tically set and ranged from 12 to 30 cm in diameter
(average 20 cm) and from 16 to 48 cm in depth.
for Feature 110 disturbances are not easily discerned. Six, possibly seven, were somewhat ovalPosthole fill was slightly less consolidated and
shaped pits (typically 25 x 30 cm at the top and 9
browner in texture than the surrounding matrix.
cm deep) containing a good deal of charred mateFlecks of charcoal occurred in the fill, particularly
rial. Four tended to contain less charcoal, to be
the upper portion, although not abundantly enough
FllO

1
0•_.
7
....

.\lcters

1

Magnetic North

84

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

c

d

Figure 41. Village Unit 10 Excavations: a, looking north at excavations in Unit 10 (arrow), western edge of Mound C
visible in upper right; b, partially exposed structure, Fl25, found in Unit 10. Scale in decimeters, arrow points to north;
c, sectioned, clay-lined, center hearth in F125. Note three periods of rebuilding and use, looking north; d, poorly
preserved flexed burial, F130, found east ofF125. Arrow pointing to the north and scale in decimeters.

to indicate burning of the structure. No entrance
was clearly defined. The largest gap between posts,
40 cm, occurred in the north, east, and south walls
(see Figure 42). This differs only slightly from the
distance between the remainder of the posts.
Major interior features, the hearth and four
probable roof support posts, were easily recognized.
At detection level, the hearth appeared as an
intensively baked, clay-lined circle measuring 70
cm in diameter and apparently flush with the house
floor. When sectioned (see Figure 4 lc), it was found
to be deep (45 cm) and to consist of three vertically
distinct hearths. No mold of a center post was
evident but the depth of the hearth certainly suggests
that a temporary center post could have been erected
and the resultant excavation subsequently used as a
hearth area. The oldest hearth, designated 1, had

not been clay-lined but the floor and lower walls
were thoroughly baked. On top of the l 0 cm of
charcoal and loose fill in hearth 1, rested the 5 cm
thick clay lining of hearth 2. This hearth was also
intensively fired, varying from a bright red on the
interior to bright orange on the exterior. Hearth 3
was partly clay-filled and formed a much shallower,
smaller (15 cm deep and a maximum of 45 cm in
diameter) basin. It showed considerably less
evidence of burning. Charcoal and archeomagnetic
samples were collected from each hearth. Only four
radiocarbon dates have been obtained (see Table
7), and these form a tight woody charcoal series
which extends from 1110 ± 80 BP to 920 ± 80 BP.
Combined with a date of 1080 ± 80 BP (see Table
7) from the charcoal in the fill of a major roof
support posthole, they indicate that the structure

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

85

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41CE19
EXCAVATION
UNIT 10

0

4
Meters

r

~

ooo

0

coo

0

f\.1agnetic North
Burned Rocks

0

00
00
00

\

I
0
0

0

0

(J

- - ........ _o/

0
0

0
0
0

0
0

•

%
0
0

Burial
(Fl30)

0
0

--

0
0
-"()-

---

Tx-1201

0

920 + 80 BP

0

0

0

Tx-1202

0

0

1080±80 BP

0

0
0

0
0

0
0
0

0
00

0

0
00

0

o

oo 0 o

0 0 00

o

cf

0

0

Tx-1307

Tx-1204
lll0+80BP

coo

PLOW ZONE

!030 + 70 BP
Tx-1308
800+ 70 BP
(com/cane)

.::_;;,.; UNDISTURBED ZONE I

..--._, CLAY LINli'<G
UNEXCAVATED

,-,

000
0

Holly Fine l'\I
Engraved Bowl

F· . '

~1

CHARCOAL-FILLED PIT
UNEXCAVATED

Q

POSTHOLE

Figure 42. Plan of Unit 10 showing Structure Fl25.

~Wl~~-~cr~i1~~:~

86

Texas Archeological Society

was probably built in the early part of the tenth
century and abandoned sometime before the early
twelfth century.
The four large, presumed roof support posts
formed a fairly evenly spaced rectangle about the
center hearth (see Figure 42). At detection level,
the postholes were about 50 cm in diameter. The
sizes of the posts were difficult to determine, but
they were probably between 15 and 20 cm in diameter. Depths of the postholes varied from 34 to 66
cm. The fill in each was distinctly and significantly
different from that of the outer wall postholes. Charcoal and fragments of fired clay were abundant and
seemed to represent trash (hearth debris?) rather
than burning of the structure. Perhaps the post timbers had been salvaged when the structure was abandoned and the resultant holes filled with debris for
safety or convenience of disposal.
Twenty-three other disturbances were recognized within the structure, at the top of Zone 1. All
but four of these upon excavation proved to be
superficial and of little or no cultural significance.
Three of the four definite cultural features were
small charcoal-filled pits or possibly minor interior
warming pits (see Figure 42). The fourth was a
much larger and vaguer disturbance which cut
through the northeast portion of the outer wall and
hence clearly post-dates the structure (see Figure
42). It measured 1.8 x 0.3 m across and 25 cm
deep. The fill was mottled and contained nothing
which aids its functional identification.
Exterior features were not very common and
those that did occur were mainly in the eastern part
of the unit (see Figure 42). Two probable postholes,
two miscellaneous pits, a cluster of rocks, three
small charcoal-filled pits, a small pit containing a
fragmentary Holly Engraved carinated bowl, and a
flexed burial (F130) are the only certain cultural
disturbances. The probable posts and charcoal-filled
pits were essentially the same as those described in
Unit 6. The small pile of apparently fire-cracked
rocks consisted of stones obtained from a nearby
outcrop on the terrace slope. This concentration
measured 54 x 60 cm and 10 cm high. No pit was
evident and other signs of burning, such as charcoal
and scorched earth, were not observed. A slightly
larger but otherwise identical pile of rocks was
found in Unit 15. Newell also encoun.tered similar
features in his village excavations (Newell and
Krieger 1949:Figure 25F; Newell's field notes on
file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory) but generally did not record them in detail.

Burial F130 was found tightly flexed in an
irregular, very shallow (8 cm deep below top of
Zone 1) grave 50 cm east of the structure (see
Figures 4ld and 42). It consisted of a single interment, an adult, possibly a female, 35+ years old at
time of death (notes by Al Wesolowsky). The bones
were in extremely poor condition, but it was possible to observe that some of the long bones showed
a condition known as periostitis and that at least
one dental abscess and one carie were present. An
Alba point, two charred Honey locust seeds, and
two flakes were recovered from the pit fill. These,
however, were found distant from the skeleton and
are probably incidental inclusions. The Alba point
indicated that the burial almost certainly does not
predate the Caddoan occupation and suggests that
it might in fact be related to it. Despite the amount
of work at the site, F130 and a generally similar
burial (F163) from the borrow pit are the only
non-specialized burials known at the George C.
Davis site. This mode of interment forms a dramatic contrast with the Special Mortuary burials,
but the sample is too small to define any pattern.

Unit 11
Excavations in this ca. 560 m2 unit between
Mounds A and B were particularly rewarding as
they yielded more features than any other unit. In
situ artifacts, however, were not very abundant and
very little of the plow zone was screened.
Two closely spaced structures, Fl39 and F160,
dominate the unit (Figure 43 and Figure 44c).
Feature 139 has a sub-circular outline, 10.3-10.4 m
in diameter. It was formed by 40 posts which had
been set into oval-shaped holes having a distinct
bench (Figure 45a-b). Where first detected, the
posthole averaged 29.7 x 39.l cm in maximum
dimensions. Depths ranged from 40 to 81 cm and
postholes were dug an average of 50 cm apart.
Posthole fill was typically somewhat browner than
the surrounding matrix and contained numerous
concretions in the upper part, yellowish sandy clay
in the lower part, and little charcoal. As a rule, the
postholes slanted outward, perhaps in compensation
for centripetal stress. This-and the lack of interior
support posts-suggests the bent-poles, "beehive"
type construction reported from the historic Hasinai
(Griffith 1954:99-100). No entrance is obvious,
although a depression 45 x 81 cm in length and
width and 30 cm deep in the south-southeast portion

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

87

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41CE19
EXCAVATION UNIT 11

,-,

MISCELLANEOUS PIT
POSTHOLE
CHARCOAL-FILLED PIT

0
•

Fl36

Tx-t312

UNEXCAVATED

@

750±90 BP

0
4
Magnetic North
Meters

•
•

0

Tx-1210

9

890±80 BP

F151

OTx-1211
860±80 BP

~~

9

Tx-1318

1

Tx-1317

O

fj•o

,' 8

O

740±110 BP

l j '760±100B~ 0

0

Ooo o

Tx-1405
570±80 BP

0

810±70 BP

Tree

•

9

Tx-1319

$

690±70 BP

0 -~:o!:~~SBP

0

0

0

o,.4,..Tx-1313
Tx-1310 0
850±70 BP

0

0

0

0
G

0

0
0

0

0

0

0
0

0
0

670±90 BP
{cane'?)

00000

0

00

0

0

8

0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

740±60BP

•
0
0

0

0

Tx-1320

0 O

000

0
0

0

8

OO

•
0

950±80 BP

Mold~

{cane?)

Q

0

Tx-lZl3

Tx-1212
1160±90 BP

Tx-1314
700±70BP

0

'.Tx-1316

O
O
0

0 0

00°

F139

0
0

Fl60

0
0
0
0
0
0

Figure 43. Features in Excavation Unit l L

of the wall may be a door-related feature. The floor
had been damaged by plowing (note plow marks in
Figure 44c), but it is unlikely that it had ever been
specially prepared.
Interior features are few and consist of eight
charcoal-filled pits and one large tree mold (see
Figure 43). The charcoal-filled pits occur primarily
in the southwest portion of the house and are an
average of 21 cm in diameter at the detection level

and 18 cm in depth. Charred com, cane (see Figure
45c), nuts, and woody material were common in
the fill, and usually concentrated in the lower parts
of the pit. Some ash was present but the general
appearance implied a smothering rather than a
well-burning fire. Charcoal also occurred in the
upper part of the tree tap root mold. This
disturbance is quite large; it measured 50 x 75 cm
at the top of Zone 1 and extended downward 1.2

88

Texas Archeological Society

c
Figure 44. Unit 11 Excavations: a, enlarging Unit 11 by blading off plow zone, looking south toward Mound A; b,
circular structure, Fl39, partially exposed, looking south; c, looking east at two circular structures, Fl39 (foreground)
and F160 (background).

m, tapering sharply. Whether or not it may have
served as a center post/hearth is unclear, largely
because it is not centrally situated. No other
possible hearth or center post was found, although
it is possible that a shallow hearth may have been
destroyed by plowing.
Fl60, the second Unit 11 structure, was found
2 m to the east of F139. Time pressure allowed us
to excavate only two-thirds of this building; fortunately, this proved enough to provide most details.
It was aligned with F139 (see Figure 43) and this,
alone, suggests that they may have been occupied
contemporaneously. Fifty exposed wall postholes
formed a neatly laid out arc and indicate a circular
structure of about 12.5 min diameter. Most lacked
the bench-like offset in F139 postholes and, on a
whole, were smaller than F139 postholes. Average

dimensions at top were 25 x 31 cm; average depth
was 44 cm. As with F139, very little charcoal was
found in the fill and neither structure evidently was
destroyed by burning.
Interior cultural features in Fl60 were absent,
although a large rodent disturbance occurred in the
center of the structure. Since rodents at the site had
an annoying propensity to burrow into the looser
fill of cultural disturbances, it is possible that at
least a small, shallow, center hearth did once exist
in F160.
Extra-mural cultural disturbances in Unit 11
are fairly common and impossible to assign with
any certainty to Fl39 or F160. The designations
given in the field are quite arbitrary. Twenty-one of
these are the ubiquitous charcoal-filled pits, seven
are probable exterior postholes, and one (Fl51, see

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

a

b

c

d

89

Figure 45. Unit 11 Features and Disturbances: a, sectioned outer wall post in F139, looking north. Post outlined by
trowel marks; b, fill removed from F139 outer wall post. Scale in decimeters with arrow pointing north; c, small pit with
charred material (mainly split cane) found inside F139. Scale in centimeters, looking north; d, concentration of sherds
cached by a rodent. Scale in centimeters, looking north.

Figure 43) is a rather large but vaguely definable
depression. Although not of cultural significance,
several interesting sherd clusters were found cached
into rodent burrows much as dominos might be
arranged on edge (see Figure 45d). The cultural
features are decidedly clustered northwest of F139
where they seemed to represent a distinct, extramural working area. Somewhat surprising, the artifacts plotted in situ did not cluster around this area.
Only five of 19 Unit 11 C 14 samples submitted
for C 14 dating have been run (see Table 7). Unless
the charcoal in the upper part of the tree mold in
F139 is from a center hearth, none of these can be
said to date the construction of either Fl39 or Fl60.
Only one is from an outer wall post (F139-83)
where the charcoal is rather clearly not from in situ
burning. The other two are from charcoal-filled pits

outside the structure. The full range of the five
dates is 1160 ± 90 BP to 740 ± 110 BP with no
clustering evident.
Unit 12
Although only 17 m south of Unit 11 (Figure
46), Unit 12 was as unproductive as Unit 11 was
productive. It was a 180 m 2 excavation which
yielded few artifacts (screening, however, was very
limited) and only five definite cultural features.
Artifacts were almost non-existent at the top of
Zone l and clearly Unit 12 samples a relatively
vacant area in the village. Designated F135, the
five features include four widely scattered
charcoal-filled pits-roughly 15 to 22 cm in diameter and 14 to 23 cm deep-and one possible

90

Texas Archeological Society

F135

.

Bladed Strip

Not Trowelled

•

0

...

C. DAVIS SITE - 41CE 19
EXCAVATION UNIT 12

Q

8

POSTHOLE
CHARCOAL-FILLED PIT
UNEXCAVATED

Magnetic North

Meters

Figure 46. Plan of Village Excavation Unit 12.

posthole. None of the charcoal collected from this
unit has been dated.

Unit 13
Unit 13, a 52 m 2 area between Unit 4 and
Mound B (Figure 47), also forms an interesting
contrast with Unit 12. Much smaller, Unit 13
yielded more artifacts in Zone 1 (virtually all of the
plow zone of Unit 12 was screened) and 16 definite cultural disturbances, Fl26. Twelve of these
were small charcoal-filled pits, one seemed more
likely a posthole, and three were somewhat vague
pits with some charcoal. One of the pits, Fl26-20,
contained what seemed to be a particularly good
sample of charred com. Two radiocarbon dates,
790 ± 80 BP and 850 ± 90 BP (see Table 7) were
obtained on charcoal in pits Fl 26-13 and Fl 26-8,
respectively.

Unit 14
This unit is an excavation approximately 50 m
south of Mound B (Figure 48). Until the summer of
1970, an old house (see Figure 2a) stood in the area
and when it was dismantled, the possibility of obtaining a less plow-disturbed sample seemed good.
This, unfortunately, was not the case. The excavations covered 140 m2 , although 90 m 2 of this was
bladed and not carefully troweled. The artifacts
were fairly frequent but the disturbances were few.
Several, including a metal can that had been buried
beneath the house, were modern. Aboriginal features (F137) include seven charcoal-filled pits, one
possible posthole, and five rather shallow and vague
charcoal stains. All were found in the west-central
portion of the unit. Two of the charcoal-filled pits,
Fl37-16B and F137-15, were radiocarbon assayed
at 1070 ± 70 BP (Tx-1208) and 860 ± 80 BP (Tx1209), respectively.

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

91

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41CE19
EXCAVATION UNIT 13

.. ,

I••:

0

MISCELLANEOUS PIT
POSTHOLE
CHARCOAL-FILLED PIT

•• •
F126

D

•

• ...

790±80 BP

..

l

•
0

Tx-1214

UNEXCAVATED

Magnetic North

•
•

Meters

•Tx-1215
850±90 BP

...·. ••

...

Figure 47. Plan of Village Excavation Unit 13.

Unit 15
Unit 15 (324 m 2) and 15 South (105 m 2) represent two discontinuous excavations immediately
west of Highway 21 and about 35 m west of Mound
A (Figures 49-51). Despite the disadvantages of
working near a well-traveled highway, it was selected for investigation because of its proximity to
Mound A. Some of Newell's 1939-1941 village
findings, particularly more exotic goods (i.e., stone
pulley type earspools, well-made bifaces, bits of
copper, quartz crystals, and a well made figurine
head), were not represented in our village unit excavations 1, 4-6, or 10-14. It seemed possible that

significant intra-site differences existed and that
work nearer to Mound A might help explain this
apparent variability in the village. To a limited extent, it has. Artifacts were more numerous in Unit
15 than in other village areas we sampled (for example, 647 decorated sherds in Unit 11 and 1578 in
Unit 15). Also, Unit 15 was the only one to yield
exotic artifacts: two large quartz crystals, a smaH
well-made biface, and two stone pulley type
earspools. Significantly, well-made bifaces and pulley type earspools are typical Class 1 offerings in
the Special Mortuary area. Since the four radiocarbon determinations for Unit 15 ranged from 1290 ±

92

Texas Archeological Society

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE
41CE19
EXCAVATION UNIT 14

F137

Eastern Part of Unit

0

Not Trowelled

l

Magnetic: North

CHARCOAL-FILLED PIT

Q

c::=::J

POSSIBLE POSTHOLE
UNEXCAVATED

Txl208

9

1010±70 BP

@

@> Txl209

Meters

860±80 BP

Figure 48. Plan of Village Excavation Unit 14.

80 BP to 980 ± 70 BP, and overlap with many of
the other village dates (see Table 7, especially Unit
6), it is unlikely that these differences in the village
can be explained as representing temporal changes.
Rather, differential access to the status goods seems
to better fit the evidence available.
The cultural disturbances in Unit 15 (Fl46)
and 15 South (F153) did not differ from those in
other village units, except that they were detected
slightly deeper beneath the surface, evidently
because of a veneer of wash from Mound A. Of the
two, Unit 15 South (see Figure 50) produced fewer
artifacts and fewer features. Here were found only
two charcoal-filled pits. These contained burned
cane, woody material, and good samples of charred
corn cobs. They ranged from 15-20 cm across to
35 cm in diameter; they varied from 18-36 cm in

depths. Situated 13 meters to the northeast, Unit 15
contained one building and two localized activity
areas (see Figures 49 and 51). The structure
survives as a circular outline (10.8 m) of 85 postholes (possibly 86, if a tree mold was incorporated
into the wall) with a possible 1 m wide entranceway gap in the northeast part of the circumference.
No prepared floor was recognized and the exact
point of origin of the house is uncertain. Portions
of the outline were detected at the top of the
undisturbed terrace, generally at 98.52 m elevation,
and this would have to represent the maximum
possible depth of the floor. Flecks of charcoal were
present in the posthole fill but too infrequent to
indicate burning of the structure or to be very
helpful in recognition of posts. Tracing the outline
of F146 proved to be very difficult and all

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE-41CE19
EXCAVATION UNIT 15

Burned Rocks

oo

0

0

0
0

0

F146

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0

0

0

0
0
0

,,
',_'

0

0

0
0
0

0

QQ

Tx-1221

1000~0 BP

0
0

ii

0.

0

0

o o o"
1

Tx-1224

°00

l

Magnetic North

QO Tx-1222
ll00±80BP

0
Meters

00

o o

0

0

'-,
''-' '

980±70 BP

0

MISCELLANEOUS PIT
POSTHOLE
CHARCOAL-FILLED PIT

I

.I

UNEXCAVATED

Figure 49. Plan of Village Excavation Unit 15 and Structure Fl46.

93

94

Texas Archeological Society

Linkage of these activity areas with the
occupants of the house is tempting but not
necessarily well founded. The southern acL.J l'E'.'l.l'\\\l~Jl
tivity area probably postdates the structure
(j
since the artifacts apparently associated are
distributed in such a manner as to suggest
that the house wall did not serve as a barrier. The more distant northern activity area
is too far removed to yield any tangible
Fl53
evidence of whether or not it is directly
associated with the structure. The four radiocarbon dates from Unit 15 (see Table 7)
are likewise of no assistance. Woody charcoal from an interior pit dated at 1000 ± 80
BP (Tx-1221) and an interior post dated at
GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE -41CE 19
1290 ± 80 BP (Tx-1223) probably do not
EXCA\'ATlON UNIT 15 SOUTH
relate directly to the structure. There is no
evidence to support burning of the house
and the charcoal in the fill of these interior
Figure 50. Plan of Village Excavation Unit 15 South.
features most probably postdates the house.
The two other radiometric determinations
from Unit 15 are from woody charcoal
recovered from two pits, one in the southern activity
postholes had to be at least partially sectioned (see
area and one in the outer wall of the house. These
Figure 51a).
are 1100 ± 80 BP (Tx-1222) and 980 ± 70 BP (TxDisturbances found within, or close to the outer
1224), respectively.
wall of, the Unit 15 structure include a small tree
taproot mold which probably served as a temporary
center post, five probable interior posts (one immeUnit 16
diately adjacent to the tree mold), and eight small
Unit 16 consists of an irregularly shaped and
pits which contained charcoal and, less often, sherds,
discontinuous excavation immediately north of
charred corn, and bone fragments. One of these pits
Unit 10 (Figure 52). It covers an area of 346 m2
cut into an outer wall post and provides one of the
with the southern section (166 m2 ) of the unit (Unit
few examples of superposition found in the village
16 South; Figure 53) being far more productive
during the 1968-1970 seasons.
Two apparent activity areas were exposed in
than the northern part (180 m 2 ). A total of 42
Unit 15, one in the northern end and the other in
culturally significant disturbances was recognized,
six (F164) in the northern segment of the unit, and
the southern part (see Figure 49). Each was marked
36 (Fl 65) in the southern part. All of those in Unit
by increases in artifacts and features. The cultur16 and most (27) in Unit 16 South were pits having
ally significant disturbances in the northern activcircular to oval outlines and containing varying
ity area include: (1) a low pile (1.4 x 1.0 m) of
amounts of charred wood, corn, cane and nuts, and
burned ferruginous sandstone rocks; (2) two small
pits (35 x 23 cm and 23 cm in depth and 23 x 26
occasional pottery sherds, chipping debris, and
cm and 8 cm deep) filled with charcoal, several
small fragments of animal bones. These pits ranged
in size from about 20 cm in diameter and 4 cm deep
sherds, a few flakes, bits of fired clay, burned
bone, and unidentified plant remains; (3) a shallow
to 95 x 84 cm across and 21 cm deep. The other
pit (50 cm in diameter and 9 cm in depth) with
nine disturbances in Unit 16 South (Figure 53) may
charred corn cobs, several sherds, and several flint
be postholes; at least they contained less charcoal
flakes; (4) a probable posthole near the pile of
and fewer specimens, and were generally more
cylindrical in cross-section. The possible postholes
burned rocks; and (5) a large pit (1.37 x 1.75 m
are concentrated in the south half of Unit 16 South
across and 37 cm deep) containing numerous small
sherds and possibly laminated, washed fill.
but form no coherent structural pattern.
CllARl"O.\J..J'!L!.I:!) !'IT

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

a

95

b

d
Figure 51. Village Excavation Unit 15: a, structure F146, looking south at Highway 21 and Mound A; b, pit largely
filled with charred corn, found south of structure F146. Scale in decimeters, looking southeast; c, concentration of
burned rocks northeast of F146. Arrow points to the north, scale is in decimeters; d, sectioned pile of burned rocks
northeast of Fl46. Arrow points to the north, scale in decimeters.

Unit 16 excavations dearly exposed at least
part of an outdoor activity area. It is difficult,
however, to define precisely the activities performed,
to link the area with a household (or households), or
to indicate accurately the temporal span of use.
Charcoal was consistently found in the pit fill,
suggesting that tasks involving the use of heatsuch as cooking, smudging, warming, firing, and
annealing-may have been frequently performed.
On the other hand, only one, possibly two, of the
pits showed definite signs of in situ burning and
only a few of the objects from the pits (the sherds,
flakes, and animal bones) had been obviously
modified by fire. Use as storage does not seem
likely since the pits are generally shallow, not lined,
and seemingly quite vulnerable to both moisture
and rodents. Perhaps a more detailed analysis of the
pit contents, as well as the specimens found about

the pits, will help better identify these features. At
present, it can only be noted that they are very
frequent at the site and that they occur most often
outside the structures.
The nearest structure to Unit 16 is Fl25, a
small circular building located 11 m to the south
(see Figures 3 and 43). Proximity of the two
suggests, but does not prove, that they may be
related. Two radiocarbon samples from Unit 16
South (Fl 65) have been dated (see Table 7). One
(Tx-1216) from a pit (Fl65-l) yielded an age of
780 ± 70 BP; the other (Tx-1217) from a possible
post yielded an age of 1020 ± 70 BP. The latter
corresponds well with dates from F125 (see Table
7), while the former is later than expected and
probably reflects either use of this activity area
over a considerable span of time or inherent
limitations in C 14 dating.

96

Texas Archeological Society

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE· 41CE19
EXCAVATION UNIT 16

;'1;965

persons. Cook's estimates are admittedly
based on very incomplete data, but are
surprisingly close to those (147 to 287
persons) calculated independently by Keller
(n.d.) on the basis of house size and
frequency and allowing 10 m2 of enclosed
living space per person.
·
(2) A resident population of this probable size, coupled with the apparent absence
of satellite communities in the middle
Neches River area (Kegley n.d.) must represent a predominantly nucleated settlement.
This pattern is in sharp contrast to many
other major Caddoan centers (e.g., Webb
and Dobb 1939; Hoffman 1970:160; Bell
1972:261) where only small maintenance
populations are indicated. Throughout most
of its history Davis was not a vacant, special purpose site.
(3) Twenty-six radiocarbon dates from
village contexts range (1 sigma) from 1430
± 160 BP to 710 ± 60 BP, with the most
probable span of occupation between AD.
890-1320 (see Table 7). The largest number
of dates (13) fall entirely between AD. 950
and 1200, suggesting a maximum density of
occupation from this period-at least in the
village west of Highway 21. Six radiocarbon
determinations are entirely or largely earlier
than AD. 950 and substantiate a late ninth
century date for the founding of the village.
These dates and the early ones from the more
specialized activity areas at the site (see Tables 2,
5, and 6) seriously weaken the A.D. 1100 date
sometimes cited by archeologists for the beginning
of the prehistoric Caddoan tradition. Furthermore,
it seems quite clear that the configuration
represented at Davis is a highly integrated cultural
form and not what I would expect of an incipient
stage of Caddoan development.
Another very striking aspect of the radiocarbon
village dates is that none falls entirely after AD.
1250, and only three even extend into the thirteenth
century. These data quite plausibly reflect a decline
in population during the latter part of the twelfth
century and abandonment of the village by the late
thirteenth century or early fourteenth century. It is
during this late period that Davis possibly became a
vacant, special purpose site. This, however, is
largely speculation.
(4) This apparent depopulation in the late thirteenth century may coincide with important changes

......__....,\\"1.098

' ,_, '

'

'

t:NEXCAY.WTEI>

Figure 52. Plan of Village Excavation Unit 16.

Summary and Reflections
Artifacts, manufacturing and food debris,
houses, and outdoor activity areas are fairly
abundant and widespread at the Davis site. They
occur primarily in the upper 20 to 30 cm of the
terrace, extending over a roughly oval-shaped area
of approximately 60 acres. Systematic surface
collecting and excavations have been used to sample
these remains, with the latter providing the reliable
and detailed data. Combined 1939-1941 and
1968-1970 investigations have excavated about 5
acres, or almost 10 percent of the non-mound
portion of the site. Although an obviously limited
and potentially biased sample, some significant
findings have been made:
(1) The amount and character of the domestic
features and debris bespeak a substantial resident
population. Using ceramic data from Newell's
excavations, Cook (1972:31-34) has estimated a
probable average standing population of 127 to 255

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site

97

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE - 41 CE 19
UNIT 16 SOUTH

Ill

•••

•
(Ill

•

•

F165

·::·

•

.·-·-.
0

"

0

Ot

0

!Ill

i

t
1

Magnetic North

•
' •• '

MISCELLANEOUS PIT

Q

l'OSTHOLE

Figure 53. Plan of Village Excavation Unit 16 South.

in the use of the Special Mortuary. Indeed, it is
very probable that the mortuary changes are direct
responses to the depopulation of the village. The
more fundamental question of why the village was
abandoned is difficult to answer, although the viability of other major Caddoan settlements after
A.D. 1250/1300 (e.g., Spiro, Belcher, Hatchel, and
Kaufman) suggests a localized phenomenon.
(5) Whereabouts of the communities that must
have resulted from a break up of the Davis village
remain equally unsatisfactorily resolved. Krieger
(Newell and Krieger 1949: 196-197), Jones ( 1957),
and Webb (1963:184-186), have reported components of the Alto focus but all of these are considerably distant from Davis and of uncertain date.

(6) Although the artifacts and feature analyses
are incomplete, several significant distributional
patterns are evident in the village. These include
the relationship of the village to the Special Mortuary and Inner Precinct areas, differences in the intra-site occurrence of status goods, and the presence
of extra-mural working areas.
(7) Mention has already been made of the lack
of occupational debris about the Special Burial area
and, conversely, the relative abundance of refuse
about the Inner Precincts. The former was evidently
regarded as a sacrosanct area, while the latter were
the most desirable· areas for habitation. The Inner
Precinct seems to have formed a nucleus for
settlement with the density of habitation becoming

98

Texas Archeological Society

less intense as one moves away from this center.
Certainly compared with our village units 1, 5, 6,
and 10-14, Newell's excavations yielded far more
specimens and instances of house superposition.
(8) Of our 10 excavations into the village, only
Unit 15 compares favorably with Newell's in terms
of frequency and kinds of artifacts. Particularly
notable are the co-occurrence of stone pulley type
earspools, large quartz crystals, and well-made
bifaces. Based on the offerings in Class 1 burials,
these artifacts can be identified as highly valued
items not available to all members of the
community. In other words, between our Unit 12
and 15 (see Figure 1) there may have existed a
social boundary. While it is still imperfectly defined,
there is evidence to suggest the existence of an elite
segment of the village about Inner Precinct A. A
similarly privileged social group may have resided
about Inner Precinct B. To terminologically identify

these have and have-not segments of the ~"'"~''U'·"".Y
I suggest the designations Inner and Outer Village,
respectively. The Inner Village I see as having
preferred access to the resources of the society,
special privileges, and possibly even greater
participation in the affairs conducted within the
Inner Precinct. Their proximity to the Inner Precinct
mirrors their higher status; it also helps to explain
the superposition of structures about Mound A.
Certainly a house located in the most desirable part
of the settlement (the Inner Village) is likely to be
refurbished and rebuilt, while those in less desirable
areas (the Outer Village) have nothing to gain by
being rebuilt in the same locale and probably are
just as likely (or more easily) to be relocated with
regard to other factors such as the location of
kindred households, slightly higher ground, less
trash, etc.
It is interesting to speculate on possible rela-

a

b

d
Figure 54. Borrow Pit Excavations: a, borrow pit southwest of Mound B, before excavation, looking south; b, northsouth Backhoe Trench 12 across borrow pit, looking south; c, looking south at two hand excavations in borrow pit.
Arrow points to location of burial, F163; d, burial (F163) found in borrow pit near south end of Backhoe Trench 12,
looking north.

Story -1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
tionships between the Inner and Outer Village and
the Special Mortuary. The presence of high status
goods in Class 1 burials and in the Inner Village
seems to me to reflect a linkage between the two,
while the absence of exotic items in Class 2 burials
and in the Outer Village seems to reflect another
set of ties. If the deceased placed in the Special
Mortuary are sacrifices, as our skeletal data suggest, then it is reasonable to hypothesize that the
two classes of burials (actually the individuals interred) are in fact symbolic representatives of the
two major social groups within the community.
(9) A more mundane but important discovery
in the village is the presence of discrete extra-mural
activity areas defined by clusters of various kinds
of pits, a few postholes, and an occasional pile of
fire-cracked rocks. In the larger village excavations
(Units 10/16, 11, and 15) at least one structure was
found in close proximity to each of these areas.
While I have been deliberately cautious about linking a specific house (household) with the adjacent
cluster of extra-mural features, the general pattern
of association is evident. It also is quite clear that
our investigations of Caddoan villages (including
Davis) have been much too limited. At Davis we
get hints of patterned arrangements of maintenance
activities but cannot presently define precisely either the tasks performed or the households involved.
A more detailed analysis of our existing Davis data
can be expected to solve only some of these problems; most others must await more extensive exposures of the village.

99

The initial exploration was in the summer of
1969 when it was mapped (see Figure 55), an
east-west oriented backhoe trench (No. 10) was cut
across the short axis of the depression, and a 2 x 2
m square was manually dug near the east-central
margin, at the Wl 145.5 line. The excavations revealed the depression indeed to be the result of
aboriginal activity. They also uncovered aboriginal
trash which had been thrown and washed into the
pit. For several reasons, the latter finding is particularly important: Namely, (1) the specimens recovered are objects that had been discarded and
knowledge of what is dumped-deliberately
thrown away-is in itself informative, (2) the fill
in the borrow pit is not as acid (average pH reading of 6.6) as elsewhere at the site and bone preservation is reasonably good, and (3) stratification
of cultural debris is better here than in the village
and mound fills.
Encouraged by the 1969 findings, more extensive explorations were planned for the borrow pit
in the 1970 season. Unanticipated delays in the
investigation of the village in 1970, however, did
not permit as much excavation in Unit 9 as was
envisioned at the beginning of this field season.
Another backhoe cut was made and only two
hand-dug areas (N737/Wl 160 and N747/Wl 146)
were opened. As a result of this work, a better
sample of specimens was recovered, the borrow pit
stratigraphy was more clearly defined, and a human burial was uncovered. The artifacts from the
Unit 9 excavations have not been analyzed but the
stratigraphy and burial can be briefly described.

THE BORROW PIT
Stratigraphy
Superficial Appearance
and Exploration

During our inspection trip to the site in the
summer of 1968, the landowners, Mr. and Mrs. W.
E. Gunderman, Jr., called my attention to an
oval-shaped (ca. 28 x 18 m) depression they had
observed in the terrace slope approximately 65 m
southwest of Mound B (see Figure 1). The manner
in which this depression interrupted the natural
contours of the slope (Figures 54a and 55) suggested
that it might be an aboriginal borrow pit. Since no
other possible borrow pit had been recognized at
the site, the testing of this area (designated Unit 9)
was deemed important and incorporated into our
field program.

Six strata were exposed in the borrow pit excavations. These include (from top to bottom):
Stratum 1 is an A horizon soil zone developed
both on borrow pit fill and on adjacent undisturbed
terrace deposits. In the borrow pit it appears as a
gray (very dark when wet) sandy loam containing
charcoal and aboriginal as well as recent trash. It
has been extensively disturbed by animals and
roots, and is probably derived from higher on the
terrace slope. The thickness of Stratum 1 varies
from 15 to 80 cm.
Stratum 2 is a homogeneous zone of light
brown (when wet) to light tan sandy loam which is
probably the parent soil for the A horizon. Contact
with Stratum 1 is relatively even but varies from

100

Texas Archeological Society

88.Sllm _ _ _ __

89.00m
89.50 m

ummm

~-----

10

0

HAND EXCAVATIONS

Meters

111111111111111

Magnetic North

BACKHOETRENCH

GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE 41 CE19
a

BORROW PIT AND EXCAVATION UNIT 9

Figure 55. Plan of Borrow Pit showing Contours, Excavation Units, and Location of Burial F163.

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
sharp to obscure. Cultural debris is present and like
that in Stratum 1 has probably been washed in from
upslope. The absence of lenses of clay or midden
debris suggests that it and Stratum 1 were deposited
after aboriginal use of the borrow pit-possibly
even after abandonment of the site. Stratum 2
ranges in thickness from just a few cm near the
southern edge of the pit to 1 m in the central
portion.
Stratum 3 is a very thick, complex aggregate
of many thin, discontinuous lenses of clay, sandy
loams, and charcoal-stained midden soil. It obviously has a complex depositional history and appears to be the result of both inwash and the piling
up of dirt from aboriginal excavations. Most of the
clay lenses are orange, suggesting that they were
derived not from a yellow clay stratum deeper in
the pit (see Stratum 6 below) but rather from clay
deposits higher in the terrace. There are, however,
some reddish and yellowish clay lenses present,
and cultural debris is fairly abundant. Stratum 3 is
the thickest zone (50 to 125 cm) exposed in our
excavations.
Stratum 4 is a layer of light gray, unstructured
loamy sand which is soft when wet and powdery
when dry. It contains a considerable amount of
cultural debris. There are a few small lenses of
laminated sand but the bulk of the zone is
unstructured. It thickens in the deepest part of the
pit (maximum of nearly 100 cm) and pinches out to
the north. This stratum may be a combination of
in wash and backdirt derived from sand layers higher
in the terrace. If it is in wash, the absence of primary

101

sedimentary structures (such as lamination) is
difficult to understand.
Stratum 5 is a discontinuous zone of compact
yellow clay which is similar to Stratum 6 but more
friable, and locally more sandy. It contains gravel
and large chunks of ironstone as well as charcoal
and other cultural debris. This is the lowest disturbed stratum exposed in the borrow pit. Near the
north end of Backhoe Trench 12 it laps against
Stratum 6 and forms a talus slope with abundant
chunks of ironstone. Stratum 5 varies from just a
few centimeters to a maximum of ca. 50 cm in
thickness.
Stratum 6 is the undisturbed terrace zone which
constitutes the base of the pit. It is an extremely
compact, sticky yellow clay with no charcoal or
other cultural debris. Stratum 6 forms resistant banks
that were particularly distinct at the north end of
Backhoe Trench 12 and the west end of Trench 10.
Three C 14 dates have been obtained from borrow pit fill (Table 8), one of 410 ± 70 BP (Tx-1207)
from Stratum 1, and two of 850 ± 60 BP (Tx-1228)
and 790 ± 240 BP (Tx-1229) from what is probably
Stratum 5. Sample Tx-1207 is quite aberrant and is
probably dating a mixture of modern and prehistoric charcoal. The two other dates are more plausible and suggest that filling of the borrow pit
occurred rather late in the history of the site.
Description of Burial (F163)
A single, semi-flexed burial (F163) is the only
cultural feature recognized in the borrow pit

Table 8. Raw Libby Radiocarbon Assays from the Borrow Pit
Provenience

Sample No.

Raw Libby Age

Sq. N737/Wl156
Stratum 1, 90.94 m

Tx-1207

410 ± 70 BP

Scattered woody charcoal in
A horizon

Test pit, Level 5
Probably Stratum 5

Tx-1228

850±60 BP

Scattered woody charcoal

Test pit, Level 5
Probably Stratum 5

Tx-1229

790± 240 BP

Scattered woody charcoal

Remarks

102

Texas Archeological Society

excavations. It was discovered in the east wall,
south end (see Figures 54c and 55), of Backhoe
Trench 12. Careful checking of the trench wall and
removal of the overburden failed to define a burial
pit. Most probably the individual was simply
placed on the existing surface and covered with
dirt. Regardless, it is clear that F163 was in the
upper part of Stratum 3, that it relates to the very
end of aboriginal exploitation of the borrow pit,
and that it was unceremoniously laid to rest without
offerings.
The skeleton was oriented N-S with the chest
down, the head to the north, and the face turned to
the east and down. The arms were extended along
the sides of the body, while the left leg was tightly
flexed to the abdomen, and what remained of the
right leg was extended. For reasons not really clear,
all bones below the right knee were missing. There
were no obvious signs of trauma, and some undetected postmortem disturbance may be the most
likely explanation.
Al Wesolowsky has examined F163 and
identified it as a robust Native American male
probably between 35 and 45 years of age at the
time of death. The skull is too fragmentary for
discriminant function analysis but an elaboration of
cortical bone on the lower anterior of the left femur
is observable and most likely represents a bone
tumor. While there is little human osteological
material for meaningful intrasite comparisons, it
may be significant that the two non-specialized
burials (Fl30 and F163) were older at the time of
death than any of the individuals recovered from
the Special Burial area.

SUMMARY
In 1969 and 1970, excavations were made in a
fairly large depression on the terrace slope 65 m
southwest of Mound B. Although less extensive
than initially planned, this work revealed the
depression to be the result of aboriginal activity. It
also produced one human burial and a fair amount
of cultural debris, including some stratified material
and the only significant sample of faunal remains
recovered thus far from the site.
Superficially the borrow pit appeared to be 28
x 18 m across and 2 m deep; excavations showed it
to have once been larger (see Figure 55), probably
about 34 x 22 m across and a maximum of 5 m

deep. The latter dimension indicates that roughly
2,000 m 3 of fill have been extracted-a figure not
in very close agreement with the 2,430 m 3 estimated to comprise Mound B. However, it is most
obvious that the borrow pit and the fill it now contains is complex and not adequately sampled. Our
work has primarily exposed an important potential
for future research at the site.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The three seasons of fieldwork described here
have added considerably to the previous interpretations of the George C. Davis site and to our knowledge of Caddoan archeology. Their success is
immeasurably indebted to the many persons involved in the project.
Those who labored in the field and laboratory
include during the 1968 Season were John
Anderson of Alto, Texas; Alton K. Briggs,
graduate student in anthropology, University of
Texas (UT); John F. Cook of Rusk, Texas; Daniel
E. Fox and Thomas R. Hester, undergraduate
students in anthropology, UT; Charlie C. King of
Rusk, Texas; James M. Malone, graduate student
in anthropology, UT; Leander Neely of Rusk,
Texas; Daniel C. Witter, unclassified student, UT;
and Pauline Zoeller, undergraduate student in
anthropology, UT. Elton R. Prewitt, undergraduate
student in anthropology, UT, served as the assistant
archeologist.
The 1969 season field (survey and excavation)
and laboratory crew consisted of: John Anderson
of Rusk, Texas; Harold L. Beall of Austin, Texas;
Kenneth M. Brown, undergraduate student in
anthropology, UT; Lowell A. Enquist of
Tanglewood, Texas; Daniel E. Fox, undergraduate
student in anthropology, UT; Glenn E. Garner of
Flint, Texas; Don L. Hamilton, graduate student in
anthropology, UT; Norma L. Hoffrichter, graduate
student in anthropology, Southern Methodist
University; Thomas E. Holloway of Dallas, Texas;
David J. Ing, undergraduate student in
anthropology, UT; Damon M. Kasper of San
Antonio; David H. Riskind, undergraduate student
in anthropology, UT; Michael Roach, Assistant
Professor of Art, Stephen F. Austin State
University; Robbie Rodgers of Glover, Texas;
Brian T. Smith, undergraduate student in
anthropology, UT; Robert L. Stiba of Taylor,

Story-1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site
Texas; and Dan Witter, Pauline Zoeller, and F. W.
Zoeller of Austin, Texas. James E. Corbin and
Elton R. Prewitt, both anthropology majors at UT,
served as assistant archeologists, and George B.
Kegley, graduate student in anthropology at UT,
headed a survey of the Davis site vicinity.
The 1970 UT Department of Anthropology
Field School students were J. Barto Arnold, III;
Kenneth Bishop; James Boone; Susan Carter; John
C. Disque; Alan R. Dulaney; Marshall Eiserer;
Susan Haisten; Mike Heisley; H. H. Howze; Robert
L. Isgur; Karen McCormick; Melinda McDonald;
Jose Pereira; Robert Reitz; Klaus E. Shawley;
Carolyn Spock; Don Warner; and Janet Wiseman.
Other personnel involved in the field school were:
Don Hamilton, assistant archeologist; Robbie
Rodgers, cook; and Pauline Zoeller, laboratory
supervisor. Barto Arnold, Karen McCormick, and
Carolyn Spock continued working at the site after
the field school.
Other persons involved in the 1970 field and
laboratory projects were John Anderson; Aurora I.
Arnold of Austin, Texas; Doug Brown,
undergraduate student in anthropology, UT;
Daymond Crawford and Mary Ann Crawford of
Buchanan, Texas; Glenn Garner; Don Hamilton,
assistant archeologist; Marsha Jackson and Scott
McKern of Austin, Texas; Karen J. McCormick,
undergraduate student in anthropology, UT; Joy
Stevenson, undergraduate student in anthropology,
UT; Robert L. Stiba of Taylor, Texas; Alan C.
Terrell, graduate student in crop and soil sciences,
Texas A&M University; F. W. Zoeller-laborer.
Don Hamilton and Kenneth M. Brown were the
assistant archeologists for the non-field school
investigations. Richard I. Ford, curator, Museum
of Anthropology, University of Michigan, oversaw
the analysis of the macrofloral remains recovered
from the 1968-1970 excavations.
In addition to the above individuals, others
who have participated in various capacities but without compensation include: Curtis L. Godfrey, Professor of Crop and Soil Sciences, Texas A&M
University, who supervised and assisted in many
ways with the soil studies; Sam Valastro, Jr., of the
Radiocarbon Laboratory, University of Texas at
Austin, who advised on the C 14 samples as well as
helped in the excavations; Al Wesolowsky, graduate student in anthropology, University of Texas at
Austin, and Robert M. Malina, Associate Professor

103

of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin,
who studied the skeletal remains; E. Mott Davis,
Associate Professor of Anthropology, University
of Texas at Austin, who acted as a consultant on
Caddoan archeology; Kathleen Gilmore and
Dessamae Lorrain of Dallas, Texas, and Jim Word
of Floydada, Texas, who during their visits to the
site helped with the digging; and R. K. Harris of
Dallas, Texas, and Clarence Webb of Shreveport,
Louisiana, who during their visits to the site graciously shared their very considerable knowledge
of Caddoan archeology.
The dedication to the project all of these
persons have shown and the skill and care with
which the members of the crew carried out their
various tasks are sincerely appreciated. It is
especially appropriate that the vital role played by
the assistant archeologists, Kenneth Brown, James
E. Corbin, Don L. Hamilton, and Elton Prewitt be
noted. Their performances were outstanding and
contributed much to the success of the field work.
Also to be singled out are Terrisa Lazicki, Senior
Administrative Clerk, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, University of Texas at
Austin, who maintained the fiscal records, typed
manuscripts, and in innumerable other ways
assisted the project; and Pauline Zoeller, who had
the very important responsibility of processing the
artifacts and records, a job which she approached
with ability and unusual dedication. Further to be
thanked are the many individuals who enhanced
our stay in East Texas. Paramount among these is
the W. E. Gunderman family, who by allowing us
to excavate on their property made the project
possible and who in their dealings with us made our
work a more pleasurable experience. The personnel
at the Texas A&M University Tree Farm permitted
us to survey their property and in many other ways
assisted the project. The families of J. A.
Richardson and Dooley Rodgers of Glover, as well
as the many individuals of Alto and Kennard,
Texas, extended kindliness which have left us with
fond memories of East Texas.
Finally, I must make known the personal debt
to the late Alex D. Krieger. While he was not,
unfortunately, able to participate in the project, he
is to a large degree responsible for my long and
keen interest in the site .. His analysis of the
1939-1941 work is a very difficult act to follow.

APPENDIXl
Preliminary Report on the Plant Remains from the
George C .. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas
1968-1970 Excavations9
Richard I. Ford
The plant remains submitted to the Ethnobotanical Laboratory, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, by Dee Ann Story represent
some of the most meticulously recovered specimens ever forwarded to the Laboratory for identification and interpretation. Several of these were
entire features jacketed in plaster for "dissection"
and flotation in a laboratory setting. Considering
the extreme care and superhuman effort that she
devoted to the recovery of biological remains, it is
disappointing to reports that animal bones were
almost non-existent and that plant fragments other
than charcoal, corn parts, and nut shells were equally
rare. Because of the sampling procedures employed
at the site, we at least know that little, if anything,
was missed.

CHARCOAL AND THE
PREHISTORIC ENVIRONMENT
Although some of the charred wood may be
building timbers, most of it is from hearths, other
forms of firepits, and refuse deposits. Table 9 summarizes the identifiable species and indicates their
relative abundance. We must bear in mind, of
course, that prehistoric people preferred certain
firewoods over others and that some trees were
more abundant than others; therefore, these percentages do not necessarily describe the proportions of these trees found in the various habitats.
A bottomland-river terrace association is
definitely represented. Maples, sycamore, hickories,
elm, cottonwood, sugarberry, sweet gum, black
walnut, and oak are found in the archeological
remains. Missing, but presumably present in the
past are ash, willow, locust, sassafras, pawpaw,

black cherry, mulberry, and persimmon. Cypress
may be present (high-powered microscopic
identification must be conducted with these pieces).
If so, then the configuration of vegetation in the
prehistoric bottomlands of the Neches River may
be reconstructed as follows. Cypress trees would
be growing in swamps and other backwater areas.
Along the shoreline one would expect eastern
cottonwoods with the river terraces forested by
sycamore, elm, maple, sugarberry, sweet gum, and
pecan. The higher terraces would also be occupied
by oak and hickory.
The upland forest was probably an oak-hickory
association growing within a shortleaf pine dominated forest. Black walnut probably was scattered
in the association where loam soils occur. Eastern
red cedar would be another tree found in forest
openings, on rocky soils, and in prairie openings. I
do not know what the sequence of successional
trees is, but presumably cedar would also invade
old corn fields.
Cane culms were identified in 48 samples.
Some of these were used to make split cane twilled
mats and others were from thatch and other building materials. As an aquatic plant, cane presumably
came from the banks, shallows, and swamps of the
Neches River.

THE PREHISTORIC DIET
(NON-AGRICULTURAL)
It was originally anticipated that the new Davis
site excavations would shed more light on prehistoric Caddoan economics. Certainly they did. The
ubiquitous presence of corn was not noted in the
original report. Furthermore, the extensive use of

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

Ford-Appendix 1: Preliminary Report on Plant Remains from George C. Davis Site

105

Table 9. Charcoal from the Geoge C. Davis Site
Identification

Acer spp.
maple
Carya spp.
hickory
Carya spp. (?)
Carya illinoensis
pecan
Juglans nigra
black walnut
Juniperus virginiana
eastern red cedar
Juniperus/Taxodium
cedar/bald cypress
Liquidambar styraciflua
sweet gum
Pinus spp.
pine
Plantanus occidentalis
sycamore
Populus deltoides
eastern cottonwood
Quercus (white group)
white oak
Que re us (red group)
red oak
Quercus sp.
oak
Quercus sp. (?)
Ulmus americana (?)
American elm
Ulmacea /Celtis laevigata (?)
hackberry
Diffuse porous
Unidentifiable
Arundinaria gigantea
giant cane
bark
pine cone scale
grass stem
bud

Number

Percentage

3

0.1

0.18

293

12.3

26.57

10
102

0.4
4.3

0.67
40.03

51

2.1

3.01

4

0.2

0.28

4

0.2

0.26

32

1.4

132.70

64

2.6

1.61

5

0.2

0.25

20

0.8

100.00

955

40.1

88.30

282

11.9

45.07

493

20.7

58.46

4
17

0.2
0.7

0.03
9.13

15

0.6

2.92

5
22
165

0.2
0.9

0.16
0.51

Weight

431
1

3
1

forest products was only hinted at in Newell and
Krieger (1949). Unfortunately, less obvious, small
seeds were not found in quantity, despite the application of the most modem excavation techniques.
Hickory nuts and acorns, probably produced
by several species, were used in quantity by the

occupants of the Davis site (Table 10). These same
trees, which also yielded the greatest amount of
firewood, were numerous enough to suggest locally extensive oak-hickory forests that even large
populations could rely upon their mast as a major
constituent of their com diet. While the hickory nut

106

Texas Archeological Society
Table 10. Wild Plant Products f:rom George C. Davis Site
Identification

Remarks

No.

NUTS
Carya spp.

hickory
Carya illinoensis
pecan
Carya sp.lillinoensis
Juglans nigra
black walnut
Quercus spp.
oak
SEEDS
Amaranthus sp.
pigweed
Chenopodium album
lambs quarters
Celtis laevigata
sugarberry
Croton sp.
croton
Cyperus sp.
flatsedge
Gramineae
grass
Helianthus annuus
sunflower
Paspalum sp.
Phytolacca americana
pokeberry
Polygonum sp.
smartweed
Rumex crispus
curly dock

contains protein, and both when boiled yield a
highly desired vegetable oil, the high lysine content
of the acorn made it an adequate supplement to the
lysine deficient corn in the diet. Black walnuts were
most likely limited in abundance and served as an
occasional tasty supplement to the diet.
Three or four plants that provided foodstuff
grew in the bottomlands. Pecan nuts would be collected here and presumably also chinquapins,
which were not recognized in the plant remains.
Entangling both trees and human collectors were
grapes, and the one carbonized seed definitely does

2782
40
7
1

507

49

not carbonized

1
3
1

carbonized
not carbonized
carbonized

22

not carbonized

3

not carbonized

1

not carbonized
not carbonized

3
1

not carbonized
not carbonized

3

carbonized

1

not carbonized

not represent their actual role as a carbohydrate and
snack food. Sugarberry (hackberry) fruits would
also be collected in the fall in this habitat, again in
unknown quantity.
The remaining carbonized seeds are both from
plants that occupy disturbed habitats and are
particularly plentiful in agricultural fields.
Chenopodium or lambs quarters provides a tasty
spinach when collected at the earliest stages of its
growth cycle and a plethora of seeds at the end of
its annual life. These were parched, ground, and
boiled into a mush or mixed and cooked with other

Ford - Appendix 1: Preliminary Report on Plant Remains from George C. Davis Site
seed meal. However, considering the abundance of
seeds produced by the plant, the occurrence of only
one seed in these samples could just as easily be an
accidental intrusion into the site.
Polygonum sp. seeds are found in many archeological sites in the Midwest and South though
their food value is not documented ethnographically. Presumably the use and preparation parallels
lambs quarters.
The remaining seeds are all recent contaminants of the excavation. They are so abundant and
easily dispersed that the fact so few were recovered is another compliment to the excavators of the
Davis site. Several of these, especially sunflower,
pokeweed, and pigweed, are potential foods and
undoubtedly were available in the fields surrounding the Davis site.

AGRICULTURE
Corn was the only cultivated plant found in
the excavations. Presumably the site was initially
occupied before beans were introduced into the
Eastern United States, and even though they were
available before the site was abandoned, the successful adaptation to corn combined with other
plants and animals may have impeded the acceptance or full potential of beans in the economy.
The bulk of the corn represents one archeologically defined type, although the presence of
two 14-rowed cobs may be another. The predominance of Eastern Complex corn is not surprising in
light of Volney Jones' (Newell and Krieger
1949:241-249) previous analysis. The size of this

collection does contribute some new information,
however.
Only one nubbin ear was found in with the 156
cobs that were measured and carefully examined.
This may imply the removal and discarding of
sucker stalks and other relatively unproductive parts
in the field. The uniformity of the cobs also suggests that care was taken in farming and the selection of the best seed stock for the next year. Such
care is not always evident especially in earlier sites,
and should be interpreted as further evidence for
their dependency upon corn.
Since the original Davis site report was published, many more sites containing Eastern Complex
corn have been described. We no longer are forced to
seek an exogenous, Mesoamerican source for this
corn, although this hypothesis has not been ruled out.
The earliest corn in the East, while basically a 12rowed descendent of Chapalote corn, is quite variable and does produced some with 8 kernel rows on
a cob. It is reasonable to argue that the Eastern
Complex corn evolved in the Middle West and was
introduced to the Davis site from a northern or eastern
source. In any event, the percentages (Table 11)
certainly support the radiocarbon dates from the site.
The earliest recognizable Eastern Complex corn does
range between 8 and 12 rows. As human and natural
selection continued over time, the row number was
reduced until the Late Prehistoric period when entire
assemblages consisted of only 8-rowed corn.
Numerous kernels and loose cupules were
found in many samples. These, along with an analysis of the productivity of the cobs based upon cob
size (length and diameter), will be discussed in a
later report.

Table 11. Com Cobs from the George C. Davis Site
Row Number
No. of cobs
Percentage

Cob cupules
Shank
Stalk

6

8

10

12

14

l

73
46.6

46
29.8

34
21.8

2
1.3

0.6

11,000+
7
68

107

APPENDIX2
Preliminary Study of the Faunal Remains from the
George C .. Davis Site, 1968-70 Excavations
Billy Davidson
INTRODUCTION
The analyzed faunal remains from the Davis
site are typical of an eastern Texas assemblage. All
material thus far identified from the site represent
species that either still inhabit the area, or that have
been recorded from the area in historic times. At
the time of this writing, a total faunal study of the
site has not been completed. This report contains
only the results of a study of faunal material
collected from the 114-inch mesh screen residue,
and material plotted in place. As a result, some
small-sized species may yet be added to the faunal
inventory for the site-along with additional
material of the species already listed-after sorting
and iden-tification of any faunal remains contained
in the bulk matrix samples. 10

PRESERVATION
The acidic soil of the Davis site is a very poor
matrix for the preservation of bone. Almost every
specimen is badly solution-pitted, and a few are
almost completely dissolved. The soil pH readings
ranged from 4.5 to 6.0 in the village, and 6.0 to 7.0
in the borrow pit (see Dee Ann Story, this volume).

METHODS
Faunal materials recovered from the 114-inch
mesh screen were cleaned, and broken specimens
repaired, by the staff of the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, and then turned over to the
author for identification. Identifications were made
by comparing the preserved material to recent skeletal remains collected by the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory and the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory of the Texas Memorial Museum.
Whenever possible, material from the site was com-

pared to recent specimens collected in the same
general area. Only jaws, teeth, and postcranial elements with at least one complete end were identified (Table 12). All other material was identified
only as small mammal, large mammal, etc.

FAUNAL ANALYSIS
Unidentified fish: One half of a fish vertebra
was recovered from the borrow pit. The vertebra
came from a fish that weighed approximately 2 kg.
Lepisosteus osseus (Linnaeus): A mass of skull
elements representing at least two individual
longnose gar was recovered from Mound C burial
F119. No postcranial elements were present, and
the skulls obviously represent burial offerings.
Terrapene sp. (Merriam): Box turtle carapace
and plastron fragments were commonly found in
the burials. Fragments were also occasionally recovered from the borrow pit and village areas.
Terrapene carolina (Linnaeus): A complete
plastron and fragmentary carapace of an eastern
box turtle were recovered from the village area.
The specimen was intact; it had not been altered in
any obvious way by the Indians.
Meleagris gallopavo (Linnaeus): Turkey remains were common in the borrow pit. They were
also occasionally recovered from the village area.
It is impossible to determine from the material
present if the birds were domestic or wild.
Procyon lotor (Linnaeus): One raccoon mandible was recovered from the borrow pit. Raccoons
are primarily found in broadleaf, deciduous woodlands, but they are rather common in the pine forests and hardwood bottoms of East Texas.
Ursus americanus (Pallas): Three canine teeth,
possibly from a single individual, were recovered
from Mound C burial F119. The teeth were from a
small, young adult, probably a female, and were
not altered in any visible way.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

Davidson - Appendix 2: Preliminary Study of F aunal Remains from the George C. Davis Site

109

Table 12. Fauna List for the George C. Davis Site, 1968-1970 Excavations
Taxa
Unidentified fish
Lepisosteus osseus
Terrapene sp.
Terrapene carolina
Meleagris gallapovo
Procyon lotor
Ursus americanus
Sciurus sp.
Castor canadensis
Sylvilagus
cf. floridanus
Sylvilagus aquaticus
Sus scrofa*
Odocoileus
virginianus
Bovidae
Dasypus
novemcinctus*

Abundance

Burial Mound

Village

Borrow Pit

x

R

x
x
x

UC

c
R

c

x
x
x

R

x
x
x

x

R

x

R

x

UC

x
x
x

UC
FC
UC

x

c

x

UC

x
x

R

x

x

* From smface or plow zone and probably recent intrusion.
R-rare, only 1 individual represented
UC-uncommon, 2 to 3 individuals represented
FC-fairly common, 4 to 6 individuals represented
C--common, more than 6 individuals represented
Sciurus sp. (Linnaeus): The complete humerus
of a tree squirrel was recovered from the lower fill
of the borrow pit. The humerus is within the size
range of Sciurus niger which occurs in the area
today, but may also represent a large individual of
S. carolinensis, which also is found in the area
today.
Castor canadensis (Kuhl): Beaver incisors
were recovered from Mound C burials Fl 19 and
F134, and from the village area. The material is
identical to recent beaver material from East Texas.
Sylvilagus cf. floridanus (Allen): Two mandibles, representing two individuals, were recovered from the borrow pit. The eastern cottontail
inhabits the area today, and the identification is
made on that basis. It is impossible to separate the
audubon cottontail, Sylvilagus auduboni, from S.
floridanus by characters present on the mandible,
and the specimens could possibly represent S.
auduboni. This is unlikely, however, since the near-

est recent record of S. auduboni is over 300 km to
the west.
Sylvilagus aquaticus (Bachman): Numerous
elements representing at least four individuals of
this species were recovered from the borrow pit.
They are indistinguishable from corresponding elements of recent swamp rabbits.
Sus scrofa (Linnaeus): Two pig teeth were recovered from the plow zone. The good preservation
of these specimens is unlike that of other faunal
material from the site, and the two teeth surely are
recent intrusions.
Odocoileus virginianus (Zimmerman): Numerous elements representing at least 17 individual
deer were recovered from all areas of the site. There
is a distinct breakdown of elements that were
associated with the burials and elements that were
being discarded in the borrow pit. For example,
elements which were commonly used as tools
(metapodials, ulnae) were more common in the

110

Texas Archeological Society

burials, represented by finished tools; while waste
bone (femurs, tibias, etc.) were almost always
discarded (Table 13).
A relatively low number of ribs, foot elements,
and to some extent, vertebra, are preserved, Perhaps these elements, especially the foot ones, were
not returned to camp from the scene of the kill. It is
also possible that the ribs were left at the kill site as
well, but it is more probable that they were simply
gnawed into unidentifiable fragments. Tail vertebra
and fibulas are absent from the collection. I can see
no reason for this, unless these parts of the animal
had special cultural significance. A further study of
this problem is warranted.
Bovidae: Two bones from the site were
assigned to this category. One of these elements,
an ulna fragment, was recovered from the plow
zone. The preservation of this specimen is unlike
that of other faunal material from the site. It
probably represents the recent intrusion of a

domestic cow. The other element, the distal end of
a metapodial, is preserved exactly like the
prehistoric faunal material. This specimen probably
represents a bison associated with the aboriginal
occupation of the site.
Dasypus novemcinctus (Linnaeus): Preservation and location of this specimen indicates that it
is a probable recent intrusion.

CONCLUSIONS
The prehistoric people who occupied the
George C. Davis site apparently hunted in all of the
major ecological areas near the site. Heavy emphasis was placed on hunting of deer, turkey, box
turtles, and, to a lesser degree, rabbits.
Two complete crania of Odocoileus virginianus are present in the material included in this
study. One of these animals was apparently killed

Table 13. Distribution of Elements Identified as Odocoileus Virginianus

Village
Element
phalanyx
carpal
astragalus
calcanus
metapodial
radius
ulna
humerus
scapula
vertebra
tail vertebra
pelvis/sacrum
femur
tibia
fibula
ribs
skull parts
jaw
teeth
antler

Borrow Pit

Unit 16

Unit 15

1

3

Unit 14

MoundC
Burials

2
1

2
1

16
3
20
24
54

3

4
2

1

6

19
24
21

3

5
5
9

41
5

l
3
1

Davidson -Appendix 2: Preliminary Study of Fauna! Remains from the George C. Davis Site
in early or mid-winter, as indicated by the presence
of well developed antler fragments still attached to
the skull. The other crania has no antler
development. Only the bases for the antler are
present, the antler itself had been shed, and no new
antler development had begun at the time of death.
This indicates that the second animal was killed in
late winter or early summer.
Certain elements of 0. virginianus, including
tail vertebra and fibulas, are completely absent
from the collection. A further study may show that
this is more than just an accident; and that it relates to certain, as yet unidentified, cultural practices of the prehistoric Caddoan people. Other
elements, especially foot pieces, are very rare in the
site, and may have been removed from the animal
before the carcass was returned to the village from
the kill locale.

111

7. Some of these difficulties stem from Newell's failure
to consider possible stages (i.e., discontinuous steps) in
mound construction. As a result, he did not record any
events, such as erosion to the mound slopes, that would help
resolve the problem.
8. The WPA excavations are reported in Newell and
Krieger (1949:15-17) as being confined to Mound A and
immediately adjacent areas. However, a fairly large area,
about 30 x 30 m, was dug at the terrace edge approximately
120 m east of Mound A (see Figure 3 herein).

9. Ethnobotanical Laboratory Report No. 462,
University of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology. Report
received by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in
1974.
10. Subsequent processing of the bulk matrix samples
from the 1968-1970 excavations failed to recover identifiable
fauna! remains.

REFERENCES CITED
NOTES
1. The mound designations A, B, and C were not used
in the Newell and Krieger (1949) report. As herein applied,
Mounds A, B, and C refer to what they called the "large
L-shaped mound," the "low, rectangular mound," and the
"high conical mound," respectively.
2. Most of the site west of Highway 21 is now Caddoan
Mounds State Historic Site.
3. Subsequent to the completion of this report, the
ceramics recovered from the 1968-1970 excavations were
analyzed by J. Barto Arnold (1973) and Gayle Fritz (1975)
as M.A. theses. In addition, all of the lithics from the site
were the subject of Harry J. Shafer's 1973 Ph.D. dissertation,
and Carolyn Spock's 1977 M.A. thesis dealt with the nonburial cultural features uncovered by both the WPA and
1968-1970 excavations.

Arnold, J. B., III
1973 George C. Davis Site Ceramic Analysis, Excavations of 1968-70. Master's thesis, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bell, R. E.
1966 Harlan Site. In Field Reports at 7th Caddo Conference ( 1963), edited by H. A. Davis, pp. 42-57. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
1972

The Harlan Site, Ck-6, A Prehistoric Mound Center
in Cherokee County, Eastern Oklahoma. Memoir
No. 2. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Norman.

Cook, S. F.
1972 Can Pottery Residues Be Used As An Index to Population? Contributions of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility No. 14, pp.
17-39. University of California, Berkeley.

4. All elevations are relative to an arbitrary datum of
100 m that was established in 1968 when topographic
mapping and gridding of the western section of the site was
begun. Regrettably, the 1968-1970 grid cannot be precisely
related to that used in 1939-1941.

Crane, H. R. and J.B. Griffin
1963 University of Michigan Radiocarbon Dates VIII.
Radiocarbon 5:228-253.

5. All radiocarbon dates presented herein are given as
raw Libby assays in years BP and 1 sigma standard deviation.
They are not adjusted for the 5730 half life, delta 13C
corrections, or dendrocalibrations.

Ford, J. A.
1951 Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site
in Avoyelles Parish, Louisiana. Anthropological
Papers, Volume 44, Part l. American Museum of
Natural History, New York.

6. Based on our findings at Mound B, I do not believe
that the hummocks (Zone 2-5) Newell and Krieger ( 1949:5864) classified as part of temporal Phase 1 have validity as
separate strata. Rather, I prefer to regard them as continua
in the early stages of initial Mound A construction and to
separate them analytically from the pre-mound context
(Zone 1).

Fritz, G. F.
1975 Analysis of Ceramic Pipes, Ear Ornaments, and Effigies from the George C. Davis Site. Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin.

112

Texas Archeological Society

Griffin, J.B.
1950 Review of: The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas, by H. Perry Newell and Alex D.
Krieger American Anthropologist 52 (No.
3):413-415.
1952

1966

An Interpretation of the Place of Spiro in Southeastern Archaeology. The Missouri Archaeologist
14:89-106.
Mesoamerica and the Eastern United States in Prehistoric Times. In Handbook of Middle American
Indians, Vol. 4, edited by R. Wauchope, pp.
111-131. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Griffin, J.B. and R. A. Yarnell
1963 A New Radiocarbon Date on Corn from the Davis
Site, Cherokee County, Texas. American Antiquity
28 (No. 3):396-397.
Griffith, W. J.
1954 The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as Seen by Europeans, 1687-1772. Philological and Documentary
Studies, Vol. II, No. 3, pp. 43-165. Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University, New Orleans.
Hoffman, M. P.
1970 Archaeological and Historical Assessment of the
Red River Basin in Arkansas. In Archeological and
Historical Resources of the Red River Basin, edited
by H. A. Davis, pp. 137194. Research Series No. l.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Jones, B. C.
1957 The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 28: 198-231.
Kegley, G. B.
n.d.
An Archeological Survey of the Middle Neches.
MS on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Keller, J. E.
n.d.
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches
Region with Emphasis on the George C. Davis Site.
MS on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Phillips, P.
1970 Archaeological Survey in the Lower Yazao Basin,
Mississippi 1949-1955. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 60, Parts
I and II. Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology. Harvard University, Cambridge.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R.
1952 Structure and Function in Primitive Society. The
Free Press, New York.
Sears, W. H.
1964 The Southeastern United States. In Prehistoric Man
in the New World, edited by J. D. Jennings, pp.
259-287. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Shafer, H.J.
1973 Lithic Technology at the George C. Davis Site,
Cherokee County, Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Spock,C.
1977 An Analysis of the Architectural and Related Features at the George C. Davis Site. Master's thesis,
Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Story, D. A.
1972 A Preliminary Report of the 1968, 1969, and 1970
Excavations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas. Report of Field Research Conducted
under National Science Foundation Grants (GS-2573
and 3200) and Interagency Contracts between The
University of Texas at Austin and the Texas Building Commission and Texas Historical Survey Committee. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Tamers, M. A., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. M. Davis
1964 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates II. Radiocarbon 6:138-159.
Valastro, S., Jr. and E. M. Davis
1970 University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates
VIII. Radiocarbon 12 (No. 2):617-639.

Mowery, I. C. and H. Oakes
1959 Soil Survey of Cherokee County, Texas. United
States Department of Agriculture, Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

Webb, C.H.
1959 The Belcher Mound, A Stratified Caddoan Site in
Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Memoirs, No. 16. Society for American Archaeology, Salt Lake City.

Newell, H.P. and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoirs, No. 5. Society for American Archaeology, Menasha, Wisconsin.

1963

The Smithport Landing Site: An Alto Focus Component in De Soto Parish, Louisiana. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 32:57-81.

Davidson -Appendix 2: Preliminary Study of Fauna! Remains from the George C. Davis Site
Webb, C.H. and M. Dodd, Jr.
1939 Further Excavations of the Gahagan Mound; Connections with a Florida Culture. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society
11:92-126.

113

Willey, Gordon R.
1966 An Introduction to American Archaeology, Volume
One: North and Middle America. Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
New York.

Observations on Caddoan Burial Practices
at the Sanders Site (41LR2)
Donny L. Hamilton

ABSTRACT
The T. M. Sanders site (41LR2) is the type site of the Sanders focus of the Early to MiddleCaddoan period
sequence. The site is situated on a terrace overlooking Bois d' Arc Creek near the Red River. Two mounds, one
a burial mound and the other a probable temple mound, are located at either end of the site with village debris
scattered between them. The burial mound was excavated in 1931 by The University of Texas at Austin but the
material has never been systematically studied. The burials from Mound 1 are analyzed and data are presented
supporting the proposition that the burials on top of the mound are different from those on the slope, but both
groups are special status burials. The Class I burials on top of the mound are high status adult males, while the
Class II burials on the mound slope accompany the Class I burials in some way, possibly as immolations.

BURIAL STUDIES
Burial practices of diverse cultures have long
been of interest to anthropologists and archeologists, for considerable insight into a culture's social
structure can be gained by understanding the belief
and behavioral systems responsible for particular
burial patterns. The societal implications of burial
studies are important in archeology for it has been
assumed that persons who are treated differentially
in life will be treated differentially in death (e.g.,
Binford 1971; Saxe 1970); therefore, it is useful to
analyze burials as fossilized terminal statuses of
individuals (Peebles 1971:68-69). As such, thematic
burial studies of non-egalitarian cultures as typified
by the various prehistoric Mississippian cultures of
the southeastern U.S. have been pursued by many
researchers (e.g., Brown 1971a; Goldstein 1980).
Of particular interest has been the diachronic and
synchronic studies of burial patterns that persist
through time and across cultures. In many Mississippian cultures, especially those with ceremonial
centers, difference in burial practices have been
observed for distinct social classes. These differences, in terms of placement, classes of artifacts,
skeletal orientations, and general mortuary treatment, are most evident when spatially distinct burial
groups, such as mound and non-mound burials, are
compared and contrasted.

From the Early Caddoan period to the Middle
Caddoan period in the Caddoan area, it was a common theme for the burials of high status individuals
to be segregated in some way, as evidenced at
Caddoan sites such as George C. Davis (Story 1972;
see Story, this volume), Belcher Mound (Webb
1959), Haley Place (Moore 1912:527-564),
Gahagan Mound (Moore 1912:511-522), Mounds
Plantation (Webb and McKinney 1975), and Spiro
(Brown 197lb:92-112). At these sites, the high status individual in multiple interments was usually
allocated more space, which was usually centrally
located in the burial pit. In other instances, the
individual may be interred singularly in a central
area of the mound and the multiple interment of
possible immolations are placed in a separate, accompanying burial pit. Both these patterns of mortuary treatment can be identified in the mound
burials at George C. Davis (Story 1972) and
Gahagan (Moore 1912).
Story (1972:56; see Story, this volume) identified two major classes of burials in the burial mound
at the George C. Davis site:
Class l burials located in deep, centrally located
pits that contained the remains of at least one
high status individual. Exotic material and a
layer of greenish loam was placed either over the
skeletal remains or over the entire grave floor.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

116

Texas Archeological Society

Class 2 burials are smaller shallower pits placed
on the margins of the mound with few offering
and no greenish loam fill.
Variation in other forms of mortuary treatment-analogous classes of burials in mound versus non-mound burials; central location in the
mound versus a peripheral location; and location
on the top of the mound versus the slope of the
mound-are evident at a number of Caddoan sites.
What is important is the overall pattern and treatment accorded the dead, not simple dichotomies or
putting too much emphasis on the quantity and
kinds of burial associations. Relying too heavily on
the burial associations and trait lists can result in
overlooking significant mortuary variations within
a society (Goldstein 1980:4). For instance, it may
well be the case that a burial in a mound without a
single associated artifact signifies a higher status
burial, one more significant to the people of that
culture, than would a burial in a non-mound cemetery with an abundance of associations. For this
reason, the emphasis of the study conducted by
Goldstein (1980) concentrated on spatial structuring of the graves in the sites.
Taking into consideration the differences
noted in mound burials at other Caddoan sites, I
was intrigued when I first read there were no
differences in the burials located on the top of
Mound 1 at the T. M. Sanders site (41LR2) and
those on the slope of the mound. I consulted all the
published material, field notes, field drawings, and
human osteology files in existence in 1973 to see
if any patterning could be discerned between the
burials at the site. The resulting paper published
here is a revised section of an unpublished report
(Hamilton 1973) on Early Caddoan burial
practices. It must be emphasized that the interpretations and conclusions presented here are
based entirely on Jackson's (1931) field notes and
drawings, Krieger's (1946) comments and 1945
notes on the site, and the sex/age identifications of
the skeletal material on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) at The
University of Texas at Austin in 1973. None of the
original material, artifacts, or skeletal material was
studied, typed, or analyzed; however, the sex/age
identifications were cross-checked with more
recent data provided by Diane Wilson (personal
communication, 1996), which is discussed later in
this paper.

BURIAL PRACTICES AT THE
SANDERS SITE
Much of what we know about the Sanders
focus (or phase) is based on the poorly documented
excavation in 1931 (Jackson 1931) and from
Krieger's (1946:171-218) succinct analysis of the
material. The Sanders focus consists of a number of
sites at the eastern edge of the Plains in northeastern Texas, extending northward into southeast Oklahoma and southward into the Sabine River drainage
in Texas. Based on the best available evidence, the
Sanders focus dates from the late Gibson Aspect
(Krieger 1946:171-203)-what is now referred to
as the Caddoan I or Early Caddoan period-through
the Caddoan II or Middle Caddoan period, from
about A.D. 1000 to 1400 (Davis 1970:42-44; Story
1990:302). The T. M. Sanders site is the type site
and major center of the Sanders Focus. The site is
located on the edge of a high river terrace on the
east side of Bois d' Arc Creek, one kilometer south
of the Red River in the northwest comer of Lamar
County. The most prominent features on the site
are a rounded burial mound (Mound 1) at the east
edge of the site and a larger, flat-topped, rectangular mound (Mound 2) on the west edge of the site
overlooking Bois d' Arc Creek. A low ridge with
abundant village debris separates the two mounds
(Figure 1).
The site was tested in 1931 by A. T. Jackson
and B. B. Gardner for the Anthropology Department of the University of Texas at Austin. Twentyone burials, numerous pits, and the post molds of a
square house (Figure 2) 1 were associated with
Mound 1. The pits, which are believed to have been
cache pits placed in the mound during an historic
occupation of the site by Kichai or Wichita-speaking people (Story 1990:302), thus post-date the burials under consideration here. Unfortunately, the
archeological material has never been adequately
described, and the basic description of the site, the
Sanders focus, and the recovered material continues to be found in Krieger (1946:171-218) and
Suhm et al. (1954:176-182). The burial data are
reinterpreted here.
For this article, the two site maps in Krieger's
(1946:Figures 9 and 10) report were scanned and
digitized on a computer (see Figures 1 and 2). In
the process, non~relevant features were omitted
from the maps. Since the quality of the field drawings of the burials varied greatly in quality and

Hamilton - Observations of Caddoan Burial Practices at the Sanders Site (41LR2)

o

50 100

200 ft

~-S-~,~~I
!Jis'
Jo
30

117

LAMAR COUNTY, TEXAS

41LR2

f'I

contour lnterv<>l = 1 foot
(.30 "''

Figure 1. The T. M. Sanders Site Plan (after Krieger 1946:Figure 9).

FEATURES
T.M. SANDERS SITE
41LR2

CJ=

BURIALS

0

= PITS

Figure 2. Features on Mound 1 (after Krieger 1946:Figure 10).

skill, depending upon who drew them, each burial
drawing was redrawn using the original drawings
and various photographs of each burial. The drawings of the burials as depicted in Figures 3 and 4
are as exact or more exact than the original field
drawing. Because of the size of some of the burial
pits in relation to the interred individuals, the burial
pit outline has been left off to save space. Labeled

below each individual in a burial is either a o for
male or a '? for female along with a number that
represents the age estimate available in 1973. The
sex/age determinations on the figures are based on
the osteological files at TARL in 1973 and most, if
not all, were identified by Goldstein (n.d.). Each
individual in a multiple interment is designated
with a roman numeral when the left to right order

118

Texas Archeological Society

CLASS I BURIALS

70 d

18d

40d

35 d

35 d'

BURIAL 2

BURIAL 4

BURIAL 6

BURIAL 8

BURIAL 1

r---------------------------1

/@
I
I
I

D

I

I
I

I

r~~, ~,!;J

I
I
I

I
I

I
I
I
I

I

I
I
I
I

'I)··,..~ t.

h
1,4 ~~ ~

I
I

I
I

I

I
I

I

I

l

55 d
BURIAL 11

mV

35 d

1
22

11
30

60

BURIAL 9

9

d

d

-------------------------------------------------------------TOP OF MOUND ~

I

I
I

'\.

I

I

1v
35-50

TWO FRAGMENTARY
ADULTS

BUR!AL 20

I

I
I

II

Iii

I

30

25

1

I

9

9

(?)

I

I
I
I

BURIAL 21

CLASS 11 BURIAL

I
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

r-------------------------------------------·--------

·------------------------------------------------

1
I
I

a

I
I
I

a

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

I

I
I
I

10 d(?)
ADULT d(?)

BURIAL 3

309
BURIAL 10

I

BURIAL 19

I
I

1..---------1

R /~

INFANT
BURIAL 16

~ ~
ADULT
INFANT
BURIAL 14

CLASS Ill BURIALS

Figure 3. Grave Drawings for Class I Burials on the top of Mound 1, one Class II Burial near the top of the mound, and
the Class III Burials, one on top of the mound and the rest on the east slope of the mound.

CLASS

II BURIALS

SKULL Ill

@

BENEATH SKULL IV

=C;)

~
~

;::.;

s:::=
I

~
"'

,~,

~

'~·

II Ill
I
60 60 6
9 ?
d

\!

\

I'

..

.J)1~

v

VII
VI
IV
55 30 25 35-50
?
9
d d
BURIAL 5

I
60
cf

II
45

\?

Ill
25

v

IV
TWO FRAGMENTARY
,,....,,,,,.("'

IV
Ill
ADULT 16
(/
d
\?
BURIAL 12

II
14

I
30

\?(?)

v

I
10
d

()

II
12
d

v

Ill
IV
12 25 35
(/
(/
d
BURIAL 13

15·
;:::
VI
35

\?

""

~

[

~
i::;i

;::::
O:;
:;::

[
~

~

~·
~
~

s.
(I>

§

~rJHU

(!!:

I

(?)

II
70

Ill
35

IV
35

I'

I'

\?

BURIAL 15

v
9
I'

VI
13

9

II
Ill
I
25 55 25
cf \'(?) \?

!!'

~
~

tJ}

~·

't/r

IV
35

v

45
cf
BURIAL 17

I'

VI
60
cf

VII
60

VIII
45

\?

9

Figure 4. Class II Burials on the east slope of Mound 1.

40
cf

65
60
cf
I'
BURIAL 18

40
d

~
......

~

~

-"°
,_.

120

Texas Archeological Society

might be confusing (recent age/sex identifications
are not reflected on these two figures, which are
discussed below).
In reference to the burials located on top of
and to the east of the burial mound, (Mound I),
Krieger (1946: 175) states:

males, and two were group burials containing
adults of both sexes. In no case, however, were
the skeletons burned or scorched in the slightest
degree. Presumably, ashes were placed on the
grave floor, or, if a fire was built within the pit,
it had been allowed to cool before the corpse
was introduced.

The 21 graves were in two groups, one scattered
over the highest part of "mound 1" 2 and the
other along the eastern end of the eminence
where it levels out along the terrace edge. There
were no distinctions in placement or content
between the two groups. They contained a total
of 60 individuals. Twelve graves contained a
single individual; the other nine contained 48
with from three to eight persons in each. Without exception the body was extended at full
length, usually on the back but at times on the
side or twisted to one side. In group burials the
individuals had been placed very close together,
their bones closely adjoining or overlapping.
Most of the graves were much longer than necessary to accommodate the bodies, but their
width was not increased in proportion to the
number of bodies; thus, a grave with one individual was 102 inches long by 32 inches wide,
while another with five was 106 by 38 inches.
The extra space at the head end of the grave was
sometimes filled with ceramic offerings, placed
some distance back of the heads, but in others
the vessels were crowded about the heads. Some
vessels were found between or next to the legs.
Bottles were evidently always placed close to
the heads. Personal ornaments such as shell
beads, gorgets, and earspools had been left in
place as in life. Only one burial containing one
individual, was without artifacts of some kind.
Grave pits were all rectangular. One skeleton [Burial 19] lay with head to the west, the
direction of another was uncertain, and the remaining 58 lay with head due east or within
about 15 degrees of east; i.e., within the range
of seasonal variation in the point of sunrise.
No cremations were found, but in several
instances there was evidence of fire in connection with burial ritual. Burial 1, an aged male
lay "on a bed of ashes five feet eight inches
long"; the grave pit being 108 by 20 inches. In
burial 2, a male about 18, there were "ashes
beneath the hips." Burial 11, containing a male
about 55, is said to have had ashy soil in the fill.
In all, seven of the 21 graves contained ashes:
five of these were single interments, all adult

When the burial data are looked at closely,
alternative interpretations are probable, but the most
significant exception taken with Krieger's description is with his statement that, "There were no
distinctions in placement or content between the
two groups." Other researchers (Wyckoff 1974:92)
have also questioned Krieger's interpretation. However, Krieger's original interpretation that there are
no distinctions in the burial groups is still accepted
without question. For instance, Wilson (1994) states
this as a premise in her article on division of labor
and stress loads evidenced in the Sanders skeletal
material. Regardless, Krieger states that 60 individuals were present; however, upon reexamining
the burials from the 1931 University of Texas excavations, 62 individuals could be identified. Eleven
were single interments and 10 were multiple interments containing 51 individuals. The two fragmentary individuals associated with Burial 20 appear to
be part of a disturbed burial and were evidently not
counted by Krieger. Based on this, it is difficult to
correlate the 92 individuals (29 females, 25 males,
18 unknown or indeterminate, and 20 children) cited
by Wilson (1994:133) or Dow (1987:39) with the
62 individuals (21 males, 22 females, 8 indeterminate, and 11 children) described in the field excavation notes. Although not cited by Wilson, her
numbers were obtained from a thesis by Dow (1987)
on the skeletal population of the Sanders site, the
Hatchel/Mitchell sites, and the Loeve Fox site. The
addition of 30 individuals to the skeletal population
from the Sanders site presents some problems that
have to be explained.
In an attempt to reconcile the different counts,
and to address an early criticism that this paper
relied on outdated sex/age identifications (Goldstein
n.d.), I contacted Diane Wilson, who generously
provided me with a list of her sex/age identifications
along with the age/sex identifications made by
Goldstein (n.d.) that closely corresponds to the same
age/sex identifications I used in this original study.
The data in Table l were compiled from two
different lists provided to me by Wilson (1996

Hamilton - Observations ofCaddoan Burial Practices at the Sanders Site (41LR2)
Table 1. Sanders Site, Comparison of Wilson's Age/Sex Identifications
with Goldstein Age/Sex Identifications in TARL files
CLASS I BURIALS
Wilson/Lab
Mean Age/Sex

Goldstein/Field
Age/Sex

366
401
389
357
354
375
378
393

60+m
19.5 f #
40m
32.5m

25m

70m
18 m
40m
35m
35m
35m
55m
30m

8

6

8

Burial No.

Accession No.

1
2
4
6
8
9
11
20-2

8

N=

30m

Comments
compares
sex difference
compares
compares
field only
compares
field only
compares

All of the Class I Burials correlate with the field notes.
CLASS H BURIALS

Burial No.

Accession No.

5-1
5-2
5-3
5-4
5-5
5-6
5-7
7-a
7-b
7-c
7
7-1
12-1
12-2
12-3
12-4
12-5
13-1
13-2
13-3
13-4
13-5
13-6

396
368
385
349
394
345
361
348
390
362
364
411
3548
3549
3550
3551
3552
346a, b
373
410
404
370
405

Wilson/Lab
Mean Age/Sex

40 f
23 (39) i
22.5m
32.5 (48) m
adult i
19 f
adult i
45m
39 f
15 f
54.5 f
15 f (i)
4i
7i
12 i
15 m
22f
19.5 f

Goldstein/Field
Age/Sex
60m
60+f
6I
55m
30m
25 f
35-50 m
45 f
25 f
21-30f
21-30 i
60m
(30 f)
(14 f)
(adult m)
(16 f)
-l

lOm*
12 m *
12m*
25 f
35 f
35 f

Comments
field only
age difference
field only
age/sex difference
compares
field only
compares
sex difference
compares
field only
compares
age difference
compares
compares
sex difference
compares
compares
compares
compares
compares
compares
age difference
field only

121

122

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. (Continued)

Burial No.
15-1
15-1 ?
15-2
15-3
15-4
15-5
15-6
17-1
17-2
17-3a
17-4
17-5
17-6
17-7
17-8
18-1
18-2
18-3a
18-4
20-1
20-3
20-4
20-4
21-1
21-2
21-3
N= 49

Accession No.
360a
360b
371
369
408
344
406
350
365
398
386
397a
388
358
353
359
403
367
407
374a
352
356
355
392
363
387
49

Wilson/Lab
Mean Age/Sex

Goldstein/Field
Age/Sex

25 f

10 I
60+I
70f
35 f
35 f
9f*
13 f *
25m
55 f
25 f
40 f
45m
60m
60+f
45 f
40m
65m
60f
40m
22f
60m
35-50 I
35-50 I
30 f
1i
25 f

37

49

55 f
30 f
9i

45 i
25 f
20.5m
31 m
47.5m
adult f
40m
42m
37.5 f
40m
21f
adult i
adult i
45 f
30.5 f

Comments
cannot correlate, delete
field only
age difference
compares
field only
compares
field only
field only
sex difference
compares
age/sex difference
compares
compares
field only
compares
compares
age difference
age difference
compares
compares
sex difference
compares
sex difference
compares
field only
compares

CLASS III BURIALS

Burial No.

Accession No.

Wilson/Lab
Mean Age/Sex

Goldstein/Field
Age/Sex

3
10
14-I
14-II
16
19

347
372

10.5 i
16 f

384a

4i

lOm*
20-25 f
(adult)
(infant)
3i
adult m

N= 6

3

3

6

L= 63

52

46

63

Comments
compares
age difference
field only
field only
compares
field only

Hamilton - Observations of Caddoan Burial Practices at the Sanders Site (41LR2)

123

Table 1. (Continued)
NO PROVENIENCE
Wilson/Lab

Goldstein/Field

Burial No.

Accession No.

Mean Age/Sex

Age/Sex

?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?

351
375

50m
30 ill

376

37.5

377
379
380

37.5 f

381
382
383a
383b
391
395
399
402
409

ill

adult

ill

55 f
26 f
14 i

Comments
no correlation
no correlation

65m
45 f

age difference

55 f

compares
no correlation
no correlation

old adult m
60+m
adult i

no correlation
compares
no correlation

adult f
30 f
40f

no correlation
no correlation
compares
compares
compares
compares

13 i

35 f
12 I
12 I

N= 15

15

9

12

L= 78

78

55

75

None of the No Provenience Burials can be correlated with the field notes.

Key:
sex: m = male, f = female, i = indeterminable
(-)=In several instances age/sex data from either Krieger notes or field drawings are inserted.
#=The individual in Burial 2 is the only Class I burial that Wilson did not sex as a male and thus the only identification that does
not support the hypothesis that the Class I burials are all adult males. This individual was sexed as a male by Goldstein.
*= sex identification by Goldstein on very young individuals are not reliable and are considered to be indeterminate in this paper.
Notes:
1. A total of 81 individuals and/or accession numbers, 15 with lost provenience, were on the two lists provided by Wilson.
This list was combined to make the one above with 78 individuals. Disregarding individual 15-1, accession number 360b, and
the 15 no provenience burials, we can account for the 62 individuals described in the field notes and drawings.
2. In Krieger (1946: 175 ), a total of 60 burials was published. In this paper, a total of 62 individuals in 21 burial pits (11
single, 10 multiple with 51 individuals) were counted. If the three individuals in the Housewright burial are added, then there
is a total of 65 individuals in 22 graves: 11 single, and 11 multiple with 54 individuals. The Housewright skeletal material is not
housed at T ARL. Possibly Krieger did not count the two fragmentary adults in burial 20.
3. Wilson (1994: 133) and Dow (1987:39) list 92 individuals: 25 males, 29 female, 18 unknown, and 20 children. There are
problem in reconciling the extra 30 individuals cited by Wilson and Dow. Without further documentation, the 15 no provenience
individuals have to be disregarded, as well as 15-1 (accession number 360b). This leaves Wilson and Goldstein age/sex
identifications on 62 individuals, the same number described in the field notes.
4. In the revised Wilson list there are 46 individuals: 15 males, 19 females, 7 unknown, and 5 children. The double age figures
in Wilson's Age/Sex column represent two different age estimates given on two separate documents.
5. After deleting 15-1, there are 62 individuals in the Goldstein list: 22 males, 24 females, 5 unknown, and 11 children.
6. Only the age/sex identification by Goldstein are depicted on Figures 3 and 4.
7. Of the 46 burials identified by Wilson that can be correlated to the known 62 burials described in the field notes and
drawings, 31, or 67 percent, agree with the earlier age/sex identifications, eight or 16 percent differ in the sex identification, and
nine or 19 percent differ in the age estimates by 10 or more years. If the same margin of error is applied to the 25 other burials
of the 62 described in the field, it can be estimated that only 3-4 individuals would change age/sex identifications, which would
not affect any of the conclusions drawn in this paper on the occupants of the 21 burial pits.

124

Texas Archeological Society

personal communication) One list contained data
on 51 individuals and a second had data on 80
individuals. The data, as presented in Table 1, are a
compilation of the two lists, and it was quickly
evident that this new data created several problems!
The list in Table 1 contains up to 81 individual; however, it is difficult to determine the exact number, for some burials from the field are not
represented and others are listed under duplicate
numbers such as 7, 7a-c, 7-1, 17-3a, 17-3b, 20-1,
20-?, etc., that are difficult to cross-reference to
specific individuals excavated in the field. Of the
81 or so individuals listed in Table 1, fifteen are not
provenienced to a specific burial. I can only conclude that over the years the Sanders skeletal material has become mixed, adding some 30 or so
individuals to the over-all count.
I was personally involved with one incident
back in the mid-1970s when rats got into a storage
area, badly damaging and mixing a considerable
amount of the skeletal collections stored there. I,
along with several other T ARL personnel, cleaned
up the room and re-boxed the skeletal material.
Considering the amount of jumbling and breakage
that had occurred, it is more than feasible that elements of the same individual got mixed in one or
more boxes from one or more sites. In fact, from
my first hand observation of the damage, it is quite
probable that some mixing occurred since many
bones were broken, and many fragments did not
have identifying numbers on them. For this reason,
any analyses based on the present Sanders collection or any other collection for that matter, such as
the Hatchel/Mitchell skeletal material, that was
stored in the same area, must be questioned unless
it can be proven without a doubt that the material
has not been mixed and corresponds exactly to what
was excavated. For the reasons stated, the skeletal
analysis on the Sanders and the Hatchel/Mitchell
skeletal material by Dow ( 1987) should be closely
scrutinized because it is not known what mixing
might have taken place, or what elements are now
missing or broken when compared to what was
originally present when the first age/sex identifications were made.
Based on the available data, it is difficult to
reconcile the field data with the burials listed in
Table 1 and there is no way to isolate the skeletal
material used by Wilson in her study or even be
assured that it is all from the same burial or even
from the Sanders site. Wilson, however, was un-

aware that any mixing might have taken place in
previous years and her study was conducted accordingly. For the present, I feel that it may be
more prudent to rely on the sexlage data made
before any date of known mixing.
For her study, Wilson used 55 adult skeletons
from the Sanders collection, seven of which could
not be identified to a specific burial. Wilson
(1994:156) goes on to state that "neither the
traditional history, ethnohistoric accounts or
archeological accounts indicate which individuals
within the population endured hardships or enjoyed
leisure." She also states that the burial population
at Sanders was considered to be an elite one,
primarily due to its placement within a mound
context, and secondarily due to the rich burial goods
that accompanied these individuals. However, she
accepts the premise stated by Krieger (1946) that
there are no distinctions between the burial
population on the top of the mound as opposed to
the burials on the mound slope. I would argue on
the other hand, that, if there is an elite population, it
would most likely be represented by burials 1, 2, 4,
6, 8, 9, and 20. All, with the possible exception of
Burial 2, are adult males and centrally located on
the top of the mound. It is these specific individuals
that should be contrasted with individuals from the
other Sanders burial populations for differences in
degenerative joint disease. Since these are the only
burials that can best be identified as representing an
elite status, it would have been interesting to see if
these specific males differed in any way from the
males represented in the rest of the burial
population. However, this was not done in Wilson's
(1994) study.
It can be argued that there are distinctions,
both in placement and content, between the burials
on the top of the mound and the burials on the slope
of the mound. From the available data at hand it is
possible to distinguish three burial classes: Class I,
Class II, and Class III. If we look just at the
distribution of the single burials (Figure 5) we see
that most are located on the top of the mound with
just three located on the east slope. If we look more
closely, we see that the single burials on the top of
the mound were all identified as adult males by
Krieger (1946: 175). These burials are identified in
this paper as being Class I burials. The three single
interments on the east slope are of a young male
(Burial 3), an adult female (Burial 10), and an infant
(Burial 16), all of which are identified below as

Hamilton - Observations of Caddoan Burial Practices at the Sanders Site (41LR2)
Class III burials. When we look at the distribution
of the multiple burials (Figure 6), we find that they
are concentrated on the east slope, but one, Burial
20, is located on the top of the mound, which for
reasons discussed below is placed in the Class I
category. This leaves only Burial 21 on the western
fringe of the mound's crest, placed in the Class II
burial group.

125

The Class I burials are located on the top of
the mound, and, with but one or possibly two exceptions, are single interments of adult males (Figure 7 and Table 2). Even the sexing data provided
by Wilson (1996 personal communication) agrees
with the male sexing of all the burials designated as
Class I, except for Burial 2. She identifies this individual as a female with a mean age of 19.5, while
Goldstein identified it as an 18 year
old male. The reader should keep
this discrepancy in mind, but because there is good reason to suspect that the skeletal material has
become mixed, I prefer to wait for
further evidence. On Figures 3 and
4, this individual is sexed as a
male, but in the following discussions, a female sex identification
is used, or at least considered.
At this point it should be
noted that while all the Class I burials, except for one, are single interments, a strict division between
single and multiple interments is
SINGLE BURIALS
not always meaningful. For instance, Burial 20 is a multiple
T.M. SANDERS SITE
~M
burial, but it is best placed with
41LR2
0
10 20 ft
the
Class I burials rather than the
D =BURIALS
Class II multiple burials.
Burial 20 is so placed on the
Figure 5. Distribution of single burials.
basis of its location on the top of
the mound, the presence of ash in
the grave fill, and the association
of ear plugs and a conch dipper
with the centrally located male, the
male sex of the central figure, and
the uncrowded, centrally located
placement accorded the central
adult male in contrast to that
allocated any one individual in any
other multiple burials. All of these
factors distinguished this burial
from the other overly crowded
multiple interments at the site. This
burial has a central male, 25 or 30
MULTIPLE BURIALS
years of age, flanked on his right
by a 22 year old female and on the
T.M. SANDERS SITE
~M
left
by a 60 year old male. The two
41LR2
fragmentary adults at the foot of
0
10 20 ft
D =BURIALS
the grave appear to be from a
disturbed burial. However, even if
Figure 6. Distribution of multiple burials

126

Texas Archeological Society

and preference is given only to
specific relationships. Burial 19 is
a single interment at the crest of
the mound; however, it is the only
grave found with the individual's
head (which is missing) oriented
toward the west. It does not have
other characteristics in common
with the other Class I burials and
is excluded from a Class I designation pending more data.
The Class I burials at the
Sanders site are interpreted to be
high-status burials analogous to
CLASS I BURIALS
the Class 1 burials identified at
the George C. Davis site. In sumT.M. SANDERS SITE
~M
41LR2
mary, the attributes that appear to
0
10 20ft
characterize
the Class I burials are:
D =BURIALS
adult males (with the possible exFigure 7. Distribution of Class I burials.
ception of Burial 2) that are centrally located on the top of the
mound with ash in the burial fill,
and concentrations of projectile
points, conch dippers, bone beads,
and ear ornaments as grave goods.
As evidenced in much of the ethnographic literature for the Caddo
peoples, positions of authority and
high status positions were primarily, but not exclusively, male
(Newcomb 1961:304).
The Class II burials (Figure 8
and Table 2) consist of nine
crowded, multiple interments, and
with one questionable exception,
CLASS II BURIALS
are located on the east slope of the
T.M. SANDERS SITE
mound. The one exception is
~M
41LR2
Burial 21, a multiple interment of
0
10 20 ft
D =BURIALS
three individuals on the west side
of the mound just inside the 458
Figure 8. Distribution of Class II burials.
foot contour, which appears to demarcate the top of the mound. As
the two fragmentary adults are intentional
can be seen in Figure 4, Burial 21 differs from the
placements in the burial, it does not alter the basic
adjacent Class I burials in both location and apinterpretation.
pearance. It is physically separated from the Class I
In the above case, it is the overall pattern
burials clustered around the top of the mound and it
which is meaningful and not any single dichotomy
is best considered as a Class II burial. Burial 7 may
such as single versus multiple interments in a
well be two separate interments with a burial of
grave. Many dichotomies, such as the presence and
either two or three individuals disturbing an earlier
absence of selected artifacts, are not significant in
grave containing two individuals. This is the only
and of themselves if the overall pattern is ignored
burial where the individuals are noticeably offset

Hamilton-Observations of Caddoan Burial Practices at the Sanders Site (41LR2)

127

Table 2. Sanders Site Burial Traits
CLASS I BURIALS

BURIAL
NUMBER

11

2

4

6

8

9

11

CLASS H BURIALS

20115

CLASS HI
BURIALS

7

12 13

15 17 18

21

Hll

5

5 6

6

3

3

3

10 14 16 19

BURIAL
TYPE
Multiple with
central
uncrowded
male
Crowded
Multiple
Single Adult
Male
Single
BURIAL
LOCATION
On top of
Mound
On Slope of
Mound

5
7

x

?

8

4

2

x x x x x

x
x x

x

x x x x x x x x

x

Ix

x xx x x x x

xi

x x x x

1

1

3

I

ASSOCIATIONS
Ash in Burial
Fill
Projectile
Points
Conch
Dippers
Pipes
Bone Beads
below Knees
Bead on
Wrist(s)
Bone Beads
on Neck
Bone Beads
on Arms
Ear
Ornaments
Gorge ts
Ceramic
Vessels

x x
x

x x
x

x x
x

x

x x x
x x x x x
x

x x x

x

x x x

x
x

x
x

x x x x
x
x
2

1

l

2

1

2

3

x
2

l

1

7

4

1

2

2 1

7

6

6 4

1

6

8

2

2
2

128

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. (Continued)
Notes:
I. The numbers in the Burial type and Burial Associations indicate the number of individuals in the burial and the number of
occurrences.
2. 4000 of the 5800 shell beads found in the 1931 UT excavations were found in the Class I burials (excluding Burial 11) with
ash in the fill.
3. Five of the seven pipes found were in Class I burials.
4. One of the seven burials with ash in the fill noted by Kieger (1946:175) cannot be identifed; otherwise, all are Class I burials.
5. Total of 65 individuals: 11 single interment~, and 11 multiple interments consisting of 54 individuals.
6. Hin the Class II Burials is the triple burial excavated by Housewright (1941) and is included to arrive at 65 individuals.

from each other. The multiple burial of three individuals excavated by Housewright (1941) 45 feet
east(?) of the crest of the mound is included with
the Class II burials.
It is suggested that the individuals in the Class
II burials might represent immolations that accompanied a high-status individual in a Class I burial.
A similar interpretation was suggested for the peripheral Class 2 burials at the Davis site as well as
the probable immolations in the early, multiple burials in the mound at the site (Story 1972:59). The
Class II burials are specialized interments whether
or not they accompanied a Class I burial. This conclusion is based on the simple fact that human populations do not normally die in groups, and the fact

that the groups do not represent a cross-section of
the sexes and ages representative of a viable population. If the Class II burials at the Sanders site are
not immolations, some rationale has to be arrived at
in order to explain the death at one time of so many
people in groups.
The Class III burials (Figure 9 and Table 2)
are, admittedly, a catch-all category, consisting of
those burials not included with the Class I or II
burials because of their over-all pattern of burial
treatment, scarcity of associations, or because of
their disturbed condition. However, this class may
have some cultural validity in its own right, for
among the burials in this class are the only two
cases of the single interment of an adolescent (Burial
3) or infant (Burial 16), the only
example of a single female (Burial
10), and the only single adult male
(?) (Burial 19) that is not classed
with the Class I burials. It can be
argued that Burial 19 (see Figure
3), despite the reverse head orientation, is a disturbed Class I burial,
but the other four burials in this
classification do not fit the criteria
for inclusion in either the Class I
or Class II burials. For this analysis, then, they are grouped as Class
III burials.
In order to determine what
artifacts or burial associations
CLASS III BURIALS
occurred with the Class I burials,
T.M. SANDERS SITE
the distributions of different
~M
41LR2
categories of artifacts were plotted.
0
10 20ft
The traits and artifacts in Table 2
D =BURIALS
are only the ones that clustered
primarily, if not exclusively, with
Figure 9. Distribution of Class III burials.

Hamilton - Observations of Caddoan Burial Practices at the Sanders Site (41LR2)
the Class I burials. There may be other meaningful
artifact patterning, but a more thorough analysis
was not undertaken and was not an objective of this
paper. Still, it can be seen from Table 2 that t~e
Class I burials differ from the other two bunal
classes in: (a) location, (b) ash in the grave fill, (c)
the presence of conch dippers, pipes, beads below
the knees, beads on the wrist(s), earspools or other
ear ornamentation, as well as (d) to some degree
the presence of projectile points when compared to
the Class II and III burials. In reference to these
differences, I offer the following observations:
I. The presence of ash in the fill of six of the eight
Class I burials may represent a tenuous relationship between the destruction of a communal
structure such as a "fire temple" in the nearby
temple mound and the burial of an important
personage such as is represented by the Class I
adult males. This interpretation is the same as
that suggested by Story (1972:59) at the Davis
site and Webb (1959:202-203) at the Belcher
Mound. Ash is found only in single adult male
interments located on the crest of the mound,
with the possible exception of Burial 2, which
Wilson identified as a female. From the data at
hand, I cannot account for the seventh burial that
Krieger (1946: 175) reported had ash in the grave
fill. It is not known whether it was a Class I burial.
The ash in these selected burials is perhaps analogous with the greenish loam found in the Class 1
burials at the George C. Davis site.
2. At the Sanders site, conch dippers are found
only in four Class I burials. They are clearly
status offerings serving as socio-technic artifacts (cf. Binford 1971), and occur in special
status burials throughout the Caddoan area, including such sites as Davis, Crenshaw, Haley,
and Spiro.
3. The strings of bone beads below the knees, seen
most clearly on burials 2, 6, 8, and 9 (see Figure
3), appear to have been used to tie the legs
together. The "drawn-in leg" position is similar
to that found atthe Haley site (Moore 1912:529
and Figure 24) and contrasts with the "bowed
leg" position of some burials at the Davis site
(Fl 18) (Story l 972:Figure 25), Gahagan (Burial
1) (Moore 1912:512), and the Belcher site
(Burial 11) (Webb 1959:84 and Figure 74).

129

Burial 11 was the only burial with ash that did
not contain any bone beads.
4. The prevalence of bone beads on the wrists and
the long conch columella beads on the top of the
skull of Burial 4 are traits held in common with
the Haley site. The two foci, Sanders and Haley,
have been interpreted to be contemporaneous
based on trade pottery (Suhm et al. 1954:181182; Davis 1970:44).
5. The distribution and number of engraved conch
gorgets, and the quantity and type of vessels, do
not appear to be significant distinguishing
characteristics since they are associated with all
three burial classes.
6. The distribution and number of ceramic vessels
among the three burial classes do not appear to
be distinctive for any one burial group. However, ceramic vessels are much more likely to
be found in Class I burials (see Table 2). It
should be emphasized, however, that in this
paper only the number of vessels was examined, and there was no attempt to see what other
patterning might be exhibited among the three
burial classes if ceramic types, varieties, and
decoration styles were examined. Ceramic vessels are found with every Class I burial, seven
of the nine Class II burials, and in two of the
four Class III burials.
7. A total of 4000 of the 5800 shell beads recovered during the 1931 University of Texas excavations were found in five of the six Class I
burials containing ash in the fill.
8. Projectile points, pipes, and ceramic vessels are
more likely found in the Class I burials, but they
occur in all three classes. Projectile points were
found in three of the seven Class I burials, and
in one Class II burial, but were not present in
any Class III burial. Five of the seven pipes
were with Class I burials and four of these
burials contained ash in the grave fill.
There has been no attempt to conduct a detailed
analysis of the kinds and types of material items
associated with the burials from the Sanders site.
The data presented in Table 2 isolates and

130

Texas Archeological Society

emphasizes only the material culture items that
appears to be concentrated in the Class I burials,
and thus sets them apart from the other burials on
the mound. Regardless, it demonstrates that the three
burial groups differ in regard to burial location,
associations, and individuals interred. A more indepth study of the burial associations would
probably strengthen this interpretation.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
It is apparent that the Class I burials at the
Sanders site stand out in comparison to the other
two burial classes. It is suggested that these Class I
burials represent special status, priestly or chiefly,
individuals who were given preferential burial treatment on the central high portion of the mound.
Special offerings, such as shell beads, bone beads,
conch dippers, pipes, ear ornaments, and other material culture items not readily available to other
members of the society, were placed with the Class
I burials. The special placing of ash in the fill of six
of the eight Class I burials appears to also be significant in the Sanders burial mound population.
As stated above, this may be a tenuous indicator of
the relationship between fire, the burning of a temple
or structure that can be expected to be found in the
platform mound, and the burial of a special status
individual intimately associated with that structure.
This is probably some representation akin to the
Caddoan "Xinesi," "perpetual fires," and "fire
temples" described in the early historical accounts
(Woodall 1969:38-45).
It is meaningful to look at the Class I and
Class II burials as specialized burials not representative of the burials of "common people" dying
naturally throughout the year, as the latter would be
represented by single interments and a more representative cross-section of the sexes and age classes
of the society. If we just look at the overall total of
the reconciled list of 62 identified burials in Table
1, there are 19 males, 23 females, 10 children, and
10 indeterminate adults. This breakdown was derived using the age/sex identifications as determined
by Wilson whenever this data were available. When
the data were not available, the earlier age/sex identifications by Goldstein and/or other sources were
used (see Table 1).
If one just looks at the overall totals, nothing
stands out. However, if the age/sex identifications
of the different burial classes are distinguished,

there are marked contrasts. These contrasts show
that a natural population profile is not present. As
can be seen in Figure 10, which presents the age/
sex data in Table 1, there is a noticeable difference
in the number of females versus males, especially
when the age/sex identifications within the different burial classes are considered. Seven of the eight
Class I burials are definitely adult males and the
eighth, though with an archeological pattern more
typical of males, may be a female. The nine Class
II burials contained 11 males, 22 females, and
seven children. This is not a normal population
curve. Why are there twice as many females as
males? As discussed above, Wilson (1994:133),
using data from Dow (1987:39), states that there
were 92 individual from the Sanders site, but there
are no field data to support the additional 30 or so
individuals in this count. Wilson (1994: 133) states
that the demography of the Sanders burial population falls with the range of a normal population
curve. Data presented here disputes this conclusion.
Until the possible additional 30 individuals from
Sanders can be explained, this statement cannot be
supported. If there are no real differences between
the burials on the top of the mound and the burials
on the slope of the mound, then it would be expected that the composition of the groups would be
representative of a normal demographic profile.
This was certainly not the case for either the Class
I burials or the Class II burials.
Regardless, it is important to stress that the
only sex identification made by Wilson that conflicts
with the basic proposition made in this paper that
the centrally located burials are for special status
male burials is her identification of the individual
in Burial 2 to be a 19.5 year old female. However,
even if this identification is correct, it does not
detract from the obvious adult male prevalence
exhibited by the burials located on the top of the
mound. For the present, as seen in Table 1, the
different sex/age identifications of the Class I burials
by the different researchers are comparatively close.
Of course, the sex identifications of very young
individuals presented in Figures 3 and 4 are not
reliable, but have been left as identified in the
excavation notes. Even the simple Figure 10 bar
graphs indicate that the Class II burial group is
over-represented by females, and the males in both
Classes I and II are rather selective. When the same
age/sex data in Figure 10 are presented on a radial
grid, which more graphically compares data over
time and shows variations and trends, clear

Hamilton -Observations of Caddoan Burial Practices at the Sanders Site (41LR2)

131

Sample= 62

5
4

-

f;3-t-~~~-.,...--~~~-ttt-~--11-i-~,,.,-~~~~--t,,,_--J"tt--o>..-~~~~~~~~~~~
g::

<!ii

;2--+-~-,,...,-~---t..}-~..,..,-~-tlf-~--11::l--~-l.tl---,....,-,::u-~--1"1-----ilJ--l\J-~.....-~~~~~~~~~

1

0-4

5-

10-

15-

20-

25-

30-

Adult

35-

40-

45-

50-

55-

60+

A.Q@

Class I Males (1)

Lij

Class I Females (1)

~

Class 11 lndeterm. (15)

~

Class II Males (11)

lmJ
g

Clau Ill lndeterm. (5)

~

Clau HI Males (1)

Class II Females (22)

Figure 10. Age-Sex Distribution in the Burial Classes.

differences are apparent concerning how males and
females are distributed within the classes and
between the classes (Figure 11). This figure shows
the broader distribution of females and the restrictive
distribution of the males.
It is suggested that with each interment of a
high-status adult male at the crest of the mound
there was an accompanying interment of several
individuals in a single burial pit on the slope of the
mound that was segregated from the Class I burials.
In other words, a special status male was placed in
a sacrosanct, centrally located area at the crest of
the mound. Possibly the Class II burials are immolations. This mortuary pattern is similar to the interment of single, adult males in centrally located
positions in the mound and accompanying peripheral multiple burials during stages III and IV of
Mound C at the Davis site (Story 1972:44-50).
If this is a valid interpretation of the Sanders
site burial practices, and the ritual was adhered to
rigidly, which cannot be presumed, there would be
a like number of Class I and Class II burials at
Sanders. This assumes that only one multiple interment is associated with each Class I burial. The
rather even split between the Class I and Class II
burials may be indicative of each group accompanying one another in a series of related burial phases
requiring one of each group each time it was repeated. The careful reader will readily see that there

is not a l: 1 ratio among the Class I and Class II
burials, and it is readily admitted that the Class III
burials are a catch-all category. However, taking
into consideration the various excavations on
Mound 1 over the years, it cannot be assumed that
we have a complete burial sample. Burials were
excavated from the mound prior to the University
of Texas excavation and more than likely there
were other burials, such as the Housewright burial,
that were excavated after the 1931 excavations.
Therefore, a 1: l ratio between the different burial
groups cannot be expected.
The interpretation of the burial of special status males with some form of accompanying Class
II immolations does not take into consideration the
flexed burials thought to be from a historic occupation on the mound (Housewright 1941; Story
1990:303), or the burials reported to have been
disturbed and destroyed by plowing both on the
mound and on the slope prior to and subsequent to
the 1931 University of Texas excavations. The
flexed burials, as well as the cache pits on the
mound, are believed to post-date the burials under
consideration here.
In summary, most of the burials excavated by
A. T. Jackson at the Sanders site in 1931, and in
1941 (Housewright 1941), on the top of Mound 1
and on its eastern slope can be interpreted as
representing specialized burials. The Class I burials

132

Texas Archeological Society

0-4
5-

60+

50-

15-

45-

20-

35Adult
Class I Males (7)

~
~

Class I Females (i)
Class II lndeterm. (15)

Sample= 62

~

fD

§

30-

Class II Males (1 i)

~

Class Ill Males (1)

Class II Females (22)
Class II lndeterm. (5)

Figure 11. Radial Age-Sex Distribution in the Burial Classes.

probably represent special status males, while the
Class II burials represent multiple immolations
accompanying the Class I burials. The relationship
of the Class III burials, if it is a valid class, to the
other two classes is not clear. However, the
possibility cannot be ruled out that one or more
belong to either the Class I or Class II burials.
Segregating special status individuals in various ways and accompanying them with multiple
immolations is a recurring burial pattern in a number of Caddoan foci and sites. It is also a possible
interpretation for the Class I Sanders burials. The
investigation of any undisturbed burials on the
mound might provide further information on the
nature and association of the different classes of
burials identified on the mound and the slope of the
mound. In addition, it is necessary that we know
where the non-specialized burials of the common
people are located in order to determine how they
are treated and what material culture items are
placed with them. Only then can we make valid
comparisons of the Sanders population as a whole.
For the present, it appears that most, if not all, of
the burials in the present sample are representative
of the special status burials at the site and they do

not represent the non-specialized burials. A detailed
study of the Sanders burials and their grave associations needs to be undertaken as well. In the meantime, this paper is presented in order to renew
interest in looking at some of the old data in a new
light and to recommend that data resulting from
recent skeletal analyses be carefully evaluated.
The brief analysis presented above demonstrates that there are distinct differences exhibited
by the groupings of burials located on Mound 1 at
the Sanders site. The pattern illustrated is similar to
that described for other Early Caddoan sites, and
even to later sites such as the shaft burial at the
Sam Kaufman site (Skinner et al. 1969). There is a
similarity and even a continuity throughout time in
all of the Caddo culture areas in the means by
which individuals are accorded special burial treatment. The pattern exhibited in the burials at the
Sanders site, which has been described as the most
divergent of the Caddoan foci, demonstrates that
there is a core theme represented there, which binds
it to other Early to Middle Caddoan cultures with
mound burials. It supports the hypothesis that high
status Caddoan burials were often accompanied by
immolations. This has been observed at a number

Hamilton - Observations of Caddoan Burial Practices at the Sanders Site (41LR2)
of Caddoan sites and other Mississippian cultures
which, as seen among the Natchez Indians, extends
into the historic period.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Publishing a paper written some two decades
earlier is not always an easy task. First, I want to
thank everyone involve with TARL who assisted
me when I first wrote this paper as part of a larger
study on Caddoan burial practices for Dr. Dee Ann
Story back in 1973. Under Dr. Story's tutelage, I
developed my interest in Caddoan archeology, and
even though I went in a different direction, her
guidance and support are gratefully acknowledged.
I want to thank Carolyn Spock for assisting me 23
years ago, again more recently for the information
she gave me on the telephone, and for putting me in
touch with Diane Wilson, to whom I am indebted
for sharing her Sanders burial data with me. I also
want to thank Dr. Harry Shafer, a fellow colleague
first at The University of Texas at Austin, and now
at Texas A&M University, who first suggested that
I publish this paper, for reading a final draft of the
article, and providing me with the benefit of his
insight and critical evaluation. I also want to thank
Miss Helen Dewolf, a valued friend and student,
who assisted in making the figures and in editing
the paper. Also my appreciation is extended to Dr.
Kevin Crisman, who redrew the drawings of the
burials while a student assistant of mine, and who
is now a colleague at Texas A&M University. As
always I am grateful to all who assisted me and
who deserve much of the credit for the completed
paper, but I alone stand responsible for any errors
and interpretations.

NOTES
1. The post molds on the northwest side of the house were
not found. In the plan, the house is diamond-shaped; however,
in the photographs (Krieger 1946:312 and Plate 16d) the
house is square. Apparently the diamond shape results from
poor triangulations.
2. Krieger put quotes around "mound l" to indicate his
feeling that it was not a true mound. After visiting the site, he
changed his mind, recognizing both mounds at the site to be
man-made over natural rises.

133

REFERENCES CITED
Binford, L. R.
1971 Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their Potential. In Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices, edited by J. A. Brown, pp. 6-29.
Memoirs, No. 25. Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C.
Brown, J. A. (editor)
197la Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary
Practices. Memoirs, No. 25. Society for American
Archaeology, Washington, D.C.
Brown, J. A.
197lb The Dimensions of Status in the Burials at Spiro. In
Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary
Practices, edited by J. A. Brown, pp. 92-112. Memoirs, No. 25. Society for American Archaeology,
Washington, D.C.
Davis, E. M.
1970 Archeological and Historical Assessment of the Red
River Basin in Texas In Archeological and Historical Resources of the Red River Basin, edited by H.
A. Davis, pp. 27-65. Research Series No. 1. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Dow,L. A.B.
1987 The Genetic Affinities and Adaptive Success of
Three Groups of Late Prehistoric Amerindians from
Texas. Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Goldstein, M. S.
n.d.
Notes and skeletal identifications on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Goldstein, L. G.
1980 Mississippian Mortuary Practices: A Case Study of
Two Centers in the Lower Illinois Valley. Scientific
Papers No. 4. Northwestern University Archeological Program, Evanston, Illinois.
Hamilton, D. L.
1973 Preliminary Analysis of Early Caddoan Burial Practices. Ms on file, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Housewright, R.
1941 A Multiple Burial in Lamar County. The Record,
Newsletter of the Dallas Archaeological Society
2(8):37-39.

134

Texas Archeological Society

Jackson, A. T.
1931 Laboratory Study of the Material Culture of the T.
M. Sanders Site. Ms on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Krieger, A. D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas with Extension of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. The University of Texas, Austin.
Moore, C. B.
1912 Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River. Journal of the
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Second Series, Vol. XIV, Pt. 4.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern
Times. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Peebles, C. S.
1971 Moundville and Surrounding Sites: Some Structural
Considerations of Mortuary Practices. In Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary
Practices, edited by J. A. Brown, pp. 68-91. Memoirs, No. 25. Society for American Archaeology,
Washington, D.C.
Saxe, A. A.
1970 Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Skinner, S. A., R. K. Harris, and K. M. Anderson (editors)
1969 Archaeological Investigations at the Sam Kaufman
Site, Red River County, Texas. Contributions in Anthropology, No. 5. Department of Anthropology,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Story, D. A.
1972 A Preliminary Report of the 1968, 1969, and 1970
Excavations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas. Report of Field Research Conducted
under National Science Foundation Grants (GS-2573
and 3200) and Interagency Contracts between the
University of Texas at Austin and Texas Building
Commission and the Texas Historical Survey Committee. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

1990 Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M.
D. Freeman, J.C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Research Series
No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25
(whole volume).
Webb, C.H.
1959 The Belcher Mound, a Stratified Caddoan Site in
Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Memoirs, No. 16. Society for American Archaeology, Salt Lake City.
Webb, C.H. and R.R. McKinney
1975 Mounds Plantation (16CD12), Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Louisiana Archaeology 2:39-127.
Wilson, D.
1994 Division of Labor and Stress Loads at the Sanders
Site (41LR2), Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 65:129-160.
Woodall, J. N.
1969 Cultural Ecology of the Caddo. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Wyckoff, D. G.
1974 The Caddoan Cultural Area: An Archaeological
Perspective. Garland Press, New York.

Foreword for Special Papers on Caddoan
Bioarcheological Research
Mary L. Powell

In 1995, Diane Wilson organized a symposium titled "Caddoan Bioarchaeological Research"
for the Caddo Conference held in Austin, Texas.
Revised versions of four of the five papers presented in that symposium are presented in this volume of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society. Each one contributes valuable information
towards our reconstruction of pre-Contact Native
American lifeways in the Caddoan area, and other
areas of Texas. The papers by Diane Wilson, Gail
Colby, and Christine Lee examine variations in
Caddo health through time and across ecological
and social boundaries through analyses of aspects
of dental and skeletal pathology that reflect diet,
food preparation techniques, activity patterns, and
infectious disease experience. The fourth paper, by
Sharon Derrick and Diane Wilson, reports an unsuspected regional dimension of variation in a particularly distinctive biological feature, cranial
modeling, a carefully designed literal personification of ethnicity. The Caddo population samples
discussed here represent sites located mainly along
the drainage of the Red River in Northeast Texas,
near the Oklahoma-Arkansas border. As symposium discussant, my comments (revised and expanded here) place these studies within a broader
framework of bio:1fcheologica1 research conducted
at many sites within the four-state Caddoan area
(Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Texas), and
throughout the southeastern U.S.
Caddoan bioarcheological research began
shortly after the turn of the twentieth century, with
the expeditions of the assiduous amateur
archeologist, Clarence Bloomfield Moore. Aboard
his steam launch "Gopher of Philadelphia," Moore
spent some 20 winters exploring mound and
cemetery sites along principal waterways of the
southeastern U.S. from Arkansas to Florida.
Although his major goal was the acquisition of
exhibition-quality artifacts for his sponsoring
institution, the Academy of Natural Sciences in

Philadelphia, Rose and Harmon (1989:292) denote
him "the 'godfather' of Arkansas osteology" in their
historical overview of bioarcheology in Arkansas
and Louisiana for two reasons. First, his published
reports include fairly detailed descriptions of
skeletal remains encountered (age, sex, and obvious
pathology) by the physician Dr. Milo G. Miller,
who accompanied Moore on his travels as
companion and personal secretary. Second, Moore
regularly sent well-preserved crania to Dr. Ales
Hrdlicka, Curator of Physical Anthropology at the
United States National Museum, Smithsonian
Institution, and examples of skeletal pathology to
Dr. D. S. Lamb of the U.S. Army Medical Museum
for analysis, including their descriptions in
appendices to his reports. Between 1908 and 1913,
Moore conducted six expeditions in Arkansas and
Louisiana; cruising the Red River in 1911-1912,
his crew of trained "diggers" (often augmented with
local labor) excavated at several Caddo sites in
Arkansas, including Crenshaw (3MI6), Haley
(3MI1), Battle (3LA1), Friday (3LA28), and
McClure (3MI29). Moore collected 13 wellpreserved complete crania and a few other skeletal
elements from the Red River sites; Hrdlicka's
descriptions of dental pathology and cranial
modeling appear in Moore's (1912) report.
Since Moore's expeditions, literally thousands
of burials have been excavated at Caddo sites,
though relatively few series have been extensively
analyzed or reported. Rose and Harmon (1989:316
and Table 35) list a total of 866 skeletal individuals
recovered from 60 Early-Late Caddoan components
in Arkansas and Louisiana alone. Ann Marie Mires
(1982) compiled the first comprehensive overview
ofCaddoan bioarcheology. Her compilation of"the
known (published and unpublished) sources that
report the finding, excavation, analysis, and
discussion of archaeological skeletal material from
the four state Caddo area" (Mires 1982:20),
presented within the context of her comparison of

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

136

Texas Archeological Society

health status of Caddo groups in different ecological
settings, provided a foundation for a subsequent
overview by Jerome C. Rose and Anna M. Harmon
(1989). This overview dealt with the history and
substantive findings of Caddoan bioarcheology. I
have drawn heavily from these two outstanding
resources for comparative data presented in this
Foreword.
Wilson and Colby evaluate the impact of the
Caddo diet-reliant upon starchy cultigens such as
maize, and also dried fruits such as persimmonupon dental health, specifically wear (attrition/abrasion), caries, and abscess formation. Wilson's
sample from the Sanders site (41LR2) reflects the
initial intensification of reliance upon maize agriculture during the Early and Middle Caddoan periods, while her Middle-Historic Caddoan samples
from the Mitchell site (41BW4) represents a population biologically adapted over many generations
to this regimen. Despite their chronological separation, both samples show similar rates of carious
teeth (19 and 23 percent, respectively), comparable
to rates reported from other Middle to Late Caddoan
populations from the eastern Red River: 14 percent
at Bentsen-Clark (Buikstra and Fowler 1975); 16
percent at Sam Kaufman (now Roitsch) (Butler
1969); 25 percent in Southwest Arkansas (Powell
1985); and 11 percent at the Belcher Mound in
Northwest Louisiana (Webb 1959). Antemortem
tooth loss was also similar in both samples: 14
percent at Sanders and 19 percent at Mitchell, but
dental abscesses rates differed sharply: 31 percent
of the Sanders individuals (0.45 abscesses per individual) versus 9 percent at Mitchell (0.12 abscesses
per individual). The Sanders caries per person rate
of 3.3 is slightly lower than the averages (4.4-8.0)
reported by Harmon and Rose (1989:347) for Early
and Middle Caddoan sites in the Red River and
Ouachita River drainages, despite the relatively
positive stable carbon isotope values derived from
Sanders burials. Both the delta-Cl3 mean values
(-10.0 and -12.9 o/oo) and the caries rates, support
Harmon and Rose's (1989:347) conclusion that "the
adoption of maize within the Trans-Mississippi
South seems to be the product of local circumstances." The Mitchell sample has caries rates of
4.5 caries per person.
The higher female prevalence of caries in these
Caddo samples mirrors the predominant pattern seen
throughout the Late Prehistoric southeastern U.S.
(Mires 1982; Larsen et al. 1991); Wilson suggests,
as others have done, that this pattern may reflect

Caddo women enjoying "snacks" while preparing
high-carbohydrate foods for meals or long-term storage. Dental wear was moderate, as is typical (and
expected) for Caddo groups employing wooden
rather than stone vessels for pounding maize into
meal (Powell 1985).
Colby's analysis of dentitions from Roitsch
(41RR16), a Middle to Late Caddoan period site
located on the Red River about midway between
the Sanders and Mitchell sites, shows a much higher
caries per individual rate (6.7) than either Mitchell
or Sanders, and more similar to the very high rate
of 8.2 noted by Harmon and Rose (1989:348) for
the Historic Caddoan period Cedar Grove site in
Southwest Arkansas. The rate of abscesses per individual (attributed primarily to carious destruction
of dental tissue) at Roitsch (1.19) was also much
more than the rate at Mitchell or Sanders. Scanning
electron microscope analysis of dental microwear
on Cedar Grove molars suggested "that the Cedar
Grove inhabitants consumed neither hickory nuts
nor minimally processed vegetable fiber, and that
the overall diet was soft with few abrasive particles" (Harmon and Rose 1989:348). Given the
relatively moderate macrowear recorded for the
Roitsch teeth, the diet there may also have been
minimally abrasive.
Colby compared dental pathology at the
Roitsch site with data from the non-agricultural
Blue Bayou site (41 VT94) on the Texas coast. Caries per individual rates differed sharply, as predicted: 6.7 for the Caddo and 0.69 for the coastal
hunter-gatherers; so did the respective rates for abscesses per individual: 1.19 versus 0.37. However,
the patterns of progressive dental wear differed only
for the posterior dentitions, and anterior dental wear
was surprisingly similar. The Blue Bayou sample
thus contrasts sharply with pre-agricultural samples
from eastern Oklahoma (Powell 1985), central Kentucky (Powell 1996), and elsewhere throughout the
southeastern U.S. (e.g., Archaic hunter-gatherers of
Tennessee and Alabama, Powell, unpublished data),
which show severe progressive wear throughout
the entire dentition. Further analysis of archeological subsistence data from that site might shed light
on specific modes of food processing that produced
such an unusual pattern.
The population samples analyzed by Christine
Lee represent different sectors of a single large
Middle to Late Caddoan (A. D. 1300-1700) Caddo
village that was originally given separate names
and site numbers (Hatchel, Mitchell, and Moores,

Powell- Foreword for Special Papers on Caddoan Bioarcheological Research
41BW2-41BW4) by their excavators. Subsequent
mixing of skeletal material from different contexts
complicated the analysis, but Lee has managed to
wrest a considerable amount of valuable data from
the combined collection with which to evaluate demography, trauma, mechanical stress (arthritis and
vertebral "slipped discs") resulting from activity
patterns, infection/inflammation, and iron deficiency
anemia. The shape of subadult mortality assumes a
familiar pattern in Late Prehistoric agricultural societies throughout the southeastern U.S. : mortality
peaks during the second year of post-natal life, and
declines thereafter until early adulthood (Powell
1988). Twenty-one percent of the individuals for
whom age could be estimated died before age six, a
somewhat higher rate than the 14.3 percent reported
by Harmon and Rose (1989:349) for a combined
sample of Early-Late Caddoan samples from the
four-state Caddo regions, but closer to that reported
(28 percent) for the Late Caddoan period. The overall proportion of subadults (aged younger than 20
years) in Lee's sample is about 31 percent, comparable to Harmon and Rose's (1989:349) combined
sample, in which "the proportion of children (35.7
percent) is typical of Red River Caddo sites." Traumatic injuries suggestive of inter-personal conflict
are rare, but minor examples of entheses (ossified
soft muscle attachments) and Schmorl's nodes (from
displaced inter-vertebral discs) are fairly common,
and reflect the ordinary workaday demands of nonmechanized agricultural life. The analysis of arthritis is complicated by the under-representation of
post-cranial remains, but Lee's rate of spinal arthritis among adults (36.7 percent) support Harmon
and Rose's (1989:349) observation that "the complex agricultural system which matured during [the
Late] Caddo [period] required an increase in the
individual work load and increased physical stress."
The rates for bone inflammation (periostitis)
in Lee's sample (20.6 percent) is similar to that
reported by Harmon and Rose (1989:349) for the
Historic Caddo population at Cedar Grove (27.3
percent); the general Late Caddoan rate is 17.6
percent, down from 26.2 percent in Middle Caddoan
samples. Mires (1982:50) reported higher infectious rates for subadults (38.9 percent) than for
adults (11.7 percent), with an overall rate of 18.8
percent in her summary of Early to Middle Caddoan
period samples on the middle Red River; her Arkansas River rates during the same periods showed
a reverse trend by age (9 .3 percent for subadults, 28
percent for adults, with an overall rate of 22 per-

137

cent). Lee suggests that at least some cases of bone
inflammation resulted from infection by endemic
treponematosis; in a paper presented at the 1995
annual meeting of the American Association of
Physical Anthropologists, Wilson and Lee (1995)
offered a tentative diagnosis of congenital treponematosis in an 18 month-old infant from the Moores
site, and noted skeletal evidence of endemic treponematosis in several adults from Moores and
nearby sites. Robey (1995) presented a detailed
discussion of examples of this same disease in his
analysis of paleopathology at the Roitsch site. There
is slightly more evidence of severe iron deficiency
anemia (11.3 percent at Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores)
when compared to Cedar Grove (9.1 percent); two
cases occurred in children aged four years or
younger, and probably contributed to their early
deaths.
In "Cranial Modeling as an Ethnic Marker
among the Prehistoric Caddo," Sharon Derrick and
Diane Wilson are to be commended for the cultural
sensitivity of their title. While the process described
does in fact "de-form" the infant cranium from its
original shape, the purely descriptive term "cranial
modeling" avoids the value-laden, distinctly pejorative connotations of the older phrase it replaces,
"cranial deformation." As they note, the practice
most probably developed from observations by generations of mothers of the unintentional occipital
flattening of infants' heads that may result from use
of the cradleboard. Beginning with Hrdlicka' s
(1912:639-640) description of a "deformed" cranium from the Haley site in Southwest Arkansas,
many researchers have commented on the diversity
and striking appearance of artificially-produced cranial shapes among the Caddo and other Native
Americans of the pre-contact Trans-Mississippi
South (Neumann 1942). The high prevalence of
some form of cranial modeling in both males and
females at all of the sites examined, prompted the
authors' interpretation of the practice as an "ethnic
marker" applied to most or all members of a particular Caddoan group for the purpose of distinguishing them from "others," rather than as some
form of "beauty mark" reserved only for certain
individuals within these groups. Their discovery of
an east-west dichotomy in cranial modeling technique (tabular versus annular binding) at Red River
sites poses an apparent contradiction to previous
archeological models of diversity between, not
within, river drainages. And their suggestion that
the higher prevalence of un-modeled crania among

138

Texas Archeological Society

males may reflect Caddo patterns of matrilineality
(and matrilocality?) brings in an important anthropological dimension to this analysis of archeological and bioarcheological data.

REFERENCES CITED

Moore,C. B.
1912 Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River. Journal of the
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
14:482-644.
Neumann, G. K.
1942 Types of Artificial Cranial Deformation in the
Eastern United States. American Antiquity 7:306310.

Buikstra, J. and D. Fowler
1975 An Osteological Study of the Human Skeletal Material from the Bentsen-Clark Site. In The BentsenClark Site, Red River County, Texas, by L. Banks
and J. Winters, pp. 79-97. Special Publication No.
2. Texas Archeological Society, San Antonio.

Powell, M. L.
1985 The Analysis of Dental Wear and Caries for Dietary
Reconstruction. In The Analysis of Prehistoric Diets, edited by R. I. Gilbert, Jr. and J. H. Mielke, pp.
307-338. Academic Press, Orlando.
1988

Butler, B. H.
1969 Analysis of the Human Skeletal Remains. In
Archaeological Investigations at the Sam Kaufman
Site, Red River County, Texas, edited by S. A.
Skinner, R. K. Harris, and K. M. Anderson, pp.
115-136. Contributions in Anthropology 5.
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Status and Health in Prehistory: A Case Study of
the Moundville Chiefdom. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D. C.

1996

Health and Disease in the Green River Archaic. In
Of Caves and Shell Mounds, edited by K. C. Carstens
and P. J. Watson, pp. 119-131. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

Harmon, A. M. and J. C. Rose
1989 Bioarcheology of the Louisiana and Arkansas Study
Area. In Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Lower
Mississippi Valley and Trans-Mississippi South in
Arkansas and Louisiana, by M. D. Jeter, J. C. Rose,
G. I. Williams, Jr., and A. M. Harmon, pp. 323-354.
Research Series No. 37. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.
Hrdlicka, A.
1912 Report on Skeletal Remains from a Mound on Haley
Place, Near Red River, Miller County, Arkansas.
J oumal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia 14:639-640.
Larsen, C. S., R. Shavit, and M. C. Griffin
1991 Dental Caries Evidence for Dietary Change: an Archaeological Context. In Advances in Dental Anthropology, edited by M.A. Kelley and C. S. Larsen,
pp. 179-202. Wiley-Liss, New York.
Mires, A. M.
1982 A Bioarchaeological Study of the Regional Adaptive Efficiency of the Caddo. Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville.

Robey, D. H.
1995 A Paleopathological Study of the Human Remains
from the Roitsch Site (41RR16, Old Sam Kaufman).
Paper presented at the 1995 Caddo Conference,
Austin.
Rose, J.C. and A. M. Harmon
1989 History of Bioarcheology and Bioarcheological Resources. In Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Lower Mississippi Valley and Trans-Mississippi
South in Arkansas and Louisiana, by M. D. Jeter, J.
C. Rose, G. I. Williams, Jr., and A. M. Harmon, pp.
291-322. Research Series No. 37. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Webb,C. H.
1959 The Belcher Mound, a Stratified Caddoan Site in
Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Memoirs, No. 16. Society for American Archaeology, Salt Lake City.
Wilson, D. and C. Lee
1995 A Possible Case of Congenital Treponematosis in a
Caddoan Population from Northeastern Texas. Paper
presented at the 64th Annual Meeting, American
Association of Physical Anthropologists, Denver.

Cranial Modeling as an Ethnic Marker
among
Prehistoric Caddo
Sharon McCormick Derrick and Diane Wilson

ABSTRACT
Cranial modeling, the intentional shaping of the infant head that produces a distinctive head form in the
adult, may have served as an ethnic identification marker among prehistoric Caddo communities. Ethnic markers
that distinguished insiders from outsiders would have been especially important to the Caddo as a means by
which to foster reciprocal relations between culturally affiliated settlements, while maintaining control of
territorial resources. The analysis of 212 crania indicates that the Caddo living in Northeast Texas used at least
four different cranial modeling styles. These modeling styles, resulting in different head shapes, appear to vary
primarily by site in a strong east/west trend, with some differences by sex, time, and burial context. This intersite variation suggests that the distribution of modeling styles may be useful in separating discrete ethnic groups
within the Caddo area.

INTRODUCTION
Body ornamentation is an effective ethnic identification marker that is sometimes produced by
intentionally redesigning body tissues. Such practices include cranial modeling, labretifery (lip
plugs), ear piercing, scarification, and tattooing.
Because body ornamentation practices may symbolize cultural belief systems and matters of social
organization (Seeger 1975), it is probable that sociocultural differences and ethnic group membership
are signified by variation in body ornamentation.
The Caddo peoples of Northeast Texas, eastern
Oklahoma, Southwest Arkansas, and Northwest
Louisiana possessed an ornamentation complex that
included cranial modeling, distinctive hairstyles, ear
spools, and tattooing (Newkumet and Meredith
1988; Carter 1995). At the time of European contact,
the Caddo were comprised of at least 25 distinct
affiliated bands or tribes (Swanton 1942; Perttula
1992). The purpose of this paper is to examine the
distribution of cranial modeling styles once present
among the Caddo in Northeast Texas in an attempt
to distinguish patterns of ethnic affiliation and
differences. Of the various ornamentation practices
used by the Caddo, cranial modeling makes perhaps
the most powerful and obvious visual statement,
probably acting as a strong ethnic marker. Cranial

modeling styles should therefore be expected to
reflect in part the underlying ethnic diversity among
the Caddo. Furthermore, due to the permanent
nature of this type of ornamentation, styles of
modeling should change relatively slowly, reflecting
genuine differences in socio-cultural systems.

CRANIAL MODELING
Cranial modeling is the custom of purposefully molding the infant head in order to produce a
particular adult head shape. This procedure is often
referred to as intentional deformation of the head,
an unfortunately negative term. In fact, the term
modeling, defined as the achievement of a desired
form, more accurately represents the cultural purpose that precipitates intentional head shaping.
The shape of the human cranium is usually
affected at birth by stress placed on the head during
delivery. During postnatal growth, the head takes
on its shape as a result of genetic instructions, a
structural relationship to the attached face and neck
(Rogers 1975), and environmental influences. The
various shapes produced by cranial modeling are
achieved mechanically by constricting the head of
the newborn. The child's head is placed in the modeling apparatus for a time period ranging from one

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

140

Texas Archeological Society

to 10 years, depending upon the cultural practice
(Bennett 1961; Rogers 1975).
Forms of cranial modeling have been divided
into two major categories (annular and tabular)
based on the type of modeling apparatus (Neumann
1942). There is a basic difference in the appearance
of crania that have been modeled in an annular
fashion as compared to crania modeled by the tabular technique. Annular modeling involves tight, circular wrapping of the infant head with soft materials
such as cloth or animal skin, or the application of
removable pads and cords (Rogers 1975). The end
result is an elongated, symmetrical, conicallyshaped head, with little or no evidence of either
compensatory lateral growth or posterior flattening
in the occipital area (Rogers 1975). As a consequence of the elongation and the constriction in
width, a furrow often forms parallel to the coronal
suture and posterior to bregma (Rogers 1975).
Alternatively, tabular modeling is produced by
the immobilization of the infant head between
boards, aided by wads of clay and, possibly, sand
bags (Bennett 1961; Loveland 1980). The
cradleboard has frequently been used as an intentional apparatus for tabular modeling (Neumann
1942; Rogers 1975; Loveland 1980). Tabular modeling should, however, be distinguished from unintentional flattening of the back or side of the head
caused by the use of a cradleboard as an infant
carrying device and sleeping surface.
Neumann (1942) classified common forms of
tabular modeling found in the Eastern United States
by the areas of the cranium that are affected. The
most common forms of modeling previously
described for the Caddo are the tabular frontovertico-occipital and the tabular parallelo-frontooccipital styles (Figure
la). Tabular
fronto-vertico-occipital modeling is produced by
placing a board on the forehead as the head is
bound to a cradleboard. This modeling style is
characterized by a flattened frontal bone, a flattened

Fronto-vertico-occipital

Parallelo-fronto-occipital

occipital bone, and compensatory growth superiorly,
causing the parietal bones to expand both upwards
and slightly laterally. Tabular parallelo-frontooccipital modeling is achieved by a similar
procedure. However, either a pad is placed at the
base of the occiput or the back of the head is
positioned in a hole in the cradleboard (Neumann
1942). This style has marked compensatory lateral
growth in the parietal and temporal areas, and
flattening of the occipital in a fashion parallel to the
shape of the frontal bone. As a consequence of our
investigations of cranial modeling, we recognize
two additional modeling styles present with some
frequency in Caddo populations (Figure 1b), the
annular versions of the fronto-vertico-occipital and
parallelo-fronto-occipital styles.

METHODS
A total of 437 Caddo crania were examined by
the authors for this study, and 212 were well enough
preserved to be included in this analysis. The majority of the crania were housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at the University
of Texas at Austin, with the remaining 15 being
housed in the Human Collections Facility at Texas
A&M University.

RESULTS
Four distinct styles of modeling were evident
in the Caddo crania from Northeast Texas: tabular
forms of fronto-vertico-occipital and parallelofronto-occipital modeling, and two annular forms
of these styles (see Figure la-b). Modeling style
context was then examined in more detail for possible patterns of sexual, geographic, temporal, and
social status differences among Caddoan populations that correlate with the cranial modeling styles.

Fronto-vertico-occipital

Parallelo-fronto-occipital

Figure 1. Tabular and Annular Cranial Modeling Styles Among the Caddo: a, tabular modeling styles; b, annular modeling
styles. Illustrations after Neumann (1942).

Derrick and Wilson -

Cranial Modeling as an Ethnic Marker among the Prehistoric Caddo

Sex
There was no statistically significant difference between females and males in either annular
and tabular cranial modeling styles (chi-square value
of 9.38). For both sexes, the predominant style was
the tabular fronto-vertico-occipital (Figure 2). However, the second and third most common styles for
females were annular parallelo-fronto-occipital (11
percent) and no modeling (6 percent), while no
modeling (24 percent) and annular parallelo-frontooccipital (14 percent) were the second and third
most common for males.

Burial Context
The results of this study showed that burial
context was related to Caddo cranial modeling.
Information on the contexts of 141 individuals was
available, including: mound, small cemetery (10 or
less individuals), large cemetery (more than 10
individuals), shaft tomb, and intrusive. Burials from
shaft tombs and intrusive contexts were poorly
represented (four individuals).
The context of the burials and modeling styles
were highly and statistically different (chi-square
value of 110.99). This is primarily due to the difference in modeling styles between individuals buried

141

in mounds compared to non-mound cemeteries (Figure 3). Mound burials contained individuals with
all styles of modeling as well as no modeling, while
both large and small cemeteries lacked some styles.
The annular parallelo-fronto-occipital and tabular
fronto-vertico-occipital styles were absent in the
small cemetery sample; they were also poorly represented (two individuals for each style) in the larger
cemeteries. Annular parallelo-fronto-occipital modeling was also poorly represented among the cemetery burials (one individual from the small
cemetery population, and three individuals from
the large cemetery population).
Among the mound burials, however, annular
parallelo-fronto-occipital modeling was the most
common form. All 17 individuals from mound contexts with this style of modeling were from the
Sanders site (41LR2); thus, it is unclear whether the
relationship of this modeling style to burial context
was due more to the character of the site itself, or
was clearly correlated with the type of site/burial
context. However, to evaluate the hypothesis that
this form of cranial modeling was related to burial
context, other sites with large populations of adults
interred in burial mounds should be studied. In the
present data base, few mound burials were represented in the eastern portion of Northeast Texas,
and the mound burials from Sanders were proportionately over-represented.

Time
Slight

Annular fronto-vertico-occipital

Tabular paralleio-fronto-occipital

Males

Annular parallelo-fronto-oo:ipital

Females
Tabular fronto-vertico-occipttal

No modeling

0

10 20 30

Figure 2. Cranial Modeling Styles by Sex.

Cranial modeling style was strongly influenced
by time, although it is unknown how much the
large Sanders population affected this trend. Fiftyone percent of the Middle Caddo an period (ca. A.D.
1200-1400) ~ample came from the Sanders site,
and the only Middle Caddoan individuals with
parallelo-fronto-occipital modeling were the 17
individuals from Sanders. Primarily due to the
Sanders site-and its apparent difference in
modeling style from sites located to the east-the
Middle Caddoan time period stands out from the
other time periods. The difference in cranial
modeling styles from the Early Caddoan period
(ca. A.D. 1000-1200) through the Historic Caddoan
period (ca. A.D. 1680 and after) was statistically
significant (chi-square value of 173) through time
(Figure 4).
The Middle Caddoan time period was also
marked by the absence of tabular fronto-vertico-

142

Texas Archeological Society

occipital modeling and the presence the two annular styles (see Figure 4). Again, due to the nature
of our sample it is unclear whether this was a temporal pattern or the influence of the westernmost
site in the Northeast Texas study region.

Site Diffe:rences
A clear difference between western and eastern
Caddo sites is noted in the cranial modeling styles.
Nearly all sites in the eastern portion of Northeast
Texas used tabular fronto-vertico-occipital modeling. To the west are a variety of modeling styles,
and some sites where no modeling predominated
(Figure 5).
In fact, the predominant style of cranial modeling at nearly all Caddo sites was tabular frontovertico-occipital, with two exceptions (Womack
[41LR1] and Sanders). At Sanders, annular
parallelo-fronto-occipital modeling predominated,
while annular fronto-vertico-occipital modeling
was more common at the Womack site. Thus, the

Sanders and Womack sites were the most dissimilar of the Caddo sites, and significantly were also
dissimilar to each other. However, both of the cranial modeling styles at these sites were achieved
by the annular technique, rather than the more common tabular technique, and Sanders was the only
site other than Womack to contain individuals with
annular fronto-vertico-occipital modeling.
It appears to be the case, therefore, that it was
the technique used to produce desired cranial modeling styles that differed from the eastern to the
western portion of the study region, rather than the
styles themselves. The differing techniques of cranial modeling are hypothesized to represent different prehistoric Caddo ethnic groups.

Stream Basins

In overviews of the Caddoan archeological
region, descriptions of Caddo settlement
distributions are commonly presented by stream
basins (Story 1990; Thurmond 1990), as if Caddo
groups are assumed to be different from one stream

Sligh!

Annular fronlo-vertico-occipital

Tabular parallelo-fron!o-occipital

Annular parallelo-fronto-occipi!al

Tabular fronto-vertico-occipi!al

No modeling

0
Shaft tomb

Mound

20

40
Small Cemetery

Figure 3. Cranial Modeling Styles by Burial Context.

60
Large Cemetery

Derrick and Wilson - Cranial Modeling as an Ethnic Marker among the Prehistoric Caddo

Slight

Annular fronto-vertico-occipital

Tabular fronto-vertico-occipital

Annular parallelo-fronto-occipilal

Middle

143

tabular fronto-vertico-occipital
(72 percent of the modeled crania), which was the predominant
style in the eastern portion of the
study area. Moving west along the
Red River, predominant styles
change to annular modes of modeling, with annular parallelofronto-occipital most common (12
percent of the modeled crania and
63 percent of the crania from the
Sanders site).

Tabular fronto-vertico-occipital

DISCUSSION
No modeling

0

50 100 150

Figure 4. Temporal Changes in Cranial Modeling Styles.

basin to another. Here we examine modeling styles
by stream basins to assess intra- and inter-stream
basin Caddo socio-cultural and archeological
differences and similarities. All but the Angelina
and Sabine river drainages were highly correlated
(Pearsons R of 0.93-0.97) by modeling style,
suggesting that cranial modeling did not vary by
stream basin, and that a similar variability in cranial
modeling styles existed among Caddo groups in the
Cypress, Neches, Red, and Sulphur stream basins
(Table 1).
Correlations in modeling styles between the
Angelina River basin and the other Northeast Texas
stream basins were somewhat lower (R==0.69-0.89)
than for the other drainages, except for that of the
Sabine River. This drainage had the lowest
correlations with the other drainages (R=0.200.69). However, both the Sabine and the Angelina
river basins had the lowest sample sizes (n=4 and
n=6, respectively), which may affect the statistical

In fact, the Red River basin is the
adequately sampled river basin, and probably provides a reasonably accurate view of river ua'""4"'~
variation in cranial
styles (see Figure
Nearly all crania in the Red River valley were modeled (92 percent). The most common
was

Several significant findings
are apparent in the Caddo cranial
modeling styles seen in sites across
Northeast Texas. Firstly, annular
modeling has not typically been
associated with the Caddoan
peoples (e.g., Hrdlicka 1909;
Dingwall 1931; Bennett 1961 ), but two annular modeling styles were found in high frequencies at the
Sanders and Womack sites. The compensating superior growth and the constriction on lateral expansion produced by annular binding is quite evident in
these distinctively shaped crania, as is the characteristic coronal saddle occurring posterior to bregma.
Secondly, the archeological evidence for the
Caddoan Area displays a pattern in which settlements are grouped along stream basins. This raises
the possibility that each drainage confluence might
represent an enclave of people sharing an ethnic
identity. If so, styles of cranial modeling should be
similar within stream basins, yet differ between
basins. Our study showed no correlation between
stream basins and modeling styles. Instead, we
found a definite dividing
between Caddo sites
to the east and west, with the tabular fronto-verticooccipital style predominant in the east, and the annular parallelo-fronto-occipital style more common
in the west.
Perhaps the reason for this finding is the small
sample sizes in drainages other than
Red River
(n=l46).
at patterning of cranial modeling
valley, it is ~..-,J~~..styles within the Red
that the
used to achieve u"''""'"
was more varied than the actual chosen
this case,
were used

Texas Archeological Society

144

Table 1. Types of Cranial Modeling by Stream Basin
Type of
Modeling
I*

Stream Basins
Angelina

Cypress

Neches

Red

Sabine

Sulphur

3

26

5

100

1

9

1

17

II
III

5

l

2

11

IV

v

1

None

2

3

2

8

3

2

Total

6

30

8

146

4

13

5

*!=tabular fronto-vertico-occipital; II=annular parallelo-fronto-occipital; III=tabular parallelo-fronto-occipital; IV=annular
fronto-vertico-occipital; V =slight

KEY
Annular styles:
A Parallelo-fronto-occiptal
B F ronto-vertico-occipital

km

Tabular Styles
C Fronto-vertico-occipital, large sample
D Fronto-vertico-occipital, small sample

E Slight
F No modeling

Figure 5. Spatial Differences in Cranial Modeling Styles.

peoples in the western portion of Northeast Texas,
and tabular modes were used in the eastern portion
of Northeast Texas. If the Red River basin is used
as an archetype for cranial modeling patterns to be
found in other drainages settled by Caddoan peoples,
then there is a large amount of variation in preferred modeling techniques within the different
stream basins. Such variation could indicate that
multiple ethnic groups lived within the major waterway drainages, and that geographical distance
from east to west may have played an important
role in ethnic affinity.
We suspected that there l:night be differences
in the degree and frequency of modeling between
males and females in Northeast Texas because that
type of divergence has been described ethnohistorically for other groups who practiced modeling,
such as the Kwakiutl and the Chinook of the Pacific Northwest (Dingwall 1931). Among those
peoples, the women were more likely to have modeled crania than the men, and when both male and
female crania were modeled, the women often had
more exaggerated head shapes than the men.
We did find a slight difference between the
sexes in modeling frequencies among the Caddo,
although not one that was statistically significant.
More females than males were modeled as expected,

and yet we also found a small difference in the
frequencies of the modeling styles themselves. More
females than males exhibited both the annular and
the tabular fronto-vertico-occipital styles, the tabular
parallelo-fronto-occipital sty le, and the slight
modeling style. Individuals with the same modeling
style were generally buried at the same sites, but
when there was a different style present, the cranium
tended to be from a male. These differences may be
related to Caddo descent reckoning, kinship, and
marriage patterns. Ethnohistoric accounts of the
Caddo describe a matrilineal form of descent, with
a shift to a more cognatic form later in historic
times (Swanton 1942; La Vere 1993). If earlier
Caddo groups were also matrilineal, it might have
been more important to identify the ethnicity of the
women forming the core of the descent group.
Women living in other matrilineal horticultural
societies, such as the Iroquois, remained in their
natal community after marriage, while the men
moved close to the family of the new wife (Leacock
1978). These men presumably would have been
buried in their new community, thus affecting the
modeling style frequencies present in the burial
populations.
Both burial context and time may be strongly
related to modeling style. Mound burials exhibited
annular parallelo-fronto-occipital modeling as a
common style, while the cemetery burials exhibited low numbers of annular parallelo-fronto-occipital modeling and the highest frequency of tabular
fronto-vertico-occipital modeling. There is a significant difference between the modeling style represented in the Early-Middle Caddoan periods and
the styles found in the other time periods. Both of
these results are probably heavily influenced by the
large Sanders mound burial population from the
Early-Middle Caddoan periods.

CONCLUSIONS
Four cranial modeling styles were present
among the prehistoric and early historic Caddo
peoples living in Northeast Texas. The most common style was tabular fronto-vertico-occipital, and
this style was preferred in the eastern portion of the
study area. There were, however, two annular forms
of modeling present, and these were best represented in the western portion of the study area at
the Sanders and Womack sites.

There may be a sex difference in both modeling
style and the frequency of modeling, although we
could not confirm this statistically. Assuming that
cranial modeling is an ethnic identifier, this
difference may reflect uxorilocality in marriage
practices, supporting ethnohistoric descriptions of
matrilineality for some Caddoan groups.
Burial context may be relevant to cranial modeling styles, with annular parallelo-fronto-occipital
modeling more frequent in the mound burials, and
with tabular fronto-vertico-occipital modeling dominant among non-mound cemetery interments. This
may, however, only reflect the statistical influence
of the large Sanders sample, or conversely, differences based on ascribed social status and the appropriateness of annular versus tabular forms of
modeling for elites versus non-elites.
There appears to be no correlation between
stream basins and modeling styles, except for a
strong east/west trend. The clearest contrast in
modeling styles may be related to the Sanders site
and this east/west differentiation. The large Sanders
sample exhibited mostly annular parallelo-frontooccipital modeling, which differed from other large
sample populations in Northeast Texas. Differences
in burial context and site location may be statistical
products that relate to the size and burial
composition of the Sanders sample, but they can
also be interpreted as evidence of a genuine ethnic
difference between the Sanders population and other
Northeast Texas Caddo groups.

REFERENCES CITED
Bennett, K. A.
1961 Artificial Cranial Deformation among the Caddo
Indians. The Texas Journal of Science 13:377-390.
Carter, C. E.
1995 Caddo Indians: Where We Come From. University
of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Dingwall, E. J.
1931 Artificial Cranial Deformation: A Contribution to
the Study of Ethnic Mutilations. John Bale, Sons
and Danielsson, Ltd., London.
Hrdlicka, A.
1909 Report on Additional Collection of Skeletal Remains from Arkansas and Louisiana. In Antiquities
of the Ouachita Valley, by C. B. Moore, pp. 171249. Journal of the Academy of Natural Science of
Philadelphia 14.

146

Texas

LaVere, D. L.
1993 Strangers for Family: Gifts, Reciprocity, and Kinship in Caddoan-Euroamerican Relations. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of History,
Texas A&M University, College Station.

Rogers, S. L.
1975 Artificial Deformation of the Head: New World examples of Ethnic Mutilation and Notes on its Consequences. San Diego Museum Papers No. 8. San
Diego Museum of Man, San Diego.

Leacock, E.
1978 Women's Status in Egalitarian Society. Current Anthropology 19 (No. 2):247-275.

Seeger, A.
1975 The Meaning of Body Ornaments: a Suya example.
Ethnology 155(3):211-224.

Loveland, C. J.
1980 The Skeletal Biology of the Caddo Indians of the
Kaufman-Williams Site, Red River County, Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville.

Story, D. A.
1990 Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, by D. A Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M.
D. Freeman, J.C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. 2 Vols. Research
Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Neumann, G. K.
1942 Types of Artificial Cranial Deformation in the Eastern United States. American Antiquity 7:306-310.
Newkumet, V. B. and H. L. Meredith
1988 Hasinai: A Traditional History of the Caddo
Confederacy. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.
Perttula, T. K.
1992 "The Caddo Nation": Archaeological and
Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas
Press, Austin.

Swanton, J. R.
1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of
the Caddo Indians. Bulletin No. 132. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.
Thurmond, J. P.
1990 Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin,
Northeastern Texas and Northwestern Louisiana.
Studies in Archeology 5. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Dental Paleopathology
the Sanders (41LR2)
and Mitchell (41BW4) Populations from the
Red River Valley, Northeast Texas
Diane Wilson

ABSTRACT
The analysis of dental remains provides a wealth of information about diet. Food items consumed, and food
preparation techniques, impact teeth throughout the life of individuals and leave evidence in the form of dental
caries, attrition, abscess, andantemortem tooth loss. Thirty-three individuals from the Mitchell site (41BW4) and
51 individuals from the Sanders site (41LR2) were examined, and although the two Caddo sites are located in
different vegetation zones and represent different time periods of occupation, there is no significant difference
in dental wear or caries rate. Antemortem tooth loss, however, is considerably higher in the Mitchell population
compared to that of the Sanders population.

INTRODUCTION
Dental health, like skeletal health, reflects the
natural and social environment, as well as genetics.
This paper focuses on the results of stress (including
chemical, mechanical, and pathogenic forces) on
the teeth in two Caddo Indian populations once
they have erupted. The specific aspects of dental
health examined in this paper-cariogenesis, dental
attrition, antemortem tooth loss, and abscessingprimarily reflect diet and food processing strategies.
Throughout the Americas, dental disorders
have increased with the adoption of maize agriculture. Reliance on maize provides a sticky, carbohydrate-rich dietary staple that is favorable to
microbial attack. Maize cultivation has been correlated with an increase in caries and abscess frequency (e.g., Stodder and Martin 1992).
Poor dental health also may directly impact
general physical health. Periodontal disease often
results in gingival inflammation, abscessing, and
tooth loss. Lesions in the mouth can serve as the
entry for pathogens that may spread to other parts
of the body.
Since dental health is
in a
measure on dietary
the examination of
dental health is useful in reconstructing nutritional
It will be shown that the maize
at the Sanders and Mitchell sites

Bulletin

Texas

were impacted by their diet primarily by a high
frequency of caries, while individuals at Mitchell
were also impacted by a high frequency of
antemortem tooth loss. Since the burials from
Mitchell are predominately from a non-mound
context, while those at Sanders were buried in a
mound, social status differences may be indicated
by these differences in antemortem tooth loss.
However, possible temporal, ethnic, and geographic
differences may also be responsible for factors
influencing dental health.

THE ARCHEOLOGICAL
SETTING
The archeological remains referred to as Caddo
or Caddoan, including the Sanders and Mitchell
sites, are believed to be the product of an in situ
development of maize agriculturalists that occupied roughly the same area occupied
the Caddo
in
historic times (Story 1990; Perttula 1992).
The Sanders site (41LR2) has not yet been dated
absolute means; however, the mound interments
are believed to
a
manifestation of Caddoan culture on the basis of ceramic
between ca. A.D.
·-"'""~"' this

(1997)

148

Texas Archeological Society

the Caddoan Area, approximately 1.6 km west of
Direct, Texas (Figure 1). The site consists of two
mounds and a low ridge of habitation midden, located on the edge of an alluvial terrace on the eastern side of Bois d' Arc Creek (Krieger 1946). Bois
d' Arc Creek is a tributary of the Red River, flowing
some 5 km northeast from the Sanders site to the
Red River.

The Mitchell site (41BW4) is a later Red River
Caddoan settlement located well east (150 km) of
the Sanders site (see Figure 1). Mitchell was occupied prior to and during the early European contact
of the area, from about AD. 1300 to AD. 1700.
Like Sanders, the Mitchell site contained a mound,
although the individuals used in this analysis were
mostly from non-mound contexts.

OKLAHOMA

• Wan_.
Mccutchan~am
Mclaughlin
~
~

-.

~

~

!
I
I

.
l

Standridge

-l Old Martin
aufman- i Plac
iiliams ·
•

eQ

•

Middl~o"~

Ouachita "~JjroSites ~ "'~.~
ARKANSAS

~

LOUISIANA

TEXAS

Figure 1. Location of Sanders and Mitchell sites along the Red River in northeastern Texas, and other sites mentioned in
the text (after Story 1990).

in the Sanders and Mitchell
AGE OF THE SAMPLE
Only individuals with dental remains were included in this study, 51 adults from Sanders and 33
adults from Mitchell. The age range was fairly large,
with the oldest individual aged about 60 years. Age
at death was estimated using a variety of techniques. Older adult age at death was estimated by
pubic symphysis (McKern and Stewart 1957;
Stewart 1979) and auricular surface (Lovejoy et al.
1985). Unfortunately, in most cases these remains
were not present, and then ectocranial suture fusion
was used (Meindl and Lovejoy 1985; Steele and
Bramblett 1988). Because ectocranial suture fusion
was used in so many cases, when other age techniques were used to asses adult age, ectocranial age
was also estimated. Generally, the ages agreed to
within a five year time span, and in sum, the age
estimates are considered fairly accurate.
The average age of death for the Sanders
population for individuals 20 years and older was
calculated to be 35.8 years. The average age of
death for males exceeded female mean age of death
slightly-at 38.3 years and 35.6 years, respectively.
This difference was not statistically significant in a
Chi-square test at the 0.05 level. The sex of adults
was determined by examining pelvic morphology,
femoral and humeral head diameters (Stewart 1979),
and facial and cranial morphology. Of the adult
population for which sex could be determined, 21
were female and 18 male (Figure 2)

149

The average age of death for adults from the
Mitchell site at age 20 was computed to be 37.8
years. Males outlived females, averaging 38.3 years,
to 35.6 years for females. There is no statistically
significant difference in the age of death for the
two populations.
Eight hundred fifty-two teeth were examined
from the Sanders site, and 481 teeth were examined
from Mitchell, 1333 teeth in all. These remains are
housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin. Individuals were included if they had mandibles and
maxillas where observations on dentition were possible; no discrimination between poorly and fully
represented individuals was employed. In other
words, if an individual lacked a maxilla and had
only half of the mandible, they were still included
in the analyzed samples. Individuals averaged 16.7
teeth per dentition, and ranged from one individual
that had lost all of his teeth prior to death (Sanders
burial #361) to another that had all 32 teeth accounted for (Sanders burial #407).

RESULTS
Caries

There are two basic components to consider in
examining caries frequency: age and diet. A sticky
carbohydrate-rich diet high in sucrose should produce a relatively high rate of caries. Bacteria (Lactobacillus acidophilus and
Streptococcus mu tans) in the
60
mouth convert sucrose in maize
into
an acid that destroys enamel
50
and dentin (Molnar 1971; Larsen
1984; Powell 1985). Rose et al.
(1984) suggested that the incidence of caries in the diet covaries
with the amount of maize that was
consumed. Stable carbon isotope
analysis should better elucidate
this relationship, as maize should
10
not be considered the only dietary
item rich in sucrose.
0 l--~--if--~~~~.......j.~~~~~-1-~~~~~+-~--'
Limited stable carbon iso20-25
26-35
45+
36-45
tope sampling from the Sanders
- - Sanders females ---- Sanders males
site indicates an intensive maize
......... Mitchell females .......- Mitchell males
diet with delta 13C values ranging
from -10.0 o/oo to -12.9 o/oo
Figure 2. Age representation of the Sanders and Mitchell adult burial
populations and representation of these adult populations with dentitions.
(Wilson and Cargill 1993). It was

150

Texas Archeological Society

expected that the high concentration of maize in the
Sanders diet would be reflected in a high occurrence of caries, and this in fact seems to be the case.
Frequencies of caries fall within the maize agriculture range of 8 to 25 percent (Turner 1979; Cohen
and Armelagos 1984; Powell 1985; Larsen et al.
1991). Of the Sanders teeth examined, 19 percent
were carious, while 23 percent of the Mitchell teeth
were carious. In fact, 79 percent of the individuals
from Sanders and 91 percent of the individuals
from Mitchell had at least one dental caries. While
proportionally more individuals from the Mitchell
site were affected by caries, the difference was not
statistically significant at the 0.05 level in a Chisquare test.
Among other investigations of Caddoan sites,
caries frequencies vary greatly. This may be more
the result of the kind of sites that have been excavated, than a true measure of caries frequency variability across the Caddoan Area. Powell (1985:327),
for example, found 25.3 percent of the teeth from a
Caddoan sample of the Sam and Wann sites (see
Figure 1) carious, and 90.6 percent of the individuals had caries. In an earlier Caddoan sample from
sites in southeastern Oklahoma, Powell and Rogers
(1980) found 43.4 percent of the teeth to be carious, and again 90.6 percent of the individuals had
caries. Other comparative data come from the
Belcher Mound, Bentsen-Clark, and Sam Kaufman

sites on the Red River, where carious teeth were
10. 7 percent, 14.1 percent, and 16.2 percent, respectively (Webb 1959; Butler 1969; Buikstra and
Fowler 1975).
Others have used what is called a caries rate
for comparison (Table 1). The caries rate is equal to
the number of caries divided by the number of
individuals in the population. Rose and Marks
(1985) used a caries rate of 2.0 to differentiate
between a high and low carbohydrate diet. The
caries rate from the Sanders and Mitchell site populations are 3.3 and 4.5 caries per individual, respectively, indicating a high carbohydrate diet. This
average fits within the range of caries for MiddleLate and Late Caddo period sites in the Red River
drainage compiled by Burnett (1990:392-394), although Burnett (1990) describes the Sanders site as
an Early Caddo entity.
Females had higher frequencies of caries than
males at both sites. Thirty-nine individuals from the
Sanders site had caries, and of them 19 were female
and 13 were male. Among the Mitchell population,
14 females and 14 males had caries. At Sanders, the
females averaged 4.4 caries per individual, while
males averaged 2.5. The Mitchell population females averaged 5.2 caries per individual, and males
averaged 4.4 caries per individual. Neither difference was statistically significant in a Chi-square test
at the 0.05 level. The caries frequency was contrary

Table 1. Caries Rates for Caddoan Sites
Site

Cultural Affiliation

N

Caries Rate

Old Martin Place

Late Fourche Maline/Formative
Caddoan

12

2.8

Bowman

Late Fourche Maline/Formative
Caddoan

12

2.5

Tigert

Early Caddoan

1

George C. Davis

Early Caddoan

14

2
8
14
23
30
75

2.0
1.2
3.5
0.3
2.7
3.1
2.8
3.5
1.0

Mineral Springs

Early-Middle Caddoan

41HS74

Early-Middle Caddoan

Roden

Middle Caddoan

Roitsch

Middle-Late Caddoan

Roden

Late Caddoan

Kaufman-Williams

Late Caddoan

Alex Justiss

Late Caddoan

151
to the age distribution of the population, suggesting
that caries were not strictly age progressive, and that
a difference in diet between females and males may
have occurred.
Although only one male and two females were
sampled for stable isotope analysis from Sanders,
results suggested that the male consumed more
maize than the females (Wilson and Cargill 1993).
The overall caries rates for the population contradict this notion, and it may be that simply more
stable carbon analyses should be done on both males
and females to clarify the relationship. As Caddoan
females were described ethnohistorically as preparing food, it is possible that a good deal of snacking
was going on among females, although the stable
isotope values suggest that females were not snacking on maize. Additionally, the ritual importance of
maize agriculture particularly among the males is
noted in the traditions of the Caddo (Newkumet
and Meredith 1988:29).
It seems likely that maize is not the sole
in these caries rates and stable isotope differences,
but persimmons and nuts may also be responsible
for diet differences between females and males.
Persimmons and various species of nuts (including
hickory and walnut) were noted ethnohistorically
as food sources among the Caddo (Swanton 1942),
and they are C3 or non-maize plants. It is possible
of this
then that females consumed a great
which is
in sucrose, causing more caries.
Additional data from comparative studies indicate that diet may not be the
caries rates
sole cause of
among females. Among most ar14
cheological and modem popula(/) 12
caries rates appear to be
-~
10
among females than males
m
1986; Walker 1986;
.:
8
0
et al. 1991 ; Larsen et al.
©6
.0
1991). Sanders is not the
E
4
::i
.... ~·''"'"'v" for which stable isotoz
2
and trace element results sugthat diet is not the
0
cause of caries

sources are inconclusive as to the
Fecause
male teeth do

males, and are exposed to risk for a longer period
of time than male dentition. Presumably, this would
result in a slightly greater frequency of lesions
among females. It should be noted, however, that
there are some exceptions to the general pattern of
female caries prevalence (Walker and Hewlett
1990).
Caries should also be age progressive. This
relationship could not be determined in the Sanders and Mitchell populations, however (Figure 3).
Others, including Hillson (1979), have not found a
positive correlation between age and caries frequency. There is a slightly negative correlation
(R=-0.14) for number of caries and age among the
Sanders population, but less of one among the
Mitchell population (R=0.09). When the number of
teeth are considered, the correlation becomes positive, but is still weak (R=0.28); adding antemortem
tooth loss to the equation does not change the correlation. This correlation only explains 8 percent
of the dental data, not a valid statistical relationship. However, when all factors are considered for
the Mitchell population alone, the correlation
(R=0.95) is highly significant. The change in the
Mitchell population is most likely due to antemortem tooth loss.
This relationship may be due to differential
antemortem tooth loss, which was considerably
greater among males than females, as well as age
progressive. Males from the Sanders site had a total

J_
f

f

.
f

f

"'

m
m

m m
~f

T
f

f

~

T "'
f
f "'

20

f

f

f

m

r~

!~

"'

T

f

m

. m.. "'

m m

"' "'

30

"'

m

m

T

m
m

T

'!'

m

~

40

Females duster at the top left
their
are

152

Texas Archeological Society

observations), while females had a total of 43
antemortem teeth lost (10.3 percent of 419
observations). A similar pattern was seen among
the Mitchell population, with 21.5 percent (n=246
observations) of male teeth having been lost
antemortem, and 16.7 percent antemortem teeth loss
(n=228 observations) among females. The sex
difference was significant in both populations at
the 0.05 level in a Chi-square test. Because of the
high rates of male antemortem tooth loss, male
caries rates may actually have been greater than
those of females, as well as more severe, resulting
in eventual loss of the affected teeth.
When antemortem tooth loss was considered
with age, females from the Sanders population ~ad
a slight and not statistically significant correlat10n
(R=O. l O). For males from Sanders, on the other
hand, the correlation was relatively high (Pearson's
R of 0.67). Among the Mitchell population, female
and male R values were more similar than they
were for the Sanders males and females, but age
and antemortem tooth loss were not highly
correlated.

Dental Attrition
Caries rates may also be related to differential
wear. Dental attrition is the natural result of a diet
high in unprocessed vegetal materials and grit. Grit
is introduced into the diet from a variety of means,
including the use of stone grinding implements.
Depending on the local environment, sand particl~s
can also result in a considerable amount of attntion. Dental attrition can lead to a pathology if the
pulp cavity is exposed, as the pulp cavity may serve
as the focus of infection, resulting in abscessing
and eventual tooth loss.
Wear was estimated using both the Smith
(1984) and Scott (1979) techniques. Both techniques
produced the same results (R=O. 73 for score
averages for all molars), indicating that they are
related. The average tooth score for all molars is
presented in Table 2. Interobserver error was not a
factor since the author completed all data analyses,
but such errors, however, should be considered
when comparing results presented here with other
data sets.

Table 2. Molar Wear Values for the Sand em and Mitchell Populations
Molar

Number of teeth*

Mean wear**

Mean wear***

RM3

14

17

11.6

10.5

2.1

2.7

RM1

17

33

17.9

12.3

3.5

3.0

RMI

20

34

22.2

18

4.5

4.1

LM 1

19

31

19.3

19.2

3.8

4.1

LM 2

18

24

16

11.5

3.1

2.7

LM 3

16

14

11

10.6

2.4

2.4

LM 3

14

24

10.7

10.6

2.5

2.5

LM 2

17

25

22.7

12.2

3.3

3.1

LM 1

16

30

18.5

17.6

3.6

4.0

RMI

14

26

17.9

16.1

3.5

3.5

RM1

15

20

14.8

14.0

3

3.1

RM3

15

18

11.5

14.0

2.9

3.0

*Value from the Mitchell population on right, values from the Sanders population are on the left.
**After Scott (1979)
***After Smith (1984)

Wilson - Dental Paleopathology in the Sanders and Mitchell Populations
Since Scott's (1979) method was felt to be a
more detailed measure of wear, it was used to test
for difference in wear patterns between the sexes
(Figure 4). Wear scores were averaged, and
individuals were grouped into age categories of 10
year intervals (individuals that could not be placed
into these categories were omitted). A two-tailed
Student's t test found no statistically significant
differences between the female and male
populations from both sites. This suggests that
differential caries rates were not the result of
differential attrition.
Wear is clearly age progressive, as seen in the
various regression analyses that predict linear relations for wear and age (see Figure 4). Scores using
the Scott (1979) method yielded a correlation coefficient, using Pearson's R, of 0.73 for the Sanders
population; the regression formula explains 54 percent of the Sanders age and tooth wear data. For the
Mitchell site, the correlation was lower (R=0.50).
When sex was added to the equation, 62 percent of
the data from Sanders was explained by the best fit
regression, but no better fit could be reached for the
Mitchell age-sex-teeth wear data.
However, since the best fit regression formula
was being sought, wear on individual teeth was

153

assessed to determine which one(s) correlated best
with age. Smith's (1984) scoring method allows for
the scoring of all teeth, and was used in the analysis, along with the best represented teeth. (This
included all teeth with samples of 30 or more from
the Sanders site, and all third molars were included
because they likely represent the clearest picture of
adult wear patterns due to there late age of eruption.) Teeth included in this analysis were: RM 3,
RM 2, RM 1, RP4, RP 3 , LP3 , LM 1, LM3, LM 1, LM 3 ,
and RM 3. None of the third molars were represented by 30 or more observations.
By far the best fit between wear and age was
derived from the maxillary left first molar in the
Sanders population, which produced an R2 value of
0.83 and a least square value of 844. Despite the
lack of significant differences in average wear between the Sanders and Mitchell populations, wear
did not correlate well with age among the Mitchell
population (R2=0.18 for LM 1).
Other teeth that also produced a regression equation that predicted age for more than 75 percent of
the Sanders population were the mandibular left
third molar and the maxillary left third premolar.
All teeth used except the right maxillary second
molar, the third premolar, and the right mandibular
molar, yielded regression
equations that predicted age
for better than 70 percent
of the population. Tooth
wear appears to be a valid
40
means for predicting the age
f
of individuals within the
Sanders population, but was
30
not valid for predicting age
in the Mitchell population.
Table 3 presents tooth
wear scores for females and
males from the Sanders
population.
The large jump
mm "I'
l!li
"I'
in wear scores from ages
30-39 to 40-49 is evident,
although the reason for this
f
f
increase is unknown. It is
possible that the dramatic
40-49
30-39
difference is the result of
relatively few older adults
surviving beyond 39 years,
hence most of the population died before dental attrition reached this
It
Figure 4. Distribution of wear patterns in the Sanders and Mitchell populations.
is also a possibility that
i--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~n

154

Texas Archeological Society

Table 3. Trends in average wear scores f:rom the Sanders population
Female mean
score

MaleN

Male mean
score

3.0
2.7
5.0
6.5
6.0

1
2
3
3
2

2.0
2.5
4.3
5.3
6.5

2.0
1.0
2.0
4.0

0
2
2
3
2

2.5
2.0
4.3
5.5

Tooth

Age

Female N

LM 1

15-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50+

5
3
3
2

15-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50+

3
2

LP 3

15-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50+

5
4
3
1
0

2.2
2.2
4.0
5.0

1
2
3
3
2

1.0
2.5
3.0
4.0
4.5

RP4

15-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50+

5
3
3
2
l

2.2
2.0
4.3
6.0
8.0

1
2
3
3
2

1.0
2.5
2.7
3.7
4.5

RMI

15-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50+

5
4
2
2
1

3.4
3.8
4.0
7.0
7.0

1
3
3
3
2

2.0
5.3
5.0
5.0
6.5

LM 3

15-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50+

1
2
3

1.0
4.0
2.0
5.0
5.0

0
1
2
2
0

1.0
2.0
1.5

15-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50+

6
2
1
2
0

LM 3

LMI

1

l

2
0

1

2

2.5
4.0
5.0
6.0

2
l
4
2

2.0
3.0
2.0
5.2
6.5

155
once enough enamel had been removed from the
occlusal surface, the amount of wear that occurred
on the exposed dentin undermined and weakened
the remaining enamel, leading to an exponential
loss of enamel at a critical stage.
Rates of attrition can be correlated with the
amount of grit and unprocessed vegetable fiber in
the diet. It was expected that tooth wear in the
Sanders and Mitchell populations would be relatively low because archeological and ethnohistorical
evidence suggested that there would be little grit in
the diet because by ca. A.D. 1700 the Caddo were
using large hollowed tree trucks as mortars with
wooden pestles (Swanton 1942). In general, the
only stone grinding implements recovered from the
Sanders and Mitchell sites are small "nutting"
stones. These grinding implements have only small
(<14 cm in diameter) circular depressions, so it is
doubtful that their use would have supplied substantial grit to the whole population's diet.
It is likely that the high level of antemortem
tooth loss biased the pattern of tooth wear at
Mitchell. The relatively low average tooth wear
values and high caries rate suggests that tooth loss
was probably caused more by carious destruction
than by attrition. Once a tooth is lost, malocclusion
often results, creating uneven wear patterns, and
often accelerating or decelerating the pace of attrition at certain locations in the dental arcade. Antemortem tooth loss is age progressive in the Mitchell
population (Figure 5).

Comparisons with other populations have been
difficult due to different techniques used to measure and score wear patterns. Powell (1985) compared dental attrition between the Sam, Wann, and
McCutchan-McLaughlin populations, and found
significantly greater wear among the earlier Fourche
Maline stone grinding implement-using populations.
Unfortunately, Powell (1985) used a different scoring technique, although it was a 1-8 ranking system
like Smith's (1984) technique. In Smith (1984),
stages 1-3 are based on cusp removal, while stages
4-8 are based on dentin exposure. Powell's (1985)
technique was based solely on dentin exposure.
Likewise, in Burnett's (1990) synthesis of Gulf
Coastal Plain bioarcheology, dental attrition is listed
as slight, moderate, and severe, as most of her
samples had simply been described in the literature
in relative terms rather than being scored in a comparable fashion.
In the only analysis of Caddoan dental remains
that used the Smith (1984) scoring system, age was
not accounted for, and only mean wear scores were
provided for the Southwest Arkansas Middle
Ouachita population (Burnett 1988: 150). The Sanders (see Table 3) and Mitchell (M1:4.5; M2:3.5;
and M3:2. l) means fit well within the range for the
Middle Ouachita sites (M1:3.5-7.0; M2:2.8-6.0; and
M3:2.0-3.8), but are higher than the scores given
from the Standridge site (M1:2.0; M2:2.3; M3:2.7),
southwest of the Middle Ouachita comparative
populations. This suggests that the Middle Ouachita,
Sanders, and Mitchell populations had comparable
amounts of grit and/or unprocessed vegetable fiber in
their diet.

"

Dental Abscess
v

~

.
0

~·

.,
."'..

"

v

v

~

.. "'"

.!.._

~

p

~

Dental abscess frequency is also an indication
of oral health (see Colby,
this volume). Here, both periapical and alveolar abscesses were lumped
since both can be
LVJ'CvLH'vL

tors, ,,._.. ~·~..,... pernGCH)m;aJ.
disease and exposure of the
and
5. Frequency of antemortem loss

site.

156

Texas Archeological Society

There were relatively few abscesses observed
in the Sanders and Mitchell populations. Sixteen of
the 51 individuals (31 percent) from Sanders had
evidence of abscessing, while only 9 percent of the
33 individuals from Mitchell had dental abscesses.
The 16 individuals from Sanders had 23 total abscesses, and the three individuals from Mitchell
had four abscesses. Due to the higher number of
abscesses seen in the Sanders population, there was
a statistically significant difference between the
two populations.
All but three abscesses were located on the
maxillary dentition among those afflicted from
Sanders. The two most commonly affected teeth
among the Sanders population were the maxillary
left canine and first molar (each with five abscesses). Among the Mitchell population, abscesses
were evenly split between the maxillary and mandibular dentitions (RP4, LM1, and 2 RC 1). Because
the canines were so commonly affected, and abscesses generally occur more often on anterior
teeth, caries did not correlate well with abscess
frequency. The number and location of abscesses
were also not closely related to dental attrition
(based on a Pearson's correlation coefficient of
0.32), suggesting that wear was not the primary
cause of dental abscesses.

Antemortem Tooth Loss

by antemortem tooth loss, followed by the 50+ age
category. Only adults with refined ages were included in this index.
Antemortem tooth loss occurred most frequently on the molars, particularly the RM 1 and
RM2 • Powell ( 1985 :331) reports that multiple rooted
teeth were more often lost in both Caddo and
Fourche Maline samples. This pattern of antemortem loss was similar to the caries pattern, and a
correlation of 0.97 (Pearson's R) suggests that the
two are highly correlated. It is likely that abscessing
results from caries that expose the pulp cavity to
infectious agents, ultimately causing tooth loss.
Antemortem tooth loss was highly biased sexually among the Sanders population, but not among
the Mitchell population. Males from Sanders had
74 antemortem tooth losses, while females lost 46
teeth prior to death. Males from Mitchell lost 53
teeth prior to death, while females lost only 38.
This difference was statistically significant in the
Sanders population in a Chi-square test at the 0.05
level. This is unusual because antemortem tooth
loss correlates well with caries frequency, yet females had higher caries frequencies. Males did live
longer than females, but like the caries frequency,
the age difference was insignificant. Gross caries
were examined to see if they occurred more frequently with males, but they did not Nevertheless,
it is likely that the higher caries frequency seen in
females is partly the result of higher antemortem
loss of afflicted teeth among males.
Antemortem tooth loss is perhaps most directly
the result of periodontal disease (Hillson 1986).
The high incidence among males probably indi-

Antemortem tooth loss was also examined as a
final measure of dental health. Antemortem tooth
loss was associated with age, carious activity, and
periodontal disease, and it was assumed that antemortem loss would increase with age.
However, this was not the case among
the Sanders population, although it was at
Table 4. Antemortem tooth loss according to age
Mitchell. One hundred and thirty-four teeth
were lost antemortem from the Sanders popuAge
Antemortem Tooth Loss Index
lation (these were not included in the 852
teeth examined), compared to 93 teeth lost
Sanders Site
Mitchell Site
antemortem from the Mitchell population.
Peak tooth loss occurred during the 30-39
20-29
2 (3/123)
5.5 (8/145)
year age interval for both populations. In or18 (29/155)
30-39
34 (47/138)
der to accurately measure antemortem tooth
40-49
37 (37/166)
17 (281165)
loss by age, an index of antemortem tooth
loss (Table 4) was constructed that took the
62 (23/37)
30 (19/64)
50+
number of teeth lost prior to death and divided it by the number of teeth present per
Note: The antemortem tooth loss index is equal to the total number
age category, then multiplied it by 100. Again,
of teeth lost before death divided by the number of teeth present per
age category, multiplied by 100.
the age category of 30-39 was most affected

in the Sanders and Mitchell Populations
cates a
incidence of periodontal disease than
among females. Conversely, these results suggest
that females who experienced antemortem tooth
loss were less apt to survive long enough to experience future loss consistent with some of the males
in their society.

Burnett, B. A.
1988 Bioarcheology of Standridge and the Middle
Ouachita Caddoan. In Standridge: Caddoan Settlement in a Mountain Environment, by A. M. Early,
pp. 143-153. Research Series No. 29. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
1990

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
These analyses of dental paleopathology have
confirmed that the expected dental pathologies associated with maize agricultural populations were
present in both the Sanders and Mitchell populations. Caries rates fell within the agricultural range
of 2.3-26.9 percent (Turner 1979:624) for carious
teeth. The high rate of caries is probably the result
of the carbohydrate-rich diet that maize provides.
In the Caddoan Area, dental attrition declines
with the adoption of maize agriculture due to the
ingestion of more soft, starchy foods, and the replacement of stone grinding implements with wood.
Lowered attrition may increase the prevalence of
caries since locations of caries remain in place
longer. Additionally, abrasives may act to cleanse
teeth of food particles (Powell 1985:323).
Abscess rates were moderate, falling within
the range of Caddoan values for all locations listed
by Burnett (1990), except for the Cooper Lake sites
on the South Sulphur River. The majority of teeth
lost before death may have been the result of destruction of supporting structures from abscessing.
However, if this were the case, a significantly
greater proportion of males should have shown signs
of abscesses than females. Instead, frequencies of
abscesses were evenly distributed between the sexes.
Other than differential rates of antemortem
tooth loss, the Sanders and Mitchell population were
relatively homogenous in terms of dental health. It
also appears that they fit well within the expected
range of dental pathologies experienced by other
Caddoan populations.

REFERENCES
Buikstra, J. and D. Fowler
1975 An Osteological Study of the Human Skeletal Material from the Bentsen-Clark Site. In The BentsenClark Site, Red River County, Texas, by L. Banks
and J. Winters, pp. 79-97. Special Publication No.
2. Texas Archeological Society, San Antonio.

157

The Bioarcheological Synthesis of the Gulf Coastal
Plain study area, Part 1: The Bioarcheological Synthesis of the Eastern Portion of the Gulf Coastal
Plain. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A.
Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J.C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B.
W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 385-418. Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Butler, B. H.
1969 Analysis of the Human Skeletal Remains. In Archaeological Investigations at the Sam Kaufman Site,
Red River County, Texas, edited by S. A. Skinner, R.
K. Harris, and K. M. Anderson, pp. 115-136. Contributions in Anthropology 5. Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Cohen, M. N. and G. J. Annelagos (editors)
1984 Paleopathology at the Origins of Agriculture. Academic Press, New York.
Hillson, S. W.
1979 Diet and Dental Disease. World Archaeology
11:147-162.
1986

Teeth. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Kelley, M.A., D.R. Levesque, and E. Weidl
1991 Contrasting Patterns of Dental Disease in Five Early
Northern Chilean Groups. In Advances in Dental
Anthropology, edited by M. A. Kelley and C. S.
Larsen, pp. 203-214. Wiley-Liss, New York.
Krieger, A. D.
1946 Cultural Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. Publication No. 4640. The University of
Texas, Austin.
Larsen, C. S.
1984 Health and Disease in Prehistoric Georgia: The Transition to Agriculture. In Paleopathology at the Origins of Agriculture, edited by M. N. Cohen and G.
J. Armelagos, pp. 367-392. Academic Press, New
York.
Larsen, C. S., R. Shavit, and M. C. Griffin
1991 Dental Caries Evidence for Dietary Change: an Archaeological Context. In Advances in Dental Anthropology, edited by M.A. Kelley and C. S. Larsen,
pp. 179-202. Wiley-Liss, New York.

158

Texas Archeological Society

Lovejoy, C. 0., R. S. Meindl, T. R. Pryzbeck, and R. P.
Mensforth
1985 Multifactorial Determination of Skeletal Age at
Death: a Method and Blind Tests of its Accuracy.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 68:114.

Rose, J. C. and M. K. Marks
1985 Bioarcheology of the Alexander Site. In The
Alexander Site, Conway County, Arkansas, edited
by E. T. Hemmings and J. H. House, pp. 79-98.
Research Series No. 24. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.

McKem, T. W. and T. D. Stewart
1957 Skeletal Age Changes in Young American Males:
Analyzed from the Standpoint of Age Identification.
Technical Report EP-45. Environmental Protection
Research Division, Quartermaster Research and
Development Center, U.S. Army, Natick, Massachusetts.

Scott, E. C.
1979 Principal Axis Analysis of Dental Attrition Data.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 51 :203211.

Meindl, R. S. and C. 0. Lovejoy
1985 Ectocranial Suture Closure: a Revised Method for
the Determination of Skeletal Age at Death based
on the Lateral-Anterior Sutures. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology 68:57-66.

Smith, B. H.
1984 Patterns of Molar Wear in Hunter-Gatherers and
Agriculturalists. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 63:39-56.
1991

Standards of Human Tooth Formation and Dental
Age Assessment. In Advances in Dental Anthropology, edited by M. A. Kelley and C. S. Larsen, pp.
143-186. Wiley-Liss, New York.

Molnar, S.
1971 Human Tooth Wear, Tooth Function and Cultural
Variability. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 34:27-42.

Steele, D. G. and C. A. Bramblett
1988 The Anatomy and Biology of the Human Skeleton.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

Newkumet, V. B. and H. L. Meredith
1988 Hasinai. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

Stewart, T. D.
1979 Essentials of Forensic Anthropology Especially as
Developed in the United States. C. C. Thomas,
Springfield, Illinois.

Ortner, D. J. and W. G. J. Putschar
1981 Identification of Pathological Conditions in Human
Skeletal Remains. Contributions to Anthropology
No. 28. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Perttula, T. K.
1992 "The Caddo Nation": Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas Press,
Austin,
Powell, M. L.
1985 The Analysis of Dental Wear and Caries for Dietary
Reconstruction. In The Analysis of Prehistoric Diets, edited by R. I. Gilbert, Jr. and J. H. Mielke, pp.
307-338. Academic Press, Orlando.
Powell, M. L. and J. D. Rogers
1980 Bioarcheology of the McCutchan-McLaughlin Site
( 34Lf-1 l): Biophysical and Mortuary Variability in
Eastern Oklahoma. Studies in Oklahoma's Past No.
5. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
Rose, J. C., B. A. Burnett, M. S. Nassaney, and M. Blaeuer
1984 Paleopathology and the Origins of Maize Agriculture in the Lower Mississippi Valley and Caddoan
Culture Areas. In Paleopathology at the Origins of
Agriculture, edited by M. C. Cohen and G. J.
Armelagos, pp. 393-424. Academic Press, New
York.

Stodder, A. L. W. and D. L. Martin
1992 Health and Disease in the Southwest before and
after Spanish Contact. In Disease and Demography
in the Americas, edited by J. W. Verano and D. H.
Ubelaker, pp. 55-74. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.
Story, D. A.
1990 Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M.
D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. 2 Vols. Research
Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.
Swanton, J. R.
1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of
the Caddo Indians. Bulletin No. 132. Smithsonian
Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, D. C.
Turner, C. G., IL
1979 Dental Anthropological Indications of Agriculture
among the Jomon People of central Japan. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 48: 101-106.

Wilson - Dental Paleopathology in the Sanders and Mitchell
Walker, P. L.
1986 Sex Differences in the Diet and Dental Health of
Prehistoric and Modern Hunter-Gatherers. Paper
presented at the European meeting of the
Paleopathological Association, Madrid.
Walker, P. L. and B. S. Hewlett
1990 Dental Health, Diet and Social Status among the
Central African Foragers and Farmers. American
Anthropologist 92:383-398.

159

Webb,C. H.
1959 The Belcher Mound, a Stratified Caddoan Site in
Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Memoirs, No. 16. Society for American Archaeology, Salt Lake City
Wilson, D. E. and D. Cargill
1993 Stable Isotope Analysis from the Sanders Site.
Caddoan Archeology Newsletter, Volume 4 (No.
3):3.

Paleopathology
the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores
Sites, Bowie County, Texas
Christine Lee

ABSTRACT
The goal of this study is to provide a general assessment of the health of the Middle Caddoan to Historic
Caddoan population at the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores sites on the Red River in Bowie County, Texas.
Cultural practices such as cranial modification and weaning age may have contributed to scalp infections,
anemia, and infant mortality. Repeated stress activities associated with agriculture and manufacturing
techniques may account for the patterns of trauma, arthritis, and periosteal infections seen in the HatchelMitchell-Moores human skeletal remains. Contact with other Caddo villages, Europeans, and the density
of settlements may have contributed to the spread of infectious disease. Despite the small number of
individuals studied, some developmental defects are also present, which may indicate a large degree of
intermarriage among the populations living at t11e three sites.

INTRODUCTION
The Hatchel (41BW3), Mitchell (41BW4),
and Moores (41BW2) sites are located on the Red
River in Bowie County, Texas. Excavations at
these sites were conducted by the University of
Texas at Austin from 1931-1939. Although originally designated as three sites, they are probably
the ceremonial centers, cemetery sites, and scattered family farms of one large Caddo village. The
burials are Middle Caddoan to Early Historic
Caddoan period in age (ca. A.D. 1300-1700) based
on associated ceramics and other archeological remains. The Hatchel site has the earliest burials (ca.
A.D. 1300), according to Creel's ceramic seriation
(Darrell Creel, 1997 personal communication), the
Mitchell burials date from about A.D. 1400-1700,
and the Moores burials occurred after AD. 1550.
Earlier Caddoan and some pre-Caddoan artifacts
are present at these sites, but none are associated
with the burials (Creel 1996).
The Hatchel site (41BW3) was prut of a joint
University of Texas and Works Progress
Administration project. Excavations were directed
by A. M. Woolsey and W. C. Beatty, Jr. Two
mounds, a village cemetery, house structures, and a
midden were excavated from November 1938 to
June 1939. Thirty-four burials were recorded at

that time, and 22 skeletons were excavated (Table
l); several others were exposed to rain and
disintegrated before they could be excavated. There
were several other instances where pottery was
located but no bones were present, and it was
concluded at the time of the excavation that these
were probably infant burials that had deteriorated.
One burial (#24) in Burial plot two was an adult
double burial. Three of the burials in Mound #1
were infants, while the fourth was an adult. The
adult burial attributed to Mound #2 was buried near
but not in the mound (Woolsey 1938).
The Mitchell site was first excavated by A. T.
Jackson in 1932, after human bone was accidentally discovered in the Mitchell farm back yard.
Four burials (K 1-4), three children and an adult,
were excavated (Jackson 1932).
During excavations at Hatchel, the Mitchell
farm landowner invited the crew to dig on his land.
The work uncovered a large cemetery (60 burials
were exposed, 57 actually being excavated), house
posts, and a midden. One bone pit was excavated
that contained a jumble of bones; due to the heavy
looting and plowing in the area, it was assumed the
landowner had reburied the bones. Burials #43 and
#44 were double burials, containing two adults, and
an adult and child, respectively. Woolsey mentions
that three infant burials were excavated from a large

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

162

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Burial Information from the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores Sites
HATCHEL
Burial Plot 1
Bl Adult

Burial Plot 2
B21 No remains

Moundl
Bl Child

VillagePlot2
Bl Child

B2Adult

B22 No remains

B2Child

B2 Adult

B5 Adult

B23 Adult

B3 Child

B3 Adult/ Not removed

BS Adult

B24 2 Adults

B4 Adult

B4 Adult/Not removed

B9 Adult

B25 Adult

B5 Adult /Not removed

BIO No remains
Bll Child

Burial Plot 3

Bl4 Adult

B34 No remains

Mound2

B6 Adult /Not removed

Bl Adult

B7 Child/ Not removed
BS Adult/ Not removed

Bl5 Child/ Not excavated

B9 Adult/Not removed
Village Plot 1

Burial Plot 4

Bl Child

B34 No remains

B2Adult

BIO Adult

B3 Adult

MITCHELL
B4Adult

B31 Child

B47 Child/disturbed

B62 Adult /plowed

B6 2 Adults/disturbed

B32Adult

B4S Adult/ disturbed

B63 Adult/plowed

B7 Adult/disturbed

B33 Adult

B49 2 Adults/disturbed

B64 Adult/disturbed/

Bl2 Adult

B35 child

B50 Adult/disturbed

B65 Child

Bl3 Adult

B36 Adult

B5 l Adult/disturbed

B66 Adult/ midden

Bl6 Child

B37 Adult

B52 Adult/disturbed

B67 Adult/midden

B 17 Adult/disturbed

B3S Adult

B53 Adult/disturbed

B6S Adult

not excavated

Bl S Adult/disturbed

B39 Adult/disturbed

B54 Adult

B69 Adult /Not excavated

Bl9 Adult

B40 Adult

B55 Adult

B70 Not excavated

B20

B41 Adult

B56 Adult/disturbed

B26 Adult/disturbed

B42 Adult

B57 Adult/disturbed

B27 Adult/disturbed

B43 2 Adults

B5S Adult

K2 Child

B2S Adult

B44 Adult/Child/disturbed

B59 Adult/ disturbed

K3 Child

B29 Adult

B45 Adult/disturbed

B60 Adult/disturbed

K4Child

B30 Adult

B46 Adult/disturbed

B61 Child

MOORES
J1 Adult

J4 Child

J7 Child

J2 Child

JS Child

JS 2 Children

J3 Adult

J6 Child

Kl Adult

Lee - Paleopathology of the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores Sites, Bowie County, Texas
mound (Woolsey and Martin 1938), but it is difficult
to tell from his notes which burials they are, or if he
is referring to burials found at the Hatchel site.
The Moores site consisted of two mounds. One
of the mounds was excavated by A T. Jackson for
the University of Texas at Austin from August 1932
to September 1932. Nine burials (Jl -8) were recovered: J1 was not located on the mound, but was
associated with a dog burial; JS was a double child
burial (Jackson 1932); burial J3 was the only adult
in the mound. Lead shots were found in the abdominal cavity of burial J3, indicating this particular individual was interred sometime after European
contact. This burial is thought to be intrusive into
the mound (Good 1977). Gilmore (1991) suggested
this burial was a Frenchman associated with La
Salle's expedition in Texas in the mid-1680s. A
reexamination of the skeletal remains of J3 by Barbara Jackson and Laura Dow, including dental evidence and crania1/postcranial metrics, indicate that
this individual is well within the Native American
range, rather than that of a European.
In general, all the burials at the three sites
were extended on their back. The one exception
was the flexed burial J3 at Moores, and this may be
due to the means of death rather than burial custom.
All mound burials were children with the exception
of burial #599 (Mound #1, burial #4 at Hatchel).
The double child burial (J4) at Moores was buried
within a structure. It is common to find Caddo
children buried in the floors of structures, but not in
structures set on earthen mounds. Four sets of
double burials were present at the three sites. Multiple burials, sometimes placed in deep shaft pits,
are common at Caddo sites on the Red River, where
they occur in mound and cemetery burials.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
All skeletal materials discussed in this article
are housed at the University of Texas at Austin,
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL).
To date, there are 16 known burials from Hatchel,
64 from Mitchell, and five from Moores (n=85
individuals). The infant burials from Hatchel and
Moores had been mixed at one time, but they were
resorted by size and reaccessioned after comparison with field notes and excavation photographs.
Several burials also have no known burial context,
and some accessioned burials do not match the

163

field notes; for the purposes of this study the adult
discrepancies were not considered further.
Individuals from Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores
(HMM) with a burial number and accession number were counted once. Accession numbers without
associated burial context were counted if they appeared to constitute a distinct individual, but those
that contained isolated skeletal remains were not
counted, as it was assumed they represented portions of other burials. Infants were aged according
to the stage of development and long bone length
(Kosa 1989). Children and adolescents were aged
by dental eruption and epiphyseal fusion (Steele
and Bramlett 1988). Sexing and aging of adults
were taken from TARL records (Table 2) and then
checked again using auricular surfaces and talus
measurements (Buikstra and Ubelaker 1994).

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Demography
Out of 85 individuals, 71 could be aged (Figure 1). At birth, the average age of death at Hatchel
was 21 years, 28 years at Mitchell, and only 8 years
at Moores (as previously mentioned, the sample
from Moores consisted of four children and only
one adult). The difference in age between Hatchel
and Mitchell is probably due to the higher proportion of children at Hatchel.
Thirty-eight percent of the Hatchel population
was under 18 years of age, but only 20 percent of
the Mitchell population was subadult. Once an individual reached adulthood, the average age of death
was 34 years at Hatchel and 35 years at the Mitchell
site. When the population is divided by sex, the
Hatchel site has older males (39 years old at death
compared to 35 years old from Mitchell) and
younger females (28 years old compared to 34 years
old) than at Mitchell. Because of the small sample
size of adults from Hatchel, the Mitchell site ages
may be a more accurate reflection of the demography of the HMM Caddo population.
A high rate of child mortality occurred before
the age of two. Based on the unfused three elements of the temporal bone (petrous, squamous,
and tympanic ring), two infants (#3585 and #515B)
were possibly premature and stillborn (Kosa 1989).
Several factors contribute to a high child mortality.
First, infants acquire passive
from their
mother before birth. This wears off gradually after

164

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Age and Sex Distribution
HATCHEL

Accession#

Burial#

Age

Sex

Comments

559

MlBl

40-50

male

"Buried on the side of the mound
possibly later than the other
mound burials."

560
561
562
563
564
565A
565B
566A
566B
567
642
884A
884B
886
3585

VP1B2
BP2B23
BP1B8
BP2B25
BP1B14
VP2Bl
VPlBl
M1B3
MlBl
BP1B5
BP1B9
BP2B24
BP2B24
VP2Bl0
M1B2

12-15
25-35
35-45
20-25
40-50
6mo. ±3
2 yr.± 8 mo.
9 mo.-1 yr.
8-10 lunar mo.
25-30
35-45
Adult
Adult
20-25
7-9 lunar mo.

indet.
female
female
female
male
ind et.
ind et.
ind et.
indet.
male
female
male
female
female
indet.

MITCHELL
506
507
508
509
510
511
512
513
514
515A
515B
516
517
518
519
520
521
522
523
524
525
526
527
528

B54
B43
B68
B28
B38
B35
Bl2
Unknown
B61
Kl
K2

B63
B56
Bl3
B40
B58
B36
B43
B19
B16
B66
Unknown
B53
B67

35-45
45-55
40-50
45-55
25-30
7±2
45-55
Adult
18 mo.±6 mo.
40-50
6-7 lunar mo.
20-25
20-25
25-30
20-25
50-60
35-45
18-23
20-25
6±2
25-30
45-55
50-60
20-25

male
female
female
male
female
indet.
female
ind et.
ind et.
male
indet.
male
female
female
male
male
male
female
male
ind et.
male
female
male
male

Lee -

Paleopathology of the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores Sites, Bowie County, Texas

165

Table2. (Continued)
Accession#

Burial#

Age

Sex

529
530
531A
531B
532
533
534
535
536
537
538
539
540
541A
541B
542
543
544A
544B
546A
546B
547
548
549
550
551
553
554
556A
556B
881
882
883
885

Bl7
B27
B49
B49
Unknown
B51
B37
B42
B4
B30
B7
B29
B41
B6
B6
Unknown
Unknown
B44
B47
B31
B31
B33
B45
B62
B50
B65
B52
unknown
K3
K4
B59
B60
B30
B27

25-30
35-45
25-30
30-40
Adult
30-40
25-30
35-45
35-45
25-30
20-25
20-25
25-35
35-40
50-60
50-60
50-60
3-6 mo.
5±2
3±1
Adult
Adult
25-30
20-25
Adult
10-12
13-17
Adult
1-2
6mo. ±3 mo.
20-25
25-30
Adult
Adult

indet.
male
female
male
male
male
female
female
female
female
female
female
female
female
male
female
male
indet.
ind et.
indet.
ind et.
male
female
male
indet.
indet.
ind et.
ind et.
indet.
indet.
female
male
male
indet.

887
888

B57
unknown

Adult
Adult

female
indet.

889A

unknown

Adult

indet.

890

unknown

Adult

891
892
893
894

B55
unknown
unknown
ET54

25-30
Adult
Adult

Comments

MNI2

Femur fragments which may belong to
already accessioned burials
Three fragments which may belong to
already accessioned burials
MNI 2. May belong to already
accessioned burials.
May belong to already accessioned
burials.

male
male
male
MNI 6. These may be from a bone pit
found during excavations.

166

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. (Continued)
Accession#

Burial#

Age

Sex

895
1063

2-4-465

Adult

male

Comments
Missing

1064
3056A

B48

3056B
3057

B48
unknown

Missing
MNI 2. These elements may belong to
already accessioned burials.
9-11
6-10

ind et.
ind et.

MOORES
572
573
574
575
576
577
571A

J6
J2
JS skel. 1
J8 skel. 2

571B
3415

indet.

J3

6mo. ±3 mo.
Child
2 yr.± 8 mo.
birth-6 mo.
Child
20-30
30-40

female
male

unknown
J4

30+
4±1

indet.
indet.

J7
Jl

birth as the infant's own immune system begins to
produce antibodies. The maternal antibodies are
antitoxic and antiviral, and do not provide protection from bacterial agents. Several bacterial infections can be passed to an infant prenataly (e.g.,
treponematosis and tuberculosis) or right after birth
(e.g., tetanus and streptococcus) (Davies 1984). Six
children under the age of six years exhibited evidence of systemic bacterial infection (periostitis).
Second, the next critical time for a child is weaning
and the introduction of solid food, as this adjustment can cause nutritional deficiencies, especially
in protein. Third, a diet low in nutrients (corn gruel)
compounded with parasitic infections, such as
roundworm, can cause chronic diarrhea. This in
turn can produce anemia and even death. Three
children under the age of six had signs of active
anemia (#544A, #574, and #3415).
Afterward, the death rate is expected to drop
through adolescence, then rise again in early
adulthood. While the Hatchel population follows
this pattern, the Mitchell population has the most
children dying between six and 12 years of age;
what may have caused this is not evident in the

Missing
ind et.
indet.
Missing
Missing
Intrusive into the mound, later than
the child burials.
Possibly not from the Moores site.

skeletal remains. Once reaching adulthood, the death
rate at Hatchel and Mitchell jumps to its highest
rate in the 20-30 year age range, lowers through the
30s, then rises in the 40s age range.
Cranial Modeling
Cranial modeling was done by the Caddo from
Early Caddoan to Historic Caddoan period times.
Previous studies have showed that there were no
significant preferences in sex or social status for
individuals with cranial modeling (Bennett 1961;
Derrick and Wilson, this volume), and that there
were two methods of cranial modeling among the
Texas Caddo groups. Tabular cranial modeling was
achieved by tying the child to wooden boards, which
flattened the cranial bones as the child grew. A
second method (annular modeling) involved binding a child's head with strips of material to achieve
a smooth, rounded contour to the skull (Derrick and
Wilson, this volume).
There were also two styles of cranial modeling
using these methods: fronto-vertico-occipital and
fronto-parallelo-occipital. Fronto-vertico-occipital

Lee - Paleopathology

Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores Sites, Bowie County, Texas

167

m i 4
::J
"'C 1 2

> 10

8
6

4
E
::J

z

2
0
())

())

.,.....

!..()

I

0

())

C\l

I

.,.....

C\l

I

I

Cf)

())

i

())

0 ())
C\l C\l

())

..-- .......

CD

Age in

I

0
Cf)

())
())

Cf)

I

0

"""

())
())

'<:.!"

+

0

!..()

Male
Female
lndetermin

Figure 1. Age Distribution at Death for the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores Sites.

cranial modeling has a sloping frontal, flattened
occipital/lamboid suture, and globular parietal
bosses, which gives the skull a characteristic wedge
shape when viewed from the side. Fronto-parallelooccipital cranial modeling, on the other hand, has
the frontal and occipital bones parallel to each other.
The occipital is flattened under the lamboid suture,
not on it, and the skull projects backward more than
it does vertically (Neumann 1942).
At the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores sites, 65
percent of the population (62 percent at Hatchel and
65 percent at Mitchell) had some evidence of cranial
modeling (Table 3). Photographs of the one adult
male at Moores (#571A) show no cranial modeling.
The only type of cranial modeling present at Hatchel
was tabular-fronto-vertico-occipital. While this is
the predominant type of cranial modeling at Mitchell
(n=24), other styles and methods were also present.
Four crania~burials #508 (female), #516 (male),
#519 (male), and #521 (male)--exhibit a type of
modeling found in neighboring Red River County at
the Kaufman-Williams site: tabular-fronto-parallelooccipital flattening. Two crania from burials #512
(female) and #539 (female) have annular frontoparallelo-occipital modeling, characteristic of the
Sanders site in Lamar County. Finally, two more
#526 (female) and #536 (female) have

annular-fronto-vertico-occipital modeling, a style
found mainly at the Womack site (41LR1). Derrick
and Wilson (this volume) have suggested that the
Caddo used cranial modeling as a means to signal
ethnic affiliation.
Several skulls exhibit depressions that may have
been caused or aggravated by cranial modeling.
This type of circular/oval depression is referred to
as a supra-inion depression. The location of these
depressions are variable, but seem to be concentrated on the upper portion of the occipital above the
protuberance, or along the lambdoid suture. The
center is porous and lower than the surrounding area
with a raised sclerotic ring. It is hypothesized that
the pressure of the head against the cradleboard, or
bindings, can cause disruptions in blood circulation.
This, along with repeated friction, can cause ailments such as hair loss (alopecia), necrosis (ischemic
ulcers), and secondary bacterial or fungal infections
(Holliday 1993:284-285).
Twenty-three (43 percent) of the crania had
supra-inion depressions, and 17 of these depressions were located on the occipital. Three cases
were in HMM children (burials #5ll, #544A, and
#565A). The most dramatic example was a 6-month
old infant (burial #565A), where the occipital had a
a
central region of bone necrosis surrounded

168

Texas Archeological Society

Table 3. Cranial Attributes

ACC#

Age

Sex

Porosity/
Diploe thickening

Supra-Inion

Cranial Modeling

Anemia

MITCHELL
506
507
508
510
511
512
513
515 A
516
517
518
519
520
521
522
523
525
526
527
528
529
530
531 B
534
536
538
539
540
541 B
543
544A
548
549
554
1063
3056 A

35-45
45-55
40-50
25-30
7
45-55
Adult
40-50
20-25
20-25
25-30
20-25
50-60
35-45
18-23
20-25
25-30
45-55
50-60
20-25
25-30
35-45
30-40
25-30
35-45
20-25
20-25
25-35
50-60
50-60
3-6 mo.
25-30
20-25
Adult
Adult
Adult

M*
F
F
F

F
M
M
F
F
M
M
M
F
M
M
F
M
M
M
M

III**
III

D
Occ***
Occ
Occ
Occ

D
D
D
DP
DP

Occ

F
Occ
Occ

DP
p
p

III
modeled

none

p
p

Occ

DP
D

Occ

DP
D
D

Occ
F

F

F
F
F
F
M
M

III
II
III
III

D
p

DP

Occ

D

Occ
Occ
Occ

F
M

I
III
III
III
IV
III
III
III
III
modeled
III
IV
III
II
III
III
III

Cribra Orbitalia

Cribra Orbitalia

Cribra Orbitalia
Cribra Orbitalia
III

p

D
M

III
p

HATCHEL
559
560
561
562

40-50
12-15
25-35
35-45

M
I
F
F

p

Occ

none

p

p

III

p

Occ
Occ

III

p

m

Cribra Orbitalia

Lee - Paleopathology of the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores Sites, Bowie County, Texas

169

Table 3. (Continued)

ACC#

Age

Sex

Porosity/
Diploe thickening

Supra-Inion

Cranial Modeling

563
564
565A
567
642

20-25
40-50
6mo.
25-30
35-45

F
M

p

Occ

III

p

DP
DP

Occ
Occ

modeled

M
F

Anemia

Cribra Orbitalia

MOORES
574
3145

Porotic Hyperostosis
Cribra Orbitalia

2
4

* M=male F=female I=indeterminate
**I=tabular fronto-parallelo-occipital; II annular fronto-parallelo-occipital; III tabular fronto-vertico-occipital; IV annular
fronto-vertico-occipital
***Occ=Occipital; F= Frontal; P=Parietal

raised sclerotic ring and periostitis on the outside.
There is an analogous case in another infant at the
Roitsch site in Red River County (Derrick, 1995
personal communication).
Four individuals had depressions in the parietal bone at the lamboid suture (burials #540, #554,
#560, and #3056A), and one individual (#540) had
two lesions in the parietal. Another case (burial
#517) had two smooth, shallow depressions located
in the squamous portion of the frontal, and burial
#53 lB had one such depression; neither were the
result of blunt trauma, as there is no involvement of
the inner table. Two skulls (burials #3057 and
#3058) from the Knight's Bluff site (41CS14) also
have double frontal depressions. Morse (1973) noted
similar depressions on crania of the Nodena phase
culture in Northeast Arkansas, and attributed them
to areas of pressure exerted by knots used in the
cranial modeling process.
Burial #559 had an occipital supra-inion depression, but no cranial modeling. This may be
indicative of other causal factors, such as scalp
infections from parasites or skin trauma.

Trauma
The most obvious case of acute trauma is a
head wound to a 25-30 year old male (burial #567),

namely a depression in the left parietal (Table 4),
with the inner table depressed and sclerotic. The
depression of the outer table measures 10.3 x 12.8
mm. This is the best evidence at HMM for
interpersonal conflict. A blow to the left side of the
head of burial #567 could have been given by a
right-handed person standing face to face with the
victim.
Accidental damage to hands and feet are fairly
common in agricultural populations, and the HMM
population is no exception. Five instances of healed
trauma to the toes (phalanges) are present in males
and females, and the phalanges are swollen with
remodeled bone on the underside of the shaft; some
also exhibit stunting of the head. This type of trauma
could have been caused by stepping on a sharp
object or stubbing a toe.
Six individuals have fractures. Two males over
the age of 30 (burials #559 and #571A) had wellhealed fractures of the humerus, with little evidence of callus formation, torsion, or angulation;
this level of healing indicates immobilization of the
arm after injury. Burial #881, a 20-25 year old
female, had a fracture to the left distal clavicle.
This is a difficult area to immobilize, and pseudarthrosis had developed. The new joint had healed
well with little bone overgrowth. These traumas,
and the fracture of burial #890's radius, may have

170

Texas Archeological Society
Table 4. Traumas

ACC#

Site

559

Hatchel

567

Hatchel

886

Hatchel

506

Mitchell

508
509
520

Mitchell
Mitchell
Mitchell

Trauma

Element

Comments

Schmorl's nodes
Fracture
Smashed phalange
Blunt trauma
Schmorl's nodes
Smashed phalange

Thoracic?
L dist. humerus*/**
Foot
L parietal
Thoracic 12
Foot

Smashed phalange
Fracture
Enthesopathies
Enthesopathies
Schmorl' s nodes

Foot
R dist. fibula
R calcaneus
R tibia
Thoracic 10-12
Lumbar 1-3
R and L mandible
L calcaneus
Foot
L calcaneus
Rt. metacarpal 3
R calcaneus
Thoracic 5-12
Lumbar 1-3
Foot
L dist. clavicle
Lumbar3-4
Thoracic 11-12
Land Rfemur
dist. radius shaft
Calcaneus
L metacarpal 3-5
Thoracic 8-12
dist. tibia shaft
R femur
L prox. humerus
Thoracic 12
Lumbar 1-2

Enthesopathies
Enthesopathies
Smashed phalange
Enthesopathies
Enthesopathies
Enthesopathies
Schmorl's nodes

525
527
531A

Mitchell
Mitchell
Mitchell

531B
881

Mitchell
Mitchell

Smashed phalange
Fracture
Schmorl's nodes

889
890
892

Mitchell
Mitchell
Mitchell

Enthesopathies
Fracture
Enthesopathies

894
3056A
571A

Mitchell
Mitchell
Moores

Schmorl' s nodes
Fracture
Enthesopathies
Fracture
Schmorl's nodes

Depression fracture

2 phalanges
Adductor hallucis
dist. shaft, posterior left

Masseter?
Achilles tendon
Adductor hallucis
Styloid process
Adductor hallucis

Pseudoarthrosis
Periosteal deposition
Linea aspera, adductor magnus?
Adductor hallucis
Palmar of each shaft

Linea aspera, Adductor magnus?

*R=Right; L=Left
**Prox.=proximal; Dist. =distal

occurred when an individual tried to brace a fall
with their arms.
Eight individuals from HMM had
hyperossification at attachment sites for muscles or
tendons (see Table 4). These bony spurs
(enthesopathies) are caused by repetitive overuse
of particular muscles (Dutour 1986). The majority

of the muscle pulls involved the legs and feet,
suggesting long distance walking, running, or
dancing (Wilson 1994: 149). All the individuals with
enthesopathies who could be sexed were males.
Dutour (1986:224) reported that this type of lesion
is common in people who walk or run long distances
on hard surfaces.

Lee - Paleopathology

Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores Sites, Bowie County, Texas

Two males exhibit finger involvement (one
left hand, one right), associated with fine finger
manipulation. Wilson (1994: 154-155) suggests
these may be caused by activities such as sewing,
ceramic manufacture, basket weaving, flint
knapping, husking maize, and shell working.
Schmorl's nodes are small, smooth cavitations
in the vertebral body, caused by herniations of the
discs (nucleus pulposus) between the vertebral
bodies of the spinal column. Pressure from the disc
causes erosion in some areas of the adjacent
vertebral bodies, resulting in depressions of the
articular surfaces. These herniations can be caused
by trauma or repeated stress (Ortner and Putschar
1981 :430). A developmental defect in the cartilage
may predispose certain individuals to these disc
herniations (Loveland 1994: 169). Seven cases of
Schmorl' s nodes were present in the HMM burials,
and in each instance they were confined to the
lower thoracic-lumbar region. While males and
females both exhibited Schmorl' s nodes, a female
(burial #531A) had the most extensive involvement
(10 vertebrae).

In burial #881, a 20-25 year old female, there
was a massive bony buildup between thoracic 1112. The thoracic 11 vertebra had a porous depression in the bottom of the vertebral body, while the
thoracic 12 vertebra had an irregular deposit of
bone which fit into the depression. This lesion was
not caused by a herniated disc, as the edges were
not smooth, and may have been the result of an
isolated traumatic episode.

Arthritis
The evidence of arthritis (erosion, osteophytes,
or eubemation) when present was not severe. At
Hatchel, 67 percent of the population had some
evidence of arthritis, while arthritis was evident in
65 percent of the population at Mitchell. The early
onset of arthritis at HMM, 20-30 years of age, points
to an environment where stressful activities were
begun long before adulthood.
The distribution of arthritis by sex and body
region is summarized in Figure 2 and Table 5.
More males than females exhibited arthritic

5

4.5
00

"O

>

4
3.5

3
2.5
2

1.5
E

1

z

0.5

::I

0
~

,_

CIJ
J

~
0
..0

LL!

......
(/")
.....

(/")

"O

c

CIJ

I

(\)
(.)

>
......
CD

(.)

.....
(\)

Q

..0

'-

E

CIJ

0

CIJ
,_
Q

Q..

I

CIJ
(f)

0

(f)

Joi

171

lnvo

Figure 2. Arthritis Patterns among Males and Females.

(1)
(1)

c

~

......
©

Q)

LI..

172

Texas Archeological Society
Table 5. Arthritis Distribution

ACC#

Jaw

Shoulder

Elbow

Wrist

Hands

Cervical

Thoracic

Lumbar

Sacrum

x

x

x

x

x

Hip

Knee

Feet

HATCHEL

559
563

x

x

x
MITCHELL

506
508
509
512
513

520
521
525
526
527
531A
531B
534
535
538
540
541B
882
892

x
x

x

x

x

x

x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x

x

x

x
x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

x

MOORES

571 A
571 B

x

involvement, and they also had more severe and
extensive overall arthritic patterns. Males had the
highest incidence of degenerative arthritis in the
elbow, cervical, lumbar region, and feet. Females
had the highest incidence of arthritis in the elbow,
knee, feet, and jaw. Only males exhibited arthritis
of the sacrum and hip. With the exception of burial
#559, where the sacral involvement may be
pathological in origin, the males with sacral
involvement were 50+ years old. The absence of
females with arthritis involvement in these areas

x
x

may have to do with the low number of HMM
females in this age group.
The discrepancy in the distribution of arthritis
between males and females implies a sexual division of labor among the Caddo at HMM. Men appear to have been carrying heavy loads on their
backs more often than women. Women have a
higher rate of degenerative changes to the knee,
which may be related to long periods of kneeling or
sitting while working.

Lee_ Paleopathology of the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores Sites, Bowie County, Texas

Periostitis occurs when the periosteum which
surrounds bone becomes irritated or traumatized.
Osteoblastic activity begins and striations of porous bone are layered over the bone surface, often
grossly distorting the original morphology of the
bone. Since periostitis is a generalized reaction, it
is not diagnostic of particular health conditions
(Ortner and Putschar 1981: 129).
At Hatchel, 29 percent of the population had
periostitis (Table 6), compared to 52 percent at
Mitchell and 33 percent at Moores. The most common bone involved was the tibia (66 percent), which
because the bone is closer to the surface, is more
prone to trauma. Eight individuals had periostitis of
the maxillary sinuses, probably a reaction to allergies, lung irritation, upper respiratory infections, or
infectious disease.
Burial #520, a 50-60 year old male with a
sinus infection, also had a lesion on the interior
shaft of one rib. The lesion was an irregular raised
area of bone deposition. Possible causes for the
lesion include adhesion of the lung to the rib after
some insult, including damage from smoking, a
blood clot, or an infectious loci (C. F. Merbs and
R. D. Carerro, 1997 personal communications).
Two Texas hunter-gatherer populations that I have
analyzed also have this osteoma: the Fred Acree
site (41CV1) has a female with the same type of
lesion on an interior side of the rib; and the LoeveFox site (41WM230) has an individual with
multiple ribs involved. The lesions were located on
the interior of the ribs directly opposite the rib
tubercle.

Infectious disease
Although some of the individuals with periostitis at HMM may be cases of treponemal infection,
the evidence is inconclusive. The first case is burial
#559, an male aged 40-50 years from Hatchel. He
exhibited multiple bone involvement without cloaca
or sequestra (diagnostic of osteomyelitis). The second is a child from Moore (burial #574) aged 2
years ± 8 months, whose skull had localized active
lesions (large-pored, but not periosteal, and the inner table is not involved) on the left parietal and
occipital. The lesions were not sym..metrical and the
inner table is not involved. This may be porotic
hyperostosis, which is not uncommon in children
with compromised immune systems.

173

The left frontal of burial #574 also had a raised
vascular area, with blood vessel grooves that emanated from the center. The left frontal, sphenoid,
and left side of the maxilla were also porous. The
left ear had no evidence of infection. The metacarpals, phalanges, both ulnas, right femur, both tibiae,
and fibulae exhibit deposition, causing expansion
of the shafts. Enamel defects, which imply growth
disturbances in utero, occurred in both of the maxillary deciduous PM4 teeth. As dental development
begins with crown formation, the areas of enamel
disrupted were in formation by the seventh lunar
month (Steele and Bramlett 1988: 102). This gives
credence to a diagnosis that a systemic infection
attacked this infant in utero.
Were the pathologies on burial #574 caused by
rickets, scurvy, tuberculosis, or osteomyelitis? The
skull and long bones do not resemble those described for rickets or scurvy, because the metaphysis were not flared and there were no pathological
fractures or bending. No ribs or vertebrae were
involved to signify tuberculosis, the metacarpals
were not irregular, bulbous and thin-shelled, and
the crania did not have lesions originating from the
inner table, which would have been indicative of
tuberculosis. Further, the long bones did not have
endosteal involvement, rings of deposition, or the
density associated with osteomyelitis. Rather, the
pattern of affliction evidenced in the bones ~f this
child most closely resembles a treponemal mfection. The age and severity of the infection suggests
a full-blown case of congenital treponematosis.
The distribution and types of lesions in burial #57 4
are similar to a case of congenital treponematosis
described in a 6-7 year old from a prehistoric site
in Virginia (Ortner and Putschar 1981:207-210).
While the evidence of an endemic treponemal focus at HMM is inconclusive, both the Womack
(41LR1) and Sanders (41LR2) populations
(41LR2) contain adult individuals with characteristics of treponemal infection (caries sicca). Since
individuals with cranial modeling styles apparently
local to the Sanders and Womack sites were buried at HMM, this suggests that treponemal infection may have been introduced sporadically into the
HMM population by neighboring Caddo traveling
up and down the Red River.
Anemia
Several factors may contribute to irondeficiency anemia, including a reliance on maize

174

Texas Archeological Society

Table 6. Periostitis Patterns
ACC#

Sinus

Humerus

Ulna

Hand

Femur

Tibia

Fibula

L

Feet

HATCHEL

559
565A
566B
567
886

L

R

R

B

L

L
L

B

R

B
B
x

MITCHELL

506
508
512
514
516
517
518
520
521
524
527
528
530
531A
531B
535
538
539
540
551
541B
544A
549
550
553
556A
882
884
889A
891
892
894
1063

L
L

x

x
L
B
B
L

R
x

B

x

x
x

B
x

B

L

B
B

B
x

x
x
L

x
L

x

B

B
B

x

L

B
x

x

R
L
x
L

B
B
B

x

R
x

MOORES

574
x=side unknown; L=left; R=right; B=bilateral

B

x

B

B

B

Lee -

Paleopathology of the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores Sites, Bowie County, Texas

agriculture, food preparation methods, parasitic
infection, chronic diarrhea, and weaning. Cribra
orbitalia, a porosity of the orbit vault, may be the
earliest expression of iron-deficiency anemia. In
porotic hyperostosis, the marrow space (diploe) of
the skull expands, causing bilateral honeycomb
porosity on the parietals and occipital; this may
occur in more severely anemic individuals (Walker
1985:141). There are seven individuals from HMM
(11.29 percent) with cribra orbitalia (see Table 3).
Two cases (burials #544 and #3145) were in
children younger than four years old.
Several HMM individuals exhibited porosity
on the frontal, parietals (along the saggital suture),
and occipital that may be evidence of healed
porotic hyperostosis, signifying anemia in the
HMM populations. However, because some occur
without diploe expansion, they may also be a
periosteal reaction to some scalp infection, or cases
of healed porotic hyperostosis with overlying scalp
infections.

Tumors
Three individuals (burials #520, #530, and
#3056) had auditory ear exostosis. These are bony
growths which obstruct the ear canal. Males have a
higher incidence of this than females. It has been
suggested that this exotosis may be caused by
chemical or mechanical irritation (Ortner and
Putschar 1981:379). Manzi et al. (1991) suggest
that one kind of irritation is prolonged exposure to
cold water through diving.
Developmental Disorders
The first kind of developmental disorder in the
HMM population was dental anomalies. Three types
of dental anomalies were present. First, one child
(burial #3415) had the deciduous mandibular lateral and central incisors fused on the left and right
sides. Second, three individuals (burials #510, #521,
and #528) had enamel pearls. Last, there were three
cases of heterotopic teeth: burial #509 had a tooth
projecting from the mental protuberance of the mandible; another (burial #527) had an incisor in the
right nasal cavity; and the third (burial #528) had
an incisor in the left palate.
There is a possible case of osteochondritis
dessecans in a 13-17 year old (burial #553), marked
by a dimple between the trochlea and capitulum of
the left humerus. Osteochondritis dessecans occurs

175

in adolescents to young adults. It effects males more
often than females and may have a familial distribution. It is a defect in the articular cartilage on one
joint surface and the necrotic subchondral bone on
the adjoining joint surface. After the necrotic bone
separates from the joint surface, the subchondral
bone deposits a thin layer of bone over the defect,
but a depression remains in the surface of the joint
(Ortner and Putschar 1981:242).
A female (burial #881) had bilateral brachydactyly of the fourth metacarpal. Brachydactyly is
the abnormal development of fingers or toes, where
growth arrests early, causing a shortness in length
and a thickness in width. Brachydactyly may be
inherited within a family as an autosomal dominant
trait, a random mutation, or from a trauma to the
area during growth (Cybulski 1987). Another isolated case of brachydactyly of the right fourth metatarsal among the Caddo has been reported by
Loveland and Gregg (1988) in a male from the
Roitsch site (41RR16) in neighboring Red River
county.
One case of an unambiguous developmental
disorder occurred in a 25-30 year old male (burial
#567). The sacrum had spina bifida occulta, where
all the neural arches were unfused. Cleft neural
arches without neural tube defects are not clinically
significant, as they are present in up to 25 percent
of live births in certain populations (Barnes
1994:46).
Burial #599, a 40-50 year-old male, had
paleopathologies that may be from developmental
defects or a severe trauma at an early age. The left
occipital condyle was slightly larger than the right,
due to arthritic erosion. The vertebrae present had
the left laminae shorter than the right, causing the
spinous processes to point toward the left. The arthritis (porosity) on the inferior rib facets of the
thoracic vertebrae was caused by the rotation of the
spinal column to the left. Such scoliosis-a lateral
deviation of the vertebrae from the saggital planeoften begins in childhood (Ortner and Putschar
1981:324). The Schmorl's nodes that developed on
Burial #599 may have been caused by a redistribution of stress through the spinal column. The right
medial femoral condyle on Burial #599 also had
some degenerative porosity and a slight bony
buildup, again probably related to compensation
for an abnormal gait.
A trauma during birth may have been responsible for this anomaly. Cases of torticollis (contraction of the stemocleidomastoid muscle) sometimes

176

Texas Archeological Society

occur during breech or other difficult births. This
would cause the child's head to tilt toward the side
of the affected muscle. It is interesting to note that
torticollis is occasionally associated with a c-shaped
scoliosis from the occipital to the sacrum, and with
asymmetry of hip joint abduction (D'Ambrosia
1986:579-580).

CONCLUSIONS
In general, the health of the Caddo people who
lived at the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores sites was
good. The well-healed fractures, the low to moderate severity of arthritis, mild anemia, and periostitis, imply a fairly successful adaptation. The lack of
evidence for interpersonal violence may indicate
that relatively little warfare took place among the
Caddo and neighboring groups. The cranial modeling and enthesopathies suggest that the Caddo traveled long distances, perhaps for marriage and trade.
The presence of a possible congenital treponemal
infant raises the question of the occurrence and
spread of the infectious disease among the Caddo.
Finally, the occurrence of developmental defects at
these sites may signal some degree of restrictive
marriage patterns through time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank the Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma for the opportunity to examine the skeletal
remains curated at T ARL. Other acknowledgments
go to Dr. Thomas R. Hester for his support and
encouragement; Dr. Darrell Creel for suggesting
the site and endless consultations about Caddoan
archaeology; Dr. Gentry Steele for insight and judgment calls on everything; Dr. Keith Condon for
taking the time to come down and look at skeleton
#574; Dr. Mary Lucas Powell, Dr. Della Cook, Dr.
Donald Ortner, Dr. Charles Merbs, and Dr.
Roseanne Carerro for consultations; and Diane Wilson, Helen Dockall, and Sharon Derrick for answering questions on anything at anytime.

REFERENCES CITED
Barnes, E.
1994 Developmental Defects of the Axial Skeleton in
Paleopathology. University Press of Colorado,
Denver.
Bennett, K. A.
1961 Artificial Cranial Deformation Among the Caddo
Indians. Texas Journal of Science 13:377-390.
Buikstra, J. and D. Ubelaker (editors)
1994 Standards for Data Collection from Human Skeletal Remains. Research Series No. 44. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Creel, D.
1996 Hatchel-Mitchell Site. In The New Handbook of
Texas, Volume 3, edited by R. Tyler, pp. 504-505.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Cybulski, J.
1987 Brachydactyly, A Possible Inherited Anomaly at
Prehistoric Prince Rupert Harbour. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 76:363-376.
D'Ambrosia, R.
1986 Musculoskeletal Disorders. Lippincott Co.,
Philadelphia.
Dutour, 0.
1986 Enthesopathies as Indicators of the Activities of
Neolithic Saharan Populations. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology 11 :221-224.
Davies, P. A.
1984 Bacterial Infections in the Fetus and Newborn Infant. W. B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
Gilmore, K.
1991 An Archeological Footnote to History. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 60:303-324.
Good, C.
1977 Preliminary Report on the Moores Plantation. MS
on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Holliday, D. Y.
1993 Occipital Lesions: A Possible Cost of Cradleboards.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 90:283291.
Jackson, A. T.
1932 Exploration of a Burial Site on E. H. Moores Plantation in Bowie County Texas. MS on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Lee - Paleopathology of the Hatchel-Mitchell-Moores Sites, Bowie County, Texas
Kosa, F.
1989 Age Estimation from the Fetal Skeleton. In Age
Markers in the Human Skeleton, edited by N. Y.
Iscan, pp. 21-54. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield.
Loveland, C. J.
1994 Vertebral Anomalies and Degenerative Lesions in
the Caddoan Skeletal Population, Kaufman-Williams Site, Red River County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 65:161-181.
Loveland, C. and J.B. Gregg
1988 Brachydactyly in a Prehistoric Texas Skeleton.
Plains Anthropologist 33:399-404.
Manzi, G., A. Sperduti, and P. Passarello.
1991 Behavior-Induced Auditory Exostoses in Imperial
Roman Society: Evidence from Coeval Urban and
Rural Communities. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 85:253-260.
Merbs, C.
1983 Patterns of Activity-Induced Pathology in a Canadian Inuit Population. National Museum of Man
Mercury Series, Paper No. 119. Archaeological Survey of Canada, Ottawa.
Morse, D.
1973 Pathologies and Abnormalities of the Hampson Skeletal Collection. In Nodena: An Account of 75 Years
of Archeological Investigation in Southeast Mississippi County, Arkansas, edited by D. F. Morse, pp.
41-60. Research Series No. 4. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

177

Neumann, G.
1942 Types of Artificial Cranial Deformation in the Eastern United States. American Antiquity 7:306-310.
Ortner, D. J. and W. G. J. Putschar
1981 Identification of Pathological Conditions in Human
Skeletal Remains. Contributions in Anthropology
No. 28. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Steele, D. G. and C. A. Bramblett
1988 ·The Anatomy and Biology of the Human Skeleton.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Walker, P.
1985 Anemia Among Prehistoric Indians of the American Southwest. In Health and Disease in the Prehistoric Southwest, edited by C. Merbs and R. Miller,
pp. 139-164. Anthropological Research Papers 34.
Arizona State University, Tempe.
Wilson, D. E.
1994 Division of Labor and Stress Loads at the Sanders
Site, Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 65: 129-160.
Woolsey, A. M.
1938 Field Notes for the Hatchel Site. MS on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Woolsey, A. M. and G. Martin.
1938 Field Notes for the Mitchell Site. MS on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin

a

ABSTRACT
Differences have been noted between hunter-gatherers and horticulturalists/agriculturalists in dental wear
and the occurrence of caries, these being correlated with their respective subsistence patterns. Two prehistoric
to protohistoric skeletal samples from Texas, Blue Bayou (41VT94) and Roitsch (41RR16), were analyzed for
wear, caries, and abscess frequency and etiology. Wear analysis showed only the molars had statistically
significant differences. Caries and abscess frequencies were high in the Roitsch Caddo sample and low from
Blue Bayou. This suggests individuals at Blue Bayou had a diet requiring relatively little anterior and more molar
processing. Abscesses appear correlated with caries frequency.

INTRODUCTION
Many researchers have noted that most
populations practicing a hunter-gatherer and
foraging subsistence pattern have a higher degree of
dental wear and a lower frequency of caries than
those populations that are agriculturalists. Conversely, most agriculturalists have a higher frequency
of caries than hunter-gatherers (Brothwell 1963;
Goldstein 1948; Hartnady and Rose 1991; Kelley et
al. 1991; Larsen et al. 1991; Littleton and Frolich
1989; Lukacs 1989; Lunt 1978; Powell 1985).
Abscesses can be the final outcome of both
cariogenic activity and dental attrition, in addition
to many other processes. Dental wear is a broad
and general term that refers to a normal biological
process (Costa 1977:18; Hillson 1986:183; Lukacs
1989:264; Powell 1985:308) resulting from
mastication, occlusion, and extra-dietary use of the
teeth. Dental abrasion in hunting and gathering
populations has been linked to a low caries rate; it
is postulated that this normal process functions as a
cleansing agent, removing debris from the teeth
(Colby et al. 1992:73; Comuzzie 1987:82;
Comuzzie et al. 1986:245; Powell 1985:309), and
eliminating potential caries sites (Powell 1985:331).
Secondary dentin (a more calcified matrix than
primary dentin) apposition on the worn occlusal
surface will work to counteract occlusal wear

Bulletin of the Texas

(Moss-Salentijn and Hendricks-Klyvert 1985).
Reactive dentin deposition on the interior surface
(pulpal cavity) of the dentin closes off the dentin
tubules that are exposed to some external insult
(Moss-Salentijn and Hendricks-Klyvert 1985). In
combination, these would provide some protection
to the pulp cavity, delaying or possibly averting the
advent of pulpitis (Figure 1).
Caries are a microbial disease which affects the
calcified tissues of the teeth, leading to the decay of
the organic matrix of not only the enamel surface of
the tooth, but also the underlying tissues (Powell
1985:312-313). Secondary dentin formation is precluded in dental decay, but reactive dentin will form

Reactive dentin

Dentin

Wear

Caries

Figure 1. Tooth Cross Section showing Secondary and
Reactive Dentin Deposition in Conditions of Wear and
Caries.

180

Texas Archeological Society

to forestall the onset of pulpitis; if the decay process
continues, the pulp cavity will be breached and
pulpitis will ensue. This process would tend to indicate a higher frequency of dental abscesses should
be seen in populations with a high degree of caries.
A high caries rate in a population has been correlated to an agricultural diet with its corresponding
increase in carbohydrates in the form of sugars,
reduced cleansing grit in the diet, and has been tied
to maize agriculture in the New World (Larsen 1984).
These processes can result in dental abscesses.
I examine patterns of abscess etiology and frequency in the Blue Bayou site (41 VT94), a hunting
and gathering population from Victoria County,
Texas, and Texas Archeological Society-Southern
Methodist University (T AS/SMU) samples from the
Roitsch site (41RR16), Caddoan horticulturalists
from Red River County, Texas, to investigate the
model of dental health described above. Blue Bayou
should have a higher degree of dental wear, a low
occurrence of caries, and fewer abscesses, with a
base cause of crown occlusal wear. The samples
from the Roitsch site should have a more moderate
to slight degree of wear, a relatively high frequency
of caries, and more abscesses with the prime etiological factor of tooth decay. As noted earlier, a
higher frequency of dental abscesses should be seen
in populations with a high degree of caries.

Forty-five individuals are in the Blue Bayou
sample. Age and sex distributions are from
Comuzzie (1987) and Huebner and Comuzzie
(1992). The ratio of males to females is 1:0.92,
with 12 males and 11 females; there is no
statistically significant difference between males
and females (Table 2). Seventy-one percent (n=32)
of the individuals are identified as adults; individuals

Table 1. Age Categories
Category

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Two different skeletal samples were used in
this analysis, linked to either a hunter-gatherer or an
agricultural subsistence pattern. The Blue Bayou
sample (Figure 2), was excavated from a prehistoric
cemetery (Comuzzie 1987:1; Huebner and Comuzzie
1992: 1). The recovered materials are associated with
a Terminal Archaic to Late Prehistoric (ca. 50 B.C.
to A.D. 1250) central Coast hunter-gatherer culture
(Comuzzie 1987:8; Huebner and Comuzzie
1992:50). The Caddoan sample, comprised of SMU
and T AS materials, is from the Arnold Roitsch
(41RR16) site (previously known as the Sam
Kaufman site). The Roitsch site (see Figure 2) is
associated with Caddoan horticulturalists (Bruseth
1996). The skeletal material (Derrick n.d.; Derrick
et al. n.d.) is from Caddoan burials dating from
about AD. 1250-1700 (Bruseth 1996; Skinner et al.
1969). The age categories used in this study are
shown in Table 1.

Age

Fetus/Neon ate

fetal to newborn

Infant

0-2 years

Early Child

3-5 years

Late Child

6-12 years

Adolescent/Juvenile

13-24 years

Subadult

0-24 years

Older Subadult/Adult
Indeterminate

18-25 years

Young Adult

25-49 years

Old Adult

50+ years

Adult Indeterminate

25+ years

Adult/Old Adult'

Adult tending
towards Old Adult

Indeterminate

Indeterminate

1

Exact age is unknown, but indicators point to an older adult.

Figure 2. Location of the Sites.

Colby -Analysis of Dental Abscess Formation

181

Table 2. 41VT94 age and sex distribution
Male

Female

Indeterminate

Total

2
2

2
2

Fetal-early child
Late child
Adolescent/juvenile

1

1

2

Su bad ult

1

3

4

1

5

2

4
4

10
1

19

22

45

Subadult/adult indeterminate

1

Young adult
Old adult

3
1

1

2

1

Adult/old adult

3

1

Adult indeterminate
Indeterminate

4

5

Total

12

11

1

Data from Huebner and Comuzzie (1992) and Comuzzie (1987)

in the Old Adult and Adult/Old Adult categories
comprise 25 percent of the identified adults and 18
percent of the total population. Of the adults, 62
percent (n=19) are not identifiable further as to age.
The SMU Caddoan sample is comprised of 30
individuals. All age and sex data for the SMU
material are from Robey (1995). The TAS material

is composed of 20 individuals (Derrick n.d.:10;
Derrick et al. n.d.); sex and age data for this sample
are from Derrick et al. (n.d.). Both samples are
combined to provide the Caddoan sample from the
Roitsch site. There are 14 males and 15 females
identified in the combined Caddoan material, with
a male:female ratio of 1:1.07 (Table 3). Adults

Table 3. 41RR16 age and sex distribution
Male
Fetal-early child
Infant
Late child
Adolescent/juvenile
Subadult/adult indeterminate
Young adult
Old adult
Adult/old adult
Adult indeterminate
Indeterminate
Total

Female

7

2
8
2
1
2

14

15

2
2

Data from Derrick et al. (n.d.) and Robey (1995)

Indeterminate

Total

2
3
4
1

2
3
4
2
3
10
5

1
2
6
2

4
15
2

21

50

182

Texas Archeological Society

(n=34) make up 68 percent of the population, with
the Old Adult and Adult/Old Adult categories
comprising 26.5 percent of the adults. Of the
identified adults, 44 percent (n=l5) could not be
classified further as to age, thus placing them in the
Adult Indeterminate category.
Wear was scored for molars following Scott
(1979), using a 0 to 40 system. Incisors, canines,
and premolars were scored for wear according to
the system developed by Smith (1984), with scores
ranging from 0 to 8. Caries were assessed as to
presence and absence, and if present were scored
for affected surface, location, and type. Once an
abscess was identified, it was measured, complications were noted, and the primary or main cause
was noted, if possible. Six etiological categories
were available: caries, wear, food impaction, periodontal disease, trauma, and indeterminate. If there
was no indication as to etiology based on remaining dentition or osseous material, the abscess was
scored in the indeterminate category.

RESULTS
Analysis of wear between the samples yielded
no statistically significant differences using Chi
square analysis. Differences are noted for molars
with the Blue Bayou sample having the highest
score (20), using the Scott (1979) wear scoring
method (Table 4). Subsequent analysis using
Kruskal-W allis one-way ANOV A on the entire data
set, indicates that the differences are significant at
the p<.05 level (Table 5). Scoring molars based on
their position as Ml, M2, and M3 (see Table 5)
again shows no significant statistical differences
using Chi square analysis between the samples. For
Ml and M2, Blue Bayou showed a higher degree of
wear (24 and 19, respectively), and for the M3, all
the samples was equivalent (score=15). Application of the Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOV A on
each of the molar classes shows no statistically
significant differences between the samples for M2
and M3, but the first molar does show significant

Table 4. Wear scores by tooth group
Site

Molars

Premolars

41VT94

20 (170)

4

(152)

4 (53)

4 (75)

41RR16
TAS
SMU

17 (133)
17 (45)

4 (115)
3 (45)
4 (70)

4 (64)
4 (25)
4 (39)

4 (102)
4 (42)
4 (60)

18

(88)

Canines

Incisors

Note: Number in parantheses are the total teeth scored. There are no statisticai differences using Chi-square analysis.

Table 5. Kruskal-Wallis One way ANOVA of molar wear

All molars
Ml
M2
M3

All Samples

41VT94 vs. TAS

41 VT94 vs. SMU

TASvs. SMU

41VT94vs. 41RR16

Y*
y

y
y

y

y
y

N

N
N

N

N

N

N

*Y is significant and N is not. Significance measured at p<.05.

N

N
N

y
N
N

Colby - Analysis of Dental Abscess Formation
differences using the Kruskal-Wallis test, p<.05 (see
Table 5). Canines and incisors in all three samples
show an average wear of stage 4 (Smith 1984). The
differences in the wear scores for premolars is one
category, with both Blue Bayou and the Roitsch
SMU sample having an average wear score of 4,
and the T AS Roitsch sample has an average wear
score of 3 (see Table 4). These differences are not
significant at the p<.05 level.
The caries rate differences between the samples
is quite striking (Table 6). The Blue Bayou sample
has the lowest incidence of caries, with 18 found in
460 total teeth analyzed. In the combined Roitsch
site Caddoan sample, 268 caries were noted in a
total of 452 teeth. Contingency table analysis of the
caries rate per tooth, per individual, and per
scoreable individual also shows significant differences (p<.05) between Blue Bayou and Roitsch for
caries per individual and caries per scoreable individual (see Table 6). The caries rate per tooth for
Blue Bayou is 0.04; the T AS sample caries rate is
0.64, and the SMU caries rate per tooth is 0.56. The
combined Caddoan sample caries rate per tooth is
0.59. The differences between the Blue Bayou and
Caddoan samples are significant at the p<.05 level.

183

A total of 24 individuals with 50 abscesses
were identified in the data set. Table 7 and Figure 3
provide a breakdown by age category for each
sample for the number of individuals with abscesses.
Blue Bayou has the fewest number of individuals
with abscesses (n=5), and the SMU Roitsch sample
has the most (n=l l); the total number of individuals with abscesses in the combined Caddoan sample
is 19. Individuals with abscess are concentrated in
the Old Adult and Adult/Old Adult categories for
the Blue Bayou sample. The T AS material from
Roitsch has one individual in both the Late Child
and Adolescent/Juvenile age categories for the
youngest manifestation of abscesses in the data set
(see Figure 3 and Table 7). In addition, the TAS
Roitsch material has five affected Young Adults
compared with only one and three affected Young
Adults for Blue Bayou and SMU Roitsch samples,
respectively.
Comparison of abscesses by sex indicate there
are 12 males with 29 abscesses, and nine females
with 17 abscesses, in the data set. Females at Blue
Bayou exhibit the fewest abscesses (n=l) and the
fewest affected individuals (n=l). Roitsch site TAS
females have the greatest number of abscesses

Table 6. Ca:ries comparison and test of significance
Site

per tooth 1

41VT94

0.04 (461)

41RR16
TAS
SMU

0.59
0.64
0.56

per individual2

number of caries

(45)

0.69

(26)

18

5.36 (50)
5.90 (20)
5.0 (30)

6.7
6.94
6.52

(40)
(17)
(23)

268
118
150

0.4

(452)
(184)
(268)

per scoreable individual3

Test of significance
41VT94 vs. TAS

41 VT94 vs. SMU

41VT94 vs. 41RR16

y
y
y

y

y
y
y

per tooth 1
per individual2
per scoreable individuaP
Significance tested at the p<.05 level.
1

Includes all teeth in the sample.
All individuals included.
3
Includes individuals with at least one scoreable tooth present.
2

y

y

Texas Archeological Society

184
10

affected individuals, and scoreable
individuals. In two of the three cat(ii
8
egories, total sample and scoreable
::::1
"'O
:;E
individuals, the Blue Bayou sample
"O
6
..5
has the lowest scores, 0.27 and
I Site I 0.43,
0
respectively. Contingency
....
4
.""""'"'"""·"·"·"····· ···! ID41VT94 I
Cl)
.0
table analysis of abscesses per ini!illlTAS
;
E
i
::::1
dividual
show significant differ2
'
"
··--················
losMu
z
i
'
I
.
ences between the samples in all
0 ..l:lli!-""'L...tlliL..llil L-""""""""IL..L.J.8J'1lidl.....illlJ....Jfilill_~~-ftiliill [~41 ~i=!!~J
categories between the Blue Bayou
.~?:>
sample and combined Caddoan
(;~
~"j
~o
sample (see Table 9).
An etiological comparison
shows no abscesses attributable to
Age Categories
caries in the Blue Bayou sample,
Figure 3. Number of Individuals with Abscesses. Age data from Derrick et al.
and conversely, no abscesses at(n.d.) for41RR16-TAS sample, Robey (1995) for41RR16-SMU sample, and
tributable to wear in the Caddoan
Huebner and Comuzzie (1992) and Comuzzie (1987) for 41 VT94.
sample (Table 10). Seventy-five
percent of the abscesses seen in
Blue Bayou individuals can be
traced to wear. In the T AS material, 59 percent of the identified
abscesses were attributable to car20
ies; caries induced abscesses occur
in
31 percent of the SMU indi~ 15 ~--··-··----------~~----·-·-·--·~------f.cm----··-·--····-----·----1
viduals.
The combined rate of
0
Site
cariogenesis-caused abscesses is 47
.B 10
§
percent for the Caddoan sample.
z
The Total column in Table 10
includes the total number of abscesses, and a percentage ratio of
the number of abscesses divided
by the total number of individuals
in the sample. The number of abscesses in the T AS Roitsch material exceeds the total number of
Figure 4. Abscess Comparison by Sex. Sex data from Derrick et al. (n.d.) for
identified individuals (see Table
4 lRR i 6-TAS sampie, Robey (1995) for 4lRR16-SMU sample, and Huebner
10). Blue Bayou had two abscesses
and Comuzzie ( 1992) and Comuzzie ( 1987) for 41 VT94.
in which the originating cause was
trauma (Comuzzie 1987; Huebner
and
Comuzzie 1992) (Figure 6a(n=lO), and the SMU Roitsch individuals have the
6b
).
Chi
square
analysis
of the abscess etiological
most affected females (n=5). Intra-site comparidata
showed
statistical
differences
(p<.05) in all
sons of males to females yield only one statistically
comparisons,
except
for
wear-induced
abscesses besignificant result using Chi square analysis: the
tween
the
T
AS
and
SMU
materials
from
the Roitsch
number of abscesses found in Blue Bayou males (7
site (see Table 10).
abscesses in 3 males) is significantly different
(I.)

0

L

s

.,y0

I

(p<.05) from the number of abscesses found in
females (1 abscess in 1 female) in the sample (Table
8 and Figure 4).
Regarding the abscesses per individual (Figure
5 and Table 9), the T AS Roitsch site sample has the
highest frequency in all categories: total population,

DISCUSSION
Wear rates between the two Texas huntergatherer and agricultural samples are not significant

Colby-Analysis of Dental Abscess Formation

185

Table 7. Number of individuals with abscesses
41VT94

Age categories
Late child
Adolescent/juvenile
Young adult
Old adult
Adult/old adult
Adult indeterminate
Indeterminate

SMU

1
1
5

l
1

2

Total
1

TAS

1

3
3

8
3
1

4
1

4

11

19

1

8

5

41RR16

Total1
1
1
9
4
3
5

1

24

Total is combination of 41 VT94 and 41RR16.

Age data for the 41RR16-TAS sample is from Derrick et al. (1996); Robey (1995) provides the age data for 41RR16-SMU
sample; Huebner and Comuzzie (1992) and Comuzzie (1987) for 41VT94.

Table 8. Abscess breakdown by sex
Site

Female
No.
Individual

Male
Individual

No.

41VT94

3

9

1

41RR16
TAS
SMU

9
4
5

20

8
3
5

11

9

16
10

Indeterminate
Individual
No.

2

2

6

Test of significance

Male vs. femalt, individuals
Male vs female, number

41VT94

41RR16

N

N
N

y

Significance measured at the p<.05 level.

for incisors, canines, or premolars. The similarity
in the degree of wear on all but the molars provides
an interesting conundrum, one that can be
attributable to demographic differences masked by
the relatively large number of adults in the Adult
Indeterminate age category. Chi square analysis
shows no significant differences between the
for the molars, but Kruskal-Wallis oneway ANOV A
indicate statistical

differences for the molars, as a dental field or group,
and for the first molar, between the two sites (see
Tables 4 and 5).
The
of dental wear exhibited in the
present study does not conform to that documented
Powell (1985) in a comparison of a Caddoan
from Arkansas and a Fourche Maline or
Woodland
sample from Oklahoma. She noted
a
degree of wear across the entire dentition in

186

Texas Archeological Society

The occurrence of caries in
the Blue Bayou and Caddoan
2.5
sample conforms to the model:
low caries in hunter-gatherers and
2 1---------j
high caries among agriculturalists.
The difference per tooth between
l.S 1 - - - - - - - - - j
Blue Bayou and the Roitsch site
1.1
is 16-fold, which is greater than
0.8
the 14-fold and 10-fold differences
between them in caries per indio.s
vidual and per scoreable indi0
vidual, respectively. Caries rate
differences between the two sites
are statistically significant at the
p<.05 level in a contingency table
Sample
analysis.
Abscess etiology follows the
Figure 5. Number of Abscesses per Individual. Individuals with enough
expected
hunter-gatherer and agdentition and alveoli to score for 41VT 94 (n=27), 41RR16-TAS sample
riculturist
patterns with wear-in(n=12), and 41RR16-SMU sample (n=20).
duced abscesses in the former and
caries-induced abscesses in the latter. An etiological comparison of the original cause of the obthe hunting and gathering Fourche Maline sample
served abscesses shows significant difference at the
compared to that of the Caddo (Powell 1985:325).
p<.05 level. Caries are the predominant cause of
No explanation can be conclusively offered for the
abscesses in the dental material from the Roitsch
wear similarities in the incisors, canines, and
site, while caries-caused abscesses are non-existent
premolars seen between the hunting-gathering popuat Blue Bayou. The major cause of abscesses at
lation from Blue Bayou and the Caddoan agriculBlue Bayou is, as expected, wear, with the Roitsch
turalists of the Roitsch site. The molar wear observed
sample showing no abscesses attributable to wear.
in the two samples tends to follow the expected
It is suggested that populations with a high caries
pattern of wear for hunter-gatherers and agriculturrate have a higher rate of dental abscesses due to
alists. It is possible that individuals in the Blue
the
physiological processes involved in the decay
Bayou sample were consuming a diet that was
process, especially as compared to populations
relatively low in grit, required relatively low antewith a low rate of caries and a high degree of wear.
rior tooth processing, but more molar processing.
2.8

2.S

!---------~-

Table 9. Abscesses per individual, test of significance
Total sample

Affected individuals

Scoreable individuals

y
y
y
y

y

y
y
y
y

41VT94 vs. 41RR16
41VT94 vs. TAS
41 VT94 vs. SMU
TAS vs. SMU (41RR16)

N
y
y

Significance tested at the p<.05 level.
Total sample: 41VT94: N=45; 41RR16: N=50; TAS: N=20; SMU: N=30
Scoreable individuals: 41 VT94: N=27; 41RR16: N=32; TAS: N=l2; SMU: N=20

Colby -Analysis of Dental Abscess Formation

187

Figure 6. Trauma-induced abscesses, Blue Bayou: a, Burial 10, upper RM2; b, Burial 24, upper RII.

Table 10. Abscess Etiological Comparison, 41VT94 Versus 41RR16

41VT94
41RR16
TAS
SMU

Caries

Wear

Trauma 1

Food
impaction 1

0

7 (70%)

2 (20%)

0

0

0
0
0

l
l

18 (47%)
13 (59%)
5 (31%)

0
0

(3%)
(5%)

0

Indeterminate

TotaF

1 (10%)

10 (26%)

19 (50%)
8 (36%)
11 (69%)

38 (75%)
22(105%)
16 (53%)

Test of significance:
41VT94 vs. TAS

41VT94 vs SMU

41VT94 VS. 41RR16

TAS vs. SMU

Total number

y

y
y
y

y
y
y

y

Wear

y
y

Caries

Significance measured at the p<.05 level.
1
2

Not included in analysis.
Total percentages are number of abscesses/total number of individuals.

N

y

188

Texas Archeological Society
CONCLUSIONS

Two human skeletal samples from Texas were
compared for wear, caries, and abscess frequency
and etiology. It was found that the hunter-gatherer
sample, Blue Bayou (41VT94), exhibited moderate
wear, a low incidence of caries, and a low frequency of abscesses, which are attributable to wear.
The Caddoan agricultural population from the
Roitsch site (41RR16) had moderate wear, a high
frequency of caries, and a relatively high frequency
of abscesses strongly attributable to caries.
The two samples meet the expected profile of
dental health in the occurrence of caries: the huntergatherers have a low incidence of caries while the
agriculturalists have a high incidence of caries. The
moderate wear scores seen in the Caddo sample
was expected, while that seen in the hunter-gatherers of Blue Bayou was not. Blue Bayou wear patterns are essentially the same as those seen at the
Roitsch site, except for that of the molars. The data
suggest that Blue Bayou individuals may have had
a diet requiring little anterior tooth processing and
relatively little grit.
The abscess data show a correlation with the
frequency of caries and the frequency of abscesses.
This is plausible because of the differential physiological response of the dental apparatus to caries
and wear. A tooth subject to wear has more responses available to it for protection than a tooth
being attacked by cariogenic bacteria. The formation of secondary dentin on the occlusal surface of
worn teeth is precluded in teeth undergoing cariogenic decay. This study supports the conclusion
that abscesses will be found in higher frequency in
populations with higher caries rates.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to express my thanks to James E. Bruseth
of the Texas Historical Commission, and the Texas
Archeological Society, for the opportunity to analysis the T AS Roitsch material, and to Southern Methodist University for the loan of the SMU material
from Roitsch. My appreciation is also extended to
Dr. D. Gentry Steele of Texas A&M University for
his guidance and support throughout this project. I
would also like to extend heartfelt thanks and appreciation to the members of the Caddo Tribe of
Oklahoma for allowing myself and other nonCaddoan scientists to study the skeletal remains of

their forebears. Cooperation such as this will further not only our understanding of the past but will
also foster better understanding for the future.

REFERENCES CITED
Brothwell, D.R.
1963 The Macroscopic Dental Pathology of some Earlier
Human Populations. In Dental Anthropology, edited by D. R. Brothwell, pp. 271-288. Pergamon,
New York.
Bruseth, J. E.
1996 The Development of Caddoan Polities Along the
Middle Red River Valley of Eastern Texas and Oklahoma. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their
Place in Southeastern Archaeology and
Ethnohistory, edited by T. K. Perttula and J. E.
Bruseth. Volume MS under review, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Colby, G. R, M. H. Hines, and D. G. Steele
1992 Analysis of Human Remains. In Exploratory Investigations at 41GV53 on Clear Creek, Galveston
County, Texas, by M. H. Hines, pp. 59-79. Report
of Investigations, No. 89. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Comuzzie, A.G.
1987 Bioarcheology of Blue Bayou: A Late Prehistoric
Mortuary Site from Victoria County, Texas.
Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas
A&M University, College Station.
Comuzzie, A. G., M. Marek, and D. G. Steele
1986 Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains from the Palm
Harbor Site (41AS80): A Mortuary Site on the Central Gulf Coast of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:213-249.
Costa, R. L.
1977 Dental Pathology and Related Factors in Archeological Eskimo Skeletal Samples from Point Hope
and Kodiak Island, Alaska. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Derrick, S. M.
n.d.
Suggested Etiology of Supra-Inion Depressions in
Artificially Modified Caddoan Crania. MS on file,
Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Colby -Analysis of Dental Abscess Formation
Derrick, S. M., G. R. Colby, and D. G. Steele
n.d.
Analysis of Human Remains from the Roitsch Site
(41RR16). MS on file, Division of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Goldstein, M. S.
1948 Dentition of Indian Crania from Texas. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 6:63-84.
Hartnady, P. and J.C. Rose
1991 Abnormal Tooth-Loss Patterns among Archaic-Period Inhabitants of the Lower Pecos Region, Texas.
In Advances in Dental Anthropology, edited by M.
A. Kelley and C. S. Larsen, pp. 267-278. WileyLiss, New York.
Hillson, S
1986 Teeth. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Huebner, J. A. and A. G. Comuzzie
1992 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of Blue Bayou:
A Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric Mortuary Locality in Victoria County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 9. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Kelley, M.A., D.R. Levesque, and E. Weidl
1991 Contrasting Patterns of Dental Disease in Five Early
Northern Chilean Groups. In Advances in Dental
Anthropology, edited by M. A. Kelley and C. S.
Larsen, pp. 203-214. Wiley-Liss, New York.
Larsen, C. S.
1984 Health and Disease in Prehistoric Georgia: The Transition to Agriculture. In Paleopathology at the Origins of Agriculture, edited by M. N. Cohen and G.
J. Armelagos, pp. 367-392. Academic Press, Orlando.
Larsen C. S., R. Shavit, and M. C. Griffin
1991 Dental Caries Evidence for Dietary Change: An Archaeological context. In Advances in Dental Anthropology, •~dited by M. A. Kelley and C. S. Larsen,
pp. 179-202. Wiley-Liss, New York.
Littleton, J and B. Frolich
1989 An Analysis of Dental Pathology and Diet on Historic Bahrain. Paleorient 15:59-75.

189

Lukacs, J. R.
1989 Dental Paleopathology: Methods for Reconstructing Dietary Patterns. In Reconstruction of Life from
the Skeleton, edited by M. Y. Iscan and K. A. R.
Kennedy, pp. 261-286. Alan R. Liss, New York.
Lunt, D. A.
1978 Molar Attrition in Medieval Danes. In Development, Function and Evolution of Teeth, edited by P.
M. Butler and K. A. Joysey, pp. 465-482. Academic
Press, New York.
Moss-Salentijn, L. and M. Hendricks-Klyvert
1985 Dental and Oral Tissues: An Introduction. Lea and
Febiger, Philadelphia.
Powell, M. L.
1985 Dental Wear and Caries in Dietary Reconstruction.
In The Analysis of Prehistoric Diets, edited by R. I.
Gilbert and J. H. Mielke, pp. 307-338. Academic
Press, New York.
Robey, D. H.
1995 A Paleopathological Study of the Human Remains
from the Roitsch Site (41RR16, Old Sam Kaufman).
Paper presented at the 1995 Caddo Conference, Austin.
Scott, E. C.
1979 Dental Wear Scoring Technique. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology 51:213-218.
Skinner S. A., R. K. Harris, and K. M. Anderson (editors)
1969 Archaeological Investigations at the Sam Kaufman
Site, Red River County, Texas. Contributions in Anthropology No. 5. Department of Anthropology,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Smith B. H.
1984 Patterns of Molar Wear in Hunter-Gatherers and
Agriculturalists. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 63:39-56.

Sacred Guardians, Profane Practitioners,
and Texans without History
Alston V. Thoms

This paper was first presented as the 1996
Fallon-Marshall Lecture in the College of Liberal
Arts, Texas A&M University, wherein it was subtitled "Native American Civil Rights, Scientific Pursuits, and Educational Issues." The lecture series
was established in 1994 by philanthropist Ms. Mary
Marshall as a discussion forum for issues in the
humanities and social sciences; it was named for
her close friend and former Dean of Liberal Arts,
Daniel Fallon. While there are a few changes to the
original version in response to reviewers' comments,
the present paper does not differ substantially from
the October 1996 lecture or the written paper submitted to the College of Liberal Arts. The writing
style remains that of a lecture, but numerous references and some text have been added to further
emphasize the complexities and diverse perspectives surrounding the implementation of the Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act.
I have also tried to alert the readers to more of the
efforts that Texas-based archeologists, agencies, and
organizations have made toward establishing better
working relationships with Native Americans who
reside in, or trace their heritage to, Texas as a geographic place._
The paper examines aspects of the Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act
(NAGPRA) of 1990. I discuss some of its effects
on the pursuit of archeology and how it relates to
Indian people, especially Texas-Native Americans.
In doing so, I address three interrelated questions:
(1) Why is it necessary in today's United States of
America to have a special law to protect human

Bulletin of the Texas

grave sites and the funerary objects contained
therein? (2) What are the historical factors underlying the recovery and analysis of thousands upon
thousands of Native American remains that are currently housed in museums and universities around
the country? (3) And, given that Native Americans
and American archeologists are likely to have decidedly different perspectives on what is important
in the past, is there a realistic likelihood of establishing a working environment characterized by cooperation without submission?
Depending upon one's perspective, both
American Indians and American archeologists, usually non-Indians, can be described as "sacred guardians" or keepers of the past. Conversely,
archeologists and Indians can both be cast as "profane" or unreligious practitioners. Our perceptions
of what is sacred or profane are determined, in
large measure, by what we learn through
enculturation processes, including our formal education. From a western-scientific perspective, professional archeologists have ethical and moral, or
as some might say, almost sacred obligation to interpret and preserve the fragile, non-renewable scientific evidence of past life ways (e.g., Shafer 1992).
Archeologists are very much concerned with
protecting Native American and other archeological sites from the ravages of looters and other adverse impacts. It is, in part, a strong commitment to
the protection of archeological sites and ancient
cemeteries, usually on behalf of the public, that
distinguishes professional and avocational archeologists from those I consider to be illicit relic

192

Texas Archeological Society

co11ectors and grave robbers. However, concepts of
scientific evidence and preservation ethics are decidedly western cultural constructions (Castle
McLaughlin, 1996 personal communication). As
such, it should not be surprising that Native Americans often have a difficult time distinguishing between archeologists and relic looters, especially
when their activities involve digging up Indian
graves. Such actions may be seen as unholy, and in
direct opposition to Native American obligations to
honor the dead and preserve their cultural traditions
(Lippert 1992; Russell 1996a). What is at issue
here are fundamental epistemological conflicts (cf.
Deloria 1992; Lippert 1992; Russell 1996b).
One of the main points in this paper is that,
historically, educational systems in Texas have perpetuated the myth that all of the real Texas Indians
died out long ago, and that today's descendants of
one-time Texas Indians have little to contribute
about, or inherit from, prehistoric Indian cultures.
Introduction of this particular socio-political myth
into the dominant scientific belief system might
well lead one to conclude, albeit incorrectly and
based on faulty assumptions, that it is entirely up to
professional archeologists and other behavioral scientists to reconstruct and preserve important elements of past Indian lifeways on behalf of the
public. In this scenario, Indians with Texas heritage
effectively become Texans without history, exemplary of what Eric Wolf ( 1982) meant when he
referred to American Indians as people without history. Their voices were not heard by the dominant
western society that effectively usurped Indian history and placed Indian people in a timeless, static
past (cf. Wolf 1982; Castle McLaughlin, 1996 personal communication).
It is only recently that the once-vanquished
Indian people have regained the political strength
required to have a meaningful voice in presenting
their history and carrying out their responsibilities
as keepers of the past. I contend that educational
systems offer the primary means by which we will
learn to be more objective about complex
multicultural issues. Educational systems that encourage learning more about Native American
epistemologies, lifeways, contributions, and related
human-rights issues are likely to be more meaningful to a greater part of American society. They are
also systems with the potential to encourage increased dialog and cooperation without submission. What will become apparent in this paper is

that my experiences as an archeologist have convinced me that recognition of basic human-rights
issues, what we often term civil rights, will prove
to be the glue that facilitates better interfaces
among American Indians, American archeologists,
and educators in general.

AN INTRODUCTION TO
NAGPRA AND ITS
IMPLEMENTATION
The Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act, better known as NAGPRA, is intended to insure that Native Americans-Indian
people-shall have ownership or control of their
direct ancestors' remains, as well as culturally affiliated human remains, associated and
unassociated funerary objects, sacred objects, and
objects of cultural patrimony. NAGPRA also affords additional protection for Indian grave sites
and cemeteries on federal and tribal lands. Of particular importance to this paper are provisions of
the act instructing public and private museums,
universities, and other institutions that receive federal funding to: (l) inventory their holdings of
Native American remains and NAGPRA-related
objects; (2) consult with Indians and other interested groups and individuals; and (3) based on findings of probable cultural affiliation, repatriate
human remains and funerary objects to the appropriate Indian people (Committee on Interior and
Insular Affairs 1990).
According to 1990 census projections, about 2
million Native Americans live in the United States
today (Paisano 1995). As yet, however, there is no
accurate count of Indian remains housed in public
and private museums, universities, and tourist attractions. Estimates range from about 125,000 to
more than 1.5 million (Trope and Echo-Hawk
1994:39), and figures vary from state to state. The
Smithsonian Institution alone housed the remains
of over 18,000 Indian people (Echo-Hawk and
Echo-Hawk 1994). I do not know even an approximate number of Native American remains stored in
Texas museums and universities, but it is probably
at least several thousand, along with well over a
million grave goods (Stanley 1996; Darrell Creel,
personal communication 1996). Neither do I know
the breakdown of time periods represented by Native American remains stored around the country,

Thoms - Sacred Guardians, Profane Practitioners, and Texans without History
but I know that many of the individuals were buried after Columbus came to the New World, and I
suspect that most of them were probably buried
sometime during the last 2,000 years.
The reader might well ask how there ever
came to be so many dead Indians in museums, universities, and private tourist attractions, not to
mention the skulls and other bones on fireplace
mantles or otherwise stored in the homes of nonIndian Americans. The answer is straightforward:
for more than 150 years, it has been commonplace
in America for non-Indians to recover the remains
of every Indian grave they encountered. Gathering
of these human remains was often intentional,
through deliberate scientific excavations, as well as
through illicit looting of grave sites. Many Native
American remains, especially skulls, were collected as part of post-Civil War, government-sponsored medical studies (Trope and Echo-Hawk
1994). Thousands of burials have also been removed as a consequence of planned archeological
excavations at Indian habitation sites, as opposed
to cemeteries per se. Most of these excavations
were part of large-scale construction projects sponsored or licensed by the Federal government, especially for reservoir and highway projects. Other
human remains have been recovered from grave
sites throughout the United States when they were
exposed through natural erosion processes.
The task of implementing NAGPRA is indeed
a monumental one. It promises to affect most of us
in one way or another because this legislation is
inextricably tied to the ever-growing awareness of
minority rights and cross-cultural issues. Within
the last few years, many of you have probably read
about or seen news stories, historical documentaries, and movies that address issues pertaining to
repatriation of Native American remains and sacred objects. Universities are identifying new ways
to incorporate Native American history and civilrights issues into their courses. Many anthropology
departments now place less emphasis on training
students in burial excavation techniques, and human remains from Native American graves are no
longer commonly used as instructional aids (cf.
Ferguson 1996; Rose et al. 1996).
Museum displays and collection management
practices have already changed dramatically. For
more than a century, the widespread display of
Native American remains was considered to be an
educational endeavor in the public's best interest,
but this was not without protest from manylndians.

193

In the mid- and late 1800s, severed Indian heads,
hands, fingers, and ears were routinely displayed
publicly (Trafzer and Scheuerman 1986). By the
mid-1900s, these kinds of displays were no longer
fashionable, but Indian burials continued to be exhibited in thousands of public museums and private
facilities around the country.
Those readers who visited museums any time
before the early 1980s undoubtedly saw Native
American burial exhibits, but probably did not see
nearly as many white-American skeletons or burials. Although NAGPRA does not prohibit public
display of Indian remains per se, its passage virtually eliminated this practice. I recently read a WorldWide-Web message that included a statement from
an archeologist reminding museum specialists that
"the current political situation prevents us from utilizing, in a museum exhibit, any burial materials"
(Hester 1995). Political winds tend to reflect majority viewpoints, and over the last few decades,
these winds have blown in the direction of insuring
civil rights for America's minorities.
NAGPRA resolves many questions about who
owns Native American remains, but it continues to
be controversial in that it heightens the debate concerning how information about past American cultures shall be kept and who shall keep it (Ferguson
1996). Many archeologists, and perhaps the American public in general, have tended to see Native
American burials as important sources of scientific
information about past lifeways and health conditions, including the origin and spread of major diseases (e.g., Owsley and Jantz 1994). From this
perspective, it logically follows that to discover,
study, preserve, and protect such important evidence is an honorable profession. In marked opposition is a viewpoint held by many Native
Americans: these burials are entitled to the same
treatment and respect that all humans commonly
afford their deceased loved ones. From this perspective, to work toward the identification and repatriation of ancestral remains and funerary objects
is to take the moral high ground. Conversely, the
purposeful excavation of grave sites and the longterm storage of human remains to satisfy scientific
interests or to educate the public is at best disrespectful and certainly not characteristic of the treatment afforded most non-Indian remains. As recently
noted, "this double standard about burials has long
been a source of conflict between Native Americans and American archaeologists" (Echo-Hawk
and Echo-Hawk 1994:21).

194

Texas Archeological Society

A PERSONAL PERSPECTIVE
In discussing relationships between Native
Americans, scientific communities, and related educational issues, I will draw from my own professional experiences during the past 20 years in the
western United States with Indian people and archeologists. I also want to illustrate how my perspectives on Texas-Native American history and
archeology are rooted in my early enculturation,
during my schoolboy days, and in my universitybased archeological training.
I am a baby-boomer descended from ethnically diverse European families with roots in Texas
since the rnid-1800s. My siblings and I are fourthgeneration inhabitants of the Texas Panhandle, an
area the Spanish called the Llano Estacado and
what the Indians undoubtedly knew as some of the
finest bison country in North America. We grew up
as farm kids and learned to look for flint chips and
arrowheads when my father was plowing the fields.
For reasons that are still not clear to me, my father
routinely told us stories about Indians. His stories
were unlike the stories my schoolmates heard. In
my dad's stories, the Indians were the good guys,
defending their homeland from foreign invaders.
It seemed only natural to me when, in the midl 950s, my parents adopted my sister Ann. She was
five years old and a descendant of Comanche and
Kiowa-Apache people. A Texan by heritage, her
initial enculturation occurred as an Indian in
Apache, Oklahoma. Ann's biological father was
never really part of her first family. When she was
four years old, her mother died and her grandmother assumed the role of primary caretaker, but
then she died the following year. Since there were
no relatives able to care for Ann, her adoption wa"
arranged through a church-sponsored agency.
I was seven when Ann became my sister in
1955. She was the only Indian in town, and the
only Indian most of my schoolmates had ever seen.
My brother and I were routinely compelled to come
to her defense because schoolboys teased her about
scalping knives, taunted her with severed hawk's
feet, and otherwise tried to make it clear that she
was a stranger in a strange land. We defended my
other sister with the same vigor, but in Ann's case,
we knew we were defending more than family
honor. We were also letting our schoolmates know
that just because Ann was darker-skinned than they
were, it did not follow that she could be treated

with any less respect than their sisters or any other
schoolgirls.
Our schoolmates also needed to be reminded
that the Texas Panhandle was Ann's ancestral homeland long before it was theirs. My father had already shown us the remains of ancient campfires
and butchered bison in the Canadian and Red River
breaks. I was always fascinated by the charcoal,
stone tools, and animal bones. To me, these were
the keys to understanding how honorable people
once made their living on a landscape I called home.
As I grew older, I wondered why my father
seemed to know so much more about Indians than
Ann did. After all, she was an Indian. Looking
back, I must have deduced from my childhood experiences that Indians with historical Texas heritage did not necessarily know very much about
their tribe's lifeways in Texas. When I was in junior high, I traveled with my parents and siblings to
Apache, Oklahoma, to visit Ann's relatives. I recall
that my father asked an older Indian what he could
tell us about where or how his people once lived in
Texas. I remember looking intently at a drum or a
shield when I heard the man reply that the only
thing he remembered was that Texas is the place
where all the dust storms originated. What I did not
know then, but am beginning to learn now, is that
my ideas about what is important in the past are not
necessarily the same as what many Indian people
see as important. Different cultural perspectives,
together with the results of 500 years of armed and
social conflicts, have adversely impacted inter-ethnic communication.
Long before entering high school, I already
knew that I wanted to be an archeologist. In doing
so, I could continue to learn more about Indians
and begin to play a meaningful role in protecting
and preserving evidence about past lifeways. My
undergraduate training was in history and anthropology, mostly archeology. I attended what is today West Texas A&M University. Much of what I
learned there reinforced my idea that it was up to
archeologists to present the public with accurate
accounts of Texas Indians. A foreword in one of
my textbooks told the same basic story:
The peoples who inhabited present-day Texas
at the dawn of historic times are even less well
known by the public than most North American
Indians and consequently there are probably
more myths, absurdities, and falsehoods connected with them than with the natives of any

Thoms - Sacred Guardians, Profane Practitioners, and Texans without History
other state. There is good reason for this ignorance and misunderstanding: most Texas tribes
disappeared many years ago, some before
Americans entered what is now Texas .... Ethnographers have had their hands so full describing the surviving North American Indian tribes
it is no wonder that Indians who can never be
known in the flesh have been neglected .... My
own ignorance of Texas Indians and the conviction that as an anthropologist I should be able to
answer questions about these bygone peoples
started me on a search for this information
(Newcomb 196l:vii).
I also learned, however, that anthropology itself sent mixed messages and perpetuated myths
about Indian people. In essence, anthropologists
were victims of their own enculturation and they,
too, harbored what my sister clearly saw and felt as
racial prejudices. On one hand, I learned from
knowledge about Indians that" ... we can gain perspective and objectivity in evaluating ourselves and
our age. Such knowledge also sets the stage for a
more intelligent and rational appreciation of other
peoples in the modem world" (Newcomb 1961 :viii).
This viewpoint stressed that "simply because other
ways are different from our own does not inevitably make them inferior or wrong" (Newcomb
1961 :viii). What was confusing in my textbook was
the way in which this statement was applied to
Texas Indians:
To some it may seem odd, even grotesque, that
knowledge of savage Karankawas or bloodthirsty Comanches can be of help in this respect. But it is. Knowledge of others forces us
to realize that our ways, our beliefs and ideals,
are only our oVvn solutions to what may be
common human problems (Newcomb 1961 :viii;
emphasis added).
I first read this statement almost 30 years ago.
Even then, it was clear to me that "savage," "bloodthirsty," and ''.grotesque" are pejorative terms that
could be used to describe events, but never to characterize an ethnic group per se. As a graduate student at Texas Tech University in the mid-1970s, I
recall reading about native peoples in New Guinea
and the practice of head-hunting, which to me was
odd, to say the least. Because my father served in
New Guinea during World War II and because he
had talked to me about the native peoples there, I

195

called and asked him if he ever saw any evidence
of head-hunting. He answered yes, but added that
the only head-hunter he ever saw was an American
soldier carrying a Japanese soldier's head. This told
me that given savage circumstances, even the good
guys sometimes behave grotesquely. The history of
armed conflict between Native Americans and EuroAmericans certainly attests to our species' ability
to act inhumanely.

NAGPRA'S ROLE IN DETERMINING
WHO SHALL BE THE KEEPERS
OF THE PAST
As I noted earlier, NAGPRA is concerned primarily with the issue of ownership of Native American remains and related items, but NAGPRA also
heightens the debate over by whom and how information about past American cultures shall be kept.
As an archeologist and as a citizen, I am very much
concerned about safeguarding material recordsthe evidence-for the totality of human occupation
in the New World. Who will protect, for posterity,
the historically significant and culturally sacred
places on the landscape? How will we memorialize
our fallen heroines and heroes? Who will manage
the places where archeological records are kept?
Answers to these questions are not likely to come
in neat packages. The issues at hand are complex;
they are inextricably tied to age-old controversies
between science and religion, to opposing perspectives of the victors and the vanquished, and I believe, to basic human-rights issues.
Graves and sacred objects are emotionallycharged, belief-conditioned, and ethnicity-bound
concepts that are not always subject to strict scientific inquiry, anti certainly not subject to protection
by "other" groups or by the "opposition." It is
widely accepted that descendants, members of the
same ethnic group, citizens, and compatriots have
"first rights" to determine treatment of human remains, burial goods, and sacred objects for which
cultural patrimony or affiliation can be demonstrated
(Deloria 1992; Lippert 1992; Rose et al. 1996).
To understand this "first-rights" concept, we
need only to recall the emotional and political
intensity of the search for remains of American
MIAs in southeastern Asia and the compelling need
to return our fallen warriors to their homeland. To
be sure, these remains are subjected to intense
scientific studies, but unless there are unusual

196

Texas Archeological Society

extenuating circumstances, they are soon reburied
according to time-honored cultural traditions. In
1903, the Cupefio Indians were relocated from San
Diego, California, where they had lived long before
Spanish settlement of the region, across a low
mountain range to a small reservation at Pala. For
the Cupeno, the hardest things to leave behind were
their cemeteries. In the words of one Cupeno who
made the trip, "No one turned around .... They did
not look back again" (Time-Life Books 1994:129).
To retain "first rights" in the treatment of deceased kinfolk and culturally affiliated human remains, it is clearly necessary to establish physical
control over the remains themselves. To be without control of the cemeteries is usually an indication of cultural disruption or ethnic disharmony.
Accordingly, it should come as no surprise that
Indian people might strenuously object when nonIndians, including archeologists and governmental
representatives, are in control of Native American
remains. To them, this is a clear violation of their
basic civil rights and a constant reminder that they
are the vanquished ones-strangers in their own
homelands.
For many Indians, the retention of cultural values is closely related to spiritual issues that are, in
turn, often related to respect for ancestors. This
concept is apparent in a 1932 book entitled Black
Elk Speaks: Being the Life Story of a Holy Man of
the Ogalala Sioux (cited in Hyslop 1996:137-139).
One of the illustrations depicts a vision of Black
Elk's where he appeared before the six grandfathers who represented regions of the world. The
grandfathers advised him about the past and described what the future would bring. This painting
reminds me of what I have been told by Kootenai
Indians who reside in the Northern Rocky Mountains. A councilwoman once told me that her people
live under a spiritual obligation to protect the land,
and that this obligation extends to the past, the
present, and the future. She said it is like the Jewish
people's covenant with God to keep and maintain
the Promised Land.
In 1906, as part of the federal Antiquities Act,
Indian people officially lost control of Native
American cemeteries and grave sites on federal land
(cf. Echo-Hawk and Echo-Hawk 1994:27). Although they would be granted U.S. citizenship
within the next 20 years, it would be more than 80
years before they regained some control over the
remains of their ancestors buried on federal lands.

The Antiquities Act assured the preservation
of historic and prehistoric archeological resources
on lands owned or controlled by the federal
government. It also created a permitting process for
"examinations, excavations, and gatherings"
undertaken for the benefit of "reputable museums,
universities, colleges, or other recognized scientific
or educational institutions, with a view to increasing
the knowledge of such objects, and that the
gatherings shall be made for permanent preservation
in public museums" (cited in McGimsey 1972:235238).
As implemented, the 1906 Act, as well as most
subsequent archeological preservation legislation,
included Native American remains and grave goods
among the items considered to have "scientific interest." For the archeological community, historic
preservation laws offered much needed protection
for non-renewable archeological evidence
(McGimsey 1972). Native American burials were
seen as especially important sources of information
about settlement and subsistence patterns, migration, diet, nutrition, and disease. Roger and Walter
Echo-Hawk probably spoke for many Indian people
when they wrote: "Indian human remains lost their
humanity entirely under the Antiquities Act, when
they became federal 'property'" (Echo-Hawk and
Echo-Hawk 1994:27).
Scientists in the United States have studied
Native American remains and burial goods as a
means of documenting past cultures, conducting
interracial studies, and more recently, learning about
the origin of certain diseases and assessing longterm changes in human health conditions (e.g.,
Cohen and Armelagos 1984; Cohen 1989; Owsley
and Jantz 1994). In doing so, they have consistently
pointed to the educational values of their studies
and to the public's interest in museum displays that
show burial practices and sacred objects used by
Indian people. In addition, it should be pointed out
that archeologists have also opened thousands of
non-Indian graves and carefully studied human remains therein, including those of Texas Civil War
veterans (Dockall et al. 1996a), African Americans
(Dockall et al. 1996b), and early-day white pioneers (Fox 1984). Within the last 10 years, more
archeologists in Texas have probably been involved
with historic cemetery removalsand reburials than
with prehistoric cemetery excavations (Christopher
Lintz, 1996 personal communication). However, at
least three factors readily distinguish most of these

Thoms- Sacred Guardians, Profane Practitioners, and Texans without History
studies from those of American Indian remains: (1)
non-Indian studies were typically done with the
prior knowledge and general cooperation of living
descendants or members of culturally affiliated communities; (2) non-Indian remains were typically reburied soon after the studies were completed; and
(3) results of studies of non-Indian remains were
usually made available to living descendants and
members of culturally affiliated communities.
Indians have long been aware that non-Indians
had control of their ancestors' remains, but it is
only recently that non-Indians have recognized this
circumstance as a violation of civil rights. U.S.
Senator Daniel Inouye, chairman of the Committee
on Indian Affairs, recently wrote about his own
recognition that Indian remains have been singled
out for experimentation and research, and about his
efforts to support NAGPRA: " ... I was shocked and
appalled. I questioned whether the human remains
of Germans, of Japanese, of the English, the French,
of the Spanish would be treated in the same manner. The answer was a resounding and certain, 'no' "
(Inouye 1994:9).
When draft versions of what would become
NAGPRA were circulated among American archeologists in the mid-1980s, considerable concern was
expressed that the proposed legislation would
threaten the very existence of archeology as a scientific discipline. Many archeologists also recognized the imbedded issue of religious freedom. They
did not want to see archeology infringe on the rights
of others to maintain religious beliefs, but at the
same time, neither did they want to see the practice
of archeology curtailed by religious beliefs (e.g.,
Lipe 1986). I was also concerned, as shown by
some of the statements I made in 1986 in response
to a request for comments from representatives of
the Society for American Archaeology (SAA):
The definitions of sacred objects and sites are
so ambiguous that any object or any place
might be called sacred. Also, the concept of
demonstrating ownership of these material
items, as well as burials, is rather ambiguously
defined. The overall intent, however, is positive: to protect human remains likely to be
representative of extant Native American
groups.... It may also be useful to establish
ground rules for"proving" ethnic identity of
prehistoric burials and artifacts. In the process, the following question should be addressed: is there a point or time range in the

197

past when ethnic affiliation is lost and skeletal
remains and artifacts become affiliated with
humanity in general, without regard to race,
color, creed, or national origin? [Thoms
1986: 1]
A leading archeologist in the western United
States summarized comments received from several archeologists, including mine, and he incorporated his own ideas in response to the SAA request.
The main concern expressed by most respondents
was that passage of some provisions of the draft
legislation would "effectively shut down" archeology on many public lands within three years. Concerning repatriation of human remains, the
perspective was one of understanding and general
agreement:
The burial provision seems appropriate. A
group's dead can be returned without significantly damaging the science of archaeology. I
know the physical anthropologists can make a
case for keeping [remains], but we are dealing
with dead people and religion in this instance
[Aikens 1986:3; emphasis in original].
On several other occasions during the 1980s, I
expressed my concerns about the pending legislation and its impact on Native American rights and
the practice of scientific archeology in North
America. My position then and now is that some
Native American remains have the scientific potential to yield important data that are useful to the
whole of humankind. If, for example, it could be
demonstrated that a particular burial or group of
burials might yield information about the origin
and spread of an extant disease, I believe that the
potential benefit of such knowledge would outweigh
issues of minority rights or freedom of religion.
Nonetheless, I am convinced that the vast majority
of decisions about the treatment of Native American remains should be made by Native Americans,
preferably those who are recognized as having descended from groups with the same or similar cultural affiliations as the deceased. Said differently, it
seems reasonable to me that dead Indians should be
treated like dead non-Indians. This usually means
that a minimal effort should be made to determine
the time of death, as well as the individual's race,
sex, age, and cause of death. Anything beyond that
level should require a court order or consent of the
descendants or their representatives.

198

Texas Archeological Society

A similar argument has been recently made by
Steve Russell, an assistant professor of criminal
justice at the University of Texas at San Antonio.
He is a Cherokee Indian, and on the boards of the
Texas Indian Bar Association and the Native American Bar Association:
The bottom line, as you say, is that an Indian
burial is a human burial. I would have no objection to a law allowing purposeful opening of a
grave for scientific purposes as long as some
meaningful standards were spelled out to a judge
when the scientific interest was to outweigh the
interest in human dignity and the exhumation
order was required to contain a date for reburial.
And as long as the law created no racial classification, either directly or by using age as proxy.
[Steve Russell, November 5, 1996 personal
communication]
Establishment of legal standards for NAGPRA
implementation and the enactment of burial protection laws at the state level, as well as the
adoption of related policies by professional and
avocational archeological communities, promise to
be subjects of discussion for years to come. The
Texas Historical Commission has long sponsored
enactment of state legislation to protect Native
American grave sites (Mallouf 1990), but it has
struggled to develop its own policy dealing with
NAGPRA-related issues (Russell 1993, 1995). In
1986, a special issue of the Newsletter of the
Council of Texas Archeologists was printed to
inform the membership of pending reburial
legislation, and to present proposed curatorial
policies for human remains. Recently, the Texas
Archeological Society (1993) formally adopted a
"Human Remains Policy Statement."
There remains considerable opposition to
NAGPRA, especially provisions that open the door
to removal of human remains and grave goods from
the exclusive jurisdiction of scientific and museum
communities. At the forefront of this opposition is
a group of mostly professional archeologists and
other specialists dedicated to the study and preservation of archeological collections. This group,
known as "The American Committee for the Preservation of Archaeological Collections" (ACPAC),
was organized in 1981. As of April 1995, it has a
membership of more than 1,000 individuals from
all 50 states (ACPAC 1995). Their application form
includes the following request for contributions:

There are no dues and no financial obligations. ACPAC's Newsletter and other activities are supported entirely by voluntary
contributions. We are grateful for any financial support you can give us in the fight to
prevent the anti-education, anti-museum, antiarchaeologist movement from destroying irreplaceable archaeological collections (ACPAC
1995].
It is clear to me from discussions with individuals opposed to some of the repatriation provisions in NAGPRA that they fear Native American
religious practitioners will eventually dictate the
conduct of scientific studies in a fashion akin to
movements by some Christian fundamentalists to
prohibit teaching biological evolution in public
schools. If this happens, I will be among those who
protest.

HISTORICAL UNDERPINNINGS:
HOW WE CAME TO BE
WHERE WEARE
Europeans have long been fascinated with dead
Indians and their grave goods. For example, a scout
from the Mayflower in 1621 returned to the ship
with corn from a storage pit and items from a recent grave. His journal entry stated: "We brought
sundry of the prettiest things away with us, and
covered up the corpse again" (Heath 1986:27-28,
cited in Echo-Hawk and Echo-Hawk 1994:12).
There is also an account of grave robbing in Cap. tain Vancouver's journal of his explorations along
the Northwest Coast near Seattle in 1792. He reported that his men returned from their shoreside
reconnaissance with Indian clothing, items of personal adornment, and weaponry they had taken from
several canoe burials they found. Captain
Vancouver expressed concern over these actions,
but nonetheless allowed his men to keep the stolen
items (Lamb 1984).
Textbooks about the history of American archeology, as well as Indian-rights publications, often point to Thomas Jefferson as the father of
American archeology because of excavations he
conducted in 1784. He carefully excavated and
documented an Indian burial mound on his property in Virginia (Echo-Hawk and Echo-Hawk 1994;
Willey and Sabloff 1980). Jefferson discovered the
remains of many individuals, finding that the oldest

burials had been placed in a low earthen mound
and that more and more earth was added as additional individuals were buried.
At the time Jefferson conducted these excavations, there was tremendous interest in the nature
and origin of Indian mounds. The big question was,
who were the Moundbuilders? Although there was
ample written and pictorial evidence to the contrary, almost no one believed the large mounds
could have possibly been built by the ancestors of
Indian people still living in the region. The widespread perception was that Indians had never been
sufficiently organized or possessed the intellectual
potential to design and build such large monuments.
Such endeavors must have been undertaken by some
long-lost civilized race, perhaps the lost tribes of
Israel or people related to the Aztec or other more
advanced people in Central and South America
(Willey and Sabloff 1980: 14-33). By about 1840,
the scientific community had demonstrated conclusively that "the Moundbuilders and the Indians were
one and the same race and that the Indians were
capable of building the mounds" (Willey and
Sabloff 1980:31 ).
Archeological studies, with ever-more sophisticated methods, continued through the 1800s to
reveal important information about past Indian
lifeways. Much of the evidence came from the study
of items recovered from graves, including stone
tools, ceramics, and trade goods. Beginning in the
mid- l 800s, Samuel Morton and other scientists conducted studies designed to characterize and compare races, especially Native Americans and
Africans. Considerable emphasis was placed on
comparisons of skull shape and cranial capacity,
and more than one study concluded by ranking
Indians and blacks below whites (Harris 1968;
Morton 1839; Nelson and Jurmain 1982:194-195).
After the Civil War, the U.S. Surgeon General's
office became involved in collecting Indian body
parts, not only from battlefields, but also by robbing graves. Indian people often objected to these
practices, in particular to the efforts to analyze their
ancestors' remains in light of theories about the
inherent inferiority of American Indians (EchoHawk and Echo-Hawk 1994:23-26; Time-Life
Books 1996).
From the standpoint of the Pawnee people, it
was especially hard to distinguish among the people
who dug up dead Indians during the twentieth
century. They believed their ancestors' burial sites

were desecrated by government archeologists in
the 1930s, and they knew that private citizens turned
cemetery sites into tourist attractions. Hundreds of
Indian remains ended up in museums. With the
onset of Indian reburial movements in the 1980s,
some museums strongly resisted the repatriation of
Native Americans, but seven out of 10 Nebraskans
are said to have supported the Pawnee. Nonetheless,
it required a new state law and court orders before
one museum allowed the remains of more than 400
Pawnee ancestors to be blessed and returned to the
Pawnee Nation (Echo-Hawk and Echo-Hawk
1994:60-65).
In marked contrast to the situation in Nebraska,
Kansas archeologists and representatives of the State
Historical Society cooperated with the Pawnee,
Arikara, and Wichita tribal governments to close
down the infamous "Indian Burial Pit" that had
attracted tourists for more than 50 years. The remains of 169 Indian men, women, and children
were reburied near Salina in 1990 (Echo-Hawk and
Echo-Hawk 1994:66-68).
It should also be pointed out that in some cases
tribes argued that all artifacts were sacred and that
no archeological studies should be undertaken at
sites in their tribal homelands. When I was a Ph.D.
student at Washington State University, I served as
a field director on a survey and test excavation
project in northwestern Montana. The project area
was within the homelands of the Kootenai Indians.
We did not discover any burial sites, but we did
find more than a hundred campsites and we
recovered thousands of artifacts. To me, these
artifacts were important evidence of past lifeways
and I believed the Kootenai people would be
interested in our findings. They were not, and I
soon learned that the Kootenai people intended to
be the keepers of their own past. The tribe's spiritual
leader and cultural advisor, Pat Lefthand,
complained to the project sponsors, the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Forest Service,
that the archeologists had desecrated sacred objects.
He argued further that the entire collection should
be thrown into the reservoir. To him, it had become
profane and retained no information that he believed
was important to Kootenai history. From my
perspective as a young archeologist, this was a clearcut example of an Indian behaving as a profane
practitioner. Years later, I realized that Mr. Lefthand
had reacted in much the same way as the Pope
might have reacted in response to an offer from the

200

Texas Archeological Society

Ayatollah to provide useful information about
Catholicism. What I am suggesting here is that
such profound epistemological differences are not
likely to be reconciled per se, but as political history
attests, religious differences can be placed on the
back burner while other issues are discussed. As I
note later, Mr. Lefthand has found some common
ground with archeology and archeologists, and he
continues to work with us toward the protection of
archeological sites and Kootenai cultural heritage.

COMMENTS ON THE ADVENT
AND PRESENT STATE OF
TEXANS WITHOUT HISTORY
At the beginning of this paper, I noted that
Texas Indians are also a people without history.
Their situation is not unlike what I described for
the Moundbuilders in the eastern United States.
Regrettably, traditional Texas history has taught us,
albeit inaccurately, that little persists of Texas Indian people. In light of my sister's own lack of
knowledge about her biological ancestors, it should
not be surprising that I came to view my undergraduate training in archeology as an almost-sacred
undertaking that would prepare me to be a true
keeper of the past.
During my last year and a half as an undergraduate student, I worked at the local museum as
one of several assistant curators of anthropology.
The project was funded by a National Science Foundation grant to catalog and better prepare the holdings for long-term storage. Among the holdings
were remains of numerous Native Americans, some
of whom must have been buried during the late
1800s, judging from the remains of cotton clothing
and metal buttons. There was a great deal of discussion about the ethnic affiliation of historic-aged
human remains. Were they Comanche, Apache,
Kiowa-Apache, Cheyenne, Arapaho, etc.? We were
seldom able to answer this question before our cataloging work was completed and the remains placed
in new storage cabinets. I often reflect that, although I had grown up with a sister whose biological parents were Comanche and Kiowa-Apache,
never once did I think that the Indian people living
in Oklahoma might have a vested interest in those
skeletal remains and associated burial goods. I believe that I failed to understand that these human
remains were important to living Indians because I

had already learned there were no longer any real
Texas Indians, and that it was entirely up to archeologists to rediscover the past.
Most books about Texas include passages stating that almost all Indians living in Texas today are
relatively recent immigrants who cannot be considered real Texas Indians. To demonstrate this point,
writers often call attention to Texas' three Indian
Reservations: (1) the Alabama-Coushatta Reservation, near Livingston in the East Texas pineywoods,
first occupied by immigrants from Mississippi and
Alabama in the late 1700s and early 1800s; (2) the
Kickapoo Reservation, along the Rio Grande near
Eagle Pass in South Texas brush country, first occupied by descendants of immigrants from the Great
Lakes area and the Midwest in the early and midl 800s; and (3) the Tigua Reservation, near El Paso
in the basin-and-range country of far West Texas,
first occupied by immigrants from north-central
New Mexico during the late 1600s. What I find
especially odd is that any non-Indian living in Texas
whose ancestors had lived here for more than 150
years certainly would be considered a native-born,
blue-blooded Texan. That Indians are not so considered smacks of the prejudicial treatment that began long ago and has been perpetuated for at least
100 years in our educational system.
As early as the 1830s, Texas history books
reported that Indian people, living in what was rapidly becoming Anglo Texas, were "but remnants of
broken tribes" (Edward 1990:93 [1836]). Indeed,
there were many Indian refugees in Texas at that
time; they had been forced from their homelands in
the southeastern and midwestem United States by
expanding Euro-American populations. Cherokee
immigrants numbered 300 by the early 1820s
(Everett 1990). Chief Duwal'li, or Chief Bowl as
he was known to the Anglos, negotiated with Spanish, Mexican, and Anglo-Texan officials for a place
for his tribe to live. He was finally granted tribal
lands when Sam Houston was President of the new
Republic of Texas, but Houston's agreement was
not upheld by the Texas Senate. In the end, Chief
Duwal'li was killed in a battle with Anglo-Texan
soldiers as he resisted expulsion to Indian Territory
north of the Red River, as ordered by the newly
elected President of Texas, Mirabeau Lamar
(Everett 1996:674-675; Murry 1992: 17).
History records that Sam Houston was the only
Texas President or Governor to argue consistently
for a policy of "co-existence" with the Texas-Na-

Thoms - Sacred Guardians, Profane Practitioners, and Texans without History
tive Americans. He negotiated treaties with many
Texas tribes, including the Lipan Apache,
Comanche, Tonkawa, and Waco people, but few of
these were ever ratified by the State Legislature.
When Houston served as a U.S. Senator in the
1850s, he was instrumental in establishing two reservations along the Brazos River and its tributaries
for the Comanche and a diverse group of East Texas
Indians (principally the Caddo peoples), as well as
the Alabama-Coushatta Reservation in East Texas
(Murry 1992: 16-17).
Mirabeau Lamar, who also served as Governor of Texas, spearheaded the Indian policy that
became known as "expel, defeat or exterminate."
His policy eventually won the day, and in 1859, all
but the Alabama-Coushatta were expelled to Indian
Territory in present-day Oklahoma. Ironically, Indian people from the Brazos River reservations were
escorted from Texas by another well-known "Indian-lover," Robert Neighbors. As the federal Indian agent, he realized that white settlers so coveted
Indian lands that if he did not work for their "removal" from Texas, the settlers would not rest until
all the Indians were killed or driven out of the
country. As things turned out, Neighbors was murdered by an Indian hater soon after he returned
from Indian Territory. According to one recent article, there was simply no room in Texas for an
"Indian lover" (Murry 1992:16-17, 27). Our historical legacy of ethnic cleansing, coupled with the
paucity of federal land in the state, represents much
of what makes NAGPRA implementation such a
difficult task in Texas (Russell 1993, 1995).
Texas historical records do attest to the fact
that there was ample room for Indian haters. Many
Texas heroes were well-known Indian haters. One
of the better-known examples is Bigfoot Wallace,
whose exploits of killing Indians and Mexicans are
detailed in a 1871 book entitled The Adventures of
Big-Foot Wallace, The Texas Ranger and Hunter
(Duval 1983 [1871]). Other Texas Rangers made
distinctions between "good" and "bad" Indians, and
openly reported acts of desecration. One such account comes from James Buckner Barry's reminiscences about the 1864 Battle of Dove Creek, when
Texas "frontiersmen" were soundly defeated by
what turned out to be "friendly" Kickapoo people
on their way to Mexico (Gallaway 1994:205-206).
The frontiersman were responding to the report of a
large group of Indians moving southward across
north-central Texas:

201

Following the trail they found a grave, which
they opened in an attempt to identify the tribe of
Indians. The grave contained the body of a female, just buried, and very richly adorned. Some
articles in the grave and some decorative articles of dress were taken and the captain stated
that he intended to send me one of the moccasins .... Out of the opening of the grave incident
there came a story which came to be a tradition
related around camp fires and firesides for many
years afterwards. It was to the effect that some
of Gillentine' s men opposed the opening of the
grave in which was found the body of the squaw.
Finding their opposition to be of no avail, they
protested against the taking of the various trinkets, beads, and portions of clothing as souvenirs. But they were laughed down by some of
their comrades who took the relics with which
the body was so richly dressed. Those who were
jibed for their protests asserted, with wry grins,
that their trinkets might prove to be "bad medicine" for them. But the men encountered no
visible results of their ghoulish act until the
battle, a few days later, with these Indians they
were trailing, when every possessor of a trinket
met death in the fight [Barry 1932: 185-186,
cited in Gallaway 1994:206-207).
A Tonkawa man, known to whites as Chief
Placido, was also considered to be a friendly Indian. He served as a scout for Stephen F. Austin
and several Texas Rangers from the 1830s until
1859 when he and his people were forcibly expelled to Indian Territory. His mother was a captured Comanche woman, but he nonetheless served
in several campaigns against the Comanches. Three
years after he was exiled, his village was raided by
Comanches and other pro-Union Indians; Placido
and more than 100 of his people were killed in the
ensuing battle (Guderjan and Canty 1989:25-26;
Schilz 1996:224-225). From the standpoint of the
vanquished Texas Indians, it probably seemed clear
that Anglo-Texans tended to believe that the only
good Indian was a dead Indian.
By the turn-of-the-century, the concept of Indians as savage killers who were culturally and
racially inferior was entrenched in the literature,
including textbooks. Books such as J.W.
Wilbarger's Indian Depredations in Texas were
widely circulated and were reprinted as late as 1967.
One might well ask why so many ideas about the
"savage" and "bloodthirsty" Indians persisted for

202

Texas Archeological Society

so long. I think the answer lies in the fact that
armed conflict persisted between Indians and nonIndians for almost 350 years, from 1528 until the
late 1870s. Neither the descendants of the victors
nor the vanquished are likely to forget such longterm warfare. My grandmother grew up in the turnof-the century years in the Canadian Breaks of the
Texas Panhandle. While I never heard her say anything especially negative about Indian people, she
once told me that she remembered well one of her
father's house guests, Mr. William Dixon, a wellknown buffalo hunter and pioneer who fought at
the Battle of Adobe Walls in 1874. He is credited
by others with using a buffalo gun to shoot an
Indian man on horseback more than a mile away
(Richardson 1996:659). I also recall my step-greatgrandmother telling me that when she was a little
girl in the 1870s, Geronimo was still on the loose!
Another prejudicial idea entrenched in educational literature of the early twentieth century is
that there were really not very many Indians. A
book entitled A New History of Texas for Schools:
Also for General Reading and for Teachers Preparing Themselves for Examination was first published in 1888 and last revised in 1912. One of the
passages about Indians included the following statement: "It is a mistake to think there were large
numbers of Indians here or in any other part of the
United States when the Europeans came"
(Pennybacker 1912:16 [1888]). In the 1960s, I also
recall finding a 1920s or 1930s Texas Civics book
in the attic of an abandoned house along the Canadian River. A passage in the book noted that the
only reason there were any remaining Texas Indians was due to the benevolent attitudes of military
personnel and missionaries, especially their efforts
to save the Indians from drunkenness and starvation by moving them to reservations in Oklahoma.
There are many other examples of the IndianTexans without history, including that embedded in
a message on a historical marker in Hemphill
County in the Canadian River valley near the Oklahoma border (cf. Dooley et al. 1985:85). Although
I am sure I read it several times in the early 1970s, I
was quite surprised when I read it again last November, and for the first time understood its subtle
message about the people without history. The 1969
plaque reads: "Old Military Road: One of the earliest known Texas Panhandle trails. Flint-pierced
mastodon bones show prehistoric men trailed this
valley before Indians were here." While it may

have been inadvertent, the message is nonetheless
clear: noble prehistoric men who hunted elephants
more than 11,000 years ago in my homeland must
have been decidedly different from the mere Indians, my sister's ancestors, who inhabited my homeland before my family arrived.
Another recent experience of mine attests not
only to the concept of Texans without history, but
also to a sanitized version of Texas history. In this
case, the information was provided in a brochure I
read while staying in a motel near the old Brazos
River Reservations in 1996. The entry, under the
heading "Brazos Indian Reservation North Line,"
told of the creation and demise of the reservations
between 1854 and 1859, noting that tribes placed
on one reservation included:
... Anadarko, Caddo, Tehuacana, Tonkawa,
Waco, and other splinter groups of the Cherokees, Chocktaws [sic], Delawares, Shawnees,
and some other remnants. The Southern
Comanches had their 4-league reservation about
45 miles to the west. Under the guidance of the
United States Agents, the Indians of the Brazos
River Reservation made much progress in agriculture, stock-raising and other arts of civilization. Drought and other adversities, however,
led to the closing of the Reservation. Emptied in
1859 when the Indians were removed to the
vicinity of Anadarko, Oklahoma, lands of the
Reservation reverted to the State, and were
opened to the preemption of Texas citizens in
1873 [Anonymous 1996:6].
On one hand, substantially more useful information is now available to the public about Indians
as people, but on the other hand, much of what is
readily available perpetuates the myth that TexasN ative Americans are peoples without history. The
latter concept goes hand-in-hand with the ethnocentric idea that archeologists and their scientific
colleagues are the only ones left who can provide
meaningful information about the Indians of Texas.
These points are well illustrated in the following
quotation from a booklet for school children entitled The Indian Years that was published in 1983:
None of the Texas Indian cultures that were
present at the beginning of the Historic period
now lives [sic] within the borders of Texas. By
1880 they had been forced out of the state or
destroyed. A handful of Lipan Apaches live in

Thoms - Sacred Guardians, Profane Practitioners, and Texans without History
New Mexico, a few Tonkawas in Oklahoma,
and the Wichitas, Caddoes [sic], and Comanches
are joined together on reservations in Oklahoma.
The Karankawas, Coahuiltecans, Atakapans,
Jumanos, and others have all disappeared-vanished forever [Vander-Meulen 1983:31].
In view of the preceding statement, it may
come as a surprise to learn that the 1990 federal
census listed Texas as having the eighth largest
Indian population in the nation, approximately
66,000 people. Oklahoma, California, and Arizona
each have Indian populations in excess of 200,000;
New Mexico has 134,000; Alaska, Washington, and
North Carolina each have Native American populations between 80,000 and 86,00; for Texas, New
York, and Michigan, the number is between 56,000
and 66,000 (Paisano 1995). Though representing
only a small percentage of the Texas population,
there are probably more Indians living here than at
any time since the early 1800s. A 1994 booklet
entitled Big City Trail: The Urban Indians of Texas,
a Teacher's Guide (Stanush 1994), provides a population breakdown by tribal affiliation and lists more
than 30,000 of these people who consider themselves to be among Indian groups with demonstrable Texas heritage. Included are 1,440
Comanches, more than 500 Kiowas, 200-plus
Apaches, about 200 Caddos, almost 16,000 Cherokees, and more than 10,000 descendants of the other
southeastern tribes that migrated to Texas in the
early 1800s, primarily Choctaw and Chickasaw
people. Consistent with the statement in the abovecited children's book, however, is the absence of
Coahuiltecans or Karankawas, although they may
be among the 14,465 listed as "tribes-not-identified" (Stanush 1994:15).
When Cabeza de Vaca and many other Spanish soldiers became shipwrecked on Galveston Island in 1528, they found an abundance of people
whom anthropologists consider to be representative
of Karankawas, Coahuiltecans, and Atakapans.
Cabeza de Vaca was one of four people who survived long enough to record his experiences. He
and two other Spanish soldiers, along with one
African slave, lived for several years along the coast,
and then walked westward across southern Texas
and northern Mexico to reach Spanish settlements
along the Pacific Coast in 1536 (Chipman 1996:882883). Cabeza de Vaca met several different groups
living along the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain, and he

203

noted that almost half of the Indians on Galveston
Island died within the first year from diseases introduced by the Spaniards. His account includes descriptions of the people as being strong and
hard-working, but there were many times when
food was scarce (Covey 1993).
It was almost a century-and-a-half before Europeans returned and stayed in Texas. In the late
1600s and early 1700s, the Spanish again found
Indian people living along the Gulf Coast between
the Rio Grande and the pineywoods of East Texas.
Although they were probably not nearly as numerous as before the spread of European diseases, there
were enough people to attract Spanish missionaries
who established several missions. Many local Indians, including those known collectively as
Coahuiltecan and Karankawa, moved to the missions, became Christians, built churches and irrigation systems, made their livings as farmers and
herders, and helped protect their homes and the
Spanish from non-local Indians, first Apaches, then
Comanches, who often raided the new settlements
(Chipman 1992; Foster 1995). Without doubt, however, there were many families and bands who remained hunters and gatherers and did not settle in
the missions, and others who only visited there.
Ethnographers and archeologists have concluded that native lifeways in South Texas had effectively ended in the mid-1840s. All the Indians
had either left the area or become fully integrated
with, and indistinguishable from, other Hispanic
people who were also living in towns like San Antonio (Campbell 1983, 1988; Newcomb 1983).
Based on results of extensive investigations, archeologists believe that the Coahuiltecan and
Karankawa people of the early historic era "represent the culmination of more than 11 ,000 years 0f a
way of life that had successfully adapted to the
climate and the resources of south Texas" (Hester
1980:38).
In spite of archeological evidence to the contrary, the perception remains that the Coahuiltecan
people were poorly adapted to their homelands and
struggled to make a living. This ethnocentric viewpoint is clearly demonstrated in a still widely-sold
and popular summary of the Texas missions. It
includes a caption for an illustration of an Indian
man near one of the San Antonio missions:
The San Antonio River was the focal point of
several Coahuiltecan bands called the Payayas.

204

Texas Archeological Society

From an almost static culture and way of life
that supplied only minimal needs, the
Coahuiltecans, within twenty years of the arrival of the Spaniards, advanced to accomplishments in building, agriculture, and ranching
[Guerra 1982:2].
There is historic evidence that many mission
Indians continued to live and farm near the missions long after secularization. With the exception
of the Alamo, the Spanish Colonial missions in San
Antonio still function as churches, and all them
remain open to tourists, largely as a result of the
National Park Service's involvement there. Information plaques along trailways through the missions note that some descendants of the mission
Indians still live in the houses surrounding the missions today.
As late as 1878, brochures produced by railroad companies encouraged tourists to come to San
Antonio, the only town in the United States "where
any considerable remnant of Spanish life exists,"
and where the tourists "could watch Indian women
dress subtropical 'leopard' and ocelot skins with
the animal's brains to keep them supple" (Doughty
1987:87). Contrary to some ethnographic literature,
this and other sources suggest that identifiable Indian populations remained in San Antonio well after the mid-1800s. I recently found a photograph at
the Institute for Texan Cultures in San Antonio that
may provide additional evidence for the presence
of Indian people living there in the late 1800s. The
photograph is believed to date to the 1880s and is
thought to have been taken somewhere behind the
Alamo. Its caption reads: "A San Antonio Indian
Chief and Two Daughters."
In the cours~ of conducting research for this
paper, I also found an account of Indians living not
far south of San Antonio. Sometime in 1912, a
white pioneer woman died and was buried at the
Longview Cemetery in Bigfoot, Texas, and "a large
number of Mexicans and Indians came to her
funeral, bringing bouquets of wild flowers. They
called her La Angel Blanca, for she had taken the
responsibility of them since coming to Frio County,
seeing that they had food, clothing, and medicine in
times of sickness or when work was slack" (Farris
1984:4).
I also heard about "Indian" men who, in the
1920s or perhaps the 1930s, lived along the Medina
River, about 25 km south of San Antonio, and

worked as laborers. Local ranchers reported that
some of these men were buried there. As late as
1921, the San Antonio Express reported that several thousand Indians, mostly people from the southwestern United States, came to the city to participate
in Catholic and Native American religious ceremonies (Sugranes 1921). It is also noteworthy that the
best-known Coahuiltecan ethnographer, Dr. T. N.
Campbell, observed that as of 1981, several descendants of Coahuiltecan groups still lived in Texas
and Mexico, but "few attempts have been made to
discover individuals who can demonstrate this descent" (Campbell 1983:346). In addition, there are
reports that several Coahuiltecan descendants are
living on the little-known Choctaw-Apache Reservation in Louisiana. Recently, arguments have been
made based on research in the Bexar County and
Catholic Church archives that there may be more
than 100,000 "Hispanicized" Texas Indians living
in South Texas, many of whom have retained their
identity as Indian people (England 1995:32-41; see
also Guerra 1994).
One group of people, consisting primarily of
individuals who grew up around the San Antonio
missions and who were taught that they are descended from Indians, has organized under the name
of "American Indians in Texas-at Spanish Colonial
Missions" (AITSCM). Recently, this organization
has come to the attention of San Antonio city officials and Texas archeologists because of its claim
to represent mission Indians in general, including
the Coahuiltecan groups who once lived in South
Texas. These claims, of course, relate directly to
NAGPRA issues; the group has already asked for
the return of remains of mission Indians and associated grave goods that are presently housed in Texas
museums and universities. The organization has
also sought information about Native American remains and grave goods that have been identified as
Coahuiltecan (Raymond Hernandez, personal communication 1996).
This is where the real controversy arises. Archeologists and physical anthropologists have studied many burials from South Texas and have
concluded that they probably are the remains of
people closely related to the historic groups identified as Coahuiltecan. But as scientists, all of us are
not necessarily comfortable with the idea that
AITSCM has a legitimate claim to Native American remains recovered from missions. Many ethnically distinct Indian and non-Indians lived in and

Thoms -

Sacred Guardians, Profane Practitioners, and Texans without History

near the missions and were buried there (Campbell
and Campbell 1996; Cargill 1996). As a result,
there are competing interests for control of the disposition of human remains and associated items,
not only between the Catholic Church and AITSCM,
but also within the local community (C. Britt
Bousman, 1996 personal communication). Opinions vary dramatically among individuals who wish
to maintain strong ties to the Church; those who are
aligned with traditional Indian belief systems; those
who share the concerns of both groups; and those
who are simply opposed to AITSCM (Ray
Hernandez, 1996 personal communication). There
are archeologists who are especially concerned
about AITSCM' s representation of a subgroup
known as the "Coahuiltecan Nation" that, in turn, is
striving for recognition as the representative group
for NAGPRA-related issues pertaining to the repatriation of skeletal remains and grave goods tentatively identified as Coahuiltecan. Clearly, many
Texas archeologists, including myself, are concerned about the potential loss of scientifically important information, specifically the data that can
be derived from skeletal remains.
Across the state, efforts are well underway to
repatriate human remains and grave goods to several tribes that are recognized by the Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA). Although it has not been without controversy, Native American remains have already been or soon will be returned to the Caddo,
Comanche, Tonkawa, Wichita, and other federally
recognized tribes. At the Comanche National Cemetery in Fort Hood, Texas, repatriation ceremonies
have been directed by the Comanche, Kiowa, Cheyenne-Arapaho, Tonkawa, and Coahuiltecans (Christopher Lintz, 1996 personal communication).
The problem arises that neither AITSCM nor
the "Coahuiltecan Nation" are recognized by the
BIA, and as such, there are no legal requirements
that force museums and universities to repatriate
Native American remains to these or any other
groups not formally recognized by the federal government. A final determination will be made by the
NAGPRA committee on unaffiliated remains. The
wording of recent draft guidelines suggests that
decisions about which, if any, Indian group will
participate in repatriation will be made by Indian
people, few of whom are likely to be archeologists.
The issue of resolving which groups will be the
spokespersons for NAGPRA issues in particular
places on the landscape promises to be a difficult

205

task, especially in light of the diverse information
available from oral and written histories, and from
the archeological record (Ferguson 1996; Rose et
al. 1996).

COOPERATION WITHOUT
SUBMISSION
One of the questions I posed at the outset of
this paper was: Is there a way for important scientific studies to be carried out on Native American
remains without infringing on the civil rights of
Indian people who trace their ancestry through those
very human remains? Said differently, is there room
for cooperation without submission? As I noted
earlier, my response is yes, there is ample room,
but we must first come to grips with history and
negative stereotypes (see Deloria 1992; Ferguson
1996; Rose et al. 1996). This will require significant adjustments in the manners in which Indian
people and their histories are presented to school
children, teachers, university students, and the public in general (Harvey et al. 1995). From prior experiences with other minority populations, our
nation and our state are already familiar with methods to implement these changes. Second, archeologists and other scientists must work hard to seek
out Indian people and share with them results of
their research. Sustained, face-to-face discussions
with tribal people and Native American organizations promise to go a long way toward establishing
an environment conducive to cooperation. Only then
can we begin to work on the problem of defining
spheres of influence.
Regrettably, racism is part of American history.
In tum, mistreatment of Native Americans and their
ancestors' remains is part of that sad legacy.
Unfortunately, professional anthropologists,
archeologists, physical anthropologists, museum
specialists, and many other members of scientific
and educational communities have all played a role
in this. Accordingly, I am not very surprised when
Indian people characterize archeologists as
inherently evil and ghoulish, or as profane
practitioners. Even so, I cannot condone this kind
of stereotyping, any more than I believe that Native
Americans are anti-science, anti-archeology,
religious fanatics.
To me, archeology and the other disciplines
just mentioned are honorable professions that have

206

Texas Archeological Society

much to offer humanity. For decades, the practitioners of these and related professions have been key
players, along with governmental agencies, in saving the past from illicit activities of relic collectors
and grave robbers. It also is important to recognize
that archeological data have been used to establish
Indian land claims (e.g., Bell et al. 1967; Christopher Lintz, 1996 personal communication). Archeologists and physical anthropologists in particular
have learned and disseminated a tremendous
amount of information about the past, and much of
that information has come from the study of Native American remains and associated grave goods
(Rose et al. 1996). This information has been requested by the public and our government, and has
been digested with an ever-increasing appetite, as
can be seen from the number of books and documentaries about America's rich archeological
record. We need to do a better job, however, of
making sure that Indian people are included in the
public with which we seek to share this information. As noted in a recent review article, "the possibility of forming partnerships between Native
Americans and osteologists has potential for producing a vibrant future for North American osteology and the new bioarcheology" (Rose et al.
1996:81).
There are many cases where Native Americans and American archeologists have cooperated
to preserve archeological resources and protect cemetery sites from looting. One recent example in
Texas occurred near Dallas as a result of the discovery of human remains during construction of a
housing development project (Cliff et al. 1996). I
have noticed, however, that there tends to be a
direct relationship between the amount of time archeologists and physical anthropologists spend talking with Indian people and the degree to which
they are sensitive to Native American concerns.
The flip-side of this is also likely to be the case; the
more time Indians spend talking to these scientists,
the more likely they may be to recognize the potential significance of scientific contributions. I am
suggesting that enhanced communication is likely
to result in greater understanding, and will help
pave the way for more objective. treatment of Indians and their lifeways in our educational literature.
While I have long been convinced that
important scientific information can and should
come from the study of human remains, I now
believe that those studies should always be

undertaken in consultation with Native Americans.
If reactions of Indian people in the Pacific Northwest
are representative of other Native American
reactions to requests from archeologists and physical
anthropologists to study remains of their ancestors,
the scientific community will have ample
opportunities. In most cases, the inter- and intratribal diversity of opinions vary from viewpoints
such as "burials and sacred things are religious,
ethnic-specific issues that must never be subjected
to scientific inquiry," to position statements such as
"work with the archeologists, but maintain control
over treatment policies." Archeologists must learn
to cope with a diversity of opinions among the
Indian communities. We must recognize that insofar
as different Indian people and groups are likely to
be the primary decision-makers regarding
NAGPRA-related issues, archeologists are likely to
have to adjust their strategies on a case-by-case
basis, at least for the time being, and while
NAGPRA issues work their way through the courts.
The Colville Confederated Tribes in
Washington state have worked closely with
archeologists since the late 1960s, and tribal
members regularly work on archeological projects.
Archeological materials not associated with burials
that are recovered from recognized ancestral lands
are now curated in an on-reservation, state-of-theart facility, built by the Corps of Engineers and
staffed by specially trained tribal members.
Avoidance and in-place preservation are the
preferred methods of grave protection, even in areas
to be inundated by reservoirs. However, when
burials are excavated and studied by archeologists,
the remains are invariably returned to the tribe for
reburial. In Washington state, laws and regulations
about burial discoveries require limited
documentation prior to reburial, documentation that
is comparable to that routinely undertaken by a
coroner's office.
At the other end of the spectrum of Indian
people who work with archeologists in the Pacific
Northwest is Montana's Kootenai tribe. Tribal members have worked closely with archeologists since
the early 1980s to protect archeological sites and
culturally important places. The tribe officially considers all excavations, collections, and analyses to
be inappropriate and against their traditions; however, they recognize that on federal lands, archeological studies are required by law. Although tribal
members seldom participate directly, they often

Thoms - Sacred Guardians, Profane Practitioners, and Texans without History
closely monitor archeological survey and testing
work. Religious leaders and culture committee
members regularly inspect archeological collections
to identify and isolate objects of special significance for special treatment. Known and suspected
Kootenai burials and related materials that were
once curated in public facilities have been reinterred. Following Montana state laws, newly discovered burials on state lands that cannot be avoided
or preserved in place are reported immediately to
the culture committee and government agency archeologists. Nondestructive, in-field documentation,
usually by archeologists, occurs while Indian and
agency representatives are present. If tribal representatives so request, the human remains are
promptly transferred to the tribe for reburial.
Native Americans with a vested interest in
Texas are speaking out more and more often. The
Tonkawa tribe recently sued the state to regain control of their ancestral lands, but they lost (Daniel J.
Prikryl, personal communication 1995). They now
come to Texas more often and participate in educational programs and pow wows. Several headlines
and articles in recent editions of the Austin American Statesman attest to a growing public awareness
about Native American issues in Texas (see Pego
1996a, 1996b, 1996c).
Various other Indian groups have cooperated
with archeologists in their recent investigations of
the Leon River Medicine Wheel at Fort Hood,
Texas. Results of these investigations indicate that
the medicine wheel is less than 100 years old, but
its relative youth does not detract from its spiritual
significance to the Indian people (Quigg et al.
1996). Representatives of several tribes and Indian
organizations recently gathered there to rebuild part
of the medicine wheel and to participate in a renewal ceremony. The group included, but was not
limited to, representatives of the Austin-based
"American Indian Resource and Education Coalition" and the "Four Winds Intertribal Society," as
well as individuals from the Shoshone, Tigua,
Comanche, and Wichita tribes. Some of these same
people, along with Fort Hood personnel and archeologists, recently established the Comanche Indian
National Cemetery nearby where numerous
NAGPRA-related reburial ceremonies have already
been held (Quigg et al. 1996). This cemetery was
created by a legally binding Memorandum of
Agreement between the U.S. Army, the Comanche
Nation, and the American Indian Resource and

207

Education Coalition, (Jackson 1996; Christopher
Lintz, 1996 personal communication).
Several other Native American organizations
exist in Texas cities, including the "Intertribal Council of American Indians" based in San Antonio and
the "Coastal Bend Council of Native Americans"
in Corpus Christi. The recently established and previously mentioned group, "American Indians in
Texas-at Spanish Colonial Missions," is actively
involved in efforts to repatriate Indian remains removed from mission sites for scientific study. All
of these organizations, as well as tribes with Texas
heritage that are now headquartered in Oklahoma
and New Mexico, have established special repatriation committees and have appointed individuals as
spokespersons for NAGPRA-related issues. In my
opinion, Texas archeologists should maintain open
lines of communication with as many groups and
organizations as practical, including those not recognized by the BIA. This requires a level of effort
that goes well beyond what is legally mandated, but
it promises to be an effort that leads to more positive working relationships between Indian people
with a Texas heritage and Texas archeologists.
Drawing from my own life experiences, I believe that archeologists are often victims of their
own enculturation processes, especially that part of
their education that perpetuated the concept of Native American Indians as peoples without history.
Texas archeologists may well have suffered more
from this affliction than other archeologists, in part
because most of us have had few opportunities to
work directly with Native Americans. For me, this
means that I have not always been as sensitive to
Native American issues as I should have been. To
be sure, there are archeologists who have spent their
careers being entirely insensitive to Indian people,
but there is less and less of this as time goes on.
When I began my professional career more
than 20 years ago, very few archeologists anywhere
in North America, including me, gave much thought
to returning Native American remains to culturally
affiliated tribes or groups. Today, many
archeologists, including those working in Texas,
have already participated in the repatriation of
Native American remains and grave goods. That
some Texas archeologists are willing and active
participants in this process suggests to me that
philosophical winds are changing in response to
political winds. There is a growing awareness that
Texas-Native Americans, ostensibly people without

208

Texas Archeological Society

history, are gaining more recognition and respect
from the archeological community. Resolution
awaits many difficult issues, especially regarding
the treatment of unaffiliated Native American
remains and the vested interests of several groups
to these remains (Deloria 1992; Jackson 1996; Lintz
1996; Lippert 1992; Quigg et al. 1996; Russell 1993,
1995, 1996b). The NAGPRA road will prove to be
difficult to travel, but in view of widespread Indian
rights and renewal movements throughout the New
World, it is a road that we must travel.
Texas archeologists have a long history of
working with descendants of the Caddo people who
once lived throughout much of East Texas (Perttula
1992). State-level planning documents for the
conduct of archeological studies in eastern Texas
now include recommendations for consultation with
the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma to identify
and maintain an inventory of archeological,
traditional, and religious sites (Perttula 1993).
Professional archeologists in the state are also
moving to improve working relationships with
Native Americans with Texas heritage. For example,
the Council of Texas Archeologists recently moved
to replace its ad hoc NAGPRA committee with a
Native American Relations committee that will
inform the membership of current issues and serve
as a point of contact for communication with
interested Native American groups.
As with other university and privately based
archeology programs in the state, the Center for
Environmental Archaeology (CEA) at Texas A&M
University is traveling down the NAGPRA road,
but we, too, have a long way to go. Because our
own limited efforts, especially our work with San
Antonio-based groups, have not been discussed previously in the literature, they are summarized here
in more detail than what I have presented for other
programs in the state. In conjunction with our archeological studies in 1992 at the proposed
Applewhite Reservoir along the Medina River south
of San Antonio, we initiated communication with
representatives of the Intertribal Council of American Indians. We informed them that while we had
not encountered any burials per se, we had discovered two 7,000-year-old human teeth, along with
deer and rabbit bones, river mussel shells, and fragments of stone tools, In 1994, they visited one of
our excavation sites at the Applewhite Reservoir.
As required by NAGPRA regulations, we notified
representatives of the Caddo, Tonkawa, and Wichita

tribes in late 1993 that our collections included
human remains and associated grave goods that
might be culturally affiliated with their tribes. In
addition, we returned Native American remains and
NAGPRA-related items to archeologists at Fort
Hood for repatriation and reburial at the Comanche
Indian National Cemetery.
CEA has also begun a series of discussions
with representatives of the American Indians in
Texas-at Spanish Colonial Missions (AITSCM).
They have since visited archeological sites in the
Applewhite Reservoir area and offered prayers to
honor the Indian people who once lived there. In
cooperation with the city of San Antonio, this group
recently constructed two medicine lodges there for
purposes of renewing their obligations to the past
and maintaining cultural traditions. Mr. Ray
Hernandez, AITSCM' s director and chairman of
their NAGPRA committee, is also an elder of the
Leon River Medicine Wheel at Fort Hood. On two
occasions, he has accepted invitations to speak to
my students at Texas A&M University about Native American issues. He has also visited the room
on campus where Native American remains are
kept, including those of mission Indians. He offered prayers for these remains, for their removal
from their current location, and their reburial at San
Antonio. As of early March 1997 when this paper
was submitted for publication, his prayers for
reburial have not been fulfilled.
Mr. Hernandez has demonstrated to me and
my students that we can learn about the past from
Indian people, people long considered to be without history. In the fall of 1996, I asked his permission to photograph the medicine lodges he and his
group built near the abandoned Applewhite dam
site. He agreed. He and his 12-year-old son Cody
met us at the site and talked with one another while
I took the photographs. Just before we left, Ray
told me that Cody had decided to write a class
paper about the Coahuiltecan people because they
were among his ancestors who lived and worked at
San Juan Mission in San Antonio. It seems that the
previous day, Cody came home very disappointed.
He began to question what his Dad had said about
the Coahuiltecan people. Ray told Cody that his
Indian ancestors had been hunters and gatherers.
Then, some of them decided to work with the Spanish priests to build the mission and the irrigation
systems there. He told how they were among the
first Christians and the first farmers and cowboys

Thoms -

Sacred Guardians, Profane Practitioners, and Texans without History

in South Texas, how they had helped defend the
mission from raids by other Indian groups, and how
they had later served as soldiers for Spain, Mexico,
Texas, and the United States. Apparently, the only
information Cody could find in the school library
was how the Coahuiltecans had always struggled to
survive before the Spanish came and that they had
subsisted on snakes, lizards, and bugs. This story
demonstrates that even though Texas-Native Americans and Texas archeologists have begun to travel
down the NAGPRA road and even though the winds
of renewal are blowing across the state, we still
have a long way to go.

209

REFERENCES CITED
Aikens, C. M.
1986 Letter to Dr. Mark Leone, SAA Government Affairs Committee, dated October 14, 1986. Copy on
file at the Department of Anthropology, University
of Oregon, Eugene.
American Committee for the Preservation of Archaeological
Collections [ACPAC]
1995 Membership Form. Newsletter, April 1995. Whittier,
California.
Anonymous
1996 Historical Monuments and Points of Interest in Graham: Brazos Indian Reservation North Line. Motel
Brochure, Graham, Texas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The responsibility for the contents of this paper, including any errors it may contain, is mine
alone, but I could not have completed it without
help from many individuals and organizations. I
am especially indebted to the College of Liberal
Arts at Texas A&M University for affording me
the opportunity to prepare this paper and present it
as the 1996 Fallon-Marshall lecture in the behavioral sciences. I also want to thank Tim Perttula,
editor of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, for encouraging me to publish this paper.
The present paper benefited substantially from
changes I made in the draft version in response to
thoughtful review comments by C. Britt Bousman,
Christopher Lintz, Castle McLaughlin, Tim Perttula,
and Steve Russell. In addition, faculty members
and graduate students in the Department of Anthropology provided considerable encouragement while
I conducted the research and prepared the lecture
and paper. Staff members at the Center for Environmental Archaeology, especially Ms. Patricia
Clabaugh, Mr. Ben Olive, and Drs. David Kuehn
and Philip Dering, also assisted me in my research
and other preparations for the lecture and paper.
Ms. Robyn Lyle, the Center's technical editor, was
especially helpful in producing a more readable
text. Finally, I also received welcome moral support from my family, as well as fellow archeologists around the state, who share my concerns about
establishing better working relationships with
Texas-Native Americans.

Barry, J.B.
1932 A Texas Ranger and Frontiersman. Edited by James
K. Greer. Southwest Press, Dallas.
Bell, R. E., E. B. Jelks, and W.W. Newcomb, Jr. (assemblers)
1967 A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archaeology and
Ethnohistory. Final Report on Grant GS-964. National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.
Black Elk
1932 Black Elk Speaks: Being the Life Story of a Holy
Man of the Ogalala Sioux As told to John G.
Neihardt (Flaming Rainbow). William Morrow &
Company, New York.
Campbell, T. N.
1983 Coahuiltecans and Their Neighbors. In Southwest,
edited by A. Ortiz, pp. 343-358. Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 10, W. C. Sturtevant, general editor. Smithsonian Institution, Washington,
D.C.
1988

The Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico: Selected Writings of Thomas Nolan
Campbell. Texas Archeol0gical Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Campbell, T. N. and T. J. Campbell
1996 Indian Groups Associated with Spanish Missions of
the San Antonio Missions National Historical Park.
Special Report No. 16. 2nd printing. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.
Cargill, D.
1996 Stable Isotope Analysis of Native American
Residents from Mission San Juan de Capistrano,
San Antonio, Texas. Master's thesis, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

210

Texas Archeological Society

Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
1996

Cabeza de Vaca. In The New Handbook of Texas,
Vol. 1, edited by R. Tyler, pp. 882-883. The Texas
State Historical Association, Austin.

Cliff, M. B., D. E. Peter, S. M. Hunt, D. Shanabrook, T. Carter,
and V. Green
1996 Archeological Evaluation of the Harbor Pointe Site
(41DL369), Dallas County, Texas. Miscellaneous
Reports oflnvestigations No. 120. Geo-Marine, Inc.,
Plano.
Cohen,M.N.
1989 Health and the Rise of Civilization. Yale University
Press, New Haven.
Cohen, M. N. and G. J. Armelagos (editors)
1984 Paleopathology at the Origins of Agriculture. Academic Press, New York.
Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs
1990 Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, Public Law 101-601, November 16, 1990.
House Reports, No. 101-877. Congressional Record,
vol. 136 (1990).
Covey, C. (translator)
1993 Cabeza de Vaca's Adventures in the Unknown interior of America. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.
Deloria, V., Jr.
1992 Indians, Archaeologists, and the Future. American
Antiquity 57:595-598.
Dockal!, H. D., D. K. Boyd, M. D. Freeman, R. L. Garza, K.
E. Stork, K. W. Kibler, and J.E. Baker
1996a Confederate Veterans at Rest: Archeological and
Bioarcheological investigations at the Texas State
Cemetery, Travis County, Texas. Reports of
Investigations No. 107. Prewitt & Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Dockal!, H. D., J. F. Powell, and D. G. Steele
1996b Home Hereafter: An Archaeological and
Bioarchaeological Analysis of an Historic AfricanAmerican Cemetery (41GV125). Reports oflnvestigations No. 5. Center for Environmental Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Dooley, C., B. Dooley, and the Texas Historical Commission
1985 Why Stop? A Guide to Texas Historical Roadside
Markers. 2d Edition. Gulf Publishing Company,
Houston.
Doughty, R. W.
1987 At Home in Texas: Early Views of the Land. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Duval, J.C.
1983(1871] The Adventures of Big-Foot Wallace, The Texas
Ranger and Hunter. Reprint, Classics of the Old
West, Time Life Books, Inc. Originally published
1871, Claxton, Remsen & Haffelfinger, Philadelphia, and J.W. Burke & Co., Macon, Georgia.
Echo-Hawk, R. C. and W. R. Echo-Hawk
1994 Battlefields and Burial Grounds: The lndian
Struggle to Protect Ancestral Graves in the United
States. Lerner Publications Company, Minneapolis,
Minnesota.
Edward, D. B.
1990[1836] The History of Texas: Or, the Emigrant's,
Farmer's, and Politician's Guide to the Character,
Climate, Soil and Productions of That Country: Arranged Geographically from Personal Observation
and Experience. Reprinted, Texas State Historical
Association, Austin. Originally published 1836, J.A.
James, Cincinnati, Ohio.
England, N.
1995 Urban Indians: Trails of Hope. Texas Highways
42(10):32-41.
Everett, D.
1990 The Texas Cherokees: A People Between Two Fires,
1819-1840. The Civilization of the American Indian Series, Vol. 203. University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.
1996

Bowl. In The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 1, edited by R. Tyler, p. 675. The Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.

Farris, F. B.
1984 From Rattlesnakes to Road Agents: Rough Times
on the Frio. Chisholm Trail Series No. 3, C. L.
Sonnichsen, editor. Texas Christian University
Press, Fort Worth.
Ferguson, T. J.
1996 Native Americans and the Practice of Archaeology.
Annual Reviews in Anthropology 25:63-79.
Foster, W. C.
1995 Spanish Expeditions into Texas, 1689-1768. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Fox, A. A.
1984 A Study of Five Historic Cemeteries at Choke Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak and McMullen Counties,
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, Vol. 9. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.

Thoms - Sacred Guardians, Profane Practitioners, and Texans without History
Gallaway, B.P. (editor)
1994 Texas: The Dark Corner of the Confederacy, Contemporary Accounts of the Lone Star State in the
Civil War. 3d Edition. University of Nebraska Press,
Lincoln.
Guderjan, T. H. and C. S. Canty
1989 The Indian Texans. The University of Texas Institute of Texas Cultures at San Antonio.
Guerra, C.
1994 Indian Heritage Runs Deep Among San Antonians.
Austin American-Statesman, 26 February, A 11.
Guerra, M.A. N.
1982 The Missions of San Antonio. The Alamo Press, San
Antonio.
Harris, M.
1968 The Rise of Anthropological Theory: A History of
Theories of Culture. Thomas Y. Crowell Company,
New York.
Harvey, K. D., L. D. Harjo, and L. Welborn
1995 How to Teach About American Indians: A Guide for
the School Library Media Specialist. Greenwood
Press, Westport, Connecticut.
Heath, D. B. (editor)
1986 Mourt's Relation: A Journal of the Pilgrims at Plymouth. Applewood Books, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Hester, T. R.
1980 Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for
Amateur Archaeologists. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.
1995

Artifacts, Archaeology and Cabeza De Vaca in
Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. September 1995, http://www.english.swt.edu/css/
trhestercdv.html

Hyslop, S. G.
1996 Voices from the Homelands. In Chroniclers of Indian Life, pp. 134-177. The American Indians, Henry
Woodhead, series editor. Time-Life Books, Richmond, Virginia.
Inouye, D.
1994 Foreword. In Battlefields and Burial Grounds: The
Indian Struggle to Protect Ancestral Graves in the
United States, by R. C. Echo-Hawk and W.R. EchoHawk, p. 9. Lerner Publications Company, Minneapolis, Minnesota.

211

Jackson, J. M.
1996 Foreword. In Archeology and Native American Religion at the Leon River Medicine Wheel, by M. J.
Quigg, C. D. Frederick, and D. Lippert, pp. vii-ix.
Archeological Resource Management Series Research Report No. 33. U.S. Army Fort Hood, Fort
Hood, Texas.
Lamb, W. K. (editor)
1984 A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific Ocean
and Round the World 1791-1795, Vol. IL In The
Voyage of George Vancouver 1791-1795, vol. II,
Second Series No. 164. The Hakluyt Society,
London.
Lintz, C.R.
1996 Scientists and Humanists: Alternative Perspectives
on Science and the Geoarcheological Investigations
at the Leon River Medicine Wheel. In Archeology
and Native American Religion at the Leon River
Medicine Wheel, by M. J. Quigg, C. D. Frederick,
and D. Lippert, pp. 163-175. Archeological Resource
Management Series Research Report No. 33. U.S.
Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.
Lipe, W.D.
1986 Letter to Dr. Don Fowler, President, Society for
American Archaeology, dated April 17, 1986. Copy
on file at the Department of Anthropology,
Washington State University, Pullman.
Lippert, D. L.
1992 Science, Savages, and Sacrilege: A Native American Archeologist Examines the Reburial Issue. CRM
News & Views 4 (No. 2):18-21. Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Mallouf, R. J.
1990 The "Battle of the Bill" in Texas. Caddoan Archeology Newsletter Volume I, No. 2:7-10.
McGimsey, C. R., III
1972 Public Archeology. Seminar Press, New York.
Morton, S. G.
1839 Crania Americana. J. Dobson, Philadelphia.
Murry, E.
1992 "Sorrow Whispers in the Winds": Native Americans and the Republic. Star of the Republic Museum, Washington, Texas.
Nelson, H. and R. Jurmain
1982 Introduction to Physical Anthropology. 2nd Edition.
West Publishing Company, St. Paul, Minnesota.

212

Texas Archeological Society

Newcomb, W.W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern
Times. University of Texas Press, Austin.
1983

Karankawa. In Southwest, edited by A. Ortiz, pp.
359-367. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol.
10, W. C. Sturtevant, general editor. Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, D.C.

Owsley, D. W. and R. L. Jantz (editors)
1994 Skeletal Biology in the Great Plains: Migration,
Warfare, Health, and Subsistence. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Paisano, E. L.
1995 The American Indian, Eskimo, and Aleut Population. Jn Population Profile of the United States,
1995. Current Population Reports, Special Studies
Series P23-189. U.S. Department of Commerce,
Economics and Statistics Administration, and Bureau of the Census. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

Quigg, M. J., C. D. Frederick, and D. Lippert
1996 Archeology and Native American Religion at the
Leon River Medicine Wheel. Archeological Resource
Management Series Research Report No. 33. U.S.
Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.
Richardson, T.C.
1996 Dixon, William. In The New Handbook of Texas,
Vol. 2, edited by R. Tyler, pp. 659-660. The Texas
State Historical Association, Austin.
Rose, J.C., T. J. Green, and V. Green
1996 NAGPRA is Forever: Osteology and Repatriation
of Skeletons. Annual Reviews in Anthropology
25:81-103.
Russell, S.
1993 Ethnic Cleansing and Land Ownership: Why the
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act Does not Protect Native American Graves
in Texas. Masters of Judicial Studies thesis, School
of Law, University of Nevada-Reno.

Pego, D.
1996a "It's OK to Be Indian Now": American Indians,
Feeling Uprooted in Texas Cities, Resolve to Keep
Traditions Alive. Austin American Statesman, August 31, El, 12.

1995

1996b "We 're Not Extinct": Forced to Leave Central Texas
in the 1800s, the Tonkawa Have Lost Most of Their
Culture. Austin American Statesman, September 1,
Dl, 6-7.

l 996b Indians and Anthropologists and the Politics of Iden-

1996c "We Are Moving Forward": 4 Texas Tribes Look to
Gambling and Tourism to Improve Life on Reservation. Austin American Statesman, September 2,
El, 10.
Pennybacker, P. V., Mrs.
1912[1888} A New History of Texas for Schools: Also for
General Reading and for Teachers Preparing Themselves for Examination. Published by the author,
Austin, Texas. Originally published 1888, Tyler,
Texas.
Perttula, T. K.
1992 "The Caddo Nation": Archaeological and
Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
1993

The Development of Agriculture in Northeast Texas
before A.D. 1600. In Archeology in the Eastern
Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 121146. Cultural Resource Management Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.

The Legacy of Ethnic Cleansing: Implementation
of NAGPRA in Texas. American Indian Culture
and Research Journal 19 (No. 4):193-211.

1996a A Time to Bury the Dead. Peace Review 8 (No.
2):245-247.
tity. In Archeology and Native American Religion
at the Leon River Medicine Wheel, by M. J. Quigg,
C. D. Frederick, and D. Lippert, pp. 177-179. Archeological Resource Management Series Research
Report No. 33. U.S. Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood,
Texas.
Schilz, T. F.
1996 Placcido. In The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 5,
edited by R. Tyler, pp. 224-225. The Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.
Shafer, H. J.
1992 Native American Perspectives on Scientific Archeology and Personal Commentary. CRM News and
Views 4 (No. 2):14-17. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Stanley, D.
1996 UT Archeology Lab Buried Under Growing Load
of Artifacts. Austin American Statesman, 4 August,
Al, Al6-A17.
Stanush, B. E.
1994 Big City Trail: The Urban Indians of Texas, a
Teacher's Guide. The Institute of Texan Cultures,
San Antonio.

Thoms -

Sacred

Sugranes, E., Rev.
1921 30,000 Flock to San Fernando Cemetery:
Battleground of the Alazan. San Antonio Express, 6
November.
Texas Archeological Society
1993 Texas Archeological Society Human Remains Policy
Statement Adopted by the Board of Directors. Texas
Archeology 37 (No. 2): 14.
Thoms, A. V.
1986 Memorandum to Dr. Melvin Aikens dated September 23, 1986. Copy on file at the Center for Northwest Anthropology, Washington State University,
Pullman.
Time-Life Books
1994 Exile for the Cupefio. In The Indians of California,
pp. 126-135. The American Indians, Henry
Woodhead, series editor. Time-Life Books, Richmond, Virginia.
1996

Winds of Renewal. The American Indians, Henry
Woodhead, series editor. Time-Life Books, Richmond, Virginia.

Trafzer, C. E. and R. D. Scheuerman
1986 Renegade Tribe: The Palouse Indians and the Invasion of the Inland Pacific Northwest. Washington
State University Press, Pullman.

and Texans without

213

Trope, J. F. and W. R. Echo-Hawk
1994 The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act: Background and Legislative History.
NAGPRA Compliance Workshop, November 1994,
Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock. Originally published in Arizana State University Law
Journal 24 Ariz. St. L. J. 135 (Spring 1992):35-77.
Vander-Meulen, S.
1983 The Indian Years. Living with the Texas Past. Series No. l. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Wilbarger, J. W.
1967(1889] Indian Depredations in Texas. Reprinted by
The Pemberton Press. Originally published 1889,
Hutchings Printing House, Austin, Texas.
Willey, G. R. and J. A. Sabloff
1980 A History of American Archaeology. 2d Edition. W.
H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco.
Wolf,E.
1982 Europe and the People Without History. University
of California Press, Berkeley.

The Asa Warner Site (41ML46),
McLennan County, Texas
Jodi F. Wright
with contributions by Barbara H. Butler, C. K. Chandler, Billy Davidson,
W. L. McClure, and Robert L. Turner, Jr.

ABSTRACT
The Asa Warner site (41ML46) is located about 12 km southeast of Waco, Texas, in McLennan County.
The site is named for the late owner, Asa Warner, who granted permission for the first excavations conducted
by the Central Texas Archeological Society (CTAS) in 1941 (Watt 1956:9). The site is on an alluvial river terrace
adjacent to Branch Creek, a tributary of the Brazos River.
The Texas Archeological Society (TAS) conducted a nine-day field school in 1973 at the site. Over 200
people excavated approximately 195 m 3 of midden, mapped and photo-documented the deposits, and recovered
over 50,000 artifacts and seven burials. The site was first occupied during the Middle and Late Archaic (40002000 years B.P.) periods, based on the recovery of 38 dart points including Gary, Fairland, and Edgewood types,
with a more substantial occupation associated with midden deposits, a variety of arrowpoints, Caddoan ceramics,
and burials that occurred between ca. A.D. 1200-1400+.

ENVIRONMENT
The Asa Warner site is located on the west
bank of the Brazos River. The Brazos runs through
a broad alluvial valley, approximately 5 km wide at
the Asa Warner site (Watt 1956:7), bordered by
Pleistocene terraces. The soil is on the Miller clay
series. These are described as deep, limy, crumbly,
and well drained. It is a highly productive and fertile soil series with a natural vegetation of hardwood forests (USDA 1942:70).

REGIONAL PREHISTORY
The earliest occupation reported in Central
Texas is the ]?aleoindian Stage (ca. 11,500-8500
years B.P.). The most notable characteristic of this
period is the hunting of now-extinct megafauna by
small and very mobile bands. In the Waco area, the
most common projectile point types are Clovis,
Folsom, San Patrice, Meserve, and Plainview.
The Archaic Stage (about 8500-1250 years
B.P.) is distinguished by nomadic groups traveling
in cyclical seasonal patterns. These peoples placed

more emphasis on gathering than did their ancestors,
but they also hunted. The Archaic period is marked
by the presence of stemmed dart points used with
the atlatl.
The appearance of the bow and arrow marks
the beginning of the Neoarchaic Stage. Potterymaking and the use of corn may also appear at this
time. Prewitt (n.d.) suggests that in Central Texas,
the use of ceramics lagged 600 years behind the
technological advance of the arrow, and that agriculture never flourished until Anglo-American settlers began moving into the region in the early
nineteenth century. The Neoarchaic Stage is dated
roughly from 1250-200 years B.P. (see Prewitt
1981, 1985).
As stated in Prewitt (n.d. ), prehistoric peoples in
the eastern part of Texas generally settled into a
horticultural way of life some 1000 years ago, but
moving west into the prairie and Edwards Plateau
environments, they were hunters and gatherers. Central Texas is somewhat unique in that both economies, albeit infrequently by the horticultural Caddo
groups, made use of the area. Prewitt (n.d.) suggests
that by character, hunting and gathering societies are
slow to change. Changes in the lifestyles of the

Bulletin of the Texas An:neoW.f<U:.at Society 68 (1997)

216

Texas Archeological Society

peoples who lived at Asa Warner were probably
linked closely to changes in the natural environment.

EARLY EXCAVATIONS AT THE ASA
WARNER SITE
In the early 1880s and 1890s geologists and
paleontologists recorded remains of the early Indians in Central Texas. In the 1930s they began to
make the effort to try to understand those remains
(Weir 1976:4). Much of the work in the area can be
attributed to the Central Texas Archeological Society (CTAS), formed in 1934.
In late 1941 and through most of 1942, the
CT AS led the first documented excavation at Asa
Warner. However, the work was not completed at
that time due to the start of World War II and the
temporary inactivity of the CTAS (Watt 1956:7).
The Asa Warner site is located in the small

community of Downsville, Texas, on Hacienda
Wesley Road.
This early CTAS project received no funding
or labor outside the donations of the members themselves. Work was only done on weekends and holidays. To cover as much area as possible, a series of
pits five ft2, and small trenches three feet wide,
were excavated on the high ridge at the site (Watt
1956:10). A line running along the approximate
middle of the ridge crest was designated as an axis
line, with a base point at its intersection with the
adjacent Warner-Webb property (Watt 1956:10).
Frank Watt's report described Asa Warner as
consisting of three smaller sites: no. 2, no. 11, and
no. 12, and a trace site, no. 1 (Watt 1956:7 and
Figure 1). His early report was primarily concerned
with Asa Warner no. 2 (the site we discuss in this
article), located on a long, narrow sand bar near an
old shore line of the Brazos River (Watt 1956:8). It
is not known exactly where the sites Watt called

, ,'
,/

,,/

,,

I

,/

ISi Burial2

0 Burial 1
r;;J Burial 5-7
51 Burial 3-4

Figure 1. The Asa Warner Site, showing excavation units, the locations of burials #1-#7, the powerline and Hacienda
Wesley Road at the right, and the permanent datum (370-375 feet amsl) at the western end of the site.
Elevations on map in meters.

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41ML46), McLennan County, Texas
no. 1, no. 11, and no. 12 are located, however. In
one preliminary report, it is noted that at site no. 10,
on a gravel terrace above Asa Warner, a Waco
Sinker was recovered (Watt 1941a:l3). These
smaller sites were probably only defined by CT AS
surface collecting activities.
The excavations produced no beads or bone
artifacts, although there were two shell pendants.
The pottery at the site was mostly what Watt considered to be Late Caddoan period Frankston focus
sherds (Watt 1956:23). Watt suggested the occupation of Asa Warner occurred at three different times:
(a) first in prehistoric times as marked by a buried
midden, (b) second by a later prehistoric surface
occupancy, and (c) finally by Native Americans in
historic times, as noted by early Anglo-American
settlers (Watt 1956:28). The absence of agricultural
implements and the limited amounts of pottery,
with a preponderance of hunting implements (projectile points, knives, and scrapers), suggested the
site was a place occupied by hunters and fishers
(Watt 1956:29).
Watt hypothesized that the people occupying
the Asa W amer site during the formation of the
midden, the first occupants, were there before the
last timber growth, while the people who left the
surface materials lived within the shadows of the
forest (Watt 1953:79). Watt considered the ceramics to have originated from East Central and Northeast Texas, and it was not related to the Tehuacana
or Waco groups (Watt 1956:29). Watt went on to
suggest that the lack of trade objects may indicate
that the people living at the site had no contact with
the Anglo-Americans, even after the coming of the
early travelers (Watt 1956:29).
The original Watt collection from Asa Warner
has bFen lost through the years. The CTAS is aware
of a few private artifact collections, and the Strecker
Museum at Baylor University has 173 sherds catalogued from Asa Warner. It has been determined
that these did not actually come from the Watt
excavations, but from another private collector. The
Strecker Museum also has possession of Watt's
burial #51 (see below) from the site.

1973 FIELD SCHOOL
The CTAS did a limited amount of excavations
at the Asa Warner site again in 1970. It was at this
time that a decision was made to conduct a Texas
Archeological Society (TAS) field school at the

217

site in 1973 (Al Redder, personal communication,
1995).
Between June 9 and June 17, 1973, the TAS
field school conducted excavations of the Asa
Warner site. Over 200 avocational archeologists
participated in the project under the direction of
Alton Briggs, the principal investigator, who was
assisted by Robert Mallouf (Richmond et al.
1985: 149). The work at the field school included
site excavation and extensive lab work.
Margie Fullen and Dot Word were in charge of
the field school's laboratory. There were problems
in keeping up with the records at the Asa Warner
field school because of a lack of communication
from the principal investigator, Alton Briggs
(Margie Fullen, personal communication, 1995).
Through personal communication with Albert Redder, who participated in the field school, I received
information about the field techniques employed
during the T AS field school. A grid system was
made using the base line formerly established by
Miles Locke in the 1970 CTAS excavations (Figure
1). Locke had tried to use the same base line established by Frank Watt in the 1941-1942 excavations.
The datum point was a power pole at the edge of the
field next to the road. The base line ran out northwest along the central ridge on which the site is
located, to a pipe driven into the ground at the
property line. An elevation datum was also established, but Redder could not recall exactly where it
was, though it was probably also at the power pole.
The site was excavated using 4 x 2 m units. All
the dirt removed from the squares was screened
through a 1/4-inch mesh (see Figure 1). The center
unexcavated section was at least four m wide to
allow for walking through the site (Figure 2). The
plow zone was flat-shoveled and screened. When
the bottom of the plow zone was reached, chisel
marks were visible; these extended deep into the
undisturbed soil.
The camping area for the participants in the
field school was located several miles northwest of
the site, near the city of Robinson. Paul Lorrain
was the camp manager. The property used for camping was owned by Mr. Leon Thompson. A grove of
large oak trees provided a nice, shady camp (Al
Redder, personal communication, 1995).
A heavy rain storm occurred on Monday or
Tuesday afternoon at the start of the field school.
A lot of damage was done to the camp and to the
excavations at the site. The excavation squares with
very sandy soil were soon dry because of the per-

218

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Excavations at the Asa Warner site.

meable soil; however, the squares nearer to the
road were clay-rich, and held the water all too well.
The damage was repaired, though, and by the same
afternoon, excavations were again in progress. The
rain also brought a plague of flies which probably
was the cause of many of the participants getting
sick (Al Redder, personal communication, 1995).
The level reports from the excavations are very
sketchy and some level reports are missing. Table 1
presents a list of the levels with some field documentation. Unfortunately, several of the available
field reports and notes are unreadable.
The general soil profile shows an upper plow
zone in reddish sandy clay over a red clay horizon,
which in turn overlays a deep deposit of alluvial
sands. The zone/level definitions are as follows:
0 the plow zone

I red clay loam
II ash and mixed soils, thin layer
III black midden
IV midden transitional zone
V yellow sand
The red clay loam zone (I) was of varying depths.
The ash and mixed soils (II) were very shallow and
could not be readily identified in the profiles most
of the time. The midden and midden transitional
zones (III and IV, respectively) also varied as to
depth. The yellow alluvial sand (V) was very deep
in some locations, and was excavated in 20 cm
arbitrary levels (i.e., Va, 0-20 cm within Zone V;

Vb, 20-40 cm; Vc, 40-60 cm; Vd, 6080 cm; Ve, 80-100 cm; Vf, 100-120
cm; and Vg, 120-140 cm).
A few additional comments can
be made regarding the soil profile at
the site, according to Al Redder. The
darker sand layer (zone III) did not
have the usual texture of midden deposits in the central Brazos River
drainage. All the burials were recovered from zone V, the older light
sand level (Al Redder, personal communication, 1995). There was also
considerable rodent activity at the
site. Several burials, for instance,
were disturbed by rodents, removing
bones from the hands and feet.
The notes from the director of the
excavation were not available to the
author. A day by day account of the progress at the
field school cannot now be reconstructed. Al Redder has stated that after the field school, members of
the local Society stayed to backfill and clean up.
During this time they recovered two additional burials (burials #6 and #7) and a possible post mold.

BURIAL ANALYSIS
Five burials were uncovered by the early CTAS
excavations in 1941-1942. These remains were
numbered #51-#55 using Frank Watt's system.
Seven burials recovered during the T AS field school
in 1973 were numbered consecutively from #1-#7.
The first five individuals were uncovered during
the field school, but as previously mentioned the
last two burials were recovered after the field school
session had ended. An analysis and report were
made by Barbara Butler in 1975 (see below). The
earlier burials were examined in 1956 by Dr. Loyal
Wilson (Wilson 1956:56).
All recovered burials (from both the 1942 and
1973 excavations) were in flexed positions, some
more loosely flexed than others. Two burials, one
from the 1942 excavations and one from the field
school, contained grave inclusions. Burial #52 had
"a large flint blade and a type of case containing
flints and a deer (?) antler tool" (Watt 1956:22).
Also with this burial was "the carapace of a land
tortoise enclosing two laurel leaf shaped flints"
(Watt 1942:17). Burial #6 had a large rock later
determined to be red ochre. The head of the indi-

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41ML46), McLennan County, Texas

219

Table 1. Levels with Field Documentation
Square

N70W78
N86W78
N86W79
N94W130
N94W132
N94Wl38
N94Wl40
N94Wl46
N94W147
N94Wl48
N94W164
N98W78
N98W142
N99W142
NIOOW130
Nl01Wl42
N102W128
Nl02Wl30
Nl02Wl32
Nl02W138
Nl02W140
Nl02Wl46
Nl02Wl48
N102Wl50
N102Wl54
N102W156
N114W78
Nll4W79

Level

0

I

x
x

x

x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x

II

III

IV

x
x

x

Va-g

x
x

x

x
x

x

x

x
x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x
x

x

x

x
x

x

x
x

x

x

x
x'
x2
x
x

x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x

x
x

x

x
x3
x
x
x
x

x=field documentation available
1
Contained burials #3 and #4
2
Contained burials #2, #5, #6, and #7
3
Contained burial #1

vidual was resting on the ochre. The rock itself had
definite wear marks on its surface (Al Redder, personal communication, 1995).
The following is a summary of the Asa Warner
burials:

Individual #3: Male; 18-23 years old
Individual #4: Indeterminable sex; 3-4 years
old
Individual #5: Female; 18-23 years old

Individual #1: Male; late-middle aged

Individual #6: Female; middle-aged

Individual #2: Very fragmentary, but appears
to be a female; based on the wear of one
molar, this appears to be the oldest person
in the group

Individual #7: Male; middle-aged
Individual #51: Male; young adult
Individual #52: Male; middle-aged
Individual #53: Male; 25-30 years old

220

Texas Archeological Society
Individual #54: Male; young adult

Skeletal Analysis of the Asa Warner Site
(41MIA6)

Individual #55: Male; young adult
An acquaintance of Frank Watt, Dr. J. D. Smith,
a dentist (deceased), completed an analysis on the
wear of the teeth from the burials recovered in
Watt's excavations. Smith (1967:18) noted that the
people at Asa Warner must have suffered much
pain due to the pathological conditions of their
mouths. He also concluded that their diet must have
been very abrasive and their teeth were probably
used as tools.
Watt (1956) commented about the probable
causes of death for some of the individuals at Asa
Warner. Individual #53 had seven arrow points with
the remains:
One was found in the chest cavity, resting slightly back of the sternum, a second was against the outside of the
humerus of the right arm and pointing
backward, a third was against the inside
of the left rib, two were in the abdominal
cavity, one was over the right shoulder,
and the other just above the right hip. Of
these only two possibly were fatal, the
others would have been in the flesh or
clothing (Watt 1956:13).

Barbara H. Butler
Seven human skeletons were recovered by the
TAS during the 1973 summer excavations at the
Asa Warner site (41ML46). Individuals #1-#5 were
recovered during the field school session and burials
#6-#7 was recovered several weeks later. During
1941-1942, five skeletons were recovered by the
CTAS from the Warner site, no. 2. Unfortunately
for this study, these latter burials were not available
for re-examination and comparisons with the others.
Information regarding these five, as presented in
Watt (1956), will be included here as appropriate.
The preservation of the bones is inconsistent.
Two skulls (burials #1 and #6) are in excellent
condition, whereas the ribs, vertebrae, pelvis, and
long bones are generally fragmentary. Some vertebrae are held together only by the sand matrix, and
any attempt at removal resulted in the complete
disintegration of the bone. Some of the bones were
reconstructable, allowing a few measurements to
be made. The teeth, when present, are generally
well preserved.

Burial #1
In burial #54, Watt (1956: 13, 15) noted that
"[a] large point with broken stem lay in the left
thorax, entering from the side and ranging slightly
upward, probably fatal."

These elements represent a late middle-aged
male in flexed position (Figure 3). The cranium is
very well preserved. Only the right and left feet and
some ribs are present from the post-cranial skeleton.

N

0

Rodent disturbance

Figure 3. Burial #1, N102W148-150, base elevation 99.465 (?).
Note rodent disturbance around hand and abdominal areas.

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas

221

Burial #2
The elements recovered of this individual are
fragmentary and incomplete. The face and mandible were not well-preserved and only one loose
lower molar was recovered (Figure 4). With due
caution, a sex determination of female was made.
Age determination is even more difficult. Based on
the degree of wear of the one molar recovered and
the relative closure of the cranial sutures, this individual appears to be the oldest of those represented
in the 1973 sample.

Burial #3
Fragmentary remains were recovered of this
individual (Figure 5), a young adult male, but the
bones are not as friable as that of Burial #2. The
age at death was most likely between 18 and 23
years. A third molar had erupted before death, attrition is moderate, and fusion scars of the long bones
are still present.

Figure 4. Burial #2, N102W130, zone Va-b, orientation
uncertain.

Burial #4
Although fragmentary osteological elements are
present representing this young individual (Figure
6), rather complete dental elements are present.
Based on these, the age at death was sometime
between the child's third and fourth year. Sex of
sub-adult skeletons cannot always reliably be determined, and this individual's sex is unknown.

Burial #5
Post-cranial elements were recovered in this
burial (Figu1e 7). Only four small cranial pieces
were present, no mandibular teeth were recovered,
and only one maxillary tooth was found. The fusion
scars present on the iliac crest of the innominate
bone suggest an age at death between 18-23 years.
The bone is very delicate and muscle markings are
weak, suggesting a female.

Burial#6
Burial #6 is a middle-aged (?) female. She is
represented by a complete and well-preserved cranium and mandible (Figure 8), as well as fragmentary post-cranial skeletal material.

G
0

Cobble

Shell
Flint

Figure 5. Burial #3, N102W128.

222

Texas Archeological Society
Burial #51
The body, loosely flexed, was lying on its
right side, face up, with the head to the west.
The hands were folded with the right hand over
the left, and if the head had been facing with
the body, would have been immediately in
front of the face ••.• Both the face and frontal
section of the skull were crushed inward, and
the mandible and maxilla were shattered. The
crushing was due to pressure from soil as no
fractures or contusions wereindicativeofblows
before death. Such other bones as remained,
were articulate[d]. Bones of one foot were all
missing, the vertebrae and rib bones, friable,
with many disintegrated. The lowerlimb bones
were at a 45 degree angle with the spine and
were in fair condition [Watt 1956:11].

0 Charcoal
Figure 6. Burial #4, N102Wl28.

. ..

Foot
N 102

w 134

Pelvis

N 102

w 132

Skull
(3 Fragments)

0

~

l!ii!Wii!i!iiiiliiiiiMMMM@Mii"'!

Figure 7. Burial #5, Nl02Wl30.

Burial #7
The cranium and mandible of this individual is
the largest of this group. Although the cranium is
somewhat fragmentary, the post-cranial remains are
the best preserved of those excavated in 1973 (Figure 9). Size alone suggests that this is a male but
the age is more difficult to determine. He was probably middle-aged at death; this is based mainly on
the comparative degree of tooth wear. Other than
the cranial sutures, which are still open, additional
osteological aging attributes were not observable.
The descriptions of burials #51-#55 that follow are quoted from Watt's (1956) article about the
Asa W am er site:

Burial #52
This burial varied from the typical Central
Texas flexed burials in that it was fully extended, with the exception of the lower limbs
doubled back so that the heels would have
touched the buttock. The feet and many of the
other bones had disintegrated and were missing. Only the larger bones, all in articulation,
of the legs, spine, skull and parts of the right
and left humerus, remained. The right arm was
extended full length by the side, slightly in
front of the body, with the left arm in the same
relative position (in] back of the body .... The
burial was at a depth of 36 inches, resting
slightly on yellow river sand, well below the
ash bed occupation level. The fill was of such
nature that it was not determined whether the
burial was made at the time of the ash bed
occupation, or through it at a later time. Excluding the missing feet the bones measured,
in situ 71 inches. No bones could be recovered
for definite determination of sex, but from
general appearance and other data, it was a
middle aged man, of over average stature.
Resting at waist level, on the right side, and in
such a position as to suggest having been worn
in a sheath or belt was a large flint lance point
or knife, wide at the base, slightly curved in
appearance, with narrow notched base [Watt
1956:11].
Burial #53
It was lying on the left side, facing northeast, with the head to the northwest, at a depth
of 36 inches to top of burial. Loosely flexed
with knees ... against the buttocks. The upper

Wright -

The Asa Warner Site (41MlA6), McLennan County, Texas

arms were pressed alongside the body, with
the right forearm at the right angle to the body
and left forearm dropped to a position with the
hand on the knees. The body was twisted in the
pit, with the head back, resting on the shoulder
blades and disconnected from the spine. The
bones were articulate except for the head and
the middle section of the spine, these vertebras
being scattered throughout the burial probably
the work of rodents. Most of the bones of the
hands were missing, the ribs were twisted and
broken and the feet were twisted into an unnatural position, due perhaps to the limitations
of the grave and shifting of the soil. Of especial
interest were the arrow points, 7 of them, with
the burial. One was found in the chest cavity,
resting slightly back of the sternum, a second
was against the outside of the humerus of the
right arm and pointing backward, a third was
against the inside of the left rib, two were in the
abdominal cavity, one was over the right shoulder and the other just above that right hip. Of
these only two possibly were fatal, the others
would have been in the flesh or clothing, three
were complete, the other four were broken;
stems, barbs, or points snapped off. This burial
is that of a male, age 25-30 years, with an
excellent set of teeth, but with... the lower
centrals arching up at the expense of the upper
centrals which were worn down to the roots
[Watt 1956:13].
Burial #54
A burial was found while undercutting the
southwest comer of the pit. This was the most
disintegrated of the burials. The entire face,
including the mandible, [was] missing. A few
fragments of ribs remained, attached to the
upper spine and sternum. All lumbar vertebrae
except the lowest were missing, also all but the
bones of three fingers. The right humerus
remained, but was displaced about 10 inches
to the front. The burial was loosely flexed with
the leg bones at right angles to the body and the
heels doubled up to the buttocks. The length of
the skeleton, in situ, was 65 1/2 inches. A large
point with broken stem lay in the left thorax,
entering from the side and ranging slightly
upward, probably fatal [Watt 1956:13, 15].
Burial #55
The burial was at a depth of 38 inches,
loosely flexed, lying on its right side, facing
southwest and with the head to the northwest.

223
N

Patella

•

Rock with.
red ocher

0

vumwunaeammeawgauanneM

Figure 8. Burial #6, Nl02Wl30.

N104 W130

Pelvis
fragment

•

N102 W132

N102 W130

• •

Skull Knee
fragment

Figure 9. Burial #7, N102Wl30.

224

Texas Archeological Society
The skull was in fair condition with the right
and center parts of the mandible and maxillae
missing. All vertebrae, except the cervical
and fragments of the lumbar, the hands and
feet were missing, with parts of the pelvis,
left humerus and forearm bones remaining.
Position of all bones except a part of the left
mandible were articulate [Watt 1956: 15].
Skeletal Morphology

Standard morphological and metric observations were made of the skeletons recovered during
the 1973 field season. The data were collected on
standardized forms used by the Osteology Laboratory, Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas
State University (now the University of North Texas).
Metric Observations
Standard measures were made on complete
bones. The landmarks as described in Brothwell
(1963) were generally used. Five individuals have
elements complete enough for measurements; these
are summarized in Table 2.
The fragmentary nature of the skeletal material limits the number of measurements possible,
especially of the infra-cranial skeletal elements.
The following generalizations can be made about
these people based on the few measures and derived indices. These representatives suggest a
population with long heads (dolichocranic), narrow
noses (leptorrhinic ), narrow orbits (hypsiconchic ),
and broad palates (brachyuranic). The two measurable femora are both flattened in the anterior-posterior dimension in the sub-trochanteric area and
are thus termc>d platymeric. The tibiae, on the other
hand, are not flat; the ratio of both measurable
tibiae fall in the mesocnemic range. Stature of only
one individual could be computed. Individual #3
has a complete fibula which, according to the Trotter and Gieser (1958:120) regression formulae for
Mongoloid males, suggests a stature of about 5 feet
7 inches.
Non-Metric Observations
Observations were made of the standard
discrete traits and the other non-discrete morphological traits. Because the sample is small, the results
of the observations are not presented in a typical

table format because they are not considered
statistically meaningful. Rather, generalizations
based on the observations will be presented.
Of the six occipital areas observed, all the sagittal sinuses turned to the right. Extra suture bones
are rare and they were observed only in the lambdoid suture. The supraorbital vessels crossed the
orbital margin either through a foramen or notch; a
notch form is more common. Parietal notches in the
temporal bone are common, but no parietal notch
bones were observed. A divided brow ridge form
was observed on four individuals and only one has
a V-shaped ridge. The expressions of the malar
tuberosites on the malar bone and the zygo-maxillary tuberosity at the inferior border of the zygomaxillary suture were either absent or slight in their
expression. About 50 percent of the marginal tubercles on the lateral margins of the malar bone are
of moderate size, and the others are large.
The expressions of most foramina were normal; only two minor anomalies were observed in
the basilar area. One individual (#1) has a complete
bridge coursing over the foramen spinosum. A small
spike of bone is present on the anterior margin of
the foramen ovale. Individual #6 has an incomplete
bridge on the left side (right side missing) coursing
over the foramen ovale.
Individual #2 has an unusual left squamosal
suture; the right is normal. The left is unusual in
that it does not exhibit the expected contour; there
is a projection of bone from the posterior one half
of the squamal suture which extends in a superior/
posterior direction.
The fragmentary nature of the infra-cranial remains also limits the quantification of the morphological characteristics, but some generalizations are
possible. Of the five individuals with at least one
calcaneum present, four individuals have two discrete calcanear facets; the other individuals have
both the right and left calcanear facets in the shape
of an hourglass. This articular facet is generally
single and although there is normally some variability in its expression, it is quite unusual that all
but one of the individuals observed in this population have it expressed as two discrete facets.
The muscle markings of individuals #2 and
#6, two females, are remarkably strong. The linea
aspera, the ridge for muscle attachment on the back
of the femur, of #2 is quite strong, as is the area
for the insertion of the triceps of the left humerus
of both #2 and #6. Although the radii and ulna of

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas

225

Table 2. Cranial & Post~Cranial Measures & Indices
CRANIAL MEASURES

#1

#2

#3

#6*

#7

Maximum Length
Maximum Breadth
Basion-Bregma
Basion-Nasion
Basion-Prosthion
Minimum Frontal
Front Arc
Parietal Arc
Occipital Arc
Trans Arc
Front Chord
Parietal Chord
Occipital Chord
Mastoid Length
Opisthion-forehead

182.5
136.0
144.0
102.0
99.5
94.0
118.0
124.0
124.0
310.0
108.5
110.5
104.5
27.5
158.0

181.0
134.0

187.5

176.0
122.0
140.0
103.5
98.5
89.0
114.0
133.0
108.0
302.0
104.0
114.5
95.0
20.0
159.0

196.0
135.0

Bizygomatic Breadth
Upper Facial Height
Total Facial Height

142.0
72.5
115.5

70.0

Orbit Height
Length
Interorbital breadth

39.0
42.l
19.0

36.5
41.0
21.0

Nose Height
Breadth

52.0
24.5

55.0
22.5

Max-Alveolar Breadth
Max-Alveolar Length

68.5
57.5

MANDIBLE

#1

Symphyseal Height
Condyle-Symphyseal Length
Bigonial Diameter
Bicondylar Width
Ascending Ramus Height
Min. Ramus Breadth
Max. Ramus Breadth
Foramen Mentalia Breadth
Body Height
Body Thickness

29.0

132.0
127.0

322.0
115.0
115.5
20.5

157.0

73.0
59.5
#2

#3

38.0
108.0

#6

111.0

121.0
67.5
32.0
44.0
44.0
31.5

32.5
44.5
50.2
14.0

96.0
122.0
143.0
112.5
330.0
109.5
123.5
95.0

14.0

#7
32.5
123.0
124.0
127.5
79.0
37.0
45.5
51.0
27.5
20.0

226

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. (Continued)
POST-CRANIAL MEASURES

#1

#2

Epicondylar Width
Radius-Max Dia. of head
Femur Length
Bicondylar Breadth
Max Dia. of head
Subtrochant:A-P
Subtrochant:M-L
Mid-Shaft A-P
Mid-Shaft M-L
Tibia Nut.-For. A-P
Tibia Nut.-For. M-L
Fibula Length
CRANIAL INDICES
Cranial Index
Length-Height
Breadth-Height
Total Facial
Upper Face
Nasal Index
Orbital Index
Maxillo-Alveolar Index
Gnathic Index
Flower's Index
POST-CRANIAL INDICES

#3

#6

66.0
24.5

61.5
23.0
461.0
452.0
43.0
24.0
32.0
25.0
22.5
32.5
22.5
381.0
#1
74.5
78.9
105.9
81.3
51.1
47.l
92.6
119.1
102.5
97.5
#1

Platymeric
Pilastric
Platycrernic
Stature est.

#2

#3

74.0

69.3

#7

49.0
24.5
39.0

38.0
26.5

#6

#7
68.8

40.9
89.0
122.7
105.l
95.2
#2

#3

#6

75.0
111.1
69.2
5'7"

#7
62.5
69.7

*Measures are estimates--cranium is laterally compressed

#2 are delicate, they exhibit very sharp interosseus
borders where the tissue joins the two bones.
It is expected that males will have more rugged muscle markings than females but the ruggedness of the proximal humerus 'markings of individual
#7, a male, are quite exaggerated even when compared to other males in this sample. Based on general observation and a very few measurements, this
individual is the largest of this group.

Dental Observations
An outstanding characteristic of the recovered
teeth is their extreme wear. Three of the adults (# 1,
#2, #6) have associated teeth which are little more
than root remains. They are worn well below the
cementa-enamel junction and exhibit irregular wear
patterns. Most of these teeth fell out of their sockets
post-mortem and they cannot be replaced to the

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas
appropriate one with any degree of accuracy because
their morphology is so generalized. This total
sample is too small, unfortunately, to make any
generalizations regarding wear patterns with age
and sex associations.
Only two individuals exhibited abscesses.
These were most likely secondary effects of extreme wear rather than caries. Only one carious
lesion was noted; it is at the cemento-enamel junction of an upper premolar of individual #7. The few
caries are not surprising in that the degree of attrition is so extreme. Because of the fragmentary condition of the jaws and the post-mortem loss of
teeth, it was difficult in some cases to accurately
distinguish between alveolar abscesses and periodontal pockets. It is safe to say that at least three
individuals (#1, #6, #7) had some degree of periodontal disease. Calculus accumulations are minimal in this sample of teeth.
Individual #1 had three congenitally missing
third molars (both mandibular teeth and the right
maxillary one). No other unusual dental anomalies
were observed. The few unworn teeth exhibited the
expected morphological variations of shovelshaped incisors, and a Y-5 fissure pattern and cusp
number for the first lower molar. The traits of the
deciduous and permanent teeth of individual #4
were similar except for the expression of
Carabelli's trait on the deciduous 2nd molar and the
first permanent molar. An eminence with an attached tip and bounded by a mesial groove is the
expression on the deciduous molar whereas the
permanent MI has a tubercle with a separate cusp.

Skeletal Pathology
Four of the individuals recovered exhibited
one or another form of non-specific pathology. The
late middle-aged male (#1) has two types of
pathological lesions. One is a shallow drainage canal
which extends from the bottom of the left second
premolar socket to the mental foramen below. On
the parietal bones of this same individual are four
pitted and porous areas, varying in size between 510 mm in diameter.
The mid-sections of the left radius and ulna of
the young adult female (#5) are bowed outwardly,
probably as a result of an infection or a warping of
the bone. The remains are too fragmentary to see
any other expressions of disease in this area. The
distal end of the right radius (ulnar area missing)

227

has very irregular morphology in that there are very
strong edges on the anterior surface.
The right malar of the middle-aged female (#6)
was probably broken and healed. The middle-aged
male (#7) is the only individual to exhibit any arthritic lesions. In this case, they were relatively
minor bony additions in the lumbar vertebra area.
In this individual it is more likely a normal aging
characteristic, rather than an abnormal and severe
pathological condition.

Comparisons with the Previously
Excavated Skeletons
Based on the data presented by Watt (1956),
comparisons between the two samples are
impossible; however, some comments seem in
order. Cranial indices of four individuals (#51-#53,
and #55) are given in a drawing (Watt 1956:22),
and it is of note that all of them have higher indices
than those four calculated for this sample (Table
3). Since the measures and formula used are not
presented, it is not known whether the difference
lie in the way the two groups were measured or in
real differences.
Mention is also made of the fact that the
anterior teeth were in opposition (edge to edge
occlusion). This is quite a usual and normal
characteristic of teeth which are worn, and thus not
an especially unique characteristic of a population,
or indicative of genetic similarity. The curvature
noted of the anterior teeth is also normal in that it
follows normal stress lines. The degree, however,
of the curves may be more than usually observed in
a dentition that exhibits a moderate amount of wear.
It is impossible to determine whether it is within
the limits of a normal expression without looking at
the skull itself.

Summary
The seven skeletons excavated during the 1973
field season include males and females, and individuals of varying ages. Since the remains are quite
fragmentary, complete observations of metric, nonmetric traits, and pathological lesions could not be
made but trends are suggested. They are a longheaded group with narrow noses, narrow eye orbits, and broad palates. They do not exhibit the
characteristic of a flattened tibia. The one male (#3)
who had a complete long bone from which stature

228

Texas

Individual
Number

Cranial
Sex

Age

Index

Class

M

Late mid-age

74.5

D

2

F

Late mid-age

74.0

D

3

M

Young adult

69.3

D

7

M

Mid-age adult

68.8

D

84.0

B
M
M
M

*51
*52
*53
*54

M?
M

Mid-age adult

77.0

25-30

75.0
76.7

D=Dolichronic (long head)
B=Brachycranic (Round head)
M=Mesocranic
*From Watt (1956)

could be calculated was about 5 feet 7 inches tall.
This individual was somewhat smaller than #7, the
largest in the sample. Females in the sample were
distinctly smaller.
Two of the non-metric traits exhibit a remarkable homogeneity in this group. One is the rightward turn of the sagittal sinus and the other is the
rather consistent expression of the double or discrete expression of the calcanear facets.
The extreme attrition of the teeth is a distinguishable characteristic of this population. It can be
concluded that the wear of the teeth was quite severe and attrition occurred at a rapid rate in the
permanent dentition at least. Since there is only one
individual with primary dentition it is impossible to
determine the relative rate of wear of children
younger than six years old.
Diseases affecting the skeletal tissues were not
common or very severe among these seven individuals. Given the extreme wear of the teeth it is
curious that no arthritic or otherwise diseased temporal-mandibular joints were present.
These skeletons provide useful data for the
description of the morphological and pathological
characteristics of the Indians of Central Texas and
Texas as a whole.

Preliminary Analysis of the Lithk Materials
from the Asa Warner Site (41ML46)
C. K. Chandler

As in all excavations, initial analysis of the
Asa Warner lithic material involved, first, cleaning
all the materials recovered and separating them into
the various artifact categories. Only about 30 percent of this work was done at the Field School with
the remainder done in Houston by my wife and I
with some help from other Houston Archeological
Society members.
It was necessary to get all the material clean in
order to identify and separate the lithics for study.
All during Field School I had the competent and
greatly appreciated help of Dick Gingrich for the
initial sorting of the lithic artifacts. Initially we
used his Bausch and Lomb binocular microscope
with zoom lens of from 7-40X to determine evidence of use or modification only on the flakes and
chips. All artifacts that could be readily separated
into standard identifiable categories, such as cores,
hammerstones, dart points, arrow points, drills, etc.,
were so handled without need for magnification at
that time. After separation of the lithics from the
other material was completed at Houston, the same

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas
analysis procedures were followed, but with Bausch
and Lomb binocular scopes of varying powers from
5-36X.
A total of 49,544 lithic artifacts were recovered, 13,207 of which were fire-fractured rock
(FCR). All of the FCR were of quartzites, limestones, conglomerates, and a few small pieces of
sandstone. It is interesting to note that none of these
were of chert or flint. There was a total of 35,616
flakes and chips, all of which were microscopically
examined for evidence of modification. Of these,
19,035 (53 percent) were identified as chips, 279 of
which showed evidence of modification. Another
16,581 (46 percent) were identified as flakes, 956
of which showed evidence of modification. Only
1.47 percent of the chips were found to be modified
while 5.7 percent of the flakes had modification.
Modification on these artifacts is defined as any
alteration of the edge resulting in micro-fracturing,
nibbling, or trimming. Additional analysis should
support identification of many of these as flake
scrapers, because some have readily visible trimming and beveling.
Including the above mentioned modified flakes
and chips, 1934 lithic artifacts were separated for
further analysis. These others are as follows:
•Cores

82

• Arrow points and
121
arrowpoint preforms

• Hammerstones

6

• Drills or aw Is

•Manos

3

• Notched flakes

11
60

•Gravers

16

• Metates
• Biface fragments
• Bifaces
• Dart points

299
55
38

• Scored ochre

2
3

• Small fragments of
smooth sandstone

2

• Flake end scrapers

Ten of the cores are of gray Cretaceous chert
which probably comes from the Edwards limestone
exposed in the Brazos River valley from about 15
km north of Waco to the vicinity of Glen Rose.
This Cretaceous material is a dominant component
of the river terraces and has apparently been reworked from them. Eight of these Cretaceous chert
cores have very angular platforms approaching 90
degrees. The remaining cores are of varying shades
of tan chert, and eight of these have angular platforms approaching 90 degrees. Most of the tan chert
cores have a rough, thick cortex indicative of terrace deposits while the Cretaceous cores generally

229

have thin smooth cortex. Eleven of the cores have
prepared platforms; however, four of these also
have cortex angular platforms. Where the cortex
angular platforms are present, these were generally
used in the core reduction. Two of the smallest
cores are bipolar.
One of the cores stands out from all the rest. It
is without cortex, has a prepared platform, is coneshaped, and shows evidence of blade production.
This core was also thermally altered. Heat treatment is indicated by the very waxy feel, glossy
surface, and structural alteration that resulted in
three heat spalls that were removed in the core
reduction process.
Eighty-four percent of the cores are of very
large pebble size, with only four percent in the
small cobble size. They range in maximum dimension from 23-74 mm, with average length, width,
and thickness of 43.4 mm, 35.5 mm, and 21.0 mm,
respectively. Pebbles and cobbles apparently do not
naturally occur at this site. Every pebble or cobble
recovered was either fired or modified as a core.
Of the six harnmerstones, three are oval coarsegrained quartzite pebbles and two of these have
wear patterns differing from the others. Five of the
six hammerstones were found in the plow zone
(Zone 0). These have use modification over one or
two sides, with concave areas showing the greatest
amount of alteration. These concave areas are also
smooth. It does not seem likely these could have
been used in a direct percussion manner for working lithic raw materials. Indirect percussion may be
indicated, but they may also have been used as
abraders in the surface smoothing of some of the
finished bifaces.
The single metate was found in Zone 0 ( 122 x
74 x 47 mm in length, width, and thickness). It was
made of a coarse-grained quartzite, and had one
well-faceted grinding surface that was pecked into
shape. The use-wear on the metate suggests the
grinding action was back and forth. On the back of
the metate are scars from use of the tool also as a
hammerstone
Of the modified flakes, 33 are flake blades.
Some of these have both a diffuse truncated force
bulb of percussion and lip on the proximal end of
the ventral surface, indicative of a soft hammer
percussion technique. Slightly crushed contact areas with prominent pointed force bulbs and without
lips predominate, however, indicating the primary
use of hard hammer percussion.

230

Texas Archeological Society

The notched flakes have one or more areas of
retouching forming concave working areas along
the flake edge; about 17 percent of the notched
flake tools also have additional edge use
modification adjacent to and to one side of the
notch. Over 90 percent of the notched flakes occur
in zones 0- III.
Two flake end scrapers were found, both in
Late Prehistoric contexts. These were manufactured
on consecutive secondary cortex flakes from the
same prepared platform core.
Sixteen of the modified flakes have the
characteristics and appearance of gravers, with a
small beak or graver-like projection in the middle
of the worked area, but generally their beaks do not
have the strength necessary for heavy duty. It may
be that the beak was not the functional part of the
artifact, but was formed fortuitously as a result of
use modification on each side of the beak, and
perhaps these should be included instead in the
notched flake category. These lithic tools were
recovered in Late Prehistoric contexts at Asa
Warner.
Of the 11 drills or awls, two are apparently
from Archaic contexts (originating in zones V or
Va below the midden). They are made of Cretaceous chert and one has a corner tang. The other
drills are from Late Prehistoric contexts (zones 0
[n=5), I (n=3], and III [n=l]), and are much smaller
as well as generally made on flakes; however, some
are made on arrow point (Perdiz) blades. Microscopic examination of use wear on the artifacts
indicate some were used for both drilling and perforating functions.
The projectile points have not been adequately
studied to permit definitive typological identifications, however, some generalization can be made.
Of the 121 arrow points and preforms from Asa
Warner, approximately fifty percent are Perdiz
(n=59), with Scallorn (n=9; variety Sattler [n=4]
and variety Coryell [n=5]), Alba (n=3), Cuney
(n=5), and Clifton (n=l 1) types also represented.
Another 24 arrow points are represented by complete or nearly complete blades, but lack the stem;
three are triangular or stemless forms (possibly preforms); and one unidentified arrow point has a convex base and side-notches.
A high percentage of the arrow points have
serrated blade edges (41 percent), and one of the
Perdiz arrow points has light surface smoothing
and remnants of red paint on both blade surfaces.

Surface smoothing (on the blade edges and the point
tip) occurs on several other arrow points, especially
on the Perdiz points. There is good evidence for all
stages of arrow point manufacture in the artifact
assemblage, indicating that many of the arrow points
were probably made on the site.
The available subsurface provenience information indicates that the arrow points were most frequent in the plow zone (Zone 0, n=50), followed by
Zone IV (n=21), Zone I (n=l5), and Zone III (n=l l);
all these are Late Prehistoric contexts. Approximately 11 percent of the arrow points were found in
Zone V, the yellow sandy alluvial sediments underlying the major Late Prehistoric component.
Of the 38 dart points, many different stem
designs are found, with Gary (n=3), Fairland (n=l),
Edgewood (n=5), and other types represented. Over
60 percent of the dart points were found in Zone
V, with another 21 percent in Zone IV, and the remainder mixed in the extensive Late Prehistoric
deposits (Zone 0-III). The Gary points came from
zones IV (n=l) and Ve (n=2); the Fairland specimen was in Zone IV; the Edgewood points were
from zones III (n=l), IV (n=2), Va (n=l), and Vb
(n=l). Rectangular-stemmed dart points were recovered in zones 0 (n=l), III (n=l), IV (n=l), Va
(n=2), and Vb (n=2), while expanding stemmed
dart points were most common in zones Va (n=9)
and IV (n=3), followed by 2 specimens each in
zones III, Ve, Vd, and 0.
Several of the complete dart points (8 percent)-including a Gary point, an Edgewood, and
an expanding stem form from zones IV and Vc,
respectively-have a waxy feel and glossy surface
which may indicate heat treatment. A high percentage of them have lateral stem edge smoothing (21
percent, all rectangular-stemmed forms. and principally from Zone V deposits), and some also have
light smoothing of the blade surface and edges.
There is a high percentage of blade beveling (42
percent, Zone IV and V deposits, including both
rectangular and expanding-stemmed forms) and serrating (34 percent, again principally from Zone V
deposits, but only on expanding-stemmed forms).
One of the dart points has one blade edge-smoothed
and blunted with fine micro-fracturing, which appears to have resulted from its use as a scraper on a
hard surface.
Three of the 19 pieces of ochre recovered from
Asa Warner have scored and scraped surfaces; one
of these was found in the plow zone (Zone 0) and

Wright -

The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas

may be associated with the Late Prehistoric
occupation. The smallest scored ochre (14 x 7 x 5
mm in size) is a fragment of a larger piece, and had
been scored on only one surface. The other scored
ochre pieces are much larger (35-40 mm in length,
29-40 mm in width, and 8-10 mm in thickness),
and were scored and scraped on both flat surfaces.
These pieces of ochre could be the source for the
red paint found on many of the pottery sherds,
though this seems doubtful if the ceramics were
made in East Texas and traded to the occupants of
the Asa Warner site (see Turner, this paper).
Of the approximately 350 bifaces and biface
fragments, finished artifacts generally classifiable
as knives are comparatively scarce (n=56). A total
of 109 of the biface fragments are from broken dart
and arrow points. Many of the fragments and whole
bifaces appear to have been broken in manufacture
or unfinished, although five were fire-fractured. The
microscopic examination on these artifacts for evidence of wear has not been made.

Analysis of the Asa Warner
(41ML46) Ceramics

Robert L. Turner, Jr.
My approach was to identify the Asa Warner
sherds by pottery type or name using the kind of
exterior decoration for identification and sorting
purposes. Next, I attempted to determine vessel
shape, such as bottle, jar, carinated bowl, etc., from
the form of the rim, the rim profile, and the shape
and size of the body and base sherds.
Considering the horizontal and vertical distribution of the ceramics, sherds from the Nl02 excavation units occurred only in the plow zone (Zone
O) and in Zone V, the yellow sand deposit below
the midden (the deepest cultural deposit at Asa
Warner). This implies that at this particular area
within the site, two different occupations were
present that may have been separated by considerable time. To the south along the N94 line, somewhat the same vertical pattern is apparent, but with
less discontinuity between the sherd-containing
zones. A comparison of the percentages of decorative techniques between Zone 0 and Zone I-V disclosed no significant differences, however. A
vertical displacement of sherds was also noted in
one case (N94Wl32), where a plain sherd from
Zone O fit a similar sherd from Zone IV.

231

Vessels
Enough sherds from several vessels were obtained to identify the shape, and in some cases, the
type of particular ceramic specimen. Figure 10, for
instance, illustrates eight sherds from a gourdshaped engraved bottle. A partial decorative pattern can be determined from several of the conjoined
sherds (Figure lOa). The bottle is undoubtedly
Caddoan in style, but the design does not appear to
fit any particular type (see Suhm and Jelks 1962).
The pendant triangles with red pigment are present
in early Ripley Engraved bottles of the Titus phase,
but the overall design is not that of a classic Ripley
Engraved bottle. My overall impression is that this
bottle is affiliated with either the earliest part of the
Late Caddoan period (ca. A.D. 1400+) or the latter
part of the Middle Caddoan period (ca. A.D. 12001400) in Northeast Texas.
It is interesting to note the many squares from
which parts of this bottle came (the tables prepared
by Turner that provided more detailed descriptions
of the sherds from each of the vessels could not be
located). One of the three conjoined sherds came
from a square 12 m to the west of the other two.
This sherd scatter in Zone 0 (the plow zone) could
come from both cultivation and from the general
dispersal of a broken vessel on a living surface.
Figure 11 illustrates two vessels. The upper
vessel, a jar, is Weches Fingernail Impressed (Figure 1 la), an Early Caddoan period type found
widely in Northeast Texas. The vessel shape (12
cm in diameter) was determined from two conjoined sherds that fit along the upper horizontallyincised line on the rim. These two sherds were
found 16 m apart, and in Zones IV and V. These
sherds provide an approximate date for these zones
in this part of the site.
Figure 11 b shows a sketch of an undecorated
bowl (24 cm in diameter). The two sherds from this
vessel are from Zone III of square N98W78. Plain
bowls were made by the Caddo in eastern Texas from
at least as early as A.D. 800 to historic times, but the
general shape and rim form is consistent with plain
vessels manufactured in Early Caddoan times.
The rim and shoulder of a large cooking vessel
was recovered primarily in Zone
with a single
sherd found in Zone I (Figure 12a). This vessel is
identified as Dunkin Incised, a common vessel form
and decorative style in Early Caddoan ceramic
assemblages in Northeast Texas. An additional 14
sherds from the base and side of this vessel were

232

Texas Archeological Society

b

c

d

e

f

Figure 10. Caddoan Engraved Bottle and sherds: a, reconstruction, body diameter 14 cm; b, N102Wl28-0;
c, Nl02W128-0; d, N102Wl30-0; e, N102Wl28-0; f, N101Wl42-0; g, N102W130-0.

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41ML46), McLennan County, Texas

233

also recovered in the T AS
excavations. The base diameter is
10 cm, while the lip diameter or
orifice is 22 cm. The height of the
vessel is actually unknown, but
Figure l 2b depicts the height in
proportion to that of other Caddoan
\
cooking vessels.
\
The vessel form shown in FigI
\
ure 13a was reconstructed from 35
\
I
./
sherds, all from N94Wl38, Zone I.
a
This is a small (14 cm orifice diameter) carinated (or shouldered)
bowl with a scalloped and slightly
out-flaring lip. Though it fits no
defined type, the general impression is of a Late Caddoan period
vessel from East Texas.
The jar fragment (Figure 13b)
is unidentified as to type, and information is lacking on zone provenience. However, cylindrical jars
b
of this form were more common in
Caddoan ceramic assemblages datFigure 11. Vessels from Asa Warner: a, Weches Fingernail Impressed jar
ing prior to ca. A.D. 1400.
reconstruction and sherd from N94W148-IV; b, plain bowl reconstruction
The large carinated bowl (Figand sherd from N98W78-III.
ure 13c) is reconstructed from 26
sherds from Zones 0 and I, some
of which were widely dispersed
from the main concentrations. In
were not decorated on the neck. One similarly
assigning four sherds from Nl02Wl30 and Nl02
decorated
bottle neck the author is aware of came
Wl32 to this vessel, not only the surface but the
from an early Titus phase site in Camp County,
paste was examined in as much detail as possible
Texas. Unfortunately, most of the sherds from this
to determine that they all belonged to the same
level (Zone 0) are too small to determine an overvessel. The vessel's orifice diameter is estimated
all decorative motif or particular design element for
at 32 cm.
the engraved bottle.
Plain rim sherds, which imply a completely
undecorated
pottery vessel, are present in several
Sherds Unrelated to Specific Vessels
zones at Asa Warner, including Zone 0 (see FigFigures 14-18 illustrate selected decorated and
ure 14b, q), Zone I (see Figure 15c), Zone III (see
rim sherds from all zones. A few comments are
Figure 16e), and Zone V. The fingernail punctated
warranted about the sherds. First, all the rim sherds
body sherds from Zone V are probably from potare straight and rounded to somewhat flat. None
tery types Dunkin Incised or Kiam Incised, while
have bulbous· or elliptical shapes in profile. The
the fingernail or stick punctated with incised line
sherds with incised lines and stick punctates in zones
body sherds from zones I, and
may be varia0, I, U, and III may be from Pennington Punctated
tions from the type Dunkin Incised. Both types
Incised or Canton Incised vessels (see Figure 14f,
represent Early Caddoan utility wares.
o, Figure 15d, Figure 16c, and Figure l 7e).
The rim sherds from Zone V, N101W154 and
The bottle neck and lip sherd from N94W164,
Nl01Wl56 (see Figure 18a-b), with red pigment
Zone O (see Figure 14m) with engraved vertical
in the engraved lines, have not been identified as
lines is somewhat unique, as most Caddoan bottles
to type. The Zone III inverted rim sherd with cross-

234

Texas Archeological Society
Fired Clay Objects other
than Pottery Sherds
Twenty-three small irregularly shaped fired clay fragments
were included with the vessel
sherds from the site. In size, they
range from approximately 0.5-2
square cm. Coloration varied
from light to a pastel pink-orange.
One fired clay object was inscribed on one side with three
parallel lines. It does not appear
to be a pottery sherd.
Several of the fired clay objects appear to be pinchings of clay
which were purposely or accidentally fired. None show traces of
the former presence of wattle, indicating that they are not pieces of
daub. Some were smooth on all
corners, edges, and surfaces; others were completely rough and
knobby. These irregular fragments
or pinchings of clay are thought to
be discarded clay pieces from onsite pottery manufacture that were
either purposely or accidentally
tossed into a fire. The provenience
of these fragments is as follows:
Area D-0 (n=l); Nl01W142-0
(n=3); Nl02Wl48-0 (n=5);
N94W138-0 (n=8); N94Wl30-0
(n=l); Nl 14W78-0 (n=l); and
N98W78-III (n=4).

General Remarks
It is important to note that this
analysis of the pottery has been
b
done without the author of this
section having participated in the
dig, without having seen other
Figure 12. Dunkin Incised jar: a, conjoined sherds, clockwise: Nl 14W78-III,
artifacts from the site, or obtaining
Nl14W78-III, Nl 14W78-III, Nll4W78-III, and Nll4W79-I; b, vessel
the opinions of others on the
reconstruction.
relationship between the pottery
and artifacts closely associated.
The sherd count determined by the
hatched engraved lines resembles Sanders
author from Asa Warner totals 425, which is
Engraved (see Figure 16d). The small engraved
somewhat different from the 462 listed in the field
and incised sherds from Zone IV cannot be
school records (Table 4). Twenty-three of this
typologically identified (see Figure l 7a-d).
difference may be accounted for by the small fired

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas

~
_____
".....

/

' ..... .....

,,,,,,,. /

/

/

a

235

the character of their paste, temper,
and hardness, but some, of course,
could have originated from other
sources. Shell temper, as determined from a weak hydrochloric
acid test, was present in no more
than two or three sherds.

Conclusions
Based solely on the pottery
sherds recovered at the Asa Wamer
site, and not on the total artifact
inventory, the following conclub
sions are drawn. First, the pottery
from the site is Caddoan and dates
mostly from ca. A.D. 1200-1300,
with the possibility of some vessels dating from the early part of
the Late Caddoan period (ca. A.D.
1400+ ). Frankston focus sherds
were not identified in the ceramic
assemblage, as was expected from
Watt's (1956) earlier analyses. The
most common ceramic type which
should have been present if there
had been a Frankston focus occu.....\
pation at Asa Warner would be
from Bullard Brushed jars, but not
a single brushed sherd was in the
collection.
Compared to a typical Caddoan
'\
midden in Northeast Texas, where
sherds number in the thousands (see
/
c
Perttula et al. 1995: 177), the quan......_
/ /
........
/
tity of pottery sherds was extremely
--------small at Asa Warner. It is possible
that some of the ceramic vessels
may have been manufactured at the
Figure 13. Vessel Reconstructions: a, scalloped rim bowl; b,jar; c,
site, but if so, it was only in very
carinated bowl.
small numbers. Due to the diversity
of paste, coloration, and vessel form
observed in the Asa Warner collection, it is more probable that the
clay pinchings described above. The remammg
vessels were transported to the site from East Texas
difference (n=14) must be attributed to the author
over a period of several hundred years. This would
having either lost or disregarded small sherds or
indicate that the ceramics are either the product of
crumbs.
short occupations by Caddoan peoples, or conAll decorated sherds incorporate design elversely the trade of Caddo vessels to a Central
ements and motifs which are Caddoan in origin.
Texas people who did not manufacture their own
The plain undecorated sherds are also Caddoan in
pottery.

~··

''

---

236

Texas Archeological Society

m

a

b

h

n

0

.··

r;;;;;;;f

u

cl

q

k

Figure 14. Rim and Decorated Sherds, Zone 0: a, engraved, Nl02W130; b, plain rim, N102Wl30; c, engraved,
NI 02W130; d, plain rim, Nl 02Wl 30; e, stick punctated, Nl 02W 130; f, incised-stick punctated, N l 01WI42; g, engraved,
Nl02W156; h, engraved, Nl02Wl54; i, incised, Nl02Wl48; j, engraved, N102Wl46; k, plain rim, Nl02Wl46; l,
junction with bottle neck(?), N102Wl28; m, engraved bottle neck, N94Wl04; n, incised, N94W164; o, incised and stick
punctated, N94Wl64; p, engraved, N94Wl48; q, plain rim, N94Wl38; r, engraved, N94Wl38.

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41ML46), McLennan County, Texas

237

c

d

e

Figure 15. Rim and Decorated Sherds, Zone I: a, engraved,
N94Wl48; b, incised, N94Wl46; c, plain rim, N94W146;
d, fingernail punctated-incised, Nl 14W78.

16. Rim and Decorated Sherds, Zone III: a, engraved,
N94Wl46; b, engraved, N98W78; c, stick punctatedincised, N98W78; d, engraved, N98W78; e, plain rim,
N98W78.

238

Texas Archeological Society

SHELLS
Shell ornaments were not found during the
field school; however, in the 1942 excavations conducted by Watt two pendants were recovered. The
following description is from Watt's report:

b

d

The only ornamental objects were two
shell pendants one of which was fragmentary, acutely curved and double
notched at one end for suspension, and
another with a drilled hole at one end.
This latter one is made from a large sea
shell rather than a river mussel. It is too
thick to have been fashioned from any
known species found this far upstream.
Warner No. 2 is the only site at which
shell pendants of this type have been
found. They were found above the ash
bed level and apparently belong with the
surface economy [Watt 1956:23].
The shell material from the T AS field school
was sorted and identified by species. The nine species of snails recovered at Asa Warner are:
Anguispira alternata, Helicina orbiculata ssp.,
Helicina orbiculata tropica, Helisoma trivolvis,
Mesodon roemeri, Polygyra dorfeuilliana, Polygyra
texasiana, Practicolella berlanderiana berlandieriana, and Rabdotus dealbatus (Table 5).
None of the snail shells occurred in concentrations
or features, and probably they represent the natural
accumulations of snails feeding on human wastes
and food garbage, rather than a source of food. AH
of these snails prefer environments of moist woodlands. Mussels have a low caloric value, so they are
considered to be more of a dietary supplement than
a mainstay.

Faun.al Analysis

Figure 17. Decorated Sherds from Zone II and IV: a,
incised, N94Wl48-IV; b, engraved, N94W148-IV; c,
engraved, N94W140-IV; d, engraved, N94Wl30-IV; e,
fingernail punctated-incised, N98W78-II.

Most of the faunal material was recently identified by Billy Davidson (Austin, Texas) at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory at the University of Texas at Austin. Later, it was discovered
that not all the faunal material had been identified,
so a box of material was sent to Bill McClure (Houston, Texas), who identified the remaining material.
Davidson commented that the material from this
site was very well preserved and there was such a
numerous and wide variety of species present (Table
6) that the people living at Asa Warner did not have

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41ML46), McLennan County, Texas

239

by far the largest resource. The
805 fragments represent at least
21 individuals (Appendix 1). This
number was determined by com\
bining the totals of Odocoileus
virginianus and Odocoileus sp.
\
a
Davidson also identified 211
"deer-sized artiodactyl" fragments. These are more than likely
also from deer. Deer was well,
but equally, represented in all archeological zones at Asa Warner
(Table 7).
The next most plentiful meat
b
source in numbers, but not in
bulk, is turtles. At least 11 individuals could be identified. Their
418 fragments represented six
species of turtle (see Tables 6 and
7). However, the ones considered
d
today as being the most edible,
soft-shell and snapping turtle,
were only represented by five and
one specimens, respectively.
The unidentified bovid bones
were found in 17 excavated
squares, with a total of 47 fragments. However, 35 of these are
e
f
from the plow zone (Zone 0) and
~
probably represent the bones of
domestic
cattle. The large num~
ber of fragments in this context
is likely the result of breakage
caused by plowing on the surface. Those bovid fragments in
the deeper levels of the site
(n=l2) are probably from bison.
There is a possibility that bison
Figure 18. Decorated Sherds from Zone V, or Zone Unknown: a, engraved
were being processed at the huntwith red pigment in lines, Nl02W156-V; b, engraved with red pigment in
ing-kill sites and only choice porlines, Nl02W154-V; c, fingernail punctated, N102Wl46-zone unknown;
tions were being carried back to
d, engraved, Nl02Wl32-zone unknown; e, engraved, N98W78-zone
the camp, thus losing many bone
unknown; f, incised, N98W78-zone unknown.
fragments.
Identifiable fish are represented only by the gar (n= 15 fragany trouble finding nourishing food. In particular,
ments). Clearly, these people were not utilizing fish
the species represented in the Asa Warner faunal
to a great extent. Another possibility is that many of
assemblage includes two species of fish, one amthe fish bones passed through the 1/4-inch mesh
phibian species, 10 species of reptiles, one bird
used for screening, and thus are underrepresented in
species, and 21 species of mammals.
the faunal remains from the site.
Only three species make up the larger portion
The rabbit and hare family are represented
of the possible meat diet. The white-tailed deer is
with 91 fragments (see Table 7). There were at

\

240

Texas Archeological Society
Table 4. The Vertical Distribution of Pottery Sherds
Rim

Decorated

Base

Plain

Total

0

14

40

5

213

272

I

5

12

75

93

3

4

31

46

17

24

Zone

II

6

5

III

4

5

IV

v

2

6

2

13

23

N

27

70

13

352

462

Table 5. Shell Inventory
Level

HO*

HOT

HT

0

82
14

82
14

2

24
4

2

Vb

24
3
2
26
45

Ve

11

11

I

AA

PBB

MR

PT

11

4

PD

RD

MS

Total

6

800
6

42
2

l

32
428

1

13

1090
36
0
88
518
68
1570
2022
621
219
207
486

335

6925

II
III
IV

v
Va

11

31
42

3
3

3
2
6
7
4

2
17
14
31
4

2

2

2
20
18
43
49
16
2
3
9

27

82

166

Vd
Ve

?

11

N

218

219

10

Provenience unknown
*HO= Helicina orbiculata ssp.
HOT= Helicina orbiculata tropica
HT= Helisoma trivolvis
AA= Anguispira altemata
PBB = Practicolella berlanderiana berlandieriana
MR= Mesodon roemeri
PT= Polygyra texasiana
PD= Polygyra doifeuilliana
RD = Rabdotus dealbatus
MS= Mussel shells
Note: All fragments were separated and subsequently discarded

8
9
11

l

3

1

36

6

1360
1748
530
210
204
448
5826

49
18
77
83
44
6

Wright-The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas

241

Table 6. Fauna! List
Fishes
Gar
Longnose gar

Lepisosteus sp.
Lepisosteus osseus

Toad

Bufo sp.

Mud turtle
Box turtle
Pond slider turtle
Softshell turtle
Snapping turtle
Whipsnake or Racer snake
Rat snake
Bullsnake
Rattlesnake
Western diamondback

Kinosternon sp.
Terrapene sp.
Pseudemys sp.
Trionyx sp.
Chelydra serpentina
Masticophis sp. or Coluber sp.
Elaphe sp.
Pituophis melanoleucus
Crotalus sp.
Crotalus cf. atrox

Wild turkey

Meleagris gallopavo

Virginia opossum
Jackrabbit
Black-tailed jackrabbit
Cottontail rabbit
Eastern cottontail
Eastern gray squirrel
Tree squirrel
Fox squirrel
Plains pocket gopher
Beaver
Hispid cotton rat
Woodrat
Coyote or dog
Domestic dog
Black bear
Raccoon
Bobcat
Deer
White-tailed deer
American pronghorn
Bison or cow

Didelphis virginiana
Lepus sp.
Lepus cf. californicus
Sylvilagus sp.
Sylvilagus floridanus
Sciurus carolinensis
Sciurus sp.
Sciurus niger
Geomys bursarius
Castor canadensis
Sigmodon hispidus
Neotoma sp.
Canis sp.
Canis cf. familaris
Ursus cf. americanus
Procyon lotor
Lynx rufus
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus
Antilocapra americana
Bos sp.

Amphibians

Reptiles

Birds

Mammals

least four cottontails and two jackrabbits. Swamp
rabbits were not identified. This seems unusual
since the river bottom provides a prime habitat for
the swamp rabbits.

The rodents are represented by 74 fragments,
with the hispid cotton rat and gopher being the
most common. Squirrel and beaver were scarce in
the remains. All these rodents were possible food

242

Texas Archeological Society
Table 7.

of Faunal Remains by A:rcheological Zones
Levels

Species
Gar
Unidentified fish

II

0

III

2

IV

v

4

Va

Vb

4
3

2

Ve

Vd

Ve

Other*

2

Toad
Pond slider
Softshell turtle
Snapping turtle
Mud turtle
Turtle
Western
diamondback
Rattlesnake
Rat snake
Bullsnake
Racer snake
Snake
Turkey
Pigeon or Dove
Opossum
Coyote
Dog
Canis sp.
Bobcat
Black bear
Eastern
cottontail
Cottontail
Black-tailed jackrabbit
Jackrabbit
Beaver
Fox squirrel
Eastern gray
squirrel
Cotton rat
Woodrat
Plains pocket
gopher
Gopher
Unidentified
rodents
Unidentified
Bovid

31
2

2

118

7

9

8

5

2

5

34

6

6
30

1
38

9

11

70

2

4

2

4

2

2

5

4

2
2

6
2

2

l

23
2
5
1
6

2
2

4

5

5
4

14
5

5

3

2

9

2

8

2

2

4
6

2
3

35

4

2

2

4

16

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MlA6), McLennan County, Texas

243

Table 7. (Continued)
Levels
Species
Deer**
Unidentified
deer-sized
Pronghorn
Unidentified
Bones***
Totals

0

II

III

IV

v

Va

Vb

Ve

Vd

Ve

Other*

32

14

23

35

4

3

164

62

42

169

173

45

70

63

32
2

22

22

57

44

7

13

7

3931

682

334

1407

1227

375

556

395

123

72

64

188

4376

790

415

1756

1534

450

700

530

178

93

98

240

*Includes 6 bones from Level Vf, 1 bone from Level Vg, and 233 bones of unknown provenience
**Does not include 7 bones in Burial #2 (n=3), Burial #3 (n=2), Burial #5 (n=l), and Burial #7 (n=l)
*** Does not include 117 bones in Burial #2 (n=6), Burial #3 (n=2), Burial #5 (n=l03), and Burial #7 (n=6)

sources. Gopher burrows were an extremely common disturbance at the site, especially around the
burials. Most of the gopher bones are probably the
result of natural deposition.
The carnivores are represented by 28 elements
and at least five species. The black bear, raccoon,
and dog are the most probable food sources, although others may have been eaten. The coyote and
bobcat would have provided fur and clothing, as
would the black bear. Ornaments made from the
metacarpals, metatarsals, and canine teeth are common in Central Texas, although none has been documented from the Asa Warner site.
Snakes, if they were used as food, were at best
a very minor resource. They were represented by
only 11 elements.
Birds were represented by 16 fragments and
two species. The wild turkey would have been a
principal food source. The pigeon or dove were
also likely food sources, but they were not as
abundant in number as the wild turkey. Beads made
from the hollow wing bones of birds are also
common in Central Texas, but such beads were not
found at the Asa Warner site.
There are a few other edible species at the site,
but they are not represented by many numbers of
identifiable specimens (see Table 7 and Appendix
1). In conclusion, hunting was a very important part
of the subsistence activities at the Asa Warner site,
particularly hunting white-tailed deer.

Based on the available information concerning
the distribution of faunal remains by archeological
zones, the plow zone (Zone 0) contained the most
faunal material, followed by zones HI (midden)
and IV(midden transitional zone). Zones V-Vb also
had considerable bone, but below zone Vb, the
amount of faunal material sharply decreases (see
Table 7).
Besides identifying species, burned and butchered bones were noted among the faunal remains.
Each level of every square contained some burned
material, but only 33 percent of the faunal material
was burned, either burned black or calcined (Table
8). Butchering faunal remains was not as common
as burning. Only 0.83 percent of the faunal material
had such marks (see Table 8), and this includes
cutting marks on mammal long bones. Figure 19
shows the distribution of the units containing the
butchered material. Apparently, the bones were not
broken in order to eat the marrow. Perhaps the
people at the site had plenty of food to eat, so there
was no need for them to put the effort into getting
the marrow out of the bone.

CONCLUSION
Asa Warner seems to consist of two
prehistoric archeological components: a Middle
and Late Archaic open campsite and later a small

244

Texas Archeological Society
Table 8. Burned and Butchered Faunal
Material from Asa Warner Site
Percent
Butchered

Percent
Burned

Va
Vb
Ve
Vd
Ve
VfNg

0.55
0.91
1.00
1.60
0.87
1.80
0.53
0.28
1.20
0.00
0.00
0.00

29.0
31.0
37.0
33.0
38.0
36.0
41.0
44.0
32.0
34.0
23.0
00.0

Average

0.84

33.0

Level
0

I
II
III

IV

v

If it is true, as Turner hypothesizes (see above),
that the recovered Caddoan ceramics were not made
in the local area, then the site may have served as a
trading post (Richmond et al. 1985:149). Additional
research is required to fully evaluate this hypothesis. The Caddo Indians had a strong influence on
prehistoric Central Texas groups. Three particular
sites near Asa Warner also show evidence of interaction and trade between the prehistoric Caddo and
native Central Texans. The Mass Burial site contained one clay earspool. This style of ear ornament
is undoubtedly Caddoan (Meroney 1936:58). The
Chupek site contains Caddoan-type pottery, mainly
dating to the Early Caddoan period. The sherds are
decorated by red slipping, incising, engraving, and
impressed-punctated designs (Watt 1941b:17). The
Baylor site also contained Caddo style ceramics
(Story and Shafer 1965:9). More research would
reveal how these sites were related to each other
and to the prehistoric Caddo Indian settlement of
East Texas.
There was no evidence of an Indian occupation
of the Asa Warner site during the
historic period, contrary to Watt's
(1956)
earlier
suggestion.
Occupation at this site in prehistoric
times seems to have been by
hunting and gathering groups that
probably entered and left the area
on a seasonal basis.

Evaluation of the 1973
Field School
As stated, I was not present at
the field school. However, some
evaluations can be offered of the
1973 TAS Field School based on
the written records and personal
contacts I have made while
preparing this article. The level and
burial reports made in the field are
extremely
sketchy. I understand
Figure 19. Map of the Asa Warner site showing the units with butchered and
that
this
was
a school and that
burned animal bones.
peoples' extent of notetaking varied
greatly. Some interpretations of the
Late Prehistoric village with abundant Perdiz
burials have probably been lost because of the
arrowpoints, lithic tools, midden deposits, and
sketchy reports, and the lack of photographs for
burials, that was Caddoan-influenced in that
every burial. The pottery assemblage from the site
Middle to Late Caddoan period ceramics occur
is missing, unfortunately, and will probably never
there in some number.
be located. The only documentation of the pottery

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas
is in this paper. Approximately 40 percent of the
total amount of cultural material from the Asa
Warner Site is currently missing. Therefore, we
may never know more than what is presented here
about the important information that the site has (or
had) to offer about the prehistory of Central Texas.
I was never able to contact Alton Briggs, the
director of the TAS field school. It is unfortunate
that it has taken 24 years for the site report to be
written. Over this time, material has been lost and
the memories of the participants have faded. Undoubtedly, the report would have been more accurate if it had been written by the Principal
Investigator within a year or so of the excavation,
but I hope the archeological information presented
here will contribute to a better understanding of the
prehistory of this part of Central Texas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Asa Warner Site was excavated in 1973
by the Texas Archeological Society and many volunteers. Thanks goes to Al Redder, for he attended
the dig and was my key source for first-hand information. Redder also helped with a lot of the interpretations of the faunal material. Randy Southers
completed the drafting. Billy Davidson and Bill
McClure identified the faunal material. I would
also like to thank Calvin Smith, at the Strecker
Museum, for his help with the background history
of the area. Ronald Ralph of Texas Parks and Wildlife was essential to my understanding of the writing process. David Lintz, also at the Strecker
Museum, offered a lot of everyday encouragement.
All of these people have helped with the interpretations and I could not have finished the report without them.

REFERENCES CITED
Brothwell, D. R.
1963 Digging Up Bones. The British Museum of Natural
History, London.
Meroney, W. P.
1936 A Mass Burial near Waco. Central Texas Archeologist No.2:58-60.

245

Perttula, T. K., M. R. Miller, R. A. Ricklis, D. J. Prikryl, and
C. Lintz
1995 Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66: 175-235.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 54:201-238.

n.d.

Chapter in unpublished manuscript on file at the
Strecker Museum, Baylor University, Waco, Texas.

Richmond, J. A., W. L. Richmond, and J. W. Greer.
1985 Texas Archeological Society Field Schools 19621982. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
54: 105-184.
Smith, J. D.
1967 Report on Teeth and Supporting Structures, Asa
Warner Burials. Central Texas Archeologist
No.8: 18-20.
Story, D. A. and H.J. Shafer
1965 Excavations at Waco Reservoir, McLennan County,
Texas: The Baylor and Britton Sites. Miscellaneous
Papers No. 6. Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Texas Archeological Society, Special Publication
No. 1, and Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin No.
4. Austin.
Trotter, M. and G. C. Gieser
1958 A Re-evaluation of Estimation of Stature based on
Measurements of Stature Taken during Life and of
Long Bones after Death. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 16:79-123.
United Stares Department of Agriculture
1942 Soil Survey of McLennan County, Texas. Bulletin
No.17. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Watt, F. H.
194la Preliminary Report on Warner Site Number 2, Part
I. Central Texas Archeological Society Newsletter.
December, Part 3-III.
194lb Preliminary Report on Potsherds from Chupek Site.
Central Texas Archeological Society Newsletter.
January, Part 2-IV.
1942

Preliminary Report on Warner Site Number 2, Part
2. Central Texas Archeological Society Newsletter.
January, Part 3-IV.

246

Texas Archeological Society

1953

Pottery Diffusions of the Central Brazos Valley.
Central Texas Archeologist No.6:57-85.

1956

Archeological Materials from the Asa Warner Sites.
The Central Texas Archaeologist No.7:6-29.

Weir, F.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Washington State University, Pullman.
Wilson, L. K.
1956 Case Report on Burials, Warner's No. 2. The Central Texas Archeologist 7:56.

Appendix 1. Fauna! Remains from the Asa
Wamer Site (41ML46)

1

Odocoileus sp.
Unidentified Bovid

Square "N-A"
349
2
1
1
l
3
3
8
21

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Pseudemys sp.
Canis cf. familaris
Sylvilagus sp.
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus
Unidentified Bovid

Billy Davidson and W. L. McClure
This appendix is a listing of the faunal
identifications. The list is presented by order of
level, then in square order. Some of the square
names are inconsistent with the way the other
squares are labeled-most squares were labeled
according to the north and west coordinates-in
that they have alphabetic designations such as N-A
or N-C. The reasoning for such square labels could
not be determined.
A few boxes of material remained to be identified when Billy Davidson completed his contract
with the TAS. These boxes were identified by Bill
McClure. The results of his work are marked with
an asterisk in Table 9.
The numbers on the left in each column represent the number of fragments of bone that were
identified. In those instances where a minimum
number of individuals could be determined, that
number is noted in brackets. Table 9 lists the faunal
remains organized by level. Table 10 lists the remains according to species.

Table 9. Fauna) Remains by Level
Level 0 (Surface)
Square "NBW Surface Bone"
56
1

Unidentified bone fragments
Pseudemys sp.

Square "N-C"
42
2
1
1
2

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Crotalus cf. atrox
Syvilagus sp.
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl

Square "ND"
402
8
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
8
5
4

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Kinosternon sp.
Pseudemys sp.
Meleagris gallopavo
Lepus sp.
Sylvilagus sp.
Sigmodon hispidus
Lynx rufus
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus
Unidentified Bovid

N86W78

*16
*1

Unidentified bone fragments
Bovid

N94 Wl64
994
41

Unidentified bone fragments
Emydidae turtles [at least 4 individuals]

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas

247

Table 9. (Continued)
5
1
1

1
1
7
10

18

Pseudemys sp.
Kinosternon sp.
Trionyx sp.
cf. Elaphe sp.
Unidentified bird
Sigmodon hispidus
Neotoma sp.
Sylvilagus sp. [at least 2 individuals]
Unidentified Artiodactyl [at least 2
in di vi duals]
Odocoileus virginianus [at least 3
individuals]

N94 W166
236
7
1
3
2
2

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Kinosternon sp.
Pseudemys sp.
Trionyx sp.
Sylvilagus sp
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.

N98 W78
128
2

1
2
5
2

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Pseudemys sp.
Meleagris gallopavo
Syvilagus sp.
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus
Bovid

NlOl W142
320
8
5
2
1
I
4
3
4
2
9
13

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Emydidae
Pseudemys sp.
Kinosternon sp [2 individuals]
Procyon lotor
Ursus cf. americana
Sciurus niger
Sylvilagus sp.
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
cf. Antilocapra americana
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus
Bovid

Nl02 Wl28
603
I
13
4
5
l
2
2
I
2
1
1
6
8
12
2

Unidentified bone fragments
Lepisosteus sp.
Unidentified Chelonia
Unidentified Emydidae
Pseudemys sp.
Kinosternon sp.
Pituophis melanoleucus cf. sayi
Lepus californicus
Sylvilagus sp.
Sciurus niger [I adult and 1 juvenile]
Sigmodon hispidus
Canis sp.
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus [at least 2 adults
and l juvenile]
Bovid

N99 W142
N102 Wl54
32
7
5

Unidentified bone fragments
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

NlOOW130

*6
*3
*8

Unidentified bone fragments
Pseudemys sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

312
9
I
5
2

1
1
3

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Kinosternon sp.
Unidentified Emydidae
Terrapene sp.
Pseudemys sp.
Didelphis virginiana
Lepus sp.
Sylvilagus sp. [at least 2 adults)

Texas Archeological Society

248

Table 9. (Continued)
1
l

1
3

Procyon lotor
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

7
22

3

Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus virginianus
Bovid

N114 W78
Nl02 Wl56
476
1
l

9
4
l

3
1

1
3
7
7
3

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Teleostei
Lepisosteus sp.
Unidentified Chelonia
Pseudemys sp.
Geomys sp.
Lepus sp.
Sylvilagus sp.
Procyon lotor
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus
Bovid

N114 W77

*l
*l
*l
*2
*1

Unidentified bone fragment
Unidentified Chelonia
Castor canadensis
Odocoileus sp.
Bovid

LEVEL I
N94 W130
*40
*6

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl

N94 Wl48
425
l
l
2
5
1
1
l

Unidentified bone fragments
Lepisosteus osseus
Unidentified Emydidae
Pseudemys sp.
Sigmodon hispidus [at least 4 adults]
Sylvilagus sp.
Lepus sp.
Lepus cf. califomicus

78
2
l
l

2
4
2
1

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Kinosternon sp.
Sylvilagus sp.
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus [1 adult]
Bovid

Nll4 W79
139
2
1
1
7

6
8

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Kinosternon sp.
Lepus sp.
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

LEVEL II
N98 W78

334
1
6
4
1

1
1
4
22
20

Unidentified bone fragments
Lepisosteus osseus
Unidentified Chelonia
Kinosternon sp.
Trionyx sp.
Meleagris gallopavo
Procyon lotor
Lepus cf. californicus
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus virginianus

LEVEL HI
N86W74
140
6

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Chelonia

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas
Table 9. (Continued)
3
8
4
1

Terrapene sp.
Lepus sp. [2 adults]
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

*2
*4
*1
*1
* 13

Kinosternon sp.
Terrapene sp.
Unidentified Columbidae
Sylvilagus floridanus
Odocoileus sp.

N86 W79
Nl14 W78
140
6
2
2
3
3
3
2

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Kinosternon sp. [at least 2 adults]
Terrapene sp.
Pseudemys sp. [at least 2 adults]
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

105
1
2
1
2
3
17

N94 W146
*2
*6
*1

Unidentified bone fragments
Odocoileus sp.
Bovid

LEVEL IV
N94 Wl30

N98 W78
995
37
4
4
4
4
4
1
5

51
68

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Emydidae [at least 4
individuals]
Kinosternon sp.[at least 2 individuals]
Pseudemys sp.
Pituophis melanoleucus [l individual]
Meleagris gallopavo [l adult]
Didelphis virginiana
Geomys sp.
Castor canadensis
Sylvilagus sp.[at least 2 adults]
Lepus sp.
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus virginianus [at least 4 adults
& 1 juvenile]
Bovi9

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Unidentified Emydidae
Pseudemys sp.
Kinosternon sp.
Geomys sp.
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus virginianus [at least 4
individuals, adult and juvenile]

1
8

Unidentified bone fragment
Odocoileus virginianus
Bovid [1 individual]

N94 Wl38
*56
*5
*l
*1
*16

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Procyon lotor
Canis cf. latrans
Odocoileus virginianus

N94 Wl40
34
3
1
6
18

Unidentified bone fragments
Unidentified Emydidae [l individual]
Pseudemys sp.
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus virginianus

N98 W142
N94 Wl48
*25
*1
*10

Unidentified bone fragments
Lepisosteus sp.
Unidentified Chelonia

808
4

Unidentified fragments
Lepisosteus osseus

249

Texas Archeological Society

250

Table 9. (Continued)
12
l
1
1
l

5
11

3
1
8
1
21
32
46
2

Unidentified Chelonia [several
individuals]
Kinosternon sp.
Terrapene sp.
Pseudemys sp.
Meleagris gallopavo
Lepus cf. californicus
Sylvilagus sp.
Unidentified rodent
Sciurus niger
Sigmodon hispidus [at least 5 adults)
Procyon lotor
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus
Bovid

N98 W78
226

5
1
3
1
1
2
1
1
l
3
2
13
2

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Unidentified Emydidae
Pseudemys sp.
Meleagris gallopavo
Canis sp.
Sylvilagus sp.
Sciurus niger
Geomyssp.
Geomys bursarius
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus
Bovid

LEVELV
N98W78
166
1
2
3
2
4
3
5

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Pseudemys sp.
Crotalus sp.
Sylvilagus sp.
Sigmodon hispidus
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

N99 W142
*61
*4
*4

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Odocoileus sp.

N102 Wl30
141
1
3
2

1
3
5
12

Unidentified fragments
Trionyx sp.
Pseudemys sp.
Sylvilagus sp.
Geomys sp.
Geomys bursarius
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus [at least 4
individuals, adults and juveniles]

Nl02 W140
Nll4 W78

*1
102

4
3
3
l
1

3
7
6

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Kinosternon sp.
Pseudemys sp.
Canis sp.
Sylvilagus sp.
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

*1

Unidentified Chelonia
Terrapene sp.

N102 W148

5
l

Unidentified fragment
Odocoileus sp.

Nl14 W78

*2

*l

Unidentified fragments
Canis latrans

Wright-The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas
Table 9. (Continued)
*8

Odocoileus sp.

LEVEL Va
N94 W140

*2
*5

Unidentified fragments
Odocoileus sp.

N94 W142
*4

Odocoileus sp.

N94 W148
57
5
1
1
1
1
2

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Pseudemys sp.
Sigmodon hispidus
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

1
2
l
6
7
6

*11
l

*l
*l

Pseudemys sp.
Geomys sp.
Geomys bursarius
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus
Odocoileus sp.
Antilocapra americana
Antilocapra americana
Bovid

Nl02 W130
*7
*1
*4

Unidentified fragment
Deer/pronghorn
Odocoileus sp.

Nl02 W138
2
2

Unidentified fragment
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl

Nl02 Wl40
N98 W142
10

20
6
1
1
1

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Unidentified Emydidae
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus virginianus

NlOl W142
*20
*3
*2
*1
*5

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified fish
Unidentified Chelonia
Terrapene sp.
Odocoileus sp.

Nl02 W128
205
*65
*2
3
1
1

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Unidentified Chelonia
Kinosternon sp.
Unidentified Emydidae

Unidentified fragment

Nl02 Wl54
135
1
2
l
5

1
3
1

3
9
2

Unidentified fragments
Lepisosteus sp.
Unidentified Chelonia
Unidentified Emydidae
Terrapene sp.
Pseudemys sp.
Trionyx sp.
Sylvilagus sp.
Sylvilagus fioridanus
Unidentified Cricetidae
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

Nl02 Wl56
98
3
6

Unidentified fragments
Lepisosteus sp.
Unidentified Chelonia

251

Texas Archeological Society

252

Table 9. (Continued)
l
1
2
3

Masticophis sp. or Coluber sp.
Lepus sp.
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

LEVEL Vb
N94 W130

1
1
*5
4

N102 W130
*8

*1
3

Unidentified fragments

N94 W132
20
*69
*3
*1
*6
*4
3
1

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Unidentified bird
Canis latrans
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

N98 Wl42
*38
*2
*2

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Odocoileus sp.

NIOl W146
*9
*2
*1
.:, l

Unidentified fragments
Pseudemys sp.
Terrapene sp .
Odocoileus sp.

Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

*3

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Odocoileus sp.

N102 W132
3

Unidentified fragments
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

Nl02 W138

*1
*I
*1

Unidentified fragment
Unidentified fragments
Lepus californicus
Odocoileus sp.

Nl02 W140
*3

Unidentified fragments

Nl02 W146
3
*2
*3

Unidentified fragments
Odocoileus sp.
Deer/pronghorn

N102 Wl48
Nl02 Wl28
101
*5
9
*1
2
1
*2
1

*l

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Kinosternon sp.
Trionyx sp.
Sylvilagus sp.
Geomys bursarius
Geomys bursarius
Canis sp.
Canis sp.

17
*112
*1
1
*1

*1
*1
*9
4

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified fragments
Lepisosteus sp.
Unidentified Chelonia
Unidentified Chelonia
Pseudemys sp.
Geomys bursarius
Sigmodon hispidus
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas

Table 9. (Continued)
N102 W150
*22
*2
*l
*1
*2

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Chelydra serpentina
Kinosternon sp.
Odocoileus sp

*8
*9

Geomys bursarius
Odocoileus sp.

N102 Wl48
*1
*7

Unidentified fragment
Odocoileus sp.

Nl02 Wl52
N102 W150
Unidentified fragment

Nl02 Wl54
166
1
16
1

2
2
1
1
6
1
7

Unidentified fragments
Lepisosteus sp.
Unidentified Chelonia
Unidentified Emydidae
Pseudemys sp.
Sylvilagus sp.
Sigmodon hispidus
Procyon lotor
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus [at least 3 adults]
Bovid

Nl14 W78

*1

Odocoileus sp.

LEVEL Ve
N94 Wl30
*2

Odocoileus sp.

N94 W132
*28
*1
*2
*5

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Canis cf. latrans
Odocoileus sp.

N102 Wl32
*4

Unidentified fragments

*90
*2
*2
*l
*14
*1

Unidentified fragments
Bufo sp.
Unidentified Chelonia
Pseudemys sp.
Odocoileus sp.
Antilocapra americana

LEVELVd
Nl02 W146
*7
*9

Unidentified fragments
Odocoileus sp.

Nl02 Wl56
*65
*5

*l
*1
*5

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Columbidae
Geo mys bursarius
Odocoileus sp.

LEVEL Ve
Nl02 Wl56
64
*34
1

*1
1
l
4
3

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Chelonia
Pseudemys sp.
Unidentified bird
Sylvilagus sp.
Lepus sp.
Lynx rufus
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.

253

254

Texas Archeological Society
Table 9. (Continued)
*7
4

Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus

N99 W142

* 13
LEVELVf

*1

N102 W156

2
*2

5
1

Unidentified fragments
Pseudemys sp.

Unidentified fragments
Sciurus carolinensis
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.

NlOO W130
*3

Unidentified fragments

LEVELVg
ASSOCIATED WITH BURIALS
N94 W130
Burial #2
1

Odocoileus sp.

UNKNOWN LEVELS
N94 Wl30
19
1
2
*2
4

8

Unidentified fragment
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus [at least 2 adults]
Bovid [l individual]

*6
*3

Burial #3
2
*33
*2

74

*2
*4
*l

*1
*l
*l
*10

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Teleostei
Unidentified Chelonia
Pseudemys sp.
Viperidae
Lepus californicus
Castor canadensis
Odocoileus sp.

N98 W142
*77
*l
*2
*8

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified Teleostei
Procyon lotor
Odocoileus sp.

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified fragments
Odocoileus sp.

Burial #5

N94 Wl42
*73

Unidentified fragments
Odocoileus sp.

Unidentified fragments
Odocoileus sp.

Burial #7
6

Unidentified fragments
Odocoileus virginianus

Burial #8
*29

Unidentified fragments

MATERIAL FROM WATT'S DIG IN 19411942
"Warner Jawbone Embedded"

17
1
2

Unidentified fragments
Didelphis virginiana
Odocoileus sp.

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas
Table 9. (Continued)
1

Odocoileus virginianus

"Trench 3 9-24"
22
5
5

Unidentified fragments
Pseudemys sp. [1 individual]
Odocoileus virginianus

"Number 15"
101
6
2
7
2

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus
Bovid

"Pit number 16"
24
4

1
6
4

Unidentified fragments
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Antilocapra americana
Odocoileus sp. [2 adults]
Odocoileus virginianus

"Warner Buried Midden"
68
1
1
8
l

8
l

Unidentified fragments
Kinosternon sp.
Procyon lotor
Unidentified deer-sized Artiodactyl
Odocoileus sp.
Odocoileus virginianus
Bovid

"Warner trench #2"

*2

Odocoileus sp.

"Warner trench #23"

*9
*1
*4

Unidentified fragments
Meleagris gallopavo
Odocoileus sp.

255

Table 10. Faunal Remains Arranged by Species
Osteichthyes
Lepisosteus osseus:
Square
N102 Wl28
Nl02 W156
N94 W148
N98 W78
N98 W142
N94 W148
Nl02 W154
Nl02 W156
Nl02 Wl46
Nl02 Wl54
Unidentified Telestostei
Nl02 W156
Unidentified Osteichthyes
N94 W142
NlOl Wl42
Total
Saiientia
Bufo sp.
Nl02 Wl50
Total
Chelonia
Pseudemys sp.
NBW
N-A
N-D
N94 Wl64
N94 W166
N98 W78
NlOO W130
NlOO W142
N102 Wl28
N102 W154
N102 W156
N94 Wl48
Nll4 W78
N86W79
N98 W78
N94 W140
N94 W148
N98 W78
N114 W78

Level
0
0

Frags.
1

I
II
III

IV
Va
Va
Vb
Vb

4
3
1
1

0
?
Va

2
3
21

Ve

2
2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1

I
III
III
III

IV
IV
IV
IV

5
3
3
5
5
2
4
2
2
3
4
l

l
3
3

256

Texas Archeological Society

Table 10. (Continued)
N98 W78
Nl02 Wl30
N94 Wl48
Nl02 W128
NlOl Wl46
Nl02 Wl48
N102 W154
N102 Wl50
Nl02 Wl56
Nl02 W156
N94 Wl42
Total
Kinosternon sp.
ND
N94 W164
N94 W166
Nl02 W142
Nl02 Wl28
N102 W154
N114 W78
Nll4 W79
N98 W78
N98 Wl42
N114 W78
N86 W79
N98 W78
N94 Wl48
Nll4 W78
N102 W128
N102 Wl28
Nl02 Wl50
Total

v
v
Va
Va
Vb
Vb
Vb
Ve
Ve
Vf
?

2
3

N102 W154
Total

1
2

Trionyx sp.
N94 Wl64
N94 W166
N98W78
N102 W130
N102 W154
Total

2
1
1

I
I
II
III
III

m
III

IV
IV
Va
Vb
Vb

1

2

l
1

4
2
1

2
4
1
3
1
1
29

Emydidae
N94 Wl64
Nl02 W142
N102 W128
N102 Wl54
N94 W148
Nll4 W78
N98 W78
N94 W140
N98 W78
N98 W142
N102 Wl28
Nl02 Wl54

0
0
0
0
I

41
8
4
5

III

1

m

37
3

IV
IV
Va
Va
Va

1
105

0
0
II

1

v

1
1
5

Va

1

66

0
0
0
0
0
0

Vb

l
1

1
1

Chelydra serpentina
N102 W150
Total
Terrapene sp.
N102 W154
N98 W142
N86W74
N86W79
N94 Wl48
N102 Wl40
NlOl Wl42
N102 Wl54
NlOl Wl46
Total

Vb

1

1

0
III
III
III

IV

v
Va
Va
Vb

4
3
2
1
1
l

5
1

19

Unidentified Chelonia
NA
NC
ND
N94 Wl66
N98 W78
N102 W128
N102 Wl54
Nl02 Wl56
N114 W77
Nll4 W78
Nll4 W79
N98 W78
N98 W142
Nl14 W78
N86 W74
N86 W79

li4W138

94 W148
98 W78

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2
2
8
7
2
13
9
9

I
I
II
III
III

2
2
6
10

m

6
6
5
12
5

III

IV
IV
IV

1

1

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas

257

Table 10. (Continued)
Nll4 W78
N98 W78
N99 Wl42
Nl02 Wl40
N94 Wl48
N98 Wl42
Nl02 W142
N102 W128
N102 W154
N102 W156
N94 W132
N98 Wl42
N102 Wl28
N102 Wl30
N102 W148
Nl02 W150
N102 W154
N94 W132
Nl02 Wl50
N102 Wl56
N102 Wl56
N94 W142
Total

IV

v
v
v
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Ve
Ve
Vd
Ve
?

4
1
5
6
2
5
2
6
3
2
9
2
2
16
1
5
4

193

Squamata
Crotalus cf. atrox
NC
0
Crotalus sp.
N98 W78
v
cf. Elaphe sp.
N94 Wl64
0
Pituophis melanoleucus cf. sayi
Nl02 W128
0
N98 W78
III
Masticophis sp. or Coluber sp.
N102 Wl56
Va
Viperidae
N94 Wl42
?
Total
Aves
Meleagris gallopavo
N-D
N98 W78
N98 W78
N98 W78
N94 Wl48

4

0
0
II
III
IV

N98 W78
Total

IV

Columbidae
N98 Wl42
Nl02 W156
Total

III
Vd

Unidentified birds
N94 Wl48
N94 W132
N102 Wl56
N94 Wl64
Total

Va
Vb
Ve
0

Marsupialia
Didelphis virginiana
N102 Wl54
N98 W78
Total
Carnivora
Canis latrans
N94 W138
Nll4 W78
N94 W132
N94 Wl32
Total

0
III

v
Vb
Ve

1
11

Canis sp.
N102 Wl28
N98 W78
N114 W78
N102 Wl28
Total

0
IV
IV
Vb

1
1
4
1

Procyon lotor
Nl02 Wl42
N102 W154
N102 Wl56
N98 W78
N94 Wl38
Nl02 W154

1

2

1
2

IV

0

2
4

1
2

5

Canis familiaris
NA
Total

1

1

9

1
6
2
10

1

1

0
0
0
II
IV
Vb

1
1
2
5

258

Texas Archeological Society

Table 10. (Continued)
N98 W142
Total

Lynx rufus
ND
N102 Wl56
Total
Ursus cf. americanus
N102 W142
Total
Lagomorpha
Sylvilagus floridanus
N98 Wl42
N102 W154
Total

Sylvilagus sp.
N-A
N-C
N-D
N94 W164
N94 W166
N98 W78
N102 Wl42
N102 Wl28
N102 W154
Nl02 W156
N94 Wl48
N114 W78
N98 W78
N94 W148
N98 W78
Nll4 W78
N98 W78
N102 W130
N102 Wl54
N102 W128
Nl02 Wl54
N102 Wl56
Total
Lepus californicus
N102 Wl28
N94 W148
N98 W78

?

2

8

0

Ve

1
1
2

0
1

III

Va

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
I
I
III
IV

IV
IV

v
v
Va

Vb
Vb
Ve

1
2

1

7
2
2
3
1
3

5
11

2
1
3
2
3
2
2
l

56

0
I
II

2
l
4

N94 Wl48
Nl02 W138
N94 W142
Total

Lepus sp.
N-D
N102 W154
N102 W156
N94 W148
Nll4 W79
N86 W74
N98 W78
N102 Wl56
Nl02 W156
Total
Rodentia
Castor canadensis
Nll4 W77
N98 W78
N94 W142
Total

Sciurus niger
Nl02 W142
Nl02 W128
N94 W148
N98 W78
Total
Sciurus carolinensis
N99 Wl42
Total
Sigmodon hispidus
N-D
N94 W164
Nl02 Wl28
N94 W148
N94 W148
N98 W78
N94 Wl42
Nl02 W148
N102 W154
Total

IV
Vb

5

?

1

14

0
0
0
I
I
III
III

Va
Ve

1
3
1

8

1

19

0
III
?

l

3

0
0

IV
IV

4
2
1
1

8

?
1

0
0
0
I
IV

v
Va
Vb
Vb

2
1
5
8
2
1
1
l

22

Wright- The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas

259

Table 10. (Continued)
Neotoma sp.
N94 Wl64
Total
Geomys bursarius
N98 W78
N102 Wl30
N102 Wl28
Nl02 W128
N102 W148
N102 Wl48
N102 Wl32
N102 W156
Total
Geomys sp.
N102 W156
Nll4 W78
N98 W78
N98 W78
Nl02 W130
Nl02 Wl28
Total

0

I

IV

v
Va
Vb
Vb
Ve
Ve
Vd

1
1
l
3
1
8
8
1
24

0

l

III
III

2
4
1
1
2
11

IV

v
Va

IV
Va

3
1
4

Artiodactyla

Unidentified Bovids
NBW
N-A
N-D
N86 W78
N98 W78
N102 W142
N102 W128
N102 W156
Nll4 W77
N94 Wl48
Nll4 W79
N94 Wl46
N98 W78
N94 W148
N98 W78
Nl02 W128

Vb

1

47

1

Unidentified Rodentia
N94 W148
Nl02 W154
Total

N102 W154
Total

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
I
I
III
III

IV
IV
Va

21
4

1
2
3

3
l

1
l
2
2

Odocoileus virginianus
NBW
N-A
N-D
N94 W164
N94 W166
N98 W78
N99 W142
NlOO W130
NlOl 142
N102 W128
N102 W154
N102 Wl56
Nll4 W77
N94 W130
N94 Wl48
Nll4 W78
Nll4 W79
N98 W78
N94 Wl46
N98 W142
Nl14 W78
N86 W74
N86 W79
N98 W78
N94 W130
N94 Wl38
N94 W140
N94 W148
N98 W78
Nll4 W78
N98 W78
N99 W142
N102 Wl30
N102 Wl48
Nl14 W78
N94 W140
N94 Wl42
N94 W148
N98 Wl42
NlOl W142
N102 Wl28
Nl02 Wl30
N102 W138

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
I
I
I
I
II
III
III
III
III
III
III

IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV

v
v
v
v
v
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va

13
15
28
3
7
12
8
26
26
5
17
3
6
29
6
21
42
6
13
21
5
5
119
1
16
24
99
17
16
12
4
20
1
8
5
4
4
2
5
24
5
2

260

Texas Archeological Society
Table 10. (Continued)
Nl02 Wl54
N102 W156
N94 W142
N98 Wl42
NlOl Wl48
N102 Wl28
Nl02 Wl30
Nl02 Wl32
Nl02 Wl38
N102 W146
Nl02 W148
Nl02 Wl50
Nl02 W154
Nl14 W78
N94 W130
N94 Wl32
N102 Wl32
Nl02 Wl48
Nl02 Wl50
Nl02 W146
Nl02 W156
Nl02 Wl56
N94 W130
N94 W130
N94 W142
N98 Wl42
N99 W142
Burial #2
Burial #3
Burial #5
Burial #7
Total

AnitlocaJJra americana
Nl02 Wl42
Nl02 Wl28
N102 Wl48

Va
Va
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Ve
Ve
Ve
Ve
Ve
Vd
Vd
Ve
Vg
?
?
?
?

14
5
8
2
1
11
3
2
l

5
13
2
14
1

'
2
5
9
7
14
9
5
18
1

8
10
8
8
3
2
1

805

0
Va
Ve

Total
Unidentified Deer-sized Artiodaetyls
N-A
0
N-D
0
N94 W164
0
N94 W166
0
Nl02 WI42
0
N102 W128
0
Nl02 W154
0

2
2
1
5

5
2
10
2
3
6

N102 Wl56
N98 W130
N94 Wl48
Nll4 W78
Nll4 W79
N98 W78
N114 W78
N86 W79
N98 W78
N94 Wl40
N94 W148
N98 W78
Nli4 W78
N98 W78
Nl02 Wl30
N94 Wl48
N98 Wl42
Nl02 W128
N102 W138
Nl02 Wl54
Nl02 W128
N102 W154
Nl02 Wl56
N94 W130
N99 Wl42
Total

0
I
I
I
I
II
III
III
III

IV
IV
IV
IV

v
v
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Vb
Vb
Ve
?
?

Unidentified bone fragments
NBW
0
NA
0
ND
0
N86W78
0
N94 W164
0
N94 Wi66
0
N98 W78
0
N99 W142
0
N100W130
0
NlOO W142
0
N102 Wl28
0
N102 W154
0
N102 W156
0
Nll4 W77
0
N94 Wl30
I
N94 W148
I
Nl14 W78
I
N114 W79
I
N98 W78
II

3
6
7
2
7
22
3
3
51
6
32
3
3
4
3
1

6
2
3
I

6
4
l

2
211

56
349
402
16
994
236
128
32
6
320
603
312
476
40
425
78
139
334

Wright - The Asa Warner Site (41MIA6), McLennan County, Texas

261

Table 10. (Continued)
N94 Wl46
N98 Wl42
Nll4 Wl78
N86 W74
N86 W79
N98 W78
N94 Wl30
N94 W138
N94 Wl40
N94 Wl48
N98 W78
N114 W78
N98 W78
N99 Wl42
Nl02 W130
Nl02 W148
Nll4 W78
N94 W140
N94 W148
N98 Wl42
NlOl W142
Nl02 W128
N102 W130
Nl02 W138
N102 W140
Nl02 W154
N102 W156
N94 W130
N94 Wl32
N98 Wl42

III
III
III
III
III
III
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV

v
v
v
v
v
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Va
Vb
Vb
Vb

2
25
105
140
140
995
1
56
34
808
226
102
166
61
141
5
2
2
57
20
20
205
7
2
10
135

98
3
20
38

NlOl Wl46
N102 Wl28
N102 W130
N102 Wl32
N102 W138
N102 Wl40
N102 Wl46
N102 Wl48
N102 Wl50
N102 Wl52
Nl02 W154
N94 Wl32
Nl02 Wl32
Nl02 W148
N102 Wl50
N102 Wl46
N102 W156
N102 Wl56
N102 Wl56
N94 W130
N94 W142
N98 W142
N99 W142
NIOOW130
Burial #2
Burial #3
Burial #5
Burial #7
Burial #5
Site Total

Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Vb
Ve
Ve
Ve
Ve
Vd
Vd
Ve
Vf
?
?
?
?
?

9
101
8
3
3
3
17
22
166
28
4
1
90
7
65
64
5
19
73

77
13
3
6
2
74
6
29

9473

Another Look at the Distribution, Age, and Function
of ''Waco Sinkers''
Charles L. Boyd and Harry ]. Shafer

ABSTRACT

We reexamine the distribution, age, and function of "Waco sinkers," which are notched pebble tools that
occur in sites in the northern part of Central Texas and in parts of North Central Texas. New information on the
numerical distribution of 1876 specimens shows a distinct concentration in the modem prairies between the
middle Brazos and upper Trinity River valleys and extending northeastward to the Red River. While dating of
these artifacts is not definitive, a Late Paleoindian-Early Archaic age is suggested based on their occurrence in
dated deposits, associated projectile point styles, and known archeological context. The function of these tools
is considered, and their distribution suggests use as part of some kind of hunting instrument.

INTRODUCTION
The enigma of detennining the ancient use of
certain artifacts is a continuing concern in archeology as new information about the artifacts in question is uncovered. New techniques of dating--or
new information on spatial distribution-may justify questioning old assumptions regarding cultural
relationships or artifact functions. Common terms
and ideas regarding usage may exist for many years
before new scientific information precipitates
changing established interpretations. This paper
challenges presently accepted theories and raises
new questions regarding the cognomen and the use
of "Waco sinkers."
Since their initial reporting of the "sinker factory site" near Waco by H. G. Moore (1935), and
Frank H. Watt's (1938) naming and analytical study
of "Waco sinkers," little attention has been paid to
these enigmatic artifacts. An occasional reference
to finding "sinker" stones or "Waco sinkers" may
be included in archeological site reports or papers
(e.g., Brown 1987:33-36; McGregor 1987; Martin
et al. 1987; Shafer 1977; Story 1965; Turner and
Tanner 1994; Weir 1979), but none discuss the
artifacts other than to refer to Watt's (1938) original paper.

GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION
AND CONTEXT
The sample of"Waco sinkers" dealt with in this
paper was recovered from counties in Central and
North Central Texas between the Brazos and Trinity
rivers (Figure 1). A survey of private collections was
made by the senior author, recording location, type,
and number of specimens in each collection. It was
not possible to obtain specific county provenience on
each specimen in the private collections, although
this information was tabulated when known. Counties from which collections were obtained were recorded, and it is from this information that the pattern
of "Waco sinker" distribution became clear.
The counties include Ellis, Falls, Hill, Johnson,
Limestone, McLennan, Coryell, Milam, and
Navarro (see Figure 1). A core area distributionwhere most specimens in the sample were collected-includes McLennan, Hill, Navarro, northern
Limestone, Ellis, southern Johnson, Kaufman, and
Hunt counties (Figure 2). Hill County accounted
for over 28 percent of all specimens, but this figure
may be biased due to surface exposure from modern agriculture. Specimens have also been reported
from Williamson (Bousman et al. 1994), Hays (Weir
1979), Brazos (Shafer 1977), and Kaufman (Story

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

264

Texas Archeological Society

i
N

I

Boyd
111>

Watt

Figure 1. The general location of archeological sites from which "Waco sinkers" referred to in this paper have been
recovered.

1965) counties, but these examples were not examined or included in this study.
"Waco sinkers" are found in varying contexts,
from isolated surface finds in the uplands, mixed
with gravels in gullies and small intermittent creeks,
associated with middens along minor and major
creeks, and on sites on terraces of the Brazos and

Trinity rivers. Examples have also been recovered
from excavated deposits at various sites throughout
the region (Bousman et al. 1994; Brown 1987;
McGregor 1987; Martin et al. 1987; Story 1965;
Weir 1979).
The notched and abraded "Waco sinkers" differ from similar artifacts which have a pecked and

Boyd and Shafer - Distribution, Age, and Function of "Waco Sinkers" 265

TECHNOLOGY
AND FORM

Figure 2. Distribution of"Waco sinkers" in Texas. Stippling
denotes the core area where these artifacts are most
concentrated; the broader distribution is outlined.

ground groove around the circumference (Weir
1979:Figure 19e-f; cf. Type 11 in Watt 1938:Figures 59-60). These latter specimens tend to be more
ovoid and may have had a different function. Weir
(1979) suggests that these and the more characteristic "Waco sinkers" were bola stones.

RAW MATERIAL
"Waco sinkers" are fashioned with few exceptions from quartz or quartzite pebbles. The quartzite specimens vary in colors from clear, to creamy
white, greenish brown, gray, dense blue, purple,
anu reddish black. The quartzite colors duplicate
those reported by Watt (1938). Hematite, sandstone, and limestone examples are also known, but
these are usually found outside the core area of this
study (Bousman et al. 1994; Weir 1979).
The source of the quartzite from the northern
part of Central Texas is the Pliocene age Uvalde
gravels, an outwash surface deposit of aggregate
that occurs as surface outcrops between streams of
the Central Texas prairies and as redeposited gravels in the streams draining the prairies (Byrd 1971).
The ultimate origin of the quartzite in the Uvalde
gravels is the easternmost ranges of the southern
Rocky Mountains in central New Mexico (Montgomery 1993).

The specimens used in the descriptive analysis came primarily from the senior author's collection. Mike Calloway's collections from Hill and
Johnson counties were also incorporated in the
analysis.
The manufacturing technology involves either
abrasion or flaking and abrasion, and follows two
trajectories or styles. The first (style I) is when a
suitable size flat oval or egg-shaped pebble is selected, and the end notches are formed by abrading
two "V" or "U" shaped notches that intersect at the
end of the pebble (Figure 3a-d, f-i; cf. Watt
1938:Figure 59, Type lA). The only additional
modification to the pebble, if needed, was generally made to even the contours.
The second method of manufacture involves
selecting a pebble and shaping it and the endssometimes bifacially-by hard-hammer flaking.
The surface of the pebble and the notches at the end
are smoothed by abrasion (Figure 3e and Figure 4cd; cf. Watt 1938:Figure 56, Type 10). Broken or
aborted specimens help to model the manufacturing
sequence for these style II examples (Figure 4a-b,
e-h) and provide more complete technological
detail (cf. Watt 1938:Types 2-7, 7a, and 7d).
A sample of 56 "Waco sinkers" were measured to obtain size and weight ranges. Length
ranges from 30-60 mm with a mean of 45.29 ±
6.05 mm. Width ranges from 26-41 mm with a
mean of 33.55 ± 4.00 mm. Thickness varies from
16-32 mm, with a mean of21.53 ± 3.31 mm. Their
weight varies from 20.24-76.12 g, with a mean of
41.41 ± 11.95 g.

DATING
Notched quartzite pebbles occur frequently in
surface collections yielding Paleoindian-Early
Archaic projectile point and tool forms (Figures 5
and 6). Artifact types in surface localities with
notched pebbles include: Hoxie (Figure 5a), Gower
(Figure 5b, d), Early Triangular (Figure 5c), Andice
(Figure 5e), Clovis (Figure 5f), Golondrina (Figure
5g-h), Plainview (Figure 5i), and Angostura (Figure
5j). In addition, Clear Fork tools (Figure 6a-b; cf.
Blaine et al. 1968), and even Clovis blades (Figure
6c-d) have been recovered from these sites. We
suspect, however, that the Clovis-age artifacts

266

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

f

c

e

d

h

Figure 3. "Waco sinkers": a-d, f-i, Style I; e, Style IL

predate the use of the notched stones. Few notched
stones have been recovered from stratigraphic
context, however, to provide a more finite temporal
placement.
The best dated examples of "Waco sinkers"
have been recovered from the Wilson-Leonard site
in Williamson County. Five specimens (four
limestone and one quartzite) are reported from Unit
II (dated 9650-8000 B.P.), associated with
Angostura and Plainview Golondrina (Bousman et
al. 1994). Four others (material not specified) were
recovered from Unit IIIA (ca. 8000 B.P.),
associated with Clear Fork tools and Angostura,
Thrall, Gower, Jetta, Hoxie, and Bandy points (Dial
et al. 1994).

FUNCTION
The name "Waco sinkers" implies use as a net
weight for fishing, although Watt (1938) used the
term only for convenience rather than for functional connotations. There is no empirical evidence
to suggest such a function; in fact, their function is
still unknown.
By weighing the contextual evidence, however,
we advance some speculations regarding their
function. It is very unlikely that "Waco sinkers"
served ritual or ceremonial functions considering
their frequency and temporal and spatial patterning.
By taking a human ecological approach to the study
of function, we assume they were tools or parts of

Boyd and Shafer - Distribution, Age, and Function of "Waco Sinkers" 267

b

e

c

d

f

Figure 4. "Waco sinkers": a-d, Style II; e-h, manufacturing failures for Style II.

tools used in adapting to specific environmental
circumstances. We now consider where they are
found, what the environment may have been like
from 9500-8000 B.P., and what resources may have
been in the environment.
Among our proposed uses are bola weights
(Weir 1979), elements in composite snares, or as
net weights in hunting. Their sheer abundance in
the core area (see Figure 2) suggests they were part
of some commonly used hunting or trapping item.
Their distribution in camp sites, isolated on prairie

surfaces, and in creek gravels would seem to suggest their use involved activities in and around specific prairie environments, and perhaps along creeks
draining the prairie (Figure 7). Furthermore, the
correlation of this distribution with the Blackland
Prairie today, plus the function or functions that
resulted in frequent loss of the notched stones in
the field, argues strongly against their use as fishing net weights.
The date ranges place the uses of these notched
stones at the transition between the Late Paleoindian

268

Texas Archeological Society

c

b

d

e

cm
0

2

I

•

f

g

h

Figure 5. Projectile point styles from the surface of sites with "Waco sinkers": a, Hoxie; b, d, Gower; c, Early Triangular;
e, Andice; f, Clovis; g-h, Golondrina; i, Plainview; j, Angostura.

and Early Archaic periods. The regional environment then was considerably different from modem
times (Figure 8). The climate from ca. 9000-7000
B.P. was probably much like Kansas today, and
was undergoing a significant warming and drying
trend from cooler/wetter conditions to warmer/wetter conditions (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Nordt
et al. 1994; Waters and Nordt 1995).
The sea level was still lower and the coastline
was a considerable distance (80-120 km) beyond
what it is today (Waters 1992:Figure 6.12). The
gradient of the major rivers would have been greater,
providing different habitats both along the wetlands
as well as on the prairies. Waters and Nordt (1995)
have documented a change in alluvial history of the
Brazos River that occurred about 8500 B.P. that
probably affected wetland ecology. From ca. 10000-

8000 B.P., the Brazos River floodplain was much
lower and broader than today (Waters and Nordt
1995), providing many thousands of acres of wetland habitats.
Nordt et al. (1994) document vegetation
changes in the Lampasas Cut Plain from plant communities dominated by C3 plants to C4 dominant
communities during the Late Pleistocene-Early Holocene transition in Central Texas. The C3 plants
include nearly all trees, shrubs, forbs, and cool season temperate grasses, while C4 plants are most
abundant in warm, semi-arid environments with
much sunlight, such as grasslands and warm prairies. A change from C3 to C4 plant communities
probably involved the development from a habitat
dominated by scattered trees, shrubs, and grasses,
to a prairie habitat dominated by grasses. In other

Boyd and Shafer - Distribution, Age, and Function of "Waco Sinkers" 269
prairie chicken, and grouse, or some mammal
species (Brian Shaffer,
1995 personal
communication).

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
I

I

2

i

I

3

I CM

b

New information is provided on the
geographic distribution of the notched pebbles
commonly referred to as "Waco sinkers." This
distribution suggests a core area that parallels what
is today the Blackland Prairie, drained by the
Brazos, the upper Trinity, the upper Sulphur, and
the upper Sabine rivers (see Figure 7). A broader
distribution represented by an occasional find
includes much of Central Texas along and east of
the Balcones escarpment into East Central Texas,
and extending perhaps to the present Gulf Coast.
This broader distribution also closely corresponds
to the linear pattern of Central Texas prairies (see
Figure 7).

d
Figure 6. Other Artifacts: a-b, Clear Fork tools; c-d, Clovis
blades.

words, the development of the Central Texas prairies is very likely documented in the C3 to C4 plant
shift beginning about 10000 to 8000 B.P.
In short, the local ecology was significantly
different compared to modern times. Given an
environment that was different from today, we
posit that such conditions may have supported
wetland habitats which invited migratory fauna
such as whooping cranes or wild geese to winter
along the middle courses of the Brazos and Trinity
rivers. Such birds could have fed on grasses and
seeds of the prairies and been inviting prey for the
Early Holocene hunters. Alternatively, the prairie
grasslands may have supported herds of pronghorn
which might h.ave been captured with bolas. This
speculation is not based on empirical evidence,
however, since faunal inventories for this period
and area are largely lacking (Barry Baker and Brian
Shaffer, 1995 personal communication). We
simply do not know what migratory or indigenous
species were present in the area at that time. Also,
it is possible that the stones were part of a trap for
some ground-dwelling birds, such as turkeys,

\l'egatatlonal Area!l
of Eastern Texas

1 Plneywoods

2 Gulf Prairies
and Marshes
3 Poat Oak Savannah

4 Black.land Prairies
5 Cross Timbers
and Prairies
6 South Texae Pla!ns

1 Edward;s Plateau

8 Roll!ng Plains

Figure 7. Distribution patterns of "Waco sinkers"
superimposed over the vegetation areas of Eastern Texas
(vegetation map after Hatch etal. 1990). Note the correlation
between the core area and the Blackland Prairie of Central
Texas, and the broader distribution's correlation with the
Central Texas Prairies in general.

270

Texas Archeological Society

Central Texas Climate

Modern

2000

cooler/
wetter

4000

-..

warmer/
drier

Q.

m
@)
i..

6000

(@
@)

>-

warmer/
wetter

=

0
.0

...

~

Cl

8000

0
"el
t'G

i..

4)

~

<

10,000

cooler/
wetter
transitional
/
/

/

12,000

Temporal data suggests a date range for use
of the "Waco sinkers" of about 7000-9000 B.P. (the
Late Paleoindian-Early Archaic transition).
Paleoenvironmental reconstructions support models of habitats considerably different from modern
times. Animal communities, especially the presence of migratory species, may have presented specific opportunities of procurement with snares,
bolas, or hunting nets that called for the use of the
notched stones.
Given the overall small standard deviation in
size, less so in weight, the composite tool on which
a "Waco sinker" was used may have evolved to a
rather specialized form. A specialized tool to take
advantage of the behavior of a particular animal
species would quickly become obsolete when that
animal either changed its geographic range or was
extirpated. The disappearance of the "Waco sinkers" in the archeological record by the Middle Archaic period would support the argument that they
were indeed part of some hunting apparatus designed to procure a specific kind of game, a game,
however, whose presence was somehow affected
by Middle Holocene climatic change.
While we do not offer conclusive evidence of
how the notched tools were used, we do hypothesize that they were used as part of composite instruments to procure some kind of game present in
this Early Holocene environment. We cannot identify the game, nor how it was procured, but given
the distribution that closely parallels today's Central Texas prairies, it is highly unlikely that these
tools were used as fish net weights. More precise
information on the archeological context, past animal and plant communities, and paleoenvironmental
models is needed before our hypothesis on the function of "Waco sinkers" can be adequately evaluated.

/

/

/

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

cooler/
14,000

wetter

(after Nordt et al. 1994)
Figure 8. A Climate Model of Central Texas showing the
cooler/wetter period transition at 10000-8000 B.P. (after
Nordt et al. 1994).

The authors would like to thank Joe Mike
Calloway, C. K. Chandler, David Lintz, and Al
Redder for sharing information on "Waco sinker"
distribution and technology. Other pertinent information or contributions to this paper were made by
Barry Baker, John E. Dockall, Lynne O'Kelly, Brian
Shaffer, and Michael Waters. The
however, bear the sole responsibility for any errors of
fact or interpretation.

Boyd and Shafer - Distribution, Age, and Function of "Waco Sinkers"
REFERENCES CITED
Blaine, J. C., R. K. Harris, W. W. Crook, and J. L. Shiner
1968 The Acton Site, Hood County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 39:45-94.
Bousman, C. B., A. Kerr, and F. Hake
1994 Early Holocene Archeology at the Wilson-Leonard
Site. Paper presented at the 52nd Annual Plains
Anthropological Conference, Lubbock.
Brown, D. 0. (compiler)
1987 Archeology at Aquilla Lake, 1978-82 Investigations,
Volume II. Research Report 81. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, V. M. and R. G. Holloway
1985 A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of
Texas: An Overview of the Pollen Evidence. In
Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant and R. G.
Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists, Dallas.
Byrd, C. L.
1971 Origins and History of the Uvalde Gravels of Central Texas. Bulletin 20. Baylor Geological Studies,
Baylor University, Waco.
Dial, S., M. Masson, and J. Guy
1994 Early to Late Holocene Archeology at the WilsonLeonard Site. Paper presented at the 52nd Annual
Plains Anthropological Conference, Lubbock.

271

Montgomery, J. A.
1993 The Nature and Origin of the Blackland Prairies of
Texas. In The Texas Blackland Prairie: Land, History, and Culture, edited by R. M. Sharpless and J.
C. Yelderman, Jr., pp. 24-40. Baylor University
Press, Waco.
Moore,H.G.
1935 A Sinker Factory. Central Texas Archeologist 1: 11.
Nordt,L. C., T. W.Boutton, C. T. Hallmark, andM. R. Waters
1994 Late Quaternary Vegetation and Climate Changes
in Central Texas Based on the Isotopic Composition of Organic Carbon. Quaternary Research
41:109-120.
Shafer, H.J.
1977 Early Lithic Assemblages in Eastern Texas. In
"Paleoindian Lifeways," edited by E. Johnson. The
Museum Journal 18:187-197.
Story, D. A.
1965 The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir,
Henderson and Kaufman Counties, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 36:163-257.
Turner, E. S. and P. Tanner
1994 The Mcfaddin Beach Site on the Upper Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:319336.
Waters, M. R.
1992 Principles of Geoarchaeology. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Hatch, S. L., K. N. Gandhi, and L. E. Brown
1990 Checklist of the Vascular Plants of Texas. The Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, The Texas A&M
University System, College Station, Texas.

Waters, M. R. and L. C. Nordt
1995 Late Quaternary Floodplain History of the Brazos
River in East-Central Texas. Quaternary Research
43:311-319.

McGregor, D. E.
1987 Lithic Artifacts. In The Bird Point Island and Adams
Ranch Sites: Methodological and Theoretical Contributions to North Central Texas Archaeology, edited by J.E. Bruseth and W. A. Martin, pp. 95-108.
Richland Creek Technical Series, Vol. IL Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study of
Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Watt, F. H.
1938 The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archeologist 4:2170.

Martin, W. A., D. E. McGregor, and J. E. Bruseth
1987 Excavations at 41FT158. In Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations along the Prairie Margins: Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology,
edited by D. E. McGregor and J.E. Bruseth, pp. 927. Richland Creek Technical Series, Vol. III. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study
of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.

Weir, F. A.
1979 Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 50:5-68.

Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics:
Petrographic Study of Collared Rim
Sherds from the Texas Panhandle
Christopher Lintz and Kathryn Reese-Taylor

ABSTRACT
Excavations at the Roper site and Cottonwood Creek Ruins during 1957-1959 recovered both cordmarked
collared and non-collared rim sherds in the Canadian River valley of Texas. Unpublished knowledge of these
sherds supported earlier contentions of Central-Southern Plains migrations or contacts during the Antelope
Creek phase.
Petrographic paste analysis of 22 sherds from six sites was used to evaluate the relative homogeneity of
ceramic technology. Both collared and non-collared sherds from Roper and Cottonwood Creek, non-collared
sherds from Antelope Creek Ruin 22 and Ali bates Ruin 28, the type sites of the Antelope Creek phase, collared
sherds from the Kit Courson site of the Buried City complex, and collared sherds from 25NC29, a central
Nebraska, Itskari phase site were used in the study.
Two distinctly different ceramic paste technologies among the small sample of sherds suggest that the
culture unit intrusion hypothesis into the Texas panhandle is not warranted. The non-collared rim sherds from
the Antelope Creek phase sites in the Canadian River valley are typically tempered with igneous (granitic family)
materials, whereas most of the Buried City complex sherds, the collared sherds from Cottonwood Creek, and
most of the collared sherds from the Roper site are tempered with sedimentary materials. The data suggest that
the Roper collared sherds may relate to the Buried City complex. Considerable ceramic paste heterogeneity is
evident among the Itskari phase from central Nebraska.

INTRODUCTION
Prehistoric relationships between the Central
and Southern Plains Village Tradition cultures have
been difficult to delineate and isolate despite many
years of speculation. The difficulty arises due to
the general similarities in stone, ceramic, fauna!,
and floral assemblages between the two regions at
that time. The major differences manifest themselves primarily in the basic geological raw materials (the tool stone sources and ceramic pastes and
temper), occasionally in stylistic or artistic elements,
such as the ceramic decorations, and more rarely in
the subtleties ·in the shape or proportion of tool
forms. The recognition of exotic materials is most
easily determined when distinctive traits from the
Southwest, Caddoan, or Mississippian regions are
recovered from Late Prehistoric Plains Village sites
in the Southern or Central Plains.
Suggestions of cultural connections between
the Central and Southern Plains are rooted in

Bulletin

Texas

observations made by Wedel (1934), then reinforced
by Works Progress Administration (WPA) field
directors and archeologists involved with defining
the Antelope Creek phase of the Texas panhandle
(Baker 1939; Krieger 1946). These interpretations
relied primarily on the occurrence of globular
cordmarked ceramics and bone horticultural
implements common to both regions. However,
these initial connections were formulated prior to
the recognition of the Washita River phase, the
Custer phase, and other Southern Plains village
complexes in Oklahoma (Bell and Baerreis 1951).
The nature of the regional relationships was
uncertain due to the crude level of cultural trait
comparisons. Most troublesome was the significance of the abundant collared rim sherds in the
Central Plains village assemblages (Upper Republican and Loup River/Itskari phases) and the scarcity
of such sherds in the Southern Plains village
collections of the Antelope Creek and Optima foci.
Collared rim vessels typically have a thickened rim,

274

Texas Archeological Society

or a bulging recurved rim form, thought to have
facilitated vessel suspension by thongs or straps
around the vessel's neck (Wood 1969:21; Grange
1968).
The first substantive study to explicitly advocate a migration from the Central Plains into the
Southern Plains was advanced by Watson (1950)
based on her Stamper site description in the Oklahoma panhandle. In this study, she recognized a
series of intermediate or transitional traits between
the Upper Republican and Antelope Creek materials. During the 1957-1960 avocational excavations
at the Roper and Cottonwood Creek sites in the
Canadian River basin, several collared rim sherds
were found. Although no detailed report formally
documented these sherds, they are cited by Jack
Hughes (1968:189) as being typical of Upper Republican collared-rim sherds found at several small
sites in the Texas panhandle.
The suggestion of Central-Southern Plains interrelationships was strengthened by a series of radiocarbon dates that showed that Antelope Creek
phase sites tended to be more recent than the Upper
Republican villages (Baerreis and Bryson 1965a,
1966). The modelling of climatic changes throughout the Central Plains area led to the conclusion
that the Central Plains was undergoing droughts at
a time when the frontal storm tracks could have
increased the rainfall over the Texas panhandle
(Baerreis and Bryson 1965b; Bryson et al. 1970).
Thus, claims for a massive culture unit intrusion of
Upper Republican people underlie the origins of
Antelope Creek cultures. Critics have attacked the
climaticaUy-induced migration concept due to a lack
of similarities of decorative traits over a wide range
of artifacts between the Upper Republican and Antelope Creek phase assemblages (Lintz 1978), and
the recognition of cultural continuity within the
Central Plains region, despite the purported drought
(Ludwickson 1975).
However, serious attention has not been
focused on the collared rim sherds from the
Antelope Creek sites. Are the paste characteristics
of the collared sherds similar to those of the noncollared sherds from the Canadian River valley?
Do they reflect local or non-local origins? How do
they compare with collared sherds from elsewhere
in the Southern or Central Plains? Could their
presence in the Texas panhandle represent brief
hunting forays, long-term cultural intrusions/
migrations, long-distance trade and exchange

between separate groups, or the borrowing of ideas
and local replication of foreign traits? A
technological, stylistic, and petrographic analysis
of a small sample of sherds might provide empirical
data to help resolve these possibilities.

EXPECTATIONS
The delineation of group relationships through
the study of ceramic form and paste is more practical than that using chipped stone tools since: (1) the
selective choices of pastes and temper materials are
partially constrained by the available geological resources, which may vary by river valley; (2) ceramic technology is malleable and allows for the
correction of errors and implementation of decorative, stylistic, and manufacturing patterns; and (3)
ceramic technology is not a short-term embedded
activity apt to occur on brief forays, but requires
considerable planning in the acquisition of clay,
temper materials, and fuels; the preparation and
manufacturing time necessary to form and cure the
vessel; and consideration of weather-related firing
conditions. For these reasons, pottery is not apt to
be replaced as readily as stone tools on brief forays
in a region. Prehistoric ceramics are thus more sensitive indicators of interregional interactions than
other cultural elements preserved in the archeological record. The complex constellations of geological, technological, and stylistic elements preserved
in ceramics makes them best suited for deriving
inferences about brief forays, trade, migrations, inter-marriage residence, or the imitation and local
replication of non-local forms.
If brief forays account for the similarity of
traits between the two regions, then it might be
expected that even though exotic materials encountered on the foray may be used to refurbish some
items, the replacement items will tend to involve
short-term investments and be relatively technologically simple (such as the replacement of broken
stone implements from local resources). However,
technologically complex cultural elements requiring considerable time and labor investments (such
as pottery manufacture) are apt not be replaced on
brief forays. Non-local ceramics would be rare.
If trade is involved, then the foreign items may
be technologically and stylistically different from
the locally-made items, and any trade pieces are apt
to occur in relatively low frequencies. A strong

Lintz and Reese-Taylor - Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics
correlation between stylistic/decorative variations
and paste/temper differences in the ceramic assemblage is also apt to occur, with few, if any, crossovers in the associations. Furthermore, one
distinctive decorative/paste group with non-local
trace temper inclusions will tend to occur far less
frequently than the decorative/paste group containing locally-available particles.
If migration or culture-unit intrusion is
involved, then there may be a strong continuity in
the stylistic/decorative patterns that cross-cut local
differences in the paste/temper characteristics. The
initial ceramic inventory transported to the new
region is apt to contain non-local paste
characteristics, that through time are replaced by
local pastes used to manufacture similar forms. The
ratio of different pastes is dependant upon ceramic
replacement rates, vessel use-life, and site
occupation duration.
If cultural integration is reflected (presumably
most often postulated as female exogamous residential practices), then a diversity of ceramic decorative styles may be amalgamated into a site's
ceramic assemblage. As with migrations, the ceramic pastes may sometimes reflect non-local or
imported wares, which are eventually replaced by
materials of local pastes and tempers. However, the
overall ceramic assemblage should be stylistically
and decoratively heterogenous with a dominance of
locally-available pastes.
If design and form ideas are adopted, borrowed,
or copied from ceramic assemblages observed elsewhere, or inspired from trade vessels, then considerable latitude in decorative trait integration and
care/detail of execution might be expected within a
range of vessels reflecting local pastes and tempers. Imitations rarely involve identical matches in
form, but rather are apt to reflect amalgamation of
ideas in relatively new permutations. The key indicators may be uniform local pastes and tempers,
coupled with stylistic elements which do not quite
have parallel combinations elsewhere.

THE LOCATION, AGE, AND
SHERD ASSEMBLAGE SIZES
FOR THE SITES
The approach used to address possible CentralSou thern Plains inter-relationships was to conduct
petrographic studies on the paste fabric and temper

275

composition of 11 collared and 11 non-collared rim
sherds from six sites, five in the Texas panhandle
and one in central Nebraska. Rim sherds were
selected specifically to control for vessel type, size,
and decorative variations, since stylistic
modifications, when present, are apt to occur along
the rim, neck, or less often along the upper shoulder
of Plains Village jars. Three to six rim sherds were
processed from each of four sites within the
Canadian River drainage and two more distant sites
to provide some preliminary information about the
range of stylistic variation and degree of paste/
temper heterogeneity in the ceramic assemblages.
Three sherds each from the type sites of
Alibates Ruins 28 (41PT11) and Antelope Creek
Ruin 22 (hereafter labeled AC-22 [41HC23] to differentiate the site from the phase), provided information on the ceramics from "typical" Antelope
Creek phase sites; all six were non-collared (Figure
1). Both collared and non-collared rim sherds were
processed from the Roper (41HC6) and Cottonwood Creek (41HC141) sites to document the range
of ceramic heterogeneity within the Canadian River
valley. Only collared sherds were processed from
the Kit Courson site (410C43) of the Buried City
complex, along Wolf Creek in the northeast part of
the Texas panhandle, and from site 25NC29, an
Itskari phase site in western Nance County, Nebraska (see Figure 1). The Buried City complex has
many architectural traits, including central depressed
floor channels and masonry foundations, as well as
strong artifactual similarities, with the Antelope
Creek phase. However, one notable departure from
the Antelope Creek phase involves a high incidence of decorated pottery and collared rim sherds
in the Buried City complex (Hughes 1991; Hughes
and Hughes-Jones 1987). The Itskari phase represents one of many Central Plains assemblages where
collared rim sherds on globular cordmarked jars
occur in abundance (Ludwickson 1975).
The following provides a brief synopsis about
the location, age, and nature of each of the six sites
used in this study. Also, the ceramic assemblage
and the number of sherds in the present study are
discussed.
The Roper site (41HC6) is located on an alluvial terrace on the west side of South Canyon, within
the Canadian River basin. The site is only 0.75 km
upstream from Sanford Dam, which impounds waters of Lake Meredith. The site was excavated by
the Norpan Archaeological Society in 1957, and at

276 Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Distribution of Ceramic Sites selected for Petrographic Analysis.

Lintz and Reese-Taylor - Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics
least four small, isolated circular structures were
exposed within the 34 5 x 5 ft units or a total area of
74.25 m2 (Dumas and Dumas n.d.; Lintz 1986, n.d.).
Two radiocarbon dates based on composite charcoal samples yielded uncalibrated dates of AD.
1300 ± 80 (WIS-134) and AD. 1355 ± 80 (WIS141). A sample of 422 cordmarked sherds from an
estimated 10-20 vessels were recovered from this
complex sub-homestead type of site (Lintz 1986).
After completing refit studies, the sherd assemblage was reduced to 379, of which 363 were body
sherds and 16 were rim sherds. Three rim sherds
were from at least two collared rim jars. Except for
one bifacial knife and a scraper made of Niobrara
jasper, and possibly these three collared rim sherds,
no exotic materials were recovered from the excavations. The present study examined all three collared rim sherds and three other non-collared sherds
(Figure 2). Based on morphology and macroscopic
examinations of the paste, two of the Roper site
collared rim sherds (Nos. 543 and 544) may be
from a single vessel.
Cottonwood Creek Ruin (41HC141) is located
on a bluff top west of Cottonwood Creek, approximately 4.5 km north of the Canadian River and 16
km northeast of the Roper site. Although this ex tensive village had been mentioned in archeological reports since the 1920s (Holden 1929;
Moorehead 1931:87, 110) and has subsequently
been destroyed by oil field development, only the
1958-1959 excavations of a single large rectangular isolated room structure conducted by the Norpan
Archaeological Society, an avocational group, have
preserved any artifacts and records from usable contexts (Carter and Carter n.d.; Lintz 1986, 1997).
Site maps indicate that at least one contiguous room
structure and at least nine other isolated rooms once
existed at this site. No chronometric or exotic crossdatable trade items were recovered from the site.
The sample of 80 cordmarked pottery sherds from
an estimated seven vessels were recovered from the
approximate 27 m2 Norpan excavation area. Only
one of the three recovered rim sherds was from a
collared rimmed cordmarked vessel. All three existing rim sherds from this site were used in this
study (see Figure 2).
The AC-22 Ruin (41HC23) is one of the two
main type localities for the Antelope Creek phase
(Krieger 1946). The site is located on a high bench
on the west side of Antelope Creek some 7 km
south of the Canadian River confluence, 6.5 km

277

south of the Roper site, and approximately 17 .5 km
south of the Cottonwood Creek Ruins. The site was
excavated by at least five expeditions between 1921
and 1938 before it was destroyed by oil field development in the 1960s (Moorehead 1931; Holden
1930; Lowrey 1932; Sayles 1935; Baker and Baker
n.d.; Lintz 1986:312-318). The architectural remains
include one large contiguous room structure with at
least seven residential rooms, each of which had
two smaller rooms flanking the east extended
entryway. The most extensive excavations were
conducted by the Works Progress Administration
(WPA) in 1938-1941, exposing approximately a
1130 m2 block area encompassing all rooms. No
radiocarbon dates exist from this site; however, the
recovery of Southwestern trade sherds (Lincoln
Black-on-Red, St. Johns Polychrome, Agua Fria
Glaze-on-Red, and Cieneguilla Glaze-on-Yellow)
cross-date the site to A.D. 1200-1400. The extensive sample of cordmarked pottery from the site
has not been studied, but cursory examination of
the remaining collections at the Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum indicates that few vessels are
decorated and collared rim sherds must be rare if
present at all (Krieger 1946). Three large straightnecked, non-collared cordmarked sherds were obtained for petrographic analysis (Figure 3).
Alibates Ruins 28(41PT11) is the second main
type site used by Krieger (1946) to define the Antelope Creek phase. It is located 1.2 km from the
Ali bates agate quarries, and some 4 km south of the
Canadian River. The Roper site is located 18.5 km
to the east, and the Cottonwood Creek Ruins are
33.5 km to the northeast. The site was first professionally visited in 1921, and repeatedly excavated
by five separate expeditions between 1928 and 1941
(Moorehead 1931; Studer 1942; Olson n.d.; Mason
n.d.; Sayles 1935; Baker and Baker n.d.; Lintz
1986:323-337). The largest and most sustained excavations were conducted between 1939 and 1941
by the WPA, during which time approximately 1515
m2 was dug in a contiguous room block of at least
four residential structures in the northern part of the
site, and an additional 4110 m2 was dug in an area
50 m to the south where another 31 isolated structures were found.
Five radiocarbon dates are available from three
rooms at the site. Room l from the northern
contiguous room block yielded an uncorrected date
of A.D. 1350 ± 75 (WIS-114), whereas two samples
from Room 19 in the same room block dated to

278

Texas Archeological Society

\
542

-o-a
F

I

546

A- 62

""'

545

I

A- 62

547

A- 119
111.4

104.1

Figure 2. Rimsherds from the Roper and Cottonwood Creek Ruins: a-f, Roper; g-i, Cottonwood Creek.

\

Lintz and Reese-Taylor - Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics

- --........

B
A22 51/45

c
A21151n

Figure 3. Rimsherds from Antelope Creek Ruin 22.

\

279

280

Texas Archeological Society

A.D. 1320 ± 70 (WIS-116) and A.D. 1180 ± 75
(WIS-129). The two dates from Room 24 in the
isolated structure area to the south were A.D. 1350
± 70 (WIS-101) and A.D. 1470 ± 80 (Tx-259).
Southwestern ceramic trade wares from the site
include Lincoln Black-on-Red, St. Johns
Polychrome, Agua Fria Glaze-on-Red, and
Cieneguilla Glaze-on-Yell ow, which have been
cross-dated between A.D. 1250-1400 (Crabb 1968).
The ceramic assemblage has also not been studied,
but a brief inspection by the senior author showed
that few sherds are decorated, and thickened rims
are rare. Three cordmarked non-collared rim sherds
from Alibates Ruin were also used in this study to
represent the Antelope Creek phase assemblage
(Figure 4).
The Kit Courson site (410C43) of the Buried
City complex is located along the south side of
Wolf Creek, a southern tributary of the North Ca-

28

A8-42
PR-330

A8-16
28 PR-295

\ \

Figure 4. Rimsherds from Alibates Ruin 28.

nadian River, in the northeastern part of the Texas
panhandle. The site is about 85-95 km north-northeast of the Roper and Cottonwood Creek Ruins.
The Kit Courson site is a complex of at least four
house sites and several middens excavated as a
privately funded project in 1986 and by the Texas
Archeological Society in 1987 and 1988 (Hughes
and Hughes-Jones 1987; Hughes 1991). The 1986
excavations opened a 134 m 2 area, which barely
extended beyond the limits of one structure; the
two subsequent T AS field schools sampled midden
deposits in a 34 x 43 m area. Architectural remains
exposed included a single rectangular room structure measuring 9 x 7 m with four roof support posts
around a central hearth, a depressed central channel, an interior platform against the west wall, and
an extended entrance towards the east; a small
square room with an interior hearth was contiguously placed along the southeast corner of the main
structure. Unlike the masonry
foundations at Antelope Creek
phase sites, the wall foundations
at the Kit Courson site consisted
of vertical slabs oriented perpendicular to the wall axes with rows
of post holes inside and outside
the masonry foundation core.
Two radiocarbon dates from the
hearth yielded uncorrected dates
of A.D. 1110 ± 100 (Beta-20277)
and A.D. 1370 ± 60 (Beta20871).
The sample size and variability of pottery from the Kit
Courson site has not been quantified. General ceramic characteristics have been published which
describe a rich variation in surface decorative treatment, including chevron-incised plain and
cordmarked wares, crenelated, filA6-92
leted, pinched, gouged, incised,
28
PR-167
punctated, and fluted rims
(Hughes 1991:144). Since decorative motifs suggest that two of
the three collared sherds submitted from the Kit Courson site may
be from a single vessel (Nos 64
and 329.6), only two different pots
are believed to be present in our
sample (Figure 5).

Lintz and Reese-Taylor - Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics

410C113\
188

sherd type and form of the interior
and exterior rim surfaces, lip
shape, collar or rim shape, decorations, and the neck and body treatments. The metric variables
recorded included: projected orifice diameter (obtained by sliding
the rim along a series of concentric circle scales until the curvature match was obtained), rim
height (distance from the lip to the
body-rim juncture), maximum collar tablet (distance from the lip to
the maximum thickness on the collar sherd), total collar length (distance from the lip to the thin neck
410C113 \ \
element below the collar), thick064
nesses of the lip, maximum collar
width, neck width below the collar, and body thickness (Figure 7).
The sherds were then thinsectioned, and each was mounted
one sample per glass slide using a
blue epoxy resin for consolidation.
The samples were then ground to
the recommended thickness of 0.03 mm (e.g.,
Shepard 1976) and stained for both alkali feldspars
and calcites. Slides were not polished and no cover
slips were used. The materials were then examined
under a petrographic microscope following methodologies established for ceramic thin-sections (for
complete descriptions of petrographic methods see
Shepard [1942, 1965, 1976]; Folk [1968]; Rice
[1987]; and Reese [1989]).
Initially, a scan of the thin-section was completed at an objective of 2.5X, and a description of
the general characteristics of the clay matrix and
the inclusions was recorded. Then, the point count
procedure using 1OX power was implemented until
at least 200 loci were documented in order to obtain a statistically representative quantification of
the paste, temper, and grain size data for comparative purposes (Rice 1987; Reese 1989). A twostage interval for stage advancement was determined
for each slide, being based on a spacing slightly
larger than the average grain size for each specimen to avoid counting inclusions more than once.
The comprehensive point count method completely
covered the thin-section area, and any minor paste
or temper variation that otherwise might have been
overlooked in the initial scan were noted.

A~

Figure 5. Rimsherds from the Kit Courson Site.

Site 25NC29, an Itskari or Loup River phase
village site, is located in western Nance County,
Nebraska, with site extensions into Merrick County.
The site is almost 700 km northeast of the Texas
panhandle Roper and Cottonwood Creek Ruins. It
consists of three structures and several extra-mural
features excavated in 1992 by the Nebraska State
Museum (Steve Holen, personal communications,
1993-1994). Although no chronometric dates are
yet available from the site, based on the age of
other Itskari sites, the village may date between
A.D. 1100-1350 (Steve Holen, personal communications, 1993-1994). The ceramic assemblage consists of about 5,000 sherds, and includes 112 rim
sherds, 60 (54 percent) of which are collared
(Peterson 1994). Three of the four analyzed sherds
were from Structure 2, a 13 m diameter house, and
one sherd was from an extra-mural area. Each is
from a different vessel (Figure 6).

METHODS
Each sherd was photographed, drawn, and a
series of attributes and metric variables were col··
lected. The attributes included observations on the

281

282

Texas Archeological Society

511
F-18

'
Figure 6. Rimsherds from Site 25NC29.

General paste categories were defined on the
basis of clay, pores, and mineral inclusion
frequencies identified during the point count.
Further refinement of the paste classifications were
based upon grain size and shape attributes identified
during the grain size count. Grain size was
determined by measuring 50
of the non-

plastic inclusions at their maximum width.
Statistically, a sample size representing 50 percent
of the population is significant and will overcome
any possible biases in the range, mode, and mean
of each specimen (Leonard 1976:153). The
size count was conducted in a similar fashion to the
point count. A two-stage interval was chosen so as

Lintz and Reese-Taylor - Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics

c

Figure 7. Metric Variables Recorded for each Sherd: A,
Rim Height; B, Maximum Collar Length (Collar Tablet);
C, Total Collar Length; D, Lip Thickness; E, Maximum
Collar Thickness;F, Neck Thickness; G, Body Thickness.

not to measure any grain twice and to allow for
complete coverage of the thin section.
The general shapes of the inclusions in the
samples are based upon categories of roundness
and sphericity established by the American/Canadian Stratigraphic Association (Folk 1968). Grain
size characteristics were identified based upon the
range, distribution, mode, and mean of each sample
in relationship to the Wentworth Size Scale. The
range indicates the maximum and minimum size
classification for the sample measured; the distribution shows the frequency of each size class; the
mode represents the most common grain size class
present; and the average and the mode together
indicate the degree of skewness in the normal curve
of the grain size distribution.

Naturally Occurring Inclusions
and Temper
A variety of criteria has been used to define
paste composition, with an emphasis placed upon
the presence or absence of tempering inclusions.

283

The identification of calcite-tempered, grogtempered, and bone-tempered pastes has been very
successful (e.g., Aten 1983; Reese 1989; ReeseTaylor 1991, 1993a, 1993b, 1993c, 1995; Reese et
al. 1995; Robinson 1992, 1994; Winchell and Ellis
1991). However, the difference between pastes with
naturally occurring inclusions and those with
tempers remains difficult to determine. Grain size
and degree of particle size sorting has been used
frequently as the major attributes for identification
(e.g., Aten 1983:231), while others have relied on a
combination of average grain size according to the
Wentworth scale and the frequency of non-plastic
inclusions within the clay matrix as the
distinguishing attributes. The percentage of nonplastic inclusions are then determined by estimating
the relative density of grains within the clay matrix
(Winchell and Ellis 1991:55).
Previous studies have subjectively introduced
biases by relying on macroscopic criteria to define
the critical attributes of modal grain size, the frequency of non-plastic inclusions, and the quality of
sorting, which have been used to differentiate between pastes with natural inclusions from those
with tempered inclusions (Aten 1983; Winchell and
Ellis 1991:55). In the present study, naturally occurring inclusions were defined as any non-plastic
particle belonging to the class Very Fine Sand or
smaller on the Wentworth scale. Although grains
larger than Very Fine Sand do occur naturally, these
generally constitute only a small percentage of the
naturally occurring bodies and are believed to reflect a low proportion of particles relative to those
intentionally included as temper.

Definition of Paste Groups
The identified geological rocks and minerals,
and the grain size characteristics, were used to delineate two levels of paste groupings. The highest
level sorted the sherds into sedimentary or igneous
groupings. The sedimentary resource group has significant proportions of individual grains of quartz
and alkali feldspars occurring as abundant sands;
the igneous resource group is defined by the presence of granitic family rock fragments.
The secondary classification within the igneous
and sedimentary source material groups is based on
the frequency of alkali feldspars in the specimens.
The percentage of alkali feldspars indicates the
relative maturity of the sands that occur (as either
temper or naturally occurring inclusions) within the

284

Texas Archeological Society

sherds. In addition, the presence of mica, biotite,
and carbonate fragments seem to reflect the variation
in procurement locales of the clay, and possibly the
tempering agents used in making pottery.

MORPHOLOGICAL AND
STYLISTIC VARIABILITY
OF THE SAMPLE
The 22 rim sherds in the study sample show
morphological and stylistic variations. As near as
can be determined, all vessels are from jar forms.
The attributes and variables used to describe the
sherd assemblage are presented in Figure 7, with
the observations summarized in Table l.
The 11 non-collared sherds in the collection
are all from the four presumed Antelope Creek
phase sites within a 33 km stretch of the Canadian
River valley of the Texas panhandle. One sherd
from the Roper site (No. 545) appears to have had
the lip cut and removed from the vessel (see Figure 2e). Overall, the non-collared vessels show
minor variability in form with no decorations, except for the cord marking. Some variation is evident in the depth and texture of the cord marking
impressions, but most are orderly placed in a vertical pattern (n=7), occasionally a diagonal pattern
(n=2), on the vessels. There is considerable standardization in form and thickness among the noncollared sherds. The vessels appear to be jars with
orifices ranging from 8-15 cm in diameter. The
neck forms are mostly straight/vertical (n=4), or
excurvate (n=3); one from the Cottonwood Creek
Ruin may be incurvate, and two are too small to
discern orientations.
The rim heights on non-collared sherds as
measured from the neck-rim juncture to the lip on
the AC-22 and Alibates 28 sherds range from 4.25.5 cm and tend to be taller than the single measurable sherd from the Roper site (3.0 cm);
however, four of the Roper and Cottonwood Creek
non-collared sherds are too small to discern rim
height. The lip forms tend to be square (n=5),
rounded (n=3), or slightly bevelled towards the
exterior surface (n=2 from Alibates Ruin); the lip
form on the cut sherd is unknown. Lip thicknesses
range from 0.42-0.54 cm, but with a single sherd
(no. 22 7 A/20) from the AC-22 site with a lip thickness of 0.67 cm. The neck portions or the rims tend
to be thicker than either the lips or body portions.

The neck-body junctures range from 0.45-0.84 cm
thick, with six of the 11 sherds being much thicker
than the rim areas. Apparently most vessels were
made with additional support in the rim-body juncture. The single exception is one sherd from Roper
(No. 545) that had a thinner neck and body than
the lip portion. The seven sherds for which body
thicknesses could be measured range from 0.400.59 cm in thickness.
In contrast, the 11 collared rim sherds show
considerable heterogeneity in rim form configuration, lip style, and ancillary decorations. All these
sherds are from the Itskari phase site, 25NC29, the
Kit Courson site along Wolf Creek, plus three sherds
from Roper and one from Cottonwood Creek within
the Canadian River valley. All seem to be from jars
with orifices measuring from 6 to perhaps 14 cm in
diameter. The collar effect is achieved by four methods: (1) a relatively parallel rim wall which bulges
out, then in; (2) a thickened rim forming a domed
surface; (3) a thickened rim with an angular, or
even a slight overhanging, ridge at the maximum
collar area; and (4) a "pseudo-collar" caused by the
tapering of the lip of a thick, excurvate rim form.
The collaring effect at the Roper and Cottonwood
Creek sites include the bulged rim (n=2), or the
thickened angular rim (n=2); in contrast, the Buried
City complex collared form is achieved by the thickening of the rim forming either a domed or angular
collar. The Itskari sherds in the sample are collared
by the bulged rim (n=2), thickened dome (n=l),
and the pseudo-collar (n=l) methods.
Decorations on the four Roper and Cottonwood Creek collar rims are merely cordmarked patterns oriented perpendicular to the lip. In contrast,
the Kit Courson sherds have either horizontal incised lines on the collar, or fingernail-gouged nodes
along the collar, and punctates or tooling on the rim
and body below the collar. The greatest diversity in
decorations occur among the Itskari sherds. The
pseudo-collar is merely cordmarked, but two other
sherds had diagonal cord marking, which contrasted
with the orientations of the cord marking below the
collar, whereas the fourth sherd had notches along
the crest of the angular collar.
The metric dimensions of the collared sherds
are presented in Table 1. Due to the small size of
the sherd sample, the importance of the metric variation is uncertain; nevertheless, the following differences are noted. Regarding lip thicknesses, the one
sherd from the Cottonwood Creek Ruin is slightly

Lintz and Reese= Taylor -

Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics

285

Table 1. Morphological Attributes and Variables
Site

Roper Site

Sherd No.
Sherd Type
Rim/Exterior Surface

542

543

544

545

546

547

Collar

Collar
Domed Abrupt

Collar
Domed Abrupt

Cut?
ND

Non-Collar
Straight

Non-Collar
Concave

Concave
Rounded
Smooth CM

Concave
Rounded
Smooth

ND
Reworked

Straight
Square

Convex
Rounded

Smooth

Smooth

Shallow CM

Unknown

Unknown

Smooth CM

Horizontal
Striations
Shallow CM

Shallow CM

Unknown

6+
3.45+?

Unknown

10+
2.80

Unknown
1.12+

15+
3.00

Unknown

2.20
2.95
0.30

1.78
2.32
0.49

0.73
0.65
ND

0.69
0.69
0.80

Domed
Rim/Interior Surface Concave
Lip form
Pointed
Collar Surface
Smooth CM
Decoration
Neck Treatment

-

-

Horizontal
Striations
Unknown

Body Treatment
Oriface Diameter*
Rim Height*
Maximum Collar
Length*
Total Collar Length*
Lip Thickness*
Maximum Collar
Thickness*
Neck Width*
Body Thickness*
Comments

2.81

I

-

1.58
2.04
0.40
0.69
0.75
0.91
One Vessel?

-

0.53
-

0.47
0.48

-

-

-

ND
-

0.53

0.42

0.69
ND

0.52
ND

-

I

*measurements in cm
ND= no data
Site
Sherd No.

Cottonwood Ruins
111.4

Sherd Type
Collar
Rim/Exterior Surface Angular
Rim/Interior Surface Concave
Lip form
Pointed
Collar Surface
CM
Decoration
Neck Treatment
CM
Body Treatment
Unknown
Oriface Diameter*
Rim Height*
Maximum Collar
Length*

Antelope Creek Ruin 22
104.1

109.3

2115U7

22 5U45

22 7A/20

Non-Collar
Convex
Concave

Non-Collar
Convex
Concave
Rounded

Non-Collar
Straight
Straight
Square CM

Non-Collar
Straight
Straight
Rounded

Non-Collar
Straight
Straight
Square

Square
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CM
Unknown

CM
Unknown

Vertical CM
Vertical CM

Vertical CM
Vertical CM

Vertical CM
Vertical CM

10+
4.12

15+
ND

9+
ND

8+
4.77

12+
4.70

12+
4.20

2.90

-

-

-

-

-

-

286

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. (Continued)
Cottonwood Ruins

Site
Sherd No.

111.4

Total Collar Length*

3.15

Lip Thickness*

0.22

Maximum Collar
Thickness*

0.97

Neck Width*
Body Thickness*

0.64
ND

Antelope Creek Ruin 22
104.1
-

0.55

109.3

0.49

-

0.45

0.69
ND

22 5I/45

21 15I/7

-

0.54
-

-

0.45

0.75
0.49

0.84
0.59

ND

22 7A/20
-

0.67
-

0.75
0.50

*measurements in cm
ND= no data
Site

Alibates Ruin 28

I

Kit Courson

28-A8-42/
PR330

28-A8-16/
PR295

A28-A6-92/
PR 167

410C43-188

Sherd Type
Rim/Exterior
Surface

NonCollar

NonCollar

NonCollar

Collar Incised

Straight

Straight

Straight

Angular

Domed

Slight Dome

Straight
Flat-bevel Exterior
-

Straigt
Flat-bevel Exterior
-

Straight
Square

Straight
Rounded
Plain Incised

Convex
Rounded
Plain Nodes

Rim/Interior
Surface
Lip form
Collar Surface

410C43-64

410C43-329.6

Sherd No.

Collar Punctate Collar Punctate

Vertical CM
Vertical CM

Diagonal CM

Diagonal CM

Four
Horizontal
Incised Lines
Smooth

Diagonal CM

Diagonal CM

Unknown

Convex
Rounded
Plain Nodes
Punctate
Fingernail
Nodes
Punctate
Smooth
Unknown

Oriface Diameter"'
Rim Height*
Maximum Collar
Length*
Total Collar

10+
5.50

8+
5.32

10+
5.04

11-14+
Unknown

8-9+
Unknown

9-11+
5.48

-

2.56

1.20

1.27

Length*
Lip Thickness*
Maximum Collar
Thickness*
Neck Width*

0.52

-

2.80
0.48

1.42

1.56

0.46

0.52

0.51

0.71

0.53

0.46

1.29
0.73

0.98
0.51

Body Thickness*
Comments

0.45

0.47

0.40

Unknown

Unknown

0.92
0.55
0.67

-

Decoration

Neck Treatment
Body Treatment

*measurements in cm

-

-

-

0.49

-

-

l

Fingernail
Nodes
Smooth, CM
CM?

One vessel?

J

Lintz and Reese$ Taylor -

Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics

287

Table 1. (Continued)
Site
SherdNo.
Sherd Type
Rim/Exterior Surface
Rim/Interior Surface
Lip form
Collar Surface
Decoration
Neck Treatment
Body Treatment
Oriface Diameter*
Rim Height*
Maximum Collar Length*
Total Collar Length*
Lip Thickness*
Maximum Collar Thickness*
Neck Width*
Body Thickness*

25NC29
413

622

F-18

Collar

Collar

Angular
Concave

Domed
Concave
Flat

Pseudo- Collar
Angular
Convex
Pointed/ Sloping

Collar
Domed

511

Pointed
Smooth CM
Punctate
Deep CM
Unknown

Smooth CM
Diagonal CM

CM on Lip

Deep CM
Unknown

Deep CM
Deep CM

10+
2.90
1.70
2.27
0.32
0.91
0.67
0.91

9+
3.90
1.10 Sloped Lip

9+
2.92
1.52
1.82
0.39
1.04
0.79
0.82

1.05
1.21
0.61

Straight
Flat to Rounded
Smooth CM
Diagonal CM
CM
Shallow CM
8-10+
3.40
1.75
2.24
0.46
1.12
0.86
Unknown

*measurements in cm

thinner (0.22 cm) than the others, while the lip
thicknesses of three Kit Courson sherds tend to be
somewhat greater (mean=0.50 cm) than those sherds
from the Roper (mean=0.40 cm) and Itskari
(mean=0.39 cm) sites. However, if collared thickness is examined, then the bulged rims from Roper
sherds are significantly thinner (mean=0.70 cm)
than the thickened ridged, domed, and the pseudocollar sherds from the Cottonwood (0.97 cm), Kit
Courson (mean=l.06 cm), or the Itskari phase
(mean=l.03 cm) sites. Little site-specific differences
are noted in the neck widths below the collar: Cottonwood Creek=0.64 cm; Roper mean=0.70 cm;
Kit Courson mean=0.60 cm; and the Itskari site
(excluding the pseudo-collar form with of 1.21 cm)
mean neck width=0.77 cm.
Considerable variation exists in the length of
the collar tablet with the single Cottonwood Creek
sherd having the longest tablet (2.90 cm), the pseudocollar sherd from the Itskari phase site has the shortest tablet (1.10 cm), and the other collar sherds
range from 1.20-2.56 cm. A comparison of the collar tablet to the total collar length shows little differ-

ences between the Cottonwood Creek Ruin sherd
with the longest dimension, and the Itskari phase
sherds and Kit Courson sherds with the shortest
dimension. The mostly bulging collar rims from the
Roper site, by contrast, have tremendous variability
in the ratio of collar table to total collar length.
If the sherds in the small sample are
morphologically representative of their site's
respective assemblages, then the overall simplicity
(i.e., more homogenous and less ornate) of the
collared rim sherds from the Roper and Cottonwood
Creek sites within the Canadian River valley stand
in marked contrast with the elaborateness of
decorated sherds from the Buried City complex or
the Itskari phase sites.

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION
OF THE PASTE VARIABILITY
The following section examines the density of
pastes and the rock and mineral content of the
temper constituents. Similar paste densities defined

288

Texas Archeological Society

on the basis of relative proportions of clays, pores,
and non-plastic inclusions (temper) in sherds may
reflect similar cultural behaviors, and/or perhaps
similar vessel functions, since the paste density has
a direct relationship to thermal conductivity.
Although distinctive patterns are reflected in the
petrographic study of the sherds, paste densities are
regarded as being less significant than the sources
of rocks and minerals of the non-plastic component
of the paste. The overall density of the pastes is
examined on a site-by site basis, then clusters of
sherds are delineated based on similarities in rock
and mineral content.

Paste Density Characteristics
When the proportions of clays, non-plastic inclusions, and pores or air pockets derived from a
200 point count sample of each sherd are plotted
on a triangular graph, several interesting clusters
are apparent (Figure 8 and Table 2). Foremost is
the considerable overlap in percentage of clay and
pores among the pastes of the non-collared sherds
from site AC-22 (58/10, 60/5, and 70/6 percent of
clay and pores, respectively) and Alibates Ruin 28
(59/6, 62/4, and 62/6), and the collared sherds from
the Buried City complex (63/4, 59/6, and 55/11).
The relative comparability in the sherds from the
two Antelope Creek phase type sites could reflect
relatively standard procedures for ceramic production, rather than vessel manufacture by the same
potter or from the same clay source, since the two
sites are about 20 km apart. The two non-collared
sherds from the Cottonwood Creek Ruins have
similar percentages of clay (and non-plastic inclusions), but fewer pores (59/2 and 7112), indicating
a somewhat denser pottery; the collared sherd from
Cottonwood Ruin has a markedly higher proportion of clay, but not pores (76/5), than the Antelope Creek and Buried City sherds. The four
collared sherds from the Itskari phase sites show a
relatively wide range of clay and pore variability,
that overlaps those from the Alibates and Cottonwood Creek Ruins. At 25NC29, the sherds tend to
reflect relatively dense clays and few pores (66/3,
6917, 71/2, and 86/6).
The most interesting clusters of sherds based
on paste densities are the collared and non-collared
sherds at the Roper site. The three non-collared
sherds from Roper have very high clay and low
pore percentages (77/5, 80/4, and 82/0), greatly

exceeding the density of pastes found on any of the
sherds in the Canadian River valley and the Buried
City sites. In marked contrast, the collared rim
sherds from the Roper site have lower densities of
clays, but an extremely high occurrence of pores
(58/16, 59/15, and 70114). This contrast between
the collared and non-collared sherds at the Roper
site may reflect very different vessel functions with
respect to thermal conductivity (e.g., Rice 1987).

Non-plastic Rock and Mineral
Constituents
The petrographic analysis delineated two fundamentally distinct groupings based on rock and
mineral content and the shape of the temper (Figure 9 and Table 3). The sedimentary group consists
of nine sherds whereas the igneous group, all of
which contained varying amounts of granite family rocks, include 13 sherds. The difference between the sherds with sedimentary sand/sandstone
or granitic inclusions could reflect either geological differences in the available sands/clays, or a
cultural selectivity based on functional distinctions
in thermal conductivity and intended use. Smaller
grain sizes in the sedimentary pastes have lower
conductivity than the larger grain sizes typical of
the igneous pastes because they have more grain
boundaries (see Rice 1987). In the discussion below, traces of minerals and elements are mentioned
only if they constitute more than one percent of the
temper-size materials in order to deemphasize
counting errors for trace materials.

Sedimentary Resource Group
The nine sherds within this group contained no
granitic family materials among the quantities of
non-plastic materials (8-35 percent) in the paste.
Most non-plastic materials consist of rounded
quartz sand (49-99 percent), with some alkali feldspar (0-50 percent) and traces of mica, biotite, and
carbonates. Since alkali feldspar weathers quickly,
it was used to identify three subgroups within the
sedimentary group.
Sedimentary Subgroup 1 consists of three
sherds with no alkali feldspars as non-plastic
inclusions, which is indicative of the use of mature
or weathered sands and sandstone sources. The paste
is a dense, slightly sandy clay, with 4-11 percent
pores and 16-35 percent non-plastic inclusions. The

Lintz and Reese-Taylor- Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics

289

0

A Collared Rim
0 Noncollared Rim

Figure 8. Proportions of Pores, Fine Sediment Paste, and Non-Plastic Inclusions.

three sherds have a wide range of variation in temper
shape (rounded to angular) and average particle
size (fine sand through coarse sand). The sherds
include one non-collared sherd from the Roper site
(No. 547) and two collared sherds (possibly from a

single vessel) from the Kit Courson site of the
Buried
(Nos. 064 and 188). The Buried City
complex sherds includes less than 3 percent mica
and between 2-9
carbonates in the noninclusions.

Texas Archeological Society

290

Table 2. Petrographic Characterization of Paste Densities
Site

Roper Site

Sherd No.

542

543

544

545

546

547

Sherd Type

Collar

Collar

Collar

Cut?

NonCo!lar

NonCollar

Point Count

100

100

100

100

100

100

Clay

70%

59%

58%

82%

77%

80%

Pores

14%

15%

16%

0%

5%

4%

Non-plastic
(Temper/Natural)
Relative Density

16%

26%

26%

18%

18%

16%

Very Low

Very High

Very High

Very Low

Very Low

Very Low

Angular

--

--

L-regular

Angular

Angular

Minimum Temper
Size

0.083

0.319

O.D75

0.377

0.667

0.348

Maximum Temper
Size

0.638

1.885

0.735

0.870

0.493

1.479

Average Temper
Size

0.293

0.809

0.249

0.597

0.745

0.650

Average Temper
Class Name

Medium Sand

Coarse Sand

Fine Sand

Coarse Sand

Coarse Sand

Coarse Sand

Temper Shape

l

Comments
Site

One Vessel?

Cottonwod Ruins

AC-22Ruin

Sherd No.

111.4

104.1

109.3

21 15I/7

22 5I/45

22 7A/20

NonCollar

NonCollar

NonCollar

Sherd Type

Collar

NonCollar

NonCollar

Point Count

100

100

100

100

100

100

Clay

75%

59%

71%

60%

70%

58%

Pores

5%

2%

2%

5%

6%

10%

Non-plastic
(Temper/
Natural)

20%

39%

27%

35%

24%

32%

Relative Density

Moderately
Low

Very High

Moderately
Low

Moderately
High

Moderately
Low

Moderately
Low

Temper Shape

Subangular

Subangular

--

Angular

Subangular

Minimum Temper
Size

0.015

0.045

0.338

0.053

0.060

0.053

Maximum Temper
Size

0.728

3.045

2.668

0.870

0.563

3.770

Average Temper
Size

0.621

0.660

0.681

0.532

0.276

0.858

Class Name

Coarse Sand

Coarse Sand

Coarse Sand

Coarse Sand

Medium Sand

Coarse Sand

and

Table 2. (Continued)
Site

Alibates Ruin 28

Kit Courson

Sherd No.

28-A8-42/
PR 330

28-A8-16/
PR295

A28-A6-92/
PR167

410C43-188

Sherd Type
Point Count
Clay
Pores
Non-plastic
(Temper/
Natural)
Relative Density

NonCollar
100
62%
6%

Non Collar
100
59%
6%

NonCollar
100
62%
4%

Collar Incised
100
55%
11%

32%
Moderately
Low
Subangular

35%
Moderately
High
Subrounded

34%
Moderately
Low

34%
Very High

35%
Very High

Rounded to
Subrounded

Subrounded

0.580

0.580

0.174

0.165

0.053

0.045

3.915

2.755

2.465

0.750

0.743

0.600

1.810

1.311

0.586

0.481

0.219

0.323

Very Coarse
Sand

Very Coarse
Sand

Coarse Sand

Medium Sand

Fine Sand

Temper Shape
Minimum Temper
Size
Maximum Temper
Size
Average Temper
Size
Average Temper
Class Name

-

Sherd No.
Sherd Type
Point Count
Clay
Pores
Non-plastic
(Temper/
Natural)
Relative Density
Temper Shape
Minimum Temper
Size
Maximum Temper
Size
Average Temper
Size
Average Temper
Class Name

410C43-329.6

Collar Punctate Collar Punctate
100
100
59%
63%
6%
4%

l

Comments
Site

410C43-64

33%
Moderately
High
Subrounded to
Subangular

Medium Sand
One Vesselj

Site 25NC29
511

413

622

F-18

Collar
100
66%
3%

Collar
100
69%
7%

Pseudo-Collar
100
71%
2%

Collar
100
86%
6%

31%
Moderately Low
Rounded

24%
Moderately High
Rounded

27%
Moderately Low
Subrounded

8%
Moderately Low
Subrounded

0.087

0.030

0.058

0.030

3.219

0.330

1.595

2.088

1.386

0.092

0.429

0.338

Very Coarse Sand

Very Fine Sand

Medium Sand

Medium Sand

292

Texas

Alibates Ruin 28
1
l?R-167
l?R 295
2
3
l?R 330
AC-22 Ruin
4
22 7A/20
5
21 15I/7
6
22 5I/45
Roper Site

PERCENT GRANITE
7

Igneous Group 5

'"'l
t>:l

3

t<

0

C/l

'"Cl

1--'i'f------

A 20

!i1

20

© Igneous Group 3

© 10

542

8
9

543
544

10
545
11
546
12
547
Cottonwood Creek Ruins
13
104.1
14
109.3
15
111.4
Kit Courson Ruins
16
064
17
188
18
329.6
Site 25NC29 (Itskari Phase)

lgI?eous Group 4
©

7

19

1

413
511
622
F-18

20
21
22.

A

©

Collared Sherd
NonCollared Sherd

r--~~~-+~~~~~~~~~~~~~~10.

Igneous Group 2

Sedimentry
Group 1

0

::1.3

©
6

21
&.

Sedimentry
Group 3

Igneous Group 1

30

40

Figure 9. Petrographically Delineated Igneous and Sedimentary Subgroups.

Sedimentary Subgroup 2 consists of five sherds
with 5-16 percent alkali feldspar as non-plastic inclusions, indicating the use of arkosic or moderately unweathered sands and sandstone sources.
With 4-16 percent pores and 18-33 percent nonplastic inclusions, the sherds are dense to moderately porous, but with a well-worked clay matrix.
Temper is sub-rounded to angular in shape and
ranges from fine to coarse sand in size. The sherds
in this group include one of the collared sherd from
the Cottonwood Creek Ruin (No. 111.4), two collared sherds from a single vessel from the Roper
site (Nos. 543 and 544), one non-collared sherd
from the Roper site (No. 546), and one collared
sherd from the Kit Courson site (No. 329.6). The
Cottonwood Creek and Buried City sherds contain
small amounts (10 and 3 percent, respectively) of
mica, whereas the two collared sherds from Roper

have 1-4 percent biotite inclusions as part of the
non-temper paste.
Sedimentary Subgroup 3 consists of a single
sherd from 25NC29. The sherd has almost 50
percent alkali feldspar as a non-plastic inclusion,
consistent with paste and/or temper materials
procured from a fairly recently exposed and
relatively unweathered source composed of
graywacke sand or sandstone. The porosity is 6
percent, with 8 percent naturally occurring
inclusions, indicating a dense, well-worked clay
matrix. Temper fragments in this sherd are subrounded, with an average size of medium sand. No
distinctive inclusions occur as minor constituents
of the temper. This collared sherd (No. 25NC29 F19) is from the extra-mural area of the village and
is quite different from the three sherds inside
Structure 2.

Lintz and Reese-Taylor - Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics

293

Table 3. Petrographic Characterization of Nonplastic Rocks and Minerals
Site

Roper Site

Sherd No.

542

543

544

545

546

547

Sherd Type

Collar

Collar

Collar

Cut?

NonCollar

NonCollar

Point Count

200

200

200

200

200

200

Non-plastic
Percent of Paste

16%

26%

26%

18%

18%

16%

62.46%

80.71%

84.55%

72.14%

88.79%

99.81%

15.37%

15.37%

11.10%

11.10%

0.06%

Quartz
Alkali Feldspar
Plagio- Feldspar

-

Granite

37.48%

Mica

0.06%

Biotite

1.00%

Carbonate

-

Volcanic Rock
Fragment

-

Chert

-

Hematite

-

Pyroxene
Total

-

16.65%

-

-

0.04%

1.00%
-

-

0.04%

-

-

100.00%

l

Comments
Site

-

-

3.84%

101.00%

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.06%

0.06%

-

0.06%

-

0.06%

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.06%

0.04%

-

0.06%

-

100.96%

100.01%

100.01%

99.99%

One Vessel?

Cottonwod Ruins

Antelope Creek Ruin 22

Sherd No.

111.4

104.1

109.3

21 15I/7

22 5I/45

22 7N20

Sherd Type

Collar

Non Collar

NonCollar

NonCollar

NonCollar

NonCollar

Point Count

200

200

200

200

200

200

Non-plastic
Percent of Paste

20%

39%

27%

35%

24%

32%

Quartz

85.00%

79.47%

62.96%

74.24%

74.94%

74.93%

Alkali Feldspar

5.00%

12.82%

14.81 %

11.42%

16.65%
4.16%

Plagio- Feldspar

-

Granite

-

Mica

10.00%

-

-

0.04%

-

-

5.!3%

22.22%

14.28%

2.56%

-

0.03%

0.03%

-

0.03%

0.04%

0.03%

-

4.16%

3.12%

-

21.89%
0.03%

Biotite

-

Carbonate

-

-

-

Volcanic Rock
Fragment

-

-

-

-

-

-

Chert

-

-

-

-

-

-

Hematite

-

-

-

-

-

Pyroxene

-

-

-

-

Total

100.00%

100.01%

99.99%

100.00%

99.99%

-

100.00%

Texas Archeological Society

294

Table 3. (Continued)
Site

Kit Courson

Alibates Ruin 2
28-A8-42/
PR330

28-AS-16/

A28-A6-92/
PR 167

410C43-188

410C43-64

PR295

410C43329.6

Sherd Type

NonCollar

NonCollar

NonCollar

Collar Incised

Collar
Punctate

Collar
Punctate

Point Count

200

200

200

200

200

200

32%

35%

34%

34%

35%

33%

88.24%

94.23%

87.88%

Sherd No.

Nonplastic
Percent of Paste
Quartz

62.50%

65.70%

55.88%

Alkali Feldspar

3.13%

22.85%

17.65%

-

Plagio- Feldspar

-

11.43%
0.03%

2.94%

-

Granite

25.00%

Mica

6.25%

Biotite

-

-

Carbonate
Volcanic Rock
Fragment
Chert

-

2.94%

-

-

-

-

3.13%

2.94%

-

Hematite

-

-

Pyroxene

-

-

Total

17.65%

100.01%

100.01%

-

-

2.94%

8.82%
-

100.00%

-

100.00%

Site

3.03%

0.03%

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

100.01%

Comments

9.09%

0.03%
2.86%
2.86%

-

100.00%
One Vessel_]

Site 25NC29
511

413

622

F-18

Sherd Type

Collar

Collar

Pseudo-Collar

Collar

Point Count

200

200

200

200

Non-plastic
Percent of Paste

31%

24%

27%

8%

Sherd No.

Quartz

64.47%

58.33%

74.05%

49.94%

Alkali Feldspar

12.89%

20.83%

18.51%

49.94%

Plagio- Feldspar

-

-

-

8.33%

3.70%

3.22%

-

3.70%

0.03%

4.17%

0.04%

Granite

19.34%

Mica
Biotite

8.33%

-

0.12%

-

-

-

-

Carbonate

-

Volcanic Rock
Fragment

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Hematite
Pyroxene

0.03%

Total

99.98%

99.99%

100.00%

100.00%

295
biotite and another 8 "'"''"""''~t
material inclusions.
The thirteen sherds within this group conmaterials ranging
tained quantities of
from 16-35 percent of the paste. Most non-plastic
materials consist of quartz (56-79 percent), alkali
feldspar (0-23 percent), and "granite family" rocks
(4-37 percent), with some traces of mica, biotite,
carbonates, volcanic rock fragments, and chert.
Granite family rocks include granite particles, and
combinations of quartz-mica schists, quartz-plagioclase feldspars, and quart-alkali feldspars. Most of
the granitic rocks and minerals are originally derived from the east slope of the Rocky Mountains
with extensive surficial exposures west of Las
Vegas, and southwest of Cimarron, New Mexico
(Condie 1981); outwash granitic materials probably
occur as well in the Ogallala formation that mantles
much of the High Plains. A total of five subgroups
are defined on the percentages of granite and alkali feldspar non-plastic inclusions in the sherds.
Igneous Subgroup 1 consists of three sherds
with 2-6 percent granitic rock fragments and 1219 percent alkali feldspar, consistent with clays
from moderately weathered sources. The range in
pores (2-6 percent) and non-plastic temper (24-39
percent) indicate a moderately dense, well-worked
clay matrix. Temper fragments are sub-rounded to
angular in shape, and medium to coarse sand in
size. The sherds include the pseudo-collar sherd
(No. 622) from 25NC29, and non-collared sherds
from the Cottonwood Creek (No. 104.1), and AC22 (Nos. 22 5I/45) ruins. The two sherds from Cottonwood Creek and 25NC29 site have less than 4
percent mica temper, whereas the sherd from AC22 has more than 4 percent carbonate temper.
Igneous Subgroup 2 consists of two sherds
with 8-12 percent granitic rock fragments and 2023 percent alkali feldspar non-plastic inclusions,
indicative of moderately weathered clay sources.
The pore spaces range from 6-7 percent and the
non-plastic materials amount to 24-35 percent of
the paste, which is a relatively dense, well-worked
clay matrix. Temper fragments are rounded to subrounded with an average range from very fine sand
to very coarse sand in size. The sherds include one
non-collared sherd from Alibates Ruin (No. 295),
and one collared Itskari phase sherd (No. 413).
Unlike the Itskari phase sherd in Igneous Subgroup
1 with mica inclusions, the sherd from the same site
assigned to this subgroup has about 4 percent

spar,
indicating clays from relatively recent
weathered sources. The temper inclusions range
from 18-35 percent of the paste, whereas the pores
constitute between 0-5 percent, both indicative of a
dense, well-worked clay. Temper fragments are
rounded through irregular in shape, and average
coarse to very coarse sand in size. The group includes only one collared rim sherd (No. 511) from
the Itskari phase site, 25NC29, and single examples
of non-collared sherds from Roper (No 545), AC22 (No. 21 15I/7), Alibates Ruin 28 (No. 167), and
the Cottonwood Creek Ruin (No. 109.3). Trace minerals are not common, including 3+ percent mica in
the Itskari sherd and about 6 percent biotite and
volcanic rock fragments in the Alibates Ruin sherd.
Igneous Subgroup 4 consists of two non-collared rim sherds from Alibates Ruin 28 (No. 330)
and AC-22 Ruin (No. 22 7A/20). The paste of these
sherds is from a weathered source of materials as
they contain 21-25 percent granitic rock fragments
and less than 4 percent alkali feldspar as non-plastic inclusions. The pores spacing in the paste ranges
from 6-10 percent, whereas the non-plastic temper
is about 32 percent in both sherds, consistent with a
moderately dense clay. Mica (6 percent) and chert
(3 percent) inclusions are present as tempering elements in the sherd from Alibates Ruin, but the
sherd from AC-22 has about 3 percent carbonate
inclusions. Temper fragments are sub-angular
coarse to very coarse sand in shape and texture.
The last Igneous Subgroup (Subgroup 5), consists of one collared rim sherd from the Roper site
(No. 542). The sherd contains 37 percent granitic
rock fragments but no alkali feldspar, denoting a
weathered clay and paste source. The pore spacing
in the paste is high at 14 percent, and non-plastic
rock temper is 16 percent. Biotite contributes only
1 percent to the temper of the paste. Temper fragments are angular pieces of medium sand.

DISCUSSION AND
CONCLUSIONS
As is usually the case, the results from the
present study must be interpreted with caution since

296

Texas Archeological Society

the sample sizes are very small and the sherds may
not be representative of the larger site assemblages.
Nevertheless, several patterns are apparent based
on the petrographic study.
First, there is a strong positive correlation between the presence of collared rim sherds and the
use of sedimentary materials for sites within the
Texas panhandle. Six of the seven collared rim
sherds from the Antelope Creek and Buried City
complexes are made of sedimentary materials; only
one collared rim sherd from the Roper site (No.
542) is made of igneous materials. A Chi-square
test on the association of sedimentary materials and
collared rims is significant at the 0.02 level of confidence. Despite the contrast in elaborate decoration for the Buried City complex sherds and the
plain collared sherds from the Roper and Cottonwood Creek sites, the pastes show similar compositions. These similarities reflect similar geological
origins of the tempers and pastes, and probably also
direct cultural interactions between people in the
Canadian River valley and those living along Wolf
Creek in the Texas panhandle.
Second, in contrast to the relative homogeneity of the collared sherds in Texas, the four sherds
from the Itskari phase site in central Nebraska show
a very wide range of variation in decoration and
paste attributes. Three of the four collared sherds
(including the pseudo-collar form) are made of igneous materials, with similar proportions of alkali
feldspars (13-21 percent), but somewhat different
percentages of granite rock (3.5-19 percent). The
fourth sherd (F-18) is made of sedimentary materials and has such a high percentage of alkali feldspar (nearly 50 percent) that the paste must have
been obtained very close to recent outcrop exposures (perhaps from areas ·.vest of the site region).
The heterogeneity might indicate that considerable
movement or trade/exchange of vessels has occurred in the Itskari assemblage of the Central
Plains Tradition, which supports recent suggestions
postulated to account for the variability of decorated Central Plains Tradition ceramics (Peterson
1994). The Central Plains interaction involves,
among other things, the movement of vessels made
from substantially different paste and temper
source areas.
Third, all of the non-collared rim sherds from
the Antelope Creek phase type localities of AC-22
and Alibates 28, and those from the Cottonwood
Creek Ruins, are made from igneous material pastes.

Indeed, if the paste compositions of the sherds from
AC-22 and Alibates 28 are representative of the
Antelope Creek phase materials, then Igneous
Subgroups 1 through 4 includes all non-collared
sherds from sites in the Canadian River valley
except for two sedimentary-tempered non-collared
sherds from the Roper site. This very strong
correlation may reflect the cultural norm within the
Canadian River valley in making pottery with
igneous temper materials, and stands in marked
contrast to the collared rim assemblage within the
Canadian River valley, and with the sherds from
the Buried City complex site. Alternatively, the
distinctions might reflect functional differences,
since the sedimentary sand/sandstone-tempered
vessels would not have been as efficient in cooking
as the granitic-tempered vessels.
Fourth, the collared rim sherds from the sites
in the Canadian River valley have stronger shared
paste characteristics with the nearby Buried City
complex than with the non-collared sherds from the
same sites. The few collared rim sherds from the
Cottonwood and Roper sites may be trade items
from the Wolf Creek drainage, rather than from the
Central Plains Tradition complexes. Indeed, the
petrographic results suggests that the folks at the
Itskari phase site of 25NC29 were beyond the direct realm of interaction of the Antelope Creek
people. Due to the lack of chronometric data from
25NC29, it is not possible to determine whether the
delineated ceramic variability relates to spatial or
temporal differences. Nevertheless, ceramic evidence eliminates any people migration or trade between Antelope Creek folks and those at the single
Itskari village. There are, however, many other
Central Plains Tradition groups, including Upper
Republican, St. Helena, Nebraska, and Lower Loup
phases involved with the manufacture of collared
rim pots which may have had a stronger role in
exchanges with the Antelope Creek people in the
south.
Fifth, the petrographic data from the Roper
site is quite complex and a little bewildering. The
occurrence of two non-collared rim sherds from the
Roper site (Nos. 546 and 547) with the same general
sedimentary paste characteristics as two collared
rim sherds from the same site (Nos. 543 and 544)
suggests that both forms may have been made from
similar sources and perhaps at similar locations, if
not traditions, which are quite distinct from those
responsible for the manufacture of the pottery at

and Reese-Taylor - Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics
the Antelope Creek phase type sites only a short
distance away. Despite the differences in rim forms
and decorative styles, these sherds are probably
linked to the Buried City complex. If the
petrographic data are indeed representative, it might
suggest that the source of the Roper ceramics, if not
the residents themselves, may have been from the
Wolf Creek vicinity. Nevertheless, the paste of one
non-collared sherd from the Roper site (No. 545) is
quite compatible with the pastes of the AC-22 and
Alibates sherds, and possibly represents the
acquisition or manufacture of ceramic vessels from
sources comparable to that used by Antelope Creek
phase people. One final collared rim sherd from the
Roper site (No. 542) is unlike any other sherd in the
study because of the very high occurrence of granitic
temper; although the source materials are very
distinctive, its significance is currently unknown.
The present study has only provided the initial data for Antelope Creek sites. Future studies
involving petrographic, PIXE, or neutron activation
analysis on larger samples of sherds will undoubtedly illuminate intra-site and intra-regional ceramic
differences. Some emphasis should focus on the
complexities apparent in the Itskari phase sample,
and clearly other Central Plains Tradition groups
(Upper Republican, St. Helena, Nebraska, and
Lower Loup) and Southern Plains Traditions folks
(Wilmore complex, Zimms complex, Pratt complex, Washita River, and Custer phases) should be
sampled along with larger samples from Itskari,
Antelope Creek, and Buried City complexes to help
delineate inter-regional patterns of interaction and
trade across the Central and Southern Plains.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the Texas Archeological Society (TAS), especially Dr. E. Mott Davis,
chairman of the T AS Donor's Fund, for awarding a
grant covering 70 percent of the cost of preparing
thin sections and the petrographic work used in this
study; Mr. Paul Ward, Treasurer of the TAS, is also
thanked for his timely payment of invoices accrued
during this project. The remainder of the thin section
and preparation costs were provided by the
Advanced Research Program of the University of
Texas, and we would like to thank Dr. Tom Hester
for his assistance in acquiring these funds.
Appreciation is also extended to Karen Anderson,

297

Bill Harrison and A. J. Taylor of the PanhandlePlains Historical Museum, for providing the sherds
from the four Antelope Creek phase sites in the
Canadian River Valley. Dr. David Hughes of
Wichita State University is thanked for sending the
sherds from the Kit Courson site of the Buried City
complex along Wolf Creek, as are Dr. Steven Holen
and Mr. John Peterson of the University of Nebraska
State Museum for providing the Itskari phase sherds
and information about site 25NC29. We also
appreciate the thoughtful review comments by Dr.
Judith A. Habicht-Mauche on an earlier version of
this paper.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1983 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press,
New York
Baerreis, D. A. and R. A. Bryson
l 965a Climatic Episodes and the Dating of the Mississippian Cultures. Wisconsin Archaeologist 46(4):203220.
l 965b Historical Climatology and the Southern Plains: A
Preliminary Statement. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society 13:69-75.
1966

Dating the Panhandle Aspect Cultures. Bulletin of
the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 14: 105-116.

Baker, E.
1939 Bimonthly letter report submitted to Floyd V. Studer.
In the Studer Files (document 708) at the National
Park Service, Lake Meredith Recreation Area,
Sanford, Texas.
Baker, E. and J. Baker
n.d.a Final Report WPA-West Texas State Archaeological Project 9249. Unpublished manuscript on file at
the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, Canyon.
n.d.b

Final Report Archaeological Survey-0.P. 665-663-404, State Application 30976. Unpublished manuscript on file at the Panhandle-Plains Historical
Museum, Canyon.

Bell, R. E. and D. A. Baerreis
1951 A Survey of Oklahoma Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
22:7-100.

298

Texas Archeological Society

Bryson, R. A., D. A. Baerreis and W. Wendland
1970 The Character of Late-Glacial and Post-Glacial Climatic Changes. In Pleistocene and Recent Environments of the Central Great Plains, edited by W.
Dort and J. K. Jones, pp 53-77. Special Publication
3. University of Kansas Department of Geology,
Lawrence.
Carter, D. and M. R. Carter
n.d.
A Preliminary Report on a Square Room in the
Cottonwood Creek Ruins of Hutchinson County,
Texas. Manuscript on file at the Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum, Canyon.
Condie, K. C.
1981 Precambrian Rocks of Southwestern United States
and Adjacent Areas of Mexico. Map, New Mexico
Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources, Socorro.
Crabb, M.
1968 Some Puebloan Trade Pottery from Panhandle Aspect Sites. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 38:83-89.
Dumas, W. and C. Dumas
n.d.
Excavutions (sic) of A-62 or Roper Nr. l. Manuscript on file at the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum, Canyon.
Folk,D.
1968 A Laboratory Manual of Optical Petrography.
Hemphill Publishing Co., Austin.
Grange, Jr., R. T.
1968 Pawnee and Lower Loup Pottery. Publications in
Anthropology 3. Nebraska State Historical Society,
Lincoln.
Holden, W. C.
1929 Some Explorations and Excavations in Northwest
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society l :23-35.
19j0

The Canadian Valley Expedition of March, 1930.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:21-32.

Hughes, J. T.
1968 Prehistory of the Caddoan Speaking Tribes. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Columbia University, New York.
Hughes, D.
1991 Investigations of the Buried City, Ochiltree County,
Texas, with an Emphasis on the Texas Archeological Society Field Schools of 1987 and 1988. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60:107-148.

Hughes, D. and A. Hughes-Jones
1987 The Courson Archaeological Projects, 1985 and
1986: A Final Report of the 1985 Investigations
and Preliminary Report of the 1986 Work. Innovative Publishing Company, Perryton, Texas.
Krieger, A. D.
1946 Culture Complex and Chronology in Northern Texas
with an Extension of Puebloan Datings to the Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. University of
Texas at Austin.
Leonard, W. M., II
1976 Basic Social Statistics. West Publishing Company,
New York.
Lintz, C.
1978 Panhandle Aspect and Its Early Relationship with
Upper Republican. In The Central Plains Tradition: Internal Developments and External Relationships, edited by D. Blakeslee, pp. 36-55. Report 11.
Office of the Iowa State Archaeologist, University
of Iowa, Ames.
1979

The Southwestern Periphery of the Plains Caddoan
Area. Nebraska History 60(2):161-182.

1986 Architecture and Community Variability within the
Antelope Creek Phase of the Texas Panhandle. Studies in Oklahoma's Past No. 14. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
1997

The 1959 Norpan Excavations at The Cottonwood
Creek Ruins (A-119), Hutchinson County, Texas.
Transactions of the 32nd Regional Archeological
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 27-74.

n.d.

The Roper Site, 41Hc-6, A Prehistoric
Subhornestead Site in Hutchinson County, Texas.
Manuscript in preparation.

Lowrey, E. J.
1932 The Archaeology of the Antelope Creek Ruins.
Master's Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas
Technical College, Lubbock.
Ludwickson, J.
1975 The Loup River Phase and the Origins of Pawnee
Culture. Master's Thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln.
Mason, J. A.
1929 The Texas Expedition. University of Pennsylvania
Museum Journal 22: 318-338.
Moorehead, W. K.
1931 Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley. Phillips
Academy, Andover, Massachusetts.

and
Olson, R.
n.d.
Untitled Report covering 1929 fieldwork (partial).
Unpublished manuscript on file at the American
Museum of Natural History, New York.
Peterson, J. K.
1994 Stylistic Aspects of Central Plains Tradition Ceramics: New Evidence from Site 25NC29. Paper
presented at the 52nd Plains Anthropological Conference, Lubbock, Texas.
Reese, K.
1989 The Ceramics of Kichpanha, Northern Belize.
Master's Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas
A&M University, College Station.
Reese-Taylor, K.
1991 Is This Craft Specialization? The Paste Composition of Preclassic Ceramics from Coaha and
Kichpanha. Paper presented at the 47th meeting of
the International Congress of Americanists, New
Orleans, Louisiana.

Reese-Taylor, K., J. Hageman, and R. A. Ricklis
1995 Preliminary Paste Analyses of Ceramic Samples
from the Mustang Branch Site (41HY209) and
Barton Site (41HY202). In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek
Valley, Hays County, Texas by R. A. Ricklis and M.
B. Collins, pp. 549-568. Studies in Archeology 19.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
Rice, P.
1987 Pottery Analysis: A Sourcebook. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Robinson, D.
1992 Petrographic Analysis of Nonlocal Plainwares. In
Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Henry), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase Ill,
Season 1, by D. Boyd, S. A. Tomka, C. B. Bousman,
K. Gardner, and M. D. Freeman, pp. 221-227. Reports of Investigations 84. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.

1993a Petrographic Analysis of Caddo Ceramics from Titus
County, Northeast Texas. In Archaeological Investigations within the Monticello B-2 First Five-Year
Disturbance Area, Titus County, Texas, by S. M.
Kotter, R. Rogers, R. Taylor, K. Reese-Taylor, and
W. P. Glander, pp. A-1 to A-13. Document No.
920013. Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc., Austin.

1994

1993b Petrographic Analysis of Caddoan Ceramics from
Rusk County, Texas. In National Register Testing
at Eight Archaeological Sites within the Oak Hill
2,280-Acre Study Area, Rusk County, Texas, by R.
Rogers, E. Foster, and K. Reese-Taylor, pp. B-1 to
B-15. Document No. 930169. Espey, Huston and
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Sayles E. B.
1935 An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.

1993c Appendix H: Petrographic Analysis. In Historic and
Prehistoric Data Recovery at Palo Dura Reservoir,
Hansford County, Texas, by J. M. Quigg, C. Lintz,
F. M. Oglesby, A.C. Earls, C. D. Frederick, W. N.
Trierweiler, D. Owsley, and K. W. Kibler, pp. H-1
to H-13. Technical Report No. 485. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.
1995

Petrographic Analysis of Ceramics. In National Register Testing of Ten Sites in the Monticello B-2
Surface Mine, Titus County, Texas, by M. A. Nash,
S. M. Kotter, K. V. Reese-Taylor, E. A. Skokan, R.
M. Rogers, and W. P. Glander, pp. C-1 to C-13.
Document No. 930529. Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Petrographic Analysis of Plain wares from 41 GR29 l.
In Data Recovery at Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg
Reservoir) Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase
Ill, Season 3, by D. Boyd, J. Peck, S. A. Tomka, K.
Kibler, and M. D. Freeman, pp. 357-361. Reports of
Investigations 93. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Shepard, A. 0.
1942 Rio Grande Glaze Paint Ware: A Study Illustrating
the Place of Ceramic Technological Analysis in Archaeological Research. Publication 526. Carnegie
Institute of Washington, Washington D.C.
1965

Rio Grande Glaze-Paint Ware: A Test of Petrographic Provenience. In Ceramics and Man, edited
by F. R. Matson, pp 62-87. Aldinc Publishing Co.,
Chicago.

1976

Ceramics for the Archaeologists. Publication 609.
Carnegie Institution, Washington, D. C.

Studer, F. V.
1942 The Texas Panhandle Alibates Ruins. Unpublished
manuscript on file at the National Park Service,
Lake Meredith Recreation Area, Fritch, Texas.
Watson, V.
1950 The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 21 :7-68.

300

Texas Archeological Society

Wedel, W.
1934 Contributions to the Archaeology of the Upper Republican Valley, Nebraska. Nebraska History Magazine 15: 132-209.
Winchell, F. and L. W. Ellis
1991 The Ceramics of the Alabonson Road Site. In
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Adaptation to the
Inland Coastal Prairie Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas, edited by H.B. Ensor and D. L. Carlson,
pp. 49-99. Reports ofinvestigations No. 8. Archaeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Wood, W.R. (editor)
1969 Two House Sites in the Central Plains: An Experiment in Archaeology. Memoir 6. Plains Anthropologist 14 (44), Part 2.

Survey at the Southeastern Edge
of the Llano Estacado
Luc Litwinionek, Eileen Johnson, and Michael Davis

ABSTRACT

A general inventory survey was undertaken for the 1993 Texas Archeological Society Field School of a
2,200 acre tract of land in proximity to the town of Southland, Garza County, at the edge of the Southern High
Plains. A total of 51 archeological sites were documented during this survey, both on the escarpment as well as
in the adjacent canyons. Sites inventoried include open campsites of varying size, lithic procurement loci, and
cairns. Occupation of the area covers most of the regionally-recognized chronological periods, extending from
the Late Paleoindian to the early 20th century. The data collected through the survey reveal settlement patterns
that appear similar to those found in general on the Southern High Plains.

INTRODUCTION
Numerous sites are known for the Llano
Estacado but relatively few have been investigated
systematically other than through excavations
(Figure 1). Of the sites investigated in this manner,
no cultural period is represented exhaustively
although some periods are better known than others
(e.g., Paleoindian: Sellards 1938; Sellards et al.
1947; Hester 1972; Honea 1980; Willey et al. 1978;
Johnson 1987; Hartwell 1991 ). Gaps in the
knowledge of the peoples and their ancient life ways
is acute for some periods, filled-in only by the
record at Lubbock Lake (e.g., Early Archaic:
Johnson and Holliday 1986; Johnson 1987), or by
Lubbock Lake and a few other sites (e.g., Middle
Archaic: Johnson and Holliday 1986; Meltzer 1991;
Evans 1951). Systematic surveys of large tracts of
land are rare and restricted to cultural resource
management related projects concerned with
reservoirs (Katz and Katz 1976; Hughes and Willey
1978; Boyd et al. 1989, 1990), military reserves
(Lintz et al. 1988; Johnson 1995), and pipelines
(Johnson 1994).
Survey of a 2,200-acre tract of land near the
community of Southland was initiated in June 1993
(Figure 2). For eight days, up to 50 members of the
Texas Archeological Society (T AS) volunteered
their time and expertise to locate and record sites
during the annual Texas Archeological Society Field
School. The area surveyed is located at the edge of

the Llano Estacado at its southeastern periphery.
The land is privately-owned, has been used as
rangeland since Anglo-European settlement in the
late 1800s, and its landscape is diverse: from the
flat uplands to the canyon margins, erosional
arroyos, and lower-margin pastures. Springs flow
from the escarpment, marshlands occur along the
streamlets flowing from the springs, and the Double
Mountain Fork of the Brazos River flows along the
bottomland of the Rolling Plains.
The survey tract is located below the mouth of
Y ellowhouse Canyon as it debauches onto the
Rolling Plains, about 32 km downstream from
Lubbock Lake (see Figure 1). This transition zone
between the Llano Estacado and the Rolling Plains
is an ecotone of rich diversity and abundance of
natural resources. Strategically-located, the tract of
land provides a panoramic view of the mouth of the
canyon and adjacent part of the Rolling Plains.
Game and people traveling into and out of the
canyon and on the adjacent Rolling Plains are visible
for miles. Equally important, the tract has had little
impact from activities other than in the residential
compound. It basically is pristine, as undisturbed a
tract of land as is possible to locate on the urbanized,
high-agriculture use, overly-collected land of
today's Llano Estacado. This means that the types
of sites, frequency of sites, distribution patterns,
and types and abundance of materials should reflect
most closely the past cultural reality of land use
and occupation.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

302

Texas Archeological Society

130,000 km2 • This plateau has a
virtually featureless surface that is
/
one of the largest of its kind in the
tUnited States (NOAA 1982). This
i
flat surface has been formed by
deposition of thick, widespread eolian sediments (Blackwater Draw
Formation) during the Pleistocene
(Holliday 1988). These sediments
form the agricultural soils of today. The Llano Estacado is defined
by escarpments along the west,
north, and east sides while the
southern portion merges with the
Edwards Plateau. The escarpments
expose the thick layer of impen--- Province border
etrable caliche known as the "Ca- - .....
Section border
prock." The surface of the Llano
Estacado has been modified locally
200mi.
by formation of several dune
300km.
fields; thousands of small lake ballano Estacada
and Rolling Plains
sins (play as) formed by deflation;
VTH/1993/LSULLU1996
and several northwest-southeasttrending drainages (draws) that are
Figure 1. Map of Llano Estacado and Rolling Plains.
tributaries of the Red, Brazos, and
Colorado rivers (Hawley et al.
1976; Reeves 1976). Throughout
the last 2 million years, the Llano Estacada has
The T AS inventory survey was designed to
been a grasslands, with some trees found primarily
locate, identify, and preliminarily date the different
in the draws and along the escarpment (Holliday
types of sites within their topographic settings based
1987; Hall and Valastro 1995).
on materials on the surface and any temporal diagThe Rolling Plains is the common term given
nostics found. The survey tract was targeted beto the southern portion of the Osage Plains section
cause of its high potential to contain sites/activities
of the Central Lowland Province, located in North
not represented at the Lubbock Lake Landmark
Central Texas and southwestern Oklahoma (Johnson
(Johnson 1987), due to the tract's topographic diand Holliday 1986). The Southern High Plains deversity, ecotonal setting, and pristine nature.
fines the western boundary, whereas the Central
Texas section is found to the south. The Balcones
Escarpment borders the eastern section of the RollPHYSIOGRAPHIC SETTING
ing Plains (Hunt 1974). This physiographic province is characterized by a heavily-undulated
Two major physiographic provinces dominate
topography, the result of ongoing erosion of the
the Plains of Texas (see Figure 1). The Llano
bordering Llano Estacado. During the last several
Estacado or Southern High Plains is a flat, grassthousand years, the escarpment has been retreating
covered plain, with playa basins, dunes, and draws
slowly,
exposing older Triassic and Permian beds.
(ephemeral stream valleys), that provide the only
Additionally,
well-entrenched drainage systems and
relief on the landscape. The Rolling Plains, to the
numerous
tributaries
have contributed to further diseast of the Llano Estacado, is defined by an erosection of this area (Brune 1981).
sional badlands topography that provides an unduA third topographic setting is found between
lating and dissected landscape.
the actual break of the Caprock and the Rolling
The Llano Es tac ado has a flat topography, low
Plains. This setting is defined by the presence of
environmental gradients, and uniform regional gedeeply
dissected canyons, bluffs, small mesas, and
ology. It is a vast plateau covering approximately
I

~

\

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis -Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado

N

303

part the survey's area northern
portion.

GEOLOGY AND SOILS
The survey area cross-cuts
a number of geological formations exposed by recent erosional factors that still are in
action today. The Permian-age
red beds that underlie the Llano
Estacado represent the oldest
strata in the region (Boyd et al.
1989). They are defined by
beds of red shale, interbedded
with gray shales, clays, mudstones and sandstones, all representing depositional episodes
of marine sediments. Above
these beds are strata of the late
Triassic Dockum Group, that is
divided into two distinct formations, the Tecovas and the
Trujillo (Gould 1906, 1907).
The Tecovas Formation, lying
directly over the Permian beds,
SOUTHLAND AND
YEllOWHOUSE CANYON
0
2-5
5
is composed of multi-colored
SAM/LSULLU1996
(kilometers)
layers of shale with interbedded
sandstone lenses. The Trujillo
Figure 2. Location of Southland and Yell owhouse Canyon.
Formation, also composed of
shales, contains heavily cemented layers of sandstone that
compose the cliff formations observable below the
remnants of arroyos. This area is designated as the
actual escarpment.
dissected plains. In the survey tract, approximately
Tertiary sediments are for the most part ab35 percent of the acreage surveyed is found along
sent. Jurassic, Cretaceous, and early Triassic strata
the escarpment, while the remaining acreage enhave been eroded away except for a limited expocompasses the dissected plains. The Caprock porsure of Cretaceous limestone that is found in
tion of the acreage is relatively flat with a slightly
Yellowhouse Canyon, north of Slaton (Barnes
undulating terrain. The eastern edge of this setting
1967), ca. 10 km upstream (see Figure 2). The late
is represented by the actual escarpment face, with
Tertiary Ogallala Formation, upstream from the surexposed Triassic sandstone layers.
vey area, rests directly on the Dockum Group. The
The Brazos River system constitutes the major
Ogallala Formation, divided into lower and upper
drainage basin in the area. The North Fork of the
units (Holliday and Welty 1981), is composed of a
Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River flows
series of layered sands, gravels, and clays. The
through Yellowhouse Canyon (see Figure 2). Three
lower unit, fluvial and lacustrine in origin, is deof its tributaries are found in near proximity to the
fined by a conglomerate of sands and gravels. The
area surveyed. The South Dokegood Creek and
upper unit, containing unconsolidated sands, clays,
secondary tributaries border the southern edge of
and silt, is probably eolian in origin (Gustavson
the survey area. The edge of North Dokegood Creek
1986). Most of the gravels used by prehistoric
borders the southeastern periphery of the surveyed
groups for the production of stone tools lie in the
terrain. Finally, Red Hollow Creek defines in large

304

Texas Archeological Society

lower unit of the Ogallala Formation (Holliday and
Welty 1981; Hood 1978).
In parts of the surrounding Llano Estacado,
the Blanco Formation blankets the Ogallala Formation. Pliocene in age, the Blanco Formation is an
extensive lacustrine deposit of dolomite deposited
in large basins cut directly into the Ogallala deposits (Holliday 1995:291). However, in the survey
area, Late Quaternary deposits appear to lie directly on top of the Ogallala Formation, and, in
some cases, overlie older Tertiary deposits.
The major Quaternary deposit found on the
Southern High Plains is the Blackwater Draw Formation (Reeves 1976). This unit is defined by the
presence of a number of eolian deposits with intercalated buried soils (Holliday, 1989, 1990, 1995).
The earliest depositional episode for the Blackwater Draw Formation occurs locally around the beginning of the Pleistocene (Holliday 1989: 1606).
Localized Quaternary playa sediments underlie, are
interbedded, or overlie the Formation (Gustavson
et al. 1994; Holliday 1995).
The representative soils found in the survey
area vary according to the topography relating to
different sedimentation processes. Soils on the Llano Estacado are related mostly to the Amarillo
series, consisting of permeable, well-drained deposits (Richardson et al. 1979: 11 ). Soils of the Acuff
Series, also characterized by permeable deposits,
are found in some areas. A number of differing
soils, however, are found off the Caprock
(Richardson et al. 1979: Sheet Number 3, 8). The
Mobeetie-Potter association is best represented, and
is distinguished by the presence of Mobeetee sandy
loams found on foot slopes and ridges and Potter
clay loams found on top of knolls and along the
escarpment (Richa:rdson et al. 1979:22).

MODERN CLIMATE
The Southern High Plains climate is semi-arid,
continental, uniform and can be classified as a dry,
mid-latitude semi-desert (Strahler and Strahler
1983). An average temperature gradient runs on a
north to south axis ranging from 56.8°-57.9° F to
62.9°-63.8° F (Rose and Strandtmann 1986). Accurate weather reports are non-existent for Garza
County but data for adjoining Lubbock County indicate an estimated mean maximum temperature in
July of 91.9° F and a mean minimum in January at

52.9° F. The average annual precipitation is 47.4
cm, occurring mostly between April and November
(Haragan 1983; Bomar 1995). Droughts are common in the area, the worst ones in recent history
occurring in 1917 and 1956 (Pass 1981; Bomar
1995). Lack of rainfall in the last seven months has
brought the onset of a resurgent drought period in
the area (Lee 1996). Winds are predominantly from
the southwest (Mowery and McKee 1959) and have
relatively high speeds.

RESEARCH APPROACH
The general approach for the survey is that
governing all Lubbock Lake Landmark
investigations (Johnson 1987). The basic cultural
assumption is that inferences concerning prehistoric
technology and subsistence can be made from
analyses of lithic and faunal materials (Johnson
1991 ). The approach to people-land relationships is
in the context of a technological-environmental
explanation given the concept that culture is
humankind's adaptation to the environment and that
the subsistence system is closely linked to the
environment. The interaction, therefore, between
culture and environment is facilitated by technology
(Bettinger 1980; Hayden 1981; Steward 1938,
1955). Much of the theoretical framework in current
hunter-gatherer studies is couched in terms of
optimal foraging strategies (Bettinger 1980; Hayden
1981; Winterhalder and Smith 1981 ), which involve
a set of methods to understand subsistence patterns
in terms of a cost-benefit analysis in exploiting
various resources. Hunter-gatherer seasonal
movement is viewed as "a balancing mechanism
for maintaining and conserving the resource base
while exploiting it at an optimal level" (Hayden
1981:375).
The givens, then, are a defined territory
wherein hunter-gatherer peoples practiced a yearly
round of economic activities exploiting resources
on a seasonal as well as scheduled basis. This type
of social structure and kinds of activities leave particular archeological traces that can be identified
(Binford 1980; Johnson 1991) and interpreted. What
is being investigated in the T AS survey are the
settlement systems and changes within those systems over time, to provide insight into adaptive
strategies and social organization (Kowalewski and
Fish 1990; Parsons 1990; Whalen 1990).

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis - Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado
Sites distributed over the landscape are the
result of a long series of successive and independent cultural groups, each with their own adaptive strategies and social organization, producing
a layered-information context of related and unrelated sites (Whalen 1990:221). A full-coverage regional survey approach is the most
appropriate for facilitating the identification of
sites, and providing interpretive advantages (e.g.,
Kowalewski and Fish 1990). This approach produces a highly-reliable model, an approximation
that captures a greater extent of the variability
inherent in settlement systems (Cowgill 1990;
Kintigh 1990; Whalen 1990). Tied to variability
is the concept of small or rare archeological occurrences (e.g., little, special, or specialized activity areas) and their significance in enhancing
the understanding of settlement systems (Cowgill
1990; Whalen 1990). A full-coverage survey of relatively high inN
tensity provides the greatest
opportunity to record the widest
range of settlement and spatial
variability, and the largest number
of these specific occurrences that,
inturn,enhancesconfidenceinthe
accuracy of site and activity estimates (Cowgill 1990:251, 257;
Whalen 1990). Such a survey entails a complete, systematic, pedestrian examination of the defined
tract at a high degree of intensity
(based on the spacing of personnel) and sensitivity (the recognition-level of the variety of traces
remaining on the surface) (Cowgill
1990; Kintigh 1990).

Figure 3. Pedestrian survey of one of the sectors of the
designated area.

A

METHODOLOGY
The methodology consisted of
a pedestrian survey (Figure 3). No
subsurface testing was undertaken
and evaluation of possible
subsurface deposits was not
ascertained. The survey area was
divided into seven arbitrary
sectors, and assigned to crews with
varying number of participants
(Figure 4). Individual members of

305

Figure 4. Modified topographic map with survey sectors.

306

Texas Archeological Society
lected during survey. As this initial investigation was an inventory survey, no piece-point
plotting was accomplished. However, in some cases, approximate
artifact locations were placed on
a sketch map. Artifacts were described and, in some cases, diagnostics were sketched on drawing
paper in the field. Sketch maps of
some sites were drawn depicting
feature locations.

RESULTS
The initial survey inventoried 57 archeological sites. Further review of the information
permitted the combination of
some of these temporary assignments, reducing the total number
to 51 (Figure 5 and Tables l and
2). The survey covered approximately 60 percent of the 2,200
acre property, or about 1,320
acres. This figure provided an
overall density of one site per 25.9
LOCATION OF
acres. The distribution of sites was
ARCHAEOLOGICAL
500
SITES
divided into two main categories:
PJULSULLU1996
CONTOUR INTERVAL 50 FEET
along the upland edges of the Caprock (13 sites over 457 acres),
Figure 5. Modified topographic map with location of archeological sites.
and along the various drainages
in the dissected plains (38 sites
over 863 acres). Clustering of sites
each crew were assigned 10 m wide transects,
along distinctive tributaries was also indicated (see
usually running east to west. Ground visibility
below). Areas between the tributaries also were
ranged from almost 100 percent on bare deflational
occupied but not as intensively. The presence of
areas and on rocky ridges to almost 0 percent in
large archeological sites, some with a number of
arroyos with heavily vegetated cover.
artifacts and features, in both of these areas indiEach archeological site recorded was assigned
cate extensive periods of occupation in the survey
a temporary site number according to the sector
area.
designations, using a capital letter according to its
While a total of 51 sites were inventoried, only
order of discovery (e.g., second site in sector three
selected ones are described in the following secwould be 3B). Full field documentation included
tion. They are considered examples of all the arphotography, notation of topography and vegetacheological sites inventoried, as they represent the
tion, and plotting of sites on 7.5 minute series and
different types of occupations found on the proplarger USGS topographic maps. At the request of
erty area. They include major sites with multiple
the landowners, the survey was primarily a nooccupations, sites containing diagnostics from difcollection survey. However, with their permission,
ferent time periods, and those illustrating the varia minimal number of diagnostic artifacts were colety of activities recognized in the survey area.

Table 1. Archeological Sites found on the Uplands
Site*

Topographic Setting

Drainage System

Elevation (m)

Site Type

Chronology

!'."'<

Feature Type

Artifact Types

GR625

upland terrace

North
Dokegood

910

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

cores, tested
cobbles, flakes

GR626

upland terrace

Red Hollow
Canyon

915

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

core, flakes

North
Doke good

915

Late Archaic

hearths

GR633

upland terrace

open camp

scrapers, Late Archaic
projectile point, bifaces,
flakes, hammerstone

I

?'.....::::

<:;·

::::
('!;)

~~

I

~
~
::::
"'::::~

I

::::

I

e;;·

I

~

~

~
~

~

:;::;

:;i

GR650

upland terrace

Red Hollow
Canyon

905

Red Hollow
Canyon

905

residence

Anglo-European

residence

tin cans, glass, bricks,
earthenware, crockery

I

~

....
~

s.
('!;)

GR651

ridged terrace

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

burned caliche

flakes

I

~
:;::;

s.
""~
(I:>

~

GR652

upland terrace

Red Hollow
Canyon

915

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

core, flakes

GR657

upland terrace

North
Dokegood

910

open camp

Protohistoric,
aboriginal
Historic

hearths/cairns

chopper, tested cobbles,
scrapers, knives, retouched
flakes, Rio Grande ceramic
sherds

I

ii
~
CYr:i
('<)

~

s.
(I:>

t"o;

S"
::::
~

GR662

upland terrace

North
Doke good

915

open camp

Paleoindian,
undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

Firstview projectile point,
flakes

~
lS'
('">

~
VJ

0

--i

Table 2. Archeological Sites found on the Dissected Plains
t"<

Site*

Topographic Setting

Drainage System

Elevation (m)

Site Type

Chronology

Feature Type

Artifact Types

?"

GR624

alluvial fan

North
Dokegood

875

rock enclosure

Pastores (?)

corral

nails

~·
;::

Red Hollow
Canyori

885

GR627

GR628

terrace ridge along
drainage

s·

I

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow
Canyon

895

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow
Canyon

870

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow
Canyon

860

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

lithic
procurement

undetermined
aboriginal

-

open camp/
lithic
procurement

Late Archaic

hearths, cairns

open camp

uniface, tested cobbles,
cores, flakes
tested cobbles, cores,
flakes

~

"'"""'

~

~

I

;::

"'<:!
~

i::i

;::

I

l':l..

ti
t::l
~

GR629

!:;•

tested cobbles, flakes
I

v:i
!::

GR630

'.;'!
~

projectile point, scrapers,
bifaces, tested cobbles,
hammerstones, flakes

...
1::1

s.
~

GR631

GR632

GR634

GR635

GR636

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow
Canyon

855

creek terrace

Red Hollow

830

alluvial fan

terrace ridge along
drainage
terrace slope

North
Doke good

915

North
Dokegood

895

North
Doke good

885

open camp

open camp

open camp

open camp

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

burned caliche

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

undetermined
aboriginal

metate, tested cobbles,
cores, hammerstones

~

I

l:i

~

~
~

s.

hammerstones

<:'I)

t"<

S'
;:::
~

scraper, flakes

I
scrapers, bifaces, mano,
tested cobbles

(I;

"""
~
~

projectile point fragments,
mano, pestle, gouge,
scrapers, hammerstones,
tested cobbles

I

hearths

~

s.

I

~
~

I';

~
VJ

0

I.Cl

w
,.....

Table 2. (Continued)

0

Site*

Topographic Setting

Drainage System

Elevation (m)

Site Type

Chronology

Feature Type

Artifact Types

I

~
~

"':;,;..
GR637

GR638

terrace ridge along
drainage
terrace ridge along
drainage

North
Doke good
North
Dokegood

875

885

cairn

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal
undetermined
aboriginal

cairns

;::i

-

;:.:-<

I
burned caliche

tested cobbles, flakes,
hammerstones

~

~

~
(')'

I

!'.':l

Cl'.)

<::>

('\

GR639

terrace ridge along
drainage

North
Dokegood

865

open camp/
lithic
procurement

undetermined
aboriginal

burned caliche

cores, utilized flakes,
flakes

GR640

series of ridges

North
Dokegood

885

open camp/
lithic
procurement

Late Archaic,
Anglo-European

hearths, oil
drilling rig

projectile point, scrapers,
bifaces, tested cobbles,
hammerstones, flakes,
tin cans

GR641

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow
Canyon

895

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

burned caliche

hearthstones

GR642

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow
Canyon

900

lithic
procurement

undetermined
aboriginal

-

flakes

GR643

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow
Canyon

875

lithic
procurement

undetermined
aboriginal

-

scraper, preform, mano,
flakes

GR644

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow
Canyon

890

lithic
procurement

undetermined
aboriginal

-

tested cobbles, flakes

GR645

terrace ridge

Red Hollow
Canyon

875

lithic
procurement

undetermined
aboriginal

-

cores, flakes

GR646

terrace ridge

Red Hollow

865

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

hearthstones

I

;;·
<:.?'

Table 2. (Continued)
I:"-;

Site*

Topographic Setting

Drainage System

Elevation (m)

Site Type

Chronology

Feature Type

~·

Artifact Types

;:;·
.....
~

;:i

GR647

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow

870

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

burned caliche

~

flakes

~;:.;..

I

~

~

;:::

GR648

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow
Canyon

870

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

burned caliche

""

scraper, tested cobbles,
preform, graver, flakes,
shaft straightener

~

;:::
!::,

;:::
l:l.,

tJ
;::i
GR649

GR653

GR654

terrace ridge

Red Hollow
Canyon

870

Red Hollow
Canyon

880

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow
Canyon

880

terrace ridge

Red Hollow
Canyon

875

terrace ridge along
drainage

North
Dokegood

900

terrace ridge

North
Doke good

870

terrace ridge

open camp/
lithic
procurement

Late Archaic

projectile point, blank,
hammerstones, mano,
uniface, flakes

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

lithic
procurement

undetermined
aboriginal

burned caliche

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

undetermined
aboriginal

cairns

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

open camp

'<:!

I

i.:::·

I

IJ:i
~

~
~

hearthstones

I

;::i

"""
;.;.
~

flakes

I

~

I::

;.;.
~

GR655

GR656

GR658

cairn

open camp

!::,

hearthstones

I

~

-

I
scraper, tested cobbles,
preform, flakes

""~

:ci
~

~

~

;.;.
~

I

t"'<

S'
;:::
<:::>

GR659

terrace ridge along
drainage

North
Doke good

850

open camp

Late Archaic

hearths

projectile points, bifaces,
metates, manos, cores,
hammerstone, flakes, bones

~

s
~

~
w
.......
,_.

\.;.)

Table 2. (Continued)

N

Site*
GR660

GR661

Topographic Setting

Drainage System

Elevation (m)

terrace ridge along
drainage

unnamed
drainage

815

creek terrace

North
Dokegood

870

Site Type
cairn

open camp

Chronology

Feature Type

undetermined
aboriginal

cairns

Late Archaic

hearths, cairns

Artifact Types

-

~
~

I

;::i

""

;:i...

terrace ridge along
drainage

North
Doke good

870

open camp

Early-Middle
Archaic, Protohistoric, aboriginal
Historic

hearths, cairns

Gower (?), Ellis, Fresno,
Washita points, scrapers,
metates, manos, flakes,
knives, preforms,
choppers, hammerstones

GR669

terrace ridge along
drainage

North
Dokegood

895

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths, cairns

flakes

GR670

terrace ridge along
drainage

North
Dokegood

855

lithic
procurement

undetermined
aboriginal

-

tested cobbles, flakes

GR671

terrace ridge along
drainage

Red Hollow

890

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

non-diagnostic projectile
point, scraper, cores

GR672

creek terrace

Red Hollow

875

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

burned caliche

scrapers, biface, uniface,
cores, chopper, flakes

GR673

creek terrace

Red Hollow

860

open camp

undetermined
aboriginal

hearths

scrapers, mano, flakes,
hammers tones

GR674

terrace ridge

Red Hollow
Canyo-1

860

lithic
procurement

undetermined
aboriginal

-

tested cobbles, cores,
hammerstones, flakes

~

~

C'

projectile point, scrapers,
metate, retouched flake,
flakes, bones

GR668

*All site numbers preceded by "41"

I

(1C)

~·
~

I

~
(")
e;;·

~

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis -

Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado

313

UPLAND SITES

A total of 13 sites were recorded on the uplands along the escarpment during the survey (see
Figure 5 and Table 1). The site density for this
portion was one site per 35 .1 acres. The majority
(n=l2) of the sites were aboriginal in origin and
appear to represent open campsites.

Anglo-European Sites

Figure 6. Upland hearth from 41GR666.

41GR650
The one Anglo-European site, 41GR650, dated
to the late 19th-early 20th century. Even though no
structure was recognized, this site appeared to be
the remains of a residence, due to the great number
of window glass observed on the ground as well as
the presence of possible chimney bricks (cf. Moir
and Jurney 1987). Tin cans, metal fragments, earthenware (one with a partial maker's mark [.. LAND]),
purple-hue bottle glass fragments, window pane
fragments, low-fired brick fragments, barrel hoops,
crockery, a mason jar top, a medicine bottle with a
LISTERINE mark, and muleshoes (smaller in size
than horseshoes) were found on the site (see Table
1). Artifacts were exposed on the slope of the canyon as well as in the sides of a road cut.

Aboriginal Sites
The 12 aboriginal sites appear to be related to
Late Holocene occupations during the Late Archaic,
Ceramic, and Protohistoric periods. A small number of temporal diagnostics, as well as the nature of
the deposits observed on these sites (Holliday 1985),
are the basis for this tentative assessment (Table 3).
However, the presence of a Paleoindian point indicates a much earlier occupation of the area (Johnson
and Holliday 1995).
These sites are all defined by burned caliche
hearths and lithic scatters of varying size (Figure
6). The sites themselves appear to reflect differing
degrees of occupation intensity according to their
content and size. The majority of these sites are
restricted spatially, being composed of two to five
hearths with a limited number of lithics, generally
including tested cobbles of Ogallala quartzite and
exhausted cores. Two sites are much more exten-

sive than the others in terms of their size and artifact concentration. Only one site, 41GR657, had
ceramics (dated to the Protohistoric period). Similarities between hearth features, lithics, and the nature of the sediments found at this site and the
remaining sites are the only indication of possible
contemporaneous occupations.

41GR657
Site 41GR657 was the largest, most complex
site recorded, covering an extensive area (Figures 7
and 8; see Table 1). The site, located in the southeastern portion of the surveyed area, ran for approximately 2 km along a promontory projecting
forward from the Caprock (see Figure 7). Found
across the site were lithics and scattered burned
caliche. At least 56 hearths were also identified,
varying in size and integrity. Some of the hearths,
particularly those found on the northern portion of
the site, were well-defined circular alignments of
burned caliche and other rocks, measuring from 12 m in diameter. In other instances, however, hearths
were defined only by the presence of 5-10 fragments of scattered burned caliche. Two concentrations of hearths were found on the site (see Figure
7), one on the highest section of the promontory at
its northern limit, where six hearths were clustered
together; and the other, right on the edge of the
escarpment on the northeastern periphery of the
site, where six hearths were noted in an area covering less than 200 m2 •
Two other categories of features were noted
on 41 GR657. The first were alignments of rocks,
found in the southeastern portion of the promontory
(see Figure 7). These features, varying in size from

314

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. Archeologirai Sites with Diagnostic Artifacts

Site

Physiographic
Setting

Site Type

Diagnostics

Cultural Period

41GR650

uplands

residence

window glass, bricks,
historic artifacts

Anglo-European

41GR624

dissected plains

rock corral

architecture

Anglo-European,
Pasto res

41GR657

uplands

open camp

Rio Grande ceramics

Protohistoric, aboriginal
Historic

41GR630

dissected plains

open camp/
lithic
procurement

projectile point

Late Archaic

41GR633

uplands

open camp

projectile point

Late Archaic

41GR640

dissected plains

open camp/
lithic
procurement;
oil well

projectile point; oil
drilling rig

Late Archaic, AngloEuropean

41GR649

dissected plains

open camp/
lithic
procurement

projectile point

Late Archaic

41GR659

dissected plains

open camp

projectile point

Late Archaic

41GR661

dissected plains

open camp

projectile point

Late Archaic

41GR663

uplands

open camp

projectile point

Late Archaic

41GR668

dissected plains

open camp

Gower (?), Ellis,
Fresno, Washita

Early and Middle
Archaic, Protohistoric,
aboriginal Historic

41GR662

uplands

open camp

Firstview point

Late Paleoindian

1.5-2.0 m, were defined by a series of rocks loosely
set between each other to form an alignment. In one
case, two parallel alignments of stones were
observed. The nature of these features are not well
understood, but they may have served for hunting
purposes or been associated with camping activities.
The other non-hearth feature was a rock cairn. One
cairn was identified at the southeastern edge of the

site (see Figure 7). Defined by a depression
measuring 2 x 1.5 m, this feature was composed of
a small scatter of caliche boulders of various size
found inside and along the depression. As the
boulders were scattered, it appeared that the feature
was disturbed. Another possible cairn was located
in the south-central portion of the site. It was not as
well-defined but was denoted, in a 1 x 1 m area, by

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis - Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado
the presence of a small number
of stacked caliche boulders.
Artifacts were numerous at
41GR657. They included a
chopping tool, bifaces (Figure
9a-b ), three hammerstones, two
manos, one preform, five scrapers, three knives, six tested
cobbles, two retouched flakes,
and numerous lithic flakes. The
predominant raw material appeared to be Potter member
\
chert, followed by Edwards For·~
mation chert, and Ogallala Formation quartzite. A few flakes
of Alibates dolomite were noted
on the surface.
~ Hearthstone scatter
GI Hearth
Four ceramic sherds were
I Rock Alignment
A Ceramic sherds (2)
located in the southern portion
9: Cairn
of the site (see Figure 7). They
41GR657
were found in groups of two
Site Sketch Map
SAM/LSULLU1 996
separated from each other over
Adapted from BJ/1993
a distance of 100 m. They were
similar in appearance and are
10-0
200
300
40-0
500
{meters)
defined by a shiny slip on the
exterior with a dark, gray-brown
interior. Remnants of a glaze on
Figure 7. Site map of 41GR657.
two of the sherds suggested the
application of a covering glaze
on the exterior of the vessel.
These sherds were identified in
the field as Tierra Blanca Plain
(Spielmann 1982); the type-site
is located in Deaf Smith County,
in the northern Panhandle.
Described as utility wares in the
Southwestern trndition, this type
dates on the Southern Plains
between A.D. 1450-1700
(Spielmann 1982), covering
both the Protohistoric and early
aboriginal Historic periods.
However, the presence of glaze
on the exterior suggested that
these sherds could be a Rio
Grande utility ware. The
presence of this Southwestern
type in the region is
contemporaneous with Tierra
Blanca ceramics (Spielmann
1982:264).
Figure 8. View towards the east of 41GR657.

315

____.. ... ,,,.._..r···-..._,,.·

/

\:~
\

J

./

_,.!'.-

316

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

f

d

h

k

m

Figure 9. LithicTools from 1993 Texas Archeological Society Field School Survey: a-b, bifaces from 41GR657; c-e,
projectile points, 41GR633; f, biface, 41GR633; g, Ellis point, 41GR663; h, Washita point, 41GR668; i, Fresno point,
41GR668;j, possible Gower point, 41GR668; k, Ellis point, 41GR668; 1, Ellis point, 41GR659; m, Late Archaic point,
41GR659. Scale 1:1.

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis - Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado

317

41GR633

N

A

41JIB<l33

UPLANDS

Figure 10. Site map of 41 GR633.

Site 41 GR633, located in a
plowed field at the eastern edge of
the escarpment (Figure 10), extends almost 350 m north to south
and 150 m from the edge back to
the west (see Table 1). It has scattered burned caliche hearthstones
across its surface, as well as a
large number of lithics. Tools
found on the surface include a
metate fragment, a scraper, three
projectile point fragments, one of
them a probable Late Archaic
point (see Figure 9c-e), four
hammerstones, and two bifaces
(see Figure 9f). Raw materials
represented include Alibates,
Edwards
Formation
chert,
Ogallala Formation quartzite, and
Potter member chert.

41GR663
Site 41 GR663, on the edge of
the escarpment, is defined by scattered fragments of burned caliche
and a small lithic scatter (see
Table 1). The site is relatively
small, extending 20 m north-south
and 50 m east-west (Figure 11).
One Late Archaic projectile point
fragment (see Figure 9g) was
identified on the surface of the
site.

41GR662

41GR663
Site Sketch Map
LSIA.W1996
Adapted from BJ/1993

Figure 11. Map of 41 GR663.

Archaic projectile point fragment
Extent of cultural remains

Fenceline

0

10

20
30
(meters)

Site 41GR662, located at the
eastern edge of the escarpment, is
defined by scattered burned caliche spread over a distance of 50 x
50 m (Figure 12), a number of
flakes of Potter member chert and
the basal fragment of a Firstview
point (Figure 13). No other identifiable Paleoindian materials were
found in association with the projectile point.

318

Texas Archeological Society
Anglo-European sites

N

41GR624

One of the most unusual and
exciting sites located was that of
41GR662
an Anglo-European rock structure (see Table 2). Found in the
south-central portion of the survey area (see Figure 5), the structure was located at the base of an
alluvial fan that runs towards the
west to the edge of the escarpment. Built from hundreds of
small caliche boulders, a rockwall enclosure was nestled along
a ridge just below the escarpment
(Figure 14). The D-shaped enclosure was about 11.6 x 9.5 m
in length and width with a 3 m
wide opening towards the north.
An alignment of small caliche
boulders appeared on each side
of the opening. The enclosure
was well-built with the rocks
41GR662
carefully
laid-in. The full height
Palooindian projaciile point fragment
Site Sketch Map
of
the
enclosure
was not deterExtent of cultural remains
LSLILW1996
Adapted from BJ/1993
0
10
20
so
mined
as
the
foundation
was burFence line
(~)
ied, but the walls were at least 1
m in height. The caliche boulFigure 12. Map of 41 GR662.
ders used in construction varied
in size and shape, averaging 35
cm in diameter, but some reached
DISSECTED PLAINS
a maximum of 1 m in size. The caliche boulders
SITES
were probably gathered from sources just below
the escarpment. The enclosure may have served as
A total of 38 sites were recorded on the disa sheep pen during Pastores activities on the Rollsected plains (863 acres) (see Table 2), a site dening Plains in the late 1800s (Taylor 1980; Freeman
sity ot one site per 22.7 acres. This is a higher site
1989).
density than on the uplands. The vast majority of
these were aboriginal in origin (n=36), one is historic, and another is an aboriginal site with an hisAboriginal Sites
toric component. The majority of sites found on the
At least three general types of aboriginal sites
dissected plains probably date to Late Holocene
appear
to be represented on the dissected plains
times, despite the general lack of diagnostics. The
(see
Table
2). Open campsites are the most numersimilarities between most of these sites and the
(n=20),
and lithic procurement sites are second
ous
ones thought to date to the Protohistoric period that
(n=l3).
In
some
cases, these lithic procurement
are found on the uplands suggested such an assesssites
are
associated
with other camping activities
ment. Five sites were dated to the Late Archaic
(n=9),
while
in
others,
they are solely raw material
period based on diagnostics (see Table 3).
procurement areas. The third type of site has rock

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis- Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado

319

Open Campsites
41GR672
This site lies in the northern portion of the
survey area along an eroded terrace (see Table 2).
The site extends along the edges of this terrace for
approximately 200 m and spreads out for 150 m
from north to south (Figure 15). Red Hollow canyon defines the southeast edge of the site while a
marshy area delimits its western limits. A modern
residence and adjoining windmill are found in the
southeastern portion of the site.
The site had three concentrations of burned
caliche hearthstones from eroding hearths as well
as scattered burned caliche (Figure 16). Other artifacts included a biface, uniface, four scrapers, a
chopping tool from Potter member chert, and two
cores (Edwards Formation chert and Ogallala Formation quartzite). Flakes of Edwards Formation
chert and Ogallala Formation quartzite were noted
on the surface of the site.
41GR671

Figure 13. Proximal section of Firstview projectile point
found at 41 GR662.

cairns (n=3). In some cases, however, the rock
cairns were found in association with open campsites.
The open campsites are similar to the ones
found on the uplands. They have scattered fragments of burned caliche, indicating the existence of
hearths. The hearths vary in integrity, from welldefined circular stone alignments to scattered fragments of burned caliche hearthstones. The intensity
of occupation appears to differ from one site to
another: while most appear to be temporary stays
(such as 41GR671 and 41GR672), five sites had
longer-term occupations (41GR631, 41GR632,
41GR659, 41GR661, and 41GR668), or at least
intensive and repeated occupations of the same locale. This assumption is based mainly on the larger
number of features and artifacts, as well as the
types of artifacts, found on these sites.

Site 41GR671 is located in the northern portion of the survey area on a east to west sloping
terrace. The site follows the contour of the terrace,
extending more than 200 m towards the north and
150 m towards the west (Figure 17). A caliche road
borders the northern extent of the site, while an
arroyo defines the western limit of the site. Red
Hollow Creek is found at the southern edge of the
site. A modern residence is found in the northeast
portion of the site.
Eight well-defined hearths, defined by concentrations of burned caliche hearthstones, were
located on this site (Figure 18a-b). Additionally,
scattered burned caliche was found across the entire site surface. Two scrapers (of Edwards Formation chert and Ogallala Formation quartzite), the
distal end of a projectile point, and two cores
(Alibates agate and Ogallala Formation quartzite)
were also identified on the surface, along with a
small amount of debitage. In addition, faunal remains were observed eroding 30 to 50 cm below
ground surface in the arroyo cut banks. However,
no distinguishable hearths were noted in the same
cut banks.

320

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 14. Composite phot of rock enclosure and setting of 41GR624.

Figure 15. General view of 41GR672.

Figure 16. Eroding hearth at 41GR672.

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis -

Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado

41GR631
Site 41 GR631 is found in the northeastern
portion of the survey area on a terrace that is
delimited by numerous blowouts created by wind
and water erosion. Steep canyons related to a
tributary of Red Hollow Creek delimit the northern
edge of the site. It extends in a northern direction
for approximately 500 m with a maximum eastwest extent of 200 m. Erosion of the main terrace
probably has destroyed part of the site.
Hearthstone fragments were found spread out
over a major portion of the site, but no well-defined
hearth features were noted. Other artifacts included
a metate, tested cobbles of
Ogallala Formation quartzite, three
hammerstones, cores of Potter
member chert, and a number of
flakes. The presence of a metate
suggested a longer-term occupation related to plant food
processing.

Figure 17. General view of 41 GR67 l.

41GR668
Site 41GR668, found in the
southeastern portion of the survey
area, is located on a terrace that is
delimited to the east by an unnamed tributary of North
Dokegood Creek and to the south
by an arroyo dissecting the terrace
from east to west. The site is 400
m north to south and 250 m east
to west (Figure 19). A slight
downward slope occurs towards
the southeast, leading to the arroyo cut. A secondary road cuts
through the site from north to
south.
Two major concentrations of
artifacts and features were noted
at 41GR668. The first area is located in the northwestern portion
of the site and is defined by two
clusters of material (see Figure
19). Cluster #1 is a concentration
of least six burned caliche hearths
as well as burned bone. Other arti~
facts include a Washita point (see
Figure 9h), a Fresno point (see Fig-

Figure 18. Hearths at 41GR671: a, cutbank; b, exposed on the surface.

321

322

Texas Archeological Society

1
2
3
4

/..----\
Slope wash

L,.-~~~-----.....-...--

_. /

\

\

'-,

''

''

'

\
\

''

"
,..-- -R-- - - . . . , •
41 6 66 8
Site Sketch Map
s•Mts1Aw199G

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

''

''

....

metate
beveled knife
metate
projectile points (Washita and Fresno)
mano
metate
side scraper
projectile point (Gower?)
projectile point (Ellis)
scraper
scraper
scraper
preform

N

~

'

Recorded artifact
Hearthstone scatter

J

Burned bone

0

Hearth

10 0
0
~Ad-'"1_
d_,,om_5_"_'
_'~ @ Cairn

NOT TO SCALE

''

'·

Figure 19. Map of 41GR668.

ure 9i), and a mano. Cluster #2 represents lithics
dispersed along the dirt road for 25 m. Three
metates, a beveled knife, and a side scraper were
found in this cluster.
The second area, in the southeastern section
of the site, is also represented by two clusters of
remains (see Figure 19). Cluster #3, approximately
15 m south of the dirt road transecting the site, is
a 100 m 2 area of six burned caliche hearths, along
with three scrapers and a preform. Cluster #4 is
located approximately 30 m to the east of Cluster
#3, along the same dirt road. This cluster includes
a burned caliche hearth, a possible Gower point
(see Figure 9j), an Ellis point (see Figure 9k), and
a scraper. An additional hearth is located northeast
of this cluster, while a rock cairn was noted to the
east. Burned caliche hearthstones are found spread
over the southeastern portion of the site, while
debitage occurs along the southern edge of the
terrace slope. Raw materials present are Edwards
Formation chert, Potter member chert, Ogallala
Formation quartzite, and Tecovas Formation chert.

41GR632

Site 41GR632 is located in the northeastern
portion of the survey area on both eroding edges of
a tributary of Red Hollow Creek. The site is 100 m

north-south and approximately 50 m east-west. Part
of the site has been washed away due to gradual
erosion of the terrace.
A mano, pestle, gouge, two scrapers, three
projectile point fragments (one possibly dating to
the Late Archaic period), hammerstones, tested
cobbles, and numerous flakes were found eroding
from both banks of the tributary. Partially buried
hearths were also noted eroding from the edges of
the tributary. These hearths did not appear to be
similar to the ones encountered on the upland sites,
in that they were composed of local burned Ogallala
cobbles and sandstone pieces. Some fragments of
burned caliche were found in association with these
hearths, however.
41GR659

Site 41 GR659 is one of the largest sites
recorded on the dissected plains. The site is found
in the southeastern portion of the survey area at the
confluence of two unnamed tributaries of North
Dokegood Creek. The site extends along these two
unnamed tributaries for at least 200 m while the
eastern extent of the site is more than 150 m along
the cut banks of the terrace (Figure 20). The
majority of artifacts and features are found along
the edges of a sloping and eroding terrace.

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis -

N

Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado

tered burned caliche hearthstones are found all along the
edge of the terrace, indicating
additional hearth features.
While features appear disff
persed over the entire area of
the site, two concentrations of
features and artifacts were ob@
served, one in the southern pori
tion and the other in the
northeastern portion of the site
(see Figure 20). Twelve burned
caliche hearths were observed in
the southern portion of the site.
Artifacts included two metates,
two metate fragments, three
manos, two projectile point tips,
and a gouge.
A minimum of seven
hearths were identified in the
Metate
@ Mano
northern portion of the site, as
j. Projectile point
well as scattered burned caliche
•
Kni1e
hearthstones. Diagnostics here
Bisonrib
include an Ellis point (see FigHearth
Caliche Hearthstone scatter
ure 91) and a probable Late Archaic projectile point (see Figure
41GR659
9m). Other artifacts included a
Site Sketch Map
SAMILSLJLLU1996
distal fragment of a Potter memAdapted from BJ/1993
ber chert biface, a unifacial
scraper of Potter member chert,
a quartzite hammerstone, one
Potter member chert core fragment, a basal fragment of a petrified wood biface, a
preform, a retouched Alibates flake, two mano fragments, and flakes and debitage.
Two bison ribs were found eroding out of the
terrace cut bank, approximately 35 cm below ground
surface in the central portion of the site (see Figure
20). Smaller bone fragments also were observed in
association with a number of the hearths eroding
from the terrace edge. Furthermore, an isolated
freshwater mussel shell fragment was observed in
the cut bank of the eroding terrace.

~'

~

323

•

~

10

20

30

40

50

(meters)

Figure 20. Map of 41GR659.

Figure 21. Hearth identified at 41GR659.

41GR661
A minimum of 20 burned caliche hearths were
observed at 41GR659 (Figure 21). Seven of these
hearths were eroding downslope from the terrace
edge (Figure 22). The remaining features are found
on the terrace; some are damaged by erosion. Scat-

Site 41GR661 represents the most extensive
site recorded on the dissected plains. The site is
located at the southern extremity of the study area
at the confluence of two unnamed tributaries of
North Dokegood Creek that run east to west from

324

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 22. Eroding hearth at 41GR659.

the main drainage. Located on a terrace that is
cross-cut by a number of arroyos, the site covers a
350 x 200 m area (Figure 23). An active stream is
found running into a small pond at the western
limit of the site.
Two types of features were noted on the surface of the site as well as in the eroding cut banks of
the arroyos intersecting the site. A minimum of 16
hearths of varying composition and integrity were
recorded on the site, with nine hearths found on the
surface composed of scattered burned caliche hearthstone. In some cases, these features remained relatively well-defined while others were scattered.
Along the eastern edge of a north-south cutbank
at the southern extremity of the site, seven hearths
were exposed over a 50 m stretch. The majority of
these hearths were found between 60 and 75 cm bs,
marked by clusters of burned caliche and sandstone
in association with lithics and bone. In some cases,
these hearths appeared to have been placed in pits.
Charcoal lenses with small bone fragments also

were noted in two instances at the end of the same
arroyo, below the 1.0 m level, suggesting an earlier
occupation at the site.
The second type of feature consists of rocks
piled up to form small distinctive markers. Six of
these features are identified, two in the main portion of the occupation, and the other four at the
northern extremity of the terrace (see Figure 23).
These features are small, varying from 0.4-1.0 min
diameter and 0.3-0.5 m in height. The function of
this type of feature is unknown. The presence of a
metate fragment in one of them and a mano in
another suggest that these features may be associated with plant processing activities.
Artifacts were concentrated in the southern
portion of the terrace. They included two complete
metates, four metate fragments, five manos, a mano
fragment, a hammerstone, a core, two bifaces, three
projectile points (two projectile point tips and a
possible Late Archaic point), a preform, a drill, and
tested cobbles. Two unifacial scrapers of Edwards
Formation chert, found side by side, were located
in the arroyo (Figure 24a-b). Lithic concentrations
occurred in two areas, and flakes were found scattered across the surface of the site. Raw materials
represented included Edwards Formation chert, Potter member chert, Ogallala Formation quartzite,
Alibates, and petrified wood.
This site contained a significant amount of
faunal remains. Most of the fauna was found in
association with the eroding hearths located on the
edges of the arroyo (see Figure 23); much were
small burned bone fragments, but some were larger
in size. Other larger bones were noted eroding from
one of the cut banks near the southern edge of the
site. However, these bones were not in association
with any cultural features.
Lithic Procurement Sites
The second type of recorded aboriginal site in
the dissected plains is the lithic procurement loci.
Thirteen of these sites occur in two distinctive
concentrations in the survey area. A majority (n=9)
are found in the northern portion of the study area,
in proximity to a few unnamed tributaries of Red
Hollow Creek. All of them are related to terraces
that have been cross-cut by these tributaries,
exposing outcrops of gravels. These gravels
contain cobbles from the Ogallala Formation and
Potter member.

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis These sites usually are
recognized by tested cobbles
of Ogallala Formation quartzite and, in some cases, cores
and preforms of Potter member chert. Hammerstones usually are found in association
with these occupations. In four
cases (41GR630, 41GR639,
41GR640, and 41GR649),
campsite activities carried out
in conjunction with lithic procurement activities are identified by the presence of
associated features.
The remaining lithic
procurement sites are located
in the south-central portion of
the survey area at the mouth
of unnamed tributaries of
North Dokegood Creek (see
Figure 5). Contrary to the
other lithic procurement loci,
these sites appear to be more
intensively used, based on
artifact densities and the
of
spatial
distributions
cultural remains.

Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado

325

N

I

..

t

-

Retouchedftl!!<e

Cobbls

'

Scraper

/

Bone-

~

Rock-....

Hserttl

U1hlcscatte<

..

I
~

41GR661
Site Sketch Map
PJL/SAMll..Sl.A.Ll.J1996
Adapted from BJ/1993

Figure 23. Map of 41 GR66 l.

41GR670
This lithic procurement site is located in the
southeastern portion of the survey area. It lies on a
unnamed northern tributary of North Dokegood
Creek, along the edges of a north-south running
terrace. The site extends for approximately 200 m
along this terrace edge, extending over 150 m from
the edge of the terrace towards the east. This site is
defined mainly by the presence of Potter member
chert tested cobbles and large cores and a number
of Ogallala Formation quartzite hammerstones.
Flakes and debitage indicate different stages of lithic
reduction were performed on the site.
41GR640
Site 41 GR640 was found along a ridge that
extends towards the southeast for more than 750 m.
Its eastern limit was steeply-defined by a drainage
that leads to the south to North Dokegood Creek.
The site itself covered an area of approximately

60,000 m 2 , 300 m from east to west, and 200 m
north to south (Figures 25 and 26). Three distinct
activity areas were noted for 41 GR640 (Figure 27).
Area # 1, in the northeastern portion of the site, had
two burned caliche hearths. Area #2, in the central
portion of the site, was represented by burned caliche hearthstones scattered over a 150 m long area.
Area #3, in the southeastern portion of the site,
contained four burned caliche hearths as well as
scattered burned caliche hearthstones. An historic
component, in Areas #1 and #3, was defined by tin
cans, glass, and an oil drilling rig and pad (see
Figure 27).
Large amounts of tested cobbles of Ogallala
Formation quartzite and hammerstones were noted
on the surface of the site. Additionally, numerous
lithic flakes and debris were present, including primary, secondary, and tertiary flakes. This indicates
different stages of reduction were employed at the
site. In addition, three scrapers, one biface, one
Late Archaic projectile point (see Figure 24c), and

326

Texas Archeological Society

b

Figure 24. Lithic Tools from the 1993 Texas Archeological Society Fieldschool: a-b,
unifacial scrapers, 41 GR66 l; c, Late Archaic projectile point, 41 GR640. Scale 1: l.

l 0 retouched flakes were noted on the surface of
the site.

terraces. In one case, however, such a feature was
found associated with an open campsite
(41GR668).

Rock Cairns
The third type of aboriginal site that occurs in
the survey tract is stacked boulders. Designated as
cairns, they generally are located on promontories
rising above the dissected landscape or on exposed
ridges found interspersed between the lower

Figure 25. General view of 41GR640.

41GR637

Site 41GR637 is located in the east-central
portion of the survey area on the upper portions of
an east-west ridge line. It extends some 75 m along
the ridge, and is defined by three of these rock
features. The first is marked by a 1.5 x 2 m depression approximately 40 to 50 cm deep. Small cobbles
as well as larger boulders are inside, and scattered
outside the periphery of, the depression. These boulders appear to have been dispersed, suggesting this
feature has been partially disturbed. The second is
found approximately 20 m to the east, and is represented by a depression measuring 1.3 x 1.8 m. The
50 cm deep depression is composed of large boulders, some only partially exposed, and smaller
cobble stones. Boulders also are dispersed outside
of the main structure, indicating possible disturbance. The third rock feature is 35 m east from the
second, and contrary to the others, it is defined by

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis -

Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado

327

reaching 30 cm in diameter.
The rocks appear to be stacked
over a depression, indicating
that the depression was excavated prior to the stacking of
the rocks. The second feature
is found 15 m to the west and
is similar in composition.
Measuring 2 x 1.5 m in size,
differing size cobbles and
boulders were stacked up to
reach a maximum height of 0.3
m. This feature also is characterized by a slight depression
underlying the stacked rocks.
In both cases, the features appear to be intact.

41GR660
Site 41 GR660 is found in
the southern portion of the survey area. It lies on a narrow
Artli'flct ooncentmtlons
east-west running ridge above
41GR640
the confluence of two interSite Sketch Map
mittent drainages, just east of
SAM/LSllU.L/1996
NOTTO SCALE
Adapted from BA/1993
the escarpment. The site has
one unique rock feature measuring approximately 2 x 1 m.
Figure 26. Map of 41 GR640.
The feature is composed of a
circular stack of boulders and
cobbles of varying size, reachstacked rocks reaching a height of 0.4 m and meaing a maximum height of 0.4 m. A large boulder,
suring 1.2 m in diameter. The rocks are smaller
measuring 0.5 x 0.4 x 0.4 m, has been placed in the
than the ones used for the construction of the two
middle of the structure and smaller boulders and
other features, averaging 0.25 m in diameter. Calicobbles are placed around the larger boulder. Some
che stones as well as Ogallala Formation quartzite
of the roch are partially buried, and vegetation
cobbles are noted in the stacked pile. The feature
growth between and on the rocks indicates an older
may be a marker, possibly pointing to the existence
age for this feature than for similar features found
of the two other features.
on the two previous sites.
~Fem::eline

Slteenent

~

41GR656
Site 41 GR656 lies on a saddle ridge located in
the west-central portion of the study area. Extending for approximately 15 m from east to west, it has
two stacked rock piles. The first of these, at the
western end of the site, measures 1.5 x 1.5 m and
reaches a height of approximately 0.25 m. It is
composed of silicified caliche cobbles, averaging
15 cm in diameter, as well as larger boulders, some

DISCUSSION
The sites found on the dissected plains appear
to be more diversified in terms of occupation periods
and activities than the sites identified on the uplands.
While no aboriginal site revealed temporal
diagnostics dating to the Paleoindian period in the
dissected plains, the presence of deeply buried
charcoal lenses at 41 GR661 indicates repeated

328

Texas Archeological Society

located eroding from the bank
of Red Hollow Creek after
completion of the survey
(Litwinionek et al. 1994).
Historic
The Archaic period is
concrete
dam
well-documented in the survey
I
area with at least two sites dating to this period on the uplands and six on the dissected
plains. A possible Gower point
(41GR668) attests to a potential occupation during the
Early Archaic period (85006300 yr. B.P.). This time period is not well-documented
on the Llano Estacado
(Johnson 1987; Johnson and
Holliday 1986; Hill et al.
1995) as Gower points are
rare, generally being found in
Hearthstone scatter
Central Texas (Prewitt 1981;
Turner and Hester 1985). The
Hearth
Middle Archaic (6300-4500
Lithic artifacts
yr. B.P.) is represented by the
~Water
presence of an Ellis point
41GR640
(5000-4500 yr. B.P.) (Johnson
Site Sketch Map
and Holliday 1986) on the disSAMJLSULLU1 996
Adapted
from
BN1993
sected
plains (41GR668).
NOTTO SCALE
Middle Archaic occupations
have been documented elsewhere on the Llano Estacada
Figure 27. Close-up of areas #1-#3 at 41GR640.
at Lubbock Lake (Johnson and
Holliday 1986), Blackwater
Draw Locality #1 (Hester
1972), and Little Sunday (Hughes 1955).
occupation of the dissected plains over time. Archaic
The Late Archaic (4500-2000 yr. B.P.) is
period sites appear more numerous on the dissected
recognized in the survey area by broken Late
plains than on the uplands. Most, if not all, of the
Archaic points on upland sites (41 GR633 and
sites without diagnostics probably are Late
41GR663) and dissected plains sites (41GR630,
Holocene in age (dated from the last 2,000 years).
41GR640, 41GR649, 41GR659, and 41GR661).
Fresno and Washita points at 41 GR668 attest to
Excavated Late Archaic occupations are poorlysubsequent occupations dating to the Protohistoric
known on the Llano Estacado, though occupations
and aboriginal Historic periods.
of the period have been identified at Lubbock Lake
Overall, all main cultural periods found on the
(Johnson and Holliday 1986; Johnson 1989), Chalk
Llano Estacado (Johnson 1987; Johnson and
Hollow (Wedel 1975; Lintz 1995), and San Jon
Holliday 1995) are represented in the survey area
(see Table 3). The initial occupation of the area
(Roberts 1942).
The Ceramic period (2000-500 yr. B.P.) is not
dates to at least Late Paleoindian times based on
well-represented in the surveyed area. It is possible
the discovery in the uplands of a Firstview point
thata number of the sites recorded may be associ(9000-8600 yr. B.P.) at 41GR631 (Johnson
ated with this period, but no diagnostics have been
1987:23). The survey area may have been occupied
found to indicate that is the case. Ceramic period
much earlier, however, as mammoth remains were

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis - Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado
sites have been recorded nearby on the Rolling
Plains, at Lake Alan Henry (Boyd et al. 1994), and
on the Llano Estacado at Lubbock Lake (Johnson
1987).
Occupations dating to the Protohistoric (500300 yr. B.P.) and aboriginal Historic (300-100 yr.
B.P.) periods are identified in the survey area on
the basis of Fresno and Washita points on the dissected plains (41GR668), and ceramic sherds dating between A.D. 1450-1700 on the uplands
(41 GR657). Protohistoric and aboriginal Historic
sites are numerous on the Llano Estacado, and occur in proximity to the survey area (Johnson 1987,
1992, 1994, 1995). On the Rolling Plains, several
such occupations are documented at Lake Alan
Henry (Boyd et al. 1993).
The three Anglo-European sites located in the
survey area date to the late 19th to early 20th century. The earliest of these is the Pastores rock enclosure (41GR624). The rock corrals identified as
Pastores features (Taylor 1980) are single-space
enclosures (no partitions) built of local materials,
nestled at the base of a bluff, oriented north-south,
of variable size, and either oval or rectangular in
shape. The rock enclosure located during this survey fits this general pattern.
Little is known about the Pastores other than
that they were primarily Hispanic sheep herders
from New Mexico that moved their sheep (and later
their families) into the Canadian River Valley (the
northern margin of the Llano Estacado), and then
onto the Rolling Plains (the eastern margin of the
Llano Estacado) from the early 1870s to the mid1880s. Taylor (1980:29) notes that "Stone corrals
were built for shelter on the open range by pastores,"
who practiced transhumance sheepherding. Long
circuit routes were made from New Mexico into
Texas moving the sheep into summer grazing
grounds, generally restricted to river valleys where
water and grass were plentiful, and then back to
winter pasture in New Mexico (Taylor 1980:21).
For about a 10-year period (1876-1886), small settlements were established in the summer grazing areas
in an attempt to remain on a year-round basis. The
establishment of the large, fenced cattle ranches
brought the Pastores occupation of this part of Texas
to an end (Taylor 1980; Freeman 1989). Archeological sites of the Pastores are rare in the region.
Only one systematic survey has been done (Taylor
1980), and that was restricted to the Texas Panhandle and sporadically along the margin of the

329

Rolling Plains abutting the Llano Estacado. Of the
56 sites recorded by Taylor (1980), seven sites appear similar to the one located during this survey; of
these, three are oval, three are rectangular, and the
shape of one is not recorded. None of these sites
have been investigated further.
A probable early 20th century residence was
identified at 41GR650 on the uplands, and tin cans
and an oil drilling station were noted at 41GR640
on the dissected plains. The low density of AngloEuropean sites appears fairly representative of the
surrounding area. Survey of the Lake Alan Henry
area, located south of the survey area on the Rolling Plains, identified only 28 historic sites (Boyd
et al. 1989, 1990), for an average of one site per
307 acres. Survey at Melrose Air Force Range, in
eastern New Mexico on the Llano Estacado (Lintz
et al. 1988), identified 12 Anglo-European sites for
an average of one site per 828 acres. This survey
recorded three sites for an average of one site per
440 acres.
Aboriginal open campsites are the most numerous in both topographic settings. Site size and
number of features and artifacts vary. The large
campsites, as indicated by the high concentration
of hearths and the large number of lithics observed,
appear to be locales occupied repeatedly over long
periods of time. At most sites, even though hearths
are numerous, they do not appear grouped. Concentrations of surface material are infrequent, indicating relatively restricted occupations on each
locale. Repeated movements of groups for centuries would account for the observed archeological
record. At Lake Alan Henry, large campsites (e.g.,
41GR291), inhabited intensively over several hundred years, were interpreted as seasonal and intermittent in character (Boyd et al. 1994:261).
Certain locales seem to have been selected
preferentially for more extended periods of occupation (such as at41GR657, 41GR659, and 41GR661)
based on the occurrence of hearth clusters. These
locales have large numbers of intensively-used
hearths (n=56 for 41GR657, n=20 for 41GR659,
and n= 16 for 41 GR66 l ), burned bone, and a greater
amount of stone tools. Plant processing is indicated
by manos and metates. These sites are adjacent to
drainages, along the main and secondary tributaries. It is possible that these locales represent base
camps that were reoccupied yearly.
Different types of features are noted in association with these open campsites, with hearths most

330

Texas Archeological Society

common. These are variable in form, construction,
and materials used. A majority have burned caliche
hearthstones stacked to form compact features.
These hearths range up to 2 m in length. Other
hearths have less rocks, and they are used to define
the feature perimeters. These hearths are more restricted in size than the others and seem less intensively used. Some of the hearths appear to have had
basins excavated prior to use, suggesting actual
cooking pits (e.g., 41 GR659). Such variation between these hearth features indicates possible differential function, perhaps differing cultural cooking
practices, or they were the product of different cultures or time periods.
Specific task sites were observed, particularly
on the dissected plains. One of the main activities
exhibited is the tapping of local raw material for
the production of tools. The high frequency of
cores of quartzite or of Potter member chert found
on many of the sites indicate exploitation of the
readily available Ogallala Formation deposits.
Presence of partially-fractured cobbles on a number of these sites indicates additional testing of
local materials. However, the actual production of
tools must have been undertaken elsewhere. Large
amounts of flakes, particularly related to the final
stages of tool production, were not noted on these
lithic procurement sites, indicating that such activities were performed at other locales. Only a few
lithic procurement sites found during the survey
(such as 41GR640) contained large amounts of
debitage.
This type of settlement pattern conforms with
the overall model of occupation for hunter-gatherers occupying the Llano Estacado. Hunting and
gathering provided the main staple diet of these
populations, although some cultigens might have
been available through trade (Spielmann 1991a,
1991 b). Settlement patterns of these groups related
to economic activities that were defined by seasonal movement on the surrounding landscape
(Johnson 1994). Semi-residential sites identified by
longer-term occupations focused on plant gathering
and food processing. Activities on these sites included production of a variety of tools, plant processing, and cooking-related practices.
Recognizable remains of these types of sites
would include ceramics, a number of hearths, and
implements (e.g., nianos and metates) for the processing of food. Based on these criteria, 41GR657,
41GR659, and 41GR661 could be considered semi-

residential sites. On the other hand, procurement
sites remained much more ephemeral. Procurement
sites oriented towards the extraction of raw materials were denoted by temporary stays of specialized
groups, and were recognized by the presence of
tested cobbles and large primary waste flakes.
The cairn sites were located mainly on the
dissected plains. They usually were located on
ridges and knolls of varying size. These rock features varied in dimension and in form: the smallest
were not more than 1.5 m in diameter and usually
circular, while the larger cairns were more ovoid in
shape and reached a maximum length of 2.5 m.
While most of them consisted of piled rocks varying in height, others appeared to be more elaborate
in construction. The latter consisted of rocks placed
over an excavated depression that delimited their
boundaries.
Additional rock features encountered during
the survey are either small piles of rocks or alignments ofrocks (41GR657 and 41GR668). The particular nature of these features has not been
ascertained. Studies on these cultural manifestations are currently lacking; consequently, their documentation during the survey brings original
information on a topic that has not been addressed
in the archeological literature for the Llano
Estacado. Investigations dealing with the recognition and the definition of these features could provide insights into the activities of aboriginal groups
occupying the area.

CONCLUSIONS
From T AS Field School efforts, close to 60
percent of the available acreage was surveyed, and
51 sites were located at a density of one site per
25.9 acres. The majority were aboriginal sites, with
two Anglo-Historic sites and one site with both
aboriginal and Anglo-European components. Sites
were distributed along the edge of the escarpment
and clustered along the various drainages that
flowed into the North Fork of the Double Mountain
Fork of the Brazos River in Yellowhouse Canyon.
The majority of sites appeared to be extensive
hearth fields associated with large encampments.
Task areas were evident, particularly locales that
appear to represent lithic procurement activities.
Several of the sites had high frequencies of cores
and tested cobbles from various locally-available

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis -

Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado

Ogallala Formation materials, particularly chert and
quartzite. Manos and metates located at some of the
tributary sites indicated plant processing activities.
The numerous hearths were variable in construction, form, and materials used.
The survey provides an important database
useful for studies in the spatial distribution of aboriginal occupation sites on the Llano Estacado and
Rolling Plains. The large number of sites recognized in a restricted area contribute to the establishment of patterns of occupations for the groups
using the region. The area surveyed comprises two
distinctive physiographic settings, and the inventoried sites appear to reflect differential use of these
two settings.
The use of landscape as a factor defining
mobility patterns and exploitation strategies of
human groups provides a framework to understand
the archeological data recovered for the survey area
(e.g., Binford 1982; Stafford and Hajic 1992;
Stafford 1995). While open campsites were found
in both settings, the acquisition of raw materials
and related procurement activities were occurring
on the dissected plains where Ogallala Formation
materials were readily available. Look-out sites,
however, may have been on the escarpment (none
were recorded by the TAS Field School), where
this setting permitted a better view of the
surrounding terrain. This relationship between types
of sites and the surrounding landscape was probably
distinctive from one time period to another. During
the Late Archaic, for instance, activities in the area
were oriented towards the tapping of local raw
materials. However, the large number of sites of
undetermined age precludes elaborating on the
possible patterns of occupation for these different
time periods.
The results of the survey provide additional
information concerning the cultural chronology of
the area and the settlement patterns of human groups
living on the Llano Estacada. The identification of
various types of structures, the discovery of a
Pastores corral, and the recording of a number of
lithic procurement sites, provide data on sites that
have not been well-documented for the Llano
Estacado. The survey gives a brief glimpse of the
lifeways of these groups and underscores the potential further investigations in the area could have
in refining the picture that is starting to emerge
concerning past occupations of the region.

331

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This survey was made possible through the
goodwill, patience, and concerted efforts of a
number of people. In particular, we thank the
landowners for granting us access and allowing
such a large group of people to traverse their
property, for sharing their knowledge about potential
sites, and their great interest. The land managers
were always gracious, helpful, very interested, and
both amused and very patient with our requests and
logistical problems. They wish to remain anonymous and to shield the exact location of the sites as
much as possible.
A heartfelt thanks is extended to both the T AS
Field School Committee members as well as the
TAS field crew that conducted the survey. Their
work is what made the survey a success. A special
thanks goes to Bryan Jameson and Skip Kennedy
for their site maps and artifact drawings that were
modified for inclusion in this article. In addition,
the efforts of the T AS lab crew are greatly
appreciated in processing the paperwork and the
small collections. Field photography was provided
by Virginia Hatfield during the survey while
Rebecca Hinrichs (Museum of Texas Tech
University) completed additional field photography
after the survey ended. Scott Malone and Patrick
Lewis (Museum of Texas Tech University) aided
in illustration production.
This article represents part of the ongoing research of the Lubbock Lake Landmark into cultural
adaptations to ecological change on the Southern
Plains. The survey and subsequent analysis was
supported by funds from the T AS Field School
Committee, Museum of Texas Tech University,
Lubbock Lake Site Foundation, West Texas Museum Association, and Southwestern Bell.

REFERENCES CITED
Barnes, V. E.
1967 Geologic Atlas of Texas: Lubbock Sheet. Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bettinger, R. L.
1980 Explanatory/Predictive Models of Hunter-Gatherer
Adaptation. In Advances in Archaeological Method
and Theory, Volume 3, edited by M. B. Schiffer,
pp. 189-255. Academic Press, New York.

332

Texas Archeological Society

Binford, L. R.
1980 Willow Smoke and Dog's Tails: Hunter-Gatherer
Settlement Systems and Archaeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45(1):4-20.
1982

The Archaeology of Place. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 1(1):5-31.

Bomar,G. W.
1995 Texas Weather. Second edition. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Boyd, D. K., M. D. Freeman, M. D. Blum, E. R. Prewitt, and
M. Quigg
1989 Phase I Cultural Resources Investigations at
Justiceburg Reservoir on the Double Mountain Fork
of the Brazos River, Garza, and Kent Counties,
Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 66. 2 Vols.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, D. K., J. T. Abbott, W. A. Bryan, C. M. Garvey, S. A.
Tomka, and R. C. Fields
1990 Phase II Investigations at Prehistoric and Rock Art
Sites, Justiceburg Reservoir, Garza and Kent Counties, Texas. Reports ofinvestigations No. 71. 2 Vols.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, D. K., J. Peck, S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler
1993 Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Henry), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase Ill,
Season 2. Reports of Investigations No. 88. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, D. K., J. Peck, S. A. Tomka, K. W. Kibler and M. D.
Freeman
1994 Data Recovery at Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg
Reservoir), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase
Ill, Season 3. Reports of Investigations No. 93.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Brune, G.
1981 Springs of Texas. Volume 1. Branch-Smith, Inc.,
Fort Worth.
Cowgill, G. L.
1990 Towards Refining Concepts of Full-Coverage Survey. In The Archaeology of Regions: A Case for
Full Coverage Survey, edited by S. K. Fish and S.
A. Kowalewski, pp. 249-259. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington D.C.
Evans, G. L.
1951 Prehistoric Wells in Eastern New Mexico. American Antiquity 17:1-9.

Freeman, M. D.
1989 Historic Resources in Justiceburg Reservoir. In
Phase I Cultural Resources Investigations at
Justiceburg Reservoir on the Double Mountain Fork
of the Brazos River, Garza and Kent Counties,
Texas, by D. K. Boyd, M. D. Freeman, M. D. Blum,
E. R. Prewitt, and M. Quigg, pp. 133-156. Reports
of Investigations No. 66. 2 Vols. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Gould, C. N.
1906 Geology and Water Resources of the Eastern Portion of the Panhandle of Texas. U.S. Geological
Survey Water Supply Paper 154.
1907

Geology and Water Resources of the Western Portion of the Panhandle of Texas. U.S. Geological
Survey Water Supply Paper 191.

Gustavson, T. C. (editor)
1986 Geomorphology and Quaternary Stratigraphy of the
Rolling Plains, Texas Panhandle. Guidebook 22.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Gustavson, T. C., V. T. Holliday, and S. D. Hovorka
1994 Origin and Development of Playa Basins, Source of
Recharge to the Ogallala Aquifer, Southern High
Plains, Texas and New Mexico. Reports of Investigations 2. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hall, S. A. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1995 Grassland Vegetation in the Southern Great Plains
during the Last Glacial Maximum. Quaternary Research 44(2):237-245.
Haragan, D.R.
1983 Blue Northers to Sea Breezes: Texas Weather and
Climate. Hendrick Long Publishing Co., Dallas.
Hartwell, W. T.
1991 Ryan's Site: A Plow-Disturbed Plainview Cache on
the Southern High Plains of Texas. Master's thesis,
Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Hawley, J. W., G. 0. Bachman, and K. Manley
1976 Quaternary Stratigraphy in the Basin and Range
and Great Basin Provinces, New Mexico and Western Texas. In Quaternary Stratigraphy of North
America, edited by W.C. Mahaney, pp. 235-274.
Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross, Inc., Stroudsburg,
Pennsylvania.

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis - Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado
Hayden, B.
1981 Subsistence and Ecological Adaptations of Modem
Hunter/Gatherers. In Omnivorous Primates: Gathering and Hunting in Human Evolution, edited by
R. S. 0. Harding and G. Teleki, pp. 344-421. Columbia University Press, New York.
Hester, J. J.
1972 Blackwater Locality No. 1: A Stratified Early Man
Site in Eastern New Mexico. Publication of the Fort
Burgwin Research Center 8. Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Hill, M. G., V. T. Holliday, and D. J. Stanford
1995 A Further Evaluation of the San Jon Site, New
Mexico. Plains Anthropologist 40(154):369-390.
Holliday, V. T.
1985 Morphology of Late Holocene Soils at the Lubbock
Lake Archaeological Site, Texas. Soil Science Society of America Journal 49:938-946.

333

Hood,H.C.
1978 Analysis of the Seymour Gravel. In Archaeological
Investigations in the Crowell Reservoir Area, Cottle,
Foard, King, and Knox Counties, Texas, edited by
G .K. Etchieson, R. D. Speer, and J. T. Hughes, pp.
379-385. Archaeological Research Laboratory,
Kilgore Research Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.
Hughes, J. T.
1955 Little Sunday: An Archaic Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
22:55-74.
Hughes, J. T. and P. S. Willey
1978 Archeology. In Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir,
edited by J. T. Hughes and P. Willey, pp. 24-31.
Archeological Survey Report 24. Texas Historical
Commission, Office of the State Archeologist, Austin.

1987

Re-Examination of Late Pleistocene Boreal Forest
Reconstructions for the Southern High Plains. Quaternary Research 28:238-244.

Hunt, C. B.
1974 Natural Regions of the United States and Canada.
W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

1988

Mt. Blanco Revisited: Soil Geomorphic Implications for the Ages of the Upper Cenozoic Blanco
and Blackwater Draw Formations. Geology 16:505508.

Johnson, E.
1987 (editor) Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on
the Southern High Plains. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.

1989

The Blackwater Draw Formation (Quaternary): A
1.4-plus m.y. Record of Eolian Sedimentation and
Soil Formation on the Southern High Plains. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 101: 15981607.

1989

(editor) 1987 Fenceline Corridor Survey and Testing Program. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary
Research Center Series 1. Museum of Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.

1990

Soils and Landscape Evolution of Eolian Plains:
The Southern High Plains of Texas and New
Mexico. In "Soil and Landscape Evolution," edited
by P. L. K. Knuepfer and L. D. McFadden. Geomorphology 3:489-515.

1991

Late Pleistocene Cultural Occupation on the Southern Plains. In Clovis Origins and Adaptations, edited by R. Bonnichsen and K. L. Turmire, pp.
215-237. Center for the Study of the First Americans, Oregon State University, Corvalis.

1995

Late Quaternary Stratigraphy of the Southern High
Plains. In Ancient Peoples and Landscapes, edited
by E. Johnson, pp. 289-313. Museum of Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.

1994

(editor) Archaeological Survey Along the Mobil
ESTE C02 Pipeline Corridor from Denver City to
Clairemont, Texas. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 6. Museum of Texas
Tech University, Lubbock.

1995

(editor) Playa Archaeology: Archaeological Investigations at Reese Air Force Base and Terry County
Auxiliary Airfield, Lubbock and Terry Counties.
Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 9. Museum of Texas Tech University,
Lubbock.

Holliday, V. T. and C.R. Welty
1981 Lithic Tool Resources of the Eastern Llano Estacado.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:201214.
Honea, K.
1980 Marks Beach, Stratified Paleoindian Site, Lamb
County, Texas: Preliminary Report. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 51:243-269.

Johnson, E. and V. T. Holliday
1986 The Archaic Record at Lubbock Lake. In Current
Trends in Southern Plains Archaeology, edited by
T. G. Baugh, pp. 7-54. Plains Anthropologist, Memoir 21.

334

Texas Archeological Society

1995

Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments of
the Southern High Plains. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66: 519-540.

Katz, S. R. and P. R. Katz
1976 Archeological Investigations in Lower Tule Canyon, Briscoe County, Texas. Archeological Survey
Report 16. Texas Historical Commission, Office of
the State Archeologist, Austin.
Kintigh, K. W.
1990 Comments on the Case for Full-Coverage Survey.
In The Archaeology of Regions: A Case for Full
Coverage Survey, edited by S. K. Fish and S. A.
Kowalewski, pp. 237-242. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington D.C.
Kowalewski, S. A. and S. K. Fish
1990 Conclusions. In The Archaeology of Regions: A Case
for Full Coverage Survey, edited by S. K. Fish and
S. A. Kowalewski, pp. 261-277. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington D.C.
Lee,M.
1996 La Nina blows El Nino. Lubbock Avalanche Journal, April 28, 1996, p. 17A.

Mowery, I. C. and G. S. McKee
1959 Soil Survey of Lynn County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington D.C.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
1982 Climate of Texas. NOAA Environmental Data Service, National Climatic Center, Asheville, North
Carolina.
Parsons, J. R.
1990 Critical Reflections on a Decade of Full-Coverage
Regional Survey in the Valiey of Mexico. In The
Archaeology of Regions: A Case for Full Coverage
Survey, edited by S. K. Fish and S. A. Kowalewski,
pp. 7-31. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington D.C.
Pass, F.
1981 Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide, 19821983. A.H. Belo, Dallas.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Lintz, C.
1995 Radiocarbon Dates from Chalk Hollow, A Stratified Site in the Texas Panhandle. Paper presented at
the 53rd Annual Plains Anthropological Conference,
Laramie, Wyoming.

Reeves, C. C., Jr.
1976 Quaternary Stratigraphy and Geological History of
the Southern High Plains, Texas and New Mexico.
In Quaternary Stratigraphy of North America, edited by W. C. Mahaney, pp. 213-234. Dowden,
Hutchison and Ross, Inc., Stroudsburg, Pennsylvama.

Lintz, C., K. Kramer, A.C. Earls, W. N. Trierweiler, T. Del
Bene, J.C. Acklen, F. Nials, and J.B. Bertram
1988 Class II Survey and Testing of Cultural Resources
at the Melrose Air Force Range, Curry and
Roosevelt Counties, New Mexico. Mariah Associates, Inc., Albuquerque.

Richardson, W. E., D. G. Grice and L. A. Putnam
1979 Soil Survey of Garza County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington D.C.

Litwinionek, L. E. Johnson, and V. T. Holliday
1994 The Sand Creek Mammoth Site, Llano Estacado.
Current Research in the Pleistocene 11:70-72.
Meltzer, D. J.
1991 Altithermal Archaeology and Paleoecology at Mustang Springs, on the Southern High Plains of Texas.
American Antiquity 56(2):236-267.
Moir, R. W. and D. H. Jurney
1987 Research Design for Data Recovery. In Pioneer Settlers, Tenant Farmers, and Communities: Objectives, Historical Background, and Excavations,
edited by R. W. Moir and D. H. Jurney, pp. 269291. Richland Creek Technical Series, Vol. V. Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

Roberts, F. H.
1942 Archaeological and Geological Investigations in the
San Jon District, Eastern New Mexico. Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collections 3. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, Washington,
D.C.
Rose, F. L. and R. W. Strandtmann
1986 Wildflowers of the Llano Estacado. Taylor Publishing Co., Dallas.
Sellards, E. H.
1938 Artifacts Associated with Fossil Elephant. Bulletin
of the Geological Society of America 49:999-1010.
Sellards, E. H., G. L. Evans, and G. E. Meade
1947 Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from
Plainview, Texas. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 58:927-954.

Litwinionek, Johnson and Davis-Survey at the Southeastern Edge of the Llano Estacado
Spielmann, K. A.
1982 Late Prehistoric Exchange between the Southwest
and Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 28(102):
257-272.
199la Interdependence in the Prehistoric Southwest: An
Ecological Analysis of Plains-Pueblo Interaction.
Garland, New York.
199lb Interaction Among Nonhierarchical Societies. In
Farmers, Hunters, and Colonists: Interaction Between the Southwest and the Southern Plains, edited by K.A. Spielmann, pp. 1-17 University of
Arizona Press, Tucson.
Stafford, C. R.
1995 Geoarchaeological Perspectives and Paleolandscapes
and Regional Subsurface Archaeology. Journal of
Archaeological Method and Theory 2(1):69-104.
Stafford, C. R. and E. R. Hajic
1992 Landscape Scale: Geoenvironmental Approaches to
Prehistoric Settlement Strategies. In Space, Time,
and Archaeological Landscapes, edited by J.
Rossignol and L. Wandsnider, pp. 137-161. Plenum
Press, New York.
Steward, J. H.
1938 Basin-Plateau Aboriginal Socio-political Groups.
Bulletin No. 120. Bureau of American Ethnology.
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
1955

Theory of Culture Change. University of Illinois
Press, Urbana.

Strahler, A. N. and A. H. Strahler
1983 Modern Physical Geography. Second edition. John
Wiley and Sons, New York.

335

Taylor, A. J.
1980 A Survey of New Mexican Pastores in the TexasPanhandle-Plains 1876-1886. Ms. on file, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
First Edition. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Wedel, W.R.
1975 Chalk Hollow: Culture Sequence and Chronology
in the Texas Panhandle. Actas del XL! Congreso
Internacional de Americanistas 41 :270-278.
Whalen, M. E.
1990 Sampling Versus Full-coverage Survey: An Example
from Western Texas. In The Archaeology of Regions: A Case for Full-Coverage Survey, edited by
S. K. Fish and S. A. Kowalewski, pp. 219-236.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D. C.
Willey, P. S. and J. T. Hughes
1978 The Deadman's Terrace Site. In Archeology at
Mackenzie Reservoir, edited by J. T. Hughes and P.
S. Willey, pp. 205-225. Archeological Survey Report 24. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the
State Archeologist, Austin.
Winterhalder, B. and E. A. Smith (editors)
1981 Hunter-Gatherer Foraging Strategies. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

Test Excavations Within the Plow Zone at the
Hogue Site (41TY2), a Playa Site on the
Southern High Plains of Texas

Susan E. Baxevanis, Eileen Johnson, Briggs Buchanan,
and William Shannon

ABSTRACT
Test excavations at the Hogue site (41 TY2 ), a playa site on the uplands of the Southern High Plains, were
undertaken by the Texas Archeological Society in 1993 under the guidance of the Museum of Texas Tech
University. The objectives were to investigate its cultural activities, delineate the stratigraphy and establish its
chronology, with the goal of making a contribution to plow zone research, thereby providing a better
understanding of site disturbance processes caused by plowing. Despite plow disturbance, the radiocarbon
ages were in serial order within the Late Holocene aeolian deposits that contained the archeological materials.
Analysis of five categories of materials suggests that the Hogue site was a campsite where domestic
pursuits occurred, primarily retooling and food preparation. Temporal diagnostics in conjunction with
radiocarbon ages indicated an initial occupation of the Hogue site in the late Ceramic period, extending into
the aboriginal Historic period. Vertical distribution analysis argues for the potential of remnant serial
occupation surfaces despite 50 years of plowing disturbance, and underscored the multi-component character
of the site. Compressed horizontal distribution analysis discerned four activity areas, each representing
domestic pursuits centered around a hearth.
Additional experimental studies of plow zones and plowing are needed, particularly for studying the
vertical movement of artifacts. Field methodologies must become more detailed and precise to gain greater
control of plow zone archeological data. These two mechanisms jointly will provide better insight into the
structure and dynamics of the plow zone itself and can establish a sounder basis to examine site integrity in
plowed contexts.

INTRODUCTION
The Hogue site (41TY2) is located on the
Southern High Plains, or Llano Estacado
("stockaded plains") (Figure 1). This 130,000 km2
plateau is bounded by escarpments along its western,
northern, and eastern borders that are from 50 to
200 m high and locally known as "the Caprock." It
is separated from the High Plains physiographic
section of the Great Plains province by an
escarpment at the Canadian River Valley to the
north and an escarpment at the Pecos River Valley
to the .west. The southern portion of the plateau
merges with the Edwards Plateau without
topographic demarcation (Holliday 1995a, 1995b).
A large plateau, the topography of the Southern

High Plains is characterized by dunes, ephemeral
lakes (playas), and ephemeral drainages (draws).
The Hogue site is located in Terry County, a
square county spanning approximately 50 km on
each side and covering 574,720 acres (Sanders
1962). Four draw systems cross Terry County from
northwest to southeast (Figure 2). The major draws
are: (1) a northern Lost Draw, (2) Sulphur Draw,
(3) a southern Lost Draw (a separate system from
the northern Lost Draw), and (4) Sulphur Springs
Draw. The northern Lost Draw flows into Rich
Lake, a natural salt lake. Sulphur Draw, the southern Lost Draw, and Sulphur Springs Draw flow
southeasterly until joining the Colorado River.
The Southern High Plains are nearly level to
very gently undulating with little dissection. A

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

338

Texas Archeological Society

103°W

.I

-35°N

0

20km

1---Y
O 10mi

-32°N
"'Sites
m Cities

Figure 1. The Southern High Plains, showing the location of the Hogue Site (41TY2).

gentle slope of approximately 2 m/km (Sanders
1962) follows the northwest to southeast axis, with
elevations ranging from 1700 min the northwest to
750 min the southeast (Holliday 1990). Sand dunes
are located in the northwestern, far eastern, and
southern portion of the county. Three salt lakes are
located in the eastern part of the county (see Figure
2). Rich Lake and Mound Lake are large salt lakes,

each surrounded by sharp relief. A third,
intermittent, small, unnamed salt lake is located
approximately 18 km southeast of Brownfield.
Terry County has 302 playas of various sizes
(Buchanan 1995a). The playas are formed by deflation and usually are associated with dune formation
(lunettes) on their leeward margins (Holliday 1985a,
1985b, 1995a, 1995b, 1997).

and Shannon -

Test Excavations at the Hogue Site

HOCKLEY COUNTY
- - --..,...

339

- ;o-:-1

-0

"'I

0

.

I

~

I

Q

0

I

~

0

0

u
::i::

I
I

0

::i

I

~I
>

I

I

0
0

I
I

+-

0

0

2

d

p
6

I

8

(kilometers)

GAINES COUNTY·

- -.. - -

,,

--1-

DAWSON COUNTY

I

Figure 2. The Location of the Hogue Site in Terry County.

The bedrock foundation consists of Permian
and Triassic redbeds (Holliday 1995b). These beds
are overlain by Cretaceous limestones, shales, and
sandstones (Harbour 1975; Gustavson and Finley
1985). Miocene and Pliocene alluvial and aeolian
sediments of the Ogallala Formation overlay Paleozoic and Mesozoic sedimentary rocks. The Blanco
Formation locally overlies the Ogallala Formation.
Overlying the Ogallala and Blanco formations,
where present, are the aeolian sediments of the

Pleistocene Blackwater Draw Formation (Holliday
1985a, 1988, 1989, 1995a, 1995b).
Terry County, as the rest of the Southern High
Plains, has a sub-humid, warm-temperate
continental climate. The region generally is
classified as dry, mid-latitude, and semi-desert
(Strahler and Strahler 1983:Plate C.2). A low
climatic gradient exists across the Southern High
Plains, and it serves as a transition zone between
arid eastern New Mexico and the more humid areas

340

Texas Archeological Society

of Central Texas (Holliday 1995a). Rainfall is
limited on the Southern High Plains and ranges
from 50 cm in the northeast to 30 cm in the
southwest (Haragan 1983; Bomar 1995). The
rainfall in Terry County averages approximately 45
cm, although the median is 40 cm (Sanders 1962).
Seasonal and annual variation occurs in the amount
of precipitation, and most falls in local showers
that occur in the spring and summer. Temperatures
on the Southern High Plains follow the climatic
gradient and average annual temperatures range
from 56° Fin the northwest to 64° Fin the southeast.
Terry County falls on the warmer end with an
average annual temperature of 62° F. As with
precipitation, wide variations in temperature occur,
especially in the spring months. Strong and
occasionally high speed, variable winds, out of the
southwest predominantly, are characteristic of the
Southern High Plains (Sanders 1962; Haragan 1983;
Bomar 1995).
The historic vegetation of the Southern High
Plains is a mixed-prairie grassland (Blair 1950).
The area is a transition zone between the more
humid tall grass of the true prairies to the east, and
the drier desert shrubland to the west (Fenton
1991). Short grasses are dominant, including buffalo grass and blue grama types predominantly, but
also bear grass, snakeweed, and rabbit bush. The
historic vertebrate fauna of the area includes mammals such as bison, pronghorn antelope, deer, jackrabbit, cottontail rabbit, prairie dog, cotton rat,
shrew, skunk, fox, wolf, coyote, bobcat, and badger (Burt and Grossenheider 1976; Davis and
Schmidly 1994). Historic herptiles include yellow
mud turtle, ornate box turtle, snapping turtle, collared lizard, Texas horned lizard, Great Plains
skink, prairie rattlesnake, garter snake, water snake,
and gopher snake (Dixon 1987). Few amphibians
are native to the area, but they include tiger salamander, Great Plains toad, chorus frog, leopard
frog, and plains spadefoot (Dixon 1987). Over 240
historic bird species populate the Southern High
Plains for at least a portion of the year (Peterson
1960; Rappole and Blacklock 1994).

ARCHEOLOGICAL
BACKGROUND
Five general cultural periods are defined on
the Southern High Plains (Holliday 1987; Johnson

and Holliday 1989, 1995). The cultural period(s) a
site represents is determined on the basis of diagnostic artifacts, radiometric data, subsistence evidence, technological traits, and environmental
considerations. The Paleoindian period is the earliest cultural period, spanning the years from 11,500
to 8500 B.P. This period represents the transition
from the Late Pleistocene to Early Holocene when
now-extinct mammals were hunted (Johnson and
Holliday 1989, 1995). The Archaic period follows,
from 8500 to 2000 B.P. Encompassing the later
part of the Early Holocene to the earlier part of the
Late Holocene, the Archaic is characterized by the
systematic incorporation of plant use into the subsistence base (Johnson and Holliday 1986, 1995).
During the Late Holocene, the Ceramic period (from
2000 to 500 B.P.) is distinguished by the presence
of both ceramics and arrow points. The Proto historic
period (500 to 300 B.P.) represents the time when
Europeans were present in the area, but their influence was minimal in the Native American's material culture or archeological record. European
material culture in the archeological record occurs
during the Historic period (300 B.P. to modern
times). This period includes both aboriginal and
European occupations (Johnson and Holliday 1989,
1995). All five cultural periods are exemplified in
the extensive research undertaken at Lubbock Lake
Landmark (Johnson 1987; Johnson and Holliday
1989), located in Lubbock County, ca. 55 km northeast of the Hogue site.
Currently, 115 archeological sites are recorded
in Terry County (Buchanan 1995a:81-110;
Litwinionek 1995:176-186), occurring in six different topographic settings. Criteria used for characterizing site settings are: rim of draws (within 1
km); within a draw; near Rich Lake or Mound Lake
(within 1 km); near a playa lake (within 1 km); in
an area of sand dunes; and disassociated (not near
a playa or rim). Some 20.9 percent of the sites are
located on the rims of draws; 14.8 percent are near
the salt lakes; 28.7 percent near playa lakes; 13
percent are located in an area of sand dunes; and
28.7 percent are disassociated. Most of the recorded sites in Terry County are known only from
surface information, with only four sites test excavated to date. Eight sites occupy more than one
topographic setting. Of those, six are found within
1 km of a rim of a draw and a playa (Buchanan
1995a:81-110; Johnson 1997). One of these sites
is the Hogue site.

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon -

Test Excavations at the Hogue Site

341

Cultural determinations of many of
the sites have not yet been made. However,
of those sites with temporal diagnostics,
Hogue is one of only two test excavated
sites located on the edge of a playa and
less than 1 km from a draw. It also is one
of only two sites in Terry County with
radiocarbon dates (Johnson 1997).

THE HOGUE SITE
The Hogue site (41TY2) is located
approximately 6.5 km north of Brownfield,
off of US Highway 62/82 and roughly 72
km east of the Texas-New Mexico state
line (see Figure 2). The site covers 0.25
acres of an agricultural field, and is situated on the margin of a small playa and
380 m southwest of northern Lost Draw
(Figures 3 and 4).
The agricultural field containing the
site is currently used to farm cotton; it is
not irrigated (Figure 5). Plowing of the
area is predominantly east to west, although it has been plowed north to south
in the past (Leon Pope, personal communication, 1995). The topography of the
area is fairly flat; however, a slight downFigure 3. Topographic Map of the Hogue Site, showing relationships
ward slope (ca. 9 cm) toward the playa to the draw, playa, and highway (not to scale).
occurs from east to west across the excavation units. Plowing techniques used in
the past at Hogue are unknown. Evidence
of deep plowing-that disturb sediments up to 50
sion. Other types of disturbance include rodent
cm below the surface--exists; but, the technique
activity and water erosion, a sediment displacement
currently in use does not cause such deep disturfactor on agricultural lands.
bance. Deep plowing likely was used irregularly to
Extensive surface collection of the site by Pope
(1991) indicated a late Ceramic and Protohistoric
combat wind erosion. Depending on the type of
sediment, deep plowing would bring an average of
period camp. Diagnostics for the late Ceramic oc15 to 20 cm of sandy clay loam subsoil to the surcupation included pottery sherds from Jornada
face in the furrow slice, and when mixed with
Mogollon and El Paso brownwares, Rio Grande
sandy surface sediment, would create a fine sandy
glaze wares, and corrugated plain wares (Pope 1991 ),
loam plow zone layer (Sanders 1962).
while the Protohistoric period was represented by
In addition to the agricultural disturbance,
projectile points (Garza, Fresno, and Harrell). A
other factors have contributed to the disturbance of
charcoal sample taken from a disturbed, dispersed
the site. Wind erosion is a factor on cultivated soils.
hearth, 10 cm within the plow zone, provided an
It can remove as much as 50 percent of the origiuncorrected assay of 350 ± 50 B.P. (Beta-54177),
nal A-horizon, and much of the organic matter and
confirming a Protohistoric period occupation (Leon
silt from the plow layer. It can also result in the
Pope, personal communication, 1992).
Test excavation of the Hogue site was
accumulation of sandy material (Sanders 1962: 19).
Finer textured soils are least affected by wind eroundertaken in 1993 by the Texas Archeological

342

Texas Archeological Society

Daium

ONOW
Elev.101609

.

Figure 4. Location of Playa, Cores, Test Excavation Units, and Datum at the Hogue Site (not to scale).

Site

343

disturbance from
in
adjoining units (Word 1993), and
each was excavated in 10 cm
levels with trowels and brushes.
Materials recovered from survey
and excavation were piece-point
plotted both vertically and
horizontally in relation to the
established datum. All sediments
recovered in the first 15-20 cm of
excavation were dry-screened in
the field using 1116-inch mesh
screens; sediments below the loose
plow zone were bagged and
tagged by provenience (unit, level,
Figure 5. General View of the Hogue Site, looking Northeast.
and stratum) and taken to the
Quaternary Research Center at
Society (T AS) Field School under the guidance of
Lubbock Lake Landmark. These provenienced
the Museum of Texas Tech University. The goal
sediments, known as matrix, were water-washed
was to make a contribution to plow zone archeology
through nested 114- and 1/16-inch screens. The
and, thereby, provide a better understanding of site
residue from this water processing, known as matrix
disturbance processes. The intent of the excavation
concentrate, contained micro-cultural and microwas to investigate artifact distribution patterns,
biological materials. A test unit was opened at
reconstruct the occupation surface(s), and delineate
48S84W to examine the stratigraphy, and two
the stratigraphy of the site.
charcoal samples were removed for radiocarbon
Excavations were undertaken in 13 of the 16
dating. Core samples also were taken at four
established units (Figures 6 and 7). Units were
locations, from the center of the playa to the crest
assigned in a "checkerboard" fashion to avoid
of the ridge, for stratigraphic purposes (see Figure

Bev.
101414.5crn

Elev.

10140icm

37S84W

37SOOW

3 units excavated
into sesquinary
38S86W

38S85W

38S83W

39S86W

39S85W

39S84W

39S83W

40S86W

40S85W

40S84W

40S83W

1 unit excavated
into1he
subp!owzone

Elev.

101408.San

Elev.
101402.San

Figure 6. Test Units Excavated at the Hogue Site. Grid north is magnetic north.

344

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Views of the T AS Field Crew Members at the
Hogue Site.

4). After seven work days, the units were backfilled
and the field was plowed by its owner.

RESEARCH APPROACH
The general research framework for investigation of the Hogue site follows the overall Lubbock
Lake Landmark research approach (Johnson 1987).
Couched in a theoretical perspective of hunter-gatherer studies and cultural ecology, the approach views
people as a component of, and interacting with, the
ecosystem. The basic cultural assumption is that
inferences concerning technology and subsistence
can be made from analyses of lithic and faunal
materials. The underlying concept is that culture
represents adaptive strategies to cope with the environment and that the subsistence system is closelylinked to the environment. The interaction between
culture and environment is facilitated by technology. Therefore, the approach to people-land relationships is in the context of a technologicalenvironmental explanation (Steward 1938, 1955;
Bettinger 1980; Hayden 1981).

Juxtaposed to cultural considerations are those
of site formation and disturbance processes. These
processes, both natural and cultural, influence the
archeological record and its interpretive potential.
Plowing is a disturbance process that directly impacts the integrity of archeological deposits. The
traditional view is that this process destroys and
homogenizes the deposits to the extent that plow
zone materials are useless for interpretation beyond
chronological information (see discussion in Ford
et al. 1972; Roper 1976; Sterud et al. 1978; Lennox
1986; Dunnell 1990; Dunnell and Simek 1995).
These materials generally have been ignored, either
discarded as "disturbed" or if excavated, the entire
plow zone taken as a unit or level. However, a
growing body of data over the last 15 to 20 years
argues for the potential of plow zone materials as
an important component of research (Lennox 1986;
Dunnell and Simek 1995). What is being investigated in the test excavations at the Hogue site is the
usefulness of plow zone materials and their interpretive potential. Therefore, overlaid and interacting with the general research approach is that of a
specific site-disturbance approach.
Plowing is a transformational process, and
plow zone archeology is concerned with the
dynamics and stochastic aspects of that process.
Empirical data are few and consensus limited on
the effects of plowing on archeological deposits.
Experimental work has been designed primarily to
interpret surface materials from plowed sites and
examine the nature of the relationship between that
surface material and the undisturbed deposits below
the plow zone. Agreement focuses on plowing as a
disturbance process that causes lateral and vertical
displacement and breakage of materials. Materials
circulate within the plow zone, thus impacting the
integrity of cultural features, artifact spatial
distributions, and the artifacts themselves (e.g.,
Tolstoy and Fish 1975; Roper 1976; Mallouf 1982;
Frink 1984; Ammerman 1985; Lennox 1986;
Lyman and O'Brien 1987; Odell and Cowan 1987;
Yorston et al. 1990; Dunnell and Simek 1995).
Consensus, however, has not been reached on the
extent of lateral displacement (e.g., Hoffman 1982;
Odell and Cowan 1987; Dunnell and Simek 1995
vs. Yorston 1990; Yorston et al. 1990) or the impact
of plowing on integrity (e.g., Odell and Cowan
1987; Yorston et al. 1990 vs. Hoffman 1982; Frink
1984; Lennox 1986; Dunnell 1990; Dunnell and
Simek 1995). Other areas of contention include: (a)
size effect, i.e., whether or not the size of the artifact

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site
affects its movement within the plow zone and how
(e.g., Frink 1984; Ammerman 1985; Lyman and
O'Brien 1987; Odell and Cowan 1987; Cowan and
Odell 1990; Dunnell 1990; Dunnell and Simek
1995); and (b) the unit of transport, i.e., whether or
not the artifact itself moves as an independent object
or moves as an element of a ped (e.g., Odell and
Cowan 1987; Dunnell 1990). Too little data are
available on the impact of vertical displacement
(Hoffman 1982; Reynolds 1982; Dunnell and Simek
1995) to form any generalities governing this action.
The dynamics of artifacts circulating within
the plow zone are not well understood. Experimental data indicate that a constant percentage of material is brought to the surface or reburied during
plowing over the years; however, various studies
determined different estimates, ranging from 5-6
percent (Ammerman 1985; Odell and Cowan 1987),
more than 10 percent (Lewarch and O'Brien 1981),
to 15-16 percent (Reynolds 1982; Frink 1984).
Based on these rates, an artifact, on average, would
appear at the surface once every 6-7 to 17-20 years.
The vast majority of artifacts remain within the
plow zone for most of the time plowing occurs. All
undergo attrition and breakage with each plow event
until a stable size is reached, that size being dependent on the class of artifact (Ammerman 1985;
Lyman and O'Brien 1987; Odell and Cowan 1987;
Cowan and Odell 1990; Dunnell and Simek 1995).
While disagreement exists as to whether or not size
affects lateral displacement (i.e., larger artifacts
moving a greater distance than smaller artifacts during a plowing event), consensus appears to be that
larger artifacts are brought to the surface more frequently than smaller ones, a phenomenon called
plow sorting (Frink 1984; Ammerman 1985; Odell
:md Cowan 1987; Dunnell and Simek 1995).
The lack of empirical data on plow zone
structure and population characteristics hampers
modeling movement and size effect within the plow
zone. Although data are limited concerning the
effect of depth on artifact movement, it has been
assumed that over time, an artifact will be found at
different depths within the plow zone (Y orston et
al. 1990:70). The plow zone itself, as an independent
unit, is conterminous with the maximum extent of
plowing and is composed of two distinct vertical
parts (Figure 8). The upper "minimum plow zone"
is the deposit that is always involved in each
plowing event while the lower "minimax plow
zone" (or "sesquinary zone" [Hoffman 1982:298])
is composed of sediments that are moved only

345

occasionally (such as in deep plowing) (Dunnell
and Simek 1995:307-308). This lower part is less
disturbed than the upper part of the plow zone but
more disturbed than the sub-plow zone (Hoffman
1982; Dunnell and Simek 1995). Based on field
observations, Dunnell and Simek ( 1995) argue that
size reduction proceeds quickly and becomes less
pronounced with subsequent plow events. Over
time, artifacts in the minimum plow zone should be
smaller than those in the minimax zone and, in
turn, they would be smaller than those in the
undisturbed sub-plow zone. The mean size by
artifact class in the minimax zone should be greater
than that for the minimum zone because the
minimax zone is plowed less. A less regular size
distribution should occur that is more akin to the
original population. Therefore, the appearance of
artifacts from the minimax zone into the minimum
zone should be detectable by size distribution
(Dunnell and Simek 1995:308-309).
Superimposed on size and vertical movement
is the impact on cultural features, either wholly or
partially in the plow zone. The empirical data available are concerned with the relationship between
surface and sub-plow zone patterns (Odell and
Cowan 1987; Yorston et al. 1990). Mathematical
modeling and simulations indicate that plowing affects clustered and structured features differentially,
destroying the integrity of structured features more
quickly than clustered ones. After 20 years of plowing, a tightly clustered assemblage can be recognized on the surface as a concentration of materials,
whereas feature structure is destroyed within 10
years of plowing. Spurious surface patterns can

minimum (upper) plowzone
--....._______,--

""~~.--1

minimax (upper) plowzone

sub-plowzone

maximum

jowzone

1

undisturbed

,_____~J

Figure 8. Schematic of Vertical Parts within the Plow
Zone.

346

Texas Archeological Society

develop from 50 to 100 years of plowing (Yorston
et al. 1990:77 and Figures 5-7). Based on these
data, the materials within the plow zone itself, particularly the minimax zone, should retain greater
integrity over that 100 year period.

STRATIGRAPHY
Playa-lake basins comprise one of the dominant drainage features on the Southern High Plains.
Playas are shallow basins that catch and hold rainwater. An estimated 20,000 playas are found scattered on the Southern High Plains landscape (Sabin
and Holliday 1995). The larger saline playa basins

often are associated with springs, and may have
evolved from smaller basins where groundwater
led to the dissolution and collapse of the underlying
Permian salts (Holliday 1995a). Wind deflation is
the main factor in removing sediments from these
basins (Gustavson et al. 1995). The typical surface
soil in playas is the Randall Clay (Sanders 1962), a
deep, clayey soil that cracks when dry and has
gilgai microrelief (i.e., surface undulations produced
by the high shrinking and swelling capacity of the
clay [Soil Survey Staff 1994]).
Stratigraphic examination of the Hogue site
and the associated playa basin was based on four
geologic cores (Figures 9 and 10), a profile of a
deep test pit, and exposures in the main excavation

Figure 9. Geologic Cross-Section and Stratigraphic Profile of Playa Basin (not to scale).

Baxevanis,

Core

93-4
Core

Test

93-3

Pit

Core

Core
93-1

93-2

--101300cm
AMSL

--100B80cm

AMSL

Key to Generalized
Stratigraphy:

Recent
Slopewash

Randall Clay

~

Pale Gray Clean Sand

[]-

Blackwater Draw
Formation

Light tan sandy
clay

Potential Archeological Zone

Olive Gray Lake Sediments

~

Plowzone

Figure 10. Diagram of Generalized Stratigraphy of Geologic Cores and Profile of Test Pit at the Hogue Site (not to
scale).

area. The four geologic cores were extracted from a
transect following a north-south line from the center of the playa to the play a margin to obtain a cross
section of the basin stratigraphy.
The first core (core 93-1 ), taken from the center
of the playa basin, is composed of recent sediment
washed down from the uplands overlying the typical

Randall Clay associated with playa basins (Table
1). The presence of redoximorphic features within
the Randall Clay is associated with wetness, and
indicates a reduction and oxidation of iron and
manganese compounds after saturation and
desaturation (Soil Survey Staff 1994). These
features indicate that the water level within the

348

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Descriptive data for Core 93w1
Depth from Surface (cm)
0-45

Description
Recent slopewash

45-240

Randall Clay

240-310

Randall Clay with dark reddish redoximorphic concentrations on ped faces

310-350

Medium gray and sandier than overlying strata; probably Blackwater Draw
Formation

playa has fluctuated over an extended period of
time. The Blackwater Draw Formation underlies
the playa sediments.
The second core (core 93-2), taken from the
playa margin 31 m east of the first core, again
exposed recent uplands slopewash overlying
Randall Clay (Table 2). However, more variations
in both units occurred. The three strata between 15100 cm may be related to early slope wash episodes
as indicated by the irregular decrease in organic
matter. Within the Randall Clay, the pale gray clean
sand from 145-220 cm indicates a possible buried
eluvial horizon overlying an illuviated horizon with
sand grains coating the ped faces. The pale gray
clean sand, and the illuviated horizon below, probably are related to a prior soil-forming episode. The
Randall Clay above the eluviated horizon may be
related to a later deposition. The lowest stratum
probably is the Blackwater Draw Formation, altered by the presence of the playa.

The third core (core 93-3) was near the excavation units and 33 m east of the second core. It
exposed the maximum zone disturbed by plowing
in this area and the intact sub-plow zone (Table 3).
These two zones represent the deposits with archeological potential. Below these deposits, the
sandy clay probably is fluvial while the lowest stratum (below 300 cm) is Iacustrine in origin.
The fourth core (core 93-4), taken upslope from
the excavation units and 40 m east of the third core,
exposed an intact profile of a portion of the Blackwater Draw Formation (Table 4). The various Bt
horizons of the Blackwater Draw Formation make
up an argillic horizon. The color of the 150-220 cm
stratum is masked by calcium carbonate accumulations, and the bottom stratum is gleyed due to repeated wetness.
A profile test pit, dug 8 m south of the excavation units, exposed the extent of the plow zone in
this area. This disturbed deposit consisted of bed-

Table 2. Descriptive data for Core 93-2
Depth from Surface (cm)

Description

0-15

Recent slopewash

15-70

Dark reddish brown sandy clay loam with staining by organic matter

70-80

Similar to stratum above but darker

80-100

Similar to stratum above but redder

100-145

Randall Clay

145-220

Pale gray clean sand

220-330

Randall Clay with sand grains coating ped faces

330-420

Bright olive gray sandy clay with organic matter staining ped faces; probably
Blackwater Draw Formation

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site

349

Table 3. Descriptive data for Core 93-3
Depth from Surface (cm)
0-70

Description
Disturbed historic slopewash

70-120

Randall Clay

120-300

Light tan sandy clay, possibly gully fill

300-320

Olive gray lacustrine clay

ded sand, sandy loam, and sandy clay loam reworked from the Blackwater Draw Formation and
lacustrine sediments (Table 5). The sub-plow zone
(58-68 cm) consisted of a dark reddish gray AB
horizon with a possible lens of Randall Clay (Figure 11). In comparison to core 93-3, the deposits
with archeological potential were shallower in the
area of this profile test pit, and in the excavation
units. The underlying stratum was a buried argillic
horizon of the Blackwater Draw Formation, with
the lower-most portions (below 100 cm) gleyed
from wetness.

Two radiocarbon samples were taken from the
northeast wall of the profile test pit for assay (Table
6 and Figure 11). Radiocarbon sample C48S84W-1
was unidentified charcoal from the lower portion of
the plow zone (10-20 cm above the top of the subplow zone). This sample yielded a corrected age of
600 ± 40 B.P. (DRI-2841). Radiocarbon sample
C48S84W-2 was an organic sediment sample recovered from the organic lens at the transition between the AB and Btb horizons at the top of the
intact sub-plow zone. This sample yielded a corrected age of 1214 ± 93 B.P. (DRI-2940). These

Table 4. Descriptive data for Core 93-4
Depth from Surface (cm)
0-100

Description
Dark reddish brown A horizon of the Blackwater Draw Formation

100-150

Reddish brown Bt horizon of the Blackwater Draw Formation

150-220

Pinkish red Btk horizon of Blackwater Draw Formation

220-240

Olive gray sandy clay Btg of the Blackwater Draw Formation

Table 5. Descriptive data for test pit
Depth from Surface (cm)

Description

0-58

Bedded sand, sandy loam, and sandy clay loam; reworked Blackwater Draw
Formation and lacustrine sediments (Al and A2) (plowzone)

58-68

Dark reddish gray AB horizon; Randall Clay lens (subplowzone)

68-100

Reddish brown Btb horizon of Blackwater Draw Formation

100+

Olive gray sandy clay, B tgb horizon of Blackwater Draw Formation.

350

Texas Archeological Society

Table 6. Radiocarbon Dates from Test Pit
Elevation
(cm amsl)

Radiocarbon
Sample

Lab
No.

Uncorrected Age
B.P.

Corrected Age
B.P.

Delta
13C

101355101345

C48S84W-l

DRI-2841

599 ±40

600 ±40

-24.91

101337101317

C48S84W-2

DRI-2940

1080± 93

1214 ± 93

-16.74

dates, and the one obtained by Pope, provide a
framework for dating the archeological materials at
the Hogue site. The radiocarbon ages have not been
tree-ring calibrated as none of the other dates from
the region or surrounding areas have been calibrated, and comparison with these dates and those

minimum plowzone

A1

minimax plowzone
C48S84W-1 - - . . . .

C48S84W-2

--..--=----A_s__o_r.:..ga_n_ic_l_en_s_ _ _- ;
Btb

------ -

from the Hogue site would lead to confusion. Furthermore, calibrations are subject to corrections,
leaving published calibrated dates inaccurate
(Stuiver 1993; Stuiver and Pearson 1992; Stuiver
and Reimer 1993; Holliday 1995b), or multiple calibrated ages for certain periods (Stuiver et al. 1986;
Bartlein et al. 1995).
The stratigraphy of the test excavation units is
similar to the profile test pit (Figure 12).
Excavations in most units did not go below the
plow zone. However, two units were excavated to
the top of the sub-plow zone, and one penetrated
into the sub-plow zone to reach the Blackwater
Draw Formation. The break between the minimum
and minimax plow zones is noted at approximately
101380 cm above sea level (asl), or 40 cm below
the surface (bs). The total depth of the plow zone
averages 55 cm bs (101345 cm asl).

Blackwater Draw

Btgb

Formation

Figure 11. Stratigraphic Profile ofTestPit, Unit Coordinates
48S84W. Location of charcoal samples indicated along
left margin (not to scale).

A

r--...______

r-______

AB

Plowzone
orgarnc
. Iens
----

Blackwater Draw Formation

Figure 12. Stratigraphic Profile of Test Excavation Unit
38S86W (not to scale).

ARTIFACTS RECOVERED DURING
THE 1993 EXCAVATIONS
Over 60,800 artifacts were recovered from the
Hogue site during the 1993 test excavations. The
vast majority were recovered in the matrix concentrates that provided the general provenience of unit,
level, and stratum. More than three times the number of bones and bone segments were plotted in
place than for flaked-lithics and burned caliche
(Table 7). Against the dark sediments, the lightcolored bone may have been easier to see. Flakedlithics, pottery, bone, burned caliche, charcoal, and
metal objects were examined and their distribution
analyzed vertically and horizontaHy. These six categories were selected on the assumption that they
would provide the most useful information in determining cultural activities through detailed iden-

Baxevanis, Johnson,
Table 7. Materials Recovered

the 1993 Test Excavations

Matrix

In-Situ

Total
Recovered

Flaked-Lithics
Bone and bone segments
Charcoal
Burned caliche
Seeds
Gastropoda
Potsherds
Metal
Hematite
Sandstone

9,198
34,123
14,037
2,757
385
54
31
10
6
5

50
163
4
51
0
0
9
0

9,248
34,286
14,041
2,808
385
54
40
10

TOTAL

60,606

278

Object

l
0

tification and spatial distributions. These identified
activities would be the basis for determining site
type within the regional settlement system for the
represented period. Flaked-lithics, pottery, and metal
provided chronological data that could be examined in relationship with their spatial distribution
and the secured radiocarbon ages. The examination
of the effects of plowing on a site was dependent
on both vertical and horizontal distribution patterns.
Patterns were examined on a category by category
basis, as well as on a composite basis. Determining
the number of occupations represented was also
dependent on spatial distributions and the effect of
plowing on those patterns.

modification and vertical and
horizontal spatial distribution.
Debris was by far the largest
category, with tools only a minor
component of the assemblage
(Figure 13a).
Methodology

Flaked-lithic artifacts were analyzed by form, material type and
source, production phase, and utilization. Debris was categorized by
material type, source, and produc7
tion phase, while flakes and tools
5
were analyzed in more detail.
60,884
Three morphological categories
were employed in describing the
flaked-lithic assemblage: flakes, debris, and tools. Flakes were analyzed for initiation
phase, shape, and termination (Cotterell and
Kamminga 1987; Hartwell 1993). Debris, conventionally termed chips, was defined as a broken flake
lacking the proximal end. Tools were classified to
type (biface, uniface, utilized flake, utilized debris,
and projectile point). Analysis included the measurement of artifacts by LED digital calipers with
an accuracy of 0.01 cm. Length measurement was
taken from proximal to distal ends of the artifacts,
with measurements of the maximum width perpendicular to the length. Thickness was measured at
the point of maximum thickness.

Flaked-Lithic Material and Source
FLAKED-LITHICS
The excavations recovered 9,248 flaked-lithic
artifacts (Table 8), including tools, flakes, or debris.
Their distributions enabled identification of possible
uses for a specific cultural activity. Additionally,
agricultural disturbance was studied for both artifact
Table 8. Flaked-Lithk Artifacts Recovered
during the 1993 Test Excavations
Object
Tool

Total
49

Flake

3,895

Debris

5,304

Total

9,248

The flaked-lithic material and source was based
primarily on a comparison with six main local and
regional sources (Banks 1990; Boyd et al. 1990;
Holliday and Welty 1981). Flaked-lithic material
was divided into five basic material types: chert,
quartzite, chalcedony, obsidian, and silicified caliche. These types were classified by physically-visible characteristics based on a macroscopic
examination. Further examination of questionable
materials was done at a microscopic level. Classification was based on the color, translucence, luster,
texture, and structure of the raw material. Ultraviolet light was not used for sourcing materials due to
time constraints.
A common source found in the area is Edwards
Formation chert. The nearest outcrop, located in
Taylor County, is on the Brazos River near Merkle,

352

Texas Archeological Society
6000

6000
5304

5500
5000
4500
>. 4000
g 3500
§_3000
~ 2500
LL 2000
1500

5500

,---

5657

r--

5000
r;.9248

n=5820

4500

3895

>. 4000

,---,

g 3500
§_sooo
~ 2500

LL 2000

1500
1000

1000

500

-----------~

500

49

0

0

30

13

88

12

20

LJ___J-'--<=~~---'-'---'-~---L..~~

t0o1
a, Form
5000 , - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,
4551

4500
4000

n--5559

3500
>.

gsooo
§_2500
~2000
1500
1000

738

500

0

sg

21

LI--'-'-=~._.___,__.__~~--''-'----'-'~--'

~N.

-140

->i--G>ra

'5'

~

Git""'
~,,.

,00,,

Cbv.:i

'5'

"c>r

~

-s'ou.

G>ft'G>..>

c, Source

q

r-~

0/1).

t:'r
(!04J.;,

Oii-,,

Figure 13. Flaked-Lithic Artifacts from the Hogue Site by: a, form; b, raw material; c, source.

approximately 225 km southeast from the Hogue
site (Frederick and Ringstaff 1994; Holliday and
Welty 1981). The Edwards Formation consists of a
fine to medium-grained limestone with occasional
chert lenses and is considered a very good grade for
flaking lithic material (Holliday and Welty 1981;
Banks 1990). The chert ranges from shades of tan,
white, gray, and blue, to darker colors with smooth
texture and low luster.
A second source is the Blanco Formation. This
Formation contains a well-developed, well-indurated caliche, formed at the top of the bedrock,
which includes a poor to good quality silicified
caliche. This material is found in exposures along
Yellowhouse Draw northeast of Lubbock, further

downstream in Yellowhouse Canyon northwest of
Lubbock, and in local outcrops along the Southern
High Plains (Ladkin and Miller 1993).
A third source common to the region is the
Ogallala Formation. The closest outcrop of the upper Ogallala Formation is 70 km northeast near the
town of Slaton. This outcrop produces a large lithology consisting of basal red to brown sand and
conglomerate, and an upper reddish, unconsolidated,
sand, silt, and clay with gravel lenses. Light colored and dark gray to black medium to coarse
quartzites are present along with medium gray chert
and brown to yellow jasper (Holliday and Welty
1981). The Potter member of the lower Ogallala
Formation has cherts and quartzites. This dense

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon -

Test Excavations at the Hogue Site

353

chert ranges from greenish gray to brown, and is a
silicified, very fine-grained siltstone (Holliday and
Welty 1981).
A regional jasper, from the Tecovas Formation, occurs in outcrops near the Palo Duro Canyon
and along the Canadian River Valley. The nearest
outcrop is located near the town of Quitaque, approximately 175 km to the northeast (Holliday and
Welty 1981). These materials are of high quality
and occur in colors of red and maroons mottled
with yellows and browns.
Another regional resource is the agatized
Alibates Dolomite in the upper Quartermaster Formation, north/northwest of Amarillo, approximately
300 km from the Hogue site. Alibates agate tends
to have a more vitreous luster than most cherts, and
is a very high quality material with banded colors
including whites, purples, blues, light reds, and yellows (Holliday and Welty 1981; Banks 1990).
Obsidian is found occasionally at archeological
sites in the region. Its nearest source is central New
Mexico (Holliday and Welty 1981) near the Jemez
Mountains, approximately 500 km northwest.
Chert materials account for 97.2 percent of the
flaked-lithic assemblage (Figure 13b). Of the chert
materials recovered, approximately 81 percent consisted of material from the Edwards Formation
source (Figure 13c). A few lithics could be identified as Ogallala Formation quartzite and Potter
member chert, however. Approximately 13 percent
of the materials are from an unknown source. Many
of these may be Ogallala gravels that are difficult
to identify by source and material due to their great
variety and small size.

Conchoidal flakes are produced during primary
reduction and are characterized by a pronounced
Hertzian cone of force (Crabtree 1972). Hard hammer percussion produces secondary detachments
(Cotterell and Kamminga 1990:141). This type of
manufacture removes the cortex from the raw material, and reduces the size of the core.
Bending flakes are characterized by a diffuse
bulb of percussion (Cotterell and Kamminga
1987:690), and generally have a pronounced lip at
the proximal end. Usually, no secondary detachments occur. Bending flakes usually are produced
during biface thinning with soft hammer implements or during pressure flaking to resharpen tools
(Cotterell and Kamminga 1987:690-691).
Compression flakes are typically produced during bipolar flaking, when a hammerstone is tapped
repeatedly upon a core placed on an anvil. This
type of manufacturing has the effect of producing a
flake being initiated from either end of the core
(Cotterell and Kamminga 1987:685). Often, the bulb
of force is removed from impact and numerous
secondary detachments occur. Compression flakes
also may be produced during core reduction.
Flakes were categorized according to seven
flake shapes (Hartwell 1993): square, rectangular,
trapezoidal, contracting, expanding, ovoid, and oblong. Termination is the designation used to describe the final effects of the force of energy applied
during initiation to the material. Six types of termination fractures were recognized: feathered, hinged,
stepped, plunging, axial, and broken. Termination
can also be affected by the quality of the lithic
material (Cotterell and Kamminga 1987:678).

Lithic Technology

Flakes

Cotterell and Kamminga (1987) provide a
good understanding of the morphology and
classification of flakes. The production phase,
initiation, shape, and termination determine flake
classification.
Production phases were assigned to standard
classes according to criteria described by Crabtree
(1972). Reduction stages included primary, secondary, and tertiary depending on how much cortical
material remains on the flake. Flakes were further
categorized based on three types of initiation: conchoidal, bending, or compression. The type of flake
represented not only the type of initiation but also
the type of manufacturing process (Cotterell and
Kamminga 1987).

Due to time constraints, approximately 6 percent (n=245) of the 3895 flakes were analyzed to
provide an indication of the types of on-site manufacturing processes. Flakes were predominately of
tertiary phase (94.7 percent) and conchoidal initiation (54.6 percent), with an expanding shape (26.7
percent) followed by feathered termination (37.9
percent) (Figure 14a-d). Hard-hammer tool manufacturing predominated, producing a large amount
of debris (57.3 percent), and a high percentage of
non-faceted (39.6 percent) or unprepared platforms
(Figures 14e and 14f)
Further comparisons of platform morphologies
between conchoidal and bending flakes reveals an
equal percentage of hard-hammer percussion and

Texas Archeological Society

354

>,

u

c

(I}

::J

u

(I}
,_

LL

250
225
200
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0

150

232

~

125
>.

u

c(!)
::J

u

100
75

{l)

69

r--

'-

LL

50
33
~

25
10

3

7

r

primary

secondary

_r=::=i

0

tertiary

a, Production Phase

125

64

54

102

100

50

90

>.

u

>,

c

u

(!)

c

::J

75

(!)

u(!)

::J

27

,_
LL

25

u

25

(!)
,_

10

0

50

LL
8

25

17

ll__hl___LJ___w___L.l__lil__LJL__Lll___L.<==:>J

~(/~<:>%:'.'°~<ol/,;.,<:>10<9,:1;.C(.,hO<),q_,~t;<:>;ho-<:>t,
<:> - ~v}"o1a; <9co-;;:_-tij.i:h_q,... ~
<:>'01.·
<9r

q>;

;y

)')<'i'l(si

;y

c,Shape

125

131

------------~

125
100

109

95

100
>.

>,

g 75

u

c

(!)

::J

(!)

75

::J

l

0(!)
'--

LL

50

50
32

25
0

Present

Absent

e, Platform

Figure 14. Frequency Distributions for Flakes: a, production phase; b, type; c, shape; d, termination; e, presence of flake
platform morphology; f, type of flake platform morphology.

Baxevanis, Johnson,

32

()
c

25

(j)

:J

CT
(j)

'-

14

LL

0

L.L__

_ L _ . l _ L_

~cer<S\J

__j___._J_ _LJ...j___

l/ol?,tq,
Cr-us1i
'Cetect
fZ:t

_J_J

il?o'ete
'l7rJ1if€ite

a, Bending Flake

50
45
40
35
>0
30
c
(j)
:J
25
CY
(j)
'20
LL
15
10
5
0

38

15

~Ce/)

Cb'

!fol)~

Cl(;Sl)C\J

('(?{,

~

lita<'.'?tci

'l7rJ1;;,

"lte

b, Conchoidal Flake

Figure 15. Flake Platform Morphology: a, bending flake; b, conchoidal flake.

soft-hammer or pressure flaking in lithic reduction
and tool manufacturing. Bending flakes overall have
a non-faceted platform morphology (Figure 15a).
This morphology indicates tool production by softhammer and pressure flaking without the preparation of platforms. Conchoidal flakes with
non-faceted platforms (50 percent) also indicate tool
manufacturing by hard-hammer percussion without
preparation of platforms (Figure 15b).
Bending flakes also have a smaller but
significant amount (23 percent) of faceted platfom1s
or prepared platforms (see Figure 15a), indicating
soft-hammer percussion used in biface thinning or
pressure flaking. The small bending flakes also
indicate possible resharpening and retooling
activities of formal tools.
The lack of core material and flakes in primary
and seconJary stages is counterbalanced by cores
previously collected from the surface (Leon Pope,
personal communication, 1995). The 1993 excavated assemblage, however, is indicative of hardhammer and soft-hammer or pressure flaking
production of tools with less resharpening and retooling activities.

Tools
Tool function and typology is based on the
analysis and understanding of the morphology and
use-wear of lithic assemblages (Frison and Bradley
1980; Hayden 1987; Knudson 1983; Moss 1983;
Semenov 1973). Analysis of types of wear is based

on selected types of common use-wear (Keeley
1980; Keeley and Newcomer 1977; Knudson 1983;
Wheat 1979). Use-wear follows four criteria: (1)
shape and size of the tool, (2) type and placement
of utilization damage, (3) distribution and
orientation of linear wear features, and (4) location
and extent of microwear polish (Keeley and
Newcomer 1977:36). The type of working edge
damage or edge-wear is the result of a specific task
such as scraping and/or the result of a multitude of
tasks; natural events could result in edge damage
misinterpreted as edge-wear (Frison and Bradley
1980:60). Categories describing edge-wear are
polishing, striations, step-flaking, crushing, smooth/
rounding, edge retouch, and unidentifiable. Edgewear is analyzed in terms of presence or absence;
and whether it was heavy, medium, or light, based
on Knudson (1983), Keeley (1980), Keeley and
Newcomer (1977), and Semenov (1973).
The concept of the Employable Unit (EU) is
based on Knudson (1983). An EU is defined as
"that implement segment or portion [continuous
edge or projection] deemed appropriate for use in
performing a specific task" (Knudson l 983:vii).
The use of the EU as an analytical unit in the
organization of typologies allows for a more reliable identification of function of a tool.
Forty-nine tools were recovered from the test
excavations at the Hogue site. Tools consisted of
six unifaces, 33 bifaces, three retouched flakes, six
utilized flakes, and one utilized piece of debris.
Functionally, 26 projectile points, one preform, eight

356

Texas Archeological Society
Table 9. Tools

Catalog#

Material

Source

Breakage

TCM-Al-1
TCM-Al-9
TCM-Al-10
TCM-Al-15
TCM-Al-16
TCM-Al-29
TCM-Al-30
TCM-Al-32
TCM-Al-36
TCM-Al-53
TCM-Al-58
TCM-Al-88
TCM-Al-89
TCM-Al-102
TCM-Al-105
TCM-Al-435
TCM-Al-526
TCM-Al-534
TCM-Al-535
TCM-Al-571
TCM-Al-576
TCM-Al-1091
TCM-Al-1149
TCM-Al-1288
TCM-Al-1289
TCM-Al-1290
TCM-Al-1291
TCM-Al-1292
TCM-Al-1293
TCM-A,l-1294
TCM-Al-1295
TCM-Al-1296
TCM-Al-1297
TCM-Al-1298
TCM-Al-1599
TCM-Al-2151
TCM-Al-2249
TCM-Al-2699
TCM-Al-2700
TCM-Al-2703
TCM-Al-3433
TCM-Al-3582
TCM-Al-3583
TCM-Al-3584
TCM-Al-3585
TCM-Al-4179
TCM-Al-4257
TCM-Al-4258
TCM-Al-4363

chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
quartzite
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
obsidian
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert
chert

Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Tecovas Formation
Other
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Tecovas Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation
Edwards Formation

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Tool-type

Tool Function Diagnostics

Biface
Uniface
Utilized Flake
Biface
Biface
Utilized Flake
Utilized Flake
Uniface
Uniface
Uniface
Utilized Flake
Biface
Biface
Utilized Flake
Uniface
Biface
Retouched Flake
Retouched Flake
Utilized Flake
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Utilized Debris
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Retouched Flake
Uni face
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface

Drill
Scraper
Projectile Point - base, Garza
Projectile Point, Harrell
Knife
Side Scraper

Projectile Point, Harrell
End Scraper
End Scraper/Side Scraper
Projectile Point, Fresno
Knife
Side Scraper
Preform
Projectile Point
Knife
Projectile Point - tip
Projectile Point
Side Scraper/Perforator
Projectile Point
Projectile Point, Scallorn
Projectile Point, Fresno
Scraper
Projectile Point
Side Scraper
Projectile Point - base, Garza
Projectile Point - tip
Projectile Point, Harrell
Projectile Point - base, Harrell
Projectile Point - base, Garza
Projectile Point

Projectile Point, Harrell
Projectile Point - tip
Projectile Point - tip
Projectile Point - tip
Projectile Point - tip
Projectile Point - tip
Projectile Point - base, Garza
Projectile Point - base, Harrell
Projectile Point - tip

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site
scrapers, three knives, and one drill were identified
(Table 9). The function of the other 10 tools was
not identified.

The Scallorn point is typical of the Southern Plains
early Ceramic (Woodland) period, dating about 20001000 B.P. (Hughes and Willey 1978:28).
The Fresno points (Figure 16b) occur in both
Protohistoric and Historic aboriginal contexts
(Runkles 1964; Johnson et al. 1977; Runkles and
Dorchester 1986; Johnson 1987; Johnson and
Holliday 1995). The four Garza (Figure 16c-e), and
six Harrell (Figure 16f-i) points are representative
of the Protohistoric period, dating from 500-300
B.P. (Johnson et al. 1977; Johnson 1987; Johnson
and Holliday 1995).

Projectile Points
Thirteen of the 26 projectile points were identified to type. The remaining 13 projectile points
have no discernible diagnostic features for identification (see Table 9).
One projectile point is identified as a Scallorn
point (Figure l 6a) made of Edwards Formation chert.

a

b

c

f

357

d

g

h

CM
Figure 16. Projectile Points recovered from the Hogue Site during the 1993 Test Excavations: a, Scallorn (TCM-Al-1291);
b, Fresno (TCM-Al-1292); c-e, Garza (TCM-Al-15, TCM-Al-1296, and TCM-Al-2249); f-i, Harrell (TCM-Al-16,
1298, 3433, and 88).

358

Texas Archeological Society

The point types and materials are very similar
to those recovered from the surface collections.
Pope (1991) notes Fresno, Garza, and Harrell points
made primarily from Edwards Formation chert and
obsidian and one Scallorn point made of Edwards
Formation chert. However, he also reports Lott,
Washita, and Perdiz points in the surface assemblage. Perdiz points generally are late Ceramic in
age (1000 to 500 B.P.) on the Southern High Plains,
while Washita points when found in stratigraphic
context date to the aboriginal Historic period (300
to 200 B.P.) (Johnson 1987; Johnson and Holliday
1995). Lott points, like the Fresno type, occur in
Protohistoric and aboriginal Historic contexts
(Johnson et al. 1977; Runkles and Dorchester 1986;
Johnson 1987; Johnson and Holliday 1995). Overall, the surface and excavated projectile point assemblages from the Hogue site overlap in age from
2000-200 B.P. The Archaic points reported by Pope
(1991) come from a nearby site that is 30 m east
upslope, along a ridge (Leon Pope, personal communication, 1995).

Knives

All three knives are made from Edwards
Formation chert. One knife (see Figure 17d) shows
little evidence of use-wear with a light (0°-30°)
edge angle and limited retouch. Likewise, knife
TCM-Al-526 only has retouch on the edge. Knife
TCM-Al-1091 was used more, with medium
rounding and smoothing wear along with stepflaking associated with retouch on one of its three
edges. Knives (Pope 1991) are numerous in the
surface collections, and all are made from Edwards
Formation chert.
Drill

The broken distal end of a drill (see Figure
17e) is made from Edwards Formation chert. It has
a projection with an acute (30°-45°) angle that exhibits heavy use. This drill is similar to those in the
surface collections (Pope 1991).
Preform

Scrapers
This functional category consists of two scrapers, three side scrapers (Figure 17 a), an end-andside scraper (Figure l 7b), one end scraper (Figure
17c), and one side scraper/perforator (see Table 9).
In the side scraper assemblage, a propensity occurs
for heavy use-wear with polishing, striations, stepflaking, smoothing/rounding, crushing, and retouch. Scraper TCM-Al-1295 (see Figure 17a) has
two step-flaked edges with medium (31° to 60°)
angles, possibly due to resharpening and medium
to heavy use-wear. Unlike the other five scrapers
of Edwards Formation chert, scraper TCM-Al1295 is made from Tecovas jasper. End-side
scraper TCM-Al-105 (see Figure 17b) is a medium-angled uniface with both step-flaking and
crushing plus abrasive smoothing and edge rounding. Evidence of retouch occurs along the two
edges of the tool. The side scraper/perforator TCMAl-1289 (utilized debris) has a medium angle edge
with heavy use-wear.
The type, source, and materials of the scrapers
are similar in the excavated assemblage. However,
in the surface assemblage, all side-scrapers are made
from Edwards Formation chert, and a greater number of end-and-side scrapers were recovered than in
the excavations (see Pope 1991).

A preform made from Edwards Formation
chert (see Figure 17f) has large, hard-hammer percussion flaking on both faces and an overall long,
triangular shape. No use-wear occurs along the
edges. Pope (1991) did not find any preforms on
the surface of the site.
Utilized Flakes
Six utilized flakes are identified based on striations, step-flaking, crushing, rounding and smoothing, and use-flaking. Flake TCM-Al-32 shows the
most use, four edges of use-wear with medium
angles, possibly from continued re-use.

POTTERY
Forty pottery sherds were recovered from the
Hogue site in the 1993 excavations (Table 10). Of
these sherds, nine had precise proveniences and 31
had a provenience of 1 m2 and a 10 cm elevation
range. A majority of the pottery sherds recovered
were severely weathered, with rounded edges and
rough surfaces, although none show evidence of
plow damage.
A number of pottery types occur on the
Southern High Plains (Runyan and Hedrick 1987;

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site

a

b

e

c

359

d

f

CM

Figure 17. Flaked-Lithic Tools Recovered from the Hogue Site during the 1993 Test Excavations: a, side scraper (TCMAl-1295); b, end-and-side scraper (TCM-Al-105); c, end scraper (TCM-Al-89); d, knife (TCM-Al-30); e, drill (TCMAl-1); f, preform (TCM-Al-571).

Schroeder 1982; Whalen 1981; Wiseman 1982).
Most of these types were defined from survey
materials in southeastern New Mexico from
unstratified, unexcavated sites without radiocarbon
dating (Kelley 1984). Little work has been done in
the Texas High Plains to establish local pottery
periods of tradewares that may occur later than
those found in New Mexico (Ladkin 1993). The
pottery from the Jomada branch of the Mogollon

culture area is the primary pottery tradition found
in western Texas and southern New Mexico
(Runyan and Hedrick 1987). The tradition is
composed of many types, particularly brownware
vessels.
Rio Grande Glazeware of the Glaze C type
(A.D. 1425-1490) is represented at Hogue by 14
sherds, possibly from the same vessel based on the
temper composition (Regge Wiseman, personal

w

Table 10. Pottery from the Hogue Site
Catalog Number

#of
Objects

Matrix

Provenience

Average elevation
(cm) above sea level

0\

0

Description

I

~
~

""

;;t..

TCM-Al-56

TCM-Al-76

TCM-Al-104

1

1

1

N

y

N

40.71585.48W

Isolated Find

38.09584.67W

101373.5

unknown

none

Light orange interior and exterior surface. Fine grained temper, includes quartz and
mica (Rio Grande Glazeware).
Orange interior and exterior surface. Black glaze on exterior. Medium grain temper
includes quartz and small amounts of mica (undifferentiated brownware).
Light orange interior and exterior surface. Rough exterior surface. Fine grained temper,
includes quartz and mica (Rio Grande Glazeware).

TCM-Al-120

1

N

37.62585.0SW

101397

Orange colored exterior, smooth grayish interior. Medium grained temper includes
mica and quartz (Rio Grande Glazeware).

TCM-Al-122

1

y

37584W

101402

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

TCM-Al-189

2

y

37584W

101385

Red color, rounded by weathering. Coarse temper, includes much mica (similar to
TCM-Al-4988) (undifferentiated brownware).

TCM-Al-214

1

y

37584W

101385

Brown/grayish hue on interior and exterior surfaces. Rim piece. Fine grained temper
includes small amounts of quartz and mica (undifferentiated brownware).

TCM-Al-503

1

N

37.66584.46W

101385

Light orange interior and exterior surface. Fine grained temper, includes quartz and
mica (Rio Grande Glazeware).

TCM-Al-559

1

N

37.11584.69W

101378.5

Light orange interior and exterior surface. Fine grained temper, includes quartz and
mica (Rio Grande Glazeware).

TCM-Al-578

1

N

37.93584.33W

101373

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

TCM-Al-598

1

N

40.73586.00W

101367

Brown interior and exterior surface with a black glaze. Rim piece. Not badly weathered.
Coarse crushed igneous temper includes quartz and mica (Glaze-on-Red).

TCM-Al-1600

4

y

40583W

101385

Orange exterior (coarse), grayish interior (smooth). Medium grained temper (primarily
fine with some larger quartz grains) (Rio Grande Glazeware) (similar to TCM-Al1605).

TCM-Al-1601

l

y

40583W

101385

Light orange interior and exterior surface. Rim piece. Fine grained temper includes
quartz and mica (Rio Grande Glazeware).

I

~

~
~

<::)

S'

~

(:;'
\::i

~

.....
(")

(I;

~

Table 10. Pottery, continued
Catalog Number

#of
Objects

Matrix

Provenience

Average elevation
(cm) above sea level

Description

I
TCM-Al-1602

1

y

TCM-Al-1603

I

y

TCM-Al-1604

2

y

TCM-Al-1605

2

y

t:l::I

~

40S83W

101375

Smooth interior and exterior surface, both pinkish brown. Fine temper includes quart
and mica (Rio Grande Glazeware).

I

40S83W

101375

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

~
:::::
""'c;·

I

~
::::;...

40S86W

101385

Gray interior and exterior surface. Coarse grained temper includes some mica and
large black grains (undifferentiated brownware).

40S83W

101385

Orange exterior (coarse), grayish interior (smooth). Medium grained temper (primarily
fine with some larger quartz grains) (Rio Grande Glazeware) (similar to TCM-Al1600).

~

~
~
J'l
t::i:;
;:::

!">

~

i::i

:::::

i::i

TCM-Al-1606
TCM-Al-2701

I
1

y

y

38S85W
39S87W

101397.5
101395.5

Dark brown interior and exterior surface. Fine grained temper includes mica. Rounded
edges due to weathering (undifferentiated brownware).
Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

J'l

I

~

::::i

~

Vi

::::;...
~

;::;
::::i

TCM-Al-2702

1

y

40S83W

101375

~

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

:::::

I
~

TCM-Al-4609

1

y

40S83W

101375

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

.....
""

TCM-Al-4632

1

y

40S83W

101375

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

"'

"'!:?.

TCM-Al-4701

1

y

40S85W

101365.5

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

TCM-Al-4709

1

y

40S86W

101385

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

TCM-Al-4788

1

y

38S85W

101365

~
~

$:)

~·
::::i

So
~

~

()'()

Light brown exterior surface. Faded black glaze on smooth, light brown interior
surface. Medium grained temper with quartz and very little mica (undifferentiated
brownware).

;:::
~

Vi
~-

w

0\
.......

<.,;..)

0\
N

~
~

"';:i:,.
~

Table 10. Pottery, continued

~

~
O'll

Catalog Number

#of
Objects

Matrix

TCM-Al-4879

2

y

37S84W

101373.5

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

TCM-Al-4900

1

y

39S86W

101375

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

TCM-Al-4977

1

y

38S85W

101385

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz,
mica, and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

TCM-Al-4988

I

y

38S85W

101375

Red color, rounded by weathering. Coarse temper, includes much mica (similar to
TCM-Al-189) (undifferentiated brownware).

TCM-Al-4998

l

y

40S86W

101375

Black glaze on interior surface, grayish exterior. Coarse temper, includes quartz, mica,
and large black grains (undifferentiated brownware, possibly Glaze-on-Red).

TCM-Al-5041

1

y

38S85W

101365

Brown exterior and grayish interior surface. Coarse grained temper includes quartz,
and small amounts of mica. Smooth edges due to weathering (undifferentiated
brownware).

TCM-Al-5042

l

N

41.10S87.01W

101402.5

Orange interior and exterior surfaces with coarse temper on all sides. Includes mica,
some quartz, and black grains (undifferentiated brownware).

TCM-Al-5043

1

N

41.80583.00W

101403

Light orange interior and exterior surface. Fine grained temper includes quartz and
mica (Rio Grande Glazeware).

Provenience

Average elevation
(cm) above sea level

~

Description

[

~

""
~

Site
communication, 1995;
et al. 1981) (Figure
18a). The appearance of these sherds is variable
due to their having been abraded by the sandy
sediment. Most have eroded surfaces, making
identification difficult.
Some sherds have a black glaze on their interior surfaces (Figure l 8b ). One sherd, located in
situ, has a black glaze on the interior and exterior
surfaces and a streaky polish on the exterior (Figure
18c). The sherd is part of the rim of an atypical bowl

363

and has crushed igneous
It is a late Glazeon-Red dated between the D and F Glaze periods
(A.D. 1490-1700) (Regge Wiseman, personal communication, 1995; Hayes et al. 1981). The rims of
Rio Grande glazewares change through time and
with the type (Mera 1933; Warren 1977; Chapman
and Enlow 1977). Therefore, rim morphology can
be a useful additional character in identifying
glazeware pottery sherds. The Hogue site rim has
parallel, straight, sides with a slightly rounded but

b

a

d

0

2

c
Figure 18. Pottery recovered from the Hogue Site Test Excavations: a, Rio Grande Glazeware (TCM-Al-120); b,
undifferentiated brownware (TCM-Al-76); c, Glaze-on-Red (TCM-Al-598); d, undifferentiated brownware, possibly
Glaze-on-Red (TCM-Al-1603).

364

Texas Archeological Society

squared apex. This morphology generally fits the
glaze (or group F) wares dating to A.D. 1650 to
1700. Another 14 sherds have a similar black glaze
on their interior surface (Figure 18d), and may be
the same Glaze-on-Red type based on the composition of the temper and other visual characteristics
(Regge Wiseman, personal communication, 1995).
Twenty-three of the sherds are classified as
undifferentiated brownware because their small
size and indistinctive compositions make identification difficult. Destructive analysis, often necessary for a specific identification, was not conducted
(Wiseman, personal communication, 1995).
The 40 pottery sherds recovered during the
1993 excavations suggest two to three time periods. Rio Grande Glazewares are represented by 29
of the 40 sherds, and can be subdivided into two
glazes: Glaze C (n=14) is the oldest (A.D. 14251490); Glaze (or group) D/F (n=15) is more recent
(A.D. 1490-1700). However, if the other Glaze D/
F sherds are the same type as the rim, then more
likely the second more recent period is A.D. 1650
to 1700. If not, then a third period is represented
by Glaze D wares that date A.D. 1490 to 1515. Additional types of vessels represented by the glazewares other than the one bowl are difficult to
determine due to the small size of the sherds and
lack of distinctive characteristics. However, most
glazeware sherds recovered from Southern High
Plains sites are from jars (Regge Wiseman, 1995
personal communication).
Brownwares recovered are more difficult to
date, or to determine vessel types, as they are made
over a wide time range, and the sherds recovered
also are small and lack distinctive characteristics.
The combination of two to three time periods and
three to four different pottery types indicate the
presence of at least three, and possibly, four vessels.

FAUNAL REMAINS
Faunal remains were examined to determine
taxonomy, morphology, and any visible modification by humans or other agencies. Identification
was based on a Southern High Plains comparative
collection located at the Museum of Texas Tech
University and taxonomic classifications in current
literature (Dixon 1987; Davis and Schmidly 1994;
Rappole and Blacklock 1994). Modification
categories include: weathering, trampling, carnivore
activity, cutlines, fracture pattern, and technological

features (Johnson 1985). Taxonomic classes
represented include: Mammalia (n=34,212), Aves
(n=2), Reptilia (n=l3), Amphibia (n=4),
Osteichythyes (n=l), and Gastropoda (n=54) (Table
11).
The majority of the bone material was very
fragmentary (see Table 11). Other than mammalian
bone scrap, only 409 (1.2 percent) bones were
identified to morphology. The most commonly
preserved of the skeletal elements at the site
consisted of tooth fragments (n=3 l l). A general
taxonomic identification of Mammalia accounted
for 99 .8 percent of the assemblage. All of the bones
show severe weathering and various degrees of
exfoliation. This damage is indicative of material
that has been exposed on the surface for a long
period of time before its original burial by
sediment. During a long exposure time, the bones
dry and become brittle. Further weathering occurs
due to sediment abrasion, water movement, and
plowing. The plowing of the Hogue site is likely
to bring the bone material periodically to the
surface (Frink 1984; Lyman and O'Brien 1987), reexposing it to wind, water, and light, and additional
fragmentation, all of which contribute to its
continuing degradation.
More detailed identification beyond that of
mammal was possible for 134 bones and shells, and
of these, 49 were identified to the species level (see
Table 11). Mammals identified were bison, wolf,
prairie dog, pocket gopher, and cotton rat. Bison
was the most numerous (50 percent) of the identifiable bone. Bison bone scrap was identified based
upon size and density.
Due to the large degree of weathering and
fracturing of the faunal remains, the number of individual animals present in the assemblage could
not be determined. The assemblage, however, does
contain a variety of species. Most of the small animals reflect the upland grasslands and adjacent
playa environments. The fish and turtles, potential
food sources, could have been brought from either
the playa or the draw, although recent research
suggests environmental changes caused the draws
in this area to experience reduced water flow beginning in the Late Pleistocene (Holliday 1995a).
The playa, then, would be the only water resource
by the Late Holocene.
Human activity is difficult to deduce from the
assemblage because of the weathering and fracturing
caused by the plow. Of the 34,286 pieces collected,
7 percent are burned (see Table 11). Other cultural

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site

365

Table 11. Faun.al Material from the Hogue Site
Identification
mammal
mammal
mammal
mammal
mammal
mammal
mammal
mammal
cf. Canis lupus (wolf)
cf. Canis lupus (wolf)
cf. Canis lupus (wolf)
Bison bison (bison)
Bison bison (bison)
Bison bison (bison)
Bison bison (bison)
Bison bison (bison)
Bison bison (bison)
Bison bison (bison)
Bison bison (bison)
Bison bison (bison)
Cynomys ludovicianus (prairie dog)
Cynomys ludovicianus (prairie dog)
Cynomys ludovicianus (prairie dog)
Geomys bursarius (pocket gopher)
rodent
rodent
rodent
rodent
rodent
Sigmodon hispidus (cotton rat)
mouse
mouse
mouse
mouse
bird
bird
amphibian
frog
fish
turtle
turtle
Terrapene ornata (ornate box turtle)
Kinosternon flavescens (yellow mud turtle)
Kinosternon flavescens (yellow mud turtle)
lizard
snake
gastropoda
Total Burned
Total Unburned
GRAND TOTAL

Element
bone scrap
teeth fragments
shaft of long bone
tooth
appendicular skeleton fragment
rib fragment
metapodial
phalange
humerus, distal fragment
sesamoid
metapodial
tooth, lower right molar
sesamoid
bone scrap
appendicular skeleton fragment
tooth fragment
shaft of long bone fragment
humerus fragment
rib fragment
periotic (ear bone)
left radius
metapodial
left tibia
left incisor, lower mandible
right mandible
left mandible fragment
mandible fragment
rib
caudal vertebra
left mandible
vertebra
pelvis
phalange
right tibia
axial skeleton fragment
shaft of long bone
vertebrae
vertebra
skull fragment
phalange
vertebrae
shell fragment
shell fragment
scapula
vertebra
tooth, lower mandible
shells

Burned

Unburned

Total

2476
17
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

31347
294
8
1
2
2

33823
311
8

4

4

1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,495

2
2

1

13
9

13
9

1

4
8
2

4
8
3

1

1

2

2

2

2

1
3

1
3

1
5
2

1
6
2

54

54

31,791
34,286

366

Texas Archeological Society

Table 12. Bone modifications
Catalog#
TCM-Al-5
TCM-Al-33
TCM-Al-190
TCM-Al-220
TCM-Al-222
TCM-Al-507
TCM-Al-509
TCM-Al-533
TCM-Al-569
TCM-Al-574
TCM-Al-4567
TCM-Al-4763
TCM-Al-4815

Element

Breakage

long bone, diaphyseal segment
humerus fragments
rib fragment
bone scrap
bone scrap
bone scrap
long bone, diaphyseal segment
bone scrap
long bone, diaphyseal segment
long bone, diaphyseal segment
rib fragment
appendicular skeleton fragment
long bone, diaphyseal segment

helical
helical
helical
helical
helical

modifications were found in the form of humaninduced breakage on 13 of the bones. Eleven bones
have helical fractures and two exhibit technological
features (Table 12). Helical fractures are caused by
dynamic impact of intact fresh bones and indicate
the breaking open of long bones (Johnson 1985).
This breakage pattern is seen commonly on
diaphyseal and rib segments (Johnson 1987;
Johnson and Miller 1993), consistent with results
found at the Hogue site. The technological features
are a result of a dynamic impact to the bone
(Johnson 1985).
These modifications are characteristic of dynamically-fractured intact, fresh bone (Johnson
1985). Aboriginal peoples on the Southern Plains
dynamically fractured bones for a variety of reasons, including butchery, extraction of nutrients
(marrow and grease), or the production of fracturebased utilitarian tools (Johnson 1985, 1987). No
fracture-based utilitarian tools were recovered at
the Hogue site. Little breakage beyond the initial
fracture is necessary to remove marrow from bison
bones. Additional nutrients, particularly fat, are contained within the compact and spongy bone. Grease
rendering requires further processing (e.g., increased
bone fracturing for greatest surface exposure and
perhaps ease of fit within a container, or boiling in
water for a period of time). Although a very small
sample, the recovered bone segments with intact
surfaces and helical fractures exhibit a range of

Technological
Feature

cone flake
helical
helical
helical
flake scar remnants
helical
helical
helical

bone lengths beyond that of the initial fracturing of
long bones (see Table 12).

OTHER MATERIALS
RECOVERED
Caliche is a whitish, calcareous-rich deposit
(Reeves 1976b) that occurs frequently on the Southern High Plains. It outcrops from the Pliocene
Ogallala Formation found throughout the High
Plains region (Reeves 1976b). Neither uniform in
size nor shape, caliche often is not acknowledged
as contributing to the archeological record, and often left uncollected. However, burned caliche provides various pertinent data (Ladkin and Miller
1993; Ladkin and O'Brien 1995). Past studies (Lintz
1989) have postulated that range fires could produce sufficient heat to crack and burn caliche. However, recent research by Ladkin and Miller (1993)
demonstrates that range fires scorch caliche and
produce only superficial burning and brown discoloration. True burned caliche is burned throughout
and identified by its gray to dark gray surface discoloration. Exposure to cultural fires (hearths) produces a true burned caliche, leading to the
conclusion that burned caliche are hearthstones and
indicative of cultural activity (Ladkin and Miller
1993:203). Only 2 percent of the burned caliche
was found in situ (see Table 7).

Baxevanis,
Although no formalized studies of hearths have
been conducted, burned caliche represents a
constructional material. Late Holocene hearths on
the Southern Plains vary in form. Those forms
associated with burned caliche include rubbleconstruction (none to shallow, excavated depression
with a layer or layers of burned caliche), ring-basin
(hearthstones around the outer edge of an excavated
hole), and lined-pits (hearthstones used as lining
for the edges, sides, and bottom of an excavated
pit) (Johnson 1987, 1993, 1995b). Disturbance to
these hearths during use and reuse, and after
abandonment prior to burial, can displace the
hearthstones. Displacement can reach the point of
disassociation from its hearth to total destruction of
the hearth itself. Nevertheless, the hearthstones point
to the presence at one time of a hearth or hearths at
the Hogue site.
Charcoal was found in quantity, but consisted
of very small pieces, intensively broken down due
to plowing. Other materials recovered include metal
(n=lO), hematite (n=7), sandstone (n=5), and seeds

101415

(n=385). The metal objects collected are
unidentifiable due to their extensive oxidation, small
size, and lack of identifying markers.

SPATIAL DISTRIBUTIONS
Vertical and horizontal distributions were
examined for flaked-lithics, pottery, bone, burned
caliche, charcoal, and metal to determine any
patterning and investigate the degree of integrity
remaining among the archeological deposits. For
vertical distributions, while most materials were
not recovered in situ, those that were guided the
manipulation and interpretation of the vertical data.
For horizontal distributions, all levels are collapsed
into a single representative plane. Most materials
were found dispersed throughout the deposits in the
test excavation area, but consistent spatial patterns
emerged that appear related both to plow
disturbance and archeological activity areas/
occupation surfaces. Furthermore, the drastic

--'~
Bl

101405-1::t;J

~
101395

:============~

;.=i

ti
'E1013s5 L---~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.!:.
(
0
.2101375
-;

~·==============================================================?l
r~i====:zifl

·--"'

~

~ 101365
~

=================;;i

id:;

~

ff

QI

~ 101355 (

~

101345

101335

0

b

·6'~
~d

101325-~
/

0

5

10

15

20

Percentage of Objects

Figure 19. Vertical Distribution of all Flaked-Lithics.

25

30

35

368

Texas Archeological Society
N cluster

-37

N

1

-38
Ol

''

c

£

::;

-39

0

Cf)

SE cluster

:~Ls(}~_ (j
-87
Lithic

-86

-85

-84

-83

Westing

Figure20. Horizontal Distribution of in situFlaked-Lithics.

decline in materials after a certain elevation is a
reflection of the depth limits of excavations (only
three units reached into the sesquinary zone and of
those, only one went into the sub-plow zone), rather
than an actual decline of cultural activity.
Vertical clustering of lithics is evident within
a 30 cm zone (Figure 19). That zone contains three
distinct peaks, with the greatest abundance of lithics
at elevation 101375 cm asl. The horizontal view
(Figure 20) indicates two clusters and a third possible concentration of lithics: a northern cluster at
37S84E; a southeastern cluster at 40S83E; and a
southwestern concentration at 40S85-86E. The vast
majority of flaked-lithics in these areas are tiny
resharpening flakes.
The vertical distribution of pottery sherds is
somewhat more dispersed than for the flakedlithics, with a 40 cm zone of occurrence (Figure

101410
101405
101400
101395

!2l Undifferentiated Brownware
li!l Glaze-on-Red

oRio Grande Glazeware

5

10

15

20

Percentage of Objects
Figure 21. Vertical Distribution of all Pottery Sherds.

25

30

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site 369
-36
'

'

--:--

-37

N

;._-·-- .. -:--LS·-·@--'

~

-38

···1·

,

Ol

c
E
_,__,

--·

'

-39

:J
0

-

'

/';

$6'

-1-

'

'
'
'

- ---- ----~--- - - --~-.--

'

(J)

-------A--

-40
'

;
-41
-42

/';

L_-_--o~·-_---_--_._-1_~-- ~- --~-- - - -\

-88

-87

-86

-85

-84

-83

-82

Westing
x

~

Q

Glaze-on-red
Rio Grande Glazeware
Undlflerentiated Brownware

Figure 22. Horizontal Distribution of all Pottery Sherds
(matrix materials plotted in corner of unit from which they
were recovered).

21). However, those two zones overlap with the
same three peaks. Two peaks show the highest
frequency of pottery sherds, at 101385 cm and
101375 cm asl. Both pottery groups (glazeware and
brown ware) appear to co-occur throughout the
cross-section as do both types of glazeware.
However, the more recent Glaze D/F sherds occur
deeper than the older Glaze C sherds. In horizontal
view, one cluster of pottery sherds occurs in the
northern section (Figure 22), coincident with the
northern lithics cluster (see Figure 20). This cluster
corresponds to the sherds at lower elevations in the
block (see Figure 21). While the northern cluster
consists of all three sherd types, the Glaze C sherds
are more numerous.
The vertical distribution of bone (Figure 23) is
similar to that for lithics (see Figure 19). Within the
same 30 cm zone, both bone and lithic artifacts
have three distinct peaks. The highest concentration is at 101375 cm asl and the next highest is at
101385 cm. This pattern holds for both unburned
and burned bone (see Figures 23a and 23b). However, the vertical distribution pattern for unburned
bone is more complex. This complexity appears
related to the much greater number of bones found
in situ than for the other artifact categories (see
Table 7). This situation provides a more realistic

view of the vertical distribution of materials, and
also verifies the distinct peaks seen with material
categories containing only one-third as many in
situ objects. The distribution of culturally-modified
bone appears diffuse, with small numbers generally
occurring in two of the levels within the 30 cm
zone (Figure 24).
The horizontal distribution shows two clusters
of bone and a third looser concentration (Figure
25a). The two bone clusters are coincident with
those of the lithics (see Figure 20), however, the
looser concentration of bone occurs in the
northwestern sector, while the looser concentration
of lithics occurs in the southwestern sector.
Culturally-modified bone and burned bone occur
primarily within the two clusters (see Figure 25a
and 25b).
The vertical distribution of burned caliche
hearthstones (Figure 26) is similar to those of the
other materials. Within the same 30 cm zone, there
are three peaks, with the highest concentration at
101375 cm asl and the second at 101385 cm. The
vertical pattern for charcoal is somewhat different
(Figure 27). The 30 cm zone has shifted downward
by l 0 cm. While the highest concentration still is at
101375 cm asl, the second is at 101365 cm.
Horizontally, the pattern for burned caliche is
quite distinctive. Two clusters (coincident with those
of the other materials) occur; however, two looser
concentrations are apparent (Figure 28). The
southwestern concentration is coincident with that
of the lithics (see Figure 20) while the northwestern
one (although minimal) is coincident with that of
the bones (see Figure 25a). When the horizontal
distributions of burned caliche and charcoal are
combined (Figure 29), the pattern of two eastern
clusters and the two more loosely aggregated
western concentrations is enhanced. The boundaries
of the concentrations are expanded a bit beyond
their initial two-unit limit, and are more diffuse.
The horizontal distribution of burned caliche when
combined with that of the pottery sherds also
provides a clearer picture of the overall pattern
(Figure 30). The distribution indicates that only a
few sherds (all Rio Grande glazewares) are
associated with the southeastern cluster; however,
all three ceramic types (Glaze D/F being more
common) are present in the southwestern
concentration. A similar pattern is discernible in
the distribution of burned caliche and bone (Figure
31 ). The distribution indicates that tiny bits of

370

Texas Archeological Society

101410
101405
101400

101395
101390
101385
I1013so

§ 101375

-.;::;

~101370
Iii

w101365

..

Iii

g>101360
~ 101355

<I:

101350

a

101345
101340
101335
101330
101325
0

10

5

15

20

25

30

35

Percentage of Objects

101410
101405
101400
101395
101390
101385
I 101 aso
g101375

~ 101370
Iii

w101365
Iii
...~101360

~101355
<I:

101350

b

101345
101340
101335
101330
101325
0

5

10

20

25

Percentage of Objects

Figure 23. Vertical Distribution of all Bone: a, non-burned; b, burned.

30

35

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site

371

101415
101410
101405
101400
e101395
.£.
c

-m

.2101390
IU

>

101385
101380
101375
101370

E3 Flake Scar Remnants

101365

DHelical

3il Cone Flake
------y

0

10

15

20

25

30

Percentage of Objects

Figure 24. Vertical Distribution of all Modified Bone.

burned caliche and burned bone are dispersed
horizontally throughout the test excavation area.
The last material examined for distribution
was that of metal. The metal pieces were too
decomposed to accurately identify, but were
assumed to be of modern origin rather than
aboriginal in age. No other materials were
recovered that indicated that the metal pieces could
represent either aboriginal Historic or early AngloAmerican peoples. Another assumption was that
their original position was on the surface and that
plowing had incorporated the pieces into the
deposits. Most of the metal was located within 15
cm of the surface. Likewise, the horizontal
distribution was also diffuse. None of the metal
artifacts appeared to be associated with the
perceived clusters and loose concentrations noted
among the other artifacts.

DISCUSSION
The Hogue site is one of many playa sites recorded on the Southern High Plains (Buchanan
1995a, 1995b, 1995c), and one of several being
investigated in Terry County and the immediately
surrounding counties (Johnson l 995a, 1997).
Based on the materials recovered, the site appears
to represent a Protohistoric period camp with such
domestic pursuits as retooling and food preparation. This scenario appears typical of playa sites in
the region (cf. Hughes and Speer 1981; Johnson
1994, 1995a; Schroeder and Rader 1995).
The flaked-lithic assemblage is made predominately from Edwards Formation chert (see
Figure 13). While the closest source for this material
is at least 225 km to the southeast, the preponderance of Edwards Formation chert is typical

372

Texas Archeological Society

-37

N cluster

~~~~.~~~~~~~~~~~.~.~~~
~

I

l(l(,>(

N

-36

~-~-~-~-~--~-

-37

---·-----~·-x·--·!···------~----o-->(;E··-------:---------

I

NW concentration,

-38

1

:

'*

'•

x

I

1

' x

______ ..'______ ...>:.! .. --x

-39

c

x

_c

c
:c
...., -39
::J

"::)

" "

1

I

I

I

I

I

N

I

I

l

I

I

I

1

I

I

I

I

t

1

I

''

r

------··r·-----·-·'1:::---------T··-------r---------,---------

OJ

·----

I

'oX

-38
OJ

'l

'

'
I

---------;l\'.---------1 ... ______ J__________l _________ l ________ _
f

I

0

0

-40

Cf)

'

-··r··---

-------····1-1-Ci

'

-- """'ii;
x

"'
-41

Cf)

I

-40

'

I

'
: xx

. . .l . . . .

I

_____ ; _______

I

I

--------r---------1-------··*··-------r-·--------r---------

'

'

I

I

'

SE cluster

-87

-86

-84

-85

-83
x

0

Westing
Unburned bone
m Burned bone

x

'

I

0

a

I

-42 L--~--'---~-___J,--~--'
-88 -87 -86 -85 -84 -83 -82

_L ____ J

-42
-88

I

.. 41 ----- ----}--- --- ---1- ---- ---- -:--- ----- --:- --llil---;---------

Westing

Hefical
Gone Flake
Flake Scar Remnants

b

Figure 25. Horizontal Distribution of Bone: a, entire in situ bone assemblage; b, all modified bones (matrix materials
plotted in comer of unit from which they were recovered).

101410
101405
101400
101395
101390
101385

h--~-~~~~~~~-~~~~~---~..JY

'if101380
~

g101375 !--,-~~-~~---~~~-~~~~~~-~----~~~~~~~~--"

~ 101370

1--,---Y

ii] 101365 ld:=m==========~
Q)

!ir101360
...

1

II>

~101355 h----"'
101350
101345
101340
101335
101330
101325
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Percentage of Objects

Figure 26. Vertical Distribution of all Burned Caliche.

35

40

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon -

Test Excavations at the Hogue Site

373

-c1

101395

B

~ ~t~=i

; : :::

~i

================:,,71@

101375 ' " 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - " '
!1013701':'=====.:;;;'!
c:
.2101365
h-----------------------Y
-;
-1

ii; 101360 '

w

:!

~101355

.____ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ___,,.
":C=========================~
_J :

Ol

~ 101350 _j'~
<(
1 o1 345
101340
101335
101330

~r=======-==-==-==-==-==-:;?I~

_J

~

l~":::1!

~

101325 _J~

--""-----------~---------

10

5

0

20

15

25

30

35

Percentage of Objects

Figure 27. Vertical Distribution of all Charcoal.

-37

r--

N

I

X

I
I

X

X

I
~
X
- - - - - - - • - - -l- - - - - - - -

-38

I

- - -

~

- - -

I

X

I

CJ)

c

XI

I

I

.c.
+-'

-39

:J

______ I ___

---------------

1

- t_

I

------

-

.l .. -

I

('

0

U)

x

I

-40
XI

-41

x

-88

Burned caliche

-87

-86

-85

-84

Westing

Figure 28. Horizontal Distribution of in situ Burned Caliche.

for Late Holocene sites on the southern portion of
the Southern High Plains (e.g., Word 1963, 1965,
1991; Collins 1968; Johnson 1987, 1993, 1995a,
1995b; Pope 1991; Schroeder and Rader 1995).
What is not typical was the very low percentage of

Ogallala Formation materials (see
Figure 13). However, this unusually low
percentage may be more a factor in the
difficulty in identifying the material
type of the very tiny lithics rather than
a true reflection of the lack of use of
locally-available materials.
Flaked-lithic tools form a very minor component of the lithic assemblage,
which is dominated by resharpening
flakes and debris (see Table 8). The
types of lithic flakes and debris indicate retooling in terms of both manufacture of new tools and reworking of
old tools to make them serviceable.
Bifaces dominate the small tool assem-83
blage and represent primarily projectile
points. These points were interpreted
as weapons used in hunting of game-animals, an
off-site task. Other than projectile points, only the
function of a few tools could be identified. These
functions centered on domestic pursuits such as
hide preparation and meat cutting. Whether or not
these tasks took place on-site or at the game-animal
kills (or both) could not be determined. However,
all the scrapers were heavily used with some

374

Texas Archeological Society

-36
I

I

-37

N

I

,. .........l

'-I

6t:,
X

I

X

6-

x

I

r

x
X

X

I

----~:-*-A---~---

-38 --- ------,-

x

'

I
I

X I

I

-39 ---- ---- -··t··- -- -- ---6-- -- ------~- ----------~----------X

x

-40

'
!

;

f6.

'

--- -- --- - --r- -x----1 X

x

1

f ~~

x:

t

I

I

-85

-84

_,_

-41

1

I

--A.- --- ------&---------- -~-!&x---xx----x
;

x

I

I

I

>),:

I

-42
-88

-87

-86

-83

Westing
x

!::,

Burned Caliche
Charccal

Figure 29. Horizontal Distribution of all Burned Caliche and Charcoal
(matrix materials plotted in corner of unit from which they were
recovered).

-36

N

-- -- - --~I --A-- - -~ -

-37

'
-----------------'

x

-38

x

x

0)

i

x

c

_c
+-'
::J
0
(})

XI

-39 ..

I

x '

--- ------'- ·x·· ----.!.--- ---- ---.!.---- ---- -'----------A--·---- -:x
~ xxx x;
X

-41

x

:x

:

+

A X:

--··· - ···· - -t·· - ···· - ·-·· -1--· - - -- - •

.+

-42

--~ --···· -

~~
..•

'$(:

-~-- ---~- .X.. ~-

.j.

'--~~~--'-~~~~-'-~~~~~

-88
x

··r··

x

-40

"'

I

-- - - - .. - - ·4- -

-87

Burned ca!iche
Pottery sherd

-86

-85

-84

-83

-82

Westing

Figure 30. Horizontal Distribution of in situ Burned Caliche and Pottery
Sherds (matrix materials plotted in comer of unit from which they were
recovered).

resharpening, while the knives showed
only light use.
The very weathered and fragmentary nature of the bone made identification difficult and only a very minor
amount (less than 1 percent) could be
identified beyond class. Of the identifiable remains, bison was the most
common animal remains and undoubtedly represented the game-animal of
choice. Based on culturally-induced
damage to the bones, elements brought
back from kills were broken open for
marrow retrieval and probable grease
rendering (based on breakage of bones
beyond what is necessary to remove
the marrow). Bison probably was not
the only food source being exploited,
as suggested by the presence of fish
and turtle remains.
Burned caliche hearthstones and
burned bone indicated the use of campfires and cooking tasks. The hearthstones in their displaced state were not
informative about the type of construction used for the hearths. Nevertheless, the clusters and concentrations
suggested at least four hearths may
have been present. Plowing has disturbed these hearths and may have destroyed their structural integrity.
However, whether these hearths were
disturbed prior to burial could not be
determined.
The lithic raw materials indicate
some type of relationship with the
western edge of Central Texas, either
through trade or travel. The pottery
underscores a relationship with the
New Mexican pueblos, providing a
time perspective from late Ceramic
through aboriginal Historic periods.
Both the pottery types and the dual
relationship with areas to the east
(Rolling Plains) and west (the Pecos
River to the Rio Grande) are typical
for Late Holocene sites on the southern
part of the Southern High Plains (e.g.,
Word 1963, 1965, 1991; Collins 1968,
1971; Johnson 1987, 1993, 1995b).
The Southern High Plains appears to
have been a dynamic area of interface

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site

-36

375

1991; Baugh 1994; Perttula et al.
1995). Supporting the trade hypothN
esis is the co-occurrence of small
-37
amounts of other New Mexican mateI
:
I
I··.: •.. ;
rials,
such as obsidian and turquoise.
I·
I
I
'V
l
In return, bison remains, some Plains
~ -·- - ~ -.- --G- ----38 - -- - - -:--I -· - - .:@:: -- ·- - G
I
i
A
lithic tool types, and limited amounts
CJ)
I
.
c
of Alibates, are found in the southI
I"
.
6 I
l
s::::.
--©----@---+-'
eastern and/or northern Pueblos (Leslie
-39 ----~----©---·-$:J
!
I
i
!
I
• I
0
1979; Spielmann 1983, 1991; Kelley
(j)
:
I
I
:
'.
6
1984; Johnson 1987, 1993, 1995b).
- - - <!J-- -0~,/!.AA
-- - &- --40 - - - - -·-I A.,- - -QI
I
;
The site is located along the east: •. A6 :
• A:
~~ ~:
ern edge of a playa basin. Other than
I
I..
I
; ..~~
~
minimal
data compilation for classifi- - - - _ l_ - - - - l - - - - - ,_ - - - - ..!. ·- - ~ _A_"'- - - -41
I
I
t
l
l
cation purposes, analysis of topographic setting and directional location
-42
_J
for playa sites has not been under-82
-85
-84
-83
-87 -86
-88
taken (see Buchanan 1995a, 1995b,
1995c). The occupation of playa sites
Westing
varies considerably from a single lo• Burned Caliche
cus to that of completely encircling
• Unburned Bone
the playa, and the sites occur from the
0 Burned Bone
rim of the basin to some distance away
Figure 3 L Horizontal Distribution of all Burned Caliche and Bone
from that rim (cf. Hughes and Speer
(matrix materials plotted in corner ofunit from which they were recovered).
1981; Buchanan 1995a, 1995b, 1995c;
Mathews and Shannon 1995). Furthermore, while the general landscape setting is that of a playa-associated location, the
between various cultures living in the region,
specific landscape usage in terms of topographic
traversing it, and trading with peoples in surrounding
and directional locus may vary with cultural time
areas.
period,
the size of the group, the number of occupaRegionally, the late Ceramic is characterized
tions,
and
climatic and environmental conditions.
by a mixed assemblage of Puebloan tradewares and
More
specific
locational data need to be recorded
Plains lithic tool types. The tradewares are domiduring
surveys,
in addition to excavations of playa
nated by Jornada Mogollon ceramics, particularly
sites,
to
adequately
explore the role of playas in the
El Paso brownwares and Chupadero Black-on-White
regional
settlement
patterns and landscape usage.
from southeastern New Mexico. Lithic tools include
The three radiocarbon ages indicate that the
two- and four-edged beveled knives and snub-nosed
sediments
at the Hogue site above the Blackwater
end scrapers. While these tool types are found
Draw
Formation
are Late Holocene in age and have
throughout the Late Holocene (e.g., at Lubbock Lake
been
accumulating
for at least the last 1200 years.
[Johnson 1987, 1993, 1995b]), tradeware centers
These
assays
come
from the minimum plow zone,
shift from southeastern New Mexican pueblos along
minimax
plow
zone,
and below the top of the unthe Pecos River to the Sierra Blanca area, to the
disturbed
sub-plow
zone.
Despite the disturbed nanorthern pueblos associated with the Rio Grande
ture of the plow zone, overall the ages are in
(particularly Pecos Pueblo and the Galisteo basin
sequence and provide a framework for dating the
south of Santa Fe). This shift takes place from the
archeological materials. The age ranges for the dilatest Ceramic period, through the Protohistoric peagnostics (projectile points and pottery, from both
riod, and into the aboriginal Historic period. While
the
test excavations and surface collection) fall
various hypotheses have been put forward to exwithin
the broad range provided by the radiocarbon
plain the mixed assemblages, the most reasonable is
dates and indicate possible multiple occupations of
that of Southern High Plains peoples trading with
the site over the last 1200+ years that continued into
the various Puebloan groups through time (Collins
aboriginal
Historic times. Based on these data, the
1971; Honea 1973; Holliday 1977; Spielmann 1983,

'

I

--- ----:-- -..--- -$- -· ---:- -,-_-·-cl>: -·-.4- --I

O.

l

I

.A.~

!

~·-:q.

J•.,

!

. ·,o
6

c _ __

___,____

__,__~_

_L __

___,____

r

376

Texas Archeological Society

Hogue site probably had more than a Protohistoric
occupation. Although the Holocene deposits are
not stratified, the archeological deposits may have
been culturally-stratified with a number of occupation surfaces in sequence prior to plow disturbance.
The spatial distributions represent a firstapproximation of the horizontal and vertical
character of the archeological deposit. In
conjunction with the stratigraphy and radiocarbon
ages, the vertical distributions indicate probable
multiple occupations as well as an internal structure
to the plow zone. With little variation, the pattern
of a 30 cm zone of materials, three distinct peaks,
and highest artifact concentration at 101375 cm asl
as well as the second peak at 101385 cm holds
throughout the material categories (see Figures 19,
21, 23, 26, and 27). The pattern also shows
increasing amounts of materials until the primary
peak. Below the primary peak, material amounts
decrease rapidly. This pattern is a reflection in part
of the decreased number of units that were
excavated to lower elevations.
Using the vertical distribution of metal to define the plow zone, and superimposing the stratigraphy and plow zone framework on the vertical
distributions of the aboriginal materials, both the
internal structure and potential multiple occupations at the site become clearer (Figure 32). In
general, the boundary between the minimum and
minimax plow zone is around 101380 cm asl.
Whether or not the primary peak at 101375 cm
represents the bottom of the minimum or the top of
the minimax zone is debatable. Given the vagaries
in plowing and erosion, the conservative approach
is to include it as part of the most active section.
Approximately 10 cm of undisturbed, sub-plow
zone (the intact zone with archeological potential)
exists in the test excavation area. Repeatedly, while
the recovered assemblages consisted of fewer artifacts in the lower plow zone, the vertical distribution pattern of several peaks, with the primary one
at 101365 cm, is evident. In focusing on the
sesquinary and undisturbed sub-plow zone, material concentrations are still evident despite a reduction in the number of units. Hoffman's (1982) study
indicates that the character of the sesquinary zone
reflects the sub-plow zone rather than the plow
zone above it. Based on the undisturbed (sub-plow
zone) to minimally disturbed (sesquinary) nature of
the deposits, then, the three identifiable levels of
artifact concentrations appear to mark distinct occupation surfaces.

The question to explore is whether these peaks
within the plow zone actually represent remnants
of occupation levels, particularly for the minimum
segment. Not enough detailed data are available on
vertical circulation patterns within a plow zone
(Hoffman 1982; Reynolds 1982; Dunnell and Simek
1995). Hoffman's (1982) data (using arbitrary S cm
levels for lithics only) indicate a homogeneous distribution of materials above the sesquinary zone.
Whether or not this homogeneous distribution includes equal numbers of lithics per arbitrary level
is not mentioned. In other cases where plow zones
have been excavated (rather than removed and discarded), they have been excavated as a single level
regardless of depth (e.g., Sterud et al. 1978; Lennox
1986; Lyman and O'Brien 1987). Therefore, the
homogeneous distribution or internal structure of
the artifacts could not be investigated. On the other
hand, if a constant percentage of materials are
brought to the surface with each plowing event and
the same artifact can reappear once every 6 to 20
years (see Lewarch and O'Brien 1981; Reynolds
1982; Ammerman 1985; Odell and Cowan 1987),
then these factors argue for homogeneity and against
recognizing serial occupation surfaces. However,
the most extensive experimental database (Reynolds
1982) is based on artificial sherds buried 5 cm deep
and then plowed a number of times by ancient
methods. Vertical movement averages 2.75 to 3.4
cm (up to 4.5 cm maximum) depending on method
(Reynolds 1982:326 and Tables 4 and 5). Initial
results from the modem plowing experiment show
that the modern methods increase both vertical artifact movement and fragmentation over the ancient
methods (Reynolds 1982:329-330). However, the
detailed experimental data for modern plowing has
not yet been published (cf. Yors ton et al. 1990:69),
and the actual amount of vertical movement, therefore, is not available. While this study is crucial to
understanding plow zone dynamics, it addresses
only a simulated single occupation in a shallow
deposit. Whether or not the vertical model being
created by this detailed and lengthy experimental
study can be extended to understand the affects of
plowing on multiple occupations within a plow zone
remains to be determined. At this point, whether or
not internal structure exists within the circulation
zone related to plowing, but unrelated to vertical
cultural occurrences (i.e., occupation surfaces), is
not known nor is what pattern the circulation zone
may exhibit when more than one occupation surface is impacted by plowing.

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon -

---

,_:;----101410

~

.

Test Excavations at the Hogue Site

377

·-~----·-------·--------------·---·----~---.

101405~
1014001

============··=··=-

101395 ~1<'.\=·=---=,-=·
101390

·C?l@

h:Bl

upper plowzone (minimal)

101385t-·~101380

(;)

-1

E

-

1
i10 3 l 5 . : -

]101370~·-

W101365 ~
<»

.

I

·

<101355 -1

i

~101360

-

.

101335

=.,

a

™

a

a

™

w

w

_, a

.,

™

a

w

==
m

w "'

w

"'™ :

:

w

m

a

™

a

m

1li

;

j)

I'

lower plowzone (minimax)

I
i

!

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -:- _ _ _ _ _ ~o_::~o-__i
<

-;-

101340

w

@

@

101350~~-'-101345

w

'

:
i

11
n

· · · - ·-

··-"'1

p

- - - - - - - .... -

........

- --- --- ---

sesquinary zone

........

J9

I

- - - ............... - .......... - .... - - - - ;:!
I

sub-plowzone

101330 ~

'

1214 ± 93•

,,

101325~

i

i/--------·----·-·--------~-·-·--·-·-------·--1-------------------~------------------------------------·-·;7'

0

5

10

15
Percentage of Overall Assemblage

20

25

30

* corrected C" assays

Figure 32. Vertical Distribution of the Overall Artifact Assemblage within the Plow Zone and Chronologic Frameworks.

The Hogue dataset include five categories of
materials, and both the overall numbers per
recognized level and number per individual
categories within and between levels vary
considerably. The peaks above the sesquinary zone
at Hogue may be false mimics of occupations
surfaces rather than reflections of ones. The pattern
seen at the Hogue site undoubtedly is a combination
of several factors.
The horizontal distributions for the individual
aboriginal material categories indicate a number of
groupings of materials while the combined data
clearly outline four groupings (see Figures 20 and
29-31). The two groupings noted as clusters (more
restricted distribution) occur in the eastern half of
the test excavation area (termed northern and southeastern clusters); the other two are concentrations
(wider-spread distribution) that occur in the western half (termed northwestern and southwestern concentrations). These groupings are interpreted as
activity areas (i.e., the differential use of space by a
group of people) disturbed to different degrees by
repeated plowing.
Each of the spatial groupings consist of the
five material categories examined, although

frequency of each category within a grouping varies.
Within the bone category, however, culturallymodified bone is absent from the southwestern
concentration (see Figure 25b). As all sediments
were fine-screened and the matrix sorted for the
micro-materials, this absence is a true reflection for
those units involved. This statement also holds for
those surrounding units where materials are either
scarce or absent. Although homogeneity could be
argued (i.e., total mixing of materials that destroys
any patterning), the variation in the frequency and
size of materials, and their distinct presence and
absence occurrences, argue for a cultural
interpretation.
Examining horizontal distributions has been
the norm in plow zone studies, with the consensus
being that detected patterning can reflect the
activities, features, and structures at a plowdisturbed site (e.g., Tolstoy and Fish 1975; Sterud
et al. 1978; Ward 1980; Hoffman 1982; Mallouf
1982; Lennox 1986; Hartwell 1991). These studies
have involved either recovered surface materials,
materials from within the plow zone, or both. As
the plow zone was treated as a single excavation
level, compressed horizontal distributions were used

378

Texas Archeological Society

to examine any patterning. Lennox (1986:256) has
developed a model based on the plan and profile of
horizontal distributions that classifies plowdisturbed activity areas. Using this model, the
Hogue site concentrations are classified as multiple
discrete activity areas, while the clusters are multiple
focal activity areas.
Most of the horizontal distribution studies are
based on the assumption that an equilibrium (distributional stability) is reached at some point in terms
of distance movement as discrete aggregates of materials persist in plowed fields (Ammerman 1985;
Dunnell 1990; Dunnell and Simek 1995). Once that
equilibrium is reached, materials recirculate within
that confine. However, both Cowan and Odell (1990)
and Yorston et al. ( 1990) point out that in a dynamic
system such as plowing, an assumption of an equilibrium state is unfounded. Equilibrium is never
reached and distributions continue to spread out
indefinitely so long as plowing continues. Simulations have been conducted to examine the dynamics
of plowing and its long-term effect on horizontal
distribution (Yorston et al. l 990:Figures 5-7), and
they indicate that spurious patterning starts to occur
by 100 years of plowing. By 50 years of plowing,
the patterning still reflects the cultural activity areas
but any internal structure is lost by 10 years.
The Hogue site has been plowed for less than
50 years. Regardless of whether or not an equilibrium is reached, the Lennox (1986) and Yorston et
al. (1990) models apply. They underscore the fact
that the distinct material groupings at Hogue are
reflections of cultural activity areas. The two different patterns formed appear related to one of three
conditions. First, based on the models, the concentrations at Hogue may have been circular assemblages of materials within a tightly restricted area
(discrete activity areas), whereas the clusters may
have been highly-structured annular assemblages
(focal activity areas). Each of the groupings basically represents the same activities (food preparation and retooling) being conducted around a hearth,
although the level of activity appears to vary within
and between the activity areas (based on frequency
of material categories). Furthermore, the different
patterns also may reflect hearth structure, the more
diffuse concentrations being associated with rubbleconstruction hearths, and the concentrations being
prepared ringed hearths.
Spatial patterning of multiple-occupations
within a plow zone has not been addressed, as previous simulations were based on the disturbance of

a single occupation surface. However, at Hogue,
the plow zone has 58 cm of depth. As a second
condition, then, these different patterns in the plow
zone deposits may reflect the amount of time vs.
the depth impacted by plow disturbance. The clusters are associated with the lower plow zone elevations while the concentrations primarily are within
the higher elevations. The higher elevations have
been subjected to more disturbance from plowing,
hence a greater disturbance to, and redistribution
of, the cultural materials. In this case, the differentiation in patterning may not reflect a difference in
activity type and hearth structure.
The third condition is a combination of the
two conditions discussed above. Given vertical characteristics, it seems reasonable to suggest that what
is being detected is repeated domestic pursuits at
Hogue over hundreds of years. But, superimposed
over that static record is a dynamic system that
moves and fragments the material. The complexity
this merger causes is little understood, and makes
interpretation beyond the most basic level of activity identification very difficult.

CONCLUSIONS
The Hogue site is a multi-component site located
on the northeast rim of a playa basin. It has been
impacted by years of plowing, although at least in
the test excavation area, about l 0 cm of intact
archeological deposits remain. Overall, the site area
is geologically-stratified, with Late Holocene aeolian
deposits resting on the Pleistocene Blackwater Draw
Formation. In the basin, Randall Clay (lacustrine
sediments) rest on the Blackwater Draw Formation.
Radiocarbon ages indicate that the Late Holocene
deposits began accumulating within the last 1200+
years. These ages are based on organic sediment
samples and charcoal. The three radiocarbon samples
are from the top of the sub-plow zone (undisturbed
deposits), the lower plow zone (lesser disturbed
segment), and 10 cm within the upper plow zone
(the most disturbed segment). Despite the plowing,
the dates are in serial order, and are concordant with
the temporal diagnostics recovered from test
excavations. These ages, along with the ceramic and
projectile point diagnostics, provide the framework
for dating the cultural occupations.
Artifact analyses indicate that the major activities throughout the various occupations were
domestic pursuits, primarily food preparation and

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site
retooling. From these, we interpret that Hogue was
used as a campsite. The site appears initially to
have been occupied in the late Ceramic period,
around A.D. 700. The bulk of the occupations probably were during the Protohistoric period, with a
final occupation in the 1700s during the aboriginal
Historic period. While all the occupations were
within the aeolian Late Holocene deposits, the archeological materials appear to have been culturally stratified, and a series of occupation surfaces
probably existed.
A theoretical and methodological framework
for dealing with plow-impacted sites and assessing
their archeological integrity still is in the formative
stage. The consensus is that these sites have research value (e.g., Knoerl and Versaggi 1984;
McManamon 1984; Yorston et al. 1990; Dunnell
and Simek 1995). Their research potential lies in
contributing to regional research issues as well as
experimental and analytical work to develop a better understanding of plow zone archeology. Both
approaches have been taken with the test excavations at the Hogue site.
While the Hogue site appears typical for playa
sites in the region, so little excavation work has
been conducted that what is typical is difficult to
define. The regional focus has been on draw sites
(particularly Paleoindian ones) to the detriment of
playa sites and their role in the settlement systems
and cultural development of the region. Another
major drawback that playa sites suffer from is that
most playas now are part of the agricultural system
on the Southern High Plains. Therefore, many playa
sites exist in plowed fields and, therefore, have
been impacted by that plowing. This situation has
led to the tendency (although not specifically stated)
of ignoring playa sites or discounting their usefulness. This situation reflects a general trend across
North America that is slow to change (cf. Dunnell
and Simek 1995). Where it is changing, the plow
zone still is treated as a single level when excavated, regardless of its depth. Experimental work
has focused on horizontal displacement based on
surface materials. The analytical focus has been on
a comparison of horizontal distributions between
surface patterns and sub-plow zone patterns. Plow
zone dynamics, the internal structure of the plow
zone, and vertical displacement have received only
minimal attention (Reynolds 1982; Yorston et al.
1990; Dunnell and Simek 1995).
The plow zone at the Hogue site was excavated in 10 cm levels, with in situ artifacts piece-

379

point plotted, and all sediments from each level
screened through 1/16-inch mesh. The latter were
sorted for recovery of materials missed during the
excavations. Three units were taken down to the
top of the sub-plow zone, while one of those units
reached the top of the Blackwater Draw Formation.
These materials were subjected to vertical and horizontal distributional analyses in order to investigate
the integrity of the site.
The materials within the plow zone did not
appear to be homogenous but rather occurred in
various combinations and frequencies through the
depth of both the plow zone and sub-plow zone.
The peaks of material in the plow zone (particularly
the minimax portion) may be reflecting remnants
of occupation surfaces or be a false mimic generated
through internal plow zone dynamics; not enough
experimental data are available for comparison.
However, the Hogue site vertical distributions
indicate the potential for occupation surfaces to
remain discernible within the plow zone even after
so+ years of plowing.
The traditional compressed horizontal distribution view of plow zone artifact data has been
used with the Hogue site materials to discern spatial patterns and make comparisons with experimental models. Four activity areas are apparent,
each centered around a hearth, and involved retooling and food preparation. Two major differences
between these areas are: (1) the intensity of each
activity within (i.e., intra-areal differences) and between (i.e., inter-area differences) them; and (2) the
age of the activity area. The two more diffuse concentrations may be younger (higher elevations) than
the two more concentrated clusters (lower elevations), and hence more subject to plowing. However, the internal structure of an activity area also
affects the pattern it produces when plow-impacted
(Yorston et al. 1990). The two patterns detected
may reflect, then, the internal structure of the activity areas rather than the age and frequency of plow
disturbance. Lastly, the patterns may be a combination of these factors, and certainly others that are
not yet recognized.
This study is both informative and flawed.
While the vertical analysis indicates the potential
for a multi-component site to retain integrity even
after deep plowing, the excavation methodology
was too gross to address this potential. To have
greater control over the vertical artifact data, the
excavation of a plow zone should be conducted
with the same precision as with an intact site. In

380

Texas Archeological Society

this case, 5 cm levels should have been used, with a
correspondingly greater attempt to locate the maximum amount of material in place. Taking the strike
and dip of each of the in situ artifacts also would
have proved useful in examining vertical movement and roll and pitch. Size distribution through
the vertical cross-section also should have been
conducted to investigate any changes through the
plow zone (see Dunnell and Simek 1995). Although
time consuming given the large number of recovered objects, if size stability is reached for each
material category, then it may have been a useful
tool to investigate the peaks and provide a better
basis to judge their significance. Lastly, while the
compressed horizontal view is useful for discerning
gross patterns (particularly with a single-component site), this view should then be broken-down
into tighter vertical slices in order to analyze those
patterns and determine their significance within a
multi-component site setting.
At least two critical needs are apparent in general plow zone studies. The first is for more detailed vertical experimental work along the lines of
Reynold's (1982; Yorston et al. 1990) work. Vertical experiments must include simulations of multiple occupations as well as comparisons of
movement between the various segments of a plow
zone. The second need is for more detailed and
precise excavation of plow zones rather than excavating them as a single level. As Reynolds
(1982:337) notes: "despite continuous disturbance
by agriculture, ... [the plow zone] ... still maintains
the profile evidence as created at occupation even
when there is minimal or indiscernible feature evidence in the subsoil."

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The investigation of plow zone archeology at
the Hogue site could not have been completed
without the assistance and cooperation of many
people. In particular, great thanks are due the TAS
Field School crews that worked diligently in the
field and in the lab. Supervising the Field School
crew were Jim Word and Leon Pope (TAS crew
chiefs), and J. Kent Hicks and Eric Schroeder
(Museum of Texas Tech University crew chiefs).
Field photography was done by Dea Young and
studio photography by Rebecca Hinrichs (Museum
of Texas Tech University). Stratigraphic work at

the site was conducted by Vance T. Holliday
(University of Wisconsin and Research Associate
of the Museum of Texas Tech University). For the
report, drafting services were provided by Scott
Malone and William Shannon, and Catherine
Crosier provided technical support (Museum of
Texas Tech University). Regge Wiseman (Museum
of New Mexico) aided in the analysis of the pottery.
The encouragement and cooperation of Leon Pope,
who discovered the site in 1989, and Brent Hogue,
the landowner who granted access to the site and
graciously allowed the crew to dig up his field, are
gratefully appreciated.
Material and documentation of the Hogue site
is housed at the Terry County Historical Museum,
Brownfield. Archival copies of field notes and other
documentation are housed at the Museum of Texas
Tech University, Lubbock.

REFERENCE CITED
Ammerman, A. J.
1985 Plow-zone Experiments in Calabria, Italy. Journal
of Field Archaeology 12:33-40.
Banks, L. D.
1990 From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Review of Lithic Sources in the Trans-Mississippi
South, the Southern High Plains and Adjacent Southwest. Memoir No. 4. Oklahoma Anthropological
Society, Norman.
Bartlein, P. J., M. E. Edwards, S. L. Shafer, and E. D. Barker,
Jr.
1995 Calibration of Radiocarbon Ages and the Interpretation of Paleoenvironmental Records. Quaternary
Research 44(3):417-424.
Baugh, T.
1994 Holocene Adaptations in
In Plains Indians, A.D.
logical Past of Historic
Schlesier, pp. 264-289.
Press, Norman.

the Southern High Plains.
500-1500: The ArchaeoGroups, edited by K. H.
University of Oklahoma

Bettinger, R. L.
1980 Explanatory/Predictive Models of Hunter-Gatherer
Adaptation. In Advances in Archaeological Method
and Theory, Volume 3, edited by M. B. Schiffer,
pp. 189-255. Academic Press, New York.
Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal
of Science 2:93-117.

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site
Bomar,G. W.
1995 Texas Weather. 2nd Edition. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Boyd, D. K., J. T. Abbott, W. A. Bryan, C. M. Garvey, S. A.
Tomka, and R. C. Fields
1990 Phase II Investigations at Prehistoric and Rock Art
Sites, Justiceburg Reservoir, Garza and Kent Counties, Texas. 2 Vols. Reports of Investigations No.
71. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

381

Cotterell, B. and J. Kamminga
1987 The Formation of Flakes. American Antiquity
52(4):675-708.
1990

Mechanics of Pre-Industrial Technology. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Cowan, F. L. and G. H. Odell
1990 More on Estimating Tillage Effects: Reply to
Dunnell and Yorston. American Antiquity 55(3):598605.

Buchanan, B.
l995a Archaeological Background of Terry County. In
Playa Archaeology-Archaeological Investigations
at Reese Air Force Base and Terry County Auxiliary Airfield, Lubbock and Terry Counties, edited
by E. Johnson, pp. 81-110. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 9. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Lubbock.

Crabtree, D. E.
1972 An Introduction to Flintworking. Occasional Papers
of the Museum 28. Idaho State University Museum,
Pocatello.

l 995b Archaeological Background of Lubbock County. In
Playa Archaeology-Archaeological Investigations
at Reese Air Force Base and Terry County Auxiliary Airfield, Lubbock and Terry Counties, edited
by E. Johnson, pp. 39-80. Lubbock Lake Landmark
Quaternary Research Center Series 9. Museum of
Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark,
Lubbock.

Dixon,J. R.
1987 Amphibians and Reptiles of Texas. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1995c Archaeological Background of Hockley County. In
Playa Archaeology-Archaeological Investigations
at Reese Air Force Base and Terry County Auxiliary Airfield, Lubbock and Terry Counties, edited
by E. Johnson, pp. 111-115. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 9. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Lubbock.

Dunnell, R. C. and J. F. Simek
1995 Artifact Size and Plowzone Processes. Journal of
Field Archaeology 22:305-319.

Burt, W. H. and R. P. Grossenheider
1976 A Field Guide to the Mammals. The Peterson Field
Guide Series 5. Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston.
Chapman, R. C. and J. G. Enloe
1977 Survey of Cochiti Reservoir: Methodology. In Archeological Investigations in Cochiti Reservoir, New
Mexico. Vol. 1: A Survey of Regional Variability,
edited by J. V. Biella and R. C. Chapman, pp. 173200. Office of Contract Archeology, University of
New Mexico, Albuquerque.
Collins, M. B.
1968 The Andrews Lake Locality: New Archaeological
Data from the Southern Llano Estacado, Texas.
Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1971

A Review of Llano Estacado Archaeology and
Ethnohistory. Plains Anthropologist 16(52):82104.

Davis, W. B. and D. J. Schmidly
1994 The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife
Press, Austin.

Dunnell, R. C.
1990 Artifact Size and Lateral Displacement Under Tillage: Comments on the Odell and Cowa.n Experiment. American Antiquity 55(3):592-594.

Fenton, J. I.
1991 An Unwitting Autobiography: Staked Plains Ecological Prehistory and History. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of History, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.
Ford, J. L., M. A. Rolingson, and L. D. Medford
1972 Site Destruction Due to Agricultural Practices. Research Series No. 3. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Frederick, C. D. and C. Ringstaff
1994 Lithic Resources at Fort Hood: Further Investigations. In Archaeological Investigations on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell
Counties, Texas, edited by W. N. Trierweiler, pp.
125-144. Archeological Resource Management Series Research Report 31. United States Army Fort
Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.
Frink, D.S.
1984 Artifact Behavior within the Plow Zone. Journal of
Field Archaeology 11 :356-363.

382

Texas Archeological Society

Frison, G. C. and B. A. Bradley
1980 Folsom Tools and Technology at the Hanson Site,
Wyoming. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Gustavson, T. C. and R. J. Finley
1985 Late Cenozoic Geomorphic Evolution of the Texas
Panhandle and Northeastern New Mexico. Report
of Investigations No. 148. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Gustavson, T. C., V. T. Holliday, and S. D. Hovorka
1995 Origin and Development of Playa Basins, Source of
Recharge to the Ogallala Aquifer, Southern High
Plains, Texas and New Mexico. Report of Investigations No. 229. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Haragan, D.R.
1983 Blue Northers to Sea Breezes: Texas Weather and
Climate. Hendrick-Long Publishing Co., Dallas.
Harbour, J.
1975 General Stratigraphy. In Late Pleistocene Environments of the Southern High Plains, edited by F.
Wendorf and J. J. Hester, pp. 33-55. Publication of
the Ft. Burgwin Research Center 9. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Hartwell, W. T.
1991 Ryan's Site: A Plow-Disturbed Plainview Cache on
the Southern High Plains of Texas. Master's thesis,
Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
1993

Notes on 41LU91and41LU92. On file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Hayden, B.
1981 Subsistence and Ecological Adaptations of Modern
Hunter/Gatherers. In Omnivorous Primates: Gathering and Hunting in Human Evolution, edited by
R. S. 0. Harding and G. Teleki, pp. 344-421. Columbia University Press, New York.
1987

From Chopper to Celt: The Evolution of
Resharpening Techniques. Lithic Technology 16:3343.

Hayes, A. C., J. N. Young, and A.H. Warren
1981 Excavation of Mound 7, Gran Quivira National
Monument, New Mexico. Publications in Archaeology 16. National Park Service, United States Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C.
Hoffman, C.
1982 Plow Zones and Predictability: Sesquinary Context
in New England Prehistoric Sites. North American
Archaeologist 3(4):287-309.

Holliday, V. T.
1977 Cultural Chronology of the Lubbock Lake Site.
Master's thesis, Museum Science, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
1985a Archaeological Geology of the Lubbock Lake Site,
Southern High Plains of Texas. Geological Society
of America Bulletin 96: 1483-1492.
1985b Morphology of Late Holocene Soils at the Lubbock
Lake Archaeological Site, Texas. Soil Science Society of America Journal 49:938-946.
1987

Cultural Chronology. In Lubbock Lake: Quaternary
Studies on the Southern High Plains, edited by E.
Johnson, pp. 22-25. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.

1988

Genesis of Late Holocene Soils at the Lubbock Lake
Archaeological Site, Texas. Annals of the Association ofAmerican Geographers 78:594-610.

1989

The Blackwater Draw Formation (Quaternary): A
1.4-p!us m.y. Record of Eolian Sedimentation and
Soil Formation on the Southern High Plains. Geological Society of America Bulletin 101: 1598-1607.

1990

Pedology in Archaeology. In Archaeological Geology of North America, edited by N. P. Lasca and J.
Donahue, pp. 525-540. Centennial Special Volume
4. Geological Society of America, Boulder.

1995a Late Quaternary Stratigraphy of the Southern High
Plains. In Ancient Peoples and Landscapes, edited
by E. Johnson, pp. 289-313. Museum of Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.
1995b Stratigraphy and Paleoenvironments of Late
Quaternary Valley Fills on the Southern High
Plains. Memoir 186. Geological Society of America,
Boulder.
1997

Origin and Evolution of Lunettes on the High Plains
of Texas and New Mexico. Quaternary Research
47(1):54-69.

Holliday, V. T. and C.R. Welty
1981 Lithic Tool Resources of the Eastern Llano Estacado.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:201204.
Honea, K.
1973 The Technology of Eastern Puebloan Pottery on the
Llano Estacado. Plains Anthropologist 18(59):7388.
Hughes, J. T. and R. D. Speer
1981 An Archeological Survey of the Pantex Plant, Carson
County, Texas. Report submitted to Mason &
Hanger-Silas Mason Co., Inc., Amarillo, Texas.
Hughes, J. T. and P. S.Willey (editors)
1978 Archeology at MacKenzie Reservoir. Archeological
Survey Report 24. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site
Johnson, E.
1985 Current Developments in Bone Technology. In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Volume 8, edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp. 157-235.
Academic Press, New York.
Johnson, E. (editor)
1987 Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the
Southern High Plains. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
1993

Late Holocene Investigations at the Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Volume 1: The 1988 Work. Lubbock
Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series
5. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Lubbock.

1994 Archaeological Survey Along the Mobil ESTE C02
Pipeline Corridor from Denver City to Clairemont,
Texas. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 6. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.
l 995a Playa Archaeology-Archaeological Investigations

at Reese Air Force Base and Terry County Auxiliary Airfield, Lubbock and Terry Counties. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center
Series 9. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.
1995b Late Holocene Investigations at the Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Volume 2: the 1989 and 1990 Work.
Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 8. Museum of Texas Tech University,
Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.
1997

Playa Archaeology-Test Excavations at Terry
County Auxiliary Airfield, Southern High Plains of
Texas. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research center Series 10. Museum of Texas Tech
University, Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.

Johnson, E. and V. T. Holliday
1986 The Archaic Record at Lubbock Lake. In "Current
Trends in Southern Plains Archaeology," edited by
T. G. Baugh. Plains Anthropologist Memoir 22:754.
1989

Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Cultural and Environmental Change on the Southern High Plains.
Journal of Quaternary Science 4(2): 145-165.

1995

Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments of
the Southern High Plains. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:519-540.

Johnson, E. and E. J. Miller
1993 Vertebrate Fauna! Remains from the 1988 Excavations. In Late Holocene Investigations at the Lubbock Lake Landmark Volume 1: The 1988 Work,
edited by E. Johnson, pp. 141-161. Lubbock Lake
Quaternary Research Center Series 5. Museum of
Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark,
Lubbock.

383

Johnson, E., V. T. Holliday, M. J. Kaczor, and R. Stuckenrath
1977 The Garza Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48:83109.
Keeley, L.
1980 Experimental Determination of Stone Tool Uses: A
Microwear Analysis. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Keeley, L. and M. H. Newcomer
1977 Microwear Analysis of Experimental Flint Tools: A
Test Case. Journal of Archaeological Science 4:2962.
Kelley, J. H.
1984 The Archaeology of the Sierra Blanca Region of
Southeastern New Mexico. Anthropological Papers
74. University of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology, Ann Arbor.
Knoerl, J. J. and N. Versaggi
1984 Plow Zone Sites: Research Strategies and Management Policy. American Archeology 4(1):76-80.
Knudson, R.
1983 Organizational Variability in Late Paleo-Indian Assemblages. Reports of Investigations 60. Laboratory of Anthropology, Washington State University,
Pullman.
Ladkin, N.
1993 Ceramic Artifacts from the 1988 Excavations. In
Late Holocene Investigations at the Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Volume 1: The 1988 Work, edited by E.
Johnson, pp. 213-222. Lubbock Lake Landmark
Quaternary Research Center Series 5. Museum of
Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark,
Lubbock.
Ladkin, N. and E. J. Miller
1993 Burned Caliche from the 1988 Excavations. In Late
Holocene Investigations at the Luhbock Lake Landmark, Volume 1: The 1988 Work, edited by E.
Johnson, pp. 177-204. Lubbock Lake Landmark
Quaternary Research Center Series 5. Museum of
Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark,
Lubbock.
Ladkin, N. and K. O'Brien
1995 Burned Caliche from the 1989 and 1990 Survey and
Excavations. In Late Holocene Investigations at the
Lubbock Lake Landmark, Volume 2: The 1989 and
1990 Work, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 281-312. Lubbock Lake Quaternary Research Center Series 8.
Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Lubbock.

384

Texas

Society

Lennox, P.A.
1986 The Innes Site: A Plow-Disturbed Archaic
Component, Brant County, Ontario. Midcontinental
Journal of Archaeology 11(2):221-268.
Leslie, R. H.
1979 The Eastern Jornada Mogollon, Extreme Southeastern New Mexico. In Jornada-Mogollon Archaeology, edited by P. Beckett and R. N. Wiseman, pp.
179-199. Santa Fe.
Lewarch, D. E. and M. J. O'Brien
1981 Effect of Short Term Tillage on Aggregate Provenience Surface Pattern. In Plowzone Archaeology:
Contributions to Theory and Technique, edited by
M. J. O'Brien and D. E. Lewarch, pp. 7-49. Publications in Anthropology 27. Vanderbilt University,
Nashville.
Lintz, C.
1989 Experimental Thermal Discoloration and Heat Conductivity Studies of Caliche from Eastern New
Mexico. Geoarchaeology 4(4):319-346.
Litwinionek, L.
1995 Site Descriptions and Assessment. In Playa Archaeology-Archaeological Investigations at Reese Air
Force Base and Terry County Auxiliary Airfield,
Lubbock and Terry Counties, edited by E. Johnson,
pp. 169-190. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary
Research Center Series 9. Museum of Texas Tech
University, Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock
Lyman, L. and M. J. O'Brien
1987 Plow-zone Zooarchaeology: Fragmentation and
Identifiability. Journal of Field Archaeology 14:493498.
Mallouf, R. J.
1982 An Analysis of Plow-Damaged Chert Artifacts: The
Brookeen Creek Cache (41HI86), Hill County,
Texas. Journal of Field Archaeology 9:79-98.

Mera. H.P.
1933 A Proposed Revision of the Rio Grande Glaze Paint
Sequence. Archaeological Survey Technical Series
Bulletin 5: 1-11. Museum of New Mexico, Laboratory of Anthropology, Santa Fe.
Moss, E. H.
1983 Some Comments on Edge Damage as a Factor in
Functional Analysis of Stone Artifacts. Journal of
Archaeological Science 10:231-242.
Odell, G. H. and F. Cowan
1987 Estimating Tillage Effects on Artifact Distributions.
American Antiquity 52(3):456-484.
Perttula, T. K., M. R. Miller, R. A. Ricklis, D. J. Prikryl, and
C. Lintz
1995 Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66: 175-235.
Peterson, R. T.
1960 A Field Guide to the Birds of Texas and Adjacent
States. Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston.
Pope, L.
1991 The Hogue Site (41TY2). Transactions of the Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern
New Mexico and Western Texas 27:3-4.
Rappole, J. H. and G. W. Blacklock
1994 Birds of Texas. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Reeves, C. C. Jr.
l 976a Quaternary Stratigraphy and Geological History of
the Southern High Plains, Texas and New Mexico.
In Quaternary Stratigraphy of North America, edited by W. Mahaney, pp. 213-234. Dowden,
Hutchinson and Ross, Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania.
1976b Caliche: Origin, Classification, Morphology and
Uses. Estacada Books, Lubbock.

Mathews, D. And W. T. Shannon
1995 Lithic Analysis. In Playa Archaeology-Archaeological Investigations at Reese Air Force Base and
Terry County Auxiliary Airfield, Lubbock and Terry
Counties, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 191-212. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center
Series 9. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.

Reynolds, P. J.
1982 The Ploughzone. In Festschrift zum 100 jahrigen
Bestehen der Abteilung fur Vorgeschichte, pp. 315340. Naturhistorische Gesellschaft, Numberg.

McManamon, F. P.
1984 The Integrity of Plowzone Sites. American Archeology 4(1):70-76.

Runkles, F. A.
1964 The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near
Post, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 35:101-125.

Roper, D. C.
1976 Lateral Displacement of Artifacts Due to Plowing.
American Antiquity 41 (3):372-375.

Baxevanis, Johnson, Buchanan, and Shannon - Test Excavations at the Hogue Site
Runkles, F. A. and E. D. Dorchester
1986 The Lott Site: A Late Prehistoric Site in Garza
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 57:83-115.
Runyan, J. W. and J. A. Hedrick
1987 Pottery Types of the Southwest Federation of Archaeological Societies (SWFAS) Area. The Artifact
25:4.
Sabin, T. J. and V. T. Holliday
1995 Playas and Lunettes on the Southern High Plains:
Morphometric and Spatial Relationships. Annals of
the Association of American Geographers 95:286305.
Sanders, D.
1962 Soil Survey of Terry County, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C ..
Schroeder, A. H.
1982 Historical Overview of Southwestern Ceramics. Arizona Archaeologist 15:1-26.
Schroeder, E. A. and B. F. Rader
1995 Archeological Survey Report of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice Lubbock Facility, Lubbock
County, Texas. Horizon Environmental Services,
Inc., Austin.
Semenov, S. A.
1973 Prehistoric Technology. Harper and Row, New
York.
Soil Survey Staff
1994 Keys to Soil Taxonomy. United States Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Spielmann, K. A.
1983 Late Prehistoric Exchange between the Southwest
arid Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist
28(102):257-272.
Spielmann, K. A. (editor)
1991 Farmers, Hunters, and Colonists: Interaction Between the Southwest and the Southern Plains. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Sterud, E. L., F. P. McManamon, and M. Rose
1978 The Identification of Activity Loci in Plough Zones:
An Example from New York State. Man in the
Northeast 15116:94-117.
Steward, J. H.
1938 Basin-Plateau Aborigina!Socio-political Groups.
Bulletin 120. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

1955

385

Theory of Culture Change. University of Illinois
Press, Urbana.

Strahler, A. N. and A. H. Strahler
1983 Modem Physical Geography. Second Edition. John
Wiley and Sons, New York.
Stuiver, M.
1993 Editorial Comment. Radiocarbon 35:iii.
Stuiver, M. and G. W. Pearson
1992 Calibration of the Radiocarbon Time Scale, 25005000 B.C. In Radiocarbon After Four Decades: An
Interdisciplinary Perspective, edited by R. E.
Tayloe, A. Long, and R. S. Kra, pp. 19-33. SpringerVerlag, New York.
Stuiver, M. and P. J. Reimer
1993 Extended 14C Data Base and Revised CALIB 3.0
14
C Age Calibration Program. Radiocarbon 35:215230.
Stuiver, M., B. Kromer, B. Becker, and C. W. Ferguson
1986 Radiocarbon Age Calibration Back to 13,300 years
B.P. and the 14C Age Matching of the German Oak
and US Bristlecone Pine Chronologies. Radiocarbon 28:980-1021.
Tolstoy, P. and S. K. Fish
1975 Surface and Subsurface Evidence for Community
Size at Coapexco, Mexico. Journal of Field Archaeology 2:97-104.
Ward,H. T.
1980 The Spatial Analysis of the Plow Zone Artifact Distributions from Two Village Sites in North Carolina.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill.
Warren, A.H.
1977 New Dimensions in the Study of Prehistoric Pottery. In Archeological Investigations in Cochiti Reservoir, New Mexico. Vol. 2, Excavation and
Analysis, 1975 Season, edited by R. C. Chapman, J.
V. Biella, and S. D. Bussey, pp. 363-374. Office of
Contract Archeology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque.
Whalen, M. E.
1981 Origin and Evolution of Ceramics in Western Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:215230.
Wheat, J.B.
1979 The Jurgens Site. Plains Anthropologist Memoir
15.

386

Texas Archeological Society

Wiseman, R. N.
1982 The Intervening Years-New Information on
Chupadero Black-on-White and Corona Corrugated.
Pottery Southwest 9(4 ):5-7. Albuquerque Archaeological Society, Albuquerque.
Word, J.
1963 Floydada Country Club Site 41FLL South Plains
Archeological Society Bulletin 1:37-63.
1965

The Montgomery Site in Floyd County, Texas. South
Plains Archeological Society Bulletin 2:55-102.

1991

The 1975 Field School of the Texas Archeological
Society. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
60:57-106.

1993

TAS Field School Crew Chief field notes. Copy on
file at Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Yorston, R. M.
1990 Comment on Estimating Tillage Effects on Artifact
Distributions. American Antiquity 55(3):594-598.
Yorston, R. M., V. L. Gaffney, and P. J. Reynolds
1990 Simulation of Artefact Movement Due to Cultivation. Journal of Archaeological Science 17:67-83.

James Bryan
Diane E. Wilson,
with a contribution by Timothy

Thomas R. Hester
Perttula

ABSTRACT
Southern Island is a large prehistoric site located on the Mexican side of Falcon Reservoir, on the lower Rio
Grande. In 1995, the senior author documented eight burials that had been exposed by erosion caused by
fluctuating water levels at the reservoir. Several of the burials were accompanied by a variety of mortuary
artifacts of Late Prehistoric age. The Southern Island cemetery is compared to four similar prehistoric sites in
the conservation pool area of Falcon Reservoir, and to cemeteries and burials reported from South Texas and
northern Tamaulipas.

INTRODUCTION
Falcon Reservoir is located on the lower Rio
Grande, south of Laredo, Texas, in Zapata and
Starr counties and portions of the Mexican state of
Tamaulipas. The reservoir was formed following
the construction of Falcon Dam on the lower Rio
Grande in the early 1950s, pursuant to a treaty
between the United States and Mexico on February
3, 1944 (Byfield 1966:12). This treaty also created
the International Boundary and Water Commission
(IBWC), which is charged with the administration
of the area within the reservoir district.
Falcon Dam is located a few km northwest of
the small town of Roma, Texas, and the waters of
Falcon Reservoir back up approximately 80 km
behind it. The U.S. shoreline alone is over 320 km
in length. The conservation pool elevation of the
reservoir is 301.2 feet above mean sea level
([amsl]; IBWC 1975). However, the elevation is
most often substantially lower due to frequent
droughts in the area, as well as from water demands
in the lower Rio Grande valley for irrigation, tending to deplete the water supply and causing the
level of the lake to drop.
The water supply at the reservoir is primarily
replenished by the Rio Grande, but it is supplemented by the Rio Salado, which flows into the
reservoir just west of the town of Zapata, Texas

(Figure 1). The Rio Salado originates in the state of
Coahuila, Mexico, northwest of the city of Nueva
Rosita. Occasionally, the Rio Salado is the primary
contributor to the watershed at Falcon Reservoir,
such as in September 1988 when tremendous rainfall associated with Hurricane Gilbert caused a massive runoff in the Rio Salado watershed. Most of
the runoff originated from the Rio Sabinas, which
flows into the Rio Salado approximately 27 km
west of the junction of the Rio Salado with the Rio
Grande. At the conservation pool, the reservoir inundates 86,843 acres, and at the maximum flood
pool elevation of 314.2 feet amsl the reservoir covers 115,406 acres (IBWC 1990:11).
A number of tributary arroyos merge with the
Rio Grande in the vicinity of Falcon Reservoir.
Major tributaries on the U.S. side of the river in the
area of the reservoir include (from north to south):
the Arroyos Dolores, Salado, San Francisco, Burro,
Chapote, Molletes, Ranchito, San Bartolo,
Velefio, Leon, Clarefio, Tigre Grande, Tigre
Chiquito, and Tinajaca. Major tributaries on the
Mexican side of the reservoir include (north to
south): Arroyos El Salado, Golondrinas, Chapote,
La Hedionda, Custes, Diablo, Gonazlefio, Coyotes, Benavides, and the Arroyo Salinillas. Infrequent heavy rainfall in the area often transforms
these normally dry arroyos into raging torrents
(Boyd n.d.a).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

388

Texas Archeological Society

ZAPATA CO.,
TEXAS

TAMPS.,
MEXICO

~~Ii
FALCON

~\~

RESERVOIR

1

--- I
I~

!

0

I

E+3

2
3
4
5
EF3
&3
Mii.ES

deposited sandstones and shales of lower
Tertiary age. These beds slope gently toward
the northeast, creating the general
southeasterly flow of the river. The underlying
bedrock consists of erosion-resistant strata
alternating with softer, easily eroded beds.
This variable erosional resistance has resulted
in gentle lanform undulations or "stair steps"
along the course of the river, although they
are presently submerged in the reservoir
(Evans 1961:34).
Evans (1961) describes three Rio Grande
terraces in the Falcon Reservoir area: the
Reynosa, Zapata, and Rosita terraces. The
Reynosa formation is an extensive silt and
caliche-capped gravel terrace believed to date
to the Middle Pleistocene (O'Neill et al.
1992:3). Large quantities of brown chert, agate, jasper, and rhyolite are present (Evans
1961:38-39; Boyd n.d.a). The Zapata terrace
dates from the late Quaternary (Evans
1961:39), and has a generally flat surface that
rests on Tertiary bedrock. The upper 8-10
meters of the terrace deposit consist of a grayish-tan silt rich in archeological materials
(Evans 1961:39-40). The Rosita terrace is situated below the Zapata terrace and above the
modem floodplain. It is Holocene in age. The
Rosita terrace is poorly preserved in the reservoir area, with remnants found mainly within
the mouths of tributary arroyos or along the
valley where lateral erosion by the Rio Grande
has failed to completely erode it (Evans
1961 :40-41 ).
The Reynosa formation is better preserved
in the southern half of Falcon Reservoir, while
the Zapata and Rosita terraces are best exposed in the northern portion of the reservoir
(O'Neill et al. 1992:3). The Southern Island
site is located on a Zapata terrace landform
(Boyd n.d.a, n.d.b).

Figure 1. Map of Falcon Reservoir, showing the location of
the Southern Island site and Arroyo Diablo.

ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES IN THE
FALCON RESERVOIR
GEOLOGY IN THE RESERVOIR
DISTRICT
In the Falcon Reservoir area, the Rio Grande
flows through a broad valley, underlain by marine-

Several hundred prehistoric and historic sites
are known in the conservation pool area of Falcon
Reservoir (Boyd n.d.a). Approximately 40 percent
of the recorded sites lie on the U.S. side of the

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula -

Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

Figure 2. Aerial photograph, looking south at Falcon Reservoir. Southern
Island is on the center right, as indicated by the arrow, and Arroyo Diablo is
just to the south. Photograph taken May 31, 1983 at an altitude of 5000 feet.
Lake elevation on this date was approximately 280 feet amsl.

389

Sites on ridges located at the north
edge of the arroyos are usually
more eroded and exposed, thus
their appearance of being "larger"
and "richer" than sites located on
the southern edges of the arroyos
that have buried archeological
deposits. Relic arroyos appear as
inlets along the reservoir shoreline.
The Southern Island site is located
at the north edge of one such
inlet-the Arroyo Diablo (Figures
1 and 2). Here it is a lengthy,
elevated section of the Zapata
terrace that is a southeasterlyfacing peninsula at intermediate
lake levels.

THE SOUTHERN ISLAND SITE
reservoir, while about 60 percent are located on the
Mexican side. The sites on the Mexican side
generally appear to be larger in areal extent and
artifact content than those on the U.S. side. A
probable contributing factor is differential site
visibility created by wave and wind erosion from a
prevailing southeasterly wind. This wind, which is
especially prominent during the spring and summer
months, creates large waves on the reservoir pool
surface that tend to impact southeastwardly-facing
landforms; the landforms most severely impacted
are on the Mexican side of the reservoir.
Additionally, during the spring and summer
months, the elevation of the reservoir is usually
declining appreciably due to the releasing of water
for downstream use. Wave and wind erosion,
coupled with the dropping water levels, probably
accounts for the sites on the Mexican side of the
lake appearing larger and more substantial than
those on the U.S. side.
In general, archeological sites at Falcon
Reservoir tend to be located near the mouths of
tributary arroyos where they merge with the Rio
Grande. They occur on interfluvial ridges between
the original riverbed of the Rio Grande and the
tributary arroyos. At intermediate lake levels, these
interfluvial ridges appear as peninsulas extending
into the lake. Often there are such ridges or
peninsulas at both edges of the arroyos (Boyd n.d.a).

The Southern Island site is located in the northern portion of Falcon Reservoir, approximately eight
km south of Zapata, Texas. Southern Island is along
the north edge of a large tributary arroyo, the Arroyo Diablo, which runs into the Rio Grande from
the west. The site was named in the early 1980s by
a number of avocational archeologists and artifact
collectors from the Rio Grande valley, who noted
that as the water levels at the lake dropped, and the
site began to be exposed, it first appears as an
"island." This island, actually an oblong and elevated section of the Zapata terrace, increases in
size as the water level at the lake drops. If the water
level continues to decline, the island becomes connected to the Mexican mainland. The top of the
island or terrace first becomes exposed when the
elevation of the reservoir is approximately 280.0
feet amsl.
The Southern Island site is exposed to severe
erosional forces, including substantial wave and
wind action. The site's southern and eastern edges
are fully exposed to the prevailing southeasterly
wind. After the site has been exposed for a period
of
the deposits dry out, and the site's sandy
matrix is actively blown away by the same prevailing southeasterly wind that is responsible for the
wave action.
The archeological deposits are further impacted
of cutbanks along the
the

390

Texas Archeological Society

eastern edge of the site. These cutbanks were over
1 m in height in portions of the site in 1995 (Boyd
n.d.a). Perttula et al. (1996:95-96) note that when
cutbanks form, they:
... slump, then form anew, once-intact archeological deposits and features become thoroughly disturbed and strewn on the recently
exposed beaches.... Essentially, as the Falcon
Reservoir shoreline recedes, or fluctuates in
elevation, a band of erosional scouring, vegetation removal, and cutbank formation (especially on southeast-facing landforms and
on the lower reaches of the major arroyos) is
created along the entire length of the reservoir. This exposes, degrades, and disperses
prehistoric and historic archeological deposits near the surfaces of the alluvial terraces
and Holocene landforms, and also the sites
located on stable pre-Holocene landforms and
deposits at higher elevations within the
flood pool.
The site exhibits an exceedingly large amount
of prehistoric cultural materials, including very large
numbers of scattered burned rock (sandstone and
chert), chert flakes and cores, mussel shell and snail
shell (Rabdotus) concentrations, as well as artifacts
dating from the Historic period (Boyd n.d.a). The
site is approximately one km in length, and about
200-300 min width, the terrace oriented from northnorthwest to the south-southeast. It ranges in elevation from ca. 255-280 feet amsl.
The density of artifacts on the surface of the
Southern Island site suggests a single, very large
occupation area resulting from use over a great
span of time. However, Perttula et al. (1996:68-69)
note that:
The terraces with the highest surface concentrations of prehistoric artifacts [such as
Southern Island] are relatively high above
the channel of the Rio Grande. Being relatively high, these surfaces have been more
heavily eroded since they have been cyclically exposed and submerged more frequently over Falcon Reservoir's history. Part
of their attraction to looters and collectors is
the high density of artifacts. It remains to be
determined whether or not artifact densities
result from (1) high levels of artifact overprinting (i.e., resulting from repetitive long-

term visits to a location on a stable surface),
(2) progressive erosion of stratified deposits
producing an artifact lag as the soil that once
separated them erodes away, or (3) a combination of the two [brackets added] .
Such sites have been classified as occupation zones
(Boyd n.d.a; cf. Hester 1976:85) at Falcon Reservoir.
Southern Island appears to be a particularly
desirable location for prehistoric and historic occupation because it is on an elevated landform on a
gentle bend of the Rio Grande; there is a good view
both up and down river. The Rio Grande was a
perennial source of water. The original bed of the
river, currently submerged in the reservoir, is located approximately 300 meters to the east. As the
riverbank is often steep, the adjacent bed of the
Arroyo Diablo would have provided easy access to
the life-giving waters of the river. Due to the site's
orientation and elevation, its exposure to the southeasterly wind would have been an important factor
to the former inhabitants of the site, especially during the warmer months when the wind would have
mitigated the relentless heat that characterizes the
region's climate during much of the year.
The site was occupied from Paleoindian times
through the Historic period (Boyd n.d.a).
Paleoindian artifacts include a Clovis basal fragment (Hester 1995) and at least 22 other Paleoindian
points collected at the southern end of the island (T.
L. Donohoo, personal communication to Hester,
1990). Also reported are Early Archaic Calf Creek
"eccentrics" (Hester 1990). Other projectile points,
of which there are large numbers, include all (or
nearly all) of the varieties found in the region, including both Archaic dai-t points and Late Prehistoric arrow points (Boyd n.d.a). Site deposits are
diverse, as evidenced by an assortment of stone
tools, the prehistoric cemetery described below,
large amounts of burned rock, eroded hearths, and
lithic debris, as well as a large number of manos
likely linked to plant processing. Faunal remains
are scattered throughout the site, but these may be
mainly associated with the ruins of a 19th century
ranch located near the central portion of the site.
The mid-19th century ranch includes four stone
house ruins and an array of glass bottles, English
and Mexican ceramic sherds (including majolicas
and lead-glazed wares), horseshoes, old buttons,
and marbles, etc. A number of glass sherds may be

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula- Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site
deliberately edge modified, resembling in form three
specimens reportedly found at the Polvo site (Cloud
et al. 1994: 109) in Presidio County. There are
similar chipped glass artifacts at 41ZP79 (Cabaseiio
Ranch), another 19th century Falcon Reservoir
ranch (Boyd n.d.a; Perttula et al. 1996). The 19th
century occupation has been identified as the old
Rancho Las Barrancas (Sr. David Bautista of
Rancho Jamaica, Tamaulipas, Mexico, 1995
personal communication). The modern Rancho Las
Barrancas lies approximately 2.8 km to the
southwest.
In 1995 and 1996, Southern Island was being
adversely affected by several other factors besides
erosion. These included regular (if not daily) visits
by looters and artifact collectors. The site is easily
accessible by motorboat, and is very popular due to
its high artifact density. Additionally, a Mexican
fishing camp was established in the central site area
late in 1996. This large camp had been located west
of the site on the Mexican mainland, but lowering
water levels forced the fishermen to move on to
Southern Island to be closer to the receding lake
shoreline. Mexican fishermen, induced by high
prices paid for artifacts by U.S. collectors, often
collect artifacts from this site and others (Boyd
n.d.a; see also Perttula et al. 1996:91). Once Southern Island connected to the mainland, large numbers of cattle moved through to graze as vegetation
began to grow there.

THE PREHISTORIC CEMETERY
COMPONENT
During periods of cyclic exposure in the early
1980s, scattered human remains were noted at
Southern Island (Boyd n.d.a). These remains were
found in the higher, central areas of the site. However, during visits to the site in the latter half of the
1980s and the early 1990s, no human remains were
recorded. In the spring of 1995, as the water level
at Falcon Reservoir was rapidly declining, a series
of eroding prehistoric burials were exposed in the
site's southern quadrant. These burials were located at a lower elevation and south of the human
remains that had been seen in the early 1980s. The
difference in elevation between the two areas is
approximately 2.5-3 m.
The area where the burials were exposed in
1995 had been continuously inundated by the

391

reservoir since 1990. Pre-1990 investigations of that
part of the site had revealed no exposed burials or
human remains, and it is likely that extensive and
rapid deflation of the surface deposits occurred as a
result of the previous cyclic inundation and exposure
of the site by fluctuating water levels. This would
account for the sudden appearance of numerous
burials where none had previously been observed.
Altogether, eight burials were recorded in 1995 by
Boyd (n.d.a, n.d.c). The burials (1-8) were
discovered between April 22, 1995 and the third
week of August 1995.
A MAGELLAN GPS unit was utilized to
determine the coordinates of each of the burial
features (coordinates on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin). Additionally, the
relative positions of the burials were field checked
utilizing a compass and a KESON 200 foot tape
(Boyd n.d.a). They were located along the eastern
edge of the site, on the crest of the eastward-facing
"ridge" of the peninsular-like terrace. This is
approximately where the top, flat portion of the
ridge begins to slope gently downward toward the
original riverbed of the Rio Grande. This setting is
quite commonly used for the placement of burials
at Falcon Reservoir (Boyd n.d.a). The burials were
in a north-to-south line (Figure 3), within an area
estimated to be 490 m in length and 60 m in width.
The site elevation in the area was estimated to be
between 268-273 feet amsl.
The placement of Burials 1-8 along the distinctive eastward-sloping, upper edge of the peninsular landform means that the burials were placed
at a relatively high elevation with a commanding
view of the drainage basin of the Rio Grande. The
linear distribution of the burials along this landform suggests a clear topographic preference for
the placement of the interments.
Burials 1-3 and 5-8 included both articulated
and disarticulated remains of a single individual,
although Burials 6-8 had been plundered by looters
prior to being recorded. Burial 4 was later determined to represent the remains of at least two individuals (see below and Wilson n.d.a, n.d.b). Thus,
at least nine individuals are represented in the 1995
Southern Island skeletal remains. Additional skeletal remains noted by the senior author in the early
1980s indicates that 10 or more individuals are
represented in the cumulative inventory of skeletal
remains collected from the site as a whole.

392

Texas Archeological Society

•

8

•

1

•

1

•

•

2

6

Figure 3. Plan view of the Southern Island cemetery site,
showing the horizontal relationships of the eight burials.
The plotting of Burial 6 is approximate, and the shaded
area for Burial 4 indicates the extent of scatter by wave
action. North-south distance is approximately 490 meters.
The Rio Grande channel is about 300 meters to the east.

In addition to the linear distribution of the
burials (see Figure 3), there is a distinctive clustering of burials (1-6) in the southern sector of the
cemetery. These six burials are located in an area
that is approximately 137 m in length. Burial 5 is
the southernmost interment, and may represent the
southern boundary of the area utilized for burials,
given that this interment is located near the point
where the flat, upper portion of the terrace appreciably slopes toward the south.

THE BURIALS
In this section, we discuss the eight burials
recorded during 1995 at Southern Island. We first
review the circumstances surrounding the discovery and salvage of skeletal remains and any associated artifacts, followed by detailed osteological

analysis of the skeletal material. Finally, thorough
descriptions of all recovered associated artifacts are
presented.
The burials were designated 1-8 in order of
their discovery (Boyd n.d.a), with the exception of
Burial 4. This burial was actually the first set of
human remains to be discovered, but they had been
scattered by wave action, and the designation as
Burial 4 was given only after three other discrete
burials (1-3) had been discovered.
All skeletal material visible at the surface, as
well as additional skeletal material carefully recovered through screening of the archeological deposits through 1/4-inch mesh cloth, was collected by
the senior author. These remains were taken to the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin (TARL) for osteological
analysis by Diane E. Wilson. All associated artifacts were collected by Boyd to safeguard them
from indiscriminate collectors and commercial looters who frequent this and many other sites in the
Falcon Reservoir. The artifacts were taken to TARL
in 1995 for detailed examination and photographs.

BURIALl
Circumstances of the Discovery/
Salvage of the Burial
This burial was discovered by the senior author on April 22, 1995. The elevation of Falcon
Reservoir on that date was 271.25 feet amsl. When
found, Burial l was still submerged in the waters of
Falcon Reservoir, in approximately 8 cm of water
(Boyd n.d.a). The feature was approximately 2.4 m
from the shoreline, and the lack of wind/waves
made possible the sighting of the burial.
A detailed examination of the feature was not
possible due to its position offshore, since the shallow water covering the burial was clouded from
churned-up muddy silt. Nevertheless, a cursory examination of the burial feature was made, showing
a cluster of skeletal material within a 51 x 39 cm
area. The skeletal remains appeared to be in disarray; i.e., they seemed to be in a disarticulated state.
It is unknown whether this was due to the remains
representing a secondary burial, or whether erosional processes caused by the fluctuating water
level of Falcon Reservoir were responsible. It is
interesting to note that minimal scattering of skeletal remains by wave action was evident. When

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula burial features have been scattered to a significant
degree at Falcon Reservoir, there is usually a marked
distributional patterning of skeletal material in a
northwest direction from the original burial feature
location (Boyd 1996b). This northwest-oriented distribution is caused by wave action resulting from
the prevailing southeasterly wind.
Clearly evident and intermixed with the skeletal remains was a large assortment of associated
artifacts, including four rectangular conch shell pendants, numerous circular conch shell beads, large
numbers of short, tubular bone beads, several Oliva
sayana beads and tinklers, one sandstone pipe, and
a small number of chert artifacts. An incised animal
bone was recovered from the surface about l m to
the northwest of the burial feature, where it had
obviously been moved by wave action.
When the discovery of the burial was made,
several factors had to be considered. First, when
the feature was discovered, the senior author knew
he would be unable to revisit the site for several
days, during which time the burial feature would
certainly be plundered by the multitudes of collectors and looters who frequent the site. Second, the
level of the reservoir was rapidly falling, and the
burial feature would become exposed above the
waterline within a span of a very few hours. Third,
the burial was still submerged, and visibility of the
feature was severely if not totally obscured by the
mud churned up in the water upon approach to the
burial. Lastly, no equipment necessary for a proper
and controlled excavation of the skeletal material
and associated artifacts was available. Photographs
of the burial were not possible due to the muddiness of the water. Given these problems, the senior
author decided that the emergency recovery of all
visible artifacts and skeletal remains had to be performed by hand, and in most cases, by feel. No
viable alternative was available at the time and
only 1.5 hours were available for the formidable
task of collecting all of the burial feature. This was
a salvage effort that was necessary due to the collector and looter activities in the area.
Initially, all the more apparent and larger
specimens of skeletal material and artifacts were
collected from the surface. Subsequent examination
of the buried deposits was made by feel; the water
became so muddy at this point that visibility was
totally impaired. This work yielded more skeletal
remains as well as many associated artifacts,
including Oliva sayana beads and tinklers, a

Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

393

rectangular conch shell pendant, several circular
conch shell beads, many short tubular bone beads,
and other chert artifacts, including projectile points.
Two perforated canine teeth were also recovered,
as was an antler billet flaking tool and two animal
claws. Artifacts and skeletal remains were recovered
to a depth of approximately 10-13 cm below the
surface. All skeletal and artifact specimens were
bagged carefully and transported from the site at
the conclusion of the work.
The site was revisited April 25, 1995. The
elevation of Falcon Reservoir was 269.90 feet amsl,
or approximately 1.35 feet lower than the day of
discovery. The burial feature was then approximately 23 m from the water's edge. This and several other subsequent visits, conducted under more
controlled circumstances and with the necessary
equipment, yielded a large number of additional
associated artifacts with Burial 1, including a bone
awl.
Osteological Analysis
Burial 1 contains the fragmentary but wellpreserved remains of a child aged 10 ± 2.5 years,
based on dental eruption. Sex cannot be accurately
determined from prepubescent remains. Skeletal remains include fragments of the cranial vault, mandible, humeri, radii, femurs, fibula, tibiae, clavicles,
inominates, scapula, metacarpals, phalanges, ribs,
and cervical and thoracic vertebrae. The anterior
portion of the mandible was missing. A pathological condition was present, namely two small circular depressions at the internal occipital protuberance
that were covered with sub-periosteal bone deposition. Although their etiology is unknown, it is likely
that these depressions were the result of inflamed
meningeal tissue. Dental remains include the deciduous right mandibular canine and first molar,
deciduous left mandibular second incisor, as well
as adult left first and second premolars. The presence of a deciduous left mandibular lateral incisor
suggests that either the tooth was retained for an
abnormally long period of time, was a grave good,
and/or the remains of a second individual.
Invento:ry/Desc:ription of the
Associated Artifacts
Burial 1 produced by far the most diversified
assortment of associated artifacts of bone, marine

394

Texas Archeological Society

shell, ground stone (pipe), and chert from the Southern Island burials. No specific placement or patterning of the artifacts was noted, and they appeared
to have been strewn among the skeletal remains.
One artifact obviously displaced by wave action
subsequent to the erosion of the burial feature was
an incised animal bone (see Figure 6a), found about
1 m from the interment. Additionally, bone beads
had been washed by the same wave action some 30
m to the northwest, although the majority of the
bone beads still remained intermixed with the skeletal remains (Boyd n.d.a).

Artifacts of Bone, Teeth, and Claws
Bone Beads (N=506)
The beads are relatively short and tubular in
style, and are presumably cut bone segments from
very small animals, perhaps birds. Bone beads are
commonly found in association with burials in the

Falcon Reservoir area (Cason 1952:240-243; Boyd
1996a, 1996b, n.d.a, n.d.b, n.d.d; Hester 1997) as
well as in the lower Rio Grande valley (cf. Collins
et al. 1969:138-141; Hestern.d.a), and in the Laredo,
Texas area (McGraw 1983:38-39).
The bone beads from Burial 1 at Southern
Island range from 0.69-3.8 cm in length; only 18 of
the beads are over 2.6 cm in length (Figure 4a-d).
These beads are yellowish-brown in color and are
in excellent condition, with only 28 broken bone
bead fragments. Several of the beads exhibit one or
more lateral incisions at one or both ends of the
specimen(s). This is probably from the preliminary
cutting of the primary bone specimen, and these
original cuts were abandoned during the cutting
process in favor of the eventual cuts which separated the specimen from the parent bone. Two of
the bone beads (see Figure 4e-f) exhibit complete
circumferential cuts. One specimen exhibits one
such cut, while the other exhibits four. Stranded
together, the beads measure nearly 6.7 min length.

a

f

Figure 4. Tubular bone beads from Burial 1, Southern Island: a-d, clusters of beads restrung in their probable
configuration as necklaces; a shows all three clusters of beads; e-f, close-up views of beads that are in the early stages
of the groove-and-snap technique for making beads (length of e is 2.5 cm; f, 1.75 cm).

Boyd,

and Perttula - Southern

a Prehistoric

Bone awl
The single bone awl was recovered from just
under the surface in proximity to the burial feature.
It appears to be made from the metapodial of a deer
(Figure 5). The specimen measures 12.37 cm in
length, 3.09 cm in width, and 1.95 cm in thickness.
It weighs 20.9 grams. Bone awls have been
previously reported as mortuary inclusions in the
Falcon Reservoir area (Cason 1952:240; Boyd
n.d.a), as well as the Loma Sandia cemetery site
(41LK28) in Live Oak County in southern Texas
(Taylor and Highley 1995:523-526).

Incised animal bones (N=5)
One complete and four fragmentary incised
animal bones were among the grave goods. These
comprise three separate rasps. The complete specimen, apparently made from a deer metapodial (Figure 6a), is 18.10 cm in length, has an average shaft
width of 1.60 cm, and weighs 43.8 grams. The
specimen exhibits 15 transverse cuts or incised lines
across the frontal portion of the specimen, nearly
distributed over a space of
approximately 53 mm. The four fragmentary bone artifacts (Figure 6b),
three of which exhibit cut marks
similar to those on the complete
specimen, are from two separate deer
metatarsals. Decorated bone artifacts
as mortuary inclusions have been reported from the Floyd Morris cemsite ( 41 CF2; Collins et al.
1969:138-141), the Ayala cemetery
site (41HG1) (Hester and Ruecking
1969), and Loma Sandia (Taylor and
Highley 1995:522-528). Taylor and
(1995:527-528 and Figure
306c) describe numerous rasp artifacts reported from South Texas
sites, including one specimen from
Loma Sandia that is somewhat similar in form to those found with Burial
1 from Southern Island.

10

Figure 5. Bone awl from Burial 1, Southern Island. Both
sides are shown.

b

0

10
centimeters

Antle:r billet
One antler billet was associated
with Burial 1 (Figure 7). This specimen is 10.92 cm in length, has an

Figure 6. Incised Animal Bones from Burial 1, Southern Island: a,
complete deer metapodial with 15 notches, probably used as a rasp; b,
group of four incised deer bone fragments from two separate deer
metatarsals, each with notches and cut marks.

396

Texas Archeological Society

10

0
centimeters

Figure 7. Antler billet from Burial 1, Southern Island.

average shaft width of 19 mm, and weighs 27.4
grams. The recovered specimen exhibits significant
wear on the distal end, and possibly on the proximal
end, while the shaft portion also exhibits considerable use. This specimen was found in direct proximity to the skeletal remains. A similar billet was
found in the deposits at the Southern Island site (not
associated with any burial) in 1995, but disintegrated immediately upon handling (Boyd n.d.a).
Two possible antler billets recovered in proximity to the burials of two young children at the
Loma Sandia site (Taylor and Highley 1995:529) is
interesting given that Burial 1 is also a young child.
Two other antler billets were found in burial contexts (though association with a specific individual
could not be made) at the Silo site in Karnes County
(Lovata 1997).

Tubular bone pipe stem
A bone artifact, likely the stem associated with
a ground stone pipe, was also recovered with the
burial. The artifact is 8.91 cm in length, with a
maximum diameter of 14.67 mm, and it weighs 7.0
grams. The bone stem is made from the medial
segment of a human right ulna, and was found in
direct proximity to the burial feature. It exhibits
extensive modification, including a rounded and
smoothed end which presumably was originally
inserted in the associated pipe. The opposite end
has been cut, and one edge exhibits 3-4 incised

lines (Figure 8). The body of the artifact exhibits
numerous small cut marks, and it is somewhat
polished in appearance (The pipe stem and the
associated pipe was previously described and
illustrated by Chandler [1996:44-45]).
No other finds of bone stems found in direct
association with stone pipes have been previously
reported from the Falcon Reservoir area. However,
a similar bone tube was recovered in 1995 at
41ZP8, a site in the northern portion of the reservoir (Cynthia Scott, 1995 personal communication), and at the Castillo site (41ZP2). The latter
bone tube was also made of human bone (Hester
1997). Although the bone tube was not found in association with a pipe at 41ZP8, the immediate site
area did yield stone pipes. One of 12 stone pipes
recovered from Loma Sandia was found with a
bone stem inserted into the stem end (Taylor and
Highley 1995:512 and Figure 299). On the South
Texas coast, a tubular stone pipe with a mouthpiece
made of modified human bone was reported by
Reed (1937:218; Hester 1969a).

Severed Human Distal Humerus
A left distal humerus ca. 8-9 cm in length was
recovered that had been cut and polished transversely about 5.4 cm above the olecranon fossa
(Figure 9). This deliberately shaped artifact of undetermined use was inadvertently mislabeled in the
field, and its association with either Burial 1 or 2 is
not absolutely certain (Boyd n.d.a), although it is
believed to be associated with Burial 1.
Hester (1969a, 1969b) has previously reported
numerous human bone artifacts from Kleberg and
Nueces counties, many of which were associated
with burials. Other specimens have been reported
from Zapata County (Hester 1997), the northeastern coast of Tamaulipas, Mexico, and in
Brownsville Complex sites such as Floyd Morris in
Cameron County (Collins et al. 1969:138).

Miscellaneous bone objects (N=2)

0

10

Figure 8. Tubular bone pipe stem from Burial 1, Southern
Island.

Both specimens are made from bone of undetermined type. The first (Figure 10) is a fragmentary
section of a large bone with a maximum diameter of
2.87 cm. It has a well~ground.and.rounded end, but
the opposite end is broken away. This specimen was
found approximately 1 m north-northwest of the
burial feature, where it is presumed to have been

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula - Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

397

washed by wave action. The second artifact is a short, fragmented
section of bone or antler (?) with
small scratch marks that are apparent under low magnification. This
specimen was recovered amidst the
collected Burial 1 skeletal remains,
along with a small animal bone.

Perforated canine teeth (N=3)
Three perforated coyote (Canis latrans) canine teeth were recovered in direct association with
the skeletal remains (Figure 11).
The three specimens are mostly
complete. Two still exhibit
Figure 9. Human bone artifact from Burial l, Southern Island. The specimen
biconically drilled holes near the
is the severed end of a distal humerus.
root end. The third is broken in
this area, and only a very small
portion of the original drilled hole is evident. The
exterior surface of the teeth retains significant
amounts of the original enamel. The teeth range
from 2.9-3.4 cm in length, and weigh between 0.8
to 1.2 grams.
Perforated canine teeth have been previously
reported from the Floyd Morris and Ayala cemetery sites (Collins et al. 1969; Hester and Ruecking
10
1969). Similar perforated canine teeth were recently
recovered from an isolated Brownsville complex
burial (41HG173) in northern Hidalgo County
(Hester n.d.a).
Figure 10. Fragmentary bone object from Burial 1,
Southern Island.

Animal claws (N=4)
Four animal claws were found
among the skeletal remains. They
are similar in appearance (see Figure 11), and range from 1.7 cm to
1.9 cm in length. The claws each
weigh approximately 0.1 gram. The
function of these claws as artifacts
is unknown.

Marine Shell Artifacts
Disc-shaped conch shell beads
(N=19)
The conch shell beads were
found directly intermixed with the

10

0
centimeters

Figure 11. Artifacts from Burial 1, Southern Island. Three specimens on
the left are perforated coyote canine teeth; the four specimens on the right
are claws from an unidentified animal.

398

Texas Archeological Society

0

Figure 12. Shell artifacts from Burial 1, Southern Island. All but
one are disc-shaped beads made of conch; one specimen (far left;
see arrow) is made from the spire of an Oliva sayana shell.

skeletal remains (Figure
The beads vary
somewhat in size and thickness, and some
are drilled from one side, while others are
biconically drilled (Table 1). Weights range
from 0.7 to 3.4 grams, with a median weight
of 1.2 grams.
Disc-shaped conch shell beads are quite
commonly found associated with burials in
the area (Boyd 1996b, n.d.b, n.d.d), and
also occur in non·-burial contexts in
archeological sites at Falcon Reservoir
(Boyd n.d.a). Similar artifacts have been
found as mortuary inclusions at the Ayala
cemetery site (Hester and Rueck:ing 1969),
as well as Floyd Morris (Collins et al. 1969),
and are characteristic of the Brownsville
Complex (Anderson 1932). Disc-shaped
beads were not found at the Loma Sandia
cemetery, although circular Busycon discs

Table 1. Disc-shaped Conch Shell Beads from Burial 1
Maximum
Thickness

Hole
Diameter

Perforation Type*

l.82**

0.68

0.50

BC

1.73

0.52

0.55

c
BC
BC
BC
BC
BC
BC

Specimen

Maximum

No.

Diameter

2
3

l.58

0.24

0.43

4

1.56

0.57

0.49

5

1.53

0.58

0.52

6

1.52

0.39

0.40

7

1.33

0.33

0.47

8

1.31

0.37

0.46

9

l.28

0.35

0.44

10

1.27

0.45

0.59

c
c

11

1.27

0.39

0.42

BC

12

1.27

0.38

0.40

c

13

l.27

0.23

0.41

BC

14

1.26

0.25

0.36

BC

15

1.25

0.43

0.42

16

1.22

0.47

0.53

17

1.22

0.42

0.48

18

1.17

0.49

0.40

19

1.17

0.46

0.41

c
c
c
c
c

* Perforation Types are C=Conically drilled and BC=Biconically drilled
** Measurements are in cm, made with Mitutoyo CD-6" BS Digimatic caliper

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula -

Southern

a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

399

to make a bead (Figure 13, top
row). The other five specimens appear to have served as tinklers.
Three of these tinklers exhibit a
transverse, perforating notch near
the anterior end from which they
were originally suspended (Figure
13, bottom row). Approximately
one-quarter to one-third of the posterior (spire) end has been removed. The cut edges have been
ground smooth. The posterior end
cuts on these specimens are irregular. The two remaining tinklers had
the posterior ends removed, and
the cut edges have been ground
smooth. One of the cut edges is a
simple transverse cut, while the
other specimen exhibits an irregularly-shaped cut similar to the other
three tinklers (see Figure 13).
These
two specimens also differ
Figure 13. Oliva sayana artifacts from Burial 1, Southern Island. Top row, 3
from
the
other tinklers in having
beads; left two specimens and bottom row, tinklers.
conical perforations drilled through
the body whorl near the anterior
end(s). The Oliva sayana tinklers
with centrally drilled holes were recovered (Taylor
and beads range in length from 3.75 cm to 4.88 cm,
and Highley 1995:536-537). Disc-shaped conch
and their weight varies from 7.9 to 18.6 grams
shell beads like these from Burial 1 were found as
(Table
2).
mortuary inclusions with a burial located in a Gulf
Oliva
sayana beads and tinklers are
coastal site in the extreme northeastern portion of
occasionally
recorded as isolated finds on Falcon
the state of Tamaulipas, Mexico, in ·1995 (Mike
Reservoir
sites,
and have also previously been
Krzywonski, personal communication 1995).
recorded in association with a single burial there
(Boyd 1996a:16; Hester n.d.b). Oliva sayana
Circular Oliva sayana bead
artifacts as mortuary inclusions have been reported
from the Ayala (Hester and Ruecking 1969) and
A single, circular bead, apparently made from
Floyd Morris cemeteries (Collins et al. 1969).
the spire of an Oliva sayana shell, was found with
Those
at Floyd Morris were found with perforated
the burial. The specimen is quite small (0.84 cm in
carnivore
canines in situ inside two of the tinklers
diameter), and weighs only 0.2 grams. The hole has
et al. 1969:142-143), where they
(Collins
been drilled from the interior side of the bead, and
apparently served as clappers. Numerous Oliva
the exterior surface was ground to shape and highly
sayana tinklers with perforated coyote teeth in situ
polished (see Figure 12). Similar beads have not
were also recovered recently from a burial
been previously reported from the area, either as
(41HG173) in northern Hidalgo County (Hester
mortuary inclusions or as non-burial finds.
n.d.a). Southern Island Burial 1 had only three
perforated canine teeth, compared to five Oliva
Oliva sayana tinklers and beads (N=8)
sayana tinklers, and presumably the three
perforated teeth were originally suspended in the
The eight Oliva sayana beads and tinklers were
three Oliva sayana tinklers with the transverse cuts
recovered in direct association with the burial. Three
at the anterior end(s).
are unmodified except that the spire was removed

400

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. Oliva Sayana Beads and Tinklers from Burial 1

Length (in cm)

Maximum Width (in cm)

Weight (g)

4.36*
4.27

2.08

10.5
9.0
8.5

1.84
1.85

3.93

Length (in cm)

Maximum Width

Hole A**

Hole B***

(in cm)

Weight
(g)

4.13

2.13

3.75

1.90

0.72
0.42

0.16
0.25

11.2
7.9

Length (in cm)

Maximum Width

Cut Length

Cut Width+

Weight

(in cm)

(in cm)

(in cm)

(g)

2.56
2.40
2.20

1.61
1.63
1.50

0.25
0.38
0.19

18.6
13.4
10.0

4.88
4.88
4.21

* Measurements made with Mitutoyo CD-6" BS Digimatic caliper
** Hole A= exterior diameter of conical drilled area
*** Hole B=diameter of actual perforation

+ Cut Width=maximum width of transverse cut

Long rectangular conch pendants (N=4)
Four long, rectangular pendants made from
conch were found in direct proximity to the burial
feature, in the midst of the skeletal remains (These
pendants have been previously reported by Chandler and Kumpe [1996:3-7]). The specimens are in
excellent shape, and have single holes drilled near
each end of the interior edge (Figure 14). These
holes are intersected at right angles by single holes
drilled into each end of the pendants. The pendants
are highly polished in appearance, and have wellsmoothed edges (Table 3). The pendants are ivory
in color, and their original usage is unknown. It is
possible, based upon examination of the characteristics of the drilled holes in each specimen, that

they may have once been bound together to form a
necklace.
Other long rectangular shell pendants have
been previously reported from Cameron County,
Texas, and adjacent coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico
(cf. Anderson 1932:29-31; Chandler and Kumpe
1996:3-7; MacNeish 1958:185). None have been
previously reported from as far inland as the Falcon
Reservoir area.

Lithic Arlifacts

Da:rt points (N=7)
The dart points are triangular and unstemmed
in form (Figure 15), and five of the specimens are

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula -

Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

401

edge is broken, but the other edge
is intact, and finely serrated like
one of the complete Matamoros
points (see Figure 15). The other
fragmentary dart point is a distal
piece made of brown-colored chert
with lighter inclusions. It is
unifacially chipped and exhibits
fine flaking along the blade edges
(see Figure 15). AH of the
projectile points were found
directly intermixed with the
skeletal remains.
Cason (1952:240) reported
"flint points" found in association
with a burial at the Castillo site
(41ZP2) 1-2 km to the northeast of
Southern Island. Recent re-exami0
nation of the Cason data (Hester
1997) indicate that these are
0
1
2
3
4
5 centimeters
Tortugas points. A burial excavated in 1990 in the northern part
Figure 14. Rectangular conch shell pendants from Burial 1, Southern Island.
of Falcon Reservoir (on the Mexican side) had 13 associated triangular unstemmed Tortugas-type
Table 3. Long Rectangular Conch Shell Pendants
points (notes on file with the sefrom Burial 1
nior author). A triangular dart
point was found in proximity to
Length*
Maximum Width*
Maximum Thickness*
Weight (g)
one of the burials at the Ayala
cemetery, but it is believed to be
0.36
1.04
5.42**
4.1
intrusive from an Archaic midden
6.07
1.26
0.41
5.5
(see Hester and Ruecking
6.86
1.21
0.40
7.2
1969: 151-152). A burial excavated
6.99
1.19
0.41
7.4
in 1956 in Cameron County
yielded an associated triangular
* Measurements in cm
dart point similar to those recov** Measurements made with Mitutoyo CD-6" BS Digimatic caliper
ered with Burial 1 (Hester
1969c:161). Numerous triangular
dart points were found in association with several
complete. The complete specimens include four
of the burials at the Loma Sandia cemetery site
Matamoros triangular dart points (Turner and Hester
(Taylor
and Highley 1995).
1993:153), and one convex-based dart point resembles the Catan type (Turner and Hester 1993:89).
Chert colors in the specimens range from tan and
brown, to red. The length of the specimens ranges
from 3.59 cm to 4.74 cm. Both the Matamoros and
Catan types date from the Late Archaic to the Late
Prehistoric periods.
In addition to the complete points, two
fragmentary dart points were also recovered with
the burial. One is the proximal fragment of a brown
chert Matamoros point (see Figure 15); one lateral

Stone tools (N=2)
Two stone tools were recovered in direct proximity to the burial feature, although their association is uncertain. One is a distally beveled Nueces
scraper (e.g., Turner and Hester 1993:267-268). It
is made from a light brown-colored chert, and is
3.79 cm in length and 3.34 cm in width, with a
maximum thickness of 0.96 cm (Figure 16d).

402

Texas Archeological Society
length, 4.05 cm in width, and has a
maximum thickness of 1.93 cm.

Broken Bifaces (N=4)

0
0

1

2

3

4

5 centimeters

Figure 15. Dart points from Burial 1, Southern Island. AH are of the
Matamoros type, except for the specimen in the upper right which is a

Four broken bifaces wei:e recovered in direct proximity to the
burial feature, but again, we cannot be certain of their association
with it. Two are thick distal and
proximal biface fragments (Figure
16c, f). The third biface is a concave-based, thin proximal fragment, possibly a knife (Figure
16e). The fourth specimen is a
thin, square-based proximal fragment with edge dulling along the
upper portion of the blade edges,
suggestive of its former usage as
a knife, or perhaps reflecting
edge-dulling with an abrader during the thinning of the biface.
Broken unifaces (N=2)
Two broken and crudely-made
unifacial tools were recovered in
proximity to the burial (Figure
16b, g). One of the specimens is
rather thick, and the other is thin.
The thick specimen exhibits a
small amount of cortex near the
edge.

d

f

g

Secondary trimmed flake
One large secondary flake, of
uncertain association, has intentional edge preparation through
Figure 16. Chipped stone artifacts from, or in the vicinity of, Burial 1,
the removal of a series of very
Southern Island: a, biface; c, e, f, biface fragments; b, g, uniface fragments,
d, Nueces tool.
small flakes. The flake is made
from a dark brown-colored chert
with lighter colored inclusions.
Nueces tools are very common in the Falcon ReserApproximately 25 percent of the dorsal surface revoir area (Boyd n.d.a). The other tool is a biface
tains the original cortex, which is lighter brown in
made of brown chert (Figure 16a). The specimen is
color than the internal chert. Several areas along
lightly flaked along one edge, but well-flaked on
the edge of the artifact were deliberately modified,
the other (with a small amount of cortex still
resulting in an effective, sharp cutting tool. The
present), thereby forming an effective scraper edge.
tool is a maximum of 7.28 cm in length, 4.53 cm
No definitive evidence of use is apparent under
in width, and l.14 cm in thickness.
magnification, however. The tool is 6.49 cm in

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula -

Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

403

Ground Stone
Stone pipe
A sandstone pipe was recovered amid the skeletal remains and has been previously reported by
Chandler (1996:44-47). The specimen is made from
a fine-grained light tan-colored sandstone with tiny
black hematite grains that are visible only under
magnification (Chandler 1996:44). The pipe has
very thin walls, and there is a crack that runs more
than halfway down one side (Figure 17). The long
tubular bone artifact described above may be the
stem to this pipe; the smooth and rounded edge of
the bone artifact fits well into the stem end of the
pipe. The exterior body of the specimen is extremely
smooth. The interior (bowl) of the artifact is blackened from use, and exhibits a significant amount of
black, charred material adhering to the internal
walls. The artifact is 7.95 cm in length, and a maximum diameter of 4.37 cm; it weighs 89.3 grams.
Other stone pipes have been previously reported from the Falcon Reservoir area (see Boyd
n.d.a, n.d.e; Chandler and Kumpe 1994:14-21; Jackson 1940; Perttula et al. 1996:Table 5). Stone pipes
as mortuary inclusions in the Falcon Reservoir have
also been reported (Hester n.d.b). Stone pipes are
known from the South Texas coast (Hester 1969a),
the lower Rio Grande valley of Texas, and adjacent
Tamaulipas, Mexico. Additionally, 12 pipes were
recovered from the Loma Sandia site, 10 of which
were found in the "cemetery zone" (Taylor and
Highley 1995:502).

Intrusive Artifact
Historic period iron artifact
An iron spur, dating from the Historic period,
was found near, but clearly not associated with, the
burial feature. This obviously intrusive artifact probably originated from the nearby Rancho Las Barrancas ruins. The spur is highly oxidized. It
measures 10.7 cm in length, 9.9 cm in width, 1.6
cm in thickness, and weighs 167.83 grams.

Summary of Burial 1
Burial 1 was discovered while it was still
submerged in Falcon Reservoir. Disturbance of the
burial feature appeared to be minimal, as the skeletal
remains and nearly all of the associated artifacts
were found tightly clustered together within a very

10

0
centimeters

Figure 17. Stone pipe from Burial 1, Southern Island.
Side and proximal (stem end) views are shown.

small area. A few smaller bones from the skeletal
assemblage had been washed to the northwest of
the burial feature, however, and the lighter bone
beads had been washed a considerable distance in
that direction. The majority of the bone beads were
still present in immediate proximity to the skeletal
remains. Overall, the burial feature appeared to be
a secondary burial, perhaps a bundle burial. Several
factors necessitated the immediate emergency
recovery of the burial to prevent its total loss or
destruction. Subsequent visits to the site were made
under somewhat more controlled circumstances, and
the remainder of the skeletal remains and grave
goods were recovered.
The skeletal remains were fragmentary but in
good condition. The remains were determined to be
those of a young child, approximately 10 years of
age at the time of death. The child had a very large
assortment of artifacts as mortuary inclusions: bone
beads, a bone awl, incised animal bones (rasps), an
antler billet, a tubular sandstone pipe with bone
stem, a severed human distal humerus, two
miscellaneous bone artifacts of undetermined use,
perforated canine teeth, animal claws, disc-shaped
conch shell beads, Oliva sayana beads and tinklers,
long rectangular conch shell pendants, dart points,
stone tools, and other assorted lithic artifacts. The

404

Texas Archeological Society

artifacts, consisting of both ornamental and
utilitarian goods, represent the most diverse
assemblage of funerary objects found to date in a
burial context in the Falcon Reservoir area, or for
that matter from South Texas in general.
The occurrence of the stone pipe with this
juvenile burial is particularly noteworthy, as Taylor
and Highley (1995:503) state that pipes were limited to certain select members of groups, based on
state-wide mortuary data. At the Loma Sandia site,
for example, only 12 pipes were recovered among
the 205 individuals (Taylor and Highley 1995:502503). Eight of the pipes were definitely associated
with burials, and two others were possibly associated with burials (Taylor and Highley 1995:518).
The antler billet grave good in Burial 1 is also
comparable to mortuary practices at Loma Sandia,
where billets were found in proximity to two juvenile burials (Taylor and Highley 1995:528).

BURIAL2
Circumstances of the Discovery/Salvage
of the Burial
Burial 2 was discovered by the senior author
on April 25, 1995, subsequent to a follow-up visit
to Burial 1. The elevation of Falcon Reservoir on
this date was 269.90 feet amsl. Since the senior
author's visit to the site on April 22, 1995, the lake
elevation had dropped 42 cm, exposing a wide strip
of shoreline on the gently sloping eastern edge of
Southern Island.
Investigations on April 25 were primarily
directed towards the completion of recovery efforts
for Burial 1 (see above). Equipment, supplies, and
allotted time was planned only for Burial 1, so
when Burial 2 was discovered a few meters away
as well as another burial (Burial 3) just down the
shoreline, the recovery task at hand was
overwhelming.
A very cursory examination of Burial 2 revealed that it was 13.7 meters to the south-southeast of Burial 1, and about 18.3 meters west of the
shoreline at that date. The skeletal remains appeared
to be concentrated in a "pile" approximately 60 cm
in diameter, and minimal scattering by wave action
had occurred. Evident on the surface, and intermixed with the skeletal remains, were very large
numbers of small tubular bone beads as well as
perforated canine teeth. This burial had not been

visible on the April 22 visit; at that time, it would
have been some distance offshore.
The discovery of Burial 2, followed by the
discovery of a third burial (3 ), necessitated
immediate investigations to save them from the
numerous collectors and commercial looters who
visited the site. In fact, at least one collector had
been to Southern Island since the April 22 visit.
Footprints, later identified as those of the late Bob
Huston, a "winter-tourist" who collected artifacts
from Falcon Reservoir sites for many years, were
seen leading directly to Burial 2 (Boyd n.d.a). No
disturbance of the burial feature had occurred. Mr.
Huston subsequently indicated that he had not
disturbed the burial in anticipation of the senior
author's visit to the site on April 25 (Bob Huston,
1995 personal communication). The most critical
factor that prevented the controlled recovery of the
burial feature was time. At least one collector
appeared on the site on that date, along with others
in the immediate area, requiring immediate action
by the senior author to recover exposed skeletal
remains and artifacts.
Skeletal material from Burial 2 was picked up
and placed in a container. The artifacts visible on
the surface (perforated canine teeth and bone beads)
were also recovered and placed into appropriate
containers. Subsequent to the recovery of most of
the skeletal remains from the surface, two Caracara
point proximal fragments and one arrow point distal fragment were found; the distal fragment was
subsequently found to fit one of the Caracara proximal fragments.
Screening of the deposits in the area of the
burial for several hours produced very large
numbers of additional bone beads, perforated
canine teeth (complete and fragmentary), as well
as one small crude bifacial artifact (possibly not
associated with the burial feature). It was apparent
that the burial feature and associated artifacts had
not been scattered after it had washed out at the
shoreline. The density of artifacts, especially the
bone beads, was appreciable in the burial feature,
and dramatically decreased away from it. Further
investigations conducted on various other dates
yielded a number of additional artifacts, including
more bone beads and perforated canine teeth, as
well as another arrow point distal fragment which
matched the remaining Caracara proximal
fragment. A small Toyah proximal fragment was
also recovered, along with a Cliffton (Perdiz
preform) proximal fragment. Some of the bone

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula beads associated with the burial had been washed
only 6-8 m to the northwest by wave action, as
compared to 30 m in the case of Burial 1.
Perforated canine teeth were found no more than 1
m from the burial.

Osteologkal Analysis
Burial 2 comprises the fragmentary but wellpreserved remains of a young adult male, aged 18
to 29 at the time of death. Sex was determined by
femoral head diameter (Stewart 1979), and talus
and calcaneus metric observations (Steele 1976), as
well as non-metric observations of cranial and pelvic morphology. Burial 2 was aged on the basis of
pubic symphysis and auricular surface morphology. Skeletal remains include fragments of the mandible, metatarsals, phalanges, ribs, cranial vault,
metacarpals, facial bones, maxilla, clavicles,
scapula, humeri, ulnae, radii, inominates, fibulae,
tibiae, tarsals, sternum, sacrum, and cervical, thoracic, and lumbar vertebrae. Dental remains include
the maxillary right first, second, and third molars,
the canine, left first and second molars, and the
complete mandibular dentition.

Inventory/Description of the
Associated Artifacts
Burial 2 had large numbers of bone and chert
artifacts with it. The artifacts appeared to have been
randomly strewn amongst the skeletal remains, with
only a minimal apparent dispersion by wave action.

Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

405

a number of beads may have passed through the
114-inch mesh screen and were not recovered.

Perforated canine teeth (N=111)
With Burial 2 were 69 complete and 42 mostly
complete coyote canine teeth with biconicallydrilled perforations near the root end (Figure 19).
In addition to the complete (or mostly complete)
specimens, there were approximately 100 fragments
from an estimated 25-35 additional specimens. The
teeth are quite well preserved, but are very fragile.
A significant amount of breakage occurred during
and after their recovery (Boyd n.d.a).
The canine teeth recovered from Burial 2 were
obviously suspended in some fashion other than as
clappers in Oliva sayana tinklers (see Burial 1).
The specimens range in weight from 0.6 to 1.9
grams, and in length from 2.55-3.99 cm. As with
the specimens from Burial 1, these teeth still exhibit
a significant amount of the original surface enamel.

Lithic Artifacts
Arrow points (N=4)
Several fragmentary arrow points were found
in direct association with the skeletal remains, including two Caracara proximal fragments and two
matching distal fragments (Figure 20a-b ), one
Toyah (Figure 20c) and one Cliffton [Perdiz preform] (Figure 20d). The complete specimen is

Artifacts of Bone and Teeth
Bone beads (N=963)
The beads are short and tubular-shaped (Figure
18). They appear to have been cut from the bones
of small animals, perhaps birds. The beads from
Burial 2 are on average considerably shorter (0.7
cm) than those found with Burial 1 (0.69-3.8 cm
range). They are dark brown in color and are
somewhat fragile. A much higher degree of
breakage was noted in the specimens from Burial 2
(about 28 percent) compared to 5.5 percent with
Burial l. Only one of the beads exhibited a complete
circumferential incision. It is unknown how the
beads might have been used in their original context.
Due to their relatively small size, it is believed that

0

Figure 18. Tubular bone beads from Burial 2, Southern
Island.

406

Texas Archeological Society
same extent as the Caracara (Boyd
n.d.a). A fragmentary Cliffton arrow point (a broken Perdiz preform) was recovered in proximity
to Burial 2. The preform would
have been quite large when it was
complete (see Figure 20d). ·Both
the Cliffton and Toyah points date
to the Late Prehistoric period (see
Turner and Hester 1993). These
point types have not been previously reported in association with
burials in the Falcon Reservoir area.

Crude bifacial scraper
Figure 19. Perforated coyote canine teeth from Burial 2, Southern Island.
Lengths of these artifacts range from 2.55-3.97 cm.

\

\

I

I

.

I

b

10

0
centimeters

Figure 20. Arrow points from Burial 2, Southern Island: a-b, Caracara; c,
Toyah; d, Cliffton (Perdiz preform).

made from a brown-colored chert, while the other
is made from a tan- and pink-colored chert. Caracara points have been previously documented in
association with burials in the Falcon Reservoir (cf.
Boyd n.d.a, n.d.b, n.d.c, n.d.d, n.d.f). In Burial 3
from Southern Island, a Caracara point is attributed
as the cause of death of the individual (see below).
Caracara arrow points as defined by Saunders and
Hester (1993:22-31) are the most common Late
Prehistoric arrow point type recorded in sites in the
Falcon Reservoir (see also Boyd n.d.g).
The Toyah point is a fragment made from a
brown-colored, translucent chart. The specimen has
a deeply concave-base (see Figure 20c), and an
impact fracture. Toyah arrow points are also common in the Falcon Reservoir area, but not to the

One bifacial stone tool, perhaps a scraper, was recovered near
the burial, but it may not be associated with the interment. The
roughly-ovate specimen is made
from a tan-colored chert, with approximately 20 percent of the dorsal surface covered with cortex.
The tool is distally beveled (Figure 21), and the form somewhat
resembles the Nueces type, albeit
relatively crude. The specimen is
strikingly similar to 26 bifacial
scrapers recovered in a small site
on the Arroyo El Salado (Boyd
n.d.a), a location some 22 km to
the northwest of Southern Island.

Summary of Burial 2
Burial 2 was discovered after it had been exposed by rapidly dropping water levels at Falcon
Reservoir. Disturbance of the feature by wave action and other erosion appeared to be minimal. The
skeletal remains and associated funerary objects
were intermixed in a "pile," and even the lighter
bone bead artifacts were moved to the northwest
only a minimal extent by wave action. As was the
case with Burial 1, Burial 2 appears to have been a
secondary or bundle burial.
Examination of the skeletal remains indicate
that the individual was 18 to 29 years of age at the
time of death. The associated artifact assemblage
included items made of bone, teeth, and chipped
stone. Great numbers of bone beads were included,

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula - Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

cm
Figure 21. Biface found near Burial 2, Southern Island.

as well as large numbers of perforated coyote teeth.
Several arrow point fragments were also recovered
from at least four distinct points. The association of
the arrow point fragments, especially one with an
impact fracture and two specimens broken in half,
raises the possibility that they may have been responsible for the individual's death, rather than being mortuary inclusions. This is conjecture,
however, and was not supported by osteological
examinations of the remains. Most of the artifacts
with this individual were ornamental, as opposed to
the combination of ornamental and utilitarian artifacts found with Burial l.

BURIAL3

407

the feature, and it was apparent that the skull and
mandible had been freshly removed. The imprints
of the skull and mandible were still clearly evident
in the mud. The remaining skeletal material was
undisturbed (Figure 22).
The remains appeared to be those of a fully
grown adult, tightly flexed, with the head oriented
to the south. The orientation of the (missing) skull
was to the east, toward the nearby Rio Grande.
Skeletal material visible at the surface included the
left clavicle, the left scapula, the left humerus, the
left ulna and radius, the left inominate (hip) bone,
the left femur, and the carpal, metacarpal, and
phalanges of the right hand, which was placed in
front of (east) and bent back toward the skull. The
individual had been buried lying on the right side.
The footprints near Burial 3 were eventually
determined to be those of the late Bob Huston, who
stated that he removed the skull and mandible so
that collectors and looters in the area would not
remove them. The skeletal remains were turned
over to the senior author.
Because of the necessity to complete the
salvage of excavations of Burial 1 and Burial 2, and
the presence of indiscriminate looters and collectors
in the immediate area, the emergency salvage
excavation of Burial 3 was essential. All skeletal
remains visible at the surface were recovered and
placed into an appropriate container. Many other
skeletal remains were recovered by feel; that is,
they were pulled out of the muddy matrix in which
they were buried. Subsequently, a small amount of
associated sediments was screened through 114-inch
mesh, resulting in the recovery of additional skeletal
remains. An estimated 85 percent of the remains

Circumstances of the Discovery/
Salvage of the Burial

Burial 3 was discovered by the senior author
on April 25, 1995, subsequent to a follow-up visit
to Burial 1 and just after the discovery of Burial 2.
At the time the elevation of Falcon Reservoir was
269.90 feet amsl. The burial was exposed by rapidly dropping water levels that exposed a significant amount of "new" shoreline. When discovered,
the burial feature was about 20 cm above the pool
surface elevation. Burial 3 was found in the part of
the sitewhere wave action is most pronounced, and
approximately 91 m south of Burial 2.
When the burial was discovered, the senior
author noted fresh footprints in the wet silt around

Figure 22. Burial 3 in situ, Southern Island. Cranium and
mandible have been removed (left).

408

Texas Archeological Society

were collected during this initial effort, but no
artifacts. A detailed examination of the surface prior
to the excavations also showed no artifacts.
Subsequent salvage investigations found additional
skeletal remains, so that an estimated 98 percent of
the remains were eventually recovered, along with
a distally-beveled stone tool. Additionally, one of
the vertebrae was later found to have an arrow
point deeply imbedded in it.
During the initial screening, the senior author
noted that the sediments in proximity to the burial
feature were extremely viscous, with the consistency and appearance of a thick chocolate pudding.
This contrasted sharply with the surrounding silt
matrix and probably delineated the outline of the
original burial pit. Similar conditions were encountered in a burial salvaged by the senior author in
May 1995 at the Scissors Island site (Burial 2;
Boyd n.d.h).
Osteological Analysis
Burial 3 represents the well-preserved remains
of an adult male who died between the age of 34
and 44 years; the age determination was based on
pubic symphysis and auricular surface morphology. The skeletal parts include a nearly complete
crania, mandible, clavicles, scapulae, humeri, ulnae, radii, carpals, metacarpals, inominates, fibulae, tarsals, metatarsals, ribs, sternum, sacrum, and
cervical, thoracic, and lumbar vertebrae. Dental remains include a supernumerary tooth in the max illa lingual to the right first molar. All teeth were
heavily worn, and included the maxillary right first
and second premolars, right canine, as well as the
left canine and first premolar. Mandibular teeth
include the right first and second premolars, and
right canine, as well as the left second incisor, first
and second premolars, and the first molar.
The sex determination for Burial 3 was based
on sciatic notch width and acetabulum diameter
(Taylor and DiBennardo 1984), femoral head diameter (Stewart 1979), femoral circumference, talus length (Steele 1976), and discriminant functions,
as well as observations of cranial and pelvic morphology. A maximum living stature of 174.46 ±
3.27 cm (roughly 5 feet 7 inches) was calculated
using formulae in Steele and Bramblett (1988).
Burial 3 had suffered two traumatic injuries,
a systemic infection, degenerative joint disease,
and two congenital defects. The probable cause of

death to this individual is the imbedded Caracara
point found in the second lumbar vertebra on the
posterior-lateral side of the vertebral body (see
Figure 24). A probable slicing wound is also
present on the left clavicle on the anterior surface
near the acromial end. It does not appear that these
two traumatic injuries were suffered in the same
life-threatening event, since the clavicular injury
shows some evidence of healing, while the projectile wound does not. The individual also suffered
a possibly unrelated systemic infection, probably
of treponemal origin (e.g., yaws or endemic syphilis), as indicated by the clear nodular focus on the
proximal left fibula and tibia. Extensive gummatous periostitis was active on the anterior surface
of the left tibia, fibula, and right humerus. This
condition was also present in the neighboring skeletal population from 41ZP7, the Beacon Harbor
Lodge site (Wilson and Hester 1996:8). Extensive
well-remodeled periostitis was present on the right
tibia. The post-mortem transverse break (broken
during excavation) through the right humerus
shows that the medullary cavity was filled in with
active endosteal deposition at the time of death.
Degenerative joint disease was present in the form
of lipping on the cervical and lumbar vertebral
bodies. Congenital defects included scoliosis
throughout the thoracic vertebrae, and shortened
left third and fourth metatarsals without evidence
of trauma. The left fourth metatarsal is 18 mm
shorter than the right.
The teeth of Burial 3 have significant wear
patterns and suggest the attrition is the result of
coarse dietary items or grit inclusions, probably
resulting from stone grinding implements. Numerous mano stones were recorded in the Southern
Island site during the 1995 work (Boyd n.d.a). The
caries rates for the Southern Island burials, including Burial 3, were relatively low at 1.4 caries per
person. The high rate of attrition and the low frequency of caries suggests that dental wear resulted
in the three abscesses found in this individual.

Inventory/Description of the
Associated Artifacts
Burial 3 was not clearly accompanied by any
artifacts. One stone tool was recovered from the
burial pit (but probably was in grave fill and not
associated), and one arrow point was found imbedded in the lumbar vertebra.

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula Lithic Artifacts
Distally beveled stone tool
One artifact resembling the Dimmit form
(Nunley and Hester 1966; see also Hester 1995:438439) was collected along with the skeletal remains.
This tool type, often lumped into the Clear Fork
category, is common in Falcon Reservoir sites, and
especially common in sites north of the reservoir
area (Boyd n.d.a).
The specimen (Figure 23) is made from a
light-colored, opaque chert. It measures 5.21 cm in
length, 3.84 cm in width, and is a maximum of 1.17
cm thick.

2

Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

409

Prewitt (1995:95) erroneously extends the
distribution of the type to Bexar, Uvalde, and Val
Verde counties.
X-rays of the second lumbar vertebra, in which
the point was lodged, were obtained by Jeffery A.
Huebner. These clearly indicate that, upon impact,
the tip of the point broke off and lodged to one side,
while the remainder of the distal portion penetrated
into the vertebra (Figure 25).

Summary of Burial 3
Burial 3 was found after being exposed by
rapidly dropping water levels at Falcon Reservoir.
The burial was found in situ, except for the cranium
and mandible, removed the previous day. Burial 3
was flexed in a fetal position, lying on the right
side, with head oriented to the south, but facing
east, toward the Rio Grande.
The individual was 34 to 44 years of age at the
time of death and had suffered from infection and
trauma. However, the cause of death was likely the
deeply imbedded Caracara arrow point in the second lumbar vertebra. No definite mortuary offerings were found with this burial, although a single
stone tool was found within the matrix of the grave
fill. Burial 3 is the only instance in the Southern
Island burials where the cause of death is reasonably certain.

3

cm
Figure 23. Dimmit tool from grave fill of Burial 3,
Southern Island.

Arrow point
On May 1, 1995, while cleaning the skeletal
remains in preparation for their transport to T ARL,
the senior author discovered a side-notched Caracara
arrow point deeply imbedded in the second lumbar
vertebra (Figure 24). The Caracara is made of a
pink-colored chert, and is broken at the proximal
end below the notch. In general, the Caracara type
is distributed around Falcon Reservoir, and extends
in a 30 km wide zone along the Rio Grande to north
of Laredo, eastward to Jim Wells and Duval counties
and, to the west, into the Mexican states of
Tamaulipas, Nuevo Leon, and probably Coahuila.

BURIAL4
Circumstances of the Discovery/
Salvage of the Burial
Burial 4 was discovered by the senior author
on April 22, 1995. This burial was actually the first
one discovered, but was numbered only after three
other discrete burials had been identified. On the
discovery date, the elevation of Falcon Reservoir
was 271.25 feet amsl.
The burial was found during surface survey of
the southern quadrant of the Southern Island site,
when scattered skeletal remains were observed
over an area approximately 37 min diameter. Some
skeletal remains were collected at that time, but it
was not certain then if the remains were from a
single burial or represented the scattered remains
of several burials (Boyd n.d.a). No associated artifacts were found with the skeletal remains.

410

Texas Archeological Society

b

c
Figure 24. Views of Caracara point imbedded in vertebra from Burial 3, Southern Island: a, view from above; b, side
view; c, close-up of side view.

Osteologica! Analysis
Burial 4 comprises the highly fragmentary and
eroded remains of a minimum of two adults of
indeterminate sex. Skeletal remains include fragmentary remains of the cranial vault, humeri, femurs, and tibiae. The additional individual was
indicated by the presence of a second right tibia.
No dental remains were recovered.

few fragmentary skeletal remains visible on the
surface within an area of approximately one square
meter. The skeletal remains were collected, and
subsequent screening of the adjacent deposits produced no additional remains or artifacts (Boyd
n.d.a). The burial was 37 m south-southeast of
Burial 3, and had been exposed by dropping water
levels at the reservoir. On the discovery date, the
pool surface of Falcon Reservoir was 267.74 feet
amsl.

BURIALS
Osteological Analysis
Circumstances of the Discovery/
Salvage of the Burial
Burial 5 was discovered by the senior author
on May 3, 1995, though it was initially found by
the late Bob Huston. The burial was marked by a

Burial 5 consists of the fragmentary, eroded
remains of an adult of unknown sex. Skeletal elements include fragments of the cranial vault, mandible, humeri, ulna, femurs, and tibiae. No dental
remains were recovered.

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula - Southern

a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

411

BURIAL7
Circumstances of the Discovery/
Salvage of the Burial
Burial 7 was discovered by the senior author
on July 20, 1995 during general site surface survey. As with Burial 6, the burial had already been
excavated by an unknown looter(s). The minimal
amounts of fragmentary bone on the surface were
subsequently collected for osteological analysis; a
small amount of additional skeletal remains was
collected on subsequent visits to the site. The burial
was located approximately 187 m north-northwest
of Burial 1. This portion of the cemetery zone was
then high and dried out, and it is presumed that the
burial had been at least partially exposed by wind
action when found by looters. It is unknown
whether the burial was originally accompanied by
grave goods.
Figure 25. X-ray images showing the embedded distal
portion of the Caracara point; note that the tip is missing
(see text).

BURIAL6
Circumstances of the Discovery/Salvage
of the Burial
Burial 6 was discovered by the senior author
on May 30, 1995 during a general surface survey of
the site. The burial had already been exhumed and
disturbed by unknown looter(s), and only minimal
amounts of fragmentary bone were evident on the
surface. This skeletal material was collected along
with additional remains on subsequent visits.
The burial was located between Burial 2 and
Burial 3, in the higher, dried-out portion of the
cemetery zone. It is presumed that the burial had
been at least partially exposed by wind erosion
when found by looters. Whether the burial was
accompanied by grave goods is unknown because
it was found after it had already been plundered.

Osteological Analysis
Burial 6 contains the fragmentary, eroded remains of an adolescent of unknown sex aged 13 to
15 years old at the time of death. Skeletal parts
include fragments of the occipital, radius, femur,
and ribs. No dental remains were recovered.

Osteological Analysis
Burial 7 is an adult of indeterminate sex.
Nearly all the bone fragments were covered by a
hard calcium carbonate almost impossible to
remove; this coating may have inhibited some
observations. Skeletal remains include fragments
of the cranial vault, mandible, clavicle, scapulae,
humeri, ulna, radii, inominate, femurs, fibula, tibia,
ribs, phalanges, metacarpals, and sacrum. Dental
remains include the left maxillary second premolar
and third molar.

BURIALS
Circumstances of the Discovery/Salvage
of the Burial
The senior author was informed about this
burial, which had been exposed by wind erosion
during the last week of August 1995 approximately
175 m north of Burial 7. Boyd initially located the
burial on August 31, 1995, and small amounts of
skeletal material were visible on the surface; these
were subsequently collected for analysis.
Additional visits to the site recovered more skeletal
remains from the surface and from screening
associated deposits, and a small number of bone
beads were found that had been missed by the
original discoverers of the burial. A single small

412

Texas Archeological Society

glass bead was also found in proximity to the burial
feature, although it was not associated with the
human remains.
The original discoverers of Burial 8 are residents of Zapata, Texas. They reportedly found the
burial as they were collecting artifacts at the Southern Island site. The skeletal remains were reportedly articulated and in the fetal position (Erick
Kruger, personal communication 1995). A small
number of bone beads were apparently collected
from the surface in direct association with the burial,
as well as a marine shell "pendant" of undetermined type. Additionally, an unstemmed biface,
lanceolate in form and similar to the Pandora type
(a preform or knife; Turner and Hester 1993), was
recovered near the burial. When Mr. Kruger became aware of the discovery of the burial, he went
to the site and screened the feature deposits, recovering approximately 550 additional tubular bone
beads. None of the artifacts recovered by Kruger or
the original burial looters are currently available
for study, and it is unknown what happened to the
majority of the skeletal remains.

Osteological Analysis
Burial 8 comprises the fragmentary, eroded
remains of a child of unknown sex, aged 10 ± 2.5
years. Skeletal remains include fragments of the
cranial vault, clavicle, ulna, inominate, femur,
fibula, ribs, and thoracic vertebrae. Dental remains
include the adult maxillary right second molar and
canine, left first incisor, first premolar, and first
and second molar, and left first molar. Deciduous
dental remains include the mandibular right first
and second molars.

Inventory/Description of the
Associated Artifacts
Associated artifacts with Burial 8 are reported
to have included those of bone and marine shell, as
well as a biface resembling a Pandora point. The
association of the Pandora biface with the burial is
certainly suspect. The Pandora type probably dates
from the Middle to Late Archaic (Turner and Hester
1993: 170), a period much earlier than most, if not
all, of the Southern Island burials (i.e., the Late
Prehistoric). The presence of bone beads and the
marine shell pendant is similar to mortuary offerings
included with Burials 1 and 2, possibly suggesting

a general contemporaneity of Burial 8 with these
interments. It is possible, then, that the Pandora
biface was inadvertently washed or eroded into the
burial feature.

Artifacts of Bone
Bone beads (N=27)
A total of 27 complete and 23 fragmented tubular bone beads was found by the senior author
with Burial 8. The beads are generally similar in
appearance and condition to those from Burial 2
(see Figure 18). The longest beads range from 0.511.47 cm in length, and 0.37-0.77 cm in width. The
beads were recovered from the surface and from
screening of the deposits in proximity to the burial
feature.

Glass artifact
Glass bead, by Timothy K. Perttula
A single red mold-pressed glass bead was
found about 1 m from Burial 8. The bead is spherical in shape, and opaque in appearance (also being
pitted and scratched), with a 6.7 mm exterior diameter and a 1.3 mm interior hole.
Mold-pressed beads were made by pressing
molten glass in a two-part mold, the glass from two
pieces brought together in the mold (Ross 1991:51;
Sprague 1991:149). A pin was pushed into the mold
and the glass to make the interior bead hole.
This kind of mold-pressed bead appears to have
been manufactured in Europe beginning about the
mid-19th century (Ross 1991:62), and was still being made as late as the 1920s, if not more recently
(Karklins 1985; Sprague 1991). Given the manufacture dates, this bead is clearly not a mortuary
item associated with Burial 8, but rather part of the
mid-to-late 19th century historic archeological debris exposed at Rancho Las Barrancas.

Summary of Burial 8
Burial 8 was recorded after it had already been
plundered by looters. The burial became exposed
by wind erosion after the deposits in which it was
located dried out. The burial was said to have been
articulated and flexed, and reportedly accompanied
by a single shell ornament, a Pandora-style biface,
and numerous bone beads. These artifacts and the

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula- Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site
majority of the skeletal remains are not currently
available for study, as the artifacts were
subsequently sold, and it is undetermined what
happened to the skeletal remains. Investigations
conducted by the senior author yielded a few bone
beads overlooked by the looters, as well as a small
amount of skeletal remains from a child aged about
10 years old at the time of death. A red glass bead
was also found near the burial, but was not
associated with it.

OVERVIEW OF THE SOUTHERN
ISLAND MORTUARY
PATTERNS
Eight discrete burials are represented in the
skeletal remains recovered by the senior author at
Southern Island in 1995. A ninth individual is indicated by a second right tibia in the Burial 4 skeletal
assemblage, and a tenth individual by the severed
distal humerus, an apparent mortuary inclusion,
found with Burial l.
Four of the burials (1-3, and 5) were recorded
prior to significant disturbance by collectors/looters. Two of these (Burials 1 and 2) were totally
undisturbed when found, and appeared to be disarticulated, or "bundle" burials. Another burial (3),
although slightly disturbed by a collector (the skull
and mandible were removed), was an articulated
burial flexed in the fetal position. The other burial
(5) was fragmentary in nature and no specific notes
on position of the remains were possible.
Burial 4 had been severely scattered across the
surface of the site area by wave action, so its original context cannot be determined. Three burials (68) were plundered prior to recordation by the senior
author. Two of these (6 and 7) had been nearly
completely excavated and/or removed by the looters, and no "overlooked" artifacts were noted. The
other burial (8) was similarly destroyed by looters,
but information regarding its original context and
artifactual content was obtained by the senior author. Additionally, artifacts which had been overlooked by the looters were collected during the
recording of the burial feature.
Three of the burials (1, 2, 8) had associated
mortuary artifacts. Another (Burial 3) had a bifacial tool found within the matrix of the grave fill,
but this is believed to have washed or eroded into
the grave. This burial also contained a Caracara

413

arrow point deeply imbedded into the individual's
lumbar vertebra. No funerary artifacts are clearly
associated with four of the burials (4-7). Burial 4
was so scattered by wave action that the association
of any artifact(s) was impossible to determine.
Burial 5 was very fragmentary in nature, and it is
unknown whether additional remains or possible
associated artifacts were present elsewhere in the
site and were not recovered. Burials 6 and 7 were
virtually destroyed by unknown looters, and it is
not known whether any associated artifacts were
recovered with them.
The kinds of artifacts found associated with
four of the burials (1-3, 8) include those made of
bone (human and animal), teeth, antler, claws, marine shell, ground stone, and lithic artifacts (Table
4). The burial with the most dramatic assortment of
artifacts is definitely Burial 1. The classes of artifacts represented in the mortuary assemblage accompanying this individual are greater than any
other burial assemblage recorded in the Falcon Reservoir region to date.
Animal bone artifacts comprise bone beads
with Burials 1, 2, and 8, as well as a bone awl and
bone rasps with Burial 1. Other bone artifacts with
Burial 1 include a tubular bone pipe stem (of human bone) and two miscellaneous bone artifacts.
Another human bone artifact, a severed distal humerus, was among the grave goods (probably) found
with Burial 1. Artifacts made from teeth (i.e., perforated canine teeth) were found with Burial l and
2. An antler artifact is represented by the antler
with Burial 1. Artifacts made from animal claws
were recovered with Burial 1.
Marine shell artifacts were recovered from two
burials (Burials 1 and 8). Burial 8 reportedly had a
single "pendant," while Burial l contained disc··
shaped conch shell beads, a circular Oliva sayana
bead made from the spire of one shell, several Oliva
sayana shell beads and tinklers, and four long rectangular conch shell pendants.
Among the stone artifacts is the ground
sandstone pipe with Burial 1. Chipped stone
artifacts were also found with Burials 1-3, and 8.
This includes projectile points (Catan and
Matamoros types), stone tools (Nueces scraper),
fragmented bifaces and unifaces, and a secondary
trimmed flake with Burial 1. Lithics with Burial 2
include arrow points (Caracara, Cliffton, and
Toyah), as well as one crude bifacial stone tool.
Burial 3 had an arrow point (Caracara), not a

414

Texas Archeological Society
Table 4. Artifact Classes found with the Southern Island Burials
Burial No.

Class
2
Bone Beads

x

Bone Awl

x

Bone Rasp

x

Bone Pipe Stem

x

Severed Human Bone

x

Misc. Bone Artifacts

x

Antler Billet

x

Perforated Canine Teeth

x

Animal Claws

x

Disc-shaped Shell Beads

x

3

4

5

6

7

8

x

x

x

Marine Shell Pendant

x*

Oliva sayana Beads

x

Oliva sayana Tinklers

x

Long Rectangular Pendants

x

Dart Points

x

Arrow Points
Stone Tools

x

Broken Bifaces

x

Broken Unifaces

x

Stone Pipe

x

x***

x

x**

x***

x***

* Unknown Type
** Includes irnbedded Caracara point
*** Unknown if mortuary item, but probably not associated
mortuary inclusion, imbedded in a vertebra, as well
as a bifacial stone tool which was possibly intrusive
in the grave fill. A single biface similar to a Pandora
type was reportedly found with Burial 8.

SUMMARY OF THE
OSTEOLOGICAL
ANALYSES
A minimum of 10 individuals is represented in
the remains recovered from the Southern Island
cemetery site in 1995. The 10 individuals are from
eight designated burials, and one of the two additional individuals is represented only by a distal left
humerus that has been modified and appears to be a
mortuary inclusion. The skeletal remains are mostly

fragmentary with surface observations ranging from
good to hampered by severely eroded surfaces. In
many cases, cancellous bone material was not recovered and can be assumed not to have been preserved. Few bones were marked by root etching,
and fewer still showed evidence of rodent gnawing.
Demography
The individuals buried at the Southern Island
site (Burials 1-8) include two children, one adolescent, one young adult male, one middle-aged male,
and three adults whose age and sex cannot be ascertained. The only individuals for whom sex could
be determined were both male. Oddly, Reinhard et
al. (1989:130-131) show a range of sex ratios that
form a very large male bias for the adjacent region

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula- Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site
of Southwest Texas, with samples containing 58
males and only 4 females, to others with 27 males
and 27 females. This suggests either differential
disposal practices for males and females at death,
or that females from the region exhibited robust
features and were thus being placed in the male
category. The inability to refine age and sex categories was due primarily to the fragmentary nature of the remains, and the absence of bones and
portions of bones with a high cancellous bone content that are appropriate to age and sex determination. Ages at death for Burials 1 and 8 were
determined by dental eruption. Ages at death for
Burials 2 and 3 were ascertained by pubic symphisis
and auricular surface morphology, in combination
with the presence of an unfused proximal clavicular epiphysis and complete eruption, but lack of
wear on the third molars for Burial 2.

415

Only two individuals from the Southern Island
site exhibit pathological alteration of the bones recovered. Burial 1 had two small circular depressions of the internal occipital protuberance that were
covered with sub-periosteal bone deposition, possibly the result of inflamed meningeal tissue. Examination of the skeletal remains of Burial 3 revealed
that the individual suffered two traumatic injuries,
a systemic infection, degenerative joint disease, and
two congenital defects.

hunter-gatherer lifestyle in which sticky
carbohydrates do not form a dietary staple. A low
frequency of dental caries is also consistent with a
high degree of dental wear since grit not only
cleanses teeth of adhering materials, but also results
in a greater rate of tooth loss than destruction due
to caries. A total of seven caries was recorded on
55 erupted teeth from which observations were
possible. The caries rate is equal to the number of
caries divided by the number of individuals. As
teeth were among the skeletal remains of only five
of the individuals from the Southern Island
population, the caries rate of 1.4 is biased by the
small sample size. Only two of the five individuals
for whom teeth were recovered had caries (Burials
1and2).
Dental abscessing was present only in Burial
3. Abscessing is the result of infectious agents entering the exposed pulp chamber of the tooth, resulting in localized infection, and ultimately a
visible drainage canal in the immediate vicinity of
the affected tooth. Exposure of the pulp chamber
can result from traumatic injury, and carious destruction, but most frequently it is the result of a
high rate of dental attrition. The high rate of attrition, and the low frequency of caries, observed in
Burial 3 suggests that dental wear resulted in the
three abscesses found in this individual. No other
dental disorders were found in the Southern Island
population. Additionally, no calculus was present
on the dental remains from the site.

Dental Attrition and Disorders

Osteologkal Conclusions

Dental attrition is not considered a disorder,
but the normal result of use that is influenced by
materials taken into the oral cavity. Dental wear is
generally age progressive. Standard techniques for
recording tooth wear follow Smith (1984) for
premolars, canines, and incisors, and follow Scott
(1979) for molars. Smith's (1984) technique relies
on a non-metric scale of one to eight, while Scott's
(1979) technique divides the molar into quadrants,
resulting in a non-metric scale of four to 40. Dental
attrition is recorded in Table 5. When Burials 2 and
3 are compared, it is evident that wear is age progressive, although the sample size does not permit
adequate testing of inter-population differences in
wear that may be related to diet, habit, or task.
There were few caries in the Southern Island
population. A low caries rate is consistent with a

The Southern Island population studied is
small, but tentative suggestions about ancient
human biology in the Falcon Reservoir area can be
offered from the available data (detailed notes and
measurements on the eight burials are on file at
T ARL). The lack of females in this population is
likely the result of a small sample size and the
generally fragmentary condition of the skeletal
remains. The lack of infants and young children is
probably also a result of small sample size and
preservation bias, or differential disposal patterns.
Pathological and violent insults are represented in
the Southern Island population. However, the
relatively tall stature estimate for Burial 3 (5 feet 7
inches; comparable to the Late Archaic Oso Creek
burials, and taller than the Late Prehistoric Blue
Bayou burials [Huebner and Comuzzie 1992:67])

Skeletal Pathology

416

Texas Archeological Society
Table 5. Dental Wear Scores for Southern Island Burials
Burial

Tooth

Smith (1984) Score

Scott (1979) Score

LP3
2

LM1
RM3
RM2

15
6
13
30

RMI

RC 1

RP
RP
RM3
RMz
RMI
RPz

RP 1
RC 1
RI2
LI1
LI2

LC 1
LP 1
LP2
LM 1
LM2
LM3
3

RPi

LF
LP 1
LM2
LM 1
LP2
LP 1
LC 1
Ll2

RI2
RC 1
RPI
RPz
Supernumerary tooth

7

8

5
6
6
10
14
10
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
4
4
27
15
9
8
8
8
39
39
8

5
7
7
7
7
8
8
8

LP2
LM 3

5

RC 1
LP
LP 1
LM 1
LM2
RMI
RPI

2
2
1

9

Note: Observations on deciduous and unerupted teeth were not recorded

8
4
12

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula suggests that individuals from the Southern Island
site probably were not under resource stress,
although a genetic predisposition for height cannot
be ruled out. Additional support for a relative lack
of stress comes from the absence of enamel
hypoplasia. Furthermore, a lack of porotic
hyperostosis suggests either a relatively high
protein diet or a living environment relatively free
from iron deficient anemia-causing parasites.
Reinhard et al. (1989) report a moderate frequency
of porotic hyperostosis and enamel hypoplasia
from adjacent regions of Texas. Hopefully, the
results presented here of the analysis of the skeletal
remains from Southern Island will be useful in
future comparisons with neighboring huntergatherer populations.

RELATIVE DATING OF THE
SOUTHERN ISLAND
BURIALS
Several of the burials (1, 2, and 8) may be dated
by an examination of their associated mortuary
caches. All three of these burials were accompanied
by artifacts which have been found with other burials dated to the Late Prehistoric period, or conform
to types which are commonly associated with that
period. For example, Burial 1 was accompanied by
bone beads, disc-shaped conch shell beads, and Oliva
sayana beads and tinklers, all found with burials at
the Late Prehistoric Floyd Morris and Ayala cemetery sites in the lower Rio Grande valley. Burial 1
also had associated perforated canine teeth, as did
burials from Floyd Morris and Ayala. Also accompanying Burial 1 were Matamoros and Catan points,
generally dated from the Late Archaic through the
Late Prehistoric period.
Mortuary inclusions with Burial 2 included
bone beads and perforated canine teeth, as did Burial
1. However, Burial 2 was accompanied by a small
number of arrow points, all of Late Prehistoric age.
Inclusion of dart points with Burial 1 and arrow
points with Burial 2 is notable considering the similarities in other kinds of artifacts in the respective
mortuary caches. This similarity in mortuary practices suggests the individuals were interred within a
relatively short time of one another, when there
was a transition in the use of dart and arrow points
in the region. Thus, the inclusion of Matamoros
and Catan points with Burial 1 in this instance

Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

417

suggests that these specimens date more closely to
the Late Prehistoric period than the earlier Late
Archaic period to which they are also ascribed.
Turner and Hester (1993) suggest that Matamoros
and Catan points continue into the Late Prehistoric
period in southern Texas. For example, at 4 lLKl 06,
Creel et al. (1979) found two Matamoros points
associated with a hearth and bone-tempered pottery. Though this particular hearth was not radiocarbon-dated, the three assays from the upper
portion of the site deposits date to the Late Prehistoric period.
Burial 8 included bone beads that were similar
in style to those found with the Late Prehistoric
burials 1 and 2. A shell ornament was also recorded
with Burial 8, with Burial 1 at Southern Island, and
with burials in the Floyd Morris and Ayala sites.
The other burials have no grave goods, and
cannot be dated on this basis. The well-preserved
skeletal remains from Burial 4 compare closely in
condition with Burials 1 and 2, and may also date
to the Late Prehistoric period.
In contrast to the other burials, where their
temporal placement is based on interpretations of
associated classes of artifacts, Burial 3 was directly
dated by radiocarbon analysis. Samples of bone
from this burial were submitted by T ARL to the
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory for AMS
radiocarbon analysis, producing an uncalibrated
date of 840 ± 70 years B.P. (A.D. 1040-1180); this
calibrates to A.D. 1250, with a 2-sigma range of
A.D. 1025-1292 (Stuiver and Reimer 1993). This
date places the burial in the Late Prehistoric period.
Burial 3 had a Caracara arrow point deeply
imbedded in one of its vertebrae. This newly
classified arrow point type had been tentatively
linked to the Late Prehistoric, so the radiocarbon
date on the recovered skeletal material provides a
more refined placement of the point type. The age
of Burial 3 in the Late Prehistoric period further
supports the contention that Burial 2, also
accompanied with Caracara points, dates to the
same period.
Based on all available information, it appears
that most or all of the burials recovered from the
Southern Island site in 1995 date from the Late
Prehistoric period. Further supporting evidence is
the fact that the burials eroded out, or were exposed, at approximately the same time, suggesting
they were buried at about the same depth in the
site's sandy matrix.

418

Texas Archeological Society

THE SOUTHERN ISLAND CEMETERY
IN THE FALCON RESERVOIR
CONTEXT
Southern Island provides a unique opportunity
to study a large prehistoric cemetery site in an inland
South Texas context. Large cemeteries have been
previously identified in areas along (or relatively
near) the coast: the Floyd Morris and Ayala sites
(and other burials and cemeteries of the Brownsville
Complex; Hester and Ruecking 1969; Collins et al.
1969); the Oso site (41NU2; Martin 1930; Jackson
1933); the Blue Bayou site (41VT94; Huebner and
Comuzzie 1992); Berryman (41NU173; Mokry
n.d.); the Odem site (41SP1; Galin n.d.; Hughes
1950); the Morhiss site (41VT1; Campbell 1976;
Dockall 1997; Woolsey and Jackson 1932); and
several others (see Perttula 1997; Perttula and
Mercado-Allinger 1996). However, few cemeteries
have been identified in the interior regions of South
or Central Texas. Identified inland cemeteries
include sites such as Loma Sandia; Olmos Dam
(41BX1); Silo (41KA102; Lovata 1997); Locke
Farm (41CM25); and Loeve-Fox (41WM230) (see
Taylor and Highley 1995:667-677).
Prehistoric cemetery sites in the area of Falcon
Reservoir have not been previously reported. Similarly, no prehistoric cemeteries have been reported
from the adjoining area of Tamaulipas, Mexico.
Single interments have been noted from the area
(cf. Boyd 1996a, 1996b, n.d.a, n.d.f; Cason
1952:239-243; Hester 1997, n.d.b; Perttula et al.
1996:Table 2), usually occurring within occupation
sites. Many interments are not accompanied by mortuary offerings, while others are accompanied with
varying quantities and classes of artifacts (Boyd
n.d.a). Primary and secondary burials are represented, and cairn burials are also occasionally found
(Boyd n.d.a [see notes on site IFR-N77], n.d.h;
Perttula et al. 1996:Tables 2 and 3). Boyd (n.d.b)
compiled information regarding burials in the reservoir, and noted five possible cemeteries (including Southern Island) on similar landforms (i.e., the
Zapata terrace) on both sides of the reservoir, including 41ZP254, Toyah 1, 41ZP8, and 41ZP7
(Beacon Harbor Lodge).

41ZP254
This site is located on the Arroyo San Bartolo,
a few km north-northwest of Zapata, Texas. At

least three individuals, plus the scattered remains
of other burials, have been found at 41ZP254 over
the last few years. No associated artifacts were
identified with any of the burials. The site appears
to have been occupied from the Early Archaic
through the Late Prehistoric periods (Boyd n.d.a).
Toyah 1 Site
This site is located on the Mexican side of
Falcon Reservoir, a few km northwest of Zapata,
Texas. The site, also with a rich occupational component, has projectile points dating from the
Paleoindian period through the Late Prehistoric
(Boyd n.d.a). At least four distinctive burials have
been found at the Toyah 1 site during the last few
years. Three of the four burials were accompanied
by associated grave goods. One burial had associated bone beads as well as a decorated freshwater
mussel shell ornament (see Boyd 1996a:13-17).
Another burial found by the late Bob Huston had
27 associated triangular bifaces, a stone pipe, and 3
Oliva sayana shell beads (Hester n.d.b). A third
burial recovered by Cynthia Scott of Zapata, Texas,
had a cache of 50 large, thin triangular bifaces
(Hester 1995:442). The fourth burial from the Toyah
l site produced no associated artifacts (notes on file
with the senior author). This particular burial is
notable in that the salvaged cranium exhibits cut
marks on the frontal, parietals, and occipital areas.
The cut marks, which are short and parallel, are
indicative of defleshing prior to disposal. The cut
marks are most evident running perpendicular to
the temporallis on the left parietal. The marks appear to have been produced by (chert) flakes rather
than bifaces, as they are narrow rather than broad
and V-shaped.

41ZP8
This site is located on the U.S. side of the
reservoir just west of Zapata, Texas, and has a
substantial prehistoric occupation, with Paleoindian
period through Late Prehistoric period (Boyd n.d.a)
projectile points. Several burials have eroded from
the site deposits in the last few years, and the exact
number of individuals represented is currently
undetermined. Most of the burials were largely
scattered by wave action from the reservoir. Possible
associated artifacts found among some of the
skeletal remains include a number of beads made

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula from freshwater mussel shell (Cynthia Scott, 1985
personal communication). A few stone pendants
and two large stone pipes found at 41ZP8 may have
been associated with some of the eroded and
scattered burials.
41ZP7 (Beacon. Harbor Lodge)
This small site, just south of 41ZP8, also was
extensively occupied from the Early Archaic to the
Late Prehistoric period (Boyd n.d.a). Several burials have been exposed in the last few years.
A number of individuals are represented in the
remains found by Jerry Boyles, formerly of Zapata,
Texas, at 41ZP7. None of these burials were reported to have had associated mortuary inclusions.
A burial salvaged by the senior author in 1984 had
numerous associated bone beads, conch shell beads,
perforated human teeth, and Caracara arrow points.
An AMS radiocarbon date of the bone from the
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory yielded an
uncalibrated radiocarbon date of 620 ± 70 years
B.P. (A.D. 1260-1400). The calibrated date (Stuiver
and Reimer 1993) has a calendrical range at one
sigma of A.D. 1326-1389, with a 2-sigma span of
A.D. 1278-1437.
A burial discovered in the site during a 1996
survey was excavated by a team from TARL (Wilson and Hester 1996). This burial had no associated
mortuary artifacts, and was located well away and
downslope from where the other burials had been
located (Wilson and Hester 1996:7).
From this archeological evidence, it appears
that archeological sites in the conservation pool
area of Falcon Reservoir with multiple prehistoric
burials are not isolated occurrences, but are in fact
quite common. These sites with cemeteries are
located on peninsular-like Zapata terrace landforms
adjacent to tributaries of the Rio Grande and in the
northern portion of the reservoir. The Zapata terrace
is within the veg a zone (Nunley 1989: 194-195).

CONCLUSIONS AND
INTERPRETATIONS
The Southern Island cemetery site is located
on the Mexican side of Falcon Reservoir, in the
state of Tamaulipas. The site is very large, and was
occupied from the Paleoindian period into the Historic ranching era. It is located on a peninsular-like
landform at the north edge of the Arroyo Diablo.

Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

419

The landform faces southward, exposing the south
and southeastward-facing portions of the site to
wave and wind erosion caused by fluctuating water
levels at the reservoir. Over a period of years, cyclic exposure/inundation of the Southern Island site
has caused substantial deflation of the deposits, and
a number of burials were nearly simultaneously
exposed during the spring and summer of 1995.
The number of burials, and their spatial distribution, indicate that the Southern Island site was used
as a prehistoric cemetery.
Eight discrete burials are represented among
the recorded burial features. The presence of the
fragmentary remains of other individuals, including
remains recorded in the site by the senior author in
the early 1980s, indicate that other burials were
present but had been highly displaced and scattered
by wave action. We presume that other interments
are present in the site deposits and that continued
fluctuating water levels in the future at Falcon
Reservoir will eventually expose more burials.
Of the eight burials recorded in 1995, it is
reasonably certain that at least five date to the Late
Prehistoric period. This assertion is based upon one
radiocarbon date, as well as the association of diagnostic classes of mortuary items with some of the
burials. The Southern Island site has a significant
Late Prehistoric period occupational component, as
evidenced by the great number of arrow points recorded there (Boyd n.d.a).
The Southern Island burials include both primary and secondary burials. At least two secondary or "bundle" burials are represented, along with
two primary, flexed burials. The burial context of
the other four interments could not be determined,
due to scattering by wave action, disturbance by
looters, or their fragmentary nature. The overall
condition of the skeletal remains was quite good,
however.
Osteological analysis of the remains indicate
that the eight burials include children and adults.
At least two of the burials had pathological conditions, most notably Burial 3. Traumatic injuries
were noted in the skeletal remains of this individual, most remarkably the imbedded arrow point
in a lumbar vertebra that was the apparent cause of
death. The tall stature estimate for the most complete set of remains (i.e., Burial 3) suggests that the
Southern Island population was not subject to resource stress, ruling out a genetic predisposition for
height. Dental disorders were nearly absent in the
dental remains, although the degree of attrition was

420

Texas Archeological Society

quite high. Additionally, the caries rate is relatively
low. The high rate of attrition was probably due to
grit inclusions in the diet caused by the use of stone
grinding implements.
Three of the Southern Island burials had associated mortuary offerings; it is unclear whether four
others originally had associated artifacts. Two of
the interments with associated mortuary items were
children, and one was a young adult. Artifacts of
bone (animal and human), antler, teeth, and claws,
as well as marine shell beads, pendants, and tinklers
are represented among the grave goods. Additionally, artifacts of stone included a stone pipe, chipped
stone tools, and dart and arrow points. The burial
with the most varied assortment of artifacts was
Burial 1, that of a young juvenile. The diversity and
number of grave goods is greater than that recorded
to date for any prehistoric burial in this region. The
inclusion of four long rectangular conch shell pendants is notable, as this type of pendant has previously been reported only in coastal regions of Texas
and adjacent Mexico, and not previously reported
in a burial context.
The presence of the Southern Island cemetery
site in the Falcon Reservoir area adds to the growing number of cemetery sites recognized in recent
years in the interior of South Texas. Indeed, this
cemetery is but one of five such cemeteries recorded by the senior author in the Falcon Reservoir
area within the last few years. It is likely that other
such cemeteries exist around the reservoir, and along
tributaries of the Rio Grande in adjacent parts of
South Texas and northeastern Mexico. Other cemetery sites within the conservation pool area of the
reservoir will likely become exposed in the future
as the water level of the reservoir continues its
cyclic fluctuations. However, potential cemetery
sites above the conservation pool will likely go
undetected, as the artificial conditions present in
the reservoir do not exist there.
The inland context of the Southern Island
cemetery, and the other four cemeteries recorded to
date, is significant in that inland cemetery sites
have been poorly known in South Texas. The best
known inland cemetery site in southern Texas is
the Loma Sandia site, dated to the latter part of the
Middle Archaic period (ca. 850-550 B.C.), much
earlier than the Late Prehistoric cemetery
component at Southern Island. There is some
sharing of artifact types in mortuary offerings
between the two cemeteries in general, but

distinctive differences between mortuary items are
starkly apparent. For example, the preponderance
of utilitarian artifacts included as mortuary offerings
with the Loma Sandia burials contrast with the
primarily ornamental nature of the Southern Island
mortuary goods. Lovata' s (1997) recent work at the
Silo site (41KA102), a Transitional Archaic
cemetery in Karnes County, found that most of the
25 burials he excavated were without grave goods
of any sort. Corner tang bifaces were found with
two individuals, one an adult and the other a juvenile
(the latter also had large triangular bifaces placed
as grave items).
The mortuary artifacts with the Southern Island burials are similar in several respects to those
found with Brownsville Complex burials located in
the lower Rio Grande valley of Texas. The Floyd
Morris and Ayala cemeteries had an assortment of
burial offerings, including bone beads, perforated
canine teeth, disc-shaped shell beads, Oliva sayana
beads and tinklers, and lithic artifacts (stone tools
and triangular dart points). Such goods were also
recovered in several Southern Island burials. Also,
distally severed human bones, and other human
bone artifacts, occurred at both the Floyd Morris
and Southern Island cemetery sites. Finally, secondary burials are also part of the Brownsville mortuary pattern.
There are differences between Southern Island
and the lower Rio Grande cemeteries in mortuary
offerings. For example, a jadeite bead, as well as
several shell artifacts made from Marginella apicina
and Noetia ponderosa were found with, or in proximity to, burials at the Floyd Morris cemetery, and
decorated and undecorated bone pendants, as well
as conch whorl pendants, were found with burials
at the Ayala cemetery. Such burial offerings were
not included with the Southern Island burials. Conversely, stone pipes, bone awls, antler billets, rasps,
arrow points, and long rectangular shell pendants
were offerings in the Southern Island burials, but
not with the lower Rio Grande valley burials, although most all are found within the material culture of the Brownsville Complex.
Similarities between the mortuary artifacts
from Southern Island and those from single burials
in South Texas and northern Tamaulipas, Mexico
are also apparent. For example, bone beads, perforated canine teeth, and Oliva sayana tinklers were
found with the Southern Island burials as well as
with an isolated burial from 41HG173 in northern

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula Hidalgo County (Hester n.d.a). Disc-shaped shell
beads and perforated canine teeth were found with
an isolated burial recorded in northern coastal
Tamaulipas, Mexico (Mike Krzywonski, personal
communication 1995), and with the burials at Southern Island. The distance between the Southern Island site and the lower Rio Grande valley sites
ranges from 130-240 km.
Similarities in the artifact assemblages
comprising the mortuary offerings of the lower Rio
Grande valley cemeteries and isolated burials, and
the burials at Southern Island are also informative.
The lower Rio Grande valley burials for the most
part conform to those of the established
"Brownsville Complex," a group of Late Prehistoric
sites dominated by the disposal of the dead in
demarcated cemeteries as well as the use and
manufacture of significant amounts of marine shell
(Hester 1969c). The presence of marine shell
artifacts in the Falcon Reservoir area, including the
burials at Southern Island, probably mark extensive
interaction between coastal and inland groups.
Hester (1970:87-88) suggests the origins of marine
shell artifacts occurring in inland South Texas
contexts:
(1) the roving hunting and gathering bands of
southwestern Texas (perhaps members of certain bands) occasionally visited the littoral,
returning to their territory with examples of
marine shell; or (2) the shells were obtained
through direct trade with coastal peoples; or
(3) the shells were obtained through trade
with some intermediary group or through contacts with wandering traders from the coast.
Hester believe' the third possibility to be the most
likely, noting "that Cabeza de Vaca (when living
among coastal peoples in the 16th century) often
went into the interior of southern Texas to exchange
pieces of sea shell, 'conchs used for cutting,' and
'sea beads' for hides, flint, and deer hair tassels"
(Hester 1970:87).
In summary, Southern Island appears to have
been a favorable site for occupation throughout the
span of human history in the area. During the Late
Prehistoric period, the site was also used as a cemetery where numerous individuals were interred.
The disposal of the dead in both primary and secondary inhumations at Southern Island closely parallels those in the Brownsville Complex cemeteries.

Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

421

Similarities in the associated artifact assemblages
from the two areas suggests possible similarities in
their respective culture traits, as well as possible
trade of raw materials utilized in the manufacture
of artifacts.
The existence of the Southern Island cemetery,
with its obviously comparable and contemporary
Brownsville Complex-like traits, located in an inland context on the lower Rio Grande, suggests the
possibility of a broad pattern of similar mortuary
traits in the southern part of South Texas. We already know that there is considerable variation in
mortuary patterns (and offerings) between the
Middle and Late Archaic, and between the Archaic
and Late Prehistoric. With further discoveries and
research, a comprehensive re-examination of our
present ideas regarding the peoples and mortuary
practices of the Late Prehistoric and Archaic periods will be warranted.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The successful completion of this paper was
possible only with the invaluable help of a number
of individuals. Dr. Thomas R. Hester, Director of
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), The University of Texas at Austin,
provided assistance to the senior author with a
number of the source reference materials used, as
well as information regarding various prehistoric
burials previously recorded in southern Texas and
northeastern Tamaulipas, Mexico. Hester, along
with Dr. Darrell Creel, also of T ARL, was
instrumental in arranging for the radiocarbon dating
of Burial 3. Carolyn Spock of TARL assisted the
senior author with obtaining site numbers. Dr.
Timothy K. Perttula, along with Dr. Hester,
originally suggested the writing of this paper, and
provided the continuing motivation necessary for
its completion. Information provided by Jim and
Cynthia Scott of Zapata, Texas regarding burials
and artifacts they had salvaged at 41ZP8 and the
Toyah 1 site was both interesting and informative.
They also provided the senior author with a base of
operations as well as a place to stay during the long
and arduous 1995 field season. Information supplied
by Mike Krzywonski of Laguna Vista, Texas
regarding a burial he had recorded in northern
coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico was equally pertinent
to this report. Sr. David Bautista, of the Rancho

422

Texas Archeological Society

Jamaica in Tamaulipas, Mexico provided valuable
infonnation about the old Rancho Las Barrancas on
Southern Island. Gaylen Gilbreath, owner of Beacon
Lodge in Zapata, Texas is thanked for allowing the
senior author unlimited access to the lodge's boat
ramp and other facilities.
Perttula would like to thank Dr. Marvin T.
Smith (Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Valdosta State University, Valdosta, Georgia)
for his assistance in the analysis of the Burial 8
glass bead.
Lastly, the late Bob Huston is warmly remembered by the senior author for his conservationminded approach to the discovery of some of the
Southern Island burials, and his encouragement to
research and report them.

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, A. E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 4:29-31.
Boyd, J.B.
1996a A Prehistoric Burial From the Rio Grande Drainage, Tamaulipas, Mexico. La Tierra 23(3):13-17.
1996b The Arroyo Diablo Burial, Tamaulipas, Mexico. La
Tierra 23(4):42-45.
n.d.a

Expedition field notes on file with the author.

n.d.b

Five Prehistoric Cemetery Sites at Falcon Reservoir. Ms. on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

n.d.c

A Late Prehistoric Burial [3] From Southern Island,
Tamaulipas, Mexico. Ms. on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.

n.d.d

A Prehistoric Burial From 41ZP7, A Cemetery Site
on the Lower Rio Grande, Zapata County, Texas.
Ms. on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

n.d.e

A Stone Pipe Blank From the Arroyo Leon Drainage System, Zapata County, Texas. Ms. on file at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

n.d.f

A Late Prehistoric Burial From 41ZP85, Old Zapata,
Zapata County, Texas. Ms. on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

n.d.g

Notes on Artifact Collections from Falcon Reservoir; Projectile point sequences (charts and graphs).
On file with the senior author.

n.d.h

A Prehistoric Cairn Burial From the Arroyo Centurion, Falcon Reservoir. Ms. on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Byfield, P. J.
1966 Falcon Dam and the Lost Towns of :zapata. The
Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Campbell, T. N.
1976 Archaeological Investigations at the Morhiss Site,
Victoria County, Texas, 1932-1940. In An Archaeological Survey of Coleta Creek, Victoria and Goliad
Counties, Texas, by A. A. Fox and T. R. Hester, pp.
81-85. Archaeological Survey Report No. 18. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Cason, J. F.
1952 Report on Archeological Salvage in Falcon Reservoir, Season of 1952. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 23:218-259.
Chandler, C. K.
1996 Stone Pipes From Falcon Reservoir. La Tierra
23(2):44-47.
Chandler, C. K. and D. Kumpe
1994 Tubular Stone Pipes From the Lower Rio Grande
Valley. La Tierra 21(3):14-21.
1996

Long Rectangular Shell Pendants From the Lower
Rio Grande Areas ofTamaulipas, Mexico and Texas.
La Tierra 22(4):3-7.

Cloud, W. A., R. J. Mallouf, P. A. Mercado-Allinger, C. A.
Hoyt, N. A. Kenmotsu, M. Sanchez, and E. R. Madrid
1994 Archeological Testing at the Polvo Site, Presidio
County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Report 39. Texas Historical Commission and U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Austin and Temple.
Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, and F. A. Weir
1969 Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley of Texas. Part 1: The Floyd Morris
Site ( 41 CF2), A Prehistoric Cemetery Site in
Cameron County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:118-146.
Creel, D., A. J. McGraw, F. Valdez, Jr., and T. C. Kelly
1979 Excavations at 4JLKJ06, A Prehistoric Occupation
Site in Live Oak County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report No. 62. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula -

Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

423

Dockall, H. M.
1997 Archaic Hunter-Gatherer Adaptation on the Inland
Portion of the West Gulf Coastal Plain: The
Bioarchaeological Evidence. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

Hester, T. R. and F. Ruecking, Jr.
1969 Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley of Texas. Part 2: Additional Materials From the Ayala Site, A Prehistoric Cemetery
Site in Hidalgo County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 40: 147-157.

Evans, G. L.
1961 Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata
Area, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 32:33-45.

Huebner, J. A. and A.G. Comuzzie
1992 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of Blue Bayou:
A Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric Mortuary Locality in Victoria County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 9. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Galin, D.
n.d.
The Odem Burial Site, 41SP1, and Comparison of
Other Coastal and Inland Burial Sites. Ms. on file at
the Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hester, T. R.
1969a Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy
Counties, Texas. Report 15. State Building Commission Archeological Program, Austin.
l 969b Human Bone Artifacts From Southern Texas. Ameri-

can Antiquity 34(3):326-328.
1969c Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley of Texas. Part 3: The Floyd Morris
and Ayala Sites: A Discussion of Burial Practices in
the Rio Grande Valley and the Lower Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40: 157166.

Hughes, J. T.
1950 Field notes concerning findings at the Odem site.
Ms. on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
International Boundary and Water Commission, United States
Section
1975 Falcon Dam and Power Plant. Brochure and map
15865. El Paso, Texas.
1990

1990 Annual Report: Operation of Rio Grande International Dams and Reservoirs. International
Boundary and Water Commission, United States
and Mexico, United States Section. El Paso, Texas.

Jackson, A. T.
1933 Excavation of the Callo de! Oso Burial Site at the
Mouth of False Oso Creek, 8 Miles South of Corpus
Christi in Nueces County, Texas. Ms. on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

1970

Marine Shells From Archeological Sites in Southwestern Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
22(1):87-88.

1976

The Archaic of Southern Texas. In The Texas Archaic: A Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester, pp. 8390. Special Report 2. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1940

1990

Early Archaic Lithic "Eccentric" Artifacts in Southern and Central Texas. La Tierra 17(3): 1-5.

1995

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:427-459.

1997

Archaic Burial Patterns in Southern Texas: Further
Data from the Castillo Site (41ZP2), Falcon Reservoir. La Tierra 24(1):4-8.

Karklins, K.
1985 Guide to the Description and Classification of Glass
Beads. In Glass Beads, pp. 85-118. 2nd Edition.
Parks Canada, Studies in Archaeology, Architecture and History, Ottawa, Canada.

n.d.a

n.d.b

Notes taken on a prehistoric burial (41HG173) from
Hidalgo County, Texas, loaned to TARL by the
Hidalgo County Historical Museum. Notes on file
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
The Rio Salado Burial, Presa Falcon, Northeastern
Mexico. Notes on file at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 12:99-137.

Lovata, T. R.
1997 Archaeological Investigations at the Silo Site
(41KA102), A Prehistoric Cemetery in Karnes
County, Texas. Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Martin, G. C.
1930 Two Sites on the Callo de! Oso, Nueces County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:7-17.

424

Texas Archeological Society

McGraw, A. J.
1983 Arroyo de los Muertos and Other Prehistoric Terrace Sites Along the Rio Grande, Laredo, Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report No. 106. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.
MacNeish, R. S.
1958 Prelirninary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas, Mexico. Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society, Volume 48, Part 6.
Mokry, E. R., Jr.
n.d.
Archaeological Investigations in Nueces County,
Texas. Ms. submitted to the Southern Texas Archaeological Association, San Antonio.
Nunley, P.
1989 A Field Guide to Archaeological Sites of Texas.
Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Nunley, P. and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit
County, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
18(3):233-253.
O'Neill, P. L., F. M. Oglesby, W. N. Trierweiler, and C. Lintz
1992 A Cultural Resource Survey at Falcon Reservoir,
Zapata County, Texas. Mariah Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Perttula, T. K.
1997 Historic Context: Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices in the Central Coastal Plains and Rio Grande
Plains of Texas. Ms. on file, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Perttula, T. K. and P.A. Mercado-Allinger (compilers)
1996 Prehistoric and Historic Burial and Cemetery Data
Base: Southern Coastal Corridor Archeological Region. In Archeology in the Central and Southern
Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by P. A. Mercado-Allinger, N. A. Kenmotsu,
and T. K. Perttula, pp. 185-189. Special Report 35,
Office of the State Archeologist, and Cultural Resource Management Report 7, Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Perttula, T. K., S. A. Iruegas, and G. L. Ellis
1996 An Assessment of the Threatened Prehistoric and
Historic Archeological Resources at Falcon Reservoir, Zapata and Starr Counties, Texas. Cultural
Resource Management Report 9. Division of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.

Prewitt, R.
1995 Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:83173.
Reinhard, K. J., B. W. Olive, and D. G. Steele
1989 Bioarcheological Synthesis. In Human Adaptation
in Central, South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R.
Hester, S. L. Black, D. G. Steele, B.W. Olive, A. A.
Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 129140. Research Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Reed, C. T.
1937 A Carancahua Fire Implement. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 9:218221.
Ross, L.A.
1991 Trade Beads from Hudson's Bay Company Fort
Vancouver (1829-1860), Vancouver, Washington.
Beads 2:29-67. Journal of the Society of Bead Researchers, Gloucester, Ontario.
Saunders, R. K. and T. R. Hester
1993 A Typological Study of Side-Notched Arrow Points
From the Falcon Lake Region of Texas and Mexico.
La Tierra 20(2):22-31.
Scott, E. C.
1979 Dental Wear Scoring Technique. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology 51:213-218.
Smith, B. H.
1984 Patterns of Molar Wear in Hunter-Gatherers and
Agriculturalists. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 63:39-56.
Sprague, R.
1991 Glass Trade Beads: A Progress Report. In Approaches to Material Culture Research for Historical Archaeologists, compiled by G. L. Miller, 0. R.
Joner, L.A. Ross, and T. Majewski, pp. 141-159.
The Society for Historical Archaeology, California,
Pennsylvania.
Steele, D. G.
1976 The Estimation of Sex on the Basis of the Talus and
Calcaneus. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 45:581-588.
Steele, D. G. and C. A. Bramblett
1988 The Anatomy and Biology of the Human Skeleton.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Stewart, T. D.
1979 Essentials of Forensic Anthropology Especially as
Developed in the United States. Charles C. Thomas,
Springfield, Illinois.

Boyd, Wilson, Hester, and Perttula Stuiver, M. and P. J. Reimer
1993 Radiocarbon Calibration Program Revision 3.0.3c.
Quaternary Research Center, University of Washington, Seattle.
Taylor, J. V. and R. DiBennardo
1984 Discriminant Function Analysis of the Central Portion of the !nominate. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 64:315-320.
Taylor, A. J. and C. L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia
Site (41LK28), A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. 2 Vols. Studies in
Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Second Edition. Gulf Publishing, Houston.

Southern Island, a Prehistoric Cemetery Site

425

Wilson, D.E.
n.d.a Human Remains from the Falcon Reservoir Area.
Ms. on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
n.d.b

Human Skeletal Remains Recovered from the Southern Island Site. Ms. on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.

Wilson, D. E. and T. R. Hester
1996 Salvage of Prehistoric Skeletal Remains From
41ZP7, The Beacon Harbor Lodge Site, Zapata
County, Texas. Technical Series 45. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Woolsey, A. M. and A. T. Jackson
1932 Morhiss Mound. Unpublished ms. on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

REVIEWS

Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Volume XLfor 1991, edited by Don G. Wyckoff and
Don Shockey, 1994. xv+ 360 pp., figures and plates.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Volume XL/I for 1993, edited by Don G. Wyckoff
and Don Shockey, 1995. xiii+ 222 pp., figures and plates.

Reviewed by Michael B. Collins, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin

Data live while theories come and go. These
two special volumes of the Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropolgical Society (BOAS) are laden with
data on the enigmatic Calf Creek phenomenon, and
can, therefore, be expected to enjoy long and useful
lives. This is an important accomplishment because,
although many archeologists have touched upon
aspects of the Calf Creek problem, they have had to
do so using extremely rarefied data. With these two
volumes in hand, a beginning has been made toward setting out in a readily accessible venue the
temporal span, spatial extent, assemblage compositions, subsistence evidence, and typological parameters of this thing called "Calf Creek."
Volumes XL and XLII of the BOAS stray from
the series norm by each focusing on a single topic:
Volume XL addresses the Calf Creek phenomenon
in the prairies of eastern Oklahoma, and Volume
XLII considers the evidence for the same manifestation in the plains of western Oklahoma. Volume XL
consists of an introduction by Wyckoff, an opening
essay ("The Calf Creek Horizon in the Osage Savannah") by Wyckoff, 14 descriptive articles by
several authors, and a concluding essay ("Some
Preliminary Conclusions about the Calf Creek Horizon in the Osage Savannah") by Wyckoff and Larry
Neal. Volume XLII begins with an anonymous introduction followed by eight descriptive articles and
an essay by various contributors; the volume concludes with an essay by Wyckoff entitled "A Summary of the Calf Creek Horizon in Oklahoma."

In his introduction to Volume XL, Wyckoff
identifies "a widely distributed prehistoric material
culture, one being called the Calf Creek horizon"
(p. 1), as the focus of the volume. He proceeds to
review the history of the concept, to introduce Volume XL, and to announce plans for the forthcoming Volume XLII. In reviewing the history of
recognizing the "Calf Creek horizon," Wyckoff appropriately does not delve deeply into theoretical or
philosophical issues of systematics, although he
hints at the problems these pose by use of the two
phrases: "this prehistoric material culture" and "the
Calf Creek horizon." The latter term prevails
throughout the two volumes.
While the intent of the volumes is to assemble
the Oklahoma evidence bearing on the Calf Creek
horizon, Wyckoff' s essay mentions the evidence
from Kansas, Missouri, Arkansas, and Texas, and
notes the unfortunate application of different regional names (especially Bell, Andice, and Calf
Creek) for what seem clearly to be the same or
closely related projectile point form(s). Wyckoff
observes that dating for the horizon is not particularly firm, but seems to fall in the 5000-6000 years
B.P. range. Among several observations, Wyckoff
makes the following that place in perspective the
assembled descriptive papers: (l) Calf Creek is proposed as a style horizon as defined by Irving Rouse;
(2) Bell, Andice, and Calf Creek are comparable
forms; (3) the name, Calf Creek, has precedence
over Bell by having been formally-as opposed to

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

428

Texas Archeological Society

provisionally-defined in 1968 by Greg Perino, and
over Andice (named by Elton Prewitt in 1983); (4)
Perino considered Calf Creek bifaces to be knives
and Wyckoff observes that they many be points
and/or knives, with the blade subject to extensive
resharpening; (5) because of this extensive blade
attrition, typological studies must emphasize the
hafting area of Calf Creek bifaces; and (6) little is
known about the non-lithic aspects of Calf Creek
assemblages.
In his essay on Calf Creek in the Osage Savannah, Wyckoff describes the biotic district where
a majority of the Calf Creek materials have been
found in Oklahoma. He also identifies the 25 Calf
Creek sites and two non-site localities in the district which are discussed in the descriptive papers
in the volume.
The 14 descriptive papers found in Volume
XL consist of abbreviated site reports that describe
and interpret data on assemblage variability, the
Calf Creek lithic reduction sequence, caching, bison hunting, burial associations, radiocarbon dates,
and burned rock features. Since the vast majority of
Calf Creek assemblages consist of nothing but
chipped stone, there is a strong emphasis on matters of lithic material sourcing, heat treatment,
knapping, tool types, breakage, refurbishing, and
tool function.
In their concluding essay in Volume XL,
Wyckoff and Neal reiterate evidence that place Calf
Creek manifestations square in the great drought of
the Middle Holocene when the Osage Savannah of
today was more arid and supported xeric-adapted
vegetation, mainly grasses. With only two widely
separated radiocarbon dates of ca. 4000 B.P. and
5700 B.P. available, the need for many more assays
is obvious. Wyckoff and Neal wonder if all of the
people who made the Calf Creek artifacts "were
familiar with each other" (p. 347), and suggest that
at least two "groups" of people existed, one using
mainly Frisco flint, the other depending upon Ozark
cherts (pp. 347-348). Interestingly, heat treatment
of chert is more common in the western than in the
eastern part of the Osage Savannah; in fact, multiple heatings seem to have been employed by Calf
Creek knappers to bring diverse cherts to comparable isotropic character. There is very little evidence for the exchange of chert between the eastern
and western portions of the Osage Savannah, but in
both areas a small amount of Edwards chert from
Central Texas is found.

Their essay ends with the observation that responsible avocational archeologists made most of
the contributions to the two BOAS volumes on
Calf Creek. Wyckoff and Neal make a plea for
greater cooperation of this kind in the future.
Volume XLII consists primarily of a collection of essays and reports on Calf Creek manifestations in two parts of the Southern Plains of central
and western Oklahoma: the Rolling Plains and the
High Plains. There is also an essay by Marjorie
Duncan that considers Calf Creek adaptations over
most of their extent from Missouri to Central Texas.
In the anonymous one page introduction, a bit of
the history of Calf Creek discoveries is presented
for the western half of the state; it is also a tribute
to the work of avocational archeologists, particularly the late Roy Patterson.
In an essay entitled "The Study Area," Wyckoff
sets the geographic stage for Calf Creek occupations in western and central Oklahoma. The sites
discussed in this volume are situated in the mixed
and short grass plains, and in the tall grass prairies,
of today. However, artifacts diagnostic of the Calf
Creek horizon are often found in Middle Holocene
contexts indicating more xeric conditions, giving
the appearance that "sizable areas along the Canadian and Cimarron [rivers] were denuded of vegetation" (p. 5).
In the first five descriptive reports, evidence
is presented to indicate that in Kay and Grant
counties (in the Arkansas River valley of north
central Oklahoma), typical Calf Creek bifaces
made of heat-treated Florence chert are found at
several sites, with similar specimens made of
Alibates dolomite occasionally observed. End
scrapers with use wear indicating dry hide scraping
are al so found.
Three papers describe surface finds-points,
mostly-in south central and in far western Oklahoma as well as adjacent parts of Texas and Colorado. Raw materials are mostly Alibates and
Ogallala quartzite, but other sources are also represented, and heat treatment is almost universal.
Two synthetic essays are included in Volume
XLII. The first, by Marjorie Duncan ("Calf Creek
Foragers: Mobility on the Southern Plains During
the Altithermal") reviews the concept of a Calf
Creek "Complex" dated approximately between
5000-6500 B.P., and arrays considerable evidence
that it was an adaptation to plains environments
during the Altithermal from southeastern Colorado

Reviews
to central Arkansas, and from central Kansas to the
coastal plain of Texas. Duncan invokes aspects of
"optimal foraging" and residential and logistical
mobility" theories to infer patterns in Calf Creek
mobility and adaptations from the admittedly limited
kinds of data that exist. One inference proposes that
highly mobile hunting of antelope and bison was a
principal subsistence strategy of a foraging nature,
and that acquisition of chert was "embedded" in
these subsistence movements. She notes that caches
of Calf Creek artifacts complicate the picture since
caches are not characteristic of foraging adaptations
in the ethnographic record. At the Williams'
Orchard, Anthony, and McKellips sites in south
central Oklahoma, chert from remote sources and
extensive reworking suggest long-term curation of
Calf Creek bifaces, but no specific mobility patterns
or subsistence-related strategies could be discerned
from the analysis of these data. Most Calf Creek
sites lack evidence for early stages of biface
reduction, and "expedient tools" are commonly
made on late stage biface thinning or resharpening
flakes, further supporting the inference of a mobile
foraging subsistence strategy.
Wyckoff concludes the two-volume series with
an essay organized around five questions. Towards
answering the first ("When were they here?"), he
reviews the very sparse and somewhat inconsistent
chronometric evidence. Two dates from sites in
Oklahoma are near 4200 and 5700 B.P., the Coffey
site in northern Kansas yielded three dates between
about 4800-5100 B.P., and Central Texas chronologies suggest an age range between 5000-6000 B.P.
To answer the question, then, it is obvious that we
need better evidence.
Assuming a "mid-Holocene" age, Wyckoff
suggests a fairly detailed answer to the second question ("What was it like?"). Eastern Oklahoma was
predominantly a grassland with only scattered trees,
and conditions in central and western Oklahoma
were probably severe, with some areas subject to
wind erosion.
Wyckoff' s response to the question, "Who
were they?" suggests that the question should have
been, "What is the Calf Creek archeological manifestation?" Presented at the beginning of this section is a summary of the kinds of Calf Creek artifacts
and their geographic distributions, along with a lament that almost nothing is known of the physical
characteristics of the bearers of that culture, much
less their social and political behaviors.

429

Subsumed in the "Who were they?" question
is another, "Where were they, and what were they
doing?" To the latter, Wyckoff responds with a
more detailed presentation identifying four tentative regional variants of the general Calf Creek
pattern after first making the important observation
that the extant distributional data largely reflect the
vagaries of site preservation and exposure by natural and artificial processes.
Fifteen sites around the Arbuckle Mountains
show a high proclivity for the use of Frisco chert.
This chert was assembled, heat-treated, worked,
and cached at sites along the Washita River where
masses of stone were worked and where diverse
other activities are indicated. Small upland sites, in
contrast, yield mostly expended Calf Creek bifaces
and flake tools.
Seven sites and numerous isolated finds in the
Arkoma basin between the Ouachita and Ozark
mountains evidence a different regional variant.
Heat-treated cherts from the Ozarks are the prevalent materials at sites typically yielding small assemblages of broken or resharpened bifaces, a few
scrapers, drills, or broken preforms. "Practice
pieces" are virtually absent in contrast to their abundance around the Arbuckles. Evidence at these sites
suggests activities other than just hunting.
Twenty-nine sites on the Osage Plains and in
the Osage Hills of north central Oklahoma comprise the third regional variant. These are characterized by the presence of heat-treated Florence
chert. Sites are comparatively small and generally
yield bifaces, scrapers, drills, and quantities of heattreated flakes. Practice pieces are also rare here.
This region seems to hold promise for the discovery of buried Calf Creek components containing
faunal or floral remains.
Eight collection areas and sites in the
Oklahoma Panhandle and southwestern Oklahoma
yield the data on which Wyckoff bases his fourth
regional variant, that of the western Osage Plains
and Southern High Plains. Documented Calf Creek
occurrences are sparse in the High Plains sector of
this region, where assemblages are dominated by
Alibates dolomite and Ogallala quartzite, and are
made up mostly of bifaces. In the Wichita
Mountains and Osage Plains, in contrast, sites are
more numerous and yield a greater diversity of
artifacts. Again, the prevailing materials are Alibates
dolomite and Ogallala quartzite, but exotic stone is
also present.

430

Texas

The final question, "Whither Calf Creek?"
considers the lack of evidence for cultural transitions
at the beginning and end of the Calf Creek culture.
It is not known what links may have existed to
earlier or later cultures, and like the other questions,
more data are needed before it can be adequately
addressed, much less answered. Wyckoff's essay
ends with a brief recap and a well-placed accolade
for the avocational and professional members of
the Oklahoma Anthropological Society who
contributed to these two volumes.
Expectedly, given the number of contributors
and the several years during which they were written, there are a number of discrepancies between
the various papers and essays in these volumes
(even between different contributions by the same
author). The most noticeable have to do with the
geographic range and temporal placement of Calf
Creek. Some of the authors also seem to have a
fairly liberal notion of what constitutes the Calf
Creek type, including specimens with contracting
as well as expanding stems, and bases ranging everywhere from concave to convex. Issues such as
these are symptomatic of the shortage of excavated
and dated components.
Overall, BOAS volumes XL and XLII are
nicely produced and well-edited. Of great benefit
to this documentation effort are the approximately
30 distributional maps and 130 plates (mostly
photographic) of artifacts in the two volumes. In
addition, there are site-specific maps, profiles, and
photographs, as well as charts and tables of data
on artifacts and other kinds of evidence. Many of
the artifact plates are unattractively laid out,
though, with individual artifacts in irregular
swatches of black background arrayed on white

background, but in most cases the essential
characteristics of the artifacts are readily visiblegreatly preferable over attractive plates with no
detail discernible on the artifacts.
Whatever the fate of their tentative interpretations, this set of bulletins will remain a credit to
Wyckoff, Shockey, the Oklahoma Anthropological
Society, and everyone else who worked to produce
them. They have arrayed the tantalizing evidence
on Calf Creek and identified the gaping lacunae.
With that done, I anticipate that these two volumes
will promptly stimulate further inquiry into the Calf
Creek question. Certainly an effort similar to this
addressing the Texas archeological data would be
profitable, as would a concerted effo1t to locate and
investigate buried, isolated Calf Creek (Bell/
An dice) components.
As a cautionary note, however, it appears to
me that the geographic range of Calf Creek (Bell/
Andice) in Texas is larger and includes some habitats not considered in any of the papers in these two
volumes. Prewitt (1995:89, 92) reports Bell and
Andice points in the canyon lands of the lower
Pecos River, in the Pecos valley in Ward County,
and in the central Llano Estacado. Also, I have seen
them in collections from on and near the southern
edge of the Llano Estacado.

REFERENCES CITED
Prewitt, E. R.
1995 Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:83173.

vestt1'f;ruicnu; at the Loma Sandia Site
A Prehistoric
and .._,.,""'"'""
in Live Oak County,
2 Vols., by Anna Jean Taylor and Cheryl Lynn Highley. Studies in
Archeology 20, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin,
1995. xxi + 846 pp, plus map packet.

Reviewed by Joan E. Baker, Texas A&M University

This report represents the long-awaited publication of data from a significant South Texas archeological site excavated in 1977 and 1978 by the
State Department of Highways and Public
Transporation (now the Texas Department of Transportation). The Center for Archaeological Research
at the University of Texas in San Antonio received
the site records and artifacts in 1985. These two
volumes are the result of the collaborative efforts
of numerous researchers, and the painstaking detail
and tightly-reasoned conclusions contained in the
report make it well worth the wait.
The first five chapters are dedicated to presenting background information, much of which is
used later to build arguments regarding the role of
the Loma Sandia site in South Texas prehistory.
The geoarcheology chapter by Vance Holliday uses
a regional perspective to examine the impact of the
site's alluvial history on human occupation; this
later becomes an important part of arguments regarding the prehistoric occupants' settlement patterns. Stephen Black provides region-specific
archeological and ethnohistorical background,
painting a picture of the prehistoric occupants as
highly mobile hunters and gatherers, with incresing
population pressure during the Middle and Late
Archaic periods leading to shifts in settlement and
technology during the subsequent Late Prehistoric
period. Grant Hall's examination of prehistoric
cemeteries on the Texas central Coastal Plain will
be invaluable to students of mortuary patterns. His
analysis of cemetery locations in time and space
provides convincing evidence for long-distance
trade and rising population densities, accompanied
by increasing interpersonal violence and conflict.
In a later chapter, he adds to this picture, using
ethnographic analogy to argue that the inclusion of
durable mortuary goods indicates control of a resource-rich area. In particular, Hall points to the
vast tracts of proliferative pecan forests on the central Coastal Plain, and suggests that prickly pear
fields to the west, as well as bay resources on the

coast, may have spurred complex systems of trade
and exchange.
The technical part of the report is characterized
by close attention to detail. The descriptions of the
mortuary and non-mortuary features are preceded
by specific definitions of feature types and
explanations of excavation methods and records for
particular features. Artifact descriptions throughout
the report contain a great deal of detailed
information regarding morphology and
classification, and they are accompanied by nearly
400 excellent photographs and drawings. Nearly
every category of data examined in this report is
summarized in more than 120 tables and/or charts.
An appendix contains raw data (i.e., weight, length,
and morphological characteristics) on all categories
of artifacts. This precision makes the report a useful
one for future research of prehistoric South Texas
material culture.
The authors strive to educate the reader, often
providing historical and/or technical frameworks
on typologies, methods, and classes of data. Ex amples of this effort include Meredith Dreiss' examination of Busycon nomenclature and Taylor's
technical and historical backgrounds on chemical
analyses of bone. Additionally, one of the most
notable and laudable aspects of the Loma Sandia
report is the decision to examine a number of specialized research questions, all of which serve to
broaden or affirm the picture of Archaic life in
South Texas. These include use-wear analyses of a
lithic artifact cache (Dodt-Ellis and Highley) and a
number ofTortugas points (Wright); investigations
of vertebrate faunal remains (Hellier, Steele, and
Hunter); pollen analysis (Jones and Sobolik);
microbotanical studies (Murry); radiocarbon assays
of wood samples (Taylor); relative dating of human
skeletal remains (Marchbanks); and spatial analysis
of the burials (Meskill).
Of particular interest among these studies is
the chemical dating performed on the human skeletal material, and the spatial analysis of the burials.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

432

Texas Archeological Society

Using fluoride and nitrogen analyses, Michael L.
Marchbanks determined that the interment of individuals at the Loma Sandia cemetery was generally
a continuous process, with only small gaps occurring between episodes of burial. He also found that
individuals were buried at variable depths, rather
than deeper burials representing older inhumations.
While the first of these conclusions is supported by
similarities in burial disposition, the second is one
that points out the value of this kind of study, since
this research question cannot be answered through
spatial analysis alone. Taylor added a note of caution regarding the dating results, focusing on the
differential absorption of fluoride by immature and
mature individuals. Additionally, both the chemical
and spatial analyses of the cemetery (the latter performed by Frances A. Meskill) suggested a shift in
the preferred locations for graves through time.
Meskill found evidence for grouped interments (suggestive of family units, catastrophic deaths, or interpersonal conflict) and memory or marking of
previous inhumations. The Loma Sandia cemetery,
then, may represent a formal, bounded, and highly
visible marker of a macroband' s rights to the surrounding resource area.
While placing Loma Sandia squarely within a
temporal and regional framework, Highley used
artifact classes and associations to address such
issues as coastal and Central Texas trade and ritual
activities. She also points out the impact of
taphonomy and differential preservation on our image of Archaic material culture. With this in mind,
Taylor examined associations of particular artifact
types within the mortuary features, concluding that
the large quantity of durable and useful items (as
opposed to decorative or ritual ones) suggests that
both personal possessions and mourners' material
contributions were included among the grave goods
at Loma Sandia.
Taylor and Highley and numerous contributors make a good case for complex Archaic societies in South Texas, relying on multiple lines of
evidence (including, among others, geological,
temporal, artifactual, and ethnographic data). The
mere presence of a large cemetery in this area demands a reexamination of the social structure of the
people who created it, while its geographic location suggests increased territoriality and a potentially decreased mobility or increased seasonal
sedentism. Lange points, asphaltum, marine shell
artifacts, and other foreign artifacts and exotic

materials demonstrate extensive interaction with
surrounding populations in Central and coastal
Texas. This interaction, possibly in the form of
trade or ritualized exchange, would have ensured
cooperative efforts for food procurement in times
of adaptational stress.
Given the meticulous detail and precise organization of the rest of the report, Chapter 8, authored
by Taylor, is something of an anomaly. It is this
chapter that in part addresses the human skeletal
material found at Loma Sandia. The osteological
analysis, originally performed by Richard Shoup,
was apparently inadequate. This is pointed out by
Taylor, who came to this conclusion after comparing Shoup's reports with the original field notes
and finding a number of discrepancies. At least
some of these discrepancies may have been influenced by two factors. First, field records of artifacts
and the like are notoriously unreliable, since they
are typically made by individuals who have only a
brief acquaintance with the material. Therefore, this
method of double-checking the human skeletal data
is probably not an accurate one. Second, as Taylor
freely admits, she is not a physical anthropologist;
her lack of familiarity with some of the basic concepts of osteology (e.g., minimum number of individuals) unfortunately may have influenced her
perception of "discrepancies." This is not to say
that the analysis done by Shoup is a complete one,
or that discrepancies do not exist. On the other
hand, Taylor's attempt to anticipate questions regarding the consistency of the osteological data is
an admirable one, and one that recurs throughout
the report. As all scientists know, this is an important aspect of the scientific process; the best way to
ensure the strength of a given theory or hypothesis
is to test them.
Ultimately, though, Loma Sandia is a cemetery site; the bioarcheological data are of utmost
importance in interpreting the site. At the first sign
of deficient analysis, the human skeletal remains
should have been reanalyzed first hand by a qualified physical anthropologist. That it was not reanalyzed is particularly disturbing in light of the fact
that a large portion of the faunal material was reanalyzed. Curiously, original unpublished analyses
were available for both data sets (as noted in the
methodology section). Presumably, the primary
motive behind this decision to prioritize one reanalysis over the other was a financial one, but the
emphasis on the faunal analysis at the expense of

Reviews
the human skeletal analysis at a cemetery site is
questionable.
In spite of these problems, Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site provides a
wonderful example of the kind of vital archeological data that can be recovered from the multitudes
of unpublished site materials that still languish in
repositories all over the country. The Loma Sandia
site has changed our ideas of prehistoric South

433

Texas culture, and the data presented in this report
add to the ever-increasing evidence for Archaic
complexity in North America. The addition of a
solid and integrated bioarcheological analysis is one
of the few things necessary to improve this wellorganized, tightly researched report. This report is
highly recommended to students of South Texas
archeology or the Archaic period, and it is destined
to become a classic of Texas archeology.

Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle

Creek Valley, Hays

Texas,

2 Vols., by Robert A. Ricklis and Michael B. Collins. Studies in Archeology 19, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, 1995. xl + 651 pp.

Reviewed by Steven W. Ahr, Texas A&M University

Researchers have become increasingly more
cognizant of the importance of ecologically-derived
approaches to modeling prehistoric human behavior. Robert A. Ricklis and Michael B. Collins
present an exemplary ecologically-integrated approach to the archeology of the Middle Onion Creek
valley in Hays County, Texas, by synthesizing a
wealth of data derived from diverse archeological
specialties. The study specifically focused on Archaic and Late Prehistoric human ecology, and the
material is presented in such a way that it will
appeal to the interests of a wide audience of researchers in numerous academic and private fields.
These investigations fit well within a small but
important class of archeological reports that emphasize the interrelationships between environment,
land use, and culture, and it provides welcome doses
of both archeological method and theory.
The report is divided into two volumes. Volume I presents the theoretical outline, cultural and
environmental settings, field methods, and individual archeological components according to the
established regional cultural chronology. Volume
II includes several topical studies, and provides
much of the environmental data for the project
area, consequently laying the groundwork for interpreting archeological materials and past human
adaptive systems within a model of fluctuating Holocene climates.
The broad human ecology approach used in
this report is rooted in the concept of the human
ecosystem and adaptive interactions between human populations, environment, and culture (p. 5).
In order to understand such interaction in prehistoric Central Texas, an examination is made of
systemic relationships between environmental, cultural, and demographic components such as diet,
resources, settlement patterns, organization, and
population densities (pp. 6-7). From these variables,
correlations between cultural patterns and environmental change are established. Knowledge of past
environments is thus a critical factor in reconstructing past adaptations. The authors illustrate the struc-

ture of natural resources in the environs of the
Blackland Prairie, Edwards Plateau, riparian floodplain, and upland settings, and suggest how these
regions would have been readily accessible to prehistoric inhabitants.
Models of changing human ecology in the
Middle Onion Creek valley are based on excavations of Early Archaic, Late Archaic, and Late Prehistoric components. Chapters 5 and 6 focus on the
Archaic period components, including discussion
of the sizes and shapes of fire-cracked rock features
during use, original arrangement of stones, and cultural and natural processes of feature stone displacement (p. 69). Feature matrices are discussed at
some length, and detailed descriptions are provided
along with lithic artifact descriptions and distributional analyses. It is through the study of these and
other variables that our understanding of the behaviors that produced various kinds of burned rock
features and their relationship to lithic artifacts will
be increased. To facilitate this understanding, discussions are placed within the context of the current status of burned rock midden research, which
is addressed in Chapter 6. While simultaneously
confronting this issue on a broad scale, small-scale
investigations of individual features are presented,
allowing archeologists to begin formulating new
questions regarding old problems.
Their interpretation of Archaic components
suggests that the area was primarily utilized for
hunting and animal food preparation, while plant
food processing is less well-represented in the
archeological record. This illustrates a common
problem in archeology-namely, how to recognize
the ghostly traces of certain past activities. By
employing new techniques of feature analysis, the
report adds to this knowledge bank, and joins a
small but growing body of literature concerned with
fire-cracked rock studies, cooking techniques, and
the types of foods prepared using hot rock
technology (see Collins 1991; Jackson 1997; Lintz
1989; Pierce 1984; Thoms 1986, 1996; Zurel 1979).
This research has the potential for refining models

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

Reviews
of
subsistence
and
an
invaluable supplement to current theories derived
from ethnographic studies.
Although investigations of the Austin interval
were limited (Chapter 7), the work in the Middle
Onion Creek valley confirmed a broad-based
subsistence strategy during the Late Prehistoric
Austin and Toyah intervals that focused on the
exploitation of wide-ranging resources such as
white-tailed deer, small mammals, land snails,
reptiles, freshwater mussels, and some plant foods.
Discussion of the Toyah components (Chapter 8)
begins with an interesting theoretical debate about
the effective use of categorical terms such as phase,
horizon, and focus to define Toyah cultural
manifestations. At first glance, such a discussion
may seem out of place; however, the benefit of
such reflection becomes readily apparent when one
considers the variability that Toyah assemblages
can exhibit, especially those oriented toward the
processing of large game such as bison. Sites in the
project area contain a fairly typical Toyah artifact
assemblage, including beveled knives, Perdiz
arrowpoints, end scrapers, ceramics, and bison bone.
Contextual data indicate short-term occupations
where various site-specific functions were carried
out, representing subsets of the Late Prehistoric
Toyah adaptive system (p. 322). This section
concludes by evaluating how well the Late
Prehistoric Toyah material culture is linked to
ethnographically documented groups known to have
inhabited the region. Also examined is the present
state of knowledge concerning the inflow and
dispersion of large game-oriented technology over
a broad area. Competing hypotheses at present
include migration of a tool kit-bearing culture group
versus diffusion of a highly specialized technology.
Volume II contains a wide assortment of topical
studies not covered in the preceding volume,
including discussions of geomorphic studies;
vegetation analyses; faunal, molluscan, pollen,
phytolith, and macrofloral remains; chronometric
investigations; archeomagnetism; magnetometer
surveys; ceramic pastes and petrographic analyses;
lithic use-wear; and residue analysis. Rather than
constituting merely a compilation of appendices,
the data are successfully integrated into the larger
vista of human ecology. For example, discussions
of site geomorphology as presented in Chapter 12
also occur throughout the archeological text, and is
successfully assimilated into interpretations of the

435

valley's flu vial
and its
implications. This is effective in explaining the near
absence of Middle Archaic materials.
Each chapter in Volume II could stand alone
as a valuable research contribution in its own right.
However, their greatest value lies in their combined effect, which is succinctly stated in the introduction: "the whole is clearly greater than the sum
of its parts" (p. 4). To illustrate, several chapters in
this volume (e.g., Chapters 13-16 and 21) provide a
thorough environmental background and form a
strong basis for refining ecological theory in order
to explain cultural dynamics. Frequent references
to these studies throughout Volume 1 also indicate
the increasing value in applying new and experimental techniques toward interpretations of archeological data.
The report is well-organized throughout, and
each chapter offers a great deal of information firmly
grounded in ecological theory; both volumes are
also well-supported by informative illustrations,
graphs, and tables. The report presents data within
a model of long-term human adaptation, and makes
a profound contribution to the study of land use in
the Blackland Prairie, studies of fire-cracked rock
features, and cultural adaptive responses to changing environments. It is quite clear that the quality
and quantity of information in this report is an
essential addition to the archeology and paleoecology of Central Texas, and that these two volumes
will serve as a valuable reference for researchers
for years to come.

REFERENCES CITED
Collins, M. B.
1991 Thoughts on Future Investigations of Burned Rock
Middens. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas:
An Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R.
Hester, pp. 1-24. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Jackson, M. A.
1997 Fire-Cracked Rock: Ethnohistory, Experiments, and
Cultural Implications. Master's thesis in progress,
Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.

436

Texas Archeological Society

Lintz, C.
1989 Experimental Thermal Discoloration and Heat Conductivity Studies of Caliche from Eastern New
Mexico. Geoarchaeology 4 (4):319-346.
Pierce, C.
1984 Analysis of Cooking Stone from a Late Period
Chumash Village. Paper presented at the 49th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Portland.
Thoms, A. V.
1986 Hot Rocks: The Short-Term Storage of Energy in
the Calispell Valley. In Calispell Valley Archaeological Project Interim Report for 1984 and 1985
Field Seasons, edited by A. V. Thoms and G. C.
Burtchard, pp. 447-477. Contributions in Cultural
Resource Management No. 10. Center for Northwest Anthropology, Washington State University,
Pullman.

Thoms, A. V. (symposium organizer)
1996 Cook-Stone Archeology in Texas: Assessing the
Nature of Fire-Cracked Rock Features in SouthCentral North America. Symposium presented at
the 67th Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society, San Antonio.
Zurel, R.
1979 Brief Comments Regarding the Nature of Fire
Cracked Rock on Aboriginal Sites in the Great Lakes
Area. Working Papers in Archaeology No. 3. Laboratory of Archaeology, Oakland University, Rochester, Michigan.

Caddo Indians: Where We Come From, by Cecile Elkins Carter. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman,
1995. xii+ 420 pp., figures, maps, and photos.

Reviewed by James E. Bruseth, Texas Historical Commission

Involving more then two decades of research,
Cecile Elkins Carter's book on the Caddo Indians
attempts to pull together the history of the Caddo
people based on archeological investigations,
historical documents, oral histories, and other
historical sources. The book was written largely
out of Carter's realization that most contemporary
Caddo know little about their past. Her purpose in
writing the book was to provide a single source of
information "about the Caddos for the Caddos" and
for anyone else without a specialized academic
background. In the book, the term Caddo is used to
include a variety of closely related groups, including
the Cadohadacho, Hasinai, Natchitoches, and
Anadarko; I use the same convention for this review.
Chapter 1 starts off with a discussion of archeology in general, and how archeologists in particular study the history of the Caddo. The chapter also
provides brief information about what archeologists have learned of Caddo prehistory from investigations of burial and habitation sites. In so doing,
it provides a very generalized overview of what is
otherwise a very complex literature obtained over
nearly a century of archeological investigations.
The remainder of the book focuses on
reconstructing sixteenth to early twentieth century
Caddo history. Specifically, the next two chapters
deal with the initial explorations of portions of
Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana by
Spanish and French explorers. One of the most
interesting features of Carter's book is the
occasional interrelating of an historical account with
contemporary Caddo information in an attempt to
show historical continuity to present-day customs,
or to add interpretive depth to the historical account.
A good example of this is her use of the account by
Henri Joutel (pp. 39-40) of the Hasinai' s dance and
celebration of the tribe's successful war against the
Cannohatinno to the west. The activities involved
displaying trophy scalps collected by Hasinai
warriors, as well as three days of dancing, feasting,
and rejoicing. Carter draws on contemporary
comparisons with an oral history interview with
Saddie Weller, who provided information on the

Caddo Turkey Dance. According to Weller, this
dance was considered a victory or scalp dance and
usually lasted three days. The comparison provides
an important connection with the seventeenth
century Hasinai, and helps to explain the traditional
importance of the Turkey Dance to the modern
Caddo people.
The next 10 chapters describe Spanish efforts
to control the northern boundary of New Spain by
establishing a series of missions and presidios among
the Hasinai and other Caddo tribes. This was a
response to France's attempts in 1685 to establish a
colony in Spanish-controlled Texas. From the accounts prepared by the Spanish missionaries, Carter
provides much detail on the seventeenth and eighteenth century customs of the Caddo, principally the
Hasinai. Although this information has been summarized in many other sources, such as Swanton
(1942) and Griffith (1954), her book is a very clear
and straightforward chronological account of early
Caddo customs. In so doing, she provides a history
not just of Caddo custom or tradition, but a history
of the Caddo people during Spain's efforts to
christianize the Hasinai.
Chapters 16-22 concentrate more on the
Cadohadacho, the northernmost Caddo group. After
removal of the Spanish missions in 1773, Spain,
France, and the United States vied for influence
among the Caddo largely to help each other better
maintain territorial claims over what is today the
boundary between Texas and Louisiana. The Caddo
were alternately courted by each country, and
supplied with European and American goods in
return for cooperation, and other governmental
promises, many of which were never realized. It
was during this period that immigrant Indian groups,
such as the Choctaw, Cherokee, Delaware,
Shawnee, and Coushatta began to move into Caddo
territory. The Osage from the north were also
attacking the Caddo along the Red River as far
down as Natchitoches. All of these factors were
reducing and consolidating the Caddo people into
smaller villages further down the Red River and
ultimately to Caddo Lake in Northeast Texas.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

438

Texas Archeological Society

European-introduced diseases also took a great toll
during this time, further decreasing their numbers.
As a smaller and weakened people, the Caddo's
influence with Spain, later Mexico, and the United
States declined as well.
Chapter 20 describes the processes and circumstances that ultimately led to the Caddo leaving
their traditional homeland in the mid-nineteenth century. A significant impetus was the establishment
of Texas as an independent country, and its vacillating policy towards Indians residing there. The
Republic of Texas concluded that only native Indians had valid claims against the land, and in these
cases the claims were only valid for occupancy but
not for outright ownership.
After this, as discussed in Chapters 21-23, most
Caddo progressively moved westward into North
Central Texas to escape encroaching Anglo-Americai1 settlers. Some of the Louisiana Caddo, however, never moved into Texas, and instead chose
simply to move to Indian Territory, or what is today Oklahoma. The Texas Caddo hoped to establish some legitimate and secure claim for land, but
eventually they were moved to the Brazos Indian
Reservation near Fort Belknap in West Texas. Relations with surrounding white settlers grew tense,
and the security of the Caddo living on the reservation was in jeopardy. Ultimately, the Caddo and all
other tribes living on the Brazos Reserve were
forced to move to avoid being killed by surrounding angry white settlers who wanted ti'le total removal of Indians from Texas. On August 1, 1859,
the Texas Caddo were relocated to Oklahoma, ending a millennia or more of a presence in Texas.
The final chapter, entitled "Julia," provides a
brief glimpse of contemporary Caddo life in
Anadarko, Oklahoma-the area settled by the
Caddo after their removal from Texas. The chapter
focuses on Julia Edge, a well-respected Caddo elder, getting ready for a Caddo celebration of Veterans Day. The chapter demonstrates how the Caddo
people, after centuries of difficulties and broken
promises by foreign governments, have for better
or worse adapted to their Oklahoma home and to a
new way of life in American society.
Carter's book is well researched and written
in a very readable style. It is one of the few

comprehensive syntheses of the recent history of
the Caddo people. By recent, I mean that it covers
the Caddo from the early sixteenth century to the
twentieth century. This is perhaps the only
criticism I have of her book, in that it provides a
history of only the last 400 years of the tribe, the
time covered in historical documents. Details on
the previous several hundred to several thousand
years of Caddo history are only briefly dealt with
in Chapter 1. Admittedly, the archeological literature for this earlier history is immense and would
have required much additional effort to synthesize-an effort perhaps understandably beyond the
scope of a single book.
Returning to Carter's original goal for the
book-to provide a single source of information
about the Caddo for the Caddo-without a doubt,
she has accomplished this, because it is a well-done
and single source of information on the Caddo' s
recent history. It is as good as, and actually better,
than many scholarly attempts at the same subject.
For this reason, I am confident that many Caddo
scholars will use the book as a major reference
work on the tribe. Whether the Caddo people themselves will use the book to learn more about their
past may be hindered somewhat by the volume's
detail. Nonetheless, they will have a single source
of information on how the tribe has changed from a
powerful Indian nation controlling major portions
of four states to the much smaller, but still proud
people they are today.

REFERENCES CITED
Griffith, W. J.
1954 The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as Seen by Europeans, 1687-1772. Philological and Documentary
Studies, Volume 2, No. 3. Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University, New Orleans.
Swanton, J. R.
1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of
the Caddo Indians. Bulletin No. 132. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.

and Empire in the
by Brian S. Bauer and David S. P. Dearborn. The University
of Texas Press, Austin. 1995. xv+ 220 pp., plates, maps, figures.

Reviewed by Carol Hayman, Austin, Texas

This book is a successful example of an
interdisciplinary study of the astronomical
underpinnings of the Inca empire. It brings together
the work of Brian S. Bauer, an archeologist, and
David S. P. Dearborn, an astrophysicist. The
approach is derived from two major sources:
historical accounts and the results of archeological
investigations.
The historical accounts were written by
Pizarro after the conquest of Peru in 1532, and the
authors developed hypotheses from these accounts
that they tested with field observations. The original sources are extensively quoted in translations,
and the authors comment on the meaning and possible accuracy of the sources. Also included is an
overview of previous research on Inca astronomy.
The authors calculated the shift in the position of
sun rise at solstice, the orientation of the earth's
axis, and the changed positions of some stars since
Inca times.
Cuzco was the site of the Inca capital, and the
basic layout of the city has not changed much since
the time of the conquest. The Coricancha, not far
from the main square, was the central shrine of the
solar cult. Other important ceremonial locations still
exist on the outskirts of the city, including
Sacsahuaman and Mantocallo, along with 300-400
huacas around the city that mark sacred shrines of
man-made and natural features. Besides being the
Incan capital, Cuzco was the center of Andean cosmological order. It was divided into four parts, and
the name given to the empire was Tahuantinsuyu,
"the four parts." It was further divided by lines
radiating from the Coricancha, which determined
the locations of hundreds of huacas.
These sacred shrines were worshipped, but the
sun was recognized as most important, the ancestor
and patron of the Inca rulers. The Inca regulated
time and scheduled rituals and public events from
astronomical observations. As the authors say, "they
took control of time itself' (p. 155). This control of
ritual celebrations centralized authority in the Inca
elite, demonstrated the power of the state, and
reinforced the belief system of celestial objects as

deities, with the ruler as the mediator between the
population and the forces of the heavens.
Determining the time to plant requires knowing the length of the year, and one's position in it,
both important in planting to avoid early risks and
in taking advantage of the growing season. Astronomical observations were carried out by a small
group of specialists, possibly quipu readers. Pillars
erected on the Cuzco horizon (now destroyed) were
used to record the movement of the sun from solstice to solstice, but the number, location, and spacing of the pillars varies in the diverse descriptions
provided in surviving accounts.
The Inca solar year was divided into 12 months.
They had a lunar calendar as well, also divided into
12 months based on the waxing and waning of the
moon. Because lunar months are shorter than solar
months, a periodic insertion of an extra month was
needed to keep the two systems synchronized.
Counting passing years seemed to have been of no
importance because it appears the Inca lacked a
fixed point in time from which to measure events.
They did not know their own age or how many
years had passed since some memorable event, such
as a solar or lunar eclipse, which elicited frightened
responses like weeping, shouting, beating drums,
and beating dogs to make them howl, all to bring
back the dying sun or moon back to life.
Bauer and Dearborn conclude that the Inca
probably had a simple practical calendar system,
and not the highly complex astronomically-based
system suggested by others. A twelve month lunar
calendar was probably in use long before the rise of
the Inca. With the establishment of the Inca empire
came the introduction of a solar year calculated
from solar motion marked by highly visible pillars
on the Cuzco horizon. This visible symbol was
used to mark time and reaffirm the legitimacy of
Inca rule.
This book is full of fascinating details that will
be useful to a lay person, a student, or a professional
interested in the archeology of the Inca, or
archeoastronomy in general. As an aid to the reader,
the book would have been improved with the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

440

Texas Archeological Society

addition of star charts and clearer diagrams of the
locations of features described in the text.
Nevertheless, it provides a fair characterization of

Inca astronomy, although the book makes clear that
not that much is actually known about what the
rulers knew and the ceremonies they performed.

Flintknapping: Making and Understanding Stone Tools, by John Whittaker. University of Texas Press,
Austin, 1994. 341 pp., figures and plates.

Reviewed by Glenn T. Goode, Texas Department of Transportation

John Whittaker begins Flintknapping: Making
and Understanding Stone Tools with the rationale
behind the book, namely that "there has never been
anything that I consider a really detailed and usable
step-by-step guide to learning flintknapping." He
goes on to say that making stone tools is helpful to
archeologists as well as being a "challenging and
enjoyable craft." To the novice, and to readers of
the book, Whittaker offers these words of encouragement: "Anyone with normal intelligence and
hand-eye coordination can make ordinary stone
tools with a little practice."
The book is written to be useful to the widest
range of readers, non-archeologists as well as students of the discipline. Whittaker avoids being
overly technical, but presents much that should interest any archeologist who works with stone tools.
Perhaps the most valuable piece of advice Whittaker
offers to the novice is to work with other knappers,
especially skilled knappers, at every chance.
The contents of the book include 11 chapters,
an appendix of resources for the knapper, and copious references covering virtually every aspect of
flintknapping. It is made easy to use by frequent
headings, indexed definitions, and numerous drawings and illustrations. Among the latter are a wide
array of artifacts and techniques, from the work of
contemporary knappers to the pressure flaking technique of Egyptian Gerzean knives.
Before discussing the basic principles of
flintknapping in Chapter 2, Whittaker provides a
definition and derivation of the term, making a
distinction between "flintknapping" and "replication." In contrast to flintknapping, the latter requires, as nearly as possible, the same tools and
techniques that were used to make ancient tools.
One of the few weak spots in the book is
Whittaker's cursory treatment of conchoidal fracture and the mechanics of brittle fracture. To describe conchoidal fracture, Whittaker begins with
the oft-cited example of a window shot with a BB,
then provides the meaning of conchoidal (shelllike), and notes that the "cone" punched out by the
BB is a Hertzian cone. The problem is that these

terms are not thoroughly defined, nor are they tied
together in a coherent way to make the fracture
process clear. At the same time, the mechanics of
brittle fracture are not well understood by archeologists in general. However, such knowledge is not
necessary for good flintknapping. The remainder of
Chapter 2 is devoted to the material properties of
siliceous stones, and to the basic terminology concerned with flintknapping and lithic analysis.
Chapter 3 involves the various techniques of
flintknapping that developed through time. Complementing the text are numerous line drawings, photographs, and pertinent archeological information,
all melded into an interesting account of the role of
flintknapping in human evolution. The account goes
along smoothly until Whittaker's discussion of the
Neanderthals, when the author cites outdated archeological data, and focuses on only one side of
the controversial issue of Neanderthal's place in
human evolution. The treatment of the Mesolithic
and Neolithic cultures of the Old World, however,
followed by the New World archeological record,
is loaded with good information, and demonstrates
Whittaker's considerable knowledge of stone-age
cultures around the globe.
The discussion of recent "stone-age" people
and modern knapping in Chapter 3 will be of particular interest to contemporary knappers and lithic
analysts of every kind. Whittaker mentions the
many people who have contributed to the understanding of stone tools, from "Flint Jack" to Ishi,
to Don Crabtree and Francois Bordes, who in the
1960s were instrumental in bringing flintknapping
into its own as a part of archeology. He also provides a reading list of the flintknapping manuals
that have preceded his, touching on their good and
not-so-good points. To his credit, Whittaker acknowledges that there is much to be learned from
non-academic flintknappers, who now far outnumber academic ones.
Raw materials and stone quality are discussed
in Chapter 4, with Whittaker reminding the reader
that crystalline structure is the single most important factor in how well a material will work. He

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

442

Texas Archeological Society

also discusses the composition and structure of silica
rocks used for knapping, along with tips on finding
the various materials used by knappers-from manmade glass to quartzite. No discussion of raw materials would be complete without mentioning
heat-treatment, which is important for today's
knappers just as it was in prehistoric times, and this
chapter includes a good accounting of the subject.
This chapter concludes with an ethical consideration of the collection of raw materials and the
dissemination of replicated artifacts. Whittaker
rightly cautions against collecting from, or addimg
to, archeological sites and espouses respect and
conservation for materials to be knapped, as these
are also non-renewable resources.
The topic of safety is covered in Chapter 5, as
Whittaker reviews the possible dangers of
flintknapping, including personal anecdotes of the
kinds of serious injury that can result from careless knapping. On the subject of proper technique,
Whittaker stresses working so that flakes are removed away from the body, and he advises special
care of the eyes. He also cautions against working
for protracted periods in unventilated environments, as this can be damaging to the lungs. It may
not be obvious to the uninitiated that in flintknapping there is a danger of silicosis, the bane of
English gunflint makers.
The author gets down to the business of flaking
in chapters 6-8. Each chapter is concerned, logically,
with one of the three primary methods of knapping,
beginning with the easiest to learn and progressing
to the hardest: hard-hammer percussion, pressure,
and soft-hammer percussion. Whittaker's discussion
is clear and thorough, and is greatly enhanced by
numerous illustrations. He carries the reader stepby-step, or stage-by-stage, through the making of
flakes and bifaces, clearly explaining flintknapping
concepts along the way. One of the many points
that Whittaker stresses is the usefulness of "stages,"
both in teaching flintknapping, and in lithic analysis.
Another is the critical role of the platform in any
method of flaking.
In these discussions, however, Whittaker
overstates the possible effect of a "rolling" or
"rotated" core on the curvature of a blade. In Figure

6.30, he notes that the core producing this curved
blade "probably rotated." In my own experiments
to intentionally make curved blades, I have found
that the blades of greatest curvature come from
cores that do not move, and that movement can
result in straighter and shorter blades (inferior blades
for my purposes). Another procedure that might
have benefited from more experimentation is bipolar
flaking. If done successfully, this method does not
produce true "cones," and the concept of
simultaneous "cones," or fracture initiations, from
both ends of the core needs further consideration.
Chapter 9 discusses the specialized flaking involved in fluting and making blades, including various indirect percussion and pressure techniques.
While the idea that "rotating" cores results in curved
blades is again overstated, for the most part this
chapter is well-done. For those hoping to make
Folsom points, it should be noted that the method
chosen to demonstrate-indirect percussion-does
not seem to have been as effective as the author
would have liked.
Chapter 10 deals with the use of stone tools.
The tips provided here will be very handy for those
knappers ready to try their hand at experimental
archeology.
Whittaker concludes this much-needed contribution to flintknapping with a look at analyzing
stone tools from archeological sites. Throughout
the book, Whittaker has talked about applying lessons from flintknapping to understanding the past.
In closing, then, he stresses the critical aspect of
"context," without which meaningful interpretation
of stone tools is impossible.
It was Whittaker's goal to produce a flintknapping guide that would be useful to a wide
range of stone-tool enthusiasts. This he has done
admirably. It is also a fascinating account of
flintknapping, from the depths of time to the present
day, and easily the best guide to learning
flintknapping that money can buy. The humor, the
many personal, ethnographic, and archeological anecdotes, and the author's "take" on many topics
make for an enjoyable reading experience. It is
easy to recommend this book to a wide range of
readers, novices and professionals alike.

AUTHORS

Steven W. Ahr, Center for Environmental Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College Station
Joan E. Baker, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station
Susan E. Baxevanis, Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock
Charles L. Boyd, College Station
James Bryan Boyd, Del Rio
James E. Bruseth, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Briggs Buchanan, Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock
Barbara H. Butler, Wilmington, Delaware
C. K Chandler, San Antonio

Gail R. Colby, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station
Michael B. Collins, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
Billy Davidson, Austin
Michael Davis, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Sharon M. Derrick, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station
Richard I. Ford, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Glenn T. Goode, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin
Donny L. Hamilton, Nautical Archaeology Program, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University,
College Station
Carol Hayman, Austin
Thomas R. Hester, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
Eileen Johnson, Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock
Christine Lee, Department of Anthropology, Arizona State University, Tempe

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68 (1997)

444

Texas Archeological Society

Christopher Lintz, TRC Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin
Luc Litwinionek, Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock

W. L. McClure, Houston
Timothy K Perttula, Frontera Archaeology, Austin
Mary L. Powell, Department of Anthropology, University of Kentucky, Lexington
Kathryn V. Reese-Taylor, Austin Community College, Austin
William Shannon, Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock
Harry J. Shafer, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station
Dee Ann Story, Wimberley
Alston V. Thoms, Center for Environmental Archaeology and Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M
University, College Station
Robert L. Turner, Jr., Pittsburg
Diane E. Wilson, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin
Jodi F. Wright, Temple

