Bulletin of the

Bulletin of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

		
			

TEXAS

RCHEOLOGICAL
A
Volume 85/2014
OCIETY
S

Volume 85/2014
PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT AUSTIN, 2014

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking: the study
of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas. The Bulletin offers an outlet for the publication of serious
research on prehistory, archeological theory, and history. In line with the goals of the Society, it encourages
the scientific collection, study, and publication of archeological data and findings.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to the members of the Society. Opinions expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Society or its Publications
editorial staff.

Officers of the Society 2013-2014
President: Wendy Lockwood

INFORMATION FOR CONTRIBUTORS

Immediate Past President: Waldo Troell

The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society (ISSN 0082-2930) publishes original papers in the
field of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas in the United States and
Mexico; papers on other areas are also considered. Articles concerning archeological theory, method, or
technique are also accepted. Preference is given to members of the Society.

President-Elect: Mary Jo Galindo
Secretary: Zac Selden

Treasurer: Marybeth Tomka

Publications Editor: Tamra L. Walter

Assistant Publications Editors: Timothy K. Perttula
Nancy Kenmotsu
Newsletter Editor: Jonelle Miller-Chapman
Administrative Director: Carole Leezer

Regional Directors: Doug Wilkens (Region 1), Virginia L. Hatfield (Region 2), Royce Baker (Region
3), George Avery (Region 4), Don Keyes (Region 5), Nelson Marek (Region 6), John E. (Jack) Keller
(Region 7), Mary and Jim Schmidt (Region 9), C. A. Maedgen (Region 10), Reeda Peel (Region 11),
Kay Hindes (Region 12).
Membership and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year.  Dues (for 2014) are as follows: Individuals $60;
Family $70; Student (to age 25) $40; Association (includes societies) $55; Institution (Library or University) $100; Contributing $100; Supporting $250; and Patron $500.  Society business memberships
are: Plainview Members $250; Folsom Members $500; and Clovis Members $1000.  Members residing
outside the United States should add $20.00 for postage.  All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter issued four times a year. A monograph
series, Special Publications, also is published by the Society.  Back issues of the Bulletin are available,
and price lists can be obtained from the Secretary.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary, Texas Archeological Society, Center for Archaeological Research, One UTSA Circle, San Antonio, Texas 78249-0658, or at the
Society’s website, www.txarch.org.
Copyright © 2014 by the Texas Archeological Society
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the Publisher. Inquiries should be addressed to Texas Archeological Society Publications Editor.
ISSN 0082-2930

CODEN: BTASDX

Printed in 2014 in the United States of America by OneTouchPoint/Ginnys in Austin, Texas

Manuscripts must be typed, double-spaced throughout, on 8½ by 11 inch white paper with a margin
of at least one inch all around. Footnotes should be avoided. References to published literature (by author,
date, and page or figure numbers) should be placed within parentheses in the body of the text, with full
bibliographic citations at the end. Personal communications should be fully identified in text citations but
not included in the reference list (see this issue of the Bulletin for examples). Authors should also consult
“Style Guide for American Antiquity” for information on style, citations and references, and technical matters
of manuscript preparation. A copy of the style guide may be downloaded from the Society for American
Archaeology website at the following URL: http://www.saa.org/publications/Styleguide/styframe.html.
A complete manuscript is one with a title, abstract, main body with subdivisions, and completed
(camera-ready) photographic or drafted illustrations. Illustrations prepared on computer should be produced
using a high quality laser printer and provided on a CD in a TIFF, JPEG, or EPS file. Any scanned graphic
should be done at no less than 300 dpi; drawings should be scanned at 600 dpi or greater. All graphics are
to be submitted as individual files, not embedded in the manuscript. Submit three copies of the manuscript
along with the manuscript on CD as a Microsoft Word file. Manuscripts are subject to peer review, and
final decisions on publication rest with the Publications Editor.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in Abstracts in Anthroplogy.
Manuscripts should be submitted to: Tamra L. Walter, Texas Tech University, Dept. of SASW, Box
41012, Lubbock, Texas 79409-1012

