Bulletin of the

E AS
RCHEO OGICAL
QCJETY Volume 76/2005

Nancy A. Kenmotsu, Editor

Published by

TE~.~~
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
at Austin
2005

CONTENTS
Foreword ......................................................................... v

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY FIELD SCHOOL REPORTS
Spanish Mission Architecture: Examples from the Second (41VT10) and Third (41VTl1)
Locations of Espiritu Santo, Victoria County, Texas
Tamra L. Walter, V. Kay Hindes, Douglas K. Boyd ................................. 1
Spanish Colonial Presidio Architecture: An Example from Presidio San Saba,
Menard County, Texas.
Tamra L. Walter, Mark Wolf, and Bennett Kimball ................................ 29
Presidio De San Saba: A Case Study in Colonial Evolutionary Architecture
Mark Wolf ................................................................ 45
Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek
Samuel S. Cason ........................................................... 61

ARTICLES
Remembering Thomas N. Campbell
Dee Ann Story ............................................................ 103
People of La Salle's Last Expedition
Kathleen Gilmore ......................................................... 107
Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas
William A. Martin ......................................................... 123
Stable Carbon Isotopes from the Stiver Ranch Burial Sinkhole (41KM140)
Christine Alvarez ......................................................... 165
Dental Wear and Pathology During the Middle Archaic on the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain
Matthew S. Taylor ......................................................... 173
Winston's Mound and Shawnee Town: Mound Explorations by the Bureau of Ethnology
in Texas, 1882-1884
Timothy K. Perttula ........................................................ 183
Annotated Bibliography
Patricia R. Lamee ......................................................... 189

HIGHLIGHTING THE SOCIETY
The Report on 41CC328
Alice Stultz .............................................................. 255

BOOK REVIEWS
The Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy K. Perttula
Elton R. Prewitt ........................................................... 266
Sea of Mud, The Retreat of the Mexican Army After San Jacinto, An Archaeological
Investigation, by Gregg J. Dimmick
Anne A. Fox .............................................................. 278
The Came Naked and Barefoot the Journey of Cabeza de Vaca Across North America,
by Alex D. Krieger
Nancy A. Kenmotsu ........................................................ 280
Late Holocene Settlement in the Taylor Bayou Drainage Basin: Test Excavations at the Gaulding Site
(41JF27), Jefferson County, Texas, by Lawrence E. Aten and Charles N. Bollich with contributions by
Kenneth M. Brown and Richard A. Fullington
Richard A. Weinstein ...................................................... 282
Archeology & History at Fort Anahuac: Results of the 2003 Season Excavations in Chambers County,
Texas, by Rachael Feit and John W. Clark with contributions by Jonathan Jarvis and Mason Miller
David 0. Brown .......................................................... 288
Under Four Flags: History and Archeology of North Loop One, Travis County, Texas,
by John W. Clark, with contributions by Barry Baker and Brian Shaffer
Rachel Feit .............................................................. 290
Prehistory of the Rustler Hills: Granado Cave, by Donny L. Hamilton with contributions
by John R. Bratten, David L. Carlson, John E. Dockall, Cristi Assad Hunter, and Harry J. Shafer
William A. Cloud .......................................................... 292
A Pest in the Land: New World Epidemics in a Global Perspective, by Suzanne Austin Alchon
Waldo Troell ............................................................. 297
Gulf Coast Archeology: The Southeastern United States and Mexico, edited by Nancy Marie White
Scott Pletka .............................................................. 299
Rock Art of the Lower Pecos, by Carolyn Boyd
Nancy A. Kenmotsu ........................................................ 301
From a Watery Grave: The Discovery and Excavation of La Salle's Shipwreck,
La Belle, by James E. Bruseth and Toni S. Turner
Mary Jo Galindo .......................................................... 304
LIST OF AUTHORS ............................................................. 307
ERRATA FOR VOLUME 75 ....................................................... 308

lV

Foreword

Volume 56 of this Bulletin was dedicated to
Thomas N. Campbell. Now, in Volume 76, we
again honor Dr. Campbell with a memoriam to
this same scholar who touched many of our lives
and served this Society in many capacities for
many years. I had the privilege to know him during my studies at the University of Texas at Austin and he had considerable influence on my own
research. His door was always open. As Dee Ann
notes in her remembrance, he was an indefatigable researcher and assumed that all others were
the same. When I expressed interest in researching the historic Caddo but confessed that I did not
know French and might therefore have difficulties
with some historic documents, he told me "If I
could teach myself Spanish, I am sure that you
can teach yourself French."
Dr. Campbell worked throughout Texas during
his career, and the topics of his research covered
the breadth of the prehistory and history of the
state. I thus believe that the varied topics in this
volume would be of interest to him. Given his
interest in the historic contact era, he would
certainly be interested in the articles on the Spanish
missions in Victoria and the Presidio San Saba in
Menard, particularly in the way the authors use a
variety of archeological and documentary evidence
to interpret building episodes and techniques. And,
I have no doubt that he would enjoy reading how
Kathleen Gilmore has brought together small
pieces of information to tell us about the people
who came to our shores with La Salle. The
annotated bibliography by Lemee would also
intrigue Dr. Campbell as it excerpts small pieces
of information from a variety of archival
documents and published sources to show
European and Native American activities between
1629 and 1758. When I talked with Dr. Campbell
in his campus office, he maintained a type of
annotated bibliography organized, not by year, but

by the name of each Native American group. Each
time he encountered the name of a group, he would
make a note of the comment, the author, and where
the document or reference could be found and
place it in the file for that group.
The other articles would also, I hope, have
been of interest to him. Campbell's work in the Big
Bend region continues to be a significant contribution, and Sam Cason's article comparing sites in
Presidio and Brewster counties continues to build
on Campbell's work. Martin's work in Cooke and
Grayson counties would have appealed to Campbell.
Like Martin, he often worked in areas of the state
where there had been limited prior work. Bill brings
us up to date with the archeological record and
describes the richness of the historic and prehistoric sites in that part of the state. Certainly
Campbell would have relished the efforts of Alvarez
and Taylor to learn about human behavior using
dental and isotopic data. Since he often used collections made years and decades before him, Campbell
would appreciate Tim Perttula's efforts to publish
about long forgotten excavations at two Caddoan
sites in east Texas. And, last, I think he would have
enjoyed the book reviews. Several of them are quite
long, equating in length to some of the articles.
This is because several of the authors sought to
thoughfully analyze the content and provide their
own thoughts, critiques, and comments on the publications. By so doing, they improve our abilities to
understand a broader context for each book, in much
the same way that Campbell did when you spoke
with him. He could always pull from his vast storehouse of knowledge to help students understand the
broader context and hone their thinking. This ability to share with others his knowledge and to encourage you to explore new ideas was remarkable.
Thus, it is with pleasure that this Bulletin is dedicated to Thomas Nolan Campbell and his contributions to Texas archeology.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

Texas Archeological Society

and Timothy K. Perttula, former editors, continued
to be welcome. I hope that this volume comes
close to their outstanding tenures as Bulletin
editors.

I would like to express my appreciation to
the individuals who reviewed and commented
on articles. Their assistance was invaluable.
Finally, the advice and comment of Myles Miller

Vl

Spanish Mission Architecture
Examples from the Second (41VT10) and Third (41VT11)
Locations of Espiritu Santo, Victoria County, Texas
Tamra L. Walter, V. Kay Hindes, Douglas K. Boyd

ABSTRACT
Archeological excavations at two sites (41VTl0 and 41VT11) of Mission Espiritu Santo de Zuniga yielded
significant data about the architectural layouts of each location. The 1997 and 1998 field schools of the Texas
Archeological Society (TAS) conducted large-scale investigations at these mission sites, thereby helping to
expose considerable architectural features at both sites. Since no maps or information about the arrangement of
the mission buildings or their architectural style have yet been found in historical documents of the Spanish
Colonial era, the archaeological investigations provide the primary source of data concerning the organization
and architectural methods used to construct the rnissions. 1 This article compares and contrasts the two sites,
revealing both similarities and differences in the mission structures and layout. Given that the mission buildings
at 41VT11 are more intact than those uncovered at 41VT10, inferences are made regarding the overall plan and
construction style of the second location of the mission based on observations made at its third location.
Following a brief discussion on the history of Espiritu Santo and the mission system in Spanish Texas, we offer
a sum:mary of each site and a comparison of the two.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Prompted by La Salle's establishment of a
French fort and colony in lands claimed by Spain,
Mission Espiritu Santo de Zuniga was originally
established in 1722 near Matagorda Bay in presentday Jackson County (Chipman 1992). Once discovered by Spanish officials, the site of La Salle's
ruined colony was selected by the Spanish to serve
as the location for a new military fort, known as
Presidio La Bahia. The mission was founded in
association with the Presidio La Bahia and was
initially intended for the conversion of Karankawa
bands (Cocos, Cujanes, Guapites, Carancaguases,
and Copanes) living along the Texas coast between the Nueces and Brazos rivers. In addition,
the mission and presidio complexes were meant to
create a presence in the area in hopes of protecting
Spanish-claimed lands from the encroaching
French. Conditions at the first location of the mission and presidio proved to be harsh and unforgiving (Mounger 1959). Relations with the Karankawa
were less than friendly and missionization (i.e.,
both the process of converting and assimilating

the native population) attempts were hardly successful. As a result, plans were made to move both
the presidio and the mission to a new, more hospitable location inland along the Guadalupe River
(Almazan 1726). The chosen area of the Guadalupe
River valley was inhabited by the Aranama (sometimes called J aranama or Xaraname) and Tamique
Indians, native groups whom the Spanish believed
would more readily accept the Christian faith. Furthermore, the area was believed to be more suitable for habitation with an abundance of local
resources necessary for survival.
The Spanish moved the mission in ca. 1725
from its first location along Garcitas Creek to the
Guadalupe River, to a spot that is today called
Riverside Park within the city of Victoria. Archival and archeological evidence suggests that the
friars moved the mission to this new location before the original presidio was transferred and before they were given official permission to relocate from the original site (Hindes et al.
1999:92).
The second site (41VTl0) of the mission may
have initially served as a visita or interim mission

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

2

Texas Archeological Society

before the third site (41VTl1) of Mission Espiritu
Santo was established. The third location was
founded sometime in 1726 along the Guadalupe
River in present-day Mission Valley. Although it
is unclear how long the second location of the
mission was occupied, and in what capacity, current research indicates that the Riverside Park location continued to operate while the third location was in use (Hindes et al. 1999). Cultural materials, such as majolica wares produced during
the last half of the 18th century, recovered from
various excavations at the second location and
archival data suggest that the site was occupied
through the first half of the eighteenth century
(Hindes et al. 1999:93). The reason the second
location of the mission may have remained open
could have been because of the large number of
Aranama groups in the area. Possibly, it may have
functioned as an outlier mission that helped to
serve the large number of Indians brought into the
mission system.
The third location of Espfritu Santo, like the
second location, was in the Guadalupe River valley
and operated from 1726 until 1749 after which it
was moved a final time to the San Antonio River in
present-day Goliad, Texas. The fourth location continued to serve primarily as a mission for the
Aranama and to a lesser extent the Tamique, although other groups are noted as having resided at
the site as well (Forrestal 1931 ). The final location
of the mission would remain open until the early
1800s. It was formally secularized in the 1830s and
the mission lands were redistributed, although not
among the native residents (Ramsdell 1938). Many
of the mission Indians had married into the Mexican population. Others joined Father De Leon, their
minister at the mission, at another location on the
San Antonio River where he attempted to train them
as independent farmers (Ramsdell 1938). Still others joined the Tonkawa and other tribes, perhaps in
an effort to return to their traditional ways of life.
All of the various locations of the Espfritu
Santo Mission were administered by priests and
friars of the Franciscan order. The purpose of these
missions, along with the numerous other frontier
missions established in Texas, was to introduce
the Catholic faith to the indigenous population
and to civilize the region (Walter 2000). Ideally, it
was hoped that through the "civilization" of the
Indian population, Spain could convert the mission Indians into loyal subjects of the Spanish
crown. This in turn would help to secure and hold

the lands claimed in northern New Spain. The
missions were to serve not only as Christianizing
institutions but also as schools where neophytes
were trained in agriculture, herding, and various
other skills including blacksmithing and weaving
(Bolton 1915). Theoretically, the missions were
only to last 10 years, after which time, it was
believed, the missionaries would no longer be
needed. Within 10 years time the conversion process was to be complete, and the lands of the
mission were to be divided among the newly converted Indians who would farm and independently
own the land (Habig 1977).
Franciscan missions in eighteenth-century
Texas, although varied, shared similar organization, layout, and management patterns. Initially, the
missions would receive grants to cover the costs of
founding the institutions (Bolton 1960). Friars stationed at each mission were typically given a small
yearly stipend that was frequently used to buy supplies for the mission (Castaneda 1936). Over time
the missions were intended to become self sufficient. Like other missions, Espiritu Santo would
eventually support itself through cattle ranching
(Ramsdell 1949). Ultimately, Espfritu Santo would
become one of the largest cattle ranching operations in Spanish Colonial Texas. Goods were
brought in via mule train and necessary supplies
were oftentimes secured from the older, more-established missions (Bolton 1960). Both the San Antonio and Guerrero missions, for example, were
relied upon to supply the Espfritu Santo missions.
Typically, a.minimum of two priests were stationed at each site, but it was not uncommon for
only one friar to be present at a mission (Bolton
1915). In addition, two to three soldiers and their
families were usually assigned to the mission to
help oversee the instruction of the neophytes and to
provide protection. When possible, Christianized
Indians from other missions were brought to newly
established missions to help with the conversion
process (Chipman 1992; Weber 1992). The missions were meant to serve as the new homes for the
native populations where they were introduced to
Christianity and Spanish culture. The Indians also
provided the much-needed labor force necessary
for the success of the missions (Weddle 1968).
In general, the Spanish missions were placed
close to streams and along high knolls or hills whenever possible (Corbin 1989). It was also important
for the missions to be near Indian camps where
missionaries could easily proselytize the native

Walte1; Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture 3
populations (Eaton 1989). Other considerations for
site location included a good source of water, arable land for farming and ranching, and available
resources of wood and stone. Once a site was selected, a crude church or chapel was typically the
first structure to be built (Walter 2000). The construction of Texas missions varied depending on
the types of raw materials available at each location, however, all of the first temporary buildings
were of jacal construction. Jacal construction uses
upright poles set into wall trenches and thatched
roofs (Fox 199l:xv). At many early missions, the
initial church was commonly built with less permanent materials such as wattle and daub and later
replaced with stone construction. Once the church
was built other buildings were added including
housing for the friars, a granary, storerooms, workshops, and living quarters for the mission Indians
and the soldiers.
At Espiritu Santo many of the living quarters
may have consisted of small huts or jacales that
were never replaced with stone structures. We suspect this because at the final location of the mission
in Goliad, a number of mission Indian quarters
were described as jacal structures that were made
of brush and plastered with clay and thatched with
grass (Castaneda 1936:180). In general, the mission buildings formed an enclosure around a plaza
or courtyard area where chores were usually carried out. Typically, these mission enclosures would
form a roughly square or quadrangle shape. Storerooms, workshops, and residences commonly lined
the inside of the mission walls. The mission
churches varied in their layout and shape. At the
more established missions in places like San Antonio and Goliad, the churches were either basilican
or cruciform in shape. These larger more enduring
churches usually had roofs formed of low masonry
domes or tunnel vaults. Smaller, less permanent
churches and other minor structures had roofs that
were low-pitched and constructed from timber
(Newcomb 1990:27-28).
Access to the interior area of the mission was
usually limited. Given the location of these sites
along the northern frontier, defense was a principal concern for both the presidios and the missions. Hence, the mission structures were frequently placed close to one another and often enclosed by a compound or palisade wall to provide
protection from outside attacks or raids (a common occurrence at missions and presidios in eighteenth century south Texas).

MISSION LAYOUT AND
ARCHITECTURE AT 41VT10
Site 41VTl0, known as the Tonkawa Bank site,
represents the second location of Mission Espiritu
Santo (Hindes et al. 1999). Attention was first called
to the site in 1922, then privately owned, when
local historian John Jarratt observed cultural remains across the site including stone ruins and part
of a human arm bone (Hindes et al. 1999). In 1930
Jarratt conducted limited test excavations around
the site and recovered majolica, stone tools, nativemade pottery, burned rocks, bone, and metates
(Jarratt 1966b). Subsequent investigations followed
including work by A. M. Woolsey from the University of Texas at Austin in 1932 who only worked
on the prehistoric component of the site. The property was purchased by the city of Victoria in 1940
for the development of Riverside Park and subsequent constmction for the park continued into the
1990s (Boyd 2004). In 1965 Jarratt returned to the
site with a small group of volunteers to excavate
within the remaining stone ruins. In addition to
exposing a number of structures, Jarratt also located three burials believed to be associated with
the mission occupation of the site. In 1978
avocational archeologist E. H. Schmiedlin completed 11 auger tests across the site followed by test
trenching carried out by archeologists from the University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA). UTSA
archeologists would later return to the site in 1989
to conduct a survey and complete shovel testing in
preparation for a children's playground to be built
to the southeast of the mission ruins (Hindes et al.
1999). Finally, in 1998 the TAS completed extensive excavations of the site focusing on exposing
foundations and other intact features. All of the
previous research at the mission site has contributed to a better understanding of the mission site
and its formal layout.
Site 41 VTlO shares in common many of the
same basic characteristics as other Spanish missions. For example, its physical setting mirrors that
of other Spanish missions. In particular, the site is
located on a high spot near water, in this case a
bluff just above the Guadalupe River. Also important for this location was its proximity to huntergatherer groups such as the Aranama and Tamique
that lived along the Guadalupe River valley (Walter
1997). Establishing a mission near the homelands
of native groups that the friars hoped to proselytize
is another feature that Espiritu Santo shares with

4

Texas Archeological Society

other missions. Furthermore, access to resources such
as wood and stone were undoubtedly considerations
for choosing an appropriate mission location. Based
on the amount of stone construction and evidence
for jacal structures, building materials were readily
available within the vicinity of site 41VTl0. Other
similarities include the type and arrangement of buildings found at the second site of Espiritu Santo which
is discussed in more detail below.
Because the missions at 41 VTIO and 41 VTll
were built within about a year of each other by the
same group of Spaniards, they display some similarities in layout and architecture. The following
discussion seeks to synthesize the currently available archival and archeological data pertaining to
the layout and architectural details for the mission
complex at 41VTl0. Reasonable inferences are then
made regarding the layout and architectural details
for the mission complex at 41VTIO. Ultimately,
the layout and architectural details for 41VTl1 are
examined and then compared and contrasted with
what is known about both missions in order to
make educated guesses about how the mission complex at 41 VTIO was constructed.
In examining the archeological and architectural data for 41VT10, particular emphasis is placed
on assessing the historical accuracy of three recon-

}:u.vJ1.5trl4tt1'7'n

"fTf...~. ~t(.;Tnr{ SiU

rn;,s;pro Ur 7>/'r'ffrA-

struction sketches of the mission. The primary and
best-known reconstruction sketch is the one produced by artist Tom Jones in the 1970s (Figure 1),
and the original is a large format drawing at the
Office of the Victoria Parks and Recreation Department. Two other smaller (page-sized) drawings were
done by local historian and avocational archeologist Jarratt; one dates to 1965 (Figure 2) and the
other is undated (Figure 3) but presumably was
drawn in the 1960s. Jarratt conducted archeological
investigations on and around site 41 VTIO, which
he called the Toncahua Bank or Bluff site (now
Tonkawa Bank site), in the 1920s and 1930s and
then again in the 1960s after the site area was bulldozed (Hindes et al. 1999:80-83). Jarratt based his
sketch maps on the archeological remains he observed and recorded, and Tom Jones based his drawing on the sketches by Jarratt. It is interesting that
all three drawings, while similar in many respects,
are also quite different.
Mission components defined during the archaeological investigation of site 41 VTIO include:
(a) the stone and cobble footings of a two-room
rectangular structure (the probable church); (b)
rubble or cobble alignments representing walls or
enclosures; (c) postholes which most likely represent a wooden stockade wall and a fence placed

1

}"';;r-tift;'f~j~a

"(1.i,{.J it. C..9'tojrd;mibt.At.t~t}A1t.f.

'°" tfu Wl>r'l'..1'_lM.~L _,TMTMS.

Figure 1. Reconstruction sketch of the Spanish mission complex at 41 VTIO by Tom Jones, ca. 1970s (courtesy of the
City of Victoria).

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture 5
around the church foundation in
the 1960s; (d) evidence of probable jacal buildings; (e) a possible
compound gate; (f) a plaza area;
and (g) a cemetery. It should be
noted that due to extensive land
modifications, the archeological
deposits and features at the site
are highly ephemeral making any
interpretations of mission architecture and the layout of the mission
compound difficult.
To date, no Spanish Colonial
documents have been located that
provide maps or architectural descriptions of the mission at
41 VTlO. What is known about the
architecture of the site derives
from twentieth-century eyewitness
accounts of the ruins and archeoFigure 2. Reconstruction sketch of the Spanish mission complex at 41VTl0 by
logical investigations. Most sigJohn L. Jarratt, 1965 (courtesy of the John Jan·att files at the Victoria Regional
nificantly, for purposes of this
History Center, Victoria College/University of Houston-Victoria Library).
study, the ruins at 41VTl0 "looked
like those at the old Quincy
Davidson Place" (Herman Fishbeck, personal comVictoria and friend and co-worker of JatTatt's, saw
munication, 1997). The Quincy Davidson place
the standing ruins at 41VTl0 prior to their being
can be identified as 41 VTll located on the John
bulldozed. Thus, his assessment of the architecClegg property in the area of Mission Valley in
tural similarity to those at Mission Valley should
Victoria County. Mr. Fishbeck, a resident of
not be underestimated.
As stated above, much of what
is known about 41 VTlO derives
from the work done in the 1960s
by Jarratt, an avocational archeologist. Jarratt saw and studied the
ruins at 41VT10 (Tonkawa Bank)
in the early twentieth century before the site had been greatly impacted by numerous modifications
including bulldozing, "soil burrowing activities" conducted by
the previous landowner Doc Hiller
(Hindes et al. 1999: 80), the construction of baseball fields, a
playground, and buildings including a park maintenance shop and
Jaycee's Hall after the property became part of Victoria's City Park.
He based his reconstructions of
the site on observations made of
the mission in the 1920s. At that
Figure 3. Reconstruction sketch of the Spanish mission complex at4 l VTIO by
John L. Jarratt, ca.1960s (courtesy the John Jan-att files at the Victmia Regional
time in the 1920s, many of the
History Center, Victmia College/University of Houston-Victmia Libraiy).
components associated with the

6

Texas Archeological Society

mission compound were still visible and identifiable.
Jarratt used first-hand recollections of the site to
help him uncover the archeological manifestations
at the site some 40 years later (Hindes et al. 1999).
In the 1960s, Jarratt excavated and mapped what
remained of the ruins after the City of Victoria
bulldozed about 2 ft off the top of the ridge where
the site is situated in 1958.
The earliest archival source providing architectural information about 41VT10 was in 1883 when
John Linn, who settled in Victoria in 1829, noted
(italics in original):
The Toncahuas ... had a church, which
was erected on what is now known as
"the Toncahua Bank," the foundation of
which is still visible, as it was built of
masonry (Linn 1883:333-334).
Jarratt (1966a:6) maintained that the standing
walls had been 3-ft (0.91 m) high as late as 1922.
He found a two-room stone building partially surrounded by stone walls on the north, east, and south,
as well as other foundations.
By 1965, the stone ruins extended about 15
cm (6 in) below the surface with only a trace of
foundations visible (Jarratt 1966b:7-9). The foundations of the "church" were "made of limestone or
sandstone rock and were two feet in width" (Jarratt
l 966b:7-9). Jarratt reported that a layer of yellow
sand had been placed in a prepared trench meant
for the building's foundations, which was then filled
with river gravel and rock and formed into a solid
mass. The stone ruins measured 12.19 m (40 ft) on
the north side, 12.80 m (42 ft) on the south side and
7.62 m (25 ft) in width. The west end on the south
side had an extension of 2 ft. The main door was in
the west elevation. The building was divided into
two rooms by a partition wall also two ft in width
with a fireplace in the front room. Buttresses were
noted at each corner (Jarratt 1966b:7-9).
The layer of sand was ca. 7.5 cm (3 inches) in
depth and placed directly on the clay subsoil (Jarratt
l 966c:6). Once these foundations reached what
Jarratt (l 966c:6) considered the original ground surface, the sandstone walls began with "some gravel
being used as filling, with the exception of the
comers and where the buttress(es) were located."
The floor was made of a limestone-caliche while
the walls were plastered (Jarratt 1966a:6).
Jarratt also found "the outline traces of other
old foundations" near where he encountered three
burials (Jarratt 1966c:5). Additionally, he found

evidence of a third room attached to the southeast
corner of the two-room structure. He believed this
third room may have served as a kitchen because
Indian pottery, majolica, burned rocks, fragments of
an old iron pot, animal bones, and shells were found
there (Jarratt l 966c:7). To the west of the two-room
structure he found a trace of a rock wall with a lot of
"burned clay and sand, fragments of baked clay,
charcoal. .. Indian pottery ... and some pottery that
had been glazed ... clam and mussel, shell, and flint
chipping" (Jarratt 1966c:8). Mr. Des Hiller, who as
a boy played around the old foundations in the early
1900s, stated that:
the large door to the building [here, Hiller
is referring to the trace of the rock wall
west of the two-room strncture] faced
west or toward the river. . . /and the
walls/ ... were about 5 feet high in places,
and had a lot of Windows or what could
of been windows, they were very small
and looked more like slots left in the wall
for some reason (Jarratt l 966c:6-7).
These openings may possibly have been troneras
(gun ports) commonly found in early structures on
sides of the doors and windows for defensive purposes (Graham 1994:26). Because of the threat of
Indian attack, the earliest structures had few, if any,
windows (Juarez 1976:21).
In 1997 and 1998, the TAS field school investigations confirmed many of Jarratt' s original observations. In 1997, the ruins at site 41 VTlO were
completely covered with topsoil and overgrown with
grass, so that only an occasional stone could be
seen. The following discussion briefly describes
the architectural features encountered during the
fieldwork and how these features relate or do not
relate to the findings of Jarratt' s 1960s excavations.
More importantly, an attempt is made to assess,
through the archeological data, the accuracy of Tom
Jones's mission reconstruction drawing (see Figure
1) in relationship to the mission compound.
Five key areas of the mission compound were
exposed during Jarratt' s excavations at 41VTl0. In
returning to the site, we sought to verify the overall
layout of the features and structures at this second
location of the mission. Thus, we targeted the same
five key areas for investigation. The areas are
designated A to Eon the site plan map (Figure 4),
and a discussion of each area is presented below.
Given that our time was limited, we excavated
backhoe trenches to expeditiously expose a

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture 7

1030.00

1026.00
1026.00
1024.00
1022.00
1021>.00

1018.00
1016.00
1014.00
1012.00

1010.00

1008.00

~

1008.00

~ ~:::~

~ :~~~o

s

996.00

~

994.00

~

992.00

i5

990.00

~ 988.00

z

986.00

8HT20

984.00
982.00

980.00
978.00
976.00

974.00

972.00
970.00
968.00

966.00
964.00
962.00
960.00

9$6.00

-+-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i='T'"T=~-=i=r'"T=~~~~~~

~~~~~~~J~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~§~~~~~~~~~~~~i~iii~i*~~i
gg8gg88 8ggggg8ggggggg 8gg

g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g 8 g g g g g g g g g

EASTING c1.n MBTER 1NTmvAL)

Figure 4. Site map of 41 VTlO showing archeological excavations and features from the 1990s excavations directed by
Kay Hindes.
maximum area. A number of backhoe trenches
(BHTs) were excavated in each area, and many
backhoe trenches revealed evidence of architectural
features that provide clues to the layout of the
mission. Cultural features and BHTs that yielded
data concerning the mission architecture are
discussed below for each site area.
Area A
Area A is located in the northwest part of the
site. Investigations in Area A (see Figure 4) included
the excavation of five backhoe trenches (BHTs 1, 4,
5, 13, and 21). The trenches yielded evidence of a
possible compound stockade enclosure and an
associated jacal structure. Evidence for a stockade
fence that may have enclosed the mission compound
is represented by a series of postholes located in
Trenches 1, 5, and 13 (see Figure 4). In all, 12
postholes were encountered in Area A. The distance

between most of the postholes is approximately 9.5
ft (2.9 m), suggesting that large posts were placed at
this distance with smaller posts filling the spaces
between the larger uprights. A similar pattern of
large and small posts interspersed was noted at
Presidio San Saba (see Walter et al., this volume).
Evidence of the smaller posts would have been
destroyed by bulldozing with only the deeper set
and larger posts leaving any visible remains.
Theoretically, other construction methods for walls
or fences could have been used at the site, however
further excavations are needed to investigate this
possibility. Also of interest is the distance noted
between Postholes 15 and 16 as well as between
Postholes 14 and 15. Because these posts are more
widely spaced than the others (6 meters apart versus
2.75-3 meters for the other posts), they may indicate
the presence of a compound gate in this location.
This is conjectural and is based on limited
information but the distance between these posts is

8

Texas Archeological Society

the drawing, however, is due west
of the church's entrance and some
distance from the northern wall of
the compound. The archeological
evidence suggests that the jacal
strncture was much closer to the
northern wall than is shown in
Jones's sketch. Additionally, archeological investigations reveal that
this feature more likely represents
the presence of a jacal living
structure, storeroom, or workshop
located along the probable wooden
northern stockade wall of the
compound. A number of these
structures were probably built along
the walls of the complex in order to
Figure 5. View of Posthole 3 in Backhoe Trench l at 41 VTlO.
accommodate residents and to
provide storage and working space
of sufficient room to accommodate wagons.
within the mission compound. The feature, clearly
Moreover, known gates ranged from approximately
defined from the surrounding clay matrix, consisted
3.5 to 4.5 meters at several of the San Antonio
of burned clay daub, charcoal, snails, lime, burned
missions (Newcomb 1990) to as wide as 7.5 meters
sandstone, and fine sand. The western and eastern
at Mission San Lorenzo (Tunnell and Newcomb
edge of the jacal feature is delineated by Postholes 2
1969). Nonetheless, additional field testing would
and 3. The feature is approximately 2.2 m (7.2 ft) in
be needed to verify the existence of a gate.
length. A very light gray (Munsell 2.5Y 7/2) linear
Two of the postholes (Postholes 1 and 3) were
stain trends east to west within the feature and may
closely investigated. Posthole 1 was ca. 40 cm (l 6
represent an inte1ior wall trench. No evidence of the
inches) in diameter and appeared irregular in shape
feature was found to the north beyond BHT 1 in
at the surface. It was identified by the presence of
either BHT 21 or BHT 4 supporting the hypothesis
stream-rolled medium to large gravels within a
that the feature most likely represents a jacal structure
sandy soil matrix. The posthole was cross-sectioned
along the proposed northern perimeter stockade wall.
and charcoal found in the profile suggests that it
Nevertheless, the entire feature has not been uncovered
was burned in place. Posthole 3, oval in shape when
and additional excavations are needed to positively
exposed at the surface, was approximately 36 cm in
identify the extent and purpose of the structure.
diameter by 60 cm in depth (14.2x23.6 inches) and
An additional feature (Feature 19) was located
was filled with medium to large river gravels, caliin BHT 21. It appeared on the surface as a sandy
che/plaster, shells, bones, and sand (Figure 5). The
oval deposit within the surrounding clay soil. Due
postholes, containing what appears to be the same
to time constraints and to the extremely dry soil
sand and gravels used in the footings, are similar in
conditions, testing of this feature was not comsize to postholes documented by Kathleen Gilmore
pleted. Further investigations will be needed in or(personal communication 1997) at Mission Rosario
der to determine what this feature represents.
in Goliad, Texas.
The remains of what appears to be a jacal
AreaB
structure (Feature 1) were located in BHT 1 to the
northwest of the stone ruins (see Figure 4). This
Area B is located in the northern part of the site
feature miginally was found by Jarratt in 1965 during
between Areas A and C and contains the remains of
his excavations at the site. It was identified as a
a rectangular, two-roomed structure that may
cooking oven based on the presence of a large amount
represent the church. The possible church consists
of fired clay/daub. Jones depicts the area as an homo
of stone and cobble foundation (Figure 6) footings
(oven) with a detached structure that has a thatched
and measures ca. 7.6xl2.0 m (25x40 ft) on the
roof (see Figure 1). The placement of this structure in
exterior. Indeed, as Jarratt discussed, the setting

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture 9
inches) to 15xl5 cm (5.9x5.9
inches), sandstone, daub, and calcium carbonate (limey sandstone
or a sandy limestone) cobbles that
are mortared/cemented together.
Oyster shells, noted in a number
of the test units, may be present
as a material component of the
foundation footings or a component of mortar or plaster from the
walls. Overall, the construction
used at41VT10 allowed the footings to give a little to help withstand the shrinking and swelling.
In order to determine the depth
of the footings, a small test unit
was placed perpendicular to the
Figure 6. View of n01ih wall of the two-room church structure at site 41VTl0.
footings in one of the southwest
corner units. The bottom of the
trench that was dug was no wider than the
trench (Figure 7) was encountered at ca. 10 cm (3.9
foundation footings. The width of the footings was
inches) below the modern smface. The resulting profound to be one vara (86 cm or 33 1/3 inches). Where
file revealed that only ca. 10 cm (3.9 inches) of the
the stones were too disturbed to make assessments
trench and footings remain, which is consistent with
of the width of the walls, the setting trench could
the ca. 6 inches noted by J an-att. The poor preservastill be observed and measured. The full width of
tion of the footings is a result of extensive land
the walls is estimated to be the same as the width of
modifications that have considerably impacted the
the setting trench.
site in the last 170 years. Impacts to the site included
Unlike site 41VT11, which is built on bedrock
dynamiting and bulldozing the stone ruins.
that provides a stable surface for foundations,
Excavations within the ruins also revealed a
41VT10 is underlain by a dense vertic soil formed
partition wall (Figure 8) that extends the full width
on Beaumont clay that shrinks and .swells with reof the structure.. While Jarratt's excavation records
peated wetting and drying. Classified as Lake Charles
note an offset or jog in the west wall of the struc(or Laewest) soils (see Boyd [2004:5, 21, 27) for a
ture, no definitive evidence of this was recognized
discussion of soils at 41 VTIO), the
drying cracks that form can be as
much as ca. 0.61 m (2 ft) wide and
extend 3.6-4.6 m (12-15 ft) across
the surface of the site.
The construction of the buildings at 41VT10 appears to reflect
the builders' knowledge of soil
and land surface conditions, and
included an adaptive technology
to provide for a footing/foundation that could withstand this
shrink and swell process. The
adaptive technology is evidenced
in the structure's footings which
are composed of a very fine
grained sand (similar to beach
sand), stream rolled gravels meaFigure 7. View showing depth of footings for two-room structure at 41VTl0.
suring ca. lOxlO cm (3.9x3.9

10

Texas Archeological Society

inches) to the south. The feature
rocks are irregular and scattered
but appear to continue to the south
and east beyond the test excavation.
Eleven postholes were also
uncovered within Area B. The
postholes are probably associated
with a fence placed around the
ruins in the 1960s. These postho les measured approximately
15-20 cm (5.9x7.9 inches) in diameter, which is half the size of
those believed to be associated
with the stockade wall. The postholes contained no gravels, and
they were placed approximately 60
Figure 8. Partition wall in the two-room structure at site 41VT10.
cm (23.6 inches) apart. This fence
was placed extremely close to the
during the T AS excavations. Our inability to confootings and may account for some of the disturbance evident in this area.
firm Jarratt's offset does not mean it is not present.
A tremendous amount of disturbance and scattered
debris was noted on the west wall. Moreover, due
AreaC
to time constraints, this area was not completely
excavated. Interestingly, the footings for the eastArea C is northeast/east of Area B and consists
ern room of the two-room structure are composed
of what were identified by Jarratt as additional
of smaller siliceous cobbles, while the west room
walls (see Figure 4) associated with the mission
contains mostly calcareous stones perhaps reflectcompound. These walls are shown in the reconstrucing a separate, or later, construction episode.
tion sketch by Jones (see Figure l ). Five trenches
The exact materials and methods used in the
(BHTs 9, 10, 17, 18, and 19) were excavated in
wall construction cannot be stated with any cerArea C, and Backhoe Trench 15 was dug just west
tainty, but Jarratt (1966c:6) reported that the "sandof Area C (see Figure 4). Our excavations confinned
stone walls began with "some gravel being used as
that additional walls were located in the area. For
filling, with the exception of the corners and where
example, evidence for wall construction was
the buttress/es/ were located" and Mr. Fishbeck
observed in BHTs 9, 10, 17, and 18.
noted that the ruins looked like those at site 41VT11.
Several of the trenches, including BHTs 9, 10,
and 18, were placed in an area shown by Jarratt on a
The southwest corner of the ruins does have a small
projection suggesting evidence of a buttress as stated
scaled site map to be the east wall of the mission
by Jarratt.
compound. The trenches were specifically located in
Although Jarratt reported finding a limestoneareas that would crosscut (bisect) the walls shown
caliche floor, the TAS excavations only revealed
on the JaiTatt map. Mortar smears and large gravels
the footings, which would have been below the
were found in BHT 9. Some mortar and limestone
floor level. Some evidence of plaster, however, was
fragments were also found in the back dirt associfound on the exterior north wall footings, suggestated with this trench.
ing that indeed, as Ja1Tatt (1966a:6) stated, the walls
What is believed to be a wall remnant, as mapped
were plastered. Additionally, Jarratt found evidence
by Janatt and sketched by Jones, was encountered at
of a possible third room attached to the southeast
a depth of ca. 8 cm (3.1 inches) below surface in
corner of the two-room structure area (see Figure
BHT 10 (Figure 9). The trench also contained small
2) which he believed may have served as a kitchen.
pea-sized road gravels probably associated with the
Excavations conducted in the area show that either
parking lot construction on the east towards what is
footings or a cobble pavement at the southeast cortoday the children's playground. The original wall
ner of the ruins expanded at least ca. 150 cm (59
can be distinguished by the size of the cobbles (ca.

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture
7-8 cm or 2.75x3.10 inches) as
opposed to the smaller size of the
road gravels (less than ca. 5 cm or
about 2 inches) and the presence of
small to medium-sized limestone
and mortar fragments mixed with
the deposits. Trench 18 also contained a highly disturbed/impacted
alignment consisting of chert
cobbles, mortar, and limestone
fragments that is probably associated with the east wall.
BHT 17 crosscuts the northern
compound wall as shown in a 1966
measured site sketch map by Jarratt
(Figure 10) and in the reconstruction sketch done by Jones (see Figure I). The trench contained gravel

II

Figure 9. Limestone and cobble alignment in Backhoe Trench 10 at site
41VT10.

Figure 10. Map of excavated features at site 41VTl0, drawn by John
Jarratt, 1966.

deposits from highway construction to a depth of approximately
22 cm (8.7 inches). At ca. 22 cm
(8.7 inches) large limestone rocks,
mortar and large gravels were encountered. The rocks and gravels
appeared to be fairly intact but due
to lack of time and the dense clay,
the trench was not completely excavated. Deposits within this
trench are heavily disturbed. However, based on our preliminary investigations conducted in this area,
the compound map produced by
Jarratt (see Figure 2), and used by
Jones to produce his reconstruction sketch, appears to us to be
fairly accurate.
To the west and north of BHT
17, BHT IS was excavated. The
trench was also placed to the
north of the stone ruins to try and
locate the northern compound
wall shown by Jarratt and sketched by Jones. Unfortunately, this
area is highly disturbed by the
adjacent road construction. A
dense layer of road gravels was
found between 0-2I cm (0-8.3
inches) below surface with the
density decreasing from 22-30
cm (8.7-11.8 inches). In the

12

Texas Archeological Society

southern portion of the trench,
larger limestone fragments with
what appear to be mortar or plaster adhered to them were encountered. Possibly, the concentration
of limestone and mortar represents wall collapse from the
northeastern corner of the mission
compound.
To the south of BHT 18 an
additional trench was excavated.
Trench 19 was opened in order to
determine whether the possible
wall encountered in BHT 18 continued to the south. No evidence
of the wall was found in this
trench. However, a metal button
and unidentified bone fragments
were found in the trench and in
the trench fill.

AreaD

Figure 11. Feature 15 in Backhoe Trench 7 at 41 VTJO.

church that was initially built at the mission prior to
the construction of the larger two-room building
that is also believed to be a church. It was not
uncommon for burials to be placed underneath the
floors of churches in Spanish Colonial sites (Hann
and McEwan 1998; Saunders 1993; Tunnell and
Newcomb 1969), so this hypothesis should not be
ruled out. Churches were typically among the first
buildings to be erected at the missions. Occasionally,
less substantial structures were initially built to meet
the immediate needs of the mission only to later be
replaced by larger and typically more-permanent
structures. Markedly, the width of the Feature 15
(0.75 vara) is less than that of the footings for the

Jarratt depicted this area as a cemetery enclosed
by a partial low stone wall and wooden fence. The
Jones sketch also illustrates Area D as a cemetery.
Indeed, burials were found in Area D during the TAS
investigations of site 41 VTlO, and supp01i the hypothesis that this area may represent the camposanto
(cemetery). Features 15 to 18 (see Figure 4) were
found in BHTs 7 and 8, as well as an undefined
alignment in BHT 12. The features consist of what
appear to be a series of cobble and rubble wall alignments along with three Spanish Colonial burials.
Feature 15 (Figure 11), in
BHT 7, is a cobble and gravel
alignment that may represent the
footing of an east-west stone wall.
The feature measures 27 .5 inches
(69.8 cm) wide or approximately
0.75 varas. It consists of small to
medium-sized limestone cobbles
and gravels, mortar or plaster
fragments, and some shell. Based
on the location of the burials found
south of the alignment, Feature 15
may represent the remains of a
stone wall placed around a cemetery as noted by Jarratt. Another
possibility is that Area D may be
Figure 12. Feature 17 in Backhoe Trench 8 at 41 VTJO.
the location of a chapel or small

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture
two-room stone ruin (1 vara). Hence, it is possible
that Feature 15 represents an early, less substantial,
mission built at site 41VTl0.
Feature 18 (see Figure 4) was also encountered
in BHT 7 and appears to be associated with the
Feature 15 alignment. The feature consists of a
possible wall foundation alignment that was identified in the trench and subsequent hand excavations.
The alignment trends east to west and a second
alignment/wall was encountered that runs northwest at approximately a 45 degree angle. The eastwest alignment is 84 cm (33.3 inches) wide and
contained large stones, gravel, cobbles, mortar and
a small concentration of oyster shells. The width of
this wall, at approximately one vara, is the same
width as the footings documented in the two-room
structure (the church), again supporting the possibility that this area may represent the remains of an
early chapel with burials underneath. Additionally,
two very large limestone cobbles were located in
BHT 14 (see Figure 4) to the west of Feature 18,
and may represent a continuation of the wall to the

13

west. The intersecting wall, running northwest to
southeast and approximately 50 cm (20 inches)
wide, contained cobbles, a large mortar fragment,
and river gravels.
Two additional trenches (BHTs 8 and 12) in
Area D also yielded evidence of wall remains.
Trench 8, oriented east to west, was excavated in
order to follow the wall alignment encountered in
BHT 7. The original trench was randomly
expanded to the northwest in order to intersect
BHT 16 and to better define the extent of the
alignment and to rule out the possibility that it
was associated with construction of the parking
lot to the east. Feature 17 was in the trench and is
comprised of an alignment of small cobbles and
gravels (Figure 13).
Trench 12 was opened to the east of BHT 7 in
order to determine whether or not the rubble wall
alignment extended to the east. What appeared to be
a rubble alignment did appear in this backhoe trench,
but due to time limitations, was not given a feature
number and was not investigated further.

Palisade Wall?

?
Soldiers Quarters·1

Mission Plaz.a
Mission Indian
Living Quarters
\
\

I

I

I

I
I
\
\

--------Palisade Wall?---------

Figure 13. Site map of site 41VTl1 showing mission buildings.

14

Texas Archeological Society

The presence of several probable wall sections
in Area D remains problematic. They may represent an earlier and independent building construction, a later construction or addition, a later reconstruction episode, part of a transept wall, or a semicircular apse within a possible chapel. Additional
investigations are needed to address the function of
this area. Without further excavations to define the
exact dimensions and layout of the walls, it is impossible to determine whether or not the footings
are supporting a cemetery wall or the walls of an
early church or chapel. If Area D does represent a
church or chapel structure, however, it is likely that
it was in use before the larger church was built and
that the two were not used as churches simultaneously.
Three burials (in a cluster designated as Feature 16) were found in BHT 7 (see Figure 4), and
all were extended and oriented east to west. Notably, Jarratt also found burials in the general
area in 1965. According to Jarratt (1966b:3), three
burials were approximately 18.3 m (60 ft) south of
the stone ruins or 11 m (36 ft) southeast from the
old foundation wall (Jarratt 1966c:5). Trench 7 was
placed about 11 m from the southeast corner of the
stone ruins confirming the presence of burials or a
cemetery in this area. Additional archeological testing of the site, however, is needed to answer two
important questions. First, are additional burials
present at the site and, if so, are they confined to
this specific area? And second, does Area D represent a walled cemetery or possibly a church that
contained interior burials?
AreaE
Area E includes the southern limits of the
mission site (see Figure 4). Given the distance of
Area E from the mission ruins, it is believed that
this area is outside the confines of the mission
compound. Trench 3, a 40-m-long (131.2 ft) trench
was excavated in Area E but did not reveal any
intact deposits. However, a number of Spanish
Colonial artifacts including lead glazed wares and
majolica, as well as daub and bone, were retrieved
from the back dirt. Artifacts including ceramics,
bones, shells, daub, and lithics found during the
excavations and in the backdirt may indicate that
jacal-type living quarters for the mission Indian
population were placed outside the compound walls.
To date, testing in this area has not provided
evidence of the southern compound wall, whether

stone or wooden stockade. Based on the presence
and types of the artifacts found in all prior testing
phases, and the concentration of the artifacts found
in BHT 3, the evidence seems to support the
hypothesis that Area E was an exterior residential
area where mission Indians lived. An alternate, but
less likely, hypothesis is that the materials found in
BHT 3 represent an accumulation of trash along a
southern stockade wall (just inside, outside, or both),
but the direct evidence of the wall has not yet been
found. If this were the case, the mission compound
was quite large, measuring at least 65 m (213 ft)
from north to south.

COMPARING AND CONTRASTING:
ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA AND THE
RECONSTRUCTION SKETCHES
The sketch of the mission at 41VT10 by Jones
(see Figure 1) does share some similarities with
Jarratt's drawings (see Figures 2 and 3) and the
archeological data; however, there are some major
discrepancies. Compound components sketched by
Jones that appear to be supported by the archeological and twentieth-century informants and documents include the church with buttresses and small
windows (or troneras), a palisade wall, and the
placement of burials in the southeastern corner of
the mission complex. Sections of stone walls along
the southern and eastern edge of the compound and
a possible wooden palisade wall along the northern
section of the mission were uncovered during excavations. Jones's sketch, however, shows only stone
walls as opposed to a wooden palisade along the
northern edge.
The southern wall and most of the western wall
are depicted as a wooden palisade. Investigations
to the south and west of the mission ruins during
the TAS field schools were limited. As a result, the
configuration, layout, and construction style of the
western and southern walls of the mission
compound are not known. Sections of a stone
footing were noted to the south of burials in Area
D. The footings run east to west and represent
either the south wall of an enclosed cemetery or
perhaps evidence of an earlier church structure.
Possibly, this east-west wall may form part of the
southern wall of the mission compound. Additional
excavations are needed, however, in order to
support this theory as evidence for posts or other
wall foundations that might be encountered farther

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture

south of the cemetery/possible church wall would
indicate that the area was enclosed within a larger
mission complex and did not form part of the
exterior wall. Nonetheless, both Jarratt and Jones
interpret the burial area as an enclosed camposanto
with its southern wall forming part of the
compound's outer south wall.
Other notable discrepancies between Jones' s
drawing and the archeological data are the placement and dimensions of the church. The sketch
places the front of the mission church flush with
the western palisade wall. This placement of the
structure is purely conjectural and seems unlikely.
Given the defensive nature of these frontier outposts, having easy access to the inside of the compound via the mission church would not have been
prudent. Indeed, most Spanish missions in Texas
were built so that access from the outside was limited. Mission churches were typically surrounded
by walls or their entrances faced the interior of the
plaza with no direct access from outside of the
compound. Interestingly, Jarratt's 1965 reconstruction sketch of the mission shows the church structure to be set back several feet from the western
wall (see Figure 2). This is quite different from
Jones' s reconstruction and probably is a more-accurate depiction of the layout of the mission. Furthermore, if the postholes found in Area A are
indeed pait of the northern wall, they indicate that
the wall extended more than 25 m (82 ft) west of
the ruins. The size of the mission church is also in
question. The horizontal dimensions of the church
appear accurate in Jones's drawing, but the vertical
dimensions seem slightly exaggerated. Using a conservative estimate that the human figures are approximately 1.5 m (5 ft) tall, this would make the
height of the building at least 4.5 m (15 ft) if not
taller. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the friars' quarters at site 41VTl1 may have been as high
as 4 m (13 ft).
Another inaccuracy in the drawing by Jones
may be the homo feature illustrated to the west of
the church entrance. Jarratt first noted the feature
during his 1965 excavations at the site and tentatively interpreted it as an oven. The oven is shown
on Jones's sketch, in association with a thatched
roof structure, to the southwest of the northern wall
in a location that does not match up with Jarratt' s
findings. Furthermore, no direct evidence for an
oven was uncovered during the excavations, but
the presence of large amounts of burned daub does
suggest the presence of ajacal-like structure.

IS

Evidence for a jacal structure, as described by
Jarratt, was found along the northern wall during the
most-recent excavations. This feature may form part
of a series of buildings along the northern wall of the
complex that is depicted in both reconstruction
sketches by Jarratt and Jones. One notable difference
is that Jmntt shows an outline of rock foundations
along the north wall on his 1965 map (see Figure 2),
while Jones depicts a long, thatched roof that may
represent contiguousjacales (see Figure 1).
In his sketch, Jones also depicts two entrances
in the western palisade wall. Unfortunately, the area
to the west of the mission ruins has not been thoroughly explored, therefore the presence and locations of gates in the west wall cannot be confirmed
archeologically. Nonetheless, evidence for a possible gate, admittedly tenuous, was noted along the
proposed northern wall in Area A. While the distance between postholes suggests that a gate may
have present in the northern wall, more substantial
evidence is needed in order to confirm its presence.
Absolutely no archeological evidence has
been found to suggest that a gun platform was in
the northeast corner of the compound (see Figure
1) or that raised guard towers were present in any
of the compound's corners (see Figures I and 3).
Jones' s depiction of these elements is purely
speculative. There is no indication that Jarratt
obtained any archeological evidence that would
support interpretations of a gun platform or guard
towers, and no such evidence was found during
the more-recent investigations (see Hindes et al.
1999; Boyd 2004).
In summary, site 41 VTIO contains the remains
of stone ruins and other features dating to the
Spanish Colonial period. Although a tremendous
amount of modification has taken place over the
site within the last 40 years, the fact that wall
footings, postholes, and other features could be
located during the TAS investigations suggests that
there are probably more structural remains present
even where topsoil removal was most severe. The
dimensions of the compound are unknown. The
west and south walls have not been defined and
other mission components, such as additional
structures and related features, may be revealed
through more-intensive investigations. What can
be said with certainty, however, is that the mission
complex included a two-room structure that appears
to represent the church, both stone and wooden
walls were constructed at the site, jacal-like
structures were present, and a concentration of

16

Texas Archeological Society

burials was located to the southeast of the main
stone ruins. Additional targeted archeological
investigations, starting with remote sensing and
followed by targeted testing of remote sensing
anomalies, are crucial for obtaining a better
understanding of the true layout of the mission
compound at site 41VT10.

MISSION LAYOUT AND
ARCHITECTURE AT 41VT11
The third location of Espiritu Santo, site 41VTl1,
is located in Mission Valley, Texas in Victoria
County and was established in 1726. Prior to the
investigations conducted by the University of Texas
and the Texas Archeological Society, little formal
work was completed at the site although the site had
been subjected to extensive looting. In 1936 an historical marker was erected in order to commemorate
the site. During the 1960's and 1970's avocational
archeologists visited the site to survey and record the
standing ruins (Walter 1997). In the spring of 1995
the Office of the State Archeologist (OSA) conducted limited testing at the site to evaluate its potential for future research. Prompted by their findings, the University of Texas Field School began
excavations at the mission in the summer of 1995.
The most extensive work at the site, however, was
completed when the TAS held two field schools at
the site in 1997 and 1998 (Walter 2000).
Like site 41VTl0 and other Spanish missions,
the third location of Espiritu Santo was built on an
elevated spot, a high knoll, within a short distance
from necessary resources such as water, building
stone, wood, and land for cultivating. Site 41VT1 l
is situated less than a kilometer from the east bank
of the Guadalupe River. In a letter to the Viceroy of
New Spain, Governor Almazan (1726) describes
the new site of the mission as follows:
it has the advantage of being on higher
ground, away from the lagoons and
swamps, has sweet soft water, an abundance of timber for all construction and
at a distance of two leagues, an abundance of good rock for building and there
is the hope of being able to find a quarry
much nearer. .. another creek (west side)
at a distance of three leagues having an
abundance of water and with sufficient
land for an ample mission, and to cultivate for the needs of the Presidio.

The availability of both land and water for raising
livestock and crops was another important criteria
for selecting a mission site (Fox 1991).
To date no references to the layout or general
construction of the third location of Mission Espiritu
Santo have been found in the archival records. What
we know about the architecture and mission's
organization has come almost entirely from the
archeological and architectural research conducted
at the site in the 1990s (Walter 2000). Based on
these recent archeological and architectural
investigations, a total of five stone structures have
been identified at the site as shown in Figure 13.
The buildings include a church (Structure B), the
friars' quarters (Structure A), an open-air chapel
(Structure C), a kitchen or refectory (Structure E),
and a building of unknown function (Structure D).
The recovery of daub from the interior of the
mission compound suggests that jacal-like
structures were also a part of the mission layout
and were probably used for housing mission Indians.
All of the mission components are addressed in the
following discussion.

Structure A
The most intensive architectural investigations
at the mission were carried out in Structure A by
Spanish Colonial architect Jack Eaton (Walter
1997). The following description is a summary of
his findings and the archeological research conducted in the building. Structure A is a free-standing,
one-room building directly south of Structure B
(see Figure 13). The remains of the entire building
(Figure 14) were exposed during the 1997 T AS
excavations, allowing a thorough inspection of the
structural foundation. The walls are of rubble
sandstone construction and may have reached a
height of 4 m (13 ft). The tall, sturdy walls would
have allowed a high ceiling and support for a roof.
Footing trenches for the wall foundations were
exposed during the excavations. The trenches were
excavated 50 cm (19.7 inches) deep into the ground
surface. The footing wall and the above-ground
walls were then built using the same construction
style and are of equal width.
Today the standing ruins measure 80-90 cm
(31.5-35.4 inches) high from the bottom of the
footings (Eaton 1998:25). The dimensions of the
building are 5.40x7.47 m (17.7x24.5 ft) on the
outside, while the interior measures 3.75x5.85 m
(12.3xl9.2 ft). Evidence for plaster was observed

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture

l7

are plastered and painted red (Figure 16). The doorway measures 87
cm (34.2 inches) wide at its opening and splays to a width of 1.6 m
(5.25 ft) toward the interior of the
structure. Splayed doorways allowed doors to be opened wide to
the interior, which was necessary
for a structure with thick walls.
The door could then be bolted
from the inside (Eaton 1998:28).
Although the remaining wall ruins
are too low to indicate the presence of windows, splayed windows were likely to have been
present in one or more of the walls.
Figure 14. Overview of Structure A at site 41VTl1 (the friars' quarters).
The windows, like the doorway,
would have splayed inward and
on both the interior and exterior walls. Although
probably had interior wooden shutters.
both the inside and outside of the building appear
An interesting feature of Strncture A is a small,
to have been plastered, the interior walls yielded
stepped altar (Figure 17) that is opposite the doorthe only evidence of having been painted. The
way (see Figure 13). Only the base of the altar
preservation of the inside walls is excellent, and
remains, but a projection on the exterior west wall
red-painted plaster was observed on all aboveof the building indicates that a niche was built into
ground wall sections (see Figure 14). The finished
the wall to accommodate a shrine. The wall projecplastered walls measure approximately 84 cm (33
tion is 2.25 m (7.4 ft) wide and extends inward 75
inches) wide or about one Spanish vara. The Spanish
vara is a unit of measurement that, through time,
hasranged from 76.8 cm (30 inches) to 90.6 cm
(35.7 inches) or about 33.3 inches. A standard length
for the vara was mandated for the New World (83.6
cm); however not everyone complied with this
prescribed number in the Spanish provinces
(Haggard 1941).
Parts of an intact, interior floor were also uncovered approximately 55 cm (21.7 inches) below
the height of the remaining walls (Figure 15). The
SECTION A-A'
flooring consists of compact caliche that is about
12 cm (4.7 inches) in thickness (Eaton 1998:25).
Beneath the floor, a layer of charcoal and ash was
r - ____ ~::·:"'~~.¢:'
J --1
encountered. The ashy lens may represent the re-+
--- - --- -mains of a perishable roof that burned and then fell
I
I
onto the floor of the structure. The roof was probI
_o
l
I
ably constructed using heavy wooden beams and
o.
· 1
mortar that were available locally. Eaton (1998:28)
notes that mortar and beam roofs were frequently
used in formal and permanent construction at mission sites during this era, especially if the materials
were easily procured.
SECTION B-B'
An inward splayed doorway (see Figure 14) is
on the east side of the building and opens up into
Figure 15. Profiles of Structure A walls at site 41VT11
(after Eaton 1998).
the mission courtyard or plaza area. The do01jambs

_____

-----~-------

-----~x

I

18

Texas Archeological Society
slabs probably formed part of a flagstone pavement
around the outside of the building (Figure 18). Eaton
interprets the structure as a residence or office for
the missionaries. The thick walls, secure doorway,
and the house shrine underscore the sturdy nature
of the structure and its use as a personal space.

StmctureB

Figure 16. Painted and plastered domjambs in Structure
A at site 41VT11.

Structure B, located north of Structure A, is a
long linear building (Figure 19) made out of sandstone with three separate rooms (see Figure 13:B 1,
B2, and B3) that may at one time have served as
storage rooms, a granary, or a church. The sturdiness of this building certainly indicates that it was
meant to last and a great deal of effort went into
its construction. Constructing well-built churches
and granaries would have been a priority for the
missionaries. The church, of course, was the most
important building at the mission, while the granary was needed to store food and, therefore, had
to be sturdy and impenetrable to both rodents and
the elements. The entire structure measures just
over 19 m long (62.3 ft) and is more than 6 m
wide (19.7 ft). The walls of the structure range in
thickness from 70-75 cm (27.6-29.5 inches). Although today plaster is only visible in small patches
on the standing walls of Room B 1, most of Structure B's interior was probably covered with plaster especially inside the church. Like the friars'
quarters (Structure A), the interior plaster was
probably painted. Unfortunately the plaster remnants on the walls of Structure B have retained

cm (29.5 inches) from the wall. The niche/shrine
probably held either a cross, crucifix, or statue of
some kind. The altar consists of a smaller, lower
step used for kneeling and an
upper step where a statue or cross
was placed. The steps are constructed of cut and dressed limestone. Limestone is not found in
the immediate area and was probably imported or procured from
another location. The altar is plastered but not painted, although redpainted plaster is noted on the altar where the wall and altar join
(Figure 21). The remains of the
altar measure 57 cm (22.4 inches)
high, 85 cm (33.5 inches) wide,
and extend out 62 cm (24.4 inches)
from the base of the wall.
Outside Structure A, several
flat sandstone slabs were encounFigure 17. View of altar in Structure A at site 41 VTI I.
tered during excavations. The

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture 19
of Structure B is approximately
30 cm (11.8 inches) below the
modern ground surface. The footings offset the wall by 10 cm (3.9
inches) (John Garner, personal
comnmnication 1998).
The above-ground walls of B 1
that are still standing today were
built using lime mortar. This suggests that the foundation of Structure B was laid down first and that
Rooms B2 and B3 were built prior
to the construction of Room B 1.
All of the Structure B walls are of
rubble stone construction, but the
sandstone used in the walls of
Room B 1 is of similar size and
shape (Figure 20) in contrast to
the irregular and random shapes
Figure 18. Reconstruction sketch of Structure A at site 41 VTll (Eaton 1998).
of the stones used in Rooms B2
and B3 (Walter 2000:80). Obvinone of their original color due to age and expoously extra time and effort was invested in the
sure to the elements.
more formal construction of Room 1.
Although no hist01ical references have yet been
Originally the walls were thicker than they are
found to indicate either the layout or the function of
today and may have approximated one Spanish vara
in width. The three rooms making up Structure B
the mission buildings, the recovery of skeletal reare designated as B 1, B2, and B3, and their exterior
mains inside both Rooms Bl and B2 supports the
walls measure 6.8x6.3 m (22.3x20.7 ft), 5.14x6.50
theory that Structure B served as a church. The
m (16.9x2 l.3 ft), and 8.5x6.1 m (27 .Ox20.0 ft),
deceased, especially those of high status or rank,
respectively. In the eastern wall of Room B 1 there
were typically buried underneath the church floor
was either a door or window that opened up into
although commoners were also interred within the
the interior mission plaza. There is also a doorway
church. Once the church floor was filled, additional
that connects Room B 1 with B2, however the exact
burials were placed in the camposanto usually near
dimensions and form of the door
is unknown due to the amount of
deterioration. Based on doorways
uncovered in two of the other
structures, the doorway(s) found
in B 1 was probably splayed.
Presumably there was also a
doorway between B2 and B3, but
only a small portion of the wall
between the two rooms was
uncovered.
Rooms B2 and B3 are not in
perfect alignment with B 1, which
may suggest that these rooms
were built at different times.
Earthen mortar was used in the
construction of Rooms B2 and B3
as well as the foundation of Room
Figure 19. View of Structure B at site 41VTl1 (facing southwest).
B 1. The bottom of the footings

20

Texas Archeological Society

(15.0x26.2 ft). This building abuts
Structure B (attached to Room B3)
and has no standing above-ground
walls. Structure C appears to be an
apse, but the walls are slightly
lopsided and no foundations were
uncovered. The rubble-stone construction of Structure C also greatly
contrasts with the building style of
Structure B.
The T AS excavations along
the east wall juncture of Structures
B and C indicate a clear difference
in construction styles (Figure 22).
The building stones used in Structure C vary greatly in size and are
Figure 20. Sandstone walls of Room Bl, Structure B at site 41VT11
much less uniform in shape than
(facing south).
those used in Structure B (Walter
2000:91). The stone walls of
Structure C were laid down on the
or adjacent to the church. Looting within the walls
original ground surface and probably were not very
of the mission structures has contributed to the
high. In addition, the walls are also thin in
poor preservation and scattered nature of these
comparison to those of Structure B. Structure C's
walls were only 58 cm (22.8 inches) wide as
remains, making it difficult to determine when the
opposed to the 75-cm-wide (39.5 inches) walls
bodies were interred. Most of the remains are not
intact, although one articulated skeleton was unobserved in Structure B. Without entrenched
footings, the wall bases could not have supported
covered inside Room B2. This burial, however,
much weight and it is likely that the building served
dates to the nineteenth century rather than the misas an open-air chapel or ramada. Ramadas were
sion era. Calico buttons found along the sternum
of the body indicated that the burial postdated the
fairly common during the earlier part of the mission
Spanish occupation of the site. Thefact that these
era, particularly in areas such as Southern Mexic;o
and the Yucatan (Burkhart 1989; Mullen 1997). An
skeletal remains were found inside the structure
open-air church would have allowed the priests to
suggests that local residents in the area during the
nineteenth century recognized this
building was the church and
therefore a holy place to inter
their loved ones.

Structure C
The layout and configuration
of Structure C (see Figure 13),
which adjoins Structure B along its
northern wall, lends additional
support to the theory that Structure
B was used as a church. Structure
C is a long, rectangular building
with a semicircular shape along its
northern end (Figure 21). The
exterior dimensions of Structure C
are 6.lx9.3 m (20.0x30.5 ft), and
its interior measures 4.6x8.0 m

Figure 21. Overhead view of Structure C at site 41 VT11.

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture 21
In addition to extensive
looting, a large anaqua tree has
grown up through the center of
the building. As a result, only
limited investigations were carried
out within Structure D. However,
enough of the structure was
exposed to allow the exterior
dimensions of this one-room
building to be estimated as approximately 8.0x6.5 m (26.2x21.3 ft).
The thickness of the walls is about
75-80 cm (29.5-31.5 ft) or roughMidden
ly equivalent to those in Structure
B. Excavations inside the building
revealed portions of the interior
Figure 22. Drawing of masonry construction at the juncture of Structures B
wall that were plastered and
and C (exterior east wall view).
painted in red and cream. No floor
was encountered, but the original
flooring was probably similar to
accommodate a larger crowd during mass as
the floors found in the other mission structures.
opposed to saying mass inside a small chapel. If
A builder's trench and the bottom of the footStructure C was used in this manner, it would have
ings were located approximately 80- 90 cm (31.5permitted the missionaries to provide religious
services to more people until a larger church could
be built.
Vertical poles may have been spread out along
the low walls of the building in order to support a
thatched roof that would have protected an altar
but also allowed the neophytes to view mass from
outside. No plaster was observed on any of the
Structure C wall remnants, but portions of an intact floor were uncovered during the excavations
of the building. The floor is approximately 2 cm
(0.8 inches) thick and consists of plaster and
packed caliche.

Structure

B

Structure

C

Structure D
Located to the northeast of Structure C is Structure D (see Figure 13). The long axis of Structure D
is oriented east-west and forms the northwest corner of the mission compound. A doorway is present
in the northwest corner of the building (Figure 23).
The entryway is not splayed and its threshold was
uncovered at 46 cm (18.1 inches) below the modern surface. Red painted plaster was observed on
the interior northern wall near the doorjamb. The
doorway was probably meant to allow access only
from inside this building to the outside of the compound rather than serving as a main entrance into
the mission plaza. Natural and cultural disturbances
hindered excavations in this structure.

Figure 23. View of Structure D doorway at site 41VTl1.

22

Texas Archeological Society

or building trenches. The construction style of Structure E resembles
that of Structure C. Both buildings
appear to have been built quickly
using irregular-shaped rubble
stones as opposed to the larger,
more evenly-shaped sandstone
blocks used in Structures A, B, and
!:,.."'SJ Rubble above rock wan
D. Although no intact plaster was
111 II I
Rock wail of Structure 4
noted inside the building, the fill
0 m 1
inside Structure E consisted of deUnexcavated Area
caying plaster and mortar as well
as wall fall rubble.
Figure 24. Sketch of Structure D footings at site 41VTl1.
The walls of Structure E are
55 cm thick, and the entire oneroom building measures 7.5x6.0 m from the out35.4 inches) below the current ground surface. The
side. An inwardly splayed doorway is located along
footings and the aboveground walls are all of sandthe southern wall near the southwest corner of the
stone and the construction style mimics that of
Structure B. Carefully selected sandstone was used
building (see Figure 13). The doorway opens up
to build the walls of Structure D, while less regular
into the plaza, and excavations exposed part of a
rocks were used in the construction of the footings
cobblestone pavement. Although the full horizon(Figure 24). The footings are about 50 cm (19.7
tal extent of the cobblestone floor is not known,
inches) deep. Although we do not know the parportions of the pavement were also found to the
south of Structure D (Figure 26). The floor is
ticular function of this building, an interesting feamade up of chert cobbles obtained from gravel
ture was uncovered in Structure D that suggests the
building was meant to last and must have served an
bars or gravel lenses in the cutbanks of the nearby
Guadalupe River. The cobbles range in size from
important purpose. The remains of a fan-shaped
5 to 20 cm (2-8 inches). Cobble pavements served
buttress were exposed along the northeast comer of
to prevent water and mud from accumulating in
the building (see Figure 13). The base of the butareas around the mission plaza and buildings. Simitress measures 3.0 m (9.8 ft) long by 2.5 m (8.2 ft)
lar types of pavements have been noted at other
wide at its thickest point. Evidently the buttress
Spanish Colonial missions and presidios in Texas
was meant to provide extra support for this corner
(Schuetz 1968; Tunnell and Newcomb 1969;
of the building.
Walter et al. 2003).
StructureE

Directly east of Structure D is
Structure E (Figure 25), which adjoins Structure D along its eastern
wall (see Figure 13). The two structures were built at different times
as indicated by their contrasting
building styles. Although the two
buildings share a common wall,
Structure E is aligned slightly offset to the north-south axis of Structure D. Like all the mission buildings at 41VTI1, Structure Eis also
heavily disturbed. No evidence of
an intact floor was found, and excavations around the structure were
not deep enough to expose footing

Figure 25. View of Structure Eat site 41VTl1.

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture 23
10 m (32.8 ft) of stone materials
have been removed from the
quarry, and scars on the rock faces
indicate that iron tools were most
likely used to remove sandstone
blocks (Jones 1998).
In addition to building stone,
materials for making lime mortar
were also readily available.
Caliche deposits are abundant at
the site, and this material can be
used as clean fill in construction
of flooring and can provide lime
for plaster and mortar. Both lime
and earthen mortar were identified
archeologically, and the discovery
of a lime kiln at the site confirmed
our suspicions that caliche rock
was being reduced to make lime.
Additional kilns were more than
Figure 26. Cobblestone pavement found in front of Structures D and E at
likely used at the mission, but only
site 41VT11.
one has been found.
Unfortunately, direct evidence
Direct evidence for the function of Structure E
for m1ss10n Indian structures was not recovered
was not recovered, but excavations just outside the
from site 41VTl1. Cultural materials including nadoorway provide some clues to the possible uses of
tive ceramic wares, stone tools and chipping debris,
this building. A trash midden was composed of
processed mussel shells, native fauna! remains,
large amounts of animal bone including cow/bison,
along with colonial artifacts such as glass beads,
pig, sheep/goat, freshwater fish, and deer as well as
ceramics, and metal were found in large quantities
colonial tableware ceramics, parts of copper cooking
outside the area of the mission compound espevessels, and other kitchen-related items. Given the
cially to the west of the mission buildings. The
types of materials recovered from the midden, it
mission Indians appear to have camped around the
seems likely that the building may have served as
outside of the mission compound (see Figure 13).
the kitchen or refectory where meals were either
Many of them probably lived in wattle and daub or
prepared, consumed, or both.
jacal-like structures both inside and outside the mission walls. The mission Indians are known to have
come and gone freely, particularly during the first 8
to 10 years of the mission's existence. The friars
ADDITIONAL MISSION COMPONENTS
struggled to keep the mission going. Shortages of
AT SITE 41VT11
food and supplies were common, and the friars
frequently had to turn Natives away when they
Building materials for the mission structures
requested food or shelter.
were procured, for the most part, locally. The
A great deal of time and effort went into the
Mission Valley location of Espiritu Santo was noted
construction of acequias, irrigation canals that were
for its abundance of available resources such as
meant to provide water to the mission fields. Ulti"sweet soft water, an abundance of timber for all
mately, the acequias were a failure due to drought
construction ... and an abundance of good rock for
and flooding episodes that wiped out portions of
building" (Almazan 1726). A sandstone outcrop is
the canals (Rinker et al. 1999).
located just 1 km (0.6 miles) south of the mission
After struggling to make the irrigation system
ruins. The sandstone from the mission buildings
successful,
the friars abandoned the acequias and
matches the stone from this outcrop, and an
began to rely on dry farming which proved to be
investigation of the area revealed clear evidence
more successful. The last 10 to 13 years of the
that the outcrop had been quarried. Approximately

24

Texas Archeological Society

mission's existence were much more stable and
allowed the Franciscans to support a larger population (Walter 2000). Plans to build more permanent
stone housing for the neophytes may have been in
the works before they were forced to move the
mission to the San Antonio River in 1749. Prior to
the move, however, it appears that the mission
Indians primarily camped outside the mission complex. It is also plausible that jacal housing may have
been provided inside the mission compound for some
of the more trusted or Christianized Indians, but
evidence for such structures has yet to be found.
While daub was found inside and outside the
mission compound, no clear patterns of jacal
structures were identified in the atcheological
investigations. Nevertheless, jacal structures were
being used at the mission for housing residents
such as the presidial soldiers who were stationed
there (Oberste n.d.). Excavations to the east of the
mission structures yielded evidence for the presence
of a presidio soldier and his wife and perhaps a
family. Large quantities of daub, square nails, and
household items indicate that a structure once stood
in this area. Spanish military and horse-related
equipment was also found in abundance, supporting
the theory that this area was occupied by at least
one presidio soldier.

E has a similar foundation, although excavations
were not extensive enough to expose them.
Conversely, the apse-shaped Structure C was built
directly on the surface with no entrenched
foundation footing. The foundations exposed in
mission buildings A, B, and D were constructed of
sandstone rubble and range in depth from 40 to 90
cm (15.7-35.4 inches) below the modern ground
surface. In general, the foundation footings are
slightly wider than the upper walls they support.
Both earth and lime mortar were also used in the
construction of the foundations.
Evidence for painted plaster was noted on several
of the buildings including A, B, and D. Not surprisingly, most of the plaster was found on the interior
walls. Small amounts of plaster were observed on
the exterior walls of Structure A, and it is likely that
most of the buildings also had plastered outer walls.
Exposure to the elements has undoubtedly disintegrated any exterior plaster that may have once been
present on many of the buildings.
Other than Structure A, no physical evidence
of roofing was found at the site. Given the remote
location of the mission and the abundance of available wood, the buildings were probably covered
with timber and mortar roofs. Although evidence
for intact floors was difficult to detect, exposed
floor remnants are best described as packed caliche
and earth.

SUMMARY OF ARCHITECTURAL
ELEMENTS AT SITE 41VT11
All the stone structures at the mission are constructed from sandstone quarried from a nearby
source. Both earth and lime mortars were used in
the buildings. Locally abundant caliche provided a
good source of lime and was also used in the flooring of several of the buildings. Construction styles
varied slightly between some buildings, but all of
the structures had rubble masonry walls and foundations. Nevertheless, the stones used in some of
the buildings were more-carefully selected and
more-uniformly placed, as noted in Structures A,
B, and D. Both Structures C and E appear to have
been erected quickly and with much less attention
paid to the alignment of the buildings and the integrity of the walls. The only cut stones observed were
used in the construction of the altar found in Structure A. The altar also was the only architectural
element made of non-local limestone.
Footings were exposed in all of the buildings
except for Structures C and E. Presumably Structure

COMPARISON OF MISSION
LAYOUT AND ARCHITECTURE AT
SITES 41VT10 AND 41VT11
Currently what we know about site 41 VTIO is
limited. Excavations have largely concentrated on
the northern and eastern sections of the site. The
reconstruction sketches produced by Jarratt and
Jones, while helpful in some ways, are flawed by a
number of inaccuracies. It appears that Jarratt's
reconstruction sketch from 1965 (see Figure 2) is
the most precise, but many of its details cannot be
corroborated by the archeological evidence. The
exact layout of the mission is not known, and we
have almost no details pertaining to above-ground
wall construction techniques since only subsurface
foundation footings have survived.
Comparisons between the reconstruction
sketches and the archeological data show both
consistencies and inconsistencies. Evidence for
both stone walls and wooden palisade construction

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture 25
was noted archeologically and in the sketches.
Jones's sketch depicts both types of construction,
but the size of the compound and locations of the
actual compound walls are still not known. The
location of the burials, first noted by Jarratt, was
verified by the recent archeological investigations,
and both Jones and Jarratt depict the burials as
being enclosed in a walled cemetery. The recently
uncovered stone foundations located north and
south of the burial area (i.e., Features 15 and 18 in
Area D; see Figure 4) could represent portions of
the cemetery wall, but they could also represent
foundations of an earlier church or chapel.
Evidence ofjacal-type structures was observed by
Jarratt, and this concept was incorporated into
Jones' s reconstruction drawing. Recent archeological investigations also indicate the presence
of possible jacal structures, although the archeological location (Feature 1 in Area A; see Figure
4) does not match the location of the thatched
roofed structures (along the east wall and outside
the compound near the homo) depicted in Jones' s
reconstruction sketch or the location of the "Indian
huts" in the plaza east of the church in Jarratt's
1965 drawing.
Based on the current data, architectural comparisons between site 41 VTlO at Tonkawa Bank
and site 41VTI1 in Mission Valley reveal the two
sites are similar in very general ways. Both have
the common components that one would expect to
find at most Spanish Colonial missions in Texas.
Both have stone structures that appear to be
churches, possibly with attached kitchens. Evidence for plastered walls and hard-packed caliche
flooring also was noted at both sites. Site 41VTl1
had two church locations representing an initial,
more ephemeral building that was later replaced
with a larger, sturdier structure. This may have
been the case at site 41VT10, but the evidence is
not definitive. Burials were found at both of the
missions, although the site 41VT11 burials postdated the Spanish occupation of the mission. The
presence of these burials inside what is believed to
be the church at site 41VTl1 is nonetheless important since it suggests that later residents of the area
were familiar with the practice of burying the dead
under the church floor and that they recognized the
structure as a church. Originally the church at Mission Valley consisted of two rooms (B2 and B3)
and only later was a third room added. Interestingly
the original two-room structure is very close to the
same size as the two-room structure at Tonkawa

Bank. Comparing the exterior dimensions, the site
41VT10 building measures 7.6x12.2 m (25x40 ft)
while the site 41 VTll building is roughly 6.3x13.0
m (2lx43 ft). The orientation of the two buildings
is much different, however. The Mission Valley
church is oriented north-south while the church at
Tonkawa Bank is oriented east-west. If Jarratt's
1965 sketch of the mission buildings is correct, the
L-shaped layout of the structures formed by the
church and the possible kitchen is somewhat similar to the overall L-shape pattern of the structures at
Mission Valley.
At both sites, one vara appears to be the standard width for the mission walls, and sandstone and
lime mortar and plaster were the primary building
materials. Unlike site 41VTI1, site 41 VTIO has no
above-ground ruins so direct archeological evidence
of wall construction is lacking. Construction styles
were probably similar, as noted by local Victoria
resident Herman Fishbeck who viewed both sites
in the mid-twentieth century. Evidence for jacal
structures is present at the mission sites, both inside and outside the compounds. Inside jacales
were probably used as storerooms, temporary housing, and workshops, while jacales located outside
the compound walls were probably houses for mission Indians.
The exact dimensions of the mission compounds are not known for either site 41 VTlO or site
41VT11, so no overall size comparison can be made.
Based on the existing data, however, we know that
the site 41VTl0 mission compound is at least 32x50
m (105x164 ft) and the site 41VT11 compound is
at least 50x53 m (164x174 ft). No evidence for a
compound wall has yet to be found at site 41VT11,
but the configuration of buildings suggests that the
Spaniards were trying to layout out the mission
complex in a square or rectangular shape. The doors
and windows that could be identified at site 41VTI1
all led to the interior of the mission plaza with the
exception of one door that probably opened outward to the exterior of the compound. If the compound wall was a wooden palisade then it is possible that little if any of the walls remain. Defense
was a primary concern so a surrounding wall would
have been a necessity.

CONCLUSIONS
The archeology at both site 41VTIO and site
41VTl1 has been critical for assessing the

26

Texas Archeological Society

organization and architectural methods employed
at each site. Although some similarities exist
between the two missions, the limited nature of the
architectural remains at the second location prohibits
more detailed comparisons. Both sites appear to
share common Spanish mission components seen
across the northern frontier of Texas including a
church, jacal living structures/storerooms, hardpacked earthen floors, and the arrangement of
buildings around an interior plaza. Additional
excavations at site 41VTl1 are currently underway
and a primary objective of these investigations is to
delineate additional ruins including temporary
housing for presidio soldiers and evidence of a
palisade wall. Present architectural data from site
41 VTlO is sparse and future investigations are
needed, however, to better define the architectural
ruins at the site.
ENDNOTE
1. Some eye-witness accounts of 41VT10, dating to
the early and mid-twentieth century, are available.

REFERENCES CITED
Almazan, Fernando Perez
1726 Letter to the Viceroy Casafuerte of New Spain dated
July 4 concerning the removal of the first location
of Mission Espiritu Santo and the presidio to the
Guadalupe River. Archivo General de la Nacion,
Center for American History, The University of
Texas, Austin.
Bolton, H. E.
1915 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. University
of California Press, Berkeley.
1960

The Mission as a Frontier Institution in the Spanish-American Colonies. Texas Western College
Press, Academic Reprints, El Paso.

Boyd, Douglas K.
2004 Geoarcheological Survey of the Proposed Six Flags
Historical Park, Victoria, Texas. Technical Reports
No. 66. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, I519-1821. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Corbin, J. E.
1989 Spanish-Indian Interaction on the Eastern Frontier
of Texas. In Columbian Consequences: Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish
Borderlands West, Vol. 1, edited by David Hurst
Thomas, pp. 269-276, Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington.
Dabbs, J. A. (Translator)
1940 The Texas Missions in 1785. Documentary Evidence for the Spanish Missions of Texas. Garland
Publishing, New York.
Eaton, J.
1989 Gateway Missions of the Lower Rio Grande. In
Columbian Consequences: Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West,
Vol. 1, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. 245-258,
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington.
1998 Excavations of Structure 2 at Mission Espiritu Santo
(41VTl1), 1997. In Archeology in Victoria County,
Texas: Manual for the 1998 Texas Archeological
Society Field School, edited by Thomas R. Hester
and Tamra L. Walter, pp. 24-31.
Forrestal, P. P.
1931 The Solfs Diary of 1767. Translated by Peter
Forrestal. Spanish Borderlands Sourcebooks, Documentary Evidence for the Spanish Missions of Texas,
Vol. 22: 355-396. Garland Publishing, New York.
Fox, A. A.

1991

An Overview of Spanish Archaeology in Texas.
Texas Papers on Latin America. Center for Archaeological Research, Paper No. 91-04. The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

Gilmore, Kathleen K.
1973 Mission Rosario Archeological Investigations, 1973.
Archeological Report 14, Part II. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department, Austin.
Graham, Joe S.
1994 El Rancho in South Texas: Continuity and Change
from 1750. University of North Texas Press, Denton.

Burkhart, L. M.
1989 The Slippery Earth: Nahua-Christian Moral Dialogue in Sixteenth-Century Mexico. The University
of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Habig, M.A.
1977 The Alamo Mission: San Antonio de Valero, 17181793. Franciscan Herald Press, Chicago and Old
Spanish Missions Historical Research Library, San
Antonio.

Castaneda, C. E.
1936 Our Catholic Heritage in Texas: The Mission Era.
Vol.1-4, Von Boeckmann-Jones Company, Austin.

Haggard, J. V.
1941 Handbook for Translators of Spanish Historical
Documents, Austin, Texas.

Walter, Hindes, and Boyd-Spanish Mission Architecture 27
Hann, J. H. and B. G. McEwan
1998 The Apalachee Indians and Mission San Luis. University Press of Florida, Gainesville.

Oberste, W. H.
n.d.
Texas Missions of the Coastal Bend. Unpublished
manuscript. Catholic Archives of Texas, Austin.

Hindes, V. K., A. A. Fox, and E. H. Schmiedlin
1999 An Overview of Test Excavations and Documentary Research at 41VT10, the Tonkawa Bank Site,
Victoria County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 70:79-96.

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
2003 Scope of Work: Proposed for Archival Research,
Geoarcheological Survey, and Remote Sensing at the
Six Flags Historical Park Location within Riverside
Park, Victoria, Texas. Unpublished document submitted to David Hoffman and Company, Evant, Texas.

Jarratt, J. L., Sr.
1932 Toncahua Indian Village. Manuscript on file, University of Houston Victoria.
1966a The Complex of Spanish Forts and Missions on the
Guadalupe River 1726-1749. Paper presented to
the Texas Archeological Society, Nov. 12, 1966.
1966b Toncahua Indian Village Excavations Field Notes
1965-1966 and Excavations Around Old Spanish
Fort Location in North End of City Park. Notes on
file at the Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
1966c Field Notes, and Narrative on Old Spanish Ruins, at
the Toncahua Indian Village, on the Toncahua Bank
on the Guadalupe River, North End of the City
Park, Victoria, Victoria County, Texas. Photocopy
of typed notes, on file at the Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Jones, B. M.
1998 Excavations at 41VT121, A Spanish Colonial Sandstone Quarry. In Archeology in Victoria County,
Texas: Manual for the 1998 Texas Archaeological
Society Field School, edited by Thomas R. Hester
and Tamra L. Walter, pp. 24-31.
Juarez, Jose Roberto, Jr.
1976 An Architectural Description of the Dolores Ranch.
Unpublished study prepared for the Ranching Heritage Center, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas.
Linn, John J.
1883 Reminiscences of Fifty Years in Texas. D&J Sadler,
New York.
Mounger, Maria A.
1959 Mission Espfritu Santo of Coastal Texas: An Example of Historic Site Archeology. Unpublished
master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Mullen, R. J.
1997 Architecture and its Sculpture in Viceregal Mexico.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Newcomb, R.
1990 Spanish Colonial Architecture in the United States.
Dover Publications, New York.

Ramsdell, C.
1938 Spanish Goliad. Unpublished manuscript on file at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1949

Espiritu Santo: An Early Texas Cattle Ranch. Texas
Geographic Magazine 13:2, pp. 21-25.

Rinker, Jennifer, I.W. Cox, and C. B. Bousman
1999 The Dam and Acequia Systems of Espiritu Santo
de Zuniga: Construction, Use, and Abandonment.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
70:123-132.
Saunders, R.
1993 Architecture of the Missions Santa Maria and Santa
Catalina de Amelia. In The Spanish Missions of La
Florida, edited by Bonnie G. McEwan, pp. 35-61.
University of Florida Press, Gainesville.
Schuetz, M. K.
1968 The History and Archeology of Mission San Juan
Capistrano, San Antonio, Texas, Vol. l. Archeological Program Report No. 10, State Building Commission, Austin.
Tunnell, C. D., and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1969 A Lipan Apache Mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz, 1726-1771. Bulletin No.14. Texas Memorial
Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.
Walter, T. L.
2000 Archaeological Investigations at the Spanish Colonial Mission of Espiritu Santo de Zufiiga (41 VTll),
Victoria County, Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
1997

The Dynamics of Culture Change and its Reflection
in the Archeological Record at Espfritu Santo,
Victoria County, Texas. Special Publication 7, Southern Texas Archaeological Association and Studies in
Archeology 23, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Walter, T. L., E. A. Cooper, N. Zayatz, and G.D. Hall
2003 The Ruin of Ruins: Archaeological Excavations at
Presidio San Saba 41MNJ, Menard County, Texas
2000-2002 Field Seasons. San Saba Regional Survey Report 2, Archaeology Laboratory, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.

28

Texas Archeological Society

Weber, D. J.
1992 The Spanish Frontier in North America. Yale University Press, New Haven.

Weddle, R. S.
1967 San Juan Bautista: Gateway to Spanish Texas. University Of Texas Press, Austin.

Spanish Colonial Presidio Architecture
An Example from Presidio San Saba, Menard County, Texas
Tamra L. Walter, Mark Wolj; and Bennett Kimbell

ABSTRACT
Archeological excavations at the Spanish Colonial presidia of San Saba have focused on exposing original
architecture and recovering material remains from within the fort. A major goal of this research is the delineation
of the presidia ruins. Ultimately, the archaeological work completed here will contribute to a faithful
reconstruction of the site, therefore understanding the layout of the fort and identifying original portions of the
presidia is critical. Through both archaeological and historical research, the architecture of the fort is slowly
revealing itself. The data that has been recovered is providing a picture of how a typical Spanish frontier fort was
constructed and laid out. The following discussion details the architectural elements and layout of the presidia
in hopes of providing a basis for which other presidios can be compared.

INTRODUCTION
Current investigations at the site of Presidio
San Saba (41MN1) in Menard County, Texas represent some of the most extensive work completed
at a Spanish fort in Texas. Research at the site was
prompted by the local community's desire to reconstruct the fort to its former appearance. Consequently, a primary objective of both the archeological and archival research is the definition of the
layout, construction style, and architectural history
of the presidio. Large-scale excavations were carried out at the fort in 2003 and 2004 by the Texas
Archeological Society. In addition, Texas Tech University has held summer field schools at the site
since 2000. These investigations have concentrated
on exposing original construction of the fort and
evidence for daily activities within the compound.
Although work is on-going, the information gathered thus far is revealing important evidence about
the fort's arrangement, its construction, and changes
that were made to the fortress over time. Information about the location of the original wooden palisade is coming to light as well.
Ideally, the research that is completed at Presidio
San Saba will serve as a basis of comparison for other
Spanish presidios in Texas and add to our existing
knowledge about military installations across the
nmthem frontier of New Spain. The following discussion provides an overview of presidio architecture

in New Spain, the history of San Saba, a review of
the historical accounts pertaining to the site, and a
summary of the architectural findings yielded during
the archeological excavations.

PRESIDIO ARCHITECTURE IN
NORTHERN NEW SPAIN
The presidia was much more than
adobe walls in a wilderness; its historical
importance lay of course, in the fact that it
was a handful of humans (with or without
fort) whose frontier emplacement manifested civilization's determination to stay
in this difficult land (Powell 1982: 140).

Spanish presidios have only recently received
attention in mainstream historical archaeology
(Bense 2004). Presidios were found across northern New Spain from the coast of California to
Florida. Spanish Texas alone had more than 10
presidios and 37 missions (Habig 1990). The word
"presidio" derives from the Latin praesidium, meaning a frontier garrison or outpost. The Romans had
such outposts in virtually all parts of their empire,
although interestingly, the term praesidium was
not not used in Spain. Fortifications in Spain
were known variously as castillos (little camps),
fortalezas (fortresses), and fuertes (strong holds)

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

30

Texas Archeological Society

(Moorhead 1975; Naylor and Polzer 1986; Williams 2004). It was not until after the Reconquista
(the reconquest of Spain from the Moors in 1492)
was complete that the term, "presidia" came into
use in Spain, describing frontier garrisons in Morocco and early military outposts in sixteenth century northern Mexico (Naylor and Polzer 1986;
Powell 1982).
As a colonial institution of Northern New Spain,
the earliest use of the word presidia began during
the Chichimeca War of 1550 to 1590. When silver
was discovered in the Zacatecas region of North
Central Mexico along the Chichimeca frontier in
1546, miners and prospectors from all over Mexico
flocked to the area. As a result, the miners and
prospectors encroached on Chichimeca lands and
eventually a war began. In an effort to protect themselves from attack along the roads to Zacatecan
mines, workers built fortified houses along the
routes called casafuertes (fortified houses) (Naylor
and Polzer 1986; Powell 1982). Many of these early
presidios employed architectural features that continued to be used on Spanish forts throughout northern New Spain for the next 200 years. Basic components of these fortifications included "four walls
enclosing an interior quadrangle with bastions or
battlements at two or more corners," allowing for
"living quarters for the occupants, storage and repair areas, stables, offices, chapel, and an exercise
and parade grounds-all protected within the perimeter of buildings and walls" (Naylor and Polzer
1986:36). The establishment of presidios spread
northward as New. Spain's frontier advanced,
stretching from California in the west to La Florida
in the east. Presidio architecture varied widely, however, and each presidial captain was given the freedom to choose the location and layout of his presidia
(Williams 2004). Nevertheless, there were basically
three distinct architectural types of presidios:
coastal, urban, and interior. Coastal or maritime
presidios were typically more heavily fortified than
interior presidios. Many of the California and
Florida presidios represent examples of coastal forts.
The forts were constructed as either square, diamond, or star-shaped structures with the most
heavily fortified sides facing the coast to protect
from sea attacks (Childers 2004; Early 2004). In
Texas, the Presidio La Bahfa at its original location
at Matagorda Bay is an example of a coastal fort.
Built in 1722 it featured an elaborate star-shaped
design. The fort was oriented to magnetic north and
consisted of a 16 pointed star-shaped wooden pali-

sade wall and several jacal structures (Bruseth et
al. 2004).
Urban presidios were found at the heart of Spanish settlements in northern New Spain. Established
within the vicinity of Spanish towns or communities, these garrisons were usually unfortified and
formed a plaza surrounded by captain's quarters,
barracks, arsenals, and storehouses. A chapel was
typically present either among the presidia buildings or within the immediate vicinity (Moorhead
1975; Early 2004). In Texas, San Antonio de Bejar
represents an urban style presidio. Founded in 1719,
Presidio San Antonio was one of the most important presidios in Texas. It protected the five missions in San Antonio and would eventually serve as
the provincial capital in 1770 (Ivey 2004; Poyo and
Hinojosa 1991).
Interior presidios were much less elaborate than
their coastal counterparts. Coastal presidios were
designed to defend against European land and naval forces. Interior presidios defended against a
new and different enemy: the Native Americans
(Barteet 2000; Moorhead 1975; Williams 2004).
Initially, these presidios were not built within Spanish towns although sometimes towns later grew up
around them. The interior forts were frequently
made of adobe but could also be constructed of
wood, jacal, or stone. The basic shape was similar
to the presidios found along the Chichimeca frontier comprising a square or rectangular shape with
bastions on opposing corners. Many, however, had
no fortifications and were simply an arrangement
of officers' quarters, barracks, store rooms, and a
chapel (Barteet 2000; Moorhead 1975; Williams
2004). Presidio San Saba is one of the many interior forts built on the Spanish frontier in Texas.
Notably, despite their locations, all of the forts included a chapel and captain's quarters.
As presidios increasingly receive more attention from archeologists, maps and descriptions of
Spanish forts created during the colonial era are
helping researchers understand the construction, layout, and use of presidios. Many of the maps and
descriptions of Spanish forts along the northern
frontier were generated during the Marquis de
Rubi's inspection tour of the military installations
of Northern New Spain. Nicolas Lafora, perhaps
the best-known Spanish engineer of the eighteenth
century, accompanied Ru bf and kept a diary of his
journey. Lafora recorded his observations and gave
detailed descriptions of 21 presidios that were visited during the inspection (Jackson and Foster 1995;

Walter, Wolf, and Kimbell-Spanish Colonial Presidio Architecture 31
Moorhead 1975; Williams 2004). However, Lafora
personally mapped the layout of only two presidios,
Guajoquilla and San Saba, and recommended that
each be abandoned (Fireman 1977; Lafora 1768;
Jackson and Foster 1995). Joseph Urrutia, a draftsman and cartographer who accompanied the inspection tour produced maps of all 21 presidios.
Urrutia was also trained as an engineer (Fireman
1977) and was responsible for completing the majority of the measuring and mapping of the sites.
Urrutia was a member of the Royal Regiment of
America and later went on to become Captain-General of the armies of Spain. Lafora' s maps were
probably based on Urrutia' s work (Jackson and Foster 1995; Jackson, 2005).
Following the Rubf expedition, King Charles
III issued the Reglamento of 1772, based in large
part on Rubf' s recommendations (Brinkerhoff and
Faulk 1965; Moorhead 1975; Williams 2004). The
Reglamento made sweeping changes in the locations and design of the frontier
presidios. In part it called for the
creation of a cordon of presidios
stretching from the Gulf of California to the Gulf of Mexico
(Brinkerhoff and Faulk 1965; Williams 2004). Only the presidia of
Santa Fe in present-day New
Mexico would be kept north of this
line. In Texas, Presidio de San Saba
would be abandoned and relocated
near the Rio Grande. The Reglamento also attempted to standardize presidia design. The effectiveness of these presidios has been
debated (Faulk 1969, 1971) but
their role in the settlement of Northern New Spain cannot be denied
(Williams 2004).

it was meant to protect were built along the San
Saba River (Figure 1). Mission San Saba was located on the opposite (south) bank of the river approximately four miles east of the fort (Hindes et
al. 1995). The mission was intended to be one of
several missions that the friars hoped to build for
the Apache. The destruction of the mission site in
March of 1758, some 13 months after it was established, however, put an end to plans to continue
missionary efforts in the area. The Comanche and
their allies carried out the attack in response to the
alliance that the Spanish had made with the Apache,
long-time enemies of the Comanche (see Wade
2003: 187 for a succinct discussion of the anger
caused by the Spanish/Apache alliance).
Despite the attack and closure of the mission,
the presidia remained in operation and continued to
serve as a military installation until 1770 when it
was abandoned (Weddle 1999). The original commander of the fort, Colonel Diego Ortiz de Parilla,

HISTORICAL
BACKGROUND

-.

·~.

The establishment of Presidio
San Saba in 1757 was prompted
by renewed interests in missionizing the Lipan Apache, hopes of
expanding the Spanish frontier,
and rumors of silver deposits in
the region (Walter et al. 2003).
Both the presidia and the mission

iii -Mission
&-Presidio
A - Indian Village or
Camp
020

40

60

miles

Figure 1: Location of Presidio San Saba and Mission San Saba and nearby
Spanish settlements (after Tunnell and Newcomb 1969).

32

Texas Archeological Society

was later replaced by Captain Felipe de Rabago y
Teran in 1760. In an effort to strengthen the fortification, Rabago replaced the original wooden garrison with a stone fort that was completed in 1762.
Rabago maintained command of the presidia for
nine years until he was replaced by Don Manuel
Antonio de Ocain 1769.
Historical records concerning the presidia and
its architectural details are limited to military matters with little information about the civilian population. Based on historical accounts, estimates of its
population range from 300-400 residents (Weddle
1999) including soldiers as well as women and
children. Daily accounts of presidia life are not
available however the isolated location of the fort
along the outer reaches of the frontier and the surrounding hostile environment suggest that life was
not easy for the presidio population. Mule trains
loaded with supplies from San Antonio and N01ihern Mexico and bound for San Saba were frequently
cut off by raids carried out by local native populations. Soldier patrols were also subject to attacks
and the presidio's livestock were easy targets for
raiding. In addition, both malnutrition and the spread
of disease plagued the residents. Not surprisingly,
the garrison attempted to retreat several times to
the nearest Spanish settlement, Mission San
Lorenzo, some 70 miles south of San Saba (Tunnell
and Newcomb 1969). Each time the fort was abandoned, however, the soldiers were reprimanded and
ordered to return to their post.

Although officially closed in 1772 (Weddle
1999), the fort was actually deserted two years earlier. Nonetheless the site continued to be used by
different groups in the following years including
the Spanish, Native Americans, Mexicans, and Texans. Modifications to the presidio were invariably
made until its final demise in the late 19th century
when the newly founded town of Menardville (later
simplified to Menard) mined the site for building
stone. Understanding the architectural history of
the presidio has therefore been a major goal of the
current investigations at the site.

HISTORICAL ACCOUNTS OF
PRESIDIO SAN SABA'S
ARCHITECTURE AND LAYOUT

Information regarding the construction and
layout of the fort comes from both historical accounts
and more recently from the archaeological
investigations. Spanish and later Anglo descriptions
of the site provide a picture of the presidio as it
changed through time (see article by Wolf, this
volume). The following discussion outlines the
architectural history of the site based on historical
documents including first-hand accounts and maps
created of the site dming the Spanish Colonial era
and in later times.
In May of 1757, the original presidio was constructed of a wooden palisade and included numerous temporary buildings of jacaltype construction. The compound
and related structures were built
to accommodate 100 presidial soldiers and their families. In 1758,
300-400 people including 237
women and children were said to
be residing at the compound
(Weddle 1999:64 ). Documents
written immediately after the attack and destruction of the nearby
Mission San Saba describe the
presidia as a wooden stockade
with several interior wooden structures, or jacals, with roofs of straw
or thatch. No plans of the original
wooden fortress have been located
to date although the famous 1760's
painting of the Mission massacre
(Figure 2) provides a generalized
Figure 2: Painting of the mission massacre, ca. 17 63 artist unknown (Photo
by Grant Hall).
view of the presidia in the far

Walter, Wolf, and Kimbell-Spanish Colonial Presidio Architecture 33
distance. Recent archival research (see Wolf, this
Urrutia's plan (Figure 4) shows the same major
volume) indicates that there were actually two
elements however, although in closer proximity than
wooden palisades; the one built in 1757 and anthose shown on the Lafora map. The Urrutia map
other built around the existing fort in 1760.
reflects a more artistic graphic style (notice the flair
Nevertheless, the wooden construction deteriowith El Sol [the sun] on the north arrow) while the
rated rapidly and was replaced in 1761 with a stone
Lafora map is clearly more meticulous with a focus
fortress made oflocally-quarried limestone. Today,
on details. Dimensions of the two plans are also
sections of the foundations, the gate posts and porsubtly different with Urrutia' s map showing a more
tions of the presidio' s walls represent what remains
rectangular-shaped structure. Fmihermore, Urrutia' s
of the stone fort (Walter et al. 2003). Unlike the
placement of the legend crowds and compromises
wooden fort, detailed maps of the stone presidio
the area to the west of the presidia and does not
have been recovered. The Lafora and Urrutia maps
provide details of the surroundings. Another, more
of the presidio were completed simultaneously in
glaring disparity between the two plans is the deJuly of 1767 (Ivey 1981; Moorehead 1975). Both
pictions of the structures in the southwest corner of
of the plans are extremely important for the dethe presidio. Figure 5 provides a comparison of the
tailed information they supply about the layout of
two maps and illustrates the contrasting portrayals
the presidio. However, scholars have frequently reof the large structure in the southwest corner, the
lied on these maps almost entirely as the final word
use of which is still unknown. The southwestern
on the presidio's appearance. Indisputably the maps
section of the presidio appears to be fairly intact
represent accurate depictions of the fort as it apand future excavations should aid in revealing the
peared inl 767, but modifications made over the
true layout of this corner.
next 100 years must also be considered in describAlthough the 1767 maps provide the basic layout
ing the architectural history of the presidio.
of the stone presidia, changes to the fort were
Despite the fact that both the Lafora and the
certainly made after 1767. Defining these changes
Urrutia maps were created during the same military
has been a goal of the archival and archeological
inspection, the two depictions vary slightly. Conseresearch. The entire fort is approximately 348 x 324
quently, comparing and contrasting the two maps
feet in size. At the time of Rubf' s inspection, major
helps to define the major differences between the
components of the roughly square presidio recorded
two plans. In general, the Lafora map is thought to
by both Lafora and Urrutia included a stone wall
be the more accurate of the two. The Lafora plan
that enclosed the compound, bastions on the
(Figure 3) shows the main entry to the presidio
northwest and southeast comers, several stone
through a gate in the west wall with a secondary
buildings and a patio in the northwest corner, and
gate shown along the east wall.
The two-story officer's quarters,
chapel and main defensive bastion
are noted in the northwest comer.
--:·...... ,.
A secondary bastion is located in
the southeast corner. Lafora indi"""'·--.
cates only one stone exterior wall
-- !Ill.; .....
.-:,. -·
built along the length of the south
""-·~:._ .... ,,..,
wall adjacent to the San Saba
River. Unlike the southern wall,
the other exterior walls have rooms
built against them. These interior
rooms helped to form a strong defensible fortification from which
the soldiers could fire at the enemy from the roofs. A large plaza
was created within the center of
this construction where military
drills and various daily activities
Figure 3: Lafora map of 1767 (copied from Ivey 1981).
were carried out.

-···

..

~

34

Texas Archeological Society

wall is located just north of the
southeast bastion. Both bastions
were armed with cannons although
only the northwest tower was
surrounded by a moat. Cannons
were placed in the upper and lower
levels of the southeast bastion and
additional cannons were located on
the gun platform of the northwest
bastion the base of which was eai1h
filled.
Historical documents that postdate the 1767 plans include several inconsistencies with the Lafora
and Urrutia plans indicating that a
number of modifications were
made to the fortress. Several of the
accounts
concerning the layout and
Figure 4: Urrutia Map of 1767 (copied from Moorehead 1975).
condition of the fort from both
Spanish Colonial and Anglo reports
mention the existence of additional
bastions or towers. For example,
Francisco Amangual on his 1808
round trip from San Antonio to
Santa Fe describes the presence of
four bastions around the fort (Ivey
1981). In 1847, the noted German
geologist Frederick Roemer, while
visiting the ruins with Baron von
Meusebach, also described a large
bastion at the northwest corner and
the remains of towers at the three
other corners. Although no original walls are left standing today,
Roemer indicates that at the time
Figure 5: Comparison of the Lafora and Urrutia Maps.
of his visit sections of some of the
walls were still standing. Portions
of the wall were estimated to be as
rooms lining the west, north, and east walls. A
high as 20 feet in some places while other walls
wooden fence enclosing a corral area is also
were only 5 to 6 feet high. Roemer noted that there
depicted along the western wall of the fort. In
were at least 50 rooms lining the outer walls of the
fort that were all fairly uniform in shape and meaaddition, Lafora and Urrutia note the appearance
sured 18 feet deep (Ivey 1981:7).
of another wooden fence that parallels the southern
wall. The fence creates a long, narrow space perhaps
In 1901, the first county judge of Menard, J. J.
Callan, sent a sketch (Figure 6) he produced of the
where additional livestock was kept. In addition to
site to Adina de Zavala in San Antonio (Callan
the captain's house and chapel, the two-story
building inside the northwest corner also included
1901). The sketch represents his recollection of the
the guardhouse and probably a number of
presidia as he first remembered viewing it in the
storerooms. Two earthen parapets, meant to prevent
early 1870s. Clearly both time and deterioration of
the presidia influenced his depiction of Presidio
outside access to the area between the fort and the
river, lined the ends of the southern wall. The
San Saba. Callan shows numerous bastions along
secondary entrance to the presidia in the eastern
with a much more extensive and creative moat

Lafora Map

Urrutia Map

Walter, Wolf, and Kimbell-Spanish Colonial Presidio Architecture 35
around the northwest bastion than the moat that
was depicted on both of the 1767 maps. The sketch
also illustrates several lines meant to represent foundations. The foundations do not correspond with
the Spanish foundations of the stone fort and may
actually reflect the use of the presidio as a cattle
pen and makeshift residence for the early Anglo
settlers of the 19th century.
In 1905, John Warren Hunter, the newspaper
editor for Menardville, printed a historical pamphlet
including the histories of the presidio and the
adjacent Mission San Saba (Hunter 1905). While
colorful, the histories were only slightly accurate
with a great deal of emphasis placed on the local
legends surrounding the mission and presidio.
Hunter included a plan of the presidio which also
shows four corner bastions, among other physical
descriptions. Sometime later, perhaps in the 1930s,
his grandson Warren Hunter, produced a painting
of the presidio showing large towers at each corner.
Hunter's rendering was clearly influenced by his
grandfather's discussion of the site. The painting

also shows a river-level entrance to the fabled
underground tunnel of local lore.
The general layout of the presidio is well
documented historically. Information regarding the
actual construction methods and techniques of the
fort, however, is lacking. Accounts of the presidio
made during the Spanish occupation of the site and
after it was abandoned provide only a few details
concerning the construction style. Nevertheless
these brief references do offer some insights into
the building methods used to erect the compound.
For example, Urrutia indicated on his map that the
presidio was constructed of small stones and mortar.
Later accounts of the fort's construction note that
many of the walls were joined together by earth but
mortar was observed on at least one of the main
buildings (Mueller 1935). Earth was also used to
build the two parapets near the river and Lafora's
account of the fort mentions that the northwest
bastion was earthen-filled.
The Spanish, German, and Anglo accounts of
the fort represent separate and distinct descriptions.

Figure 6: J. J. Callan sketch map of presidio (map courtesy of the Center for American History, Austin).

36

Texas Archeological Society

All of the later documentations of the compound
describe a much different presidio layout than what
was illustrated in 1767. Discrepancies in the descriptions of the fort can be attributed to a number
of factors including rebuilding and renovations to
the fort as well as deterioration of the ruins over
time. Changes may have been made to the existing
stone fort as early as 1769 after Oca officially assumed command of the garrison. Rubi's inspection
of the fort was not favorable and attempts may
have been made to reinforce the fort in response to
his criticisms. Certainly, the construction of new
bastions might have been incorporated into plans to
strengthen the compound. Additional changes or
renovations may have followed when the site was
re-occupied in 1790 by Colonel Juan de Ugalde
(Weddle 1999). Ugalde used the fort as a base
camp for forming his troops in alliance with the
Comanche to punish the Apache.
When the town of Menardville was established
in the late 1800' s, the pillaging of the site for building stone drastically reduced the wall construction,
and by 1895 the walls were below waist high. The

stone entryways of the main gate were in place as
the only apparent architectural landmarks. In 1937
the Texas Centennial Commission completed a reconstruction of the fort that focused on the northwest corner (Figure 7). The reconstruction collapsed
not long after it was built, however, due to poor
quality mmiar and inferior construction methods.
With the exception of the main gate, the reconstruction does not appear to be accurate although
there is limited evidence of what appears to be
Spanish walls at the base of some of the reconstructed walls. Door jambs from the original west
gate were still in place when the reconstruction
began, however the rebuilt northwest bastion and
inte1ior rooms of the northwest corner do not line
up with the original fort based on our excavations.
Excavations in the northwest corner have not exposed any foundations or footings in either the
nmihwest rooms or near the bastion although a
great deal of wall fall was uncovered. Unfortunately, the reconstruction and its subsequent collapse has destroyed or obscured much of the original architecture in this area. Archeological investigations have therefore concentrated on other portions of the site
with greater potential for intact architecture.

THE ARCHEOLOGY OF
PRESIDIO SAN SABA

SAN
SABA
RIVER

Figure 7: Modern map of site with 1937 reconstruction shown in bold (after

Ivey 1981).

Recent investigations of the
site include five summer field
schools (2000-2004) held by Texas
Tech University and the 2003 and
2004 Texas Archeological Society
field schools. These investigations
constitute the most intensive work
completed at the site to date. Previous archeological investigations
at the fort include work completed
by Kathleen Gilmore and Dessamae Lorraine in 1967 who surveyed the site and carried out limited test excavations (Walter et al.
2003). In addition to excavations,
remote sensing of selected portions of the site was also carried
out by the Texas Historical Commission in the fall of 2004. Both
ground penetrating radar (GPR)

Walter, Wolf, and Kimbell-Spanish Colonial Presidio Architecture 37
and magnetometer surveys were conducted near the
dicate that the doorways to these rooms opened up
southern end of the fort and in smaller areas in the
towards the interior compound of the presidio (Ivey
northern half of the presidio. Due to the paucity of
1981). Interestingly, several cobble pavements were
historical information pertaining to construction, the
located at the fort including two just outside of
West Wall Rooms 1 and 2 (Figures 8, 9, and 10).
archeological excavations and remote sensing surAdditional cobble pavements were uncovered north
veys are crucial for investigating building styles and
of West Wall Room 1 and north of the south wall.
methods. Furthermore, data recovered from these
Although not yet verified archeologically, these two
investigations are helping to answer some important
pavements were also probably situated next to buildquestions regarding the relationship between the
early, wooden fort and its later stone replacement.
ings and their entrances. Cobble floors served to
To date the archeological work has helped to
prevent mud from accumulating outside doorways
expose 01iginal architecture in several areas of the
and reduced the amount of dirt brought inside. The
site. Among the first findings were stone door jambs
pavements may also have been used for limiting
discovered in the northwest corner after wall fall
erosion along the wall line. The cobblestones crewas removed in January of 2000. The dressed stone
ated a more permanent walking surface adjacent to
jambs are clean and straight and identical in section
stoops or porch areas outside of the perimeter rooms.
to the original gate posts at the western entrance.
They consist of smoothly rounded river rocks that
are tightly set against each other to minimize settleThey share the same dimensions and are all made
of limestone. The doorways are formal openings
ment. A very similar paving system was identified
that probably marked entryways into the interior
during excavations at Mission San Lorenzo de la
Santa Cruz, near present-day Camp Wood, Texas
patio. These features are among the only ornamen(Tunnel and Newcomb 1969:16-18, 22, 26, 27). In
tal stonework uncovered at the site. In addition to
addition to the stone pavements, evidence for an
above-ground features, excavations at the site also
revealed architectural remains below the surface. For example,
original presidio floors, wall foot[]Areas excavated 2000-2003 :::::: Room Excavations
ings, and some sections of intact
[]
Areas excavated 2004
walls have been exposed.
111111 Units with cobblestone
Most of the below-ground
pave
~---\
features were found within the
room excavations along the presidio walls. Portions of at least eight
rooms have been investigated and
include a room along the north
wall, three rooms along the east
wall, two rooms along the west
wall, and interestingly, two rooms
along the south wall (Figure 8).
As previously noted, Roemer observed that there were approximately 50 rooms along the walls
measuring 18 feet deep. The dimensions of the rooms measure
roughly 4 x 5.5 m or about 13 x
18 ft. Given these dimensions (assuming that the rooms are continuous) an estimated a total of 53
rooms could have lined the perimeter walls thus confirming the
observations made by Roemer.
Although no doorways have been
Figure 8: Site map showing 2003 and 2004 excavations.
uncovered, historical accounts in-

41MN1

38

Texas Archeological Society

walls of the fort as well as the
interior room walls are between
75 and 100 cm in width or approximately one Spanish vara. 1
The footings, when exposed in
their entirety, were approximately
50-100 cm deep. Upper wall portions were rarely found intact and
typically ranged from 20-50 cm
above the footings. The exposed
wall foundations show the use of
large stones (Figure 13) which
were needed to support the weight
of the upper walls. Inferior-quality stone was employed in the conof the footings. Some of
struction
Figure 9: Cobble pavement in front of West Wall Room 1 in the southwest
the
stones
are porous with rough,
corner of the fort.
non-angular edges. Smaller stones
were used as chinking to be set
into the larger gaps in order to
maintain the integrity and line of
the footings. The majority of stone
Cobble pavement
used in the presidio' s construction
consists of limestone rubble or
fieldstones that were selected for
their shape and placed with little
or no dressing. More carefully selected wall stones were placed
above the footings which had good
weight-bearing capacity. The
shape of the stones plus the crude
mud mortar found in the presidio
construction was sufficient to set
the wall in a durable fashion. In
this manner, the presidio was
erected rather quickly and required
little masonry expertise.
In addition to stone construcPost hole
tion, evidence for other building
materials was also recovered from
within the rooms. Large amounts
Figure 10: Planview of excavations in West Wall Room 1.
of daub, for example, were collected from most of the structures.
Daub or adobe may have been
intact interior floor was also found inside and just
used for roof construction or perhaps for walls. For
south of West Wall Room 1. The floor is comprised
instance, East Wall Room 3 had a concentration
of a hard-packed earthen surface. Cultural materials
of daub that was only found along the eastern wall
including ceramics, bone, Spanish Colonial glass and
of the structure (Figure 14). Wattle and daub or
metal, and gunflints were found just above this livjacal-type construction was not just for temporary
ing surface (Figures 11 and 12).
buildings and these types of structures likely conExcavations within the perimeter rooms extinued to be used even after the stone fort replaced
posed both footings and upper walls. The outer
the original presidio. The daub concentration is

Waltn~

Wolf, and Kimbell-Spanish Colonial Presidio Architecture 39

c

Figure 11: Ceramics from excavations (a. Puebla Blue on White majolica;
b. San Elizario polychrome majolica; c. Huejotzingo majolica; d-e. Aranama
or Abo polychrome majolica; f. green lead-glazed ware).

possibly the remains of an earlier
house structure that was incorporated into the stone walls or perhaps it represents an attempt to
reinforce the existing stone walls.
If the daub is from an earlier jacal
structure it might represent an
original building from the first fort
thus providing support for the
theory that the wooden and stone
presidios are in the same location,
All of the rooms investigated,
with the exception of those along
the southern wall, yielded evidence reflecting their use as households. For example, large quantities of butchered faunal remains,
portions of eating utensils, broken
pieces of majolica plates and other
tablewares along with a number
of earthernware sherds from cooking vessels were recovered from
inside the buildings. The purpose
of the rooms may have changed
over time and many of them were
probably used as storerooms or
workshops and then converted into
households or vice versa. It is also
possible that the rooms served

more than one function at a time.
Our on-going analysis of the material remains removed from the
rooms is addressing these issues.
The presence of structures
along the south wall provides some
of the first concrete evidence of
changes that were made to the fort
after the 1767 inspection. In addition to the archaeological investigations, remote sensing along the
southern end of the presidio also
revealed the existence of architectural remains. Although both the
Lafora and Urrutia maps show an
unidentified square building near
the southwest corner of the fort
(see Figure 5), archaeological excavations have not yet confirmed
any foundations or ruins associated with this structure noted on

Figure 12. Artifacts from excavations at the presidio (a. iron knife; b. copper
patch; c. copper chocolate pot handle; d. copper pot handle; e-g. Spanish
colonial glass).

40

Texas Archeological Society

more surprisingly the remains of
several intact posts (Figure 18).
Three meters of trench were uncovered revealing at least four
well-preserved posts. The trench
measured 25-30 cm wide and 7080 cm deep (Figure 19). The trench
narrowed at the bottom and was
filled with sandy loam that was
easily removed. The wooden posts
consisted of two large posts and at
least two smaller posts. One of the
larger posts was noted in the profile of the west wall of the excavation unit therefore its exact dimensions are not known. The other
Figure 13. Wall foundations of the West Wall near the southwest corner.
large post, however, was uncovered inside the exposed trench.
This post is 11 cm in diameter and measures 42 cm
the 1767 plans. The GPR results, however, do indicate more extensive ruins that line the interior of
from its base. The two smaller posts were placed
the south wall (Figure 15). The buried features apcloser together and are at a distance of 35 cm from
pear to be rooms that were added after the Rubf
the larger, more intact post. Additional smaller posts
inspection and may also include the remains of the
were probably placed in between the two larger
square building noted on the maps. Despite limited
archaeological testing in this area, sections of two
rooms were exposed near the southwest corner and
the southeast corners of the fort (South Wall Rooms
1 and 2 respectively). Excavations were fairly limited in South Wall Room 2 so the exact function of
this structure is not known. Investigations were more
extensive in South Wall Room 1. This building is
the only room excavated to date that may represent
a structure used as something other than a household. Although household-related items were found
inside the room, large quantities of what appears to
be a powdered pre-mix used in construction were
found near the eastern end of the structure (Figure
16). The building may have been used to store
construction materials at one time although additional excavations are needed to verify its usage.
Another goal of the investigations is the definition of the relationship between the first wooden fort
and its later stone replacement. The remote sensing
surveys have generated data that provide some interesting clues to the placement of the original fort.
Sections of a stockade trench were detected by both
the GPR (Osborne 2004) and the magnetometer surveys (Figures 15 and 17). The trench was located in
the area where Lafora indicated the presence of a
wooden stockade on the south side of the fort. An
excavation unit was opened in order to verify the
Figure 14: East Wall Room with daub concentration.
remote sensing findings and exposed the trench and

Walter, Wolf, and Kimbell-Spanish Colonial Presidio Architecture 41
stakes but have since deteriorated.
The distance between the two large
posts is approximately 120 cm.
Presumably, this pattern of large
stakes evenly placed at regular intervals with smaller posts placed
in between was continuous.
The remote sensing survey also
revealed additional bmied features
that have yet to be velified through
excavation. For example, the magnetometer survey detected another
similar trench feature directly underneath the south stone wall (Jim
Bruseth, personal communication
2004). This feature may represent
an earlier wooden stockade that was
replaced with stone. If the remains
of a wooden stockade are found beneath the stone wall, an argument
can be made that this feature represents the oliginal fort. The GPR
survey also helped delineate the outline of the southern wall. The configuration of both the southwest and
southeast comers closely mirrors the
layout depicted by Lafora (see Figure 15). Perhaps most exciting is
the fact that the foundations of the
southeast comer where the second
miginal bastion was built appear
fairly intact. As previously noted,
historic accounts describe the pres-

1}

10

20

30

Meters

Figure 15: GPR map showing anomalies along the southern wall and the
north half of the presidia.

Figure 16: Building material(?) from south wall excavations.

ence of two additional bastions on
the southwest and northeast comers
that did not exist in 1767. The remote sensing survey of the northeast comer, although limited, does
not show extensive archjtectural remains that would indicate the presence of a bastion. The features detected in the southwest comer, while
similar to the layout recorded by
Lafora, do appear to be slightly
larger and may represent the addition of a bastion. Excavations in the
southwest comer have been primarily limited to West Wall Room 1.
Nonetheless, a small area of about
4 x 4 square meters was opened to
the south of the room where a bastion may have been constructed. The

42

Texas Archeological Society

60

10

80

90 100 110 120

130 140 150 160 East

Figure 17: Magnetometer survey results showing trench lines. A points to
the southern trench that was exposed while B points to another possible
trench directly underneath the stone foundations of the south wall of the fort.

Figure 18: View of intact posts in builder's trench, South Wall room 1.

and Texas Tech field schools has
been highly successful from an architectural viewpoint. While historic records have provided some
information on the layout of the
presidio and descriptions of the site
as it appeared through time, archaeology is needed to verify the
01iginal constrnction of the site and
to define specific changes that were
made to the fort since its creation.
Important features are being revealed through the archeological
investigations that are providing a
better understanding of how the
stone presidio was designed and
built. The exposed architecture reflects the work of both skilled and
unskilled labor. The sophisticated
stone work observed in the door
frames suggests the presence of experienced masons while the rnbble
constrnction of the main walls of
the fort underscores the use of an
inexperienced group of builders (i.e.,
soldiers) to constrnct a fortress in a
relatively short amount of time. Additional features uncovered during
the investigations include cobblestone and earth-packed pavements,
jacal constrnction, a stockade trench

West Wall Profile
excavations uncovered two small
postholes and the remains of a wall
rnnning perpendicular to the southern wall of West Wall Room 1 (see
Figures 9 and 10). Interestingly, the
wall does not relate to anything
drawn on the Lafora or Urrutia
maps. Unfortunately, not enough of
this footing has been excavated to
date to determine its extent or its
function.

Trench
Bottom of Post
42cmbs

CONCLUSIONS
As evidenced by the discoveries made so far, the archeological
work conducted by both the T AS

Intact post

Figure 19: Sketch of stockade posts in builder's trench.

Walter, Wolf, and Kimbell-Spanish Colonial Presidio Architecture 43
with intact posts, additional rooms along the south
wall, evidence for a bastion in the southeast comer,
and possible evidence for another bastion in the southwest corner.
The archeological work at Presidio San Saba is
still on-going and future investigations will focus
on defining the bastion in the southeast corner and
the architectural remains in the southwest comer,
exploring the findings of the remote sensing surveys, and examining additional rooms for evidence
of workshops or storerooms that may have been
used by the Spanish residents. Ideally the information generated by the work that is completed at the
site will serve as a basis of comparison for other
studies of presidio architecture. The ultimate goal
of the excavations, however, is to provide enough
data for a more precise reconstruction of the presidio
and the lifeways of its inhabitants.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank all of the TAS
members who participated in the 2003 and 2004
field schools for their hard work. We would also
like to thank the Texas Historical Commission and
Jim Bruseth for providing equipment and for conducting the magnetometer survey. Also, Tiffany
and Glynn Osborn oversaw the GPR survey. We
are also grateful to Kathleen Gilmore who helped
arrange the remote sensing survey of the site and
provided much needed guidance and advice.

ENDNOTE
1. The Spanish vara ranged from 76.8 cm (30 inches) to
90.6 cm (35.7 inches) even though a standard vara length
of 83.6 cm was mandated for the New World (Haggard
1941).

REFERENCES CITED
Barteet, Charles Cody
2000 Defending the Spanish World: Spanish Military Architecture of the Sixteenth through Eighteenth Centuries. Unpublished master's thesis, Division of Visual
Arts, University of San Antonio, San Antonio.
Bense, Judith A.
2004 Presidios of the Spanish Borderlands: Introduction.
Historical Archaeology 38:1-5.

Brinkerhoff, Sidney B. and Odie B. Faulk
1965 Lancers for the King: A Study of in the Military
System of Northern New Spain, with a Translation
of the Royal Regulations of 1772. Arizona Historical Foundation, Phoenix, AZ.
Bruseth, Jane E., Jeffery J. Durst, Tiffany Osburn, Kathleen
Gilmore, Kay Hindes, Nancy Reese, Barbara Meissner, and
Mike Davis.
2004 A Clash of Two Cultures: Presidio La Bahia on the
Texas Coast as a Deterrent to French Invasions.
Historical Archaeology 38:78-93.
Callan, J. J.
1901 ColTespondence to Adina de Zavala. Original in the
Adina de Zavala papers, Box 2Ml33. The Center for
American History, The University of Texas at Austin.
Childers, Ronald Wayne
2004 The Presidio Systems in Spanish Florida: 1565 to
1763. Historical Archaeology 38:24-32.
Early, James
2004 Presidios, Mission, and Pueblo: Spanish Architecture and Urbanism in the United States. Southern
Methodist University Press, Dallas.
Faulk, Odie B.
1969 The Presidios: Fortress or Farce? Journal of the
West 8:22-28
1971

The Leather Jacket Soldier: Spanish Military Equipment and Institutions of the Late 1g1i Century. SocioTechnical Publications, Pasadena, California.

Fireman, Janet R.
1977 The Spanish Royal Corps of Engineers in the Western Borderlands: Instruments of Bourbon Reform,
1764 to 1815. The Authur H. Clark Company, Glendale, CA.
Habig,M. A.
1990 Spanish Texas Pilgrimage: The Old Franciscan Missions and other Spanish Settlements of Texas, 16321821. Franciscan Herald Press, Chicago.
Hunter, John WalTen
1905 Rise and Fall of Mission San Saba. Reprinted in
The Frontier Times, Bandera, Texas.
Ivey, James
1981 A Reexamination of the Site of Presidio of San
Saba, La Tierra 8 (4) 2-11.
2004

The Presidios of San Antonio de Bejar: Historical
and Archaeological Research. Historical Archaeology 38 (3):106-120.

Jackson, Jack
n/a
Joseph Ramon de Urrutia de las Casas. The Handbook of Texas Online athttp://www.tsha.utexas.edu/
handbook/online/articles/UU/furmn.html.

44

Texas Archeological Society

Jackson, Jack and William C. Foster
1995 Imaginary Kingdom: Texas as Seen by the Rivera
and Rubi Military Expeditions, 1727 and 1767.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Lafora, Nicolas de
1939 Nicolas de Lajara. Relacion del viaje, que hizo a
las presidios infernos situados en la front era de la
America Septentrional. Ed. Vito Alessio Robles.
Editorial Pedro Rebredo, Mexico.
Moorhead, Max L.
1975 The Presidio: Bastion of the Spanish Borderlands.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Mueller, Oswald
1935 Roemer's Texas. Standard Printing Company, San
Antonio, Texas.
Naylor, Thomas and Charles Polzer
1986 The Presidio and Militia on the Northern Frontier
of New Spain 1570-1700, Vol. I. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ.
Osborne, Tiffany
2004 Report on Ground Penetrating Radar Mapping,
Presidio San Saba, Menard, Texas. Unpublished manuscript on file with authors.
Powell, Philip Wayne
1982 Genesis of the Frontier Presidio in North America.
The Western Historical Quarterly 13:125-141.

Poyo, Gerald and Gilberto Hinojosa
1991 Tejano Origins in Eighteenth-Century San Antonio.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Tunnel, C. E. and W.W. Newcomb
1969 A Lipan Apache Mission: San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz, 1762-1771. Bulletin of the Texas Memorial
Museum, Vol. 14, The University of Texas, Austin.
Wade, Maria F.
2003 The Native Americans of the Texas Edwards Plateau, 1582-1799. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Walter, Tamra L. Elizabeth A. Cooper, Nancy Zayatz, and
Grant D. Hall
2003 The Ruin of Ruins: Archaeological Excavations at
Presidio San Saba, 41MN1, Menard County, Texas,
2000-2002 Field Season. San Saba Regional Survey Report 2, Archaeology Laboratory, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.
Weddle, R. S.
1999 The San Saba Mission: Spanish Pivot in Texas.
Texas A&M Press, College Station.
Williams, Jack S.
2004 The Evolution of the Presidio of Northern New
Spain. Historical Archaeology 38:6-23.

Presidio De San Saba
A Case Study in Colonial Evolutionary Architecture
Mark R. Wolf with Spanish translations by David R. McDonald

ABSTRACT
A visible landmark on the northern edge of the Texas hill country since its inception, even in its current ruinous
state, the Spanish presidia San Luis de las Amarillas-also known as Presidio de San Saba-was an outpost that was
under almost continuous construction. Originally established in May, 1757 near present day Menard, Texas, as a
crude wooden compound, the presidia was converted over time to a stone structure, the ruins of which can be still
seen today. While this conversion from wood to stone has generally been known, recent translations of key rediscovered transcripts of primary Spanish Colonial documents are revealing a sequence of previously unconsidered
construction techniques and timelines. This new understanding of the construction sequencing will require a reevaluation of data from recent excavations at the presidio, and a re-consideration of future excavation plans.

INTRODUCTION
This article will illustrate the new construction
data for Presidio de San Saba by presenting chronological translations of six key documents after an
overview of the construction sequence as we presently understand it. Suggestions will also be provided for their use in understanding the architectural history of the presidia. The reader must recognize this is a very preliminary report. While the
data presented is quite valuable, it is not presented
as being comprehensive or complete. More archival research is ongoing and another, more complete
report, incorporating corresponding archeological
evidence, is planned for the future.

ARCHITECTURAL HISTORY
For a general overview of the founding, life,
abandonment, and after-life of the presidio please
refer to Robert S. Weddle's (1964) classic, The
San Saba Mission, Spanish Pivot in Texas. This
book gives a masterful portrayal of the extreme
conditions and isolation in which the priests, the
few Indian converts, Spanish soldiers, civilians
and their families existed in the remote San Saba
river valley under extreme and hostile conditions
from 1757-1770. Weddle also provides insight into
the continual use of the presidia up to current

times. With respect to this report, we will review
and expand on what has been previously understood about the architecture of the wooden
presidia, and through its initial conversion from
wooden to stone materials. The timeframe in this
report will focus on events from May, 1757
through November, 1761. This was a very dynamic period in the life of the presidio.
By order of the Viceroy, Marques de las
Amarillas, the construction of the presidia was to
be built of timber as economically as possible
(Weddle 1964: 43). It was a large compound, protecting the largest garrison in Spanish Texas (100
men and their families-approximately 400 people).
The initial presidio was built of wood and consisted of a stockade which surrounded small, mudcovered wooden jacales or huts with straw roofing. The presidia also had gun platforms or bastions constructed for the cannon (Nathan and
Simpson 1959:xvi).
The presidia compound was much larger than
that of the nearby Mission Santa Cruz de San Saba,
which also began construction in May, 1757,
approximately four miles downstream on the
opposite bank of the San Saba River, for the
conversion of the Lipan Apache (Castaneda 1938,
Dunn 1914, Weddle 1964). During the fateful attack
on the mission and subsequent siege of the presidia
from March 16-21, 1758, approximately 300
soldiers and family members, along with horses

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

46

Texas Archeological Society

and other livestock, were brought into the presidio
for protection (Nathan and Simpson 1959:50, 52).
Brief references were made of reinforcing of the
presidio at this time, but no details were offered
(Nathan and Simpson 1959:48).
Construction of the initial presidio was under
the supervision of Colonel Diego Ortiz Parrilla and
was accomplished through the summer months of
1757. Letters from Parrilla to the Viceroy, Marques
de Amarillas (Gilmore 1967:44-72), were very general in content with respect to the actual construction sites or techniques-Parrilla seems to concentrate most of his writings on more administrative
and political topics. Very few physical references
to the initial presidio are mentioned in documents
found to date, other than usually describing
Parrilla' s reluctance to remain at this exposed site
(Castaneda 1938:398, 399).
Apparently, material improvements to the
presidio were minimal from 1758 through 1760
(Weddle 1964: 150). After command of the presidio
was transferred in October, 1760-from Parrilla to
Captain Phelipe de Rabago y Theran-the presidio
began its transformation from wood to stone construction (Weddle 1964:154-155). Rabago and his
contemporaries have proven to be more descriptive
writers, at least when it comes to describing the
presidio and the material improvements made to it.
Rabago's November 6, 1761 letter, included in this
report (Document 6 below), even has him boasting
to the recently appointed viceroy Marques de Cruillas
that the presidio was beginning to resemble a castle!
No contemporary graphic drawings of the
early wooden presidio have been discovered to
date. There are three known detailed drawings of
the stone presidio-one by Rabago ca. 17631764-apparently a conceptual plan for the stone
conversion (Archivo de San Fernando el Grande,
vol. 18:46, 47), one by Nicolas La Fora (Carlson
1992:49), and another by Joseph Urrutia (Moorhead 1991: 138-139). Both La Fora's and Urrutia's
plan maps were prepared simultaneously in 1767
as documentation for the Rubi expedition, and
both depict the presidio in its nearly complete
form. The La Fora and Urrutia maps have been
long recognized and considered as the final stone
presidio plan. However, excavations in 2003 and
2004 have revealed additional footings for rooms
not previously shown along the southern wall (see
Walter, Wolf and Kimbell, this volume), thus confirming additional construction continued perhaps
until, or even after, its formal abandonment.

Thus, while detailed information of the stone
presidio has been available, primary descriptions of
the wooden compound have been very general and
sketchy in comparison until now. The following
recently translated letters now provide very interesting and startling details regarding the evolution
of the wooden presidio phase.

THE TRANSLATED DOCUMENTS
In a recent attempt to pinpoint the actual location of the wooden presidio, the author, in collaboration with archeologist Dr. Kathleen Gilmore, began a search for primary documents written by
Rabago, Parrilla, or their contemporaries, which
would provide more definitive information on the
location of the wooden presidio. Twentieth century
documents written and drawn by J. J. Callan (1901),
a pioneer Menard County settler, implied the
wooden and stone presidio sites might be in separate locations (for a copy of the 1901 map, see
Walter, Wolf, and Kimbell, this volume). The document search was conducted in preparation for a
planned field survey at the presidio in November,
2004. The survey was conducted by Dr. James
Bruseth and William Pierson (Texas Historical
Commission), Dr. Kathleen Gilmore, Dr. Tamra
Walter (Texas Tech University), Tiffany Osburn
and the author.
Time allotted for document research and translation was extremely limited. However, a swift and
successful search of Spanish Colonial transcripts at
the Center for American History in Austin, Texas
yielded good results. Quality translations and additional research were provided by Spanish Colonial
historian David R. McDonald. These translations
now provide a new understanding of the evolutionary architecture now known to exist at this site. The
documents also reveal much rich detail about the
terrain, environs, and extreme living conditions encountered in the remote northern outposts of Spanish Texas during that time.
The six documents featured here span the time
frame from October, 1760 to November, 1761.
This was a politically pivotal time in the presidio's
history. Colonel Parrilla, after his perceived punitive attack in 1759 of the Taovaya village on the
Red River failed, was relieved of his duty as commander of the presidio (Weddle 1964:137, 138).
He was replaced in October, 1760 by Captain Phelipe
de Rabago y Theran, a previously disgraced

Wolf-Presidio De San Saba 47
officer who actually was the commander of these
troops at the San Xavier mission and presidia
complex prior to Colonel Parrilla' s appointment
(Castaneda 1938, vol. III). In an interesting
agreement between Parrilla and Rabago, Parrilla
continued to administer the presidia while under
the command of Rabago until January 1, 1761, at
which time Rabago then assumed full command
(Castaneda 1939:40). Now, cleared of charges
and re-instated, all eyes were watching Rabago

to see how he would perform. Rabago wasted no
time in establishing himself as Commander
through his large scale material improvements to
the presidia.
The architectural descriptions found in these
documents provide new understandings in the development of the presidio's construction. As such,
please note that, for reference, all pertinent architectural topics in the following letters have been set
in bold type for clarity and emphasis.

Document One
Author's synopsis: When summoned by the Viceroy to testify in Mexico City regarding the ill-fated
1759 punitive campaign against the northern tribes who attacked the presidia and destroyed the mission on
March 16, 1758, Colonel Parrilla called on Captain Manuel Rodriguez to assume command in his absence
(Weddle 1964:150). Since Parrilla never returned to the San Saba valley-being replaced by Phelipe de
Rabago y Theran, Rodriguez found himself in the awkward position of having to officially participate in
the transfer of command of the presidio to Rabago. His certification is part of a lengthy auto in which he
minces few words in describing the conditions under which he has had to endure. Rodriguez provides a
terse description of the poor quality of construction evidenced at the wooden presidia. Rabago then
includes documents of his own, dated October 6th and 11th.
Manuel Rodriguez to the Viceroy: October 6 , 1760, with corresponding documents by Phelipe de
Rabago y Theran, et al, dated October 6 and 11, 1760.
CERTIFICATION I, Manuel Rodriguez, captain for His Majesty of the Royal Presidio San Juan
Bautista del Rio Grande de! Norte and Commandant of this presidia of San Luis de las Amarillas
(which I have been by request of Colonel Don Diego Ortiz Parrilla), say that Don Phelipe de Ravago
y The ran, proprietary captain for His Majesty of this said royal presidia, has released me by means of
the foregoing requisitory order [exhorto ], and I legally certify, to the extent I am permitted, the
following points that are expressed as follows:
That during the time I have commanded this presidia, its complement of regular enlistees
[arreglados 1 has never been complete. But counting the auxiliaries. with the regulars I have
received. the total is more than one hundred.1 These troops and their officers, however, were always
divided between this presidia and that of San Antonio in order to situate it [in coordination with] the
said presidia of San Antonio because of the zeal of the barbarous enemy nations who have attacked
this presidia.
With regard to what he [Rabago] says about the equipment of the soldiers who have been in this
presidia, it is clear [to me after] having seen [the troops] I have dispatched to escort the pack animals
carrying the supplies, that those who have left were equipped in one unit; but with only one horse
[each], and they numbered twenty men, with ten more that were gathered at the [presidia] of San
Antonio for the rearguard of the supply train.
Of the remaining regulars and auxiliaries that have remained in this presidia, most are without
leather-jacket armor [cueras] and many of them are without swords or shields. The mounted guards
are armed with only muskets and munitions.
Regarding horses-how many are being kept at the said site in San Antonio in charge of that
commandante, I cannot say, nor do I know what [horses] they will be able to have. Here, I have
maintained those horses that are sufficient for an infantry on foot. 2
I have never seen the royal soldier record book [filiations], regulations, and superior dispatches
cited in the said requisitory order [exhorto ]. I have requested that Don Miguel Gortari, treasurer of
the said Colonel [Diego Ortiz Parrilla], who is present at this presidia, produce them, but he has
told me they are not in his possession.

48

Texas Archeological Society

Regarding the auxiliaries who remain in this presidia I certify that they have accompanied me in
pe1forming their service on foot and they have complied faithfully in all that has been ordered. As a
result, it is just that they should be conceded licenses [to leave] except for those who truly wish to
remain. The total number of auxiliaries is thirty-two.
Regarding the cannons, I have six in the bastions [baluartes] of this presidio, but I do not know
to whom they belong, nor do I know the existing amount of powder and ball, for it is kept in
possession of the said Don Miguel [de Gortari].
The construction of this presidio is composed of a surrounding stockade in the manner of
chamacueros, 3 as they are called in these lands. It will not last long, since the posts in the ground
will rot and the houses [casitas] will be ruined-as has happened with two of them that have
collapsed. Also, there has never been a stock [cepo] for punishment.
In view of foregoing, Seiior Don Phelipe de Rabago y The ran, to order for your troops to pass in
review and receive and the rest of it, I transfer in the terms that would be most suitable, leaving me free
of this responsibility [so I may] return to my presidia where I may be needed. I leave the present
consideration thus to the service ofHis Majesty in order to provide supplies for his troops, being within
the assumption of the requisitory order [exhorto]. Dated this royal presidia of San Luis de las
Amarillas on October 6, 1760 and for certification, I signed: Manuel Rodriguez.
JUDICIAL PROCEEDING [AUTO] In the said presidia on the sixth of the said month and year,
I Captain Phelipe de Rabago y Theran having seen the foregoing reply and certification made by
Captain Manuel Rodriguez in which he stated that having served at this presidia by request of
Colonel Diego Ortiz Parrilla, but only in the governing of it and nothing else, and that for this
reason he could not transfer the company nor the rest of what is expressed in the requisitory order
[exhorto] that is the principle of these judicial actions and to urge that the said captain be
immediately permitted to leave when he pleases. And when Don Raphael Martinez Pacheco passes
in review of the troops and conducts the rest of the judicial actions with his citation because, as thus
I have been verbally informed by Don Miguel de Gortari, treasurer for the said Colonel, he is the
person whom the Colonel Don Diego Ortiz Parrilla had deputized to make the transfer. For this
judicial proceeding [auto] thus, I provided, ordered and signed before myself as judge receptor, for
lack of a royal public notary, and written on common paper for lack of what should be used. And I
swear to all the foregoing and signed it with the assisting witnesses, Phelipe Rabago de The ran. In
assistance, Lorenzo de Bustamente and Phelipe de Ojugas y Theran in the said presidia.
ANOTHER In this aforesaid presidia on the !Ith day of October and [the same] year, in view that
Don Raphael Martinez Pacheco has arrived at this presidia with the soldiers that were at San
Antonio de Bexar, I the said Captain, Phelipe de Ravago y Theran, should order and I do order that
tomorrow, the 12th, be cited, for him attend as the troops pass in review. In addition, I am
transferring the office of Presidio San Xavier to this one of San Saba, augmenting the military
positions in order to [strengthenJ4 those that are there. And thus I will transfer the royal book of
soldier records. For this judicial proceeding [auto] I have provided, ordered and signed, acting as
my [own] receptor as has been said, to which I swear. Phelipe de Rabago y Theran. In assistance,
Lorenzo de Bustamente; in assistancePhelipe de Ojugas y Theran.
CITATION In the said presidia on the same day, month, and year [October 11, 1760], I, the said
captain, in conformance with what was ordered in the preceding judicial proceeding [auto}, Don
Raphael Martinez Pacheco, whom I know and who personally appeared before me. I informed him
[about the proceedings], and having understood its content, he said the following: that he is ready to
attend to the review on the appointed day; that the royal book of soldier records is not in his
possession nor is it in the office of the presidia being transferred; that one and the other is in the
possession of Colonel Diego Ortiz Parrilla; that the company of this presidia comprises ninety-nine
men-one hundred counting the captain. In addition, he says that he has to receive by transfer, by
order of the said Colonel Diego Ortiz Parilla, four cannons, pertaining to me, that the said captain
brought on my account to Presidio of San Xavier which belong to His Majesty (may God protect
him), and another four cannons, with the powder and ball that may exist, that likewise belongs to His

Wolf-Presidio De San Saba 49
Majesty. The same captain responded and signed with me, along with those in assistance, and I
acted as judge receptor for lack of a public notary as had been noted, to all of which I swear. Phelipe
Rabago y Theran, Raphael Martinez Pacheco. In assistance, Lorenza de Bustamente and Phelipe de
Ojugas y Theran in the said presidia.

Document Two
Author's synopsis: In an interesting document written by an assemblage of military authors regarding
the potential of another attack on the presidio, reference is again made briefly to the palisade construction
of the stockade and houses. This short document reveals the high degree of tension and concern over
further aggression from the northern tribes, still felt almost three years after the mission massacre. It also
infers the poor condition of the wooden presidio at this time. Two signers of this document worth
mentioning are Bernardo de Miranda, discoverer of the still legendary Los Amalgres silver mine, some 80
miles east of the presidio, in 1756 (Castaneda 1938:379-382), and Joseph Antonio Gutierrez, a servant who
survived the attack and destruction of the Mission Santa Cruz de San Saba (Nathan 1959:43).
Declaration by Phelipe de Rabago y Theran, et al. Presidio San Luis de las Amarillas, February 24,
1761.

DECLARATION An Indian woman of the Lipan nation arrived at the royal Presidio de San Luis de
Las Amarillas on February 23, I761 at about noon. She is a fugitive from the Comanche Indians who
held her captive, and she gave the following account: That the said Comanche Indians, Taguayas,
Taguacanes, Quichos, Tancaguas, and Yiojuanes have joined together and are advancing toward
this presidia. For this pwpose they have dispatched spies who are traveling throughout this land,
gathering together the said nations. When the planting is finished [they intend] to unite and to
attack this presidio, bringing hatchets5 to cut the posts [palizada] of the jacales and set fires- all of
which was communicated by words and perceptible signs. Those present were Pedro Hernandez,
Alferez Asencio de! Raso, Sergeant Joseph Antonio Flores, Bernardo de Miranda, Corporal Juan de
Ungria, Joseph Antonio Trujillo, Ignacio Leal, Joseph Antonio Gutierrez, Miguel Gortari and Joseph
Gil, who signed with me (those that were able). Phelipe de Rabago y Theran Proprietary Capitan for
His Majesty (may God protect him) in this said royal presidia before me as judge receptor, assisted by
my witnesses for lack of a public or royal notary and on [common] paper for lack of any that is
stamped - to which 1 swear: Phelipe de Ravago y The ran. In assistance [as witnesses]: Lorenza de
Bustamente and Antonio Melis.

Document Three
Author's synopsis: Written shortly after the above letter, the following certification, by seasoned
officers who had been at the presidio since its inception, appears to have been intended for the new
Viceroy, Marques de Cruillas, as a historical overview of the trials endured in the San Saba valley. Clearly
written to place Captain Rabago in a very favorable view, the letter begins with a recap of the major
participants and events surrounding the destruction of Mission Santa Cruz de San Saba. More interesting
though is the description of the existing presidio construction, including previously unknown details, as
well as the very ambitious expansion and remodeling work planned and initiated by Rabago. Thus, it is
now to be understood there were in fact two distinct wooden presidios-Parrilla's and Rabago's.
Certification by Lieutenant Juan Galvan, et al. to Viceroy Marques de Cruillas. Presidio de San Saba.
February 27, 1761.
CERTIFICATION-Most Excellent Senor
Seiior-Don Juan Galvan, Lieutenenant; Don Asencio del Raso, Alferez6 ; Joseph Antonio Flores
and Pedro Jimenez, sergeants of this royal presidia de San Luis de las Amarillas, present since its

50

Texas Archeological Society
establishment at this San Saba River, certify insofar as the law permits us and no more, in order to
manifest to the most excellent Viceroy, the Governor and Capitan General of this New Spain, that
at the same time this presidia was built a mission was put to the east on the bank of this river. It
had three missionaries 7 from the Apostolic College of Santa Cruz de Queteraro and a lay brother
[who came] with the ardent zeal to congregate in it the Indians of the Lipan [Ypandes 8 ] nation so
they would embrace the faith. During this time there arrived at this presidia some eight hundred
souls of both sexes of the Lipan nation to consult with the reverend fat he rs and they remained in
accord for the time in which they had to come to settle at this site. But they went away because the
reverend Father President Fr. Alonzo Giraldo [Terreros] had not brought the supplies [avio] to
distribute among them, for he had them at the missions of the River of San Antonio, from where he
had to bring it, as was [eventually] done. During this time the mission was assaulted by the
Taguayas, Taguacanes, Yojuanes, Yervipiamos, Mayeyes and other northern nations. They destroyed the mission, burned it, and killed two missionaries and many other persons who were
there. Afterwards no efforts had been made to congregate the said Lipan Indians in mission, but
they continued to come and go to this presidia-and the reverend fathers have been desiring and
hoping for the opportunity to congregate them. When the Captain who now is at this presidia, Don
Phelipe de Rabago y Theran, came from [Presidio] del Sacramento to this one he traveled
through the land to which the Lipan nations had retreated. During this trip he told the Lipans that
he had to come to live with them. From that time he has not stopped persuading them and giving
gifts to secure their reduction and to congregate them in mission, telling them of the great benefit
that they would gain. They responded that they were very afraid of the interior nations already
cited. But he assured them that he would defend them with his soldiers-and if these were not
sufficient he would bring more. [He said that the enemy Indians] would have to kill the said
captain and all the soldiers before he would let them be hurt. Assured by this word the said Lipans
are offering to gather to congregate in mission, which notice the captain has given to the
Reverend Father President of the Missions of San Antonio, Fr. Acisdos9 Valverde. He was very
pleased with this news and said that he will come next April, no matter what hardships are
necessary, because of his ardent zeal for the conversion of these nations.
In addition, we certify that this presidio, since Captain Don Phelipe de Rabago took possession [of this presidio], has been maintained with ninety-nine military positions. That its
occupation in the time of Diego Ortiz de Parilla was in bringing supplies, guarding the horse
herd, and building this presidio with some small houses made of posts [casitas de palizada]
commonly called chamaqueros. 10 And these little houses were all the security, force and
rearguard that Colonel Parrilla left, along with four adobe bastions [baluartes de adobe] which
wzth the rains have been ruined. Today, the efforts of the troops [continue in] escorting
supplies, guarding the horse herds and other expeditions to bring recruits of capable men for
the service, to bring horses and staff the presidio. The rest of the men work at enclosing the
entire presidio with thick, tall posts so that the little houses are within the stockade. 11 They are
building two bastions-one a terraplein 12 with palisades high and thick, the other is roofed and
serves as the major guard [grail guardia] so as to not impede the handling of the cannons. It is
equally palisaded like the other bastion and in the same manner the [stockade] is being put in
circumference of the presidia. Previously, a large distance was cleared so that the vegetation
[monte] will not hinder the cannon fire. Also, the said captain is planning to plow and see if the
lands are suitable for the sowing of corn, wheat, and other crops. But reports have been
received from two Indians about the barbarous Indians who in other occasions have killed and
robbed, as already expressed, saying that they are coming to attack in a greater number and
force [see Document 2 above]. Because of this only one and one-half fanegas 13 of corn was
planted in order to attend to and complete the stockade. The captain bought eight yokes of oxen
in San Antonio with the desire to build the entire presidio with stone, but the severity of winter
did not permit further progress in the material construction of it. And so that this may be known
and manifest where it is needed we state this in this royal Presidio de San Luis de Las Amarillas on
February 27, !761. For those who did not know how to sign their names, Joachim Urandain
signed at their request-Juan Galvan-by request of Alferez Don Asencio Raso and sergeants
Joseph Antonio Flores and Pedro Jimenez-Joseph Joachin Urandain

Wolf-Presidio De San Saba 51

Document Fou:r
Author's synopsis: In this letter, Rabago responds to the Viceroy's request for more information on the
material existence of the presidio and its environs. He also takes advantage of the situation and elaborates
on his presidio remodeling plans, describing in detail the actual work currently being accomplished at the
presidio.
Letter-Phelipe de Rabago y Theran to the Marques de Cruillas. Presidio San Luis de las Amarillas.
March 2, 1761.
Most Excellent Senor,
On the day 18th of February, I received the superior order from Your Excellency of the 17th of
November of the past year [of 1760] in which Your Excellency ordered me to give an account of the
location of this presidia, its neighboring Indians, with the clearest report [of] individuals and the
number of troops in the presidia, progress made in the establishment of the presidia and the
missions, in the spiritual conquest of the Indians, and everything else pertaining to the sovereignty of
his Excellency in the state of and number of troops that is involved in its daily operation discipline,
aptitude and functions that it exercises.
The Presidio San Luis de las Amarillas is situated on the north side of the San Saba River. To the
east are extended plains; to the west, an abundance of building stone, woods, pastures, watering
places for cattle and horses, and everything needed for settlements. It is located on the margins of
the provinces of Texas, New Mexico, Nueva Viscaya, Coaguila. Two hundred twenty-five leagues to
the east of this presidia is that of Los Adaes, where the Governor of Texas resides. It is located
seventy leagues northwest of San Antonio de Bexar; from the Presidio San Juan Bautista it is 120
leagues to the north east; the distance from this presidia to the Presidio del Sacramento, also in the
province of Coaguila, is 140 leagues to the south; at the union of the River Concho and that [Rio
Grande] of the North is a presidia whose captain is Don Alonso Victores Rubin de Celis, located 140
leagues to the northwest[sic].
There are 99 troops in this presidia at the time, including four officers. ... Since I arrived at this
presidia, the continuing operation of the troops is for a party to patrol the frontier to the north;
another party cares for the presidia' s small horse herd; another, with an officer, transports supplies
from the missions of the San Antonio River; a lieutenant with six soldiers recruits people capable of
service in the province of Coaguila to replace the auxiliaries that Col. Don Diego Ortiz Parrilla
obtained-who have presented writs [permitting them] to return to their homes. .. Nineteen men do
daily guard duty and they are waiting for transfer [se mantienen estos de planion]. For a month and
a half the remainder are removing the woods that surround this presidio so that the thickness of it
not impede firing of the cannon. And at the same time [they are] strengthening [the presidio] as
much as possible, for [I found its] structure in such miserable condition, as your excellency can
see from the certification that accompanies the diligencias cited, given by the captain of the
Presidio del Rio Grande [Manuel Rodriguez], whose testimony consists of three pages.
For this reason I have built two elevated bastions [baluartes] made of very thick wood. One has
an embankment [terraplen]; the other is roofed with room for many soldiers [capaz para gran
guardia] and operation of three cannons. In the same manner I am equipping and fortifying the
entire presidio with a thick palisade [estacada] that is not less than 8.3 feet in height [3 varas] not
counting 4.3 feet [1.5 varas] fixed in the ground. And the two bastions with six cannons cover the
entire presidio in any direction or purpose that may be needed. However, I need two soldiers skilled
infiring the cannon. Despite efforts it has not been possible to teach them because of their stupidity.
The poverty of these troops, [the fact that] they are running out of offensive and defensive
armaments, horses, and the other necessary items to pe;form their services, does not permit me to do
more than fortify the presidia and maintain this place until my supplier [el habio] arrives from that
city. My agent [apoderado] advised me on January 11, he will leave that city on the 251" of the same
month, bringing everything necessary of clothing, armaments, saddles, saddle bags [cojinillos],
bridles, and everything needed for a well-equipped soldier. For this purpose he advises me that
fourteen families are ready to march from the Sacramento Presidio [Presidio Santa Rosa].

52

Texas Archeological Society
Real Presidio de San Saba, March 2, 1761, Phelipe de Ravago y Theran
[to] Most Excellent Senor [Viceroy] Marques de Cruillas

Document Five
Author's synopsis: In this letter to the Viceroy, Rabago gives a very descriptive account of his exploration
of the lands north and west of the presidia, also documenting rivers and springs which he qualifies as good
locations for new settlements. He begins the letter documenting the completion of the new stockade, an effort
which took over four months.

Letter-Phelipe de Rabago y Theran to the Marques de Cruillas. Presidio San Luis de las Amarillas.
July 12, 1761.
Most Excellent Senor,
Senor,
Having completed the stockade [estacada] of this presidio, about which I have informed Your
Excellency, I also obtained the droves of horses that I had requested to outfit these troops. And I
immediately put them in continuous motion to occupy these frontiers-that is to patrol the countryside to find out if the enemy intends to attack the presidia.
For this purpose I dispatched a lieutenant with forty men to the northwest of this presidia with the
order to reconnoiter the land, the resources it offers, plains, rivers, springs of water, Indian nations
that inhabit it, and their alliances and customs. After an expedition of twenty-four days he returned
and reported that he had discovered five springs of water that form a substantial river. The first
spring joins with the wooded14 spring at a distance of about 73 miles, from this presidia; the second
at about 13 miles; the third and fourth at 2. 6 miles each; and the fifth is a distance of 16 miles from
it origin. 15
All of these springs are sufficient for settlements, with wood and stone for building, plains for
planting, and everything needed for establishing populations. These springs of water form a river that
had been called "Florido, " 16 and it joins with the Colorado. This last has its origin at a distance of
about ten to twelve leagues straight ahead to the Rio Puerco [Pecos]. It comes through a very extended
plain [plan] from the wooded area of the land17 (like the acequia of Istucalco that enters that city) and
runs North to South and joins with the Rio Grande del Norte toward its midpoint. The lieutenant found
its waters to be SO feet in width 18 and 3.7 feet in depth. 19 To the north and south there were plains as far
as the eye could see. To the west ran two sierras in which woods could be discerned. They found two
salt lakes, one on the east side and the other on the west side of the same river.
They also encountered a pueblo of Indians on the march, and when the soldiers discovered them
the Indians fled. The lieutenant arrived at the said pueblo and did not permit any soldier to take the
least thing from them. And a short distance from there, about a league, the lieutenant stopped where
two Indians came showing that they had come to give thanks to him for not having taken anything
from his village. They were very amazed that Spaniards had come to that place, for they had not
known of them except from their relations with the Apaches. When the Spaniards asked why they had
fled, they responded that they had believed them to be Comanches, which a few days earlier had
finished off one of their pueblos. Feaiful of another [attack], most of the people had run away to a
nearby pueblo to warn them so all could retreat to the sierras. But realizing that the Spaniards were
good people, they went to advise their community and they all came to trade with the Spaniards.
After having treated them well and giving them presents that the officers and soldiers brought, the
Indians said goodbye saying that they would return. The troops waited two days at that place. Seeing
they did not come back the lieutenant decided to return to the presidia because these same Indians
had told him that nearby were other nations who were very bad. Nevertheless, he reconnoitered the
main part of the land that he traversed, which showed itself to be [ rich20 ] in minerals. All of which
it had seemed necessary to report to Your Excellency.
Regarding some of the mentioned springs of water, the Apache and Lipan Indians had already
informed me that they were suitable for population. And regarding these Indians, Senor Excellency,
I have come to the opinion that one of the reasons that they would not congregate in a mission is that

Wolf-Presidio De San Saba 53
they pretend peace at [Presidio] San Antonio de Bexar, Villa de San Fernando, [Presidio] Rio
Grande and then openly go to war, robbing horses, eating the cows, and murdering [without any
retaliation against them .... ]2 1 If these robberies could be prevented, I do not doubt that they would
go into a mission and embrace the Holy Evangelist. I can not correct these abuses, however, for I
lack sufficient authorization, and I have bosses in all those said presidios for its contention [sic].
May our Lord guard the important life of Your Excellency for the many and happy years that the
kingdom requires. Royal Presidio de San Luis de las Amarillas, Rio de San Saba, July 12, 1761.
Most excellent Senor
BL Pde V. E. [I kiss the feet of Your Excellency]
Phelipe de Rabago y Teran
[to] Most Excellent Senor [Viceroy] Marquez de Cruillas

Document Six
Author's synopsis: Obviously proud of his accomplishments in the major improvements he has made
to the presidia, Rabago now describes his newest construction activity that initiates a new phase in the
permanent existence of the presidio. The creation of a two-story casafuerte, or strong house made of thick
limestone walls, located at the northwest corner of the site, begins the transition of the presidia from a
vulnerable wooden outpost to an impenetrable stone fortress, the ruins of which still exist today. Previous
writings (Castaneda 1939:41, 156, Weddle 1964: 155) alluded Rabago was boasting he had constructed the
entire presidio at this time to resemble a castle. It is clear that in this letter he was referring to the visual
impact of a limestone masonry structure-with a two story element-making its imposing statement in
contrast with the adjacent, more rudimentary wooden palisade. Rabago then lays out his plan to convert the
soldiers' quarters into stone structures-the work to be done by the soldiers on their own time.
Letter-Phelipe de Rabago y Theran to Marques de Cruillas. Presidio San Luis de las Amarillas.
November 6, 1761.
Most Excellent Senor,
Senor,
In consideration of the indefensibility of this presidia in case of an attack and the low morale of
the men, I initiated construction of the stockade about which I informed Your Excellency on
another occasion. I have proposed to the soldiers the necessity of a strong-house [casafuerte}, in
which all the men could be gathered and be defended in case it should be necessary. And I began
construction of it, to the men's enthusiasm, without regard to the cost (and it has not been cheap).
At the present it is being completed, and certainly in its fortification-being built with stone- it
resembles a castle and dominates the entire presidia which it can easily defend.
It appears that some Apache chiefs, reassured by the appearance of [the strong house], want to
settle at this river-not withstanding the fear that they always have of the other Indians who are their
enemies. It also appears that these [enemy Indians] have inspected the view of the said [strong]
house-but with contrary effect, because two numerous bands have arrived in this area and they
subsequently left without incident.
After the work is finished, which will be done in this month, I have also proposed to the soldiers
the construction of their houses in the convenient form, which they will be making according to
military duties. And in this manner the [strong}-house has been built; when completed, His
Majesty will have here the strongest presidia known in these lands. As for what is my responsibility, I assuage His Majesty with the large measure I have spent and will yet spend.
Now the Most Excellent Reverend President of the Missions has arrived here from Presidio del
Rio Grande (Fray Diego Jimenez). At his request, I detennined-meanwhile that Apache chiefs have
just arrived- to negotiate their entry into missions [reducci6n] and make a new examination of
irrigable lands, waters, woods, and other necessary resources for a settlement on this river. And
without doubt that all such is found in this interior land and river that offers so many and such
utilities, as you will understand from the judicial proceedings for the Apaches's mission that are to

54

Texas Archeological Society
be conducted. I do not omit to represent to Your Excellency's zeal that within this terrain is the
nearest and most numerous Indian nations who, if missionized, could shape land into a new kingdom
because the many rivers at proportioned distances offer opportunities for settlements that can
develop the great amount of minerals that at each step are encountered.
May our Lord God guard the important life of Your Excellency in the greatest health for the many
years that this kingdom requires royal Presidio of San Saba, November 6, 1761
Most Excellent SeFior,
Your most reverent subject B. L. P. de V. E. [kisses the feet of your Excellency]. Phelipe de Rabago
y Teran
[To] Most Excellent Sei'ior [Viceroy] Marquez de Cruillas.
(-de Theran)

CONCLUSIONS
The translations presented here, considered
together, represent a body of knowledge previously unconsidered in contemporary histories
(Castaneda 1939; Gilmore 1967; Weddle 1964)
regarding the evolutionary construction of the
presidio. An architectural chronology can now
be created which strongly suggests the post was
in a logical state of continual improvements and
expansion throughout its years of operation. It is
now apparent this work was a systematic progression of construction, not massive undertakings completed in compressed bursts of activity.
Based on these documents, a construction timeline can now begin to be established regarding
the creation of and modifications to what we
now know are two distinct wooden presidios.
See Figure 1 for a conceptual model of the presidio' s phased construction.

Parrilla's Wooden Presidio
Against his better judgment, and pressured by
the Franciscan priests to concede the establishment
of the presidio and mission along the San Saba
River, Colonel Parrilla began construction of the
presidio in early May, 1757. Erected as quickly as
possible, we now know the post consisted of a
crude chamacuero stockade with four adobe bastions. Within the stockade were built small chamacuero houses-very crude forms ofconstruction consisting of vertical posts driven into the ground and
lashed together with leather rawhide binding. The
actual shape of the presidio's footprint has yet to be
determined. Trees were cleared away from the compound, with the trunks and secondary branches serving as structural or stockade construction material.

The roofs of the houses were of straw thatch (Nathan
1959:55, 96).
While it is yet unknown how much additional
construction occurred at the site during Parrilla' s
tenure, there appears to have been minimal maintenance at the post. By October, 1760, the bastions
had basically melted into unusable masses and at
least two of the small houses had collapsed. Clearly,
the Lipan Apache could not have considered this as
an impressive and protective place of refuge, especially after the nearby mission-of similar construction-was so easily destroyed by their enemies.
This level of construction quality, or rather lack
of it, seems to be a pattern with Parrilla. In 1750,
Parrilla was charged with the construction of the
Presidio San Miguel de Horcasitas (Polzer 1997:
382). While larger in scope, the presidio was also
crudely built of both wood and adobe. By 1757, the
presidio was already rapidly deteriorating. The wood
was rotting and the adobe walls were melting away.
Formal inspections and charges were made against
Parrilla, who countered that he had appointed others to perform the actual construction and it was
they who were accountable for the work (Polzer
1997:381-406). The crude workmanship cited is
similar to the descriptions for Presidio de San Saba.
Rabago's Wooden Presidio
When Captain Rabago assumed command, he
made a point to describe the deplorable physical
condition of the presidio. To his credit, he quickly
began an ambitious improvement plan, literally surrounding and replacing Parrilla's presidio stockade
with his own comparatively stout wooden structures. During the winter of 1760-1761, perhaps motivated by fear of another full scale attack by the
Northern tribes, Rabago began a more significant

Wolf-Presidio De San Saba 55

•, I>"•••d••••<11•@00•@~~

0 ................ D

@-

:ooaooa:
o;oooooa
.....................[J~
•

.

:. . aaaaoa:..:.:
.
: :aaaaao i:
@Cl

G 9G

'

~

•

'

0

.....

.b

•

0

•••

f

"

'1

tt G

• • IJ , •

:

,
,'
,

,

•

§

g

·~

• o1

lo

:••°''*'••ttoooo,o:

:fle

.,. "

0 ''""'
•11 . . . . @
4111 <!1 <II@ <lt</11 <11•<11 ll><ll f> <il<l!I <11@1"'1
IP

Summer/Fall 1757
Wood stockade
Four adobe bastions
Chamacuero houses w/ thatch roofs

SprinWSummer 1761
New wood stockade surrounds presidio
Two wood bastions replace adobe
Houses assumed to remain

0DODOO

Qlj•bo••••ooo
•'@011&'09

oaoooo ...•
•

~

•••

··••111o······

•4•4••·· •••

"

•

(\)o!IHliilefllJ<1a()l0'11J<l>@4!»@00

<t

,,

•

..

•

fl

"

Q

•,

•

•

"···15····9··
"•••lit······
···••ofll.-'li!!-$l.'lt
0

.

41

•• v

November 1761
New stone casafuerte completed
Stockade assumed still in place
Chamacuero housing still in place

.

•••••lflto•••••••ooo.•

Ol>!<iH!ll

~

1762-1167 (perthe La Fora plan)
Bastions, stockade replaced w/ stone
Soldiers quarters built against outer wall
Construction continues after 1767

Figure 1. Conceptual model for the presidio's phased construction.

56

Texas Archeological Society

clearing of the area around the presidia, gathering
thick stout logs of over 13 feet in length. In February, 1761, construction began for the new stockade
which apparently encircled the existing frail presidia
enclosure. Two new large bastions and a large
roofed room were also built to replace the four
melting adobe bastions. This work continued from
February until July, 1761. It is unknown if any of
the original presidia materials were re-used in construction of the new compound. It is also unknown
if the Parrilla-era buildings were removed at this
time. However, the presidia now was much more
secure and defensible.
It should be noted that Rabago planned from
the outset to convert the presidia from wood to
stone construction, as he had purchased eight teams
of oxen in 1760 for the purpose of hauling quarried
stone to the site. However, the very cold winter
weather precluded such an endeavor. When faced
with the possible threat of a Norteno attack as
warned by the Lipan woman, Rabago most likely
felt obligated to strengthen the presidia rapidly and
thus chose to build the stout wooden stockade and
bastions out of necessity. Clearly, this was always
considered an intermediate solution.

Parrilla's time were still in use. This may also imply
the conversion of the wooden stockade into the stone
rooms as delineated on the 1767 maps. The letter also
states the soldiers were obligated to build their own
rooms on their own time (Castaneda 1939:41).

Archeological Considerations
During the recent excavations conducted by
Texas Tech University and TAS from 2000-2004,
various features were revealed which may appear unrelated to the stone presidia construction
(Walter, et. al. 2003:29, 30). These include a subsurface remnant of an intact wooden post-uncovered within the existing presidia plaza (Figure 2), post molds (Figure 3), apparent trenches,
daub stains and a variety of pits and middens in
seemingly unrelated locations. In November,
2004, excavations by Texas Tech University, under the direction of Dr. Tamra Walter, revealed
the southern 'corral' trench-as indicated on the
La Fora and Urrutia maps. The trench, complete
with in situ bases of placed wooden posts, contained Spanish Colonial potsherds within its soil
matrix (Figure 4). It is unknown at this time if

Conversion to Stone
In the late summer or autumn of 1761, Rabago
began his conversion of the presidia into stone.
While the new wooden stockade was a great improvement over the flimsy chamacuero stockade, it
still had defensive limitations since the stockade
was only just over 8 feet high. While defendable by
the troops, it could still be easily scaled in an attack. Based on Rabago's letter of November 6,
17 61, there was concern about the protection of the
garrison should this event occur. Rabago describes
the construction of a large stone 'casafuerte' which
could hold all the troops in defense. His description
of this work seems to match the grouping of the
two-story stone rooms, surrounded by a patio,
shown on LaFora's and Urrutia's 1767 maps and
noted as the officer's quarters. The foundations and
base courses of these very thick and mortared walls
exist today at the site. And their more precise construction, at a different angle from that of the adjacent stone soldiers' quarters, suggests different construction episodes for these rooms.
Rabago continues in his letter to describe future
construction of soldiers' quarters 'in the convenient
form.' This may imply the original small casitas from

Figure 2. View from 2003 of excavation of wooden post
discovered in eastern central plaza area.

Wolf-Presidio De San Saba 57

Figure 3. View from 2003 of excavated post mold in southwest quarter room complex.

this trench possibly served as a previous wooden
presidio wall component (Gilmore 1967:17).
Consideration of the now known phases of the
presidio footprint requires a revisit of these features
with respect to their place within the construction
sequence. Additional remote sensing of the presidio
site should reveal the post molds and multiple wall
trenches of varying depths for the original wooden
stockades and chamacuero structures. Careful observations of all excavations within the plaza area
of the stone presidio may reveal subtle construction
data and provide information on the actual
'presidios-within-a-presidio,' thus presenting a
unique opportunity to further understand the rich
history of occupation at the Presidio de San Saba.

Figure 4. View from 2004 of excavation of southern-most
trench wall along with wooden post.

58

Texas Archeological Society

ENDNOTES
1. Passage is underlined in the typescript.
2. Rodriguez seems to be referring to soldiers as dragoons, who ride out to a conflict but dismount to fight.
3. Although the word "chamaquero,"or "chamacuero"
was widely used during the 18th and 19th centuries, it
does not appear in any Spanish dictionary, dictionary
of Mexican Spanish, Hispanic encyclopedia, or lexicon. Both the jacal and chamacuero were makeshift
structures used for living or utility purposes, but to
contemporaries there was a clear distinction between
the two. The chamacueros were evidently built with
upright posts that were secured with leather (cuero),
similiar to what John James described in his diary while
in San Antonio in February 1855: "Others [houses]
were built of tree trunks-some of which were irregular and crooked-set in the ground and bound together
at the top with transverse pieces of lumber, outside and
inside, tied with thongs of rawhide, the interstices between the tree trunks filled with lime mortar, the roof
thatched." (Smith 1955).
4. He uses an unknown word here: Sabeer.
5. Text says "hayas," but there is no such noun as haya,
or aya, that fits this context, which calls for some kind of
cutting instrument. Whoever made this transcript probably a misread "hachas" (hatchets, or axes) for hayas.
6. The dictionary defines "Alferez" as an infantry standard bearer. Various documents show that that the position was ranked between lieutenant and sergeant.
7. The text uses the term "religiosos," or religious, meaning members of a religious order.
8. Hence, "Ypandes" is rendered "Lipan."
9. Fr. Asiclos Valverde, according to Fr. Marion Habig
(1976:59).
10. Chamacueros were simple structures built with vertical posts caulked with mud and probably fastened at the
top with rawhide. See description in Footnote 3 above.
11. "Stockade" and "palisade" are used interchangeably
here.
12. The top platform of a rampart for the cannon.
13. Approximately 2.5 acres. One fanega of land is the
area that can be planted with one fanega (1.6 bu.) of
seed, or about 1.6 acres.
14. The word "Para!'' has several meanings that do not
really fit this context-such as scaffoling and the upright
posts on a cart. It can also mean (mar.) launching way.
Rabago may have meant "Parral," which would refer to
vines or grapevines at the spring.
15. Twenty-eight leagues, five leagues, one league, one
league, and six leagues respectively. One league equals
2.63 miles (Johnson, Jelks 1958:416, Gilmore 1967:27).
16. This was the Concho River, according to Weddle
(1964:151).
17. Pelo de la tierra.
18. Eighteen varas in width.

19 One and one-third varas in depth.
20. Typescript says "paino"-there is no such word in
Spanish.
21. Typescript is garbled here.

REFERENCES CITED
Archivo General de Indias, Sevilla
1760 Certification by Manuel Rodriguez and documents
by Phelipe de Rabago y Theran, Presidio San Luis
de las Amarillas. Audencia de Mexico, 91-3-3, Dunn
Transcripts, 1759-1762, Box 2Q150, Book 100,
pages 28-32, Center for American History, The University of Texas at Austin.
1761

Declaration by Phelipe de Rabago y Theran et al,
Presidio San Luis de las Amarillas. Audencia de
Mexico, 91-3-3, Dunn Transcripts, 1759-1762, Box
2Q150, Book 100, pages 53, 54, Center for American History, The University of Texas at Austin.

1761

Lt. Juan Galvan et al to the Viceroy Marques de
Cruillas, Presidio San Luis de las Amarillas,
Audencia de Mexico, 91-3-3, Dunn Transcripts, 17591762, Box 2Q150, Book 100, pages 59-62, Center for
American History, The University of Texas at Austin.

1761

Phelipe de Rabago y Theran to Marques de Cruillas,
Presidio de San Saba, Audencia de Mexico, 91-3-3,
Dunn Transcripts, 1759-1762, Box 2Ql50, Book
100, pages 15-25, Center for American History, The
University of Texas at Austin

1761

Phelipe de Rabago y Theran to Marques de Cruillas,
Presidio San Luis de las Amarillas, Historia, Volume 94, Part 1, Bolton Transcripts, Box 2Ql85,
Book 381, pages 12-15, Center for American History, The University of Texas at Austin.

Archivo General de la Nacion, Mexico
17 61 Phelipe de Rabago y The ran to Marques de Cruillas,
Presidio de San Saba. Historia, Volume 94, Part 1,
Bolton Transcripts, Box 2Q185, Book 381, pages
28-30, Center for American History, The University of Texas at Austin.
Archivo de San Francisco el Grande
1763 Box 2Q254, Volume 20 (1751-1767), pages 46, 47,
Center for American History, The University of
Texas at Austin.
1767

Box 2Q255, Volume 23 (1750-1757), pages 85111, Center for American History, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Callan, J. J.
1901 Correspondence to Adina de Zavala, 1901. Original
in the Adina de Zavala papers, Box 2Ml33, The
Center for American History, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Wolf-Presidio De San Saba 59
Carlson, Shawn Bonath
1991 The Search for San Saba: An Apache Mission on
the San Saba River, Menard County, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Archeological Surveys Number 9, for The
Center for Historic Resources, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
Casteneda, Carlos E.
1938 Our Catholic Heritage in Texas 1519-1936. Vol.
Ill, The Missions at Work, 1731-1761. Von
Boeckman-Jones, Austin, Texas.
1939

Our Catholic Heritage in Texas 1519-1936. Vol JV,
The Passing of the Missions, 1762-1782. Von
Boeckman-Jones, Austin, Texas.

Dunn, William E.
1914 The Apache Mission on the San Saba River: Its
Founding and Failure. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 17:379-414.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1967 A Documentary and Archeological Investigation of
Presidio San Luis de las Amarillas and Mission
Santa Cruz de San Saba, Menard County, Texas.
State Building Commission, Archeological Program,
Report No. 9, Austin, Texas.
Habig, Fr. Marion
1976 The Alamo Chain of Missions. Franciscan Herald
Press, Chicago, Illinios.
Ivy, James
1981 A Re-examination of the Site of the Presidio San
Saba. La Tierra 8(4):2-11.

Moorhead,MaxL.
1975 The Presidio: Bastion of the Spanish Borderlands.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, Oklahoma
(1991 edition).
Nathan, Paul D. and Lesley Byrd Simpson.
1959 The San Saba Papers: A Documentary Account of
the Founding and Destruction of San Saba Mission.
John Howell Books, San Francisco.
Polzer, Charles W., SJ., and Thomas E. Sheridan,
1997 The Presidio and Militia on the Northern Frontier of
New Spain: A Documentary History. Volume 2, Part
One, The Californias and Sinaloa-Sonora, 17001765. The University of Arizona Press, Tuscon.
Smith, Ophia D.
1955 "A Trip to Texas in 1855" Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 59:36, 37.
Walter, Tamra et al
2003 The Ruin of Ruins, Archeological Excavations at
Presidio San Saba, 41MNJ, Menard County, Texas,
2000-2002 Field Seasons. San Saba Regional Survey Report 2, Archeology Laboratory, Texas Tech
Archeological Laboratory, Texas Tech University,
Lubbock.
Weddle, Robert S.
1964 The San Saba Mission: Spanish Pivot in Texas. The
University of Texas Press, Austin, Texas (1988
edition).

Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek
An Inter-Landscape Comparative Analysis in the Southern
Trans-Pecos Region, Texas
Samuel S. Cason

ABSTRACT
This article presents archeological data from Perdiz Creek, collected during the 2000 Texas Archeological
Society field school. Survey and test excavation data from Perdiz Creek are compared to Gilliland Canyon using
a landscape approach, noting differences in feature distributions and environmental contexts. Coarse-grained
observations are used to construct hypotheses concerning mobility patterns in different landscape settings.
Recommendations are made about how similar analyses may contribute to an understanding of prehistoric
behavioral diversity in the southern Trans-Pecos and hunter-gatherer studies in general.

INTRODUCTION
Recent field investigations in the Southern
Trans-Pecos provide archeological data that add to
our growing understanding of behavioral diversity
in the region. Data are presented from small scale
test excavations and survey along Perdiz Creek focusing on high visibility features related to prehistoric subsistence. This information is compared to
that collected at a contrasting study area, Gilliland
Canyon, one with a distinctively different environmental setting. Although subsurface excavations
were undertaken only at Perdiz Creek, the focus of
this investigation is on the distribution of surface
features including hearths and middens. The archeological material observed at each study area is
the result of palimpsest deposits, overlapping occupations and events, and a range of taphonomic processes (Folley 1981). Therefore, the analysis is
based on the overall assemblage of features rather
than on aspects of specific sites, components, or
cultural historical taxonomic units.
Information from Perdiz Creek was collected by
members of the Texas Archeological Society (TAS)
at the organization's annual field school in 2000.
The event was hosted by the Center for Big Bend
Studies (CBBS), headquartered at Sul Ross State
University in Alpine, Texas, and was carried out on
the McGuire Ranch in the Southern Trans-Pecos
region of Texas. The CBBS provided logistical

support and framed the project's research goals and
objectives. TAS also provided logistical support as
well as funding. Robert J. Mallouf, CBBS Director,
and William A. Cloud, CBBS CRM Coordinator,
directed the project.
There is a dearth of information about prehistoric lifeways in the Southern Trans-Pecos region,
particularly of the Marfa Plain where the McGuire
Ranch is situated. As the Marfa Plain is a veritable
blank spot on the map of archeological knowledge
of the region, any information constitutes a significant contribution. Known sites were assessed in
preliminary investigations preceding the field
school, and several were selected for follow-up subsurface test excavations to determine the nature of
archeological deposits and to assess their archeological integrity for future investigations. Investigations indicate that there are distinct differences in
the feature assemblages between the Perdiz Creek
and Gilliland Canyon study areas.
Ethnographic accounts of modern peoples related to mobility and subsistence are used to understand prehistoric behavioral variability in the
Southern Trans-Pecos region. Binford (1980)
makes useful distinctions between logistical and
residential mobility and the factors that condition
these variations. In this model, logistical movements, such as hunting trips and gathering forays to
acquire resources are contrasted against movement
of residential camps and living units. Resource

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

62

Texas Archeological Society

distributions play a critical role in conditioning a
spectrum of mobility variants. This variability is
best understood when viewed as responses to different environmental conditions, particularly
macro-regional or large-scale ecological settings.
According to this familiar model, one might expect Southern Trans-Pecos mobility behaviors to
trend towards the forager end of the mobility continuum. Relative to Great Plains groups, TransPecos inhabitants would have had relatively more
frequent residential moves, while logistical moves
may have been shorter and more frequent. This is
primarily due to vegetative and trophic environments. The plains environment supports large mammal food resources; these resources are highly mobile making for very patchy and unpredictable resources, suggesting that a logistical strategy of
bringing resources to a central camp through extended logistical forays would be most profitable.
While the Southern Trans-Pecos resources are not
homogeneously distributed on the landscape, resources are more predictable with respect to their
location and seasonality. Accordingly, moving between "patches" of resources would seem a more
viable strategy.
In further contrast, the arid adapted behaviors of
Southern-Trans Pecos inhabitants can be expected to
differ significantly from arboreal or equatorial groups.
It is speculated that Southern Trans-Pecos groups
had a lower rate of residential moves, as they were
somewhat tethered by water sources (see Taylor
[1964, 1966] for a description of tethered nomadism). Trans-Pecos environments are more 'patchy'
than forest or tropical environments, as these high
primary productivity areas are characterized by more
homogeneous distributions of resources (Kelly 1995).
While Southern Trans-Pecos inhabitants appear
to fall towards the forager end of the continuum,
intra-group behavioral variability is an important consideration. Changes and variation of subsistence related mobility are explicit components of Binford's
model and are the focus of this investigation.
Lee (1984) and Yellen's (1976, 1977) accounts
of the Dabe !Kung are instructive in this regard. The
!Kung are similar (though not simply analogous) to
inhabitants of the Southern Trans-Pecos in that they
rely on adaptations to an arid environment. In the
Kalahari, mobility is strongly conditioned by variable
distributions of resources and seasonal availability
of water. Their dry season camps host high visibility
material evidence for both shelter and food
processing. During this portion of the year residential

mobility is extremely low and logistical foraging
mobility is high, as they are extremely tethered by
very localized and limited water sources. Alternately,
during the wet season, residential groups fragment
into smaller group parties, picking up camp and
making more frequent residential moves, traveling
between different resource patches. These wet season
camps, occupied for only a few days, would show
little evidence of habitation.
Binford (1980) notes characteristic archeological signatures for these different mobility strategies. With decreases in residential mobility and
increases in length of logistical movements, he expects higher visibility material remains in residential localities. In a forager context, this can be a
result of redundancy, where localities are used repeatedly from season to season. To simplify this
observation, we can speculate that where residential mobility is lower, logistical forays are more
lengthy; where use of the landscape is more redundant, we can expect higher visibility archeological
remains. This generalization is somewhat intuitive,
in effect saying the longer a group stays in one
place, the more debris they will leave behind. From
this somewhat oversimplified observation it is postulated that between environmentally contrasting,
but similar sized study areas, we can discern differences in mobility patterns and land use.

LANDSCAPE AND. SCALE

This investigation of Perdiz Creek, Gilliland
Canyon, and the Southern Trans-Pecos utilizes the
concept of landscape, adapted from the discipline
of landscape ecology. The methods used in the
current project are not a drastic departure from "site"
based investigations, but the application of the landscape concept is intended to be a tool to define the
scale of investigation not frequently addressed elsewhere in archeological investigations. This concept
of landscape usefully integrates ecological ideas
and places emphasis on the relationship between
resource distributions and human behavior.
Definition of scale has been brought to the
forefront in landscape ecology and the search for
understanding between pattern and process (Butzer
1980; Black et al. 1997:16-17). Levin (1989) notes
that the selection of a proper scale of analysis is
contingent on the pattern that is under investigation. In this sense, one can expect that the processes
needed to explain inter-site patterning would be

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 63
different from those needed to explain intra-site
patterns. Similarly, the information needed to understand the mobility strategies employed in a single
drainage basin (Steward 1938) would be different
from that needed to explain mobility strategies employed in different parts of the world (Binford 1980;
Kelley 1995).
A landscape can be somewhat difficult to define, as it has been referred to in many ways in
various disciplines. Farina (1996:2) describes a landscape as "a particular configuration of topography,
vegetation cover, land use and settlement pattern
which delimits some coherence of natural and cultural processes and activities." Forman (1995:13)
provides a more practical definition, describing the
spatial extent of the landscape scale:
A landscape is ... a mosaic where the
mix of local ecosystems or land use is
repeated in similar form over a kilometers wide area where several attributes
tend to be similar and repeated across the
whole area, including geological landforms, soil types, vegetation types, local
faunas, natural disturbance regimes, land
uses, and human aggregation patterns.
Thus a repeated cluster of spatial elements characterizes a landscape.
Forman (1995: 14) further notes some important
attributes of a landscape: "The above-described
concept, now widely used, integrates a focus on:
a) spatial pattern; b) the area viewed in an aerial
photograph or from a high point on the land; and
c) unity provided by repeated pattern." The definitions provided by Forman and Farina suggest
that, regardless of the inherent ambiguity of the
term, some consensus can be reached as to what
defines a landscape.
The landscape defined by Fonnan, and used here,
lies within a hierarchical system of scale, including
in descending magnitude: biosphere (planet), continent, region, landscape, local ecosystem, and site. In
this scheme, the degree and shape of forest canopy
might be used to understand animal behavior at the
site level, while large scale weather patterns might
be needed to understand species distributions at a
regional or continental level.
The Perdiz Creek and Gilliland Canyon study
areas do not in themselves define or fully encompass
landscapes, as their boundaries are defined by
property boundaries and logistical constraints. They
do, however, represent significant samples of

landscape units from which it is possible to project
patterns and processes. While this concept is fraught
with practical difficulties, it serves as a useful
interpretive framework upon which we might build
future investigations and research designs (see Black
etal.1997:16).

PERDIZ CREEK WITHIN
THE SOUTHERN TRANS-PECOS
CHIHUAHUAN DESERT BIOTIC
PROVINCE
The Perdiz Creek study area is located in the
southern Trans-Pecos, a geographical region dominated by the Chihuahuan Desert biotic province
(Brown 1982a). The Chihuahuan Desert is classified as warm-temperate, and is the largest desert
region of North America, covering significant portions of Mexico's northern states, southwestern
Texas, southern New Mexico, and southeastern Arizona. It is characterized as a high desert with elevations between 400 m along the lower Rio Grande
and 2000 m in its southwestern extent.
Temperatures range from exceedingly hot summers (>40 C) to cold winters (<30 C); typically
there are 200-250 frost-free days during the year
between March and the beginning of autumn. Precipitation ranges between 200-300 mrrJyear and
varies greatly over its geographic expanses (Brown
l 982a). The majority of precipitation occurs as intense thunderstorms between May and September;
the most intense storms occur the late summer.
Rainfall usually falls during warm seasonal periods
when evapotranspiration is high and effective precipitation is much lower. Thunderstorm runoff is
quickly channeled by flashfloods, resulting in little
effective moisture.
The Chihuahuan Desert shares a characteristic
with two other North American deserts: a floral
dominance of Larrea tridentada (creosotebush).
This species is typically commingled and shares
dominance with Flourensia splendens (tarbush) and
Acacia neovericosa (whitethorn acacia). Other characteristic floral species are Fouquieria splendens
(ocotillo), Koeberlinia spinosa (allthorn), and a wide
variety of others. Modern boundaries of the
Chihuahuan Desert are a reflection of a relatively
recent encroachment of very xeric conditions into
regions of semidesert grasslands. More than 1000
plant species endemic to this region form a distinctive overall biotic community. The Chihuahuan

64

Texas Archeological Society

Desert is essentially a shrub-dominated biome with
leaf and stem succulents (cacti) assuming a secondary and localized role in plant communities.
Powell (1998:2) notes: "In overall profile the
Trans-Pecos can be pictured as extensive lower
elevation flats, slopes, dunes, basins, hills, ridges
surrounding higher, island like mountains, plateaus, and basins" (Figure 1). The range of mean
annual temperatures, amounts of monthly rainfall,
and vegetation communities further demonstrate
the diversity of these topographic settings. Some
of this environmental diversity is characterized by
biotic subdivisions.
Brown (1982a) recognizes several biomes
(biotic communities) within the Chihuahuan

Desert. Biomes are natural formations within a
biotic province characterized by distinctive
vegetation physiognomy. Biomes are "plant and
animal community responses to integrated
climactic factors, more or less regional in scope"
(Brown 1982a:9). The divisions pertinent to the
present investigation include desert scrub,
semidesert grasslands, interior chaparral, and
the madrean montane forest. Not all of these
biotic communities are fully encompassed by the
Chihuahuan Desert, but all are present and
adjacent within the Southern Trans-Pecos,
forming the mosaic character noted above.
In the southern Trans-Pecos, there is an overall
correlation between lower elevations and Chihua-

Davis Mountains

Toyah
Basin
Glass
Mountains

Chinati
Mountains

<;hristµ:ias/
~our'lJains
»'i~;·~/
',•

'\

,,)'$. c(:~,

Bofacillos
Mountains

. .I

....../

Mountains

Figure 1. Overview of Southern Trans-Pecos region showing major physiographic features.

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 65
huan Desert (desert scrub) flora. Mountain "islands"
are the principle features of macro topographic
relief, and desert flora is present on their lower
slopes to the extent that soils, moisture, and
elevation factors permit. The desert scrub biome
(Brown 1982b), which accounts for much of the
homogeneous appearance of the Chihuahuan Desert
plant assemblage, is subdivided further into three
different communities, based upon: 1) soil
properties, (2) topographic relief, (3) bedrock
substrata, and (4) local climate.
The "plains community" is dominated by three
shrub species: creosotebush, tarbush, and whitethorn
Acacia. This triad is commonly mixed or broken by
stands of Prospis glandulosa var. torreyana (mesquite) and is characterized by expansive outwash
plains, low hills, and valleys. The distribution and
nature of this community type is significant in respect to the presence of mesquite, which has been
documented historically and ethnohistorically as an
important subsistence staple for human populations
(Simpson 1977).
The "succulent scrub community" is found on
slightly higher elevations that display more topographic relief. Plant community associations include
Euphorbia antisyphilitica ( candelilla), Agave
lechugilla (lechugilla), and Ocotillo. The change to
"succulent scrub upland" in the desert scrub biome
occurs at still higher elevations, accompanied by an
increase in leaf succulents that include Agave,
Hechitsa, Yucca, and Dasylirion (sotols). Lechugilla
is often found in dense and nearly impenetrable
stands interspersed with a modest number of woody
shrubs and cacti.
Succulent scrub communities frequently grade
into semidesert grasslands at their upper limit and
co-mingle with summer grasses (Bouteloua),
sparse Pinon, and chaparral. Desert scrub also
comes into contact with madrean evergreen woodland or interior chaparral (see below). The presence of sotol, agave, and yucca in these communities suggest their distribution was an important
factor in prehistoric subsistence. Powell (1998:7)
notes that there is a strong correlation between
bedrock substrate in these areas and the preponderance of yucca and agave. A sotol-lechugil1a
association is common on limestone hills, whereas
a sotol grassland association is more common on
igneous formations.
Brown (l 982a) classifies the semidesert
grassland biome as warm-temperate grassland in
a semiarid environment characterized by drying

wind and frequent droughts. More xeric plant
communities have substantially encroached upon
this biome, and the landscapes hosting these grasslands may have been significantly different in
the recent past. This possibility is a compounding, if not confounding, factor in ecologicalarcheological correlations.
Semidesert grasslands are typically situated at
elevations between desert scrub and mountain evergreens and chaparral. They generally receive between 250 and 450 mm of precipitation per year
where predictable summer rainfalls support perennial bunch grasses, dominated at lower elevations
by Bouteloua gracilis (blue gramma) and Buchloe
dactyloides (buffalo grass).
Dasylirion wheeleri (sotol), Nolina microcarpa
(beargrass) and agaves are present in varying frequencies as are varieties of yucca, mesquite, and a
host of other forbs, succulents, and shrubs. These
species of dry-tropic stem, leaf succulents and
scrub serve to break up expanses of grassland landscape. Tarbush, whitethorn Acacia, Mesquite,
Creosotebush, and cacti are typical Chihuahuan
desert scrub species that are found to invade grasslands in increasing rates.
The "interior chaparral" corresponds to
Powell's (1998) classification of oak-pinyon juniper woodland. Brown (1982a) describes this biome
as a climax community dominated by a pinyonjuniper association with a preponderance of oak
species, predominantly Quercus (live oak). These
oak species host prolific acorns seed crops that
provided a significant subsistence resource to historic and prehistoric populations.
The "madrean evergreen woodland" biome
corresponds to Powell's classification, conifer
forest and is classified as a mild winter- wet
summer woodland. Trees include evergreen oaks
between 6-15 m high and alligator and one-seed
juniper. Quercus grisea (emory oak and gray
oak) are common, alongside Arbutus arizonica
and A. Texana (madrones). At higher elevations,
these species grade into conifers, including ponderosa pine and sparse stands of aspen. This
biome occurs at a similar elevation gradient as
grasslands and its formation may be soil and
moisture dependant. The madrean evergreen
woodland appears savanna-like, and is often
found within or above drier interior chaparral
with a mean annual precipitation range of 200400 mm. These conditions provide optimal habitat for white tail and mule deer.

66

Texas Archeological Society
Perdiz Creek Study Area Environment

The Perdiz Creek study area lies within the
McGuire Ranch, located south and west of the town
of Marfa, Texas, and is approximately 35 mi (56km)
southwest of Alpine, Texas. The Del Norte Mountains lie 25 mi (40km) to the east; the Chinati Mountains lie 35 miles (56km) to the southwest, and the
Davis Mountains are 30 miles (48km) to the north.
The ranch occupies approximately 60,000 acres that
encompass a variety of topographic and ecological
settings (Figure 2).
The study area is drained by Perdiz Creek,
which runs roughly west to the southeast, joining
Alamito Creek to the south of the study area. The
surrounding uplands are made up of highly eroded

rim rock of igneous rhyolite and basalt, and form
the western counterpart of the linear escarpment
east of Alamito Creek. Small tributaries of Perdiz
Creek produce a complicated erosion pattern, forming what Kelley et al. (1940:82) refer to as a "veritable bad-land." The landscape is highly irregular
compared to the eastern portions of the McGuire
Ranch. To the east of Alamito Creek is an escarpment of basalt that parallels the main drainage. This
escarpment forms a north-northwest to south-southeast trending cliff line.
More xeric desert scrub communities have progressively impinged on the grassland biome, supplanting some admixture of desert scrub plant species. Still, the landscape adjoining Perdiz Creek to
the east hosts a very different semidesert grassland

Perdiz Creek
Study Area

Figure 2. Southern Trans-Pecos region with study areas depicted.

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 67
plant assemblage. The predominant biotic community within the Perdiz Creek landscape unit is a
plains community desert scrub dominated by
tarbush, creosote, and acacias. It is possible that
during prehistoric times the amount of topographic
relief and the prevailing soil conditions would have
hosted a similar desert scrub environment. These
factors place the landscape within a fairly diverse
ecological setting situated at the junction of desert
scrub vegetation, a significant riparian corridor
(Alarnito Creek), and an isolated grassland. The
study area is within reach of several key resources:
game populations (pronghorn antelope, white tail
and mule deer, and, possibly, bison) in the grasslands; important water sources, water fowl, and
firewood along the riparian corridor. The diverse
plant resources within the desert scrub environment, particularly mesquite, likely played a major
role in foraging subsistence. Perdiz Creek is a relatively small drainage system compared to the adjacent Alamito Creek drainage. This larger drainage
corridor hosts more substantial alluvial terraces and
undoubtedly contained more predictable water
sources than Perdiz Creek. This last point is important to bear in mind during subsequent discussions
of land use of the Perdiz Creek area, as cultural
activities may have been more intense along
Alamito Creek to the east.

Paleoindian and Early Archaic periods are not well
represented in the study areas, an overview of
these time periods is pertinent to questions and
further research suggestions addressed at the close
of this investigation.
Paleoi:ndian Period (ca. 10,000-6500 B.C.)
Evidence of Paleoindian lifeways in the Southern Trans-Pecos is limited to sporadic surface finds
of Clovis, Folsom, Plainview, and Golodrina projectile point types. Nowhere in the region is there
evidence of long term campsites, large game procurement/processing, or rock shelter habitation.
Synthesizing paleoenvironmental data from pollen
studies, fossil packrat middens, and geomorphology, Mallouf ( 1981) postulates that Late-Pleistocene
environments in the Southern Trans-Pecos were
generally more moist and cooler than at present.
Conifer forests dominated high elevation settings,
and lower elevations were composed of mixed
woodland and scrub environments interspersed with
grasslands. His hypothetical model of Late-Pleistocene I Early-Holocene cultural interactions suggests changing climatic and ecological conditions
may have contributed to a shift to more diversified
Early Archaic subsistence economies by 8500 B.C.
This early change would have been coeval with
Folsom big game hunting lifestyles elsewhere in
North America.

CULTURAL HISTORICAL
CONTEXT

Archaic Period (ca. 6500 B.C.-A.D. 900)

Traditionally, Southern Trans-Pecos archeology
has been investigated and understood in a cultural
historical framework. Since excavations of stratified
cultural deposits have been relatively sparse, the
region's socio-cultural units are best understood in
relation to neighboring regions. Excavations in the
Southern Plains, Central Texas, and the Lower
Pecos River areas have provided relatively detailed
culture-chronological sequences. This is particularly true in the earlier cultural periods, including
the Paleoindian, Early, Middle, and Late Archaic.
The Late Prehistoric period is best represented by
stratified archeological sites in the Southern TransPecos, primarily those sites in rock shelters that
exhibit exceptional preservation, and in village
sites along the Rio Grande corridor. Excellent
overviews of the regional prehistoric cultural
history are found in Suhm et al. (1954) and Mallouf
(1985, 1999). While material representative of the

The Early Archaic (ca. 6500-3000 B.C.) is
poorly understood in the Southern Trans-Pecos due
to limited excavated components dated to this pe1iod. Manifestations of this period are restricted to
surficial finds of diagnostic aitifacts. These include
comer notched and expanding stemmed dart points
such as Baker, Uvalde, Martindale, Early Barbed,
Pandale, Zorra, Bulverde as well as Clem· Fork tools
(Sanchez 1999). A comparison to cultural chronologies in adjoining regions provides the most useful
information about the Early Archaic. Prehistoric cultural units from the Lower Pecos River region are
provided by Weir (1976) and Prewitt (1981) and
include the San Geronimo through Marshall Ford
phases (Mallouf 1985). Diagnostic artifacts in the
Southern Trans-Pecos region suggest some attributes
are shared with these cultural units. Many of these
phases are only loosely defined and their viability as
sociocultural units is debatable (Johnson 1986).

68

Texas Archeological Society

These include Circleville phase (ca. 6550-5050
B.C.), San Geronimo phase (ca. 5050-4050 B.C.),
and Jarrell phase (ca. 4050-3050 B.C.).
Generally, it is suggested that Early Archaic
lifeways reflect a shift from specialized hunting to
a more diversified subsistence strategies. Technological innovations are evidenced by grass lined
pits, sandals, and matting. People of the Early Archaic made use of large earthen ovens with attendant burned rock middens, indicating a growing
reliance on desert succulents such as lechugilla,
sotol, and prickly pear (Mallouf 1985; Sanchez
1999). The lack of data from this period presents a
significant gap in our understanding of regional
prehistory and is considered as a high priority for
future research (Mallouf 1985).
The Middle Archaic (ca. 3000-1000 B.C.) is
better understood through dry cave excavations from
the region during the 1920s, '30s and '40s
(Campbell 1970; Kelley et al. 1940). Diagnostic
projectile points include Langtry, Val Verde,
Perdenales, Shumla (both early and late varieties),
Almagre, Marshall, and Arenosa. Other artifacts
reflecting technological change include increased
numbers of grounds tone and perishables (cordage,
sandals, netting, and others). Increased frequencies
of burned rock features such as hearth fields and
middens indicate a greater reliance on desert succulents (Mallouf 1985; Sanchez 1999).
The earlier portion of the Middle Archaic is
loosely associated with the Langtry-Val Verde complex (Mallouf 1985) and is believed to reflect influence from the Lower Pecos River cultural sphere.
Projectile point styles from the Southern TransPecos are diagnostic of several Lower Pecos River
and Central Texas phases (Prewitt 1981): Clear Fork
phase (ca. 2650-2050 B.C.); Marshall Ford phase
(ca. 2050-1450 B.C.); Round Rock phase (ca.
1450-650 B.C.). While there are some typological
similarities between projectile points of the Southern Trans-Pecos, Central Texas, and the Lower
Pecos River areas, "the typology and chronology of
one region cannot be transferred blindly to another
region" (Hughes 1991: 17). Instead, it is likely that
cultural developments between the three areas differed in significant ways. The number and density
of Middle Archaic sites suggest a substantial increase in local populations and an expansion of
land use strategies and adaptations to more diversified environments (Mallouf 1985).
The Late Archaic period has received slightly
more scrutiny than the earlier Archaic periods.

Kelly, Campbell, and Lehmer defined a Chisos
Focus in the 1940s, defined by substantial ring
middens, distinctive corner notched dart points,
basketry, and a number of other perishable items
found in dry desert caves. Roughly coeval phases
in the Lower Pecos River region include the Uvalde
phase (ca. 300 B.C. to A.D. 200) and the Twin
Sisters phase (ca. A.D. 200-500) (Prewitt 1981).
Data indicate a continued increase in site density and more varied landform use. Campsites became considerably larger and contained increased
numbers of burned rock features. There are sparse
indicators of cultigens in dry caves, but this minimal
evidence does not support an idea that horticulture or
agricultural was well developed. The material culture is more diverse, and perishable items are more
numerous in dry rock shelters. Increased site density
suggests continued population growth and adaptation to a changing environment (Mallouf 1985).
The Late Prehistoric Period
(ca. A.D. 700 -1540)
Compared to earlier periods, the Late Prehistoric has received substantially more scrutiny since
the 1930's. Elsewhere in North America, this period is marked by technological innovations including the bow and arrow, the advent of ceramics, and
the introduction of agriculture.
Archeological investigations have been most
substantive in the southern sector of the region,
mostly along the Rio Grande and its confluence
with the Rio Conchos on the Mexico side of the
river, or the "La Junta de Los Rios." This locality
was described by early Spanish soldiers, explorers, and missionaries during the time of European
contact (Kelley 1986). Kelley's investigations
(Kelly et al. 1940) established some of the Late
Prehistoric Period's earliest cultural constructs, and
many of these constructs apply to the study area
as well. These include the Livermore foci (now
termed phase) and the La Junta and Conception
foci. Local researchers refer to these foci as
"phases," a change from earlier taxonomic classification schemes.
The Livennore phase, dating between A.D. 900
to A.D. 1200 (Kelley 1957) and characterized by a
number of triangular and notched arrow points (including the Livermore style) may extend to southeastern New Mexico and as far south as northern
Coahuila (Mallouf 1999). Origins for the Livermore
phase may have been intrusive movements of Plains

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 69
groups (Kelley et al. 1940), or alternately, the phase
may be indigenous in origin (Mallouf 1999).
The Late Prehistoric Period is much better
understood as a result of a series of excavations
and surface recordings in the La Junta district
(Kelley 1957; Kelley et al. 1940; Mallouf 1985,
1999). The earlier La Junta phase, A.D. 12001400, is characterized by distinctive technological
innovations: floodplain agriculture, pit house architecture, and adobe-jacal architecture. Representative sites are located in an area along the
confluence of the Rio Grande and its tributary
drainages. Structural remains include oval and rectangular pit houses that sometimes incorporated
low adobe walls or curbs in room blocks of several houses. Artifacts believed to be associated
with the Concepcion and La Junta phases include
arrow points (Fresno, Perdiz, Toyah) and ceramic
tradewares similar to those found to the northwest
in El Paso and New Mexico. Associated ceramic
styles include El Paso Polychrome, Chupadero
Black on White, and a variety of Chihuahuan
Polychromes (Kelley et al. 1940:34).
Architectural and ceramic styles indicate an
important relationship with Jornada Mogollon cultural spheres during this period. Kelley and Kelley
(1990) suggest intrusive movements into the La
Junta District, while Mallouf ( 1999) points out the
distinct possibility that indigenous peoples adopted
these technologies.
Mallouf (1999) has briefly described the Cielo
complex, that is roughly contemporaneous (A.D.
1300-1700) with the La Junta and Concepcion
phases. The Cielo complex is characterized by
circular stacked stone structures believed to be
wickiup type dwellings. These features are often
found together in village-like complexes found in a
circumscribed area near the La Junta District and to
the northeast (Mallouf 1999, Figure 14). Hearth
remnants and refuse deposits, as well as Perdiz
arrow points, chipped stone tools, and bone tools,
have been found in association with these stone
features. While these sites are near La Junta phase
architectural sites, ceramics are conspicuously
absent from Cielo complex sites. The close
proximity and overlapping dates of the La Junta
phase and Cielo complex suggest a unique
relationship between what appear to be relatively
mobile hunter-gatherer peoples and more sedentary
agricultural peoples. Mallouf ( 1999:73-85) discusses some exciting research questions regarding
the possibility of symbiotic relationships between

groups practicing different but complimentary
subsistence strategies. His hypotheses include: the
Cielo complex and La Junta phases represent ethnically and socially distinct groups in a symbiotic
relationship; or, Cielo complex sites represent
seasonal foraging camps of peoples based in the La
Junta district who practiced agricultural during
portions of the year or when conditions were
conducive.
The Concepcion phase incorporates developments in the La Junta district during European contact. This phase is marked by changes in architectural styles, changes in ceramic types, and other
changes in artifact assemblages (Kelley et al. 1940).
Habitation structures became larger and no longer
incorporated adobe in their construction. While
tradeware ceramics continued in use, Kelley notes
the use of locally produced wares, including Chinati
Plainware and Capote Red-on-Brown.
The Concepcion phase overlaps with the first
appearance Europeans: Nunez Cabeza de Vaca (ca.
1535), Espejo ( ca. 1582), and several subsequent
entradas (Kelley 1952, 1986). The archival records
from these entradas document the presence of indigenous groups, including the "Paturabeyes" and
"Jumanos," establishing a cultural territory in the
general Southern Trans-Pecos and La Junta district.
Mallouf (1999:76) suggests that, given symbiotic
relations between early Cielo complex occupants
and La Junta phase agriculturalists "there exists a
potential ancestral linkage of the Cielo complex to
the Jumano, Cibolo, or Chisos Indians of the 16th
and 17th century Spanish account."

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Few archeological investigations have taken
place in the vicinity of the Perdiz Creek project
area, fewer still on the immediate Perdiz Creek
landscape. The only work documented was undertaken by J. Charles Kelley et al. (1940) and C.
Albritton Jr. and Kirk Bryan (1939). These collaborative efforts were part of a joint expedition sponsored by the Peabody Museum of Archeology and
Ethnology, which was organized to investigate archeological sites and associated geologic deposits
in the Big Bend region of Texas. The group visited
a number of sites in the region, conducted small
scale excavations, and made geomorphologic observations of surrounding soil deposits. Soil observations contributed to a geomorphic history of the

70

Texas Archeological Society

area, defining the Neville, early Calamity, and later
Kokemot soil formations (Kelley et al. 1940:48).
Two of the sites investigated by these early
endeavors are located approximately 22 miles south
of the confluence of Perdiz and Alamito Creeks.
The Shiner site (41PS26)is located along Alamito
Creek, where investigators encountered buried
hearths, pit house floors, and artifacts within Calamity and Kokemot formation deposits.
The Shafter site (41PS53) is located in an irrigation ditch adjacent to Alamito Creek. Here, in the
Kokemot formation, investigators recorded exposed
hearth features, charcoal lenses, and artifacts, including El Paso Polychrome ceramic sherds. Several possible house floors were noted among the
exposed cultural debris. Lastly, the group excavated a flexed burial that they suspected was
inhumed beneath a house floor. The cultural material at 41PS53 was attributed to the La Junta phase.
The Jordan Gap 1: 1 site is located on a small
west bank tributary of Alamito Creek approximately
one mile south of its confluence with Perdiz Creek.
In a cutbank, investigators noted four stratified occupations: groundstone in the lower Calamity formation assigned to the Big Bend Cave aspect, and a
hearth, projectile points, and chipped stone in the
upper Kokernot formation assigned to the Late Prehistoric Period.
The Alpine site (7:2S) is located on Perdiz
Creek upstream from its confluence with Alamito
Creek. This site is situated adjacent to the current
project area, below the basalt escarpment. Kelley et
al. (1940) recorded several distinct areas within
this site, each situated on a unique landform. The
team (Kelley et al. 1940:82) reported that, along
the creek:
at various points in the badlands area,
archeological sites erode from alluvium
at various levels, or appear in situ in
vertical arroyo banks. So vast is the
eroded area, so complex the archeological picture, that it is impossible to clearly
reconstruct events at the site. No excavation was attempted.
Immediately south of Perdiz Creek the landforms
are more stable. At various locations south of the
creek, Kelley et al. (1940) noted hearths exposed in
ancillary arroyo cuts, thick layers of fire cracked
stone, ceramic fragments attributed to the Alamito
phase, and brown corrugated ceramic sherds; all
were associated with Kokernot formation soils and

attributed to the Late Prehistoric. The group also
observed a burned and tanged projectile point, a
chipped stone blade, and crude bifacial tools within
the Calamity formation. These artifact types were
unfamiliar to the investigators and were assigned to
an unknown cultural affiliation.

2000 TAS ARCHEOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATIONS
Fieldwork and Methodology
TAS field investigations on the McGuire ranch
are best characterized as reconnaissance and subsurface testing. This is true of both survey and subsurface testing activities. The ranch was portioned into
seven survey areas (areas A-G) that roughly approximate an environmental stratification. Areas A through
D are located in the east and northeast portion of the
ranch and correspond to the semidesert grassland
biome. Areas E and F encompass the east and upper
rim of the basalt escarpment and the floodplain corridor of Alamito Creek, respectively. Area G is comprised almost entirely of the Frenchman Hills landscape and the Perdiz Creek drainage system. The
survey areas were demarcated for general logistical
purposes and do not represent a systematic sample
technique. None of the survey areas were covered in
their entirety but instead were spot-checked in a
reconnaissance fashion.
Crew members conducted a pedestrian survey
spaced at intervals approximately 20 m apart. They
documented resources in personal field notes and
recorded sites on state archeological survey forms.
Most sites were recorded with sketch maps using a
compass and pace technique, and global positioning devises (GPS) were used to record site locations. In all, 9000 acres were surveyed during 10
days of investigation. Due to time constraints, the
portions of the landscapes that were covered vary
greatly in shape and area. Accessibility and/or topographic setting determined survey locations.
The portion of Perdiz Creek in the southwest
portion of the McGuire Ranch is the focus of this
investigation(area G). It encompasses a segment of
Perdiz Creek and a number of smaller tributary
drainages northwest of its confluence with Alamito
Creek. These small drainage patterns are highly
irregular and form a badland-like topography. Area
G encompasses approximately 6,000 acres bounded
by the McGuire Ranch property lines. The steep

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 71
escarpment of rhyolite and basalt dominates the
eastern portion of Area G. It runs roughly northwest to southeast and overlooks Alamito Creek and
both its floodplain and te1wces to the east.
Prior to field school investigations, local informants with intimate knowledge of the landscape accompanied CBBS investigators on a preliminary reconnaissance. Archeologists visited
high visibility archeological resources that were
surveyed in a cursory fashion to determine their
potential for further investigation, particularly subsurface testing. Informants shared with CBBS investigators specimens in their own extensive artifact collections gathered from sites. Based on these
data, five sites were selected for further investigation and subsurface testing.
Preliminary field investigations noted a very
high frequency of humanly modified and naturally
occurring specimens of chalcedony on the crests of
landforms near the basalt escarpment. Abundant
debitage made of this material was found at many
of the sites and the intervening landscape. Earlier
visits to this area suggested that the rim escarpment, formed of vesicular basalt, was the source of
this raw material. This prompted an additional survey objective: to identify and document any possible chalcedony quarries.
Pedestrian Survey Results
Survey crews inspected approximately 440
acres of the escarpment landform and examined the
high flats west of the rim, nearly vertical exposures, and the colluvial talus immediately below
the escarpment. They recorded five sites within this
small sample area.
Site 41PS832 is a high density scatter of
debitage found among the widespread scatter of
debitage covering much of the landform. The site
occupies and area roughly 100 m across.
Site 41PS833 is an extension of a diffuse lithic
scatter that covers a large peninsular rim rock projection in the southeastern portion of area G. This
portion of the rim rock escarpment is dominated by
a moderately dense scatter of debitage of locally
available chalcedony. The site area measures approximately 100 m across and is bounded by natural breaks in the rim rock that drop away steeply
towards the Alamito Creek floodplain to the east
and the erosional cut made by Perdiz Creek. A light
density scatter of burned rock was found among the
debitage, but no distinct features were noted. There

is an exposure of banded chalcedony along the steep
escarpment of the basaltic rim rock formation.
Site 41PS834 is likewise an extension of this
ubiquitous scatter of debitage and burned rock that
covers much of the uplands. This location was noted
for the higher density of debitage situated on the
upper edge of an arroyo cut that incises the landform. A single unifacial scraper and projectile point
were mapped and collected from the surface. The
extent of the high density scatter covers an area of
23 x 30 m.
Site 41PS839 is located at the bottom of a
small arroyo cut that incises the eastern boundary
of the rim rock escarpment. Two hearths were noted
along the small drainage within an incipient terrace. Each of these hearths are semi-intact and located in a light to moderate density scatter of burned
rock. An unspecified quantity of groundstone fragments were noted along with debitage and bifacially modified flakes. A finger-like projection of
the rim rock escarpment overlooks the site from the
southwest. Atop this landform is a relatively a high
density scatter of chalcedony debitage.
Site 41PS841 is located at the head of a small
arroyo cut that incises the rim rock escarpment,
overlooking Alamito Creek floodplain to the east.
At the head of the drainage cut, on the upper escarpment, is an exposure of basaltic bedrock.
Ground into this surface is a set of five mortar
holes that vary in dimension from 11-18 cm deep
and 20-34 cm in diameter. Situated among these
mortar holes is a small tinaja depression that holds
water from surface runoff. Investigators found one
ground stone mano, three scrapers, two small dart
points, and two late-stage biface fragments in the
vicinity of the mortar features. An unspecified
amount of debitage was noted as well. A second
tinaja is located approximately 15 m north of the
bedrock mortars. These natural features hold water,
which would have aided in the processing of resources. Approximately 100 m downstream from
the head of the drainage, below the upper escarpment, is an in situ exposure of chalcedony within
the basaltic parent material that shows signs of quarrying. Overall, this site location is advantageous
due to its proximity to numerous resources, including standing water, bedrock for groundstone implements, and chipped stone procurement.
Sites recorded in the course of pedestrian survey
are generally characterized as diffuse lithic scatters
associated with the fairly ubiquitous presence of
chalcedony and rhyolite raw materials. Furthe1more,

72

Texas Archeological Society

survey substantiates that many high visibility
features and sites had been identified by local
informants along the lowlands of Perdiz Creek and
its tributaries.
Subsurface Testing
Five sites in the Perdiz Creek study area were
selected for subsurface testing. Each locality was
surface mapped and tested to assess the nature and
extent of subsurface deposits. Excavations consisted
of lx 1 m test units or smaller subdivisions. Units
were laid out in reference to a site datum on a
magnetic north and east-west grid system established independently at each location. Units were
excavated according to 10 cm arbitrary levels and
screened through 118 inch machine cloth. Artifacts
recovered in the screening process were collected
according to 10 cm levels and assigned a single lot
number. Artifacts discovered in situ were assigned
a separate lot number and plotted on unit plan view
maps. In several instances, soil and feature matrix
samples were collected for future analysis.
Surface artifacts, outside of established excavation units, were treated in a variety of ways.
Unmodified debitage was estimated without quantification or specific provenience, while formal tools
were mapped in place using a theolodite or a total
data station (TDS). Diagnostic projectile points were
given horizontal provenience and assigned individual lot numbers. Beyond this general description of testing methods, each location is discussed
independently below.
The Gallie Site (41PS838)

The Gallie Site is situated on the west bank
terrace of Perdiz Creek. The site area measures
150 m north-south by 75 m east-west. It is a broad
and relatively light density scatter of chipped and
ground stone artifacts among burned rock features
and incipient midden deposits. There are several
exposures of basaltic bedrock along the creek bed
where tinaja depressions have formed; one of these
holds water even during extreme dry seasons.
Cultural material is concentrated on the eastern
part of the terrace where it slopes toward the bend
in Perdiz Creek. This part of the landform receives
over-bank flooding deposits during periodic wet
seasons, and the edges of the landform are subject
to arroyo cutting and high energy erosion. Several
of the burned rock features that are exposed in this

area are probably the result of erosional forces that
partially uncovered these buried deposits.
Eighteen cultural features were encountered on
the surface of the site. Twelve of these were hearths,
70 cm to 3.0 m in diameter. These features were
scattered over the site area with no readily
discernable clustering or intra-site patterning. Four
additional features were burned rock clusters or
concentrations. Two clusters are very suggestive of
dump piles from hide lined boiling basins. A single
incipient midden feature was recorded on the eastern portion of the landform. This feature occupies
an aerial extent of approximately 20 m square, consisting of a high density scatter of burned rock in
the midst of dark, charcoal stained soil. Burned
rock is uniformly distributed within the feature, but
is not so dense as to dominate the soil matrix.
Midden deposits are not substantially mounded
above the surrounding ground surface and its shape
in generally amorphous.
Chipped stone artifacts observed on the landform surface include a variety of small, stemmed
dart point fragments as well as arrow points and
fragments. Unmodified debitage is abundant and
dominated by locally available chalcedonies. Groundstone artifacts include mano and metate fragments.
Seven units (four lx2 m and three lxl m) were
excavated at the Gallie site to investigate the nature
and integrity of subsurface deposits and to determine the morphology of burned rock features. Test
unit 1 was excavated wi.thin a relatively high density surface scatter of burned and fire cracked rock
(FCR). FCR and frequent charcoal flecking is
present to 30 centimeters below surface (cmbs).
Moderate amounts of debitage accompanied this
light, midden-like deposit. A single utilized flake
and a Perdiz arrow point were recovered from the
first 10 cm level of the unit.
Test unit 2 was excavated to a depth of 20
cmbs. Chipped stone debitage decreased in frequency with depth, and charcoal flecks were found
sparsely scattered in the soil and matrix. One biface
fragment was recovered from level 2.
Test unit 3, a 1 x 2 m unit excavated to a 20
cmbs, yielded nine pieces of debitage in the first
level and two pieces in the second level. Test unit 4,
a lxl m unit excavated to 10 cmbs, yielded ten
pieces of debitage and one Livermore arrow point in
the single level excavated. Test unit 5 was placed on
the perimeter of the incipient midden feature. Profile
exposures indicate an anthropogenic soil moderately
stained with charcoal. Debitage was frequent in all

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 73
three levels excavated. Very little burned
rock was noted. Test unit 6, a lxl m unit,
was excavated within Feature 6 (Figure 3).
Excavated to 40 cmbs, the profile revealed
a basin shaped hearth with a moderately
charcoal stained matrix and sparse FCR.
Test Unit 7 (1 x 2m) was excavated
over Feature 8 (F8), a remarkably wellpreserved hearth (Figure 4). This unit was
placed to bisect F8 in order to determine
feature morphology. The hearth proved to
be a slightly basin-shaped depression filled
with numerous basaltic cobbles, tightly
packed in a circle 1. 7 m in diameter. The
profile of the feature indicates it is 15 cm
deep with abundant charcoal chunks (Figure 5). A large fragment of mostly burned
wood was recovered. The matrix surrounding the FCR was collected, as were large
quantities of bulk carbon for radiocarbon
dating. The single submitted radiocarbon
sample (Beta-161391; see Table 1) was

Legend
0

20

40

centimeters

D.
D

•

®

Heavily charcoal-stained
loamy sand with charcoal
chunks burned rock
Unexcavated
Fire-cracked rock (FCR)
Rodent disturbance

Figure 3. Gallie Site, Test Unit 6, hearth Feature 6 profile.

returned with a calibrated date
range of A.D. 1660-1950. The intercept points are equally as disparate. These ranges are a by-product of the high variability in atmospheric C14 during this timeframe,
resulting in a highly irregular calibration curve. The hearth basin excavation revealed linear impressions, probably the signs of the
excavation of the depression during hearth construction. These impressions on the base of the feature were noted as "digging stick
marks" and attest to the general
integrity and preservation of the
feature despite its surficial context.

Perdiz Creek Site
(41PS836)

0

20

40

V

Fire-cracked rock

centimeters

Figure 4. Planview of hearth (F8) Test Unit 7, Gallie site.

The Perdiz Creek Site is located
along a sharp bend of Perdiz Creek,
two km west of the rim rock
escarpment. The site is situated on
an eroding, primary stream bank
terrace (Figure 6). The Windy
Spring site, described below, lies
upslope and north-northeast of

..,,.
-...)

~
~
~

"';i;..

Table 1. Radiometric dates recovered from features in the Perdiz Creek Landscape unit.

~
;:::..
~

c

Site
(41PS)

Site
Name

Beta

Cal AD

Cal BP

Intercept with
calibration curve
(Cal AD)

~
i=;•

()()

Conventional
Age BP

!::l

unit

level

......

contexts

\.f'.I

c

....

e"l
~

835

Windy Spring

161386

1040-1280

910-670

1210

840 +/-50

N100/E120

1

Charcoal stained soil
recovered from general
midden deposit matrix

835

Windy Spring

161387

1220-1400

730-550

1290

710+/-60

N102/W114

2

Charcoal stained soil
recovered from general
midden deposit matrix

836

Perdiz Creek

161388

1530-1550
1630-1950

420-400
320-0

1670, 1780, 1800

190+/-60

TU-A

NA

837

Metate

161389

900-1030

1050-920

1000

1050+/-40

N87/E98

4

hearth matrix recovered
from small subfeature
within a larger midden
deposit

838

Gallie

161390

1020-1270

930-680

1180

880+/-60

TU-1

3

general midden soils

838

Gallie

161391

1660-1950

290-0

1690, 1730,
1810, 1920, 1950

130+/-50

TU-7

hearth matrix

hearth feature F8

I

q

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 75
this site. Cultural material is
distributed along the main drainage
across from a short, vertical exposure of basalt that forms a steep
embankment. The site is sheltered
and has ready access to water
pooling in bedrock tinajas in the
stream course bottom.
A high density artifact scatter
(including both formal tools and
debitage), hearth features, and a
midden deposit are present on the
site, along with a light scatter of
lithic debris. The midden deposit
is exposed on the surface in an
area that measures 40 m northsouth and 20 m east-west. Portions
of this feature have been substantially truncated by small arroyo

[]

LJ

Unexcavated

centimders

Fire~crncked

rock (FCR)

Rodent disturbance

Figure 5. Profile of Feature 8, Test Unit 7, Gallie site.

----

..........

''

''

''

''

''

I

meters.

''

I

I

I
I

''

''

''

I
i

I
I

''

'

'

\

\
\
\

\
\
\

\
I

/

'1
I

/

,/

I

-- ---

------------- ---- --U:GFND

--- --Dailnll

Site !J'Jl!ll-dary
Loca!it)

burned

Comonrhnc

Hearth
\..kquitc trees

\faidcn fonturc

Figure 6. Sketch map of Perdiz Creek Site.

76

Texas Archeological Society

the ground surface. This feature (Hearth 1) was
well intact (Figure 7). FCR was tightly packed
within a 4 m diameter area with a central, highdensity concentration of FCR measuring 1 m
across. All FCR was carefully mapped before removal and the unit was trench excavated across
the feature to obtain a feature profile sketch. Artifacts within the feature consist of 19 pieces of
unmodified debitage. Feature fill samples and matrix were collected, as well as bulk-carbon used to
acquire radiocarbon dates. Several large fragments
of charcoal were noted in the samples that may be
adequate for wood species identification.
A single charcoal sample (Beta-161388) was
submitted for radiocarbon dating and returned with
a date range (calibrated) between AD. 1530-1550
and AD. 1630-1950 (see Table 1). These disparate
ranges are a result of the high variability in atmospheric Cl4 during this time frame. The intercept
points may be more instructive, at
AD. 1670, AD. 1780, and AD.
1800. However these date ranges
are to be interpreted, it appears that
this discrete, mostly intact hearth
feature is historic in age and constructed by indigenous peoples, as
indicated by the debitage.
Test Unit B was excavated
within the surface expression of
the midden and indicated that anthropogenic soil is as deep as 50
cmbs. This feature has vague
boundaries that are difficult to
distinguish (Figure 8). It appears
only slightly mounded above the
surrounding landscape and FCR
density is variable. FCR is most
heavy on the southern end of the
feature. On the surface it measures roughly 60 x 25 m. Excavations indicated a general depth of
40-50 cm. Soils within the deposit are darkly stained with carbon and charcoal flecks are abundant in places. Three shovel
probes were excavated within the
northern portion of the midden
Legend
and indicate that anthropogenic
0
20
40
soils
vary considerably with depth
V
Fire-crach>Jrock
~'"'-t ·if""i.
centime!ers
and that deposits between the
north and south surface exposure
are not uniform.
Figure 7. Test Unit A plan view, Perdiz Creek Site, showing hearth stones.

cuts along the stream terrace. The surface expression of the midden deposit is a moderate to highdensity scatter of burned and fractured basaltic
cobbles within a matrix of soil that is heavily
stained with charcoal. The feature has an amorphous boundary, and it is possible that there are
multiple concentrations of FCR obscured by loamy
sand overburden. A high-density scatter of artifacts, 15 features, and a large midden deposit were
recorded within a 140 x 120 m area. All of the
features consist of discrete burned rock concentrations that represent hearths with various amounts
of disturbance, ranging from mostly displaced to
strongly intact.
Two 1 x 2 m units and three shovel probes
were excavated in the vicinity of the primary
midden deposit to investigate the nature and integrity of subsurface deposits. Test Unit A was
excavated over a single hearth feature visible on

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 77
Windy Spring Site
(41PS835)
The Windy Spring Site is located on a gradual southwest-facing slope nmih of Perdiz Creek. It
is situated mid-slope between the
upper crest of the rim rock escarpment to the east and the main
drainage. Cultural material on the
site's surface consists primarily of
a moderate density scatter of
burned rock surrounding a core
area of an incipient midden. The
scatter of burned rock occupies an
amorphous area about 45 m across.
Legend
Debitage formed of local chalceV Burned rock
dony is found in high densities
0
20
40
e:::::::s;;;;.,1... within the site area. The central
centimeters
incipient midden measures approximately 20 m across and is
Figure 8. Test Unit B, excavated in midden deposits, Perdiz Creek Site.
identified by the occurrence of
abundant burned rock and charcoal stained soils. Three projectile
points, two bifacial tools, two ceramic fragments,
soil overlying basaltic bedrock. No cultural mateand a groundstone metate fragment were recorded
rial was recovered from this excavation.
on the surface.
The shallow profile of anthropogenic soils and
Five units were excavated (one l x 1, three
the lack of identifiable stratigraphy suggest that
1 x 2s, and one lx3 m), and with the exception of
this feature may represent a short-term event or
the 1 x 1 unit, all were excavated within the midden
possibly a single occupation (Figure 10). Two soil
deposit. Ba.sed on these units, it is apparent that
samples recovered from the general midden have
the midden is relatively shallow (approximately
dates that conflict with a single event hypothesis.
15-20 cm in depth) and rests on a bedrock surface
Radiocarbon dates from sample numbers Beta(Figure 9). Soils within the midden are moder161386 and 161387 have intercept dates of A.D.
ately stained with charcoal and a minimal amount
1210 and A.D. 1290, respectively. Their calibrated
of ash. FCR is not tightly packed, so that the
date ranges overlap, while their conventional racharcoal stained soil matrix distinguishes the
diocarbon ages B.P. do not. This observation is
midden from the surrounding soils. Chipped stone
significant because, in the case of other midden
frequency in subsurface deposits is generally light
deposits in the Perdiz Creek study area, it was
(Table 3) and formalized tools were not abundant.
difficult or impossible to determine how many
Eight projectile points were recovered in test excomponents or formation events were represented
cavations, seven in the first arbitrary level and one
in the formation of burned rock accumulations.
in level 2. Three projectile points were noted on
This large feature at the Windy Spring Site is a
the surface of the landform. No discrete features
possible exception.
were encountered in the course of excavations
within the midden.
Metate Site (41PS837)
One 1 x 1 m unit was excavated 12 m outside
of the surface expression of burned rock and midden
The Metate Site is located in the northwestern
deposits to investigate the nature of surrounding
sector of area G, situated on a tributary to Perdiz
soils and deposition. This unit revealed that surCreek. The site is an incipient midden amidst a
rounding soils are weakly developed, consisting of
high density surface scatter of debitage, chipped
stone tools, and groundstone debris.
approximately 15 cm of decomposing bedrock and
5

\I)

1)

78

Texas Archeological Society

,,.

.,. ,,..--

/

.,,...,,,,..-----------

...........

Surface Expression of
Midden Deposit

/
/

/

/
/

/

/

\

/

\

I

\

I

\

\
\
I

Unit
Nl05D
W!OO

I
I
I
I

I

I

<o11lt

~ri°2io

\

~ ~/

\
\

PP4 A

\

\

/

\

\\

\

"

/

i

/

j

/

\

I

/!

\

\

i3"

"";/_._

~

;?

~

/

/~1
/

_/ //
/

~--

/

AMetat:;,~/------------~

/

//

,,/

\
\

/

\

I

/I

"

"

j;(/
I

I

//

',

/

\

-----

LEGEND
.....

...

Site bounda1y

/

\

//

\

\

,;.Mano

/

\

!

I

'\,,

[

\ "I.
/

\

/

/

b

/---~

,//

\\

~

/

I
I
I
I

//

\

~

''

__

Contour line

/

Dovvnslope

/

...

/
/

I

I

Shrubbery
Depression

Mag

Excavation unit
Artifact

,,
meters

BF,,,Bi-facc
C "'Ceramic
PP"'· Projectile point

Datum

Figure 9. Sketch map of Windy Spring Site.

On the surface, the midden feature is not
substantially mounded and does not have any visible
central hearth or depression. Burned rock was found
in moderate density and is not tightly packed within
the surrounding charcoal stained matrix. FCR is

distributed in an area that measures approximately
10 m across and is elliptical in shape. The
boundaries of the feature are not well defined, as
lighter densities of burned rock are strewn around
the perimeter of the central portion of the moderate

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 79
One lx2 m (Unit N87 /E98)
unit was excavated within the
central portion of the midden
feature. It was placed adjacent to
the pothole, as there was a clear
indication that it would sample a
considerable depth of dense midden stained soil. This test unit was
excavated to a depth of 70 cmbs,
though the size of the units
decreased with depth to accomtij Clwrcoal ~rained soil matri;.,
modate time constraints. FCR was
Uncxctn-<!le<.lbedrock
counted according to arbitrary 10
cm levels and was assigned to
rough size classes in an effort to
document gross changes in FCR
Figure 10. Windy Spring Site, Unit N106/Wl20, profile of shallow midden
density with depth.
deposit.
A shallowly buried concentration of tightly packed FCR
(Figure 11) was encountered within a matrix of
density scatter. Soil within the surface expression of
the feature is moderately to heavily stained with
darkly stained midden soil. This concentration proved
charcoal and diffuse carbon material. The central portion of the
midden deposit is overgrown with
mesquite brush, which likely
indicates ground disturbance. This
feature is located approximately
100 m west of the tributary drainage and is at the toe of a gradual
slope that leads up and east to the
higher rim rock. deposits of igneous
and basaltic material.
Artifacts observed on the surface include two large metate fragments and abundant chipped stone
debris. Three projectile point fragments were mapped before collection. Surface artifacts surrounding
the feature were recorded within a
40 m diameter area.
Subsurface testing at this location consisted of two 1 x 2 m units,
one 1 x 1 m unit, and five shovel
probes. The purposes of these ex\
cavations were to investigate the
subsurface integrity and extent of
M•i;
the midden and to investigate
0
20
40
whether significant intra-site varic1..111irndi:.:rs
ability could be identified in buried
deposits. A single pothole on the
Figure 11. 41PS837, southern portion of unit N87 /E98, planview of hearth
site provided a glimpse into the na(Fl) constructed within the midden.
ture and depth of midden deposits.

I

80

Texas Archeological Society

north wall of the unit, extending
into the central portion of the excavation unit. The boundary of this
feature was clearly demarcated by
the relative frequency, density, and
sizes of FCR. Impressions on this
feature suggest that it is a boundary portion of a larger feature buried outside of the test unit. Since
this feature extended past the base
of the excavation unit, it apparently represents a portion of a large
accumulation of FCR. It is speculated that the concentration is a
LJ lleanh· ciKffW>>i 'imaetl irn>my
portion of the central focus of the
midden deposit, possibly an excaLl m~"''""~°''
0 lJncxcavated
vated roasting pit (see Black et. al
1997:84-85). Due to time con~ Rmlentdisturbnnce
straints, it was left intact for future investigations.
Artifact recovery from this
Figure 12. Profile drawing of unit N87 /E98, showing midden deposits and
unit included numerous specimens
Feature 1.
of debitage, a grooved tooth, a medium sized ungulate mandible, and
to be a sem1-rntact hearth feature, which was
a single ceramic fragment. The ceramic specimen
subsequently cross sectioned and profiled (Figure
is a single body fragment of a type known as
12). The hearth was a roughly basin shaped
Chupadero Black on White.
arrangement of FCR, 85 cm in diameter and 20 cm
A final 1x2 m (N97/El01) unit was excavated
to the north of the initial 1 x 2 m unit in lighter
deep in cross section. Soil samples were collected
from the interior of this feature and charcoal was
surface soils. This unit was placed to investigate
extracted from the interior matrix for radiocarbon
the potential of buried midden deposits in the
northern portion of the site and to determine whether
dating. This sample (Beta 161389) was dated to
between AD. 900-1030 (1050-920 B.P.) with an
there might be significant intra-site differences in
intercept at AD. 1000. This feature very likely postartifact frequencies and densities. Excavated to a
dates the surrounding midden since it appears to have
depth of 80 cmbs, soils were minimally charcoal
been constructed within that deposit and overlies the
stained. FCR was infrequent in this area, and
deeper midden soils.
debitage was more abundant.
Charcoal stained soil was recorded 60 cmbs,
resting upon lighter carbonate rich loamy sands.
Artifact Recovery from Subsurface
Bioturbation complicated the profile considerably,
Testing
as there was no discernable stratigraphy noted within
the profile with the exception of the relatively darker
In order to address to landscape scale phenomand FCR rich cross-section of the hearth feature.
enon, the following overview of subsurface testing
A second 1 x 1 m unit (N87/El02) was excatakes a macroscopic approach, treating each site
vated in a stand of mesquite within the dark, charexcavation as a sample of the larger study area.
coal stained soil and a slightly elevated portion of
Recognizing excavations at these locations were
the midden deposit. This unit was excavated to a
limited in scope, the overall goal is to give a larger
depth of 60 cmbs, and profiles displayed excepscale impression of the nature of archeological detionally dark (gray to black) stained soil. A tightly
posits within the Perdiz Creek study area. In so
packed concentration of large-sized FCR (Figure
doing, Perdiz Creek can be qualitatively compared
13) was encountered in the second arbitrary level
to a different study area where data were collected
(7 cmbs). This concentration dominates the entire
at a similar scale. The overview and analysis is

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 81

Figure 13. Metate Site, unit N87/El02, Feature 2.

comprised of descriptions of artifacts and features
and their distributions.
At four sites, Windy Springs, Perdiz Creek,
Metate, and Gallie, a total of 20 1 x 1 m units were
excavated. All of these units were placed within
or in the vicinity of substantial subsistence related
features, ranging from incipient midden deposits
to hearth fields or individual hearths. Recovery
included large quantities of burned rock, debitage,
modified debitage, formalized tools including
bifaces and projectile points, groundstone, macro
floral and faunal remains, charcoal samples, feature matrix samples, and some few ceramic sherds.
Most of the artifacts on the surface of the tested
sites were merely noted in a rough inventory. Diagnostic artifacts were assigned surface provenience and collected.

Debitage
The objective of the lithic analysis is to account for frequencies of artifacts and types of
artifact classes within the small excavation
samples. Furthermore, it is used to give an impression of the nature and intensity of activities
preformed at the site area and within the landscape unit, with an emphasis on intensity of use.
It is hypothesized that frequencies suggest some
measure of energy expended at the site location,
intensity of energy expended in stone tool manufacture, and maintenance, as well as activities
carried out with the aid of these tools. The preparation of platforms would intuitively seem to be
a more intensive manufacture technique than
early-stage reduction. It could also be the case

82

Texas Archeological Society
Single facet: a simple platform with a
single plane where the flake was struck
from the core.

that more specialized subsistence activities are
carried out with more formalized and refined tools.
All chipped stone from excavation units were
closely inspected and categorized according to specific attributes and unit provenience (Andrefsky
1998). All specimens were initially sorted accordirig to whether they exhibited modification in the
form of retouch, as informal tools. The unmodified
specimens were further sorted according to the
amount and portion of the flake represented. These
categories consist of:

Multiple facet: where the platform is
composed of more than one distinct
plane, often where smaller flakes were
removed from the edge of the core or
tool to prepare the platform for a specific
end result.
Ground: where the platform shows signs
of abrading and grinding, often to
strengthen the platform edge for a desired end result; another prepared platform.

Complete flake: a specimen with complete platform, distal termination and lateral edges.

Cortex: where the platform is a cortical
surface, indicating early-stage lithic reduction.

Flake fragment: a specimen with the
distal terminal portion of the flake absent, but with an intact platform.

Crushed: where the platform has been
smashed, often with a highly irregular,
stepped surface.

Chip: a specimen with the proximal portion and platform absent; distal and terminal portion remaining.
Chunk: a specimen with neither terminal nor proximal portion, where the approximate portion represented is extremely difficult to discern, and where
specimens are very angular.

Chipped stone from each level was next
classified as to whether there was any cortex left on
any portion of the specimen (cortex present or cortex
absent). Lastly, each complete flake and flake
fragment, i.e. specimens with an intact platform,
were examined with a 20 x hand lens to determine
the nature of the platform. These specimens were
then classified according to platform type:

Modified debitage was also inspected with a
hand lens, each piece being recorded with a set of
attributes including: portion of flake represented
(fragment, complete, etc.); number of modified
edges; length of modified edge; shape of modified
edges (concave or convex); whether it shows signs
of only modification and/or utilization.
Given the sample population, the percentage of
prepared platforms at all four sites is presented
(Table 3). These numbers are remarkably similar. It
can be postulated that if different activities, or
activities of different intensity, were practiced at
different locations in the Perdiz Creek landscape,
different percentages of prepared platforms would

Table 2: Frequencies and averages of unmodified chipped stone at four sites.

Unmodified
debitage

Number of
unit levels

1527

14

109

Perdiz Creek

714

14

51

Metate

734

28

26

Gallie

763

15

50

Site
name
Windy Springs

Average unmodified
debitage per level

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 83
Table 3. Percentages of prepared platforms at four sites.
Total
platforms

Total prepared
platforms

% prepared
platforms

Windy Springs

702

103

14

Perdiz Creek

341

69

20

Metate

336

52

15

Gallie

387

61

15

Site
name

500

D Surface

450

Level 1

424

400
350

Level2

300

Level3

350

236

250
207
200

136

150
100

93
49

50

30
2

0
N100/W120

N102/W1i4

N104/W114

N105/W100

N106/Wi13

Figure 14. Unmodified debitage at each excavation unit, per level at the Windy Spring Site.

500
450

D Surface

400

D Level 1

350

Level2

300

Level 3

281

250
200
146

150
100

71

50

19

0
SP #1

SP#2

SP #3

TU#A

Figure 15. Unmodified debitage at each excavation unit, per level at the Perdiz Creek Site.

TU#B

84

Texas Archeological Society

500

400

D Level i
D Level 2

350

Level 3

300

II Level 4

250

~Level 5

450

~~~ Level 6

200

158

EJ Level 7

150
100

N87/E102

N87/E98

N97/E101

sp
N106/E94

sp
N87/E108

sp
N94/E106

sp
N94/E110

sp PH

Figure 16. Unmodified debitage at each excavation unit, per level at the Metate Site.

500
450
400
350

D Surface

300

D Level 1
238

250

Level2

200

Level3

150

117
95

100

59
50
0
N87/E108

TU #1

TU#2

TU #3

TU #4

TU #5

Figure 17. Unmodified debitage at each excavation unit, per level at the Gallie Site.

be apparent in the archeological record. As these
numbers are not drastically different, it is postulated
that there is some uniformity or homogeneity in the
activities performed at these locations.
Figures 14-17 depict the frequencies of
unmodified debitage recovered from each level
of individual subsurface test units. They show
that in most cases artifact frequencies are highest
in the upper deposits of the excavation units,

indicating that these features and cultural
deposits are not deeply buried, and that the upper
ten centimeters are representative of the highest
density of cultural material. This is a useful
observation for future investigations, since it
points out that shallow excavations and testing
can yield useful information.
An exception to this point is the Metate Site,
where the highest average frequencies of artifacts

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 85
are found in level 2, 10-20 cmbs. Since this is true
concerning several units across the site area, the
site appears to have a buried cultural deposit.

Modified Debitage
Modified flakes occur in relatively small
numbers (n=40) compared to the amount of unmodified debitage recovered from all of the test
excavations. Very few of these specimens displayed a high degree of modification, such as
extensive retouching where the edge of the flake
has been substantially reduced. The majority of
specimens are fragmentary chips or flake fragments, and most specimens have multiple modified edges, both concave and convex. Material
types are dominated by a locally available red or
brown rhyolite, followed by locally available
chalcedony. Only seven of these 40 specimens
are formed on cherts that are not immediately
available within the study area. This fact suggests that these more 'exotic' materials were conserved for different types of tools, rather than
mere expediency tools like modified flakes. Alternatively, the abundance of locally available
materials may have obviated the need to construct tools from exotic stone.

Projectile Points
A total of 32 projectile points (Tables 5-6, Figures 18-21) were recovered from the ground surface and in subsurface excavations at sites in the
Perdiz Creek project area. These artifacts were anaTable 4. Frequencies of modified debitage
at each site.

Number of Modified Debitage Specimens
Site Name

Total

Windy Springs

18

Perdiz Creek

9

Metate

3

Gallie

10

Total

40

lyzed in the laboratory, where they were recorded
with a number of attributes. They consist of the
shape of stem and blade edges, neck width, base
width, length of blade, width of blade, and metric
weight. Formal typologies were assigned using descriptions from Suhm and Jelks (1962). Nine specimens were recovered from the upper l 0 cm of
excavation units, and two were recovered from 1020 cmbs. The remaining 21 specimens were recorded as surface finds at seven of the sites recorded in the study area. Due to the palimpsest
nature of surface deposits, their behavioral relationship to excavated cultural deposits and features
is very ambiguous.
The projectile point collection consists of 19
dart points, six arrow points, and six specimens that
are too fragmentary to identify with confidence.
Seven dart points have expanding stems, three have
parallel sided stems, three have bulbous stems, three
have contracting stems, and three are too fragmentary to classify the stem side shape. Dart points can
be classified as Palmillas (Figure 18, K; Figure 20,
U and X), Pandale (Figure 20, W), Paisano (Figure
20, V), possibly Almagre (Figure 18, I; Figure 19,
P), and Shumla (Figure 18, H; Figure 19, R).
Arrow points (n = 6) consist of two notched
specimens, one bulbous stem, two expanding
stemmed, and one contracting stem (Figure 18,AG). Specimens assigned to a formal typology include: two Toyah (Figure 18, C and E); three
Livermore (Figure 18, A, B, G); and, one Perdiz
(Figure 18, F).
Ten projectile points were recovered from
excavation units in a subsurface or near surface
context. Eight of these projectile points were found
at the Windy Spring Site. At the latter site, four
projectile points were recovered from a single 1 x 2
m excavation unit (N102/Wl 14). One Toyah arrow
point fragment (see Figure 18, C) was recovered
from level 1 of this unit, 7 cm below the ground
surface. A second projectile point fragment (see
Figure 21, bb) was recovered from level one and is
likely a shoulder fragment of a dart point too
fragmentary to be diagnostic. A third dart point
fragment (Figure 19, N) was recovered from level 1
of this unit; it is an un-typed, expanding stem
specimen. The fourth projectile point fragment
(Figure 18, K) was recovered from screened soil in
level 2. This fragment is the basal portion of a
Palmillas dart point. These specimens were found
within the boundaries of the midden feature in the
center of the site.

Texas Archeological Society

86

Table 5. Provenience of projectile points.
Photo
Letter

Site
(41PS)

Unit

A

835

NlOO Wl21

Livermore Arrow
Point

Late
Prehistoric
(AD. 900-1400)

aa

835

N102 Wll5

Unidentified Fragment

Unknown

B

835

NlOO Wl22

Livermore Arrow Point

Late Prehistoric
(A.D. 900-1400)

bb

835

N102 Wll4

Unidentified Fragment

Unknown

c

835

N102 Wll4

Toyah Arrow Point

Late Prehistoric
to Historic

cc

835

NA

na

Unidentified Fragment

Unknown

D

835

Surface
Provenience

na

Unidentified Dart Point

Unspecified
Archaic

dd

838

Surface Provenience

na

Unidentified Fragment

Unknown

E

835

Nl06 Wll3

Toyah Arrow Point

Late Prehistoric
to Historic

ee

838

Surface
Provenience

Unidentified Fragment

Unknown

F

838

TU#4

Perdiz Arrow point

Late Prehistoric
(A.D. 1200-1500)

ff

838

Surface
Provenience

Unidentified Fragment

Unknown

G

838

TU#l

Livermore Arrow Point

Late Prehistoric
(AD. 900-1400)

H

835

NlOO Wl20

Shumla Dart Point

Late Archaic (ca.
1000 B.C.-200 B.C)

I

835

Surface
Provenience

Possible Almagre
Dart Point

Middle Archaic

Level

na

na

na

Three projectile points were recovered from unit
N100/W120 at the Windy Spring site. Two Livermore arrow points (see Figure 18, A and B) were
found in level one, each 3 cm below the ground
surface. A single Shumla type dart point fragment
(see Figure 18, H) was recovered from level 1 of this
same unit, 1Ocm below the ground surface. In unit
N106/Wl 13, a single Toyha arrow point (see Figure
18, E) was recovered from screened soil in level 1.

Type

Approximate
Age

Two arrow point fragments were found in
excavation units on the Gallie site. In Test Unit 1, a
single Livermore arrow point (see Figure 19, G)
was recovered in level 1, I cmbs. This unit was
situated within a surface expression of light charcoal staining and scattered burned rock, in what
might be best described as an incipient midden. In
Test Unit 4, a single Perdiz arrow point (see Figure
19, F) was recovered in the screened soil of the

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 87
Table 6. Provenience information for dart points (continued).
Photo
Letter

Site
(41PR)

Unit

Level

Type

Approximate
Age

J

835

Surface
Provenience

na

Unidentified Dart Point

Unspecified
Archaic

K

835

N102 W114

2

Palmillas Dart Point

Middle to Late
Archaic

L

836

Surface
Provenience

na

Unidentified Dart Point

Unspecified
Archaic

M

836

Surface
Provenience

na

Unidentified Dart Point

Unspecified
Archaic

N

840

Surface
Provenience

na

Unidentified Dart Point

Unspecified
Archaic

0

840

Surface
Provenience

na

Unidentified Dart Point

Unspecified
Archaic

p

840

Surface
Provenience

na

Possible Almagre
Dart Point

Middle Archaic

Q

840

Surface
Provenience

na

Unidentified Dart Point

Unspecified
Archaic

R

838

Surface
Provenience

na

Possible Shumla
Dart Point Fragment

Late Archaic (ca.
1000 B.C.-200
B.C)

s

838

Surface
Provenience

na

Unidentified Dart Point

Unspe<::ified
Archaic

T

838

Surface
Provenience

na

Unidentified Dart Point

Unspecified
Archaic

u

838

Surface
Provenience

na

Palmillas Dart Point

Middle to Late
Archaic

v

837

Surface
Provenience

na

Paisano Dart Point

Transitional
Archaic (ca. 200
B.C.-600 B.C.)

w

834

Surface
Provenience

na

Pandale Dart Point

Early Archaic (ca.
4000 B.C.-2500
B.C.)

x

837

Surface
Provenience

na

Palmillas Dart Point

Middle to Late
Archaic

y

837

Surface
Provenience

na

Unidentified Dart Point

Unspecified
Archaic

z

832

Surface
Provenience

na

Unidentified Dart Point

Unspecified
Archaic

88

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 18. Arrow and dart point recovered from Perdiz
Creek investigations.
Figure 19. Dart point recovered from Perdiz Creek investigations.

Figure 20. Dart points recovered from Perdiz Creek investigations.

Figure 21. Projectile point fragments recovered from Perdiz
Creek investigations.

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 89
upper 5 cm of level one. This unit was excavated to
investigate the extent of midden deposits, but
found the underlying soils were free of charcoal
and burned rock.

Ceramic Sherds

surface is decorated with black lines, depicting
the corner of a possible rectangle, with closely
spaced parallel lines intersecting the corner at -45degree angles. This fragment is suggestive of
Chupadero Black on White pottery occasionally
noted elsewhere along the Rio Grande corridor
(Kelley 1940:34) and was included as an artifact
diagnostic of Kelley's La Junta focus, but recent
instrumental neutron activation analysis has demonstrated that Chupadero Black on While was
manufactured in central New Mexico and traded
widely throughout southern New Mexico, the
Southern Plains of Texas, and Trans-Pecos Texas
(Creel et al. 2002). The single sherd was found
within Test Unit N87/E102 at the Metate Site.
This unit was situated within a dark midden deposit, and the fragment was recovered in level 2,
approximately 10-20 cmbs.

Thirty-three ceramic sherds were recovered in
subsurface testing and surface collections at five
site localities. The ceramic assemblage is divided
into four types based on color, texture, and surface
treatment. Figure 22 displays representative specimens from each type.
Type 1 (n = 3; Figure 22, C) has a smooth and
slightly burnished surface texture, dark brownish red
in color. The interior is a similar color absent the
burnishing. In cross section, the paste is very dark
gray (charcoal colored) with very course temper
that is white in color. A tempering
agent is visible on the interior and
exterior surfaces as well, and there
are exterior markings or patterned
finishings that may be a product
of grass or stick rubbing or roughening. All sherds of this type were
found on the surface of the Windy
Spring Site, within or directly adjacent to the surface expression of
the primary midden.
Type 2 (n = 1; Figure 22, A)
has a grayish, red-brown, smooth
exterior surface. In cross section it
has a similar .color to the exterior
surface, with minor white colored
tempering agent. The burnished
interior surface is very dark gray.
This specimen is unique in that it
has distinctly different exterior and
interior surface coloration and
treatment. Both interior and exterior surfaces evince possible
smoothing with fingers or grasses
as attested by intersecting parallel
smudges. The single fragment representative of this category was
collected from the surface of the
Lost Pottery Site.
Type 3 (n = 1; Figure 22, D)
has a course light gray exterior
surface and in cross section has
the same color, relatively fineFigure 22. Examples of ceramic types recovered from excavations in plan
and profile.
grained in texture. The interior

90

Texas Archeological Society

Type 4 (n = 28; Figure 22,B) is the most common ceramic type noted in the study area and has a
mostly grayish red-brown exterior, cross section and
interior color. The paste is mostly course with a few
white colored temper particles. No surface decoration is present, but smiace treatment can be seen in
the form of intersecting smudges possibly from
grasses or fingers. This last type has some minor
variation in color, but are all remarkably similar.
This type has distinct similarities to the cmde Chinati
Ware noted at localities along the Rio Grande corridor (Kelley et al. 1940:34) and was included in
Kelley's Concepcion phase. All sherds of this category were found on the surface of the Lost Pottery
Site within an approximately three m diameter area
and all likely come from the same vessel.

Cultural Features
From a review of the individual feature descriptions above, it is apparent that hearths are not
large or contain substantial quantities of burned
rock (with the exception of Feature 8 at the Gallie
Site). Hearth feature frequency and density is minimal at the Metate and Windy Springs localities,
while most of the hearths recorded are found at the
Perdiz Creek and Gallie sites. The Gallie Site contained 12 hearth features, and the majority, with the
exception of features 6 and 8, are largely disturbed
and do not contain a great number or volume of
stones. Most of these features consist of loose but
discrete clusters of five to 20 pieces of burned rock
that appear to be purely surface manifestations. The
majority of features at the Perdiz Creek location,
with the exception of Hearth Feature 1, are similarly not very substantial.
Many of these features have been significantly
disturbed over time by taphonomic processes such
as erosion and modern landscape modification. It is
plausible to assume that if these features had at one
time contained large quantities and volume of
burned rock, there would have been some evidence
of this in the area immediately surrounding the
hearth remnants. In contrast to comparative study
units, hearth features are relatively few and
unsubstantial in the Perdiz Creek landscape. Several
factors can account for this impression, such as: the
unsystematic sampling method, visibility, or
different food processing activities. These issues
will be visited further in subsequent discussion.
Five midden features were recorded in the
Perdiz Creek survey area. The feature recorded

at the Metate Site is a somewhat diffuse surface
expression with minimal mounding, visible
within an area measuring 10 m across. Its principle characteristics are very dark soil staining
and moderate to high densities of burned rock in
the intervening matrix, and the boundaries of
this feature are vague and amorphous. This same
description applies to the midden recorded and
tested at the Perdiz Creek Site. While neither of
these features is significantly mounded, each has
a substantial subsurface content in the form of
burned rock and heavily charcoal stained soil to
a depth of between 20 to 60 cmbs. Chipped stone
densities in these features are somewhat variable. Two sub-features (Hearth Fl and possible
roasting pit F2) were identified within the midden
deposit at the Metate Site. Two midden features
were identified at the Gallie Site locality, but
neither of these is very substantial in comparison to the midden features at other site localities. Each of these consist of medium to high
density burned rock scatters with minimal charcoal stained soil. Subsurface deposits within the
Gallie Site middens were unsubstantial compared
to other Perdiz Creek midden features.
The Windy Spring Site contains the most discrete midden, but its subsurface extent is limited by
the shallow depth of the deposit to bedrock (-10-20
cmbs). This feature has a somewhat amorphous
perimeter and is roughly 15 m across. While the
soil in the intervening soil matrix is distinctly stained
with charcoal, burned rock is not exceptionally
dense and does not dominate the cultural deposit.
No sub-features were identified within the general
midden deposit.

SUMMARY OF ARTIFACT
ASSOCIATIONS WITH FEATURES
IN SUBSURFACE CONTEXTS
As noted earlier, the majority of excavation
units in the Perdiz Creek study area were situated
within the surface expressions of subsistence related
features, including isolated hearths, burned rock
accumulations, and charcoal stained soil deposits.
Excavated hearths were, for the most part, discrete
and isolated features, with minimal amounts of
associated chipped stone debris. The larger burned
rock accumulations and midden features exhibited
very vague soil stratigraphy, where separate
occupations or events were difficult, if not

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 91
impossible, to identify with the extent of subsurface
testing employed during field school investigations.
Other than debitage, artifacts associated with the
larger features (excluding hearths) include modified
and utilized flakes, bifacial chipped stone tools,
projectile points, ceramic sherds, groundstone, and
bone fragments.
Excavation units within the midden feature at
the Windy Springs Site recovered 23 modified flake
specimens as deep as 30cmbs and one mano fragment was recovered from 20 cmbs. Nine bifaces
were recovered from the upper two 10 cm levels,
both early and late-stage reduction specimens. Nine
cores or core fragments were recovered from subsurface deposits within the midden feature. While
several ceramic fragments were noted on the surface of the midden expression, none were found in
a subsurface context. A total of six projectile points
and point fragments were recovered from subsurface contexts. Toyah and Livermore points were
recovered from 0 to 10 cmbs, which support the
Late Prehistoric radiocarbon assay from midden
soils. Three dart point fragments (one Palmillas,
one Shumla, and one unidentified fragment) were
recovered between 3 and 10 cmbs. These Late Archaic specimens are vertically interspersed with the
Late Prehistoric specimens and represent earlier occupation below the Late Prehistoric midden, displaced by activities associated with the feature. It
is, therefore, difficult to detennine whether the other
recovered artifacts, i.e. bifaces, debitage, modified
flakes, are actually associated with the Late Prehistoric midden activities.
Two test units were excavated in the large
midden feature at the Metate site. Two sub-features
were identified within the larger midden deposit,
consisting of a near surface hearth and a large
burned rock concentration that is postulated to be a
central roasting pit feature. No bifaces or modified
flakes were recovered from excavations centered
over the possible roasting pit. Three modified flakes
were recorded in excavations outside of the midden
feature. Four bifaces were recovered from the
general midden matrix in unit N87 /E98, and six
bi faces were recorded in unit N97IE101. Those
units are situated at, respectively, farther distances
from the central roasting pit feature (Unit N87 I
El02). Unmodified debitage occurs in increasing
frequency in excavation units that are farther from
the possible roasting pit feature. These observations
are at least suggestive of some significant intra site
variability, where tool manufacture, maintenance,

and processing activities are arranged around the
central pit feature. While the excavation sample
size is too small to draw meaningful conclusions, it
clearly suggests productive avenues for future
investigations.
No projectile points were found in association
with the Metate Site features. Of note is the single
Chupadero Black on White ceramic sherd recovered from 10-20 cmbs in the test unit centered over
the possible roasting pit (N87/E102). This specimen is a tradeware from central New Mexico. This
single artifact indicates that the groups who used
the Perdiz Creek landscape in their subsistence
rounds had some level of interaction with groups to
the north and northwest, as did the groups in the La
Junta district to the south.
At the Perdiz Creek site, there were no projectile points recovered from subsurface excavations.
Test Unit B was excavated inside the large midden
composed of burned rock and charcoal stained soil.
In this unit two early-stage biface fragments were
recovered in a subsurface context, along with six
modified flakes.
At the Gallie Site, several test units (1, 2, and
5) yielded artifacts other than unmodified chipped
stone. Recovery in Test Unit 1, excavated in an
ephemeral midden deposit, included seven pieces
of unmodified debitage, three cores, one biface,
one Livermore projectile point, and a single mano.
Test Unit 5 was likewise excavated in an ephemeral scatter of charcoal and burned rock. This test
unit recovered three pieces of modified debitage,
three core fragments, two early-stage bifaces, and a
single mano fragment. Test Unit 2 was excavated
in charcoal stained soil. This unit recovered one
core, and one biface fragment. As these test units
were not excavated within a discrete feature, it is
not possible to determine behavioral associations.

PERDIZ CREEK IN OVERVIEW
When the archeological manifestations within
the Perdiz Creek study area are considered in
overview, it is possible to sketch a general
impression of the nature of surface deposits and a
small sample of subsurface deposits. Generally,
within the 6,000-acre sample unit, we see four
locations that host clusters of subsistence related
burned rock features. These take the form of mostly
small, unsubstantial hearths and midden deposits.
Most hearths consist of relatively loose clusters of

92

Texas Archeological Society

burned rock. The midden features (n = five) are
formed of charcoal stained soils with moderate
amounts of burned rock in the intervening soil
matrix. These midden features are considered to
be unsubstantial and incipient, i.e. "just coming
into being, and not fully formed." Radiocarbon
dates (n = six) for the incipient midden features
and hearths all fall within a Late Prehistoric to
Proto-Historic time period (see Table 1).
Chipped stone technologies evident at site locations are not exceptionally diverse, consisting overwhelmingly of unmodified debitage (n = 3,762 from
excavation units), simple modified flakes, few formalized tools, and a small number of projectile points.
Formalized scrapers, spoke shaves, perforators, d1ills,
pecking stones, hammer stones, metates, figurines,
shell, and other decorative items indicative of more
diverse activities are absent from the Perdiz Creek
artifact assemblages in subsurface contexts. Recovered diagnostic artifacts are indicative of Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric use of the sites.
Groundstone specimens, though present, are sparse
(n =four) from excavation units, 10 recorded in field
notes). The specimens are formed mostly of locally
available materials. Bedrock mortars, while present
in the project area (n = eight), are not abundant.
Ceramic sherds (n = 33) are dominated by a single
type (Chinati Plainware), with the exception of a
single decorated Chupadero Black on White specimen, likely traded and imported from neighboring
peoples to the north and northwest. The ceramic
sherd assemblage likely came from a small number
of vessels, indicating that ceramic technologies were
not used heavily within the area or in association
with features recorded in the sample area.
No evidence of structures or habitation was noted
within the Perdiz Creek landscape unit. A single
Cielo complex structure was found adjacent to the
southern boundary of the study area, but no sites
with these characteristic structures were noted in the
survey areas. In general, habitation structures such
as stacked stone wicki-up rings, pit houses, or jacal
structures are not known in the actual project area,
and are not known to occur in any abundance in
nearby areas.

COMPARATIVE STUDY AREAS
AND LANDSCAPE UNITS
Archeological data, information concerning the
material remains of past human behavior, are usefully

considered within a larger context. In the same sense
that a projectile point can offer little information
without provenience, the archeological data of Perdiz
Creek can be better understood when viewed in
relation to comparative observation units. The goal
of this section is to introduce a comparative study
area with a description of the nature of burned rock
features present there, and to compare their
distributions to the evidence previously presented
for Perdiz Creek. Observations at each of these
locations is course-grained, in that reconnaissance
level recording was focused on high visibility
archeological material, mostly surface expressions
of large burned rock features.
In Gilliland Canyon, archeological data were
collected according to different methods, varying
in systematic survey coverage and descriptions.
While this is certainly not an optimal situation for
comparison, the available data are probably representative and serve as an excellent departure point
for understanding behavioral variability between
different landscapes

Comparative Unit Environment:
Gilliland Canyon
The comparative study area is within the Glass
Mountains, approximately 69 km east-northeast of
the Perdiz Creek study area. The Gilliland Canyon
study area, privately owned by Mr. Homer Mills
and Jim and Carol Dakus, is named after the prominent geographical feature in the unit. The study
area is situated in a rugged mountain range formed
mostly of fault blocked limestone deposits. Elevations range between 5,791 and 4,300 feet, and the
research unit is superimposed upon a central drainage, Gilliland Creek, and the linear ridges that flank
its west and east sides. The canyon sides are steep
and the drainage assumes a position in the mountain range making it a somewhat ideal causeway
between the Marathon Basin to the south and the
Toyah Creek drainage basin and grasslands to the
north. A smaller portion of this study area occupies
an ancillary drainage basin, Jail Canyon, immediately adjoining Gilliland Canyon from the west.
The Gilliland Canyon study area lies within a
setting distinctly different than Perdiz Creek, and
can be described as the northeastern boundary of
the Trans-Pecos. Beyond the Glass Mountains, to
the east, are the distinct physiological characteristics of the Stockton Plateau. The Glass Mountains
are also adjacent to the Monahan Sand Dunes to the

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 93
north, and the Toyah Creek basin and grasslands to
the east and north. The surrounding plant community contrasts with Perdiz Creek, being dominated
by a madrean woodland and sotol scrub community. While Gilliland Canyon does not have the immediate access to major biomes and ecological settings as does Perdiz Creek, a greater small-scale
diversity of resources are present within the unit.
The steep slopes of the canyon walls host dense
stands of sotol, a resource that has been documented
ethnographically as an important food and fiber
source. The margins of the canyon floor contain
stands of emory and live oaks intermixed with stands
of juniper (Warnock 1946, 1977). All these tree species have reproductive biomass, acorns and berries,
recognized in archeological and ethnographic documentation as important resources (Creel 1994;
Niethammer 1974). Mesquite likewise is a common
food source, but its abundance may be a product of
modern conditions, including range land modification and livestock grazing. Vegetation density is generally higher in the Glass Mountains, with more
above-ground structural biomass, as compared to the
dominance of grasses and subsurface plant components found in the Perdiz Creek setting.
Initial investigations in Gilliland Canyon began
with a 1998 Sul Ross State University archeological
field school, directed by Robert J. Mallouf. Activities focused on the test excavation of a large, partially buried burned rock midden eroding from a
terrace fronting on Jail Canyon, a tributary to
Gilliland Canyon (Mallouf n.d.). In 2000, the Center
for Big Bend Studies conducted a reconnaissance
over approximately 9000 acres of the study area.
Twenty-three sites were recorded by this author, who
visited midden features and recorded site localities
using pedestrian survey techniques. Each of these
sites is centered on high visibility features that typically consist of large, mounded burned rock middens.

Gilliland Canyon Feature
Distributions
A total of 106 hearth features and 29 burned
rock middens were recorded at 23 sites (Table 7).
These features are located mostly on the main stem
terraces of Gilliland Creek and its tributary drainages. Two localities were recorded high above the
drainage floor, one on an elevated bench, and another in a saddle above the main drainage. Hearth
features range from small, loose clusters of a few
stones, to large pavement or mounded style hearths

up to 3 m in diameter. A simple classification of
these hearths consists of small clustered variety
(small hearths) and large substantial features (large
hearths). These two varieties subsume a significant
amount of diversity, but the classification is useful
here for course-grained comparisons. The small
hearth varieties range from tight clusters of five to
40 stones, often significantly displaced and having
vague or amorphous boundaries. The large hearth
varieties are mostly over 1.0 m in diameter, formed
of 50 to 400+ stones, tightly packed, often displaying a pavement or mounded shape, and sometimes
numerous courses deep. These features are often
substantial and well defined, and they occasionally
have intact stained soil and charcoal chunks under
the stones and in the intervening soil. Of the total
number of hearths (n = 106), 68 are small, while 38
are large. Hearths are frequently in close proximity
to burned rock midden features.
The 29 midden features display significant morphological diversity. Four general classifications are
defined here to facilitate course-grained comparisons.
Mounded middens are very high-density clusters of
burned rock, where stones mostly dominate the
feature's matrix deposit. These middens are by definition numerous courses thick and mounded above
the s1mounding landform surface. Within this class
of midden feature are further morphological differences. These features are sometimes domed, round or
oval, displaying a significant degree of symmetry,
while at other times they are irregularly shaped with
stepped levels of mounding, some with a shallow
central depression on the crest of the dome. This last
characteristic is fairly common, where the central
depression is filled with dark, charcoal stained soil
and burned rock relatively lighter in density. The
overall morphology is mounded rather than ring-like.
These mounded middens range in size from 3 to 17 m
in diameter, and are mounded 30-100 cm above the
surrounding surfaces. Eighteen of these features were
recorded in the study area.
The second class of midden feature is termed a
ring midden, denoted for its characteristic ring
shape, mostly a circular, low mound of burned rock
where the central portion is mostly free of stones.
The single ring type midden located in the Gilliland
Canyon study area is a small mound, - 3 m in
diameter, mounded -30 cm above the surrounding
surface. Elsewhere in the Trans-Pecos, these
middens show significant morphological diversity.
The third class of midden feature is a crescent
midden, similar to the ring midden but displaying

94

Texas Archeological Society
Table 7. Gilliland Canyon Study Area, list of feature types associated with individual sites.
Site
number*

Small
hearths

Large
hearths

Burned rock
scatters

HMl

Mounded
middens

Crescent
middens

Incipient
middens

Ring
middens

1

HM2

2

1

HM3

2

1

1

HM4

1

8

2

HMS

4

3

HM6

2

HM7

9

HM8

4

HM9

9

HMlO

3

1

3

1

1

1
1

3

1

4
1

1

2

2
1

HMll

1

HM12
HM13
HM14

1
3

3

HM15
HM16

2
1

3

3

CD17

1

CD18

1

CD19
CD20

1

2

1

CD21
CD22

11

CD23

15

Totals

68

18

38

1

19

18

9

Total hearths=l06
Total middens=29

*Editor's Note: The site numbers shown are not trinomials from The University of Texas at Austin.
Sul Ross State University has not yet applied for those permanent designations.

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 95
only a portion of the perimeter mound of burned
rock. One of these features was recorded in the
Gilliland Canyon study area.
The fourth midden type is termed an incipient
midden which in most cases has very weak or ambiguous morphology. These features are differentiated from the other midden types by their relatively
smaller number and density of stones. These burned
rock features are rarely mounded and are often represented by a high density cluster of FCR on the ground
surface, where soil rather than stone dominates the
smTounding matrix. Often there is some degree of
charcoal staining in the surrounding soils. Nine of
these features were recorded in the study area.
The overall picture that emerges from archeological reconnaissance in the Gilliland Canyon study
area is considerably different from that of Perdiz
Creek. There is a relatively high number of more
robust subsistence related features in the Gilliland
Canyon unit. These are generally more intact and
contain higher amounts of burned rock and charcoal stained soil matrix. While midden features are
quite numerous in this area, hearth features also
occur in higher frequency, and a higher number of
these hearth features are of the large size class.
The formational process of middens in Gilliland
Canyon is still unclear. It has not yet been determined if these large features are the product of
repeated use over several seasons, several generations, or several thousands of years. The degree of
morphological diversity between these middens may
indicate different functions and likely different
methods of processing a variety of resources. Future investigations, with the aid of radiocarbon assays, might determine that morphological variability is a product of changes in food processing methods developed over time, i.e. temporal variability.
While it can be safely assumed that we know very
little concerning how these features relate to changing subsistence strategies, the unique archeological
signature left by the distributions of these features
is a good starting place, especially when compared
between different environments.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
BETWEEN STUDY AREAS

Subsistence Features and Hunter
Gatherer Behavior
The term "burned rock midden" used here encompasses a substantial variety of features.

Archeologically, they are viewed as high density
concentrations of thermally altered stone. They are
typically made up of a course fraction mat1ix, composed of cobbles or small boulders, as well as a fine
fraction matrix, with soil filling the voids between
course fraction elastics. The fine fraction matrix commonly includes varying amounts of carbon, chunks
of charcoal, and ash (Collins 1994). The content of
midden deposits includes artifacts, (chipped and
grounds tone, ceramics), micro and macro floral debris, and micro and macro faunal material.
A burned rock midden (BRM) is here differentiated from other cultural features in a qualitative
and subjective fashion. It is different from a burned
rock scatter in that a midden has more discrete
boundaries, has a much higher frequency and density of thermally altered stone, and has a distinctive
carbon stained fine fraction matrix. BRMs are discerned from stone hearths in their aerial extent,
density of matrix material, and the assumption that
a midden feature represents a higher intensity and
more industrious activity.
Collins (1994) provides a useful overview of
BRMs. A distinction is drawn between the general
class of BRMs, which include the sub-classes of
mounded BRM and annular BRM. The mounded
form is a distinct morphological feature found mostly
in Central Texas, but also in portions of the southern
Trans-Pecos region. Annular middens have their own
characteristic distribution, being much wider over
portions of western Texas, northern Mexico, and
portions of the lower Southwest. Prewitt (1981) notes
a correlation between archeological time frames specific to each midden type. The mounded forms have
been dated to as early as the Middle Archaic of
Texas from 5000-2500 B.P. The annular forms have
a later time distribution, between 2500 B.P. up to the
historic period. While these date ranges provide a
rough framework for the development of midden
features, later observations suggest that these dates
are somewhat in question (Black et al. 1997; Mallouf,
personal communication 2004), where it seems that
the annular forms of burned rock middens may date
between ca. A.D. 800-1200.
The function and acreational history of the
mounded variety of BRMs has been subject to a
high degree of speculation. Explanations include:
1) they are the refuse pile and secondary dump
locations for the byproducts created by other burned
rock features, such as the cleaning out of hearth
basins; 2) they are the result of multiple and overlapping hearth construction in a confined space, so

96

Texas Archeological Society

that burned rock naturally accumulates over time as
consecutive hearths are constructed in the same
location; 3) they are the product of a specific subsistence activity, such as the bulk processing of a
vegetable resource in earth ovens; 4) they are the
product of a specific activity performed repeatedly
in a single location, such as the repeated use of a
mounded BRM for the construction of successive
earth ovens. Morphological studies made through
excavations suggest that several of these explanations may be needed to explain the mounded BRM
phenomenon. In some cases, hearths are discernable
within the midden matrix, while in others slab lined
features are found to be the central sub-feature
within the midden. Creel (1994) notes the correspondence of the mounded BRM variety with contemporary distributions of oak in central Texas,
attributing this correspondence to the processing of
acorns as a major food source. There is a further
correspondence of these features with geologic exposure oflimestone on the Edward's Plateau, and it
is hypothesized that limestone aids the leaching of
tannin from acorns, making them palatable and digestible for humans. The western distribution of
the mounded middens overlaps with eastern distribution of annular middens (their relationship to sotol and agave sp. is discussed below). Prehistoric
distribution of oak, sotol, and agave in this area is
subject to some debate (Creel 1994), making a direct functional relationship between mounded
middens and oak tenuous.
Greer (1964) deals with variations on the annular midden or midden circle, and mescal pits. He
observes that, generally, different forms are found
associated with different geographic and geological
contexts. He distinguishes between midden circles,
which are entirely above ground, and mescal pits,
which have an above-ground burned rock deposit
associated with an excavated, subsurface pit or depression. Type I includes both large, steep walled
middens with pronounced central depressions, and
smaller, slightly mounded variety where the central
depression is filled with an ashy, charcoal stained
soil matrix.
Mescal pits, referred to as earth ovens, are
excavated depressions associated with burned rock
debris, the latter often forming the ring or crescent
midden described by Greer (1964) and others.
Ethnographic accounts describe the use of mescal
pits in the greater Southwest, western Texas, northern
Mexico, and southwestern Arizona (Castetter and
Opler 1936). This technology is applied today in

northern Mexico to prepare sotol bulbs for production
of alcoholic beverages (Niethammer 1974). Greer
(1964) notes a variety of mescal pits ranging from
shallow depressions to steep walled depressions that
are lined with stone slabs. Occasionally, these pits
are found in association with a heavy accumulation
of stone debris, and sometimes none at all.
Greer (1964) provides a useful overview of
ethnographic and ethnohistoric accounts of the use
of earth ovens and mescal pits. It is important to
note that many of these observations are from western Texas, adjoining northern Mexico, New Mexico,
and Arizona. Many groups using this technology,
including Mescalero Apache and Lipan Apache,
are known from ethnohistoric accounts to have inhabited the Trans-Pecos region. These features and
food preparation activities are mentioned in a
plethora of ethnographic accounts, a summary
(based on the information in Greer [ 1964]) of which
is provided below.
The principal resource processed in these accounts is sotol (sp) and maguey (agave). The hearts
of sotol and the tubers of the maguey plant are
gathered en mass by foraging parties that range far
afield, depending on the local abundance of the
resource. Hearts and tubers are brought to a central
location where the earth oven pit is excavated. The
pits, as noted earlier, range in size from a shallow
depression to a pit up to a meter deep and two
meters across. These larger pits undoubtedly involve a great deal of labor. A fire is kindled inside
the pit, then overlain by stones that are heated. This
process alone may take the greater part of a day.
Once the fire has burned down, the tubers and sotol
hearts are arranged in the pit, over the rocks, and
covered completely with soil. The oven is left to sit
and bake for up to two days. The roots and hearts
are then removed and are further processed in the
same location. To make drink, the sotol hearts are
pounded and pulverized in mortars while water is
added, and the liquid is subsequently drained from
the vegetable debris. For foodstuffs, hearts and roots
are ground and pulverized into a flour like substance from which cakes are made.
The overall picture of this process suggests a
very labor-intensive activity, which can take more
than three days to carry out. Furthermore, these
activities resemble a central place model involving:
logistical forays of variable length, performing
simple gathering activities, then congregating at a
central place where resources are processed. The
activities that produced midden features undoubt-

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 97
edly varied significantly in the expenditure of time
and energy.
When we consider midden features at Perdiz
Creek, it is apparent that they do not resemble any of
the distinct burned rock midden types described by
Greer (1964 ), as they lack the well defined morphological characteristics, such as mounding, central depressions, crescent, or ring shaped perimeter. Rather,
these features are incipient and not robust. Comparatively, they have a small volume of burned rock and
their morphology is generally weak. Based on background knowledge discussed in previous sections,
several possibilities exist concerning their formational history: 1) these features are the palimpsest
accretion of several hearths that have been deflated
and their matrices commingled; or, 2) midden deposits represent a mass processing event, necessitating energy and activities beyond the scope of typical
hearth construction, possibly the parching of a large
number of mesquite beans, succulent parts, tubers,
or a combination of several of these. The second
hypothesis will be used for comparative processes,
supported by the generally homogeneous matrix deposits and the lack of discrete hearth features found
within the Perdiz Creek midden deposits.
The majority of features recorded in Gilliland
Canyon, though variable, have the overall characteristics of the mounded burned rock middens
described by Greer. However, it is likely that further
investigations and excavations will indicate that
these features are center-focused middens, more
similar to annular or ring middens (Black et al.
1997:284). They have a considerably higher volume
of burned rock in comparison to the Perdiz Creek
features. The formational history behind these
middens is likewise not well understood. Features
may represent a single, very intensive processing
event or closely spaced seasonal events. It is also
possible that the extensive midden deposits are the
product of multi-generational use, massive
accretions of burned rock over an extended time
period. While further investigations are needed to
answer these questions, the single event or closely
spaced event possibility is assumed here, minimally
supported by the strong morphology and structural
integrity of many of these features.
In Perdiz Creek we see relatively few high
visibility features and all are incipient in nature.
When the number of acres surveyed is considered
(9,000 for Perdiz Creek and 6,000 for Gilliland
Canyon), the number of hearth and midden features
(n = 19 and n = 5 respectively) in Perdiz Creek is

significantly less than the number of like features
in Gilliland Canyon (n = 106 and n = 29 respectively). Similarly, the features in Gilliland Canyon
are more substantial and have considerably higher
visibility on the landscape. The middens and the
large hearths in Gilliland Canyon are extremely
suggestive of redundant land use and repeated, centrally focused activities. One plausible explanation
is that mobility patterns in Perdiz Creek, in contrast
to Gilliland Canyon, were of a nature that residential moves were more frequent and logistical forays
were shorter. It follows that in Gilliland Canyon,
residential occupations were longer in duration and
seasonally reoccurring, and logistical forays were
longer. Alternatively, it is possible that the incipient features in the Perdiz Creek study area represent specialized logistical localities, where resources
were processed, then transported to a central, more
long-term residential camp.
It may be useful to speculate that group sizes
differed between landscape units as well, where
foraging parties and residential units in the Perdiz
Creek landscape were smaller to facilitate more
frequent movements, and more dispersed in order
to make more efficient use of the more thinly distributed resources. Given the proximity of these
different landscape units in the Southern TransPecos, it is possible that groups engaging in different subsistence and mobility strategies in different
areas could at some point have been part of larger
sociocultural units. Undoubtedly, different landscapes played different roles in the subsistence strategies of prehistoric peoples in the region. Smaller
groups making use of the Perdiz Creek landscape
could have seasonally merged with one another, or
groups from other areas, to form larger units utilizing the Gilliland Canyon area at some point in their
movements within the region.
It is important to note that both the Perdiz Creek
and Gilliland Canyon study areas have been surface collected extensively in recent times. Collections from both these areas contain a wide variety
of artifacts, including projectile point styles indicating a deep history of land use and occupation.
While small dart points and Late Prehistoric arrow
points dominate the assemblages collected in systematic excavation and site recording, surface collections contain projectile point styles indicative of
late Paleoindian and Early Archaic occupations as
well. Furthermore, surface collections contain a
wide variety of chipped stone tools, including drills,
perforators, formalized scrapers, spoke shaves,

98

Texas Archeological Society

bifaces, a variety of groundstone, and ceramics.
While these artifacts are indicative of diverse activities, it is not possible to associate them directly
with any of the feature assemblages examined in
this investigation.
If we can accept the simplified expectations discussed in the introduction as a working hypothesis,
we can search for forms of supporting evidence,
ideally independent of the distribution of high visibility features in the two study areas. Elaborating on
the mobility hypothesis used here, how might other
aspects of archeological assemblages, on a landscape
level, be expected to vary according to different mobility patterns? This study hypothesizes that localities used for extended periods should produce evidence of a greater diversity of activities, including
tool maintenance, processing of different resources,
methods of storage, and construction of habitation
structures. It is assumed that persistent environmental properties would have conditioned human behavior in similar ways over time. This case may be true
of the Late Prehistoric period encompassed by radiocarbon dates recovered from the features in the Perdiz
Creek study area. Given these suppositions, we
should expect to see some degree of consistency in
human land use in the archeological record of the
Perdiz Creek landscape. Finally, working with the
proposed mobility hypothesis, we should expect that
Perdiz Creek material should reflect a smaller diversity of cumulative activities in comparison to landscapes with higher redundancy use.
Small scale and fine-grained information is likely
the most useful in this regard. Unfortunately, at a
landscape scale sample, this information is available
only for Perdiz Creek. Reviewing the inventory
analysis, it is apparent that there is a seemingly low
diversity of artifact classifications, a low percentage
of prepared platforms, and a small number and variety of groundstone implements. Feature types outside of midden deposits are likewise low in number
and display little variability (though this last observation is based on a purely subjective overall impression). While this appears to weakly support the
mobility hypothesis posited above, comparative
samples of subsurface artifact inventories would be
needed to make more meaningful observations.
A definitive explanation of this postulated behavioral diversity cannot be achieved at this stage,
but it is useful to speculate in order to formulate
future hypotheses. The Dobe !Kung example cited
above is a good modern example of intra-group behavioral diversity, especially with regards to mobil-

ity strategy (Lee 1984, Yellen 1977). There we see
the importance of several key-conditioning properties, namely the seasonal availability of resources.
We could expect that during times and at places
where resources are abundant, plentiful, and predictable, we could expect to find more redundant land
use and centrally focused activities. This is certainly
true of dry season !Kung camps where activities are
tethered to large water holes. A similar scenario could
be expected at wet season camps in the northern
!Kung district. While not as severely tethered to
water resources as during the dry season, mongongo
nut groves present a somewhat predictable and abundant resource, which likely restricts movements
(lower mobility) when compared to dry season foraging trips or hunting expeditions, when resources
are not nearly as abundant or predictable.
This scenario presents one with expectations
for the archeological record in the southern TransPecos. Very generally, we might expect repeated
and redundant land use in landscapes where resources are more predictable and more abundant.
Such a pattern would be a product of longer duration occupation. We could further expect these areas to have a higher diversity of activities and that
the cumulative deposition from these activities will
result in higher visibility archeological remains.
The feature assemblage in the Gilliland Canyon study area has been observed to be more diverse and of greater visibility than the Perdiz Creek
area. Likewise, there is a greater floral diversity in
the Glass Mountain landscape, along with a greater
number of vegetable resources. Succulents, namely
agave and sotol, are more abundant in the Glass
Mountains and are not seasonally dependant in their
harvesting for subsistence uses. In comparison, the
Perdiz Creek study area has a smaller variety of
major vegetable staples. If modern conditions are
analogous to prehistoric conditions, the principle
resources would likely have been mesquite beans
(which are seasonally dependant on their harvest
and yield) and game in the neighboring semidesert
grassland (which comprise highly mobile and less
predictable resources).
Another contributing factor to the dispersal and
concentration of subsistence related activities, particularly processing of resources, could be the "lay
of the land" or the physiographical setting of the
different study areas. Put simply, Gilliland Canyon,
because of its high topographical relief, offers a
smaller space for use in the processing of subsistence staples. Activities would need to be focused

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 99
in a smaller area, namely on the narrow and limited
alluvial benches at the base of the steep canyon
walls. In contrast, the Perdiz Creek topography is
marked by less topographic relief, facilitating more
diffuse activities.

CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER
RESEARCH
Comparing the archeological evidence between
Perdiz Creek and Gilliland Canyon study areas
shows differences in the nature and distribution of
high visibility subsistence related features. This is
most evident in the frequency and distribution of
hearth and midden features. The Perdiz Creek study
area is characterized by few and relatively unsubstantial hearth and midden features. Gilliland Canyon displays a greater frequency and morphological diversity of features, which are notably more
robust and substantial than the Perdiz Creek feature
assemblage. Prior knowledge based on observations of modern hunter-gatherer groups makes it
possible to hypothesize differences in mobility patterns practiced at these different locations. It is
postulated that the more robust features present in
Gilliland Canyon are the result of relatively longer
residential events and a higher redundancy of land
use and resource extraction. Subsistence activities
at Perdiz Creek appear to have been more dispersed,
where movements consisted of farther ranging logistical forays, pursuing less predictable resources.
Tentative explanations for the apparent behavioral
diversity are based on the nature and distiibutions
of resources in each of the different study areas,
principally the abundance, diversity, and predictability of key subsistence staples.
In order to better understand how the Perdiz
Creek and Gilliland Canyon feature assemblages relate to behavioral diversity across the Southern TransPecos region, greater chronometric control and further data sets are needed. These include standardized
data collection of feature assemblages at a larger,
landscape scale, as well as the documentation of
environmental attributes. Furthermore, much can
be learned concerning properties that condition behavioral diversity from modern hunter-gatherer
groups. While the present study begins to address
some issues of behavioral diversity in the Southern
Trans-Pecos, different scales of observation are
needed to improve our understanding of the region,
and human behavior in general.

Survey and test excavations in the Perdiz Creek
study area provided preliminary archeological data
for a landscape in the southern Trans-Pecos that
has not previously been addressed. To date, most
archeological investigations have taken place in the
southern sector, mainly along the Rio Grande corridor, in the La Junta district, in the mountains and
bajadas surrounding Big Bend National Park, in
Green Valley within the central volcanic mountain
ranges of the region, within the Glass Mountains
adjacent to the Stockton Plateau, as well as a smattering of small scale investigations at select localities across the region. Investigations at Perdiz Creek
add to our understanding of archeological variability between different geographical settings in the
Southern Trans-Pecos.
From the sample of features there emerges an
image of the landscape use of the Perdiz Creek
drainage, specifically within a Late Prehistoric
timeframe. Excavations at these locations suggest
that these features are not the product of long term,
repeated use, but rather, the result of single or relatively short-term activities. Clearly, further excavations are needed to make more substantive observations concerning the nature of these features. Small
block excavations could yield morphological data
useful in understanding the formational history of
burned rock and charcoal stained soil accumulations. Further studies may be able to discern morphological diversity between roughly contemporaneous features within the study area.
Further investigations could yield useful comparative information concerning artifact/tool diversity as a measure of the diversity of activities associated with the use of midden features. Excavations
outside of midden features may be more instructive
concerning types of activities associated with the
features themselves. While the sample size is small,
excavations at the Metate Site indicate that, between
the midden feature deposits and surrounding deposits (outside of these features), there are drastic differences in the frequency of artifacts and tools types.
A comparison of the Perdiz Creek and Gilliland
Canyon study areas has demonstrated significant
environmental and archeological variability, with
some important implications concerning behavioral
diversity within the southern Trans-Pecos region.
Considering the minimal amount of chronometric
control, this regional approach appears somewhat
a-temporal in nature. Overall, radiometric dates and
feature morphology address a very broad time period, namely the Late Prehistoric period. Further

100

Texas Archeological Society

questions should address in more detail the relationship between the two study areas.
While the southern Trans-Pecos region is ex pansive, it is likely that a single group could have
practiced a variety of mobility strategies in different environmental contexts. Still, the notion of a
"group" is ambiguous at best. Some similarities in
technological attributes (diagnostic artifacts and feature types) suggest some continuity of landscape
use at the level of the "phase." This is suggested by
the ubiquitous presence of Late Prehistoric Perdiz
and Toyah arrow points found across the region, as
well as a plethora of Late Archaic dart point types.
Common feature types found across the region also
suggest shared technologies. Certainly, a cultural
taxonomic unit such as a phase covers a broad time
period and subsumes smaller "group" units. It is
tempting to envision that a single group included
the Perdiz Creek area in their subsistence rounds,
then perhaps combined with other groups in the
Glass Mountains, changing their mobility strategy
to more efficiently exploit resources in a different
ecological setting.
This is a perplexing proposition. The !Kung
example demonstrates the fluidity of group constituency, from large dry season communities to
smaller family household units in wet season camps.
Even family units can be fluid as relationships
change and are redefined. Furthermore, these relationships seem nearly impossible to identify in the
archeological record.
For these reasons, it is proposed that future investigations include a larger scale approach, a landscape level approach, in investigating the relationships between different environmental settings. What
is needed most is some degree of chronological control in order to identify roughly contempcraneous
mobility strategies. This entails the acquisition of
numerous radiocarbon dates of different types of
features in contrasting landscape settings. In this way
questions would address not how a specific group
utilized different mobility strategies, but rather, what
roles different landscapes played in the overall subsistence system of populations in the Trans-Pecos
region. Thus, investigations could prosper from
macrb geographical inquiry, rather than relying
heavily on cultural taxonomic questions.
Examining the archeological evidence firsthand,
then attempting to explain the behavior that produced that evidence can be considered a kind of
bottom up approach to the explanation of prehistoric behavior. A number of factors make this a

complicated and potentially dubious approach. The
first is that taphonomic processes make archeological remains very difficult to explain and ascribe
behavioral causal agents to observed patterns. In
the case of this comparative analysis, it is not clear
specifically what kind of behavior and post depositional processes produced the features in question.
Second, there is a dangerous risk of circular reasoning where evidence is interpreted in order to support a premature conclusion. A top down approach
would ideally involve the construction of a model
based on prior knowledge, where one generates
expectations of human behavior given certain conditions, then testing how the archeological data supports or refutes those expectations. As this project
is based principally on the presentation of archeological material evidence, collected a priori, a bottom-up approach has served as the principle tool of
data interpretation.
It is tempting to envision the apparent mobility
patterns at Perdiz Creek and Gilliland Canyon superimposed onto a larger scale scheme of the southern Trans-Pecos region. When it becomes possible
to determine the ages of different features, it will be
exciting to compare different landscape patterns,
specifically to the area along the Rio Grande corridor in the vicinity of the La Junta District. In this
region we see different types of features not addressed in Perdiz Creek or Gilliland Canyon due to
their complete absence. These features include semisubterranean pit houses, jacal and adobe structural
remnants, and in the Cielo complex, stacked stone
structural remnants. Many of these features have
associated radiocarbon dates and a wealth of data
concerning associated tool assemblages, many of
which may elucidate changes in mobility strategies
in different landscape settings.
A top down approach in the southern TransPecos, particularly at a landscape scale, would
seek to investigate what environmental properties
may condition mobility strategies of populations
in different environmental contexts. While
variables such as effective temperature and primary
biomass appear to be useful properties in
understanding large scale, inter-group variability,
it is likely that different properties are needed to
explain smaller scale, intra-group behavioral
diversity at the scale of the landscape.
Profitable research could entail an in-depth
survey of ethnographic literature in an effort to
understand how modern intra-group mobility
changes in relation to different environmental

Cason-Prehistoric Archeological Investigations at Perdiz Creek 101
properties. This could be achieved by documenting environmental variables within areas known
ethnographically to host specific kinds of mobility
patterns. Useful properties might include topographic relief, plant community, the structure of
adjoining ecological communities, trophic structures, and proximity to different resources including information and social resources. Conditioning relationships at this scale are poorly understood, and any advances in this area would not
only advance understanding of the southern TransPecos, but human behavior in general.

REFERENCES CITED

Creel, D.
1994 Assessing the Relationship Between Burned Rock
Midden Distribution and Archaic Subsistence in
West Central Texas. In The Burned Rock Middens
of Texas: An Archaeological Symposium, edited by
T. Hester (editor), pp. 33-44. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory The University of Texas at
Austin.
Farina, A.
1996 Principles and Methods in Landscape Ecology.
Chapman & Hall, New York.
Foley, R.
1981 Off -Site Archaeology: an Alternative Approach for
the Short Sited. In Patterns of the Past: Essays in
Honor of David Clarke, edited by I. Hodder, G.
Isaac, and M. Hammond, pp.157-183. Cambridge
University Press.

Albritton, C., and K. Bryan
1939 Quaternary Stratigraphy of the Davis Mountains,
Trans-Pecos Texas. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 50: 1423-1474.

Forman, R. T.
1995 Land Mosaics: The Ecology of Landscapes and Regions. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Andrefsky, W.
1998 Lithics: Macroscopic Approaches to Analysis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Greer, J. W.
1964 A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits.
Southwestern Lore 3:41-55.

Binford, L. R.
1980 Willow Smoke and Dog's Tails. American Antiquity 45:4-20.

Hughes, J.
1991 Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the High
Plains. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
60: 1-55.

Black, S. L., L. Ellis, D. Creel, and G. Goode
1997 Hot Rock Cooking on the greater Edwards Plateau:
Four Burned Rock Midden Sites in West Central
Texas. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin, and Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Brown, D. E.
1982a Biotic Communities of the American SouthwestUnited States and Mexico. Desert Plants 4:1-342.
1982b Chihuahuan Desert Scrub: Southwestern USA,
Mexico, Vegetation. Desert Plants 4:169-79.
Butzer, K. W.
1980 Context in Archaeology: An Alternative Perspective. Journal of Field Archaeology 7(4):417-422.
Campbell, T. N.
1970 Archeological Survey of Big Bend National Park,
1966-1967. Submitted to the National Park Service.
Copy on file, Big Bend National Park.
Collins, M.
1994 Thoughts on Future Investigations of Burned Rock
Middens. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas:
An Archaeological Symposium, T. Hester (editor)
pp.1-24. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Johnson L.
1986 Plague of Phases: Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy
in Texas Archaeology. Bulletin of Texas Archeological Society 57:1-25.
1994

The L(fe and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk. Office
of the State Archeologist Report 38, Texas Department of Transportation and Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Kelley, J.C., T. N. Campbell, and D. J. Lehmer
1940 The association of Archaeological Materials with
Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region Of
Texas. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society
Publication 10, Alpine.
Kelley, J. C.
1952 The Historic Indian Pueblos of La Junta de Los
Rios. New Mexico Historical Review 28:21-51.
1957

The Livermore Focus: A Clarification. El Palacio
64:44-52.

1986

Jumano and Patarabueye, Relations at La Junta de
los Rios. Anthropological Papers No.77, Museum of
Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Kelly, R. L.
1995 The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter Gatherer Lifeways. Smithsonian Institution.

102

Texas Archeological Society

Kelley, J. Charles and Ellen Abbott Kelley
1990 Presidio, Texas (Presidio County) Water Improvement Project, an Archaeological and Archival Survey and Appraisal. Blue Mountain Consultants, Fort
Davis, Texas.
Lee, R.
1984 The Dobe !Kung!. Holt, Reinhart and Winston, New
York.
Levin, R.H.
1989 The Problem of Pattern and Scale in Ecology. Ecology 73(6):1943-1967.
Mallouf, Robert J.
1981 Observations Concerning Environmental and Cultural Interactions During the Terminal Pleistocene
and the Early Holocene in the Big Bend of Texas
and Adjoining Regions. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:121-146.
1985

A Synthesis of Eastern Trans Pecos Prehistory. Unpublished Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin.

1999

Comments on the Prehistory of Far Northeast Chihuahua, the La Junta District, and the Cielo Complex. The Journal of Big Bend Studies 11 :49-92.

n.d.

Archeological Test Excavations at an Endangered
Burned Rock Midden in the Glass Mountains of
Brewster County, Texas. Notes on file, Center for
Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University.

Niethammer, C.
1974 American Indian Food Lore. Collier Books, New
York.
Powell, A. M.
1998 Trees and Shrubs of Trans-Pecos Texas. Big Bend
Natural History Association, Big Bend National
Park Texas.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.
Sanchez, J.
1999

Archeological Reconnaissance of the Upper Fresno
Canyon Rim, Big Bend Ranch State Park, Texas.
Center for Big Bend Studies, Reports in Contract
Archeology 1. Sul Ross State University, Alpine.

Simpson B. B.
1977 Mesquite: Its Biology in Two Desert Scrub
Ecosytems. Dowden, Hutchison and Ross. Inc ..
Steward, J.
1938 Basin Plateau Aboriginal Sociopolitical Groups.
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 120. Washington, D.C ..
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook to Texas Archaeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.
Taylor, W.
1964 Tethered Nomadism and Water Territoriality: an
Hypothesis. Acts of the 35th International Congress
of Americanists, pp. 197-203. Mexico City.
1966

Archaic Cultures Adjacent to the Northeastern Frontiers of Mesoamerica. In the Handbook of Middle
American Indians: Archaeological Frontiers and
External Connections. Vol. 4, edited by G.E.
Ekholm, G.R Willey, pp.59-94. University of Texas
Press, Austin.

Yellen, J.E.
1976 Settlement Patterns Among the !Kung. In Kalahari
Hunter Gatherers, edited by R.B. Lee and I. De Vore.
Harvard University Press.
1977 Archaeological Approaches to the Present. Academic Press, New York.
Warnock, B. H.
1946 The Vegetation of the Glass Mountains. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Biology,
University of Texas, Austin.
1977

Wildflowers of the Davis Mountains and Marathon
Basin Texas. Sul Ross State University, Alpine.

Weir,F. A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Washington State University, Pullman.
Winterhalder, B., and E. Smith
1992 Evolutionary Ecology and Human Behavior. Hawthorn, N.Y.

Remembering Thomas N. Campbell
By Dee Ann Story

There is much to be remembered about Dr.
Thomas Nolan Campbell, who passed away on October 15, 2003 in Austin, at the august age of 95.
His daughter T. J. and numerous friends, many of
whom are former students, survive him. Tom had a
long, very productive career, distinguishing himself as teacher, archeologist, ethnohistorian, editor,
and administrator. He was a finely balanced man
who combined a critical eye, integrity, and high
level of scholarship with modesty, humor, and unselfish regard for the welfare of others.
Tom was born in Munday, Texas, and spent
most of the first two decades of his life in north
Texas. He stood out early, graduating in 1925 as
valedictorian of the town's one high school, an
honor he often humorously dismissed (like others
he was to receive) by pointing out that there had
been only 19 students in his graduating class. After
two years at McMurry College in Abilene, where
he had majored in English and French, Tom depaited for Austin to continue his English studies at
The University of Texas. It is here that he found
anthropology and an institution that would become
his professional home for over 50 years.
Tom's university studies were self-funded and
consequently often interrupted by the need to earn
money. He received a BA degree in anthropology
in 1930, just as the Great Depression deepened
and jobs became extremely difficult to find. Very
short of funds, he returned to north Texas to teach
English, typing, bookkeeping, and even mathematics in high school. His first job took him to Snyder,
Texas, where he was paid in scrip, then on to
Albany where his degree from a respected institution enabled him to earn real money. Finally solvent, Tom came back to UT in 1934 to work on a
master's degree in anthropology. Still he had to
support his studies with a sundry of jobs that included teaching assistant, WPA pot-mender, student
registrar, and guide to a special Texas Centennial
exhibit. He completed his thesis, entitled, "A Study

of Ornamentation in The Pottery of Prehistoric East
Texas, with Special Attention Given to Designs,"
in 1936. That same year he was awarded a tuition
scholarship to Harvard University. Again his studies were interrupted, first by the lingering Depression and the need to return to UT to teach, then by
World War II. Nonetheless, Tom received from
Harvard a second Masters Degree (1940), married
Austinite Lorene Gregg (June 1940), and, following four years (1942-1946) in the Air Corps, earned
a Harvard Ph.D. (1947). Based on mostly investigations carried out by others, his dissertation was a
scholarly synthesis of coastal archeology and its
possible relations to Mexico and the Lower Mississippi Valley. While some individual sections
(namely, reports on the Caplen, Johnson, Kent
Crane, and Live Oak Peninsula sites) were later
published, the bulk of the dissertation, including a
very useful review of previous research, unfortunately stayed buried at Harvard.
In 1947 Tom came back to Austin and the UT
anthropology department, where almost every
weekday until the mid- l 990s he could be found
working in his office. Except in later years when he
would take a brief nap after lunch, his door was
always open and the welcome warm for students,
colleagues, and friends. His routine did not greatly
change after his retirement and appointment as
Professor Emeritus in 1978. He was a workhorse in
the department, serving as chairman between 1947
and 1962 and director of Research in Anthropology
between 1947 and 1966, without relief from
teaching duties. He offered a variety of courses,
and supervised numerous graduate students. I
enjoyed and greatly benefited from the ones I took:
Texas Indians, North American Archeology,
Primitive Arts and Crafts, Advanced Physical
Anthropology, a summer field school (at the Kincaid
site), and two graduate seminars in archeology. He
was a commanding and stimulating presence in the
classroom. He was articulate, up-to-date, and quick

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

104

Texas Archeological Society

to add humor to his lectures. Not one to waste
paper, the blank pages of the unclaimed blue books
used in final exams became Tom's favorite writing
pads. He was also well known for using a pencil
until it was so short it could no longer be held.
In addition to his many faceted roles in the
department, Tom found time to be active in a number of professional organizations. He was a charter
member of the Society for American Archaeology
(1939) and the editor of its journal, American Antiquity (1962-66); served as an editorial council
member of the American Anthropological Association (1962-66); was secretary of the Anthropology
Section of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (1941); was vice president
(1952 and 1965) and journal editor (1953-56) for
the Texas Academy of Science; was elected a member of the Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologia
(1963) and the New York Academy of Sciences
(1964); and was made an honorary life member of
the Texas Academy of Science (1957).
Tom joined the Texas Archeological Society
in 1938 and became a fellow in 1962. He served
the Society as a Regional Vice President (194748, 1952-56), Editor (1958-61), Vice-President
(1963) and President (1964) and contributed a
number of articles to the Bulletin. Tom and the
late Curry Holden are the only persons to have
been a member of the Texas Archeological Society for 65 years. Interestingly, Tom had a history
course from Curry Holden at McMurry College.
Then, while working on his doctorate at UT, Curry
hired Tom who was an expert typist (and equally
proficient at shorthand) to type copies of selected
documents in the Texas State Archives. These
clerical skills, which served Tom well on many
occasions, were learned when as a high school
student he received a tuition scholarship to a newly
started Munday business college.
Author of numerous publications, Tom is best
known to many people as a researcher. Other than
work at Awatovi Pueblo in Arizona (1937) and
brief reconnaissances in northeast Mexico (1947)
and western Oklahoma (1975), his field archeological experiences were in Texas. As a student
he worked for J.E. Pearce at a number of central
Texas sites in the early to mid-1930s, then with
Walter Goldschmidt in east Texas (most notably at
the Keith Mound), and in 1938-39 with J. Charles
Kelley and Donald Lehmer on a Harvard funded
milestone study of the archeology of the Big Bend.
After returning to UT in 1947, he undertook several

excavations as field schools. These include the
Mustang Lake shell midden in Calhourn County, a
huge burned rock midden in central Texas (the
McClure Mound) in Williamson County, and the
Kincaid Shelter in Uvalde County. He would also
take students on day field trips, which on one
occasion caught Tom and the students separated
from their vehicle by rapidly raising waters of
Onion Creek near Austin. It was only after a
miserable night in a small rockshelter that they
were able to return to town. Tom's last field projects
were surveys he carried out for the National Park
Service, first (1963) of Padre Island National
Seashore, then (1966-67) of the Big Bend National
Park. Despite the variety of his fieldwork, Tom
never regarded himself as a field archeologist.
Indeed, he seemed more at home in an archive than
an excavation trench. I think this was because he
enjoyed the challenge of making sense out of the
often fragmentary and confusing historic documents. And, he never lost his fondness for literature.
While all of his archeological publications remain as solid, lasting contributions, it is the coast
ones that I believe will be the longest remembered.
Tom always insisted that he became interested in
this region simply because it was being ignored by
other professional archeologists active in Texas at
the time (the late 1940s). This belittles in a characteristic Campbell fashion the rigor and big picture
he brought to coastal archeology in clear and concise writing style. Using primarily the collections
and notes made by others, he greatly refined the
systematics and chronology of the central and lower
coastal zones as well as addressed such issues as
possible Mesoamerican and other cultural contacts
and the relationships between archeological complexes and Native American groups. Appropriately
the Texas Historical Commission in 1998 named
him Archeologist of the Year.
The wide range of his research interest and
publications is awe-inspiring. For example, topics
of his articles include petroglyphs as a measure of
slope stability (with Ben Howard and others, Science 1941); thoughts on the origin of burned rock
middens (with J. Charles Kelley, American Antiquity 1942); the pioneer tree-ring work of Jacob
Kuechler (Tree-Ring Bulletin, 1949); use of medicinal plants by the Choctaw, Chickasaw and Creek
Indians (Journal of the Washington Academy of
Sciences, 1951); origins of the mescal bean cult
(American Anthropologist 1958); the Choctaw
afterworld (Journal of American Folklore, 1959);

Story-Remembering T.N. Campbell
Comanche raiding trails in Trans-Pecos Texas (with
William Fields, West Texas Historical Association
Year Book, 1968); bibliographies of Texas archeology (UT Department of Anthropology, Archeology
Series 1952 and TAS Bulletin 1958); Indian baskets
(with Glen Evans, Texas Memorial Museum 1970);
paleo-Indian projectile points from the southern
plains (Panhandle-Plains Historical Review
1955)-and many, many more.
From early on, Tom found Native Americans
of special interest, and it is his ethnohistoric research that best speaks to the many successes of his
career. With dogged scholarship and the ability to
remember minute details, he has revolutionized our
thinking about 16th-18th century groups in what is
now northeastern Mexico and southern Texasand, by example, all surrounding areas. He demonstrated the complexities of the early times and
showed how name variants have greatly confused
group identifications. And, with the help of William Newcomb, he established that the Tonkawa
were not native to Texas, and with LeRoy Johnson,
Jr. he recognized a previously undetected Native
American language (Sanan). He especially took
pleasure and pride in working with daughter T.J.
who had majored in Spanish at UT and taught Spanish in the Austin public schools. He valued her
critique of his translations and writing as well as
their occasional collaboration. The enormity of his
ethnohistoric output is astonishing and merits publication as an annotated bibliography. He, for example,
contributed 558 entries pertaining to Indians in the
New Handbook of Texas History (1996).

105

His ethnohistoric legacy extends beyond
publications in the form of students he supervised
or influenced. These most notably are Maitin Salinas
whose master's thesis on the Indians of the Rio
Grande Delta has been published by the UT Press
(1990), and Mariah Wade whose dissertation on the
early Native Americans of the Edwards Plateau is
being published by UT Press in several parts (first
part came out in 2003; others not yet scheduled).
Both of these works set new standards in ethnohistory. In addition, there are many others-such as
Nancy Kenmotsu-who were more indirectly but
still greatly influenced by Tom through visits to his
office and reading his writings.
As I reflect on the over 50 years that had the
pleasure of knowing Tom, I most often recall him
as an exceptionally kind and decent person, an
individual who represented the best of what
academia has to offer. I will always be grateful for
his encouragement and what he taught me in and
out of the classroom. He was very modest and
would no doubt be taken aback by my accolades
no matter how justified they are. I remember him
coming into my office just after he had read the
dedication to him in volume 56 of the T AS Bulletin. He said it made him feel important but that he
would soon recover.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Information provided by T.J. Campbell and
Carolyn Spock is greatly appreciated.

People of La Salle's Last Expedition
Kathleen Gilmore

ABSTRACT
The people of La Salle's last expedition presumably were expecting to be settlers of a colony. Those
hired by La Salle and others at La Rochelle claimed to be skilled in certain trades. Those hiring them
presumably thought that those trades would be useful at a settlement. They were hired for two years. The
volunteers were mostly adventurers, some hoping to make a fortune. There were at least two families, but
probably no more than three or four unmarried women. However, today we know more about their death
than about the people themselves. This article brings together the limited detail about those people. Some
brief biographies are included.

BACKGROUND1
Four ships left La Rochelle, France in the summer of 1684 sailing between the port's massive twin
towers into the Atlantic Ocean and headed toward an
unknown land-the American Gulf Coast. These ships
were loaded with materials for a settlement. Passengers included both volunteers and hired workers.
This was the enterprise of Robert La Salle to claim
the drainage of the. Mississippi Rover for France.
The ships were the Francois, a supply ship
with. a small crew, loaded with food and supplies
for household use, the Aimable, another supply ship
with a larger crew and passengers, the Belle, La
Salle's personal ship, and the Joly, a warship and
an escort to the expedition. King Louis XIV put La
Salle in charge of the expedition including the ships.
However, in doing so, he divided the authority for
the expedition and thereby caused friction between
Captain Beaujeu of the Joly and La Salle.
As the expedition approached the island of
Santo Domingo, the Francois, had fallen behind
the other ships and the Spaniards captured it,
thus depriving the expedition of much needed
supplies. After a three-month stay on the southern
coast of Santo Domingo at Petit Goave, the
expedition headed out for the Gulf Coast of North
America to find the Mississippi River. Sailing
along the coast, and stopping at places for water
and to view the land, La Salle saw nothing
resembling the River.

Farther down the coast they came to an opening in the coast that La Salle decided was the mouth
of the Mississippi River. The opening was very
narrow and the Belle was sent through the passage
first, to be followed by the Aimable. A lot of the
material had been unloaded from the Aimable, to
lessen the ship's draft. However, as the Aimable
approached the inlet to sail through, it came too
close to the shore and was stranded on a sandbar.
Unloading began immediately using long boats that
were not in top-notch shape. The material was piled
on the coast and most of the people of the expedition disembarked there as well.
During a subsequent reconnaissance of the surrounding area, La Salle found what he considered
an ideal site for a settlement (Joutel 1962:58). This
site was about 4 miles up the drainage of Garcitas
Creek that flows into Matagorda Bay. A few houses
were begun, but food had to be rationed because of
the loss of the cargo ships, and life began in a
settled fashion. Fortunately, game was plentiful,
and the poor rations were partially supplemented
but still many of the settlers starved. Disease was
rampant partly because of the poor diet and poor
living conditions-many were dieing every day.
Adding to the colonist's misery was the wreck
of their last ship, the Belle, on the north shore of
present day Matagorda Peninsula. The few survivors
of the wrecked ship finally arrived at the settlement
after some months had passed. The situation was so
bad that La Salle was forced to attempt to get help.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

108

Texas Archeological Society

After La Salle had explored the country for
many miles around the settlement, he finally realized the colony was not at the mouth of the Mississippi River. Thus, he decided to go in search of it,
talcing seventeen people with him. Their shoes and
clothing were worn out so they were outfitted with
clothes of the other inhabitants, making shoes of
leather belts, and using the sails salvaged from the
wrecked ships for shirts. It was on this last trip that
La Salle was murdered by his own disgruntled and
angry men. The remaining men he had taken with
him argued and fought among themselves resulting
in most of them killing each other. From there,
Henri Joutel, Abbe Cavelier (La Salle's brother),
Colin Cavelier (La Salle's nephew), Marle, Father
Douay and Tessier, the pilot on the Belle left for
Canada, attempting to return to France. Henri Joutel,
Douay and the Caveliers arrived in France in October 1688. Based on this timing, help could have
reached the settlers by yuletide that year but it did
not come. After that, it was too late. The Karankawa
Indians, probably knowing that La Salle was dead,
made a surprise attack in late 1688, killing all but a
few children who were rescued by the Karankawa
women. In sum, the tradesmen and others who sailed
from La Rochelle with high hopes found their settlement did not meet their dreams. In their expedition,
these people not only lived on the edge, they were
forced over it.

INTRODUCTION
Standing on the bluff on the west side of
Garcitas Creek, Victoria County, Texas, one can
look toward the west and imagine what was happening there in 1685. Those walking around the
site of the French settlement today might be able to
see in their imaginations La Salle, Joutel and others. But who were these others? Who were these
people who sought a new life in this strange and
unknown place? They may have been courageous
people but their hopes and dreams of a new life and
riches must have begun to fade with the disasters
that befell the settlement. Certainly, their dreams
ended in the total devastation of the settlement and
death of most of the settlers.
To find out what might have motivated these
people to choose such a difficult enterprise, I wanted
to know as much as I could about the participants.
The following data are the results of this research. I
found it was impossible to learn something about

each individual and what I did learn was mostly
sketchy, without the kind of detail I would prefer.
Moreover, it is impossible to estimate accurately
the number of people who intended to colonize in
this new, strange world where the expedition had
landed. For example, it is not known how many
sailors of the stranded Aimable and other persons
went back to France with the Joly. Thus, I found it
impossible to estimate the number of expedition
personnel. I found it more feasible to estimate the
number who intended to become settlers of the
colony. To do so, I used a list of people compiled
by De Villiers (1931:161) with modifications that
are now known since he compiled the list, and the
list of those hired by La Salle (De Bry n.d.). Most
of the persons on the latter list were hired for a twoor three-year contract but one could suspect, since
these were trades people, they would also eventually become colonists. La Salle may have hired
other persons who are not known.
The modified list of De Villiers amounts to 51
(Table 1), plus the human remains of a boy found at
the site in 2002 (King Personal Communication),
and those hired by La Salle number 37 plus two
hired by others. Adding these together indicates 91
settlers for the colony. I have not counted ships
crews in this 91, although some of these crew members were forced to stay at the settlement because
of the shipwrecks. Some of them died en route and
others returned to France on the Joly. As a result,
these confusing data add to the problem of having
an accurate estimate of intended settlers. The combination of the two lists mentioned above is the one
I consider as the best estimate of those who intended to stay and colonize.
I recognize this number is somewhat arbitrary.
Very few sailors were counted because the sailors
were probably assigned to their ship. Yet, when the
Belle wrecked, some seamen were probably forced
to stay so a few were counted in the final numbers.
The pilots of the Belle were not counted except
Tessier. Consequently, the number I used includes
the persons who were likely to have intended to
settle at the colony on a permanent basis. Perhaps
more information on this can be found in the future.
THE PEOPLE
Those Hired By La Salle
The following section is an analysis of "Those
Hired By La Salle." This document, in the archives

Gilmore-People of La Salle's Last Expedition 109
Table 1. Modified List of the Members of La Salle's Expedition.
Barbier, Gabriel or "Minime" lieutenant
Barbier (Mme)
Barbier (baby)
Barthelemy, Pierre
Bremant, Eustache
Carpentier, Le, master carpenter
Cavelier (L'abbe Jean)
Cavelier de la Salle (The younger)
Chefdeville (Abbe de)
Crevel de Moranger, lieutenant
Davault or Daneau, hunter
Desloges, volunteer
Douay, Father Anastase
Dahaut, Pierre, merchant
Dumesnil, valet of La Salle
Fontaine, soldier
Gayen or Goyen, volunteer
Guichard, soldier
Grollet, Jacques, sailor
Hiems or Hiens (Hans or James)
Hurie or Hurier, volunteer
Joutel, Henri, volunteer
La Jeunesse, soldier
L' Archeveque, Jean, valet of Duhaut
La Villeperdix, volunteer

Leclerc
Leclerc, Father Maxime
Le Gros, Jaches, commissary
Liotot, Etienne, surgeon
Marle, Jean Pierre(?) volunteer
Memre, Father Zenobe, recollet
Meunier, Pierre, son of Sieur de Preville
Nika, Shawnee
Oris or Ory
Paris (Mlle)
Planterose, Jacques, volunteer
Ruter, sailor
Sablonniere, Edmond-Gaston de Ravenel La, lieutenant
Sage, valet of La Salle
Talon, Lucien, carpenter
Talon, Isabelle
Talon, Pierre
Talon, Jean-Baptiste
Talon, Lucien
Talon, Robert
Talon, Marie Madeleine
Talon, Marie Elisabeth
Tessier, second mate
Thibault, volunteer
Turpin, soldier

of La Rochelle, was located by John de Bry. His
article, entitled "Fleshing out the Cultural History
of la Belle and the La Salle Expedition (1683-1687)"
is unpublished. 2 The present article contains bar
charts of the ages and trades of the men and a
discussion of the group (Table 2). This is intended
to complement de Bry' s research.
The 39 people mentioned in de Bry's article
were tradesmen with skills that would benefit the
colony. These people were hired in La Rochelle but
they had a diversity of nationalities. Ten seamen
are listed which de Bry notes were probably hired
for the Belle since it was the only ship of the expedition whose crew was not filled. Noticeably lacking is a potter since most villages in this time period would have needed that kind of tradesmen.
Only one blacksmith is noted.
La Salle commented that some men were undisciplined and not accustomed to following orders. Perhaps these are the ones, so nearing starvation, that they ate the poisonous fruit, despite warn-

ings, resulting in half of them dieing, according to
La Salle (Margry 1886 Vol. 3:526). No further biographical information on these undisciplined men
is available at present.
Table 2 is a list of the names of the 39 men hired
by La Salle. Tables 3 and 4 are bar charts showing
the numbers by age and by trade, and Table 5 is a list
of the places of origin. The bar chart by age in Table
3 shows the majority was between 20 and 40. The
youngest was 18 and the oldest 65. It is surprising
that a man 65 years old was hired because 300 years
ago few lived to that age, and 65 was considered a
very old age. He must have been an exceptional
person, or thought he had no future, especially if he
was living in poverty. He died aboard the Belle
shortly after the landfall of the fleet in Texas.
The bar chart by trade in Table 4 shows there
were more carpenters and seaman than any other
occupation. Unfortunately, for the settlement, most
of these carpenters appear to have died or were lost
since Joutel (Margry 1886 Vol. 3:527) wrote that

110

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Those Hired by La Salle.

Last Name

First Name

Age

Home

Alay
Barteau
Belliard

Jean
Jean
Louis

19
30
48

Belliard
Bore
Carlot
Chaigneau

Francois
Jacques
Yvon
Pierre

22
32
19
26

Caen in Normandie
Croisic
Saint-Herie de Matha
in Saintonge
Rochefort
Sables d'Olonne
Audierne in Bretagne
La Rochelle

Chappeau
Couilland
Crugeon
Devenot

Anthoine
Pierre
Adrien
Jean

27
44
24
36

Di Bonardi
Dubos
Fougeron
Grenot
Jean

Pietro Pauollo
Jean
Alain
Abel
Francois

40
23
19
30
36

Jean
Joutard
La Treuille
Labaussair
Larantin
La Roche

Jacques
Jacques
Vivien
Jacques
Jacques
Pierre

65
20
21
22
22
22

Brouage
La Rochelle
La Rochelle
Mourinot of Saint-Cerninde-Reillac
Turin au Piemont, Italy
Dieppe in Normandy
Quimper-Corantin in Bretagne
Es nan des
Saint-Herie de Matha
in Saintonge
Moeze in Saintonge
Oleron
Saujon in Saintonge
Saint Jean d' Angely
Thouars
Saint-Crepin, Saintonge

Le Febvres
Lebeau (or Lereau?)
Lespinne
Leurand
Liotot
Marcollay
Morel

Noel
Rene
Jean
Jean
Etienne
Claude
Jean

25
26
18
30
30
19
32

Vire in Normandy
Moeze in Saintonge
Verteuil in Angoumois
Moeze in Saintonge
Provence
Mouron in Annis
Havre

Nicollas
Pelle
Philly (dit Bouillan)
Ruine
Savary
Tapin
Vallee
Varachieux
Vigneau
Vincent

Jacobus
Rene
Jean
Louis
Louis
Francois
Guillaume
Pierre
Julien
Pierre

33
34
29

Brandenbourg, Germany
Saumur
La Rochelle
Vemars, near Paris
Havre
Binet in Poitou
Podemer near Nantes
Tournay in Angoumois
Marans
Angouleme

25
20
30
35
25
50

Craft

seaman
carpenter/shipwright
carpenter/shipwright
miller
seaman
maker of barrels
& carts
carpenter/shipwright
carpenter/shipwright
seaman
farmhand
pelter & glover
seaman
seaman
seaman
carpenter/shipwright

seaman
seaman
baker
shoemaker
maker of barrels
& crates
mason & stone cutter
plowman
blacksmith
surgeon major
carpenter/shipwright
seaman/carpenter/
shipwright
cannoneer
toolmaker
pilot
surgeon
seaman
soldier on the Joly
miller
mason
gardner
master carpenter/
shipwright

Gilmore-People of La Salle's Last Expedition 111

Table 3. Those Hired by LaSalle by Age
20..--~~~~~~~~~~~~--.

>-

g

15+----

~ 10+---~ 5

C"

u.

0

Under 20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69
20

Table 4. Those Hired By LaSalle by Trade

10+-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

;:::...

gs+-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-111-~~~~~~

cu

g.6+-~~~~--~~~~~~~~~~---~~~~~~

Cl>

i...

u..

4+-~~~~--~~~~~~~~~~---~~~~~~

La Salle himself had to lay out the main building as
well as where the mortise.and tenons belonged because there were no master carpenters left and those
carpenters that were left were ignorant persons.
The list of Place of Origin (Table 5) shows most of
those hired were from La Rochelle and the surrounding Saintonge area with one from Germany
and one from Italy.
Biographical Sketches3
The following section contains brief biographical sketches of some of the volunteers of the La Salle
enterprise. They vary in length and detail since data
were not equally available on all these persons.

Henri Joutel
Henri Joutel was born in Rouen, France in
1659 (Allaire 2004a). 4 Weddle (1996 Vol. 3:1008)
writes that before joining the La Salle expedition,

he had been in service of the army for sixteen or
seventeen years. He was a friend of the Cavelier
family and joined the La Salle expedition in 1684.
He was a big man. When the Indians from the
Caddoan settlement on the Red River met his small
party headed to Canada, in a welcoming gesture,
they carried him to the settlement. It took two
Caddo to carry Joutel. Even then his legs were
still touching the ground. He was carrying at the
time, a large cooking pot, a brace of pistols, a
shotgun, and trade materials for the Indians. In his
journal of the entire expedition, he never once
recorded that he was ill nor did he complain of the
physical exertion. Therefore, Joutel was large and
apparently healthy.
Joutel was among the survivors that eventually
returned to Canada after the murder of La Salle. He
arrived in France in October of 1688. His return
was in time to ask for help for the beleaguered
colony, but it did not happen. This was a sad blow
to Joutel since he could not save his friends.

112

Texas Archeological Society

He married Madeline Cailou on November 29,
1708. He was asked to return to America with the
expedition of Iberville. He refused, but his journal
of his experiences in the Ill-fated colony and his
journey north toward Canada was used by the expedition (Weddle 1996 Vol. 3:1008).

Ravenel de Sablonniere
This man, age 23 or 24, was on of two sons,
either Edmond-Gaston de Ravenel, or GastonTable 5. Those Hired by La Salle
by Place of Origin.
Place of Origin
Angouleme
Audierne in Bretagne
Binet in Poitou
Brandenboug, Germany
Brouage
Caen in Nomandie
Croisic
Dieppe in Normandy
Esnandes
Havre
La Rochelle
Mar ans
Moeze in Saintonge
Mourinot of Saint Cerin-de-Reillac
Mouron in Aunis
Oleron
Podemer near Nantes
Provence
Quimper-Corantin in Bretagne
Rochefort
Sables d'Olonne
Saint Jean d' Angely
Saint-Crepin in Saintonge
Saint-Herie de Matha in Saintonge
Saugon in Saintonge
Saumur
Thouars
Turin au Piemont, Italy
Vemars near Paris
Verteuil in Angoumois
Vire in Normandy

Frequency
I
1
1
1
1
1

2
4
1

3
1

1

1

2
1

1

1
1

Hierosme de Ravenel, born of Gaston-Jean-Baptiste
de Ravenel, a wealthy nobleman. The two boys
were born in 1660 and 1661. The fact that Joutel
called the Ravenel on the expedition "Marquis"
makes it possible that he was the older of the two
sons, or he may have been the younger and his
older brother deceased. The son with La Salle's
expedition (hereafter called Sablonniere) was
granted a lieutenant's commission in Tonti's group
before leaving France with La Salle in 1684. He
signed, with others, the report of the wreckage of
the Aimable. The original of this document has no
comma after the "Ravenel" making it evident that
Ravenel is part of the name Ravenel de Sablonniere
(Allaire 2004a).
Sablonniere apparently had a very good time in
Petit Goave where the expedition stayed for three
months. He gambled away most of his goods and
contracted a disease (from a woman, doubtless) which
later caused him to walk with such difficulty that he
asked to be relieved of his duties as lieutenant so he
could spend his time with the servants and children
at the settlement. La Salle felt he had no choice but
to relieve his of his duties because he was unable to
perform them (Margry 1886 Vol. 3:544).
Sablonniere wanted to marry one of the servant
girls, but was denied permission by both Joutel and
La Salle. Joutel noted the girl was called "Paris"
because she was from Paris. Sablonniere was killed
by the Karankawas with the others at the settlement
in late 1688.
During archeological excavations at the Fort
St. Louis site, human remains were found near the
largest building built by the French (Personal Observation 2003). These were buried by Alonso De
Leon when he came to the fort in 1689 (Bolton
1963:398-399). The remains are of a boy, a female and a male. The age and height of the male
were difficult to determine because the post-cranial skeleton was incomplete. However, the age
range is between early 20s and 40, and the height
was within a medium range of 5'6" more or less.
The female remains were of a youngish woman.
No other information is available about her. The
remains of the boy were aged about I 0 or younger.
The bones of the male were markedly diseased
with syphilis (King personal communication
2004). Since Sablonniere was also diseased it is
possible these remains are his. Furthermore, one
could suppose, on a romantic level, the female
bones might have been those of Paris, the girl he
wanted to marry.

Gilmore-People of La Salle's Last Expedition 113
Jaques Grollet
Jaques Grollet (variously spelled) was born in
La Rochelle, France. He stated to De Leon, when
captured in 1689, that he was about 28-30 years old
(Canedo 1968:110). He became a companion of
Jean L' Archeveque during their stay with the Cenis
(Caddos) after Joutel and companions had headed
for Canada. While with the Cenis, both Jean and
Jaques were tattooed on their faces. After capture
by the Spaniards, he and L' Archeveque spent some
time in prison in Spain but the two were finally sent
back to Mexico to become members, along with
Pierre Meunier, another member of La Salle's expedition, for colonization of New Mexico when
Vargas, Spanish Governor of New Mexico, made
his second entrada in 1693, after the Pueblo Revolt.
Grollet married Elena Gallegos of Bernalillo,
New Mexico in 1699 (Esquibel and Colligan
2001:67). They had one son named Antonio Gurule.
This son and his wife, Antonia Quintana had nine
children (Sanchez 2004: 1,25). At present, descendants are scattered over western and southern United
States with at least one in the government in Washington, D.C. (Gurule Personal Communication 2002).

Jean L'Archeveque
Jean L' Archeveque (Gilmore 1998:35) was
born in Bayonne, France in 1672, the son of Claude
L' Archeveque and Maria d' Armana. Although he
was born in Bayonne, he was not Basque (West
Personal Communication 2001). In the Paris
Notarial Records of Rouen for 1684, there is an
inventory after death of Etienne L' Archeveque. His
family came from Normandy. Since L' Archeveque
is not an ordinary name, even in France, this person
may have been a relative of Claude, possibly indicating that as a merchant Claude had moved to
Bayonne from the Normandy area.
Joutel noted that L' Archeveque was "taken" in
Petite Goave but this is doubtful because in his
declaration, and later, in his marriage bans, he said
he had come with La Salle and four ships. Also, he
said he came with primo hijo. He likely meant La
Salle but he could have meant Pierre Duhaut who
was Jean's employer. Duhaut and his brother were
from Bayonne (Canedo 1968:107). Jean went on
the last journey of La Salle headed toward Canada
and France. He took part in the ambush that resulted in the murder of La Salle. He seemed to have
regretted the murder of La Salle because he rushed

to tell Joutel of the "terrible event" and warned
Joutel not to resist the men of the mutiny (Margry
1886 Vol. 3:21). At the time of La Salle's murder,
L' Archeveque was 15 years old but seemed considerably older, and the foregoing action indicates he
felt considerable responsibility. The fact that Jean
attributed the murder of La Salle to Liotot instead
of to Duhaut was probably because he was employed by Duhaut and was likely his kinsman. It
could be he was protecting his relative along with
protecting himself.
When the group headed by Joutel and the Abbe
Cavelier, La Salle's brother, started on the journey
to Canada and hopefully on to France, L' Archeveque pleaded sickness and remained with the Cenis
Indians where he lived the life of the Indians for
two years. He allowed himself to be tattooed on his
face. Since Grollet had decided to stay behind also,
he and Jean had become friends.
In 1689, the Jumano Indians, making their annual trading trip in the spring to the Cenis, told the
Cenis of an attack on Ft. St. Louis (Kelley
1952:227). Jean and Grollet decided to visit the
settlement along with Indian companions. They
found the settlement devastated and reported finding 14 bodies, which they buried. They returned to
the Cenis village feeling sad and homesick for any
European contact. Hearing of Spaniards in the area,
L' Archeveque tried to contact them unsuccessfully.
Meanwhile, De Leon had found the French village
in its sad condition. He traveled on to the Cenis
village and there captured both L' Archeveque and
Grollet (Gilmore 1998:42-43).
Jean, along with Grollet and Meunier, were
attached as exiles in the Vargas reentry of New
Mexico in 1693, after the Pueblo Rebellion (Canedo
1968: 110). L' Archeveque and Meunier were to be
soldiers at the fort at Santa Fe, whereas Grollet,
being a seaman, was not attached to the presidio
and instead settled in Bernalillo.
In 1697, Jean married Antonia Gutierrez whom
he had met on the journey to Santa Fe (L' Archeveque 1697). At the muster before entering New
Mexico, she was described as being 16 years of
age, a "tall, broad faced, brown-haired, brown-eyed"
young woman (Twitchell 1914). She had been widowed at the beginning of the trip and doubtless was
befriended by 20 year-old Jean, eventually falling
in love. They had two children. Antonia died about
1700 (Gilmore 1998:35-46).
Jean accompanied the Villasur expedition into
the plains in 1720. There was information that the

114

Texas Archeological Society

Pawnees, with a group of Frenchmen, were ready
to wage war. Unfortunately, the Indians attacked
the New Mexico troops in a surprise move killing
all but a few of the expedition. The dead included
Villasur and L' Archeveque. 5
Throughout his time at the French settlement
Jean seemed to be older than his years would indicate. He was large for his age and was treated as an
adult during most of this time. He also did not
complain of sickness as much as several others had
often done. Perhaps he was in better health. He was
well educated. In 1698 when the French were interviewing the Talon brothers, they were asked about
L' Archeveque and Grollet. Pierre Talon remarked
that "they were grown men who were intelligent,
especially L' Archeveque. They [the Spaniards]
feared that they would bring back to France too
much knowledge of this particular country" (Weddle
1987:247). His handwriting on the note he sent to
the Spaniards was well executed. He must have
sickened at the destruction at the French settlement
and became determined to leave, return to his own
kind regardless of their nationality.
Becoming a success in Santa Fe attests to his
intelligence and assertiveness. He also had a strong
libido. After Antonia died he fathered several "natural," or born out of wedlock children whom he
raised in his household. L' Archeveque has many
descendants who are scattered over the western and
southern United States (West personal communication 2001). 6
Pierre Meunier
Pierre Meunier was born in Paris about 1670.
He never stated his age precisely. His father was
Louis Meunier, Sieur de Preville, treasurer to Louis
XIV, and his mother was Isabel German. It is likely
La Salle was friendly with Meunier' s parents because, according to Pierre, La Salle told Pierre's
father he would treat him like his own son during
the coming adventure.
Apparently, Meunier was on the Belle when a
mutinous group decided to cut a cable. When La
Salle later learned of the plot, he had four put in
chains, Meunier one of them (Margry 1886 vol.
3:530). After the tragic wrecking of the Belle, and
the misfortunes of those on it, the survivors were
finally able to return to the settlement.
Meunier accompanied the group that would
attempt to go to Canada. This group, consisting
of 17 persons from the settlement with La Salle,

was on the way to the Cenis village when
Moranget (La Salle's nephew), Saget (La Salle's
servant), and Nika (a Shawnee Indian) were
killed one night. The next day when La Salle
came to the site Pierre Duhaut shot him in the
head. Meunier was a witness to La Salle's murder and he reported in his declaration that Duhaut
was the actual murderer (Meunier in Foster
1998:Apendix A).
Some authors state that Meunier was left with
the Cenis with Pierre Talon to learn the language.
But, he could have learned the language at a later
date when he was with the Indians for two years. It
was during this time also that Meunier visited the
Cadohadacho village on the Red River with his Indian friends from the Cenis village (Foster l 998:Appendix A). He had allowed himself to be tattooed to
show his friendly intentions toward the Indians.
He and Pierre Talon had become companions and were captured together by De Leon in
1690. When they were found they were apprehensive of what lay ahead. They both gave depositions to De Leon and were taken to Mexico
City, with Francisco Martinez, an interpreter.
There, Meunier gave another deposition, which
seemed to imply that he had been on some exploration trips with La Salle. His observations are
rather well stated with some parts in detail although others were sketchily told.
He accompanied the Teran expedition in 1691
into present day Texas and visited the Cadohadacho
village on the Red River (Teran 1932:60). His statement that he had visited this village with the Cenis
may be why he was left behind to accompany the
expedition when others (Grollet and L' Archeveque)
were went to Spain, as he would have known the
area as well as the language.
Later he met again L' Archeveque and Grollet,
all three being sent in exile to New Mexico with a
group of colonists in 1693 (Twitchell 1914). He
and L' Archeveque were to become soldiers at the
presidio at Santa Fe.
In late December 1699, Pierre married Lucia
Madrid, daughter of Pedro Madrid, a soldier at
the presidio of El Paso del Norte (Meunier 1699).
Meunier may have been transferred to that
presidio. We have no further information about
the couple except one instance in 1700 when
Meunier signed over his power of attorney, as
did others, so the soldiers might get paid
(Esquibel and Colligan 2001 :69). It is a mysterious disappearance for both Pierre and Lucia.

Gilmore-People of La Salle's Last Expedition 115
Searches of the literature have revealed nothing.
However, a group of documents from the church
of Guadalupe now in Juarez, Mexico across the
river from El Paso, may contain information
about them. Some of the documents of this period were placed in an unlocked rectory where
they were available to whomever wanted them.
This story is told by Bud Newman, 1983 "The
Case of the Missing Documents." At present,
some of the documents are being recovered.
It is possible the couple could have returned to
France? It seems unlikely since the three Frenchmen, L' Archeveque, Grollet and Meunier had been
exiled from Europe by the Spanish government.

Colin Crevel De Moranget
Colin Crevel de Moranget, a Lieutenant, was
also La Salle's nephew, the son of La Salle's sister
who married a Crevel. Along with Barbier he was
listed on Tonti's list of those who traveled down
the Mississippi River with La Salle in 1682 (Margry
1888 vol. 1:634). Tonti did not use the "Moranget"
attached to his name, referring to him as simply
"Crevel." Not much is known about him. He was in
the forefront of those La Salle depended on, although Moranget did not always precisely follow
orders. He was on the journey to go to Canada and
France. When the travelers had proceeded not too
far from the Cenis, a hunting group of the travelers
killed some game. La Salle sent Moranget to look
for this group and when he found them, he treated
the men in the group harshly. Resentment had been
building against Moranget and La Salle for some
time. That night Liotot, the surgeon, killed Moranget
and also La Salle's hunter Nika and his valet, Saget.
Moranget did not die instantly but sat up and Marle,
a member of the hunting group, was forced by the
others to shoot him. Presumably, these bodies were
left unburied.

When the depleted group left the Cenis for Canada
and had stopped near the Cadohadacho village, another member of the group (Marle) went for a swim
in the river. Colin Cavelier saw that Marle was
drowning but he was too late to save him.
Colin Cavelier reached France with his cousin
Abbe Cavelier and Joutel. He became a soldier but
died several years afterward (Foster 1998:50n).

Marle
This man's first name was probably Jean-Pierre
according to one of his present day family descendents in La Brie, France (J.P. Marle Personal Communication, 1988). He accompanied the group with
Joutel on the way to Canada. He was present at the
murder of La Salle. After Liotot had attacked
Moranget, Moranget sat up and the group forced
Marle to end Morang et' s life. On the way to Canada
Joutel described Marle as one of the "prime" members of the group (Joutel 1962: 135). Having arrived
on the Red River near the Cadohadacho village,
Marle decided to go for a swim, but unfortunately
he drowned before he could be rescued. He was
buried in a small mound behind the chief's cabin.
The chief's wife placed a basket of corn on the
grave every day.
His remains were found in 1936 by the archeologist, A.T. Jackson (Jackson 1932). At the time
the remains were not considered to be the remains
of a non-Indian, but circumstantial evidence and
skeletal analysis now support the fact that these are
the bones of Jean-Pierre Marle (Gilmore 1996:303).
These bones also indicate he had strong musculature and his hands showed hard work. The remains
indicate a man of about 40 plus years old (King
1996:320). Three musket balls lay in his chest cavity. Of course, it is not known when these shots
were acquired. His present day relatives could supply no information about his life in France prior to
this enterprise.

Colin Cavelier
Colin Cavelier was another nephew of La Salle,
a son of La Salle's brother. Some authors place his
age about 10 whereas others as older, perhaps 17
when the group left on the tiip to Canada and thence
to France. Joutel in some places called him the
young Cavelier to distinguish him from La Salle
and the Abbe Jean Cavelier (Joutel 1962). La Salle
may have taken him on many of his explorations so
he must have been old enough to be self-sufficient.

Anastase Douay
Anastase Douay, a recollet friar, was born,
according to Hennepin (in Weddle 2001: 121) in
Quesnoy, France. He accompanied the La Salle
expedition expecting to become a missionary to the
natives. He witnessed the murder of La Salle and,
after returning to France, wrote about it in an
account of his experiences. He must have forgotten
the last circumstance of La Salle's death, or

116

Texas Archeological Society

imagined so strongly what he might have done, that
he believed it. His account told of the shooting of
La Salle while he stood by, shaking, thinking he
would be the next to be shot. He told of burying La
Salle and erecting a cross over his grave (Delanglez
1938). Others told of stripping La Salle of his
clothes and leaving his body to be ravaged by wild
animals. This latter circumstance is supported by
the fact that later, after the spoils of the murders
were distributed, one person had appropriated La
Salle's jacket and another had his gold coins.
Father Douay accompanied Joutel and the Abbe
Cavelier with a small group headed for Canada and
France, where they arrived in October 1688. He,
along with Pierre and Jean-Baptiste Talon, returned
with Iberville to establish a settlement on the Gulf
Coast now known as Mobile. Further information
about Douay is not known.

Tanneguy Le Gallois De Beaujeu
Tanneguy Le Gallois de Beaujeu was captain
of the warship Joly that escorted La Salle on his
expedition to establish a colony in the "New World."
He was appointed captain to replace Sieur Pingault
(de Bry n.d.:3) shortly before the expedition set
sail. The King placed La Salle in command of the
expedition including its ships, putting Beaujeu under La Salle's command. This rankled Beaujeu because he felt he knew more about sailing that La
Salle, thus causing conflict between the two men
(de Bry n.d.:4). Although this conflict seems to
make it improbable that Beaujeu would place his
pewter plates aboard the Belle. Such plates, however, were recovered aboard the ship in archeological excavations in 1996 and contain a coat of arms
similar to those of the families of Le Gallois de
Beaujeu and Edouard Ier de Beaujeu (Allaire
2004b )7 indicating that the plates did belong to
Beaujeu. It is a mystery how and why his plates had
been placed on the Belle.
The warship Joly commanded by Beaujeu sailed
for France with Aigron, the captain of the Aimable,
Minet the engineer and Esmanville, a priest, plus
and unknown number of sailors from the Aimable
in March 1685 (Joutel 1962:57).

Gabriel Barbier
The following was written by Stephanie Olech
and Gabriel Sheridan (Olech and Sheridan 2002),
descendants of Barbier' s family:

Gabriel Le Minime Barbier was
baptized on September 6, 1656 at Notre
Dane de Montreal in Canada. He was
probably born the day before. His father
was Gilbert Barbier dit Le Minime. His
mother was Catherine De La Vaux. His
parents were married at Notre Dame de
Montreal in 1650. They were both from
Nevers in Northern France. Gilbert
Barbier had arrived in Hochelaga (later
to become Ville Marie, then Montreal) in
1642 with the original 12 colonists to
found the future city. His father was a
Master Carpenter and was in charge of
building all the fortifications and buildings of the new city. They had six children, three boys and three girls ... Most
descendants are from Adrienne Barbier
Trudeau. Later, Gilbert Barbier' s father
became the attorney for Charles Le
Moyne who was the father of Iberville
and Bienville who followed through with
La Salle's plans for French colonies on
the Gulf Coast.
Gabriel, as a voyageur, traveled by canoe with La Salle in 1681-1682 on the
complete discovery of the Mississippi all
the way to the Gulf of Mexico and back
to Montreal. He was with him for the
founding and naming of what is now
Louisiana. In 1683 he accompanied La
Salle back to France to the court of Louis
XIV at the Louvre to convince the king,
as a native born Canadian, [to provide
testimony] of the truth of La Salle's discovery and to lobby for founding a new
colony on the lower Mississippi. In 1684
he left with La Salle, having been made a
Lieutenant, with the four ships that
landed in present day Texas and founded
Fort St. Louis there. He married one of
the few women who also landed in Texas
and thus [his] became the first recorded
marriage of Europeans in what is now
the state of Texas. He called his wife
"Princess" and La Salle named the Princess River after her. Gabriel was left in
charge of the fort while La Salle left with
others to try to get help for the fort. The
reason he was left in charge of women,
his child, the priests and others was that
he had injure his foot on a splinter, which
[would have] slowed down the rest. They
were all massacred by the Karankawa

Gilmore-People of La Salle's Last Expedition 117
Indians during Christmas time in 1688
after La Salle had been assassinated by
other Frenchmen (from a journal of Jou tel
1684-1687).
Gabriel Sheridan, a family descendant, describes the Barbier men as having brown, curly hair
and brown eyes, in height about no more that 5'8".
On the map (Joutel 1962 [1713] frontispiece)
annotated by Joutel there are two branches on
present day Lavaca River. On this map a key has
the following notation:
E. Riviere aux Cannes, ainsi apellie
depuis son embouchure jusqu 'a la
fourche qui la separe en 2-bras don't
celui qui est a droit apeller Mignone,
acause des amours d'un nomme le sr
Barbier Lieutenant, et se separe encore
au dessus en trios autres; celui qui est a
gauche de la premiere fourche s'apelle
Princess acause de la meme raison.
Translation: "River of the Cannes, so
called from the mouth up to the branch
where it separates into 2 branches, which
is cleverly ca:lled R. "Mignone," because
of the loves of Sieur Barbier, Lieutenant,
and it is separated again into three others;
The branch that is at the left of the first
branch is named "Princess" for the same
reason."

These rivers, according to Weddle (1996:36)
are present day Lavaca and Navidad rivers. La Salle,
on his final journey, upon crossing these rivers in
1687, named them "Mignone," meaning "darling"
and "Princess," Barbier's lover's name, in honor of
his friendship of Lt. Barbier.

Father Zenobia Membre
Father Zenobia Membre was born in Baupaume
in the French Netherlands. He entered the monastery in Artois in the province of Saint-Antoine.
With his cousin Fr. Chretien Le Clercq, he was sent
to Canada where he arrived in 1675. Membre accompanied La Salle to Niagra, Mackinac, and Fort
Crevecoeur, the latter in Illinois. Father Zenobia
went with La Salle's excursion down the Mississippi River and back in 1682.
After this, he went with La Salle when La Salle
presented his project of a colony in America to enhance trade and occupy all the lands drained by the

Mississippi. Membre and his cousin, Fr. Le Clerq,
accompanied La Salle's fleet to establish this colony
and missions for the Indians on the Gulf shores. He
was aboard the wreck of the Aimable, barely escaping being drowned. He did not accompany La Salle
and his party when they left the settlement on January 7, 1687 to obtain help for the beleaguered colony,
possibly because sometime before he had been injured by a wounded buffalo. He died with the others
remaining at the settlement near the Christmas season of 1688. He was a well-liked and effective priest
(Cox 1968 [1905]:106 fn.).

Talon Family
The Talon family was one of two families to
accompany the La Salle expedition to the Gulf. The
father was Lucien (born ca. 1643), a native of
Beauvais, and the mother, Isabelle Planteau Talon
(born ca. 1646), a native of Paris (Weddle 1996
Vol. 6: 197). They were probably married in Canada.
They accompanied La Salle's expedition with six
children; Marie-Elizabeth (born 1672) the oldest,
who died probably during the winter of 1685-1686
at the settlement; Marie-Madeleine (born 1673);
Pierre (born 1676); Jean-Baptiste (born 1679);
Lucien, born probably during the voyage from
Canada to France; and Robert (born 1684) during
the voyage to the Gulf. Another boy Eustace Breman
was with the family and was probably a relative.
Lucien the father was a master carpenter. He was
lost on one of La Salle's first exploring trips from
the settlement.
At the time of the massacre late in 1688, Pierre
was with the Indians somewhere in present day east
Texas. The other Talon children and Eustace
Breman were saved from the massacre by the
Karankawa women. Jean-Baptiste's description of
the massacre (Weddle 1987:209) when interviewed
by the Spaniards is the only first hand description
known. Why Eustace Breman was not interviewed
is not known, or Marie-Madeleine for that matter,
but an interview with her was probably because she
was a female.
When at the Karankawa village a group of Indian males gathered around in a bunch seemingly
to molest Marie-Madeleine. The Talon brothers
(Robert, age 4, Lucien, age c. 6, and Jean-Baptiste,
age c. 9) and Eustace Breman formulated a plan to
keep this from happening. Eustace Breman was the
spokesman who confronted the Indians saying if
they harmed Mari-Madeleine, the God of the

118

Texas Archeological Society

Frenchmen would shower His wrath upon them.
This act saved her and the Indians departed.
On one of La Salle's earlier trips, Pierre Talon
had been left with the Cenis Indians to learn their
language. He was taken from the Cenis along with
Pierre Meunier by Alonso De Leon in 1690. The
other Talon children were taken from the Karankawa Indians in 1690 and were sent to Mexico City
where they lived with the Viceroy's family. MarieMadeleine and Robert were sent from Mexico to
Spain with the Viceroy upon his retirement. Pierre,
Jean-Baptiste and Lucien were put into military
service and assigned to a ship, the Santo Cristo,
that was captured by the French about 1698. The
three boys wanted to be taken to Spain but were
sent to France instead. They were again enrolled in
military service, this time for France (Weddle 1997,
Vol.6:197). However, Lucien, being too young for
French military service, was sent as a servant to
Oleron. Nothing more is known about Lucien.
Jean-Baptiste, who gave the only eye witness
account of the massacre at Fort St. Louis, and Pierre,
who was present at the murder of La Salle, were
both finally interrogated by the French in 1698.
It came to the attention of Pierre Le Moyne,
Sieur d'Iberville, that people who had been with La
Salle were in France. He contacted Henri Joutel and
the two Talon brothers, Pierre and Jean-Baptiste. He
was planning, in essence, to carry out La Salle's plan
for a French settlement on the Gulf of Mexico. Joutel
refused the invitation to accompany the expedition.
However, the two brothers joined the second voyage
with Iberville and provided invaluable information
and also their knowledge of the Indian and Spanish
languages. They were assigned to the command of
Louis Juchereau de St. Denis who was the founder
of Nachitoches, Louisiana. In 1701, Pierre and JeanBaptist were reported in prison in Portugal. Nothing
definite is further known about Jean-Baptiste. Ten
years later, Pierre and another brother, Robert Talon,
were with St. Denis on the Rio Grande (Weddle
1996, vol. 6:197).
These two brothers apparently went back to
Louisiana. Weddle notes (1996 vol. 6: 197) that
Pierre probably eventually went back to France and
died there. Robert resided in Mobile where at
present his descendants live, as well as in the state
of Louisiana (Spencer Personal Communication,
2005). Marie-Madeleine returned to Canada where
her son Pierre's marriage is recorded in 1719
(Weddle 1996, vol. 6: 197). He was her only child
(Newfield Personal Communication 2002).

The Other Family
The other family besides the Talon was
composed of a soldier who died fairly early in the
experience, and his wife. There is no specific
record of their name or how many children in the
family, but since this is called a family (Foster
1998: 118) there must have been at least one child.
This was probably a boy about 10 in view of the
following. When De Leon visited the site in 1689,
he found and buried three bodies (Bolton
1963:398). It is probable that animals had disturbed
the remains of all three because they were in
fragmentary condition when discovered and excavated during archeological fieldwork at the site.
The remains were those of a man, a woman and a
child-a boy of about 10 (King personal communication 2004). All the other male children at the
site have been accounted for. The remains of the
boy consisted of only one leg. This was sufficient
to determine sex and age, according to H. Gill
King, a forensic anthropologist. It is curious that
the Karankawa women did not rescue this boy as
they had the other children. Was he hiding with
his mother so well that after the initial massacre
that these three people were found and murdered?
Moreover, the male remains were badly diseased
with syphilis, a man who could hardly walk (See
Sablonniere this article). He may have hidden instead of running for cover. This man, then, was
probably Sablonniere.

The Girls of the Expedition
Joutel notes there were seven females on the
expedition. These were as follows, although they
may not be the seven Joutel referred to: Madame
Talon, Marie-Elizabeth Talon, Marie-Madeleine
Talon, "La Princess," "Paris," the girl from Saint
Jean d'Angely, and a soldier's wife (Foster ed.
1998:118).
Marie-Elizabeth Talon died at the settlement
probably in the winter of 1685-1686. MarieMadeleine Talon was rescued from the massacre of
1688 by the Karankawa women, along with the
other Talon children and Eustace Breman. During
the Talon children's confrontation with the Indians
about to molest Marie-Madeleine, the fact that
Eustace Breman confronted the Indians for the other
Talons suggests that Eustace may have been the
oldest of the male children there. Marie-Madeleine
with others was sent to Mexico City to live in the

Gilmore-People of La Salle's Last Expedition 119
Viceroy's household. She finally moved to France
and then Canada where she man-ied Pierre Simon.
She had a son there who was called Pien-e.
The girl from Saint Jean d' Angely, whose name
is not known, was on the Belle when it was wrecked.
She returned to the settlement with Father
Chefdeville and the others. Presumably she was
killed by the Karankawa in the massacre at the end
of 1688.
"Paris" was an unnamed girl but was from the
city of Paris. She was "young, shapely and not uncomely" (Foster 1998:143). Sablonniere wanted to
man-y her but Joutel refused saying that she was
beneath his station. He even forbade them to speak
to each other (Foster 1998:143). She may have been
part of the reason that Sablonniere resigned his rank
as lieutenant so that he could spend his time with the
women and children at the settlement. She was presumably killed at the massacre.
"La Princess" was the name Barbier gave to
the girl he fell in love with and eventually man-ied.
Joutel (in Foster 1998: 155) said of her: "The proverb is quite true that there is no unbecoming love
even if the object is not charming." A house was
built for the newly married couple. In time, La
Princess had a miscarriage. However, later, she delivered a healthy baby. When La Salle set out on
his final trip to Canada, he named the present day
Lavaca River, the "Princess," and one of its branches
"Mignone" in honor of Barbier' s wife because La
Salle noted.it was.on.these banks that Barbier declared his love of La Princess. Princess and her
baby were first rescued by the Karankawa women
but both were later killed.
The girls and women, in addition to the men,
were taught how to shoot by Joutel. This activity
was in the form of a contest. The girl coming closest
to the mark was given "some other trifle" whereas
the men were awarded some brandy. In addition, if
the girls and women know how to shoot, they could
be assigned to sentry duty (Foster 1998:145). These
contests were to help the inhabitants protect themselves, but unfortunately, these lessons did not help
in the surprise attack by the Indians.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Looking back over the persons of the settlement, one wonders if the kinds of people had anything to do with the "bad luck" that La Salle had at
the settlement. Unfortunately, historical documents

seldom write of thoughts and dreams. We do know
the people of La Salle's last journey were courageous. They made a long sea voyage across a vast
ocean and expected to settle and colonize a little
known or even explored land. Not only courageous
but all must have had a feeling of adventure. Some
likely had thoughts of immense wealth. Some may
have been in search of religious freedom. Then
what caused these great expectations to end so tragically? Did the personalities and the character of the
people have anything to do with the failure of the
colony? First we will look at the group of tradesman hired by La Salle.
Before sailing, La Salle hired and signed contracts with 39 tradesmen in the Menon legal office
in La Rochelle. After landing and putting the men
to work, La Salle complained they were undisciplined and not accustomed to obeying orders
(Margry 1874-1886 vol. 3:526). Apparently, these
men did not have the sufficient skills required to
benefit the colony. La Salle also noted that half of
them died from eating poisonous fruit after being
warned the fruit was poisonous. The other tradesmen probably died shortly thereafter in view of the
short rations and hard work they were required to
perform.
The fact that these men were undisciplined
points to the errors of La Salle and his poor planning. He was not careful to hire knowledgeable
persons. He also complained when getting ready to
build the principle house at the settlement that the
master carpenters had died or were lost and the
carpenters remaining were lacking in skill.
Excepting those hired by La Salle, most of the
persons at the settlement were of the bourgeoisie
(middle class). One ranking nobleman's father was
a marquis, but this man, Sablonniere, was a wastrel
(see biographical sketch of Sablonniere this article).
He may have been instrumental in the wreck of the
Belle, a hard blow for La Salle and the people.
Other persons or settlers of the colony became
embittered when their dreams of fortunes faded.
This was especially true of the merchants who had
brought many items to trade to the Indians. Pierre
Duhaut, one of the merchants, was further embittered because of the loss of his brother, so much so
that he was willing to murder his leader, La Salle,
the final act of unmitigated bitterness.
The recollet priests who had accompanied the
expedition had expected to eventually become missionaries and convert the Indians to Christianity.
This never occurred and must have been a source

120

Texas Archeological Society

of frustration to them. Abbe Esmanville returned to
France on the Joly having become disenchanted
with La Salle. La Salle ordered Esmanville' s diary
destroyed because it told of La Salle's unjust practices. The priests' frustration seems to be further
indicated by Father Douay's tale of La Salle's murder, falsely saying he buried La Salle and erected a
cross over his grave. The other recollets who were
left by La Salle at the site were killed in the massacre at the end of 1688.
A further indication of the pending lack of success of the colony is the fact that there were only
seven females, listed previously, among the inhabitants. Their small number bodes for lack of success
because offsp1ing are necessary for the perpetuation
of a colonial enterprise. Is it possible La Salle planned
that after success of the settlement he would request
more French women be sent? This same problem
existed later with other beginning French colonies.
For example, it was requested that French women be
sent to New Orleans and other fledgling colonial
settlements, because the anxious Frenchmen were
marrying the Indian women (Rowland and Sanders
1929:207). Moreover, the complaint stated that instead of making French-like women of the Indians,
the Indians were making Indian-like men of the
French. Consequently, the population of the colony
would become not purely French.
In sum, the tragic enterprise of La Salle seems
to have been doomed from its beginning. The personnel of the expedition did not fill the necessary
requirements for a colony to perpetuate itself. La
Salle apparently lacked the ability to hire skilled
tradesmen. He also lacked effective managerial
skills for the colony to survive. Moreover, Joutel
noted that La Salle shared his plans with no one,
nor would La Salle ask for advice, other indications
of an insecure individual.
Nevertheless, part of La Salle's dreams were
realized when a French settlement was established
at present day Mobile, Alabama more than 20 years
after La Salle's unsuccessful attempt. A little later
French settlements were also established at New
Orleans and Nachitoches in present day Louisiana.
The French did not gain La Salle's claim for the
entire drainage of the Mississippi River but did
occupy present day Louisiana and part of the Gulf
Coast, thereby leaving a French imprint and flavor
on the entire area.
Another result of La Salle's efforts was to motivate the Spaniards to colonize Texas, a neglected are.
Therefore, present day Texas, instead of having a long

term influence by the French, was left (especially
south Texas) with an overlay of Spanish influence.

MEMORIUM
This article is dedicated to the memory of Sally
Glmore Shaw who read a slightly different version
at the Society of Historical Archeology meeting
January, 2006, in Sacramento.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
My sincere thanks go to Dr. James E. Bruseth,
Texas Historical Commission, for encouraging me
to write this aspect of La Salle's enterprise. My
thanks also go to Dr. H. Gill King, Forensic Anthropologist, of the University of North Texas for
providing me with information on the three burials
found at the site. Also appreciated is the invaluable
research provided by Bernard Allaire, Bordeaux,
France and John de Bry, Melbourne Beach, Florida.
Very importantly as well my many grateful thanks
go to Leanna Schniebs who helped me get started.
To Sally Shaw go my many thanks for the help that
was indispensable. This manuscript could not have
been finished without her help.

REFERENCES CITED
Allaire, Bernard
2004a Sieur Ravenel de la Sablonnieres and the 1684 Texas
Expedition. Unpublished, copy on file with the author.
2004b The Pewter Arms from the Bark La Belle. Unpublished, copy on file with the author.
Bolton, H.E.
1963 Spanish exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706.
Barnes & Noble, New York.
Canedo, Lino Gomez
1968 Primeras Exploraciones y Poblamiento de Texas
(1686-1694). Instituto Technologico y de Estudios
Superiores de Monterrey, Monterrey.
Cox, Isaac J. (editor and translator)
1968 The Journeys of Rene Robert Cavelier Sieur de La
Salle, Vol. 1. The Pemberton Press, Austin.
De Bry, John
n.d.
Fleshing out the Cultural History of Ia Belle and
the La Salle Expedition (1684-1687). Unpublished,
copy on file with the author.

Gilmore-People of La Salle's Last Expedition 121
De Villiers, Marc
1931 L'Expedition de Cavelier De La Salle dans Le Golf
Du Mexique (1684-1687). Librairie D'Amerique et
D'Orient, Adrien-Maisonneuve, Paris
Esquibel, Jose Antonio and John B. Colligan
1999
Spanish Recolonization of New Mexico: An Account Of the Families Recruited at Mexico City in
1693. Hispanic Genealogical Research Center of
New Mexico, Albuquerque.
Foster, William C. (editor)
1998 The La Salle Expedition to Texas, The Journal of
Henri Joutel 1684-1687, translated by Johanna S.
Warren. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1973 The Keeran Site, The Probable Site of La Salle's
Fort St. Louis in Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Reports, No. 24, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
1989

An Archeological Footnote to History. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 60:303-324.

1998

Treachery and Tragedy in the Texas Wilderness:
The Adventures of Jean L' Archeveque in Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archelological Society 69:3546 (with King, H. Gill).

King, H. Gill
1989 Skeletal Analysis oflndividual 571-A, (J-3). Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60:311.
2001

Personal Communication.

Margry, Pierre (editor)
1879-1886
Decouvertes et etablissements des francais
Dans Le sud de l'Amerique septentrionale (16141754), 6 vols. Maisonnueve. D. Jouaust, Paris.
Meunier, Pierre
1690 Inte1rngation. Archivo General de Indias, Audencia de
Mexico, Dunn Transcripts, Barker Library, Austin.
1699

Pre-Nuptial Investigations, Pedro Meunier. Chancery Office, Archdiocese of Santa Fe. Hemenway
Collection Vol. 5, Document 12. State Records Center and Archives, Santa Fe.

Newfield, Paul
2002 Personal Communication.
Newman, Bud
1983 The Case of the Missing Documents. From the
Catholic Archives of Texas. Austin.
Teran, Don Domingo
2000 The Expedition of Don Domingo Teran de los
Rios into Texas. Preliminary Studies of Texas
Catholic Historical Society, Vol.II, No. 1, St.
Edwards University, Austin. Mattie Austin
Hatcher, A. M., translator.

Weddle, R. S.
1972 La Salle's Survivors. Southwestern Historical Quarterly Vol. 75(4): Texas State Historical Association,
Austin.
1987

La Salle, the Mississippi, and the Gulf, Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.

1989

The French Thom, Rival Explorers in the Spanish
Sea, 1682-1762, Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1996

Talon Children. The New Handbook of Texas, The
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

West, Mida Griego
2001 Personal Communication.

ENDNOTES
1. This information is taken from Joutel (1962) and
Margry (1879-1888 Vol. 3).
2. A copy of this article is possession of the writer.
3. See Lemee, this volume, for additional information on
some of the travels of some of these individuals.
4. From birth certificate found by the research of Bernard Allaire, Bordeaux, France.
5. A. Bandelier wrote a short book (1962 [1893]) about
L' Archeveque entitled El Dorado (The Gilded Man).
6. Some of the information on L' Archeveque and Grollet
was furnished by Mida Griego West, Albuquerque, who
is a descendent of both L' Archeveque and Grollet.
7. The research on the coat of arms of the Beaujeu family
was done by Bernard Allaire, 2004.

Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke
and Grayson Counties, Texas
William A. Martin

ABSTRACT
Archeological sites in the Cooke County area have been understudied. At the request of the Cooke County
Historical Commission, archeologists from the Texas Historical Commission undertook an effort to sample
as many of the major drainages and physiographic zones of the county as possible, obtain information on a
variety of sites and document them on State of Texas Archeological Site forms. Twelve sites were recorded
that included occupations from most of the major cultural periods of history and prehistory, illustrating the
rich archeological heritage of the region.

INTRODUCTION
The Cooke County Archeological Project
(CCAP) was undertaken by staff of the Archeology
Division of the Texas Historical Commission (THC)
during the week of November 13-17, 1989, at the
request of Ms. Margaret Parx Hays of the Cooke
County Historical Commission. Ms. Hays was concerned that several important historic and prehistoric
sites were present in the county, but that very few
had been recorded or studied. From the standpoint of
Texas archeology, the area along the Red River in
this part of the state was a virtual terra incognita. At
that time, the only professional reports available on
excavated sites in Cooke County were the Fish Creek
Reservoir (Moss Lake) report by Southern Methodist University (Lonaine 1969) and one of the Lake
Ray Robe1is reports by the University of North Texas
(Prikryl and Yates 1987). Ms. Hays urged the THC
to visit the county and document some of its more
important sites. Ms. Ona B. Reed, a long-time member of the Texas Archeological Stewardship Network, Texas Archeological Society, and at that time,
Chair of the Cooke County Historical Commission,
was also a leading proponent of this project. She
accompanied the survey crews in the field and assisted with site documentation.
The CCAP was not an intensive survey like
those conducted to comply with historic preservation laws, where a large amount of acreage is inspected and shovel tested in an effort to record all

sites within a given project area. It cannot even be
construed as a reconnaissance survey of the county.
More accurately, it was a series of brief visits to
specific sites that were already known to local residents, amateur archeologists, and collectors. The
project's goal was to record these sites on official
state of Texas site forms and briefly assess their
potential importance for future research. Although
some time was spent examining creek bank profiles
to search for buried deposits near some of the sites
that were recorded, the vast majority of the effort
was aimed at delineating site boundaries and depth
of deposit at the sites our informants knew about.
Although the project was of extremely short duration (four days), 12 sites were recorded in different
physiographic zones along the major drainages
within Cooke County and a portion of western
Grayson County.

ENVIRONMENT
The prehistoric use of the landscape was determined in large paii by the physical environment.
Local geology, hydrology, climate, soils, and vegetation worked in combination to provide resources,
such as stone for tools, or habitat for critical food
resources, such as deer, or other game animals.
Tools were designed to hunt and process specific
species of plants and animals, and changes in climate over time changed the availability of these

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

124

Texas Archeological Society

resources. Moreover many assemblages originally
created for hunting and gathering eventually included tools necessary for agriculture. The characteristics of the various physiographic zones identified in the project area are summarized below.
Geology, Soils, and Vegetation
Cooke County, in the extreme north central
portion of Texas, is bounded by Montague County

to the west, Wise and Denton counties to the south,
Grayson County to the east, and the Red River (and
the State of Oklahoma) to the north (Figure 1). The
landscape varies from sandy hills with oak-savanna
on the east and west, to relatively flat prairie in the
central portion, to low hills and steep wooded breaks
along deeply incised streams and gullies near the
Red River (Figure 2). The county lies within the
transition between the Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic province, which parallels the Gulf of

OKLAHOMA

Blackland Prairie

0
0

CrossTimbers
Grand Prairie

Figure 1. Study Area along the Red River and the upper reaches of the Elm Fork of the Trinity River showing major
physiographic zones and reservoirs referenced in text.

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 125

Figure 2. Deeply incised stream channel, typical of northern Cooke County drainages.

Mexico, and the Great Plains physiographic
province (Carr 1969). Three geographic zones,
subdivisions of these larger provinces, are present
in the county: the Eastern Cross Timbers, the Grand
Prairie, and the Western Cross Timbers. The
geographic zones largely correlate with the major
geologic formations, which in turn are responsible
for the dramatic shift in soils from sand to clay to
sand again as one moves across the county. The
following discussion summarizes the geology, soils,
and vegetation associated with each of these
geographic zones.

Eastern Cross Timbers
This zone is characterized by extensive gently
sloping to rolling uplands that are moderately dissected. Sloping to rolling sandstone-capped hills
and ridges rise prominently above the surrounding
uplands. The Woodbine formation, consisting of
sandstone, shales, sandy shales and fine-to-coarse
sands underlies this zone (Prikryl 1990:6). Iron oxides of limonite and hematite give the Woodbine its
characteristically reddish-brown color and ironstone
concretions are exposed on the surface of some

upland slopes. Stream valleys are narrow and have
steep gradients.
Much of the rural land is in improved pasture,
native grass pasture, or noncommercial oak forest
vegetation, and is used primarily for grazing beef
cattle. Improved pasture and urban development is
increasing in the Eastern Cross Timbers, especially
to the south of Cooke County. Historically, this
area supported oak savanna vegetation with a tall
grass understory. Little bluestem, purpletop tridens,
indiangrass, switchgrass, big bluestem, post oak,
blackjack oak, elm, coralberry, American beautyberry, bumelia, greenbrier, and elbowbush are some
of the dominant species. Engelmann-daisy, lespedezas, and trailing wildbeans are among the numerous perennial forbs (Soil Survey Staff 1981:61).

Grand Prairie
The Grand Prairie developed on a gently rolling
to hilly, dissected plateau made up of a variety of
limestones, clays, and marls. Stream valleys are
shallow and narrow in their upper reaches but
deepen and broaden near the eastern edge of the
area. A few outliers of the Woodbine formation

126

Texas Archeological Society

form knobs along the eastern edge of the Grand
Prairie that stand out as dramatic hills on an
otherwise flat to gently rolling terrain.
Today, most of the land is native rangeland and
improved pasture with beef cattle as the principal
livestock. Some valleys, bottomlands, and the
deeper soils on uplands are still used as cropland,
and native pecan orchards are common along the
floodplains. This area originally supported prairie
vegetation with widely scattered live oak trees. Little
bluestem, indiangrass, big bluestem, and switchgrass are typical species. Little bluestem, sideoats
grama, tall grama, and scattered shrub live oak and
juniper trees characterize the natural vegetation on
the very shallow soils and along escarpments (Soil
Survey Staff 1981:61-62).

dissected, although land in the northern portion of
the county has a higher average slope gradient.
Stream valleys are narrow and have steep gradients.
Today, most of the Western Cross Timbers zone is
comprised of pasture or noncommercial oak forests
that are used for grazing beef cattle. Cropland has
been decreasing for many years in favor of improved
pasture. Historically, this area supported savanna
vegetation with tall grass interspersed among trees
and underbrush. Little bluestem, purpletop tridens,
indiangrass, switchgrass, big bluestem, sand
lovegrass, post oak, blackjack oak, elm, coralberry,
greenbrier, and elbowbush are dominant species.
Engelmann-daisy, Maxmilian sunflower, and trailing
wildbean are among the numerous perennial forbs
(Soil Survey Staff 1981:60-61).

Western Cross Timbers

River Drainages

This zone lies within the Paluxy formation, a
reddish sandstone and shale unit with sandy soils
that support post oak savanna. The Western Cross
Timbers receive about 2.5 inches less rain than the
Eastern Cross Timbers, so although the vegetation
is similar, the woodlands are not as lush. The uplands
are nearly level to rolling and are moderately

Two major drainage basins are present in Cooke
County (see Figure 1). Every stream north of
Gainesville drains into the Red River (Figure 3).
All other drainages flow into the Elm Fork of the
Trinity River. The Red River is part of the Mississippi drainage and is the second longest river in
Texas. It forms the northern boundary of ten Texas

Figure 3. The Red River valley in Northern Cooke County.

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 127
counties, and has served as a political boundary
since early historic times. In the 1700s the river
was regarded as the dividing line between France
and Spain. The Red River was formally set forth as
the northern boundary of Texas in the Adams-Onfs
Treaty of 1819. This treaty, ratified by Spain and
the United States in 1821 and by Mexico in 1822,
established the Red River as the southwestern
boundary of Louisiana as far northwest as the 1OOth
meridian (Kleiner 1996:492).
The Red River is impounded by Denison Dam,
northwest of Denison, Texas to create Lake
Texoma. Authorized by the Flood Control Act of
1938, it was built by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers and opened in 1944. The lake covers
over 89,000 acres in Texas and Oklahoma including portions of Grayson and Cooke counties,
Texas, and Marshall, Johnson, Bryan, and Love
counties, Oklahoma (Breeding 1996:31). Erosion
along the shoreline has exposed numerous archeological sites, and eight sites were recorded along
the western end of the lake in Grayson County
during the CCAP.
Fish Creek is an important tributary that originates from the confluence of North Fish Creek and
South Fish Creek, which were dammed to form
Moss Lake (formerly Fish Creek Reservoir). It
winds east, then northwest, southeast, and finally
south for a total of three miles to its mouth on the
Red River. It traverses an area of flat to rolling
terrain with deep, fine sandy loam that supports
brush and various grasses.
The headwaters of the Elm. Fork of the Trinity
River originate in Montague County northwest of
Gainesville. Because it is a rather small stream that
far north, residents of Cooke County refer to it as
Elm Creek. The Elm Fork flows to the south-southeast to join the West Fork of the Trinity River just
west of Dallas. The Trinity River proper begins at
the confluence of the West and Elm Forks and
flows from there southeast to the Gulf of Mexico.
Two reservoirs are present along the Elm Fork. The
upper reaches of Lake Ray Roberts lie within the
southeastern corner of Cooke County. The lake was
constructed by the Fmt Worth District of the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers in the late 1980s, and
covers approximately 30,000 acres in Denton,
Grayson, and Cooke counties. A few miles downstream in Denton County is Lake Lewisville, similar in size to Lake Ray Roberts, which was constructed by the Fort Worth District of the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers in the 1950s.

CULTURE HISTORY
Over the years, several cultural periods have
been defined for North Central Texas and adjacent
areas in Oklahoma. Early attempts to define cultural chronology prior to the refinement of radiocarbon dating (Krieger 1946; Stephenson 1952;
Suhm et al. 1954) were based on artifacts recovered
from sites that often contained mixed assemblages
from multiple time periods. As additional sites were
investigated and their components dated more precisely through radiocarbon assay, the earlier constructs had to be redefined. As new kinds of information were collected from archeological sites due
to improved field methods (e.g., flotation to recover charred plant materials) and multidisciplinary
studies designed to understand the paleoenvironment and human ecology, further refinements
were made. Using this new information, Lynott
(1977) and Prikryl (1990) developed somewhat
similar chronologies for North Central Texas. For
the purposes of this study, several of the older chronological schemes are addressed, but Prikry l's 1990
chronology appears to be the most up to date and
most useful for the CCAP.
Paleoindian (pre-8500 B.P.)
When distinctive fluted spear points were found
lying in the midst of mammoth ribs along Blackwater Draw near Clovis, New Mexico, in the 1930s,
archeologists proposed that the Clovis culture was
a big-game hunting culture that specialized in hunting large, now-extinct, Pleistocene animals (Willey
1966:38). Since a different form of fluted spear
point was found near Folsom, New Mexico in association with extinct bison, archeologists proposed
that Clovis culture was succeeded by Folsom culture, which also consisted of bands of nomadic biggame hunters. This belief persisted for much of the
201h century as more and more intact sites of this
age were found in association with the bones of
large extinct species in many different parts of North
America. For example, at the Domebo site in Oklahoma, not far to the north of Cooke County, Clovis
points and tools were recovered in association with
the bones of the Imperial mammoth (Gettys
1984:101).
Most of the information on Paleoindian
occupation in the study area is inferred from surface
finds of projectile points. It is rare to find intact
Paleoindian sites, but two North Central Texas sites

128

Texas Archeological Society

have had important impacts on our understanding
of Clovis culture and subsistence and on the
controversy about the earliest human occupation of
the continent.
One of these sites, the Lewisville site (41DN72)
became famous when excavations by the Dallas
Archaeological Society in the 1950s uncovered a
Clovis point and a hearth that yielded a highly
controversial date of 37,000 B.P. (Crook and Harris 1957). This date was controversial because the
generally accepted date-range for the Paleoindian
period elsewhere extends back no more than ca.
13,500 B.P. Thus, the dates from the Lewisville
site either pushed the dates for Clovis back tremendously, or indicated that Pre-Clovis people had used
the hearth. The rising waters of Lake Lewisville
soon inundated the site and further investigations
were not conducted until 1979, when a drought
exposed the site once again. At that point, the
Smithsonian Institution conducted a study at the site
(Stanford 1982), which showed that the anomalously
early radiocarbon age was due to pieces of lignite
(soft coal of great antiquity) that were found to be
included in the hearth. The carbon from the lignite
apparently had skewed the date. Subsequent geomorphic studies along the Trinity River (Ferring
1986) suggest that the features at the Lewisville site
were not in situ because they occurred at elevations
that correspond with the Coppell Alluvium, which is
much too old to contain Clovis materials buried in
situ (Ferring and Yates 1997:5). Thus, although it
figured prominently in the debate between ClovisFirst and Pre-Clovis theories, the LewisviHe site
proved not to be the result of a Pre-Clovis occupation, or even an intact Clovis occupation.
Perhaps the most important North Central Texas
Paleoindian site was discovered in the spillway of
Lake Ray Roberts when erosion exposed a deeply
buried (ca. 35 ft. below surface) Paleoindian camp.
Named the Aubrey site (41DN479), it was comprised of a cluster of features and artifacts forming
separate camp areas around a pond (Ferring 1989,
1990, 1995, 2001). It yielded substantial information in the form of 23 radiocarbon ages in proper
stratigraphic order, with two charcoal specimens
from a hearth dating the Paleoindian occupation at
around 11,500 years ago, and dates from above and
below the occupation level bracketing it between
12,300 and 10,940 years ago (Ferring 2001). The
site provided an exceptional look at fauna utilized
by the Clovis inhabitants. More than 4000 faunal
remains were recovered, and the variety of fauna

was extraordinary. In addition to large game, such
as bison bones found at a butchering station on the
edge of the pond, the remains of turtles, rodents,
rabbits, squirrels, fish, and bird remains were also
identified. In recent years, many archeologists have
come to view the emphasis placed on the big-game
hunting tradition to the exclusion of other subsistence activities as an artificial construct reflecting
the vagaries of preservation at Clovis-age sites rather
than reality. Indirect evidence supporting this idea
includes edge wear on stone tools that appear to
have been produced by plants. For example, at the
Gault site (41BL323) in Bell County, use-wear studies identified a Clovis blade with the highly developed use-wear signature of grass cutting (Inmann
and Hudler 1998). The faunal data from the Aubrey
site offers direct evidence of the wide variety of
animals utilized by these people. As with many
other Clovis sites, lithic materials for tools, such as
Alibates agatized dolomite and Tecovas quartzite,
were procured from a source area a minimum of
200 km from the site. Ferring noted a lack of redundancy among the various camp areas and suggested
that this is evidence for a flexible and generalized
subsistence system among the Clovis inhabitants
(Ferring 2001:243).
Early Archaic (8500-6000 B.P.)
Little is known about the Early Archaic occupation of the study area because no sites with isolable
Early Archaic components have been identified in
North Central Texas (P1ikryl 1990:69), and the situation to the north in Oklahoma is not much better. At
the Gore Pit site in Oklahoma, several charcoal
stained pits were excavated, two of which yielded
three radiocarbon dates associated with the Early
Archaic period (Hughes 1984: 110). However, Prikryl
(1990:69) notes that no diagnostic points were found
in association with the dated features, and the point
types recovered from the site spanned the Paleoindian
through Late Archaic periods. The Ivan Cox Farm
(41C0183), documented later in this report, is a site
that has had multiple occupations and projectile
points garnered from 30 years of surface collection
present a clearer picture of the variety of types present
in Cooke County. There, Ernie Martin has identified
projectile points types ranging from Paleoindian
through Late Prehistoric sites including several Early
and Middle Archaic types.
Prikryl mapped 22 sites in his study area along
the Elm Fork and its tributaries south of Cooke

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 129
County that yielded Early Archaic projectile points,
but many were from the surfaces of plowed fields
or from sites mixed with later materials. Most of
those sites had already been destroyed by the time
Prikryl conducted his research, and all of the remaining sites had suffered some degree of damage.
Diagnostic projectile points were primarily Angostura and Early Split-stemmed forms. These points
are extremely similar to those found in Central,
South, and East Texas and in Oklahoma, which
indicates a continuation of a hunter-gatherer subsistence pattern with a high degree of residential
mobility (Prikryl 1990:71).
One key difference between the Early Archaic
deposits and those of preceding Paleoindian populations can be seen in the choice of lithic materials
used to manufacture tools. Whereas most of the
materials found at Paleoindian sites are high quality exotic stone, such as Edwards chert, Alibates
agatized dolomite, and Tecovas quartzite, Archaic
deposits yield tools and lithic debris from local
stone sources. In Oklahoma, Ogallala quartzite is
the most common material used during the Archaic period (Hughes 1984:116), and this material
is also commonly found on sites in the Cooke
County vicinity.
Middle Archaic (6000-3500 B.P.)
Even less is known about the Middle Archaic
occupation of the study area than the Early Archaic
occupation. Only 18 sites with Middle Archaic materials were document by Prikryl (1990:73), and all
of them had been destroyed or inundated, so none
have been closely examined. Pollen from bogs in
Oklahoma suggests that warm arid conditions prevailed during the first part of the period, and that
conditions became moister between 5000 and 4000
years ago. The oak-savanna regime of the Cross
Timbers may have formed during this period
(Prikryl 1990: 71).
Projectile points manufactured during this period were quite different from the Early Archaic
points, shifting from split-stemmed forms to basally
notched and stemmed forms. Large dart points with
two deep basal notches have been found from south
Texas into Oklahoma. These dart points types include Andice, Bell, and Calf Creek. The stemmed
points include types such as Carrollton, Morrill, and
Wells. Wells points have a broad distribution like
the basally notched points, whereas Carrollton and
Morrill points are less widespread (Prikryl 1990:71).

It is during the Middle Archaic period when
regional differences among groups are first recognized by differences in artifact assemblages. Several phase names were created to assign a name to
the traits that were recognized and associated with
a specific region at different points in time. For
example, Crook and Harris (1952) defined the Trinity Aspect of the Archaic period for the area in the
Upper Trinity River watershed using data from 28
floodplain and te1Tace sites found near Dallas. The
Trinity Aspect included the Carrollton focus, marking the Middle Archaic, and the Elam focus, which
encompassed the Late Archaic. Tools attributed to
the Carrollton focus in addition to the Carollton
dart point included Waco sinkers (small cobbles
with notches at each end) and very crude large
quartzite bifaces called Carollton axes. Many projectile point types attributed to these foci have also
been found in Oklahoma (Wykoff 1984:143), so
the geographic limits of the Trinity Aspect were
more far reaching than just the Upper Trinity basin.
However, many of the sites used to define the Trinity Aspect contained mixed deposits of artifacts
from different occupations. Prikryl (1990:73) notes
that Waco sinkers found in East Texas predate the
Middle Archaic, whereas Carrollton axes have been
found in Late Archaic contexts at Wister Phase
sites in Oklahoma.

Late Archaic (3500-1250 B.P.)
Somewhat more is known about the Late Archaic occupation of the region than the earlier occupations because many more sites with Late Archaic diagnostic artifacts have been recorded, and
some well-stratified sites have been excavated and
studied in detail. Prikryl's 1990 study included 66
Late Archaic sites, 35 of which had no signs of
earlier occupation. After analyzing the artifacts from
these sties, he concluded that the projectile points
diagnostic of this period are different from those
assigned to the Late Archaic Elam focus by Crook
and Harris (1952). The Gary dart point was shown
to be the most common type. Moreover, some types
assigned to the Middle Archaic Carrollton focus,
such as Trinity and Dallas points, were relatively
common in the Late Archaic deposits. Other Late
Archaic points included Godley, Ellis, Elam,
Edgewood and Yarbrough (Prikryl 1990:74).
Several reasons for the dramatic increase in
sites during the Late Archaic period have been hypothesized. One obvious possibility is an increase

130

Texas Archeological Society

in population during this period, which could have
been spurred by environmental conditions becoming more favorable for animal and plant species
used by humans, or perhaps a change in subsistence
technology that allowed population growth using
the same resources. Perring (1986) conducted a
geomorphic study along the Trinity and identified
the West Fork Soil at several localities. He noted
that it could have formed due to an increasingly
moist climate. This same paleosol was also observed during the excavations at site 41C0141 and
radiocarbon dates from features above and below it
indicate it formed between roughly 1000 and 1900
years ago, during the latter part of the Late Archaic
period (Perring 1987). This lends support to the
hypothesis that favorable environmental conditions
may have spurred population growth. For example,
as moisture increased the woodlands of the Cross
Timbers would have expanded, creating an increase
in mast production for use by both humans and the
game animals they hunted (Prikryl 1990:74).
Prikryl noted three Elm Fork sites excavated at
Lake Ray Roberts that contained Late Archaic deposits unmixed with artifacts from earlier or later
occupations. At 41DN85 two stone-lined hearths
were reported in association with ground and
chipped stone tools and debitage and at 41DN103
an Elam point was found in association with a hearth
(Skinner et al. 1982; Skinner and Baird 1985). Major excavations by Prikryl at 41C0141, in Cooke
County, produced solid data from a stratified alluvial context where a bridge was being built. Charcoal found in hearths yielded radiocarbon dates,
Late Archaic diagnostic tools were found, and faunal remains were identified.
Late Prehistoric I (1250-750 B.P.)
For a variety of reasons, more information is
available on sites dating to the Late Prehistoric
period than for the previous periods. This is due,
in part, to the fact that environmental processes
stimulating decay of bone and admixture of artifacts have had less time to impact these more
recent deposits. More importantly, greater numbers of artifacts and features are present on Late
Prehistoric sites due to major changes in subsistence practices (such as the introduction of agriculture) that allowed, or perhaps required, longer occupations at each site with a corresponding increase in
the deposition of materials. The adoption of ceramic
technology also accounts for an increased number of

items found in midden contexts. For example, the
use and production of ceramic vessels led to the
creation of numerous pottery sherds when vessels
broke, with some tossed aside in middens and others
remaining near their place of use where they broke.
The increase in overall data from these sites, coupled
with a greater degree of regional diversity in artifact
assemblages and decorative patterns among ceramics, led archeologists to create several new focus/
phase names to organize the information. The Woodland and Plains Village periods of Oklahoma roughly
equate temporally with Prikryl's Late Prehistoric I
and II periods. The cultural constructs within these
periods that are most relevant to Cooke County include the Bryan focus and Washita River phase,
defined by Oklahoma archeologists (Bell and
Baerreis 1951 ), and the Henrietta focus, defined by
Texas archeologist, Alex Krieger (1946).
Prikryl (1990:79) noted evidence for a high
degree of cultural continuity between the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric I periods, as suggested
by the fact that 34 of the 36 sites in his study area
containing Late Prehistoric I components also had
Late Archaic deposits. Evidence for major technological changes during this period includes the presence of expanding-stemmed, square-stemmed, and
comer-notched arrow points on sites, indicating
adoption of the bow and arrow, and the presence of
pottery sherds, indicating the use of ceramics for
cooking and storage. Charred corncobs and cupules
have been recovered from several sites in the region, demonstrating a shift from complete reliance
on hunting and gathering to some degree of reliance on agriculture.
The Late Prehistoric I period is the first in
which houses are identified, probably reflecting
more substantial construction due to the need to
stay in one place while tending crops. Regional
variation in house design is seen with some houses
visible as circular arrangements of postholes, such
as those found along Mountain Creek in Dallas
County at the Cobb-Pool site (Peter and McGregor
1988) and further to the south at the bird Point
Island site along Richland Creek (Bruseth and Martin 1987), or oval arrangements of postholes, as at
the sites dug along Fish Creek (Lorraine 1969), or
as square arrangements of post holes, like those
found at sites dug at Lake Texoma (Bell and
Baerreis 1951).
At Lake Texoma, data from excavations at the
Marrs site (34Br18) and the Flanagan site on the
Oklahoma side of Lake Texoma near the confluence

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 131
of the Red and Washita Rivers (Bell and Baerreis
1951) were used to define the Bryan focus. Subsequent salvage excavations at the Boat Dock site (Bell
1958), the James site (Ray 1960), and the Buncombe
Creek site (Wykoff 1964) yielded similar assemblages and were also assigned to the Bryan focus.
Bryan focus houses were square, possibly with
rounded comers, and had four center posts, a central
hearth, and an extended entrance way. The Bryan
focus, however, is one of the early attempts to organize the data that needs to be updated. Story (1990)
and McGregor (n.d.) both find many problems with
the Bryan focus. For example, although flexed burials were uncovered at two of the Bryan focus sites,
Story (1990:358) notes that many, if not most, of
these interments are probably related to earlier Archaic or Woodland components. Storey states that
the Bryan focus, "requires major restudy and rethinking" due to the mixture of dart and arrow points
and ceramic types included in the assemblage.
McGregor (n.d.) proposes three temporal
subperiods of the Late Prehistoric period for North
Central Texas that he also applies to the Lake
Texoma area. The two most recent of these
subperiods are represented at four sites: Haley's
Point-Area F (34Mal5) and Treasure Island
(34Mal50) along the Red River at Lake Texoma,
the Dillard site (41C0174) upstream at the
confluence of the Red River and Fish Creek, and
the Currie site (34Gv22) upstream on the Washita
River. Area F at Haley's Point yielded Alba and
Bonham arrow points and five of the six radiocarbon dates from the house structure fall within the
A.D.1200-1300 range. Similarly, at the Currie site
(34Gv22) 54 rectangular-stem arrow points that
could be classified as Alba and Bonham were found,
and a house was uncovered that probably dates
between A.D.1020 and A.D.1310 (Drass 1997:59).
These sites contain components that McGregor assigns to his middle subperiod (ca. A.D.1000-1300),
which roughly corresponds with the latter part of
Prikry1' s Late Prehistoric I period.
Along Fish Creek, the only drainage completely
within the Cooke County project area, some interesting sites have been investigated that appear to
have Late Prehistoric I Period components with
some admixture of Late Prehistoric II materials.
Dessamae Lorraine (1969) from Southern Methodist University investigated these sites prior to the
construction of Fish Creek Reservoir (Moss Lake)
in the mid-1960s. Evidence of five oval to circular
structures were uncovered that Lorraine believed

dated between A.D. 850 and 1000. Substantial
samples of Nocona Plain ceramics and other
Henrietta focus artifacts were also found, but the
late arrow point types Harrell, Washita, and Fresno,
which are commonly associated with the Henrietta
focus, were rare in these assemblages. Instead,
specimens of earlier Eddy arrow points were found
(Prikryl 1990:29). Brack's (2000:196) recent examination of the Fish Creek ceramics indicates that
the Nocona Plain sherds are tempered with a mixture of fossil shell and fresh shell. Interestingly,
Lorraine had uncovered a cache of fossil shell at
site 41C05, and it may have been intended for later
use as ceramic temper.

Late Prehistoric II (750-250 B.P.)
Prikryl (1990:79) obtained a date of 1060±50
B.P. at site 41C0141 just above the West Fork
paleosol, which he believes dates the beginning of
a drying trend that continued into the Late Prehistoric II period. A change to a drier climate would
have caused the demarcation line between short
grass prairies to the west and tall grass prairies to
the east (and woodlands in the Cross Timbers and
areas further to the east) to change over time, with
an increase in short grass prairie. Since bison prefer
short grass prairies, they were most likely to be
present in the region during drier periods. Lynott
(1979) conducted an interesting study of bison bone
recovered from sites in North Central Texas in
which he concluded that herds of bison were not
common in the region until· after A.D. 1200. Further archeological evidence for the presence of bison and changes in subsistence practices during the
Late Prehistoric II period has been found at several
sites in Texas and Oklahoma, including the presence of bison scapula hoes and charred corn. Sites
in the vicinity of Cooke County that date to this
period are similar to Plains Village sites found to
the north, west, and southwest.
The Henrietta focus, which extends over a broad
area along the Salt Fork and Clear Fork of the
Brazos River north to the Red River and east to
Dallas, is the southernmost example of Plains
Village culture. Krieger (1946) defined the Henrietta
focus on the basis of excavations at the Harrell site
at the confluence of the Salt Fork and Clear Fork of
the Brazos River in Young County, Texas. There,
in deep sediments extending down 25 ft., remains
of a prehistoric village and traces of earlier Indian
camps were found. As with the Bryan focus and

132

Texas Archeological Society

other early foci, the definition of the Henrietta focus
included a mix of early and late materials. However,
most of the materials related to a Late Prehistoric II
period village with a distinctive assemblage of shelltempered pottery, basally and side-notched
triangular arrow points (Harrell and Washita points),
bison-scapula hoes, handheld mussel tools,
diamond-shaped beveled knives (also called fourbeveled knives), hide scrapers, and small drills.
The assemblage shares many similarities with Plains
Village Washita River phase assemblages. The
Washita River phase is a northern Plains Village
adaptation with an economy centered on bison
hunting and horticulture along the Washita and
Canadian River valleys in south-central Oklahoma.
Washita River phase assemblages are dated to
broadly A.D. 1200-1500 (Brack 2000:14) and may
date mainly between A.D. 1300-1450 according to
Drass (1997).
Within the Cooke County project area, the
Dillard Site (41C0174) is the best-reported site
with a Late Prehistoric II period component with
Henrietta focus materials (Martin 1994). Recorded
and excavated by Ernie Martin on land owned by
Dutch Dillard and Don Monroe, the site is strategically situated on a ridge overlooking Fish Creek at
the point where it enters the Red River floodplain
(about 1.5 miles downstream from the dam at Moss
Lake). The Dillard Site yielded tremendous data on
a Plains Village occupation that included bellshaped storage pit features and several bone tools,
including bison bone digging tools. Charred corncobs indicate that maize was an important constituent of the diet.
Bone preservation was excellent and 13 burials
were uncovered at the site, including a mass grave
containing five individuals (Martin 1994). Evidence
of copper was detected on one skull fragment, and
an unusual whelk shell gorget in the shape of a
human hand was found in association with Burial 2.
Other than maiine shell beads and the gorget, no
artifacts were clearly associated with the human remains. The shell objects may simply have been attached to the clothing of the deceased as opposed to
formal grave offerings (Martin 1994). The Dillard
site was part of an extensive trade network as evidenced by the wide variety of lithic material coming
from as far away as Arkansas, Central Texas, and
perhaps New Mexico as indicated by an obsidian
Washita point. The copper could come from the far
west or perhaps as far north as the Great Lakes and
the whelk shell gorget came from the Gulf coast.

Large quant1t1es of shell tempered Nocona
Plain pottery were recovered. In addition to
Nocona Plain pottery, Caddoan trade pottery from
the both the Sanders and Titus phases in East
Texas was recovered. Brack (2000: 197) points out
that Ernie Martin found a cluster of fossilized oyster shells at the Dillard site and he believes that
fossil shell was used to temper pottery at that site
as it was just upstream at the Fish Creek sites
excavated in the 1960s.
Although the entire span of site occupation is
estimated to fall between approximately A.D. 1150
and 1350, most of the recovered material dates to
the latter half of this range. Charcoal from a soil
layer separating two superimposed burials yielded
a corrected date of 680±110 BP and charcoal near
the bottom of a bell-shaped pit yielded a corrected
date of 622±58 BP. Most of the arrow points were
serrated Washita points and Fresno points, and although some Sanders phase ceramics (ca. A.D. 8001200) were noted, most of the ceramics were later
types such as Nocona Plain and Titus phase
Caddoan wares (ca. 1200-1500). The Dillard site
contains a minimally mixed deposit that McGregor
assigns to his late subperiod.
The serrated Washita points appear to be
common in the Red River vicinity, but there are
no precise dates associated with them. McGregor
(n.d.) notes that the Treasure Island site
(34Mal50) downstream from the Cooke County
project area offers a unique opportunity to obtain radiocarbon dates associated with the serrated Washita point type. There, an assemblage
of 22 serrated Washita arrow points came from
the fill of a multiple-burial pit (Baugh et al.
2002). If some of the bone could be submitted
for radiocarbon assay, it may be possible to place
this type in a more precise time frame.
On a final note regarding significant changes
over time, Prikryl documents an interesting trend
with respect to the raw materials selected for the
manufacture of projectile points in his study area.
The use of chert and quartzite exhibit an inverse
relationship over time, with quartzite use increasing
steadily from Paleoindian through the Late Archaic
periods as chert use declined. Then, beginning in
the Late Prehistoric I period, chert again increased
gradually as quartzite use declined by about the
same amount until in the Late Prehistoric II period
the ratio of chert to quartzite in tools was about the
same as that observed for Middle Archaic sites.
(Prikryl 1990:64). The vast majority of quartzite

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 133
utilized was Ogallala quartzite obtained from upland
deposits of Uvalde Gravels.
COOKE COUNTY HISTORY
The Red River was one of the first rivers
encountered by Spanish explorers in Texas. In 1541
Coronado explored the upper reaches of the Prairie
Dog Town Fork of the Red River in Palo Duro and
Tule canyons far to the west of Cooke County. In
1542, Moscoso crossed the Red River in Louisiana
and on into East Texas (Bruseth and Kenmotsu
1993). In 1690 Domingo Teran de los Rfos reached
the Red River at the Caddo Indian settlements near
present Texarkana (Kleiner 1996). However, the first
Europeans known to have visited the Cooke County
vicinity were members of the Pedro Vial expedition
who camped on the banks of the Elm Fork near
present day Gainesville on June 30, 1788 as they
traveled east to Natchitoches (Collins 1981:4).
The first Anglo settlers in the region arrived in
the 1840s, when it was part of the newly created
Peters colony. Settlers were offered 640 acres for
each head of a family with 320 acres for each single
man, plus land for a church in each settlement (Minor 1996a:47). In 1847, Fort Fitzhugh (see 41C04)
was built east of the Elm Fork of the Trinity River
about three miles southeast of Gainesville. The fort
was constructed by a company of Texas Rangers
from McKinney in nearby Collin County. It was
commanded by Colonel William F. Fitzhugh, and
consisted of a small log stockade with a single row
of blockhouses and a stable. The fort served as a
temporary camp from which patrols were sent to
protect settlers from Indian raids. Although the first
settlement in Cooke County grew up around the
fort, the fort was abandoned by 1850 when
Gainesville became the county seat (Minor
1996b:l 101).
In 1850 Gainesville was established on a 40acre tract donated by Mary E. Clark in the county's
approximate geographic center. The town was
named in honor of General Edmund Pendleton
Gaines, a United States general under whom Colonel Fitzhugh had served. The original town consisted of three families living in log houses near the
banks of Elm Creek, but by 1858 Gainesville was
made a stop on the Butterfield Overland Mail.
An important event known as "The Great Hanging" took place during the Civil War in Gainesville,
when forty suspected Unionists were hanged and
two others were shot as they tried to escape. Men

were also killed in neighboring Grayson, Wise, and
Denton counties. Few had actually conspired against
the Confederacy, and many were innocent of the
abolitionist sentiments for which they were tried
(Mccaslin 1996:309).
Cooke and the surrounding counties voted
against secession and a secret fraternal organization, the Union League, was formed in Cooke and
nearby counties (Collins 1981:11). Most men joined
to resist the draft and provide common defense
against Indians and renegades, but rumors began to
circulate of plans for an assault on Gainesville and
Sherman. When General William Hudson ordered
the arrest of all able-bodied men who failed to
report for Confederate military duty, Texas state
troops, led by Colonel. James G. Bourland, arrested
more than 150 men on the morning of October 1,
1862 (Mccaslin 1996:309).
Colonel Bourland and Colonel William C.
Young convened a citizen's court of twelve jurors,
including seven slaveholders (none of the men arrested owned slaves). The jury condemned seven
influential Unionists, but an angry mob took matters
into its own hands and lynched 14 more men before
the jurors recessed. The following week Colonel
Young was assassinated, which prompted a retrial of
the prisoners. Nineteen more men were convicted
and hanged. Elsewhere in North Central Texas, five
men were hung in Sherman, five were hung in
Decatur, and one prisoner was shot in Denton in
response to the supposed Unionist plot.
These events had far reaching effects as articles
from the Texas press were reprinted across the South.
As a result of this negative publicity, an embarrassed
President Jefferson Davis abandoned his demand for
an inquiry into a similar incident involving northern
troops in Palmyra, Missouri. The northern press heralded the story as another example of Rebel barbarism (Mccaslin 1996:310). Perhaps the only remaining physical evidence marking this event is the headstone of Nathaniel W. Clark in the Clark Cemetery
near Wolf Creek (Figure 4).
After the Civil War, Gainesville grew extensively as it became a major supply point for cowboys when the cattle industry expanded. The
Chisholm Trail became the major route out of Texas
for livestock from 1867 to 1884. Joseph G. McCoy,
of Illinois, persuaded Kansas Pacific Railroad officials to lay a siding at the hamlet of Abilene, Kansas, where he built pens and loading facilities. In
1864, Jesse Chisholm began hauling trade goods to
Indian camps about 220 miles south of his post

134

Texas Archeological Society
Railway was constructed, making the town a
shipping point for ranchers and farmers (Minor
1996a:47). The high price of cotton allowed
Gainesville to survive the disappearance of the cattle
drives, and the discovery of oil in the mid-1920s
helped the town survived the Great Depression
better than similar communities. In the 1930s,
Gainesville became home to the Gainesville
Community Circus, which eventually gained a
national reputation. Shortly after the United States
entered World War II, Camp Howze was constructed west of town as an infantry-training center.
The influx of approximately 10,000 troops
temporarily doubled the local population. After
World War II Gainesville's population grew
steadily, surpassing 10,000 in the mid-1950s and
14,000 by the late 1980s. In the early 1990s
Gainesville had 600 businesses and a population of
14,587 (Minor 1996a:47).

FIELD METHODS

Figure 4. The headstone of Nathaniel W. Clark, a victim
of the Great Hanging.

near modem Wichita. In 1867, the first cattle drive
from Texas to McCoy's facilities discovered
Chisolm's wagon tracks near the North Canadian
River and followed them into Abilene. Eventually,
the entire trail from the Rio Grande to central Kansas was named after Chisolm (Worchester 1996:89).
The cattle did not follow a clearly defined trail
except at river crossings; when dozens of herds
were moving north it was necessary to spread them
out to find grass. After trailing techniques were
perfected, a trail boss, ten cowboys, a cook, and a
horse wrangler could trail 2,500 cattle three months
for sixty to seventy-five cents a head. This was far
cheaper than shipping by rail. Between 1871, when
Abilene ceased to be a cattle market, and 1884 the
trail might end at Ellsworth, Junction City, Newton, Wichita, or Caldwell in southern Kansas. The
Western Trail by way of Fort Griffin and Doan's
Store ended at Dodge City. The Chisholm Trail
was finally closed by barbed wire and an 1885
Kansas quarantine law (Worchester 1996:89).
In 1886, the Santa Fe line reached Gainesville
and in 1887 the Gainesville, Henrietta and Western

As noted in the introduction, this project was
not a traditional archeological survey in the sense
that investigators spent a lot of time searching for
sites. Avocational archeologists led the crew to the
sites and arranged meetings with collectors who
had recovered artifacts from these sites. The project
goals were to record and map as many sites as
possible within the four-day window allotted, to
photograph avocational collections if the artifact
proveniences were known (Figure 5), and to record
any additional sites that might be found in the vicinity of the sites reported by the avocationals.
Methods of examining each site differed depending
on whether or not the landowner granted permission to dig shovel tests and collect artifacts. The
individual site descriptions discuss the methods used
to record each site.
In general, the survey methods included shovel
tests, roughly 30 cm in diameter, excavated in 10cm levels and screened through 1/4-inch mesh, combined with general surface collections of diagnostic
artifacts. All sites were photographed with color
slide film and black and white film, and site sketch
maps were made using the pace and compass technique. All features and diagnostic artifacts were
also photographed. State of Texas site forms were
completed for each site. At the Sivells Bend site
(41C0159), the crew also back filled a large pothole after photographing and drawing the profiles,

Martin-Documenting Arclieological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 135

Figure 5. Dan Prikryl photographs a prehistoric bow and historic artifacts from a Cooke County collection.

to keep it from eroding into a much bigger hole.
Wherever possible, the crew examined cut banks
and similar areas of ground exposure adjacent to
sites to search for features and artifacts eroding out
(Figure 6).

SURVEY RESULTS
The fieldwork progressed as follows. On Tuesday, November 14, Ona B. Reed took the crew to
visit Thurman Ward at his home in Sivells Bend.
He showed us his collection from several sites in
the County, including a well preserved wooden bow
(125 cm long) found in a cave near Lake Texoma.
We took a few photographs of his collection, but
most of the material was unprovenienced. He led us
to the Sivells Bend site (41C0159) and told us as
much about it as he could remember. The entire
crew spent most of the day recording the Sivells
Bend site, which includes the Dillard Cemetery. At
the end of the day, the crew stopped to examine a
hilltop overlooking the river that was reported to
Ernie Martin as the site of either a Spanish outpost

or an 1840s blockhouse. However, only a few pieces
of 20th century milled lumber, a couple of tested
quartzite cobbles and natural blocks of limestone
on a limestone outcrop were found. About 200 m
out into the pasture a masonry cattle trough was
present. We did not record this location as a site.
On Wednesday, November 15, the crew members split into two crews. Wayne Bartholomew
led a crew that visited sites at Lake Texoma that
Ernie Martin knew about, while Bill Martin took a
crew with Ona B. Reed to visit sites in far western
Cooke County. The Texoma crew recorded sites
41C0181 and 41GS114 and examined two areas
of shoreline where sites had been previously noted,
but found only a single quartzite flake along one
stretch of beach. The other crew recorded sites
41C0175 and 41C0177.
On Thursday morning, November 16, Ernie
Martin took the entire crew to the site of Fort
Fitzhugh (41C04). After recording the site, the
Texoma crew returned to Lake Texoma and recorded sites 41GS23, 41GS115, and 41C0182. The
other crew recorded one more site in the Elm Fork
drainage (41CO178) before moving on to sites on

136

Texas Archeological Society

confluence of Redmond Creek and the
Elm Fork. A company of Texas Rangers, whose main foti was at McKinney
in Collin County, used it as a temporary
base for launching patrols to the north
and west. The fort reportedly consisted
of a small log stockade with a single
row of blockhouses and a stable (Minor
1996b: 1101). However, an article in the
Gainesville Daily Register, dated August
29, 1950, states that, "Heavy rocks which
lie in such abundance over the hill which
formed the foundation for the fort, still
suggest the outlines, although many have
been removed and others displaced." According to this article, Fitzhugh was born
in Kentucky in 1818 and moved to Missouri as a child. He fought under General Edmund Pendleton Gaines in the
Florida war (Second Seminole War
1835-1842) and also fought in the Mormon war (1838), that removed Mormons
from the state of Missouri. He came to
Texas in 1845 and established a plantation at McKinney, but left to fight in the
Mexican War ( 1846-1848) before establishing a camp along Elm Creek in 1846
where Fort Fitzhugh was built in 1847.
At that time he held the rank of captain;
Figure 6. Exposing a possible hearth in the cut bank profile of Blue
he became Colonel Fitzhugh during the
Hollow.
Civil War while fighting for the Confederacy.
The first settlement in Cooke County grew up
the Fish Creek drainage (41C0179 and 41C0180).
Finally, on Friday, November 17, Robert Brooks,
around the fort, but was abandoned by 1850 (Minor
Oklahoma State Archeologist, accompanied the
1996b: 1101). According to the Gainesville Daily
crew to Ernie Martin's Gainesville office to view
Register article, when the town was moved, it was
Colonel Fitzhugh who suggested that it be named
his collection. The remainder of the day was spent
Gainesville in honor of General Gaines, whom he
showing Dr. Brooks the sites that had been recorded and discussing his views on the prehistoric
greatly admired. In 1948 the local Boy Scout unit
occupations on both sides of the Red River.
donated a plaque to mark the spot where the fort
once stood. At that time, the only structural remnants of Fort Fitzhugh were a well that had been
Site Descriptions
dug about thirty feet northwest of the stockade and
a caved-in ammunition dump that may have been
41C04, Fort Fitzhugh
part of the original military outpost.
Fort Fitzhugh, named for Colonel William F.
In 1967, Margaret Parx Hays, then President of
Fitzhugh, was one in a series of military outposts
the Cooke County Heritage Society and Chair of
built from Preston to the Rio Grande for the protecthe Cooke County Historical Survey Committee,
tion of settlers from Indian raids. The fort was built
concentrated her efforts on obtaining historical inin 1847 on an alluvial terrace adjacent to the Elm
formation on Fort Fitzhugh. A series of letters on
Creek floodplain, approximately 30 ft. higher than
file at the THC demonstrates Ms. Hays' persistence
the floodplain and about 500 m east of the
in searching for historical documentation. She wrote

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 137
to the Army Library at the Pentagon, the Library of
Congress, the Great Plains Historical Association,
and museums and military historians at various universities trying to find out whether or not the fort
was originally built as a US military fort. She also
attempted to find maps of the fort and records on
the personnel stationed there, although no such
records could be found. She then wrote to Curtis
Tunnell, State Archeologist at the Texas State Building Commission (later subsumed under the Texas
State Historical Survey Committee in 1969, which
ultimately became the Texas Historical Commission in 1973), suggesting that the fort would make
a good State Park. Curtis assigned his assistant,
Harald P. Jensen, to contact Ms. Hays and investigate the site. THC files also contain several letters
from Jensen to the landowners, Ms. Hays, and participants in the excavations.
Fulton Murray, Jr., who owned the site in 1968,
allowed Jensen to conduct archeological excavations in June of 1968. Work was conducted with
some assistance from avocational archeologist R.K.
Harris, and Dessamae Lorraine, the Southern Methodist University (SMU) archeologist who had conducted excavations at sites along Fish Creek prior
to the inundation of Fish Creek Reservoir (Moss
Lake). Local teenage volunteers, including Ernie
Martin, provided the bulk of the labor for these
excavations.
The only written information readily available
regarding the actual excavation is a brief and uninformative site form prepared by Jensen. The site
form lists the area of occupation as 50 square meters
and the condition of the site as "excavated and
refilled." Apparently, these site dimensions refer
only to the portion of the site where two blocks
were excavated, rather than the entire fort area. The
article in the Gainesville Daily Register infers that
the fort was about 40 ft. long and laid out with a
southeast to northwest orientation based on "the
rocks which formed the foundation for the walls."
Jensen described the matrix as black clayey silt and
the artifacts recovered included "ceramics, glass,
metal, bone and a few Indian artifacts."
In 1969, Mr. Murray constructed a home in the
vicinity of the fort, and the entire area that had been
excavated by Jensen was bulldozed. Several artifacts
were collected from the smface by Mr. Murray and
photographs were sent to Jensen to assist in the
preparation of a report on the excavations. Some of
Jensen's 1969 letters indicate that he was in the
process of preparing a report, but no such document

has been found in the THC files. Artifacts from the
excavation are curated at TARL, but it appears that
a report was never produced.
In 1989, Jack Crozier owned the site and he
graciously allowed us to conduct a surface examination along roads, gullies, and other disturbed areas. As previously mentioned, Ernie Martin had
worked on Jensen's crew in 1968 and was able to
point out the exact locations of the two block excavations that had been placed over two separate structures. Block 1 was a rectangle measuring 5 x 2 m.
Four foundation stones from a fireplace uncovered
in excavation unit #13 during the 1968 excavations
were observed along with foundation stones from a
wall adjacent to the fireplace at the southern end of
the block. Three metal arrow points were reportedly recovered from this block in 1968. Block 2
formed an ell, with a 3 x 2 m rectangle that had an
additional 1 x 1 m unit added to one side. There,
two boulders from walls of a separate structure
uncovered in excavation unit #2 were observed.
This description of the second block varies from
a more recent (2003) sketch map prepared by Ernie
Martin (Figure 7), which shows Block II as a larger
block than originally described, consisting of 13
units with foundation stones uncovered in the center of the block. The map also shows the relationship of the excavation units to each other and to the
original and current positions of the marker placed
at the site in 1948, which had been placed directly
over fireplace stones. The map reveals that fireplace stones were uncovered in the southwest corner of the 5 x 2 m Block I, along with the three
metal arrow points arranged in a linear fashion along
what may have been a wall.
The crew conducted a general surface collection and obtained several items that are likely related to the occupation of the fort, including some
refined earthenware and stoneware, and some metal
items. Table 1 lists all of the artifacts collected and
several are illustrated in Figure 8. The ceramics
most likely to have been deposited during the brief
occupation of the fort include four very small sherds
of flow blue china manufactured between 18351900 (Williams 1981:7), and a sherd of transferprinted earthenware with a green floral design on a
white background that appears to be most similar to
patterns manufactured between ca.1815 and 1850,
as identified in Pollan et al. (1996). A smaller piece
of transfer-printed ware with a black vegetative
motif on a light blue to violet background probably
dates to this period, but it is too small to positively

138

Texas Archeological Society

~
~

Possible Wall

I

-N-

0

4

Original marker
position prior to
excavation

Meters

Marker location
after excavation

Foundation stones

41C04
1968 Excavations

Figure 7. Ernie Martin's map of the 1968 excavations at Fort Fitzhugh.

identify. Four badly eroded/burned light green
sherds (three from the same vessel) may be decorated with a hand-painted design, which was common in the 1840s and 50s, but the design is nearly
obliterated due to the bad preservation. Two light
green salt-glazed exterior/plain-glazed interior
stoneware sherds were also collected that appear
typical of specimens manufactured around 1850
(Greer 1981). A sherd of blue shell-edged ware
with a smooth rim was recovered, along with a
small sherd displaying part of a foot ring that may
be from the same vessel, judging from the faint
blue tint in the glaze. However, this smooth-rim
style dates later than the fort occupation, becoming
most common around 1875. Two small whiteware
sherds, a small sherd that was light blue on one side
and white on the other, and a yellow creamware
sherd were also recovered, but these types of ceramics were commonly in use over such a long
period that they cannot be used for precise dating.
Five machine-cut square nails may date to the
fort occupation, but they could also date as recently
as the early 1900s. Two pieces of aqua-colored
bottle glass, probably from patent medicine or

extract bottles, probably postdate the fort occupation
since they were more common in late 19th century.
A few small unidentifiable iron fragments were
found and one linear iron object about the size of a
tableware knife was found, but it cannot be
positively identified. The most unusual item
collected was a rectangular flat piece of iron with
four identical nail or screw holes punched in the
four corners, a large (ca. 3 cm) hole near the middle
of the piece, but offset to one side, and one small
roughly rectangular hole half way between the large
hole and one of the corner holes (see Table 1). This
may be part of a latch for a trunk or a door, but no
positive identification could be made. Obvious later
intrusive artifacts include a fragment of bakelite, a
plastic which was patented in the early 1900s and is
still in use today, and an object that appears to have
been a flat six-pointed star-shaped piece of
aluminum that was bent in half as if to form a
clamp of some type.
We also examined the knoll across the draw
where an 1830s gun barrel was reportedly found
during bulldozing to construct the barn that stands
there today. We did not find any historic material,

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 139

0

0

1

i

2

2

3

4

3 centimeters

Figure 8. Iron and ceramic artifacts recovered at Fort Fitzhugh in 1989.

3inches

140

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Surface Artifacts Recovered from
Fort Fitzhugh (41C04)

CERAMICS
Refined Earthenware
Flow Blue China
Transfer Printed White Ware
Light Green (eroded) White Ware
Blue Outside/White Inside WW
Blue tinted White Ware
Shell-edged White Ware
Pure White White Ware
Creamware
Stoneware
Salt-Glazed exterior
METAL
Machine-cut Nails
Linear strap/knifeblade?
Iron Lockplate
Unidentifiable Iron Fragments
Aluminum six-pointed star clamp?

4
2
4

2

the map generated by this magnetometer survey
includes numerous anomalies, most, if not all,
are a result of modern metal such as nails and
fence staples and entire fence lines. The 1968
excavation blocks are visible as large black spots
on either side of the series of linear anomalies
that represent T-posts from a new fence. Given
the fact that the original fort area has been
partially excavated and then subsequently
bulldozed, and that the surrounding area has been
an active ranch for many years, it seems unlikely
that very much remains to study archeologically
at this site.

41C0159, the Sivells Bend Site
5

OTHER HISTORIC
Bakelite fragment
PREHISTORIC
Anvil/Nutting stone
Quartzite tertiary flake
Shell-tempered sherd

but did collect a prehistoric anvil or nutting stone, a
quartzite flake, and a small shell-tempered sherd
with the shell leached out.
Bulldozing for house and barn constrnction undoubtedly disturbed the site, especially the main
area that was excavated by Jensen, but it seemed
that that some portion of the archeological component might be relatively intact. Based on the surface distribution of artifacts, site size is estimated
to be at least 55 x 15 m (artifacts extended into
areas with poor ground surface visibility). The actual fort location was roughly 100 m west of the
point labeled "Site of Fort Fitzhugh" on the USGS
Woodbine 7 .5' quadrangle.
In August of 2003, at the request of Ona B.
Reed, the THC made a final attempt to better
define Fort Fitzhugh. Using an extremely
sensitive Cesium magnetometer to generate a
map of magnetic anomalies across the site, the
THC hoped to identify walls and other historic
features by their magnetic signatures. Although

The Sivells Bend Site is situated along the
edge of an alluvial terrace composed of sandy
loam overlying sandy clay that lies about 50 feet
above the Red River floodplain. The river once
abutted up against this terrace, but not necessarily
during the period when the site was occupied.
South of the alluvial terrace are hills rising another 150 feet in elevation, forming a series of
breaks dissected by small streams. The site is extremely large, measuring approximately 1250 x
250 m. In 1989, one third of the site was an old
field covered with grasses and weeds, one third
was plowed, and one third was pasture covered
with Coastal Bermuda grass (Figure 9). Thurman
Ward owned the eastern two thirds of the site and
a Mrs. Martin owned the western third planted in
Coastal Bermuda grass.
Mr. Ward led the crew out to this site and
provided as much information as he could
remember about the site, which was considerable,
since he grew up on the site in a house that used to
stand close to the site's center (near the outbuilding
shown on the Marietta West Okla.-Tex. 7.5'
quadrangle). He searched the fields for arrowheads
as a boy in the 1920s and 1930s. He stated that
when the old field had first been plowed, he
observed four or five (or perhaps as many as eight)
possible houses that appeared as dark circular
stains (probable middens) .. He described one of
the houses as a series of circular charcoal stains,
20-30 cm in diameter, arranged in a circular pattern
that was 3-m in diameter or greater. He also
pointed to a rise at the far eastern end of the site
(about 80 m northwest of the possible house
patterns) and said it contained the remains of a
structure. He had recently excavated the center of

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 141
house cluster and it yielded a
good
deal of shell-tempered
\
Dillard
pottery. The soil in this area was
Cemetery
characterized as a reddish brown
sandy loam from surface to a
Mr. Ward's Pit
depth of 20 cm overlying brown
sandy loam from 20-50 cm,
\ Ruins of Mr.Ward's
overlying a culturally sterile
\
boyhood home
orange brown compact loam from
50-70 cm. The other four tests
were dug to the south, east, and
north of the possible house area,
Reported
Burial
and these tests recovered very
little.
Within the "House Mound"
Area, cultural material was observed all the way to the bottom
of Mr. Ward's excavation, a
depth of approximately 1.5 m
below surface. Mr. Ward described finding an oval concenof charcoal and burned
tration
Figure 9. Sivells Bend site, showing site areas referenced in text.
clay at the western end of his
excavation, which must have
this rise and had left the excavation open (Ernie
been a hearth. This feature was contained enMartin later squared up the hole and cleaned off
tirely within his excavation and he dug all of it
the walls). This portion of the site was designated
away. He did not mention the depth at which this
as the "House Mound" Area. Mr. Ward also
feature was observed, but stated that he found
reported that a burial was found long ago at the
nutshell all the way to the bottom of his excavawestern end of the site on the Martin property,
tion and that he believed the material continued
where another concentration of material was
deeper.
present. He stated that cultural materials were
The crew did not excavate any units in this
confined to the fields with reddish brown sandy
portion of the site; instead, crew members scraped
loam and that those with brown sandy loam
down the walls of Mr. Ward's excavation to crecontained very little.
ate fresh surfaces and mapped the profiles. All
profiles were examined and the north, east, and
south profiles were mapped and photographed. The
The Old Field and "House Mound" Area
walls of the excavation revealed what may be a
Most materials collected at the Sivells Bend
burned, prepared clay house floor with an associsite were artifacts recovered from shovel tests
ated hearth (a separate feature from the one excaexcavated in the old field near the location where
vated by Mr. Ward). The clay lens was visible in
Mr. Ward reported observing remains of possible
all profiles at approximately 50 cm below surface
circular houses. This area was within the eastern
(Figure 10). Thickness of the clay was variable,
third of the site, just north of an east-west trending
but generally ranged from 3-6 cm over most of the
intermittent stream. Five shovel tests were
profile. The clay was extremely hard to scrape
excavated in 10-cm levels and screened through
when the walls were being cleaned. A whole
1/ -inch mesh. Ceramics, flakes, cobbles, and some
charred
acorn was found in the profile beneath
4
historic glass were collected (Table 2). Most
this probable house floor. Fire-cracked rock and
material was found in the upper 30 centimeters,
unidentified animal bone were also observed in
but within the proposed house cluster, some
the profile, primarily in the zone above the clay
material occurred as deep as 60 cm below surface.
lens. A probable bison vertebra was also collected
The first shovel test was dug within the possible
from the South wall.

Table 2. Prehistoric Artifacts from Shovel Tests at the Sivells Bend Site (41C0159)

>-'

..i;:,.

N

Shovel Test

Depth (cm)

Ceramics 1

Flakes

FCR

Burned Clay

Bone

Shell

Charcoal (g)

I

~
;-:
>::i

"";:i....
~

Eastern Third of Site

;:s..
~

N-1

N-2

W-1
W-2
W-3

0-10
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
0-50
50-60
60-70
70-80
0-10
10-20
0-20
20-30
0-10
10-20
20-40
40-50
50-60

1 shell
10 shell
13 shell
6 shell
2 shell
0
1 leached
0
0
0
0
0
0
3 grog(?)
0
0
1 grog(?)
0

0
3
4
2
0
0
1
0
0
0
I
0
1
4
4
0
I
1

0
1
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
I
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0

0
0
l
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
0

1
1
0
11
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0-10
10-20
20-30
0-10
10-50

0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
2
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
1
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
1

Wes tern Third of Site
N-3

W-4

1

Ceramic temper terms: shell is ground mussel shell, leached exhibits voids where a calcareous temper has completely dissolved, grog (?)indicates
sherds where temper was minimal and difficult to see, but appeared to contain some fine inclusions of grog.

<:::>

C'
<:;q

....

(")

>::i

~

.....
(")
~

q

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 143

Figure 10. The author points out the baked clay and ash lens exposed in the wall of Mr. Ward's excavation.

The North profile was especially interesting.
It revealed the hearth in profile, which appeared

as an 18-cm-thick orange (burned) clay containing two distinct ash lenses at the bottom. Five
relatively large pieces of ashy burned clay, measuring about .3 cm in thickness, were collected
from the North wall. This is also the only profile
that suggests that an earlier building episode occurred, as evidenced by a less distinct clay lens at
a depth of 75 cm below surface. Although this
lens is somewhat ephemeral, its presence suggests
long-term occupation of this area with multiple
building episodes. It appears that this area was
built up through the intentional addition of fill,
rather than by natural means.
The floor of Mr. Ward's excavation measured
approximately 2. 7 m x 1.5 m. Of this, an area measuring 1.5 m x 0.5 m was scraped clean and mapped
in plan view. The plan revealed a possible posthole
near the north wall and, 60 cm to the south, a large
pit feature was exposed. Assuming the feature was
symmetrical, it would have formed an oval measuring about 100 cm NS x 90 cm EW. One light gray
fine quartzite flake was collected from the floor.
After recording observations in the "House Mound"

Area, the crew backfilled the hole to keep it from
eroding into a much bigger hole.
The Plowed Field
The central third of the. Sivells Bend site had
been plowed and recently planted in wheat.
Ground surface visibility was excellent. Some
burned cobbles were observed in plowed field,
along with a light scatter of lithic debris, but no
diagnostic artifacts were found. Mr. Ward indicated that nothing significant had ever been found
in this field.
The Pasture
The western third of the Sivells Bend site, on
the Martin property, was planted in Coastal
Bermuda grass. After securing permission to dig
from Mrs. Martin, we excavated two shovel tests.
No artifacts were recovered from the first test, which
was excavated in the vicinity where Mr. Ward
remembered a burial being uncovered in the 1920s
or 30s. Despite the fact that Mr. Ward remembers
this area as having an artifact concentration equal

144

Texas Archeological Society

to that present at the eastern end of the site, only
two flakes were recovered from the plow zone in
the second test, and one burned rock was noted.
The soil was described as a brown sandy loam from
surface to 30 cm overlying a more compact reddish
silty loam from 30-50 cm.

meter high. In 1989, a few crypts remained pretty
much intact, but some exhibited large cracks. Several grave markers include a late-19th century dove
motif, and one relatively modern grave was observed with the name "Allen" inscribed on the headstone. Due to time constraints, the crew was unable
to map the cemetery, although several photographs
were taken.

The Dillard Cemetery
The Dillard Cemetery (not shown on the
Marietta West Okla.-Tex. 7.5' quadrangle) is situated in a roughly rectangular patch of forest in the
far northeastern corner of the Sivells Bend site (it
was not assigned a separate trinomial). It is situated
along the edge of the terrace overlooking the Red
River floodplain to the north and a spring-fed tributary to the east. The spring still flows just to the
south of the cemetery. Dutch Dillard once owned
this property, and Mr. Ward stated that he has always known it as the Dillard Cemetery. The most
noteworthy characteristic of the cemetery is the
presence of masonry crypts made of mortared stone
and mortared brick (Figure 11). These crypts measure about 3 meters long, 1.5 meters wide, and 1

Artifacts from the Sivells Bend Site
Three distinct kinds of pottery were observed
on this site. One type exhibits pores where some
type of calcareous temper has leached out of the
paste (Figurel2b). Only one sherd of this type was
observed. It may have been shell-tempered, but
doesn't quite look like most leached shell tempered
ceramics the author has observed elsewhere. It has
a core and exterior color of light brown (7.5YR6/
4) and an interior color of slightly darker grayish
brown (7.5YR6/2). Then there are a few sherds that
have no easily visible temper, but may contain small
bits of grog. These are characterized by an exterior
color of grayish brown (ranging from 10YR7/4 to

Figure 11. Stone crypt in the Dillard Cemetery at the far eastern end of the Sivell's Bend site.

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 145

0

0

.5

1 inch

2

3cm

a
Figure 12. Examples of ceramic sherds found at the Sivell's Bend site. (a) sherds showing various amounts of shell
tempter, (b) sherds with calcareous temper completely leached.

10YR4/2) and a very dark grayish brown (10YR3/
2) interior color. One of these sherds had the
curvature indicative of the neck of a water bottle, or
possibly even that of a pipe bowl. No decorated
sherds were observed.
Finally, numerous shell-tempered sherds were
recovered from shovel test N-1, all of which appear
to be from the same vessel. These sherds exhibit a
high density of crushed shell in- the paste and appear to be typical of the type Nocona Plain (see
Figure 12a). Most were fired in a reducing atmosphere and have a dark gray (1 OYR3/2) interior
color, a very dark gray (10YR3/1) core color and a
dark brown (7.5YR4/4) exterior color. Two appear
to have been oxidized and have a lighter exterior
color (extending half way through the core) of
10YR6/4. They are all extremely friable and
crumble easily when handled. There are several
small sherdlets (sherds measuring less than l cm in

diameter) in the collection that are not included in
the counts presented in Table 2 because most appear to have broken off of the larger sherds in the
bag after the field collection was made.
The fire-cracked rock is comprised mostly of
friable sandstone and quartzite cobbles. The flakes
recovered include a wide variety of cherts and finegrained quartzites, such as Ogallala quartzite, in a
variety of colors. All of these materials would have
been present locally in gravel deposits along the
Red River.
The only identifiable bones recovered were a
small bird bone and a deer tooth found in shovel
test N-1 and a probable bison vertebra found in the
wall of Mr. Ward's excavations. Shovel test N-1
also contained other small unidentifiable bone fragments in an excellent state of preservation. About
half the bone was unburned, and the other half was
charred or calcined.

146

Texas Archeological Society

Summary
This site has outstanding research potential, especially the eastern third in the old field where the
"House Mound" Area occurs. Only a sparse scatter
of burned rock and flakes were found in the central
third (plowed field) along with the remains of the
house in which Mr. Ward grew up along the western edge of this field. Because the western third
was in pasture, the crew was unable to learn much
about it, but Mr. Ward reports that it contains an
artifact concentration similar to that found at the
eastern end of the site.

41C0175, the Grady McElreath Site
Ona B. Reed led us to this site, which is named
for its owner, Mr. Grady McElreath. She had worked
at the site on March 29, 1969 with Jerry Humphries,
a graduate student at SMU who recorded the site
and conducted a surface collection with several
avocational archeologists as part of an archeology
class. She provided a copy of his sketch map and a
site form. Humphries' sketch map and site form list
the site as X41C01, which denotes the old SMU
site recording system. Despite the U.T. site form, it
appears that the site was not recorded with TARL
until after the THC site visit in 1989, since no
trinomial had been assigned and no site was plotted
on T ARL maps in this location.
The site lies approximately 1.2 miles north
northeast of the town of Illinois Bend. Although it
falls within Cooke County, the western edge of
the site appears to be less than 100 m from the
Montague County line. It is situated on a high
terrace overlooking the Red River floodplain about
80-100 feet below. The Red River is about a half
mile north of the site, but the nearest natural water
occurs within an intermittent stream along Southeast side of site. The headwaters of this stream
begin as extremely ephemeral shallow draws
within the plowed field where the site is located.
Southeast of the site area, about 100 m from main
rise, the stream becomes deeply entrenched to a
depth of 15-20 ft. and flows due east out to the
floodplain. Part of the crew walked down into the
steep stream valley looking for cut banks or erosional areas along the steep slope up to the site.
Although some great exposures more than 3 m in
depth were observed extending down to weathered shale bedrock, no cultural materials or midden
stains were observed.

The site area encompasses at least 300 x 200 m,
with the main rise that contains the densest concentration of cultural materials covering an area of about
118 x 208 m. The site had been plowed and planted
in winter wheat, but ground surface visibility was
only fair (estimated at 40-50 percent) because the
lack ofrain created dry, dusty conditions in the sandy
loam. No artifacts were collected from this site.
Artifacts indicative of Late Prehistoric period
occupation (pottery) and probable Archaic period
occupation were found in 1969. It is difficult to
determine period of occupation from Humphries'
site form because it simply lists projectile points
without specifying arrows or darts. However, Ona
B. Reed remembered collecting some arrow points
in 1969, and these are probably the "small projectile points" listed in Table 3. Mr. Ward also knew
of arrow points being found on the site. The 1969
crew collected metate fragments, projectile points
(sometimes listed as large or small, but only one
specified as a dart point), sherds, hammerstones,
scrapers, a knife, and burned bone fragments
(Table 3). The I 989 crew observed burned rocks,
fragments of manos, and lithic debris in a light
scatter about the site. Most lithic debris was a
coarse white quartzite, but some yellow siltstone
or chert from river cobbles was observed along
with some red mottled chert. No pottery or cultural features were observed during the 1989 visit,
but in 1969, Ona B. Reed noted an oval area south
of the main rise that was stained. This stain probably represents a midden or house area. She also
noted a bone concentration between the main rise
and the stained area.
Conditions were so poor during the 1989 visit
that it is difficult to assess the nature of this site.
Reportedly, many people have collected this site
over many years, so the quantity of diagnostic material remaining is undoubtedly diminished. However, the site appears to have some potential for
addressing Archaic and Late Prehistoric occupation, based on the 1969 work.

41C0176, the Warrens Bend Site
This site is situated south of Warrens Bend on
the Red River along an alluvial terrace adjacent to
Blue Hollow, a permanent tributary (Figure 13).
Blue Hollow trends north-south along most of its
course, but used to turn abruptly and run east-west
from this site out to the Red River. However, it
now takes a slight jog to the east and then runs

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 147
Table 3. Surface Artifacts Collected in 1969 from the Grady McElreath Site (41C0175)
AreaA 1

AreaB

AreaD

Other Areas

1 hammerstone
1 projectile point fragment
(possibly a knife)
1 burned projectile point
1 small projectile point
1 distal tip of a large projectile point
4 scrapers
1 scraper (possibly also a knife)
1 distal tip of a large projectile point
3 sherds
1 flake
1 rock

1 bone fragment

2 hammerstones

1 hammerstone

1Areas

l dart point
5 metate fragments
1 mano
1 bone fragment

are those assigned by Humphries and shown on his 1969 sketch map.

north-south as a result of channel diversion in the
1920s. After a concrete dam was constructed in the
original channel about 80 m east of the present
diversion channel, the original channel silted in.
The diversion channel was directed north-south
along the property line and it bisects the site. Today
the site lies in fields of silty loam on both sides of
the channel. From the look of the topography and a
midden eroding out of the creek banks, it appears
that some of the best portions of the site were removed when the creek was diverted. In 1989, Don
Monroe owned the eastern half of the site and
Melvin Trammel owned the western half. The southern boundary was not clearly determined, but it is
somewhere in the forest beneath the colluvium along
the base of the hill.
The site extends over an area measuring 250 m
east-west by 140 m north-south. About two thirds
of the site lies to the east of the channel, where two
low rises were observed. The first is a large, low,
nearly circular rise near the site's center (referred
to as the Main Rise) that measures approximately
60 m in diameter. The second is a smaller low rise
measuring 30 m north-south by 40 m east west in
the southeastern corner of the site. This smaller rise
overlooks the confluence of the original channel
with a southeast trending intermittent stream. This
intermittent stream also forms the eastern boundary
of the site.

The depth of deposit is approximately 35-40
cm below surface, based on examination of creek
bank exposures and a pot hunter's holes, as well as
the excavation of three shovel tests. Ground surface visibility was 100 percent in plowed fields and
0 percent in the forest. There were several good
exposures along the creek channel. On the eastern
side of Blue Hollow, two shovel tests were dug and
screened in the wooded area south of the old natural channel, and one shovel test was dug and
screened on a low rise in the old field north of the
old channel. The crew made a non-controlled collection of diagnostic artifacts from the plowed surface of this site west of the diversion channel.
Five pot holes were present in the field on the
west side of the diversion channel and two areas
of excavation into the creek bank on the southern
edge of the site were noted where a midden was
exposed in the cut bank. Some burned rock and
animal bones were observed in the backdirt piles,
but none of the bones appeared to be human. With
the help of the landowner, the author contacted
Jimmy Wingler, the person responsible for the
digging, to inquire about his interest in the site
and request that he not excavate any further. Mr.
Wingler described himself as an amateur archeologist who is interested in archeology, but has no
access to professionals or a local society. This is
an area of the state that could benefit from the

148

Texas Archeological Society

~--

....

Corn Field

.,,.
/

""'

-----, ..........
Old Field

--

.. -.. --- ....

--

{

---

......

''

''

'\_,,
\: \: \.,,

@

l
\

'\."

\

ST1

Meters

'\

\

Main Rise

41C0176

\

\

~
'+.:

.-----,,

"

!r-0,.,
ll

~

Forest

Orig1·na.1 c
', \
::
', \ ''-"\I•' 'G,,...0 U>,
-----., reek ch
" Low Rise',
Shallow ch·---~nnet
',_
;\ \, ~~
----.-----~~et (sifted')y- -·--------· \
~-~
ST2

•
Forest

ST 3

-.___ ___ in

D -._____

\

'-'::_,

-- eeper
--\ ___ _
-......__ Cha.nnet..........__'\
1929 Dam

----------\----

Southern site boundary undetermin\d
Figure 13. Warren's Bend site showing midden, collector's pot holes, and THC shovel test locations.

creation of an archeological society if guided by a
professional archeologist.
The midden exposed in the cut bank of the
diversion channel is very dark and clearly visible, extending down 20-30 centimeters below
surface. Shovel testing on the east side of the
diversion channel documented the midden on a
rise in an old field to a depth of only 22 cm
below surface. The midden was not observed in
the two shovel tests dug in the colluvium south
of the natural channel, but the test closest to the
creek appeared to be comprised of recent colluvium. Any cultural features present at this site
should be easy to see during excavation due to
the dark gray midden overlying the natural reddish brown soil. No other cultural features were
observed at the time of our visit, but avocational
archeologists report finding burials at this site.
Occupation of this site appears to be limited to
the Late Prehistoric period.
Two very thick sherds (1.6 cm and 1.1 cm
respectively) were collected from the western portion of the site, along with burned rock, a small
unidentifiable fragment of long bone from a deersized animal, and lithics. Some mussel shell was
observed on the surface. These sherds were not
shell-tempered, but rather grog and bone tempered

(Figure 14). The very faint decoration visible on
the exterior surface appears to be cord-marking,
but it is too faint to positively identify and might be
the result of very light brushing.
41C0177, Dr. Cole's Site
Situated on the south side of North Fish Creek,
this site appears to have great potential for yielding information about Late Prehistoric period
lifeways. Thurman Ward led the way to this site,
stating that materials extended from the creek all
the way back to the hills, covering an area of
about 40 acres. However the densest concentration is estimated at about 100 x 40 m adjacent to
the creek, and this is the area the crew recorded as
the site. Mr. Ward had collected beveled knives
and a piece of obsidian from the rise adjacent to
the creek. Obsidian was also recovered downstream at the Dillard site (41C0174), and it is
likely that the residents of Dr. Cole's site obtained
this material from the Dillard site.
North Fish Creek forms both the northern and
eastern site boundaries. The creek is deeply entrenched and is avulsing southward in the direction
of the site, cutting into the rise containing the densest concentration of material. A steep cut bank with

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 149

0
0

.5

1 inch

2

3cm

Figure 14. Grog and bone tempered sherd from the Wan-en's Bend site.

Table 4. Artifacts Recovered from Shovel Tests at the Warrens Bend Site (41C0176)
Depth (cm)

Artifacts

0-10

20-30

2 sandstone fragments, 3 tertiary chert flakes,
2 secondary chert flakes
1 FCR, 1 deer-sized long bone (small fragment),
1 tertiary chert flake, 1 tertiary quartzite flake,
1 secondary siltstone flake
No recovery

2

0-30
30-40

No recovery
1 quartzite flake from water-worn cobble

3

0-40

No recovery

Shovel Test No.

10-20

150

Texas Archeological Society

Table 5. Surface Artifacts from the W estem
Half of the Warrens Bend Site (41C0176)
1 fire reddened sandstone cobble
2 decorated sherds from the same vessel
Thickness: 1.6 cm and 1.1 cm respectively
Temper: grog with some bone
Exterior color: buff (7.5YR7/2)
Interior color: buff (7.5YR7/2)
Core color: gray (10YR5/2)
Decorative element: cord-marked? brushed?

a 20-25 ft. vertical drop to the creek is present along
the northern edge of this rise. A northward flowing
intermittent stream makes a sharp tum to the east
shortly before it joins North Fish Creek. This stream
marks the eastern edge of the broad area of artifacts
reported by Mr. Ward, and forms the southern boundary of the site as the THC crew recorded it.
Most of the site is in pasture, but a small portion
of the eastern edge extends slightly into riparian
forest. Approximately 80 percent of the site appears
to be intact. Ground surface visibility ranged from
20 to 40 percent in some eroded areas, but was
generally nonexistent due to pasture and forest cover.
Where vegetation was sparse enough, materials were
visible on the surface. The crew spread out and
walked these areas to conduct a surface collection.

Two shovel tests were dug on the main rise and
the matrix was screened through 1/4-inch mesh. The
soil profile consists of brown sandy loam overlying
hard sandy clay. Flakes, bone fragments, and an
animal tooth were collected from shovel tests (Table
6). These shovel tests indicate that the depth of
cultural deposits extend at least 30 cm below surface. In addition, two beveled knife fragments were
collected from the surface (Table 7). One was
clearly of the four-beveled variety, but the other
was broken approximately in half and it was not
possible to determine whether it was a two-beveled
of four-beveled knife.
This may be an important Late Prehistoric site,
based on the materials attributed to it by Thurman
Ward. The beveled knives are most frequently associated with Late Prehistoric Plains Village bison
hunting, and this is the only site visited during this
survey where such implements have been found.
Also, obsidian is not commonly found in this part
of Texas. The site merits further testing.

41C0178, Jack Crozier Site
Jack Crozier, owner of the Fort Fitzhugh site,
also owns this large upland site in the Cross Timbers. Ernie Martin has a surface collection from
visits he has made at various times over the past 20
years. No pottery has ever been found, but Early
Archaic diagnostic artifacts (e.g., a Meserve point

Table 6. Artifacts Recovered from Shovel Tests at Dr. Cole's Site (41C0177)
Shovel Test No.

2

Depth (cm)

Artifacts

0-10
10-20

1 tertiary chert flake
1 tertiary chert flake

0-10

1 large secondary chert flake, 1white chert tertiary flake,
1 gray chert tertiary flake, 1 Ogallala quartzite tertiary
flake, 1 coarse-grained quartzite tertiary flake
1 primary chalcedony flake, 1 white chert tertiary flake,
l gray chert tertiary flake, 1 unidentified mammal bone
fragment
l gray chert utilized flake, lfriable sandstone fragment,
2 sherdlets (no visible temper), 3 fragments from a
single deer tooth, 2 unidentified mammal bone
fragments, 1 calcined mammal bone fragment

10-20

20-30

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 151
Table 7. Beveled Knives from the Surface of Dr. Cole's Site (41C0177)
1 four-beveled knife manufactured from a light gray chert with some beige cortex present

Severely resharpened before discard
Length: 4.78 cm (tip is broken, so the knife was actually longer)
Width: 1.67 cm
Thickness: 0.88 cm
1 broken beveled knife manufactured from dark gray chert with a small amount of brown cortex
Broken nearly in half; impossible to determine if it had four bevels or only two
Length: 2.44 cm (broken approximately in half, so estimated to have been about 5 cm long)
Width: 1.65 cm
Thickness: 0.71 cm

that had been reworked into a scraper) have been
recovered. He led the crew to the site and pointed
out the location where he found the reworked
Meserve point and the general locations of greatest
artifact concentration.
The site lies within the drainage basin of the
Elm Fork of the Trinity River. Wolf Creek is 100 m
east of the site, but a spring-fed, permanent stream
bisects the site into northern and southern halves.
The areas n01ih and south of the spring-fed creek are
in pasture with typical Cross Timbers vegetation,
consisting primarily of oaks, adjacent to the stream.
Ground surface visibility was fair on the north side
of the creek, due to the presence of some erosional
areas, but was very poor on the south side of the
stream where the pasture grasses were much thicker.
The site is estimated to cover an area measuring 200 x 240 m, with the concentration north of
the stream measuring 100 x 200 m, and the concentration south of the stream measuring 100 x 60 m.
Much of the site occurs on a gradual to steep
hillslope. Ernie Martin reports that 90 percent of
the artifacts were found on the slope north of the
stream. The crew observed several flakes of chert
and quartzite and a sandstone nutting stone on the
north side of the stream.
The crew dug two shovel tests on the south
side of the stream where the pasture grasses were
thick. Chert and quartzite flakes were collected from
one shovel test, but the other shovel test was sterile
(Table 8). Shovel testing indicates a depth of deposit of at least 40 cm below surface, with the soil
comprised of sandy loam. Shovel testing ceased at
50 cm due to low recovery, but no change in the
matrix was observed. No surface collection was

conducted at this site. No features were observed,
but Ernie Martin showed us an area where he had
found a human tooth (post-mortem loss) indicating
the presence of at least one human burial.
Approximately 90 percent of the site remains
intact. Although few artifacts were observed during
the crew's visit, the information regarding early
materials and a probable burial indicate that further
testing is warranted.

41C0179, The Beck Site
Claude Beck owned this site in 1989. When he
found projectile points and other artifacts in fill dirt
he purchased from Mr. Beck, Ernie Martin brought
it to Mr. Beck's attention. Ernie examined the grader
cuts and showed Mr. Beck that his fill dirt operation was mining an archeological site. Mr. Beck
stopped the operation once he became aware of the
damage to the site.
The site is situated at the foot of a steep slope
that rises 100 feet above the South Fish Creek
floodplain (Figure 15). The site is located 45 m
south of South Fish Creek to the east of the
confluence of South Fish Creek and Landers
Branch. The northern half of site (north of the
road) had been cleared and had 80 percent ground
surface visibility. The half south of the road was
covered in riparian forest and had no ground surface visibility. Materials are present within the
colluvium covering the gradual slope at base of
hill and extend down the slope and across the road
onto the alluvial floodplain where the fill dirt had
been mined. A dry erosional wash was arbitrarily
selected as the southern boundary of the site, since

152

Texas Archeological Society
Table 8. Artifacts Recovered from Shovel Tests the Jack Crozier Site (41C0178)

Shovel Test No.
2

Depth (cm)

Artifacts

0-10
10-20

1 beige chert tertiary flake
1 large Ogallala quartzite secondary flake,
1 white novaculite (?) flake
1 light gray chert tertiary flake, 1 dark gray chert
tertiary flake, 1 fire-reddened (?) chert tertiary flake
1 yellowish brown chert tertiary flake

20-30
30-40

area. Most of the diagnostic artifacts recovered are
there was not enough time to conclusively deterfrom Late Prehistoric period occupations, but the
mine the limits through shovel testing. The site
presence of a gouge and the quantity of burned rock
area is roughly 70 x 75 m in extent.
observed suggest that the site might also have a
Ernie was of the opinion that about 90 persubstantial Archaic component.
cent of the site had been scraped away. Much of
About half of this site remains intact. The
the site north of the road had been destroyed by
number of hearths observed in close proximity to
the front-end loader, and this portion of the site
each other suggests that this was an intensively
appeared to have the densest concentration of
occupied site at one time, or that there were repeated
deposits. However, after examining the entire landform, including the forested slopes
south of the road, we concluded
that only about 50 percent of the
~
site had been impacted.
FISH CREEK
Two shovel tests were excavated
/
on the wooded slope south of the
I I
road, both of which produced flakes
from the sandy loam matrix. These
II I
shovel tests indicate that the depth
I Ir'>
Deer Stand
D
of cultural deposits extend at least
I It
30-40 cm below surface. Materials
20
0
I /?
from shovel tests were collected and
Meters
a random surface collection was
/
'
I
/Mechanically Scrapec:l" '( ~
made. Artifacts recovered included
I
Gouge / ,X(
a sandstone or quartzite gouge, a
I
Hearths
o
x
Grass
I
o o o
/ /
shell-tempered (Nocona Plain) sherd,
0
She~d /
/
flakes, cobbles, and a Washita arrow
Forest (
I Arrow Point x / ./ ./ /
\
point (Tables 9 and 10).
'l
I
/ _./ j·-:'.
\
)
I
,,,,__,, ~~ "'.
I
In the shallowly scraped area
GENTLE
I
north of the road, five possible
I
,,,----_l__--~
SLOPE
I
hearths were noted and mapped.
~;
Forest
"'.
/~
These consisted of cobble concentrations surrounded by dark soil.
( Inter . --~ \
SJ1
ST2 /
They were exposed by shallow
tnittent st~~
41 C0179 @ /STEEP
ream-~~ _ _ _ _ _ ...... _..,.
'{LOPE
passes of the scraper along the southwest edge of the intensively scraped
area. The sherds and Washita arrow
Figure 15. The Beck site, showing shovel test locations, exposed hearths,
and completely scraped area.
point were also recovered from this

Ii

..,.----....

I/
!Ji

r\
1

p- - - __/_----:,,,,/

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 153
Table 9. Artifacts Recovered from Shovel Tests at the Beck Site (41C0179)
Shovel Test No.

2

Depth (cm)

Artifacts

0-10
10-20
20-30

No recovery
1 light gray fine-grained quartzite tertiary flake
1 light gray chert tertiary flake

0-10

2 light gray fine-grained quartzite tertiary flakes
(1 secondary, 1 tertiary), 1 chert chunk, 1 dark gray
fine-grained quartzite tertiary flake, 1 yellowish brown
fine-grained quartzite secondary flake
1 small chert secondary flake, 1 gray chert tertiary
flake, 1 yellowish gray chert tertiary flake
1 small chert tertiary flake, 1 small fine-grained
quartzite tertiary flake, 1 chert cobble, 3 FCR (friable
sandstone, one oxidized to orange)

10-20
20-30

Table 10. Artifacts Collected from the Surface of the Beck Site (41C0179)
1 shell-tempered Nocona Plain sherd,
Exterior color: brown 10 YR 512
Interior color: dark brown 10YR5/l
1 broken Washita arrow point with serrated blade like those recovered at the Dillard site
Length: ca. 1.50 cm (tip and part of base were broken, so it was actually longer)
Width: ca. 1.00 cm
Thickness: 0.24 cm
1 gouge manufactured on a flake of dark gray fine-grained quartzite
Length: 5.73 cm
Width: 3.22 cm
Thickness: 1.34 cm

occupations in the same area over time. The site
definitely has research potential for Late Prehistoric
settlement studies, and possibly for Archaic
settlement as well.

41C0180, The Barlow Cemetery
This historic cemetery is situated on a high
ridge overlooking the Red River Valley. The site is
listed as the Barlow Cemetery on the USGS
Marysville Tex.-Okla. 7.5' quadrangle. Interments
began in the 1880s and are arranged in regular rows
within a rectangular fenced enclosure along the hilltop. A prehistoric component is also present inside

the cemetery fence that extends outside the fence to
the north. Thurman Ward reported that he found
historic period clay marbles at the site. He has
collected artifacts from the surface over many years.
The crew conducted a random surface collection of prehistoric material, recovering one small
end scraper, one biface fragment, and one small possible spokeshave. The only other artifacts noted were
a few flakes. The site may date to the Late Prehistoric period, based on the presence of the thumbnail
scraper. No prehistoric features were observed.
Cedar Creek, about 200 meters to the west, is
the closest source of water, but the Red River is only
about 400 m to the north, where it turns to the north-

154

Texas Archeological Society

east along a bluffline. The upland vegetation is mostly
native grasses interspersed with some cedars and
oaks. Due to the sparseness of the vegetative cover,
ground surface visibility was around 70 percent.
Site size is roughly 110 by 60 m, including
both the prehistoric component and the historic
cemetery. However, the fence around the cemetery
encloses a roughly 60 x 70 m area, and the prehistoric
material appears to be confined to an area of about
40 x 70 m, mostly north of the cemetery. Although
no shovel tests were dug, the highly eroded nature of
this upland landform suggests that any prehistoric
deposit is very shallow. Several historic graves with
a wide variety of grave markers were present in the
cemetery. However, there was no time to fully
document the cemetery. Aside from a few photographs, the graves were not recorded.
Although it is estimated that up to 80 percent
of the prehistoric component is still intact, further
investigation does not seem warranted. This is a
fairly small, sparse site with limited research potential. The historic cemetery, on the other hand,
should be documented with notes and photographs
for each grave, along with a map.

41C0181
Ernie Martin has conducted surface collections
on this site, and directed the crew to its location.
The site is at least 115 x 50 m in extent, but the
actual size is difficult to estimate because of poor
ground surface exposure. This site lies on a high
terrace about 40 ft. above the Red River, which
forms its northern boundary. Vegetation consists of
post oak, blackjack oak, and native bluestem
grasses. Limestone bedrock can be seen in the lower
part of the cut bank of the Red River underneath
the site deposits. A major spring, called Dripping
Spring, is located about 450 meters due south of the
site. The sp1ing vent forms a drainage that flows
into an unnamed creek that empties into the Red
River about 140 m east of the site.
Surface inspection and shovel testing were conducted. Ground surface visibility was 100 percent
in the dirt road and trails, but was nonexistent elsewhere. Cultural materials were shallowly buried,
except in road cuts. Diagnostic artifacts were collected from the surface and all artifacts from shovel
tests were collected. Ogallala quartzite flakes and
flakes of several colors of chert were observed on
the surface in the road ruts. In all, perhaps 30 pieces
of chipping debris and 12 burned rock fragments

were seen. The cut bank exposures along the edge
of the river were too steep to safely examine.
Six shovel tests were excavated near areas
where denser surface distributions of artifacts were
observed in the road. The matrix consisted of a
brown to dark brown fine sandy loam over a mixed
reddish brown/brown fine sandy silt encountered at
30-40 cm below surface, with the upper unit being
thicker as one moved downslope toward the creek.
Beneath the sandy silt was a red to reddish brown
silty clay at a depth of about 50 cm. The boundary
between the upper sandy loam and the lower silty
clay was diffuse. In one especially deep road rut, a
layer of compacted pebbly silty clay loam was underlain by a yellowish sand at a depth of 75-80 cm
below surface. The few artifacts recovered are listed
in Table 11. The depth of the deposit is approximately 20-50 cm below surface. No cultural features were observed.
The site is located in a favorable setting near a
spring and the river. Unfortunately, hunters and
fishermen utilize this setting quite heavily. Deep
road ruts from their trucks have damaged some of
the deposits, and many people are likely to have
collected artifacts. The Tulsa District should limit
traffic in this area until the site can be evaluated for
National Register of Historic Places eligibility.

4JGS114, The Sheppard Park Site
This site is situated at the very northern tip
of a low projection of land within the Sheppard
Air Force Base. Recreation Area. It is the first
point of land west of the Fobb Bottom State
Hunting Area. This low landform is landscaped
and vegetated primarily in grass. It lies within
the floodpool of Lake Texoma and is occasionally inundated. The site overlooks the confluence
of Briar Creek and the Red River. Briar Creek,
located about 150 to 200 m to the west, flows
northward, while the Red River flows southward
along the eastern side of the site. The confluence
was presumably north or northeast of the site in
what is now Lake Texoma.
Site area is estimated to measure roughly 200
x 250 m. All survey was limited to visual
inspection of the ground surface and cut banks
along the shore. The soil matrix consisted of 1015 cm of fine sandy loam over red compacted
sandy clay. Ground surface visibility was only 0
to 10 percent. The depth of the deposit is undetermined, but is believed to be only 10 to 15 cm below

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 155
Table 11. Artifacts Recovered from Shovel Tests at 41C0181
Shovel Test No.
3

Depth (cm)

Artifacts

0-20
20-30

No recovery
1 gray chert secondary flake, 1 white chert
primary flake
1 Ogallala quartzite primary flake, l small chert
tertiary flake

30-40

4

0-10
10-20
20-43

No recovery
1 light gray chert tertiary flake
No recovery

5

0-20
20-30
30-40
40-53

No recovery
l gray chert tertiary flake
1 brown siltstone secondary flake
No recovery

7

0-10

1 Ogallala quartzite tertiary flake, l gray chert
tertiary flake
No recovery
l large quartzite primary flake
No recovery

10-20
20-30
30-40

surface based on depth of presumed culture bearing
strata (fine sandy loam).
A very light scatter of chert debitage and burned
rock occurred along a 100-125 m stretch of shoreline. No diagnostic materials or cultural features
were observed. Artifacts were eroding out of a 2 to 3
m deep cutbank, presumably from the thin 10-15 cm
cap of fine sandy loam that overlies the red compacted sandy clay. One chunk of siltstone with cortex on 100% of the dorsal surface was recovered
from the cut bank at the northwest portion of the
site. Heavy shoreline erosion has removed much of
the deposit. It appears that very little remains intact,
perhaps less than 25 percent.

41GS115
Ernie Martin has found artifacts on the surface of this site, which is located along a periodically inundated low knoll on a point of land approximately 750 m north of the Sheppard Air Force
Base Recreation Area and about 1.125 km west of

the Willis Point, Fobb Bottom State Hunting Area.
The primary concentration of cultural materials is
confined to the south side of this point overlooking
the confluence of an unnamed intermittent stream
and Caitlin Creek. At one time, intermittent drainages were probably located within 50 m of the site.
Vegetation consisted of grass, oaks, pecans, and
various hardwoods. The current site area is estimated to measure only 74 x 27 m. However, site
materials were probably much more extensive prior
to the impoundment of Lake Texoma and some
artifacts may be submerged beneath the lake waters. Some burned rock, a biface fragment, and a
quartzite flake were noted along the northeastern
shore of this particular point of land, suggesting
another site was once located there. Ground surface
visibility was very poor on that portion of the landform due to drifting sands along the shoreline and
cut bank margins. The southwestern shoreline of
this point exhibits cut bank exposures up to 1.7 m
high (Figure 16). The percentage of intact deposits
remaining is unknown.

156

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 16. Inspecting the cut bank at site 41GS115.

Survey included visual inspection of the ground
surface and cut banks along the shore and excavation of 4 shovel tests. Debitage was recovered from
all of the 4 shovel tests (Table 12). The shovel tests
were plotted on a map made with the pace and
compass technique. The soil matrix consisted of
medium fine sandy loam over red compacted sandy
clay. Ground surface visibility varied from poor to
fair, but overall visibility was estimated to be 40 to
50 percent. The depth of the archeological deposit
was not precisely determined, but is restricted to
the sandy loam A horizon ranging from 30 - 60 cm
thick, with an average thickness of about 35 cm
across much of the site.
One feature was recorded, but it is unknown if
it is of cultural or natural origin. Feature 1 was a
circular arrangement of limestone cobbles measuring 33 cm in diameter. Two larger pieces were
lying horizontally on the ground surface, while 13
other pieces formed a circle, with several of these
tilted at about a 55 degree angle. A single small
tertiary flake was found immediately adjacent to
the feature and a second flake was found some 10 ft
away. It was difficult to determine if the rocks were
fire-cracked. The rocks were sitting on, or just

above, the red sandy clay B horizon. Most of the
brown fine sandy loam matrix had been stripped
away by erosion.
In addition to artifacts collected from shovel
tests, surface artifacts that were observed but not
collected included possible burned limestone and
sandstone, 20-30 tertiary Ogallala quartzite flakes,
a few tan and white chert flakes, and a single
biface fragment.

41GS23
The Cocklebur Site
Ken Brown (UT Austin) originally recorded
this site in 1972 during the Texoma Enlargement
Project. Ernie Martin also has conducted surface
collections at this site, which is situated on a periodically flooded point of land on the north side of
Slickum Slough, directly across the slough from a
Texaco oil field. This area is west of the main
channel of the Red River and about four km north
of the Sheppard Air Force Base Recreation Area.
Slickum Slough drains the adjoining upland areas
and empties into present day Lake Texoma adjacent to the site.

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 157
Table 12. Artifacts Recovered from Shovel Tests at 41GS115
Depth (cm)

Artifacts

0-10
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-80

1 reddish chert secondary flake
1 light gray chert tertiary flake
No recovery
1 chert secondary flake
No recovery

2

0-30
30-40
40-70

No recovery
1 small chert secondary flake
No recovery

3

0-10
10-20
20-30
0-50
50-60

1 Ogallala quartzite secondary flake
1 dark gray chert tertiary flake
No recovery
No recovery
1 reddish chert tertiary flake
1 white chert primary flake

Shovel Test No.

4

Artifacts were observed along a 400 m-long
stretch of shoreline that was about two m wide.
These site dimensions were recorded on the site
form, but obviously the entire extent of the site area
is larger. No cultural features were noted, but chert
and quartzite flakes, crude bifaces, and burned rocks
were observed as a discontinuous scatter of material
along the 400 m of shoreline. Material was exposed
on the beach on both the lake and the slough sides,
in small quantities. Ground surface visibility away
from the beach was 0-10 percent due to grasses and
weedy growth.
Due to time constraints, the site was given only
a cursory examination and no shovel tests were
dug. All observations were based on visual inspection. Materials were not visible on the surface away
from the beach, but are presumed to be buried in
the intact sandy loam A horizon. A low, one-mhigh cut bank parallels the shoreline and it appeared as though site materials were eroding from
within this profile. The depth of sandy loam above
the red sandy clay B horizon was variable, but
could not be precisely determined due to the heavily
eroded nature of the shoreline. The discontinuous
nature of the cultural materials may be a function
of differential erosion and or reflect multiple overlapping or adjacent sites.

41C0182
Dirt Road Site
This is another site Ernie Martin is supposed to
have visited, but his description of the location was
somewhat vague and the site observed by the field
crew was so small that they were not sure if this site
was the same one he had described. It is situated on
an alluvial te1Tace of the Red River only about 50
m east of the main channel. Cultural materials were
observed over a 60 m long exposure in a dirt road
crossing the West Handy Oil and Gas Field.
Ground surface visibility was 100 percent within
the bladed road, but away from the road it was only
0-10 percent due to grasses and scattered oaks and
pecans. The site dimensions were recorded on the
site form as 60 x 10 m (artifacts observed over a 60
m stretch along the road by the width of the road),
but the entire extent of the site is not known. No
cultural features were noted, but burned rock, chert
and quartzite debitage were observed in the road.
The materials appeared to be in situ and not brought
in as road fill. No artifacts were collected.
All observations were based on a very brief
visual inspection, just enough to confirm that a site
was present. The depth of the deposit is unknown,
but since the only disturbance appears to be from

158

Texas Archeological Society

the road, it is estimated that perhaps 75 percent of
the site is intact.
41C0183
Ivan Cox Farm Site

pebbles. Part of the site is in cultivation, part is an
orchard, and the rest is unimproved pasture of Coastal
Bermuda and numerous wild native grasses. Ground
surface visibility is usually around 60-70 percent,
with 100 percent visibility in the cultivated portion.
Several occupations, spanning the Paleoindian
to Late Prehistoric periods, occurred at this site
based on the diagnostic artifacts recovered. Ernie
Martin identified Meserve, Angostura, Dalton, San
Patrice, Scottsbluff, and Calf Creek dart points,
representing the Paleoindian to Early Archaic occupations. Wells, Gary, Yarbrough, Kent, Godley,
Darl, Lange, Marcos, Martindale, Castroville, and
Dallas or Trinity dart points reflect most of the
Archaic period occupations. Only two arrow points
are known from the Cox Site, both of the Bonham
type (Figure 18). Other artifacts present included
metates, nutting stones, gouges (Clear Fork type),
scrapers (both hafted and hand held), and drills. No
beads or pottery have been found at this site. No
cultural features were discernable, but the site is
littered with rocks darkened by burning. These rocks

This is a large productive site that was recorded
by Ernie Martin shortly after the Texas Historical
Commission 1989 fieldwork had been completed. He
mailed the site form and photographs to the author so
they could be added to the report. This is the only site
discussed in this article that was not actually visited
by Texas Historical Commission staff.
Beginning in the 1930s and continuing for more
than 40 years, random surface collections were
conducted at this site. Ivan Cox, Ernie Martin, and
Steve Brammer all have collections that include
projectile points, metates, drills, gouges, scrapers,
bifaces, and nutting stones. Located in southeastern
Cooke County, approximately nine miles southeast
of the city of Gainesville, this site lies along the
east bank of Indian Creek south of Lake Kiowa. It
is situated on an alluvial ten-ace 2530 feet above the bed of Indian
,,,,.....
Creek, which is part of the Elm Fork
/
/
I "
"7 '
drainage basin (Figure 17). The
Uncultivated /
Orchard
creek is about 60 m west of the site,
/ Old Fence LinE:
/'~~
1
\
iPlowed Annuall~
and the highest part of the site is
I
~
about 100 m from the creek. The
I Melon Patc1~po 0 O
Q
ten-ace slopes from east to west,
I Plowed once/
o 0/
'
with an additional slope to the
I
in 1981 ch
'L=Gar.=den I
southwest. The terrain slopes away
i(';r~
O o
(~~~v
from the terrace to the creek on the
~j
f 0
0/
,JV'
west side and to a large sandy
,
'
/'
I
,
peanut field on the south. A large
0 f Uncultivated
wooded rocky hill rises 125 feet
I
r'j_
above Indian Creek one-half mile
Uncultivated r 0 0 /~,,_!
I
south of the site.
The site is estimated to be 3-4
acres in extent. Since it has only
I Area washed away \ f "'\
/
been surface collected, the depth of
-+--- by 1966 flood;
~! ~
I
/
replaced with fill
~~
the cultural deposit is unknown.
/
~J
I
Approximately 25-30 percent of the
/
IQ~~
I
site remains intact, while approxi!
Peanut Field
/
I
I
/
/\
mately 60-70 percent of the site is
Regularly Cultivated
I
0 I ~
regularly affected by cultivation.
1
Erosion from flooding in 1966 and
1
subsequent refilling of the area by
~
1
r / o
40
the landowner destroyed about five
percent of the lower portion of the
Meters
f /
site. The soil consists of sandy loam
Figure 17. Ivan Cox site as drawn by Ernie Martin.
mixed with numerous dark sandstone

-.... '

J

trn

Cpo
I

L0 ___

10

I

/ " " " l,,C/~D /

I

I

41co1as

ru~

-i-

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 159

Figure 18. A small sample of the many artifacts collected over the years at the Ivan Cox site documents Paleoindian
through Late Prehistoric occupation.

have been disturbed by cultivation, but there are
probably intact deposits beneath the plow zone and
are most likely undisturbed cultural deposits in the
areas of the site that are not under cultivation.
Artifacts were concentrated along the highest
ridge of the terrace, where an orchard is now located,
extending south to the northernmost part of the peanut field. The Paleoindian points are generally made
from imported or uncommon material, while those
of the Archaic period were manufactured from local
materials. Ernie Martin believes that this site was a
regular stop on the seasonal round beginning late in
the Paleoindian period and lasting up to the beginning of the Late Prehistoric period.

CONCLUSIONS
Prior to this report, the archeology of Cooke
County was known only by the handful of avocational archeologists who collect there. The limited professional excavations at Fish Creek Reservoir (Moss Lake) by Lorraine (1969) provided a

glimpse of the potential the county held, as did
excavations at 41C0141 at Lake Ray Roberts
(Prikryl and Yates 1987). Ernie Martin's excellent
excavations at the Dillard Site (41C0174) provided
a wealth of data for the Late Prehistoric period
along the Fish Creek/Red River area (Martin 1994).
Otherwise, nothing had been published on the archeology of the county. The Cooke County Archeological Project was designed to sample as many
of the major drainages and physiographic zones of
the county as possible in the limited time frame
available to obtain information on a variety of sites
and document them on State of Texas Archeological Site forms.
In four days, 12 sites were sampled and recorded, many of which appear to have good research
potential. The site that appears to offer the greatest
potential is the Sivells Bend site (41C0159). The
quantity of materials recovered from the few shovel
tests dug and the profiles observed in Mr. Ward's
excavation, coupled with reports of midden stains
and house patterns, clearly indicates that a village
was present during the Late Prehistoric period.

160

Texas Archeological Society

Another site with great potential for understanding
the Late Prehistoric period is the Warrens Bend
Site (41C0176), which had a midden clearly visible in the cut bank of Blue Hollow. It is also one of
the most threatened sites in the area, with five potholes on the site proper and two excavations into
the midden along the cut bank. These sites could
reveal information about this time period along this
stretch of the Red River.
Along the Fish Creek drainage, Dr. Cole's
Site (41CO177) is particularly interesting and
appears to retain a good deal of contextual integrity. The fragments of beveled knives found by
the crew, coupled with reports of complete beveled knives and obsidian, indicate further excavations would be informative. The Beck site
(41C0179) has been severely damaged by the
mining of topsoil, but approximately 50 percent
of the site is still intact. The presence of hearth
features suggests that additional excavation
would also be productive.
Within the Elm fork drainage, the Ivan Cox
Farm site (41C0183) appears to have the greatest potential for understanding the Paleoindian
and Archaic period occupations. Although, not
visited by the crew during this project, the quantity of artifacts recovered over the years and the
amount of the site remaining intact, as reported
by Ernie Martin, suggest that this would be a
very productive site for future research. Another
site within the Elm fork drainage that was reported to contain early materials was the Jack
Crozier site (41C0178). Although the crew observed few artifacts, the reported Meserve point
and the presence of a probable burial indicate
that further testing is warranted.
It is difficult to assess the potential of many of
the sites due to lack of data, either due to poor site
conditions at the time of our visit or the brevity of
the site visit as we endeavored to reach all of the
sites reported by avocationals. The Grady McElreath
Site, 41C0175, did not appear to have features or
many artifacts the day the crew visited it, but dry
dusty conditions prevailed. In 1969, promising
stains and bone concentrations were observed, so
the site may have some research potential. With
respect to the sites recorded at Lake Texoma, several
may have potential for additional study, but the
massive erosion from the lake coupled with the
cursory examination of most sites allows only
general recommendations to be made. The Tulsa
District should limit traffic or other disturbances in

the areas of 41C0181, 41C0182, 41GS23, and
41GS115 until the sites can be evaluated for
National Register of Historic Places eligibility.
The prehistoric sites with the least potential for
further study include 41C0180, the Barlow Cemetery, which contains only a prehistoric surface artifact scatter, and 41GS114, The Sheppard Park
Site, which has been almost completely eroded away
by Lake Texoma. Although there is a lot of local
interest in Fort Fitzhugh, 41C04, due to its historical importance to the City of Gainesville, very little
appears to remain intact. Key portions of the site
that were subjected to archeological excavation have
been bulldozed, and other portions have been damaged by house and barn construction. It is possible
that the most informative portion of the site has
been destroyed, but because this is an important
historical site, additional shovel testing should be
conducted to determine if any intact archeological
deposits are left.
On a final note, it seems that this area of the
state would benefit greatly from the creation of a
local archeological society, particularly if guided
by a professional archeologist, such as the Texas
Historical Commission Regional Archeologist for
this region. This project has demonstrated that there
are numerous sites with tremendous potential for
yielding data about a region for which the archeology still remains virtually unknown. Many of the
sites remain fairly well intact, and there are interested avocationals present in the area who simply
need some guidance on the appropriate methods of
site recording and excavation. At present, Cooke
County is not threatened with the kind of development that has destroyed virtually all major sites that
once were present in the Dallas-Forth Worth
metroplex. It may never suffer development on this
scale, but some action should be taken soon to
document and study these sites before any further
development does occur.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The dedication of Ms. Margaret Parx Hays and
Ms. Ona B. Reed of the Cooke County Historical
Commission to recording the County's varied resources prompted the THC to conduct the CCAP.
The success of the project was due primarily to
the efforts of Dr. Ernie Martin, a long-time avocational archeologist with an encyclopedic
knowledge of the local archeology. Dr. Martin

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 161
contacted most of the landowners to secure
permission for entry to their property and for
recording sites on state site forms. He also
accompanied us into the field to lead us to several
important sites.
The following landowners are thanked for generously allowing us to document the sites on their
property: Grady McElreath, Robert McElreath,
Thurman Ward, Dr. James R. Cole, Jack Crozier,
Claude Beck, Don Monroe, Melvin Trammel, and
Steven Snuggs. Michael Corkran, at that time with
the Tulsa District of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, granted permission to survey federal land at
Lake Texoma without an ARPA permit. Herb Smith,
Texoma Project Manager, is thanked for his assistance with our work at the lake. We are also grateful to Robert Brooks, Oklahoma State Archeologist, who spent a day in the field with us to view the
Texas side of the Red River.
Finally, the following people are thanked for
their fieldwork efforts: Nancy Kenmotsu, Daniel
Prikryl, Wayne Bartholomew, Deborah Smith, and
Jan Murray. Mark Denton is thanked for his assistance in the identification of historic period artifacts.

REFERENCES CITED
Baugh, Timothy, Steven Mack, and Virgil Swift
2002 Plains Burial Objects as a Potential Indicator of
Ethinicity. Paper presented at the 2002 Plains Conference.
Bell, Robert E.
1958 Archaeological Investigations at the Boat Dock Site,
Ma-I, in the Lake Texoma Area, Marshall County,
Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 6:37-47.

Bruseth, James E. and William A. Martin (editors)
1987 The Bird Point Island and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and Theoretical Contributions to North
Central Texas Archaeology. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume 2. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Bruseth, James E. and Nancy A. Kenmotsu
1993 From Naguatex to the River Daycao: The Route of
the Hernando de Soto Expedition through Texas.
North American Archaeologist 14:199-226.
Carr, John T., Jr.
1969 The Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas
Water Development, Board Report 53. Austin.
Collins, Michael
1981 Cooke County, Texas: Where the South and West
Meet. Cooke County Heritage Society, Gainesville,
Texas.
Crook, Wilson W., II and R.K. Harris
1952 Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: the Carrollton and Elam Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 23:7-38.
1957

Drass, Richard
1997 Culture Change on the Eastern Margin of the Southern Plains. Oklahoma Anthrological Society Memoir No. 7 and Studies in Oklahoma's Past No. 19,
Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman, OK.
Ferring, C. Reid
1986 Late Quaternary Geology and Environments of the
Upper Trinity Basin. In An Assessment of the Cultural
Resources in the Trinity Basin, Dallas, Tarrant, and
Denton Counties, Texas, edited by Bonnie C. Yates
and C. Reid Ferring, pp.32-112. Institute of Applied
Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.
1987

Geoarchaeology of Site 41C0141: A Late Holocene
Locality in the Upper Trinity Basin. In Test Excavations at 41CO141, Ray Roberts Reservoir, Cooke
County, Texas, edited by Daniel J. Prikryl and
Bonnie C. Yates, pp. 1-54. Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

1989

The Aubrey Clovis Site: A Paleo-Indian Locality in
the Upper Trinity River Basin. Current Research in
the Pleistocene 6:9-11.

1990

The 1989 Investigations at the Aubrey Clovis Site,
Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 7.

1995

The Late Quaternary Geology and Archaeology of
the Aubrey Clovis Site, Texas: A Preliminary Report. In Ancient Peoples and Landscapes, edited by
Eileen Johnson, Museum of Texas Tech University,
pp. 273-281.

Bell, Robert E. and David A. Baerreis
1951 A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
22:7-100.
Brack, Michael L.
2000 Shell Tempered Ceramics of the Late Prehistoric
Southern Plains: Toward a Cultural Understanding
of Nocona Plain. Unpublished Master of Arts thesis, Department of Anthropology, Wichita State
University.
Breeding, Seth
1996 Lake Texoma. In The New Handbook of Texas,
Vol. 4. p. 31. Texas State Historical Association,
Austin.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man near Lewisville
and Associated Fauna! Material. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 28:7-97.

162

Texas Archeological Society

2001

The Archaeology and Paleoecology of the Aubrey
Clovis Site (41DN479) Denton County, Texas. Center for Environmental Archaeology, University of
North Texas, Denton.

Meltzer, David J. and Michael R. Bever
1995 Paleoindians of Texas: An Update on the Texas
Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:47-81.

Fen-ing, C. Reid and Bonnie C. Yates
1997 Holocene Geoarchaeology and Prehistory of the Ray
Roberts Lake Area, North Central Texas. Institute of
Applied Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton.

Minor, David
1996a Gainesville. In The New Handbook of Texas, Vol.
3. p. 47. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Gettys, Marshall
1984 Early Specialized Hunters. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by Robert E. Bell, pp. 97-108. Academic Press, Orlando.
Greer, Georgeanna H.
1981 American Stonewares, the Art and Craft of Utilitarian Potters. Schiffer Publishing Limited, Box E,
Exton, Pennsylvania.
Hughes, David T.
1984 The Foragers: Western Oklahoma. In Prehistory of
Oklahoma, edited by Robert E. Bell, pp. 109-117.
Academic Press, Orlando.
Kleiner, Dianna J.
1996 Red River. In The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 5. p.
491-493. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946 Cultural Complexes and Chronologies in Northern
Texas with Extension of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. The University of Texas at Austin, Austin.
Lon-aine, Desamae
1969 Archaeological Excavations at Fish Creek Reservoir.
Contributions in Archaeology No. 4. Department of
Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Lynott, Mark J.
1977 A Regional Model for Archaeological Research in
Northcentral Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
1979

Prehistoric Bison Populations of Northcentral
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
50:89-101.

Martin, Ernest
1994 The Dillard Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 62: 105-200.

l 996b Fort Fitzhugh. In The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 2.
p. 1101. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Peter, Duane E. and Daniel E. McGregor (editors)
1988 Late Holocene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek
Drainage. Joe Pool Lake Archaeological Project,
Volume I. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Pollan, Sandra D., W. Sue Gross, Amy C. Earls, Johnny T.
Pollan, Jr. and James L. Smith
1996 Nineteenth-Century Transfer-Printed Ceramics from
the Townsite of Old Velasco (41BOl25), Brazoria
County, Texas: An Illustrated Catalogue. Prepared
for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston
District. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R. and D.A. Lawson
1972 An Assessment of the Archeological and Paleontological Resources of Lake Texoma, Texas-Oklahoma. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Survey
Report No. 10. The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas.
Prikryl, Daniel J.
1990 Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition ofCultural
Concepts and Chronologies along the Trinity River,
North-Central Texas. Office of the State Archeologist
Repoit 37, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Prikryl, Daniel J. and Bonnie Yates, eds.
1987 Test Excavations at 41COJ41, Ray Roberts Reservoir, Cooke County, Texas. Contributions in Archaeology No. 4. Institute of Applied Sciences,
North Texas State University, Denton.
Ray, Max A.
1960 The James Site, Br-11, an Archaeological Site in
Bryan County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society 8:53-74.

Mccaslin, Richard B.
1996 Great Hanging at Gainesville. In The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 3., pp. 309-310. Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.

Rohn, Arthur H.
1998 Haley's Point (34MAl5) on the Red River, Marshall
County, Oklahoma (Area F). Wichita State University Publications in Anthropology No. 4, Wichita,
Kansas.

McGregor, Daniel E.
n.d.
Some Thoughts on Refining the Bryan Focus: A
View from South of the Red River. Unpublished
manuscript on file with the author.

Skinner, S. Alan and LeAnne Baird
1985 The Archaeology and History (~f Lake Ray Roberts,
Vol. 3: Settlement in a Marginal Zone. AR Consultants. Dallas.

Martin-Documenting Archeological Sites in Cooke and Grayson Counties, Texas 163
Skinner, S. Alan, M.B. Cliff, L. Baird, J. Garber, V.
Scarborough, K. Singleton, , A. Pitchford, J. Renner, K.
Fimple, K. Han, and D.G. Shaddox
1982 The Archaeology and History of Lake Ray Roberts,
Vol. 2: Construction Area Testing. Environment Consultants, Inc., Report 82-9. Dallas.
Soil Survey Staff
1981 USDA Agriculture Handbook No. 296, Land Resource Regions and Major Land Resource Areas of
the United States. Washington DC.
Stanford, Dennis
1982 A Critical Review of Archeological Evidence Relating to the Antiquity of Human Occupation of the
New World. In Plains Indian Studies: A Collection
of Essays in Honor of John C. Ewers and Waldo
Wedel, edited by D.H. Ubelaker and H.J. Viola, pp.
208-218. Smithsonian Contributions to Anthroplogy
30. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington D.C.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1952 The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. American Antiquity 17(4): 299-312.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 Handbook of Texas Archaeology: Type Descriptions.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.
Story, Dee Ann
1990 Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain: Volume I, by Dee Ann Story, Janice A. Guy,
Barbara A. Burnett, Martha Doty Freeman, Jerome
C. Rose, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl
J. Reinhard. Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series No. 38, Fayetteville.

Williams, Petra
1981 Flow Blue China: An Aid to Identification. Fountain
House East, Jeffersontown Kentucky (Revised edition).
Willey, Gordon R.
1966 An Introduction to American Archaeology, Vol 1.,
North and Middle America. Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Worchester, Donald E.
1996 Chisolm Trail. In The New Handbook of Texas,
Vol. 2. p. 89. Texas State Historical Association,
Austin.
Wykoff, Don G.
1964 The Archaeological Report of the Buncombe Creek
Site, Marshall County, Oklahoma. Oklahoma River
Basin Survey, General Survey Report No. 3.
1984 The Foragers: Eastern Oklahoma. In Prehistory of
Oklahoma, edited by Robert E. Bell, Academic
Press, Orlando, pp. 109-160.

Stable Carbon Isotopes from the Stiver Ranch
Burial Sinkhole (41KM140)
Christine Alvarez

ABSTRACT

The stable carbon isotope analysis of the individuals at the Stiver Ranch burial site suggests they shared
a mixed diet of predominately C3 plants and animals that eat these plants, and lesser amounts of CAM/ C4
plants. Furthermore, the distribution of oC 13 values at 41KM140 indicate a single dietary population among
the mortuary sample interred at the site. Comparison with oC13 values from other Central Texas mortuary
sites reveals dietary trends for hunter-gatherer populations which warrant further stable carbon isotope
research in the Central Texas region.

INTRODUCTION
The field of bioarcheology, or the study of human skeletal remains in an archaeological context,
is of growing importance in archeology today, especially in regards to sites with mortuary components. In addition to information gleaned from burial
goods and mortuary practices, study of the skeletal
remains themselves can provide additional valuable information about a population including demography, health status, diet and adaptive efficiency. For example, bioarcheological analysis was
a key component in the study of a number of wellknown prehistoric burial sites in Texas, including
Bering sinkhole and Seminole sinkhole. With advances in scientific techniques which can draw information from human bone, such as stable carbon
isotope testing, research which focuses on human
skeletal material is increasingly important. Stable
carbon isotope testing is a valuable method in analysis of dietary patterns and is a vital component for a
complete understanding of the lifeways of the burial
sinkhole skeletal population.
With funding provided by the Council of Texas
Archaeologists (CTA), a total of five samples of
human bone from Stiver's Ranch Burial sinkhole
were submitted to Geochron laboratories for stable
isotope testing of carbon in collagen to reconstruct
the possible diet of individuals interred at the
sinkhole. Two additional stable carbon isotope
values were added when the results of radiocarbon

analysis were made available. In this paper I present
the results of stable carbon isotope analyses, compare the results with those of other mortuary sites
in Texas, and examine dietary patterns and hypotheses based on stable carbon isotope values
reported from mortuary sites in Central Texas.

SITE DESCRIPTION AND
METHODS OF EXCAVATION
The Stiver Ranch burial sinkhole (41KM140)
is a prehistoric burial site located on private land in
Kimble County, TX (Figure 1). The excavations at
the burial sinkhole took place over two South Texas
Archaeological Association (ST AA) field schools
in 1999 and 2000, with Dr. Steve Black as Principal Investigator. The investigative strategy for the
site was complete excavation, with some modifications to control for the confined area of the sinkhole. At the start of the excavations in 1999, the
sinkhole was divided into two excavation units,
north and south, or Unit N and Unit S. Levels in
each unit were to measure lOcm in depth, but by
Unit N, level 4, average depth per level had reached
15 cm, a combination of difficult and cramped excavation conditions, rocky matrix, and an eager
field crew. Between the 1999 and 2000 field
schools, excavation during the weekends resulted
in the north and south units being combined into
one center unit where level depth was taken down

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

Texas Archeological Society

166

It was clear upon initial review of the remains and field
notes that the individuals in the
sinkhole were commingled and
that the majority of the bones
were disarticulated and frag..... .l. ....
mented. Analysis of over 3,500
bone fragments indicates that a
minimum of eight adult individuals, including one cremation, and two subadult individuals were deposited at the sinkhole. A minimum of eight adult
individuals was determined by
calculating the highest number
of duplicated bone elements, or
MNI.
Commingling and frag*
mentation appears to be a result
of taphonomic processes, and
thus individual burials could not
be reconstructed. Likewise, no
discrete deposits were distinguishable. Analysis of the distribution of bone fragments
Figure 1. Location of Burial Sinkhole sites in Central Texas, including
shows two large concentrations
41KM140.
of bone in the upper and lower
regions of the sinkhole, represented as the grey areas in Figure 2. These areas
about 45cm. Unfortunately, the only detailed records
are only representative of zones where bone exthat were kept for the weekend excavations were
ceeds 200 fragments per level, and are not discrete
triangulation data for key artifacts and larger bones.
During the 2000 field school,
the north unit was expanded
northward and was titled Unit
Grey area=200+ Bone Fragments per Level
N(A) and the south unit expanded
Black Area=Cremation
Surface
southward as Unit S(A). The levels of these new units were to
measure 15cm in depth and were
Entrance
numbered 4 through 8 to match
up with the existing levels for
Units N and S. Unfortunately, after the field school excavations,
the sinkhole was never backfilled,
and looters made their way to the
sinkhole floor in 2003. Bones and
artifacts that were disturbed during this incident were packaged
and transferred to me for inventory and analysis. Figure 2 is a
vertical profile map of the completed excavations, including arFigure 2. Vertical Profile Map of Excavations at 41KM140, including the
eas of bone concentration, disfrequency of remains classified by amount of bone fragments and level.
cussed below.
ll

ire

r

-t:L-11_ • • • l ' i - - =

Souther~~rthern

Alvarez-Stable Carbon Isotopes from the Stiver Ranch Burial Sinkhole (41KMJ40) 167
deposits. Even so, the concentrations are indicative
of an upper and lower deposit which at one time
may have been discrete from each other.

from the Late Archaic throughout the Late
Prehistoric period.

STABLE CARBON ISOTOPES
DA TING METHODS
As at other mortuary sites, understanding the
time period during which the site was utilized is
of primary importance. An accurate site chronology allows the researcher to draw information regarding patterns of use of a site, and in
bioarcheology, trends of change in the population. For example, at Bering sinkhole, discrete
deposits were dated to the Early Archaic through
the Late Prehistoric, and analysis of the skeletal
remains could therefore inform on patterns in
health and diet over most of prehistory. In contrast, all remains from Seminole sink dated to
the Early Archaic period. Unfortunately, the degree of commingling at 41KM140 did not allow
for the precise associations between time period
and burials as was seen at Bering sinkhole and
Seminole sink, however both relative dating and
absolute dating were used in an attempt to refine
the chronology of the site.
Relative dating of 41KM140 using artifact association was of limited reliability due to the commingling of deposits. However, temporally diagnostic artifacts were used when available to give a
broad range of time during which the site was probably used for burial, assuming that projectile points
and other artifacts were interred with individuals as
grave goods. Nine diagnostic projectile points including one Travis/Nolan, six Frio, and two
Edwards indicate that the sinkhole was used during
the Middle Archaic through the Late prehistoric, a
period of use of approximately 4,000 years (Collins
1995). Generally, projectile points from earlier time
periods were recovered from the lower deposits,
and those from the later time periods were recovered from the upper deposits.
With funding provided by the STAA, two
bone samples were selected for absolute dating.
AMS radiocarbon dating of two samples of
human bone from the upper and lower deposits
gave radiocarbon ages of 800±40 B.P. and
2130±40 B.P. respectively. These dates fall
within the time range suggested using temporally
diagnostic artifacts. Using AMS radiocarbon
dates alone to establish the chronology of the
site confirms that the site was used for burial

The concentration of the elements carbon and
nitrogen are under metabolic control in an animal's
tissues, or collagen. The amount of each element
consumed by an individual is expressed by a ratio
of the amount of each isotope (C 13 for carbon) to
the amount of each element (C 12 for carbon) in the
bone collagen. These ratios are not transferred
exactly from the food to the consumer, but differ
because of fractionation, or the preferred incorporation or exclusion of one isotope or another in a
chemical reaction (Price et al. 1985). Because
lighter isotopes react more quickly in a reaction
than heavier ones, collagen will reflect different
proportions for different isotopes. For example,
carbon values are less negative than the diet food,
while nitrogen values are more positive than the
diet food (by about three parts per thousand).
Knowing the unique properties of carbon and nitrogen, and their use by plants and animals, allows
researchers to correlate the isotopic compositions
of dietary resources with those found in bone collagen (Ambrose 1993).
Carbon can enter a consumer's diet through
three possible sources, depending on the photosynthetic pathway of the plants consumed. C3 plants
utilize a photosynthetic pathway with three carbon
atoms, C4 plants use four atoms, and CAM plants
can utilize both pathways. C4 plants include a variety of grasses and agricultural crops. Their oC 13
values, or the ratio of the carbon isotope 13 to
carbon 12, are less negative than C3 plants, because
they are less depleted in carbon. C3 plants such as
bushes and most trees have more negative values.
Lastly CAM or Crassulacean acid metabolism
plants, such as most cacti, have values similar to C4
plants. Because different foods in an individual's
diet (C 3 plants vs. C4 plants for example) produce
different isotopic signatures, researchers are able to
determine to varying degrees what sort of diet foods
were being utilized by that individual. In addition,
collagen turnover in adult humans is rather slow
and thus the sample values given always show the
accumulation of isotopes over a long period of time,
specifically the diet of an individual over the last
10-30 years of life. Because of this accumulation,
stable carbon isotope ratios are a good indicator of

168

Texas Archeological Society

the long-term diet of an individual (Mays 2002,
Bousman and Quigg, n.d.).

ENVIRONMENT AND DIET
A thorough discussion of stable isotope analysis
of carbon and its use in reconstructing the diet of
prehistoric populations has been given thorough
attention elsewhere (Ambrose 1993, Mays 2002,
Pate 1994, Price et al. 1985, Schwarcz and Schoeninger 1991). However, a brief review of some of
the most common dietary resources available in the
Central Texas region is presented. The range of
carbon isotope values (oC 13 ) for these resources is
also indicated.
Plants and animals which may have been utilized as part of the diet in Central Texas include a
variety of C3 plants (mean value of -27 %0) which
are abundant in the Edwards Plateau and neighboring regions. C3 plants include acorns harvested from
live oak and shin oak, sotol, onion, and persimmon.
Edible CAM (Crassulacean Acid Metabolism)
plants in the region, many of which yield oC 13
values in the C4 plant range (mean -12.5%0), include prickly pear and yucca (Huebner 1991). Deer,
which consume a diet of C 3 plants, were also part
of the Central Texas diet, along with a variety of
other animals including bison, rabbits, and turtles
(Baker 1998, Bement 1994).
The abundance of C3 plants and some CAM
plants suggest that hunter gatherers utilizing plant
resources in this region should have an isotopic
signature indicating a diet which includes a mixture
of predominately C3 plants, and lesser amounts of
C4 or CAM plants. The assumed dividing point in
human 8C 13 values for a C3 dominant diet vs. a C4
dominant diet is approximately -14%0 (Huebner
1991). Therefore, values with a negative greater
than -14%0 would suggest a diet similar to Central
Texas mixed C3 and CiCAM diets, and values more
positive than the -14%0 dividing point would reflect
a C/CAM diet similar to those found in the Lower
Pecos region of Texas (Huebner 1991 ).

SAMPLE SUBMISSION
AND RESULTS
Funding provided by the CT A allowed for
only five samples of the entire skeletal assemblage to be submitted for stable carbon isotope

testing. These samples were carefully selected to
avoid including the same individual twice. This
was particularly difficult due to the fragmented
and commingled nature of the sample. To avoid
this problem, three right distal humeri and two right
mandibular bodies were selected. The intention
was to include the highest amount of duplicated
bone elements possible to avoid selecting bones
that belonged to the same individual. Samples were
also selected from both upper and lower deposits
of the sinkhole since these areas contained the
most complete bone fragments.
As previously stated, a minimum number of eight
adult individuals were interred at the sinkhole, and
this was determined after calculating the highest number of duplicated bone elements. The selected
samples represent at least three to five out of eight
adult individuals from the sinkhole. Since three right
humeri cannot possibly belong to the same individual, at least three individuals are represented by
the samples selected. At most, five individuals are
represented by the samples selected, if every bone
selected belongs to a different individual.
Two additional samples, which were from the
upper and lower deposits of the sinkhole respectively, provided both oC 13 values and AMS radiocarbon ages (Table 1). Inclusion of these two
samples added two additional oC 13 values, which
lie within or near the range of values given for the
undated samples. The results show a range of 8C 13
values with a mean of -17.7±0.92 %0 (Table 1). The
distribution of values lies close to the sample mean,
with very little deviation. As Bousman and Quigg
(n.d.) note, such a small range, with values which
lie close to the sample mean, suggests that only one
dietary population is represented.

PATTERNS, COMPARISON,
AND DISCUSSION
The values from the Stiver Ranch sinkhole indicate that individuals had a mixed diet of C3 and
C4 plants, with a greater dependence on C3 plants
and probably animals which ate C3 plants such as
deer. Since the mean 8C 13 value (-17.4 %0) for the
41KM140 sample series was more negative than
the dividing point in human 8C 13 values for a C3
dominant diet vs. a C4 dominant diet (-14%0), the
results suggest that the individuals interred at the
Stiver ranch burial sinkhole consumed a diet similar to Central Texas mixed C3and C/CAM diets

Alvarez-Stable Carbon Isotopes from the Stiver Ranch Burial Sinkhole (41KM140) 169
Table 1. Stable Carbon Isotope Samples from 41KM140
Radiocarbon
Age

8C 13

Sample#

Description

41KM140-S4-H

Right humerus, collagen

800± 40
Years B.P.

-18.6 %0

Geochron Laboratories

41KM140-CT

Mandibular molars,
collagen

2130± 40
Years B.P.

-17.2 %0

Geochron Laboratories

41KM140-C-1

Right Mandible,
collagen

n/a

-18.2 %0

Geochron Laboratories

41KM140-C-2

Right Humerus, collagen

n/a

-17.3 %0

Geochron Laboratories

41KM140-S4-3

Right Humerus, collagen

n/a

-17.4 %0

Geochron Laboratories

41KM140-S4-5

Right Mandible, collagen

n/a

-17.5%0

Geochron Laboratories

41KM140-NA4-4

Right Humerus, collagen

n/a

-15.7%0

Geochron Laboratories

Laboratory used

-17.4 %0 ± .92

Mean

Table 2. Average Stable Isotope Values From Sites on the Edwards Plateau, South Texas,
and the Lower Pecos.*
Area

8c13

Reference

-17.4 ± .92 (7)
-15.8 ± .97 (16)

Alvarez 2005
Bement 1994

-16.9 (1)
-12.1 (1)

Huebner et al.1996
Tennis 1994

-14.0 ± 1.23(6)
-16.8 ± 3.3 (8)

Huebner 1991
Turpin 1988

Edwards Plateau
Stiver Ranch (41KM140)
Bering Sinkhole (41KR241)
South Texas
41KA89
La Villita (41BX917)
Lower Pecos
Various Sites
Seminole Sink (41VV620)
Modified from Pertulla (2001: Table 12)
*Mean values, sample size given in parenthesis

170

Texas Archeological Society

(Huebner 1991). The sample values also fall well within the range
-13
of 8C 13 values reported from morIll
tuary sites in the Central Texas
-14
region, which are reported in Table
ill
2 along with 8C 13 values from
South Texas and the Lower Pecos.
Ill
0
Ill
.,"' -15
Of specific interest are the
:::l
values reported from Bering Sink~
*
hole burial site (41KR241), also
~ -16
0
u
located in Central Texas (Bement
..."'
0
1994 ). Stable carbon isotope
i:i
"'
2130±40yBP
-17
samples from Bering sinkhole
were dated to the Early, Middle
and Late Archaic, showing a dis-18
tribution of values that become
*~00±40yBP
more negative over time (Figure
3). Stable carbon isotope values
-19
from 41KM140 with known raEarly Archaic Middle Archaic
Late Archaic
KM140
Bering Sink
Bering Sink
Bering Sink
diocarbon ages indicate that the
diet of individuals at 41KM140
falls within the pattern of increasFigure 3. Stable carbon isotope values for Bering sinkhole and 41KM140.
ing negativity over time as seen
at Bering. However, the small
sample size (n=2) of dated samples suggests this
CAMI C4 plants. Furthermore, the distribution of
8C 13 values at 41KM140 indicate a single dietary
trend is weak. In addition, because the majority of
population among the mortuary sample interred at
the 41KM140 samples are undated, the hypothesis
the site. Results from this study are similar to those
that the diets in Central Texas become more dependent on C3 plants and animals over time can only
found at other mortuary sites in Central Texas, such
as Bering sinkhole, which also suggest a mixed diet
be tentatively supported by the data.
Without further AMS radiocarbon dates which
with a dependence on C3 plants and animals. However, stable isotope data from 41KM140 can only
can confirm the chronology at 41KM140, additional
tentatively support the idea that this dependence
inferences based on stable carbon isotope data would
increases from the Archaic period through the Late
be speculative at best. The undated values imply that
Prehistoric period. It may also be the case that the
samples from for 41KM140 could date to the Late
Prehistoric period, assuming later ages all show more
diets of groups utilizing the Stiver Ranch burial
negative values. However for this to be the case, one
sinkhole may have been more consistently depenmust also assume that the dietary pattern at the Stiver
dent on C3 plants and animals throughout time.
Ranch sinkhole is identical to that at Bering sinkhole. In another scenario, where the undated values
are representative of the entire span of use at the
REFERENCES CITED
sinkhole, diets of individuals at 41KM140 may be
more consistent, with more negative 8C 13 values,
Alvarez, C.A.
over time than those at Bering sinkhole.
2005 Bioarchaeological Investigation of Human Skeletal
Cl

i

'--~--.~~~~~-.--.-~~~~-...-.~~~~-...-.~--'

CONCLUSION
The stable carbon isotope analysis of the individuals at the Stiver Ranch burial site suggests they
shared a diet of predominately C3 plants and animals that eat these plants, and lesser amounts of

Remains at the Stiver Ranch Burial Sinkhole
(41KM140). Unpublished MA thesis, Department of
Anthropology, Texas State University, San Marcos.
Ambrose, S.H.
1993 Isotopic Analysis of Paleodiets: methodological and
interperative considerations. In Investigations of
Ancient Human Tissue, edited by M. K. Sandford,
pp. 59-130. Gordon & Breach, Reading.

Alvarez-Stable Carbon Isotopes from the Stiver Ranch Burial Sinkhole (4IKM140) 171
Baker, B.
1998 Vertebrate faunal remains from the 1/4-inch and 1/
8-inch screens. In Wilson-Leonard, An 11,000-Year
Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas, Vol. V: Special Studies, edited by M.B.
Collins, pp. 1463-1509. Studies in Archeology 31.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.Austin,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Bement, L.C.
1994 Hunter-gatherer mortuary practices during the Central Texas Archaic. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bousman, C.B., and Quigg, M.
n.d.
Stable Carbon Isotopes from Archaic Human Remains in the Chihuahuan Desert and Central Texas.
Unpublished manuscript in possession of author.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:361-400.
2004

Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of
Texas, edited by Timothy K. Perttula, pp. 101-126.
Texas A & M University Press, College Station.

Huebner, J.A.
1991 Cactus for Dinner, Again! An Isotopic Analysis of
Late Archaic Diet in the Lower Pecos Region of
Texas. In Papers on Lower Pecos Prehistory, edited by Solveig A. Turpin, pp. 175-190. Studies in
Archeology 8. Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas, Austin.
Huebner, J. A., R. Blackgrun, C.K. Chandler, J.L. Mitchell,
and E.H. Schmiedlin
1996 Human Burial Recovery from 41KA89, Karnes
County, Texas. La Tierra 23(1):16-20.

Mays, S.
2002 The Archeology of Human Bones. Routledge, London.
Pate, F.D.
1994 Bone Chemsistry and Paleodiet. Journal ofArchaeological Method and Theory. 1(2):161-209.
Perttula, T. K.
2001 Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices in the Rio
Grande Plains and Central Coastal Plains Archeological Regions of Texas. La Tierra 28(3, 4):2-83.
Price, T.D., Shoeninger, M.J., and Armelagos, G.J.
1985 Bone Chemistry and Past Behavior: an Overview.
Journal of Human Evolution 14:419-447.
Schwarcz H.P., and Schoeninger, M.J.
1991 Stable Isotope Analyses in Human Nutritional Ecology. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 34:283321.
Tennis, C.L.
1994 Evaluation of Archaeological Materials from the
Little Church of La Villita Property, San Antonio,
Texas. Archaeological Survey Report No. 228. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Turpin, S. A.
1988 Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical Shaft Tomb,
Val Verde County, Texas. Memoir 22. Plains Anthropologist 33(122), Part 2.

Dental Wear and Pathology During the Middle Archaic
on the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain
Matthew S. Taylor

ABSTRACT
The Ernest Witte site (41AU36) is a large multicomponent cemetery located on the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain
in Austin County, Texas. The oldest group of burials from the site, Group 1, date to the Middle Archaic time
period (3500-1500 B.C.). Forty-two adult dentitions with 753 teeth and tooth sockets were selected for a study
of dental pathology. While incidences of caries, enamel hypoplasias, and calculus were low, differential patterns
of dental wear between the sexes resulted in high levels of dental abscesses and antemortem tooth loss. This
differential pattern of wear resulted in poorer dental health for the females of the population. Reasons for the
different patterns of wear include nonmasticatory functions or diet, either of which would suggest that women
and men of the Middle Archaic Texas Gulf Coastal Plain were living and working very differently.

INTRODUCTION
Most bioarcheological or paleopathological research conducted on the skeletal populations from
the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain have been broad-based
studies in the form of master's theses (Comuzzie
1987; Powell 1989; Taylor 2001), dissertations
(Baker 2001; Dockall 1997), or site reports (Malina
and Bramblett 1981; Miller 1991; Powell 1994;
Wesolowsky and Malina 1976). Of the presented or
published research, few reports have been concerned
specifically with the dental anthropology of the region (exceptions include Colby 1997; Comuzzie and
Steele 1988, 1989; Taylor 2002), which is surprising
considering the generally poor state of preservation
of prehistoric skeletal remains in the area (Dockall
1997:51; Steele and Olive 1989; Taylor 2001:51).
Of the studies that have been carried out on the
skeletal remains of Texas Gulf Coastal Plain populations most have been concerned with the Late
Archaic (1500 B.C-A.D. 100) time period. This is
understandable considering that the bulk of the
samples from the region date to this period (Hall
1995a; Patterson 2000). Only two skeletal samples
of significant size predate the Late Archaic and of
these, only the Middle Archaic portion of the Ernest
Witte site is currently available for study (the other
sample, Early Archaic 41VT98, is under study outof-state but is likely to be reburied when it is returned). Some researchers have avoided the Ernest
Witte sample because of its poor preservation

(Dockall 1997:48), but that does not mean that no
worthwhile data can be collected from the remains.
Rather, it should be regarded as an opportunity to
focus on the dental anthropology of an underrepresented population and time period. The purpose of
this report is to examine the dental wear and pathology from the Group 1 burials from the Ernest
Witte site, which represent the only significant skeletal population dating to the Middle Archaic on the
Texas Gulf Coastal Plain.

BACKGROUND
The Ernest Witte site is a multicomponent cemetery located in Austin County, Texas (Figure 1),
approximately 40 kilometers west of Houston (Hall
1981:1). Excavations carried out from 1974-75 revealed four discrete burial groups that ranged in
date from the Middle Archaic (3000-1500 B.C.) to
the Historic (1700+) time periods. The eldest burial
group, Group 1, contained 45 burials. Two burials
were radiocarbon dated to 4560±140 and 3480±90
B.P. (Hall 1981:49). These dates place the group in
Middle Archaic, according to the chronology devised by Patterson (1995).
The prehistoric peoples of the Texas Gulf
Coastal Plain are believed to have practiced a
conservative hunting and gathering lifestyle during
all phases of occupation (Few 1988; Patterson 1979,
1995; Story 1985). Although there is a passing

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

174

Texas Archeological Society

translated to dental disorders,
means that certain pathologies
such as enamel hypoplasias, caries,
11111
and
dental calculus (calcified
Amarillo
plaque), should be found in low
frequencies. Enamel hypoplasias
appear on teeth as grooves or lines
!II
Dallas
that represent systemic stresses,
Lubbock
11111111
Fort
like malnutrition or infectious
Worth
disease, that occur during dental
El Paso
development (Goodman and Rose
Ernest
1990). Dental Caries are lesions
Witte
caused
by organic acids resulting
Au~in
~
Houston
from bacterial fermentation of
11111
sugars and carbohydrates (Larsen
et al. 1991).
Other maladies, such as severe
dental wear, and the complications
that arise from it, should be more
common (Lukacs 1989). Dental
abscesses are often the result of
heavy occlusal wear, especially if
the pulp chamber of tooth is exFigure 1: Location of the Ernest Witte (4 lAU36) and Blue Bayou cemeteries.
posed to infectious agents (Clarke
and Hirsch 1991 ). It was expected
that the Middle Archaic population from the Ernest Witte site will follow such a
mention of agriculture on the lower Brazos by
pattern of dental health and disease, i.e. a high rate
French explorers in 1687 (Foster 1998:40,183),
of wear combined with low frequencies of infecthere is little archeological evidence that suggests
tious
dental disease and conditions related to inadthat native groups practiced agriculture on a
equate nutrition.
consistent basis.
Dental wear occurs by several various processes.
The Middle Archaic time period was characTeeth may be worm down by attrition, abrasion,
terized by a sparse, but growing, population that
and/or erosion. Attrition is the loss of dental enamel
exploited spatially fixed but seasonally abundant
or dentine due to tooth to tooth contact (Pintado et
resources. As the population grew and competition
al. 1992). Abrasion is the wear caused by food, grit,
for resources increased, cemeteries began to be utior nonmasticatory activities (Larsen et al. 1998),
lized in order to "lay claim" to certain resource
while erosion is the dissolution of tooth surfaces by
patches (Story 1985; Hall 1995a, 1995b). These
chemical corrosive agents. Such agents would come
patches probably included groves of pecans, stands
into contact with the dentition due to bulimia, gastroof acorn-producing oak trees, and oxbow lakes and
oesophageal reflux, or an acidic diet (Bartlett 1998).
sloughs that were purposefully used to trap fish.
According to Smith (1984) molar wear patThe river bottoms and drainages of the region would
terns differ depending on lifestyle. Hunter-gatherer
also have supported numerous species of game anipeoples generally have a flat, fairly even pattern of
mals, the most important of which would have been
wear on their molars. Agriculturalists tend to have
whitetail deer (Hall 1998). Isotopic analysis of
a
more oblique, angled form of molar wear. This
samples from the Late Archaic portion of the Ernest
type of wear can have a major effect on the freWitte site reinforces this dietary hypothesis
quency and type of infectious dental diseases.
(Huebner and Boutton 1992).
Kieser and coworkers (2001) have recognized
In general, hunter-gatherer peoples suffer from
four distinct planes of dental wear in a study of
an endemic disease pattern (low occurrence, low
prehistoric native New Zealanders. The first is the
frequency), albeit in a physically demanding
curved plane of Monson (resembling a shallow U),
environment (Armelagos 1990, 1997). This pattern,

Taylor-Dental Wear and Pathology During the Middle Archaic on the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain 175
which is the normal condition of unworn teeth. The
second is a reversed plane of Monson with associated heavily worn cusps (resembling an inverted
U). Third is an accentuated Manson's curve (a steep
U shaped curve) and fourth is a flat wear plane
(Kieser et al. 2001).

tooth socket was either fully or partially healed.
Dental calculus was assessed by the method illustrated by Brothwell (1981: 155), and was rated on a
scale of slight, moderate, or severe.

RESULTS
MATERIALS AND METHODS
For this study, only adult dentitions from Group
1 of the Ernest Witte site were selected for analysis.
Adults were defined as individuals with fully
erupted teeth, i.e. all teeth are in occlusion and
dental growth has ceased. Subadults were not included in the study because of their low number
and differential preservation. This resulted in a
sample of 42 individuals with 691 observable teeth
and 62 empty or resorbed (healed or partially healed
due to tooth loss during life) tooth sockets. The
sample is made up of 15 females, 18 males, and 9
of undetermined sex. The average age of females in
the sample was 36.5 years while males averaged 32
years (Taylor, 2001:75).
The 42 individuals represented were assessed
for both sex and age. Sex assessments were based
on the morphological features of the pelvis (Phenice
1969; Bruzek 2002) and the skull (Meindl et al.
1985). Additional sexing techniques consisted of
seriation of specific post-cranial measurements
(Black 1978; Taylor 2001:74).
Assessments of dental remains and the presence
or absence of pathological conditions were made
using macroscopic observations. Pathologies were
assessed on a per tooth basis. Dental wear and first
molar wear angle was scored according to the
method devised by Smith (1984). Wear was
assessed on a 1 to 8 scale (1 = no observable wear
and 8 = total elimination of enamel). Molar wear
angle was measured using a steel protractor with a
locking pivot arm. Intraobserver error was
calculated at <2mm. Periodontal disease, defined
as a loss of alveolar bone (the bone surrounding the
teeth), was measured from the cementa-enamel
junction of the tooth to the remaining bone. Since
there is a range of normal variation in this distance,
only measurements greater than 2mm were
considered pathological (Hillson 1996). Dental
abscesses, enamel hypoplasias, caries, and antemortem tooth loss (AMTL) were assessed following
Buikstra and Ubelaker (1994). AMTL was determined to have occurred before death if the empty

The average dental wear of Group 1 was classified as moderate to severe. This degree of wear
was not significantly different between males and
females. The most heavily worn teeth were the
first molars and incisors. The average wear score
for maxillary first molars of females was 6.25.
Males averaged 6.3. Average scores for first mandibular molars averaged 6.15 for females and 6.2
for males. This trend was observable on both the
mandible and maxilla (Tables 1, 2). Two individuals in the sample displayed lingual tilting of
their right first molars. Additionally, a number of
female individuals in Group 1 displayed a noticeably oblique uneven pattern of wear on their molars, while the males generally did not (Figures 2,
3). Measurements of the wear angle of the first
molars yielded some unexpected results. Overall,
the wear angle of the first right maxillary molars
was 13.30°, while the mandible averaged to 9.50°.
The average wear angle for females was 19.17°
(maxillary) and 12.89° (mandibular). For males
the average was 12.42° on the maxilla and 7.50°
on the mandible (Figure 4).
Periodontal disease, expressed as a loss of alveolar bone, was the most common dental pathology in the sample. A total of 34 of 42 dentitions
(80.9 percent) displayed bone loss greater than 2
mm. The most commonly affected teeth were the
canines, followed by the incisors, premolars, and
molars. On average there was 1.74 mm greater bone
loss on the mandible than the maxilla. There was
no significant difference in frequencies of periodontal disease based on sex.
Of 753 observable teeth and tooth sockets, 59
showed evidence of antemortem loss (bone resorption). In terms of the number of individuals affected,
17 of 42 dentitions (40.5 percent) suffered at one
episode of AMTL. Fifty-two of the 59 (88. l percent)
exfoliated teeth were mandibular, with only 7 lost
from the maxilla. There was also a greater antemortem loss among females. Females lost 50 total teeth,
while males were missing only 9 (Table 3).
The overall rate of enamel hypoplasias was
very low. Only three individuals in the sample dis-

176

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2: Typical dental wear observed in males from the
Middle Archaic portion of the Ernest Witte site. Note the
flat plane of wear.

Figure 3: First molar exhibiting oblique, accentuated reverse
Monson' s wear plane. This pattern was commonly observed
in females from the Middle Archaic Ernest Witte sample.
Abrasion has exposed the pulp cavity, causing an abscess.
Note the second molar has been lost antemortem.

20

~Females
[!]Males
[!]Total

Maxillary

Figure 4: Angle of wear observed on the first molars in the Middle Archaic portion of the Ernest Witte Site.

Taylor-Dental Wear and Pathology During the Middle Archaic on the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain 177
Table 1: Composite Dental Wear of Adult Males (n=18) in Group 1 of the Ernest Witte Site.
Maxillary
Tooth (n)

R.M3(1Il
R.M2(13J
R.M102l
R.P2ooi
R.Pl(l!J
R.Cc12i
R.I2csJ
R.Il(6J
L.IJ(4)
L.I200J
L.C(l2l
L.P1c1s)
L.P203l
L.MIC14l
L.M2osJ
L.M3(lll

Average
Wear

Range

4.8
5.5
6.3
5.1
5.4
5.0
5.8
4.8
5.5
5.1
4.6
5.6
5.5
6.3
5.8
4.5

3-8
3-8
4-8
3-8
2-8
2-8
4-8
3-7
4-7
2-8
1-8
2-8
3-8
4-8
3-8
3-8

Mandibular
Tooth (n)

Average
Wear

Range

L.M3(13J

4.8
5.1
6.1
5.1
5.0
5.0
5.8
5.7
6.0
6.0
4.8
5.7
5.2
6.3
5.7
4.7

2-7
3-8
4-8
3-8
3-8
3-8
2-8
3-8
5-7
4-8
2-8
2-8
2-8
4-8
3-8
3-8

L.M2021
L.M1c13)
L.P2(13)
L.P1(11)
L.C<SJ
L.12(9)
L.II(7)
R.I1c2J
R.I2C4l
R.C(lOJ
R.Pl(I2J
R.P203l
R.M1cn1
R.M2(16)
R.M303l

Table 2: Composite Dental Wear of Adult Females (n=16) in Group 1 of the Ernest Witte Site
Maxillary
Tooth (n)

R.M3C6l
R.M2cs)
R.M!C9l
R.P2C7l
R.P1cs)
R.CC9l
R.l2C6l
R.II(7)
L.lt(3J
L.12(5)
LC 01 l
L.P!C9l
L.P2C9l
L.M1c11)
L.M2C8l
L.M3(1Il

Average
Wear

Range

3.0
5.9
6.2
5.4
5.4
5.0
4.8
4.7
4.3
5.2
5.7
6.3
5.3
6.3
4.9
3.7

1-6
3-8
3-8
2-8
1-8
2-8
3-8
2-8
3-7
3-8
2-8
4-8
3-8
3-8
2-7
1-7

Mandibular
Tooth (n)

Average
Wear

Range

L.M319)
L.M2(9l

4.6
5.2
6.1
5.4
5.3
4.7
5.8
6.5
7.0
5.7
5.2
6.2
5.8
6.2
4.9
4.6

1-7
3-8
3-8
2-8
2-8
2-8
4-8
5-8
5-8
3-8
2-8
2-8
2-8
3-8
2-8
1-8

L.M1c11)
L.P2(9)
L.Pion
L.CC9l
L.12(5)
L.Il(2)
R.Il(3l
R.I2(7)
R.CC 9J
R.P102J
R.P2CIOJ
R.M1c12)
R.M2C9l
R.M3C9l

Texas Archeological Society

178

Table 3: Frequencies of Dental Pathologies in Group 1 of the Ernest Witte Site.
#of teeth

# affected (%)

% Female 1

% Male 2

Caries

691

29 (4.2)

40.7

59.3

Hypoplasias

691

3 (0.4)

*

*

Abscess

691

33 (4.8)

74.2

25.8

AMTL

753 3

59 (7.8)

84.7

15.3

Pathology

* not significant
1

n=l5
n=l8
3 Teeth and tooth sockets
2

played clear evidence of growth disruption (0.5
percent of all teeth). All instances were observed
on the right canine: 2 mandibular and 1 maxillary.
Zero individuals displayed more than one hypoplasia (Table 3).
Dental caries were associated with 29 teeth in
the sample. These 29 were found on only 12 individuals. Females accounted for 10 of the caries,
while males possessed 16 (see Table 3). The remaining three caries were found on individuals of
undetermined sex. The maxilla had more caries
(n=l 7) than the mandible (n=l2). The most commonly affected teeth were the second and third
molars. Dental calculus was observed on 26 teeth
from 8 individuals. All calculus deposits were
graded as slight in severity. The molars were the
most frequently affected teeth. A total of 16 individuals were afflicted with 33 dental abscesses (5.1
percent of all teeth). Of these, 23 were found on
females and only 8 on males (Table 3).

DISCUSSION
Certain aspects of the dental anthropology of
Ernest Witte Group 1 are worth noting, either because they do not fit with the dental model for
hunter-gatherer health or they differ from results
previously published on similar populations. One
aspect is the extremely low rate of enamel hypoplasias. Generally, hunter-gatherer populations have a
relatively low level of enamel hypoplasias compared to agricultural populations (Goodman 1991;

Lukacs 1989). Yet the frequency observed in Group
l (0.4 percent) is too low to be reasonable. The
most likely explanation of the hyper low frequency
is found in the makeup of the sample. Since the
sample is made up entirely of adults, dental wear
has erased most of the evidence of enamel hypoplasias, producing a deceptively low frequency. Unfortunately, this limits what can be said about nutritional stress in the Middle Archaic. In order to
answer this question, research would have to focus
on non-dental indicators, such as adult stature. Ongoing studies by the author suggest that the Ernest
Witte Group 1 sample was not undersized and were
reasonably well nourished.
Another unusual aspect of the sample is the
manner of dental wear. While the severity of dental
wear was similar for both sexes, the type of wear
differed significantly between males and females.
The first molar wear of females resembled an accentuated reverse Monson's curve (a steep inverted
U). This resulted in oblique angles of wear. The
male's plane of wear was generally flat or resembled
a shallow reverse Monson's curve. Measurements
of the first molar wear angles quantify this finding
and it begs comparison with other similar samples.
Unfortunately, no data for molar wear angle exists for any other population on the Texas Gulf
Coastal Plain. Colby ( 1997) did comment on an oblique molar wear pattern for the Late Archaic/Late
Prehistoric Blue Bayou cemetery, but there was no
measurement of the wear angle. However, this data
can never be collected as the sample was recently
reburied. Other reports on Texas Gulf Coastal Plain

Taylor-Dental Wear and Pathology During the Middle Archaic on the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain 179
cemetery populations have not commented on the
presence or absence of molar wear angle.
Two disorders, dental abscesses and AMTL
are present in relatively high frequencies. Traditionally, AMTL and abscesses have been regarded
as complications arising from dental caries. Given
the low frequency of caries in the sample, this explanation is not satisfactory. A better explanation
for the Group 1 sample is the type and degree of
dental wear. Many abscesses in the sample are the
result of the oblique wear pattern. This pattern exposed the pulp cavity of the tooth to infectious
agents. As a result, these infections had the opportunity to destroy dental and alveolar tissues, resulting in exfoliation of the tooth. This pattern was
more commonly observed in females than males
and correlates with the differing planes of molar
wear. Females in the sample have a greater wear
angle, a greater frequency of dental abscesses, and
have lost many more teeth than males. The oblique
plane of dental wear (an accentuated reverse
Monson's curve) caused a chain of events that
started with exposure of the pulp cavity, infection,
dental abscess, and exfoliation.
It is unclear in the archeological record what
might be responsible for the differing angle of wear
between the sexes. Smith (1984) reported that agriculturalists have a greater angle of wear than huntergatherers. The female sample from Ernest Witte
Group 1 does appear to have an agricultural-like
wear angle. However, there is little archeological
evidence to support the idea of agriculture on the
Texas Gulf Coastal Plain during any prehistoric
era. In the absence of such evidence other explanations must be considered.
The differences in pathologies may be a factor
of age. While the average age of females (36.5
years) was greater than males (32 years), the overall severity of wear was about the same (see Tables
1, 2). Since the pathological conditions are the result of the pattern of wear, rather than its severity,
age is unlikely to have been a mitigating factor.
Wear could also be attributable to a nonmasticatory use of the dentition related to a division of
labor. Females may have been responsible for an
activity that created the oblique wear angle and the
resulting pathologies. A second possibility is that
the angle of dental wear in Group 1 is the result of
differential diets. There are plant foods in the area
(e.g. pecans, acorns) that can be processed to the
point that they would mimic the soft consistency
usually associated with agricultural crops.

If the first scenario is correct, then one can
only speculate on what materials were being chewed
to explain the wear pattern. Since organic matter
(such as plant fibers or skins) rarely, if ever, survives the soil conditions of the Texas Gulf Coastal
Plain, the archeological record is not particularly
helpful in determining what might be responsible.
Even though we do not know what the females
were processing, the patterns of molar wear and
disease would demonstrate that there was a significant division of labor between men and women that
involved nonmasticatory functions.
The second scenario is perhaps more difficult
to imagine, but it does explain the frequency of
tooth loss and disease of the premolars and molars. This hypothesis would assume that there was
a division of food procurement or processing in
the society by sex. Perhaps the women of the society, remaining in base camps to collect pecans and
acorns ate a more heavily processed diet. The men,
possibly hunting and away from these base camps
for extended periods, would have relied on a less
processed diet. This would have resulted in females displaying an agricultural-like dental wear
pattern and males a flatter, more forager-like wear
pattern.
Overall, the females of Group 1 of the Ernest
Witte site suffered poorer dental health than the
males. While there are significant differences in the
frequencies of AMTL and abscesses, other pathologies, such as calculus, enamel hypoplasias, caries,
and alveolar bone loss, do not differentially select
for one sex over another. In general, the pattern of
dental disease fits the expectation for a prehistoric
hunter-gatherer population. But the angle of dental
wear, and the high frequency of pathologies resulting from it, is noteworthy. While a similar pattern
of wear was observed at Blue Bayou (Colby 1997),
it has not been reported in other Late Archaic populations (see Dockall 1997). Continuing research by
the author of Late Archaic samples suggests that
this phenomenon was not widespread on the Texas
Gulf Coastal Plain.

CONCLUSIONS
Examination of the dental remains from Group
1 of the Ernest Witte site demonstrate that the patterns of dental wear and disease during the Middle
Archaic of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain are complex. While the overall results are indicative of a

180

Texas Archeological Society

hunting and gathering lifestyle, certain aspects of
the sample suggest that either nonmasticatory
functions or diet differed between the sexes. This
differential pattern resulted in a divergent molar
wear patterns and a greater frequency of dental
pathology in females.
While Ernest Witte Group 1 represents the only
significant Middle Archaic population on the Texas
Gulf Coast, further dental investigations from later
populations could help to answer the questions
raised by this report. There are sufficient samples
from the Late Archaic that could be studied to determine if the patterns of dental health and disease
observed in Group 1 are confined to the Middle
Archaic or are continuous through time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wishes to thank Drs. Robert Paine
and Grant Hall of Texas Tech University for their
comments and guidance during this research. I also
wish to thank Dr. Darrel Creel and Laura Nightengale of the Texas Archeological Research Lab for
access to the collections.

REFERENCES CITED
Armelagos, G.J.
1990 Health and Disease in Prehistoric Populations in
Transition. In Disease in Populations in Transition:
Anthropological and Epidemiological Perspectives,
edited by A.C. Swedlund and G.J. Armelagos, pp.
127-144. Bergin and Garvey, New York.
1997

Disease, Darwin, and Medicine in the Third Epidemiological Transition: Book Review. Evolutionary
Anthropology 5(6):212-220.

Baker, J.E.
2001 No Golden Age of Peace: A Bioarchaeological Investigation of Interpersonal Violence on the West
Gu(f Coastal Plain (Texas). Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology. Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Bartlett, D.W.
1998 The Causes of Dental Erosion. Oral Diseases 3:209211.
Black, T.K.
1978 A New Method for Assessing the Sex of Fragmentary Skeletal Remains: Femoral Shaft Circumference. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
48:227-232.

Brothwell, D.R.
1981 Digging Up Bones. 3rd ed. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, New York.
Bruzek, J.
2002 A Method for Visual Determination of Sex, Using
the Human Hip Bone. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 117:157-168.
Buikstra, J.E. and D.H. Ubelaker
1994 Standards for Data Collection from Human Skeletal Remains. Research Series No. 44, Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Clarke, N.G. and R.S. Hirsch
1991 Tooth Dislocation: The Relationship with Tooth
Wear and Dental Abscesses. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 85:293-298.
Colby, G.R.
1997 Analysis of Dental Abscess Formation in a Texas
Hunter-Gatherer and a Texas Agricultural Population. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
68:179-189.
Comuzzie, A.G.
1987 The Bioarcheology of Blue Bayou: A Late Prehistoric Mortuary Site from Victoria County, Texas.
Unpublished master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Comuzzie, A.G. and D.G. Steele
1988 Maxillary Lingual Anterior Tooth Wear in Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers from the Texas Coast. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 75: 197-198.
1989 Enlarged Occlusal Surfaces on First Molars Due to
Severe Attrition and Hypercementosis: Examples
from Prehistoric Coastal Populations of Texas. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 78:9-15.
Dockall, H.D.
1997 Archaic Hunter-Gatherer Adaptation on the Inland
Portion of the West Gulf Coastal Plain: The Bioarchaeological Evidence. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Few,J.
1988 Indians of the Texas Gulf Coast: A Synthesis of
Archeological, Historical, and Theoretical Information. In A Collection of Papers Reviewing the Archeology of Southeast Texas, edited by P. Wheat
and R.L. Gregg, pp. 3-7. Report No. 5, Houston
Archeological Society.
Foster, W.C.. editor
1998 The La Salle Expedition to Texas: The Journal of
Henri Joutel, 1684-1687. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Taylor-Dental Wear and Pathology During the Middle Archaic on the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain 181
Goodman, A.H.
1991 Stress, Adaptation, and Enamel Developmental Defects. In Human Paleopathology: Current Synthesis
and Future Options, edited by D.J. Ortner and A.C.
Aufderheide, pp. 280-287. Smithsonian Institution,
Washington D.C.

Larsen, C.S., M.F. Teaford, and M.K. Sanford
1998 Teeth as Tools at Tutu: Extramasticatory Behaviour
in Prehistoric St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands. In
Human Dental Development, Morphology, and Pathology, edited by J.R. Lukacs, pp. 401-420. University of Oregon Press, Eugene.

Goodman, A.H. and J. Rose
1990 Assessment of Systemic Physiological Perturbations
from Dental Enamel Hypoplasias and Associated
Histological Structures. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 33:59-110.

Lukacs, J.R.
1989 Dental Pathology: Methods for Reconstructing Dietary Patterns. In Reconstruction of Life from the
Skeleton, edited by M.Y. Iscan and K.A.R. Kennedy,
pp. 261-286. Alan R. Liss, New York.

Hall, G.D.
1981 Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of
the Lower Brazos River Valley, Texas. Research
Report No. 51, Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Malina, R.M. and C.A. Bramblett
1981 Skeletal and Dental Materials from the Ernest Witte
(41AU36) and Leonard K (41AU37) Sites. In Allens
Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the
Lower Brazos River Valley, Texas, by G.D. Hall, pp.
325-352. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

1995a A Perspective on Some Prehistoric Cemeteries in
Texas: Loma Sandia in the Regional Setting. In
Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia
Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas, by A.J. Taylor and
C.L. Highley, pp. 47-57. Studies in Archeology 20,
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1995b Prehistoric Cemeteries on the Texas Central Coastal
Plain: Interpretations and Hypotheses. In Archeo/ogical Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site
(41LK28): A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in
Live Oak County, Texas, by A.J. Taylor and C.L.
Highley, pp. 633-647. Studies in Archeology 20,
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, the University of Texas at Austin.
1998

Prehistoric Food Resource Patches on the Texas
Coastal Plain. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society. 69: 1-10.

Hillson, S.
1996 Dental Anthropology. Cambridge University, Cambridge.
Huebner, J.A. and T.W. Boutton
1992 The Isotopic Composition of Human Diets in Prehistoric Southeastern Texas. Texas Journal of Science 44:43-51.
Kieser, J.A., K.J. Dennison, J.A. Kaidonis, D. Huang, P.G.P.
Herbison, and N.G. Tayles.
2001 Patterns of Dental Wear in the Early Maori Dentition. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology
11:206-217.
Larsen, C.S., R. Shavit, and M.C. Griffin
1991 Dental Caries Evidence for Dietary Change: An Archaeological Context. In Advances in Dental Anthropology, edited by M.A. Kelley and C.S. Larsen,
pp. 179-202. Wiley-Liss, New York.

Meindl, R.S., C.O. Lovejoy, R.P. Mensforth, and L.D. Carlos
1985 Accuracy and Direction of Error in the Sexing of the
Skeleton: Implications for Paleodemography. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 68:79-85.
Miller, E.
1991 Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains. In Alabonson
Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptation to the Inland Coastal Prairie Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas, edited by H.B. Ensor and D.L. Carlson.
Reports of Investigations No. 8, Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Patterson, L.W.
1979 A Review of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas
Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
50:103-123.
1995

The Archeology of Sontheast Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 66:239-264.

2000

The Late Archaic Mortuary Tradition of Southeast
Texas. La Tierra 27:28-44.

Phenice, T.W.
1969 A Newly Developed Visual Method of Sexing the
Os Pubis. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 30:297-302.
Pintado, M.R., G.C. Andersen, R. DeLong, and W.H. Douglas
1992 Variation in tooth wear in young adults over a two
year period. Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry 77:313320.
Powell, J.F.
1989 An Epidemiological Analysis of Mortality and Morbidity in Five Late Prehistoric Populations from the
Upper and Central Texas Coast. Unpublished
master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

182

Texas Archeological Society

1994 Bioarchaeological Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains from the Mitchell Ridge Site. In Aboriginal
Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology of the Mitchell Ridge Site, 41GV66,
Galveston Island, by R.A. Ricklis, pp. 287-405.
Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus
Christi, Texas.
Smith, B.H.
1984 Patterns of Molar Wear in Hunter-Gatherers and
Agriculturalists. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 63:39-56.
Steele, D.G. and B.W. Olive
1989 Bioarcheology of the Region 3 Study Area. In From
the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in
Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by T.R.
Hester, S.L. Black, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, A.A.
Fox, K.J. Reinhard, and L.C. Bement, pp. 93-114.
Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series No.
33, Fayetteville.
Story, D.A.
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West
Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Food Production
in North America, edited by R.I. Ford, pp. 19-56.
Anthropological Papers No. 75, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Taylor, M.S.
2001 Paleopathology of the Ernest Witte Site. Unpublished master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas.
2002 Patterns of Dental Wear and Disease in the
Middle Archaic of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain:
An Example from the Ernest Witte Site. American Journal of Physical Anthropology Supplement 34:153-154.
Wesolowsky, A.B. and R.M. Malina
1976 The Human Skeletal Material from Boys School
and their Implications for Aboriginal Demography. In Excavations at the Harris County Boys'
School Cemetery: Analysis of Galveston Bay Area
Mortuary Practices, by L.E. Aten, C.K. Chandler,
A.B. Wesolowsky, and R.M. Malina, pp. 80-85.
Special Publication No. 3, Texas Archeological
Society, Austin.

Winston's Mound and Shawnee Town
Mound Explorations by the Bureau of Ethnology
Texas,1882-1884
Timothy K. Perttula

ABSTRACT
The Winston's Mound and Shawnee Town sites are Caddo Indian sites in Northeast Texas excavated in the
1880s by Colonel P. Norris of the Division of Mound Exploration at the Bureau of Ethnology. They represent
some of the earliest archeological investigations of Caddo Indian sites, but have been virtually forgotten and
overlooked since. In this paper, I describe the archeological collections from the sites at the National Museum
of Natural History, Smithsonian Instituiton.

INTRODUCTION
The Division of Mound Exploration of the Bureau of Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, carried
out investigations of mound sites throughout the
eastern United States between July 1882 and June
1890 (Smith 1985:Table 2; Thomas 1894). Sometime between July 1882 and June 1884 1, Colonel
Philetus W. Norris, of Norris, Michigan, conducted
excavations at two Caddo Indian sites in East Texas
as part of the work of the Division of Mound Exploration. Although not the first archeological work
on Caddo Indian sites in Texas-that honor belongs to Edward Palmer in 1879 (Jeter 1990:66)it still represents very early investigations. However, these investigations have been virtually forgotten and overlooked by modern-day Caddo archeologists. The two sites of interest here are
Winston's Mound on the Red River in Bowie
County, Texas, and the Shawnee Town site near
the Sulphur River in Red River County, Texas.
Small collections of recovered archeological
materials from both these sites are in the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural
History (NMNH) collections. These collections
were examined and photo-documented in August
2005 during a visit to the NMNH with representatives of the Caddo Nation of Oklahoma as part of
the repatriation efforts of the NMNH, Repatriation
Office. The NMNH, Repatriation Office had compiled a list of their collections from sites in Texas,

Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana that fall within
the known Caddo area (see Rogers and Sabo 2004),
and this list included the collections from the
Winstons' Mound and Shawnee Town sites. They
had accession numbers that indicated the artifacts
had been collected by the Division of Mound Exploration, and many of the larger sherds have
"Norris" written on them in black ink.
To date, no more specific information about
the two sites-or the work that was actually conducted at them by Norris-has been located in the
Smithsonian Institution's or the National Anthropological Archives records. Searching the records
continues. Perhaps the artifact ledgers of the Division of Mound Exploration or the journals and
letters of Colonel Norris will eventually yield specific information on the sites and where they are
located in Bowie and Red River counties, respectively. If so, they hopefully will add a more-detailed context to this early work on Caddo mound
sites in Texas.

WINSTON'S MOUND
In the available NMNH records, this site is
described as being in Bowie County along the Red
River. I suspect that the mound site is probably
in the eastern half of the county since all the
other known mounds in the county are found
along this stretch of the valley. Other important

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

184

Texas Archeological Society

and investigated Caddo mounds reported from this
area include the Hatchel (41BW3), Horace Cabe
(41BW14), and Eli Moores (41BW2) sites
northwest of Texarkana, Texas.
The NMNH collections from the Winston's
Mound site include primarily ceramic artifacts, but
there are a series of novaculite and chert blades
present (Figure 1) that are probably associated with
the Caddo occupation at Winston's Mound.

Figure 3. Possible Dunkin Incised jar fragment.

Figure 1. Novaculite blades from the Winston's Mound site.

The ceramics from the site are predominantly
shell-tempered Caddo wares. There is, however, a
grog and bone-tempered bowl that had been decorated with faint vertical engraved lines (Figure 2),
and a possible Dunkin Incised jar decorated with
opposed incised lines on the rim. Remnants of small
loop handles are on the rim (Figure 3).

Figure 4. Shell-tempered plain jar base.

Figure 5. Simms Engraved rim sherd.
Figure 2. Vertical engraved bowl.

The shell-tempered wares from the Winston's
Mound site include a plain jar base (Figure 4 ), and
a rim sherd from a distinctive short-rimmed Simms

Engraved vessel (Figure 5), probably a deep carinated bowl.
Other shell-tempered sherds have a curvilinear
appliqued decorative element (Figure 6), red-slipped

Perttula-Winston's Mound and Shawnee Town 185
Avery Engraved bowl sherds (Figure 7a), horizontal
and red-slipped rims (Figure 7 c ), horizontal
engraved and incised rims (Figure 8a, d), a scalloped
rim from a plain carinated bowl (Figure 8e), as well
as rim and body punctated sherds (Figure 7b and
8b ). One small body sherd from a bottle (see Figurer
7d) has a series of engraved concentric circles.
Two of the sherds have been engraved on the
interior of an interior thickened rim (see Figure 8c, f).
The engraved elements consist of small rectilinear
and hatched elements. These are probably from two
different shell-tempered Bowie Engraved carinated
bowls (see Suhm and Jelks 1962: 17 and Plate 9).
Figure 6. Appliqued body sherd.

SHAWNEE TOWN

Figure 7. Decorated rim and body sherds: a) Avery Engraved; b) punctuated sherd; c) horizontal and red-slipped rim;
d) bottle sherd with engraved concentric circles.

Figure 8. Decorated sherds from the Winston's Mound
collection: a) horizontal engraved and incised rim; b)
punctated sherd; c) sherd with interior engraving; d)
horizontal engraved and incised rims; e) carinated bowl
rim; f) sherd with interior engraving.

In the NMNH records, the Shawnee Town site
was stated to be in Red River County, near the Sulphur River. It is suspected that the Shawnee Town
mound is located in the southeastern part of Red
River County, perhaps near the confluence of
Shawnee Creek and the Sulphur River. No recorded
mounds are currently known in this part of the county.
The Shawnee Town site is not associated with
any occupation by the Shawnee Indian tribe. The
Shawnee moved into Northeast Texas around 1800,
and had settlements in the Sulphur River basin,
including one reported on Shawnee Creek in the
1820s in Red River County (Steely 1982:20).
Shawnee Town is apparently a more recent name
given by Anglo-American settlers to this area of
Red River County.
The materials recovered by Norris from the
Shawnee Town site include ceramic and lithic artifacts. Among the lithics are a large celt fragment
(Figure 9) made of metamorphic rock (probably
collected from Red River gravel sources), a stone
ear spool (Figure 10a), and an otherwise unmodified but perforated stone pebble (Figure lOc). There
is also a fragment of a ceramic spindle whorl or
perforated sherd in the collection from Shawnee
Town (Figure 10b).
Both shell-tempered and grog-tempered pottery is present in the Shawnee Town collection.
Since the use of shell-temper by the Caddo in this
are did not begin until ca. A.D. 1300 or later, this is
good evidence that the main use of the site by
Caddo peoples took place after A.D. 1300.
These collections include a single group of basal
sherds from an undecorated grog-tempered vessel.
The much more numerous shell-tempered ceramics

186

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9. Celt.
Figure 12. Emory Punctated-Incised rim sherds.

jars. Simms Engraved vessels are usually present
on Caddo sites along the Red River beginning after
ca. A.D. 1500, so at least some part of the Shawnee
Town Caddo occupation-as with the Winston's
Mound Caddo occupation-appears to have taken
place around the time of first European contact
with the Caddo in the mid-16th century.

Figure 10. a) stone ear spool; b) ceramic spindle whorl; c)
perforated stone pebble.

include a complete Simms Engraved carinated bowl
(Figure 11), four rims from Emory PunctatedIncised vessels (Figure 12), and a number of sherds
with appliqued ridges and punctations as decoration
(Figure 13), probably on the body of large cooking

Figure 13. Appliqued and punctated body sherds.

Also recovered by Norris was a small marine
shell pendant (Figure 14). The pendant has a single
drilled suspension hole at one end.

CONCLUSIONS
Figure 11. Simms Engraved vessel.

The Winston's Mound and Shawnee Town
sites in Northeast Texas were explored by the

Perttula-Winston's Mound and Shawnee Town 187
and Shawnee Town collections. Bo Nelson and
Mark Walters were of considerable help in documenting the collections from the two sites, and all
the photographs were taken by Bo Nelson.
Thanks are also extended to Nancy Kenmotsu
for helpfuil comments on a draft of this manuscript.

NOTES
Figure 14. Marine shell pendant.

Division of Mound Exploration of the Bureau of
Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution in the early
1880s. Since that time, the excavations by Colonel P. W. Norris at these two Caddo sites have
been forgotten, and the collections have languished at the Smithsonian Institution ever since.
With an opportunity provided by the Caddo Nation of Oklahoma and the National Museum of
Natural History (NMNH), Repatriation Office,
at the Smithsonian, the collection has now been
examined and cursorily studied in an effort to
bring the two Caddo sites to the light of day.
More investigations are warranted to tell the tale
of the two sites, and hopefully information about
the 1880s work at the sites can be found in the
records of the National Anthropological Archives
and the NMNH.
The artifacts recovered by Colonel Norrisespecially the whole ceramic vessels and the vessel
sections-suggest that in his work, he encountered
burials or other unique features containing whole
vessels. Whether these features were in mound deposits or in off-mound cemeteries is not known at
this time. The kinds of artifacts found at the two
sites also indicate that they were occupied primarily after A.D. 1300 by Caddo Indian groups affiliated with other Caddo communities living on the
Red River and the lower Sulphur River valleys.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I appreciate the opportunity provided by Robert
Cast and Bobby Gonzalez of the Caddo Nation of
Oklahoma, and the Repatriation Office at the
Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of
Natural History (especially Dorothy Lippert), to
study the collections from the Winston's Mound

1. Since Colonel P.W. Norris was not appointed until
August 1882 (Thomas 1894: 19), and began his first mound
exploring expedition from Pipestone County, Minnesota,
on August 29, 1882 (Perttula and Price 1984:3), subsequently working in mound in Missouri, Illinois, Kentucky,
Arkansas, and Mississippi until January 1883, it is likely
that he did not come to Texas until later in 1883.

REFERENCES CITED
Jeter, M. D. (editor)
1990 Edward Palmer's Arkansaw Mounds. University of
Arkansas Press, Fayettville.
Perttula, T. K. and J. E. Price
1984 The 1882 Investigations by Colonel P. W. Norris on
the Powers Fort Site, 23BU10, Southeast Missouri.
Tennessee Anthropologist 9(1):4-14.
Rogers, J. D. and G. Sabo III
2004 Caddo. In Handbook of North American Indians, Volume 14, Southeast, edited by R. D. Fogelson, pp.
616-631. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Smith, B. D.
1985 Introduction to the 1985 Edition. In Report an the
Mound Explorations of the Bureau of Ethnology, by
C. Thomas, pp. 5-19. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.
Steely, S.
1982 Six Months from Tennessee. Hennington Publishing
Company, Wolfe City, Texas.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Special Publication No. 1, Texas Archeological Society, and Bulletin No. 4, The Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.
Thomas, C.
1894 Report of the Mound Exploration of the Bureau of
Ethnology. Accompanying paper in Twelfth Annual
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 1890-1891. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

An Annotated Bibliography of Some Documents Concerning
European and Native American Interactions Across
the Spanish Colonial Borderlands and
the Gulf Coast States, 1629-1758
Patricia R. Lemee

This work began as a simple, chronological
list of information gleaned from documents directly related to the compiler's research which
focused originally on the French Canadian Louis
Juchereau de St. Denis and his trade relationship
with Diego Ramon, commandant at San Juan
Bautista, on the Rio Grande. Individuals who nurtured and guided early phases of the research
pointed out the importance of placing these two
men and their activities in context. Thus, the scope
of research changed, and so, too, the list which
has evolved as a chronological annotated bibliography, for wont of a better description, covering
the years 1629-1758.
In no regard is the bibliography definitive;
rather, it incorporates only those sources examined
by the compiler. Annotations similarly are limited
to those portions of documents or quotes within
documents that directly related to the compiler's
research. No attempt was made to correct authors'
misstatements and/or misconceptions expressed in
quoted passages. Thus, the Saenz letter of November 4, 1720 to Valero is quoted without annotation
concerning Paso del Norte having been called the
Rio del Norte. Of interest to the compiler was
Saenz's further comment that the river froze allowing passage across it of sand-weighted carts from
New Mexico. Whether the title is apt, the work has
served as a useful tool and study guide.
Chief among those who "nurtured and guided"
are Nancy Kenmotsu, A. Joachim McGraw, Robert
S. Weddle, and the late James E. Corbin. Helpful,
too, have been Donald Chipman, Light Cummins,
Hiram Gregory, Dayna Bowker Lee, and Jesus
Maria Ramon, the latter graciously having facilitated research in Mexican archives. The various
contributions of these individuals are valued, and
long will be remembered.

Coupled with study of published and unpublished works, archival research has been conducted in Mexico (Guerrero, Mexico City,
Monclova, Monterrey, Parras, and Saltillo); in
Quebec, the Archives Nationales Quebec in SaintFoy, and the Musee de la Civilisation, Quebec
City; in Louisiana, the Cammie G. Henry Research Center at Northwestern State University
of Louisiana, Natchitoches; The Center for Louisiana Studies at The University of Louisiana,
Lafayette; The Historic New Orleans Collections'
Williams Research Center; The New Orleans Public Library, microfilm collection; Hill Memorial
Library's Louisiana and the Lower Mississippi
Collection at Louisiana State University, Baton
Rouge, and, in Texas, The Nettie Lee Benson Latin
American Collection and The Center for American History, University of Texas, Austin; The
Catholic Archives of Texas, Austin, and the Ralph
W. Steen Library, Special Collections, Stephen F.
Austin University, Nacogdoches.
In addition to a standard bibliography, this annotated version includes a "Source" section designed to enhance its "user-friendliness." Included,
too, is a "Quotes/Notes/Questions" section consisting of extracts from sources. Also in the section are
research notes as well as questions rising from information in the sources. For example, concerning
the 1691 entry for Massanet' s diary of the Teran
Expedition, what link exists, if any, between Fr.
Massanet's "Xoloton" (meaning black nuts) and
Frances Karttunen's "Xoloton," the Nahua word
meaning "little page," the term a lady uses to address her grandchild? Hopefully other researchers
will be able to answer this question, as well as
others posed herein.
Diacritical marks have been omitted from this
work which itself is extracted from a larger

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

190

Texas Archeological Society

investigation currently in progress that links some
events in the Spanish borderlands to the highest
levels of European state craft. Publishing the
Date
1629

A~

Mendoza-Lopez
Expedition to
Jumanos, 16831684

Location
West Texas

1632

Mendoza-Lopez
Expedition to
Jumanos, 16831684

West Texas.

1650

Mendoza-Lopez
Expedition to
Jumanos, 16831684

West Texas.

1654

Mendoza-Lopez
Expedition to
Jumanos, 16831684

Texas

1659

El Paso de! Norte

3/6/1662

Penalosa diario

New Mexico

1666

Indian nations in
revolt

Mexico

1680

Pueblo Revolt

9/30/1683

Letter, report and
reply of maestre de
campo Don Joseph
Francisco Marin to

Parral

bibliography was not a consideration until James E.
Corbin suggested it, and encouraged it be done.
Thus it is presented as a tribute to his memory.

_Q_uotes/ Notes/ Questions
"In 1629, Father Salas, accompanied by
soldiers, went rnore than 100 leagues
eastward and worked for a time among
this nation" (Jumano ).

[Note: l league=2.6 or 3.0 miles,
various!YJ
Father Salas this time found Jumano 200
leagues southeast of Santa Fe, on the
Nueces River. Bolton writes, the Nueces
"was clearly a branch of the upper
Colorado."
Captains Hernando Martin and Diego del
Castillo with party of soldiers traveled to
Nueces where pearls were found. Went 50
leagues beyond Jumanos and reached
borders of territory of people called "Tejas"
who were ruled by a king.
Intrigued by tales about pearls and Tejas,
the viceroy sent Diego de Guadalajara with
30 soldiers to the place where Martin and
Castillo had gone four years earlier. He
went 30 leagues beyond Jumano, engaged
in battle with Caitaos, took 200 captives and
"rich spoils in the way ofpeltry." Mendoza,
leader of 1683 expedition to the same region
was with Guadalaj_ara's 1654 el9::'._edition.
Established in 1659. Juarez/El Paso grew
up around site.
Jean Nicolas Delisles' notes included; in
French; diario written by Nicholas de
Freitas, member of expedition. Penalosa
had gotten crosswise with clergy resulting in
his becoming a victim of the Inquisition.
Imprisoned. he later went to Europe, and
petitioned English to finance expedition to
capture riches of Mexico. English decline,
he goes to Louis XIV's court and says they
are "all ears." He proposes a plan as does
La Salle and quickly there is a l 7'11 -Century
bidding war between the two men. Includes
some reference to plan for Penalosa to
move into area around Rio Panuco
[Tampico Bay] after La Salle was
established on the _gulf coast.
List oflndian naciones (nations) in revolt
in northern Mexico in 1666, includes
mention of those under Don Benito who
"attacked the carts on the camino del
Parral."
According to Bannon, Spanish retreat from
Santa Fe to Paso del Norte. For years
Spanish traders had traded in west Texas
with Jumanos and other groups. The
Spanish retreat doomed that trade plus,
without Spanish presence, Apaches moved
into the r~on,_2_ushing_ out the Jumanos.
Viceroy ordered Marin to give an account of
the region. Marin gives bounds of Nueva
Vizcaya: 24 & 1/3° [nmih latitude], more or
lessJat a_2_oin!l l 0 or 12 leag_ues below city_

Source
Bolton
1908:313

Bolton
1908:313

Bolton
1908:314

Bolton
1908:314

Bolton
1908:314
Margry
1876-1886,
vol III:44-55

Valdes
1995:205

Bannon
1940: 80-86;
Bolton
1908:314

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:389

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 191
Date

Activity

Location

his Excellency the
Count of Galve

9/30/1683

Joseph Francisco
Marin to Count of
Galve

Parral

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
of Durango, its capital and metropolis. On
south is Nueva Galicia and its districts, and
on east is the New Kingdom of Leon.
Boundary runs between Saltillo and the villa
of Monterrey, and extends to Coahuila, and
the Rio del N01ie (which the Indians call
Alcachagua). To [the] northeast the
province stretches to such a longitude that
the boundary is considered to extend as far
as the Colbert River. All of these widely
extended domains are inhabited by
innumerable nations. To the north the
province extends as far as the presidia of El
Paso, which is in latitude 32°, less one-third
and from there the bounds of New Mexico
bear toward its c~tal, which is Santa Fe.
"Nations which inhabit the country from
Durango to the junction of the Rio de
Conchas and the Rio del Norte (which the
Indians call Alcachagua) that is, as far as
the said junction and on either side of the
river, are as follows: Tepeguanes; those of
Parras; the Tobosos; the Cocoiomes; the
Gavilanes [the Sparrow Hawks]; those of El
Sombrero Prieto [the Black Hats]; the
Cocoiomes of Tecolote; the Babosarigames;
the Rijos de la Tierra [the Sons of the
Ea1ih]; the Rijos de las Piedras [the Sons
of the Stones]; the Rijos de Lodo [the Sons
of Mud]; the Negritos; the Salineros; the
Jojocomes; other Gavilanes [Sparrow
Hawks]; those of Coahuila; the Chisos,
comprising seven nations, namely, the
Chisos, the Chichitames, the
Satapayogliglas, the Guazapayogliglas, the
Osatayogliglas, the Cacuitaomes; the
Otauay, the Batayogliglas; the
Sunigugliglas; the Cacucoat; the
Guamuchiquat; .the Bajopapay; the
Boomes; the Cocosut; the Colorados; the
Ajames; the Tuimamare; the Teimamar,
the Oymamare; the Sinibles; the
Mopututur; the Totomonos, who are called
Cabezas Blancas [White Heads or those of
white hair]; the Cocomoguacales; the
Salineros; the Bacopo; the Pobas; the
Estoytto; the Sibuitutilca; the Esaugui; the
Cuicuiguas; the Trimmomos; the
Cuurbipicas; those of El Pescado [the
Fish]; the Pinanacas, who are called
Desorejados [Cropped Ears]; the Pinanuas,
who are called the Apagados [the
Pusillanimous]; the Bobori, who are called
the Cometunas [the Prickly Pear Eaters];
the Tuidamoydan, who are called Rijos de
la Sierra [Sons of the Mountain]; the
Mascagua, who are called the Duros [the
Cruel ones]; the Uracas; the Parugan, who
are called Bedor Fiero [Great Stench]; the
Tuigare, who are called the Palo [the Pole]
with which they beat the Opoli; the
Tuicuiguan, as they are called here; the
Popos Pocodomen, who are called
Comesacate lGrass Eatertl; the

Source

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:389

192

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
Guascadome, who are called the people of
the nuts; the Acoclames; the Cholomes;
those of the Pellejo Blanco [White Skin]; the
Cabezas de Guacale; the Enemigos del
Cerro [the Hill Enemies]; the Papacolani;
the Cucubipi ; the Mastajamesquite; the
Malas Flechas [Bad Arrows]; the
Babimamar; the Cotomamar; the
Totolomes; the Osatames; the Cocomas; the
Paracan; the Tuigar; the Opulas; the
Manos Prietas [Black Hands]."
"Captain Juan Hernandez de Retana
discovered the last of these 18 nations on an
expedition he made in July 1683 to La Juna
de los Rios. They inhabit the mountainous
region of that junction."
"Those inhabiting the opposite bank from
La Junta, between Texas and New Mexico,
are the following 54 nations: the Salchomis;
those of Pie de Recacalote; the Guacali
[Fruit Hamper]; those of Sinorejas; those
of the Cabellos Blancos [White
Headshair?]; the Salcocolomes; the
Bapacore; the Sallas; the Borrados; the
Siniples; those of the Dientes Alazanes
[Sorrel-colored Teeth]; those of the Casas
Moradas [Mulberry-colored Houses],
comprising four nations of the same name;
the Cabezas [Heads]; the Conejos [Rabbits];
the Alzados [Rebels]; the Pajaritos [Little
Birds]; the Humanas; the Come Cibolos
[Buffalo Eaters]; the Arcos Tirados [Long
Bows]; the Cibolos [Buffalos]; the Apaches;
the Mesquites; the Cacalotes [Maize Gruel];
the Posalmes; the Polacmes; the Oposmes;
the Pulicas; the Topacolmes; those of the
Miembros Largos [Long Limbs]; those
who eat all of their food made into pinole
[meal]; the Gaapa; the Paiaias Cuchite; the
Canaq; the Tugues; the Cruiamos; the
Ymittes; the Rayados [the Striped] the
Ysuguaios; the Mamuyas; the Satatu; the
Yaguat; the Comeviejos; the Chaures; the
Mapoch; those of the Manos Sordas [Still
Hands]; those of the Arcos Podridos
[Rotten Bows]; those of the Arcos Buenos
[Good Bows]; other Borrados; those of the
Colas Largas [Long Tails]; the Tejas."
"All these nations are more peaceful than
warlike, for which reason it should be
possible to penetrate with ease to their
interior. The Apaches maintain a
continuous war with them."
"The Indians who inhabit the country from
the Rio Conchos to New Mexico, and from
there to the Rio Tizon, the coast of the
South Sea, and the provinces of Sonora and
Sinaloa, total 27 nations, follow: the
Conchos; the Julimes; the Christian
Sumas; the heathen Sumas; the A_E_aches;

Source

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 193
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
the Taos, those of New Mexico; the
Moquinos; the Yutas; the Jouas; the
Apaches Cruzados, which is a widespread
nation; the Pimas who are very numerous;
the Seris; the Tepocas; the Sobal; the
Sonoras; the Chinipas; the Guacapares,
who are the Taraumares; the Janos; the
Yaquis; the Rau; the Babun; the Potutu,
the Cocori; the Tepagui, the Conecuaris."
"This land is depopulated and despoiled of
almost everything. Mining and farmwork
ceased, principal mining establishments
have been abandoned as well as the
iITigated and the seasonal crops. The cause
is the extreme boldness and daring of the
Indians for they are continually stealing
horses and killing the inhabitants to such a
degree that without an escort and good
guard the few laborers who have remained
are not able to work. Most of the fortunes
have decayed. To this the epidemic which
prevailed last year ( 1682), and part of that,
contributed not a little, for it destroyed more
than a third of the kingdom, the working
people suffering more generally from this
misfortune."
"From Durango to PaITal are two roads.
One by way of Santa Catalina where there is
a presidio of that name. Distance between
these places is 70 leagues and in that region
live part of widely distributed nation of
Tepeguanes who for many years have
maintained strict fidelity and obedience.
Road is only slightly secure because squads
of Tobosos continually spy upon it. The
road by way of Cuencame is safer and
much travelled because 3 presidios are
situated along it."
"Cocoiomes and Tobosos influence
barbarous nations of region, enciting them
to make depredations."
Discussions about how these Indians steal
horses. Says they eat some of these animals.
Remedy and relief from these constant
injuries (Indian attacks) is the preservation
of presidios Pasaje, Gallo, CeITo Gordo,
Conchos and Janos and establishment of
another. Describes routes Indians use to
enter the region. It is necessary to leave
some soldiers at presidio to guard it and to
send remainder of presidia! soldiers to
reconnoitre outlying regions with squads of
40 .or 50 with some friendly Indians as
guides. Cause Indians to be reduced in
missions near presidios rather than in
regions where Indians live. Says that is how
the Peteguanes and Taraumares became
highly Hispanicized, developed some culture
and b~an to raise cattle and cultivate their

Source

194

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

lands.
Defines four "fierce and warlike nations of
Chisos as the Chichitames, the
Satapayogliglas, the Guazapayogliglas and
the Osatayogliglas."
Concerning the Cocoiomes-Tobosos, he
opined that "active and bloody war, without
quarter, should be waged against them, for
they have failed time without number in the
obedience which they promised, being
apostates from the Evangelical law, which
they profess. They are the ones who arouse
other nations against the Spanish by
exciting them with the great amount of
booty which they have acquired .... For there
have been left only the bands of El Tecolote,
Lorencillo, Cejablanca [White Eye-Brow],
El Cola de Coyote [Coyote Tail], and
Contrerillas, which at most cannot reach
100 braves (for thus they call the fighting
Indians)."

Jumano at El Paso

El Paso

"Best time to wage war is in the rainy
season, as water is then found everywhere
easily for the soldiers and horses. The worst
and most difficult time is in the dry season
when there is no water except at long
distances."
Juan Sabeata with some of his Jumanos
and allies shows upin El Paso. Expresses
urgency for Spanish help against the
Apaches. Sabeata lived at a place Spaniards
called La Junta at confluence of Conchas
with Rio Grande; had been baptised at
Parral. Some Jumano lived "eastward of
La Junta on the buffalo plains near the
modern Nueces River." Bolton makes it
clear that this river is distinct from Nueces
at San Saba.

Bolton
1908:314-315

Sabeata represents all chiefs of his
"neighborhood" as well as groups to the
east, including the Tejas, to ask for
missionaries and for help against the
Apaches.

10/20/1683

Domingo Gironza
Petris de Cruzati,
_governor and

Pueblo
Nuestra
Senora de

Among 30+ tribes about which Sabeata
spoke, he told particularly about "great
kingdom of Tejas," a populous realm some
15 or 20 days eastward of La Junta and
ruled by a powerful king. "As for the chief
who visited Diego del Castillo, who had been
east many years before, he was not the king
of the Tejas, but merely the king's
lieutenant. The Tejas were a settled people,
he said, and raised grain in such
abundance that they even fed it to their
horses. Tejas were neighbors of Gran
Quivira and they visited back and forth
almost dai!Y,"
Reports by letter that a Jumano called in his
language Sabeata and called in Spanish
Juan who was b~tised at Parral; before

Hackett
1931-1934:
137-139

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 195
Date

Activity
captain general of
New Mexico, to the
viceroy

Location
Guadalupe
de! Paso

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
Cruzati reached El Paso, Sabeata had been
there, returned to his land which Sabeata
reports is "6 or 8 days from this pueblo
from where he was sent by all the captains
of different nations who have their
territories in direction of the east." Cruzati
ordered Sabeata and his six companions to
appear before him. The interpreter was
Captain Hernando Martin Serrano, a
citizen of these provinces who knows the
Jumano language.
Sabeata says he "lives with many of his
Jumano nation at the junction of the Rio de!
N01ie and the Concho which must be about
eight days' journey from El Paso." Sabeata
and his 6 captains named Juan, Alonso,
Bartolome, Luis, Francisco and Jose [Note:
Christian names suggest baptism] had
come to ask for ministers "to teach the
Indians in their land where 10,000 were
asking for baptism, among them the
Julimes and Jumanos." Indians also hoped
for protection of Spaniards against their
Apache enemies who have a rancheria very
near theirs. Sabeata referred to old
friendship between Jumano and Spaniards
from New Mexico.
From El Paso "to where other Jumano are
is six days' journey; that buffaloes are 3
days' journey from where Sabeata is at
present. River Las Nueces is 3 days' journey
from that place. There are nuts in such
abundance on this river that they constitute
the maintenance of many nations who enjoy
friendship and barter and exchange with
his Jumano. Those groups are: Miembro
Largo, .a large and extended nation; the
nation that grinds [muele]; Flechas Feas
[Ugly Arrows]; Gente de Pescado; Gente
Que Come [the people who eat]; Gente del
Agua Sucia [People of the Dirty Water];
Tuxaxa; Pefiimde [Gente Penunde]; the
Tixemu people [Gente Tixumu]; Gente de la
Nuez [people of the nut]; Janaque; Tohojo;
Emiti [Note: St. Denis's Emet?]; Caimanes;
Toapa, Quioboriqui; Toapari; Geobari;
Borobamo; Cocuma; Obozi; Comocara;
Bean; Arihuman; Utaca; Tumpotogua;
Mano; Los Surdos; Quide; El Gran Reyno
de los Texas, those who make arrows; the
great kingdom of Quivira; the very extended
nation of the Yutas, and the Jumanos.
There are other, many nations with whom
the Jumanos trade."
Sabeata said that where he now lives (La
Junta) he left two Indians of the Texas
nation awaiting the reply which Sabeata will
carry in order to take the information to
those of their nation. These people have told
Sabeata that into the eastern region
~aniards INote: actual!.Y_ means

Source

196

Texas Archeological Society

Date

1683

Activity

Mendoza expedition
to Jumanos

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

Frenchmen] are entering by water in
wooden houses and that they barter and
exchal![e with the said nation of the Texas.
Juan Dominguez de Mendoza expedition,
1683-1684. Bolton says between this
expedition and the previous one (1654) "we
are told that trade and friendship had been
maintained with these Indians with such
security that Spaniards, six, eight and ten,
went to their lands and villages every year to
trade with these Indians."

Bolton 1920:
314

[Note: Thirty years earlier, Mendoza went
with Guadalajara to the Jumanos. The
Pueblo Revolt interrupted the
Spanish/Native American trade in region
where Apaches took over, precluding
Jumanos' safe travel to and from region of
their La Junta. See April 1686 entries in
which Fray Lopez discusses Mendoza
having lost his fortune in or as a result of
the 1680 Pueblo Revolt. Could personal
trade have influenced Mendoza's
e~edition?J

12/1511683

Mendoza expedition

Indian groups accompany Mendoza. They
are: Jumana, Ororosos, Beitonijures,
Achubales, Cujalos, Toremes, Gediondos,
Siacuchas, Suajos, Isuchos, Cujacos,
Caulas, Hinehis, Ylames, Cunquebacos,
Quitacas, Quicuchabes, Los que asen
Arcos, Hanasines. Sabeata says his Indian
allies are scheduled to arrive. He names
them, as recorded in the Mendoza diary.
They are: People of the Rio de los Tejas,
who had sent a message that they would
come, the Huicasique, Aielis, Aguidas,
Flechas Chiquitas, Echancotes, Anchimos,
Bobidas, Injames, Dijus, Colabrotes,
Unojitas, Juanas, Yoyehis, Acanis, Humez,
Bibis, Conchumuchas, Teandas, Hinsas,
Pojues, Quisabas, Paiabunas, Papanes,
Puchas, Puquahianes, Isconis, Tohumas,
Pagaiames, Abas, Bajuneros, Nobraches,
Pylchas, Detobitis, Puchames, Abau,
Oranchos.
Reached junction of Middle Concho with
Nueces at place near modern San Angelo,
according to Bolton, where he previously
had been with Guadalajara. Further, at Rio
San Clemente (Colorado near junction with
main Concho) they remained 6 weeks, killed
over 4,000 buffalo; built "stronghold and
chapel"; left and promised to return next
year. Mendoza went to Mexico City to
present memorials and, in 1685 and 1686,
they urged Spanish occupation of Jumano
country.
[Note: This might actually have happened
had La Salle not showed up on the Texas
coast the next year (1684).]
Mendoza Sf!YS

th~(~ainish)

could not

Bolton 1920:
313-343

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 197
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

wait any longer for Sabeata's friends to
show; they had to leave. Agreement was
made with messengers of nations not
present that a return trip would be made,
the time set being 1685. "Separating
ourselves, some nations departed toward
their land with the Indian who governed
them, who is a Christian and is proficient in
the Mexican language and in Castillian"
[Note: possibly "them" in sentence above is
a reference to groups from the south.]

1684

Memoir concerning
Penalosa's plan to
be used by LaSalle

Gulf Coast/
Spanish
mines

1/1684

Memoir by
Penalosa

Expedition
against New

5/2/1684

Mendoza
expedition: Santa
Cruz

Mendoza says, "we provided meat and, with
other nations with us, took a different route
from that which we first followed. Remained
with us only some families. Sabeata, fearful
of his bad work, fled, for he had plotted
withsome nations to kill us, and then found
out we had learned it already from the same
nations, who dealt with the Spanish with
great fidelity. His conduct [was] so bad, he
was perhaps afraid they [the Indians] would
kill him, for he [Sabeata] remained in bad
r~ute with all those nations."
Reads much like what became La Salle's
plan for gulf coast voyage; author
(Penalosa) asks for the title of viceroy and
c~tain::_g_eneral of all lands discovered.
Proposed expedition against New Biscay.

Bisc~MX.

On Mendoza's return, he "set out from this
place, which was given the name San
Atanacio, because it was his day." Is on
same river and has same plants, quantity of
fish and same animals. Is distant from San
Clemente about 4 leagues. "In this place,
which was given the name Santa Cruz ... "

AC 1684

Margry
1876-1886,
vol. III:48
Bolton 1908:
340

[Note: How close is this to San Saba de

5/411684

1686

Santa Cruz and is there a connection?
Mendoza does not say he named it Santa
Cruz. He just says "it was given the name
Santa Cruz." Ifhe did not name it, who
did TI_
Left Santa Cruz on 4"' ofMay; h·aveled 6
leagues to place "which was given the name
San Augustine because it is in a valley with
many pines [Note: Is this the Upper
Nueces?] It is on a river which flows toward
the west. [Note: Is this a segment of upper
Nueces?] They left San Augustine on May
11
7tli and, 4 days later, on the 11 ' • were at La
Hasencion del Senor on a river beautiful
with pecan trees, grapes and mulberries.
This river flowers toward the east.

Mendoza expedition

Letter of Fray
Nicolas Lopez to the
viceroy

New Mexico

[Note: Is this a different river, or same
riverTI
Explanation of why he came to court "to
represent miserable state of New Mexico
and the sufferings of its inhabitants." Came
also to....12_oint out the number of nations

Bolton
1908:341

Hackettl 9311934, vol
II:360-362

198

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

asking for baptism "availing themselves of
the means of our holy law to bring
ministers to their lands by pretending that a
cross fallen from heaven had appeared to
them,_for those heathen saw there was
small intention on the part of the Spanish to
make an expedition to their lands and hoped
by this prodigy of the cross to encourage
them to make the journey."
Said Jumanos were especially important
and they always maintained friendship with
the Spanish. At urgent request of said
barbarians the petitioner went down in
company with two religious persons,
travelling barefoot, until they reached the
place called La Junta de los Rios. There
they found two huts erected by the heathen
where religious began to give catechism and
to build four more huts where nine nations
were sheltered. 500 souls baptised.
"Exploring and penetrating their lands, in
the north as well as the east, the petitioner
[Lopez] visited seventy-six [76] nations in
the interior. Touched upon the threshold of
the extensive and powerful kingdom of the
Tejas and set foot in the country of the
nation called Aijados, adjoining the great
kingdom of Quivira. All the land is rich in
nuts, plums, berries, pine-nut trees and
grapes and great numbers of buffaloes as is
set forth in the itinerary made by the leader
of the expedition, the maestre de campo,
Juan Dominguez de Mendoza."
"At this time much may be accomplished
through the friendliness toward the
Spaniards of sixty-five nations."
Lopez says he knows the Jumano language
and has preached in it.
Mentions ingress of the French and that the
complete ruin of the Jumano is threatened.

4/2411686

4/25/1686

Fray Nicolas Lopez,
custodian and
legate of his
Holiness in New
Mexico
Fray Nicolas Lopez
to the Senor

There are 75 [Note: what happened to the
65 previously mentioned?] asking for aid
against the Apache nation. Reports he is
presenting a map of region to viceroy. Has
prepared the map according to his true
knowledge and understanding having
traveled over the greater part of the country
and explored the routes of those kingdoms,
for from the kingdom of the Texas he
advanced a distance 25 leagues to the
confines of the Aijados nation, which
divides the kingdom from La Gran Quivira.
Reports Frenchmen are trying to settle to
the east.

Discusses General Juan Dominguez de
Mendoza who had served the crown in the

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:363
Hackett
1931-1934,

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 199
Date

Activity

Location

Secretary

1688

Letter of Fray
Damian Massanet
to Don Carlos de
Siguenza; concerns
discovery of the Bay
of Espiritu Santo

Zacatsol

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

provinces of New Mexico from age 14 to 54,
and who had asked the viceroy of New
Spain for the governorship of New Mexico,
presenting his papers and certificates of
service from the said age at his own expense
since he always had the means. Governship
was denied and it was given to a person
"entirely incompetent for the business, from
whom there were expected many losses."
Seeing he had not secured the govemship,
General Mendoza presented this second
petition to make an expedition to the lands
in the east and north. He is the only one for
this expedition, and in order to force out the
French (who now may be settled there) for
he is fully experienced in matters of war and
known to be a man of good fortune in it. "I
do not know what will result from this
second memorial, but I believe it will be the
same of the first." The general has desired
to take a ship and place himself at the feet of
the Majesty to inform him concerning all
these kingdoms and provinces, as one who
has explored and penetrated them, but,
finding himself in falling fortunes. ("For in
the loss of New Mexico he lost more than
40,000 pesos, besides the loss by death of
more than 66 persons of his blood.") The
small means he now has have not permitted
him to C<llJY out his wish.
Indian groups listed by Juan Jarri as those
he found at Zacatsol: Mescales, Yoricas,
Ch om en es (Jumanos ), Machomenes,
Sampanales, Paquachiams, Tilpayay, Apis.

vol II: 363364

[Note: Interestingly, the Mescales, the
Jumanos and the Apis/Apes later were
between Brazos River and Colorado River at
Rancheria Grande; further, in 1690, a
Mescale "who had been with the Tejas
more than a year, "appeared before Alonso
de Leon in Monclova.]
Massanet writes that "Zacatsol is 20 leagues
beyond Rio Grande which is the river that
comes from the north and is called Rio de!
Norte. From mission of San Salvador to the
said sierra there are 60 leagues, and
Coahuila the same." Distance from Mission
San Salvador (Massanet's mission at
Caldera, Coahuila, Mexico) is 60 leagues,
and from Coahuila the same.
[Note: This confirms Leon's statement that
it is 40 leagues from Coahuila (Monclova)
to Rio Grande and 20 leagues more to
Zacatsol. However, Fr. Larios (in 1675)
says it is 60 leagues from Monclova to Rio
Grande. Either Larios' calculations were
erroneous or possibly he crossed upriver
from Eagle Pass. Larios, the son of a
Spaniard and a baptized Indian, was fluent
in Nahuatl or "Mexican language" as it
fr~uentlY_ was described in the historic

Bolton 1908:
356

200

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

record.]
1688

Massanet to Carlos
de Siquenza

Zacazol

5/1688

Capture of Jean
Jarry (variants:
Juan Jarri, Juan
Enrique, Jean
Andres, Francois
Jarry

Sierra de
Axatscan/A
xaxcasi/Sier
ra Dacate/
Sierra
Zacatsol/
Sacatsol I
Yacatsol

511688

1/11/1689

Diego Ramon

Juan Andres

Presidio de
Coahuila

"The said captain of the Pacpul nation,
named Juan, set out, and having drawn
near to the sierra of Zacazol-which means
"stone nostrils" and in the language of its
Indians of that place it is called Axaxcasi
which means the same thing, he found an
assembly of many Indian nations composed
of the following: Mescales, Yuricas,
Chomenes, Machomenes, Sampanales,
Pa_g_uachimis, Ti~ and A__rjs."
[Note: Frenchman Jean Jarry "captured"
near a site probably in the vicinity of the
Anacacho Moutains located just west of
Uvald_e, Texas. 1
Three names for the sierra: Sacatsol/
Yacatsol/ Zacatsol are Nahuatl, Axatscan
possibly is Comecrudo and Dacate is
uncertain]
Diego Ramon member of Alonso de Leon
expedition to capture Jean Jarry (Juan
Gery.)
[Note: It is unclear whether Ramon was
among those Leon left at Rio Grande or
whether Ramon accompanied Leon to
Sacatsol/Dacate/Anacacho/ AxatscanJ
Abstract of marriage investigation for
"Juan Andres of the French nation, native
of Jiblue, New France; had lived at Presidio
of Coaguila one month and Antonia de
Lara, a Spaniard, native of San Luis
Potosi, resident of Presidio of Coaguila for
6 years." Includes notation that General
Alonso de Leon brought Andres back from
his expediton to Texas.

Hackett
1931-1934,
volI:l43

Robles
1978:340;
Hackett
1931-1934,
vol.I:l47;
McGraw and
Sparks
1991 :53-56
Robles 1978:
341;
Portillo
1984:176

Guerra et al.
1989:38

[Juan Andres is known historically as Ju:an
G~

8/2811689

Leon to viceroy,
enclosing
declaration of
Mescal Indian

Presidio de
Coahuila

Mescal Indian arrived at Monclova. He had
lived more than a year among the Tejas. 18
Frenchmen arrived from a great river and
began to form a settlement near where the
two Frenchmen (L'Archeveque and Grollet)
had been captured. French had brought
domestic animals and two cannon. Tejas
helping build French houses, three already
constructed. Reportedly French had made
three attempts to settle near coast. French
intend to settle near Tejas. Mescal says
Tejas chief sent word that some of his
people would soon visit Coahuila so that
priests might be sent to live among them.
Leon reported he had sent Frenchman
Jean Gery (Jean Jarri/Juan Andres) to the
Rio Grande to await the expected visitors,
with instructions to treat them with all
courtesy and consideration.
[Note: Reference to interaction between
northeastern Mexico and East Texas

Dunn
1917:114

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 201
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

groups. Also, cannon in East Texas before
Spanish occupation? Doubtful unless Tonti
had brought a small swivel cannon.
Reference to two cannon keeps popping up
in French and Spanish reccords.]
Tonti is at his Arkansas Post by 1686 with
plans to find Mexico's mines.

1690

Itinerary, De Leon,
1690

East Texas

8/1511691

Fray Francisco
Casanas de Jesus
Maria to the
Vicer'2Y_ of Mexico
Fray Francisco
Casanas de Jesus
Maria to Viceroy

Province of
Texas

8/15/1691

8/1511691

8115/1691

Fray Francisco
Casanas de Jesus
Maria to Viceroy

Fray Francisco
Casanas de Jesus
Maria to Viceroy

Province of
Texas

Province of
Texas

Province of
Texas

Leon suggested that capitan Diego Ramon
of San Juan Bautista be placed in
command of Spanish troops in East Texas
if_2!esidio were established there.
Establishes mission at San Francisco de los
Tejas; locates and secures release of two
Talon children who had been with La
Salle's ..£..OSt on B'!l_e Saint-Louis.
"chiefs of the Cadodachos and certain
chiefs of this Province ofTexa - known
also by the name of Asinai."
"Rivers: there are only three rivers in
Province: La Santissima Trinidad, crossed
about 10 leagues before one reaches settled
portion of the province. The second, El
Arcangel San Miguel, is about 3 leagues
within the inhabited portion. On banks of
this stream ... mission has been
founded ..... the third river is about 10
leagues from the last named stream, and ...
I have named it Pascua del Espiritu Santo."
filote: the Trini.!Yz Nechas and AI!.8_elina'U_
"Hunting: at various times in the year
Indians come together for purpose of going
out to hunt buffalo. Nearest place they can
be found is about 4 days' travel from this
place. The reason for their going in bands
to hunt the buffalo is fear of other Indians,
their enemies."
[Note: I interpret "this place" to be San
Francisco de los Te_ias mission]
Clothing and Costuming: "[the Asinai] do
not lack articles of adornment for their
festivities, such as collars, ornaments and
pendants like the Mexican Indians wore
when they were heathens. These Indians
knew neither gold nor silver. Many of their
ornaments they have secured from other
nations, such as glass beads, bells and other
things of a similar nature which are not to
be found in this country .... They use paints
whenever they are ready to set out of a war
expedition. They claim that the paint serves
to keep their enemies from recognizing
them. They do the same thing for the same
reason whenever they know that visitors are
coming from some other tribe."
War Dance: Before going to war, they
dance and sing for seven or eight days.
When their language is learned, "we can
_g_arner in a _E!eat harvest because mai:!Y.

Bolton 1908:
416
Hatcher
1927:206
Hatcher
1927:209-210

Hatcher
1927:211

Hatcher
1927:213-215

202

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

tribes are gathered together in these
meeti~."

8/15/1691

Fray Francisco
Casanas de Jesus
Maria to Viceroy

Province of
Texas

8115/1691

Fray Francisco
Casanas de Jesus
Maria to Viceroy

Province of
Texas

1691

Father Fray Isido
Felix Espinosa

Province of
Texas

1691

Father Chretien Le
Clercq

Gulf Coast

Nine tribes: "(1) Nabadacho = Ineci. Within
bounds of this tribe is located mission of
Nuestro Padre de San Francisco as well as
the mission I have founded ... Santissima
Nombre de Maria. (2) Necha, separated
from 1" tribe by river Archangel San
Miguel. These two tribes are located toward
the northeast. To the southeast is the (3)
Nechavi tribe. Another tribe, located about a
half a league away is the (4) Nacono. To the
north of the boundary of the Necavi is a
tribe called (5) Nacachau. Between this tribe
and one of (6) Nazadachotzi which is
located toward the east on the road to the
home of the grand xinesi, about half way
between the tribes is another called (7)
Cachae. Their boundary begins at the home
of the grand xinesi. Northward of the
boundary of this tribe are the (8) Nabiti.
Adjoining and to the eastward are the (9)
Nasayaha Indians. These 9 tribes occupy
about 35 leagues and they are all subject to
thegrand xinesi."
Communal Labor: "Among them [Asinai]
there is no exchange, save by bartering. It
seems that everything they own they do not
hold as personal property but as common
_QrOQerty:."
Concerning the life of Father Casanas:
"Casanas was carried by the angel to
another village which lies to the north, more
than a hundred leagues distant from the
province of Texas, and in their language it
was called Cainios [Cainio] and the people
Cainigua. 5,000 Indians .... [He] found
himself familiar with the language of those
people,and with words filled with ardor he
enlig_htened them."
[Extracted from Le Clercq's Establishment
of the Faith in New France. Le Clercq had
been with La Salle's Gulf Coast expedition.

Hatcher
1927:215

Hatcher
1927:218

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:l66

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol. II: 177

Describing area around La Salle's, Le
Clercq writes, "The neighboring nations are
the Quoaquis [Quaaquis], who sow maize,
and have an abundance of horses to sell.
They likewise have as neighbors the
Bahamas and the Quinetes nations,
wanderers with whom they are at war.

1691

Massanet diary

Texas

[Note: Bahamas = Yerbipiamos? Bahamas
translates from Spanish as those live in the
low area/region, i.e. Bahama Islands ... so
named because of the shallow water/shoals
and difficulty to navigate them. Hackett
preserved Pichardo's Spanish "Bahamas"
which both Joutel and Le Clercq spelled
"Ebahamo.'1
Teran/Massanet: "On Wednesday, the 13111 ,
I named this place San Antonio de Padua.
In the Indian language it is called
Yanaguana. Pay<iy_as said they would guide

Hatcher
1932:48-67
[Explanation
includes two

Lemee-Amwtated Bibliography 203
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

Massanet to rancheria of Chomanes
Indians."

diaries: one
by Teran
himself
(Teran/
Teran); the
second bv Fr.
Massanet
who
accompanied
the expedition
(Teran/
Massanet).

"From mission I founded in the Valle de
Santiago, under the name of San Salvador
[near Cerralvo] up to this place all the
Indians speak the same language. From
this place to Los Techas are other
languages. There follow the Indian nations
of Catqueca, Cantona, Emet, Cauas
[Cavas], Zana, Rojo [Tojo], Toaa and
others. The place refened to, on account of
being on the borderline of Indians who,
although they are all friendly and do not
wage war, speak a different language. This
same place ... which they call Xoloton which
means 'black nuts.' These other last-named
nations who are on the road to Los Techas,
call it [Xoloton] Bataconiquiyoqui."
"[W]e encountered an Indian coming on
horseback. Indians said the captains of
Choma, Cibola, Cantona, Cholome, Cat,
Queca and Caynaya nations were coming to
receive us peaceably. Captains appeared, all
on horseback. They had small saddles they
had taken from Apaches in war. They
produced two letters from religious who had
remained "last year" among the Techas, the
letters sent by an Indian who had come
from Los Techas."
They headed to their village on Rio
Guadalupe, travelling northeast through
level country with low hills. Halted on bank
of arroyo that unites with the river;
rancheria was in the woods. Named place
San Gerbasio. In the Indian language it is
called Conaqueyadeta, that is to say, where
the river rises.
"One captain was Juan Sabeata with his
people and nation of the Choma. Choma,
Cibola and Caynaaya lived and have their
lands on the banks of the Rio de! Norte.
They likewise border on the Apache Indians
and have wars with them. The Indians of
the Choma nation are the ones whom in
Parral and New Mexico they call Jumanes.
Every year they come to the head of the Rio
de Guadalupe and sometimes as far as the
Techas. Come to kill buffaloes, and as soon
as cold weather begins, they retire to their
own country."
[Th ]e said Indians [Jumano] every year
enter Pana! and Paso del Nuevo Mexico.
Sabeata's purpose in coming there
[Guadalupe] was for the buffalo and to
bring the pelts."
Text gives reference to Captain Tomas of
the Calqueca nation.

204

Texas Archeological Society

Date

1691

1691

Activity

Location

He says Muruam nation at peace with the
Indians of the coast of La Bahia.
Concerning Xoloton, Karttunen writes,
"When we examine the Bancroft Dialogues,
a sixteenth-century Nahuatl text that
exemplifies polite direct address among
people of different age, rank, and sex, we
find that courtesy involves indirection to the
point of actual inversion of stated
relationships." Continuing, "when a lady
speaks to her own grandchild, she refers to
him as xoloton, 'little page'."

Xoloton

Teran diary

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

La Bahia de
Espiritu
Santo

[Note: what linkage exists between
Massanet's Xoloton (black nuts) and
Karttunen's xoloton (littlepC\g~)71
Instructions: "The vessel in which this
voyage is to be made is to be in Bahia de
Espiritu Santo toward the end of April of
this year. The said governor shall arrange
for his lieutenant, Captain Francisco
Martinez, to be within sight of this bay at the
time."
[Note: Martinez, fluent in French,
previously had been at the bay during the
1689 De Leon expedition. Martinez later
served at Pensacola.]
P. 16: "We remained here until the 3rct (July
1691), when ... Captain Francisco Martinez
departed." "The trip down to the Old Fort
and back to this camp on the river
consumed the time from our arrival on the
3rd until the 19'h ."
[Note: The anticipated vessel with Spanish
provisions did not arrive during those six
days. Consideration given to Martinez
making a second trip to await the vessel. He
decided instead to continue to the kingdom
of the Tejas and, from there, to make a trip
to the "Old Fort", i.e. La Salle's former post
on Garcitas Creek.]
They started for the "Old Fort" on August
24, 1691. On September 8th, they
encountered Spaniards from company of
Captain Gregorio [Salinas] Varona. They
camped on banks of "Rio de los Franceses"
where barracks had been constructed.
Teran informed Varona had put ashore
July 2"d last, remaining to this day,
September 8 th •
[Note: Had Maiiinez actually gone to the
coast? If so, how did he not find vessel that
reportedly was there?]
On March 5th, 1692, he met with a party
from vessels under command of Juan
Enriquez Varroto, captain of artillery,
whom they found waiting for them. They
had been there, ke~~ a constant watch

Source

Karttunen
1992:239-256

Hatcher
1932:3-48;
Weddle 1968:
67-70

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 205
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

for Teran's company for more than two
months; a vessel had been stationed there as
well.
Teran dated his account "at Lago de San
Bernard.a de San Francisco, May 24 ill,
1692." On that date, he embarked on a
frigate to begin explorations of the coast.
[Note: How long did Spaniards remain in
region? Does the known record support
directly or indirectly their occupation, if only
temporarily, of the former site of La Salle's
post? Is there archeological evidence at the
site to support a pre-1721 Spanish
occ~ation?J

10/25/1693

Fr. Massanet

East Texas

9/2911695

Luis Granillo
concerning the
French coming
toward plains of
Cibolo

Santa Fe

10/211695

Diego de Vargas
Zapata Lujan
Ponze de Leon,
governor of
province of New
Mexico
Luis Granillo,
Alonso Garcia

Santa Fe

10/411695

1/1696

Reply of fiscal

Villa San
Lorenzo de
Pi curies

Mexico City

"buried swivel guns, bells, etc. and
abandoned [the] missions."
[Note: Indians report swivel guns to
Bienville in April 1700. See April 22, 1700
entry. These swival guns keep showing up.]
An account of the coming of Captain
Mathias Lujan from his alcaldia of
Picuries, Picuries is a pueblo. Some
Indians came to Picuries to trade. Those
Apaches brought news a large number of
Frenchman are coming toward plains of
Cibola; that Apaches are retreating to this
(Picuries) neighborhood on account of
frequent attacks made on them by
Frenchmen.
He orders some of his men to return to
Picuries to interrogate those Apaches who
brought news of Frenchmen.

They told Apaches at Picuries the Spanish
were their friends and Apaches replied they
were very pleased about that. Spaniards
asked about Frenchmen beyond their
territory. Apaches said that seven nations
beyond the region where they live, very far
from these pmis, had informed them that
certain white men came to the bank of the
water and made war on the people of
Quivira and other parts and presently they
go away, and again return and make war
and go away, and that it is very far off, and
they have not seen them, and that they have
this report from other nations hostile to
them, giving to understand that they who
have given them the said information are
their enemies and slaves.
In a council of war in Mexico in January
1696, the fiscal stated that Luis Gramillo,
an Apache, had information that many
Frenchmen were coming toward the Plains
of Cibola. Later, in October, two Apache
chiefs visiting Taos said that 6 tribes on the
east had reports that "some white men came
to the banks of a lake to make war in the
_2!.Jiviras, had _g_one aw~ and returned later

Clark 1902:2

Hodge
1929:72-76

Hodge
1929:73-75

Hodge
1929:76

Hodge
1929:72-76

206

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

7/29/1697

Expedition

Colorado

8/1/1697

Expedition

New Mexico
to Colorado

8/3/1697

Expedition

New Mexico

1697

News of French
from Navajo

New Mexico

1698

Navajo return east
for revenge

Southern
Plains

1698

Huguenots

Louisiana

1698

Iberville:
Prospectus for for
exploration and
settlement of a
proposed colony

Louisiana

2/1698

Pontchartrain to
Iberville

Written in
France

4/22/1698

Ponchartrain to
Begon

Written in
France

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
for the same purpose." Apaches had not
themselves seen the white people. Vargas
requested and was denied two pieces of
artill~ to r~el af!Y_ attack.
Rio Napestle = Arkansas. It was named Rio
Grande de San Francisco by Spaniards and
flows north to east.
Discussion about Frenchman and pregnant
wife who were scalped. Apaches took from
them a large gun, a kettle, a red-lined cap
and the gun powder he carried. Later,
Apaches showed gun to Juan de
Archeveque who said he recognized the gun
and that it belonged to his kinsman
(another Frenchman). Spainards traded for
this gun and other firearms to include 3
carbines. Apaches said "the enemies, the
Pawnee, sell to the Spaniards [French
actually] the Apache women and children
whom they take prisoners as they (the
Apache) themselves sold to us those of the
Pawnees they capture."

Source

Thomas
1935:67
Thomas
1935:67

[Note: Jean L'Archeveque, present at La
Salle's murder, was captured by Alonso de
Leon in 1689 and returned to Mexico; then
to Spain and, later, returned to Mexico and
on to New Mexico where he married and
became man of means.]
Spaniards talked peace and lovebeads with
Thomas
the Apaches, "dwelling upon the enmity
1935:68
which they have with the barbarous tribes of
the Pawness and Jumanos."
Thomas
Navajos, accustomed to long journeys to
Quivira, frequently fought the French and
1935:13
Pawnees, in alliance at that time, bringing
the spoil to trade in New Mexico [Note: Do
they refer to Taos? ] Story goes that on one
such eastward trek, 4,000 Navajos were
killed b__y_ the French and Pawnees.
Annihilated three Pawnee rancherias and a Thomas
1935:14
"fortified place." [Note: How many Navajo
were there after 4,000 killed__y_ear__Qrior?l
Giraud 1953,
Rumored desires of exiled Huguenots to
vol.I:l8
establish themselves in Louisiana.
Purpose was to control mouth of the
Lemmon et
al. 2003:41.
Mississippi River by means of an
establishment of St. Esprit Bay; 60
Canadians descending Mississippi River
from the Lakes, establishing a colony and
building a fort; need of diligence and
secrecy.
Giraud 1953,
Pontchartrain ordered Iberville, recently
vol. I:20
arrived from Hudson Bay, to detain
Canadians who had come with him from
the Artie coast. These Canadians would
become members of Iberville voyage to
Louisiana.
AC 1698
Ponchartrain orders Begon to keep in
France the 60 Canadians who had arrived
from Newfoundland with Serigny so
Iberville would have reenforcements for his
Louisiana J2!0iect. On back of the document

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 207
Date

Activity

Location

6/1811698

Iberville to
Pontchartrain

La Rochelle,
France

1699

Navajo

Taos

1/511699

Mision Francisco
Javier en el Valle de
San Cristobal

Coahuila,
Mexico.

21211699

Iberville

3/22/1699

Iberville

412211699

Spanish deserters

Massacre
Island
Red River

French post

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
is written: "Rolle des Canadiens [The roll of
Canadians] passes de Plaisance en France,
5 M'!2'._l699."
English prepare for settlement on the
Mississippi River.
Navajos return from "grudge match" with
Pawnee/French. They bring with them the
spoils of victory: slaves, jewels, carbines,
cannons, powder flasks, gamellas, sword
belts, waistcoasts, shoes and even small pots
of brass. They told Spaniards of defeat the
kar_£!ior,J:!aisi~ French for their valor.
40 leagues north of Monclova, Mission San
Francisco Javier was established for the
Ervipiame by Diego Ramon and Fr.
Cristobal Munoz Montes de Oca.
[Note: Interestingly, two other missions in
modem Texas later established for the
Ervipiame were San Javier de Najera (San
Antonio) and San Javier (near Rockdale.)
Whether the San Antonio mission ever was
erected is uncertain; some of its Indians
later were absorbed into Mision San
Antonio de Valero (Alamo). The Rockdale
mission was short-livedJ
Lands at the island.
He (Taensa Indian) made map showing
river named Tasenocogoula (Red) in which
are 2 branches: on west branch there are 8
villages called Yatache, Nacthytos, Yezito,
Natao, Cachaymoua, Cadodaquio, Nataho,
Natsytos. From Senys to Cadodaquio is 53
leagues.
[Note: reference is made to Indians as
m'!l2._makertl
Five Spanish deserters from Pensacola who
were going on foot to New Spain were
brought by some Indians from La Mobile to
Iberville. The Spaniards' report to him
included mention of there being at
Pensacola a soldier and maker of edge tools
who had been in group that went to drive
out La Salle and his people; that he (the tool
maker) had been chosen to live at fort the
Spanish had built in an Indian nation
where he remained three years. [Note: this
is the first reference in French record to
Spanish occupation in modern East Texas.]
But failing to get along with Indians they
were compelled to abandon fo1i where they
had two cannon. Spaniard said two
Frenchmen were still there with Indians
and they had married Indians. [Note: Could
this be a reference to survivors of La Salle's
colony?] Report says from there (the
Hasinai village) to Mexico is a well-beaten
path. Spaniard tells Iberville about Old and
New Mexico. Rep01is there are only 250
Spaniards at Santa Fe. Three of these
~aniards are half-breeds who were sent to

Source

Margry
1876-1886,
vol I:58
Thomas
1935: 14

Portillo
1984:27

McWilliams
1981 :37
McWilliams
1981:70

McWilliams
1981:93-96

208

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

Pensacola under duress; one is from the
mining camps of St. Louys Potasy (sic).
Iberville writes, "I am going to take these
Spaniards to France with me, two on the
Marain and three on the Badine. "

12116/1699

1700

Governor Cuerbo y
Valdes to Diego
Ramon

Lipan Apache

Mexico

Llaneria
Grande,
north of
San
Antonio

[Note: on Iberville's 2nd voyage to
Louisiana, he brings St-Denis plus two
Talon brothers. Soon after landing in
Louisiana, Iberville sends St-Denis and
others in search of the Red River and the
HasinaiJ
Ramon is given necessary authority to go
north from Monclova to establish Indians
in pueblos, to name a governor and cabildo
for each pueblo and to assist missionaries
who will establish churches (missions) at
each pueblo.
[Note: This occurs just as Iberville/St
Denis/Talon brothers are arriving on
Louisiana _gulf coast.]
"Mountain orientation of most Apachean
groups, including those who ultimately
came to be considered Plains people, is well
documented. Only Kiowa Apache, and
possibly those who became known as the
Lipan, eventually committed themselves
predominantly to the plains. Even so, the
movements of the Lipan in particular were
affected by conflicts with the Comanche
from the l 8'h century onward. Before
suffering a major defeat by Comanche in
1723, they (Lipan) had been living near the
Llaneria Grande north of San Antonio,
Texas."
"Ethnohistory of Lipan is more obscure,
but on basis of linguistic..and other cultural
evidence, there is little doubt that they and
the Jicarilla share a close common heritage.
Historic Lipan and Jicarilla may both
consist of aggregates of various Apachean
groups noted throughout the 17'h&l8th
centuries in the Texas-Oklahoma
Panhandle region."
"Lipan seem to have been in close
association with Jicarilla and both may
represent the coalescence of some of the
earlier Plains and transitional zone Apache
who were noted by chroniclers in the region
of northeastern New Mexico, the TexasOklahoma Panhandle, and the
southwestern Nebraska regions. By the
1700s the Comanche advancing from the
north pushed them into west Texas where
again they established themselves in the
vicinity of mountainous terrain. We can see
reflections of the mobility in scattered
references to the confrontations they had
with the French and their (French) Pawnee
allies in eastern Texas, and there is some
evidence that th~ had further ~oradic

AGN 1699

Perry
1991:132-133

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 209
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

contact with the Kiowa to the north (see
Dyan 1974:15).

1700
1/9/1700

Taos
English ships

Mississippi
River/
English
turn

[Note/Question: When exactly did Lipan
slaves begin to appear in Natchitoches?
What group exactly traded them to the
French? Possibly Tawakoni and Toavoyas
who offered Caney (Lipan Apache) slaves to
La H~e?J.
Apaches say French destroyed a Jumano
pueblo. Spaniards in New Mexico initiate
_Q}an for an el92_edition to the east.
Sauvolle advises Iberville that before his
(Iberville's) return from France to
Louisiana, Bienville had seen on the
Mississippi River [Note: at place known
from that time until now as English Tum]
an English corvette of 10 guns commanded
by William Lewis Bond. [Note: Iberville
previously had captured Bond's ship during
battle at Hudson Bay.]
Bond told Bienville that three ships left
London in October 1698 to establish a
settlement on the Mississippi River. One
ship returned to London; two continued in
May 1699 from Carolina where most
passengers had remained [Note: these were
Huguenots.] Bond had "gone looking" for
the Mississippi 30-40 leagues east of where
the relations about Louisiana written by the
Recollet Father and Tonty (sic) had located
it; there he found only poor harbors and a
Spanish post "about 90 leagues west of this
river."
[Note: Concerning the three English ships,
they are believed to have been part of Daniel
Coxe's company, Coxe having then recently
purchased the Carolana patent.]
"They believe, as I do," Iberville writes
about the reported Spanish post, "that is St.
Louis Bay." One English ship had "gone
on, followed coast to the west to explore it as
far as Panuco."
[Note: Panuco River in Mexico with outfall
near Tampico: What Spanish post on the
Texas gulf coast in 1699? Might this be a
reference to Spanish occupation of the "old
fort" mentioned in 1691 Teran/Massanet?
Record does not indicate whether Spanish
post was occupied when English saw it;
however, it might be interpreted to mean it
were occupied. Is it possible La Salle's post
on the Baye Saint-Louis=
Teran/Massanet's 1691 "old fort"=
reported Spanish post on coast in 1699? Is
it possible Spaniards had abandoned the site
and that some of those on board (French
Huguenots) the English ship had been left
to settle there, or that they later settled there?
Further, is this the 2_redicate for the

Thomas
1935:14
Mc Williams
1981: 106108, 120

210

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

combined Spanish /French land expedition
from Pensacola/Mobile in 1702/1703 to
investigate a rumored English colony on the
Texas coast?]
English captain threatened to return and
settle on opposite side of river from
Iberville's French settlement.

2/1/1700
2/16/1700

Iberville headed to
River Marne (Red
River)
Tonty arrives

Louisiana
Louisiana

2/17/1700

Iberville journal

Louisiana

2/28/1700

Orders for
St. Denis

Louisiana

3/511700

Iberville' s
description
Land route
Iberville headed to
Taensas/Senis

Louisiana

3/13/1700

Iberville
interrogates
Ouchita Indain

Present
Lake St.
Joseph in
modern
Tensas
Parish, LA

3/19/1700

Departure for
Hasinai/Senis

Louisiana
colony

3/22/1700

Iberville journal

Louisiana
colony

3/12/1700

Iberville moves quickly to establish a post on
the Mississippi in order to take possession
of it before the English. Prepared for
journey up the Marne (Red) River near
where the Senis (Hasinai) live. Iberville
"sent M. de St. Denis on with two pirogues
and two bark canoes to take the lead."
He went up Red River near the upper part
of which the Senis [Asinais] live.
In boat with 18 men, 14 left at Bayougoulas.
Men with him are from Illinois and
Tamarouas living on both sides of
Mississippi near mouths of Illinois and
Missouri rivers. French missionary sent
there in 1700.
Iberville wrote, "I have no need to take
naval cadets into the woods, or a good many
of the others, who are not at all suited."
[Note: One of those Iberville believed well
suited, he later demonstrated, was St.
Denis.l
Iberville sent St. Denis on with 2 pirogues
and 2 bark canoes to take the lead and to
hunt if they find game within 15 leagues
from here.
Nice description of land route and distances
up Red River from Taensas villages to

Mc Williams
1981:114
Mc Williams
1981:117

McWilliams
1981:118

Mc Williams
1981: 120
McWilliams
1981:123

Cadod~uios.

Louisiana

"6 a.m. set out in canoe with 6 men to go to
Taensas and to get everything ready to go
overland to Senis, leaving my brother with
rest of my men at Nadchez (sic) to prepare
meal for the journey, where it is more easily
done than at Taensas."
Interrogated Indians about nations west of
them and along River Marne, questioning
particularly a Ouatchita (sic) Indian who
had been to Caddaquios and to some
Spanish posts. He (Ouatchita) reports roads
as difficult, whole route being overland.
Said he would guide Iberville if he were paid
well.
Iberville writes, "My brother (Bienville) and
the Sieur de St.Denis got ready to set out
with 20 men to go by land to the Senis. I
could not make this journey because of an
aching in the knees, which prevents me
from walkin_&"
Iberville mentions his brother Bienville and
St. Denis had set out for the Red River
exploration with one Shawnee, one
Ouachita who is the _g_uide, and six Taensas.

Mc Williams
1981:127

Mc Williams
1981:128

McWilliams
1981:130

McWilliams
1981:132

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 211
Date

Activity

3/22/1700

Portion of
Bienville's journal
of overland journey
(March 22- May
18) from Taensas
to Village of
Yataches (Yatasi on
Red River)

Location
Louisiana
colony

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

"With several Cadodaquios at this village
and one Naouadiche and one Nadaco I
have discussed the neighboring areas of this
country. They all tell me that they have been
to a Spanish settlement, which is five-1/2
days by land to the west of this village. They
go and come on horseback. At those
establishments, they say, the Spaniards have
four pieces of cannon. There are a number
of men, women, and children, whites, and
mulattoes and blacks, and they till the soil.
The settlement is close to the village of the
Nouadiches. The Nouadiche who talks to
me says that he lived with them nearly a
year and on several occasions went on
horseback with some Spaniards, who he
tells me are black, apparently Negroes, to
another settlement, which he locates five
days' travel west-northwest of the former
one. At this settlement there were only
Negroes with their families. He reports
them to be rather numerous and leads us to
believe that the Negroes at this settlement did
not welcome any white Spaniard; and when
white ones came, the blacks drove them off
without speaking to them; he had not,
however, seen them fight each other. He
gives the name of this settlement as
Connessi, that is, the Blacks; and the first
one, the Spanish settlement, he calls in their
language Yayecha. He reports that by land
it is three days northwest by west from
Connessi to the Chomans, and that from
the Chomans to the Conoatinos and to three
other nations it is approximately one and
two days' journey. These four nations
make war on the Spaniards and on all the
Indians to the south and southeast and east
of them. According to all Indians of this
village, the River Mame (Red) flows to the
village of the Cadodaquios and divides into
two branches one day's journey above
them: one runs to the northeast and the
other to the west-northwest. Along this
branch are two nations: one is called
Chaquantie, which is four days from the
Cadodaquios; the other is named the
Canchy. These Indians are at peace with the
Canoatinos, who are numerous."

McWilliams
1981:146-156;
Van Ermen
1990: 38, 42,
54;
Lemmon et
al. 2003:29,
39, 58;
Butler
1934:71;
Lee and
Gregory
personal
communicati
on 2004

Du Ru mentioned the French heard in
several villages about a distict where a
sizeable group of Negroes lived. These were
mulattoes, both women and men. The
Indians reported these had revolted and
deserted the Spaniards.
[Note: Are the reported mulatto and Negro
Spaniards who do not like white Spaniards
possibly the groups designated on various
maps reproduced in Van Ern1en's The
United States in Old Maps (1990)?]
lD<llPa Bowker Lee and Pete

Gr~in

212

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

Natchitoches explained that Canneci,
variously spelled in the record, was a Caddo
word which referred to Apaches, although
according to Bienville (above) the word
meant "blacks." It is known that Lipan
slaves in the Natchitoches area later were
described in the historic record as
Canneci/Connessi/Canchy.
The precise meaning of the term remains in
question.

5/6/1700

Olivares to Cuerbo
yValdez

Rio Grande
m1ss10ns

5/18/1700

<=:uerbo y Valdez to
viceroy

Monclova,
Coahuila,
Mexico

5/1811700

Iberville

Louisiana
colony

5/19/1700

English traders in
area; Indian wars

Louisiana
colony

Bienville's reference to the Connessi
settlement seems to be the first recorded use
of the term. Future research perhaps will
determine whether the black Spaniards of
whom he writes might be a reference to the
Negroes who had escaped the Teran
expedition in East Texas, and, further,
whether they had assimilated with an
AJ2_ache ~01:!£ in TexasJ
Ladino Indians (one in particular named
Juan de la Cruz Castillo) from La Caldera
(near Massanet's old mission) come to
Solano and to San Juan Bautista to disrupt
efforts there. They are Mescales. There are
other Mescales who are not ladinos. Says
"Indians at missions consume all com
immediately; do not save any .... no concern
for tomorrow." Missionaries live in fear
and request military protection to prevent
complete destruction of Rio Grande
missions.
Petitions for establishment of presidia on
Rio Grande (1) to protect missions from
molestations of barbarous Indians and (2)
to prevent the French from entering the
region. Mentions the enemy Toboso
Indians .and concern about coastal Indians,
from the east, joining them (Tobosos) to
give us (Spanish) continued war. Requests
loads of tobacco, strawberries and turnips
for Indians. Also, small bells "which are the
kind tht'2. like best."
Iberville reports his brother Bienville's
return with two bark canoes and seven men.
Said Bienville did not go up (beyond) Yatasi
villages (on the right bank of Red River
above Natchitoches) from which he brought
back one Senis and one Souchiti01:!YJ.sicd
Account of Arkansas who came to Tonicas
and reported on English traders who had
been at Arkansas during Feb (1700);
English gave them 30 guns/powder/bullets
and engaged them to make war on
Choquichoumans (tribe on the Yazoo) who
are a Chicacha nation. [Note: This is a long
convaluted story. An Englishman had come
by Arkansas via the Ouabache (Vabache =
Lavaca in Spanish = where Charles
Juchereau de St. Denis, older brother of
Louis Juchereau de St. Denis, a few years
later established his post. Guiding the
E~ish was Couture, a French deserter

AGN 1700a

AGN 1699

McWilliams
1981:143

McWilliams
1981:144

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 213
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

from Tonti's "Arkansas Post."]
5/26/1700

St. Denis/Bienville
on Red River

Louisiana
colony

5/26/1700

Iberville's
instructions

Louisiana
colony

7/16/1700

Letter: Fray Diego
de San
Buenaventura y
Salazar

Mexico

7/19/1700

Tejas Indians in
Mexico

Mexico

7/20/1700

Declaration
concerning Tejas

Mexico

Bienville and 20 Canadians, including StDenis, on Red River [Note: river also called
Tassenocogoula in Taensa language] went
through a region where in time of flood
Indians abandoned their villages to build
their huts on platforms. They could not go
above Yatasi, thus did not reach upper
Caddo vill~s or to Cenis _(_Hasina!i
St. Denis to return to explore the upper part
of Mame (Red) River. Levasseur was to
accompany him to make maps and take
careful observations of the latitude. Six
others to accompany them. St. Denis to have
"the Spaniard" to see whether he can
discover some mines. They were to try
reaching the Quiouahan who are at war
with the Spaniards. They were to leave the
fort on the Mississippi River at the
beginning of August ( 1700); to take also the
Nadchito (sic) and the Naouadiche (sic) and
to give each of the two a gun and some
ammunition, a cloak, and a shirt. Trade
goods he should take included twenty shirts,
twenty hatchets, eight dozen knives, three
dozen mirrors, a hundred awls, three dozen
chisels, one-half pound of vennillion, one
hundred needles and twenty pounds of glass
beads.
[Note: Who are the Quiouahan? Sounds
much like Kiowa. Would be interesting if
correctJ
Two points: (1) says two Tejas Indians have
come to him to give report of Frenchmen in
East Texas and (2) early reference to
"camino real" as it concerns Texas: "being
founded farther from Nuevo Reyno de Leon
and from the Province of Coahuila on the
Royal Road (camino real) of the Tejas and
Espiritu Santo Bay which has been
discovered these past years to be populated
with Frenchmen."
[Note: Some historians have interpreted the
camino real reference to mean "the camino
real to Espiritu Santo." My interpretation is
"on the camino real of the Tejas and (at)
Espiritu Santo." In 1700, Espiritu Santo is
a placename associated not exclusively with
the Texas Gulf CoastJ
Concerning three Tejas Indians who
brought news about Frenchmen on Red
River. Indians reported this to Fr. President
Diego de San Buenoventura y Salazar who
in tum informed Jose Urrutia who
delivered news to Mexico.
Interrogation of Tejas Indian by Jose
Urrutia who lived several years among
Caddo, who "speaks and understands the
mother tongue which the said Indians
speak" and who became (a) son-in-law of
Die_g_o Ramon who commanded San Juan

Giraud 1953,
vol 1:39

Margry
1876-1886,
vol IV:462466

AGN
1700b :38-39.

AGN
l 700b:38-39

AGN 1700c

214

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

Bautista and (b) himself commanded
presidia at San Antonio, Texas. Discussion
about French in East Texas; about "three
crosses" (tres cruses) on Trinity River.
Urrutia related the declaration of one Tejas
who he said "was called Muchacho who
has "mujer de usanza" of his own nation
and who is native of the Province of the
Tejas and of the Asinais nation."
Muchacho reported that 30 Frenchmen
whom he knew to be French from being like
the ones he had seen from Espiritu Santo
Bay, came and on another occasion among
the Tejas in the place which they call Los
Nazones which is between the Caudadachos
and Tejas. He stayed for 1-1/2 yrs. Said
Frenchmen spoke with the captain of
Nazones. Frenchmen wished to proceed to
the Tejas. They told them (the Frenchmen)
the Spaniards were still among the Tejas
and for this reason they did not pass.
Frenchmen gave Indians two muskets and
Indians gave them two horses. French
came to said place on foot, dressed in long
coats of different colors with white hats with
feathers, and their guns and others with
shawl-like peasant caps with which they
covered the face. And he heard said to other
Indians that 50 or 60 leagues beyond the
Caudadachos, Frenchmen had built many
earthen houses on the banks of the river.
And that they come approaching the
Caudadachos and French bring with them
religious who wear habits like these of StFrancis and hoods like Cocurochos and
that said French are coming near to them.
Because they come, inhabiting and making
earthen houses, his uncle, the governor of
the Tejas Indians, sent him on this mission,
in the month when the corn was tall, to ask
for religious that they might come to the
three crosses, 100 leagues beyond their land
which is called the Rio San Marcos where
they wish to come to settle because of the
good lands. The repmi was not received
under oath because the Indian was a
heathen (unbaptised). Fr. San
Buenaventura also asked the viceroy for
suppmi (oxen, axes, food, Tlaxcalteco
Indian families, blue cloth to clothe the
Indians and two loads oftobaco in place of
beads because these do not serve them) of
the Rio Grande mission San Juan Bautista
and Solano. Asked also that Captain
Protector for that region be appointed.

7/21/1700

Letter: Fiscal
Espinosa to Viceroy

Mexico

[Note: is this reference to 'three crosses"
possibly the same as Jose Urrutia's "Tres
Cruces?'}
·
Jos. Antonio de Espinosa, fiscal, writes
viceroy. Includes mention of Frenchmen
reported seen "among the Tejas & the
Caudacachos (sic) with some religious
which accordi1'!& to what one is _given to

AGN 1699

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 215
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

understand, are Capuchins, and they are
making settlements and building houses on
the banks of a river, inquiring where there
are Spaniards, without having dared to pass
to the Tejas because they have said
(although it is not so) the Indians with
whom they have talked had Spaniards
among them."

7/23/1700

Resolution: General
Junta

Mexico

7/2411700

Resolution

Mexico

[Note: This refers to Bienville and St. Denis.
This information got to Mexico City before
Bienville made it from Red River back to
BiloxiJ
"Giving notice that 2 Indians of the Tejas
nation, adjacent to said missions, have come
to give account that into their lands [they]
have enterred peaceful Frenchmen who
have been received by the Governor, who
sent them to bring this news and to ask
Spaniards and Fathers who will defend
them as best they can." It was resolved by
common accord that a protector be named
and that he be someone who will be of the
utmost satisfaction of the said reverend
father friar Diego de Buenaventura y
Salazar and that he will enjoy the same
salary as a soldier in the presidios of
Coahuila. Resolution ordered governors of
Coahuila and Nuevo Reyno de Leon to
make more inquiry about the French,
procuring knowledge of the state in which
the matter may be found today, reporting
whether said French are maintaining
themselves there.
Jose Unutia appointed Captain Protector of
Rio Grande mission Indians.

AGN 1699

AGN 1699

[Note: Urrutia married daughter of Diego
Ramon, commandant at Presidio San Juan
Baustista.]

917/1700

Iberville to Minister
of Marine

16 families of Tlaxcalteco Indians were sent
from Saltillo to Rio Grande missions.
Repmis he left orders with Sauvole to send
St. Denis, in early August, with 7 men to go
up the Marne (Red) River. States he had
written St. Denis at the Mississippi (Fort de
la Boulaye) that it was important when he
should reach the Thocanhe, a nation 4 days
above the Cadodaquis (sic), to arrange to
have them guide him to the Canoatinos, at
war with the Spaniards. Also, he is to make
an alliance with them and to propose an
alliance or peace with the Cadodaquis, in
order that the French can travel easily to the
Canoatinos without offending the
Cadodaquis. Iberville ordered St. Denis to
purchase Spanish slaves from the
Canoatinos.
[Note: Iberville's "Thocanhe" seem to be
the Tawakoni which elsewhere in the
historic record are recorded variously as
Tuacana, Tebancanas, and Trois Cannes

Margry
1876-1886,
vol IV: 370377

216

Texas Archeological Society

Date

12/12/1700

Activity

Fr. San
Buenaventura y
Olivares to
Governor Cuerbo y
Valdez

Location

Mision San
Juan
Baustista,
Coahuila,
Mexico.

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
(literally, Three Canes.) All are phoenetic
variants of the same _EFOl.:!2_ nameJ
Lengthy letter with discussion about
barbarous Indians who massacred soldiers
at Presidio de Coahuila (Monclova) and
then came to the Rio Grande missions. "I
fear many more deaths and greater ruins
will be perpetrated because the enemy
Indians have come to know our house very
well. They ate and drank with the Spanish
the day following the fatal occurrence in
Coahuila: the death of the soldiers. Today
we saw the heads of the Christians in this
wilderness. These Indians came here withe
intention of killing us. They molested the
Indians here who wanted to become
Christians. They intended to kill us and take
all we have, which is little or nothing. They
killed nine [Indians] in the stockade. All the
land is disturbed. The Indians 'on our side'
request soldiers to help them avenge
themselves on their enemies and to see if
they can draw out their children and wives
who were taken prisoners. The Indians of
the missions cannot plow the lands w/o
being molested by enemy Indians. These
have retired [left] the missions until
Spaniards shall come and help them pacify
them [enemy Indians.] Devoid of friendly
Indians; missionaries considering
retreating to La Punta (Lampazos). Father
Hidalgo comes to you to present our case at
your feet."

Source

AGN 1699

Reports two Indians came from the coast or
bay and gave notice that 10 Frenchmen had
arrived at their rancherias. Of them they
told the names of two captains and said that
they recei.ved them. They said that since they
live higher up from the bay, they should
return. They said they would take the
Spanish to where the French are. They
were not far from this post, according to
what I am told, but they have fathers and
that they make mission. The Indian
Ignacio, citizen of La Caldera, was
int~eter.

12/13/1700

Fr. Olivares to Fray
Felipe Galindo

Rio Grande
del Norte,
Presidio
San
Juan
Bautista

Reports the missions are abandoned; the
missionaries are alone. Says he knows the
Indians of Don Thomas have killed the
soldiers in Coahuila (Monclova.). They
have acquired such dexterity, together with
the Yrbipiamos, they came to kill us,
persuaded and advised by an Indian of this
nation who having been in this place had
stolen an Indian woman, fleeing with her to
his rancheria. Ervipiame told Xiames
Indians that with not much cost or risk of
life for them (Indians), they could kill us
(think he refers to the missionaries) and
depopulate this mission as they had another
(mission) where they killed the Payayes after
they luring them from their mission. Took
our cattle and goats. Are well armed. Th~

AGN
l 700a:48

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 217
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

are a squad of 16 Indians sufficient to carry
out their evil deeds. They gave these with
one rancheria of some Indians whom they
called Xijames, belonging to Mission
Peyotes with whom they were talking and to
whom they devulged their plan. They
(Ervipiamos) invited the Peyotes join them;
if they did not, they would steal their women
and children as they had done to other
Indians who intented to become Christians.
Ervipiame killed 14 Payaye; made slaves of
their women and children. Went then to the
Xijames and disclosed to the Indian called
Ignacio of La Caldera. The purpose of the
Yrbipiamos and their plot. The four mosos
(young men) and the Indian Y gnacio acted
quickly. Gathered mission Indians,
surrounded the enemy, gave a shout and
descended on them. They killed them with
knives. They (the Yrbipiamos) were thrown
into the river and those that lived fled to
those of our side who killed them and took
their arms. Only a few escaped and they will
go to the wilderness to give news of the
outcome.
Said also the Ervipiame had killed nine of
10 mission neophytes who tried to defend
themselves and us. Later, these rebel
Indians continued to persuade other
Indians to leave the missions.

Spring,
1701

Bienville/St. Denis
on Red River

Louisiana
colony, Red
River

3/2811701

Viceroy's order to
establish flying
company
commanded by
Diego Ramon

Mexico

Mentions report from Indians of French
settlin_g and_g_oi~ from vill'!&_e to villa_ge.
Bienville again on Red River with St. Denis.
Got to Natchitoches and upper
Kadohadacho villages but not to Cenis;
learned Spaniards had not been in
Kadohadacho villa~s for a lon_g_ time.
"I order there be created and formed a
flying company without station or form of a
presidia. The Reverend Father Missionaries
and the officer to be named will designate
the place where it is formed, not to stay
permanently but for going from it for the
places where it is needed. It shall consist of
30 men and an officer, who shall be the
Capitan Diego Ramon. The appointment is
sent this date for assisting the Mission of
San Juan Bautista de] Rio Grande de!
Norte, in Coahuila, for use in going over
the lands in order to free missionaries and
inhabitants from invasions of the
barbarians. The soldiers of the Presidio of
Coahuila also will help them in these
operations ... for which is designated the
annual salary of 300 pesos in common gold
to each one, and 500 for the captain and
leader. From this company 3 squards of 10
men each shall be formed. Two, with the
company of the said Presidio of Coahuila,
must travel continually over all the land,
according to what the missions are doing,
for...J2!"0tection of the religious, the increase

Giraud 1953,
vol I:48

AON 1701

218

Texas Archeological Society

Date

5/4/1701
5/28/1701

1702

Activity

Diego
Ramon/Flying
Com..Q_a1!Y_
St. Denis/Red River

News about
Missouri tribes;
Spanish mines in
New Mexico

Location

Mexico
Fort
Billochies
(Biloxi)

Tamaroas

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
and conversion of Christianity, discovering
settlements and designs of the French of
which the letter of the Religious tell,
communicating to me and the soldiers the
news which they may acquire, in order that
proper action may be taken. The other
squard shall be maintained always in
company and assistance of the
missionaries, without losing them from
sight, in order that it may defend them
a_gainst the barbarous nations."
Diego Ramon received order for foundation
of Flying Company of the Rio Grande del
Norte.
St. Denis went to Red River; Iberville
returned to France; reference to eclipse on
August 28, 1701.
[Note: Consultation with Astronomy
Department, University of Texas at Austin:
no lunar eclipse on this date; possibly
solarJ
Missionnary at Tamaroas (Illinois)
gathered some information about nations of
the Missouri, thanks to French Canadian
traders Simonille and Le Boeuf who
wintered with Osages. He learned PawneeOmahas were the most numerous tribe in
region. They were 250-300 leagues (750-900
miles) from the Tamaroas. Bergier
projected establishing a mission there.
Planned then to give Jesuits authority to
evangelize lower course of river----Missouri
and Osages.
Also in 1702, nine French left Tamaroas
with intention of contacting PawneeOmahas. [Note: was this Derbanne's trek
up Missouri?. He said there. were nine
people in his group. This is the same
number the vicar said were headed to
Missouri]. In March 1703, larger French
group left (about 20) who intended to
establish French fo1i in Pawnee-Omaha
territory. Planned to put post in midst of
Pawnee-Omahas, Iowas and Otots who
occupied the west and east banks of
Missouri and area at confluence with Platte
River. Fort not established in 1703 because
Indians were too hostile.
Bienville reported in 170611708 that French
coureurs de bois were going from "village to
village" along the Missouri River.
Nicolas de la Salle submits plan in 1708 to
explore the region of the Missouri River.
Dartaguiette wrote, 20 June 1710, "each day
we learn some particular about the
Missoury (sic) River." Main interest was on
mining riches and on communications with
New Mexico; that the network of its
tributaries could make_Q_ossible. Some

Source

AGN 1701
BN 1701

Giraud 1953,
vol 1:360

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 219
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

Spaniards convinced Dartaguiette, as
Iberville believed, that the Missouri afforded
direct access into New Mexico.

1117/1702

French ships to
Vera Cruz

Louisiana

1/28/1702

Trip to Vera Cruz

Louisiana

711702

New Mexico
expedition eastward

New Mexico

9/611704

Bienville to
Pontchartrain

Fort Louis

10/3/1704

Interrogation by
Gregorio Salinas
Varona of Mendoza

Mexico

1705

English attack
Pensacola

Pensacola

1706

Urribarri expedition
from New Mexico

New Mexico

1723/24 - Bourgmont was on the Platte.
[Note: this is after Villasur Expedition. Also,
Bomxmont was in France 1720-1722:.l
Francisco Martinez, commandant at
Pensacola and formerly stationed at San
Juan Bautista on Rio Grande; with Alonso
de Leon at La Salle's post on Baye SaintLouis, asked Iberville for a smack (a small
sailing vessel) to send to Vera Cruz to give
notice that provisions should be sent to him
as he has on.!Y_ a week's supp!Y_ remaini12£
Iberville sent king's smack Precieuse from
Louisiana to Vera Cruz with a crew of 16
men under Monsieur. Dugue (Pierre du
Guay de Boisbriant) in command.
Boisbriant became governor of Louisiana
after Bienville was recalled.
Spanish expedition against Farones. Same
month and probably with this expedition, 56
Pecos Indians killed a Francisco
lFrenchman?l amon_g_ the Jumanos.
Bienville to Minister. Bienville, St. Denis,
and Tonty lead force against Alabama
Indians

Mendoza was a Spaniard who set out from
Pensacola with other Spaniards and some
Frenchmen (latter under Bienville's orders)
to scout along Texas coast for Englishmen
rnmored to have settled there. A shoot out
between Frenchmen and Spaniards occurs.
Mendoza survives/gets away and
Frenchmen return to their fort on coast
(according to French accounts). Mendoza
reported to Spanish authorities in Mexico
he had walked overland to San Juan
Bautista.on Rio Grande. He was
interrogated in Coahuila by Salinas
Varona.
French continue to petition for cession of
Pensacola to France - French fear English
capture of Pensacola would jeopardize
security of Louisiana. Spain regards
Pensacola as it link between Mexico and
Cuba; French push for combined
French/Spanish attack against English at
Carolina. Pensacola beseiged by English
who already have attacked Spanish at St.
Au_gustine
"Before end of 17m century, wild rnmors
that Frenchmen had reached Santa Fe.
Other interests, especially Indian relations,
furnished motives for northeastward
expeditions early in 18" century. In 1706,
Juan de Urribarri was sent by Governor
Cubero to the unknown land of the plains to
ransom Christian captives from northern
tribes. Crossed Napestle [Arkansas] River,
near modern Pueblo, Colorado, and

Mc Williams
1981:162

Mc Williams
1981: 162

Thomas
1935:14
Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
III:l8-22
AGN 1704

Rowland&
Sanders
1929, vol
III:30-3 l,
450

Bolton 1920:
291

220

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

7/9/1706

Iberville' s death

Havana

1707

Diego Ramon
expedition
into Texas

Texas

Diary: Espinosa,
Olivares, Aguirre
Expedition to Texas

Near
modern
Colorado
River, Texas

4/1709

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
reached the Indian settlement of El
Cuartelejo, near the Colorado-Kansas
border where he heard new reports of
Frenchmen amon__g_ the Pawnees."
Iberville died, presumably of yellow fever,
aboard his flagship, after making his will
and receiving last rites of the church. He
was buried the same day in the parochial
church of San Cristoval, the church record
listing him as "El General Don Pedro
Barbila." His exact burial site is unknown.
The church was moved in I 741. He left a
widow, Marie-Therese Pollet, and five
children.
Expedition diary.
[Note: Ramon reportedly made other
expeditions - one to Pecos River region and
another, reportedly in 1703, to Cerro de la
Plata. No record of the expedition has been
found. If the 1703 expedition date proves
correct, it coincides with Weddle: "In 1703,
Buenaventura de Aguirre, serving as
commander of Presidio San Juan Bautista
del Rio Grande during one of the several
unexplained absences of Captain Diego
Ramon." Apart from Cannen Miranda,
where is Cerro de la Plata?]
Crossed the Nueces. Came to arroyo.
"From here we went to stop on the Sarco
River or, as the Indians call it, Rio Frio."

Source

Mc Williams
1981:13

AGN 1707;
Bannon
1940:66-67

Tous
1930:4, 7

[Note: Rio Sarco =Rio Frio.]
Near Colorado River. "Where we left the
river there is an opening or space for about
half a league, surrounded by trees, where
we found a deserted rancheria, in the form
of a half moon, which had more than 150
circular huts, but large and well made."

1709

Olivares, Espinosa,
Aguirre Expedition
to Texas

Colorado
River

[Note: Map of Indian settlement and
environs where Juan Jarry was captured
depicts a half moon configured rancheria.
Are there other examples of Indian
settlements in half-moon configurations?
What's the significance?]_
Crossed the Colorado. Found Cantona
captain with 40+ Indians, most of Yojuanes
nation, some were Simomos and others
Fusolibi. Others came. Altogether there are
about 90 Indians. Cantona had been
concerned the Spaniards' smoke was made
by Apaches.
Cantona rancheria about four leagues from
nver.
"Seeing our care in travelling near the
Arroyo de los Otates had not had the desired
result in encountering the Texas, and
knowing that the Indian captain of the
Yojuanes, called Cantona, went in and out
ofthe_Q_ueblos of the Texas with his_Q_e~e,

Hackett
1931-1934,
volII:176

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 221
Date

Activity

Location

11/20/1710

Fray Francisco
Hidalgo to Fray
Isidro Cassos

East Texas

1711

French ship
confiscated at Vera
Cruz

Mobile,
Mexico,
Madrid

5/1211712

Memoir of
D' Aiiaguette to
Ponchartrain on
present condition of
Louisiana

Bayonne,
France

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

we questioned the said Indians with special
care, and asked if it were true that they [the
Tejas] had left their country and come out
to the Rio de San Marcos [Colorado] to
plant and settle on it, as they had told us.
They replied that this was not the case; that
the Asinays Indians, called the Texas, were
in their country, where they had always
lived, and that they had not come out to
plant in the place that we mentioned. They
came out only in bands, to kill buffaloes for
meat, in the region between the Rio
Colorado and their own counti:y."
After their crops are matured, all the
Indians gather in house and patio of their
captain to hold feasts. They sing in a
strange tongue. They hold three dances
during these days and there are no more
durif!g_ the rest of the _y_ear.
French vessel sent from Louisiana to Vera
Cruz with supplies to be exchanged for food
for return to Lousisiana. Ship confiscated
at Vera Cruz.
[Note: D' Artaguette had served briefly as
the commissaire ondonnateur (treasurer) of
the Louisiana colony. This memoir was
written following his return to France.]

Hatcher 1927

Giraud 1953,
vol I:l98
Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
II:65

"According to report of the nations of the
Red River. .. one hundred and thi1iy or one
hundred and forty leagues up this (Red)
river there are twenty-five or thirty negroes
established in an Indian village who have
fled from the Spanish settlements. They
have many horses and cause war to be
carried on against the Mexicans."

6/1712
1713

Company of
Louisiana
Salinas Varona

France
Pensacola

[Note: Yet another reference to black
S_2.aniards. See March 22, 1700 ent~
Discussion of the establishment of Antoine
Crozat's Co11!12_aJlY of Louisiana.
"Salinas, however, was one of the worst
offenders, as he came to enjoy a virtual
monopoly on private trade in the region.
The governor sold goods from a personal
warehouse and store to alleviate chronic
shortages at the settlement. In forbidding
the French at Dauphin Island to sell to the
Spanish at Santa Maria de Galve, Salinas
induced supply shortages, which he then
filled. Visiting French chaplain Francois Le
Maire accused Salinas of disrupting
Mobile's economy and claimed that the
governor had siphoned off Spanish silver:
'The little money in circulation [at Mobile]
has come from Pensacola .... But two years
ago, a new Governor [Salinas] came to
Pensacola. By means of a shop and
warehouse filled with all kinds of
merchandise he has cut all channels
through which some part of this money
could flow into our colony."
"Le Marie reriorted that Salinas, 'whose

Giraud 1953,
vol 1:249-251
Clune et al.
in Bense
2003:66

222

Texas Archeological Society

Date

711713

Activity

Duclos to
Pontchartrain

Location

Fort Louis

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
pay, leaving out the profit derived from this
commerce, is double of that of our most
imLortant Provincial _g_overnors in France"'
Duclos-commissaire ordonnateur
(commissary general/treasurer) of
Louisiana.

Source

Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
II:75,78

"[T]he governor of Pensacola was about to
abandon his place since he had nothing
more with which to support his garrison
which he could not send into the woods, as
was done with that of Fort Louis, because
of the Alabama Indians who are making
war on him and are killing all the Spanish
soldiers who go out of their fort."

10/9/1713

Duclos to
Pontchartrain

Fort Louis

10/2611713

Cadillac to
Pontchartrain

Fort Louis

Commends Monsieur de la Joncquiere,
captain of the Baron de La Fauche. "I have
just learned ... the vessel Baron de La
Fauche was preparing to leave at once for
Vera Cmz under charter to the governor of
Pensacola [Salinas Varona.]. It is to return
here, but as it may meet at Vera Cruz
vessels ready to depart for France I have the
honor to send you by this opportunity."
Memoir concerning Province of Louisiana.
Crozat's trade with Mexico obstructed by
Spanish company; proposals with regard to
Vera Cruz and St. Bernard Bay
Cadillac writes, "I confen-ed with Mr.
Casatorrs (sic), governor of Havana, long
governor of Florida where he has become
acquainted with region from that country as
far as Vera Cruz. [He] assured me he had
examined all gulf by the sea and that it was
nothing but the same country, that is to
say-a poor land of white sand without their
being any good p01i, that those of which
they have taken possession are a great
burden two them and they are obliged to
guard them for fear that the other nations
by establishing themselves in them may be
near enough to insult them more easily in
the direction of Vera Cruz. The custom of
the Spanish is such that they do not
abandon their possessions voluntarily."
Reports a Canadian named St. Michael has
knowledge of metals. St. Michael had been
in New Spain and in Mexico where he
talked to Mr. Gallo, the secretary of the
viceroy, who sent him to see the mines. Mr.
Gallo had told him [St. Michael] it was
surprising that in the time that we had been
here we had not found any mines of gold
and of silver since those of New Mexico and
theirs in our countries are on the Missoui
River.
[Note: Cadillac's "Mr. Gallo" is Gallut who
wrote later from Mexico concerning St.
Denis.]
A man named Richard assured Cadillac

Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
II:79-162
Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol II:
162-204

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 223
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

that a Spaniard from Pensacola, when
returning by land to New Cruz (Vera Cruz)
had found a silver mine near the sea. The
man had informed the viceroy who "had the
man put in a tower. .. to finish his life in
order that he might not be able to point out
the place."
An officer at Pensacola secretly told Cadillac
that miners who are experts recognize
mines only by a moss that is on the surface
of the ground or of the rock and this moss
is quite different from the others.

10/1713

Cadillac to Crozat

Fort Louis

2/1/1714

Bienville letter

Fort Louis

6/1911714

St. Denis

Rio Grande

7130/1714

Viceroy to King of
Spain concerning
Salinas Varona

Mexico

1715

Hurtado expedition
against Apaches
Council of War;
testimony of various
individuals

West Texas

7/1715

Santa Fe

Cadillac went to Pensacola to meet with
Governor Salinas Varona (variously
referred to as commandant and governor)
for two reasons: ( 1) to discuss measures
they could take to obtain for him the
assistance he needs, and (2) to get
information from him for explorations and
to organize an exchange of commerce by
sea and by land with New Spain. Result was
to send French vessel Baron de la Fauche
to Vera Cruz, the governor having
chartered it for a return voyage at rate of
4,000 piastres per month and security for
the ship in the name of the Catholic King
with half the cargo (still aboard ship)
having not been unloaded upon arrival
from France.
Cadillac wrote negative statements about St.
Denis's activities on Red River and about St.
Bernard Bay; mentions Fray Francisco
Hida!g_o's two letters
Bienville to Minister concerning exploration
of Red River; expenses incurred at Vera
Cruz.
St. Denis arrives at Ramon's presidio San
Juan Bautista.
Salinas Varona, governor of Santa Marie
de Galve (Pensacola) arranged with
Cadillac to chmier, at 4,000 pesos per
month, the vessel Baron de La Fauche to go
to Vera Cruz to obtain aid for Pensacola.
Linares, the viceroy, informed his king that
in lieu of persuing charges against him
(Salinas Varona), he has ordered Salinas
Varona to pay the charter fees from his own
money. Sent 15,940 pesos [Note: This was
presumably to pay the gmTison at
Pensacola] and ordered Spanish officials
and governor at Vera Cruz to permit no
commerce with them (those arriving aboard
the vessel) nor merchandise from what
came in it. Linares mentions his uncertainty
about Salinas Varona' s .E_U.EJ2..0Ses.
Juan PaezHurtado with 250 men pursued
A2aches into _present west Texas
"[O Jn the road to the plains there are some
rancherias of Apaches whom they call
Chipaynes or Limitas, who in their
language are known as Deijines, and that
these and the Faraon nation are one and

Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol III:
174-178
Le Moyne
1714
Bannon
1940:103
Linares 1714

Bolton
1920:290
Thomas
1935: 80

224

Texas Archeological Society

Date

7/22/1715

7/2311715

9/20/1715

Activity

Council of
War/testimony
about various
Indian _grnllQ_s
Council of War;
Captain Juan de
L' Archiveque on
list of settlers going
on campaign
against the Apaches
Chipaines or
Limitas; General
Don Juan Paez
Hurtado is
commander.
St. Denis/trip to
Mexico

Location

Santa Fe

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
the same. This nation has committed many
robberies and murders in this jurisdiction.
They are those who, when ransoming is
begun in Pecos, mingle with the Indians of
the plains who take them and go into the
pueblo at peace with them ..... These Indians
have their habitation in the plains country
where the grass is very dry, and for this
reason their trail is difficult to follow."
Reference to pueblo of Pi curies composed of
30 houses of wood entirely smeared with
clay outside.

Source

Thomas
1935: 82

Santa Fe

Time for war against Apaches .... month of
September will be an opportune time; there
is much pasture and water for the
horseherd; and although Indians say in the
middle of August the Apaches reap their
maize, it appears this is not possible, having
sowed it the end of April. Nations to
participate in war will be Teguas, Taos,
Pecos and Picuries.

Thomas
1935: 84,88

Louisiana,
Texas,
Mexico

Narrative of St. Denis' journey to Mexico
with extract of letter to Gallut, ex-treasurer
of Viceroy in Mexico, from Geraldo Moro
(Gerald More) in Mexico, believed to be
either friend or agent of Crozat. Mention of
Illinois Frenchmen on Missouri River.
Proces verbal [Proces verbal: in French
law, a detailed authenticated account drawn
up by a magistrate, police officer, or other
person having authority of acts of
proceedings done in the exercise of his duty.
In a criminal charge, a process-verbal is a
statement of the facts of the case. The tern1
is also sometimes applied to the written
minutes of a meeting or assembly.}
concerning a vessel sent to Mobile to request
of Cadillac the loan of a French vessel to be
sent to Vera Crnz to secure goods for
Pensacola. The document was signed:
Gregorio Salinas Varona, Jean Joseph
Torres, Jean Manuel Roldan and Alonso
Salinas Varona. Cadillac loaned Salinas
Varon the vessel, captained by Captain Jean
Escoubet.
Certification of Escoubet's arrival on the
Saint-Marie at Vera Cruz. Included is a
statement by Escoubet about his voyage to
that place.

Margry
1876-1886,
vol VI:21 l,
214;
Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
III:l76
AE 1715:17

11/8/1715

Proces verbal:
Salinas Varon

Pensacola

11128/1715

Escoubet in Vera
Cruz

Vera Cruz

Giraud writes, "When the captain of the
Aimable-Marie of La Rochelle, Jean
Escoubet, tells how he entered the port of
Vera Cruz, he does not hide the fact that,
under the pretext of careening, he had no
aim but to sell his cargo-and he managed
in this way to dispose, on 'the Spanish
coast,' of 30,000 piastres' worth of goods.

AE 1715:18;
Giraud 1953,
vol II:l82

Lemee-Amwtated Bibliography 225
Date

1716

Activity

Location

St. Denis' marriage
to Manuela
Sanchez Navarro y
Gomes Mascorro

Mexico

1716

Duclos to
Pontchartrain

Mobile

217/1716

St. Denis/Cadillac's
letters concerning
New Mexico
St. Denis/trip to
Mexico
St. Denis/Domingo
Ramon expedition

Paris

2/1111716
4/2611716

6/1716

7/18/1716

Natchitoches
garrison

St. Denis' trip to
Mexico

Paris
Rio Grande

Natchitoches, Louisiana

Louisiana,
Texas,

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
[Note: No record of repercussions against
Salinas Varona concerning this matter has
been located. Is it possible this incident
slipped under the viceroy's radar? And, if
so, how could that have happened?
Regardless, it is interesting to con.sider the
possibility that Cadillac and Salinas Varona
had reached an agreement not altogether
dissimilar from the agreement later reached
by St. Denis and Diego Ramon on the Rio
Grande. It has been demonstrated, at least
in Pensacola, that Salinas Varona did not
alwi!.Y_s deal from the to_Q_ of the deckJ
Marriage record not yet located.
[Note: Located Manela's 1697 baptismal
record in diocesan archives in Saltillo. She
was baptised at Santiago Apostolica in
Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico; had at least
one sibling, a sister Maria Antonia.
Manuela was a daughter of Diego Sanchez
Navarro y Camacho and Mariana Gomez
Mascorro y Garza. Diego Ramon, who
commanded Presidio San Juan Bautista,
had married Feliciana Camacho y Botello
de Sanchez Navarro, the widowed mother of
Dieg_o Sanchez Navarro'j_ Camacho:l
Duclos advises against placing garrison at
St. Bernard Bay. Concerns about Spanish
vessels destroying French vessels; Spanish
troops on rivers into bay
Ministerial notes on St. Denis' and
Cadillac's letters about New Mexico.
Crozat to Council concerning St. Denis'
Mexican ex]Jedition.
St. Denis guided expedition which consisted
of 65 people and resulted in establishment
of six Spanish missions and a presidio in
East Texas.
[Note: missions were abandoned by
Spaniards in 1719; reestablished in 1721 by
A_g_Uil.Y_OJ
Bienville says he received word at Natchez of
advancing Spanish entrada (Ramon/St.
Denis); ordered DuTisne to occupy
Natchitoches site; Du Tisne traditionally
regarded as 1st Natchitoches commandant.
[Note: St. Denis established a trading post
on the Red River near the village of the
Natchitoches which itself was near the site
of modern Natchitoches, LA. Some
historians erroneously have credited St.
Denis with establishing the French post StJean Baptiste. Interestingly, both Cadillac
and Bienville take credit for having ordered
a garrison to the site when word was
received of the approaching Ramon
el92_editionJ
Geraldo Moro (Gerald More) to Crozat
concerni~ St. Denis's journey from Mobile

Source

Lemee
1998:348.

Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
II:95
Margry
1876-1886,
vol VI:l95
AC 1716
Foik 1933

Lemee
1998:342;
Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
III:515

Moro 1716;
Roland and

226

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

Mexico

to Mexico; soldiers to arrest the
Frenchmen.
St. Denis in Mobile after 1713 trip to
Mexico.
Crozat agreed .to advance merchandise
totalling 60,000 livres.

Sanders
1929, vol
III:l76
Bugbee
1898:266-281
Bugbee
1898:266281;
Le Page du
Pratz 1758,
vol 1:17, 18;
French 18461875, vol
III:47

8/25/1716

St. Denis

Mobile

9/1716

Trading company
formed for overland
venture to Mexico

Mobile

11/4/1716

Fray Francisco
Hidalgo to the
Viceroy

Province of
Texas

11/4/1716

Fray Francisco
Hidalgo to the
Viceroy

Province of
Texas

11/4/1716

Fray Francisco
Hidalgo to the
Viceroy

Province of
Texas

11/4/1716

Fray Francisco
Hidalgo to the
Viceroy

Province of
Texas

[Note: Since foreign merchants or
merchandise were forbidden in Mexico, this
was by definition a smuggling enterprise.
Du Pratz says St. Denis opposed
organization of the company when he
learned some of its members proposed
making the trip with him. He insisted these
members be instructed to make it appear
they were his employees and that the goods
were his alone, i.e. that he was bringing to
Mexico his personal effects. St. Denis had
gone one round with officials in Mexico; he
was not eager for another. St. Denis knew
he had to avoid all possible suspicion on the
second tr!2J
Hidalgo says he wrote two letters to the
French.
[Note: Reply was arrival of two Frenchmen
at that court, i.e. St. Denis' 1714 arrival at
San Juan BautistaJ
Tribal organization and location of
missions: "The nation of the Asinai, whom
we call Tejas or Texias, contains many
tribes. Extends as far as Rio Misuri (sic).
Following northern range for 53 leagues or
less one finds the bands of the Cadodachos,
Nazoni, Nacitos, and Nadzoos. Further on,
in vicinity of Rio del Misuri are large settles
of the Caynio, Tobacana [Tawakoni] and
other tribes. To the east is the settlement of
Nachitoz (sic) where French are continuing
to settle and also other settlements on the
way to the French bases which are at the
mouth of Rio de! Misuri where it flows into
Rio de la Palizada."
Not possible to raise large herds of horses
on account of the woods. Says these Indians
plant their ground in common using
wooden hoes. They greatly appreciate iron
hoes. Have axes of different kinds from the
French. Women are more intent on
working than men who spend their time
visiting and planning their wars, which
usually occur in the winter. All these
nations are closely united and visit each
other continual!Y,
It is necessary to explore plains which lie a
little more than 2 days' travel to the
northwest of this mission. He thinks that is
where the Trinity River falls are located.
Urges settlement of Bahia de! Espiritu
Santo. "Because I already have examined
the country that lies between the two rivers
of San Marcos and Espiritu Santo before
th~ unite to enter the said Bahia, I know

Hatcher
1927:53

Hatcher
1927:54

Hatcher
1927:56-57

Hatcher
1927:57-58

227
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

that there are open stretches and large
plains and great conveniences for
establishing large settlements of
Spaniards."
"This climate [is] more agreeable than coast
where there are heavy sleets in the winter.
Diseases [are] there, too. Area sunounded
by hostile Indians both on the little islands
in the said Bahia as well as in surrounding
country. All these form one nation. When I
first went to explore the San Marcos River
further up than the junction with the
Espiritu Santo River, I found a large lagoon
which we believed to be an outlet from the
San Marcos River. With a little wind it had
waves like the sea. The Texas Indians call
the enlargement Sapinay. But going on up
above the said junction we explored Cenito
Colorado which, at Bahia, was always
thought to be on the banks of the Colorado
or Espiritu Santo River. On the plains that
are bounded by the lagoons it would be
possible to locate the settlement; and I judge
that a boat could ascend the river, enter the
lagoon, and explore it to determine upon the
conveniences the various locations may
offer.

11/4/1716

Fray Francisco
Hidalgo to the
Viceroy

Province of
Texas

2/1511717

Salinas Varona to
the viceroy

Written at
Pensacola

[Note: where exactly are Sapinay and
Cenito ColoradoTI_
Concerning Caynigua (Illinois), Panni and
Apache: "French consider these Indians as
theirs (Caynigua and Panni.) They are 150
leagues upstream from the Illinois to the
Panni. The 3 arms of the stream which
become Rio de] Misuri unite at the pueblo of
the Panni to fonn this river which they say
is as large as La Palizada. These Indians
fom1 a buffer against the Apaches and they
have bitter wars with them. Pannis are
considered greater warriors than the
Apaches and they have taken a great
number of prisoners from them which they
have sold to the French who buy them and
keep them as slaves. The three branches of
the river mentioned flow out of a watershed
which is near the South Sea." He heard
that two years earlier (1714) 150
Frenchmen made an expedition there, but
he knows nothing_ more about that."
Two items, one dated Jan. 20, 1717, and the
other dated Feb. 15, 1717. Salinas Varona
forwarded to the viceroy a map and a
description of the route traveled by St. Denis
to Mexico, warning the viceroy about St.
Denis's intent for illicit trade.
[Note: Pondering Salinas Varona's 1717
warning to the viceroy about St. Denis/illicit
French trade, coupled with remembrances
of events which occurred 14 months prior
(see November 8, 1715 entry) gives rise to
the _Q_ossibili!Y_ that Salinas Varona himself

Hatcher
1927:60

AGI 1717

228

Texas Archeological Society

Date

4/9/1717

4/21/1717

Activity

Derbanne diary

Derbanne diary

Location

Written at
Natchitoches

Written at
Natchitoches

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
might have been the object of no small
concern in Mexico City at that time.
Whether authorities there suspected Salinas
Varona's complicity in illicit trade with the
French, or whether the Spaniard innocently
contracted a French trade ship to bring
provisions from Vera Cruz to Pensacola is
unknown. That said, if these questions can
be raised nearly three centuries after the
facts, it is reasonable to suggest authorities
at the time might have asked the same or
similar_g_uestionsJ
"Some Paillailles (Payayas) came up to us,
took us to their village where we stayed until
the 11 lh. At that village, Spainiards trade for
a few ox-hides."
[Note: What Spaniards exactly? San
Antonio mission/presidio not established
until the followi~earJ.17lill
They cross Rio Grande; and arrive at the
Spanish presidio San Juan Bautista. 30
soldiers and a captain [Diego Ramon]
protecting missions San Juan Bautista and
San Bernardo. No silver there. "Fifty
leagues above place place where we crossed
it (Rio Grande], is a post which is only 18
leagues from the river called St-Gregory
where there is a garrison of 10 men. Silver
is obtained at that place. Boca de Leones
has several mines now ( 1717) being
worked."

Source

Margry
1876-1886,
vol VI:202

Margry
1876-1886,
vol VI: 204

[Note: I think above should be translated
"Fifty leagues beyond the place," rather
than "above." Further, I interpret
Derbanne's reference of silver at StGregory to mean the Minas de San
Gregorio de Cerralvo located almost exactly
18 leagues, or approximately 54 miles, from
the Rio Grande. Minas de San Gregorio de
Cerralvo was for some 50 years the capital
ofNuevo Leon, before Monterrey.]
Reports the Spanish are about to establish a
post on the river of Monsieur de La Salle.
States the Indians in those parts detest the
Spaniards; it is not difficult to change them
over to French side if we (French) cared to
take the trouble to do so.

6/511717

Fr. Olivares letter

Mexico

711717

Viceroy to reinforce
garrison in Texas

Mexico

No fortifications anywhere; the presidio is
open on all sides. No fmi and only soldiers
"who never have heard a musket fired."
Olivares, a priest, complains mightily
against St. Denis and Diego Ramon and
their]Jrofitable contraband tradirig_
"In July 1717, a Frenchman who had
served in the retinue of the Duke of Linares,
Sieur du Bourg, informed the Council of
the Navy of the viceroy's decision to
reinforce without delay his garrison in
Texas."

AGI 1717
Giraud 1953,
vol II:192

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 229
Date

Activity

9/18/1717

St. Denis's
declaration
(2nd expedition to
Mexico)

Location
Mexico

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

St. Denis says he is 38 years old when
actually he then was 41. St. Denis says it
has been "17 years less 11 months" since
he left Old France. (Note: it actually was 17
years plus 11 months when St. Denis left
France aboard the Renomee with Iberville.)
St. Denis declared it had been 20 years since
he "set out from New France" [Canada]
and he has not returned to it.

Shelby
1923: 165-183

[Note: The above dates St/ Denis' departure
from Canada as 1697 which corroborates a
later reference to his detainment in France
with those arriving there from
Newfoundland with Iberville's brother
Serigny. St. Denis is listed as one of the
engagees detained in France to sail with
Iberville on his 2nct voyage to Louisiana if
the colony there were deemed sufficiently
successful to merit continuation.]
Also, reference to goods brought: St. Denis
reports there was cloth, lace, brocade, etc.
which he was bringing "for his wife to
wear."
[Note: Manuela still was in Mexico as of
April 1717 and, presumably, still there at
time of St. Denis's September declaration in
Mexico.]
Refers to his "wife and children at Rio del
Norte [San Juan Bautisita.]."
[Note: Thus, Manuela did not leave Mexico
with Ramon expedition of 1716. Further, by
September 1717, the couple had at least 2
children.]
Interesting discussion of Indian groups;
refers to Apache as Padoca.
[Note: French records demonstrate the te1m
Padoca/Padouca first was used by
Frenchmen referring to Apache groups;
later, Frenchmen used the term when
referring instead to Comanches.]
St. Denis mentions a Frenchman who came
to visit him in prison, "Francisco Pudrie,
who was arrested" (released by 18'1 of Sept
1717).

11/18/1717

Derbanne diary of
trip to Mexico with
St. Denis

Louisiana

[Note: There is no question that Francisco
Pudrie was Francois Poudrie who was on
the 1699 list ofiberville's engagees in
France. Surname appears also as
Poudrid/Poudrier. How did Poudrie get to
Mexico? What happened to him after
release from Mexican prision? Cannot
locate him a~here after 1717J
St. Denis, Derbanne and others set out
from Dauphine Island for Mexico.

Margry
1876-1886,
vol VI:l99207

230

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

11128/1718

Alarcon

East Texas
villages

11116/1718

Royal ordinance/St.
Bernard Bay

Paris

1719

La Harpe

Possibly
near South
Canadian
River in
Oklahoma

1/15/1719

1129/1719

1130/1719

Council to Bienville
concerning French
declaration of war
a_g_ainst S_]2_ain
St.Denis/route from
Mexico through
Rancheria Grande
in Texas to
Louisiana; Cerro
de la Plata

Lord Secretary Don
Miguel Fernandez
Duran to Viceroy
Valero

Paris

Mexico
through
Rancheria
Grande in
Texas to
Louisiana;
Cerro de la
Plata

Madrid

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

Alarcon in East Texas from
October-November 28 when he began his
return for San Antonio. Got as far as
Trinity River where he spent 20+ days
because it was flooded. He arrived back in
San Antonio late December and learned in
January that St. Denis had been through
the area and was headed east to Louisiana.

Hoffman
1935:78

[Note: Alarcon had received no scouting
report about St. Denis when, in fact, the
men most probably were in the same area at
approximately the same time! Most
probably St. Denis was east of the Trinity
before the November flood]
Authorizes Company of the West to
establish a military and commercial post at
St. Bernard Bay.
La Harpe visited Touacara village where
there were Caney slaves [Lipan Apache]

AC 1718
Smith
1959:528-529

Present also are the Toajas chief who
presents to La Harpe one Caney slave,
stating his disappointment La Harpe had
not been present one moon prior when the
chief had 17 Caney slaves which they had
eaten in a public feast.
[Note: this reference hints to the origin of
Lipan slave trade that later extended
southeast to the Natchitoches region,
possibly by the late 1730s. Touacara
appears in the historic record variously as
Troiscannes, literally Three Canes, among
others. These variants were phoenetic
renderings of one group name. Similarly,
Toajas, Toayas, Tawehas and Toavoyas
possibly are phoenetic variants of one group
namej
.
Announcing declaration of war against
Spain.
Alarcon learned St. Denis was headed
north.from Mexico City toward Louisiana.
Alarcon's scouts inquired of Indians of
Rancheria Grande whether they had seen
St. Denis. They had seen him, they reported.
[Note: St. Denis got around and beyond
Alarcon who was at San Antonio. Further,
the Indians of Rancheria Grande allowed
St. Denis passage east when they had
st<2.2.12_ed Alarcon from _g_oir!_g_ east]
Notification that the king of Spain informed
the duke regent of France had made an
alliance with ( 1) the archduke, (2) the duke
of Saboya and (3) the king of England, and
declared war against Spain; French troops
have been sent to march to frontiers of this
kingdom to enter it. Orders viceroy to
safeguard the plazas and presidios of this
kindgom, advising governors not to admit to
..r._orts, on a1!YJ2!etext or motive whatever it

AC 1719

Hoffman
1935 :87

Thomas
1935:139

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 231
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

may be, any French ship arriving at them
and that in case any enter, their people be
seized and kept secure and their effects put
in safe-keeping and kept in close custody
until new orders come from his majesty.
But concerning those French. who are
established in these parts with the
permission of his majesty, no violence may
be permitted because of the affection and
reverence which all this nation has for his
majesty, lamenting the irregular procedure
of the duke regent who governs it.
Notification that England assembled 10
warships and other vessels for purpose of
crossing to America. Also two frigates, one
with 46 cannon, 270 men and one of 36
cannon with 160 men. Waiting for good
winds "to put out from the Downs [on the
English coast] to sail to South Sea with
authority to plunder coasts of Chile and
Peru and to seize vessels met on that sea
and sailing to do likewise to galleon of
Philippines on its arrival and departure
from Acapulco and attacking the coast of
that kingdom." Ordered to communicate
news immediately to presidents of audencias
of Guatemala, Manila and Guadalajara,
and to governors of coasts of North and
South Seas of this kingdom to exercise care,
etc.
La Harpe wrote he learned from Spanish
priest at Los Adaes identified therein as
"Father Manuel," who had come to say
mass at Natchitoches, and that the Spanish
governor Martin de Alarcon intended to
establish a Spanish post among Nassonites;
La Harpe immediately set out to establish a
French post at the Nassonites (Nasonis),
"two leagues above the Cadodaquious"
before the arrival of Alarcon.
La Harpe arrived at Nassonites village

Smith
1958:86

3/111719

La Harpe leaves to
establish post at
Nassonites

Started at
Natchitoches

4/511719

La Harpe diary

Nassonites
villages

4/511719

La Harpe wrote
Spanish governor
Martin Alarcon at
Los Adaes
Death of Diego
Ramon
Alarcon to His
Excellency

Nasoni
village

Governor said "no" to trade; Francois
Blonde! in command at Natchitoches Post
(site of modern Louisiana city).

Smith,
1959:373-374

Coahuila,
Mexico
Santiago
de la
Monclova,
Coahuila,
Mexico

Ramon died in Coahuila.

Lemee
1998:351
Hackett
1931-1934,
vol III:265

4/10/1719
4/14/1719

Responding to his Excellency's displeasure
about Alarcon's not having destroyed the
French and the furor caused by his
(Alarcon's) letter dated Nov 24, 1718.
Alarcon says, in effect, he was hamstrung
because his orders included informing the
religious of his activities. Alarcon said the
religious ended up giving him orders; had
his orders been secret, in the military
fashion, he would/could have acted in a very
different manner. "Senores of the royal
junta looked upon the matter with great
discretion, and since that body is composed
of such _gJ"eat soldiers with so much

Smith
1958:250

232

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

4/19/1719

Bienville learns
France and Spain
at war (War of the
Quadruple
Alliance)

Mobile

5/2411719

Margi! to La Harpe

East Texas

6/1719

Black slaves in
Louisiana

Louisiana

611719

French attack at
Los Adaes
_("Chicken War'}
Spanish flotilla

Los Adaes

8/511719

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
experience to assist them, it is a pity, sir, that
such exalted intellect do not come to these
parts, and not simple men such as I,
because they would execute the project
much better than I, would save the king
much expense, and would be of great
usefulness to this kingdom. I am very weary
of all of this."
Bienville's brother Serigny arrives with
news that France declared war against
Spain on January 9, 1719.

Fr. Margi! de Jesus writes letter to La
Hai:Q_e
"[T]he first shipment of [black] slaves was
unloaded in Louisiana in June of 1719;
they were, however, only distributed among
the plantations along the Mississippi from
the Gulf to Natchez. Africans did not make
their appearance in the Illinois Country
before 1720, when they were brought by
Philippe Renault who had bought them in
the French island colony of Saint
Domi~ue J_now, Hait!l"
Blonde! commandant at Natchitoches, led
sevem soldiers to Los Adaes

Pensacola

Flotilla arrives in Pensacola.

8/611719

French

Pensacola

French surrender Pensacola

8113/1719

Order for Council
of War; Council
ofWar and Diary of
the Campaign of
Governor Valverde
Against the Utes
and Comanches

Santa Fe

8/19/1719

Spanish attempt
maritime landing;
French successfully
defend

Dauphine
Island
[known
formerly as
Massacre
Island at the
mouth of

War declared upon the Utes; reference to
dogs which Utes use. L' Archeveque talks
about Apaches who raid at El Cuartelejo.
L' Archeveque lived from time to time at
Cuartelejo where he was engaged in trade
(see Gilmore, this volume). Mention of
Apache chief Carlana of Sierra Blanca; La
Jicarilla chief El Coxo; Carlana's braves
armed with arrows, machetes and oval
leather shields. Indians brought 680 horses
for expedition. Indians' horses never mixed
with horse herd of presidio and settlers.
Trade in deer pelts. Tobacco is best gift that
can be made to Apaches. Reference to dogs
on which were loaded the poles for tents and
other utensils th~ used.
Activities continued through 9/22/1719
when French ships that had arrived set sail
for Pensacola to recapture it before Vera
Cruz forces arrived.

8/3/1719

Viceroy Valero to
Senor Don Manuel
San Juan de Santa
Cruz

Source

Conrad
1970: 112;
Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
III:236-237
Smith
1959:373
Balesi
1992:246

Joseph
1999:77
Conrad
1970:114
Conrad
1970:114
Thomas
1935:99

Conrad
1970:118

MobileB~

Mexico City

"In understanding of your Grace's letter of
August 3 last, together with testimonies
which accompanied it about the
imprisioning and seizure of the goods of the
French, which your grace has done, of
those who hve been found in the district of

Thomas
1935:139

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 233
Date

8/3/1719

Activity

La Harpe
encounters
Touacara
[Tawakoni] high
chief

Location

Near the
Canadian
River in
Oklahoma

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
your government, in accordance with the
notification which I received under date of
July 3, last, about this matter, I remit to
your Grace the adjoined dispatch so that in
accordance with its contents and the royal
purpose of his majesty, observance may be
arranged concerning the treatment of this
nation. That is, in the case of those who are
established in these countries with royal
permission and have given no suspicious
indications, no indignities may be done
them. With regard to the English, your
Grace will be on the alert for whatever may
occur in your district to defend it from the
hostilities which thq_ mig_ht attem...l2_1:."
"[W]here the high chief of the Touacra
[Tawakoni] nation, accompanied by six
other chiefs of the nations, awaited me,
having had news of my arrival through
some Naouydiches who had gone ahead;
they were mounted upon very beautiful
horses saddled and bridled according to the
Spanish mode."

Source

Smith,
1859:525;
Johnson and
Jelks
1958:407408,414

"[T]he Touacara chief had me informed
through a Naouydiche, who spoke the
Nassonite language understood by the
soldier of the garrison."
La Harpe makes an alliance with the
Touacara chief. La Harpe "mounted on a
fine horse, which they had brought to me
and we marched in company to their
villages."
"These villages make only one village."
"[T]he nations of these establishments are
the Touacaras [Tawakoni}, Toayas
[Tawehash], Caumuche [Comanche],
Aderos [Ardeco], Ousitas [Wichita], Ascanis
[Yscancis], Quataquois [Kiowa-Apaches],
Quicasquiris [Wichita], Honechas."
"these people were leaving all their villages
after the month of October in order to go on
the chase, from where they returned only in
the month of March in order to sow their
maize, beans and pumpkins."
"The chief of the Touacaras nation is the
most re~ected of all these nations."
He departs Touacara [Tawakoni] villages.

8/13/1719

La Harpe

8/1611719

Montignyto
Missions
Etrangeres at Paris

Rome

8/17/1719

Pensacola
recaptured by
French
Valverde diario

Pensacola

10/22/1719

New Mexico

Company of the West is growing, absorbs
Companies of Senegal, West Indies and
China and now is called Company of the
Indies.
Reference to a M. de Lisle, Lieutenant,
placed in command of "great fort"
ffensacola).
Apache chief of those of rancheria of El
Cuartelejo. During an interrogation of
wounded A_Q_ache chief with the __g_ovemor

Smith
1859:534
Allain
1988:67
Conrad
1970: 122
Thomas
1935: 130

234

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

Valverde in New Mexico, the chief answered
that while he and his people were in his land
which is farther in from El Cuartelejo, on
the most remote borderlands of the
Apaches, the French united with the
Pawnees and the Jumanos attacked them
from ambush while they were planting
corn. They have seized their {Paloma] lands
{probably in northeast Colorado along the
South Platte River} and taken posses ion of
them and held them from that time on.

10/263011719

Bienville

Dauphine
Island

11/22/1719

Claude Du Tisne
writes to Bienville.

Illinois
Territory

11130/1719

Antonio de Valverde
Cosio to viceroy
Valero

Santa Fe

The Apache chief says "French have built
two large pueblos, each of which is as large
as Taos. In these the French live with
Pawnees and Jumanos to whom they have
given long guns which they [the French]
have taught them to shoot. They also carry
some small guns suspended from their
belts. At the time of their battle with the
Apaches, the Apaches told the
French/Pawnee/Jumanos they would advise
their friends, the Spaniards, in order that
they might defend them. The French
responded they were greatly pleased to have
them notify the Spanish and bring them
there, for they are women "crionas" [sic]
these are words, however rude, that the
Indians are accustomed to use to incite ire.]
All enemy were dressed in (torn out??) that
they have done them much damage in
taking away their lands and that each day
they are coming closer. This is the reason
that moved Apaches to come, establishing
themselves on the lower part of the river
[Note: Napastle =Arkansas] to be able to
live in safety from their enemies." Apaches
said French also have "three other
settlements on the other side of the large
river, and that frbm these they bring arms
and the rest of the things they bring to those
which they have recently constructed. They
know this because they were told by some
women of their tribe who were made
captives among the French when they had
war but had fled, returning to their
kinsmen."
Minutes of Council of Commerce at
Dauphine Island. Reports 300 Spaniards
are coming to Texas. Orders Blonde! and
Derbanne to build an "additional new fort"
to accommodate 50 soldiers. Ordered
distribution of presents to Natchitoches,
Dulchionis, Adais, Cenis, Nasonis,
Caddoes, Nanatsohos and Naco_g_doches.
Du Tisne had been the first commandant at
the Natchitoches post. Bienville receives
letter December 29, 1719
filote: transit time: five weeksJ
Valverde reports on 2 months' expedition
against Ute/Comanche nations begun 15
September. He went to rancheria of La
Jicarilla A...I:..ache who ~eed to ioin

Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol III
267

Conrad
1970:125

Thomas
1935:141

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 235
Date

12/1111719

Activity

Manuel de San
Juan Cruz,
governor ofNueva
Vizcaya to Viceroy
Valero

Location

Parral,
Nueva
Viscaya,
Mexico

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
expedition. Describes Jicarilla houses as
flat-roofed and reports they love Jesus. They
plant com, squash, and kidney beans and
lay out ditches to irrigate their crops. He
went on to rancheria of one callied Chief
Coxo (Jicarilla) where he was met by
another chief of the Carlana Apaches who
live in Sierra Blanca. They joined in.
Arrived Rio Napeste which the French call
Acansas. From there, they traveled north to
a place some distance from El Cuartelejo,
some 4- 5 days' travel away. They found
no Utes. He starts back. He crosses Napeste
lower down. Apache comes up, says to wait
for the rancheria of the Palomas and
various others, all Apaches. Multiple
Apache groups show up, old women with
hugs and kisses - the usual expressions of
affection the Spanish say they always got.
Then he interrogates an Apache who says
he was wounded when his tribe was fighting
the cancer (Kansas) nation. The Kansas
fight with Palomas. French are friends of
Cancers, Tejas and Pawnees; he says that
their (French) first settlement was among
Cadohachos (sic); carry some long muskets
and go about on foot, dressed in red clothes
with their hunting caps of same color.
"Cadohachos carry large flintlocks and go
dressed in red also. French have settlement
on very large river which here is known as
Jesus Maria (modem South Platte). the
name Cpt. Naranjo gave it on a journey
which he made there. Apaches also said
French recently established two other
settlements up the river on the north bank;
French were confederated with Pawnee and
Jumano to whom they have given firearms
which they fire on forked sticks. Apaches
who were former French captives say that
from those old settlements they are
reenforcing those recently built with arms
and every necessary; there are beautiful
white women among the French. He made
motions to show they (the white women)
wore their hair tied together on the crowns
of their heads." Apaches formerly at El
Cuartelejo deserted the spot, dispersing
among other rancherias of their tribe
because Utes persecuted/molested them
there (El Cuartelajo). Concluded this place
is 200 leagues from French settlements.
Enemy appears to be penetrating little by
little inland. Mentions formerly reporting on
Frenchman Juan de L' Archeveque who
had come to that country. He is married
now and supports himself honestly. Went
with Valverde on expedition as an
int~eter of the tongue of his nation.
Mentions "release and discharge of the
persons and goods of the French who were
imprisoned and sezied at the order of your
Excellency because it did not appear that
th~ had license from his maj_es!Y_ to have

Source

Thomas
1935:146

236

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

entered these provinces."
Relates report of captains of Conchos,
Campana, and al cal de mayor of the valley
of San Bartolome that 70 leagues from
Santa Fe there are 6,000 Frenchmen. Said
some Apaches had been in French
settlement where they stole four hand axes
and two guns.

12/29/1719

Revolledo to Viceroy
Valero

Mexico

1719

La Harpe
Nassonites

Red River

1720

Memoir: Guillaume
& Joseph Nicolas
Delisle

France

21211720

Aguayo gets word
St. Denis convening
with Indians

Rio Grande

2/20/1720

Villardeau to

L~c

Ft. Louis,

Reports on readiness of Spanish: not good.
Soldiers serve only to fight Indians, not
Europeans. Requests training for soldiers
plus 1,000 large guns, 1,000 bayonets and
1,000 sheaths, 500 pairs of pistols, 500
lances, powder, balls ,all at his majesty's
exr>_ense.
Suggests Valero order the Frenchmen not
be released from prison. Concern about
French alliance ith Kansas, Tejas, Pawness
and their ingress via either Rio Missouri or
on that of Cadodachos; Greater defense is
suggested. Suggests establishing a presidio
at El Cuartelejo and congregating Apaches
there "for their safety." Give them the "light
of the Gospel ... .It should also follow that,
being so scattered they extend to the Tejas
and the Mississippi River, we shall use them
[Apaches] as an auxiliary in those parts for
defense."
La Harpe told about "several nomad
nations, 80 leagues up Red River from
Kadohadacho village, who are at war with
Canecy [Lipan Apaches] near Spanish
settlements."
Variation of magnetic needle in North
America. Champmeslins observations; table
for comparison of variation observed in
voyage to Louisiana in 1720 by Fr. Laval,
and 12Y Halley's 1720 mi!Q.
Reported St. Denis with many Indians in
convocation "30 miles" from San Antonio.
[Note: Juan Antonio de la Pena's version
says "30 leagues." Shelby's article in
Hispanic American Historical Review
(1933) references 30 miles and says
Spanish later learned it was 30 leagues.
Possibly she based her reference to miles in
Buckley's article re: Aguayo expedition. It is
interesting that 30 leagues (using 2.6
miles/league) from San Antonio= 78 miles
= possibly region of Montopolis crossing on
Colorado = possible proposed location for
St. Denis' post on Riviere aux Cannes? My
rationale is thus: predicated on online
calculations of the Texas Mileage Guide,
Office ofthe Comptroller, the distance
between San Antonio and AustinBergstrom is 80 miles. The Montopolis
crossing would be a mile or two shy of that
figure which renders the Montopolis
crossin_g_ as aJ2..0Ssibili!Y_ for St Denis' J2..0stJ
News of ~anish exr>_edition a_gainst

Thomas
1935:148

Smith 1958:
253

ASH 1720

Buckley
1911:31

AC 1720

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 237
Date

Activity

3/21/1720

St. Denis
commissioned
lieutenant

Location
Biloxi
Louisiana

3/23/1720

Renault
d'Hauterive
commissioned
"captain in
command"

Natchitoches

4/1111720

Minutes of Council
of Commerce

Dauphin
Island

5/27/1720

Valverde to Viceroy
Valero

Santa Fe

6/2/1720

Order for Council
of War

Santa Fe

6/15/1720

Valverde to Valero

Santa Fe

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
Louisiana.
"List of Officers who are to command the
25 companies of infantry which the
Company maintains in Louisiana" dated
Jan. 21, 1721. Mention about St. Denis,
"He is at Biloxi. He is most wise."
[Note: Why, if St. Denis were "so wise," did
Bienville commission him a lieutenant
rather than a captain as he had
commissioned Renault? Possibly another in
a series of hints that Bienville did not like or
was jealous of St. Denis. The historic record
includes other such hintsj
Giraud says d'Hauterive was a son of the
"gran voyer" at Tours, France. He arrived
in Louisiana in early 1720, and was sent to
Natchitoches to replace the commandant Lt.
Blondell who died "at the end of the
war. ... He [Renault] is at Natchitoches.
There is nothing more to say about him. He
was sent a short time ago to replace M.
Blondel who died."
Discussion of St. Bernard Bay and French
prisoners at Havana; Se1igny to postpone
return to France as Chateauguay and other
offices arep6soners at Havana.
Valverde reports having gone to Paso de!
Rio del Norte [El Paso] because it was
"necessary to take some precautions."
There he received on March 4, 1720, the
viceroy's dispatch in response to Cruz's
(Nueva Vizcaya governor) and his own
(Valverde's) reports to viceroy. Concerning
25 soldiers placed at El Cuartelejo: El
Cuartelejo is 130 leagues from Santa Fe
and it is 70 leagues from El Cuartelejo to
Pawnees composing the 200 leagues from
Santa Fe to French possessions. He makes
the case that presidio at El Cuartelejo is too
far from Santa Fe and too far from region
of Picuries, Jicarilla and Sierra Blanca
Apaches whom Spanirds propose be settled
at presidio. Says El Cuartelejo has only
seasonal resources Indians are there only at
certain times of year to ranch and then
disperse to pass the rigorous winters, A
great number of Indians of different
nations are there. [Note: It seems the
Apache groups that Spanirds intended to
reduce and use as an auxillary are the
Jicarillas, Carlanas (sometimes called
Sierra Blancatl and Picuriesj
Includes councils which General Antonio
Valverde Cosio, governor and general of
New Mexico, ordered convened with regard
toplacing 25 Spaniards at El Cuartellj_o.
At El Paso del Norte in February to take
measures toward preservation of peace
which Indians of nearby nation of Apaches
maintain with those of the Zuma (Sumas)
tribe and to supply that presidio with best
equipment of arms. Received Valero' s
di~atch about Valverde makin_g_ eJSQ_edition

Source
Conrad
1970:142

Giraud 1953,
vol III:367;
Conrad
1970:143

Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol III,
283-284
Thomas
1935:154

Thomas
1935:156
Thomas
1935:160

238

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

6/2/1720

Order for Council
of War

Santa Fe

7118/1720

St. Denis'
Commission as
Commandant at
Haute Riviere aux
Cannes

Paris

8/6-9/1720

Translation of
Spanish diary
_{Villasm:l
Villasur Expedtion

8/7/1720

New Mexico
Platte River

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
to reconnoiter the French and to establish
some 25 men in presidio. Expresses not
understanding clearly whether Valero wants
presidio established at El Cuartelejo or La
Jicarilla, the latter being what Valverde
recommended. Marginal note says the
resolution was that the presidio be placed in
the vall~ of La Jicarilla.
Includes councils which General Antonio
Valverde Cosio, governor and general of
New Mexico, ordered convened with regard
to _Q!aci~ 25 S...r..aniards at El Cuartelej_o.
St. Denis is commissioned as commandant
on the Haute (upper) Riviere aux Cannes

Translation of fragment of Spanish
document found after defeat of Spanish
detachment 121_ Oto Indians.
Reconnaissance; left river Jes us Maria
(South Platte) following trail of Pawnees.
Captain Serne's servant, a Pawnee, said
village of his kinsmen was on bank of a
river, faci~ north.
Sails beyond St. Bernard Bay; enters,
sounds and maps Aransas Bay instead.

8/1720

Berenger

St Bernard
Bay

1720

Viceroy in Mexico
gets notification
from Philip V of
Spain

Europe

Notification sent that Philip V of Spain
surrendered to terms of Quadruple
Alliance; Aguayo could wage only a
defensive war with French.

Oct-Nov,
1720

St. Denis, Bellisle,
Hasinai

East Texas

Bellisle says his letter delivered to St. Denis
by Hasinai who themselves were instructed
by St. Denis to rescue Bellisle. Belillse
remained with Indian Angelique among
Hasinai two months before he was
permitted to go to Natchitoches.

10/8/1720

Valverde to Valero

Santa Fe

[Note: Places St. Denis in region in
September/ October/November 1720---a
short time before he was reported by Sana
to be meeting at the river Los Brazos de
Dios with Indians]
Valverde reports fate ofVillasur expedition
(Valverde's lieutenant-general was Pedo de
Villasur). Half the presidia! force from
Santa Fe was killed in ambush by Pawnees
who reportedly carried French weapons.
Among the dead was Jean de
L' Archeveque, formerly a member of La
Salle's expedition and who was present
when La Salle was murdered (see Gilmore,
this volume). There were few survivors. One
survivor reported Frenchmen participated
in the ambush. Another survivor said he
thought no Frenchmen had participated but
that Indians did have French we1!:)2_ons.

Source

Thomas
1935:156
Margry
1876-1886,
vol VI:220221;
Lemee
2003:41-42
Thomas
1935:133
Thomas
1935:134

Weddle and
Lemee
2003:20
Wagner
1983.
Forrestal,
1935, vol
II:7;
ASF 1720;
Turanzas
1961: 1-85
Folmer 1940:
225

Thomas
1935:162

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 239
Date

11/411720

Activity

Saenz to Valero

Location

Mexico

11/12/1720

Revolledo to Valero

Mexico

11/13/1720

Declaration of Felix
Martinez, life-tenre
captain in New
Mexico
[Note: declaration
made to Juan de
Olivan Revolledo
who had
interrogated St.
Denis]

Mexico

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
Survivors took refuge with some Apaches
(no band name given). Spanish survivors
and some Apaches offered services for
retalliation. One Apache said French live in
round houses which hold four persons. On
their roofs were large arquebuses. Apache
women, escaped from the French, reported
these houses.
Saenz defers to veracity and well-known
fidelity of Valverde. Mentions plans
underway by Aguayo in accordance with
royal order that French not penetrate the
territories of this royal domain (mentioning
Texas). Notes Valverde did not mention by
what river the French had made ingress.
Then he provides a long discussion about
possibilities. He says if French come by Rio
de! Norte (Rio Grande) they easily could
penetrate Parral and other presidios to the
destruction of the royal dominion.
Continuing, he says they "follow the Rio de!
Norte to the Paso de! Norte [El Paso] which
they call the Rio de! Norte." He says at this
pass the river freezes so that with sand the
carts which go from New Mexico can cross.
He instructs Aguayo regarding Texas to
make "an offensive and a defensive war in
Texas" for the express purpose of cutting
off the French penetration to New Mexico
by the Mississippi and the Palisada. [Note:
these are two names for one river.}
Mentions French allies are the Pawnee,
Utes, Comanches and Canceres.
This concerns the French penetrating the
region of Julimes and allying them against
Spanish; mentions 45 Spaniards killed in
Villasur expedition massacre. He mentions
the French and Pawnee probably cannot
reach Julimes of the rebellious six nations
situated near junction of the Rio de! Norte
and Sacramento because: (a) it is too far
and (b) there are other tribes, some
antagonistic like the Apaches and others
with neither dependence upon nor alliance
with them, like the Conchos and Zumas. It
appears the French come to river of the
Pawnees by the Missouri. Revolledo says
that Aguayo is to be notified and, if he sees
any Pawnees, to mistrust them as he does
the French, but to find out distance from
Pawnees to the Tejas. Aguayo is to inform
Pawnee of affection for Spanish of Indians
at La Jicarilla.
Martinez criticizes Valverde for not leading
expedition as ordered and for sending
instead Villasur. He has nothing good to
say about the man. He speaks candidly, and
says Villasur was completely inexperienced
in military affairs and the management of
arms. He also identifies the Rio Jesus
Maria as the River of the Pawnee = South
Platte.

Source

Thomas
1935:167

Thomas
1935:169
Thomas
1935:170.

240

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

12/29/1720

LaHarpe receives
order in France as
commander

Location
St. Bernard
Bay

1121/1721

St. Denis

French
Province of
Louisiana

1/22/1721

St. Bernard Bay

Biloxi

2/2/1721

Aguayo Expedition

Near San
Antonio

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

La Harpe is ordered to make an
establishment at St. Bernard Bay and to
open trade with New Spain.

Heinrich,
1908:116

[Note: Erroneous assumption in France,
based on officials having sent several
previous orders to Bienville, seems to have
been that the French in Louisiana already
had secured the b<lYJ
List of officers who are to command the 25
companies of infantry which the Company
maintains in Louisiana; entry for St. Denis
reports he was comissioned on Mar. 21,
1720, "he is at Biloxi; he is most wise."
Beranger leaves to find St. Bernard Bay

Per Buckley: It was reported that St. Denis
was with many Indians in convocation" 30
miles" from San Antonio. [Note: not miles;
possibly leagues.]

Conrad
1970:142

Wagner
1983;
Weddle and
Lemee
2003:20-34
Buckley
1911:31
Forrestal
1935:9

Pena: The Sana report this to Garcia at
San Antonio who relays message to Aguayo
who still is south of Rio Grande; he received
word in February but the report does not
say exactly when St. Denis and Indians
were seen.

1721

Spanish occupation
of former site of La
Salle's post

Baye SaintLouis

2/22/1721

Death of Blonde!

France

3/25/1721

St. Denis

3/31/1721

St. Denis and
Weillard
d' Auvilliers

San
Antonio
Written in
Paris
concerning
post on
Riviere aux
Cannes

[Note: This could have been any time
during winter 1720/1721. It was not
uncommon for Indians to go to war during
buffalo hunting season. The point is that St.
Denis met with Indian groups at a time
when he knew they would be in area in
large numbers]
Site occupied before April 18, 1721 when a
lieutenant and four soldiers arrived in San
Antonio, dispatched there from the bay by
Captain Jose Domingo Ramon (son of
Diego Ramon, the deceased commandant at
Presidio San Juan Bautista on the Rio
Grandtl
La Harpe, himself in France, writes, "The
French learned of the death of M. Blonde!,
a captain and commander of the
Natchitoches_Q_ost."
Leaves to go to San Antonio
"St. Denis, Commandant on the Riviere aux
Cannes, and W eillard [Willart?]
d 'Auvilliers, senior commissioner of the
same post," are to receive 5% gratuity on the
benefits of merchandise.
"The Company knowing that the Sieur de
St. Denis, Commandant on the Riviere aux
Cannes, and the Sieur Weillard d' Auvilliers,
senior commissioner on the same post, wish
to use their abilities and their experience in
~eninK and establishin_g_ trade abroad, on

Forrestal
1935:17

Conrad
1953:166
Folmer
1949:83
Margry
1876-1886,
vol VI:223;
Lemee
2003:41-42

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 241
Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

the other side of the ocean. Wishing to
reward their cares for the success for the
enterprise, the Company has granted them
a commission of 5% on the profits of the
sale of the goods, which they will take from
the said post to foreigners. This bonus they
will divide in half during the time that it
pleases the Company to retain them in its
employ. The Company asks and orders the
Commissioner and Directors of the Colony
of Louisiana to pass on and allow expenses
against the Accounts of the General Store of
the said post, upon receipt of the aforesaid
Srs. de St. Denis and Weillard d'Auvilliers,
and the records in due form of sales made
by them to foreigners. Allow the five percent
accorded them as explained above. For such
are the intentions of the Company, done at
Paris in the offices of the India Company,
on March 3 1, 1721."

4/4/1721

St. Denis

Natchitoches

6/1/1721

Aguayo

Rancheria
Grande

6/2211721
7/8/1721

San Juan de los
Jumanes
Aguayo diary

7/9/1721

Aguayo diary

7/1211721

St. Denis'
exQedition
King's orders to
Bienville

Paris

Bienville

Louisiana

7/1611721

7/20/1721

Nuestra
Senora del
Buen
Suceso
Trinity
River

Paris

[The record suggests Haut Riviere aux
Cannes is a region in modern Texas rather
than in Louisiana]
St. Denis to be placed at Nasonis up to and
including Natchitoches by order of
Company of the Indies
Scouts are on Rio Espiritu Santo; "looking
for Rancheria Grande and to learn designs
of the French because we had not been able
to find out why they [French] had
congregated so many tribes and we had not
metlseen] a single Indian."
Creek east of Brazos River.
Found Indians of Rancheria Grande with
the Bidais and Agdocas. There were 200
Indians; they had white silk French flag
with blue str~s.
The river is swollen; they spent 16 days
here. Aguayo told captains of Rancheria
Grande and other Indians to go back across
the Brazos River; he would build mission
for them in San Antonio when he returned
there.
La Houssaye sends word about St. Denis's
e~edition to San Antonio
Word sent May 6 from Spain to Viceroy in
Mexico about French/Spanish peace
treaty/gets Bienville word of St. Denis'
award of Cross of of St. Louis
Bienville letter to Council (Paris) "I received
four days ago (July 16) the King's orders
with the instruction to receive St. Denis into
Military Order of St. Louis with which I
shall not fail to comply."
Bienville mentions St. Denis is commander
at Riviere aux Cannes, and that the King
had ordered suspension of hostilities
between France and Spain.

Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol II:
265
Forrestal
1935:27

Forrestal
1935:30
Forrestal
1935:35
Forrestal
1935:37

AC 172lb
Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
II:305
Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
II:304, 306

242

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

Bienville talks about Nuevo Leon and
Spaniards from New Mexico were headed
north to attack French on Illinois River but
were themselves massacred by Indians.

7/25/1721

Aguayo

Angelina
east of
Trinity

7/28/1721

Frenchman

Spanish
camp west
of Neches

7/3111721

St. Denis arrives at
Aguayo camp

8/6/1721

Juan Rodriquez

Spanish
camp west
of Neches
Concepcion
Mission

8/6/1721

Bienville to
Company of the
Indies

Fort St.
Louis

Bienville to La
Haf]J_e
Bienville's
correspondence to
Navy Council in
France
Aguayo receives
letter from Rerenor
(sic) [Renaud
d'Hauterive]
commandant
St. Denis, captain in
command at Riviere
aux Cannes

St. Bernard
Bay_
St. Bernard
Bay

8/10/1721
12/15/1721

9/1/1721

9/5/1721

Poste St
Jean
Baptiste,
Natchitoches
Riviere aux
Cannes

Bienville repmis to Council "we are sending
a garrison to St. Bernard's Bay." The
Spanish are in San Antonio, 60 leagues east
of Rio Grande; they found a silver mine in
that vicinity but cannot work because of
-2.fOXimgy of French.
Aguayo encounters cacique of Hasinai
Indian at this location. The Hasinai says he
knew Spaniards had reached Trinity earlier.
[Note: This mean St. Denis knew, tooj
Frenchman informs Aguayo of St. Denis's
desire to approach if he were assured safe
conduct. Aguayo says 'yes' and Frenchman
leaves next mornil!&_ to advise St. Denis.
St. Denis rests; meets with Aguayo
following day, August 1.
"As soon as his Lordship arrived at
Concepcion Mision, Juan Rodriquez
reported he had learned from Indians that
St. Denis, after returning from his interview
with his Lordship on the Neches, he had for
three days remained about seven leagues
from this mission. He had been visiting the
Ca:dodachos and other tribes of the
province, whom during the previous winter
he had convoked in order to go to take
possession of La Bahia de! Espiritu Santo
and to proceed from there to San Antonio."
[Note: Rodriquez did not leave Aguayo at
Trinity with other Indians of Rancheria
Grande. Was San Jose de los Nasonis
__r_ossib!Y_ one of St. Denis' s "base camJlS?}_
He writes that "St. Denis leaves on a trip."
[Note: St. Denis left on the San Antonio
expedition earlier than date of Bienville's
letter, i.e. Bienville wrote after the factj
He writes concerning the settlement at St.
Bernard Bay
La Harpe sails for the bay. Beranger is the
ship's captain. Vessel entered Galveston Bay
(rather than St. Bernard Bay) on August
27, 1721.
Renaud writes he has no orders to permit
Aguayo's settling at Los Adaes.

Document talks about salary of major
officers in Louisiana listing names,
comments and salary. There are listed
Commanders of Particular Posts and
Commanders, Afajors, Engineers,
Inspectors. Beside Commanders there is
written parenthetically, "The following posts
have not _y_et been established: St. Bernard

Forrestal
1935:38-39

Forrestal
1935:40
Forrestal
1935:42
Forrestal
1935:46

Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol 11
Conrad
1953:173-174
Conrad
1953:173
Forrestal
1935:53

Conrad 1953

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 243
Date

9/26/1721

Activity

Certificate of
reception du Sr. de
St. Denis dans
l'ordre militaire de
St. Louis

Location

Fort Louis

10/3/1721

LaHarpe

Biloxi

10/15/1721

La Harpe

Natchitoches

11/3/1721

Letter: Alarcon to
the king

East Texas

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
Bay [La Harpe] and the Riviere aux Cannes
[St. Denitl."
Bienville's letter notifying St. Denis of his
reception to Military Order of St. Louis; "St.
Denis, lieutenant d'une Compagnie
Frenche de la Marine, Commandant au
poste de la Riviere aux Cannes en cette
province."
"Certificate of the Reception of the Sieur de
St. Denis into the Military Order of St.
Louis. "We, Jean-Baptiste de Bienville,
Knight of the Military Order of St.Louis,
General Commandant for the King in the
Province of Lousiana: Certify that by virtue
of the power given me by His Majesty, on
Dec. 1, 1720, received into the Military
Order of St. Louis, Sieur de St. Denis,
lieutenant of a naval detachment,
commandant of the post of Riviere aux
Cannes, in this province. We have
proceeded to his reception on September 26
of the present year, have read the statutes,
and received the solemn oath of fidelity in
the usual manner, in the presence of
Messrs de la Tour and Boispinel, knights of
the said order, and other military officers of
Fort Louis, of Louisiana, on the twentysixth d'!Y._ of S~tember, 1721."
La Harpe returned to Biloxi following an
unsuccessful attem...,2! to settle St. Bernard.
La Harpe writes that Bienville received a
letter from Renaud, commandant at
Natchitoches, that Aguayo arrived Adaes on
August 15. La Harpe explains Bienville was
concerned Aguayo might overpower
Natchitoches and Bienville would be blamed
because he had not given command of the
post to St. Denis who many people believe
had a great influence of the Indian nations.
Thus, Bienville decided, against his will, to
put St. Denis in command and relieve
Renaud of his duties.
"I always exercised all the care and
vigilance possible to prevent French from
trading in the places that I had reduced.
This, I understand, has been their purpose,
and not settlement, and I earnestly believe
they would have succeeeded had it not been
for the opposition that I offered, in order to
dislodge them. Finding myself in a certain
place and being informed they were 6
leagues away I sent two soldiers with a letter
from the leader of the said French to find
out whether the news I had was correct. It
turned out to be true, but there were only 25
Frenchmen--five men and 20 naked and
barefoot boys, who were lodged in some
huts without any sort of shelter or
protection. They saw in another hut much
clothing, whose value, at a conservative
estimate, would be about 200,000 pesos. It is
v~obable theiriourn~y_ was directed

Source

AC 1721c

Conrad
1953:182
Conrad
1953:184

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol III:266

244

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

toward the kingdom of New Spain, for they
had made several days' journey when,
learning that I was marching with my
soldiers toward those parts, they retired and
went to the place where they were seen."
Said religious opposed his plan to go to
Natchitoches and seize the Frenchmen and
confiscate their goods. "I was keeping a
diary setting down everything that took
place; managed previously to take from the
French another portion of the clothing.
Said he reported this to the viceroy who
ordered the goods be placed in the caja real
nearest to where he was. It is inferred,
therefore, that the purpose, intention and
aim of the French is and has been none
other than to open trade in the reduced
region. They would not have accomplished
this ifI had been able to operate freely."

11/9/1721
11/26/1721

Aguayo announces
plan to depart
rel£ on
Bienville to
Company of the
Indies concerning
La Harpe

East Texas

St. Denis's
command

New
Orleans

12/9/1721

Aguayo

"old road
through
Monte
Grande"
Encadenado

12110/1721

Aguayo

Bienville writes to

Forrestal
1935:57

d~arture

New
Orleans

12/211721

12/1721

[Note: Hackett's note (vol III: 265, f21) says
it is possible Alarcon was referring to
merchandise which St-Denis carried
through Texas to Rio Grande on second
expedition. That seems unlikely because StDenis's 2"ct expedition to Mexico was in
1717. The goods most probably were those
ordered by Bienville to be distributed to
Indian allies of the French]
Informs the soldiers to be ready to depart
Nov. 12; severe winter storm delayed

Los Adaes

He will send La Harpe to explore Arkansas
River region to establish and command a
post there to comply with Company of
Indies' orders. He does not mention when
he will send La H'!!J2..e.
Bienville: Duvergier and Delorme write "In
consequence of the letter by the Company
on the fourth of last April [See entry for
April 4, 1721] that it would be necessary to
place Monsieur St Denis at the Nasonis, or
in the vicinity, and to extend his command
over the latter, in order to flatter him
more-up to and including the
Natchitoches, in consideration of the perfect
knowledge that we know he has of this river
and of the Indians of these regions, we have
appointed him as commandant of the said
post of the Natchitoches and of the Nasonis,
to follow there the orders and the
instructions that will be sent to him."
Aguayo returns to Mexico via "old road"

Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
II:264
Margary
1876-1886,
vol VI:224225;
Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
II:265

Forrestal
1935:59

[Note: modem Highway 21.]
This is located four leagues from San
Marcos River.

Forrestal
1935:59

[Note: Encadenado means linked or
chained, possibly an allusion to area where
Indian groups were linked /allied like maybe
Rancheria Grande'U_
"I do not see that anything_ can authorize

Rowland and

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 245
Date

Activity

Location

Viceroy

12115/1721

Bienville letter

St Bernard
Bay, Los
Adaes,
Natchitoches

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

you to fortify that post since it is between
that of the Natchitoches and that of the
Caddoes, which we have in our possession."

Sanders
1929, vol
III:312

[Note: why did Bienville wait at least six
weeks to write Aguayo? Six weeks is
predicated on the October 15, 1721, entry in
La Harpe's journal stating Bienivlle had
received a letter from Renaud at
Natchitoches of Aguayo's intention to
reocc1:1.QY_ Los Adaesj
Bienville reports La Harpe's attempt to settle
St. Bernard Bay was unsuccessful. He gives
a long explanation why St. Bernard Bay
was not a good idea anyway. He is critical of
St. Denis for his failure to stop Spanish
resettlement at Adaes or the Caddoes
(Hasinai), and says St. Denis had "our
orders and instructions" to execute the
intention of the Company of the Indies to
oppose Spanish return to region; Bienville
reports he has sent orders to St. Denis
whom the Company has appointed
commandant on Red River.

Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
III:3 l 3

St. Denis is appointed commandant of the
Red River, and is sent the cross of the
Military Order of St. Louis.

12116/1721

La Harpe' s diary

Arkansas

12/23/1722

Aguayo

5/1/1722
5/5/1722

Memoir on
Natchitoches
St. Bernard Bay

San
Antonio
Natchitoches

5/8/1722

Aguayo

1723

Renault
d'Hauterive

1723

Aguayo to Viceroy
Casafuerte; no date
given for this letter,
but is written after
his 1721 expedition

Written in
Paris
San Xavier
de Najera

Parras,
Coahuila

1723

Memoir

Louisiana

2/1/1723

Bienville to council

New
Orleans

Bienville reports Aguayo sent l 00 men to
St. Bernard B':!:Y:
La Harpe leaves for Arkansas
Aguayo arrives in San Antonio.
Lengthy memoir about French post SaintJean B~iste, Natchitoches
Council to Bienville commenting on his
December 15, 1721 letter about Spaniards at
Los Adaes
Note: mission failed and was joined in
1724/25 to Mision San Antonio de Valero
J_aka Alamc.U_
Renault's commission as captain of
company of infantry at Natchitoches is
delayed. Document gives acknowledgement
of d'Hauterive's command.
Aguayo expresses his belief the French have
hindered commerce of New Mexico, with
Texas, and with the bay of Espiritu Santo.
Believes the French incite the Apaches to
wage war on Spaniards who travel in
Texas. French at Natchitoches solicit them
in Texas in exchange for muskets for
horses, which they do not breed.
He says that French at Natchitoches and
the Caudodachos (sic) hold the most direct
_12_oint of en!!:Y_into New ~ain.
Memoir gives its boundaries; St. Bernard
B~ settlement mentioned
New Orleans made capital of Louisiana;
Bienville asks for honors for his services.

Conrad
1953:187
Forrestal
1935:60
AC 1722a
AC 1722b
Forrestal
1935:61
AC 1723a

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol 1:247-248

AC 1723b
Margry
1876-1886,

246

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

1/1724

Death of Domingo
Ramon

Location
La Bahia
on Texas
Gulf Coast

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
Domingo Ramon killed by Indians in this
area. The missionary there, Father Fray
Ignacio de San Jose y Baena, went in
search of those Indians who had fled to the
hills.

Source
vol IV:641
Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:ll3

[Note: possibly a mistranslation of mantes.
It probably should be wilderness rather
than hills.]

1724

4/19/1724

4/21/1724

Governor
Fernando Perez de
Almazan

Edict: to Juan
Domingo de
Bustamante,
Governor of New
Mexico from
viceroy Marques de
Casa Fuerte.
Declaration of
Francisco
Lorenzode
Cass ados

San
Antonio

Santa Fe

New
Orleans

Aguayo report

Coahuila

1725

Bienville memoir on
Louisiana

New
Orleans

Hackett footnote

[Note: "Them" were at least the Tamiques
and Xaranames (see Jan 1724 en!!:Yll
Spaniards of Santa Fe are buying from
French in Louisiana merchandise to
amount of 12,000 pesos.

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:ll l,
113

Thomas
1935:245

[Note: who, what, when, where?]

211725

1726

The Indians [see 1726 entry] were
Tam!.g_ues and Xaranames.
Says Indians who murdered Ramon were
area Indians aided by "Nortenos."
Missionary could not persuade the Indians
who murdered Ramon to return to the
presidio, so he determined to live among
them.

Espiritu
Santo

He denied knowledge of trade with the
French. He said it would be a pity if anyone
in this region dealt with the aforesaid
French in these parts because eve1y year
they to go the royal stores at Chiguagua
(Chihuahua, Mexico) to buy what they need
in clothing and other things. He has seen
French we'!Q_ons that Indians car!:Y:
Aguayo refutes opinion that epidemic
[scurrvy] occurred at La Bahia. He said
perhaps those who died did so from hunger,
and blames that on Domi~o Ramon.
Caddo post is 100 leagues above
Natchitoches; Nasonis, Kichais,
Nacogdoches and Nanatsohos are united in
same village on Red River. They carry on
war with Caccecy [refen"ing either to
Apache or to Kansas Indians.] He asks that
they send 6 Frenchmen to guard possession
of post of Caddoes.
[Note: Are the Nacogdoches living on Red
River and in same village with other
groups? The groups are together there for
some reason when Bienville went through
re_g_ion in 17201
Missionary at Espiritu Santo moved his
mission some 10 leagues northwestward to
Guadalupe River because of hostilities
between the Indians and the soldiers.
Shortly afterward, the presidio is moved to
same site [near mission on Guadalupe] by
Domingo Ramon's successor.

Thomas
1935:245

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:ll 7
Hackett
1931-1934,
vol III:499539

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol V:l09

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 247
Date

Activity

1726

La Bahia moved

2/1411729

Letter from King of
Spain to viceroy

6/18/1730

Berenger

1734

Death of Marques
de Agu'!}'_o
Bienville and
Salmon to Minister

8117/1735

Location

Seville

New
Orleans
Coahuila
New
Orleans

12/19/1735

Gonzales to St.
Denis

Los Adaes

12/20/1735

St. Denis to
Gonzales

Natchitoches

8/3011736

St. Denis' letter to
Spanish governor
Manuel de
Sandoval

Natchitoches

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
Governor Cabello later wrote that scurvy
was the cause for both relocations.
Missionary assembled Tamique and
Xaranames at new mission site. New
captain (Juan Bustillos), seeing it
impossible to take water from the river to
irrigate the land, moved La Bahia presidio
to the side of the mission. This occurred
between February 1725 (date of Aguayo's
r~01Q. and 1726.
Makes clear Aguayo was governor of two
Spanish provinces: Nuevas Philipinas (later
called Texas) and Coahuila-not then one
province of Coahuila y Tejas. "The viceroy
having accepted it [Aguayo's offer], he
conferred upon him, for this, in my royal
name, the offices of governor and captaingeneral of the said provinces ofNuevas
Filipinas and of Coahuila."
Aguayo established presidios in Texas with
25 men; another among the Adays with 100
men; one on bay of Espiritu Santo. "These
were without expense to my real hacienda.
Sent map and plans and affidavits of having
reestablished the said 6 missions [in Texas],
and of having erected three more besides,
one at La Bahia, and two in San Antonio."
"Berenger, Jean. Naval captain, interred
June 18, 1730."
Aguayo died at his hacienda San Francisco
de los Patos near General Ce_geda, Coahuila
He gives information on the fortifications in
the colony (Natchitoches mentioned); he
also reports death of Devin in 1734 and on
the ~aniards of New Mexico
Gonzales, commander at Spanish presidio
Los Adaes, asks St. Denis to discontinue his
efforts to build a French post in Spanish

Source

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:112

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:105

Woods 17181750
Lemee
2003:43
AC 1735

Margry
1876-1886,
vol VI:237

territ~

1739

Mallet Expedition

Canada to
New Mexico
to
Louisiana

St. Denis acknowledges Gonzales'
letter-writes to Gonzales (who wrote he had
advised his superiors about St. Denis's
moving the French fort to the Spanish side
of the river) "you have done your duty." St.
Denis says he will continue to build the new
fort. And he did.
"Indians whom the Spaniards call Apaches,
and the French Kanecios. These Apache
Indians are in the eastern part of the
possessions of the Catholic King, at 42 [32]
degrees. Those Indians do not wish to admit
the Spaniards, against whom they wage
incessant warfare."
Pichardo says these Indians are those that
Casanas calls Sadammos.
Pierre and Paul Mallet left Canada
reportedly to establish trade with New
Mexico although most probably to
investigate mining activity near Santa Fe.
Their return voyage ended in New Orleans
where__Q.Jans were formulated for a second

Margry
1876-1886,
vol VI:238

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:213

Folmer 1939;
Bell et al.
1967:255

248

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

417/1739

Agreement to
furnish supplies for
Chickassaw war

Louisiana

51411739

Claim for
accounting

Louisiana

2/28/1740

Natchez Massacre

Natchez

Fall,1741

San Juan Bautista
and San Bernardo

Rio Grande
missions
between
Nuevo
Laredo and
Piedras

3/26/1744

Last will and
testament of Louis
Juchereau de St.
Denis
Louis Juchereau de
St.Denis
St. Denis' death
announcement

Location

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
e~edition to New Mexico.
Louis Juchereau de St. Denis enters into
agreement with M. [Monsieur] de Salmon
to furnish, for war with Chickassaws, 100
head of horned cattle and to have them led
to Arkansas, at 100 livres apiece, to be paid
for on receipt of delivery furnished by
guardian of the King's store. Signed:
Salmon, Bienville, St. Denis, Roumier,

Source
Records of
Louisiana
Superior
Council
1921:493

Hen~

"De la Chaise answers "there is no money
in this Post of Natchitoches, that even the
troops are paid in merchandise from the
King's store. As there are no sergeants or
sheriffs at Natchitoches, it would be
necessary for the Intendant-Commissary
jointly with the Governor to issue orders to
M. de Saint Denis, the commandant, in
order to insure execution by the troops."
Signed: De la Chaise
Natchez Indians attack French post

Rio Grande missions San Juan Bautista
and San Bernardo were ordered
secularized.

Records of
Louisiana
Superior
Council
1921:503

Rowland and
Sanders
1929, vol
I:54-56
Gilmore
1969:30

N~ras

6111/1744
61211744

Natchitoches

Natchitoches
Natchitoches

The inventory of St Denis' personal
belongings contains descriptions of
numerous articles of elaborately decorated
clothiJ2g which were of no small e~ense.
Buried June 12, 1744, "within the parish
church."
Announcement of death of Louis
Juchereau de St. Denis and inventory of

St. Denis
1744
St. Denis
1744
St. Denis
1744

some.J2_f~

2/1/1747

Decree by viceroy,
the Count of Revilla
Gigedo

Mexico City

4/16/1748

King of Spain to
viceroy, Grancisco
de Guemes y
Horcasitas (Count
of Revilla Gigedo,
Guemes y
Horcasitas-viceroy
ofMexico, 17461755)

El Bueno
Retiro,
San Xavier
Missions
[near
modem
Rockdale,
TX.)

San Xaviar missions: Ordered three
missions erected on banks of river: San
Francisco Xavier de Horcasitas, Nuestra
Senora de la Candelaria, and San
Yldefonso for the heathen Indians of the
Rancheria Grande, Deadoses, Mayeyes,
Y1!i_uanes, Cocos, and other nations.
Four captains of the Yoguanes, Deadoses,
Mayeyes, and Rancheria Grande came to
San Antonio de Valero to request missions
be founded for them.
"Following their example, holy baptism was
eagerly requested ... by the nations of the
Vidais, the Caocos, the Lacopceles, the
Anchoes, the Tups, the Atias, the Apapax,
the Tlacopetles, the Cancepues, the
Tancagues, the Hiscas, the Nouidis
(Naudis), the Casos, the Tanico, the Quisis,
the Anatagua, the Atasacneus, the Pastates,
the Geotes, the Atiasnogues, the
Taguacana, the Taguayas, and others."

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:l24

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II: 123

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 249
Date

1748

Activity

Father Fray
Domingo Arricivita

Location

Queretaro

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions

Source

"considering that the gravity of the business
admits of no delay, and that there are in the
province of Los Texas the nations of
heathen Indians who are
mentioned ... requesting baptism and to
unite with the body of the church (which is
the principal object that I have ordered to be
attended to and promoted); and that that
country, because of its extent, its
uninhabited state, and its proximity to the
regions where the French have intruded,
deserves greater care and vigilance, to the
end that they [the French] may be prevented
from inciting and winning the idolatrous
Indians to their side."
"Father Fray Mariasno Francisco de los
Dolores y Viana came upon a large
assemblage of various nations-Mayeyes,
Yojuanes, Deadoses, Vi dais, and others"

Hackett
1931-1934,
vol II:l 19120

"The site of their rancheria was 70 leagues
distant from San Antonio, and they had
located it in a valley which was situated
between the two rivers of Las Animas and
San Xavier, at the palce where they unite.
They thereby obtained protection, and had
their families and droves of horses
[cavalladas] safeguarded from the invasions
of the Apaches. They likewise had an
abundance of walnuts, medlars, plums,
grapes and many other fruits; the chase of
the bear, deer, buffaloes, turkeys, and
rabbits lured them; but the strongest
reasons was that that site was at about the
center of all the points where lived their
relatives and allies. For, their nations being
very numerous, it was necssary for them to
divide to enable them to maintain themselves; but in such manner that. if, because
of war with the Apaches, or for some other
reason, they desired to unite, they could
send up smokes as a signal to do so."

1758

Father Fray
Domingo Arricivita.
[Note: Arricivita
was selected as the
official chronicler
of the College of
Saint Francis de
Queretaro and a
former missionery
at Mision San
Ildefonso, one of
the three San
Xavier missions.]

Mexico

[Note: this is Charles W. Hackett's and
Charmion Clair Shelby's English translation of Pichardo's rendering of Arricivita's
works. Another translation of the same
passage appears in the entry below.]
Indians at San Xavier missions: "Their
rancheria was 60 leagues [Note: Hackett's
translation of Pichardo above translates it
as 70 leagues] from San Antonio, situated
in a valley surrounded by the hills of the two
rivers, the Animas and the San Xavier, at
the very place where they joined. This
natural enclosure afforded protection for
their families and stock against the attacks
of the Apaches.At the same time, it provided
them with the abundant supplies of nuts,
medlars, plums, grapes, and many other
frutis, which attracted game: bear, deer,
buffalo, turkey, and rabbit. More important,
it was a converging point for all the pathes
leading to the places where their relatives

Hammond
and Rey
1996:4-5

250

Texas Archeological Society

Date

Activity

Location

8/1/1755

Abandonment

San Xavier
missions
San Saba

4/1757

San Saba

2/28/1758

San Saba

Mission
Santa Cruz
de San Saba

3/24/1758

Governor Angel
Martos

San Saba

Quotes/ Notes/ Questions
and neighbors lived. Their nations being
many and populous, they had to divide in
groups in order to secure food. But, in the
same manner, if they should wish to unite
on account of Apache wars, or for any
other reason, they would notify one another
~means of smoke sLg_nals."
Completion of transfer of San Xavier
missions to the Rio San Marcos
Presidio and mission established at San
Saba
Indian attack and massacre at mission

Martos writes he has received a letter from
Diego Ortiz Parilla concerning the attack on
Mission Santa Cruz de San Saba of more
than two thousand Comanche Indians and
other nations who are allied with them.

NOTES
1. See Gilmore, this volume, for biographies of La
Salle's people.

REFERENCES CITED
Abbreviations
AC , Archives de Colonies
AE, Esp., Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres,
Correspondence Politique, Espagne
AE, Mem et Doc Amerique, Ministere des Afaires
Etrangeres, Memoires et Documents, Amerique
AGI, Archivo General de Indias
AGN, Archivo General y Publico de la Nacion
ASF, Archivo San Francisco el Grande
ASH, Archives, Services Hydrographique
BN, Biblioteca Nacional
AC
1684

1698

Memoir. Unpublished document on file at AC, 13c,
J :252, 5, microfilm, Center for Louisiana Studies,
University of Louisiana, Lafayette.
Letter. Unpublished document on file at AC, C13,
C,2,f.1-17, microfilm, Center for Louisiana Studies,
University of Louisiana, Lafayette.

1716

Letter. Unpublished document on microfilm on file
at Williams Research Center, Historic New Orleans
Collection AC., Cl3,4:09.

1718

Royal Order. Unpublished document on file at the
AC, A22:94; AC F3, 2451: n.p., CLS, Historic New
Orleans Collection.

Source

Gilmore
1969:38
Weddle
1964:50
Weddle
1964:68;
Castilla
2000:88
Valdes
1995:247

1719 Declaration of War. Unpublished document on file
at the AC, B 41:611 1, microfilm, CLS, Historic
New Orleans Collection.
1720 Villardeau letter to Legac. Unpublished document
on file at the AC, Cl3, 69, microfilm, CLS, Historic
New Orleans Collection.
l 72la Letter from Bienville. Unpublished document on
file at the AC, Cl3, 69, microfilm, CLS, Historic
New Orleans Collection.

172lb Letter. Unpublished document on file at the AC,
Cl3, 6:193, microfilm, CLS, Historic New Orleans
Collection.
1721c Letter. Unpublished document on file at the AC,
C13A, 6:186, microfilm, CLS (Paris), Historic New
Orleans Collection.
l 722a Memoir. Unpublished document on file at the AC,
Gl, 464: n.p, microfilm, Historic New Orleans Collection.
1722b Letter to Bienville. Unpublished document on file
at the AC, Cl3, 6:264, microfilm, CLS, Historic
New Orleans Collection.
l 723a Commission. Unpublished document on file, AC,
B43:285, microfilm, CLS, Historic New Orleans
Collection.
1723b Memoir. Unpublished document on file, AC, Cl3,
7:288, microfilm, CLS, Historic New Orleans Collection.
1735

AE
1715

Letter. Unpublished document on file, AC, Cl3,
18: 117, microfilm, CLS, Historic New Orleans Collection.

Proces verbal. Unpublished document on file at
the Archives of Foreign Affairs, Paris, AE, Esp.,
243:17

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 251
AGI
1717

Letter to the Viceroy, AGI, Mexico. Unpublished
document on file at the Center for American History, The University of Texas at Austin, 61-6-35.

Bannon, John Francis
1940 The Spanish Borderlands Frontier 1513-1821. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque

Letter, AGL Unpublished document on file, Center
for American History, The University of Texas at
Austin, volume 61-6-35:19-22.

Bell, Robert E., Edward B. Jelks and W.W. Newcomb
1967 A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory, Final Report for a Grant, National
Science Foundation (unpublished).

AGN
1699 Letter to Diego Ramon. AGN, Provincias Internas.
Unpublished document on file at the Center for
American History, The University of Texas at Austin, volume 28:23.

Bense, Judith A. (editor)
2003 Presidio Santa Maria de Galve, A Struggle for Survival in Colonial Spanish Pensacola. University
Press of Florida, Gainesville.

1700a Letter. AGN, Provincias Internas. Unpublished
document on file, Center for American History, The
University of Texas at Austin, volume 28:48.

BN
1701

1717

l 700b Letter to superiors, AGN. Unpublished document
on file at the Center for American History, The
University of Texas at Austin, 38-39.
1700c Interrogation of Tejas Indian. AGN, Provincias
Internas. Unpublished document on file at the Center for American History, The University of Texas
at Austin, volume 28:10.
1701

1704

Testimonio del Decreto de Fundacion del Presidio
de San Juan Bautista, AGN, Historia. Unpublished
document on file at the Center for American History, The University of Texas at Austin, volume
29:72-75.
Interrogation of Mendoza by Gregorio Salinas
Varona, AGN, Provincias Internas. Unpublished
document on file at the Center for American History, The University of Texas at Austin, volume
28:77.

Letter. Unpublished document on file at the Library
of Congress, MSS. fr. 21690: 215, microfilm.

Bolton, Herbert Eugene (editor)
1908 Spanish Exploration in the Southwest 1542-1706,
Barnes & Noble, New York.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene and Thomas Maitland Marshall
1920 The Colonization of North America, 1492-1783. The
Macmillan Company, New York.
Buckley, Eleanor Claire
1911 The Aguayo Expedition into Texas and Louisiana,
1719-1722. Southwestern Historical Quarterly,
XV:l-65.
Bugbee, Lester A.
1898 The Real Saint-Denis. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 1:266-284.

Expedition Diary, AGN, Provincias Internas. Unpublished document on file at the Center for American History, Tue University of Texas at Austin,
volume 28:55-71.

Butler, Ruth Lapham
1934 Journal of Paul.Du Ru Missionary Priest of Louisiana. Caxton Club, Chicago.

Allain, Mathe
1988 Not Worth a Straw: French Colonial Policy and the
Early Years of Louisiana. Center for Louisiana Studies, University of Southwestern Louisiana.

Carroll, William M. (translator) and Wagner, Frank (editor
and translator)
1983 Beranger's Discovery of Aransas Pass. Occasional
Papers, Volume 8, May, The Friends of the Corpus
Christi Museum, Corpus Christi.

1707

ASF
1720

Memoir. Unpublished document on file at the Center for American History, The University of Texas
at Austin, 2Q229 volume 710:215-284.

Castilla, D. Juan M. Romero de Terreros
2000 San Saba, Mision Para Los Apaches: El Plan
Terreros Para Consolidar La Frontera Norte De
Nueva Espana. Eurolex, S.L., Madrid.

Letter, French Colonial records. Unpublished document on file at the Library of Congress, microfilm
115-15; no. 19, Washington, D.C.

Chipman, Donald and Harriett Denise Joseph
1999 Notable Men and Women of Spanish Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Balesi, Charles J.
1992 The Time of the French in the Heart of North
America, 1673-1818. Alliance Francaise, Chicago.

Clark, R. C.
1902 Louis Juchereau de St. Denis and the Reestablishment of the Tejas Missions. Southwestern Historical Quarterly VI: 1-26.

ASH
1720

252

Texas Archeological Society

Conrad, Glenn R.
1970 The First Families of Louisiana. Blaitor's Publishing Division, Baton Rouge.

Hackett, Charles Wilson (editor)
1923 Historical Documents Relating to Mexico, Nueva
Vizcaya. Two volumes, Carnegie Institution, Washington, D.C.

Conrad, Glenn R. (editor and annotator)
1971 Jean Benard de La Harpe: Historical Journal of the
Settlement of the French in Louisiana. University of
Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette.

1931-1934
Pichardo's Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and Texas. Four volumes, University of Texas
Press, Austin.

Dunn, William Edward
1917 Spanish and French Rivalry in the Gulf Region of
the United States, 1678-1702: The Beginnings of
Texas and Pensacola. Bulletin 1705, Studies in History, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dyan, Isadore
1974 Lexical Reconstruction: The Case of the ProtoAthapaskan Kinship System. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Foik, Paul J.
1933 Captain Don Domingo Ramon's Diary of His Expedition into Texas In 1716. Preliminary Studies of
the Catholic Historical Society, Volume II, Number
5, Austin.
Folmer, Henri
1939 The Mallet Expedition of 1739 Through Nebraska,
Kansas, and Colorado to Santa Fe. The Colorado
Magazine XVI(5):161-173.
1940

De Bellisle on the Texas Coast. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 44:204-231.

Forrestal, Peter P. (translator)
1935 Pena's Diary of the Aguayo Expedition. Preliminary Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society, Volume II, Number 7, Austin.
French, Benjamin Franklin
1846-1875
Historical Collections of Louisiana. Three
volumes, Wiley and Putnam, New York.
Gilmore, Kathleen Kirk
1969 The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical Site
ldent!fication. State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report Number 16, Austin.
Giraud, Marcel
1953 Histoire de la Louisiana Francaise. Five volumes,
Presses Universitairs de France, Paris.
Guerra, Jr., Rau!J., Nadine M. Vasquez, and Baldomero Vela,
Jr. (compilers and editors)
1989 Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese
of Guadalajara, Provinces of Coahuila, Nuevo Leon,
Nuevo Santander, Texas: 1653-1750. Published privately the the editors, printed by The University of
Texas at Pan American Print Shop, Edinburg.

Hatcher, Mattie Austin
1927 Descriptions of the Tejas or Asinai Indians, 16911722. Southwestern Historical Quarterly XXX:5062, 150-180.
1932

The Expedition of Don Domingo Teran de los Rios
Into Texas. Preliminary Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society, Volume II, Number 1, Austin.

Heinrich, Pierre
1970 La Louisiane Sous La Compagnie Des lndes, 17191731. Burt Franklin, New York
Hammond, George P. and Agapito Rey (translators)
1996 Apostolic Chronicle of Juan Domingo Arricivita:
The Franciscan Mission Frontier in the Eighteenth
Century in Arizona, Texas, and the Californias. Two
volumes. Academy of American Franciscan History, Berkeley.
Hodge, F. W.
1929 French Intrusion toward New Mexico in 1695, New
Mexico Historical Review, University of New
Mexico.
Hoffman, Fritz Leo (translator)
1935 Diary of the Alarcon Expedition Into Texas, 17181719, Fray Francisco Celiz. The Quivira Society.
Johnson, Jr., Leroy and Edward P. Jelks
1958 The Tawakoni-Yscani Village, 1760; A Study in
Archeological Site Identification. The Texas Journal of Science, X( 4):405-422.
Karttunen, Frances
1992 After the Conquest: The Survival of Indigenous Patterns of Life and Belief. Journal of World History
3:239-286.
Lemee, Patricia R.
1998 Tios and Tantes: Familial and Political Relationships of Natchitoches and the Spanish Colonial
Frontier. Southwestern Historical Quarterly, CI
(3):341-350.
2003

Ambivalent Successes and Successful Failures: St.
Denis, Aguayo, and Juan Rodriquez. InThe French
in Texas: History, Migration, Culture, edited by
Francois Lagarde, pp. 35-45. University of Texas
Press, Austin .

Lemmon, Alfred, John T. Maigll, and Jason R. Wiese, editors
2003 Charting Louisiana: Five Hundred Years of Maps.
The Historic New Orleans Collection, New Orleans.

Lemee-Annotated Bibliography 253
Le Moyne, Jean Baptiste, sieur de Bienville.
1714 Letter. Unpublished document on file at Historic
New Orleans Collection Microfilm AC., Cl3b, l:n.p.

Robles, Vito Alessio
1978 Coahuila y Texas en la Epoca Colonial. Editorial
Porrua, S.A., Mexico.

Le Page du Pratz
1758 Histoire de la Louisiane. Three volumes, De Bure,
Paris.

Rowland, Dunbar, and Albert G. Sanders
1929 Mississippi Provincial Archives, 1701-1729: French
Dominion. Three Volumes, Jackson.

Linares, Virrey
1714 Letter. AGI Mexico 486A. Unpublished document
on file at the Center for American History, The
University of Texas at Austin (translated copy courtesy of R.Wayne Childers).

Shelby, Charmion Clair
1923 St. Denis's Declaration Concerning Texas in 1717.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly XXVI: 165183.

McGraw, A. Joachim, John W. Clark, Jr., and Elizabeth A.
Robbins
1991 A Texas Legacy, The Old San Antonio Road and
The Caminos Reales, A Tricentenniel History, 16911991. Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, Austin.
McWilliams, Richebourg (translator and editor)
1981 Iberville' s Gulf Journals. The University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa and London.
Margry, Pierre (editor)
Decouvertes et etablissements des francais
1876-86
dans l 'ouest et dans le sud de l 'Amerique septentrionale (1674-1754). Six volumes, Imprimerie D.
Jouaust, Paris

Smith, Ralph
1958a Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe:
Discovery Made by Him of Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern Historical Quarterly LXII:75-86.
1958b Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe:
Discovery Made by Him of Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern Historical Quarterly LXII:246-249.
St. Denis, Louis Juchereau de
1744 Will, Testament, and family papers. Unpublished
documents on file at the Cammie G. Henry Research Center, Northwestern State University of
Louisiana, Natchitoches.

Moro, Geraldo
1715 Letter. AGN, Provincias Internas. Unpublished
document on file, Center for American History, The
University of Texas at Austin, volume 181:11.

Swanton, John R.
1996 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of
the Caddo Indians. University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman and London.

Pena, Juan Antonio
1722 Derrotero de la Expedicion en la Provincia de los
Texas, Nuevo Reino de Philipinos, que del orden
del Exmo. Senor Marques de Valero Vi-Rey de esta
Nueva Espana ha hecho D. Joseph Azlor, Caballero
Mennadero del Reino de Aragon, Governador y
Capitan General de dicha Provincia de Texas,
Nuevas Philipinos, y de esta de Coahuila, Nuevo
Reino de Estramadura, Mexico. Transcript, Archivo
San Francisco el Grande, Mexico City, Volume 710,
Box 2Q229, 215-184, Center for American History,
The University of Texas at Austin ..

Thomas, Alfred Barnaby (translator and editor)
1935 After Coronado: Spanish Exploration Northeast of
New Mexico, 1696-1727. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.

Perry, Richard J.
1991 Western Apache Heritage: People of the Mountain
Corridor. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Portillo, Esteban L.
1984 Apuntes Para La Historia Antigua De Coahuila y
Texas. Biblioteca de la Universidad Automoma de
Coahuila. Saltillo.
Records of Louisiana Superior Council
1921 Records for 1739. Louisiana Historical Quarterly
4:493.

Tous, Gabriel
1930 The Espinosa-Olivares-Aquirre Expedition of 1709.
Preliminary Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society, Volume I, Number 3, Austin.
Turanzas, Jose Porrua
1961 Documentos eclesiasticos y civils de la provincia de
Texas o Nuevas Philipines, 1729-1779. Collecion
Chimalistec de Libros y Documentos Acerca la
Nueva Espana 12, Madrid.
Valdes, Carlos Manuel
1995 La Gente Del Mezquite, Los Nomadas Del Norte En
La Colonia. Centro de Investigaciones y Estudios
Superiores en Antropologia Social, Mexico City.
Van Ermen, Eduard
1990 The United States in Old Maps and Prints. Atomium
Books, Inc., Wilmington.

254

Texas Archeological Society

Wagner, Frank, (editor and annotator)
1983 Beranger's Discovery of Aransas Pass, A Translation of Jean Beranger's French Manuscript by
Willima M. Carroll. Occasional Papers, Volume 8,
May. The Friends of the Corpus Christi Museum,
Corpus Christi.
Weddle, Robert S.
1964 The San Saba Mission Spanish Pivot in Texas. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
1968

San Juan Bautista: Gateway to Spanish Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Weddle, Robe1i S. and Patricia R. Lemee
2003 Exploring the Texas Coast: Bellisle, Beranger and
La Harpe, 1719-1721. In The French in Texas: History, Migration, Culture, Francois Lagarde, editor,
pp. 20-34. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Woods, Earl. C.
1718-1750
Sacramental Records, volume 1. Archdiocese of New Orleans.

HIGHLIGHTING THE SOCIETY

The Society offers its members and the public many avenues for participating in the archeology of Texas: this Bulletin, the quarterly Newsletter, public lectures at the annual meeting, the
annual meeting, field schools, and more. Highlighting is devoted to showcasing those exciting
avenues to ensure that all members know of, and can take advantage of, other aspects of the
Society. This year we highlight the many members that actively participate in Texas archeology as
members of regional societies. Often, at the request of local landowners, those regional societies
perform archeological work on private land, accurately documenting sites and conducting excavations. Like professionals, these members recognize the need to document those excavations, either
through publication of small monographs, articles in a well-circulated publication, or, in this case,
the Bulletin. As such, these reports are an important part of the archeological record and provide
documentation that can be used by future researchers. Alice Stultz, an active TAS member and an
Archeological Steward for the Texas Historical Commission, here documents the excavations of
the Concho Valley Archeological Society at an archeological site in Concho County.
Readers who are non-members and wish to learn more about the Society or to become
members can go to the back page of this Bulletin or go to the Society's website at www.txarch.org.

A Prehistoric and Early Settlers' Site (41CC328)
on the Upper Reaches of Brady Creek
Alice Stultz

INTRODUCTION
This project addressed a two-fold interest by the Concho Valley Archeological Society (CVAS) to:
(1) practice "hands-on" archeological methods in the field; and, (2) assist a landowner who desired
information about the many Early Archaic to Late Prehistoric
artifacts on part of her land. As a result of these combined
interests, the CV AS, with the assistance of Dan Potter, Regional Archeologist with the Texas Historical Commission
(THC), undertook test excavation units at site 41 CC328. The
units were located contiguous to a spring on the landowner's
property. The spring is also adjacent to a State Archeological
Landmark (SAL), site 41CC298, which consists of around 45
known and documented mortar holes in bedrock slabs. Site
41CC298 is less than 150 meters away from site 41CC328. A
surface survey of 41 CC328, in the fall of 2004 after the SAL
celebration and dedication, yielded Early Archaic to Late
Prehistoric points (Figure 1) and a large variety of broken
historic glass, metal and pottery. The CV AS did two days of
surface survey and excavated five test units around two historic settler's headquarters' foundations in conjunction with
Figure I. Prehistoric dart points from the
a large area with burnt rock and scattered lithics that is on an
landowner's surface collection.
elevated rise near the spring.

Bulletin of the Texas Arclzeological Society 76 (2005)

256

Texas Archeological Society
SITE LOCATION

The site is located near a spring that drains into Brady Creek. It is adjacent to US 83, south of Eden and
north of Menard, Texas. This is an area rich in prehistoric and historic sites. Burnt and fire-cracked rock is
prolific over the entire area. The owner of the site is a member of the second family who occupied and
ranched this land. Although adjacent to site 41 CC298, the SAL with mortar holes, no mortar holes have
been found on site 41 CC328. Due to the current use of the land for sheep and deer hunting, a surface survey
of the site was conducted in autumn, 2004 but the test units were not dug until February, 2005.
At the celebration for the SAL designation and dedication, archeological interest developed in studying
the land adjacent to the mortar hole site. Notes were taken at that time in order to fill out a site form and
obtain the site number and later the test units were placed in locations selected by Dan Potter of the THC,
the author, and the landowner. In February, interference with specific agricultural activities (sheep lambing) and recreational activities (leasing for deer hunting) was not a matter of concern, so the landowner was
pleased to allow the CV AS to undertake the excavations. The test units also gave the CV AS an opportunity
for "hands on" archeological methods in the field that was different from the majority of their work. Prior
to this experience, the CV AS has primarily focused on cavalry posts and camps in West Texas such as
Camp Elizabeth, Grierson Springs, Fort Concho, and Fort Chadbourne.
The original plan was to open up two test units. However, five one by one meter units were laid out with
the transit and GPS designations by Dan Potter with the help of CVAS members (Figure 2). After beginning
work on the site, two of these units
were aborted due to weather and
two other units were laid out.

BACKGROUND
Early recorded history of this
south central portion of land in
Concho County was derived from
the landowner's research. The site
is mainly comprised of two parcels
of land (2027 and 2030) and a portion of another south of Brady
Creek. The original grantee of parcel 2027 (patented on May 25,
1856) was George Friedrich Mueller who bought the land on May
22, 1858. After seven absentee
landowners speculated on this land
on the frontier, M. H. Robinson
sold the land to Charles Edward
and Samuel Waring for $50.00 on
August 3, 1876. Two years later,
Samuel Waring paid $160 to
Charles Edward Waring for the undivided interest of his brother's land
on October 27, 1878.
Parcel 2030 (patented November 25, 1854) was originally
granted to Karl Haas. Four absentee landowners speculated on the
land. On October 5, 1895 the

Figure 2. Establishing the datum at site 41CC328.

Highlighting the Society

257

Waring brothers leased it for $8.00 per year from Wakeman and Tainter, both of New York. Charles E. and
Samuel Waring had actually served as tenants since September 22, 1887. On March 25, 1899 Samuel
Waring purchased the north half from Jesup Wakeman and the south half from Charles M. Tainter. On
August 21, 1907 it was declared a homestead of approximately 200 acres. A homestead in Texas is a legal
instrument to protect a domicile and possessions thereon from creditors and taxing authorities in case of
default of payment. The significance of the instrument in this case establishes the fact that this loc;ation was
the primary headquarters of the Waring family who owned and operated 22 112 contiguous sections of
land. 1 As with these parcels, the Waring brothers acquired the land by purchase.
On March 3, 1873, Gideon Pace patented one league and one labor of land. This land was issued to the
heirs of Gideon Pace on January 25, 187 5 in lieu of lost headright Certificate 102, a certificate that was lost
on the frontier. On February 22, 1875, James, Robert and Demsy Pace and Laura Key lick received the land
from an affidavit of heirship after the death of their father Gideon Pace. On December 15, 1896, a general
warranty deed from Mary C. Paschal, administrix of the estate of I.H. Paschal, deceased, sold the land to
Samuel and Charles E. Waring for $2.00 per acre. The aforementioned Charles Waring, born in Ireland,
never married and died in 1898 in Concho County. His brother, Samuel Waring was born December 14,
1860 in Ireland and died April 10, 1924 in Concho County. He was married July 23, 1891 to Elizabeth
Sarah Molloy.
As the foregoing lays out, the first landowners to actually live and work the ranch were the Waring
brothers. The next landowners were the current landowner's parents, Richard Jesse and Rosa Lapp Jesse.
The existing ranch house, smoke house, laundry house with cistern and garage attached, and outbuildings
were present prior to 1939 when the landowner, Margaret Rose Jesse Loveless, was born. She was the
fourth of four children. She remembers the drought in the 1950s when her father had 300 sheep that he fed
daily augmented with burned prickly pear as feed.
Richard Jesse was aware of and basically protected the mortar holes at site 41CC298. He was also
cognizant of the presence of artifacts on the land where site 41 CC328 is situated, but he left them
undisturbed. Nonetheless, some pilfering from poachers has occurred over the years. Erosion during the
drought of the 1950s revealed surface artifacts and young collectors were allowed on the land by permission
of the landowner. Margaret has a collection of cobalt blue Vicks Vapor Rub jars from many decades,
vanilla extract bottles, French harps, clock pieces, purple glass, square nails, wire, car parts and gun pieces
from the site (Margaret Rose Jesse Loveless, personal communication 2004).

SITE DESCRIPTION
The site is located in the Edwards Plateau physiogeographic region in a live oak savannah. 2 The soil
has a shallow depth to limestone bedrock and is dominated by cobbles. The land in Concho County is
gently undulating with elevations from 1,400 feet near the Colorado River to 2,400 feet in the southwest
part of the county (Clower and Dowell 1990: 1), and average rainfall is around 23 inches. Summers are hot
and winters are fairly warm with rain in early fall and late spring. Snow is rare with 49 degrees being the
average winter daily temperature and 82 degrees the average daily summer temperature. The average
winter lows are in the low 40s but temperatures reach the mid 90s in the summer. Sheep, goats, and beef
cattle are the principle ranching stock with 75 percent of the land used as rangeland. The rest is mainly
cultivated in crops of hay, wheat, and oats, cotton, grain and forage sorghum.
The soils in the immediate area using the SCS Soil Series are NuA, TKC, KtB, Fr, RoA and KXB
(Clower and Dowell 1988:42). The silty clay loam soil is severalJeet thick and slopes gently toward the
spring. Many of the soils at the site are mollisols. In the vicinity of the spring, permeability is slow as is
consistent with a spring bed (Clower and Dowell 1988:53).
The site is located adjacent to the spring that bubbles visibly in the winter months prior to spring
foliage growth. In times of drought, it disappears except for the higher concentration of vegetation in the
area. The site slopes to the spring in a gradual undulating manner with the rockier soil at higher elevations
and with a higher concentration of vegetation at the lower level. Predominantly the vegetation on the site
consists of live oak, mesquite, pecan, buffalo grass, coastal Bermuda, agarita, red grama, Texas grama,

258

Texas Archeological Society

heavy tridens, three awns, western ragweed, broomweed, horehound, lotesbush, sideoats grama, Engleman
daisy, tasajilla, and prickly pear.
The major disturbances to the site are the pit areas where soil was removed for the construction of US
83 from Eden to Menard. That highway is just west of the site. The Texas highway department made the
southernmost pit when constructing US 83 in the 1930s. The northernmost pit was made during a US 83
construction improvement project in the 1950s when "shoulders" were added to the highway along with
straightening of the existing curves about a mile south of the site. The landowner mentioned that inside
these pits dirt had been leveled for rain water collection for livestock.
East of these two pits lies the less disturbed area of the site. In this less disturbed area, there are two
approximately five meter long rock foundation walls flush with the ground level. The foundation walls are
on a high point of the site. Brick remnants can be seen to the northwest of the foundation walls. In addition
to the two walls, the surface has revealed an area of high concentration of broken glass, gun parts, china and
pottery (historic), French harp parts, black wind chargers (3/4 inch by three inches long black cylinders that
supplied wind power to the house) and square nails. A water well that was hand dug is situated about 30
meters from each of these two rock protrusions. These walls are too far apart for a single structure.
Moreover, in old photographs, the house is shown in relation to the well, indicating that it was not of a size
to encompass both rock walls.
Fortunately, the site has not been root plowed. Instead, the mesquite trees were killed with coal oil in
the 1940s, thereby protecting the archeological deposits of the site. The ebbing and flowing of the spring
waters and rains have caused some erosional changes to the site. Other impacts to the site stem from
overstocking cattle and sheep and wind erosion during the drought of the 1950s.
The elevation is highest at the caliche pit rim dropping towards the east to springs that bubble up presently
after autumn rains. The landowner noted these are seasonal and appear after fall rains and prior to the
mesquite trees sprouting in the spring. The spring was not visible during the surface survey in the fall of 2004.

DESCRIPTION OF FIELD WORK
A surface survey in the fall of 2004, during the SAL celebration nearby, yielded Early Archaic to Late
Prehistoric points and a large variety of broken historic glass, metal and pottery. At that time the landowner
discussed her interest in learning about the site nearby and asked the CVAS to work on the property at a
later date. February 2005 was agreed upon to avoid lambing and deer leasing activities.
Dan Potter (Figure 3) of THC
met the landowner, author and
some of the members of CVAS on
February 3, 2005. Two datum
rebars were located and set in concrete. One was near an area of
heavy concentration of fire cracked
rock and the other was adjacent to
a well between the spring and the
two rock foundation protrusions.
The well was probably dug between
the 1880s and the 1890s. Elevations and measurements were set at
each of five test units using the transit (see Figure 2). The first test unit
was near the heavy fire cracked
rock area. An Early Archaic Nolan
point was found on the surface
nearby (Turner and Hesterl985:
Figure 3. Dan Potter taking notes during excavations at site 41CC328.
132). The next unit was placed near

Highlighting the Society

259

a probable historic "trash pit" that had long been a source of interest to the landowner. The next two units
were near each of two rock foundation lines that were about 30 meters apart. Their distance from each other
seemed to indicate that they did not belong to a single structure. The fifth unit was on a higher elevated
slope and southwest of the structure foundations but equidistant to the spring approximately 20-30 meters
from the damp ooze of the spring water the day of the study.
In addition to these five units, two other units were opened near a large live oak tree, locally known as
"the hitching post tree." Late Prehistoric Scallorn points (Turner and Hester 1985: 189) and burnt rock were
prolific in this area, and the landowner wanted to see what the group would find in test units in this area as
well. This was also an area equidistant from the spring, similar to the other units.
A crew chief was designated at each unit and only two units were opened at a time. At least 20
members of the CVAS worked on the site during the four days of activity (Figure 4). The units were dug in
10 centimeter levels. Shovels were used to remove the winter forbs and grasses on the surface of each unit.
Each unit was to be dug 10 to 20 centimeters beyond encounters of sterile soil. This was done in all but two
units; it could not be accomplished
in those two units due to time and
weather. The soil was collected in
buckets and screened using one
quarter inch screen over sawhorses. Artifacts were collected on
the screen and put in bags for laboratory cleaning and analysis. Photographs were taken of features
and artifacts were photographed in
the laboratory.
The primary datum was buried with concrete into the ground
at E0422569 N3449367. All measurements were taken from this
datum and with the transit at this
point. Another datum was set north
of the well at the historic foundations. This was also set using NAD
Figure 4. Excavations in progress at site 41CC328.
83 and was E0420600 N33449367.

RESULTS
All units were in a semicircle around the spring, northeast of the area with large quantities of burned
rock. Unit N991 E995 was dug to a depth of 58 centimeters. The soil was primarily dark, sandy loam
throughout the unit. The unit's surface elevation was 92.43 meters. In the first eight centimeters there were
a few primary and secondary chert flakes with fire cracked limestone (Table 1). Chert cores and clear bottle
glass were also present. Secondary and finishing flakes were in the top 2-3 centimeters of the level.
However, there was a marked reduction of lithic artifacts in Level 2, and fire cracked rock (FCR) was
absent. In Level 3, FCR was again present as well as a mixture of historic pottery shards, bottle glass, bone,
and chert debitage. In the fourth level, there was evidence of repeated and sustained fires based on the FCR,
lime chalk, non-structural daub in the dark sandy loam matrix. One small semicircular scraper that was
extensively worked was found with 54 pieces of chert debitage and 3 sherds of clear bottle glass. Level 5
yielded large pieces of FCR in dark sandy loam with two bone fragments of a medium size animal, and 32
chert flakes of various sizes. Level 6 was basically sterile except for 10 small pieces of debitage. The unit
was closed and back filled at this point.
Unit N906 E977 was located near the house foundation area. This unit was dug to 55 centimeters from
datum elevation of 99.95 meters. The first level contained mixed historic artifacts with a few prehistoric

260

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Artifacts Recovered from Unit N991 E995.

Level

Depth
(cm)

Debitage/
Flakes

Other

1

8

few

FCR, cores

2

18

few

3

28

40

FCR

4

38

54

preform,
scraper,
FCR

5

48

32

FCR

6

58

10

Metal

Glass

Teeth/
Bone

Pottery

few

10

4
3

2

artifacts in a dark, sandy loam matrix (Table 2). Artifacts from the level included a wire nail, copper clasp,
iron fitting, 20 sherds of clear bottle glass and two sherds of blue green (Coca Cola) bottle glass, sherds of
porcelain and white glazed earthenware pottery, a high number of pieces of chert debitage, one base of a
broken dart point, a chert drill, and bone. In Level 2 the historical artifacts were absent but, as Table 2
shows, there were significant quantities of debitage, along with 16 bone fragments of various sized animals.
The level also contained two mussel shell fragments, one semicircular chert scraper, and one broken spear
point tip. Level 3 contained an even higher quantity of lithic artifacts in a dark, sandy loam matrix. The
flakes consisted of 13 primary and 80 secondary flakes. Four bone fragments were recovered. In addition to
these, one chert scraper, two point bases, one chert drill or awl, and one sherd of white glazed earthenware
were recovered (Figure 5). Soil in Level 4 changed from dark sandy loam to medium brown sandy loam
with ash, tiny charcoal pieces and few artifacts. One human juvenile bicuspid, one tusk (possibly of boar),
six bone fragments, 36 pieces of debitage and one projectile point perform were recovered. The final level
contained what appeared to be a small hearth in medium brown sandy loam (Feature 1). The matrix of the
feature contained small flecks of ash and charcoal. The charcoal was too small to collect a sample. The
interior of the hearth was approximately 20 centimeters wide. In this level there was one unfinished point of
indeterminate type, one small end scraper, one bone fragment, one mussel shell fragment, and four thinning
flakes. After photos were taken and drawings made the unit was back filled.
Table 2. Artifacts Recovered from Unit N 906 E997.
Depth
(cm)

Debitage/
Flakes

Points

Other

15

74

1

chert drill

2

25

80

1

scraper

3

35

93

2

scraper, awl

4

45

36

preform

5

55

4

preform, scraper

Level

Shell

Metal

Glass

Pottery

Teeth/
Bone

3

22

5

3

2

16
1

4
8

1

1

Highlighting the Society

261

Unit N935 E977 was on the south edge of the
presumed house foundation with a surface elevation of 99 .17 meters. This was one of the early
ranch buildings constructed prior to the 1930s. There
is a photo of this house in the 1940s with girls
"kodaking" on a Sunday afternoon (i.e., taking photographs) and the well is visible in the background
(Figure 6). The unit was placed on the presumed
stoop or porch area of the house. Level one was
dug to 15 centimeters. As expected, many of the
artifacts were historic and probably related to the
house. Flat window glass sherds were prominent
(n = 67). Other historic artifacts include a brown
clay marble, a rusted knife blade measuring 16
centimeters long by two centimeters at its widest
Figure 5. Projectile point fragments and drill/awl
part, white glazed pottery sherds, the lip and neck
recovered from unit N906 E977.
of a clear glass bottle with "o" marking on the side,
and two metal nail-like pieces of metal (one possibly a square nail). Prehistoric artifacts include one mussel shell and 20 pieces of debitage. Level 2 had a
damp, dark loamy matrix containing 186 pieces of debitage, two dart fragments with well worked bifacial
edges (possibly Frio or Uvalde [Turner and Hester 1985:100,155]), one large chert core, and one unifacial
flint scraper (Figure 7). Level 3 was a dark sandy loam containing 80 pieces of chert consisting of 20 large
chert flakes and 60 pieces of debitage. Other artifacts include a unifacial scraper, one point base, and one
dart point. The next level was dug to a depth of 45 centimeters and it contained 52 debitage, four bone
fragments and a point base. In level 5, dug to a depth of 55 centimeters, there were 54 small pieces of
debitage with two small shell fragments. The lower eight centimeters of this level were sterile so it was
decided to close this unit and backfill the dirt.
Table 3. Artifacts Recovered from Unit N 935 E977.

Level

Depth
(cm)

Debitage/
Flakes

1

15

20

2

25

186

2

scraper, core

3

35

80

2

scraper

4

45

52

5

55

54

Points

Other

Shell

clay marble

Metal

Glass

Pottery

3

79

6

Teeth/
Bone

3
2
4

2

Another unit was opened 40 meters east from N906 E977. It was called "hitching post unit" for
simplicity. Unlike most of the other units, no pottery was recovered from this unit. Moreover, overall
recovery in the hitching post unit was smaller than in the other four units. In Level 1 of this unit the soil was
a dark, sandy loam. The flakes were of various sizes. One flake could be the center portion of a point or
blade. Several metal pieces (including two fence staples, one 12 gauge shotgun shell base, and one piece of
glass with the initials "U.S.") were also recovered. Level 2, dug to a depth of 20 centimeters, had soil that
was the same dark sandy loam but damper than in Level 1. This level contained a higher quantity of chert
than the first level, of which 11 were large chert spalls. A piece of hematite or ferrous sandstone was also

262

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Tolls recovered from unit
N935E977, level 2: top, scraper;
bottom, dart point fragments.

Figure 6. 1940s photograph of house and well near where unit N935E977
was placed (photograph courtesy of landowner).

recovered. Level 3 was in the same dark, sandy loam containing several small, decomposed bone fragments,
one fence staple, and 25 pieces of debitage. Level 4 was dug to a depth of 40 centimeters of dark, sandy
loam. In addition to 48 flakes, the level contained three mammal teeth and one point base (Figure 8). The
matrix of Level 5 was a loose sandy, loam containing 82 flakes of various sizes, 29 bone fragments (most
less than 3 centimeters), one large possible bison tooth, one large mussel shell, one lower quarter of a lance
point resembling a Firstview, Midland, Milnesand or Scottsbluff. It has a fine parallel flaking and the "flat
foot" of the Scottsbluff, but the base is more angled to the outside than is normal with Scottsbluff. In
addition, one triangular point (possibly an Early Triangular) that has been pitted and abused from fire
(Figure 9) was recovered. Level 6 was sterile.
The final unit was opened next to the "hitching post unit." That unit was 39 meters east of N906 E977.
It was dug in 10 centimeter units from surface to a depth of only 30 centimeters. It was closed at this point
due to a prediction of rain on the already saturated soil. Level I was freely mixed with historic and lithic
artifacts (Table 5). In addition to flakes, the level had three pieces of wire, two pieces of oxidized iron, one
clothing grommet, two square nails, one white porcelain sherd, four pieces of bone, and one unguent tooth.
Level 2 had similar items but the historic artifacts decreased in proportion to the prehistoric although this
Table 4. Artifacts Recovered from the Hitching Post Un.it.

Depth (cm)

Debitage/
Flakes

1

10

31

2

20

68

Level

3

30

25

4

40

48

5

50

82

Points

Other

Shell

Metal

Glass

Teeth/
Bone

5
hematite/
sandstone

3
3

FCR
2

3
1

Highlighting the Society

263

Figure 8. Lithic and bone artifacts from the
Hitching Post, level 4.

Figure 9. Selected artifacts from the-Hitching Post, level 5.

level had the highest quantity of nails and other construction-related artifacts within the site. There were 32
square nails, two wire nails, one brass rivet, and eight unidentified pieces of ferrous metal. The pottery
sherds consisted of one sherd of tan slipware and one of white glazed stoneware. Prehistoric artifacts
consisted of a depleted chert core, one unifacial scraper, one possible mano fragment, 15 animal bone
fragments, one piece of sandstone, and 200 flakes. Level 3 was in a dark brown, loamy soil containing two
mussel shell fragments, a possible awl, point tip of chert artifact, a pestle like rock, 95 flakes, one small
preform and 11 bone fragments.

Table 5. Artifacts Recovered from the "Adjacent to Hitching Post" Unit.

Depth
(cm)

Debitage/
Flakes

l

10

9

2

20

200

scraper, core,
mano?, sandstone

3

30

95

awl, preform,
pestle?

Level

Points

Other

Shell

2

Pottery

Teeth/
Bone

8

I

5

43

2

16

Metal

Glass

11

CONCLUSIONS
41CC328 is a site that has been used through the centuries by many people. By using arbitrary and
controlled surface surveys and five test units, we found that the site has a mixture of historic and prehistoric
artifacts, much as we had predicted. Bone, teeth, fire cracked rock, debitage from construction of chert
tools and performs and scrapers were found that would have supported prehistoric activities at the site.
Historically, this spring site was home for early ranching activity in Concho County after 1880. The land at
the site has not been radically disturbed by root plowing, a common practice in this part of Texas that can
severely impact archeological deposits. However, east of the site are two caliche pits made by the highway
department in the 1930s and 1950s for highway improvements.

264

Texas Archeological Society

The soil at the site is predominantly silty clay loam. (Clower and Dowell 1988:51-58). It is dark brown
ranging from 7.5YR 4/2 to 7.5 YR 3/2 and dark brown lOYR 4/2 with a moderately fine granular structure.
On the slopes of the site the soil runs from shallow, calcariferous and rocky to a gradual deeper, silty clay
loam as the ground approaches the spring and boggy area around the spring. These soils are consistent with
primarily live oak, pecan and mesquite trees; grama, Bermuda, bluestem, heavy tridens and buffalo grasses;
and prickly pear, tasajilla, Engleman daisy, agarita, and horehound.
Historically, this region was used in the early statehood of Texas with cavalry posts scattered at
intervals throughout the county. Early ranching began in the late 1880s, and modem ranching of cattle,
sheep and goats continues today. At the site itself, there are two small protruding foundations that appear to
represent structures in close proximity to a hand-dug water well. Window glass and other artifacts from a
unit placed near one of the foundations were consistent with photographs taken around 1940s on the porch
of the ranch house.
There is a large quantity of fire cracked rock throughout the site with an increased concentration
northwest of the spring. The entire site is also littered with lithic material, ranging from cores and preforms
to finely chipped points and debitage. Fire cracked rock is also evident with reddish and black coloration
and sharp edges. The site is represented by artifacts from the Paleo-Indian with the possible Scottsbluff
(7120 B.C. to 6650 B.C.); Martindale (4000 B.C. to 1000 A.D.), Nolan (4000 B.C. to 2500 B.C.), and
possible Early Triangular (3700 B.C. to 3600 B.C); (Turner and Hester 1985:89, 100, 120-121, 126, 132,
139-140, 150-151, 155, 189). Scallorn arrow points associated with the late Prehistoric era (A.D.700 to
1200) were numerous on the surface and in the landowners' collection of the site. A fire pit or hearth
(Feature 1) was noted in one test unit and a soil change believed to be evidence charring was noted in the
unit placed in the area of the concentration of burnt rock. As mentioned, the site is approximately 150
meters from site 41CC298 that contains 45 known mortar holes. Due to their proximity, it is possible that
the some of the occupants of site 41 CC328 also contributed to the construction and use of the mortar holes
at41CC298.

FUTURE OF THE SITE
The owner plans to leave the site as it is and allow no disturbance by current ranch operations. The
hope is for little future disturbance as well. She hopes to one day create a museum of some of the ranch
outbuildings with the items collected from the site to preserve the heritage of the area for future landowners. The family was delightful to work with and have become avid avocational archeologists with education
and preservation being their primary goal. This appears to be a rich site and one which the landowner and
the CV AS may partnership to further explore and educate its members.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thanks to Dan Potter of the THC, the landowner, and members of the CV AS who helped with this
testing and recording of site 41CC328. The CVAS members included Jack Woodrow, Bill Yeates, Brownie
Roberts, Fred Braziel, Jack Pool, Michele Hester, Virginia Hudspeth, Andrew Verley, Birk Stathers, Tim
and Bonnie Brewster, Fred and Kay Campbell, Gary Heumier, Judy Hall, Lindsey Skelton, Sara Seals,
Margaret Loveless, Ward Gregory and Alice Stultz. Margaret and Ben M. Cox and Red and Ivie Spiller
visited the site. Ward Gregory, Bill Yeates and Alice Stultz were photographers. Andrew Verley and Jack
Pool were crew chiefs. Thanks to Claude Hudspeth, regional representative to Texas Archeology Society
(TAS) and Steward with THC, for requesting funds from TAS for latrines for the survey. Thanks to TAS
for providing these funds.

Highlighting the Society

265

NOTES
1. A section is one square mile.
2. Because of concerns about unauthorized access to the site, the landowner has requested that a general site
location map be omitted.

REFERENCES CITED
Clower, Dennis F., and G.S. Dowell,III,
1988 Soil Survey of Concho County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

The Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press, College Station
(2004), iii+ 471 pp.

Reviewed by Elton R. Prewitt

This 471-page folio volume is a moreextensively edited and updated sequel to the 1995
edition of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society. In editor Timothy K. Perttula's words, "Our
primary goal is to record and communicate, in one
accessible source, what has been learned (and what
we still do not know) about all aspects of Texas
archeology from about 1950 to 2000." While many
of the individual chapters are updated versions of the
1995 volume, some are completely new chapters.
The book accomplishes that stated goal, and is
destined to be an essential reference for the foreseeable future. That is not to say that the volume
does not have its problems-it does. In giving the
1950 to 2000 range for an update, we are led to
expect a fuller review of findings during that 50year period since the Handbook of Texas Archeology was published (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954),
but in reality, the emphasis is upon what has been
learned since a late 1980s multi-volume overview
funded by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers was
published. That multi-volume set is a limited edition series in the so-called "gray literature" of contract archeology that is not readily accessible to the
public. In fairness to the authors, though, their reliance upon that series varies greatly within the individual chapters.
In keeping with tradition, I will first describe
the contents of this book, and make mostly positive
comments as I go along. The amount of detail I
provide for each chapter varies in relation to how
widely the region is known, and how much new
synthesis is provided. This is minimal in some chapters, and prodigious in others. Then, I will make a
few specific comments about perceived problems
at the end of the review. So, if you want to know
what is in the book, read the first part of the review;
if you want the irritating snippets that irk me, then
read the second part. Better yet, just go ahead and
read both.
Perttula organized the book into six parts
comprised of 13 chapters followed by the references

cited and a page g1vmg information about the
authors. An acknowledgements page following the
table of contents recognizes key individuals and
their contributions to the production of the volume.
Individual chapters end with a short acknowledgements section. Part One is titled "Texas Prehistory"
and contains two chapters. The first chapter is "An
Introduction to Texas Prehistoric Archeology" by
Perttula in which he summarizes the history of
important syntheses of Texas archeology, and accurately states the need for the present volume. The
second half of the introduction describes the organization of the volume. It is organized primarily upon
physiographic regions, and secondarily upon
specific cultural complexes within single or adjacent
regions. This follows traditional treatments of
Texas, for better or for worse. Table 1.1 presents a
very useful summary of chronological schemes for
eleven regions and shows the variability currently
in vogue across the state, while a series of figures
illustrate the archeologic, physiographic, and biotic
regions. Other figures identify important archeological sites during the Paleoindian, Archaic, and
Late Prehistoric periods.
Chapter Two is entitled "Paleoindian Archeology in Texas" and is written by C. Britt Bousman,
Barry W. Baker, and Anne C. Kerr. This comprehensive summary first reviews the history of Early
Man studies in Texas, then embarks upon a detailed
analysis of projectile point forms found within that
period. Statistical analyses are used to suggest a
reclassification of selected lanceolate dart points.
Key Paleoindian sites are reviewed with both descriptions and discussions of geologic stratigraphy.
A section on "Absolute Chronology" follows in
which extremely detailed descriptions are provided
for the Paleoindian date sequence, and which includes tables of radiocarbon date analyses. A section called "Components and Site Distributions"
contains a huge table listing known Paleoindian
sites and their recorded components extracted from
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

Reviews 267

(TARL) files at The University of Texas at Austin.
A series of maps follows this in which sites with
specific types of projectile points are plotted. A
section on "Subsistence" discusses foodstuffs in a
more comprehensive manner than most of those
normally seen in treatises dealing with Paleoindianage remains. Particularly useful is another large
table listing the primary faunal remains found at
the many Texas Paleoindian sites. A short section
describing the scant human remains known from
this period is followed by another short section,
"Assemblage Comparisons and Lithic Technology."
The tables provide quantitative comparisons of artifact assemblages and comparisons of source materials from which the artifacts are manufactured.
A very short discussion on transitions into the Archaic period ends the chapter.
Part Two, "The Hunter-Gatherers of the Central
and Southern Texas Prairies and Plains," also contains two chapters and is led off by Chapter Three,
"Archeology of Central Texas," prepared by Michael
B. Collins. He states he eschews a synthesis in favor
of a critique of practice, a summation of what we
currently know, and a consideration of ways by
which we can learn more before a succeeding synthesis is written. It is good that he reiterates that, by
whatever names they are called, chronological constructs are essential. This leads into a description of
Central Texas as an archeological area, and about
the chronology that has been constructed as well as
other accomplishments. This is followed by a discussion of the French term "gisement" and its' application to the region. While I bridle at being urged
to use this term, the discussion of deep stratified
sites is very good in light of the excellent chronological charts provided to illustrate the fascinating
time depth and vertical control found in Central
Texas. His preference for the term "interval" for
chronological segments is something that bears serious consideration. The following synthesis is indeed brief considering the vast data available, but
the illustrations of key chronologically sensitive artifacts are parsimoniously chosen to illustrate the
many changes through time evident in this region.
The concluding section challenges practitioners to
look more closely at such things as plant and animal
remains directly instead of using tools as proxies for
infen-ing generalized adaptations.
Chapter Four, "The Prehistory of South
Texas," by Thomas R. Hester defines the highly
variable region succinctly and provides a brief
description of historical biotic changes before

embarking upon a description of "The Nature of
the South Texas Archeological Record" in which
the geomorphic character-and problems-of sites
in the region is summarized. The contrasts with
the Central Texas region helps one understand the
difficulties encountered in teasing out the
geological and cultural history in this area. The
following "Cultural-Historical Framework"
summarizes the chronology and illustrates key
artifacts found in each time period. Hester's use
of the term "horizon" is a bit askew to the
preceding chapter, but if one mentally inserts
"interval" wherever "horizon" is used, it is much
less jarring to the senses. The array of artifacts
illustrated is greater than the previous chapter,
and it is good to see items other than lithics
properly illustrated. The discussions of shell
artifacts, and of the subregion of the Rio Grande
Delta are welcome inclusions.
Part III is titled "Coastal Groups" and contains
two chapters written by Robert A. Ricklis. Chapter
Five, "Prehistoric Occupations of the Central and
Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview, "begins
with a review of key site excavations and syntheses
that emphasize the contributions made by T. N.
Campbell, Dee Ann Story, and James E. Corbin."
Ricklis then defines the Central Texas Coast as a
region, and summarizes its physiographic evolution during the late Pleistocene and throughout the
Holocene geological periods. The discussion of
chronology begins with a rejection of the previous
concept of an Aransas focus, phase, or complex
during the Archaic period; he also rejects
Weinstein's more recent proposed series of phases
as inherently flawed due to inadequate definition.
The Late Prehistoric-age Rockport phase is seen as
the archeological correlate of the historic ethnic
group known as Karankawa. A brief discussion of
radiocarbon dating includes Table 5.1 that lists 81
assays thought to be in good cultural and stratigraphic eontexts (62 of these are from Ricklis' own
work) that extend over 7,000 years B.P. (corrected).
The Early Archaic occupations are discussed
relative to shoreline occupations during specific
time intervals as documented by the radiocarbon
dates presented in Table 5.1. This is a very effective manner of presentation, and drives home the
relationship between human occupations on the
coast and global climatic events that control environmental conditions in the region. Figure 5.7
graphically demonstrates the radiocarbon sequence
in relation to sea level rises, stillstands, and

268

Texas Archeological Society

highstands. Examples of stone and shell tools of the
Early Archaic period are well illustrated. The
Middle Archaic coincides with a probable sea level
highstand, and evidence of occupation during this
time is ephemeral. The Late Archaic sees a surge in
shellfish utilization, especially moderate to high
salinity species such as oyster, scallop, sunray
venus, quahog, and lightning whelk. Abundant fish
remains, attested by the numbers of otoliths (literally, ear stones; actually, ear bones) per square
meter, are seen toward the end of the Late Archaic
as illustrated by Figures 5 .11 and 5.12. Diagnostic
stone tools illustrated include a variety of both triangular unstemmed and stemmed dart points, while
shell tools include whelk whorl (outer body) adzes
and hammers as well as whelk columella (central
spiral column) gouges (again, probably adzes).
Some bone tools, including socketed points and
awls or flaking tools, are also illustrated. Basketry
is known through impressions left in burned clay
and in asphaltum lumps and it is during this time
that formal cemeteries become common.
The Late Prehistoric period is divided into an
earlier Initial and a later Final subperiod. The Initial Late Prehistoric is characterized by triangular
arrow points, corner-notched arrow points as well
as plain sandy-past ceramics and, toward the end of
the subperiod, by the locally distinct Rockport ware
ceramics. Subsistence remains are overwhelmingly
dominated by shellfish and fish, which reflect the
natural bounty of the estuarine environment. The
Final subperiod equates with the Toyah phase/horizon/interval of adjacent inland Central Texas. Contracting stem Perdiz type arrow points and lithic
tools associated with bison hunting and processing
are added to the resident coastal tool kit. The
Rockport ceramics become more elaborate in this
subperiod, and bison bones are added to the deer
bones, shellfish, and fish remains that demonstrate
the meat protein diet of the coastal zone residents.
Ricklis follows this by presentation of a model illustrating the long-term human responses to rapid
environmental changes in the Coastal Bend region.
As presented in Figure 5.24, Ricklis has developed
a simple elegant model that illustrates the complexities of life along the coastal zone very effectively. This chapter ends with a brief discussion of
the lower portion of the Texas Coast, including the
Rio Grande Delta. It is unfortunate that this area is
not treated in detail, but in light of Hester's previous chapter, this can be forgiven. It is quite interesting to note, though, that Ricklis finds merit in

the resource zone adaptation models presented by
Tomka and Bousman (1990), and gives a thoughtprovoking discussion of that model, in contrast to
Hester's previous chapter in which the attention is
given to the mechanics of trade between the Rio
Grande Delta peoples and the peoples of the
Huastecan region to the south.
Chapter Six, also written by Ricklis, deals with
"The Archeology of the Native American Occupation of Southeast Texas." A definition of the area of
concern, which bridges four major ecotones in a
cross-hair fashion, concludes with a declaration that
the chapter will focus on selected work that postdates the syntheses and overviews provided by Aten
(1983) and Story (1990). A brief description of the
modern environment segues into a discussion of
paleoenvironmental change that relies heavily upon
geomorphology for a review of long term climate
change and the relationship of Holocene sea level
fluctuation with the evolution of the modern coastal
environment. Figure 6.2 illustrating the currently hypothesized relative sea level is particularly informative, and sets the stage discussing the archeology.
Little is known about the Paleoindian period
along the Texas Gulf coast since most items of that
age have been found either in surface contexts,
eroded contexts (such as McFaddin Beach locality), or in mixed deposits where materials are commingled with those of Archaic age. That Paleoindian
people lived in the region is not disputed; the problem identified is that no one has found a discrete
component of that age to provide reliable information about what the inhabitants were doing (other
than using projectile points such as Clovis, Folsom,
San Patrice, Scottsbluff, and such). His discussion
of the inland Archaic is not much more detailed,
but does include a generalized projectile point sequence for the region (Figure 6.3). Among other
things, I am a bit surprised at the age ascribed to the
Neches River and Trinity dart point types; I should
think their position should be reversed with that of
the Bell/Andice/Calf Creek, but this reflects the
difficulty of producing a Central Texas-type chronology in an area dominated by mixed, bioturbated
sandy deposits. The description of Late Archaic
large cemeteries is concise and accurate. The coastal
Archaic, which begins about 5,000 B.P., is treated
in a bit more detail, and includes (in addition to
shellfish) information about relatively abundant vertebrate fauna! remains which are lacking in the
inland sites. Bone and shell tools, ornaments, and
other items are common relative to the sparse lithics

Reviews 269

that occur in the lithics-poor region. A discussion
called "Holocene Evolution of the coastal Environment and Human Shoreline Occupation during the
Archaic" gives well-reasoned details about the relationships of people, resources, shorelines, and their
complex interactions, and is backed up by excellent
graphics relating radiocarbon dated components to
sea level rises, highstands, and stillstands.
Ricklis treats the Ceramic Period in more detail than the Archaic, and meshes recent work with
a lot of information derived from Aten's work
regarding chronology and diachronic trends on the
upper coast. This is divided into Early Ceramic
and Late Prehistoric periods, and well illustrated
with charts, lithic tool forms, and the myriad variations of ceramic vessel forms and decorative motifs. The Mitchell Ridge Site is used to discuss
"Demographic and Cultural Change during
Protohistoric and Early Historic Times." Included
are illustrations of elaborate bone and shell musical instruments and ornaments as well as lithic
tools. A summary of the Ceramic Period relates
cmTent information to the Mossy Grove Tradition
and includes recent proposed models that describe
settlement and subsistence patterns. The chapter
ends with a summary that suggests key points for
continued regional research, led by suggestions
regarding poor chronological controls in the inland area and learning more about understanding
the radiocarbon calibration needed on estuarine
shell assays, and ending with a plea Jo look east of
the Sabine River to develop understanding of the
relationship with upper coastal people with those
inhabiting what is now southern Lousisiana.
Part IV, titled "The Desert Archeology of Western Texas," again is comprised of two chapters.
Chapter Seven, written by Myles R. Miller and
Nancy A. Kenmotsu, is called "Prehistory of the
Jornada Mogollon and Eastern Trans-Pecos Regions
of West Texas," is one of the longer chapters in the
volume. The reason for the length is quickly explained as they review the previous research and
show that a comprehensive synthesis has not been
forthcoming since the mid-Twentieth century. They
specifically opt to present a dual approach wherein
an overall cultural-historical structure is maintained,
but emphasize trends in "settlement mobility and
landscape use, changes in subsistence economies
as reflected in dependence upon domesticated versus no-domesticated plants and animals, and how
changes in technology, settlement structure, and
social organization reflect the evolution of these

settlement and subsistence systems." That is a tall
order, but one upon which they deliver due in no
small part to their inclusion of considerable illuminating data from the adjacent states of New Mexico
and Chihuahua.
The environment and climate of the region,
which is situated in the basin and range physiographic province, is reviewed first and is followed
by a concise section titled "Status of Archeological
Investigations and Background for Inquiry." Data
on site density and distribution are presented along
with numbers of radiocarbon dates and dated sites
by county, which is paired with a distribution map,
provide background for a traditional cultural historical figure correlating the relative sequences in
the Eastern and Western Trans-Pecos subregions.
Pre-Clovis (or Pre-Projectile Point) evidence is reviewed and shown to be lacking in substance. Detailed data are presented for the Paleoindian Period,
and is divided into discussions of Clovis, Folsom,
and Late Paleoindian manifestations. This is followed by a thorough discussion of the Archaic Period that is packed with references. As with many
areas, the Early Archaic is found to be difficult to
deal with due to a paucity of quality data; much of
the better stratigraphic relationships come from
three rockshelters in New Mexico and one deeply
buried site near Balmorhea. Figure 7 .11 illustrates
projectile point forms for the entire Archaic in the
region, but formal names are not provided even
though several names are used in the text. The
Middle Archaic Period also suffers from a lack of
quality data during the early portions, but open
sites on alluvial fans are shown to have yielded
greater amounts of data for the later part of the
period. In addition to thermal features, small habitation structures are documented at this time, and
radiocarbon support from several sites is illustrated.
The Late Archaic is shown to have experienced a
significant increase in features, numbers of sites,
and an inferred increase in population accompanied
by expansion into a greater range of ecological
zones. The development of horticulture and agriculture during this period is thoroughly discussed,
and includes tabulation of radiocarbon assays performed on corn samples. A range of other economically important plants are identified that show distinct changes in subsistence patterns. An excellent
comparison is made contrasting the emerging dependence upon agriculture in the Western TransPecos versus the continuation of some variation of
hunting and gathering in the Eastern Trans-Pecos.

270

Texas Archeological Society

The Archaic section concludes with a presentation
of general trends during the period. Settlement and
demographic trends are illustrated with a series of
five sets of summed radiocarbon probability samples
and a chart comparing projectile point forms by
distribution and through time. Data is also presented illustrating changes relating to projectile
point form and technology changes; these focus on
haft configurations and blade edge characteristics.
Regional interaction is examined by looking at
quantities and sources of raw materials.
Considerable discussion is presented for the
Formative/Late Prehistoric Period, beginning with
a detailed examination of the internal chronology.
Problems are aired regarding traditional tripartite
terminologies, and how various developments occur at different times, thus crosscutting commonly
used phase names and chronological divisions based
upon architectural styles. Probably more importantly, they point out that increased agricultural
specialization seems to have occurred between about
A.D. 1250 and A.D 1450. Descriptions of architectural forms explores the variations in structural
forms, beginning with rounded semi-subteITanean,
then to single square or rectangular, to multi-feature room blocks, and how these vary through time
and by settlement/subsistence characteristics. The
succeeding discussions on dating the architectural
sequence are effectively illustrated by summed
probability histograms of both radiocarbon and
archeomagnetic assays. Radiocarbon assay results
are used for the La Junta area around Presidio. A
review of variations in settlement layout presents
intriguing changes in intensity of use of certain
areas (and supposedly resource zones). Figure 7.25
is a fascinating radiometric histogram illustrating
the relationships among pithouse floor contexts,
secondary trash deposits, and rock-lined thermal
features. The complex relationships of plazas, villages, and extramural features are also considered.
This segues into settlement pattern and land uses
that presents the Fort Bliss segment of the Tularosa
Basin in New Mexico as a model. Once again,
summed radiocarbon probability histograms are
used effectively to illustrate changes in land use
patterns (Figure 7 .28). The following discussion of
Formative Period subsistence patterns focuses on
the variability between domestic and non-domestic
food plants since faunal resource data are scarce.
Technological patterns during this period include a
discussion of thermal and storage features whose
trends are effectively illustrated through summed

radiocarbon probability histograms. The essentials
of ground stone are followed by a similar treatment
of ceramics (this is not a guide to ceramics identification), and brief mention is made of variations in
aITow point styles.
The next section discusses the general Late
Prehistoric developments in the Eastern TransPecos, which saw relatively little work between
1940 and about 1980. Essentially, the Archaic
lifeways continued in this region, but sites like Wind
Canyon are used to show regional interaction between the agriculturalists and non-agriculturalists.
The pithouse villages near La Junta are described,
as are the circular stone structures ascribed to the
Cielo Complex. The section concludes with mention of various aITow point styles and their utility in
examining extra-regional interactions. The chapter
concludes with a section dealing with the PostPueblo through Early Spanish Colonial Period. The
near-abandonment of the El Paso region is contrasted with the rectangular multi-room structures
near La Junta and the circular Cielo Complex structures that occur near and to the east of La Junta.
While the structures near La Junta can be linked to
the historically identified Patarabueyes, the Cielo
Complex circular structures are not conclusively
associated with the Jumano, nor have structures
related to the historically known Manso and Suma
been conclusively identified in the Lower Valley
area of El Paso. Establishment of missions in the
A.D. l.600s and the relocation of groups subsequent to the Pueblo Revolt of 1680 are described,
and a detailed review of faunal, floral, and stmctural remains from this period end the section. A
short Summary ends the chapter with a reminder
that the Jornada Mogollon and Eastern Trans-Pecos
should not be overlooked as a fertile place to examine numerous aspects of prehistory and history that
are essential to understanding what is happening in
adjacent regions.
Chapter Eight, by Solveig A. Turpin, is entitled
"The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and
Northern Mexico." She describes the area centered
on the confluence of the Pecos River with the Rio
Grande as the smallest of the defined archeological
regions, and attributes the definition to its
association with the extent of distinctive rock art
found in the rugged canyons. A reiteration of the
strong ties between hunter-gatherer adaptations and
environmental factors leads into a brief review of
the regional Holocene climatic conditions. Regional
variability in dependable water sources, and the

Reviews 271

paucity of quality data in the southern half of the
region (northern Coahuila), still allows the
conclusion that the region as a whole shared a single
belief system as expressed in the rock art. A review
of other geologic factors affecting the archeological
record is followed by mention of known historic
changes in geomorphology and biota, ending with
the observation that the composition of extant flora
and fauna are the product of modern livestock
husbandry. A basic history of archeological research
includes reference to over 300 radiocarbon assays
from the area, and the current chronological
framework is illustrated (Figure 8.1 ). The introductory section ends with a description of two competing models interpreting the prehistoric adaptations in the region.
The remainder of this chapter reviews the chronological sequence in descending order of Period
and Subperiod, beginning with the Paleoindian that
is divided into three subperiods. The inclusion of
the pre-12,000 B.P. Aurora Subperiod based upon
two sites may prove controversial, but the remains
at Bonfire Shelter and Cueva Quebrada cannot be
totally ignored at the behest of the Clovis first theorists. The Bonfire Subperiod is based on Bone Bed
2 at Bonfire Shelter where extinct bison are found
to have been killed with a variety of projectile point
styles, including Folsom and Plainview, during a
mesic climatic period. Late Paleoindian is included
within the Oriente Subperiod where broad resource
procurement strategies are reflected. Notably, the
earliest known fiber or textile industry appears during this time. The Archaic is divided into the obligatory early, middle, and late, with subperiods assigned to these broad subdivisions. Entrenchment
of the local adaptation is seen in the Early Archaic,
a period during which drought and erosion were
experienced in the region. The presence-and useof rockshelters as habitation sites preserved human
waste in the semi-arid desert environment in a way
that is only dreamed of in other regions. Thus,
features such as latrines and artifacts of wood, fiber, and bone provide detailed information not available in adjacent areas. Changes in the fiber industry, projectile points and other tools, and mortuary
practices are reviewed through the succeeding
subperiods of the Archaic. Notable is the abrupt
appearance ofL.ower Pecos River style polychrome
rock paintings beginning at the outset of the San
Felipe Subperiod about 4100 B.P. Several things
cause Turpin to argue for increasing regionalization
of the people during the Early and Middle Archaic.

She postulates increased population stressed by
limiting ecological factors, and presents two competing models to explain responses that might ex plain the appearance of rock art as a communication
device that relieves social tension and competition.
Abrupt changes are noted in the Late Archaic
beginning with the Cibola Subperiod when bison
reappeared in the region during a mesic climatic
interval. Tools and rock art styles (the Red Linear
style) leads to a suggestion of an influx of new
people, but whether they replaced the previous
residents or coexisted with them is left open to
further examination. A return to drier conditions
in the Flanders and Blue Hills Subperiods are again
associated with changes in tool and rock art styles.
Once again, regional intensification is suggested
to correlate with broad resource procurement, diversified diet, and mobility within the environment. The Late Prehistoric sees the introduction
of the bow and arrow during the Flecha Subperiod,
and the appearance of Red Monochrome sty le rock
art. Notably, ring middens seem to consistently
yield radiocarbon dates of this subperiod even
though much older projectile point styles are also
associated with these food processing facilities. A
case is also made for foreign incursion based on
mortuary customs as well as clothing and adornment styles displayed in the rock art. The Infierno
Phase ends the prehistoric discussion. It is characterized by stone circles representing pole anchors(?) w;ed for shelters such as wikiups or possibly small tipis. The tool kit is characterized by
flake blade projectile points, steeply beveled end
scrapers, and ceramics. Turpin suggests these are
intrusive peoples, possibly representing a prehistoric expression of the historically described annual hunting trips to the mouth of the Pecos River
by people from northern Mexico. While the widespread Toyah phase/horizon/tradition to the north
and east is mentioned as a partial correlate, no
comparisons are made with the similar age Cielo
Complex to the west.
The Historic Period briefly describes the Plains
Biographic style of rock art and Spanish accounts
of the region. Mention is made of the construction
of the southern transcontinental railroad in the early
1880s and the subsequent opening of the region to
Anglo-American settlement and the beginning of
the ranching industry. Historic Period archeology
describes the minimal investigations made to date
of both Native American and non-native sites and
objects. Turpin ends the chapter with a concise

272

Texas Archeological Society

summary that ties the dynamics of the region into a
coherent whole.
Part IV is entitled "The Hunters and Farmers
of the High Plains and Canyonlands" and contains
three chapters. Eileen Johnson and Vance T.
Holliday wrote Chapter Nine, "Archeology and Late
Quaternary Environments of the Southern High
Plains." The opening remarks of this chapter makes
it clear that the authors are focused on the
Paleoindian Period, and that data from a half-dozen
sites (most especially, Lubbock Lake), will dominate their discussions. They provide a concise description of the Southern High Plains setting before
embarking on a description of the "Cultural and
Environmental Chronology." They recognize five
general time periods for the region, including
Paleoindian, Archaic, Ceramic, Protohistoric, and
Historic. The section on the Paleoindian Period is a
comprehensive summary of a great quantity of data
amassed from the region, including the adjacent
eastern New Mexico portions. Descriptions of the
paleoenvironmental record are woven into the cultural discussions, beginning with Clovis. Primary
sites are used to illustrate both the environment and
the cultural adaptations through each of the succeeding subperiods, including Folsom and Late
Paleoindian. Explicit radiocarbon dates are interspersed liberally in the text. Illustrations of stratigraphic columns are supplemented by photos of
various types of projectile points showing variations through time. It is evident that a lot of thought
and care went into the preparation of this excellent
summary of an extensive subject.
The Archaic Period describes the regional
drying trend that was accompanied by localized
desiccation and aeolian deposition subsequent to
the more mesic environment enjoyed during
Paleoindian times. Precious little is know about the
Early Archaic of this region, and even less is known
about the Middle Archaic, a time that coincides
with the Altithermal when conditions were hot, dry,
and dusty to the point that massive aeolian
deposition occurred. The Late Archaic is somewhat
better known; climatic conditions eased during this
period, and greater amounts of surface water and
vegetation made the region more inhabitable. A
few bison kill sites are known in addition to more
traditional habitation sites during this period, and
the scanty data are supplemented with references to
the Lake Alan Henry investigations just off the
edge of the High Plains and downstream from
Lubbock Lake. The Ceramic Period is described as

beginning about 2000 B.P., and climatic conditions
are thought to have fluctuated between mesic
periods and episodic droughts (a pattern that
continues today). They divide the period into an
earlier part that is viewed as a transition from the
Late Archaic. Radiocarbon dates associated with
early style arrow points (such as Deadman's) show
an overlap with late style dart points and radiocarbon
dates excavated from bison kill sites. The later part
is seen as a mixed assemblage of Puebloan (or
Jornada Mogollon) tradeware and Plains lithic tool
types. While several sites are mentioned where data
on this subperiod are reported, no interpretations
are offered. The Protohistoric Period is predominantly associated with the Garza arrow point type,
and a series of sites with materials of this age are
mentioned. Most appear to be open camps, but at
least one bison kill site in New Mexico appears to
date to this period. A description of the Historic
Period includes the scant information on Native
American sites, and mentions the Plains Biographic
style rock art at Lake Alan Henry. Discussion of
European incursions and settlement includes the
pastores as well as ranchers, traders, buffalo
hunters, and the military. The few excavated
historic sites are briefly discussed. The chapter
ends with a Summary Discussion that succinctly
wraps it up. While the length of regional
occupation is stressed, it is still clear that more is
known about the very early and the late than is
known about what is in between.
Chapter Ten, entitled "The Palo Duro Complex: Redefining the Early Ceramic Period in the
Caprock Canyonlands" is written by Douglas K.
Boyd. Based on the work Boyd conducted at Lake
Alan Henry from 1987 to 1993, this chapter differs
from previous ones in that it looks at a specific
cultural unit in detail as opposed to summarizing a
region through time. The introductory comments
review the Woodland tradition on the Southern
Plains to the north and east, and the Formative
stage Jornada Mogollon to the west and southwest
as a way to establish six specific goals for the
chapter. These include defining an ecological subregion, summarizing culture history and paleoclimatic conditions, identifying surrounding cultural
units, identifying Palo Duro sites, reevaluating the
Palo Duro Complex in light of recent data, and,
finally, to speculate on interactions between Palo
Duro people and the people of the surrounding cultures. In my opinion, Boyd succeeds admirably in
achieving his goals.

Reviews 273
The first section describes the Caprock
Canyonlands in terms of the subregions' environmental diversity, paleoenvironments, and cultural
history. Essentially, the region is defined as a northsouth oriented irregularly shaped area that takes in
the eastern edge of the Llano Estacado (Caprock)
and the adjacent eroded canyonlands extending from
the south side of the Canadian River southward to
the upper Colorado River basin. This is described
as a resource rich zone that would have been critical in terms of subsistence and settlement, one that
could have been used as a home base from which to
exploit seasonal resources on the adjacent Southern
High Plains to the west, or the Rolling (or Lower)
Plains to the east. A map showing the boundaries of
the subregion in relation to the other major regional
physiography is accompanied by an illustration of
middle to late Holocene climatic conditions charted
against bison exploitation, cultural periods, and cultural complexes. The following section, called "Regional Cultural Complexes and Phases during the
Late Prehistoric I Period, "succinctly summarizes
the adjacent cultural complexes" accompanied by a
map (Figure 10.3) that illustrates their ranges. This
leads into a subsection that describes in detail known
archeological remains attributable to the Palo Duro
Complex (again, accompanied by a table listing the
sites with references, and keyed to a map). Table
10.2 summarizes extant radiocarbon assay results
that are attributed to the Palo Duro Complex. Residential basecamps are then described, including detailed data from the Kent Creek and Sam Wahl
sites that are illustrated with site plans, floor plans,
and photos of features such as a house and storage
pits. Changes in artifacts and features through time
within the Palo Duro Complex are used to suggest
that site function and subsistence activities may
have changed dramatically at these sites around
A.D. 1100. A different set of sites comprised of
twelve campsites and four rockshelters are described
in the next subsection. Interestingly, Boyd stresses
that what he calls campsites were (for the most
part) excavated before Jornada Mogollon style
pithouses were identified in this area, and that the
absence of such structural evidence may be attributed to sampling deficiencies or simply failure to
look for houses. This section concludes with a review of human burials that may be associated with
the Palo Duro Complex.
The next section is titled "Redefinition of the
Palo Duro Complex. This very detailed section,
accompanied by charts, tables, and artifact

illustrations, starts with chronology, then goes into
subsistence and site function. This is approached
through examination of the various classes of
artifacts (lithic, bone, ceramic), their relative
percentages, and even size comparisons among
classes such as grinding stones. The Jornada
Mogollon ceramics are shown to be of several types,
and petrographic data indicate a variety of nonlocal origins. In the "Features" subsection, variability in this category is illustrated in tabular format, as is architectural variability of the three
excavated houses. Faunal and floral remains are discussed at some length, and include tabular data
presentations. Five major interpretations of the
biotic data suggest that bison were not a significant
food source, that the primary food sources were
plants, that a wide range of plant foods were used,
that (despite the fact that direct evidence is lacking)
horticulture may have been practiced, and, finally,
that variations noted suggest differences in site
function. This is followed by a subsection on
"Seasonality, Residential Mobility, and Settlement
Patterns" that attempts to reconstruct these patterns
using the limited data at hand. A discussion of the
"Geographic Range and Intercultural Relationships"
is somewhat extensive, but succeeds in placing the
Palo Duro Complex in perspective to the defined
cultural units that surround it. A key recognition in
this discussion is the extent to which the Palo Duro
Complex appears to have been influenced by the
Jornado Mogollon. Interestingly, this subsection
concludes with an observation that it is possible
that the Palo Duro Complex, along with the probably
related Blow Out Mountain Phase, is the antecedent
of the widespread Toyah phase/horizon/tradition of
Central Texas This chapter ends with a short
"Summary and Conclusions" section that succinctly
captures the essence of the Palo Duro Complex.
Robert L. Brooks wrote Chapter Eleven, entitled "From Stone Slab Architecture to Abandonment: A Revisionist View of the Antelope Creek
Phase." Brooks explicitly sets out in an "attempt to
interpret the archeological record based on what we
currently know of the material record of Antelope
Creek." He opens with a general overview of this
farming-based phase that dates from about A.D.
1200 to A.D. 1500, listing many of the key sites,
and incorporating the notion of a physiographic
circumscription that played an important role in
establishing permeable boundaries for this cultural
expression limited to the Texas and Oklahoma panhandles. Importantly, the boundaries of Antelope

274

Texas Archeological Society

Creek contain the primary outcrops of a key regional lithic resource-Alibates agatized dolomite.
Previous investigations over the past one hundred
years are then described in detail, setting up a review of the cultural taxonomy that concludes with
a summary of Lintz' confusing 1986 varianUphase
definition. Adjacent cultural expressions are briefly
described. The next section reviews data regarding
the origins of the Antelope Creek phase, concluding that there are no clear antecedents for this unique
culture of Southwestern-influenced architecture
mixed with Plains Woodland derived material culture. A section on biological characteristics reviews
the physical anthropology of human remains associated with Antelope Creek phase sites. There appears to be an interesting variation in the diet between female and male members of the group. A
section on chronology reviews radiocarbon and
archeomagnetic assays, and ceramic tradeware dating. He suggests the assays indicate the phase actually ended at about A.D. 1450, consistent with significant changes in agricultural economies elsewhere in the American Southwest.
A section on "Settlement and Architecture" condenses a tremendous amount of information on
variations of the typical slab-lined semi-subterranean house architecture and storage features. Preferred settlement locations are also described. This
section ends with a discussion of the social structure implications derived from analysis of the architectural remains. "Subsistence" is the next topic,
and includes descriptions of a variety of cultigens,
wild plant foods, and an array of animals, including
bison, that played significant roles in this culture.
Comments regarding the specific type of agriculture employed are well chosen. The section of
"Technology" summarizes the stone, bone, and ceramic assemblages. Interestingly, Brooks specifies
that the bone tool assemblage is the most distinctive to Antelope Creek phase, and includes an array
of hoes, knives, digging sticks, hide grainers, awls,
needles, wedges, and such. "Trade and Warfare"
are examined in the next section. It appears that
trade was heavily oriented to the Puebloan cultures,
with little interaction with Caddoan people to the
east. Warfare is described as being oriented toward
defense of territory and competition for resources
rather than other reasons postulated by various folks
over the years. A discussion of mortality during
this phase follows, and details of variations in interment are reviewed. He concludes that there is
very little differentiation of status in the manner of

burial, but that where grave goods are present, they
are of overwhelming Southwestern origin. The final section on "Abandonment" describes the sudden disappearance of the Antelope Creek phase
people between A.D. 1450 and A.D. 1500. Various
reasons for this are explored, and basically is correlated with similar events across the Southwest. The
question of where these people went is left unresolved, but their material culture is too different
from that of the Jumanos, Querechos, Teyas, and
other groups to suggest a transformation into any of
those groups encountered by early European explorers in the region. This chapter concludes with a
brief summary that lists three suggestions for future
study of the Antelope Creek phase: refine data
recovery techniques, systematic examination of human biology, and renewal of academic interest in
the study of this culture.
Part IV is entitled "Hunter-Gatherer and
Farming Groups in the Post Oak Savanna, Tallgrass
Prairies, and Pineywoods of Eastern and Northern
Texas," and consists of two chapters. Chapter 12,
by Ross C. Fields, is titled "The Archeology of the
Post Oak Savanna of East-Central Texas." While
five large project areas (3 reservoirs and 2 lignite
mines) intensively investigated since about 1980
are noted as the primary sources of data for this
chapter, in reality, it is based heavily upon Fields'
work at two of those projects, Cooper Lake and
Jewett Mine. The introductory section describes
the north-south trending Post Oak Savanna,
including physiography, biota, and climate. He
narrowly defines the area of concern, and explicitly
excludes adjacent cultural or natural areas such as
the Caddoan heartland, the Blackland Prairies, and
the Eastern Cross Timbers; also excluded is
consideration of Historic Period Native American
occupations (Nortefio phase). A histogram of
uncalibrated radiocarbon assays illustrated in Figure
12.2 clearly shows that the vast majority of available
dates are less than 5000 years old. Thus the
chronology is divided into only three periods for
purposes of this chapter. The first is the "Pre-Late
Archaic Period" that first summarizes the skimpy
data for this period. Cooper Lake is described first,
and is largely based on limited investigations of the
Finley Fan site. A similar situation is described for
the Jewett Mine and adjacent Lake Limestone area
where only a couple of sites are comfortably dated
to this period despite the fact that a number of
artifacts (primarily projectile points, several of
which are illustrated) are know to be older than

Reviews 275
Late Archaic. Site functions in both areas are
suggested to be residential base camps.
Substantially greater amounts of data are available for the Late Archaic and Woodland periods.
A plethora of stone artifacts are listed for the Cooper Lake area during this period, many of which
are other than projectile points. Plant and animal
remains are not preserved in the Late Archaic so
interpretations are necessarily based upon the stone
tools and heated cobble features. However, at some
of the Woodland sites, sparse plant remains suggest squash, acorns, hickory and pecan nuts, plums,
and tubers were part of the diet, but definitive
evidence of horticulture remains elusive, as does
the identification of houses even though isolated
post molds are identified. Meager faunal remains
indicate a broad range of animals, from mussels
and turtles to deer and bison, were procured. These
materials are interpreted to indicate decreased
group mobility, but still do not suggest fully sedentary occupations. At Jewett Mine, there is a
similar range of stone tools, but the sandy soils do
not preserve bone and botanical remains are sparse,
being mostly limited to burned nutshells (hickory
and walnut). Sandy paste ceramics are present, as
are a few sherds of a locally made thin-walled
clay paste ceramics. These data are interpreted to
represent seasonal foraging.
The Late Prehistoric period is described in
greater detail due to greater numbers of sites, better
preservation of faunal and floral materials, and a
broader range of stone artifacts and ceramics. At
Cooper Lake, architectural features such as houses
and drying racks are indicated by post molds, while
pit features contain consolidated trash. Fields
describes a variety of bone, stone and shell tools,
and a great range of ceramics demonstrating various
vessel forms and decorative motifs Tropical
cultigens are present along with a long inventory of
native plants that were used as food. Similarly, a
range of animals were trapped and hunted for food
as well as bone and presumably hide resources. A
well-reasoned case is made for virtual abandonment
of the Cooper Lake area by about A.D. 1500. At
Jewett Mine, similar stone tools and heated cobble
features are reported, although the ceramics differ
somewhat during the early portion of the period.
During the later portion, sherds with apparent
Caddoan motifs appear. Limited data on faunal and
floral remains suggest that horticulture was not
adopted in this area. Changes in settlement strategies
from the early to late Late Prehistoric are suggested,

as is a shift from a forager system to more
logistically organized system.
The following section deals with data trends in
time and space. Various technological trends are examined, including different stone tool categories, ceramics, and cooking methods. Interestingly enough,
differing technological trajectories are identified and
illustrated between the northern and southern portions of the study area. Subsistence trends are harder
to follow simply because of the paucity of remains
p1ior to the Late Prehistoric. Greater detail is presented in the discussion of site functions, settlement
strategies, and use intensity, and differences are inferred again on a north-south basis. The following
discussion on "Sociocultural Interaction" uses scarce
exotic items, projectile points styles, and ceramics to
examine this difficult topic. Once again, very different patterns are described for the northern Cooper
Lake area compared to the southern Jewett Mine
area. The final section in this chapter is a summary
that very elegantly presents the conclusions drawn
from the review of this subregion.
Chapter Thirteen, written by Timothy K.
Perttula, is entitled "The Prehistoric and Caddoan
Archeology of the Northeastern Texas Pineywoods." As with three of the previous chapters, this
one is focused upon a single cultural group, albeit a
broad one, that occupied the Pineywoods of northeast Texas and beyond. A description of the natural
setting is illustrated with a physiographic map showing the area inhabited by the Caddo people, and
major subdivisions relevant to the text. This is followed by a review of majm: investigations in the
Texas segment of the Caddoan region. The next
section deals with the archeological record, and
begins with a summary treatment of the Paleoindian
and Archaic periods. Fortunately, Perttula does not
let state boundaries constrain him, and includes
relevant data from the adjacent states of Arkansas,
Louisiana, and Oklahoma where needed to provide
appropriate perspective on materials in Texas. Of
particular interest is the suggestion that the region
was somewhat drier between 8000 B.P and 4000
B.P, and saw a reduction in overall biomass concomitant with an expansion of the prairies. He goes
on to review the Late Archaic settlement patterns
that pretty much agree with the data reviewed earlier by Fields. A summary of the Woodland period
occupations examines the influence thought to have
derived from the Lower Mississippi Valley cultures. Whether ceramic styles were copied, or
whether exchange of goods was involved is a

276

Texas Archeological Society

subject not resolved. Comparisons and contrasts
with the Mossy Grove tradition to the south are
also made. Consideration is given to the proposition that horticulture was introduced during the
Woodland period, and settlement patterns are reviewed to contrast these with the continuation of
seasonally scheduled resource procurement in many
parts of the area. Burial mounds and exotic trade
goods found in discontinuous parts of the region
suggest that more complex social organization developed rapidly. A discussion of mortuary practices concludes this subsection.
An exhaustive review of the late Formative,
and Early and Middle Caddoan periods is amply
illustrated with charts of radiocarbon assays, cemeteries, house patterns, village structure, and various artifacts. Without repeating all the details here,
suffice it to say that Perttula does an admirable job
of condensing a tremendous amount of information
to describe the rich material culture of the Caddo
during these periods. This is followed by a section
that goes into greater depth about the character of
prehistoric Caddoan ceramics. Vessel form, paste,
temper, and decorative motifs are succinctly presented, again with ample illustrations and even a
chart illustrating a principal components analysis
of the chemistry of Caddoan ceramics. This relatively new approach shows relationships between
composition and specific stream drainages that allow greater examination of actual movement of
vessels as opposed to transfer of design information. This is even more important in light of recent
advances in detecting fine-scale changes in style
through time that can be refined to a few decades
duration. The Late Caddoan period is then reviewed,
and the spatial relationship of the various phases
during this period are clearly illustrated in Figure
13.26. Variations between permanent settlements
with mounds and cemeteries, dispersed hamlets,
and isolated farmsteads are compared among several of the phases, as are cemetery practices.
The Titus phase is selected for extended treatment in a discussion of its temporal position, its
boundaries, and its people. This phase is thought to
represent the remains of several Caddoan groups
who lived between the Sabine and Sulphur rivers
from around A.D. 1430 to A.D. 1680. Residential
areas, mounds and community centers, cemeteries,
ceramics, and tropical cultigens are all described in
detail, and are accompanied by precise maps and
illustrations that convey the essence of the text.
Included is a description of the significant quanti-

ties of non-local artifacts that attest to the wealth
and extent of trade during this time. A section titled
"The Demise of the Titus Phase" recounts recent
data that ties the disappearance of these Caddoan
people with Spanish entradas, specifically the De
Soto/Moscoso expedition of A.D. 1542-1543. A
short "Concluding Remarks" ends the chapter with
a statement regarding the unprecedented loss of
Caddoan cemeteries to commercial looters, and the
need for archeologists and surviving Caddo people
to work in concert to stem the losses and to preserve their rich heritage.
Now, I will turn my attention to specific comments on this volume. Although it is an edited
volume, the individual chapter authors were given
wide reign for their contributions. This leads to
annoying inconsistencies, especially in the presentation of dates. Some folks use B.P. dates, some use
B.C./A.D., some use both, some use the latest corrections and calibrations, and some use uncorrected
dates. Frankly, this gives me headaches trying to
correlate data between chapters, and in an edited
volume, I would expect that a standard would be
set so that there is at least minimal consistency in
chronometric values. The worst problem with this
volume, though, is the "References Cited." Whoever designed this critical part of the book failed
miserably because it is nearly impossible to find a
specific reference. Admittedly, it runs 60 pages long,
and if it were properly designed and formatted, it
probably would be 85 or.90 pages long. However,
the time wasted trying to verify citations far outweighs the nominal costs that would be added to do
the job right.
While they may be minor to some folks, small
slips become very annoying in quantity. For example, in Figure 1.5 on page 11, Bonfire Shelter is
omitted from the important Archaic sites despite
the fact that Bone Bed 3 is the only Late Archaic
bison jump in the region, yet in Figure 1.8 on page
13 the site is listed as an important Late Prehistoric
site when there are no Late Prehistoric remains
present there! Similarly, on page 39, Bonfire Shelter is described as being located on "Mile Creek;"
there is no such drainage! There is a Mile Canyon
through wh1ch Eagle NesfCreek flows, and Bonfire Shelter is located near the head of Mile Canyon. Additionally, on page 210 the Wind Canyon
site on Eagle Mountain is misidentified as the "Wind
Mountain" site. Never heard of it!
Some topics are practically ignored, such as
rock art. Only in the Chapter 8 dealing with the

Reviews 277
Lower Pecos River region is rock art treated as an
integral part of the archeological record. While admittedly it is poorly known, rock art is not mentioned as part of the record for the Central Texas
region in Chapter 3. There is a vast amount of rock
art in the Jornada Mogollon and Eastern TransPecos (Chapter 7), but it is mentioned only in passing. No mention at all is made in Chapter 9 of the
extensive Plains Biographic style rock art present
around the Southern High Plains. In Chapter 7
(which I consider a superior chapter), the survey
and data recovery work done in the upper potions
of Sanderson Canyon are omitted from the Eastern
Trans-Pecos discussion even though the earlier testing of rockshelters in nearby Roark Canyon were
included. In Chapter 9, there is great emphasis on
geomorphic interpretations relating to the Southern
High Plains, yet the apparent Altithermal age scouring of the canyons adjacent to the Caprock documented at Lake Alan Henry is not mentioned.
Some of the typological assignments are problematical. For example, the Thrall points described
in Chapter 2 are within the expectable variability of
the previously defined Victoria type, and even
though the chronological placement of the latter is
still in question, I do not think the hairsplitting
separation by Bousman, Baker and Kerr is justified. In Chapter 12 it is bothersome that Fields uses
the name Neches River for a dart point style I
originally named the Oletha variant of Neches River,
and subsequently elevated the variant to the status
of a type when it became apparent they were disparate in both age and distribution. Indeed it is very
unfortunate that a popular type guidebook also failed

to see that difference and is now using illustrations
of Oletha points and calling them Neches River.
There are strengths and weaknesses in all the
chapters, and even though I made copious notes
about both, it is time to move along without going
into too many nit-picking details. I think I have given
the reader a good sense of what is in this extremely
important compilation that provides up-to-date information on Texas archeology as of about A.D.
1998-2000. Not all of the state was covered, and
each author (or authors) wrote about what they knew
best-their own research. In some cases this came out
well, and in others it resulted in lapses that are bothersome since relevant data was apparently not consulted or was simply ignored. While it is important
that each author's perspective be presented, is it very
troublesome, for example, that Ricklis pretty much
wrote off the inland portion of Southeast Texas in an
otherwise well written Chapter 6 because he has
done no work there and can not bring himself to rely
upon other researchers for appropriate reference data.
This is also the case in Chapter 9 where Johnson and
Holliday seem to be oblivious to considerable research in the Southern High Plains that does not deal
with the Lubbock Lake site.
This is an essential reference book summarizing many of the varied aspects of Texas archeology, and it should be added to any serious research
library. It is not a handbook for the identification of
artifacts, yet it has ample illustrations of many artifacts. If you tn1ly want to learn about the rich cultural history of Texas during the 12,000 or so years
before Europeans arrived in the Americas, you need
to read this book.

Sea of Mud, The Retreat of the Mexican Army After San Jacinto, An Archaeological Investigation, by
Gregg J. Dimmick. The Texas Historical Association, Austin. 2004, xviii + 362 pp.

Reviewed by Anne A. Fox

This book will be enjoyed by both archeologists
and historians, particularly those who have
conducted excavations at military sites or who have
researched and written about Texas history. It would
be hard to say whether the archeology or the history
has been more extensively explored by the author.
While the history gets more emphasis, the author's
familiarity with the archeological investigations
carried out in the area of the Mexican Army's retreat
at San Jacinto fills in many details of that aspect of
the project.
A reader may at first question whether the archeology mentioned can be truly called "an archeological investigation." However, two reports published by the Houston Archaeological Society confirm that the recovery of the numerous military
artifacts was accomplished in a professional manner, despite the fact that it was done throughout
such a large area and by the use of metal detectors.
The area was meticulously mapped and the location of each artifact recovered was recorded with a
GPS reading. The artifacts were carefully cleaned
and photographically recorded. Jack Jackson's excellent maps help the reader to follow the movements of the army throughout the adventure. Clear
photographs of the artifacts recovered are included
throughout the book. These are all identified and
often described and analyzed in some detail, which
will be most helpful to those of us who can make
good use of the information.
The first five chapters deal primarily with the
immediate days after the defeat of General Santa
Anna at San Jacinto on April 21, 1836, and the
confusion and reorganization of the Mexican
troops who did not participate in that battle, under
the command of General Vicente Filisola. The
author worked extensively with Texas historians
who have specialized in this time period, obtaining
from them all sorts of references to create a picture
of the events as they took place. The inclusion of
pages of quotations from military reports,
correspondence, and officers' later memoirs paints

a detailed picture of events and also of the
personalities of the generals involved.
Chapters 6 through 10 deal with the actual march
of the Mexican anny in their attempt to find a way to
cross the Colorado River in order to regroup and
challenge the Texas Army. Here, again, the text relies on numerous quotations from correspondence
between the generals. As the army marched westward and crossed the San Bernard River, General
Filisola's account of the crossing paints a picture of
the horrible problems to come. The sky opened and
completely flooded the river valley just as the last
troops crossed, and the troops spent the night squatting "with the water reaching their backsides." The
total flooding of the valley caused the army to decide
to go north in order to find a safe crossing of the
Colorado River. Before long, the troops were up to
their waists in mud, and the artillery, and the other
heavy equipment, were bogged down. The descriptions of what the army went through in their desperate attempts to move mules, wagons and equipment
continue for 52 pages.
At this point the archeology enters into the
discussion, and reference is made to two archeological reports by the Houston Archaeological Society that actually describe the work done at various sites along the path of the retreat. Anyone
who is particularly interested in the archeological
aspect of the project really should obtain and read
these reports. [Hudgins and Dimmick. A Campsite
of the Retreating Mexican Army, April, 1836,
41WH91, Wharton County, Texas. Report No. 13,
1998 and Hudgins, Kreler, and Dimmick. Tracking the Mexican Army through the Mar De Lodo
(Sea of Mud), April 29-May 9, 1836. Report No.
14, 2000].
Chapter 11 reports the arrival of 300 members
of the Texas Army who caught up with the rear of
the Mexican troops on May 1st. They were surprised
to find the enemy's camp deserted and littered with
equipment, guns, and lances that had been hastily
discarded a well as mules left mired in the mud.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

Reviews 279

Chapters 12 and 13 relate the final arrival of
the Mexican army at the Atascosito Crossing, its
total disorganization at that point, and General
Filisola' s decision to retreat to Mexico. Dimmick' s
Conclusion in Chapter 14 summarizes the difficulty of General Filisola in deciding first to retreat across the Colorado, and then later to retreat all the way home to Mexico. Appendices
include an officer's diary, a deposition of Col.
Jose de la Pena and tables showing the strength
and condition of the Mexican Army on May 9,

1836, and on May 14, 1836.
This interesting and useful book is recommended to anyone interested in Texas history, in
military artifacts of the 1836 time period, and in
what can be learned through meticulous archival
research and archeology accomplished with metal
detectors and the use of GPS recording. If you
tend to get bogged down in archival details, keep
going and you will find out what is possible with
the help of historians, professional translators, and
military experts.

We Came Naked and Barefoot the Journey of Cabeza de Vaca Across North America, by Alex D.
Krieger, edited by Margery H. Krieger. University of Texas Press, 2002. xvii+ 318 pages.

Reviewed by Nancy A. Kenmotsu

Alex Kreiger' s book, analyzing the route taken
by Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, Andres Dorantes
de Carranza, Alonso del Castillo Maldonado, and
Estevan, is a wonderful and remarkable book! The
book began in 1955 as Kreiger' s dissertation presented to the faculty at the Universidad Nacional de
Mexico. After retiring from teaching at the University of Washington in 1979, Kreiger returned to the
effort, translating Spanish documents relating to
the incredible journey that lasted 14 months and
covered (depending on how one interprets the route)
between 2,300 and 2,640 miles "naked and barefoot." While he never completed the book, his wife
did so posthumously at the urging of Dee Ann
Story. Tom Hester, editor of the Texas Archeology
and Ethnohistory Series at the University of Texas
Press, knew this was an important publication and
was pleased to include it in that Series. In his
Afterword (pages 149-153), Hester notes that this
is the authoritative route of the journey and most of
the other published routes are either slightly or
grossly inaccurate. Hester expresses the hope that
"Kreiger's volume will help peel away some of
the mystery of Cabeza de Vaca and formalize a
reasoned and rational view of his journey and interactions with native peoples" (page 149). I certainly hope he is correct because misinterpreted
routes showing the men meandering through the
Texas Panhandle continue to be found in the literature and create havoc with ethnohistoric interpretations (cf. Hickerson, N.P., The Jumanos Hunters and Traders of the South Plains, University of
Texas Press, 1994).
The volume begins with a Foreword by Tom
Hester, followed by a Preface by Margery Krieger
detailing her and her husband's efforts to publish
the account. Then Krieger offers an Introduction
that provides the context for the reader, including
a detailed analysis of previous interpretations of
the route of Cabeza de Vaca and his colleagues. It
is in this introduction that the reader begins to
recognize Krieger's intimate and vast knowledge

of the geography, flora, fauna, and geology of
Texas and northern Mexico along with a thorough
understanding of the region's archeological and
ethnohistorical records. He quietly and calmly
discusses other routes, noting what he agrees with
and authoritatively dismissing those that simply
fly in the face of fact. Hallenbeck, whose 1940 publication on the route takes the four men through
the Texas Panhandle, particularly troubled him:
"Hallenbeck had the advantage of the efforts of all
his predecessors to trace the route of the journey,
but he does not seem to have benefited from it"
(page 17). Krieger's analysis of these

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

Reviews 281
interpretations, and Hester's comments on more
recent interpretations, are important. Each will help
us understand better the peoples who occupied the
land that Cabeza de Vaca traversed. For example, if
you assume that Hallenbeck and others are correct,
then the remarks about linguistic boundaries or about
enemies and friends will be attributed to groups in
the Panhandle not groups in northern Mexico.
Part II of the book is Krieger's analysis of the
journey and his interpretation of the route, beginnina
with the ill-fated Narvaez expedition that ended
b
.
.
badly on the Texas Gulf Coast. His analysis is
based on the joint report given by the four survivors to the government shortly after their arrival in
Mexico. The report does not exist intact but rather
was paraphrased by the Spanish historian Gonzalo
Fernando de Oviedo y Valdez in his Historia general y natural de las Jndias (Royal Academy of
History, Madrid, 1851-1855 [original published in
1547]). In addition to this report, Krieger used
Cabeza de Vaca' s own account of the journey,
Relacion de los naufragios, written around 1537.
Krieger was clearly charmed by the latter: "The
document is not only a compelling story of a remarkable adventure but is also the first ethnography of native peoples of North America. It contains
unique information on customs and beliefs of many
Indian peoples over a vast area of the southern
United States and northern and western Mexico"
(page 5). Appendices I and II are translated versions of these .two accounts, and they give the reader
an opportunity to inspect and evaluate Krieger's
analysis and interpretation.
Krieger's route interpretations demonstrate that
his was no armchair analysis. Rather, he had been
there and he considered the route from the perspective of men who were traveling by foot. Thus, shortly
after the men crossed the Rio Grande, he discounts
other interpretations of the passage by Cabeza de
Vaca that the men began to see mountains (pages
58-59). Previous researchers of the route have stated
that the mountains mentioned were the Panorames.
Kreiger, considering the problem from the perspective of men on foot, states (page 59):
There are, in fact, two mountain ranges
almost exactly the right distance from
the Gulf of Mexico. The small Sierra de
Panorames in northern Tamaulipas was

regarded by Coopwood as the range
mentioned by Cabeza de Vaca. However,
the Panorames are a good 60 miles south
of the Rio Grande and are only 1,000 feet
in elevation. One must be within 15 miles
of them to see them at all. The second
range is the much higher and broader
Sierra de Cerralvos, also in Tamaulipas.
The Cerralvo range attains an elevation
of 4,800 feet and can be seen from thirty
or 40 miles away.
Readers will find similar thoughtful remarks
about the cultural implications of the statements in
the document. Thus, he (page 56) states that just
south of the Rio Grande "it is worth noting that the
travelers came to a settlement of more than one
hundred dwellings-which seems very large for
hunter-gatherers such as these and surely was the
largest the survivors had yet encountered. Hov.:ever, archeological surveys in the Falcon Reservoir
basin revealed evidence of settlements of this or
greater size, another point in favor of locating the
river crossing in this area."
Although I thoroughly enjoyed the read and
loved all parts of the book, I was disappointed in two
aspects of the publication. The first is that none ~f
the references cited in Hester's Foreword or his
Afterword were in the References Cited section of
the book. This is a significant editorial error by the
University of Texas Press. If they go to a second
edition or printing of the book, and I hope that they
do, they need to correct the oversight. The second is
that although there are four maps showing his route,
the maps do not show all groups encountered nor all
geographic features mentioned by Krieger in the text.
Thus, there are times that one has to resort to other
maps to follow Krieger's rationale for the route taken.
That said, I highly recommend the book to
others. It is very worthwhile. The careful analysis
and interpretation of the route and the discussion of
the people encountered by the four travelers is fascinating. You will learn much about the small scale
societies that occupied this vast region by reading
it. Mrs. Krieger modestly states at the end of her
Preface, "I hope that others will take pleasure in
this marvelous story of four remarkable men" (page
xvii). I certainly took pleasure in this marvelous
story and I know that many others will too.

Late Holocene Settlement in the Taylor Bayou Drainage Basin: Test Excavations at the Gaulding Site
(41JF27), Jefferson County, Texas, by Lawrence E. Aten and Charles N. Bollich with contributions by
Kenneth M. Brown and Richard A. Fullington. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, Studies in Archeology No. 40 and the Texas Archeological Society, Special
Publication No. 4, 2002, x + 132 pages.

Reviewed by Richard A. Weinstein

Most state archeological societies conduct summer field schools and/or training sessions that allow their members to participate in the various tasks
associated with archeological research. These
schools are conducted with the best of archeological intentions. More often than not, however, the
data collected during such field schools sit dormant
for years and years, generally forgotten and neglected while the original project directors move on
to other areas of interest or to unrelated work required by their full-time jobs. This is unfortunate,
as the field-school data usually were collected in a
highly detailed manner by extremely careful individuals. To resurrect such long-forgotten excavations, to analyze and interpret their data, and to
make that information available to the archeological community is an extremely difficult, yet highly
important, exercise.
Lawrence Aten and Charles Bollich are to be
commended for doing exactly that, plus much,
much more. Their report on the Gaulding site
(41JF27), published jointly by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (Studies in Archeology No. 40) and the Texas Archeological Society
(Special Publication No. 4), examines and analyzes data collected during the fourth summer field
school of the Texas Archeological Society (TAS).
This field school occurred between June 12 and
19, 1965, and was attended by approximately 60
individuals under the supervision of Dessamae
Lorrain, Burney McClurkan, and Doris Olds. One
of the current authors (Bollich) participated as a
T AS member. It marked the first time in over 30
years that a "shell-bearing" site had been excavated on the upper Texas coast.
In addition to the data acquired during the T AS
field school, Aten and Bollich incorporate information obtained nine years later by small-scale excavations directed by Bollich for the Beaumont Art

Museum (now the Art Museum of Southeast Texas)
as a means to illustrate to young people the importance of such sites. Later, in 1995 and 1996, the
authors revisited the locale to acquire soil borings
and column samples for fine screening and additional radiocarbon dating. To this day, Gaulding
remains one of only a handful of sites in the Sabine
Lake area that has ever received proper archeological attention. For that reason, the site's story is an
extremely important one.
The Gaulding site itself is a moderate-size shell
midden, or "shell-bearing" site as the authors prefer to call it, located along the northern edge of
Taylor Bayou about 20 km west of Sabine Lake. It
consists mainly of the brackish-water clam Rangia
cuneata, although some oysters ( Crassostrea
virginica) also are present. At the time of the field
school, the site measured approximately 100 m long
by a maximum of 30 m wide and reached a height
of about 1 m above the water in Taylor Bayou. This
bayou is one of the main water courses within the
so-called Taylor Bayou drainage basin. As such, it
is part of a network of channels that drain most of
the Pleistocene-age Beaumont formation in the area
south of the city of Beaumont. The bayou eventually passes through several kilometers of fringing
Holocene marsh and then empties into the southwestern corner of Sabine Lake. Thus, aboriginal
inhabitants residing at Gaulding had access to woodlands and prairies of the adjacent Beaumont formation, nearby coastal marshes, the waters of Sabine
Lake, and, slightly farther away, beaches along the
Gulf coast.
Aten and Bollich begin their examination of
the Gaulding site by briefly discussing previous
archeological research within the Sabine Lake
region, particularly that area within the Taylor
Bayou drainage basin. Since both the 1965 field
school and the 1974 Art Museum excavations were

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

Reviews 283

designed to teach archeology, neither was guided
by a specific series of research questions. Thus,
Aten and Bollich next provide a modern set of
research topics around which they direct most of
their subsequent analyses and interpretations: (1)
chronology, (2) site types and regional settlement
pattern, (3) geoarcheology and site formation, (4)
paleoecology, (5) subsistence and seasonal
movements, (6) territoriality, (7) technology, and
(8) mortuary practices. These topics then are
followed by descriptions of the 1965, 1974, and
1995-96 field investigations.
One of the more interesting chapters is devoted
to a study of site formation. It is in this part of the
report that one learns the nature of the site's stratigraphy (defined by a sequence of 10 "layers"), probable cultural components, and the ages of these
components. The latter were defined on the basis of
seven radiocarbon dates and diagnostic ceramic artifacts, and were grouped into stratigraphic analysis
units (AUs) that represent "three distinctive and
well-dated periods of archeological accumulation"
(p. 23). The deepest and earliest of these AUs,
identified as the Lower AU, fell within the early
Late Archaic period and dated roughly to between
4000 and 3700 cal years B.P. It was marked by
varying strata (Layers 2 through 5) that included,
from bottom to top, whole Rangia shells within a
dense clay matrix, whole Rangia shells with very
little soil matrix, and both whole and fragmented
Rangia shells with. little associated matrix. The second, or Middle, AU dated to the middle Late Archaic period between ca. 3000 and 2700 cal years
B.P. It included Layers 6 through 9 and these were
represented by whole and fragmented Rangia shells
in a moderate clay matrix, whole shells in a layer
with little matrix, and fragmented Rangia shells
also with little matrix. The Upper AU (represented
by Layer 10) dated from sometime during the first
millennium B.C. to ca. A.D. 1300. Unlike the previous AUs, it included sparsely scattered Rangia
shells in a relatively thick layer of rich organic
humus. The authors argue that these layers represent a common sequence of aggradation at shellbearing sites along the upper Texas coast: lower
and upper deposits of shell that contain a significant amount of soil matrix and an intervening deposit of shell with little to no soil matrix.
To examine the validity of this sequence further,
the authors subjected a series of soil samples retrieved during the 1995-96 fieldwork from Layers 2
through 10 to detailed grain-size and compositional

analyses. They also obtained undisturbed core
samples from each layer and these were impregnated with epoxy glue for use both as a permanent
record of site stratigraphy and as hardened deposits
that could be thin sectioned and examined microscopically. Generally, these studies supported the
three-part sequence of site formation. Importantly,
they also yielded information for each layer on the
burned/unburned ratio of Rangia shells, the ratio of
tight to left Rangia valves, the sizes of Rangia
shells (which can be related directly to the ages of
the clams harvested), the presence or absence of
iron concretions, the types and quantities of terrestrial snails, and the quantity of oysters. The latter
was found to be most important, as it was reasoned
that oysters only could have resulted either from an
influx of marine water into the middle reaches of
the Taylor Bayou basin or by travel downstream by
the site's inhabitants to collect the shellfish in Sabine
Lake, a distance of ca. 25 km.
After examining all of the evidence, Aten and
Bollich provide a summary of the site formational
processes that created the Gaulding shell deposits.
They concluded that the initial shell layer (Layer 2)
was an accumulation of shells redeposited atop the
upper part of the Beaumont formation (Layer 1).
These shells apparently had been displacement from
a nearby habitation area. Due to its secondary nature, this deposit had a high degree of soil matrix
relative to the amount of Rangia shells present. It
also lacked much evidence of vertebrate faunal remains and artifacts. The next sequence of deposits
(Layers 3 through 9) resulted from activities that
took place directly atop the site. Included were
cooking, clam opening, and clam discard. A few
associated artifacts and vertebrate faunal remains
were present, as well. In contrast, little to no matrix
was present. The final deposit (Layer 10) consisted
almost entirely of natural sediment with very little
shell. It did, however, contain most of the recovered artifacts (in this instance, aboriginal ceramics)
plus fairly well-preserved vertebrate faunal remains,
particularly very tiny bones from numerous small
animals. Also associated was a single burial pit that
descended downward from Layer 10.
A substantial chapter devoted to the technology of the site's inhabitants provides a wealth of
information on the various artifacts retrieved from
Gaulding. Since aboriginal ceramics from the Upper AU of Layer 10 comprise the bulk of the artifacts collected, most of the chapter is devoted to
their analysis. This showed that ceramic-producing

284

Texas Archeological Society

peoples restricted their activities to the northeastern
end of the site (as determined by the distribution of
sherds at the locale) and that at least two separate
occupations once occurred during the accumulation
of Layer 10: ( 1) an early ceramic occupation dating
from ca. 2200 to 1900 B.P., or roughly equivalent
in time to the late Tchula period in the lower Mississippi River valley (LMV) and the Clear Lake
period in the Galveston Bay (GB) area; and (2) a
later occupation dating from only 600 to 800 B.P.,
and equal to the early Mississippi period (LMV)
and the late Round Lake period (GB).
Aten and Bollich sort the Gaulding ceramics
into the type-variety system of ceramic classification, a system originally employed on the upper
Texas coast in Aten's (1983) masterful synthesis of
the region. One minor change is evident between
the two publications: the old type Mandeville Plain
has been subsumed under Tchefuncte Plain, thereby
making it a variety of Tchefuncte Plain (i.e.,
Tchefuncte Plain, var. Mandeville). This is something long advocated by the present reviewer (see
Weinstein and Rivet 1978). Other typological
changes suggested elsewhere (Weinstein et al. 1988;
Weinstein 1991) have not been followed, but reasons for such are clearly provided and the authors
note that such modifications might be worth pursuing in the future. Regardless, Aten and Bollich conducted a grain-size analysis of several of the types
and varieties found at Gaulding and compared the
results to similar studies of local sediments from
different environments (as reported in several soils
surveys and geological studies of the region). Of
paiticular interest is the discovery that O'Neal Plain,
var. Conway seems to have been tempered with
sand collected from local riverine point-bar deposits, while vessels of Tchefuncte Plain, Baytown
Plain, var. Phoenix Lake, and San Jacinto Incised,
var. Spindletop were fashioned from clays commonly found in a marsh setting.
The discussion of lithic remains is somewhat
less detailed than that of the ceramics, but still
provides useful archeological data. Two unidentified dart points (one similar to the Kent type) came
from the Lower AU, while two Gary dart points,
another unidentified dart similar ·to a Kent, one
Perdiz aiTOw point, and one unidentified arrow point
came from the Upper AU. Perhaps most interesting
was a metate fragment from the Upper AU. It apparently had been fashioned and used as a metate
elsewhere, broken, and then one of the broken fragments brought to Gaulding where it possibly served

as a weight or leather-working tool. Rounding out
the list of noteworthy artifacts are two socketed
bone points, a deer ulna awl, perforated Rangia
valves, and a possible unfinished conch columella
bead. These are items commonly found on shellbearing sites along the upper Texas coast.
Another section of the report examines subsistence data from the site (mainly as it relates to the
shellfish and vertebrate faunal remains recovered),
the lone burial unearthed in the Upper AU, seasonality, and regional settlement patterns. Of special
interest to this reviewer was the possibility raised
by the authors that not all of the shellfish remains
represented individuals consumed by the people
who collected them. Rather, some of the Rangia
clams could have been used as bait to help catch
garfish, alligators, or other carnivorous fish and
aquatic reptiles (i.e., snapping turtles). This brings
to mind a symposium at the 1987 Southeastern
Archaeological Conference in which arguments
were offered both for and against the prehistoric
use of Rangia meat as chum to attract shrimp for
subsequent capture in nets or weirs. Although several people presented papers during the symposium,
this reviewer is aware of only one that eventually
was published (Brown 1988).
Since Rangia were present throughout the stratigraphic sequence at Gaulding, but in differing quantities per layer, Aten and Bollich also looked at the
"long-term presence of the Rangia cuneata clam in
the Taylor Bayou drainage basin" (p. 65). By comparing logs from engineering borings from locations within the basin (obtained originally by the
Galveston District of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers) with radiocarbon dates from Gaulding and
other archeological sites and geological deposits in
the area, the authors were able to determine that the
period of maximum Rangia occurrence coincided
with the Lower and Middle AUs at Gaulding, ca.
4000 to 2000 B.P. Subsequent to that time, clams
became scarce within the basin. Oysters also were
most pronounced in the Lower AU. The authors
argue that these periods of heightened shellfish accumulation may have occurred as Rangia larvae
were swept upstream from the marshes along the
lower reaches of the bayou, probably due to storm
surge, and then settled to form local non-reproducing populations that would survive for no more
than 10 years. Another surge episode then would be
required before Rangia could establish a new population in the waters near the site. Given the quantities of shellfish at Gaulding, such episodes must

Reviews 285
have been fairly frequent during the early to middle
Late Archaic period.
Almost 2,600 identifiable vertebrate bones were
recovered at Gaulding. Unfortunately, the vast majority of these remains (n= 1, 706) came from the
Upper AU of Layer 10. Only 84 specimens came
from the Middle AU of Layers 6 through 9, while
43 bones were retrieved in the Lower AU of Layers
2 through 5. Aten and Bollich argue that this discrepancy is not due to unequal preservation, as
typical shell-bearing sites provide an environment
conducive to bone preservation and the Gaulding
bones from the Middle and Lower AUs were in
good condition. Rather, they suggest that the dichotomy in the amount of bones between the Upper
AU and the Middle and Lower AUs reflects real
differences in faunal exploitation and/or availability through time. Overall, the authors see a major
shift in subsistence patterns from the early Late
Archaic period, during which terrestiial and avian
vertebrates were utilized, to the Late Prehistoric,
ceramic-producing people, who mainly relied on
aquatic and terrestrial vertebrates.
Discussion of the lone burial uncovered at
Gaulding is interesting, not so much for the information on the individual interred at the locale (an
adult female, ca. 30 to 40 years of age, without
accompanying grave goods), but for the summary
of other aboriginal burials found at sites in the
Sabine Lake area. This information is particularly
important as it brings to light unpublished data on
about 27 individuals, their burial orientation, and
their associated grave goods.
Perhaps the most interesting chapter, at least in
the eyes of this reviewer, is entitled "Paleoenvironment." Within it, the authors synthesize data on the
region's paleoclimate and paleogeography. Interpretations related to the former are drawn heavily
from analyses by Kenneth M. Brown and Richard
W. Fullington of the terrestrial snails found at the
site in 1965 and 1995-96, respectively, and included
in two appendices to the report. Basically, they
show that the lower portion of the Lower AU (early
Late Archaic period) may have occurred during a
waning dry period (the last of the Altithermal?)
with dry summers and cold winters. this was followed by the onset of a warmer, wetter period associated with the upper part of the Lower AU. Such
conditions then lasted through the Middle AU (with
minor fluctuations), eventually reaching modern climatic conditions by the upper portion of the Upper
AU (Late Prehistoric period).

Discussions on the region's paleogeography are
mainly related to a model of sea-level fluctuation
proposed by several Florida geologists, principally
William F. Tanner (1991, 1992, 1993; Tanner et al.
1989) and Frank W. Stapor and his colleagues (Stapor
and Tanner 1977; Stapor et al. 1991). These individuals produced a sea-level curve for southwest
Florida that has been modified slightly by archeologists working in that area (Walker et al. 1994,
1995). When Aten and Bollich compared the periods
of site occupation at Gaulding to the modified curve,
they found that all major occupations occurred during
times of higher sea level. For instance, the occupation
related to the Lower AU could be tied to a period of
elevated sea level identified as "Tanner A." That of
the Middle AU could be matched with another rise
labeled "Tanner C." And the final occupation of
the Upper AU equated with the Lacosta rise of
southwest Florida.
Importantly, Aten and Bollich argue that it was
during these periods of higher-than-normal sea level
that storm surges would have been more likely to
have swept Rangia larvae into the lower and middle
reaches of the Taylor Bayou basin, thus allowing
for Rangia beds to develop in the site vicinity, as
discussed above. During those intervening periods,
when sea level was lower than normal, Rangia
would not have been swept into the site area, no
shellfish beds would have formed, and the middle
to lower parts of the basin (including the Gaulding
location) would not have been at.tractive to aboriginal settlement. Not coincidentally, these intervening periods correspond quite well with those hiatuses in occupation noted at Gaulding. The authors
suggest further that this model should be testable in
other areas of the Texas coast-a line of investigation that several archeologists working in Texas
have started to address (i.e., Prewitt and Paine 1988;
Ricklis and Cox 1991; Ricklis 1993, 1995; Ricklis
and Blum 1997; Ricklis and Albert 1998; Weinstein
2002; Ricklis and Weinstein 2005).
Overall, Aten and Bollich have admirably fulfilled the wishes of any archeologist wishing to
learn from long-dormant data acquired at a site
excavated by a society field school years and years
ago. The report is replete with detailed analyses,
modern research topics and interpretations, and an
excellent set of appendices to help suppo1t the entire story. The Gaulding site report is a must read
for anyone working on shell-bearing sites, not only
along the Texas coast but elsewhere across the Gulf
of Mexico.

286

Texas Archeological Society

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1983 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press,
New York.
Brown, I. W.
1988 Some Thoughts on the Shrimping Hypothesis and
Coastal Ceramic Diversity in the Lake Pontchartrain
Region. Mississippi Archaeology 23(1):34-42.
Prewitt, E. R., and J. G. Paine
1988 The Swan Lake Site (41AS16) on Copano Bay,
Aransas County, Texas: Settlement, Subsistence, and
Sea Level. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58:147-174.
Ricklis, R. A.
1993 A Model of Holocene Environmental and Human
Adaptive Change on the Central Texas Coast:
Geoarchaeological Investigations at White's Point,
Nueces Bay, and Surrounding Area. Coastal Archaeological Studies, Inc. Submitted to Koch Gathering Systems, Inc., Corpus Christi.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower
Texas Coast: A Regional Overview. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 66:265-300.

Ricklis, R. A., and B. M. Albert
1998 Response of Pluvial and Barrier Island Systems to
Climate and Sea Level Change, Central Texas Coast:
The Geoarchaeological and Palynological Evidence.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin. Summary report submitted to
Geography and Regional Science Program, National
Science Foundation, Grant .No. SBR-9423650. On
file, National Science Foundation, Washington, D. C.
Ricklis, R. A., and M. D. Blum
1997 The Geoarchaeological Record of Holocene Sea
Level Change and Human Occupation of the Texas
Gulf Coast. Geoarchaeology: An International Journal 12(4):287-314.
Ricklis, R. A., and K. A. Cox
1991 Toward a Chronology of Adaptive Change During
the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Bend Area. La
Tierra: Journal of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association 18(2): 13-31.
Ricklis, R. A., and R. A. Weinstein
2005 Sea-level Rise and Fluctuation on the Texas Coast:
Exploring Cultural-ecological Correlates. In Gulf
Coast Archaeology, the Southeastern United States
and Mexico, edited by N. M. White, pp. 108-154.
University Press of Florida, Gainesville.

Stapor, F. W., Jr., T. D. Mathews, and F. E. LindforsKearns
1991 Barrier-island Progradation and Holocene Sea-level
History in Southwest Florida. Journal of Coastal
Research 7(3):815-838.
Stapor, F. W., Jr., and W. F. Tanner
1977 Late Holocene Mean Sea Level Data from St. Vincent
Island and the Shape of the Late Holocene Mean Sea
Level Curve. In Coastal Sedimentology: Proceedings of a Symposium Offered at Florida State University, 29 Janum}' 1977, edited by W. F. Tanner, pp.
35-68. Coastal Research and Department of Geology, Florida State University, Tallahassee.
Tanner, W. F.
1991 The "Gulf of Mexico" Late Holocene Sea Level
Curve and River Delta History. Transactions-Gulf
Coast Association of Geological Societies 41 :583589.
1992

Late Holocene Sea-level Changes from Grain-size
Data: Evidence from the Gulf of Mexico. The Holocene 2(3):249-254.

1993

An 8000-year Record of Sea-level Change from
Grain-size Parameters: Data from Beach Ridges in
Denmark. The Holocene 3(3):220-231.

Tanner, W. F., S. Demirpolat, F. W. Stapor, and L. Alvarez
1989 The "Gulf of Mexico" Late Holocene Sea Level
Curve. Transactions-Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 39:553-562.
Walker, K. J., F. W. Stapor, Jr., and W. H. Marquardt
1994 Episodic Sea Levels and Human Occupation at
Southwest Florida's Wightman Site. The Florida
Anthropologist 47(2):161-179.
1995

Archaeological Evidence for a 17 50-1450 BP
Higher-than-Present Sea Level Along Florida's Gulf
Coast. In Holocene Cycles: Climate, Sea Levels,
and Sedimentation, edited by K. J. Walker, F. W.
Stapor, Jr., and W. H. Marquardt, pp. 205-218. Journal of Coastal Research, Special Issue No. 17.
Coastal Education and Research Foundation, Inc.,
Fort Lauderdale.

Weinstein, R. A.
1991 Lido Harbor (41GV82): A Late Prehistoric Campsite and Extraction Locale, Galveston County, Texas.
Coastal Environments, Inc. Submitted to Galveston
District, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Weinstein, R.A. (editor)
2002 Archaeological Investigations at the Guadalupe Bay
Site (41 CL 2): Late Archaic Through Historic Occupation Along the Channel to Victoria, Calhoun
County, Texas. 2 vols., Coastal Environments, Inc.
Submitted to Galveston District, U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, Galveston.

Reviews 287
Weinstein, R. A., C. E. Pearson, J.P. Whelan, Jr., and D. B.
Kelley
1988 Archaeological Investigations Along the Lower Trinity River, Chambers and Liberty Counties, Texas.
Coastal Environments, Inc. Submitted to Galveston
District, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

Weinstein, R. A., and P. G. Rivet
1978 Beau Mire: A Tchula Period Site of the Tchefuncte
Culture, Ascension Parish, Louisiana. Anthropological Report No. 1. Louisiana Archaeological Snrvey and Antiquities Commission, Baton Rouge.

Archeology & History at Fort Anahuac: Results of the 2003 Season Excavations in Chambers County,
Texas, by Rachael Feit and John W. Clark with contributions by Jonathan Jarvis and Mason Miller.
Hicks & Company Archeology Series 132. July 2004, 82 pp.+ vii.

Reviewed by David 0. Brown

Built by the Mexican government at the urging
of General Manuel de Mier y Teran, Fort Anahuac
was one of a series of forts proposed to regain
control of the Texas frontier that was being ovenun
by legal and illegal Anglo settlement. A key site in
the events of the early 1830s that eventually led to
the Texas Revolution, the fort and its first commander, Juan Davis Bradburn, became a lightning
rod for complaints by the Anglo colonists against
the Mexican government. The arrival of Bradburn
and his small garrison was not taken as good news
by the colonists who had previously been exempt
from taxation and until then had seen almost no
interference from the Mexican government. Angered by his protection of escaped slaves from Louisiana, William Travis feuded with Bradburn and
threatened to attack the fort. Bradburn eventually
resigned under pressure and the fort was abandoned
in 1832. By 1835, the new Mexican government
under Santa Anna had refurbished and re-occupied
the fort only to be once again dislodged by a small
band of Texicans under Travis.
Despite its critical role in fomenting the 1836
revolution, Fort Anahuac has remained largely unknown outside of Chambers County. Picked over
for salvageable materials by local residents, the old
fort fell into disrepair and was eventually bulldozed
by the county to create the park that now contains
the ruins. In the report of the second phase of Hicks
& Company archeological and historical studies
sponsored by Chambers County with funds from
the Texas Preservation Trust Fund, Feit and Clark
present the results of their investigations and a summary of previous work. Following a magnetometer
survey by the Texas Historical Commission in 2001
and preliminary test investigations by Hicks & Company in 2002, the Hicks & Company team proceeded to strip 1940s fill from the top of the fort
area with a Gradall and excavate a series of units
around historic features during the 2003 investigations. Unlike the earlier season in which Hicks &
Company investigators found few artifacts, the 2003

season revealed not only five new historic features,
in addition to the four that had been discovered in
the previous season, but a number of period artifacts associated with several of the features and
with the remnants of occupation surfaces of the era.
The report includes a detailed description of the
features and the recovered artifacts, with a well
written account of the historical events that brought
the fort into the political forefront in 1830s Texas.
Their conclusions and a tentative reconstruction are
presented in the final chapters of the report.
As described in the methodology section, the
research design for the 2003 season primarily featured questions about the extent, alignment, function, and construction technology within areas or
features defined in previous investigations. In most
of these areas, the Gradall was used to strip relatively deep layers of recent fill so that the units
could focus directly on the features of interest. Previous excavations had established that these overlying deposits .contained no intact remains. Deposits from the excavation units were screened except
in those cases where it was determined that the fills
were culturally sterile. In the end, all but two of the
proposed research questions were addressed; the
two that were not, including trenching under the
park road and along the bluff area, were dropped
for practical considerations.
Overall, the report is a well written and valuable contribution not only to our knowledge of the
fort but to the Mexican period in Texas. The descriptions of the excavations and the features are
clear and the interpretations are credible. While the
results to date still do not give us a complete picture of the fort and its ancillary structures, the layout of known walls, buildings, and other features
provides an excellent window onto the design of
the fort and its construction technology. The projected layout corrects several misconceptions held
by previous researchers whose investigations had
attempted to characterize the fort based on very
limited information.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

Reviews 289
Feit and Clark's investigations clearly show the
double wall configuration that probably surrounded
the entire fort. The discovery of internal dividing
walls suggests that the area between the double walls
was carved up into rooms whose roofs provided a
walkway along the top of the wall behind the parapet, a common design in presidios and frontier forts.
Curiously, the exterior defensive wall is not perfectly parallel to the interior one. Although possibly
an indicator that the two walls were not contemporaneous, it is more likely a sign of the limited resources for the initial construction. Nonetheless, the
main walls have substantial foundations that are integrated into an overall defensive configuration that
included bastions on at least two of the wall comers.
The discovery of two associated brick-walled
outbuildings also provides information on the organization of the outpost. Feit and Clark suggest that
neither was a defensive structure based on the relatively slender walls. No function could be identified for the smaller of the two, but they suggest an
administrative function, perhaps as part of the customs house operation, for the larger.
Among the most interesting remains were a series of subterranean canals or drains that underlie
several of the walls and buildings. While all Spanish
forts may not have had such features, they are not
uncommon in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century fortified sites, and must have been vital to drain this
extremely wet area along the banks of upper
Galveston Bay. Feit and Clark's suggestion that the
drains were added after the initial construction appears reasonable, especially with respect to the manner in which they cut through the main fort walls,
although the fact that these features ran at an angle to
interior buildings might seem to suggest that the
buildings were added after the drains. In any case,
even if the drains were built after the initial construction, their presence confirms that the fort was rather
more than a hastily thrown up construction.
Local researchers have reported that a tunnel
was present at the fort, possibly an emergency escape route. Tunnels have been reported at a wide
range of fortified sites and, in fact, at a host of
historic and prehistoric sites of all types throughout
the Americas. While the remains of such tunnels
have actually been identified at a small handful of
sites, their presence has been difficult to identify at
many more. These tunnels have eluded magnetometers, ground-penetrating radar, backhoe trenching,
and hand excavation units, and may in many cases
have been little more than folk tales. Although the

possibility of a tunnel cannot be ruled out at Fort
Anahuac, Bradburn seems to have had little enough
time and money to build the fort, much less a tunnel,
and there seems to be little indication that his initial
expectations were that he would face the determined
resistance that he ultimately did. Thus, it may not be
so surprising that the Hicks & Company team did
not encounter a tunnel, although it is not impossible
that the subterranean drains may well have been
mistaken for tunnels at some point in the past.
The Hicks & Company report presents the basic data on the excavations and the recovered remains in a well organized and eminently readable
fashion. The master list of strata is a particularly
welcome addition to the interpretation. The report
is well illustrated with photos and drawings of excavation units, features, and artifacts. A few of the
field photos should probably have been shaded
while some of the stylized drawings are a bit too
busy and somewhat difficult to interpret. Likewise,
the choices of scale for some of the artifact photos
seem odd. Although it makes sense to present artifacts grouped by material type, it might have been
more useful to enlarge the metal button and gunflint,
for example, rather than the somewhat ordinary
sherds. All in all, however, the copious illustrations
are an essential part of the description of this site.
In general, Feit and Clark's report is a fine addition to the corpus of literature on early Texas historical archeology as well as an important resource for
those who are interested in the evolution of fortifications in the New World. The minor quibbles with
graphics and the occasional editorial and spelling errors take nothing away from the valuable contributions of this work. The study serves more than adequately to update the progress of investigations that
will hopefully be augmented by further seasons of
work. With respect to this, one of their most important
conclusions is that more is left to be studied, and
given the seminal importance of this fort in the history
of Texas, one hopes that such future seasons will be
possible. Although it is a shame that the fort was
allowed to fall into disrepair and was ultimately damaged by the political entity that should have been
protecting it, the current efforts of Chambers County
to determine what is left and ultimately protect or
even perhaps partially reconstruct portions of the fort
should be commended and supported. And the determined efforts of the investigators, working with what
many had probably regarded as an almost completely
destroyed site, have brought light and perhaps new
recognition to a critical era in the history of Texas.

Under Four Flags: History and Archeology of North Loop One, Travis County, Texas, by John W.
Clark, with contributions by Barry Baker and Brian Shaffer. Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Division, Austin. 2004, 328 pp.

Reviewed by Rachel Feit

Archeologists engaged in cultural resource
management know too well the frustration of trying
to understand a single site in isolation. Too often
the sites we examine through compliance archeology are just pieces of a story. They are portions of
sites, fragments of communities, or incomplete parts
of cultural systems that happen to fall within proposed rights of way or on the edge of property
boundaries. As fragments, these sites have little
research value. Rarely, do CRM archeologists have
an opportunity to examine sites holistically, as part
of a larger network. Under Four Flags: History
and Archeology of North Loop One by John W.
Clark is a report that does just that. In it Clark
synthesizes the results of archeological investigations for seven nineteenth and early twentieth century sites, and the historical research on many more
within the Waters Park and Duval communities of
northern Travis County.
Working for TxDOT in the 1980s, archeologists
undertook this project as part of the compliance
effort for the construction of North Loop One (aka
North Mopac) in Travis County, Texas. With the
construction of North Loop One, TxDOT archeologists were lucky enough to have an entire
community-stretching from US 183 to Parmer
Lane-to investigate archeologically. When the
project began in the early 1980s, John Clark
insightfully perceived that the archeological remains
of homes, businesses, roads, and dams within the
path of the then un-built North Mopac were part of
a system that developed and functioned organically
during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The
research value of each site was not necessarily
intrinsic but measurable only through a wide-angled
lens that could account for the entire complex.
Applying a theoretical template not unlike the
political ecology model proposed by Thomas
Sheridan, Clark examines the sites within the path
of North Loop One not only as cultural-ecological
systems but also as political-economic units. The
people and personalities associated with them were

part of a community that labored together, traded,
intermarried, and socialized with one another. The
specific developmental trajectory of this community
was influenced not only by these social relationships
but also by a unique set of ecological and
environmental factors. At the time TxDOT began
this study, these ideas had not yet been articulated
in one theoretical framework, and consequently
Clark's approach was (and still is) quite visionary.
In the opening chapters of the report, Clark
introduces the project and its context. The natural
environment, he argues, was critical to the pattern
of initial development within the North Loop One
area, which straddles the edge of the Balcones Escarpment. Early settlement and agriculture developed on the Big Prairie side of the escarpment,
while use of the upthrust side of the escarpment

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

Reviews 291
focused on exploitation of cedar and grasslands for
grazing. Roads evolved mainly on the edge of this
geologic dividing line and fonned the main communication arteries linking the early households in the area.
Maps of site distributions in the report clearly demonstrate the linear placement of these historic sites along
the Upper Georgetown and Stringtown Roads.
Once rail transportation was introduced to central Texas, however, rail stops became a major economic catalyst. A rail stop located on the Upper Georgetown Road near Walnut Creek created a small economic boom for one landowner, Silas Summers, who
sold the land that eventually developed into the Waters Park Community in the 1880s. Located along a
large meander of Walnut Creek, at the edge of the
Balcones Escarpment, Waters Park became an attractive weekend picnic destination once the Austin
Northwest Railroad built a stop there. Amenities that
were built to accommodate weekend tourism included
a gazebo, a baseball diamond, a dam over the creek,
and Andrew Peyton's Tavern.
Clark traces the history of this area and its development through detailed use of archives, local genealogies, land use histories, maps, aerial photos and oral
interviews. The project was an enormous undertaking. The report examines and reports on over 20
historic archeological sites, as well as several prehistoric sites. Seven historic sites were specifically targeted for archeological investigation for this project.
These include the Wallace Site (41TV291), first occupied by the Rogers family prior to 1880, a railroad
section house (41TV632), the Summers/Colvin
House (41TV633), the Andrew Peyton Tavern
(41TV634), the Water Park Dump (41TV635), and
the Upper Georgetown Road (41TV637). The total
effort required hundreds of test units, and analysis of
over 100,000 artifacts. Clark's "Results of Investigations" section provides concise summaries of the
work conducted at each site and the artifacts that
were found. The report will undoubtedly become an
invaluable reference tool for anyone conducting historical archeological investigations of nineteenth and
early twentieth century communities in Texas (be
sure to request Appendices 14-23 on CD-ROM containing artifact inventories).
With the report's comprehensive site data and
relatively robust philosophical underpinnings, the

final synthesis of the project, then, is somewhat
unsatisfying. Published almost six years after Clark
had actually retired from TxDOT, Clark himself
admits that his original manuscript was heavily edited after his retirement. Whether some of those
deletions occmred in the synthesis or not, I believe
that the final "Summary" chapter could have been
much more developed.
In terms of artifact analysis, Clark modeled his
own analytical categories on South's in order to
compare basic functional categories between similar historical sites in the southeast. But South's
categories themselves are extremely general and
useful for only basic comparisons. Moreover, most
of South's work was conducted on Colonial and
Plantation sites of the east coast, which are hardly
comparable to late nineteenth century frontier settlement sites in central Texas.
Much more could have been made of land use
patterns and artifact comparisons between sites actually investigated for this project. For instance, the
summary section of the report describes the breakdown of animal bones found at each of the sites
investigated. Virtually all of the sites investigated
for this project exhibited the same general consumption patterns, with beef and rabbit predominating, followed by pig then chickens, sheep, and
goats. However at one site, the Summers/Colvin
site, chicken was clearly the most common animal
remain. Nothing is made of this significant discrepancy, which could be a major indicator of socioeconomic status or cultural preferences, and Clark
states in the conclusion that class and cultural differentiation among sites was not possible from artifact content.
But this seems to be an endemic problem in
most CRM reports (including, no doubt, my own)
on Texas archeology. That is, we offer much data,
but much too little synthesis and interpretation.
What does artifact, feature and land use patterning
actually tell us about how people lived, and how
does it compare with other sites of similar and
divergent contexts. If we are to make our reports
meaningful, as no doubt we desire, we must take
that critical leap from assembling data to writing
history. Under Four Flags heads down that path,
but stops short of the end point.

Prehistory of the Rustler Hills: Granado Cave, by Donny L. Hamilton with contributions by John R.
Bratten, David L. Carlson, John E. Dockall, Cristi Assad Hunter, and Harry J. Shafer. The University of
Texas Press, xviii-296 pages, 2001.

Reviewed by William A. Cloud

Donny Hamilton's book on the archeology of
the Rustler Hills-a chain of hills running northsouth through eastern Culberson County-concentrates on findings from Granado Cave (41CU8).
Previous archeological excavations within the study
area were primarily conducted during the 1930s
(Sayles 1935, 1941; Jackson 1934a, 1934b, 1937),
concentrating on deposits in some of the larger
caves. While a few more recent efforts have supplemented those investigations (Tanner 1949; Skinner
1978; Ward 1992), the area has remained poorly
known archeologically. Accordingly, Hamilton's
publication on his findings from Granado Cave from
testing conducted in 1976 and an 11 day investigation in 1978 is a welcome addition to the archeological record of the region.
Hamilton begins with a well-written and informative environmental background chapter in which
he presents the Rustler Hills as a desolate area on
the margins of more habitable and hospitable regions. Recent and historic analyses of spring and
well water in the area are presented (pgs. 8-11) to
emphasize the poor quality of this critical resource.
Using this data, Hamilton suggests water during
prehistory was similarly unpalatable and, as such, a
marginal resource. He draws on several lines of
evidence, most importantly the widespread occurrence of gypsum. While he makes a fairly convincing case, the reader should be cautioned that water
quality may have been affected in historic times by
groundwater depletion and water in prehistoric times
may or may not mirror historic quality.
The archeological background chapter (Chapter 3) clears up some confusion in the literature
over past research in the Rustler Hills. Hamilton
succinctly presents past efforts at sinkhole/cave sites
in the area (Caldwell Shelter No. 1, Caldwell Shelter No. 2, McAlpin Cave No. 1, McAlpin Cave No.
2, Shelby Brooks Cave, and ELCOR Cave) while
indicating that little work has been done on open
sites in the vicinity. In fact, Table 3 .1 indicates
there are only two such sites (41CU3 and 41CU260)

recorded in the Rustler Hills. The lack of recently
investigated open sites in the area is a problem
when considering some of the conclusions in the
final chapter.
Chapter 4 contains a description of Granado
Cave, an introductory section providing information on how eight of 10 burials were discovered,
methodological approaches from testing and final
excavation, and findings from the investigations.
This chapter is presented in an orderly and comprehensible manner, and is well illustrated with photographs and drafted figures.
Ten human burials from Granado Cave are presented in Chapter 5, eight of which were uncovered
by Mr. Frank Granado, the person who discovered
the cave. Mr. Granado is commended for sharing
information from his efforts and graciously providing the materials for documentation, but it must be
recognized that the bulk of grave goods were unearthed during his uncontrolled efforts. Human
burial data in private collections or unearthed in
uncontrolled manners, such as these, are often documented by archeologists (e.g., Comuzzieet al. 1986;
Mallouf 1987; Word and Fox 1975; Parker 1982).
Since burials contain important component-specific
information, such documentation is clearly needed.
Nonetheless, this is an imperfect context. Despite
this drawback, this chapter presents details of the
burials, artifacts reported to be in association, and
skeletal data. Hamilton discusses problems with
several of the burials, which is often related to the
lack of solid context. Regardless, the Granado Cave
burials contained a wealth of perishable items that
are fully described in subsequent chapters.
Chapters 6 (Cordage and Cotton), 7 (Basketry),
8 (Matting, Bags, and Sandals), and 9 (Wood Artifacts) provide detailed descriptions of the perishable materials. Be assured, there are plenty of interesting artifact photographs and descriptions in these
chapters. The presence of cotton is used to suggest
a trade network existed with villages to the west.
Hamilton states (pg. 89) that "radiocarbon dates

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

Reviews 293

from the associations containing cotton are the earliest dates for cotton in Texas." Other unique and
important artifacts presented in these chapters include a deep parching tray (mud-coated basket) and
other coiled baskets with mud-coated and charred
interior surfaces, several tumpline carrying or burden baskets (presented as "Rustler Hills Kiahil.s"),
distinctive plaited and twined mats, twined rabbit
robes, twined grass bags, woven fishtail sandals, a
notched rhythm stick and sounding stick, rabbit
sticks, arrow fragments, and a notched arrow
foreshaft. Hamilton argues (pg. 126) that several of
these items are unlike any others in the region or
greater Southwest, and "indicate that the people
who inhabited this area were a small group of conservative hunters and gatherers who concentrated
on subsisting in a harsh, unforgiving environment."
To his credit, Hamilton conducted a bit of experimental archeology by constructing a tumpline
basket like the ones recovered with the burials.
Although one illustration (Fig. 7.8) is provided to
show the exterior surface of the weaver's knot, the
description of this step-by-step process would be a
little easier to visualize if additional schematic illustrations had been provided.
Chapter 10 presents pottery from the site and
other nearby sites, all attributed to trade from cultures in adjacent areas: the Casas Grandes area of
Chihuahua, agricultural villages around El Paso,
and Puebloan groups in the regions of the Seven
Rivers and the middle Rio. Grande. Only a single
"killed" Mata Red-on-Brown Textured jar and 21
sherds from other vessels were recovered from
Granado Cave. Pieces of the jar, a minor type at
Casa Grandes (Di Peso et al. 1974), had been
found by Mr. Granado around Burials 2 and 3,
with additional sherds recovered by Hamilton. A
photo (Fig. 10.1) shows the reconstructed vessel.
However, a drawing (Fig. 10.2) better illustrates
the design elements. Hamilton's accompanying description is thorough, and discusses difficulties in
typing the jar as well as chronological considerations. He ultimately assigns the jar to Burial 2;
however, this association cannot be confidently
demonstrated due to removal of both burials by Mr.
Granado. In Table 10.1 Hamilton provides quantified data on ceramics recovered from sites in the
Rustler Hills, illustrating the relative scarcity of
pottery in the area and the types present. The table
would be easier to read if the three areas the ceramics originated from (South Central New Mexico, El
Paso and Mimbres Area, and Northern Chihuahua)

were highlighted, bolded or indented in some manner. As presented, the areas, types, and subtotals
are all in the same column making it hard to distinguish the separations.
Chapter 11, written by John E. Dockall and
Harry J. Shafer, details recovered lithic artifacts.
This analysis is presented in a comprehensive and
understandable manner, indicating most of the tools
at the site were expediently manufactured. The authors use past use-wear studies from Hinds Cave
(Shafer and Holloway 1979) and other considerations to classify seven specimens as "Chert Agave/
Sotol Knives." This formal name contrasts to the
informal appearance of the implements (see Figure
11.3). Since utilized edges of six of these (one was
not measured) contained somewhat disparate splineplane angles-27, <30, 32, 39, 45, and 60.5 degrees-some of these tools were likely used for
additional or other purposes. Five arrow points were
recovered and the authors state (pg. 192) that "the
only arrow points found in Granado Cave that can
be dated by radiocarbon association are illustrated
in Figure 11.7 (b, d, e)." However, the caption for
(b) states that it was found on the surface. Another
problem with this discussion is that the specimens
illustrated as (a), (c), and (e) are said to be probable
variants of Livermore with Mallouf (1987:9, Figure 6) cited. Checking the reference, only (e) appears to be similar to the illustrated points from the
cairn at Burnt Springs, but is typologically unassignable due to breakage. Furthermore, Mallouf,
who is currently working with the Livermore Cache
(Janes 1930) and a number of other Livermore phase
sites, indicates that stem configurations [expanding] of specimens (a) and (c) do not conform well
to the Livermore type (Robert J. Mallouf, personal
communication 2005). One other typological assessment is questionable. The specimen illustrated
in Figure 11. 7i is said (pg. 194) to resemble "a
Palmillas dart point in its moderate shoulders, expanding stem, and its convex base." The illustration indicates the stem is parallel-sided, a form not
usually attributable to the Palmillas type (Suhm, et
al. 1954:462; Turner and Hester 1993: 167).
A few other comments on this chapter are offered. The authors divide bifaces into Stage I and
Stage II categories (pg. 194), but do not give a
reference even though several different biface classifications have been developed. In the discussion
under the heading of Dorsal Variation (pgs 200201), there is a pronounced editorial error. The
opening paragraph is repeated almost verbatim in

294

Texas Archeological Society

the middle of the following paragraph, the only
difference being a percentage; 20/377 presented as
51.3% initially, then conectly as 5.31 % in the second version. While the percentage is ultimately corrected, it is somewhat surprising that such an enor
occurs in a book of a major press. Another apparent
editorial decision that is questionable occurs in Figure 11.9, a bar graph showing the size grade of
debitage as broken down by material type. Both
black and white bars are used for two separate size
classifications (white-0-10 mm and 10-20 mm;
black--40-50 mm and 60-70 mm) making portions of the graph difficult to comprehend.
Chapter 12 (Miscellaneous Artifacts) presents
some of the more interesting specimens recovered
from Granado Cave. These are divided into the
following categories: Ceremonial Items, Bone
Tools, Beads, Feathers, and Desiccated Fruit. The
ceremonial items, all recovered from burials, are of
special interest since they are rarely seen. There are
excellent descriptions and photographs of these
specimens, which consist of an unusual limonite
cone, clay balls, a rattlesnake-rattler rattle, deerhoof tinklers, a bird-head skin, and tanned skins.
The limonite cone and bird-head skin are both described as one-of-a-kind aitifacts, which seems substantiated given their descriptions and step-by-step
accounts of how they were made. All in all this
chapter provides some fascinating information.
Chapter 13, by Cristi Assad Hunter, contains
data on 2,938 vertebrate faunal remains. This chapter is straightforward, with the findings illustrated
in four easy to read tables. One of the tables (Table
13.4) lists faunal remains from select Granado Cave
coprolites. The predominance of cottontail and jackrabbit bones in the overall collection is supported
with similar data from the coprolites. Additionally,
through her analysis, Hunter indicates (pg. 234)
"that small animals were eaten either whole or in
part, with the bones being chewed and swallowed
along with the soft tissue." Further faunal data is
presented in an appendix written by Hunter and
David L. Carlson, which provides information on
how two species of cottontail found in Culberson
County were differentiated. Since this data is applicable in other areas, it should prove useful to the
larger archeological community.
Chapter 14, written by Hamilton and John R.
Bratten, provides pollen data recovered from coprolites in both Granado Cave and Caldwell Shelter
No. 1. There is a great deal of interesting data in
this chapter indicating (pgs. 254-257) ingestion of

grasses, Mormon tea, desert hackbeny, mesquite,
cactus, and a few other plants. They also offer that
several of these may have been ingested to combat
dianhea since a majority of the coprolite samples
were paddylike. Here again data are suggestive of
poor water in the area, although in this case it is
prehistoric data. The authors establish an "economic
pollen spectrum" for the Rustler Hills and compare
this with similar data obtained from Hinds Cave
(Lower Pecos) and Frightful Cave (Chihuahua,
Mexico). They state (pg. 258) "An economic pollen spectrum ... is a pollen signature of a particular
culture inhabiting a particular region, based on the
plants that were being intentionally ingested during
a particular time range." The problem I see with
this definition is that it is extremely difficult to
positively identify "a particular culture" at any site
based on a coprolite. Even if Hamilton's premise is
correct that a single "culture" is represented at
Granado Cave, there is the possibility that other
cultural groups traveling through the area may have
"deposited" some of the coprolites. The comparison with Hinds Cave and Frightful Cave provide
some interesting data, but since the time periods
represented by these three data sets span different
portions of the past the results do not allow for
substantive interpretation. Changes through time at
a given site or comparison of sites in different regions at the same point in time would be much
more useful.
Radiocarbon dating is presented in Chapter 15,
although much of this data is discussed previously.
Stuiver and Reimer (1993) are cited for the calibration program used throughout. However, presentation of the data is somewhat unique. For example, a
sample of human skin from Burial 1 (Tx-3093) was
reported (pg. 54) as yielding a date of "A.D. 310
(403) 496," while a piece of human skin from Burial
2 (Tx-2823) is reported (pg. 57) as yielding a date
of "A.D. 409 (-446-) 615." The figure in parentheses is apparently a "most likely" date, but the dashes
in the latter example are particularly puzzling.
Eleven of the 20 dates are reported with the dashes,
and this should be explained for the reader.
An additional problem with the dating, primarily discussed in Chapter 5, is that Hamilton accepts one date for three of the burials (Burials 2, 4,
and 5) while disregarding other date(s) from the
same interment. On page 263 he states, "Dates on
skin, both rabbit and human, were found to be consistently older than any accompanying material. As
such, these radiocarbon dates are best disregarded."

Reviews 295

This would seem to explain his accepted dates for
Burials 2 and 4; however, he disregards a date
from a sedge mat in Burial 5 while accepting a
date from cordage. One would presume this was
because it fit his model better, but all he offered
(pg. 65) was that "The grass mat date of A.D.
993-115 is deemed to be the most reliable in this
instance." He apparently meant to say that the
cordage date was acceptable. As far as "disregarding" radiocarbon dates from human skin, right
after cautioning about the reliability of such material, Hamilton states (pg. 263), "If the date of the
sedge mat from Burial 5 (TX-3096) of A.D. 191
and possibly the human skin date from Burial 1
(Tx-3093) of A.D. 403 are also taken to be valid,
then this range extends to A.D. 190/400 to A.D.
1430." Despite the above criticism, Hamilton is
commended for dating and reporting so many
samples from a single site in the region.
Despite the positive points of the book presented above, this author cannot agree with many
of the conclusions in the final chapter. Especially
troubling is the new phase proposed for the Rustler
Hills, termed the Castile phase. While Hamilton is
applauded for his review of guidelines for defining
archeological phases as proposed by Willey and
Phillips (1958:22-29) and his discussion of
Johnson's (1987) critique of past phase designations in Texas, he (pg. 274) summarily casts those
cautions aside and proposes that the "Castile phase"
be used to designate the cultures of the Rustler
Hills for the period A.D. 200-1450.
Hamilton brings several separate lines of evidence forward in this discussion. Using Newcomb
(1961) and Hickerson (1994) among others, he offers the possibility that early inhabitants of the west,
or perhaps entire continent, were Hokan speakers,
later split by invading groups of Uto-Aztekan- and
Athapaskan-speaking people. In this model, the
Hokan speakers, represented in Historic times by
the Coahuiltecans of South Texas and groups on
the Pacific coast, were pushed into unoccupied,
marginal environments in late prehistoric times by
the other groups. Here the poor quality of the water
is cited in suggesting the Rustler Hills to be such a
place. Furthermore, Hamilton provides past skeletal classificatory nomenclature (Otomid) to suggest similarities between a nearby burial most likely
from Paleoindian times (Midland Man), and those
from the Rustler Hills and the Oso site in South

Texas, the latter "assumed to be representative of a
Coahuiltecan skeletal form (pg. 269)." Hamilton then
states (pg. 269), "The time period involved, the
amount of occupational debris, the number of burials, and the marked similarities in the material culture found in the Rustler Hills indicate that the caves
were occupied by a relatively small group of individuals who were probably related." After questioning Sayles' (1935) assignment of findings in the
Rustler Hills to the Hueco phase, and Lehmer' s
(1948) placement of the Hueco phase as the earliest
of the Jornada Branch, Hamilton provides a critique
of this somewhat controversial phase, defined well
before the advent of radiocarbon dating and other
modern analytical techniques. He concludes that a
Hueco period of an unknown time span be assigned
to the region encompassed by southern New Mexico
and the northern half of the Trans-Pecos.
While Hamilton is commended for his suggested refinement of the Hueco phase, his Castile
phase is problematic, at least in this author's mind.
The duration of this phase is rather long, a span of
1,250 years (A.D. 200-1450) in which a single
culture is said to exist in the Rustler Hills and Great
Gypsum Plain-and Hamilton says it could have
started even earlier and extended later in time (pg.
274). Also troubling is the lack of open sites in the
model that would, if present, provide a more holistic understanding of use of the environment. Furthermore, the lack of extensive excavation at
Granado Cave, and the factthat most of the burials
and grave goods were recovered by Mr. Granadowithout proper archeological methods, techniques,
and documentation-relegate the phase to one that
needs serious investigation and refinement. To
Hamilton's credit, he does state (pg. 276) that the
phase "can be more clearly delineated with subsequent excavations." I would argue there needs to be
a great deal more excavation data, from both within
sinkholes of the area and open sites that are not
directly adjacent to sinkholes to make this a welldefined phase.
In closing, thanks are extended to Hamilton
and the other authors of the Granado Cave report
for following through with publication of the data
despite a lengthy delay. The report offers a great
deal of data that will be useful in understanding
cultures of the area and greater region. Of particular value are the descriptions, photographs, and schematic drawings of the perishable artifacts.

296

Texas Archeological Society

REFERENCES CITED
Comuzzie, A. G., Marianne Marek, and D. Gentry Steele
1986 Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains from the Palm
Harbor Site (41AS80), a Mortuary Site on the Central Gulf Coast of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:213-249.
Di Peso, Charles C., John B. Rinaldo, and Gloria J. Fenner
1974 Introduction to Casas Grandes Pottery Types, Viejo
Period Ceramics, and Media Period Ceramics. In
Casas Grandes: A Fallen Trading Center of the
Gran Chichimeca, by Di Peso, Charles C., Vol. 6,
pp. 1-316. The Amerind Foundation, Inc., Dragoon
and Northland Press, Flagstaff.

Hickerson, Nancy
1994 The Junmanos: Hunters and Traders of the South
Plains. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Jackson, A. T.
l 934a Excavation of a So-Called Cave, or Sink-Hole Shelter, on Judge C.M. Caldwell Ranch, 36 Miles Northwest of Toyah, Culberson County, Texas. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
l 934b Excavation of Large Cave on Shelby Brooks Ranch,
32lEFI/2 Miles Northwest of Toyah in Culberson
County, Texas. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Parker, Wayne
1982 The Wooden Bow Burial Site, Floyd County, Texas.
La Tierra 9(4):17-25.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 21. Gila Pueblo, Globe Arizona.
1941

Infant Burial in Carrying Basket. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
13:77-87.

Shafer, Harry J., and R. G. Holloway
I 979 Organic Residue Analysis in Determining Stone
Tool Function. In Lithic Use-Wear Analysis, edited
by Brian Hayden, pp. 385-400. Academic Press,
New York.
Skinner, S. Alan
1978 A Secondary Burial Cache from West Texas. Journal of Field Archaeology 5:484-489.
Stuiver, Minze, and Paula J. Reimer
1993 Extended 14C Data Base and Revised Calib 3.0 14 C
Age Calibration Program. Radiocarbon 35(1):215230.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society vol. 25.

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 9: 146-192.

Tanner, Robert William
1949 The Caldwell Ranch Sites: A Distinctive Culture
Complex in the Northeastern Trans-Pecos. Unpublished M.A. thesis, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Janes, Susan
1930 Seven Trips to Mount Livermore. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society 3:8-9. Sul Ross State
Teachers College, Alpine, Texas.

Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1993 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Second edition. Gulf Publishing Company, Houston.

Johnson, LeRoy Jr.
1987 A Plague of Phases: Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy
in Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:1-26.

Willey, Gordan R., and Philip Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

1937

Lehmer, Donald J.
1948 The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. Social Science Bulletin 17, University of Arizona 19(2):9-99.

Ward, Christine Gray
1992 Shelby Brooks Cave: The Archaeology of a Dry
Cave in the Texas Trans-Pecos. Unpublished M.A.
thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Mallouf, Robert J.
1987 Las Haciendas: A Cairn-Burial Assemblage from
Northeastern Chihuahua, Mexico. Office of the State
Archeologist Report 35, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Word, James H., and Anne Fox
1975 The Cogdell Burial in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 46:1-64.

Newcomb, W. W. Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press,
Austin.

A Pest in the Land: New World Epidemics in a Global Perspective, by Suzanne Austin Alchon.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, 2003. ix+ 214 pp.

Reviewed by Waldo Troell

Pest in the Land takes on a common theme,
and one of interest to archeologists here in Texas:
the spread and outcome of European disease on
Native American populations. Suzanne Austin
Alchon presents a slimly held theory: that virgin
soil epidemics (diseases new to a land or region),
such as small pox, measles, and the plague were no
more devastating to American populations than they
were when the same diseases arrived in Europe,
Asia, and Africa. This perspective contradicts the
common perception that scholars today associate
the decline of Native American populations after
the introduction of these Old World diseases. Instead, Alchon presents the view that the great loss
of population and failure of Native Americans to
recover and reestablish their political and economic
control was caused by European colonialism, which
created practices of continental warfare, abusive
labor conditions, slavery, and forced, violent migrations. She posits that these practices undermined
the social, political, and economic structures, resulting in the downfall of the Native groups.
The author presents data to support l:ler
assumption that neither colonialism nor epidemic
disease exclusively caused the decline in Native
American populations. Instead, she attempts to
integrate both views as the cause of the population
loss. In Chapter 1 Alchon gives examples from the
historic record in which human response to illnesssuch as divine causality, isolation of the sick, flight
of the healthy, healing prayers and rituals-is the
same throughout the Old World, in both Europe
and the Middle East. She also points out that leaders'
reactions to frequent epidemics affected rates of
mortality. For instance, in Europe the elites devised
control methods that limited the impact on the
population, while the Middle East did not. In
contrast, she asserts that the Middle Eastern belief
that disease was God's will resulted in greater
devastation because they failed to install controls to
limit the spread of those diseases. Her documentation for these differences often consisted of

extensive anecdotes from historic documents. While
I appreciated the anecdotes, the sheer volume of
these accounts sometimes made them too much to
grasp and they seemed repetitive.
In Chapter 2, the author describes the major
issues in the disease environments in the Americas
versus disease environments in the Old World.
Examples include lack of crowded infective type
diseases or domesticated animals. A discussion of
extant disease in the New World and warfare
patterns of groups encountered in the New World
follows, and together these indicate the prehistoric
New World was not a paradise. Unfortunately, this
discussion was not as helpful as I had hoped because

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

298

Texas Archeological Society

Alchon does not define the medical terms she
employs; instead she assumes the reader is
acquainted with them.
Alchon used Chapter 3 to compare and contrast virgin soil epidemic outbreaks in the New and
Old Worlds. Similar to the information already presented, she includes multiple historic accounts to
describe epidemics introduced into and spread
through Native Americans populations, and she provides the resulting mortality rates to reflect similarities in population migrations, mortality rates,
and military actions. Then, Alchon presents the
major difference: time. In the New World, introduction of so many virgin soil epidemics occurred
at one time, whereas in the Old World populations
usually had a few generations to recover between
epidemic occurrences. In her opinion, it was this
quick, expansive devastation that was the key to
Native populations' inability to regain their populations or power structures.
In Chapter 4, the author explains the four colonial systems affecting Native Americans and the
way these different approaches influenced native
groups' survival. This description was well researched and quite helpful. In fact, I had not seen as
detailed a description of how colonial systems affected native populations elsewhere. Here, Alchon
reiterates that Native Americans did not have a
reduced immunity to virgin soil epidemics compared to people in the Old World, but rather were at
a disadvantage because these diseases were released

on the New World over such a short time. When
coupled with the harsh and many times devastating
policies of the colonial powers, the Native Americans could not reorganize.
In this slim volume, Alchon effectively weaves
together two competing views of Native American
decline, providing a richer and more accurate view
of the complex nature of cultures clashing and its
impact on the New World populations. And, she
does it effectively because she provides so many
examples from the historical record, both Old and
New World. On the other hand, such heavy reliance
on those accounts limited the book's scope. No
discussion of possible environmental factors, like
the severe drought during the 1500s, was included.
This failure disappointed me. Although exclusion
of other contributing factors does not directly
undermine her argument, their omission does. It
makes the reader wonder if she ever considered
those contributing factors or if she simply is unaware
of them. Also, Alchon uses what I would consider
to be controversial archeological dates for the
introduction of people to the New World that are
not well accepted by the archeological community.
Again, while this does not strictly affect her
argument, it does raise the question of the accuracy
of other information in the book. In summary, I
found the book to be informative; however, I would
have liked a more conservative timeline and more
inclusive treatment of potential causes of Native
American population decline in the New World.

Gulf Coast Archeology: The Southeastern United States and '-'"-''1'1."·" edited by Nancy Marie White.
University Press of Florida, Gainesville, 2005. xvi+ 416 pp.

Reviewed by Scott Pletka

The edited volume Gulf Coast Archaeology:
The Southeastern United States and Mexico concerns the relationship between the prehistoric cultures of these regions. As the title implies, the scope
of this book is broad. It not only discusses the
archeology of the Southeastern United States, Texas,
and Mexico but covers many time periods and types
of material culture. According to the introductory
chapter-penned by editor White-the book is intended primarily for scholars of the Gulf Coast,
encouraging them to consider anew possible regional connections. White also expresses hope that
the book may also prove interesting to scholars of
long-distance interaction. The book does contain
many worthwhile chapters. As a whole, however,
this volume is unlikely to satisfy either audience.
The volume originated from a symposium held
at the annual meetings of the Society for American
Archaeology. As this origin implies, the book's
chapters vary greatly in their adherence to the stated
topic and in their approach to that topic. White's
introductory and concluding chapters strive mightily to integrate the material found in the rest of .the
book, with some success. Some contributions breezily assert that various similarities in material culture between the Southeast and Mexico provide
evidence for some sort of ties between the peoples
of these regions, leaving it to future research to
work out the details. Other chapters delve into the
details of local adaptations, providing the reader
with the opportunity to engage in the comparative
work. Few chapters, however, tackle head-on the
meaning and significance of the putative ties between the Southeast and Mexico.
The chapters which focus on Mexico exemplify this diversity. The contributions by Wilkerson,
Cabrera, and Ocana all point to various material
culture similarities between Mexico and the Southeast. Daneels and colleagues postulate that some
Middle and Late Classic Period groups in Veracruz
grew crops like cotton for use in long-distance exchange. Pool documents variability in the scale of

organization among Olmec societies, drawing parallels to similar variability among Mississippian
groups. Clark and Knoll chart the appearance and
spread of maize, manioc, mounds, and ceramics
around North and South America. They conclude
that the movement of goods, ideas, and peoples has
a deep but complicated history. Colonization does
not seem to have been a particularly important
mechanism by which goods and ideas diffused.
Two chapters concentrate on the Southeast but
that is about all they have in common. Widmer
discusses the environmental conditions which engendered complex social organization around the
Gulf Coast. Kehoe, in contrast, details additional

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

300

Texas Archeological Society

similarities in material culture between the Southeast and Mexico, arguing that Mississippian societies shared symbols of power with Mesoamerica.
The contributions from Texas distinguish themselves in a number of ways. These chapters make
accessible data collected from a number of cultural
resource management projects. They are among the
best-written chapters. And they seem to have a sometimes tenuous connection to the rest of the volume.
The archeological record of coastal Texas is
generally quite different from the record of neighboring regions. The effort made by the book to
grapple with the distinctiveness of Texas is one of
its most laudable features. Although Texan groups
did maintain ties to Southeastern and Mexican cultures, the extent of those ties appears limited compared to the relationships said to exist between the
Southeast and Mexico. The apparent lack of interaction with Texas may nevertheless provide useful
clues for understanding the interaction occurring
elsewhere. One of the four Texas-themed chapters
discusses this issue extensively.
Chapters by Ricklis and Weinstein, Gadus, and
Kibler deal much more thoroughly with details of
coastal hunter-gatherer subsistence and mobility in
Texas. A second chapter by Kibler, however, directly addresses the circumstances that limited inter-regional interaction through Texas. Poor environmental conditions along the south Texas coast
inhibited the transmission of people, goods, and
ideas through this area, so Southeastern and Mexican groups presumably took alternate routes by sea
to maintain whatever relationships they had.
Despite the diversity of these chapters, some
themes do emerge. Features of the Gulf, such as

favorable ocean currents and the ubiquity of
navigable rivers which drain into it, promoted interregional trade and other kinds of long-distance
relationships. Many authors see stable sea levels and
favorable environmental conditions as a key to
explaining the emergence of sedentary and complex
societies around the Gulf. Estuaries and lagoons
provided abundant resources for hunter-gathererfishers while rivers supported ample fertile lands for
farmers. These groups developed inter-regional ties
which may have been important for the emergence
of social inequality and hierarchical organization.
Elites in both the Southeast and Mesoamerica built
similar types of monuments, which may have
originated in eastern North America. These groups
may have shared symbols and an underlying ideology
that supported their status.
The book may best serve as a source of inspiration for scholars interested in the topic of prehistoric Gulf Coast connections. It raises many issues,
resolving few. How can the observed similarities
be explained? What is the history of contacts among
regions? Why are specific elements of material culture adopted in a particular time and place? Readers sympathetic to the idea that contact between the
Southeast and Mexico fostered significant social
developments may be disappointed that the book
generally does not explore detailed hypotheses regarding the origins and mechanisms of this contact.
Readers unsympathetic to this idea will likely remain unconvinced, since the evidence marshaled in
its favor is often dispensed in a cursory fashion.
Those readers simply interested in that blank spot
on the map of Gulf Coast archaeology where Texas
lies will be most likely to find some new insights.

Rock Art of the Lower Pecos, by Carolyn E. Boyd. Texas A&M University Press, College Station. 2003,
xii + 139 pages.

Reviewed by Nancy A. Kenmotsu

If you enjoyed the Texas Archeological
Society's field school at Amistad National Recreation Area, if you have an interest in rock art or the
prehistory of the Lower Pecos, or if you are simply
interested in the Middle Archaic or hunter-gatherer
archeology, then Carolyn Boyd's book is for you.
A professional artist who then earned her doctorate
in anthropology, Boyd brings a unique perspective
to the world class rock art of the Lower Pecos
region, a perspective that allowed her to move beyond sketching, documenting, and photographing
individual elements within the large painted panels
on shelter walls in the Lower Pecos region. This
perspective is presented in Chapter One "The Work
of Art." Here she asks the reader to consider the
content behind any work of art, including rock art
that is thousands of years old. She correctly notes
that "archaeological research has focused on the
more material aspects of life, avoiding the areas of
human cognition or symbolic structures" (page 3),
particularly in the United States. She admonishes
us to lose our reluctance to consider symbolic features, saying "In non-Western societies ... art objects are often considered essential and powerful
instruments-not passive props but active participants in the sociocultural system within which they
were produced" (page 3). She feels strongly that the
rock art of the Lower Pecos was an active participant
in the local sociocultural system. She began working
in that region by first drawing individual elements,
but she quickly "recognized that the placement of
imagery on the shelter walls was not random but
patterned" (page 27). This book is about her unraveling and interpretating the patterns in five panels from
Rattlesnake Canyon (41VV180), White Shaman
(41VV124), Panther Cave (41VV83), Mystic Shelter (41VV612), and Cedar Springs (41VV696). From
these panels, she argues that:

The art and artists were active agents in
creating, maintaining, reproducing, and
challenging existing social relations and

religious identities. The rock art preformed work-it was a powerful form of
technology used to ensure the continuation of self and society in the lower Pecos
region four thousand years ago (page 5,
emphasis in the original).
She goes on to describe the five panels and
detail motifs that are sets of inter-related elements
that are repeated. Some are repeated within the same
site; others are found at several or all five sites.
Motif A, found in all five panels as well as
elsewhere in the region, is described in Chapter
four and consists of a crenelated arch, an opening
in the center of the arch, and a skeletonized anthropomorphic figure located above, behind, or below the arch. The anthropomorph is either surrounded by a particular animal (panther or deer)

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

302

Texas Archeological Society

or has animal attributes, such as horns, on its body.
Having identified this motif and its patterns across
the sites, Boyd searched the ethnographic literature
to find parallel arches that represent part of that
society's symbolic belief system. Using examples
from the Aztec, Huichol, Yaqui, and Hopi, she finds
that the literature "revealed striking similarities"
between iconography in each of those societies and
that of the Lower Pecos motif (page 54). Because
of the striking similarities (and they truly are striking), she suggests that the broad meanings of the
iconography in those societies may be applied to
better understand the motifs in the Lower Pecos.
Specifically, she suggests that the arches are "analogous to the serpent as the barrier or gateway through
which the shaman must pass on his or her journey
to the otherworld" (page 55). The opening in the
arch is the passageway itself, while the shaman is
the anthropomorph. Skeletonizing the anthropomorph (where the anthropomorphic figure has a
series of lines across its body) is interpreted to
mean the shaman is experiencing "a ritual death in
order to be reborn into the spiritual realm" (page
55). Finally, the animals and animal attributes represent the shaman's assistant.
To strengthen her interpretations, Boyd turns
to cognitive neuroscience and studies of hallucinatory imagery. Some of this literature is from studies
of shamans who were asked to draw or describe the
images they saw while under the influence of one
or another hallucinogens. Other literature comes
from medical studies of migraine hallucinations.
Because arches, zigzag lines, arid other patterns are
commonly reported in these studies, Boyd uses these
studies to support her analogies.
Chapter five looks at Motifs B and C in ways
similar to the discussion of Motif A in Chapter
four. Since these two motifs are interpreted to be
associated with the use, during the Middle Archaic, of psychotropic plants by shamans, the chapter is an important one for researchers in the Lower
Pecos. I will not, however, offer details of her
analysis and interpretation, but encourage readers
to explore it personally.
In her final chapter, she returns to the theme
that rock art is not decorative or non-utilitarian.
Rather it represents iconography of symbols
important to the society that created it. It "worked"
(page 106) within the Lower Pecos to communicate
relationships between animals, the local ecology,
and the social environment. "[R]ock art was a
vehicle through which important information and

instruction could be disseminated to the community
without threatening autonomy" that was important
to hunter-gatherers (page 107).
The volume is well written, well researched
and, in general, quite powerful. However, some
aspects of the book are problematic for me. First, as
one of those conservative, materialistic archeologists, while I agree with her that art can be an active
participant in a sociocultural system, the extent to
which she takes this is a stretch. I can go part way
with her, but her ethnographic analogies, while powerful, are from relatively recent and/or modern
groups. Can·ying these analogies back 4,000 years
makes me want more demonstrable evidence in the
material remains. And, I hope that future researchers in the Lower Pecos region try to look for evidence to support (or not) her interpretations, a hope
that she also expresses in her final chapter. Certainly, she challenges us to reanalyze and look at
the evidence in new ways. Also in her favor, she
notes the geographic variations in some of the patterns-feather hipclusters in the rock art around
Seminole Canyon versus rabbit-eared anthropomorphs west of the Pecos. Is this evidence for territorial markers? As she concludes, the evidence is too
limited to answer that question yet. This and other
patterns need more empirical evidence, not just from
rock art studies, but also from excavations. Thus,
while her work is provocative, I find myself still
doing some fence-sitting but very intrigued.
Another minor problem is that she fails to mention the rampant looting that has occurred in the
Lower Pecos region. While this was certainly not
her thesis or purpose, I spent a number of years
doing intermittent field work in the shelters of the
Lower Pecos and they have been savaged by individuals looking for artifacts, including taking pieces
of rock art panels home to sit on their mantels. Any
book on the region, particularly one that is dedicated to the region's world class rock art has, in my
opinion, a duty to point out to all readers the irresponsible treatment the shelters have received over
the past few decades. Finally, she fails to mention
the efforts of the Texas Historical Commission in
the Lower Pecos. Given that this agency lead an
effort to install an archeologist at the National Recreation Area and to revive interest in the region and
protection for the sites, they deserved some mention, however slight.
These issues notwithstanding, the book is worth
obtaining for your library. It is extremely well
illustrated, both with black and white photographs

Reviews 303

and with Boyd's beautiful colored renderings of the
five rock art panels. For those who have seen the
remarkable rock art of the region, that makes the
book an excellent addition to your libraries. And,
regardless of whether you do or do not agree with

her interpretations, it is a very thoughtful and serious
attempt to use the rock art to better understand the
peoples who occupied the region 4,000 years ago.
For this alone, I urge all members of the Society to
read the book.

From a Watery Grave: The Discovery and Excavation of La Salle's Shipwreck, La Belle, by James E.
Bruseth and Toni S. Turner. Texas A&M University Press, College Station, 2005, xiii + 139 pp.,
plates, maps, figures.

Reviewed by Mary Jo Galindo

This publication covers one of the most
remarkable undertakings in twentieth-century
archeology in Texas. From its inception, the
project-to locate, excavate, and preserve La
Belle-is marked by firsts. Whether you consider
the private sector fundraising, the multi-million
dollar coffer dam, or the sheer number of amazing
artifacts recovered by the project, the excavation of
La Belle is one for the U.S. history books.
The story appropriately begins in 1686 as the
La Belle lay anchored in Matagorda Bay. Bruseth
and Turner's narrative relies on the Journal of
Henri Joutel 1684-1687, Robert Weddle's Wreck
of the Belle and Wilderness Manhunt: The Spanish Search for La Salle, and the surviving pages
from La Belle's log archived in Seville, among
other historical documents.
Sidebars highlight important concepts and provide footnoted sources that facilitate further research. The narrative is carefully footnoted throughout. Notes appear in a separate appendix, which
both promotes a seamless read and cause the interested scholar to continually flip to the back of the
book instead of to the end of each chapter. I dealt
with this annoyance, as ever, by keeping my current page of notes bookmarked.
Despite this wealth of citations, the narrative
makes some unsubstantiated assertions, particularly
regarding the stranded French crew's alcohol consumption, for example, that left this reader wondering how such statements could be based on anything
but stereotypical supposition and bias. In general,
however, I found the narrative to be quite effective
at offering plausible, fact-based, historical recreations
of pivotal, as well as mundane, moments.
The Spanish began searching for Robert
Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle about a year before the
La Belle was shipwrecked, thanks to Denis Thomas, who abandoned the voyage in Haiti. He evaded
the dangers of the Gulf of Mexico to sail with
pirates. Their ship was soon captured by the Spanish and, in an attempt to save his life, he insisted he

was not a pirate and confessed his knowledge of La
Salle's plans. He told them La Salle was bound for
the mouth of the Mississippi River to create a settlement that would support the exploration of the Spanish silver mines to the west.
The revelation prompted the Spanish to send
a total of eleven expeditions by land and sea to
search for the would-be invaders. The impact of
the news would last for decades and would
influence future Spanish colonization efforts such
as Nuevo Santander along the lower Rio Grande
valley in the mid-eighteenth century. Jumano,
Cfbolo, and Karankawa Indians also fueled Spanish fears with reports of contact with French
traders and French inquiries about Spanish silver
mines. Representatives of these three Indian
groups were also instrumental in recovering and
preserving the pages of La Belle's log from Fort

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 76 (2005)

Reviews 305

St. Louis that were eventually placed in the
archives of Seville.
Chapter 2 summarizes La Salle's motivation,
experiences, and talents that led him to undertake
his ill-fated voyage. We are reminded of La Salle's
impressive accomplishments prior to his mistaken
landing in Matagorda Bay. He discovered the mouth
of the Mississippi River at the Gulf of Mexico and
claimed possession of one-third of the North American continent for France. In Chapter 4 we learn that
Louis XIV diverted La Salle to the Gulf of Mexico
from his originally planned northerly route to
Canada and then down the Mississippi River. This
change was not without consequences. La Salle had
been warned by experienced sailors about the strong
easterly currents that carried ships towards the Bahamian Channel as they traversed the Gulf of
Mexico, and he also had to contend with inaccurate
seventeen-century navigational aids. Thus, when
land was sighted, La Salle wrongly concluded they
were east of the Mississippi River and pointed his
ships into the sunset.
Chapter 3 fast-forwards to the 1970s when
Southern Methodist University archeologist Kathleen
Gilmore focused on the Keenan site in Victoria
County. Her ceramic analysis provided the first conclusive evidence supporting this as the location of La
Salle's Fort St. Louis. Having found the fort, Gilmore
knew La Belle had to be close by. She consulted
historical maps and gleaned whatever locational data
they offered. Geomorphologist Robert Morton of the
University of Texas then went to work modeling
shoreline changes since 1686 and defined high probability areas for a magnetometer survey in search of
La Belle and her sister ship l'Aimable. Barto Arnold
undertook a magnetometer and helicopter survey
based on these data, but did not meet with success in
1978. He was, however, involved in the second successful attempt in 1995, using a transportation enhancement grant to do so.
In the interim years, a dearth of public funding
for the project prompted efforts to secure private
funding from several foundations and a federal highway initiative through the Texas Department of
Transportation to spend tax dollars on promoting
attractions that can be viewed by the traveling public. Thus, with a melange of private and public
monies, was born one of the most significant examples of Heritage Tourism in the state. It would
be years before a string of museums along the Texas
Gulf Coast would rise to house the magnificent La
Belle artifacts, but by July 1995 a 17-year search

culminated in conclusive evidence in the form of a
French-inscribed cannon, whose manufacturing date
was consistent with La Salle's voyage.
Chapter 4 takes the reader from the initial formation of the research design and recovery strategy
through the excavations inside the coffer dam and
down to the removal of the final hull timbers. Total
recovery of La Belle was decided upon despite the
high costs because it would be impossible to protect the remains of the shipwreck in the future were
it only partially excavated. Construction of the
multi-million dollar coffer dam provided dry conditions by which to excavate and undoubtedly allowed the archeologists to maximize their study
and collection of the remarkably well-preserved ship
and cargo.
Operating the coffer dam cost $100,000 per
month. The challenges of securing private funds to
continue the project at critical stages was aided by
the tremendous public interest in the recovery effort. The expense of the coffer dam is justified by
the project's significant contribution to our understanding of Texas colonial history. Because of the
fine efforts of all who conceived of the plan, sweated
in the dirt, or contributed monetarily to its success,
the recovery of La Belle and her cargo represents a
milestone in U.S. archeology.
Chapter 5 is an in-depth look at the beautiful
vessel that was La Belle. By deciding to disassemble the hull, archeologists revealed that the ship
was actually a kit, designed to be carried as Trans
Atlantic cargo and assembled upon reaching North
America. Disassembly offered incredible insights
into seventeen-century ship building practices. Construction techniques and details revealed La Belle
as a unique example of the merging of two styles of
shipbuilding (Mediterranean and Atlantic) during
the time of a royal effort to modernize the French
Navy's shipbuilding practices.
Analysis of the type and age at harvest of the
trees used to hewn La Belle's hull timbers produced surprising results. It turns out that many of
the large timbers were recycled. Nearly all were
harvested 20 years before the ship was constructed.
Some were cut more than 200 years prior to construction. Of the samples that could be analyzed
dendrochronologically, a majority of the trees providing timbers were 100 years old at harvest. The
youngest was 60 years old when pressed into service as a part of La Belle's hull.
Chapter 6 is the heart of this publication perhaps
in large part because of the remarkable preservation

306

Texas Archeological Society

and array of artifacts recovered. If you want to cut
right to the chase, skip to the artifact photos which
begin on page 83. I jest, though, because without
the rest of the book's chapters, you'd be missing
the rich context that helps interpret these artifacts.
It is amazing that in so many categories, the La
Belle artifacts represent the most abundant, best
preserved in its class, and, in some cases, a unique
specimen that was previously unknown. Reading
the artifact descriptions, I could not help but
appreciate how La Belle's cargo will influence the

course of numerous theses and dissertations for
decades to come. Indeed, at Texas A&M there are
already several students engaged in preserving and
studying La Belle artifacts. The responsibilities of
caring for La Belle's cargo have influenced the
standards for curation facilities throughout Texas
in a manner similar to how the desire in the 1970s
to protect shipwrecks led to the establishment of
the Antiquities Code of Texas. In any event, the
book is a good read, and worth having in your
personal library.

Reviews 307
AUTHORS

Christine Alvarez, Texas State University
Samuel Cason, Arcadis, Inc.
Douglas K Boyd, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin
David 0. Brown, Anthony and Brown Consulting, Austin
William A. Cloud, Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University, Alpine
Rachael Feit, Hicks & Company, Austin
Anne A. Fox, Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio
Mary Jo Galindo, Archeological Consultants, Inc.
Kathleen Gilmore, Archeologist, Dallas
V. Kay Hindes, Historic Preservation Office, City of San Antonio
Nancy A. Kenmotsu, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin
Bennett Kimbell, Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock
Patricia R. Lemee, Research Historian, Austin
William A. Martin, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
David R. McDonald, Independent historian and translator, San Antonio
Timothy K. Perttula, Archeological and Environmental Consultants, LLC, Austin
Scott Pletka, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin
Elton R. Prewitt, President, The Shumla School, and Research Fellow, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin
Dee Ann Story, Professor Emeritus, The University of Texas at Austin, Wimberly
Alice Stultz, Archeological Steward, Texas Historical Commission, San Angelo
Matthew S. Taylor, Department of Anthropology, University at Albany, State University of New York.
Waldo Troell, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin
Tamra L. Walter, Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock
Richard A. Weinstein, Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge
Mark R. Wolf, Architect, San Antonio

308

Texas Archeological Society

Errata for the 2004 Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Volume 75
page 58: Citation listed for Dockall, John should be listed with Dickens, William as the author.
page 150: Header for the Artifacts of Pecos book review indicates there is a new preface. There is no new preface,
merely a new foreword by Fred Wendorf.

