Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

March 20, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2012-7: A Cultural Resources Background Review of the 870-Meter
Buntin A Pipeline in East-Central Dimmit County, Texas
Mr. David Black
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Mr. Black,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during a cultural resources background review
of the Buntin A Pipeline right-of-way (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Buntin A Pipeline on county-wide topographic map.

Background Review
Old Maps, Aerial
Photographs, Historic
Research
Diagnostic projectile points
such as Clovis, Folsom, and
Plainview types found in
Dimmit County indicate
that the area has been
occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources
such as wild game, fruits,
seeds, and roots made the
land hospitable. Early
technology included tools
from wood and stone,
woven basketry, sewed
rabbitskin robes, and a very
effective weapon was the
atlatl, a throwing stick that
greatly increased the
deadliness of their spears
(Hester 1984; Leffler 1996).
Perhaps as early as 1,300
years ago, they learned to
make pottery and to hunt
with bows and arrows.
“During the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, the
Coahuiltecan Indians native Figure 2. Buntin A Pipeline on MacDonald Lake (1982) USGS
to Dimmit County were 7.5' topographic map.
squeezed out by other
Indian who were migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south.
Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches
moved in to take their place” (Leffler 1996).
“No permanent Spanish settlement seems to have been established in the future Dimmit County.
Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio
Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. After the Mexican War of
Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its citizens to settle in Texas.
Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that included territory now in
Dimmit County. None of the recipients seems to have made use of the land, however. By 1836, when
Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated almost solely by Indians”
(Leffler 1996).

Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of Dimmit County lay in the
disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for desperate
characters until about 1865. Carrizo Springs was founded in 1865, with the new settlers who lived
in jacals or dugouts frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part tobeing
pursued by the Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave
Dimmit County by 1877, and in 1880 Carrizo Springs became the county seat for the newly formed
county. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an
important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators
combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
Although the residents of Dimmit County learned to cope with the sparse annual rainfall, artesian
wells ushered in an era of large vegetable truck farms in the 1890s, and Dimmit County became
known as part of the Texas Winter Garden Region, one of the most prolific vegetable-growing areas
in the country.
As with rest of the nation, the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced to cut
back their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on raising
poultry, hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county
in the 1950s certainly bolstered Dimmit County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim
to most of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively
increasing part of the county’s development (Leffler 1996).
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Other than early work done by A. T. Jackson in 1932, perhaps the earliest systematic archaeological
survey in Dimmit County was conducted by Thomas Hester and Parker Nunley in 1964 and 1965.
Their work resulted in the documentation of 24 archaeological sites in the county, ranging in age
from the Early Archaic through the Late Prehistoric Toyah phase (Nunley and Hester 1966).
However, other surveys in the county since that time have resulted in a total of 153 archaeological
sites being documented in the county as of February 1, 2012. Of these, 99 are prehistoric open
campsites ranging in age from the Paleoindian through Late Prehistoric periods. Prehistoric burials
have been discovered at four of these campsites. Prehistoric lithic scatters and lithic procurement
sites account for 50 of those documented. Historic sites documented in the county include houses
from the 1800s built of stone (one with a cowboy burial), farmstead operations, and a railroad berm
from the 1800s. Other sites of interest include a carved Indian petroglyph, and other petroglyphs near
Campo de los Cuervos. The only designated State Archaeological landmark in the county is the
Dimmit County Courthouse (Atlas 2012).
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicates that no
professional archaeological surveys have been conducted within one mile (1,609 meters), and no
archaeological sites have been recorded within one mile. However, as shown in Figure 2, TAAI has
recently conducted a survey of moderate and high probability areas along the Stumberg Lateral; no
archaeological sites were found along the Stumberg Lateral (Nickels 2011).

Soils Map
The Buntin A Pipeline
crosses three soil types that
vary in depth. Figure 3 shows
the soils that are to be
intersected by the Buntin A
Pipeline (Web Soil Survey
2012). Table 1 then presents a
brief description of each type,
and their potential to contain
buried and intact cultural
deposits.

Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the Buntin A Pipeline.
Table 1. Soils Dissected by the Buntin A Pipeline.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact Archaeological
Potential

Catarina clay (CGB)

Pryor sandy clay loam (PyB)

Tonio fine sandy loam (TOB)

Deep clayey soils on gently sloping

Minimal to Moderate to about 26

upland areas

inches below the surface

Moderately deep loamy soils on gently

Minimal to moderate to about 9

undulating uplands

inches below the surface

Deep loamy soil on gently undulating

Minimal to Moderate to about 30

uplands

inches below the surface

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Based upon the negative findings of known archaeological sites within the area, and at best a
moderate potential for significant archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area, we
recommend that construction of the Buntin A Pipeline as currently aligned be allowed to proceed
as planned, with no further archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that if any
previously undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development of the pipeline, such
finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological
consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
March 19, 2012].

Hester, T. R.
1984 Fragments, Flints, and Footprints: The Prehistory of Dimmit County. In Dimmit
County Mesquite Roots, Volume I, pp. 1-6, edited by L. K. Tidwell. Wind River
Press. Austin, TX.
Leffler, J.
1996

Dimmit County. The New Handbook of Texas Online, Volume 2, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Nickels, D. L.
2011 A Cultural Resources Survey of the 8.0-Mile Stumberg Lateral in Dimmit County,
Texas, October 26, 2011. Interim Letter Report submitted to Flatrock Engineering
and Environmental, Ltd. By Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations,
Martindale, Texas.
Nunley, P., and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. XVIII, No. 3, pp. 233-253.
Web Soil Survey
2012 Dimmit County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed March 19,
2012].

