AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
ED KHARBAT DRIVE EXTENSION, PHASE II PROJECT
IN MONTGOMERY COUNTY, TEXAS
Antiquities Permit 4733

By
William E. Moore
Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 185
2008

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
ED KHARBAT DRIVE EXTENSION, PHASE II PROJECT
IN MONTGOMERY COUNTY, TEXAS

Project Number: BVRA 07-34

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
City of Conroe
Post Office Box 3066
Conroe, Texas 77305

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey was conducted along the route of the proposed Ed
Kharbat Drive extension in the city limits of Conroe in central Montgomery County,
Texas by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) on December 4, 2007 for the
City of Conroe under Antiquities Permit 4733. No archaeological sites were
identified, and no artifacts were collected. In all, 4560 feet (12.6 acres) were
investigated. It is recommended that construction be allowed to proceed as
planned.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I appreciate the assistance of those who participated in this project. Maps
and logistical support were provided by Troy Toland, P.E. of the Capital Division,
City of Conroe. I was assisted in the field by C. J. Locklear and Tanner Singleton.
Jean Hughes at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) checked the
site records for previously recorded archaeological sites in the project area and
vicinity. Lili G. Lyddon prepared the cover and figures that appear in this report.
Nora Rogers assisted in the editing and proofreading of this report.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................4
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................5
METHODS ..........................................................................................................10
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................12
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................15
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................16
Appendix I. Shovel Test Log

FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location .............................................................................................. 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map Conroe.................................................... 3
Figure 3. Shovel Test Locations ................................................................................... 11
Figure 4. View of Woods in Area A ............................................................................. 13
Figure 5. Stewarts Creek (looking north).................................................................... 14

iv

INTRODUCTION
The City of Conroe proposes to extend Ed Kharbat Drive from Loop 336 to
Foster Drive in the city limits of Conroe in central Montgomery County (Figure 1).
The total length of the new road will be 4560 feet with a construction easement of
120 feet (12.6 acres). This road will cross Stewarts Creek, the only stream
crossing in the project area. The area examined is depicted on the USGS 7.5'
topographic map Conroe, Texas (Figure 2).
Montgomery County is located in Southeast Texas, an area known to
contain significant archaeological sites.
A summary of previous work by
professional archaeologists in the county is summarized in the Archaeological
Background section below. Because of the potential of the project area to contain
significant prehistoric and/or historic sites, a cultural resource study by a
professional archaeologist was required by the Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division. The project area is owned by the City of Conroe.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map Conroe

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The following statements were summarized from the Handbook of Texas
(Webb 1952) and the Soil Survey of Montgomery County (McClintock et al.
1972:1). Montgomery County, in the East Texas Timberlands Region, is bounded
on the north by Walker and San Jacinto counties, on the east by Liberty County, on
the south by Harris County, and on the west by Waller and Grimes counties.
Montgomery County covers 1047 square miles of flat to gently rolling terrain. The
county's principal water source is the San Jacinto River basin drainage system,
which includes Peach, Caney, Spring, and Bushy creeks. Montgomery County is in
the southeastern part of Texas in the land resource area of the East Texas
Timberlands, Blackland Prairie, and the Gulf Coast Prairies. The northern and
western parts of the county are undulating and the south and southeastern parts
are level to gently sloping. Elevation varies between 79 feet in the southern part of
the county to 330 feet in the northwestern part.
Vegetation is typical of the Piney Woods area with thick stands of longleaf,
shortleaf, and loblolly pines; hickory; maple, sweet gum and black gum; oak, and
magnolia trees. Grasses include Virginia Wildrye, blackseed needle grass, and
purpletop. Wildlife in the county includes eastern gray and fox squirrels, various
species of bats and skunks, and small herbivores such as gophers, mice, rabbits,
and armadillos, as well as raccoons, white-tailed deer, opossum, bobcat, coyote,
and red and gray fox. Alligators, frogs, toads, and numerous species of snake,
including the poisonous copperhead, cottonmouth, coral snake, and rattlesnake,
are found in abundance. A wide variety of birds such as mockingbirds, cardinals,
doves, quail, blue jays, and roadrunners, to name a few, are also native to the area.
The climate is subtropical humid with warm summers and mild winters. The
average annual relative humidity is 73%, and the average rainfall is 47.44 inches.
The average annual temperature is 68° Fahrenheit. Temperatures in January
range from an average low of 39° to an average high of 61° and in July range from
72° to 95°. The growing season averages 270 days per year with the last freeze in
early March and the first freeze in late November (Webb 1952).

4

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
General
Montgomery County is located in the Southeast Texas Archeological Study
Region of the Eastern Planning Region as defined by the Department of Antiquities
Protection in Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993). It is located in the Southeast Texas
cultural-geographical region (Region 6) as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985:88-90) in
a statistical overview. At the time the overview was published, Montgomery County
was 14th in the region with 62 recorded archeological sites. The 62 sites
comprised 3.81% of the region and .31% of the state. As of August 11, 2006 there
were approximately 205 recorded prehistoric and historic sites in Montgomery
County (TARL site files). No prehistoric sites are listed in the National Register of
Historic Places, but one prehistoric site (41MQ73) has been determined to be
eligible (TARL files). The Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern Region
of Texas (Moore 1989) cites 87 references for the county. Although many of these
investigations have been small area surveys, often resulting in no sites being
recorded, several projects involving larger areas have been conducted. The
following is a discussion of previous work in Montgomery County.
Prehistoric Overview
A detailed discussion of the culture sequence of the project area is beyond
the scope of this negative report. An excellent summary of some of the major
efforts to describe and synthesize Montgomery County prehistory is presented in
the Lake Creek Reservoir report (Bement et al. 1987). Although brief discussions
of Montgomery County prehistory are presented in the various contract reports for
the area, only two deal with major excavations of prehistoric sites. These are the
Scott’s Ridge site (41MQ41) by Shafer and Stearns (1975) and sites 41MQ4 –
41MQ6 in the San Jacinto River Basin, Lake Conroe (Shafer 1968).
Shafer and Stearns (1975:8-11) divide the prehistoric past of this area into
two temporal periods. These are the Lithic Period (8000 B.C. to 200 B.C.) and the
Ceramic Period (200 B.C. to A.D. 1700). The Lithic Period is that time prior to the
invention and use of the bow and arrow and pottery. Very little is known regarding
the early sites of this period except sites are found on the crests of high ridges
overlooking stream valleys or old geomorphic features where original surfaces are
reasonably intact. Later in the period, sites are found on recent geomorphic
features such as sandy ridges, knolls, and low bluffs along permanent streams of
all sizes. In general, subsistence data for this period is lacking.

5

The Ceramic Period began with the introduction of pottery in Southeast
Texas. The Early Ceramic Period is characterized by the same kinds of lithic
artifacts used during the previous period, and sites are found on the same
landforms. The only discernible difference is the use of pottery. Site locations were
the same during the Late Ceramic Period, and the bow and arrow was now being
utilized.
Prehistoric Investigations
The first site to be recorded in the county is a Late Prehistoric site (41MQ1)
on the West Fork of the San Jacinto River documented by E. Mott Davis of the
Anthropology Department, The University of Texas at Austin, during a field trip to
Montgomery County in 1956. Following this visit by E. Mott Davis, the county
remained virtually unexplored until 1965 when archaeologists working for the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project (TASP) surveyed an area to be affected by the
proposed Conroe Reservoir (Shafer 1968). As a result of this survey, 32 sites
(41MQ4-41MQ36) were recorded and three were recommended for testing. In the
spring of 1967, three sites (41MQ4 - 41MQ6) recorded during the Lake Conroe
survey were tested by TASP (Shafer 1968). These excavations provided the first
substantial body of data for Montgomery County and made it possible for the first
time to discuss the archaeology of the area based on artifacts excavated under
controlled conditions.
In 1975, eight years after the Lake Conroe excavations, an archaeological
survey was conducted in the Sam Houston National Forest adjacent to Lake
Conroe (Shafer and Baxter 1975). Three sites (41MQ41 - 41MQ43) were recorded
in Montgomery County, and two sites (41WA81 - 41WA82) were recorded in
Walker County.
During the summer of 1975, site 41MQ41 was tested by archaeologists from
Texas A&M University (Shafer and Stearns 1975). This site is located in the area
to be affected by construction of the Scott's Ridge Recreational Area. This effort
was very significant at the time as it provided an opportunity for archaeologists to
test and confirm the hypothesis that "prehistoric sites having considerable antiquity
do occur on older landforms in the area" (Shafer and Stearns 1975:37).
The work conducted at Lake Conroe only sampled sites on recent
geomorphic features. The Scott's Ridge site, however, represents the first site
investigated in the area that could be "tentatively placed in the Early and Middle
Lithic Periods" (Shafer and Stearns 1975:37).

6

Probably the largest area to be investigated in the county was the site of the
proposed Woodlands Development, a tract of 23,000 acres in the southern part of
the county along Spring Creek. The project was initiated by the Coastal Zone
Resources Division of Ocean Data Systems, Inc. under subcontract with Greiner
Engineering Sciences, Inc. (1980) of Tampa, Florida in 1979. In all, this project
recorded 12 prehistoric sites (41MQ63 - 41MQ74). Six of the sites are associated
with the Neo-American or Late Prehistoric (corresponds to the Ceramic Period as
defined by Shafer and Stearns (1975); 2 sites contained both Neo-American
(Ceramic Period) and Archaic (Lithic Period) components, and 4 sites were
classified by the authors as "undifferentiated" prehistoric.
No historic sites or standing structures were encountered. Not one of the 12
sites was eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. Except
for sites 41MQ70 and 41MQ73, no further work was recommended. The majority
of sites are described as "small and unproductive, possibly short-term or transitory
habitation localities."
In 1981, sites 41MQ70 and 41MQ73 were tested by Greiner Engineering
Sciences, Inc. (1981) in order to determine their eligibility for the National Register
of Historic Places. Site 41MQ70 was found to be not eligible, and site 41MQ73 was
found to be potentially eligible.
In 2002, an archaeological survey of approximately 262 acres in central
Montgomery County was conducted by Moore Archeological Consulting (Schubert
et al. 2002). The entire development consists of approximately 11,000 acres;
however, the Corps of Engineers only required that a smaller sample be examined.
A two-stage investigation was conducted; Stage 1 consisted of shovel testing, site
delineation, and excavation of test units, while Stage 2 completed site testing and
conducted backhoe trenching. The investigation was limited to areas along Fish
Creek, one of its tributaries, and the location of two smaller water control structures.
Five prehistoric sites (41MQ175 - 41MQ179) were recorded during the Stage I
survey, all of them along Fish Creek. Each of the five sites was in settings with
deep sandy soil. The sites were not recommended for further work.
Investigations Near the Project Area
According to the Archeological Sites Atlas, there have been several surveys
by professional archaeologists in the immediate area. Two area surveys have
been conducted in the general vicinity with negative results. In 2000, a study for
the proposed Conroe Golf Course was conducted by archaeologists from Moore
Archeological Consulting (Terneny and Beck 2000). They investigated 300 acres
on an unnamed tributary of Little Caney Creek 1.7 km to the northeast of the
current project area. In 2007, a study for a proposed Habitat for Humanity Housing
Development was carried out by archaeologists from American Archaeology Group
(Bradle and Griggs 2007). They investigated 36 acres on Stewarts Creek 2.3 km to
the north of the current project area.

7

According to the Archeological Sites Atlas, there have been professional
investigations along portions of Stewarts Creek. In 1980, that section of Stewarts
Creek within the project area was examined for the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). The Atlas does not state who performed the survey, and no report
documenting this work was located. This study examined the creek and a portion
of the landform above the creek on the north bank. No sites were recorded.
Historic Overview
The Historic Period is marked by the introduction of European artifacts and
materials into the prehistoric lifestyle. Although no well defined Historic Indian sites
have been found in the immediate area, examples are present in the Wallisville
area where evidence of French and Spanish interaction is believed to be present
(Gilmore 1974; Dillehay 1975) and Lake Livingston where at least two sites
containing materials believed to represent Alabama or Koasati Indian settlements
have been examined (Hsu 1969). Two historic sites are listed on the National
Register of Historic Places. They are the Arnold-Simonton House (possible
plantation) and the Kirbee Kiln (a 19th century pottery). Kirbee Kiln is also listed as
a State Archeological Landmark.
According to Newcomb (1961), the main indigenous Indian groups in
Southeast Texas south of the Caddo were the Bidais, Deadose, Patiri, and
Akokisa. These groups were closely related and spoke the Atakapan language. A
written document by an early resident of Harris County mentions a group of Bidais
or Akokisa in the area in 1918 (Moore 1992).
Montgomery County is located in an area that was divided into colonization
contracts eventually administered by Stephen F. Austin. Anglo-American settlers
began moving into the area in the 1820s. One of the first pioneers was Andrew
Montgomery who established a trading post at the crossing of two historic trails,
Loma del Toro and the Lower Coushatta Trace about three miles west of the
project area. Other settlers joined him, and the area became known as
Montgomery Prairie. Montgomery County was created in 1837 with the town of
Montgomery as the first seat of government.
The early economy was based on agriculture consisting mainly of
subsistence farming and plantations. The Arnold-Simonton home in Montgomery
was constructed in 1845 and may have functioned as a plantation. Although cotton
was the major crop, corn and tobacco were widely grown. In the early days, the
lumber industry provided fuel and building materials.

8

Following the Civil War, the railroad brought major changes to the area.
Railroads not only allowed for the creation of new settlements, but they also
allowed for a more efficient means of harvesting and marketing the vast amounts of
timber in the area. In the latter part of the 19th century and the early part of the 20th
century, lumber was a booming industry in Montgomery County. Shipping points
along the railroad became communities as the area prospered. In the 1950s, this
industry declined due to lack of conservation of timber resources and increased
competition in other areas of Texas.
In the 1930s, the discovery of oil created a new era of prosperity with the
creation of the Conroe Oil Field. An oil field near Lake Creek eventually became
the 6th largest in the country. Evidence of this industry is still found in the form of oil
field roads, abandoned oil derrick sites, and wooden structures. Oil is still a major
form of revenue for the county. The last major change is the growth associated
with the proximity of Montgomery County to the Greater Houston Area.
Historic Investigations
In general, few projects designed to investigate historic sites have been
carried out in Montgomery County. Most historic sites have been recorded during
archaeological surveys in which prehistoric and historic sites were identified and
recorded. Only two sites in the county are listed in the National Register of Historic
Places. These are the Arnold-Simonton House on Rankin Street and the Kirbee
Kiln archaeological site (41MQ38). One site (41MQ73) has been determined to be
eligible for designation as a State Archeological Landmark.
Kirbee Kiln is a 19th century stoneware pottery that operated near the town
of Montgomery between 1850 and 1860. It produced utilitarian stoneware pottery
used in the preparation and storage of food. This unique historic site is described
as a “groundhog kiln” and is the first to be excavated in Texas (Malone et al. 1979).
More information regarding the history of Montgomery County can be found
in county histories by William Hardy Gandy (1952), Robin Montgomery (1975), the
Montgomery County Genealogical Society (1981), as well as the Handbook of
Texas (published book and online).

9

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, a records check for previously recorded sites in or
near the project area was conducted by Jean Hughes at TARL. The Principal
Investigator visited the project area on December 4, 2007 with Tanner Singleton
and City of Conroe employee C. J. Locklear. The project area was divided into two
segments based on the crossing of Stewarts Creek. Area A is that portion of the
project area from Loop 336 to the creek, and Area B is that portion from the creek
to Foster Drive. Although the main focus of this investigation was Area A, both
sides of the creek were investigated.
Area A is 1400 feet in length (3.9 acres). First, the creek bank containing
exposed sand was investigated for displaced cultural materials, but no artifacts
were observed. The initial shovel test in this area was excavated on the south bank
15 meters from the creek). The remaining tests in this area were dug at intervals of
20 meters to 45 meters in a southerly direction to Loop 336. In all, eight tests were
excavated, and the excavated soil was passed through ¼” hardware cloth. Six of
the eight tests were dug to clay, and the remaining two were terminated at 100 cm
in sandy soil. The depth of the tests dug in Area A varied in depth from 35 cm to
100 cm. A shovel test log was kept and is part of the field notes (Appendix I). The
approximate location of the eight tests is shown in Figure 3. The project was
documented with field notes and digital photography. At the time of this survey,
Area A was wooded with pines and mixed hardwoods. A clearing had been
established along the proposed route of the road. According to the Archeological
Sites Atlas, this area has not been investigated by a professional archaeologist.
Area B is 3160 feet in length (8.7 acres). There was a very good exposure
of sand on this bank, and it was investigated for displaced cultural materials. No
artifacts were observed. The first shovel test (ST 9) was excavated 15 meters from
the creek). This test was terminated at 30 cm when clay was encountered.
According to Mr. Locklear, there was a pipeline that in this area that paralleled the
creek. The test was dug through a dark soil that he believed was intrusive. We
stopped at this point believing the area had been disturbed. The last test (ST 10)
was dug in the floodplain and terminated at 50 cm when clay and wet soil was
encountered. The only high ground on the north side of the creek is at the extreme
end of the project area at Foster Drive. At the time of this survey, most of Area B
was in pasture, and a segment at the north end was in maintained yards in a
residential area and was adjacent to a paved road (2250 feet). According to the
Archeological Sites Atlas, a portion of this area was visited by archaeologists for the
EPA in 1980. They examined the creek and a portion of the landform adjacent to
the creek with negative results (see Archaeological Background above).

10

Figure 3. Shovel Test Locations

11

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
This survey did not identify any prehistoric or historic archaeological sites
within the 4560-foot project area. At the time of this survey, the area south of the
creek (Area A) consisted of a forest containing stands of pines and hardwoods
(Figure 4), and the soil was sandy loam over clay. The creek contained water, and
the banks contained exposed sand making a surface inspection possible (Figure 5).
The route for the proposed road had been cleared and flagged making it easy to
take accurate measurements between shovel tests. Although the landform, as it
appears on the topographic map, appears to be a good setting for a prehistoric site
no cultural materials were recovered. Shovel tests were excavated for a distance
of 285 meters south of the creek because of the higher ground in this direction and
the presence of a tributary of Stewarts Creek on the east side. The apex of the
landform is to the south and east of the proposed road, and this may be the most
likely setting for a site if one is present in this area. Area B passed through a lowlying area and ended at the creek. The soils were wet and contained clay at a
shallow depth. Only the extreme northern segment of this area was on a higher
elevation. There is a hill just to the east of the proposed road in this area; this is a
much more probable setting for a prehistoric site than the current route as proposed
by the City of Conroe.
The soils in Area A are identified in the soil survey for Montgomery County
(McClintock et al. 1972:Sheet 48) as Albany fine sand (Ab) and Fuquay loamy fine
sand (Fs). Albany fine sand is found on convex ridges overlooking stream terraces.
Soils in the Albany series are somewhat poorly drained soils that are sandy to a
depth of 40 to 60 inches. Fuquay loamy fine sand consist of deep, well-drained
soils that are sandy to a depth of 20 to 38 inches. These soils developed in loamy
deposits on stream terraces. The soils next to the creek in Area B are Bibb soils,
frequently flooded (Bb). These soils are found in the floodplains of streams
draining sandy and loamy soils. The inland area north of the creek contains soils
described as Conroe loamy fine sand, 0 to 5 percent slopes (CoC). This soil is
found on broad ridges that have convex slopes. The loamy soils are about 30
inches thick and overlay clay containing ironstone concretions.

12

Figure 4. View of Woods in Area A

13

Figure 5. Stewarts Creek (looking north)

14

RECOMMENDATIONS
No archaeological sites were found to be present within the boundaries of
the project area. It is, therefore, recommended that construction of the extension of
Ed Kharbat Drive be allowed to proceed as planned without further consultation
with the Texas Historical Commission. Should cultural materials be discovered
during the construction of the extension of Ed Kharbat Drive, work in the area of the
find must cease until the situation can be assessed by the Texas Historical
Commission. Also, should the route of the proposed road be changed, the Texas
Historical Commission must be notified as additional survey by a professional
archaeologist may be necessary. This survey was conducted according to the
Minimum Survey Standards as outlined by the Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division.

15

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28.
Bement, Leland C., Rolfe D. Mandel, Jesus F. de la Teja, Dan K. Utley, and
Solveig A. Turpin
1987 Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology of Lake Creek Reservoir,
Montgomery County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research
Report Number 97.
Bradle, Michael R., and John Griggs
2007 An Intensive Archeological Survey of a Proposed Habitat for
Humanity Housing Development in the Stewarts Creek Drainage,
Montgomery County, Texas. American Archaeology Group, Report of
Investigations 129.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1975 Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity River Delta,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report Number 51.
Gandy, William Hardy
1952 History of Montgomery County, Texas. (publisher not cited)
Gilmore, Kathleen
1974 Cultural Variation on the Texas Coast: Analysis of an Aboriginal Shell
Midden, Wallisville Reservoir, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report Number 44.
Greiner Engineering Sciences, Inc.
1980 Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodlands, Texas. Greiner
Engineering Sciences, Inc.
1981 Archeological Testing at Sites 41MQ70 and 41MQ73 at the
Woodlands, Montgomery, Texas. Greiner Engineering Sciences, Inc.
Hsu, Dick Ping
1969 The Arthur Patterson Site: A Mid-Nineteenth Century Site, San
Jacinto County, Texas. Texas State Building Commission and Texas
Water Development Board, Archeological Report Number 5.

16

Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission, Cultural Resource Management Report Number 3.
McClintock, W. R., Jr., T. L. Galloway, B. R. Stringer, L. E. Andrew
1972 Soil Survey of Montgomery County, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and Forest
Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station.
Malone, James M., G. H. Greer, and Helen Simons
1979 Kirby Kiln: A Mid-19th Century Texas Stoneware Pottery. Texas
Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist, Report 31.
Montgomery County Genealogical Society, Inc.
1981 Montgomery County History. Hunter Publishing Company. Conroe,
Texas.
Montgomery, Robin
1975 The History of Montgomery County. Jenkins Publishing Company.
Moore, William E.
1989 Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern Region of Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 31.
Moore, William E., and Roger G. Moore
1992 An Archeological Survey of the Site of the Proposed Montgomery
County Municipal Utility District Number 15, Sewage Treatment Plant
in Montgomery County, Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting,
Report of Investigations Number 68.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
University of Texas Press.
Schubert, Darren K., Douglas G. Mangum, and Roger G. Moore
2002 An Archeological Survey and Backhoe Trenching of Four Sites in
the Bluegreen Southwest Ridgelake Shores Development in
Montgomery County, Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting,
Report of Investigations Number 312.
Shafer, Harry J.
1968 Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin,
Montgomery County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project Number 13.

17

Shafer, Harry J., and Thomas B. Stearns
1975 Archeological Investigations at the Scott’s Ridge Site (41MQ41),
Montgomery County, Texas. Texas A&M University, Anthropology
Laboratory, Report Number 17.
Shafer, Harry J., and Edward P. Baxter
1975 An Archeological Survey of Scott’s Ridge and Kaygall Recreation
Sites, Sam Houston National Forest, Texas. Texas A&M University,
Anthropology Laboratory, Report Number 15.
Terneny, Tiffany, and Abigail P. Beck
2000 Archeological Survey of a Proposed 300-Acre City of Conroe Golf
Course, Montgomery County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigations 267.
Webb, Walter Prescott
1952 The Handbook of Texas (Volume I). Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.

18

APPENDIX I
SHOVEL TEST LOG
Shovel
Test

Depth (cm)

Comments
Area A

1

100

dug through wet sand; did not encounter clay

2

100

dug through wet sand; did not encounter clay

3

60

dug through damp sand; clay at 60 cm*

4

50

dug through damp sand; clay at 50 cm*

5

50

dug through damp sand; clay at 50 cm*

6

35

dug through damp sand; clay at 35 cm*

7

80

dug through damp sand; clay at 80 cm*

8

80

dug through damp sand; clay at 80 cm*
Area B

9

30

dug through dark humus (possibly intrusive);
gray clay at 30 cm

10

75

dug through wet sand; clay at 75 cm

*small pebbles present above and within the clay

