AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
SOUTHWEST TEXAS TELEPHONE COMPANY
FARM-TO-MARKET ROAD 470 FIBER OPTIC PROJECT
IN BANDERA COUNTY TEXAS

Antiquities Permit 5392

BVRA Project 09-27

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore, RPA

Prepared for
Southwest Texas Telephone Company
Post Office Box 128
Rocksprings, Texas 78880

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

2009

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of approximately six miles of new fiber optic line
in southwest Bandera County, Texas was performed on September 9 and 10,
2009 by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) under Antiquities Permit
5392. The archival research indicated that there are no known previously
recorded archaeological sites within the Area of Potential Effect (APE).
Archaeologists from SWCA Environmental Consultants of Austin had surveyed a
small portion of the western end of the project area in 2005 with negative results.
The current field survey consisted of a 100% Pedestrian Survey that inspected
the exposed surface that had been disturbed by highway improvements and
trench profiles that were still open during the installation of a portion of the fiber
optic line. No evidence of an archaeological site was found, and no artifacts were
collected and curated. It is recommended that the client be allowed to continue
with the installation of the fiber optic line. The project area is 0.73 acre in size.
Copies of the final report are on file at the Texas Historical Commission (THC),
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the Southwest Texas
Telephone Company, TRC Engineering, and BVRA.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are appreciative of the assistance provided by others during
this project. Gary Gilmer is the Owner and President of the Southwest Texas
Telephone Company in Rocksprings, Texas, and he was our contact with that
agency. The engineering firm responsible for this project is TRC Engineering of
Kerrville, Texas. Maps and other information were provided by Donna Bogart at
TRC Engineering. We are grateful to Steve Carpenter at SWCA Environmental
Consultants of Austin who took time from his busy schedule to discuss work by
his firm in the area. The site records at TARL were checked by Jean Hughes for
previously recorded sites in the project area. Lili G. Lyddon of LL Technical
Services drafted some of the figures that appear in this report. She also edited
the report.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT...........................................................................................................II
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ......................................................................................III
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................4
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................5
METHODS ..........................................................................................................10
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................16
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................18
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................19

Figures
FIGURE 1. GENERAL LOCATION MAP .............................................................................. 2
FIGURE 2. PROJECT AREA ON TOPOGRAPHIC QUADRANGLES ......................................... 3
FIGURE 3. CENTRAL REGION OF TEXAS ......................................................................... 6
FIGURE 4. PREVIOUS SURVEYS IN BANDERA COUNTY .................................................... 7
FIGURE 5. BORE HOLE BACK DIRT (FACING EAST) ........................................................ 12
FIGURE 6. RIP RAP (FACING EAST)............................................................................... 13
FIGURE 7. BACKFILLED TRENCH (FACING EAST)............................................................ 14
FIGURE 8. OPEN TRENCH (FACING EAST) ..................................................................... 15

iv

INTRODUCTION
The Southwest Texas Telephone Company of Rocksprings, Texas plans
to install new fiber optic line in rural Bandera County (Figure 1). The project area
is within the right-of-way of Farm-to-Market Road 470. The length of the
proposed fiber optic line is approximately six miles. The line is 1.25 inches in
diameter, and it will be placed in a ditch 10 to 12 inches wide and 36 inches
deep. Boring will be used at all creek crossings, and the fiber optic line will be
encased. No cemeteries are within 100 feet of the APE. Funding for this project
will be provided by the Southwest Texas Telephone Company from their General
Fund. Because of the presence of significant archaeological sites in the area, the
THC required a formal survey by a professional archaeologist. The reviewer for
this project is William A. Martin, Staff Archaeologist at the THC. In order to
comply with these requirements, the Southwest Texas Telephone Company
retained BVRA of Bryan, Texas to conduct this investigation. The project area is
depicted on two USGS 7.5’ topographic quadrangles. They are Seco Pass
(2999-423) and Vanderpool (2999-314) (Figure 2).

1

Figure 1. General Location Map

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangles

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Bandera County is located within the Edwards Plateau of Central Texas.
To the west is the Stockton Plateau, and the two plateaus are bounded on the
south and east by the Balcones Escarpment. To the north is the Llano Estacado,
and to the west are the mountains of the Big Bend. The uplands of the Edwards
Plateau are relatively level, and they contain karstic features such as playas and
sinkholes that fill with water during the rainy season. The area is also
characterized by deep canyons, valleys, and divides that contain steep bluffs and
overhangs or rock shelters. Terraces and floodplains are present along the
major streams. Limestone outcrops dominate the surface geology, and the local
soils have developed from the weathering of limestone and marls. According to
Fisher (1983), the project area is located within the Glen Rose formation and
undivided Quaternary deposits. The Glen Rose formation consists of alternating
beds of limestone, dolomite, and marl. The Quaternary deposits consist of slope
wash, alluvium, and colluvium made up of silt to cobble-sized derivates of
Cretaceous limestone, dolomite, and chert. In this area, most of the soils are
shallow to very shallow and stony on moderate to steep slopes. Deeper soils are
found in floodplain settings along major streams and the tops of plateaus
(Anonymous 1958). The project area is located in a region defined as dry humid
mesothermal (Blair 1950:113). Pollen data from a number of localities in
Southwest Texas indicate that a gradual increase in aridity prevailed in this
region from post-glacial times to the present (Bryant 1969:124). There are no
major streams within the project area. Drainages present include ephemeral
streams and headwaters of ephemeral streams.

4

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Bandera County is located in the Central Texas Cultural-Geographical
Region of Texas as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985) in a planning document
published by the THC. The counties in this region correspond roughly with the
Edwards Plateau region (Figure 3). This region has been delineated for
management purposes, and it may not coincide exactly with regions defined by
other researchers. There were 3507-recorded sites in the region in 1985, and
Bandera County was eighteenth in the region that consists of thirty-four counties.
Of the thirty-three recorded sites in Bandera County in 1985, fourteen are
described as General Archaic, and four are described as Late Prehistoric. There
is no information for the remaining fifteen sites. Disturbance to sites in the county
is listed by Biesaart et al. (1985:110) as erosion (n=11), construction (n=4),
dispersed (n=11), and vandalized (n=5). Ten sites are described as destroyed,
and one site is described as pristine. Investigation at sites in the county in 1985
consisted of excavated (n=3), tested by hand (n=9), and surface collected
(n=24). According to the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, there were 214
recorded prehistoric and historic sites in the county at the time of this survey.
There are five sites currently listed in the in the National Register of Historic
Places, and they are all within the city limits of Bandera. There are nine sites
that have been designated as a State Archeological Landmark, and not one of
these sites are within the boundaries of the current project area. Types of
prehistoric sites in the county include camps (temporary and permanent) located
on terraces near streams and buried in the floodplains of major streams, lithic
scatters, middens in rock shelters and sinkholes, burned rock mounds, and
burned rock middens. Historic sites in the rural areas of the county are not
always tied to water and include the remains of farming and ranching activities in
the form of standing structures (i.e. houses and outbuildings), features
associated with farming and ranching such as wells, cisterns, watering troughs,
cattle dip tanks, and cemeteries.
When the archeological bibliography for the Central Texas region was
published in 1997 by the THC (Simons and Moore 1997), there were forty-nine
references to fieldwork and research projects relating to Bandera County. The
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, shows fourteen area surveys and twenty linear
surveys as having been conducted in Bandera County (Figure 4), and most of
these were for the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) and are along
highways. These surveys date from 1975 to 2008. Only one of these is included
within the boundaries of the current project area, and it is discussed below. As
stated above, there have been several area and linear surveys by state agencies
and private contract firms in addition to three field schools by The University of
Texas at Austin in 1989, the Texas Archeological Society in 1990, and Trinity
University in 1992.

5

Figure 3. Central Region of Texas

6

Figure 4. Previous Surveys in Bandera County

7

Sue Amini-Minor recorded twenty-five sites in the county, and this is the
most by any individual. Archeological Steward C. K. Chandler recorded twentytwo sites (TARL site files). Together they recorded forty-seven sites, which is 22
percent of the known sites in Bandera County. Other individuals who recorded
sites in the county are J. W. Beavin, M. L. Beadles, David Calame, Mary Frances
Chadderdon, Roy Heidman, Thomas R. Hester, Al Leippe, Leland W. Patterson,
Wayne Roberson, Bryant Saner, Jr., Herb Uecker, Jay Woodward, and Woody
Woodward.
Archaeological surveys in the county include work at Lost Maples State
Park (Kegley 1977) and the Hill Country State Natural Area (Turpin 1994) by
archaeologists from the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department; work along
Ranch-to-Market Road 187 (Lawrence et al. 2005) and for the Hill Country
Telephone Cooperative (Chavez 2008a, 2008b) by SWCA Environmental
Consultants; the Bandera Centerpoint project (Labadie 1987) by The University
of Texas at San Antonio; Texas Forest Service Oak Wilt Project by the Texas
Forest Service, Texas A&M University and The University of Texas at Austin
(report not found); proposed development at Koyote Ranch by Cojeen
Archeological Services (Cojeen and Burkhalter 2003); Love Creek Preserve by
the Texas Historical Commission (report not found); work on Farm-to Market
Road 475 (TxDOT 1983), a bridge replacement at Farm-to-Market Road 689
(TxDOT 1989) and the Ranch-to-Market Road 337 project (1977, 1992) by the
Texas Department of Transportation; the Medina Lake Transmission Line project
by the Lower Colorado River Authority (Malof 2007). The only survey in close
proximity to the current project area is the 2005 investigation along Farm-toMarket Road 187 by SWCA Environmental Consultants in 2005 (Lawrence et al.
2005). This project paralleled the highway in a north-to-south direction from
Utopia northward along the highway to just beyond the Lost Maples State Park
entrance. Their project area intersects Farm-to-Market Road 470 at the western
end of the current project area. Three previously unrecorded sites (41BN190 –
41BN192) and one isolated find were recorded, but not one of these sites is
within or near the current project area. These sites are described as two surface
lithic scatters and one buried site. They were not considered by the recorders as
potentially eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or for
designation as a State Archeological Landmark.
Excavation and testing projects include work at the Rainey site (41BN33)
by Jerry Henderson (2001) at the Texas Department of Transportation and the
Mingo site (41BN101) by Brett A. Houk and John C. Lohse (1991), members of
the Texas Archeological Society.
In 1989 and 1990, The Texas Archeological Society held its annual field
school near Utopia in Bandera County. Information documenting this field school
is found in Texas Archeology (33(4):17, 34(2):4, and 34(2):5-6) and the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association Newsletter 15(3):1.

8

Additional information regarding the prehistory of Bandera County can be
found in the statistical overview by Biesaart et al. (1985), the bibliography for the
Central Region of Texas (Simons and Moore 1997), a planning document
prepared by the THC entitled Archeology in the Central and Southern Planning
Region, Texas: A Planning Document (Mercado-Allinger, et al. 1996), and a
thesis by Paul Maslyk (1992) entitled “Prehistoric Settlement in the Sabinal River
Valley, Uvalde and Bandera Counties, Texas.”

9

METHODS
Records Check
Prior to entering the field, the Texas Archeological Site Atlas and the files
at TARL were checked for previously recorded sites and past surveys in the
project area and vicinity. Several documents were reviewed during the planning
stages of this project. These are a planning document by the THC (Biesaart et al.
1985), an Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region of Texas published
by the THC (Simons and Moore 1997), and all volumes of the Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology published by the THC. The interested reader is referred to
these sources for additional information regarding the prehistory of the area. The
survey was documented through the utilization of Microsoft Word and Excel
documents. Location data was collected and documented with a Garmin GPSaided computer topographic program, National Geographic Topo and ESRI
ArcMap. A Kodak digital camera was used to document the project, and all
photographs were enhanced using Adobe Photoshop software. The field survey
was conducted on September 9 through September 11, 2009.
Field Survey
The field methods employed for this survey were developed to fit the
conditions of the project area at the time of the survey and were influenced by
past surveys in the area and information regarding the types of previously
recorded sites in the general area. The only previously recorded sites near the
project area are in the low floodplain areas of Seco Creek to the east of the
current project area. These sites are restricted to the surface with a maximum
depth below the ground surface of one foot. The only previous professional
survey touches the western end of the project area and runs in a north-south
direction along the right-of-way of Ranch-to-Market Road 187 (Lawrence et al.
2005). Only three sites were found during this survey that included 175 acres of
right-of way. Of these, two were restricted to the surface, and the third was found
to exist in a buried soil in the Sabinal River floodplain. No such geomorphic
features exist in the current project area. The western end of the project area
was included in the survey along Ranch-to-Market Road 187 survey. However,
the soils in this area are very shallow with areas of limestone bedrock at or near
the surface. The majority of the project area had shallow rocky clay soil with
bedrock exposed in many areas. The deepest soils encountered were clay silts
deposited by slope wash deposition, not alluvium from stream high-energy
events.

10

The project area was investigated through a 100% Pedestrian Survey.
Surface visibility was excellent due to the lack of vegetation. At the time of this
survey, the client was in the process of installing the fiber optic line, and the
presence of exposed trenches afforded excellent profiles that exposed the
subsurface the depth of the APE. In addition, much of the right-of-way had been
disturbed by past and present work along the highway by the Texas Department
of Transportation.
The surface survey was accomplished by walking each segment twice.
The Project Archaeologist parked his vehicle and examined the right-of-way. On
the return trip to the vehicle, he looked across the fence from the edge of the
right-of-way to see if he could observe any indications of a site on the surface
such as flakes or burned rock that might extend into the right-of-way of the
project area.
Piles of back dirt were present in areas where boring had been
conducted, and these piles were examined (Figure 5), and rip rap or concrete
slabs had been added by the Texas Department of Transportation in areas of
high erosion such as the low intermittent stream crossings and the slopes above
them (Figure 6). Exposed backhoe trenches were present in areas where phone
connection boxes were to be installed, and the profiles of these trenches were
examined. The section of the project area where the cable had been installed
and backfilled offered an excellent view of the subsurface fill (Figure 7). The
method of trench backfilling utilized a machine that rolled the fill from both sides
of the trench back into the trench. This action mixed the fill making the portion
left on the surface a composite of the various strata. This area was examined for
displaced artifacts or burned rock. The area of open trenches presented a profile
of the trench walls and scattered trench back dirt (Figure 8), and these were also
examined. The remainder of the area had not been trenched, but some road and
creek crossings had been bored. These areas, as well as the rest of the project
area, were also visibly inspected.

11

Figure 5. Bore Hole Back Dirt (facing east)

12

Figure 6. Rip Rap (facing east)

13

Figure 7. Backfilled Trench (facing east)

14

Figure 8. Open Trench (facing east)

15

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Records Check
The records check revealed that there are no known prehistoric or historic
sites within the project area, and no cemeteries are located within 100 feet of the
APE. Only one survey has been conducted near the project area. This was a
study along Ranch-to-Market Road 187 by SWCA Environmental Consultants in
2005 (Lawrence et al. 2005). This survey is discussed in the Archaeological
Background section above.
Field Survey
The project area is approximately six miles long and is completely within
the right-of-way of Farm-to-Market Road 470. Highway construction activities
had completely altered the original ground surface within the right-of way. Hills
and rises had been cut through, low areas had been filled, and all areas had
been graded and ditched. Recent highway activities included grading and the
addition of either rock rip rap or concrete slabs in areas of high erosion such as
the low intermittent stream crossings and the slopes above them.
The field investigations found that much of the proposed project had been
completed, and construction was continuing in the remainder of the area. The
western 6740 meters of the project area in the right-of way on the south side of
the road had been trenched, the cable had been laid, and the trench backfilled.
The small, intermittent stream crossings and the intermittent headwaters of Little
Creek had been crossed by boring. Installation of the fiber optic line was in
progress from the east side of the small intermittent section of Bravo Creek
eastward to a location where Farm-to-Market Road 470 had been crossed by
boring. The length of this segment was 1090 meters. An open trench with the
fiber optic cable in place was present throughout this area. The soil map
indicated that this area has some of the deepest soils in an area containing
mainly shallow soils. Observations of the open trench and the completed line
revealed that the trench had been placed within the footprint of an earlier cable
construction disturbance. Portions of a previously installed cable were observed
lying next to the new cable in the open trench, and some twisted sections of old
cable was observed on the backfilled surface. The cable route then crossed to
the right-of-way on the north side of the highway and continued eastward for
2285 meters to a point above the west bank of Seco Creek where it had been
bored under Farm-to-Market Road 470 to connect to an existing telephone
building on the south right-of-way. This section had not been trenched, but areas
such as rocky hilltops and an intermittent stream crossing Farm-to-Market 470 in
two areas had been bored.

16

This survey found no evidence of an archaeological site on the surface,
exposed in the trench profiles, or across the fence on private property. It is
concluded that the potential for deeply buried sites within the right-of-way along
Farm-to-Market Road 470 is low. This conclusion is based on the surface
survey, an examination of the profiles exposed by the trenches associated with
the on-going installation of the fiber optic line, the fact that the previously
recorded sites in the vicinity of the project area are restricted to the surface, and
the presence of shallow soils in the right-of-way.

17

RECOMMENDATIONS
No archaeological sites were found within the current project area.
Therefore, it is recommended that the client be allowed to install the remainder of
the fiber optic line as planned. Should construction plans change that will add new
line in an area not previously surveyed by a professional archaeologist, the THC
must be notified in case additional survey is warranted. Also, if prehistoric or
historic cultural materials are unearthed in areas during construction, all work in the
area of the find must stop until the THC can evaluate the situation. This study was
performed in accordance with the Minimum Survey Standards as defined by the
Archaeology Division of the THC.

18

REFERENCES CITED
Anonymous
1958 Watershed Work Plan for Watershed Protection and Flood
Prevention of Dry Devils River and Lowery Draw Watershed,
Schleicher and Sutton Counties, Texas. Manuscript prepared under
the authority of the United States Department of Agriculture and the
Soil Conservation Service.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28, Texas Historical
Commission.
Birkeland, Peter W.
1999 Soils and Geomorphology. (3rd Edition) Oxford University Press,
New York.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
2(1):93-117.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr.
1969 Late Full Glacial and Postglacial Pollen Analyses of Texas
Sediments. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation presented to the
Graduate College at The University of Texas at Austin.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1981 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Sonora Sheet (1:250,000 scale) The
University of Texas at Austin.
Chavez, Michael R.
2008a Hill Country Telephone Cooperative Zones 1-4 Project: Comfort
Hasenwinkle Road Route, Bandera County, Texas. Interim report by
SWCA Environmental Consultants.
2008b Hill Country Telephone Cooperative Zones 1-4 Project: Tarpley 4F
Route, Bandera County, Texas. Interim report by SWCA
Environmental Consultants.
Cojeen, Christopher A., and Roger Burkhalter
2003 Report on the Archeological Survey of the Koyote Ranch-Bandera
Unit L.P. Recreational Vehicle Park Project, Bandera and Kerr
Counties, Texas. Unnumbered report by Cojeen Archeological
Services, Norman, Oklahoma.

19

Fisher, W. L.
1983 Geologic Atlas of Texas, San Antonio Sheet. Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Henderson, Jerry
2001 Excavations at the Rainey Site (41BN33): A Late Prehistoric Sinkhole
Site in Bandera County, Texas. Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Division, Archeological Studies Program,
Report 5.
Houk, Brett A., and John C. Lohse
1991 Archeological Investigations at the Mingo Site (41BN101), Bandera
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 61:193247.
Kegley, George B.
1977 A Preliminary Cultural Inventory of Lost Maples State Park, Bandera
County, Texas. Unnumbered report.
Labadie, Joseph H.
1987 A Reconnaissance of Electrical Transmission Line Rights-of-Way in
Bandera and Kerr Counties, Texas. The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Center for Archaeological Research, Survey Report 164,
Lawrence Ken, Michael R. Chavez, and Laura Acuna
2005 An Archaeological Survey of the RM 187 Improvement Project,
Bandera County, Texas. Interim report prepared by SWCA
Environmental Consultants.
Malof, Andrew F.
2007 An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Lower Colorado River
Authority’s Proposed Medina Lake Transmission Line Project,
Bandera and Medina Counties, Texas. Lower Colorado River
Authority, Parks and Resource Conservation Service, Interim Report
Number 13.07.
Maslyk, Paul
1992 Prehistoric Settlement in the Sabinal River Valley, Uvalde and
Bandera Counties, Texas. M.A. Thesis, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Mercado-Allinger, Patricia A., Nancy A. Kenmotsu, and Timothy K. Perttula
1996 Archeology in the Central and Southern Planning Region, Texas: A
Planning Document. Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report
35 and the Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 7. Texas Historical Commission.

20

Schoeneberger, P. J., D. A. Wysocki, E. C. Benham, and W. D. Broderson (editors)
2002 Field Book for Describing and Sampling Soils, Version 2.0. Natural
Resources Conservation Service, National Soil Survey Center,
Lincoln, Nebraska.
Simons, Helen, and William E. Moore
1997 Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region of Texas. Office of
the State Archeologist, Special Report 36, Texas Historical
Commission.
Texas Department of Transportation
1977 RM 337: from SH __ in Medina, West to RM 187, South of
Vanderpool, CRA, Bandera County. Unnumbered letter report by
the Texas Department of Transportation. *
1983 FM 475 from the Kendall County Line, West to SH 16, Cultural
Resources Assessment, Bandera County. Unnumbered letter
report by the Texas Department of Transportation.
1989 FM 689: Bridge Rehabilitation at Bandera Creek and No Name
Creek, Cultural Resources Survey, Bandera County.
1992 Cultural Resources Survey Report: RM 337 Reconstruction.
Unnumbered letter report by the Texas Department of
Transportation.
Turpin, Jeff
1994 Hill Country State Natural Area: A Survey of High Traffic and High
Potential Areas, Bandera and Medina Counties, Texas. Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department, Cultural Resources Program,
Report 94-4.
_____
* The State Highway number was not legible

21

