AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE BUENA VISTA - BETHEL
SPECIAL UTILITY DISTRICT FM 66 TRANSMISSION LINE AND
PUMP STATION PROJECT IN ELLIS COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project 09-11

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore, RPA

Prepared for
Buena Vista - Bethel Special Utility District
312 South Oak Branch Road
Waxahachie, Texas 75167

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of a proposed 6.5 mile water transmission line
and a 2.296 acre tract that will be the site of a proposed pump station in central
Ellis County, Texas was performed on June 24 and 25, 2009 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates (BVRA) for the Buena Vista-Bethel Special Utility District
(SUD) under Antiquities Permit 5321. The project encompasses both the Phase
1 and Phase 2 sections of the proposed water line project. In all, the area
comprises 18 acres. The areas investigated included one major creek crossing,
five unnamed tributaries, one locality near a previously recorded site (41EL175)
and the site of a proposed pump station. No sites were found, and no artifacts
were collected. Therefore, it is recommended that the Buena Vista-Bethel SUD
be allowed to proceed with their project with no further consultation from the
Texas Historical Commission (THC). Copies of the report are on file at the THC,
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL); Buena Vista-Bethel SUD; and
BVRA.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are appreciative of the assistance provided by others during
this project. Ben Shanklin of Childress Engineers provided the necessary maps
and other information regarding this project. Joe Buchanan, Manager of the
Buena Vista – Bethel SUD signed the permit application as the representative of
the Sponsor and provided assistance in the field. Brad Jones, also of the Buena
Vista –Bethel SUD, assisted the Project Archaeologist in the field. Lili G. Lyddon
of LL Technical Services prepared some of the figures that appear in this report
and edited the manuscript. The THC is thanked for allowing us to use a figure in
one of its reports in this document.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT...........................................................................................................II
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ......................................................................................III
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................4
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................8
METHODS ..........................................................................................................12
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................20
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................21
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................22

Appendix I. Previously Recorded Site 41EL175

Figures
FIGURE 1. GENERAL LOCATION ..................................................................................... 2
FIGURE 2. PROJECT AREA ON TOPOGRAPHIC QUADRANGLES ......................................... 3
FIGURE 3. NORTH CENTRAL CULTURAL-GEOGRAPHICAL REGION OF TEXAS .................... 9
FIGURE 4. PREVIOUS ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEYS IN ELLIS COUNTY............................ 11
FIGURE 5. SURVEY AREAS A-G ................................................................................... 13
FIGURE 6. AREA B ...................................................................................................... 15
FIGURE 7. DEEPLY ENTRENCHED CREEK AT AREA D.................................................... 16
FIGURE 8. SOIL PROFILE NEAR SOUTH PRONG CREEK (AREA D).................................. 17
FIGURE 9. AREA F....................................................................................................... 18

iv

INTRODUCTION
The Buena Vista – Bethel SUD plans to install 6.5 miles of 20 inch water
transmission line and the construction of a pump station on a 2.296 acre tract in
central Ellis County, Texas (Figure 1). This project is being funded by the Texas
Water Development Board (TWDB), and Mr. T. Clay Schultz is the agency
representative. The water line will be placed in a trench with a maximum depth
of six feet, and the width of the trench will be 3.5 feet. There will be a permanent
construction easement of 20 feet, and the water transmission line will be placed
in the center of this easement. The water line and other proposed improvements
will be on private property within an existing easement owned by the Buena Vista
- Bethel SUD. The current project area is depicted on two USGS 7.5’
topographic quadrangles. They are Boz (3296-232) and Forreston (3296-231)
(Figure 2). Ellis County is located in a part of Texas that contains numerous
prehistoric and historic sites, many of which have been considered to possess
significant research potential. The TWDB requested an archaeological survey
prior to allowing the construction of the proposed water line. In order to comply
with this request, BVRA was retained by the Buena Vista - Bethel SUD to
perform the cultural resources survey.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangles

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The following information was taken from a contract report by Yedlowski et
al. 1998) the Texas Almanac for 2004 and 2005 (Dallas Morning News 2004), Hill
(1891, 1901), Larkin and Bomar (1983), and Brooks et al. (1964).
The project area is located entirely within Ellis County in north-central
Texas south of the Dallas metropolitan area and southeast of the Forth Worth
metropolitan area. The project area includes portions of Waxahachie, which is
the county seat, and rural portions of the county that are in agricultural lands and
the yards of private residences. Much of the county consists of relatively level to
gently sloping blackland prairie with an average elevation of between 400 feet
and 500 feet above mean sea level. Relief is more rugged in the western part of
the county where the Austin Chalk formation crops out and forms the White Rock
Escarpment, and floodplain development is most extensive in the eastern part of
the county along the Trinity River and on portions of some major streams. The
Trinity River is the major drainage in the area, and it is typified by wide river
terraces and numerous tributaries with similar terrace development. Within the
project area, the major stream is South Prong Creek. Ellis County contains
massive beds of Upper Cretaceous chalk, marl, and shale, and contributed to the
formation of the soils that are presently found in the area. Throughout the
county, there is an unconsolidated and discontinuous gravel deposit of pebblesized to small cobble-sized quartz, quartzite, jasper, limestone, and silicified
wood fragments. This deposit occurs as a thin veneer in upland areas and has
been identified in all but the Mountain Creek drainage in northwest Ellis County.
This deposit was first described in central and south Texas by Hill (1891, 1901)
who named it Uvalde Gravel. This gravel deposit is the only locally available
source of raw materials for the manufacture of stone tools. According to a figure
in the report by Yedlowski et al. (1998:Figure 1.8), there are eight Uvalde Gravel
veneers in close proximity to the current project area. According to Yedlowski et
al. (1998:9), Ellis County is situated in the center of the Blackland Prairie biogeographic province. The clayey soils that are common in the area are mainly
the product of in situ weathering of underlying Upper Cretaceous parent
materials such as chalks and marls. The western portion of Ellis County falls
within a transitional belt between the Subtropical Subhumid climatic regions of
Texas, while the eastern portion of the county falls entirely within the Subtropical
Humid region (Larkin and Bomar 1983:2). The mean annual temperature at
Waxahachie is 66 degrees Fahrenheit. Summers tend to be hot with an average
July monthly high temperature of 96.9 degrees Fahrenheit. Winters are usually
moderate with an average January low temperature of 33.1 degrees Fahrenheit,
and freezing weather is rare and short-lived. The average length of the freezefree season is 243 days (Brooks et al. 1964).

4

According to the soil survey for Ellis County, there are nine soil types
within the project area or APE. These consist of various forms of clay, silty clay,
clay loam, eroded soils, and alluvial land. The specific soil types are discussed
below.
Austin silty clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (AuB)
AuB soils are found on ridges along foot slopes and base slopes, and the
parent material is residuum weathered from chalk. The depth to restrictive
feature is 20 to 40 inches to paralithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and
the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding
and ponding is described as “none.” The available water capacity is moderate
(about 6.1 inches). A typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 16 inches,
silty clay from 16 to 34 inches, and bedrock at 34 to 42 inches.
Austin silty clay, 3 to 5 percent slopes (AuC2)
AuC2 soils are found on ridges along back slopes and side slopes, and
the parent material is residuum weathered from chalk. The depth to restrictive
feature is 20 to 40 inches to paralithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and
the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding
and ponding is described as “none.” The available water capacity is moderate
(about 6.1 inches). A typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 16 inches,
silty clay from 16 to 34 inches, and bedrock at 34 to 42 inches.
Whitewright and Austin soils, 2 to 5 percent slopes eroded (BkC2)
Whitewright eroded soils are found on ridges and on shoulders, summits,
and interfluves. The parent material is residuum weathered from Austin chalk
formation. The depth to restrictive feature is 10 to 20 inches to paralithic bedrock.
This soil type is well drained, and the distance to the water table is more than 80
inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as “none.” The available
water capacity is low (about 3.3 inches). A typical profile is silty clay loam from 0
to 7 inches, silty clay loam from 7 to 19 inches, and bedrock at 19 to 30 inches.
Austin eroded soils are found on ridges and on back slopes and side
slopes. The parent material is residuum weathered from chalk. The depth to
restrictive feature is 20 to 40 inches to paralithic bedrock. This soil type is well
drained, and the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency
of flooding and ponding is described as “none.” The available water capacity is
moderate (about 6.1 inches). A typical profile is silty clay from 0 to 16 inches,
silty clay from 16 to 34 inches, and bedrock at 34 to 42 inches.

5

Broken alluvial land (Br)
Br soils are found along drainage ways, and the parent material is silty
alluvium of quaternary age derived from chalk. This soil type is well drained, and
the frequency of flooding is described as “rare.” The available water capacity is
moderate (about 9.0 inches). A typical profile is clay loam from 0 to 80 inches.
Eddy soils, 3 to 8 percent slopes, eroded (EdD2)
EdD2 soils are found on ridges and on shoulders, summits, back slopes,
side slopes, and interfluves. The parent material is residuum weathered from
Austin chalk. The depth to restrictive feature is 3 to 15 inches to paralithic
bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and the distance to the water table is
more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as “none.”
The available water capacity is very low (about 0.7 inches). A typical profile is
gravelly clay loam from 0 to 6 inches and bedrock at 6 to 70 inches.
Houston Black clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (HaA)
HaA soils are found on plains. The parent material is residuum weathered
from calcareous shale of Taylor marl and Eagleford shale. The depth to
restrictive feature is more than 80 inches. This soil type is well drained, and the
distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and
ponding is described as “none.” The available water capacity is high (about 9.5
inches). A typical profile is clay from 0 to 16 inches and clay from 16 to 80
inches.
Houston Black clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (HaB)
HaB soils are found on ridges. The parent material is residuum weathered
from calcareous shale of Taylor marl and Eagleford shale. The depth to
restrictive feature is more than 80 inches. This soil type is well drained, and the
distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and
ponding is described as “none.” The available water capacity is high (about 9.5
inches). A typical profile is clay from 0 to 16 inches and clay from 16 to 80
inches.
Stephen-Eddy complex, 3 to 5 percent slopes eroded (SeC2)
Stephen soils are found on ridges, summits, shoulders, and interfluves.
The parent material is residuum weathered from the Austin chalk formation. The
depth to restrictive feature is 7 to 20 inches to paralithic bedrock. This soil type
is well drained, and the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches.
Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as “none.” The available water
capacity is very low (about 1.5 inches). A typical profile is silty clay form 0 to 12
inches and bedrock at 12 to 70 inches.

6

Eddy soils are found on ridges, summits, shoulders, and interfluves. The
parent material is residuum weathered from the Austin chalk formation. The
depth to restrictive feature is 3 to 15 inches to paralithic bedrock. This soil type
is well drained, and the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches.
Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as “none.” The available water
capacity is very low (about 0.9 inches). A typical profile is gravelly clay loam
from 0 to 6 inches, gravelly clay loam from 6 to 10 inches, and bedrock at 10 to
60 inches.
Stephen silty clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (StB)
StB soils are found on ridges, summits, shoulders, and interfluves. The
parent material is residuum weathered from the Austin chalk formation. The
depth to restrictive feature is 7 to 20 inches to paralithic bedrock. The soil type is
well drained, and the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches.
Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as “none.” The available water
capacity is very low (about 1.8 inches). A typical profile is silty clay from 0 to 14
inches and bedrock at 14 to 40 inches.

7

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
According to a planning document published by the THC (Biesaart et al.
1985:Figure 4), Ellis County is part of the North Central Texas CulturalGeographical Region of Texas (Figure 3). In 1985, Ellis County had 35 recorded
sites, and was 10th in the region that consists of 29 counties. Of the 35 recorded
sites in 1985, 1 was described as Paleo-Indian, 23 are described as Archaic, and
11 are described as Late Prehistoric. Disturbance to sites in the county is listed
by Biesaart et al. (1985:122) as caused by erosion (n=30), construction (n=6),
disturbed and artificially capped (n=13), deflated (n=3), dispersed (n=29), and
“potholed” or surface collected (n=10). Investigation at sites in the county in 1985
consisted of those tested by hand (n=2), tested by machine (n=2), and surface
collected (n=18). Sites with hearths numbered 5, sites with burned rock features
numbered 7, sites with burials numbered 3, and sites described as stone quarries
numbered 2. One site was reported to have midden soil. Today, there are more
than 250 sites known to exist in the county. The planning document does not
provide site numbers that can be associated with the above statements.
Our research documented two prior archaeological surveys that include a
portion of the current project area. These are a large area survey in 1989 and
1990 for the Superconducting Super Collider project and a smaller area survey
by the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) in 2005. The 1989-1990
survey was performed by Mercyhurst College of Pennsylvania through Southern
Methodist University (SMU), and they used SMU personnel. This survey
recorded 159 sites (41EL58 – 41EL99, 41EL100 – 41EL213, 41EL215, 41EL217,
and 41EL218). One of these sites (41EL175) is depicted on the Texas
Archeological Atlas as being very close to the project area. The archaeologist
responsible for this project did not submit site forms for all of the 157 sites, and
there is no form for 41EL175. The only report documenting this project was
published in 1998 by Yedlowski et al. (1998). According to this report (Yedlowski
et al. 1998:240), site 41EL175 is a historic site encompassing approximately
26,879.59 square feet in the drainage of an unnamed tributary of South Prong
Creek. The report also states that the site is located in an area of Austin silty
clay at an elevation of about 660 feet above mean sea level. The central feature
of this site was a dwelling, which was subsequently documented by Hardy-HeckMoore, Inc. (1990) and DeLara Almond Architects (1992). The location of this
site as plotted on the TARL maps is depicted in Appendix I.
The TxDOT survey investigated a small tributary of South Prong Creek
along Farm-to-Market Road 66. This survey covered four acres, and it did not
record any archaeological sites. This report was not available during this project.
It is listed on the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas as an unnumbered letter report
at TxDOT.

8

Figure 3. North Central Cultural-Geographical Region of Texas
(used with permission from the THC)

9

Two surveys were conducted on South Prong Creek north and south of
the project area by archaeologists from the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) in
1975. These two investigations were in close proximity to the project area and
were negative in terms of recording new archaeological sites. Copies of the
reports were not available during this project. The northern survey consisted of
six acres and was situated on a prominent landform above South Prong Creek.
The second SCS survey consisted of forty-eight acres and was located on both
banks of the creek 300 feet south of the current project area. A linear survey
was performed in 1998 for the TWDB. This survey started at the Waxahachie
water treatment plant and continued to the east and northeast for 2.8 miles. No
sites were found. The report documenting this work was not available during this
project. These are the closest surveys to the current project area.
There have been two major reservoir studies in the area. Bardwell
Reservoir is in Ellis County and was surveyed by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Program (TASP) in the 1960s (Shafer 1964). Lakeview Lake (which
includes a small portion of Ellis County) was surveyed by SMU in 1979 and 1980
(Raab et al. 1982). Although neither of these surveys recorded sites in the
project area, they provide useful information regarding the prehistory and history
of Ellis County and the general area. The survey of the site of Bardwell
Reservoir in the southeastern part of Ellis County recorded 14 sites (41EL2 41EL15). One of these sites (41EL11) was viewed as significant and tested in
1965 under the supervision of William M. Sorrow (1966). This effort recovered
dart points, arrow points, ground and pecked stone, pottery fragments, and bone.
The site dates from the Late Archaic through the Late Prehistoric periods of
Texas prehistory. In addition, seven hearths, three burials, and two pits were
recorded. The function of the pits is unknown. Sorrow believes that this site was
originally occupied by Central Texas groups who later shared the site with groups
from East Texas. The survey by SMU in 1979 and 1980 investigated the
proposed Lakeview Lake that covers portions of southwest Dallas County,
southeast Tarrant County, northeast Johnson County, and northwest Ellis
County. No sites were recorded in Ellis County
A review of the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas revealed numerous area
and linear surveys throughout Ellis County. Figure 4 is a map that depicts these
surveys, but it was not possible to identify all of them by agency and date. This
map was included to give a general idea of the extent of previous work in the
county. A search of the TARL library identified numerous reports documenting
work in Ellis County by professional archaeologists. Contract reports for work in
Ellis County are housed in the libraries at TARL and the THC.

10

Figure 4. Previous Archaeological Surveys in Ellis County

11

METHODS
Background Research
Prior to entering the field, the Archeological Sites Atlas and the files at
TARL were checked for previously recorded sites and past surveys in the area.
Several documents were reviewed during the planning stages of this project.
These included a planning document by the Texas Historical Commission
(Biesaart et al. 1985) and all volumes of the Abstracts in Texas Contract
Archeology published by the THC. The interested reader is referred to these
sources for additional information regarding the prehistory of this area. The
USDA online soil survey for Ellis County was reviewed in order to identify the
soils present in the Area of Potential Effect (APE).
Field Survey
The field survey was conducted on June 24 and 25, 2009. The entire
project area was visually inspected during a “windshield survey” designed to look
for historic buildings and cemeteries that might be affected by the proposed
water line. Portions of the pipeline segment of the project area near creeks and
near previously recorded site 41EL175 were chosen prior to the survey to be
subjected to an intensive survey if needed. Seven areas (A-G) (Figure 5) and the
area of the proposed pump station were subjected to this more intensive
investigation. The field survey consisted of shovel probes and visual inspection of
the ground surface and cut banks. No areas were considered appropriate for
shovel testing due to the amount of surface and subsurface visibility, shallow
soils, and disturbance.
Area A
This 400 meter area is located at the eastern end of the project area near
the tie-in with the existing Waxahachie water treatment plant. The area was
chosen due to the existence of a small dry tributary of Waxahachie creek that
parallels the proposed water line. Soils consist of Stephen-Eddy complex and
Houston Black clay. The area was in recent cultivation for wheat and had been
cut over. Surface visibility was estimated to be between 70% and 80%. Given
the amount of surface visibility and the disturbed nature of the shallow soils, the
investigation consisted of a pedestrian survey and shovel probes. No cultural
features or artifacts were observed.

12

Figure 5. Survey Areas A-G
Area B
This 340 meter area is located on the south side of Farm-to-Market Road
66 along a small dry tributary of Waxahachie creek that parallels the proposed
water line. Soils consist of Houston Black clay and Stephen silty clay. The area
had recently been plowed, and surface visibility was 100% (Figure 6). Given the
amount of surface visibility and the disturbed nature of the shallow soils, the
investigation consisted of a pedestrian survey and shovel probes. No cultural
features or artifacts were observed.

13

Area C
This 160 meter area is located on the north side of Farm-to-Market Road
66 and crosses a small intermittent tributary of South Prong Creek. Soils consist
of Stephen-Eddy complex. The area was located in highly disturbed developed
residential yards. Given the amount disturbance of the shallow soils, the
investigation consisted of a “windshield survey” only.
Area D
This 520 meter area is located on the north side of Farm-to-Market Road
66 along both sides of South Prong Creek. Soils consist of Broken alluvial land
along the creek sides, Austin silty clay further back from the creek, and StephenEddy complex on the ridges above the creek. The deepest of these soils is the
alluvium adjacent to the creek. South Prong Creek is deeply entrenched at this
location and flows over exposed bedrock (Figure 7). The portion of the proposed
waterline in these deep soils was paralleled by a deep artificial ditch placed to
drain the highway. This ditch presented a clean profile from 6 feet to 12 feet high
(Figure 8). This ditch face was visually inspected. The proposed pipeline in this
area is proposed to cross beneath the creek by boring from the high banks. The
boring stations will be located in the Austin silty clay area where bedrock is near
the surface. These areas have been disturbed by cultivation and residential
yards. Ground surface visibility was good at both locations. In the Stephen-Eddy
complex, areas of bedrock were exposed on the surface. Given the amount of
surface visibility and the disturbed nature of the shallow soils, the investigation
consisted of a pedestrian survey and shovel probes. No cultural features or
artifacts were observed.
Area E
This 180 meter area is located on the north side of Farm-to-Market Road
66 and crosses a small intermittent tributary of South Prong Creek. Soils consist
of Eddy soils with bedrock very near the surface. The area was found to have
been previously surveyed by TxDOT, and it was not investigated.

14

Figure 6. Area B

15

Figure 7. Deeply Entrenched Creek at Area D

16

Figure 8. Soil Profile Near South Prong Creek (Area D)
Area F
This 80 meter area is located on the north side of Farm-to-Market Road 66
near the location of site 41EL175. The previously recorded site was described as
being located 400 feet north of Farm-to-Market Road 66, and the proposed water
line is within 40 feet of its northern right-of-way. Soils in Area F consist of Austin
silty clay. The area had been very disturbed by activities associated with a tree
farm/nursery located on the property (Figure 9). Visibility was good along the
proposed water line route. An erosional topographic feature separates the route
of the proposed water line and the area where the site was recorded, and the
eroded sides of this feature were examined. Given the amount of surface visibility
and the disturbed nature of the shallow soils, the investigation consisted of a
pedestrian survey and shovel probes. No cultural features or artifacts were
observed.

17

Figure 9. Area F
Area G
This 100 meter area is located on the north side of Farm-to-Market Road
66 at the crossing of the intermittent headwaters of Big Onion Creek. At this
location, the stream is only a slight linear depression, and was covered with
grass. Soils consist of Houston Black clay. The area was deemed to be in a very
low probability area for a site, and the investigation consisted of a pedestrian
survey only. No cultural features or artifacts were observed.
Pump Station
This 2.3 acre area is located on the north side of Farm-to-Market Road 66.
Soils consist of Austin silty clay. The area had been disturbed by cultivation
activities and, at the time of the survey, wheat had been recently harvested.
Ground surface visibility was estimated at 80%. Given the amount of surface
visibility and the disturbed nature of the shallow soils, the investigation consisted
of a pedestrian survey and shovel probes. No cultural features or artifacts were
observed.

18

The survey was documented through the utilization of Microsoft Word and
Excel documents. Location data was collected and documented with a Garmin
GPS-aided computer topographic program, National Geographic Topo and ESRI
ArcMap. A Kodak digital camera was used to document the project, and all
photographs were enhanced using Adobe Photoshop software.

19

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
According to the Archeological Sites Atlas, a small segment along Farmto-Market Road 66 had been surveyed by archaeologists from the Texas
Department of Transportation in 2005. Part of the project area was surveyed by
archaeologists from Mercyhurst College working with SMU in 1989 and 1990
during the Superconducting Super Collider project, but this area is not shown on
the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas. One previously recorded historic site
(41EL175) was located near the current project area. No evidence of this site
was found within the APE for this project.

20

RECOMMENDATIONS
No archaeological sites were found as a result of this project, and no
evidence of previously recorded site 41EL175 was found within the project area
APE. It is recommended that construction be allowed to proceed as planned by the
Buena Vista – Bethel SUD without further consultation with the THC. Should
construction plans change to include additional water line in an area that can be
viewed as a likely setting for an archaeological site, the THC must be notified in
case additional survey by a professional archaeologist is warranted. Should
evidence of a prehistoric or historic site be unearthed during construction, all work
in the area of the find must stop until the THC can evaluate the situation. This
study conformed to the Minimum Survey Standards as defined by the Archaeology
Division of the THC.

21

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical
Commission.
Brooks, C. A., C. A. Rogers, J. H. Mayberry, J. O. McSpadden, Jr., W. D. Mitchell,
and J. W. Huntsinger
1964 Soil Survey of Ellis County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station.
Dallas Morning News
2004 Texas Almanac: 2004-2005. Published by the Dallas Morning News.
DeLara Almond Architects
1992 Historic Structures Management Plan. Report submitted to the Texas
National Research Laboratory Commission by DeLara Almond
Architects and the Archaeology Research Program, Department of
Anthropology, Southern Methodist University.
Hardy-Heck-Moore, Inc.
1990 Historic Resources Survey of Ellis County, Texas, 1989-1990: An
Inventory for the U.S. Department of Energy in Support of the
Superconducting Super Collider. Report submitted to Universities
Research Association, Inc. (Subcontract Number ESC-90820) by
Hardy-Heck-Moore, Inc.
Hill, R. T.
1891 Notes on the Geology of the Southwest. American Geologist 7.
1901 Geography and Geology of the Black and Grand Prairies, Texas with
Detailed Descriptions of the Cretaceous Formations and Special
Reference to Artesian Waters. In Twenty-First Annual Report of the
United States Geological Survey to the Secretary of the Interior,
1899-1900, Part VII – Texas. United States Government Printing
Office, Washington, D.C.
Kingston, Michael T., and Ruth Harris (Editors)
1983 1984-1985 Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide. Dallas.
Larkin, T. J., and G. W. Bomar
1983 Climatic Atlas of Texas. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Report Number LP-192.

22

Raab, L. Mark, Allan J. McIntyre, James E. Bruseth, Daniel E. McGregor, C. Reid
Ferring, and Nancy G. Reese
1982 Archaeological Investigations at Lakeview Lake: 1979 and 1980.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Archaeological Monographs, Number 2.
Shafer, Harry J.
1964 An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Bardwell Reservoir,
Ellis County, Texas. Report submitted to the National Park Service
by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of
Texas at Austin in accordance with the provisions of Contract 1410-0333-956.
Sorrow, William M.
1966 The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Number 10.
Yedlowski, Joseph L., Kevin J. Shaunessy, David H. Jurney, and J. M. Adovasio
1998 Archaeological Investigations in Support of the Superconducting
Super Collider, Ellis County, Texas. Archaeological
Research Program, Mercyhurst College, Erie, Pennsylvania.

23

APPENDIX I
PREVIOUSLY RECORDED SITE 41EL175

