AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE CITY OF
SONORA WATER IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
IN SUTTON COUNTY TEXAS
Antiquities Permit 5202

By
William E. Moore and Charles D. Frederick

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 217

2009

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE CITY OF SONORA’S
WATER IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
IN SUTTON COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project 09-09

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore, RPA

Prepared for
City of Sonora
201 East Main Street
Sonora, Texas 76950

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey and a geoarchaeological investigation of four
segments of new water line in west-central Sutton County, Texas was performed
on March 30, 2009 and April 2-5, 2009 by Brazos Valley Research Associates
(BVRA) and Charles D. Frederick (consulting geoarchaeologist) for the City of
Sonora under Antiquities Permit 5202. The archival research indicated that
several prehistoric sites have been recorded in the vicinity. One of the three
segments (Area 4) had been examined by a professional archaeologist in 1970
and 1971 prior to construction of Interstate Highway 10. Since the proposed
route of the water line in Area 4 passes within seventy-five feet of the Sutton
County Cemetery, this area was evaluated in order to determine if scraping for
unmarked graves would be necessary. In the segment adjacent to the cemetery,
the new line will replace an existing line and will occupy the same footprint.
Following a consultation with the Texas Historical Commission (THC), it was
decided that monitoring during the installation of the trench in this area would be
required. At Area 2, a sparse scatter of one scraper, two flakes, two chert
fragments, and fire-cracked rock was found on the surface. In addition, two
pieces of burned limestone were observed within the A horizon of Backhoe
Trench 2. Shovel tests were excavated in the vicinity of the backhoe trench, but
no cultural materials were observed. Although the burned rock and the flake
scatter may represent human activity in the project area, it was decided that the
cultural materials were too few in number and too scattered to warrant assigning
a site number. Previous disturbance by the landowner may have dispersed any
concentration of cultural materials making it impossible to locate the locus of the
site associated with these specimens. Copies of the final report have been
submitted to the THC, the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL),
Charles D. Frederick, the City of Sonora, and BVRA.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are appreciative of the assistance provided by others during
this project. Our contacts at the City of Sonora were Dean Carrell (City Manager)
and Patti Prather (City Secretary). The engineering firm responsible for this
project is Enprotec/Hibbs & Todd, Inc. John D. Voller (Project Manager) and
Mark McHan (Project Geologist) provided us with maps and other information.
Bruce Kerbow, owner of the Kerbow Funeral Home, shared his knowledge of the
history of Sutton County Cemetery. We are especially grateful to Jimmy Powers
for allowing us to dig backhoe trenches on his property and conduct a pedestrian
survey outside the Area of Potential Effect (APE) in Area 2. The site records at
TARL were checked by Jean Hughes for previously recorded sites in the project
area and vicinity. Lili G. Lyddon of LL Technical Services prepared the cover and
figures that appear in this report. She also edited the report. William A. Dickens
analyzed the lithics collected at Area 2.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT...........................................................................................................II
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ......................................................................................III
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................4
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................5
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROJECT AREA...........................................................9
METHODS ..........................................................................................................22
GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS....................................................24
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................34
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................36
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................37
Appendix I: Shovel Test Log
Appendix II: Artifact Analysis
Appendix III: Description of Borrow Pit and Backhoe Trenches

iv

Figures
FIGURE 1. GENERAL LOCATION OF PROJECT AREA ........................................................ 2
FIGURE 2. PROJECT AREA ON TOPOGRAPHIC MAP SONORA ........................................... 3
FIGURE 3. CENTRAL REGION OF TEXAS ......................................................................... 6
FIGURE 4. PLAN VIEW OF AREA 1 ................................................................................ 10
FIGURE 5. PHOTOGRAPH OF AREA 1 (LOOKING NORTH) ................................................ 11
FIGURE 6. PLAN VIEW OF AREA 2 ................................................................................ 13
FIGURE 7. PHOTOGRAPH OF AREA 2 (LOOKING NORTH). ............................................... 14
FIGURE 8. PLAN VIEW OF AREA 3 ................................................................................ 16
FIGURE 9. PHOTOGRAPH OF AREA 3............................................................................ 17
FIGURE 10. PLAN VIEW OF AREA 4 .............................................................................. 19
FIGURE 11. PHOTOGRAPH OF AREA 4 (LOOKING WEST) ................................................ 20
FIGURE 12. VIEW OF PROJECT AREA LEAVING ROAD CUT (LOOKING WEST) .................. 21
FIGURE 13. BORROW PIT EXPOSURE ........................................................................... 26
FIGURE 14. AREA 2..................................................................................................... 27
FIGURE 15. GULLY PROFILE ........................................................................................ 29
FIGURE 16. LOCATION OF BACKHOE TRENCHES AND SHOVEL TESTS ............................ 30
FIGURE 17. BACKHOE TRENCH 1 ................................................................................. 31
FIGURE 18. BACKHOE TRENCH 2 ................................................................................. 32

v

INTRODUCTION
The City of Sonora plans to install new water line in the city limits of
Sonora, Texas (Figure 1). The project area consists of four segments of water
line that will connect to existing line. The new line will be buried in trenches at
Area 2 and Area 4. In Area 1 and Area 3, the new line will be installed through
directional boring. The new line will be installed in trenches two feet wide and
between four and five feet deep. The one exception is the line adjacent to the
Sutton County Cemetery. Here, the line will replace an existing water line and
will not be in previously undisturbed ground. Detailed information and line
drawings of each segment are presented in the section entitled Description of the
Project Area later in this report. This project is being funded by the Texas Water
Development Board (TWDB). TWBD archaeologist, Chris Caran, requested that
all areas where new water line is to be installed be investigated by a professional
archaeologist and a geoarchaeologist. In addition, the report is to be reviewed
by Ed Baker at the THC. In order to comply with these requirements, the City of
Sonora retained BVRA of Bryan, Texas to conduct this investigation. The project
area is depicted on the USGS 7.5’ topographic quadrangle Sonora (3000-312)
(Figure 2). This project is required in accordance with the State Antiquities Code
since the proposed project includes ground disturbance to clear land for
construction.

1

Figure 1. General Location of Project Area

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map Sonora

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Sutton County is located within the Edwards Plateau of Central Texas. To
the west is the Stockton Plateau, and the two plateaus are bounded on the south
and east by the Balcones Escarpment. To the north is the Llano Estacado, and
to the west are the mountains of the Big Bend. The major drainages in the area
are the Pecos River to the west and the Devils River that flows through Sutton
County. The project area is drained mainly by the Dry Devil’s River and some of
its tributaries that flow through the town of Sonora. The uplands of the Edwards
Plateau are relatively level, and they contain karstic features such as playas and
sinkholes that fill with water during the rainy season. The area is also
characterized by deep canyons, valleys, and divides that contain steep bluffs and
overhangs or rock shelters. Terraces and floodplains are present along the
major streams. Limestone outcrops dominate the surface geology, and the local
soils have developed from the weathering of limestone and marls. Most of the
soils are shallow to very shallow and stony on moderate to steep slopes. Deeper
soils are found in floodplain settings along major streams and the tops of
plateaus (Anonymous 1958). Soils in Sutton County are only about 10 inches
deep in 70 percent of the county and 20 inches deep in about 15 percent of the
county. About 77 percent of the soils are clayey, and about 71 percent are stony.
Only about 11 percent of the soils formed in alluvium in the valleys (Wiedenfeld
and McAndrew 1968:1). Soils found in the project area are discussed in the
Description of the Project Area section below. The climate of the plateau country
is characterized by a decrease in rainfall from east to west. The project area is
located in a region defined as dry humid mesothermal (Blair 1950:113). Pollen
data from a number of localities in Southwest Texas indicate that a gradual
increase in aridity prevailed in this region from post-glacial times to the present
(Bryant 1969:124).

4

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Sutton County is located in the Central Texas Cultural-Geographical
Region of Texas as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985) in a planning document
published by the THC. The counties in this region correspond roughly with the
Edwards Plateau region (Figure 3). This region has been delineated for
management purposes, and it may not coincide exactly with regions defined by
other researchers. There were 3507 recorded sites in the region in 1985, and
Sutton County was eleventh in the region that consists of thirty-four counties. Of
the twenty-two recorded sites in Sutton County in 1985, two are Middle Archaic,
one is Late Archaic, and two are General Archaic. Disturbance to sites in the
county is listed by Biesaart et al. (1985:187) as erosion (n=16), construction
(n=6), dispersed (n=4), and vandalized (n=3). Investigation at sites in the county
in 1985 consisted of excavated (n=4), tested by hand (n=7), and surface
collected (n=13). At the time of this survey, there were 80 recorded prehistoric
and historic sites in the county. At the time of this survey, two sites are listed in
the in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and one site has been
designated as a State Archeological Landmark (SAL). The NRHP sites are the
Old Mercantile Building and the Sutton County Courthouse, both in the town of
Sonora. The SAL site is also the courthouse.
When the archeological bibliography for the Central Texas region was
published by the THC (Simons and Moore 1997), there were only twenty
references to field work in Sutton County. Most of these projects (n=12) were a
result of construction associated with construction of Interstate Highway 10
(Crawford 1973; Jarvis and Crawford 1974; Doran 1976; Luke 1981). The
remaining projects consisted of archaeological reconnaissance for the City of
Sonora (Whitsett 1976, 1978) and survey for the All American Pipeline (MuellerWille 1986, Labadie 1987).
The first professional survey in the county was an investigation of the
route of the proposed Interstate Highway 10 in 1970 and 1971 (Crawford 1973).
This study was conducted in Crockett, Kimble, Pecos, and Sutton counties. In
Sutton County, seventeen prehistoric archaeological sites (41SU1 – 41SU17)
were recorded. These sites are described in Crawford’s (1973:10-14) report as a
lithic scatter, ring middens, and burned rock middens. Site 41SU10 is very close
to Area 4 in the current project area. This site was found to be on an eroded
surface with shallow soils. Artifacts were observed scattered over a wide area
and consisted of flakes, a scraper, and a biface. Not one of the seventeen sites
found during this survey was recommended for further investigations. As a result
of this survey, Crawford (1973:31) hypothesizes that the “region was
intermittently inhabited by aboriginal peoples solely dependent upon a hunting
and gathering way of life.”

5

Figure 3. Central Region of Texas

6

He states that large amounts of chipped stone artifacts were found at the
earlier sites, while the later sites were almost void of artifacts except for the
burned rock middens. He believes the ubiquitous ring middens represent a
greater emphasis on the utilization of local plants such as agave. This site type is
believed by most archaeologists to be associated with the preparation of food.
An in-depth study of ring middens in the area is presented in a Masters thesis by
William E. Moore (1980).
The next professional study was conducted in the city limits of Sonora by
W. Hayden Whitsett in 1976. Whitsett (1976) conducted a reconnaissance for
the Texas Department of Water Resources for the improvement of wastewater
treatment facilities. Whitsett recorded one site (41SU26) as a surface scatter
containing lithic debitage and burned rock on a terrace overlooking the Dry Devils
River. Artifacts observed include one large end scraper and one large biface.
The size of the site was estimated at 40 meters by 75 meters. The size of the
area surveyed is not stated in the abstract, and a copy of his letter report was not
available. Whitsett recommended eligibility testing for 41SU26. In 1978, Whitsett
(1978) conducted a second reconnaissance in the city limits of Sonora for the
improvement of wastewater treatment facilities. According to his abstract, survey
and testing were conducted. Whitsett surveyed 50 acres and presumably tested
41SU26. According to his abstract, the site was largely restricted to the surface
with only five centimeters of soil above limestone bedrock. Whitsett’s letter
report was not available at the time of this study.
The final archaeological investigation in the immediate area was in the city
limits of Sonora and was performed by archaeologists from Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc. in 1979 (report not available). This study recorded six
prehistoric lithic scatters (41SU22 – 41SU27). Five of the sites are described as
being located on a terrace overlooking the Dry Devils River and Lowery Draw,
but no information is available for the geographic position of the remaining site.
Soils at four of the sites are shallow, being between five and ten centimeters over
bedrock. Depth of the soil at the two remaining sites is not stated on the site
forms. The size of these sites varies (based on field estimates) from 10 meters
in diameter to 100 meters in diameter. The size was not determined for one site.
Artifacts observed and collected include bifaces and biface fragments, unifaces
tools, a dart point fragment, a scraper, and debitage. No mention is made of
burned rock. The only site that can be assigned to a temporal period is 41SU22.
Based on the recovery of a dart point, this site is believed to date to the Archaic
period. No statement regarding the eligibility of these sites for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places or for designation as a State Archeological
Landmark appears on the site forms. A controlled surface collection and
subsurface testing was recommended for sites 41SU22 and 41SU27.

7

Additional information regarding the prehistory of Sutton County can be
found in the statistical overview by Biesaart et al. (1985), the bibliography for the
Central Region of Texas (Simons and Moore 1997), and a planning document
prepared by the THC entitled Archeology in the Central and Southern Planning
Region, Texas: A Planning Document (Mercado-Allinger, et al. 1996).

8

DESCRIPTION OF THE PROJECT AREA
Area 1
Area 1 is a 325-foot segment that will be disturbed by the installation of a
new two-inch water line (Figure 4). This line will connect an existing two-inch
water line to the west with an existing six-inch water line to the east. Because
the majority of this area is beneath a concrete parking lot and driveway, the line
will be installed by directional boring or tunneling. The boring machine will set up
several feet away from the proposed tie-in connection to the existing water line
and will punch a six-inch hole at the surface. The six-inch auger bit will be
controlled by the machine’s computer to drill to a pre-determined depth and then
follow the proposed path for the new water line until it reaches the tie-in location
at the end of the proposed route. The new water line will be attached to the drill
stem and pulled back through the borehole. The tie-in locations on the existing
water lines will be excavated, and the tie-ins will be made and backfilled.
According to the soil survey (Wiedenfeld and McAndrew 1968), the soils in
this area belong to the Tarrant-rock outcrop complex (Tr). This complex is close
to streams and is chiefly in the southern and western parts of the county. About
75 percent of this complex is stony clay about seven inches thick that is underlain
by fractured limestone. In other areas, these soils vary in depth from two inches
near rock outcrops to twelve inches between ledges or in cracks. In general, soils
of the Tarrant Series are shallow stony and clayey soils on hills. These soils have
a rapid runoff, a moderate water intake rate, and a low capacity to store water.
Because of the shallow nature of the soils beneath the concrete, the fact that the
ground surface was disturbed during paving for the parking lot and driveway
(Figure 5), BVRA believes this is a very low probability area for an intact
prehistoric site.

9

Figure 4. Plan View of Area 1

10

Figure 5. Photograph of Area 1 (looking north)

11

Area 2
Area 2 is a 1500-foot segment that will be disturbed by the installation of a
new two-inch water line (Figure 6). This line will connect an existing two-inch
water line to the west with an existing two-inch water line to the east. The line will
be placed in a trench four to five feet deep and two feet wide. It will be placed
within a fifteen-foot easement, and the cover will be thirty-six inches. The terrain
at Area 2 is flat and featureless (Figure 7).
According to the soil survey (Wiedenfeld and McAndrew 1968), the soils in
this area belong to the Knippa series, specifically Knippa silty clay (Ky). This soil
type occurs as narrow strips along streams, and it is the most extensive soil in
the valleys. Soils of the Knippa series have a surface layer of calcareous silty
clay or clay. The top eight inches consists of a moderate, very fine and fine,
subangular blocky or granular structure. The lower ten inches has moderate,
fine, and medium subangular blocky structure. The subsurface layer, to a depth
of fifty inches, has moderate, fine, and medium subangular or irregular blocky
structure. The underlying material is made up of gravel and boulders mixed with
clayey outwash. The depth to this material ranges from thirty-three to sixty-five
inches or more. Knippa soils are well drained, permeability is moderate to slow,
and the capacity to store water is high. The field inspection by Charles Frederick
revealed the surface in the northeastern segment to consist of Pleistocene soils,
while the southwestern segment contains Holocene soils that have the potential
to contain buried cultural materials.

12

Figure 6. Plan View of Area 2

13

Figure 7. Photograph of Area 2 (looking north).

14

Area 3
Area 3 is a 670-foot segment that will be disturbed by the installation of a
new two-inch water line (Figure 8). This line will connect an existing two-inch
water line to the north with an existing two-inch water line to the south. The line
in this area will be installed within a fifteen-foot easement by directional boring at
a depth of at least four feet. The depth of the line at the slopes of the draw may
be as deep as eight to nine feet to transition the pipe smoothly from the bottom of
the draw to the areas beyond the draw. The line will also be deeper as it crosses
State Highway 277 in order to maintain a cover of thirty-six inches over the pipe
below the existing ditch flow line. The north side of this area is covered with pens
for chickens and a horse (Figure 9).
According to the soil survey (Wiedenfeld and McAndrew 1968), the soils in
this area belong to the Frio series, specifically the Frio-Dev association (Fd).
Soils in the Frio series consist of deep, dark-colored soils on flood plains. They
are nearly level, but there are scattered, deeply sloping areas along old sediment
filled channels. Gravel and cobblestones occur on the surface and in the profile
in some places. The surface layer is about twenty inches thick and consists of
dark grayish-brown silty clay loam or clay loam that has been darkened by
organic material. It is calcareous and friable. Limestone pebbles make up as
much as thirty percent of this layer. The subsurface layer, to a depth of fifty
inches, consists of grayish-brown silty clay loam to silty clay. It is gravelly in
most places, and the amount of gravel increases with depth. The underlying
material consists of limestone gravel or cobblestones mixed with soil material.
The depth to the limestone bedrock ranges from three feet along the smaller
streams to more than fifteen feet along the large streams. Frio soils are well
drained and have a moderate water intake rate, and they are subject to flooding
at regular intervals.

15

Figure 8. Plan View of Area 3

16

Figure 9. Photograph of Area 3.

17

Area 4
Area 4 is a 2340-foot segment that will be disturbed by the installation of a
new six-inch water line (Figure 10). This line will connect an existing six-inch
water line to the east with an existing six-inch water line to the west. There will
not be an easement for that portion of the line that is installed within the TxDOT
right-of-way from State Highway 277 to the Sutton County Cemetery. The new
line will be located and installed in accordance with the permit from TxDOT.
Based on previous experience with TxDOT projects, this agency will want the line
to be installed as close to the right-of-way as possible and as existing utilities
within the right-of-way will allow. The pipe in this area will be buried at least four
feet deep in a two-foot wide trench, except for that short segment (160 feet) in
front of the Sutton County Cemetery (Figure 11). In this area, the new line will
replace the existing line and will occupy the same footprint. In the rest of this
area (when possible), the easement will be fifteen feet. The rest of the new line
will be placed in the access road within the right-of-way next to Interstate
Highway 10. Most of this segment passes beneath a high hill that has been cut
into during highway construction (Figure 11). When the line leaves the road cut,
it proceeds down a 2.5% to 3% slope until it connects with the existing line at a
Shell gasoline station (Figure 12). State Highway 277, which crosses the APE at
a right angle, will be crossed by directional boring.
According to the soil survey (Wiedenfeld and McAndrew 1968), the soils in
this area belong to the Tarrant series, specifically the Tarrant-rock outcrop
complex (Tr) and the Tarrant soils (Ts). This complex is close to streams and is
chiefly in the southern and western parts of the county. About 75 percent of this
complex is stony clay about seven inches thick that is underlain by fractured
limestone. In other areas, these soils vary in depth from two inches near rock
outcrops to twelve inches between ledges or in cracks. In general, soils of the
Tarrant Series are shallow stony and clayey soils on hills. These soils have a
rapid runoff, a moderate water intake rate, and a low capacity to store water.

18

Figure 10. Plan View of Area 4

19

Figure 11. Photograph of Area 4 (looking west)

20

Figure 12. View of Project Area Leaving Road Cut (looking west)

21

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, the Archeological Site Atlas and the site records
at TARL were checked for previously recorded sites and past surveys in the
project area and vicinity. Archaeological reports relevant to the project area were
reviewed in order to ascertain the kinds of prehistoric sites known to occur in the
region and to become familiar with the prehistory of the area.
The majority of Area 1 is covered with concrete associated with a parking
lot and a driveway. Therefore, no subsurface investigation in this area was
conducted.
Area 2 was investigated by the Pedestrian Survey method, backhoe
trenching, and shovel testing. The surface of the entire APE was examined. The
landowner gave permission for the Principal Investigator to conduct a surface
inspection of his land outside the APE. Therefore, a wider area was inspected
for evidence of an archaeological site. The northern end of this area was found
to consist of Pleistocene age soils. Since the only possibility of an archaeological
site would be within the shallow mantle of surface soils and the fact that this
mantle had been greatly disturbed by agricultural activities, no shovel tests or
backhoe trenches were excavated. The southern end of this area consists of
Holocene age soils that have the potential to contain cultural materials. In this
area, two backhoe trenches were excavated, and the profiles were examined by
the geoarchaeologist. The results of the geoarchaeological investigation are
discussed in the section entitled Geoarchaeological Investigations below. At the
eastern end of Backhoe Trench 2, two pieces of burned limestone rock and a
bone fragment were encountered in the A horizon. Based on this find, five
shovel tests were excavated along the route of the water line in an attempt to
locate additional evidence of a site (Appendix I). These tests were dug at close
intervals in order to test the immediate area where the burned rock and bone
fragment were found, and they were dug through the A horizon, the same level
as the burned rock and bone fragment. The debitage found on the surface was
collected and analyzed in the laboratory (Appendix II). They were discarded
following the completion of this project. Photographs of each of the four areas,
the backhoe trenches, and the area near the Sutton County Cemetery were
taken with a digital camera.
It was not possible to dig backhoe trenches at Area 3 due to the presence
of chicken houses and a horse pen. Since the water line will be installed through
the process of directional boring beneath the creek, the northern and southern
ends of this area were examined by the geoarchaeologist in order to evaluate the
impact of this procedure to the landscape where Holocene age soils are present.
At the northern end, it was determined that the impact of the boring would have
no significant effect. Therefore, no subsurface investigation was conducted. At
the southern end, there was a gully that offered a natural profile. This profile was
scraped to look for evidence of cultural materials.

22

Most of Area 4 is within the access road along Interstate Highway 10.
Part of this area had been surveyed in 1970 and 1971 by archaeologists from the
Texas Highway Department (Crawford 1973). A short segment of the proposed
water line passes very close to the Sutton County Cemetery, and it is not known
if this portion was part of the survey area by the Texas Highway Department.
There is an existing six-inch water line in front of the cemetery, and the new line
will be placed within the trench for the existing line. At the time of this survey, the
exact location of buried utilities was not known. Therefore, no subsurface
excavations were conducted. The Principal Investigator discussed that part of the
APE near the cemetery with Bruce Kerbow, owner of the Kerbow Funeral Home
and was told that the fence was erected over 50 years ago as a boundary for the
cemetery. He stated that there have been no graves placed outside this fence
since that time. Mr. Kerbow also stated that all graves since the 1950s within the
cemetery had headstones. Most of the remainder of the line passes through a
massive road cut. Should a site be present in this area it would be on top of the
hill that is outside the APE. Therefore, this area was not examined by BVRA.
After leaving the road cut, the proposed water line will connect with an existing
line across State Highway 277 at a Shell gasoline station, approximately 950 feet
from this point. The line proceeds down a slope that is a 25 – 30 foot drop (2.5%
- 3%) in elevation. The nearest water to the end point of the new line is the Dry
Devils River, which is approximately 600 feet to 700 feet to the west.

23

GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Field Methods
Two backhoe trenches (BT 1 and BT 2) were excavated, and two exposed
areas (one borrow pit and one gully) were examined. Trenches were excavated
to about 1.2 meters deep with a ramp at one end and three vertical walls (less
than 4 feet tall). Trench walls were cleaned with a pick, knife, and trowel to
search for cultural material, and the end wall was used for a formal description.
These deposits were described in general accordance with Schoeneberger et al.
(2002), with the exception that the fundamental unit of field observation was a
“zone,” which was used to represent any physically distinct deposit. All zones
were subsequently assigned soil horizon designations. Trench descriptions are
provided in Appendix III and discussed in the text below. The approximate age
of the deposits examined in the field was inferred on the basis of the degree of
soil development in accordance with general principles outlined by Birkeland
(1999) and correlation with alluvial stratigraphic work elsewhere in Central Texas.
Geomorphic Setting
The City of Sonora is situated in an alluvial valley at the confluence of
Lowrey Draw and the Dry Devils River. Both streams have their headwaters
along the southern margin of the Edwards Plateau to the north of Sonora. The
Dry Devils River originates in Schleicher county about 20 miles north of Sonora,
to the west and south of the town of Eldorado. The river enters Sonora from the
north and immediately south of town it makes a prominent bend to the southwest.
Lowrey Draw originates about 12 miles northeast of Sonora near the county line
between Schleicher and Sutton counties. The courthouse and historic core of
Sonora are built on the interfluvial ridge between the two streams, and the town
is surrounded by dissected mesas that are underlain by the Segovia Formation of
the Edwards Group Limestone as defined by the Bureau of Economic Geology
(1981).
Above Sonora, the Bureau of Economic Geology (1981) does not map any
Holocene alluvium (Qal) in either valley. Instead, it maps the valley floor as
Quaternary undivided (Qu), which is a composite unit consisting of Holocene and
Pleistocene age deposits that are described as “alluvial fan deposits, colluvium,
caliche and alluvium.” These alluvial fan deposits merge with colluvium and
alluvium, caliche-cemented, poorly sorted angular-to-rounded rock fragments of
locally derived material. Caliche also forms partly alluviated flats, mostly soil
covered. Although it is likely that discrete mappable deposits of Holocene and
Pleistocene alluvium are present in this area, they are not mappable at the scale
of the Bureau of Economic Geology map.

24

Areas 2 and 3 were examined during this phase of work. Two backhoe
trenches were excavated within Area 2, which is located to the south of Sonora
and adjacent to the athletic field on land owned by Jimmy Powers. Area 3 is the
point where a new pipeline is proposed to cross Lowrey Draw immediately north
of State Highway 277. A single gully exposure was documented on the south
side of the creek at this area.
Area 2
The proposed pipeline route in Area 2 traverses a gently westward sloping
surface that originates at the toe of the limestone upland to the east of Ranch
Road 1691 and is partially underlain by a low-order, unnamed stream floodplain
which drains a small canyon formed in the limestone uplands southeast of
Sonora. Ranch Road 1691 traverses the floor of this drainage on its way out of
Sonora to the southeast. This small canyon and the westward sloping surface
are all mapped as Quaternary undivided by the Bureau of Economic Geology
(1981), and the soil in the area trenched is mapped by Wiedenfeld and
McAndrew (1968) as the Angelo Silty Clay Loam (classified as an Aridic
Calciustoll). This soil series is described as “deep or very deep, well drained,
moderately slowly permeable soils formed in calcareous loamy and clayey
alluvium” and is primarily mapped on ancient stream terraces (Wiedenfeld and
McAndrew 1968).
The geology in the vicinity of Area 2 appears to consist of an ancient
stream deposit as well as one or more deposits of Holocene alluvium.
Immediately south-southwest of the athletic field, there is a borrow pit that has
been excavated to a depth of about two meters. This borrow pit provides a view
of the near surface geology. The eastern side of the borrow pit exposes a
gravelly Pleistocene alluvial deposit within which a petrocalcic horizon has
formed (Figure 13). Based on the degree of soil development, this deposit is
probably in excess of 50,000 years old, and it has no potential for buried cultural
material in any horizon other than the thin (<20 cm) A horizon. The western side
of the borrow pit appears to be underlain by a younger, Holocene alluvial deposit,
but sculpting and dumping of gravel along the pit margin precluded a clear view
of this deposit within the borrow pit. The modern tributary channel is situated
south of the borrow pit and immediately north and more or less parallel to a
caliche oil-field road that crosses this portion of the area in an east-west
direction. A short undetermined distance to the west, this small stream enters
the Dry Devils River, but that is outside of Area 2. The proposed pipeline follows
the fence line where it borders a housing development that is situated west of the
athletic stadium. A narrow ditch runs around this development and at the eastern
(upslope) margin the surface the houses have been built on lies almost three
meters below the former natural ground surface and the ditch that circumscribes
the development intersects the course of the small stream immediately west of
Area 2. Area 2 is depicted in Figure 14.

25

Figure 13. Borrow Pit Exposure

In Area 3, the newly proposed pipeline crosses Lowrey Creek near its
confluence with the Dry Devils River. This area is close to the point that the
Bureau of Economic Geology starts mapping Qal (Holocene alluvium) in the
Devils River valley, and the soils in this area have been mapped by Wiedenfeld
and McAndrew (1968) as the Frio-Dev association (map unit Fd). The Frio-Dev
association consists of five soil phases (four of the Frio Series and one of the
Dev Series (both series are classified as cumulic haplustolls) that occur as long
narrow strips adjacent to larger streams in this area. The Dev series soils exhibit
A-C profiles and consist of “deep, dark-colored, well-drained, very gravelly soils
on the flood plains of streams that drain limestone areas,” whereas the Frio
Series soils exhibit A-AC-C profiles and are described as “grayish-brown to very
dark grayish-brown, moderately fine textured, well-drained soils on the flood
plains of streams that drain limestone areas” (Wiedenfeld and McAndrew
1968:32-34).

26

Figure 14. Area 2

The landforms present at this stream crossing imply that several different
age deposits are locally present. On the north side of Lowery Draw, two
constructive alluvial surfaces are present. Fay Street, where the proposed water
line bore hole will be placed north of Lowrey Draw, is built upon a broad alluvial
surface that appears to be the floodplain of the Dry Devils River. Inset into this
surface immediately adjacent to Lowrey Draw is a slightly lower surface that lies
about two meters above the Lowery Draw channel, and this surface appears to
be the active or late Holocene floodplain of Lowrey Draw. Although no
exposures of either of these surfaces were observed, the landscape position of
the landforms suggest that these are Holocene deposits, and a Late Holocene
age is presumed.

27

The south side of the Area 3 crossing is a constructional alluvial surface
that lies about four meters above the Lowry Creek channel. A gully that has cut
southward into this surface adjacent to a gasoline station provides a good view of
the deposits (Figure 15). The location of this cut is fortuitous, given that nearly
the entire path of the pipeline on the south side of Lowrey Draw is now covered
in pavement associated with the filling station.
Results
Observations from Trenching in Area 2
Two trenches and five shovel tests were excavated within the area of the
presumed Holocene alluvial deposits west of the borrow pit (Figure 16). Backhoe
Trench 1 (see Appendix III for description) was closest to the borrow pit, and this
trench revealed an alluvial deposit within which an A-AB-Bk soil profile had
formed (Figure 17). The presence of a nodular morphology to the calcic B
horizon (Zone 3, Bk horizon) suggests that this deposit is of late Pleistocene to
Early or Middle Holocene age and has the potential to contain buried cultural
resources. No cultural material was observed within this trench exposure.
The second trench was placed into a slightly lower surface (no clear scarp
separated the two trench localities) and revealed what appear to be two different
age alluvial deposits separated by an unconformity (Figure 18). The top meter
consisted of a deposit that is interpreted as a Late Holocene alluvium within
which an A-AC soil profile had formed. This deposit fined upward, and the basal
part (Zone 2) appeared to be poorly sorted channel sediment. Two pieces of
burned limestone were found near the base of the A horizon (Zone 1) at depths
of 25 and 31cm below the existing ground surface and, despite examining the
entire trench wall with a trowel, no other cultural material was found. To evaluate
the potential for buried cultural material five shovel tests were excavated
adjacent to Backhoe Trench 2 within the proposed pipeline route (three to the
north and two to the south), and no additional cultural material was observed.
The basal 30 cm of Backhoe Trench 2 (95-125 cm) consisted of slightly redder,
well-structured clay that was interpreted as older alluvial deposits, possibly the
same deposit as exposed by Backhoe Trench 1.

28

Figure 15. Gully Profile

29

Figure 16. Location of Backhoe Trenches and Shovel Tests

30

Figure 17. Backhoe Trench 1

31

Figure 18. Backhoe Trench 2

32

Stratigraphic Observations in Area 3
The only visible exposures in this area are the deposits revealed by the
gully adjacent to the filling station. Examination of this cutbank revealed the
presence of a Late Pleistocene or Early Holocene alluvial deposit at depth (below
70 cm), which is unconformably draped by a younger, presumably middle or Late
Holocene alluvium (5-70 cm). The top five centimeters in this exposure is an
introduced gravelly fill. The upper alluvial deposit exhibits an A-ABk-C soil profile
and the ABk horizon consists of weak stage II (nodular) calcic horizon, which
contained 5% small (<2 mm) calcium carbonate nodules. The older alluvial fill
consisted of a Bk horizon that also exhibited a Stage II nodular calcic horizon but
with considerably more secondary (or pedogenic) calcium carbonate (common
(15%) coarse (0.5 to 1.5 cm) calcium carbonate nodules). This deposit was also
demonstrably rubified and exhibited 7.5YR hues, whereas the overlying younger
alluvial deposit was predominantly 10YR hues. A six-meter long section of the
gully face was picked and examined for cultural material, but no prehistoric items
were observed.
Conclusions
Both Area 2 and Area 3 contain significant amounts of Holocene alluvium
that have the potential to contain buried cultural material. Two backhoe trenches
were excavated in Area 2, and no cultural material was observed in context in
Backhoe Trench 1. Two pieces of burned limestone were observed within the A
horizon at Backhoe Trench 2. Five shovel tests excavated adjacent to Backhoe
Trench 2 failed to recover additional burned rock or prehistoric artifacts.
Although no trenches were excavated in Area 3, examination of a gully
exposure on the south side of Lowrey Draw provided an image of the age of the
deposits in this area, and no buried cultural material was observed.

33

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The records check revealed that three of the areas (1-3) had not been
visited by a professional archaeologist, and no prehistoric or historic sites are
known to be present in either of these areas. Part of Area 4 was examined in
1970 and 1971 as part of the survey for the proposed Interstate Highway 10.
This investigation recorded one site (41SU1) in close proximity to Area 4 (see
Archaeological Background above). Previous surveys in the county have
documented prehistoric sites dating to the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods of
Texas prehistory in the general area. The majority of these sites are burned rock
middens and lithic scatters. Carin burials, rock art, and sites in rock shelters
have been recorded in the region, but the landscape in the current project area is
not suitable for these kinds of sites.
Area 1 was found to be a low probability area for a prehistoric site due to
the fact that the soils in this area are shallow and rocky. Also, at the time of this
visit the majority of the area was beneath a concrete parking lot and driveway.
Any site present would be restricted to the very disturbed surface.
At Area 2, a very sparse scatter of debitage and some burned rock was
observed on the surface. According to Jimmy Powers (personal communication,
April 6, 2009), this entire area has been disturbed through root plowing, pushing
of mesquite, and grass burning. According to Powers, root plowing and mesquite
pushing disturbs the surface to a depth of three feet. If this is true, any site in this
area to this depth would be greatly disturbed and have no research potential.
The geoarchaeological investigation, however, did not confirm disturbance to this
depth. The fires associated with grass burning could account for some of the
burned limestone rock present. It is also possible that there is more debitage
and perhaps some diagnostic artifacts present beneath the surface as they were
moved about during the root plowing and mesquite pushing. The soils in this
area are Pleistocene and Holocene in age. One interior flake was found on the
surface at the northern end of this area where Pleistocene age soils are present,
and one scraper, one flake, and two large chert fragments were found at the
southern end in the area where Holocene soils are present.
Area 3 also contains Holocene soils, but the water line will be placed
beneath the creek and through the area by directional boring. Based on a study
of the area by Charles Frederick, it is believed that minimal impact will result from
this method of installing the water line.

34

At Area 4, the water line will be placed along the access road of Interstate
Highway 10 and within 75 feet of the Sutton County Cemetery. A field inspection
of this area failed to identify any evidence of a prehistoric or historic site. The
access road has been totally disturbed during the construction associated with
Interstate Highway 10. Therefore, if a site was not located during the previous
survey by the Highway Department, it would have been destroyed during the
above-mentioned construction. The Sutton County Cemetery contains graves
dating to the 19th century, and it is still in use. According to Bruce Kerbow, the
area was fenced approximately 50 years ago to enclose the original cemetery
and to mark the boundary for future burials. This fence has been in place for at
least 50 years, and no burials since that time have been placed outside the
fence. The old portion of the cemetery is hundreds of feet from the fence and the
APE. Therefore, it is unlikely that there are unmarked graves that far from the
original cemetery.

35

RECOMMENDATIONS
Since no prehistoric site was identified as a result of this survey, it is
recommended that construction in areas 1-3 be allowed to proceed as planned. It
is also recommended that monitoring by a professional archaeologist be conducted
in that portion of the proposed water line that will be placed within 75 feet of the
Sutton County Cemetery. Should construction plans change to include new areas
or a change in any of these areas, the THC and the TWDB must be notified in case
additional survey by a professional archaeologist is warranted. Also, if prehistoric
or historic cultural materials are unearthed during construction, all work in the area
of the find must stop until the THC and the TWDB can evaluate the situation. This
study was performed in accordance with the Minimum Survey Standards as defined
by the Archaeology Division of the THC.

36

REFERENCES CITED
Anonymous
1958 Watershed Work Plan for Watershed Protection and Flood
Prevention of Dry Devils River and Lowery Draw Watershed,
Schleicher and Sutton Counties, Texas. Manuscript prepared under
the authority of the United States Department of Agriculture and the
Soil Conservation Service.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28, Texas Historical
Commission.
Birkeland, Peter W.
1999 Soils and Geomorphology. (3rd Edition) Oxford University Press,
New York.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
2(1):93-117.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr.
1969 Late Full Glacial and Postglacial Pollen Analyses of Texas
Sediments. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation presented to the
Graduate College at The University of Texas at Austin.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1981 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Sonora Sheet (1:250,000 scale) The
University of Texas at Austin, Austin.
Crawford, Daymond D.
1973 An Archaeological Survey on Interstate Highway 10. Texas State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Publications in
Archaeology 2.
Doran, Glen Harold
1976 The Next Week Site. Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, Publications in Archaeology 9.
Jarvis, R. Whitby, and Daymond D. Crawford
1974 Archaeological Excavations on Interstate Highway 10, Sutton County,
Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Publications in Archaeology 4.

37

Labadie, Joseph H.
1987 Cultural and Paleontological Resources of the All American Pipeline
Supplementary Environmental Impact Statement, Between McCamey
and Webster, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Luke, Clive J.
1981 Test Excavations at Three Burned Rock Midden Sites in Schleicher
and Sutton Counties, Texas. Texas State Department of Highways
and Public Transportation, Publications in Archaeology 19.
Mercado-Allinger, Patricia A., Nancy A. Kenmotsu, and Timothy K. Perttula
1996 Archeology in the Central and Southern Planning Region, Texas: A
Planning Document. Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report
35 and the Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 7. Texas Historical Commission.
Moore, William Edward
1980 An Analysis of the Lithic Remains from Several Ring Middens in
Crockett County, Texas: A Study in Site Function. Unpublished
Masters thesis presented to the Graduate College at Texas A&M
University.
Mueller-Wille, Catherine
1986 Treatment Program for Prehistoric and Historic Sites Found along the
Celeron/All American Pipeline Right-of-Way in Texas from All
American Pipeline MPH 1165 to All American Pipeline MPH 1190.
Archaeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University. On file
at the Texas Historical Commission.
Schoeneberger, P. J., D. A. Wysocki, E. C. Benham, and W. D. Broderson (editors)
2002 Field Book for Describing and Sampling Soils, Version 2.0. Natural
Resources Conservation Service, National Soil Survey Center,
Lincoln, Nebraska.
Simons, Helen, and William E. Moore
1997 Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region of Texas. Office of
the State Archeologist, Special Report 36, Texas Historical
Commission.
Whitsett, W. Hayden
1976 An Archeological Reconnaissance at Sonora C-48-1153-02. Texas
Department of Water Resources, Letter Report on file at the Texas
Historical Commission.

38

Whitsett, W. Hayden (continued)
1978 An Archeological Reconnaissance at the City of Sonora C-48-115301. Texas Department of Water Resources, Letter Report on file at
the Texas Historical Commission.
Wiedenfeld, C. C., and J. DeWayne McAndrew
1968 Soil Survey, Sutton County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, Washington, D.C.

39

Appendix I: Shovel Test Log
__________________________________________________________________
Shovel
Depth*
Area
Results
Test
__________________________________________________________________
1

35 cm

2

Holocene soil with small
limestone gravels; no
cultural materials

2

35 cm

2

Holocene soil with small
limestone gravels; no
cultural materials

3

38 cm

2

Holocene soil with small
limestone gravels; no
cultural materials

4

40 cm

2

Holocene soil with small
limestone gravels; no
cultural materials

5

35 cm

2

Holocene soil with small
limestone gravels; no
cultural materials
__________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
* depth below the ground surface

40

Appendix II
Lithic Analysis
(by William A. Dickens)

41

Discussion
Six lithic specimens were submitted for analysis. They consist of one
scraper, two flakes, two large chert fragments, and one limestone cobble. These
specimens were collected from the surface over a wide area. They are described
below.
Scraper
This specimen is made on a large flake that falls within the size grade 3
category (greater than 3/4 inch and less than 1 inch). The material is a light to dark
brown mottled chert with a few whitish blotches. It is a complete interior flake that
appears to be an “overshot flake,” or one that has been removed from the entire
width of some portion of a chert cobble. The dorsal surface exhibits an earlier
removal scar that covers most of its surface, forming a slight depression. The
platform is crushed, and there is a large “erailleur” scar present on the ventral
surface. The entire distal edge, on the side of the parent cobble, has been
retouched from the ventral surface, and this has resulted in a slight concave shape.
This edge still is still sharp and exhibits little wear.
Flake 1
This flake falls within the size grade 5 category (greater than 3/8 inch and
less than ½ inch). It is a complete interior flake made from a light brown chert. It
has a plain platform, is “un-lipped,” and contains a slight bulb.
Flake 2
This flake also falls within the size grade 5 category. Only the distal portion
of the flake is present. It has a triangular cross-section that suggests it is part of a
blade with the distal end retaining some cortical material. This indicates it was an
overshot type flake removal. The interior of the flake is a yellowish-brown chert,
and the color gradually changes to white towards the cortical area.
Chert Fragment 1
This chert fragment measures 70.6 mm in length, 57.6 mm in width, and
22.5 mm in thickness. The interior of this cobble is light gray in color with a darker
gray band near the outer surface. Portions of the surface are heavily patinated,
and some cortex is present. The dorsal surface contains a number of “pits” or
potlids, indicating contact with fire sometime in the past. This fragment was
removed from a larger cobble, and one of its sides ha been flaked. The specimen
appears to have been either a flake core or an early attempt at making a larger tool
or biface.

42

Chert Fragment 2
This chert fragment measures 59.7 mm in length, 34.3 mm in width, and
24.7 mm in thickness. It is essentially an unaltered chert fragment. Some pitting is
present on the ventral surface, and a small sliver has been detached from one
corner. The interior within the resulting scar is bright or shiny, indicating that the
material has been heated (probably through natural causes). Its color is a dark
grayish-brown with some brown cortex along one edge.
Limestone Cobble
This specimen is a typical limestone cobble that has been weathered on the
surface for an extended period of time. It measures 69.2 mm in length, 51.0 mm in
width, and 34.7 mm in thickness. Weathering has created a rounded shape to all
but one edge, which has been broken. No apparent heating or thermal fracturing is
evident on the fractured edge or on any of the other surfaces.
Summary
Although several of the collected specimens contain some evidence of
cultural modification, the scattered nature of the finds suggests that the ground
surface has been altered by ranching activities or that these specimens represent
scattered isolated finds.

43

APPENDIX III
DESCRIPTION OF BORROW PIT AND BACKHOE TRENCHES

By
Charles D. Frederick

44

Borrow Pit (East End Exposure)
Location: Zone 14R 3 42 618 Easting 33 81 548 Northing
Geologic Units: Bureau of Economic Geology map unit Quaternary Undivided
(Qu) and Holocene alluvium
Cultural material: Light scatter of fire-cracked rock and debitage in the A horizon
Comments: This borrow pit was excavated along the western edge of the
Quaternary undivided outcrop, and it exposes an ancient alluvial deposit in the
east wall and a deposit that was presumed to be Holocene along the west wall.
Sculpting of the quarry margin did not leave a good exposure of the younger
deposit along the western wall, but the eastern wall retained a 1 to 2 meter tallstanding face that revealed a gravelly alluvial deposit within which an A-Bkm-Bk
soil profile had formed (Figure 13). On the basis of the degree of soil
development, this deposit is inferred to be in excess of 50,000 years old. The
presence of an advanced stage calcic B horizon (specifically the Bkm soil horizon
or K horizon, as it is sometimes called) (e.g., Birkeland 1999:356-357) requires a
very long period of time to form. A formal description was not made of this
exposure as the deposit is clearly Pleistocene in age and has no potential for a
significant buried archeological site.

45

Backhoe Trench 1
Location: Zone 14R 3 42 500 Easting 33 81 532 Northing
Geologic Units: Holocene alluvium (estimated to be of terminal Pleistocene to
Middle Holocene age)
Cultural material: A very light scatter of burned rock and debitage was observed
across the surface around the trench. No portion of this scatter was observed in
context within the trench.
Comments: No comments for this trench.
Zone Horizon

Depth

1

A

0-32 cm

2

AB

32-60 cm

3

Bk

60-125
cm
or more

Description
Dark brown (7.5YR 3/2, moist) silty clay to clay, very
friable, moderate medium to fine subangular blocky
structure, gradual smooth boundary, violently
effervescent, few (3%) coarse fragments, most of
which were fine subrounded limestone gravel.
Brown (7.5YR 4/2, moist) clay, friable, strong medium
to fine angular blocky structure, gradual smooth
boundary, violently effervescent, few to common (35%) coarse fragments, similar to Zone 1.
Reddish brown (5YR 4/4, moist) silty clay, slightly
hard, moderate medium prismatic structure parting to
strong fine to very fine subangular blocky structure,
violently effervescent, common (5-7%) calcium
carbonate filaments, common (5%) medium (2-5 mm)
prominent white (10YR 8/1) irregular shaped friable
masses of calcium carbonate, 7-15% coarse
fragments consisting of matrix supported fine
subrounded limestone gravel.

46

Backhoe Trench 2
Location: Zone 14R 3 42 422 Easting 33 81 524 Northing
Geologic Units: Holocene alluvium (zones 1 and 2 appear to be a Late Holocene
alluvial fill that rests unconformably upon an older alluvial deposit (presumably
the same deposit revealed by Backhoe Trench 1, which is estimated to be of
Late Pleistocene to Early Holocene age).
Cultural material: No cultural material was observed on the ground surface but
two burned rocks were observed in the A horizon (25 and 31 cm below the
existing ground surface).
Comments: Zones 1 and 2 are inferred to be of Middle to Late Holocene age,
whereas Zone 3 is inferred to be of Early Holocene to Late Pleistocene age. The
entire trench was picked and examined with a trowel to search for buried cultural
material, and only two pieces (burned limestone) were observed. A series of five
closely spaced shovel tests situated along the proposed pipeline north and south
of the trench recovered no additional cultural material.

Zone Horizon
1
A

Depth
0-31 cm

2

AC

28-95 cm

3

2Bk

95-125
cm

Description
Black (10YR 2/1, moist) silty clay, very friable, weak to
moderate coarse subangular blocky structure parting
to strong very fine crumb structure, abrupt smooth
boundary, violently effervescent, 5-7% coarse
fragments throughout (matrix supported), two pieces
of burned limestone were observed within this deposit
between 25 and 31 cm.
Very dark gray (10YR 3/1, moist) very gravelly clay to
silty clay, friable, weak medium subangular blocky
structure parting moderate very fine subangular blocky
structure, abrupt wavy boundary, violently
effervescent, 40 to 60% coarse fragments, most of
which are < 2 cm subrounded limestone gravels, but a
few larger clasts are present.
Dark brown (10YR 3/3, moist) to brown (7.5YR 4/3,
moist) clay, very firm, strong medium angular blocky
structure, violently effervescent, common (3-5%)
calcium carbonate filaments, 5-10% coarse fragments,
the majority of which are matrix supported < 2 cm
diameter subrounded limestone gravel.

47

Gully Exposure, adjacent to South Side of Lowrey Draw
Location: Zone 14R 3 41 998 Easting 33 82 295 Northing
Geologic Units: Middle or Late Holocene alluvium resting unconformably upon
Early Holocene or Late Pleistocene alluvium.
Cultural material: None observed.
Comments: Zone 1 is introduced fill, zones 2-4 are inferred to be a middle-to-late
Holocene alluvial fill, and Zone 5 is inferred to be of Early Holocene or Late
Pleistocene age.

Zone Horizon
1
C

Depth
0-5 cm

2

2Ab

5-30 cm

3

2ABkb

30-55 cm

4

2C

55-70 cm

5

3Bk

70-170
cm

Description
Grayish-brown (10YR 5/2, dry) slightly gravelly silt
loam, loose, single grain, abrupt smooth boundary,
violently effervescent, 20% coarse fragments
(rounded gravel).
Dark gray-dark grayish-brown (10YR 41/5, dry) clay to
silty clay, hard, strong medium to fine subangular
blocky structure, gradual smooth boundary, violently
effervescent, <3% coarse fragments.
Grayish-brown (10YR 5/2, dry) silty clay, hard, strong
medium subangular blocky structure, abrupt wavy
boundary, violently effervescent, common fine distinct
white spherical masses and crystals of calcium
carbonate.
Grayish-brown (10YR 5/2, dry) extremely gravelly
loam, loose, single grain, abrupt wavy boundary,
violently effervescent, ~75% coarse fragments.
Light brown (7.5YR 6/4, dry) silty clay, hard, strong
medium prismatic structure parting to strong fine
angular blocky structure, violently effervescent, few to
common (3-5%) calcium carbonate filaments,
common (15%) coarse (0.5-1.5 mm) prominent white
irregular to spherical calcium carbonate nodules, 3-5%
coarse fragments.

48

