AN CULTURAL RESOURCES ASSESSMENT FOR THE
MARSHALL IVY ROAD BRIDGE REPLACEMENT PROJECT
IN ANGELINA COUNTY, TEXAS

William E. Moore
Author and Principal Investigator

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Assessment Report Number 30

February 2017

A CULTURAL RESOURCES ASSESSMENT FOR THE FOR THE
MARSHALL IVY ROAD BRIDGE REPLACEMENT PROJECT
IN ANGELINA COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 17-01

William E. Moore
Principal Investigator

Prepared for
Angelina County Commissioner’s Court
Angelina County Courthouse
215 East Lufkin Avenue
Lufkin, Texas 75902

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

2017

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am appreciative of the assistance provided by others during this project.
Councilman Terry Pitts was my main contact with the county and he was very helpful.
Sean Doyle is a staff archaeologist at FEMA and he advised me as to the preferred
methods for conducting the investigation. The figures were prepared by Lili G. Lyddon
and Michele Amason.

ii

CONTENTS
Abstract – Page ii
Acknowledgments – Page iii
Introduction – Page 1
Environment – Page 3
Archaeological Background – Page 4
Results and Conclusions – Page 6
Recommendations – Page - 9
References Cited – Page 10
FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location of Project Area – Page 1
Figure 2. USGS 5.5’ Topographic Quadrangle Manning– Page 2
Figure 3. Northeast Texas Cultural-Geographical Region– Page 4
Figure 4. View of Bridge Looking North Prior to 2016 Flood – Page 7
Figure 5. East Bank of Shawnee Creek – Page 8
Figure 6. West Bank of Shawnee Creek – Page 8

iii

INTRODUCTION
The bridge at the crossing of Marshall Ivy Road and Shawnee Creek
washed out during a flood in March of 2016. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) is proposing to fund the cost of replacement of a
larger bridge. The county will assume the initial cost of this project and FEMA
proposes to provide reimbursement through its “Public Assistance Grants
Progrem.” In addition to the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) as a
consulting party on this project (36 CFR 800.2) they are signatories to the
“Programmatic Agreement” of September 11, 2014 (stipulation(s) I.B.1 (d), II.C 4
(e), II.C 5 (b), and II.C 6 (a) with the Texas Historical Commission (THC) and the
Texas Department of Public Safety (TXDPS)/Texas Division of Emergency
Management. The tribes are also consulting parties under the provisions of 36
CFR 800. This project is a resolution of potential adverse effects and is being
conducted in with the cooperation of FEMA, SHPO, and TXDPS
The Area of Potential Effect (APE) is in the central part of the county near
the town of Huntington (Figure 1). Figure 2 depicts the APE on the USGS 7.5’
topographic quadrangle Manning (3194-214). Shawnee Creek begans near the
town of Huntington and flows a distance of twenty miles to its mouth at the
Neches River. It is intermittant in its upper reaches. The main vegetation on its
banks consists of mixed pine and hardwood forests and grassland areas.

1

Figure 1. General Location of Project Area

2

Figure 2. USGS 7.5’ Topographic Quadrangle Manning

3

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
According to a statistical overview of prehistoric sites in Texas by Biesaart,
et al. (1985:Figure 15) and an archaeological bibliography of the Northeastern
Region of Texas (Martin 1990), Angelina County is located in the Northeast
Texas Cultural-Geographical Region. This area encompasses 30 counties
(Figure 3). Nancy Kenmotus and Timothy K. Perttula (1993) co-authored a
planning document for the Texas Historical Commission’s Eastern Planning
Region. They write that Angelina County contained the second highest number of
important hunter-gatherer sites in Northeast Texas (n=3) and at least 13
important Late Caddoan sites. Because of the proximity of Angelina County to
this adjacent Northeast Texas Cultural-Geographical Region, some cultural traits
were probably shared between the prehistoric inhabitants of both regions. The
statistical overview cannot be viewed as 100% accurate but it does provide a
time frame for comparisons.

Figure 3. Northeast Texas Cultural-Geographical Region

4

The earliest archaeological research in the area was performed in the late
1930s and early 1940s by researchers from The University of Texas at Austin.
At that time, prehistoric cemeteries and mound sites were considered to be of
primary importance. Two key figures were G. E. Arnold and A. T. Jackson. They
travelled about the state visiting known sites and plotting their approximate
locations on highway maps. In some cases, testing and surface collecting was
conducted. The location of sites was drawn in field notebooks and later plotted as
dots on highway maps published by the Texas Highway Department.
Unfortunately, this information is often less than accurate making confirmation of
sites recorded by Arnold and Jackson difficult and sometimes impossible.
The nearest recorded site to the APE is 41AG23. It was documented by
Arnold as an “Indian Burial Ground” approximately 200 feet in diameter and
about 150 feet above Spring Branch on a hill with dense vegetation slightly
above bottom land through which Spring Branch flows. He documented it as
East Texas Site No. 263. The site form is not dated and is very sparse. There is
no discussion of the burials or associated artifacts.
From the late 1940s until the mid 1970s, most of the archaeological
research in East Texas was carried out in connection with reservoir construction
and work by United States Forest Service personnel. Robert L. Stephenson
(1948a, 1948b) published the results of his work at the proposed McGee Bend
Reservoir in Angelina, Jasper, Nacogdoches, Sabine, and San Augustine
counties. At the time, this was the only major archaeological investigation in the
county performed by a professional archaeologist in a systematic manner.
In the 1970s, Ross Fields (1979) presented an overview of the cultural
resources of the Davy Crockett, Sam Houston, Angelina, and Sabine National
Forests of Texas. This document provides a brief discussion of all sites in each
forest and 23 sites in Angelina County are mentioned. Another important
document for this area is a cultural resource overview of the National Forests in
Texas by John Ippolito (1983).
The growing population of Angelina County and growth of industry in the
area has been the catalyst for an increase in cultural resources surveys. As a
result, there are 221 known archaeological sites in the county at the time this
assessment was prepared as opposed to only 50 in 1985. This is an increase of
110% and is an indicator of the potential of significant sites yet to be discovered.

5

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Environmental Setting
The area planned for construction is in a floodplain setting where floods
are a frequent occurrence. According to soil survey for Angelina County, the soil
on both banks of the creek belongs to the Koury Series (Dolezel 1988:96).
This soil is found on nearly level bottomlands of small streams and creeks.
The B Horizon begins at 17 inches and consists of silt loam, loam, or very fine
sandy loam. During the cool season, the water table has been measured at a
depth of 1.5 to 2.5 feet in some areas. Areas that flood regularly and often retain
water at the surface were not selected by prehistoric groups for campsites. The
primary utilization of such areas would have been the exploitation of local flora
and fauna. The gathering of plant resources was an ephemeral task that is
highly unlikely to be traced to a specific locality. Three major freshwater riverine
resources utilized in prehistoric times were fish, turtles, and mussels. The
process of retrieving these sources of food from a stream was also a temporary
activity that did not involve a site of any permanence. Although some cleaning
may have been conducted at the creek, cooking and consumption was typically
done at the camp.
Sean Doyle (2017) wrote a very detailed letter to Mark Wolfe (SHPO) that
presents a very thorough discussion of the project to include its potential effect
on cultural resources is presented. Doyle writes that past flooding events have
“scoured the stream channel significantly with the basin being recorded in 2013
as 4 ft. deeper than its 2003 level.” His conclusion to this activity if that the
“expository potential of any archaeology, if present” is degraded.
Road and Bridge Construction
The roads leading to the bridge crossing on both banks were raised as high
as 15 feet in order to avoid closure during periods of flooding. This was done by
importing dirt from another area to be used as fill. A concrete abutment was erected
on each bank to keep the fill in place and provide a structure on which to attach the
bridge. Figure 4 depicts the bridge and pilings on the east bank prior to the 2016
flood.

6

The aforementioned letter from Sean Doyle to Mark Wolfe delineates the
APE as an area of 50 feet by 70 feet. Kevin Gee is the engineer for GoodwinLasiter, Inc. who is heading up this project and he provided me with the following
information. The proposed construction consists of a single span precast concrete
beam bridge 26 feet in width and roadway approaches. The new abutments will be
constructed using 16-inch precast pilings and cast-in-place caps. This will increase
the width of the road at the bridge from 20 feet to 26 feet by adding an additional 3
feet on each side. The original construction methods at the time would have
disturbed an area much larger than the existing road surface footprint, extending to
the width of the base of the embankment. Therefore, construction of the bridge and
wider road approaches will take place on previously disturbed ground.

Figure 4. View of East Bank of Creek Prior to 2016 Flood
The pilings or bridge supports will also be placed in areas affected by the
previous construction and their footprint will be a 16-inch square. Figure 5 depicts
the disturbed area between the embankment and creek on the east bank. This area
will be capped with concrete to prevent future erosion. The bridge failure was
caused by the collapse of the embankment on the west bank. Figure 6 shows the
west bank as seen from the opposite side of the creek.

7

Figure 5. East Bank of Shawnee Creek

Figure 6. West Bank of Shawnee Creek

8

Previous Investigations
Two previous cultural resources surveys have been conducted within 2 km
of the bridge crossing. The Archeological Sites Atlas mentions a TxDOT project
that was conducted in 2007 for improvements to U.S. Highway 69. However, the
permit referenced for this project cites a different report that was not available at
the time of this writing. The project as depicted on the Atlas did not record any
archaeological sites.
A 3-D seismic survey was conducted in the Angelina National Forest that
examined various landforms from floodplains to uplands (Moore 2008). Shovel
tests in floodplain settings similar to the current APE were negative in terms of
yielding cultural materials. One of the streams in the project area is a tributary of
Shawnee Creek.
It is my professional opinion that an investigation of the APE as currently
proposed is not likely to yield cultural resources deemed significant enough to halt
construction.

RECOMMENDATIONS
It is recommended that the county be allowed to proceed with construction
as planned. Should evidence of a prehistoric or historic site be encountered during
any phase of construction in any of the areas investigated, all work must stop until
the situation can be evaluated by archaeologists at FEMA and the THC. In the
event, survey is required, it is also recommended that the original Scope-of-Work
be followed and a new review period of 30 days not be initiated. If the tribes do not
respond within their 30 day window, their failure to respond should be taken as lack
of concern that the proposed project will affect cultural resources of interest to
them.

9

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical
Overview. Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28.
Texas Historical Commission.
Dolezel, Raymond
1988
Soil Survey of Angelina County, Texas. Soil
Conservation Service, U. S. Department of Agriculture in
cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station,
College Station.
Doyle, Sean
2017

Fields, Ross
1979

Ippolito, John E.
1983

Letter to Mark Wolfe, State Historic Preservation Officer
dated February 3, 2017

Cultural Resources of the Davy Crockett, Sam Houston,
Angelina, and Sabine National Forests of Texas. Report
submitted to the United States Department of Agriculture,
U.S. Forest Service by the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

A Cultural Resource Overview of the National Forests in
Texas. Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Lufkin, Texas.

Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A
Planning Document. Department of Antiquities Protection,
Cultural Resource Management Report 3. Texas Historical
Commission.
Martin, William A.
1989

Archeological Bibliography for the Northeastern Region of
Texas. Department of Archeological Planning and Review,
Cultural Resource Report 1 and Office of the State
Archeologist, Special Report 32, Texas Historical
Commission.

10

Moore, William E.
2008

An Archeological Bibliography of the Frontline Geoservices
Manning 3-D Seismic Survey in the Angelina National
Forest, Angelina County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research
Associates, Contract Report 201.

Stephenson, Robert L.
1948a
Archaeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir - Jasper,
Sabine, San Augustine, Angelina, and Nacogdoches
Counties, Texas - A Preliminary Report. Manuscript on file at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1948b

Archaeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir: A
Preliminary Report. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society 19:57-73.

11

