AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
COLEMAN COUNTY TELEPHONE COOPERATIVE, INC
DISTRIBUTION NETWORK UPGRADE NUMBER 2 PROJECT
IN COLEMAN AND BROWN COUNTIES, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 09-08

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Coleman County Telephone Cooperative, Inc.
Post Office Box 508
Santa Anna, Texas 76878

ABSTRACT
A cultural resources survey of the proposed route of a telephone cable was
conducted by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) in April of 2009 for the
Coleman County Telephone Cooperative, Inc. under Antiquities Permit 6213. The
total length of the project area is 38 miles and covers 76 acres. In all, thirty-five
areas were examined. Most of the project area is in Coleman County, but a small
segment is in Brown County. Two previously recorded prehistoric sites and one
possible site location are shown on the topographic quadrangles on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) as being in close proximity to the Area
Potential Effect (APE). No previously unrecorded archaeological sites were found
and recorded as a result of this survey, and no artifacts were collected. There are no
historic sites or cemeteries within the path of the telephone cable as currently
proposed. The location of the two previously recorded sites and the possible site
location were visited, and no evidence of a site was found at either location. The
agency responsible for reviewing this project is the Texas Historical Commission
(THC), Archeology Division. Copies of the final report will be housed at the THC,
TARL, BVRA, and the Coleman County Telephone Cooperative, Inc.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to those individuals who participated in this project. At
TRC Engineering, Inc. we were assisted by Donna Bogart (Project Manager). Ms
.Bogart provided maps and logistical support. Our contact at the Coleman County
Telephone Cooperative, Inc. was Tim Humpert (General Manager). Jean Hughes at
TARL assisted the Principal Investigator during his visit to TARL to check site records
and maps for previously recorded sites in the project area and vicinity. Lili G. Lyddon of
L. L. Technical Services and Edward P. Baxter prepared the figures. Ms. Lyddon edited
the report.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT.................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.............................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING.................................................................................... 3
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ....................................................................... 4
METHODS ................................................................................................................. 7
SECTION 1 ................................................................................................................ 8
SECTION 2 .............................................................................................................. 14
SECTION 3 .............................................................................................................. 18
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS............................................................................. 22
RECOMMENDATIONS............................................................................................ 23
REFERENCES CITED............................................................................................. 24

Appendix I: Previously Recorded Sites
Appendix II: Areas Investigated
Appendix III: Shovel Test Log

iv

List of Figures
Figure 1. General Location.......................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. View of Scraped Right-of-Way (facing north)............................................... 9
Figure 3. View of Culvert Profile (facing north).......................................................... 10
Figure 4. 41CN193 (facing northwest) ...................................................................... 11
Figure 5. 41CN186 (facing northwest) ...................................................................... 16
Figure 6. Historic Structure (facing north) ................................................................. 20
Figure 7. Right-of-Way Near Possible Prehistoric Site.............................................. 20

v

INTRODUCTION
The Coleman County Telephone Cooperative, Inc., located in Santa Anna,
Texas, proposes to improve its telephone system by providing service to existing
customers in rural Coleman and Brown counties (Figure 1). The main portion of the
project area is in Coleman County with a minor segment in Brown County. This firm
plans to place approximately 62 miles of telephone cable within the state highway
and county road rights-of-way and centered in a 16.5-foot wide construction corridor.
The cable will be between 0.5 and 1.5 inches in diameter and will be placed in a
trench 12 inches wide and 36 inches deep on all county roads and 42 inches deep on
all state highways and Farm-to-Market roads. Creek borings will most likely be
deeper than five feet below the channel bottom. A trenching machine will be used to
dig the trenches for the installation of the telephone cable. Topographic coverage of
the entire project area is provided by sixteen USGS 7.5’ maps. These are Bangs
(3199-413), Bead Mountain (3199-314), Burkett (3199-433), Coleman (3199-432),
Crooked Creek (3299-122), Fife (3199-133), Lake San Tana (3199-431), Lake
Scarborough (3199-433), Novice East (3199-344), Santa Anna (3199-424) Speck
Mountain (3199-421), Talpa (3199-342), Thrifty (3199-442), Valera (3199-341), Voss
(3199-311), and Whon (3199-134). The THC stated that the line on only five of
these quadrangles should be investigated. The areas examined during this study are
depicted the following quadrangles: Burkett (3199-433), Crooked Creek (3299-122),
Lake Scarborough (3199-433), Novice East (3199-344), and Valera (3199-341). In a
letter from William A. Martin of the THC to Donna Bogart of TRC Engineering
Services, Inc, a cultural resources survey by a qualified professional archaeologist
was requested. In order to satisfy this requirement, TRC Engineering, Inc. and the
Coleman County Telephone Cooperative, Inc. retained BVRA to perform this service.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
According to Biesaart et al. (1985:Figure 4), The project area is located within
two geographic regions of Texas. They are the Cross Timbers and Lower Plains.
Blair (1950:98-100) places it within the Austropriarian biotic province.
Brown County is an area of rolling hills and varied soils that drains to the
Colorado River that forms the southern boundary of the county. According to Clower
(1980:1), the pattern of soils in Brown County is complex. He states that four major
geologic formations have influenced the nature of the soils. In Brown County and
adjacent Mills County, three major land resource areas converge. In the eastern part
of the area are the soils of the Grand Prairie; in the western part of the area are soils
of the Texas North Central Prairies, and in the northern part of the area are soils of
the West Cross Timbers. The soils of the Grand Prairie and Texas North Central
Prairies formed mainly under grass vegetation and are dominantly dark colored and
loamy and clayey. The soils of the West Cross Timbers formed under post oak
savannah and are dominantly light colored and sandy and loamy. Brown County
receives 27.3 inches of annual rainfall. A January minimum temperature of 33
degrees Fahrenheit and a July maximum temperature of 97 degrees create a long
growing season. Much of the economy depends on agriculture, and the major crops
include hay, peanuts, and pecans. Livestock includes cattle, poultry, hogs, and goats
as well as dairies. Oil and gas production is also a part of the economy.
Most of Coleman county consists of gently undulating uplands with elevations
that range from about 1300 feet above sea level at the Colorado River to about 2250
feet in the northwestern part of the county. Coleman County receives 26.82 inches of
annual rainfall. A January minimum temperature of 32 degrees Fahrenheit and a July
maximum temperature of 96 degrees Fahrenheit creates a growing season of 235
days. About 62 percent of the county is used as range, and cattle and sheep are the
principal livestock. The rest of the agricultural land is cultivated or in old fields that
were cultivated in the past. Small grains, sorghums, and cotton are the main crops.
Oil and gas production is a part of the economy as is quarrying for stone.
The reader is referred to Volume I (Stratigraphy) of the Geology of Texas by
Sellards et al. (1932) for a more in-depth discussion of the geology of this area. The
following data are taken from the Texas Almanac for 1984-1985 (Kingston and Harris
1983), the soil survey for Coleman County (Botts et al., 1974), and the soil survey for
Brown and Mills counties (Clower 1980).

3

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
General
The project area is located in a region referred to in a statistical overview
compiled by Biesaart et al. (1985:Figure 15) as the North Central Texas CulturalGeographic Region. When the overview was published in 1985, there were 1302
recorded archaeological sites in the region. This figure represented 6.44% of the
state. Of the 13 cultural-geographical regions in Texas, the North Central Texas
Cultural-Geographic Region was 8th in number of sites recorded. The planning
document does not provide site numbers that can be associated with the above
statements.
In 1985, there were 95 previously recorded sites in Brown County. This was
3.55% of the region and 0.47% of the state. Site types were listed as Paleo-Indian
(2), Archaic (33) and Late Prehistoric (2). Some sites are mentioned as being
disturbed due to erosion, construction, and vandalism. One site is listed as
destroyed. One site had been excavated, 3 sites had been tested by hand, 2 sites
had been tested by machine, and 65 sites had been surface collected. Since 1985,
the number of recorded sites in Brown County has increased from 95 to 559.
In 1985, there were 151 previously recorded sites in Coleman County. This
was 5.64% of the region and 0.75% of the state. Site types were listed as PaleoIndian (2), Archaic (84) and Late Prehistoric (13). Some sites are mentioned as being
disturbed due to erosion, construction, soil deflation, and vandalism. No sites had
been excavated, 49 had been tested, and 71 had been surface collected. Features
observed include hearths, burned rock middens, and one bone bed. Three burials
were reported, as well as a stone quarry and a stone tool manufacturing area. Since
1985, the number of recorded sites in Coleman County has increased to 285.
Previous Investigations in the Project Area and Vicinity
The first archaeological investigation to be conducted in the area was an
informal survey by E. B. Sayles, an employee of The University of Texas at Austin. In
the 1920s and 1930s, he traveled about the state and recorded sites. His travels
took him to Coleman County where he identified two prehistoric sites (41CN186 and
41CN193) near the current APE (Appendix I). He wrote no formal report of his work
and kept only sketchy notes. Sayles plotted his sites on highway maps and
sometimes made hand drawn maps. Over time, other archaeologists have tried to
relocate his sites and plot them on 7.5’ USGS topographic quadrangles housed at
TARL.

4

The site form for 41CN186 is very brief and does not give the date that it was
visited by Sayles. The only information regarding the site is that it is scattered over
three acres. In 1982, Darrell Creel examined Sayles’ notes and attempted to plot the
location of this site on the Novice East topographic quadrangle. Creel admits that his
plotting is tentative, and he states that a visit to the area may confirm the location of
this site.
The site form for 41CN193 is also very brief, but it gives the apparent date of
Sayles’ visit as 1928. It also describes this site as six mounds occupying an area of
one or two acres. In 1983, Darrell Creel examined Sayles’ notes and attempted to
plot the location of this site on the Crooked Creek topographic quadrangle. Creel
states that he is “confident of the plotting,” but he admits that the “data on which it is
based are few.” In addition, to these two sites, there is an open circle on the Burkett
topographic quadrangle, and this is an indication of a possible site (Appendix I).
There is no site form, and the map plotting is the only information available.
Previous Investigations in Brown County
The earliest professional activity in Brown County occurred in 1919 when
Professor J. E. Pearce of The University of Texas at Austin trenched two burned rock
middens at the Pittman Farm site (41BR3) on Willis Creek, a tributary of Pecan
Bayou (Campbell 1952). No artifacts were found in either trench, and Pearce
concluded that the middens represent debris discarded from a central hearth area.
Other early work in the county was conducted by Cyrus N. Ray in the 1930s. Ray
(1933) examined a burial that was being destroyed by road construction. In 1960, a
guide to the literature of Texas archeology was published by Thomas N. Campbell
(1960) in the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. In this volume, only seven
references to Brown County were included. The first series of modern era
professional investigations in the county were carried out by archaeologists from
Texas A&M University. Most of these projects were in areas along Pecan Bayou
(Shafer 1975; Shafer et al. 1975a, 1975b; 1976). These studies found a variety of
sites that include lithic scatters, burned rock middens, lithic quarries or procurement
areas, rock shelters, and habitation sites. Based on this work, they concluded that
prehistoric occupation was concentrated along the major streams, and the upper
reaches of tributaries were utilized on an occasional or intermittent basis. Many of
the archaeological sites in Brown County were recorded in the 1970s by locals along
Turkey Creek and Red River and scattered about the landscape in the northern part
of Brown County. The kinds of sites identified were mainly lithic scatters and burned
rock middens. Since 1985, when only 95 sites were known in the county, there has
been an increase in archaeological survey, and now there are 559 recorded sites in
Brown County. One area that has been extensively studied is Camp Bowie. Two of
the larger studies on this military reservation were conducted by The University of
Texas at San Antonio (Mauldin and Broehm 2001; Greaves 2002; Mauldin et al.
2003) in 1990 and 2001. The most recent investigation was by BVRA in 2009
(Moore and Baxter 2009).

5

Previous Investigations in Coleman County
The only major archaeological survey that has been conducted within the
boundaries of Coleman County was for the proposed Stacy (O. H. Ivie) Reservoir that
was projected to flood portions of Coleman, Concho, and Runnels counties over
19,200 acres. The first survey was conducted by archaeologists from Espey, Huston
& Associates in 1980, and three reports were written in 1981 by Wooldridge (1981),
Nichols (1981), and Freeman and Freeman (1981). According to the abstract for this
report, a 100% pedestrian survey recorded 431 sites in the three counties. Types of
prehistoric sites recorded include burned rock middens, campsites, lithic scatters,
quarry sites, lithic procurement sites, lithic workshops, base camps with middens,
small camps, and rock cairns. These sites date to the Paleoindian, Archaic, and Late
Prehistoric periods of Texas prehistory. Historic Indian sites include possible tipi
rings. Of the total number of prehistoric sites, 327 contained only prehistoric cultural
materials, and 42 contained prehistoric and historic components. The 62 historic
sites include cemeteries, farmsteads, industrial sites, house sites, lime kilns, and
ranch complexes. Standing structures include a cotton gin, house, outbuildings,
cellars, cisterns, foundations, corrals, and cattle pens. These sites are discussed in
the second volume of the Stacy Reservoir report (Freeman and Freeman 1981).
Additional work at the site of the proposed reservoir include survey at the dam
construction zone (Bailey et al. 1989), an inventory of cultural resources above the
1,55..5 contour line (Bryan and Collins 1988), data recovery at site 41CN74
(Batterman 1991), and an investigation of historic cemeteries (Earls et al. 1991).
The remainder of cultural resource surveys in Coleman County consists of
small area and linear projects performed for various federal agencies such as
Farmer’s Home Administration (FMHA), Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA),
Rural Electrification Agency (REA), and Soil Conservation Service (SCS). According
to the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, there have been few previous surveys in the
vicinity of the current project area.

6

METHODS
Background Check
Prior to entering the field, the site records at TARL on the campus of The
University of Texas at Austin and the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas were checked for
the presence of previously recorded archaeological sites in the project area and vicinity.
In addition, a thorough review of the existing literature for the project area was
conducted.
Field Survey
The project area was divided into three sections (Appendix II). Portions of the
project area near creeks and bayous, historic properties on private land, and areas near
previously recorded sites within each section were subjected to an intensive survey.
These investigations consisted of shovel probes and shovel tests where appropriate
and visual inspections of the ground surface, bar ditch, and profiles of hills exposed by
road construction. In Section 1, profiles in recent highway construction backhoe
trenches were examined. The areas examined within each section were assigned letter
designations. Section 1 contains 13 areas (A-M), Section 2 contains eleven areas (AK), and Section 3 contains eleven areas (A - K). Within the three sections, 37 creek
crossings, 1 historic property, and the 3 locations where sites located by E. B. Sayles in
the 1930s were examined. Other areas within each section (such as highway cut
banks and the tops of hills) were “spot checked,” but these areas are not depicted on
the project area maps in this report. The entire area was visually inspected during a
“windshield survey” designed to look for historic buildings and cemeteries that might be
affected by the telephone cable. Shovel tests were given numerical designations by
section. They were not excavated in areas where the A Horizon had been severely
disturbed or in areas where firm clay was present at the surface. In all, 25 shovel tests
were excavated. Ten test were in Section 1, six tests were in Section 2, and nine tests
were in Section 3. Information regarding the shovel tests was entered onto n Microsoft
Excel shovel test log (Appendix III). The survey was documented through the utilization
of Microsoft Word and Excel documents. Location data was collected and documented
with a Garmin GPS-aided computer topographic program, National Geographic Topo
and ESRI ArcMap. A Kodak digital camera was used to document the project, and all
photographs were enhanced using Adobe Photoshop software. The three sections, the
thirty-five areas investigated, and the methods used are discussed in detail below.

7

SECTION 1
Section 1 is approximately fourteen miles long and is located along State
Highway 283 north of the city of Coleman and is completely in Coleman County. It is
on the 7’5’ USGS topographic quadrangles Crooked Creek and Lake Scarborough.
The northern boundary of the proposed buried telephone cable is Farm-to-Market
Road 1274, and the southern portion ends at the southern boundary of the 7.5’
USGS topographic quadrangle Lake Scarborough 3.6 miles north of the intersection
of State Highway 84 and State Highway 283. Originally, there was a 2.5 mile section
along Private Road 2832 that runs from the intersection of Private Road 2832 and
State Highway 283 westward along Jim Ned Creek. This section was deleted from
survey because permission from the landowner was not given to access this area.
The remaining area of Section 1 measures 11.4 miles. In the northern part, the
proposed buried cable route runs in the right-of-way along the west side of State
Highway 283 until the intersection of Private Road 2832 where it switches to the
right-of-way on the east side for the rest of the section. Since the Private Road 2832
section was deleted from the survey area, there may not be a need to cross the
highway. Anticipating such action, the east side of the highway on the part of Section
1 north of Private Road 2832 was also investigated. The majority of Section 1
consisted of a very clayey soil with small limestone rock fragments. No chert sources
were found associated with the limestone. Near Jim Ned Creek, dark brown clay soil
was encountered. The majority of the creek crossings were small intermittent
headwater branches that were completely dry. The only water observed was in the
main channel of Jim Ned Creek and Indian Creek. Most of the section was
undergoing road construction activities that resulted in a vast area of exposed ground
surface exposure (Figure 2), and the rest was characterized by a mowed right-of-way
with good ground surface visibility. New culvert construction activities at every low
area or intermittent stream crossing presented backhoe trench profiles deeper then
the 42 inch APE along most of the route (Figure 3). These profiles were all visually
inspected, and a sample of the back dirt from excavation for a culvert was screened
at one of them. This was particularly useful along the deeper clay soils next to Jim
Ned Creek. This section was surveyed on April 2-5, 2009. There were 13 areas (A-M)
where intensive investigations were performed in Section 1. In areas A-C, both
sides of the road were examined.
Area A
Area A is 780 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the west side of
State Highway 283 where a small intermittent headwater branch of an unnamed
tributary of Jim Ned Creek crosses the road. The creek had no deeply incised bed.
Soils were clay mixed with limestone fragments. The areas on both sides of the
drainage were visually inspected on both sides of the highway, and the new culvert
cut profiles were examined. No shovel tests were excavated.

8

Figure 2. View of Scraped Right-of-Way (facing north)
Area B
This area is 460 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the west side of
State Highway 283 where a small intermittent headwater branch of an unnamed
stream that is a tributary of Jim Ned Creek crosses the road and the higher ground
on both sides. Soils were clay mixed with limestone fragments. The areas on both
sides of the drainage were visually inspected on both sides of the highway, and the
new culvert cut profiles were examined. No shovel tests were excavated.
Area C
This area is 825 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the west side of
State Highway 283. This area is a hillside where the highway runs alongside a small
intermittent drainage to the west that is a tributary of Jim Ned Creek. Most of the
right-of-way was in a highway cut into the hillside. Soils were clay mixed with
limestone fragments. The area was visually inspected on both sides of the highway,
and the new culvert cut profiles were examined. No shovel tests were excavated.

9

Figure 3. View of Culvert Profile (facing north)

10

Area D
This area is 1930 feet long and is in the vicinity of the location of 41CN193 as
depicted on the topographic map at TARL. It contains a small intermittent stream
crossing that is a tributary of Jim Ned Creek. It is in the right-of-way on the west side
of State Highway 283. Soils were clay loam mixed with limestone fragments over
clay. No large chert cobbles were observed within the right-of-way. The field on the
west side of the road (where the site is believed to be located) has been under
cultivation, and there is a greater then 75% surface visibility. The private property on
the east side of the highway was in cultivation at the time of this survey and had >
90% surface visibility. These fields were visually examined from the edges of the
rights-of-way. A small rise with scattered limestone cobbles was noted in the western
field, but they did not appear to be burned (Figure 4). Since this area was outside the
APE, it was not investigated. Area D was visually inspected on both sides of the
highway, and the new culvert cut profiles were examined. Three shovel tests (5-7)
were excavated to heavy dark clay, and all were negative. Both sides of the highway
were investigated.

Figure 4. 41CN193 (facing northwest)

11

Area E
This area is 620 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
State Highway 283 where it is crossed by Jim Ned Creek and the north side of the
creek. In this area, the right-of-way has been built up with fill by road construction and
was at ground level at the edge of the right-of-way next to the property fence. Soils
were a dark clay loam over dark clay. The area has been disturbed by road
construction. Four shovel tests (1-4) were dug in this relatively flat area that ran from
the creek to a clay and rock hill to the north. All tests were negative. A small dry
drainage separated shovel tests 3 and 4.
Area F
This area is 770 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
State Highway 283 and the south side of Jim Ned Creek. The area investigated was
from the south bank of the creek to a low hill to the south. This area contained black
clay loam over clay and tan clay. The black clay loam was also observed on the
north side. Three shovel tests (8-10) were excavated, two in the black clay and the
third in the tan clay. Small limestone gravels were present in some of the tests. The
right-of-way had been disturbed by recent construction, and the culvert cuts were
examined.
Area G
This area is 550 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
State Highway 283 where it is crossed by a small dry unnamed tributary of Jim Ned
Creek. The area was visually inspected, and the new culvert disturbance profile and
disturbed ground surface was inspected. This area consisted of clay and gravels. No
shovel tests were excavated.
Area H
This area is 885 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
State Highway 283 where it is crossed by a small dry unnamed tributary of Cow
Creek. The area was visually inspected, and the new culvert disturbance profile and
disturbed ground surface was inspected. This area consisted of clay and gravels. No
shovel tests were excavated.
Area I
This area is 2160 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
State Highway 283. Both sides of Cow Creek were visually inspected, and a profile
created by a newly installed culvert disturbance and the disturbed ground surface
was inspected. This area consisted of clay and gravels. Area I has been greatly
disturbed by past and current construction, and the highway right-of-way has cut into
the hill. No shovel tests were excavated.

12

Area J
This area is 760 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
State Highway 283 where it is crossed by a small, dry unnamed tributary of Indian
Creek. This drainage had been disturbed by highway construction. Area J was
visually inspected, and a culvert profile cut was examined. No shovel tests were
excavated.
Area K
This area is 820 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
State Highway 283 where it is crossed by a small, dry unnamed tributary of Indian
Creek. The drainage in this area had been disturbed by highway construction. The
southern part of this area consists of a hill that has been cut into by the highway rightof-way. The north side of the creek consists of clay and gravels. This area was
visually inspected, and a culvert profile cut was examined. No shovel tests were
excavated.
Area L
This area is 980 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
State Highway 283 where it is crossed by a dry unnamed tributary of Indian Creek.
Clay and gravels were observed at the surface and in areas where the right-of-way
had been recently scraped. The visibility in the disturbed right-of-way was excellent.
This area was visually inspected, and a culvert profile cut was examined. No shovel
tests were excavated.
Area M
This area is 685 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
State Highway 283 where it is crossed by an unnamed tributary of Indian Creek. A
pool of stagnant water was observed in part of the creek bed. The visibility in the
disturbed right-of-way was excellent, and a culvert profile cut was examined. No
shovel tests were excavated.

13

SECTION 2
This section is 12.7 miles long and is located west of Coleman along State
Highway 153 and along gravel-surfaced county roads north and south of the
highway. The section is on the 7.5’ USGS topographic quadrangles Novice East and
Valera. The southern portion of Section 2 begins on County Road 441 approximately
1.5 miles south of State Highway 153. The proposed buried telephone cable route is
on the west side of the highway. It continues north to County Road 418 where it
turns east to the intersection of County Road 438. Here it is on the north side of the
highway. Then it turns north and is on the east side of the highway. The route
continues north to the intersection of State Highway 153. At this point, the route
separates into two branches. One runs east along the southern right-of-way of State
Highway 153 for approximately 5.5 miles. The other branch continues northward
along the eastern right-of-way of County Road 438 to the intersection of County
Road 440 for approximately 0.7 mile. At this point, the route shifts to the west side of
County Road 438 and continues to the point where the county road turns to the west
and follows the northern right-of-way to the intersection of County Road 411 where it
is on the west and north sides of the highway. At the intersection of County Road
411 and County Road 458, it is on the east side of the highway for a short distance
(0.47 mile). The majority of Section 2 consisted of a clayey soil with small limestone
rock fragments. Most of the drainage crossings were small intermittent headwater
streams which were all dry at the time of the survey. The only water observed was in
the main channels of Live Oak Branch and Hords Creek. The section was surveyed
on April 2-4, 2009. There were 11 areas (A-K) where intensive investigations were
performed in Section 2.
Area A
This area is 1900 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the west side of
County Road 441 where it is crossed by Turtle Creek, an unnamed tributary, and the
area between the drainages. The surface and ditch profiles were visually inspected.
Shovel probes revealed hard clay. Shovel Test 1 was excavated where clay loam
was observed. This test revealed 10 cm of clay loam over hard clay. The right-ofway was disturbed.
Area B
This area is 2100 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the west side of
County Road 441 and the north side of County Road 418 where it is crossed by two
unnamed tributaries of Hords Creek and the area between the drainages. Both
streams were dry at the time of the survey. The surface and ditch profiles were
visually inspected. Shovel probes revealed shallow clay loam over hard clay and
rock. Three shovel tests (2-3) were excavated.

14

Area C
This area is 820 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the north side of
County Road 438 where it is crossed by Live Oak Branch, a dry intermittent stream.
The soil in this area consisted of clay and gravel. The road was cut below the
original ground surface, and the eroded side of the ditch offered excellent visibility.
There was a very narrow right-of-way between the dirt road and the property fence.
No shovel tests were excavated.
Area D
This area is 890 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the north side of
County Road 438 where it is crossed by a dry unnamed tributary of Live Ranch
Branch. The surface and ditch profiles were visually inspected. Shovel probes
revealed hard clay and gravel. No shovel tests were excavated.
Area E
This area is the location of 41CN186 as depicted on the topographic map at
TARL on the northwest side of County Road 411. It was very brushy in the narrow
strip between the road and the property fence. Soil consisted of hard orange clay.
No burned rock was observed. The private land was in short pasture, and no burned
rock middens were noted. (Figure 5) The surface and ditch profiles were visually
inspected. Shovel probes revealed hard clay. The road has cut into the side of the
landform. No shovel tests were excavated.
Area F
This area is 750 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the north side of
County Road 411 where it is crossed by a dry unnamed tributary of Bachelor Prong
Branch. The surface and ditch profiles were visually inspected. Shovel probes
revealed hard clay. No shovel tests were excavated.
Area G
This area is 2200 feet long and consists of the south side of State Highway
153 where it is crossed by Live Oak Branch. Both banks of this stream were
inspected, and stagnant water was observed in the creek. The road bed and part of
the right-of-way has been built up except for a narrow strip next to the edge of the
right-of-way. There is an existing waterline in this strip. Two shovel tests (5-6) were
dug on the west side of the creek. The east bank has clay at the surface and drops
steeply to the creek. The hill on the east side has been cut through by the highway.

15

Figure 5. 41CN186 (facing northwest)
Area H
This area is 650 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the south side of
State Highway 153 where it is crossed by McCall Branch. Both banks were
inspected. The surface and ditch profiles were visually inspected, and shovel probes
revealed hard clay and rock. No shovel tests were excavated.
Area I
This area is 675 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the south side of
State Highway 153 where it is crossed by an unnamed tributary of Hords Creek. The
surface and ditch profiles were visually inspected. Shovel probes revealed hard clay
and rock. No shovel tests were excavated.

16

Area J
This area is 590 feet long and consists of the south side of State Highway 153
where it is crossed by an unnamed tributary of Hords Creek. The surface and ditch
profiles were visually inspected. Shovel probes revealed hard clay and rock.
Area K
This area is 700 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the south side of
State Highway 153 where it is crossed by an unnamed tributary of Hords Creek.
The surface and ditch profiles were visually inspected. Shovel probes revealed hard
clay and rock.

17

SECTION 3
This section is 10.6 miles long and is located northeast of Coleman on the 7.5’
USGS topographic quadrangle Burkett and is in Brown and Coleman counties. The
proposed route runs along Farm-to-Market Road 585 and along gravel county roads
to the north and south. The southern portion of this section begins on County Road
164 and is located on the west side of this road, and it continues north to the
intersection of County Road 164 and Farm-to-Market Road 585. At this point, the
route separates into two branches. One is on the north and east side of Farm-toMarket Road 585 and proceeds eastward for approximately 4.4 miles before it ends.
The other branch continues north on County Road 164 and is on the east side of the
road. When it reaches County Road 162 it turns to the north and follows State
Highway 206 on the north side where it ends. The majority of Section 3 consisted of
a clayey soil with small limestone rock fragments. The drainages crossing the project
area were all small intermittent tributaries of larger creeks, and all were dry at the
time of this survey. This section was surveyed on April 4, 2009. There were 11 areas
(A-K) where intensive investigations were performed in Section 3.
Area A
This area is 870 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the west side of
County Road 164 where it is crossed by a dry unnamed tributary of Wood Branch.
The right-of-way in this area has been disturbed by prior buried cables and the bar
ditch. The surface and ditch profiles were visually inspected, and shovel probes
revealed hard clay. On the north side of the creek in the right-of-way there was a cut
bank that provided a profile. The soil in this profile consisted of clay.
Area B
This area is 450 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the west side of
County Road 164 where it is crossed by a dry unnamed tributary of Hay Branch. The
right-of-way in this area has been disturbed by prior buried cables and the bar ditch.
The surface and ditch profiles were visually inspected, and shovel probes revealed
hard clay and limestone formations.
Area C
This area is 550 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
County Road 164 where it is crossed by a dry unnamed tributary of Hay Branch and
the right-of-way on the north side of Farm-to-Market Road 585 that parallels the
creek. The area investigated includes portions of both roads. The right-of-way on the
north side of Farm -o-Market Road 585 was visually inspected, and shovel probes
and two shovel tests (1-2) were excavated. The right-of-way on the east side of
County Road 164 was visually inspected, and shovel probes and one shovel test (8)
were excavated. These tests and probes revealed a shallow clay loam over clay
mixed with gravels.

18

Area D
This area is 270 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the north side of
Farm-to-Market Road 585. On a hilltop there is a historic wooden house on private
land north of the road (Figure 6). The surface and ditch profiles were visually
inspected, and shovel probes were excavated. Hard red clay was observed. Shovel
Test 3 was excavated into the hard clay, and it revealed that the clay continued to the
bottom of the test. There is no indication that any subsurface deposits from the house
exist at this location. The only surface artifacts were a few tin cans and a bucket
next to the fence.
Area E
This area is 1900 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the north side of
Farm-to-Marked 585 where it is crossed by Hay Branch, an unnamed tributary, and
the land in between the two drainages. Both banks of these streams were
investigated, and they were dry at the time of this survey. The surface and ditch
profiles were visually inspected and shovel probes and four shovel tests (4-7) were
excavated. They revealed shallow clay loam over hard clay.
Area F
This area is 580 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the north side of
Farm-to-Market Road 585 where it is crossed by a dry unnamed tributary of Pasture
Branch. The surface and ditch profiles were visually inspected, and shovel probes
were excavated. Only hard clay was observed.
Area G
This area is 5488 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
County Road 164 where an unnumbered prehistoric site recorded by E. B. Sayles
may be located. The soil in the right-of-way was hard clay at the surface, and the
right-of-way was very disturbed. Should a site be present, it would be restricted to
the clay surface. The area outside the right-of-way was visually inspected from the
right-of-way, and no indication of a site was observed. The surface and ditch profiles
were visually inspected, and shovel probes were excavated revealing only hard clay.
In many places the right-of-way has cut below the old ground surface level (Figure 7).
Two small dry drainages were examined with negative results. Gobbler Branch
crosses the road in the southern portion of Area G, and an unnamed tributary of
Gobbler Branch crosses in the north portion.

19

Figure 6. Historic Structure (facing north)

Figure 7. Right-of-Way Near Possible Prehistoric Site

20

Area H
This area is 1150 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
County Road 164 where it is crossed by a dry unnamed tributary of Gobbler Branch.
The surface and ditch profiles were visually inspected, and shovel probes were
excavated. The soil consisted of hard clay.
Area I
This area is 1300 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
County Road 164 where it is crossed by a dry unnamed tributary of Deadman
Branch. The surface and ditch profiles were visually inspected, and shovel probes
were excavated. The soil consisted of hard clay.
Area J
This area is 570 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
County Road 162 where it is crossed by Deadman Branch, a dry creek. The surface
and ditch profiles were visually inspected, and shovel probes were excavated. The
soil consisted of hard clay and rock.
Area K
This area is 1780 feet long and consists of the right-of-way on the east side of
County Road 162 near Pecan Bayou. The area investigated was the toe slope of the
edge of a clay hill overlooking the Pecan Bayou floodplain. The soil in the right-ofway is clay and rock, while a little further east on private land plowed fields indicated
a clay loam deposit. The route ends at State Highway 206. At this location, there was
a plowed field that is part of the Pecan Bayou floodplain. In this field, the soil was
clay loam. The edge of the field was walked, and no artifacts were observed. Shovel
Test 8 in the disturbed right-of-way revealed 30 cm of clay loam over clay.

21

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
No previously unrecorded prehistoric sites were found to be present within the
path of the telephone cable as currently proposed. No evidence of the two previously
recorded sites and one possible site location was found as a result of this survey. No
historic sites or cemeteries were found to be within the path of the telephone cable as
currently proposed. One of the more common prehistoric sites in this part of Texas is
the lithic scatter or lithic procurement site. The reason for the absence of this site
type in the project area is due to a lack of chert cobbles on the surface or in the creek
beds in the areas surveyed. Overall, the soils were found to be shallow, and they
consisted of clay loam over clay. The depth of the clay loam varied from 10 cm to 60
cm. The majority of the twenty-five shovel tests (n=22) encountered hard clay
between 10 cm and 40 cm.

22

RECOMMENDATIONS
The proposed construction will not affect any prehistoric or historic sites eligible
for listing in the National Register of Historic Properties or for designation as a State
Archeological Landmark. In addition no historic cemeteries will be affected. It is,
therefore, recommended that the Coleman County Telephone Cooperative, Inc. be
allowed to proceed with the installation of the telephone cable in the project area as
planned. Should any archaeological sites not mentioned in this report be discovered
during construction, all work must cease until the situation can be resolved by the THC.
If the route of the telephone cable is changed to include areas not assessed during this
study, the THC must be notified, as additional field survey may be necessary. This
project was conducted following the Minimum Survey Standards defined by the THC,
Archeology Division.

23

REFERENCES CITED
Bailey, Gail L., James T. Abbott, Michael B. Collins, Martha Doty Freeman, Jeanine
M. Seay, David L. Miller, and Dan K. Utley
1989 Cultural Resources Survey, Testing, and Assessments in the Dam
Construction Zone at Stacy Reservoir, Coleman and Concho Counties,
Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations Number
65.
Batterman, Bill
1991 Archaeological Investigations at Sites 41CN74, 41CC46, 41CC44/45 in
the O. H. Ivie Reservoir, Coleman and Concho Counties, Texas. Mariah
and Associates, Inc. Technical Report Series 391.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office
of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical
Commission.
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Botts, O. L., Buford Bailey, and Wayburn D. Mitchell
1974 Soil Survey of Coleman County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station.
Bryan, William A., and Michael B. Collins
1988 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources above the 1,55.5
Contour Line, Stacy Reservoir Recreation Areas, Concho, Coleman, and
Runnels Counties. Prewitt and Associates, Reports of Investigations
Number 57.
Campbell, Thomas Nolan
1952 Early Archaeological Excavations in the Vicinity of Brownwood, Texas.
The Record 10(3):10-14.
1960 Texas Archeology: A Guide to the Literature. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 29:117-254.
Clower, Dennis F.
1980 Soil Survey of Brown and Mills Counties, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with
the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.

24

Earls, Amy C., Christopher R. Lintz, George W. Gill, Patrick L. O’Neill, and W. Nichlas
Trierweiler
1991 Investigations of Historic Cemeteries at O. H. Ivie Reservoir, Coleman,
Concho, and Runnels Counties, Texas. Mariah and Associates, Inc.
Technical Report 403.
Freeman, Martha Doty, and Joe C. Freeman
1981 A Cultural Resources Inventory and Assessment of the Proposed Stacy
Reservoir (Volume II). Espey, Huston & Associates. Document Number
81052.
Greaves, Russell D.
2002 Archaeological Survey of Three Land Parcels and Testing of Four
Archaeological Sites at Camp Bowie, Brown County, Texas. The
University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report
Number 328.
Kingston, Michael T., and Ruth Harris (Editors)
1983 1984-1985 Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide. Dallas.
Mauldin, Raymond P., and Cory J. Broehm
2001 An Archaeological Survey of 90 Acres at Camp Bowie, Brown County,
Texas. The University of Texas at San Antonio, Center for Archaeological
Research, Archaeological Survey Report Number 319.
Mauldin, Raymond P., David L. Nickels, and Cory J. Broehm
2003 Archaeological Testing to Determine the National Register Eligibility
Status of 18 Prehistoric Sites on Camp Bowie, Brown County, Texas (2
volumes). The University of Texas at San Antonio, Center for
Archaeological Research, Archaeological Survey Report Number 342.
Moore, William E., and Edward P. Baxter
2009 An Archaeological Survey for the Camp Bowie Veteran’s Memorial Sports
Complex in Brown County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates,
Contract Report Number 213.
Nichols, Peter W.
1981 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of the Proposed Stacy
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman and Runnels Counties, Texas. (Volume
III). Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. Document Number 81052
Ray, Cyrus N.
1933 The Brownwood Skull. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 5:95-98.

25

Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932 The Geology of Texas (Volume I: Stratigraphy). The University of Texas
at Austin.
Shafer, Harry J.
1975 An Archeological Survey Report of Floodwater Retarding Structure 26A1, Brownwood Laterals Watershed. Texas A&M University,
Anthropology Laboratory, Report Number 26.
Shafer, Harry J., Edward P. Baxter, and James Phil Dering
1975a Brownwood Laterals Watershed, Brown County, Texas: Archeological
Surveys of Floodwater Retarding Structures 1, 2, 2A, 5, 18, 24, and 26.
Texas A&M University, Anthropology Laboratory, Report Number 13.
Shafer, Harry J., Edward P. Baxter, and James Phil Dering (continued)
1975b Upper Pecan Bayou Watershed, Brown County, Texas: Archeological
Survey of Floodwater Retarding Structure No. 30. Texas A&M
University, Anthropology Laboratory, Report Number 11.
Shafer, Harry J., Edward P. Baxter, and Thomas B. Stearns
1976 Archeological Assessment of Upper Pecan Bayou and Brownwood
Laterals Watersheds, Brown County, Texas. Texas A&M University,
Anthropology, Report Number 29.
Simons, Helen, and William E. Moore (compilers)
1997 Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region of Texas. Office of
the State Archeologist, Special Report 36, Texas Historical
Commission.
Woolridge, Harold G.
1981 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of the Proposed Stacy
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas.(Volume I).
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. Document Number 81052.

26

APPENDIX I
PREVIOUSLY RECORDED SITES

APPENDIX II
AREAS INVESTIGATED

APPENDIX III: SHOVEL TEST LOG
SHOVEL TEST
NUMBER

DEPTH
IN CM

SOIL TYPE

COMMENTS
Section 1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

60
60
40
20
0
40
40
40
30
10

clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay

Area E,north side of Jim Ned Creek
Area E,north side of Jim Ned Creek
Area E, south side of unnamed small drainage
Area E, north side of small unnamed drainage
Area D, screened culvert backdirt
Area D, vicinity of 41CN193
Area D, vicinity of 41CN193
Area F, south side of Jim Ned Creek
Area F, south side of Jim Ned Creek
Area F, south side of Jim Ned Creek
Section 2

1
2
3
4
5
6

20
30
30
20
40
40

clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay

Area A, south of Turtle Neck Creek
Area B, vicinity of Hords Creek
Area B, vicinity of Hords Creek
Area B, vicinity of Hords Creek
Area G, west of Live Oak Creek
Area G, west of Live Oak Creek
Section 3

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

30
10
20
20
20
20
10
30
40

clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay
clay loam / clay

Area C, between unnamed tributary and FM 585
Area C, between unnamed tributary and FM 585
Area D,near house site on private property
Area D, by Hay Branch
Area D, between Hay Branch and unnamed tributary
Area D, between Hay Branch and unnamed tributary
Area D, east of unnamed tributary
Area C, north of unnamed tributary
Area K, edge of Pecan Bayou floodplain

