AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE FALLS-ON-THE-BRAZOS
PARK IN FALLS COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 06-20

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared for
Falls County
Post Office Box 458
Marlin, Texas 76661

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey at the site of Falls-on-the-Brazos Park was performed
by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) on October 24, 2006.
This
investigation examined the site of a proposed observation tower and an area where
outdoor cooking pits will be installed. The subsurface in both areas was examined with
a backhoe to the depth of the Area of Potential Effect (APE). In all, 11.85 acres were
examined. No evidence of a prehistoric or historic site was found. This project was
performed under Antiquities Permit 4287 issued by the Texas Historical Commission
(THC), Archeology Division. No artifacts were collected. Copies of the report are on
file at the THC, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), BVRA, and Falls
County.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to those who made the successful completion of this project
possible. Linda Kendall of Kerbow and Associates and Doyle Sebesta of Sebesta and
Associates provided the project area maps used in this report. Jack Hogg and Roy
Erwin of the Falls County Road and Bridge Department accompanied the field survey
crew during this investigation, and they were very helpful. The Honorable Tom Sehon,
Falls County Judge, was the sponsor for this project. The field crew consisted of
James E. Warren (Project Archaeologist) Bobby Jemison and Art Romine. Jean
Hughes, Records Conservator at TARL, performed the records check for previously
recorded sites in the project area and vicinity. The figures were prepared by Lili G.
Lyddon of LL Technical Services, and the cover was prepared by Edward P. Baxter.
Technical support was provided by Jennifer McMillan, and Nora Rogers served as
editor and proofreader.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT............................................................................................................................. ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................... 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ............................................................................................. 5
METHODS............................................................................................................................... 6
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND.............................................................................. 8
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS ..................................................................................... 10
RECOMMENDATIONS....................................................................................................... 11
REFERENCES CITED ........................................................................................................ 12
Appendix I. Backhoe Trench Profiles
FIGURES
Figure 1.General Location .................................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Plan View of Falls-on-the-Brazos Park .............................................................. 3
Figure 3. Project Area on Topographic Map Cedar Springs ........................................... 4
Figure 4. Backhoe Trench 1 ................................................................................................. 7

iv

INTRODUCTION
Falls County plans to construct an observation tower on a high bluff
overlooking the Brazos River and install a series of outdoor cooking pits within the
boundaries of Falls-on-the-Brazos Park in central Falls County (Figure 1). The
footprint of the observation tower will be 10 feet by 10 feet. It will be supported by
metal pilings which will be anchored into the subsurface at a depth of six feet and
surrounded by concrete. The tower will protrude over the bank of the river and serve
as a platform for bird watchers interested in observing the Bald eagle. In addition,
15 outdoor cooking pits will be installed along the southern boundary of the park in
conjunction with proposed primitive camping sites. These pits will be placed in holes
two feet in depth. A pedestrian bridge is planned to span the slough that bisects the
park in an east-west direction. No subsurface disturbance is planned for this
improvement which is outside the current project area. Instead, three eight-foot by
forty-foot culverts will be brought in and covered with used concrete. A trail from the
entrance of the park will be constructed through the primitive camping area and end
at the observation tower. This trail will not affect the subsurface. Except for the
pedestrian bridge, there are no planned improvements for the remainder of the 22­
acre park at this time. Funding for this project is being provided by a grant from the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD). A map of the park depicting the
areas surveyed, and the approximate location of the seven backhoe trenches
appears as Figure 2. The current project area is depicted on the USGS 7.5’
topographic quadrangle Cedar Springs (3196-223) (Figure 3).
The tract where the observation tower is to be placed was viewed by BVRA
as a medium to high probability area for a prehistoric site as it is on a high bluff with
deep sandy soils overlooking the confluence of McCullough Slough and the Brazos
River. The THC shares this opinion. In a letter from the THC dated September 16,
2006 to Jeff Hauff at the Grants-in-Aid Program at TPWD, the Falls-on-the-Brazos
Park was recommended for archaeological survey. In order to satisfy this
requirement, Falls County contracted with BVRA to perform this service.

1

Figure 1.General Location

2

Figure 2. Plan View of Falls-on-the-Brazos Park

3

Figure 3. Project Area on Topographic Map Cedar Springs

4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Falls County is located in the east-central part of the state. In general, the relief
is undulating to rolling with some broad flatlands. The major drainage in the county is
the Brazos River and its tributaries. This river passes through the center of the county
in a shallow valley two to three miles wide. The other major streams are the Little
Brazos River and Big Creek. The floodplains along these streams are ¼ mile to 1 mile
in width. The county slopes generally to the southeast. Elevations vary throughout the
county from 300 feet to 500 feet above sea level. There is one elevation, however, in
the northwest corner of the county that is about 700 feet. In winter, the average
temperature is 49.8 degrees Fahrenheit, and the average daily minimum temperature
is 39.2 degrees Fahrenheit. In summer, the average temperature is 82.4 degrees
Fahrenheit, and the average daily maximum temperature is 93.2 degrees. The total
annual precipitation is 33.85 inches. The growing season occurs from April through
September. It is during this time that rainfall is the greatest. July is generally the driest
month of the year. The average date of the last occurrence of freezing temperatures in
spring is March 9th, and the first occurrence of freezing temperatures in the fall occurs
on November 24th.
According to the soil survey for Falls County (Wyrick 1978:Sheet 35), the soils in
the project area belong to the Westwood series and the Yahola series. Westwood
series soils consist of reddish-brown soils that formed in the stratified, calcareous,
loamy alluvial sediment. These soils are found on high bottom land and on the leveled
edges and in bottoms of natural, secondary drainageways in bottom land. Slopes
range from 0 to 8 percent. The specific soil type in the project area belonging to this
series is Westwood complex, 0 to 8 percent slopes (62). These soils rarely flood. The
surface layer of this soil is a moderately alkaline silty clay loam about nine inches thick.
From nine to eighteen inches, is a moderately alkaline silty clay loam. The underlying
layer, to a depth of sixty inches, is reddish-brown, moderately alkaline silty clay loam
that is stratified with reddish-brown fine sandy loam and reddish-brown silty clay.
Yahola series soils consist of reddish-brown soils that formed in slightly altered
loamy, calcareous alluvium on long narrow flood plains paralleling the river. The
specific soil type in the project area is Yahola fine sandy loam, occasionally flooded.
This soil type consists of deep, well-drained, nearly level soils on flood plains of the
Brazos River. It floods only once in every four to ten years. Slopes are 0 to 1 percent
and plane. Some areas are smooth, while others are channeled by shallow
drainageways. This soil has a surface layer of reddish-brown, moderately alkaline fine
sandy loam about ten inches thick. Below the surface layer, to a depth of thirty-seven
inches, the soil is reddish-yellow, moderately alkaline fine sandy loam. Between thirtyseven and fifty-eight inches the soil is a reddish-brown, moderately alkaline loam.
Underlying these strata, to a depth of eighty inches, is a yellowish-red, moderately
alkaline fine sandy loam and thin strata of loamy fine sand and clay loam. Permeabilty
is moderately rapid, and the available water capacity is medium. The root zone is deep
and easily penetrated by roots. Runoff is slow, and the hazard of water erosion is
slight.

5

METHODS
Pre-Field Tasks
Prior to entering the field, the site records at TARL were checked for the
presence of previously recorded archaeological sites in the project area and vicinity.
Relevant archaeological reports documenting work in Falls County were reviewed in
order to become familiar with the types of prehistoric and historic sites found in the
area.
Field Survey
William E. Moore was the Principal Investigator, and James E. Warren was the
Project Archaeologist. A survey of the site of the proposed observation tower and the
primitive campground where the outdoor cooking pits will be installed was conducted
on October 24, 2006. At the time of this study, the ground cover was obscured by
grass that is regularly mowed by inmates of the local prison. Oaks and mixed
hardwoods along with various understory plants were scattered across the area,
especially adjacent to the slough. The site of the proposed observation tower was
investigated using a backhoe. A single trench was dug to the approximate depth of the
APE. This trench was 4 meters long, 1.4 meters wide, and 1.96 meters deep. Figure
4 depicts the excavation of this trench in its early stages. The Project Archaeologist,
using a Munsell Soil Chart, profiled the north wall of Trench 1. This profile, and the
profiles of the other trenches, is depicted in Appendix I to this report. Five additional
backhoe trenches were dug in the primitive campground area to the depth of the APE
(two feet) or greater. Each of these trenches was 4 meters long and 1.4 meters wide.
The depth, however, varied from 1.14 meters (Trench 4) to 1.42 meters (Trench 2).
Clay or bedrock was not encountered in any of the six backhoe trenches in the area to
be funded by the TPWD. A seventh trench was excavated at the site of the proposed
pedestrian bridge. It was terminated at 79 centimeters when the backhoe broke a
water line. This project was documented by field notes and digital photography. In the
area of the proposed observation tower, a vertical cut bank was examined for signs of
an in situ archaeological site. No such evidence was observed. The location of the
seven trenches is depicted in Figure 2 above.

6

Figure 4. Backhoe Trench 1

7

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
General
According to a published planning document for the Eastern Planning Region of
Texas (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:Figure 1.1.2), Falls County is situated within the
Prairie Savannah archeological study region. According to the planning document, the
prehistory of this region has not received as much attention as many other regions of
Texas. According to a statistical overview published by the THC (Biesaart et al.
1985:Figure 15), Falls County is located in the North Central Texas Culturalgeographical region. In 1985, Falls County contained 16 recorded sites (Biesaart et al.
1985:114) - .60 percent of the region and .08 percent of the state. Only six counties in
the region had fewer recorded sites.
In 1985, 0 sites in the county had been
excavated, 0 had been tested by hand, and 10 had been surface collected. One
recorded prehistoric site in the county was listed as Paleoindian, 2 were listed as Early
Archaic, 2 were listed as Middle Archaic, 1 was listed as Late Archaic, 8 were listed as
General Archaic, and 8 were listed as Late Prehistoric (Biesaart et al. 1985:133).
Currently, there are 71 recorded sites in Falls County.
Historic Indian groups known to have inhabited parts of Falls County are the
Cherokee, Tawakoni, and Waco (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:Figure 2.6.11). In 1845,
there was a Cherokee village near the confluence of the Bosque River and the Brazos
River. Circa 1809, the Tawakoni had three towns on the Brazos River about 80 miles
north of the Camino Real crossing of the Brazos. The Waco may have been derived
as a group from the Tawakoni. Circa 1829, they lived on the Brazos River south of the
confluence of the Brazos and Bosque rivers. By 1841, they had moved up the Brazos
River along with other Wichita-speaking groups and lived near the Tawakoni a few
miles below the Clear Fork of the Brazos before moving to the Brazos Indian
reservation (Watt 1969).
In 1843, the Torrey brothers created the Torrey Trading Post on the Brazos
south of the current project area. The site of the trading post was on the line
separating the Indian and white settlements. Here, the Indians signed treaties and
received presents until 1854 when they were settled on reservations on the upper
Brazos River. According to Dr. Ferdinand Roemer, a German scientist who traveled
throughout Texas from 1845 through 1847, the trading post was on a hill covered with
oak trees two miles from the Brazos River above Tohawacony Creek (Roemer
1983:191-192).
The nearest recorded site, according to the Historic Sites Atlas, is 41FA2. It is
described on the site card as a campsite. There is no site form, and it appears that it
may be incorrectly plotted. On the atlas it is shown to be in the river. According to the
site card, it may be in another location at or near the site of 41FA4, which is several
kilometers south of the current project area. The nearest recorded site for which there
is good data is 41FA7. This is a prehistoric site in a gravel pit 2.6 kilometers south of
the current project area.

8

Another prehistoric site (41FA6) is located downstream from the current project
area. This site is near the location of Fort Milam, which was established in 1834 to
protect the colonists from Indian attacks. It was originally named for the village of
Sarahville de Viesca, the capitol of Sterling C. Robertson’s colony. The name was
changed to Fort Milam in 1835. It is located four miles southwest of Marlin in western
Falls County. No site number has been assigned to the fort. (Webb 1952:630)
According to the Texas Historic Sites Atlas, there has been only one survey in
the vicinity of the project area. In 1975, the Texas Highway Department (now Texas
Department of Transportation) examined a portion of County Road 712. No sites were
found. There is no report documenting this investigation on file at TARL.
According to the site records at TARL, there has been only one major survey
conducted in Falls County. This study was conducted by J. Parker Nunley in 1978 and
involved twelve proposed floodwater-retarding structures to be constructed in the Big
Creek Watershed (Nunley 1978). In all, 19 prehistoric sites and one historic site were
recorded. The site numbers are 41FA43 – 41FA62 Most of the prehistoric sites only
contained a few lithics on the surface and were not considered significant. He refers to
these sites as open campsites or lithic scatters. Three sites (41FA50, 41FA55, and
41FA58) were recommended for testing. Site 41FA58 is described on the site form as
“possibly the most significant site of any visited in the course of the present study.” He
observed numerous bifaces and biface fragments, four manos and several fragmented
manos, hammerstones, burned rock concentrations, and numerous flakes and chips in
a newly reclaimed field. Projectile point types Darl (n=2) and Gary (n=1) were found at
this site. Most of the sites in his project area lacked diagnostic artifacts and features.
Only six sites (including 41FA58) contained datable projectile points such as Carrollton,
Darl, Fresno, Gary, and Perdiz. The single historic site (41FA60) was identified as the
Tacker family cemetery that dates to the middle of the 19th century.
For additional information regarding past work in Falls County, the interested
reader is advised to consult the planning document by Kenmotsu and Perttula
(1993), the statistical overview by Biesaart, et al. (1985), and the Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology series compiled for the THC by William E. Moore. This series
provides abstracts for the years 1987 – 1992.

9

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Examination of the files at TARL in Austin, Texas revealed no sites have been
recorded in the project area, and a professional archaeologist had not previously
examined the park. Archaeological surveys have been conducted in the general area,
and these are discussed above in the Archaeological Background section of this report
above.
The field survey excavated six backhoe trenches to the depth of the APE or
greater in all areas except in the vicinity of the proposed pedestrian bridge due to a
broken water line. These trenches were dug through loamy clay, sandy loam, and clay
loam. As stated above, no firm clay or bedrock was encountered. No evidence of a
prehistoric or historic site was found in the exposed cut bank near the proposed
observation tower, on the surface in either area, or in any of the seven backhoe
trenches. Local informants reported a major prehistoric site about five miles south of
the park in an upland setting above the Brazos River. A conversation with Jack Hogg
of the Falls County Road and Bridge Department revealed that no prehistoric artifacts
have been found in the park area or on the higher landform located on prison property
just south of the park. Flooding can be a problem in park if the slough is not able to
contain the rising water, and BVRA believes that prehistoric groups selected higher
landforms for their camps. The project area could have been visited by bands of
Indians utilizing the river for fishing or collecting mussels, but no evidence of this
activity was observed during this study.
The previous survey by Nunley (1978) revealed that significant prehistoric sites
are present in Falls County; however, it also demonstrated that a large percentage of
prehistoric sites in the area appear to be limited activity areas where some form of
stone tool manufacture or refurbishing was the major task being conducted. The
presence of manos suggest processing of plants, and the burned rock is an indicator of
possible hearths. Although the data on the site forms are often sketchy, it appears that
the vast majority of prehistoric sites are near a permanent water source. In another
part of the county, 41FA7 is located in a multiple resource area being situated at a
gravel quarry and at the confluence of a creek and the Brazos River. The finding of a
small family cemetery (41FA60) demonstrated that isolated historic sites may appear
anywhere on the landscape.
This survey was conducted in accordance with the Minimum Survey Standards
as outlined by the Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division.

10

RECOMMENDATIONS
No archaeological sites were found within the footprint of the proposed
observation tower or in the areas where the outdoor cooking pits will be installed. It
is, therefore, recommended that construction be allowed to proceed as planned
Should evidence of a prehistoric or historic site be encountered during the
construction phase, all work should cease until the situation can be assessed by the
Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division. Prehistoric campsites are
typically recognized by the presence of burned rock (evidence of hearths), stone
tools (arrowheads), and waste material (flakes). If Falls County decides to change
its construction plans to include areas not examined during this survey, additional
investigation by a professional archaeologist may be necessary.

11

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office of
the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical Commission.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938 Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw Hill. New York.
Gould, F. W.
1969 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. The Agricultural and
Mechanical College of Texas, Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
College Station.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Kingston, Mike, and Ruth Harris (Editors)
1983 Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide. A. H. Belo Corporation.
Dallas.
Nunley, J. Parker
1978 Archeological Survey of Portions of Big Creek Watershed: Falls,
Limestone, and McLennan Counties, Texas. Nunley Multimedia
Productions, Miscellaneous Papers Number 2, Dallas.
Roemer, Ferdinand
1983 Roemer’s Texas. Texian Press. (reprint of the 1935 edition published by
the Standard Printing Company of San Antonio, Texas.
Watt, Frank H.
1969 The Waco Indian Village and Its People. The Central Texas
Archaeologist 9:195-237.
Webb, Walter Prescott (editor)
1952 The Handbook of Texas: A Dictionary of Essential Information. The
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

12

APPENDIX I
BACKHOE TRENCH PROFILES

