F

La Vista
de la

rontera

Center for Big Bend Studies • Sul Ross State University • Volume 23 • Fall 2012
A Member of the Texas State University System

n Update on the Genevieve Lykes
robust and comprised of larger stones compared to the smaller
more simplified versions that were subsequently built. What
Duncan Site and
was being cooked in any of these has yet to be determined. At this
Appro
Approximately
11,000 years ago in a
boggy/marshy riparian zone along
bogg
Terlingua Creek, a prehistoric band
Ter
of humans built a fire with mesquite and saltbush wood in a
q
stone-lined pit. Who were these
people?
l ? What
Wh were they
h cooking?
ki
How long did they stay at the
site? And when they left, where did they go? These are just a few
of the questions Center for Big Bend Studies (CBBS) archaeologists have been pondering as test excavations proceeded at the
Genevieve Lykes Duncan site on the 02 Ranch.
As reported in last year’s edition of La Vista de la Frontera, the
CBBS’s long-standing research of the Big
Bend’s Paleoindian period was energized
through discovery and test excavations
at the Lykes-Duncan site in 2010–2011.
Our testing is now complete, and we have
learned a great deal about the site’s earliest
occupants and the evolving environment in
which they lived.

time, only the initially discovered ca. 11,000-year-old hearth has
been excavated and is particularly notable for containing several
unusual rock-free voids as well as fragments of a metate.
As indicated in last year’s newsletter, the use of stone within
hearths for basin linings and/or for heating elements was not
widespread during Paleoindian times. In fact, a perusal of the
literature indicates this phenomenon has been reported from
only a couple of other Late Paleoindian sites, and was completely
lacking in earlier times. Heated rocks were used to retain and
regulate heat, and this technology was needed to render certain
plant foods edible, such as sotol and agave in West Texas. The use
of rock within hearths across North America during subsequent

Thus far, we have identified six Paleoindian hearths at the site: two dating from ca.
11,000–10,600 years ago and four dating
from ca. 9,500–8,700 years ago. Both date
ranges fall within the Late Paleoindian period (ca. 11,500–8,500 years ago), a time for
which little was known in the region prior to
discovery of the Lykes-Duncan site. In fact,
almost all previous data from this period
consists of isolated surface finds of spear
points, with the Plainview, Golondrina, and
Angostura types most represented—and
Angostura leading the way.
All six Late Paleoindian hearths are stonelined and in shallow pits. However, the two
earlier ones stand apart, appearing more

Bob Mallouf and the 11,000-year-old hearth at the Genevieve Lykes Duncan site.

cultural periods was ubiquitous and has been related to plantfood processing. Similarly, grinding stones such as the metate
fragments recovered from the hearth—a common artifact used
in plant-food processing by more recent cultures—were also rare
in Late Paleoindian times.
Although the metate fragments had been subjected to heat while
in the hearth, a residue analysis identified distinctive phytoliths (microscopic silica particles) on the specimens from a type
of grass (dendriform), a member of the sunflower family, and a
plant of the spiderwort genus. Ethnographic accounts from the
19th and early 20th centuries indicate natives ground the seeds
of certain plants and mixed the resulting powder with water to
make dough; the dough was fashioned into cakes and cooked
in hearths to produce edible bread-like substances. While such
accounts include grass and sunflower seeds, it is unknown why
plants of the spiderwort genus were ground.
An important goal during testing was to identify the occupation
zone or living surface associated with the 11,000-year-old hearth.
While there were no visible connections from the pit to a possible
associated surface, there was a measurable spike in cultural debris
about 5–10 centimeters above the upper part of the hearth pit.
This spike consisted of scattered burned rocks, flakes and chips
(debitage)—residue from the manufacture of stone tools—and
burned animal bone fragments. The scatter of burned rocks likely
represents hearth maintenance. As hearthstones were repeatedly
heated and then cooled down, they broke into angular pieces and
were less effective in retaining heat. Accordingly, when this happened they were discarded and replaced. Debitage present on this
possible surface was comprised of high quality siliceous stone as
well as local mudstone or siltstone. High quality, sometimes exotic,
toolstones are often
found in Paleoindian
contexts, while the
mudstone or siltstone
debris represents an
immediately
available resource that
outcrops on a hillside
adjacent to the LykesDuncan site. The
Ca. 11,000-year-old flakes and chips.
small burned bone

Conjoining metate fragments from the 11,000-year-old hearth.

2

Center for Big Bend Studies

Chet Walker uses ground penetrating radar to identify subsurface
anomalies.

fragments recovered thus far, none of which are intact enough to
be confidently identified, suggest the site occupants at this time
targeted small game animals, such as rabbits and rodents. Further
work at the site will likely greatly expand this ancient menu.
While our attention has been focused on the 11,000-year-old occupation at the site, we have discovered even earlier stone tools
several feet lower and, below that, a tiny piece of charcoal dated
to ca. 12,600 years ago. These findings may represent Folsom or
other Early Paleoindian peoples, although the charcoal could well
be from a natural fire.
An important part of the research at Lykes-Duncan concerns reconstruction of the ancient environment which was intricately
connected with Late Paleoindian people’s daily lives. Through various analyses we have learned that many of the plants in today’s
Chihuahuan Desert were present in the vicinity of the LykesDuncan site during Late Paleoindian times, including mesquite,
saltbush, creosotebush, cholla, Mormon tea, sagebrush, thistle,
and plants of the sunflower family. Contrastingly, wood charcoal
in a ca. 9,000-year-old hearth was identified as pecan, and today
pecan only extends westward to the Del Rio, Texas, area. All in all,
these data paint a picture of a slowly evolving environment, one
with many of the constituents of today’s desert, but with more
available moisture.
Prior to launching our next phase of work at the site—a block excavation scheduled for early fall 2012—we enlisted Dr. Chet Walker to conduct a geophysical investigation (using both a magnetometer and ground penetrating radar) of the sediments in the heart
of the site. Although his instruments only provided data from the
ground surface down to a gravel lens overlying the Paleoindian
deposits, he identified a number of subsurface anomalies that
could represent hearths, pits, or other cultural features. Each of
these will be explored during our upcoming excavation and what
(Continued on pg. 14)

As
A new discoveries go, the Genevieve
Lykes
Lyk Duncan site has been the source of
L
much excitement
excitemen
ntt aand anticipation at the CBBS. This disn
covery has been
n the
t culmination of a long process of pieceviden reflected in the stratified soils of the
ing together evidence
proceeesss tthat actually began in the 1930s. With
region—a process
t 02 Ranch as a natural laboratory for
the addition of the
t d iin 2001
h
study
2001, our chances
of finding very early sites escalated
dramatically. This is in large part due to the presence of unusually deep arroyo systems across Green Valley, drainage courses
that have eroded downward into ancient soils of the right age to
contain the remains of Paleoindian inhabitants.

Due to its location
near the arroyo floor,
the Searcher site was determined to be extremely susceptible to erosion. With the Big
Bend rainy season approaching
a
rapidly, it
was decided that measures should be taken to scientifically explore the stone feature and surrounding deposits. In May 2012 a
backhoe was used to remove overburden in preparation for hand
excavation of Feature 1, and a series of short backhoe trenches

Lower portion of Feature 1 showing slabs placed strategically on floor of pit.

were used to examine surrounding areas of the arroyo wall. One
of these backhoe cuts revealed a second burned stone feature
(Feature 2) nearby and at a similar elevation as Feature 1. A radiocarbon assay of charcoal from it returned a date (6770–6600 B.C.)
indicating construction and use about 500 years after Feature 1.

Bob Mallouf and Robert Gray expose Feature 1 at the Searcher site.

The ability of field archaeologists to recognize
high probability landforms and soil zones associated with early sites in the Big Bend has evolved
through the years. The recent discovery by a CBBS
staff archaeologist of a second deeply buried Paleoindian site is a case in point. The Searcher site
was discovered by Robert Gray in April 2012 on
the 02 Ranch. Located only 2.5 miles from the
Lykes-Duncan site, the Searcher site is similarly
on a tributary arroyo of Terlingua Creek. Exposed by down-cutting of the arroyo bed, the site
lies buried some four meters below the ground
surface in an exposure of Early Holocenes soils.
Deep in the arroyo wall, Gray discovered a stonefilled pit (termed Feature 1) that had been cut by
episodic flooding. Most of the exposed stone in
this feature was burned, and bits of charcoal were
eroding from between the stones.

Our carefully controlled hand excavation of Feature 1 commenced
immediately and was completed by mid-June 2012. Excavation entailed the detailed recording of every stone comprising the feature,
the removal of feature matrix samples for special studies such as
pollen and plant macrofossils, and determination of how the feature
was originally constructed by the site inhabitants.
Excavation proved Feature 1 to be surprisingly large
and substantial, constructed in a shallow circular to
oval pit, comprised of a series of strategically placed
stone slabs across the pit floor, and followed by
placement of fist-sized or larger rocks as probable
heating elements. The absence of charcoal beneath
the slabs indicates the fire in the pit was built after
placement of these stones. Significantly, Feature 1
was found to be unlike other stone features in the
Big Bend for which we have excavation data. We
currently are awaiting the results of our special
studies of this feature with great anticipation.

Within three weeks of completing the Searcher excavation, arroyo flooding had removed that area of the
CBBS crew working on Feature 1 arroyo bank where Feature 1 had been discovered. If
not for its timely discovery and the ensuing excavaat the Searcher site.
tion, this unusual thermal feature would have been completely destroyed and missing from the regional archaeological record. Arroyos
Soils surrounding Feature 1 were suggestive of considerable antiq- along Terlingua Creek often assist CBBS archaeologists by opening
uity, and a charcoal sample was obtained from the matrix within portals into deeply buried deposits, but frequently these windows
the feature for radiocarbon dating. As suspected, the date obtained close rapidly—timing can mean everything!
—Robert J. Mallouf
(7280–7050 B.C.) placed the site within the Late Paleoindian period.
La Vista de la Frontera

3

illing in the Blanks for
One of the most frustrating things for
archaeologists in the eastern TransPecos is that, in archaeological circles (including Texas archaeologists), our region
has been thought of as a “blank space” on the map. In the
past, too little information had been gathered, and that
which did exist had not been disseminated effectively to
archaeologists outside the region. The Trans-Pecos Archaeological Program (TAP) was initiated in 2004 by the
CBBS to fill this gap on the map—to develop syntheses specific to
the eastern Trans-Pecos for the five standard cultural periods of
prehistory (i.e., Paleoindian, Early Archaic, Middle Archaic, Late
Archaic, and Late Prehistoric) and to share these findings with
the scientific community and the general public.
CBBS crew excavating discard piles at the Paradise site.

Earth ovens were a technological adaptation by indigenous groups
that allowed certain plant foods to be cooked. In the Big Bend, this
meant that succulent plants (primarily plants of the Agave family—yucca, sotol, and lechuguilla), a plentiful and reliable food
source, could be made edible. This was accomplished by constructing an earth oven, which consisted of a shallow basin filled with
heated rocks upon which succulent hearts were placed; this pile
was then sealed with a mound of earth. The succulents needed
to bake for about two days in order to break down the complex
sugars in the hearts of the plants so that they could be digested.
Because earth ovens had to be dismantled to retrieve the contents and were typically used repeatedly, their original configurations and associated activity areas were almost always destroyed.
However, since the Paradise earth oven had been used only two or
three times, we were able to discern the separate firings, unique
information regarding its construction (a borrow trough and pits
where dirt was scooped out to cap it), and the activity areas associated with its operation. Furthermore, a contracting stem dart
point—the only known diagnostic stone tool of Middle Archaic
people—was found on the adjacent living surface and is now one
of the most solidly dated points of this type in Texas.

Earth oven remnant at the Paradise site.

We got off to a good start for the Middle Archaic period (2500–
1000 B.C.) with discovery of the Paradise site (41PS914) in eastern Presidio County. After receiving a 4,000 year-old radiocarbon
date from a buried thermal feature, we began excavation in the
spring of 2004. The site is located in the headwaters of Terlingua
Creek, and that spring was one of the wettest on record. It took
us two months, during which we had to make many hair-raising
escapes from rising waters, but we succeeded in uncovering one
of the most intact earth ovens discovered in Texas.

4

Center for Big Bend Studies

No sooner had we wrapped up the lab work and analyses for this site,
than two other Middle Archaic sites fell into our laps. Originally discovered in 1979, the Rosillo Peak site (41BS762) was reevaluated in
2005 prior to construction of a radio repeater system. Following a helicopter ride to the summit of the mountain, a CBBS crew conducted
a small-scale investigation while enduring the winds of March. Cooking features were absent and stone tools recovered were predominantly projectile points, particularly ones from the Middle Archaic.
Of 69 projectile points recovered from the surface, 15 have contracting stems; and of the 16 points recovered from excavation
units, 7 exhibit contracting stems. The lack of everyday tools and
thermal features—cultural residue typically found at sites in the
region—is striking. This, in tandem with the fairly inaccessible
mountaintop setting (several thousand feet above the desert
floor) and associated ambience, suggests the site may have been
used for ceremonial or ritual purposes.

the Middle Archaic Period
a prehistoric cache. Several large cobbles or small boulders positioned immediately upslope of the points likely formed, when
intact, a cairn to mark the cache location. Surprisingly, the apex
of the petroform was found to “point” due north, directly at the
cache. Subsequent excavation here revealed the cairn’s intact
vestiges—four more dart points nested within two freshwater
mussel shells and capped by a smooth river cobble. Of the points
recovered, 11 are most similar to the Almagre type, and two are
probably Langtry. This marks the first time that these two types
have been found in close association, an indication they were used
at the same time, probably by the same group of people. Like Rosillo Peak, many aspects of this site suggest ritualism.

CBBS crew members on Rosillo Peak.

The other site pertinent to this discussion—Lizard Hill Cache
(41BS1779)—was discovered in the lowland Chihuahuan Desert
near the Rio Grande in 2006. A CBBS crew initially discovered
several intriguing features at the site, including an unusual, squat
V-shaped rock alignment (petroform). Further gleaning there led
to discovery of nine contracting stem dart points lying in a closely
spaced array on the side of a small hill—apparent remnants of

Petroform at the Lizard Hill site.

All three sites give us important insights into Middle Archaic behavior. They provide the backbone of a new synthesis by this author soon to be published by the CBBS. Approximately 575 sites
were used to construct a picture of Middle Archaic lifeways for
the region. Importantly, no longer are we dependent on information from neighboring areas in our attempts to understand the
Middle Archaic milieu.
—Andrea J. Ohl
The Lizard Hill cache.

View to the north from Rosillo Peak.

La Vista de la Frontera

5

C

The CBBS has a long and rich history of
research and collaboration with the National Park Service (NPS). We have conducted a variety of projects over the last
17 years for three NPS properties: Big
Bend National Park, Guadalupe Mountains National Park, and Lake Meredith
National
Nati
Na
tio Recreation Area (which includes Aliti
tio
bates Flint Quarries National Monument).

Big Bend National Park Survey

The Big Bend National Park
(BBNP) project, begun in
1995 and the largest archaeological survey in the history
of the Big Bend (and among
the largest in the state), is
now in its final stages. Since
fieldwork was completed in
2010, an equally challenging Colors represent environmental
phase of the project has been zones in BBNP.
underway—analysis and writing the final report. Representing
the culmination of over ten years of work (there was a ca. six-

Recording the ruins of a historic automobile near Glen Springs.

Survey crew documenting a prehistoric structure in BBNP.

year lapse in funding), reporting will entail summarizing the
results of fieldwork, analyzing the diverse artifacts collected
and cultural features discovered, and interpreting prehistoric
and historic human behavior evident in the data—such as patterned distributions of artifacts and features and whether certain environments or settings were preferred at different times
in the past. The CBBS is working with BBNP’s archaeologist Tom
Alex and Geographic Information System (GIS) specialist Betty
Alex, and other scientific collaborators to complete the report.
Importantly, project data and the park’s GIS are facilitating construction of a predictive model of site locations in unsurveyed
portions of the park, which will be particularly useful to park
managers. Publication of the report is scheduled for mid-2013.

Documenting a historic stone corral in Big Bend National Park.

Lake Meredith and Alibates Flint Quarries
For about ten years, the CBBS has been performing archaeological surveys and site documentations in the Texas Panhandle at Lake Meredith National Recreation Area and Alibates
Flint Quarries National Monument. However, 2012 marked
the close of a ca. two-year project on these properties that involved no fieldwork—an overview and assessment of all archaeological resources and all past investigations on these federal lands. The many tasks included compiling a lengthy and
comprehensive bibliography and building a substantial database. Spanning roughly 80 years of work in this portion of the
southern Great Plains, the multifaceted database makes an
array of information much more accessible to park managers.

6

Center for Big Bend Studies

CBBS researchers pouring over Lake Meredith archaeological documents at the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum in Canyon, Texas.

This overview and assessment project provided a rare opportunity to summarize and synthesize the cultural history of a very
rich archaeological landscape, one renowned as the focus of the
Antelope Creek phase—a Late Prehistoric culture known for its
distinctive architecture and material culture—and the source
of “Alibates Flint,” a high-quality toolstone that was mined
at the quarry and traded over vast stretches of central North
America. Important aspects of the project involved assessing
past archaeological endeavors on the NPS lands and recommending the direction of future investigations.
A museum accession book catalogues archaeological specimens from Lake Meredith and Alibates Flint Quarries.

Guadalupe Mountains National Park
On another front, since 2009 the CBBS has conducted a number
of archaeological site assessments at Guadalupe Mountains Na-

As of the fall of 2012, the CBBS had assessed about 90 sites
at GUMO, from the lower desert flats below El Capitan, to the
depths of McKittrick Canyon, to high mountain ridges in the
northern portion of the park. The aboriginal archaeological record in these diverse settings is rich, ranging from high-mountain Paleoindian camps; huge, 500–1,000-year-old, ring-shaped
mounds of burned rock; and relatively recent camps and battlegrounds of historic Apache Indians. Furthermore, the CBBS collaborated with the University of Arizona in documenting the
Williams Ranch homestead and complex, an important historic
ranching operation that predates the park. Additional site assessments are scheduled for the near future.

The NPS provided pack-mule support for archaeological fieldwork in
the remote backcountry of the Guadalupe Mountains.

tional Park (GUMO). Rather than searching for and recording
new sites, our task has been to assess the condition of known
sites so that the NPS can monitor how they are affected by
natural erosion, park visitors, forest fires and, in unfortunate
instances, looting.

Recording a prehistoric site in a high-mountain meadow.

Continuing Collaborations with the National Park Service
These contracted, cultural resource management projects are
important to the CBBS. They help us maintain business relations with a major, federal land-holding agency, provide supplemental funds for our overall program, and assist the NPS in
managing their cultural resources. Most importantly, they help
us with our research. Although some may argue that Lake Meredith is a little far afield for the CBBS, there was a real connection at various times in the past between cultures in the Texas

Panhandle and those on the western side of the Pecos River. Accordingly, our findings from all three properties facilitate an understanding of past people’s behavior in the greater Big Bend.
Lastly, it is simply a pleasure to conduct archaeological research
in some of the most stunning and intriguing landscapes in the
American West as our collaborations with the NPS continue
into the future.
—Samuel S. Cason and David W. Keller
La Vista de la Frontera

7

C

d in a range of d
The CBBS remains engaged
diverse research across the greater Big Bend
study area. Over the last year progress was
mad
made on a number of ongoing projects, while
groundbreaking disco
discoveries and new opportunities opened additional avenues of research. Work at the Searcher site (see page 3
in this issue) is the result of a recent discovery and represents another important chapter in CBBS research on the 02 Ranch. It is
one of 35 sites discovered on the ranch over the last year and many
of these have excellent research potential. Similarly, we have made
considerable progress in our research of Pinto Canyon Ranch.
Located in a remote and rugged section of the Big Bend country, Pinto Canyon Ranch has been the subject of CBBS research
over the last ten-plus years, and the past year saw the launching
of several new investigations. Following another round of survey
and reconnaissance at the ranch, CBBS staff explored for intact archaeological deposits in a partially buried open campsite, within
a structural remnant on the surface of another site, and in a well

Remains of stone architecture in Surprise Rockshelter, Pinto Canyon Ranch.

CBBS crewmember maps and documents artifacts on the surface of
Surprise Rockshelter.

8

Center for Big Bend Studies

preserved rockshelter. Test excavations at
Surprise Rockshelter, in the heart of the
ranch, yielded the most promising results.
This hidden rockshelter contains the remd
d impornants of an extensive stone structurall foundation
and,
tantly, lacks any evidence of looting. Our investigation revealed
that the shelter was occupied for over 3,000 years, with significant findings from both the Late Archaic (1000 B.C.–A.D. 700) and
Late Prehistoric (A.D. 700–1535) periods. A variety of perishable
items were also recovered, including fireboards, basketry, and
matting. Such items, which illustrate the richness of prehistoric
life, are typically not preserved in open sites and, unfortunately,
are all too often removed from shelters by looters.
Significant progress has also been made in researching the history of Pinto Canyon Ranch. With the bulk of archival research
complete, the focus turns to conducting oral histories—typically
the most fruitful of all historical sources. To date, 24 interviews
have been conducted with an estimated dozen or more
yet to go. In addition, research for
two major parts of
the history is nearly
complete: that of
the abandoned village of Pueblo Nuevo and of the locally
famous Chinati Hot
Springs. Papers on
these topics were
presented at recent
CBBS conferences
and an article on
the latter was published in the local
Muniz family members at Pueblo Nuevo in
ca. 1956.

Muniz family descendants at Pueblo Nuevo in 2009.

tudies Research Across
literary journal, the Cenizo. Research will continue through the
fall of 2012, with an expected publication date in 2013.
Ongoing studies at the Nature Conservancy’s Independence
Creekk Preserve brought
b
h a CBBS crew back
b k to the
h Logan’s
’ Terrace site along a tributary of the Pecos River. Cisco Equipment in
Odessa donated the use of a backhoe to excavate a series of deep
trenches across the
site. Serving as “windows” into the subsurface deposits, these
trenches
revealed
charcoal stains, hearth
remnants, tools, and
other archaeological
remains as deep as 2
meters below the surface. These efforts and
ensuing
laboratory
analysis of collected
samples have provided more information
about the condition
and extent of this buried campsite situated
in a strategic location
on the eastern reaches
of our study area.

Archaeological testing at Logan’s Terrace
site, Independence Creek.

The CBBS conducted
its first foray into historic restoration in 2011–2012. Located
roughly ten miles northeast of Dryden in Terrell County, Camp
Meyers was a U.S. military outpost of Fort Clark occupied during
the early 1880s—primarily by Black Seminole scouts and their
commanding officer. Although the camp was only occupied for
about four years, it retains a well preserved array of early historic
artifacts and features, including ruins of a limestone building—
the focal point of the camp. Stabilization of the main ruin was enthusiastically funded by landowner and Sul Ross alumnus, Thad
Steele, and work commenced early in 2011 directed by research
preservation specialist Pat Taylor from Mesilla, New Mexico.

Later in the spring of 2012, CBBS scientific collaborator Mark
Willis conducted aerial mapping of the site with an unmanned
automated vehicle (UAV). Data gathered from this drone-like aircraft generated detailed 3-D maps that will help interpret the site
d guide
d ongoing preservation efforts.
and

Stabilizing structural remains at Camp Meyers.

Another research opportunity opened as a result of a recent invitation from Jack Skiles, owner and steward extraordinaire of the
renowned multi-component site known as Bonfire Shelter. Last
spring, Skiles guided CBBS staff on an informative tour of the
site and several other important rockshelters in the immediate
vicinity. Within Bonfire Shelter, archaeological excavations from
the 1960s and 1980s still reveal carefully exposed layers from the
past, including the remains of butchered bison thought to have
been run over the cliff edge at two different times—by Late Archaic peoples ca. 2,600 years ago and by Paleoindians ca. 10,200
years ago. Of particular interest is an undated bone bed below
the Paleoindian component. The CBBS is actively working with
Skiles to assess the possibility of reopening a portion of this layer
to search for evidence of a still earlier human presence at the site.
—Samuel S. Cason and David W. Keller

Archaeological steward and site owner Jack Skiles leads a tour of Bonfire Shelter.

La Vista de la Frontera

9

C

Sharing the work CBBS does wit
with
th the
e public is an important part of our mission
mission.
Below is a selection of community events in which CBBS staff members have been involved.
f presented “Big Bend Prehistory and Findings at the Nine Point Mesa Ranch” to ranch
owners and friends, January 2012.

Roger Boren

f presented “Paleoindians in the Big Bend:

f presented “The Early Archaic Cultural Period
in the Eastern Trans-Pecos” at the 88th Annual Meeting of the West Texas Historical
Association in Lubbock, April 2011.

Preliminary Investigations at the Genevieve
Lykes Duncan Site, 02 Ranch, Brewster
County” at the Texas Academy of Science
meeting in Alpine, March 2012.

f presented “The Black Hills Survey Revisited”

f presented “Buried Paleoindian Occupations

at the CBBS 18th Annual Conference,
November 2011.

f presented “The Black Hills Revisited” at the
89th Annual Meeting of the West Texas
Historical Association in Alpine, March
2012.

f presented “The Genevieve Lykes Duncan
Site” to Texas State University System
Board of Regents’ spouses, August 2011.

f presented “Buried Paleoindian Occupations

f presented “Coming Up from the Canyons:

in the Big Bend of Texas: The Genevieve
Lykes Duncan Site” to Sierra Club members, April 2012.

An Overview of CBBS Archaeological Investigations on the Pinto Canyon Ranch, Past and
Present” at the CBBS 18th Annual Conference, November 2011.

f presented to the “Lady in Blue” group from
Spain, July 2012.

f presented “An Introduction to Archaeology

f performed cleanup at the Millington site
with students, April 2012.

f presented an archaeology program for
elementary students at the Museum of
the Big Bend, September 2012.

f presented “Buried Paleoindian Occupations
in the Big Bend of Texas: The Genevieve
Lykes Duncan Site” at the “Alpine-in-Austin” meeting in Pflugerville, March 2012.

Sam Cason

with An Emphasis on West Texas” to students of Marfa Elementary, March 2012.

in the Big Bend of Texas: The Genevieve
Lykes Duncan Site” to the Geological
Society of America South-Central Section
Meeting in Alpine, March 2012.

f presented and gave a field tour to the
f presented “The Genevieve Lykes Duncan
Site” to the Retired Teachers of Brewster
County, September 2011.

f presented “The Genevieve Lykes Duncan
Site” to the Alpine Kiwanis Club and the
Alpine Lions Club, October 2011.

Texas Master Naturalists, August 2012.

Andy Cloud and Roger Boren
f gave a field tour of San Esteban Rockshelter
to Alpine ISD Science Camp, June 2011.

f presented “The Late Prehistoric Period in
the Big Bend” to the Alpine Kiwanis Club,
October 2011.

f presented “Removing the Shroud of Mystery: Archaeology in the Big Bend” to the
general public at the Grace Museum in
Abilene and to Abilene High School biology students, October 2011.

f gave a field tour of the Genevieve Lykes
Duncan site to ranch owners and associates, November 2011.

f gave a radio interview on the “Sound of

Susan Chisholm
f was a judge for the Big Bend Regional History Fair in Alpine, February 2012.

Andy Cloud
f assisted with a field video at the Genevieve Lykes Duncan site for the TPWD
Lone Star Land Steward Award, April
2011.

10 Center for Big Bend Studies

Texas” with Tumbleweed Smith, November 2011.

f presented “The Genevieve Lykes Duncan
Site: An 11,000-Year-Old Paleoindian Occupation in the Big Bend” to the general
public at Front Street Books in Alpine,
November 2011.

f presented “Paleoindians in the Big Bend:
Preliminary Investigations at the Genevieve
Lykes Duncan Site” at the CBBS 18th Annual Conference, November 2011.

f gave a field tour of San Esteban Rockshelter to the Texas Historical Foundation
board members, July 2011.

Andy Cloud and Bob Mallouf

Bobby Gray

f gave a field tour of the Genevieve Lykes

f presented “A Synopsis of Over Ten Years

Duncan site to family of the landowners,
May 2011.

of Research on the 02 Ranch, Brewster and
Presidio Counties, Texas” at the CBBS 18th
Annual Conference, November 2011.

Jamie Hampson
(CBBS Research Associate)

f presented “Meaning and Motivation: West
Texas Rock Art Through Time” at Art and
Archaeology Group, University of Cambridge, England, November 2011.

f presented “Contested Images: Rock Art,

Reeda Peel Fleming
f was the symposium organizer for “Low
Tech to High Tech: Wide Ranging Efforts to
Preserve Trans-Pecos Rock Art” at the 82nd
Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society meeting in Fort Worth; she
also presented “Rock Art Recording Efforts
in the Texas Trans-Pecos” at that meeting,
October 2011.

f presented “Bee Cave-Black Hills Project:
Searching for Cultural and Temporal Patterns” at the CBBS 18th Annual Conference, November 2011.

f presented “Tracking Miniature Zoomorphic
Pictographs through the Eastern TransPecos” at the 89th Annual Conference of
the West Texas Historical Association in
Alpine, March 2012.

f presented “Tracking Tiny Zoomorphs across
the Eastern Trans-Pecos” to the Alpine
Senior Circle, May 2012.

Landscape, and Identity in West Texas and
Beyond” at the North American Archaeological Research Group Inaugural Symposium, University of Cambridge, England,
February 2012.

f presented “Contested Heritage: Rock Art
and Identity in National Parks” at the Art
Makes Society Session of the Society for
American Archaeologists Conference,
Memphis, April 2012.

David Keller
f presented “The Search for Paleoindians in
the Big Bend” at the 88th Annual Meeting
of the West Texas Historical Association
in Lubbock, April 2011.

f presented “Taming the Healing Waters: A
History of the Chinati Hot Springs” and “Images of America: Alpine” at the CBBS 18th
Annual Conference, November 2011.

f presented “Albin Odell, Early Homesteader
in Pinto Canyon” at the Odell Family Reunion in Fort Davis, July 2012.

f presented “Meyers Spring: Images of Native

f gave a site tour at the Pinto Canyon
Ranch to guests of the landowner, October 2011.

f presented “Paleoindians in the Big Bend:
Preliminary Investigations at the Genevieve
Lykes Duncan Site, 02 Ranch” at the CBBS
18th Annual Conference, November 2011.

f presented “Archaeological Research and Private Land Ownership” to the general public
at the Menil Foundation and Fine Arts
Museum in Houston, November 2011.

f presented “An Overview of Past Paleoindian
Research in the Big Bend” and “A Historical
Perspective on the Search for Paleoindians in
the Big Bend” at the Geological Society of
America South-Central Section Meeting,
March 2012.

f presented “The Livermore Phase: Lifeways
and Ritualism” to ranch owners and guests
at the Livermore Ranch, March 2012.

f presented “Ritual Lifeways of the Late
Prehistoric Livermore Culture” at the Texas
State University System meeting of vice
presidents and facility directors, July
2012.

Andrea Ohl
f presented “Middle Archaic People of Eastern
Trans-Pecos Texas: Their Life and Times
2500–1000 B.C.” at the CBBS 18th Annual
Conference, November 2011.

Richard Walter
f presented “The Elusive Calf Creek Culture in
the Big Bend” at the 88th Annual Meeting
of the West Texas Historical Association
in Lubbock, April 2011.

f presented “The Center for Big Bend Studies

American and Spanish Cultural Exchange”
to the Big Bend Arts Council, May 2012.

Feature Recovery Program: An Ongoing
Study of Feature Variability in the Big Bend”
at the CBBS 18th Annual Conference,
November 2011.

f presented “Meyers Spring: Images of Native
American and Spanish Cultural Exchange”
at Meyers Spring to the Rock Art Foundation, May 2012.

f presented “Las Apacheria de los Despoblado” at the 89th Annual Conference of
the West Texas Historical Association
meeting in Alpine, March 2012.

f presented “Archaeological Investigations
at the Fulcher Site Located Along the Lower
Reaches of Terlingua Creek” and “Excavations at the Paired Feature Site, Pecos County, Texas” at the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Southwest Federation of Archeological Societies in Iraan, April 2012.

Bob Mallouf

CBBS Staff

f presented “The Big Bend Past” at Persim-

f participated in the Texas Department

mon Gap Ranch to a select group, September 2011.

of Transportation’s Adopt-A-Highway
Program.

La Vista de la Frontera 11

M

useum of The Big
Bend News

Removing the Shroud of Mystery:
Archaeology in the Big Bend
On September 8, the Museum of the Big Bend in partnership with the Center for Big Bend Studies and Humanities Texas, opened the highly anticipated exhibit, “Removing the Shroud of Mystery: Archaeology in the Big Bend.”

Removing The
Shroud Of Mystery
ARCHAEOLOGY IN THE BIG BEND
September 8, 2012 - February 3, 2013

Found across the vast Big Bend region of Texas are clues left behind that
help tell the story of some of the “First Texans.” Our oldest archaeological
sites have been traced back more than 10,000 years; they tell us about people
with complex cultures that adapted to centuries of changing environments,
climates, and resources in a diverse and rugged landscape. Since they left no
written record for us to decipher and study, our understanding of this past
relies on the scientific study of what these early peoples left behind—tools,
shelters, remnants of their daily lives and artwork.
Based on work at La Junta de los Rios and at sites from across the region, the
centerpiece of the exhibit features a life-size, three-dimensional hypothetical model of an excavation at a site dating to between 4500 B.C. and A.D. 1500.
In addition, the exhibit explores Native American rock art in the Big Bend,
and other intriguing pieces
of the region’s
archaeological
record.

trappings
of
texas

FEB 22 - APR 14, 2013

Sul Ross State University
A Member of the Texas State University System
???(!?(+0$ƫ?+?'ƫ?$!(0!.ƫƫƫđƫƫƫ?+?1)!*0?0%+*ƫĒƫ?+?'ƫ?.0ƫ?!?+. %*#ƫ?5ƫ?!! ?ƫ?!!(ƫƫƫđƫƫƫ ((1/0.?0%+*ƫ?5ƫ?2.?)ƫ?1)%0.!/?1ƫƫƫđƫƫƫ?!*0!.ƫ"+.ƫ?%#ƫ?!* ƫ?01 %!/Čƫ?1(ƫ?+//ƫ?0?0!ƫ?*%2!./%05ƫģƫ?(,%*!Čƫ?!4?/

The exhibit will run from September 8, 2012, through the end of January
2013. Museum hours of operation are Tuesday through Saturday, 9 a.m.
to 1 p.m. and Sundays from 1 p.m. to 5 p.m. Admission is free, although
donations are welcome. For more information, please contact Museum
Curator, Mary Bones at maryb@sulross.edu or 432-837-8734.

C U S T O M C OW B OY G E A R
AND FINE WESTERN ART

Trappings of Texas
Come join the MoBB as we celebrate the 27th Annual Trappings of Texas
Custom Cowboy Gear & Fine Western Art Exhibit & Sale on February
22–23, 2013. Opening night is considered the best party in the Big Bend
where good food, music, and art come together. The next morning, better
than a wild west shootout is the Trappings Auction where steals and deals
can be made! For opening night tickets and further information, call 432837-8143 or email nacosta@sulross.edu.

MoBB Membership Opportunities—please
museum website at www.sulross.edu/museum.
Sul Ross State University
A Member of the Texas State University System

12 Center for Big Bend Studies

visit the

he J. Charles and Ellen A.
Kelley Memorial Library
The J. Charles Kelley Memorial Library was dedicated in 2001
soon after the CBBS moved into its renovated offices in Ferguson
Hall. Subsequent to J. Charles Kelley’s passing in 1997, a collection of over 4,000 volumes was donated by Ellen A. Kelley, forming the core of the new library. This collection included volumes
in the disciplines of archaeology, cultural anthropology, ethnohistory, and history. Many of these are rare, out-of-print publications covering some of the most important scientific work conducted in the Southwestern United States and Mexico.
Enhancing the Kelley donation are three additional donated collections, comprising more than 1,000 volumes. These donations
include the Leslie and Helen Davis collection, the John and Carrol
Hedrick collection, and the Linda Cordell collection. In addition,
new volumes are continuously being added to the library through
subscription service and donations. Others including CBBS personnel, Bob Mallouf and Andrea Ohl, have donated portions of
their personal libraries. A complete set of topographic maps covering the eastern Trans-Pecos region and beyond are also housed
in the library. The CBBS library is not a lending library; however,
it is available and open to students and researchers for on-site use
during regular office hours.
Ellen Abbott Kelley joined the staff of CBBS in 1997. From
that time, Ellen shouldered the immense task of organizing
the library which she maintained until her untimely death in
the fall of 2011. Maintenance of the library, considering the
continual inflow of new volumes, was a relentless task requiring constant reorganizational efforts. Early in 2011, Ellen
began an all-out initiative to reorganize and re-catalog the
entire library. Unfortunately, Ellen was not able to see this
effort through to fruition. Employees of CBBS are picking up

the mantle in an effort to complete this probable multi-year
project.
During Ellen’s tenure at CBBS, it was not possible to walk into the
library without her asking, “What can I do to help you?” Ellen would
usually walk directly to the exact shelf where the particular volume
you needed was hiding. We, the employees here at CBBS, are finding it very difficult to cope without our beloved Ellen directing our
library searches.
In order to recognize Ellen’s many years of dedicated service,
the Center for Big Bend Studies has the honor of rededicating
the library as the J. Charles and Ellen A. Kelley Memorial Library. A new plaque to this effect has been placed just outside
the library entrance.
—Roger Boren

In Memory of Ellen Abbott Kelley
Ellen Abbott Kelley, 78, died October 9, 2011, at her home outside of Fort Davis.
Ellen was born January 8, 1933, in Carbondale, Ill., to Hazel and
Talbert Abbott. She graduated from the University of Illinois,
Champaign-Urbana in 1955 with a B.A. degree in geography and
earned an M.A. in anthropology at Southern Illinois University
(SIU) in 1960. She joined the faculty/staff of SIU as an instructor in the University Museum and Department of Anthropology.
Ellen was promoted to assistant professor in the University Museum and Curator of Collections (later, curator of Mesoamerican
Collections) and was supervisor of the Museum Research Laboratory until 1978. She was active in archaeological fieldwork from
(Continued on pg. 14)

La Vista de la Frontera 13

An Update on the Genevieve Lykes Duncan Site, continued from page 2.

we learn will help in interpreting the
next round of geophysical data recovered from the site.
La Vista de la Frontera is the annual newsletter of the Center for Big Bend Studies of Sul Ross State University. Address correspondence to the Editor, Center for Big Bend
Studies, Box C-71, Alpine, TX 79832, or cbbs@sulross.edu.
Editing by William A. Cloud and Susan Chisholm.
Graphic design by Letitia Wetterauer.

CBBS Advisory Council
Chairman: J. Tillapaugh, Odessa
Director: William A. Cloud, Alpine
Félix D. Almaráz Jr. Rick Hendricks
San Antonio
Santa Fe, NM

Ex Officio from
SRSU, Alpine:

Jed Becker
El Paso

Claude Hudspeth
San Angelo

J. P. Bryan
Houston

John Klingemann
San Angelo

Paul Carlson
Ransom Canyon

Ben Love
Marathon

Ricardo MaestasQuint Thurman
Melleta Bell
Jim D. Case
James W. Downing

Tom Crum
Granbury

John L. Nau, III
Houston

Honorary
Members:

Lonn Taylor
J. Travis Roberts Jr. William C. Foster
Marathon
Rubén Osorio Zuñiga
Neil Caldwell
William Wright

David Fannin
Marfa
Pete P. Gallego
Alpine

Abilene

Texas State University System
Board of Regents
Mr. Charlie Amato,
Chairman
San Antonio

Mr. David Montagne
Beaumont

Ms. Donna N. Williams,
Vice Chair
Arlington
Dr. Jaime R. Garza
San Antonio
Mr. Kevin J. Lilly
Houston
Mr. Ron Mitchell
Horseshoe Bay

Ms. Trisha Pollard
Bellaire
Ms. Rossanna Salazar
Austin
Mr. William F. Scott
Nederland
Mr. Andrew Greenberg,
Student Regent
Arlington

Dr. Brian McCall
Chancellor
Austin

Mission
The Center for Big Bend Studies fosters interdisciplinary scholarship of the diverse prehistoric, historic,
and modern cultures of the borderlands region of the
United States and Mexico, with emphasis on the area
encompassed by Trans-Pecos Texas and north-central
Mexico. The Center is committed to the recovery, protection, and sharing of this region’s rich cultural legacy
through dynamic programs involving research, education, public outreach, and publication.

Volume 23, Fall 2012
www.sulross.edu/cbbs/
cbbs@sulross.edu

14 Center for Big Bend Studies

If one was to have walked across the
surface of the Genevieve Lykes Duncan site ten years ago, prior to its exposure in a recent arroyo, they would
have seen little evidence of what lay
buried and preserved beneath the Probable surface on right associated with
11,000-year-old hearth.
mesquite-choked landscape. Our investigation has revealed that during at least one flood event over 4,000 years ago, the
main stem of Terlingua Creek carved its way into the Late Paleoindian deposits at the
site and carried unknown scientific treasures downstream to be broadly dispersed.
Luckily, the creek then retreated back across the valley and never returned, leaving
the remaining vestiges of this precious archaeological record intact for our discovery.
We have already learned a great deal about the early inhabitants from this record and
only time will tell what other secrets will come to light from our larger excavation.
—William A. Cloud
In Memory of Ellen Abbott Kelley, continued from page 13.

1952 until 1994 at various locations and sites including the Illinois River Valley; the
Cache River Valley of southern Illinois; Canada de Cochiti just off the Cochiti Indian
Reservation in New Mexico; the Schroeder Site outside Durango, Mexico; and Alta
Vista outside Chalchihuites, Mexico. Ellen married J. Charles Kelley, director of the
University Museum and professor of anthropology at SIU in 1966. They worked as a
research team for 30 years, studying the Chalchihuites culture of northern Mexico.
The Kelleys moved to Fort Davis in 1977 when J. Charles retired from SIU. They
became affiliated with Sul Ross State University and continued active research in
northern Mexico and the Trans-Pecos area of Texas. Ellen joined the staff of the
Center for Big Bend Studies (CBBS) of Sul Ross State University when J. Charles
died in 1997. She continued to work at the CBBS until her death.
Ellen was a member of Sigma Xi and the Society for American Archaeology. She coauthored many books and professional articles, and presented numerous research
papers at professional meetings. She was passionate and knowledgeable about her
work with a special love for ceramic analysis of the Chalchihuites Culture. In 2007,
Mexico dedicated an archeological museum named the J. Charles Kelley and Ellen
Abbott Kelley Museum in the state of Zacatecas at the Alta Vista site near Chalchihuites, Mexico. Ellen was again honored for her work in Mexico in 2011.

Thank You!
Thee CB
Th
C
CBBS
BS extends heartfelt thanks to those foundations and individuals
BS
who have provided support since the 2011 edition of La Vista de la Frontera
was published. All contributors are greatly appreciated! Special thanks are extended to the largest contributors: The Brown Foundation, Inc., of Houston;
the Coypu Foundation; the Wayne and Jo Ann Moore Charitable Foundation; the Joan and Herb Kelleher Foundation; the Alfred S. Gage Foundation; Jeff Fort; Cameron and Susan Duncan; Genevieve Duncan; J. P. and
Mary Jon Bryan; Thad Steele; George Canon; Edgar and Linda Duncan; Dr.
Iris Korus; and an anonymous donor through the Orange County Community Foundation.

TH ROCKSH

ELT
ER

TE

N

TE

IE

S

N

Volume 23 of the Journal of Big Bend Studies is now available. We also have some of
our more popular journals listed below.
The abstracts can be read on our website,
www.sulross.edu/cbbs/.

RF

T
O R B I G BEND S

UD

IE

O
ECL
BL
TA

CE

Journal 23 now on sale

S

OTH ROCKSHE
LT
E CL
ER
BL
TA

CE

?

CBBS Store

RF

Sul Ross State University

O R B I G BEN D S

TU

D

Sul Ross State University

back

front

CBBS T-Shirts

$15

Featuring rock art from the Big Bend’s Tablecloth Rockshelter, the CBBS t-shirts were designed by our former graphic
illustrator, Avram Dumitrescu, and are produced in Alpine,
Texas. Available in green or khaki, adult sizes S, M, L, XL, XXL
and youth sizes S, M, and L.
$15 each

JBBS 22

JBBS 21

T-shirt #1 Size _________
T-shirt #2 Size _________
T-shirt #3 Size _________
T-shirt #4 Size _________

JBBS 20

Color
Color
Color
Color

khaki
khaki

green
green
green

khaki

green

khaki

CBBS Notecards

JBBS 19

A detail from Tablecloth Rockshelter, recorded by Reeda Peel, and a
stunning photograph by Andy Cloud are now
w
available on postcards and notecards. $1 perr
postcard ($8 for a pack of 10), $2 per notecard
d
($18 for a pack of 10). Contact Susan Chisholm
m
at (432) 837-8179 to place an order.

JBBS 18

Membership Levels
Student $20

Individual $35

(first year is free)

Family $50

Institutional $50

Lifetime $1,000

Mail orders to

Donations
In addition to my membership, I support the work of the Center for Big Bend Studies with my
tax-deductible contribution to the FRIENDS OF THE CENTER FOR BIG BEND STUDIES.
$100

$200

$500

$_________ This is a comfortable level of support for me.

CBBS
SRSU
Box C-71
Alpine, TX 79832

℡

Merchandise
Books / T-shirts total

Order by Phone

Total

M−F, 8 to 5
(432) 837-8179

Pay by Check

Credit

Visa/MasterCard

Signature

Name as it appears on card

Exp. Date

Card Number
Shipping Address

Phone

City

?

Or by email
State

Zip Code

cbbs@sulross.edu
La Vista de la Frontera 15

Address Service Requested
232267-121700-60-RES

www.sulross.edu/cbbs/
Center for Big Bend Studies
Sul Ross State University
Box C-71
Alpine, Texas 79832

Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PAID
Alpine, Texas
Permit No. 2

Center for Big Bend Studies

TH
19 ANNUAL
CONFERENCE
N o v e m b e r 9 –10

Mike Slaton's painting, Of Two
This year's banquet speaker is folklorist,
Minds, will be raffled off at the
conference. Slaton's work has
historian, and radio producer, Tumbleweed
received many awards and
Smith . Smith keeps audiences laughing with
recognitions.
timeless relevant humor and voices of
personalities from his radio documentaries, The Sound of Texas.

Tumbleweed Smith began his daily radio program, The Sound of Texas, in 1969. It went on to become the most
widely syndicated feature program in Texas. In the show's 40-plus years, he has developed the largest
independent collection of oral history in the United States with a library of more than 10,000
interviews. He shares his passion and entertains through speaking engagements and his three
stage plays: Texas Stories, Mountain Voices, and Natural Born Storytellers. He has performed
live all over Texas and in six other states and three foreign countries. His honors include two
CLIO advertising awards, the governor's award for tourism, the West Texas Chamber of Commerce Cultural Achievement Award, two Telly Statuettes, and two Freedoms Foundation Awards.

