Reading the Desert’s Stones:

Archaeology in Big Bend National Park
Nearing the end of another sweltering day of fieldwork
in Big Bend National Park, the sun bearing down in its
relentless march across the sky, two archaeologists slogged
up a low hillside looking for clues. Wiping the sweat from
their brows, they saw a linear alignment of rocks that, at first,
appeared to be just another old two-track road. Or was it?
They followed the serpentine line as it snaked uphill until it
intersected a second line of rocks to form a large V-shaped
figure. Blinking in disbelief, they realized what they had
stumbled upon was not a road at all, but a rare prehistoric
feature known as a petroform (a deliberate arrangement of
rocks on the ground).
A rush of excitement washed over them as they hurried
upslope to further discoveries: a small ring of stones and
three circular “pavements” of limestone cobbles. Clearly, the
petroform was not an isolated phenomenon. Alerting the
crew, the team of archaeologists fanned out to comb over the
site. Almost immediately a crew member found a projectile
point, and then a second one. The rest of the crew rushed
over and, within a few minutes, they had identified seven
contracting-stem dart points within a two-meter area. By
all appearances, the team had discovered a 4,000-year-old
dart point cache!
The discovery of the Lizard Hill cache—as it came to
be known—eventually produced a total of 13 projectiles

Inside:
Director’s Update .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
CBBS Investigates Enigmatic Prehistoric Tool .  .  .  .  . 4
Black Hills Rock Art and the Prehistoric Sky  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
Pinto Canyon Ranch: Window to the Past .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
Preserving History in the Big Bend .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10
In Memory of Mozelle Jeffrey .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
Meet New CBBS Staff  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13

Medicine wheels, like this one, are a rare type of petroform, two of which
were documented during the project.

and served as the highlight of a long and arduous cooperative project between the CBBS and the National Park
Service that spanned more than ten years. As the biggest
archaeological survey in the state’s history in the most
iconic part of Texas, the Big Bend National Park Project
was a study in superlatives. Over the course of nearly 30,000
person-hours of fieldwork, crews surveyed more than 60,000
acres (roughly 8 percent of the entire park), discovering
more than 1,400 new sites and collecting more than 2,000
artifacts, most of which were temporally or functionally
diagnostic. As a result of its breadth and scale, by the time
fieldwork was complete the project could boast having
made one of the greatest archaeological contributions in
the region’s history.
In addition to many hundreds of feature and artifact
types commonly found across the region, the project also
yielded archaeological residue previously unknown to science,
including a new type of thermal feature (the cobble-lined
hearth), a variety of zoomorphic, anthropomorphic, and

Summary of Findings

The results of analyses provided some
of the first scientifically derived, testable hypotheses ever produced on archaeological
data in the park. And some of those findings were surprising. One thing that became
clear was that instead of a steady, predictable
progression, social and technological change
remained complex and often non-linear
throughout prehistory—notably in matters
of population density, social structure, site
distribution, and subsistence strategy.
The earliest cultural materials recovered
during the project dated to the Late Paleoindian period (ca. 10,200–6500 B.C.). Here we
found the data supported prevailing beliefs
that groups during this time tended to be
small and highly nomadic and that their adCrew members record prehistoric stone structures at the Cuesta Arriba site in the far western
aptation was focused on lowland areas which,
portion of Big Bend National Park.
during the much wetter early Holocene, may
abstract petroforms, ritual and utilitarian artifact caches, have offered the best suite of resources.
unusual tool forms, and exotic ceramics—some from as far
Adaptive strategies seem to have changed during the
away as the Gulf Coast. Diagnostic artifacts recovered indi- Early Archaic (ca. 6500–2500 B.C.), which coincided with the
cated human occupation spanning at least 10,000 years. Site Holocene Climatic Optimum (a warm period around 7,000
complexity was similarly broad, ranging from a single hearth years ago), when higher elevation landforms were preferred.
or artifact scatter to prehistoric structures with contiguous Although population levels seem to have been significantly
room blocks and lithic procurement areas spanning more higher than in the Paleoindian period, group size appears to
than a square mile.
have remained small and highly mobile. Technological adaptations may have included the cobble-lined hearth, a new
Analysis
feature type that could be restricted to this period, possibly
Although both historic and prehistoric sites were amply reflecting specific resource processing.
represented, almost 75 percent of the documented sites were
During the Middle Archaic (ca. 2500–1000 B.C.), the
exclusively prehistoric. By contrast, only 4 percent of the sites data suggest something of a cultural flowering that, in many
were exclusively historic; and 22 percent had both historic and aspects of prehisprehistoric components. However, because the most persistent toric behavior, far
academic questions pertain to the prehistoric record, analyses exceeded periods
focused on sites from this lengthy period. Many aspects of both before and afmaterial culture were examined, but the analysis focused on ter. Middle Archaic
site size, content, spatial distribution, and temporal affiliation. sites indicate a subAccordingly, sites were organized by the time period stantial increase in
during which they were occupied and the environmental zone both population
in which they occurred. This distribution was then compared and group size,
to expected values, the assumption being that sites “should possibly with large
be” uniformly distributed across the landscape such that the seasonal aggreganumber of sites in any given zone should be proportionate tions. The period
to the area surveyed within that zone. Thus, if 20 percent of also witnessed an
the survey acreage occurred in the uplands, all things being increase in the
equal, we should expect to find 20 percent of sites in that use of earth-oven Chronology: Percentage distribution of tempozone. If those two figures diverged, it suggested the uplands technology (sub- rally diagnostic projectile points.
were more or less attractive as a campsite during the time terranean cooking),
period in question.
possibly signaling more intensive use of succulents (desert
plants that retain water). The wide variety in size and type of

2 Center for Big Bend Studies

(Continued on page 14)

From the Director...
These are great times for the Center for Big Bend Studies!
We are on the heels of our 2016 annual conference—a huge
success with a record number of great presenters on a wide
range of topics. In fact, since publishing our Summer 2015 La
Vista de la Frontera, we’ve had two well-attended conferences
with entertaining banquet presentations by Ambassador of
Spain Miguel Angel Mazarambroz (“Bernardo de Galvez:
Spanish Hero of the American Revolution”) in 2015 and
Mary Margaret McAllen (“Maximilian and Carlota: Europe’s
Last Empire in Mexico”) most recently. Additionally, on the
eve of the 2015 conference we were treated to an advance
viewing of the documentary movie Texas Before the Alamo
by filmmaker Bill Millet. We also have good news to report
regarding fundraising, staff, field projects, and publications,
as well as new international collaborations.
Fundraising remains an integral part of my job, and I
can report many successes. Grants by The Brown Foundation,
Inc. of Houston in fall 2015 and fall 2016 were especially
important. We also received significant contributions from
the George and Cynthia Mitchell Foundation, the Still
Water Foundation, Wayne and Jo Ann Moore Charitable
Foundation, and the Texas Historical Foundation, as well as
from entities (the Texas Preservation Trust Fund and the City
of Alpine), and individuals ( Jeff Fort, the Duncan Family
Fund, the Shelburne Family Fund, and Kim and Annchen
Lawrence). These allowed us this past summer to “restock”
staff lost recently through attrition (see page 13).
Field projects continue to uncover significant data on the
prehistoric and historic occupants of the region. Our efforts
on the 02 Ranch remain focused on the Genevieve Lykes
Duncan (GLD) site and Perdiz Trail. Work at GLD has
slowed as the block excavation nears completion; further excavation plans include deep testing and efforts in an adjacent
block. We are about finished with an article on the first phase
of work at GLD, and it is scheduled for publication in the
2016 Journal of Big Bend Studies ( JBBS). At Perdiz Trail—a
shallowly buried campsite approximately 500 years old—our
most recent excavations revealed tantalizing evidence of a
stoneless wickiup; further efforts there are in the planning
stage. A select handful of sites on Pinto Canyon Ranch have
been the focus of our investigations over the last 18 months
(see page 8). Investigations of rock imagery at several sites
in the Black Hills of Chalk Draw Ranch have revealed very
possible archaeo-astronomy relationships (see page 7).

In addition to Volume 28 (2016) of the JBBS, we have
three publications that are nearing completion. David Keller
is lead author of the massive Big Bend National Park report
(see cover story). Due to its sheer size and our desire to
widely share these data, we plan to publish the report on our
website. David is also the author of a book on the history of
Pinto Canyon entitled In the Shadow of the Chinatis: Pinto
Canyon in the Big Bend of Texas, which is being published by
Texas A&M Press. Associate Andrea J. Ohl is the author
of Middle Archaic People of Eastern Trans-Pecos Texas: Their
Life and Times, a book that synthesizes the Middle Archaic
period (ca. 2500–1000 B.C.); it is slated for publication in our
Trans-Pecos Archaeological Program series.
And finally, I am excited to report that through a revival
of La Junta de los Ríos research we are on the cusp of collaborative arrangements with two federal agencies in Mexico
(the Archivo General de la Nación [AGN] and the Instituto
Nacional de Antropología e Historia [INAH]), while also initiating a relationship with archivists in Spain. I have proposed
the La Junta Collaborative Project to focus on the Spanish
mission period (ca. A.D. 1683–1760), initially through an
extensive search in the various archives of Mexico and Spain
(original documents from the Spanish period were curated
in Mexico and copies were sent to the King in Spain), then
through archaeological investigations on both sides of the
border. Ultimately, the plan is for the various collaborators
to jointly publish findings from the project.
Through these activities and initiatives, the Center continues its march forward to unlock forgotten or unknown
parts of the history and prehistory of the greater Big Bend
region. These efforts can be very difficult and slow paced, but
successes, of which there have been many, keep us on task!
–William A. Cloud

CBBS Director Cloud (back center) during a recent visit to INAH headquarters in Chihuahua City. Others include filmmaker Bill Millet (back left)
and INAH Chihuahua Director Jorge Carrera (front right).

La Vista de la Frontera

3

CBBS INVESTIGATES

ENIGMATIC PREHISTORIC TOOL FROM COAHUILA
An enigmatic Late Prehistoric tool found in dry caves
and on the margins of ancient lakebeds of the Bolsón de
Mapimí and Laguna Basin in Coahuila is under scrutiny
by CBBS researchers. The utilitarian implement has been
generically termed raspadores enmangados, or “sleeved scrapers” (i.e., attached by means of a “sleeve” at the working end
of the handle), and raspadores con espigas, or “scrapers with
spikes.” The tool was brought to the attention of the scientific
community in the 1950s by Mexican archaeologists working
at the renowned mortuary site of Cueva de la Candelaria
northeast of Torreón, Coahuila. In 1956, Aveleyra Arroyo
de Anda et al. of Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia
(INAH) discussed the distinctive tool form and suggested
it was virtually unique to the Chihuahuan Desert of northcentral Mexico. Despite environmental similarities, this type of
implement has not yet been found in archaeological deposits
along or north of the Rio Grande in Texas.
The artifacts consist of long, split sotol stalk handles
tipped with unusually delicate unifacial (rarely bifacial) stone
scrapers (Figure 1). The thin stone tips—commonly sidenotched to accommodate the binding—were inserted into
split or notched ends on the handles and wrapped tightly with
small-diameter sinew or fiber cordage. A thick, black adhesive of asphaltum or resin was then applied over the binding

to further strengthen the hafts and minimize movement of
the tips during use (Figure 2). Morphological variations of
the stone tips and examples from the Laguna de Mayrán in
Coahuila are described by Hester (1971).
The combination of a long (up to 80 cm), soft-wood
handle and a small, delicate stone tip, has led researchers to
speculate on how the tools were used by prehistoric hunters
and gatherers. In a 1974 letter to Thomas Hester, longtime
INAH researcher Beatrice Braniff wrote, “. . . these notched
end-scrapers must have been dedicated to very fine functions
both because of their small size and refined production, as
well as because they are hafted on a delicate stem.” Aveleyra
Arroyo de Anda et al. (1956) described the scrapers as “. . .
remarkable on account of their strange shape, as if . . . inspired
by the thumb-nail” and considered them to be diagnostic
artifacts of the peoples who buried their dead in Cueva de
la Candelaria.
Noting that the long, narrow, sometimes-curved handle
would have allowed insertion of the tool into a small orifice,
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda et al. (1956) speculated it was
used to remove pulp from gourds to facilitate their use as
containers, or possibly to extract animal brains for use in
the tanning of hides. Other hypothesized functions include

Figure 1. Dorsal and profile views of Coahuila hafted scraper. Note curvature of handle.

4 Center for Big Bend Studies

extracting honeycomb from beehives. According to both
archaeological accounts and informants, the notched stone
tips tend to be concentrated along the peripheries of ancient
lakebeds (pozas), thus adding to the riddle of tool function.
To understand the form and function of these intriguing
tools, the CBBS has documented over 120 of the scraper
tips—possibly from a cache—in a private collection procured
during the 1950s. In addition, chemical analysis of residues
on the tip and handle of one intact composite tool has been
undertaken. Findings thus far are inconclusive, but one hypothesized use—the collecting of honey—appears unlikely.
Current data suggest the tools were used primarily in the
processing of desert plants (Gemert et al. 2007). Based on
analogy and experimentation, Aveleyra’s original suggestion
that they were designed for the removal of pulp in making
gourd containers seems most logical. Explanations for the
absence of this tool from Chihuahuan Desert sites north of
the Rio Grande in Texas are not yet forthcoming.

References Cited:
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis, L.M. Maldonado-Cordell, and P.
Martinez del Rio
1956 Cueva de la Candelaria: Memorias del Instituto Nacional
de Antropología e Historia, Volume 1, Mexico.
Beatrice Braniff to Thomas R. Hester
18 March 1974
On file, Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State
University.
Gemert, Janine Van, Julie Stambek, Robert Mallouf, Marvin Rowe,
and Ruth Ann Armitage
2007 Characterization of a Use Residue on a Unique Stone
Tool from the Coahuila Desert. Poster exhibit presented
at International Symposium on Archaeometry.
Hester, Thomas R.
1971 Hafted Unifaces from Southwestern Coahuila, Mexico.
The Kiva 36(4):36–41.

–Robert J. Mallouf

Figure 2. Detail of sinew and asphaltum or resin haft—dorsal and profile views.

Ellen Sue Turner Memorial Fund
Ellen Sue Turner made many contributions to Texas archaeology, including
tireless research of the many projectile point types (dart and arrow points)
in the state. She continues to contribute to Texas archaeology through
the Ellen Sue Turner Memorial Fund, which supported the salaries of our
summer interns—Juan “Kiko” Morlock (2015) and Lindsey Griffin (2016).
Please visit our website (http://cbbs.sulross.edu) to learn more about the
fund or to donate. Or use the CBBS store on page 15 of this newsletter to
make your donation. Call 432-837-8179 for more information.
Ellen Sue Turner

La Vista de la Frontera

5

Thank You!
The CBBS extends sincere thanks to foundations and individuals who have provided support since publication of the last newsletter (Summer 2015).
These contributions have played significant roles in our many achievements.
Listed below are all contributors based on a cumulative total.

Gold Donors
($10,000 and above)

The Brown Foundation, Inc., of
Houston
Cynthia and George Mitchell
Foundation

Kelleher, Herb and Joan*

Miller, Harry*

Millet, Bill and Maria

Morgan, Vic and Mary Jane*

Olsen, Paul and Kathleen*

Murrell, Jim and Mary Lynn

Turner, Norman*

Peterson, G.E. “Pete” and

Tusch, Robert and Dee*

Carol*

Watkins, Dixie and Elaine*

Pittman, Jean Hardy

West Texas National Bank

Reed, Ona B.

Fort, John F., III*

Whorton, Brenda

Roberts, Benny and Gena*

Lawrence, Kim and Annchen*

Contributors
($500–$999)

Duncan, Cam and Susan*
Duncan, Genevieve*

(In memory of:
Tom Lawrence,

Roberts, Ike
Roberts, Tim, and Karen
Little

Cockrum, David and Sally

Roberts, Travis*

Love, Ben*

Smith, Thomas (Ty)

Orr Family Foundation

Wright, Paul

Taylor, Lonn and Dedie

Shelburne, Orville and Rita

Sponsors
($100–$499)

Mike Lawrence, and
Jean Shoultz)

Still Water Foundation
Wayne and Jo Ann Moore
Charitable Foundation

Silver Donors
($5,000–$9,999)

Tillapaugh, J.*
Turpin, Evans
Vaughan, W.J. and Kitty

Almaraz, Felix and Dolores

Wright, Bill*

Becker, Jed*

Wright, Fred and Cherry

Bertini, John E., Jr.

(In memory of

Caldwell, Neil

Darren

Carlson, Paul and Ellen*

Willis

Texas Historical Foundation

Case, Jimmy

Wright)

Bronze Donors
($1,000–$4,999)

Cloud, Andy and Mary

James Donnell Family*

Adkins, Anne Marie*
Beard, Tom and Val*
Big Bend Brewery

Canon, George Mickey*
Carlson, Paul*
Chambers, Clint and Siva*
City of Alpine, Texas
Combs, Susan*
Cloud, Patricia*
ConocoPhillips
Dasch, Julius and Pat*
Duncan, Edgar and Linda*
Durham, Kenneth and Patsy*
ExxonMobil Foundation
Hill, Jean Merrill
Juarez, Nicandro and Elizabeth*

Casey, Stephen
Crum, Tom and Mary*
Foley, Patrick
Gauss, Joseph and April
Gesick, Edward John, Jr.

Wulfkuhle, Virginia*

Friends
(Less than $100)
Biellier, Shirley
Black, Stephen
Bruner, Thomas
Davis, Helen
Eoff, Jerry
Gipps, Jerry
Gossett, Greg and Leslie
Hatfield, Carter, and M.
Page
Hickerson, Nancy
Jansyn, Ruth
Jarrard, Robert
Knezek, Robert and LaVerne
McReynolds, Richard
Osborn, Oliver
Plowman, Dawson
Sanders, Ron and D.J.
Shannon, Michael
Sommers, Ron and Kubricht
Tawater, Art and Dianne
Weber, Edgar
Weedin, Jim and Teresa*
Williams, Douglas
Wright, Richard
* Lifetime Members

Green, Shirley
Hendricks, Rick
Jackson, Liz
Jameson, Bryan and Carol
Johnson, Jerry
Jones, Ralph and Maria
Kenmotsu, Nancy
King, Bentley and Georgia
Korbell, John and Bonnie
Korus, Iris*
Leggett, Robert and Dee
Mazarambroz, Miguel Angel
McCrory, John and Marilyn

6 Center for Big Bend Studies

Texas Historical Foundation Vice President Bruce Elsom, left,
presents a check to CBBS Director Andy Cloud.

Rock Art of the Black Hills and
the Prehistoric Sky
A 2006 survey in the Black Hills of central Brewster
County recorded 29 rock art sites. Almost all of the imagery
is petroglyphic, in the style known as Desert Archaic Abstract.
There are no recognizable quadrupeds and only one biped—a
probable anthropomorph; but several petroglyphs depict circular, human-like faces wearing conical hats, with some facial
features represented by natural rock features. Rock art at two
of the recorded sites may have been influenced by observers
of the prehistoric sky.
In a narrow (1.5-meter-wide) alcove at the Beehive site in
the western Black Hills, a two-ringed concentric circle is carved
into the vertical face of the alcove. This intrigued longtime
CBBS volunteer and avocational astronomer Benny Roberts;
and on the 2016 summer solstice ( June 20), Benny, his wife
Gena, and CBBS staff archaeologist Roger Boren gathered
at the site to observe the sunlight and shadows cast upon the
rock art. At around 7:00 p.m., sunlight entered the shady
alcove. For the next hour, they watched as the light touched
the rock art panel and progressed over it, moving across the
circles until both were bathed in light. At this position, the
combination of sunlight, shadow, and rock art revealed the
profile of a face wearing a conical hat—with a google eye
represented by the concentric circles and an ear represented
by a crack in the rock (Figure 1). This image was remarkably
similar to the aforementioned Black Hills petroglyphs (Figure
2). On subsequent trips to the site ( July 10 and September 22,
the autumnal equinox), sunlight did not touch the panel, suggesting that the petroglyph is a summer-solstice solar marker.

Figure 1. Summer-solstice solar
marker: Beehive site, western
Black Hills.

Figure 2. Representative Black Hills
petroglyph: human-like face wearing
conical hat.

In the eastern Black Hills, the Pecked Cupule site consists
of 23 cupules and several grooved lines carved into a large, flatlying, sandstone boulder spall (Figures 3, 4). During a recent
examination of the site, Benny spotted similarities between
the pattern formed by seven of the cupules and that formed
by the stars representing the front portion of the Scorpius
constellation (Figure 5, page 12).

Figure 3. Archaeologists examine pecked cupule patterns on boulder
spall. Pecked Cupule site, eastern Black Hills.

Figure 4. Longtime CBBS volunteer Benny Roberts uses his laptop to illustrate similarities between pecked cupules on boulder
spall (foreground) and the Scorpius constellation.
(Continued on page 12)

La Vista de la Frontera

7

Pinto Canyon Ranch
Introduction

In the Chinati Mountains near the southern boundary
of the 63,000-acre Pinto Canyon Ranch (PCR), the CBBS
is excavating in deeply buried deposits that range in age from
Late Paleoindian to Late Prehistoric times. Of special interest
are two sites—Gateway Terrace and Cerro Hueco—where
thick Middle Archaic deposits representing successive occupations can step us through portions of the 1,500-year period.
Another remarkable aspect of the archaeological landscape
of PCR is the prevalence of stone-based architecture and
structures in a variety of settings. Through focused excavations
of buried deposits and innovative documentation of stone
structures, we expect to study cultural change over time and
develop a more complete understanding of the lives of these
early inhabitants.

Gateway Terrace

During a 2013 reconnaissance survey, CBBS personnel
discovered several thermal features eroding from the terrace
of a major drainage. Small-scale testing and radiocarbon
dates of charcoal associated with the hearths and earth-ovens
indicated prehistoric activities ranging from the Middle Archaic to Late Prehistoric periods. Radiocarbon dates from five
subsequent exploratory excavations across the 7,500 m2 site
included Early Archaic dates as well. Thus, Gateway Terrace
is a multicomponent site comprising remnants of multiple
occupations spanning as much as 8,000 years of prehistory.
A unique characteristic of Gateway Terrace is its thick
(one meter) strata of buried Middle Archaic deposits, which
capture a range of occupations. In fact, it is the only such site
ever discovered in the greater Big Bend region. Excavation

An overview of CBBS excavations of Middle Archaic components

at Gateway Terrace.

is underway. The general time frame has been determined
through stratigraphic relationships, additional radiocarbon
dating of charcoal, and two projectile point fragments whose
morphologies appear to match Middle Archaic technology
identified elsewhere in the Big Bend. In addition to a variety
of stone features, excavation has yielded remnants of tool
manufacture, including groundstone, which provide clues to
technological development.

Cerro Hueco

CBBS Staff Archaeologist Taylor Greer documenting a Middle Archaic thermal
feature at Gateway Terrace.

8 Center for Big Bend Studies

On a similar landform about four miles up-drainage
from Gateway Terrace lies the Cerro Hueco site, which was
discovered by John Greer in 1977 (Greer et al. 1980). Over
successive CBBS field visits, numerous projectile points and
point fragments representing up to 8,000 years of occupation
were identified on the surface. Five exploratory excavations
yielded radiocarbon dates ranging from the Early Archaic to
Late Archaic and exposed artifacts, features, and archaeological debris as deep as 70 centimeters below the surface.
In 2015, we began to investigate an intact Middle Archaic occupation that lies a mere 10 centimeters below the
surface. The deposits are rich in artifacts, which include

Window to the Past
projectile points and point fragments, bifaces, debitage
and modified debitage, and small bone fragments. The
thermal features in this excavation differ substantially in
shape, size, and complexity from those at Gateway Terrace; this may imply that they had different functions.
The Middle Archaic age of these deposits is based on radiocarbon dates of charcoal taken from the basal layer of
fire-cracked rock in a thermal feature and a similarly associated, diagnostic projectile fragment. We expect the
abundance of artifacts and features at Cerro Hueco
to complement our work at nearby Gateway Terrace.
As with Gateway Terrace, Cerro Hueco offers exemplary
opportunities beyond the Middle Archaic. Charcoal from
deep deposits adjacent to the ongoing excavation yielded an
Early Archaic radiocarbon date, the oldest yet documented
on the ranch. Moreover, volunteer Gena Roberts discovered a projectile point with characteristics of Late Paleoindian technology (possibly 11,000 years old) in situ near the
base of a thick layer of deposits a stone’s throw away from
the excavation block.
Pinto Canyon Ranch Radiocarbon Dates
Convent?ional
Date (B.P.)*

Calibrated
Date†

Period

Gateway Terrace
590 +/- 30

A.D. 1360

720 +/- 30

A.D. 1310

930 +/- 30

A.D. 1095

2580 +/- 40

685 B.C.

3250 +/- 40

1530 B.C.

3470 +/- 30

1810 B.C.

3580 +/- 40

1910 B.C.

3590 +/- 40

1950 B.C.

3600 +/- 40

1955 B.C.

4270 +/- 40

2905 B.C.

4600 +/- 40

3320 B.C.

Late
Prehistoric
Late Archaic

Mid. Archaic

Early Archaic

Cerro Hueco
2520 +/- 40

660 B.C.

Late Archaic

3690 +/- 30

2080 B.C.

Mid. Archaic

6850 +/- 40

5745 B.C.

7420 +/- 40

6310 B.C.

Early Archaic

* Assays by International Chemical Analysis.
† Calibrated dates are midpoints in the highestconfidence 2-Sigma range (e.g., 87%).

Stone Structures

Over 250 stone structures have been identified at 120
sites in a variety of settings on the ranch. The structures, which
often occur in groups, are typified by stone enclosures or “rock
rings,” many of which are presumed to be foundations for
wickiups (thatch- or hide-covered domiciles). However, variations in size, shape (e.g., round, oval, linear), and complexity
imply a range of functions that include defense, ritualism, and
storage. In 1980, Robert Mallouf provided the first substantial
documentation of stone structures in the Big Bend of Texas
and adjacent Mexico. He formulated the anthropological
taxon Cielo complex from patterns of stone-ring architecture
and specific feature and artifact associations dating to A.D.
1250–1680.
Excavations at two sites are shedding new light on
stone structures across the PCR. In 2015, students at the
CBBS-hosted Sul Ross State University archaeological field
school helped excavate a multi-course stone enclosure at
the Sundown site. Charcoal from the enclosure, which appears to be semi-subterranean, yielded a
radiocarbon date of A.D. 770–900. In 2014,
charcoal from an excavated stone ring at
the Anilla Plata site provided a date of A.D.
1040–1220. Both of these dates are earlier
than the conventional time frame of the
Cielo complex (Mallouf 1999:65), although
the latter is close. No age-diagnostic artifacts
have been uncovered from either structure.
As we explore stone structures throughout the ranch, a distinctive pattern consistent
Untyped Late Paleoindian point recovered
with Mallouf ’s observations (1999) elseat Cerro Hueco.
where in the Big
Bend is apparent:
namely, clusters
of structures
atop precipitous landforms,
such as mesas,
buttes, and isolated knolls. In
2015, we began
documenting
sites and features
with innovative
Recent excavations underway at Cerro Hueco showing shallow Middle Archaic
feature (left) and deep test unit (right) exposing earlier materials.

(Continued on page 12)

La Vista de la Frontera

9

Preserving History in the Big Bend
Through partnerships with Big Bend National Park, the
Presidio County Historical Commission, the City of Presidio,
and a local archaeological steward, the CBBS is helping to
protect historic structures and sites across the greater Big
Bend region.

Big Bend National Park (BBNP)

A proposal to document and restore historic structures
in BBNP was submitted by park Registered Professional
Archeologist (RPA), Staff Archaeologist, and Cultural Resources Program Manager Connie Thompson Gibson to the
Southwest Border Resource Protection Program. The proposal
seeks funding for the first year of an aggressive five-year project. Eight structures are targeted for the first year, including
five listed in the National Register of Historic Places: the
Hernandez-Alvino House at Castolon; the Livingston House,
Postman’s Shack, and motel at Hot Springs; and the Sublett
Farm House (Rancho Estelle) on the Rio Grande. Others
under consideration include the Sam and Nena Nail adobe
ranch house, the U.S. Cavalry Camp granary in the Castolon
Historic District, and the Homer Wilson Ranch. Selections
will be based on factors that include historic significance,
condition, accessibility, and logistical considerations.
As co-principal investigator in the proposal, CBBS
Senior Project Archaeologist David Keller will work with
Gibson to assess and document baseline conditions, develop
restoration plans, and oversee and document all repair, stabilization, and restoration work. In conjunction with adobe
and earth-plaster specialists, the project will improve safety
and visitor access while preserving historically invaluable
resources. If the proposal is accepted, work will begin in
2017. “The alternative,” Gibson states in the proposal, “is to
continue on the path to total loss and destruction of hundreds
of historic buildings and features that represent the story of
the Old West in the heritage of our American nation.”

Ruidosa Church

One of the most exciting developments in recent months
is the revival of the Ruidosa Church project. Boasting perhaps the largest traditional adobe arches in Texas, El Corazon
Sagrado de la Iglesia de Jesus, Ruidosa was built by local townspeople in the early 1900s and used for decades for weddings,
funerals, and Sunday mass. As the town’s population dwindled
in the 1950s and 1960s, the church fell into disuse and began
to deteriorate. By 1991, it was in such poor condition that the
Catholic Diocese of El Paso slated it for demolition. Public
outcry, however, forced them to reverse their decision.
In 2006, through grants from the Texas Historical Commission (THC) and others, the church was stabilized and part
of the left front tower was rebuilt. However, due to funding
shortages, the project was abandoned and the church was,
once again, left to the forces of nature.
This year, the diocese agreed to deed the church to
Presidio County. This is a critical first step toward creating
the Friends of the Ruidosa Church—a dedicated 501(c)3
organization that will be able to raise funds through taxdeductible donations. In the coming months, the CBBS
will partner with the Presidio County Historical Commission and Presidio County to develop a restoration plan and
fundraising strategy for this historically and architecturally
significant vernacular structure.

Two images of the Alvino
House—one of several structures that will be examined
during the Big Bend National
Park restoration project.
The Ruidosa Church ca.1963 before its deterioration became advanced.

Concordia Cemetery, Shafter

When new residential construction threatened possible
graves adjacent to the historic Concordia Cemetery in the
silver-mining town of Shafter, THC archaeological steward
Monroe Elms alerted the CBBS. A crew was quickly deployed
to assess potential impacts and, in the process, discovered
that the THC lacked formal documentation of the cemetery.

10 Center for Big Bend Studies

This prompted the crew to properly record the cemetery
and register it with the state. Although some burials were
identified beyond the confines of the designated cemetery,
the crew was able to determine that the new construction
did not appear to be damaging the graves, some of which
date back to the 1880s.
Right: Ornate metal cross at the grave of
J. Sloan Sr.—one of several graves located
beyond the confines of Concordia Cemetery
in Shafter.
Below: White metal crosses and robust cairn
burials mark Concordia Cemetery.

El Cementerio del Barrio de los
Lipanes, Presidio

For several years, the CBBS has worked to protect El
Cementerio del Barrio de los Lipanes—one of the oldest cemeteries in the region. The small, primitive cemetery is located
in a part of Presidio that may have served as a campsite for

El Mulato native Oscar Rodriguez and Marfa native Jerry Lujan look at concrete
crypts at El Cementerio del Barrio de los Lipanes in Presidio.

nomadic Lipan Apaches during the waning days of the La
Junta Pueblos in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries. Soon after being alerted about the cemetery in
2014, the CBBS scientifically documented the site, registered
it with the state, and facilitated its designation as a State
Archeological Landmark (Keller 2015).
In response to ongoing concerns of vehicular impacts
to the cemetery, which is situated adjacent to an alley in a
residential part of town, CBBS staff asked the Presidio City
Council to address the issue. The council unanimously agreed
to close the alley and pledged to work with the CBBS to
further protect and enhance the site as part of an ongoing
collaboration to preserve the city’s prominent historical legacy.

Reference Cited

Keller, David W.
2015 Lipan Cemetery to Receive State Recognition. La Vista
de la Frontera 25:4.

In Memoriam: Mozelle Jeffrey

Mozelle Jeffrey became involved with the CBBS in 2009
when she asked us to investigate prehistoric cultural features
on her property in south Brewster County. In early 2010 we
aerial-mapped Mozelle’s property the old-fashioned way, using
kites and a helium blimp. Soon after, we excavated several of
the thermal features (hearths) located near her home.
Mozelle was fascinated with archaeology and prehistoric
cultures, and she began volunteering in our J. Charles and
Ellen A. Kelley Memorial Library in October of 2012. She
soon took over the creation of a special section dedicated
to housing all of the Kelley manuscripts and publications.
Mozelle was as passionate about her work at the CBBS as
she was about life in general. She brought laughter and joy
to work with her and was a friend to everyone she met.
A couple of years ago, Mozelle purchased a second home in
North Carolina to be near her daughter during the hot summers,
and that is where she passed away on July 23, 2016. She will be
sorely missed as a dear friend and as a volunteer for the CBBS.

Roger Boren, Andrea Ohl, and Mozelle Jeffrey (right) at the Genevieve Lykes
Duncan site.

La Vista de la Frontera

11

Pinto Canyon Ranch: Window to the Past, continued from page 9.

References Cited:
Cason, Samuel S.
2014 Trans-Pecos Archaeological Imagery. La Vista de la Frontera
24:8–9.
Greer, John, Jean A. Richmond, and Mavis Loschneider
1980 An Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Chinati Mountains, Presidio County, Southwest Texas. Draft report prepared for the Texas Natural Areas Survey. On file, Center for
Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University.

CBBS crew sectioning circular structural remnant (wickiup) at Anilla Plata.

technology and 3D data-production techniques—drone
aerial photography, photogrammetry, and Structure from
Motion (Cason 2014). At one site of particular interest, we
documented six structures atop a high, narrow ridge overlooking the Rio Grande floodplain and into the mountains
of Mexico. A rockshelter on the slopes below the ridge attests to a domestic occupation though no such debris has
been found around the ridgetop structures, suggesting they
were used for some special purpose. Bolstering this impression, CBBS archaeologists Casey Wayne Riggs and Juan
Morlock discovered a cache of three complete, expertly
fashioned stone bifaces amidst what appears to be a toppled
stone cairn situated just below the structures adjacent to an
access route to the ridge summit.

Plan view (showing baulks after excavation) of one
of the many circular, stone-based structures on the
Pinto Canyon Ranch.

There is much yet to learn, and our efforts of documenting these unique features, sites, and landscapes are gaining
momentum with the support of the PCR landowner and
comparative research across the region. By combining traditional field methods with 3D data-production techniques,
we hope to gain a better understanding of these complex,
diverse, and widespread stone structures.
–Samuel S. Cason and Kay Plavidal

12 Center for Big Bend Studies

Mallouf, Robert J., and Virginia A. Wulfkuhle
1980 Rosillos Mountains Reconnaissance: general observations.
On file at the Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State
University.
Mallouf, Robert J.
1999 Comments on the Prehistory of Far Northeastern Chihuahua,
the La Junta District, and the Cielo Complex. Journal of Big
Bend Studies 11:49–92.

Rock Art of the Black Hills and the Prehistoric Sky, continued from page 7.

Ethnographic studies suggest that the front half of
Scorpius (i.e., excluding the stars representing the stinger)
held significant meaning for Native Americans in the eastern
U.S. and the Plains (Lankford 2007:240–256). An additional
five cupules on the boulder are thought to represent the five
brightest stars in the Pleiades star cluster. As viewed from the
Pecked Cupule site on or about May 11 between ca. 2000
B.C. and A.D. 2000, the Pleiades star cluster rose above the
horizon about one hour before the Sun in the eastern sky.

Figure 5. (Left) Color-coded schematic of Pecked Cupule rock art boulder,
eastern Black Hills. Red: Scorpius constellation. Blue: Pleiades star cluster. Yellow: unreconciled cupules. (Right) Scorpius constellation. Image
created by Roger Boren via Software Bisque SkyX Edition.

–Roger Boren and Benny Roberts
Reference Cited

Lankford, George E.
2007
Reachable Stars: Patterns in the Ethnoastronomy of Eastern
North America. The University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

New CBBS Staff
Taylor Greer

Taylor is from Austin. She
received a B.A. in anthropology from Texas State
University in San Marcos.
During her time there, she
participated in a field school
in Belize and fell in love with
archaeology. After graduation, her first job in her field
was a dig with CBBS, where
she met many like-minded
people, explored the beautiful city of Alpine, and learned a lot about Texas archaeology.
She then accepted a staff archaeologist position with the
Center and made Alpine her new home. Her interests also
include photography, music, and art.

Lindsey Griffin

Lindsey has been a student
worker/intern at the Center
since attending the 2015 Sul
Ross State University archaeological field school hosted
by CBBS. She is an undergraduate at Sul Ross studying geology with a minor in
anthropology and plans to
graduate in 2018. From Amarillo, Texas, Lindsey moved
to Alpine in the summer of
2013 with hopes to explore the Big Bend and the opportunities it offered. Going to the field school and working
with the CBBS has opened the doors to much learning and
experience in archaeology which Lindsey plans to apply in
her further education.

Rodrigo Molina

Rodrigo, a native of El Paso,
joined the Center as a staff
archeologist in July. In May
of 2015 he graduated from
The University of Texas at
El Paso with a B.A. in anthropology and a minor in
criminal justice. He began
volunteering with the Jornada Research Institute ( JRI)
shortly after graduation. The

majority of his experience is in the Southwest, primarily in
the area of Tularosa, New Mexico. He hopes to continue
volunteering with the JRI.

Bryon Schroeder

Bryon is our new project
archaeologist. He recently
received his Ph.D. in archaeology from the University of
Montana with research focused on high-altitude hunter-gatherer sites in the Wind
River Range of the Middle
Rocky Mountains. He also
holds both a B.A. and M.A.
in archaeology from the University of Wyoming where he
studied Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric hunter-gatherer
refuge fortification and defensive structures. He has worked
throughout Wyoming, Colorado, Utah, New Mexico, Montana, and most recently the Central Coast of California. His
broader research interests focus on interpersonal conflict in
hunter-gatherers across time and space, macroevolutionary
models, and inheritance theory. He is a recent convert to Bayesian modeling specific to radiocarbon data. He is a blank slate
when it comes to Texas archaeology and is excited to delve
into the complexities of Trans-Pecos prehistory.

Kay Plavidal

Kay is our new editor. She
earned a B.S. in geology from
the University of New Orleans and an M.S. in geology
from the University of Utah,
where she studied volcanic
rocks similar in composition
to those in the Davis Mountains. She worked as a geophysicist in the oil industry
for five years before changing
careers and moving to Austin
to work as a technical writer. For 16 years, she documented
hardware and software used in hydrocarbon exploration and
in semiconductor manufacturing. In 2007, she left private
industry to teach Environmental Science at Austin Community College. Yielding to a 23-year fascination with the
Big Bend, she and husband Larry moved to Alpine in 2013.
They love the small-town life, dry climate, and hiking in Big
Bend National Park and the Davis Mountains.

La Vista de la Frontera

13

Archaeology in Big Bend National Park, continued from page 2.

LaVista de la Frontera is the annual newsletter of the Center for Big
Bend Studies of Sul Ross State University. Address correspondence
to the Editor, Center for Big Bend Studies, Box C-71, Alpine,TX
79832, or cbbs@sulross.edu.
Editing by William A. Cloud and Kay Plavidal.
Graphic design by Kay Plavidal and Letitia Wetterauer.

CBBS Advisory Council
Chairman: Tom Crum, Granbury
Director: William A. Cloud, Alpine
Félix D. Almaráz Jr.
San Antonio
J. P. Bryan
Houston
Paul Carlson
Ransom Canyon
Ken Durham
Alpine
David Fannin
Marfa
Pete P. Gallego
Alpine
Rick Hendricks
Santa Fe
Jerry Johnson
Alpine

John Klingemann
San Angelo
Ben Love
Marathon
Miguel Angel
Mazarambroz
Houston
John L. Nau, III
Houston
J. Travis Roberts Jr.
Marathon
David G. Rogers
Alpine
J. Tillapaugh
Odessa
William Wright
Abilene

Ex Officio from
SRSU, Alpine:
Bill Kibler
Jim D. Case
Melleta Bell
James W. Downing
Liz Jackson
Mark S. Saka

Honorary
Members:

Lonn Taylor
Rubén Osorio
Zuñiga
Neil Caldwell
Claude B. Hudspeth

Texas State University System
Board of Regents
Ms. Rossanna Salazar
Chairman
Austin
Mr. William F. Scott
Vice Chairman
Nederland
Mr. Charlie Amato
San Antonio

Mr. David Montagne
Beaumont
Mr. Vernon Reaser, III
Bellaire
Mr. Alan L. Tinsley
Madisonville
Ms. Donna N. Williams
Arlington

Ms.Veronica Muzquiz Edwards
Mr. Dylan McFarland
San Antonio
Student Regent
Dr. Jaime R. Garza
Huntsville
San Antonio
Dr. Brian McCall
Chancellor
Austin

Mission
The Center for Big Bend Studies fosters interdisciplinary scholarship of the diverse prehistoric, historic, and modern cultures of the
borderlands region of the United States and Mexico, with emphasis
on the area encompassed by Trans-Pecos Texas and north-central
Mexico. The Center is committed to the recovery, protection, and
sharing of this region’s rich cultural legacy through dynamic programs
involving research, education, public outreach, and publication.

Volume 26, 2016
cbbs.sulross.edu
cbbs@sulross.edu

14 Center for Big Bend Studies

sites also hints at increased specialization, including a rich spiritual life as
suggested by the profusion of abstract petroforms and ritual caches, such as
the Lizard Hill cache.
Adaptive patterns seem to have shifted by the Late Archaic (ca.
1000 B.C.–A.D. 700). Although human population levels appear to have
continued to rise, the data suggest that group size declined significantly,
possibly reflecting higher mobility and increased opportunism in foraging patterns. Sites from this period are also distributed more uniformly
across the landscape than those from any other time period. Meanwhile,
specialization seems to have decreased as sites became more uniform in
size and composition. A possible decline in the use of earth ovens and an
increase in the use of ring hearths (hearths “ringed” by a circle of rocks)
further suggest changing subsistence strategies.
Both population levels and group size appear to have increased during
the Late Prehistoric (ca. A.D. 700–1535) although the latter did not rise
to the level observed during the Middle Archaic. Mobility seems to have
declined from that of the Late Archaic and the lowlands assumed increasing importance, especially as base camps. Use of earth-oven technology as
well as stone-based wickiups appears to have increased or were utilized in
greater numbers within individual sites. Taken as a whole, the data reveals
a continuum of prehistoric life that waxed and waned in adaptive strategies and complexity through time, likely reflecting broader climatic and
socio-cultural shifts.

Conclusions

Although the results of analyses were far more nuanced than the
above generalizations suggest, it is significant that most of these tentative,
preliminary conclusions were derived from multiple analyses, which demonstrated greater consistency than chance alone would allow. This, in turn,
bolstered confidence in both the data and in the veracity of results. But,
in addition to what these results tell us about prehistoric human behavior,
they also bear on prevailing concerns that surficial survey data cannot be
subjected to analysis. The age-old wisdom holds that such data has less
integrity than subsurface deposits as a result of natural and human-based
impacts (such as erosion and casual artifact collecting).
Fortunately, the findings here suggest otherwise: that survey data can
rise to the occasion, even if its accuracy must be conditioned by both the
quality and quantity of the data. In other words, if enough high-quality
survey data is collected, it can cut through the “noise” introduced by such
impacts. In all, the Big Bend National Park Project was a pioneering effort
that is helping to re-write the archaeological record of the Big Bend as
we know it. And in learning to read the desert’s stones—the lithic legacy
of bygone peoples—we have been afforded a rare glimpse into the rich
cultural legacy of one of our greatest national parks.
Keep on the lookout for the official 800-plus-page report of findings from
the Big Bend National Park Project, which will be available on our website
upon completion.
–David Keller

CBBS Store
ELT
ER

TE

S

N

N

IE

CE

TE

RF

T
O R B I G BEND S

UD

Sul Ross State University

Our most recent journals are
shown here. View abstracts
and journals on our website at:
cbbs.sulross.edu.

IE

TH ROCKSH

CE

O
ECL
BL
TA

Journal 27 Now Available

S

OTH ROCKSHE
LT
E CL
ER
BL
TA

RF

O R B I G BEN D S

TU

D

Sul Ross State University

back

front

CBBS T-Shirts

$15 each (plus $3 shipping for
the first book and 50¢ for each
additional book)

Featuring rock art from Big Bend’s Tablecloth Rockshelter. Designed by former CBBS graphic illustrator Avram
Dumitrescu, and produced locally in Alpine. Colors: green
or khaki. Adult sizes: S, M, L, XL, XXL. Youth sizes: S, M, L.
$15 each (plus $1 shipping per shirt)

JBBS 27 __

T-shirt #1
T-shirt #2
T-shirt #2

Size: _____
Size: _____
Size: _____

Color: __ khaki
Color: __ khaki
Color: __ khaki

__ green
__ green
__ green

CBBS Challenger Grande Mug
JBBS 26 __

JBBS 25 __

These 14 oz. ceramic mugs have a classic, simple style with a bright white glossy finish and
large comfortable handle. Dishwasher-safe.
$15 each (plus $1 shipping per mug)

JBBS 24 __

Qty. ___

CBBS Caps

JBBS 23 __

JBBS 22 __

Membership Levels
Student $20

JBBS 20 __

( June 1–May 31 membership year)

Individual $35

(first year is free)

Brushed washed dark khaki, 100%
cotton twill cap embroidered with
the CBBS logo. Casual, unstructured
design, 6 panels, curved visor, adjustable Velcro closure. One size fits most.
$15 each (plus $1 shipping per cap)

Family $50

Institutional $50

Lifetime $1,000

?

Donations

Mail orders to

In addition to my membership, I support the work of the Center for Big Bend Studies with my
tax-deductible contribution to the FRIENDS OF THE CENTER FOR BIG BEND STUDIES.

CBBS
SRSU
Box C-71
Alpine, TX 79832

$100

$200

$500

$_________ This is a comfortable level of support for me.

$

Donation to the Ellen Sue Turner Memorial Fund

?

Merchandise

Order by Phone

Merchandise total
Total
Pay by

Check

Visa/MasterCard

Name as it appears on card
Card Number
Shipping Address
City

M−F, 8 to 5
(432) 837-8179

Signature
Exp. Date
Phone
State

Zip Code

New! Order merchandise, pay membership, or donate online at: cbbs.sulross.edu/store.php



Qty. ___

?

Online at:

cbbs.sulross.edu/
store.php

La Vista de la Frontera

15

Center for Big Bend Studies
Sul Ross State University
Box C-71
Alpine, Texas 79832

cbbs.sulross.edu
Address Service Requested
232267-121700-60-RES

Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage

PAID
Alpine, Texas
Permit No. 2

