Chapter 8: Snails

INTRODUCTION
Snails recovered from the bench deposits offer perhaps the single best source of
paleoenvironmental data from the site. They are well preserved, at least in the upper part
of the stratigraphic section. Most of them probably represent populations that lived on or
near the site. Some may have been deposited by flooding, but the collection is dominated
by terrestrial snails, as is the case at most terrace sites. Aquatic snails are rarely found in
significant numbers in alluvial archeological sites unless the excavations penetrate some
sort of buried swale, oxbow, or other depression. There are about two dozen land snail
taxa, a couple of species of amphibious snails, about a half dozen species of aquatic
snails, and at least one slug present in the bench deposits.

For comparison with the bench deposits, there are some limited collections of
contemporary snails from elsewhere in the catchment, and there is a large collection from
the quarter-inch and eighth-inch mesh sample at the Smith Creek Bridge site (Brown
2002). It is the only large, thoroughly studied archeological collection in the immediate
area. There is also a very large collection of large-bodied and medium-bodied snails in
the quarter-inch screen sample from the blufftop excavations at Berger Bluff, but
unfortunately these have never been analyzed. I have examined a few lots in cursory
fashion, but there is no comprehensive inventory from the blufftop excavation block. The
sampling method has a profound effect on the quality of paleoenvironmental data
recoverable from snails, because many species are too small to be retained on quarterinch mesh, and even the juveniles of most species will fall through the mesh. Good
936

sampling practice recovers microsnails, medium-bodied, and large-bodied snails alike,
using appropriate field techniques.

Snails are usually good paleoenvironmental indicators because they are abundant
and preserve well (at least in south Texas), can be treated quantitatively, and are often
good indicators of moisture levels and deciduous tree cover. The snail fauna from the
bench contrasts significantly with what is known about contemporary populations – there
are fewer arid-adapted species in the bench, there are more moisture-dependent species,
and there are species now regionally extirpated by climate change. There is also probable
evidence for change in geographic ranges of some species. In the following pages I will
examine the usefulness of the snail fauna as a paleoenvironmental indicator, first by
exploring how biogeography relates to environmental tolerances. I will explore
biogeography first at a continental scale, then a statewide scale, then on the scale of
habitat or microhabitat preferences. Farther along in the chapter I will present species
accounts that list the known habitat preferences for the Berger Bluff species (and it is
these accounts that contain the key characteristics for interpretation of the faunal record).
I will also discuss specimen recovery methods, shell taphonomy, changes in species
diversity, and the relationship between body size, abundance, and environmental
tolerances.

BODY SIZE, ABUNDANCE, AND HABITAT SPECIFICITY
Burch and Pearce (1990:Fig. 9.4) classify adult land snails into minute (less than
3 mm), small (3-10 mm), medium (11-30 mm), and large (more than 30 mm) size classes.
I prefer instead a three-part division for both land and aquatic snails:
937

•

microsnails (less than about 5 mm in maximum dimension), about 39% of the bench
taxa, exemplified by Gastrocopta

•

medium-bodied snails (about 5-12 mm), about 32% of the bench taxa, exemplified by
Oligyra and Praticolella

•

large-bodied snails (over 12 mm), about 29% of the bench taxa, exemplified by
Anguispira and Mesomphix

Figure 8.1 shows abundance plotted against approximate body size. Body size is
represented by the maximum dimension (shell height, for conical-shaped snails, and
diameter for disk-shaped snails) reported for adults of each species in the malacological
literature, not the actual specimens in the collections. Since juveniles and variably-sized
adults are disregarded, these are only very rough plots, but they show there is only the
weakest of relationships between abundance and size. Three assemblages that will later
be discussed in more detail are shown. “A” is a collection of river drift snails from the
Brazos River near Columbus and another from the mouth of the Colorado River reported
by Branson (1967). I have combined the counts for the two collections and list only the
taxa found in the Berger Bluff catchment (about 21 other taxa have been omitted). “B” is
a 1998 collection of drift snails from a location upstream from Berger Bluff, on the Preiss
Ranch. “C” consists of archeological specimens from two columns (N109 E103 and
N110 E102) of matrix samples derived from the bench deposits. Each dot on the
scatterplot represents a species, and linear regression trendlines are fitted to each
distribution. Assemblage “A” shows almost no relationship between abundance and body
size. Assemblages “B” (r2 =0.19) and “C” (r2 = 0.01) show a very weak tendency for the
smallest species to occur in greater abundance (the linear regression lines curve because
the X axis is logarithmic).
938

Among vertebrates, there is a well-known tendency for smaller animals to be
more abundant than larger animals (Damuth 1981; McMahon and Bonner 1983:227-228),
especially when more than one trophic level is involved (mice outnumber lions).
Blackburn and Gaston (1994) maintain that animal body size distributions are actually
“log right-skewed;” that is, the most abundant animals are not really the smallest ones,
but those of intermediate size. According to McClain (2004:328), the relationship
between abundance and size is negative when studied at coarse scales, but log-normal or
log-uniform when studied at local scales. The snails studied in this chapter all survive on
about the same trophic level, and the size-abundance relationship is quite weak. Small
vertebrates usually show more species diversity than large ones, too (Hutchinson and
MacArthur 1959), but here again the snails depart from this rule, since each size class is
roughly a third of the taxa.

For the Brazos-Colorado drift samples, the two most abundant taxa are
microsnails; for the Preiss Ranch drift sample, the eight most abundant taxa are
microsnails; and for the bench matrix columns, the most abundant taxon is a microsnail,
but below these levels, the size-abundance relationship breaks down.

Body size is important because the microsnails include many of the most habitatdiagnostic taxa. The snails found at Berger Bluff vary widely in their diagnostic value.
Aquatic snails in the floodplain deposits indicate overbank flooding, but some aquatic
taxa (for example, Planorbella trivolvis) may be more characteristic of ponded water
while others (Cincinnatia integra) may be found in running water. The succineids are
amphibious and are characteristic of damp ground. Among the terrestrial taxa, many
species are characteristic of damp, wooded habitats with abundant leaf litter and downed
939

wood. These can either be microsnails (like Gastrocopta contracta), medium-bodied (like
Euchemotrema leai), or large-bodied (like Anguispira strongylodes). Some taxa (such as
Oligyra orbiculata or Zonitoides arboreus) are very cosmopolitan and hardy and can
withstand a wide range of environmental conditions, so much so that I tend to regard
them as possible indicators of environmental stress.

940

Figure 8.1 (following page). Snail Abundance Plotted Against Body Size. Each dot
represents a taxon, and maximum size in millimeters determined from
literature sources (height for conical snails, diameter for discoidal snails) is
plotted against the count for that taxon. A, combined drift samples from the
Brazos River near Columbus and another from the mouth of the Colorado
River reported by Branson (1967). Only species found in the Berger Bluff
bench are plotted. B, a drift sample from Coleto Creek on the Preiss Ranch,
collected following a flood in the fall of 1998 (note Y axis scale is
different). Both of these represent flood-deposited contemporary snails. C,
archeological specimens from two columns (N109 E103 and N110 E102) of
matrix samples from the bench deposits. The X axis on all plots is
logarithmic, and the scale on the right shows the mesh size for quarter-inch
screening. All these plots show there is either no relationship or a very weak
relationship between snail body size and abundance.

941

942

BIOGEOGRAPHY
Because there are very few laboratory studies of environmental tolerances for the
Berger Bluff species, the environmental significance (and habitat associations) of each
species must be assessed by examining its contemporary distribution. One way to begin is
by looking at the continent-wide range maps of the various species. This has limited
value, because snails really live in microhabitats rather than habitats. For example, marsh
snails like Oxyloma are found in the arid desert West, but they are confined to seeps and
cienegas. The marsh snails are diagnostic of damp ground, but the damp ground is limited
to the cienega and is not typical of the entire desert West (Mead 1991:221). Still, it is
useful to look at large-scale distributional patterns before examining smaller-scale habitat
preferences. The maps that follow are very approximate, because species mapping is very
incomplete. At the risk of concealing this incompleteness, I have simplified the maps by
drawing boundary lines around major concentrations of reported localities.
Table 8.1 lists geographic ranges of land snails found in the bench deposits.
Aquatic snails are not listed because they tend to have nearly continent-wide
distributions. The land taxa can be classified into six groups:
•

Texas: four large/medium polygyrids (Mesodon, Polygyra and Praticolella species)
are essentially confined to Texas.

•

Texas-Florida-Mexico: three species are found mostly in Texas and Florida in hot and
humid to arid maritime climatic conditions; they also extend into Nuevo León (Correa
Sandoval 1997) and may be limited to the north by winter temperatures (Fig. 8.2).

•

Gulf Coastal Plain: two more taxa occupy Texas, Florida, and the mid-south; these
range farther north and more inland than the Austral species, and presumably can
tolerate colder and drier conditions (Figs. 8.3, 8.4; Austroriparian province of Burch
1962:Fig. 10).

943

•

South-Central United States: three more taxa occupy parts of Texas, Oklahoma, and
the Trans-Mississippi South. These presumably tolerate more continental climates,
since they are centered more in the interior of the continent (Fig. 8.5). The
distribution of Oligyra orbiculata outside Texas is poorly documented, however.

•

Eastern United States: the largest number of species (13) range over most of the
eastern US, including several species of Gastrocopta (Fig. 8.6), Mesodon thyroidus,
Pupoides albilabris, and other taxa clearly limited on the west by rainfall, in the north
by cold temperatures. These are species tolerant of higher annual rainfall and colder
temperatures than is usually characteristic of present-day Texas. Some of these, like
Anguispira, Mesodon, and possibly Catinella, reach their southwesternmost limits
near Goliad County. Also included is one of the extirpated taxa (Pomatiopsis
lapidaria, Fig. 8.7) from the bench (the other two are aquatic). Presence of these
suggests a climate more like the present eastern US, though one aridity-tolerant
species, Hawaiia minuscula, extends into Nuevo León (Correa Sandoval 1997).

•

Entire United States: one land snail, Zonitoides arboreus, is widely distributed
throughout the continental US and beyond, much like the aquatic snails. This is the
only terrestrial species ranging far into the western US, and its cosmopolitan
distribution suggests it is highly adaptable to widely varying climates, including arid
ones. It is also very common in the wooded eastern US.

944

Table 8.1: Geographical Ranges of Terrestrial Species Found in the Bench Deposits.
Texas

Eastern United States

Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Polygyra mooreana
Polygyra texasiana triodontoides
Praticolella pachyloma [P. berlandieriana]

Catinella vermeta
Euchemotrema leai
Gastrocopta armifera
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pentodon
Gastrocopta procera
Gastrocopta tappaniana
Hawaiia minuscula
Helicodiscus singleyanus (?)
Mesodon thyroidus
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Pupoides albilabris
Strobilops texasiana

Texas-Florida-Mexico
Gastrocopta pellucida
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Pupisoma disocoricola
Gulf Coastal Plain
Anguispira strongylodes
Carychium mexicanum

Entire United States

South-Central United States

Zonitoides arboreus

Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata
Rabdotus dealbatus [R. mooreana]

945

Figure 8.2. Approximate Range of Gastrocopta pellucida as Mapped by Hubricht. Map
adapted and generalized from Hubricht (1985:Map 49). Range actually
extends into Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado, New Mexico (Metcalf 1984:5)
and to the eastern side of Utah (Oliver and Bosworth 1999). This is a rather
arid-adapted microsnail.

946

Figure 8.3. Approximate Range of Anguispira strongylodes as Mapped by Hubricht.
Map adapted and generalized from Hubricht (1985:Map 159). This is a
large-bodied woodland snail.

947

Figure 8.4. Approximate Range of Carychium mexicanum as Mapped by Hubricht. Map
adapted and generalized from Hubricht (1985:Map 14). Compare with Fig.
8.8. This is a microsnail found on wet floodplains. Range also extends into
Nuevo León, Tamaulipas, and San Luis Potosí in Mexico (Correa Sandoval
2003). Its northern limit corresponds very roughly to a mean daily minimum
temperature of about 50-55º F.

948

Figure 8.5. Approximate Range of Mesomphix friabilis as Mapped by Hubricht. Map
adapted and generalized from Hubricht (1985:Map 239). This is another
large-bodied woodland snail.

949

Figure 8.6. Approximate Range of Gastrocopta contracta as Mapped by Hubricht. Map
adapted and generalized from Hubricht (1985:Map 42). Compare with
Figure 8.9. This is a microsnail common to the bench deposits. Its
distribution actually extends into Ontario and Manitoba in Canada (Oughton
1948:50) and Nuevo León, Tamaulipas, and San Luis Potosí in Mexico
(Correa Sandoval 2003). Its western limit corresponds to the 5-inch mean
total precipitation isohyet for September.

950

Figure 8.7. Approximate Range of Pomatiopsis lapidaria as Mapped by Hubricht. Map
adapted and generalized from Hubricht (1985:Map 11). This amphibious
marsh microsnail is present in the bench deposits, but now extirpated in
Texas.

951

If we narrow the focus from continent-wide to statewide geographic ranges, it is
possible to be even more specific about some environmental tolerances, because the
distributions of most of these species are actually better mapped in Texas than elsewhere
(Figs. 8.8-8.16 and 8.18 illustrate some of the Berger Bluff species). In some cases, part
of the range limits for a species can be matched to a band of mean annual rainfall
isohyets, or perhaps to a minimum temperature isotherm. Each species has a minimum
and maximum annual precipitation that is characteristic of its range, and because Texas is
the southwestern limit for many of these species, it is sometimes possible to specify
roughly the minimum annual precipitation for the species. For example, the western
range limit for Mesodon thyroidus in Texas corresponds roughly to the 32-36 inch
rainfall isohyets, or roughly 80-90 cm of rainfall per year (Fig. 8.12; Larkin and Bomar
1983:18). Actually, for this species, the limiting factor may be the western limit of broadleafed deciduous trees which require at least 80-90 cm of annual rainfall, and which
Mesodon depends on for leaf litter habitat. The maximum precipitation limit is more
difficult to specify, and for most species can be found somewhere to the east or northeast
in some distant part of the eastern United States.

A glance at geologic, vegetation, rainfall and temperature maps for Texas shows
that units of the first three variables are generally arranged in curving bands that roughly
parallel the Gulf Coast, while the temperature isotherms tend to run east-west, orthogonal
to the others. The western limits of many of these snail species roughly coincide with
some of these major geologic, vegetation, or rainfall bands and so it is difficult to specify
which – soil, vegetation, or moisture – controls the species boundary, and in fact all three
are probably interrelated. Annual rainfall and soil texture may determine the extent of
deciduous woodland, which in turn determines the range of the species. Because Texas
952

has a mild climate, temperature seldom seems to be a limiting factor here. One possible
exception is Rabdotus alternatus. This species is not found in the bench deposits or in the
local modern fauna (whether it occurs in strata 4 and 5 is unknown), but it occurs in
Holocene deposits a short distance upstream at the Smith Creek Bridge site, where I
suggested (Brown 2002:237-238) it had expanded its range during the Hypsithermal.
Figure 8.17 shows the northern limit as mapped by Fullington and Pratt (1974:Fig. 5)
compared with the 68-70° F mean annual temperature isotherms. The congeneric R.
dealbatus (Fig. 8.18) seems to be limited by moisture and calcium availability.
Examination of the maps shows some differences between the species. For
example, Pupisoma dioscoricola (Fig. 8.15), Mesodon thyroidus (Fig. 8.12), Praticolella
pachyloma (Fig. 8.14), Anguispira strongylodes (Fig. 8.3), and Mesomphix friabilis (Fig.
8.5) are clearly much more restricted to the wetter eastern part of the state than are
widespread species like Gastrocopta pellucida (Figs. 8.2, 8.10 or Oligyra orbiculata (Fig.
8.13), which cover the eastern part of the state but also extend well into the drier western
part. The mapped distribution for G. pellucida is actually misleading, because it extends
into Oklahoma (Wyckoff, Theler, and Carter 1997:Table 4), Kansas (Leonard 1959:180181; Franzen and Leonard 1947), Colorado, New Mexico and Arizona (Bequaert and
Miller (1973:171) and just into the eastern edge of Utah (Oliver and Bosworth (1999:Fig.
50) as well. In Mexico, it extends at least as far south as Jalisco and San Luís Potosí.
While examining these maps, it is important to remember that the mapping is very
generalized and incomplete, and the snails actually live in habitats or microhabitats
embedded in the larger biome.

953

The history of molluscan zoogeographic ranges (both terrestrial and aquatic) on
the Southern Plains since the Late Pleistocene has been one of contraction toward the east
or northeast as regional climate warmed and dried both during and after the Younger
Dryas. The same process has been documented for the central Plains, except that some
species withdrew to the Rocky Mountains instead of eastward (Wells and Stewart 1987).
Viewed from the vantage point of individual archeological or paleontological sites, range
contraction appears as progressive extirpation of species (Pierce 1987:Fig. 6.1).
According to Neck (1995a:284), the modern land snail fauna of the southern Plains
includes 24 terrestrial species (including one slug) compared to 69 species (with two
species of slugs) earlier in the Quaternary. The aquatic snail fauna consists of nine
species, compared to 57 aquatic species earlier in the Quaternary. At the Lake Theo site,
Neck has recognized five sequential stages of species deletion from the early Younger
Dryas to the present (Neck 1987a:Table 3), which he attributes chiefly to declining
precipitation and loss of gallery woodland.

Several of the contemporary species present at Berger Bluff appear to be at the
southwesternmost limit of their geographic range. The clearest examples are Anguispira
strongylodes, Mesomphix friabilis, Mesodon thyroidus, and possibly Catinella vermeta
and Carychium mexicanum (Figs. 8.3, 8.5, 8.12, 8.4; Hubricht 1985:Map 134). Their
distribution suggests that as global warming progresses, their ranges will withdraw to the
northeast into the woodland of east Texas, resulting in local extirpation for these species.
Indeed, I have not seen living examples of Anguispira or Mesomphix in the catchment,
although Neck (1977) reports them present in the area. In addition to these species, there
are several others whose ranges extend into the western part of Texas, but also occur even
farther to the west as fossils, according to mapping by Hubricht (1985). Included in this
954

group are Gastrocopta pentodon, Strobilops texasiana, Euchemotrema leai, Gastrocopta
tappaniana, and perhaps Polygyra texasiana (Hubricht 1985:Maps 61, 104, 427, 57, and
373). These appear to represent species that have contracted their ranges to the eastward
during the Quaternary, but not so far eastward as to approach Berger Bluff.

Figure 8.8. Approximate Range of Carychium mexicanum in Texas as Mapped by Fullington
and Pratt. Map adapted and generalized from Fullington and Pratt (1974:Fig. 3).
The locations of Berger Bluff and three other early snail faunas are shown.
Compare with Fig. 8.4.
955

Figure 8.9. Approximate Range of Gastrocopta contracta in Texas as Mapped by
Cheatum and Fullington. Map adapted and generalized from Cheatum and
Fullington (1973:Fig. 3). The locations of Berger Bluff and three other early
snail faunas are shown. Compare with Fig. 8.6. Note irregular distribution
and alpine population in the Big Bend. Range also extends into Nuevo León,
Tamaulipas, and San Luis Potosí in Mexico (Correa Sandoval 2003).

956

Figure 8.10. Approximate Range of Gastrocopta pellucida in Texas as Mapped by
Cheatum and Fullington. Map adapted and generalized from Cheatum and
Fullington (1973:Fig. 5). The locations of Berger Bluff and three other early
snail faunas are shown. The boundary shown here is not very accurate. It
actually extends into Oklahoma, Colorado, and New Mexico and into Nuevo
León, Tamaulipas, and San Luis Potosí in Mexico (Correa Sandoval 2003).
Compare with Figure 8.2. Note that this is a more arid-tolerant snail than the
congeneric G. contracta.

957

Figure 8.11. Approximate Range of Euchemotrema leai in Texas as Mapped by Cheatum
and Fullington. Map adapted and generalized from Cheatum and Fullington
(1971:Fig. 15). The locations of Berger Bluff and three other early snail
faunas are shown. This is a medium-bodied woodland snail.

958

Figure 8.12. Approximate Range of Mesodon thyroidus in Texas as Mapped by Cheatum
and Fullington. Map adapted and generalized from Cheatum and Fullington
(1971:Fig. 13). The locations of Berger Bluff and three other early snail
faunas are shown, along with the 32-inch and 36-inch mean annual rainfall
isohyets (1951-1980 data from Larkin and Bomar 1983:18). Western limit
of this snail seems to be determined by deciduous woodland or moisture
limits.

959

Figure 8.13. Approximate Range of Oligyra orbiculata in Texas as Mapped by Fullington
and Pratt. Map adapted and generalized from Fullington and Pratt (1974:Fig.
1). The locations of Berger Bluff and three other early snail faunas are
shown. This is a very abundant, cosmopolitan, hardy medium-bodied
operculate species. Range extends into Nuevo León, Tamaulipas, and San
Luis Potosí in Mexico (Correa Sandoval 2003).

960

Figure 8.14. Approximate Range of Praticolella pachyloma in Texas as Mapped by
Cheatum and Fullington. Map adapted and generalized from Cheatum and
Fullington (1971:Fig. 12). The locations of Berger Bluff and three other
early snail faunas are shown. The range as shown by Hubricht (1983:Map 3)
is slightly different. This is a medium-bodied polygyrid, and one of the few
species that is nearly endemic to Texas.

961

Figure 8.15. Approximate Range of Pupisoma dioscoricola in Texas as Mapped by
Cheatum and Fullington. Map adapted and generalized from Cheatum and
Fullington (1973:Fig. 8). The locations of Berger Bluff and three other early
snail faunas are shown. Open circles represent the only known locations for
contemporary specimens. Range also extends into Nuevo León, Tamaulipas,
and San Luis Potosí in Mexico (Correa Sandoval 2003).

962

Figure 8.16. Approximate Range of Polygyra texasiana texasiana in Texas as Mapped by
Cheatum and Fullington. Map adapted and generalized from Cheatum and
Fullington (1971:Fig. 8). The locations of Berger Bluff and three other early
snail faunas are shown. Compare with Fig. 8.49, which shows the
approximate range for Polygyra texasiana triodontoides, the subspecies
believed to be present at Berger Bluff.

963

Figure 8.17. Approximate Range of Rabdotus alternatus in Texas as Mapped by
Fullington and Pratt. Map adapted and generalized from Fullington and Pratt
(1974:Fig. 5). The locations of Berger Bluff and three other early snail
faunas are shown, along with the 69-70º F mean annual temperature
isotherms (1951-1980 data from Larkin and Bomar 1983:50). This species
does not occur either in the bench deposits or in the modern local fauna
(despite the mapping shown here), but was found throughout Holocene
deposits at the Smith Creek Bridge site. Its northern limit seems to be
determined by minimum temperatures, and it probably expanded its range
into the catchment during the Hypsithermal.

964

Figure 8.18. Approximate Range of Rabdotus dealbatus in Texas as Mapped by
Fullington and Pratt. Map adapted and generalized from Fullington and Pratt
(1974:Fig. 6). The locations of Berger Bluff and three other early snail
faunas are shown. This is possibly the chief species of Rabdotus found in
the bench deposits.

965

More useful still are regional or local-scale surveys of snail populations. These
often use traps for live snails, or involve the collection of litter samples from small
(usually 50 cm square) quadrats arranged on grids or transects. The data from surveys
like these are more useful because the actual microhabitat preferences of the snails can be
discerned, and living snails can more easily be discriminated from subfossil shells. The
surveys usually produce counts and densities of individuals, and when reproducible
methods are used, species richness can be reliably determined. Some of these studies
attempt to relate distributions to biome, vegetation density, rainfall, temperature, soil
calcium content, pH, or other factors (Goodfriend 1992:Table 1). Examples of these
quantitative or semi-quantitative surveys are the Southern Plains Gastropod Survey
(Wyckoff, Theler, and Carter 1997), surveys in Kaufman County, Texas

(Logsdon

1967), Alberta (Kralka 1986; Boag and Wishart 1982), Kansas (Basch, Bainer and
Wilhm 1961), Tennessee (Coney et al. 1982; Getz and Uetz 1994), Minnesota (Coulter,
White, and Nordlie 1963), Wisconsin (Theler 1997; Nekola and Smith 1999), the Great
Lakes region (Nekola 2003), Maryland (Hotopp 2002), Norway (Vollan 2003), and
Germany (Martin and Sommer 2004a, 2004b).

THE SOUTHERN PLAINS GASTROPOD SURVEY
The Southern Plains Gastropod Survey was done in 1995-96 and is one of the
most useful surveys for interpreting the Berger Bluff snail record because it allows us to
see how snail abundance and species richness respond to a major moisture gradient
across the North American midcontinent. Wyckoff, Theler and Carter surveyed land snail
assemblages in a 400 mile long (640 km), 60 mile wide corridor extending from Kay
County in eastern Oklahoma to Colfax County in northeastern New Mexico, in the
966

foothills of the Rocky Mountains. Eleven localities were sampled, recovering over 34,000
snails representing 24 species, at least nine of which are also found at Berger Bluff. Each
locality was about 400 m or less in diameter, sampled with transects consisting of three
50 x 50 cm quadrats spaced about 10-20 m apart. One to six transects were collected per
locality, for a total of 34 (and 114 quadrats) for the entire survey (Wyckoff, Theler, and
Carter 1997:Table 4). The actual samples consist of one to two liters of organic detritus
and up to 2 cm of the underlying soil from the surface of the quadrat, floated in water and
then sieved through a #40 (0.425 mm) geologic sieve. In some cases half samples (split
with a sample splitter) were analyzed. Surrounding vegetation and topography were
recorded, and soils were field-tested for texture, consistency, moisture content, and pH
(Wyckoff, Theler, and Carter 1997:7, Fig. 4).

The survey provided a wealth of information that can be used to help interpret the
Berger Bluff snail assemblage. The six taxa with the highest frequency of recovery
(Pupoides albilabris, Gastrocopta procera, G. pellucida, Hawaiia minuscula,
Succineidae, and Helicodiscus singleyanus) are all found in the bench deposits at Berger
Bluff, although most have much lower abundance rankings there. Except for the
succineids, all are microsnails adapted to the open, grassy, xeric habitats found in the
survey corridor, which has mean annual rainfall varying from about 40 cm in New
Mexico to 92 cm at the eastern end in Oklahoma (the latter is about the same as for the
Berger Bluff catchment). In fact, nearly all the snails recovered by the Southern Plains
survey are microsnails. The survey area is largely treeless, and large-bodied woodland
snails are absent.

967

Figure 8.19 shows how snail distribution plots against the westward-declining
rainfall gradient from eastern Oklahoma into New Mexico. In both panels, the horizontal
axis is longitude, from the 96th meridian westward to the 105th meridian. Mean annual
rainfall is plotted as a heavy line. In panel “A,” the presence or absence of 11 taxa that
are also found in the bench deposits is shown for the 11 localities (Succineidae are
represented in the bench by Catinella vermeta, and the slug species is unidentified, but
could possibly be Deroceras laeve). Three taxa on the lower right occurring only at the
easternmost locality (Gastrocopta armifera, G. contracta, and G. pentodon) appear to be
less arid-tolerant than the rest. Panel “B” repeats the rainfall plot (scaled on the left),
along with curves for species richness (average number of species per collection locality)
and density (average number of snails per square meter for a locality), with separate
scales on the right side. What Figure 8.19 shows is that although regional moisture levels
decline from east to west, population density and species richness decline in uneven
fashion. There are obvious peaks for density and richness representing the Kubik,
Burnham, and Black Mesa localities. Average species richness varies from 1 to 8
(maximum range, 0 to 14), and average density varies dramatically from 13 to 4763
individuals/m2 (Wyckoff, Theler, and Carter 1997:Table 6). The survey shows that
although snail populations respond to large-scale environmental gradients, there are
“hotspots” of density and species richness, embedded in the larger patterns, and
representing more localized habitats (here, mostly rock ledges) favorable for snails. To
summarize, snails are good environmental proxies, but are even better habitat proxies.

968

Figure 8.19. The Southern Plains Gastropod Survey. Each panel plots mean annual
rainfall (1970-1999 data from Grey House Publishing 2000) for the 11
collecting localities against longitude, running east to west. A, presenceabsence for 11 categories of mollusks found both in the survey and at Berger
Bluff. B, mean annual rainfall plotted against species richness and density
(number of snails/m2) for the 11 localities (data from Wyckoff, Theler, and
Carter 1997:Table 6). Panel “B” shows there are density and richness
“hotspots” embedded in the regional moisture gradient.
969

TERRESTRIAL SNAILS AS ENVIRONMENTAL PROXIES FOR MOISTURE AND
DECIDUOUS TREE COVER
Evans (1972:91) characterizes land snails as follows:
The ecological niche of most species of land snail is that of small herbivore,
scavenger and carrion feeder, living close to the surface of the ground and preyed
on, largely one suspects as a subsidiary food source, by birds, hedgehogs, shrews
and other small beasts. Most favour the moister and less disturbed habitats of the
ecosystem. None appear to be restricted to living on or in association with
particular plant species, though the structure of the vegetation is an important
factor in their livelihood.
According to Martin, “terrestrial gastropods function primarily in the environment
as herbivores, mycophagists (i.e., fungi eaters), and detritivores, although a few snails are
carnivorous, feeding on insects, nematodes, earthworms, or other gastropods” (Martin
2000:52).

Which variables control the abundance of live land snails in a given area? What
controls their diversity? What controls the proportions of different taxa in a fauna? Evans
(1972) devotes an entire chapter to this topic, and Goodfriend (1992:Table 1) also
reviews it. Factors most often investigated in the biological literature are moisture, cover
(in the form of vegetation, litter, or other objects), food, presence or absence of
disturbance, temperature, calcium availability, and pH (Evans 1972: 92-100; Burch and
Pearce 1990:201-203; Cain 1983:600-605; Goodfriend 1992:Table 2; Hotopp 2002). In
most of Texas, especially south Texas, the latter three factors can largely be disregarded.
Except in the quartz sands of east Texas, calcium is usually present in bedrock or
pedogenic carbonate, pH is above neutral, and annual temperatures are mild enough not
to be a limiting factor for most species.
970

In Texas, the most important factors for land snails appear to be the highly
interrelated variables of moisture, plant cover, and geology. Moisture is necessary for
survival of the snails, the plant cover (often deciduous tree litter) they live in, and the
litter or fungi they eat. Snails prefer to deposit their eggs in moist soil. Moisture and
geology determine whether woodland is primarily deciduous or coniferous. Many snails
tend to avoid coniferous woodland, either because conifers tend to grow in calciumdeficient soils, or because conifer needles lack calcium. Some snails are thought to obtain
calcium from leaves of deciduous trees (Burch and Pearce 1990:202), so this kind of litter
may provide both cover and calcium. Geology determines whether calcium is available
from bedrock. Calcium may also come from lichens or mosses, and judging from the
geology of the bench deposits (as presented in Chapter 4), it seems plausible that mosses
and lichens were abundant when the bench deposits were forming.

Many of the studies that have been done show that soil calcium levels can
determine snail abundance and diversity (Burch 1955; Coney et al. 1982; Johannessen
and Solhøy 2001; Hotopp 2002) in acid soils where limestone bedrock or pedogenic
carbonate are lacking. Others (Riggle 1976) show negative or species-specific responses.
Although most of the Berger Bluff catchment is covered by quartz sand soils, there may
be enough pedogenic carbonate present to supply calcium needs. Certainly, the abundant
phreatic carbonate in the bench sediments was more than adequate for local snail
populations, and it seems likely that the combination of abundant moisture and calcium
carbonate made the spring-margin area a local “hotspot” for snails.

A number of specialized geographic surveys of land snails have also examined
other environmental factors such as exposure to sunlight, topographic position, cliff area
971

(Vollan 2003), elevation or slope, forest succession or stage (Coney et al. 1982; Hoff
1962), microtopography (Davies and Grimes 1999), species of tree litter (Getz and Uetz
1994) or cover (Burch 1956), disturbance by fire (Nekola 2002) or forest removal (Ström
2004), magnesium, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and organic carbon content of soil
(Burch 1955; Riggle 1976; Nekola and Smith 1999; Ondina et al. 2004). None of these
appear to be as important for Texas snails as moisture and tree cover.

Careful survey of the biological literature on snails shows that their abundance
and taxonomic diversity is actually controlled on two levels:
1) a macroclimatic level: statewide or continent-wide distribution maps show that snails
respond to macroclimatic factors;

2) the habitat level: snails respond heavily to favorable microhabitats embedded in
regions that may have contrasting humidity, edaphic, or temperature profiles.
In other words, both scales of variation are relevant, regardless of whether we
examine contemporary distributions over a large geographic area, or look at changes
through time at a single archeological site.

Moisture Requirements
Water loss and recovery are critical for survival of snails and slugs. They lose
moisture from the integument and lungs, as well as through the shell and through the
mucus trail when moving. Active slugs can lose 30-40% of their body weight within two
hours (Prior 1985:403). Snails regulate water loss by adjusting behavior in both time and
space. They are nocturnal, they gravitate towards areas with high relative humidity
972

(preferably fully saturated air) or moist substrates, and they are inactive during the day
when humidity is lower. During extended dry periods, snails can estivate, practicing
metabolic arrest and withdrawing into the shell. Operculate species (like Oligyra
orbiculata or Pomatiopsis lapidaria) reduce water loss by closing the aperture with the
trapdoor-like operculum, while non-operculate species secrete a temporary epiphragm to
seal off the aperture (Prior 1985:404-407). Under present climatic conditions, Rabdotus
may remain dormant for up to 3-4 months at a time during summer and winter (Horne
1973:325). Presumably, reduced seasonality in the Younger Dryas would imply less
estivation by most species. Habitat selection is an important strategy for reducing water
loss. Land snail surveys large enough to cover several different types of habitats usually
reveal that snail species diversity and/or population density increases as habitat moisture
increases (see Getz 1974; Boag and Wishart 1982:2635; Bush 1988:856; Martin and
Sommer 2004a:201; 2004b:539). Figure 8.20, redrafted from Evans (1972:Fig. 34) shows
contemporary snail samples from some sites in northwestern Germany. Both population
density (top panel) and species richness (bottom panel) increase somewhat as relative
humidity increases. The patterning here, although not strong, is perhaps better defined
than in Figure 8.19.

973

Figure 8.20. Effect of Humidity on Snail Density and Species Richness. A, Effect of
humidity on population density in 11 contemporary samples from
northwestern Germany; B, effect on species richness. Both panels are
redrafted from Evans (1972:Fig. 34). Patterning is relatively weak, although
the scale used in panel B makes it look somewhat stronger.
974

Although snails are not as abundant in desert biomes as in better watered areas,
some species do live in desert areas, and are able to do so by selecting the most sheltered
microhabitats and by remaining dormant between infrequent periods of rainfall
(Wiesenborn 2003). Except for the amphibious species, land snails also avoid excessive
water and actual submersion and will climb to escape excess water (Machin 1975:137).
Rabdotus, Oligyra, Mesodon and other species can often be seen clinging to brush well
off the ground surface following rains in south Texas. Machin (1975:120) maintains that
most water uptake is through the skin, some occurs through food uptake, and whether any
occurs by drinking is unknown. According to Cook (2001:468), “drinking” is by contact
rehydration through the foot. The largest land snails in the bench deposits were probably
capable of traveling no more than a few meters during a night. The home range for the
microsnails is unknown, but at most was probably no more than a few centimeters. As a
consequence, travel to a point source of water is not usually feasible, so land snails must
maintain their water balance by maintaining themselves in a sufficiently humid
microhabitat. Among the largest land snails known are an Australian snail, Hedleyella
falconeri (up to 9-10 cm in diameter), which moves an average of 8.7 m per night
(maximum, about 48 m; Murphy 2002:Table 4) and the giant African snail, Achatina
fulica which moves 1.5-8.3 m over a two-month period (Tomiyama and Nakane 1993).
These give some idea of the upper limit of land snail home ranges. Much more
representative, probably, is a study by Karson (1999) of movement patterns by
Anguispira alternata, a close relative of the Anguispira strongylodes snails found in the
bench deposits. Daily minimum distances traveled averaged about 41 cm, but could be as
much as about 3.25 m (Karson 1999:Fig. 12). This is probably fairly representative for
the larger-bodied snails in the bench deposits. Punctum pygmaeum is a minute land snail
with a shell width of about 1.0-1.5 mm and minimum movements of 9.5 cm over a 12975

hour period in the wild. Some snails moved as much as about 23 cm in captivity (Baur
and Baur 1988:Fig. 3). This might give a rough indication of home range size for the
Berger Bluff microsnails.

The relative size of the snail (both within and among species) has an important
effect on its resistance to desiccation. In some cases, juveniles have been shown to have
less resistance than adults (Arad and Avivi 1998). Microsnails ought to be especially
sensitive to water loss, because as size decreases, the ratio of shell surface area to body
volume increases. Barnhart (1989) studied desiccation reactions in pupillid microsnails,
including four species present in the bench deposits (Gastrocopta armifera, G. contracta,
G. procera, and Pupoides albilabris). He found that the mass-specific evaporative water
loss varies by a factor of about ten from microsnails to larger-bodied pulmonate snails,
and the microsnails are indeed more susceptible to desiccation, but some large bodied
species have water loss rates as low as the pupillids he studied (Barnhart 1989:Fig. 2).
Some Gastrocopta armifera individuals were able to survive as much as nine months at
zero relative humidity, though most survived only 2.5 months.

Because microsnails are more susceptible to desiccation, they ought to be
especially good indicators of environmental factors such as soil moisture, annual rainfall,
and average relative humidity, as mediated by vegetation.

Vegetation and Ground Cover
Although terrestrial snails can be found in habitats ranging from marshland to
forest, open grassland, or desert, they are probably most common in woods and
grasslands. Perhaps two-thirds of the terrestrial snails found in the bench deposits are
976

commonly found in deciduous woodland. The others are characteristic of more open
terrain, ranging from open grassland to chaparral to bare ground (the latter just a couple
of species). Habitat preferences for each species will be listed in the species accounts
later in this chapter.
Vegetation is a major determinant of snail abundance and diversity, because
vegetation helps to trap moisture, to retard exposure to wind and sun, and to furnish food
matter and host fungi for grazing. Land snail surveys large enough to cover several
different types of habitats usually reveal that snail abundance and /or species richness are
greatest where deciduous tree cover is heaviest (Boag and Wishart 1982:Figs. 1-4; Karlin
1961; Kralka 1986:160; Oughton 1948:93-94; Vollan 2003:22-23). Getz and Uetz
(1994:71) found a positive correlation between snail species diversity and leaf litter
diversity. Studies of logging in forest areas show that both snail species diversity and
abundance decline after clearcutting (Hylander, Nilsson and Göthner 2004). Rotting logs
and downed wood are often important microhabitats for snails (Örstan 1999).

Land snail censuses that include both wooded areas and more open areas
(grassland or bare ground) help to illustrate the importance of deciduous woodland. In the
Southern Plains Gastropod Survey, the most protected and moist habitats had the highest
densities (rock ledges, riparian woodlands, and wooded dunes) and greatest number of
taxa (rock ledges, riparian woodlands) of land snails. The least protected and driest sites
(dunes, pastures, mesa tops) had the lowest densities and number of taxa (Wyckoff,
Theler and Carter 1997:Table 7). A survey in Kansas that encompassed several different
kinds of habitats recovered land snails in greatest density in an open prairie wash, a westfacing slope, a hedgerow, and a spring; low densities were found in prairie, stream, and
977

pond areas. The highest species richness was found in a wooded area, hedgerow, spring,
and limestone ledge; lowest species richness was found around ponds, in prairie, quarry,
under a rotten log, and on a south-facing slope (Basch, Bainer and Wilhm 1961:Table
III).
In a survey by Logsdon (1967) in Kaufman County, Texas, the greatest land snail
species diversity was found on the Trinity River floodplain (Forney site, 20 land snail
taxa), in dense grassland with hackberry and elm trees (Reese Farm, 13 taxa), on a creek
floodplain with grass, elm, and hawthorn (Talty site, 9 taxa), and elm-boxeldercottonwood woodland (Elmo site, 9 taxa). The lowest species richness was found in areas
with ponds (one or no land taxa), and a sparsely vegetated area (Cedarvale site, one
species) with some oak and elm trees, as well as semiarid fields and overgrazed
floodplains.

Microhabitats
Much of the biological research on land snails shows that microhabitat structure is
of key importance in determining presence and density of populations. In other words,
from the snail’s point of view, it may not make any difference whether the tree canopy
overhead is oak or sweetgum, as long as a sufficient thickness of leaf litter is present, and
soil moisture retention is adequate. Floristic structure (density and height of cover) may
be more important than floristic composition (Labaune and Magnin 2001). Nekola’s
ordination study of Great Lakes area snails sorted the samples into cliff, upland forest,
lowland forest, upland grassland, and lowland grassland groups, but also found that soil
surface architecture could predict the species composition of all but 8% of the samples
(Nekola 2003:67). Soil architecture consisted of either “duff” (organic horizon over 4 cm
thick over a friable A horizon) or “turf” (organic horizon less than 4 cm thick over an A
978

horizon with thick plant roots). In England, Bush (1988) found shade-preferring taxa in
grassland, either under small shrubs or on protected slopes, living in what were evidently
suitable microhabitats embedded in the more open grassland. Some species may show
measurable preferences for leaf litter versus moss, versus rocky talus, versus rotting log
microhabitats (Coney et al. 1982:90). In Alberta, Platt (1980:21) found that most snails
collected in coniferous forest habitats were found near aspen trees or under fallen aspen
logs. In Norway, Vollan (2003:38) found that areas with “calcium-indicating mosses on
dry surfaces” had a high species richness and density of land snails.

One of the clearest examples of the importance of microhabitats is the distribution
by landform in the Southern Plains Gastropod Survey (Fig. 8.21). Here, the most
protected habitat, rocky ledges, yields 15-60 times as many snails as the least protected
habitats (mesa tops, pastures, sand dunes; Theler, Wyckoff and Carter 2004:Fig. 2) and
the species richness is about 2-3.5 times as high.

979

Figure 8.21. Density Variation by Microhabitat in the SPGS. Protected habitats (rock
ledges and wooded areas) have higher population density and species
richness (adapted from Theler, Wyckoff, and Carter 2004:Fig. 2) of
contemporary snails in northern Oklahoma and New Mexico.
SNAILS AS PALEOENVIRONMENTAL DATA
European paleoenvironmental researchers have long used snails as a proxy data
source, mostly in England, France, and Poland, employing both biological and stable
isotope methods. The principal text (Evans 1972) is by a British archeomalacologist.
Table 8.2 lists selected examples of paleoenvironmental studies using snails. The main
purpose of the table is to show where most of the studies are found and the analytical
methods used [a much more comprehensive list for the United States is given by Bogan
and Grady (1991:Table 1)]. For the most part, the European studies are much more
extensive and sophisticated than those done in the US. The Europeans began to
experiment with multivariate ordination methods by at least the 1980s, seeking to extract
980

major paleoenvironmental variables (such as temperature or extent of tree cover) from
numerical data matrices, and in some cases, to compute transfer functions for variables
such as atmospheric temperature. Rousseau, Limondin and Puissegur (1991) review the
major analytical methods that have been applied.

In contrast to the European approach, the chief analytical method applied in most
archeological projects in Texas (whether CRM-based or otherwise) is to throw the snails
away without studying them, except for a few cases where isotope or epimerization
studies are done. Table 8.2 lists some of the major examples in Texas, but the studies
listed here represent only a tiny fraction of the archeology that has been done, nearly all
of which ignores the potential for archeomalacology. No ordination or transfer function
studies have been attempted yet in Texas, although several analyses of epimerization or
stable isotopes have been done.

981

Table 8.2. Selected Examples of Paleoenvironmental Studies Using Snails.
Location

Analyses

Reference

France

diversity index, correspondence analysis

Western
Europe
Western
Europe
Western
Europe
England

correspondence analysis, temperature
transfer functions
correspondence analysis, temperature
transfer functions
Mutual Climatic Range analysis

Rousseau, Limondin, and
Puissegur (1993)
Rousseau (1991)

England
England
Germany
Germany,
Luxembourg
Ontario
Caverne de la
Mine, Quebec
New Trout
Cave, Hamilton
Cave, West
Virginia
Hall Shelter,
Kentucky
Hayes site,
Tennessee
22 OK 904,
Mississippi
Banks site,
Iowa
Conklin
Quarry, Iowa
County Line
site, Illinois
Rench site,
Illinois
Cherokee
Sewer site,
Iowa

species ID, detrended correspondence
analysis
correspondence analysis, temperature
transfer functions
species ID, comparison with other proxies
species ID, comparison with other proxies,
mollusk zones, diversity index
species ID, mollusk zones
species ID, mollusk zones
species and habitat preference ID,
geographic range
species ID

Rousseau et al. (1994)
Moine et al. (2002)
Bush (1988)
Rousseau, Preece, and
Limondin-Lozouet (1998)
Meyrick and Preece (2001)
Meyrick (2003)
Meyrick (2001)
Yang, Yarrow, and Mackie
(2001)
Lauriol et al. (2003)
Bogan and Grady (1991)

species ID, species diversity plot

Bobrowsky and Gatus (1984)

species and habitat preference ID

Klippel and Turner (1991)

species and habitat preference ID
species ID, morphometrics

Peacock and Melsheimer
(2003)
Baerreis (1971)

species and habitat preference ID

Baker et al. (1986)

species and habitat preference ID,
epimerization
species and habitat preference ID, transfer
functions from morphometrics
species ID, geographic range, transfer
functions from morphometrics

Miller et al. (1994)

982

Rollins (1993)
Baerreis (1980)

Table 8.2 (continued)
Black Hills,
South Dakota
Various sites,
KS, NE, OK,
Texas
Various sites,
Kansas,
Nebraska
North Cove
site, Nebraska
Hudson-Meng
site, Nebraska
Big Hawk
Shelter, OK
CD 257,
Delaware
Canyon, OK
Various sites,
SW Kansas,
NW Oklahoma
Hajny site,
Oklahoma
Burnham site,
Oklahoma
Domebo site,
Oklahoma
New Mexico
Folsom site,
New Mexico
Llano Estacado
sites, Texas and
New Mexico
Rex Rodgers
site, Texas
Sulphur
Springs site,
Texas
Various sites,
Arizona
Lubbock Lake,
Texas

species and habitat preference ID,
geographic range
species and habitat preference ID

Jass et. al. (2002)

species and habitat preference ID,
geographic range

Wells and Stewart (1987)

species ID

Stewart (1989)

species and habitat preference ID

Wu and Jones (1978)

species and habitat preference ID

Hall (n.d.)

species and habitat preference ID,
geographic range

Fullington and Fullington
(1982a)

species and habitat preference ID,
geographic range, transfer functions from
morphometrics
species and habitat preference ID,
geographic range
species and habitat preference ID,
geographic range
species and habitat preference ID,
geographic range
review of historical biogeography
18
O and 13C isotope analysis of land snails

Simon (1977), Hibbard and
Taylor (1960)

species and habitat preference ID

Drake (1975)

species and habitat preference ID

Fullington (1978a)

species and habitat preference ID

Neck (1994d)

species ID, comparison to other proxies

Mead (1991)

species and habitat preference ID,
temperature and precipitation estimates
from area of sympatry

Pierce (1987)

983

Taylor (1960)

Branson (1992), Theler (1992)
Theler (2003a, 2003b)
Cheatum and Allen (1965)
Metcalf (1997)
Balakrishnan et al. (2005)

Table 8.2 (continued)
Lake Theo site,
Texas
Aubrey site
41 DL 270,
Texas
Cooper
Reservoir,
Texas
Bardwell
Reservoir,
Texas
Livingston
Reservoir,
Texas
Various sites,
N Texas,
Panhandle, OK
41 MK 38,
Texas
Hog Creek
sites, Texas
Hoxie Bridge
site, Texas
41 TV 368,
Texas
Kenyon
Rockshelter,
Texas
WilsonLeonard site,
Texas
Richard Beene
site, Texas
Anthon site,
Texas
Swan Lake site,
Texas
Guadalupe Bay
site, Texas
Smith Creek
Bridge site,
Texas

species and habitat preference ID
species and habitat preference ID
species and habitat preference ID

Neck (1978, 1987a), Johnson,
Holliday and Neck (1982)
Neck (2001)
Neck (1994a)

species ID

Slaughter (1964)

species ID

Slaughter and Thurmond
(1965)

species ID

Slaughter (1965)

species and habitat preference ID

Cheatum and Allen (1963,
1965)

species and habitat preference ID

Todd (2002)

species and habitat preference ID

Kirby and Reeder (1980)

species ID

Bond (1978:208-216)

species and habitat preference ID

Neck (1981b)

species and habitat preference ID

Neck (1986a)

species and habitat preference ID

Shaw et al. (1998)

species and habitat preference ID

Neck (1992)

species and habitat preference ID

Neck (2002)

species and habitat preference ID

Neck (1987c)

species and habitat preference ID

Fullington (2002)

species and habitat preference ID,
qualitative climate inferences from
morphometrics

Brown (2002)

984

Table 8.2 (continued)
Berclair
Terrace, Texas
Fordyce
Quarry, Texas
La Paloma
Mammoth site,
Texas
Resaca del
Rancho Viejo,
Texas
Skyline Shelter,
Texas

species and habitat preference ID

Conkin and Conkin (1962)

species and habitat preference ID
species and habitat preference ID

Conkin, Conkin and Mason
(1962)
Neck (1981a)

species and habitat preference ID

Neck (1985)

species and habitat preference ID

Neck (1990b)

Note: For many additional examples, see Bogan and Grady (1991:Table 1) and Goodfriend
(1992:Table 3).

The French approach to ordination studies is particularly interesting because of a
heavy emphasis on atmospheric temperature as the principal variable extracted
(Rousseau, Limondin and Puissegur 1993; Rousseau, Limondin, Magnin and Puissegur
1994; Rousseau, Preece and Limondin-Lozouet 1998; Moine et al. 2002) despite the fact
that many of the contemporary biological studies identify other factors (altitude,
microhabitat variation, litter thickness, soil calcium, and so forth) as the most significant
variables driving snail abundance and diversity, including at least one study done in
France (Labaune and Magnin 2001). There seems to be a major discrepancy between
European paleoenvironmental studies (which infer temperature control of variation) and
biological studies (which infer a variety of more local factors). The discrepancy might be
due to the scale of the calibration data sets used for the paleoenvironmental studies.
Rousseau and others (1994) calibrated their study with modern snail analog assemblages
collected all the way from Scandinavia to southern France. Using a latitudinal gradient
this large, it is not surprising that most of the variation is temperature-related. Most of the
985

biological studies cover smaller areas. Larger-scale studies, like the Southern Plains
Gastropod Survey, or Nekola’s (2003) survey of the Great Lakes area, are the exception
rather than the rule.

Paleoenvironmental studies that compile calibration data sets covering large
geographical areas are an attempt to substitute space for time. Researchers want to know
how the abundance of a particular species might vary as temperature changes, so a series
of modern snail samples is collected along a north-south temperature gradient that is
sufficiently long to show major variation (Rousseau et al. 1994:Fig. 1; or, in the case of
the Southern Plains Gastropod Survey, an east-west moisture gradient). Kadmon and
Heller (1998) studied land snails in Israel, an elongated country with a strong north-south
rainfall gradient, and as might be expected, the first axis of variation extracted in their
ordination study was variation in rainfall. In any case, the scale of the gradient that is
used for calibration will affect the results, because different variables become dominant
at different scales of inspection.

Except for isotope studies, most paleoenvironmental studies using snails in the US
have been qualitative in nature. Snails are identified, inventoried, and assessed for habitat
preference, then interpreted qualitatively. There are two kinds of numerical studies that
might be attempted. The first consists of ordination studies of large matrices of snail
counts, as the Europeans have done, with or without the subsequent computation of
climatic transfer functions. The second consists of morphometric studies of selected
species over time, with or without the subsequent computation of climatic transfer
functions. A small number of these studies have been done in the US, mostly on pupillid
species in the Midwest (Baerreis 1971, 1980; Couri 1976; Simon 1977). In Texas, an
986

early attempt was made by Amaral and Witter (1973), who measured Anguispira and
Mesomphix shells from Laneport Reservoir. My own morphometric study of Rabdotus,
Praticolella, and Polygyra at the Smith Creek Bridge site (Brown 2002:262-263) was an
attempt to discover if large and medium-bodied snails were sufficiently sensitive to
environmental changes to show recognizable fluctuations in body size. In that case, the
polygyrids Praticolella and Polygyra showed some variation over time.

CONTEMPORARY SNAIL POPULATIONS, REGIONAL AND LOCAL
Some kind of baseline knowledge of contemporary populations is essential when
evaluating any proxy biotic indicator of past environments. Cheatham and Fullington
(1971, 1973), Fullington and Pratt (1974), and Hubricht (1985) map Texas land snail
distributions and list some generalized habitat preference data, but provide no data on
relative frequencies or distribution across local habitats. Tables 8.3 through 8.9 provide
some data that may be helpful in assessing contemporary populations. I have already
listed many of these collections in the Smith Creek Bridge site report (see Brown
2002:218-219), but more detail is provided here.

Branson (1967) collected two large river drift samples, on the Brazos River near
Columbus and the other at the delta mouth of the Colorado River, presumably near Cedar
Bayou. These are drift samples outside of the Guadalupe River basin, so they are not
locally relevant, but since Branson lists the counts by species, they provide an
opportunity to look at relative frequencies integrated over a large area of the Gulf coastal
plain. In Table 8.3 I have simply combined the Brazos and Colorado River counts and
ranked them by frequency (a few of the names have changed since 1967, so I list both
987

versions). I am only interested in species known to appear in the Berger Bluff catchment,
so 20 additional taxa that he lists are omitted from the table. This table shows not only
which Coleto basin species are most abundant on the coastal plain, but also which are
most likely to float in water and appear in drift samples. Most of them are land snails.
Only five genera (Biomphalaria, Gyraulus, Planorbella, Cincinnatia, and Valvata) are
aquatic, and the last two are listed as extirpated by Fullington (1978b). The Valvata
specimen is unquestionably an exhumed fossil. The two most abundant taxa, Gastrocopta
contracta and Hawaiia minuscula, are microsnails. There are few large-bodied taxa and
they are relatively few in number, perhaps an indication that the large taxa do not float
well. In summary, we can draw three conclusions from this table: 1) large drift samples
capture a good representation of taxonomic diversity; 2) most specimens are land, not
aquatic snails; 3) drift samples appear to be hydrodynamically biased in favor of micro
species and against large-bodied taxa.

Table 8.4 (adapted from Neck 1987b:Table 2) lists live snails found by Raymond
Neck near the Smyth Crossing site in Uvalde County, Texas. Again, this sample is not
close to the Coleto Creek basin (it is located in a drier part of south Texas), but it
illustrates some important points. Snail assemblages are strongly conditioned by habitat.
Species richness and snail density are reduced on the exposed gravel bar, and greater in
the two vegetated habitats. Ten species are found in the riparian woodland compared to
nine in the prairie, and if the large number of Rabdotus are omitted, the population would
be much larger in the woodland than in the prairie.

Table 8.5 lists taxa collected before 1977 by Raymond Neck from two localities
relatively close to the Berger Bluff catchment – Goliad State Park and the Guadalupe
988

River floodplain at the US Highway 59 crossing in Victoria. Neck (1977:65) explicitly
notes that none of these are from river drift. All of these species except Thysanophora
hornii and perhaps Euconulus chersinus trochulus are present in the bench deposits.

Table 8.3. Contemporary Drift Snails From the Brazos River and Colorado River.
Taxon
Gastrocopta contracta
Hawaiia minuscula
Oligyra orbiculata
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon
Polygyra texasiana
Gastrocopta procera
Rabdotus dealbatus
Pupoides albilabris
Euchemotrema leai
Biomphalaria havanensis
Zonitoides arboreus
Helicodiscus singleyanus
Polygyra mooreana
Praticolella berlandieriana
Mesodon thyroidus
Planorbella trivolvis
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Mesomphix friabilis
Angusipira strongylodes
Vertigo rugulosa
Gastrocopta tappaniana
Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Valvata tricarinata

Synonomy
(Branson 1967)

Bulimulus dealbatus
Stenotrema leai
Taphius havanensis

Helisoma trivolvis
Retinella indentata
Anguispira alternata

(fossil specimen?)

Adult
Body
Size
micro
micro
med
micro
micro
med
micro
large
micro
med
med
micro
micro
med
med
large
large
micro
large
large
micro
micro
micro
micro
micro

Combined
frequency

Rank

2477
627
543
242
147
104
73
40
37
30
23
18
18
16
13
11
5
4
4
3
2
2
1
1
1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
12
13
14
15
16
17
17
18
19
19
20
20
20

Source: Branson (1967)
Notes: Frequencies are combined totals for the Brazos River near Columbus and the
Colorado River near Matagorda. Only taxa found in the Berger Bluff catchment are listed; 21
other taxa listed by Branson are omitted here. Large = large bodied; med = medium-bodied;
micro = microsnail.

989

Table 8.4. Live Snails from Smyth Crossing, Uvalde County.
Taxon
Rabdotus mooreanus
Gastrocopta pellucida
Helicodiscus singleyanus
Polygyra texasiana
Oligyra orbiculata
Thysanophora hornii
Pupoides ablbilabris
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Succineidae
Gastrocopta contracta
Number of taxa:
Number of specimens

Gravel
bar
4
5
2
2
3
3
1

7
27

Riparian
woodland
3
28
11
15
9
18
11
9
5
7

Savannah/
prairie
75
14
15
8
13
2
6
1
3

10
126

9
146

Source: Neck (1987b:Table 2).

990

Row
totals
78
46
31
25
24
23
20
10
9
7

Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Table 8.5. Contemporary Snails From Goliad County and Guadalupe River Floodplain.
Goliad State Park, Goliad County
Anguispira strongylodes
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Euconulus chersinus trochulus
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida hordeacella
Gastrocopta pentodon
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Oligyra orbiculata
Helicodiscus singleyanus
Mesodon roemeri
Mesodon thyroidus
Mesomphix friabilis
Polygyra mooreana
Polygyra texasiana texasiana
Praticolella pachyloma
Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Rabdotus dealbatus
Strobilops texasiana
Thysanophora hornii*
Zonitoides arboreus
Guadalupe River at US 59, Victoria County
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai aliciae
Gastrocopta pellucida hordeacella
Gastrocopta procera procera
Gastrocopta tappaniana
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
* Not found at Berger Bluff
Source: Neck (1977)

991

Table 8.6 lists snails collected from the surface at seven localities in the Berger
Bluff catchment, while collecting water and soil samples for diatom analysis. All of these
were dead shells, except for seven live succineids found on the surface of a damp swale
on the first low terrace of Coleto Creek on the Preiss Ranch (locality D-21). Since these
specimens were hand-collected, the list is biased in favor of large and medium-bodied
species. All of these are terrestrial except the aquatic Planorbella and Biomphalaria and
the amphibious Succineidae.

992

Table 8.6. Surface-Collected Snails from Diatom Sampling Localities.
D-2, Pool with green algae (DeWitt County)
Planorbella trivolvis juvenile (?)

1

D-6, Drift from floodplain (DeWitt County)
Mesodon thyroidus adults
Mesodon sp. juveniles
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Oligyra orbiculata juvenile
Rabdotus cf. R. dealbatus adults
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Succineidae
Biomphalaria obstructa

7
7
7
1
10
5
2
1

D-9, Floodplain north of crossing (DeWitt County)
Rabdotus cf. R. dealbatus adult
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma adults
Praticolella sp. juveniles

1
2
4
3

D-19, Northwest bank of creek (DeWitt County)
Mesodon thyroidus adult
Mesodon sp. juvenile
Rabdotus cf. R. dealbatus adults
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Helisoma anceps juveniles

1
1
2
2
2

D-21, Downed wood in live oak mott (Goliad County)
Strobilops texasiana juvenile
Helicodiscus singleyanus adults
Helicodiscus singleyanus juveniles
?Gastrocopta pellucida juvenile

1
2
3
1

D-21 Vicinity, prickly pear patch (Goliad County)
Mesodon thyroidus adult
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Polygyra texasiana adult
Helicodiscus singleyanus
Succineidae

1
5
1
1
1

D-21 Vicinity, swale on floodplain (Goliad County)
Oligyra orbiculata adult
Succineidae (live)

1
7

Note: Identification by K. Brown.

993

CONTEMPORARY SNAIL SAMPLES FROM THE PREISS RANCH
On November 18, 1998, in conjunction with diatom sampling, Cecil Calhoun and
I collected some contemporary snail samples from the Preiss Ranch, about 10.5 km
northwest of and upstream from Berger Bluff. The area is on the south side of Coleto
Creek, west of Arnold Road, and the geology is discussed in Chapter 4 (see Fig. 4.5 for a
map of the area). Two localities were sampled with excavated 50 x 50 cm quadrats. The
procedure is essentially the same as that used for the Southern Plains Gastropod Survey,
except that only one quadrat was collected at each locality, instead of three replicates. All
of the snail identifications here are my own.

Locality D-20 (UTM coordinates Zone 14, E6 72 080, N31 94 030) is on the
sandy lower post-Beaumont terrace, 3.75 m above the creek at about 125 feet. The
quadrat was laid out inside a small live oak mott about 10 x 35 m in size (see Fig. 4.18
for a photo). The surface was sandy and mostly free of vegetation under the oak canopy
except for scattered dewberry, yaupon, live oak seedlings, poison ivy, bull nettle, Ipomea
sp. (?), and mustang grapevines. The terrace surface had been briefly overtopped by the
floods of November 13-15, October 18-20, and possibly October 6-7, 1998. Outside the
canopy but adjacent, prickly pear, scarlet sage, tasajillo, mesquite seedlings, and ragweed
were present, with some thin Bermuda grass cover on the nearby slope. The ranch is
actively grazed by cattle. Two levels were collected from the quadrat. Level 2 (2-4 cm)
was collected but has not been processed. Level 1 (0-2 cm) included very little surface
leaf litter and consisted of 2.0 liters of sand (4.64 kg dry weight ) sieved through #8 and
#35 mesh geologic sieves. The results are shown in Table 8.7. Large numbers of

994

Gastrocopta pellucida (129) and Helicodiscus singleyanus (85), along with nine
Gastrocopta contracta, a single Rabdotus, and an aquatic snail were recovered.

Table 8.7. Snails From 50-cm Quadrats on the Preiss Ranch.
Taxon

#8
#10 mesh #18
#25
#35
Row
mesh + floated mesh mesh mesh total
D-20, 50 cm quadrat, level 1 (Lower post-Beaumont terrace) 2.0 liters, 4.64 kg dry wt
Gastrocopta pellucida adults
36
83
119
Gastrocopta pellucida juveniles
7
3
10
Gastrocopta contracta adults
2
7
9
Gastrocopta sp. juveniles
0
22
22
Helicodiscus singleyanus adults
11
39
50
Helicodiscus singleyanus juveniles 9
26
35
cf. Rabdotus dealbatus juvenile
1
0
1
Planorbidae, unidentified
1
0
1
Unidentified juveniles
2
4
6
D-21, 50 cm quadrat, level 1 [Beaumont (?) terrace] 4.20 liters, 4.47 kg dry wt
Gastrocopta pellucida adults
0
4
0
Gastrocopta sp. fragments
0
2
0
Strobilops texasiana juvenile
0
1
0
cf. Vertigo rugulosa (?)
0
1
0
Unidentified fragments
0
1
0

4
2
1
1
1

Notes: #8 and #35 mesh only used for D-20; floated material combined with #10 used for
D-21, along with #25 and #35 mesh; floated material, #10 and #35 were barren of snails.
Identification by K. Brown.

Locality D-21 (UTM coordinates Zone 14, E6 72 370, N31 93 780) is on the
sandy Beaumont (?) terrace roughly 330 m away from the creek. This locality is inside a
much larger, more mature live oak mott with closed, well-shaded canopy, dense leaf
litter on the ground, and moderately abundant downed wood (see Fig. 4.17 for a photo).
There is fairly heavy ground cover, mostly frostweed in some areas, but also ragweed,
995

coral bean, French mulberry, hackberry, tasajillo, huisache, yaupon, cowpen daisy,
poison ivy, sunflower, scarlet sage, and huisache daisy. A single 50 x 50 cm quadrat was
excavated here about 70 cm from the base of a large live oak tree. Two levels were
collected from the quadrat. Level 2 (2-4 cm) was collected but has not been processed.
Level 1 (0-2 cm) consisted of 4.2 liters of sand (4.47 kg dry weight) with very abundant
leaf litter. It was sieved through #10, #25, and #35 mesh sieves. Any snails that floated
during processing were combined with the #10 mesh sample. The results are shown in
Table 8.7. Because this locality is so heavily vegetated and leaf litter is thick, an abundant
snail population was expected, but instead, this quadrat proved to be nearly sterile,
producing only a few Gastrocopta pellucida, a Strobilops texasiana, and a single snail
tentatively identified as Vertigo rugulosa (?). The low snail density in this protected
locality remains unexplained. The mott serves as a shade refuge for cattle, so possibly
cattle disturbance is related in some way.

About 700 g of downed live oak wood was collected off the surface, bagged, and
later rinsed in the lab to extract microsnails. The results are shown in Table 8.6. Only a
few Helicodiscus singleyanus and single specimens of Strobilops texasiana and
Gastrocopta pellucida were recovered. Downslope and several meters north from locality
D-21, a small grab sample of mostly large and medium-sized snails (Oligyra, Mesodon,
Polygyra, Helicodiscus, and a succineid) was collected from an exposed prickly pear
patch and is listed in Table 8.6.

One additional collection was made from a drift sample found on the south bank
of Coleto Creek, due north of locality D-21. The location is marked as “DS” for “drift
sample” on Fig. 4.5. This flood deposit of leaves, woody debris and snail shells was
996

probably left by the waning floodwaters of November 13-15, 1998, and was bagged in
its entirety and returned to the lab for processing. Careful hand picking produced over a
thousand specimens, of which over 95% are terrestrial. The results are shown in Table
8.8, and in Table 8.9, I have re-ordered the same data by abundance rank. These two
tables, along with Table 8.7, seem to offer a fair picture of the contemporary snails in the
catchment. Gastrocopta pellucida is the most abundant species, followed by Helicodiscus
singleyanus (adults and juveniles combined). These two species are hardy, droughttolerant, cosmopolitan species that can persist in well-drained sandy pasture subject to
severe summer drying. Gastrocopta contracta, a more mesic-adapted species, is much
less abundant. In the drift sample, the contracta/pellucida ratio is about 1:2, and in the
excavated quadrats, it is less than 1:14. Later in this chapter, I will suggest that the
contracta/pellucida ratio is a useful measure of prevailing soil moisture, and will show
that the ratio is very different in the bench deposits. Somewhat over half the individuals
in the drift deposit are members of fairly drought-resistant, stenotopic species (G.
pellucida, G. pentodon, H. singleyanus, Oligyra orbiculata, Pupoides albilabris), often
characteristic of open, sparsely wooded or grassy areas. These may have come from
grassy slopes adjacent to the creek or from open, grassy floodplain surfaces. Less than
half the individuals come from species (Gastrocopta contracta, Carychium mexicanum,
Strobilops texasiana, ?Vertigo rugulosa, Polygyra cereolus, Euconulus sp.) more
characteristic of wooded floodplains or more mesic habitats. Except for the aquatic snails,
this is a somewhat more drought-adapted assemblage than is seen in the bench deposits.

The drift sample includes at least 20 taxa of land snails (possibly more, since
some are unidentified) and at least seven of aquatic snails. Some of these deserve
comment, either because the identifications are tentative or because they have not been
997

previously reported from Goliad County. There are 49 specimens from the drift sample
and one from locality D-21 tentatively identified as Vertigo rugulosa. This is an
uncommon species, poorly mapped in Texas and not documented as occurring any closer
than Lavaca County and Jackson County (Cheatum and Fullington 1973:Fig. 11). This is
a tentative identification, previously unreported for Goliad County. Polygyra auriformis
is not reported from Goliad County, but is present in Victoria County and Gonzales
County (Cheatum and Fullington 1971:Fig. 6). Polygyra cereolus, also previously
unreported in Goliad County, is synonymous with Polygyra septemvolva and is typically
a tropical coastal resident (Pratt 1981:Fig. 11), perhaps a recent invader. Helicodiscus
eigenmanni is unreported from Goliad County but occurs in the Edwards Plateau area
(Hubricht 1985:Map 180). The three specimens found here are larger than typical H.
singleyanus.

Fullington (1978:20, 37) says that all known records of Cincinnatia integra
(synonymous with C. cincinnatiensis) in Texas are fossils, but expressed the opinion that
living colonies might be found in northeastern or central Texas. That seven specimens
were found in the drift sample may indicate a living population somewhere in the Berger
Bluff catchment. It seems unlikely as many as seven fossils would be present in a single
modern drift sample. Branson (1967:299) also found one in his Colorado River drift
sample. One specimen resembling Micromenetus dilatatus is present, but the
identification is tentative. Another small striated planorbid is unidentified; it resembles
some species of Drepanotrema, such as Drepanotrema aeruginosum (?).

998

Among the commented species (V. rugulosa, P. auriformis, P. cereolus, H.
eigenmanni, M. dilatatus, the possible Drepanotrema, and C. integra), only C. integra is
found in the bench deposits.

Among the (approximately) 27 taxa in the drift deposit, only one aquatic snail
(Helisoma anceps) might be considered large-bodied, while seven land or amphibious
species are medium–bodied, and the rest are microsnails. All of the major large-bodied
genera found in the bench deposits (Anguispira, Mesomphix, Mesodon, Rabdotus,
Planorbella) are absent from this drift deposit, either because of hydrodynamic bias or
some other reason. Very small genera like Helicodiscus or any of the Gastrocopta will
often float if the shell is empty, because surface tension bars water from entering the
shell. Larger species tend to fill with sediment or water, though I have seen abundant
Anguispira strongylodes in Brazos River drift. Mesodon and Rabdotus shells were found
on floodplains elsewhere in the catchment (Table 8.6), but no Anguispira or Mesomphix.

999

Table 8.8. Contemporary Snails from Coleto Creek Drift Sample, Preiss Ranch.
Terrestrial taxa
Carychium mexicanum adults
Euchemotrema leai adult
Euconulus sp. 1
Gastrocopta contracta adults
Gastrocopta pellucida adults
Gastrocopta pentodon adults
Gastrocopta procera adults
Gastrocopta spp., unidentified
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Helicodiscus eigenmanni 2
Helicodiscus singleyanus adults
Helicodiscus singleyanus juveniles
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Oligyra orbiculata juveniles
Polygyra auriformis adult
Polygyra cereolus
Polygyra texasiana adults
Polygyra sp. adults 3
Polygyra sp. juveniles
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma adults
Pupoides albilabris adults
Strobilops texasiana adults
Strobilops texasiana juveniles
Succineidae
cf. Vertigo rugulosa 4
Zonitoides arboreus
conical-discoidal juveniles 5
discoidal juveniles 6
spiral juveniles 7
TERRESTRIAL SUBTOTAL:

Count
59
1
11
96
201
28
13
33
8
3
98
74
36
11
1
14
29
4
30
1
10
38
20
12
49
1
29
8
47
965

Aquatic taxa
Biomphalaria obstructa
Cincinnatia integra
Helisoma anceps
Lymnaeidae, unident. juveniles
cf. Micromenetus dilatatus
Physella virgata juveniles
Planorbidae, juvenile
Planorbidae, unident. striated 8
AQUATIC SUBTOTAL:
GRAND TOTAL:

Count
22
7
1
7
1
8
1
1
48
1013

Terrestrial percent: 95.26
Aquatic percent: 4.74

Other aquatic fauna
Corbicula fluminea, paired
Corbicula fluminea, single
Ostracods, paired valves
Ostracods, single valves

64
24
8
11

Notes: Drift sample collected from south bank of Coleto Creek on Preiss Ranch, north of diatom
locality D-21, November 18, 1998. Identification by K. Brown.
1
2

Resembles Euconulus trochulus; largest is 2.7 mm in diameter.
Larger than H. singleyanus (3.6, 3.4, 3.0 mm diam.), faint horizontal ridges, deep interior teeth.

(Notes continued on following page)
1000

(Table 8.8 notes continued from previous page)
3

Possible P. cereolus X P. texasiana hybrid? Aperture resembles P. cereolus, but shell is domed
like P. texasiana.
4
Not previously reported in Goliad County. Most appear slightly subadult, less than 2 mm height.
5
No umbilicus (juvenile Oligyra or Polygyra, cannot discriminate).
6
Presumably juvenile Glyphyalinia, Mesomphix, or similar taxa.
7
No umbilicus; these resemble Gastrocopta sp. juveniles.
8
Resembles Drepanotrema aeruginosum?

1001

Table 8.9. Coleto Creek Drift Sample Ranked by Abundance.
Taxon (or category)
Gastrocopta pellucida adults
Helicodiscus singleyanus adults
Gastrocopta contracta adults
Helicodiscus singleyanus juveniles
Carychium mexicanum adults
cf. Vertigo rugulosa
spiral juveniles
Strobilops texasiana adults
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Gastrocopta spp., unidentified
Polygyra sp. juveniles
conical-discoidal juveniles
Polygyra texasiana adults
Gastrocopta pentodon adults
Biomphalaria obstructa
Strobilops texasiana juveniles
Polygyra cereolus
Gastrocopta procera adults
Succineidae
Euconulus sp.
Oligyra orbiculata juveniles
Pupoides albilabris adults
discoidal juveniles
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Physella virgata juveniles
Cincinnatia integra
Lymnaeidae, unident. juveniles
Polygyra sp. adults
Helicodiscus eigenmanni
cf. Micromenetus dilatatus
Euchemotrema leai adult
Helisoma anceps
Planorbidae, juvenile
Planorbidae, unident. striated
Polygyra auriformis adult
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma adults
Zonitoides arboreus

Count
201
98
96
74
59
49
47
38
36
33
30
29
29
28
22
20
14
13
12
11
11
10
8
8
8
7
7
4
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Note: Data from Table 8.6, reordered by abundance.
1002

Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
19
20
21
21
21
22
22
23
24
25
25
25
25
25
25
25
25

SNAILS FROM THE BENCH DEPOSITS AT BERGER BLUFF

Kinds of Samples
There are three kinds of samples of snails from the bench deposits:

1) Snails from the quarter-inch screen. All snails retained on the quarter-inch dry screen
were saved from six excavation units. In two other units, Unit 2 and N113 E98, snails
were not saved. Because dry screening resulted in significant shell breakage (especially
in the more heavily cemented lower levels) and loss of juveniles and microsnails, this
sampling method produced a partial, but fairly good sample of almost 9000 large and
medium-bodied snails, inventoried and identified in 1996 and 2003 by K. Brown. The
principal value of these samples is to provide a more extensive quantitative picture of the
large species than can be obtained from small matrix samples. Over 600 microsnails and
three sphaeriid clams were also recovered from sediment lodged in the apertures of (or
adhering to the outside of) larger species. These, termed “fortuitously recovered
microsnails,” cannot be considered an unbiased sample of the micro-sized species, but
they have also been inventoried and represent an additional source of useful information.

2) Snails from two matrix columns. Columns of matrix samples from two units, N109
E103 and N110 E102, were washed through fine-mesh geologic sieves to obtain a
representative sample of all body sizes. Processing of about 138 kg of sediment
representing 47 samples yielded 4905 snails and two sphaeriid clams altogether,
identified in 1982 by Raymond Neck. Because of the processing method, this is the most
unbiased sample of species available, although the sample volume is obviously not as
1003

large as in the other two methods. Microsnails and large and medium-bodied adults and
juveniles were recovered. Snails that floated to the surface during processing were
tabulated separately, in order to check whether any taxa were especially prone to fluvial
deposition.

3) Snails from bulk matrix passing the quarter-inch screen in N109 E96. All dry matrix
passing the quarter-inch screen in this unit was bagged in bulk and later washed through
fine-mesh screens at the Vertebrate Paleontology lab, primarily to check for
microvertebrate remains. The screen residue was stored in the lab, and selected levels
were later picked. This recovery method produced large numbers of microsnails and
juveniles from larger species, but because the picking and identification process is so
time- and labor-intensive, few levels have been picked. Analytically combined with the
quarter-inch sample from N109 E96, these levels have the (mostly unrealized) potential
to yield very large, relatively unbiased samples of all species and age groups. Fine mesh
samples tend to capture the embryos and juveniles that are missed in the 1/4-inch sample,
but because juveniles often cannot be identified very specifically, fine mesh samples may
actually tend to produce a higher proportion of unidentified specimens.

Snail Shell Taphonomy and Identification
Several factors potentially can influence the numerical composition of
archeological snail assemblages:
1) differential preservation of shells
2) differential identifiability of taxa
3) differential buoyancy of shells deposited by flooding
1004

4) variation in diligence of screeners recovering snails from 1/4-inch screen
5) differential reproductive rates of different species
Shell architecture (for example, the strength of the bonds between the whorls) and
compactness (overall size in relation to wall thickness) of the shell are the chief factors
determining whether a shell will survive chemical decay, bioturbation, and the
archeological recovery process. Survival, in this case, means preservation of enough of
the shell to ensure it is not counted more than once.

Identifiability of the bench species varies considerably. Some taxa, like
Anguispira strongylodes or Oligyra orbiculata can be reliably identified even from small
fragments of shell, based on distinctive texture or shape, and both of these taxa are
monotypic as well, so there is little likelihood of a misidentification. At the other extreme
are many of the microsnails (such as the various Gastrocopta species) which usually
cannot be identified unless nearly all the shell is present. The difficulty of identification
also varies widely. Many of the discoidal shells (both land and aquatic taxa) are hard to
discriminate (for example, Helicodiscus singleyanus and Hawaiia minuscula, or
Planorbella trivolvis and Helisoma anceps). In some cases, species that are
morphologically convergent have similar habitat preferences, so the analytical penalty for
making a wrong identification is not severe. Some of the individual taxa deserve
comment, as follows.
1) Small, compact shells in the genera Oligyra, Polygyra, Euchemotrema, and Strobilops
have survived best and may be slightly overrepresented.

1005

2) Anguispira shells tend to survive well (the exterior ridging adds strength) and are
readily identifiable, but the basal whorl is usually broken away at the aperture, so that
diameter measurements represent a minimum diameter only. Many shells even retain
their orange tiger banding, and this is the only species in the bench deposits to retain any
of its original coloration. Perhaps because of shell strength, juveniles are better
represented than in most other species, and even embryonic Anguispira are present in
some quantity in various levels.

3) Rabdotus shells are rarely found intact in the bench deposits (the more robust
Rabdotus alternatus found at the Smith Creek Bridge site are either rare or absent here),
but sometimes enough of the basal part remains to allow measurement of the aperture
height. Adults and juveniles may be somewhat underrepresented in the counts. The
number of Rabdotus intact enough for measurement is remarkably small, compared to the
Smith Creek Bridge site.

4) Survival of Mesomphix shells is poorest because the whorls are poorly joined (the
species name friabilis is descriptive), and the species is underrepresented. The shell is
rather thick-walled, but the joints are so weak that fragments survive much better than
complete shells.

5) Survival of Mesodon shells is similar to that of Mesomphix, or even worse. Very few
intact or measurable specimens were found in the bench deposits, but wall fragments can
be identified on the basis of very fine raised ridges, much finer than those seen on
Anguispira. Tentatively, two species of Mesodon are thought to be present, but the
scarcity of complete specimens obscures this issue.
1006

6) Some genera (most notably Praticolella and Mesodon) have spires that collapse easily,
making height measurements impossible. This, in turn, may make it impossible to assign
the specimen to species. Many of the Rabdotus shells from the bench also have the spires
snapped off, making height measurements impossible.

7) There are also survivorship differences among the microsnails. Compact species like
Strobilops seem to be resistant to destruction. Among the species of Gastrocopta, G.
contracta, which is short and wide with a well-developed reflected lip at the aperture,
seems to be more durable than G. pellucida, which is slender and more delicate.

8) Slug plates are perhaps the most durable of all the shells in the deposits, but are so
difficult to recognize in sorting that they are probably the most underrepresented element
in the entire assemblage. Slug plates resemble nothing more than small fractured quartz
pebbles, and are very easy to overlook. Only two slug plates have been found in the
bench deposits, but I suspect they are far more common and have simply been missed in
sorting.
Figures 8.22 and 8.23 show the stratigraphic distribution of large and mediumbodied snails (adults and juveniles) from the 1/4-inch screen in six excavation units.
Fortuitously recovered microsnails are omitted from these plots, and the histograms show
density (number of individuals per cubic meter of fill) in order to accommodate the oddsized excavation levels at the top of most of the excavation units. These histograms show
that snails are abundant in the uppermost strata (particularly strata 3 and 2D, where they
number over 9000 specimens per cubic meter in one unit), but decline precipitously in

1007

abundance with depth. In all the units, the counts diminish dramatically below the base of
stratum 2C.

Figure 8.22. Density of Snails Recovered From Quarter-Inch Screen, Eastern Three
Units. Snail density (counts of individuals per cubic meter, not including
microsnails) is plotted by excavation level in the three easternmost
excavation units. Note reduction in density below stratum 2C.
1008

Figure 8.23. Density of Snails Recovered From Quarter-Inch Screen, Western Three
Units. Snail density (counts of individuals per cubic meter, not including
microsnails) is plotted by excavation level in the three westernmost
excavation units. Note reduction in density below stratum 2C.

1009

This vertical pattern is exactly opposite to that that displayed by the diatoms. In
the single column of samples (from N110 E102) analyzed, diatoms become more
abundant and diverse with depth. As a result of this distribution, paleoenvironmental
information from snails is biased toward the upper half of the bench deposits. There are
four possible explanations for the observed vertical distribution:
1) Snail populations expanded late in the history of the bench deposits. This seems
unlikely, since other data from the site suggests the environment was becoming drier and
subject to more frequent flooding late in the history of the bench.

2) Declining sedimentation rates allowed more shells to accumulate at the top of the
bench. This also seems unlikely. As discussed in Chapter 4, there may have been longterm changes in sedimentation rates, but there is no unambiguous evidence for it.
Sedimentation rates were perhaps slightly higher in stratum 1, and possibly in some of
the other sandy units, but there is no reason to assume a dramatic slowing of
sedimentation at the top of the bench. Resolution of the radiocarbon assays is too poor to
clarify this issue.

3) Chemical decay has removed shells from the lower deposits. Chemical dissolution and
removal in the lower strata is very likely. In Unit N112 E97, shells in the 92.45-92.40 m
level and below show thinning and weakening of the shell wall and heavier exterior
carbonate deposits. In some cases, heavy, dense carbonate deposition inside shells has
formed a steinkern inside the shell, fragmenting the wall and forcing the fragments apart
with expansion.

1010

4) More thorough cementation of the lower strata has caused increased breakage of
shells recovered from the 1/4-inch screen. In the carbonate-cemented lower levels of the
bench deposits, heavy working of the fill was necessary during field dry-screening in
order to force it though the 1/4-inch screen, resulting in severe breakage of snails shells.
This is probably the single most important factor responsible for reduced snail counts in
the lower strata.
Figures 8.24 and 8.25 show the same data as the top two panels in Figure 8.22,
but plotted as curves rather than histograms. The heavy solid curve is for large and
medium-bodied snails from the quarter-inch screen. Also shown, as a dashed line, is the
curve for snail density in the snail matrix columns (all body sizes, from microsnails to
large-bodied species) for the two units where snails from came small matrix samples.
These two figures illustrate the effect that recovery method has on snail counts. In both
Figure 8.24 and Figure 8.25, snail density is higher in the matrix columns than on the dry
screen, at least in the lower strata, but density fluctuations are more or less synchronized.
In the upper parts of both excavation units (indicated by the brackets) the two density
measures become desynchronized, and the curves cross toward the top of each plot.

Examination of these two plots suggests not only that factor 4 listed above (dry
screen breakage) is a major contributor to the decline in snail counts, but some
environmental factor causing decoupling of microsnail and large/medium snail
population sizes may have become active later in the history of the bench deposits (in
upper stratum 2B and above).

1011

Figure 8.24. Coarse and Fine Mesh Recovery Compared for Unit N109 E103. Solid line
shows density of large and medium-bodied snails from the ¼-inch screen
(fortuitously recovered microsnails are not included here); dashed line
shows density of all body sizes from matrix samples wet-sieved through fine
mesh. Bracketed area indicates where the two recovery methods become
desynchronized.

1012

Figure 8.25. Coarse and Fine Mesh Recovery Compared for Unit N110 E102. Solid line
shows density of large and medium-bodied snails from the ¼-inch screen
(fortuitously recovered microsnails are not included here); dashed line
shows density of all body sizes from matrix samples wet-sieved through fine
mesh. Bracketed area indicates where the two recovery methods become
desynchronized.

1013

Figure 8.26 was compiled in order to discover whether unequal shell breakage
and loss in the lower part of the bench deposits has affected the composition of the large
and medium-bodied assemblage from the 1/4-inch screen. Data from all excavation units
except Unit 2 and N113 E98 are aggregated. The upper pie chart shows the percentage
composition for strata 2D and 3 combined, while the lower one shows strata 1 and 2A
combined. Counts from stratum 2B, which is intermediate in preservation characteristics
and counts of microsnails, are omitted. Only the most abundant taxa are labeled for
clarity. These two pie charts show that the most durable species tend to dominate both,
but the two are not as different as might be expected. The principal difference between
the two is that Anguispira strongylodes, the most abundant species in strata 1 and 2A,
retreats to fifth rank in the upper pie chart. This may be due partly to taphonomic
considerations, but it also may be largely due to habitat change. In general, these
diagrams suggest shell decay and loss has biased the earlier part of the record less than I
would have expected, given the severe reduction in counts toward the base of the bench
deposits.

1014

Figure 8.26. Principal Taxa From the Quarter-Inch Screen, Upper and Lower Part of the
Bench Deposits. Microsnails and counts from stratum 2B are omitted. The
chief difference is the reduction in Anguispira in the upper diagram.
1015

Opercula and Snail Eggs
Although shell preservation is poor in the lower part of the bench deposits, it is
actually quite good in the upper part, as demonstrated by the recovery of delicate, thinwalled microsnails like Carychium mexicanum or Helicodiscus singleyanus, and very
small, thin-walled, embryonic or juvenile Rabdotus, Anguispira, Glyphyalinia, and other
taxa.

Two other kinds of items illustrate the excellent preservation of snail assemblages
in the upper part of the bench. Over 600 opercula from Oligyra orbiculata were
fortuitously recovered while processing snails from the 1/4-inch screen sample (Table
8.10). These small, teardrop-shaped, leaflike bits of shell (Fig. 8.27) can easily fall
through 1/4-inch mesh, so thousands of them were probably present in the sediment that
was screened, and those recovered are probably a very small fraction of the number that
were originally present. They are common inclusions in south Texas archeological sites.
There are other operculate species (such as Pomatiopsis lapidaria and Valvata
tricarinata) present, but none of their opercula have been found. As Table 8.10 shows,
the distribution of opercula is similar to that of shells – most are confined to stratum 2D
and above, except in unit N112 E97, where significant numbers were found in stratum
2C. Only a few specimens were found in stratum 2A, and none from the 1/4-inch screen
in stratum 1.

1016

Table 8.10. Stratigraphic Distribution of Opercula from Oligyra orbiculata.
N109 E103
93.14-92.90
92.90-92.85
92.85-92.80
92.80-92.75
92.75-92.70
92.70-92.65
92.65-92.60
92.60-92.55
92.55-92.50
92.50-92.45
92.45-92.40
92.40-92.35
92.35-92.30
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20
92.20-92.15
92.15-92.10
92.10-92.05
92.05-92.00
92.00-91.95
91.95-91.90
N110 E102
93.08-92.90
92.90-92.80
92.80-92.75
92.75-92.70
92.70-92.65
92.65-92.60
92.60-92.55
92.55-92.50
92.50-92.45
92.45-92.40
92.40-92.35
92.35-92.30
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20
92.20-92.15
92.15-92.10
92.10-92.05
92.05-92.00
92.00-91.95
91.95-91.90

Count
31
20
20
7
4
9
6
6
1
1
1

1
2

3
7
13
7
4
2
1

1
1

Stratum
2D/3
2D/3
2D
2D
2D
2D
2C/2D
2C
2B/2C
2B
2B
2B
2B
2B
2B
2A/2B
2A
2A
1/2A
1
1

91.90-91.85
91.85-91.80
91.80-91.75
91.75-91.70
91.70-91.65
91.65-91.60
91.60-91.55
N111 E101
92.89-92.80
92.80-92.70
92.70-92.65
92.65-92.60
92.60-92.55
92.55-92.50
92.50-92.45
92.45-92.40
92.40-92.35
92.35-92.30
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20
92.20-92.15
92.15-92.10
92.10-92.05
92.05-92.00
92.00-91.95
91.95-91.90

3*
2D/3
2D
2D
2C
2C
2B/2C
2B/2C
2B
2B
2B
2B
2B
2A/2B
2A/2B
2A
2A
2A
2A/2A calcrete
2A calcrete

N112 E99
92.89-92.60
92.60-92.55
92.55-92.50
92.50-92.45
92.45-92.40
92.40-92.35
92.35-92.30
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20
92.20-92.15
92.15-92.10
92.10-92.05
92.05-92.00
92.00-91.95
91.95-91.90

1017

1/2A calcrete
1
1
1
1
1
1

4
26
4
14
6
3

1
1

1

11
1

1

2D/3
2D
2C/2D
2C
2B/2C
2B
2B
2B
2B
2B
2B
2A/2B
2A
2A
2A
2A
1/2A
1

2C/2D
2B/2C
2B
2B
2B
2B
2A/2B
2A/2B
2A
2A
2A
1/2A
1
1
1

(Table 8.10 continued)
N112 E97
93.14-92.75
92.75-92.70
92.70-92.65
92.65-92.60
92.60-92.55
92.55-92.50
92.50-92.45
92.45-92.40
92.40-92.35
92.35-92.30
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20
92.20-92.15

Count
68
81
10
7
3
2

1

N109 E96
93.08-93.00
93.00-92.95
92.95-92.90
92.90-92.85
92.85-92.80
92.80-92.75
92.75-92.70
92.70-92.65
92.65-92.60
92.60-92.55
92.55-92.50
92.50-92.45
92.45-92.40
92.40-92.35
92.35-92.30
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20
92.20-92.15
92.15-92.10
92.10-92.05
92.05-92.00

Stratum
2D/3
2C/2D
2C
2C
2B/2C
2B
2B
2B
2B
2B
2A/2B
2A
2A

1018

Count
31
23
30
34
48
24
8
9
7
4
5
1
1
1

1

Stratum
2D
2D
2D
2D
2D
2D
2D
2D
2D
2D
2C/2D
2C
2C
2B/2C
2B
2B
2A
2A
2A
2A
2A

Figure 8.27. Opercula From Oligyra orbiculata. Two examples from N109 E96 (92.7092.65 m), 1/4-inch screen sample.
The apertures of the larger shells buried in the bench deposits offer a protected
microenvironment, and it is not uncommon to find small bits of charcoal, baked clay, or
the shells of juveniles or smaller snail species lodged in sediment filling the aperture. In
at least two instances, calcified snail eggs were found lodged in the apertures of adult
individuals recovered from the 1/4-inch screen. Besides demonstrating the probable
presence of reproducing populations on the site itself, these fragile specimens illustrate
the excellent preservation of the snail fauna in stratum 2D and above.

1019

Snail eggs have been previously recovered from Pleistocene and earlier deposits
on the Plains and in the Mississippi Valley (Pierce 1993; Tompa 1976, especially Fig. 1).
A clutch of calcified eggs was found in the aperture of an adult Anguispira strongylodes
(16.7 mm in diameter) from N109 E96 (92.85-92.80 m, Lot B-128) recovered from the
1/4-inch screen (Fig. 8.28). There are two complete or nearly complete spherical eggs
about 2.0 mm in diameter, plus fragments of another 4-5 (?) eggs, accompanied by the
shell of a juvenile Glyphyalinia umbilicata (?). These appear slightly smaller than the
2.2-2.4 mm reported by Hubricht (1952:33-34, as Anguispira alternata crassa, obsolete
taxonomy) as well as those of the related species, Anguispira alternata, which has eggs
reported to be 2.5 mm in diameter by Gugler (1963:198), or 2.27-2.52 mm by Kingston
(1966:531), or 2-3 mm by Elwell and Ulmer (1971:205). Anguispira alternata eggs are
laid in clutches of 9 to 28 according to Kingston (1966:531) or 2 to 25 according to
Elwell and Ulmer (1971:205). These eggs are presumed to be from a gravid individual
that died in the spring or early summer before ovipositing, although it should be noted
that another Anguispira shell from the same lot contained two very small juvenile
Anguispira that had already hatched, and were presumably fortuitously lodged in the
shell aperture.

In another example, remains of two spherical calcified eggs (Fig. 8.29) were
found in the aperture of an adult Mesomphix friabilis shell from the 1/4-inch screen
sample in N109 E96 (92.70-92.65 m, Lot B-131). These are essentially identical in size
(both 2.1 mm diameter) and appearance to the Anguispira eggs, and the possibility exists
that they represent an instance of an Anguispira individual using an empty Mesomphix
shell for oviposition.

1020

Figure 8.28. Calcified Eggshells From Anguispira strongylodes Aperture. Presumed to be
Anguispira eggs, these came from N109 E96 (92.85-92.80 m). These are the
two most complete specimens.

Figure 8.29. Calcified Eggshells From Mesomphix friabilis Aperture. Found in N109 E96
(92.70-92.65 m).
1021

All of these eggs are smaller than those reported by Conkin, Conkin and Mason
(1962:49, Plate 1, Fig. 14) from Angelita Terrace deposits at the Fordyce Quarry in San
Patricio County.

Snail Faunas as Death Assemblages
Except for the live succineids collected on the Preiss Ranch, and some of the
faunas collected by Raymond Neck, all of the snail assemblages discussed here, including
the Preiss Ranch collections, are death assemblages. Studies of marine mollusks where
both live and dead individuals are collected from the same area show that, on average,
death assemblages contain about 25% more species than live assemblages, due to the
effects of time-averaging. Likewise, there are usually more dead individuals than live, so
abundance is time-averaged as well. On the other hand, relative abundance rankings are
more robust and are usually more comparable between live and dead assemblages
(Kidwell 2002).

It is likely that archeological snail faunas are similarly inflated in species richness
and abundance due to time-averaging, and this may be responsible for some of the
contrasts between archeological and contemporary faunas seen at various places in Texas.
On the other hand, Neck (1987) has presented good evidence for progressive extirpation
of species – in other words, some taxa simply drop out of the record during the Holocene,
never to reappear, regardless of how well sampled the modern fauna might be. All of
these factors (time-averaging, sampling and extraction methods, mesh size, and
taphonomic biasing) must be considered when comparing contemporary and
archeological faunas.
1022

SPECIES ACCOUNTS
The following long section presents a brief resume of each species found in the
bench deposits. While these may be of little interest to the general reader, it is here that
specific information on habitat preference or taxonomic ambiguity will be found, and I
recommend reading at least the accounts for a few of the key species, like Carychium
mexicanum, Gastrocopta contracta, G. pellucida, Pomatiopsis lapidaria, Cincinnatia
integra, and Valvata tricarinata. For each, I list the counts from the snail matrix columns
and 1/4-inch screen samples. Counts from bulk matrix in N109 E96 are not listed because
the inventory is not complete. There are many more snails in those samples, but I have no
final count. Each account will list any difficulties in identification or classification, a
summary of habitat preferences, and some indication of where the taxon has been found
in the archeological or paleontological landscape. Table 8.11 is a comprehensive species
list for the bench deposits, with taxon code names for use in tables and diagrams. Table
8.12 is a suggested taxonomy for the land and amphibious species only, based on Burch
and Pearce (1990). Note that this is only one of many competing recent taxonomies, and
it differs from the older conventional taxonomy. For example, the family Polygyridae in
the older taxonomy is here replaced by the family Mesodontidae.

TAXONOMIC REVISIONS SINCE 1982
The first assessment of the snail fauna was a study of two sieved matrix columns
done in 1982 by Raymond Neck. This has served as the foundation for all subsequent
work, but I have revised some of the taxonomy used then because 1) a few of the species
names have changed since then; 2) a few detailed studies of specific taxa by other
malacologists (for example, Hubricht 1983 and Pratt 1981) have led to better
1023

understanding of classifications; 3) I have done metric studies on some taxa that have
some bearing on classification; and 4) I have found some taxa that I believe were either
not present in the matrix columns or might have been overlooked. The taxonomic
changes that I have made since Neck’s original 1982 study are as follows.
1) Change Praticolella berlandieriana to Praticolella pachyloma. Based on Hubricht
(1983), I believe essentially all the Praticolella at Berger Bluff fit the definition of P.
pachyloma better than P. berlandieriana, as used by Neck.

2) Change Rabdotus mooreanus and Rabdotus dealbatus to Rabdotus sp. I suspect that
the Rabdotus in the bench deposits fit the definition of R. dealbatus best, but
identification is ambiguous. See discussion in species accounts.

3) Change Stenotrema leai aliciae to Euchemotrema leai. The genus name has changed,
and I believe the subspecies is uncertain.

4) Change Helicina orbiculata tropica to Oligyra orbiculata. The genus name has
changed, and studies have shown the subspecies name has little significance.

5) Add Mesodon cf. M. roemeri. Neck did not recognize any Mesodon roemeri (a central
Texas species) in the deposits, but I believe some of the specimens fit the morphology
best.

1024

6) Add Glyphyalinia cf. G. roemeri. Neck classified all Glyphyalinia as G. umbilicata,
but three specimens from the 1/4-inch screen sample seem to fit the description of G.
roemeri.

7) Change Polygyra to Polygyra texasiana triodontoides. Most of the Polygyra in the
bench deposits seem to fit the definition of P. texasiana triodontoides best, based on
Pratt (1981).

8) Add unidentified slug. Neck found no slug plates in either of the matrix columns, but
at least two examples have been found in the N109 E96 bulk matrix samples.

9) Change Physa virgata to Physella virgata. The genus name has changed.

10) Add Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp. A snail that I believe resembles Fossaria has been
found since Neck’s original work.

11) Change Helisoma trivolvis to Planorbella trivolvis. The genus name has changed.

1025

Table 8.11. Comprehensive List of Snail Taxa From the Bench Deposits.
Terrestrial species

Taxon code

Anguispira strongylodes
Carychium mexicanum
Euchemotrema leai
Gastrocopta armifera*
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon
Gastrocopta procera
Gastrocopta tappaniana
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Glyphyalinia cf. G. roemeri (?)
Hawaiia minuscula
Helicodiscus singleyanus
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri (?)

ANGS
CARM
EUL
GARM
GCON
GPEL
GPEN
GPRO
GTAP
GLYU
GLYR
HAWM
HELS
MROE

Mesodon thyroidus

MTHY

Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata

MEZF
OLIO

Polygyra mooreana

PMOO

Polygyra texasiana triodontoides
Praticolella pachyloma (P. berlandieriana?)
Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Rabdotus dealbatus (R. mooreanus?, R. alternatus?)
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Unidentified slug

PTEX
PRAP
PUPD
PALB
RAB
STRO
ZONA
SLUG

Amphibious species
Catinella vermeta
Pomatiopsis lapidaria**

CATV
PLAP

Aquatic species
Biomphalaria obstructa
Cincinnatia integra***
Gyraulus parvus
Helisoma anceps
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp. (?)
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Valvata tricarinata**

BIOO
CINI
GYRP
HANC
LYM
PHYV
PTRI
VALT

*
Now only approximately west of Balcones Escarpment; extirpated from Gulf Coastal Plain?
** Extirpated in Texas.
*** Listed by Fullington (1978:20) as “Fossil, potentially recent” but apparently surviving
sparsely in Coleto Creek and lower Guadalupe River drainages.

1026

Table 8.12. Taxonomy of Land and Amphibious Snails From the Bench.
Class Gastropoda
Subclass Prosobranchia
Order Archaeogastropoda
Suborder Neritopsina
Superfamily Neritoidea
Family Helicinidae
Oligyra orbiculata
Order Mesogastropoda
Superfamily Truncatelloidea
Family Pomatiposidae
Pomatiopsis lapidaria [amphibious]
Subclass Pulmonata
Order Acteophila
Superfamily Auriculoidea
Family Carychiidae
Carychium mexicanum
Order Geophila
Suborder Orthurethra
Superfamily Pupilloidea
Family Stroblipsidae
Strobilops texasiana
Family Pupillidae
Vertigininae
Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupillinae
Pupoides albilabris
Chondrininae
Gastrocopta armifera
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastropcopta pentodon
Gastrocopta tappaniana
Suborder Heterurethra
Superfamily Succinoidea
Family Succineidae
Catinella vermeta (avara) [amphibious]
Suborder Sigmurethra
Infraorder Holopodopes
Superfamily Orthalicoidea
Family Orthalicidae (= Bulimulidae)
Rabdotus dealbatus
1027

(Table 8.12, continued)
Infraorder Aulacopoda
Superfamily Arionoidea
Family Helicodiscidae
Helicodiscus singleyanus
Family Discidae
Anguispira strongylodes
Superfamily Limacoidea
Family Vitrinidae
Zonitinae
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Hawaiia minuscula
Mesomphix friabilis
Zonitoides arboreus
Family Limacidae
(Deroceras laeve)
Infraorder Holopoda
Superfamily Mesdontoidea
Family Mesodontidae
Mesodontinae
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon thyroidus
Polygyra texasiana triodontoides
Praticolella pachyloma
Euchemotrema leai
Adapted from Burch and Pearce (1990:206-210); aquatic snails are not listed.

TERRESTRIAL SNAILS
Anguispira strongylodes (Fig. 8.30), ANGS
Matrix columns: 372 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 1225 specimens
Body size: Large bodied, adults from the bench deposits about 13.0-19.7 mm in diameter

1028

Figure 8.30. Anguispira strongylodes. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. N112
E97 (93.14-92.75 m), Lot B-112.
1029

This species was originally classified as a weakly banded subspecies (Anguispira
alternata strongylodes) of Anguispira alternata by Pilsbry (1948:577) and has only
recently been elevated to specific status. Consequently, although A. alternata is one of
the most studied and best described North American snails, almost nothing has been
published specifically about Anguispira strongylodes. Under current taxonomy, A.
alternata occupies the northern part of the eastern US (Hubricht 1985:Map 158) and A.
strongylodes the southern part (Fig. 8.3), including Texas. Previous references to A.
alternata in Texas can now be linked to A. strongylodes. The genus has many variants
(see MacMillan 1940). Pilsbry lists the diameter as 18 mm, but the largest adults from the
bench deposits average about 17 mm, and the largest specimen is 19.7 mm in diameter.
Juveniles of various sizes are common, down to embryos as small as 1.7 mm in diameter.
According to Elwell and Ulmer (1971:209), newly hatched A. alternata are about 2 mm
in diameter, so the smallest shells 1.7-1.8 mm in diameter represent “stillborn”
hatchlings. Juveniles from the bench deposits may equal or outnumber adults, and
indicate the presence of a breeding population on or near the site. According to Elwell
and Ulmer (1971:204), ovipositing A. alternata are 13 mm in diameter or larger, so adult
A. strongylodes are presumed to be at least 13 mm in size (shells 8 mm in diameter are
about 14.5 weeks old). The shell is prominently ribbed and fairly thick-walled and sturdy,
and consequently may be slightly overrepresented in the deposits compared to less robust
species. Even small fragments can easily be identified by the ribbing. Sometimes known
by the common name “Southeastern Tigersnail,” A. strongylodes is characterized by
weak orange banding on the shell exterior. Banding is best developed on juveniles rather
than embryos or adults, and is strongest in the upper part of the bench, in stratum 2C or
above, but occasional banded individuals were found as deep as stratum 2B. This is the
only pigmented species found in the bench deposits.
1030

Anguispira strongylodes is chiefly a woodland snail (Hubricht 1985:18) reaching
its southwestern limit in the counties of De Witt, Victoria, and San Patricio (McGee
1965:90). Hubricht (1964:32, as A. alternata crassa) found it under logs in pinehardwood forest in the Sulphur River bottom, Cass County. In Tennessee, it was found to
prefer limestone substrates, moist soils, and steep forested slopes (Coney et al. 1982:83,
93). Habitat preferences of the closely related species Anguispira alternata are fairly well
documented. The species is colonial (Leonard 1959:130) and occurs in wooded
floodplains and moist upland wooded areas (Amaral and Witter 1973:421; Baker
1935:261-262; Douglas 1963:186; Branson and Batch 1970:344; Metcalf 1962:285;
Nekola and Smith 1999). According to LaRocque (1970:671-672, extensive discussion) it
is a hardy snail favoring deciduous woodland (often in dead leaves, humus, or under logs
or rocks) but able to live in drier, more open areas (see also Leonard 1959:130). In Iowa,
Elwell and Ulmer (1971:204) report
Anguispira alternata was found predominantly in well-established deciduous
forests with mesic soil conditions and generally low light intensities during the
summer. They were most numerous on north-facing slopes where there were
downed trees in various stages of decomposition and abundant leaf litter in fall,
winter and spring…. Best collecting sites in fall and early spring were leafclogged spillways, perhaps because of greater water retention. In at least one
collecting area there was a conspicuous size differential between snails found on
and in the soil and those found under bark on decaying trees. Larger snails (8-19
mm) were found on the soil surface or at depths of approximately 2-3 cm; smaller
ones (3-7 mm) were found under bark on decaying trees.
In the bench deposits, the large component of Anguispira strongylodes is regarded
as an indicator of well-developed deciduous woodland (both on the floodplain and valley
slopes) and abundant decaying wood (a signal of mature forest) in the Younger Dryas and
early Holocene. The strong presence of juveniles in the deposits probably indicates heavy
deciduous canopy and downed wood on or very near the site. The related species
1031

Anguispira alternata is occasionally found as a minor taxon in grasslands, provided cover
in the form of logs or rocks is available (see Theler 1997:Table 4), but the genus is a
typical eastern woodland snail and rarely extends very far onto the Plains. Daily
minimum distances traveled by these snails average only about 41 cm, but may be as
much as 3.25 m (Karson 1999:Fig. 12).

The stratigraphic distribution of A. strongylodes in the bench deposits is variable.
It occurs throughout the section, but in nearly all the 1/4-inch screen samples, it is much
more abundant at the top of the section (above 92.50 m), generally declining in
abundance toward the base. However, this may be chiefly a result of shell breakage
during screening, because the frequency curves for Anguispira in the two fine-sieved
matrix columns (N109 E103 and N110 E102) look very different. In the N110 E102
column, the frequency actually peaks at 92.25-92.20 m, near the base of stratum 2B. In
the N109 E103 column, the peak in frequency is at the top of the section, but there are
significant numbers of specimens throughout the section.

According to Elwell and Ulmer (1971:206), Anguispira alternata forms an
epiphragm to seal the aperture and is resistant to desiccation; adults can estivate for
several months. They burrow shallowly into the soil in clusters to estivate in the winter
months (Douglas 1963:192; MacMillan 1940:380); whether the southern form,
Anguispira strongylodes also does this is unreported. The snails will climb to avoid
immersion in water.

Anguispira strongylodes has been recovered archeologically in east and southeast
Texas and in the eastern part of central Texas (Amaral and Witter 1973; Brown and
1032

Hughes 2003:126; Bond 1978:Table 4; Fullington 1995:Table H-1; Gardner 2000:221222; Shaw et al. 1998; Kirby and Reeder 1980; Moore et al. 1996), where it is listed as A.
alternata in the older literature. According to Simmons (1956), it is found in central
Texas burned rock middens, although it is rarely mentioned in any of the recent literature
on such sites. Curiously, only a single specimen was found at the Guadalupe Bay site
(Fullington 2002a:Table 13-1), and none were found at the Smith Creek Bridge site
(Brown 2002). None were found in surveys of the modern and recent fauna on the Preiss
Ranch, and none were seen anywhere in my diatom sampling throughout the Berger Bluff
catchment, although several Mesodon specimens (a taxon often associated with
Anguispira) were found. Raymond Neck also reported it from Victoria and from Goliad
State Park (Table 8.5). It is reported from 41 GD 21 (Fox 1979:Table 8).

The species is reported from Pleistocene terrace deposits on Clear Creek, Denton
County, near the Aubrey site (Cheatum and Allen 1963:175) but not from the Aubrey site
(Neck 2001). It is reported from the Lewisville site (Crook and Harris 1957:57). Conkin,
Conkin and Mason (1962:38) reported it from Pleistocene terrace deposits on the Nueces
River (Fordyce Quarry, San Patricio County). These specimens (reported as Anguispira
alternata) ranged in diameter from 16.2 to 18.0 mm. The location is well to the south of
its present southern limit in Goliad County. Three specimens were also found at the Pavo
Real site (Brown 2003:270). here again, the species is to the south of its present limit in
Comal County.
Carychium mexicanum (Fig. 8.31), CARM
Matrix columns: 336 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 4 fortuitously recovered specimens
Body size: Microsnail, maximum height 1.7-2.0 mm (Fullington and Pratt 1974:10)
1033

Figure 8.31. Carychium mexicanum. Two specimens from N109 E96 (92.85-92.80 m),
Lot B-128.
This is the smallest snail found in the bench deposits. High quality SEM photos,
including detail of the surface texture, have been published by Burch and Van Devender
(1980:Figs. 63-65, 67-68). A surprising number were recovered by fine mesh sieving of
the matrix columns, and the near absence of the species from the 1/4-inch screen sample
is due to its small size. The species is stratigraphically concentrated, mostly in the upper
part of stratum 2B, with a secondary concentration in stratum 2A or 1. This is a coastal
plain species (Fig. 8.4; Hubricht 1985:Map 14; Burch and Van Devender 1980:Fig 73),
perhaps temperature-limited at the northern edge of its range, but in Texas, it occupies
most of the eastern half of the state (Fig. 8.8). Correa Sandoval (2003) reports it from
Nuevo León, Tamaulipas, and San Luis Potosí, and it apparently extends as far south as
Guatemala (Pilsbry 1948:1060). Fullington and Pratt (1974:9, 10) observe that
1034

“generally, the carychiids are found only in moist or wet places in old logs or under
masses of decaying, wet leaves…. Carychium mexicanum in Texas is found in leaf litter,
usually on a floodplain. It is often common where it occurs, but is sporadic in its
distribution.” Hubricht notes “Found in wetter habitats than C. exile, although they are
sometimes found together. In Florida it is usually found in swamps. Common in eastern
Mexico” (Hubricht 1985:6). Fullington (1978a:113) also notes that “it is generally in
close association with water and has been collected crawling in submerged moss.” A
related species, C. exile, is sometimes found as a marsh snail, and another related species,
C. exiguum, is frequently found as a Pleistocene fossil in Southern Plains sites.

Because Carychium mexicanum is so small, it is often overlooked both in
contemporary surveys and in archeological recovery. Although practically all Carychium
on the high Plains are C. exiguum, Fullington (1978a:113) nevertheless reports C.
mexicanum as present at the Rex Rodgers site, far to the northwest of its present
distribution. It has also been found at 41 MM 340 and 341 (Fullington 2001), Denton
Creek (Neck 1994a:Table 17), Wilson-Leonard (Shaw et al. 1998:Table 37-3) and the
Perry site in Freestone County (Fullington 1987), and Raymond Neck (1986a) recovered
contemporary specimens from screened leaf litter at Kenyon Rockshelter, but did not find
any in the archeological deposits. It can be regarded as a good mesic floodplain indicator
in the bench deposits. I list it here as terrestrial rather than amphibious. The drift sample
from the Preiss Ranch contained 59 specimens (Table 8.9).
Euchemotrema leai (Fig. 8.32), EUL
Matrix columns: 13 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 54 specimens
Body size: Medium-bodied, diameter 7.0-9.3 mm (Cheatum and Fullington 1971:41-42),
8.5-9.2 mm (Logsdon 1967:77-78), 6.5-8.5 mm, height 3.5-5.6 mm (Branson 1969:389)
1035

Figure 8.32. Euchemotrema leai. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. Both
specimens from N109 E103 (92.70-92.65 m), lot B-10.

1036

These distinctive medium-bodied polygyrids were formerly termed Stenotrema
leai aliciae, and appear as such in most of the published literature. A related subspecies,
Euchemotrema leai cheatumi, is reported from Palmetto State Park, near Ottine in
Gonzales County (note that some of the measured specimens reported by Cheatum and
Fullington also come from here), but does not seem to be present at Berger Bluff. The
latter is smaller and shallower in profile (Fullington 1974). Specimens from the bench
deposits are apparently all examples of the aliciae subspecies. For specimens from the
1/4-inch screen, the mean diameter is 8.54 ± 0.33 mm (range, 7.8-9.2 mm, N = 40). The
mean shell height is 5.57 ± 0.29 mm (range, 5.0-6.2 mm, N = 28). Shells are reasonably
durable, although prone to collapsed spires. The parietal teeth are poorly attached and are
often missing from the bench specimens.

Regarding habitat preference, Hubricht (1985:41) says “usually found in
meadows, along roadsides, and near springs, but also found in floodplain woods.”
Logsdon (1967:77) reports “found in damp places under logs, bark or leaves; near water.”
Metcalf (1962:282-283) reports the species “was most abundant along the wooded
floodplain of the Arkansas River under leaf litter and decaying logs and branches.”
Leonard (1959:87) says “The typical subspecies inhabits very humid areas… found in
Kansas both in the moist wooded areas of the eastern part of the State and in the more
open situations of the central third, while occasional local populations are known in
wooded areas associated with streams in the western third.” Basch, Bainer and Wilhm
(1970:568): “In all cases, this species was collected on the reservation in wooded or
shaded areas having a fair amount of moisture. It was most common around the limestone
ledge in C33, but was not abundant anywhere. At the five stations where this species was
collected, shells were found under decaying logs, in leaf mold and in other decaying plant
1037

parts.” LaRocque (1970:568) says “damp places near water” and gives a detailed
synopsis. Further habitat descriptions can be found in Goodrich and van der Schalie
(1944:266, as S. monodon), Leonard and Goble (1952:1040), and Branson and Batch
(1970:339). It is absent from the Southern Plains Gastropod Survey.

This species occurs throughout the lower Mississippi River Valley, north to
Kansas and Iowa, east into Georgia and Kentucky (Hubricht 1985:Map 427). In Texas, it
occupies the eastern half of the state, except in south Texas where it is largely confined to
the coast (Fig. 8.11). Archeological examples have been recovered from the Domebo site
(Cheatum and Allen 1966:38-39), the Lewisville site (Crook and Harris 1957:57), the
Aubrey site, Lake Theo, the Smith Creek Bridge site, the Guadalupe Bay site, the
Gaulding site, 41 FB 34 (Neck 1986b), FB 199, FB 200, the Berclair Terrace (Conkin
and Conkin 1962:Fig. 5, 6, as Stenotrema monodon aliciae) and the Pavo Real site.
Paleontological localities include the Stillhouse Hollow site (Cheatum and Slaughter
1966:53), Wood Pit Pond (Slaughter et al. 1962:48), Fordyce Quarry (Conkin, Conkin
and Mason 1962:29) and various undated central and south Texas exposures reported by
Hubricht (1962).

In the bench deposits, this species is interpreted as an indicator of mesic riparian
woodland with abundant leaf litter and rotting wood.
Gastrocopta armifera, GARM
Matrix columns: 1 specimen
1/4-inch screen sample: none
Body size: Microsnail, maximum height 3.7-5.0 mm (Cheatum and Fullington 1973:11)

1038

This is the largest species of Gastrocopta in Texas, and although it occurs at
many archeological and paleontological sites scattered throughout the Plains, only a
single example was found in the bench deposits (N109 E103, 92.40-92.35 m). In Texas,
this calciphile species is reported only west of the Balcones Escarpment, except for
instances in the far northeast corner of the state (Red River and Bowie County; Cheatum
and Fullington 1973:Fig. 2) and seems to be absent from the Gulf Coastal Plain. No
specimens were found on the Preiss Ranch, at Victoria or Goliad State Park (Table 8.5),
or in Branson’s inventory of Colorado and Guadalupe River drift (Table 8.3). From a
continental perspective, it has a widespread but spotty distribution, occurring in
Appalachia into New England and Ontario (Oughton 1948:50), the central Mississippi
River Valley, and throughout the Plains (Hubricht 1985:Map 44), westward into New
Mexico, Colorado, Manitoba, Alberta (Metcalf and Smartt 1997:28), and even Alaska
(LaRocque 1970:Fig. 574). The shell is comparatively large and barrel-shaped. A series
from Comal County recorded by Hubricht (1972:Fig. 4) measures about 4.3-5.0 mm in
height and 2.3-2.7 mm in width.

According to Cheatum and Fullington (1973:11), G. armifera “usually occurs in
calcareous areas under limestone rocks, leaf litter or rotting logs. It may be found in
moist situations or on dry sparsely-wooded hillsides.” In Kaufman County, Logsdon
(1967:49) found it at three sites. It was common in decaying logs at one site, and was also
found under leaves and other forest debris (see also Cheatum and Burt 1931:336). In New
Mexico, it occurs in brushy areas on hillsides, scarps and along streams (Metcalf and
Smartt 1997:28). In Kansas, it is “a gregarious species occurring commonly on wooded
slopes, near or removed from a stream. It is to be found under dead wood, limestone
rocks, or light cover of leaf mold or other debris” (Franzen and Leonard 1947:329). In the
1039

Southern Plains Gastropod Survey, this species was moderately abundant, but was almost
entirely restricted to rock ledges at the east end of the transect, where it occurred with a
density of 127 individuals per square meter (Wyckoff, Theler and Carter 1997:37).
Another survey in Oklahoma confirms that the species is spotty in distribution, but may
occur in fairly high numbers in the few places where it does occur (Metcalf 1984:Table
1), mostly in riparian woodland. In the Texas Panhandle Neck (1990:13) found it in a
xeric site with no leaf litter, only downed wood and flood debris as cover. This was the
most common species in Theler’s (1997:Table 4) inventory of xeric hill prairies in
Wisconsin.

This species has been recovered at the Aubrey site (Neck 2001:Table 7.2, 7.3),
Lubbock Lake (Pierce 1987:Table 6.1), Lake Theo (Neck 1978:94, Neck 1987a:316),
Wilson-Leonard (Shaw et al. 1998), the Hog Creek project (Kirby and Reeder
1980:Table 15.1), the Burnham site (Theler 2003a, 2003b), and many other localities
throughout the Plains. The single specimen from the bench deposits may be tentatively
regarded as a riparian woodland indicator, but a calciphile species that can tolerate dry
and well-drained conditions. Franzen and Leonard (1947:330) have characterized as a
eurytopic species, able to estivate in drought conditions.
Gastrocopta contracta (Fig. 8.33), GCON
Matrix columns: 347 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 90 fortuitously recovered specimens
Body size: Microsnail, average height 2.2-2.5 mm (Cheatum and Fullington 1973:13);
2.3-2.8 mm (Logsdon 1967:47)
Gastrocopta contracta is one of the most important and informative species in the
bench deposits. It is a ubiquitous and rather abundant mesic-adapted species that is
1040

largely replaced in the modern fauna by the more arid-adapted Gastrocopta pellucida. It
is an eastern US species (Fig. 8.6) extending northward into Ontario (Oughton 1948:50),
with a somewhat irregular distribution in Texas (Fig. 8.9) that covers the eastern part of
the state with gaps in southeastern and deep eastern Texas. LaRocque (1970:Fig. 676)
shows one occurrence in Alaska. Populations in the Big Bend and New Mexico are
confined to mountainous areas (Metcalf and Smartt 1997:28).

Cheatum and Fullington (1973:13) list habitat preference as “quite similar to G.
armifera, but seems to prefer areas with greater moisture than is true of armifera.”
According to Neck (1981c:123), “this species usually occurs in riparian woodlands.
Although it is usually found in association with [Pupoides albilabris and Gastrocopta
pellucida], it generally requires a more mesic microhabitat.” In Kaufman County,
Logsdon (1967:46-47) notes it “was abundant in the wooded floodplains of Forney, the
wooded sandy loam at Elmo, and the grassy woodlands of the Reese Farm. It was scarce
on the plains of the Linehan Farm and the woods which are subject to inundation along
Kings Creek…. Specimens were taken from rotten logs, stream debris, under leaves,
decaying grass debris, and the rich humus of the Terrell homestead.” Branson (1961a:55)
says it “is found on moist shaded areas which are abundantly supplied with limestone and
rich decaying organic matter; mycophagous.” In Tennessee, it “had an affinity for neutral
soils of medium moisture content, late stages of forest succession and leaf litter
microhabitat.” In Kansas, “most of the shells occurred under rocks in fairly moist
conditions or under leaf mold in shaded areas” (Basch, Bainer and Wilhm 1961:192) and
“collections made in 1961, a year of above normal rainfall, revealed G. contracta to be
far more abundant than G. armifera in habitats where soil was moist due to seepage. At
Station W18 hundreds of specimens of this species were found under small logs,
1041

branches and stones in a sparsely wooded area of upland sloughs….” (Metcalf 1962:287).
In the Southern Plains Gastropod Survey, this species was moderately abundant but
occurred only at the eastern end of the transect, with a density of 505 individuals per
square meter in rock ledges, 68 in riparian woodlands, and 52 on toeslopes. It reaches its
eastern range limit near the 32-35-inch annual rainfall isohyets (Wyckoff, Theler and
Carter 1997:37).

Figure 8.33. Gastrocopta contracta. N109 E96 (92.70-92.65 m), Lot B-131.
In the bench deposits, this species is somewhat concentrated in the middle part of
the stratigraphic section, mostly in strata 2A, 2B, and 2C. In the two matrix columns,
there are 347 Gastrocopta contracta compared to only 12 Gastrocopta pellucida. In the
bulk matrix sample from N109 E96 (92.35-92.30 m) there are 153 G. contracta and only
1042

six G. pellucida; in the 92.05-92.00 m level, there are 10 G. contracta and only one G.
pellucida. In the local modern fauna, the proportions appear to be reversed. In all the
combined Preiss Ranch samples, there are 105 Gastrocopta contracta and 335
Gastrocopta pellucida (Table 8.13). This reversal is believed to be the result of a
contemporary climate that is much more arid than that in the Younger Dryas and early
Holocene. Some of this may be due to a taphonomic effect, since the more slender and
thin walled G. pellucida are more subject to breakage than the robust G. contracta. It
should also be noted that in the drift samples reported by Branson (1967), the relative
proportions are similar to those in the matrix columns – there are about ten times as many
G. contracta as G. pellucida (Table 8.13). In collections at Welder Refuge in San Patricio
County, Branson (1960) found about 500 G. pellucida compared to 42 G. contracta. In
the Berger Bluff matrix columns, about 61% of the specimens floated to the surface
when the samples were processed.

The species has been recovered at a number of archeological sites, mostly in the
eastern part of the state, such as the Aubrey site, Wilson-Leonard, the Mustang Branch
site (Neck 1994b:Table 111), Kenyon Rockshelter (Neck 1986a), 41 WM 118 (Amaral
and Witter 1973), the Anthon site (Neck 2002:260), the Buckhollow site (Neck 1994c),
various sites at Palmetto Bend Reservoir (Neck 1981c), 41 MM 340 and 341 in Milam
County (Fullington 2001), the Gaulding site (Fullington 2002b), the Denton Creek site
(Neck 1994a:Table 17), 41 FT 193 in Freestone County (Fullington 1987), and 41 DT 59
at Cooper Lake (Fullington 1995), 41 CC 112 in Concho County (Treece 1992:Table 15),
as well as the Domebo site (Cheatum and Allen 1966:39) and 34 CD 257 (Fullington and
Fullington 1982a) in Oklahoma.

1043

Table 8.13. Gastrocopta contracta and Gastrocopta pellucida Frequencies.
Brazos and Colorado drift samples (Branson 1967)
Combined

G. contracta
2477

G. pellucida
242

Preiss Ranch samples
Drift
D-20
D-21
Wood

G. contracta
96
9

G. pellucida
201
129
4
1

N109 E103 matrix column
93.14-92.90
92.90-92.85
92.85-92.80
92.80-92.75
92.75-92.70
92.70-92.65
92.65-92.60
92.60-92.55
92.55-92.50
92.50-92.45
92.45-92.40

G. contracta
26
14
4
8
2
3
10
7
12
16

G. pellucida
5
1
2

1

92.40-92.35
92.35-92.30
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20
92.20-92.15
92.15-92.10
92.10-92.05
92.05-92.00
92.00-91.95
91.95-91.90

G. contracta
8
17
6
11
6
9
6
2
2

G. pellucida

1

N110 E102 matrix column
92.90-92.80
92.80-92.75
92.75-92.70
92.70-92.65
92.65-92.60
92.60-92.55
92.55-92.50
92.50-92.45
92.45-92.40
92.40-92.35
92.35-92.30
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20

G. contracta
7
2
1
1
5
8
30
14
24
10
7
9
5

G. pellucida
1

1

92.20-92.15
92.15-92.10
92.10-92.05
92.05-92.00
92.00-91.95
91.95-91.90
91.90-91.85
91.85-91.80
91.80-91.75
91.75-91.70
91.70-91.65
91.65-91.60
91.60-91.55

1044

G. contracta
18
11
3
12
5
1
1
1
1
1
1

G. pellucida

Gastrocopta pellucida (Fig. 8.34), GPEL
Matrix columns: 12 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 5 fortuitously recovered specimens
Body size: Microsnail, maximum height 1.9-2.6 mm (Cheatum and Fullington 1973:17);
1.8-2.3 mm (Logsdon 1967:51-52); 1.6-2.6 mm (Branson 1961a:59)
This rather arid-adapted species is the smallest Gastrocopta, with a slender,
somewhat fragile shell. There are few specimens, and most of them are in the upper part
of the section. This may indicate some loss of shells due to fragility, but I doubt it
accounts entirely for the scarcity of this species in comparison to Gastrocopta contracta.
It is much more common in the Preiss Ranch samples, both in the drift sample and the
two excavated quadrats (Table 8.13). This species occurs eastward to New Jersey, Florida
(Fig. 8.2) and the West Indies and westward into southeastern Colorado, New Mexico,
South Dakota, the Chihuahuan Desert (Metcalf and Smartt 1997), Arizona (Bequaert and
Miller 1973:80, 171), eastern Utah (Oliver and Bosworth 1999:Fig. 50), Mexico, and
Guatemala. In Texas, it is widespread throughout much of the state (Fig. 8.10).

Gastrocopta pellucida “occurs more abundantly in open areas with scattered trees
and shrubs. In the Dallas area it has been found associated with grass roots” (Cheatum
and Fullington 1973:17). In Kaufman County, Logsdon (1967:52) found it in wooded
areas around shrubs and trees, in grass and leaves. Hubricht says “usually found in open,
grassy places or in open woods; often in dry, sandy places. In Florida it is sometimes
found on the undersides of palmetto leaves” (Hubricht 1985:10). It was the most
abundant species in the Southern Plains Gastropod Survey, where almost 6000 specimens
were collected, and was especially common in rock ledge microhabitats (with a density of
1142 per square meter). It also occurred in riparian woodland and wooded dunes
(Wyckoff, Theler and Carter 1997:35). Elsewhere in Oklahoma, “under rocks and piles of
1045

Bermuda grass” (Branson 1961a:59). In the Texas Panhandle, “this small species is often
associated with G. procera but is more drought tolerant and is often associated with grass
roots” (Neck 1984:71). In Nuevo León, it occurs in open areas with scattered trees and
low shrubs and oak-pine-fir (Correa Sandoval 1997:138)

Figure 8.34. Gastrocopta pellucida. N109 E96 (92.85-92.80 M), Lot B-128.
In the bench deposits, Gastrocopta pellucida is regarded as a drought-tolerant,
eurytopic species, possibly originating in open, grassy areas above the floodplain. It is
present at many of the same sites yielding G. contracta, such as Wilson-Leonard, the
Mustang Branch site, 41 WM 118, the Anthon site, the Buckhollow site, various sites at
Palmetto Bend Reservoir (Neck 1981c), 41 MM 340 and 341, 41 CC 112, the Gaulding
site, and the Denton Creek site. It is also present at the Smith Creek Bridge site (Brown
2002:257), the Richard Beene site (Neck 1992:Table 2), Lubbock Lake, the Rex Rodgers
1046

site, Lake Theo (Neck 1978:94), Winston’s Cave in Bexar County (Hudler 2000:Table 414) and the Domebo site (Cheatum and Allen 1966:39) in Oklahoma.
Gastrocopta pentodon, GPEN
Matrix columns: 1 specimen
1/4-inch screen sample: none
Body size: Microsnail, maximum height 1.5-1.8 mm (Cheatum and Fullington 1973:18)
A single example of this small, rather undistinctive Gastrocopta species was
found in the N110 E102 matrix column at 92.50-92.45 m. It is similar to Gastrocopta
tappaniana (a wet-ground species) and can be confused with it (see discussion in Metcalf
and Smartt 1997:29). According to Cheatum and Fullington (1973:20), it is “a snail of
well-drained woodland areas and of meadows associated with sparse vegetation, Leaf
litter and other objects serve as cover.” It is widely distributed through the Trans-Pecos
and eastern part of the state and occurs widely as a Pleistocene fossil. It was uncommon
in the Southern Plains Gastropod Survey, occurring in riparian woodland at the east end
of the transect (density, 51 per square meter). Beyond Texas, it occurs widely in the
eastern US (Hubricht 1985:Map 61) and into New Mexico and possibly Arizona (?), and
southward at least as far as Nicaragua (López and Pérez 1998). Hubricht (1985:9) says it
is “a calciphile. Usually found in upland woods in rather dry situations, but is sometimes
found in low, wet places with G. tappaniana.” This species was also very common in
Theler’s (1997:Table 4) inventory of hill prairies in Wisconsin. Coney and others
(1982:83) found it inversely correlated with soil moisture.

The single specimen from the bench deposits can be regarded as a eurytopic, dry
woodland or grassland indicator. Examples have been found at the Aubrey site, Lubbock
Lake, Rex Rodgers, the Perry site (Fullington 1987:Table 4-9), 34 CD 257 (Fullington
1047

and Fullington 1982a), the Domebo, Burnham, and Hajny sites (Branson 1992:101) in
Oklahoma, as well as some sites in Mississippi (Peacock and Melsheimer 2003).
Paleontological occurrences include the Ben Franklin fauna in Delta County (Cheatum
and Allen 1963:175), the Wood Pit Pond locality on the Trinity River (Slaughter et al.
1962:46-47) and a locality near Sattler in Comal County, reported by Hubricht (1962:1).
Gastrocopta procera (Fig. 8.35), GPRO
Matrix columns: 27 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 2 fortuitously recovered specimens
Body size: Microsnail, maximum height 2.3-3.0 mm, average 2.4 mm (Cheatum and
Fullington 1973:19-20); 2.3-2.9 mm (Logsdon 1967:50-51)
There are 23 specimens of this species scattered through various levels of the
N109 E103 matrix column, perhaps slightly more common in the upper levels. The N110
E102 matrix column has only four specimens. The widespread but spotty geographic
distribution of Gastrocopta procera is similar to that of G. pentodon, both in Texas and
across the eastern part of the US. According to Cheatum and Fullington (1973:20), “this
species occurs in open as well as woodland areas and is unusually more abundant in the
latter. It is frequently found under limestone rock on sloping hillsides with sparse trees
and shrubs.” Hubricht (1985:9) labels it “a calciphile. Usually found on rather dry ground
with sparse vegetation. Frequently found with Pupoides albilabris.” Logsdon (1967:5051) found it in woodland debris, leaves in and around rotting logs. In Kansas, Basch,
Bainer and Wilhm (1961:193) noted “It seems to be able to survive more adverse
conditions than many other gastropods in the state. Leonard and Goble… believe that the
success of this species in Kansas is due to its ability to withstand periods of drought and
high temperature. It favors hillsides and shuns extremely moist situations. Favorable
habitats include timbered areas, both in upland and floodplain situations, as well as
1048

grasslands… and it is frequently found beneath leaves and about old logs. Other sources
(for example Metcalf 1962:288) confirm that G. procera can be found in both riparian
and dry upland, grassy and wooded habitats. In the Southern Plains Gastropod Survey,
this was the second most common species, and almost 4800 specimens were collected. It
was abundant in rock ledges and toeslopes. Wyckoff, Theler and Carter (1997:32) believe
that it is found only in areas with at least 160 frost-free days, but it occurs as far north as
Wyoming, South Dakota, and Iowa (Reigle 1963).

Figure 8.35. Gastrocopta procera (?) Basal Fragment. N109 E103 (92.85-92.80 m).
In the bench deposits, this snail is interpreted as a eurytopic, arid-tolerant, dry
woodland or grassland indicator, similar to G. pellucida and G. pentodon. It has been
recovered at a wide variety of archeological sites, including the Aubrey site, Lubbock
Lake, Rex Rodgers, Lake Theo (Neck 1978:94), 41 CC 112 in Concho County (Treece
1049

1992:Table 15),

the Denton Creek site, the Anthon site, the Buckhollow site, the

Mustang Branch site, the Wilson-Leonard site, Kenyon Rockshelter, the Richard Beene
site, Winston’s Cave (Hudler 2000:Table 4-14), the Sleeper site (Neck 1991:Tables 32,
33), 34 CD 257 (Fullington and Fullington 1982a), the Burnham site in Oklahoma, as
well as some sites in Mississippi (Peacock and Melsheimer 2003).
Gastrocopta tappaniana, GTAP
Matrix columns: 1 specimen
1/4-inch screen sample: none
Body size: Microsnail, average height 1.9 mm (Cheatum and Fullington 1973:23); 1.52.5 mm (Leonard 1959:176), 1.7-2.2 mm (Wu and Jones 1978:201)
A single example of this extirpated (?) mesic-adapted species was recovered from
the N109 E103 matrix column (92.45-92.40 m). There are records of shells scattered
widely across the state (including Brooks County and Comal County) but according to
Cheatum and Fullington (1973:23) living specimens have not been recovered in Texas.
Beyond Texas, the distribution is much the same as for the other low-density species of
Gastrocopta – widely scattered but spotty across the eastern and central US (Hubricht
1985:Map 57). According to Cheatum and Fullington (1973:23), “Its preferred habitat
seems to be on woodland slopes adjacent to streams or other bodies of water. Unlike G.
pentodon it is usually associated with moist areas.” Hubricht (1985:9) says “A calciphile.
Usually found in wet places, margins of ponds, floodplains of streams, and marshes. In
the southeastern United States, it is found on the undersides of palmetto leaves.” Leonard
(1959:177) says “This snail is found beneath wood, logs and similar debris in moist
places, especially on floodplains and in moist upland forested areas.” Basch, Bainer and
Wilhm (1961:193) collected it under rocks around a spring and in riparian woodland in
Kansas. Neck (1994e:147) lists “protected areas in canyon woodlands.” Although this
1050

snail could perhaps have been classified as amphibious, I have listed it as terrestrial, and
for the bench deposits, the single known example is considered a wet floodplain
indicator.

This species seems to be fairly uncommon in the archeological record. Examples
are reported from the Clovis and Plainview sites (Drake 1975:225), Aubrey site, Rex
Rodgers, the Denton Creek site, 34 CD 257 (Fullington and Fullington 1982a) and the
Burnham site in Oklahoma, as well as a protohistoric site in Mississippi (Peacock and
Melsheimer 2003) and the Hudson-Meng site in Nebraska (Wu and Jones 1978:200-201).
It also occurs in the paleontological record (Allen and Cheatum 1961; Branson, Taylor
and Taylor 1962; Schultz and Cheatum 1970, Slaughter and Thurmond 1965).
Glyphyalinia umbilicata (Fig. 8.36), GLYU
Matrix columns: 236 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 167
Body size: Large microsnail, diameter 4.7-7.1 mm (Burch 1962:101, as Retinella
indentata); 5.0-7.1 mm (Pilsbry 1946:291, as Retinella indentata paucilirata); 2.3-3.0
mm (Logsdon 1967:63, as Retinella indentata paucilirata)
Both the taxonomy and identification of this common, small, zonitid snail are
very obscure. For many years, the species was included as Retinella indentata or
Retinella indentata paucilirata in the subgenus Glyphyalinia (Pilsbry 1946:288), but
Hubricht (1976:105-106) clearly recognizes Glyphyalinia umbilicata as a distinct, valid
species, and Raymond Neck identified all of these specimens from the matrix columns as
Glyphyalinia umbilicata. The name Glyphyalinia indentata may also have been applied.
In nearly all the older literature, such as Leonard (1959:113-14), the species is listed as
Retinella indentata paucilirata.
1051

Figure 8.36. Glyphyalinia umbilicata. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. N112
E97 (93.14-92.75 m), Lot B-111.

1052

To compound the situation, the shell is fairly nondescript and can easily be
confused with other small discoidal species known to be present at the site, such as
Zonitoides arboreus, Hawaiia minuscula, or perhaps juvenile Mesomphix friabilis. In
addition, there are three specimens in the 1/4-inch screen sample that seem to fit the
description of Glyphyalinia roemeri better, and in examining lots of shells from Berger
Bluff, there is always the possibility that previously unrecognized genera such as
Nesovitrea or Retinella might be found. The key diagnostic characters for Glyphyalinia
umbilicata at Berger Bluff are the presence of faint radial indented “spokes” (hence the
name indentata) on the exterior shell surface and a very narrow umbilicus. Zonitoides
arboreus has a wider umbilicus and lacks the radial lines.

As mapped by Hubricht (1985:Map 231), the species has an odd distribution
confined mostly to the eastern part of Texas (see also McGee 1965:76) and to Florida,
and a small stretch of the Atlantic coastal plain to the north. However, it is also reported
in Utah by Oliver and Bosworth (1999:213-214), and Pilsbry (1946:291, as R. indentata
paucilirata) reports it in Indiana, Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana,
Mississippi, Missouri, Oklahoma, New Mexico, Arizona, Durango, Jalisco, Morelos,
Michoacan, and Puebla as well as Texas. Most of the published habitat preference
information is listed under the Retinella indentata rubric. The species is “usually found
under logs and leaf litter in the woods bordering streams” (Hubricht 1985:25), “from
rotten logs, forest debris, and under leaf litter” (Logsdon 1967:63), “collected from moist
areas only, with the largest number found under moist leaf mold in a hedgerow…. This
species was often found under or on rotting wood or in moist leaf litter” (Basch, Bainer
and Wilhm 1961:196, as R. indentata). According to Neck (1981c:124), it occurs in both
woodland and grassland where abundant cover is available. Only 8 specimens were found
1053

in the Preiss Ranch drift sample (Table 8.9). In the bench deposits, this species is
considered a mesic deciduous woodland indicator, although it apparently persists in some
rather arid parts of Mexico and the western US. Specimens occur throughout the section,
but are especially abundant in three zones: at the top of the section, in stratum 2B, and in
stratum 2A.

Unfortunately, the persistent taxonomic confusion in the literature makes it
difficult to discern exactly what has been recovered archeologically. Glyphyalinia
umbilicata is reported from the Mustang Branch site, the Wilson-Leonard site, Kenyon
Rockshelter, Bering Sinkhole (Bement 1994:Table 7), the Anthon site, the Buckhollow
site, 41 CC 112, 41 TV 368 (Neck 1981b), 41 JK 66, 41 JK 74, and 41 JK 78 (Neck
1981c:Tables 11-5 to 11-8), 41 WM 312 (Voellinger and Gearhart 1987:Table 28), the
Gaulding site and 34 CD 257 (both as Glyphyalinia indentata paucilirata). A few
examples (measuring 2.4-6.3 mm in diameter) were found at the Smith Creek Bridge site
(Brown 2002:Table 73).

Glyphyalinia indentata is reported from the Aubrey site, Rex Rodgers, the Denton
Creek site, and the Burnham site. Retinella indentata is reported from 41 WM 118, the
Berclair Terrace in Bee County (Conkin and Conkin 1962:348) and the Domebo site in
Oklahoma. Whether all of these reported examples are separate species or the same is
unclear.

1054

Glyphyalinia cf. G. roemeri (?) (Fig. 8.37), GLYR
Matrix columns: none
1/4-inch screen sample: 1 specimen
Body size: Microsnail, diameter 4 mm (Pilsbry 1946:278, as Retinella roemeri)
A single specimen fortuitously recovered from the 1/4-inch screen in N109 E103
(92.85-92.80 m, lot B-5) fits the definition of Glyphyalinia roemeri. It has a diameter of
3.3 mm, height of about 1.4 mm, and an umbilicus 0.7 mm wide. It differs from G.
umbilicata by having a much wider, well-defined umbilicus and lacking the radial
impressed “spokes” on the exterior surface. It differs from Zonitoides arboreus in having
a slightly wider umbilicus and a shallower profile. Glyphyalinia roemeri is an Edwards
Plateau species (Hubricht 1985:Map 224) that is not reported for the coastal plain (except
for occurrences in the counties of De Witt, Refugio and Nueces mapped by McGee
1965:25), so either I have misidentified the specimen, or the range of the species was
greater at the end of the Pleistocene. According to Hubricht (1985:23-24), the species is
“found under rocks and in moist leaves on wooded talus slopes, in ravines, and in caves.”
In Travis County, Neck (1994e:149) lists the preferred habitat as caves and wet areas.
Archeological specimens have been reported from Kenyon Rockshelter and from 41 CC
112 in Concho County (Treece 1992:Table 15), which is also outside the documented
range of the species. It is also reported (as Retinella roemeri) from 41 CH 56 (Weinstein
and Whelan 1987:Table 4-14), again outside its documented range.

1055

Figure 8.37. Glyphyalinia cf. G. roemeri (?). Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view.
N109 E103 (92.85-92.80 m), Lot B-5.

1056

Hawaiia minuscula, HAWM
Matrix columns: 3 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: none
Body size: Microsnail, diameter 2.0-2.8 mm (Burch 1962:106), 0.4-2.7 mm (Branson
1967:295), 2.0-2.5 mm (Leonard 1959:120)
This small, discoidal snail is very similar in appearance to Helicodiscus
singleyanus and might easily be confused with it. Although it often occurs in large
populations in contemporary snail faunas (Branson found 1080 specimens at Welder
Refuge), only three specimens were found in the matrix columns from the bench
deposits. Hubricht (1985:29) characterizes it as “a species of bare ground. I have never
found it in leaf litter.” In contrast, Coney and others (1982:90) found it positively
associated with leaf litter (and inversely associated with soil moisture) in Tennessee.
Leonard (1959:120) says it is “found under logs, sticks, stones and in clumps of grass in
both floodplain and upland situations.” Leonard and Goble (1952:1042) remark
“although this small snail prefers a woodland environment, it is able to survive under arid
conditions…. it was abundant only along the banks of the small stream (SC). Here, it was
in the loose moist soil under a light layer of decaying vegetation. Other habitats included:
under leaves in an oak-elm area (SE); among grass roots (SH); and under decaying logs
on the north facing slope.” This was the fourth most common species in the Southern
Plains Gastropod Survey, where it was found in rock ledges and under downed wood in
riparian woodland. It also showed up in fairly high abundances in Nekola’s (2002:Table
2) study of grasslands in Minnesota, Iowa, and Wisconsin. It occurs throughout the
continent from Alaska and Maine to Costa Rica, as well as the Caribbean, westward to
Arizona (Pilsbry 1946:421). It is common in New Mexico (Metcalf and Smartt 1997:51)
1057

and Texas (McGee 1965:80). According to Metcalf (1984:61), it has broad ecological
tolerances.

The species is reported from a wide range of archeological sites, including the
Aubrey site, Rex Rodgers, Lubbock Lake, Lake Theo, the Sulphur Springs site in Martin
County (Neck 1994d), Winston’s Cave, 41 WM 118 (Amaral and Witter 1973), the
Anthon site (Neck 2002:260), the Buckhollow site (Neck 1994c), 41 MM 340 and 341,
the Gaulding site, 41 CH 56 in Chambers County (Weinstein and Whelan 1987:Table 414), the Denton Creek site, 41 FT 193, 41 DT 59, 34 CD 257, the Burnham and Hajny
Mammoth sites (Oklahoma) and Lehner and Murray Springs sites (Arizona; Bequaert and
Miller 1973:145). It also appears at various undated paleontological sites reported by
Hubricht (1962).

The few Berger Bluff specimens are interpreted as indicators of open grassland or
well-drained, open woodland.
Helicodiscus singleyanus (Fig. 8.38), HELS
Matrix columns: 2526
1/4-inch screen sample: 272 fortuitously recovered specimens
Body size: Microsnail, diameter 2.0-3.0 mm (Burch 1962:79), 1.1, 2.1 mm (Branson
1967:296), 2.5 mm (Leonard 1959:133), 2.4 mm (Pilsbry 1948:636)
Remarkably, this very small, rather nondescript discoidal snail is the single most
abundant species in the bench deposits, regardless of body size. Because it is small,
somewhat delicate and thin-walled, its abundance cannot be due to exceptional durability.
There is also no compelling evidence that it is especially well adapted to microhabitats at
the site. I suspect, although I can find no data on reproductive rates, that it is probably a
1058

prolific breeder (perhaps an r-selected species) and this may account for its consistent
abundance. The literature does not support this speculation, however; where recovery
rates for contemporary specimens are reported, they are low to moderate. Perhaps the
species is hardy and can persist in dry conditions, but becomes much more numerous
when allowed by moist habitats. It accounts for almost 18% of the terrestrial snails in the
Preiss Ranch drift sample (Table 8.8). This species has gone largely unnoticed in the
biological, if not the archeological literature, and it is difficult to discover anything
definitive about its properties or habitat preferences. The distribution map published by
Hubricht (1985:179) is largely blank, not because of low population densities, but
because of inadequate reporting.

Figure 8.38. Helicodiscus singleyanus. Selection of six different-sized specimens from a
lot of 29 in N109 E96 ((2.85-92.80 m), Lot B-128. All views are apical
except bottom right two specimens.
1059

Hubricht (1985:22) says only “a species of open, grassy places, roadsides, along
railroads, and meadows.” This species was fairly common and moderately abundant in
the Southern Plains Gastropod Survey, occurring with a density of 83 individuals per
square meter on a mesa top. It was also found in rock ledges and riparian woodlands, and
in low numbers on toeslopes and in grasslands (Wyckoff, Theler and Carter 1997:36). La
Rocque (1970:685) says “damp to dry habitat, damp, protected places or relatively dry,
exposed habitats. This species is more tolerant of drouth than others and requires little
cover.” Basch, Bainer and Wilhm (1961:195) collected only five specimens, remarking
“It seems probable that H. singleyanus lives among grass roots, even on exposed slopes
that become hot and dry during the summer… it is usually found under forest debris or
among leaves or piles of washed materials….” The species is reported in Theler’s
(1997:Table 3) study of Wisconsin hill prairies and Nekola’s (2002) study of grasslands
in Minnesota, Iowa, and Wisconsin, but in fairly low densities. Metcalf (1984:61) found
it widespread but not abundant. Fullington (1978:112) says “it is assumed that in this area
(including Texas) that it can tolerate drier conditions by burrowing under grass roots…. a
relatively common fossil species in Texas but some records may be based on H.
minuscula with which it may easily be confused.” In New Mexico, it occurs under stones,
rock talus, or leaf litter and is a common fossil in Quaternary floodplains (Metcalf and
Smartt 1997:40).

In the bench deposits, Helicodiscus singleyanus is presumed to be a eurytopic,
drought-resistant snail capable of surviving in fairly open, well-drained habitats. In the
Berger Bluff matrix columns, about 34% of the specimens floated to the surface when
the samples were processed. This species is abundantly distributed throughout the bench

1060

deposits. Every sample in both matrix columns was well supplied with specimens,
especially the strata above stratum 2A.

Archeological occurrences include the Aubrey site, Rex Rodgers, Lubbock Lake,
Mustang Branch, Wilson-Leonard, Richard Beene, Anthon, Buckhollow, Sleeper site,
Bering Sinkhole (Bement 1994:Table 7), 41 FS 6 (Wulfkuhle 1986:405), 41 CH 56 in
Chambers County (Weinstein and Whelan 1987:Table 4-14), Swan Lake (Neck 1987c),
Denton Creek, Kenyon Rockshelter, 41 TV 368, 41 WM 312 (Voellinger and Gearhart
1987:Table 28), 41 FT 193, 41 CC 112, 34 CD 257, and the Domebo and Burnham sites.
At Burnham, it is one of the most abundant terrestrial species.
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri (Figs. 8.39, 8.40), MROE
Matrix columns: none
1/4-inch screen sample: 8 specimens
Body size: Large-bodied, diameter 20.0-28.0 mm (Cheatum and Fullington 1971:30);
18.0-24.0 (Logsdon 1976:76-77), 18.0-21.5 (McClure 1970:Table 1)
As mapped by Cheatum and Fullington (1971:Fig. 9), the present range of
Mesodon roemeri lies in central, east-central, and north Texas, with the closest reported
occurrences in Wharton County and Lavaca County. Likewise, Raymond Neck did not
find any examples of the species in his studies of the N109 E103 and N110 E102 matrix
columns. However, of the 90 specimens from the 1/4-inch screen identifiable as
Mesodon, eight (from N111 E101 and N112 E97) seem to fit the definition of Mesodon
roemeri better than Mesodon thyroidus and have tentatively been classified accordingly.
These are larger in diameter and relatively shallower in profile than M. thyroidus.
Although there are few measurable specimens to compare (only four M. thyroidus and six
M. roemeri), the differences seem definite. Specimens classed as M. roemeri have a
1061

diameter of 22.08 ± 1.93 mm (range, 19.20-24.90 mm) and a height/diameter ratio of
0.6013 ± 0.0237, usually with 5 or 5.5 whorls. Specimens classed as M. thyroidus have a
diameter of 21.44 ± 1.66 mm (range, 19.00-23.50 mm) and a height/diameter ratio of
0.7084 ± 0.2360, usually with 4.25 whorls. The shells of this genus are quite fragile, and
both species of Mesodon are probably greatly underrepresented in the counts.

For habitat preference, Cheatum and Fullington (1971:31) say “Occurs more
commonly in dense woodlands along water; or sometimes thriving colonies may be found
living under humus in sparsely-wooded slopes.” Hubricht (1985:44) says “Found under
rocks, leaf litter, and logs on wooded slopes near streams.” Logsdon (1967:76) found it
in decaying log debris in wooded floodplains, and Neck (1996) found it in similar
habitats in Meridian State Park. The autecology of the species was studied experimentally
by McClure, who compared Mesodon roemeri with Rabdotus dealbatus from the same
collection area. She found M. roemeri is active 50-60% of the year, has lower mortality
and reproductive rates than Rabdotus, and is adapted to a wooded habitat that is less
variable, more humid, and cooler than the grassland habitat preferred by Rabdotus. This
species is much less tolerant of high temperatures than Rabdotus dealbatus, and high
mortality occurs in hot, dry conditions (McClure 1970:33). She estimates that M. roemeri
become mature at 1.5-2.0 years of age and have an average lifespan of three years or
more. She also observes that “Mesodon will eat nearly every kind of food offered but
seems to prefer fungi if they are available in the field. Often I have observed this species
literally packed inside and under mushrooms and puffballs of various kinds…. The
preferred habitat of Mesodon roemeri is under and on the bark of moist, decaying fallen
logs. In the woods hundreds could be collected in a few minutes from beneath the bark of
an appropriately decayed log.” (McClure 1970:50-51).
1062

Figure 8.39. Mesodon cf. M. roemeri (?). Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. N112
E97 (93.14-92.75 m), Lot B-112. Also see next figure.

1063

Figure 8.40. Mesodon cf. M. roemeri (?), Adaxial View. Same specimen shown in Figure
8.39.
A census of snails in measured quadrats yielded a density of about 3.7 Mesodon roemeri
per square meter in a wooded area (and about 1.6/m2 in the entire survey area; Randolph
1973:955).

Archeological occurrences include the Sleeper site, Bessie Kruze site (Gardner
2000:222), the McDonald site (Neck 1987d:Table III.1), Bear Creek Shelter (Lynott
1978:70), 41 WM 312, and 41 BT 37 (Malof 2004:51); and the Potters’ Pleasure site,
Five Goat Shelter, Stone Rockshelter, L. E. Robertson Shelter, the Dam site, Windy
Shelter, and Opilionid Shelter, all in the Hog Creek project (Kirby and Reeder 1980). In

1064

the bench deposits, this species is interpreted as an indicator of heavy, closed-canopy
deciduous woodland.
Mesodon thyroidus (Figs. 8.41, 8.42), MTHY
Matrix columns: 2 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 10 specimens (plus 72 fragmentary Mesodon sp.)
Body size: Large-bodied, average diameter 20 mm, height 12-13 mm (Cheatum and
Fullington 1971:29); diameter 20.7-28.3 mm (Logsdon 1967:75-76); 18.5-24.5 mm
(Pilsbry 1940:709), 17.5-22.1 mm (Leonard 1959:87); diameter 17.5-23.0 mm, height
11.0-15.5 mm (Branson 1969:389)
Complete Mesodon shells are scarce in the bench deposits owing to postmortem
breakage from processes such as sediment compaction and screen damage. In many
levels, there are recognizable Mesodon shell fragments, but no complete shells. The MNI
count of 72 individuals from the 1/4-inch screen could include both Mesodon roemeri
and Mesodon thyroidus, but probably represents mostly the latter. Consequently, I
estimate there are far more M. thyroidus present than the 12 identifiable individuals listed
above. Fragments and complete shells are present throughout strata 2C, 2D, and 3, but are
absent below, except for a single fragmentary individual at the 92.15-92.10 level in N109
E103. The exclusion of Mesodon from the lower bench strata could be due either to poor
shell preservation or to habitat unsuitability.

Only five individuals were complete enough for measurement. These have a mean
diameter of 21.44 ± 1.66 mm (range, 19.00-23.50 mm) and a height/diameter ratio of
0.7084 ± 0.2360, usually with 4.25 whorls. Mean height is 15.43 ± 1.17 mm (range,
11.80-15.30 mm).

1065

Figure 8.41. Mesodon thyroidus. Top, apical view; bottom, umibilical view. N109 E103
(93.14-92.90 M), Lot B-1.

1066

Figure 8.42. Mesodon thyroidus, Adaxial View. Same specimen shown in Figure 8.41.

Foster (1936) studied size variation in large samples of Mesodon (here the
obsolete name Polygyra thyroides is used) in Illinois and found considerable local
variation in size. Modal sizes for most of his specimens are about 17.5-19.1 mm (Foster
1936:Figs. 1-3, 5).

Mesodon is a well-known and studied large-bodied eastern woodland genus
usually associated with leaf litter and rotting logs (Branson and Batch 1970:339).
Logsdon (1967:75) says “Mesodon thyroidus was collected from logs, moist sticks, flood
debris, and damp decaying spots on trees at the Forney site (C), and from logs in the
weeded flood plains three miles west of Crandall.” There are too many habitat
1067

descriptions to list here. La Rocque (1970:573-574) gives an extensive synopsis; see also
Metcalf (1962:283). According to Leonard (1959:90),
This forest snail is found on and under rotten logs, smaller pieces of wood and in
litter. This subspecies seems to be closely associated with floodplains and their
margins in Kansas, but has been reported from drier situations in Indiana… and
Michigan…. [it is also recorded] from marshy areas, as well as on trees at heights
of from 2 to 6 feet above the ground. According to Goodrich and van der
Schalie… this species adapts itself well to open fields and gardens.

The species was recorded by Goodrich and van der Schalie… as feeding on
“mildews, slime molds and fungi.” According to Pilsbry (1940:710), Mesodon
thyroidus has been reported feeding chiefly on wood nettles (Laportia
canadensis) in Illinois, whereas others, studying the species elsewhere, have
reported the principal food to be fungi.
According to Blinn (1963:501), the snails ingest log mold and when feeding on
angiosperms, usually eat damaged and decaying plant tissue. Decaying logs (usually
found in mature deciduous floodplain woodland) seem to be an important microhabitat
for this species. Mesodon thyroidus also frequently climbs trees, as much as 13 feet above
the ground. Blinn found them on ash, elm, linden, hackberry, and willow. It forms an
epiphragm and hibernates (in northern Illinois, mostly from November through March)
partly buried in the soil and can withstand subfreezing soil temperatures (Blinn
1963:501). Some members of the genus are known to be able to float in water (Webb
1964).

Mesodon thyroidus occurs throughout the eastern US (Hubricht 1985:Map 466),
as far north as southern Ontario (Oughton 1948:8) halting near the eastern edge of the
Plains, probably due to the lack of woodland. In Texas, it occurs in the eastern third of
the state, roughly bounded on the west by the 32-36” rainfall isohyets (Fig. 8.12).
1068

Occasional recent examples of this species, both juvenile and adult, were found during
diatom sampling in the Berger Bluff catchment (Table 8.6). In the bench deposits, this
species is also interpreted as an indicator of heavy, closed-canopy, mature deciduous
woodland with abundant leaf litter and rotting wood. However, it is noteworthy that
clustering and ordination studies (discussed later in this chapter) consistently grouped this
snail with more arid-adapted species from the bench.

Archeological examples of this species are somewhat sparse: the Aubrey site, 41
DT 59 (Fullington 1995), the Guadalupe Bay site (Fullington 2002a); 41 JK 53, 41 JK 66
and 41 JK 74 (Neck 1981c), 41 FB 199 and 41 FB 200 in Fort Bend County (Zimmerman
1996:Table 8, 9), 41 WL 15 in Waller County (McClure and Neck 1987:Table 1), and the
Domebo site (Cheatum and Allen 1966:39) in Oklahoma. At 41 FB 200, one of the
features excavated had a concentration of Mesodon thyroidus.

1069

Mesomphix friabilis (Figs. 8.43, 8.44), MEZF
Matrix columns: 149 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 1021 specimens
Body size: Large-bodied, diameter 21.0-26.3 mm (Pilsbry 1946:328, Burch 1962:92)
Although abundant in the bench deposits, these large, spherical zonitid snails are
largely overlooked in the literature. Mesomphix is a typically Appalachian genus (Pilsbry
1946:305), but most of the other species in the genus are much better documented.
Distribution extends from the central coastal plain of Texas northeastward throughout the
Mississippi River basin to Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, and Virginia (Hubricht 1985:Map 239,
La Rocque 1970:Fig. 487). It is reported from Goliad State Park (Table 8.5) and from the
counties of

Victoria (Pilsbry 1946:330), Calhoun, De Witt, and

Refugio (McGee

1965:77), but I have seen no contemporary specimens in the Berger Bluff catchment.

According to Hubricht (1985:26), the species is “usually found on floodplains
under leaf litter, but sometimes found on river bluffs and in ravines.” In Travis County,
Neck (1994e:149) lists it from riparian woodlands. Neck also says “Mesomphix friabilis
is characteristic of mesic woodlands and is often associated with Anguispira
strongylodes, although M. friabilis is able to survive in woodlands which are too xeric for
A. strongylodes. Cover may be supplied by leaf litter; downed wood is not utilized.”
However, Amaral and Witter (1973:421) found it under moist rotting logs in the San
Gabriel River floodplain. It has a thick shell and is a calciphile species (Riggle 1976:8).
In Indiana, it has been found in a cypress swamp (Goodrich and van der Schalie
1944:270). There are several allied species of Mesomphix in the eastern US, and they are
nearly always found in habitats with leaf litter and decaying wood (cf. Branson and Batch
1970:341-342). Two of these species, Mesomphix andrewsae and M. subplanus, have a
1070

density of about 0.15-0.20 individuals per square meter (Stiven 1989:375). One allied
species, Mesomphix cupreus, is said to be carnivorous, preying on other snails (La
Rocque 1970:631-632).

Figure 8.43. Mesomphix friabilis. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. Small to
medium-sized adult from N109 E103 (92.90-92.85 m), Lot B-3, ¼-inch
screen sample. See also Fig. 8.44.
1071

Figure 8.44. Mesomphix friabilis, Adaxial View. Same specimen as Fig. 8.43.

In the bench deposits, this species is regarded as another good indicator of mesic
deciduous woodland, similar to Anguispira, Euchemotrema, and Mesodon. Although the
shell wall in this species is thick and sturdy, the exterior surface is glossy and the whorls
are weakly joined as a result. Collapsed spires are common. The aperture does not have a
reinforced lip, so chipped apertures are also common in the bench specimens, and it is
impractical to obtain measurements on most specimens, although Amaral and Witter
(1973:Fig. 76) measured Mesomphix friabilis from 41 WM 118. Archeological examples
are known from the Wilson-Leonard site, the Bessie Kruze site, Rice’s Crossing, 41 WM
53, 41 WM 124, 41 WM 258, and 41 WM 267 (Fullington and Fullington 1982b), 41
WM 130 (Bond 1978:Table 4), 41 WM 118 (Amaral and Witter 1973), 41 WL 15 in
Waller County (McClure and Neck 1987:Table 1), 41 JK 66, 41 JK 74, and 41 JK 78 in
Jackson County (Neck 1981c). No examples were found at the Smith Creek Bridge site
or anywhere in the catchment during diatom sampling.
1072

Oligyra orbiculata (Fig. 8.45), OLIO
Matrix columns: 420 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 4067 specimens
Body size: Medium-bodied, diameter 6.1-8.6 mm (Fullington and Pratt 1974:8), 5.0-8.5
mm (Burch 1962:37), 8.1-9.3 mm (Logsdon 1967:79)
This medium-bodied, eurytopic, colonial, operculate snail is the most abundant
species recovered from the 1/4-inch screen and the second most abundant species
recovered from the matrix columns. It is also probably the most common easily visible
species encountered today in most of south and central Texas. It was formerly named
Helicina orbiculata and appears under that name in older literature. The common
subspecies H. orbiculata tropica (distinguished by a heavily thickened apertural lip) has
been determined to be a morphological variant with no taxonomic value (Strenth and
Littleton 2000). With its thick, subspherical shell and teardrop-shaped operculum (Fig.
8.27), this species is well-equipped to limit water loss and is very drought resistant. It is
often seen in open, bare to grassy areas that are too xeric for other species. It is a
cosmopolitan and resilient species often appearing in large numbers, much like
Helicodiscus singleyanus.

According to Fullington and Pratt (1974:8),
Helicina orbiculata occurs in localized colonies, usually on limestone, in
deciduous or juniper woodlands. In the sandy soils of the Pine-Hardwoods forests
in east Texas it is rare and colonies are widely separated. It is… often found in the
woodland corridors along prairie streams. It is semi-arboreal, climbing on rocks,
shrubs, and the lower parts of tree trunks. It estivates in the open, cemented to
rocks and tree trunks during summer dry spells. During the winter it hibernates in
the soil at the base of trees and rocks.

1073

Figure 8.45. Oligyra orbiculata. Top row, apical view; bottom row, umbilical view. Five
specimens out of 537 from N112 E97 (93.14-92.75 m), bag 1 of 2, Lot B111.

Fullington and Pratt also claim that the species is absent from grassland, but I have seen it
many times in South Texas grassland with only scattered shrubs or trees. Hubricht
(1985:3) says “A calciphile. Prefers sunny situations, roadsides, and glades. It sometimes
occurs in woods, but is not as abundant in such habitats.” In Kaufman County, it occurs
in “woodlands, exposed areas such as pastures and grass lands… on the trunks of Celtis
occidentalis and the surfaces of logs in the woodlands of Forney (C); on leaf debris at the
Terrell pasture (S); and on sticks….” (Logsdon 1967:78).

1074

According to Cheatum (1934:147),
H. o. tropica is one of the most abundant species of terrestrial gastropods
occurring in Dallas County, Texas. After a light shower one can collect hundreds
of individuals that are creeping over weeds and grasses in many pasture lands.
Since it is a snail that is especially hardy and has a great resistance to drouth,
individuals appear to be as abundant in exposed areas as in protected woodland
regions.

This species often appears in large numbers in archeological sites. Almost 20,000
specimens were recovered from just a few units at the Rice’s Crossing site (Brown and
Hughes 2003), and almost 10,500 were recovered from the combined 1/4-inch and 1/8inch mesh sample in a single 1 x 1 m unit at the Smith Creek Bridge site. The dominance
of this species may be missed by conventional screening methods, though, because
archeologists rarely collect this species, and many of the shells will pass through 1/4-inch
mesh (at the Smith Creek Bridge site, this mesh captured only 53% of the Oligyra;
Brown 2002:260). Juveniles and smaller adults will be missed. At the Wilson-Leonard
site, when the entire stratigraphic section is considered (including Archaic midden
deposits; Shaw et al. 1998:Table 37-2), over 31, 000 Oligyra were recovered using 1/4inch and 1/16-inch mesh, and the species represents 70% of the medium and large-bodied
snails recovered. At some sites, this species appears in very large numbers at the top of
the stratigraphic section, declining greatly in frequency downward. Some examples
include the Smith Creek Bridge site (Brown 2002:Fig. 97), Wilson-Leonard, and various
sites in the Hog Creek Reservoir and Leona Watershed projects. I have discussed this
trend in the Smith Creek Bridge site report (Brown 2002:263-264). This downward
decline in frequency is not likely to be taphonomic in origin, because the shells of this
species are exceptionally durable.
1075

Although Oligyra orbiculata is a catholic, stress-resistant species capable of
adapting to both wet and dry environments, paleoenvironmental evaluation requires
assessment of the entire assemblage. At sites where this species appears in large numbers
to the near-exclusion of other species, it is reasonable to assume the environment was
xeric or otherwise stressful, and Oligyra was able to out-compete other snail species.
Environmental stress could be regional and climatic in nature, or it could be a result of
prehistoric occupants of a site clearing vegetation and packing the topsoil with foot
traffic. In stratigraphic levels where Oligyra is among several species that simultaneously
increase in number, interpretation becomes more complex, especially if the other species
are mesic woodland indicators. In cases like that, changing depositional rates and
admixture of species from different habitats might be implicated.

If Oligyra is a marker species for drought-prone Holocene climates, it might be
worthwhile to inquire how common it is in Late Pleistocene sites that are situated within
its present range in Texas. At the Aubrey site, the species is quite rare; none were found
in the pond margin, and only one was found in the pond axis samples (Neck 2001:Tables
7.2, 7.3). At the Pavo Real site, about 21% of the snails from Zone 5 are Oligyra (Table
A3-2 in Brown 2003 is incomplete because of an editing error); in Zone 6, about 36% are
Oligyra, and in Zone 7, six out of eight snails are Oligyra. At the Richard Beene site, I
estimate about 20% of the medium or large-bodied terrestrial snails from the Late
Pleistocene-early Holocene levels are Oligyra (samples below the Elm Creek paleosol,
based on Neck 1992:Table 4, and omitting microsnails). At the Wilson-Leonard site, the
species represents about 51% of the medium and large-bodied snails in Unit I.
Preservation is undoubtedly an issue at some of these other early sites. Particularly at the

1076

Wilson-Leonard site, I suspect the species is disproportionately represented because more
fragile genera like Mesodon have been taphonomically deleted from the lower deposits.

In the bench deposits at Berger Bluff, Oligyra orbiculata represents about 45% of
the medium-bodied and large-bodied snails recovered from the 1/4-inch screen
(microsnails are omitted from this estimate) from all levels and units. When this
percentage is plotted vertically on a unit-by-unit basis, the stratigraphic patterns that
emerge vary from unit to unit. In some units, such as N112 E97 and perhaps N109 E96,
there is a clear trend for increasing dominance of the species over time. In other units,
such as N109 E103, N110 E102, N111 E101, and N112 E99, the distribution is erratic in
the lower levels (due to small sample sizes) and stable or only slightly increasing in the
upper levels. Figure 8.46 shows the pattern for some of these units. There seems to be a
weak trend for the species to become more dominant toward the top of the bench
deposits, a trend that cannot be ascribed entirely to taphonomic processes. In Figure 8.26,
it appears that the chief source is the reduction in the relative number of Anguispira in the
upper part of the bench deposits. I suspect this indicates advancing desiccation of the
habitat as the Holocene is entered.

In the bench deposits, this species is interpreted as a cosmopolitan, eurytopic,
drought-resistant snail that can tolerate both wet and dry conditions, and is well-adapted
to continental Holocene climates. It may indicate the presence of open xerithermic
habitats.

1077

Figure 8.46. Vertical Distribution of Oligyra orbiculata. Frequency of O. orbiculata as a
percentage of medium and large-bodied snails recovered from the ¼-inch
screen is shown here for four units. Microsnails and data from matrix
samples are omitted. Only the top two units show a slight indication of
increase in the species near the top of the bench.
1078

Polygyra (Millerelix) mooreana, PMOO
Matrix columns: 98 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: none
Body size: Medium-bodied, diameter 6.5-8.5 mm (Cheatum and Fullington 1971:17),
diameter 7.3 ± 0.4 mm (range, 6.7-8.3 mm; Pratt 1981:28)
In his 1982 analysis of two matrix columns, Raymond Neck identified 98 out of
108 Polygyra specimens as Polygyra mooreana (revised to Millerelix mooreana by Pratt
1981). Neck identified no Polygyra texasiana at all in the N109 E103 column, and only
10 specimens in the N110 E102 column. However, Neck’s analysis did not consult
Pratt’s extensive revision and detailed study of Texas polygyrids, which had only
recently become available. When I examined the Polygyra from the Smith Creek Bridge
site (295 specimens), I found that essentially all specimens corresponded best to Polygyra
texasiana triodontoides, a new subspecies endemic to De Witt County defined by Pratt
(1981:70-72). This subspecies is intermediate in size between P. mooreana and P.
texasiana texasiana and higher-domed than either (see Table 8.14).

Examination of specimens from the 1/4-inch screen sample of the bench deposits
(851 specimens) shows that they, too, conform best to Polygyra texasiana triodontoides.
Although I have not re-examined the Polygyra specimens in the matrix samples studied
by Neck, I suspect they, too, are most likely. P. texasiana triodontoides.

Pending further study of the Polygyra from the matrix columns, I have retained
Raymond Neck’s classification as P. mooreana and P. texasiana. My expectation,
however, is that probably all of the Polygyra at Berger Bluff are Polygyra texasiana
triodontoides.

1079

Regarding Polygyra mooreana, Cheatum and Fullington (1971:17) report “Occurs
in a variety of habitats, ranging from deep moist woodlands to sparsely-timbered hillsides
where rocks and debris afford protection and preserve moisture.” Pratt (1981:31) says
“Millerelix mooreana inhabits rocky slopes, generally in oak or oak-juniper woodland,
and always on a calcareous substrate, either limestone, shale, or occasionally a calcareous
cemented sandstone. It is absent from dry hilltops and seems to be replaced by Polygyra
texasiana on valley floors and stream floodplains.”
Polygyra texasiana triodontoides (Fig. 8.47), PTEX
Matrix columns: 10 specimens recorded as P. texasiana, but not the nominate subspecies
1/4-inch screen sample: 884 specimens (plus 231 fragmentary unidentified Polygyra)
Body size: Medium-bodied, diameter 8.3 ± 0.4 mm (range, 7.8-8.1 mm; Pratt 1981:70)
See the taxonomic discussion above. Polygyra texasiana triodontoides is a
subspecies defined by Pratt (1981:70-72). All or nearly all of the Polygyra from the 1/4inch screen seem to conform best to this subspecies, which is intermediate in size and
shape between Polygyra mooreana and Polygyra texasiana texasiana. There are 884
whole specimens plus another 231 damaged specimens that are likely the same species,
for a total of 1115. Table 8.14 shows how the shell dimensions compare to the biological
definitions and to a large sample from the Smith Creek Bridge site. Figure 8.49
graphically portrays shell diameter and height for the bench specimens from the 1/4-inch
screen.
In Figure 8.48, a very small number of outliers can be seen on both the left (about
5 specimens) and right (about 5 specimens) sides of the histograms. The outliers on the
left could be scarce examples of Polygyra mooreana, and those on the right could be

1080

Polygyra texasiana texasiana, or they might simply be aberrant triodontoides individuals.
All of these species tend to intergrade and hybridize to some extent.

Figure 8.47. Polygyra texasiana triodontoides. Top row, apical view; bottom row,
umbilical view. Selection of five specimens out of 100 from N112 E97
(93.14-92.75 m), bag 1 of 2, Lot B-111. Top left specimen resembles P.
mooreana morphotype.
The triodontoides subspecies, as recognized by Pratt, has a much smaller
geographic range than the texasiana subspecies. Its type locality is in De Witt County,
and it extends into Louisiana in a narrow band along the coast (Fig. 8.49; compare with
Fig. 8.16; see also Hubricht 1985:Map 375). According to Pratt (1981:72), “Polygyra
texasiana triodontoides is a form of the Gulf Prairies and their included fresh-water
marshes. It is characteristically found in wetter areas than P. t. texasiana.” Hubricht
1081

(1985:38, as Polygyra triodontoides) says “found in the litter in low, wet ground near
ponds and lakes and along rivers.” Regarding the texasiana subspecies, Cheatum and
Fullington (1971:12) say that it “occupies a variety of habitats ranging from deep
woodlands to open prairies, where it may be found under rocks and other objects. During
drouth, well-formed epiphragms may be present that seal the aperture, thus preventing
water loss.”

Figure 8.48. Histograms of Polygyra texasiana triodontoides Body Size. A, diameter
(N = 830); B, height (N = 756) for specimens from ¼-inch screen, all units
except Unit 2 and N113 E98.
1082

Table 8.14. Metric Statistics for Polygyra Species.

Contemporary biological samples
Millerelix (Polygyra) mooreana (Pratt 1981:28)
mean diameter
7.3 ± 0.4 mm (range, 6.7-8.3 mm)
mean height/diameter ratio
0.52 ± 0.02 mm (range, 0.49-0.55)
Polygyra texasiana triodontoides (Pratt 1981:70)
mean diameter
8.3 ± 0.4 mm (range, 7.8-8.1 mm)
mean height/diameter ratio
0.56 ± 0.03 (range, 0.50-0.61)
Polygyra texasiana texasiana (Pratt 1981:61)
mean diameter
9.5 ± 0.7 mm (range 8.8-10.7 mm)
mean height/diameter ratio
0.49 ± 0.02 (range 0.45-0.53)
Archeological samples
Polygyra texasiana triodontoides (Brown 2002:Table 71)
Smith Creek Bridge site, N51 E101, all levels, 1/4-inch and 1/8-inch mesh
mean diameter
mean height/diameter ratio:

8.86 ± 0.75 mm (range, 6.8-11.0 mm, N = 295)
not recorded

Polygyra texasiana triodontoides
Berger Bluff bench, all units except Unit 2 and N113 E98, 1/4-inch screen sample
mean diameter
median diameter
mean height
median height
mean height/diameter ratio
median height/diameter ratio

8.34 ± 0.40 mm (range, 7.3-10.2 mm, N = 830)
8.30 mm
4.45 ± 0.28 mm (range, 3.50-5.62 mm, N = 756)
4.40 mm
0.5328 ± 0.0400 (range, 0.4382-0.6347, N = 735)
0.5341

1083

Figure 8.49. Approximate Range of Polygyra texasiana triodontoides in Texas as
Mapped by Pratt. Map adapted and generalized from Pratt (1981:Fig. 13).
Compare with Fig. 8.16.

In the bench deposits, this species is regarded as an indicator of mesic floodplain
habitats, probably with deciduous tree cover. Specimens are largely restricted to the
upper part of the bench deposits, probably because of shell destruction in the lower strata.

1084

Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma (Fig. 8.50), PRAP
Matrix columns: 13 specimens identified as P. berlandieriana by Raymond Neck
1/4-inch screen sample: 30 specimens, plus 78 fragmentary (probably P. pachyloma)
Body size: Medium-bodied, diameter 8.5-11.0 mm, height 7.5-9.0 mm (Hubricht
1983:246)
In 1982, Raymond Neck originally identified all 13 Praticolella specimens found
in the N109 E103 and N110 E102 matrix columns as Praticolella berlandieriana.
However, Hubricht (1983) later published improved descriptions and illustrations of all
Praticolella species in Texas, and based on his species definitions, I assigned all of the
Praticolella specimens at the Smith Creek Bridge site to Praticolella pachyloma, a
species that is closely related but higher-domed. The Smith Creek Bridge site is an
instructive case, because after plotting all the specimens from the N51 E101 study
column that were intact enough to measure (N =287), it became clear that there was far
more variability in size than allowed for by the published biological species definitions
(see Brown 2002:Fig. 101). This suggests the biological definitions are based on
inadequate data. Figure 8.52 is a reproduction of the Smith Creek Bridge site data. Many
of the Smith Creek Bridge site specimens are much larger than the published ranges for
either species.
When the Berger Bluff bench specimens from the 1/4-inch screen sample are
plotted the same way, the pattern is less clearcut, because there are far fewer (N = 24)
intact, measurable specimens at Berger Bluff than at the Smith Creek Bridge site. Here,
many of the specimens are smaller than provided for in the biological definitions (Figs.
8.53, 8.54). When all of the Praticolella metric data are considered (Table 8.15), it is
apparent that small sample of Berger Bluff bench specimens is more or less metrically

1085

intermediate between P. pachyloma and P. berlandieriana. This is not surprising, since
these species readily hybridize and intergrade.

Figure 8.50. Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma, Adaxial View. Specimen from N109 E103
(92.70-9.65 m), Lot B-10.

1086

Figure 8.51. Praticolella Height vs. Diameter, Smith Creek Bridge Site. A, scatterplot of
body height vs. diameter (N = 287) for all measurable specimens from N51
E101 at the Smith Creek Bridge Site. B, scatterplot of aperture height vs.
width (N =409). Illustration after Brown (2002:Fig. 101).

1087

When morphology rather than size is considered, the more complete specimens
from the bench deposits appear to resemble Praticolella pachyloma more than
Praticolella berlandieriana; in sorting, 26 specimens were classified as P. pachyloma,
none were classified as P. berlandieriana, and the rest were indeterminate or too
damaged for classification. In summary, the specimens from the bench seem best
considered as Praticolella pachyloma or perhaps a hybrid between this species and P.
berlandieriana. The bench specimens are high-domed, with an aperture that is almost
equal in height and width. They are, however, smaller and less elevated than the Smith
Creek Bridge site specimens. The height/diameter ratio for the bench specimens is
0.7946, which is almost exactly the same as for the illustration presented by Hubricht
(1983:Fig. 4). It is possible that the bench specimens are more hybridized with P.
berlandieriana than are those from the Smith Creek Bridge site.
Regarding geographic range (Fig. 8.14) and habitat preference, the following is
quoted from the Smith Creek Bridge site report:
The present distributions of two species of Praticolella overlap in the De Witt
County area. According to Hubricht, P. pachyloma occupies the south, central,
and much of the upper coastal plain, while P. berlandieriana occurs farther inland
in central and east-central Texas (Hubricht 1983:Map 1, 1985:Maps 430, 432) and
reportedly extends into Nuevo Leon and Tamaulipas (Correa Sandoval 1997:139).
Cheatum and Fullington show the two distributions as more nearly coinciding
(Cheatum and Fullington 1971:Fig. 11, 12). Neck has recognized both species cooccurring at archeological sites in Fort Bend County. At one site, P.
berlandieriana predominates (Neck 1986b), while at the other (Neck 1991a), the
proportions are reversed. According to Neck (1991a:16), P. pachyloma prefers
sandy soils, while P. berlandieriana prefers clay or loamy soils, and "disturbed
habitats, particularly those with wide expanses of bare soil" (Neck 1987b; see also
Neck 1994a:150).
It is perhaps significant that P. pachyloma seems to have the widest
environmental tolerance of the various Praticolella species. Its inland counterpart,
Praticolella berlandieriana, can be found in wooded floodplains, in brush
thickets, or in grassland; in rainy weather it climbs bushes and in dry weather
1088

burrows in topsoil or under downed wood (Pilsbry 1940:695). Praticolella
pachyloma is found in either open or wooded habitats, usually in sandy soil or
under litter (Hubricht 1985:41-42). Branson (1960:151) reports it from floodplain
and brushy habitats in San Patricio County (Brown 2002:222-223).

Praticolella specimens from the bench deposits are regarded as most likely
Praticolella pachyloma or a closely related hybrid, probably derived from a well-drained
sandy habitat. Specimens are most common in the upper part of the bench deposits, but
are also found in the lower strata, including one example found in the upper part of
stratum 1. These snails are large enough for adults to be captured by the 1/4-inch screen,
but are often incomplete due to collapsed spires.

Figure 8.52. Praticolella Height vs. Diameter, Berger Bluff Bench. Scatterplot of body
dimensions for all measurable specimens from the ¼-inch screen (N = 24).

1089

Figure 8.53. Histogram of Body Diameter, Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma. All specimens
measurable for diameter (N = 48) are shown for the ¼-inch screen sample
from the bench deposits.

1090

Table 8.15. Metric Statistics for Praticolella Species.
Contemporary biological samples
Praticolella berlandieriana (Hubricht 1983:246)
diameter
9.0-11.5 mm
height
7.3-8.2 mm
aperture height
3.2-4.1 mm
aperture width
3.0-4.2 mm
Praticolella pachyloma (Hubricht 1983:246)
diameter
8.5-11.0 mm
height
7.5-9.0 mm
aperture height
3.8-5.0 mm
aperture width
3.2-4.8 mm
Archeological samples
Praticolella pachyloma (Brown 2002:Table 72)
Smith Creek Bridge site, N51 E101, all levels, 1/4-inch and 1/8-inch mesh
mean diameter
10.33 ± 0.77 mm (range, 6.8-11.0 mm, N = 370)
mean height
8.32 ± 0.67 mm (range, 6.5-10.7 mm, N = 290)
mean H/D ratio
0.8033 ± 0.0382 (range, 0.7000-0.9314, N = 284)
mean aperture height
4.18 ± 0.40 mm (range, 3.1-5.3 mm, N = 410)
mean aperture width
4.16 ± 0.37 (range, 3.0-5.5 mm, N = 409)
whorls
5.20 ± 0.21 (N = 278)
Praticolella pachyloma
Berger Bluff bench, all units except Unit 2 and N113 E98, 1/4-inch screen sample
mean diameter
9.40 ± 0.87 mm (range, 6.00-11.10, N =48)
mean height
7.54 ± 0.83 mm (range, 6.00-9.80, N = 24)
mean H/D ratio
0.7946 ± 0.0594 (range, 0.6593-0.9468, N = 24)
mean aperture height
3.65 ± 0.30 mm (range, 3.10-4.40, N = 50)
mean aperture width
3.78 ± 0.37 mm (range, 2.70-4.70, N = 53)
whorls
not recorded
median diameter
9.35 mm
median height
7.40 mm
median aperture height
3.60 mm
median aperture width
3.70 mm

1091

Pupisoma dioscoricola (Fig. 8.54), PUPD
Matrix columns: 9 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 1 specimen
Body size: Microsnail, diameter 1.5-1.8 mm, height 1.5-2.0 mm (Cheatum and Fullington
1973:26)
This is one of the smallest microsnails found in the bench deposits, and one of the
most informative. It is a coastal plain species with a discontinuous range extending from
Texas through Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, South Carolina, and much of
Florida (Hubricht 1985:Map 98). Hubricht terms it a “widely distributed Neotropical
species.” It also occurs in Mexico (in gallery woodland; Correa Sandoval 1997:Table 1,
2003) and South America; the type locality is in Jamaica (Pilsbry 1948:1008). In Texas, it
is recorded by Cheatum and Fullington (1973:26) in the counties of Cameron, Hidalgo,
Live Oak, Liberty, Brazos and Gonzales. McGee (1965:131) reports it from several more
counties, including Brazoria, Cameron, Harris, Hidalgo, Fayette, Lavaca, Matagorda, San
Patricio, and Victoria. It is “an arboreal species. Most frequently found on the undersides
of palmetto leaves… The slime of species of this genus is much more adhesive than that
of other land snails. They are not as likely to be dislodged by storms as other arboreal
species would be” (Hubricht 1985:12). Cheatum and Fullington (1973:27) report “we
have collected P. dioscoricola on the underneath surface of palmetto leaves and have
found it in nearly all palmetto growths in which we have collected in south Texas.
Although never abundant, it has been present. Hubricht (Correspondence, November 22,
1971) informs us that it also occurs on the trunks of ironwood during wet weather.” I
have repeatedly checked the undersides of palmetto leaves in Travis County for this
species myself and have never seen it, so evidently central Texas is too dry to support it.
1092

Figure 8.54. Pupisoma dioscoricola (?). Oblique basal view of damaged specimen
tentatively identified as Pupisoma dioscoricola, from N109 E103 (92.8092.75 m), Lot B-7, fortuitously recovered from ¼-inch screen sample.
Because this species is very small and resembles an embryonic polygyrid, it can
easily be overlooked or misclassified. I am aware of no other archeological reports in
Texas or nearby states, and the only paleontological locality I can find is the Wood Pit
channel deposit (Slaughter et al. 1962:49) in north Texas. In the bench deposits, this
species is taken as a good indicator of mesic floodplain habitat, probably supporting
native palmetto. Dwarf palmetto (Sabal minor) is still present on the Coleto Creek
terraces today (Espey, Huston and Associates 1976:Table 2-18). Although only nine
specimens are present in the matrix columns, they have an interesting distribution. Eight
of the nine occur below 92.45 m, and only one was found in the upper part of the bench
deposits. A single probable specimen (diameter, 1.0 mm) was fortuitously recovered from
the 1/4-inch screen in unit N109 E103 (92.80-92.75 m).

1093

Pupoides albilabris (Fig. 8.55), PALB
Matrix columns: 31 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 3 specimens
Body size: Microsnail, height 4.2-5.0 mm (Cheatum and Fullington 1973:28); 4.2-4.9
mm (Logsdon 1967:54); 4.5-5.6 mm (Leonard and Goble 1952:1035)
This small, arid-tolerant, conical snail is widespread in Texas and occurs rather
commonly in contemporary biological surveys, archeological and paleontological sites. It
is larger and somewhat more durable than many of the other microsnails, and according
to Bequaert and Miller (1973:79) is morphologically variable. A few specimens were
found in the Preiss Ranch drift sample (Table 8.8), but not in either of the excavated
quadrats. It occurs throughout the eastern US (Hubricht 1985:Map 38) and westward as
far as the Dakotas, Colorado, Utah (Oliver and Bosworth 1999:Fig. 51), New Mexico
(Metcalf and Smartt 1997:27), and Arizona, as well as northern Mexico (including Baja
California) and the Caribbean. It was the single most commonly encountered species in
the Southern Plains Gastropod Survey (Wyckoff, Theler and Carter 1997:32; see also
Branson 1961a:52), occurring in low numbers but high ubiquity on all landform types.
According to Cheatum and Fullington (1973:28) it is “most abundant in limestone areas
where it may be found under rocks, in grass root and under leaf litter in sparse
woodlands.” In Kaufman County, “this species was abundant in the grassy woodlands of
the Reese Farm and was scarce in the Trinity bottom at Forney. It was taken from forest
debris at Elmo (C); leaf litter at Talty (C); rich humus at Terrell (C); and grass debris in
the pasture at the Linehan Farm (C)” (Logsdon 1967:53). In Kansas, Leonard and Goble
(1952:1035) report “it was abundant in the steep, well-drained areas of the west-facing,
wooded slope (SF). The species was common on limestone ledges at the summit of the
north-facing slope and a few specimens were collected from the loose soil around the
roots of tall grass and weeds.” Metcalf (1984:60) says “Pupoides albilabris resembles
1094

Gastrocopta pellucida in being tolerant of xeric conditions in the southwestern states. It
was found in many localities and in various kinds of habitats.” In New Mexico,
“Pupoides albilabris may be found in brushy areas under stones or in leaf litter. In the
southern part of the state, it may occur under stems of dead yuccas and dead, detached
caudices of sotol” (Metcalf and Smartt 1997:27).

Figure 8.55. Pupoides albilabris, Adaxial View. N109 E103 (93.14-92.90 m), Lot B-1.

1095

As might be expected, this species occurs rather commonly in archeological and
paleontological sites and can be readily retrieved in fine-mesh samples. Archeological
finds include Aubrey, Lubbock Lake, Lake Theo, Rex Rodgers, Sulphur Springs (Neck
1994d), Denton Creek, Wilson-Leonard, Richard Beene, Mustang Branch, Winston’s
Cave, Anthon, Buckhollow, Gaulding, Guadalupe Bay, 41 CC 112, 41 FB 32 (Neck
1991a), 41 WM 118, 41 WM 130, 41 WM 312, 41 TV 368, 41 CH 56, 41 MK 38 (Todd
2002), and the Burnham site. It was not found at the Domebo or Hajny Mammoth sites,
despite the fact that it is a common Oklahoma species. References for all these sites can
be found in the preceding species accounts. It was recovered in large numbers from the
historic component of 22 OK 904 in Mississippi (Peacock and Melsheimer 2003:Table
3.1); here it seems to occupy a dry microhabitat in an otherwise humid region.

In the bench deposits, this species is regarded as a eurytopic snail capable of
tolerating either damp or very dry conditions ranging from the aridity of northern Mexico
to the humidity of Florida. Likewise, its temperature tolerance extends from Maine to
Florida and the Gulf coast. It can also tolerate the extremes of continental climate found
on the Plains in Oklahoma, Kansas and South Dakota. The relatively small number of
specimens from the bench deposits is scattered throughout the stratigraphic sections, and
there is one specimen from the upper part of stratum 1. If this species can be taken as a
continental climate indicator, its relatively low numbers probably indicate that local
climate was not strongly continental in the Younger Dryas and early Holocene.

1096

Rabdotus cf. R. dealbatus (Fig. 8.56), RAB
Matrix columns: 158 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 1127 specimens (462 adults, 535 juveniles, 130 indeterminate)
Body size: Large-bodied, height 17.0-33.0 mm (Fullington and Pratt 1974:16), 14.7-26.2
mm (Logsdon 1967:69), 16.3-26.0 (Burch 1962:133)
The species of Rabdotus present in the bench deposits is something of an enigma.
According to Fullington and Pratt (1974) and Hubricht (1985), the geographic ranges of
three species (Rabdotus dealbatus, R. mooreanus, and R. alternatus) overlap in Goliad
County, but all of the recently dead Rabdotus visible on the surface in the catchment area
appear to be very small, thin-walled Rabdotus dealbatus (Table 8.16), distinguished
mainly by gray-brown stripes on the shell surface.

These three species are only weakly differentiated. They overlap greatly in size
and shape, and because of bleaching and loss of pigmentation, archeological examples
are difficult to speciate. Problems of identification are addressed at length in the Smith
Creek Bridge site report, and the reader is referred there (Brown 2002:229-238) for a
more much thorough discussion. Rabdotus alternatus alternatus is the largest species
(Table 8.16). It is robust and thick-walled, relatively slender in shape, and is sometimes
characterized by a slight swelling on the columella, by a thickened lip, and by reddishbrown pigmentation inside the aperture (Fullington and Pratt 1974:15). About 45% of the
Rabdotus from the Smith Creek Bridge site had thickened lips and about 16% had reddish
interiors. Most of the Smith Creek specimens seemed to correspond best to this species,
so they were assigned to Rabdotus alternatus (Brown 2002:234-237), whose range
extends from Mexico northward across the Rio Grande Plain (Fig. 8.17) to Berger Bluff.
This is a colonial species characteristic of chaparral habitat in the lower Rio Grande
valley (Pilsbry 1946:Fig. 2). According to Neck (1990c:2-3) “R. alternatus was most
1097

abundant (18.6/m2) where tall mesquite and cedar elm were dominant; snails were
observed up to 11 m above soil level…. Optimum habitat of R. alternatus in this area
occurs in the thorn woodland in an upland, well-drained environment.” Rabdotus
mooreanus is intermediate in size, but has about the same diameter/height ratio as R.
alternatus (Table 8.16) and is characterized by a white, unpigmented shell. It is most
often an open grassland or prairie species, but may also be found in gallery woodland
(Fullington and Pratt 1974:18). Its range extends from the central coastal bend
northwestward through central, Lower Pecos, and north-central Texas (Fullington and
Pratt 1974:Fig. 7), where it is broadly sympatric with R. dealbatus, the latter usually
occurring in woodland areas.

Rabdotus dealbatus is the smallest and most gracile of the three species, is
relatively more obese, and recent shells are characterized by exterior gray-brown streaks.
The interior is unpigmented and the lip may be somewhat thickened, but not as frequently
or as heavily as in R. alternatus. It is also colonial and occurs widely through the eastern
half of the state, except in the woodlands of deep east Texas (Fig. 8.18). It is the most
mesic-adapted of the three species and ranges as far north as Kansas (Leonard 1959:103104), where it is judged a recent invader, and as far east as Illinois, Kentucky, Tennessee,
and Alabama (Pilsbry 1946:8). It also extends westward into southern New Mexico
(Hubricht 1985:Map 355). Except for isolated outliers, it is limited on the west in Texas
roughly by the 22-32 inch (56-81 cm) isohyets (due to continentality effects, it tolerates
drier conditions at the southern border of Texas than at the northern border). According
to Fullington and Pratt (1974:16), it is “found under rocks, logs, and similar cover,
emerging at night and during wet, overcast weather. During dry weather it is found
cemented to the underside of cover objects or, rarely, to sheltered tree trunks or rock
1098

ledges. It burrows several inches into the soil prior to winter hibernation…. In Texas it is
generally found along stream bottoms and in similar open woodlands within the prairie,
being replaced by R. mooreanus in open grasslands.” Logsdon (1967:69) found these
estivating on fence posts, on dead weeds in an open field, and under leaf litter in
Kaufman County. Simmons reported

It is found on the Leon River flood plain, up the steep hillsides, in the limestone
bluffs, and over the hills into the treeless pastures where it is more abundant and
most at home. It is found in populous colonies in the high open pasture lands
where there is only grass and weed coverage.

It can survive the severest drouths....This snail is often found by the hundreds
where it has climbed weeds up 6 inches to 3 feet above the soil. It is notable that it
always climbs dead, last years weeds....

Here, in Coryell County in the limestone lands it attains greater size than in clay
or sandy soils. To illustrate: a collection made in an abandoned field 6 miles to the
southwest, the average height is 19 mm, whereas in a collection made on the high
prairie lands approximately 250 feet above the river flood plain the average B.
dealbatus is...height 26 to 28 mm, aperture 12 to 14 mm. high, 10 mm. wide
(Simmons 1954:20-21).

Rabdotus shells from the bench deposits lack pigment, inside and out, and are a
pinkish off-white in color. No systematic observations on columellar swellings or
thickened lips were made, but in general, reinforced lips are occasionally present, but not
nearly as well developed as in many of the Smith Creek Bridge site specimens. The mean
diameter/height ratio for adults is 0.5639 (Table 8.17), which is consistent with either R.
mooreanus or R. alternatus, but not R. dealbatus. The mean height for adults is about 26
mm, which is within the range of variation prescribed by Fullington and Pratt for any of
1099

the three species. It is also considerably larger than any of the recently dead Rabdotus
that can be collected in the region. Mean heights for recent Rabdotus dealbatus shells
range from about 17-21 mm (Table 8.16). Mean heights for archeological specimens
from south Texas range from about 23-28 mm (Table 8.17). Figure 8.57 shows shell
heights and diameters for all adults from the 1/4-inch screen. Figure 8.58 shows the very
same adult specimens combined with those juveniles that were retained on the screen
(many embryonic specimens probably fell through or were destroyed, and are not shown
here). Of the 997 Rabdotus specimens complete enough for age classification, 54% were
juvenile and 46% were adult. This is a typical mortality profile for a contemporary death
assemblage, and it is also typical for excavated assemblages from the 1/4-inch screen,
provided the assemblage is not altered by human collecting bias (either prehistoric or
archeological).

The Rabdotus adults from the bench deposits are actually slightly larger than the
specimens tentatively assigned to Rabdotus alternatus from the Smith Creek Bridge site,
yet they lack the pigmentation, columellar swelling, and frequent heavily reinforced lips
found at that site. Are the specimens from Berger Bluff simply examples of Rabdotus
dealbatus that are larger than most contemporary individuals? Or are they small examples
of Rabdotus alternatus that lack some of the characteristic nominal attributes of the
species? Among the collections from the 1/4-inch screen, there are five large specimens
that compare well in size and shape with the presumed Rabdotus alternatus from the
Smith Creek Bridge site. These are from N112 E 99 (92.89-92.60 m, Lot B-89, 2
specimens) and N112 E97 (93.14-92.75 m, Lot B-112, 1 specimen; 92.75-92.70 m, Lot
B-113, 2 specimens).

1100

Table 8.16. Metric Statistics for Contemporary Rabdotus.
Species definitions (Fullington and Pratt 1974)
Rabdotus dealbatus dealbatus
height 17-33 mm
Rabdotus mooreanus
height 20-30 mm
Rabdotus alternatus
height 23-43 mm

D/H ratio .57-.65
D/H ratio .47-.62
D/H ratio .48-.63

Measured contemporary biological samples
Blue Bayou site, pooled samples 1 and 2 (Victoria County)
Rabdotus dealbatus adults (Brown 2002:Table 75)
mean height
17.55 ± 1.28 mm (range, 15.0-20.8, N =42)
mean diameter
10.82 ± 0.81 mm (range, 9.6-12.4, N = 44)
mean aperture height
8.88 ± 0.79 mm (range, 7.2-10.5, N =44)
mean aperture width
5.28 ± 0.50 mm (range, 4.3-6.8, N = 44)
mean diameter/height ratio 0.6189 ± 0.03 (range, 0.54-0.68, N = 42)
Diatom locality D-6 (Smith Creek, De Witt County)
Rabdotus dealbatus adults (Brown 2002:Table 75)
mean height
20.68 ± 1.41 mm (range, 18.8-23.4, N =10)
mean diameter
12.47 ± 0.82 mm (range, 10.8-13.4, N = 10)
mean aperture height
10.72 ± 0.63 mm (range 9.6-11.5, N = 10)
mean aperture width
6.61 ± 0.42 mm (range, 5.8-7.2, N = 10)
mean diameter/height ratio 0.6037 ± 0.03 mm (range, 0.56-0.65, N = 10)
Welder Wildlife Refuge (San Patricio County)
Rabdotus dealbatus adults (samples courtesy of Andy Malof, 2001)
Patch 1
mean height
19.30 ± 1.96 mm (range, 16.10-24.00, N =38)
mean diameter
11.64 ± 0.95 mm (range, 9.70-13.90, N = 40)
mean aperture height
10.03 ± 0.99 mm (range, 8.30-12.40, N = 40)
mean aperture width
6.38 ± 0.64 mm (range, 5.30-8.50, N = 40)
mean diameter/height ratio 0.6043 ± 0.0320 (range, 0.5450-0.6630, N = 38)
Patch 2
mean height
20.29 ± 1.68 mm (range, 15.90-25.40, N = 185)
mean diameter
11.91 ± 0.88 mm (range, 9.60-14.20, N = 187)
mean aperture height
10.42 ± 0.83 mm (range, 8.10-12.60, N = 188)
mean aperture width
6.65 ± 3.86 mm (range, 4.50-5.88, N = 188)
mean diameter/height ratio 0.5825 ± 0.0232 (range, 0.5276-0.6429, N = 183)
Patch 3
mean height
19.13 ± 1.80 mm (range, 15.20-22.20, N = 16)
mean diameter
11.14 ± 0.95 mm (range, 9.20-13.00, N = 16)
mean aperture height
9.81 ± 0.98 mm (range, 7.40-11.80, N = 16)
mean aperture width
5.99 ± 0.69 mm (range, 4.70-7.10, N = 16)
mean diameter/height ratio 0.5830 ± 0.0211 (range, 0.5538-0.6230, N = 16)
1101

Table 8.17. Metric Statistics for Archeological Rabdotus.
Camber site (Atascosa County; Turpin 2004:Appendix IV), Rabdotus sp.
mean height
25.88 ± 4.23 mm (range, 9-35, N = 634)
Blue Bayou site (Victoria County)
41 VT 94, Test Pit 21 (S0 W2.5, no levels), Rabdotus sp. adults
mean height
28.26 ± 2.11 mm (range, 23.04-32.8, N = 55)
mean diameter
16.52 ± 1.30 mm (range, 13.96-19.44, N = 62)
mean aperture height
15.07 ± 1.20 mm (range, 12.74-18.16, N = 66)
mean aperture width
not measured
mean diameter/height ratio 0.5894 ± 0.0291 (range, 0.5222-0.6630, N = 51)
Smith Creek Bridge site (De Witt County; Brown 2002:234)
N51 E101, all levels, Rabdotus cf. R. alternatus adults
mean height
24.83 ± 2.32 mm (range, 15.3-32.5, N = 3990)
mean diameter
14.56 ± 1.29 mm (range, 10.5-19.3, N = 4111)
mean aperture height
12.26 ± 1.15 mm (range, 7.6-16.8, N = 1936)
mean aperture width
7.40 ± 0.69 mm (range, 5.1-10.0, N = 1946)
mean diameter/height ratio 0.5874 ± 0.0286 (range, 0.4984-0.7202, N = 3934)
Berger Bluff, upper deposits
N97 E96, level 16 (97.70-97. 55 m), 1/8-inch screen sample, Rabdotus sp. adults
mean height
mean diameter
mean aperture height
mean aperture width
diameter/height ratio

22.6 ± 2.96 mm (range, 16.28-27.34, N = 11)
12.36 ± 1.32 mm (range, 9.52-15.02, N = 11)
11.94 ± 1.20 mm (range, 9.28-13.48, N = 11)
not measured
0.5712 ± 0.0332 (range, 0.5053-0.5937, N = 11)

Berger Bluff bench, 1/4-inch screen sample
All units pooled except Unit 2 and N113 E98, Rabdotus cf. R. dealbatus (?) adults
mean height
mean diameter
mean aperture height
mean aperture width
mean diameter/height ratio

26.24 ± 2.78 mm (range, 18.90-32.70, N = 72)
14.73 ± 1.47 mm (range, 11.40-19.20, N = 199)
13.19 ± 1.50 mm (range, 8.28-17.70, N = 194)
7.84 ± 0.97 mm (range, 5.50-11.20, N 155)
0.5639 ± 0.0313 (range, 0.4841-0.6184, N = 67)

median height
median diameter
median aperture height
median aperture width
median diameter/height ratio

26.15 mm
14.56 mm
13.12 mm
7.70 mm
0.5627
1102

Figure 8.56. Rabdotus sp. Adults, Adaxial View. Four representative specimens from
N112 E97 (93.14-92.75 m), Lot B-112.

Evaluating the 158 specimens from the two matrix columns, Raymond Neck
initially considered many of them to be intermediate between Rabdotus dealbatus and
Rabdotus mooreanus, but eventually classified them all as Rabdotus dealbatus. He also
specifically commented,

One species not found in the samples from Berger Bluff is the South Texas tree
snail, Rabdotus alternatus. This species is found over most of southern Texas to
the south and west of Berger Bluff. R. alternatus is not to be expected in the
immediate vicinity of Berger Bluff, and its absence from the samples is not
significant in regards to environmental reconstruction (Neck n.d.a:4).

1103

I have followed Neck in tentatively classifying all of the Rabdotus from the bench
deposits as Rabdotus dealbatus, but the classification is not quite so clearcut as portrayed
by him. The specimens from the bench do not, in fact, correspond to modern Rabdotus
dealbatus in pigmentation, shape factor, or size. Nevertheless, the overall match in terms
of size, shape, and nominal attributes (such as lack of interior reddening, columellar
swelling, and weak lip reinforcement) is perhaps better for this species than for the other
two alternatives. The fact that archeological adult Rabdotus in south Texas are, on
average, about 30% larger than contemporary specimens (when comparing collections
that are not size-biased) needs explanation. The problems discussed above are a good
example of the ambiguities that inhere in comparing archeological and modern faunas of
any kind, when only hard parts can be observed archeologically, and when taphonomic
biases or secular size changes may have altered the picture as well.

The Rabdotus specimens from the bench deposits are tentatively regarded as most
likely a natural death assemblage of calciphile Rabdotus dealbatus, probably
characteristic of either fairly well-drained, open woodland or of grassland. Although
there is clear evidence of human occupation in the bench deposits, there is no indication
any of the Rabdotus were used as food sources this early in the history of the site. The
large assemblages of Rabdotus in the blufftop stratum 5 midden and at the Smith Creek
Bridge site, on the other hand, were probably largely food remains.

1104

Figure 8.57. Histograms of Rabdotus Body Size, Adults Only. Top, height (N = 72);
bottom, diameter (N = 199) for specimens from ¼-inch screen, all units
except Unit 2 and N113 E98.

1105

Figure 8.58. Histograms of Rabdotus Body Size, Adults and Juveniles Combined. Top,
height (N = 173); bottom, diameter (N = 415) for specimens from ¼-inch
screen, all units except Unit 2 and N113 E98.

1106

Strobilops texasiana (Fig.8.59, 8.60), STRO
Matrix columns: 28 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 11 fortuitously recovered specimens
Body size: Microsnail, diameter 2.4 mm (Fullington and Pratt 1974:26), 1.9-2.0 mm
(Burch 1962:66), 2.7 mm (1 specimen; Logsdon 1967:68)
This distinctive small snail is easily recognized, not readily confused with other
species, and is fairly resistant to destruction, although only fortuitously retained on the
1/4-inch screen. The domed shape and exterior ribbing add structural strength to the shell.
It has a somewhat discontinuous distribution in Maryland, Virginia, and South Carolina
westward to Texas (Hubricht 1985:Map 103), where it is widely distributed in the eastern
half of the state, extending westward in major river valleys (Fullington and Pratt
1974:Fig. 13), but not very common in south Texas. It is found around rotten logs, under
loose bark, and in leaf litter (Fullington and Pratt 1974:26; Neck 1987a:316). Logsdon
(1967:68) reported “Strobilops texasiana was found in drift debris at the Forney site (C),
Talty (A) and the Reese Farm (C). Specimens were also collected from rotten logs at the
Four Wyn Ranch (S).” Neck 1996:95) reports it from wooded areas. Coney and others
(1982:93) found it significantly associated with the leaf litter microhabitat, although it
also has a wide habitat breadth.

This species was moderately abundant in the Preiss Ranch drift sample (where 38
adults and 20 juveniles were recovered), and juveniles were also recovered from locality
D-21 both in quadrat sampling and attached to downed wood in the live oak mott, as well
as Goliad State Park (Table 8.5). Although not abundant, it is widely distributed through
the stratigraphic section in the bench deposits. This is one of the few species that is
perhaps as common in the lower parts of the bench deposits as in the upper part, probably
because of its durability. There are several specimens from stratum 2A, and two were
1107

found in stratum 1 samples at 91.70-91.65 m and 91.60-91.55 m in the N110 E102 matrix
column.

Figure 8.59. Strobilops texasiana, Adaxial View. Specimen from N109 E96 (92.90-92.85
m), Lot B-127.

1108

Figure 8.60. Strobilops texasiana, Additional Views. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical
view. Same specimen as previous photo.

1109

This species has probably experienced significant eastward range contraction
during the Holocene. According to Neck (1987a:Table 3), it was extirpated from the Lake
Theo area in the Late Holocene. Archeological examples have also been found at the Rex
Rodgers, Aubrey, Denton Creek, Wilson-Leonard, Mustang Branch, Kenyon
Rockshelter, Winston’s Cave, Richard Beene, Anthon, Smyth Crossing, and Gaulding
sites, as well as 41 FT 193, 41 WM 118, 41 MM 340, 41 MM 341, 41 CH 56, 41 JK 53,
41 JK 66, 41 JK 78, and 41 MK 38 (Todd 2002:Table 1). It has been reported in
paleontological context from Palo Blanco Creek in Brooks County (Hubricht 1962:3), the
Fordyce Quarry in San Patricio County (Conkin, Conkin and Mason 1962), Stillhouse
Hollow (Cheatum and Slaughter 1966), Wood Pit Pond and Channel (Slaughter et al.
1962), and the Clear Creek and Ben Franklin faunas (Cheatum and Allen 1963).

This species is interpreted as evidence of mature woodland, either well-drained
upland woods as on the Preiss Ranch, or mature riparian woodland.

Zonitoides arboreus (Fig. 8.61), ZONA
Matrix columns: 4 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 3 fortuitously recovered specimens
Body size: Microsnail, diameter 5-6 mm (Burch 1962:117), 4-6 mm (Leonard 1959:122),
3.7-4.8 mm (Logsdon 1967:62)
This rather nondescript microsnail has a continent-wide distribution and is
therefore presumably the most cosmopolitan and adaptable species found in the bench
deposits. Although Leonard (1959:123) says it is colonial, only seven specimens were
found in the bench deposits. Hubricht (1985:32) says “usually found on rotting logs and
in floodplains, as well as upland woods” (see also Branson and Batch 1970:343; Hoff
1962:54). Leonard (1959:123) says “The habitat is notably varied. The snail is found in
1110

wooded areas, on bluffs along streams, in grassland and under stones and boards. It is
found most abundantly in and around loose bark of fallen trees.” Logsdon (1967:61) says
“Zonitoides arboreus was living primarily in rotten logs, and was taken from five sites.
This species is common in habitats where other species were scarce or missing, being the
only one taken from the sparsely vegetated site at Cedarvale, with its very low level of
P2O5 and low nitrogen level. The organic matter was 2.2%.” In Tennessee, Coney and
others (1982:95) found it to have a wide habitat breadth, and associated with rotting log
microhabitats. Leonard and Goble (1952:1044) report “Z. arboreus was common on the
north facing slopes, where it was found under decaying logs and under leaf humus in an
oak-elm association.” The species was moderately common in the SPGS, where it
occurred in densities of 49 and 144 individuals per square meter in mountaintop and rock
ledge habitats (Wyckoff, Theler and Carter 1997:38).

The few examples found in the bench deposits are mostly in the upper part of the
stratigraphic section, although one was found in the N110 E102 matrix column at 92.1092.05 m, in stratum 2A. This species is regarded as an indicator of mature woodland with
downed wood.

Archeological examples have been found at the Aubrey, Lubbock Lake, Denton
Creek, Winston’s Cave, Mustang Branch, Gaulding, and Guadalupe Bay sites, as well as
41 DT 59, 41 MM 340, 41 MM 341, 41 FT 193, and 34 Cd 257.

1111

Figure 8.61.Zonitoides arboreus. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. Specimen
from N109 E96 (92.70-92.65 m), Lot B-10.
1112

Unidentified slug (Fig. 8.62), SLUG
Matrix columns: none
1/4-inch screen sample: none
N109 E96 bulk matrix: 2 specimens
Body size: Micro-sized slug plate (soft tissue body size unknown)
Slugs are snails that lack an external shell, having only a very small, internal
vestigial shell, called a slug plate. Because slugs are almost entirely soft tissue and the
only hard part likely to be preserved is small and inconspicuous, they are rarely identified
from archeological sites except when fine-screened matrix samples are examined by
experienced archeomalacologists. No slug plates were recovered by Raymond Neck from
the two matrix columns he examined, nor were any found while sorting snails from the
1/4-inch screen, but two slug plates were discovered while rough-sorting fine-screened
bulk matrix from N109 E96 (93.08-93.00 m and 92.75-92.70 m; no lot numbers currently
assigned).

The specimen from the 93.08-93.00 m level resembles a small longitudinally split
clear quartz grain, but is in fact a calcareous slug plate. It is 2.6 mm long, 1.5 mm wide,
with a maximum thickness of about 0.5 mm. It is convex on one side and unevenly flat
on the other. Fine growth laminations can be seen near the edges under magnification.
Although the unidentified slug that produced this slug plate was likely as large or larger
than any of the large-bodied snail species (Mesomphix, Anguispira, Rabdotus), the slug
plate itself is comparable in size to a microsnail, and must be recovered by the same
techniques used for those minute species. The specimen from the 92.75-92.70 m level is
almost identical (and is presumably the same species), 2.8 mm long and 1.7 mm wide.

1113

Because slugs lack external shells, they are even more sensitive to water loss than
other land snails, and are restricted to moist habitats. In archeological or paleontological
projects, slug plates are most often recovered where cienega, spring-margin, or pondmargin deposits are sampled. Pleistocene deposits sometimes produce slug plates from
the extinct giant Pleistocene slug, Deroceras aenigma, a member of the Limacidae
(Taylor 1960:80; Plate 4, Figs. 14-16, 19-26; Leonard and Frye 1962:24; Plate II, Fig.
27).

Figure 8.62. Slug Plate From Unidentified Slug. N109 E96 (93.08-93.00 m), bulk matrix
passing ¼-inch screen. View of convex face.
Deroceras aenigma has been reported from the Burnham site (Theler 2003a),
while Deroceras laeve has been reported from the Aubrey site, Lubbock Lake, Wilson1114

Leonard (Shaw et al. 1998:Table 37-11), and the North Cove site in Nebraska (Stewart
1989), and Deroceras sp. has been reported from the Anthon and Denton Creek (Neck
1994a) sites. Both Deroceras aenigma and D. laeve have been reported from the Richard
Beene site, where the former appears only in sample 30, and the latter in samples 25, 28,
and 30 (Neck 1992:Table 4) near the bottom of the stratigraphic section. McGee
(1965:162) regards Deroceras laeve as introduced to Texas from more northerly parts of
the US, and lists Philomycus carolinianus as the only native slug, but the archeological
evidence seems to dispute that position.

Slugs are probably much more common in wetter, cooler climates like the
northeastern or northwestern US than in Texas. In central Maine, for example, 35% of the
terrestrial gastropods collected by Martin (2000:51) were slugs. In Texas, slugs are
familiar to urban dwellers mainly because of the artificially humidified plant-rich habitats
we voluntarily provide for them. They occur in arid climates, such as New Mexico, but in
the wild are usually found only around springs, streams, or wet montane meadows
(Metcalf and Smartt 1997:51). Even more so than other land snails, they use behavioral
adaptations to restrict water loss, foraging mainly at night during periods of high
humidity.

Slug plates in archeological sites can be taken as indicators of consistently wet
conditions, but because they are so easily overlooked in sampling, their absence should
not necessarily be taken to indicate aridity.

1115

AMPHIBIOUS SNAILS
Catinella vermeta (Fig. 8.63), CATV
Matrix columns: 5 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 8 specimens
Body size: Small to medium-bodied, median height 5.4-9.5 mm (range, 4.15-12.6;
Franzen 1982:Table 1), height 7-13 mm (Burch 1962:67), both as Succinea avara; 10.813.3 mm (Hubricht 1961:61, as Catinella texana), 6.5-14.5 mm (Logsdon 1967:80)
This amphibious snail is a member of the family Succineidae, which are said not
to be identifiable except by soft-tissue dissection. The taxonomy of these snails is very
convoluted. The generic names Succinea, Catinella, and Quickella have all been applied
in the past and will be found in the literature. The following combinations (and others)
appear:
Catinella vermeta
Catinella avara
Catinella texana
Quickella vermeta
Succinea avara

The definitive study is by Franzen (1982), who provides metric statistics for
specimens from the southern Plains. Adults are typically about 8 mm high and 4.5 mm in
diameter, but vary considerably. Regarding habitat preference, Hubricht (1985:16, as
Catinella avara) says “Usually found on wet ground in low, wet places, floodplains,
margins of ponds, marshes, and swamps in both shady and sunny situations.” Logsdon
(1967:80) says “Catinella vermeta was found at six sites; being collected from fence
posts, where it was aestivating, under leaves, under Sorghum halepense cover, and on the
stems of Cyperus setigerus, which were growing near a pond.” This species is sometimes
found under logs near streams (Cheatum and Burt 1931:338).
1116

Figure 8.63. Catinella vermeta, Adaxial View. N109 E96 (93.08-93.00 m), Lot B-125.
Larger of two specimens in this lot.
Branson (1963:80) says, “This form is nearly always found in moist areas,
sometimes actively entering the water… Its food consists primarily of algae, fungi, and
molds of various types.” They are widespread in Texas (McGee 1965:100).

The succineids are really amphibious snails, but they have been variously
classified as terrestrial or aquatic by previous authors. I have seen them most often on
open damp ground in shallow swales in otherwise flat ground, but they are also known to
1117

estivate on trees. These are very thin-shelled, fragile snails. Because they stay close to
water but avoid swift flows, they do not need thick shells to retain moisture or resist
strong currents. Consequently, they are fragile and are likely to be underrepresented in
archeological collections, even if they are large enough to be retained on a 1/4-inch
screen. Most of the specimens from the bench deposits are from near the top of the
stratigraphic section, where carbonate cementation is less pronounced and shell breakage
is probably less severe.

These snails are typically marsh, cienega, spring-margin or stream bank snails.
Since the bench deposits are interpreted as a spring margin site, much greater
representation would be expected if the shells were more durable. The low frequency of
this species is assumed to be at least partly due to taphonomic deletion.

Succineids are often found (at least in low numbers) in archeological sites, but are
likely to be listed by a wide variety of names (probably far more names than actual
species are present), or often just as “Succineidae”. This species is found at the Aubrey
site (as Catinella avara) and perhaps at the Hajny Mammoth site (Branson 1992, as
Quickella cf. vermeta).

Pomatiopsis lapidaria (Fig.8.64), PLAP
Matrix columns: 5 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: none
Body size: Microsnail, modal height for adults 4.5-6.0 mm (maximum, 7.0-8.5 mm;
Dundee 1957:13); height 6.75 mm (LaRocque 1968:413)
This small, conical operculate (prosobranch) snail is widely distributed in the
eastern US, in the Mississippi River basin, and elsewhere, but is apparently now
1118

extirpated in Texas (Fig. 8.7, based on Hubricht 1985:Map 11). Burch and Van Devender
(1980:Fig. 44) show isolated occurrences in New Mexico and the Texas panhandle, but
the nature of the localities is not clear. Neck (1990a) does not list it. Branson, Taylor, and
Taylor (1962:284) list it for Oklahoma only as a fossil species. It is sexually dimorphic;
females (modal size 5-6 mm) are slightly larger than males (modal size 4.5-5.0 mm;
Dundee 1957:13). Males are slightly more slender, with a slightly higher whorl count.
Adults can presumably be anywhere from about 4.0-8.5 mm high; the lifespan is about
three years. The most comprehensive study of this species is by Dundee, who says
“Pomatiopsis lapidaria is found in a variety of habitats such as marshes, wooded flood
plains of small creeks, grassy hummocks in low, wet pastures… and in upland artesianfed marshes. The features common to all P. lapidaria habitats seem to be: (1) a very
moist substratum with enough sand to prevent it from becoming muck, (2) shade, (3)
fresh water. As with all of these general descriptions of habitats, one must keep in mind
the seasonal factor – that these habitats are drier at certain times of the year” (Dundee
1957:11-12). The species is colonial, shifting position seasonally to maintain proximity to
moisture, and estivating with the operculum closed in dry weather. Maximum movement
during the lifespan of the individual is about six feet (Dundee 1957:14).

Hubricht (1985:4) says, “A calciphile. This species has often been referred to as
amphibious or even aquatic. But, having collected it at more than 300 localities, it is my
opinion that, were it not for its aquatic affinities, it would have been accepted as a land
snail without question. Found crawling on damp mud on floodplains, but usually above
the normal high-water line; also on talus slopes, in ravines, and on mountainsides. During
winter floods it may be washed into streams, where it may live for some time. During
warmer weather it may climb up on plants and tree trunks to escape the water.” In
1119

Kentucky, according to Kaplan and Minckley (1960:65) it is “Abundant; all stations. We
collected living specimens of this species from the bottom of the creek in March and
December. The latter occurrence was in a bottom sample obtained from 5 feet of water.
The species was also found living along the stream banks, sometimes as far as 40 yards
from the creek.” The species has been documented from hummocky swamps (Hubricht
1960:33) and seepage areas (Van der Schalie and Getz 1962). Ameel (1938:703) also
summarizes habitat preference.

Figure 8.64. Pomatiopsis lapidaria, Adaxial View. Specimen from snail matrix column,
N110 E102 (92.20-92.15 m, sample 14.

It is clear from the sources consulted that this stenotopic species prefers damp,
marshy terrain but can live submerged in water for extended periods of time without
1120

making an effort to escape. Five examples of this species were recovered from the two
matrix columns analyzed by Neck – a single occurrence in each of five excavation levels,
all of them below 92.25 m in elevation. These are all in strata 1, 2A or the very lowest
part of stratum 2B.
Large numbers of this species were recovered from the pond margin (and smaller
numbers from the pond axis) at the Aubrey site (Neck 2001:Tables 7.2, 7.3). Fairly large
numbers were also obtained from the Domebo site (Cheatum and Allen 1966:Table 2). A
few specimens were recovered from Wilson-Leonard (Shaw et al. 1998:Table 37-6).
Paleontological occurrences include one locality in Caddo County, Oklahoma (Branson,
Taylor and Taylor 1962), several Texas localities such as the Byers locality in Clay
County (Allen and Cheatum 1961), Stillhouse Hollow (Cheatum and Slaughter 1966), the
Clear Creek fauna (Cheatum and Allen 1963), Cooper Reservoir (Slaughter 1964), and a
nameless locality in Comal County (Hubricht 1962:1). The rarity of this snail in
archeological contexts perhaps indicates it is a useful Pleistocene marker species in
Texas.

1121

AQUATIC SNAILS
As in most archeological sites, there are relatively few aquatic snails in the bench
deposits, but those present are quite informative. There are two prosobranch species,
Cincinnatia integra and Valvata tricarinata, and the remaining species are all pulmonate
snails. Prosobranch snails are gill-breathing, and cannot tolerate poorly oxygenated
water. These probably came from a nearby habitat with clear, perennially running water,
perhaps a spring run located close to the site. The remaining species are pulmonates, or
lung-breathing snails capable of surviving on poorly oxygenated water, often in
temporary ponds or seasonally drying drainages. Some of these snails have varices, or
growth interruption features visible on the shell that suggest either overwintering or
seasonal disruption of the aquatic habitat. These probably came from Coleto Creek itself.
All of the aquatic snails, regardless of origin, were probably deposited by periodic
overbank flooding of the creek. Most of these aquatic species are widely distributed
across the North American continent, but Valvata tricarinata is extirpated in Texas.
Biomphalaria obstructa, BIOO
Matrix columns: 3 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: none
Body size: Microsnail, maximum diameter 11 mm (Fullington 1978b:182)
This planorbid (pulmonate) genus is found in tropical regions from Africa to the
Caribbean, South America, and the Gulf of Mexico region in the US. In Texas, the
species present is usually classified as Biomphalaria obstructa, although it has also
occasionally been classified as Biomphalaria havanensis (Burch and Tottenham
1980:198). Biomphalaria havanensis may be as much as 10-13 mm in diameter
1122

(Thompson 1984:72). In Texas, it is widely distributed wherever suitable aquatic habitats
are found and has been previously reported from the counties of De Witt and Victoria
(see also Lindholm 1979:31). Fullington (1978b:183) says “I have collected living
specimens from mud in a dry stock tank in Brewster County and from clear Hill Country
streams.” It occurs as far north as Garza County and Erath County. This was the most
common aquatic species found in the Preiss Ranch drift sample (Table 8.8). The shell
itself is small, flat, and discoidal in shape. According to Malek (1969:189),
“Their distribution in Louisiana coincides with bottomland hardwoods, cypress
and tupelo (Nyssa) as well as with the delta and subdelta mud flats and their
freshwater marshes…. the habitats of these snails in Louisiana are clear or slightly
turbid waters with mud banks and humus bottoms…. There was a seasonal
temperature variation of 20° C (9° C - 29° C). Freezing or near freezing
temperatures were also occasionally recorded during 1961 and 1963. A maximum
temperature of 32° C was measured in certain microhabitats.”

One of the specimens from the N109 E103 matrix column comes from near the
top of the column at 92.85-92.80 m, while the other two come from the N110 E102
column at 92.15-92.10 and 92.05-92.00 m, in stratum 2A.

A couple of examples of this species are reported as B. havanensis from the
Wilson-Leonard site (Shaw et al. 1998:Table 37-6). Other examples of B. havanensis are
reported from 41 CC 112 (Treece 1992) and 41 WM 312 (Voellinger and Gearhart 1987).
It has also been reported from the Sleeper site (Neck 1991), although because the finescreen samples were washed with creek water, it is unclear whether the specimens from
the fine-screen samples might be modern contaminants. Bequaert and Miller (1973:207)
list Biomphalaria havanensis as “a common Pleistocene fossil in Texas and Louisiana.”

1123

Cincinnatia integra (Fig. 8.65), CINI
Matrix columns: 52 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 8 specimens
Body size: Microsnail, maximum height 6 mm (Fullington 1978b:36); 4.0-6.0 mm
(Clarke 1973:241-242)
This prosobranch species was formerly classified as Cincinnatia cincinnatiensis,
but Hershler and Thompson (1996) have re-examined the taxonomy and classified it by
the original name, Cincinnatia integra. It may also appear as Amnicola integra in some of
the older literature. The common name is “Midland Siltsnail.” Fullington (1978b:37)
points out that it is a fairly common Pleistocene fossil in north Texas, but he could find
no definite living populations in the state and tentatively regarded it as extirpated in
Texas. He remarked that “However, it probably will be found alive in the streams of
northeastern or central Texas… it is strongly suspected that relict colonies might exist in
some northern Hill County streams.” Seven specimens were found in the Preiss Ranch
drift sample (Table 8.8), and if these are not subfossil, possibly they indicate the presence
of a recent population in the Coleto Creek basin. Hershler and Thompson (1996:50, Fig.
70) show the species as widely distributed in the Mississippi River basin and Midwest
and present across the south-central part of Texas in an irregular band from Chambers
County in the east to Kinney County in the west. They list it as occurring in Cardenas
Creek, Goliad County, Ripley Lake and Garcitas Creek (Victoria County) and the
Guadalupe River. In Kansas, it occurs in the eastern half of the state, but may be
declining (Angelo, Cringan and Fry 2002:249).

1124

Figure 8.65. Cincinnatia integra, Adaxial View. From N109 E103 matrix column (92.0091.95 m), coarse fraction.

These are small, broad, conical snails with large circular apertures. They could
possibly be confused with a variety of other small conical snails, including juvenile
Rabdotus. Fullington (1978b:37) says “Cincinnatia cincinnatiensis inhabits streams,
usually with moderate to slow flow. The substrate may be soft mud or sand-gravel,
always with abundant algae and macrophytic vegetation present…. The food is chiefly
diatoms.” Leonard (1959:34) says “In Lone Star lake, A. integra was found living on mud
bottom in quiet shallow water near the mouth of a small creek emptying into the lake. In
this habitat the water was somewhat turbid and contained large masses of floating and
1125

partly submerged algae. In Shoal Creek it was found living on ooze-covered gravel
bottom in clear quiet water about one foot deep.” Branson (1961b:42) says “in Oklahoma
they have only been found in sand or gravel-bottomed streams possessing abundant
aquatic vegetation, and in running water.” In Canada, the species has been found in small
rivers (slow to moderate current) to large lakes (Clarke 1973:242-243).

This species has a very interesting stratigraphic distribution in the bench deposits
(Table 8.18). In the N109 E103 matrix column, it occurs in moderate numbers, but only
below the base of stratum 2B (92.25 m and below). In the N110 E102 matrix column and
in other units where specimens were fortuitously recovered from the 1/4-inch screen, it is
more widely distributed, with occurrences scattered all the way from stratum 1 to stratum
2D.

This species is occasionally recovered from archeological contexts. It has been
found at 41 MK 38 (Todd 2002:Table 1), 41 CH 56 (Weinstein and Whelan 1987), and
the Denton Creek, Richard Beene, and Wilson-Leonard (Shaw et al. 1998:Table 37-8)
sites. Two specimens were found at the Smith Creek Bridge site (Brown 2002:252).

1126

Table 8.18. Provenience of Cincinnatia integra Specimens.
1/4-inch Screen Sample
N109 E103
92.90-92.85
92.15-92.10

Stratum 2D
Stratum 2A

1
1

N111 E101
92.65-92.60

Stratum 2C

1

N109 E96
93.08-93.00
92.85-92.80
92.45-92.40
92.40-92.35
92.15-92.10

Stratum 2D
Stratum 2D
Stratum 2C
Stratum 2C
Stratum 2A

1
1
1
1
1

N109 E103 Matrix Samples
92.25-92.20
92.20-92.15
92.15-92.10
92.10-92.05
92.05-92.00
92.00-91.95
91.95-91.90

Stratum 2B
Transitional
Stratum 2A
Stratum 2A
Transitional
Stratum 1
Stratum 1

10
4
6
3
2
8
6

N110 E102 Matrix Samples
92.90-92.80
92.80-92.75
92.70-92.65
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20
92.05-92.00
91.90-91.85
91.85-91.80

Stratum 2D
Stratum 2D
Stratum 2C
Stratum 2B
Stratum 2B
Stratum 2A
Calcrete
Stratum 1

2
1
1
3
3
1
1
1

1127

Gyraulus parvus (Fig. 8.66), GYRP
Matrix columns: 11 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 8 fortuitously recovered specimens
Body size: Microsnail, maximum diameter 5 mm (Fullington 1978b:189); 1.5-4.5 mm
(Clarke 1973:401)
This very small planorbid (pulmonate) snail is widely distributed across the entire
continent and is rather widely distributed in Texas as well, although there seem to be no
recent reports in or near Goliad County. It can be confused with related species such as
Gyraulus circumstriatus, or other small planorbids such as Micromenetus dilatatus. It has
a fairly fragile, thin-walled shell and could be underrepresented due to taphonomic
deletion. This species is characteristic of water bodies with dense aquatic vegetation,
often with mud bottoms (Fullington 1978b:190; Dawley 1947:694; Dexter 1956:367;
Tuthill, Clayton and Laird 1964:354). Clarke (1973:403) collected it in lakes, vernal and
permanent ponds, backwater areas of streams, swamps, and rivers and creeks; bottom
types were diverse, but mud occurred in 60% of the localities. In lotic habitats, current
was slow to moderate. According to Leonard (1959:61), “G. parvus in Kansas is common
in natural and artificial lakes and occasionally in quiet pools in stream beds…. The
species is frequent on or among aquatic plants such as Chara, Typha, Spirogyra, and
duckweed, and occurs on submerged blades of living and dead grasses or on dead tree
leaves in water.” In Alberta, it is more common in lentic (lakes and ponds) than lotic
(rivers and creeks) habitats, and is found in water with a mean pH of 8.8 (range, 7.5-10.7;
Prescott and Curteanu 2004:31). It is common in the slough and Spring Lake at San
Marcos, less so under algae and rocks in the San Marcos River (Lindholm 1979:31). It
has also been found in playa lakes in the Panhandle, often on mud bottoms (Neck and
Schramm 1992:207). It has also been found in deep water in the Great Lakes (Burch and
Jung 1987:267).
1128

Figure 8.66. Gyraulus parvus. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. N109 E103
(92.65-92.60 m), Lot B-11.

1129

In the bench deposits, the small numbers of Gyraulus parvus recovered are
scattered throughout the stratigraphic section from stratum 1 to stratum 3, with no
particular concentration at any one level. Other archeological examples have been found
at the Aubrey site, Domebo site, Rex Rodgers, Lubbock Lake, 41 FS 6 (Wulfkuhle
1986:405), 41 MK 38 (Todd 2002:Table 1), Lake Amistad, 41 TG 91, 41 TV 368,
Aquilla Lake, various sites (41 WM 56, 41 WM 73, 41 WM 304) on the San Gabriel
River (Fullington and Fullington 1982b), Blockhouse Creek, the Sleeper site, and 41 CC
112 (references for most of these are in Brown 2002:256), as well as the Lehner and
Murray Springs sites in Arizona (Bequaert and Miller 1973:205).

At Berger Bluff, this species is taken as an indicator of fairly slow (perhaps silty
or turbid) current conditions in Coleto Creek, probably with a muddy bottom and
abundant aquatic vegetation.
Helisoma anceps (Fig. 8.67), HANC
Matrix columns: none
1/4-inch screen sample: 17 specimens
Body size: Medium to large-bodied, maximum diameter 17 mm (Clarke 1973:428); 9-15
mm (Thompson 1984:73)
Although Clarke (1973:429) lists mean diameters of about 9-12 mm for Helisoma
anceps, most of the specimens from the bench deposits are slightly smaller. Herrman and
Harman (1975:8) report diameters of 9.5-10.4 mm at the end of the first year of growth in
New York. This pulmonate snail is very closely related to Planorbella trivolvis and is
difficult to distinguish from juveniles of that species. Distinguishing characters for H.
anceps are 1) small size, 2) carination of the body whorl on both faces, 3) a somewhat
angulated aperture, compared to the evenly rounded aperture in P. trivolvis (see
1130

Thompson 1984:Figs. 158-160). In some of the older literature, this species is listed as
Helisoma antrosa. Raymond Neck did not identify any examples of this species in the
matrix columns, but several that seem to fit the definition occur in the quarter-inch mesh
sample, and several specimens from the matrix columns that Neck identified as
Planorbella trivolvis seem to me to fit the definition of Helisoma anceps better.

Helisoma anceps is a fairly common species, both in present-day water bodies
and in archeological deposits, although only one specimen was found in the Preiss Ranch
drift sample. Fullington (1978b:196) says
In Texas, H. anceps occurs principally in streams and along upper river
stretches and usually not in large populations per locality. The presence of
aquatic vegetation does not appear to be necessary. It seems to especially
be prevalent in gravelly, riffle areas. Analysis of all available Texas
Helisoma anceps specimens revealed that the distribution of living
populations is spotty while the fossil distribution is quite extensive and
numerous. This may be an indication that H. anceps, actually a more
northern, cooler climate species, is being extirpated from this area by
current drying trends.
Lindholm (1979:31) found these in slackwater areas in the San Marcos River
floodplain. In Oklahoma, Branson (1961b:61) says “This unmistakable species is widely
divergent as to its habitat requirements. It may be found in rapidly flowing creeks and
rivers, in back waters, or in ponds. It seems to prefer copious vegetation but there seems
to be no obvious substrate specificity.”

In Kansas, “H. antrosa was found less commonly than H. trivolvis ‘apparently
because of a closer restriction to habitat. It prefers clean running water…’ In Kingman
County, the habitat has been recorded as shallow streams with wide, sandy and sandyloam flood plains, the tree flora consisting mainly of cottonwood and willow” (Leonard
1131

1959:60). In Minnesota, it is common in both lakes and rivers (Dawley 1947:694; Tuthill,
Clayton and Laird 1964:354). In North Dakota, it occurs in intermittent and small
perennial streams (Cvancara 1975:Table 1).

In the bench deposits, examples of this species are more or less evenly distributed
from stratum 2A to stratum 2D. In unit N109 E103, they are mostly found near the base
of the unit, but in N111 E 101, the opposite is true. Diameters range from 4.3 to 15.3 mm,
although many have chipped apertures. Mean diameter is 8.66 ± 2.56 mm. At least four
specimens have varices, or growth arrest features visible on the shell. This indicates
either some sort of disruption (perhaps seasonal drying) of the aquatic habitat or
hibernation during overwintering. In three cases, the varix is close to the aperture,
suggesting the event was followed shortly thereafter by the death of the individual. A
scenario involving seasonal drying of the water body, followed by a flood event that
deposited the snail on the floodplain surface might be indicated. Or the varix might
simply indicate winter hibernation. In the fourth case, the varix is faint and well back
from the aperture, suggesting considerable time had elapsed between the disruptive event
and deposition of the shell.

Helisoma anceps is occasionally found in archeological sites, but is probably less
common than Planorbella trivolvis. A small number were found at the Smith Creek
Bridge site (Brown 2002:252-253). Others have been found at the Aubrey site, the
Richard Beene site, Lubbock lake, Justiceburg Reservoir, Lake Amistad, Aquilla Lake,
the Shrew site, Blockhouse Creek, Skyline Shelter, the Sleeper site, various sites at O. H.
Ivie Reservoir (references for most of these are in Brown 2002:253).

1132

Figure 8.67. Helisoma anceps. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. N109 E96 bulk
matrix, coarse fraction (92.70-92.65 m). Juvenile, largest of three specimens
in this lot.
1133

Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp. (?) (Fig. 8.68), LYM
Matrix columns: none
1/4-inch screen sample: 1 fortuitously recovered specimen
Body size: Microsnail, measured height 4.6 mm
The 1/4-inch screen sample from the uppermost level (93.14-92.75 m, Lot B-111)
in unit N112 E97 contains a single small specimen that appears to be a member of the
Lymnaeidae (a pulmonate family). It resembles some species of Fossaria, such as
Fossaria obrussa or Fossaria dalli (compare with Burch and Tottenham 1980:Figs. 570,
575, 588; Fullington 1978b:Figs. 10, d; 11, f; La Rocque 1968:Plate 9, Figs. 8, 10-12).
The maximum height is 4.6 mm, diameter 2.7 mm, aperture height 2.8 mm and aperture
width 1.9 mm. It has a large, oval aperture that accounts for about 61% of the shell
height, and has a somewhat rounded (not sharply pointed ) apex. Unfortunately, there are
many species of Fossaria, and they are highly variable in shape, even within a species.
Fullington (1978b, see discussion on pages 150-151) recognizes only two species of
Fossaria in Texas, F. obrussa and F. dalli. These often appear in the older literature
under the generic names Galba and Lymnaea. These species of Fossaria are found in
shallow water or ponds with mud bottoms, bordered by sedges and cattails (Leonard
1959:52, 56) or marshy areas (La Rocque 1968:475). Clarke (1973:289) found F. dalli in
lakes and rivers with slow to moderate current and variable bottom composition.

The single specimen from the bench deposits probably indicates a slackwater or
slow current muddy habitat similar to that occupied by Gyraulus parvus. Jokinen (1978)
reports that many of the Lymnaeidae estivate out of the water, on or under mud or soil,
on trees or aquatic vegetation. She found that juvenile Lymnaea elodes would migrate out
of receding pond water and spend 3-4 months in late summer and fall on dry objects.
1134

Figure 8.68. Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp. (?), Adaxial View. N112 E97 (93.14-92.75 m),
Lot B-111.
Various species of Fossaria have been recovered from archeological or paleontological
sites, such as the Aubrey, Wilson-Leonard, 41 WM 312, 41 CC 112, Skyline Shelter, the
Sulphur Springs site, and the Hajny Mammoth site.

1135

Physella virgata, PHYV
Matrix columns: 1 specimen
1/4-inch screen sample: 2 specimens
Body size: Small to medium sized, mean height 7.32 ± 1.65 mm for Texas populations
(range, 1.8-14.9 mm; Burnside 1998:Table 1, 63); 0.5-13.8 mm (McMahon 1975:Fig. 3)
This pulmonate species is listed as Physa virgata in the older literature. Although
Burch and Tottenham (1980:184, 188, 190) recognize eight species of Physella in Texas,
all with nearly identical shells, Fullington (1978b) recognizes only one living species, P.
virgata. This genus exhibits extreme phenotypic plasticity in shell size and shape.
Burnside (1998) carried out an extensive morphometric study of Physella shells in 66
samples from Texas and nearby areas of adjacent states, concluding all of the previously
recognized species can be collapsed into a single highly variable species, which he
suggests should be assigned the name Physella heterostropha by taxonomic priority rules
(Burnside 1998:102). Shell length for all 66 samples was found to be normally distributed
(Burnside 1998:Fig. 12). Based on crossbreeding experiments, Dillon and others (2005)
recommend subsuming this species under Physa acuta, but for the present study, I will
adhere to the recognized name Physella virgata.

A few examples of this taxon were also found at the Smith Creek Bridge site, and
I refer the reader to the more extensive discussion there (Brown 2002:255). One of the
Smith Creek specimens had a red-pigmented spire, but none of the Berger Bluff
specimens have any pigmentation. One of the specimens from the 1/4-inch screen sample
is a very small basal fragment (only 2.9 mm high) from an embryonic or juvenile,
tentatively identified as Physella (N109 E96, 92.35-92.30 m). The other (N111 E101,
92.55-92.50 m) is also fragmentary, with an estimated height of about 14.7 mm.

1136

This species has a very high heat tolerance and has been documented
living in artificially heated water as high as 39.5° C (103.1° F; McMahon
1975:1173). It has also been found in cobble riffles in the cold, clear water
of the Devil's River (Davis 1980). Neck (1986a:425) found it in a
springfed stream near Kenyon Rockshelter and in playa lakes in the
Panhandle on aquatic vegetation (Neck and Schramm 1992). According to
Fullington, Physella virgata may be found in almost any kind of aquatic
habitat and has a statewide distribution (Brown 2002:255).
Physids have been collected from acidic bayous in East Texas to
ephemeral pools in high canyons of the Guadalupe Mountains. Physa, like
other pulmonate freshwater snails has the ability to aestivate during
periods of drought. Because they can tolerate aquatic environmental
extremes and due to their apparent genetic plasticity, shell form is
extremely variable and, in Texas at least, reflects Texas edaphic features.
In acidic, sandy-bottomed east Texas water, physid colonies are dwarfed.
In the Central Texas limestone region, shell size and variability within
populations is pronounced. Westward, even though most of the surface
rocks and soils are basic pH, colonies are again dwarfed (Fullington
1978b:182).
Crowl and Schnell (1990:366) found that where crawdads are abundant, these
snails are large in size but have low population densities; and conversely, in the absence
of crawdads, the snails are small, but in dense populations. Physella virgata has been
found at the Aubrey site, Rex Rodgers, the Richard Beene site, La Paloma Mammoth site
(Neck 1981a), Wilson-Leonard site, Aquilla Lake, 41 WM 56, 41 WM 304, 41 WM 328
(Fullington and Fullington 1982b), 41 WM 312 (Voellinger and Gearhart 1987), the
Perry site (Fullington 1987), Skyline Shelter, 41 CC 112, and the Mustang Branch site, as
well as the Lehner and Murray Springs sites in Arizona (Bequaert and Miller 1973:202).

The few examples of Physella from the bench deposits are regarded as
cosmopolitan eurytopic aquatic snails. These snails could be derived either from Coleto
Creek or from a nearby spring run. Various species of Physa or Physella are often found
in spring habitats (see Wilhm 1970; Varza and Covich 1995; Gaskin and Bass 2000).
1137

Planorbella trivolvis (Fig. 8.69), PTRI
Matrix columns: 28 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 13 specimens
Body size: Large, maximum diameter 19.5-31.7 mm (in Canada, Clarke 1973:453-454);
13.4-20.5 mm (in Texas, Logsdon 1967:41)
Fullington (1978b:17) classifies these snails as Helisoma trivolvis lenta, but they
are simply recognized here as Planorbella trivolvis. The following information is
excerpted from the Smith Creek Bridge site report:

Planorbella trivolvis is a common and widely distributed aquatic snail and is frequently
found in stagnant, ponded water (Branson 1961b:62), although it also occurs in creeks
and rivers (La Rocque 1968:503), and is
most often found in shallow water one foot or less deep on ooze-covered
bottoms, rocks covered with algae, and dead leaves and stems of plants.
Occasionally trivolvis is found out of the water on wet vegetation
(Leonard 1959:58-59).
In Texas, Fullington (1978b:206) reports
It was very common in the shallow backwater areas of streams where
green algae was [sic] abundant. However, it was also common in the
shallow, protected coves of lakes where I found it crawling on mud, old
cans, and on stems of emergent vegetation. Physa virgata usually was
associated....
Logsdon (1967:41) found these in ponds, transient pools, creeks, and the Trinity
River, on floating wood, submerged limbs and sticks, and on shallow, ooze-covered
bottoms. Planorbella trivolvis is fairly resistant to drying of its habitat and can be found
in ephemeral ponds and tanks that disappear in midsummer. Although in northern
regions, it burrows to escape winter freezes, in Texas it probably burrows into bottom
1138

mud to escape summer drying of water bodies (Cheatum 1934b:394). Gradual desiccation
of oxbows or sloughs will concentrate these snails in the deepest part. Although in
extremely dry conditions (relative humidity of only 12-14%), it can only survive two
hours or less out of water, in more humid conditions (96-98% relative humidity), it can
survive out of water about three weeks (Gallo, Fried and Holliday 1984). Cheatum
(1934b:393) was able to keep eight out of 20 P. trivolvis alive for 68 days in mud that
was artificially wetted at intervals (the 18 H. anceps in the experiment did not survive).
In another experiment involving naturally damp mud, eight out of 15 survived 62 days. P.
trivolvis specimens from the River Spur site had pronounced varices that I suspect may
have been due to midsummer desiccation of the oxbow (Brown 2002:254).

Examples of this species are found throughout the stratigraphic section in the
bench deposits, in all strata. They are somewhat more abundant in strata 2A, 2B, and
2D/3. It should be noted that although Raymond Neck apparently classified all of the
Helisoma from the matrix columns as Helisoma trivolvis (= Planorbella trivolvis), in
cases where I have re-examined the same specimens, I would have classified them as
Helisoma anceps. Specimens of Planorbella trivolvis from the 1/4-inch screen range
from juveniles about 5.4 mm in diameter to adults as much as 18.9 mm in diameter. The
mean diameter is 13.20 ± 4.62 mm. A couple of individuals have faintly developed
varices, and one has two episodes of shell damage followed by repair. In the bench
deposits, this species is regarded as a eurytopic, drought-resistant aquatic snail probably
indicative of stagnant or slow-moving, likely turbid waters. It is perhaps the most
common aquatic snail reported from Texas archeological sites. A list of examples may be
found in the Smith Creek Bridge site report (Brown 2002:254-255) but will not be

1139

repeated here. About three dozen were also found at the Pavo Real site (Brown
2003:271).

Figure 8.69. Planorbella trivolvis. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. N112 E97
(93.14-92.75 m), Lot B-111, largest of three specimens in this lot.
1140

Valvata tricarinata (Figs. 8.70-8.75), VALT
Matrix columns: 3 specimens
1/4-inch screen sample: 1 specimen
N109 E96 bulk matrix: 6 specimens
Body size: Microsnail, height 1.5-5.1 mm (mean about 3.34 mm; Clarke 1973:235)
This small but distinctive, turreted, operculate prosobranch snail is a species with
northern affinities, extirpated in Texas now but a characteristic fossil in Pleistocene
deposits in Texas and elsewhere. It occurs extensively in Canada, where its range extends
above N 55° latitude, to Hudson Bay and beyond, with some occurrences almost to N 68°
latitude, near the Beaufort Sea (Clarke 1973:238). In the eastern US, it extends from
Virginia westward to the eastern part of the Great Plains (La Rocque 1968:Fig. 221). It is
found in all the Great Lakes and occurs in Illinois, Wisconsin, Iowa (Bovbjerg, Dusil and
Broer 1982), Montana (?), Washington, and North and South Dakota. According to
Taylor (1960:48), the southernmost known occurrence is in Nebraska:
A species found only in permanent lakes and rivers. In northern Nebraska
this species was found in a spring-fed pond of temperature 15° C. The
snails were crawling on aquatic plants, largely Ceratophyllum, Elodea,
and algae, near the edge of the pond…. Valvata tricarinata was found
considerably south of its previously known range…. Its existence at this
locality is considered possible because of the insulating effect of the cool
spring water. This northern species is probably able to live here because
the pond is warmed little if at all during the summer hot spells. Other
permanent ponds in Cherry County, apparently similar except that they
lack spring sources, were examined without finding this species.
It should be noted that Wallen and Dunlap (1955:79) report finding Valvata
tricarinata in Woodward County, Oklahoma, and Branson (1961b:38-39) apparently
accepts this as a valid record for a living population. If so, this is probably the
southernmost record for live populations (Woodward County is in western Oklahoma,
just north of N 36° latitude). However, Neck (1982) doubts the existence of living
1141

populations. According to Burch and Jung (1987:239), it also occurs in Arkansas.
Branson (1967:299) also reports a single specimen in river drift from the mouth of the
Colorado River in Matagorda County, but this is undoubtedly a redeposited fossil.
Regarding the species in Canada, Clarke (1973:237) says
Of 80 Valvata tricarinata collections made during this survey, 30 are from
large lakes, 4 from small lakes, 2 (only 1 specimen each) from permanent
ponds, 6 from backwater areas of large subarctic rivers, 15 from rivers
over 100 feet wide, 7 from rivers 50 to 100 feet wide, 8 from rivers 25 to
50 feet wide, 4 from permanent streams 10 to 25 feet wide, and 4 from
subarctic muskeg. Bottom sediments were of all types, aquatic vegetation
was present at nearly all localities and in lotic habitats current was
moderate, slow or not discernible.
Clarke goes to add that the species was not found in small or temporary ponds. In
Minnesota, Dawley (1947) found the species in small streams, large rivers, soft-water and
medium-hard water lakes, hard-water prairie lakes, and river lakes, on shallow sandy
beaches and on vegetation. Mackie and Flippance (1983:Table 1) found it waters with a
pH range of 6.00-8.37. Horst and Costa (1971) studied the species in McCargo Lake,
New York, and found it most abundant at a water depth of two meters and temperature of
24° C, which is probably unusually warm for the species. A more typical temperature
range is probably at or below the 15° C temperature reported by Taylor. For comparison,
the pre-impoundment aquatic ecology study of Coleto Creek measured water temperature
at 17° in February to 30° in July (Murray, Jinnette and Moseley 1976:Table 1). The
species is widespread and abundant in Alberta, mostly in hard water rivers and lakes
(uncommonly in creeks and ponds) with a mean pH of 9.1 (range, 8.1-10.0; Prescott and
Curteanu 2004:16).

1142

Figure 8.70. Valvata tricarinata. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. N109 E96,
bulk matrix, coarse fraction (92.70-92.65 m). Note three varices visible in
top view.

1143

Figure 8.71. Valvata tricarinata, Adaxial View. Same specimen as shown in previous
figure.

Valvata tricarinata is a common Pleistocene marker fossil in Texas and
elsewhere. It occurs abundantly in the Carrollton Alluvium at the Aubrey site, somewhat
less abundantly in the pond axis and pond margin (Neck 2001:Tables 7.1, 7.2, 7.3). At
Lubbock Lake, it becomes extinct between Stratum 1, where it is present (11,100
RCYBP) and Stratum 2, where it is absent (10,500 RCYBP; Pierce 1987:Table 6.2). It is
found at the Rex Rodgers and Snail Bed (41 BI 57) sites. It also occurs in the Clear Creek
and Ben Franklin faunas (Cheatum and Allen 1963), the South Fish Creek and GiffordHill local faunas, Dallas County (Willimon 1972:Table 1). Hubricht (1962:1) reports
large numbers of Valvata tricarinata from an undated locality on Palo Blanco Creek in
Brooks County.

1144

Figure 8.72. Valvata tricarinata. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. N109 E96,
bulk matrix, coarse fraction (92.55-92.50 m). Larger of two specimens in
this lot.
1145

Figure 8.73. Valvata tricarinata, Apical View. N109 E96, bulk matrix, coarse fraction
(92.55-92.50 m). Smaller of two specimens in this lot.

Todd (2002:Table 1) reports one specimen (along with 8 specimens of
Cincinnatia integra) from mid-Holocene context in a site at Brady. I suspect this
specimen is redeposited. It occurs at paleontological localities associated with
archeological site 41 CC 255 (along with Cincinnatia integra and Elimia comalensis),
investigated during the All-American Pipeline Project. This site is located on Kickapoo
Creek in western Concho County. Fullington (1978b:82) reports fossil records from the
counties of Armstrong, Delta, Denton, Hardeman, Motley, Randall, and Swisher. The
species is found at the Plainview site (Neck 1995b:Table 25), but has not been reported
from the Lake Theo, Richard Beene or Wilson-Leonard sites, nor from any of the Llano
Estacado localities studied by Drake (1975).
1146

Figure 8.74. Valvata tricarinata. Top, apical view; bottom, umbilical view. N 109 E96,
bulk matrix, coarse fraction (92.35-92.30 m). Larger of two specimens.
1147

Figure 8.75. Valvata tricarinata. Top, apical view; bottom, adaxial view. N112 E97
(92.25-92.20 m), Lot B-97.
1148

Beyond Texas, it occurs at the Domebo site (Cheatum and Allen 1966), the
Burnham site (Theler 2003a, 2003b), the Butler Spring Sloth Locality in Kansas (Devore
1975), the Dows Local Biota of Iowa (Hudak 1984), the Perry Mastodon site in Illinois
(Adams and Fraunfelter 1974), the Nonconnah Creek Mastodon site, Tennessee (Brister,
Armon and Dye 1982), various Pleistocene localities in North Dakota (Clayton 1961;
Tuthill 1961), the Berends and Doby Springs local faunas of Oklahoma and the Mount
Scott local fauna of Kansas (Miller 1966). See La Rocque (1968:367) for additional fossil
localities.

From the distributional evidence, it is clear that Valvata tricarinata extended far
to the south of its present geographic range during the Pleistocene, the southernmost
reported locality being the one near Falfurrias, in Brooks County, reported by Hubricht.
Although the species is often found in abundance in deep lakes today (including all of the
Great Lakes), it likely inhabited cold springs and springfed creeks and ponds at the
southern edge of its range during the Pleistocene and earliest Holocene. Depending on the
near-constant temperature groundwater sources at these sites, it evidently experienced a
major northward range retraction (to about N36-37° or beyond) as groundwater sources
diminished with the onset of the Holocene.

These are very small snails, easily overlooked if fine screening is not done.
Several specimens were discovered while picking bulk matrix samples from N109 E96.
These range from a probable juvenile 1.6 mm in diameter and 1.0 mm high, to an adult
3.9 mm in diameter and 2.8 mm high. Because there are many levels in this unit that have
not yet been picked, there are probably additional specimens yet to be discovered. Table

1149

8.19 shows the provenience of the known specimens of Valvata tricarinata. Examples
were found in strata 1, 2A, 2B, and 2D.

In the bench deposits, this species is regarded as a Pleistocene marker fossil, most
likely a cold spring inhabitant.

Table 8.19. Provenience of Valvata tricarinata Specimens.
Stratum

No. of
specimens

Height
(mm)

Diameter
(mm)

______________________________________________________________________________________________________

N109 E103 Matrix Column
92.10-92.05
2A

1

*

N110 E102 Matrix Column
92.05-92.00
2A
91.75-91.70
1

1
1

*
*

N112 E99, 1/4-inch Screen Sample
92.25-92.20
2A

1

2.0

2.3

N109 E96 Bulk Matrix
92.70-92.65
92.55-92.50

2D2
2D1

1
3

92.35-92.30

2B

2

1.5
2.4
1.6
1.7
2.8
1.0

2.2
3.4
2.8**
2.4
3.9
1.6***

* unavailable for measurement; sent to SMU as voucher specimen by Neck
** probable juvenile
*** probable juvenile with chipped aperture

1150

INTERPRETATION OF THE QUARTER-INCH SCREEN SAMPLE
Tables 8.20 through 8.25 record the snails recovered on the 1/4-inch screen
(fortuitously recovered microsnails, most of them derived from sediment lodged in the
apertures of larger species, are also included). Figures 8.76 through 8.78 show the
proportional representation of large and medium-bodied genera in the 1/4-inch screen
sample from all units combined except Unit 2 and N113 E98. To compile these
simplified diagrams, microsnails were disregarded, all Rabdotus age classes were
combined, and all Mesodon and all Praticolella categories were combined. Except for
two cases, excavation levels that included more than one stratum were grouped with the
stratum having the greatest representation in the level. In two cases, levels evenly split
between strata were simply omitted from the counts.

A major issue raised in Chapter 4 was whether biological remains would sort out
consistently into assemblages that correspond to the muddy (stratum 2A, 2C, and 3) and
sandy (stratum 1, 2B, 2D) units visible in the bench deposits, or instead show long-term
trends that crosscut strata. For the large and medium-bodied snail, the major trends seem
to be ones that crosscut strata. The diagrams show that from the base of the section
upward,
1) Anguispira strongylodes becomes less abundant;
2) Oligyra orbiculata becomes more abundant;
3) Rabdotus sp., Polygyra texasiana, and Mesomphix friabilis remain the next most
abundant genera; these three simply shift relative ranks from stratum 2A through 2D;

1151

4) Mesodon species, Euchemotrema leai, Praticolella pachyloma, and aquatic genera
remain minor elements throughout; Praticolella is well represented only in stratum
2A.
These trends probably represent long-term drying of the habitat. Both Anguispira
and Oligyra have rather durable shells, so it is unlikely these trends are taphonomic in
nature. Anguispira is a woodland snail, and its decline over time may be due to reduction
in riparian tree canopy, although Mesomphix, also a woodland snail (and a frequent
associate of Anguispira) does not show the same decline. The increase in Oligyra over
time likely signals increasingly stressful and drought-prone habitats or climates, since this
genus is typically hardy and very resistant to drought. It is also advisable to keep in mind
that Oligyra is small enough that many of the shells will pass through a 1/4-inch screen,
and this has undoubtedly affected the counts. The apparent low representation of some
genera (such as Mesodon and Praticolella) may be due in large part to shell fragility.

Of the major genera represented, Anguispira, Mesomphix, Mesodon, and
Euchemotrema are typically woodland inhabitants and probably indicate the presence of
riparian deciduous woodland. Oligyra and Rabdotus are generally found in more open
areas, ranging from grassland to chaparral to parkland. Presumably these snails are
derived either from more open areas of the floodplain or from open slopes adjacent to the
floodplain.

1152

Terrestrial, large/medium
48 24 19
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai adults
4
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon cf. M. thyroidus
2 1
Mesodon sp., fragmentary
6 5 5
82 42 44
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata adults
323 145 141
Polygyra texasiana adults
87 47 17
Polygyra sp., fragmentary
32 5 5
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma
1 1
Praticolella sp., fragmentary
1 1 6
Rabdotus sp. adults
26 14 5
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
21 22 12
Rabdotus sp., age class indet. 13
3
Unlipped shells
2
Unidentified, terrestrial
10
3
Aquatic, large/medium
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified
1
Miscellaneous terrestrial
Opercula from O. orbiculata
31 20 20
Terrestrial, large/medium
Aquatic, large/medium
TOTAL:

13 12 13 17
1 1 3 2

9

1 2 3 1 1
21 16 10 5 2
80 97 64 52 36
12 24 18 12 5
6 5 5 4 2
2 1
1 1
4
10 5 5 5 3
16 16 6 6 3
2
1
3

1

1
1

6

92.30-92.25

92.35-92.30

92.40-92.35

92.45-92.40

92.50-92.45

92.55-92.50

92.60-92.55

92.65-92.60

92.70-92.65

92.75-92.75

92.80-92.75

92.85-92.80

92.90-92.85

N109 E103

93.14-92.90

Table 8.20. Snails Recovered From the Quarter-Inch Screen in N109 E103.

7

2

1

1
1

1
6 6
9 13
4 3
1 1

3
6
2
1

1
7
1

1
6
1
1

1
2

2
3

3
4

2
1

7
1

1
1
2
7

4

1
9

6

6

658 307 260 163 181 129 104 68
1 0 0 0 2 2 0 0
659 307 260 163 183 131 104 68

(continued on next page)

1153

1

1

1

5 32 37 16 12 19
0 0 0 1 0 0
5 32 37 17 12 19

2

2
3

1
4

2

Class totals

92.00-91.95

4

Row totals

92.05-92.00

3

91.95-91.90

92.10-92.05

92.15-92.10

92.20-92.15

N109 E103

92.25-92.20

(Table 8.20, continued from previous page)

2097

Terrestrial, large/medium
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai adults
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon cf. M. thyroidus
Mesodon sp., fragmentary
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Polygyra texasiana adults
Polygyra sp., fragmentary
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma
Praticolella sp., fragmentary
Rabdotus sp. adults
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Rabdotus sp., age class indet.
Unlipped shells
Unidentified, terrestrial

5

5
1

2
3
1
1

2
5
1

1
2

3
4

9
2

1
1
24
1
1

201
15
0
3
26
248
1020
236
71
5
18
93
119
27
2
13

1
1

2
4

1

1

11

Aquatic, large/medium
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified

1

1

2

1

6
0
1
4

Miscellaneous terrestrial
Opercula from O. orbiculata
Terrestrial, large/medium
Aquatic, large/medium
TOTAL:

1
15 21
1 1
16 22

2
45
2
47

109
9 11
0 1
9 12

(continued on next page)

1154

5
0
5

0
0
0

Terrestrial microsnails
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon (?)
Gastrocopta cf. G. procera
Gastrocopta sp.
cf. Glyphyalinia roemeri
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Helicodiscus singleyanus
cf. Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Zonitidae, cf. Nesovitrea sp.
Unident. terrestrial microsnails

3

1
1

3

1

1
2
1
6 1
7 11

3

2
1
1

1

3
2

1

1
1
1

1
2

1

Aquatic microsnails
Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp.
Planorbidae, unidentified
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Valvata tricarinata

1
1

Miscellaneous aquatic
Sphaeriid clams
Pisidium sp.

(continued on next page)

1155

1

1

92.30-92.25

92.35-92.30

92.40-92.35

92.45-92.40

92.50-92.45

92.55-92.50

92.60-92.55

92.65-92.60

92.70-92.65

92.75-92.75

92.80-92.75

92.85-92.80

92.90-92.85

N109 E103

93.14-92.90

(Table 8.20, continued from previous page)

63

Terrestrial microsnails
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon (?)
Gastrocopta cf. G. procera
Gastrocopta sp.
cf. Glyphyalinia roemeri
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Helicodiscus singleyanus
cf. Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Zonitidae, cf. Nesovitrea sp.
Unident. terrestrial microsnails

0
1
9
0
0
1
2
1
13
29
1
2
0
1
0
3

1

1

4

Aquatic microsnails
1

Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp.
Planorbidae, unidentified
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Valvata tricarinata

1

2
2
0
0
0
0
2

Miscellaneous aquatic
Sphaeriid clams
Pisidium sp.

Class totals

Row totals

91.95-91.90

92.00-91.95

92.05-92.00

92.10-92.05

92.15-92.10

92.20-92.15

N109 E103

92.25-92.20

(Table 8.20, continued from previous page)

1
1

(End of Table 8.20)

1156

1
1

Terrestrial, large/medium
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai adults
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon cf. M. thyroidus
Mesodon sp., fragmentary
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Polygyra texasiana adults
Polygyra sp., fragmentary
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma
Praticolella sp., fragmentary
Rabdotus sp. adults
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Rabdotus sp., age class indet.
Unlipped shells
Unidentified, terrestrial
Aquatic, large/medium
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified
Miscellaneous terrestrial
Opercula from O. orbiculata
Terrestrial, large/medium
Aquatic, large/medium
TOTAL:

14

9

3
3
22 28
42 44
16 10
1 2

7 12
4 2

9

6 19

8
1

1 1
1
1
1
21 3 3 8 1
116 42 29 29 13
22 8 7 18 5
4
6
2
2
17 2 4 6 1
14 4 8 3 1

4

1
3
3

5

6
5
2

3
1

4

1
4
2

1

2
5
3

2
1

2

1
1

92.25-92.20

92.30-92.25

92.35-92.30

92.40-92.35

92.45-92.40

92.50-92.45

92.55-92.50

92.60-92.55

92.65-92.60

92.70-92.65

92.75-92.70

92.80-92.75

92.90-92.80

N110 E102

93.08-92.90

Table 8.21. Snails Recovered From the Quarter-Inch Screen in N110 E102.

2

1

2
2

1
2
1

1
1

1

1
1
3

7 13

7

4

2

1

109 110 208 60 59 90 31 11 22 11 14
0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
109 110 209 60 59 91 31 11 22 11 14

(continued on next page)

1157

5
0
5

6
0
6

6
0
6

Terrestrial, large/medium
Aquatic, large/medium
TOTAL:

Class totals

Row totals

91.60-91.55

91.65-91.60

91.70-91.65

91.80-91.75
91.75-91.70

91.85-91.80

91.90-91.85

91.95-91.90

2

92.00-91.95

6 11

92.05-92.00

92.10-92.05

Terrestrial, large/medium
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai adults
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon cf. M. thyroidus
Mesodon sp., fragmentary
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Polygyra texasiana adults
Polygyra sp., fragmentary
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma
Praticolella sp., fragmentary
Rabdotus sp. adults
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Rabdotus sp., age class indet.
Unlipped shells
Unidentified, terrestrial
Aquatic, large/medium
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified
Miscellaneous terrestrial
Opercula from O. orbiculata

92.15-92.10

N110 E102

92.20-92.15

(Table 8.21, continued from previous page)

812

1
4 1
10 11
2 3
1
4
1
1

1

1
2
2

104
1
0
6
9
111
354
103
14
3
9
57
39
1
1
0

1
1

3
1

4
0
0
3
1

2

1

1

29 31
0 2
29 33

39
2
0
2

5
0
5

1
0
1

(continued on next page)

1158

2
0
2

0
0
0

0 0
0 0
0 0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

Terrestrial microsnails
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon (?)
Gastrocopta cf. G. procera
Gastrocopta sp.
cf. Glyphyalinia roemeri
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Helicodiscus singleyanus
cf. Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Zonitidae, cf. Nesovitrea sp.
Unident. terrestrial microsnails
Aquatic microsnails
Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp.
Planorbidae, unidentified
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Valvata tricarinata
Miscellaneous aquatic
Sphaeriid clams

1

2

2
1

1

1
1

2
2

5
1

1

1

1

(continued on next page)

1159

1

92.25-92.20

92.30-92.25

92.35-92.30

92.40-92.35

92.45-92.40

92.50-92.45

92.55-92.50

92.60-92.55

92.65-92.60

92.70-92.65

92.75-92.70

92.80-92.75

92.90-92.80

N110 E102

93.08-92.90

(Table 8.21, continued from previous page)

Terrestrial microsnails
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon (?)
Gastrocopta cf. G. procera
Gastrocopta sp.
cf. Glyphyalinia roemeri
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Helicodiscus singleyanus
cf. Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Zonitidae, cf. Nesovitrea sp.
Unident. terrestrial microsnails
Aquatic microsnails
Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp.
Planorbidae, unidentified
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Valvata tricarinata
Miscellaneous aquatic
Sphaeriid clams

Class totals

Row totals

91.60-91.55

91.65-91.60

91.70-91.65

91.75-91.70

91.80-91.75

91.85-91.80

91.90-91.85

91.95-91.90

92.00-91.95

92.05-92.00

92.10-92.05

92.15-92.10

N110 E102

92.20-92.15

(Table 8.21, continued from previous page)

24
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
13
8
0
0
1
0
0
1

1
1

1

2
0
2
0
0
0
0
1
1

(End of Table 8.21)

1160

1

Terrestrial, large/medium
Aquatic, large/medium
TOTAL:

1
6
4

1
4

6
1
1

92.15-92.10

4
3

92.20-92.15

18
23

1
2
3
1

92.25-92.20

1

92.30-92.25

1
3
2

92.35-92.30

17 9 7 3 10
138 26 66 22 21
26 8 30 14 11

92.40-92.35

2
1

2

92.60-92.55

92.65-92.60

92.70-92.65

11 11 24 15 23
2
2
2

92.45-92.40

4
18
5
2
2
1
3
4

92.50-92.45

1

92.55-92.50

Terrestrial, large/medium
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai adults
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon cf. M. thyroidus
Mesodon sp., fragmentary
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Polygyra texasiana adults
Polygyra sp., fragmentary
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma
Praticolella sp., fragmentary
Rabdotus sp. adults
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Rabdotus sp., age class indet.
Unlipped shells
Unidentified, terrestrial
Aquatic, large/medium
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unident. large/med.
Miscellaneous terrestrial
Opercula from O. orbiculata

92.80-92.70

N111 E101

92.89-92.80

Table 8.22. Snails Recovered From the Quarter-Inch Screen in N111 E101.

4

3

5

2

4

2

8

1
1

1
6
4
1

1
3
1

2
3

4
2

1
1

1

2
1
1

1

1
1

1
1
1

1
1

1
4 26

1
6

4 14

1
6

3

40 246 62 138 59 75 11
0 1 0 2 0 2 0
40 247 62 140 59 77 11

(continued on next page)

1161

9
0
9

1

1

5 19
0 0
5 19

8
0
8

1
9
0
9

8 16
0 1
8 17

Terrestrial, large/medium
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai adults
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon cf. M. thyroidus
Mesodon sp., fragmentary
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Polygyra texasiana adults
Polygyra sp., fragmentary
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma
Praticolella sp., fragmentary
Rabdotus sp. adults
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Rabdotus sp., age class indet.
Unlipped shells
Unidentified, terrestrial
Aquatic, large/medium
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified large/med.
Miscellaneous terrestrial
Opercula from O. orbiculata
Terrestrial, large/medium
Aquatic, large/medium
TOTAL:

Class totals

Row totals

91.95-91.90

92.00-91.95

92.05-92.00

N111 E101

92.10-92.05

(Table 8.22, continued from previous page)

707
1

115
6
2
0
0
55
319
107
5
6
6
41
36
0
7
2

1

6
3
1
0
2
60
2
0
2

0
0
0

0
0
0

(continued on next page)

1162

0
0
0

Terrestrial microsnails
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon (?)
Gastrocopta cf. G. procera
Gastrocopta sp.
cf. Glyphyalinia roemeri
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Helicodiscus singleyanus
cf. Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Zonitidae, cf. Nesovitrea sp.
Unident. terrestrial microsnails
Aquatic microsnails
Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp.
Planorbidae, unidentified
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Valvata tricarinata
Miscellaneous aquatic
Sphaeriid clams

92.15-92.10

92.20-92.15

92.25-92.20

92.30-92.25

92.35-92.30

92.40-92.35

92.45-92.40

92.50-92.45

92.55-92.50

92.60-92.55

92.65-92.60

92.70-92.65

92.80-92.70

N111 E101

92.89-92.80

(Table 8.22, continued from previous page)

1
1

1
3
6

2
2

5

1

1

2

1

2

1
1
1

(continued on next page)

1163

Terrestrial microsnails
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon (?)
Gastrocopta cf. G. procera
Gastrocopta sp.
cf. Glyphyalinia roemeri
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Helicodiscus singleyanus
cf. Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Zonitidae, cf. Nesovitrea sp.
Unident. terrestrial microsnails
Aquatic microsnails
Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp.
Planorbidae, unidentified
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Valvata tricarinata
Miscellaneous aquatic
Sphaeriid clams

Class totals

Row totals

91.95-91.90

92.00-91.95

92.05-92.00

N111 E101

92.10-92.05

(Table 8.22, continued from previous page)

30
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
14
10
0
0
2
0
0
1

1

2
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

(End of Table 8.22)

1164

Terrestrial, large/medium
Aquatic, large/medium
TOTAL:

2
20
58
12
5

1
8 1
5 13
1 1

2
5
2
2

3
3

1

1

4

1

92.10-92.05

1

92.15-92.10

1

92.20-92.15

8

92.25-92.20

92.40-92.35

4
1

92.30-92.25

92.45-92.40

7

92.35-92.30

92.50-92.45

33

2
24
10
4

92.55-92.50

Terrestrial, large/medium
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai adults
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon cf. M. thyroidus
Mesodon sp., fragmentary
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Polygyra texasiana adults
Polygyra sp., fragmentary
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma
Praticolella sp., fragmentary
Rabdotus sp. adults
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Rabdotus sp., age class indet.
Unlipped shells
Unidentified, terrestrial
Aquatic, large/medium
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified
Miscellaneous terrestrial
Opercula from O. orbiculata

92.60-92.55

N112 E99

92.89-92.60

Table 8.23. Snails Recovered From the Quarter-Inch Screen in N112 E99.

3

7

3

6

1

1
1

1

1
1

1
2

1
1

2
1
2

3
4
1

1

3

1
1
1

2
1
11

1

170 27 28 20 11
3 0 0 0 0
173 27 28 20 11

(continued on next page)

1165

1
3
0
3

4
0
4

6 10 10
0 0 0
6 10 10

6
0
6

1
0
1

Terrestrial, large/medium
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai adults
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon cf. M. thyroidus
Mesodon sp., fragmentary
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Polygyra texasiana adults
Polygyra sp., fragmentary
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma
Praticolella sp., fragmentary
Rabdotus sp. adults
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Rabdotus sp., age class indet.
Unlipped shells
Unidentified, terrestrial
Aquatic, large/medium
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified
Miscellaneous terrestrial
Opercula from O. orbiculata
Terrestrial, large/medium
Aquatic, large/medium
TOTAL:

Class totals

Row totals

91.95-91.90

92.00-91.95

N112 E99

92.05-92.00

(Table 8.23, continued from previous page)

296
74
1
0
0
3
38
87
18
9
0
3
38
16
8
0
1
3
0
0
2
1
13
0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

(continued on next page)

1166

Terrestrial microsnails
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon (?)
Gastrocopta cf. G. procera
Gastrocopta sp.
cf. Glyphyalinia roemeri
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Helicodiscus singleyanus
cf. Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Zonitidae, cf. Nesovitrea sp.
Unident. terrestrial microsnails
Aquatic microsnails
Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp.
Planorbidae, unidentified
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Valvata tricarinata
Miscellaneous aquatic
Sphaeriid clams

1

1
1
2

1

(continued on next page)

1167

92.10-92.05

92.15-92.10

92.20-92.15

92.25-92.20

92.30-92.25

92.35-92.30

92.40-92.35

92.45-92.40

92.50-92.45

92.55-92.50

92.60-92.55

N112 E99

92.89-92.60

(Table 8.23, continued from previous page)

Terrestrial microsnails
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon (?)
Gastrocopta cf. G. procera
Gastrocopta sp.
cf. Glyphyalinia roemeri
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Helicodiscus singleyanus
cf. Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Zonitidae, cf. Nesovitrea sp.
Unident. terrestrial microsnails
Aquatic microsnails
Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp.
Planorbidae, unidentified
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Valvata tricarinata
Miscellaneous aquatic
Sphaeriid clams

Class totals

Row totals

91.95-91.90

92.00-91.95

N112 E99

92.05-92.00

(Table 8.23, continued from previous page)

8

1

1

1

0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0

(End of Table 8.23)

1168

Terrestrial, large/medium
Aquatic, large/medium
TOTAL:

3

2

1
3
4
1
1

1
2

1
1

2

1

1
1

1

2

1

Class totals

1

Row totals

2

92.20-92.15

2 1 1
8 4 4 5
62 33 27 14
13 18 7 5
3 5 4 1

92.25-92.20

4
149
929
156
30
5
9
54
101

92.30-92.25

92.45-92.40

24 24 12 12
2

92.35-92.30

92.50-92.45

88
11
6

92.40-92.35

92.55-92.50

92.65-92.60

92.70-92.65

92.60-92.55

Terrestrial, large/medium
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai adults
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon cf. M. thyroidus
Mesodon sp., fragmentary
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Polygyra texasiana adults
Polygyra sp., fragmentary
Praticolella cf P. pachyloma
Praticolella sp. fragmentary
Rabdotus sp. adults
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Rabdotus sp. age class indet.
Unlipped shells
Unidentified, terrestrial
Aquatic, large/medium
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified
Miscellaneous terrestrial
Opercula from O. orbiculata

92.75-92.70

N112 E97

93.14-92.75

Table 8.24. Snails Recovered From the Quarter-Inch Screen in N112 E97.

1927

11
6

3
2
3

1
1

1
2
2

1

7

1

1
1

2
1

175
13
6
0
9
176
1076
200
48
5
13
74
112
5
13
2

1

13
2

8
1

1

2
0
5
1

5
1
149

10

7

3

2

1555 131 93 59 42 13
5
0 1 1 0 0
1560 131 94 60 42 13

(continued on next page)

1169

1
5
0
5

7
0
7

0
0
0

6
0
6

4 12
0 1
4 13

172
0
0
0

Terrestrial microsnails
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
2
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon (?)
Gastrocopta cf. G. procera
Gastrocopta sp.
cf. Glyphyalinia roemeri
25
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
11
Helicodiscus singleyanus
cf. Pupisoma dioscoricola
1
Pupoides albilabris
1
Strobilops texasiana
1
Zonitoides arboreus
Zonitidae, cf. Nesovitrea sp.
Unident. terrestrial microsnails 2
Aquatic microsnails
Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp.
1
Planorbidae, unidentified
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Valvata tricarinata
Miscellaneous aquatic
Sphaeriid clams

Class totals

Row totals

92.20-92.15

92.25-92.20

92.30-92.25

92.35-92.30

92.40-92.35

92.45-92.40

92.50-92.45

92.55-92.50

92.60-92.55

92.65-92.60

92.70-92.65

92.75-92.70

N112 E97

93.14-92.75

(Table 8.24, continued from previous page)

85

1
1

1

1

5
4

3

4
1 12

1

1

1
1

1

1

3

0
0
7
1
0
0
0
0
35
36
0
1
1
1
1
2
2

1

0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0

(End of Table 8.24)

1170

Terrestrial, large/medium
25 20
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai adults
1
3
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon cf. M. thyroidus
1
Mesodon sp., fragmentary
6
1
53 25
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata adults
210 126
Polygyra texasiana adults
44 23
Polygyra sp., fragmentary
2
8
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma
2
4
Praticolella sp., fragmentary
2
1
Rabdotus sp. adults
28 23
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
32 39
Rabdotus sp., age class indet. 16
4
Unlipped shells
1
2
Unidentified, terrestrial
Aquatic, large/medium
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified
Miscellaneous terrestrial
Opercula from O. orbiculata
31 23
Terrestrial, large/medium
Aquatic, large/medium
TOTAL:

13
1

41
1

97
1

78
3

58
4

4
3
5
1
22 31 64 28
99 124 189 138
10 19 41 37
10
5 13 16
1
2
1
5
7 11 25 19
15 23 21 10
5
5
5
3
1
1
4

1
26
74
10
11

1

1
11
8
4

56
3

38
67
15
4
1
2
13
14
13
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

24

8

9

34

48

92.45-92.40

92.50-92.45

27 24
1

22

31 32

1 2
18 25
52 24
6 2
2 1
2 1
1
4 3
8 8
2 4

1
17
34
6
3

17 16
36 16
4 3
6 1

4
1
8
8
1

3 3
6 3
5 11
10 5
2

1

1

30

92.55-92.50

92.60-92.55

92.65-92.60

92.70-92.65

92.75-92.70

92.80-92.75

92.85-92.80

92.90-92.85

92.95-92.90

93.00-92.95

N109 E96

93.08-93.00

Table 8.25. Snails Recovered From the Quarter-Inch Screen in N109 E96.

1

7

4

5

1

422 280 188 265 463 342 208 227 122 96 105 120 90
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
0 0
2
0 0
422 280 188 265 465 344 210 229 122 96 107 120 90

(continued on next page)

1171

Terrestrial, large/medium
Aquatic, large/medium
TOTAL:

1

3
5

5
3

3
8

1
2

1

2

1

Class totals

2

Row totals

9

92.05-92.00

92.20-92.15

3

92.10-92.05

92.25-92.20

14

92.15-92.10

92.30-92.25

Terrestrial, large/medium
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai adults
Mesodon cf. M. roemeri
Mesodon cf. M. thyroidus
Mesodon sp., fragmentary
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata adults
Polygyra texasiana adults
Polygyra sp., fragmentary
Praticolella cf. P. pachyloma
Praticolella sp., fragmentary
Rabdotus sp. adults
Rabdotus sp. juveniles
Rabdotus sp., age class indet.
Unlipped shells
Unidentified, terrestrial
Aquatic, large/medium
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified
Miscellaneous terrestrial
Opercula from O. orbiculata

92.35-92.30

N109 E96

92.40-92.35

(Table 8.25, continued from previous page)

3022

1

1
2

1

1
4

1
2
1

2
2
4
1

2
1
1
1

556
18
0
1
25
393
1211
220
1
84
11
29
159
213
2
89
13
0
12

1

6
1
2
3

1

1

1

1

27 15 30
1 1 0
28 16 30

5
0
5

(continued on next page)

1172

3
0
3

227
2
0
2

8
0
8

4
0
4

Terrestrial microsnails
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon (?)
Gastrocopta cf. G. procera
Gastrocopta sp.
cf. Glyphyalinia roemeri
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Helicodiscus singleyanus
cf. Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Zonitidae, cf. Nesovitrea sp.
Unident. terrestrial microsnails
Aquatic microsnails
Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp.
Planorbidae, unidentified
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Valvata tricarinata
Miscellaneous aquatic
Sphaeriid clams

2
2
3

1
1
1

2
1

2
3

8

1
1
2 10

1
8
6

2
5

2
9

1

8 13
7 25

1

1

7

92.45-92.40

92.50-92.45

92.55-92.50

4

6 13

2

6 12 22
9 30 41

2

4

92.60-92.55

92.65-92.60

92.70-92.65

92.75-92.70

92.80-92.75

92.85-92.80

92.90-92.85

92.95-92.90

93.00-92.95

N109 E96

93.08-93.00

(Table 8.25, continued from previous page)

6
1
8

1

1
6

2 5
7 15

1

1
1
1

1
1
1

1

(continued on next page)

1173

1
1

Terrestrial microsnails
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon (?)
Gastrocopta cf. G. procera
Gastrocopta sp.
cf. Glyphyalinia roemeri
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Helicodiscus singleyanus
cf. Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Zonitidae, cf. Nesovitrea sp.
Unident. terrestrial microsnails
Aquatic microsnails
Cincinnatia integra
Gyraulus parvus
Lymnaeidae, cf. Fossaria sp.
Planorbidae, unidentified
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Valvata tricarinata
Miscellaneous aquatic
Sphaeriid clams

Class totals

Row totals

92.05-92.00

92.10-92.05

92.15-92.10

92.20-92.15

92.25-92.20

92.30-92.25

92.35-92.30

N109 E96

92.40-92.35

(Table 8.25, continued from previous page)

376

7

4

3

1

2

1

1
1

1
3
4

2

1
1

1
1

3
6
72
4
0
0
10
0
88
185
0
0
6
1
0
1
8

1

1

5
2
0
1
0
0
1
1

(End of Table 8.25)

1174

Figure 8.76. Snails Recovered From Quarter-Inch Screen, Strata 2D and 3. Counts
combined for all units; fortuitously recovered microsnails omitted.
1175

Figure 8.77. Snails Recovered From Quarter-Inch Screen, Strata 2B and 2C. Counts
combined for all units; fortuitously recovered microsnails omitted.

1176

Figure 8.78. Snails Recovered From Quarter-Inch Screen, Strata 1 and 2A. Counts
combined for all units; fortuitously recovered microsnails omitted. Note
sample size in stratum 1 is only 21 specimens.
1177

Cluster Analysis of the Quarter-Inch Screen Sample
Cluster analysis of the quarter-inch screen sample used raw counts (rather than
densities or percentages) from 99 cases (excavation levels, mostly 5 cm thick but
including some extra thick initial levels) divided into 14 variables (snail taxa or
categories, large and medium-bodied only), as follows:
Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai aliciae
Mesodon spp.
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata
Polygyra sp.
Praticolella sp.
Rabdotus sp.
Unlipped shells
Unidentified terrestrial snails
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified
MVSP 3.1 was used for clustering and ordination studies. Both cases (levels) and
variables (taxa) were clustered. The 99 levels represent all the excavation levels with at
least some snails on the 1/4-inch screen from the six one-meter units studied. A wide
variety of distance measures and clustering methods was tried, but the best results seemed
to come from Euclidian distance coupled with centroid clustering. Logarithmic and
logratio transformations were tried, but the best results came from untransformed data.
When excavation levels were clustered, the resulting dendrogram (too large to
reproduce here) shows a great deal of stratigraphic coherency. That is, levels that are in
the same stratum tend to group together in the same cluster. One major cluster is
composed mostly of mixed stratum 2A and 2B levels, another mostly of 2C and 2D
1178

levels, and a fourth mostly of stratum 2D. This suggests that to some extent, the different
strata have partly recognizable taxonomic signatures for the large and medium-bodied
snail taxa.
When the snail taxa are clustered using the excavation levels as variables (Fig.
8.79), they sort out to a large extent by habitat preference, despite the fact that the data
matrix is now unbalanced. Good practice in ordination studies requires more cases than
variables, but in this exercise, there are 14 cases (taxa) against 99 variables (excavation
levels). Despite this inherently lopsided data matrix, the four aquatic taxa cluster
together, joined by Euchemotrema, Mesodon and Praticolella. Mesomphix and Rabdotus
cluster together, joined first by Polygyra and then by Anguispira. All of these except
Rabdotus are woodland snails. Oligyra orbiculata joins all the others as an outlier, which
is appropriate since it is the hardiest and most abundant taxon.

1179

Oligyra orbiculata
Praticolella sp.
Mesodon spp.
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified
Physella virgata
Helisoma anceps
Unidentified terrestrial
Unlipped shells
Euchemotrema leai
Polygyra sp.
Rabdotus sp.
Mesomphix friabilis
Anguispira strongylodes
1000

800

600

400

200

0

Figure 8.79. Cluster Analysis of Snails From the Quarter-Inch Screen. Clustering by
variables using the centroid method and a Euclidian distance function (scale
at bottom). MVSP 3.1 analysis uses 14 variables (taxa) and 99 cases
(excavation levels).
Correspondence Analysis of the Quarter-Inch Screen Sample
The correspondence analysis option in MVSP 3.1 was used to analyze the same
data matrix used for cluster analysis. Without detrending or downweighting of rare taxa,
the first three axes extracted account for only 53% of the variance in the matrix,

1180

indicating that spatial patterning of the large and medium-bodied snail taxa is only
moderately well developed, and nearly half of the variance remains unexplained.

Detrending and downweighting of rare taxa increases the explained variance to
about 58%, but results in a much less interpretable solution, so this option was not used.
Table 8.26 shows variable scores for the first three axes. These axes are interpreted as
follows:
Axis 1: aquatic and deciduous woodland taxa
High positive loadings
Physella virgata (aquatic)
Helisoma anceps (aquatic)
Anguispira strongylodes (terrestrial, woodland)
Praticolella sp. (well-drained, open)
Planorbidae, unidentified (aquatic)
Planorbella trivolvis (aquatic)

7.405
4.503
2.202
1.274
1.091
0.618

High negative loadings
Oligyra orbiculata (grassland or open woodland)

-0.708

Axis 2: dry woodland? (interpretation uncertain)
High positive loadings
Physella virgata (aquatic)
Mesomphix friabilis (terrestrial, woodland)
Praticolella sp. (well-drained, open)
Rabdotus sp. (grassland or open woodland)

53.764
0.921
0.837
0.825

High negative loadings
Planorbidae, unidentified (aquatic)
Helisoma anceps (aquatic)
Planorbella trivolvis (aquatic)
Polygyra sp. (terrestrial, woodland)

-3.125
-1.757
-1.409
-0.762

Axis 3: xeric, drought-adapted
High positive loadings
Praticolella sp. (well-drained, open)
Planorbella trivolvis (aquatic)

6.868
3.836
1181

Rabdotus sp. (grassland or open woodland)
Oligyra orbiculata (grassland or open woodland)

0.605
0.107

High negative loadings
Physella virgata (aquatic)
Planorbidae, unidentified (aquatic)

-21.013
-3.729

Axis 1 (31% of variance) has a strong aquatic component, along with Anguispira
strongylodes, an important woodland taxon, although two other woodland taxa,
Mesomphix and Mesodon, contribute little. Oligyra, a drought-adapted taxon, has a
negative loading.

Axis 2 (12% of variance) is difficult to interpret but seems to feature taxa
(Mesomphix, Praticolella, Rabdotus) that may be found in open, somewhat dry, welldrained woodland. The high loading for Physella virgata is not thought to be meaningful.

Axis 3 (10% of variance) is more interpretable and seems to feature droughtadapted taxa (Praticolella, Rabdotus, Oligyra) found in open terrain (grassland or open
xeric woodland).

Case scores from the correspondence analysis can be plotted two different ways:
as a bi-axis scattergram (Figs.8.80, 8.81) or as vertical curves representing each axis.
Figures 8.82 and 8.83 are vertical plots of the case scores for each of the three axes for
the 1/4-inch screen sample from N109 E103 and N110 E102. Both of these plots (as well
plots for other excavation units, not shown here) indicate the axis 1 scores show a slight
upward-declining trend. This probably indicates the declining importance of aquatic and
woodland taxa toward the upper part of the bench deposits, perhaps as a result of long-

1182

term drying of the habitat. All three axes show more variability at the base of the section,
perhaps because of small sample sizes.

0.61

2B

0.53
2B
0.46
2A

2B

0.38

Axis 2 (dry woodland?)

0.30
2B

2A
2C2C
0.23
2B
2B2D
2D
0.15 2B
2D
2D
2A 2B 2C 2B
2D
2B
2D
2B 2D
2B 2A
2A2B
2B
2D
2C
2D
2D
0.08
2B
2D
2B
2C 2D
2A
3 2B2C/2D
2D
2D
2B
2D 2D
2D
2B
2C
2D
2D
2D
2B
3
2A
-0.7
-0.4
-0.2
0.2
0.4
0.7
0.9
2C
2D
2A
-0.08
2A 2B
2D
1
2C
2D
2B 2B
2A
-0.15 2B
2B
2A/2B
2C
2B
2C
2C
2C
-0.23
2B
2A
2C
2B
1
2B
-0.30 2C
2A
1
2B
2A
-0.38
-0.46
-0.53

1.1

1.3

1.5

1.8

2.0

2.2

2A2C
2B

2A
2A

2A
2A
2A
1

-0.61
-0.68
2A

-0.76

Axis 1 (aquatic--deciduous woodland)

Figure 8.80. Correspondence Analysis of Snails From the Quarter-Inch Screen. Plot of
cases (excavation levels identified by stratum) on the first two axes.

1183

1.8

2A
2B

1.6
1.3

2B

1.1

2A

1

2B

Axis 3 (xeric)

0.9
2A
0.7
2B
2B

2D
2A

2A

0.42C

2B
2A

2C
2D
2C
2A 2C 2A
0.2
2D2B
2B 2B
2C/2D
2D
2B
2D
2D
2D
2D2D
2D
2B
2D
2D 2D 2D
2D
2B 2A
2D
2D
2D
2B
2C2C
2D2D
2C
2D
2B
2B2D
2A
1
2D
2B
1
2C
2B
2C
2A
2B
32C
-0.7
-0.4
-0.2
0.2
0.4 2B2B
0.7
0.9
2C
2C
2B
3
2B
2B
2C
2B
2A
2B
-0.2
2A/2B
2B
2A
2A
2A 2B
2B
2C
2B
-0.4
2A

2C
1.1 2B 1.3
1.5
2A
2A

1.8

2.0

-0.7
2B
2A

-0.9
-1.1
2B
-1.3

Axis 1 (aquatic--deciduous woodland)

Figure 8.81. Correspondence Analysis of Snails From the Quarter-Inch Screen. Plot of
cases (excavation levels identified by stratum) on the first and third axes.

1184

2.2
2A
1

Figure 8.82. Vertical Plot of First Three Axes, N109 E103. Case scores from
correspondence analysis of snails from the quarter-inch screen are shown.
Note axis 1 (aquatic and deciduous woodland taxa) tends to decline upward,
suggesting progressive drying of the habitat, although axis 3 (xeric taxa)
does not increase upward.

1185

Figure 8.83. Vertical Plot of First Three Axes, N110 E102. Case scores from
correspondence analysis of snails from the quarter-inch screen are shown.
Vertical patterns here are similar to the previous figure. No snails were
recovered from the quarter-inch screen in the lower levels of this unit.

1186

Table 8.26. Correspondence Analysis of Snail Taxa From the Quarter-Inch Screen.
Eigenvalues
Percentage
Cumulative Percentage

Axis 1
0.101
30.52
30.52

Axis 2
0.040
12.01
42.52

Axis 3
0.035
10.48
62.27

Variable scores

Axis 1

Axis 2

Axis 3

Anguispira strongylodes
Euchemotrema leai aliciae
Mesodon spp.
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata
Polygyra sp.
Praticolella sp.
Rabdotus sp.
Unlipped shells
Unidentified terrestrial
Helisoma anceps
Physella virgata
Planorbella trivolvis
Planorbidae, unidentified

2.202
0.058
-0.361
0.285
-0.708
-0.305
1.274
0.064
-1.061
-1.368
4.503
7.405
0.618
1.091

-0.599
0.062
0.059
0.921
-0.096
-0.762
0.837
0.825
0.537
-2.154
-1.757
53.764
-1.409
-3.125

-0.284
-0.346
-0.788
-0.250
0.107
-0.935
6.868
0.605
0.994
-6.977
0.126
-21.013
3.836
-3.729

Notes: no detrending, no downweighting of rare taxa, maximum of five axes; 14
variables (taxa), 99 cases (excavation levels).

SNAILS FROM SIEVED MATRIX COLUMNS
Two columns of sediment samples from the southwest corners of the two deepest
excavation units were selected for fine mesh sieving (Table 8.27):

1) N109 E103. This column consists of 21 samples. The uppermost is a large
sample (10.651 kg dry weight) from an initial level 24 cm thick. Samples below that
average 2.938 kg in size (range, 2.160-3.972 kg; total column weight, 69.419 kg).

1187

2) N110 E102. This column consists of 26 samples. The average dry sample
weight is 2.642 kg (range, 1.546-5.446 kg; total column weight, 68.699 kg). All samples
were 5 cm thick except for the uppermost sample, which was 10 cm thick.

Table 8.27. Snail Matrix Sample Weights.
N109 E103
Sample
93.14-92.90
92.90-92.85
92.85-92.80
92.80-92.75
92.75-92.70
92.70-92.65
92.65-92.60
92.60-92.55
92.55-92.50
92.50-92.45
92.45-92.40
92.40-92.35
92.35-92.30
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20
92.20-92.15
92.15-92.10
92.10-92.05
92.05-92.00
92.00-91.95
91.95-91.90

N110 E102
Sample weight (kg)
10.6505
3.8481
2.7402
2.5968
2.3000
3.2022
2.3660
3.4702
2.6793
2.1602
3.0355
3.0615
3.7583
2.7275
2.8668
3.0167
3.9715
2.4515
2.4803
3.5868
2.4485

Sample
92.90-92.80
92.80-92.75
92.75-92.70
92.70-92.65
92.65-92.60
92.60-92.55
92.55-92.50
92.50-92.45
92.45-92.40
92.40-92.35
92.35-92.30
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20
92.20-92.15
92.15-92.10
92.10-92.05
92.05-92.00
92.00-91.95
91.95-91.90*
91.90-91.85
91.85-91.80
91.80-91.75
91.75-91.70
91.70-91.65
91.65-91.60
91.60-91.55

* Floated snails from this sample lost during lab processing.

1188

Sample weight (kg)
3.6843
3.2173
2.7360
3.7962
2.5090
3.1265
5.4457
2.3718
3.0752
2.1275
2.2745
2.4850
2.6632
2.8249
2.2875
2.5500
2.6697
2.3585
2.1247
2.4370
1.5630
2.1510
2.3854
1.5455
2.2685
2.0215

Extraction Methods
The thoroughly dried sediment (stored in paper bags for about nine months) was
first weighed on a triple beam balance, then soaked in a dispersant solution of water and
dishwasher detergent, to break clay bonds in the sediment. Soaking times varied from a
few hours to one or two days. Generally a few snail shells lacking trapped sediment
would break free and float to the top of the container as soon as the sample was poured
into the dispersant. By experimentation, it was found that repeated gentle stirring and
skimming with a fine mesh strainer recovered most of the smaller species at this stage.

After soaking, and after repeated stirring of the bottom sludge failed to release
any additional snails, the sludge was gradually poured into nested #12 (1.7 mm mesh)
and #35 (0.5 mm) geologic sieves. The coarser #12 sieve served to catch the larger snails,
rocks, and rhizoconcretions which might clog the finer screen. The mesh size of the #35
screen is small enough to retain shells of the smallest species.

After all of the sediment was washed through the sieves, the residue was dried
and the coarse fraction was hand picked for shells and shell fragments. The fine fraction,
that retained on the #35 sieve, consisted mostly of coarse to fine sand and
rhizoconcretions, since most of the smaller shells had already floated free. However,
some shells of smaller species with entrapped sediment were still present, and in order to
recover these, the dried fine residue was poured into a saturated warm salt solution. The
absence of trapped water in the shells and the increased specific gravity of the solution
helped release a few additional small shells at this final stage of recovery.

1189

Recovery is believed to be nearly complete for whole shells and most shell
fragments over 1.7 mm across. Recovery of whole shells should be nearly complete for
species 0.5-1.7 mm across. Spot inspection of fine residue samples revealed many small
fragments from larger species, but no whole snail shells. The extraction process, then,
yielded three fractions from each sample:
1) whole shells and some larger fragments, larger than 1.7 mm
2) whole shells 0.5-1.7 mm, non-floating
3) whole shells 0.5-1.7 mm, floating
These three fractions were given to Raymond Neck for sorting and identification.
After identification, the fractions were tabulated separately, but I have combined the
counts from the separate fractions for analysis and ordination studies. Tables 8.28 and
8.29 show the results for these two matrix columns. There are 31 taxa. For the most part,
I have left the species assignments as defined by Neck, although I suspect that the
Praticolella are actually P. pachyloma, and the Polygyra are P. texasiana triodontoides.
Looking at the two matrix columns combined, across all strata, the snail taxa are
mostly a mixture of 1) cosmopolitan, drought-resistant, open terrain species 2) deciduous
woodland species, and 3) aquatic species (Fig. 8.84).
Cosmopolitan, drought-resistant snails of two species (Helicodiscus singleyanus
and Oligyra orbiculata) make up about 60% of the total from the matrix columns.
However, the abundance of these snails may be misleading. Although no data on
reproduction rates are available, it seems likely that both species are prolific breeders
adapted to unpredictable climatic conditions. It may be the case that both resemble rselected species, producing large numbers of offspring to compensate for high juvenile
1190

mortality, in which case large sample numbers might overstate the importance of the
species in the snail fauna.
The four next most abundant taxa (Anguispira strongylodes, Gastrocopta
contracta, Carychium mexicanum, and Glyphyalinia umbilicata) are deciduous woodland
or wet floodplain species accounting for another 26% of the total. The remaining taxa are
a mixture of woodland, open terrain, amphibious and aquatic snails, most of them
accounting for less than 1% each of the total (Fig. 8.84). Of particular interest are the
relatively large numbers of Carychium mexicanum recovered from the matrix columns.
This species is a good indicator of wet floodplain habitats. The most abundant aquatic
snail is Cincinnatia integra, accounting for just over 1% of the total.

1191

93.14-92.90 3/2D
38
92.90-92.85 2D
25
92.85-92.80 2D
18
92.80-92.75 2D
8
92.75-92.70 2D
7
92.70-92.65 2D
4
92.65-92.60 2C
6
92.60-92.55 2C
13
92.55-92.50 2B
13
92.50-92.45 2B
3
92.45-92.40 2B
10
92.40-92.35 2B
3
92.35-92.30 2B
4
92.30-92.25 2B
4
92.25-92.20 2B
14
92.20-92.15 2A/2B 15
92.15-92.10 2A
13
92.10-92.05 2A
13
92.05-92.00 2A
17
92.00-91.95 1
9
91.95-91.90 1
3
Column totals:
240

1
4
1
2
1
0
3
3
19
15
14
9
0
9
3
8
6
9
7
0
13
127

0 3
0 1
0 1
0 1
0 0
0 0
1 1
1 1
0 0
0 0
0 1
0 0
1 0
0 0
0 0
1 1
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
4 10

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

26 5
14 1
4 0
8 2
0 0
2 0
3 0
10 1
7 0
12 0
16 0
8 0
17 0
6 0
11 0
0 0
6 0
9 0
6 1
2 0
2 0
169 10

(continued on next page)

1192

0 0
0 1
0 2
0 4
0 1
0 0
0 0
0 1
0 0
0 1
0 2
0 4
0 0
0 0
0 2
0 3
0 0
0 0
0 2
0 0
0 0
0 23

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

1 66
0 77
0 61
0 54
0 32
0 30
0 30
0 46
1 68
0 79
0 71
0 68
0 31
0 54
0 55
0 45
0 61
0 72
0 50
0 32
0 34
2 1116

0 26
0 20
0 2
0 2
1 2
0 0
0 1
0 3
0 4
0 4
0 3
0 2
0 2
0 2
0 6
0 1
0 4
0 5
0 5
0 2
0 0
1 96

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1

Strobilops texasiana

Pupisoma dioscoricola

Pomatiopsis lapidaria

Mesomphix friabilis

Mesodon thyroidus

Helicodiscus singleyanus

Hawaiia minuscula

Gastrocopta tappaniana

Gastrocopta procera

Gastrocopta pentodon

Gastrocopta pellucida

Gastrocopta contracta

Gastrocopta armifera

Euchemotrema leai aliciae

Catinella vermeta

Carychium mexicanum

N109 E103

Anguispira strongylodes

Table 8.28. Snails Extracted From Sieved Matrix Samples, N109 E103.

0 2
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
1 1
0 0
0 1
1 4
1 1
1 1
0 2
0 0
1 3
0 1
0 0
5 16

93.14-92.90 3/2D
8 69
92.90-92.85 2D
11 40
92.85-92.80 2D
9 20
92.80-92.75 2D
3 22
92.75-92.70 2D
4 23
92.70-92.65 2D
2 13
92.65-92.60 2C
6 13
92.60-92.55 2C
1
8
92.55-92.50 2B
4
7
92.50-92.45 2B
1
3
92.45-92.40 2B
13
2
92.40-92.35 2B
10
3
92.35-92.30 2B
10
5
92.30-92.25 2B
5
3
92.25-92.20 2B
2
4
92.20-92.15 2A/2B
6
4
92.15-92.10 2A
8
9
92.10-92.05 2A
8
2
92.05-92.00 2A
6
6
92.00-91.95 1
8
4
91.95-91.90 1
0
3
Column totals:
125 263

16
9
5
5
3
11
4
1
1
3
0
0
1
0
0
4
2
0
0
0
0
65

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0 1 35
0 4 8
1 4 4
1 0 6
0 3 5
1 1 5
2 0 6
0 0 0
0 0 2
0 0 1
0 0 2
0 3 3
0 3 4
0 0 0
0 2 3
0 0 5
0 0 2
0 2 0
0 1 3
0 0 0
0 0 0
5 24 94

(End of Table 8.28)

1193

0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2

0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

1 1
1 0
0 0
0 1
0 0
0 1
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 2
1 0
2 0
0 2
0 1
0 1
1 1
0 1
0 0
6 11

0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 10
0 4
0 6
0 3
0 2
0 8
0 6
0 39

Row totals

Valvata tricarinata

Cincinnatia integra

Physella virgata

Planorbella trivolvis

Gyraulus parvus

Biomphalaria obstructa

Zonitoides arboreus

Rabdotus sp.

Pupoides albilabris

Praticolella berlandieriana

Polygyra texasiana

Polygyra mooreana

Oligyra orbiculata

N109 E103

Glyphyalinia umbilicata

(Table 8.28, continued from previous page)

0 299
0 216
0 133
0 119
0
83
0
71
0
76
0
89
0 126
0 122
0 137
0 114
0
81
0
89
0 116
0 101
0 120
1 125
0 112
0
67
0
62
1 2458

92.90-92.80 2D
9
0
92.80-92.75 2D
0
0
92.75-92.70 2D
0
0
92.70-92.65 2C
3
0
92.65-92.60 2C
11
1
92.60-92.55 2C
12
8
92.55-92.50 2B/2C
11 32
92.50-92.45 2B
7 19
92.45-92.40 2B
11 39
92.40-92.35 2B
3 14
92.35-92.30 2B
5 13
92.30-92.25 2B
12
6
92.25-92.20 2B
19
7
92.20-92.15 2B
10 10
92.15-92.10 2A
6
9
92.10-92.05 2A
6 17
92.05-92.00 2A
5
6
92.00-91.95 2A/calc
0
6
91.95-91.90 calc
0
1
91.90-91.85 calc
1
4
91.85-91.80 1
1
8
91.80-91.75 1
0
3
91.75-91.70 1
0
3
91.70-91.65 1
0
1
91.65-91.60 1
0
1
91.60-91.55 1
0
1
Column totals:
132 209

0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3

0
7
0
2
0
1
0
1
0
5
0
8
0 30
0 14
0 24
0 10
0
7
0
9
0
5
0 18
0 11
0
3
0 12
0
5
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0 178

1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2

(continued on next page)

1194

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
50
0
36
0
51
0
72
0
82
0 104
0 134
0
98
0 125
0
74
0
56
0
68
0
60
0
55
0
30
0
54
0
35
0
30
0
17
0
25
0
27
0
31
0
28
0
13
0
21
1
34
1 1410

1 3
0 2
0 0
0 0
0 8
0 8
0 6
0 2
0 2
0 0
0 1
0 1
0 4
0 2
0 4
0 3
0 1
0 1
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 5
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
1 53

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
4

Strobilops texasiana

Pupisoma dioscoricola

Pomatiopsis lapidaria

Mesomphix friabilis

Mesodon thyroidus

Helicodiscus singleyanus

Hawaiia minuscula

Gastrocopta tappaniana

Gastrocopta procera

Gastrocopta pentodon

Gastrocopta pellucida

Gastrocopta contracta

Gastrocopta armifera

Euchemotrema leai aliciae

Catinella vermeta

Carychium mexicanum

N110 E102

Anguispira strongylodes

Table 8.29. Snails Extracted From Sieved Matrix Samples, N110 E102.

0 1
0 0
1 0
0 1
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 1
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
1 0
0 2
0 3
0 2
0 0
0 0
0 0
2 0
0 0
0 0
0 1
0 0
0 1
4 12

92.90-92.80 2D
92.80-92.75 2D
92.75-92.70 2D
92.70-92.65 2C
92.65-92.60 2C
92.60-92.55 2C
92.55-92.50 2B/2C
92.50-92.45 2B
92.45-92.40 2B
92.40-92.35 2B
92.35-92.30 2B
92.30-92.25 2B
92.25-92.20 2B
92.20-92.15 2B
92.15-92.10 2A
92.10-92.05 2A
92.05-92.00 2A
92.00-91.95 2A/calc
91.95-91.90 calc
91.90-91.85 calc
91.85-91.80 1
91.80-91.75 1
91.75-91.70 1
91.70-91.65 1
91.65-91.60 1
91.60-91.55 1
Column totals:

7
6 2
6
9 1
3 10 1
4 10 3
4 11 10
9 20 2
7 19 4
7
9 0
17
7 1
11
2 0
11
4 1
2
1 2
4
3 0
2
8 0
3
9 1
9
5 2
3
4 0
1
3 0
0
1 0
0
0 0
1
0 0
0 16 3
0
0 0
0
0 0
0
0 0
0
0 0
111 157 33

3
2
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10

0
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
8

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
7

12
5
1
5
3
2
3
0
1
1
0
5
4
4
3
2
3
3
2
1
0
4
0
0
0
0
64

(End of Table 8.29)

1195

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
5

0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
5
2
0
0
1
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
17

0 2
0 1
1 0
0 1
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 3
0 3
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 1
0 0
0 0
0 1
0 1
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
1 13

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2

Row totals

Valvata tricarinata

Cincinnatia integra

Physella virgata

Planorbella trivolvis

Gyraulus parvus

Biomphalaria obstructa

Zonitoides arboreus

Rabdotus sp.

Pupoides albilabris

Praticolella berlandieriana

Polygyra texasiana

Polygyra mooreana

Oligyra orbiculata

N110 E102

Glyphyalinia umbilicata

(Table 8.29, continued from previous page)

107
65
70
106
137
175
247
161
231
115
99
115
110
117
83
107
75
51
21
34
47
65
33
16
22
38
2447

Figure 8.84. Percentage Composition of Combined Matrix Columns. Proportional
representation of species in both matrix columns combined, across all strata.
Species names for Polygyra and Praticolella are the original ones assigned
by Raymond Neck.

1196

Figures 8.85-8.87 show the taxonomic composition broken down by strata.
Helicodiscus singleyanus is the most abundant species in all except the uppermost
diagram (Fig. 8.85, top), which illustrates a single excavation level, the uppermost level
(N109 E103, 93.14-92.90 m), consisting mostly of stratum 3 and a small amount of
stratum 2D sediment. Oligyra orbiculata is the most abundant species here. These
diagrams show that next to Helicodiscus, the next most abundant species are mostly
woodland

taxa

(Carychium,

Anguispira,

Gastrocopta

contracta,

Glyphyalinia,

Mesomphix) and a few more drought-tolerant (Oligyra, Rabdotus) or aquatic
(Cincinnatia) taxa.
There are a few stratigraphic trends that are apparent from these pie charts.
Carychium mexicanum, a mesic floodplain forest species, is abundant in the three lowest
strata, declining in importance in stratum 2C and above. At the same time, Oligyra
orbiculata takes its place as a second-ranked species in stratum 2C and increases in
importance toward the top of the columns. This seems to be clear evidence of increased
drying of the habitat. However, Anguispira strongylodes, another woodland species, also
becomes more abundant toward the top of the columns.

1197

Figure 8.85. Taxonomic Composition of Matrix Columns, Strata 2D and 2D/3.
1198

Figure 8.86. Taxonomic Composition of Matrix Columns, Strata 2B and 2C.
1199

Figure 8.87. Taxonomic Composition of Matrix Columns, Strata 1 and 2A.
1200

Cluster Analysis of the Matrix Columns
Combining the results for the N109 E103 and N110 E102 matrix columns
produced a simplified data matrix consisting of 25 variables (taxa) and 47 cases (matrix
samples). The raw specimen counts were used, not converted to percentages or weighted
by sample volume. All the aquatic species were combined into a single “aquatic”
variable, and both species of Polygyra were combined into a single “Polygyra” variable
for this analysis. Clustering of excavation levels (Fig. 8.88) shows considerable
stratigraphic coherency, as was the case when the 1/4-inch samples were clustered.
Clustering of species largely groups them by abundance (Fig. 8.89), replicating the
ranking seen in the pie chart (Fig. 8.84). Helicodiscus singleyanus and Oligyra orbiculata
appear as outliers, followed by Anguispira strongylodes and a cluster composed of
Carychium mexicanum and Gastrocopta contracta. This is essentially an ordering based
on numerical abundance.

1201

2B
2B/2C
2B
2C
2C
2B
1
1
1
1
calc
1
1
1
calc
2A/calc
2A
2A
2D
1
2C
2D
2D
2D
2C
2D
2D
2B
2B
2B
2A
2A
2A/2B
2A
2B
2B
2B
2B
2A
2B
2B
2B
2B
2C
2D
2D
3/2D
48

36

24

12

0

Figure 8.88. Cluster Analysis of Snails From Combined Matrix Columns. Clustering by
variables using the centroid method and a Euclidian distance function (scale
at bottom). MVSP 3.1 analysis uses 25 variables (taxa) and 47 cases (matrix
samples). All aquatic snails were combined for this analysis, and both
species of Polygyra were also combined. Note strata tend to cluster together
to a large extent.

1202

Helicodiscus singleyanus
Oligyra orbiculata
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Rabdotus sp.
Mesomphix friabilis
Polygyra spp.
Aquatic
Pupoides albilabris
Gastrocopta procera
Strobilops texasiana
Gastrocopta pellucida
Praticolella berlandieriana .
Euchemotrema leai
Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Zonitoides arboreus
Hawaiia minuscula
Mesodon thyroidus
Gastrocopta tappaniana
Gastrocopta pentodon
Gastrocopta armifera
Catinella vermeta
Gastrocopta contracta
Carychium mexicanum
Anguispira strongylodes
320

240

160

80

0

Figure 8.89. Cluster Analysis of Snails From Combined Matrix Columns. Clustering by
cases using the centroid method and a Euclidian distance function (scale at
bottom). MVSP 3.1 analysis uses 25 variables (taxa) and 47 cases (matrix
samples). All aquatic snails were combined for this analysis, and both
species of Polygyra were also combined.
Correspondence Analysis of the Matrix Columns
Correspondence analysis was done using the same 25 species by 47 sample data
matrix used for the cluster analysis. This analysis uses more variables and fewer cases
than the correspondence analysis done on the 1/4-inch screen sample, but has similar
1203

resolving power. The first three axes extracted explain about 52% of the variance in the
matrix. Detrending and downweighting were not used. Table 8.30 shows variable scores
for the first three axes.

The principal difference between this correspondence analysis and the one done
for the 1/4-inch screen sample is that the first two axes are reversed. That is, the first axis
appears to reflect aridity or drought resistance, and the second axis is identified with
aquatic and riparian woodland species, while for the 1/4-inch screen sample, the first axis
was identified with aquatic and riparian woodland species, and the second axis with dry
woodland. This difference is probably due to the large numbers of moisture-sensitive
microsnails in the sieved matrix samples. The first three axes from the correspondence
analysis of the matrix samples are interpreted as follows:
Axis 1: dry woodland
High positive loadings
Gastrocopta pellucida (well drained, open)
Mesodon thyroidus (dry woodland)
Polygyra spp. (woodland)
Rabdotus sp. (well drained, open)
Euchemotrema leai (woodland)*
Oligyra orbiculata (open, drought-resistant)

3.523
3.347
2.272
2.044
1.875
1.874

High negative loadings
Pomatiopsis lapidaria (amphibious)
Pupisoma dioscoricola (wet floodplain)
Carychium mexicanum (wet floodplain)

-2.391
-1.759
-1.580

Axis 2: aquatic and deciduous woodland taxa
High positive loadings
Pupisoma dioscoricola (wet floodplain)
Aquatic species, combined
Pomatiopsis lapidaria (amphibious)
Strobilops texasiana (woodland)

5.591
5.340
4.880
1.901
1204

High negative loadings
Zonitoides arboreus (open, dry woodland)
Praticolella berlandieriana (open, dry woodland)
Polygyra spp. (woodland)
Oligyra orbiculata (open, drought-resistant)

-3.428
-3.037
-1.046
-0.536

Axis 3: dry woodland? (interpretation uncertain)
High positive loadings
Mesodon thyroidus (dry woodland)
Zonitoides arboreus (open, dry woodland)
Pupisoma dioscoricola (wet floodplain)*
Polygyra spp. (woodland)

4.902
3.782
2.185
2.110

High negative loadings
Gastrocopta tappaniana (wet floodplain)
Euchemotrema leai (woodland)
Gastrocopta contracta (mesic floodplain)

-5.594
-2.707
-2.127

* This species seems incompatible with the others in this group.

Axis 1 (31% of variance) has positive loadings chiefly for species that are fairly
drought-resistant and adapted to well-drained terrain ranging from open and grassy to
partly wooded. Marshy and mesic riparian floodplain species show negative loadings.
Axis 2 (12% of variance) has positive loadings for marshy and wet floodplain species and
negative loadings for some of the drought-adapted species. This is a “mesic” axis. Axis 3
(less than 9% of variance) is less interpretable, but seems to be another xeric axis.
Positive loadings are mostly for dry woodland species, but Pupisoma dioscoricola is
inexplicably grouped with this axis, and aquatic snails also have a fairly high positive
loading. This axis seems to be less xeric and more mesic than axis 1.

Figure 8.90 is a bi-axis plot for the first two axes from the matrix sample
correspondence analysis; Figure 8.91 shows axes 1 and 3. In both these plots, which
1205

show the individual samples marked by their stratum assignments, the horizontal axis is
characterized by increasing aridity toward the right side. Most of the stratum 1 samples
cluster toward the left side, and most of the stratum 2D samples toward the right side,
because there is a moderate long-term trend toward increasing aridity toward the top of
the bench stratigraphic section. Clustering is particularly well-defined in Figure 8.91.

Figure 8.92 is a bi-axis plot of the variables (taxa) from correspondence analysis
of the combined matrix samples. The different species are distributed on this plot largely
in terms of moisture sensitivity. Species in the upper lefthand quadrant (such as
Pomatiopsis lapidaria, Pupisoma dioscoricola, and the aquatic species) have the highest
moisture requirements, while species at the right end of axis 1 (such as Gastrocopta
pellucida, Oligyra orbiculata, and Polygyra spp.) are the most drought-adapted. Mesodon
thyroidus and Catinella vermeta appear much farther toward the xeric end of axis 1 than
expected (although Catinella often thrives in damp microhabitats that are embedded in
much drier environments). Figures 8.93 and 8.94 are vertical plots of case scores on the
first three axes for the N109 E103 and N110 E102 matrix sample columns, respectively.
Figure 8.93 shows the clearest vertical pattern. The scores for axis 1, identified with dry
woodland species, increase upward in the stratigraphic column, especially above 92.50
m, indicating increasing aridity late in the stratigraphic sequence. The increase begins
near the top of stratum 2B and continues through strata 2C and 2D, with a brief
regression in stratum 2D. The vertical plot for the N110 E102 column (Fig. 8.94) is
almost identical. It begins at the base with a great deal of variability in all axes in stratum
1, then shows the same pattern of upward increase above that. The strongest peaks for
mesic-adapted species (axis 2) occur at the top of stratum 1 and near the base of stratum
2B.
1206

Table 8.30. Correspondence Analysis of Snail Taxa From Combined Matrix Samples.

Eigenvalues
Percentage
Cumulative Percentage

Axis 1
0.159
31.38
31.38

Axis 2
0.063
12.31
43.68

Axis 3
0.044
8.70
52.38

Variable scores

Axis 1

Axis 2

Axis 3

Anguispira strongylodes
Carychium mexicanum
Catinella vermeta
Euchemotrema leai aliciae
Gastrocopta armifera
Gastrocopta contracta
Gastrocopta pellucida
Gastrocopta pentodon
Gastrocopta procera
Gastrocopta tappaniana
Glyphyalinia umbilicata
Hawaiia minuscula
Helicodiscus singleyanus
Mesodon thyroidus
Mesomphix friabilis
Oligyra orbiculata
Polygyra sp.
Pomatiopsis lapidaria
Praticolella berlandieriana
Pupisoma dioscoricola
Pupoides albilabris
Rabdotus sp.
Strobilops texasiana
Zonitoides arboreus
Aquatic species, combined

0.609
-1.580
0.738
1.875
-1.564
-0.261
3.523
-2.189
0.581
-2.019
-0.203
0.510
-0.450
3.347
1.378
1.874
2.272
-2.391
0.364
-1.759
1.146
2.044
-0.514
1.242
-0.734

1.378
-0.622
0.606
0.195
-2.522
0.026
0.765
-4.215
1.253
-0.664
-0.130
-1.767
-0.286
-0.741
0.586
-0.536
-1.046
4.880
-3.037
5.591
0.353
0.304
1.901
-3.428
5.340

-0.738
-1.405
1.367
-2.707
1.829
-2.127
-2.450
-1.816
1.399
-5.594
-0.373
-0.258
0.584
4.902
-1.643
-0.094
2.110
0.582
-0.010
2.185
0.503
-0.087
-0.823
3.782
1.569

Notes: no detrending, no downweighting of rare taxa, maximum of five axes; 25
variables (taxa), 47 cases (matrix samples). Analysis is for combined matrix samples
from N109 E103 and N110 E102.

1207

0.9
1

1 0.8
2B
0.6

Axis 2

0.5
2A/2B
2A

1

0.3
2B
2A
2B2B
2A
2A

2A

0.2

2B

calc

2C

2B
-0.7

-0.6
1 1

1

2D

2B
-0.4

-0.2
2A
2A/calc
2D2C
2B
2B
-0.2
2B 2B/2C
2B2B 2B
calc
2B
1

2D

2D
0.2
2C

2C

3/2D

0.4 2D

0.6

2D

0.9

2D
2C
1

-0.3

0.7

2D

-0.5
Axis 1

Figure 8.90. Correspondence Analysis of Snails From Combined Matrix Columns. Plot of
cases (excavation levels identified by stratum) on the first two axes. This
analysis uses the simplified matrix (aquatic species combined, Polygyra
species combined), no detrending, and no downweighting of rare species.
The first axis appears to record increasing aridity from left to right.

1208

0.9

0.7

0.6
2D

1
Axis 3

1
1

calc

1

0.4
2D

calc
1

1
2B
1

-0.7

2D

2C

-0.6

2B

2A/2B
0.2

2D

2C
2D
2D

2A 2C
2B

2B 2A
2B 2B2B
2A/calc2B
2A
2B
-0.4
-0.2
2A
2B
2B
2B/2C
2B
-0.2
2A
2B

1
2D
2C

0.2
2C
2B

0.4

0.6
2D

0.7

0.9

3/2D

2A
-0.4

-0.6
Axis 1

Figure 8.91. Correspondence Analysis of Snails From Combined Matrix Columns. Plot of
cases (excavation levels identified by stratum) on the first and third axes.
Note clustering of stratum 1 samples in upper left quadrant and stratum 2D
samples in right-hand quadrants.

1209

Figure 8.92. Correspondence Analysis of Snails From Combined Matrix Columns. Plot of
variables (taxa) on the first two axes. The species are arranged mostly along
a moisture gradient decreasing from upper left to lower right.

1210

Figure 8.93. Vertical Plot of First Three Axes, N109 E103. Case scores from
correspondence analysis of snails from sieved matrix samples are shown.
Note axis 1 (dry woodland taxa) tends to increase upward, and peaks in
scores do not coincide with strata.

1211

Figure 8.94. Vertical Plot of First Three Axes, N110 E102. Case scores from
correspondence analysis of snails from sieved matrix samples are shown.
All three axes are highly variable in stratum 1. The vertical patterns here are
very similar to the previous plot.

1212

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS FOR CHAPTER 8

Composition of the Fauna
The Late Pleistocene-early Holocene snail fauna found in the bench deposits at
Berger Bluff is species-rich (biologists apply the term “speciose”). As far as can be
determined, there are at least 35 or 36 species present. The exact number is uncertain
because of uncertainty about some of the classifications (particularly Rabdotus, or species
like Polygyra mooreana or Praticolella berlandieriana that were identified by Raymond
Neck, but which I suspect are not applicable). Further picking and sorting of matrix from
N109 E96 might also reveal additional species. Table 8.31 records species richness for
some contemporary snail surveys and some archeological sites where fine-mesh sampling
has been done. Berger Bluff is second only to Lubbock Lake in species richness.

Microsnails, medium-sized, and large snails each represent about a third of the
Berger Bluff species list. From this inventory, 25 or 26 are terrestrial snails that fall into
two major groupings: 10 species that are chiefly cosmopolitan, eurytopic, droughttolerant species well adapted to stressful habitats; and another 15 or 16 species that are
chiefly woodland snails, many of them found in mature, deciduous floodplain woodlands.
Included in this group is at least one unidentified species of slug. As in most biological
assemblages, most of the species are represented by relatively few individuals, but two
species from the eurytopic, drought-tolerant group (Helicodiscus singleyanus and Oligyra
orbiculata) are numerically dominant in the fine-sieved samples, where they represent
over 60% of the individuals.

1213

Table 8.31. Snail Species Richness at Some Southern Plains Sites.

Locality

Number of taxonomic
categories*

Contemporary surveys
Welder Refuge (Branson 1960)
Preiss Ranch drift sample (Table 8.8)
Goliad State Park (Neck 1977)
Sleeper site vicinity (Neck 1991)
Southern Plains Gastropod Survey
Smyth Crossing (Table 8.4)
Victoria (Neck 1977)

33
27
22
18
2-14**
10
6

Archeological or paleontological studies
Lubbock Lake (Pierce 1987)
Berger Bluff bench
Wilson-Leonard (Shaw et al. 1998)
Aubrey pond margin (Neck 2001)
Aubrey pond axis (Neck 2001)
Lake Theo (Neck 1987a)
Domebo (Cheatum and Allen 1966)
Burnham (Theler 2003a)
Mustang Branch (Neck 1994b)
Hajny Mammoth fifth spring (Theler 1992)
Hajny Mammoth second spring (Branson 1992)
Richard Beene (Neck 1992)
Sleeper (Neck 1991)
Winston’s Cave (Hudler 2000)
Buckhollow (Neck 1994c)

47
35-36
35
33
32
28
28
26
21
19 or more
15
16
13
12
10

* “Taxonomic categories” are mostly species, but may include higher order groupings or
morphological categories.
** Anywhere from two to 14 taxa were found at a single collecting locality; 24 taxa were
found in the entire survey.

1214

In addition to the terrestrial species, there are two species of amphibious snails
and at least eight species of aquatic snails. In general, these are much less numerous than
the terrestrial snails. In the matrix columns, terrestrial snails represent 97.8% of all
individuals, amphibious snails account for 0.20%, and aquatic snails account for 2%. This
kind of assemblage is characteristic of an elevated floodplain or terrace without major
depressions, oxbows, or ponded water. For large and medium-bodied snails recovered
from the 1/4-inch screen, 99.5% are terrestrial and 0.5% are aquatic (the only amphibious
species from the 1/4-inch screen are tabulated as fortuitously recovered microsnails here).

Archeological sites with major swales, cienegas, ponds, or oxbow lakes may yield
significant numbers of stagnant water aquatic snails (Planorbella, Gyraulus,
Biomphalaria, Physella, Micromenetus, etc.) and amphibious snails (Oxyloma, Succinea,
Catinella, etc.). Recognizable assemblages of snails from damp habitats are referred to as
wet ground taxocenes (that is, similar assemblages occur at multiple sites; Evans et al.
1992; Davies, Gale and Lees 1996; Davies 1998).

Several southern Plains sites have yielded candidates for wet ground taxocenes.
At Lubbock Lake, the major lacustrine or marsh units are strata 2, 3, and 4B. These units
yielded amphibious taxa such as Oxyloma and Succinea, many aquatic taxa such as
Gyraulus parvus, G. circumstriatus, Physa anatina, P. gyrina, Lymnaea palustris, and L.
humilis, as well as a few terrestrial taxa (Gastrocopta pentodon, Vertigo ovata and,
curiously, Hawaiia minuscula; Pierce 1987:Tables 6.1, 6.2). Roughly 97% of the
individuals are aquatic. At the Aubrey site, the pond margin yielded large numbers of the
amphibious snail Pomatiopsis lapidaria, smaller numbers of Catinella avara, and much
smaller numbers of aquatic species such as Gyraulus parvus or terrestrial species such as
1215

Gastrocopta contracta, Strobilops texasiana, and Discus cronkhitei (Neck 2001:Table
7.2). Of the pond margin individuals, 6% are aquatic (9 taxa), 73% are amphibious (4
taxa), and 21% are terrestrial (19 taxa). At the Burnham site in Oklahoma, the North 3
Trench sampled a pond or pond margin (Theler 2003a:173). Here 65% of the individuals
are terrestrial (about 16 taxa), 3% are amphibious (one taxon), and 32% are aquatic
(about a dozen taxa; Theler 2003a:Table 11.3).

These three sites vary widely in the relative proportions of terrestrial, amphibious
and aquatic species, but it is clear that none of them are dominated by terrestrial species
to the extent that the bench deposits at Berger Bluff are. If the proportions can be used as
a guide, the floodplain sediments at Berger Bluff were better drained and less subject to
flooding than the sampled areas of Lubbock Lake, the Aubrey site, and the Burnham site.
If the sampled areas of the bench sediments had been boggy or marshy, they probably
would have yielded large numbers of Succinea, Oxyloma, Catinella, Pomatiopsis, or
similar species, although these species are also quite fragile and subject to taphonomic
deletion.

Although studies of the snails from the bench deposits seem to indicate somewhat
drier conditions than suggested by the sediment and diatom studies, nevertheless there is
evidence of greater effective moisture and greater species richness in the Younger Dryas
and early Holocene than at present, as is the case at Lubbock Lake, the Aubrey site, and
the Richard Beene site.

1216

Extirpations and Range Changes
Unlike the mammal fauna, there were few actual extinctions among the North
American gastropod fauna at the end of the Pleistocene (the giant slug, Deroceras
aenigma, is one of the few exceptions), and there are no extinct species in the bench
fauna. However, several major geographic range shifts were begun at the onset of the
Holocene, and in fact essentially the entire fauna is still making gradual adjustments to
climatic change today. Most of these changes are eastward or northeastward contractions
of range in response to Holocene drying, but in a few cases, neotropical species have
expanded northward from Mexico or westward along the Gulf coast during the Holocene.
In cases where a species has withdrawn entirely from the state of Texas, the term
“extirpation” can be applied, but extirpation is really just a more extreme case of range
contraction. At Berger Bluff, the most significant examples are prosobranch aquatic or
amphibious species.

The chief effect of these Holocene range changes at any particular location is the
deletion from the species list of several species that were present in the Pleistocene and
the addition of a few new tropical species arriving from the south or the Gulf region.
Neck (1995a) estimates that Quaternary fossil snail assemblages from the southern
Plains, with over 140 species, have been reduced to just over 40 species at present, and
only part of the discrepancy is due to time-averaging of the fossil faunas. He attributes
the depauperization of the fauna to regional drying, increased thermal stress, and
increased seasonality.

1217

The most significant extirpation in the snail fauna from the bench sediments is
Valvata tricarinata, an aquatic snail with northern affinities usually found in cold lakes
and rivers or, in the southern part of its range, in cold springs or ponds. It is a common
Pleistocene index fossil. Contemporary populations are found no farther south than
Nebraska (or possibly western Oklahoma or Arkansas? Fig. 8.95), where Taylor (1960)
found it in water at 15° C (59° F). A reported occurrence in New York at 24° C (75° F) is
probably atypically warm. The species has been entirely extirpated from Texas and much
of the southern US as a result of Holocene warming and drying. Specimens from the
bench are well-preserved and similar in condition to other kinds of snails, and there are
no indications they have been redeposited from older Pleistocene deposits.

A second aquatic species, Cincinnatia integra, is more problematical. Fullington
(1978) listed it as “fossil, potentially recent,” but sparse populations apparently are
scattered across Texas, including the lower Guadalupe River drainage. Seven specimens
were found in the Preiss Ranch drift sample. This is probably a species that has been
reduced in numbers but not entirely extirpated during the Holocene. Both of these aquatic
species are prosobranch (gill-breathing) snails.

Pomatiopsis lapidaria, an amphibious marsh snail, is another prosobranch snail
now extirpated in Texas (Fig. 8.7). It appears at the Aubrey, Domebo, and WilsonLeonard sites and is probably another Pleistocene index species, found at sites with
cienega deposits.

1218

Figure 8.95. Contemporary Range of Valvata tricarinata. Approximate distribution based
on La Rocque (1968:Fig. 221), Clarke (1973:238), Burch and Tottenham
(1980:84). Question marks designate doubtful occurrences.

1219

A single example of Gastrocopta tappaniana was found in the bench deposits.
Although a few specimens are occasionally found in archeological or paleontological
sites, Cheatum and Fullington (1973) report finding no living populations in Texas. Neck
(1994e:147) reports it in Travis County, so perhaps it exists now only in protected
refugia. A wet floodplain dweller, like Pupisoma dioscoricola, it may be found on the
undersides of palmetto leaves.

A single Gastrocopta armifera was also found. This terrestrial microsnail is found
today mostly west of the Balcones Escarpment and appears to be absent from the Gulf
Coastal Plain. Its appearance at Berger Bluff is probably a rare example of westward
range contraction during the Holocene. According to Raymond Neck (personal
communication), this is the first find of this species on the Gulf Coastal Plain.

I

have

also

tentatively

identified

one

other

terrestrial

species

now

characteristically found on the Edwards Plateau. A single specimen thought to be
Glyphyalinia roemeri was found in the bench deposits. Eight specimens thought to be
Mesodon roemeri were found in the bench deposits. This species has been reported from
Goliad State Park (Table 8.5) but is otherwise probably rare in the region at present. If
these identifications are correction, they may be evidence of westward and/or northward
range contractions during the Holocene.

Comparisons With Contemporary Faunas
Although contemporary snail faunas in and near the Coleto Creek basin are not
very well documented, there are major differences between the known species lists and
the Younger Dryas-early Holocene assemblage recovered from the bench deposits.
1220

Contrasting the modern species lists and counts shown in tables 8.5 through 8.9 with the
lists and counts recovered from the bench deposits (shown in tables 8.11, 8.20-8.25 and
8.28-8.29) highlights these differences.

Several genera or species appear in the Preiss Ranch drift sample that are absent
from the bench deposits. Five terrestrial species [Euconulus sp., Helicodiscus
eigenmanni, Polygyra auriformis, P. cereolus, Vertigo rugulosa (?)] and at least one
aquatic species [Micromenetus dilatatus (?) and possibly some species of Drepanotrema]
appear to be new additions to the fauna. Thysanophora hornii is also reported from
Goliad State Park (Table 8.5). These new additions are a mixture of central Texas, eastcentral Texas, Gulf Coastal Plain, tropical and arid-adapted species.

Several species present in the bench deposits seem to be absent or rare in the
contemporary fauna. Two terrestrial species (Gastrocopta armifera and Glyphyalinia cf.
G. roemeri) appear to be present there but absent in the modern fauna. Four more species
(Euchemotrema leai, Hawaiia minuscula, Mesodon roemeri, and an unidentified slug) are
present in the bench deposits but are either rare or have simply been overlooked in the
modern fauna. One amphibious species (Pomatiopsis lapidaria) and one aquatic species
(Valvata tricarinata) found in the bench are known to have been regionally extirpated.
One lymnaeid snail (cf. Fossaria sp.) recovered from the bench may or may not be
present in the modern fauna.

Some of the most important shifts in the snail fauna are ones of degree rather than
kind. The most dramatic example is the substantial replacement of Gastrocopta
contracta, a mesic-adapted species found in abundance in the bench deposits, with
1221

Gastrocopta pellucida, a drought-adapted species found in abundance in the modern
fauna (Table 8.13). In the bench deposits, Gastrocopta contracta accounts for about 89%
of all Gastrocopta individuals, Gastrocopta pellucida for about 3%. In the diatom
sampling quadrats on the Preiss Ranch (Table 8.7), Gastrocopta contracta accounts for
about 6% of all identifiable Gastrocopta individuals, Gastrocopta pellucida for about
94%. In the drift sample, Gastrocopta contracta accounts for about 28% of all
identifiable Gastrocopta individuals, Gastrocopta pellucida for over 59% (Table 8.8).
This is one of the clearest examples of partial species replacement driven by increased
aridity and continentality of climate during the Holocene.

Another example is the Holocene population explosion of Oligyra orbiculata.
This highly adaptable, drought and stress-resistant operculate species is probably the
most abundant and widespread medium or large-bodied snail across most of the state of
Texas today. In the sieved matrix columns from the bench, it represents less than 9% of
the count for all species. This is probably the most representative recovery method. In the
1/4-inch screen sample, which fails to capture juveniles and small adults (as well as
microsnails), Oligyra represents about 46% of the medium and large-bodied species. At
the Smith Creek Bridge site, it represents about 58% of the sample, and increases
dramatically in frequency over time (Brown 2002:263-264). I attribute this explosion in
population size to its ability to out-compete less adaptable species in the increasingly
continental climates of the Holocene, and I suspect the beginnings of this population
increase can be seen in the increased percentages of Oligyra that appear in strata 2D and
3 at the top of the bench deposits.

1222

Some species common to abundant in the bench deposits are reported still present
in the area, but seem to be rather rare in the modern fauna of the catchment. Anguispira
strongylodes, Mesomphix friabilis, Cincinnatia integra, and possibly Euchemotrema leai
are examples. These large to medium-bodied woodland snails, Anguispira, Mesomphix,
and Euchemotrema, are present in the upper deposits at Berger Bluff, but absent at the
Smith Creek Bridge site (only two Euchemotrema specimens were found), and only one
example of the aquatic snail Cincinnatia was found at that site.

In general, most of the species that have been deleted or at least reduced in the
Holocene local fauna are moisture-dependent or dependent on the presence of mature,
riparian deciduous woodland while the species that are new additions or have increased
in density are cosmopolitan and drought-resistant, able to thrive in less heavily vegetated
habitats.

Stratigraphic Trends and Ordination Results
Numerical studies of the matrix and 1/4-inch screen samples make it clear that
there is moderate spatial patterning of snails in the bench deposits. That is, the snails are
neither strongly patterned nor randomly distributed in the deposits. The first three axes in
the correspondence analyses account for about 50% of the variance in the data matrix.
This suggests there were no radical changes in habitat during the Younger Dryas and
early Holocene period represented by the bench deposits.

Nevertheless, there are clear indications of progressive drying during this time.
This can perhaps be seen most easily in Figure 8.93 and 8.94, where the axis 1 (dry
1223

woodland) case scores drift toward the right side of the graph as they climb upward; or in
Figure 8.82 and 8.83 where the axis 1 (aquatic and deciduous woodland) case scores drift
to the left as they climb upward. It can also be seen in the bi-axis plots, especially Fig.
8.91, where most of the stratum 1 samples are clustered at the left (mesic or negative) end
of axis 1 and most of the stratum 2D samples are clustered at the right (xeric or positive
end). The same trend can also be discerned in the various pie charts presented in this
chapter (Figs. 8.26, 8.76-8.78, 8.85-8.87) in which woodland species like Anguispira
strongylodes or Carychium mexicanum become less abundant through time and
cosmopolitan, drought-resistant species like Oligyra orbiculata become more abundant
late in the sequence (Fig. 8.46). This is a long-term trend that persists throughout the
stratigraphic section and crosscuts strata. Aquatic snails are also less common later in the
sequence, although this could be due to increasing elevation of the floodplain surface
above the channel bed. The ordination studies seem to arrange the species chiefly along a
gradient of varying moisture dependence. None of the numerical studies seem to sort
them out by body size, shell robustness, or other characteristics.

In Chapter 4, I asked whether the alternating sandy and muddy strata making up
the bench deposits should be considered the result of regional climate variation or the
autochthonous result of localized channel shifting. I suggested that the ecological
signature of organisms preserved in the strata might help to clarify that question. Where
the snail fauna is concerned, the sandy and muddy units do not seem to have an
ecological signature. Adjacent strata are more similar than different (Fig. 8.89), and the
significant trends that can be discerned tend to crosscut strata rather than to link them in
groups.

1224

SUMMARY OF CHAPTER 8
The bench deposits hold the remains of a diverse snail fauna, a fauna adapted to
somewhat greater effective moisture (and probably lower air and water temperatures)
than at present. Many of the species are saprophilous leaf litter dwellers indicating the
presence of a mature, riparian deciduous woodland covering the floodplain and perhaps
the adjacent valley slopes. This is a mesic to dry woodland fauna, but not a wet ground
taxocene like those seen in Pleistocene cienega deposits in the desert west. Hydrological
changes at the end of the Younger Dryas probably stripped out much of this riparian
woodland and the snail populations that lived in the leaf litter, perhaps replacing slowgrowing broad-leafed tree species with faster-growing species adapted to more frequent
and peaked flood events. Regional changes in climate and environment reduced snail
species diversity, causing statewide extirpations of some species (mostly gill-breathing
aquatic or amphibious species) and significant geographic range changes for others.
Valvata tricarinata, a Pleistocene marker species, is the most notable of these deleted
taxa. Typically a lake or cold spring snail, it was probably extirpated when groundwater
temperatures rose at the end of the Younger Dryas. New eurytopic species, more
cosmopolitan and drought–resistant than the deleted stenotopic species, entered from the
south or east to replace the lost taxa. Elements of the Pleistocene fauna (for example,
Oligyra, Rabdotus, and Gastrocopta pellucida) that were better adapted to the drier and
more continental climates of the Holocene tended to increase in proportional
representation through time.

1225

References for Chapter 8
Adams, Scot C. and George H. Fraunfelter
1974

The Composition and Characteristics of the Molluscan Fauna Associated With the
Perry Mastodon of Glen Ellyn, Illinois. Transactions of the Illinois Academy of
Science 67(2):202-208.

Allen, Don and E. P. Cheatum
1961

A Pleistocene Molluscan Fauna Near Byers, Clay County, Texas. Journal of the
Graduate Research Center 29(1):137-169. Southern Methodist University Press.

Amaral, William W. and Dan C. Witter
1973

Some Ecological Interpretations of a Prehistoric Land Snail Fauna, 41 WM 118.
Appendix B (pages 413-432) in Frank W. Eddy, Salvage Archeology in the
Laneport Reservoir District, Central Texas. University of Texas at Austin, Texas
Archeological Survey.

Angelo, Robert T., M. Steve Cringan, and James E. Fry
2002 Distributional Revisions and New and Amended Occurrence Records for
Prosobranch Snails in Kansas. Transactions of the Kansas Academy of Science
105(3-4):246-257.

Arad, Zeev and Tzameret R. Avivi
1998

Ontogeny of Resistance to Desiccation in the Bush-Dwelling Snail Theba pisana
(Helicidae). Journal of Zoology 244(4):515-526. Zoological Society of London.

1226

Baerreis, David A.
1971

Environmental Reconstruction Through Molluscan Remains: A Preliminary
Report on the A. C. Banks Site. Chapter 7 (pages 95-108) in Marshall McKusick
(ed.), Prehistoric Investigations. Office of the State Archaeologist of Iowa, Report
No. 3.

1980

Habitat and Climatic Interpretation Derived from Terrestrial Gastropods at the
Cherokee Sewer Site. Chapter 4 (pages 101-122) in Duane C. Anderson and
Holmes A. Semken, Jr. (eds.), The Cherokee Excavations. Holocene Ecology and
Human Adaptations in Northwestern Iowa. Academic Press.

Baker, Frank C.
1935

Land and Freshwater Mollusca From North Star Lake and Vicinity, Itasca
County, Minnesota. American Midland Naturalist 16(3):257-274.

Baker, Richard G., R. Sanders Rhodes II, Donald P. Schwert, Allan C. Ashworth,
Terence J. Frest, George R. Hallberg, and Jan A. Janssens
1986 A Full-Glacial Biota from Southeastern Iowa, USA. Journal of Quaternary
Science 1(2):91-107.

Balakrishnan, Meena, Crayton J. Yapp, David J. Meltzer, and James L. Theler
2005

Paleoenvironment of the Folsom Archaeological Site, New Mexico, USA
Approximately 10,500 14C YR B.P. as Inferred from the Stable Isotope
Composition of Fossil Land Snail Shells. Quaternary Research 63(1):31-44.

Barnhart, M. Christopher
1989

Evaporative Water Loss from Minute Terrestrial Snails (Pulmonata: Pupillidae).
The Veliger 32(1):16-20.

1227

Basch, Paul F., Philip Bainer and Jerry Wilhm
1961

Some Ecological Characteristics of the Molluscan Fauna of a Typical Grassland
Situation in East Central Kansas. The American Midland Naturalist 66(1):178199.

Baur, Anette and Bruno Baur
1988

Individual Movement Patterns of the Minute Land Snail Punctum pygmaeum
(Draparnaud) (Pulmonata: Endodontidae). The Veliger 30(4):372-376.

Bement, Leland C.
1994

Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices During the Central Texas Archaic.
University of Texas Press.

Bequaert, Joseph C. and Walter B. Miller
1973

The Mollusks of the Arid Southwest. University of Arizona Press.

Blackburn, Tim M. and Kevin J. Gaston
1994

Animal Body Size Distributions: Patterns, Mechanisms and Implications. Trends
in Ecology and Evolution 9(12):441-474.

Blinn, Walter C.
1963

Ecology of the Land Snails Mesodon thyroidus and Allogona profunda. Ecology
44(3):498-505.

1228

Boag, D. A. and W. D. Wishart
1982

Distribution and Abundance of Terrestrial Gastropods on a Winter Range of
Bighorn Sheep in Southwestern Alberta. Canadian Journal of Zoology
60(11):2633-2640.

Bobrowsky, Peter T. and Thomas W. Gatus
1984

Archaeomalacological Significance of the Hall Shelter, Perry County, Kentucky.
North American Archaeologist 5(2):89-110.

Bogan, Arthur E. and Frederick V. Grady
1991 Two Pleistocene Molluscan Faunas From Eastern West Virginia. Pages 189-213
in James R. Purdue, Walter E. Klippel, and Bonnie W. Styles (eds.), Beamers,
Bobwhites, and Blue-Points: Tributes to the Career of Paul W. Parmalee. Illinois
State Museum Scientific Papers, Vol. 23 and University of Tennessee,
Department of Anthropology Report of Investigations No. 52.

Bond, Clell L.
1978

Three Archeological Sites at Hoxie Bridge, Williamson County, Texas. Texas
A&M University, Anthropology Laboratory, Report No. 43.

Bovbjerg, Richard V., Roger L. Dusil, and Rebecca L. Broer
1982 The Gastropods of Lake West Okoboji, Iowa, Twenty Years Later. Proceedings
of the Iowa Academy of Science 89(2):62-67.

Branson, Branley A.
1960

Gastropoda of the Rob and Bessie Welder Wildlife Foundation Refuge, San
Patricio County, Texas. Southwestern Naturalist 5(3):143-159.

1229

1961a The Recent Gastropoda of Oklahoma, III. Terrestrial Species: Pupillidae,
Carychiidae, Stobilopsidae and Oligyridae. Proceedings of the Oklahoma
Academy of Science 41:45-69.
1961b The Recent Gastropoda of Oklahoma. Part II. Distribution, Ecology and
Taxonomy of Fresh-Water Species, with Description of Helisoma travertina,
sp. nov. Oklahoma State University Publication 58(17).
1963

The Recent Gastropoda of Oklahoma, V. Terrestrial Species, Valloniidae,
Achatinidae and Succineidae. Proceedings of the Oklahoma Academy of Science
43:73-87.

1967

Notes on and Measurements of River-Drift Snails from Texas. The Texas Journal
of Science 19(3):292-300.

1969 Distribution Records and Annotations for Some Arkansas, Missouri and Kansas
Mollusks. Transactions of the Kansas Academy of Science 72(3):386-393.
1992

Gastropods From the Second Spring Deposit, Hajny Mammoth Site. Chapter 11
(pages 101-102) in Don G. Wyckoff, Brian J. Carter, Peggy Flynn, Larry D.
Martin, Branley A. Branson, and James L. Theler, Interdisciplinary Studies of the
Hajny Mammoth Site, Dewey County, Oklahoma. Oklahoma Archeological
Survey, University of Oklahoma, Studies of Oklahoma’s Past No. 17.

Branson, Branley A. and Donald L. Batch
1970

An Ecological Study of Valley-Forest Gastropods in a Mixed Mesophytic
Situation in Northern Kentucky. The Veliger 12(3):333-350.

Branson, Branley A., John Taylor, and Constance Taylor
1962

A Pleistocene Local Fauna From Caddo and Canadian Counties, Oklahoma.
Oklahoma Geology Notes 22(11):280-295.

Brister, Ronald C., John W. Armon and David H. Dye
1982

American Mastodon Remains and Late Glacial Conditions at Nonconnah Creek,
Memphis, Tennessee. Memphis State University, Anthropological Research
Center, Occasional Papers 10.
1230

Brown, Kenneth M.
2002

Snails From the Quarter-Inch and Eighth-Inch Screens. Appendix F (pages 212275) in Dale Hudler, Keith Prilliman, and Thomas Gustavson, The Smith Creek
Bridge Site (41 DW 270) A Terrace Site in De Witt County, Texas. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin, Studies in
Archeology 35 and Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of
Transportation, Archeology Studies Program, Report No. 17.

2003

Mollusks From the Pavo Real Site. Appendix 3 (pages 267-275) in Michael B.
Collins, Dale B. Hudler, and Stephen L. Black, Pavo Real (41 BX 52): A
Paleoindian and Archaic Camp and Workshop on the Balcones Escarpment,
South-Central Texas. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of
Texas at Austin, Studies in Archeology 41, and Environmental Affairs Division,
Texas Department of Transportation, Archeology Studies Program, Report 50.

Brown, Kenneth M. and Sheila M. Hughes
2003

Snail Remains (sic) Associated With the Rice’s Crossing Site (41 WM 815).
Appendix D (pages121-137 in Russell K. Brownlow, Archeological
Investigations at 41 WM 815, A Blackland Prairie Site, Williamson County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin,
Studies in Archeology 36; and Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Department, Archeological Studies Program, Report 23.

Burch, John B.
1955

Some Ecological Factors of the Soil Affecting Land Snails in Virginia. The
Nautilus 69(2):62-69.

1956

Distribution of Land Snails in Plant Associations in Eastern Virginia. The
Nautilus 70(2):60-64.

1962

How to Know the Eastern Land Snails. Pictured-Keys for Determining the Land
Snails of the United States Occurring East of the Rocky Mountain Divide.
Dubuque, Wm. C. Brown Company, Publishers.

1231

Burch, J. B. and Younghun Jung
1987

A Review of the Classification, Distribution and Habitats of the Freshwater
Gastropods of the North American Great Lakes. Walkerana 2(8):233-291.

Burch, J. B. and Timothy A. Pearce
1990 Terrestrial Gastropoda. Chapter 9 (pages 201-309) in Daniel L. Dindal (ed.), Soil
Biology Guide. John Wiley & Sons.

Burch, J. B. and John L. Tottenham
1980

North American Freshwater Snails. Species List, Ranges and Illustrations.
Walkerana, No. 1.

Burch, J. B. and Amy S. Van Devender
1980

Identification of Eastern North American Land Snails. The Prosbranchia,
Opisthobranchia and Pulmonata (Actophila). Museum of Zoology and
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan.

Bush, M. B.
1988

The Use of Multivariate Analysis and Modern Analogue Sites as an Aid to the
Interpretation of Data from Fossil Mollusc Assemblages. Journal of
Biogeography 15(5-6):849-861.

Cain, A. J.
1983 Ecology and Ecogenetics of Terrestrial Molluscan Populations. Chapter 14 (pages
597-647) in W. D. Russell-Hunter (ed.), The Mollusca. Vol. 6, Ecology.
Academic Press.

1232

Cheatum, Elmer P.
1934a Arboreal Behavior of Helicina orbiculata tropica “Jan” Pfr. The Nautilus
47(4):147-148.
1934b Limnological Investigations of Respiration, Annual Migratory Cycle, and
Other Related Phenomena in Fresh-Water Pulmonate Snails. Transactions of
the American Microscopical Society 53(4):348-407.

Cheatum, E. P. and Don Allen
1963

An Ecological Comparison of the Ben Franklin and Clear Creek Local Molluscan
Faunas in Texas. Journal of the Graduate Research Center 31(3):174-179.
Southern Methodist University Press.

1965

Pleistocene Land and Fresh Water Mollusks from North Texas. Sterkiana 18:116.

1966

Ecological Significance of the Fossil Freshwater and Land Shells From the
Domebo Mammoth Kill Site. Pages 36-43 in Frank C. Leonhardy (ed.), Domebo:
A Paleo-Indian Mammoth Kill in the Prairie-Plains. Great Plains Historical
Association, Contributions of the Museum of the Great Plains No. 1.

Cheatum, Elmer P. and Charles E. Burt
1931

An Annotated List of the Snails of Ellis County, Texas. The American Midland
Naturalist 12(9):329-340.

Cheatum, Elmer P. and Richard W. Fullington
1971

The Aquatic and Land Mollusca of Texas. Dallas Museum of Natural History,
Bulletin 1. Part One: The Recent and Pleistocene Members of the Gastropod
Family Polygyridae in Texas.

1973

The Aquatic and Land Mollusca of Texas. Dallas Museum of Natural History,
Bulletin 1. Part Two: The Recent and Pleistocene Members of the Pupillidae and
Urocoptidae (Gastropoda) in Texas.

1233

Cheatum, Elmer P. and Bob H. Slaughter
1966

Notes on the Alluvial History of the Lampasas River, Texas. Journal of the
Graduate Research Center 35:48-54. Southern Methodist University Press.

Clayton, Lee
1961

Late Wisconsin Mollusca from Ice-Contact Deposits in Logan County, North
Dakota. Proceedings of the North Dakota Academy of Science 15:11-18,

Coney, C. Cliff, Wallace A. Tarpley, John C. Warden and Jerry W. Nagel
1982

Ecological Studies of Land Snails in the Hiwassee River Basin of Tennessee,
U.S.A. Malacological Review 15:69-106.

Conkin, James E. and Barbara M. Conkin
1962

Pleistocene Berclair Terrace of Medio Creek, Bee County, Texas. Bulletin of the
American Association of Petroleum Geologists 46(3):344-353.

Conkin, James E., Barbara M. Conkin, and William T. Mason, Jr.
1962

Pleistocene Snails from San Patricio County, Texas. Transactions of the Kentucky
Academy of Science 23:25-50.

Cook, A.
2001

Behavioural Ecology: On Doing the Right Thing, in the Right Place at the Right
Time. Chapter 13 (pages 447-487) in G. M. Barker (ed.), The Biology of
Terrestrial Molluscs. CABI Publishing.

Correa Sandoval, Alfonso
1997 Caracoles Terrestres (Mollusca: Gastropoda) de Iturbide, Nuevo León, México.
Revista de Biologia Tropical 44(3):137-142.
1234

2003

Gastrópodos Terrestres del Noreste de México. Revista de Biologia Tropical
51(Suppl. 3):507-522.

Coulter, John C., Glen L. White, and Frank G. Nordlie
1963 Habitat Specificity in Land Snails. Proceedings of the Minnesota Academy of
Science 30(2):116-119.

Couri, Claydon C.
1976

Temperature Related Shell Variation in Holocene Gastrocopta procera
(Gastropoda: Pulmonata) From the Continental United States, A Biometric
Analysis. Unpublished MS thesis, Kent State University.

Crook, Wilson W., Jr. and R. K. Harris
1957

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas, and Associated
Faunal Material. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 28:7-97.

Crowl, Todd A. and Gary D. Schnell
1990

Factors Determining Population Density and Size Distribution of a Freshwater
Snail in Streams: Effects of Spatial Scale. Oikos 59(3):359-367.

Cvancara, A. M.
1975 Aquatic Malacogeography of North Dakota. Proceedings of the North Dakota
Academy of Science 27(Part II):68-82.

Damuth, John
1981

Population Density and Body Size in Mammals. Nature 290(5808):699-700.

1235

Davies, Paul
1998

Numerical Analysis of Subfossil Wet-Ground Molluscan Taxocenes from
Overbank Alluvium at Kingsmead Bridge, Wiltshire. Journal of Archaeological
Science 25(1):39-52.

Davies, P., C. H. Gale and M. Lees
1996

Quantitative Studies of Modern Wet-Ground Molluscan Faunas from Bossington,
Hampshire. Journal of Biogeography 23:371-377.

Davies, P. and C. J. Grimes
1999

Small-Scale Spatial Variation of Pasture Molluscan Faunas Within a Relic
Watermeadow System at Wylye, Wiltshire, U.K. Journal of Biogeography
26(5):1057-1063.

Davis, Jack R.
1980

Species Composition and Diversity of Benthic Macroinvertebrates of Lower
Devil's River, Texas. Southwestern Naturalist 25(3):379-384.

Dawley, Charlotte
1947

Distribution of Aquatic Mollusks in Minnesota. The American Midland Naturalist
38(3):671-697.

Devore, Cynthia H.
1975

The Molluscan Fauna of the Illinoian Butler Spring Sloth Locality from Meade
County, Kansas. Pages 19-28 in G. R. Smith and N. E. Friedland (eds.), Studies
on Cenozoic Paleontology and Stratigraphy in Honor of Claude W. Hibbard.
Museum of Paleontology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

1236

Dexter, Ralph W.
1956

Comparison of the Gastropod Fauna in the Drainage Systems of Champaign
County, Illinois. The American Midland Naturalist 55(2):363-368.

Dillon, Robert T., Jr., John D. Robinson, Thomas P. Smith and Amy R. Wethington
2005

No Reproductive Isolation Between Freshwater Pulmonate Snails Physa virgata
and P. acuta. The Southwestern Naturalist 50(4):415-422.

Douglas, Charles L.
1963

Population Analyses, Variation and Behavior of Anguispira alternata alternata.
Transactions of the Kansas Academy of Science 66(2):186-194.

Drake, Robert J.
1975

Fossil Nonmarine Molluscs of the 1961-63 Llano Estacado Paleoecology Study.
Pages 201-245 in Fred Wendorf and James J. Hester, Late Pleistocene
Environments of the Southern High Plains. Southern Methodist University,
Publication of the Fort Burgwin Research Center, No. 9.

Dundee, Dee S.
1957 Aspects of the Biology of Pomatiopsis lapidaria (Say) (Mollusca: Gastropoda:
Prosbranchia). Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan, Miscellaneous
Publications 100.

Elwell, Adela S. and Martin J. Ulmer
1971 Notes
on the Biology of Anguispira
Endontidae). Malacologia 11(1):199-215.

1237

alternata

(Stylommatophora:

Espey, Huston & Associates
1976

Baseline Survey of the Terrestrial Ecology of the Coleto Creek Power Plant and
Cooling Reservoir Site. Document No.7674, Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.
(Austin) prepared for Central Power and Light Company (Corpus Christi).

Evans, John G.
1972

Land Snails in Archaeology. With Special Reference to the British Isles. Seminar
Press.

Evans, J. G., P. Davies, R. Mount and D. Williams
1992

Molluscan Taxocenes from Holocene Overbank Alluvium in Central Southern
England. Chapter 7 (pages 65-91) in Stuart Needham and Mark G. Macklin (eds.),
Alluvial Archaeology in Britain. Oxbow Monograph 27. Oxbow Books.

Foster, Thural D.
1936

Size of Shell in Land Snails of the Genus Polygyra. American Midland Naturalist
17(6):978-982.

Fox, Daniel E.
1979

Archaeological Investigations of Two Prehistoric Sites on the Coleto Creek
Drainage, Goliad County, Texas. University of Texas at San Antonio, Center for
Archaeological Research, Archaeological Survey Report 69.

Franzen, Dorothea S.
1982

Succinea avara Say from the Southern Great Plains of the United States. The
Nautilus 96(2):82-88.

1238

Franzen, Dorothea S. and A. Byron Leonard
1947

Fossil and Living Pupillidae (Gastropoda: Pulmonata) in Kansas. The University
of Kansas Science Bulletin 31(part II, No. 15).

Fullington, Richard W.
1974 Two New Land Gastropods From Texas (Zonitoides and Stenotrema). The
Nautilus 88(4):91-93.
1978a Mollusca. Pages 108-113 in Jack T. Hughes and Patrick S. Willey,
Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Office of
the State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report 24.
1978b The Recent and Fossil Freshwater Gastropod Fauna of Texas. Unpublished PhD
dissertation, North Texas State University.
1987

Invertebrate Faunal Remains. Pages 46-57 in Daniel E. McGregor and Jeffery
Bohlin, Excavations at 41 FT 193, The Perry Site, in Daniel E. McGregor and
James E. Bruseth, Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the Prairie Margin: Site
Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology. Richland Creek Technical
Series, Vol. III, Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth
and Man, Southern Methodist University.

1995

Molluscan Remains Recovered From Site 41 DT 59, Cooper Lake, Texas.
Appendix H (pages H-1 to H-7) in Maynard B. Cliff, Melissa M. Green, Steven
M. Hunt, and David Shanabrook, Archeological Test Excavations at Two
Prehistoric Sites (41 DT 59 and 41 DT 247) at Cooper Lake, Delta County,
Texas, 1994. Geo-Marine, Inc., Miscellaneous Report of Investigations 90.

2001

Gastropod Analysis. Appendix G (pages 106-112) in Richard B. Mahoney and
Steve A. Tomka, National Register Eligibility Testing of 41 MM 340 and 41 MM
341, Along Little River, Milam County, Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 303
and Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Department,
Archeological Studies Program, Report 30.

2002a Gastropod Remains. Chapter 13 (pages 685-693) in Richard A. Weinstein (ed.),
Archaeological Investigations at the Guadalupe Bay Site (41 CL 2): Late Archaic
Through Historic Occupation Along the Channel to Victoria, Calhoun County,
Texas, Vol. II. Baton Rouge, Coastal Environments, Inc.

1239

2002b Terrestrial Gastropods From the 1995 Bulk Sampling at the Gaulding Site, 41 JF
27. Appendix F (pages 122-125) in Lawrence E. Aten and Charles N. Bollich,
Late Holocene Settlement in the Taylor Bayou Drainage Basin: Test Excavations
at the Gaulding Site (41 JF 27), Jefferson County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin, Studies in Archeology 40 and
Texas Archeological Society, Special Publication 4.

Fullington, Richard W. and Kate Fullington
1982a Molluscan Faunas From Delaware Canyon. Chapter V (pages 95-116) in C. Reid
Ferring (ed.), The Late Holocene Prehistory of Delaware Canyon, Oklahoma.
North Texas State University, Institute of Applied Sciences, Contributions in
Archaeology, No. 1.
1982b Molluscan Fauna Tables. Appendix D (Volume 3, pages D-1 to D-50) in T. R.
Hays (compiler, editor), Archaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel
Reservoir Districts, Central Texas. Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied
Sciences, North Texas State University.

Fullington, Richard W. and William L. Pratt, Jr.
1974

The Aquatic and Land Mollusca of Texas. Dallas Museum of Natural History,
Bulletin 1. Part Three: The Helicinidae, Carychiidae,
Achatinidae,
Bradybaenidae, Bulimulidae,
Cionellidae, Haplotrematidae, Helicidae,
Oreohelicidae, Spiraxidae, Streptaxidae, Strobilopsidae, Thysanophoridae,
Valloniidae (Gastropoda) in Texas.

Gallo, Gregory J., Bernard Fried, and Charles W. Holliday
1984 Effects of Desiccation on Survival and Hemolymph Osmolality of the Freshwater
Snail, Helisoma trivolvis. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology, Part A,
78A(2):295-296.

1240

Gardner, Karen M.
2000

Invertebrates From the Bessie Kruze Site. Appendix III (pages 221-226) in LeRoy
Johnson, Life and Death as Seen at the Bessie Kruze Site (41 WM 13) on the
Blackland Prairie of Williamson County, Texas. Environmental Affairs Division,
Texas Department of Transportation, Archeology Studies Program, Report No.
22.

Gaskin, Bobbie and David Bass
2000

Macroinvertebrates Collected From Seven Oklahoma Springs. Proceedings of the
Oklahoma Academy of Science 80:17-23.

Getz, Lowell L.
1974

Species Diversity of Terrestrial Snails in the Great Smoky Mountains. The
Nautilus 88(1):6-9.

Getz, Lowell L. and George W. Uetz
1994

Species Diversity of Terrestrial Snails in the Southern Appalachian Mountains,
U.S.A. Malacological Review 27:61-74.

Goodfriend, Glenn A.
1992

The Use of Land Snail Shells in Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction. Quaternary
Science Reviews 11(6):665-685.

Grey House Publishing
2000

Weather America. A Thirty-Year Summary of Statistical Weather Data and
Rankings. Lakeville, Connecticut, Grey House Publishing.

1241

Gugler, Carl W.
1963

The Eggs and Egg-Laying Habits of Some Midwestern Land Snails. Transactions
of the Kansas Academy of Science 66(2):195-201.

Hall, Stephen A.
n.d.

Paleoenvironmental Synthesis of Hominy Creek Valley: Pollen and Land Snail
Evidence. Pages 44-55 in Donald O. Henry, The Prehistory and
Paleoenvironment of Hominy Creek Valley 1978 Field Season. Skiatook Lake
Project, Laboratory of Archaeology, Department of Anthropology, University of
Tulsa.

Herrman, Sheila A. and Willard N. Harman
1975 Population Studies on Helisoma anceps (Menke) (Gastropoda: Planorbidae). The
Nautilus 89(1):5-11.

Hershler, Robert and Fred G. Thompson
1996 Redescription of Paludina integra Say, 1821, Type Species of Genus Cincinnatia
(Gastropoda: Hydrobiidae). Journal of Molluscan Studies 62:33-55.

Hibbard, Claude W. and Dwight W. Taylor
1960

Two Late Pleistocene Faunas From Southwestern Kansas. University of
Michigan, Contributions From the Museum of Paleontology 16(1):1-223.

Hoff, C. Clayton
1962

Some Terrestrial Gastropoda From New Mexico. The Southwestern Naturalist
7(1):51-63.

1242

Horne, Francis R.
1973

The Utilization of Foodstuffs and Urea Production by a Land Snail During
Estivation. The Biological Bulletin. Lancaster, Pennsylvania, The Marine
Biological Laboratory.

Horst, Thomas J. and R. R. Costa
1971

Distribution Patterns of Five Selected Gastropod Species from McCargo Lake.
The Nautilus 85(2):38-43.

Hotopp, Kenneth P.
2002 Land Snails and Soil Calcium in Central Appalachian Mountain Forest.
Southeastern Naturalist 1(1):37-44.

Hubricht, Leslie
1952

The Fossil Snail Eggs of the Loess. The Nautilus 66(1):33-34.

1960

Pomatiopsis lapidaria on the Southern Atlantic Coastal Plain, With Remarks on
the Status of P. praelonga and P. hinkleyi. The Nautilus 74(1):33-34.

1962

Land Snails From the Pleistocene of Southern Texas. Sterkiana 7:1-3

1964 Two Eastern Land Snails New to Texas. The Nautilus 78(1):31-32.
1972

Gastrocopta armifera (Say). The Nautilus 85(3):73-78.

1976

Notes on Some Land Snails of the Eastern United States. The Nautilus 90(3):104107.

1983

The Genus Praticolella in Texas (Polygyridae:Pulmonata).
25(3):244-250.

1985

The Distributions of the Native Land Mollusks of the Eastern United States.
Fieldiana: Zoology New Series 24. Field Museum of Natural History,
Publication 1359.

1243

The

Veliger

Hudak, Curtis M.
1984 Paleoecology of an Early Holocene Faunal and Floral Assemblage From the
Dows Local Biota of North-Central Iowa. Quaternary Research 21(3):351-368.

Hudler, Dale B.
2000

Modeling Paleolandscapes in Central Texas. Unpublished PhD dissertation,
University of Texas at Austin.

Hutchinson, G. E. and Robert H. MacArthur
1959

A Theoretical Ecological Model of Size Distributions Among Species of Animals.
The American Naturalist 93(869):117-125.

Hylander, Kristoffer, Christer Nilsson, and Tove Göthner
2004 Effects of Buffer-Strip Retention and Clearcutting on Land Snails in Boreal
Riparian Forests. Conservation Biology 18(4):1052-1062.

Jass, Christopher N., Jim I. Mead, Amy D. Morrison, and Larry D. Agenbroad
2002

Late Pleistocene Mollusks from the Southern Black Hills, South Dakota. Western
North American Naturalist 62(2):129-140.

Johannessen, Lars E. and Torstein Solhøy
2001 Effects of Experimentally Increased Calcium Levels in the Litter on Terrestrial
Snail Populations. Pedobiologia 45(3):234-242.

Johnson, Eileen, Vance T. Holliday, and Raymond W. Neck
1982

Lake Theo: Late Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Data and New Plainview
(Paleoindian) Date. North American Archaeologist 3(2):113-137.
1244

Jokinen, Eileen H.
1978

The Aestivation Pattern of a Population of Lymnaea elodes
(Gastropoda:Lymnaeidae). American Midland Naturalist 100(1):43-53.

(Say)

Kadmon, Ronen and Joseph Heller
1998

Modelling Faunal Responses to Climatic Gradients With GIS: Land Snails as a
Case Study. Journal of Biogeography 25(3):527-539.

Kaplan, Michael F. and W. L. Minckley
1960 Land Snails From the Doe Run Creek Area, Meade County, Kentucky. The
Nautilus 74(2):62-65.

Karlin, Edward J.
1961

Ecological Relationships Between Vegetation and the Distribution of Land Snails
in Montana, Colorado and New Mexico. American Midland Naturalist 65(1):6066.

Karson, Miranda A.
1999

Movement Patterns in the Land Snail Anguispira alternata. Unpublished MS
thesis, Michigan State University (Zoology).

Kidwell, Susan M.
2002 Time-Averaged Molluscan Death Assemblages: Palimpsests of Richness,
Snapshots of Abundance. Geology 30(9):803-806.

Kingston, Newton
1966

Observations on the Laboratory Rearing of Terrestrial Molluscs. American
Midland Naturalist 76(2):528-532.
1245

Kirby, Foster E. and Richard L. Reeder
1980

Gastropod Analysis. Pages 460-488 in Donald O. Henry, Foster E. Kirby,
Anne B. Justen, and Thomas R. Hays, The Prehistory of Hog Creek: An
Archaeological Investigation of Bosque and Coryell Counties, Texas. Laboratory
of Archaeology, Department of Anthropology, University of Tulsa.

Klippel, Walter E. and William B. Turner
1991

Terrestrial Gastropods From Glade Sere and the Hayes Shell Midden in Middle
Tennessee. Pages 177-187 in James R. Purdue, Walter E. Klippel, and Bonnie W.
Styles (eds.), Beamers, Bobwhites, and Blue-Points: Tributes to the Career of
Paul W. Parmalee. Illinois State Museum Scientific Papers, Vol. 23 and
University of Tennessee, Department of Anthropology Report of Investigations
No. 52.

Kralka, Robert A.
1986

Population Characteristics of Terrestrial Gastropods in Boreal Forest Habitats.
The American Midland Naturalist 115(1):156-164.

Labaune, Corinne and Frédéric Magnin
2001

Land Snail Communities in Mediterranean Upland Grasslands: The Relative
Importance of Four Sets of Environmental and Spatial Variables. Journal of
Molluscan Studies 67(4):463-474.

La Rocque, Aurele
1968 Pleistocene Mollusca of Ohio. State of Ohio, Department of Natural Resources,
Division of Geological Survey, Bulletin 62, Part 3.
1970 Pleistocene Mollusca of Ohio. State of Ohio, Department of Natural Resources,
Division of Geological Survey, Bulletin 62, Part 4.

1246

Larkin, Thomas J. and George W. Bomar
1983

Climatic Atlas of Texas. Texas Department of Water Resources, LP-192.

Lauriol, B., E. Deschamps, L. Carrier, W. Grimm, R. Morlan, and B. Talon
2003 Cave Infill and Associated Biotic Remains as Indicators of Holocene
Environment in Gatineau Park (Quebec, Canada). Canadian Journal of Earth
Sciences 40(6):789-803.

Leonard, A. Byron
1959

Handbook of Gastropods in Kansas. University of Kansas, Museum of Natural
History, Miscellaneous Publication No. 20.

Leonard, A. Byron and John C. Frye
1962 Pleistocene Molluscan Faunas and Physiographic History of Pecos Valley in
Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas, Report of
Investigations 45.

Leonard, A. Byron and C. Raymond Goble
1952

Mollusca on the University of Kansas Natural History Reservation. The
University of Kansas Science Bulletin 34(2):1013-1055.

Lindholm, Jay J. T.
1979 The Gastropods of the Upper San Marcos River and Their Trematode Parasites.
Unpublished MS thesis, Southwest Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas.

1247

Logsdon, Willard T.
1967

An Ecological Survey of the Recent Land and Fresh Water Gastropods of
Kaufman County, Texas. Unpublished MA thesis (Biology), Southern Methodist
University.

López, Al and A. M. Pérez
1998

Nuevos Registros de Caracoles Terrestres en Nicaragua: Vertigo milium,
Gastrocopta pentodon, y Strobilops strebeli. Revista de Biologia Tropical
46(1):167-168.

Lynott, Mark J.
1978

An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney, Texas.
Archaeology Research Program, Research Report
115, Department of
Anthropology, Southern Methodist University.

MacMillan, Gordon K.
1940

A Monographic Study of the Snails of the Genera Anguispira and Discus of North
America, Exclusive of Mexico. Annals of the Carnegie Museum 27:371-426.

McClain, Craig R.
2004 Connecting Species Richness, Abundance and Body Size in Deep-Sea
Gastropods. Global Ecology and Biogeography 13(4):327-334.

McClure, Polley A.
1970

Physical Environmental Stability as a Determinant of Size of the Tolerance-Niche
and Population Characteristics of Two Land Snails (Mesodon roemeri, Bulimulus
dealbatus). Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.

1248

McClure, William L. and Raymond W. Neck
1987 Vertebrate and Molluscan Remains Recovered From a Site on the Murchison
Ranch, Waller County (41 WL 15). Journal of the Houston Archeological Society
87:20-22.

McGee, Paul L.
1965

Distribution and Ecology of the Terrestrial Mollusks of the Texas Coastal
Counties. Unpublished MS thesis, University of Houston (172 pp.).

McMahon, Robert F.
1975

Effects of Artificially Elevated Water Temperature on the Growth,
Reproduction and Life Cycle of a Natural Population of Physa virgata Gould.
Ecology 56(5):1167-1175.

McMahon, Thomas A. and John T. Bonner
1983

On Size and Life. New York, Scientific American Library.

Machin, John
1975

Water Relationships. Chapter 4 (pages 105-163) in Vera Fretter and J. Peake
(eds.), Pulmonates. Vol. 1, Functional Anatomy and Physiology. Academic
Press.

Mackie, Gerald L. and Linda A. Flippance
1983

Intra- and Interspecific Variations in Calcium Content of Freshwater Mollusca in
Relation to Calcium Content of the Water. Journal of Molluscan Studies
49(3):204-212.

1249

Malek, Emile A.
1969

Studies on “Tropicorbid” Snails (Biomphalaria: Planorbidae) From the Caribbean
and Gulf of Mexico Areas, Including the Southern United States. Malacologia
7(2-3):183-209.

Malof, Andrew F.
2004

Invertebrate Faunal Remains. Pages 48-61 in Daniel J. Prikryl, Andrew F. Malof,
and Glenn T. Goode, Limited Test Excavations at 41 BT 37 LCRA Double Horn
Resource Area, Burnet County, Texas. Lower Colorado River Authority, Cultural
Resource Report No. 11.

Martin, Konrad and Michael Sommer
2004a Effects of Soil Properties and Land Management on the Structure of Grassland
Snail Assemblages in SW Germany. Pedobiologia 48(?):193-203.
2004b Relationships Between Land Snail Assemblage Patterns and Soil Properties in
Temperate-Humid Forest Ecosystems. Journal of Biogeography 31(4):531-545.

Martin, Scott M.
2000

Terrestrial Snails and Slugs (Mollusca: Gastropoda) of Maine. Northeastern
Naturalist 7(1):33-88.

Mead, Jim I.
1991

Late Pleistocene and Holocene Molluscan Faunas and Environmental Changes in
Southeastern Arizona. Pages 215-226 in James R. Purdue, Walter E. Klippel, and
Bonnie W. Styles (eds.), Beamers, Bobwhites, and Blue-Points: Tributes to the
Career of Paul W. Parmalee. Illinois State Museum Scientific Papers, Vol. 23 and
University of Tennessee, Department of Anthropology Report of Investigations
No. 52.

1250

Metcalf, Artie L.
1962 Gastropods of Cowley County, Kansas. Transactions of the Kansas Academy
of Science 65(2):275-289.
1984

Land Snails (Gastropoda: Pulmonata) From Cimarron County, Oklahoma. Texas
Journal of Science 36(1):53-64.

1997

Land Snails of New Mexico From a Historical Zoogeographic Point of View.
Pages 71-108 in Artie L. Metcalf and Richard A. Smartt, Land Snails of New
Mexico. New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science, Bulletin 10.

Metcalf, Artie L. and Richard A. Smartt
1997 Land Snails of New Mexico: A Systematic Review. Pages 1-69 in Artie L.
Metcalf and Richard A. Smartt (eds.), Land Snails of New Mexico, New Mexico
Museum of Natural History and Science, Bulletin 10.

Meyrick, R. A.
2001

The Development of Terrestrial Mollusc Faunas in the ‘Rheinland Region’
(Western Germany and Luxembourg) During the Lateglacial and Holocene.
Quaternary Science Reviews 20(16-17): 1667-1675.

2002

Holocene Molluscan Faunal History and Environmental Change at Kloster Mühle,
Rheinland-Pfalz, Western Germany. Journal of Quaternary Science 18(2):121132.

Meyrick, R. A. and R. C. Preece
2001

Molluscan Successions from Two Holocene Tufas Near Northampton, English
Midlands. Journal of Biogeography 28(1):77-93.

Miller, Barry B.
1966

Five Illinoian Molluscan Faunas From the Southern Great Plains. Malacologia
4(1):173-260.
1251

Miller, Barry B., Russell W. Graham, Alan V. Morgan, Norton G. Miller, William D.
McCoy, Donald F. Palmer, Alison J. Smith, and J. J. Pilny
1994

A Biota Associated With Matuyama-Age Sediments in West-Central Illinois.
Quaternary Research 41(3):350-365.

Moine, Olivier, Denis-Didier Rousseau, Dominique Jolly, and Marc Vianey-Liaud
2002

Paleoclimatic Reconstruction Using Mutual Climatic Range on Terrestrial
Mollusks. Quaternary Research 57(1):162-172.

Moore, Roger G., Linda W. Ellis, G. Lain Ellis, Laurie S. Zimmerman, William L.
McClure, and Saul Aronow
1996

Data Recovery Excavations at Sites 41 FB 199 and 41 FB 200 in Joseph S.
and Lucie H. Cullinan Park Fort Bend County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigations 153.

Murphy, M. J.
2002

Observations on the Behaviour of the Australian Land Snail Hedleyella falconeri
(Grey, 1834) (Pulmonata: Caryodidae) Using the Spool-and-Line Tracking
Technique. Molluscan Research 22(2):149-164.

Murray, Scott, Scott Jinnette, and Frank Moseley
1976

Aquatic Ecology, Coleto Creek Project. Unpublished report prepared for Central
Power and Light Company. Copy on file with the author (used with permission).

Neck, Raymond W.
n. d. a Analysis of Mollusca of the Berger Bluff Site (41 GD 30A). Unpublished
typescript, June, 1982, 8 pages, on file with the author.
n. d. b Annotated List of Snails Recovered From Berger Bluff Site (41 GD 30A).
Handwritten manuscript (6 pages) on file with the author.
1252

1977

New County Records of Land Snails of Texas. Sterkiana 65-66:5-6.

1978

Molluscan Remains and Environmental Interpretations at the Lake Theo Folsom
Site (41 BI 70), Caprock Canyons State Park, Briscoe County, Texas. Appendix
(pages 92-98) in Billy R. Harrison and Kay L. Killen, Lake Theo: A Stratified,
Early Man Bison Butchering and Camp Site, Briscoe County, Texas.
Archeological Investigations, Phase II. Canyon, Panhandle-Plains Historical
Museum.

1981a Non-Marine Gastropod Fauna from an Early Holocene Mammoth-Bison Site in
the Llano Mesteno of South Texas. Texas Conchologist 17:93-96.
1981b Environmental Reconstruction Involving Terrestrial Gastropods from an
Archeological Site (41 TV 368), Travis County, Texas. Texas Conchologist
18:20-21.
1981c Analysis of Gastropods Recovered from Archeological Sites in the Palmetto
Bend Reservoir. Appendix II (pages 123-137) in Research Staff of the Texas
Archeological Survey, Phase III: Prehistoric Archeological Research Within
Palmetto Bend Reservoir, Jackson County, Texas. University of Texas at
Austin, Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 82 (Palmetto Bend
Reservoir Series, Vol. 6).
1982

Valvata tricarinata (Say) in Early Holocene of Texas Coastal Plain. Texas
Conchologist 18:46-48.

1984

Living Terrestrial Gastropods From the Eastern Caprock Escarpment, Texas. The
Nautilus 98(2):68-74.

1985

Paleoecological Implications of a Holocene Fossil Assemblage Lower Rio
Grande, Cameron County, Texas. Texas Memorial Museum, Pearce-Sellards
Series 41.

1986a Molluscan Remains and Environmental Reconstruction at the Kenyon
Rockshelter, 41 TV 742. Appendix E (pages 425-437) in Robert J. Coffman,
Margaret C. Trachte, and Michael B. Collins, Cultural Ecology of the Kenyon
Rockshelter and the Cunningham Site, Canyon Creek Development, Travis
County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations 53.
1986b Analysis of Molluscan Remains Recovered From 41 FB 34, Fort Bend Co.,
Texas. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 86:8-10.
1987a Changing Holocene Snail Faunas and Environments Along the Eastern Caprock
Escarpment of Texas. Quaternary Research 27(3):312-322.

1253

1987b Terrestrial Gastropod Succession in a Late Holocene Stream Deposit in South
Texas. Quaternary Research 27(2):202-209.
1987c Analysis of Gastropods. Appendix 3 (pages 167-172) in Elton R. Prewitt, Susan
V. Lisk, and Margaret A. Howard, National Register Assessments of the Swan
Lake Site, 41 AS 16, on Copano Bay, Aransas County, Texas. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations 56.
1987d Analysis of 1982 Molluscan Fauna. Appendix III (pages III-1 to III-13) in
David O. Brown, Richard P. Watson, and Jack M. Jackson, Archeology at
Aquilla Lake 1978-1982 Investigations, Vol. III. University of Texas at Austin,
Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 81.
1990a Ecological Analysis of the Living Molluscs of the Texas Panhandle. American
Malacological Bulletin 8(1):9-18.
1990b Molluscan Remains from Skyline Shelter, Val Verde County, Texas (41 VV
930). Appendix (pages 68-76 and unpaginated tables) in Solveig Turpin, Skyline
Ranch Project. Draft report submitted to the Texas Historical Commission.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
1990c Dense Colonies of the South Texas Tree Snail (Rabdotus
Endangered Phenomenon? Atala 16(1-2):1-5.

alternatus): An

1991

Modern Environment and Paleoenvironmental Reconstructions. Appendix 1
(pages 179-188) in LeRoy Johnson, Jr., Early Archaic Life at the Sleeper
Archaeological Site, 41 BC 65 of the Texas Hill Country Blanco County,
Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
Highway Design Division, Publications in Archaeology, Report 39.

1992

Late Pleistocene and Holocene Environments in the Medina Valley of Texas as
Revealed by Nonmarine Molluscs (14 pages, no pagination). In Rolfe D.
Mandel and S. Christopher Caran (eds.), Late Cenozoic Alluvial Stratigraphy
and Prehistory of the Inner Gulf Coastal Plain, South-Central Texas.
Guidebook, 10th Annual Meeting, South-Central Friends of the Pleistocene .

1994a Analysis of Molluscan Remains from 41 DL 270. Pages 221-235 in Dana
Anthony and David O. Brown (eds.), Archeological Investigations in the Denton
Creek Floodplain. Data Recovery Excavations at 41 DL 270, Denton and Dallas
Counties, Texas. Hicks & Company Archeology Series 37.
1994b Interpretation of Molluscan Remains from the Mustang Branch Site (41 HY 209).
Chapter 16 (pages 491-497) in Robert A. Ricklis and Michael B. Collins,
Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley,
Hays County, Texas. University of Texas at Austin, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, Studies in Archeology 19.
1254

1994c Snail Fauna of the Buckhollow Site. Appendix II (pages 293-294) in LeRoy
Johnson, The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk. As Seen From the
Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41 KM 16, of Kimble County, Texas. Office of
the State Archeologist, Report 38.
1994d Analysis of Gastropod Remains from Prehistoric Wells at Sulphur Springs
Site 41 MT 21. Appendix E (Pages E-1 to E-4) in J. Michael Quigg, Charles D.
Frederick, and Christopher Lintz, Sulphur Springs Draw: Geoarchaeological
and Archaeological Investigations at Sulphur Draw Reservoir, Martin County,
Texas. Mariah Associates, Inc., Technical Report 776.
1995a Extirpation of Quaternary Molluscs of the Southern High Plains – An Ecological
Model of Favorable Activity Periods. Pages 283-287 in Eileen Johnson (ed.),
Ancient Peoples and Landscapes. Lubbock, Museum of Texas Tech University.
1995b Molluscan Remains. Pages 59-67 in Vance T. Holliday, Stratigraphy and
Paleoenvironments of Late Quaternary Valley Fills on the Southern High Plains.
Geological Society of America, Memoir 186.
1996

Survey of Land Snails of Meridian State Park, Texas. Appendix B (pages 95-97)
in Carole A. Medlar, Dan K. Utley, and S. Christopher Caran, Texas Central: The
Cultural Resources of Meridian State Park Bosque County, Texas. Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department, Cultural Resource Program, Report 96-7.

2001

Molluscan Remains From the Aubrey Site. Chapter 7 (pages 89-102) in C. Reid
Ferring, The Archaeology and Paleoecology of the Aubrey Clovis Site (41 DN
479) Denton County, Texas. University of North Texas, Department of
Geography, Center for Environmental Archaeology.

2002

Land Snails and Environmental Reconstruction of the Anthon Site (41 UV 60).
Appendix 1 (pages 257-267) in Glenn T. Goode, The Anthon Site: A Prehistoric
Encampment in Southern Uvalde County, Texas. Texas Department of
Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Archeological Studies Program,
Report 38.

Neck, Raymond W. and Harold L. Schramm, Jr.
1992

Freshwater Molluscs of Selected Playa Lakes of the Southern High Plains of
Texas. Southwestern Naturalist 37(2):205-209.

1255

Nekola, Jeffrey C.
2002

Effects of Fire Management on the Richness and Abundance of Central North
American Grassland Land Snail Faunas. Animal Biodiversity and Conservation
25(2):53-66.

2003

Large-Scale Terrestrial Gastropod Community Composition Patterns in the Great
Lakes Region of North America. Biodiversity Research 9(1):55-71.

Nekola, Jeffrey C. and Tamara M. Smith
1999

Terrestrial Gastropod Richness Patterns in Wisconsin Carbonate Cliff
Communities. Malacologia 41(1):253-269.

Oliver, George V. and William R. Bosworth, III
1999

Rare, Imperiled, and Recently Extinct or Extirpated Mollusks of Utah. A
Literature Review. Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, Publication 99-29.

Ondina, P., J. Hermida, A. Outeiro, and S. Mato
2004

Relationships Between Terrestrial Gastropod Distribution and Soil Properties in
Galicia (NW Spain). Applied Soil Ecology 26(1):1-9.

Örstan, Aydin
1999

Land Snails of Black Hill Regional Park, Montgomery County, Maryland.
Maryland Naturalist 43(3-4):20-24.

Oughton, John
1948

A Zoogeographical Study of the Land Snails of Ontario. University of Toronto
Studies, Biological Series No. 57. University of Toronto Press.

1256

Peacock, Evan and Rebecca Melsheimer
2003

Terrestrial Gastropods from Archaeological Contexts in the Black Belt Province
of Mississippi. Pages 27-47 in Evan Peacock and Timothy Schauwecker (eds.),
Blackland Prairies of the Gulf Coastal Plain. Nature, Culture, and Sustainability.
University of Alabama Press.

Pierce, Harold G.
1987

The Gastropods, With Notes on Other Invertebrates. Chapter 6 (pages 41-48) in
Eileen Johnson (ed.), Lubbock Lake. Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern
High Plains. College Station, Texas A&M University Press.

1993 On the Identification of Fossil Terrestrial Gastropod Eggshells. The Nautilus
107(2):79-80.

Pilsbry, Henry A.
1940

Land Mollusca of North America (North of Mexico). Vol. I, Part 2. The Academy
of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Monograph 3.

1946

Land Mollusca of North America (North of Mexico). Vol. II, Part 1. The Academy
of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Monograph 3.

1948

Land Mollusca of North America (North of Mexico). Vol. II, Part 2. The Academy
of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Monograph 3.

Platt, Thomas R.
1980

Observations on the Terrestrial Gastropods in the Vicinity of Jasper, Alberta
(Canada). The Nautilus 94(1):18-19.

Pratt, William L., Jr.
1981 A Revision of the Land Snail Genus Polygyra in Texas. Unpublished PhD
dissertation (Biology), University of Arizona.

1257

Prescott, David R. C. and Medea M. Curteanu
2004

Survey of Aquatic Gastropods in the Central Parkland Subregion of Alberta.
Alberta Species at Risk Report 92.

Prior, David J.
1985

Water-Regulatory Behaviour in Terrestrial Gastropods. Biological Reviews of the
Cambridge Philosophical Society 60(3):403-424.

Randolph, Polley A.
1973

Influence of Environmental Variability on Land Snail Population Properties.
Ecology 54(4):933-955.

Reigle, Norman J.
1963

Northern Records of Gastrocopta procera. The Nautilus 77(1):16-18.

Riggle, Roy S.
1976

Quantitative Examination of Gastropod and Soil Relationships in an Oak-Hickory
Forest in the Lower Illinois Valley Region. Sterkiana 62:1-17.

Rollins, Harold B.
1993 Environmental Indicators from Gastropod Shells. Pages 40-49 in Mark A.
McConaughy (ed.), Rench A Stratified Site in the Central Illinois River Valley.
Illinois State Museum Reports of Investigations No. 49.

Rousseau, Denis-Didier
1991

Climatic Transfer Function from Quaternary Molluscs in European Loess
Deposits. Quaternary Research 36(2):195-209.
1258

Rousseau, Denis-Didier, Nicole Limondin, and Jean-Jacques Puissegur
1991

Palaeomalacological Proxy Data for European Holocene Climates. Pages 175-189
in Burkhard Frenzel (ed.), Evaluation of Climate Proxy Data in Relation to the
European Holocene. Gustav Fischer Verlag.

1993

Holocene Environmental Signals from Mollusk Assemblages in Burgundy
(France). Quaternary Research 40(2):237-253.

Rousseau, Denis-Didier, Nicole Limondin, Frederic Magnin, and Jean-Jacques Puissegur
1994

Temperature Oscillations Over the Last 10,000 Years in Western Europe
Estimated from Terrestrial Mollusc Assemblages. Boreas 23(1):66-73.

Rousseau, Denis-Didier, Richard Preece, and Nicole Limondin-Lozouet
1998

British Late Glacial and Holocene Climatic History Reconstructed from Land
Snail Assemblages. Geology 26(7):651-654.

Schultz, Gerald E. and Elmer P. Cheatum
1970

Bison occidentalis and Associated Invertebrates From the Late Wisconsin of
Randall County, Texas. Journal of Paleontology 44(5):836-850.

Shaw, Leslie C., Raymond W. Neck, James L. Theler, and Michael B. Collins
1998

The Molluscan Paleoassemblage. Chapter 37 in Michael B. Collins
(assembler, editor), Wilson-Leonard An 11,000-Year Archeological Record of
Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Volume V, Special Studies. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin, Studies in
Archeology 31; and Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs
Department, Archeological Studies Program, Report 10.

Simmons, Frank
1954

Notes on Texas Bulimulus. The Nautilus 68(1):20-23.
1259

1956

Snails of the Burnt Rock Middens. Central Texas Archeologist 7:48-51.

Simon, Peter R.
1977

Climatic Significance of Nonmarine Mollusks from the Illinoian Stage of the
Pleistocene from Southwestern Kansas and Northwestern Oklahoma. Unpublished
MS thesis, Kent State University.

Slaughter, Bob H.
1964

Geological Survey and Appraisal of the Paleontological Resources of the Cooper
Reservoir Basin Delta and Hopkins Counties Texas. Southern Methodist
University Press, Fondren Science Series 6.

1965

Preliminary Report on the Paleontology of the Livingston Reservoir Basin, Texas.
Southern Methodist University Press, Fondren Science Series 10.

Slaughter, Bob H., Wilson W. Crook, Jr., R. K. Harris, D. C. Allen, and Martin Seifert
1962

The Hill-Shuler Local Faunas of the Upper Trinity River, Dallas and Denton
Counties, Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas, Report of
Investigations No. 48.

Slaughter, Bob H. and John T. Thurmond
1965

Geological and Paleontological Survey of the Bardwell Reservoir Basin Ellis
County, Texas. Southern Methodist University Press, Fondren Science Series 8.

Stewart, J. D.
1989 Paleontology and Paleoecology of the 1987 Excavation of the North Cove Site, 24
HN 164. Chapter 5 (pages 63-80) in Mary J. Adair (ed.), Archaeological
Investigations at the North Cove Site Harlan County Lake, Harlan County,
Nebraska. Final Report, Kaw Valley Engineering & Development, Inc., Junction
City, Kansas and Parkville, Missouri.
1260

Stiven, Alan E.
1989 Population Biology of Two Land Snails (Mesomphix spp.): Variation Among Six
Southern Appalachian Sites With Differing Disturbance Histories. Oecologia
79(3):372-382.

Strenth, Ned E. and Thomas G. Littleton
2000 A Revision of the Land Snail Helicina orbiculata (Gastropoda: Prosobranchia)
From the Southern United States. Texas Journal of Science 52(1):25-32.

Ström, Lotta
2004

Long-Term Effects of Riparian Clear-Cutting – Richer land Snail Communities in
Regenerating Forests. Unpublished Degree Thesis in Biology, Umeå University,
Sweden.

Taylor, Dwight W.
1960

Late Cenozoic Molluscan Faunas From the High Plains. USGS Professional
Paper 337. US Department of the Interior, United States Geological Survey.

Theler, James L.
1992

Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction From Gastropods at the Fifth Spring Deposit,
Hajny Mammoth Site. Chapter 12 (pages 103-108) in Don G. Wyckoff, Brian J.
Carter, Peggy Flynn, Larry D. Martin, Branley A. Branson, and James L. Theler,
Interdisciplinary Studies of the Hajny Mammoth Site, Dewey County, Oklahoma.
Oklahoma Archeological Survey, University of Oklahoma, Studies of Oklahoma’s
Past, No. 17.

1997

The Modern Terrestrial Gastropod (Land Snail) Fauna of Western Wisconsin’s
Hill Prairies. The Nautilus 110(4):111-121.

1261

2003a Paleoenvironmental Interpretation From Burnham Site Gastropods: 1989 Results.
Chapter 11 (pages 169-189) in Don G. Wyckoff, James L. Theler and Brian J.
Carter (compilers, editors), The Burnham Site in Northwestern Oklahoma:
Glimpses Beyond Clovis? Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History
(University of Oklahoma) and Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Memoir 9.
2003b Gastropods From the 1992 Excavations at the Northwest Exposure. Chapter 12
(pages 191-193) in Don G. Wyckoff, James L. Theler and Brian J. Carter
(compilers, editors), The Burnham Site in Northwestern Oklahoma: Glimpses
Beyond Clovis? Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History (University of
Oklahoma) and Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Memoir 9.

Theler, James L., Don G. Wyckoff, and Brian J. Carter
2004 The Southern Plains Gastropod Survey: The Distribution of Land Snail
Populations in an American Grassland Environment. American Malacological
Bulletin 18(1-2):1-20.

Thompson, Fred G.
1984

The Freshwater Snails of Florida. A Manual for Identification. Gainesville,
University of Florida Press.

Todd, Jesse
2002

Mollusca From Brady, Texas. Appendix 1 (pages 21-27) in S. Alan Skinner,
Archaeological Delimitation of Site 41 MK 38 Brady, Texas. AR Consultants,
Inc., Cultural Resources Report 2002-56.

Tompa, Alex
1976

Fossil Eggs of the Land Snail Genus Vallonia (Pulmonata: Valloniidae). The
Natuilus 90(1):5-7.

1262

Treece, Abby C.
1992

A Study of Five Annular Burned Rock Middens From the O. H. Ivie Reservoir,
West Central Texas. Unpublished MA thesis, University of Texas at Austin.

Tuthill, Samuel J.
1961

A Molluscan Fauna and Late Pleistocene Climate in Southeastern North Dakota.
Proceedings of the North Dakota Academy of Science 15:19-26.

Tuthill, Samuel J., Lee Clayton and Wilson M. Laird
1964

A Comparison of a Fossil Pleistocene Molluscan Fauna From North Dakota With
a Recent Molluscan Fauna From Minnesota. The American Midland Naturalist
71(2):344-362.

Van der Schalie, Henry and Lowell L. Getz
1962 Reproductive Isolation in the Snails, Pomatiopsis lapidaria and P. cincinnatiensis.
The American Midland Naturalist 68(1):189-191.

Varza, D. and A. P. Covich
1995 Population Fluctuations Within a Spring Community. Journal of the Kansas
Entomological Society 68(2 Supplement):42-49.

Voellinger, Leonard R. and Robert L. Gearhart, II
1987

Mitigation of Impacts at Three Burned Rock Midden Sites in the Block House
Creek Development Williamson County, Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.,
Document No. 860188.

1263

Vollan, Thor Inge
2003

Predicting Abundance, Species Richness and Assemblages of Woodland Snails
Using Environmental Variables. Unpublished Thesis Candidatus Scientiarum
(Zoology), University of Bergen, Norway.

Wallen, I. E. and Paul Dunlap
1955

Further Additions to the Snail Fauna of Oklahoma. Proceedings of the Oklahoma
Academy of Science 34:76-80.

Webb, Glenn R.
1964

Stream Dispersal of Mesodon. The Nautilus 78(1):30.

Weinstein, Richard A. and James P. Whelan, Jr.
1987

Archaeological Testing at Three Sites in the Wallisville Lake Project Area, Trinity
River Delta, Chambers County, Texas. Coastal Environments, Inc.

Wells, P. V. and J. D. Stewart
1987 Cordilleran-Boreal Taiga and Fauna on the Central Great Plains of North
America, 14,000-18,000 Years Ago. American Midland Naturalist 118(1):94-106.

Wiesenborn, William D.
2003

White Desertsnail, Eremarionta immaculata (Gastropoda: Pulmonata), Activity
During Daylight After Winter Rainfall. Southwestern Naturalist 48(2):202-207.

Wilhm, Jerry L.
1970

Some Aspects of Structure and Function of Benthic Macroinvertebrate
Populations in a Spring. The American Midland Naturalist 84(1):2-35.
1264

Willimon, Edward L.
1972

New Local Faunas and Paleoecology (Pleistocene) of North Central Texas. The
Texas Journal of Science 23(4):449-469.

Wu, Shi-Kuei and Charles A. Jones
1978

Molluscs From the Hudson-Meng Site. Appendix II (pages 193-210) in Larry D.
Agenbroad, The Hudson-Meng Site: An Alberta Bison Kill in the Nebraska High
Plains. Privately reprinted by the author.

Wulfkuhle, Virginia A.
1986

Investigations Into the Prehistory of the Upper Clear Fork of the Brazos River
Fisher and Jones Counties, Texas. Unpublished MA thesis, University of Texas at
Austin.

Wyckoff, Don G., James L. Theler, and Brian J. Carter
1997

Southern Plains Gastropods: Modern Occurrences, Prehistoric Implications.
Final Report to the National Geographic Society, Grant #5477-95.

Yang, J., P. F. Karrow, and G. L. Mackie
2001 Paleoecological Analysis of Molluscan Assemblages in Two Marl Deposits in the
Waterloo Region, Southwestern Ontario, Canada. Journal of Paleolimnology
25:313-328.

Zimmerman, Laurie
1996

Invertebrate Remains. Appendix IX (12 pages) in Roger G. Moore, Test
Excavations at Sites 41 FB 199, 41 FB 200 and 41 FB 202 in Cullinan Park, Fort
Bend County, Texas. Vol. II. Moore Archeological Consulting, Report of
Investigations 92.
1265

