Chapter 4: The Depositional Record
INTRODUCTION
This chapter will describe the immediate geologic context of the site, describe the
complete stratigraphic section (including the upper deposits), examine the diagenetic
history of the sediments, and explore some possible reasons for the cyclic banding visible
in the cutbank. Some of this has already been touched upon in Chapter 1, and I will refer
to some of the illustrations in that chapter. A key question in this chapter will be to
determine which elements of depositional patterning might be due to climatic change and
which might be due to fluvial behavior that is intrinsic to Coleto Creek itself. Before
addressing these questions, though, it may be appropriate to review some of the
biological properties of riparian habitats.

THE FLOODPLAIN ENVIRONMENT
Archeologists often dig in open upland settings, where surfaces may be stable and
sediments heavily weathered, or where slow degradation or colluviation are common.
Bioturbation and soil development are the dominant processes, biotic remains (bone,
shell, charcoal) are often poorly preserved, and the archeological record is likely to be
compressed and mixed. Floodplain settings are different. One has only to look at the
complex, multi-layered profiles of deep alluvial sites like Devil's Mouth (Johnson
1964:Fig. 5), Arenosa Rockshelter (Patton and Dibble 1982:Fig. 5), or Peace Point
(Stevenson 1985:Figs. 4, 5) to see that the geoarcheological potential for complexity,
preservation (of stratigraphy and biota), and time resolution is likely to be much higher
(Collins 1995:374 ff). Floodplain environments are dynamic. The flood zone is a conduit
400

for sediment, organic matter, plants, animals, and information — in the sense that
changes in environmental conditions either upstream or downstream may be
communicated along a riparian corridor. An example would be a downstream increase in
channel gradient causing an episode of channel incision that gradually works its way
headward. Floodplain environments may be spatially complex; much of the spatial
structure is determined by energy gradients associated with stream activity. On the broad
flat, floodplains of large rivers, minor elevation differences and hydroperiod (duration of
flooding) can determine vegetation type (Shankman 1993, Wharton 1980), while channel
migration history may determine the age of tree stands (Brown 1997:Fig. 4.5) or the
location of successional assemblages (Brown 1997:Fig. 4.7). A classic study by Shelford
(1954, especially Fig. 4) illustrates this spatial complexity. Floodplains of small streams
like Coleto Creek cannot be expected to resemble the Mississippi bottoms, but may have
shown past spatial complexity in their own right.

Floodplains, especially wooded floodplains, have been characterized as having
greater primary productivity (Brown 1997:104; Sharitz and Mitsch 1993:323, 344) and
plant biomass, and greater biodiversity (Gregory et al. 1991:544) than surrounding
uplands. If true, this ought to be of interest to archeologists since productive and diverse
habitats ought to be both an attraction to prehistoric human populations and a ready
source of identifiable "ecofacts." For example, Hall (1998) has suggested that floodplains
in the Gulf coastal plain are exceptionally productive biologically (Hall's examples
actually include at least three different trophic levels, though). However, these
generalizations deserve scrutiny. Because the Coleto Creek floodplain appears to have
been wetter and more heavily wooded in the Pleistocene, I have looked mostly at
floodplains in the southeastern US for comparative data. Annual biomass production
401

varies widely among Southeastern floodplains, from about 681 to 1607 g/m2/yr in cases
examined by Brinson and others (1981:Table 11). Basal area in upland forests is
controlled by precipitation, while riparian forests are largely independent of precipitation
(Brinson et al. 1981:Fig. 8) and may or may not have greater basal area than upland
forests.

Comparing floodplain and upland areas on scales of productivity and biodiversity
is more difficult than might be imagined, because there are few ecological studies that
encompass both areas, and because many studies focus only on trees and shrubs, ignoring
herbaceous or grassy vegetation. A recent study by Megonigal and others (1997)
compares productivity of transects in Louisiana and South Carolina floodplain forests
with various upland forests. Figure 4.0 is adapted from their Figure 3. They found that net
primary productivity was lower on "wet" than "intermediate" and "dry" floodplain sites,
and that productivity of upland forests was not significantly different from "intermediate"
floodplain sites. Another study on the Sangamon River in Illinois (Fig. 4.1, B) found that
biomass was actually higher in the upland forest zone than on the floodplain (Johnson
and Bell 1976). A second study on the Sangamon River found that bird/mammal
population density and biomass and bird species diversity were higher on the floodplain
than on the adjacent upland (Blem and Blem 1975).

Ideally, to see how floodplains compare with uplands in terms of productivity
and biodiversity, we would like to examine some transects that begin at the streambank,
move across the floodplain, up the valley wall, and across the uplands to the nearest
drainage divide (Fig. 4.1, A). Unfortunately, at least in Texas, there seem to be no cases
to study. A number of transects of riparian habitats have been done, but they nearly
402

always stop at the valley edge (Fig. 4.1, C-H), presumably either because the study was
originally defined as a survey of riparian vegetation only, or because farming and
ranching has drastically changed the vegetation outside the valley itself. In most cases,
vegetation inventories are for trees, shrubs, or vines only. In cases where gallery forests
are embedded in a prairie landscape, the species richness of grasses and forbs might
actually be far higher on upland prairie, but if the study is confined to woody vegetation,
the prairie is not included.

Figure 4.0. Primary Production for Upland and Floodplain Habitats Compared. Box-andwhisker plots of aboveground net primary production (g/m2/yr) for various
upland sites in North Carolina and elsewhere (N = 22, 8, respectively) and
for floodplain sites in Louisiana and South Carolina (after Megonigal et al.
1997:Fig. 3). Centerline = median, box = 25th-75th percentiles, whiskers =
5th-95th percentiles. These plots show that the upland woodlands are nearly
as productive as the “intermediate” floodplain sites.
403

Figure 4.1 (following page). Cross-Valley Traverses of Plant Species Richness and Basal
Area. A, an idealized transect that begins at the streambank and extends all
the way to a flanking drainage divide; B, Sangamon River, Illinois, trees
(Johnson and Bell 1976); C, Neches River in Hardin, Polk, Tyler, Jasper
County; trees, shrubs, vines (Marks and Harcombe 1975); D, Spring Creek,
Dallas County; trees, shrubs, vines (Nixon et al. 1991); E, Sabinal River,
Bandera County to Uvalde County; trees, shrubs, vines; Wood and Wood
(1989:Fig. 2); F, Frio River, Real County to Live Oak County; trees, shrubs,
vines (Wood and Wood 1988:Fig. 2);G, San Antonio River, Wilson County;
trees, shrubs, vines; Bush and Van Auken (1984:Fig. 2);H, Leona River,
Uvalde County to Frio County; trees, shrubs, vines (Wood and Wood
1989:Fig. 2). Dash-dot lines indicate basal area (square meters per hectare)
in all cases except panel B, which shows biomass.

404

405

Figure 4.1, C-H, shows cross-valley transects of species richness and basal area
for woodland on various Texas floodplains. Most of these are for woody vegetation only,
and except for the Neches River floodplain (C), stop at the valley edge. Species richness
refers to the number of woody plant taxa counted in a given sample plot along a transect
from the stream bank to the upslope end of the transect. These plots show that both the
diversity and cross-valley spatial distribution of woody plants vary considerably for
different rivers and creeks. Perhaps the only common pattern is the reduction of species
richness (and sometimes basal area) immediately along the stream bank. The same
pattern can be seen in transects from Oregon and California (Gregory et al. 1991:Fig. 7).
This is a typically Holocene pattern that occurs because flood stress restricts streambank
woodland to black willow and a few other fast-growing species that can regenerate after
flood devastation. A Pleistocene flood regime that featured less flashy discharge would
probably promote a flattening of all these curves.

The pre-inundation vegetation survey for Coleto Creek Reservoir (Espey, Huston
and Associates 1976:Tables 2-2 to 2-6 and 2-15 to 2-17) shows the following results:

“bottomland forest” (actually wooded terrace)

31 taxa

“brushland”

48-60 taxa

“grassland”

45-47 taxa

Some of this information has already been reproduced in Tables 1.6 and 1.7 of the
present study (which, however, omit "zero coverage" taxa). Although true mesic
406

floodplain is not represented in the Espey Huston study, it is clear that the grassland and
brushland habitats actually have more plant taxa than the wooded terrace due to the
addition of many more kinds of forbs. The most diverse sample, with 60 taxa, was
recorded in springtime.

This brief survey suggests that whether floodplain environments are truly more
productive and vegetatively diverse than uplands depends on landscape context and
season. A wooded floodplain embedded in a wooded or scrub brush upland landscape
might have slightly greater productivity and species richness than the upland forest,
especially if it lies in a subhumid to semiarid climatic region where the upland woodland
depends on precipitation, but the floodplain woodland is subsidized by runoff. In the dry
season, even the minimal amount of stream base flow supplying the floodplain forest
might give it an advantage by maintaining the floodplain water table.

On the other hand, where a floodplain gallery woodland is embedded in a prairie
upland, the upland prairie might be expected to have a much higher diversity of plants,
chiefly forbs, especially in springtime. Primary productivity would probably also
fluctuate much more from season to season in an upland prairie.

All of the foregoing has concerned primary productivity — that is, plants. What
about higher trophic levels? For small mammals, the Espey Huston baseline study
produced the following results (Espey, Huston and Associates 1976:Table 3-19):

407

Number of small
mammals trapped

Number of
taxa

“lowland forest”

1

1

“upland forest”

1

1

“brush piles”

27

2

“brushy pasture”

19

4

“open pasture”

27

2

This is probably typical of small mammal trapping studies in general: rodents
are most abundant where there is abundant ground cover and plenty of forage in the form
of forbs and seed-producing grasses, and least abundant in closed-canopy woodland,
where shade inhibits the growth of ground cover. In a study in Johnson County, riparian
woodland had four species, upland juniper woodland had one species, and grassy upland
areas had two to five species (Hanchey and Wilkins 1998:Table 1). A study at
Fairfield Lake in Freestone County produced these data (Wilkins and Broussard
2000:Table 1):
Number of small
mammals/100 trapnights

Number of
taxa

Creekbottom forest

1.94

5

Marsh

7.73

4

Upland post oak forest

0.18

1

Pine forest

0.65

3

Grassland

0.64

3

In a study adjacent to Caddo Lake in Harrison County, four habitat types were
studied: bottomland hardwood, sideslope hardwood, mixed slope pine-hardwood, and
408

upland pine. Bird diversity and abundance were greatest in bottomland hardwoods, but
mammal diversity was greatest in upland pine, mammal abundance greatest in mixed
pine-hardwood (Daniel and Fleet 1999).

In other environments, such as the Pacific Northwest, small mammal species
richness, population size, and body weight may be greater in riparian than in upland areas
(Doyle 1990). In trapping studies that might typically record only four to seven species of
small mammals, the contrasts in species richness between riparian and upland habitats
obviously will not be so great as for plants. A more significant pattern is for population
sizes of some species to fluctuate dramatically from season to season or year to year
(Grant, Carothers, and Gidley 1985).

By comparison, for some larger rivers of the southeastern US, Wharton and others
(1981:Tables 4.13-4.16) list the following numbers of species:
Small
mammals

Amphibians/
reptiles

Chattahoochee R. (Georgia)

7

23

Alcovy R. (Georgia) pitfalls

7

12

Alcovy R. (Georgia) traps, etc.

-

18

Congaree Swamp (South Carolina) -

30

Here we have no data for upland habitats, but the numbers at least suggest that
most of the faunal diversity is expressed by amphibians and reptiles, rather than
mammals. In some riparian ecosystems, amphibians and reptiles may outnumber birds
and small mammals (Brode and Bury 1984). The following data on number of forest
409

herpetofauna species come from Harrison County, near Caddo Lake (Fleet and Autrey
1999:Table 1):
Bottomland
hardwoods

Slope
hardwoods

Upslope
pine-hardwoods

Upland
pines

Salamander species

5

3

2

4

Anuran species

11

10

8

8

Turtle species

5

2

1

1

Lizard species

4

4

4

4

Snake species

13

16

13

11

TOTALS

38

35

28

28

Here, floodplain habitats clearly have more species richness than upland pine forests,
because of the greater variety of anurans, turtles, and salamanders in bottomlands.

Snails have different habitat requirements from small mammals. Because they
acquire body water mostly from food and minimally by drinking, most snails are highly
susceptible to water loss and seek either mesic habitats or damper microhabitats that are
embedded in dry habitats. While there are very few published snail censuses to consult, it
is not surprising to find that riparian woodlands tend to have both larger populations and
greater species richness than upland areas. A survey in Oklahoma and New Mexico by
Wyckoff, Theler, and Carter (1997:Table 7) found an average of 6 species (range, 0-12)
and a density of 1142 individuals/m² in riparian woodlands, compared to a mean of 2
(range, 0-6) and density of 280-310 individuals/m² on mesa tops, pastures, and plains. A
survey by Logsdon (1967) in Kaufman County found 23, 10, and 4 taxa on the Trinity
River, Brushy Creek, and Kings Creek floodplains, respectively. Abandoned fields,
410

pastures, and similar habitats had a range of 1-9 species, but typically about 3-5 species. I
will have more to say about these studies in Chapter 8.

If we return to the picture of coastal plain floodplains presented by Hall (1998)
and ask, "Are floodplains more productive and biodiverse than uplands?" we must
conclude the answer is, "It depends." It depends on whether we are talking about plants,
small mammals, or snails. It depends on whether the floodplains are wooded, and
whether grasses and forbs as well as trees, shrubs, and vines are to be inventoried. It
depends on the season, especially where forbs, grasses, or rodents are concerned — for
seasonally migratory species (birds) or animals with high fecundity and short lifespans,
both abundance and diversity will vary by season. It depends on whether wooded
floodplains are embedded in upland prairies or in upland woodland. And it depends on
whether the prevailing climatic regime is moisture-deficient (so that any upland
vegetation is heavily influenced by precipitation rates) or has a moisture surplus, and
whether riparian woodland is subsidized by base flow that is maintained by groundwater
discharge, or is sustained only on runoff from precipitation events.

GRAIN-SIZE ANALYSIS OF SEDIMENTS

THE PHI SCALE
Grain-size analysis uses the Wentworth scale of size grades. This is a logarithmic
scale in which each successively larger size grade is exactly twice as large as the
preceding grade. Size grades are expressed in terms of the phi (φ) scale instead of
millimeters, and since the phi scale is logarithmic, grades coarser than 0.0 phi (coarse
411

sand) take on increasingly negative values, while grades finer than 0.0 phi take on
increasingly positive values (Krumbein 1936). Phi is defined as
φ = -log2 X
where X is the grade limit in millimeters.
All of the gravel grades have negative values, and the higher the negative value,
the coarser the gravel (and this is why grades will always be written here as "1 to 2 phi"
rather than "1-2 phi"). Inspection of Table 4.1 should clarify this for the reader. Analysis
of the Berger Bluff samples was done in 0.5 phi intervals, and by convention, the coarser
grades appear on the left side of the X axis in the histograms. Silt is sediment (usually
fine-grained quartz particles) finer than 4.0 phi, or 0.0625 mm. Clay has been defined
many ways in scientific usage; here it is defined as sediment finer than 8.0 phi (0.0039
mm in size). This is a geological definition of clay (Krumbein and Sloss 1963:Table 4-1;
Folk 1980:24) and I have followed the geological definition in dealing with Berger Bluff
sediments, which have little evidence of pedological alteration. In soil science, the
definition differs slightly. For example, Birkeland (1984:Table 1-3) defines clay as
particles finer than 0.002 mm and silt as finer than 0.02 mm. These are pedological
definitions of silt and clay, as followed by the USDA, and, presumably, all soil labs that
do textural analyses. Sediments analyzed here generally range between -2.5 phi and >9.0
phi, comprising 23 separate measured grades at 0.5 phi intervals.

412

Table 4.1. Wentworth Size Grades for Bench Sediments.
Phi value

Millimeters

Held on:

Held on:

-2.5 φ
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
>9.0

5.66 mm
4.00
2.83
2.00
1.41
1.00
0.71
0.50
0.35
0.25
0.177
0.125
0.088
0.0625
0.044
0.031
0.02210
0.0156
0.0110
0.0078
0.0055
0.0039
0.0028
0.0020
not analyzed
separately

Size grade

Analysis method

N/A*
pebble
granule
granule
very coarse sand
very coarse sand
coarse sand
coarse sand
medium sand
medium sand
fine sand
fine sand
very fine sand
very fine sand
coarse silt
coarse silt
medium silt
medium silt
fine silt
fine silt
very fine silt
very fine silt
clay
clay

N/A*
sieve
sieve
sieve
sieve
sieve
sieve
sieve
sieve
sieve
sieve
sieve
sieve
sieve
pipette
pipette
pipette
pipette
pipette
pipette
pipette
pipette
pipette
pipette

NOTE: "Held on" means that particular grade is held on a sieve with the specified mesh.
For example, coarse sand between 0.5 phi and 1.0 phi is retained on the 1.0 phi sieve, and
has diameters ranging between 0.50 mm and 0.71 mm. In other words, the size grade is
named by its finer limit.
* Except for ro-tapped coarse gravels from N109 E96, all bench sediments analyzed were
finer than -2.5 phi.

413

Sieve and pipette analysis
Because the bench sediments are heavily carbonate-cemented, the sediment
samples (each about 15 g) had to be disaggregated in hydrochloric acid before analysis.
Disaggregation was done very carefully to try to avoid digesting any clasts which
themselves might have been of carbonate composition. Non-bench samples were not
acid-digested. Gravel and sand-sized sediments were partitioned by dry sieving. Silt and
clay-sized sediments were partitioned by pipette analysis. In this kind of analysis, a
measured quantity of the sediment finer than 4.0 phi is blended in solution with distilled
water and sodium hexametaphosphate (to deflocculate the clay particles), then allowed to
settle in a glass cylinder, while 20 ml samples were drawn off by pipette at timed
intervals. The size of the silt and clay particles is estimated with Stokes's Law of settling
velocities. As time passes and the solution clears, successively finer particles of sediment
are left in suspension. For clay particles, the process of drawing off successively finer
samples at logarithmically greater time intervals could go on indefinitely. Since the time
intervals increase exponentially, as a practical matter it is impossible to measure more
than a few of the coarsest clay grades. In the present analysis, only the two coarsest clay
grades (8.0 to 8.5 and 8.5 to 9.0 phi) were measured, since the last named requires eight
hours and 10 minutes of settling time. An important implication is that all of the grain
size histograms shown here essentially have undefined righthand tails. That is, the infinite
number of finest clay grades could only be added together and reported as "clay finer
than 9.0 phi". In practice, I have instead reported the 23 measured grades, plus totals for
gravel, sand, silt, and clay. The actual lab procedure is considerably more complicated
than portrayed here, but is detailed in Appendix 1 (sediment analysis methods).
414

Grain-size statistics
Because the phi conversion translates the logarithmically scaled particle sizes to
an arithmetic scale, the arithmetic mean, standard deviation, skewness, kurtosis, and
coefficient of variation can be computed in conventional fashion (Krumbein 1936:39).
Until the development of the personal computer, most geologists used less precise
graphic but computationally simpler measures (in which graphic means, graphic
standard deviations, and so forth are computed from cumulative curves; Folk 1980).
These remain the most common measures seen in the literature, because grain-size
analysis suddenly fell out of fashion at about the same time the personal computer arrived
in the early 1980s to expedite the computations.

Grain-size statistics for the bench sediments have been computed by the method
of moments, after Krumbein (1936) but with a few differences (see the grain-size
appendix for details). The mean grain size is a measure of sediment fineness (higher
positive values mean finer-grained sediment. The standard deviation is a measure of
sorting (a smaller standard deviation means better sorting). The coefficient of variation is
a measure of sorting that is independent of grain size. Skewness is a measure of departure
from a normal distribution. Positively skewed samples have an excess of coarse grades
and a long tail of fine grades, while negatively skewed samples have an excess of fine
grades and a long tail of coarse grades. A normal distribution has a skewness of zero. All
of the bench samples have negatively skewed distributions, while the upper deposits and
two samples from the Lissie terrace cutbank have positively skewed distributions. In the
field of statistics, there is actually a variety of formulas for computing skewness. The one
used here is based on the difference between the mean and the median:
415

Sk = 3(Xbar-Md)

SD

where Sk = skewness
Xbar = mean grain size
Md = median grain size
SD = standard deviation of grain size

A variety of statistics conceivably could be computed from the available grainsize data, but only the ones italicized in Table 4.2 are of concern here: the proportions of
gravel, sand, silt, and clay; and the mean, standard deviation, skewness, and coefficient of
variation, computed for all grades in a sample (maximum, 23 grades). The number of
grades varies because some samples may not have gravel or coarse sand. Because the
coarsest two clay grades (up to 9 φ) are included in the statistics, the statistics should be
comparable to other analyses using the pedological definition of silt (coarser than 9 φ).
”All grades” means all gravel, sand, silt, and the two coarsest clay grades. When the
proportions for the individual grades are added together, the sum typically amounts to
about 60-80% for the bench samples. The remaining 20-40% represents the clay that
remained in the water column after analysis was finished – the infinite tail of various clay
grades that could not be analyzed because of excessive settling time. Thus, statistics like
mean grain size necessarily disregard nearly all the clay in the sample, but at least the
procedure is consistent across all the samples. For gravel, sand, silt, and clay percentages,
the procedure is different. Here, all the proportions are recalculated so as to sum to 100%
after carbonate is removed. After the gravel, sand, silt, and first two clay grades are added
together, the difference between that sum and 100% is assumed to represent clay plus
some small unknown amount of analytical error.
416

Table 4.2. Potential Grain-Size Statistics for Bench Sediments.
1. Mean, all grades
2. Standard deviation, all grades
3. Skewness, all grades
4. Kurtosis, all grades
5. Coefficient of variation, all grades
6. Mean, sand grades only
7. Standard deviation, sand grades only
8. Skewness, sand grades only
9. Kurtosis, sand grades only
10. Coefficient of variation, sand grades only
11. Mean, silt grades only
12. Standard deviation, silt grades only
13. Skewness, silt grades only
14. Kurtosis, silt grades only
15. Coefficient of variation, silt grades only
16. Proportion of gravel
17. Proportion of sand
18. Proportion of silt
19. Proportion of clay
20. Proportion of fines (silt+clay)
21. Sand/silt ratio
22. Sand/clay ratio
23. Silt/clay ratio
NOTE: This is a list of some possible statistics that could be computed using bench
sediment data. The most important ones are italicized.

Transport modes: how they relate to sediment texture
Sediment coarseness is, for the most part, a measure of the amount of local
energy in the fluvial system. Well-known laws of hydrodynamics define what discharge
velocity is necessary to set a sediment particle in motion and keep it moving (Krumbein
and Sloss 1963:197-203; Leopold, Wolman, and Miller 1964:169-180; Leopold
1994:191-197; Brown 1997:Appendix 1). Coarse sediment in channels moves by traction
417

(rolling or tumbling) along the bottom or by saltation (momentary rebounding above the
bed, usually of somewhat smaller caliber particles), and fine sediment moves in
suspension (fine particles kept aloft in the water column by turbidity). Much of the finest
sediment load also moves in solution as dissolved load also, but we are not concerned
with that here. These same processes — traction, saltation, and suspension — also apply
when streamflow moves out of the channel and spreads over the floodplain in overbank
floods, but unless the flow occupies a new or pre-existing channel across the floodplain,
the first two processes are not likely to be important far beyond the channel bank.
Instead, coarse sediments are likely to remain concentrated near the channel as levee,
crevasse splay, or chute bar deposits, in most cases. Deposition from suspension is
usually the dominant process for overbank flooding, provided the flood is sufficiently
prolonged. Deposition occurs in still or stilling waters. When an overbank flow
encounters a heavily vegetated floodplain (such as the floodplain of Coleto Creek when
the bench sediments were accumulating), the flow may initially change from laminar to
turbulent, which actually prevents deposition, but with further penetration into the
floodplain, the flow is soon stilled, providing the opportunity for fine sediment to drop
out of suspension. Later in this chapter, I will discuss patterns of deposition transverse to
the channel axis in much more detail, and will show that stream scale, vegetation, and
duration of flooding are important variables.

The clay component of the suspended load in streams draining this region is
chiefly montmorillonite. Clays in suspended load samples collected from the Guadalupe
River at Nursery contained 74-82% montmorillonite, with the remainder kaolinite and
illite (Sorenson 1975).

418

A clay particle of diameter 0.0001 mm settles 0.0001 cm/sec, which is 1 foot in
about 3 days. A silt particle with diameter 0.02 mm settles 0.04 cm/sec, which is 1
foot in 10 minutes (Krumbein and Sloss 1963:197).
Because clay minerals form thin, platelike particles, deposition even in very still
water is a slow process. Some quartz grains may even occur in clay-sized grades as well
(Leschak and Ferrell 1988). Even under laboratory conditions (deionized water,
dispersant, and absolutely still solution), it takes the coarsest grade of clay eight hours to
settle 10 cm. Clay deposition, then, is likely to occur naturally only in closed depressions
or in very prolonged, stilled floodwaters that persist for many days. As documented in
Chapter 1 (Figs. 1.41 through 1.45), such conditions are absent in contemporary Coleto
Creek, except for relatively small closed depressions or vegetated creek backwaters. In
my excursions up and down Coleto Creek over the past two decades, I have seen no clay
drapes on floodplain sediments except in closed depressions. Farther downstream,
Morton and McGowen (1980:43) report that "mud deposits are usually destroyed by
desiccation and aeolian erosion. Rare occurrences of thick, homogeneous mud or a
mixture of mud and gravel are concentrated in lenses within chutes and along channel
margins." For larger streams, at least, more sediment is actually transported as suspended
load than as bedload (see Leopold 1994:Figs. 11.9-11.11). Limited studies appear to
show that the Guadalupe River carries a greater suspended load than bedload, by about an
order of magnitude (Holley 1992:Table 3.8.6). In that study, bedload is defined as
sediment between about -3.0 φ and +3.0 φ (pebbles to fine sand; Holley 1992:Table
3.8.7), while suspended load is defined somewhat arbitrarily as about 4.0 to 9.0 φ (silt
and coarse clay; Holley 1992:Table 3.8.5). According to Gomez (1991:89), “bedload will
rarely include sediment that is finer than 01.-0.2 mm in diameter [about 2.25 to 3.25 φ],
because once disturbed these particle sizes go directly into suspension.”
419

There is, of course, a rough correspondence between grain size and transport
mode. Generally speaking, gravel moves by traction, sand by traction and saltation; clay,
silt, and the very finest grades of sand move in suspension. The size grades found in a
deposit may give some idea of the transport history. Visher (1969) attempted to deduce
different transport mechanisms from the size spectrum. He suggests that for fluvial
sediments, 1) the traction load is coarser than about 1.0 φ, 2) the saltation load ranges
from about 1.75 to 2.5 φ, 3) the lower limit of the suspension load ranges from about 2.75
to 3.5 φ (Visher 1969:1093). Presumably, the gaps between these ranges represent mixed
processes. Ashley (1978:Fig. 3) places the upper boundary of traction at about 2 φ.
Other factors, such as grain size inheritance, may influence grain size. A wellknown study by Folk and Ward (1957) of a Brazos River gravel bar in Milam County
showed that the grain-size spectrum in the bar was determined mostly by the parent
material supplying the sand and gravel upstream, and that variations in flow did little to
redistribute the components in the bar itself.

Polymodal sediments
There are some environments (sand beaches, dunes, and lake beds, for example)
characterized by well-sorted sediments (a limited range of size grades). More often,
though, samples may contain distinct subpopulations of sand, silt, and clay (see Ashley
1978:Fig. 6). Polymodal samples like this might, therefore, represent a variety of
different transport modes, or they might simply represent:
1. mixtures of different grades carried in turbulent water, deposited rapidly without
sorting;
420

2. small-scale graded beds (coarse material at the base, fining upward) that represent
waning streamflow, mixed by bioturbation long after deposition;
3. coarser, porous sediments later infiltrated by silt or clay carried either by groundwater
or percolating rainwater.
In the last case, the coarse sediment might document the original transport mode,
while infiltrated clay represents soil-forming processes.

Nearly all the bench sediment samples show some degree of polymodality. Figure
4.2 is a hypothetical example to show how the grain-size modes might relate to the mean,
standard deviation, and possible transport modes.

Parsing these subpopulations into the components contributed by different
transport modes is a worthwhile goal, but perhaps an intractable one. Ashley (1978) tries
to do it using a graphical method advocated by Harding (1949). Harding's method,
developed for biological material, involves creating a lognormal plot on probability
paper, modeling the subpopulations as normal distributions. A simpler compromise might
be to compute separate statistics for the arbitrarily defined sand and silt fractions.

Grain-size statistics: how they relate to transport mode
The mean grain size is a measure of the caliber of the sediment, and therefore of
the amount of energy in the fluvial system, all other factors (such as grain size
inheritance, or diagenesis) being equal. Since it incorporates all of the measured grades,
in most cases the mean does not coincide with the most prominent grain-size mode, and

421

since most bench samples are chiefly sand, the mean is in large part a measure of sand
fineness and abundance (Fig. 4.2).

Figure 4.2. Grain-Size Distribution of a Hypothetical Sample. This imaginary sample is
polymodal and shows what the clay fraction might look like if a more
detailed analysis were possible. Superimposed curves suggest different
transport modes. Areas where tails of curves overlap show some sediment
grades may be transported more than one way. The plotted mean and
standard deviation are not ideal statistics for polymodal samples, and are
biased toward the sand fraction.
422

The standard deviation and coefficient of variation are measures of sorting, which
in large part may be influenced by the degree of separation between different
subpopulations (sand, silt, clay; or traction and suspension loads). Ashley (1978:411)
says flatly that "statistical measures (such as skewness and kurtosis) simply reflect the
relative magnitude and separation of populations." As a general rule, coarser-grained
sediments are deposited more rapidly, with poorer sorting, and finer-grained sediments
are deposited slowly with better sorting, so it is not surprising that plots of grain size
against sorting usually show the two covarying in a quasi-linear way. Poor sorting and
large standard deviations may suggest greater energy in the fluvial system.

Skewness is a measure of departure from the normal distribution. Because the
bench sediments have long tails of silt and clay-sized fractions, all are negatively skewed.
The degree of negative skewness is highly correlated with the mean grain size, so it does
not add much to the characterization of the sediment. Samples with high negative
skewness should indicate a larger proportion of deposition from suspension, and a lower
level of energy in the fluvial system.

Grain-size analysis of Texas sediments and soils
A cursory review of the contract archeology literature shows that grain-size
analysis has been used with increasing frequency in the last few years. I reviewed
examples from the following counties: Titus, Hopkins, Rusk, Montague, Freestone, Leon,
Chambers, Liberty, Harris, Grimes, Coryell, Concho, Coleman, Runnels, Tom Green,
Kent, Garza, and Willacy. Many of these projects are in the Eocene sand belt of east and
423

east-central Texas, where archeologists have resorted to grain-size analysis to correlate
excavations in thick, homogeneous sand sheets. Others are in the Rolling Plains, where
analysis has been used to characterize profiles in river terraces.

Of the studies reviewed, about half are analyses at 0.5 φ intervals, with most of
the rest at 1.0 φ intervals; a few have only percentages of gravel, sand, silt, and clay.
Occasionally, analysis of fines was done by pipette (Nordt and Jacob 1995:160) or by
pipette with centrifuging to extract clay (Mandel 1994:41), but far more commonly,
samples were sent to a soils lab, usually at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee or
Texas A&M University, where soil-science (rather than geological) methods have been
used. This is probably appropriate where the chief interest is in defining paleosols, rather
than sedimentary features. In these cases, analysis was usually by sieving of sand, with
hydrometer analysis of silt and clay. In some cases, the size grades are defined as the
pedological ones mentioned above by Birkeland, but in most cases the grades are not
even defined. It is very rare to find any explicit statement of what constitutes clay. In
some cases, sand was determined by sieving, clay by pipette, and silt was taken as the
difference between the two. Vague allusions indicate that a few studies were apparently
done in-house by CRM firms. A small number of studies report only gravel, sand, silt,
and clay percentages.

The most common method of data reduction is to compute the standard deviation
and mean grain size in phi units, although the method of computation is never explained.
In cases where only the sand fraction is separated into size grades, these statistics are
computed only for the sand component. One study (Rogers, Foster, and Reese-Taylor
1994:Appendix D) reports the graphic mean and standard deviation; the same study (page
424

66) says "this (sic) data is presented graphically in Chapter VII through histograms and
logarithmic probability charts," but the promised plots are missing. A few others do use
log probability plots. One (Skokan et al. 1997) makes extensive use of them, but does not
use the straight-line segments plotted by Visher (1969). Occasionally stratigraphic plots
of sand or clay percentages (Bousman 1992:Figs. 12, 13) or of grain-size means and
standard deviations are used (Fields et al. 1991:Figs. 27, 49, 65, 78). This is the approach
used for the Berger Bluff sediments.

The principal deficiencies in these studies are 1) failure to define grades, 2) failure
to specify lab methods, 3) omission of analysis of fines, 4) omission of summary
statistics, and 5) too many reports that simply list data tables, without stratigraphic plots.

MAGNETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY

Magnetic minerals
Magnetic susceptibility is determined by applying a temporary, artificial magnetic
field to a small sediment sample, and is defined as the ratio of the magnetization induced
in the sample to the strength of the applied field (Gale and Hoare 1991:202). Useful
overviews can be found in Gale and Hoare (1991:201-229), Dalan and Banerjee (1998),
and Maher (1998). The present study uses mass susceptibility (susceptibility normalized
by the dry weight of the sediment sample). An inventory and details of sample
preparation will be found in Appendix 3 (magnetic susceptibility samples).

425

A wide variety of magnetizable iron oxide minerals can be found in sediments
and soils: magnetite (Fe3O4), hematite (Fe2O3), maghemite (gamma Fe2O3), goethite
(alpha FeOOH), lepidocrocite (gamma FeOOH), and others. The principal advantage of
measuring susceptibility is that it can be determined quickly and cheaply, with small
samples. In cases where enhanced susceptibility is associated with organic matter, the
susceptibility signature may remain even where the organic matter has long since
decayed away. The principal disadvantage is one of equifinality: susceptibility can be
enhanced by more than one process, and very often it is not clear which process is
responsible (see Maher 1998:Table 2). Firing of sediments can enhance susceptibility
through the conversion of hematite to magnetite or maghemite (Ellwood et al. 1995), but
there are no indications that firing has altered any of the bench area samples. There are
indications of fire-building by the site's occupants (two documented hearths and
occasional scattered bits of charcoal, fired clay, calcined bone, and heat-crazed chipping
debris) but there are no prominent susceptibility peaks coinciding with these indicators,
even where sample columns were collected less than a meter away from the known
hearths.

The other processes known to be responsible for susceptibility enhancement of
alluvium are pedogenesis and deposition of fine-grained magnetic material as part of the
sediment suspended load (Oldfield 1992). Both processes appear at Berger Bluff: samples
from the modern soil developed on the upper deposits show a typical pedogenic
susceptibility profile, while sample columns from the bench sediments show
susceptibility values that are highly correlated with the silt and clay content of the
sample. Fine-grained magnetic minerals have been shown to be present in suspended load
samples, yielding susceptibility values that are greater than those of gleyed soils, but
426

smaller than those of woodland topsoil (Walling et al. 1979:Table 1). These minerals
may have been created elsewhere as a result of pedogenesis elsewhere, then redeposited
along with the associated silt and clay as soils upstream were eroded. In the extensively
studied deposits of the Chinese loess plateau, both the susceptibility and coefficient of
frequency dependence increase as size grades become finer, peaking in the clay fraction
— and this is true both for paleosols and the interbedded unaltered zones (Zheng et al.
1991:Fig. 1). Apparently, then, the clay fraction is strongly associated with enhanced
magnetic susceptibility, regardless of the transport mechanism.

Susceptible minerals can also be created in situ in sediments by pedogenesis.
Authigenic ultrafine-grained magnetite can be formed by soil weathering (Maher and
Taylor 1988; Dearing et al. 1996). In such cases, the vertical distribution of the
susceptibility values shows a typical "A horizon bulge" (Gale and Hoare 1991:Fig. 4.29;
Maher and Taylor 1988:Fig. 2) in which the values peak just below the surface, then
taper off into the B and C horizons. This trend parallels the typical vertical distribution of
organic carbon as well. Susceptibility samples from the upper deposits at Berger Bluff
show this kind of profile, tapering off to a minimum at about 1.5 m below the ground
surface. The values are also conspicuously higher than those from the bench sediments,
which are carbon-depleted.

According to Maher,
Pedogenic formation of ferrimagnets appears to be favoured in well drained, not
very acidic soils (pH ~5.5-7), on weatherable, Fe-bearing (but often not Fe-rich)
substrates. The amount of magnetic enhancement often shows little correlation
with other soil parameters, with the exception of some positive correlation with
soil organic carbon and cation exchange capacity. The minerals formed by
enhancement are magnetite and, by subsequent oxidation, maghemite. Maghemite
is thus a common component of enhanced soils; it is not formed directly, but as an
427

alteration product of the original mixed Fe2+/Fe3+ spinel, magnetite. Oxidation of
the smallest magnetite grains to maghemite may promote their subsequent
survival in the soil. Ultrafine magnetite may be dissolved even in non-reducing
conditions, due to its structural Fe2+ content; in contrast, the Fe3+ oxides require
reduction for their dissolution (Taylor, pers. commun.). This may explain the
observed link between susceptibility enhancement and a seasonally wet/dry
climate regime (Tite and Linington, 1975), with magnetite formation during
periods of intermittent soil wetness and its oxidation to maghemite in subsequent
dry periods (Maher 1998:47).
Citrate-bicarbonate-dithionite (CBD) treatment is often used for selective removal
of the pedogenic magnetic component. Susceptibility is measured before and after
treatment, and the difference is taken as the pedogenic signal.

Various iron oxides and amorphous manganese oxide compounds as well as
magnetic minerals (chiefly magnetite) can also be synthesized by magnetotactic bacteria,
either in aquatic or damp soil environments (Fassbinder, Stanjek, and Vali 1990; Maher
1998:28-31; Moskowitz, Frankel, and Bazylinski 1993; Mustoe 1981). The
magnetosomes produced are about 40-120 nanometers (a billionth of a meter) long.
Greigite may be produced in sulfidic brackish water environments (Mann et al. 1990).

Iron oxides can also be redistributed by either vadose or phreatic water.
Waterlogged or gleyed soils tend to have low susceptibility values because reducing
conditions dissolve magnetic minerals and keep them in solution. Gleyed soils tend to
have low coefficients of frequency dependence (Xfd, see below) because fine-grained
magnetic material is most easily dissolved (Gale and Hoare 1991:214). This may well be
the cause of reduced susceptibility values in Stratum 1 of the bench deposits.

428

Iron deposition in illuvial horizons will raise susceptibility values, but not Xfd.
Iron content in the bench sediments is variable and somewhat idiosyncratic from
excavation unit to unit. Counts of ferromanganese nodules recovered from the 1/4" screen
do not correlate well with the magnetic susceptibility profiles, possibly because they were
not consistently saved.

Measures and units
For Berger Bluff, magnetic susceptibility is reported in cgs (centimeter / gram /
second units; coulombs) units. Much of the literature elsewhere in the world, especially
in Europe, is reported in SI (Système Internationale units; amperes per meter, tesla). The
two systems can be reconciled by means of the equation

Xcgs = 4 π XSI

where X is the chi value. The chi value, generally defined as the ratio of the
magnetization induced to the strength of the applied field, is defined in practice as

X = (R*7.36)/W

where X = chi (in dimensionless units)
R = susceptibility reading (at low or high frequency)
W = sample weight in grams

429

The Berger Bluff samples were measured on a Bartington MS2 system at two
frequencies: low frequency at 0.465 kHz and high frequency at 4.65 kHz. Thus, for each
sample there is a low-frequency chi value (Xlo) and a high-frequency chi value (Xhi).

The coefficient of frequency dependence (Xfd) is a measure of the extent to which
changing measurement frequency changes the reading, and it is also an indicator of very
fine-grained magnetic material. It is defined as

Xfd = ((Xlo - Xhi)*100)/ Xlo

BERGER BLUFF IN ITS IMMEDIATE GEOLOGIC SETTING
The following assessment of the site setting is based on
1. Identification by Charles Winker of terrace surfaces shown on the USGS Schroeder
7.5' sheet;
2. General observations made by Winker in his thesis (Winker 1979) and during a field
trip to Berger Bluff (December 5, 1979);
3. My own observations and sampling of the cutbank near the site, including two
stratigraphic sections in the Lissie Formation upstream from the site;
4. Observations, profiles, and sampling of backhoe trenches in and around Area B
during the Coleto Creek Flume #3 project.
There are four major geologic units in the immediate vicinity of the site. Some of
these are visible both as mappable surfaces (Table 4.3) and in natural or artificial
exposures that could be examined during fieldwork, while others were not examined in
section during our fieldwork and simply represent surfaces recognized on the USGS or
430

pre-construction topographic maps. From youngest to oldest, these are:
1. Post-Beaumont fill and surface (after Winker 1979; Pleistocene and Holocene);
locally, I recognize an older Upper post-Beaumont (pBU) and a younger Lower postBeaumont (pBL).
2. Beaumont surface (Pleistocene). The Beeville-Bay City Sheet of the Geologic Atlas
of Texas (Barnes 1975) does not show the Beaumont Formation in the immediate
area, but through more detailed mapping in the immediate area, Charles Winker has
identified what appear to be remnants of Beaumont-age Coleto Creek terraces inset
into the Lissie Formation both upstream and downstream from Berger Bluff (Figs.
4.3-4.5)
3. Lissie Formation fill and surface (Pleistocene).
4. Goliad Formation bedrock (Miocene or Miocene/Pliocene) and surface [mapped as
"pre-Lissie surfaces" by Winker (1979:Table 3)]
In addition to these, there are at least two different sets of large meander scarps on the
east side of the creek. These are of unknown antiquity (marked U for "unknown" on Fig.
4.3), but truncate Beaumont and upper post-Beaumont surfaces.

The ravine and Goliad Formation bedrock
Immediately west of the site, and forming its western boundary, a long, relatively
straight, deeply incised ravine cuts north-northeastward into the Lissie terrace sediments
and joins the creek normal to its southern edge (Figs. 1.30, 4.3, 4.8). In the surrounding
countryside, Winker has identified a couple of southwest-northeast trending low fault
scarps (Fig. 1.25) that separate Lissie and pre-Lissie sediments. The ravine is not exactly
parallel to these, but it is fairly linear, suggesting it might have originated as some sort of
stress feature of Quaternary age. This is speculative, however, since there is no physical
evidence of displacement or fracturing in the ravine.
431

Table 4.3. Terrace Heights, USGS Schroeder Quad.
Mean

Standard
deviation

Range

Number of
terraces
tallied
_____________________________________________________________________
post-Beaumont (lower)

10.8 ft
3.30 m

3.4 ft
1.05 m

5-15 ft
1.5-4.6 m

6

post-Beaumont (upper)

20.4 ft
6.22 m

3.2 ft
0.98 m

15-25 ft
4.6-7.6 m

12

Unknown

25 ft, remnants at 35 ft
7.6 m, remnants at 10.7 m

Beaumont

40.0 ft
12.19 m

Lissie

about 65 ft
about 19.81 m

pre-Lissie (Goliad)

about 160-195 ft
about 48.8-59.4 m

7.1 ft
2.16 m

N/A
30-50 ft
9.1-15.2 m

8

40-70 ft
12.2-21.3 m

N/A
N/A

Source: USGS 7.5' Schroeder quad, terrace mapping by Charles Winker, modified by K.
Brown; no field inspection except GD 30-31 area, and Lissie cutbank.

432

Figure 4.3 (following page). Immediate Geologic Context of Berger Bluff. Terrace
surfaces as mapped by Charles Winker (personal communication, 1979) on
part of the Schroeder quadrangle surrounding Berger Bluff. Contour interval
is five feet. I have extended somewhat Winker's mapping of the postBeaumont deposits and have divided this unit into two surfaces, upper and
lower. Goliad Formation ("pre-Lissie") surfaces are just outside the limits of
this map. Note large meander scarps of unknown age on northeast side of
Coleto Creek. A simplified version of this map with topography deleted
appears as the next figure.

433

434

Figure 4.4. Simplified Map of Terrace Surfaces. This is Figure 4.3 with topography
deleted to highlight the placement of different terrace surfaces and meander
scarps (numbers 1-5).
435

Figure 4.5 (following page). Terraces on the Preiss Property. At the confluence of
Fifteenmile Coleto and Twelvemile Coleto Creek (upper lefthand corner,
Fig. 1.25), these units are tentatively identified: B = Beaumont (?) age
Coleto Creek terrace; pBU = upper (?) post-Beaumont terrace; hatched area
= lower (?) post-Beaumont terrace; 20, 21 = sampling localities for diatoms
and snails; G = gravel scatter (Fig. 4.6); DS = drift snail sample; quarry
symbol = gravel quarries, probably in veneer of Pliocene Willis Formation
capping Goliad Formation bedrock. Mapping is tentative, based only on
brief surface inspection. Contour interval is five feet; north is at top of page.
Road along right side of map is Camp Coleto Road south of the creek,
Arnold Road north of it. Source: USGS 7.5' Schroeder quad (1964 edition).

436

437

Figure 4.6. Gravel Deposit on the Lower (?) Post-Beaumont Terrace. Looking southsoutheast at gravel in shallow scour atop terrace on Preiss Ranch, near
confluence of Twelvemile and Fifteenmile Coleto Creek. Photo November
18, 1998, shortly after flood.

438

Figure 4.7. Grain-Size Histogram for Lower (?) Post-Beaumont Terrace. This sample was
collected 2-4 cm below the surface of the terrace, about 3.75 m above the
current water level, at diatom sampling locality D-20A, on the Preiss
property, Goliad County (southernmost dot marked "20" on Figure 4.5).
None of the gravel shown in Figure 4.6 occurred where this sample was
collected. The histogram shows gravel and sand-sized components only;
fines ("pan" fraction, shown at right) were weighed but not analyzed. Grain
size is measured (in phi units) on the Wentworth scale, shown at the bottom.

439

Figure 4.8. The Ravine. Looking south-southwest toward the head of the ravine, from
the eroded post-Beaumont surface (1977 testing phase). Area B of Berger
Bluff lies to the left. Exposed areas have thin veneer of Lissie Formation
sediments over Goliad Formation bedrock.

440

The highly calcareous, sandy Goliad Formation (Miocene or Miocene/Pliocene;
Baskin 1991) crops out over a large area of Goliad, DeWitt, and Victoria counties
upstream from the site, and its downdip contact lies about a kilometer and a half up
Coleto Creek (Geologic Atlas of Texas, Beeville-Bay City sheet). This is the northeastern
end of what W. Armstrong Price termed the "Reynosa Plateau," and he observed that "the
eastern margin of the plateau is formed...by a low, interrupted scarp...more or less
constantly present, where the Reynosa Caliche dips eastward under the Lissie" (Price
1936:559). This scarp probably corresponds to the one identified by Winker. In the
immediate vicinity of the site, the Goliad Formation lies very thinly buried by more
recent deposits, but appears as sandstone ledges forming knickpoints in the floor of the
ravine (Fig. 1.32). This rock is fine, well sorted, tabular bedded quartz sand (with modes
at 2.0 to 2.5, 2.5 to 3.0, and 3.0 to 3.5 phi on the Wentworth scale) with well indurated,
opaque, white carbonate cement (Fig. 4.9, 4.10). Fines (silt and clay-sized sediments)
appear to be scarce and porosity is presumably high (see Arredondo and Thomann
1996:286). There are also strata of less well indurated, marl-like calcareous clays. A low
knoll of white, caliche-like material appears, sectioned by the cutbank, between the
ravine mouth and the bench area (Fig. 4.11); this is presumably part of the Goliad
Formation, and here it is directly overlain by post-Beaumont sediments. Elsewhere,
however, the Lissie Formation (Pleistocene) sediments immediately west and south of the
site appear to represent a relatively thin mantle (thickening near the creek) overlying
Goliad sandstone or marl bedrock. On the flat Lissie surface well to the south of the site,
coring data suggest about 3-4 m of Lissie sediments overlie the Goliad, although the
drilling logs (Flume 3 core data, URS Forrest and Cotton, Inc.) were recorded with
engineering properties rather than geology in mind, and are hard to interpret. The Lissie
sediments are deeply weathered and oxidized, reddish fine sand, silt, and clay with a thin
441

layer of Goliad Formation rubble or rip-up clasts overlying the contact in some places.
The contact can be traced up the ravine, except where obscured by brush or slumped soil,
and the contact rises headward somewhat more rapidly than the ravine floor. Small
Goliad sandstone clasts were frequently encountered in the bench excavations, especially
in the southernmost unit (N109 E96), suggesting that an exposed outcrop of sandstone
probably existed to the south or southwest while the lower post-Beaumont sediments
were accumulating.

Figure 4.9 (following page). Grain-Size Histograms for Goliad Sandstone Samples.
Histograms show gravel and sand-sized components only; fines ("pan"
fraction, shown at right) were weighed but not analyzed. Samples 1, 3, and 4
were disaggregated by gentle, mechanical maceration in a mortar; sample 2,
a finer-grained unit, was digested in dilute HCl. All of these samples come
from bedrock exposed in the ravine. Grain size is measured (in phi units) on
the Wentworth scale, shown at the bottom.
442

443

Figure 4.10. Goliad Sandstone Bedrock Outcrop. Looking east at tabular bedded Goliad
sandstone in east wall of ravine; scale is 50 cm long. Photo taken December
9, 1979.

444

Figure 4.11. Goliad Formation Marl or Calcareous Clay. Looking southwest at lightcolored Goliad Formation marl or calcareous clay overlain by postBeaumont sediments; view from creek. Bench area lies out of view to left,
ravine mouth out of view to right. Surface slopes down and topsoil thins to
right because of erosion into the ravine. Photo taken November 8, 1979.
In most of the backhoe trenches dug in Area B (Brown 1986:Figs. 2, 4),
indurated Goliad bedrock formed the floor of the trench and was reached at a depth of
about 1.5-1.9 m. This sandstone varies from a friable, gritty rock to a hard, caliche-like,
fine-grained rock. In general it closely resembles sandstone exposed in the floor of the
ravine about 3 meters lower in elevation. Overlying the indurated bedrock is a caliche
zone that is probably pedogenic in origin, although it may have developed not by
downward transport of carbonate through the vadose zone, but rather by upward capillary
movement of carbonate-laden water from underlying bedrock. In its purest form (backhoe
trench 2, zone 2, sample 4) it is pure white, with a
445

light, talc or diatomite-like

consistency and texture, with dry weight about 1.3 g/ml. Hand specimens contain no
visible contaminants, but samples digested in HCl yield about 13% of fine and very fine
sand (chiefly 2.0 to 3.0 phi). It occurs as massive, structureless deposits. In most of the
trenches, however, the caliche occurs as discontinuous masses intermixed with calcareous
tan fine sand and fragments of indurated white sandstone. The caliche unit is laterally
rather variable in composition and thickness (ranging from about 40 to 125 cm thick). A
rather compressed solum is developed on the caliche, becoming very organic-rich in
areas covered by anaqua motts; the soil corresponds well to descriptions of Valco soils in
Victoria County (Miller 1982:81-82). In an earlier publication (Brown 1986:12) the term
marl was applied generally to unconsolidated Goliad deposits at this site, the chalklike
unit exposed in the backhoe trenches is probably better regarded as a caliche of
pedogenic origin. All of this caliche is restricted to the ridge south of area A, and nothing
comparable is found in the bench deposits.

Although the deposits on the southwest side of the creek near the site are
mostly mapped as Lissie Formation by the Geologic Atlas, this area represents the basal
part of the Lissie, and where it has been truncated by erosion into Coleto Creek is really
just a thin mantle of gravelly sand and orange sandy clay over the Goliad Formation,
except immediately adjacent to Coleto Creek itself where it thickens to eight meters or
more of valley fill. This dramatic thickening of the Lissie deposits along Coleto Creek is
a clue that the drainage is probably quite old, evidently predating the Lissie Formation
itself. Equally surprising, however, are indications that the small drainages entering the
Coleto from the southwest might be just as old. The two-foot contour map of the Berger
Bluff vicinity shows a striking contrast in the topography on the northeast and southwest
sides of the creek. The topography on the southwest side is bedrock-dominated and is
446

deeply dissected by several ravines that are disposed at right angles to the trend of the
creek. The topography on the other (Victoria County) side of the creek is flat and smooth
by comparison and represents the nearly unmodified surface of a thick package of
Holocene alluvial fill (Fig. 1.30). Hand testing of Berger Bluff in 1977 and 1979 and
backhoe testing in 1983 (at Area B and south of it) has established that, away from the
creek bluff, the Goliad Formation lies nearly everywhere just under the surface — in
other words, the present topography on the Goliad County side of the creek seems to
follow closely the subsurface configuration of the Goliad Formation. Inspection of utility
pole borings and gullies near the site has helped to amplify the backhoe testing data and
provide some idea of bedrock topography away from the site.
The information we have suggests the erosional events that produced the system
of ravines draining northeast to the Coleto may not have originated within the Lissie
Formation but perhaps predated it, since the Lissie thickens locally to follow the eroded
surface of the Goliad Formation downward. This implies the bedrock-dominated
topography on the southwest side of the creek is quite old. This picture of the bedrock
geology has several implications for the archeological history of the site:
1. The bedrock channel of the ravine seems to have been present throughout the
occupation of the site, and if not choked with sediment, probably has also been a
functioning drainage as well;
2. Although now masked by post-Beaumont alluvium, the Goliad Formation probably
lies a short distance southwest of the bench excavations and rises rapidly to an
elevation of about 111 feet MSL (ca. 102.80 m in terms of the primary datum; Fig.
1.33) eighty meters back from the creek, forming what presumably would have been
a steep, rocky hillside, perhaps with thin, unstable, poorly developed soil cover
throughout the history of the site. This rocky hillside has been a constant source of
clastic debris (sandstone and marl fragments) and possibly some colluvial sediment,
especially during the early history of the site.

447

3. This large subsurface mass of highly calcareous sandstone and marl has furnished a
constant source for calcium carbonate mobilized by groundwater and re-precipitated
in the archeological deposits, especially the lower units.
4. The Goliad Formation bedrock has probably restricted lateral migration of Coleto
Creek southward, although as noted above the only outcrop visible along the creek in
1979 was the small exposure of marl immediately upstream from the bench area.
The Evangeline aquifer
The Lissie Formation sediments in this area, although not indurated, are clearly
finer grained than most of the Goliad Formation bedrock. This is probably because the
Berger Bluff area was on the periphery of the Goliad age "Coleto" meanderbelt system,
as defined by Solis I. (1981:Fig. 26), but by Lissie depositional time, was an interfluvial
area distant from the main Guadalupe meanderbelt (Solis I. 1981:Fig. 29). The Goliad
Formation sediments appear to be a local aquifer, presumably part of the regional
Evangeline Aquifer, which also extends into the upper part of the Fleming Formation
according to Baker (1979:40; Figs. 7, 8, 14) or else is separate from the Fleming aquifer
(Snyder 1995). Perhaps this aquifer is partially confined by the finer grained overlying
Lissie sediments; in any case, it seems to have been a local source of somewhat alkaline
groundwater during the Pleistocene and the wetter parts of the Holocene. A small
perennial spring pool, rimmed with cattails, lies in the bed of the ravine southwest of the
site (Figs. 1.30, 1.31). Groundwater from the Evangeline aquifer in Bee County had a
measured pH of 7.3 and temperature of 23.7º C (Snyder 1995:Table 3). The Goliad
Formation is also a host for uranium mineralization (Hoel 1982), and groundwater from
the Evangeline aquifer may carry trace amounts of uranium or radon. The uranium occurs
as uraninite and as amorphous uranium (Arredondo and Thomann 1996). The most
porous objects recovered from excavations in the bench sediments (mostly fired clay
448

nodules, but also including some animal bone) occasionally have a faint yellow tint that
may represent some type of uranium oxide coating left by groundwater. Many of the
uranium minerals have a yellow color, while uraninite is black, often with a steely luster.
Many of the animal bones recovered from the bench deposits have patchy black to steely
blue-black surface stains that have been interpreted as manganese, but could just as easily
be uraninite. No mineralogical studies of these coatings have been done.

Lissie terrace sediments
Two stratigraphic sections were recorded for the Lissie terrace cutbank during
fieldwork at Berger Bluff. Section #1 (Fig. 4.12) is located just upstream from the ravine
bordering the site on the northwest. It is over 6 meters from top to bottom. The upper 3.5
m (Fig. 4.13) consist of gray sandy clay with well-developed soil structure and are
probably post-Beaumont sediments resting on an eroded Lissie contact, although in the
profile, the contact appears gradational rather than clearly erosional. Alternatively, the
entire upper 6 m might be Lissie Formation. Possibly this could have been investigated
by collecting an oriented sediment sample to check magnetic polarity, since much of the
Lissie Formation probably accumulated during a period of reversed polarity, but no
oriented samples were collected. Below these gray sediments are slightly rubified silty
sediments with carbonate webbing and caliche nodules, evidence of fairly strong soil
development. A sediment sample (1-1) at about 4.5 m was subsampled to allow Barbara
Winsborough to check for diatoms (diatom sample 40). She found that the sample was
barren of diatoms. At the base of section 1, a thin irregular layer of structureless, wellsorted, fine sand overlies the Goliad marl and may represent reworked sediment from the
Goliad Formation (Fig. 4.13). Modal grain size of the sand is 2.5 to 3.0 phi, and it is
449

remarkably well sorted. A sediment sample (1-3) was subsampled to check for diatoms,
and diatom sample 42 produced a small but interesting assemblage that differs
significantly from that found in the bench sediments. Present were several marsh species
(Epithemia turgida, Denticula elegans, Fragilaria pinnata, and Opephora martyi) that
probably represented a resident population (Winsborough 1992). Indeed, the last two taxa
are not represented at all in the bench sediments. Fragilaria pinnata prefers cool, welloxygenated water. The other diatoms in the sample are mostly corroded and fragmented
by reworking. Further details will be presented in Chapter 7 (diatoms and freshwater
sponge spicules).

The dust fraction from all of the Lissie sediment samples was checked
microscopically for freshwater sponge spicules. None were seen in sample 1-1,
occasional spicules were seen in sample 1-2, and in sample 1-3, very well preserved,
complete or nearly complete spicules identical to those in the bench deposits were seen.
In sample 1-4, only one possible spicule was noted. All of the freshwater sponge spicules
(megascleres) seen so far are the same; the species is unknown, but they resemble
illustrations of Spongilla lacustris, a common pond sponge. All of the spicules seen are
oxeas with readily visible axial filaments, and they extinguish under polarized light,
indicating they are made of isotropic silica.

450

Figure 4.12. Lissie Formation, View of Section 1. Looking south-southwest at Lissie
terrace stratigraphic section 1, from the creek. Ravine mouth and Berger
Bluff lie out of view to the left. Scale is 50 cm long. In the foreground are
slumped blocks of clay-rich Lissie sediments. Photo taken March 10, 1980.

451

Figure 4.13. Lissie Formation, Measured Section 1. Four sediment samples were
collected; grain-size was determined for samples 1-2 and 1-3 (see Fig. 4.16)
and diatom subsamples were extracted from samples 1-1 and 1-3.
452

Section #2 is located an estimated 100 m farther upstream and is also about 6
meters thick, although it was recorded in two offset subsections. Fig. 4.14 shows just the
upper part of the section. It is slightly higher both stratigraphically and in terms of
absolute elevation than the first section. Iron content increases noticeably upstream and is
considerably greater in this section. The A horizon is better developed and more sharply
defined here (Fig. 4.15), approximately 80 cm thick, and immediately under it is a zone
of intensely weathered, heavily rubified sediments. It appears as a brightly colored,
mottled dark brown and orange unit with small ferromanganese concretions. This appears
to be a well-developed oxic horizon (presumably a Bo or Bw horizon) indicating
prolonged soil development, perhaps under well drained conditions with high
temperatures. A grain size sample (2-1) from this unit contains about 4% gravel, 62%
sand, 12% silt, and 22% clay (Fig. 4.16). The clay is either authigenic or translocated.
Under the weathered zone is a transitional unit, then several meters of pinkish tan silty,
clay-rich sand similar to that in the first section. A major horizon of abundant caliche
nodules is located at about 6 to 7 meters below the surface, with scattered nodules and
one minor band of nodules above that.

Only three sediment samples from the Lissie sediments have been analyzed for
grain size, but they are consistent. The samples are over half sand (Table 4.4) with a
primary size mode at 2.5 to 3.0 phi, and in one case a secondary mode at 1.5 to 2.0 phi.
This is consistent with the coarser grained depositional units in the bench deposits (strata
1, 2B, 2D, and 2E, discussed later). The extent to which these units may have inherited a
grain size imprint from Lissie sediments is discussed later. All four sediment samples (21, 2-2, 2-3, and 2-4) were examined microscopically, but no sponge spicules were seen.

453

Figure 4.14. Lissie Formation, View of Top of Section 2. Looking west at topmost part of
Lissie terrace stratigraphic section 2, showing the uppermost two units,
terrace surface at top of frame. Sample 2-1 was collected here. Scale is 50
cm long; photo taken March 10, 1980. Compare with Figure 4.15.

454

Table 4.4. Grain-Size Statistics for Miscellaneous Samples.
Sample

Mean Standard Skewness Coefficient Gravel
Grain deviation (unitless) of
%
Size
Variation
(φ)
(φ)

Lissie terrace stratigraphic sections
Lissie 2-1
2.64
2.22
-0.28
Lissie 1-2
3.92
1.80
+0.49
2.90
1.16
+0.38
Lissie 1-31

0.84
0.46
0.40

3.73
0
0

Sand
%

Silt
%

Clay
%

62.11
53.37
83.22

12.43
28.28
8.54

21.73
18.35
8.24

Lower (?) post-Beaumont terrace, Preiss property, locality D-20A (gravel and sand only; fines
not analyzed)
D-20A
1.80
0.70
-0.05
0.39
0.15
98.59 N/A
N/A
N109 E96
93.00-92.952 4.08
92.30-92.25 3.36
92.15-92.10 4.96

2.53
2.21
1.95

-0.71
-0.22
-1.98

3.11
0.65
0.03

39.87
52.51
23.62

14.38
21.81
39.01

42.64
25.03
37.34

Cutbank, Stratum 2E (gravel and sand only; fines not analyzed)
93.45-93.403 1.11
1.74
-1.77
1.57
9.92

90.08

N/A

N/A

Cutbank, Stratum 2E
93.40-93.35 2.83
2.39

64.37

13.34

19.19

-0.05

0.62
0.66
0.39

0.84

0.31

NOTE: Percentages and statistics are computed on a carbonate-free basis; statistics
include the coarsest two clay grades (8.0 to 8.5 φ and 8.5 to 9.0 φ), but not the unanalyzed
clay grades that are finer. The clay percentage includes an error component.
1

Reworked Goliad sand.

2

Extracted from pollen sample at 92.99-92.98 m; slight loss of sand and fines during lab
processing. Includes chert pebbles in -3.0 to -2.5 φ grade.
3

Large (274.4 g) sample for gravel analysis; statistics were computed only for the 15
gravel and sand grades that were analyzed. Sample was disaggregated in acid.

455

Figure 4.15. Lissie Formation, Measured Section 2. Section was measured in two
discontinuous, offset segments four meters apart. Inset shows location. See
Fig. 4.16 for grain-size distribution of sample 2-1.
456

Figure 4.16 (following page). Grain-Size Histograms for Lissie Sediment Samples.
Analysis by sieving of coarse fraction and pipette analysis of silt and clay
fractions; only the coarsest two clay grades (8.0-8.5 and 8.5-9.0 phi) were
determined individually. Grain size is measured (in phi units) on the
Wentworth scale, shown at the bottom. Sample 1-3 is believed to be
reworked Goliad sediment at the base of the Lissie Formation deposit.

457

458

Because the Lissie Formation is perhaps the most likely candidate for contributing
sediment to the bench deposits, the Lissie terrace cutbank was examined fairly carefully
for biological material that could have been reworked into later deposits. No vertebrate
remains, mussel shells, or snail shells were seen in this part of the cutbank, and the
diatom assemblage clearly does not match that from the bench sediments. Only the
freshwater sponge spicules concentrated in the reworked Goliad sand remain as potential
contaminants.

Elevation of the Lissie terrace surface ranges up to about 150 feet above MSL
away from the creek, but it has eroded to about 100 feet (30 m) elevation along the creek.
Its average elevation above the creek bed is roughly 20 m (Table 4.3). The flat, sandy,
well-drained Lissie surface has a distinctive, easily recognized cover of open post oak,
blackjack, and live oak woodland where it has not been cleared for pasturage. A wide
variety of soils is developed on the Lissie deposits, but in the area around the site, Straber
loamy fine sand and Telferner fine sandy loam are most extensive (Miller 1982:sheets 21
and 26). These soils are slightly to moderately acid in the upper part of the solum.

The Lissie Formation is known to be Pleistocene, but as far as I know, there are
no chronometric isotope assays from Texas. It is too old for radiocarbon assay, and there
are presumably no deposits suitable for fission-track dating. Aronow (1993) considered it
equivalent to the Montgomery and Bentley terraces of Louisiana, although a more recent
stratigraphic chart for Louisiana lists the Lissie Alloformation as equivalent in time to the
Bentley Alloformation (Lower Pleistocene), which is succeeded by the Montgomery
Alloformation (Middle Pleistocene; Johnston et al. 2000). Autin (1993:10, Table 2)
equates it with the Intermediate Complex, which in turn has been considered
459

Yarmouthian, pre-Sangamonian, or Sangamonian in age, generally Middle Pleistocene.
Aronow (in Moore and Sanchez 1993:12) suggested the Lissie Formation is over 100,000
years old. Charles Winker considers it to be less than 1.4 million years old and at least
400,000 years old, and notes that reversed magnetic polarity measurements near Bellview
suggest it is at least 700,000 years old (Winker 1991:103). Durbin, Blum, and Price
(1997:Fig. 1) evidently equate the top of the Lissie Formation to the Matuyama-Brunhes
polarity reversal at 780,000 BP. If this is the case, the extensive soil development and
sesquioxide accumulations seen in the cutbank are not surprising. Horse (Equus francisci)
remains have been reported from it (Lundelius and Stevens 1970).

Beaumont terrace surface
The Beaumont and Lissie formations are expressed mainly as coastwise terrace
surfaces, but also extend up the valleys of major coastal rivers in the form of narrow
flanking riverine terraces of equivalent age (Doering 1936:435 and Fig. 1). They are
mapped as such by the Geologic Atlas of Texas for the Brazos and Colorado rivers, but
not for the Guadalupe or San Antonio River, and only to a very limited extent for the
Nueces River. Van Siclen (1991) divides the Beaumont coastwise terrace into Eunice
(later) and Oberlin (earlier) terraces in the Houston area. There are no Beaumont terrace
deposits in the immediate vicinity of Berger Bluff, nor does the Beeville-Bay City Sheet
of the Geologic Atlas of Texas recognize any such deposits closer than Victoria, but
Winker (personal communication, 1979) has identified several Coleto Creek terrace
remnants of Beaumont age inset into older Lissie Formation deposits. The closest of these
lie a little over a kilometer away, to the south-southeast and east-northeast (Figs. 4.3,
4.4). These Beaumont remnants rest at about 115 to 120 feet (35-37 m) in elevation, or
460

about 12 m above the contemporary creek (Table 4.3). This unit generally supports
mesquite or post oak woodland similar to that on the Lissie terrace, except where it is
cleared for cultivation. Denhawken-Elmendorf, Edna, Dacosta, and Straber soils are
represented (Miller 1982:sheets 21 and 26). Blum and Price (1994:88) estimate a
maximum age for the Beaumont Formation of about 600,000 years. There are
thermoluminescence (TL) dates of 71,900±6100 and 91,700±7900 BP (Durbin, Blum,
and Price 1997) and optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) dates ranging from
97,500±75,100 BP to 179,300±145,500 BP (Durbin 1999:Table 1) on Nueces River
terrace deposits, and four dates ranging from 102,000±6000 BP to 119,000±9000 BP
from Colorado River deposits (Blum and Price 1994:90) identified with the Beaumont
Formation. Aronow lists radiocarbon dates of 34,610±1990, 39,600±????, and
43,600±1270 RCYBP uncal (Moore, Dureka, and Aronow 1996: 15). There are some
faunal and floral assemblages (Aronow, Neck and McClure 1991; Elsik 1986) known
from the Houston area.

Post-Beaumont surfaces
Berger Bluff itself consists of post-Beaumont sediments, and the rest of this
chapter will be concerned with the nature of these sediments and their stratigraphic
relationships, but the present discussion mostly concerns the mappable surfaces of these
deposits.

Two distinct post-Beaumont terrace surfaces are tentatively recognized, an upper
surface (pBU) associated with the stratigraphic section at the site, and a lower surface

461

(pBL). Winker does not distinguish these two surfaces.

The upper post-Beaumont surface rests at about 6 m (range, about 5-8 m)
above the present bed of Coleto Creek. In the immediate vicinity of the site, the absolute
elevation of this surface is about 98-102 feet MSL. At the site, the bluff edge lies about
8.0-8.5 meters above the water surface during base flow conditions. The upper postBeaumont deposits are believed to date from the late Pleistocene to the late Holocene
(Late Prehistoric in the archeological chronology). Dacosta series, Telferner series,
Rupley fine sand, and Straber loamy fine sand occur on this surface.

The tentatively recognized lower post-Beaumont surface occurs at about 3.3 m
above the contemporary creek channel. In the vicinity of Berger Bluff, it is represented
by paired terrace surfaces at about 90 feet elevation (27 m) about a kilometer downstream
where the creek makes an abrupt turn; these have not been examined in the field. Within
the bounds of the Schroeder quad, the post-Beaumont surface slopes downstream at the
rate of about 0.88 meters per kilometer, which is nearly the same as the Beaumont slope,
0.79 m/km, but significantly less than the modern channel gradient, 1.57 m/km. Both the
upper and lower units are mostly represented by paired surfaces, but the lower surface
includes some very narrow, linear surfaces that are usually (but not always) closer to the
contemporary channel than the upper surface (Fig. 4.3). The upper surfaces seem to be
somewhat more numerous and extensive than the lower surfaces; it is very unfortunate
that none of the latter received any geomorphic inspection before the reservoir was
constructed. No archeological sites in the Schroeder quad can be identified with the lower
post-Beaumont unit. Most of these surfaces are below the pool level of the reservoir and
are therefore unclassified by the Victoria County soil survey; the single exception on the
462

Schroeder quad is classified as Kuy loamy sand. All of the terraces that I have examined
in this area appear to be fill terraces. Goelz (2003:page 3-1, Fig. 3-2) trenched and
examined a terrace (less than two meters above the bed of Perdido Creek on the Fannin
quad) that she interprets as an “erosional” (strath) terrace cut into Lissie and/or Goliad
Formation sediments.

Well downstream from Berger Bluff, the cutbank shows a thick black clay loam A
horizon over homogeneous brown sediments. In general the sediments exposed
downstream from the site are much more homogeneous and have a much higher
proportion of clay. During the Flume #3 project in 1983, two backhoe trenches were dug
about 286 m downstream from Berger Bluff, at a site recorded as 41 GD 31 (shown on
Fig. 1.30, south of the "GD 31" label; and Brown 1983:Fig. 2). The first trench (BHT 1)
was located 16 m south of the lake shore and reached a maximum depth of 3.6 m below
the terrace surface, which lies at 98.5 feet. No cultural material was found, and the
deposits do not resemble the upper post-Beaumont deposits at Berger Bluff. Visual
estimates of clay content (no lab data are available) are about 30% to 40% or more. In
general, the sediment becomes less gray and more tan in color with depth, and the clay
content in the samples collected appears to diminish with depth. A very tight, compact
clay stratum was noted at 2.65 m. A soil coring device would not penetrate more than
about 20 cm of the compact clay in the bottom of the trench. Caliche nodules (true
accretional caliche nodules with botryoidal growth structure, not Goliad marl clasts)
appear in the lowest three soil samples collected at 3.0 m and below, perhaps suggesting
a fluctuating water table and seasonal drying. Snails were noted at about 3.0 m and
below, probably all Oligyra orbiculata tropica.

463

These sediments are somewhat enigmatic. The surface here is nearly as high as at
Berger Bluff, yet the deposits are lithologically distinct, indicating either that this is a
remnant of the lower post-Beaumont surface, or else a separate and very distinct facies of
the upper post-Beaumont unit. None of the sediments at a comparable elevation at Berger
Bluff have such a high clay content.

The second backhoe trench (BHT 2) was located further to the south (56 m south
of the lake shore) at the contact between the post-Beaumont and Lissie terraces; the
sediments here are markedly different from those exposed in the first trench, but it is
unclear whether they represent undisturbed Lissie deposits, or colluvium eroded off the
Lissie scarp and mixed with post-Beaumont alluvium. Most of the section consists of
very light-colored tan, clay-rich sediment. Below about 1.86 m, moderately abundant
Rabdotus and Oligyra snails were noted, the clay is variegated with blue-gray streaks,
and above this is a zone with small caliche nodules.

Beaumont (?) and post-Beaumont terraces on the Preiss property
On November 18, 1998, Cecil Calhoun and I briefly examined terrace deposits
on the Preiss property in Goliad County. This area is west of Arnold Road, at the
confluence of Twelvemile Coleto Creek and Fifteenmile Coleto Creek, above the head of
the reservoir (Fig. 4.5; the area is also shown in the upper lefthand corner of Fig. 1.25).
Lower areas had experienced flooding on three occasions shortly before our visit
(October 6-7, October 18-20, and November 13-15, 1998). Located here (locality D-21)
is an extensive surface lying about 25-30 feet (7.6-9.1 m) above the channel. The surface
sediments are loose sand, and live oaks with trunk diameters up to 70 cm occur in groves
464

and motts (Fig. 4.17). These deposits actually enclose a small Goliad Formation outlier
(capped with Willis Formation or other gravels) that stands on the south side of the creek
where the road crosses. The Geologic Atlas classifies this surface as Pleistocene
"fluviatile terraces undivided," while Winker (personal communication, 1979) classifies it
as "Beaumont (?)."

Figure 4.17. Preiss Ranch, Diatom and Snail Sampling Locality D-21. Looking
northwest; Cecil Calhoun is standing at sampling locality in live oak mott on
Beaumont (?) terrace. Photo November 18, 1998.

Lying below this surface, at the confluence, is another surface about 10-20 feet
(3-6 m) above the channel. At diatom sampling locality D-20A, the surface was measured
465

by hand level at about 3.75 m above water level. These deposits also consist of loose
sand, supporting smaller motts with live oak trunks up to 30 cm in diameter (Fig. 4.18).

Figure 4.18. Preiss Ranch, Diatom and Snail Sampling Locality D-20, Area “A.” Looking
north-northwest across lower (?) post-Beaumont terrace. Coleto Creek is
behind oak mott. Photo November 18, 1998.
The terrace scarp is mantled with loose, slumped fill, suggesting that the deposits
are unconsolidated and perhaps relatively young. This surface is tentatively regarded as
lower post-Beaumont, although without any subsurface view of the contact between the
two deposits, it is impossible to be certain that these possible post-Beaumont sediments
are really inset into older sediments. Because the area is located at the confluence of two
major streams, it is possible that discharge from Twelvemile Coleto Creek has diverted
466

the flow from Fifteenmile Coleto Creek, causing it to cut an erosional bench into the
higher surface. The surface showed clearly that the November 13-15 and October 18-20
floods (and possibly the preceding one as well) had overtopped the surface and flowed
south to north here. A flood scour on the southwest edge of this terrace (Fig. 4.6) has a
somewhat thin scatter of chert gravel up to 12-13 cm long (the largest clast was a small
Goliad sandstone boulder 15 by 25 cm). This gravel did not appear to be a lag deposit,
but rather Coleto Creek bedload material that had been rolled up onto the terrace surface
by recent or older flooding, perhaps as a result of the kind of diversion suggested above,
although other known examples of this kind of deposition usually involve larger, more
coherent, flat-bottomed lobes of gravel deposited on fine-grained floodplains (Ritter
1975; Ritter and Blakley 1986). The original source is likely Willis Formation deposits
somewhere upstream.

A grain-size histogram for a sediment sample collected at 2-4 cm below the
surface at locality D-20A is shown in Figure 4.7. With a prominent sand mode at 1.5 to
2.0 φ, this sample is somewhat coarser than all the Berger Bluff samples (only the
colluvial rill deposits in N109 E96 are coarser), and resembles a Coleto Creek bedload
sample (Figure 1.48, top) more closely than anything else. This is consistent with the idea
that this might be a very recent (Late Prehistoric or protohistoric?) terrace, formed during
a recent climatic period as a result of very flashy flooding. No archeological material was
seen anywhere on these terraces in our brief visit.

467

Meander scars of unknown age
North of Berger Bluff, on the opposite side of the creek, lies a pair of linked,
poorly defined arcuate meander scarps of very large radius (Fig. 4.4, "1," "2"). These are
of unknown age, but truncate the Beaumont-age surface slightly (they are indistinct
topographically and in airphotos). These have estimated radii of curvature of about 285
and 623 m, respectively (the former is elliptical rather than circular). The soil units (Kuy
loamy sand, Rupley fine sand, and Straber loamy fine sand) mapped in the vicinity do not
correspond to the spatial limits of the meander scars, and the degree of typical soil
development gives no clues to the age of the scars.

East and north of the site are two much smaller meander loops (Fig. 4.4, "3," "4")
with estimated radii of roughly 250 and 313 m, respectively. They are separated but
probably contemporaneous, and are inset into the floor of the larger pair of scars. One
truncates upper post-Beaumont terrace fill, while the other encircles what is tentatively
interpreted as an isolated remnant of upper post-Beaumont fill. These meander loops are
clearly much younger than the first pair. Drainage in both is clockwise. The first of these
smaller loops has three prehistoric archeological sites (41 VT 49, 50, 51) in the interior
part of the loop, but there are no diagnostic artifacts, and shovel tests reached a maximum
depth of only about 80 cm. Sediments are reported as sandy loam or sand, with gray clay
at a depth of 60 cm at 41 VT 50 (Fox and Hester 1976:42-43).

Loops "3" and "4" are incised below a bank elevation that appears to be about
7.6-9.1 m above the contemporary creek channel, or in other words, at or slightly above
the upper post-Beaumont surface. They are remnants of a tightly meandering channel
468

pattern that differs greatly from the current straight pattern. A fifth meander alcove
downstream from the site ("5" in Fig. 4.4) is infilled with sediments tentatively associated
with the lower post-Beaumont surface; the radius of curvature for this scarp is estimated
at about 145 m.

Remarks
Very large, arcuate meander scarps and coarse-grained terrace deposits of
Deweyville age have been identified in most of the major river valleys of the coastal
plain. Typically, two to three different terraces occur in the complex, with steeper
gradients than modern floodplains (Blum, Morton, and Durbin 1995:54). Radiocarbon
assays of 13,230±110 RCYBP (Baskin 1991:998), 13,250±250, 19,900±500, and
25,700±800

RCYBP

uncal

(Pearson,

Davis,

and

Tamers

1966:458)

and

thermoluminescence) assays ranging from 31,400±2200 BP to 52,600±5300 BP (Durbin,
Blum, and Price 1997) have been obtained. Optically stimulated luminescence dates of
26,000±16,800 to 32,100±4100 BP have been obtained from Nueces River terraces
(Durbin 1999:Table 1). Blum, Morton and Durbin suggest that these oversized meanders
represent a Pleistocene climatic regime featuring greater annual runoff than at present,
but in the form of floods of only moderate magnitude. Deweyville gravels in southeast
Louisiana are finer-grained and better sorted than both Prairie (Beaumont) formation and
Holocene gravel deposits (Self 1983:Fig. 5), supporting the notion that glacial to lateglacial discharge rates were higher than at present, but much less flashy. The lower
Guadalupe River valley has evidence of either two (Weinstein 1992:Fig.2.7; and
Geologic Atlas of Texas, Beeville-Bay City Sheet) or three (Blum, Morton, and Durbin
1995:54) of these terraces, including some in the Coleto Creek valley near its confluence
469

with the Guadalupe River.

There are no comparable coarse-grained deposits known in the vicinity of Berger
Bluff. The only features that might plausibly compare to the known Deweyville features
at the mouth of Coleto Creek are the large meander scarps, loops "1" and "2" of Figure
4.4, and nothing is known about the sediments with which they appear to be partially
backfilled.

In summary, the immediate geologic context of Berger Bluff is clearly a
patchwork of surfaces and sedimentary units of greatly differing antiquity and degrees of
preservation and weathering. It is very unfortunate that the original reservoir survey was
done in 1975 before geoarcheological assessments of fluvial environments became a
routine part of CRM work. As a result, except for the site itself and the immediate area
around it, most of the proposed terrain units that I have presented here have not been
ground truthed. Because of reservoir flooding, they are now inaccessible. My
classification of upper and lower post-Beaumont surfaces should be regarded as tentative.
Localities 3 and 5 in Figure 4.4 particularly invite geoarcheological assessment.

470

STRATIGRAPHY OF THE POST-BEAUMONT DEPOSITS AT BERGER BLUFF

Overview
The basic stratigraphic framework for the post-Beaumont deposits was defined by
Glen Evans, who visited the site during the summer of 1979, while the large excavation
block in the upper deposits was being dug. Evans recognized five major strata, numbered
1-5 from the base of the bluff upward (Figs. 4.19, 4.20). That classification was adopted
both for the report on the upper deposits (Brown 1983) and for the present study.
However, I have formally subdivided stratum 2 (as units 2A through 2E) and have
informally subdivided stratum 4 (as units 4A through 4E).
Strata 1, 2, and perhaps 3 comprise the indurated “bench” deposits (Pleistocene
and Holocene) and are of direct concern here, while strata 4 and 5 comprise the “upper”
deposits (Holocene) and will be discussed in much less detail. In several respects, stratum
3 is transitional between the bench and upper deposits and some justification could be
found for putting it in either category, but I have chosen to include it as part of the bench
deposits. There is no obvious stratigraphic marker that divides the Pleistocene from the
Holocene at Berger Bluff – rather, there are evolutionary and time-lagged changes in the
regional environment.

The environmental history and stratigraphy of the site are so intertwined that it is
difficult to speak of one without some understanding of the other. Perhaps the simplest
way to introduce the subject is to give a very brief capsule history of events, a history that
will be filled out in much more detail as we work our way through the geology and
biology of the site.
471

Figure 4.19. Schematic View of Stratigraphy at Berger Bluff. View looking upstream
(northwest), showing the major stratigraphic units (subdivisions not
indicated). Vertical exaggeration is 2X.

472

Figure 4.20. Photographic Section of Berger Bluff. Looking southwest at complete
section of Berger Bluff. Excavated area is out of view to left, ravine is out of
view to right. Prominent voids are areas where gravel pockets (probably
representing the entry of hurricanes into the drainage in the early Holocene)
have washed out. Dark zones below the pockets are damp zones (with mold
growth) produced by capillary wetting from the creek. Wavy structures
above the pockets are a thin veneer of sheetwashed sediment, not primary
sedimentary structures. Note modern soil development on slowly eroding
surface at top of profile. Photo November 8, 1979.
473

Compared to the later Holocene and the present, regional temperatures were
cooler, during the Younger Dryas and earliest Holocene (despite that fact that insolation
was peaking, in large part because of the continued meltwater feed to the Gulf),
evaporation rates were lower, winter rainfall was probably greater than in the Holocene,
turbulent weather events such as hurricanes or fast-moving spring and fall Arctic fronts
were nonexistent, stream discharge was muddier but flashy discharge events were rare or
nonexistent, ground cover was much more extensive, sheet erosion was greatly retarded,
sediment supply to the creek was much finer-grained, the creek valley was wider and
flatter, the floodplain tree canopy was more extensive, and the creek was not nearly as
deeply incised. These factors combined to produce two important results: 1) groundwater
recharge rates were probably much higher in the catchment than at present, and
groundwater movement through the Evangeline Aquifer was much greater; 2) the
floodplain was experiencing slow aggradation instead of the relatively rapid incision and
net removal of sediment from the catchment that occurred until the reservoir was
completed in 1980. In terms of Nanson and Croke’s (1992) genetic classification of
floodplains, the Coleto Creek floodplain probably resembled class C1 (laterally stable
single-channel floodplains) in their Class C (low-energy cohesive floodplains).
Fine-grained, rather muddy sand accumulated on the flat, floodplain surface and
was partially cemented by calcium carbonate, a phreatic carbonate deposited by
groundwater flowing out of Goliad sandstone bedrock. In some levels, phreatic carbonate
makes up over 25% of the dry weight of the sediment. Carbonate deposition either kept
pace with aggradation or, more likely, filled pores in the matrix later as additional
sediment accumulated above.

474

No actual buried spring conduit has been located at Berger Bluff, but it seems
apparent that there were one or more springs or seeps at the base of the valley wall,
probably located not far to the south of the excavated area, closer than the
contemporary spring (Fig. 1.31) situated in the ravine to the west. There may have
been other small ravines or gullies, now buried but formerly cutting into the sandstone
bedrock and providing an outlet for groundwater seepage. Spring sites in the eastern US
are often associated with peat deposits, and sites in the western US with organic “black
mats,” but no such deposits are present at Berger Bluff. Muddy units rich in silt and
clay alternated with cleaner sandy units as the bench aggraded. The silt and clay are
evidence of the sustained flooding necessary to allow fine sediments to drop out of the
water column, and the clay makes the sediment especially resistant to erosion.

At some point during the early Holocene, annual precipitation declined, and as a
result, aquifer recharge and discharge rates also declined greatly. After this point,
sediments continued to accumulate on the floodplain, but saturation with phreatic
carbonate was greatly diminished, so that newly added sediments lacked the binding
cement found in the earlier deposits. There are carbonate filaments and nodules in the
upper deposits, but it is pedogenic carbonate and is not extensive enough to act as a
cement.

Concurrently with this change, the nature of the sediments aggrading on the
floodplain began to change. Overall, disregarding strata, the bench sediments are about
36% sand, 31% silt, and 32% clay, an equable mix that makes for fairly cohesive
sediments even without the carbonate binder. The uppermost bench unit, stratum 3, is a
thick, silty stratum that perhaps visually resembles a redeposited soil. Strata 4 and 5
475

apparently accumulated not much more rapidly during the balance of the Holocene, but
are texturally different: the proportions of silt and gravel stay roughly the same, but clay
drops to less than 13%, while sand increases to over 51% of the sediments, greatly
boosting the friability of these upper deposits. The change in sediment texture is probably
due to reduction in ground cover in the drainage basin upstream (due to regional
aridification) and increasingly seasonal precipitation as the jetstream followed the
retreating Laurentide ice sheet northward. Flashier discharge removed the periods of
standing water that had previously contributed sedimentary fines, and also began to strew
occasional lenses of gravel across the floodplain whenever more violent floods occurred.
The floodplain may have evolved into some type of Class A (high–energy non-cohesive)
floodplain in the genetic classification of Nanson and Croke (1992).

As a result of the dramatic increase in sediment friability in or above stratum 3,
the bluff face has retreated above stratum 2E, leaving a prominent, indurated erosional
bench.

The

division

into

“bench”

and

“upper”

sediments,

then,

has

true

paleoenvironmental significance and is not simply a minor geomorphological feature.
The localization of this retreat to a relatively small alcove 22 m long suggests that of the
two factors, the reduction in cement is at least as important for friability as the change in
texture. To the west of the bench, in an area perhaps not reached by groundwater seepage,
the bluff has eroded uniformly into a single vertical face (Figs. 1.29, 4.20).

The top of the bench, then, is not only a visible geomorphic feature, but a
paleoenvironmental benchmark. If it had occurred neatly at the Pleistocene-Holocene
boundary, the division into “bench” and “upper” sediments would mark the beginning of
the Holocene. However, the most important environmental shift appears to be lagged well
476

into the early Holocene, perhaps by a millennium and a half, and the evidence for and
causes of this lag will be discussed at length in the pages to come. Fine sandy sediments
continued to accumulate at a fairly rapid rate, with no evidence of erosion, until some
time in the late Holocene, at which point Coleto Creek began to incise rapidly downward,
cutting to the base level it occupied in 1979, and exposing about nine meters of
sedimentary history.
In the sections to follow, I will provide descriptive summaries of all the strata,
working upward from stratum 1, and then discuss some topics that embrace all the strata
– texture, magnetic susceptibility, carbonate content, micromorphology, and inclusions.
Most of these properties are expressions of processes that crosscut strata, so most of the
analysis will focus on vertical plots, rather than stratum-by-stratum analysis. Counts and
weights of materials found in the excavations often vary more from unit to unit than they
do from stratum to stratum, so it is difficult to characterize the strata by calculating
averages of recovered items. One of the most conspicuous and interesting features of the
bench deposits is the regular alternation of muddy and sandy units, perhaps forming pairs
or couplets. A major goal of analysis is to identify the source of this cyclic bedding, and
the final sections will present and evaluate some competing hypotheses (buried soils,
autocyclic bedding, graded bedding, and allocyclic bedding). Discussion of the age of
the deposits will be deferred to the chapter on radiocarbon dating.

The reader should also understand that there are two kinds of gravel deposits
buried in the bench deposits. Along the cutbank, and exposed in a few of the excavation
units near the cutbank, lenses, pockets and stringers of chert and quartz pea gravel can be
seen, often supported in a matrix of coarse sand. Little or no calcareous material is
present. This material is similar (both in size grading and lithology) to the gravel that
477

could be seen in the submerged bed of the creek in 1979, and it represents material
brought down the creek from the various Miocene and Quaternary geologic units exposed
in the drainage basin upstream. It has some significance for interpreting the hydrologic
history of the creek.

The second kind of gravel consists of small lenses of highly calcareous gravel
and sand exposed in unit N109 E96, about six meters southwest of the cutbank. The
material is highly variable in composition and consists of carbonate nodules, pebbles and
sand, or carbonate-cemented aggregates of calcareous, quartz, or chert sand, along with a
smaller proportion of chert or quartz gravel, supported in a matrix of quartz sand. The
carbonate clasts are generally less well rounded than the chert or quartz clasts and have
not been transported as far; in the three samples analyzed for lithology, they constitute
about 29-93% of the coarsest grades. The maximum caliber of the carbonate nodules is
larger (over 3 cm in maximum axis length) than the chert or quartz, but the density
(weight per spherical volume of the clast) is considerably less. This material has been
eroded from Goliad Formation bedrock that was exposed somewhere along the valley
wall to the south or southwest, moved a short distance toward the creek axis, and
redeposited on the slowly aggrading floodplain as small fan or outwash deposits. It
probably has no particular climatic significance.

Figures 4.19-4.23 and 4.53 illustrate the bench stratigraphy with photos and
profiles of the cutbank. Figures 4.24-4.52 are taken from the individual excavation units
and provide more detailed profiles, plans, and a few photos, accompanied by stratigraphic
plots of inclusions and magnetic susceptibility data. Appendix 4, which lists counts and

478

weights of items recovered from the 1/4-inch screen, also lists stratum assignments for
each excavated level.

Figure 4.21. Bench Cutbank, Looking West. This view (January 26, 1980) looking
upstream was taken after a flood had washed the face clean. Dark zone just
above base of profile is stratum 2A. Excavations are out of view to right.
Scale is 50 cm long.

479

Figure 4.22 (following page). Cutbank Profile. This seventeen-meter profile was drawn
along the slightly irregular northwest-southeast trending cutbank, extending
from near the E100 grid line downstream past the stratum 2E sampling
locality (see inset). Upstream is to the right in the view shown here. The
arbitrary meter marks shown do not correspond to the grid system. Slumped
material covers the base of the profile down to the waterline.

480

481

Figure 4.23. West Cutbank Profile. Looking south-southwest at profile recorded for a
narrow, cleaned section of the cutbank near the western (upstream) end of
the bench area. The upper surface is defined by a narrow ledge where the
eroded bench surface merges with the vertical bluff face upstream. Perhaps
better than any other, this profile illustrates the alternating rhythm of muddy
and sandy units.
482

Figure 4.24 (following page). Profile of Unit N109 E103. This is a continuous, unfolded
profile of all four walls of this 1 x 1 m excavation unit. Elevation in meters
is shown on the left. The top boundary is the eroded surface of the bench.

483

484

Figure 4.25 (following page). N109 E103, Stratigraphic Plots of Screened and Magnetic
Susceptibility Samples. The top two panels show vertical double-axis plots
of clasts (left, chert gravel, Goliad sandstone clasts, caliche nodules) and
diagenetic constituents (right, calcareous rhizoconcretions and
ferromanganese nodules) expressed as densities (counts or weights per cubic
meter). The bottom two panels show magnetic susceptibility data. Low and
high-frequency data are in chi units. The coefficient of frequency
dependency is a unitless ratio. Note that in this and the following plots, the
uppermost samples may differ somewhat in elevation for the screen samples
compared to the susceptibility samples. Note that shading is only an
approximate indication of the vertical position of muddy units.

485

486

Figure 4.26 (following page). Profile of Unit N110 E102. This is a continuous, unfolded
profile of all four walls of this 1 x 1 m excavation unit. Elevation in meters
is shown on the left. The top boundary is the eroded surface of the bench.
Feature 6 was encountered in the northwest corner, so it appears at both
ends of the unfolded profile. The thin unlabeled stringer just above Feature 6
on the left side, enclosed in stratum 2A, is a thin zone with calcareous
concretions.

487

488

Figure 4.27 (following page). N110 E102, Stratigraphic Plots of Screened and Magnetic
Susceptibility Samples. The top two panels show vertical double-axis plots
of clasts (left, chert gravel, Goliad sandstone clasts, caliche nodules) and
diagenetic constituents (right, calcareous rhizoconcretions and
ferromanganese nodules) expressed as densities (counts or weights per cubic
meter). The bottom two panels show magnetic susceptibility data. Low and
high-frequency data are in chi units. The coefficient of frequency
dependency is a unitless ratio. Note that shading is only an approximate
indication of the vertical position of muddy units.

489

490

Figure 4.28. N110 E102, South Wall. Looking down and south at profile wall, no scale.
Wavy crosslaminations marked by cream-colored carbonate stains can be
seen in the lower third of the profile, but the calcrete zone at the base of
stratum 2A is not apparent in this photo. Photo December 17, 1979.

491

Figure 4.29. N110 E102, West Wall. Looking down and west at profile wall, no scale.
Wavy crosslaminations marked by cream-colored carbonate stains can be
seen in the lower third of the. Feature 6 appears in the righthand corner of
the unit, but is also not readily visible in this photo. Part of unit N111 E101
can be seen in the upper right corner. The dark zone below the midpoint of
the profile is stratum 2A, but the calcrete zone at the base of stratum 2A is
not apparent in this photo. Photo December 17, 1979.

492

Figure 4.30 (following page). Profile of Unit N111 E101. This is a continuous, unfolded
profile of all four walls of this 1 x 1 m excavation unit. Elevation in meters
is shown on the left. The top boundary is the eroded surface of the bench. In
two of the walls, the upper part of stratum 2A is distinguished by a grayer
color, fewer concretions, and some freshwater mussel shells.

493

494

Figure 4.31 (following page). N111 E101, Stratigraphic Plots of Screened and Magnetic
Susceptibility Samples. The top two panels show vertical double-axis plots
of clasts (left, chert gravel, Goliad sandstone clasts, caliche nodules) and
diagenetic constituents (right, calcareous rhizoconcretions and
ferromanganese nodules) expressed as densities (counts or weights per cubic
meter). The bottom two panels show magnetic susceptibility data. Low and
high-frequency data are in chi units (note scale differs somewhat from
similar plots for other units). The coefficient of frequency dependency is a
unitless ratio. Note that shading is only an approximate indication of the
vertical position of muddy units.

495

496

Figure 4.32. N111 E101, South Wall. Looking down and south at profile wall; scale is 50
cm long. Note occasional vertical burrows or root molds, widely scattered
wavy crosslaminations. Photo December 21, 1979.

497

Figure 4.33. N111 E101, West Wall. Looking down and west at profile wall; scale is 50
cm long. Edge of mussel shell protrudes from stratum 2A at right. Photo
December 21, 1979.

498

Figure 4.34 (following page). Profile of Unit N112 E99. This is a continuous, unfolded
profile of all four walls of this 1 x 1 m excavation unit. Elevation in meters
is shown on the left. The top boundary is the eroded surface of the bench.
Note occasional Goliad sandstone clasts, and mussel shells appearing in
both muddy units (2A and 2C). The origin of the large disturbance in the
northeast corner is unknown.

499

500

Figure 4.35 (following page). N112 E99, Stratigraphic Plots of Screened and Magnetic
Susceptibility Samples. The top two panels show vertical double-axis plots
of clasts (left, chert gravel, Goliad sandstone clasts, caliche nodules) and
diagenetic constituents (right, calcareous rhizoconcretions and
ferromanganese nodules) expressed as densities (counts or weights per cubic
meter). The bottom two panels show magnetic susceptibility data. Low and
high-frequency data are in chi units. The coefficient of frequency
dependency is a unitless ratio. Note that shading is only an approximate
indication of the vertical position of muddy units.

501

502

Figure 4.36. Profile of Unit N113 E98. This profile of the west and north walls also
shows the vertical position of Feature 5 in schematic fashion and was drawn
on the next-to-last day of field work. Note that part of the west wall has
been cut away by the excavation of Unit 2 in the previous summer. The
microfauna deposit associated with the hearth was not visible in the profile,
but its vertical position is indicated in schematic fashion on the west wall
with small “X” symbols. The transitional zone above stratum 2A was not
readily identifiable in other excavation units.
503

Figure 4.37. N113 E98, West Wall. Looking west at west profile wall after strata have
been incised. At the right side, this excavation unit intrudes into Unit 2, dug
the previous summer and not aligned with the grid system. Scale is 50 cm
long.

504

Figure 4.38 (following page). Profile of Unit N112 E97. This is a continuous, unfolded
profile of all four walls of this 1 x 1 m excavation unit. Elevation in meters
is shown on the left. The top boundary has been partly modified by removal
of overburden. The upper part of stratum 2C is slightly grayer, with a
slightly higher clay content. Disturbances visible in the north wall consist of
homogeneous coarse to fine sand and clay (10YR 6.5/3) and calcareous
concretions. In the north and west walls, stratum 2B has a sandier upper unit
and a more clay-rich lower unit.

505

506

Figure 4.39 (following page). Profile of Unit N109 E96. This is a continuous, unfolded
profile of all four walls of this 1 x 1 m excavation unit. Elevation in meters
is shown on the left. The top boundary is an artificial surface created by
removal of overburden.
The much greater stratigraphic complexity of this unit is due to gravel bars and other
colluvial inputs evidently arriving from the nearby buried valley wall, but many more
isolated sandstone clasts are also visible, compared to the other excavation units. Most of
this was probably created by exposure and erosion of Goliad Sandstone bedrock. Stratum
2D can be divided into three subunits. The top unit (2D3) is lighter, with fewer Goliad
sandstone clasts; unit (unit 2D2) is grayer, with more sandstone and snail shells; unit 2D3
has less sandstone and snail shells but more clay than 2D1 (Feature 7 could possibly have
originated from this unit).
The following features are keyed to numbers shown on the profile:
1) a small zone with slightly more tan clayey sand and no cultural debris
2) a gravel lens embedded in stratum 2B
3) a lens of distinctive, homogeneous tan silt found in the southwest corner (sampled for
magnetic susceptibility) unlike sediments elsewhere in the bench
4) a thin lens of gravel lying atop the stratum 2B basal contact
5) a mineralized bone fragment lying atop the aforementioned lens
6) a small patch of clean tan sand in the fill of Feature 7
7) a unit of fine sand atop the gravel bar below
8) a lens or bar with pockets of coarse sand and pebbles in a matrix of clean to muddy
loose sand, thinning and rising slightly eastward, embedded in stratum 2A
9) sandy western end of lens “10”
10) another lens or bar of randomly oriented (?) chert and sandstone pebbles and clean
coarse quartz sand, with ferromanganese nodules evidently formed in place after
deposition of the bar; clastic material is coarser than lens “8”
11) a cream-colored stain in unit 2D1
12) a lens of tan-gray clayey sand with ferromanganese concretions at the base of unit
2D1
13) small lens of gray sandy clay, caliche nodules and chert gravel, at the contact
between strata 2A and 2B
14) possible disturbance (?) consisting of slightly grayer sandy clay with snail shells,
sandstone nodules, ferromanganese concretions in stratum 2D3 ; a small pocket of
snail shells occurs in the middle.

507

508

Figure 4.40 (following page). N109 E96, Stratigraphic Plots of Screened and Magnetic
Susceptibility Samples. The top two panels show vertical double-axis plots
of clasts (left, chert gravel, Goliad sandstone clasts, caliche nodules) and
diagenetic constituents (right, calcareous rhizoconcretions and
ferromanganese nodules) expressed as densities (counts or weights per cubic
meter). The bottom two panels show magnetic susceptibility data. Low and
high-frequency data are in chi units. The coefficient of frequency
dependency is a unitless ratio. Note that shading is only an approximate
indication of the vertical position of muddy units. Note also that the scales
on the top left and bottom right panels differ significantly from those in
most of the other plots. Coarse clastic material is more abundant in this unit
than in the others.

509

510

Figure 4.41. Grain-Size Samples from N109 E96. Shown here are two grain-size samples
from the most southwesterly excavation unit. The sample at 92.15-92.10 m
is from stratum 2A, a muddy unit, while the one from 92.30-92.25 m is from
stratum 2B, a sandy unit. Note the differences in sand and silt content and
peakedness. Note that only the two coarsest grades of clay were analyzed;
there is an infinite tail of unanalyzed clay grades on the right side of each
histogram. The key shows the Wentworth classification (VC = very coarse,
C = coarse, M = medium, F = fine, VF = very fine) and the vertical scale,
the height of each histogram bar in terms of percentage of sample.
511

Figure 4.42. N109 E96, West Wall. Floor lies at 92.00 m, profile pins visible about
midway up the corners lie at 92.50 m. Feature 7 pit fill is faintly visible in
section, cutting into stratum 2A above and toward right end of scale. View
looking west, February 17, 1980.

512

Figure 4.43 (following page). N109 E96 Floor Plans, 92.05-92.00 m. The lower floor
plan was drawn at 92.00 m and shows only small remnants of outwash
deposits along the north wall. The upper plan is for the 92.05-92.00 m level
and shows location of silt and gravel samples. “CAL” = caliche nodule at
92.00 m; “SS” = Goliad sandstone nodule.

513

514

Figure 4.44. N109 E96, Looking Down and West at 92.05 m Floor. Tan silt in upper left
corner, coarse outwash deposits outlined in white on right side. Compare
with Fig. 4.46, lower plan. Photo January 27, 1980.

515

Figure 4.45. N109 E96, Looking Down and West at 92.10 m Floor. Coarse sand deposit
in northwest corner is outlined in white. Compare with Fig. 4.46, upper plan.

516

Figure 4.46 (following page). N109 E96 Floor Plans, 92.10-92.05 m. The lower plan
shows outwash deposits along the north wall and a tan silt deposit in the
southwest corner. The largest outwash area consists of variegated tan and
gray, coarse to fine sand and clayey sand. The rest of the floor consists of
light brownish-gray (10YR 5.5/2) sandy clay, mottled with dark brown
ferromanganese stains and cream-colored carbonate webs. The upper plan
shows a remnant ferromanganese stain from Feature 7 and outwash deposits
in the northwest quadrant. The rest of the floor is similar to the one below,
with some small Goliad sandstone nodules.

517

518

Figure 4.47. N109 E96, Looking Down and West at 92.15 m Floor. View of floor cleaned
up after flood (compare with Fig. 4.48, lower plan, rotated 90° compared to
this photo) with major features indicated. Feature 7 stain is incised at top,
coarse sand deposit at bottom. Photo January 26, 1980.

519

Figure 4.48 (following). N109 E96 Floor Plans, Two Views of 92.15 m Floor. Shown
here are two views of the same floor, the upper plan drawn January 19, 1980
before flooding and the lower one drawn January 26, after post-flood
cleanup. Both show remnant stains from Feature 7 along the west wall and
outwash deposits along the north wall, but differ somewhat in detail. In the
lower plan, the largest outwash area consists of gray-tan (10YR 5.5/2.5)
coarse to fine sand with some clay (grain size is patchy) and scattered sandsized caliche; ferromanganese concretions are less abundant and more
clustered than elsewhere. The south half of the floor is light gray (10YR5/2)
variegated sandy clay with carbonate stains and moderate quantities of
scattered ferromanganese concretions.

520

521

Figure 4.49 (following page). N109 E96 Floor Plans, 92.30-92.20 m. The lower plan
shows a remnant outwash lens along the east wall, and the base of Feature 7
(haloed by a transitional zone) along the west wall. In the upper plan, the
eastern lens is gone, but a coarse-grained lens of outwashed material appears
in the southwest corner. It consists of mixed small (3 cm and under) Goliad
sandstone nodules and chert pea gravel (the former more abundant than the
latter), randomly oriented. It lacks ferromanganese stains, but otherwise the
matrix is the same as most of the rest of the unit: light gray-brown (10YR
6.5/2) clayey sand with occasional snail shells present. The 92.27 m
elevation shown refers to the base of one of the larger sandstone nodules in
this gravel splay. In the 92.30-92.25 m level, the matrix sample normally
collected from the southwest corner was shifted eastward to avoid a flake
fragment found in place.

522

523

Figure 4.50 (following page). N109 E96 Floor Plans, 92.80-92.60 and 92.45-92.40 m.
Upper panel is a composite plan of Goliad sandstone, mussel shell, and
charcoal in four different excavation levels. Numbered Amblema plicata
valves are as follows: 1, right valve, 92.62 m; 2, smashed left valve with old
break, 92.69 m; 3, right valve, 92.62 m; 4, left valve, 92.68 m; 5, an
unidentified fragment, 92.75 m. Charcoal sample (AA2831, 9880±90 BP)
was collected from underside of sandstone slab. Lower panel shows small
lens of outwashed sand in northwest corner at 92.40 m.

524

525

Figure 4.51. N109 E96, Grain-Size Histograms for Coarse-Grained Outwash Deposits.
Top panel, quartz and caliche sand lens near north wall (approximately
92.14-92.10 m; see Fig. 4.48); silt and clay were not analyzed for this
sample; rightmost bar represents pan fraction. Middle panel, clean sand and
gravel from extreme northeast corner (92.05-92.00 m; see Fig. 4.43). Lower
panel, caliche and chert gravel and sand, northeast corner (92.05-92.02 m;
Fig. 4.43, upper plan).
526

Figure 4.52. N109 E96, Looking Down and South at 92.80 m Floor. This view shows
part of the scatter of Goliad sandstone clasts mapped in the upper panel of
Fig. 4.50 but has a different orientation and shows only one level. Scale is
50 cm long.

STRATIGRAPHY OF THE BENCH DEPOSITS
Stratum 1 (sandy unit)
The lowest stratigraphic unit exposed in the post-Beaumont sequence, this thick
sandy unit extends well below the water level in the creek. The maximum thickness
visible in the cutbank is about 70 cm. The upper 10-20 cm was penetrated by three
excavation units, and a fourth (N110 E102) was excavated about 35 cm into it, to an
527

elevation of 91.55 m. Our knowledge of this stratum is therefore limited to the uppermost
portion, apart from what could be observed in the cutbank. It is gray (in the upper 10 cm)
to grayish-tan in color (2.5Y 5.5/2 moist). After the carbonate has been removed by acid
digestion, the upper 35 cm of stratum 1 consists of about 38% sand, 30% silt, 30% clay
(plus analytical error), and 1% gravel, but this characterization conceals a good deal of
variability. Composition ranges as follows:
Gravel: 0 to 4.5%
Sand: 23 to 51%
Silt: 24 to 38%
Clay (plus analytical error): 24 to 40%
Note that the proportions given above (and in all of the following discussion) are
for dry sediment weight after the carbonate has been removed. A single sediment sample
from this stratum was submitted for radiocarbon assay (GX-18866-AMS). It comes from
N111 E101 matrix column at 91.95-91.90 m and was found to be extremely low in
organic

content

(about

0.1%

after

concentration;

Harold

Krueger,

personal

communication, December 28, 1991). The δ 13C value of the humin fraction is -21.0 ‰.

Fairly abundant chert gravel was recovered from the 1/4-inch screen in this
stratum (Table 4.5). Stratum 1 was not subdivided in the field, although a subtle color and
grain size division was noticed in the cutbank, with the lower unit bearing a pinkish cast
perhaps due to iron staining. The staining increases in an upstream direction, possibly
indicating a greater proportion of reworked Lissie sediments in this direction.

528

Table 4.5. Material Recovered from Quarter-Inch Screen.

Average of all units except N113 E98 and N109 E96
Stratum

Average
chert gravel
density
(count/m3)

Average
snail
density
(count/m3)

Average
rhizonconcretion density
(g/m3)

Average
FeMn
density
(count/m3)

Average Goliad
SS and caliche
nodule density
(g/m3)

Number
of levels
averaged

3
2D
2C
2B
2A
1

2000
2163
570
370
326
1430

2168
3180
1710
310
239
10

13,634
11,524
13,094
10,683
17,490
26,068

126
166
53
30
16
72

2225
1088
1040
1487
257
918

1
7
6
26
14
12

126
152
143
43
234
72

2225
6249
5164
2169
8861
918

1
17
8
28
19
12

Average of all units except N113 E98

3
2D
2C
2B
2A
1

2000
2626
2210
661
5287
1430

2168
4419
1808
331
199
10

13,634
12,388
11,622
10,277
16,358
26,068

In the sediment sample column from N110 E102, another change in the sediment
occurs about 10 cm below the upper contact. Samples above 91.75 m are fine-grained and
clay-rich, with little gravel present; sediment is primarily less than 2.5 phi in size, without
prominent size modes. The sample from 91.75-91.70 m is a sandy, higher energy deposit
with over 4% gravel, including some over 4 mm in diameter, and with a prominent size
mode at 2.5-3.0 phi (Fig. 4.66). Samples below this become progressively sandier and
even more strongly modal, but have less and less gravel. The uppermost stratum 1 sample
can be characterized as clay-rich and poorly sorted, the lowest sample as sandy and wellsorted. The prominent size mode at 2.5 to 3.0 phi matches the dominant mode expressed
in all three of the analyzed Lissie terrace samples, and may indicate that sediment below
91.75 m was partly reworked from eroding Lissie deposits upstream.
529

The stratigraphic change at 91.75-91.70 m was recognized in the profiles of
N110 E102, but did not appear as distinct as in the sediment samples. This is the only
instance in which laboratory analysis of the sediment disclosed a major stratigraphic
change not recorded in profiles of the excavation units.

Prominent, discontinuous, wavy horizontal crosslaminations are visible in strata 1
and 2A in the cutbank profile, marked by cream-colored (postdepositional)
carbonate staining (Fig. 4.53). While these are not thought to be channel bedforms,
they could represent small scale primary sedimentary structures of some sort developed
on the floodplain paleosurface -- perhaps small scale ripples or undulations. Because
they are discontinuous and overlapping, they do not appear to be laminae that were
originally planar but later deformed by depositional loading. Another possibility is that
they are not depositional features at all, but represent fossilized wetting fronts developed
in the sandy sediments by groundwater movement. In others words, these might be the
calcareous equivalents of the clay lamellae that are often seen in sandy sediments as a
result of seasonal fluctuation of the water table. For the four samples analyzed, carbonate
makes up about 24% by weight of the raw stratum 1 sediment, but the average would
probably be about 28% except for missing data from two samples. Carbonate content
rises from about 22% at the lowest point in the sample column to about 26% just below
the calcrete zone (see stratum 2A notes). Soluble calcium carbonate is here expressed as

CaCO3
sediment weight + CaCO3

530

Figure 4.53. Closeup of Strata 1 and 2A in Cutbank Profile. Looking southwest at lower
part of cutbank profile, near the downstream end where only the top part of
stratum 1 is exposed. Top part of view is stratum 2A, and stringline is set at
92.40 m. Note wavy carbonate-impregnated laminations. Scale is 50 cm
long.

Stratum 1 also contains abundant calcareous nodules and gritty, prominent creamcolored rhizoconcretions. Carbonate rhizoconcretions are very abundant in this stratum,
more so than in any of the others; an average density of over 26 kg per cubic meter was
calculated for stratum 1 based on screen recovery (Table 4.5). Goliad sandstone clasts
and caliche nodules are less abundant in stratum 1 than elsewhere in the bench, and are
actually much more abundant in the immediately overlying stratum 2A.

531

Large black ferromanganese concretions are also fairly abundant, more so than in
the immediately overlying

strata.

Occasional

widely

scattered

cultural

debris

[charcoal, chipping debris, small chert thermal spalls, small baked clay nodules, mussel
shell fragments, a piece of charred antler or bone, and other small bones or bone
fragments, including

a turtle

plastron

(Emydidae, either Pseudemys concinna or

Trachemys scripta) with cut marks; Fig. 4.54] was observed in the profiles or excavated
from stratum 1, all of it within 33 cm of the upper contact. Snail shell is quite scarce in
stratum 1, but inspection of surviving shells suggests that dissolution by groundwater is
only partly responsible. Many of the snail shells from stratum 1 are somewhat pitted and
weakened, but mechanical breakage during processing of the sediment probably accounts
for most of the sample loss. Almost no shells were recovered from the 1/4-inch screen,
but slightly better recovery of microsnails was achieved from the matrix samples,
probably as a result of the less traumatic methods used for matrix sample processing.
Two sphaeriid clams and a number of aquatic snails are present in the matrix samples
from 91.85-91.80 m, and the 91.75-91.70 m sample contains a single example of the cold
water spring snail Valvata tricarinata. Cincinnatia integra appears in the matrix samples
from N109 E103. This slow-current aquatic snail is a diatom feeder and seems to be
somewhat more common in Pleistocene than in Holocene deposits.

As in the rest of the bench sediments, pollen recovery from stratum 1 is almost
nonexistent. Only scattered grains of pine, sweetgum, oak, cottonwood, Cheno-Ams, and
high-spined and low-spined Compositae were recovered, along with a few fungal spores.
A single dry sediment sample (N111 E101, 92.00-91.95 m) spanning the contact between
strata 1 and 2A was scanned microscopically for freshwater sponge spicules at 100X.
Sponge spicules and other siliceous biotic debris were found to be fairly abundant, but
532

fragmentary. Diatoms (mostly soil or marsh species), sponge spicules, phytoliths, and
chrysophyte cysts were also abundant in the diatom samples from 91.85-91.60 m
analyzed by Barbara Winsborough (see Chapter 7, diatoms). Chrysophytes are algae in
the class Chrysophyceae (mostly freshwater). Aquatic diatoms are relatively abundant in
strata 1 and 2A (especially the interval at 92.15-91.75 m in stratum 2A and near the top
of stratum 1). Abundant freshwater sponge spicules, diatoms, some ferromanganese
deposition and finely divided charcoal appear in a sediment thin section from N111 E101
(91.95-91.90 m).

Figure 4.54. Turtle Plastron Fragments (With Cutmarks) in situ in Stratum 1 Cutbank at
92.12 and 92.08 m, Looking Down and South. Emydidae (either Pseudemys
concinna or Trachemys scripta, Lot B-154). Scale is 15 cm long.

533

No cultural features or concentrations of debris are known to be associated with this
stratum, but a dark gray-brown stain (about 20 cm in diameter, 9YR 3.5 3.5/2 moist)
consisting of clay-rich sediment mottled with burnt umber colored iron stains was
discovered above the 91.90 m level in unit N110 E102 (Figs. 4.55, 4.56). The stained
area was softer than the surrounding carbonate-impregnated sediment, and was still
visible in the floor when the unit was discontinued at 91.55 m. It is interpreted as a buried
taproot mold from a tree. A phytolith sample was collected but not analyzed.

The upper contact of stratum 1 varies in elevation from a minimum of 91.84 m in
N110 E102 to a maximum of 92.24 m near the west end of the cutbank profile. Average
elevation appears to be slightly above 92.00 m. The basal elevation of the stratum is
unknown.

Stratum 2A (muddy unit)
This grayish brown (2.5 Y 5.5/2 to 10 YR 4.5-6.5/1-2 moist) fine grained zone
overlying stratum 1 is the lowest stratum with substantial evidence of human occupation.
In Figure 4.21, it is the lower and more prominent of the two dark bands visible in the
cutbank. The maximum thickness exposed is about 38 cm, in the cutbank profile. It
was completely penetrated by four 1 x 1 m excavation units, and the upper 15-25 cm
of the stratum was exposed in three other units. It consists primarily of about 41% silt
and 40% clay, with a small amount (about 19%) of sand after carbonate removal. X-ray
diffraction of a clay sample from N110 E102 (92.05-92.00 m) identifies montmorillonite.
No gravel was found in the grain-size samples extracted from the matrix column,
although small quantities of chert gravel were occasionally recovered from the 1/4-inch
screen (Table 4.5).
534

Figure 4.55. Probable Tree Mold, 91.60-91.55 m. A dark stain representing a probable
tree taproot mold is shown in plan view at two different levels in unit N110
E102.
535

Figure 4.56. Probable Tree Mold, 91.90 m. Upper panel, a dark stain representing a
probable tree taproot mold is shown in plan view about 30 cm above the
preceding levels in unit N110 E102. Lower panel, photo looking down and
north at taproot mold in 91.95-91.90 m level. Scale is 50 cm long.
536

After carbonate removal, composition ranges as follows:
Gravel: none
Sand: 16 to 24%
Silt: 39 to 42%
Clay (plus analytical error): 37 to 43%
The silt fraction is remarkably uniform in amount and size composition
throughout. Fig. 4.41 (lower histogram) shows a detailed view of the grain-size
composition from the 92.15-92.10 m level in unit N109 E96. Seven radiocarbon assays
derive from this stratum. One of these (GX-17035-II) is from a sediment sample
extracted from the matrix column in N111 E101 at 92.15-92.10 m. Organic carbon
content was similar to the stratum 1 sample – about 0.21 g of carbon was extracted from
1.022 kg of dry sediment. The δ 13C value of the humin fraction is –18.3 ‰.
A prominent and widespread depositional surface occurs about 6-10 cm below the
top of stratum 2A, marked by a scatter of mussel shells lying concave side up (Figs.
4.22, 4.30, 4.33, 4.34). When, in November 1979, we faced off and cleaned the cutbank
profile for the first time, a thin band of minute desiccation cracks appeared along this
surface a day or two later, as the sediments dried. Presumably this indicates a slightly
higher clay content on this surface, although an increase in clay content at this level
does not appear in the sediment sample column from N110 E102, nor is the surface
visible in that unit. Mussel shells associated with this surface were excavated in three
units, N113 E98, N112 E99, and N111 E101, and more shells appear in the cutbank
adjacent to these units. All of the shells that can be definitely associated with this surface
are Threeridge (Amblema plicata) except for a single very large partial Giant Washboard
537

valve (Megalonaias nervosa). A single Southern Mapleleaf (Quadrula apiculata) right
valve was collected from the cutbank about 20 m downstream from the bench
excavations and may also be associated with stratum 2A, but because of the distance, its
assignment to this surface is uncertain. Scattered charcoal and occasional bone and
chipping debris are also associated with this surface. Lenses of coarse sand and gravel
also appear at this level in the excavation unit closest to the bluff (N109 E96), but are
believed to represent ravine outwash deposits and are presumably unrelated to the shellbearing surface. These are detailed below.

A second but much less extensive surface can be defined in two units only, N110
E102 and N111 E101. In the former, a hard, limey calcrete pan occupies the lower 6-13
cm of stratum 2A (Fig. 4.26). It is cream-colored to light gray (2.5 Y 6.5/2 moist) and has
a gritty, cementlike consistency. Iron stains are present but not abundant. Calcium
carbonate content reaches a maximum of 31% by weight in the middle of this zone (the
greatest amount in any of the analyzed sediment samples) and then declines to a
minimum of about 11% below the top of the zone. This limey zone is thought to be a
diagenetic feature postdating the deposition of stratum 2A. The top of the zone may
correspond to a shift in depositional conditions, since a small but significant amount of
gravel in -1.0 to -0.5 phi size range appears at 92.05-92.00 m, accompanied by some
coarsening of the sand fraction. Associated with this surface is a small charcoal-stained
pit or lens (Feature 6), scattered bits of charcoal, some bone, and a small chert core. The
average carbonate content for stratum 2A overall is about 19%.

A deposit of tan (9 YR 6.5/1 moist) homogeneous silt, with a slight reddish hue
and fewer iron stains than stratum 2A, appears 16 cm below the top of that stratum in
538

the southwest corner of N109 E96. It is unclear whether this represents a unique deposit
within stratum 2A, or is the upper part of stratum 1, since excavation was abandoned in
the unit before this silt deposit could be identified.

Small, coarse-grained sand and gravel bars were also uncovered in stratum 2A in
unit N109 E96. Because 1) these gravel bars are confined to the test unit farthest from the
creek, 2) the gravel is dramatically coarser than the muddy floodplain surface on which it
rests, and 3) the gravel is probably mostly derived from erosion of Goliad Formation
bedrock, these bars are believed to represent outwash from small ravines or rivulets cut
into buried bedrock slopes somewhere to the south and west — bedrock that was
obviously exposed when the gravel bars were forming, but is now buried by postBeaumont terrace deposits. These localized outwash deposits are splayed outward onto
the finer-grained floodplain deposits left by the creek, and they recur at intervals in strata
2A and 2B, after which they disappear. These bars can be seen in profile in Fig. 4.39 and
in plan view in Figs. 4.43-4.50. The lithology, texture, and sorting of the gravel is highly
variable from lens to lens. Sorting varies from unimodal (Fig. 4.51, top panel) to heavily
left-skewed (two lower panels). In the three samples analyzed for lithology and texture,
the largest clasts are all calcareous and are, respectively 2.0, 3.15, and 1.14 cm in
maximum length. Much of the calcareous material consist of small caliche-like nodules,
hard, smooth-surfaced (without adhering quartz grains), and cream-colored. Calcareous
clastic material makes up respectively 29%, 49%, and 93% of the samples, and chert and
quartz pebbles (perhaps also derived from the Goliad Formation) make up most of the
rest (Table 4.6). The finer grades are dominated by quartz sand and silt.

539

Table 4.6. Lithology of Coarse-Grained Outwash Deposits, N109 E96.
N109 E96 (approx. 92.14-92.10 m), quartz and caliche sand pocket near north wall
-4.5 to -4.0 to -3.5 to -3.0 to -2.5 to -2.0 to -1.5 to Percentage
-4.0 phi -3.5 phi -3.0 phi -2.5 phi -2.0 phi -1.5 phi -1.0 phi
Clastic material:
calcareous pebbles, aggregates
chert or quartz pebbles
ferruginous sandstone clasts

1

13
2

Other inclusions:
ferromanganese nodules
snail shell fragments
bone fragments

64
7
1

460
19
1

2

2685
197
2

93.10
6.83
0.07

41
8
2

N109 E96 (92.05-92.02 m), tightly packed caliche and chert gravel and sand, northeast corner
-4.5 to -4.0 to -3.5 to -3.0 to -2.5 to -2.0 to -1.5 to Percentage
-4.0 phi -3.5 phi -3.0 phi -2.5 phi -2.0 phi -1.5 phi -1.0 phi
Clastic material:
calcareous pebbles, aggregates
chert or quartz pebbles
ferruginous sandstone clasts
Goliad sandstone clasts

7

26
3

1

2

57
36

Other inclusions:
ferromanganese nodules
snail shell fragments
chert flake/shatter/heat spall

109
107

191
200

6

5

2

12

469
595

1150
1108
1
4

11
1

21
2
1

49.29
50.27
0.02
0.44

N109 E96 (92.05-92.00 m), clean sand and gravel, extreme northeast corner
-4.5 to -4.0 to -3.5 to -3.0 to -2.5 to -2.0 to -1.5 to Percentage
-4.0 phi -3.5 phi -3.0 phi -2.5 phi -2.0 phi -1.5 phi -1.0 phi
Clastic material:
calcareous pebbles, aggregates
chert or quartz pebbles
ferruginous sandstone clasts
Goliad sandstone clasts
orthoquartzite pebble

20
7

18
35

41
69

62
151

1

4

12

1

3

4

162
454
3
2

1

Other inclusions:
ferromanganese nodules
chert flake/shatter/heat spall

540

9
1

29.08
68.71
0.29
1.82
0.1

Microscopic examination of the finer grades of sand shows that many of the
grains have whitish calcareous coatings, probably remnants of the original calcareous
cement. These lenses have also been infiltrated by the same gray phreatic carbonate
found elsewhere in the bench deposits. One of the samples collected at 92.05-92.00 m
includes a small chunk of carbonate-cemented conglomerate (10 YR 7.5/2), with chert
pebbles up to 14 mm in diameter. It seems clear that the phreatic carbonate has infiltrated
the gravel lenses after they were buried in stratum 2A floodplain sediments. Small
numbers of ferromanganese nodules, snail shell fragments, and bone fragments are also
present. A small chert flake fragment and a shatter fragment (or heat spall) were also
found in two of the samples. These appear to be cultural and have unabraded edges. Since
chipping debris, bone, and snail shell were found in the overlying and adjacent stratum
2A sediments, it is possible the items found in the gravel samples were simply introduced
from the adjacent sediments.

The prominent wavy crosslaminations seen in stratum 1 are also visible

in

stratum 2A in the cutbank profile, but were not recognizable in any of the excavations.
Abundant small, dark brown ferromanganese concretions and iron stains are present, and
rhizoconcretions are more abundant in this stratum than in any of the others except
stratum 1. When unit N109 E96 is included in the averages, this stratum has the highest
densities of chert gravel (5287 per cubic meter), ferromanganese concretions (234 per
cubic meter, and caliche nodules and Goliad sandstone clasts (8861 per cubic meter),
although the densities drop considerably when that unit is excluded (Table 4.5).

Material recovered from stratum 2A includes chert flakes, shatter fragments and
thermal spalls, a large core-trimming flake (Fig. 3.11), a small carved and polished bone
541

or antler (?) pin, fired clay nodules (some with plant impressions), small heat-discolored
(?) sandstone fragments, hackberry seed fragments and animal bone [small birds,
cottontail rabbit, rabbit-sized animal, a fish tooth, part of a caudal vertebra from a
raccoon-sized animal, various bone fragments from rodents or other small mammals,
long bone shaft fragments from deer-sized animals, some of it burned, turtle carapace
fragments, packrat (Neotoma sp) and gopher (Geomys sp.) teeth]. It is worth noting that
although gopher teeth were recovered from this stratum, the dense clay making up the
deposit is entirely unsuitable as a substrate for gopher burrows, and it is likely that the
gophers themselves were brought in from adjacent higher terraces with sandy surface
soils.

A couple of small (maximum length 23.8-37.0 mm) chert or quartz pebbles that
are probable manuports (unmodified geological materials carried onto the site by human
agency) were found in stratum 2A. It is also likely that the small triangular chert biface
(Fig. 3.11) discovered underneath Feature 5 is associated with stratum 2A, because it was
recovered at 92.18 m, and stratum 2A appears to extend as high as 92.25 m in the nearby
west wall profile of unit N113 E98 (Figs. 4.36, 4.37). Feature 6, a very shallow oblong pit
(about 5 cm deep) 49 cm long and 18-23 cm wide originates near the base of stratum 2A,
but contained only a few bits of wood charcoal, fired clay nodules, and some iron-stained
snail shell. A small polyhedral chert core (Fig. 3.11) was found nearby, its base resting at
91.97 m, approximately where the lower contact of stratum 2A should be.

Snails are somewhat more abundant and diverse in stratum 2A than in stratum 1.
Specimens of the cold water spring snail Valvata tricarinata were recovered from matrix
samples in N109 E103 (92.10-92.05 m) and N110 E102 (92.05-92.00 m) and from the
542

1/4-inch screen in N112 E99 (92.25-92.20 m). Specimens of Cincinnatia integra were
recovered from matrix samples in N109 E103 and N110 E102 and from 1/4-inch screen
samples in N109 E103 and N109 E96. A single sphaeriid clam valve was recovered from
a transitional level at the top of the stratum (N109 E103, 92.20-92.15 m), another from
midstratum (N110 E102, 92.05-92.00 m), and a single peaclam (Pisidium sp.) valve from
a transitional level at the base (N109 E103, 92.05-92.00 m).
Scattered grains of oak, cottonwood, willow, high-spined and low-spined
Compositae, and Liguliflorae (a composite, member of the sunflower family) were
recovered in pollen analysis, along with some fungal spores. A single stratum 2A wood
charcoal sample submitted for identification could not be identified. A small fragment of
unidentified charred plant material (probably monocot, similar to a sedge or rush) was
found in an un-numbered radiocarbon sample from N113 E98 (92.2092.15 m). A single
dry sediment sample (N111 E101, 92.05-92.00 m) was scanned microscopically at 100 X
for freshwater sponge spicules. Sponge spicules and other siliceous biotic debris were
found to be somewhat less abundant and more fragmentary than in the level below, but
diatoms are more abundant in this stratum than in any of the others. Diatoms, sponge
spicules, phytoliths, and (in some levels) chrysophyte cysts were also abundant in the
diatom samples from 92.15-91.85 m analyzed by Barbara Winsborough (see Chapter 7 on
diatoms). Most of the samples from this stratum contain numbers of aquatic diatoms.
Samples from stratum 1 up as high as the midpoint of stratum 2A (at 92.10-92.05 m)
contain relatively high counts of Epithemia adnata, an epiphytic diatom characteristic of
marshes and aquatic habitats. Above that level, the species becomes very scarce. A
sediment thin section from N111 E101 (92.05-92.00 m) has abundant ferromanganese

543

deposits, charcoal, diatom and sponge spicule fragments, and displacive carbonate
growth pushing apart skeletal grains.

Stratum 2B (sandy unit)
This mottled gray-brown (10 YR 5.5-6.5/1.5-2.0 moist) sandy stratum is lighter
in color than the adjacent strata and is quite similar in overall composition to stratum 1,
with nearly equal amounts of sand (37%), silt (31%), and clay (32%), with trace amounts
of gravel. X-ray diffraction of a clay sample from N110 E102 (92.45-92.40 m) indicates
chlorite or kaolinite. After carbonate removal, the range of composition is:
Gravel: 0 to 0.09%
Sand: 21 to 43%
Silt: 28 to 37%
Clay (plus analytical error): 27 to 42%
Organic carbon content of stratum 2B is apparently low. A single humin sample
was extracted from the N111 E101 matrix column at 92.40-92.35 m and assayed by AMS
(GX-18867-AMS). The δ 13C value of the humin fraction is –22.1 ‰. Stratum 2B visibly
coarsens upward, with relatively more sand in the upper portion and more fines near the
bottom. This trend was perceptible in the excavation profiles, and in some cases a
division into a sandier upper unit and a muddier lower unit was made. In the sediment
sample column, the sand population becomes finer up to a point just above the middle of
the stratum, then reverses the trend and coarsens toward the top of the stratum. The
distribution of modal grain sizes is similar to the lower part of stratum 1. Fig. 4.41 (upper
histogram) shows a detailed view of the grain-size composition from the 92.30-92.25 m
level in N109 E96. Near the middle of the cutbank profile (Fig. 4.22), a small lens of
544

coarse sand appears near the top of the stratum, and a stringer of pea gravel can be seen at
the contact between this stratum and the overlying one. Large disturbances of unknown
origin were also visible in the northeast corner of unit N112 E99 (Fig. 4.34) and north
wall of N112 E97 (Fig. 4.38)

Another characteristic of stratum 2B is the variability in thickness shown in the
cutbank profile, where it varies from as little as 3 cm to as much as 19 cm in thickness
(Fig. 4.22). In the excavation profiles, it is perhaps no more variable than the other strata,
but it is thicker (8-43 cm) there than in the cutbank. Variability in thickness appears to be
a function equally of variation in the elevation of both upper and lower contacts. This
stratum was penetrated by all eight of the excavation units, making it the best sampled of
the bench deposits.

The uppermost of the ravine outwash features uncovered in unit N109 E96
occurs in stratum 2B. It is a small gravel bar running diagonally across the southwest
corner, composed of small Goliad sandstone and caliche nodules, mixed with some
chert pea gravel in a matrix of light gray-brown clay-rich sand (Fig. 4.49). Another lens
of caliche and chert gravel appears at the base of stratum 2B along the north wall of the
same unit.

Rhizoconcretions are less abundant in stratum 2B than in any of the other strata,
regardless of which units are averaged (Table 4.5), but small rhizoconcretions show in a
sediment thin section from N111 E101 (92.40-92.35 m). Carbonate content is about 15%.
The

iron stains which give this zone its mottled appearance become darker, more

545

compact, and more abundant toward the base of the stratum, where small black
ferromanganese concretions appear. These concretions are not very abundant.

Small nodules of Goliad sandstone are occasionally found in this stratum, but are
less common than the other strata except in unit N109 E96, which is presumed to be
closer to the valley wall and therefore to the source of the clasts. If this unit is included in
the averages, the situation reverses and stratum 2B has higher densities of Goliad
sandstone and caliche nodules than most of the other strata (Table 4.5).

Less common are chipping debris, chert or quartzite pebbles and thermal spalls,
bits of heat-discolored sandstone and poorly preserved mussel shells; rarely, bone and
small bits of charcoal were encountered in the excavations. A number of small fired clay
nodules were recovered. Animal bone includes gopher (Geomys sp.) mandible and
maxilla fragments, other rodent teeth and a mandible fragment, snake and salamander
vertebrae, a rabbit (Sylvilagus sp.) tibia fragment, fragments from unidentified rabbitsized animals, the proximal femur of a small bird, a urostyle from a small frog, carapace
fragments from a small juvenile turtle (unidentified), unidentified small mammal bone
fragments, and long bone fragments from a wolf-sized or deer-sized animal.

The principal evidence of human occupation is the hearth, Feature 5, and
associated microfauna deposit; these occur at the base of the stratum, in Unit 2 and unit
N113 E98. The composition of the microfauna deposit will be presented in some detail in
the chapter on vertebrates. For the time being, it will suffice to say that the deposit
includes a wide variety of small animals: amphibians (small mouthed salamander,
?leopard frog, toad), snakes (?ringneck, ?longnosed, brown or rough earth snake), lizards,
546

small birds, small perch-sized fish, and a variety of small mammals, including eastern
mole, hispid pocket mouse, kangaroo rat, least shrew, pocket gopher, packrat, deer mouse
or white-footed mouse, northern grasshopper mouse, vole (either pine vole or prairie
vole) and cottontail rabbit. Many of these animals are fossorial and come from sandy
habitats. Some come from dry habitats, but many come from damp habitats, and the fish
undoubtedly derive from Coleto Creek. Both open and wooded habitats are probably
represented.

Microsnails are slightly better preserved in stratum 2B (especially in the upper
part) than in stratum 2A. The lower part of the stratum contains a few aquatic snails,
while the top part has none except for the uppermost 1/4-inch screen sample in a few
units. The cold spring snail Valvata tricarinata appears in unit N109 E96 at 92.35-92.30
m (three specimens). Cincinnatia integra continues to appear in some numbers at the
base of the stratum in N109 E103 (10 specimens in the 92.25-92.20 m level) and in N110
E102 (92.30-92.25, 92.25-92.20 m). Microsnail samples at 92.55-92.40 m in N109 E103
and at 92.55-92.30 m in N110 E102 contain a concentration of Carychium mexicanum, a
very small, wet floodplain species.

Pollen is almost entirely absent from stratum 2A. Three indeterminate grains and
a single grain of Carya sp. (most likely pecan) were recovered, but the zone from 92.35
to 92.15 m was entirely devoid of pollen. Wood charcoal from N112 E99 (92.40-92.35
m) has been identified as oak (Quercus sp.). Freshwater sponge spicules and phytoliths
were found in most of the diatom samples from this stratum, and chrysophyte cysts were
found in the lowermost sample.

547

Diatom counts are much lower in stratum 2B than in strata 1 and 2A. Soil, marsh,
and aquatic species were recovered. The sample from 92.40-92.35 m lies at the midpoint
of the stratum in unit N110 E102, and it contains higher diatom counts and species
richness than the rest of the stratum 2B samples, and it includes several marsh and
aquatic species not found in the others.

Stratum 2C (muddy unit)
This dark colored, muddy stratum is an analogue of stratum 2A, but is thinner
and, as a unit, somewhat coarser as a result of greater proportions of sand and gravel
(although the sand itself is finer than in stratum 2A). It was penetrated by seven
excavation units. The average thickness of stratum 2A is roughly 18 to 29 cm, while
stratum 2C is generally about 10 to 17 cm thick, but thickens downstream in the cutbank
profile, to a maximum thickness of 40 cm at the east end of the bench. Stratum 2C is a
mottled gray (10 YR 5.5/1.0-1.5 moist, 2.5 Y 6.5/2 dry) and brown (7.5 YR 4.5/4 moist),
similar in color to stratum 2A, but more uniform from profile to profile. It has the same
plastic, clay-rich appearance as stratum 2A, and consists of about 31% sand, 33% silt,
and 36% clay, with trace amounts of gravel (although these averages are based on only
three sediment samples). After carbonate removal, the range of variation is:
Gravel: 0 to 0.70%
Sand: 26 to 38%
Silt: 29 to 36%
Clay (plus analytical error): 33 to 38%
A sediment subsample was extracted from the N111 E101 matrix column at
92.70-92.65 m and submitted for radiocarbon assay (GX-17034-II). About 0.17 g of
548

carbon was extracted from 1.129 kg of sediment. The δ 13C value of the humin fraction is
–19.0 ‰. More chert gravel was recovered from the 1/4-inch screen than in strata 2A and
2B (Table 4.5). The composition of stratum 2C is somewhat intermediate between that of
2A and 2B; a grain size mode at 2.5 to 3.0 phi is represented in stratum 2B but is not
shown in stratum 2A. The upward-coarsening trend of the sand fraction in stratum 2B
reverses in this stratum. In unit N112 E97, a division can be made between an upper unit
and a lower unit that is less gray, has slightly less clay, and in some places has slightly
more concretions. This muddy unit is much fainter and less well-defined than stratum 2A.
That is illustrated by photos of the cutbank (Fig. 4.21), and some of the unit profiles
where the contacts could not be successfully matched in adjacent walls (Fig. 4.30) or
could not be traced in some walls (Fig. 4.34, Fig. 4.36). Stratum 2C was a difficult
stratum to profile in nearly all the units. At the east end of the bench, a one-meter long,
thin layer of scattered pea-sized chert gravel appears at the contact between stratum 2C
and 2B in the cutbank profile. Nearby in stratum 2B is a lens of coarse sand. These
deposits

perhaps suggest higher discharge conditions in this vicinity, but are not

duplicated elsewhere at this stratigraphic position. Some small pockets of sand also
appear in the north wall of N112 E97 and the west wall of N113 E98.

Calcium carbonate rhizoconcretions are much less abundant than in stratum 2A,
but are more abundant than in stratum 2B. Ferromanganese concretions are also more
abundant (Table 4.5). Carbonate webbing is more conspicuous in this stratum than in
the overlying stratum 2D, although rhizoconcretions were nearly as abundant in that
stratum. Carbonate content is about the same as in stratum 2B, or 15%. Iron stains are
darker, more compact, and more abundant in stratum 2C than in the overlying stratum

549

2D. In unit N109 E96, Goliad sandstone clasts are more abundant than in stratum 2B,
although in the remaining units, the density diminishes slightly.

Because this stratum is thin, the sample of its contents is small. A small
unmodified quartz cobble (74.5 mm long) was found in unit N109 E103. Chert flakes,
heat spalls, fired clay nodules, discolored sandstone, hackberry seed fragments,
occasional small bits of mussel shell (none identifiable) and charcoal, and animal bone
were recovered. Identifiable wood charcoal includes Ulmus sp. (elm) and Carya sp.
(probably pecan). Identifiable bone includes a bullfrog (cf. Rana catesbeiana) urostyle
fragment, frog pelvic girdle fragment, salamander vertebra, a fish tooth, fish vertebra,
caudal vertebra from a packrat-sized mammal, calcined rabbit (Sylvilagus sp.) tibia
fragments, unidentified rodent rib fragment, and a skull fragment (with cut marks) from
some unidentified small animal. A chert cobble core (Fig. 3.11) and the distal left
humerus of an adult raccoon (Procyon lotor, Fig. 4.57) were recovered from the cutbank.
The latter is the largest single bone element found in the bench deposits, although it is
probably not the largest animal represented.

Also possibly associated is a small, poorly defined pit (?), Feature 7. The actual
surface of origin of Feature 7 is somewhat ambiguous; it could have been excavated
from a surface as low as the contact between strata 2B and 2C or as high as some point
within stratum 2D. Associated with this feature, both within and outside the fill, are
bone fragments and small animal bones in somewhat greater than usual abundance (cf.
Dipodomys ordii, frog, small mammal, turtle carapace). A possible chopping tool made
from a chert cobble (Fig. 3.11) was recovered nearby, but at an elevation definitely
below the point of origin of the feature.
550

Figure 4.57. Raccoon Humerus Exposed in Stratum 2C, Cutbank. Looking southwest;
measuring tape ruled in inches and centimeters. This is the largest single
element known from the bench deposits, although it is probably not the
largest animal represented. Photo December 10, 1979.

Snails from stratum 2C are more abundantly preserved in the 1/4-inch screen
sample, although microsnails are actually less abundant than in stratum 2B. Three
examples of Cincinnatia integra were recovered from the 1/4-inch screen sample in N111
E101 (92.65-92.60 m) and N109 E96 (92.45-92.40 m and 92.40-92.35 m) and one from a
matrix sample in N110 E102 (92.70-92.65 m). Other aquatic snails recovered from the
1/4-inch screen include Helisoma anceps, Gyraulus parvus, and unidentified planorbids
(two examples of each).
551

Of the two pollen samples analyzed from this stratum, one was entirely barren,
while the other contained only a single grain of low-spined Compositae and a single
trilete spore.

Diatoms are as abundant in stratum 2C as in strata 2B and 2D. Evidently
preservation is more or less constant for these three strata. Taxonomic composition is
similar to the other strata. Sponge spicules and phytoliths are present, but not abundant.

Stratum 2D (sandy unit)
This thick, sandy stratum is perhaps the most variable (both laterally and
vertically) of the bench deposits, although this variability does not show in the sediment
sample column. Stratum 2D was completely penetrated by 3 m2 of excavation units, and
in another 4 m2 the upper part had been partially removed by erosion of the bench
surface. Excavation of most units began in this stratum; in only one unit (N109 E103)
was it completely sealed by overlying deposits.

Stratum 2D is composed of about 51% sand, 22% silt, and 26% clay, with trace
amounts of gravel; after carbonate removal, the range of composition is:
Gravel: 0 to 1%
Sand: 46 to 56%
Silt: 19 to 25%
Clay (plus analytical error): 22 to 28%
Considerably more chert gravel was recovered from the 1/4-inch screen than in
the strata below (Table 4.5). This unit is characteristically mottled and variegated
552

throughout. The mottling is caused by homogeneous gray (10 YR 6.5/2) stains, usually
vertical

but sometimes oblique, curving, or horizontal.

These probably represent

krotovinas excavated by burrowing insects, moles (?), or crawdads (although no crawdad
remains have been found in the site), or perhaps they are small root molds that have filled
with sedimentary fines. In some cases they have a carbonate core. These stains are
present in all the bench strata, but are most visible in the sandy, light-colored stratum
2D. They are conspicuous in black and white photos (Figs. 4.28, 4.29, 4.32, 4.33), less
so in black and white infrared and color. Rusty brown (7 YR 5.5/3) iron stains, lighter
in color and less prominent than in the zones below, are the other source of mottling. A
large disturbance of unknown origin can also be seen in the southeast corner of unit N109
E96 (Fig. 4.39).

In

the cutbank profile, near Feature 5, this stratum

appears

relatively

homogeneous (10 YR 5/4 dry), but downstream near the east end of the profile, coarse
sand appears at the base, grading upward to fine sand at the top.

In two excavation units, stratum 2D was divided into three separate depositional
zones, but the zones are not comparable from unit to unit. In one of them (N109 E103) a
thin band about 3-7 cm thick, grayer and muddier than the rest of the stratum, appears
near its midpoint, dipping slightly eastward (Fig. 4.24). This zone is very poorly defined
and was not recognized until excavation of the unit was finished, and it was noticed on an
overcast day when lighting conditions were especially good.

In another unit, N109 E96, stratum 2D was divided into three zones of nearly
equal thickness. Here again the middle zone is slightly grayer and muddier, but is about
553

17-23 cm thick and is chiefly distinguished by more sandstone nodules and snail shells
(Fig. 4.39). Its definition may be due primarily to debris scattered from a nearby
possible hearth (see below). Again, these subzones are faintly defined and cannot really
be seen in the photos of the profiles (Fig. 4.42). The following descriptions of the
subzones in N109 E96, listed from the top down, are excerpted from the field notes:

Stratum 2D3: Variegated gray (root molds: 10 YR 6.5/1.5) and rusty brown (iron
stains: 10 YR 5.5/3) clay-rich sand with calcium carbonate concretions. Fewer
sandstone nodules than 2D2; some snail shell, occasional charcoal; lower contact
indistinct.
Stratum 2D2: Slightly grayer than 2D3, but chiefly distinguished by more sandstone
nodules and snail shell; gray-brown (10 YR 6.5/2) sandy clay with sandstone nodules
about 0.5 to 2.5 cm in diameter, Rabdotus sp. and other snail shells (iron stained);
ferromanganese stains; lower contact indistinct.
Stratum 2D1: Same as 2D2, but less sandstone and snail shell; more clay than 2D3.
Feature 7 could originate from this zone, since stratum 2C matrix is noticeably sandier
in the vicinity of Feature 7. Color is 10 YR 5.5/2.
Rhizoconcretions in stratum 2D are intermediate in density, while Goliad
sandstone clasts and caliche nodules are abundant, especially in unit N109 E96.
Carbonate content is about 15%, similar to the previous two strata. Ferromanganese
concretions are also abundant, more so than in most of the other strata (Table 4.5).

One feature, a possible hearth, is known to be associated with stratum 2D. It
consists of a cluster of 9 or more sandstone nodules discovered at about 92.75 m while
clearing overburden south-southeast of N109 E96. Scattered sandstone fragments, small
bits of charcoal, and some mussel shell

(Amblema plicata left and right valves)

uncovered at a comparable level in that unit (Figs. 4.50, 4.51) appear to be
associated, and also correspond in depth to stratum 2D2. Juniperus sp. charcoal
554

(presumably Eastern red cedar) found in this debris scatter was collected for assay AA2831 (Fig. 4.50). The rock cluster was never assigned a feature number, formally
investigated, or recorded. Its location is indicated on Fig. 3.1, and Fig. 3.7 shows the
general area. Feature 7, also located in N109 E96, could conceivably have originated
from the base of stratum 2D, but is considered more likely to be associated with stratum
2C.

Material recovered from stratum 2D includes chert chipping debris, heat spalls or
shatter fragments, fired clay nodules, heat-discolored sandstone, calcined snail shell,
hackberry seed fragments, and charcoal.

Animal bone recovered from stratum 2D includes cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus sp.,
mandible, tooth, astragalus, scapula, ilium, tibia fragments and possibly a vertebra),
pocket gopher (Geomys sp., mandible, humerus), eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus, distal
humerus fragment), rodent, rabbit or bird long bone shaft fragments, turtle carapace
fragment, a small fish mandible fragment, rodent, snake and salamander vertebrae, and
unidentified herpetofauna.

Shell preservation is evidently much better in this stratum than in the deposits
below it. Only stratum 2A has larger quantities of mussel shell. Whether expressed as
counts or densities, snail quantities are also high in stratum 2D – for example a density of
4439 individuals per cubic meter is estimated for all the units where snails were saved. In
N110 E102, the snail counts rise dramatically in stratum 2D for both the 1/4-inch and
microsnail samples. In N109 E103, counts are higher for the 1/4-inch sample, but not for
microsnails. A few specimens of probable calcareous snail egg casings have been found
555

in the bench deposits, and one example consists of some egg casings found inside an
adult Anguispira strongylodes shell in N109 E96 (92.85-92.80 m). These are extremely
delicate and thin, and illustrate the excellent preservation of much of the biological
material, at least from the upper part of the bench sediments. At least six examples of
Cincinnatia integra are known (three from matrix samples in N110 E102, and three from
1/4-inch samples in other excavation units), as well as one example of Valvata tricarinata
from stratum 2D1 and another from stratum 2D2 in unit N109 E96. A single sphaeriid
clam valve was recovered from the 92.60-92.55 m level in N109 E96. Diatom counts are
low (and species richness is relatively low) in stratum 2D. The identified taxa are mostly
the same soil and marsh species found in the preceding strata, with a few aquatic species.
Phytoliths and a few broken sponge spicules were also found in the diatom samples.
Biosilica is scarce in a sediment thin section from N111 E101 (92.80-92.70 m). The three
pollen samples analyzed for stratum 2D contained a single grain of pine, 31 high-spined
Compositae grains, a fungal spore, and a couple of indeterminate grains. One sample
contained no pollen at all. A small piece of unidentified tree resin, sap, or amber was
found in the coarse fraction of the sieved bulk matrix from N109 E96 (92.75-92.70 m,
stratum 2D2). Remnants of carbonate coating suggest this item is contemporaneous, and
not a modern contaminant. Several sap-producing tree species in the Cupressaceae or
Fabaceae can be found in the region today.

Stratum 2E (sandy unit)
Directly overlying stratum 2D, and bordering the bench area on the downstream
side, is a coarse sandy deposit about 30 cm thick, designated stratum 2E (Figs. 4.22,
4.58). Its elevation range in the cutbank is 93.52-93.18 m.
556

Figure 4.58. Stratum 2E Sediment Sample Column. Looking south at short sample
column in cutbank. Note gravel lens in mid-column. Visible part of scale is
about 13 cm long. Photo December 29, 1979.
Because it appears rather easily eroded and is completely absent over the bench
itself, I assumed at first that it had formerly covered the bench area but had been removed
by erosion. However, in the few profiles of stratum 3 available, it can be seen that
stratum 3 merges uniformly with stratum 2D underneath, with no visible erosional
contact. This suggests that stratum 2E is a lens of limited extent which pinches out
557

somewhere to the southeast of our excavations (it first appears in the cutbank about
16.5 m downstream from Feature 5). Its extent downstream is unknown, since the
cutbank profile was not faced off far enough in that direction to reveal its limits; but it
is not thought to be extensive.

Stratum 2E consists of relatively coarse sand with scattered pea-sized chert
gravels and occasional pockets of gravel or coarser sand. It has a slight yellowish tint
(10 YR 6.5/3.5) and is lightly mottled with iron stains. Ferromanganese concretions are
uncommon. The single sediment sample completely analyzed (Fig. 4.59, collected from
the cutbank at 93.40-93.35 m) consists of 3% gravel, 64% sand, 13% silt, and 19% clay
(plus analytical error) after carbonate removal; it includes gravel from a small lens
about 10 cm thick encountered in sampling, and therefore does not accurately represent
the composition of the sample as a whole. Grain size modes evident in this sample
closely match those shown in the stratum 2D samples; there are modes at –2.5 to –2.0,
0.5 to 1.0, 1.5 to 2.0, and 2.5 to 3.0 phi. Carbonate content can be approximately
estimated from the grain-size sample at about 7% (this procedure is not quite as precise
as that used for the other bench samples, but should be reasonably close).

Another sample collected at 93.45-93.40 m was partially analyzed, and
includes about 10% gravel and 67% sand (the fines were not analyzed); modal structure
is similar to the first sample. Carbonate content of this sample was about 8%, and the
coarsest sieved grades contained significant numbers of rhizoconcretions. No cultural
debris was visible in this stratum in the Coleto Creek cutbank, and none was found
during collection of sediment samples. However, no other controlled excavation has
been done in this unit, so we cannot be sure that it is sterile.
558

Figure 4.59. Grain-Size Histograms for Stratum 2E. Only sand and gravel grades were
analyzed for the top sample. For the lower sample, analysis was done by
sieving of coarse fraction and pipette analysis of silt and clay fractions; only
the two coarsest clay grades (8.0 to 8.5 and 8.5 to 9.0 phi) were determined
individually.
559

The gravel pockets embedded in stratum 2E are its most striking feature. Where
these have washed out of the cutbank, they show up as voids (for example, at the top of
the photo in Fig. 4.21). The large voids seen in Fig. 4.20 probably correspond as well.
The coarse, sandy-gravelly nature of stratum 2E, and its limited extent, tend to suggest it
might be the result of a single, rapid depositional event. It cannot be a crevasse splay
since the creek has never had well-developed natural levees. An alternative thesis
would be that it represents bedload deposits from channel migration over the site, but
this can probably also be ruled out since the contact between strata 2D and 2E appears
gradational rather than disconformant. Probably the most plausible explanation is that
stratum 2E represents coarse-grained overbank sediment deposited during flooding. It
does not, however, have the preponderance of calcareous clastic debris seen in the
ravine outwash deposits excavated in N109 E96, so the sediment source must be Coleto
Creek itself rather than the nearby ravine. It is possible that stratum 2E might simply be a
coarse-grained channel-margin facies of stratum 3, but I have classified it as part of
stratum 2 because it more closely resembles those sediments.

No excavations were done in stratum 2E, except for the short matrix sample
column 22 cm wide collected from the cutbank profile. Four samples were collected:
93.45-93.40, 93.40-93.35, 93.35-93.30, and 93.30-93.25 m. Only the upper two were
analyzed for grain size, and the 93.45-93.40 m sample for diatoms. The diatom count (15)
and species richness (5 taxa) are both very low. No information on bone, shell, charcoal,
pollen, rhizolith, caliche nodule, or sandstone clastic content is available, though the
remaining samples have been archived. Although no radiocarbon assays are available, the
deposit is presumed to be early Holocene in age since it is stratigraphically higher than an
apparently valid early Holocene assay (AA2831) from stratum 2D.
560

Stratum 3 (muddy/loamy unit)
Stratum 3 is one of the most distinctive and easily recognized depositional units in
the Berger Bluff sequence, and it may appear downstream at 41 GD 31 as well. It is a
dark, chocolate-brown (when moist, but 8 YR 6.5/3 dry), snail-rich, sandy silt/clay with
some carbonate webbing and a tendency to form blocky peds. Conceivably, a large part
of this stratum might represent either redeposited soil or silt and clay-rich alluvium
stripped from the head of the Coleto Creek catchment by early Holocene erosion, but no
micromorphological studies to look for relict pedogenic features have been done. It is
characterized by an abundance of sand in the “very fine” (3 to 4 phi) grade and a distinct
brown tint that contrasts with the gray tint of the underlying sediments. The color
perhaps suggests that groundwater saturation was beginning to diminish and pedogenic
processes were beginning to prevail over redox conditions as stratum 3 started to
accumulate, probably in the early Holocene, although the density of rhizoconcretions
remains high.

Excavations were begun in four units just above its basal contact, so a small
sample drawn from the very base of the stratum is available. However, the initial levels
generally included some stratum 2D sediment. Only in unit N110 E102 was the initial
level (93.08-92.90 m) confined almost entirely to stratum 3. This makes it difficult to say
much about the contents. A single analyzed sediment sample (N109 E103, 93.14-92.90
m) contains about 35% sand, 33% silt, 32% clay (plus analytical error), and trace
amounts (0.08%) of gravel after carbonate removal. However, significant amounts of pea
gravel (estimated density, 2000 per cubic meter) were recovered from the 1/4-inch screen
in the single excavation level analyzed, so gravel content in the grain-size sample may
561

not be representative. Goliad sandstone, caliche nodules, and ferromanganese concretions
were also fairly abundant in the single excavation level analyzed. For the single sediment
sample analyzed, carbonate content is high (about 22%), higher than in stratum 2D.

Elevation of the basal contact varies from as low as 92.83 to as high as 93.18 m
where visible in profiles. Elevation of the upper contact was measured in four places
along the walls of a notch we cut into the slip-off slope (Fig. 3.2), and here the upper
contact clearly dips northeastward, toward the present creek channel, at a rate of about
6 cm per meter, from a maximum of 93.57 m to a minimum of 93.32 m. This is the only
profile of any extent showing the north-south dip of any of the bench strata. The average
thickness of stratum 3 is estimated at about 40 cm.

During plane table mapping of the bench, before excavations were started, I tried
to map the upper contact of stratum 3 where it seemed to be exposed on the toeslope east
of the notch (the lower contact was obscured by slumped fill), but the elevations are a
meter higher than those given above (which are based on good exposures in various
profiles). Because of this, I suspect that what was actually mapped was a muddy subunit
of stratum 4, perhaps part of stratum 4B (?).

The exposed face of stratum 3 all along Berger Bluff is littered at its base with
abundant snails and elongate, fragile rhizoconcretions. It is not clear whether these are
actually more abundant in the basal part, or if they simply accumulated there after
eroding from the face. It is clear, however, that stratum 3 probably contains the most
abundant snail fauna in the stratigraphic sequence. It is unfortunate that we do not have
a better sample from it. The brown, loamy texture and rhizoconcretion-littered surface
562

give it a very distinctive appearance. Because stratum 3 is more friable than the
underlying sediments, it has been removed by erosion from the top of the bench for a
distance of several meters back from the cutbank (Fig. 4.19). As a result, it is entirely
absent from the main cutbank profile (Fig. 4.22), although it can be seen upstream (Figs.
4.20, 4.23), and the full thickness lay concealed under slumped sediments forming the
toeslope at the rear of the bench area. Fig. 4.60 shows what stratum 3 looks like in
profile. In the photo (looking southwest), Ralph Robinson is collecting a phytolith sample
from stratum 3 in the wall of the notch cut into the toeslope. The location is immediately
above the un-numbered possible rock-lined hearth (see stratum 2D description above).
The lightly incised upper contact of stratum 3 lies just above his head in the photo. Above
that is the lighter-colored sandy base of stratum 4. The level line above that is set at 94.00
m.

Downstream from Berger Bluff, at 41 GD 31 (also now inundated), a very
similar depositional unit appears in post-Beaumont deposits exposed in the Coleto
Creek cutbank: a chocolate-brown, clay-rich stratum with

abundant snail shell

(Rabdotus sp. and other species) and chipping debris, and some mussel shell
(tentatively identified as Amblema plicata, Cyrtonaias tampicoensis, Lampsilis sp., and
unidentified specimens, probably mostly Amblema). A “Victoria” point (straight-based
variant) was found here at 41 GD 31 on the eroding surface (Brown 1986:Fig. 3, l). A
transit shot at the base of this stratum, 253 meters downstream from the bench, gave an
elevation of 93.26 m, which is slightly higher than the average basal elevation in the
bench area (but consistent with the profile shown in Fig. 4.23). At approximately 175 m
downstream from the bench, a cluster of thermally fractured chert cobbles was noted
eroding from this stratum.
563

Figure 4.60. Stratum 3 and Basal Part of Stratum 4. Looking southwest at Ralph
Robinson collecting phytolith samples from corner of notch cut into bluff.
Stratum 3 is the dark zone whose upper contact lies just above his head;
everything above that is stratum 4. Undocumented possible hearth lies under
paper bag. Stringline is set at 94.00 m. Photo January 13, 1980.

A concentration of chipping debris discovered in the uppermost level of unit
N109 E103 at Berger Bluff is derived from stratum 3. Many of the 41 flakes or
fragments recovered match in color and texture, suggesting they are derived from a
564

limited set of parent cobbles. An in situ chipping area seems to be indicated, although
no feature number has been assigned to the concentration.

The sample of animal bone from stratum 3 is very small. A couple of bone
fragments (one with possible gastric rounding) from an unidentified deer-sized animal
and a long bone shaft fragment from a pocket mouse-sized animal were found in unit
N110 E102. In unit N109 E103, the initial level spanned both stratum 3 and part of
stratum 2D, and gopher (Geomys sp.) mandible and maxilla fragments, a vole (Pitymys
sp.) molar, a least shrew (Cryptotis parva) mandible fragment, a hispid pocket mouse
(Chaetodipus hispidus) left femur fragment, a pocket mouse-sized calcaneum, a snake or
lizard vertebra fragment, a salamander vertebra, and unidentified bone fragments from
deer-sized (calcined) and rabbit-sized animals were recovered from this transitional level.
A few mussel shell fragments were recovered from stratum 3, including a single valve
(probably Amblema plicata) broken during excavation of the initial level in N110 E102.
There are no pollen samples from stratum 3.

Snails are abundant in stratum 3. The density of the specimens recovered (both
from the 1/4-inch screen and from the matrix samples) declines somewhat from that
found at the top of stratum 2D, but is still higher than most of the rest of stratum 2D.
Species richness is high in both kinds of samples. A complete mud dauber nest (possibly
fired; Fig. 9.14) was uncovered at 93.20 m while removing stratum 3 overburden. The
location (N113.63 E94.92) is shown in Fig. 3.1. There are no analyzed diatom samples
from stratum 3. The uppermost sample in the diatom column is from 92.95-92.90 m in
N109 E103, and lies almost entirely in the upper part of stratum 2D.

565

STRATIGRAPHY OF THE UPPER DEPOSITS
During the rest of the Holocene, two massive, sandy depositional units
accumulated above stratum 3. Although there are some weakly expressed variations in
sediment texture in stratum 4, the depositional style can best be characterized as
“massive” and homogeneous, in contrast to the cyclic nature seen in the bench sediments.
Carbonate is present in these units, but it is evidently pedogenic rather than phreatic
carbonate, accumulating as the regional climate became progressively drier during the
early and middle Holocene.

Almost nothing is known about the middle part of the Berger Bluff stratigraphic
sequence because the 4.4 meters of sediments intervening between the highest point in
the bench excavations and the lowest point in David Brown’s blufftop excavations
remain uninvestigated, except for a narrow profile cleared for collection of phytolith
samples. A section of the bluff face about 25 cm wide was troweled clean starting at the
base of the notch cut into the toeslope, at about 93.06 m, and running upward to about
95.25 m. A second narrow cleared face, offset slightly east of the first, was cleared from
about 95.25 m upward past the 97.50 m level. Various weakly demarcated textural zones
could be seen in these two columnar profiles, but how extensive they might be is
unknown.

Stratum 4 (massive sandy unit)
The original description of this stratum by Glen Evans says simply “gray,
medium-grained siliceous sand – prominent vertical jointing makes this unit especially
566

susceptible to erosion – snail shells moderately abundant.” The lower contact is located at
93.60-93.70 m in the phytolith profile, and the upper contact was drawn at 98.75-98.95 m
in profiles of the blufftop excavation block (Fig. 4.61), giving it an estimated thickness of
about 5.15 to 5.35 m. Its thickness is readily apparent in Figure 4.19, and its appearance
can be seen in Figure 4.20. The basal part appears in Figure 4.60, from just above
Robinson’s head to the top of the photo, and the upper part appears in Figs. 4.61 and
4.62. Only the uppermost 1.20 m of this stratum was sampled by the blufftop
excavations.

I have assigned 11 very informal subdivisions to stratum 4, based on what was
visible in the narrow phytolith column profile. They may have no significance beyond the
limits of the profile. From the base of the stratum upward, these are as follows:
4A: a sandy zone 30-40 cm thick (93.60-94.07 m).
4B: a thick muddy zone with caliche webbing (94.07-95.70 m); cultural debris at various
levels in the upper half.
4C: a sandy zone (95.70-96.00 m).
4D: a muddy zone, sandy at base with increasing fines toward the top (96.00-96.35 m).
4E: no description recorded.
4F: a sandy zone (96.45-96.50 m).
4G: a thick sandy silt zone with carbonate (96.50-97.40 m).
4H: darker silt zone (97.40-97.57 m?).
4I: “compact buff fine sand,” (about 97.57-98.50 m?), zone 4a in Brown (1983:Fig. 5).
4J: “light tan fine sand with land snail concentration” (about 98.50-98.75 m?), zone 4b in
Brown (1983:Fig. 5).
4K: “tan fine sand” (about 98.75-98.90 m?), zone 4c in Brown (1983:Fig. 5).
567

Figure 4.61. Stratigraphy of the Upper Deposits in Main Excavation Block. Shown here
is the west wall of the 3 x 4 m blufftop excavation block dug in the summer
of 1979. Profile similar to Brown (1983:Fig. 6), but redrawn from original
field profile. Approximate location of sample column in southwest corner
(collected 1981 by K. Brown and J. DeCosta) is shown. To left of the
column, magnetic susceptibility sample numbers are listed; to the right,
diatom sample numbers are listed for the two samples analyzed. Inclusions
are mostly freshwater mussel shell, with some Goliad sandstone clasts.
568

Figure 4.62. Stratum 5 Profile, Looking South. View of south wall of main excavation
block in the upper deposits (compare with Brown 1983:Figs. 5, 9). The floor
in the left foreground corresponds roughly to the stratum 4/5 contact.
A few observations can be offered on the last three units, which are exposed in the
blufftop excavation block, and which extend from 97.57 to the uneven upper contact at
about 98.75 to 98.90 m. Sediment texture in this uppermost 1.2-1.4 m of stratum 4 (Table
4.7), based on three analyzed samples, consists of
Gravel: 1 to 2%
Sand: 49 to 50%
Silt: 34 to 36%
Clay: 13 to 15%
569

Sediment texture in both stratum 4 and stratum 5 is rather homogeneous. The sand
fraction (about half of the sediment) is chiefly fine sand, well-sorted and unimodal with a
prominent size mode at 2.5 to 3.0 phi (Fig. 4.63). Stratum 5 is somewhat more leptokurtic
(or “peaked”) and has higher skewness values than stratum 4, but otherwise the sediment
textures are very similar.

Sediment color is a homogeneous beige, 10YR 6.5/1.5 dry at the base of the
excavation block to 10YR 7.5/3 dry in the middle of the exposed part, to 10YR 7/1.5 dry
at the upper contact. Sediment colors become progressively and steadily grayer and
darker up-profile, as the dense anthrosol corresponding to stratum 5 is entered, but the
consistently beige colors in stratum 4 suggest it contains very little organic content. This
is supported by magnetic susceptibility values. Both low-frequency and high-frequency
chi values rise dramatically from stratum 4 to stratum 5, and increase upward through the
latter.
Dry sediment samples from 97.75 m and 98.45 m were scanned microscopically
for freshwater sponge spicules. None were found, but the sample at 98.45 m had fairly
abundant small needles, and these were also present (but in lesser abundance) in the
sample from 97.75 m. These do not extinguish under polarized light, and may perhaps be
dispersed pedogenic calcite needles (see Klappa 1980:Fig. 9, e, f; Wright and Tucker
1991:16). They seem to be absent from the bench deposits.

570

Table 4.7. Grain-Size Statistics for the Upper Deposits.
Sample

Mean

SD

Skew-

φ

φ

ness

CV

Gravel
%

Sand
%

Silt
%

Clay
%

4.15
4.02
3.98

1.98
2.13
1.90

+.64
+.44
+.82

.48
.53
.48

0.0
2.02
0.0

56.51
54.49
61.27

39.07
39.45
34.64

4.42
4.04
4.08

4.10
4.10
4.04

2.26
2.21
2.22

+.28
+.28
+.16

.55
.54
.55

1.89
1.13
2.01

53.51
55.77
53.63

39.24
37.67
39.64

5.36
5.42
4.72

Stratum 5
99.75
99.50
99.00

Stratum 4
98.55
98.25
97.75

NOTES: Only the sample at 99.00 m was disaggregated in acid; the sample at 98.25 m
contained many calcareous granules. Statistics include the two coarsest clay grades (8.0
to 8.5 φ and 8.5 to 9.0 φ) but not the finer unanalyzed clay grades. Clay percentage
includes an error component. Percentages are recalculated to sum to 100%. Skewness
and coefficient of variation are unitless statistics. SD = standard deviation; CV =
coefficient of variation.

571

Figure 4.63 (following page). Grain-Size Histograms for the Upper Deposits. Shown here
are grain-size histograms for three samples each from strata 4 and 5,
collected from the exposed wall of David Brown’s excavation block into
the upper deposits. The elevation of the sample at its base and corresponding
magnetic susceptibility sample numbers are shown on the right. See Fig.
4.21 for location of samples. Analysis by sieving of coarse fraction and
pipette analysis of silt and clay fractions; only the two coarsest clay grades
(8.0 to 8.5 and 8.5 to 9.0 phi) were determined individually. No acid
digestion of samples was done. Note extreme homogeneity of samples
throughout both strata, presence of clay in all samples, presence of gravel in
samples 101 and 105-109, and similarity in size modes to bench samples.

572

573

Stratum 4 also includes occasional snails and snail shell fragments, small calcareous
nodules, some carbonate webbing in areas, and frequently hackberry (or anaqua?) seeds.
Part of Test Pit 1, dug in 1977 and located on the north side of the blufftop excavation
block, was excavated in 15 cm levels to a depth of 150 cm, and then a shovel test in the
floor was dug to 190 cm. Cultural material (decreasing with depth) was found in the
upper 70 cm of stratum 4 (Fox, Black and James 1979:Table 2). Unidentified turtle,
bobcat, and bison bone is reported from this test pit at 120 cm and below (Fox, Black and
James 1979:Table 3). The contents of two levels (1/4-inch wet screen fraction, level 14,
98.00-97.85 m and level 16, 97.70-97.55 m) near the bottom of the blufftop excavation
block in unit N97 E96 were scanned carefully. Level 14 has 38 pieces of chipping debris
and some thermally fractured chert or quartzite, 925 pieces of gravel (677.1 g), and no
ferromanganese concretions. Level 16 has four pieces of chipping debris, a single
ferromanganese concretion, and 316 pieces of gravel (233.1 g). Large and mediumbodied snail taxa include a number of Polygyra sp., plus Rabdotus sp., Oligyra
orbiculata, Praticolella sp., but only one specimen of Anguispira strongylodes. A single
diatom sample from near the base of the blufftop excavations (N97 E96, 97.75 m) was
analyzed and found to be barren of diatoms, phytoliths, pollen, and sponge spicules.

There are no radiocarbon assays from this stratum, nor were any diagnostic
artifacts recovered from the excavation block or test pits. Presumably, this stratum began
accumulating sometime in the early Holocene and continued until the start of the Late
Holocene.

From the limited information available, it appears this unit accumulated rather
rapidly over the course of several millennia in the Middle Holocene. Visual evidence
574

suggests there is less silt and clay in the upper part of the stratum than in the lower part,
which may indicate decreasing flood duration. The dilution effect of rapid accumulation
rates might help to explain the apparent lack of organic matter, biological indicators, and
pedogenesis, and relative scarcity of cultural debris.

Stratum 5 (massive sandy unit)
Stratum 5 is the uppermost unit in the stratigraphic sequence at Berger Bluff. It
includes the dense midden under the anaqua grove at Area A, but it also extends well
beyond Area A into Area B and the surrounding areas without much evidence of
occupational debris. Area A is characterized by a well-developed, organic-rich
contemporary soil, and along the bluff face, the overthickened A horizon extends to
perhaps 2 meters or more below the surface in spots where anaqua root systems have
been active (Figs. 1.34, 4.64). It is probably the local equivalent of the Copan Soil
discussed by Hall (1990). In such places, the A horizon may even have incorporated the
uppermost part of stratum 4. The organic matter is presumably derived from anaqua leaf
litter, because there is no understory in the anaqua grove. Away from Area A, the
contemporary soil is also pronounced but somewhat thinner (about 20-50 cm; Brown
1986:Fig. 4, Table 1) and seems to be better developed in anaqua groves than in grassy
areas. In the blufftop excavation block, stratum 5 is roughly equivalent to the A horizon
and is about 1.0-1.2 m thick. Munsell colors range from buff (10YR 7/1.5 dry) at the base
to gray (10YR 5/1 dry) near the surface (Table 4.8).

575

Figure 4.64. Looking Southwest at Excavations. Well-developed, cumulic contemporary
soil developed in stratum 5 and upper part of stratum 4 caps the bluff, and is
especially deep where root systems of anaqua trees have penetrated. Photo
December 4, 1979.

A soil sample from a depth of 30 cm in Test Pit 1 contained 1.4% organic matter,
with a pH of 8.5, but no pollen (letter of July 1, 1977, Vaughn Bryant to Anne Fox, on
file at UTSA-CAR). A sediment sample from about 25 cm below the surface in the main
block contained so much finely divided organic matter that grain size analysis was nearly
impossible. A single diatom sample collected at 99.75 m contained no phytoliths. Dry
sediment samples from 99.00 and 99.75 m scanned for freshwater sponge spicules did not
reveal any spicules, although a duplicate slide from the diatom sample at 99.75 m
revealed a couple of spicule fragments.
576

Table 4.8. Munsell Soil Colors for Strata 4 and 5, Blufftop Excavation Block.
Sample elevation
(m)

Munsell color

Comments

Stratum 5
99.90
99.85
99.75
99.65
99.60
99.55
99.45
99.40
99.35
99.30
99.20
99.15
99.05
99.00
98.95
98.90
98.85

10YR 5/1
10YR 5/1
10YR 5/1
10YR 5.2/1
10YR 5.2/1
10YR 5.5/1
10YR 5.5/1
10YR 5.5/1
10YR 5.5/1
10YR 5.5/1
10YR 5.5/1
10YR 5.5/1
10YR6/1.5
10YR6/1.5
10YR6.5/2
10YR6.5/2
10YR 6.5/1.5

hackberry or anaqua seeds

snail shell abundant here and above

Stratum 4-5 transition
98.80

10YR 7/1.5

Stratum 4
98.75
98.65
98.60
98.55
98.50
98.25
98.00
97.75
97.55

10YR 7/1.5
10YR 7.5/2.5
10YR 7.5/2.5
10YR 7.5/3
10YR 7.5/3
10YR 7.5/3
10YR 7.5/3
10YR 7.5/2
10YR 6.5/1.5

increased fines, snail shell here and above

NOTE: all colors recorded dry in 2004 from archived phytolith column collected in 1979
at N97.50 E96.
577

Microscopic calcite (?) needles are abundant at 99.00 m, but fairly scarce at 99.75
m; they are short and uniform in length.

The pronounced overthickening of the A horizon at Area A has probably occurred
because sometime in the Late Prehistoric period (see chronological discussion below),
sediment deposition at Berger Bluff ceased for the first time and Coleto Creek began to
incise its earlier deposits, leaving a stable surface available for soil development. In
addition, the soil in Area A probably qualifies as a cumulic anthrosol because of the
dense midden deposits. Large quantities of freshwater mussel shell, snail shell, bone, and
occasional clusters of Goliad sandstone hearthstones have probably introduced significant
amounts of calcium carbonate and phosphate to the soil.

Despite the dramatic increase in organic matter in stratum 5, the sediment itself is
not much different from the upper part of stratum 4. Stratum 5 has slightly more sand and
slightly less gravel, silt, and clay, but the differences are very minor. Based on three
analyzed samples, the sediment consists of:
Gravel: none to 2%
Sand: 50 to 55%
Silt: 31 to 37%
Clay: 10 to 15%
The mean grain size in the two strata is nearly identical. Stratum 5 is slightly
better sorted and more leptokurtic (Fig. 4.63), with slightly higher skewness values, but
the differences are minor. Nothing in the grain-size analysis suggests the depositional
processes differ in these two units.
578

Stratum 5 was divided into three subunits by Brown (1983:Fig. 6): 5a, light
grayish brown loamy fine sand; 5b, grayish brown fine sandy loam with midden debris;
5c, the same but culturally sterile.

How did Stratum 5 form?
Glen Evans interpreted stratum 5 as coppice dune deposits. His field sketch
describes it as “a gradual and very slow accretion of wind-transported silt and fine sand
derived mainly from the sand bars along the Coleto Creek channel, together with the
decompositional organic products of herbaceous and woody vegetation. It is an
aggradational soil zone overlying stream terrace deposits” (field notes, June, 1979). My
interpretation differs. I believe stratum 5 represents the same sort of fluvial deposits
represented by the other four strata lying beneath it. I have four reasons for arguing that
stratum 5 is fluvial, not eolian in origin.
1) If there is a major change in transport mechanism across the boundary between
stratum 4 and stratum 5, it is not captured in the grain-size data. The grain-size modes
(Fig. 4.63) and statistics (Table 4.7) are nearly identical, at least in the upper part of
stratum 4 and in stratum 5. Indeed, there is far more variability within some individual
bench strata (all of which are known to be fluvial) than between strata 4 and 5.
2) Coleto Creek lies north of Area A, and in the Holocene climatic regime, the
only time of year when strong northerly winds would be available to transport sand
southward out of the channel is in winter. Prevailing winds from the north account for
less than 6% of the year (Fig. 1.16). All of the contemporary wind-reworked sandbars at
Berger Bluff lie on the north side of the creek. Moreover, stratum 5 is essentially a thick
579

sand sheet. It does not have the parabolic or infilled parabolic plan form usually
associated with large sand bodies moved by wind, although it could also be argued this
geometry would not be expected in a coppice dune anyway.
3) Although only one of the three analyzed stratum 5 grain-size samples contained
gravel, the stratum is nevertheless known to contain significant amounts of scattered pea
gravel. The gravel count in the uppermost 20-30 cm of stratum 5 ranges from none to a
count of over 500 per m3. Maximum densities in stratum 4 are higher (over 6000/m3 in
level 14, for example), but a density of 500/m3 is well within the range of variation of the
bench deposits (Table 4.5). All of this gravel is too heavy to have been windblown.
Some of the gravel in the upper deposits could have arrived on the screen as
contamination sucked in through the water intake during wet screening (a few Corbicula
fluminea clams about the same size as pea gravel occur in the collections, and these are
definitely water-intake contamination), but I doubt this accounts for very much of the
gravel recovered on the screen from stratum 5. Incidentally, none of the gravel from the
bench deposits is contamination, since wet screening was not done in bench excavations.
Some gravel could have been introduced by prehistoric human occupants as
contamination during mussel-collecting or water-collecting activities, but again I doubt
this accounts for much of the gravel. If the gravel was introduced at the same time as the
sand, silt, and clay making up the deposit, it must have been brought in by running water,
not wind.

4) The three analyzed samples from stratum 5 contain, respectively, about 9, 11,
and 14% clay (allowing for analytical error). This is probably too high a clay content for
windblown sediments (but see below). When mud is deposited by waning floodwaters in
580

a stream channel, it forms a clay drape over the bedload sediments. As this clay drape
dries, it curls up into small, hard chips of clay that resist further size reduction. These are
usually too heavy for wind transport, although some regions of Texas do have clay dunes
formed by wind moving clay pellets along the ground (Price 1963; Frederick 1998). In
general, though, clay is cohesive and resists disintegration into particles small enough for
aerial transport unless salts are present.

Clay dunes are usually a special case, in which salt (sea salt near the coast,
gypsum salts inland) makes the clay hygroscopic, and moisture breaks it into sand-sized
pellets by alternate wetting and drying (Bowler 1973). The inland southeastern Louisiana
Pleistocene dunes reported by Otvos and Price (2001) are an exception. Some of these
have extraordinarily high silt (8.5-25.5%) and clay (4.5-22%) content, apparently derived
from exposed salt-free floodplain sediments. One example cited has about 50% silt and
33% clay (Otvos and Price 2001:152), but the authors offer no explanation of how such
clay aggregates could be moved by wind. In arid but non-saline continental settings, clay
content of dunes is usually much lower. For example, in a dune site in Wyoming reported
by Tucker (1985:Table 7), clay content ranges from 4.8-6.8%). The Muleshoe dune sands
of Texas-New Mexico average roughly 3-6% (Muhs and Holliday 2001:Fig. 10). In sites
like those, clay can sometimes accumulate in lamellae as a result of pedogenic processes
(Muhs et al. 1996:138, clay content 1-7% in Colorado dunes), but there are no pedogenic
clay lamellae known from any of the deposits at Berger Bluff. Based on profiles and
observation while digging, the silt and clay in stratum 5 appears evenly dispersed, not
concentrated in any sort of Bt horizon or in lamellae.

581

Perhaps the best analogy for evaluating stratum 5 as a potential coppice dune is a
series of Pleistocene stream-bordering sand dunes reported from Georgia by Ivester and
Leigh (2003). Here, sand seasonally blown out of sandbars and lateral bars much like the
modern Coleto Creek bars formed dunes that migrated onto adjacent floodplains and
were halted by vegetation. The floodplain-dune interface is marked by dramatic reduction
in both clay content and coarse sand content (Ivester and Leigh 2003:Fig. 7). Dune sands
had an average of about 1% clay and only 0.01% gravel. Compared to river sand, dune
sediments were slightly finer, less well sorted, and had lower kurtosis values (Ivester and
Leigh 2003:Table 2). The authors note that “the presence of >1% gravel or >2% very
coarse sand indicates that the deposit is probably fluvial” (Ivester and Leigh 2003:303).
Comparable dunes from South Carolina have about 0.21 to 3.45% clay (Markewich and
Markewich 1994:Table 1). Tested against these examples from Georgia and South
Carolina, we would have to conclude that stratum 5 probably does not have the attributes
of an eolian deposit.

It is easy to see why stratum 5 could be interpreted as windblown sediment. It is
fine-grained (mean is about 4.05 φ for all grades together) but poorly sorted (standard
deviation about 2.0 φ, coefficient of variation about 0.50), has low skewness values
(about +0.63), has a leptokurtic, nearly unimodal size distribution, and would be very
homogeneous in composition if not for the substantial addition of organic matter and
cultural debris. However, many of these properties are partly inherited from the Miocene
source sands in the catchment, and to some extent they probably also characterize all of
the deposits that underlie stratum 5. The prominent size mode at 2.5 to 3.0 φ seen in the
stratum 5 samples also appears in stratum 4 and in many of the samples from the bench
deposits. The chief difference with the bench samples is that most of them also have
582

several other size modes as well. Average grain size (4.16 φ for all of the bench samples
averaged together) and standard deviation (2.12 φ, coefficient of variation 0.55) are
similar, although skewness values differ. Compare the three stratum 5 samples shown in
Fig. 4.63 with the three lowermost samples (91.70 to 91.55 m) shown in Fig. 4.66. All of
them look very similar, even though the latter three are known to be fluvial in origin.

Stratum 5 can also be compared statistically to continental dune sands – the
Georgia and Colorado stream-bordering dunes cited above, as well as worldwide sand
seas summarized by Ahlbrandt (1979:Table 2; see also Lancaster 1986:Table 1).
Compared to these known eolian examples, the stratum 5 sediment is finer-grained and
has larger standard deviations. For the three analyzed stratum 5 samples, the mean grain
size for the sand fraction only (no gravel, silt, or clay) is 2.60 ± 0.82 φ (”moderately
sorted”). Where the coefficient of variation can be computed, it is larger, except for the
Georgia examples. For another comparison, the Muleshoe dune sands average about 2.5
to 3.0 φ, with a standard deviation of about 0.5 to 0.7 φ for sand grades only (Muhs and
Holliday 2001:Fig. 9).

When Did Coleto Creek Begin Its Late Holocene Incisive Phase?
Correctly identifying the mode of deposition for stratum 5 is important, because it
relates to the timing of Late Holocene hydrological change and channel incision. If
stratum 5 is windblown sand, seasonal drying of the channel and incision of the channel
at the beginning of the Late Holocene, perhaps around 3000 RCYBP are probably
implied. On the other hand, if stratum 5 is fluvial in origin, as I have suggested, continued
overbank deposition of sand until some time in the Late Prehistoric is probably implied,
with major hydrological changes and channel incision occurring then, rather than earlier.
583

No radiocarbon assays are available from stratum 5. The age of the deposit can
only be estimated from a few time-diagnostic artifacts recovered from the blufftop
excavations. A single Morhiss point was recovered from level 7 in unit N97 E96, and
another variant was recovered from level 6 in N99 E97 (Brown 1983:Fig. 16, k, m). Both
are near the lower contact for stratum 5. A third specimen (Brown 1983:Fig. 16, l) was
found much higher in level 2 and is perhaps displaced. Little is known about the age of
these artifacts, but Hudler estimates an approximate age of 2800-3100 RCYBP
(“Analytical Unit C”) at the Smith Creek Bridge site in De Witt County, based on a
radiocarbon assay of 2860±40 RCYBP (Hudler, Prilliman and Gustavson 2002:56).
Based on these findings, it may be reasonable to estimate that stratum 5 began
accumulating about 3000 RCYBP, or approximately at the beginning of the Late
Holocene mesic climatic interval.

Estimating the most recent age limit for stratum 5 is more difficult. The creek lies
far below the surface of the site now and contributes no sediment to the surface. Any
surface accretion occurring now can only come from very minor sheetwash off the gentle
slope to the south. When did Coleto Creek stop contributing overbank sediment and
incise far enough below the blufftop that even major floods could not overtop the site?
The most recent prehistoric artifacts recovered were Perdiz points (levels 1 and 2) and
bone-tempered plainware sherds (level 1; Brown 1983:67-69, Fig. 16). Four long bones
or fragments from levels 1 and 2 were also identified as bison or cow. These Toyah Phase
items probably date about 1250-1700 cal AD (very roughly 795-220 RCYBP). Since they
were found shallowly buried, it may perhaps be assumed that sediment deposition ceased
sometime around 1250-1700 AD. Alternately, deposition might have ceased somewhat
earlier, with the Perdiz points and potsherds discarded on the surface but later buried by
584

bioturbation. A thin (0-11 cm) zone of culturally sterile sand overlies the midden (Brown
1983:Figs. 5-6, zone 5c), evidently representing either sheetwashed colluvium or
overbank sands. A couple of metal artifacts were also recovered from level 1, and these
surely must have been buried by disturbance processes.

The Smith Creek Bridge site could be used for comparison (a single Perdiz point
and some ceramics were found there) if 10-50 cm of sediment had not been removed
from the site before excavations started (Hudler, Prilliman and Gustavson 2002:1). A
thick package of sediment has been deposited on the south side of the channel in very
recent historic time (Collins 1999), but not on the north side, which is higher. The Burris
site (41 VT 66/VT41) is located about 9.7 km downstream from Berger Bluff just across
the Victoria County line, and likewise on the southwest bank, on a steep bluff above the
channel, here incised about 12 m below the site. The site has a small Toyah Phase midden
(Feature 3) with Perdiz points and bison bone at about 20-40 cm below the surface (but
some bone as high as 10-20 cm and some as deep as 50-60 cm; Shaffer 1989:173). The
depth of burial for the Toyah Phase component is only slightly greater (20 cm) than at
Berger Bluff, but there is a fairly steep hillside to the south (Brown 1983:Fig. 20) which
might have contributed colluvium. The same question arises here as at Berger Bluff: did
the thin veneer of sediment over the Toyah Phase component originate as 1) sheetwashed
colluvium (probably the most plausible source), 2) overbank deposition, or 3) eolian
deposition (the least likely source, in my view)?

Given the uncertainty about the date of burial of the Toyah Phase components at
these sites, it seems entirely plausible that Coleto Creek might have started its incisive

585

phase as early as 1100 AD. Hall (1990) has reviewed Late Holocene alluvial sequences
from Oklahoma to Central Texas. He reports that
Low rates of sediment deposition characterized flood plains of all stream orders in
the region from about 2 to 1 ka, resulting in the formation of a soil characterized
by a cumulic, organic-rich, over-thickened A horizon. The soil was first studied
and dated in the Little Caney River valley, northeastern Oklahoma, and named the
Copan Soil… (Hall 1990:343).
The Copan Soil formed during the Late Holocene mesic interval (the uppermost
radiocarbon assays from this soil average about 900-1000 RCYBP), and is buried at
many of the sites studied by Hall. At Berger Bluff, however, there is no later
sedimentation and the soil is still forming. Stratum 5 is probably equivalent to the upper
member of the West Range alluvium at Fort Hood (Nordt 1992:75). Also possibly
equivalent is the Asa Soil, another overthickened, organic-rich soil recognized in the
Brazos River valley; however, it dates to 1250-500 RCYBP (Waters and Nordt
1995:317).

A dry interval in the Plains starting about 1000 RCYBP (roughly 1100 cal AD)
decreased plant cover and increased sheet erosion rates, leading to a widespread pattern
of channel trenching (Hall 1990; Blum, Toomey and Valastro 1994:Fig. 11, F; Arbogast
and Johnson 1994:Fig. 4). A review by Daniels and Knox (2005:Fig. 6) suggests the most
pronounced evidence occurs about 800-1100 RCYBP, peaking at about 900 RCYBP. The
same interval, as well as an interval at 500 RCYBP, occurs in the southwestern US
(Waters and Haynes 2001:Fig. 4) and in the Pedernales River valley (Blum and Valastro
1989). A similar episode of entrenchment of the Republican River occurs in Nebraska
sometime after 1800-1100 RCYBP (Martin 1992). In the southern Colorado Plateau,
arroyo cutting occurs at 1200-1400 cal AD (Hereford 2002). At Berger Bluff, Coleto
586

Creek incised completely through almost 9 m of sediments in just a few centuries. Wolf
Creek incised through the same thickness of sediment in central Kansas at the same time
(Arbogast and Johnson 1994).

The incisive event identified by Hall corresponds to the Medieval Climatic
Anomaly (Bradley, Hughes, and Diaz 2003:405), a period with fairly warm temperatures
that persisted until the beginning of the Little Ice Age. Northern hemisphere temperatures
peaked at about 1100 and 1175 AD (Jones, Osborn, and Briffa 2001:Fig. 2). In south
Texas, Castro and Goblet (2003) estimate a rapid warming of about 3.4° C between 900
and 600 RCYBP, based on noble gas paleothermometry from the Carrizo aquifer.
However, this is also a fairly quiescent period in terms of ENSO events. Although the
available fossil coral record has gaps, the densest clusters of extreme ENSO events seen
in the reconstructed part of the record occur at about 940, 1200, and 1390 AD, and from
about 1630 AD to the present (Cobb et al. 2003:Fig. 6). It also corresponds to a minimum
in magnetic susceptibility values and arboreal pollen at Camp Bullis Bat Cave (Hudler
2000:Figs. 4-15, 4-20) and to the onset of eolian episodes at Lubbock Lake, Marks Beach
(Forman, Oglesby, and Webb 2001:Fig. 4) and elsewhere in the Plains (Madole 1994;
Mason et al. 2004). Salinity records from Plains lakes indicate high frequency of extreme
droughts at 1000-1200 AD (Laird et al. 1996). Brown et al. (1999:507-508) report
Midwestern megaflood events in the Orca Basin sedimentary record at about 1200 cal
AD (approximately 840 RCYBP, using an assumed marine reservoir age of 400 years).

Biological Clues to Late Prehistoric Hydrology
Curiously, the upper part of stratum 5 contains large numbers of gar elements
(mostly ganoid scales, some vertebrae, and a few dentary or mandible fragments, found
587

in nearly all the units). By far, the largest number occur at 15-30 cm, but a significant
number occur at 0-15 cm, and some are found at 30-60 cm. Apparently none were
recovered below level 4 (Flynn 1983:Table 23). Some of these are identified as
longnosed gar, Lepisosteus osseus. Longnosed gar prefer deep pools, oxbows, and
vegetation-choked backwaters, although they spawn in clear-flowing shallow gravelly
riffles in spring. Most of the gar elements are not identified to species, and besides the
longnosed gar, spotted gar (L. oculatus) and alligator gar (L. spatula) also occur in the
region. Alligator gar prefers habitat similar to the longnosed gar, but spotted gar prefers
clear water.

Regardless of the species involved, significant numbers of gar probably imply the
presence of deep pools nearby – perhaps a pool and riffle configuration like that further
downstream – unless the fish were taken only during spawning season. Remains of
various aquatic turtles were also found in the upper 60 cm of stratum 5 at Berger Bluff.
Like the gar, most of the identified specimens were found in level 2 (15-30 cm), with a
lesser number in level 1. Most of these were spiny softshell turtle, listed by Flynn as
Trionyx spiniferus. These may be the Guadalupe spiny softshell, listed as Trionyx
spiniferus guadalupensis by Garrett and Barker (1987:121-122) and as Apalone spinifera
guadalupensis by Vermersch (1992:129-131). It prefers “moderate to fast current and
sandy or muddy bottoms” Garrett and Barker (1987:121). Red-eared slider (Trachemys
scripta) was also tentatively identified from carapace fragments (Flynn 1983:105) in
levels 1-3 (0-45 cm). This species favors slow-moving waters with soft, muddy bottoms
and submergent vegetation (Garrett and Barker (1987:106). River cooter is also reported
from level 1 (carapace fragments, listed as Chrysemys concinna) in one unit. Presumably
this is Texas River Cooter, listed as Pseudemys texana by Garrett and Barker (1987:100)
588

and Vermersch (1992:109-112). It prefers slow-moving water with abundant aquatic
vegetation.
Beaver teeth were recovered from the Morhiss component at the Smith Creek
Bridge site (Froelich 2002:Table 100) but beaver remains are not known from any of the
Berger Bluff deposits or any of the other nearby sites in the lower part of the catchment.

Freshwater mussel shells from the upper 15 cm of stratum 5 include Threeridge
(Amblema plicata), Texas Pimpleback (Quadrula petrina), Southern Mapleleaf (Q.
apiculata),

Tampico Pearlymussel (Cyrtonaias tampicoensis), Yellow Sandshell

(Lampsilis teres), and Texas Lilliput (Toxolasma texasensis). Only two of these species
were found in the bench deposits. Most of these species tend to occur frequently in
muddy bottoms, often with fairly slow flow, and do not tolerate deep, shifting sand,
although they can also occur in shallower, faster water. The Threeridge (which is
abundant) tolerates drought and low water quality, while the Yellow Sandshell (which is
infrequent) is intolerant of drought. The Texas Lilliput is a small pond species, found
today in nearby stock ponds on the Beaumont terrace surface. A somewhat larger suite of
species was found at the Smith Creek Bridge site (Howells 2002:Table 67), but level 1 at
that site contained only the Threeridge (Howells 2002:Table 66) and only a small sample
of mussels from stratum 5 at Berger Bluff has been identified.

In general, the freshwater mussel taxonomic composition suggests deep, fairly
stable, perhaps mud-bottomed pools, a configuration consistent with the presence of gar,
as noted. On the other hand, nearly all the individual shells in the stratum 5 midden are
fairly small, young individuals. The same pattern appears at the Smith Creek Bridge site
589

(Howells 2002: 202). Examination of the one species (the Threeridge) common both to
the level 1 sample from stratum 5 and to the bench deposits shows that the stratum 5
individuals are conspicuously smaller than the bench specimens, suggesting either
increased collecting pressure or more frequent washouts, preventing the Late Holocene
individuals from reaching full adult size. The freshwater mussel evidence will be
presented in more detail in Chapter 9.

The apparent absence of freshwater sponges during the accumulation of stratum 5
is notable, but the habitat conditions controlling sponge growth are poorly understood.
Robinson (1979) reports sponge spicules from all of the samples examined at 41 GD 21,
including the one collected at a depth of 10-20 cm. Sponge spicules (megascleres) were
absent from all of the stratum 4 and 5 samples examined and collected from the blufftop
excavation block, both the two diatom samples analyzed by Barbara Winsborough and
the four dry sediment samples that I scanned myself. I found one or two small fragments
on an archival duplicate of slide 29 furnished by Winsborough (see Fig. 7.20), but
otherwise spicules seem to be absent from this stratum. The spicules are small enough to
be wind-deposited and are found in Midwestern loess deposits (Jones and Beavers 1963),
so the depositional agent is not an issue. It seems likely that Coleto Creek became
unsuitable habitat for sponges by the onset of the Late Holocene. Perhaps base flow rates
became too low, or water temperatures too high, or the water was too poorly oxygenated.
All of these factors could be present if deep pools isolated by very shallow connecting
riffles were present in the Late Holocene. Sponges are filter feeders, so they need at least
some water flow. Siltation might affect them adversely, yet Cheatum and Harris
(1953:100) found high turbidity had no adverse effects on sponges in the Trinity River –
some colonies were living in mud-covered conditions. Most sponges lived in habitats
590

with turbidity readings ranging from 20 to 150 ppm, but at times, readings went as high
as 5300 ppm. Water temperatures above 30° C (86° F) and declining water levels can
have adverse effects (Harrison 1974:34). No freshwater sponges were reported from
Coleto Creek in the pre-inundation aquatic ecology study by Murray, Jinnette and
Moseley (1976).

Another possibility is that diatoms and sponge spicules are simply not well
preserved in the upper deposits. Both are silicate forms, however (the spicules are
hydrated silica, or opal), and should be chemically similar to the quartz sand enclosing
them. Yet another possibility is that all of the sponge spicules in the Berger Bluff deposits
are reworked from the lower part of the Lissie terrace deposits upstream, and spicules are
absent from stratum 5 and the upper part of stratum 4 simply because the creek channel
had become well elevated above that part of the Lissie terrace by then, and had raised
itself above the source for reworked spicules. Spicules were found no higher than sample
1-2 in Lissie section 1 (Fig. 4.13).

Late Holocene Environmental Changes: Summary
Near Berger Bluff and upstream throughout most of the catchment, Coleto Creek
is wide, shallow, rather deeply entrenched into its valley, and heavily sand choked
(before impoundment; see descriptions in Chapter 1). As far as can be determined from
historical accounts, this configuration already existed when the earliest European settlers
arrived, and it cannot be attributed to historic Euroamerican land modification (see
historical review in Chapter 1).

591

The aquatic animal remains recovered from the upper deposits allow us to guess
at hydrological conditions in the creek during the Late Holocene (from about 3000
RCYBP to perhaps 795-220 RCYBP). The available evidence seems to indicate the creek
looked rather different then, and hints at the presence of some fairly deep, large pools
nearby, perhaps with rather sluggish flow conditions. Neither the gar nor the various
kinds of freshwater mussels are found very near the site today (yellow catfish and buffalo
were the largest fish found in this reach of the creek before impoundment).

From the respectable thickness of strata 4 and 5, it is clear that massive amounts
of sand were transported through the Coleto Creek drainage during the Holocene, with
part of the sand lodged in temporary storage throughout the valley. By the Late Holocene,
the channel base was evidently well elevated above its present position and then,
sometime in the Late Holocene, the channel began rapidly incising downward toward its
contemporary position. The trigger for entrenchment might have a regional arid phase
like that identified at 1000 RCYBP by Hall (1990), but there have been several arid
episodes in the Late Holocene, some later than that singled out by Hall. Holliday (2001),
for example, recognizes arid phases at 1150-1650 RCYBP, 800 RCYBP, and 300-450
RCYBP on the southern High Plains.

Another possible geomorphic event trigger might have been increasing stream
gradient caused by falling sea level. There is fairly good evidence that sea level in the
Gulf had risen to a highstand of nearly 3 m above present levels by the Late Holocene,
roughly 1500-2500 RCYBP (Kibler 1994:56; Walker, Stapor and Marquardt 1995;
Morton, Paine and Blum 2000; Blum et al. 2002), then falling to present levels shortly
after 1000 RCYBP. A steadily falling sea level after 1500 RCYBP, coinciding with a
592

regional arid phase at 1150-1650 RCYBP might have crossed a geomorphic threshold
that triggered the regional stream entrenchment that is still ongoing in Texas rivers and
creeks today. In addition to base level reduction and increased frequency and severity of
flash flooding, other factors such as reduction in sediment load ⎯ or change in channel
morphology (sinuosity or width-depth ratio) ⎯ can trigger stream incision.

In any case, entrenchment and evolution of the creek to its present sand-choked
state evidently occurred sometime in the Late Holocene, but without better chronological
control, we cannot say whether the process began during the Toyah Phase or earlier. Even
if entrenchment began as early as 1100 RCYBP, the creek might have continued to
overtop the terrace and add some sediment for some centuries afterward.

Once incision began, it evidently proceeded rapidly. Hereford (1984:665) points
out that incised channels tend to focus flood energy and prevent floods from spreading
out and dissipating their erosive force. Incision therefore acts as a positive feedback
process, once the erosive threshold is crossed.

593

DEPOSITIONAL PROPERTIES OF THE BENCH SEDIMENTS

Sediment Texture
Laboratory methods and data for grain-size analysis are documented in Appendix
1. The bench sediments in general consist of roughly equal amounts of sand, silt, and clay
(gravel is scarce except for stratum 2E and certain levels in stratum 1), but the
proportions vary significantly by stratum (Fig. 4.65). The bench alluvium is made up of
alternating sandy and muddy strata, and these can tentatively be arranged in pairs or
couplets:
Stratum 3: muddy, thick
Stratum 2D: sandy, thick, fining upwards
Stratum 2C: muddy, thin, coarsening upwards, not prominent
Stratum 2B: sandy, thin
Stratum 2A: muddy, thick
Stratum 1: sandy, thick, fining upwards
The thickness relationships are perhaps best seen in Fig. 4.23. Textural
relationships are plotted in a variety of ways in Fig. 4.66 through Fig. 4.72. The basic
data for these illustrations come from the composite grain-size column consisting of 25
samples at 5 cm intervals from N110 E102, plus three more samples from N109 E103
added at the top of the column. Fig. 4.67 adds some additional samples from N109 E96,
stratum 2E, the upper deposits, and Coleto Creek. Figs. 4.66 and 4.68 also include one
sample from stratum 2E.

594

Figure 4.65. Stratigraphic Distribution of Gravel, Sand, Silt and Clay. Level-by-level
distribution of gravel, sand, silt, and clay. The uppermost data point is for a
single sample extracted from stratum 2E in the cutbank (see Fig. 3.1 for
location). The next three data points (extending from 93.14 to 92.80 m)
come from the southwest corner of unit N109 E103, and the remaining 25
data points are from the southwest corner of N110 E102. Stratum
boundaries are shown by heavy horizontal lines. Clay percentages are for
total clay (not just the two analyzed grades) plus analytical error.

595

Figure 4.66. Grain-Size Sample Column: Stacked Histograms (following page). Levelby-level distribution of grain size, in half-phi increments from –2.5 phi to
+9.0 phi, in order by elevation and stratigraphy. The uppermost histogram is
for a single sample extracted from stratum 2E in the cutbank (see Fig. 3.1
for location). Four samples were collected, but only one (which cut into a
lens of pea gravel) was analyzed. The next three samples (extending from
93.14 to 92.80 m) come from the southwest corner of unit N109 E103, and
the remaining samples are from the southwest corner of N110 E102. The
brackets on left and right indicate stratigraphic assignments, and the vertical
lines are the major divisions for gravel, sand, silt, and clay. Note that only
the two coarsest grades of clay were analyzed; there is an infinite tail of
unanalyzed clay grades on the right side of each histogram. The key shows
the Wentworth classification (VC = very coarse, C = coarse, M = medium, F
= fine, VF = very fine) and the vertical scale, the height of each histogram
bar in terms of percentage of sample. Note the persistence of modes from
level to level, the conspicuous skewness of most histograms, and the varying
amounts of silt in the sample.

596

597

Figure 4.67. Berger Bluff and Coleto Creek Bedload Samples: Scattergram of Mean
Grain Size Versus Standard Deviation. Plotted here are three contemporary
bedload samples from Coleto Creek, 33 samples from the bench deposits,
and four samples from the upper deposits. The coarsest bench sample
(single isolated open circle at left side of scatter) is a sample of gravel and
sand only from stratum 2E (93.45-93.40 m). Fines were not analyzed for
that sample, but are believed to be insignificant in proportion. The stratum
2E samples may represent displaced bedload material.

598

Figure 4.68. Grain-Size Sample Column: Scattergram of Mean Grain Size Versus
Standard Deviation. Plotted here are three samples from N109 E103, 25
from N110 E102, two from N109 E96, and a single sample from stratum 2E
collected from the cutbank. Mean grain size (a measure of texture) is plotted
against the standard deviation of the grain size (a measure of sorting), both
expressed in phi units. This graph shows that each stratum has a distinctive
textural signature, and that the sandy units (“open” symbols) are much more
variable than the muddy units (filled circles, triangles, and square), but they
become less variable over time (the scatter of points from strata 1, 2B, and
2D becomes progressively smaller).
599

Figure 4.69. Grain-Size Sample Column: Stratigraphic Plot of Statistics. Mean, standard
deviation, skewness, and kurtosis in phi units are plotted for all grades
(including only the two coarsest grades of clay, however). The uppermost
three data points come from N109 E103, and the remaining 25 data points
are from the N110 E102 sample column. Elevation (93.14 m to 91.55 m) is
shown on the left, and stratigraphic divisions are shown on the right. Note
that this plot does not include the stratum 2E sample collected from the
cutbank.

600

Figure 4.70. Grain-Size Sample Column: Stratigraphic Plot of Grain-Size Mean and
Coefficient of Variation. This double-axis plot shows that texture and
sorting are interrelated, even when sorting is expressed by the coefficient of
variation rather than the standard deviation). The uppermost three data
points come from N109 E103, and the remaining 25 data points are from the
N110 E102 sample column. Elevation (93.14 m to 91.55 m) is shown on the
left. Note that this plot does not include the stratum 2E sample collected
from the cutbank.

601

Figure 4.71. Bench Deposits: Grain Size Regressed Against Elevation. Regression lines
are fitted to mean and standard deviation of grain size (in phi units) for the
sample column from the bench. Short-term variation about the regression
line is much more significant than any long-term trends shown by the lines
(note very low r2 values). The sediments show a very slight coarseningupward trend.

602

Figure 4.72. Bench and Upper Deposits: Grain Size Regressed Against Elevation. In this
plot, elevation is rescaled from the previous figure and six samples from the
upper deposits (strata 4 and 5) are added (no data are available from the
middle part of the stratigraphic section). These plots demonstrate even more
dramatically that there is little or no long-term trend in grain-size variation,
and that short-term variation occurs on a much larger scale. Note also how
much more variable the bench samples are than the upper samples.

603

Most textural properties show inflection points (indicating some kind of trend that
reverses) close to stratum boundaries as drawn on the unit profiles (see, for example, Fig.
4.65 and Fig. 4.69), but the inflection points do not coincide exactly, because the contacts
seen in the unit walls were generally vague and gradational, most likely because limited
postdepositional bioturbation has smeared the boundaries.

Many floodplain or stream terrace deposits are characterized by “fining-upwards”
sediment texture – that is, the higher in the stratigraphic sequence, the finer-grained the
sediment becomes (Waters 1992:132-135). Where floodplains are built by lateral
accretion, the material making up the floodplain is stratified by weight and size. The
coarse-grained gravel making up the traction load stays near the base of the channel,
coarse sand is deposited at the bases of point bars, finer sand is deposited on the top parts
of point bars, and fine-grained sands and silts from the suspended load are deposited on
top as a “topstratum” deposit.

Even if the floodplain is chiefly built up by vertical accretion, the sediments may
still show a fining-upward pattern. If the channel bed is stable or slowly incising while
the floodplain surface is built up by overbank deposition, the surface becomes higher and
higher through time, and it becomes more and more difficult for floodwaters to overtop
the channel banks and cover the floodplain. As the surface rises, only the upper part of
the water column can spread over the floodplain, and it is the upper part of the water
column that carries the finest sediment. As a result, both the rate of deposition (Wolman
and Leopold 1957:Fig. 64; Hereford 1984; Moody, Pizzuto, and Meade 1999:301, Fig. 7;
Moody and Troutman 2000:120) and perhaps the grain size of the overbank sediment will
diminish through time.
604

Taken as a whole, the bench deposits as a whole display no upward fining.
Figures 4.65 and 4.69 show that, while there is significant stratum-by-stratum variation,
there are no pronounced long-term trends. If a regression line is fitted to the data points
for mean grain size in Fig. 4.69, there is actually a very slight (r2 = 0.08) trend toward
upward coarsening (shown as Fig. 4.71). Grain size can be expressed as

y = -0.4332 x + 44.319
where y = mean grain size per sample in phi units
x = elevation in meters

The lack of upward fining is probably due to the fact that the bench deposits are
chiefly overbank vertical accretion deposits with an exceedingly slow accretion rate. All
the deposits are fairly fine-grained to begin with, and accumulation rates were so low that
terrace height never became a significant factor conditioning deposition, at least not in
this early part of the site’s history. The slight trend toward upward coarsening might be
an expression of long-term climatic processes during the Younger Dryas. A regression
line fitted to the data points for the standard deviation of grain size indicates a slight (r2 =
0.12) trend toward larger standard deviations up-section (Fig. 4.71, right panel).

If the regression is extended to include the grain size samples from the upper
deposits, the same trends are found, but are even less pronounced. Mean grain size
coarsens slightly (r2 = 0.04), but there is almost no vertical trend for standard deviation of
grain size (r2 = 0.0001, Fig. 4.72). Clearly, short-term variation is much more dramatic
than any long-term variation in grain size expressed throughout the Holocene.

605

Sediment texture is the sum of two components: an inherited texture component
and a depositional process component. Grain size can be analyzed both by looking at
summary statistics (mean, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis) and at patterns of
individual sand or silt modes (the peaks that appear in histograms like Fig. 4.66). Some of
the modal properties of the sediment may be inherited from the original Miocene source
sediment. Most of the Goliad sandstone (Fig. 4.9), Coleto Creek bedload (Fig. 1.48), and
lower post-Beaumont surface samples (Fig. 4.7) have sand modes that are somewhat
coarser than those found in the bench sediments, but there are some points of
coincidence.

Figure 4.66 is a reasonably complete textural cross-section of the excavated
sample of the bench deposits. It can be read by starting at the bottom righthand corner,
working upward, and then visually stacking the lefthand column on top of the right
column. The most conspicuous mode is one for fine and very fine sand, at 2.5 to 3.5 φ,
running through all the samples. This mode also appears in the lower two Goliad
sandstone samples shown in Fig. 4.9, and it may be that the dominance of this particular
grade of sediment is partly inherited from Miocene source sediments, and partly the result
of depositional processes. Sediment of this size is usually found as coarse suspension
load, near the textural boundary between bedload and suspended load. Sand from the
contemporary creek bed (Fig. 1.48, various modes mostly from 0.5 to 2.0 φ, as well as
gravel) and the terrace surface on the Preiss Ranch (Fig. 4.7, mode at 1.5 to 2.0 φ) are
mostly in the coarse to medium sand range. The former is coarser by virtue of being
bedload, not overbank material, but the latter undoubtedly registers the higher fluvial
energy levels seen in the Holocene. Figure 4.67 shows how the overbank sediment
samples from the bench and the upper deposits compare with bedload samples from
606

contemporary Coleto Creek. The isolated bench sample (a single circle toward the left
side of Fig. 4.67) is from stratum 2E in the cutbank. As the plot indicates, the bedload
samples are markedly coarser, and two of the three are much better sorted than the Berger
Bluff samples.
Other less conspicuous modes that can be picked out from the histograms in Fig.
4.66 include a coarse silt mode (4.5 to 5.0 φ) that begins in the upper part of stratum 1
and runs through stratum 2C, and two secondary and tertiary sand modes that begin in
stratum 2C and run to the top of the column. One is for medium sand (1.5 to 3.0 φ) and
one for coarse sand (0.5 to 1.0 φ). These represent the coarsening-upward trend that
appears above 92.65 m, but notice also that silt and clay are also significantly diminished
above 92.65 m. This indicates not just the addition of coarser grades of sand, but the
reduction of suspended load, probably because of shortening of flood duration.

The small number of samples with pulses of gravel can also be picked out from
Fig. 4.66 – these appear as isolated blocks on the far left end of the histogram at 91.75 to
91.65, 92.70-92.65, 92.80-92.75, and 93.40-93.35. These may be the residue from
individual more substantial floods. The sample at 92.05-92.00 is anomalous, because the
sediment at this level is otherwise very fine-grained.

The lowest three samples in the column (91.70 to 91.55 m) have very peaked sand
fractions and relatively little silt or clay, indicating comparatively high-energy deposition.
The fourth sample from the base (91.75-91.70) is very heterogeneous. It has significant
amounts of gravel, but also an increase in fines. Above this sample, the next nine samples
(92.20 to 91.75 m), drawn from stratum 2A and the calcrete zone at the top of stratum 1,
607

have increased quantities of silt and clay and much less sand, suggesting a significant
increase in flood duration. In the next seven samples (92.60-92.20 m), the sand returns
and the fines diminish in stratum 2B. In stratum 2C (92.70-92.55 m), the proportions
reverse again. Silt and clay increases somewhat, but increasing quantities of sand appear
in the upper two samples. Above 92.65 m, polymodal sand fractions appear (especially in
stratum 2E). The source of this polymodality is uncertain, but it is clear that the
competence (sediment-carrying ability) of the creek has increased above the 92.65 m
level.

In Fig. 4.68, the bench samples plotted in Fig. 4.67 are shown in greater detail
(the isolated stratum 2E sampled is omitted here for scaling purposes). Although the
bench strata can be grouped into “sandy” or “muddy” end members, each stratum has a
fairly unique grain-size signature when mean grain size is plotted against sorting. The
scattergram shows that the sandy units (open symbols) are much more variable than the
muddy units (filled symbols), but they become less heterogeneous over time (from
stratum 1 to 2B, to 2D, the spread of points becomes smaller, and there is a long-term
trend toward coarser grain size and more heterogeneous (less well sorted) texture. The
general trend of the samples up-section is to progress from the lower right to the upper
left part of Fig. 4.68.
Figure 4.69 shows the mean, standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis of
samples in the grain-size data column for the bench samples. Because the standard
deviation is partly dependent on the size of the mean, it is not a truly independent
statistic. In Fig. 4.70, I have replotted the mean, and I have weighted the standard
deviation by the mean to calculate the coefficient of variation, a size-independent
608

measure of the textural heterogeneity of the sample. The scale for the mean is shown in
phi units at the base of the graph, and the scale for the coefficient of variation (a unitless
ratio) is shown at the top. The figure shows that even when the effect of textural grade is
removed, the vertical trends in sorting remain. There are peaks in sediment heterogeneity
near the top of stratum 1, the midpoint of stratum 2B, and at the base of stratum 2D.

Magnetic Susceptibility
Laboratory methods and numerical data for magnetic susceptibility analysis are
documented in Appendix 3. Plots for individual excavation units are shown in Figure
4.25, 4.27, 4.31, 4.35, 4.40 and 4.73. Table 4.9 shows magnetic susceptibility values
averaged by stratum. Chi values are quite low; low-frequency values for the bench
sediments range from a minimum of 2.3332 to a maximum of 7.1828. How do these
values compare to other Texas sites?
Table 4.10 shows some comparative susceptibility data for recent archeological
projects elsewhere in Texas. I have cited only studies that use cgs units, and most of the
values were estimated from published stratigraphic plots, since the actual numbers are
rarely given in the publications. Studies that use field measuring devices usually employ
SI units, and these are not consulted here. The table shows that the Berger Bluff
susceptibility readings are comparable to most of those from sandy sediments in the
eastern part of the state, except for 41 LE 120, which has unusually high readings. On the
other hand, maximum susceptibility readings from sites in or near the limestone-derived
sediments of the Edwards Plateau are much higher, perhaps because of higher clay
content, lower accretion rates than in the East Texas examples, or more concentrated
anthrosols.
609

Table 4.9. Average Magnetic Susceptibility Values by Stratum.

Stratum

Average low
frequency chi
value

Average high
frequency chi
value

Average Xfd
value

Number of
samples
averaged

Upper deposits
5
4 (upper part)

7.5316
4.4352

7.0250
3.8861

4.7619
12.3160

4
6

Bench deposits
3
2E
2D
2C
2B
2A
1

no data
3.5646
5.0324
5.5721
5.4315
5.9423
4.7219

no data
3.1491
4.3830
4.8237
4.9943
4.8345
4.5332

no data
12.0319
7.6074
15.6506
8.0037
18.7945
4.5751

none
4
20
11
27
20
12

In general, the sandy Miocene sediments in the Berger Bluff catchment do not
have a particularly high iron content, compared to bedrock geology in East Texas,
although strongly rubified Lissie Formation sediments are present just upstream from the
site. The Goliad Formation contains some titanomagnetite (Arredondo and Thomann
1996:287).

610

Table 4.10. Magnetic Susceptibility Values from Some Texas Archeological Sites.
Site and context

County

Minimum
chi value

Maximum
chi value

Reference

Fig. or
page

4.45
4.04
1.13
5.19
5.86

6.27
6.09
6.49
6.68
6.48

Gose (1994a)

334
333
332
332
333

5
5
14
15
12
7

>40
22
32
110
36
12

Rogers (1997)

Fig. 16

3
1
1

5
8+
8+

Gose (1994b)

Fig. A-6

5.2
5.2

6.5
6.8

Gose (1995)

Fig. 4

4.2
4.2
5
4
3.8
3.2

6.8
5.3
6
6.2
5
6.8

Gose (1995)

Fig. 9

22.5

35

Gose (2004)

Fig. 1

18

44

Kibler and Scott (2000)

Fig. 11

30
18
10
12

68
47
13
14

Gose and Nickels (1998)

Fig 11-9
Fig 11-8

0.5
1.8
3.9
1.3

45.5
57.8
62.6
45.6

Takac and Gose (1998)

Tbl 28-2
Tbl 28-3
Tbl 28-4
Tbl 28-5

2
21
21

50
70
77

Gose (2002)

Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3

Tertiary sand belt
Valley Branch
non-feature
non-feature
non-feature
Feature 3
Feature 4
41 LE 120
Trench 1
Trench 6
Trench 7
Trench 8
Trench 8
Trench 8
41 GM 224
Profile 224
Profile A
Profile B
41 GM 166
Location 1
Location 2
41 GM 281
Unit 59S
Unit 89E
Location A
Location B
Location C
Location D

Montague

Lee

Fig. 17

Grimes

Grimes
Grimes
Fig. 11

Llano Uplift margin
41 BT 37

Burnet

Edwards Plateau or plateau margin
Cibolo Crossing
Center block
Culebra Creek
Profile 1
Profile 2
Profile 3
Profile 4
Wilson-Leonard
Square 12
Square 20
Square 33/56
Square E28/S78
Armstrong
BHT 5
Column A
Column F

Bexar
Bexar

Williamson

Caldwell

611

Magnetic susceptibility of sediments can be enhanced by pedogenesis, by
burning, possibly by human introduction of organic matter, and by alluvial deposition of
ferrimagnets. The pattern of susceptibility readings in the upper deposits, in which the chi
value (both low and high-frequency) increases significantly above 98.55 m, suggests
enhancement is due to the well-developed, overthickened Late Holocene soil developed
here (Fig. 4.74). There could be some cultural contribution, as well, although the
maximum low-frequency chi value is only 8.8536. The pattern is similar in shape and
scale to profiles from the Valley Branch site (Gose 1994a:332, 333) and 41 GM 224
(Gose 1994b:Fig. A-6, Profile B), and is similar in shape, if not scale, to profiles from
the Armstrong site (Gose 2002:Fig. 1). It is also similar to profiles shown by Maher
(1998:Fig. 7) and Maher and Taylor (1988:Fig. 2). According to Maher,
Pedogenic formation of ferrimagnets appears to be favoured in well drained, not
very acidic soils (pH ~5.5-7), on weatherable, Fe-bearing (but often not Fe-rich)
substrates. The amount of magnetic enhancement often shows little correlation
with other soil parameters, with the exception of some positive correlation with
soil organic carbon… (Maher 1998:47).
Magnetic susceptibility in strata 4 and 5 seems to be controlled largely by
pedogenic maturity of the sediments. A different pattern is shown by the susceptibility
values from the bench deposits. The values here are only slightly lower than those from
the upper deposits, but they tend to oscillate about a central value, without any significant
long-term trends. This kind of patterning can also be seen at 41 GM 281 (Gose 1995:Fig.
11, Location A, C), at 41 GM 224 (Gose 1995:Fig. A-6, Profile 224), at the Valley
Branch site (Gose 1994a:335), and at the Culebra Creek site (Gose and Nickels 1998:Fig.
11-8, Profile 3, 4). Magnetic enhancement of the bench sediments by organic matter or
burning can be ruled out. Organic content is very low, and although there is scattered
evidence (in the form of fired clay nodules, heat-fractured chert, and charcoal flecks) of
612

burning, it is dispersed except for Feature 5 and a possible hearth near unit N109 E96.
The two samples that are spatially closest to known or possible firing events are sample
84 (N113 E98, 92.40-92.30 m) and sample 133 (N109 E96, 92.85-92.80 m), and neither
has especially high chi values (Appendix 3). Sample 84 is, however, marked by a very
low coefficient of frequency dependency, and sample 133 is underlain by two samples
with very low coefficients.
Figure 4.73 shows that susceptibility variation in the bench deposits is largely
controlled by clay and silt content of the samples. In this figure, I have plotted four
variables: 1) low-frequency susceptibility, 2) coefficient of frequency dependency, 3)
percentage of carbonate-free sediment represented by silt, and 4) percentage of
carbonate-free sediment represented by clay. Since these variables have widely differing
values, I have plotted all four as departures from their respective means, in order to get
them all on a comparable scale. As the plot shows, all four variables track each other
closely through vertical space. Table 4.9 indicates that the average low-frequency chi
values are slightly higher for the muddy units (strata 2A and 2C) than for the sandy units
(1, 2B, 2D, and 2E). The coefficient of frequency dependency is also markedly higher for
strata 2A and 2C (although it is also unexpectedly high for stratum 2E).

613

Figure 4.73. Silt, Clay, and Magnetic Susceptibility Curves for Grain-Size Column. All
of the values shown here are plotted as departures (either positive or
negative) from their mean values, in order to show them all on a comparable
scale. The curves differ in length because no phytopol sample was available
for magnetic susceptibility subsampling in the uppermost level. The
uppermost two silt and clay data points come from the N109 E103 matrix
column; the third silt and clay data point also comes from the N109 E103
column. The uppermost magnetic susceptibility data point comes from the
upper half of the 92.90-92.80 m level in N110 E102, and the one below that
comes from the lower half of the same level. All other data points below that
come from the N110 E102 matrix column, at 5 cm intervals. Plotted
vertically here are the low-frequency magnetic susceptibility chi value, the
coefficient of frequency dependency (Xfd), the percentage of silt, and the
percentage of clay in the sample (all as departures from their respective
means). The plot shows that all of the curves are highly correlated, and the
percentage of fines in the sample appears to control the strength of the
magnetic susceptibility signal.
614

Figure 4.74. Magnetic Susceptibility Curves for the Upper Deposits. Low-frequency and
high-frequency chi values are plotted for stratum 4 (six samples) and
stratum 5 (four samples). The marked increase in chi values above 98.55 m
is due to the presence of the well-developed Late Holocene soil in stratum 5.

615

Various empirical studies have repeatedly shown that enhanced magnetic
susceptibility is associated with finer-grained sediments, chiefly clay particles and to a
lesser extent, silt particles (Gale and Hoare 1991:205). A study by Zheng and others of
grain-size fractions ranging from fine sand (3φ) to fine clay (above 10 φ) shows that
susceptibility increases progressively with finer grain size (Zheng et al. 1991:Fig. 1).
Another study by Feng and Johnson (1995:Table 1) shows the same thing – silt has
greater susceptibility than sand, and clay has more than silt. Studies of Holocene
Mississippi River floodplain soils show that Fe2O3 content is strongly correlated with clay
content (Aslan and Autin 1998:Fig. 9, B). The chief conclusion to be drawn is that for the
bench sediments, magnetic susceptibility is not a proxy for weathering intensity, but
rather a proxy for clay and silt content, and by extension, for overbank flood duration. Its
principal value is to provide an indication of the distribution of suspended load in
excavation units where no grain-size analysis was done. Quartz sand mostly serves to
dilute the magnetic signal, which is probably why most of the sites in the Tertiary sand
belt have low chi values similar to those at Berger Bluff. The Cibolo Crossing site
furnishes another good example – even though the absolute susceptibility values are
higher, here too the values appear to be controlled largely by the relative proportions of
sand and clay (see Kibler and Scott 2000:Fig. 11). At Berger Bluff, low values in strata 4
and 5 are probably due both to sand dilution and the relative youthfulness of the blufftop
soil horizon.

In the bench deposits, generally speaking, the low-frequency readings spike
positively in the two muddy units, strata 2A and 2C, and would probably spike in stratum
3 as well, if more samples were available. The high-frequency readings follow the same
trend as the low-frequency readings, but deviate somewhat in some places. Moreover,
616

there is a definite tendency for the readings to spike near the bases of muddy units (Fig.
4.25 and 4.35 offer good examples), although in some cases, the spikes may appear near
the top (Fig. 4.27) or middle (Fig. 4.31) of stratum 2A. Unit N109 E96 also has a very
dramatic negative spike in the low-frequency reading at 92.80-92.75 m, in stratum 2D2,
and units N109 E103 and N111 E101 have some indications of negative spikes in stratum
2D.

There are also prominent negative spikes in stratum 1 in units N109 E103, N111
E101, N112 E99, and N110 E102, although only the latter extends deep enough into
stratum 1 to demonstrate this clearly. This negative trend in chi values is probably due to
past waterlogging of the sediments. Waterlogged sediments typically show reduced
magnetic susceptibility due to loss of iron or conversion to non-ferrimagnetic forms
(Maher 1998:47-48; Gale and Hoare 1991:214; Weston 2004; Grimley, Arruda and
Bramstedt 2004). Unit I at the Wilson-Leonard site furnishes a good archeological
example (Takac and Gose 1998:Fig. 28-1).

Vertical distribution of the coefficient of frequency dependency seems to be less
patterned. There is a well-defined positive spike at the top of stratum 1, in the calcrete
zone in unit N110 E102 (Fig. 4.27, lower right panel), but otherwise the coefficient
shows few interpretable trends. Values are conspicuously negative in unit N109 E96,
which is likely to be the unit closest to a source of groundwater saturation. The value of
the coefficient is often taken as an indication of the proportion of pedogenically formed
(rather than detrital) ferrimagnets.

617

Organic Carbon Content
The bench sediments contain very low levels of organic carbon. An attempt was
made by Michael Marchbanks at the UTSA-CAR archeology lab to determine organic
carbon content by the loss-on-ignition method for a column of samples from N109 E103
and N110 E102, but it was unsuccessful. The procedure is described in Appendix 2. After
the analysis was completed, I discovered that the weight loss on ashing for each sample
was heavily correlated with its clay and silt content. The bench sediments contain so
much clay and silt that they are significantly hygroscopic. Ashing of the sediment
samples simply drove off the bound water, and nearly all the weight change was due to
water loss rather than organic carbon loss. Any actual weight change due to carbon loss
was so trivial in comparison as to be undetectable.

Four much larger samples of sediment were later processed by Geochron
Laboratories for radiocarbon assay, and careful processing of much larger volumes of
sediment established that organic carbon content was indeed very low.

Coarse Clastic Material
Coarse clastic debris found in the bench deposits falls into three categories:
1) colluvial outwash deposits restricted to N109 E96, dominated by calcareous material;
2) isolated clasts scattered through all other excavation units in various strata, dominated
by calcareous material;
3) lenticular pockets of chert gravel strewn along a conspicuous bedding plane (stratum
2E) exposed in the cutbank.

618

Much of the coarse clastic material found in the bench sediments is calcareous in
composition and consists of Goliad sandstone (fine to coarse-grained quartz sandstone
with white calcareous cement), fissured sandstone, fine-grained white or cream-colored
marly or limestone-like clasts, calcareous petrified wood, and cream-colored to light gray
caliche nodules. Sandstone clasts are usually friable and rounded, not angular. All of this
material appears to intergrade visually, and in practice I found it impossible to reliably
separate caliche nodules from Goliad Formation debris. I tentatively regard the caliche
nodules as clastic (reworked from older deposits upstream) rather than autochthonous in
origin (see discussion below).

Aside from the concentrated colluvial lenses of coarse-grained outwash gravel
found in unit N109 E96 (Table 4.6), there are scattered, isolated or clustered clasts found
elsewhere in the bench deposits. A few of these are probably chunks of sandstone or chert
pebble manuports introduced by human agency, but most probably represent coarse
colluvial debris sheetwashed or rolled onto the floodplain surface from the adjacent
valley slope. In general, coarse clastic material becomes less abundant moving southwest
to northeast across the excavated units. Chert gravel is about 11 times as abundant in
N109 E96 as it is in any of the other units, and calcareous debris (Goliad sandstone and
caliche nodules) is almost 15 times as abundant, undoubtedly because N109 E96 is likely
positioned close to the buried valley wall. Table 4.5 shows that the density of coarse
clastic material (chert gravel, Goliad sandstone, caliche nodules) tends to be higher in the
sandy strata than in the muddy strata, as long as unit N109 E96 and its outwash lenses are
omitted from the averages. If that unit is included in the averages, the relationship no
longer holds. Inspection of the data plots for the individual units (upper left panel in Fig.
4.25, 4.27, 4.31, 4.35, and 4.40) confirms that densities are usually (but not always)
619

reduced in the muddy units and tend to peak in the sandy units, except in N109 E96. In a
number of cases, spikes in coarse clastic debris match spikes in rhizoconcretion or
ferromanganese concretion density. Since these items are thought to be diagenetic, not
clastic in origin, the spikes might be the result of screener bias (a more conscientious
screener taking over from a crew member who was less conscientious).
Most of the above material, then, is interpreted as colluvial debris derived from
weathering of Goliad formation bedrock that surely must have been exposed somewhere
to the south and southwest of unit N109 E96 in the late Pleistocene and early Holocene.
This presumably includes a significant amount of Miocene chert gravel released by
weathering from that bedrock. However, there are also pockets of chert gravel, mostly
near the cutbank, in stratum 2E that represent coarse-grained bedload material lofted out
of the creek channel and deposited on the floodplain surface by major flood events.
Anyone who has examined creek floodplains after severe floods has probably seen gravel
lobes like these overlying recently buried vegetation on fine-grained floodplain surfaces.
Knox (1993) has used buried cobble and boulder deposits like these to track major floods
throughout the second half of the Holocene in southwestern Wisconsin. According to
Ritter (1975:646-647) bedload gravel can exit the channel either by rolling and saltating
up the surface of enchannel bars, or occasionally in momentary suspension in very highenergy floods. Most examples seem to be associated with smaller creeks (for example,
Costa 1974:Fig. 1), but Ritter and Blakley (1986) also report large gravel lobes (with
gravel up to about 5 cm in diameter) from flooding on the Gasconade River in Missouri.
Gravel lobes tend to occur as elongate bars, subparallel to the stream axis, and are planoconvex in cross-section along their transverse axes. The gravel pockets visible in the
Coleto Creek cutbank are not obviously plano-convex, but they have probably been
620

sectioned longitudinally by erosion, and may have been affected somewhat by sediment
compaction. Ice-rafting can also emplace coarse debris (Moody, Pizzuto, and Meade
1999:301, Fig. 8) but is unlikely here, either in the Pleistocene or Holocene.

Extreme floods create macroturbulence that can transport boulder-sized clasts and
carry gravel out of the channel into depositional facies where bedload would not
normally be found. The most extreme examples come from bedrock-floored, highgradient streams on the Edwards Plateau (Baker 1977:Fig. 17). Lower gradient, alluvial
floored coastal plain streams like Coleto Creek have much lower, but still significant
transport capabilities. The lag deposits of chert cobbles seen in interdune areas directly
across the creek from the bench (perhaps introduced by Hurricane Beulah in 1967) are
adjacent to the channel proper and have perhaps not been lofted any significant distance,
but chert cobbles seen on the Preiss Ranch Lower (?) Post-Beaumont terrace surface (Fig.
4.6) sit well above the present channel. These cobbles (probably reworked from Willis
Formation deposits) are much larger clasts than those eroding from the gravel pockets at
the top of the bench, and reflect the magnitude of contemporary Holocene flood events.
The line of gravel pockets marking the top of the bench sediments is probably a
stratigraphic marker for beginning of large-scale Holocene flood events in the Coleto
Creek basin. These were most likely major subtropical storms generated by a nearby
hurricane landfall, or a major storm event triggered by a fastmoving spring or fall Arctic
front colliding with overriding Gulf moisture. Both kinds of events are characteristically
Holocene events that could happen only after 1) sufficient warming of Gulf water
temperatures in the early Holocene or 2) removal of Arctic front blockage by melting of
the Laurentide ice sheet.
621

Fossil Wood
Small fragments of fossilized wood (unidentified) were found scattered
throughout the bench deposits. These have a chalky, calcareous, cream-colored exterior,
often with a harder, light gray-brown interior, and occasionally patches of the typical
gray micritic carbonate cement that permeates all the bench deposits are found adhering
to the exterior surface. The mineralized wood and the adhering cement have a very
different appearance. This fossil wood superficially resembles and was mistaken for
travertine during the excavations and initial lab cataloging, and was identified as
mineralized wood only after thin sections were examined. The age of the wood is
unknown, but I suspect it is most likely Miocene, and derived from the Goliad Formation,
based on the thorough mineralization and the pervasiveness of calcareous mineralization
in that formation. It was cataloged separately (as “travertine”) in lab processing, but no
effort has been made to study its distribution in the deposits.
There are some recurrent shapes among the wood fragments. Straight or twisted
hemicylindrical shapes, often with one rounded end, are common. Two specimens from
unit N112 E97 selected for thin sectioning are reasonably representative. The first
specimen (93.14-92.75 m, 1/4-inch screen, bag 2, lot B-112) is hemicylindrical in section
with one rounded end, 43.5 mm long, 22 mm wide, with a wall thickness of 4.5-8.0 mm,
weighing 13.7 g (Fig. 4.75, upper photo). The second specimen (92.40-92.35 m, 1/4inch screen, lot B-120) is a shorter, porous hemicylindrical section 26.5 mm long, 10.512.5 mm wide, 3-4 mm thick, weighing 1.4 g (Fig. 4.75, lower photo). Cellular wood
structure can be seen in both transverse and longitudinal thin sections (Fig. 4.76, 4.77).

622

Figure 4.75. Fossil Wood Selected for Thin-Sectioning. Upper photo: N112 E97 (93.1492.75 m), bag 2, specimen B-112; lower photo: N112 E97 (92.40-92.35 m),
specimen B-120.

623

Figure 4.76. Thin Section of Fossil Wood. N112 E97 (93.14-92. 75 m), bag 2, specimen
B-112. Longitudinal section with unpolarized light through one of the three
specimens shown in Figure 4.75, top photo.

624

Figure 4.77. Thin Section of Fossil Wood. N112 E97 (93.14-92. 75 m), bag 2, specimen
B-112. Transverse section (with unpolarized light) near interior surface,
through one of the three specimens shown in Figure 4.75, top photo.
These items are regarded as fossils reworked from older deposits upstream and deposited
on the surface by floods. They are relatively lightweight, and could probably be picked
up and moved by running water rather easily.

DIAGENETIC PROPERTIES OF THE BENCH SEDIMENTS
The interpretation offered here is that the bench sediments accumulated very
slowly (over two millennia or more) by vertical overbank accretion, with no visible
removal of sediments by erosion. A slowly aggrading surface like this would ordinarily
625

provide a site for extensive soil development with conspicuous horizonation, but the
bench sediments were persistently saturated by groundwater, which served to greatly
retard weathering and soil development except perhaps during limited seasonal drying
episodes. There are only limited indications of soil development, mostly appearing
toward the top of the bench (especially in stratum 2D) as seasonal drying became
somewhat more pronounced during the transition into the Holocene.

Aside from oxidation, many of the most important weathering processes
associated with soil development (such as translocation of clays, sesquioxides or
carbonates) are the result of vertical movement of vadose water in well-drained sediments
(Birkeland 1984:120-144). Frequent or near-constant groundwater saturation, however,
prevents both oxidation and vertical movement of illuvial clays, iron minerals, and
pedogenic carbonates. Instead, most of the diagenetic features seen in the bench
sediments are those related to groundwater saturation and movement: phreatic carbonate
cement, abundant rhizoliths, and movement and redistribution of iron, manganese and
uranium minerals. The two very fine-grained strata (2A and 2C) near the middle of the
section may also have tended to restrict water movement to horizontal rather than vertical
movement. Stratum 2A, in particular, may have served at times as an aquitard.

Aslan and Autin (1998) studied Mississippi River floodplain soils near Natchez,
and the part of their study that deals with backswamp deposits serves as a useful model
for interpreting fine-grained sediments that are frequently saturated. The scale of the
floodplain and the source of waterlogging differs from the Berger Bluff case, but the
study is still relevant. They found that backswamp soils form in less than 5400 years,
mottles and slickensides develop in tens to a few hundreds of years, and poor drainage
626

and slow but continuous sedimentation inhibits weathering. Soil chemistry is largely
controlled by depositional differences in parent material, rather than by weathering
processes (Aslan and Autin 1998:443). Calcite and gypsum precipitate from groundwater
during seasonal rise and fall of the water table (Aslan and Autin 1998:445), rather than
from downward movement of vadose water.

Various Forms of Carbonate
Carbonate occurs in several different forms. Nearly all of it has been mobilized
from the Goliad Formation aquifer, carried in solution by groundwater, and deposited
somewhere in the bench sediments. There are, however, no known examples of
travertine. Travertine usually forms where outflowing water is aerated and degassed by
flowing downward over rocks. Likewise, dispersed microscopic pedogenic calcite (?)
needles, seen in the upper deposits, do not seem to be present in the bench deposits. Jim
Abbott’s (2001:Appendix II) remarks on secondary carbonates in the Texas coastal plain
environment can be profitably read in conjunction with this section.

Phreatic carbonate matrix cement: This light gray, micritic carbonate is pervasive
throughout the bench deposits, filling pores between sediment grains and lining voids in
the matrix. For the bench as a whole, it represents about 17.83% by weight of the matrix
(range, 10.52-30.52%, standard deviation, 4.99%). Its role in creating the indurated
benchlike landform at the site has already been mentioned, but once emplaced, it has also
served to prevent bioturbation by plants and animals, and it has also served as an ionic
buffer for animal bones and freshwater mussel shells, providing an alkaline environment
that has helped to preserve them. It also encrusts and penetrates small bits of wood
charcoal found in the sediments, and must be thoroughly removed to allow accurate
627

radiocarbon assay of charcoal and sediments. Since the proximate source is the Goliad
Formation bedrock, the carbonate is assumed to have no measurable radiocarbon activity.
It is most abundant in stratum 1 and declines slightly above stratum 2A, increasing again
somewhat near the top of the bench. When damp, the carbonate gave the stratum 1
sediments the consistency of damp, partly hardened concrete or mortar, difficult to dig
with a trowel. In stratum 1, cream-colored carbonate forms wavy crosslaminations that
appear in all the profiles (Fig. 4.28, 4.29). These probably represent deposits that formed
along wetting fronts in the sandy sediments, and may be carbonate analogs of clay
illuvial bands that are often seen in seasonally saturated sandy sediments. They have the
same shape in profile.

Groundwater carbonates can be precipitated either below the water table or above
it in the capillary fringe zone. Precipitation can be triggered by an increase in calcium
ions, removal of water by plant roots, and removal of CO2 by bacteria or by degassing
through matrix pores (Wright and Tucker 1991:7, 8).
Laminar carbonate (“calcrete zone’): Seen only in N110 E102, this 5-13 cm thick
cream-colored calcrete zone (2.5Y 6.5/2 moist) directly underlies stratum 2A (Fig. 4.26).
There is no indication it formed as a pond deposit or as a subaerial travertine deposit, or
as a pedogenic caliche deposit. The clay-rich stratum 2A capping it probably served as an
aquitard confining groundwater movement, but allowing its deposition somehow.
Carbonate pans: Flatlying panlike or other irregular hard masses of carbonate (up to 10
cm or so in horizontal extent) were occasionally encountered in the excavations. These
were composed of quartz sand cemented by the same gray, micritic carbonate making up
the rhizoconcretions found in the sediments. They were uncommon and simply seemed to
628

be areas with especially dense accumulations of phreatic cement. As a rule, these were
well enough indurated that they could be removed from the sediments without breaking
up.

Carbonate encrustations on inclusions: Most of the objects recovered from the bench,
whether chert flakes, chert pebbles, bone fragments, fired clay nodules, or wood charcoal
fragments, have small patches of

gray phreatic carbonate adhering to the surface,

acquired after burial. In many cases, the carbonate has a threadlike tubular shape
suggesting it was deposited where plant rootlets enclosed buried objects.

Carbonate webbing, filaments, or films: Unfortunately, I made no systematic
observations on this form. My impression is that carbonate filaments are not very
abundant, but are probably much better developed in stratum 3 and above, into the upper
deposits.

Rhizoconcretions: These are individual fossils that can be extracted intact from the
enclosing matrix, as opposed to root stains that break up when the matrix is excavated.
Klappa (1980) uses the generic term “rhizolith” to refer to preserved root fossils, and uses
the term “root tubule” to refer to cemented cylinders around root molds. I have not
followed Klappa’s terminology, preferring to use the terms “rhizoconcretion” and
“rhizolith” interchangeably to refer to these root tubules. In any case, they appear to form
as indurated calcium carbonate encrustations that form around living plant rootlets
(possibly in association with soil bacteria or fungi) as the rootlet draws groundwater from
the enclosing sediment, and may continue to accrue after the rootlet has died. The exact
nature of the process is still unknown. Krinitzsky and Turnbull (1967:33) attribute it to
629

removal of CO2 from groundwater by roots and/or increase in saturation of carbonate in
groundwater, but Klappa (1980:625-628) seems to dispute this viewpoint. Abbott
(2001:204) suggests they form in matrix that is periodically saturated. However, similar
rhizoconcretions are common in loess (see Krinitzsky and Turnbull 1967:Fig. 1), where
they may be associated with grass rootlets.
Rhizoconcretions are abundant and ubiquitous in the bench deposits. The
individual fragments were recovered by the thousands from the 1/4-inch screen. They
vary somewhat in diameter, shape, and fragmentary length, but most are somewhat
narrower than a pencil, generally 3.2-3.8 mm in diameter, and composed of hard, light
gray-brown micrite similar to that serving as matrix cement (Fig. 4.78). The evidence
seems to suggest that although the concretions are nearly as thick as a pencil, the fine
rootlets (unidentified) that served as the original nucleation site were probably less than a
millimeter in diameter. Thin sections made transverse to the long axis of six of these
rhizoconcretions (N112 E97, 92.35-92.30 m) show they are composed of micrite (Fig.
4.79). Occasional sediment grains (“floating skeletal grains”) may appear in the interior,
but most sediment grains line the outside surface. Sediment grains seen in the interior of
the rhizoconcretion are rare small to medium grains that are usually toward the periphery,
not in the core area. A few examples of rhizoconcretions with a single very small central
root channel can be seen, but more usually the transverse sections are riddled with highly
irregular voids (compare with Klappa 1980:Fig. 5, d). There are usually two or three
larger ones (0.7-1.4 mm maximum diameter) and many smaller ones (usually about 0.10.3 mm in diameter). These are assumed to be longitudinal channels, but I have no
longitudinal thin sections to verify this. There are also occasional subrounded to circular
channels (0.1-0.2 mm diameter), but they are much less common. Surrounding the small
630

channels, or sometimes extending transversely across part of the diameter of the
rhizoconcretion, can be seen thin, light brown, linear cellular structures that may
represent silicified root sheaths.

Figure 4.78. Rhizoconcretions Submitted for Thin-Sectioning. Six rhizoconcretions from
unit N112 E97 (92.35-92.30 m), 1/4-inch screen were epoxied as a group
and sectioned transversely.
These extinguish completely in polarized light and may be composed of amorphous
opalescent silica. A few examples (N112 E97, level 1) of contemporary rootlets growing
through longitudinal channels in rhizoliths were seen; similar instances have been
reported in the geological literature.

631

Figure 4.79. Rhizoconcretion in Transverse Thin Section. Part of the wall of a single
rhizoconcretion from the group of six shown in the previous photo.
Photographed through 5X lens in polarized light. Several subcircular
longitudinal canals can be seen.
In addition to the pencil-sized rhizoconcretions, there are irregular fine root
tubules about 0.8-1.0 mm in diameter, usually surrounding an open central void about
0.3-0.4 mm in diameter. These are fairly abundant, but essentially impossible to quantify.
The central void is often surrounded by a white, caliche-like hypocoating that may or
may not survive breakup of the matrix during excavation (Fig. 4.81).
632

Figure 4.80. Rhizoconcretion with Attached Sediment Grains. Shown here is another
rhizoconcretion in transverse section with several quartz grains both
attached to the exterior surface and embedded in the interior. Photo in
unpolarized light with 2.5X lens. Provenience is the same: N112 E97
(92.35-92.30 m), 1/4-inch screen.
Density (weight per unit volume) of rhizoconcretions is shown in Table 4.5 and in
Figure 4.25, 4.27, 4.31, 4.35, and 4.40. Density is highest at the base (stratum 1) and top
(stratum 3) of the bench and seems to follow that of other forms of carbonate. There is a
very conspicuous peak in density immediately below stratum 2A, at the same level as the
calcrete zone exposed in N110 E102. This peak appears in all of the four units that were
deep enough to penetrate stratum 1. The reason for the increase in rhizoconcretion
density at the top of the bench, during a period when spring discharge was apparently
diminishing, is unclear. There are almost no data on density in stratum 3, but very large
633

numbers of rhizoconcretions were seen exposed on the eroded surface of stratum 3 at the
beginning of the field project. There is no indication that these rhizoconcretions have a
clastic origin, and they are assumed to represent evidence of very dense vegetation
growing on the floodplain surface as the bench deposits accumulated. Unfortunately, I
did not check the contemporary soil surface at the top of the bluff to see if contemporary
rhizoconcretions were being formed there.

Figure 4.81. Minor Forms of Rhizoconcretions. A, N111 E101 (92.80-92.70 m), 1/4-inch
screen, two specimens; B, N110 E102 (92.15-92.10 m), matrix column, two
specimens; C, N112 E97 (92.25-92.20 m), 1/4-inch screen; D, N112 E97
(92.30-92.25 m), 1/4-inch screen; E, N110 E102 (92.55-92.50 m), 1/4-inch
screen.
Root stains and casts: In addition to solidified light gray rhizoconcretions, there are also
chalky, powdery white or off-white vertical and horizontal calcareous stains visible in the
profiles of the various excavation units. These are often larger, perhaps 2 cm or more in
diameter, and the larger examples can be traced downward for several centimeters, in
634

many cases crosscutting the stratum boundaries as marked on the profiles. These stains
crumble and disappear when the fill is excavated, but they are well enough defined to
show up faintly in photographs of the profiles (see tops of profiles in Fig. 4.28, 4.29,
4.32, and 4.33) and occasionally to appear in floors of units (Fig. 4.43, 4.49). Many of
these stains are about the same diameter as or slightly smaller than crawdad burrows, but
they probably represent a type of plant root larger than those responsible for the
rhizoconcretions. These may be sites where roots have decayed, the void has filled with
sediment that contrasts texturally with the enclosing matrix, and preferential infiltration
of carbonate has then followed. Klappa (1980:620) calls these “root casts.”
Caliche nodules: Carbonate nodules, varying widely in size, hardness, color, granularity
and abundance were found in all the bench strata. Some of these resemble pedogenic
(“caliche”) carbonate nodules and are probably of Quaternary age, but as I have already
remarked, there is so much overlap between these and the calcareous sandstone and
marly carbonate nodules originating as colluvial debris from the Goliad Formation that it
was impossible to sort them out consistently. Nodular carbonate forms in the bench
deposits appear to be a mixture of some Quaternary material with a great deal of
Miocene-aged material, perhaps ultimately also of pedogenic origin (Hoel 1982:105113). Radiocarbon assays, luminescence assays of occluded single quartz grains, or
carbon isotope studies would be required to sort out the age and origins of the different
kinds of carbonate nodules.
Among the nodular carbonate material from the bench are a number of very hard,
cream-colored light to gray nodules, usually highly fissured, (Fig. 4.82; compare with
Abbott 2001:Fig. 59, C) that resemble pedogenic nodules. One of these (lot B-148, N109
E96, 92.05-92.00 m, stratum 2A) was submitted for thin-sectioning. It has a
635

homogeneous, very fine-grained calcite fabric with a few widely scattered, subangular
floating skeletal grains; some of these are fairly large (Fig. 1.83). The exterior boundary
is almost entirely free of attached matrix grains, except for one small area (Fig. 1.84).
The nodule has branching radial fissures that are lined with secondary carbonate crystals
(larger than those in the body of the nodule) and patchy, dark brown iron or manganese
oxide stains.

Figure 4.82. Caliche Nodule from Bench Deposits. The photo log for this lab photo is
incomplete, but this is probably the specimen submitted for thin sectioning
from N109 E96 (92.05-92.00 m), 1/4-inch screen, slide B-148.

636

Figure 4.83. Thin Section of Caliche Nodule. Section through exterior boundary.
Diagonal fissure with manganese staining in lower right corner; large
floating quartz grain near center. Note fine-grained crystalline matrix and
lack of attached sediment grains. Polarized light, 2.5X lens. N109 E96
(92.05-92.00 m), 1/4-inch screen, slide B-148.

637

Figure 4.84. Thin Section of Caliche Nodule, Showing Attached Grains. Another view of
the exterior boundary of the same nodule, this one showing attached
sediment grains in polarized light, 2.5X lens.
These nodules may be reworked from older deposits like the Lissie terrace exposure
upstream. Wright and Tucker (1991:14) use the term “allorthic nodules” to refer to
nodules that are reworked from another source. Although these are probably pedogenic in
origin, I do not think they are contemporary with the bench deposits. When they were
encountered in situ, they were not surrounded by any kind of carbonate matrix halo. In
each case, the boundary between the nodule and the surrounding matrix appears to be
clear and sharp. This contrasts with the rhizoconcretions, whose exterior surfaces
resemble the matrix from which they were excavated. I have tentatively interpreted these
nodules as evidence of reworking, rather than pedogenesis. Some kind of chronometric
analysis is needed to resolve their origin. Caliche nodules from the Lissie terrace scarp

638

upstream are very irregular in shape, white to cream-colored, with a finely botryoidal
surface texture (Fig. 4.85).

Figure 4.85. Caliche Nodule from Lissie Terrace. This specimen was collected from an
exposure upstream from the bench and is less dense and more earthy in
texture than most of the examples from the bench.
Redoximorphic Features and Precipitates
From redox (reduction-oxidation) indicators in the sediments, it is clear that the
bench deposits were saturated with groundwater much of the time, although oxidation
features also indicate there was some seasonal drying, particularly in the upper part of the
bench.
639

Munsell matrix colors: The bench sediments, except for strata 2E and 3, are
overwhelmingly gray. The gray color derives from the pervasive gray micritic cement,
from the gray color of the clays in the sediments (especially strata 2A and 2C), and from
frequent reducing conditions resulting from groundwater saturation. Soil scientists often
judge that gray matrix colors indicate seasonal saturation for more than 50% of the year
(Jacobs, West, and Shaw 2002). Table 4.11 lists field-recorded Munsell colors.
Unfortunately, few colors were recorded in the field because a Munsell book was not
always available.
There is little variation in hue or chroma throughout the stratigraphic sequence.
What little variation occurs is mostly in color value, with very slightly lighter values
toward the top of the section. Table 4.12 lists Munsell colors recorded in the lab on
archived phtyolith/pollen samples from N110 E102, using a blue-filtered incandescent
light that is intended to emulate natural light. Hue varies by about one Munsell unit
(samples below 91.90 m have a slight pinkish cast), value varies by about one unit, and
chroma varies by about half a unit. Stratum 2E has a slight yellowish tint and is lightly
mottled with iron stains. Stratum 3 has a distinctive chocolate-brown tint. This slight
color change at the top of the bench is probably due to the reduction in spring discharge
at the onset of the Holocene. The two prominent dark bands seen in section (strata 2A
and 2C) are dark because of increased clay content, not organic content, and the moisture
and disseminated manganese dioxide associated with the clay.

640

Table 4.11. Field-Recorded Munsell Values.
Stratum

Excavation profiles

3
2E
2D

8YR 6.5/3 dry

2C

2B
2A

calcrete zone
1

Cutbank

8YR 6.5/2 dry
7YR 5.5/3 mottled brown
to gray 10YR 6.5/2 root stains
2D1: 10YR 5.5/2
2D2: 10YR 6.5/2
2D3: 10YR 6.5/2.5
10YR 5.5/1 moist
10YR 5.5/1.5 gray with
7.5YR 4.5/4 mottles
10YR 5.5/1.5
10YR 5.5/1.5 moist
10YR 6.5/2
10YR 4.5/1 moist
10YR 6.5/2
2.5Y 7/2 loose matrix
10YR 5.5/2
2.5Y 6.5/2 moist
2.5Y 5.5/2 moist

641

10YR 6.5/3.5
2.5Y 6.5/2 dry
2.5YR 7.5/1 dry
10YR 5/4 dry mottles

2.5Y 6.5/2 dry

2.5Y 6.5/2 dry
2.5Y 5.5/2 moist

Table 4.12. Munsell Colors for Archived Phytolith/Pollen Samples, N110 E102.
Sample elevation (m)

Dry color

Moist color

92.90-92.80 upper sample
92.90-92.80 lower sample
92.80-92.75
92.75-92.70
92.70-92.65
92.65-92.60
92.60-92.55
92.55-92.50
92.50-92.45
92.45-92.40
92.40-92.35
92.35-92.30
92.30-92.25
92.25-92.20
92.20-92.15
92.15-92.10
92.10-92.05
92.05-92.00
92.00-91.95
91.95-91.90
91.90-91.85
91.85-91.80
91.80-91.75
91.75-91.70
91.70-91.65
91.65-91.60
91.60-91.55

10YR 6.5/2
10YR 6.5/2
10YR 6/2
10YR 6.5/2
10YR 6.5/2
10YR 6.5/2
10YR6/2
10YR 6.5/2
10YR 6.5/2
10YR 6/2
10YR 5.5/2
10YR 5.5/2
10YR 5.5/2
10YR 5.5/2
10YR 5.5/2
10YR 5/2
10YR 5/1.5
10YR 5/1.5
10YR 6/2
10YR 6/2
9YR 6.5/2
9YR 6.5/2
9YR 6.5/2
9YR 6.5/1.5
9YR 6/1.5
9YR 6.5/1.5
9YR 6.5/2

10YR 4.5/2
10YR 5.5/2.5
10YR 5.5/2.5
10YR 5.5/2
10YR 5.5/2
10YR 4.5/2
10YR 4.5/2
10YR 4.5/2
10YR 4.5/2
10YR 4.5/2
10YR 4.5/2.5
10YR 4.5/2.5
10YR 4.5/2
10YR 4/2
10YR 4/2
10YR 3.5/2
10YR 3.5/2
10YR 3.5/2
10YR 3.5/2.5
10YR 4/2
9YR 4.5/2
9YR 4.5/2.5
9YR 4.5/2
9YR 4.5/2
9YR 4.5/2
9YR 4.5/2
9YR 5.5/2.5

642

Although there are no true blueish or greenish gley colors, the gray cast of the bench
sediments suggests iron-manganese depletion.
The relationship of color and wetness is explained largely by the oxidationreduction cycles of Fe and Mn…. Reduction in soils is essentially a biological
process…. When the supply of O2 in the soil is depleted, anaerobic organisms
take over and dehydrogenate soil organic matter. The H atoms lost in this process
consist of a proton H+ and electron e-, so the process is considered to be oxidation
of organic matter. Electrons produced are donated to Mn3+, Fe3+, SO2-4, etc.
which become reduced to Mn2+, Fe2+, and S- (as sulfide)…. Because Fe2+ is
relatively soluble, Fe losses occur by leaching during the reduction cycle. Gray
colors are mainly caused by a lack of Fe-oxides. In contrast, the yellowish brown
color of soils is due mainly to goethite, and the reddish color to hematite (Evans
and Franzmeier 1988:354).
Ferric (Fe2O3) iron is a strong coloring agent, but ferrous (Fe O) iron is not, so the
acquisition of the extra electron has a significant effect on color. Fluctuating water tables
cause the sediment state to alternate between oxidation and reduction, and this typically
causes mottling. Reduced sediments can also oxidize and change color when exhumed
and exposed to the air, but no instances of this were observed during fieldwork at the site.

Sediments exposed in the cutbank had a very slight pinkish cast, especially in
stratum 1, which is why colors recorded from the cutbank are listed separately in Table
4.11. The pinkish cast was not noticed in profiles of N110 E102, but it does appear in
archived phytolith/pollen samples at 91.90 m and below (see Table 4.12). The pinkish
cast may be due to iron oxides associated with carbonate cement. There also might be
some introduction of rubified sediments from the Lissie Formation in this area.
Iron and manganese stains: All of the bench strata are mottled to some extent with
yellowish-brown (for example, 10YR 5.5/3 in stratum 2D) to brown (7-7.5YR 4.5-5.5/34) stains which become progressively darker and more compact toward the base of the
643

section. These are sites of

ferromanganese accumulation (probably associated with

bacterial oxidation) and indicate occasional seasonal drying of the sediments, but in all
strata the percentage of profile area covered by stained areas is much smaller than that
with gray sediments. Oxidation indicates that the sediments were aerated, not
waterlogged, for at least part of the year. Soil scientists usually refer to large, diffuse
oxide concentrations like these as “iron masses.” Goethite, lepidocrocite, maghemite,
ferrihydrite and similar minerals produce colors like these.

Manganese stains on bone: Bone fragments from the bench deposits very often have
black or silver-black stains on the exterior surface. In cases where the stain covers the
entire bone, careful microscopic examination is necessary to distinguish between staining
and charring (examples of both have been seen). Although no mineralogical identification
of these stains has been done, there are presumed to be manganese dioxide. Another
possibility would be some type of uranium oxide, such as pitchblende (or uraninite).

Uranium oxide efflorescences (?): Porous items recovered from the bench deposits
(mostly baked clay nodules and bones) frequently have an unidentified, faint yellow
powdery exterior coating that may perhaps be carnotite or some other uranium oxide
mineral. Impermeable items (such as chert pebbles or chipping debris) lack this coating.
Uranium is known to exhibit preferential accumulation toward the exterior of bone
(Millard and Hedges 1995). The Goliad Formation is a well-known uranium host (Hoel,
1982; Arredondo and Thomann 1996). Millard and Hedges (1995:Fig. 10) report that
waterlogged sites have lower concentrations of uranium in bones than other kinds of
sites, but I suspect that the sites they studied were not fed by an aquifer emerging from a
major uranium host. No mineralogical studies have been done of these yellow coatings.
644

Manganese or uranium precipitates (?): Only a few uncommon, very small
accumulations of silver-black, vesicular-textured material were recovered from the
sediments. Initially mistaken for charred plant matter or bone in the field, they were later
examined microscopically and found to be unidentified mineral precipitates, perhaps
some kind of manganese or uranium mineral such as birnessite or pitchblende. Unlike the
coatings noted above, these are small aggregates that are not associated with porous
inclusions. Very large accumulations of manganese and iron oxides are sometimes
produced by bacterial oxidation around cold springs. Mustoe (1981) reports on one such
locality where the soil contains about 43% MnO2 and 20-30% Fe2O3 produced by
bacterial oxidation. Nothing comparable to that was found in the bench sediments.

Ferromanganese concretions: Iron and manganese are chemically similar elements and
are frequently found together in nodules and concretions. Ferromanganese concretions
are small, hard, spherical aggregates with concentric layers of iron and manganese oxides
that form in soils subjected to periodic wetting and drying (White and Dixon 1996).
According to Stiles, Mora and Driese (2001:943), they occur most frequently in silt or
clay-rich soils with poor drainage under “moderate continental to warm subtropical
temperature regimes” and are well formed within 3000-4000 years. However, I have
seen preferential accumulation of very small, buckshot-sized ferromanganese nodules in
the tops of postholes of Caddoan structures dating about 840-1255 cal AD at the George
C. Davis site, which suggests that very small concretions conceivably can form in as little
as 700-1100 years in favorable microsites and climates. Several kinds of manganese
minerals like birnessite, rhodocrosite or lithiophorite and iron minerals like goethite or
lepidocrocite may be involved. The iron content has been used as a measure of mean
645

annual precipitation during the formation of the concretions (Stiles, Mora and Driese
2001).
Ferromanganese concretions recovered from the bench deposits are commonly
sand-sized to buckshot-sized, occasionally pea-sized. Although they are smaller than the
1/4-inch mesh spacing of the screens, the buckshot-sized concretions were recovered
from the artifact screens in some numbers, probably because they were trapped by
matrix. Recovery densities are especially high in the topmost strata (stratum 2D and 3;
Table 4.5). The screen sample plots (Fig. 4.25, 4.27, 4.31, 4.35 and 4.40) show that in
every unit, densities of ferromanganese concretions fluctuate widely, but closely track the
density of chert gravel. This can only mean that either 1) the ferromanganese concretions
are clasts, like the gravel, or 2) the densities of both gravel and concretions fluctuate
chiefly as a result of variations in screener competence. Both explanations are possible, if
not equally plausible. Different crew members worked the screens as most of the units
were deepened, and their collection diligence was variable. Although the density of the
concretions varies from stratum to stratum, no clusters were seen in the excavations – that
is, there was no evidence that concretions were accumulating as clastic material in low
spots or behind obstructions. A few concretions were present in the gravel deposits
discussed above (in N109 E96 and in stratum 2E), but they seem to be less common there
than in the rest of the deposits.
All of the excavated sediment passing through the 1/4-inch screen was collected
from unit N109 E96 and later wet-screened through two finer mesh sizes, “coarse” and
“fine” (window mesh). The coarse fraction from selected levels has been picked to
extract microsnails, and ferromanganese concretions were also extracted from a few of
the levels. As a result, large and presumably representative samples of concretions are
646

available for study from just a few levels in this one excavation unit. A single sample
from the 92.35-92.30 m level was selected for study. As it happens, no ferromanganese
concretions were recovered from the 1/4-inch screen in this particular level, but 1101
specimens varying in shape from spherical to oblong were counted from the coarse
fraction passing the screen, and their diameter was measured. The median diameter is
2.00 mm and mean diameter is 2.19±0.76 mm (range 1.0-6.7 mm). Figure 4.86 shows the
size distribution. The average size probably varies considerably in other levels, but no
data are available. It is clear, though, that most of the concretions are small enough to
pass through the 1/4-inch screen, and although the screen counts probably give a
reasonable estimate of the level-to-level fluctuations in abundance, they do not give a
very good estimate of absolute abundance. The same thing is probably true of any other
kinds of geological or biological material smaller than the 1/4-inch mesh. To take another
example, from the 93.08-93.00 m level in the same excavation unit, three concretions
were recovered from the 1/4-inch screen, but another 1844 were recovered from the bulk
matrix coarse fraction, plus 374 exfoliated fragments (these were counted, but only the
largest spherical concretion, 6.8 mm in diameter, was measured).
Many of the concretions are spherical, others oblong, and some are more
irregular, with somewhat pitted surfaces. They are not attracted to a magnet, and
presumably have a higher manganese than iron content. Most are quite black (7.5 YR 1/1
is typical), with only a few brown (roughly 7.5YR 6/5) specimens. In addition to the 1101
spherical specimens in the 92.35-92.30 m level, there are an additional 118 exfoliated
hemispherical to tabular fragments. Some of these have fresh breaks produced during
excavation, but most do not. These might suggest that some or all of the concretions were
formed elsewhere, exhumed by erosion, and deposited in the site as clastic material.
647

Figure 4.85. Size Distribution of Ferromanganese Concretions. Maximum diameter of
spherical or subspherical concretions (N = 1101) extracted from fill passing
the 1/4-inch screen in a single 5-cm excavation level (upper stratum 2B)
from N109 E96 is shown, along with limits of 1/8-inch and 1/4-inch mesh.
Exfoliated fragments are not included.
Some of the spherical concretions have rather coarse-grained sand grains attached
to the exterior surface (under the microscope, these actually look like miniature armored
mudballs). I have not measured the sand grains, but many of them appear to be coarser
than the average grain size of the sand fraction in the bench sediments. A few concretions
also have attached carbonate root tubules or thin surface carbonate coatings.

648

Animal and Plant Disturbances
Visible in the unit profiles are a few, somewhat larger disturbances in two of the
sandy units, stratum 2B (Fig. 4.34 and 4.38) and 2D (Fig. 4.39) and one of the muddy
units, stratum 2C (Fig. 4.38). These are interpreted as noncultural, perhaps animal
burrows (possibly nest chambers of fossorial animals). They are not common, and none
were noticed in the cutbank profile. There are also a number of vertical shaftlike
disturbances a few centimeters in diameter that I have interpreted, above, as root stains.
These perhaps show most clearly in Fig. 4.32. They are about the same diameter as
crawdad burrows, but there is no evidence of the extensive underground chambers that
are associated with crawdad burrows (Grow and Merchant 1980; Hobbs 1991: Fig. 22.17;
Hobbs and Whiteman 1991) and I think they are much more likely to be root stains than
crawdad burrows. There is no evidence of the extensive burrowing seen at the Aubrey
site (Ferring 2001:Fig. 3.25) or the Burnham site (Dort and Martin 2003:Plate 4a).
Remains of several kinds of fossorial animals (eastern mole, Attwater’s or Texas pocket
gopher, prairie or pine vole, northern grasshopper mouse, Ord’s kangaroo rat, hispid
pocket mouse, deer mouse or white-footed mouse, least shrew, and smallmouthed
salamander) were found in the bench deposits, but most of these are believed to have
been introduced from better-drained upland habitats or from more friable areas of the
floodplain. Most of these burrowing taxa are known to prefer friable, sandy, clay-free
soils that are not waterlogged, and would probably be excluded from burrowing in the
bench deposits by the clay content (and, once emplaced, the carbonate content as well) of
the sediments. Some (like kangaroo rats and the northern grasshopper mouse) are
specifically dryland rodents and can be excluded on that basis alone. Of the fossorial taxa
named, the smallmouthed salamander (Ambystoma texanum), eastern mole (Scalopus
649

aquaticus), and pocket gopher (Geomys sp.) are most likely to live in floodplain habitats,
but whether they actually occupied the site itself is unknown. Smallmouthed salamanders
are known to occupy abandoned crawdad burrows, but I can find no evidence that they
actually dig burrows themselves. The habitat preferences and likely sources of these
animals will be discussed in some detail in the chapter on vertebrate remains. Almost all
of these animals have extensive horizontal runs. Gophers, for example, have long
horizontal runs several centimeters in diameter that lie just beneath the ground surface.
As the photos of the unit profiles show, most of the visible disturbances are vertical, there
are no large horizontal runs, and most of the vertical traces are probably root stains.
Several lines of evidence can be used to evaluate the extent of bioturbation in the
bench deposits: sharpness of stratigraphic contacts, sharpness of chipped stone artifact
edges, integrity of bone and shell deposits on buried surfaces, and extent of inversions in
radiocarbon assays. Essentially all the stratigraphic contacts are fairly diffuse, indicating
that some bioturbation has occurred, probably by plant roots. Charles Frederick noted
(see slide 7 notes) that no earthworm turbation was seen in any of the sediment thin
sections examined. The upper and lower contacts of the clay-rich strata (2A and 2C) are
equally diffuse, which is one of the signals that these strata are not buried soil horizons.
No earthworm castings were noted in the excavations or in the small number of sediment
thin sections examined. The edges of artifacts from the bench deposits are razor-sharp
when examined microscopically. There is no evidence of the kind of microabrasion that
can result from burial in extensively bioturbated deposits. The microfauna deposit
associated with Feature 5 shows little evidence of disruption. Most of the bone was
discovered at the same level as the hearth or slightly higher. The hearth lies at 92.38 m,
while most of the microfauna in unit N113 E98 is concentrated at about 92.40 m. Below
650

that elevation, the amount of bone drops off rapidly; above, smaller quantities of bone
were found as high as 92.443 m, the detection elevation for the bone bed in this unit. In
other words, while some elements may have been moved as much as 4 cm vertically,
most of the bone remained concentrated on a single buried surface.
The mussel shell-bearing surface in stratum 2A shows a similar degree of
stratigraphic integrity. Most of the shells found in situ or in the unit profiles at this level
rested on surfaces between 92.13 and 92.18 m and all were flat-lying; none were rotated
into vertical positions. Mussel shells from the same surface seen in the cutbank profile lie
at about 92.20 m or slightly above and are similarly flat-lying, although a few were
slightly rotated (these cannot be seen very clearly in Fig. 4.22 because of the scale of the
drawing, but the orientation is clearly indicated in the original field profile).

My interpretation of the bench deposits is that some bioturbation has occurred,
and small items have experienced vertical movements up to several centimeters in extent,
but bioturbation was arrested as soon as extensive phreatic cementation took place, and as
a result, the amount of bioturbation is probably less than that suffered by most
archeological sites, especially in comparison to other sites in very slow aggradational
settings.

Sediment Thin Sections
Sediment blocks collected in the field with vertical orientation recorded are useful
to check for soil development, since many weathering processes involve vertical
translocation of clays and sesquioxides, or vertical cracking during seasonal drying.
Because no oriented sediment samples were collected during the original fieldwork, I
651

selected seven small blocks of sediment with unknown orientation from the matrix
samples collected from unit N111 E101 and had them vacuum-epoxied and thinsectioned by Spectrum Petrographics (Winston, Oregon) in 1995. A potassium
ferricyanide stain for highlighting ferrous iron in carbonate-rich samples was also applied
to half of each thin section. The thin sections represent strata 1 through 2D and were
selected because they were near the middle of the stratum and were thought to typify it,
or might represent extremes in grain-size characteristics based on comparison with unit
N110 E102. There are one sample each from strata 1, 2B, and 2D, and two samples each
from strata 2A and 2C. In early 1996, both Dr. Charles Frederick and I examined the thin
sections carefully, and I recorded our observations. Reproduced below are some brief
notes on the individual thin sections. “CF” denotes comments by Frederick, and my own
comments are labeled “KMB.”

Slide 1 (92.80-92.70 m, stratum 2D): Lithology includes quartz, microcline, zircon, finegrained chert, chalcedony, plagioclase (?) feldspar. Poorly sorted, not much biosilica,
very little detrital carbonate (CF). Many grains have thin surrounding voids that follow
the grain surface, where plasma has pulled away from the grain. Clay linings are just as
well developed on voids as on grains (KMB). Figure 4.86.

Slide 2 (92.70-92.60 m, stratum 2C): Metamorphic quartz present. Better sorted than
slide 1; some detrital calcite present (CF). Figure 4.87.

652

Figure 4.86 (following page). Sediment Thin Section 1. N111 E101 (92.80-92.70 m,
stratum 2D). Top, large angular grain with argillan on all sides, polarized
light. Bottom, representative section showing channel, unpolarized light.

653

654

Figure 4.87 (following page). Sediment Thin Section 2. N111 E101 (92.70-92.60 m,
stratum 2C). Top, representative section with red-stained carbonate
concentration around small void, unpolarized light. Bottom, large sediment
grains bearing very faint argillans along fissure, unstained area, unpolarized
light. Circular black spots are air bubbles in mounting medium.

655

656

Slide 3 (92.65-92.60 m, stratum 2C): Better sorted than above, finer texture. Very large
piece of detrital carbonate present; fair amount of silt. Better structure (more fissures)
than slide 1 or 2; better pedality, probably mostly because of finer grain size (CF). This
thin section has fewer clasts, more clay, but a few fairly large grains. One grain seen with
red-stained lining (KMB). Figure 4.88.

Slide 4 (92.40-92.35 m, stratum 2B): More silt, less clay than above; fine sand. Argillans
are small, not common. Lithology about the same as samples above; includes quartz,
feldspars (some microcline), some unidentified heavy mineral with heavy relief and
unusual cleavage (zircon?). Carbonate approaching nodular form is present (in slides
above, carbonate is concentrated around voids). This sample has more snail shell, and a
few phytoliths still are present (CF). Faint argillans fairly abundant on large grains, but
not necessarily smaller grains; argillans look depositional rather than stress-related.
Cross-striated B-fabric not really noticeable except in one area. Fissures mostly lack clay
linings. Good example of rhizoconcretion, unidentified amber-colored object, root tubule
with phytoliths (?), large fecal pellet (?) with silica coating (?) seen. Biosilica and some
possible charcoal were seen (KMB). Figure 4.89.

657

Figure 4.88. Sediment Thin Section 3 (following page). N111 E101 (92.65-92.60 m,
stratum 2C). Top, representative section, large rock fragment with faint
argillan at bottom center in polarized light; clear grains are quartz. Bottom,
oblong void lined with red-stained carbonate, unpolarized light. Circular
black spots are air bubbles in mounting medium.

658

659

Figure 4.89. Sediment Thin Section 4 (following page). N111 E101 (92.40-92.35 m,
stratum 2B). Top, large angular grain with well-developed argillan,
unpolarized light. Bottom, possible insect fecal pellet, unpolarized light.

660

661

Slide 5 (92.15-92.10 m, stratum 2A): Somewhat more feldspar (though still uncommon)
than in previous slides. This sample is better sorted. Rhizolith-like carbonates are better
defined. A lot of small biosilica present. Fairly good structure (blocky to subangular
blocky). Fair amount of carbonate present. Not many argillans; a few small, thin ones;
most clay seems to be in plasma (CF). Circular void with phytoliths and sponge spicules
noted. Thin section seems to have a lot of possible phytoliths; sponge spicules also seen.
Skeletal grains are mostly very small, few and far apart, so grain counts are low.
Argillans are rare and very thin when present; may be stress-related. Not much indication
of striated fabric. What appears to be biosilica is very abundant. Clear squarish to
rhomboidal objects are much more abundant than sponge spicules. A good many of these
presumed phytoliths have faint argillans – more so than the skeleton grains (KMB).
Figure 4.90.

Slide 6 (92.05-92.00 m, stratum 2A): Iron/manganese (opaque black-brown spots) fairly
abundant. Possible fecal pellet noted. Sorting is poor, worse than slide 5. A lot of
carbonate around pores. Massive accumulations of carbonate that may not be pore coats.
Two or three different generations of carbonate (see brown mass with gold pore linings
inside it). More displacive carbonate growth pushing apart framework grains. Some
manganese halos in carbonate around pores. Unidentified mineral (has mahogany-like
appearance) seen. More argillans on this slide than slide 5 [note by KMB: this is
contradicted by my point counts), mostly around grains rather than channels. Fairly large
quartz in fine groundmass (CF). The increased number of faint argillans in this slide
may be stress cutans. Most of them are bounded by additional clay and silt, not voids.
However, some large grains bounded by voids are definitely depositional. A hint of
striation present in plasma. This slide seems to have a lot of finely divided charcoal
662

(probably associated with Feature 6; charcoal samples were found and collected during
excavation in this unit). Charcoal recorded at 12 different coordinate locations. Diatom
and sponge spicule fragments seen. Linear void lined with elongated charcoal fragments
noted, may be some biosilica associated. Looks like a partially charred organic item later
depleted by decay? (KMB).

Slide 7 (91.95-91.90 m, stratum 1): Slightly better sorted than slide 6; more silt.
Splotchiness in red-stained area suggests possible secondary mineralization or colloidal
silica (?). Some voids have a lining that does not take the stain, and may be silica.
Abundant sponge spicules and diatoms. No classic worm turbation in any of the slides. A
little bit of FeMn accumulation but not as big or well-developed as in slide 6. Displacive
carbonate growth pushing apart skeletal grains and plasma (CF). Slide area is small and
highly fissured, and areas with carbonate have few countable grains. This slide has a fair
amount of biosilica and very finely divided charcoal toward one side; less charcoal than
in slide 6, but still a respectable amount. Cluster of charcoal fragments noted at X=39.3,
Y=9. Interesting euhedral carbonate growth around skeleton grain noted. Diatoms,
sponge spicules seen, some unidentified biosilica. This slide has the most vivid clay
interference colors of all seven. Argillans may be stress-related (KMB).

663

Figure 4.90. Sediment Thin Section 5 (following page). N111 E101 (92.15-92.10 m,
stratum 2A). Top, irregular carbonate-lined void to right of center; possible
phytoliths are present, but inconspicuous; polarized light. Strawlike object is
lint or other contamination on slide. Bottom, representative fissured area in
upolarized light. Circular black spots are air bubbles in mounting medium.

664

665

Figure 4.91. Sediment Thin Section 6 (following page). N111 E101 (92.05-92.00 m,
stratum 2A). Top, area showing fissures, charcoal fragments and sponge
spicules in unpolarized light. Bottom, Rabdotus shell fragment in section,
carbonate void linings

666

667

Figure 4.92 (following page). Sediment Thin Sections 6 and 7. Top, thin section 6 (N111
E101, 92.05-92.00 m, stratum 2A), 10X lens, unpolarized light, showing
nearly complete sponge spicule (white arrow near center) and diatom (white
arrow in lower right corner). Bottom, thin section 7 (N111 E101, 91.9591.90 m, stratum 1), 2.5X lens, unpolarized light, stained area. Gray mass
covering most of view is carbonate; white areas are voids or quartz grains.
Dark circular area is an air bubble in the mounting medium.

668

669

Despite the fact that the sediment thin sections represent an infinitesimally small
sample of each excavated level, they do a remarkably good job of faithfully representing
the sediment texture, sorting, carbonate and sesquioxide content documented by largerscale sampling and analysis methods. Slides 6 and 7 have also faithfully captured the
finely divided charcoal associated with the cultural occupation zone around Feature 6, at
the base of stratum 2A.

In addition to the essentially anecdotal data collected above, I recorded point
counts of argillans on skeleton grains for all seven thin sections. There are several kinds
of diagenetic features that could be recorded by point counts, but I chose to concentrate
on argillans because these I felt these could be reliably counted and would best whether
vertical translocation of sedimentary constituents by vadose water had occurred in
addition to groundwater diagenesis. Argillans are the microscopic clay films that may
accumulate on quartz and other kinds of sediment grains. They can be recognized as
bright gold or yellowish linings that extend partway or completely around the
circumference of a grain when viewed in thin section with transmitted light.

I placed each slide on a marked X-Y stage with the long axis of the slide running
parallel to the X axis, selected 5 different Y coordinates from a random numbers table,
and then scanned each of the five transects along the X axis at 50X magnification (or
100X where necessary) under both polarized and unpolarized light. Each sediment grain
that was transected by the crosshairs was tallied as “no argillans,” “faint argillans,” or
“well-developed argillans.” The number of grains tallied for each slide ranged from 323
to 618, for a total grain count of 3568 for all seven slides. Only argillans on skeleton
grains were counted; argillans on pores, channels, and biosilica were not counted, despite
670

the fact that clay linings on pores and phytoliths are fairly common at some levels.
Depositional and stress argillans were not distinguished in the counts. Stress argillans are
created when seasonal expansion and contraction of clay-rich sediments realigns clay
platelets next to sediment grains. They represent localized realignment of clay, rather
than actual movement of clay into a horizon from overlying zones.
The results of the point counts are shown in Table 4.13 and Figure 4.93. The point
counts show the majority of the sediment grains lack clay films entirely, and when they
are present, they are usually not well-developed (the lowest two slides lack them
entirely). This suggests that downward translocation of clay by vadose water was a
relatively uncommon weathering process in the history of the bench sediments, and it
helps to confirm that the clay-rich strata do not represent translocated clay. Translocation
of clays is inhibited by flocculation, which is promoted when carbonate and iron
hydroxides are present (Birkeland 1984:132-133), as is the case in the bench sediments.
Figure 4.93 also shows that argillans become increasingly scarce with greater depth in the
profile, and do not increase in the clay-rich strata (shaded in the illustration). The only
significant development of argillans is at the top of the profile, probably for two reasons:
1) groundwater saturation in the basal part of the profile has excluded clay translocation,
2) the bench sediments were exposed to more intense weathering later in the bench
stratigraphic sequence, when the uppermost strata were accumulating.

671

Table 4.13. Point Count Data for Argillans on Skeleton Grains (Selected Samples from
N111 E101).
Excavation
level (m)

Stratum

No argillans
present (%)

Faint argillans Well-developed
(%)
argillans (%)

Number of
grains
counted

92.80-92.70
92.70-92.65
92.65-92.60
92.40-92.35
92.15-92.10
92.05-92.00
91.95-91.90
TOTAL:

lower 2D
upper 2C
mid-2C
mid-2B
upper 2A
lower 2A
upper 1

66.25
61.39
70.17
80.53
81.33
92.23
96.86

26.78
35.65
27.89
18.62
8.04
7.76
3.13

489
575
466
714
323
618
383
3568

6.95
2.95
1.93
0.84
0.61
0.00
0.00

NOTES: Samples are unoriented; counts are for argillans on skeletal grains only;
argillans on pores, channels, and biosilica were not counted (clay linings on pores are
fairly abundant at some levels). Counts at 50X (and where necessary, 100X) under
unpolarized and polarized light, along four randomly selected X-transects per slide (five
transects for the 91.95-91.90 sample). Depositional and stress argillans were not
distinguished in the counts; most of the “faint argillans” in the lowest three samples may
actually be granostriated birefringence fabric.

672

Figure 4.93 (following page). N111 E101, Percentage of Grains With Argillans. Plotted
here are point count data for seven un-oriented sediment thin sections from
the N111 E101 matrix sample column. Four transects were done for each
slide, and the percentage of sediment grains bearing argillans (clay coatings)
was tallied, each instance classified as “well-developed,” “faint,” or “none.”
Counts are for argillans on skeletal grains only (a total of 3568 grains was
counted for all seven slides); argillans on pores, channels, and biosilica were
not counted. Note that argillans are scarce but are most frequent at the top of
the column, and are not markedly more abundant in the muddy zones.

673

674

INTERPRETING THE DEPOSITIONAL AND DIAGENETIC RECORD

Evidence for a Nearby Spring
Reconstructing the former environment of an archeological site from the remote
past can be difficult when the terrain (relative elevation above a stream channel), climate,
groundwater discharge rates, stream morphology and plant life have all changed and can
only be inferred generally. Cold spring sites in the eastern US are usually characterized
by complex interlayers of sand, gravel, clay, and “organic sand” or peat, often in lenses
convoluted or contorted by soft sediment deformation. The few spring sites documented
in the literature seem to be mostly paleontological localities where megafauna have been
recovered. Good examples are found in Missouri (Haynes 1985:Figs. 9, 15, 17, 18;
Saunders 1977:Fig. 5-7, 16), Nebraska (Adair 1989:Figs. 9, 13, 18, 21, 22-24, 27, 30),
Nevada (De Narvaez 1995) and in Texas at the Aubrey site (Ferring 2001:Fig. 3.17 and
41-42). In most cases these seem to be artesian springs with an associated funnel-shaped
conduit where spring discharge emerges under pressure. The conduit may have a basal
gravel overlain by contorted deposits of well-rounded and polished sands; “in general,
springs are characterized by a complex microstratigraphy of interbedded clastic,
carbonate, and carbonaceous sediments overlying conduits fill with well-sorted sand and
gravel” (Waters 1992:216). Haynes (1985:16-20) provides a good analysis of spring
development. The peat deposits are accumulations of hydrophilic vegetation in ponds or
marshy areas hosted by topographic lows.

Spring sites in the Plains, Great Basin and Southwest lack peat deposits but may
be marked by organic “black mats” (De Narvaez 1995, Quade et al. 1998) that formed
675

during the Younger Dryas. These may be seeps or gravity springs feeding cienegas or
playas, or they may be artesian springs associated with rock faults. Many of the western
sites in carbonate-rich regions have extensive deposits of marl, tufa or travertine (Haynes
1967; Nelson et al. 2001; Newton and Grossman 1988; Kaufman et al. 2002; Pigati et al.
2004), sometimes elevated well above modern water tables. Marshy or damp-ground
snails, such as the genera Catinella or Oxyloma of the family Succineidae may be
common. Many of the spring sites in the eastern US are still active, but the western sites
are often fossil sites documenting higher groundwater recharge and discharge rates
during the Younger Dryas or earlier periods (Quade and Pratt 1989). The Hajny
Mammoth Site is a good example of a Plains spring site with well-defined conduits
(Wyckoff 1992:Figs. 5-7, 5-11, 5-14, 5-15 to 5-17) but no organic deposits. Regarding
springs associated with fine-grained deposits in the Great Basin, Quade and others
observe that “Most carbonate cements develop along a capillary fringe in the subsurface,
due probably to pumping by phreatophytes, thus driving solutions toward supersaturation
with respect to calcite” (Quade et al. 1995:218) and that seems to apply to the bench
deposits at Berger Bluff as well.
There is no direct evidence for a spring conduit, pool, or spring run visible in the
bench deposits at Berger Bluff. Likewise, there is no evidence of ponded water in the
immediate bench area, nor were any clear examples of travertine or tufa found (although
much of the fossil wood superficially resembles travertine). There are no peat deposits,
nor any indication that peat deposits were once present but later destroyed by oxidation.

Despite this lack of direct evidence, I believe that the bench area represents the
margin of a former spring or seep, probably associated with the ravine located
676

immediately upstream, with a small Goliad sandstone outcrop serving as the aquifer. The
evidence for this spring consists of 1) the extensive subsurface deposits of phreatic
carbonate and extensive accumulation of carbonate in the form of rhizoliths, 2) the
presence of a contemporary spring pool nearby in the ravine before reservoir inundation
(Fig. 1.31), and 3) the occasional presence of cold spring snails (Valvata tricarinata) in
the bench deposits. The phreatic carbonate deposits appear to be somewhat localized,
indicating that they were not part of the stratigraphy throughout the entire floodplain, and
it could well be that spring discharge has been fixed in this spot for much of the
Quaternary due to the location of the Goliad Formation outcrop and perhaps even
because of minor faulting (?) along the axis of the ravine (although that is speculative,
and not based on any physical evidence). There is no direct evidence bearing on the
presence or absence of a spring pool, but I think it is likely a pool or spring run was
present somewhere, serving as the principal attraction for human occupants of the site.
The absence of peat or other extensive organic deposits may be due to the lack of a
suitable topographic depression in the bench area.

The extent to which the bench deposits were damp or groundwater-saturated as
they accumulated can be assessed from the diagenetic record and the inventory of snails
and diatoms (the two kinds of organisms most likely to have lived directly on the site).
Carbonate and sesquioxide accumulation, ferromanganese concretions, and evidence of
structure (fissuring) and argillans seen in the thin sections all indicate that the sediments
were damp much of the time but were also seasonally desiccated. Oxidation of iron,
micromorphological evidence of fissuring, and limited development of argillans,
especially in the upper part of the section, suggest significant seasonal drying. This is

677

somewhat surprising, given the evidence presented in Chapter 1 for restricted seasonality
at the end of the Pleistocene.

Depending on the size of the snail and the recovery method used, about 96-99 %
of the snails from the bench deposits are terrestrial taxa. This proportion of terrestrial
species is quite typical for stream-terrace archeological sites in Texas, even when the
terrace surface is close to and not far above the channel. Large numbers of aquatic or
damp-ground taxa are rarely found in archeological sites unless a depression or washover
of some sort is present on or near the site. In the bench deposits, the largest number of
aquatic taxa are found toward the bottom of the section in upper stratum 1, stratum 2A,
and lower stratum 2B. Aquatic taxa represent a very small proportion of the large and
medium-bodied snails but a somewhat larger proportion of the microsnails. Damp ground
taxa such as Catinella vermeta, Pupisoma disocoricola, Pomatiopsis lapidaria, or
Carychium mexicanum and aquatic taxa such as Cincinnatia integra, Gyraulus parvus,
Biomphalaria havanensis, or Valvata tricarinata are found in small numbers among the
microsnails. Similar taxa (at the generic level) are found in the black mats from Nevada
reported by Quade et al. (1998:Table 2), but in much larger numbers. The black mats also
tend to lack the larger numbers of terrestrial taxa found in the bench. The terrestrial taxa
from the bench are a mixture of drought-tolerant and more moisture-dependant woodland
taxa.

Many diatom taxa were recovered from the bench deposits. Nearly all are
characteristic of marshy or aquatic habitats. The counts, however, are dominated by a
much smaller number of taxa that occur in greater abundance than the others, which are
represented by only a few specimens. One abundant taxon, Hantzschia amphioxys, is a
678

soil diatom. The other major taxa (such as Pinnularia borealis, Navicula mutica,
Epithemia turgida, E. adnata, Fragilaria ulna, Cocconeis placentula, and Nitzschia
amphibia) are variously characteristic of soil, marshy, and aquatic habitats. There is a
clear pattern of declining species richness and abundance over time and toward the top of
the section, especially above stratum 2A, probably as a result of increasingly frequent and
pronounced seasonal drying as the Younger Dryas ended and the Holocene began. Many
of the species are alkaliphile, which is not surprising given the calcareous nature of the
aquifer. There are a couple of species, such as Diploneis petersenii and Diadesmis
aerophila, that are characteristic of peat or other mossy microhabitats, but they are
scarce. The soil and marsh diatoms probably represent populations growing on the site,
while the smaller number of aquatic forms represent diatoms that originated in Coleto
Creek and were deposited by flooding. Both snails and diatoms will be discussed in much
greater detail in the chapters on biological remains.

Cyclic Bedding
Apart from cementation, the most striking characteristic of the bench deposits is
the apparent occurrence of cyclic bedding. There appears to be a regular alternation of
sandy and muddy units that can be arranged in pairs or couplets. Strata 1 and 2A are
relatively thick and distinct, 2B and 2C are thinner and less distinct, 2D and 3 somewhat
thicker again. Unfortunately, the sequence is not long enough to be certain that a true AB cycle is present, but the pattern is still distinctive enough to require explanation.

Five explanatory hypotheses seem possible. The first two can be discarded fairly
easily, but the other three require more detailed consideration.
679

Hypothesis 1 (Buried Soils): The dark bands visible in the cutbank superficially resemble
buried soils. The same thing has been observed for the “Modern alluvium” on the Concho
and North Concho River (Frederick 1996:99). The dark bands are clearly not buried A
horizons, as the organic content is far too low (about 0.1% of the silt-clay extract used for
radiocarbon assay), and the dark color is derived chiefly from the clay and silt content.
The possibility that these are Bt horizons can also be ruled out. Birkeland (1984:Table 21) gives some very specific criteria for recognizing an argillic horizon. It must be at least
7.5 or 15 cm thick, depending on texture and thickness of overlying horizons; it must
have at least 120% of the amount of clay in the overlying horizon (in cases where these
horizons have 15-40% clay), and clay bridges or cutans must be visible in thin section.
Depending on the clay mineral, translocation ceases when the clay percentage rises above
20-40%, since the clay essentially clogs the porosity of the soil (Birkeland 1984:134).
Clay proportions range from about 8% to over 45% in the sediment sample column. In
cases where a complete, uneroded solum is present, most buried soils have a sharp upper
boundary and a diffuse lower boundary (Brakenridge 1988:151, Retallack 1988:7). Welldeveloped argillic horizons usually show a “clay bulge” in which most of the clay occurs
at the top of the horizon, and tapers off below that (Birkeland 1984:126; for an example
see Ferring 1992:Fig. 1-9), but strata 2A and 2C do not fit the pattern very well. Clay and
silt increase from top to bottom in stratum 2C and are increased, but more or less constant
from top to bottom in stratum 2A (Fig. 4.65). Another consideration is that for both
strata, the thickness of overlying sandy sediment is probably insufficient to generate the
amount of clay concentrated in these muddy units (about 40 cm of sand over stratum 2C
and 55-70 cm over stratum 2A). The “clay bulge” for each of these zones is thinner, more
compressed, and abrupt than would be expected for a horizon of pedogenic origin. The
thin section data show that argillans are present, but they are uncommon, poorly
680

developed, and diminish steadily from the top to the bottom of the section. Most
significantly, they do not increase in the clay-rich horizons (Fig. 4.93). The source of the
clay expressed as argillans is unknown; possibly all of it is derived from stratum 3. Soil
scientists estimate that a span of least 2000-3500 years is required for development of an
argillic horizon (depending on parent material and climate; Cremeens 1995:1383), while
the couplets seen in the bench deposits probably represent roughly a millennium.
My interpretation of the muddy strata is that they represent depositional, not
pedogenic features, and although there has been some limited translocation of silt and
clay, it was largely discouraged by frequent high water tables and high carbonate content
of the sediment until late in the history of bench aggradation. The “buried soil”
hypothesis can be rejected.
Hypothesis 2 (Graded Point Bar Bedding): According to the classical model of Wolman
and Leopold (1957) based on their study of Watts Branch in Maryland, floodplains
occupied by meandering streams are formed chiefly by lateral accretion. According to
this model, the coarsest-grained material remains in the channel bed where stream power
is greatest; finer grained material accumulates in point bars, and the “decrease in flow
velocity upwards across the bar surface results in the deposition of coarser particles at the
base and finer particles at the top of the point bar. The decrease in grain size upward is
referred to as a fining-upward sequence… This sequence of lateral accretion sediment is
capped by vertical accretion deposits, usually thin, horizontally laminated silts and clays
washed over the bar surface during overbank floods” (Waters 1992:133; see also Allen
1965:140). Lateral accretion deposits, then, are a series of onlapping layers that might
include gravel at the base, sand in the middle, and a topstratum of silt and clay (Frazier
and Osanik 1961:Fig. 2; Bernard et al. 1970:Fig. 23; Morton and McGowen 1980:Figs.
681

17, 18; Saucier 1994:192). As the channel marches from side to side across the valley
width, a continual layer of coarse sediment is laid down at the channel base and a
continual fine-grained topstratum is laid down at the surface. Incidentally, contemporary
Coleto Creek side-attached and point bars are stratified with respect to sedimentary
structures (Morton and McGowen 1980:Figs. 29-32), but are almost exclusively clean
sand. As Collins (1995:367-368) has pointed out, the absence of archeological sites on
the concave sides of meanders is due to lateral migration.
The hypothesis that each couplet in the Berger Bluff stratigraphic sequence
represents a graded point bar deposit can easily be rejected. There is no evidence that the
Coleto Creek channel has migrated across the bench area (at least since the valley was
previously incised earlier in the Pleistocene), and there are no channel lag deposits or
unconformities visible anywhere in the cutbank or excavations. There are also a number
of buried cultural and noncultural features that would have been removed if the creek
channel had migrated across the area during the period of concern. All of the floodplain
deposits making up the bench were clearly deposited outside the creek channel, not in it.
Furthermore, if each of the three or so couplets represented a single fining-upward flood
event, an extraordinarily long recurrence interval would be implied to account for the
2000-2500 or so years of deposition that is probably present.

Since the influential work of Wolman and Leopold on Watts Branch in the 1950s,
a great deal more global research on floodplain construction has been done, and it is now
known that, contrary to the classical model, many floodplains are actually built by
vertical accretion. Some examples are given by Schumm and Lichty (1963), Ritter,
Kinsey and Kauffman (1973), Stene (1980), Nanson and Young (1981), Hereford (1984),
682

Nanson (1986), Gomez et al. (1998), Allred and Schmidt (1999), Moody, Pizzuto and
Meade (1999), and Moody and Troutman (2000). These are examples of class C1
floodplains as defined by Nanson and Croke (1992:477-478). Floodbasins of large finegrained rivers may have tens of meters of vertically accreted overbank sediments. Farrell
(1987) reports 10 meters of floodbasin sediments for the Mississippi River near Baton
Rouge. Collins (1999) reports about 1.5 m of sandy vertical accretion sediments,
apparently representing a very small number of historic flood events on the right bank of
Smith Creek, across from the Smith Creek Bridge site. This and the examples given by
Schumm and Lichty show that vertical accretion can sometimes be quite rapid. Vertical
accretion can occur in either the floodbasin or the channel (in which case channel
narrowing occurs). In addition to these geological examples, there are many
archeological examples of occupation sites encased in thick sequences of fine-grained
alluvium that have never been disrupted by channel migration. In Texas, the Devil’s
Mouth site (at least 15 m of overbank or eolian sediments; Johnson 1964, Sorrow
1968a:Fig. 13), Nopal Terrace (at least 5.5 m; Sorrow 1968b), 41 LK 31/32 (up to 15 m;
Scott 1982:16) and the Richard Beene site (about 20 m; Thoms 1992) are good examples.
Sites like these persist either because the river channel is laterally stable, or never
migrates all the way from one side of the valley to the other, and is able to fill the
floodbasin with thick sequences of overbank sediments, contrary to the classical
Wolman-Leopold model. These “gisements” are testament to the potential importance of
vertical accretion deposits. In some cases, the asymmetrical positioning of tributaries on
only one side of a main valley may dump sediment preferentially on one side of the
valley, protecting that part of the valley fill from lateral migration.

683

Hypothesis 3 (Graded Floodbasin Bedding): According to Allen (1965:153),
Interstratification of coarse with fine overbank sediment is found throughout the
topstratum of floodplains lacking clear environmental subdivisions. Flood waters
are not obstructed in their passage down these plains devoid of significant relief,
in contrast to the situation in floodplains marked by alluvial ridge-floodbasin
complexes that impede and pond flows. In the latter floodplains interstratification
of coarse with fine layers is generally limited to levees. …units varying in
thickness from a fraction of an inch to a foot or so are involved. In certain cases it
is the coarser units that are dominant, in others it is the finer layers…. The deposit
of each flood usually comprises a coarse layer below representing the rise to
maximum stage, followed gradationally by a fine unit recording recession.
Allen refers to these as “undivided topstratum deposits” (see Allen 1965:Fig. 31).
This hypothesis has a measure of plausibility, but inherits the same objection as
hypothesis 2 ⎯ the span of time represented by the bench deposits is probably too long to
be accounted for by only three flood couplets. Furthermore, some of the cultural and
noncultural features are found buried in the middle of the coarse or fine units.

Some archeological sites with alternating silty and sandy zones may be examples
of this kind of bedding, although the origin of the bedding is rarely discussed explicitly.
The Devil’s Mouth site might be a possible example. At the Turkey Bend Ranch site,
banding is interpreted as out-of-phase sediment contributions from the Concho River and
Colorado River (Treece et al. 1993:Fig. 5.5; Lintz, Treece and Oglesby 1995:157).
Research by Moody. Pizzuto and Meade (1999:Fig. 8) shows that multiple sandy and
muddy units can occur in a single annual flood deposit.
Hypothesis 4 (Autocyclic Bedding): According to this hypothesis, sandy and muddy units
simply represent different facies of floodplain sediment deposition. Sandy units were
deposited when the laterally migrating creek was near the site (but without actually
removing any of the bench sediments) and muddy units were deposited when it was
684

distant. The caliber of the sediment represents the proximity of the energy source
responsible for transportation. This model, termed autocyclic bedding (Beerbower 1964),
simply implies redistribution of energy within the depositional system, but no net change
in energy input into the system as a whole.
During overbank flooding, deposition rates are highest at the channel banks and
drop off exponentially toward the flood basin (Walling, Quine, and He 1992:Figs. 7.5,
7.8; Walling and He 1998:Fig. 3; Törnqvist and Bridge 2002:Figs. 2, 6, 7) because
current velocity drops off rapidly once the overbank environment is entered and is no
longer able to sustain sediment particles in traction or saltation. In part, this is because
current velocity is slower at the top of the water column, and in part because the channel
bank is often vegetated and vegetation breaks up laminar flow and creates turbulence,
allowing sediment to drop out of suspension. It is this energy decay process that accounts
for the presence of levees bordering the channel. However, once levees are in place, it is
possible for some of the highest rates of deposition to occur in floodbasin depressions.
This is particularly true for fine-grained systems with heavily vegetated floodplains like
the Cache River reach studied by Kleiss (1996). She documented accretion rates in the
cypress-tupelo swamp equal to or greater than that on the levee systems (Kleiss
1996:330) and estimated that about 14% of the suspended load entering the bottomland
hardwood forest is retained there annually.

Sediment grain size also drops off exponentially away from the channel in most
cases. Table 4.14 lists a few actualistic case studies (arranged very roughly by increasing
catchment or stream size) showing how overbank sediment becomes progressively finer
away from the channel. These studies are based either on samples collected in transects
685

run at right angles to the channel axis, or sometimes on grids of sampling mats. Surface
samples, cores, or sometimes sediment traps made of artificial turf are used. Grain size is
usually reported as median grain diameter or as a percentage of various size grades (sand,
silt, clay). Walling, Owens and Leeks (1997:Fig. 11) have recompiled a few of these
grain size decay curves in terms of percentage distance from the channel. In most cases,
grain size drops off dramatically within about the first 20% of the total transect length
and then varies little beyond that. In a few other cases, the decay function is much flatter,
possibly indicating the absence of floodplain vegetation, or strong convective currents
that penetrate the interior of the flood basin for some reason. Figure 4.94 shows some
examples of grain size decay curves from streams of differing scales in England, Wales,
and Australia. Figure 4.95 shows relative amounts of clay, silt, and sand in three different
transects running away from the channel of the River Severn in England (after Marriott
1996:Fig. 3.5). The samples are mostly silt, but note that clay is present all across the
floodbasin, while large amounts of sand are confined to the channel margin.

Exponential decay of grain size means that in most cases, the flood basin area
beyond the “levee” region immediately adjacent to the channel is covered with silt and
clay deposits that are fairly uniform in size. In effect, the decay curve resembles a twostate system: flood basin deposits are fine-grained until a channel moves very near
through lateral migration (or in some cases until levee progradation occurs), at which
point the overbank deposits become abruptly coarser-grained.

686

Table 4.14. Case Studies of Sediment Fining Away from Channels.
1. Hughes and Lewin (1982:Fig. 3, C), Nameless artificial channel, Wales
Catchment size: ?
Channel width: 1.11 m
Floodplain width: 8.8 m
Transect length: 5 m
Data: median diameter
2. Nanson and Young (1981:Figs. 5, 6), American Creek and Minnamurra River, Australia
Catchment size: 27 km2, 142 km2
Channel width: ?
Floodplain width: ?
Transect length: 45 m, 80 m
Data: % silt and clay
3. Lecce and Pavlowsky (2004:Figs. 5, 6), Blue River, Wisconsin
Catchment size: 2.0-128 km2
Channel width: ?
Floodplain width: 60-360 m (valley width)
Transect length: 14-140 m
Data: % sand
4. Walling, He and Nicholas (1996:Fig. 12.14), River Culm, England
Catchment size: 276 km2
Channel width: ?
Floodplain width: ?
Transect length: 120 m
Data: % finer than 0.063 nm
5. He and Walling (1998:Figs. 4, 7), Rivers Stour, Culm, Severn, Rother, Avon, England
Catchment size: 276, 355, 523, 2900, 3717 km2
Channel width: ?
Floodplain width: ?
Transect length: 140-300 m, 90-300 m
Data: % clay, % sand, median diameter
6. Cazanacli and Smith (1998:Figs. 6, 7), Saskatchewan River, Centre Angling Channel,
Saskatchewan
Catchment size: ?
Channel width: (estimated at 80-240 m based on Fig. 2)
Floodplain width: ?
Transect length: 40-120 m
Data: % fine sand, % very fine sand, % coarse silt, etc. to clay, median diameter
(continued on next page)

687

7. Wistendahl (1958:Fig. 2), Raritan River, New Jersey
Catchment size: ?
Channel width: ?
Floodplain width: less than 0.5 mi
Transect length: 170 m
Data: % sand, % silt, % clay
8. Walling, Owens and Leeks (1997:Figs. 4, 11), Rivers Wharfe and Ouse, England
Catchment size: 818 km2 and 3315 km2
Channel width: ?
Floodplain width: ?
Transect length: 140-200 m
Data: median diameter
9. Marriott (1996:Figs. 3.4, 3.5), River Severn, England
Catchment size: 10,000 km2
Channel width: 60-70 m
Floodplain width: ca. 360-575 m (?)
Transect length: ca. 250-650 m (?)
Data: mean grain size in phi units; % sand, silt, and clay
9. Hudson and Heitmuller (2003:Fig. 8), Pánuco River, Mexico
Catchment size: 98,227 km2
Channel width: ?
Floodplain width: ca. 2-20 km
Transect length: 1 km
Data: median grain size as D84 mm
11. Asselman and Middlekoop (1995:Fig. 10, 12), Rivers Waal and Meuse, Netherlands
Catchment size: 250,000 km2 and 33,000 km2
Channel width: 260 m and 150 m
Floodplain width: ?
Transect length: 300 m
Data: % sand
12. Guccione (1993:Figs. 6-8), Buffalo, White, and Mississippi River, Arkansas
Catchment size: ?
Channel width: 20 m, 30 m, 1600 m
Floodplain width: 0.3 km, 2.1 km, 88. 5 km
Transect lengths: 100 m, 5 km (Mississippi)
Data: % sand, % coarse silt, % medium silt, % fine silt, % silt, clay-free or sand-free basis
13. Kesel et al. (1974:Fig. 3), Mississippi River, Louisiana
Catchment size: ?
Channel width: ca. 700-2000 m (?)
Floodplain width: ca. 0-17 km (? one side only)
Transect length: 10 km
Data: median diameter

688

Figure 4.94 (following page). Reduction in Grain Size With Increasing Distance From
Stream Channel. Shown are three examples with transects of differing
lengths, from differently-scaled streams. A, a nameless artificial channel in
Wales (after Hughes and Lewin 1982:Fig. 3, C); B, American Creek, New
South Wales, after Nanson and Young (1981:Fig. 5); C, River Swale, Site
13, England (after Walling, Owens, and Leeks 1997:Fig. 4, A). Note that the
textural measure in “B” is simply the percentage of sand in the sample.

689

690

Figure 4.95 (following page). Relative Proportions of Sediment Fractions With
Increasing Distance From Stream Channel. Shown here are transects of
different length from three sampling localities on the River Severn in Wales
(after Marriott 1996:Fig. 3.5).Note the absence of clay from the levee facies
in these silt-dominated floodplain deposits, and the scarcity of sand in the
floodbasin facies. These are surface samples collected after a flood in 1990.

691

692

This hypothesis is somewhat difficult to evaluate for the bench deposits. In the
immediate vicinity of Berger Bluff, Coleto Creek appears fairly stable in position, with
fairly low sinuosity and little evidence of lateral migration. It may well have had a more
sinuous channel pattern when the bench sediments were accumulating, but the location of
the channel is unknown. Because the northeast valley wall is gently sloping and mantled
with Holocene sediments, the maximum valley width here is unknown. Maximum
floodplain width is undoubtedly somewhere between 60 and 300 meters. It is unclear
whether the Late Pleistocene floodplain was wide enough to allow the textural contrasts
seen in the bench stratigraphy to develop by simple movement of the channel from one
side of the valley to the other. The autocyclic hypothesis could have been tested by
placing backhoe trenches at right angles to the creek axis, on the northeast side of the
creek to look for buried paleochannels and evidence of stratigraphic continuity, but this
was never done during any of the reservoir fieldwork. This is a good example of how
lack of a holistic research design in cultural resource management studies can hamper
later analysis. We can only conclude that hypothesis 4 (autocyclic bedding) is plausible
but cannot be tested with the information at hand.
Hypothesis 5 (Allocyclic Bedding): This model proposes that submillennial climatic
cycles and depositional processes are chiefly responsible for the textural contrasts in the
bench deposits, all of which are overbank (floodbasin) deposits. Energy variations
responsible for textural contrasts are extrinsic to the catchment and to the depositional
system, and are ultimately provided by the climate system.

Sandy units accumulated in drier periods with more seasonal rainfall, when

693

1) upland ground cover throughout the catchment was sparser, rainfall infiltration rates
were reduced, runoff and sediment production were enhanced,
2) discharge was flashier, higher peak energy was available to transport a coarser-grained
sediment load, and
3) flood duration was shorter, providing less time for fine-grained suspended silts and
clays to drop out of suspension (bedload-dominated stream, Fig. 1.41, bottom)

Muddy units accumulated in wetter periods with more even annual distribution of
rainfall, when
1) upland ground cover was heavier, infiltration rates were maximized, runoff was
slowed or minimized, and sediment production was reduced,
2) discharge was less flashy and more tempered, and unable to transport coarser-grained
sediment, and
3) flood duration was prolonged, providing time for suspended load (especially finegrained clays) to drop out of suspension (suspended load-dominated stream, Fig. 1.41,
top).
This is essentially the explanation for sediment grading at Arenosa Shelter offered
by Patton and Dibble (1982:116-117). Of the five hypotheses I have offered, this one is
perhaps the most plausible because is consistent with the known (or estimated)
stratigraphic and spatial constraints of the late Pleistocene/early Holocene Coleto Creek
floodplain. The length of the proposed climatic cycles is unknown, but would probably
amount to several centuries. As Table 1.1 shows, there are a number of different cycles
ranging in length from 120 to 550 years identified in the GISP2 oxygen isotope data that
might reasonably fit the known radiocarbon sequence from the bench deposits.

Of the four sediment humin samples submitted for radiocarbon assay, the two
samples from sandy units have δ 13C values that are slightly more negative (-21.0 ‰ and
694

–22.1 ‰) than the values from the muddy units (-18.3 ‰ and –19.0 ‰). These values are
exactly intermediate between C3 and C4 plants, and represent about a 3 ‰ average
contrast that could have possibly some climatic significance, although the small number
of samples suggests caution in interpretation. The direction of the contrast is also
opposite to expectations. If the sandy units represent more arid periods, greater
proportions of C4 plants and less negative values (not more negative values, as
determined) should be expected. The reason for this is unclear. It could have something
to do with the greater propensity of the coarse-grained samples to admit contaminants
through groundwater movement (?), or some other undiscovered cause. If, as the snail
data seem to indicate, the floodplain was wooded, 13C values closer to –25 ‰ might be
expected.

Hypothesis 5 could also perhaps be tested by looking for systematic contrasts in
biological remains from the sandy and muddy units. To some extent the distribution of
the material limits our ability to do that. Animal bone is highly concentrated in one area
of the site, and snail shell numbers diminish with depth, although diatoms are more
abundant and evenly distributed. Subsequent chapters will examine this material, but
meanwhile, to evaluate this hypothesis some further background is required, as follows.

Climate and Sedimentation Rates
The literature on the relationships between climate, erosion, vegetation cover, and
sedimentation production and transport is extensive, but inconclusive and scattered
among many different disciplines. In the United States, much of the empirical research
has been done in the loessic region of the upper Mississippi River valley or in the semiarid to arid Southwest, regions that differ climatically from the Berger Bluff catchment.
695

Soil scientists use a Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation that incorporates “cropping
factors” and “conservation practice factors” that are not relevant to preagricultural
situations. There are two aspects that need to be understood: 1) how climate change
affects sediment yield in the catchment, and 2) how climate change affects sediment
transport, deposition and grading – in other words, how might climate change affect grain
size at the depositional site? Schumm (1977:25-30, 43-48) and Hooke (2000) provide
useful comprehensive reviews. Some of the earliest research was by Langbein and
Schumm (1958), who performed a synchronic review of sediment yields from 94 stations
in the US. They found that sediment yields were minimal in arid areas, increased to a
peak in areas with effective annual precipitation at about 12 inches (about 30 cm) and
then declined with increasing precipitation (Langbein and Schumm 1958:Fig. 2, 3),
because areas with higher annual rainfall had more extensive ground cover. The Berger
Bluff catchment has about 2.7 times this much annual precipitation at present, and would
have had equal or greater amounts in the Younger Dryas, with reduced evaporation rates
due to somewhat cooler temperatures. The result would have been reduced sediment
yield in wetter periods. Sediment yield declines very rapidly as ground cover increases
(Fig. 4.96). A sediment yield curve constructed by Dendy and Bolton (1976) is similar,
but peaks at about 50 cm (20 inches) annual precipitation (Hooke 2000:Fig. 2, A). Wilson
compiled yet another curve, based on about 1500 drainage basins, that has two peaks at
76 cm and 177 cm of annual precipitation, with a minimum at about 100 cm (Wilson
1973:Fig. 1). Another data set compiled by Walling and Webb (1983:Fig. 4.5, also
reproduced in Hooke 2000:Fig. 2, C) for 1246 stations is much noisier and almost
trendless. A variety of studies from more restricted geographic areas, reviewed by
Walling and Webb (1983:Fig. 4.7) suggest that sediment yield simply increases along
with increasing mean annual precipitation despite any counterbalancing effect of
696

vegetation cover. All of these studies are, of course synchronic, and any attempts at
predicting changes in sediment yield from changes in rainfall involve the substitution of
space for time, possibly a questionable enterprise.

Figure 4.96. Sediment Yield and Ground Cover. After Schumm (1977:Fig. 2-3).

697

Mean annual atmospheric temperature is also relevant, because higher
temperatures increase evaporation rates and therefore reduce the effectiveness of
precipitation for creating ground cover. All other things being equal, rising atmospheric
temperatures, such as those at the end of the Younger Dryas, should produce higher
sediment yields (Fig. 4.97). Simultaneous rainfall reduction and increasing temperature
should accelerate the effect. One modeling study done to anticipate global warming
estimates that for each 1% change in precipitation, there is about a 2% change in runoff
and a 1.7% change in erosion (Nearing, Pruski and O’Neal 2004).

Precipitation periodicity is probably more important than cumulative annual
precipitation. Periods when rainfall events were highly clustered into a few intense
storms (a more typically Holocene climatic pattern, Figs. 1.14, 1.15) would have been
much more erosive than periods when precipitation was equably distributed throughout
the year in smaller events (a Pleistocene pattern). This is substantiated by Wilson’s study,
which suggests that erosion rates are higher in areas with strongly seasonal climates
(Wilson 1973:342). Periods with more intense rainfall events would have had reduced
ground cover and higher runoff rates because of reduced infiltration time (Hooke
2000:1781).

698

Figure 4.97. Effect of Temperature on Precipitation-Sediment Yield Relationship. Shaded
band shows contemporary annual precipitation total for comparison (after
Schumm 1977:Fig. 3-1). Higher temperatures encountered at the onset of
the Holocene would produce higher sediment yields for a constant amount
of precipitation.
A study of the Paria River basin in Utah and Arizona is particularly helpful
because it is based on a restricted area with carefully documented discharge, suspended
load, and aggradation records (Graf, Webb and Hereford 1991; Hereford 2002). The
authors found that seasonal distribution of floods controls channel aggradation and
degradation, and floodplain aggradation is a result of short-scale climate cycles:
Flood-plain formation, therefore, began during a period of decreased frequency of
tropical cyclones, and the greatest rate of aggradation occurred during the period
699

of lowest frequency of tropical cyclones. Flood-plain aggradation appears to
occur when floods are large enough to overtop existing deposits but are too small
to significantly erode the deposits (Graf, Webb and Hereford 1991:1410).
It is also entirely possible that there may not be a linear relationship between
precipitation and sediment yield (Tucker and Slingerland 1997). Schumm proposes a
“complex response” of drainage systems:
[Where] an event causing an erosional response within a drainage basin (tilting,
changes of baselevel, climate and/or land use) creates a high sediment production,
which in turn causes deposition and an increase of gradient. This, then is followed
by incision of the alluvial deposits as the sediment load decreases. This sequence
of events is the complex response…. (Schumm 1977:77).
Researchers who see a major role for allocyclic (climatic) control of
sedimentation rates point to cases where depositional histories of various drainages are
approximately in phase across large regions (for example, see Knox 1995 and especially
Hereford 2002:Fig. 8). Researchers who do not see such a role point to cases where
depositional histories of adjacent drainages are out of phase, and there are many
examples of those, as well (Waters 1985).

Climate and Textural Changes
Sediment grain size is often used as a climate proxy in studies of cores extracted
from marine (Poore and Wright 1999) and lacustrine environments. In continental lakes,
cores are taken from depocenters (the “profundal zone”) and pulses of coarser-grained
sediment are usually taken to indicate wetter, colder, or stormier periods when stronger
stream discharge carried heavier particles into the center of the lake. This method has
been used both for open lakes (lakes with both inflow and outflow; Campbell 1998) and
closed basins (Anderson 2001; Noren et al. 2002). Sediment pulses are taken to indicate
700

higher stream discharge, but it is not always clear if higher discharge means prolonged
wet periods, or simply more intense runoff events. Conceivably, a shift to a more
seasonal, monsoonal rainfall pattern with infrequent severe storms could produce
sediment pulses without any increase in annual precipitation – indeed, even in a climate
with declining precipitation. However, in some cases the sediment pulses are also
associated with reduction in salinity, based on proxy indicators such as ostracods or
sediment chemistry. At Lake Estancia, the strongest sediment pulses are spaced about
200 to 400 years apart and tend to occur in clusters about 2000 years apart (Allen and
Anderson 1993; Anderson 2001:77-78). Major pulses occurred at the end of dry periods,
when renewed stream discharge flushed accumulated sediment into the lake.

The association of coarser-grained sediment pulses with wet periods in lacustrine
settings is, to some extent, opposite to the relationship I have proposed in Hypothesis 5,
but only because the lake studies have not distinguished between increases in annual
precipitation and increases in precipitation seasonality. In fluvial floodbasin settings, I
propose that finer-grained deposits will result from smaller magnitude, more frequent,
longer duration floods (flat hydrograph, Fig. 1.14, top ) and coarser-grained deposits will
result from infrequent but large-magnitude, short-duration floods (peaked hydrograph,
Fig. 1.14, bottom).

Except for the slackwater depositional system at Arenosa Shelter (Patton and
Dibble 1982), examples of explicitly inferred allocyclic control on grain size in fluvial
settings are difficult to find in the geologic literature, in part because so much research
emphasis has been placed on autocyclic mechanisms. Vittori and Ventura (1995)
examined an extensive series of cores from the Po River valley in Italy, and reconstructed
701

a chronology extending to 160,000 BP from an averaged core sequence 150 m deep.
They attribute coarser-grained phases and higher sedimentation rates to glacial phases,
and finer-grained, slower sedimentation rates to “temperate-wet” periods (Vittori and
Ventura 1995:737-738). Large-scale studies like this in glacially influenced settings are
not helpful for understanding floodplain deposition at Berger Bluff.

Aggradation and Incision
Much of the literature on Quaternary valley fills in the Southwest and Plains deals
with alternating phases when sediment was first deposited, then either removed entirely
by erosion (creating unconformities and missing sediment packages) or isolated as
terraces left standing when streams incised below the former floodplain surface. And
much of the literature deals with explaining this alternation between a two-state system
consisting of aggradation and incision. At Berger Bluff, this is not particularly helpful
because erosion has been a very minor part of the story. If there is any consensus about
what type of climatic shift might cause streams to incise (disregarding other possibilities
like tectonic uplift), it is probably that incision is mainly triggered by large floods
(Hereford 2002) or up-basin sediment starvation. There is less consensus on whether
large floods are more likely to occur in an arid phase or a wet phase. The view taken here
is that extreme floods are more likely in arid phases (Patton and Dibble 1982; Leopold
1994:11; Molnar 2001; Hereford 2002), but incision was rarely the result in the Coleto
Creek basin. Why should this be so?

It is helpful to contrast the history of Quaternary valley fills on the Edwards
Plateau portrayed by Blum, Toomey and Valastro (1994) with that of the Berger Bluff
catchment. They suggest that stripping of soil mantles from upland surfaces in the Late
702

Holocene promoted rapid focusing of discharge into stream channels. Unlike the Edwards
Plateau, however, the Berger Bluff catchment mostly consists of unconsolidated sandy
sediments with very little exposed bedrock. Sediment production rates have presumably
been consistently high throughout the Quaternary. Only two incisive episodes are
documented in the stratigraphic section at Berger Bluff. The first is the incisive episode
that immediately predates the accumulation of stratum 1. Other than this relationship, it is
undated, but might correlate with the pre-Younger Dryas period of incision on the
Edwards Plateau proposed by Blum, Toomey and Valastro (1994:15) at 14,000 to 11,000
RCYBP. A date somewhere near the onset of the Younger Dryas or somewhat before
would be consistent with the known age of the bench deposits. The second is the equally
problematical Late Holocene incision, whose date I have already discussed at some
length earlier in this chapter.
The tentatively recognized lower post-Beaumont terrace, discussed much earlier
in this chapter(Fig. 4.3, 4.4, Table 4.3), might indicate a mid-Holocene erosive event not
represented at Berger Bluff, or it might simply represent localized lateral channel
migration (six terrace remnants are identified in the area studied). At the Smith Creek
Bridge site, which lies near Yorktown some 55 river kilometers upstream from Berger
Bluff, about 1.8 m of Holocene sediments unconformably overlie Pleistocene sediments
(Hudler, Prilliman and Gustavson 2002:27), suggesting that some sediment was likely
removed here by erosion at some point during the first half of the Holocene. The dating
of this erosive event is very uncertain, as there are no radiocarbon assays pertaining to
this part of the section and few time-diagnostic artifacts. A single Gower-like and a single
Morhiss projectile point from the base of Unit II sediments (Hudler, Prilliman and
Gustavson 2002:Table 11) provide conflicting estimates of the maximum age for Unit II
703

(anywhere between 6950 and 3550 RCYBP). In any case, it is possible that there were
Holocene erosive events in the Coleto Creek basin that simply are not represented at
Berger Bluff.

Reconstructing Past Channel and Floodplain Configuration
The relationships between the variables of sediment load, discharge, channel
sinuosity and width-depth ratio are well-established in fluvial geomorphology. The type
of sediment load has a strong influence on channel cross-sectional shape (Schumm
1977:110-111). In general, streams carrying little bedload and those with fine-grained,
cohesive banks are relatively narrow, deep, and sinuous (Leopold, Wolman and Miller
1964:202; Schumm 1977:117). Streams carrying coarse-grained bedloads, with sandy,
noncohesive banks and streams with flashy discharge are shallow and wide, generally
with low sinuosity ⎯ exactly like contemporary Coleto Creek before impoundment (see
“The Contemporary Coleto Creek Fluvial System” in Chapter 1). Morton and McGowen
(1980:39), describing lower Coleto Creek (near Highway 59), report a sinuosity of 1.37,
a width/depth ratio of 16:1, and a gradient of about 38 cm/km. At Berger Bluff, the
sinuosity is about 1.02 and gradient about 1.57 m/km (see “Channel Form and Bed
Sediments” in Chapter 1). The width/depth ratio was about 120:1 if measured at the water
surface during the period of fieldwork, but perhaps roughly 35:1 if measured at
“bankfull” elevation. The creek bank is very poorly defined along much of the reach
where the site is situated, so it is very difficult to specify a bankfull depth and width
accurately here, but the 76 foot contour interval on the URS/Forrest and Cotton
topographic map can perhaps be taken as a rough marker.

704

Streams with noncohesive banks generally accommodate increased discharge
rates by eroding the banks and widening, rather than bed scouring. The Cimarron River
and Paria River examples already discussed provide good examples of this. Streams with
cohesive banks accommodate increased discharge by experiencing overbank flooding.
Schumm (1960) measured channel width, depth, bed grain size, and channel grain size
for 90 river cross sections in the Plains and computed the relationship (shown in Fig.
4.98) between the width/depth ratio and the weighted mean percentage of silt and clay.
The weighted mean percentage of silt and clay (M) is computed as
M = Sc x W + Sb x 2D
W+2D
where Sc = percentage of bed silt and clay
Sb = percentage of bank silt and clay
D = channel depth
W = channel width
silt and clay = sediment finer than 0.074 mm
This weighting simply gives twice as much emphasis to the bank sediment as the
bed sediment. Figure 4.98 clearly shows that the smaller the percentage of fines in the
channel perimeter, the flatter the channel cross-sectional shape. Since neither W nor D
are known for the Younger Dryas-aged creek channel at Berger Bluff, we cannot use this
precise relationship to work backward from the known sediment texture to the channel
shape. However, I have taken the data on bank texture from Schumm’s (1960:Table 1)
data and replotted it with arithmetic axes in Figure 4.99, fitting a logarithmic curve. Here
the X axis is simply unweighted silt/clay percent in the channel bank. The r2 value
reduces to about 0.69 when this simplified version is used. We can take the
approximately equivalent textural data for the bench as a whole (63% silt and clay for the
entire bench), keeping in mind that Schumm defines “fines” as sediment below 0.074 mm
and I define it as sediment below 0.0625 mm (Table 4.1). A very approximate width705

depth ratio of about 30:1 can be read off on the Y axis of Figure 4.99, keeping in mind
also that the bench textural data probably come from the floodbasin, not the channel
bank.

Figure 4.98. Effect of Silt and Clay on Width/Depth Ratio. This log-log graph shows the
effect of weighted mean percent of silt and clay (M, see text) in the channel
banks and bed on the width/depth ratio of the channel (after Schumm
1960:Fig. 8). The dashed line is the approximate width/depth ratio for preinundation Coleto Creek at Berger Bluff.

706

Figure 4.99. Effect of Silt and Clay in Bank on Width/Depth Ratio. This is a simplified
version of most of the data shown in the previous figure. Here the axes are
arithmetic and only the silt and clay percent in the bank is used. A log
function is fitted to the first 69 cases in Schumm (1960:Table 1). The dashed
line shows the relationship for the average silt and clay content (63%) of the
bench sediments.

I suspect that this reconstructed 30:1 width/depth ratio is actually far too flat,
given the evidence for very cohesive floodplain sediments, equable discharge, and
relatively narrow floodplain width that would have characterized the Younger Dryasaged valley. A steeply-banked channel with a width/depth ratio of anywhere from 3:1 to
10:1 would seem reasonable.

707

The floodplain itself would have been wider, flatter, and less drought-prone when
the bench sediments were accumulating. Before reservoir inundation, the flood-prone
zone was not morphologically well-defined. Coleto Creek is largely confined to its
incised valley, but in severe floods can overtop the lowest terraces, as I have remarked in
the section on the Preiss Ranch. In the Younger Dryas, the floodplain at Berger Bluff
must have been wider and lower in order to accommodate the long-duration floods that
left the substantial quantities of silt and clay at the bench. It must also have been rather
flat, both because gradually settling sediments leave a flat surface, and because cohesive
silty or clayey sediments would have resisted scouring (and drying, as well).

The Potential Role of Beaver in Coleto Creek Paleohydrology
Although giant beaver (Castoroides ohioensis, 60-100 kg body size) is known
from a couple of localities in Texas, it is unlikely that it was present in the Coleto Creek
drainage, especially in the time span under consideration. Furthermore, according to
Kurtén and Anderson (1980:236), there is no evidence it built dams. However, modern
beaver, Castor canadensis (18 kg body size, up to 27 kg), were likely present in the upper
catchment throughout the Pleistocene and in at least the wetter parts of the Holocene, as
the remains from the Smith Creek Bridge site suggest, even though no beaver remains
have been found at Berger Bluff or any of the other nearby sites. Beavers prefer fastgrowing riparian tree species such as willows (Salix) or cottonwood (Populus) for browse
and will often clearcut floodplain stands of these trees. They extensively alter stream
systems by dam-building, tunneling, and clearcutting (Naiman, Johnston and Kelley
1988). Dams may vary in height from as little as 20 cm to as much as three meters
(Müller-Schwarze and Sun 2003:54).
708

Beavers are colonial rodents, and there are a few differences between Texas
populations and their better-studied boreal counterparts. In Texas they live in cutbank
burrows rather than in lodges (Schmidly 1994:377). In northern regions, beaver ponds
may be frozen over and excluded from sedimentation for four to seven months of the year
(Butler and Malanson 1995:260), but this is unlikely in south Texas, even in the
Pleistocene.

Beaver ponds often occur in strings along a stream, creating a stepped-pool
gradient. In Quebec, dam frequencies of 8.6 to 16 per kilometer have been documented
(Naiman, Johnston and Kelley 1988:754; see also Gurnell 1998:Table 3). They tend to
occur in headwaters, because floods may remove dams in lower reaches. Beaver dams
potentially could have several different effects on stream hydrology, some of them
perhaps mutually offsetting:

1) ponds intercept mineral and organic sediment loads, acting as settling pools and
possibly causing sediment starvation in downstream reaches of streams, resulting in
patchy distribution of grain sizes along the length of a stream (fine-grained sediment
in ponds, coarse-grained in reaches between ponds or meadows; Gurnell 1998:181);
2) clearcutting around ponds removes riparian vegetation around ponds that otherwise
might create turbulence and trigger sediment deposition (in other words, dams might
increase sediment deposition in channel facies but decrease it in floodbasin facies);
3) dams tend to even out flows in streams and flatten flood hydrographs, unless
4) catastrophic failure of dams during flooding might cause extreme flood events and
scouring downstream (cf. Schipke and Butler 1991; Gurnell 1998:182);
5) ponds create suitable habitat for amphibians, reptiles, and for freshwater mussels or
other aquatic species that cannot tolerate turbulent flow (Müller-Schwarze and Sun
2003:128-129); they favor lotic over lentic taxa.

709

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS FOR CHAPTER 4
The bench deposits at Berger Bluff represent Coleto Creek floodplain alluvium,
fine-grained overbank deposits formed by vertical accretion near the south valley wall
during part of the Younger Dryas, Preboreal, and part of the Boreal period. Along with a
modern analog in the ravine, abundant phreatic carbonate suggests a spring or seep was
nearby, although no physical evidence of an ancient spring was present in any parts of the
site that were visible. Likewise, there is no direct evidence of the Pleistocene creek
channel at the site – there are no major buried erosional contacts, point bar sands, or other
lateral accretion deposits. Both the maximum depth and maximum age of stratum 1 are
unknown. There is fairly conspicuous evidence of cyclic deposition during this early part
of the Berger Bluff stratigraphic sequence, marked by alternating sandy and muddy
layers of sediment. The reason for this cyclicity is uncertain. Submillennial climatic
cycles (allocyclic variation) are perhaps the most likely cause, with the muddy units
accumulating during wetter periods having more equable year-round distribution of
rainfall, and sandy units accumulating during drier periods with more seasonally
concentrated rainfall events (Fig. 4-100 presents a qualitative model for some of the
major variables). Alternatively, it is also possible that cyclic variations in sediment
texture are simply due to lateral shifting of the creek channel and its relative nearness to
the bench area (autocyclic variation). Cyclic variation in grain size is superimposed upon
a slight coarsening-upward trend that may represent climatic changes associated with
regional warming at the end of the Pleistocene.

710

Figure 4.100 (following page). A Stochastic Model for Cyclic Sedimentation. This
flowchart represents what I think might be the relationships between major
variables controlling cyclic sedimentation in the bench deposits. Not all of
the potential variables are listed here; for example, stream gradient reacting
to rising sea level, or possible beaver damming are not listed.

711

712

Present-day Coleto Creek is a bedload-dominated stream (Fig. 1.41, bottom), with
large quantities of clean white sand in temporary storage as dunes and sandbars. From the
Younger Dryas into the early Boreal period, the creek was a suspended load-dominated
stream (Fig. 1.41, top). For the bench deposits as a whole, about 63% of the sediment
consists of silt and clay. The presence of so much silt and clay in the bench deposits is a
strong indicator that out-of-bank flooding was a fairly frequent occurrence, but floods
were fairly prolonged and not erosive in nature. This amount of silt and clay also suggests
the creek banks were fairly cohesive and the creek channel significantly narrower and
deeper than at present. The fairly large Amblema plicata mussels found in the bench
deposits are consistent with this interpretation. A high silt and clay content would also
have made the floodplain deposits more resistant to seasonal drying, and the presence of
rather abundant amphibians (salamanders, frogs, and toads) among the vertebrate remains
suggests the floodplain was well-watered and vegetated, supporting a diverse and robust
amphibian population. Many of the snails recovered from the bench deposits are
characteristically associated with leaf litter, suggesting the floodplain was well wooded
with a fairly continuous canopy of deciduous trees.

The source for the abundant phreatic carbonate and carbonate rhizoconcretions is
believed to be the Evangeline Aquifer, and carbonate mobilized from the calcareous
Miocene Goliad Formation bedrock near the site. The carbonate served to buffer the
otherwise potentially acid floodplain quartz sands, resulting in good preservation of bone
and diatoms, moderately good preservation of snail shell, and somewhat poor
preservation of freshwater mussel shell. The carbonate also partially cemented the bench
deposits, restricting erosion and bioturbation.

713

Together, the abundant phreatic carbonate and suspended-load sediments suggest
the regional climate was significantly wetter, probably in large part because of reduced
evaporation rates, and rainfall amounts were much less seasonal and more equably
distributed during the year, resulting both in more consistent spring flow and less flashy
stream discharge. Carbonate content is very high in stratum 1, possibly because it is
capped by the fine-grained sediments in stratum 2A, but begins to decline in the upper
part of stratum 1, reaching a minimum at the midpoint of stratum 2A. Above that, it
fluctuates slightly before starting to increase again at the top of the section as stratum 3
appears. This might indicate spring discharge was highest early in the sequence, then
declining but showing a slight resurgence late in the sequence.

Evidence from profiles, thin sections and ferromanganese concretions suggests
that even though vertical accretion rates were probably rather slow, the floodplain
sediments were sufficiently saturated during enough of the year to limit weathering and
soil formation. Concretions, iron-manganese stains, structure (fissuring) and argillans
suggest that the sediments experienced seasonal drying, mostly late in the stratigraphic
sequence.

The top part of the bench deposits, representing the early Holocene, records
several important events. Above stratum 2, phreatic carbonate is greatly reduced
(although rhizoconcretions are apparently still abundant), suggesting that spring
discharge was also greatly reduced. Above stratum 3, there is a major change in
depositional style from cyclic deposition in strata 1-3 to massive deposition in strata 4 and
5. Pockets of gravel and coarse sand appear in stratum 2E and presumably at equivalent
levels elsewhere in the bluff face. These are believed to represent coarse-grained bedload
714

material moved out of the channel and onto the floodplain surface by a major flood event,
possibly one of the first hurricanes to enter south Texas from the Gulf as the Gulf waters
warmed sufficiently to sustain hurricanes early in the Holocene. Alternatively, the flood
event might have been triggered by the advent of one of the first Arctic cold fronts to
enter Texas after retreat of the Laurentide ice sheet exposed the midcontinent to
southward-penetrating Arctic airmasses early in the Holocene. Finally, clay (and perhaps
silt) content is reduced as massive deposition of the somewhat coarser-grained stratum 4
begins.

These geomorphic events are clearly the result of regional warming and drying at
the beginning of the Holocene. Reduction in spring discharge occurs first, suggesting a
reaction by the Evangeline Aquifer to regional drying, followed by a series of related
changes in stream behavior that represent concentration of rainfall into seasonal peaks
(much like today’s rainfall pattern, Figs. 1.14, 1.15) and at least one major flood triggered
either by a hurricane, an Arctic cold front, or possibly even jetstream-directed weather
associated with an early El Niño event (there are several kinds of these characteristically
Holocene weather events that could produce a major flood).

None of these events can be precisely dated. The highest (both stratigraphically
and in elevation) radiocarbon assay available is AA2831, 9880±90 RCYBP, collected at
92.75 m in stratum 2D. All of these events occur somewhat above that level, and hence
later by an unknown amount of time. Reduction in phreatic carbonate occurs an unknown
number of centimeters above AA 2831. The top of stratum 3 occurs almost 80 cm above
AA 2831. The base of stratum 2E, the coarse-grained flood event, rests at about 93.18 m,
or 43 cm higher in absolute elevation than AA 2831. The best estimate for the timing of
715

these environmental changes would be some time early in the Boreal period, or well into
the early Holocene.

As we have seen in Chapter 2, the major climatic transition in the Greenland
summit ice cores occurs at about 10,091 RCYBP, or about two radiocarbon centuries
before AA2831. Why are these significant environmental changes in the Coleto Creek
basin lagged well after the abrupt end of the Younger Dryas in the ice cores? I suspect a
major part of the reason is the series of delayed glacial meltwater flooding events
(MWF5A through MWF5G) identified by Aharon (2003), extending from 9970 to 8900
RCYBP that affected the Gulf at the same time as the events I have identified above.
These meltwater pulses (see Chapter 2) were probably still entering the Gulf at the same
time that stratum 3 was accumulating, and it was only after their effect was dissipated
that major hydrological changes began to take effect in the Berger Bluff catchment. The
meltwater pulses probably played a major role in delaying and buffering the response of
the circum-Gulf environment to the onset of the Holocene.

The bench deposits are coeval in part with Unit I as defined by Waters and Nordt
(1995:Fig. 4) in the Brazos River drainage, Georgetown Alluvium as defined by Nordt
(2004) for Cowhouse Creek at Fort Hood, Columbus Bend Allomember 1 as defined by
Blum and Valastro (1994:Fig. 9) in the lower Colorado River drainage, the Q2 terrace on
the Sabinal River as defined by Mear (1995:Table 3), the lower part of the Applewhite
Terrace on the Medina River (Thoms 1992:Fig. 3), and the Post-Deweyville Unit 1 on the
lower Nueces River as defined by Durbin (1999:119-126), but the upper and lower age
limits on these units as defined show wide discrepancies. Likewise, some of these units
are terminated by alvulsion or erosion and floodplain abandonment and some are capped
716

by paleosols, while at Berger Bluff the record is one of continuous deposition overprinted
by major changes in depositional style.

Although the Late Pleistocene/Early Holocene depositional histories of these
different drainages show some general similarities, when examined in detail they are
clearly out of phase. This is not surprising, given that the basins vary widely in size and
are placed in contrasting climatic regions. Both the Brazos and Colorado drainages, for
example, originate in New Mexico in a vastly different climatic regime. Large streams
like these pass through so many different climatic and geologic zones that their
depositional histories are a compound of many different factors. Smaller basins like the
Berger Bluff catchment are likely to be much more responsive to local or regional
environmental changes. Lee Nordt (2004:299) reaches the same conclusion when
comparing Cowhouse Creek with the much larger Brazos River basin.

717

References for Chapter 4
Abbott, James T.
2001

Houston Area Geoarcheology. A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway
District. Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation,
Archeology Studies Program, Report No. 27.

Adair, Mary J. (ed.)
1989

Archaeological Investigations at the North Cove Site Harlan County Lake,
Harlan County, Nebraska. An Interdisciplinary Approach. Kaw Valley
Engineering & Development, Inc., Junction City, Kansas and Parkville, Missouri.
Final Report Submitted to US Army Corps of Engineers, Kansas City District.

Aharon, Paul
2003

Meltwater Flooding Events in the Gulf of Mexico Revisited: Implications for
Rapid Climate Changes During the Last Deglaciation. Paleoceanography
18(4):pages 3-1 to 3-13.

Ahlbrandt, Thomas S.
1979

Textural Parameters of Eolian Sediments. Chapter B in Edwin D. McKee (ed.), A
Study of Global Sand Seas. U. S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1052.
United States Geological Survey.

Allen, Bruce D. and Roger Y. Anderson
1993

Evidence from Western North America for Rapid Shifts in Climate During the
Last Glacial Maximum. Science 260(5116):1920-1923.

718

Allen, J. R. L.
1965

A Review of the Origin and Characteristics of Recent Alluvial Sediments.
Sedimentology (Special Issue) 5(2):89-191.

Allred, Tyler M. and John C. Schmidt
1999

Channel Narrowing by Vertical Accretion Along the Green River Near Green
River, Utah. Geological Society of America Bulletin 111(12):1757-1772.

Anderson, Roger Y.
2001

Rapid Changes in Late Pleistocene Precipitation and Stream Discharge
Determined from Medium- and Coarse-Grained Sediment in Saline Lakes. Global
and Planetary Change 28(1-4):73-83.

Arbogast, Alan F. and William C. Johnson
1994

Climatic Implications of the Late Quaternary Alluvial Record of a Small Drainage
Basin in the Central Great Plains. Quaternary Research 41(3):298-305.

Aronow, Saul
1993

The Fate of Fisk's Pleistocene Units in Texas. Pages 128-132 in Whitney J. Autin
and John Snead (eds.), Quaternary Geology and Geoarchaeology of the Lower
Red River Valley. A Field Trip.

Aronow, Saul, Raymond W. Neck, and William L. McClure
1991

The Caroline Street Local Fauna: A Late Pleistocene Freshwater
Molluscan/Vertebrate Fauna from Houston, Harris Co., Texas. Transactions of
the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 41:17-28.

719

Arrendondo, Alonzo G. and William F. Thomann
1996

Uranium Mineralization in the Goliad Formation of the Kingsville Dome In Situ
Leach Uranium Mine in Kleberg County, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
48(4):283-296.

Ashley, Gail M.
1978

Interpretation of Polymodal Sediments. The Journal of Geology 86(4):411-421.

Aslan, Andres and Whitney J. Autin
1998

Holocene Flood-Plain Soil Formation in the Southern Lower Mississippi Valley:
Implications for Interpreting Alluvial Paleosols. Geological Society of America
Bulletin 110(4):433-449.

Asselman, Nathalie E. M. and Hans Middelkoop
1995 Floodplain Sedimentation: Quantities, Patterns and Processes. Earth Surface
Processes and Landforms 20(6):481-499.

Autin, Whitney J.
1993

Quaternary Geology of the Lower Red River Valley. Pages 5-24 in Whitney J.
Autin and John Snead (eds.), Quaternary Geology and Geoarchaeology of the
Lower Red River Valley. A Field Trip.

Baker, E. T., Jr.
1979

Stratigraphic and Hydrogeologic Framework of Part of the Coastal Plain of Texas.
Texas Department of Water Resources, Report 236.

720

Baker, Victor R.
1977

Stream-Channel Response to Floods, With Examples from Central Texas.
Geological Society of America Bulletin 88(8):1057-1071.

Baskin, Jon A.
1991

Early Pliocene Horses from Late Pleistocene Fluvial Deposits, Gulf Coastal Plain,
South Texas. Journal of Paleontology 65(6):995-1006.

Beerbower, James R.
1964

Cyclothems and Cyclic Depositional Mechanisms in Alluvial Plain
Sedimentation. Pages 31-42 in Daniel F. Merriam (ed.), Symposium on Cyclic
Sedimentation. University of Kansas (Lawrence), State Geological Survey of
Kansas, Bulletin 169, Vol. 1.

Bernard, H. A., C. F. Major, Jr., B. S. Parrott, and R. J. LeBlanc, Sr.
1970

Recent Sediments of Southeast Texas. A Field Guide to the Brazos Alluvial and
Deltaic Plains and the Galveston Barrier Island Complex. Guidebook 11, Bureau
of Economic Geology, University of Texas at Austin.

Birkeland, Peter W.
1984

Soils and Geomorphology. Oxford University Press.

Blem, Charles R. and Leann B. Blem
1975

Density, Biomass, and Energetics of the Bird and Small Mammal Populations of
an Illinois Deciduous Forest. Transactions, Illinois State Academy of Science
68(2):156-164.

721

Blum, Michael D., Amy E. Carter, Tracy Zayac, and Ron Goble
2002

Middle Holocene Sea-Level and Evolution of the Gulf of Mexico Coast (USA).
Journal of Coastal Research, Special Issue 36:65-80.

Blum, Michael D., Robert A. Morton, and James Durbin
1995

"Deweyville" Terraces and Deposits of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 45:53-60.

Blum, Michael and David M. Price
1994

Glacio-Eustatic and Climatic Controls on Quaternary Alluvial Plain Deposition,
Texas Coastal Plain. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological
Societies 44:85-92.

Blum, Michael D., Rickard S. Toomey III, and Salvatore Valastro, Jr.
1994

Fluvial Response to Late Quaternary Climatic and Environmental Change,
Edwards Plateau, Texas. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology
108(1-2):1-21.

Blum, Michael D. and Salvatore Valastro, Jr.
1989

Response of the Pedernales River of Central Texas to Late Holocene Climatic
Change. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 79(3):435-456.

1994 Late Quaternary Sedimentation, Lower Colorado River, Gulf Coastal Plain of
Texas. Geological Society of America Bulletin 106(8):1002-1016.

Bousman, C. Britt
1992 Geomorphic Investigations. Chapter 5 (pages 25-32) in Eloise F. Gadus, Ross C.
Fields, C. Britt Bousman, Steve A. Tomka, and Margaret A. Howard, Excavations
at the Finley Fan Site (41 HP 159), Cooper Lake Project, Hopkins County, Texas.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Reports of Investigations 78.
722

Bowler, J. M.
1973

Clay Dunes: Their Occurrence, Formation and Environmental Significance.
Earth-Science Reviews 9(4):315-338.

Bradley, Raymond S., Malcolm K. Hughes, and Henry F. Diaz
2003

Climate in Medieval Time. Science 302(5644):404-405.

Brakenridge, G. Robert
1988

River Flood Regime and Floodplain Stratigraphy. Chapter 9 (pages 139-156) in
Victor R. Baker, R. Craig Kochel, and Peter C. Patton (eds.), Flood
Geomorphology. John Wiley & Sons.

Brinson, Mark M., Bryan L. Swift, Reuben C. Plantico, and John S. Barclay
1981

Riparian Ecosystems: Their Ecology and Status. Eastern Energy and Land Use
Team, National Water Resources Analysis Group, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
Biological Services Program FWS/OBS-81/17 (Kearneysville, West Virginia).

Brode, John M. and R. Bruce Bury
1984

The Importance of Riparian Systems to Amphibians and Reptiles. Pages 30-36 in
Richard E. Warner and Kathleen M. Hendrix (eds.), California Riparian Systems.
Ecology, Conservation, and Productive Management. University of California
Press.

Brown, A. G.
1997

Alluvial Geoarchaeology. Floodplain Archaeology and Environmental Change.
Cambridge University Press.

723

Brown, David O.
1983

The Berger Bluff Site (41 GD 30A): Excavations in the Upper Deposits, 1979.
Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio,
Archaeological Survey Report 115.

Brown, Kenneth M.
1986

Archaeological Survey and Backhoe Testing for Flume No. 3 Right-of-Way at
Coleto Creek Reservoir, Goliad County, Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 128.

Brown, Paul, James P. Kennett, and B. Lynn Ingram
1999

Marine Evidence for Episodic Holocene Megafloods in North America and the
Northern Gulf of Mexico. Paleoceanography 14(4):498-510.

Bush, J. K. and O. W. Van Auken
1984

Woody-Species Composition of the Upper San Antonio River Gallery Forest. The
Texas Journal of Science 36(2-3):139-148.

Butler, David R. and George P. Malanson
1995

Sedimentation Rates and Patterns in Beaver Ponds in a Mountain Environment.
Geomorphology 13(1-4):255-269.

Campbell, Celina
1998 Late Holocene Lake Sedimentology and Climate Change in Southern Alberta,
Canada. Quaternary Research 49(1):96-101.

724

Castro, Maria C. and Patrick Goblet
2003

Noble Gas Thermometry and Hydrologic Ages: Evidence for Late Holocene
Warming in Southwest Texas. Geophysical Research Letters 30(24), pages 2-1 to
2-4.

Cazanacli, Dan and Norman D. Smith
1998 A Study of Morphology and Texture of Natural Levees – Cumberland Marshes,
Saskatchewan, Canada. Geomorphology 25(1-2):43-55.

Cheatum, E. P. and Joseph P. Harris, Jr.
1953

Ecological Observations Upon the Fresh-Water Sponges in Dallas County, Texas.
Field & Laboratory 21(3)97-127.

Cobb, Kim M., Christopher D. Charles, Hal Cheng, and R. Lawrence Edwards
2003

El Niño/Southern Oscillation and Tropical Pacific Climate During the Last
Millennium. Nature 424(6946):271-276.

Collins, Michael B.
1995

Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.

1999

An Object Lesson in Site Survey. La Tierra 26(1):37-40.

Costa, John E.
1974

Stratigraphic, Morphologic, and Pedologic Evidence of Large Floods in Humid
Environments. Geology 2(6):301-303.

725

Cremeens, D. L.
1995 Pedogenesis of Cotiga Mound, a 2100-Year-Old Woodland Mound in Southwest
West Virginia. Soil Science Society of America Journal 59(5):1377-1388.

Dalan, Rinita A. and Subir K. Banerjee
1998 Solving Archaeological Problems Using Techniques of Soil Magnetism.
Geoarchaeology 13(1):3-36.

Daniel, Ryna S. and Robert R. Fleet
1999 Bird and Small Mammal Communities of Four Similar-Aged Forest Types of the
Caddo Lake Area in East Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 51(1):65-80.

Daniels, J. Michael and James C. Knox
2005

Alluvial Stratigraphic Evidence for Channel Incision During the Mediaeval Warm
Period on the Central Great Plains, USA. The Holocene 15(5):736-747.

De Narvaez, Cynta
1995

Paleohydrology and Paleotopography of a Las Vegas Spring. Unpublished MS
Thesis (Quaternary Studies), Northern Arizona University.

Dearing, J. A., K. L. Hay, S. M. J. Baban, A. S. Huddleston, E. M. H. Wellington, and P.
J. Loveland
1996

Magnetic Susceptibility of Soil: An Evaluation of Conflicting Theories Using a
National Data Set. Geophysical Journal International 127(3):728-734.

726

Dendy, F. E. and G. C. Bolton
1976

Sediment Yield-Runoff-Drainage Area Relationships in the United States.
Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 32:264-266.

Doering, John
1936

Post-Fleming Surface Formations of Coastal Southeast Texas and South
Louisiana. Pages 432-469 in Donald C. Barton and George Sawtelle (eds.), Gulf
Coast Oil Fields. A Symposium on the Gulf Coast Cenozoic. American
Association of Petroleum Geologists [Paper reprinted from Bulletin of the
American Association of Petroleum Geologists 19(5):651-688, 1935].

Dort, Wakefield Jr. and Larry D. Martin
2003

Geology of the Burnham Site (34 Wo 73), Woods County, Oklahoma: A 1991
Perspective. Chapter 4 (pages 45-64) in Don G. Wyckoff, James L. Theler and
Brian J. Carter (compilers, editors), The Burnham Site in Northwestern
Oklahoma: Glimpses Beyond Clovis? Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural
History and Oklahoma Anthropological Society Memoir 9.

Doyle, A. T.
1990

Use of Riparian and Upland Habitats by Small Mammals. Journal of Mammalogy
71(1):14-23.

Durbin, James M.
1999

Geomorphic Response to Late Quaternary Climate and Sea-Level Change, Lower
Nueces River, Texas. Unpublished PhD dissertation (Geosciences), University of
Nebraska-Lincoln.

727

Durbin, James M., Michael D. Blum, and David M. Price
1997

Late Pleistocene Stratigraphy of the Lower Nueces River, Corpus Christi, Texas:
Glacio-Eustatic Influences on Valley-Fill Architecture. Transactions of the Gulf
Coast Association of Geological Societies 47:119-129.

Ellwood, Brooks B., Duane E. Peter, William Balsam, and Jurgen Schieber
1995 Magnetic and Geochemical Variations as Indicators of Palaeoclimate and
Archaeological Site Evolution: Examples from 41 TR 68, Fort Worth, Texas.
Journal of Archaeological Science 22(3):409-415.

Elsik, W. C.
1986

Palynology of a Late Pleistocene Giant Ground Sloth Locality, Southwest Harris
County, Texas. Pollen et Spores 28(1):77-82.

Espey, Huston & Associates
1976

Baseline Survey of the Terrestrial Ecology of the Coleto Creek Power Plant and
Cooling Reservoir Site. Document No.7674, Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.
(Austin) prepared for Central Power and Light Company (Corpus Christi).

Evans, C. V. and D. P. Franzmeier
1988

Color Index Values to Represent Wetness and Aeration in Some Indiana Soils.
Geoderma 41(3-4):353-368.

Farrell, Kathleen M.
1987

Sedimentology and Facies Architecture of Overbank Deposits of the Mississippi
River, False River Region, Louisiana. Pages 111-120 in Frank G. Ethridge,
Romeo M. Flores, and Michael D. Harvey (eds.), Recent Developments in Fluvial
Sedimentology. Contributions from the Third International Fluvial Sedimentology
Conference. Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Special
Publication 39.
728

Fassbinder, Jorg W. E., Helge Stanjek, and Hojatollah Vali
1990

Occurrence of Magnetic Bacteria in Soil. Nature 343(6254):161-163.

Feng, Z.-D. and W. C. Johnson
1995

Factors Affecting the Magnetic Susceptibility of Loess-Soil Sequence, Barton
County, Kansas, USA. Catena 24(1):25-37.

Ferring, C. Reid
1992

Alluvial Pedology and Geoarchaeological Research. Chapter 1 (pages 1-39) in
Vance T. Holliday (ed.), Soils in Archaeology. Landscape Evolution and Human
Occupation. Smithsonian Institution Press.

2001 Geology of the Aubrey Clovis Site. Chapter 3 (pages 23-54) in C. Reid Ferring
(ed.), The Archaeology and Paleoecology of the Aubrey Clovis Site (41 DN 479)
Denton County, Texas. University of North Texas, Dept. of Geography, Center for
Environmental Archaeology.

Fields, Ross C., L. Wayne Klement, C. Britt Bousman, Steve A. Tomka, Eloise F. Gadus,
and Margaret A. Howard
1991

Excavations at the Bottoms, Rena Branch, and Moccasin Springs Sites, Jewett
Mine Project, Freestone and Leon Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Reports of Investigations 82.

Fleet, Robert R. and Bradley C. Autrey
1999 Herpetofaunal Assemblages of Four Forest Types from the Caddo Lake Area of
Northeastern Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 51(4):297-308.

729

Flynn, Lois M.
1983

Faunal Analysis: 41 GD 30A. Appendix II (pages 104-122) in David O. Brown,
The Berger Bluff Site (41 GD 30A): Excavations in the Upper Deposits, 1979.
Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio,
Archaeological Survey Report 115.

Folk, Robert L.
1980

Petrology of Sedimentary Rocks. Austin, Hemphill Publishing Company.

Folk, Robert L. and William C. Ward
1957 Brazos River Bar: A Study in the Significance of Grain Size Parameters. Journal
of Sedimentary Petrology 27(1):3-26.

Forman, Steven L., Robert Oglesby, and Robert S. Webb
2001

Temporal and Spatial Patterns of Holocene Dune Activity on the Great Plains of
North America: Megadroughts and Climate Links. Global and Planetary Change
29(1-2):1-29.

Fox, Anne A. and Thomas R. Hester
1976

An Archaeological Survey of Coleto Creek, Victoria and Goliad Counties, Texas.
Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio,
Archaeological Survey Report 18.

Fox, Anne A., Stephen L. Black, and Steven R. James
1979

Intensive Survey and Testing of Archaeological Sites on Coleto Creek Victoria
and Goliad Counties, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, University of
Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 67.

730

Frazier, D. E. and A. Osanik
1961

Point-Bar Deposits, Old River Locksite, Louisiana. Transactions of the Gulf
Coast Association of Geological Societies 11:121-137.

Frederick, Charles D.
1996

Geomorphic Investigations. Chapter 5 (pages 85-109) in J. Michael Quigg, Jay
Peck, Christopher Lintz, Abby C. Treece, Charles D. Frederick, Roman Clem, G.
Lain Ellis, Paul Schuchert and James T. Abbott, Early Archaic Use of the Concho
River Terraces: Cultural Resource Investigations at 41 TG 307 and 41 TG 309
Tom Green County, San Angelo, Texas. TRC Mariah Associates Inc.

1998 Late Quaternary Clay Dune Sedimentation on the Llano Estacado. Plains
Anthropologist 43-164:137-155.

Froelich, Laura
2002

Identification of Faunal Remains. Appendix H (pages 284-337) in Dale Hudler,
Keith Prilliman, and Thomas Gustavson, The Smith Creek Bridge Site (41 DW
270) A Terrace Site in De Witt County, Texas. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin, Studies in Archeology 35 and
Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation,
Archeology Studies Program, Report No. 17.

Gale, Stephen J. and Peter G. Hoare
1991

Quaternary Sediments. Petrographic Methods of the Study of Unlithified Rocks.
Belhaven Press, Halsted Press, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Garrett, Judith M. and David G. Barker
1987

A Field Guide to Reptiles and Amphibians of Texas. Texas Monthly Press.

731

Goelz, Melinda A.
2003 Geoarcheological Assessment of a 345-kV Transmission Line Corridor in Goliad
and Karnes Counties, Texas. Appendix C in Burns & McDonnell, Inc., Phase I
Cultural Resource Investigation for Central and South West Services, Inc. 345kV
Transmission Line Project Goliad and Karnes Counties, Texas. Houston, Burns &
McDonnell, Inc.

Gomez, Basil
1991

Bedload Transport. Earth-Science Reviews 31(2):89-132.

Gomez, Basil, Dennis N. Eden, David H. Peacock, and Edward J. Pinkney
1998

Floodplain Construction by Recent, Rapid Vertical Accretion: Waipaoa River,
New Zealand. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 23(5):405-413.

Gose, Wulf A.
1994a Magnetic Susceptibility Analysis. Appendix VIII (pages 327-336) in Alston V.
Thoms (ed.), The Valley Branch Archaeological Project: Excavations at an
Archaic Site (41 MU 55) in the Cross Timbers Uplands, North-Central Texas.
Archaeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Reports of
Investigations 15.
1994b Archeomagnetic Results from Site 41 GM 224. Appendix A (pages A-1 to A-11)
in Robert Rogers, Excavations at Site 41 GM 224 in the Gibbons Creek Lignite
Mine Permit 38A Area Grimes County, Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.
Document No. 930476.
1995

Archeomagnetic Studies of Sites 41 GM 166 and 41 GM 281. Appendix H (no
pagination) in Robert Rogers, Archaeological Excavations at Prehistoric Sites 41
GM 166, 41 GM 281, and 41 GM 282 at the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine Grimes
County, Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. Document No. 940611.

2002

Magnetic Susceptibility Studies of Site 41 CW 54. Appendix B (pages 109-114)
in Eric A. Schroeder and Eric R. Oksanen, Data Recovery at the Armstrong Site
(41 CW 54) Caldwell County, Texas. Volume I: Background, Methods, and Site
Context. Paul Price and Associates, Inc., PPA Cultural Resources Report 0284.
732

2004

Magnetic Susceptibility Analyses of Site 41 BT 37. Pages 78-80 in Daniel J.
Prikryl, Andrew F. Malof, and Glenn T. Goode, Limited Test Excavations at 41
BT 37 LCRA Double Horn Resource Area, Burnet County, Texas. Lower
Colorado River Authority, Cultural Resource Report 11.

Gose, Wulf A. and David L. Nickels
1998

Archaeomagnetic and Magnetic Susceptibility Analyses. Chapter 11 (pages 204214) in David L. Nickels, C. Britt Bousman, Jeff D. Leach, and Diane A. Cargill,
Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site, 41 BX 126, Bexar County, Texas.
Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio,
Archaeological Survey Report 265 and Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Archeology Studies Program, Report No. 3.

Graf, Julia B., Robert H. Webb, and Richard Hereford
1991

Relation of Sediment Load and Flood-Plain Formation to Climatic Variability,
Paria River Drainage Basin, Utah and Arizona. Geological Society of America
Bulletin 103(11):1405-1415.

Grant, W. E., P. E. Carothers, and L. A. Gidley
1985

Small Mammal Community Structure in the Postoak Savanna of East-Central
Texas. Journal of Mammalogy 66(3):589-594.

Gregory, Stanley V., Frederick J. Swanson, W. Arthur McKee, and Kenneth W.
Cummins
1991

An Ecosystem Perspective of Riparian Zones. BioScience 41(8):540-551.

Grimley, David A., Nancy K. Arruda, and Mark W. Bramstedt
2004

Using Magnetic Susceptibility to Facilitate More Rapid, Reproducible and Precise
Delineation of Hydric Soils in the Midwestern USA. Catena 58(2):183-213.

733

Grow, Linda and Henry Merchant
1980

The Burrow Habitat of the Crayfish, Cambarus diogenes diogenes (Girard).
American Midland Naturalist 103(2):231-237.

Guccione, M. J.
1993

Grain-Size Distribution of Overbank Sediment and Its Use to Locate Channel
Positions. Pages 185-194 in M. Marzo and C. Puidefábregas (eds.) Alluvial
Sedimentation. International Association of Sedimentologists, Special Publication
17. Blackwell Scientific Publications.

Gurnell, Angela M.
1998

The Hydrogeomorphological Effects of Beaver Dam-Building Activity. Progress
in Physical Geography 22(2):167-189.

Hall, Grant D.
1998

Prehistoric Human Food Resources on the Texas Coastal Plain. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 69:11-33.

Hall, Stephen A.
1990

Channel Trenching and Climatic Change in the Southern U.S. Great Plains.
Geology 18(4):342-345.

Hanchey, Matthew F. and Kenneth T. Wilkins
1998

Habitat Associations of the Small-Mammal Community in the Grand Prairie of
North-Central Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 50(2):107-122.

734

Harrison, Frederick W.
1974

Sponges (Porifera: Spongillidae). Chapter 2 (pages 29-66) in C. W. Hart Jr., and
Samuel L. H. Fuller, Pollution Ecology of Freshwater Invertebrates. Academic
Press.

Haynes, C. Vance, Jr.
1967

Quaternary Geology of the Tule Springs Area, Clark County, Nevada. Part 1
(pages 15-104) in H. M. Wormington and Dorothy Ellis (eds.), Pleistocene
Studies in Southern Nevada. Nevada State Museum, Anthropological Papers 13.

1985

Mastodon-Bearing Springs and Late Quaternary Geochronology of the Lower
Pomme de Terre Valley, Missouri. Geological Society of America Special Paper
204.

He, Q. and D. E. Walling
1998

An Investigation of the Spatial Variability of the Grain Size Composition of
Floodplain Sediments. Hydrological Processes 12(7):1079-1094.

Hereford, Richard
1984

Climate and Ephemeral-Stream Processes: Twentieth-Century Geomorphology
and Alluvial Stratigraphy on the Little Colorado River, Arizona. Geological
Society of America Bulletin 95(6):654-668.

2002

Valley-Fill Alluviation During the Little Ice Age (ca. A.D. 1400-1880), Paria
River Basin and Southern Colorado Plateau, United States. Geological Society of
America Bulletin 114(12):1550-1563.

Hobbs, H, H. III
1991

Decapoda. Chapter 22 in James H. Thorp and Alan P. Covich (eds.), Ecology and
Classification of North American Freshwater Invertebrates. Academic Press.

735

Hobbs, Horton H. Jr. and Mike Whiteman
1991

Notes on the Burrows, Behavior, and Color of the Crayfish Fallicambarus (F.)
devastator (Decapoda: Cambaridae). The Southwestern Naturalist 36(1):127-135.

Hoel, Holly D.
1982

Goliad Formation of the South Texas Gulf Coastal Plain: Regional Genetic
Stratigraphy and Uranium Mineralization. Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of
Texas at Austin, Department of Geological Sciences.

Holley, Edward R.
1992

Sediment Transport in the Lower Guadalupe and San Antonio Rivers. Center for
Research in Water Resources, University of Texas at Austin, CRWR Technical
Memorandum 92-1.

Holliday, Vance T.
2001

Stratigraphy and Geochronology of Upper Quaternary Eolian Sand on the
Southern High Plains of Texas and New Mexico, United States. Geological
Society of America Bulletin 113(1):88-108.

Hooke, Roger LeB.
2000

Toward a Uniform Theory of Clastic Sediment Yield in Fluvial Systems.
Geological Society of America Bulletin 112(12):1778-1786.

Hudler, Dale B.
2000

Modeling Paleolandscapes in Central Texas. Unpublished PhD dissertation
(Anthropology), The University of Texas at Austin.

736

Hudler, Dale, Keith Prilliman, and Thomas Gustavson
2002

The Smith Creek Bridge Site (41 DW 270) A Terrace Site in De Witt County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin,
Studies in Archeology 35 and Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department
of Transportation, Archeology Studies Program, Report No. 17.

Hudson, Paul F. and Franklin T. Heitmuller
2003

Local- and Watershed-Scale Controls on the Spatial Variability of Natural Levee
Deposits in a Large Fine-Grained Floodplain: Lower Pánuco Basin, Mexico.
Geomorphology 56(3-4):255-269.

Hughes, Denis A. and John Lewin
1982 A Small-Scale Flood Plain. Sedimentology 29(6):891-895.

Ivester, Andrew H. and David S. Leigh
2003

Riverine Dunes on the Coastal Plain of Georgia, USA. Geomorphology
51(4):289-311.

Jacobs, Peter M., Larry T. West, and Joey N. Shaw
2002

Redoximorphic Features as Indicators of Seasonal Saturation, Lowndes County,
Georgia. Soil Science Society of America Journal 66(1):315-323.

Johnson, Forrest L. and David T. Bell
1976

Plant Biomass and Net Primary Production Along a Flood-Frequency Gradient in
the Streamside Forest. Castanea 41(2):156-165.

737

Johnson, LeRoy Jr.
1964

The Devil's Mouth Site. A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin,
Archaeology Series 6.

Johnston, John E. III, Paul V. Heinrich, John K. Lovelace, Richard P. McCulloch, and
Ronald K. Zimmerman
2000

Stratigraphic Charts of Louisiana. Louisiana Geological Survey, Folio Series 8.
Louisiana State University.

Jones, P. D., T. J. Osborn, and K. R. Briffa
2001

The Evolution of Climate Over the Last Millennium. Science 292(5517):662-667.

Jones, Robert L. and A. H. Beavers
1963 Sponge Spicules in Illinois Soils. Soil Science Society of America Proceedings
27(4):438-440.

Kaufman, Darrell S., Gary O’Brien, Jim I. Mead, Jordon Bright, and Paul Umhoefer
2002 Late Quaternary Spring-Fed Deposits of the Grand Canyon and Their Implication
for Deep Lava-Dammed Lakes. Quaternary Research 58(3):329-340.

Kesel, Richard H., K. C. Dunne, R. C. McDonald, K. R. Allison and Bradley E. Spicer
1974

Lateral Erosion and Overbank Deposition on the Mississippi River in Louisiana
Caused by 1973 Flooding. Geology 2(9):461-464.

738

Kibler, Karl W.
1994

Archeological and Geomorphological Investigations at Prehistoric Sites 41 WY
50 and 41 WY 60, Willacy County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of
Investigations 95.

Kibler, Karl W. and Ann M. Scott
2000

Archaic Hunters and Gatherers of the Balcones Canyonlands: Data Recovery at
the Cibolo Crossing Site (41 BX 377), Camp Bullis Military Reservation, Bexar
County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Reports of Investigations 126.

Klappa, Colin F.
1991

Rhizoliths in Terrestrial Carbonates: Classification, Recognition, Genesis and
Significance. Sedimentology 27(6):613-629.

Kleiss, Barbara A.
1996 Sediment Retention in a Bottomland Hardwood Wetland in Eastern Arkansas.
Wetlands 16(3):321-333.

Knox, James C.
1993

Large Increases in Flood Magnitude in Response to Modest Changes in Climate.
Nature 361(6411):430-432.

1995

Fluvial Systems Since 20,000 Years BP. Chapter 4 (pages 87-108) in K. J.
Gregory, L. Starkel, and V. R. Baker (eds.), Global Continental Palaeohydrology.
John Wiley & Sons.

Krinitzsky, E. L. and W. J. Turnbull
1967

Loess Deposits of Mississippi. Geological Society of America, Special GSA
Papers 94.
739

Krumbein, W. C.
1936 Application of Logarithmic Moments to Size Frequency Distributions of
Sediments. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 6(1):35-47.

Krumbein, W. C., and L. L. Sloss
1963

Stratigraphy and Sedimentation. (second edition) W. H. Freeman & Company.

Kurtén, Björn and Elaine Anderson
1980

Pleistocene Mammals of North America. Columbia University Press.

Laird, Kathleen R., Sherilyn C. Fritz, Kirk A. Maasch, and Brian F. Cumming
1996 Greater Drought Intensity and Frequency Before AD 1200 in the Northern Great
Plains, USA. Nature 384(6609):552-554.

Lancaster, N.
1986

Grain-Size Characteristics of Linear Dunes in the Southwestern Kalahari. Journal
of Sedimentary Petrology 56(3):395-400.

Langbein, W. B. and S. A. Schumm
1958

Yield of Sediment in Relation to Mean Annual Precipitation. Transactions,
American Geophysical Union 39(6):1076-1084.

Lecce, Scott A. and Robert T. Pavlowsky
2004

Spatial and Temporal Variations in the Grain-Size Characteristics of Historical
Flood Plain Deposits, Blue River, Wisconsin, USA. Geomorphology 61(3-4):361371.
740

Leopold, Luna B.
1994

A View of the River. Harvard University Press.

Leopold, Luna B., M. Gordon Wolman, and John P. Miller
1964

Fluvial Processes in Geomorphology. W. H. Freeman and Company.

Leschak, P. and R. E. Ferrell, Jr.
1988

Morphologies of Suspended Clay-Sized Quartz Particles in the Mississippi River
and Their Relation to Sedimentary Sources. Geology 16(4):334-336.

Lintz, Christopher, Abby Treece, and Fred Oglesby
1995

The Early Archaic Structure at the Turkey Bend Ranch Site (41 CC 112), Concho
County. Chapter 5 (pages 155-185) in James E. Bruseth and Timothy K. Perttula
(eds.), Advances in Texas Archeology, Vol. 1. Texas Historical Commission,
Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resources Management Report 5.

Logsdon, Willard T.
1967

An Ecological Survey of the Recent Land and Fresh Water Gastropods of
Kaufman County, Texas. Unpublished MA thesis, Southern Methodist University.

Lundelius, Ernest L. and Margaret S. Stevens
1970

Equus francisci Hay, a Small Stilt-Legged Horse, Middle Pleistocene of Texas.
Journal of Paleontology 44(1):148-153.

Madole, Richard F.
1994

Stratigraphic Evidence of Desertification in the West-Central Great Plains Within
the Past 1000 Yr. Geology 22(6):483-486.
741

Maher, Barbara A.
1998

Magnetic Properties of Modern Soils and Quaternary Loessic Paleosols:
Paleoclimatic Implications. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology
137(1-2):25-54.

Maher, Barbara A. and Reginald M. Taylor
1988

Formation of Ultrafine-Grained Magnetite in Soils. Nature 336(6197):368-370.

Mandel, Rolfe D.
1994

Geomorphology and Soil Stratigraphy of 41 MU 55. Chapter 4 (pages 41-50) in
Alston V. Thoms (ed.), The Valley Branch Archaeological Project: Excavations
at an Archaic Site (41 MU 55) in the Cross Timbers Uplands, North-Central
Texas. Archaeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Reports of
Investigations 15.

Mann, Stephen, Nicholas H. C. Sparks, Richard B. Frankel, Dennis A. Bazylinski, and
Holger W. Jannasch
1990

Biomineralization of Ferrimagnetic Greigite (Fe3S4) and Iron Pyrite (FeS2) in a
Magnetotactic Bacterium. Nature 343(6255):258-261.

Markewich, H. W. and William Markewich
1994

An Overview of Pleistocene and Holocene Inland Dunes in Georgia and the
Carolinas – Morphology, Distribution, Age, and Paleoclimate. U. S. Geological
Survey Bulletin 2069. United States Geological Survey.

Marks, P. L. and P. A. Harcombe
1975

Community Diversity of Coastal Plain Forests in Southern East Texas. Ecology
56(4):1004-1008.

742

Marriott, S. B.
1996

Analysis and Modelling of Overbank Deposits. Chapter 3 (pages 63-93) in
Malcolm G. Anderson, Des E. Walling and Paul D. Bates (eds.), Floodplain
Processes. John Wiley & Sons.

Martin, Charles W.
1992

Late Holocene Alluvial Chronology and Climate Change in the Central Great
Plains. Quaternary Research 37(3):315-322.

Mason, Joseph A., James B. Swinehart, Ronald J. Goble, and David B. Loope
2004

Late-Holocene Dune Activity Linked to Hydrological Drought, Nebraska Sand
Hills, USA. The Holocene 14(2):209-217.

Mear, Charles E.
1995

Quaternary Geology of the Upper Sabinal River Valley, Uvalde and Bandera
Counties, Texas. Geoarchaeology 10(6):457-480.

Megonigal, J. Patrick, William H. Conner, Steven Kroeger, and Rebecca R. Sharitz
1997

Aboveground Production in Southeastern Floodplain Forests: A Test of the
Subsidy-Stress Hypothesis. Ecology 78(2):370-384.

Millard, Andrew R. and Robert E. M. Hedges
1995

The Role of the Environment in Uranium Uptake by Buried Bone. Journal of
Archaeological Science 22(2):239-250.

Miller, Wesley L.
1982

Soil Survey of Victoria County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service, USDA, in
cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
743

Molnar, Peter
2001

Climate Change, Flooding in Arid Environments, and Erosion Rates. Geology
29(12):1071-1074.

Moody, John A., James E. Pizzuto, and Robert H. Meade
1999

Ontogeny of a Flood Plain. Geological Society of America Bulletin 111(2):291303.

Moody, John A. and Brent M. Troutman
2000

Quantitative Model of the Growth of Floodplains by Vertical Accretion. Earth
Surface Processes and Landforms 25(2):115-133.

Moore, Roger G., James T. Dureka, and Saul Aronow
1996

An Archeological Survey of Two Segments of Goose Creek (74.4 Acres) in the
City of Baytown, Harris County, Texas. Houston, Texas, Moore Archeological
Consulting, Reports of Investigations 128.

Moore, Roger G. and Joseph M. Sanchez
1993

An Archeological Survey of the Langham Creek Channel Improvement Project
(HCFCD Unit U100-00-00) Harris County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Reports of Investigations 71.

Morton, Robert A. and J. H. McGowen
1980

Modern Depositional Environments of the Texas Coast. Bureau of Economic
Geology, University of Texas at Austin, Guidebook 20.

744

Morton, Robert A., Jeffrey G. Paine, and Michael D. Blum
2000

Responses of Stable Bay-Margin and Barrier-Island Systems to Holocene SeaLevel Highstands, Western Gulf of Mexico. Journal of Sedimentary Research
70(3):478-490.

Moskowitz, Bruce M., Richard B. Frankel, and Dennis A. Bazylinski
1993

Rock Magnetic Criteria for the Detection of Biogenic Magnetite. Earth and
Planetary Science Letters 120(3-4):282-300.

Muhs, Daniel R. and Vance T. Holliday
2001

Origin of Late Quaternary Dune Fields on the Southern High Plains of Texas and
New Mexico. Geological Society of America Bulletin 113(1):75-87.

Muhs, Daniel R., Thomas W. Stafford, Scott D. Cowherd, Shannon A. Mahan, Rolf Kihl,
Paula B. Maat, Charles A. Bush, and Jennifer Nehring
1996

Origin of the Late Quaternary Dune Fields of Northeastern Colorado.
Geomorphology 17( 1-3):129-149.

Müller-Schwarze, Dietland and Lixing Sun
2003

The Beaver. Natural History of a Wetlands Engineer. Comstock Publishing
Associates (Division of Cornell University Press).

Murray, Scott, Scott Jinnette, and Frank Moseley
1976

Aquatic Ecology, Coleto Creek Project. Unpublished report prepared for Central
Power and Light Company. Copy on file with the author (used with permission).

745

Mustoe, G. E.
1981

Bacterial Oxidation of Manganese and Iron in a Modern Cold Spring. Geological
Society of America Bulletin Part 1, 92(3):147-153.

Naiman, Robert J., Carol A. Johnston, and James C. Kelley
1988

Alteration of North American Streams by Beaver. BioScience 38(11):753-762.

Nanson, Gerald C.
1986 Episodes of Vertical Accretion and Catastrophic Stripping: A Model of
Disequilibrium Flood-Plain Development. Geological Society of America Bulletin
97(12):1467-1475.

Nanson, G. C. and J. C. Croke
1992 A Genetic Classification of Floodplains. Geomorphology 4(6):459-486.

Nanson, G. C. and R. W. Young
1981

Overbank Deposition and Floodplain Formation on Small Coastal Streams of
New South Wales. Zeitschrift für Geomorphologie 25(3):332-347.

Nearing, M. A., F. F. Pruski and M. R. O’Neal
2004

Expected Climate Change Impacts on Soil Erosion Rates: A Review. Journal of
Soil and Water Conservation 59(1).

746

Nelson, Stephen T., Haraldur R. Karlsson, James B. Paces, David G. Tingey, Stephen
Ward, and Mark T. Peters
2001 Paleohydrologic Record of Spring Deposits in and Around Pleistocene Pluvial
Lake Tecopa, Southeastern California. Geological Society of America Bulletin
113(5):659-670.

Newton, Mark S. and Ethan L. Grossman
1988 Late Quaternary Chronology of Tufa Deposits, Walker Lake, Nevada. The
Journal of Geology 96(4):417-433.

Nordt, Lee C.
1992

Archaeological Geology of the Fort Hood Military Reservation Ft. Hood, Texas.
United States Army Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management Series,
Research Report 25.

2004 Late Quaternary Alluvial Stratigraphy of a Low-Order Tributary in Central Texas,
USA and Its Response to Climate and Sediment Supply. Quaternary Research
62(3):289-300.

Nordt, Lee C. and John S. Jacob
1995

Geoarcheological Investigations of Shell Midden Sites 41 LB 4, 41 CH 357, 41
CH 252, and 41 CH 70: the Wallisville Reservoir Area. Chapter 4 (pages 157184) in H. Blaine Ensor (ed.), Archeological Test Excavations at Four Shell
Midden Sites in the Wallisville Lake Project Area, Chambers and Liberty
Counties, Texas. Geo-Marine, Inc., Wallisville Lake Project Technical Series,
Reports of Investigations 2.

Noren, Anders J., Paul R. Bierman, Eric J. Steig, Andrea Lini, and John Southon
2002

Millennial-Scale Storminess Variability in the Northeastern United States During
the Holocene Epoch. Nature 419(6909):821-824.

747

Oldfield, Frank
1992

The Source of Fine-Grained "Magnetite" in Sediments. The Holocene 2(2):180182.

Otvos, Ervin G. and David M. Price
2001

Late Quaternary Inland Dunes of Southern Louisiana and Arid Climate Phases in
the Gulf Coast Region. Quaternary Research 55(2):150-158.

Patton, Peter C. and David S. Dibble
1982

Archeologic and Geomorphic Evidence for the Paleohydrologic Record of the
Pecos River in West Texas. American Journal of Science 282:97-121.

Pearson, F. J., Jr., E. Mott Davis, and M. A. Tamers
1966

University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates IV. Radiocarbon 8:453-466.

Pigati, Jeffrey S., Jay Quade, Timothy M. Shahanan, and C. Vance Haynes, Jr.
2004 Radiocarbon Dating of Minute Gastropods and New Constraints on the Timing of
Late Quaternary Spring-Discharge Deposits in Southern Arizona, USA.
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 204(1-2):33-45.

Poore, R.Z., and L. M. Wright
1999

Holocene Continental Flood Events in Marine Sediments of the Gulf of Mexico:
U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 99-566.

748

Price, W. Armstrong
1936

Reynosa Problem of South Texas, and Origin of Caliche. Pages 550-587 in
Donald C. Barton and George Sawtelle (eds.), Gulf Coast Oil Fields. A
Symposium on the Gulf Coast Cenozoic. American Association of Petroleum
Geologists [Paper reprinted from Bulletin of the American Association of
Petroleum Geologists 17(5):488-522, 1933].

1963

Physicochemical and Environmental Factors in Clay Dune Genesis. Journal of
Sedimentary Petrology 33(3):766-778.

Quade, Jay and William L. Pratt
1989

Late Wisconsin Groundwater Discharge Environments of the Southwestern Indian
Springs Valley, Southern Nevada. Quaternary Research 31(3):351-370.

Quade, Jay, Richard M. Forester, William L. Pratt, and Claire Carter
1998

Black Mats, Spring-Fed Streams, and Late-Glacial-Age Recharge in the Southern
Great Basin. Quaternary Research 49(2):129-148.

Quade, Jay, Martin D. Mifflin, William L. Pratt, William McCoy, and Lloyd Burckle
1995

Fossil Spring Deposits in the Southern Great Basin and Their Implications for
Changes in Water-Table Levels Near Yucca Mountain, Nevada, During
Quaternary Time. Geological Society of America Bulletin 107(2):213-230.

Retallack, Greg J.
1988

Field Recognition of Paleosols. Pages 1-20 in Juergen Reinhardt and Wayne R.
Sigleo (eds.), Paleosols and Weathering Through Geologic Time: Principles and
Applications. Geological Society of America Special Paper 216.

749

Ritter, Dale F.
1975 Stratigraphic Implications of Coarse-Grained Gravel Deposited as Overbank
Sediment, Southern Illinois. Journal of Geology 83(5):645-650.

Ritter, Dale F. and Donald S. Blakley
1986

Localized Catastrophic Disruption of the Gasconade River Flood Plain During the
December 1982 Flood, Southeast Missouri. Geology 14(6):472-476.

Ritter, Dale F., W. Fred Kinsey, III and Marvin E. Kauffman
1973 Overbank Sedimentation in the Delaware River Valley During the Last 6000
Years. Science 179(4071):374-375.

Robinson, Ralph L.
1979

Biosilica and Climatic Change at 41 GD 21 and 41 GD 21A. Appendix IV (pages
102-113) in Daniel E. Fox, Archaeological Investigations of Two Prehistoric Sites
on the Coleto Creek Drainage, Goliad County, Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 69.

Rogers, Robert
1997

National Register Testing at Site 41 LE 120 Sandow Mine, Lee County, Texas.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Document 970348.

Rogers, Robert, Eugene Foster, and Kathryn Reese-Taylor
1994

National Register Testing at Eight Archaeological Sites Within the Oak Hill
2,280-Acre Study Area Rusk County, Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.,
Document 930169.

750

Saucier, Roger T.
1994

Geomorphology and Quaternary Geologic History of the Lower Mississippi
Valley, Vol. 1. Vicksburg, US Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways Experiment
Station.

Saunders, Jeffrey J.
1977

Late Pleistocene Vertebrates of the Western Ozark Highland, Missouri. Illinois
State Museum, Reports of Investigations 33.

Schipke, Katherine A. and David R. Butler
1991

The Use of Dendrogeomorphic Techniques to Date a Beaver-Dam Outburst Flood
in Oglethorpe County, Georgia. The Geographical Bulletin 33(2):80-86.

Schmidly, David J.
1994

The Mammals of Texas. Revised Edition. University of Texas Press.

Schumm, S. A.
1960

The Shape of Alluvial Channels in Relation to Sediment Type. Erosion and
Sedimentation in a Semiarid Environment. United States Geological Survey,
Professional Paper 352-B.

Schumm, Stanley A.
1977

The Fluvial System. John Wiley & Sons.

751

Schumm, S. A. and R. W. Lichty
1963

Channel Widening and Flood-Plain Construction Along Cimarron River in
Southwestern Kansas. Erosion and Sedimentation in a Semiarid Environment.
United States Geological Survey, Professional Paper 352-D.

Scott, Robert F. IV
1982

Excavations at Sites 41 LK 31/32 and 41 LK 202 in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
South Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series, Vol. 8.

Self, Robert P.
1983

Petrologic Variation in Pliocene to Quaternary Gravels of Southeastern Louisiana.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 33:407-415.

Shaffer, Brian S.
1989

Late Prehistoric Faunal Subsistence on the South Texas Plains: Analysis of the
Vertebrate Faunal Remains from 41 VT 66, Victoria County. Plains
Anthropologist 34-124 (Part 1):171-178.

Shankman, David
1993

Channel Migration and Vegetation Patterns in the Southeastern Coastal Plain.
Conservation Biology 7(1):176-183.

Sharitz, Rebecca R. and William J. Mitsch
1993 Southern Floodplain Forests. Chapter 8 (pages 311-372) in William H. Martin,
Stephen G. Boyce, and Arthur C. Echternacht (eds.), Biodiversity of the
Southeastern United States. Lowland Terrestrial Communities. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
752

Shelford, V. E.
1954

Some Lower Mississippi Valley Flood Plain Biotic Communities; Their Age and
Elevation. Ecology 35(2):126-142.

Skokan, Elizabeth A., Eugene R. Foster, Robert M. Rogers, David L. Sherman, and
Michael A. Nash
1997

Cultural Resources Investigations of the Oak Hill D-III Permit Area Rusk County,
Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Document 940002.

Snyder, Grant L.
1995

Geology and Hydrogeology of Naval Air Station Chase Field and Naval Auxiliary
Landing Field Goliad, Bee and Goliad Counties, Texas. U. S. Geological Survey,
Water-Resources Investigations Report 95-4038.

Solis I., Raul F.
1981

Upper Tertiary and Quaternary Depositional Systems, Central Coastal Plain,
Texas. Regional Geology of the Coastal Aquifer and Potential Liquid-Waste
Repositories. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas at Austin,
Report of Investigations 108.

Sorenson, Raymond P.
1975

Clay Mineralogy of Suspended-Load Transport, Guadalupe River, Texas.
Unpublished MA thesis, University of Texas at Austin.

Sorrow, William M.
1968a The Devil’s Mouth Site: The Third Season – 1967. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project 14, University of Texas at Austin.
1968b Test Excavations at the Nopal Terrace Site: Val Verde County, Texas. Papers of
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 15, University of Texas at Austin.
753

Stene, Larry P.
1980

Observations on Lateral and Overbank Deposition – Evidence from Holocene
Terraces, Southwestern Alberta. Geology 8(7):314-317.

Stevenson, Marc G.
1985

The Formation of Artifact Assemblages at Workshop/Habitation Sites: Models
from Peace Point in Northern Alberta. American Antiquity 50(1):63-81.

Stiles, Cynthia A., Claudia I. Mora, and Steven G. Driese
2001 Pedogenic Iron-Manganese Nodules in Vertisols:
Paleoprecipitation? Geology 29(10):943-946.

A

New

Proxy

for

Takac, Paul R. and Wulf A. Gose
1998

Magnetic Susceptibility of Sediments. Chapter 28 in Michael B. Collins
(assembler, editor), Wilson-Leonard An 11,000-Year Archeological Record of
Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Vol. IV: Archeological Features and
Technical Analyses. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of
Texas at Austin, Studies in Archeology 31 and Environmental Affairs Division,
Texas Department of Transportation, Archeology Studies Program, Report 10.

Thoms, Alston V.
1992 Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene Regional Land Use Patterns: A Perspective
from the Preliminary Results of Archaeological Studies at the Richard Beene Site,
41 BX 831, Lower Medina River, South Texas. In Rolfe D. Mandel and S.
Christopher Caran (eds.), Guidebook, 10th Annual Meeting, South-Central Friends
of the Pleistocene, Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 4
(no pagination).

754

Tite, M. S. and R. E. Linington
1975

Effect of Climate on the Magnetic Susceptibility of Soils. Nature 256(5518):565566.

Törnqvist, Torbjörn E. and John S. Bridge
2002

Spatial Variation of Overbank Aggradation Rate and Its Influence on Avulsion
Frequency. Sedimentology 49(5):891-905.

Treece, Abby C., Christopher Lintz, W. Nicholas Trierweiler, J. Michael Quigg, and
Kevin A. Miller
1993

Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie Reservoir, Concho, Coleman,
and Runnels Counties, Texas. Vol. III, Data Recovery Results from Non-Ceramic
Sites. Mariah Associates, Inc. Technical Report 346-III.

Tucker, Gregory E. and Rudy Slingerland
1997

Drainage Basin Responses to Climate Change. Water Resources Research
33(8):2031-2047.

Tucker, Gordon C., Jr.
1985

Archaeological Investigations at 48 SW 2302, A Sand Dune Site in Southwestern
Wyoming. Plains Anthropologist 30-110(Part 1):305-324.

Van Siclen, DeWitt C.
1991 Surficial Geology of the Houston Area: An Offlapping Series of Pleistocene (&
Pliocene?) Highest-Sealevel Fluviodeltaic Sequences. Transactions of the Gulf
Coast Association of Geological Societies 41:651-666.

755

Vermersch, Thomas G.
1992

Lizards and Turtles of South-Central Texas. Austin, Eakin Press.

Visher, Glenn S.
1969

Grain Size Distributions and Depositional Processes. Journal of Sedimentary
Petrology 39(3):1074-1106.

Vittori, Eutizio and Giancarlo Ventura
1995 Grain Size of Fluvial Deposits and Late Quaternary Climate: A Case Study in the
Po River Valley (Italy). Geology 23(8):735-738.

Walker, Karen J., Frank W. Stapor, Jr., and William H. Marquardt
1995

Archaeological Evidence for a 1750-1450 BP Higher-Than-Present Sea Level
Along Florida’s Gulf Coast. Chapter 30 (pages 205-218) in Charles W. Finkl, Jr.
(ed.), Holocene Cycles: Climate, Sea Levels, and Sedimentation. Journal of
Coastal Research Special Issue 17.

Walling, D. E. and Q. He
1998 The Spatial Variability of Overbank Sedimentation on River Floodplains.
Geomorphology 24(2-3):209-223.

Walling, D. E., Q. He and A. P. Nicholas
1996

Floodplains as Suspended Sediment Sinks. Chapter 12 (pages 399-440) in
Malcolm G. Anderson, Des E. Walling and Paul D. Bates (eds.), Floodplain
Processes. John Wiley & Sons.

756

Walling, D. E., P. N. Owens and G. J. L. Leeks
1997

The Characteristics of Overbank Deposits Associated With a Major Flood Event
in the Catchment of the River Ouse, Yorkshire, UK. Catena 31(1-2):53-75.

Walling, D. E., M. R. Pearl, F. Oldfield, and R. Thompson
1979

Suspended Sediment Sources Identified by Magnetic Measurements. Nature
281(5727):110-113.

Walling, D. E., T. A. Quine and Q. He
1992

Investigating Contemporary Rates of Floodplain Sedimentation. Chapter 7 (pages
165-184) in P. A. Carling and G. E. Petts (eds.), Lowland Floodplain Rivers.
Geomorphological Perspectives. John Wiley & Sons.

Walling, D. E. and B. W. Webb
1983

Patterns of Sediment Yield. Chapter 4 (pages 69-100) in K. J. Gregory (ed.),
Background to Palaeohydrology. A Perspective. John Wiley & Sons.

Waters, Michael R.
1985

Late Quaternary Alluvial Stratigraphy of Whitewater Draw, Arizona: Implications
for Regional Correlation of Fluvial Deposits of the American Southwest. Geology
13(10):705-708.

1992

Principles of Geoarchaeology. A North American Perspective. University of
Arizona Press.

Waters, Michael R. and C. Vance Haynes
2001 Late Quaternary Arroyo Formation and Climate Change in the American
Southwest. Geology 29(5):399-402.

757

Waters, Michael R. and Lee C. Nordt
1995 Late Quaternary Floodplain History of the Brazos River in East-Central Texas.
Quaternary Research 43(3):311-319.

Weinstein, Richard A.
1992

Archaeology and Paleogeography of the Lower Guadalupe River/San Antonio
Bay Region. Cultural Resources Investigations Along the Channel to Victoria,
Calhoun and Victoria Counties, Texas. Coastal Environments, Inc., prepared for
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District.

Weston, D. G.
2004 The Influence of Waterlogging and Variations in Pedology and Ignition Upon
Resultant Susceptibilities: a Series of Laboratory Reconstructions. Archaeological
Prospection 11(2):107-120.

Wharton, Charles H.
1980 Values and Functions of Bottomland Hardwoods. Transactions of the Forty-Fifth
American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference, pp. 341-353. Wildlife
Management Institute, Washington, D. C.

Wharton, Charles H., Victor W. Lambour, John Newsom, Parley V. Winger, L. L.
Gaddy, and Rudy Mancke
1981

The Fauna of Bottomland Hardwoods in Southeastern United States. Chapter 4
(pages 87-160) in J. R. Clark and J. Benforado (eds.), Wetlands of Bottomland
Hardwood Forests. Proceedings of a Workshop on Bottomland Hardwood Forest
Wetlands of the Southeastern United States. Developments in Agricultural and
Managed-Forest Ecology 11. Elsevier Scientific Publishing Company.

758

White, G. Norman and J. B. Dixon
1996

Iron and Manganese Distribution in Nodules from a Young Texas Vertisol. Soil
Science Society of America Journal 60(4):1254-1262.

Wilkins, Kenneth T. and David R. Broussard
2000 Small Mammals of the Post Oak Savannah in East-Central Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science 52(3):201-212.

Wilson, Lee
1973

Variations in Mean Annual Sediment Yield as a Function of Mean Annual
Precipitation. American Journal of Science 273(4):335-349.

Winker, Charles D.
1979

Late Pleistocene Fluvial-Deltaic Deposition, Texas Coastal Plain and Shelf.
Unpublished MA thesis, University of Texas at Austin.

Winsborough, Barbara
1992 Diatom Paleoecology of the Berger Bluff Archaeological Site. Unpublished
manuscript (12 pages) on file with the author.

Wistendahl, Warren A.
1958

The Flood Plain of the Raritan River, New Jersey. Ecological Monographs
28(2):129-153.

Wolman, M. Gordon and Luna B. Leopold
1957

River Flood Plains: Some Observations on Their Formation. U. S. Geological
Survey Professional Paper 282-C. United States Geological Survey.
759

Wood, Carl E. and Judith K. Wood
1988

Woody Vegetation of the Frio River Riparian Forest, Texas. The Texas Journal of
Science 40(3):309-321.

1989

Riparian Forests of the Leona and Sabinal Rivers. The Texas Journal of Science
41(4):395-411.

Wright, V. Paul and Maurince E. Tucker
1991

Calcretes: An Introduction. Pages 1-22 in V. Paul Wright and Maurice E. Tucker
(eds.), Calcretes. Reprint Series Vol. 2 of the International Association of
Sedimentologists. Blackwell Scientific Publications.

Wyckoff, Don G.
1992

The Alluvial Deposits and Sequence. Chapter 5 (pages 31-54) in Don G.
Wyckoff, Brian J. Carter, Peggy Flynn, Larry D. Martin, Branley A. Branson, and
James L. Theler, Interdisciplinary Studies of the Hajny Mammoth Site, Dewey
County, Oklahoma. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, University of Oklahoma,
Studies of Oklahoma’s Past 17.

Wyckoff, Don G., James L. Theler, and Brian J. Carter
1997

Southern Plains Gastropods: Modern Occurrences, Prehistoric Implications.
Final Report to the National Geographic Society, Grant #5477-95.

Zheng, Hongbo, Frank Oldfield, Lizhong Yu, John Shaw, and Zisheng An
1991

The Magnetic Properties of Particle-Sized Samples from the Luo Chuan Loess
Section: Evidence for Pedogenesis. Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors
68(3-4):250-258.

760

MAPS
Geologic Atlas of Texas (Virgil E. Barnes, Project Director)
1975

Beeville-Bay City Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas at
Austin.

761

