Chapter 10: Vertebrate Fauna

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW
Animal bone from the bench deposits at Berger Bluff is, for the most part,
remarkably well preserved, especially in comparison to other sites of similar age.
Although most of the bone is mechanically fragmented and complete elements are
somewhat uncommon, on the whole it shows limited evidence of chemical dissolution
and hardly any of the kind of splitting and cracking to be expected from surface exposure
and weathering. Fluvial abrasion also seems to be absent. Figure 10.1 is provided to
illustrate just how well-preserved and small some of the elements can be in this
assemblage. The specimen is a complete dorsal fin spine from a very small unidentified
fish; the bone is reddish-brown, slightly glossy, with no corrosion or etching.

Nearly all the bone from the bench deposits comes from microvertebrates. The
largest identifiable bone is a fragment of a raccoon humerus (Fig. 4.57). Otherwise the
bone comes from a wide variety of small animals. There are mammals (insectivores,
rodents, and lagomorphs, as well as two raccoon elements), amphibians, reptiles (turtles,
snakes, lizards), birds, and fish. There are almost no medium or large mammals, and
except for a possible specimen of giant tortoise, the largest animal represented is about 13
kg or less in live body weight; most of the animals probably weighed 300-400 g or less.
Much of the assemblage represents what I will term a reclusive fauna, a collection of
small, cryptic, inconspicuous animals. I believe that the animal bone in the bench
deposits derives both from cultural and noncultural sources, but the emphasis in this
1351

chapter will mostly be on vertebrates as paleoenvironmental indicators. One osseous
artifact (a small polished pin probably made of antler) is present in the collection.

Figure 10.1. Dorsal Fin Spine of Unidentified Fish. This complete fin spine from a very
small unidentified minnow, shiner, or darter-sized fish (or juvenile of a
larger species) is shown to demonstrate that the best-preserved portion of the
bone assemblage is nearly as pristine as fresh bone. The uppermost object is
the tip of a common household straight pin, shown for comparison. Ambient
bone from coarse fraction of bulk matrix sample, N109 E96 (92.35-92.30
m); articular end at upper right.

With one exception (possible Gopherus hexagonatus) there are no known extinct
vertebrate species in the bench deposits, but there are several species that are now absent
from the local area due to small-scale range shifts and environmental change during the
course of the Holocene (Table 10.1). I believe the near absence of extinct species is a
function of the size of the animals, not the age of the deposits (although that possibility
1352

should also be considered). Vertebrate extinctions near the end of the Pleistocene were
mostly confined to larger animals [none of the disappearing small species listed by
Graham and Lundelius (1995:Table 11.1) were present in the catchment area in any
case], and these are the taxa that are not present in the bench deposits. The modern
vertebrate fauna lacks several species that are present in the bone assemblage from the
bench, and there are many species in the modern fauna (mostly larger-sized mammals,
birds, fish and snakes) that are not present in the sample from the bench. The same can be
said of the vertebrate assemblage from the upper deposits (Flynn 1983:Table 1).
There are two basic categories of bone from the bench deposits:
1) Ambient bone is represented by scattered bone fragments distributed thinly throughout
the sediments in nearly every area that was sampled. Some of these show evidence of
human alteration (heat discoloration or rare cutmarks) and probably have been
contributed by human activity, but most probably represent background noise –
animals that died on or near the site from natural causes.
2) The hearth deposit is a spatially distinct, highly concentrated deposit of microfauna
closely associated with Feature 5, a small fire hearth built directly on the floodplain
surface (see Chapter 3). The hearth deposit is believed to be entirely the result of
human activity and all the bone in it is believed to be cultural in origin. Both
categories will be discussed in detail later in this chapter, and I will discuss the
possible origin of the deposit at some length, because identifying the responsible
predator helps clarify what kinds of biases or filtering mechanisms might have
structured the taxonomic composition of the deposit.

1353

Table 10.1. Vertebrate Taxa Recovered From the Bench Deposits.
Taxa Associated With Feature 5 (“Hearth Deposit”)
Mammals
Scalopus aquaticus
Chaetodipus cf. C. hispidus
Cryptotis parva
Dipodomys cf. D. compactus or D. ordii
Geomys sp. (G. attwateri or G. personatus)
Sylvilagus sp. (S. floridanus or S. audubonii)
Neotoma sp. (N. floridana or N. micropus)
Peromyscus sp. (P. maniculatus or P. leucopus)
Onychomys leucogaster
Microtus ochrogaster or Pitymys pinetorum
Amphibians
Ambystoma texanum
Rana cf. R. berlandieri
cf. Hylidae or Microhylidae
Bufo sp. (B. americanus or B. houstonensis)
Snakes
cf. Rhinocheilus lecontei
Colubrinae
Natricinae

Eastern mole
Pocket mouse, cf. Hispid
Least shrew
Gulf Coast or Ord’s kangaroo rat
Pocket gopher, Attwater’s or Texas
Cottontail rabbit, eastern or desert
Woodrat, eastern or southern Plains
Mouse, deer or white-footed
Northern grasshopper mouse
Prairie or pine vole
Smallmouthed salamander
Leopard frog, cf. Rio Grande
Cricket, chorus, treefrogs,
narrowmouth toads
Toad, American or Houston
cf. Longnose snake
cf. Diadophis punctatus 1
either Storeria dekayi or Virginia
striatula 2
Pit vipers

Viperidae, unidentified

Lizards, unidentified (small, possibly including subadult Sceloperus)
Birds, unidentified passerine, small
Fish
unidentified (small, perch-sized, mature, possibly multiple species)

[Table 10.1 continued on next page]

1354

{Table 10.1, continued from previous page]
Taxa Found Elsewhere in the Bench But Not Represented in the Hearth Deposit
Mammals
cf. Lepus californicus
Sigmodon hispidus
Procyon lotor
Unidentified large (deer-sized?) mammal

Black-tailed jackrabbit
Hispid cotton rat
Raccoon

Amphibians
Rana catesbeiana

Bullfrog

Reptiles
cf. Gopherus hexagonatus (?)
Emydidae
Kinosternidae
Nerodia sp.
Virginia striatula (definite ID)

Extinct large tortoise (?) 3
Unidentified cooter or slider
Unidentified musk or mud turtle
Water snake, unidentified
Rough earth snake

Fish
Lepisosteus sp.

Gar, species unknown

Notes: Lagomorphs in the hearth and non-hearth samples were identified by different
analysts.
1
2
3

The Colubrinae are a subfamily of the Colubridae, small burrowing snakes. There are
four vertebrae resembling Diadophis punctatus, ringneck snake
The Natricinae are another subfamily of the Colubridae. Two vertebrae resemble
either Storeria dekayi, Texas brown snake, or Virginia striatula, rough earth snake
Tentative identification based on a very small carapace fragment
In the following pages, I will review the modern and Rancholabrean faunas of the

surrounding region, discuss some properties that apply to ambient and hearth-related
bone alike (weathering, staining, fragmentation and heat alteration), discuss
characteristics of the ambient and hearth-related assemblages (taxonomy, estimates of
individuals, presence of juveniles, and so forth), and then present species accounts.
1355

CONTEMPORARY LOCAL FAUNA
Baseline ecological assessments of Coleto Creek Reservoir were done in 1975-76.
The mammal, amphibian, reptile, and fish species recorded by Espey, Huston &
Associates are listed in Tables 10.2, 10.3, and 10.4. There is also a long list of 121 bird
species (Espey, Huston & Associates 1976:Table 3-7), but I have not reproduced it here.
Altogether, 18 mammal, 33 herpetofaunal, 29 fish, and 121 bird species were recorded,
for a total of 201 vertebrate species. However, the pre-inundation studies only lasted
about nine months and were mostly limited to land included in the reservoir boundaries.
It seems likely that many more than 201 species potentially might occur in the Berger
Bluff catchment (which extends upstream well beyond the reservoir limits) or in the
foraging radius of any predator based nearby. In an attempt to measure the size and
composition of the contemporary local fauna, I have compiled Tables 10.5, 10.6, and
10.7 from published and unpublished literature. These show additional species that were
not recorded in the reservoir studies but that might reasonably be expected to occur in the
area and either occupy or range into the catchment and surrounding area. “Local” is very
loosely defined as Goliad County plus any of the adjoining counties. Because this part of
Texas is not especially well sampled, I have been relatively unconservative in admitting
species to the lists. As a result of this exercise 31 additional mammal species, 63
additional herpetofaunal species, and 27 additional fish species that are known to occur in
the region can be nominated as potential contemporary residents of the catchment area.
There are published Christmas bird count lists from the Victoria area that could be used
to augment the list of birds as well, and this would probably add a large number of bird
species (including migratory species).
1356

Table 10.2. Contemporary Mammals From Coleto Creek Reservoir.

Marsupials
Didelphis marsupialis

opossum

Insectivores
Scalopus aquaticus
Cryptotis parva

eastern mole
least shrew

Carnivores
Procyon lotor
Mustela vison
Mephitis mephitis
Urocyon cinereoargenteus
Canis latrans

raccoon
mink
striped skunk
gray fox
coyote

Rodents
Sciurus niger
Geomys bursarius
Baiomys taylori
Peromyscus leucopus
Sigmodon hispidus
Myocastor coypus

fox squirrel
Plains pocket gopher*
Northern pygmy mouse
white-footed mouse
hispid cotton rat
nutria**

Lagomorphs
Lepus californicus
Sylvilagus floridanus

Black-tailed jackrabbit
eastern cottontail rabbit

Artiodactyls
Odocoileus virginianus

white-tailed deer

Xernartha
Dasypus novemcinctus

nine-banded armadillo**

* Probably G. attwateri or G. personatus in current taxonomy
** Introduced species
*** Historic immigrant
Species: 18
Source: Pre-inundation survey, Espey, Huston & Associates (1976:Table 3-14).
1357

Table 10.3. Contemporary Herpetofauna From Coleto Creek Reservoir.
Toads and frogs
Scaphiopus holbrooki
Acris crepitans
Hyla cinerea
Hyla squirella
Hyla versicolor
Pseudacris streckeri
Pseudacris triseriata
Bufo valliceps
Rana catesbeiana
Rana utricularia
Gastrophryne olivacea

eastern spadefoot
northern cricket frog
green treefrog
squirrel treefrog
gray treefrog
Strecker’s chorus frog
striped chorus frog
Gulf coast toad
bullfrog
southern leopard frog [= R. sphenocephala?]
Great Plains narrowmouth toad

Turtles
Kinosternon subrubrum
Trachemys scripta
Terrapene carolina
Terrapene ornata
Trionyx sp.

eastern mud turtle
red-eared slider [=Chrysemys scripta]
eastern box turtle
western box turtle
softshell turtles*

Anoles, lizards and snakes
Anolis carolinensis
Sceloporus olivaceus
Sceloporus undulatus
Scincella lateralis
Cnemidophorus sexlineatus
Coluber constrictor
Elaphe obsoleta
Heterodon platyrhinos
Lampropeltis calligaster
Masticophis flagellum
Nerodia erythrogaster
Nerodia fasciata
Nerodia rhombifera
Opheodrys aestivus
Pituophis melanoleucus
Thamnophis proximus
Agkistrodon piscivorus

green anole
Texas spiny lizard
northern fence lizard
ground skink [= Leiolopisma laterale]
six-lined racerunner
racer
rat snake
eastern hognose snake
prairie kingsnake
coachwhip
blotched water snake [=Natrix erythrogaster]
broad-banded water snake [=Natrix fasciata]
diamondback water snake [=Natrix rhombifera]
rough green snake
bullsnake
western ribbon snake
cottonmouth

Species: 33
* Probably Trionyx spiniferus guadalupensis (Guadalupe spiny softshell)
Source: Pre-inundation survey, Espey, Huston & Associates (1976:Table 3-6)
1358

Table 10.4. Contemporary (Pre-Inundation) Fish From Coleto Creek.

Cyprinidae
Campostoma anomalum
Cyprinella lutrensis [=Notropis lutrensis]
Cyprinella venusta [=Notropis venustus]
Notropis buchanani
Notropis stramineus
Opsopoeodus emiliae [=Notropis emiliae]
Pimephales vigilax

central stoneroller
red shiner
blacktail shiner
ghost shiner
sand shiner
pugnose minnow
bullhead minnow

Catostomidae
Carpiodes carpio
Ictiobus bubalus

river carpsucker
smallmouth buffalo

Ictaluridae
Ictalurus punctatus
Noturus gyrinus

channel catfish
tadpole madtom

Cyprinodontidae
Cyprinodon variegatus
Fundulus olivaceus

sheepshead minnow*
blackspotted topminnow

Poeciliidae
Gambusia affinis
Poecilia latipinna

western mosquitofish
sailfin molly*

Atherinidae
Menidia beryllina

inland silverside*

Mugilidae
Mugil cephalus

striped mullet*

[continued on next page]

1359

[Table 10.4, continued from previous page]
Centrarchidae
Lepomis auritus
Lepomis cyanellus
Lepomis gulosus
Lepomis humilis
Lepomis macrochirus
Lepomis megalotis
Lepomis microlophus
Lepomis punctatus
Micropterus punctulatus
Pomoxis annularis

redbreast sunfish**
green sunfish
warmouth
orangespotted sunfish
bluegill
longear sunfish
redear sunfish
spotted sunfish
spotted bass
white crappie

Cichlidae
Cichlasoma cyanoguttatum

Rio Grande cichlid**

Percidae
Etheostoma gracile

slough darter

Species: 29
* Estuarine or brackish water species.
** Locally introduced species.
Source: Pre-inundation survey (Murray, Jinnette and Moseley 1976:Tables 16-19).
Current taxonomy is used; names in brackets are those from the original source.

The Christmas bird counts for Victoria for 1978-1997 have a mean of about 115
species (range, 91-159; source: American Birds, 1978-93, National Audubon Society
Field Notes, 1994-97). Table 10.8 summarizes the numbers and suggests that the
contemporary local fauna includes well over 319 vertebrate species. Birds represent about
38% of the species (and would rank even higher if regional bird counts had been
included), herpetofauna accounts for 29%, fish 18%, and mammals 15% of the species.
For the Guadalupe Delta Wildlife Management Area, 308 bird species have been
recorded (Texas Parks and Wildlife n. d.).
1360

If vertebrate species richness was comparable or even higher during the Younger
Dryas and early Holocene, there may well have been some 300-350 vertebrate species
locally present, especially if extinct species or species with known range shifts are also
considered. Table 10.9 lists a dozen and a half extinct species (mostly mammals) that
might possibly have been present during the Younger Dryas. The list is generalized from
paleontological research throughout Texas, since very little is known about terminal
Pleistocene faunas in the immediate area (the number of horse species is uncertain, but
there were apparently several). The list is short because most Pleistocene extinctions
occurred by about 11,400-10,800 RCYBP according to Fiedel and Haynes (2004:123124) or by 10,400 RCYBP according to Beck (1996:Appendix). Cuban sloths and
dwarfed mammoths on Wrangel Island and the Channel Islands in the Pacific are
exceptions surviving well onto the Holocene. Table 10.10 shows some of the presumed
Rancholabrean faunas that have actually been recovered in nearby areas (all lack
chronometric control). Only one of the extinct species on this list has been found at
Berger Bluff, but they clearly were present in the area at some time in the past.

The species list from the bench deposits (Table 10.1) indicates there are at least
30 species present in the archeological sample (and probably more, but with uncertainty
resulting from difficulty in identification). If there were about 350 vertebrate species
present in the local area in the Younger Dryas, then these 30 or more species represent a
sample of only about 9% of the local vertebrates. The conclusion that this represents a
very incomplete sample of the regional vertebrate fauna is inescapable; but is it also a
biased sample? It is indisputably size-biased, since the animals are nearly all
microvertebrates, but is it also biased with respect to the habitats in which the animals
originated? I will discuss these topics in some detail as this chapter unfolds.
1361

Table 10.5. Additional Regionally Recorded Mammals.

Note: below are listed animals recorded not in the pre-inundation baseline survey, but in
the surrounding counties, and that might reasonably be expected to occur in the area
(based chiefly on Schmidly 2004). Extinct, domestic, and introduced species are not
included.
Blarina carolinensis
Pipistrellus subflavus
Lasiurus borealis
Lasiurus cinereus
Lasiurus intermedius
Nycticeius humeralis
Tadarida brasiliensis
Spermophilus tridecemlineatus
Geomys attwateri
Perognathus merriami
Sciurus carolinensis
Chaetodipus hispidus
Dipodomys compactus
Reithrodontomys fulvescens
Peromyscus maniculatus
Onychomys leucogaster
Neotoma floridana
Neotoma micropus
Canis rufus
Bassariscus astutus
Mustela frenata
Mustela vison
Taxidea taxus
Spilogale putorius
Conepatus leuconotus
Lutra canadensis
Felis concolor
Lynx rufus
Tayassu tajacu
Antilocapra americana
Bison bison

southern short-tailed shrew
eastern pipistrelle
eastern red bat
hoary bat
northern yellow bat
evening bat
Brazilian free-tailed bat
thirteen-lined ground squirrel
Attwater’s pocket gopher
Merriam’s pocket mouse
eastern gray squirrel
hispid pocket mouse
Gulf coast kangaroo rat
fulvous harvest mouse
deer mouse
northern grasshopper mouse
eastern woodrat
southern Plains woodrat
red wolf
ringtail
long-tailed weasel
mink
badger
eastern spotted skunk
eastern hog-nosed skunk
river otter
mountain lion
bobcat
collared peccary
pronghorn
bison

Species: 31

1362

Table 10.6. Additional Regionally Recorded Herpetofauna.
Note: below are herpetofauna recorded not in the pre-inundation baseline survey, but in
the surrounding counties, and that might reasonably be expected to occur in the area
(based chiefly on Dixon 1987 and Werler and Dixon 2000).
Siren intermedia nettingi
Ambystoma texanum
Ambystoma tigrinum tigrinum
Notophthalmus meridionalis
Notophthalmus viridescens louisianensis
Hypopachus variolosus
Scaphiopus couchi
Pseudacris clarki
Bufo debilis debilis
Bufo speciosus
Bufo woodhousei velatus
Rana berlandieri
Gastrophryne carolinensis
Alligator mississippiensis
Chelydra serpentina serpentina
Kinosternon flavescens flavescens
Graptemys caglei
Pseudemys texana
Gopherus berlandieri
Alligator mississippiensis
Holbrookia lacerata subcaudalis
Holbrookia propinqua propinqua
Phrynosoma cornutum
Sceloporus variabilis marmoratus
Eumeces fasciatus
Eumeces laticeps
Eumeces septrionalis obtusirostris
Cnemidophorus gularis gularis
Ophisaurus attenuatus
Leptotyphlops dulcis dulcis
Leptotyphlops dulcis dissectus
Arizona elegans arenicola
Arizona elegans elegans
Arizona elegans philipi
Coluber constrictor anthicus
Coluber constrictor etheridgei
Coluber constrictor flaviventris
Coluber constrictor oaxaca

western lesser siren
smallmouth salamander
eastern tiger salamander
black-spotted newt
central newt
sheep frog
Couch’s spadefoot
spotted chorus frog
eastern green toad
Texas toad
Woodhouse’s toad
Rio Grande leopard frog
eastern narrowmouth toad
alligator
common snapping turtle
yellow mud turtle
Cagle’s map turtle
Texas river cooter
Texas tortoise
American alligator
southern earless lizard
keeled earless lizard
Texas horned lizard
rosebelly lizard
five-lined skink
broadhead skink
southern prairie skink
Texas spotted whiptail
western slender glass lizard
Plains blind snake
New Mexico blind snake
Texas glossy snake
Kansas glossy snake
painted desert glossy snake
buttermilk racer
tan racer
eastern yellow-bellied racer
Mexican racer

[continued on next page]
1363

[Table 10.6, continued from previous page]
Coluber constrictor priapus
Drymarchon corais erebennus
Elaphe guttata guttata
Elaphe guttata emoryi
Elaphe guttata meahllmorum
Elaphe obsoleta lindheimeri
Farancia abacura reinwardti
Heterodon nasicus gloydi
Heterodon platirhinos
Lampropeltis calligaster calligaster
Lampropeltis getula splendida
Lampropeltis getula holbrooki
Masticophis flagellum flagellum
Masticophis flagellum testaceus
Masticophis schotti ruthveni
Masticophis taeniatus schotti
Nerodia erythrogaster flavigaster
Nerodia erythrogaster transversa
Nerodia fasciata confluens
Nerodia rhombifer rhombifer
Opheodrys aestivus
Pituophis catenifer sayi
Regina grahami
Rhinocheilus lecontei tessellatus
Salvadora grahamiae lineata
Storeria dekayi limnetes
Storeria dekayi texana
Tantilla gracilis
Tantilla nigriceps fumiceps
Thamnophis marcianus marcianus
Thamnophis proximus diabolicus
Thamnophis proximus proximus
Thamnophis proximus orarius
Thamnophis proximus rubrilineatus
Thamnophis sirtalis sirtalis
Tropidoclonion lineatum
Virginia striatula
Micrurus fulvus tener
Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix
Agkistrodon contortrix laticinctus
Crotalus atrox
Crotalus horridus atricaudatus

southern black racer
Texas indigo snake
corn snake
Great Plains rat snake
southwestern rat snake
Texas rat snake
western mud snake
dusky hognose snake
eastern hog-nosed snake
prairie king snake
desert king snake
speckled king snake
eastern coachwhip
western coachwhip
Ruthven’s whipsnake
Schott’s whipsnake
yellow-bellied water snake
blotched water snake
broad-banded water snake
diamond-backed water snake
rough green snake
bull snake
Graham’s crayfish snake
Texas longnose snake
Texas patchnose snake
marsh brown snake
Texas brown snake
flat-headed snake
Texas blackhead snake
checkered garter snake
arid land ribbon snake
western ribbon snake
Gulf coast ribbon snake
red-striped ribbon snake
eastern garter snake
lined snake
rough earth snake
Texas coral snake
southern copperhead
broad-banded copperhead
western diamondback rattlesnake
canebrake rattlesnake

Species: 61
Species + subspecies: 80
1364

Table 10.7. Additional Regionally Recorded Fish.
Note: below are additional fish species recorded from the Guadalupe River at Victoria
and Seguin (1949-1989) in surveys commissioned by Dupont, species that conceivably
could have been found in the lower part of Coleto Creek, or could have been obtained by
a wide-ranging predator. Because they are part of the regional fauna, they are listed here.
Ambloplites rupestris
Ameiurus natalis [=Ictalurus natalis]
Anchoa mitchilli
Astyanax mexicanus
Atractosteus spatula [=Lepisosteus spatula]
Cyprinus carpio
Dorosoma cepedianum
Dorosoma petenense
Etheostoma chlorosomum
Fundulus chrysotus
Fundulus notatus
Gobionellus boleosoma
Ictalurus furcatus
Lepisosteus oculatus
Macrhybopsis aestivalis [=Hybopsis aestivalis]
Micropterus salmoides
Micropterus treculi
Morone chrysops
Moxostoma congestum
Notemigonus crysoleucas
Notropis amabilis
Notropis volucellus
Percina carbonaria [= P. caprodes carbonaria]
Percina macrolepida
Pomoxis nigromaculatus
Pylodictis olivaris
Trinectes maculatus

rock bass**
yellow bullhead
bay anchovy*
Mexican tetra**
alligator gar
common carp**
gizzard shad*
threadfin shad
bluntnose darter
golden topminnow
blackstripe topminnow
freshwater goby, darter goby*
blue catfish
spotted gar
speckled chub
largemouth bass
Guadalupe bass
white bass
gray redhorse
golden shiner
Texas shiner
mimic shiner
Texas logperch
bigscale logperch
black crappie
flathead catfish
hogchoker*

Species: 27
* Estuarine or brackish water species.
** Locally introduced species.
Source: Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia (1991:Table V-2). Current
taxonomy is used; names in brackets are those from the original source.
1365

Table 10.8. Species Richness of Contemporary Vertebrate Fauna.

Species recorded in pre-inundation studies
Number of
species

Table

mammals
herpetofauna
fish
birds

18
33
29
121

10.2
10.3
10.4
not listed

subtotal:

201

Additional regionally recorded species
Number of
species

Table

mammals
herptetofauna
fish
birds

31
61
27
?

10.5
10.6
10.7
not listed

subtotal:
grand total:

119+
320+

1366

Table 10.9. Extinct Species Potentially Present in the Region.

Bison antiquus
Camelops hesternus
Canis dirus
Coragyps occidentalis
Dasypus bellus
Equus spp.
Geochelone crassiscutata?
Geochelone wilsoni
Geococcyx californicus conklingi
Gopherus hexagonatus
Mammut americanum
Mammuthus columbi
Megalonyx jeffersonii?
Panthera leo atrox
Paramylodon harlani
Platygonus compressus
Smilodon fatalis
Tapirus veroensis

extinct bison
yesterday’s camel
dire wolf
western vulture
giant armadillo
several species of extinct horse
giant tortoise
Wilson’s tortoise
extinct roadrunner
extinct tortoise
American mastodont
Columbian mammoth
Jefferson’s ground sloth
American lion
Harlan’s ground sloth
flat-headed peccary
saber-toothed tiger
Vero tapir

Parameters for listing:
1. Extinct species
2. Not yet extinct at 11,000-10,000 RCYBP
3. Plausibly present on central Gulf coastal plain

1367

Table 10.10. Fossil Species From Nearby Undated Rancholabrean Sites.
Morhiss Site (Victoria County)
Alligator sp.
Antilocapra sp.
Bison sp.
Camelops sp.
Chelonia (order)
Equus sp.
Geochelone sp.
Hemiauchenia sp.
Mammuthus sp.
Odocoileus sp.
Ursus sp.

alligator
antelopes, unidentified
bison, unidentified
camel, unidentified
turtles, unidentified
extinct horse, unidentified
extinct tortoise, unidentified
extinct llama, unidentified
mammoth, unidentified
deer, presumably white-tailed
bear, unidentified

Weesache (Goliad County; Welsch collection, see Chapter 1)
Bison antiquus
extinct bison (Fig. 1.21)
Geochelone sp.?
extinct tortoise?
Buckner Ranch (Bee County)*
Alligator sp.
Anura
Bison sp.
Blastomeryx sp.
Camelidae
Carnivora
Chelonia (order)
Equus sp.
Geochelone/Gopherus**
Geomys sp.
Glyptotherium floridanus
Holmesina sp.
Lepus sp.
Mammuthus columbi
Mammutidae
Meleagris gallopavo
Ondatra zibethicus
Scalopus aquaticus texanus
Serpentes
Sigmodon hispidus

alligator
frogs/toads, unidentified
bison, unidentified
extinct deer
camel, unidentified
carnivore, unidentified
turtles, unidentified
extinct horse, unidentified
tortoise, unidentified
pocket gopher, unidentified
Simpson’s glyptodont
pampathere, undoubtedly H. septentrionalis
jackrabbit, unidentified
Columbian mammoth
mastodonts, unidentified
turkey
muskrat
eastern mole
snakes, unidentified
hispid cotton rat

[continued on next page]

1368

[Table 10.10, continued from previous page]
Buckner Ranch 3 (Bee County)
Bison sp.
Chelonia (order)
Equus sp.
Holmesina sp.
Mammuthus columbi
Rodentia
Testudinidae
Xenartha

bison, unidentified
turtles, unidentified
extinct horse, unidentified
pampathere, unidentified
Columbian mammoth
rodents, unidentified
tortoises, unidentified
armadillos and sloths

Dan Fox Ranch (Bee County)
Mammuthus sp.

mammoth, unidentified

Heard Ranch (Bee County)
Bison sp.
Equus complicatus
Testudo sp.

bison, unidentified
extinct horse
tortoise, unidentified

Lucas Ranch (Bee County)
Equus sp.
Mammuthus sp.
Odocoileus sp.
Osteichthyes
Protolabis sp.***
Pseudemys/Trachemys sp.
Rodentia
Sylvilagus sp.
Trionyx sp.

extinct horse, unidentified
mammoth, unidentified
deer, presumably white-tailed
fish, unidentified
(pre-Rancholabrean camel)
cooter/slider turtle, unidentified
unidentified rodents
unidentified rabbits
softshell turtle, unidentified

Medio Creek (Bee County)
Bison sp.
Carnivora
Chelonia (order)
Elephantidae
Equus sp.
Mammut sp.
Nannippus sp.***
Odocoileus sp.
Rodentia

bison, unidentified
unidentified carnivores
turtles, unidentified
mammoths, unidentified
extinct horse, unidentified
mastodon
(pre-Rancholabrean horse)
deer, presumably white-tailed
rodents, unidentified

O’Brian Ranch (Bee County)
Alligator sp.
Antilocapridae
Bison sp.
Camelops sp.

alligator
antelopes, unidentified
bison, unidentified
camel, unidentified

[continued on next page]
1369

[Table 10.10, continued from previous page]
Capromeryx minor
Cricetidae
Dasypus bellus
Equus sp.
Glyptotherium floridanus
Mammuthus sp.
Osteichthyes
Testudinidae

pronghorn, small extinct
cricetid rodents, unidentified
extinct beautiful armadillo
extinct horse, unidentified
Simpson’s glyptodont
mammoth, unidentified
fish, unidentified
tortoises, unidentified

Powers Ranch (Bee County)
Bison sp.
Camelidae
Carnivora
Chelonia (order)
Equus altidens
Equus leidyi
Geochelone sp.
Glyptotherium floridanus
Hemiauchenia sp.
Lepisosteus sp.
Pseudemys/Trachemys sp.
Trionyx sp.

bison, unidentified
camel, unidentified
unidentified carnivores
turtles, unidentified
Troxell’s stilt-legged horse
extinct horse
extinct tortoise, unidentified
Simpson’s glyptodont
extinct llama, species unidentified
gar, unidentified
cooter/slider turtle, unidentified
softshell turtle, unidentified

Cove Harbor (Aransas County)
Alligator mississippiensis
Amiidae
Aves
Bison sp.
Camelidae
Equus sp.
Geomyidae
Glyptotherium floridanus
Lepisoteidae
Leporidae
Mammut americanum
Myliobatidae
Odocoileus sp.
Osteichthyes
Platygonus sp.
Pseudemys/Trachemys sp.
Rodentia
Scalopus sp.
Serpentes

alligator
bowfin, unidentified
birds, unidentified
bison, unidentified
camel, unidentified
extinct horse, unidentified
pocket gophers, unidentified
Simpson’s glyptodont
gar, unidentified
rabbits and hares, unidentified
mastodont
unidentified ray (marine)
deer, presumably white-tailed
fish, unidentified
flat-headed peccary
cooter/slider turtle, unidentified
rodents, unidentified
mole, presumably Scalopus aquaticus
snakes, unidentified

[continued on next page]
1370

[Table 10.10, continued from previous page]
Terrapene sp.
Trionyx sp.
Xenartha

box turtles, unidentified
softshell turtle, unidentified
armadillos and sloths

Nobles Point (Calhoun County)
Alligator sp.
Anura
Bison sp.
Camelops sp.
Cuvierionus sp.
Emydidae
Equus sp.
Eremotherium sp.
Glyptotherium floridanus
Holmesina sp.
Lepisosteus sp.
Odocoileus sp.
Serpentes
Tanupolama sp.

alligator
frogs/toads, unidentified
bison, unidentified
camel, unidentified
extinct gomphothere
water and box turtles, unidentified
extinct horse, unidentified
extinct megathere
Simpson’s glyptodont
pampathere, unidentified
gar, unidentified
deer, presumably white-tailed
snakes, unidentified
llama-like camel

DeWitt County (unspecified locality)
Mammuthus sp. (skull)

mammoth, unidentified

Fred Dubose Farm (Gonzales County)
Bison sp.
Chelonia (order)
Mylodontidae

bison, unidentified
turtles, unidentified
extinct sloth

Dreyer Farm (Gonzales County)
Mammuthus sp.

mammoth, unidentified

Guadalupe River (Guadalupe County)
Mammut americanum (molar)

mastodon

Seguin (Guadalupe County)
Mammuthus sp.

mammoth, unidentified

*

This site also has an extensive fauna of Clarendonian age from the Goliad
Formation; see also Nash (2001).
** Moodie and VanDevender (1979) list this as Geochelone wilsoni.
*** An earlier fossil, not part of the Rancholabrean fauna.
Source: TMM online vertebrate paleontology database, except as noted.

1371

The position taken here is much like that summarized by Edward Deevey:
In the creative restoration that follows paleoecological field work, the ecosystem
must be fleshed out to some degree by analogy with modern counterparts. Any
organization, especially any nonobvious organization, that is discerned in the
restored system may therefore have been put there by the observer. It is not
surprising that paleoecologists generally refrain from asking quantitative or
synecological questions and concentrate on the autecologies of species they can
see (Deevey 1969:225).

THE TEXAN/TAMAULIPAN BOUNDARY
Berger Bluff lies on the boundary between the contemporary Texan biotic
province to the northeast and the Tamaulipan biotic province to the southwest (Presley
2003:Figs. 2, 6). In reality, these biotic provinces are large-scale macroecological zones
that have little in the way of visible physiographic expression. The major vegetation
zones run southwest to northeast and cut through the boundary without stopping (Fig.
1.17). Annual precipitation isoclines run mostly north-south and do not correspond to the
boundary. Likewise, temperature isotherms are irregular and do not correspond very well.
Despite this lack of expression, there seem to be several definite examples of parapatric
species distributions along the boundary between the Texan and Tamaulipan biotic zones.
Parapatric distributions are ones in which pairs of taxa have separate but adjoining
distributions, with no more than a narrow zone of overlap in between (Bull 1991; Dalbey
1980). For example, the area lies on or near the parapatric range boundaries between the
eastern woodrat (Neotoma floridana), Attwater’s pocket gopher (Geomys attwateri), and
thirteen-lined ground squirrel (Spermophilus tridecemlineatus) in the Texan province,
and the southern Plains woodrat (Neotoma micropus), Texas pocket gopher (Geomys
personatus), and Mexican ground squirrel (Spermophilus mexicanus) in the Tamaulipan
province (although the gopher boundaries actually overlap in Bee, Goliad, and Karnes
1372

County; Schmidly 2004:331, 340). These boundaries likely have shifted constantly
northeast or southwest during the Quaternary in response to the vagaries of climatic and
floristic change. The site lies in post oak parkland (Figs. 1.17, 1.22), although coastal
prairie can be found less than 5 km away (Fig. 1.17). Many of the typical neotropical taxa
characteristic of the Tamaulipan zone (Presley 2003:Table 1) are absent from this area.

There are also several examples of Texan species whose range appears limited at
the southern end by the Texan/Tamaulipan boundary, but without matching Tamaulipan
species: the smallmouth salamander (Ambystoma texanum), eastern narrowmouth toad
(Gastrophryne carolinensis), three-toed box turtle (Terrapene carolina triunguis),
broadhead skink (Eumeces laticeps), southern prairie skink (Eumeces septentrionalis
obtusirostris), swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus aquaticus), eastern gray squirrel (Sciurus
carolinensis), red fox (Vulpes vulpes, an introduced species), mink (Mustela vison).
These species cannot be considered parapatric, but they might be environmental indicator
species nevertheless.

There are also a significant number of herpetofaunal species whose northern
limits stop at or near the boundary with the Texan biotic province in this immediate area:
the eastern green toad (Bufo debilis debilis), Rio Grande leopard frog (Rana berlandieri),
southern earless lizard (Holbrookia lacerata subcaudalis), keeled earless lizard
(Holbrookia propinqua propinqua), rosebelly lizard (Sceloporus variabilis marmoratus),
Texas indigo snake (Drymarchon corais erebennus), and Schott’s whipsnake
(Masticophus taeniatus schotti) may be examples. Not all of these are confined to the
Tamaulipan province, but at least in this area of the state, they seemed to be limited by
the boundary with the Texan province.
1373

The number of species responding to the boundary between these two major
biotic provinces suggests it might have some environmental significance, and its position
has probably shifted along a southwest-northeast axis throughout the Quaternary in
response to climatic developments.

SPECIES RICHNESS COMPARED TO OTHER LATE RANCHOLABREAN SITES
If other archeological and paleontological sites of similar or slightly greater age in
Texas are examined, it is clear that the number of species recovered depends on a wide
variety of factors – the concentration of bone in the sediments, the amount of fill
processed to recover bone, the condition of the bone after burial, and the processes that
contributed bone to the sediments at the outset (fluvial deposition, on-site death, raptor
pellet deposits, and so forth). Table 10.11 lists several archeological and paleontological
components of late Wisconsinan to early Holocene age, as well as a few local sites of
later Holocene age. Hall’s Cave, Cueva Quebrada, Bonfire Shelter, and the Aubrey and
Driscoll sites are all considerably older than the bench deposits at Berger Bluff; Zesch
Cave is undated. The numbers shown in Table 10.11 are minimum numbers of species.
For example, if a site has produced “Osteichthyes, unidentified,” then it can only be said
that there is at least one species of fish present at the site, and a “1” is entered in the fish
column. There were probably at least two or three species of horse present regionally at
the end of the Rancholabrean Land Mammal Age (Baskin and Mosqueda 2002), but the
actual number is uncertain.

1374

Table 10.11 shows several things:
•

Berger Bluff has neither the longest nor the shortest species list, but is somewhere in
the middle

•

Fish and birds are especially underrepresented at all kinds of sites, although the
number of waterfowl at Lubbock Lake is impressive

•

None of the sites appears to even approach a complete sampling of the spectrum of
species that probably existed in their respective regions when the faunas were
accumulating in the sites

The numbers of species at these sites vary widely, and it is clear that there is no
single cause. Lubbock Lake probably leads the list because fieldwork was extensive, and
special attention was paid to recovery of microvertebrate and other faunal material. The
Armstrong and Richard Beene sites probably have few species because of poor
preservation. And for nearly all sites where predation (either human or nonhuman) was
involved, most likely only part of the faunal spectrum is documented because predation
was rather highly targeted, and not overly opportunistic. I suspect the lack of fish and
birds has more to do with lack of sampling by predators and less with taphonomic decay.

Zooarcheologists often seem to have less expertise or interest in fish and bird
remains, and that may lead to taxonomic deflation for these groups as well. Sinkhole and
cave sites like Hall’s Cave and Zesch Cave often produce high species counts because
they are raptor roosts or carnivore dens that tend to concentrate faunal remains. Sites like
this can record a fairly complete roster of the local mammal fauna, at least (Hadly 1999).
In addition to these considerations, the species counts are probably significantly inflated
because of time-averaging. Most of these components probably represent slices of time
that are at least a couple of thousand years long.
1375

Table 10.11. Vertebrate Minimum Species Richness for Various Archeological and
Paleontological Sites.

Site

Minimum Number of Species Present
Fish

Birds Herpetofauna Mammals

Paleoindian archeological components
Lubbock Lake 1
10
34
2
Aubrey (all loci)
7
4
Driscoll 3
7
2
Wilson-Leonard (strat I, II)4 2
1
Berger Bluff bench
2
1
Levi Rockshelter 5
1
0
Cueva Quebrada 6
?
?
7
Buckner Ranch
0
1
Kincaid Shelter (zones 2-4) 8 0
2?
Richard Beene 9
1
1
Gault (Clovis component) 10 0
1
Armstrong 11
0
0
Bonfire Shelter 12
0
0
Lake Theo 13
0
0

38
10
9
10
14
3
?
5
4
5
1
1
0
1

42
24
24
20
14
22?
23
14*
12
11
8
5
6
5?

Total
124
45
42
33
31
26?
?
20
18?
18
10
6
6
5?

Holocene (Archaic/Late Prehistoric) archeological components
Berger Bluff, upper 14
3
8
13
22**
Burris 15
1
2
5
8

46
16

Paleontological components
Hall’s Cave 16
5
17
Zesch Cave
0

106?
65?

19?
9

21?
10

61?
46?

* Includes Capromeryx, although TMM database lists it as deriving from Goliad Fm.
* * Includes sheep/goat, European pig, javelina.
Note: numbers given are minimum numbers of species. In most cases, the actual number
of species is probably significantly higher due to identification difficulties.
[Table 10.11 footnotes continued on next page]
1376

[Table 10.11, continued from previous page]
Sources:
1. Johnson (1987:Table 7.1, Paleoindian components only)
2. Yates and Lundelius (2001:Tables 8.1, 8.3)
3. Lewis (n.d., Table 1)
4. Balinsky (1998:Tables 35-2, 35-3); Bousman (1998:Tables 8-19, 8-20)
5. Alexander (1963:Table 1)
6. Lundelius (1984)
7. Nash (2001:Appendix 3) and TMM database
8. Winans (n.d.)
9. Baker and Steele (1992:Table 1, Paleoindian components only)
10. Cinda Timperley (2005, personal communication)
11. Johnson, Baxevanis and Willett (2002:Table 1)
12. Bement (1986)
13. Harrison and Killen (1978:Tables 3, 4)
14. Flynn (1983:Table 21)
15. Shaffer (n.d., Table 1)
16. Toomey (1993:Table 11)
17. Sagebiel (1998)

1377

HISTORY OF COLLECTION AND IDENTIFICATION
In order to understand the nature of the animal bone collection from the bench
deposits, it is critical to understand something of the history of its collection and study.
After completion of the excavations in April, 1980, individual bone specimens that had
been found in place or on the field screens were returned to the UTSA-CAR archeology
lab for cataloging. Dozens of plastic tube bags (Fig. 3.9) containing about a cubic meter
of fill that been collected underneath the 1/4-inch screen from unit N109 E96 had already
been delivered to the Vertebrate Paleontology lab at the University of Texas at Austin for
processing. In 1982, the cataloged specimens were identified by Boyce Cabaniss, then a
graduate student in vertebrate paleontology, using the comparative collections at the VP
lab. Cabaniss also washed down the matrix from N109 E96 through nested coarse and
fine mesh screens. There are no lab notes from the washing process, and since I was in
San Antonio at the time, I did not observe the screenwashing. The mesh size was not
recorded anywhere, but the coarse mesh is believed to be 1/8-inch and the fine mesh is
undoubtedly window screen. Cabaniss also screenwashed some smaller lots of matrix
from Unit 2, the cutbank profile in stratum 2A, and a very important bag of fill from
N113 E98 (92.40 to approximately 92.35 m, lot B-107A) which later proved to contain
bone from the hearth deposit. After washing down the samples and drying the residue,
Cabaniss began trial picking of some lots, and reported that the residue was so
unproductive that it was not worth picking. This was very disappointing, and after
Cabaniss abandoned picking efforts, the residue was then put in storage in the VP lab,
where it was to stay for several years.

1378

In 1982, Cabaniss identified the in situ and 1/4-inch screen specimens (over 3200
specimens; Table 10.12), and prepared an inventory. In 1987 I began to photograph the
bone for eventual publication, but since the identifications were recorded in the inventory
but not, in every case, on the provenience tags, in the summer of 1987 I enlisted the help
of Alisa J. Winkler, then a graduate student in vertebrate paleontology at Southern
Methodist University, to select specimens for photography, re-identifying them when
more than one specimen was present in a vial, and recording the correct anatomical
orientation. During this process nearly every fragment was re-examined and the original
identification checked. The result was that the original identification was found to be very
accurate. Very few errors in identifications were found, and these were very minor in
nature. In addition, several small bits of bone that had never been identified were located.
These, along with some previously considered unidentifiable, were identified by Winkler,
using the Shuler Museum comparative collection. No new taxa were added, but the
element count was increased. Winkler also assisted by computing MNIs (Minimum
Numbers of Individuals). Cabaniss and Winkler were both supported by a grant from the
Texas Archaeological Foundation awarded to me in 1982. They were selected as
consultants specifically because of their familiarity with microvertebrates.

In 1988 and 1989, the herpetofauna (including turtle material) from the identified
material was pulled and sent to the late Bill McClure (1927-2002) of Houston, Texas, for
further identification. McClure, an amateur herpetologist and osteologist with a
comprehensive personal reference collection, was a recognized expert with extensive
experience in Texas zooarcheology. He was able to refine the identifications and add
several previously unrecognized taxa to the species list. His results were reported in

1379

1989, with a few additional identifications reported in 1991, and the herpetofaunal
material was returned to me.

Table 10.12. Specimen Counts (NISP) for Major Categories of Bone.

Analyzed

Not Yet
Analyzed
_______________________________________________________________________
Ambient Bone (N = 2560)
1/4-inch screen (cutbank, all units except Unit 2)
N109 E96, bulk matrix, coarse fraction, 8 levels*

462
125

----1986

Hearth Deposit (N = 4102)
Unit 2 (lot B-149)
N113 E98 (lots B-105, B-106, B-107)
N113 E98 matrix sample (ca. 92.40-92.35)

44
2909
------

--------1188

3540

3174

Subtotals:
Grand total: 6714

* 13 more levels remain unpicked and will probably produce additional bone.
Note: conjoinable fragments with fresh breaks are counted as one specimen.

In summary, Cabaniss and Winkler examined and identified all the cataloged
material, McClure provided further identifications of herpetofauna, and Winkler did most
of the MNI calculations. I typed up the specimen inventory, measured samples of the
bone fragments, made some observations on whether bone breakage was pre-excavation
or excavation-related, did a color analysis of some bone samples, and recorded some
1380

more detailed observations on fish vertebrae and turtle shell. In 1990, I did an X-ray
analysis of growth rings in some of the fish vertebrae from the bench deposits (Brown
1990) as part of a course in vertebrate biostratigraphy with Dr. Ernest Lundelius.

At some time during this period, Lundelius notified me that the screenwashed
residue which had been in storage for several years in the VP lab was about to be
discarded and asked if I wanted to have it returned. I took possession, began to pick some
of the material, and discovered that Cabaniss’s assessment of the material’s potential
several years earlier had been unduly pessimistic. There was perhaps enough bone
material to justify the considerable picking effort, and the residue also yielded very large
quantities of microsnails (including new specimens of Valvata and Cincinnatia) along
with occasional cultural debris (microflakes), hackberry seeds, and other items of interest.
I selected eight excavation levels from N109 E96 for complete picking and spent several
hundred hours picking the residue over the next couple of years. Levels were selected so
as to provide a good representation from the bottom, middle, and top of the stratigraphic
section; this effort produced an additional 1986 specimens that have not yet been
analyzed. A single lot from N113 E98 (92.40 to approximately 92.35 m, lot B-107A)
produced another 1188 specimens, also not yet analyzed (Table 10.12). In 1992, all of the
residue was inventoried and repackaged.

PROVENIENCE CATEGORIES AND RECOVERY METHODS
Ambient Bone
Ambient bone is believed to represent an assortment of bone from animals that
died naturally on the site, animals that were introduced by human agency, and
1381

conceivably occasional fragments that may have been introduced as clastic material by
flooding or sheetwash, although there is no clear physical evidence for this in the form of
fluvial abrasion. In some cases small clusters of a few bone fragments were found
associated with debris (charcoal, chipping debris, mussel shells) that was clearly cultural
in nature, suggesting at least some of the ambient bone is of cultural origin, but there are
no dense concentrations comparable to the hearth deposit. Ambient bone was recovered
by several methods:
1) Fragments found on the 1/4-inch screen; some of these are smaller than 1/4
inch in length, because some were found atop sediment trapped by the screen;
2) Fragments found and plotted in place (these are rare);
3) Fragments recovered from the two matrix columns (N109 E103 and N110
E102) that were processed for grain-size analysis (each column was only about
25 x 25 cm in horizontal extent, so the number of specimens is small);
4) In unit N109 E96 only, fragments recovered by fine-mesh sieving of the bulk
matrix passing the 1/4-inch screen. These represent fragments that are smaller
than the 1/4-inch mesh but larger than the fine mesh used to sieve the bulk
matrix. Matrix was recovered from all levels, but only a few have been picked
to extract bone and other debris.
Ambient bone was recovered from the cutbank and from all excavation units
except Unit 2 (Fig. 10.2); all of the bone from that unit is considered part of the hearth
deposit. Most of the bone from unit N113 E98 is also considered part of the hearth
deposit, although isolated bones in excavation levels well above or below the level of the
hearth (92.38 m) are considered “ambient”.

The archeological literature is replete with studies showing that 1/4-inch mesh
does a poor job of sampling the remains of small animals (Thomas 1969; Shaffer 1992a,
1999; Gordon 1993; Shaffer and Sanchez 1994; James 1997; Cannon 1999; Vale and
1382

Gargett 2002; Gobalet 2005; Nagaoka 2005; Zohar and Belmaker 2005). The gist of the
literature is that coarse mesh
1) reduces the quantity of bone recovered
2) biases recovery by omitting small taxa, thereby reducing species richness and evenness
3) can alter the rank order of species abundance
4) may bias element recovery by loss of small elements.

Figure 10.2. Location of Major Divisions of the Vertebrate Fauna.
1383

The most systematic studies of screening bias that have been done involve
experimental sieving of disarticulated modern comparative skeletons (Shaffer 1992a,
Shaffer and Sanchez 1994, Nagaoka 2005), but these studies do not duplicate the
fragmented condition of archeological collections. The vertebrate remains from the bench
deposits certainly bear out the first observation. Collections from the 1/4-inch screen are
very sparse, and in the two units where bone was also recovered from sediment samples
processed for grain-size analysis, in several cases more bone fragments were recovered
from these small bulk samples (less than 2 kg) than from the rest of the level after it was
passed through the 1/4-inch screen. The 1/4-inch screen, then, is an inadequate estimator
of the density of ambient bone. For ambient bone from the 1/4-inch screen the average
density is about 39 fragments per cubic meter (average of 115 excavation levels in six
units), but many levels yielded no bone at all. The stratigraphic distribution of bone from
the 1/4-inch screen is also quite erratic – there is no clearly defined preservation gradient
like that seen for snails, diatoms, and freshwater sponge spicules (note that here I am
using the term “bone density” to refer to the concentration of fragments in the sediments,
not the hardness or compactness of the bone mineral itself).

A much better estimate of the density of ambient bone can be obtained from the
bulk matrix that was passed through the 1/4-inch screen in unit N109 E96 and later finesieved, although only a few levels have been picked. For these eight levels, fragment
counts are as follows:
Level

Count

93.08-93.00 m:
92.75-92.70 m:
92.70-92.65 m:
92.55-92.50 m:

952
386
35
233
1384

92.50-92.45 m:
92.35-92.30 m:
92.15-92.10 m:
92.05-92.00 m:

47
359
51
48

The average density for these eight levels, then is about 5400 fragments per cubic
meter, an estimate that is both much higher than and more realistic than that obtained
from the 1/4-inch screen, but a density that is nevertheless much lower than that found in
the Feature 5 hearth deposit. Figure 10.3 shows the vertical pattern of bone fragment
density for the eight levels in N109 E96 (in thousands per cubic meter); the actual counts
are noted beside each data point. Although there are only eight data points, there is a clear
hint that ambient bone density probably declines with depth, very much like the snail
shell discussed in Chapter 8. The cause, however, is unclear. The bone from stratum 2A
has much the same uncorroded appearance as that from stratum 2D. There are no clear
indications that bone has been removed from the deposits by chemical dissolution.

The Hearth Deposit: Excavation of a Microvertebrate Bone Bed
When the hearth, Feature 5, was originally exposed and investigated on June 29,
1979, a 1 x 1 m excavation unit (Unit 2) was laid out around it, oriented more or less
parallel to the prevailing slope of the bench surface. The unit was excavated down to the
baked surface of the hearth (initially estimated at 92.355 m, but later resurveyed at 92.38
m). A dense concentration of microvertebrate bone was found, mostly to the southeast of
the firehardened and brightly oxidized surface (Fig. 10.4), at the same elevation as the
fired surface, and in a narrow band perhaps 30 cm across at the most, extending to the
edge of the excavation unit. Perhaps a few bone fragments lapped onto the fired surface
1385

or were embedded in it. but neither the field notes nor personal recollection disclose
anything about it. Most lay to the southeast in sediment that had not been heat-altered.

Figure 10.3. Density of Ambient Bone Fragments in N109 E96. Plot shows density of
fragments (in thousands per cubic meter of fill) in the eight levels out of 21
that have been picked to extract bone and other items; from bulk matrix
passing the ¼-inch screen, coarse fraction only. Although only eight levels
are plotted, the curve suggests decreasing bone frequency with depth.
Numbers at each density point are actual fragment count.
1386

Animal bone from this concentration was recovered by careful exposure and
hand-picking of individual elements, and very small quantities of fill were scooped into a
plastic bag for later fine sieving when concentrations of very small fragments were found.
All of the fill from Unit 2 was also screened in conventional fashion, but essentially
nothing was found on the screen. The bone recovered from Unit 2 was later cataloged as
lot B-149 (44 items) and no excavation was done below the level of the fired surface.
These small animal bones were rather closely packed, but no instances of articulation
were noted during excavation, which was fairly slow and careful. No additional bone was
found elsewhere in Unit 2.

No additional bone from the hearth deposit was recovered until April 15, 1980,
when unit N113 E98 was laid out next to Unit 2. Because this unit is on the site grid
system, its northwest corner cut into the south quadrant of Unit 2 and penetrated into the
abandoned floor of Unit 2. Excavation was begun in 10 cm arbitrary levels and relatively
little bone was encountered in the uppermost 26-28 cm of fill, but about midway into the
92.50-92.40 m level, at 92.443 m, a dense concentration of microfauna was discovered in
the north-central area of the unit (Fig. 10.4). It was immediately apparent that the same
microvertebrate bone bed had been encountered, and the detection elevation was 6 cm
higher in this unit than in Unit 2. At this point, the collection bag used for the 92.5092.40 m level (lot B-105) was closed out and a new bag (lot B-106) was begun for the
remainder of the level. Lot B-106 extends from about 92.44 m to the 92.40 m floor, but
does not cover the entire unit because part of the unit had already been cleared down to
the 92.40 m floor. Figure 10.5 shows the vertical relationship between these different lots
in schematic fashion.

1387

Figure 10.4. Plan of Hearth Deposit. The lower unit, N113 E98, cuts into Unit 2.
1388

An extract from my field notes of April 15, 1980 records the circumstances of discovery:

92.50-92.40 …a concentration of very tiny rodent-sized bones was found near the
base of this level, mainly in the north central part of the square. Detection
elevation of the bone bed was 92.443 m; some bones were still showing in the
92.40 floor, but most of the bones were found above this level. The bone density
drops off rapidly below 92.40 m. This concentration is definitely associated with
the hearth, Feature 5, to the north. The center of the hearth is about 85 cm north of
the center of the densest concentration. It is my impression that the bones are not
evenly concentrated; they occur in sub-concentrations, seemingly, within the main
concentration. This could perhaps indicate the concentration originated as
articulated or semiarticulated units that have been disrupted by bioturbation. No
definite examples of articulation were observed, but systematic exposure of the
bones was not attempted. Maximum thickness of the concentration is about 4 cm;
the densest concentration was about 35 cm in diameter, but bones occurred
throughout the northern third of the square
92.40-92.30 Bone continues to occur in the NW quadrant of N113 E98, in the
upper 5 cm, but as scattered occurrences…. (K. Brown, Berger Bluff field notes).

At about 92.42 m, the principal bone concentration was about 16 x 20 cm in
diameter, centered at about N113.68 E98.45 (Fig. 10.4). In the 92.40 m floor, the
principal concentration had become slightly more diffuse, shifting southeastward to
center at N113.64 E9.60, enlarging to roughly 36 cm in diameter. As far as the entire
bone concentration can be reconstructed from evidence in both units, it seems to have
been shaped somewhat like an inverted comma, with the elongated end to the north,
extending to the hearth. The maximum north-south dimension would have been perhaps
90-100 cm, and the maximum east-west width, near the south end, perhaps 30-40 cm or
so. Although the bone, in many cases, appeared to lie in small clusters, there were no
recognizable outlines or differently textured fills to verify the presence of coprolites or
digestive pellets. No preferred orientation of the bone was noted during excavation in
1389

either unit, although because of the contingencies of excavation, I cannot be certain that a
preferred orientation would have been recognized even if present. Although a substantial
area remained unexcavated in the vicinity of the bone bed at the end of the project,
enough is known about its spatial distribution to suggest that it is considerably smaller
and more tightly clustered than the pellet midden left by the tree-roosting great horned
owl investigated by Terry (2004), where bone was found in a four-meter radius around
the tree. Likewise, it is much smaller than the latrine or marking areas of most
mammalian carnivores (see Andrews 1990:42).

Figure 10.5. Schematic Section, Bone Lots in the Hearth Deposit. This is a schematic
view, looking west, of unit N113 E98. For the actual west wall profile, see
Fig. 4.36. Only the unshaded lots are considered part of the hearth deposit.
Lot B-106 was collected separately when the top of the bone bed was
encountered at 92.443 m. Lot B-107A was extracted from matrix collected
between the 92.40 m floor and the approximate midpoint of the 92.40-92.30
m level. The arrow on the right indicates the elevation of Feature 5.
1390

Although checking for articulated units was recognized in the field as an
important problem, too little time remained to allow exposure of the microfauna in situ.
As an alternative, apparent clusters of bone were excavated as clods of matrix to be
dissected later in the lab. These were later dissolved in household vinegar and cataloged
separately (note that lot B-107A has not been treated with anything and a large quantity
of bone from this lot is available for potential chemical or isotope studies). Five major
units in lot B-105, termed Groups 1-5, were treated this way. Group 1 was further broken
down into subunits 1a through 1k. Loose fill from the 92.50-92.40 m level was
designated Group 1 Residual material, and actually accounts for the greatest number of
specimens. By the time lot B-106 was isolated, no apparent clusters of bone remained, so
this remnant of the level was collected as loose fill and was later washed through a
kitchen strainer to recover very small fragments. All of this material (except for lot B107A, which has not been studied yet) is itemized in Appendix 6. These subclusters were
not mapped when they removed because too little time remained. Excavation of the unit
was terminated the next day (April 16, 1980) as the water level in the reservoir
approached the unit.

This method of recovery was inconclusive for discriminating articulated units.
One thing clearly demonstrated, however, is that while some clods of fill (probably the
smaller ones) likely contained only a single taxon, some unmistakably contained multiple
taxa. Group 3 in lot B-105, for example, contained eastern mole, frog or toad,
smallmouth salamander, fish, bird, and perhaps one to three sizes of unidentified small
mammals (grasshopper mouse-sized, pocket mouse-sized, and woodrat-sized). In other
words, perhaps as many as eight or more different kinds of animals, depending on the
actual identity of some of the small fragments that could not be identified. In this case,
1391

each taxon seems to be represented by only one or two elements. The greatest number of
elements seems to occur in Group 1g, which had 15 salamander vertebrae, possibly all
from the same individual. One or two elements per taxon, however, is more typical for lot
B-105 as a whole. It seems clear that the subclusters of bone recognized in the excavation
floor were not partial skeletons of small animals, but instead were clusters of individual
elements pooled, in some cases, from several different kinds of animals.

This is exactly what might be expected if the small clusters of bone actually
represent fecal remains, or decomposed coprolites in a latrine area left by a predator with
a broad-spectrum diet. Some clusters, probably the smaller ones, appear monotypic and
may be the remains of a single animal. Group 1b (a hispid pocket mouse), 1f (a gopher),
1 i (an unidentified rodent), 1k (a possible small bird), Group 2 (possibly a single pocket
mouse or kangaroo rat), Group 4 (a woodrat), and Group 5 (medium-sized fish) might be
examples, but in these cases skeletal representation is very incomplete – only a few
elements are present. The reader may wish to scan Appendix 6 to get some impression of
the composition of these lots.

Because very little bone was visible when the 92.40 m floor was reached,
excavation of the 92.40-92.30 m level (lot B-107) was begun without any anticipation of
the need for subdivision. However, some bone began to appear once excavation got
underway, so a sample of matrix from approximately the upper 5 cm of this level was
bagged separately as lot B-107A. Lot B-107A ultimately yielded 1186 fragments (these
have been counted but not yet identified), or about half the quantity included in lot B106.

1392

To summarize, five lots of bone (B-149, B-105, B-106, B-107, and B-107A) from
Unit 2 and N113 E98 comprise the hearth deposit. Technically, these extend from 92.50
to 92.30 m, but it was clear during excavation that the greatest quantity of bone was
tightly concentrated in a zone not much thicker than 4 cm, from 92.44 m to 92.40 m or
slightly below. My interpretation of this bone bed is that it represents a single relatively
short-term (perhaps less than a year?) depositional event on a single surface. The bone
deposit has experienced slight postdepositional bioturbation that has dispersed part of it
vertically over a span of no more than a few centimeters, and horizontally no more than a
few decimeters. The depositional surface may have sloped upward slightly to the
southeast, since the detection elevation here was slightly higher than next to the hearth.
No ash, charcoal, or fired clay was found mixed with the bone in N113 E98 to suggest
the bone had been raked out of the hearth.

Estimating the density of the bone deposit is difficult because the bone was not
uniformly distributed within the arbitrary levels used. If we assume the densest part
occurred between 92.44 and 92.35 m, then 3444 fragments were recovered from this
space, giving a calculated density of more than 38,266 fragments per cubic meter of fill.
This is about seven times as great as the ambient bone density established by fine sieving
of bulk matrix from N109 E96 (see earlier discussion, above), a method that ought to be
comparable to that used here. Essentially all the bone in the hearth deposit was recovered
either by fine sieving of clods or small quantities of loose matrix scraped directly off the
excavation floor, or by careful hand-picking of in situ fragments exposed during
excavation. Little or no bone was recovered on the 1/4-inch screen from these levels. It is
clear that this was an effective recovery method for microvertebrate remains.

1393

It is also clear that there are significant differences in density and composition
between the ambient and hearth-related vertebrate remains, even when comparable fine
sieve recovery methods are used. When unidentified bone fragments are omitted from
consideration, the hearth deposit has large numbers of bone fragments from salamander
(perhaps all Ambystoma texanum), followed in ranked abundance by eastern mole,
unidentified fish, various snakes (especially Colubridae), frogs or toads (perhaps mostly
Rio Grande leopard frog and American toad), pocket gophers, unidentified small birds,
pocket mice, woodrats, lizards, and several other less abundant taxa (Fig. 10.6; Fig. 10.7
includes unidentified categories). The ambient bone has material from rabbits (probably
mostly cottontails, but perhaps including some jackrabbits), followed in ranked order by
pocket gophers, turtles (cooters or sliders, mud or musk turtles), fish (including gar),
salamanders, frogs or toads, small birds, snakes (including water snake), raccoon, cotton
rats, kangaroo rats, pocket mice, shrews, and several other taxa; eastern moles are
infrequent (Fig. 10.8).

The most salient compositional differences are the appearance of turtle, raccoon,
and cotton rat among the ambient fauna, the diminished importance of salamanders, and
the reversed abundance of rabbits and moles. Rabbits are abundant and moles scarce in
the ambient fauna, but the reverse is true for the hearth deposit. Some of these differences
are probably the result of differing recovery techniques. If all of the matrix residue
samples from N109 E96 could be picked and the bone identified, some of the apparent
differences between ambient and hearth-related bone might be diminished.

Table 10.13 lists the relevant lot numbers for the different categories of bone.

1394

Table 10.13. Lot Numbers for Animal Bone.

Ambient Bone, Identified and Inventoried
B-104
B-43
B-108
B-44
B-109
B-45
B-110
B-46
B-150
B-50
B-1
B-51
B-2
B-52
B-3
B-54
B-4
B-57
B-5
B-59
B-6
B-61
B-7
B-62
B-8
B-62A
B-9
B-63
B-11
B-69
B-16
B-72
B-17
B-73
B-18
B-76
B-19
B-86
B-28
B-88A
B-29
B-89
B-31
B-91
B-32
B-92
B-33
B-98
B-34
B-101
B-35
B-111
B-36
B-116
B-40
B-123

B-125
B-126
B-128
B-129
B-130
B-131
B-133
B-134
B-135
B-136
B-137
B-139
B-140
B-141
B-141A
B-142
B-143
B-144
B-146
B-147
B-148
B-154
B-156
B-157 *
B-158 *
B-159 *

Hearth Deposit, Identified and Inventoried
B-105
B-107
B-106
B-149
Hearth Deposit, Not Yet Identified or Inventoried
B-107A
* Note: at present, these are the only N109 E96 bulk matrix lots with numbers assigned.

1395

Figure 10.6. Hearth Deposit, Taxonomic Composition by Number of Specimens. Relative
proportions of major vertebrate categories are ranked by NISP. Unidentified
categories (unidentified vertebrate, unidentified mammal, small mammal,
mesomammal, etc.) are omitted, so only 448 out of the 2909 fragments
studied are actually graphed here. Categories vary in taxonomic breadth
from class (Class Aves, Class Osteichthyes, for taxa that cannot be
identified any more precisely) to species (Onychomys leucogaster,
grasshopper mice). Note that the most abundant taxa are chiefly riparian
ones.

1396

Figure 10.7. Hearth Deposit, Taxonomic Composition With Unidentified Categories.
Relative proportions of major vertebrate categories are ranked by NISP,
with various categories of unidentified fragments (shaded area) included.
About 83% of the fragments fall into these unidentified categories.

1397

Figure 10.8. Ambient Bone: Taxonomic Composition by Number of Specimens. Relative
proportions of major vertebrate categories are ranked by NISP. Unidentified
categories (unidentified vertebrate, unidentified mammal, small mammal,
mesomammal, etc.) are omitted, so only 103 out of the 587 fragments
studied are actually graphed here. Categories vary in taxonomic breadth
from class (Class Aves, Class Osteichthyes, for taxa that cannot be
identified any more precisely) to species (Procyon lotor, or raccoon). Note
that both riparian and upland taxa are represented.

1398

Figure 10.9. Ambient Bone: Taxonomic Composition by Number of Specimens. Relative
proportions of major vertebrate categories are ranked by NISP. This graph is
similar to the previous figure, but some identified bone from matrix passing
the ¼-inch screen in unit N109 E96 is added to the tallies (Note: for matrix
samples, only three levels are included, and not all the bone from the levels
is tallied). Unidentified categories (unidentified vertebrate, unidentified
mammal, small mammal, mesomammal, etc.) are omitted, so only 127
fragments studied are actually graphed here. Adding these specimens from
fine-screen recovery changes the relative positions of some of the less
common categories and adds one general category, a cricetid mouse.
1399

Figure 10.10. Ambient Bone: Taxonomic Composition by Number of Specimens.
Relative proportions of major vertebrate categories are ranked by NISP.
Unidentified categories (unidentified vertebrate, small mammal,
mesomammal, etc.) are shaded and represent the two most abundant
categories. Some identified bone from matrix passing the ¼-inch screen in
unit N109 E96 is added to the tallies (Note: for matrix samples, only three
levels are included, and not all the bone from the levels is tallied).
Categories vary in taxonomic breadth from class (Class Aves, Class
Osteichthyes, for taxa that cannot be identified any more precisely) to
species (Procyon lotor, or raccoon).
1400

CONDITION OF THE BONE
Taphonomy embraces a chain of several different processes: bone breakage,
mastication, or dismemberment by predators; postmortem dispersal and breakage of
skeletons by scavengers or flooding; bone loss; above-ground weathering; further
diagenesis after burial, and breakage as a result of soil expansion and contraction. Some
of these are relevant to the bench deposits, while others are not.

Limited Evidence for Weathering
Behrensmeyer (1978:153) uses the term weathering to describe physical changes
in bone both above and below ground, and Lyman (1994:354) apparently follows the
same usage. I think it is useful to have a term restricted to above-ground alteration, and I
prefer to use the term “weathering” only for above-ground breakdown of bone (as does
Andrews 1990:10). I prefer to use the term diagenesis for all postmortem changes in
bone, either above-ground or below ground. In my view, diagenesis of most bone starts
with above-ground weathering, then continues with a different set of alteration processes
after burial.

The appearance and state of preservation of the ambient and hearth-related bone is
essentially the same, so both categories can be discussed together here. The most
important modification is mechanical breakage. Breakage can occur 1) during predation
(from mastication, dismemberment, or digestive processes), 2) during burial (from matrix
expansion and contraction), or 3) during excavation by the archeologist. All three are
probably evident in the bench assemblage, and I will discuss these at some length later in
the chapter. There is an enormous literature on the taphonomy of small animal remains
(mostly small mammals) in raptor pellets and animal scats, but nearly all this literature
1401

deals with the early stages of bone breakage, digestion, and breakdown. Very little of it
deals with the weathering processes that occur after pellet middens or latrines are created.
Behrensmeyer (1978) has defined a series of six progressive weathering stages for large
mammals in east Africa (the scheme is only applicable to mammals over 5 kg body
weight). None of the animal bone from the bench deposits shows any appreciable
correspondence to any of the weathering stages defined by Behrensmeyer, except perhaps
for very rare, minor longitudinal cracking. Otherwise, the bone appears unweathered and
does not resemble bone that has been long exposed on the ground surface. The deep
cracking, flaking, and exposed fibrous texture documented by Behrensmeyer are absent
here. According to Andrews and Armour-Chelu (1998:438), weathering in wet temperate
climates is much slower.

Studies of weathering effects on small mammal bone by Andrews (1990:10-16),
on amphibian bone by Pinto and Andrews (1999:422-424), a study of bone dispersal by
Terry (2004), studies of bird bone weathering (Bocheński and Tomek 1997) and
bioerosion (Davis 1997) and very brief comments by Bickart (1984:532) are much more
relevant. Andrews exposed barn owl pellets to weathering in a wet temperate climate, and
found no weathering of the enclosed bone after two years. Additional weathering of
exposed bone produced minimal changes. His results for small mammal bone
(documented by SEM photography) can be summarized as follows (from Andrews
1990:Table 1.3):
0-2 years:
1-5 years:
3-5+ years:
4-5+ years:

no modification
slight splitting of bone, chipping of teeth and splitting of dentine
more extensive splitting, but little flaking of bone; chipping and
splitting of teeth leading to loss of parts of crown
deep splitting and some loss of deep segments between splits;
extensive splitting of teeth
1402

Bone from the bench deposits corresponds either to Andrews’s stage 1 (unaltered)
or incipient stage 2; occasional splitting of long bones is seen but the chipping of occlusal
surfaces of teeth (Andrews 1990:Figs. 1.4, D-G; 1.5, B-D; 1.6, A-E) seems to be absent
(compare with occlusal surface photos presented later in this chapter), and much of the
longitudinal splitting of long bone in the bench deposits is due to interior carbonate
growth after burial, not to weathering.

Pinto and Andrews left frog skeletons exposed to weathering for 18 months,
finding microscopic longitudinal splitting and slight surface erosion on bones placed with
a southern exposure (Pinto and Andrews 1999:Fig. 6A), but no splitting on bone with a
northern exposure. This type of splitting is not visible on amphibian bone from the bench
examined at magnifications up to 70X with a conventional binocular microscope.

Why Is Evidence for Weathering Limited?
It may seem paradoxical that the animal bone from the bench deposits shows few
indications of weathering, given the evidence (presented in Chapter 4) that depositional
rates of fine-grained Coleto Creek floodplain sediments were not particularly high. With
relatively slow depositional rates, extensive weathering might be expected, if the
depositional

microenvironment

were

not

a

factor.

However,

I

suspect

the

microenvironment was in fact a controlling variable. In Chapter 4, I showed that there is
limited evidence for weathering of the sediment itself, and the same can be said of the
inclusions in it. The chert, for example, is unpatinated.

1403

Thanks to studies by Trueman and others (2004) and Nielsen-Marsh (2000), the
physical processes of large mammal bone weathering are well understood. A bone resting
on the ground surface draws up pore water from the soil and evaporates it to the
atmosphere on exposed surfaces (a wicking process); organic material (and nitrogen) is
lost, bone crystal size increases, authigenic minerals (calcite, barite, and others)
accumulate, and macroscopic splitting, cracking and flaking occur. Macroporosity
increases, while microporosity decreases. Degradation of collagen is driven by
temperature fluctuations and the presence of UV light (Trueman et al. 2004:736). Major
physical changes occur in surface-resting bone within about two to five years after
deposition. However, the conditions in Kenya under which Trueman and others carried
out their study are probably quite different from those found on the late Pleistocene-early
Holocene Coleto Creek valley floor, where temperatures were lower and less variable,
moisture levels much higher and less variable, but most critically, heavy tree cover was
probably present. During the growing season, extensive deciduous tree canopy not only
shields the site from UV radiation, it acts as thermal insulation and creates a layer of leaf
litter that in itself acts as a shielding microenvironment. In Chapter 8, I showed how this
kind of microenvironment is critical to the survival of moisture-dependent and
saprophilous snail species. For large mammal bone, Behrensmeyer (1978:159) suggests
that weathering is slower in more heavily vegetated habitats. Experiments by Brain
(1981:115-116 and Fig. 120) show that bleaching, cracking and protein loss are retarded
by shade. According to Brain, in shaded situations, fat may be retained in bones for
decades. I suspect that the Coleto Creek floodplain supported a heavy deciduous tree
canopy during the late Pleistocene and early Holocene, significantly reducing UV light
levels and fluctuations in moisture and temperature, and this canopy was a critical factor
in sustaining snail and amphibian populations, as well as retarding bone weathering.
1404

Color and Texture Groups
Regardless of whether ambient or hearth-related bone is considered, there is some
variation in the color and surface texture of the fragments. Scattered throughout the
deposits are occasional fragments that have obviously been discolored or otherwise
altered by exposure to fire. These are not abundant, but they are present in both ambient
and hearth-related bone. Figure 10.11 is a macrophoto of a small unidentifiable fragment
selected to show the effects of pronounced calcining.

The largest group of fragments consists of semi-glossy, reddish-brown, orange, or
brown fragments. These are well-preserved, appear hard, perhaps proteinaceous, and
when broken may exhibit spiral-like fractures. The source of the rubification is unknown;
it does not appear to be fire-reddening. It may be preferential uptake of iron from
groundwater, but if so, is remarkably uniform. The color affects the whole bone, not just
the surface. Figure 10.12 shows two very small unidentified fragments selected from the
N109 E96 bulk matrix sample to illustrate this color-texture class. The kind of vertebrate
and the element are unknown. The source of the edge rounding on the upper example is
unknown; it could be gastric digestion or groundwater diagenesis, but is not typical of the
most of the bone from the bench. Notice the hard, glossy texture and absence of surface
pitting or etching, splitting, or flaking. This group appears unweathered and little altered
except for fragmentation (either perimorten or in the ground) and rubification.

The second, slightly less abundant group consists of beige, earthy or mattetextured fragments that appear more porous and softer, and perhaps less proteinaceous
(?). It is not clear whether this group has experienced slight weathering or whether there
1405

might be some other cause for the different appearance. Because these fragments are
more porous, they are much more likely to have black surface manganese stains and
yellow uranium oxide stains. Figure 10.13 shows a small unidentified fragment from the
same provenience as the previous examples. Note the nonglossy, slightly pitted
appearance and the irregular broken edge.

Figure 10.11. Calcined Bone Fragment. Macrophoto of a small unidentified ambient bone
fragment, showing crazing and white to gray colors characteristic of
calcining. This specimen was found in the vicinity of Feature 7 (Fig. 4.49)
and could be associated with it. N109 E96 (92.35-92.30 m), bulk matrix,
coarse fraction.

Why, then, are there two different color-texture groups in the same deposits? One
hypothesis might be that these represent both unweathered and slightly weathered groups
1406

that entered the site through somewhat different taphonomic pathways. This seems
unlikely, however, because both groups are present in the same samples, and in particular
both groups are present in the hearth deposit, a bone bed which there is good reason to
suspect accumulated as a relatively short-term single event. Another possibility is that the
color-texture groups represent slightly different responses to diagenesis by different taxa
or different elements. Some of the bone comes from animals spending part or all of their
lives in water (fish, frogs, salamanders), and these, like the birds, probably have less
dense bone than terrestrial, cursorial mammals. Likewise, some elements (scapulae, for
example) may have less dense bone than load-bearing long bones, or teeth. Weathering
responses of different elements from the same carcass are known to vary according to
exposure history (Lyman and Fox 1989:300). This problem could be attacked by scoring
the fragments individually for taxon, element, color, and texture, but that level of detail is
beyond the scope of the present study. The fragments in Appendix 6 have been scored for
taxon and element, and some of the fragments from the N109 E96 matrix have been
scored for color, but the complete set of characters has not been recorded for any sample.
In order to investigate the size distribution and color patterning of the ambient
bone, fragments from three excavation levels (92.05-92.00 m, 92.15-10 m, and 92.3592.30 m) in the lower part of unit N109 E96 were recorded. This sample consists of a
total of 414 bone fragments (not yet identified or sorted by species) picked from the
coarse fraction residue derived from the bulk matrix passing the 1/4-inch screen in this
unit.

The maximum dimension of each bone fragment was recorded to the nearest 0.1
mm with dial calipers, and a Munsell color was recorded except where the bone fragment
1407

was too small or the surface was not clearly visible; color could be recorded for 275
fragments. Munsell notations were entered in a spreadsheet and a cluster analysis was
done. The cluster analysis (not illustrated here because the dendrograph is too complex
for legibility) revealed three principal groups:
Group 1: a large group (56%) of reddish-brown, semi-glossy fragments averaging
about 3.82 YR 4.58/4.20
Group 2: a slightly smaller number (41%) of beige, matte-textured fragments
averaging about 7.28 YR 6.16/4.10
Group 3: a very small number (3%) of gray or white calcined bone fragments
averaging about 3.33 YR 4.13/0.33

Manganese and Uranium Oxide Staining
Black manganese dioxide surface coatings are fairly common on many of the
bone fragments from the bench deposits. In most cases, these are small irregular patches,
but one or two very small fragments entirely coated in manganese stains have been seen.
These can be distinguished from charred bone by careful examination under
magnification. Stained bones are probably more common among the more porous, beige,
matte-textured color group.

Manganese-stained bones are perhaps most often reported from wet cave deposits
in limestone terrain (Shahack-Gross 1997; López-González, Grandal-d’Anglade and
Vidal-Romaní 2006) where the stains are formed by manganese-oxidizing bacteria in
damp but oxygenated, contexts with circumneutral pH. Occasionally, examples are
reported from open sites (Bloom 1986:236).

1408

Figure 10.12. Examples of Semiglossy Texture. Macrophotos of unidentified fragments,
both red-brown and semiglossy, from N109 E96 (92.35-92.30 m), bulk
matrix, coarse fraction. Edge rounding on “A” is not typical, and the cause
is unknown. Note absence of pitting, splitting, or root etching.
1409

Figure 10.13. Example of Matte Texture. This small unidentified fragment comes from
the same lot as the fragments in the previous figure, but is beige with a
matte texture and appears slightly weathered in comparison. N109 E96
(92.35-92.30 m), bulk matrix, coarse fraction.

Less common than manganese-stained bones are examples with a distinct yellow
cast that is suspected to be uranium oxide staining (see discussion in Chapter 4). These,
too, are probably found mainly among the beige, matte-textured group. According to
Millard and Hedges (1995), uranium content is higher in sites that are annually flooded or
that receive vadose water than waterlogged sites. Likewise, uranium content is higher in
sites with carbonate deposits than in peat.

1410

Carbonate Deposits

The animal bone from the bench deposits is unmineralized – that is, there is no
evidence of replacement of bone constituents by minerals in groundwater – but many of
the bones are heavily lime-encrusted. The crusts are simply patches of the enclosing
sediment (silt and clay particles, quartz sand) cemented in calcium carbonate that appear
identical in color, texture and hardness to the calcrete pans and rhizoconcretions
discussed in Chapter 4. Most of these encrustations are so hard that they cannot be
removed without destroying the bone. In some cases these have formed on the exterior
surfaces of intact bones. In cases where bone breakage occurred before or during burial,
breakage has provided an entry route for groundwater to invade the interior of the bone
and deposit carbonate inside, in many cases splitting and forcing the bone apart as a result
of continued carbonate growth (Fig. 10.14). In the collection are a number of “exploded”
rodent mandibles that have been slowly forced apart by calcareous growths, retaining the
teeth and mandible fragments in more or less correct anatomical position. In cases where
some teeth have fallen out of their sockets before or after burial, the vacant alveoli have
probably provided entry routes for carbonate.

Rodent Gnawing and Root Etching
No examples of rodent or carnivore gnawing have been seen. Nearly all the bone
is below the size range in which such damage is normally seen, in any case. Likewise, no
examples of root etching were seen (see Fisher 1995:Fig. 12 for an example). Surface
channels (see below) are present, but seem too small and too abrasive in nature to
represent root etching.
1411

Figure 10.14. Carbonate Growth Forces Longitudinal Splitting. The original break on this
very small unidentified tubular bone fragment allowed carbonate growth to
occur in the interior, resulting in longitudinal splitting. The carbonate here is
white and powdery, unlike the hard gray carbonate most commonly seen.
N109 E96 (92.35-92.30 m), bulk matrix, coarse fraction.

Fungal Bioerosion, Channeling and Pitting

Fungal degradation is an important part of bone diagenesis. The process starts
with above-ground weathering, and since fungi are aerobic, it can continue after burial as
long as the burial medium is moist and oxygenated (bacteria may possibly be implicated,
1412

as well). Fungal erosion results in tunnels and channels, termed “Hackett tunnels,” about
0.25 mm in width (Davis 1997:397). Presumably, fungal hyphae generate either acid
hydrolysis or enzymes (collagenases) that create localized dissolution of the bone.
Nicholson (1996:518) reports experimentally produced channels are about 0.5-2.0 mm
long and 0.03-0.10 mm wide, and she also reports pits about 0.02-0.05 mm in diameter.
Features this size are large enough to be seen with conventional light microscopy. For
illustrations, see Nicholson (1996:Figs. 3, 4) and Davis (1997:Fig. 13). Several authors
also report much smaller fungal tunnels and channels about 2-10 µm in width (Davis
1997:389-390) that would not be readily observable with conventional binocular
microscopy. Trueman and Martill (2002:376) report a variety of tunnel-like (“Wedl
tunnels”) and hole-like features ranging in size from about 5 µm up to 15 or even 30 µm
in diameter in very old fossil bone. Features this size should be detectable by thin
sectioning or scanning electron microscopy, but not by ordinary binocular microscopy.

Detecting fungal bioerosion may be important because it removes collagen,
affecting the suitability of the bone for radiocarbon assay, and because its presence or
absence may clarify the mode of death. Butchery, defleshing or cooking may remove
bacteria in the gut contents and impede bacterial degradation, as well as removing tissue
that might serve as a postmortem host for fungi (Trueman and Martill 2002:380-381). To
check for evidence of large-scale bioerosion features, small samples of ambient and
hearth deposit bone fragments were examined under a binocular microscope at 70X
(SEM imaging or histological thin sections were considered too ambitious for the present
study). At this magnification, features about 0.02 mm or greater in width ought to be
recognizable. The following samples were examined: from the hearth deposit (lot B107A), 87 bone fragments; from the ambient bone (five lots from N109 E96 bulk matrix,
1413

see below), 150 fragments. No definite examples of fungal bioerosion were seen at this
magnification, and indeed I would not expect features 30 µm or less in diameter to be
visible in any case, so this effort was inconclusive. However, other kinds of surface
modifications were visible at 70X.

A small percentage of the fragments examined at 70X had surface channels or
scars. Most of these appear to be abrasive rather than chemical in nature. These may be
straight or meandering, are often transverse to the long axis of the bone, and are usually
about 0.2 mm wide. Most are not very deep, though some are deep enough to expose the
medullary cavity. One of the more extreme and deeply channeled examples is shown in
Fig. 10.15. This one, which resembles a termite-riddled stick, is partially obscured by
white powdery carbonate that has infilled many of the features. In five samples selected
from the N109 E96 bulk matrix samples, the following showed channeling:
92.05-92.00 m: 5 out of 40 channeled
92.15-92.10 m: 0 out of 3 channeled
92.15-92.10 m, NE half: 0 out of 13 channeled
92.35-92.30 m: 1 out of 21 channeled
92.55-92.50m: 8 out of 76 channeled

Nearly all the best-developed examples of channeling were seen on short sections
of long bone shafts, probably from small rodents or insectivores. For some reason, other
kinds of fragments (vertebrae, maxillary or cranial fragments) were mostly unaffected.

Much more common than channels are small, shallow pits usually about 0.4 mm
across but ranging from 0.1 to as much as 1.2 mm or more in diameter. They are so
diverse in concentration and size that I did not tally their frequency. In some cases these
1414

are clustered or coalesced to form larger cratered or “gnawed” appearing fields, often
near the end of a bone fragment. The more extreme examples resemble termite-infested
wood, and indeed it may be in some cases that both channeling and pitting are due to
some kind of insect predation (carrion beetles?; cf. Korth 1979:260), either above ground,
in leaf litter, or after burial. Both pits and channels seem to be uncommon on amphibian
or fish bone, perhaps because of differences in bone hardness. They are probably too
small to represent rodent gnawing, and are easily overlooked without magnification.

Figure 10.15. Surface-Channeled Shaft Fragment, Ambient Bone. Unidentified long bone
shaft fragment with surface channels, some infilled with carbonate deposits.
Channels are probably too large to represent fungal bioerosion. N109 E96
(92.05-92.00 m, bulk matrix, coarse fraction).

1415

Shallow conical pits without overhanging edges resemble tooth pitting produced
on small mammal bone by Bofi foragers of central Africa. Landt (2004) collected bones
discarded (without passing through the digestive tract) after native foragers had gnawed
the meat off. Prey included giant pouched rats and galagos, both weighing about a
kilogram, and small murid rats and mice weighing less than a kilogram. Tooth pits on
murid rat and mouse bone had a median diameter of 0.22 mm, mean of 0.47 ± 0.40
(range, 0.20-1.13 mm; Landt 2004:Table 5.5) and appear to resemble the pits seen on the
Berger Bluff bone (see Landt 2004:Figs. 5.2, 5.4).

Cutmarks
Possible butchering marks have been found on only three bones from the bench
deposits. One is a left distal humerus of a raccoon (Procyon lotor) that appears to have
a spirally fractured proximal end. This specimen (Fig. 10.16) was embedded horizontally
in the cutbank profile (in stratum 2C, at about 92.46 m; Fig. 4.57) and was struck by the
trowel while profiling. The specimen is badly fissured and was removed in a block
and treated with PVA at the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory. On the anterior
surface is an oblique V-shaped cut mark about 9 mm long and 0.3 to 0.6 mm wide,
taking the form of two narrow V-shaped marks at the distal end. This scar is partly filled
with sediment and is coated with PVA, making it difficult to see whether it
represents trowel damage or stone tool damage. Judging by what can be seen, it seems
more likely that the scar was left by a stone tool, perhaps a chert flake. The opposite side
of the bone, which was cleaned in the laboratory, has a great many smaller scars that
were obviously left by a dental pick during cleaning. These are much shallower,
shorter, and usually fresher appearing.
1416

Another specimen consists of a small fragment apparently broken off one of two
larger pieces of turtle plastron (Fig. 4.54) which was also struck by a shovel during
cleaning of the cutbank profile. These turtle plastron fragments (from stratum 1, at 92.12
and 92.08 m) are also shown on the cutbank profile (Fig. 4.22). The small fragment
bearing the cutmarks measures 11.3 mm x 9.5 mm across and is 2.6 mm thick. It has two
parallel cutmarks on what may be the interior (?) surface (Fig.10.17). The marks are 3.0
mm and 3.4 mm long and are 0.2 mm wide, spaced 1.0 mm apart. Lime deposits and a
few sediment grains are visible in the marks, which are deeply U-shaped in cross-section.
These marks are not fresh and are believed to have been made with a chert flake.

The third specimen was found in N109 E96 (92.45-92.40) and consists of a very
small, thin, somewhat curved bone, perhaps a skull fragment, from some very small
unidentified animal (Fig. 10.18). It measures 4.0 mm x 6.2 mm across and on the convex
face has a set of fine scratches, consisting of four subparallel scratches with a faint,
divergent fifth scratch. The set of marks as a group measures 2.5 mm long and 0.4 mm
wide. The scratches are very uniform in width and when measured with a calibrated
optical microscope reticle are only about 0.02 mm wide. The origin of these marks is
unknown. The bone fragment, although unidentified, appears to be from a small animal
for which butchering would not be expected, and the marks are much finer than those
generally left in butchering (as in the first two examples). They are definitely not a result
of excavation damage. These marks are wider than human tooth scratch marks found by
Landt (2004:Table 5.9) on the bones of murid rats and mice. His examples averaged 0.03
± 0.03 mm in width.

1417

Figure 10.16. Cutmarked Raccoon Humerus. Left distal humerus fragment of Procyon
lotor with oblique cutmark, perhaps made removing the pelt from the
foreleg. Cutbank, stratum 2C, 92.46 m (lot B-156). See also Fig. 4.57.

1418

Figure 10.17. Detail of Cutmarks on Turtle Plastron. Two parallel cutmarks on the
interior (?) surface of a small fragment of turtle plastron. This fragment is
one of six associated with two larger fragments identified as Emydidae
(Pseudemys concinna or Trachemys scripta). All of the fragments (lot B154) were found in the cutbank at the base of the stratum 1 exposure and are
presumably all part of a single individual. The cutmarks are old and are
definitely not excavation damage. This is the stratigraphically lowest bone
known from the entire site. The location of the plastron is shown in Figs. 3.1
and 4.22 and an in situ photo of the largest fragment is shown as Fig. 4.54.

1419

Although surface marks created by trampling and sedimentary abrasion (Fisher
1995:Figs. 8, 9) can sometimes mimic cutmarks left by humans, the cutmarks on the first
two specimens (and possibly the third) appear to conform morphologically to marks left
by stone tools (compare Fig. 10.17 to Fisher 1995:Figs. 1, 2a, 2b).

Chemical Dissolution: Limited Evidence, Ambiguous Sources

If bone fragments from the bench deposits are examined under magnification
(10-70X), some evidence of chemical dissolution can occasionally be seen. Occasional
extreme cases are seen where large areas of surface bone have been removed, exposing
cancellous or fibrous bone structure underneath (Fig.10.19). These are uncommon, and
many of them appear to be the poorly ossified ends of amphibian bones. Amphibian
bones often have cartilage attachments at the end, and the adjacent part is poorly ossified
and easily degraded by weak acids (Fig. 10.20). The same thing might be true for juvenile
mammal bones. In other cases, there are small damaged areas on the articular ends of
long bones, exposing chemically-rounded interior cancellous bone.

In cases like these, it is not always clear whether there has first been mechanical
damage that exposed the cancellous bone to subsequent chemical attack, or if the damage
is simply due to chemical removal of bone alone. A few bone splinters appear heavily
weathered into irregular surface contours, perhaps by groundwater contact. A few more
have broken edges that have subsequently been rounded and polished (Figs. 10.12, A;
10.21) and these are almost certainly due to gastric polish, but they are not particularly
common.
1420

Figure 10.18. Unidentified Fragment with Cutmarks. Small flat bone fragment from
unknown animal with four subparallel fine scratches. Larger grooves visible
on surface are natural sulci. Ambient bone, N109 E96 (92.45-92.40 m, lot
B-136.

1421

Figure 10.19. Surface-Corroded Bone Fragment From the Hearth Deposit. Chemical
attack (either groundwater or stomach acids) appears to have removed
surface bone from this small unidentified fragment, exposing the cellular
structure underneath. N113 E98 (92.40-92.30 m, approximately upper 5 cm
of level), lot B-107A.

1422

Figure 10.20. Corroded Long Bone Epiphysis (?) From the Hearth Deposit. Articular end
(?) of unidentified bone fragment with chemically corroded surface. N113
E98 (92.40-92.30 m, approximately upper 5 cm of level), lot B-107A.

For both the hearth deposit and the ambient bone, mechanical breakage is far
more pervasive and destructive than chemical alteration for the collection as a whole, and
dissolution is in most cases not readily apparent except with magnification. Likewise,
chemical alteration has not significantly reduced the identifiability of the elements, unlike
mechanical breakage.

1423

Figure 10.21. Edge-Polished Long Bone Fragment From the Hearth Deposit.
Unidentified long bone splinter with edge rounding and (gastric?) polishing
on one end. N113 E98 (92.40-92.30 m, approximately upper 5 cm of level),
lot B-107A.

Neutral pH soils usually have calcium and phosphate concentrations close to
saturation with respect to hydroxyapatite, and the rate of dissolution is therefore
very much slower than the few years or so that would be the case for pure water,
Therefore, most dissolution takes place when conditions change and become
greatly undersaturated, either due to a reduction in pH or, more commonly,
through recharging with fresh water. Such recharging happens in contexts with
active hydrology, such as when close to the ground surface (percolating rainwater
not yet equilibrated with soil hydroxyapatite), or in highly conductive soils (such
as sands and gravels), which themselves are often found as alluvial deposits on
flood plains and so on. This provides an adequate explanation for the general, if
anecdotal, impression of excavators that bones from sandy deposits and/or flood
plains are generally much more porous and friable (Hedges 2002:323-324).

1424

The bench deposits are an exception to the above statement. While there was an
active and frequent groundwater presence in the late Pleistocene and early Holocene, it
was well saturated with carbonate from the Goliad Formation. Very alkaline
environments can lead to increased calcium/phosphorus ratios in bone and ultimately to
bone solubility (Linse and Burton 1990), but the bench deposits may have been
circumneutral during most of their history.

Some of the bone has demonstrably been “digested,” but whether the digestion is
by groundwater or the stomach acids of predators is usually unclear unless some kind of
abrasive polish is associated. Postburial alteration of bone involves some welldocumented processes (reduced microporosity, increased macroporosity and crystallinity,
uptake of calcium and uranium compounds; Hedges 2002; Hedges and Millard 1995) that
are distinct from predator digestion, but not necessarily by surface inspection at 10-70X.

Fragmentation

Fragmentation of animal bone can occur from a variety of causes. Butchery or
dismemberment of large or medium-sized animals by humans can result in fragmentation,
but there are very few specimens from the bench deposits that fall into these size
categories and might be candidates for this sort of process. All the rest of the bone is from
small animals, and must have been fragmented by different processes. Ethnographic
accounts show that when small animals are consumed by humans, they are normally
cooked whole and either swallowed whole, roughly torn apart, or pounded on some sort
of anvil. The murid rat and mouse bones studied by Landt were roasted, but had little
damage (but recall that these were bones that were discarded, not ground up and passed
1425

through the human digestive tract). He observes that “Even on the small MRM bones (N
= 27), there is little fragmentation of whole bones, and most of the mastication damage is
limited to the proximal and distal ends. This damage is discernible in crenulated edges
that resulted in the removal of small amounts of cancellous bone tissue but did not result
in the removal of epiphyseal ends” (Land 2004:67).

Fragmentation of bone from small animals can result from mastication by humans
or other carnivores, from dismemberment by raptors, possibly from fluvial redeposition
(but see the discussion in a later section of the hearth deposit), from sediment contraction
and expansion during burial, or from excavation damage by archeologists. In the bench
deposits, I believe the chief causes of breakage are mastication, sediment compression,
and excavation damage. To a limited extent, these different sources can be discerned by
examining the bone under magnification. If the bone was broken while it still retained
significant amounts of collagen, a spiral break should result, resembling the broken edge
seen in Fig. 10.12, A (Lyman 1994:320). This kind of break could result from
mastication, pounding, trampling, or other sorts of perimortem damage. If the bone is
broken after it has become decollagenated, usually by prolonged burial, either a clean
transverse snap (for dense bones like long bones) or a jagged, irregular break might be
expected (Lyman 1994:320), but in any case the surface of the break should have the
same color as the rest of the bone. Bones broken during the bench excavations have
rather light-colored, usually rough-textured breaks that make an obvious contrast with the
rest of the bone. Careful microscopic examination of the collection from the bench shows
that there are all three kinds of breaks, singly and in combination. Some fragments, for
example, have both old snaps and fresh excavation damage. Microscopic examination (up
to 70X) very often shows sediment grains or carbonate deposits (or occasionally
1426

manganese deposits) in the medullary interiors of bone fragments or covering broken
edges, indicating that the bones were already broken before they were excavated.

Perhaps in most cases, fresh breaks can be reliably distinguished from old ones,
but distinguishing mastication from sediment compression breakage is less certain.
Smoke and Stahl (2004) studied sediment compression breakage of Peromyscus leucopus
(white-footed mouse) bones, but since they used green bone in a gravel matrix, the results
have limited relevance to Berger Bluff. Their study showed that gravel compaction
produces extensive breakage of bones extracted from screech owl pellets, but much less
breakage of bones that were artificially macerated.

Measurement of Size Grading

Several lots representing both the hearth deposit and ambient bone have been
measured. For the hearth deposit, lots B-105, B-107 and B-149 have been measured,
while lots B-106 and B-107A have not (no bone was found on the 1/4-inch screen from
these levels). Fragments were measured to the nearest tenth of a millimeter with a pair of
sliding vernier calipers marked in 0.05 mm increments. Measurements were made of the
longest dimension on each fragment, regardless of whether the long axis corresponded to
the anatomical orientation of the bone. In some cases the dimension measured was
actually diagonal to the natural orientation of the bone. For the ambient bone, the most
accessible and representative lots are from the bulk matrix samples passing the 1/4-inch
screen in N109 E96, so a few of the lots that have been picked were selected for
measurement (no lot numbers have been assigned for these yet). Lots from the 92.0592.00 m, 92.15-92.10 m (SW half, NE half), and 92.35-92.30 m levels were selected for
1427

measurement, and bones found on the 1/4-inch screen (there are only three from these
levels) were included. Measurements of the ambient lots were made measured to the
nearest tenth of a millimeter with a pair of plastic dial calipers marked in 0.10 mm
increments. The difference in measuring instruments is not thought to have any
significant effect on comparing the two categories of bone. A total of 1096 fragments has
been measured, and the results are shown in Table 10.14 and Figure 10.22.

The median size for all fragments measured from the bench deposits is just 3.10
mm and is identical for the hearth deposit and ambient bone. The mean for the ambient
bone is slightly smaller, probably because of slightly more rigorous collection technique.
The size distributions for both categories of bone are right-skewed and are probably very
slightly truncated on the left due to failure to measure bits of bone smaller than 0.8 mm
(Figure 10.22). Figure 10.23 shows the array of bone in lot B-107A. This lot has not yet
been sorted, identified or measured, but it is entirely comparable in appearance and
composition to the lots that have already been studied.

As the illustration shows, most of this bone is smaller than 1/4-inch mesh, but the
recovery techniques used were effective in capturing it. The largest bones recovered from
the bench deposits are the raccoon humerus fragment (Fig. 10.16), 6.56 cm long, and a
large turtle (Emydidae) hypoplastron fragment 7.8 cm long, both recovered from the
cutbank. However, neither of these is included in the measured lots, so neither appears in
Figure 10.22, and it is likely that there are a few unidentified fragments in the bench from
animals larger than raccoons or turtles.

1428

The frequency profiles shown in Figure 10.22 are not particularly diagnostic of
anything except friability. The leptokurtic, somewhat right-skewed shape of the curve is
typical for size distributions of all kinds of friable material recovered in archeological
excavations (potsherds, firecracked rock, and glass fragments, for example). I have seen
no published size curves for animals of comparable size, but there are a few published
frequency curves for bone fragments derived from large animals (Bar-Oz et al. 2005:Fig.
13.4; Harrell 1988:Fig. 1; Lyman 1994:Fig. 8.10; Watson 1972:Fig. 1), and these have
the same general shape, differing mainly in the units used for the X axis.

Table 10.14. Size Grading of Bone Lots.
Ambient bone [92.05-92.00, 92.15-92.10 (SW half, NE half), and 92.35-92.30 m levels]
mean
3.48 mm
median
3.10 mm
standard deviation
2.67 mm
skewness*
13.01
range
1.1-50.0 mm
N
417
Hearth deposit (Lots B-105, B-107, and B-149)
mean
4.00 mm
median
3.10 mm
standard deviation
2.96 mm
skewness*
2.15
range
0.8-20.9 mm
N
679
Combined samples
mean
median
standard deviation
skewness*
range
N

3.81 mm
3.10 mm
2.86 mm
5.50
0.8-50.0 mm
1096

* As computed in Microsoft Excel 97.
1429

Figure 10.22 Size Distribution of Ambient and Hearth Deposit Bone Fragments. Samples
of ambient bone (N109 E96, 92.05-92.00 m, 92.15-92.10 m, 92.35-92.30 m;
bulk matrix, coarse fraction and ¼-inch screen, N = 417) and hearth deposit
bone (lots B-105, B-107, and B-149; N = 679) are measured to the nearest
tenth of a millimeter for maximum length and plotted here. One large
ambient bone fragment falls off the graph and has been omitted.
MEASURES OF ABUNDANCE
Rational Basis for Counting

The animals represented in the hearth deposit are believed to have arrived at
Berger Bluff in the digestive tract of a predator, deposited as coprolites (this issue will be
discussed later in much more detail). Whether the entire carcass was deposited depends
1430

on the particular consumption and excretion history of each animal unit, but in any case
the animals represented are so small that it is unlikely they were extensively butchered
and shared among multiple consumers. There is, then, a fairly high probability that bones
from the entire carcass are present in the hearth deposit (or to put it another way, that
there has been little off-site bone loss), although since much of the bone bed probably
remains unexcavated, the sample is incomplete.

Figure 10.23. Fragmented Animal Bone From the Hearth Deposit. Unsorted bone
fragments from N113 E98 (approximately upper 5 cm of 92.40-92.30 m
level), lot B-107A. Fragments picked in December, 1989 from loose matrix
wet-sieved by Boyce Cabaniss. This view is representative of the size and
degree of fragmentation of both the hearth deposit and ambient bone. These
fragments have not been identified or measured yet. Compare with Walker
(1975:Fig. 1).
1431

For the ambient bone, the situation is different. Most of this bone is thought to
represent what Lyman calls “background scatters” (Lyman 1994:189-191) – animals that
may have died on the site, been deposited in coprolites, or possibly arrived as clastic
material in overbank flooding (although there is no evidence of fluvial abrasion). For this
material, the animals may or may not have arrived on the site as complete carcasses – the
issue is problematical. These points need to be kept in mind when considering the
following discussion.

In tallying the bone fragments from the bench deposits, a reasonable set of goals
might include:

1) estimating the relative proportions of the different taxa;
2) making at least an order-of-magnitude estimate of the number of individuals
present in the hearth deposit.

Various measures of abundance have been proposed for use in zooarcheology,
and the literature on their merits or defects is extensive. Many of them are designed to
deal with situations where large animals are butchered in the field and returned to a base
camp for further processing, and consequently have little relevance to the present study.
The principal measures are:

NISP (number of identified specimens): simply the frequency of elements or fragments of
any kind that can be assigned to a particular taxon.

1432

MNI (minimum number of individuals): the minimum number of animals necessary to
account for the elements or fragments in a particular provenience unit (site,
stratum, arbitrary level, or other three-dimensional unit). Determined by counting
the most abundant element (for example, left distal humerus), often refined by
noting differences in size or age of individual.

Other measures (not used in the present study) include:

MAU (minimum animal units): specimen counts divided by the frequency of the element
in a skeleton of that particular taxon.

MNE (minimum number of elements): see Lyman (1994:102-104).

WAE (weighted abundance of elements): see Hesse (1982:166-167).

The most useful discussions of the NISP and MNI measures are found in Grayson
(1984) and Klein and Cruz-Uribe (1984). There are several well-known problems with
using NISP as a measure of abundance. Fragmentation of bone (as in the Berger Bluff
case) tends to drive up the specimen counts, inflating the apparent number of animals,
although if fragmentation is thorough enough, it can reduce identifiability to the point
that it begins to have the opposite effect and the number of identifiable specimens will
level off (Marshall and Pilgram 1993; Cannon 2005). Different taxa may also have
different numbers of bones, so taxa that have the highest number of easily identifiable
elements may be overrepresented. In the Berger Bluff assemblages, the most

1433

problematical taxa are those that are likely to be represented mostly by vertebrae – the
snakes, and to a lesser extent, salamanders and fish.

To take a graphic example, there are 25 complete snake vertebrae plus four
vertebral fragments in the identified part of the hearth deposit, and (a rough estimate)
perhaps another three dozen in lot B-107A not yet sorted or identified. Thus, there are
probably at least 62 snake vertebrae, perhaps more or less. Since colubroid snakes in
general have about 200 or more vertebrae per individual (Romer 1956:229), without
further information we cannot say if these 62 vertebrae represent 62 distinct snakes or
perhaps a fourth of one single snake. Fortunately, some of the vertebrae are identifiable at
least to the family level and below, showing that in fact there are several different kinds
present.

The principal objection raised by Grayson against MNI as a measure of
abundance is the problem of aggregation. To take a heuristic example, suppose that the
most abundant element in a site for some particular taxon is the left humerus, and there
are four distal and two proximal fragments. If the entire site is the basis for computing
MNIs, then the four left distal humeri provide a minimum number of four individuals.

On the other hand, suppose the uppermost stratum of the site has only three distal
fragments, and the lowest stratum has one distal and two proximal left humeri, and
likewise suppose these two strata are sufficiently separated that mixing is unlikely. In that
case, the upper stratum would yield an MNI of three and the lower of two, for a total of
five. As Grayson (1984:27-49) points out, the number of provenience units (strata,
arbitrary levels, excavation squares or areas) that are used to subdivide the collection and
1434

the assumptions underpinning these subdivisions have a profound effect on not just the
computed number of individuals, but the ratios between different taxa.

Because the hearth deposit is believed to represent a single relatively short-term
depositional event, it is appropriate to aggregate all the lots of bone shown in Fig. 10.5
for a single MNI calculation. For the ambient bone, the situation is somewhat different.
The bone fragments come from eight different excavation units, scattered through fill that
accumulated over the course of a couple of thousand years, and it seems unlikely that
elements from stratum 2D in the westernmost units could be part of the same individuals
as elements from stratum 1 in the easternmost units. In this case, it seems reasonable to
use depositional strata as the units of aggregation, even though the geological
depositional events and the taphonomic depositional events need not have any particular
relationship.

Accordingly, I have calculated MNIs for the ambient bone in two different ways:
aggregating elements across the entire site (“MNI SITE”) and aggregating them by strata
(“MNI STRATA”). As expected (and as in the examples given by Grayson) aggregating
by strata produces somewhat higher minimum numbers. Where possible, I have also
taken into account animal size and presence of juveniles in calculating MNIs. For
example, among the bird material from the hearth deposit are sparrow-sized, blue jaysized, and quail-sized elements. None have been identified taxonomically, but three sizes
of birds seem to be represented, and I believe at least three individuals are present.

Taxonomic uncertainty may also reduce the precision of MNI counts as well as
the total MNI count. For example, Lot B-106 has a single Cryptotis parva molar and a
1435

partial edentulous left mandible that could only be ascribed to Soricidae. These are
probably the same animal, but even if the mandible is listed as Cryptotis parva, the MNI
will remain at one. In this case, uncertainty changes nothing.

The salamanders from the hearth deposit are a more nettlesome problem,
however. It is highly likely that only one species, Ambystoma texanum, is represented in
the entire site. However, some fragments were identified as Ambystoma texanum, others
as Ambystoma sp. (included are three vertebrae slightly larger than typical A. texanum
vertebrae), and still others as “Salamander, unidentified.” Classing all of these as A.
texanum and computing MNIs accordingly would be too presumptive, perhaps. Keeping
them in separate categories produces a different set of MNI counts. No MNI values are
provided for generalized categories like “Salamander, unidentified” or “Rodent,
unidentified,” because more than one taxon might be represented in categories like this.
MNI counts are meaningless for such taxonomically vague categories, so the symbol N/A
(not applicable) is used in the specimen tables.

Rabbits from the ambient fauna provide another example of multiple levels of
uncertainty. A single distal metapodial classed as “Leporidae” comes from a large rabbit,
perhaps swamp rabbit or blacktailed jackrabbit (1.5-4 kg body weight), and there is also a
scapula fragment resembling blacktailed jackrabbit. Most of the remaining material
comes from smaller rabbits than these. Eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus floridanus, 1-2 kg)
seems most plausible, but most is simply classified as “Sylvilagus sp.”. Cabaniss also
classified some of the material as Sylvilagus cf. S. audubonii or S. floridanus. Sylvilagus
audubonii is the desert cottontail, a xeric upland chaparral species whose present range in
west Texas approaches no closer to Berger Bluff than LaSalle County (Schmidly
1436

2004:463). Based on its present range, desert cottontail seems implausible for the Berger
Bluff material, but Cabaniss felt it was a reasonable match from an osteological
perspective. In summary, although the rabbit material is listed under four different
categories, it seems rather likely that there are only two species, a large rabbit
(uncommon, perhaps jackrabbit) and a smaller one (common, perhaps eastern cottontail).
Some of the material listed only as Sylvilagus comes from the same excavation levels (or
adjacent ones) as that classified as S. audubonii/S. floridanus. Surely these must represent
parts of the same individuals. I have listed suggested MNI estimates for the Sylvilagus sp.
material even though it is unidentified because there are simply too many specimens to
disregard.

Grayson and others have shown that the relationship between NISP and MINI is
usually curvilinear, or is linear when plotted on logarithmic axes (Bobrowsky 1982;
Grayson 1984:49-68). In some cases, the relationship may be linear. For the bench
deposits, the logarithmic function is weak (r2 = 0.46, plotted on linear axes) for the hearth
deposit, slightly stronger (r2 = 0.65) for ambient bone when aggregated by strata, and a
linear function yields slightly higher r2 values for both. The corresponding correlation
coefficients are considerably lower than those shown by Grayson (1984:Table 2.18),
perhaps because he uses larger samples. Some analysts have suggested the true number of
original individuals producing the bone assemblage lies somewhere between the NISP
and MNI values, and for the Berger Bluff case, this is almost certainly true. It is also clear
that the discrepancy varies by taxon. For the least shrew elements mentioned above, the
NISP (2) and MNI (1) are not far apart. For the salamander remains, the minimum
numbers probably underestimate the original number of individuals to a significant
degree.
1437

THE AMBIENT FAUNA
Table 10.15 lists counts for the identified portion of the ambient fauna. As the
table shows, the total minimum number of individuals is rather low (less than four
dozen), partly because the “background scatter” of bone in the site is only moderately
abundant, but chiefly because most of the lots analyzed were not collected with
techniques designed to recover small animal remains. As I have remarked earlier, where
fine sieving was used to process fill from unit N109 E96, much larger quantities of small
bone fragments were recovered, but nearly all of this bone has yet to be identified and is
not listed in Table 10.15.

When all of the bone has been picked from the N109 E96 matrix and identified, it
will be possible to compare the bench deposits against other early floodplain sites where
fine sieving has been employed, such as the Armstrong, Aubrey, Lubbock Lake, and
Wilson-Leonard sites, to see how recovery rates and species composition compare. The
bench deposits can supply this information, but studies are not yet complete.

Figures 10.8 to 10.10 show the simplified taxonomic composition by NISP, while
Fig. 10.24 shows the composition by MNI. Both kinds of diagrams are similar. The
assemblage consists almost entirely of small animals, but there are a handful of bone
fragments from large animals (possibly deer), and a number of specimens from mediumsized animals (mostly rabbits and a couple of raccoon specimens). Rabbits, gophers,
turtles, and salamanders are the most abundant taxa. Jackrabbit, cotton rat, raccoon,
unidentified large animals, turtles, water snake, and gar are all ambient taxa not known
from the hearth deposit (Table 10.1). Bone fragments probably entered the deposits
1438

through several different pathways. Some (for example, rabbit, raccoon, and some of the
deer-sized fragments) may be the result of on-site butchering by humans. Others may
have been deposited in human coprolites, but not in concentrated latrine areas like the
hearth deposit. Some of the small animal fragments may come from animals that died
naturally on the site, and it is possible that a few fragments (particularly the smaller fish
vertebrae) might have been deposited as clastic material during flooding, although as I
have pointed out earlier, there is no evidence of fluvial abrasion on the bone.

The rabbits and most of the small mammals likely were obtained in brushy or
open to parkland habitats in the adjacent sandy uplands. Raccoons and moles may have
been obtained on the Coleto Creek floodplain, the moles perhaps in less heavily wooded
parts. Gophers, woodrats, small perching birds, and voles might have originated either in
the uplands or less heavily wooded parts of the floodplain. The fish, water snake, frogs
and toads, salamanders, and turtles are diagnostic of standing water sources and would
have been found in (or for some groups, near) the creek.

In general, there is a heavy representation of non-mammals from riparian habitats
and mammals from upland habitats, with the riparian animals roughly twice as abundant
as the upland animals, whether measured by NISP or MNI. Most of the riparian taxa are
heavily dependent on reliable water sources, especially during breeding season.

1439

Table 10.15. Ambient Fauna: Measures of Abundance.
NISP

Fish, unidentified
12
Snakes
1
Virginia striatula
Nerodia sp.
1
Snake, unidentified
2
Lizards, unidentified
1
Turtles
cf. Gopherus hexagonatus
1
cf. Sternotherus odoratus
1
Kinosternidae, unidentified
1
Emydidae
8
Turtle, unidentified
4
Birds, unidentified
5
Rabbit or bird
10
Amphibians
cf. Bufo sp.
2
cf. Rana berlandieri
6
1
Rana catesbeiana
Frog/toad, unidentified
2
Salamanders
cf. Ambystoma sp.
6
Salamander, unidentified
2
Mammals
1
Cryptotis parva
1
Scalopus aquaticus
Geomys sp.
21
cf. Dipodomys ordii or D. compactus
2
2
Chaetodipus hispidus
1
Onychomys leucogaster
1
Sigmodon hispidus
Cricetidae, unidentified
1
Neotoma sp.
1
P. pinetorum or M. ochrogaster
4
cf. Sylvilagus audubonii or S. floridanus
4
Sylvilagus sp.
11
cf. Lepus californicus
1
Leporidae
1
2
Procyon lotor
Rodent, unidentified
18
Small mammal, unidentified
107
Mammal, unidentified
4
Animal, unidentified
338
TOTALS: 587

1440

MNI SITE MNI STRATA

2

2

1
1
N/A
1

1
1
N/A
1

1
1
1
1
1
1
N/A

1
1
1
1
3
3
N/A

2
3
1
N/A

2
3
1
N/A

1
N/A

3
N/A

1
1
5
1
1
1
1
N/A
1
1
1
2
1
N/A
1
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
35

1
1
6
1
2
1
1
N/A
1
3
2
3
1
N/A
1
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
45

Figure 10.24. Ambient Bone: Taxonomic Composition by Minimum Number of
Individuals. Relative proportions of major vertebrate categories are ranked
by MNI (Note: for matrix samples, only three levels are included, and not all
the bone from the levels is tallied). The minimum numbers shown here are
low – the first four categories have an MNI of only six apiece. Compare
with Figure 10.9.

1441

Heat-Altered Ambient Bone
Table 10.16 lists specimens with evidence of heat alteration in the analyzed
portion of the ambient bone assemblage. Artiodactyls (probably white-tailed deer),
unidentified gopher-sized animals, rabbits (Fig. 10.25), and a turtle appear to be
represented. There are also examples in the unanalyzed portion of the ambient
assemblage (Figs. 10.11, 10.26).
Table 10.16. Heat-Altered Ambient Bone.
Unit
N109 E103

Level
93.14-92.90

N109 E103

92.90-92.85

N110 E102

92.20-92.15

N110 E102
N110 E102

92.10-92.05
91.95-91.90

N110 E102

91.70-91.65

N111 E101

91.95-91.90

N109 E96
N109 E96

92.50-92.45
bulk matrix
92.45-92.40

N109 E96

92.40-92.35

N109 E96

92.25-92.20

Taxon
Description
Unidentified animal 2 calcined fragments from deersized animal (lot B-1)
Unidentified animal 1 calcined cancellous bone
probably from rabbit-sized or larger
animal (lot B-3)
Unidentified animal 7 small splinters of charred antler
(lot B-54)
Unidentified animal 1 charred antler splinter (lot B-57)
Unidentified animal 1 burned long bone shaft fragment
from Geomys-sized animal
(lot B-62A)
Unidentified animal 1 small sliver of charred antler (lot
B-69)
Unidentified animal 1 calcined pelvis (?) fragment from
Geomys-sized animal (lot B-88A)
cf. Lepus
1 calcined fragment, border of
glenoid fossa, rt scapula (lot B-157)
californicus
Sylvilagus cf.
2 proximal tibia fragments,
S. audubonii or
calcined, cracked and heat-warped
(lot B-136)
S. floridanus
Unidentified animal 1 charred long bone shaft fragment
(lot B-137)
Turtle
2 slightly heat-discolored carapace
(Kinosternidae?)
fragments (lot B-143)

See also lot B-133
1442

Juveniles
Osteological evidence of juvenile animals is surprisingly uncommon. Only four
specimens are known from the analyzed portion of the ambient bone. One is the shaft and
part of the distal end (with an unfused epiphysis) of a very gracile left tibia that compares
well with Dipodomys ordii (Ord kangaroo rat) or possibly Gulf Coast kangaroo rat
(Dipodomys compactus). This specimen (N109 E96, 92.35-92.30 m, lot B-140) was
found in the fill of Feature 7, a small pit (Figs. 4.39, 4.49). Another is the centrum of a
caudal vertebra (with unfused epiphyses) from an unidentified raccoon-sized animal
(N112 E97, 92.25-92.20 m, lot B-123). There are also an upper incisor and an
unidentified cheek tooth probably from a pocket gopher, Geomys sp., in lot B-158 (N109
E96, 92.70-92.65 m, bulk soil sample, coarse fraction).

Dipodomys ordii has a rather long breeding period, almost seven months
(Garrison and Best 1990:4); animals from Utah in captivity may produce up to five litters
per year (Egoscue, Bittmenn and Petrovich 1970:Table 1). In the Panhandle and
Oklahoma, young might be born from August to February or later, and young individuals
could appear anytime in fall, winter or spring (McCulloch and Inglis 1961; Hoditschek
and Best 1983). After birth, juveniles grow rapidly for the first 28 days, then more slowly
out to the 70th day (Smith, Richins and Jorgensen 1978). Dipodomys compactus is less
well known, but may breed in the summer (Baumgardner 1991:3).

Attwater’s pocket gopher (Geomys attwateri) breeds October to June with peaks
in December-January and April-May, producing at least two litters per year (Schmidly
1443

2004:334). The Texas pocket gopher (Geomys personatus) may breed year-round
(Schmidly 2004:342).

Bone Fragments From Large Animals
Fragments from large animals (larger than a raccoon or jackrabbit) are so
uncommon that they can be described individually here. All are found in the ambient
assemblage, none in the hearth deposit. Small fragments of thoroughly charred long bone
are almost impossible to distinguish from antler, so the identity of some of the small
slivers listed below is uncertain.
Lot B-1, N109 E103 (93.14-92.90 m). Two small fragments of thoroughly calcined long
bone from a deer-sized animal. Both are shades of black, medium to light gray, and
white. One fragment is 1.68 cm long, 7.8 mm wide, 3.2 mm thick with carbonate deposit
on a broken edge. The other is 1.40 cm long, 7.5 mm wide, 4.3 mm thick. These appear
slightly thinner than the midshaft of a modern white-tailed deer tibia.
Lot B-29, N109 E103 (92.05-92.00 m). Very small triangular splinter of beige (8YR
7.5/4) matte-textured bone, from some animal larger than a small mammal. Length, 1.19
cm, width 4.4 mm, thickness 3.0 mm. One fresh (?) break, plus old break with carbonate
deposit (dry bone fracture?).
Lot B-3, N109 E103 (92.90-92.85 m). Small irregular fragment of thoroughly calcined
cancellous bone from unknown animal, rabbit-sized or larger. Bone is white to light graybrown (10YR 7.5/1.5), 1.33 cm long, 8.3 mm wide, 5.6 mm thick.
Lot B-31, N109 E103 (92.00-91.95 m level, found at 91.95 m?). Long bone splinter 4.63
cm long, maximum width 0.97 cm, maximum thickness 4.5 mm. A fairly good match
with the midshaft of a modern white-tailed deer tibia (wall thickness 4.0-6.3 mm); has
green bone fracture on one end, excavation damage on the other. Exterior surface has
laminar flaking, as if weathered. Bone is light beige (10YR 8/3 to 7.5 YR 5.5/5) and
appears decollagenated (Fig. 10.27, A). A second fragment (Fig. 10.27, B) resembles the
first but does not join, has dry bone fractures on both ends; 17.9 mm long, 10.4 mm wide,
3.1 mm thick. Found at 91.992 m (?), these two fragments were found in the same area
but separated vertically by about 4 cm.

1444

Lot B-33, N110 E102 (93.08-92.90 m). Long bone shaft fragment 2.52 cm long, 1.31 cm
wide, 1.9-3.1 mm thick. Green bone fracture along one edge. Interior surface has thick
carbonate deposit. Exterior surface has hairline cracks oblique to long axis of element as
well as raised bone texture (probably from weathering), also oblique. Exterior is light
beige (6YR 7/4). This could possibly be a rib fragment from a deer-sized animal. Fig.
10.27, D.
A second smaller fragment (Fig. 10.27, C) is 14.9 mm long, 6.6 mm wide, 2.2 mm thick.
A small flat bone fragment (unknown element and animal, larger than a small mammal).
Could be a medium or large-sized animal. Bone is cream-colored (7.5YR 9/3) with heavy
chemical dissolution of all surfaces, because of which original type of break cannot be
determined.
Lot B-54, N110 E102 (92.20-92.15 m). Seven small splinters of charred bone or antler,
probably one specimen that shattered during excavation. the largest is 1.33 cm long, 3.2
mm wide, 1.9 mm thick. Exterior surface is light brown (7.5YR 4.5/3.5), charred interior
is brown-black (7.5YR 3/1); Fig. 10.27, E.
Lot B-57, N110 E102 (92.10-92.05 m). One charred bone or antler splinter, probably
related to the specimens in lot B-54. Light yellow-brown (7.5YR 7.5/2.5) with brownblack interior (7.5YR 2.5/0) and surface manganese stains, 1.56 cm long, 3.3 mm wide,
3.0 mm thick. Fig. 10.27, G.
Lot B-69, N110 E102 (91.70-91.65 m). Small splinter of charred bone or antler, 1.30 cm
long, 3.7 mm wide, 2.5 mm thick. Cream-colored and black, with manganese stains; Fig.
10.27, H.
Lot B-108, Plotted bone fragment at N113.64 E98.86, 92.14 m. Very small chip from
cortical wall of long bone (?) of raccoon-sized or larger animal. Matte-textured beige
bone with yellow (uranium oxide?) stain. Has dry bone fracture and very slight polish,
but not on broken surface. Small exterior pit. Length 8.9 mm, width 4.8 mm, thickness
1.7 mm.
Lot B-141, N109 E96 (92.30-92.25 m). Very small tabular section of the cortical wall of
a long bone (?) from a deer-sized animal (Fig. 10.27, F). Closely resembles lot B-31
specimens, but smaller fragment. Length 8.3 mm, width 5.6 mm, thickness 3.1 mm.
Surface is cream to beige (7.5YR 8/3.5) showing chemical dissolution and manganese
stains, with a chalky appearance. Breakage is probably dry bone fracture.
In addition to the above, there is a probable carapace fragment from a large
extinct tortoise (see the following text section).

1445

Figure 10.25. Calcined Rabbit Bones From the Ambient Fauna. Sylvilagus cf. S.
audubonii or S. floridanus (or possibly some other rabbit-sized animal), two
proximal tibia fragments, calcined, heat cracked and warped. Orientation
uncertain. The specimen on the left has a transverse heat crack that does not
show in this photo. N109 E96 (92.45-92.40 m), lot B-136.

1446

Figure 10.26. Calcined Fish Spine From the Ambient Fauna. Calcined base of dorsal fin
spine (?) from unidentified small fish. N109 E96 (92.35-92.30 m), bulk
matrix, coarse fraction. This fragment comes from one of the lots of bone
not yet analyzed.

1447

Figure 10.27. Ambient Bone and Antler From Large Animals. A, B, long bone shaft
splinters, identical in appearance but not joining, deer-sized animal, N109
E103 (92.00-91.95 m), lot B-31; C, flat fragment with chemical dissolution
(digestion?), D, possible rib fragment (?) from deer-sized animal, C-D are
both from N110 E102 (93.08-92.90 m), lot B-33; E, seven small splinters of
charred bone or antler, N110 E102 (92.20-92.15 m), lot B-54; F, long bone
(?) fragment from deer-sized animal, N109 E96 (92.30-92.25 m), lot B-141;
G, charred bone or antler splinter with manganese stains, N110 E102
(92.10-92.05 m), lot B-57; H, charred bone or antler splinter with
manganese stains, N110 E102 (91.70-91.65 m), lot B-69.

1448

Carapace Fragment From Extinct Large Tortoise (?)

A very distinctive small triangular bone fragment from the ambient bone
assemblage is tentatively identified as a plastron or carapace fragment from Gopherus
hexagonatus, an extinct large land tortoise. The fragment (Fig. 10.28) is 1.70 cm in
maximum length, 1.28 cm in maximum width, and 5.4 mm in maximum thickness. The
bone is beige (7.5YR 7.5/3.5), somewhat chalky and decollagenated in appearance. The
exterior surface (Fig. 10.28, A) has a fine raised linear texture that is probably an
adaptation for adhesion of the chitonous epidermal scutes. The opposite side exposes
very large cells from the interior cancellous bone, and the interior surface of the fragment
is missing, so the original thickness cannot be determined. One edge may correspond to
part of a suture. The specimen was found in unit N109 E96 (92.25-92.20 m), lot B-142,
in stratum 2A or at the contact with the overlying stratum 2B. The specimen is not
mineralized and is similar to other beige, matte-textured bone from the deposits.

Although this specimen is quite small, the texturing of the exterior surface is very
distinctive, and the coarse cellular structure on the opposite side even more so. Both the
texturing and the very coarse cells match a Gopherus hexagonatus specimen from the
Ingleside site in the Vertebrate Paleontology collections. No other taxa, either living or
extinct, could be found in the collections matching this combination of characters. In
particular, the large cellular structure rules out smaller kinds of turtles.

The chronology and paleoecology of Gopherus hexagonatus are poorly known.
Rancholabrean specimens are known from the Beaumont Formation in Willacy County
1449

(Westgate 1987), from the Ingleside fauna (Lundelius 1972), from Brooks County, the
latter dated at 17,950 ± 70 RCYBP (C. R. Lewis, personal communication). Other
specimens are also known from Briscoe County in the Texas Panhandle and from Kansas
(Reynoso and Montellano-Ballesteros 2004). The genus appeared at least as early as the
Miocene (Bramble 1982).

Figure 10.28. Carapace Fragment From Large Tortoise (?). Obverse and reverse views of
small bone fragment from ambient bone assemblage, tentatively identified
as extinct tortoise, Gopherus hexagonatus. A, exterior, surface with fine
raised texture; B, exposed cancellous bone with very large cells on interior.
N109 E96 (92.25-92.20 m), lot B-142, stratum 2A or contact with stratum
2B.

1450

Another giant tortoise of Rancholabrean age, Gopherus donlaloi, has recently
been described from northwestern Tamaulipas, but its geographic range is unknown
(Reynoso and Montellano-Ballesteros 2004).

These Pleistocene giant tortoises were very large turtles. Gopherus hexagonatus
had plastron lengths of 58-85 cm and carapace lengths of 59-64 cm (Westgate
1987:Table 28); Gopherus donlaloi has a recorded carapace length of 58 cm (Reynoso
and Montellano-Ballesteros 2004:Table 3). Geochelone wilsoni, the other common
extinct Rancholabrean turtle in south Texas, is considerably smaller. The contemporary
equivalent of these tortoises is Gopherus berlandieri, the Texas Tortoise, a nonburrowing subtropical species no more than 22 cm long (Vermersch 1992:124-128)
occasionally recovered from south Texas archeological sites (Shaffer 1989). The extinct
varieties were burrowing tortoises, and the genus is characteristic of friable sandy soils
(Bramble 1982:865). The Willacy County G. hexagonatus specimens were found in welldrained Rio Grande floodplain or levee deposits. In the Coleto Creek area, suitable
substrates for burrowing could probably be found anywhere in the creek floodplain or
sandy Miocene uplands. G. hexagonatus was formerly thought incapable of burrowing
(Auffenberg 1962:32), but the position of the Willacy County specimens suggests they
died in burrows, and the structure of the head and neck suggests an adaptation to digging
(Bramble 1982). Gopherus berlandieri is markedly ectothermic (see Vermersch
1992:126) and it has been suggested that the giant extinct species were likewise, but
capable of tolerating some climatic variation by burrowing (Westgate 1987:215).
Reynoso and Montellano-Ballesteros (2004:835) suggest that these giant tortoises
suffered extinction due to environmental desiccation and were replaced by G. berlandieri
because it is better adapted to arid climates.
1451

Figure 10.29. Ambient Bone, Various Lots and Taxa.
A, small salamander vertebra and B, larger salamander vertebra, both from N112 E97
(93.14-92.75 m, bag 1 of 2, lot B-111)
C, small snake vertebra, dorsal view, N110 E102 (92.45-92.40 m), lot B-46, from
sediment sample
D, Sylvilagus sp. right distal astragalus from small rabbit, dorsal view, N110 E102
(91.90-91.85 m), lot B-63
E, Sylvilagus sp. proximal right calcaneum from small rabbit, lateral view, N110 E102
(92.10-92.05 m), lot B-57
F, centrum of caudal vertebra from raccoon-sized mammal, N112 E97 (92.25-92.20 m),
lot B-123
G, very large frog, cf. Rana catesbeiana, proximal urostyle fragment, dorsal view, N109
E96 (92.50-92.45 m), lot B-135
H, Procyon lotor?, partial right M1 in carbonate concretion, lateral view, N110 E102
(92.60-92.55 m), lot B-40
I, Geomys sp., left mandible, lateral view, N110 E102 (92.50-92.45 m), lot B-43, in
carbonate concretion and fractured by carbonate growth
J, Geomys sp., right mandible with P4, M1 and M2, medial view, N110 E102 (92.45-92.40
m), lot B-45
1452

Figure 10.30. More Ambient Bone, Various Lots and Taxa.
A, unidentified fish tooth, orientation uncertain, and B, unidentified small mammal
patella, posterior view, both N110 E102 (92.05-92.00 m), lot B-59
C, salamander vertebra, dorsal view, and D, Cryptotis parva, edentulous right posterior
mandible fragment, medial view, both N109 E103 (93.14-92.90 m, sediment sample), lot
B-2
E, unidentified small fish, left mandible fragment, dorsolateral view, N109 E96 (92.8092.75 m), lot B-129
F, Sylvilagus sp., proximal scapula fragment, lateral view, and G, possible herpetofauna
(?), distal humerus embedded in carbonate; both N109 E103 (92.80-92.75 m), lot B-7

The southeastern gopher tortoise, Gopherus polyphemus, is considered a keystone
species because its remarkably long burrows provide habitat for many other species
(Eubanks, Michener and Guyer 2003). Replacement of G. hexagonatus by G. berlandieri
in south Texas presumably implies a significant reduction in burrow size, and this may
have had cascading effects on other fossorial fauna at the end of the Pleistocene.

1453

Figure 10.31. More Ambient Bone, Various Lots and Taxa.
A, unidentified Chaetodipus-sized rodent, proximal shaft of right femur (stained dark
reddish-brown), medial view, N109 E103 (92.75-92.70 m sediment sample), lot B-9
B, cf. Rana berlandieri, urostyle fragment, ventral view, N109 E103 (92.45-92.40 m
sediment sample), lot B-19
C, unidentified Chaetodipus-sized animal, left tibia shaft fragment, medial view, from
Feature 7 fill, N109 E96 (92.30-92.25 m), lot B-141A
D, unidentified large snake vertebra, ventrolateral view, N109 E96 (92.70-92.65 m), lot
B-131
E, Scalopus aquaticus, left distal humerus fragment (iron oxide stained), medial view,
N109 E96 (92.60-92.55 m), lot B-133
F, unidentified small bird, left proximal femur fragment, anterior view, N112 E99 (92.5092.45 m), lot B-92
G, cf. Rana berlandieri, pelvis fragment, posterior view, N109 E96 (92.45-92.40 m), lot
B-136

1454

Whittled Bone Pin (?)
This problematical item (Figs. 10.32, 10.33) is a small, tapering pin made of bone
(or possibly antler) recovered from N109 E96 (92.20-92.15 m), lot B-144 m. It is
distinctly tabular in cross-section, and when viewed on edge, appears somewhat
laminated. The tabular shape and faint laminations suggest it is bone. It was compared
under magnification to recent samples of bone and antler, and a sample of fossil
mammoth ivory. The surface texture also corresponds fairly well to antler, but not to
ivory. The object was broken during excavation, providing an opportunity to inspect a
fresh cross-section. In section, the interior is laminated and darker yellowish in color,
haloed by a lighter cream-colored zone (diagenesis after manufacture?).

The overall shape is irregularly tapering with heavily rounded edges, a rounded
tip, and heavily polished surfaces with occasional small carbonate deposits. The length is
1.65 cm, maximum width 4.7 mm, and maximum thickness 2.4 mm. Because of the
heavy rounding and polishing, it resembles a digested bone fragment with extensive
gastric polish, but there are faint striations on the flat surfaces that may be whittling
marks, and these suggest it is actually an artifact rather than digested bone. Most of the
striations are parallel to the long axis, but some deviate at slight angles.

This item is tentatively interpreted as a bone artifact rather than digested bone,
and if the identification is correct, it is the only bone artifact known from the bench
deposits. Its function is unknown.

1455

Figure 10.32. Whittled Bone (?) Pin. Whittled and polished tabular bone (?) or antler pin
from N109 E96 (92.20-92.15 m), lot B-144. Break is excavation damage.

1456

Figure 10.33. Detail of Whittled Bone (?) Pin. Magnified view of recently broken end of
tabular pin, showing surface texture, rounding and polishing, and small
carbonate deposits.

1457

THE HEARTH DEPOSIT
The hearth deposit is a microvertebrate bone bed similar to the hearth-proximate
bone concentrations found at the Aubrey site (Ferring 2001:189) and possibly to the
Rodent Level Faunule at the Medicine Lodge Creek site, Wyoming (Walker 1975). Table
10.17 lists counts for the identified portion of the hearth deposit. Not included is a large
bone lot (B-107A) that has been informally inspected but not yet identified. Figures 10.6
and 10.7 show the composition of the assemblage by NISP, both with and without
categories of unidentified specimens. Figure 10.34 shows the composition by MNI. Since
the hearth deposit is believed to be essentially a single relatively short-term depositional
event, all of the identified lots are aggregated to compile this simplified diagram.

Figure 10.34 was compiled with the application of considerable simplification and
many assumptions. Consider the total for salamanders. All of the salamander material is
likely Ambystoma texanum, but some is identified as Ambystoma sp. and some only as
unidentified or possible salamander. The material consists of vertebrae, humerus and
femur fragments, ilia, and unidentified long bone fragments. Three proximal humerus
fragments suggest a minimum of three individuals, but there are at least 29 unidentified
long bone fragments. There are about 108 vertebrae. Since Ambystomatid salamanders
have about 42 vertebrae per individual (15 trunk, 1 sacral, 3 caudosacral, and about 33
caudal; Babcock and Blais 2001), about two and a half individuals would account for the
vertebral total (not including additional specimens in lot B-107A). Francis (2002:16) lists
an average of about 40 vertebrae for salamanders in general. However, terrestrial
salamanders (like lizards) may practice tail autotomy (Pfingsten and Downs 1989:7), so
the 108 vertebrae could conceivably account for more than three individuals, if any of
1458

them had lost tails. Nevertheless, three seems the most plausible estimate for the
identified portion of the assemblage, so that number is used as a minimum estimate.

Figure 10.34. Hearth Deposit, Taxonomic Composition by Minimum Number of
Individuals. Relative proportions of major vertebrate categories are ranked
by MNI. All of the analyzed lots from the hearth deposit are aggregated
here. Compare with Figure 10.24.

1459

Figure 10.34, like Figure 10.24, should be viewed with a dash of skepticism
because of the many unknowns involved in compiling a list of minimum numbers. It
should also be kept in mind that there are over 2400 unidentified fragments in the
analyzed part of the assemblage – fragments that, could they be identified, might change
the picture significantly – and even more in the unanalyzed part. In terms of composition,
the hearth deposit is similar to the ambient fauna, differing in these respects:
1) No remains of turtles, raccoons, or large animals are known from the hearth deposit
(charred splinters of deer bone are entirely absent) and there are no extinct taxa
2) No recognizable evidence of gar, cotton rat or jackrabbit was found among the fish,
rodent and lagomorph remains from the hearth deposit
3) Peromyscus sp. (deer mouse or whitefooted mouse) is present in the hearth deposit
4) The sample size is larger than the ambient assemblage, so it is not surprising that a
somewhat larger variety of snakes, frogs and toads could be identified
5) Rabbits and gophers are noticeably less abundant than in the ambient faunal
assemblage

As in the ambient fauna, there is a heavy representation of non-mammals from
riparian habitats and mammals from upland habitats, with the riparian animals roughly
twice as abundant as the upland animals, whether measured by NISP or MNI. Some of
the snakes are identifiable as probable floodplain or wetland species. Perhaps roughly
60% of the MNI values represent riparian taxa, another 20% are perhaps upland taxa, and
another 20% are of unknown derivation (birds, for example, could have been obtained
either in upland or riparian habitats).

1460

Table 10.17. Hearth Deposit: Measures of Abundance.

Fish, unidentified
Snakes
cf. Rhinocheilus lecontei
cf. Diadophis punctatus
Colubrinae
Storeria dekayi or Virginia striatula
Viperidae
Snake, unidentified
Snake or lizard
Lizards
cf. Sceloporus subadult?
Lizards, unidentified
Birds, unidentified
Amphibians
cf. Bufo sp.
Bufo cf. B. americanus
Hylidae or Microhylidae
cf. Rana berlandieri
Frog/toad, unidentified
Salamanders
Ambystoma texanum
cf. Ambystoma sp.
Salamander, unidentified
Amphibian, unidentified
Mammals
Cryptotis parva
Soricidae
Scalopus aquaticus
Geomys sp.
cf. Dipodomys ordii or D. compactus
Chaetodipus hispidus
Chaetodipus/Perognathus sp.
Heteromyidae
Onychomys leucogaster
Peromyscus sp.
Neotoma sp.
P. pinetorum or M. ochrogaster
cf. Sylvilagus audubonii or S. floridanus

(Table continued on next page)

1461

NISP

MNI

49

3

1
4
8
3
2
9
3

1
1
2
1
1
1
N/A

1
10
18

1
1
3?

1
1
2
6
15

N/A
1
1
2
3?

63
54
35
13

3?
2?
N/A
N/A

1
1
86
21
5
17
1
2
3
1
37
5
2

1
N/A
6
4?
2?
2?
N/A
N/A
1
1
1
1
1

(Table 10.17 continued from previous page)

Insectivore, unidentified
Rodent, unidentified
Small mammal, unidentified
Mammal, unidentified
Animal, unidentified
TOTALS:

NISP

MNI

1
46
159
100
2123
2910

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
47

Heat-Altered Bone From the Hearth Deposit
There are only seven specimens with evidence of heat alteration in the analyzed
portion of the hearth deposit. Unidentified animals and smallmouth salamander are
represented. Although the hearth and the adjacent microvertebrate bone bed are closely
associated in three-dimensional space, there is no indication the bone itself was “roasted”
in the Feature 5 fire. The animals may have been cooked, but they may have been cooked
in some other fire, elsewhere, or the cooking process may not have affected the bone
enough to leave macroscopic visual evidence. Only one fragment was found in Unit 2;
the rest were all found in N113 E98.

These heat–altered items might represent animals that were roasted somewhere,
then eaten and deposited in a latrine area next to the hearth, or they might represent bone
fragments already present in the sediments and fortuitously exposed to heat when the
Feature 5 fire was built. There is no way to discern the correct sequence of events. The
fragment found in Unit 2 is calcined, and calcining requires direct exposure to fire and
high temperatures; bone buried more than 5 cm below a fire will only be charred, not
calcined (Stiner et al. 1995:230-231; Bennett 1999). Temperatures somewhere in the
1462

general range of 600-900° C are required for calcining (Shipman, Foster and Schoeninger
1984:313). A distal Sylvilagus sp. femur fragment found about 10 cm below Feature 5
when it was removed showed no evidence of heat alteration.

The following heat-altered items were found:
Lot B-149, Unit 2, fired surface of Feature 5 and adjacent area. Calcined V-shaped bone
fragment. Judging by size and thickness, it may be from a lagomorph-sized or larger
animal, though not necessarily a mammal. The fragment is white to light blueish-white
(7.5YR 7.7/0) to light gray-brown (7.5YR 7/2) with a somewhat glossy texture on the
exterior, black on the interior, possibly corresponding to Stage IV (645-<940° C) of
Shipman, Foster and Schoeninger 1984:313). It measures 6.1 mm long, 3.45 mm wide,
with a wall thickness of 0.25 to 1.05 mm (Fig. 10.38, G).
Lot B-106, N113 E98 (92.443-92.400 m). Ambystoma cf. A. texanum, three heatdarkened salamander vertebrae. One is nearly complete, another slightly less so, the
third partial. Two have recent cracks, probably because heating made the bone brittle.
All are a deep glossy brown (2.5YR 2.5/2.5 to 2.5YR 3/3.5) and yellow. They are not
charred or carbonized, but rather have a carmelized appearance (Fig. 10.49, C).
Ambystoma texanum, one heat-altered ilium (Fig. 10.35, A). This specimen is dark
brown (2.5YR 2.7/2) and has the same glossy carmelized appearance as the vertebrae
described above, and may be part of the same individual. Specimen is 2.2 mm long
and 1.8 mm wide.
Unidentified animal, two very small bits of brown, carmelized-appearing bone similar
to those above, and possibly part of the same salamander. One resembles a
semispherical ball joint, is 1.4 mm in diameter and extensively cracked; the other is a
small bit of cancellous bone 1.3 mm across.
Archeologists commonly expect visual proof in the form of cutmarks or burning
as evidence that animals were consumed by hunter-gatherers, but most archeologists are
focused heavily on large animals like deer and bison. The ethnographic and archeological
record shows that small animals were treated differently, and cutmarks and burning

1463

cannot often be expected for small animals that may have been roasted whole,
dismembered by tearing, or pounded into mush with a hammerstone and anvil.

In rare cases, high rates of burning may be seen on rodent remains (23% of
individuals reported by Simonetti and Cornejo 1991), but a more typical example is the
archeological record from the Henderson site, a Late Prehistoric horticultural pueblo in
New Mexico. There, Speth (2000:96) estimates the following frequencies for burned
bone:

bison

~6.0% burned

jackrabbit

~2.5% burned

cottontail

~2.0% burned

prairie dog

~2.0% burned

gopher

~0.8% burned

small rodents ~0.6% burned

Speth makes a convincing case that at least the first five categories are food
remains, yet all show low rates of heat alteration. Cutmarks are not often found on the
remains of woodrat-sized or smaller animals, and the occasional cases seen (Parmalee
1975; Young 1980:105) are probably an indication that the animal was skinned rather
than singed before cooking.

1464

Figure 10.35. Smallmouth Salamander Ilia From the Hearth Deposit. Two ilia of
Ambystoma texanum. Specimen A is charred. The ends are irregular because
cartilaginous extensions are attached here. N113 E98 (92.443-92.400 m), lot
B-106.

Preparation of Small Animals for Human Consumption
Although North American ethnographers have seldom bothered to record native
uses of small animals with any detail or consistency, enough information remains to

1465

establish a few points. One early account comes from Sonora, where Pfefferkorn
recounts:

The hungry Sonoran eats not only rats, but also snakes, lizards, locusts, worms,
caterpillars, and all kinds of insects. He cuts off the head and tail of a snake,
throws the body into the fire or upon hot coals, and after it has been half roasted
he removes it, beats off what ashes may be clinging to it, and devours it whole.
He does the same with lizards….
The Sonoran does not boil meat; that would be too much ceremony for him. It is
enough for him if his meat is partly roasted. A thin, pointed piece of wood does
him for a spit. On this he sticks the meat, holds it in the flame, turns it around
often so that the fire can get at it on all sides, and after it has sputtered awhile in
the fire, it is roasted enough to please him…
Rats are put on spits as are larks in Germany and are roasted like other kinds of
meat. They are not disemboweled (Pfefferkorn 1949:199; translation of original
1794 edition).

One of the earliest accounts of small mammal processing in the western U.S. is by
Captain J. H. Simpson (1876:53), who records a visit to the Gosiute Indians on May 9,
1859:

While this was going on, an Indian came in from his day’s hunt. His largest game
was the rat, of which he had a number stuck around under the string of his waist.
These were soon put by the old woman on the fire, and the hair scorched; this
done, she rubbed off the crisped hair with a pine-knot, and then, pressing her
finger into the paunch of the animal, pulled out the entrails. From these, pressing
out the offal, she threw the animal, entrails and all, into the pot (Simpson
1876:53).

Among the Wintu
Small game was generally cooked in the following manner. It was singed, the
paws and tail were cut off, and the entrails removed. The animal was then roasted
in a bed of hot coals. Then the hide might or might not be removed. The body was
1466

then pounded, bones and all, until it was fine and crumbly. Sometimes the
pounding was done before roasting (DuBois 1935:14).

Edward Palmer, describing the Paiute of the 1860s-1870s, remarked

I saw them collect grasshoppers, land turtles, lizards, snakes, mice, ratts and
rabbits, swifts and horned toned [sic, toads] and without taking off their hides or
extracting their entrals threw them on the fire cooked them a little, with their
fingers took them out and devoured them… (Heizer 1954:7).

Among the Walapai,

Rats are boiled unskinned and ungutted. Some eat them whole; but some throw
away the skin and viscera. For roasting, rats are skinned, but not gutted. The
carcasses are tied together, belly to belly and head to rear, lashed with yucca in
pairs. After the leg bones are broken and the legs twisted together, the bundle is
thrown into the fire and rolled over until browned on all side. The rats were then
ready for storage and could be preserved for several months… When rats are
boiled the guts are taken out… They are not skinned but eaten right out of the
skin. The guts are given to old people who roast them over hot coals. Rats are also
roasted. The “big guts” are taken out and thrown away; the small guts are left in.
Six or seven are roasted together in the earth oven. Mice are killed and eaten like
rats. It takes a good many of them to make a meal. They are roasted whole. The
kangaroo rat is cooked in the earth oven, neither skinned nor gutted. The pine
squirrel… is roasted whole on coals. The tail is cut off… The ground squirrel…
roasted in the earth oven after the “big guts” are removed. Chipmunks… are
roasted whole on coals. The prairie dog… is skinned and roasted. The viscera are
left in and eaten…. The gopher… is roasted and eaten; the skin is not removed.
Small birds were cooked whole. Some birds had the beak and legs cut off before
roasting. [Chuckwalla:] The viscera are removed and thrown away. Everything
else is eaten. The chuckwalla is roasted in the pa’vuk. The tail is put in the mouth,
and the back broken so that a circle can be made with the legs inside. After
roasting, the animal is cut up (Mook 1935:75-76).

At Portales Cave, Tamaulipas, in archeological deposits ca. 5650 RCYBP, Marsh
(1964:54) found a nearly complete skeleton of a pocket mouse (Perognathus sp.) in one
1467

coprolite; one side was charred black, the other side less so. In another coprolite, a large
part of

a Northern pygmy mouse (Baiomys taylori) skeleton was found, with the

extremities of the legs and the lower part of the jaw charred. These are probably
examples of animals that were overcooked and passed intact through the digestive tract as
a result. Charred lizard (leg bones), unidentified rabbit-sized mammal (patella) and small
rodent (leg bones) remains, as well as the charred ribs and vertebrae of a snake were also
found.

Table 10.18 presents a small sample of some ethnographic records. Animals
smaller than lagomorphs were almost always roasted or boiled whole. Boiling was most
common for cultures with ceramics, but most hunter-gatherers were probably familiar
with stone boiling in perishable containers (there is no evidence of stone boiling in the
bench deposits, nor were local stones very suitable for it). Boiling would not leave any
obvious evidence of heat alteration. Low levels of heating could possibly be detected
with transmission electron microscopy (Koon, Nicholson and Collins 2003), but only if
collagen can be extracted from the bone, and it is also known that long-term diagenesis
duplicates many of the physical effects of boiling (Roberts et al. 2002). In cases where
small animals are roasted, either on spits or in coals, scorching of caudal and foot
elements might be expected, but the other skeletal elements would be shielded from
scorching by meat (Shipman, Foster and Schoeninger 1984:322; Morlan 1994:139). In
cases where the entire animal is pounded into flour, the bones are simply removed from
the archeological record. In the bench deposits, there are many bones and no evidence of
ground stone tools (cf. Yohe, Newman and Schneider 1991), so pulverization of small
animals can probably be ruled out.

1468

Processing of a woodrat is described by a Kiliwa informant from Baja California
as follows:

First a fire is built of small branches. While the flames are high the whole animal
is tossed into the fire. When the hair is well singed the rat is removed with a pair
of sticks, used as tongs, and placed on a branch of fresh juniper or some similar
evergreen. The skin, partially cooked, slips off cleanly and easily. The entrails are
removed and the rat laid on the green boughs. After the flames of the fire have
died down sufficiently the carcass is placed on the coals to roast for 10 or 15
minutes.
The most remarkable part of the procedure takes place after the meat is cooked.
The legs are pulled off and nibbled in the classic manner. However, the rib cage,
spine and pelvis are placed on a flat rock, sometimes a metate, and thoroughly
crushed with a hammerstone. The carcass, well shredded, is then eaten, bones and
all (Michelsen 1967:76).

In this case, only the axial skeleton is selectively removed from the archeological
record, while in others the entire animal is pulverized, but it is clear that animals are not
always pulverized, for many of the coprolites analyzed in the Borderlands region contain
small bones that have been masticated but not powdered.

Lagomorphs may either be treated like the smaller animals or more like large
animals. They may be dismembered before cooking and the long bones may be broken to
extract the marrow or cut for bead manufacture (Lubinski 2003). In cases where rabbits
are roasted whole, scorching may be confined to foot elements (Hockett and Bicho
2000:719), but in other cases long bones may be extensively burned (Lubinski 2003:201).
Rabbit-roasting pits have been recognized archeologically in New Mexico (Skelton
1981:63), marked by concentrated bone fragments, many charred.

1469

I suggest this evidence indicates that the absence of cutmarks and the very low
incidence of charring in bone from the hearth deposit cannot be taken as any kind of
proof that the animals were not cooked. For small animals, evidence of cooking may
often be too subtle to be detected by visual inspection.

Juveniles
As in the ambient fauna, there are few juveniles present in the hearth deposit. The
material includes a rabbit, a woodrat, a kangaroo rat, possibly gopher and lizard, and
some unidentified material that could either belong to these individuals or some other
unrecognized animal. The following items were recovered:
Lot B-149, Unit 2, Feature 5 and adjacent area
Sylvilagus cf. S. audubonii or S. floridanus (Desert or Eastern cottontail rabbit), left
calcaneum with epiphysis unfused, from young adult; Fig. 10.38, C
Lot B-105, Group 2, N113 E98 (92.50-92.40 m)
Heteromyidae (unidentified pocket mouse or kangaroo rat), left proximal tibia without
epiphyses, from juvenile, about 30% complete (possibly part of the Dipodomys individual
listed below?); Fig. 10.42, B
Group 1f, Geomys sp. (pocket gopher), proximal shaft fragment of right femur
comparable in size to subadult G. bursarius, 30% complete
Lot B-106, N113 E98 (92.443-92.400 m)
Neotoma sp. (unspecified woodrat), shaft of right femur, missing distal epiphysis, from
young adult, about 80% complete
Unidentified rodent, one left proximal femur of juvenile; one proximal epiphysis from
juvenile, complete except for some exposure of cancellous interior
Unidentified small mammal, fragment of proximal radius from juvenile; Fig. 10.43, I
Unidentified lizard, one vertebra from a small lizard, perhaps subadult Sceloperus sp.
Lot B-107, N113 E98 (92.40-92.30 m), Dipodomys cf. D. compactus or D. ordii (Gulf
coast or Ord’s kangaroo rat), one deciduous right P4
1470

The scarcity of juveniles in the hearth deposit raises the question of season of
capture. The ethnographic record is almost nonexistent. The Wintu were said to hunt
woodrats in the winter when they were sluggish (Lapena 1978:337), but the Eastern
Pomo hunted them year-round (McLendon 1977:12). Life history data for these genera
are no more helpful. All of these animals – rabbits, woodrats, and kangaroo rats – are
probably polyestrous and breed nearly year-round in south Texas. According to Schmidly
(2004:462), for the Desert Cottontail “in Texas, onset of breeding begins in February, and
pregnant females, lactating females, and young in the nest have been found in every
month except January, July, and October. There may be two or more litters a year.” For
the Eastern Cottontail, the breeding season extends from January to September, but the
peak is in February-March, with a gestation period of about 40 days (Schmidly 2004:461;
see also Chapman and Morgan 1974; Conaway, Sadler and Hazelwood 1974). I have no
data for fusion rates of the calcaneum in Sylvilagus, but Bothma, Teer and Gates
(1972:1219) documented fusion rates for the humerus of Sylvilagus floridanus at Welder
Wildlife Refuge and found the proximal epiphysis requires at least 10 months to fuse in
most individuals (range, 7-14 months). The variability in breeding dates plus variability
in fusion rates, when added together, are so extensive that a juvenile rabbit with an
unfused calcaneum could have been collected any time of the year.

For the Eastern Woodrat, the breeding season is the same as the Eastern
Cottontail, January to September (with a gestation period of 33 days; Schmidly
2004:431). However, in south Texas, Southern Plains woodrats are said to be polyestrous,
breeding throughout the year and producing up to 5 litters per year (Raun 1966:14;
Merkelz and Kerr 2002:74-75; Suchecki et al. 2004; see also Conditt and Ribble 1997),
although there may be peaks in reproduction in February-April and November-December
1471

(Raun 1966:14; Johnson 1952:101). It also seems likely that in the equable climates of
the Younger Dryas, breeding season for most animals were longer, and some animals that
are monestrous now may have been polyestrous during the Pleistocene. This is suggested
in part by the fact that for all these animals, breeding season becomes longer with
decreasing latitude.

Figure 10.36. Eastern Cottontail, Fusion Rates for Proximal Humerus. The rate of fusion
for the proximal epiphysis of the humerus is shown here for Sylvilagus
floridanus in San Patrico County (adapted from Bothma, Teer and Gates
1972:Fig. 2). The fusion rate for the calcaneum is assumed to be roughly
comparable.

1472

In summary, identifying the few juveniles in the hearth deposit offers no help for
recognizing in which part of the year the deposit was created. Of far more interest is the
question of why so few juveniles seem to be present in the sample of predated individuals
in the first place. The poorly ossified bones of juveniles might have been removed by
chemical dissolution (dissolution either by stomach acids of predators or by groundwater
after burial), but a more promising answer is found in Gerald Raun’s study of Southern
Plains woodrats in San Patricio County. Raun (1966:Table 12) found that adults
represented about 86% of his year-round trapped sample of woodrats (range, 71-96%),
and he attributed it to nonseasonal breeding and small litter size. This is probably the
explanation for the scarcity of juveniles in the bench deposits. If many of the species
were polyestrous, producing small litters, there may have been few juveniles in the
population, especially when pre-Holocene climatic conditions prevailed.

It should be observed that some of the species present in the bench deposit (most
notably cotton rats and voles) are notorious for cyclic population sizes, but no juveniles
of these “unstable” taxa were found.

1473

Table 10.18. Ethnographic Examples of Small Animal Preparation.
Prey taxon

Affiliation

Treatment

Reference

Peromyscus/
Reithrodontomys
unspecified mice

Northern
Paiute
Northern Ute

roasted in coals

Fowler 1989:24
Smith 1974:49

unspecified mice

Digueno

cooked in hot coals, then skinned,
entrails removed
roasted or pounded and stewed

kangaroo rat

Northern
Paiute
Seri
Northern Ute
Digueno

roasted in coals

Southern
Paiute
Yavapai and
Tulkepaia
Tepehuan

baked in ashes unskinned; sometimes
skinned and eviscerated, never boiled
make incision in abdomen and roast; or
skin and boil
skinned, eviscerated, roasted on spit or in
coals
broiled on coals

kangaroo rat
unspecified rats
unspecified rats
unspecified rats
(woodrat?)
unspecified rats
(woodrat?)
unspecified
rodents
rats, mice, quail,
ground squirrels
woodrat, mice,
groundhog,
ground squirrel,
gopher,
chipmunk
woodrat

boiled with salt
entrails removed, then roasted in coals
roasted or pounded and stewed

Cuero 1970:3233
Fowler 1989:24
Malkin 1962:9
Smith 1974:49
Cuero 1970:3233
Kelly 1964:52

Owens
Valley
Paiute

eviscerated, skin sewn up with stick,
roasted buried in coals

Corbusier 1886:
328
Pennington
1969: 125
Sparkman 1908:
199
Steward 1933:
255

singed, roasted in coals

Fowler 1989:24

woodrat

Northern
Paiute
Navaho

Bailey 1940:284

woodrat

Havasupai

clean without removing fur, salt, bake in
coals
pit-baked, covered with moist sand

woodrat

Western
Apache

woodrat

Zia Pueblo

woodrat

Seri

Luiseño

roasted on hot coals and ashes, made into
soup; boiled rats mashed except for head
and vertebrae; or singed whole in the fire
and fur scraped off with a stick,
eviscerated
skinned and cooked in grease
skinned and roasted in the ground under
coals

(Table continued on next page)
1474

Weber and
Seaman 1985:63
Buskirk 1986:
136

Stevenson 1894:
26
Felger and
Moser 1991:53

(Table 10.18, continued from previous page)
Prey taxon

Affiliation

Treatment

Reference

woodrat

Yaqui

cooked in olla

Moisés, Kelley
and Holden
1971:180

gopher

Maya

Hovey and

gopher

Tepehuan

mole

Pima Bajo

singed in pit oven, fur scraped off,
rinsed, placed on coals and covered with
hot rocks, leaves and dirt; then
eviscerated; meat is pulled off bones;
skin eaten; vertebrae and long bones
given to dogs
skinned, eviscerated, roasted on spit or
boiled with other kinds of meat
skinned, eviscerated, roasted on a spit

mole

Tepehuan

chipmunk

Southern
Paiute
N. Paiute
Tarahumara

chipmunk
chipmunk
ground squirrel

Northern
Paiute

ground squirrel
ground squirrel

Northern
Paiute
Tepehuan

ground squirrel

Seri

tree squirrel

Northern
Paiute
Southern
Paiute
Northern Ute
Northern
Paiute
Southern
Paiute

tree or rock
squirrels
prairie dog
prairie dog
prairie dog
prairie dog

NE Yavapai

skinned, eviscerated, roasted on spit or
boiled with other kinds of meat
roasted in ashes

Rissolo 1999:
273-274

Pennington
1969:124-125
Pennington
1980:201-202
Pennington
1969:124-125
Kelly 1964:52

roasted in coals
roasted on spit without skinning or
eviscerating
fur singed, removed with grass brush,
entrails evacuated then replaced, body
pinned shut, body roasted entire;
sometimes roasted without cleaning or
dressing; brains sucked from skull
singed and roasted in pit

Fowler 1989:24
Bennett and
Zingg 1935:118
Wheat 1967:9

skinned, eviscerated, roasted on spit or in
coals
eviscerated, fur singed off, pit-baked

Pennington
1969: 124
Felger and
Moser 1991:53
Fowler 1989:24

roasted in sand

Fowler 1989:24

roasted in ashes about 2 hours, then
skinned
entrails removed, then roasted in coals
roasted in sand

Kelly 1964:52

tossed into fire, then removed, scraped,
and eviscerated; belly pinned with twigs,
baked in ashes, sometimes boiled
cooked in hot ashes after gutting and
skinning

Kelly 1964:
157

(Table continued on next page)
1475

Smith 1974:49
Fowler 1989:24

Gifford 1936:
266

(Table 10.18, continued from previous page)
Prey taxon

Affiliation

Treatment

Reference

prairie dog

Navaho

Bailey 1940:284

groundhog
quail

Northern
Paiute
NE Yavapai

clean with or without removing fur, salt,
bake in hole in ground
gutted, then sewn up, roasted in the skin
under coals
eggs and birds cooked in ashes

quail

Pima Bajo

picked, eviscerated, roasted on a spit

dove

NE Yavapai

dove and quail

Havasupai

cooking in ashes without eviscerating or
picking
pit baked in wet sand

various small
birds
crow

NE Yavapai
W Yavapai

cooking in ashes without eviscerating or
picking
cooked in ashes or boiled

chachalaca

Pima Bajo

eviscerated, roasted on a spit

unspecified
lizards
unspecified
lizards
chuckwalla
chuckwalla

Southern
Paiute
Digueno

eaten in summer, roasted in ashes

turtles, tortoises,
snakes, lizards
land turtle

roasted or pounded and stewed

Mohave
W and NE
Yavapai
Seri

Roasted in ashes, weighted with stone
cooked in hot ashes, gutted or ungutted

Pima Bajo

removed from shell, cooked in olla
briefly, then fried
roasted live in fire, then shell cracked

land turtle

Comanche

aquatic turtle

Pomo

rattlesnake

Tepehuan

snakes

Digueno

marmot

Southern
Paiute

boiled with salt

placed on fire, when shell cracks open,
meat is removed and broiled on coals; or
placed unopened in ashes to bake
rattles and head cut off, skinned, cooked
for an hour in an olla
roasted or pounded and stewed
roasted in skin, sometimes boiled

(Table continued on next page)

1476

Fowler 1989:25
Gifford 1936:
267
Pennington
1980:194
Gifford 1936:
267
Weber and
Seaman 1985:63
Gifford 1936:
267
Gifford 1936:
267
Pennington
1980:194
Kelly 1964:182
Cuero 1970:3233
Stewart 1968:36
Gifford 1936:
268
Malkin 1962:
22-23
Pennington
1980:236
Smith and Smith
1977:90-91
Barrett 1952:
105
Pennington
1969: 144
Cuero 1970:3233
Kelly 1964:52

(Table 10.18, continued from previous page)
Prey taxon

Affiliation

Treatment

Reference

rabbit

Northern Ute

Smith 1974:49

rabbit

Southern
Paiute

rabbit

Northern
Paiute

rabbit

Shoshoni

rabbit

Western
Yavapai

rabbit

Mohave

rabbit

Pima Bajo

rabbit

Cahuilla

skinned, split in half, entrails removed,
then boiled
roasted for an hour in ashes, pelt left on
in summer, pelt removed and used in
winter; ribs, vertebrae, and long bones
sometimes pounded on mortar
skinned, bones ground and boiled; extra
carcasses dried, then boiled whole or
pounded to make soup
abdomen slit, entrails evacuated, then
replaced, cooked in hot ashes
cooked in ashes or boiled; preserved
several days by skinning, charring
slightly, and hanging up
skinned, legs broken, folded under and
stuck into carcass, tied up; roasted in
ashes; pounded meat and bones on
mortar, roasted again
skinned, eviscerated, roasted on a spit or
sometimes boiled
singed, then skinned and eviscerated,
liver and entrails eaten separately

rabbit

Luiseño

rabbit

Wappo

rabbits and
rodents

Seri

broiled on coals; or baked in earth oven,
sometimes pounded entire in mortar,
then eaten or preserved
pounded (including bones, entrails, ears)
and roasted
roasted on a spit or baked in a pit

Kelly 1964:52,
182
Wheat 1967:14
Lowie 1924:197
Gifford 1936:
266
Stewart 1968:36

Pennington
1980:201
Lando and
Modesto
1977:110
Sparkman 1908:
198
Driver 1936:186
Felger and
Moser 1991:53

(End of Table 10.18)

Illustrations of the Hearth Deposit Faunal Assemblage
Figures 10.37 to 10.52 present a gallery of photographs illustrating the range of
taxa and elements from the hearth deposit (the first photograph also includes one item
from the ambient bone assemblage). Mammals are shown first, followed by amphibian,
snake, lizard, and fish bone.
1477

Figure 10.37. Hearth Deposit and Ambient Bone: Eastern Mole, Gopher, Leporid.
Hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.40-92.30 m, lot B-107)
A, Scalopus aquaticus, right proximal femur fragment, anterior view
B, Neotoma sp., right ischium, ventrolateral view
D, Geomys attwateri or G. personatus left humerus
E, Scalopus aquaticus, right humerus, posterior view
F, Scalopus aquaticus, right humerus, anterior view
Ambient bone (N113 E98, 92.20-92.15 m, lot B-108). See Fig. 9.11 for location
underlying the hearth deposit
C, cf. Leporidae, distal metapodial fragment, posterior view

1478

Figure 10.38. Hearth Deposit: Eastern Mole, Woodrat, Rabbit, Frog, Unidentified. A,
Scalopus aquaticus, right humerus, posterior view; B, Scalopus aquaticus,
right edentulous mandible, labial view; C, Sylvilagus sp. left calcaneum
(unfused epiphysis at bottom); D, Neotoma sp., left scapula fragment,
glenoid fossa at top; E, right proximal femur fragment of unidentified
rodent, anterior view; F, long bone shaft fragment from unidentified frog
(orientation uncertain); G, calcined bone fragment from unidentified
mammal. Unit 2, Feature 5 surface and adjacent area, lot B-149.

1479

Figure 10.39. Hearth Deposit: Eastern Mole, Gopher, Rabbit Bone. All from N113 E98
(92.50-92.40 m), lot B-105. These items come from different clusters of
bone recognized in the floor of the excavation unit.
Scalopus aquaticus: A, proximal right tibia, posterior view, Group 1h; B, distal left tibia,
anterior view, Group 1h; C, carpal, orientation uncertain, Group 1h; F, right humerus,
posterior view, Group 1j; G, left edentulous mandible fragment, medial view, Group 1
Residual; H, right edentulous mandible, lateral, Group 1 Residual.
Unidentified Neotoma-sized mammal: D, rib head, Group 1h.
Sylvilagus sp.: E, left mandible fragment with alveoli for P3-P4, medial view, Group 1h.
Geomys sp.: I, left proximal humerus fragment, posterior view, Group 1 Residual; J,
glenoid fossa of right scapula, medial view, Group 1 Residual; K, left P4, labial view,
Group 1 Residual; L, right I1, dorsal view, Group 1 Residual.

1480

Figure 10.40. Hearth Deposit: Eastern Mole Humerus. A, anterior view; B, posterior view
of same specimen. Fragmentary right humerus of Scalopus aquaticus
(smaller of two in this lot). Breakage seen at top of “A” is old (preexcavation), interior has carbonate deposits. From unanalyzed lot B-107A
(N113 E98, approximately upper 5 cm of 92.40-92.30 m level), coarse
fraction from wet-sieved loose matrix.
1481

Figure 10.41. Hearth Deposit: Additional Eastern Mole Humerus Fragments. Fragments
of a right humerus of Scalopus aquaticus (larger of two in this lot).
Specimen shows old breakage, surface cracking and flaking, and extensive
carbonate deposition in the interior. From unanalyzed lot B-107A (N113
E98, approximately upper 5 cm of 92.40-92.30 m level), coarse fraction
from wet-sieved loose matrix.
1482

Figure 10.42. Hearth Deposit: Rodent and Insectivore Bone. These items come from
different clusters of bone recognized in the floor of the excavation unit. A,
Chaetodipus hispidus, left edentulous mandible, medial view, Group 1
Residual; B, Heteromyidae, left proximal tibia (juvenile), posterolateral
view, Group 2; C, Scalopus aquaticus, right ulna, medial view, Group 3; DF, teeth from Neotoma sp., all Group 4 and probably all the same individual
(D, right M2, E, right M1, F, lateral view of large incisor). N113 E98 (92.5092.40 m), lot B-105.

1483

Figure 10.43. Hearth Deposit: Rodent, Insectivore, Bird, Unidentified Bone. A, proximal
epiphysis of unidentified rodent tibia; B, small baculum from unidentified
rodent; C, Soricidae (probably Cryptotis parva), left mandible fragment; D,
unidentified bird, radius fragment; E, F, unidentified bird long bone
fragments; G, claw from unidentified small vertebrate; H, astragalus from
unidentified small vertebrate; I, proximal radius fragment from unidentified
juvenile small mammal; J, phalanx from unidentified vertebrate. All this
material is from the hearth deposit in N113 E98 (92.443-92.400 m, lot B106). Considered unidentifiable in the initial study, it was identified by Alisa
Winkler in September, 1987.

1484

Figure 10.44. Hearth Deposit: Small Mammal Metapodials. A variety of small mammal
metapodials (orientation uncertain) from N113 E98 (92.443-92.400, lot B106). These are all from material initially sorted as unidentifiable, later
identified by Alisa Winkler in September, 1987.

1485

Figure 10.45. Hearth Deposit: Rodent and Amphibian Bone. A, Chaetodipus/
Perognathus sp., right distal tibia, lateral view; B, C, Geomys sp.
metacarpals, posterior view; D, Neotoma sp. right femur, posterior view; EG, Neotoma sp. or Neotoma-sized rodent, caudal vertebrae, various views;
H-J, unidentified frog or toad pelvic fragments; K, frog or toad urostyle
fragment, dorsal view; L, M, unidentified frog or toad radius/ulna
fragments; N-P, unidentified frog or toad atlas vertebrae, posterior view; Q,
group of seven unidentified salamander limb bone fragments, orientation
uncertain (likely Ambystoma texanum). All from N113 E98 (92.443-92.400
m, lot B-106).

1486

Figure 10.46. Hearth Deposit: Rodent, Amphibian, Bird and Fish Bone. These items
come from different clusters of bone recognized in the floor of the
excavation unit. A, Onychomys leucogaster distal right mandible fragment,
lateral view, Group 1a; B, frog or toad left distal humerus fragment, anterior
view, Group 1a; C, Chaetodipus/Perognathus sp. right mandible fragment,
lateral view, Group 1b; D, phalanx from Neotoma-sized mammal, lateral
view, Group 1d; E, pelvis fragment from Neotoma-sized mammal, lateral
view, Group 1d; F, Geomys sp. right proximal femur fragment, anterior
view, Group 1f; G, lower beak of small passerine bird, Group 1g; H, J,
group of 15 salamander vertebrae, Group 1g; I, K, fish vertebrae, Group 1g.
All from N113 E98 (92.50-92.40 m), lot B-105.

1487

Figure 10.47. Hearth Deposit: Amphibian and Lizard Dentition Fragments. From N113
E98 (approximately upper 5 cm of 92.40-92.30 m), lot B-107A. This lot has
not been formally studied, but selected items have been noted and
photographed. A, A’, interior and exterior surfaces of unidentified maxillary
fragment (cf. Rana catesbeiana?); B, B’, interior and exterior surfaces of
unidentified lizard dentary. A is probably from a large frog, but the heavy
surface ornamentation seen in A’ does not seem typical of R. catesbeiana.
1488

Figure 10.48. Hearth Deposit: Salamander Long Bone Fragments. A variety of
salamander long bones and long bone fragments from N113 E98 (92.44392.400 m, lot B-106), orientation uncertain. This is all material initially
sorted as unidentifiable, but later identified by Alisa Winkler in September,
1987.

1489

Figure 10.49. Hearth Deposit: Salamander Vertebrae. Top row, first three vertebrae (“C”)
are charred; next four vertebrae (“M”) are manganese-stained. This is a
selection from the 90 specimens in this lot. N113 E98 (92.443-92.400 m),
lot B-106, sieved loose fill, coarse fraction.

1490

Figure 10.50. Hearth Deposit: Snake and Lizard Vertebrae. Top two rows, snake
vertebrae; bottom row, lizard vertebrae. All from N113 E98 (92.443-92.00
m), lot B-106, sieved loose fill, coarse fraction.

1491

Figure 10.51. Hearth Deposit: Fish and Bird Bone. A, two fish teeth (orientation
uncertain); B, six fish vertebrae; C, eight fish vertebrae; D, four fish dorsal
fin spines of various sizes; E, fish pectoral fin spine; F, left proximal
carpometacarpus (medial view) of a small bird; G, left proximal ulna
(dorsolateral view) of small bird; H, left proximal carpometacarpus (lateral
view) of bird. N113 E98 (92.443-92.400 m), lot B-106, sieved loose fill,
coarse fraction.

1492

Gas Chromatographic Analysis of Sediment Lipids
One important question that can be asked about the hearth deposit bone
assemblage is whether the bones arrived at the site completely defleshed, or accompanied
by any kind of soft tissue residue. In January, 1990, I submitted three very small sediment
samples (4.2-6.1 g) to Michael Marchbanks to check for plant or animal lipids preserved
in the bench sediments. A number of different fatty acids were found to be present in the
samples (lipids include fatty acids, sterols, alcohols, aldehydes, and hydrocarbons;
Marchbanks 1991).

The sediment samples were extracted with a cleaned stainless steel spatula.
Sample “A” (4.2 g) was scraped from the baked surface of the hearth, Feature 5, which
had 10 years previously been removed from the site in a block and curated in the
archeology laboratory. For comparison with the hearth sample, two background samples
at about the same elevation, but some distance away were analyzed. Sample “B” (5.6 g)
was removed from the bagged matrix sample collected in the southwest corner of unit
N113 E98 (92.40-92.30 m), and a second background sample was removed from the
matrix sample collected in the southwest corner of unit N112 E99 (92.40-92.35 m).
Figure 10.52 shows the location of these samples. The general location of the hearth
deposit, or microvertebrate bone bed, is also shown in very schematic fashion – the actual
limits of the bone bed are unknown and were not visible in the floors of the excavation
units (see Fig. 10.4).

1493

Figure 10.52. Location of Lipid Samples. The extent of the hearth deposit bone bed is
shown very schematically – the actual limits are unknown. A, B, and C are
the three samples analyzed.
The analysis protocol is as follows:
Lipids were extracted from the soil samples utilizing the methodology described
in Marchbanks (1989). The soil sample… was then ground into dust and stored in
glass vials (in a freezer) until lipid extractions were conducted. The lipids were
extracted in a Soxhlet extractor (70° C) in a 2:1 chloroform:methanol solvent for
approximately seven hours. The solvent was then evaporated and the organic
1494

residues converted to methyl esters. The fatty acids were separated from the other
forms of lipids by thin-layer chromatography in a neutral lipid tank. The samples
were then analyzed on a Hewlett-Packard GC (gas chromatograph) with a 30
meter 0.25 mm-ID DB-5 capillary column using temperature ramp programming.
The peaks were “identified” by a combination of their retention times and known
standards (Marchbanks 1991).

The results of the analysis are shown in Table 10.19, which shows the percentage of
saturated fatty acids. The acids are identified in the table by structural form rather than
name (for example, C12:0). The “C” stands for carbon, the 12 for the number of carbons,
and the 0 for the number of double bonds in the chain (if there are no double bonds, it is a
saturated fatty acid; one with a single double bond is monounsaturated, and one with two
or more is polyunsaturated). Numbers without colons represent acids labeled only by
retention time.

The analysis shows that the hearth sample differs from the two background
samples in having a much more diverse array of acids preserved in small quantities.
According to Marchbanks

…the hearth has between 4.84 and 5.71 times more organic residues (fatty acids)
than the two samples which can be utilized as background or controls.
The %S is just the percent of saturated fatty acids present in the sample; for
reasons discussed elsewhere (Marchbanks 1989) just the fatty acids C12:0 and
C14:0 represent the saturated fatty acids, while C18:2 and C18:3 represent the
unsaturated ones. The higher the %S value, the more likely the residue reflects the
presence of faunal residues, while lower values tend to reflect floral parent
materials. The two matrix samples are fairly similar to each other and other soil
samples that have been analyzed by the author. They mostly contain straightchain fatty acids with no double bonds and very few diagnostic fatty acids. The
high %S ratios of these two samples [are] also characteristic of background or
“blank” samples since fatty acids naturally degrade and occur in the form of
straight chains. The hearth sample, on the other hand, is very different in
1495

concentration and characteristic of faunal parent materials. There is very little
evidence for floral residues within this sample. In addition, the %S ratio (74.96) is
well within the normal range for faunal residues (Marchbanks 1991).

Table 10.19. Results of Lipid Analysis.
Acid
3.02
C12:0
C13:0
C14:0
4.31
C15:0
C16:0
C16:1
5.88
6.14
C17:0
C18:0
8.59
C18:1
C18:2
C18:3
14.69
C20:0
C22:0
C20:1
C22:1
Total area
%S

Sample A
F5
0.02
0.97
0.35
3.25
0.43
0.79
41.21
2.63
0.22
3.21
1.53
30.84
2.59
8.52
1.27
0.14
1.81

Sample B
N113 E98

Sample C
N112 E99

0.51

1.56

2.04

1.91

45.24

41.56

3.29
12.37

12.29

26.31

24.05

9.38
0.54
0.32

16.97
0.82
0.84

12978
67.64

10115
74.78

0.22
43291.90
74.96

Plants are low in saturated fatty acids, land animals are high, and fish are
intermediate (Marchbanks 1989:Fig. 10). The lipid analysis is significant because it
suggests the bone deposit may have been accompanied by some sort of chemical residue
from animal fats when it was originally deposited. Domestic rats and mice are about 241496

35% lipids by dry weight (Clum 1997:Table 2). Table 10.20 shows fat and energy content
for some of the hearth deposit species (or congeneric species when the appropriate
species could not be found). Among other things, this suggests the deposit is not a lag
deposit of defleshed animal bones deposited by flooding. Likewise, it suggests the hearth
deposit is not a raptor pellet midden, because raptor digestive systems are very efficient
and acidic, and essentially remove nearly all the soft tissue from the prey before a pellet
is ejected. It also suggests that the southwest corner of the N113 E98 excavation unit is
essentially beyond the limits of the bone bed.

INTERPRETATION OF THE HEARTH DEPOSIT
This chapter is concerned mainly with vertebrate remains as paleoenvironmental
indicators, not as cultural debris, so even though I regard much of the faunal assemblage
as “artifacts,” (in the sense of items transported and modified by humans), I will present
only a condensed synopsis of the cultural context. “Agency” (who transported the
vertebrate remains, and why) is relevant to environmental context because different kinds
of predators have different foraging radiuses, collection biases, and capabilities.

I have already shown that the bench sediments contain a background scatter
(“ambient bone”) of small vertebrates distributed through the deposits in low density, but
the remarkable microvertebrate bone bed (“hearth deposit”) extending outward and
downstream from Feature 5 is much more concentrated (though largely similar in
composition) than the ambient bone. To explain this extraordinary concentration of bone,
three scenarios seem possible:

1497

Table 10.20. Proximate Composition of Some Prey Species and Congeners.
% crude fat

% lipid

kcal/g

Source

Snakes, various

6.51

1

Lizards, various

5.50

1

Rana clamitans

10.2

4.80

1

Peromyscus leucopus

19.9

5.51

1

Peromyscus maniculatus

14.38

Peromyscus maniculatus

15.67

Peromyscus maniculatus

3

17.49-19.65

5.20

4

5.05-5.14

2

Perognathus spp. mean

11.65

4.91

4

Dipodomys spp. mean

10.15

4.84

4

Neotoma lepidus

7.64

4.81

4

Onychomys torridus

20.79

5.39

4

4.65

2

Microtus ochrogaster

14.59-16.08

Microtus pennsylvanicus

15.5

5.34

1

Lepus californicus

4.5

4.54

1

Sources:
1. Dierenfeld, Alcorn and Jacobsen (2002:Table 1)
2. Fleharty, Krause and Stinnett (1973:Tables 1, 2)
3. Schulte-Hostedde, Millar and Hickling (2001:Table 1). Calculated as 12.71 g fat divided by
88.37 g dry mass.
4. Kaufman, Kaufman and Wiener. Perognathus data are means of species means for
Perognathus longimembris, P. formosus, and P. fallax. Dipodomys data are means of species
means for Dipodomys merriami, D. microps, and D. agilis.
Note: these values are listed on a dry matter basis and will be smaller on the basis of fresh meat.
Ambystoma texanum males produce about 1.81 kcal for live weight of 7.71 g; nongravid A.
texanum females, 1.42 kcal for live weight of 9.33 g (Finkler and Cullum 2002:Table 1).

1498

1) the bone bed is a fluvial lag deposit
2) the bone bed is a raptor pellet midden
3) the bone bed is a latrine area for a terrestrial predator
If scenario 3 is selected, then there are two possibilities:
3A) the latrine area was used by a nonhuman predator
3B) the latrine area was used by human predators of small animals
In the following sections, I will evaluate arguments for and against these different
scenarios. The discussion is simply a condensed version of what could be a much more
detailed evaluation.

The Bone Bed As a Fluvial Lag Deposit
Some microvertebrate bone deposits in the fossil record have been interpreted as
having accumulated either in standing or running water. Some of the microfauna from the
La Paloma mammoth find in Kenedy County may have originated in this way (Suhm
1980:95). Although most studies of bone behavior in fluvial environments have been
done by taphonomists like Diane Gifford and Anna Behrensmeyer (1977), who are
concerned mainly with larger animals, a few studies (Dodson 1971, Korth 1979, Wolff
1973, Brady 2005) have been done by paleontologists with taphonomic interests in the
smaller vertebrates. Shipman (1981:22-41) and Brady (2005) provide useful summaries.
At Berger Bluff, the hearth deposit is clearly not an in-channel assemblage, but occurs in
a floodbasin facies, where the observations that seem most relevant are these:

1499

1) The bone is not streamworn. Korth’s experimental abrasion of small mammal bones in
tumbling barrels shows exactly the location and kind of damage that ought to occur if
bone is transported as bedload material (Korth 1979:262-265). See also Pinto Llona and
Andrews (1999:Fig. 5). A few of the bone fragments show minor chemical rounding, but
abrasion seems to be absent. Breakage of the bone is extensive, but is believed to be due
to a combination of mastication, sediment compression, and excavation damage.

2) Nothing is present to confine the deposit. It does not lie in a basin or scour hole, but
appears to represent a relatively thin, lens-like deposit that was originally left on a flat
floodplain surface and was slightly dispersed both upward and downward after burial by
very minor bioturbation. The northwest margin of the deposit laps onto the hard, baked
surface of Feature 5.

3) No other clasts with similar weight and density (chert or Goliad sandstone pebbles)
were found among the bone, which was enclosed in fine-grained matrix. If the bone bed
is a lag deposit, where is the lithic bedload material? Near the top of the section,
especially in stratum 2E, there are pockets and streamers of chert gravel that were
probably lofted out of the channel onto the floodplain surface (see Chapter 4 discussion
and photos), but these lack bone.

4) The lipid analysis suggests soft tissue residues were deposited along with the bone.

5) Turtle shell and bone fragments from large animals are present in the ambient bone,
but absent from the hearth deposit (consistent with its interpretation as a coprolite
accumulation).
1500

6) The hearth deposit includes both dense/compact and lightweight/flat bone fragments,
an observation that became apparent while rinsing off some of the cleaned bone. The
mixture of these hydrodynamically incompatible elements argues against a lag deposit.
Many small fragments are present that ought to have been winnowed out and removed
even by a fairly weak current. Since these were obviously not removed when the bone
bed was buried, the deposit may have been anchored by vegetation, matted together by
vegetal digesta, or cemented by urine deposits.

The Bone Bed As a Raptor Pellet Midden

Background
Perhaps the most striking feature of the hearth deposit is that the animals are
nearly all small. The largest animals are a juvenile and (presumably) an adult cottontail
rabbit. The presumed adult remains are a tooth and a mandible fragment so small that it is
difficult to tell much about the size of the rabbit. If the rabbit is an Eastern Cottontail, it
might have weighed 1-2 kg or less. The only other potential larger animals are snakes,
and there is uncertainty about the size of some of those, because vertebrae are not very
good indicators of maximum snake size. Other than these possible exceptions, the
animals are small, with mammals ranging from a least shrew at 4.0-7.5 g to woodrats at
about 200-350 g. The fish are small fish (panfish or smaller) insofar as can be judged
from the size of the vertebrae, the birds are small birds (perhaps small perching birds,
sparrow-sized), the most identifiable snakes are small snakes, and the amphibians are
fairly small as well.
1501

Taken at face value, the small size of the animals in this microvertebrate bone bed
might be considered diagnostic of a raptor pellet midden, and in fact, deposits like this,
especially in caves and rockshelters, are usually interpreted as pellet middens. Raptors
prefer small animals not just because their lifting capacity is limited, but also because the
owls, at least, usually swallow their prey whole and do not extensively dismember them.
Because raptors do not have teeth, they do not macerate their prey like terrestrial
carnivores – instead, they swallow small animals whole, or larger animals in torn-off
chunks, and most of the digestive work is done by very acidic gastric fluids. Digestion
removes the meat and leaves a compacted mass of bone encased in hair or feathers, which
is then regurgitated in the form of an oblong pellet at the roosting site. Usually about 3549% of owl pellet weight is bone, the rest being hair (Moon 1940:Table II; Duke et al.
1975:Table 2); in contrast, only about 1.7-7.6% of hawk pellet weight is bone; (Duke et
al. 1975:Table 2). For barn owls, each pellet contains, on average, 2.28 ± 1.05 prey
individuals (Lyman, Power and Lyman 2003:10). In order to evaluate the hearth deposit
as a potential pellet midden, a brief review of some basic facts about raptors is necessary.

Raptors include owls (Strigiformes, about 17 kinds in Texas) and diurnal birds of
prey (Falconiformes, including caracaras, eagles, hawks, kites, falcons, about 34 kinds in
Texas). These two orders differ in habits and physiology, so their pellet middens also
differ. Owls are nocturnal birds of prey, prey chiefly on small night-foraging rodents
which they tend to swallow whole, have less acidic gastric fluids, and create less
extensive corrosion and breakage of bone in pellets [although Andrews (1990:32) says
that bone breakage by owls has been underestimated]. Falconiforms, – especially hawks –
are diurnal birds of prey, may prey on somewhat larger animals like rabbits as well, have
more acidic stomach fluids, tend to tear their prey and cause more severe mechanical and
1502

chemical damage to bone (Duke et al. 1975; Mayhew 1977). According to Dodson and
Wexlar,
Barn owls take 95% of their prey in the mouse size range; screech owls take 83%
of their prey in this same size range… For great horned owls, mice form but 33%
of their diet, while rabbit- and squirrel-sized items constitute 57% of the diet
(Dodson and Wexlar 1979:282).
Hawks and owls are both opportunistic predators, the hawks specializing in
daylight hunting, owls in nighttime hunting, with hawks taking, on average, somewhat
larger prey (Jaksic 1983:Table 5).

All raptors have acid stomach fluids. For the barn owl (Tyto alba), the pH is about
4.0 before feeding and about 6.0 at pellet egestion (range, 1.9 to 6.2; Smith and
Richmond 1972:180). For great horned owls (Bubo virginianus), the pH is 2.2 ± 0.7, redtailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis), 1.8 ± 0.8; for Swainson’s hawk (Buteo swainsoni), 1.6
± 0.2; for peregrine falcons (Falco peregrinus), 1.8 ± 0.2, for bald eagles (Haliaeetus
leucocephalus), 1.3 ± 0.1 (Duke et al. 1975:Table 1). Immature raptors have more acid
fluids and cause even greater bone loss, probably using the calcium for their own
developing systems (Andrews 1990:31). Experiments suggest bone loss of about 65-82%
at a “hawk” pH of 1.66 and about 25-37% at an “owl” pH of 2.35 (Cummings, Duke and
Jegers 1976:Table 1).

Both breakage of the bones of prey animals and complete loss of some elements
(due to digestion of the bone itself) occurs in the digestive process. Controlled feeding
experiments with captive raptors have produced a large body of data. For the major
skeletal elements recovered from owl pellets, about 85% are present (34% complete) in
1503

great horned owl pellets; 82% present (72% complete) from barn owl pellets; and 72%
present (18% complete) in screech owl pellets (Dodson and Wexlar 1979:Table 1).
Andrews (1990:Table 2.3) lists completeness values of 27-63% for barn owl, 49-60% for
long-eared owl, and 36-57% for short-eared owl. Data on hawks are much harder to find.
Andrews (1990:Table 2.4) lists completeness values of about 21-42% for European
kestrels, harriers and falcons, but the data collected by Hoffman (1988:Table 1) for redtailed, rough-legged, and sparrow hawks suggest much lower completeness values; for
example, recovery rates for mouse femurs were 6%, 1%, and 4% respectively, among the
three hawk species. Hoffman’s data confirm that for hawks, not just severe breakage but
complete removal of bone elements is common.

Barn owls are notable among raptors for inflicting the least damage on bone.
Figure 10.53 shows a raptor pellet collected on the upland right-of-way between Coleto
Creek and Turkey Creek during the 1983 Flume 3 survey. The raptor is unidentified, but
barn owl is a very plausible guess. The most notable aspects of the pellet contents are the
completeness of the element inventory, the limited breakage, and the large number of
epiphyseal caps from the long bones of juvenile animals. Either this owl was mostly
targeting juveniles, or the pellet was cast during a season when many juveniles were
dispersing. Figure 10.54 compares the maximum length of the bones or bone fragments
in this pellet with those from the hearth deposit (this is the same curve as the one labeled
“hearth deposit” in Fig. 10.22).

Bone fragments from hawk and other diurnal raptor pellets consists of sharppointed diaphysis fragments, elements with thinner areas corroded away by acids, and

1504

rounded and corroded teeth with dissolved and powdered enamel (Mayhew 1977:26,
Figs.2, 3).

Figure 10.53. Contents of Raptor Pellet From Coleto Creek Reservoir. This is nearly all
the bone in a pellet found on the upland surface in the Flume No. 3 survey.
A domestic rat (Rattus sp.), at least one pocket mouse (Chaetodipus/
Perognathus sp.) and perhaps other individuals are present. Predator is
unknown, but barn owl is plausible. Most elements are unbroken, even
fragile ones like ribs. Element representation is fairly complete, and many
are juveniles. Circular objects below and to left of mandibles are small
epiphyseal caps from juvenile long bones. Not shown are a few
Chaetodipus/ Perognathus bones and some insects. Compare with
fragmented bone in Fig. 10.23.
1505

Figure 10.54. Comparing Fragment Size in the Hearth Deposit and a Raptor Pellet. The
size distribution from the hearth deposit (copied from Fig. 10.22, measured
to nearest tenth of a millimeter) is compared to the size distribution for
bones and fragments from a raptor pellet, shown in the previous figure. The
hearth deposit has fewer large items and many more fragments less than 5
mm in length, probably due to predator mastication.

Andrews summarizes the analytical problem thus:
Many of the species of owl swallow their prey whole and so there is minimal
breakage of postcranial elements. This contrasts with small mammalian
carnivores, which usually chew their prey, and with the diurnal birds of prey,
which tear their prey apart. A simple measure of breakage can thus be expected to
differentiate these major groups of predator. This is attempted in this section, but
it should be remembered that small mammal bone is extremely fragile and easily
broken by agencies quite apart from the predator. As a result, fossil bone
1506

accumulations are usually so much more fragmentary than undamaged pellet
assemblages that it is difficult to compare them (Andrews 1990:50).
Evaluation of the Hearth Deposit
The Feature 5 hearth deposit does not match the characteristics of a raptor pellet
midden because:
1) Fragmentation of the bone does not match that seen in raptor pellet middens. In
hawks, bone is either removed entirely or severely reduced by acid corrosion, but long
bones are not usually snapped and crushed (see Andrews 1990:31, bottom). In Hoffman’s
captive feeding experiments, most mouse bones simply disappeared entirely from hawk
pellets (Hoffman 1988:Table 1). Conversely, breakage in owl pellets is not as severe as
that seen in the hearth deposit. In Dodson and Wexlar’s experiments, on average about
44% of the elements they tabulated were complete; in Andrews’s tabulation of the
humerus, ulna, femur, and tibia in pellets of seven kinds of European owls, on average
about 81% were complete. Compare this with the hearth deposit (Fig. 10.23), where
nearly all the long bones are fragmentary, and the only elements that are complete are
very small foot elements (unguals, phalanges, and so forth), vertebrae (caudal vertebrae
may be complete; trunk vertebrae may have snapped zygopophyses) and occasional
isolated fish or mammal teeth. Extensive fragmentation of the hearth deposit suggests
mastication, which rules out all the avian predators – unless one is to argue that all the
breakage is due to taphonomic or excavation damage.

2) Essentially all the small mammals represented in the hearth deposit are nocturnal
foragers, which renders diurnal birds of prey as an unlikely predator. Cryptotis,
Dipodomys, Chaetodipus, Onychomys, Peromyscus, Neotoma, and Pitymys/Microtus are
1507

all nocturnal genera. Scalopus and Geomys are fossorial, with poor vision, and when they
venture above ground, it is usually at night or in low-light conditions. Sylvilagus is most
often crepuscular, but may be seen in the daytime.

3) Salamanders, fish, and frogs or toads make up a significant portion of the hearth
deposit. Salamanders are rarely found in raptor pellets. A survey of amphibians and
reptiles in raptor diets (Ross 1989) lists no examples of Ambystoma texanum as prey. The
tiger salamander, Ambystoma tigrinum, is taken by burrowing owls, great horned owls
and Swainson’s hawks, but these instances are rare. Long-eared owls take Ambystoma sp.
only in “trace” amounts (Marti 1976:Table 2). The Eastern screech owl, barred owl, and
red-shouldered hawk have been found to take some other kinds of salamanders. With a
few exceptions (common blackhawk, broad-winged hawk, red-shouldered hawk (Ross
1989:Table 2; Howell and Chapman 1998:Table 1); amphibians contribute almost no
biomass to the diets of raptors in North America. Frogs (including bullfrogs and leopard
frogs) and toads (including American toad) are taken by hawks and owls as well as
loggerhead shrikes, but probably not in quantity except possibly by the last-named. Fish
are taken by eagles, but they make up a major part of their diet, and normally appear in
much greater numbers than are seen in the hearth deposit (cf. Bryan et al. 2005). In a
survey of North American bald eagles, fish ranged from 6.1% to 90.1% of the diet; on the
Texas coastal plain, they represent about 30% (Mabie, Merendino and Reid 1995:Tables
1, 2). In a golden eagle survey, fish represented only 0.4% (Olendorff 1976). Otherwise,
fish appear only sporadically in hawk diets and almost never in owl diets. Of the fish
remains in the hearth deposit, the larger vertebrae and fin spines are probably from
panfish that might have been suitable raptor prey, but there are also very small vertebrae
(little more than a millimeter in diameter, perhaps darter or shad-sized) from fish too
1508

small for raptor prey. Unless these represent the stomach contents of some other animal
consumed by a raptor, they are more likely to have been obtained by humans seining the
creek.

Table 10.21 summarizes dietary data for raptors from South Texas (these are all
pellet studies, except for the last, which lists observational data). No amphibians and only
one instance of fish predation are listed for these South Texas raptors (although
ferruginous pygmy owls, not listed here, do take narrowmouthed toads; Proudfoot,
Beasom and Chavez-Ramirez 1999:4). The most frequent prey species are cotton rats,
least shrews, fulvous harvest mice, rice rats, northern pygmy mice, and juvenile
cottontails. Most of these prey species are likely to be found in open areas, although the
following raptors have preferred habitat in riparian woods at Guadalupe Delta Wildlife
Management Area: eastern screech owl, great horned owl, barred owl, white-tailed kite,
bald eagle, sharp-shinned hawk, Cooper’s hawk, and red-shouldered hawk (Texas Parks
and Wildlife n. d.).

4) Element representation does not match that seen in raptor pellet middens. Table 10.22
is a rough approximation of the skeletal element frequencies for all analyzed small
mammals from the hearth deposit combined. The information is extracted from Appendix
6 and includes many of the same kinds of assumptions used to compute the MNI totals.
In compiling this list, two or more fragments in the same lot from the same kind of
element were arbitrarily assumed to come from the same element. The list shows that
isolated teeth and foot elements (phalanges, carpals, tarsals, metacarpals, metatarsals,
astagali, calcanei) are much more abundant and pelvic elements and maxillae much less
abundant than in the raptor samples studied by Andrews (1990:Figs. 3.2-3.4).
1509

Barn owl, San Patricio

Barn owl, Kleberg

Barn owl, Kleberg

Barn owl, Jim Wells

Barn owl, Cameron

Bald eagles, various

White-tailed hawk, Aransas, Refugio

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15

16

Prey Genus
Sigmodon
Cryptotis
Reithrodontomys
Oryzomys
Baiomys
Sylvilagus
Peromyscus
Chaetodipus
Neotoma
Aves
Mus
Scalopus
Notiosorex
Didelphis
Perognathus
Onychomys
Geomys
Perognathus
Geomys
Geomys
Rattus
Liomys
Sylvilagus
Lepus
Colinus

Prey Species
hispidus
parva
fulvescens
palustris
taylori
floridanus
leucopus
hispidus
micropus
(birds)
musculus
aquaticus
crawfordi
virginiana
flavus
leucogaster
attwateri
merriami
personatus
bursarius
rattus
irroratus
florid./aububonii
californicus
virginianus

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X X X
X
X
X X X
X X X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X X*

X
X

X X
X X
X X

X

X X

X

X

X

X X
X X
X
X
X X X X
X X
X X X
X
X X
X
X
X X X
X
X X
X X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X X X
X
X X X
X
X
X**
X
X
X X
X
X X X X
X
X
X X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X X
X

X X
X
X

(Table continued on next page)
1510

X
X
X X
X

X

Counts of occurrences

Barn owl, Matagorda

4

Harris's hawk, Uvalde

Barn owl, Aransas

3

White-tailed kite, Jackson

Barn owl, Calhoun

2

Short-eared owl, Hidalgo

Barn owl, Colorado

1

Reference:

Barn owl, Webb

Barn owl, Colorado

Raptor and county

Table 10.21. South Texas Raptor Diets.

12
11
10
9
8
8
7
6
6
6
5
4
4
4
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

Prey Genus
Mimus
Blarina
Spermophilus
Geomys
Sciurus
Sylvilagus
Dasypus
Mephitis
Sus
Icteridae
Callipela
Cyanocitta
Zenaida
Muscivora
Toxostoma
Sturnella
Spizella
Serpentes
Pituophis
Thamnophis
Eumeces
Sceloporus
Ophisaurus
Fish
Turtles

Prey Species
polyglottos
hylophaga
mexicanus
breviceps
niger
florid./aquaticus
novemcinctus
mephitis
scrofa
(bird)
squamata
cristata
macroura
forficata
sp.
magna
sp.
(snakes)
sayi
sirtalis
septrionalis
undulatus
ventralis

Barn owl, Kleberg

Barn owl, Kleberg

Barn owl, Jim Wells

Barn owl, Cameron

Bald eagles, various

White-tailed hawk, Aransas, Refugio

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15

16

X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X**
X**

(End of Table 10.21; references on next page)
1511

Counts of occurrences

Barn owl, San Patricio

4

Harris's hawk, Uvalde

Barn owl, Matagorda

3

White-tailed kite, Jackson

Barn owl, Aransas

2

Short-eared owl, Hidalgo

Barn owl, Calhoun

1

Barn owl, Webb

Barn owl, Colorado

Reference:

Barn owl, Colorado

Raptor and county

(Table 10.21 continued from previous page)

2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

References for Table 10.21
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Baker (1986:Table 1)
Davis (1938)
Baker (1991:Table 1)
Baker (1991:Table 1)
Cameron (2003:Table 1)
Otteni (1971:Table 1)
Byrd (1982:Table 6)
Baker (1991:Table 1)
Raun (1960:Table 1)
Baker (1991:Table 1)
Goetze and Jimenez (1999:Table 1)
Hogan et al. (1996)
McKey and Fischer (1972)
Brannon (1980:Table 8)
Mabie, Merendino and Reid (1995:Table 1)
Stevenson and Meitzen (1946:202-303)

* See Otteni (1971:Appendix B) for complete list of bird species, too extensive to list
here.
** See Mabie, Merendino and Reid (1995:Table 1) for complete list of birds, fish and
turtles.

Terry (2004:Fig. 6) found that foot elements represented 44% of intact owl pellets, but
were absent in broken-up pellets; she attributes the loss to decay and bioturbation.

5) The hearth deposit is probably too small to represent a pellet midden. Among the
hundreds of raptor pellet studies that have been done over the last 50 years, I am aware of
only one study where the researcher actually bothered to investigate the spatial
distribution of fallen pellets at a roost. This is Terry’s study of great horned owl pellets in
Washington state. She found that bone concentration peaked at a distance of two meters
from the roost tree, but some bone was found as far away as 4.5 m (Terry 2004:Fig. 4).
1512

Table 10.22. Hearth Deposit: Element Representation for All Small Mammals Combined.
MNE Totals
Cranial
skull
L mandible
R mandible
isolated teeth
Cranial total:

2
6
4
86
98

Appendicular
Forelimbs
scapulae
L humerus
R humerus
unspecified humerus
L ulna
R ulna
unspecified ulna
L radius
R radius
unspecified radius
metacarpal
carpal/metacarpal
carpal
third anterior phalanx
second anterior phalanx
first anterior phalanx
Forelimb subtotal:

3
9
6
8
6
2
1
2
2
4
2
8
7
6
7
8

MNE Totals
Hind limbs
L femur
R femur
unspecified femur
L tibia
R tibia
unspecified tibia
calcaneum
astragalus
second posterior phalanx
Hind limb subtotal:
Unspecified limb
metapodial
third phalanx
second phalanx
first phalanx
first/second phalanges
tarsal/carpal
Unspecified limb subtotal:
Appendicular total:

81

Axial
cervical vertebra
caudal vertebrae
unspecified vertebrae
Vertebra subtotal:
ribs
Axial total:
Pelvic region
pelvis
baculum
Pelvic total:

1513

8
5
10
5
3
4
4
3
1
43

26
7
1
2
22
14
72
196

1
30
13
44
12
56

3
1
4

Even though the Berger Bluff hearth deposit was never completely excavated and little is
known about its spatial limits, it is clear that the midden documented by Terry is far
larger than the Berger Bluff hearth deposit. Unfortunately, I do not know how
representative her study might be for raptors in general. Certainly pellets cast from a
roost 5-10 m high ought to disperse over a fairly large area, especially when deflected by
lower-hanging branches.

6) There is no reason to expect a raptor pellet midden to be associated with a hearth or
burned bone. Feature 5 is not a burned raptor roost. It is clearly not a tree burn of any
kind. The number of heat-altered fragments in the hearth deposit is very small, but they
are nevertheless present, and the bone deposit extended right up to and onto the fired
surface of the hearth. The association is as solid as any can be in the domain of
archeology.

The Bone Bed As a Latrine Area for a Mammalian Predator

The hearth deposit seems to best match the characteristics of a latrine area for a
mammalian predator (in a later section I will suggest the predator is probably human), for
these reasons:

1) Extensive breakage of the bone is interpreted as the result of mastication.

2) The presence of animal lipids in the hearth sediment suggests digestive system of the
predator was not as efficient as raptor systems.
1514

3) The perceived size of the bone bed is appropriate for a latrine area, either for humans
or for some small terrestrial predator such as a procyonid or mustelid.

4) The taxonomic composition of the fauna seems consistent with the foraging range and
abilities of a terrestrial predator. The small birds present in the assemblage might be
more difficult to catch for a terrestrial predator than for a raptor, but would be well within
the capabilities of a human hunter-gatherer, or even a coyote.

Many mammalian predators use defined latrine areas, mark home ranges with
scats, or bring food back to dens (Andrews and Evans 1983:290). Long-tailed weasels
(Mustela frenata) and raccoons (Procyon lotor) are opportunistic riparian generalists with
defined dens and latrine areas, and both seem in many respects to be good candidates for
creators of the hearth deposit. Both species are nocturnal, but weasels may also forage in
the daytime and have large home ranges which may encompass upland areas as well,
making it a particularly good candidate. Other procyonids (ringtail) and mustelids (otter,
mink) are probably less suitable candidates. Schmidly, describing weasels, says
The bulk of their diet is composed of small mammals, including moles, shrews,
ground squirrels, tree squirrels, flying squirrels, pocket gophers, woodrats, cotton
rats, deer mice, harvest mice, and small cottontails. Occasionally, they will eat
small birds, reptiles, amphibians, and insects…. Weasels often kill more than they
need, in which case the surplus is stored for future use (Schmidly 2004:171).

Voles and grasshopper mice are also taken (Sheffield and Thomas 1997:5; Quick
1951). In the Midwest, Microtus, Reithrodontomys, Peromyscus, and Sylvilagus are
important prey, especially in winter (Polderboer, Kuhn and Hendrickson 1941:Table 1).
A long-tailed weasel den in Iowa is described as follows:
1515

The first den excavated was located in the weed patch. It was an old mole run that
had been used by at least two weasels during the winter months. The nest was in
an enlargement of one of the runs about six inches below the surface of the
ground and about two feet from the entrance of the burrow. The nest cell was nine
inches in diameter and had four burrows radiating from it. This nest chamber was
filled with grasses packed in a layer-like formation. In the center of this mass was
a nest hollow lined with patches of mouse and shrew fur. Beneath this layer of fur
and at the sides of the nest were skins, various bones, and skulls of partially eaten
mice and shrews. The presence of scats in the next mass indicated that the weasels
had defecated in the nest…. A mass of scats was found packed into one of the
radiating tunnels, and some mouse and shrew remains were found stored in two
other tunnels (Polderboer, Kuhn and Hendrickson 1941:117).

Caching is also described by Muths (1998). In contrast to weasels, raccoons tend
to den in trees and their scats may be left on or at the bases of trees (Noren 1941:Figs. 3,
5), especially in windfall gap areas. Page, Swihart and Kazacos (1998:183) report that
“latrines were more often associated with substrates such as logs or stumps, increased
numbers of understory trees, and higher average stem counts than random.” The latrines
are also foraging sites for granivorous rodents, birds, and other animals (including some
animals eaten by raccoons) foraging for undigested seeds in decaying raccoon feces
(Page, Swihart and Kazacos 2001). In North Dakota, 62% of foraging sites were in
wetlands, 12% in wooded areas, and only 7% in upland grassland (Greenwood
1982:240). Weasel latrines tend to be located near dens (Quick 1951:283), which for
weasels, are usually burrows. Errington (1936:406) describes a latrine as occupying “one
square foot, some feet beyond the main entrance of the den.” This is much smaller than
otter (Lutra canadensis) latrines, which are described as 5-20 m in radius (Ben-David et
al. 1998:2567). Weasels are small, swift animals with high metabolism (and
correspondingly high defecation rates), adult males weighing only about 300-500 g,
about the same body mass as a barn owl or Cooper’s hawk. They have long, slender
bodies adapted for hunting fossorial rodents in narrow tunnels and burrows. They may
1516

occupy burrows (with enlarged chambers 3.5-5 cm in diameter) dug by moles or pocket
gophers. Home ranges have been measured at 44-60 hectares for adult females and 120241 hectares for males (Gehring and Swihart 2004). Raccoons are much larger animals
(females, 4.6-8.6 kg, males 5.8-11.0 kg in San Patricio County; Gehrt and Fritzell
1999:21), and they eat a much greater proportion of plant foods and insects.

Very little information is available on bone in mustelid scats. Andrews and Evans
(1983:302) looked at scats from the least weasel (Mustela nivalis), a smaller relative of
the Texas long-tailed weasel, as well as the pine marten, another mustelid:

The bones in these scats were generally too fragmentary for identification even to
body parts…. The bones all show signs of digestion. The enamel on the vole
molar prisms is etched and corroded along the salient angles and the dentine and
cement are partly dissolved. The enamel on some of the rodent incisors is
completely dissolved and the dentine deeply etched… the mandibles and maxillae
have lost the outer surface of bone… The postcrania are generally broken, with
rounded edges to the breaks and deeply corroded surfaces of the bone – where the
surface has been penetrated the inside of the bone may be partly hollowed out
(Andrews and Evans 1983:302).
Raccoons eat most of the species found in the hearth deposit, although not in the
proportions recovered there. Cryptotis parva, Scalopus aquaticus, Pitymys pinetorum,
Peromyscus leucopus, P. maniculatus, Neotoma floridana, tree squirrels, pocket mice,
cotton rats, gophers, Sylvilagus floridanus, passerine birds, snakes, lizards (including
Sceloporus undulatus), fish (centrarchids, cyprinids), frogs (Rana sp.) and other animal
foods such as crawdads, turtle eggs, and snails have all been documented, although plant
foods and insects make up a major part of the diet. Reptiles, amphibians, and fish
(including minnows) are less important than might be expected in riparian habitats
(Wood 1954).
1517

Salamanders rarely appear in the diets of either weasels or raccoons, and
documented cases are usually idiosyncratic examples of predation on single individuals
(Sturges 1955). Greenwood (1981:757) found mandibles of Ambystoma tigrinum in 9%
of raccoon scats in North Dakota. Unspecified salamanders have also been reported in
Kentucky-Tennessee (Smith, Kennedy and Baumgardner 1987:Table 1), and Missouri
(Noren 1941:76), but these are only one or two occurrences, unlike the kind of
representation seen in the Feature 5 hearth deposit. Weasels and raccoons are
opportunistic, but unless the smallmouth salamanders in the hearth deposit were
ambushed during a migration or dispersal event, they seem unlikely prey. Upland species
such as grasshopper and pocket mice and kangaroo rats are also rare or unreported in
raccoon diets.

The diet of minks (Mustela vison) appears to be generally similar to that of longtailed weasels, but some studies show greater use of fish, frogs, or birds (Arnold and
Fritzell 1989:Table 1; Casson and Klimstra 1983:Table 1; Gilbert and Nancekivell
1982:Table 1; Korschgen 1958:Table 1; Waller 1962: Table 1). I have seen no mention of
predation on salamanders.

Evaluation

The foregoing summary suggests that the hearth deposit fits the taphonomic and
dietary profile of a terrestrial carnivore – such as a small mustelid – better than a raptor.
The long-tailed weasel (Mustela frenata) and American mink (Mustela vison) are perhaps
1518

the best candidates among the procyonids and small mustelids. However, there are a few
mismatches between the profile and the archeological evidence:

1) If the extensive chemical digestion of bone documented by Andrews and Evans for
the least weasel is also characteristic of the long-tailed weasel, it does not match the
masticated but mostly undigested bone in the hearth deposit.

2) The substantial numbers of salamanders, fish, frogs, and toads in the deposit are not
characteristic of long-tailed weasel dietary profiles.

3) Voles are a major food item for weasels, but are scarce in the hearth deposit.

4) There is no reason to expect a mustelid latrine to be associated with a hearth or
burned bone.

The Bone Bed as a Human Latrine

The most parsimonious explanation for the microvertebrate bone bed adjacent to
Feature 5 is probably that it is a human latrine area, and the most compelling arguments
are probably the customary archeological ones of association and cultural modification.
The most relevant questions seem to be these:

1) Is the bone deposit associated with other evidence of human activity?
2) Is the taphonomy of the deposit consistent with human digestion?
1519

3) Does the taxonomic composition of the deposit correspond with dietary evidence from
prehistoric hunter-gatherer sites?

Cultural Associations
Feature 5 is interpreted as a small hearth, not a tree burn or a burned woodrat
house. The bone bed is adjacent at the same level, lapping slightly onto the baked surface.
It seems clear that the latrine deposit was created after active use of the hearth had
ceased, and the few bones in the deposit that show evidence of heat alteration were
probably not burned in the hearth itself. I interpret the animal remains as likely having
been cooked elsewhere (probably at some other site, or elsewhere on the floodplain), but
the sparse evidence of heat alteration is significant because it suggests human
involvement, regardless of where the cooking actually occurred.

Other than the bone, cultural debris found at the same level is sparse. Two
microflakes or shatter fragments were recovered from the bone bed in fine-sieved loose
matrix (N113 E98, 92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106). These appear to be cultural, not natural
flakes or shovel retouch flakes (Fig. 10.55), although neither have bulbs of percussion.
One (Fig. 10.55, B) is chert and may be an edge collapse flake, while the other looks like
a quartzite thermal spall. Microflakes like these are often found in human coprolites from
dry shelters (Stock 1983:Fig. 15, B), and some archeologists have suggested they were
ingested when stone tool edges were rejuvenated by chipping with the teeth. Other than
these items, there is no other cultural debris directly associated with the bone bed. A
heavy percussion flake found 13.5 cm above the bone bed is presumably unrelated. It is
not surprising that cultural debris is scarce – there would be no reason to expect much of
1520

it in a latrine area, and debris density is very low everywhere in the bench deposits,
anyway.

Figure 10.55. Microflakes From the Hearth Deposit. These very small specimens are the
only lithic items recovered in direction association with the microvertebrate
bone bed. Both are from N113 E98 (92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106). A is
probably a quartzite thermal spall with very small patches of carbonate
encrustation; B is a chert nicroflake; it lacks a bulb of percussion, but may
be an edge-collapse flake. Neither shows any evidence of fluvial abrasion.

In the end, it is probably the evidence of limited heat alteration and of direct
spatial association with the hearth that provide the strongest arguments for interpreting
the bone bed as a human latrine. It is difficult to build any kind of convoluted scenario
that would account for burning in a fluvial deposit, a raptor pellet midden, or a small
carnivore latrine.
1521

Human Digestion: What Kind of Evidence?
Unlike raptors, humans have teeth, and unlike other kinds of mammalian
carnivores, humans have flat-topped molars well adapted for crushing bone. And unlike
all other predators, humans usually (but not always) cook meat before eating it. More
importantly, humans have cuisine, which means not only cooking meat, but eating it in
combination with plant foods that might buffer the bone (both physically and chemically)
against digestive damage (see Sutton and Reinhard 1995; Sutton 1993). Other carnivores
(raccoons, for example) sometimes eat significant amounts of plant food, but usually not
at the same time as animal foods, and not as part of a structured cuisine. These factors
might be expected to contribute to some kind of human signature in digested small
animal remains.

What kind of damage can be expected to show on bone that has passed through
the human digestive tract? Information is surprisingly sparse. In a study by Crandall and
Stahl (1995), a single short-tailed shrew (Blarina brevicauda) was skinned, eviscerated,
boiled for two minutes, and swallowed without chewing by a human subject. The bone
was recovered from the feces and studied. The study showed significant attrition. Some
elements disappeared entirely, especially trunk vertebrae and phalanges. Teeth also
disappeared or showed chemical alteration. Digestion removed the proximal end of a
humerus and bent a tibia-fibula back upon itself (Crandall and Stahl 1995:Figs. 8, 10).
The authors conclude that
Nevertheless, skull breakage, maxillary tooth loss, mandibular breakage, and the
high proportion of isolated teeth in the assemblage all compare at least minimally
with small mammalian carnivores and Category 5 modification. Molar digestion
is similar to mammalian carnivores in that a range of digestive states from
intermediate to extreme damage were apparent (Crandall and Stahl 1995:795).
1522

Unfortunately, this was not an entirely realistic experiment because the prey was
not chewed, the cooking time was probably too short, and it is not clear from the report
what else (besides the marker foods of corn and sesame seeds) was eaten along with the
shrew. The most significant findings are probably that the bone recovered by Crandall
and Stahl was probably much more chemically corroded than the bone from the Berger
Bluff hearth deposit. Normal human gastric pH is probably around 1.5 to 1.6, about the
same as that of hawks (it varies according to meal interval, age, and health) and is rather
acidic. It is unfortunate that the experiment involved only one animal and did not
replicate actual cuisine.

Human digestion of fish bone has also been studied experimentally by Jones
(1986) and Butler and Schroeder (1998). The first study simply found that most of the
bone disappeared, but the study by Butler and Schroeder is much more thorough and
interesting. In their study, three tui chub (a cyprinid fish, about 66-85 mm long) were
boiled for five minutes and swallowed with limited chewing. Fragments were recovered
from feces passed through three sizes of fine mesh. Vertebrae (both trunk and caudal)
survived best, but many cranial elements were lost; altogether, 84 elements out of the 315
originally present were recovered; of the 91 bone fragments recovered, 88 passed the 3.2
mm mesh and 29 passed the 1.6 mm mesh, so fragment size is quite comparable to that in
the hearth deposit (Butler and Schroeder 1995:Table 1). Aside from fragmentation, the
chief modifications produced were deformation of vertebrae (14 out of 19 specimens;
Butler and Schroeder 1995:Table 6, Fig. 5). Deformation of the fresh, somewhat plastic
vertebral centrum apparently occurs during or after mastication (I have not seen obvious
plastic deformation on any of the Berger Bluff bone). Of the bones that survived, over
80% were at least two-thirds complete (Butler and Schroeder 1995:966). Butler and
1523

Schroeder also studied tui chub bones in 10 human coprolites from Hidden Cave,
Nevada. These remains were also very small (70% passed the 3.2 mm screen), coming
from fish estimated to average 57 mm in length. They were also much better preserved,
with many elements having survivorship values over 50% (Butler and Schroeder
1995:Fig. 7). Surface pitting and edge rounding were common in some coprolites,
uncommon in others. In general, the fish bone fragments from the Hidden Cave
coprolites were better preserved than those recovered from the experimental ones,
perhaps underscoring the importance of considering cuisine when doing this kind of
experimental work.

The study of bone mastication among Bofi foragers done by Landt (2004) has
considerable relevance, but is procedurally opposite to that of Crandall and Stahl, in that
the bone was chewed but not digested. This review suggests that the experimental work
that has been done on human digestion of bone is simply too limited to allow “agency
diagnosis” of bone assemblages like those from Berger Bluff. Collections of human
coprolites from dry shelters are probably the next best source of information. There are
inevitable problems with coprolites, because archeologists will never know for sure what
constituents have been eaten but not preserved, nor will we know for sure how cooking
was done, but at least the problems of limited samples and unrealistic experimental
design are lacking.

Comparative Evidence From Human Coprolites in Dry Regions
Almost all the documented coprolite assemblages (or analyzed mummies) come
from Late Archaic sites in the Lower Pecos region of Texas, from other states in the
1524

desert west, or from Mexico. Most come from dry shelters, although there are a few
unsheltered latrines such as the Myoma Dunes and La Quinta sites in California (Wilke
1978; Sutton 1993). These have somewhat different prey animals (and undoubtedly
different plants and cooking methods) from those at Berger Bluff, but are still very
informative. The aggregate collections display a wide variety of subsistence and
medicinal plants and small animals of all kinds. The intestines of the Skiles mummy (41
VV 656, 1150±70 RCYBP), for example, contained very small fish (two species of
shiners, Notropis spp.), catfish, a small fossorial snake (Tantilla sp.), possible bat, an
unidentified bird, and mice and gophers (Peromyscus

and Thomomys; Turpin,

Henneberg and Riskind 1986:307).

There is a great deal of cultural continuity in North American prehistory, and that
makes this material relevant to the Berger Bluff research. This kind of material may be
removed in space and time from the bench deposits at Berger Bluff, but it shows what
kinds of animals were used, and if the bone fragments are studied carefully, they could
show what kind of damage might be expected as a result of human digestion.
Unfortunately, perhaps because most of the coprolite studies have been done by
palynologists, the bone fragments are almost never studied beyond the initial attempt to
identify the species, and sometimes even that is not done. The focus on most coprolite
studies is on plants and pollen, and the bone has never been studied at the same level of
taphonomic detail as that found in raptor pellets or carnivore scats. As a result, we have
SEM photos and element counts of bones from owl pellets, but almost none from human
coprolites. Nevertheless, the coprolites remain our best source of comparative
information, and they show that all of the animals in the Berger Bluff hearth deposit were
eaten by prehistoric hunter-gatherers -- at least, given the level of identification in most
1525

of the studies. Sobolik (1993) has reviewed the recovery of small animals (excluding
fish) in the United States. Her review shows that at the generic level and above, most of
the taxa in the Berger Bluff hearth deposit have been recovered from coprolites
somewhere in the US. Snakes (Colubrinae, Colubridae), Sceloporus, Ambystoma, Rana,
various small birds, Peromyscus, Onychomys, Microtus, Dipodomys, Neotoma, and
Geomyidae are all hearth deposit taxa represented by coprolites. Table 10.23 shows taxa
recovered from coprolites in Texas and Tamaulipas, including three sites not reviewed by
Sobolik. The only hearth deposit taxa that are not explicitly represented in the coprolite
assemblages are the ?American toad (Bufo americanus), least shrew (Cryptotis parva),
eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus), and some snakes (?longnose, ?ringneck, brown or
rough earth), undoubtedly missing simply because these are mostly species found in the
eastern part of the state. It should also be mentioned that Bufo carries toxins that might
make it unpalatable.

In some cases, reptile, lizard, and fish scales, otoliths, feathers, and bits of fur
serve to identify some animals in coprolites, but none of these were found in the bench
deposits. Otoliths might well have survived in the bench sediments, but none were found.
The other items may well have been present at some time, but have since decayed.
Animal bones recovered from known human coprolites vary widely in their
completeness. At one end of the spectrum are the nearly complete Perognathus and
partial Baiomys taylori skeletons reported from Tamaulipas by Marsh (1964). At the
other end are highly fragmented remains that look very much like those in the hearth
deposit (for example, see Sobolik 1988:Figs. 20, 22). Remarkably large pieces of bone
are present in some coprolites.

1526

References

Granado Cave

Baker Cave

Common name
Hinds Cave

Taxon

Portales or
Romero's Cave

Table 10.23. Taxa Recovered From Coprolites, Texas and Tamaulipas Sites.

Identified at least to genus
Aplodinotus grunniens
Ictalurus sp. or Pylodictus sp.
Zenaidura sp.
Colinus viginianus
Colubridae (cf. Thamnophis sirtalis)
Colubridae (cf. Masticophis flagellum)
Chiroptera (cf. Tadarida mexicana)
Sceloporus (?) sp.
Rana sp.
Citellus sp.
Onychomys leucogaster
Baiomys taylori
Reithrodontomys fulvescens
Peromyscus cf. P. leucopus
Peromyscus sp.
cf. Perognathus sp.
cf. Dipodomys sp.
Neotoma albigula
Neotoma sp.
Sigmodon hispidus
Lepus californicus
Sylvilagus sp.
Lepus sp.
Ondatra zibethecus
Procyon lotor
Urocyon cinereoargenteus
Odocoileus sp.

Freshwater drum
Catfish
Dove
Northern bobwhite
cf. Garter snake
cf. Coachwhip
Mexican free-tailed bat
Rough-scaled lizard
Frog
Ground squirrel
N. grasshopper mouse
N. pygmy mouse
Fulvous harvest mouse
cf. White-tailed mouse
Deer mice
cf. Pocket mouse
cf. Kangaroo rat
White-throated woodrat
Woodrat
Cotton rat
Black-tailed jackrabbit
Cottontail
Jackrabbit
Muskrat
Raccoon
Gray fox
Deer

(Table continued on next page)
1527

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X X
X
X
X
X X X
X X
X
X X X
X
X
X
X
X
X

6
6
6
6
1
1
1
6
6
5, 6
6
3
3
4
4, 6
3
3
6
2, 4, 5,6
4, 5, 6
6
2, 4, 5, 6
2, 5
5, 6
6
6
5

Fish, small
Fish
Aves
Aves (wren-, dove/quail-, owl-sized)
Lacertilia
Serpentes
Rodentia
Rodentia, rat-sized
Rodentia, Peromyscus-sized
O. leucogaster or Reithrodontomys sp.
Lagomorpha

Small fish
Fish
Birds
Small-medium birds
Lizards
Snakes
Rodents
Rat-sized rodent
Deer mouse-sized rodent
Grasshopper or harvest
mouse
Rabbits/hares

X
X
X X
X
X X X
X X
X X
X
X
X
X X

X
X
X

References

Portales or
Romero's Cv

Granado Cave

Identified to higher taxonomic
levels

Baker Cave

Hinds Cave

(Table 10.23 continued from previous page)

5, 6
4
1, 3, 4
6
2, 3, 4, 6
3, 4, 5, 6
1, 4
6
6
6
1, 4

1. Edwards (1990:Table 7)
2. Hunter (2001:Table 13.4)
3. Marsh (1964)
4. Sobolik (1988:143-44, Table 15)
5. Stock (1983:Table 10)
6. Williams-Dean (1978:Table 10)
Note: the currently recognized local ground squirrel is Spermophilus mexicanus, not Citellus.
Sylvilagus cf. S. audubonii and Neotoma cf. N. albigula are also found in coprolites from
Caldwell Cave (41 CU 1; Holloway 1985:Table 4).

Figure 10.56 shows a coprolite from Conejo Shelter with a large piece of
unidentified bone from some small animal embedded in it. Figure 10.57 compares size
grading of the Berger Bluff hearth deposit with bone fragments extracted from a single
human coprolite excavated at Baker Cave (41 VV 213) in 1985. This coprolite (not one
of the samples studied by Sobolik) was excavated from unit N5 E4 in stratum 2-16D
(N5.06 E3.11, 98.63 m) and contained what appeared to be bone fragments created by
smashing bone from some medium or large mammal (perhaps to produce bone grease?).
1528

This is a source of bone that appears to be entirely lacking in the Berger Bluff bench
deposits, but it illustrates part of the size distribution of bone fragments that may be
found in human fecal remains. The fragments ranged in maximum length from 1.2-24.0
mm.

Figure 10.56. Human Coprolite From Conejo Shelter. Unidentified animal bone
embedded in a coprolite from Conejo Shelter (41 VV 162), N90 W95, Lens
9, south end, 9.17; collected during the original field excavations in 1967 by
Robert Alexander. This is specimen 30 from an unpublished isotope study
by Jeff Huebner. It has a fibrous appearance because the occupants of the
shelter had a high-fiber diet. Photo October 22, 1990.

1529

Figure 10.57. Comparing Fragment Size in the Hearth Deposit and a Coprolite From
Baker Cave. The size distribution from the hearth deposit (copied from Fig.
10.22, measured to nearest tenth of a millimeter) is compared to size
distribution for bone fragments in a human coprolite from Baker Cave
(N5.06, E3.11, 98.63 m, stratum 2-16D). Bone fragments in the Baker Cave
coprolite may have been produced by smashing bone from some large
animal and have a much less clumped size distribution.

Figure 10.58 shows a very small long bone shaft fragment discovered in one of
the unstudied lots of bone from the Berger Bluff hearth deposit. It has an unusual
compression fracture in which splinters of bone (perhaps additional diaphysis fragments
from the same long bone) have been rammed into the medullary cavity. This kind of
1530

fragment compression is occasionally seen in raptor pellets, where it is produced by
intense peristatltic activity in the raptor’s alimentary tract. Whether it also occurs in
human digestion is unknown, but it seems plausible.

Figure 10.58. Hearth Deposit: Shaft Fragment With Compression Fracture. Unidentified
very small long bone shaft fragment with splinters rammed into medullary
cavity. N113 E98 (92.40-92.30 m, approximately upper 5 cm of level), lot
B-107A.
Table 10.24 lists element representation for rodents in the Baker Cave coprolites
studied by Sobolik. Unidentified rodents, Peromyscus and Neotoma are combined to
create this listing (fish, lizards, and birds are omitted) condensed from Sobolik
(1988:Table 15). The list shows that essentially all parts of the body are represented,
confirming that rodents are eaten whole (although caudal and trunk vertebrae are not
distinguished in the original table). Comparing this list (rodents) with Table 10.22 (all
small mammals) shows that the two are much the same, except for a greater number of
1531

unspecified limb elements and fewer axial elements in the hearth deposit. Figure 10.59
illustrates this similarity with pie charts.

Table 10.24. Element Representation in Baker Cave Coprolites.
Element

Count

Cranial
cranial fragments
molars
incisors
mandible fragments
maxilla fragment
Cranial total:

17
25
9
4
1
56

Forelimb total:

6
4
3
1
14

Hind limb total:

8
5
1
9
2
25

Unspecified limb total:

5
5

Axial total:

42
20
62

Pelvic total:

3
3

Forelimbs
humerus fragments
radius fragments
scapula fragments
ulna fragment
Hind limbs
tibia fragments
femur fragments
tibia/fibula fragment
astragali
calcanei
Unspecified limb
phalanges
Axial
vertebrae
ribs
Pelvic region
os coxae

Source: Sobolik (1988:Table 15). Note: counts for Peromyscus, Neotoma, and unidentified rodent
are combined here.

1532

Figure 10.59. Element Representation Compared: Hearth Deposit and Baker Cave
Coprolites. Top, data from Table 10.22. Bottom, data from Table 10.24,
extracted from Sobolik (1988:Table 15). Note that the Baker Cave coprolite
graphed in Fig. 10.57 is different from these.
1533

Another important observation emerging from coprolite, mummy, and midden
studies is that many of the fish remains are very small, suggesting mass capture (seining)
of very small species (or juveniles of larger species), probably in shallows or backwaters.
This was recognized as early as 1934, when Carl L. Hubbs identified possible minnow
vertebrae in a coprolite from Fate Bell Shelter in Val Verde County (Jones 1935, Report
No. 70-A, page 2). The small fish (shiners and a small catfish) found in the Skiles
mummy have already been mentioned. The fish remains found by Williams-Dean
(1978:197) and Stock (1983:110) in Hinds Cave coprolites are described as “small,”
although the only genera identified (Aplodinotus and Ictalurus) can grow to considerable
size. Stock (1983:116) describes the remains as “tiny vertebrae and cranial fragments of
small fish, including the catfish family, Ameuridae.” Fish was the most common type of
bone (vertebrae, ribs) found in Baker Cave coprolites by Sobolik (1988:144; Fig. 21),
often accompanied by charcoal, although she says nothing about their size. Identification
of fish scales from the coprolites by David J. Lee shows that most are from small taxa
(Cypriniformes, Perciformes, Centrarchidae), presumably minnow-sized to panfish.
Studies of the intestinal contents of the Spirit Cave mummy (9415 ± 25 RCYBP) showed
large quantities of small fish bone (91.82% indeterminate Cyprinidae, 3.73% tui chub,
4.01% suckers, 0.43% redside or dace; Eiselt 1997:120), with vertebrae and head
elements somewhat overrepresented. A live length of 3-7 cm is estimated for most of the
fish (Eiselt 1997:131).

Very small fish remains have also been found in open sites, both in latrines and
middens (Gobalet 1989). At Myoma Dunes,
Many of the bones were burned, especially the fin spines and rays. This would
indicate exposure to fire, either in drying and smoking or roasting, and 88% of the
1534

samples containing fish remains also included charcoal fragments…. Small
fingerlings, as, for example those of Colorado River bonytail chub (Gila elegans)
were consumed whole, as indicated by the pharyngeals and vertebrae recovered
from the coprolites (Wilke 1978:82).
At the Rye Patch Reservoir project in Nevada,
Two kinds of small fish were recovered from Rye Patch (Rhinichthys sp. and
Richardsonius sp.), virtually all of them from Elko-age Feature 12 at Sandy Bank,
which yielded 339 minnow bones from about 25% of the flotation sample
recovered from the dark midden lens. In addition, 81 minnow bones were
recovered in the field during screening…. Some of the recovered minnow bones
were charred. Minnows were recognized as sometimes-important food items by
the ethnographic Washo and Paiute…. They could be caught in quantity using
baskets, a practice important both during droughts in isolated pools of a dying
river, and in the winter through the ice…. Due to the nutritious nature of any fish,
the small minnows are not regarded as culturally marginal food animals….
(Dansie 1987:141-142).
These examples show that prehistoric human consumption of minnow-sized fish
and deposition of minnow-sized fish bone in latrine areas is by no means atypical, and it
is consistent with the size range of the fish remains from Berger Bluff, in both the
ambient and hearth deposit assemblages.

Comparative Evidence From Ethnographic Accounts
Ethnographic accounts of predation on small animals come mostly from northern
Mexico and the desert West in the US. By the time serious ethnographic recording got
underway in the second half of the 19th century, few residents of other areas retained
precontact lifeways. These early ethnographers probably interviewed or observed mostly
adult men, less often adult women, never children, and were far more interested in the
taking of big game than in small animal collecting. Despite these obvious biases and
1535

filters, scattered accounts of small animal predation can be found in the literature. These
accounts make it clear that, particularly in arid areas, a wide variety of rodents, snakes,
lizards, small birds and fish were taken. Rodents taken included not just larger species
like prairie dogs, woodrats and ground squirrels, but smaller murids such as Dipodomys
and Peromyscus.

Some of the most interesting accounts are the earliest ones by travelers and
missionaries in the Spanish borderlands. Describing the 16th century “Chichimecs,”
Durán wrote:
They hunted all day for rabbits, deer, hares, weasels, moles, wildcats, birds,
snakes, lizards, mice, and they also collected locusts, worms, herbs, and roots.
Their whole life was reduced to a quest for food. In order to kill a snake they
spent an entire day crouching behind a bush, watching the snake at its lair as a cat
will wait for a mouse (Durán 1964:11-12; note, in the original edition “topos” is
used for moles and “ratones” is used for mice).
Describing the native inhabitants of Nuevo Leon in the middle 17th century, De León
wrote:
There is no bird or animal they do not eat, even unclean and poisonous ones, such
as snakes, vipers, rats and other things, except the toad and the swift. They are,
men as well as women, great fishermen. They fish with various methods, with the
arrow, with nets, blinding the fish at night, and entering their caves to seek them
out. They roast them with tripe, often after two days… (Brown 1988:9).
Describing Baja California in 1761, Jacob Baegert wrote:
The Indians also eat snakes, lizards, night owls, bats and pieces of meat which
they scratch from animal skins… It is very common that the Indians eat all kind
and species of mice, and catching them is such sport that they customarily spend
weeks at it. When they go hunting, those of them who speak some Spanish say
ruta and raten (mice and rats), and voi ratenar, I go mice hunting; just as those
Indians when they go fishing say, vado piscari, I go fishing.
1536

Spiders, even large ones, toads and similar vermin, they either kill with their
hands or take them away with their bare hands when they have already been killed
(Baegert 1982:222).
Also writing in the middle 18th century (1755-1767), Joseph Och wrote:
They catch snakes…. Only if they are excessively hungry do they skin them, wrap
them around a stick, roast them in the fire, and eat them with great relish, in the
manner of eating an eel.
This voracity incites them also to gulp down unseemly things such as rats of great
size, larger than two fists; snakes of various lengths and thicknesses, as well as
finger-long grasshoppers (Och 1965:131-132; 179).
Speaking of the “Indians of the province of Texas,” in 1767-68, Fray Gaspar José de
Solís wrote:
In the woods they live on horses, mules, mares, deer, since there are many, bison
which abound, bear, berrendos, wild boar, rabbits, hares, dormice, and other
quadrupeds, with snakes, vipers, wild turkeys, geese, ducks, hens, partridges,
cranes, quail and other kinds of birds that are on the beach or on the banks and
margins of the rivers, with fish of all kinds, which abound (Kress 1931:43).
The following account of a fire drive by Ignaz Pfefferkorn is translated from the 1794
original:
This thick brush is infested with large numbers of rats and mice which the
Sonorans sometimes hunt. Twenty or thirty and sometimes more Sonorans
assemble and surround a given circle of brush. They start fires, setting the dry
brush ablaze in a circle, and the animals hidden therein are forced to take flight.
As the fire advances, the animals retreat more and more to the center and the
Indians in turn close the circle on them. In this manner the hunt is continued, until
finally a large number of rats and mice is driven together into the center. Of these,
the heat has already killed some and burned others; the rest are killed by the
Indians with clubs. Then the distribution is made. Each Indian fastens to a string
by their tails the mice which have fallen to his share. He hangs this string over his
shoulder like a bandoleer (Pfefferkorn 1949:198-199).
1537

Writing in 1799, José Cortés wrote
From the tenderest age they are schooled in this vital activity. When they are
boys, the hunting of prairie dogs, ferrets, squirrels, hares, rabbits, badgers, and
mice is reserved for them (Cortés 1989:68).
Almost a century later, Eugene Trippel described the diet of the Yuma:
Moles, gophers, chipmunks, woodrats, jack and cottontail rabbits, small birds,
quail, wild ducks and geese, and land tortoises, diversify the bill of fare (Trippel
1889:575).
This much later account comes from the Yaqui, 1939-1945:
My poor sister-in-law was a good and patient woman. She just went looking for
rats and cactus when there was nothing else to eat.
Big rats built nests up high in mesquite trees. She had to walk three or four miles
to find any rats because they were all gone around Torim village, since the poor
Yaqui families hunted out every rat nest near the pueblo. When the Yaquis have
plenty of corn and beans and meat to eat, rats move back closer to the village.
You can tell how hungry the people of Torim are by how close to the village rats
can be found. The name of our village, Torim, means rats; maybe people here
have always had to eat rats.
Anastasia could get two or three dozen rats on a good day, cooking them in an
olla with corn or wheat (Moisés, Kelley and Holden 1971:179-180).
This account is interesting because it is one of the few accounts that mentions women
procuring small animals, and because it shows that by the 1940s, rats were no longer
highly esteemed as a food source. For the Panamint,
Their animal food consists principally of jack-rabbits, cotton-tail rabbits, and
quails, occasionally mountain sheep or deer, and sometimes wood rats, kangaroo
rats, white-footed mice, and a large lizard known as the chuckawara (Colville
1892:352).
1538

Delfina Cuero, a Diegueno informant, recounted
We used to eat rats, mice, lizards, and some snakes, but I don’t remember what
kind. We roasted them. The little things were pounded on a rock. Bones and all
and then stewed (Cuero1970:32-33).
An early account by Palmer of the Paiute says
I saw them collect grasshoppers, land turtles, lizards, snakes, mice, ratts [sic] and
rabbits, swifts and horned toned [sic, horned toads] and without taking off their
hides or extracting their entrails threw them on the fire cooked them a little, with
their fingers took them out and devoured them… (Heizer 1954:7).
Powell wrote,
Lizards are used for food in seasons of scarcity. They are killed by throwing
stones or clubs at them, or are shot with arrows. Many are caught with hooks
which are used to pull them from the crevices in the rocks.
The region inhabited by the Utes swarms with these reptiles an in warm seasons
they may be caught in great numbers. Sometimes they are collected for winter
use, and for this purpose they are arranged in long strings by hooking the tail of
one into the mouth of another. Then the strings are hung up on the branches of
trees to dry, and when thoroughly dried they are laid away in this form or ground
with mealing stones and preserved as flour.
Horned toads (species rhynomosa [sic; Phrynosoma spp.]) are sometimes used in
the same way but only in cases of great want… Fowler and Fowler 1971:14).
Among the Northern Ute,
Only the Uintahs ate field mice. A hunter would sit where he saw the trail of the
mice and catch them when they came by. Mice were cooked in hot coals, and
when done, were skinned and the entrails were removed.
The Uintahs shot rats with bow and arrow. The entrails were removed before
roasting the rats in the coals. Prairie dogs were treated in the same way (Smith
1974:49).
1539

The following comes from Frank Buckelew’s account of captivity by the Lipan Indians in
1866:
We came to a place where rats had made large mounds of sand among the prickly
pear. The Indians spent some time here and killed enough rats to have a real feast.
Rats seemed to be a very choice meat among the Lipans. They would roast them
whole, and when taken from the fire the skin and fur were burnt to a crisp, this
was peeled off and the flesh eaten. The intestines were dried up in a hard lump
and this was thrown away. I was hungry enough to eat the roasted rats. The
Indians seemed to think they were a rare treat (Dennis and Dennis 1925:128).
From the reference to “mounds of sand,” it seems likely these were kangaroo rats,
probably Dipodomys ordii, D. merriami, or less likely D. compactus.
The Northern Paiute used deadfalls to trap prairie dogs, gophers, or ground
squirrels (the same term is used for all), whitetail antelope ground squirrels
(Amnospermophilus leucurus), western gray squirrels (Sciurus griseus), desert woodrats
(Neotoma lepida) and bushy-tailed woodrats (N. cinerea), golden-mantled ground
squirrels (Spermophilus lateralis), Townsend’s chipmunk (Eutamias townsendii), desert
kangaroo rats (Dipodomys deserti), Ord’s kangaroo rats (D. ordii), deer mice
(Peromyscus maniculatus) or western harvest mice (Reithrodontomys megalotis), and
pinyon mice (Peromyscus truei; Fowler 1989:23-24). The Kaiparowits Southern Paiute
hunted marmots, unspecified squirrels, chipmunks, gophers, and unspecified rats (Kelly
1964:157). The Walapai hunted rats (evidently woodrats), kangaroo rats, chuckwallas,
snakes, and lizards, as well as “practically every available bird” (McKennan 1935:64).
The Tepehuan of Chihuahua trap gophers, moles, woodrats, and unspecified mice
(Pennington 1969:124-125). The Pima Bajo killed gophers, moles, “bushy-tailed rats”
(woodrats, presumably), tree and ground squirrels (Pennington 1980:201-202). Northern
Pimans (the Papago and their neighbors along the Gila River) hunted cotton rats
1540

(Sigmodon arizonae), woodrats (Neotoma albigula), jackrabbits, round-tailed ground
squirrels (Spermophilus tereticaudus), and Harris’s antelope squirrel (Ammospermophilus
harrisii; Rea 1998:Table 4.1). Cotton rats were prized above all:
People eat those. They live in that no’oshkal, breed in there. Not fat. But they got
more meat in there. Put a stick through and put them over the fire. Don’t skin
them. Then just peel them off after. Roast them again. Then this time they get
brown. One or two is enough. They do that when they go out hunting and burn the
brush (Rea 1998:177).
The above accounts are just a very small sample of some of the recorded
ethnographic literature. They show that lizards and mouse-sized rodents (perhaps in the
20-40 g size range) were hunted or trapped along with somewhat larger kangaroo rats
(generally in the 40-70 g size range) and the larger woodrats, cotton rats, and gophers
(generally about 150-350 g). In desert areas, granivorous rodents probably represented a
major portion of the available animal biomass. Hunting and trapping was probably most
often done by individuals or small groups (for example, groups of boys). The fire drives
described by Pfefferkorn and Rea’s informant are presumably somewhat less common
“mass capture” events. A more efficient mass capture technique was to let the snakes eat
the rodents, and then eat the snakes, which probably accounts for how often snakes
appear as food items in these borderland accounts. Some small animals are seldom or
never mentioned in dietary accounts – notably shrews, salamanders, frogs, and toads
(other than horned toads, which are really iguanid lizards anyway). In most cases these
are neither confirmed or denied as food sources, so we can only say that they were not
recorded. The ethnographies do not prove they were not eaten.

1541

Bias Against Small Animals by Archeologists and Ethnographers
Given that the bones of all these small animals appear in prehistoric human
coprolites, that the available ethnographies from the same regions clearly describe their
use as food sources, and there is artifactual evidence of trapping, collecting, evisceration,
cooking and mealing of small animals, one would think that the issue of human predation
on small animals had been settled long ago. What about artifactual evidence?

Figure 10.60 illustrates some gear – found in dry shelters in the Lake Amistad
region – suitable for procuring small animals. Shown are a generalized digging stick, a
probable deadfall trigger stick, and part of a scissors snare. Only the scissors snare (C) is
dated (at 2440 RCYBP), but the other two items are probably of equal or lesser vintage.
Probably only the digging stick (A) was in use at Berger Bluff, but this assemblage
illustrates that this Late Archaic technology exists in the dry shelters of the region, even
though most of it has been left for pothunters to recover. Deadfalls probably would not
have been used at Berger Bluff because the local Goliad Sandstone bedrock does not
break up into large, flat, durable slabs.

In a sample of stone tools from Hinds Cave examined for organic residue, rodent
hair was found on nine, rabbit hair on three, and deer hair on only two (Sobolik
1996:Table 1; see also Yohe, Newman and Schneider 1991), suggesting these tools were
mostly used to process rodents.

Despite the overwhelming array of evidence I have presented above, there has
always been considerable resistance by archeologists to acceptance of small animals as
1542

food items. Most of the resistance is directed at snakes, lizards, amphibians, bats, and
especially rodents. Small birds, fish, and turtles seem to be less controversial. Rodent
remains are usually dismissed as “intrusive,” oftentimes even when they belong to nonburrowing species (Morlan 1994:135).
“Intrusive” is a code word meaning that the zooarcheologist can then abandon any
further analytical responsibility. Richard Morlan observes,
It seems fair to say that these animals burrow to live, not to die. In this perspective
the discovery of a burrower’s bones in an archaeological site can be considered a
failure in the burrowing strategy…. The main message is that any rodent that can
intrude itself into an archaeological site can probably extrude itself as well.
Rodent bones occur in sites not because of rodent activities but because their
activities are interrupted by some other agency, usually their predators (Morlan
1994:135, 139).
Archeologists who are convinced that rodents are always intrusive should
demonstrate it by digging control pits outside of site boundaries and showing that rodent
bone densities are just as high outside the site as inside.

Many of the animals found in the Berger Bluff hearth deposit are fossorial and/or
nocturnal foragers. Species like these are ideal prey for diurnal foraging humans, because
they are confined to burrows during the day and can be dug out with a digging stick like
the one shown in Fig. 10.60. Often there are indications, like fresh dirt mounds, showing
whether a burrow is occupied. Strictly fossorial species, like the eastern mole and pocket
gophers, are not fast runners. Essentially blind when dug out and exposed to bright
daylight, they cannot escape. Cursorial nocturnal foragers, like kangaroo rats and pocket
mice, are fast runners but usually have large eyes adapted to functioning in very low light
levels and are ill-adapted to navigation when suddenly thrust into bright daylight.
1543

Figure 10.60 (following page). Prehistoric Small-Animal Procurement Gear From the
Lower Pecos. Found in dry shelters, these are examples of artifacts that
could have been used for small animal procurement. A is a wooden digging
stick (distal end at top) that was mostly used for plant collection but could
also be used to excavate occupied animal burrows (wooden artifact
recording project, specimen 12-1). It comes from 41 VV 66 in the Lake
Amistad area. B is a possible deadfall trigger stick from an unrecorded site
in the Lake Amistad area (specimen 2-11). C is part of a scissors snare
(specimen M) from Baker Cave (41 VV 213), Greer excavations, Square 20,
Zone 7 (=9), Feature 117, dating to 2440 RCYBP. Note that items B and C
are shown at about twice the scale of the digging stick. Of the items shown
here, probably only the digging stick was used at Berger Bluff, but this
illustration is intended to illustrate that there is artifactual as well as
coprolite and midden evidence of small animal use.

1544

1545

Traps or snares could be used to capture some of these animals, but for most of
them, a digging stick and a dog are all the technology needed. Snares for birds and seines
for fish might be needed. Reptiles and amphibians (particularly the salamanders) can be
caught in pitfalls, leading one to wonder if the two small pits (Feature 6 and Feature 7)
could possibly have functioned as amphibian pitfalls. Present-day herptetologists
conducting amphibian censuses usually find that pitfalls are the most effective capture
technique. Feature 6 originated in stratum 2A and clearly predates the microvertebrate
bone bed, but the surface of origin for Feature 7 is somewhat ambiguous (Fig. 4.39). The
notion that it is contemporary with Feature 5 and the hearth deposit cannot be ruled out.
Whyte (1991:170) found that small mammals, frogs, and toads could escape from pits 40
cm deep unless the walls were moist or the pit was water-filled. Rodents, especially
heteromyids, should be able to escape from small pits like Feature 6 and Feature 7.

The reptiles and amphibians found in the hearth deposit are all ectotherms.
Animals like these are sluggish when warming up after a cool night. Smallmouth
salamanders, toads, ringnecked snakes, or longnose snakes might be caught emerging
from burrows or under logs rolled aside during early morning foraging trips by gathering
parties, as well as caught in pitfalls.

Mary Stiner has already expressed my view of these animals as resources in a
section she calls “Hunting by Gathering,”
The use of plants and that of small animals have much in common tactically
because these resources are stationary gatherable particles, often scattered in time
and space. These characteristics generally set plants and small prey apart from
large game.

1546

Small prey may be considered sessile in habit either because they are truly
immobile (as are plants), or because their territories are so small that the effect is
one of immobility from the human point of view. Small prey may also require
different, sometimes incompatible, search and procurement tactics from what is
typical of large game hunting. Small animals are protein-rich, sometimes fat-rich,
and represent potential sources of limiting nutrients that humans must consume
regularly. Because most kinds of small prey are easily gathered, they are
accessible to a wider variety of persons (ages and sexes) in social groups, and
obtaining them is less likely to conflict with the demands of child care (Stiner
1994:158).

Small animals have some other properties making them useful food sources for
hunter-gatherers. As Stiner indicates, they may be encountered while foraging for plant
foods, so in optimal foraging terms, there is no additional “search time” cost, and their
sessile habits mean that “pursuit time” is relatively minimal as well. For small mammals
in particular, the edible meat percentage is quite high. Stahl (1982:823) estimates edible
meat percentages at about 67-76% for small mammals he sampled (for species found at
Berger Bluff that he studied, the percentage is even higher, about 85%). Many rodents
have seasonal lipid cycles, storing up fat for the winter season (Fleharty, Krause and
Stinnett 1973:Fig. 5). As a result, rodents taken in late fall or early winter would have
particularly high fat content.

Evaluation: The Bone Bed As a Human Latrine

Reviewing the criteria presented earlier, we can conclude that the extensive
mechanical breakage and limited evidence of chemical rounding seen on the hearth
deposit bone is probably consistent with an interpretation of human digestion, but a
definitive taphonomic evaluation is hampered by the lack of detailed studies of bone
known to have passed through the human digestive tract. The few experimental studies
1547

that have been done seem to indicate more severe bone loss, chemical damage, and
deformation than is seen in the hearth deposit, but these studies have generally lacked a
realistic design (for example, limited or no chewing of the bone). A “cuisine-based”
approach in which plant foods buffer the animal foods needs to be tried, and experimental
bones should be chewed, not eschewed. Until better and more realistic experiments are
done, I regard the taphonomic profile for human-digested bone as ambiguous. Likewise,
a significant sample of bone has been extracted from known human coprolites at various
sites in the Trans-Pecos and Lower Pecos regions of Texas, but studies of the bone have
never extended beyond identified species and elements, so here again the opportunity to
define what digested bone looks like has been deferred.

On the other hand, it is possible to say with some certainty that both the
ethnographic and coprolite records of human diet in the region are consistent with the
taxonomic composition of the hearth deposit. To be sure, these records are well removed
both in space and time from Berger Bluff, but we can say that elsewhere, in later
prehistory, native populations were eating similar kinds of animal foods. Salamanders
appear rarely in coprolite records, and I find no explicit mention of them as human food
in any of the ethnographies -- but this could well be a case of inadequate documentation.

The strongest evidence for human agency remains the clear spatial association of
the bone bed with the hearth, Feature 5. I can envision no plausible scenario that would
link a mustelid latrine or a raptor pellet midden to a restricted area of fire-building on a
flat floodplain surface, but it is easy to imagine the trampled and vegetation-cleared area
around an abandoned hearth being selected as a preferred human latrine at a site that was
visited only sporadically during the course of foraging trips.
1548

SPECIES ACCOUNTS
If only one or two items are present, provenience is listed; if more than one or two
are present, it is omitted but can be looked up in Appendix 6.
Lepisosteus sp. (unknown species of gar; Fig. 10.61)
Ambient fauna
1 ganoid scale

A single very small ganoid scale from some unknown species of gar was
discovered in an as yet unstudied lot of bone from N109 E96 (93.08-93.00 m, bulk
matrix, coarse fraction). Because this item adds a new taxon to the species list from the
bench deposits, I report it here, even though the rest of the lot remains unstudied. Gars
have scales in a variety of sizes covering their bodies, and this one is far smaller than
most of the hundreds of gar scales recovered from the Late Holocene blufftop midden. It
could belong to any of three species of gar (alligator, longnose, or spotted) found in the
region. Flynn (1983) identified some of the gar from the blufftop midden as Lepisosteus
osseus, but I am not sure of the basis for the identification. Gar usually imply fairly deep
pools of water, consistent with the hydrological reconstruction presented in Chapter 4.
They can also grow to be very large individuals, but the size of this one is unknown.
Fish, unidentified, small to medium-sized (Figs. 10.1, 10.26; 10.30, A, E; 10.46, I, K;
10.51, A-E; 10.62 to 10.65)
Element
mandible
teeth
vertebrae
dorsal fin spine
pectoral fin spine
unidentified fin spine
unidentified fragments

Ambient bone NISP
1
2
1
6
2

1549

Hearth deposit NISP
2
27
6
1
1
12

Figure 10.61. Gar Scale, Ambient Bone. Very small ganoid scale from unidentified gar
(Lepisosteus sp.). A, exterior surface; B, interior surface of same specimen.
N109 E96 (93.08-93.00 m), bulk matrix, coarse fraction.

1550

Figure 10.62. Ambient Bone, Small Fish Vertebra. Unidentified small, manganesestained fish vertebra from coarse fraction of bulk matrix, N109 E96 (92.3592.30 m). No lot number assigned yet.

Figure 10.63. Ambient Bone, Small Fish Vertebra. Unidentified small fish vertebra from
coarse fraction of bulk matrix, N109 E96 (92.35-92.30 m). No lot number
assigned yet.
1551

Figure 10.64. Very Small Unidentified Fish Vertebra From the Ambient Bone
Assemblage. Centrum of very small vertebra recovered from coarse fraction
of bulk matrix, N109 E96 (92.35-92.30 m). This specimen is poorly
preserved and somewhat corroded in appearance, and may be from a poorly
ossified juvenile.

1552

Figure 10.65. SEM Photo of Fish Vertebra. This vertebral centrum of a small unidentified
fish comes from the hearth deposit and was acid-etched with 10% HCl
before scanning electron microscopy; the corroded appearance is due to this
etching, not to taphonomic decay. The contrast has also been heightened to
emphasize bone texture. Arrows 1 and 2 mark the end of warm-season
growth (porous radial bone structure) and the beginning of cold-season
dormancy (dense lamellar bone growth). Death of this individual appears to
have occurred at the end of the second winter (?). N113 E98 (92.50-92.40
m), lot B-105. Bar scale is 1 mm long.

1553

None of these specimens has been identified beyond the Class level, but all are
assumed to be freshwater teleosts. Most are from small fish, minnow-sized to panfish
sized, although six spine fragments, a tooth, and a couple of vertebrae come from
somewhat larger fish; some of these larger specimens come from the hearth deposit,
although most of the fragments there are from small fish. The ambient fauna specimens
must have come from Coleto Creek or from a small spring run, if there was one nearby.
On the other hand, if the hearth deposit specimens, as I believe, came from a latrine area,
they could have originated in any stream within human foraging radius, including the
Guadalupe River. The smaller fish could perhaps represent any number of different
families, such as the Cyprinidae (minnows), Poeciliidae (livebearers), Centrarchidae
(sunfish), Percidae (perch), and others. Coleto Creek has representatives of all these
(Table 10.4). The red shiner (Cyprinella lutrensis), western mosquitofish (Gambusia
affinis,) and centrarchids (usually juveniles) like the bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus) were
the most common fish collected in the pre-inundation survey (Murray, Jinnette and
Moseley 1976:12-13). A number of the vertebrae compare well in size with typical
centrarchids (Fig. 10.65), but there are also many from very small fish (Figs. 10.6210.64) or juveniles.

Vertebral centra were the most abundant elements recovered. As is usually the
case with archeological material, the neural and hemal spines, and often the basapophyses
are broken off. Of the specimens recovered, five could be classified as possibly cervical
vertebrae, one as possibly a thoracic vertebra, three as either cervical or thoracic, three as
caudal, and 16 as unclassifiable. All of the caudal vertebrae occurred in the hearth
deposit, where tail vertebrae might not be expected as dietary remains, but they were
fairly small. The 24 specimens from the hearth deposit that could be measured had a
1554

mean centrum diameter of 3.19 ± 0.69 mm (range, 1.8-4.3 mm). The single vertebra from
the ambient fauna measured 3.8 mm in diameter. Seventeen of the 24 measurable
vertebrae were slightly oblong rather than perfectly circular in sectional view, with the
minimum diameter averaging about 92% of the maximum. The longer axis is dorsoventral in some specimens, lateral in others.

Growth rings were also examined in these vertebrae, using surface inspection and
conventional light microscopy. As an experiment, one specimen (Fig. 10.65) was etched
in dilute HCl acid and then photographed with a scanning electron microscope to see if
growth ring definition could be enhanced. Growth ring studies were done as part of a
paleontology class project (Brown 1990). Table 10.25 shows the results of ring counts.
Many of the ring counts are somewhat tentative as a result of poor ring definition or
degradation of the centrum surface or edge. Few could be counted with absolute
confidence. The “tentative” counts represent the best guess, and if these are added to the
definite counts, there appear to be six specimens each of three, four, and five-year old
fish (one of these may possibly have six rings), one that is either one or two years old,
and five specimens where no count at all is possible. Among other things, these counts
help greatly to define the minimum number of fish present in the hearth deposit. Based on
ages, there must be at least three or four individuals present, all of different ages.

If the outer edge of the centrum is not too corroded, it is often possible to
determine the season of death for the individual. In the simplest case, vertebral facets
typically show wide, light-colored bands of porous bone alternating with narrow, darkcolored bands of dense bone. The porous bone is a result of rapid bone growth during the
warm season, when the metabolic level of the fish is highest and assimilation of calcium
1555

through the gills and phosphorous from the diet is at a peak (fish are ectotherms and their
activity level depends on water temperature). The hypermineralized dense bone is laid
down in the cold season, when metabolic levels are minimal and bone growth is slow. It
is important to note that “cold season” and “warm season” correspond to water
temperature, which is considerably lagged behind air temperature during the course of the
year. In Texas, dense bone growth may occur as late as late April (Brown 1990:6).

Table 10.25. Ring Counts of Fish Vertebrae From the Hearth Deposit.
Specimens with 1-2 rings

1

Specimens with 3 rings
definite
tentative
total:

2
4
6

Specimens with 4 rings
definite
tentative
total:

2
4
6

Specimens with 5 rings
definite
tentative
total:

1
5
6

No count possible

5

Grand total

24

1556

The terminal growth rings were examined and classified for 26 vertebrae from the
hearth deposit. Both vertebral facets were inspected, classified separately, and checked
for consistent classification. In several cases, growth rings were too poorly defined, the
terminal edge was corroded, or the facet was too carbonate-encrusted to allow
determination. Of the 26 specimens categorized, none had obvious evidence of porous
bone forming the terminal ring. Nine had terminal rings composed of dense bone, six
were classified as “probably dense,” and four were classified as “uncertain, possibly
dense.” Seven specimens were too obscure or damaged for classification. In summary,
the evidence suggests that probably all of the fish in the hearth deposit were killed and
eaten during the cold season. In contemporary climatic conditions, this might represent
October/November through April, but the span might have been somewhat different at
the end of the Pleistocene. The consistency of the seasonal classifications is further
support for the notion that the hearth deposit represents a relatively short-term event.

Birds, unidentified, small (Figs. 10.31, F; 10.43, D-F; 10.46, G; 10.51, F-H)
Element
lower beak
coracoid
ulna
radius
femur
distal phalanx
humerus
carpometacarpus
long bone shaft fragments

Ambient bone NISP

Hearth deposit NISP
1

1
2
1
1
1
1
2

3
10

All of the bird material comes from relatively small birds, none identified. A beak
(Fig. 10.46, G) comes from a small passerine bird. The remaining material is described as
“small,” sparrow-sized, bluejay-sized, or quail or pigeon-sized. The kind of habitat
represented is unknown.
1557

cf. Sceloporus sp. (? possible spiny lizard)
Hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106)
1 vertebra

Bill McClure identified this item as “a vertebra of a small lizard, perhaps subadult
Sceloporus.” The identification is therefore quite tentative, based mainly on the size, and
should not be considered definitive – the vertebra might have come from some other kind
of iguanid lizard. There are three species in this genus in the region: Sceloporus
olivaceus, S. undulatus, and S. variabilis (Dixon 1987:Maps 78, 80, 81). These are
diurnal lizards, most likely found in brushy or rocky areas; S. olivaceus is arboreal, the
other two terrestrial (Vermersch 1992).

Lizards, unidentified (Fig. 10.47, B, B’; 10.50, bottom row)
Ambient fauna
1 vertebra
Hearth deposit
6 vertebrae
4 unidentified fragments

All this material comes from small unidentified lizards. The dentary fragment in
Fig. 10.47 comes from an unstudied lot of hearth deposit bone.

Snake or lizard, unidentified
Hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106)
3 vertebra fragments

These are fragmentary Squamata, but cannot be assigned to either snake or lizard.

1558

Virginia striatula (Rough earth snake)
Ambient fauna: N110 E102, 92.45-92.40 m, lot B-46)
1 vertebra

This small vertebra retrieved from a matrix sample is the only specimen, although
three other vertebrae are classed as Natricinae (see below). The rough earth snake is a
small fossorial species (adults only about 18-25 cm long) reported from both the counties
of Victoria and Goliad. According to Werler and Dixon,
This abundant reptile inhabits the eastern half of the state, where it is likely to be
encountered in almost any region with damp soil and debris for concealment.
Suitable habitat includes pine woods, hardwood forest, sparsely wooded rocky
hillsides, swamp edge, and grasslands (Werler and Dixon 2000:327).

This snake is chiefly nocturnal (although Vermersch and Kuntz 1986:102 say it is
diurnal), and when on the surface can be found under rocks, logs, or leaf litter, often in
wooded creek bottoms (Vermersch 1986:102). Leaf litter seems to be an important
component of its habitat and most captures are in wooded areas (Clark 1964:288). This
species is also more tolerant of cold weather than other snakes. It can be found
aboveground under cover in the winter as long as temperatures are above 50° F. One was
collected near Goliad on February 10, 1969 (Karges 1978:121). It may burrow into soft
soil, occupy the burrows of other animals, or crawl into dead trees (Werler and Dixon
2000:327). It is a very small and slow-moving species, and apparently is limited by soil
moisture (in Kansas, for example, it is found only in the southeastern corner of the state),
but active after rainfall. Clark (1964:Fig. 13) found captures peaked in March. These
snakes may occur in high population densities, 229-348 per hectare having been recorded
in Brazos County. This is a good example of a reclusive species, and one that could be
recovered by someone looking for occupied eastern mole burrows. It has been recovered
1559

in the Clear Creek fauna (Holman 1963:161-162, as Haldea striatula), from Lubbock
Lake (Johnson 1987:Table 7.1, as Virginia cf. V. striatula), and from 41 CH 161, at
Cotton Lake in Chambers County (McClure 1997).
Natricinae (Storeria dekayi texana or Virginia striatula; Texas brown snake or Rough
earth snake)
Hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106)
3 vertebrae

Three vertebrae are identified as from a colubrid snake of the subfamily
Natricinae. These could either be from Texas brown snake or Rough earth snake. Both
are similar small fossorial snakes, although the Texas brown snake is slightly larger (2333 cm long). Like the Rough earth snake, it is a cold-tolerant, reclusive inhabitant of
wooded creek bottoms and leaf litter; it may be common in marsh and mesic grassland
(Frese 2001:14). Its geographic range extends farther westward (onto the Llano Estacado)
than the Rough earth snake, so it is probably slightly more tolerant of arid conditions.
The Texas brown snake feeds mainly on earthworms, slugs and snails and may be
specially adapted for feeding on snails (Werler and Dixon 2000:266-267). According to
Vermersch and Kuntz (1986:81) it is diurnal in spring and fall, nocturnal in hot weather.
…it shows a preference for wet, shaded places that offer some ground cover and
enough surface litter where hiding places, earthworms, and other prey abound.
Such habitations include river and creek floodplains and their slopes, swamps,
freshwater marshes, damp woods, and even water-filled ditches (Werler and
Dixon 2000:265).
Storeria cf. S. dekayi occurs in the Easley Ranch (Holman 1995:151) and Tonk
Creek faunas (Parmley and Pfau 1997), and S. dekayi at 41 FB 32 (McClure 1989). Even
though these vertebrae cannot be separated into Virginia or Storeria, the two taxa are so
similar in habits that the environmental significance is the same.
1560

Colubrinae (unidentified snakes in the subfamily Colubrinae)
Hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106)
12 vertebrae
The Colubrinae are another subfamily of the Colubridae. Present are two
vertebrae from an unidentified snake with an estimated snout-vent length of about 60 cm,
plus ten smaller vertebrae, of which four are similar to Diadophis punctatus (ring-necked
snake). Ring-necked snakes are not currently recorded from the region. The Prairie ringnecked snake (Diadophis punctatus arnyi) occurs on the Edwards Plateau and to the
northwest; the Mississippi ring-necked snake (Diadophis punctatus strictogenys) occurs
on the upper Texas coast (Werler and Dixon 2000:90, 96) and might be a better
geographic match for the Berger Bluff specimens. Judging by its distribution, the
Mississippi subspecies must have higher moisture requirements.

The ring-necked snake is another reclusive, nocturnal, fossorial snake that shelters
under decaying logs, rotting tree stumps, leaf litter, or in the loose bark of trees. It
normally hibernates from October to early April (Werler and Dixon 2000:97). The Prairie
subspecies feeds on earthworms, slugs, insects, salamanders and their eggs, frogs, lizards,
and other snakes; in a study in Virginia, 80% of the diet consisted of salamanders (Werler
and Dixon 2000:93). This is of interest in view of the relatively large numbers of smallmouthed salamanders in the bench deposits. Since Diadophis punctatus is not currently
reported from the region, the possibility should also be considered that the vertebrae
actually belong to another of the small fossorial species in the area. Paleontological and
archeological occurrences are rare. It is presumably the Trans-Pecos subspecies, D.
punctatus regalis, that has been found at Fowlkes Cave (Parmley 1990:270-271). D.

1561

punctatus has also been found at Cave Without a Name (near Boerne; Hill 1971) and 41
CH 161 (Chambers County; McClure 1997).
cf. Rhinocheilus lecontei (Long-nosed snake)
Hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106)
1 vertebra

The Texas long-nosed snake, R. lecontei tessellatus, occupies the western twothirds of the state (Werler and Dixon 2000:247). Its eastern range limit closely parallels
the 90 cm annual precipitation isohyet in north Texas and the 70 cm isohyet in south
Texas, which brings it close to Berger Bluff. It is not reported for the counties of Goliad
or Victoria, but apparently has been reported in the counties of De Witt and Karnes.

This somewhat reclusive snake clearly belongs to the minority of xeric upland
species found in the Berger Bluff fauna, along with the pocket mice and kangaroo rats,
which it occasionally eats. It is a medium to large snake, usually 51-76 cm long, preying
mainly on lizards and occasional small snakes. It lives in dry habitats with sandy soil in
grassland or chaparral (Werler and Dixon 2000:247) but may live in oak and hackberry
stands in sandy areas (Vermersch and Kuntz 1986:73). Unlike the other fossorial species,
this one is an active burrower, and likely derived from the sandy upland habitat rather
than the Coleto Creek floodplain. It is also somewhat cold-tolerant, active in temperatures
as low as 59° F. This species has been recovered from Pendejo Cave (Harris 2003:Table
4.3), Howell’s Ridge Cave (Van Devender and Worthington 1977:94), the Slaton Local
Fauna (Holman 1995:151), Fowlkes Cave (Parmley 1990), Cave Without a Name (Hill
1971), Baker Cave (Chadderdon 1983:Table 8) and Lubbock Lake (Johnson 1987:Table
7.1).

1562

Nerodia sp. (unidentified water snake)
Ambient fauna (N109 E96, 92.80-92.75 m, lot B-129)
1 vertebra

A single large vertebra was recovered near the top of the unit in stratum 2D2.
There are three different water snakes of the genus Nerodia in Coleto Creek Reservoir
(Table 10.3). The Blotched water snake (Nerodia erythrogaster transversa), the Broadbanded water snake (Nerodia fasciata confluens) and the Diamond-backed water snake
(Nerodia rhombifer rhombifer) all occur in the area (Werler and Dixon 2000:201-205,
217-219). In addition there are two species, Nerodia clarki clarki and Nerodia cyclopion,
that usually occur in brackish water habitats along the coast. These are less likely
candidates, but might be within the foraging radius of a predator. The following are
composite comments intended to apply to the three chief species.

These are all large snakes (76-122 cm), especially the Diamond-backed water
snake, which can reach a length of over 1.73 m. They are swimming snakes, the first two
preying on frogs, toads, salamanders, and crawdads and/or fish. The Broad-banded water
snake spends about 60% of its time in the water (Werler and Dixon 2000:204); these
snakes prefer sluggish water with emergent vegetation, and this one probably lived in
Coleto Creek, although it might also be found in a nearby spring run. When out of the
water, these snakes may be found in grassy areas. They are also mostly nocturnal in hot
weather, but may be diurnal in the winter, and according to Vermersch and Kuntz
(1986:62), the Diamond-backed water snake is active year-round in south-central Texas.
When on land in the summer, it takes refuge under logs or litter, or in crawdad burrows.
These snakes are also arboreal, often hanging off tree limbs. They are also pugnacious
and aggressive when approached by humans. Various species of Nerodia (not necessarily
1563

the ones discussed here) have been found in paleontological localities such as the
Gilliland, Slaton, Clear Creek, and Howard Ranch (Holman 1995:150-152) and Tonk
Creek (Parmley and Pfau 1997) faunas, Fowlkes Cave (Parmley 1990:271), Cave
Without a Name (Hill 1971), and occasionally in archeological sites such as Lubbock
Lake (Johnson 1987:Table 7.1), Rex Rodgers (Hughes and Willey 1978:107), the Aubrey
site (Yates and Lundelius 2001:Table 8.1, 8.3) Loyola Beach (Smith 1986:Table 9), and
the Buckeye Knoll site (Weinstein 1992:Table 7-47, 7-48) and three sites at Allens Creek
(McClure 1987). The genus was also reported (as Natrix sp., outmoded taxonomy) from
the upper deposits at Berger Bluff by Flynn (1983).
Viperidae (= Crotalidae; unidentified vipers and pit vipers)
Hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.50-92.40 m, lot B-105)
2 vertebrae (1 of which is caudal)

Two vertebrae from unidentified poisonous snakes were found in the hearth
deposit. There are probably at least five kinds of vipers and pit vipers in the region (Table
10.3, 10.6): western cottonmouth (Agkistrodon piscivorus leucostoma) two subspecies of
copperheads (Agkistrodon), and two rattlesnakes (Crotalus). In addition to the familiar
western diamondback, a small population of canebrake rattlesnakes lives on lower Coleto
Creek. The cottonmouth is, of course, likely to be found along Coleto Creek.
Copperheads would be found in deciduous woodland, either in the creek bottom or
possibly in more open postoak woodland on the sandy uplands. Rattlesnakes could be
found in any brushy area, especially on the valley slopes or at the edge of gallery forest
overlooking patches of prairie.

1564

Rattlesnakes are fairly well documented as human food items in the borderlands
and Great Basin (Brown 1988:9; Driver and Driver 1963:61; Pennington 1969:144;
Smith 1974:51) and indeed, are still eaten in Texas today. Among the Cora,
The iguana and the rattlesnake are both eaten. Of the snake, only the middle part
of the body is used owing to the Cora belief that venom contained in the head and
tail makes these parts unpalatable. This kind of practice and belief is also found
among the Seri (Malkin 1958:75).
A captivity account describing the Comanche (?) says
…if they could find a big rattlesnake they would kill him before he was disturbed
so as to prevent him from biting himself. Then they would cut off his head about
twelve inches back and cut off the tail, taking the middle part and boil it until the
flesh would drop off the bones (Smith and Smith 1977:122).
Viper and pit viper vertebrae are fairly common occurrences at archeological sites
of all ages in most parts of the state (Alexander 1963:Table 1; Lord 1984; Fox
1979:Table 16; Yates and Lundelius 2001:Table 8.1, 8.3; Johnson 1987:Table 7.1;
Weinstein 1992:Table 7-19, 7-24, 7-29, 7-30, 7-35, 7-47, 7-48; Wright 1997:241; Steele
et al. 1999:Table 24; Nash et al. 2002:25). Sometimes heat-altered examples are found
(Thornton and Smith 1995:300-301).

Snakes, unidentified (Figs. 10.29, C; 10.31, D; 10.50)
Ambient fauna
2 vertebrae, both small
Hearth deposit
5 caudal vertebrae
4 small vertebra fragments

These vertebrae cannot be identified beyond the suborder Sepentes.
1565

Emydidae (?Pseudemys concinna or Trachemys scripta elegans, River cooter or Redeared slider; Figs. 4.54, 10.17, 10.66, 10.67)
Ambient fauna (Cutbank, stratum 1, 92.12 m and 92.08 m)
1 hypoplastron fragment
1 epiplastron fragment
6 additional associated plastron fragments

All of the turtle material is from the ambient bone assemblage, none from the
hearth deposit. These plastron fragments come from a single unidentified Emydid turtle.
The Emydidae include map, cooter, slider, and box turtles. McClure identified these as
either Pseudemys concinna or Trachemys scripta, but the cooter that is reported for the
area is actually Pseudemys texana, the Texas river cooter (Dixon 1987:Map 55) and
perhaps that is a more likely candidate.

In any case this is an aquatic turtle, evidently a slider or cooter. These are
medium-sized turtles, about 15-28 cm long with hingeless plastrons (Ernst 1989:Fig. 4.4),
found in ponds and lentic streams, usually with soft mud bottoms and abundant aquatic
vegetation. This is exactly the kind of hydrologic system reconstructed for Coleto Creek
in Chapter 4. The familiar red-eared slider (subspecies elegans) occurs over most of the
state except for parts of far west Texas and extends into the Mississippi Valley and upper
Midwest (Ernst 1989:Fig. 4.6). Tucker, Filoramo and Janzen (1999:199) measured
carapace lengths for females at 21.35 ± 0.14 cm in Illinois, and discovered that the heads
and legs of dead turtles were removed by predators. The Texas river cooter is endemic to
the Colorado, Brazos, and Guadalupe river systems (Vermersch 1992:109). These turtles
may be seen collectively basking on logs or brush in creeks and may also move
individually overland between bodies of water.

1566

The specimens consist of one large hypoplastron fragment (7.8 x 3.2 cm,
maximum thickness 5.94 mm); one smaller fragment, apparently of anterior margin of
epiplastron (4.0 x 3.3 cm; maximum thickness 6.14 mm), plus six small tabular
fragments, one of which has two parallel cut marks on the interior (?) surface. All were
found closely associated and apparently are fragments of the same plastron. The cutmarks
appear to be evidence of human modification, but there is no indication of heat alteration.

Turtles were usually processed by roasting them in the shell in an open fire. The
following account of the Comanche (?) in the early 1870s probably applies to tortoises
(likely Gopherus berlandieri) rather than aquatic turtles, but the method is the same:

The Indians are very fond of dry land terrapins, or turtles, and when they found
these testudos crawling about they lost no time in roasting them. One day
Tosacowadi went out and brought in a great number of terrapins, as many as he
could carry in a sack on his horse. While he was gone the squaws and I dug and
gathered a lot of wild potatoes, a bushel or more. When the terrapins were brought
into camp we built a big fire and threw the terrapins in alive, and we had great
sport cooking them. They would get pretty lively in trying to get out of that fire.
Being naturally a slow creature, it was really surprising to see how fast they could
move when they get hot. We kept them engaged until they were all dead and
cooked, and then we raked them out of the fire, cracked them open with our
tomahawks, and with the roasted potatoes we had a feast (Smith and Smith
1977:90-91).
This method should result in heat alteration on both carapace and plastron, a
condition frequently seen in archeological specimens (Rhodin 1992). An alternative
method used by the Seminole was to remove the plastron first. In that case, only the
carapace should show heat alteration:

Most meats are boiled, but turtles are not infrequently roasted before the fire. The
Indians seldom take the trouble to kill the unfortunate reptiles before commencing
1567

to prepare them for food -–they merely cut off the plastron and butcher the animal
alive and kicking, when it is set up before the fire and roasted in its own oven
(Skinner 1913:76-77).

Figure 10.66. Turtle Plastron Fragment From the Cutbank. Both sides of fragment of left
hypoplastron (unidentified Emydidae, perhaps Trachemys scripta or
Pseudemys concinna). Grooves (sulci) on exterior are natural surface
sculpturing. See Fig. 4.54 for photo, Figs. 3.1 and 4.22 for location. This
specimen is unmodified, but an associated smaller fragment (Fig. 10.17) has
cutmarks. Stratum 1, lot B-154 (ca. 92.08-92.13 m).

1568

This would result in the kind of evidence seen on the stratum 1 specimen –
cutmarks, but no heat alteration.

Figure 10.67. Another Turtle Plastron Fragment From the Cutbank. Views of both sides
of plastron fragments (unidentified Emydidae, perhaps Trachemys scripta or
Pseudemys concinna). The larger fragment above is the left epiplastron. See
Figs. 3.1 and 4.22 for location. These fragments do not show clearly in Fig.
4.54, but were found nearby. They are also unmodified, but an associated
smaller fragment has cutmarks. Stratum 1, lot B-154 (ca. 92.12-92.15 m).
1569

Kinosternidae (unidentified mud or musk turtles; Figs. 10.68, 10.69)
Ambient fauna (N109 E96)
1 right pleural plate (two joining fragments), 92.55-92.50 m, lot B-134
1 peripheral plate fragment, 92.35-92.30 m, lot B-139

McClure identified a pleural plate as probably Sternotherus odoratus (stinkpot
turtle), but possibly a subadult mud turtle (Kinosternon sp.). The pleural plate is 14.1 mm
long, 9.15 mm wide, 0.9-1.7 mm thick; it is arched, from near the medial ridge, and has
small conical pits as part of the surface sculpturing (Fig. 10.68). Pits like these also occur
on box turtle carapaces (Carpenter 1956) and are a natural feature of the shell. The
peripheral plate fragment is identified only as Kinosternidae, mud or musk turtle. It is 9.5
mm long, 5.9 mm wide, 1.1-1.95 mm thick, and has a cavity for rib insertion on one edge
(Fig. 10.69).

Musk turtles are rather small aquatic turtles, about 8-10 cm long (up to 13.7 cm),
found throughout east and central Texas. It is a bottom-dwelling turtle found in lentic
creeks, sloughs, swamps, and ponds with mud bottoms, and it tends to stay in the water,
not often emerging onto land. Basking is done partially submerged. As its name indicates,
it has musk glands designed to repel predators.

Turtles, unidentified
Ambient fauna
4 carapace fragments (2 possible Kinosternidae, 1 possible Emydidae)

There are two carapace fragments that do not join but were probably one broken
in excavation (Fig. 10.70). From a small turtle, these may be Kinosternidae, but are
uncertain. Both are slightly heat-discolored (N109 E96, 92.25-92.20 m, lot B-143,
stratum 2A) and are from the fill of Feature 7. Another carapace fragment is from a
1570

medium-sized turtle, perhaps Emydidae (N109 E96, SW half, 92.15-92.10 m, lot B-146,
stratum 2A). The remaining carapace fragment is too small for any kind of identification.

Figure 10.68. Turtle Carapace Fragment, Ambient Bone. Right pleural plate from
carapace of a musk or mud turtle (Kinosternidae, probably Sternotherus
odoratus but possibly subadult Kinosternon sp.). Interior, side, and exterior
views of the same specimen are shown. Conical pits on the exterior are part
of natural sculpturing. N109 E96 (92.55-92.50 m), lot B-134.
1571

Figure 10.69. Turtle Carapace Fragment, Ambient Bone. Small fragment of peripheral
plate from carapace of a mud turtle (Kinosternidae sp.). Edge indentation is
a rib insertion point. N109 E96 (92.35-92.30 m), bag 2 of 2, lot B-139.

1572

Figure 10.70. Turtle Carapace Fragments, Ambient Bone. Two fragments of unidentified
carapace from a small turtle (perhaps Kinosternidae) do not join but are
evidently pieces of one broken in excavation. Both appear slightly heatdiscolored, probably from vertebral plate of carapace. These were found in
the fill of a small pit, Feature 7. The larger fragment has part of a suture
along one edge. Interior surfaces are shown here. N109 E96 (92.25-92.20
m), Feature 7 fill, lot B-143.

1573

Bufo sp. cf. ?B. americanus? or ?B. houstonensis (American or Houston toad)
Hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106)
1 left ilium fragment

This specimen is in the genus Bufo, but species assignment is very problematical.
McClure assigned it to either B. americanus or B. houstonensis, but Bufo americanus as
currently recognized is confined to extreme northeastern Texas, and B. houstonensis to an
area northeast of Goliad County no closer than Columbus (Dixon 1987:Maps 8, 28).
There are three other toads present in the region that perhaps should also be considered
better candidates: Texas toad (B. speciosus), Gulf Coast toad (B. valliceps), and
Woodhouse’s toad (B. woodhousei). Mulcahy and Mendelson (2000) have proposed
revising Texas and Louisiana B. valliceps to Bufo nebulifer.

The Gulf Coast toad is the only toad species recorded during the pre-inundation
ecological survey (Table 10.3) and is the one most commonly seen in the area. American
and Houston toads are small toads, about 5-11 cm long, while the Gulf Coast and
Woodhouse’s toad are slightly larger, about 5-13 cm long. Most toads are closely tied to
water and are chiefly active at night, especially after rainfall. Like other amphibians, they
are sensitive to humidity. Blair (1960:173) suggests populations may be limited by access
to damp ground for burrowing. Most lay their eggs in ponds or other still water sources.
The Texas toad is the most arid adapted, and burrows in loose, sandy soil. Toads also
have parotoid glands that secrete toxins to ward off predators, and in some cases these are
fatal to the predator. Nevertheless, toads are often preyed upon by snakes and raptors.
This might be taken as a strong argument that these remains do not represent human food
items, but it is useful to remember that ethnographies show hunter-gatherers who predate
malodorous or venomous animals (such as skunks or rattlesnakes) always know how to
1574

remove the threatening glands when processing the animal. The small sample of toad
remains known from the bench deposits consists of forelimb elements and part of a
pelvis.

cf. Bufo sp.
Ambient fauna
2 proximal ends of humeri
Hearth deposit
1 proximal left radius-ulna

These long bone fragments resemble toad rather than frog, but cannot be
identified further. Toads seem rarely to be reported in the archeological literature,
although Bufo sp. has been reported from 41 CL 70 and 41 CL 59 (Weinstein 1992:Table
7-24, 7-35), the Asa Warner site (Wright 1997:241) and a few others.
Rana catesbeiana (Bullfrog; Fig. 10.29, G)
Ambient fauna (N109 E96, 92.50-92.45 m, lot B-135)
1 urostyle fragment (articular end)

A single urostyle fragment from a bullfrog was found near the upper contact of
stratum 2C, at about the same level as the possible surface of origin of Feature 7.
Whether it is associated in some way with this small pit is unknown. The maxillary
fragment shown in Fig. 10.47, A, A’ appears to be from a very large frog and is from an
unstudied lot of material. It does not match comparative specimens of Rana catesbeiana
closely, but is a better match for that than for other frog species. The bullfrog is native to
south Texas (Neck 1981) and covers most of the state except some parts of the TransPecos (Dixon 1987:Map 36). It is the largest true frog in North America, up to 20 cm
long (legs extended; average about 9-15 cm) and 0.5 kg in weight. It is an aquatic frog,
usually living in ponds, marshes, stream backwaters, or other lentic habitats, seldom
1575

straying far from water. It prefers warm weather and hibernates during the winter, and is
mostly nocturnal. These frogs are opportunistic generalists in diet, eating snails, snakes,
worms, insects, crawdads, frogs, small fish, mammals, and birds. Predators of bullfrogs
include cottonmouths, otters, water snakes, Mississippi kites, broad-winged hawks, and
people. Although there are many reports of Rana sp. in Texas archeological sites, fewer
than might be expected have been identified as Rana catesbeiana. Examples have been
found at the Wilson-Leonard (Balinsky 1998:Table 35-2), Lubbock Lake (Johnson
1987:Table 7.1), 41 ZV 10 (Hester 1978:46) and 41 CH 161 (McClure 1997).
Considering the large size of this frog, it is surprising that so few occurrences are
reported in the archeological literature.
Rana cf. R. berlandieri (cf. Rio Grande leopard frog; Fig. 10.31, B, G)
Element
urostyle
humerus
pelvic girdle
tibiofibula
ilium
phalanges
metatarsal shaft fragment?

Ambient bone NISP
1

Hearth deposit NISP
1

1
1
1
2

1
3
1

Most of the identified frog material is leopard frog. There are two right ilia and
one left in the hearth deposit. One of the rights comes from an individual with an
estimated snout-vent length of 6-7 cm, the other a length of 7-8 cm. The smaller of the
two, plus a 9 mm long section of tibiofibula, come from Unit 2, where Feature 5 is
located.

Curiously, the pre-inundation ecological survey (Espey, Huston & Associates
1976:Table 3-6) recorded only Southern leopard frog (Rana sphenocephala), not Rio
1576

Grande leopard frog. The two have complementary but not quite parapatric distributions.
The Rio Grande leopard frog is more arid-adapted, occupying south and west Texas. The
Southern leopard frog, which seems to be the contemporary species, is more mesicadapted and occupies the eastern part of the state (Dixon 1987:Maps 34, 38). The two
species occur in separate leopard frog clades and are not very closely related (ZaldívarRiverón, León-Regagnon and Nieto-Montes de Oca 2004:Fig. 4). Assuming the
archeological material is correctly speciated, this seems to be one of few cases in the
bench deposits where a more xeric species has been replaced in the modern fauna by a
more mesic-adapted one.

Rio Grande leopard frogs are chiefly riparian stream-dwellers in creeks, rivers,
and ponds. It is primarily nocturnal, and may burrow under rocks in the daytime (Garrett
and Barker 1987:42). Like bullfrogs, they are also opportunistic generalists (Parker and
Goldstein 2004).

Salamanders (Smallmouth salamander and unidentified salamanders; Figs. 10.29, A, B;
10.30, C; 10.35; 10.45, Q; 10.46, H, J; 10.48, 10.49)
Ambystoma texanum
Ambystoma cf. A. texanum
Ambystoma sp.
Salamander, unidentified
Salamander, possible
Element
humerus
femur
unident. long bone fragment
ilium
axis vertebra
precaudal vertebra
caudal vertebra
unidentified vertebra

Ambient bone NISP

8

1577

Hearth deposit NISP
8
5
29?
2
1?
21
1
85

Figure 10.71. Smallmouth Salamander. Photo of Ambystoma texanum by John White;
used with permission.
Two kinds of mole (= ambystomatid) salamanders are found in this part of Texas:
the Smallmouth salamander (Ambystoma texanum, Fig. 10.71) and the Eastern tiger
salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum tigrinum), both sympatric over a large area of eastern
Texas (Dixon 1987:Maps 3, 4) and differing greatly in size. The Smallmouth salamander
is a small one, about 11-18 cm long. Live body weight ranges from 8 g for males to 11 g
for gravid females (Finkler and Cullum 2002:Table 1). The Eastern tiger salamander is
much bigger, about 18-33 cm long. Apparently no salamanders at all were found in the
pre-inundation survey (Table 10.3) of Coleto Creek Reservoir. Smallmouth salamanders
are recorded from Victoria County, but I know of no records from Goliad County.
1578

Although, as the list above indicates, there are different levels of uncertainty
about the classification of the salamander material, I believe that all of it is probably
Ambystoma texanum. The species is also known to hybridize with other Ambystoma
species (Downs 1989:150). One vertebra in lot B-105 and three in lot B-106 were larger
than usual, but not so large as to indicate A. tigrinum. Of the 18 vertebrae identified as A.
texanum in lot B-106, 14 could be measured, and these have a mean length of 2.65 mm,
range 2.4-3.4 mm; all of the centra are closed. One vertebra from lot B-106 has an open
centrum. Most of the salamander material was found in the hearth deposit, where there
are probably at least three individuals, but possibly more. An ilium and some vertebrae
show evidence of heat alternation, suggesting these individuals were cooked. There is no
cranial material at all in this collection – all of it is postcranial. Like others of its kind,
Smallmouth salamanders are mostly body and tail. The tail is usually 40% or more of the
total length, with males having longer tails (Bishop 1962:155). The head is small and the
limbs are little more than vestigial. Vertebrae are the mostly commonly recovered and
identified elements.

Mole salamanders are reclusive and nocturnal, preying on earthworms, beetles,
spiders, and the like. They spend most of their time in burrows or under logs (Minton
1972:50), leaf litter and rocks, emerging at night, especially after heavy rains. Like other
amphibians, they have low rates of metabolism and remain inactive in borrows when not
actively foraging at night (Pfingsten and Downs 1989:6). They may occupy eastern mole
burrows and have often been recorded in crawdad burrows in wetter habitats (Fiorentino
2002:3, 16). They have often been recorded being plowed up out of animal burrows.
They live in mesic deciduous forests (Wicknick, Anthony and Reblin 2005). They may
also be common in marshland and mesic grassland (Frese 2001). In other parts of the
1579

country where there are ponds in upland settings, they may be found in drier upland
forest, but the Coleto Creek catchment had no upland ponds until artificial stock ponds
were built starting in the 1950s. Speaking of salamanders in general, Bishop (1962:12-13)
says,

Many species may be found by turning logs, piece of bark, stones, and rock
fragments. Well rotted logs should be pulled apart and loose bark stripped from
the trunks of standing and prostrate trees… Many terrestrial species, which have
an aquatic larval stage in their life history, congregate in large numbers in or near
the breeding waters and advantage should be taken of such assemblages. In this
category are many of the species of Ambystoma.

These salamanders migrate en masse overland at night (often after or during
rainstorms) to shallow breeding ponds where eggs are deposited, after which the males
may disperse to moist refuges embedded in drier habitats at some distance from the ponds
(McWilliams and Bachmann 1988:68; Smith 1934:399). In the summer months, adults
can be found in creek beds, floodplain swamps, prairie, and rocky hillsides (Smith
1961:36). Harper and Guynn (1999) studied some other species of salamanders in North
Carolina forests and discovered that densities were highest in moist sites, usually with
northern or eastern exposures, and in areas with high densities of snails. They suggest
that since salamanders eat snails, the snails serve as a necessary calcium source. If these
findings apply also to Ambystoma texanum, it raises the interesting possibility that
Smallmouth salamanders might have been attracted directly to Berger Bluff because of its
moist habitat and abundant phreatic carbonate. Berger Bluff is essentially a carbonate
island in a sea of Miocene and Quaternary quartz sand.

1580

The presence of Smallmouthed salamanders in the bench deposits indicates not
only the presence of wet habitat, but more specifically lentic bodies of water, because
these salamanders must lay their eggs in still bodies of water. There must have been
either closed depressions or at least partially obstructed sloughs or overflow channels in
the Coleto Creek floodplain to provide suitable habitat. Abundant submerged vegetation
is also important to serve larval salamanders as a refuge from predation. There are
stream-breeding populations of A. texanum, but they are confined to headwaters beyond
the reach of predatory fish (Downs 1989:144). The hydrologic regime suggested here is
very consistent with the picture presented by the sediments, aquatic snails, freshwater
mussels, and diatoms.

The ethnographic record for salamanders of any kind is almost nonexistent.
Mexican salamanders (Ambystoma mexicanum) are still sold for human consumption in
markets in Mexico. The Pomo denied eating salamanders, but used them in sweat baths
(Barrett 1952). There are a few scattered references in the archeological literature.
Ambystoma (?) vertebrae were found in human coprolites from Salts Cave, Kentucky
(Watson 1969:55). The related species Ambystoma tigrinum has been recovered at 41 CO
141 (Yates 1987:Table 4.1), L. E. Robertson Shelter, Opilionid Shelter (Butler
1980:Table 12.13, 12.16), Lubbock Lake (Johnson 1987:Table 7.1) and at Pendejo Cave
(Harris 2003:Table 4.2). Unidentified salamanders have been found at the Aubrey site
(Yates and Lundelius 2001:Table 8.1, 8.3), the Wilson-Leonard site (Balinsky
1998:Table 35-1), the Panther Springs Creek site (Hulbert 1985:Table 31) Timmeron
Rockshelter (Harris 1985:Table 4) and at 41 CH 36 (Dillehay and Davidson 1975:Table
9). Plethodontid salamanders are reported from 41 AU 38 (Lord 1981:Table IV-I). A.
texanum also appears occasionally in the paleontological record (Holman 1965;
1581

1995:152; Parmley and Pfau 1997). Aside from humans, predators of salamanders
include raccoons, otters, possums, coyotes, snapping turtles, burrowing owls, barred
owls, and screech owls.

Cryptotis parva (Least shrew; Fig. 10.30, D)
Ambient fauna (N109 E103, 93.14-92.90 m, lot B-2)
1 mandible
Hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106)
1 molar, M1

Soricidae (Shrews, likely Cryptotis parva?; Fig. 10.43, C)
Hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106)
1 edentulous mandible

An edentulous shrew mandible was found in the hearth deposit, along with a loose
tooth of Cryptotis parva which very likely goes with the mandible. The body of this very
small insectivore averages about 6 cm long, and the weight is only about 4.5 g (range,
4.0-7.5 g). This species lacks the venom of shrews of the genus Blarina.

There are four kinds of shrews in the area: Southern short-tailed (Blarina
carolinensis), Elliot’s short-tailed (B. hylophaga), Desert (Notiosorex crawfordi), and
Least shrew. The first two are eastern species, the third a xeric species occupying the
western part of the state, and the Least shrew is a fairly cosmopolitan species occupying
most of Texas except for part of the Edwards Plateau and the Trans-Pecos (Schmidly
1994:55). It was collected during the pre-inundation survey (Table 10.2).

The tooth is a lower left first molar with the hypsodont shape and reddish-tipped
coloration typical of Cryptotis parva teeth. The tips of both roots are missing, with old
1582

breaks, and a small fragment of mandible is lodged between. The unidentified Soricidae
mandible is broken off at both ends; the remaining part is 4.19 mm long. The posterior
root of the M2 is broken off in the socket, and some of the other alveoli have sediment or
carbonate in them, indicating that some or all of the teeth became separated from the
mandible before excavation. The only character that can be measured is the mandibular
body depth at the midpoint of the second molar, 1.49 mm, which compares well with the
body depth of 1.5 ± 08 mm reported by Graham (1976:Table 5) but is greater than
comparative specimens of C. parva and N. crawfordi I have measured. All that can be
definitely said is that the specimen does not belong to Blarina.

Shrews are hyperactive, with high metabolic rates and voracious appetites. They
are mostly insectivores, foraging aboveground on insects, spiders, earthworms,
centipedes, snails, and occasional vegetal matter. They are semifossorial and mostly
nocturnal, spending daytime in nests or burrow systems, usually built under a rotting
fallen log or flat rock. Least shrews are usually found by overturning logs, rocks, or
debris. Several of the accounts in the biological literature explicitly state that Cryptotis
can easily be caught by hand after being unearthed. Although they are aggressive and
very cursorial, they have poor eyesight and hearing. Kilham (1954) remarks that a
captured individual tried but could not bite him. There are also several accounts of least
shrews being dug out by dogs (Hamilton 1934, 1944; Peterson 1936). They can also be
captured in pitfalls.

Least shrews prefer areas with dense grass, sometimes with weeds or thorny
thickets, but little or no tree canopy. Here they may share runways with hispid cotton rats,
short-tailed shrews, rice rats, or harvest mice. These grassy areas may be upland prairie
1583

or on creek floodplains if it is open. Unlike heteromyid rodents, least shrews seem to
require some drinking water on a regular basis. Raun (1959:Table 1) recorded Cryptotis
parva from postoak-blackjack oak woodland, wooded floodplain, and peat bogs at
Palmetto State Park, and Blair (1952:237) found them common in mesic deciduous forest
near Luling, but these reports seem atypical. In the pre-inundation survey at Coleto Creek
Reservoir, none were trapped in bottomland forest, live oak forest, post oak forest, brush,
brushy ravine, or improved pasture habitats; 12 individuals were collected in open
pasture and five in brushy fencerow sites (eight in October, four in January, two in April,
and three in August; Espey, Huston and Associates 1976:Tables 3-15 through 3-19). This
indicates most of the Lissie and Beaumont terrace surfaces provide good Cryptotis habitat
except where tree cover is heavy.

Cryptotis parva has one of the most widespread distributions of any of the bench
deposit mammals, extending throughout the eastern US and eastern Plains as far north as
latitude N43-44° and southward to the Isthmus of Panama. Over this extensive range,
average annual temperatures range from about 8° C in the north to about 25° C in the
tropics, where the average annual precipitation is over 398 cm. At its western limit in
Colorado, annual precipitation is about 36.7 cm. Its western range limit has retracted
since the Pleistocene due to Holocene drying (Hafner and Shuster 1996; Porter 1976).

Documented predators include barn, great horned, long-eared, short-eared, sawwhet, barred, and screech owls; red-tailed hawks, white-tailed kites, bobcats, swift foxes,
red foxes, minks, coyotes, and copperhead snakes. The species has been found in low
frequencies at a significant number of archeological sites, including the Guadalupe Bay
site (Scott and Dukes 2002:Table 11-2), Swan Lake (Westgate and Prewitt 1987:Table
1584

37), Big Lake (Raun and Laughlin 1972:Table 1), the Kyle site (Lundelius 1962:Table 4),
the Hinojosa site (Steele 1986:133-134), various sites at Hog Creek Reservoir (Butler
1980:Tables 12.12, 12.13, 12.15), Wilson-Leonard (Balinsky 1998:Table 35-1) and 41 JK
91 (McGuff and Davidson 1978:Table 18).

Scalopus aquaticus (Eastern mole; Fig. 10.31, E; 10.37, A, E, F; 10.38, A, B; 10.39, A-H;
10.40, 10.41; 10.42, C)
Element
mandible
P3
P4
M2
M3
incisor
P4
M1
M2
M3
skull fragments
left humerus
right humerus
left ulna
right ulna
left radius
right radius
left femur
right femur
left tibia
right tibia
carpal
carpal/metacarpal
first anterior phalanx
second anterior phalanx
third anterior phalanx
second posterior phalanx
first phalanx, unspecified
second phalanx, unspecified
third phalanx, unspecified

Ambient bone NISP

1

1585

Hearth deposit NISP
3
1
2
1
1
5
1
1
1
1
3
6
4
2
5
2
2
1
1
3
1
7
9
6
7
6
1
1
1
2

The Eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus) is one of the most abundant taxa in the
hearth deposit. Most of the remains come from the forelimb (Fig. 10.72), because this
small insectivore has very robust, heavily developed forelimbs adapted for digging
(Campbell 1939) and the forelimb elements preserve well. No vertebrae, ribs, scapula,
clavicles, or pelvic components were recovered, unless they remain unrecognized in the
unidentified small mammal category. This is the only mole in Texas. The species covers
the entire eastern two-thirds of the state. Except in the Panhandle, the western range limit
corresponds very crudely to about 56 cm of annual precipitation. These are small,
compact mammals with massive, shovel-like forelimbs and a short tail. The eyes are
covered with skin and essentially nonfunctional. The body is about 12.4 cm long. A scent
gland on the belly is used as a marking device and is thought to render moles, like other
insectivores, unpalatable to predators (Schwartz and Schwartz 1981:46, 48). Nationwide,
females average about 60 g in weight, males about 100 g. Yates and Schmidly (1977:Fig.
8) recognize seven subspecies in Texas, including Scalopus aquaticus alleni in the region
around Goliad County; this is the smallest subspecies in the entire state (Yates and
Schmidly 1977:27-28), with a total length of 14 cm or less (Davis 1942:386).

The Eastern mole is fossorial, spending perhaps as much as 99% of its lifetime
underground (Lowery 1974:86). Two kinds of tunnels are dug: 1) shallow, temporary
insect-foraging tunnels about 2-3 cm under the surface; 2) more permanent deep tunnels
10-40 cm below the surface (Harvey 1976:436) with an underground nest (10-22 cm
diameter) and latrine area. Home ranges are large (average about 0.74 hectares, up to a
hectare or more for males). Schmidly estimates densities of four moles/hectare for most
places in eastern Texas (Schmidly 1983:51).

1586

Figure 10.72. Eastern Mole Elements Recovered From the Hearth Deposit. Shading gives
a rough indication of the elements recovered (skull fragments are tentative).
The entire manus is shaded, but it has not been demonstrated that all parts
were recovered.
Moles are detectable only when infrequently venturing aboveground or when
actively displacing dirt. They are incapable of overland flight and can only escape by
digging. Some references say Eastern moles are diurnal, others nocturnal, but in any case,
activity is confined to the tunnel. Preferred foods are earthworms, grubs, insect eggs,
1587

beetles, ants, centipedes, and small amounts of plant litter, occasionally other small
animals (mice, voles, frogs, etc.; Hartman, Whitaker and Munsee 2000 ). The species was
recorded during the pre-inundation survey (Table 10.2), but no information is given on
density or habitat preference. Moles occupy floodplains if they are not subject to annual
flooding, although Blair (1939) found them on recently flooded terrain in Oklahoma.
McCarley (1952:104-105) found them both in floodplain forest and postoak-blackjack
oak associations, but mostly in the latter. Floodplain soils seem to be preferred, as long as
they are sandy and moist, not clay-rich or flooded, and edaphic conditions seem to be
more important that ground cover, since moles may be found in habitat ranging from
grassland to woodland. In Kansas, these moles show a definite preference for lowland
sites under tree canopy and avoid the uplands (O’Neal and Kaufman 2004). In Willacy
County, Texas, moles were abundant in deep sand with brush, prickly pear thickets, and
mesquite savanna (Blair 1952:231-232). At Palmetto State Park (about 100 km northwest
of Berger Bluff), Scalopus was found to be confined to the upland postoak-blackjack oak
community, except for sandy outwash areas that lapped onto the floodplain of the San
Marcos River (Raun 1959:160).

At Berger Bluff, it seems likely that the Eastern moles found there could have
been obtained either on the floodplain or on adjacent higher sandy terraces. Although the
Coleto Creek floodplain sediments are sandy now, at times during the Pleistocene the
floodplain may have been somewhat too fine-grained for good mole and pocket gopher
habitat, in which case higher levels of soil moisture might have allowed these populations
to move up onto the adjacent terraces. In fact, populations may have shifted topographic
position repeatedly as prevailing grain size in the valley varied (see Chapter 4). None of
the krotovinas seen during excavation of the bench deposits are thought to belong to
1588

Scalopus, in part because the sediments were probably too clay and silt-rich for suitable
substrate most of the time. Referring to Scalopus aquaticus on the Aransas Peninsula, J.
A. Allen wrote, “Moles are very numerous all over the peninsula, perhaps the most
common of any of the small mammals…. They are particularly active after a rain….
Mole runways are very common even in parts of the country where the soil is very poor,
apparently nothing but sand…. But they are most common where the soil is more or less
damp…. They appear also to be more active in the fall, spring and winter months than in
summer…. The position selected for the nest is several feet below the surface, and always
in a hard place to get at, being generally under a clump of bushes or a tree” (Allen
1894:186-187).

Like other fossorial species, the Eastern mole has a wide range of climatic
tolerance. It is distributed widely throughout the eastern US; its southern limits are in
northern Tamaulipas, about 70 km south of the Rio Grande, perhaps limited by high
burrow temperatures. It extends to the north as far as central Minnesota, into
Massachusetts, and southeastward nearly to the tip of Florida, westward to Wyoming.
Over this range, mean annual temperatures vary from about 2° C to 24° C and mean
annual precipitation from about 26 cm to about 146 cm.

Moles have few natural predators and low mortality rates. Owls (especially barn
owls) are probably the chief predators, but hawks, skunks, coyotes, red foxes, badgers,
and possums occasionally prey on them. They are absent from most predator diet studies,
and when present rarely account for more than one or two percent of the diet.
Ethnographic accounts of humans preying on moles are scarce (see Durán 1964:11). A

1589

few groups in the borderlands region are known to have occasionally eaten moles of the
genus Scapanus. Among the Pima Bajo,
Pedro Estrella Tanori recalled that during his childhood moles were eaten. They
were drawn, skinned, spitted, and roasted (Pennington 1980:201-202).
Among the Tepehuan,
Tuvoki is a term applied indiscriminately to a small black mole (topo) and to a
large gray gopher (tuza)…. Gophers and moles are caught in steel traps (borrowed
or traded from the mestizos), or when found in the open, they are killed with bows
and arrows. However, the Indians state that there is little opportunity for
surprising gophers or moles in open country since the animals can detect the scent
of human beings for some twenty or thirty feet. Once killed, they are skinned,
drawn and roasted on a spit or boiled with scraps of any other meat that may be
available (Pennington 1969:124-125).
Trippel (1889:575) recorded that moles were eaten by the Yuma of California and
Arizona. Scalopus aquaticus occurs widely in the paleontological and archeological
record of Texas. It is widespread in Pleistocene deposits and appears in some areas, such
as Edwards County (Dalquest, Roth and Judd 1969:222) where it is absent today. It is
found at the Avenue site in Austin (Lundelius 1992:334), Friesenhahn Cave, Hall’s
Cave, Cave Without a Name, Miller’s Cave, Zesch Cave, Longhorn Cavern, Carroll
Creek, Howard Ranch, as well as the Jones-Miller site in Colorado.

It is even more widespread in archeological deposits. Locally, it is found in the
upper deposits at Berger Bluff as well as at 41 GD 21, the Burris site, and the Smith
Creek Bridge site. Table 10.26 gives some examples of archeological occurrences in
Texas selected without regard to time period or region. Parmalee (1975) also reports on a
specimen from Tennessee with cutmarks.
1590

Table 10.26. Some Archeological Examples of Scalopus aquaticus in Texas.
Site

Reference

Smith Creek Bridge
41 GD 21
41 GD 21A
Burris
Buckner Ranch
Guadalupe Bay
41 CL 70, CL 59
41 JK 66, JK 74, JK 179, JK 91
Big Lake
Ingleside Cove
Hinojosa
Loma Sandia
41 MC 292
Allens Creek sites
Alabonson Road
41 CH 46
41 CH 172
41 CH 252
41 CH 63
Crawford
Taddlock
Williams
Levi Rockshelter
Kyle Rockshelter
Bear Creek Shelter
Aubrey
Lake Theo
Roper

Froelich (2002:Table 91, 96)
Butler (1979:Table 16)
Fox, Black and James (1979:Table 3)
Shaffer (n.d., Table 1)
Nash (2001:Appendix 3)
Scott and Dukes (2002:Table 11-2)
Weinstein (1992:Table 7-20, 7-29)
Winans (1981:Table III-1)
Raun and Laughlin (1972:Table 1)
Story (1968:Table 14)
Steele (1986:Table 10)
Hellier et al. (1995:Table 113)
Steele and Assad Hunter (1986:Table 39; page 485)
McClure (1987:9)
Baker et al. (1991:Table 33)
Dillehay and Davidson (1975:Table 9)
Dillehay and Davidson (1975:Table 11)
Shaffer (1995:Table E-2)
Weinstein et al. (1988:Table 6-5)
Hunter (1988:311, Table 53)
Bruseth and Perttula (1981:Table 7-3)
Parmalee and Opperman (1983:Table 1)
Alexander (1963:Table 1)
Lundelius (1962:Table 4)
Lynott (1980:table 12)
Yates and Lundelius (2001:Table 8.1, 8.3)
Harrison and Killen (1978:Table 4)
Duffield (1970:Appendix D)

1591

Geomys attwateri or Geomys personatus (Attwater’s or Texas pocket gopher)
Geomys sp. (pocket gopher, unidentified; Figs. 10.29, I, J; 10.37, D; 10.39,I-L; 10.46, F)
Element
maxilla
mandible
I1
incisor, lower
incisor, unspecified
P4
molar, upper
M3
molar, unspecified
cheek tooth
left humerus
right humerus
humerus, unspecified
right scapula
left femur
right femur
metacarpal
caudal vertebra

Ambient bone NISP
2
8
2
3
2
1
1
2
1

Hearth deposit NISP

1
1

4
1
1
1
5
2
2
2

The taxonomy of pocket gophers in Texas has been extensively revised in recent
years, in part as a result of RNA and morphometric studies (Jolley, Honeycutt and
Bradley 2000; Mauk, Houck and Bradley 1999). Cabaniss originally identified most of
this material simply as Geomys sp. and some was identified as “Geomys bursarius or
Geomys personatus.” As currently understood, there are two pocket gophers with an
overlapping distribution in the region around Berger Bluff: Attwater’s pocket gopher
along the central coast (where it is endemic), and the Texas pocket gopher (G.
personatus) on the Rio Grande Plain, extending northward into Goliad County
(subspecies G. personatus fallax). Both species, then, are recorded for Goliad County.
Geomys bursarius is listed for the pre-inundation ecological survey (Table 10.2), but no
one has re-examined those specimens to see whether they should be reclassified as G.
attwateri or G. personatus.
1592

Based on current knowledge of gopher taxonomy, I suspect all the Berger Bluff
material is probably the endemic Geomys attwateri, but that cannot be demonstrated
without further detailed studies. The material that Cabaniss originally labeled as “Geomys
bursarius or Geomys personatus” should probably be relabeled as “Geomys attwateri or
Geomys personatus.” Much of the gopher material consists of mandibles (often invaded
by carbonate) with partial dentition, or easily recognized but loose incisors. The ambient
fauna (N109 E96, 92.70-92.65 m, lot B-158) contains two teeth from a subadult.
Immature gophers are vulnerable when dispersing overland, above ground (Williams and
Cameron 1984).

Attwater’s pocket gophers weigh about 163 g for adult males and 131 g for
females (Williams and Cameron 1991:1) and are about 22 cm in total length. Texas
pocket gophers are larger, weighing up to 400 g, and 30-32 cm in length (including tail;
Schmidly 2004:341). Pocket gophers are fossorial generalist herbivores (Williams and
Cameron 1986). They prefer moist, sandy soil, and the postoak parkland on the
Beaumont and Lissie terrace surfaces in the Coleto Creek Reservoir area provides ideal
habitat. Gopher burrows and tunnels were in evidence throughout the area surveyed by
archeologists before the reservoir was built, and much of the surface evidence was found
atop gopher mounds (see Fox, Black and James 1979). The comments already made
about Eastern moles apply as well to gophers: floodplain deposits should provide good
gopher habitat as long they are not flooded or otherwise saturated, but at times in the late
Pleistocene, the floodplain sediments might have been too silty or clay-rich for gophers,
and populations might have shifted out of the valley to adjacent terraces. Burrows
average about 18 cm in depth, deepening to about 20 cm in the dry summer months
(Williams and Cameron 1990:Fig. 1). Individual burrow systems cover about 200 m and
1593

have a total length of about 90 m in a circuitous pattern (Cameron et al. 1988:Fig. 1), but
occupied burrows can be recognized by evidence of fresh dirt. Gophers are active in all
hours of the day, but largely confined to the burrows.

Gopher remains are common in archeological sites, where they are invariably
designated “intrusive” and then disregarded, even though there is an extensive record of
gophers being snared, hunted, or flooded out for human consumption. Most of the
ethnographic records probably pertain to Thomomys or other genera found in the
borderlands region. Gophers were eaten by the Yokuts (Gayton 1948:75), Wappo (Driver
1936:186), Wintu (DuBois 1935:13), Plains Cree (Mandelbaum 1979:69), Kutenai
(Turney-High 1941:41), Chilula (Lake 1982:66), Diegueno (Cuero 1970:56), Yuma
(Trippel 1889:575), Mohave (Stewart 1947:83), Pima (Russell 1908:82), Tepehuan
(Pennington 1969:124-125), Chichimeca-Jonaz (“tusa,” Driver and Driver 1963:61),
Owens Valley Paiute (Steward 1933:255), Northern Paiute (Fowler 1989:24), Western
Shoshone, Panamint, Nevada and Utah Southern Paiute, Western Ute, Southern Ute
(Fowler 1986:80), Santa Clara Pueblo Indians (Hill 1982:54), and many other groups.
Snaring, deadfalls, archery, and flooding of burrows with water are methods mentioned
in the ethnographies. The Tarahumara used springpole snares (Bennett and Zingg
1935:117), while the Cahita used a springpole snare with a unique ceramic housing
(Beals 1943:Fig. 1). The contemporary Yucatec Maya still practice springpole snaring of
hispid pocket gophers (Orthogeomys hispidus) for human consumption, a process that is
described in good detail by Hovey and Rissolo (1999). Most archeologists, however,
choose to remain blissfully oblivious to this panorama of historical data (however, see
Shaffer 1992b).

1594

Chaetodipus hispidus (Hispid pocket mouse; Fig. 10.42, A; 10.45, A; 10.46, C)
cf. Chaetodipus hispidus
Chaetodipus/Perognathus sp.
Element
mandible
upper incisor
M1
M2
P4
P4
M1 or M2
M1
M2
unspecified molar fragments
left femur
left tibia
right tibia

Ambient bone NISP

Hearth deposit NISP
3

1
1
1
2
3
1
1
1
2
1
1
2

The Hispid pocket mouse (Chaetodipus hispidus, formerly Perognathus hispidus)
occupies nearly all of Texas, including the Berger Bluff area. Merriam’s pocket mouse
(Perognathus merriami) occupies most of the western two-thirds of the state and occurs
in Bee County but apparently has not been recorded in Goliad County (Schmidly
2004:353). No pocket mice of any kind were trapped in the pre-inundation ecological
survey, although some remains were found in a raptor pellet collected during the Flume
No. 3 survey (Fig. 10.53). This mouse ranges throughout the Plains as far north as
southern North Dakota and as far south as central Mexico (Paulson 1988:Fig. 3). Most of
the identified elements are from the dentition. Among the premolars and molars from the
hearth deposit, two are heavily worn and four slightly worn, suggesting at least two
individuals of differing ages.

Pocket mice (and kangaroo mice) are the mouselike counterparts of kangaroo rats,
the other members of the family Heteromyidae. Like them, they have cheek pouches,
1595

oversized hind limbs and relatively long tails, and are fossorial, solitary, nocturnal
rodents with relatively long lifespans. They are generally dormant in winter. These are
medium to relatively large mice with a body length of about nine to 11-12 cm, with a tail
roughly the same length. Adults weigh about 30-47 g (average about 35 g).

Pocket mice are nocturnal seed foragers, transporting the seeds in cheek pouches.
Alcoze and Zimmerman (1973) found that seeds made up 81% of their diet in Fisher
County; insects made up 13.9% of the spring diet and 1.2% of winter diet. According to
Dalquest and Horner (1984:115), these mice, like kangaroo rats, can subsist without
drinking water. They have a “quadrupedal bounding gait” (Price and Waser 1985:211)
rather than the bipedal hopping of kangaroo rats. They are said to be aggressive, yet when
kept in confinement become tame. Hispid pocket mice apparently tolerate denser, less
friable soils than kangaroo rats (Blair 1952:241; Alcoze and Zimmerman 1973:907;
Paulson 1988:3). Dalquest and Horner (1984:114) observe that burrow entrances may be
plugged with dirt during the daytime if the burrow is in sandy soil, but left unplugged if
in harder soil. Schmidly (2004:358) says that the burrows resemble 1-inch auger holes
bored straight into the ground. Bailey (1971:280) remarks that burrows are hard to locate.
Burrows average about an inch in diameter and descend in a vertical drop for
several inches, then in a more gentle incline or spiral to a depth of a foot or more.
Shallow burrows, like those of the silky pocket mouse, are sometimes constructed
in sandy or gravelly soil…. There may be several entrances to a burrow, but
usually there are only two or three (Dalquest and Horner 1984:114).
Hispid pocket mice have a large continental range and occupy a variety of
campestral habitats, but the most significant habitat type is shortgrass prairie, often with a
significant percentage of forbs. Many studies have shown that these mice prefer
somewhat denser vegetation than is tolerated by kangaroo rats. Where Dipodomys ordii
1596

may occupy nearly bare disturbed ground, Chaetodipus hispidus may prefer terrain where
disturbance has ceased and rank weedy vegetation is covering the area. Sand dunes,
riparian habitats, and closed-canopy woodlands are usually avoided, however. In Texas,
these mice are common on the coastal prairie. The pocket mice in the bench deposits may
have originated in the grassy postoak parkland on the Lissie and Beaumont terrace
surfaces, though not in areas with closed canopy. Raun (1959) at Palmetto State Park and
McCarley (1952:107) in Oklahoma found them in similar habitat. Hispid pocket mice
occur in low densities. In Texas, Hay (1951:16) measured home ranges yielding a density
of about 1.50/hectare for females and 2.15/hectare for males. In Kansas and Oklahoma,
densities have been estimated at around 0.30-0.60/hectare. In a study in Webb County,
Windberg (1998) found the species spread evenly in low densities across a variety of
grass and shrub habitats.

Chaetodipus hispidus is a very eurytopic species. It occupies nearly the entire
state, from the arid Trans-Pecos to the humid northeastern corner, and is absent only from
deep southeast Texas (Schmidly 2004:359), and obviously is not greatly limited by
precipitation or temperature. It can tolerate fairly arid conditions (annual precipitation
22.7 cm) to mesic (137 cm) and mean annual temperatures ranging from 5.17° C in the
north to 23.3° C in the south. It is expected to show less response to global warming than
other rodent species (Cameron and Scheel 2001:668).

The chief predators are owls (especially barn owls) and western diamondback
rattlesnakes. Pocket mice (Perognathus spp.) were eaten by the Owens Valley Paiute,
Panamint, Western Shoshone, Utah and Nevada Southern Paiute, Chemehuevi, Southern
Ute, and Western Ute (Fowler 1986:80). Hispid pocket mice are fairly common in both
1597

paleontological and archeological deposits in Texas. About half the archeological sites
are open ones. In keeping with the biological traits of the species, it occurs widely but in
low frequencies. Some examples are Lubbock Lake (Johnson 1987:Table 7.1), Big Lake
(Raun and Laughlin 1972:Table 1), 41 NU 103 (Steele and Mokry 1985:Table 2), 41 MC
296 (Steele and Hunter 1986:492), 41 FB 32 (McClure 1989:19), Loeve-Fox (McDonald
1974:Table VIII), Kyle (Lundelius 1962:Table 4), L. E. Robertson Shelter, Five Goat
Shelter, the Dam site, Opilionid Shelter, and Windy Shelter (Butler 1980:Tables 12.13
through 12.17), Taddlock (Bruseth and Perttula 1981:Table 7-3), 41 DL 147 (Yates
1982:Table II-2), the Rainey site (Henderson 2001:Table 13, 15), Baker Cave (Douglas
1970:Table 1), Seminole Sink (Rosenberg 1985:205), Allen Ranch Rockshelter (Green
and Green 1974:Table 4), and Canyon City Club site (Duffield 1970:Table 31, 32). There
are also many more reports that simply list “Perognathus sp.”
Heteromyidae (unidentified pocket mouse or kangaroo rat)
Hearth deposit
1 proximal tibia (juvenile)
1 mandible fragment with incisor

Dipodomys compactus or Dipodomys ordii (Gulf coast or Ord’s kangaroo rat)
Dipodomys cf. D. ordii
Dipodomys sp.
Ambient fauna
1 left proximal tibia (N109 E96, 92.35-92.30 m, lot B-139)
1 left distal tibia (juvenile, Feature 7 fill; N109 E96, 92.35-92.30 m, lot B-140)
Hearth deposit
1 unspecified molar
1 P4
2
1M
1 deciduous P4
1 M3

As in the case of several other taxa, the mammalian taxonomy of kangaroo rats
has been revised since the original identifications were done. All of this material was
originally identified either as Dipodomys cf. D. ordii or just Dipodomys sp., but the
1598

kangaroo rat now recognized in the region is the Gulf Coast kangaroo rat, Dipodomys
compactus (Schmidly 2004:365) recently elevated to specific status, and it seems likely
that all the Berger Bluff material belongs to this species, based on current knowledge of
geography (Baumgardner and Schmidly 1981:Fig. 11). As currently recognized, Ord’s
kangaroo rat (Dipodomys ordii) occurs in south Texas, but no closer than the counties of
Atascosa and McMullen (Schmidly 2004:371). The two species are sympatric over a
large part of south Texas and are closely related (Baumgardner and Kennedy 1994:Fig.1;
Carrasco 2000:Fig. 4), differing mainly in minor details of the head and tail
(Baumgardner 1991:1). Because the revision is recent, the ecological and archeological
literature has much more information on Ord’s than on Gulf Coast rats. McCoig (1983)
has done a thesis on Gulf Coast rats from Padre Island, but I have not seen it. No
kangaroo rats were found in the pre-inundation ecological survey. Schmidly (2004:365)
maps records of D. compactus in Bee County and Gonzales County, but not the counties
of Goliad, Refugio, Victoria, De Witt, or Karnes. There appears to be at least one juvenile
in both the hearth deposit and the ambient fauna. The breeding cycle is little known, but
other species in the genus are polyestrous and breed year-round. The deciduous P4 in the
hearth deposit indicates a juvenile. McCulloch (1961:159) says deciduous teeth of D.
ordii indicate an age less than two months, but he found them in individuals trapped as
late as mid-November. Dalquest and Carpenter (1986:252) say that even the youngest
individuals they trapped had some wear on these teeth, but the hearth deposit specimen is
unworn, and must be from a very young individual.

Along with pocket mice, kangaroo rats are members of the Heteromyidae. The
Gulf Coast kangaroo rat (subspecies D. compactus sennetti, Baumgardner and Schmidly
1981:Fig. 11) covers most of the Rio Grande Plain. It occupies areas with sandy soil and
1599

sparse vegetation: mesquite savanna, post oak-blackjack oak parkland (Baumgardner
1991:3). Baumgardner and Schmidly (1985) found that where D. compactus and D. ordii
lived sympatrically in Jim Hogg County, D. compactus occurred adjacent to disturbed
sites, but where the species were separated, D. compactus lived in both disturbed and
undisturbed habitats. This suggests the Gulf Coast kangaroo rat has some affinity for
open, disturbed areas (such as revegetating burned areas) and can move into them when
in competition with other species. Near Berger Bluff, this species was perhaps associated
with pocket mice, Northern grasshopper mice, and woodrats in the grassy postoak
parkland on the Lissie and Beaumont terrace surfaces, provided it was not too heavily
vegetated at the time, and had some bare ground for dust bathing. Dipodomys ordii has
been recorded from floodplain habitats in western states (Miller, Wilson and Andersen
2003), but these are probably less vegetated than Coleto Creek.

These kangaroo rats are solitary, territorial, and nocturnal, remaining in their
burrows (often with plugged entrances) during the day. Locomotion is by hopping, hence
the name. These are medium-sized rats, weighing about 44-60 g, with large hind feet
(about 3.6 cm long) and long tails (about 12 cm long). Ord’s rats average about 60 g. The
stance is bipedal, and kangaroo rats can jump up to 1.2 m high and 1.8 m horizontally
(Dalquest and Horner 1984:117), leaving paired hind footprints behind. The related
species D. merriami and D. microps have top speeds of 32 and 21 km/hour, respectively.
Bailey (1971:267) describes Dipodomys ordii burrows:
In many cases, the burrows enter the ground under the edge of cactus or some of
the low bushes or spreading plants that seem to offer them shelter and protection,
but in other cases they are in the most exposed and unprotected situations. A sand
bank or sloping dune is a favorite site for the burrow, which always enters the
ground at a nearly horizontal position, often with the doorway slightly lower than
the main shaft of the burrow. They do not, as some other species, build mounds
1600

over their dens, but the burrows are often in groups of three or four or even more,
radiating from a common underground center. For the size of the animal the
burrows are rather large, and at times considerable earth is thrown out, usually to
quite a distance from the entrance. Part of the burrows are closed during the day,
apparently to keep out snakes and other enemies, but some are always left open,
and it is probable that the closed burrows are the ones occupied.
Entrances are large, perhaps 7.5-9.0 cm in diameter, approached by runways or
beaten paths. Like grasshopper mice, kangaroo rats are dust bathers, rolling in the sand to
control secretions produced by sebaceous glands. According to Findley (1987:83), dustbathing sites tend to be traditional and communal. Presence of open ground with loose
sand is therefore an important part of habitat selection. Kangaroo rats are granivorous,
eating seeds from a variety of forbs, grasses, and shrubs (Alcoze and Zimmerman
1973:905, 906). They can subsist while drinking little or no water, obtaining some
moisture from seeds, thanks to efficient kidneys, skin oil, and nocturnal habits. The
climatic tolerance of the Gulf Coast kangaroo rat is somewhat restricted, simply because
its range is mostly confined to the Rio Grande Plain. Average annual temperatures vary
from about 20.6-23.3° C and annual rainfall from 51-84 cm.

Regarding ease of capture by humans, Findley remarks “It is possible to slowly
approach a foraging kangaroo rat and then with a quick pounce to catch it by hand. If you
miss the first time, however, you are in for a wild chase. Even newly captured Dipodomys
are relatively gentle, and with a little care they may be handled quite easily….” (Findley
1987:81). Several other accounts also mention capturing D. ordii or D. merriami by hand,
and add that the rats can be routed out of their burrows by stamping on them. Davis
(1966:172) remarks that “they are timid and make interesting pets. Also, their flesh is
white, tender, and as delicious as frogs’ legs or chicken.” Kangaroo rats were eaten by the
Seri (Malkin 1962:9), Lipan Apache (Dennis and Dennis 1925:128, quoted earlier),
1601

Nomlaki (Goldschmidt 1951:401), Panamint Shoshone (Coville 1892:352), Northern
Paiute (Fowler 1989:24), Washo, Owens Valley Paiute, Western Shoshone, Nevada and
Utah Southern Paiute, Western Ute, Southern Ute, Northern Ute, and Eastern Shoshone
(Fowler 1986:80). Among the Walapai, “The kangaroo rat, ohu’l, which only comes out
after dark, was obtained by building a fire beside his hole. When he ran out he was killed.
Practically all rodents, including mice, iwê’, were killed and eaten whenever the
opportunity presented itself” (McKennan 1935:64). The following early account of
nocturnal rodents with cheek pouches comes from Baja California and probably refers to
kangaroo rats and pocket mice:
Aún más regalada que la carne de las ardillas es para los indios la de las ratas, que
dicen ser muy tierna y blanca; y por eso cuando tienen ocasión de matar alguna,
no la pierden; mas como ellas poco andan de día, no tienen los indios ocasión de
matar muchas, como quisieran. En todas partes, poblados y despoblados, hay
grande abundancia de ratones, con las propiedades que tienene en todas partes. Lo
particular que se halla en éstos de la California es el tener dos bolsas más abajo de
las orejas, y cerca de la boca, una en cada lado… (del Barco 1973:21-22).
Kangaroo rat remains are infrequently found in archeological sites, but any that
have been found in south Texas have probably been listed as Dipodomys ordii. D. ordii is
reported from Lubbock Lake (Johnson 1987:Table 7.1); Dipodomys sp. is reported from
the Aubrey site (Yates and Lundelius 2001:Table 8.1, 8.3) and Hinds Cave (Lord 1984). I
have already mentioned the Dipodomys remains found in coprolites from Tamaulipas
(Marsh 1964:52-53) and Wilke (978:82) has reported bone fragments of immature
kangaroo rats (probably D. merriami or D. deserti) in two human coprolite samples from
Myoma Dunes in California. Teeth of Dipodomys heermanni are reported in one
coprolite from Bamert Cave, California ( Nissen 1973:67).

1602

Onychomys leucogaster (Northern grasshopper mouse; Fig. 10.73)
Ambient fauna (N110 E102, 92.00-91.95 m), from matrix sample
1 M1

This species is represented only by a single lower right first molar (Fig. 10.73)
found at the base of stratum 2A, at about the same level as Feature 6, and probably just
above the extensive zone of phreatic carbonate in that unit. Since it came from the matrix
sample, it would have been found in the southwest corner about a meter away from the
feature.

Grasshopper mice are insectivorous cricetid rodents. The Northern grasshopper
mouse is a xeric-adapted mouse occupying south and west Texas. Schmidly (2004:422)
indicates it has been collected from the counties of Bee and Refugio, but not Goliad.
None were collected in the pre-inundation ecological survey. In its continental
distribution, it is clearly an arid land rodent, occupying vast reaches of the shortgrass
plains and basin and range province of the desert West, into northern California and
Washington. Its eastern limit roughly corresponds to the eastern limit of shortgrass
prairie, approximately following the 71 cm annual precipitation isohyet. To the west, the
limit is the Sierra Nevada rainshadow. These mice seem not to be limited by aridity, but
by heavier rainfall and ground cover. Refugio County seems to be the most mesic part of
its entire range.

These small mice weigh about 27-46 g (average about 35 g). They are nocturnal
(Stockrahm et al. 1995:17), aggressive and strongly territorial, preying on insects and
other rodents. The digestive tract in other species is adapted to handle large amounts of
indigestible insect chitin. In laboratory experiments, grasshopper mice readily kill all
1603

kinds of smaller sympatric rodents (Peromyscus, Perognathus, Microtus, Sigmodon,
Reithrodontomys; McCarty 1978:4) and have been observed killing Dipodomys ordii
(Rebar and Conley 1983:984; Ruffer 1964:27). Dietary studies suggest about 1-9%
mammal or reptile consumption. In wintertime, they may partly switch to seeds.
Grasshopper mice are active in early evening, least active under a full moon.

As a carnivore, Northern grasshopper mice are higher in the food chain than other
rodents and are less common, although Blair (1952:243) reported them “surprisingly
common at times in some localities in the Tamaulipan province.” Studies in South
Dakota found densities of 0.50-0.55 individuals/hectare (Wilhelm, Choate and Jones
1981:31-32). Home ranges are large (2.3 hectares in one study; McCarty 1978:3). They
have four burrow types: 1) nest burrows, average maximum depth 14 cm with two
entrance tunnels; 2) retreat burrows, depth 20 cm; 3) small cache burrows for seeds; 4)
miscellaneous burrows (latrines, signpost burrows used for dust bathing, etc.; Ruffer
1964).

Northern grasshopper mice are found in sandy areas, shortgrass or mixed grass
prairie, dune areas, or open brushland (Ruffer 1964; Wilhelm, Choate and Jones 1981:20;
Flake 1973:636-637; Genoways and Jones 1972) and are fairly cosmopolitan in habitat
choice. In Martin County, Ramsey and Carley (1970) found them associated with
Neotoma micropus and Dipodomys ordii in areas with fine sandy loam and heavy
mesquite growth. Blair (1954:252) found them mostly restricted to sandy soils. Some
biologists have suggested they prefer disclimax communities with bare, disturbed ground
and weedy pioneer annuals such as ragweed. Egoscue (1960:101) suggests their
distribution may be controlled more than anything else by the availability of dry ground
1604

for dust bathing. At Berger Bluff, this species would have been found in association with
heteromyid species (Dipodomys and Chaetodipus) in some open sandy upland habitat,
possibly at some distance from the site.

Figure 10.73. Grasshopper Mouse Molar From the Hearth Deposit. A, lower left first
molar of Onychomys leucogaster mounted on the tip of a common steel
straight pin; B, occlusal surface of same specimen; orientation uncertain.
Unit 2, Feature 5 and surrounding surface, lot B-149.
1605

Like the heteromyids, even though grasshopper mice are inherently aggressive,
they are said to be docile when handled by humans (Bailey 1971:139). There seems to be
little mention of them in the ethnographic record, although Fowler (1986:80) says that
Onychomys spp. were eaten by natives of the Great Basin. A fairly large sample of
Onychomys leucogaster appears in Late Pleistocene deposits at Schulze Cave in Edwards
County (Dalquest, Roth and Judd 1969:Table 1), although none are recorded in the
modern Edwards County fauna (Schmidly 2004:422).

Although not abundant, Northern grasshopper mice are more commonly reported
in the archeological record from Texas than might be expected (Table 10.27). The species
was also found in the upper deposits at Berger Bluff (Fox, Black and James 1979:Table
3).

1606

Table 10.27. Some Archeological Examples of Onychomys leucogaster in Texas.

Site

Reference

Petronila Creek

Lewis (1988)*

Loyola Beach

Smith (1986:Table 25)*

41 WY 60

Rawn-Schatzinger (1981:Table 25)

Kyle

Lundelius (1962:Table 4)

Mason Ranch

Benfer and Benfer (1981:20)

Cobb-Pool

Peter and McGregor (1988:Table 9-19)

Cueva Quebrada

Lundelius (1984:467)*

Baker Cave

Hester (1983:Table 3)

Hinds Cave

Lord (1984:Table 8)

Seminole Sink

Rosenberg (1985:205-206)

Bonfire Shelter

Lorrain (1966:Table 14)*

Pratt Cave

Lundelius (1979:250)

West Cave

O’Laughlin (1977:Table C5)**

Deadman’s Shelter

Schultz and Rawn (1978:Table 49)

Lubbock Lake

Johnson (1987:Table 7.1)

41 TG 91

Creel, Scott and Collins (1990:Table 3)

* Reported as Onychomys sp. or Onychomys cf. O. leucogaster.
** Possibly Onychomys arenicola?

1607

Peromyscus cf. P. leucopus or P. maniculatus (cf. White-footed mouse or Deer mouse)
Hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106)
1 proximal femur

This species is represented only by a proximal fragment of the right femur in the
hearth deposit. Deer mice (15-32 g, grasslands or brush) and White-footed mice (15-25 g,
average 22 g, woodlands) are sympatric over nearly all of the state of Texas (Schmidly
2004:404, 406). Only the White-footed mouse, P. leucopus, was trapped during the preinundation ecological survey (Table 10.2). The single femur fragment is not enough to
distinguish between these two species. Fossil Peromyscus species are difficult to
distinguish even when dentitions are available for study (Martin 1968).
Regarding Peromyscus leucopus, Schmidly says,
In the main, these mice are woodland dwellers, a trait best illustrated along the
western border of their range, where they are restricted almost entirely to creek
and river bottoms. As one progresses eastward, the mice are found in a
progressively greater variety of habitats. In east-central Texas, they are most
abundant in bottomlands, less so in post oak uplands, and almost completely
absent from prairie lands…. They are adept at climbing and often den in hollow
trees out of danger from overflow waters. In areas not subject to inundation, they
live in dens under logs, in stumps, brush piles, burrows, or buildings.
Peromyscus leucopus mostly is nocturnal, and it forages for seeds, mesquite
beans, berries, fruits, nuts, and insects at night. In addition, carrion is sometimes
consumed. A considerable amount of the foraging activity of the white-footed
mouse occurs in brushy vegetation (Schmidly 2004:402-403).
As Table 10.28 shows, nearly all the White-footed mice trapped in the preinundation survey came from brushy areas, evidently on the Beaumont terrace surface
adjacent to the valley slope (Espey, Huston and Associates 1976:Fig. 2-2) in areas with
huisache, mesquite, and some post oak. Only one was trapped in creekbottom woodland,
so evidently the local White-footed mice have habitat affinities more akin to Deer mice
than is usually the case. In other parts of the country, White-footed mice are more typical
1608

of hardwood forest and Deer mice of grassland and abandoned fields (Brown 1964:Table
1; see also Lackey 1978; Kaufman et al. 1983). Elsewhere, they may be found both in
floodplain forest and adjacent upland forest (Batzli 1977; Blem and Blem 1975;
Frydendall 1961). Grant, Carothers and Gidley (1985:Table 1) found a mean density 6.45
individuals/hectare (range, 0-29) in an old field in post oak savanna near College Station.

Table 10.28. Small Mammal Trapping Data for Coleto Creek Reservoir.
Habitat
Open pasture
Brushy pasture
Brush piles
Upland forest
Lowland forest
Total:

Cryptotis
parva
12
5
0
0
0
17

Peromyscus
leucopus
0
4
12
0
1
17

Sigmodon
hispidus
0
4
0
0
0
4

Source: Espey, Huston and Associates (1976:Table 3-19).

Regarding Deer mice, Schmidly says,
These mice occupy a variety of habitats, ranging from mixed forests to grasslands
to open, sparsely vegetated deserts. In Texas, they usually inhabit grasslands or
areas of open brush, especially where weeds and grasses offer concealment and a
source of food….
They are almost strictly nocturnal…. They live in underground burrows, in brush
piles, or in crevices among rocks. The burrow is simple in design and usually
consists of two or three short branches converging from as many surface openings
to a single tunnel that slopes steeply to the globular nest chamber, which is 7-10
cm in diameter (Schmidly 2004:405-406).

1609

These are nocturnal mice with large eyes and relatively rotund bodies about 9-10
cm long. Average maximum running speed for Deer mice is 13.4 km/hour (Djawdan and
Garland 1988:Table 1). Pettus and Robinson (1957) report catching three Deer mice by
hand during the evening in Aransas County.

Species of Peromyscus are mentioned only sparingly in the ethnographic
literature, in large part because they are lumped indiscriminately with vague categories of
“field mice” that cannot be assigned to biological taxa. For example, the “dormice”
mentioned by Solís might well be Peromyscus. According to Bennett and Zingg
(1935:119), the Tarahumara trap Peromyscus dificilis (in pitfalls?), then singe and roast
them on a spit. Fowler (1986:80) says Peromyscus crinitus was eaten by many native
groups in the Great Basin. The Northern Paiute ate Peromyscus truei and Peromyscus
maniculatus (or possibly Reithrodontomys; Fowler 1989:24-25). Coville (1892:352) says
that “white-footed mice” were eaten by the Panamint Shoshone. Good evidence of
Peromyscus consumption comes from coprolite and mummy studies. Peromyscus was
found in the Skiles mummy (Turpin, Henneberg and Riskind (1986:307) and in coprolites
from Hinds Cave (Williams-Dean 1978:197), Baker Cave (Sobolik 1988:Table 15), Salts
Cave (Watson 1969:55), and Hoy House at Mesa Verde. Osteological remains are also
fairly widespread, usually in low frequencies, in Texas archeological deposits, for
example the Smith Creek Bridge site (Froelich 2002:Table 96), 41 CL 70 and 41 CL 59
(Weinstein 1992:Table 7-20, 7-29, 7-30), Loma Sandia (Hellier, Steele and Hunter
1995:Table 113), Baker Cave (Douglas 1970:Table 1), Hinds Cave (Lord 1984:Table 8,
13), the Rainey site (Henderson 2001:Table 1, 2), Wilson-Leonard (Balinsky 1998:Table
35-1), and Lubbock Lake (Johnson 1987:Table 7.1).

1610

Sigmodon hispidus (Hispid cotton rat)

Ambient fauna (N109 E103, 92.65-92.60 m, lot B-11)
1 M2
1 M3

The only evidence of cotton rat identified so far is a carbonate concretion with
remnants of the mandible and lower second and third molars, from the ambient fauna.
The Hispid cotton rat is a medium-sized rat (80-150 g) with a body about 16 cm long. It
occupies the entire state and is a generalist herbivore, feeding on grasses, seeds, and
occasionally insects or animal matter. Most of the diet (61-92%) consists of monocots,
but some dicots are eaten (Randolph, Cameron and Wrazen 1991; Kincaid and Cameron
1982:Table 1). On the Texas coastal plain, it is a grassland rodent, found chiefly in prairie
and mesquite savanna habitats. Farther west, it lives in barren ground at the base of low
clumps of mesquite (Schmidly 2004:425). In the pre-inundation ecological survey at
Coleto Creek Reservoir, the few cotton rats trapped came from brushy pasture habitat
(Table 10.28). Its contemporary range includes the southeastern U. S., the southern
Plains, and most of Mexico and Central America. The genus Sigmodon is subtropical in
origin, and the species (currently bounded on the north at about latitude N40°), now
expanding northward, must adapt to colder winter temperatures (Scheck 1982). It appears
occasionally in the Late Pleistocene-early Holocene record of Texas (for example,
Friesenhahn Cave, Cave Without a Name, Longhorn Cavern, Levi Rockshelter, Lubbock
Lake, Baker Cave, Schulze Cave, Richard Beene). At Wilson-Leonard, it is absent from
the earliest deposits, making its first appearance in Level 41 near the top of Stratum 1 and
becoming more frequent in the Holocene deposits above (Balinsky 1998:Table 35-2).
Sigmodon hispidus has been characterized as limited by cold winter temperatures
(Langley and Shure 1988), and it is curious that the species would become more common
at Wilson-Leonard as increasingly severe winters encroached at the onset of the
1611

Holocene. It is fairly abundant at Lubbock Lake (Johnson 1987:75), but absent from the
Aubrey site.

Hispid cotton rats are often nocturnal but are also frequently active during the
day, and as a result are preyed upon by Swainson’s hawks, red-tailed hawks, and other
hawks, as well as barn owls, short-eared owls, coyotes, and snakes. Like voles, they are
prolific breeders prone to major cyclical fluctuations in population density, with crashes
due to drought, freezes, or other factors. Population booms result from several successive
rainy years with mild winters. It is interesting that, for a species with such potential for
dense populations, only one individual is known from the bench deposits, and none from
the hearth deposit. Sigmodon hispidus differs from most of the other rodents in the fauna
in being a frequently diurnal herbivore, where most of the others are nocturnal
granivores, but how this might result in its archeological scarcity here is unclear.
Elsewhere, as at Hinds Cave and Baker Cave, it has been found in coprolites.

Arizona cotton rats (Sigmodon arizonae) were probably second only to woodrats
as major food items among native American Indian populations of Arizona and Sonora,
especially the Pima (Rea 1998:176-180). They were hunted with fire drives, rodent
hooks, and clubs.

1612

Microtus ochrogaster (Prairie vole, Fig. 10.76) and/or Pitymys pinetorum (Pine vole;
Figs. 10.75, 10.77)
Element
mandible
M2
M3
cheek tooth
molar, unspecified
M1
M2
proximal femur
metatarsal

Ambient bone NISP

Hearth deposit NISP
1
1

1 (N109 E103, 93.14-92.90 m)
1 (N109 E96, 92.35-92.30 m)
1
1
1
1 (N109 E96, 92.50-92.45 m)
1 (N109 E96, 92.50-92.45 m)

Voles are especially interesting because they are perhaps the only climatically
sensitive mammal in the bench deposits, and their geographic distribution appears to have
changed frequently throughout the Quaternary, perhaps mostly in response to prevailing
rainfall and/or temperature, and is still changing today. Their distinctive rootless,
prismatic teeth are the elements usually recognized and studied. There are two species of
voles remaining in Texas (several others suffered extinction earlier in the Pleistocene):
the Prairie vole (Microtus ochrogaster) and the Pine vole (Pitymys pinetorum, sometimes
listed as Microtus pinetorum). Figure 10.74 shows the continental distribution, although
the part of this map that covers Texas does not include the most recent information. See
Schmidly (2004:446) for the most up-to-date distribution map for Texas. The Prairie vole
is a grassland species, covering much of the central U. S. and extending into Canada. The
Pine vole is a woodland species of the eastern and southeastern U. S., and their ranges
overlap in the upper Midwest and Mississippi drainage.

In Texas, a single small population of Microtus ochrogaster ludovicianus near
Sour Lake (Fig. 10.74) was extirpated after 1902. Another subspecies, Microtus
ochrogaster taylori, expanded into the panhandles of Texas and Oklahoma in the 1980s
1613

(Stangl, Goetze and Spradling 2004), perhaps in response to the alfalfa fields sustained
by pivot irrigation systems there. This species, then, currently lives no closer to Berger
Bluff than the Wichita Falls region. The Pine vole (Pitymys pinetorum), on the other
hand, has a very patchy distribution across the entire northeastern quadrant of Texas with
records in only 19 counties (Schmidly 2004:446). The closest populations to Berger Bluff
are in the counties of Kerr, Gillespie, and Madison. No voles were recovered in preinundation trapping studies at Coleto Creek Reservoir.

Figure 10.74. Range Limits for Prairie and Pine Voles. Additional populations of both
species have been recorded in Texas since this map was drawn. See
Schmidly (2004:446) for recent mapping.

1614

Despite this very sketchy modern distribution, paleontological and archeological
deposits show that voles were widespread in Texas in the Late Pleistocene, early
Holocene, and Late Holocene (including the Late Prehistoric). The situation in the
Middle Holocene is less clear – the distribution may have resembled today’s, with voles
largely absent (Graham 1987:Table 10, 11) during the Hypsithermal. The situation at
Berger Bluff is a microcosm of that elsewhere in the state: microtine remains are present
in the Late Pleistocene and earliest Holocene bench deposits and in the upper deposits
atop the bluff, at the 15-30 cm and 30-45 cm excavation levels, but nothing is known
about the distribution in the intervening Middle Holocene deposits, which have never
been tested. Incidentally, Hulbert identified these as Pitymys pinetorum, but the
specimens in question are an edentulous mandible and anterior half of a skull, whose
specific identification ought to be rechecked. Microtines are also present in late context at
41 GD 21A (Fox, Black and James 1979:Table 3) and the Smith Creek Bridge site
(Froelich 2002:Table 95). A plausible reconstruction of Quaternary range modulation for
both vole species might look something like this:
Late Pleistocene-early Holocene:
Hypsithermal:
Earliest Late Holocene:
Medieval Warm Period:
Little Ice Age:
Late Historic:

Range expansion
Range contraction
Range expansion
Range contraction
Range expansion
Range contraction and expansion

Voles are small mice, related to the lemmings of Europe and North America.
They are, generally, boreal-adapted mammals, and the fact that the ranges of both species
have been displaced northward since the Pleistocene may indicate that summer maximum
temperatures also act as a limiting effect. At present, the southern limit of the Pine vole is
at about latitude N30° (mean daily maximum for August, 35° C or 95° F), while for the
Prairie vole it is about N36° 30” (mean daily maximum for July, 33.9° C or 93° F). Dice
1615

(1922:46) long ago suggested that Prairie voles could not tolerate summer maximum
temperatures above 36° C (96.8° F), based on laboratory experiments. Suitable habitat for
either species (prairie for the Prairie vole, postoak woodland for the pine vole) must have
been present near Berger Bluff in the Late Holocene, and seems to be present still, so
non-habitat factors must account for their contemporary absence.

According to Semken and Wallace (2002:24; also compare Fig. 4, h and i), the
only element useful for discriminating between these two species is the lower first molar.
Only one of these was recovered, a left lower first molar from the hearth deposit (Unit 2,
Feature 5 and adjacent surface, lot B-149; Fig. 10.76), but fortunately it is in good shape,
with a readable occlusal surface. According to Semken and Wallace, Microtus
ochrogaster lower first molars have the following features:

1) a broad (>0.2 mm) “isthmus” between the 6th and 7th re-entrant angles;
2) only the medial portion of each re-entrant is oriented anteriorly;
3) enamel tends to be thicker on the leading edges relative to the trailing edges;
4) the 6th re-entrant angle is shallow and tends to be directed at a right angle to the
long axis of the tooth (Semken and Wallace 2002:29-30).

The lower first molar shown in Fig. 10.76 seems to meet all four criteria (this can
best be seen by comparing the photo to Fig. 4, “h” and “i” of Semken and Wallace), and I
conclude it is a good match for Microtus ochrogaster. If it is reasonable to assume all the
microtine elements in the hearth deposit come from a single individual, then these may be
Prairie vole as well. The remaining elements, from N109 E103 and N109 E96, probably

1616

represent at least three more voles, based on stratigraphic separation, but there are no
teeth suitable for speciation.

Figure 10.75. Microtine Molar From Ambient Bone. Occlusal surface of lower first molar
of Microtus/Pitymys sp., from coarse fraction of wet-sieved bulk matrix
passing the ¼-inch screen. N109 E96 (92.55-92.50 m), no lot number
assigned yet. Note degraded edges of occlusal surface.

1617

Figure 10.76. Closeup of Microtine Teeth From the Hearth Deposit. Occlusal view of
loose lower left first and second molars (Microtus ochrogaster) arranged in
approximate anatomical relationship. From Unit 2, on surface of Feature 5
and immediately surrounding area, at 92.38 m; lot B-149.

1618

Figure 10.77. Microtine Molar From the Hearth Deposit. Occlusal surface of Microtus sp.
upper right third molar. N113 E98 (approximately upper 5 cm of 92.4092.30 m level), lot B-107A, coarse fraction of loose matrix wet-sieved by
Cabaniss. This specimen comes from an unstudied lot and is not listed in the
specimen table at the head of this section. It compares fairly well to
Microtus ochrogaster.

Figures 10.78 and 10.79 illustrate additional microtine specimens from excavation
levels 2 and 3 in the excavation block in the upper deposits. The anterior skull segment
shown in Figure 10.78 is probably derived from an owl pellet, because removal of the
occipital area is characteristic of owl predation.

1619

Figure 10.78. Microtine Skull From the Upper Deposits. Medial and maxillary views of
Microtus/Pitymys sp. skull from the upper deposits at Berger Bluff, N98 E97
(level 3), lot 1.

1620

Figure 10.79. Microtine Mandibles From the Upper Deposits. A, left mandible of
Microtus/Pitymys sp. (lingual view) from stratum 5, N97 E99 (level 2,
99.80-99.65 m); B, left mandible of Microtus/Pitymys sp. (lingual view)
from stratum 5, N98 E97 (level 3, 99.65-99.50 m?), lot no. 2.

1621

Both of these voles are small to medium-sized stocky mice with short legs and
relatively short tails. Prairie voles have a body length of about 10-13 cm and weigh about
30-50 g (average about 38 g), Pine voles about 25-45 g. Prairie voles live in:

1) drier upland prairies
2) weedy fields and thickets, including disturbed or disclimax vegetation
3) riparian habitat only if grassy and unforested
4) rarely in upland forest

Grasses such as bluegrass or brome, and thickets of dewberry or broomsedge are
prime habitat, and the postoak parkland on the Beaumont and Lissie terrace surfaces
would probably be good Prairie vole habitat. Pine voles live in:

1) deciduous forest with heavy leaf litter
2) grassy or weedy areas, including disturbed or disclimax vegetation
3) swampy areas with sedges
4) edge areas between woodland and meadow

Both species are fossorial, especially the Pine vole, which digs complex tunnel
systems (2-5 cm diameter, 10-30 cm deep) just below the litter layer. Prairie voles have
similar systems (Mankin and Getz 1994:Fig. 1), but surface runways are more extensive.
Entrances are marked by dirt piles and grass clippings. Tunnels are about 4.7 cm in
diameter and 14 cm deep, but nest chambers are about 5-6 cm deep (Mankin and Getz
1994:Table 1). Prairie voles prefer to burrow in sand. Both species live in groups. They
do not hibernate and are active both day and night (although Prairie voles have been
1622

reported in the literature as nocturnal, diurnal, and crepuscular). Prairie voles in lab
colonies will submit to frequent handling by humans.

Like cotton rats, both species are subject to population cycling, so population
density statistics vary widely. For Prairie voles, densities of less than one to 360 per
hectare have been reported (up to a remarkable 1060/hectare in one study). For Pine
voles, densities of less than one to 222/hectare have been reported. Both species are
herbivorous for the most part (grasses, sedges, forbs, roots, tuber, fruits, seeds, etc.).

It may come as a surprise to many archeologists, but voles of one species or
another have been recovered widely from Texas archeological sites, mostly Holocene.
They have been recovered archeologically from the following counties: Bexar, Bosque,
Briscoe, Collin, Cooke, Coryell, Dallas, Delta, Denton, Fort Bend, Freestone, Goliad,
Hill, Hopkins, Jackson, Jim Wells, Live Oak, Lubbock, Montague, Navarro, Randall, San
Patricio, Swisher, Travis, Uvalde, Val Verde, Willacy, Williamson, Wood and probably
others I have overlooked.

The nature of this interaction between humans and voles is seldom clear, but skull
fragments, teeth, and possibly other elements of Microtus sp. were recovered from a
human coprolite at Salts Cave, Kentucky (Watson 1969:55). Occasionally, provocative
numbers of microtine remains are recovered from archeological sites in contexts that
strongly suggest human exploitation. One example is the Schmidt site in Nebraska, where
20% (= 6 of 31?) of the Microtus mandibles from Feature 221 were charred, suggesting
cooking (Satorius-Fox 1982:60). Another example is the Stigenwalt site in Kansas, an
Early Archaic site (7410 ± 70 RCYBP, Tx-5694; 7590 ± 100 RCYBP, Tx-6050) with
1623

burned limestone features resembling central Texas incipient burned rock middens, in
which remains of Microtus ochrogaster or Pitymys pinetorum were found (NISP = 155,
MNI = 4), and 24 out of 155 elements showed evidence of burning (Thies 1990:Table 1,
3). A third example is the Medicine Lodge Creek site in Wyoming, where six different
species of voles were found (Rodent Level Faunule, MNI = 323; Deep Deer Faunule,
MNI = 4; Fire Pit Faunule, MNI = 4; Pryor Stemmed Faunule, MNI =2; Walker
1975:Table 1, 2, 5, 6). The minimum number of 180 Microtus ochrogaster individuals in
the Rodent Level Faunule (9590 ± 180 RCYBP, RL-393) is particularly notable. This
faunule is about the same age as the stratum 2D deposits at Berger Bluff. Walker
concludes
Basically, the remains indicate an attempt toward complete utilization of all
possible food resources for life existence. No animal group was ignored in the
quest for food by the prehistoric inhabitants of the area. Snakes, lizards, birds,
rabbits, rodents, carnivores, cervids, and bovids were all collected and utilized as
food.
A minimum number of 101 pocket gophers, 135 bushy-tailed wood rats, 134
montane voles and 180 prairie voles are represented in this midden… (Walker
1975:8).
Another possible example might be the Spring Creek site in Nebraska (Grange 1980).

1624

Neotoma cf. N. micropus or N. floridana (cf. Southern Plains or Eastern woodrat; Fig.
10.38, D; 10.42, D-F; 10.45, E-G; see also Fig. 10. 39, D; 10.46, D, E for unidentified
woodrat-sized rodent remains)
Element
M1
M2
M3
incisor
molar, unspecified
M1
M2
scapula
ischium
humerus
femur
caudal vertebra
fragments, mandible?

Ambient bone NISP

Hearth deposit NISP
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
2
1 (young adult)
3
23*

* Probably fragments of disintegrated mandible represented by lower molars and incisor.
Also note Lot B-4 has a tooth enamel fragment, possibly from a Neotoma molar.
Two species of woodrats (or packrats, as they are sometimes called) with
essentially parapatric ranges meet in a boundary near the Guadalupe River (Dalbey
1980). The Southern Plains woodrat, Neotoma micropus, is a typical south Texas resident
of the chaparral in Tamaulipan biotic province, while the Eastern woodrat, Neotoma
floridana, is an East Texas woodland dweller. Curiously, no woodrats were recorded in
the reservoir area by the pre-inundation ecological survey (Table 10.2), but Neotoma
micropus is recorded from the counties of Goliad, De Witt, Karnes, Refugio, and
Calhoun (Dalbey 1980:Fig. 5; Schmidly 2004:437), as well as the Guadalupe Delta
Wildlife Management Area.

Southern Plains, Eastern, and White-throated woodrats are all so closely related
phylogenetically that even rodent specialists sometimes have trouble distinguishing them
using diagnostic features like coat color. They also readily interbreed and hybridize
1625

where their ranges abut (Birney 1976; Zimmerman and Nejtek 1977). Discriminant
analysis can separate the two species, and shows that Eastern woodrats are slightly larger
(Dalbey 1980:58). Southern Plains woodrats weigh about 204-310 g (average about 240
g), while Eastern woodrats weigh about 200-350 g (average about 265 g). Figure 10.80
illustrates first and second molars for comparative specimens of both species and shows
how similar the teeth are.

Figure 10.80. Comparative Specimens of Neotoma Molars. Recent specimens of the
upper left first and second molars of Neotoma floridana and Neotoma
micropus from the UTSA-CAR comparative collection. These differ little in
appearance except for the degree of tooth wear
1626

Schmidly (1983:202, Fig. 4) maintains that Southern Plains woodrats can be
distinguished from Eastern woodrats by virtue of a much less well-developed
anterointernal reentrant angle on the upper first molar. A single left upper first molar is
present in the hearth deposit (N113 E98, 92.443-92.400 m, lot B-106) for comparison
with a reference specimen of N. micropus and Schmidly’s Figure 4. The specimen is from
an adult with lightly worn teeth and the anterointernal reentrant angle is very poorly
developed (Fig. 10.81). By this criterion, it compares very well with Neotoma micropus.
A second test depends on the width of the second loph of the lower first molar (see
Lundelius 1979:250, Harris 1984). A single lower first molar is present in the hearth
deposit (N113 E98, 92.50-92.40 m, lot B-105, Fig. 10.82). The width of the second loph
was measured with a microscope reticle at 1.86 mm, narrower than the mean (1.998 mm)
for Neotoma micropus comparative specimens measured by Harris, and in fact beyond
one standard deviation, but within the range (1.84-2.21 mm) given. Harris found N.
floridana measured 1.93 mm or greater. By this criterion, then, the Berger Bluff teeth
seem to pertain to Southern Plains rather than Eastern woodrats (however, see Graham
1976:80-82, Fig. 15, for cautionary discussion). As in the case of Microtus teeth, large
samples are really needed for reliable species discrimination.

Southern Plains woodrats and Eastern woodrats have fairly distinct habitat
preferences, with the former occupying mostly chaparral or arid brushland terrain and
the latter, mesic woodlands and rocky outcrops. The most relevant data on habitat
preference of both species are from a study by Dalbey (1980) in De Witt, Gonzales,
Guadalupe, and Wilson counties. Dalbey found that most Neotoma micropus were
found in thornbrush-prickly pear associations; 70% of the individuals trapped came
from prickly pear patches, 14% from woodpiles, 9% from abandoned buildings, and
1627

7% from open areas (Dalbey 1980:25). Thornbrush consisted most often of mesquite and
Condalia.

Figure 10.81. Closeup of Neotoma Molar From the Hearth Deposit. Occlusal surface,
upper left first molar of Neotoma sp. from N113 E98 (92.443-92.400 m), lot
B-106. The second and third molars are also present in this lot, but not
shown here.
1628

Figure 10.82. Closeup of Neotoma Teeth From the Hearth Deposit. Occlusal view of
Neotoma sp. lower right first and second molars from N113 E98 (92.5092.40 m), lot B-105.
1629

Raun (1966) studied the species in a prickly pear-shortgrass community (with
mesquite and granjeno) at Welder Refuge, near Sinton, and found the rats closely
associated with prickly pear patches. Box (1959) also studied Southern Plains woodrats at
Welder Refuge and likewise found them most common in the prickly pear-shortgrass
community and absent in the bunchgrass-annual forb community. Likewise, in Zavala
County, Johnson (1952:13-32) found them most common in the mesquite-cactus
community (30 dens per acre, 74 per hectare), less so in the mesquite-brush community
(10 dens per acre, 25 per hectare), and nearly absent in other habitats; 70-80% of dens in
the mesquite-cactus community were directly associated with prickly pear. Other studies
elsewhere in Texas and New Mexico have found them in mesquite savanna, ravine, cedar
bluff, or sandy habitats. The close association in south Texas of Neotoma micropus with
Opuntia (both prickly pear and tasajillo) is significant, since neither of these plants
occurs very commonly nor in extensive patches in the Coleto Creek Reservoir area at
present. Both Opuntia lindheimeri and Opuntia leptocaulis are present, but are
insignificant in comparison to most other areas of south Texas. Opuntia leptocaulis, for
example, accounts for only 0.02% of cover in the live oak stand habitat (Espey, Huston
and Associates 1976:Table 2-13). It is also noteworthy that no woodrats of either
species were trapped during the Espey Huston study.

In the study by Dalbey (1980:26-27), 70 % of his Eastern woodrats were trapped
in prickly pear patches (in blackland prairie, mixed woodland, and mesquite grassland),
while 25 % occurred in wood piles and one individual was found in an abandoned
house. Over much of the rest of Texas, post oak woodland is more typical habitat for
Eastern woodrats (Schmidly 1983:197; Dalquest and Horner 1984:150; Raun 1959:Table
1; McCarley 1959:411); in East Texas, the species may occur in hardwood or pine
1630

forested bottom lands (Baker 1942), although Lowery (1974:256) says it is rare or absent
in dry upland pine forest in Louisiana. In Oklahoma, the species also prefers ravines in
areas wooded with post oak and blackjack oak (Murphy 1952:206; Hays 1958:242;
McCarley 1952:108). Goertz (1970:97-98) found the species most common in upland
woods, including dry ravines, less so in brushy riparian woods; edge areas had fewer
woodrats. In

north central Oklahoma, Schnell et al. (1980:Table 1) found Eastern

woodrats most common in lowland

forest with coralberry, elm,

and other woody

vegetation. In many parts of the eastern United States, the species may be found in
swamps or marshes, and in grasslands it is mostly confined to gallery woods. Where
rocky bluffs or ledges are present, their distribution may partly govern the occurrence of
the species (Cudmore 1985). The above information shows clearly that the most likely
modern habitat for Eastern woodrats near Berger Bluff would consist of wooded ravines
and those parts of the post oak woodland with more closed canopy on the Lissie terrace
surface, even though woodrats are not known to live there now.

Population densities estimated for Southern Plains woodrats are 0-31 per hectare
at Welder Refuge (Raun 1966:37), 50 per hectare in Zavala County (Johnson 1952:79.
For Eastern woodrats, reported densities include 25 per hectare in Brazos County (Tate
1970:10), about 2 per hectare in Polk and Tyler counties (Baker 1942), and 0.62-7.19 per
hectare in Oklahoma (Schnell et al. 1980:Table 1).

Southern Plains woodrats are almost wholly vegetarian, subsisting chiefly on
foods such as prickly pear pads and tunas; Raun observed that in the summer, south
Texas woodrats have red-stained muzzles from eating ripe

tunas (Raun 1966:8).

Tasajillo stems are used in house-building where prickly pear is not available, and
1631

possibly the tasajillo tunas are eaten as well. Other favored foods include mesquite bean
pods, acorns, wild plums, Ephedra needles (Dalquest and Horner 1984:154), agarita and
granjeno berries (Box 1959:715). Other kinds of bark, roots, nuts, or seeds may be eaten.
Like the heteromyid rodents, Southern Plains woodrats are said to obtain their water
intake from food, although they will drink free water if necessary (Davis 1966:201;
Bailey 1971:174; see also Olsen 1976).

Eastern woodrats have a diet that reflects their typically more forested habitat.
Favored items are acorns, nuts, or leaves of post oak, water oak, walnut, pecan,
hackberry; fruit and leaves of yaupon, cactus stems and tunas, mushrooms, wild grapes,
juniper berries, leaves of pecan, French mulberry, greenbriar, perppervine, trumpet vine,
rattan, sumac bark and seeds, and many other kinds of vegetation; snails and insects are
also said to be eaten on occasion (Schmidly 1983:200; Dalquest and Horner 1984:151;
Lay and Baker 1938). Eastern woodrats can also subsist without drinking water, and
their dens are often located far from water sources (Murphy 1952:211).

Woodrats are nocturnal animals. Raun reports Southern Plains woodrats at
Welder Refuge were most active between dusk and midnight, with 82% of the animals
trapped before 9 PM; weather conditions or moonlight did not appear to affect capture
rates (Raun 1966:18-19).

Woodrats of all kinds are well known for building houses or dens from various
expediently collected materials. Species living in rocky areas often build them under
ledges or overhangs, but woodrats living elsewhere build their dens in the open, often
against or among standing vegetation, especially cactus (see Bailey 1971:171-172;
1632

Birney 1973:29). Johnson (1952; see Raun 1966:Appendix III) gives a detailed
description of Neotoma micropus dens in Zavala County, where typical dens are conical,
20-24 inches (51-61 cm) high and about 36 inches (91 cm) in diameter. Dens may be
built around prickly pear patches, at the base of mesquite trees, or over fallen logs and
are evidently constructed at night of sticks, animal dung, and other materials, and in
south Texas are frequently armored with cut pieces of prickly pear or tasajillo. Hester
and Hill (1980) describe two houses in Zavala County, built of typical chaparral
vegetation (prickly pear, mesquite, lotebush, huisache, tasajillo, granjeno, and guayacan)
and slightly larger in diameter than the average size reported by Johnson. Raun (1966:20)
found that in areas of Welder Refuge where building material was scarce, dens were
insubstantial low mounds of debris in cactus patches, and the lack of above ground
structure was compensated by fairly extensive burrow systems. Johnson found three
entrances (usually about 2 inches above ground level) to be typical, although as many as
five were seen; inside a central chamber about eight inches (20 cm) in diameter is
usually found, with three side chambers, one of which contains the nest; food storage
chambers containing seeds or other food items may be found (Raun 1966:57). Johnson
found that some dens had burrows leading underground from the center of the den,
about 20 cm under the surface. Finley (1958:490-491) found 2-3 nests per den, all
underground, and also reports "escape tunnels;” one of these was U-shaped, running 2.5
feet (75 cm) away from the den to a depth of 14 inches (36 cm), then doubling back
to emerge near the den. Some dens have mazes of sunken or underground
passageways, as well as networks of surface runways leading away from the den
(Dalbey 1980:25). Woodrat dens have a distinct musky odor, and scent marking has
been reported for western species of Neotoma. In south Texas, cotton rats and whitefooted mice (Peromyscus leucopus) may co-occur in Neotoma micropus dens.
1633

Woodrats were probably hunted by every native American group in whose
territory they occurred. Next to rabbits, they are the most common small animal food
source mentioned in ethnographies, especially for the Southwest, California, Mexico, and
the Great Basin. Hunting was done by tearing down occupied dens with sticks or rodent
hooks, or setting the den on fire, killing the evicted rats with sticks or bows and arrows,
or by trapping with deadfalls. John Rope, a Western Apache informant interviewed by
Grenville Goodwin, recalled,
We boys used to hunt pack rats with bow and arrows. A lot of us used to start out
in the morning and hunt till mid-afternoon. The way we got the rats was by one
boy poking a long stick into the rat's nest. The other boy would stand near the
nest entrance on the opposite side. When the stick was poked in, the rat would
come to the door and stick his head out. Then the boy would shoot him.
Sometimes the rats would come to the door and then go back. If they would not
come out, we would tear the house down and dig them out of their hole. We
would poke our stick in the hole and if there was hair on the end of it when we
took it out, then we knew the rat was there and we would dig him out (Basso
1971:97).

A Chiricahua Apache informant quoted by Opler reported that
The Chiricahua hunt those big rats and eat them. Two men go to a nest. One
pokes a stick in; the other waits at the other end and shoots when the rat comes
out. For this they use a small arrow the same as is used for birds. It is all wood,
with a sharpened point. When they get a good many rats, they pierce the legs and
carry them home on poles over the shoulder. Sometimes to get them a person
pokes into a hole and hits them with a stick when they come out (Opler
1965:325).

Gifford (1936:266, 275) gives the following account of how woodrats were used by the
Yavapai:

1634

Woodrats caught in stone deadfall trap, without bait, so placed that animal sprang
trigger in passing. Trap at times baited with cooked mescal. Set by man.
Woodrat nests in cacti or bushes pulled to pieces with 6- to 8-ft. stick with
curved end; stored pinon nuts taken, rats killed as they left nest. Shot with
arrows, hit with sticks, or seized by necks in bare hands and struck against
rocks. Rats poked out of nest with straight end of stick; if they did not come
out, crooked end of stick used to pull nest to pieces. Rats tied in pairs with
soaproot fiber around necks. Eight pairs might be tied on one piece of fiber.
Woodrats boiled whole (NE Yavapai), with intestines removed (W Yavapai).
Some baked under ashes. Skinned before baking and skin placed in cleaned
abdominal cavity. Skin eaten as delicacy. Woodrats skinned, slightly charred, and
hung in hut in bundles of 20 or 30, kept for a few days. Boiled later. Woodrat
brains sometimes preserved for skin dressing.
Referring to Neotoma micropus in Aransas County, J. A. Allen (1894:175) wrote
“Capt. N. C. Phillips, an old settler, says these rats are excellent eating, in his estimation
far superior to squirrel meat.” Remains of woodrats commonly occur in Texas
archeological sites, in shelters, caves, and open sites alike. They occur in the upper
deposits at Berger Bluff, in levels 2 and 3 (Flynn 1983). Neotoma remains have been
found in human coprolites at Caldwell Cave (Holloway 1985:Table 4), Granado Cave
(Hunter 2001:Table 13.4), Hinds Cave (where remains, including at least two juveniles,
occurred in 19 or 20 of the coprolites studied; Williams-Dean 1978:Table 10) and Baker
Cave (Sobolik 1988:Table 15).

cf. Lepus californicus (cf. Black-tailed jackrabbit)
Ambient fauna (N109 E96, 92.50-92.45 m, bulk matrix sample, lot B-157)
1 scapula fragment
A calcined fragment of the border of the glenoid fossa from a right scapula has
been identified as Black-tailed jackrabbit. This is a large rabbit weighing about 1.5-4.0
kg. It is native to the western and southern parts of the state in sparsely vegetated areas,
1635

but has spread to most of the rest of Texas as a result of artificial land clearance
(Schmidly 1983:112). They are crepuscular herbivores. Recorded from the reservoir area
during the pre-inundation survey, they presumably would have been found in open
upland prairie areas.

Sylvilagus cf. S. auduboni or S. floridanus (Desert or Eastern cottontail; Fig. 10.25)
Ambient fauna
1 mandible (N109 E103, 92.84-92.80 m, lot B-5)
1 astragalus (N109 E103, 92.84-92.80 m, lot B-5)
2 tibia fragments (calcined; N109 E96, 92.45-92.40 m, lot B-136)
Hearth deposit
1 M3
1 calcaneum (young adult)

These items were identified as either Desert or Eastern cottontail. However, at
present the xeric-adapted Desert cottontail occurs only in the west half of the state and is
recorded no closer than Duval County. The Eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus floridanus) is
distributed over most of the state and was recorded from the reservoir area in the preinundation ecological survey. It seems like a more likely identification for this rabbit
material. Swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus aquaticus) also occurs in the area but is a larger
rabbit.

The Eastern cottontail is medium-sized rabbit weighing about 1-2 kg. It occupies
brushy and grassy areas and should be most likely found in postoak parkland on the
Beaumont and Lissie terrace surfaces. They are crepuscular herbivores.

1636

Sylvilagus sp. (unidentified cottontail rabbit; Fig. 10.29, E; 10.30, F; 10.38, C)
Element
mandible
cheek tooth, unspecified
scapula
ilium
vertebra
distal femur
proximal tibia
distal tibia
calcaneum
astragalus
metatarsal

Ambient bone NISP
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1

Hearth deposit NISP
1

These elements cannot be speciated, but most come from a small species of
rabbit. Possibly these represent more Eastern cottontail elements.

cf. Leporidae (cf. unidentified rabbit; Fig. 10.37, C)
Ambient fauna (N113 E98, 92.20-92.15 m)
1 distal metapodial
This is a distal metapodial fragment from a large rabbit (?), perhaps Sylvilagus
aquaticus or Lepus californicus (?), but too badly fragmented for identification.

Rabbit or bird
Ambient fauna (lots B-5, B-7, B-9, B-11, B-34, B-50, B-73, B-76)
10 long bone shaft fragments or carbonate casts

Present in the ambient fauna are 10 gracile long bone shaft fragments (or
carbonate steinkerns) too fragmentary to distinguish between rabbit or bird. However,
since no large birds are known from the bench deposits, I suspect these are all rabbit or
some comparably-sized mammal.
1637

Procyon lotor (Raccoon; Fig. 4.57, 10.16, 10.29, H)
Ambient fauna
1 M1 (N110 E102, 92.60-92.55 m, lot B-40) ?Procyon lotor
1 distal humerus (Cutbank profile, stratum 2C, 92.46 m)
The only raccoon elements come from the ambient fauna: a lower first molar (in
carbonate concretion) tentatively identified as raccoon, and a cutmarked left distal
humerus (discussed earlier in this chapter). Lot B-123 also has the centrum from a caudal
vertebra from some unidentified raccoon-sized animal. Adult raccoons from San Patricio
County average about 6 kg (up to 11 kg for males; Gehrt and Fritzell 1999:Fig. 1).

1638

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS FOR CHAPTER 10
Animal bone from the bench deposits is generally in good shape, except for
mechanical breakage. Breakage is due to predator mastication, matrix compression, or
excavation damage. Fluvial abrasion appears to be essentially absent, and chemical
rounding and dissolution are minimal. About 30 taxonomic categories can be recognized,
and compared to other Texas sites of similar age, only Lubbock Lake, the Aubrey site
and the Driscoll site have greater species richness. The bone fragments identified in this
chapter represent only about half the bone recovered so far from the bench deposits. The
other half remains unstudied, and additional bone is known to be present in matrix
samples that have not yet been picked, so there is considerable potential for additional
species to be added to the species list (Table 10.1).

The Berger Bluff fauna is essentially Holocene in character, for the most part.
One extinct species is tentatively recognized: extinct giant tortoise, Gopherus
hexagonatus, based on a very small carapace fragment less than 2 cm across.

The identification is tentative only because of the small size of the fragment;
morphologically, it is a very good match for a comparative specimen from the Ingleside
site, and I consider it a fairly confident identification. It is identical in appearance to the
other bone from the site and shows no indication of having been reworked from older
deposits. The specimen was recovered 50-55 cm below radiocarbon sample AA2831
(9880 ± 90 RCYBP, uncalibrated) and is older than that assay by some unknown number
of years. It is likely to be one of the youngest examples of this species documented in
North America, but the assay provides only a minimum age.
1639

Animal bone in the bench deposits occurs in two different forms: 1) ambient
bone, or a low-density background scatter of small bone fragments; 2) the hearth deposit,
a concentrated microvertebrate bone bed discovered next to Feature 5, a small unprepared
hearth buried in stratum 2B sediments (Tx 3569, 11,550 ± 800 RCYBP, uncalibrated).
Based on incomplete preliminary counts, the ambient bone appears to have a stratigraphic
preservation gradient similar to the snail shell, declining in frequency with greater depth.
Since the bone (including the deeper samples) shows little microscopic evidence of
chemical dissolution, the reason for declining frequency is not yet clear. It might be due
to greater matrix expansion and compression at depth, to decelerating sedimentation
rates, or to unrecognized chemical removal of bone.

The Berger Bluff vertebrate assemblage does not look like the kind of bestiary
that archeologists are accustomed to seeing in most archeological sites. The animals here
are mostly small, reclusive, and heavily weighted towards amphibians and rodents. I
believe this is because at this early stage in its history, the site functioned mostly as a
diurnal way station for parties of women, children and dogs foraging in the Coleto Creek
valley and adjacent uplands for plants and animals. Only much later in its history, in the
late Holocene, did the site become a major base camp with a complete cross-section of
the entire social community, and the inevitable midden deposits that resulted.

In terms of origin, the animals found in the bench deposits fall into two basic
groups: 1) a large group of animals tethered to standing water or moist soils, collected in
Coleto Creek or the floodplain deciduous forest along the creek valley; 2) a smaller group
of xeric upland animals collected from open, well-drained habitats, possibly at some

1640

distance from the site. This breakdown reflects the basic biological rule that amphibians
tend to live in bottomlands, fossorial rodents in xeric uplands (Busch et al. 2000).

Water-Tethered Fauna
Many of the animals in the bench deposits are tethered to standing, or in some
cases, slow-moving water. The gar, small fish, aquatic turtles (Emydidae, Kinosternidae),
larger frogs (bullfrog, Rio Grande leopard frog) and water snake (Nerodia) would have
been found in the water and dependent on a permanent water source. The other
amphibians (smallmouthed salamander, cricket or chorus frogs, toad) would have been
found near, and at times in, lentic water bodies. Amphibians both absorb and lose water
through the skin and must stay in humid or wet habitats. The reproductive cycle of
amphibians such as frogs and smallmouthed salamanders depends on laying eggs in
water, usually in closed depressions such as floodplain ponds or vernal pools that are
small enough and isolated enough to lack a fish population that might prey on the eggs
(Petranka 1983). The presence of abundant algae or other submerged vegetation is also
important as a shield against predation (Holomuzi 1989). Small closed water bodies are
generally less abundant on the Coleto Creek floodplain today. There are large, deep pools
in the creek, but these have major fish populations. Bragg (1949:23) says that Ambystoma
texanum eggs are never laid in water more than one foot deep, and usually in water not
more than four inches deep. The contemporary floodplain sediments are often too sandy
to retain water in closed depressions, except in the main channel of the creek itself.
Chapter 4 showed how the floodplain sediments in the late Pleistocene were much more
silt- and clay-rich than today, and the reconstructed hydrologic system for Coleto Creek
in the Late Pleistocene portrays a sluggish, meandering, muddy stream that probably
would have created small oxbows or cutoff sloughs with clay bottoms that would hold
1641

water and provide good breeding ground for an abundant community of amphibians.
Rainfall during the Younger Dryas is believed to have been more evenly distributed
throughout the year, less seasonal than today, with greater rainfall during the winter,
reduced evaporation rates due to lower temperatures, more constant aquifer recharge, and
less flashy stream discharge than today. Groundwater spring discharge would have
accounted for a much higher (and thunderstorm runoff lower) proportion of stream
discharge during the Younger Dryas. A climatic regime like this would have kept
floodplain pool levels high during the winter and early spring. Ambystoma texanum
breeds and lays eggs from late January until April in Texas (Garrett and Barker 1987:53;
or in March in some of the more northern states), so the presence of a robust salamander
population attests to the stability of lentic water bodies on the floodplain in winter and
early spring. This reconstruction is entirely consistent with the evidence already
assembled from diatoms and freshwater sponges (Chapter 7), aquatic snails (Chapter 8)
and peaclams and freshwater mussels (Chapter 9). No salamanders were found during the
pre-inundation ecological survey done in 1975-76. Whether they are truly extirpated in
the Coleto Creek Reservoir area or whether sampling was simply inadequate is unclear.

In addition to these animals that were either outright aquatic fauna or at least
heavily water-tethered, there are others that prefer moist to marshy soil. The fossorial
pocket gophers and Eastern mole require moist (but not saturated or flooded) soil for
digging. If these animals were found on the floodplain, it would have been in the
somewhat higher, better drained, open unsaturated parts. Alternatively, if the climate was
wet enough, these animals might have been found on the Beaumont and Lissie terraces,
and may never have entered the floodplain. Gophers tunnel where they can practice
underground herbivory of forbs, grasses, tubers and the like. Basically, they are ground
1642

cover-eaters, and ground cover is generally lacking in closed-canopy deciduous
floodplain forest, so unless there were openings in the floodplain woodland, they might
have been found on the adjacent Quaternary terraces instead. Moles are insectivorous and
could have been found in either topographic situation.

In Chapter 4, evidence for cyclic bedding was presented. The grain size of the
floodplain sediments varied cyclically throughout the Younger Dryas and early
Holocene, and at times, the floodplain may have been too fine-grained for pocket gophers
and moles, displacing these populations up onto the adjacent terraces. During coarsergrained intervals, these populations might have expanded back onto the floodplain again.

The other moist soil fauna are the small fossorial snakes, Virginia, Storeria and/or
Diadophis. These are typically found in marshy habitats in the Midwest and eastern U. S.
Likewise, raccoons are usually found close to water, although they can be seen at night
foraging in all kinds of habitats more distant from water sources. Regarding the
contemporary environment, the pre-inundation ecological survey says
The creekside environment probably supports the most diverse and abundant
herpetofauna of any habitat on the site. Half the snakes collected are found
primarily near water. The creek and its moist immediate environs harbor several
aquatic turtles and anuran amphibians. During the spring and early summer after
periods of rainfall, temporary and semi-permanent ponds and roadside ditches
serve as breeding sites for a variety of frogs and toads. Nine of the 11 species
identified onsite prefer these breeding habitats to the larger, more permanent
creeks. Predatory aquatic snakes can also be found in these temporary habitats
(Espey, Huston and Associates 1976:3-5).

1643

Xeric Upland Fauna
The second group of animals in the bench assemblage is perhaps smaller in
number but even more diverse. They are intriguing because most of them -- chiefly
rodents -- represent rather arid-adapted species found somewhat farther to the southwest
today. Many of them are species not reported from Goliad County today, but found in
nearby counties to the southwest. The Northern grasshopper mouse, the Black-tailed
jackrabbit, the longnosed snake (Rhinocheilus lecontei) and possibly the kangaroo rat
(assuming it is Dipodomys compactus) fall in this xeric group, and perhaps the extinct
giant tortoise should be included, too. The heteromyids and the grasshopper mouse
normally require bare ground for dust bathing, and may be found in disturbed habitats
with disclimax vegetation. A few other species (least shrew, hispid pocket mouse, hispid
cotton rat, Eastern cottontail, vole and possibly the uncertain woodrat species) are also
upland prairie species, but have more cosmopolitan distributions.

Today, the Guadalupe River is the approximate boundary between the Texan
biotic province and the Tamaulipan province to the south. As a result, several of the
vertebrates found in the bench deposits are species pairs with parapatric distributions that
make it difficult to determine which species is present. Examples are the N. micropus-N.
floridana species pair, the P. leucopus-P. maniculatus species pair, or the S. audubonii-S.
floridanus species pair. During the Younger Dryas, with higher and more equable rainfall
rates, this boundary was likely displaced to the southwest of its present position. This
means that animals like the Northern grasshopper mouse or the Black-tailed jackrabbit
might have been found even farther away from Berger Bluff than today. It suggests that
the predator who introduced the prey animals to the site had a large foraging radius. It
also adds a bit of disharmony to the composition of the fauna. The Northern grasshopper
1644

mouse is probably the only species in the fauna that is slightly extralimital, however, and
it is recorded from Bee County. The extinct species and disharmonious taxa that are
characteristic of the late Pleistocene (Graham and Lundelius 1995) are mostly lacking
from the Berger Bluff bench fauna.

Berger Bluff Vertebrates: A Reclusive Fauna
What characteristics tie together the animals found in the Berger Bluff species
list? Most of them are small, most probably less than 200-400 g in live weight. The
extinct giant tortoise, the raccoon, and whatever species (deer or antelope perhaps) might
be represented by the handful of large mammal bone fragments are the largest animals,
but most are small, regardless of whether they are mammals, birds, fish, or herptiles.

Many of the species in the list are reclusive, cryptic, nocturnal and fossorial.
McWilliams and Bachmann (1988:68) remark “Adult A. texanum are fossorial and are
conspicuous to most human observers only during early spring when they migrate on the
soil surface towards ponds where they breed and lay their eggs.” Other fossorial species
include the giant tortoise, Eastern mole, pocket gopher, vole, least shrew, pocket mouse,
kangaroo rat, Northern grasshopper mouse, and the small fossorial snakes (Virginia,
Storeria or Diadophis). Woodrats and toads might be considered semifossorial. In fact,
nearly every terrestrial animal in the list takes refuge either in a burrow or a den (raccoon,
woodrat) of some sort

Archeologists tend reflexively to equate “fossorial” with “intrusive,” but in fact,
nocturnal-fossorial animals are highly adaptive prey for human foragers. Animals that
forage at night take refuge in burrows that, if they can be located and assessed for
1645

occupancy by the forager, essentially serve as traps for the prey. Occupied burrows can
be recognized by fresh dirt, tracks, fecal pellets or grass clippings. Some species that use
scent-marking may be detectable by odor. An animal confined to its burrow can easily be
dug out with a digging stick. Animals that forage at night usually have eyes adapted to
dim light and the accounts of wildlife biologists show that they are usually confused and
disoriented when evicted into sudden bright daylight. The accounts also mention that
many of them can easily be caught by hand. A couple of digging sticks, a dog, and a pack
of eager children are all the technology needed to collect most of the terrestrial species.
The small fish could be collected by seining, and the small birds by fiber snares.
Deadfalls were probably not used because there is no good local source of rock slabs.

The reptiles and amphibians are particularly vulnerable as human prey. These
animals are poikilotherms (the term ectotherm is also used), or cold-blooded animals.
Pokilotherms are often at a disadvantage when preyed upon by endotherms (although
sometimes the predation goes the other way). Salamanders or snakes evicted from their
burrows in the cool of the early morning can be expected to be sluggish and easily
captured. In addition, because of their physiology, amphibians and reptiles are not
adapted to sustain rapid bursts of energy even when at temperature equilibrium.
According to Pough,
…aerobic metabolism accounts for only a small portion of the total energy used to
sustain high levels of activity… The consequent depletion of cellular energy
stores and accumulation of lactic acid in tissues leads to rapid exhaustion. Many
reptiles and amphibians are completely exhausted by 3-5 min of maximum
activity and may require several hours to return their tissue to resting levels of
lactic acid (Pough 1980:95).
Consequently, endothermic humans and dogs have the upper hand when hunting
and collecting these kinds of animals (sun-basking turtles are a familiar example).
1646

Antipredator defense mechanisms listed for the genus Ambystoma include “noxious skin
secretions, parotoid glands, dorsum of tail glandular, immobile posture, body coiled,” and
several distraction mechanisms, such as tail lashing and wagging (Duellman and Trueb
1986:Table 10-1; see this source for a good discussion of predator avoidance for
amphibians in general). Another distinct possibility is that amphibians were captured in
pitfalls. Wildlife biologists studying the effectiveness of different censusing methods for
amphibians have found that pitfalls are one of the most effective capture techniques for
salamanders and other amphibians. This raises the intriguing possibility that the two
small pits (Feature 6 and Feature 7) discovered in the bench deposits might have been
amphibian pitfalls, either intentional or unintentional.

Most of the animals in the hearth deposit are cryptic, inconspicuous, and
obtainable by turning over rotting logs, peeling loose bark off trees, kicking over brush
piles or woodrat dens, or digging up burrows. This is low-technology foraging, and it is
the sort of activity normally expended by groups of children and dogs accompanying
women on plant-foraging trips. In anthropological terms, this would be an “embedded
activity,” where the principal goal is to collect plants, water, or firewood, but various
small prey are taken whenever encountered. In optimal foraging terms, search time is
minimized because it is an embedded task. The Internet hosts a number of online
“herping journals” maintained by amateur herpetologists who keep logs of their field
trips. The standard method used to find herpetofauna in the field is to seek out trash piles
and flip over pieces of tin or plywood, logs, old tires, and the like. Many of the species
turned up this way are the same ones found at Berger Bluff. This practice is a perfect
modern analog for Paleoindian herptile foragers.

1647

The animals represented in the hearth deposit are variously capable of running,
jumping (pocket mice and kangaroo rats), burrowing, slithering, swimming, and flying,
and they are derived from both floodplain and upland (possibly at some distance)
habitats. The forager responsible for the latrine deposit was capable of dealing with
multiple behavioral modes and foraging in disparate habitats. This kind of opportunistic
flexibility seems characteristically human.

The Hearth Deposit: What Does It Signify?
The hearth deposit, or microvertebrate bone bed, is a concentrated, spatially
restricted deposit of small animal bone immediately adjacent to and slightly lapping onto
Feature 5, a small patch of fire-baked floodplain sediment at the base of stratum 2B.
Earlier in this chapter I considered three different models for the origin of this deposit. It
does not fit the criteria for a fluvial lag deposit; it does not fit the criteria for a raptor
pellet midden very well, and it seems to correspond best to the latrine area of a
mammalian predator. In some respects it may fit the profile of a mustelid fairly well, but
we know little about how such a latrine might appear archeologically. Considering all the
evidence, I think the deposit corresponds best to the physical and taphonomic profile of a
human latrine area (the appearance of possible human tooth pitting like that documented
by Landt is especially promising for further study). My experience with prehistoric
human latrine deposits is limited to a very different kind of context at Baker Cave, but the
latrine we excavated there (later analyzed by Sobolik) corresponds closely in size and
degree of clustering to the bone bed at Berger Bluff, if one can imagine most of the
organic constituents decayed away. All things considered, though, I think the strongest
arguments for human agency are still the customary archeological criteria of close spatial
association and the very limited, but definite evidence of burning on a few of the small
1648

animal bones. As I have said earlier, I do not think those bones were necessarily burned
in Feature 5, but they are evidence of human involvement. I have also shown that
essentially all the animals (or at least kinds of animals) in the hearth deposit appear as
food items in ethnographies, in known human coprolites elsewhere in the borderlands,
and as inclusions in midden deposits in Texas and elsewhere. What more evidence do we
need?

At Hidden Cave, Nevada, Thomas (1985:382-383) makes a case for considering
the site as a diurnal way station – a temporary stopping point visited for a few hours
during the course of daily foraging trips, perhaps a place to collect spring water, check
amphibian pitfalls, and look for riparian animals; a place usually visited only by foraging
parties, not by the complete local community, and seldom or never for overnight stays; a
place visited often, but with limited human impact, and only sparse accumulation of
cultural debris. Such a place, with its human markers but little or no impact on the
immediate habitat, would make an ideal spot for paleoenvironmental studies.

Comparable Sites
Berger Bluff is unusual, but it is not unique. The most relevant comparison is to
the Aubrey site, where
The identified small mammal bone distribution does not appear at all to be
random… as there are multiple clusters, each comprised of (sic) multiple taxa.
Each of the rabbit bones is near a hearth, as are the clusters of microtines, gophers
and moles. Burned small mammal bone is also near the southern hearths, while
the category “rodentia” is quite widely scattered….
Burned snake and turtle are found almost exclusively with the southern hearths,
with only three turtle fragments on the west edge of the block…. No burned
reptiles were found in the northern area. Six of the ten fish bones are associated
with hearths as well, also suggesting a use-related distribution. Overall, the
1649

evidence that small game was intensively processed at Aubrey is compelling
(Ferring 2001:189).
In addition to the Aubrey site, there are several other Late Paleoindian or Early
Archaic sites that have extensive assemblages of small animals in contexts that suggest a
cultural origin: Baker Cave (Texas), the Stigenwalt site (Kansas), and Medicine Lodge
Creek site (Wyoming) are examples, and there may be others, such as the Allen site
(Nebraska).

Missing Taxa
Two small taxa, key markers of Pleistocene deposits, are apparently missing from
the Berger Bluff assemblage: Masked shrew (Sorex cinereus), and Southern bog lemming
(Synaptomys cooperi). Some other small mammal taxa still found in the area are also
apparently missing: there are no sciurids of any kind (four species are resident at present,
all diurnal), and short-tailed shrews (Blairina), rice rats (Oryzomys), pygmy mice
(Baiomys) and harvest mice (Reithrodontomys) are not currently known from the
collections. Any of these might be found with further picking of matrix or further
examination of the unstudied lots. I have seen at least one small long bone (not reported
here) that is an excellent match for Reithrodontomys.

1650

References for Chapter 10
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
1991

A Review of Chemical and Biological Studies on the Guadalupe River, Texas,
1949-1989. Division of Environmental Research, Academy of Natural Sciences of
Philadelphia, Report 91-9.

Alcoze, Thomas M. and Earl G. Zimmerman
1973 Food Habits and Dietary Overlap of Two Heteromyid Rodents From the Mesquite
Plains of Texas. Journal of Mammalogy 54(4):900-908.

Alexander, Herbert L., Jr.
1963

The Levi Site: A Paleo-Indian Campsite in Central Texas. American Antiquity
28(4):510-528.

Allen, J. A.
1894

On the Mammals of Aransas County, Texas, With Descriptions of New Forms of
Lepus and Oryzomys. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 6:165198.

Andrews, Peter
1990

Owls, Caves and Fossils. Predation, Preservation, and Accumulation of Small
Mammal Bones in Caves, With an Analysis of the Pleistocene Cave Faunas From
Westbury-sub-Mendip, Somerset, UK. The University of Chicago Press.

1998

Taphonomic Observations on a Surface Bone Assemblage in a Temperate
Environment. Bulletin de la Société Géologique de France 69(3):433-442.

1651

Andrews, Peter and E. M. Nesbit Evans
1983

Small Mammal Bone Accumulations Produced by Mammalian Carnivores.
Paleobiology 9(3):289-307.

Arnold, Todd W. and Erik K. Fritzell
1989 Spring and Summer Prey Remains Collected From Male Mink Dens in
Southwestern Manitoba. Prairie Naturalist 21(4):189-192.

Auffenberg, Walter
1962 A Redescription of Testudo hexagonata Cope. Herpetologica 18(1):25-34.

Babcock, Sharon K. and Jennifer L. Blais
2001

Caudal Vertebral Development and Morphology in Three Salamanders With
Complex Life Cycles (Ambystoma jeffersonianum, Hemidactylium scutatum, and
Desmognathus ocoee). Journal of Morphology 247:142-159.

Baegert, Jacob (Elsbeth Schulz-Bischof, translator)
1982

The Letters of Jacob Baegart 1749-1761 Jesuit Missionary in Baja California.
Los Angeles, Dawson’s Book Shop.

Bailey, Flora L.
1940 Navaho Foods and Cooking Methods. American Anthropologist 42(2, Part 1):270290.

1652

Bailey, Vernon
1971

Mammals of the Southwestern United States (With Special Reference to New
Mexico). New York, Dover Publications (reprint of 1931 original edition,
Mammals of New Mexico, North American Fauna 53, USDA Biological Survey).

Baker, Barry W., Brian S. Shaffer, Kristin D. Sobolik and D. Gentry Steele
1991

Faunal Analysis. Chapter 7, Part 1, Analysis of the Vertebrate Faunal Remains.
Pages 139-161 in H. Blaine Ensor and David L. Carlson (eds.), Alabonson Road:
Early Ceramic Period Adaptation to the Inland Coastal Prairie Zone, Harris
County, Southeast Texas. Texas A&M University, Archeological Research
Laboratory, Reports of Investigations 8.

Baker, Barry W. and D. Gentry Steele
1992 A Late Pleistocene Through Late Holocene Faunal Assemblage From the Richard
Beene Archaeological Site (41 BX 831), Bexar County, South-Central Texas:
Preliminary Results. In Rolfe D. Mandel and S. Christopher Caran (eds.), Late
Cenozoic Alluvial Stratigraphy and Prehistory of the Inner Gulf Coastal
Plain, South-Central Texas. Guidebook, 10th Annual Meeting, South-Central
Friends of the Pleistocene.

Baker, Rollin H.
1942

Notes on Small Mammals of Eastern Texas. Journal of Mammalogy 23(3):343.

1986

Barn Owl Prey Selection: 1938 and 1984. The Southwestern Naturalist 31(3):401.

1991

Mammalian Prey of the Common Barn-Owl (Tyto alba) Along the Texas Coast.
The Southwestern Naturalist 36(3):343-347.

1653

Balinsky, Robin
1998

Pleistocene to Holocene Wilson-Leonard Microvertebrate Fauna and Its
Paleoenvironmental Significance. Chapter 35 (pages 1515-1542) in Michael B.
Collins (assembler, editor), Wilson-Leonard An 11,000-Year Archeological
Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Volume V, Special Studies.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin, Studies
in Archeology 31; and Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Department, Archeological Studies Program, Report 10.

Bar-Oz, Guy, Mina Weinstein-Evron, Perry Livne and Yossi Zaidner
2005

Fragments of Information: Preliminary Taphonomic Results From the Middle
Palaeolithic Breccia Layers of Misliya Cave, Mount Carmel, Israel. Chapter 12
(pages 126-134) in Terry O’Connor (ed.), Biosphere to Lithosphere. New Studies
in Vertebrate Taphonomy. Proceedings of the 9th Conference of the International
Council of Archaeozoology, Durham, August 2002. Oxbow Books.

del Barco, Miguel (Miguel León-Portilla, ed.)
1973

Historia Natural y Crónica de la Antigua California. Adiciones y Correciones a
la Noticia de Miguel Venegas. México, D.F., Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Instituto de Investigaciones Históricas.

Barrett, S. A.
1952

Material Aspects of Pomo Culture. Bulletin of the Public Museum of Milwaukee
20(1):1-260.

Baskin, Jon A. and Antonia E. Mosqueda
2002

Analysis of Horse (Equus) Metapodials From the Late Pleistocene of the Lower
Nueces Valley, South Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 54(1):17-26.

1654

Basso, Keith H. (ed.)
1971

Western Apache Raiding and Warfare. From the Notes of Grenville Goodwin.
Tucson, University of Arizona Press.

Batzli, George O.
1977

Population Dynamics of the White-Footed Mouse in Floodplain and Upland
Forests. The American Midland Naturalist 97(1):18-32.

Baumgardner, George D.
1991

Dipodomys compactus. Mammalian Species 369. American Society of
Mammalogists.

Baumgardner, George D. and Michael L. Kennedy
1994

Patterns of Interspecific Morphometric Variation in Kangaroo Rats (Genus
Dipodomys). Journal of Mammalogy 75(1):203-211.

Baumgardner, George D. and David J. Schmidly
1981

Systematics of the Southern Races of Two Species of Kangaroo Rats (Dipodomys
compactus and D. ordii). Occasional Papers 73, The Museum, Texas Tech
University.

1985

Microhabitat Relationships of Kangaroo Rats (Dipodomys compactus and D.
ordii) in Southern Texas. The Southwestern Naturalist 30(2):315-317.

Beals, Ralph L.
1943

The Aboriginal Culture of the Cahita Indians. Ibero-Americana 19, University of
California

1655

Beck, Michael W.
1996

On Discerning the Cause of Late Pleistocene Megafaunal Extinctions.
Paleobiology 22(1):91-103.

Behrensmeyer, Anna K,
1978

Taphonomic and Ecologic Information From Bone Weathering. Paleobiology
4(2):150-162.

Bement, Leland C.
1986

Excavation of the Late Pleistocene Deposits of Bonfire Shelter, 41 VV 218, Val
Verde County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at Austin,
Archeology Series 1.

Ben-David, M., R. T. Bowyer, L. K. Duffy, D. D. Roby, and D. M. Schell
1998

Social Behavior and Ecosystem Processes: River Otter Latrines and Nutrient
Dynamics of Terrestrial Vegetation. Ecology 79(7):2567-2571.

Benfer, Alice and Robert Benfer
1981

The Mason Ranch Burial Cave, Uvalde County, Texas. La Tierra 8(3):16-26.

Bennett, Joanne L.
1999

Thermal Alteration of Buried Bone. Journal of Archaeological Science 26(1):1-8.

Bennett, Wendell C. and Robert M. Zingg
1935

The Tarahumara. An Indian Tribe of Northern Mexico. University of Chicago
Press.
1656

Bickart, K. Jeffrey
1984

A Field Experiment in Avian Taphonomy. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology
4(4):525-535.

Birney, Elmer C.
1973

Systematics of Three Species of Woodrats (Genus Neotoma) in Central North
America. University of Kansas, Museum of Natural History, Miscellaneous
Publication 58.

1976

An Assessment of Relationships and Effects of Interbreeding Among Woodrats of
the Neotoma floridana Species-Group. Journal of Mammalogy 57(1):103-132.

Bishop, Sherman C.
1962

Handbook of Salamanders. The Salamanders of the United States, of Canada, and
of Lower California. New York, Hafner Publishing Company.

Blair, W. Frank
1939

Some Observed Effects of Stream-Valley Flooding on Mammalian Populations in
Eastern Oklahoma. Journal of Mammalogy 20(3):304-306.

1952

Mammals of the Tamaulipan Biotic Province in Texas. The Texas Journal of
Science 4(2):230-250.

1954

Mammals of the Mesquite Plains Biotic District in Texas and Oklahoma, and
Speciation in the Central Grasslands. The Texas Journal of Science 6(3):235-264.

1960

A Breeding Population of the Mexican Toad (Bufo valliceps) in Relation to Its
Environment. Ecology 41(1):165-174.

Blem, Leann B. and C. R. Blem
1975 The Effect of Flooding on Length of Residency in the White-Footed Mouse,
Peromyscus leucopus. The American Midland Naturalist 94(1):232-236.
1657

Bloom, Jonathan A.
1986

Analysis of Faunal Remains. Appendix E in Cathy A. Robison, Archaeological
Excavations at the Fitzgibbons Site, Gallatin County, Illinois. Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale, Center for Archaeological Investigations, Research
Paper 53.

Bobrowsky, Peter T.
1982

An Examination of Casteel’s MNI Behavior Analysis: A Reductionist Approach.
Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology 7(2):171-184.

Bochenski, Zbigniew M. and Teresa Tomek
1997

Preservation of Bird Bones: Erosion Versus Digestion by Owls. International
Journal of Osteoarchaeology 7:372-387.

Bothma, J. du P., James G. Teer, and Charles E. Gates
1972 Growth and Age Determination of the Cottontail in South Texas. Journal of
Wildlife Management 36(4):1209-1221.

Bousman, C. Britt
1998

Late Paleoindian Archeology. Chapter 8 (pages 161-210) in Michael B. Collins
(assembler, editor), Wilson-Leonard An 11,000-Year Archeological Record of
Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Volume I, Introduction, Background, and
Syntheses. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at
Austin, Studies in Archeology 31; and Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Department, Archeological Studies Program, Report 10.

Box, Thadis W.
1959

Density of Plains Wood Rat Dens on Four Plant Communities in South Texas.
Ecology 40(4):715-716.
1658

Brady, Mara E.
2005

An Experimental and Field-Based Approach to the Taphonomy of
Microvertebrate Assemblages: A Case Study in the Judith River Formation of
North-Central Montana. St. Paul, Minnesota, Macalester College, Geology
Department Honors Project.

Bragg, Arthur N.
1949

Observations on the Narrow-Mouthed Salamander. Proceedings of the Oklahoma
Academy of Science 30:21-24.

Brain, C. K.
1981

The Hunters or the Hunted? An Introduction to African Cave Taphonomy. The
University of Chicago Press.

Bramble, Dennis M.
1982

Scaptochelys: Generic Revision and Evolution of Gopher Tortoises. Copeia
1982(4):852-867.

Brannon, Jack D.
1980

The Reproductive Ecology of a Texas Harris’ Hawk (Parabuteo unicinctus
harrisi) Population. Unpublished MA thesis, University of Texas at Austin.

Brown, Kenneth M.
1988

Some Annotated Excerpts From Alonso de Leon's History of Nuevo Leon. La
Tierra 15(2):5-20.

1990 Energy-Dispersive X-Ray Analysis of Growth Rings in Fish Vertebrae.
Unpublished paper (on file with the author) prepared for Geology 392K, Fall,
1990.
1659

Brown, L. N.
1964

Ecology of Three Species of Peromyscus From Southern Missouri. Journal of
Mammalogy 45(2):189-202.

Bruseth, James E. and Timothy K. Perttula
1981

Prehistoric Settlement Patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir. Southern Methodist
University and Texas Antiquities Committee. Texas Antiquities Permit Series 2.

Bryan, A. Lawrence Jr., Lara B. Hopkins, Carol S. Eldridge, I. Lehr Brisbin Jr., and
Charles H. Jagoe
2005

Behavior and Food Habits at a Bald Eagle Nest in Inland South Carolina.
Southeastern Naturalist 4(3):459-468.

Bull, C. M.
1991 Ecology of Parapatric Distributions. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
22:19-36.

Busch, Cristina, Daniel Antinuchi, J. Cristina del Valle, Marcelo J. Kittlein, Ana I.
Malizia, and Aldo I. Vassallo
2000

Population Ecology of Subterranean Rodents. Chapter 5 (pages 5-1 to 5-29) in E.
A. Lacey, J. L. Patton, and G. N. Cameron (eds.), Life Underground: The Biology
of Subterranean Rodents. University of Chicago Press.

Buskirk, Winfred
1986

The Western Apache. Living With the Land Before 1950. University of Oklahoma
Press.

1660

Butler, Barbara H.
1979

Faunal Remains From Coleto Creek, Goliad County, Texas. Appendix I (pages
83-99) in Daniel E. Fox, Archaeological Investigations of Two Prehistoric Sites
on the Coleto Creek Drainage, Goliad County, Texas. University of Texas at San
Antonio, Center for Archaeological Research, Archaeological Survey Report 69.

1980

Aboriginal Vertebrate Utilization in the Hog Creek Area. Pages 376-435 in 460488 in Donald O. Henry, Foster E. Kirby, Anne B. Justen, and Thomas R.
Hays, The Prehistory of Hog Creek: An Archaeological Investigation of
Bosque and Coryell Counties, Texas. Laboratory of Archaeology, Department of
Anthropology, University of Tulsa.

Butler, Virginia L. and Roy A. Schroeder
1998

Do Digestive Processes Leave Diagnostic Traces on Fish Bones? Journal of
Archaeological Science 25(10):957-971.

Byrd, Carey L.
1982

The Home Range, Habitat and Prey Utilization of the Barn Owl (Tyto alba) in
South Texas. Unpublished MS thesis, Texas A&I University, Kingsville.

Cameron, Guy N.
2003

Prey Use by a Pair of Barn Owls (Tyto alba) in a Texas Coastal Habitat. The
Texas Journal of Science 55(3):219-224.

Cameron, Guy N. and D. Scheel
2001

Getting Warmer: Effect of Global Climate Change on Distribution of Rodents in
Texas. Journal of Mammalogy 82(3):652-680.

1661

Cameron, Guy N. Stephen R. Spencer, Bruce D. Eshelman, Lawrence R. Williams and
Michael J. Gregory
1988

Activity and Burrow Structure of Attwater’s Pocket Gopher (Geomys attwateri).
Journal of Mammalogy 69(4):667-677.

Campbell, Berry
1939

The Shoulder Anatomy of the Moles. A Study in Phylogeny and Adaptation. The
American Journal of Anatomy 64(1):1-39.

Cannon, Michael D.
1999

A Mathematical Model of the Effects of Screen Size on Zooarchaeological
Relative Abundance Measures. Journal of Archaeological Science 26(2):205-214.

2005

NISP, Bone Fragmentation, and the Measurement of Taxonomic Abundance.
Unpublished paper, 70th Annual Meeting of the Society for American
Archaeology, 2005 (copy on file with the author).

Carpenter, Charles C.
1956

Carapace Pits in the Three-Toed Box Turtle, Terrapene Carolina Triunguis
(Chelonia – Emydidae). The Southwest Naturalist 1(2):83-86.

Carrasco, Marc A.
2000

Species Discrimination and Morphological Relationships of Kangaroo Rats
(Dipodomys) Based on Their Dentition. Journal of Mammalogy 81(1):107-122.

Casson, John E. and W. D. Klimstra
1983

Winter Foods of Mink in Southern Illinois. Transactions of the Illinois State
Academy of Science 76(1-2):281-292.

1662

Chadderdon, Mary F.
1983

Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas: The 1976 Excavations. Center for
Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 13.

Chapman, Joseph A. and Raymond P. Morgan II
1974

Onset of the Breeding Season and Size of First Litters in Two Species of
Cottontails From Southwestern Texas. The Southwestern Naturalist 19(3):277280.

Clark, Donald R.
1964

Reproduction and Sexual Dimorphism in a Population of the Rough Earth Snake,
Virginia striatula (Linnaeus). The Texas Journal of Science 26(3):265-295.

Clum, Nancy J.
1997 Nutrient Content of Five Species of Domestic Animals Commonly Fed to Captive
Raptors. Journal of Raptor Research 31(3):267-272.

Colville, Frederick V.
1892

The Panamint Indians of California. American Anthropologist (old series) 5:351361.

Conaway, Clinton H., Kenneth C. Sadler and Donald H, Hazelwood
1974

Geographic Variation in Litter Size and Onset of Breeding in Cottontails. Journal
of Wildlife Management 38(3):473-481.

Conditt, Sarah A. and David O. Ribble
1997

Social Organization of Neotoma micropus, the Southern Plains Woodrat.
American Midland Naturalist 137(2):290-297.
1663

Corbusier, William M.
1886

The Apache-Yumas and Apache-Mohaves. The American Antiquarian 8(6):325339.

Cortés, José (Elizabeth A. H. John, ed., John Wheat, translator)
1989

Views From the Apache Frontier. Report on the Northern Provinces of New
Spain. University of Oklahoma Press.

Coville, Frederick V.
1892

The Panamint Indians of California. American Anthropologist (old series) 5:351361.

Crandall, Brian D. and Peter W. Stahl
1995

Human Digestive Effects on a Micromammalian Skeleton. Journal of
Archaeological Science 22(6):789-797.

Cudmore, Wynn W.
1985

The Present Distribution and Status of the Eastern Woodrat, Neotoma floridana,
in Indiana. Proceedings of the Indiana Academy of Science 94:621-627.

Cuero, Delfina
1970

The Autobiography of Delfina Cuero, A Diegueño Indian, As Told to Florence C.
Shipek; Interpreter, Rosalie Pinto Robertson. Malki Museum Press, Morongo
Indian Reservation.

Cummings, J. H., G. E. Duke and A. A. Jegers
1976 Corrosion of Bone by Solutions Simulating Raptor Gastric Juice. Raptor
Research 10(2):55-57.
1664

Dalbey, Frederic C.
1980 Parapatric Distribution of Neotoma floridana and Neotoma micropus in
Southcentral Texas: An Ecological and Morphological Study. Unpublished MS
thesis, Southwest Texas State University.

Dalquest, Walter W. and Rose M. Carpenter
1986 Dental Characters of Some Fossil and Recent Kangaroo Rats, With Description of
a New Species of Pleistocene Dipodomys. Texas Journal of Science 38(3):251263.

Dalquest, Walter W. and Norman V. Horner
1984

Mammals of North-Central Texas. Wichita Falls, Midwestern State University
Press.

Dalquest, Walter W., Edward Roth and Frank Judd
1969

The Mammal Fauna of Schulze Cave, Edwards County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Florida State Museum, Biological Sciences 13(4):205-276.

Dansie, Amy J.
1987 Archaeofaunas: 26 PE 450 and 26 PE 366. Pages 137-182 in Mary K. Rusco and
Jonathan O. Davis, Studies in Archaeology, Geology and Paleontology at Rye
Patch Reservoir, Pershing County, Nevada. Carson City, Nevada State Museum,
Anthropological Papers 20.

Davis, Paul G.
1997

The Bioerosion of Bird Bones. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology 7:388401.

1665

Davis, William B.
1938 A Heavy Concentration of Cryptotis. Journal of Mammalogy 19(4):499-500.
1942

The Moles (Genus Scalopus) of Texas. The American Midland Naturalist
27(2):380-386.

Deevey, Edward S., Jr.
1969

Specific Diversity in Fossil Assemblages. Pages 224-241 in Brookhaven National
Laboratory, Diversity and Stability in Ecological Systems. Brookhaven Symposia
in Biology, No. 22. Upton, New York, Brookhaven National Laboratory. BNL
50175 (C-56). Biology and Medicine – TID-4500.

Dennis, T. S. and Mrs. T. S. Dennis
1925

Life of F. M. Buckelew The Indian Captive As Related by Himself. Bandera,
Hunter’s Printing House.

Dice, Lee R.
1922

Some Factors Affecting the Distribution of the Prairie Vole, Forest Deer Mouse,
and Prairie Deer Mouse. Ecology 3(1):29-47.

Dierenfeld, Ellen S., Heather L. Alcorn and Krista L. Jacobsen
2002

Nutrient Composition of Whole Vertebrate Prey (Excluding Fish) Fed in Zoos.
Manuscript (18 pp) on file with author.

Dillehay, Tom D. and Billy M. Davidson
1975

Statistical Data on Faunal Remains From Excavated Sites in the Wallisville
Reservoir, 1973 Season. Appendix IV in Tom D. Dillehay, Prehistoric
Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity River Delta, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey, Research Report 51, University of Texas at Austin.
1666

Dixon, James R.
1987

Amphibians and Reptiles of Texas With Keys, Taxonomic Synopses, Bibliography,
and Distribution Maps. W. L. Moody, Jr. Natural History Series No. 8. Texas
A&M University Press.

Djawdan, Minou and Theodore Garland, Jr.
1988

Maximal Running Speeds of Bipedal and Quadrupedal Rodents. Journal of
Mammalogy 69(4):765-772.

Dodson, Peter
1971

Sedimentology and Taphonomy of the Oldman Formation (Campanian), Dinosaur
Provincial Park, Alberta (Canada). Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
Palaeoecology 10(1):21-74.

Dodson, Peter and Diane Wexlar
1979

Taphonomic Investigations of Owl Pellets. Paleobiology 5(3):275-284.

Douglas, Charles L.
1970

Analysis of the Faunal Remains. Part II in James H. Word and Charles L.
Douglas, Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. The University of
Texas at Austin, Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin 16.

Downs, Floyd L.
1989

Ambystoma texanum (Mathes). Pages 139-154 in Ralph A. Pfingsten and Floyd L.
Downs (eds.), Salamanders of Ohio. Columbus, College of Biological Sciences,
Ohio State University and Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of
Wildlife.

1667

Driver, Harold E.
1936

Wappo Ethnography. University of California Publications in American
Archaeology and Ethnology 36(3):179-220. University of California Press.

Driver, Harold E. and Wilhelmine Driver
1963

Ethnography and Acculturation of the Chichimeca-Jonaz of Northeast Mexico.
Bloomington, Indiana University.

DuBois, Cora
1935

Wintu Ethnography. University of California Publications in American
Archaeology and Ethnology 36(1):1-148.

Duellman, William E. and Linda Trueb
1986

Biology of Amphibians. McGraw-Hill Book Company.

Duffield, Lathel F.
1970

Some Panhandle Aspect Sites in Texas: Their Vertebrates and Paleoecology.
Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Wisconsin.

Duke, G. E., A. A. Jegers, G. Loff and O. A. Evanson
1975

Gastric Digestion in Some Raptors. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology
50A:649-656.

Durán, Fray Diego (Doris Heyden and Fernando Horcasitas, translators)
1964

Aztecs. The History of the Indies of New Spain. New York, Orion Press
(translation of the original edition of Historia de las Indias de Nueva España e
Islas de la Tierra Firme).
1668

Edwards, Sherrian K.
1990

Investigations of Late Archaic Coprolites: Pollen and Macrofossil Remains From
Hinds Cave (41 VV 456), Val Verde County, Texas. Unpublished MA thesis,
Texas A&M University, College Station.

Egoscue, Harold J.
1960 Laboratory and Field Studies of the Northern Grasshopper Mouse. Journal of
Mammalogy 41(1):99-110.

Egoscue, H. J., J. G. Bittmenn and J. A. Petrovich
1970

Some Fecundity and Longevity Records for Captive Small Mammals. Journal of
Mammalogy 51(3):622-623.

Eiselt, B. Sunday
1997

Fish Remains From the Spirit Cave Paleofecal Material 9,400 Year Old Evidence
for Great Basin Utilization of Small Fishes. Nevada Historical Society Quarterly
40(1):117-139.

Ernst, Carl H.
1989

Systematics, Taxonomy, Variation and Geographic Distribution of the Slider
Turtle. Chapter 4 (pages 57-67) in J. Whitfield Gibbons, Life History and Ecology
of the Slider Turtle. Smithsonian Institution Press.

Errington, Paul L.
1936

Food Habits of a Weasel Family. Journal of Mammalogy 17(4):406-407.

1669

Espey, Huston & Associates
1976

Baseline Survey of the Terrestrial Ecology of the Coleto Creek Power Plant and
Cooling Reservoir Site. Document No.7674, Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.
(Austin) prepared for Central Power and Light Company (Corpus Christi).

Eubanks, Jeannine O., William K. Michener and Craig Guyer
2003

Patterns of Movement and Burrow Use in a Population of Gopher Tortoises
(Gopherus polyphemus). Herpetologica 59(3):311-321.

Felger, Richard S. and Mary B. Moser
1991

People of the Desert and Sea. Ethnobotany of the Seri Indians. Tucson,
University of Arizona Press.

Fernandez-Jalvo, Yolanda and Peter Andrews
1992

Small Mammal Taphonomy of Gran Dolina, Atapuerca (Burgos), Spain. Journal
of Archaeological Science 19(4):407-428.

Ferring, C. Reid
2001

The Archaeology and Paleoecology of the Aubrey Clovis Site (41 DN 479) Denton
County, Texas. Center for Environmental Archaeology, Department of
Geography, University of North Texas.

Fiedel, Stuart and Gary Haynes
2004

A Premature Burial: Comments on Grayson and Meltzer’s “Requiem for
Overkill.” Journal of Archaeological Science 31(1):121-131.

1670

Findley, James S.
1987

The Natural History of New Mexican Mammals. Albuquerque, University of New
Mexico Press.

Finkler, Michael S. and Kathryn A. Cullum
2002 Sex-Related Differences in Metabolic Rate and Energy Reserves in SpringBreeding Small-Mouthed Salamanders (Ambystoma texanum). Copeia
2002(3):824-829.

Finley, Robert B., Jr.
1958

The Wood Rats of Colorado: Distribution and Ecology. University of Kansas
Publications 10(6):213-552. Lawrence, University of Kansas, Museum of Natural
History.

Fiorentino, Robert
2002

Status of the Small-Mouthed Salamander, Ambystoma texanum (Mathes) in West
Virginia. Unpublished MS thesis (Biological Sciences), Marshall University.

Fisher, John W., Jr.
1995

Bone Surface Modifications in Zooarchaeology. Journal of Archaeological
Method and Theory 2(1):7-68.

Flake, Lester D.
1973

Food Habits of Four Species of Rodents on a Short-Grass Prairie in Colorado.
Journal of Mammalogy 54(3):636-647.

1671

Fleharty, Eugene D., M. E. Krause and Dan P. Stinnett
1973

Body Composition, Energy Content, and Lipid Cycles of Four Species of
Rodents. Journal of Mammalogy 54(2):426-438.

Flynn, Lois M.
1983

Faunal Analysis: 41 GD 30A. Appendix II (pages 104-122) in David O. Brown,
The Berger Bluff Site (41 GD 30A): Excavations in the Upper Deposits, 1979.
Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio,
Archaeological Survey Report 115.

Fowler, Catherine S.
1986

Subsistence. Pages 64-97 in Warren D’Azevedo (volume editor), Handbook of
North American Indians, Vol. 11 (Great Basin). Washington, Smithsonian
Institution.

Fowler, Catherine S. (compiler, editor)
1989

Willard Z. Park’s Ethnographic Notes on the Northern Paiute of Western Nevada,
1933-1944. Volume 1. University of Utah Anthropological Papers 114. Salt Lake
City, University of Utah Press.

Fowler, Don D. and Catherine S. Fowler (eds.)
1971

Anthropology of the Numa. John Wesley Powell’s Manuscripts on the Numic
Peoples of Western North America 1868-1880. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology 14.

Fox, Daniel E.
1979

Archaeological Investigations of Two Prehistoric Sites on the Coleto Creek
Drainage, Goliad County, Texas. University of Texas at San Antonio, Center for
Archaeological Research, Archaeological Survey Report 69.
1672

Fox, Anne A., Stephen L. Black, and Steven R. James
1979

Intensive Survey and Testing of Archaeological Sites on Coleto Creek Victoria
and Goliad Counties, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, University of
Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 67.

Francis, Eric T. B.
2002

The Anatomy of the Salamander. Facsimile Reprints in Herpetology, Society for
the Study of Amphibians and Reptiles (2002 reprint of original 1934 edition).

Frese, Paul
2001 Observations on the Herpetofaunal Community of a Natural Marsh in Northern
Missouri. Missouri Herpetological Association Newsletter 14:13-14.

Froelich, Laura
2002

Identification of Faunal Remains. Appendix H (pages 283-337) in Dale Hudler,
Keith Prilliman, and Thomas Gustavson, The Smith Creek Bridge Site (41 DW
270) A Terrace Site in De Witt County, Texas. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin, Studies in Archeology 35 and
Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation,
Archeology Studies Program, Report No. 17.

Frydendall, Merrill
1961 Occurrence of Peromyscus leucopus aridulus in Ellis County, Kansas With Some
Notes on Their Activities. Transactions of the Kansas Academy of Science
64(1):36-40.

Garrett, Judith M. and David G. Barker
1987

A Field Guide to Reptiles and Amphibians of Texas. Texas Monthly Press.

1673

Garrison, Tom E. and Troy L. Best
1990

Dipodomys ordii. Mammalian Species 353. American Society of Mammalogists.

Gayton, A.H.
1948

Yokuts and Western Mono Ethnography. I: Tulare Lake, Southern Valley, and
Central Foothill Yokuts. Anthropological Records 10(1).

Gehring, Thomas M. and Robert K. Swihart
2004 Home Range and Movements of Long-Tailed Weasels in a Landscape
Fragmented by Agriculture. Journal of Mammalogy 85(1):79-86.

Gehrt, Stanley D. and Erik K. Fritzell
1999 Growth Rates and Intraspecific Variations in Body Weights of Raccoons
(Procyon lotor) in Southern Texas. American Midland Naturalist 141(1):19-27.

Genoways, Hugh H. and J. Knox Jones, Jr.
1972

Mammals From Southwestern North Dakota. The Museum, Texas Tech
University, Occasional Papers 6.

Gifford, Diane O. and A. Kay Behrensmeyer
1977

Observed Formation and Burial of a Recent Human Occupation Site in Kenya.
Quaternary Research 8(3):245-266.

Gifford, E. W.
1936 Northeastern and Western Yavapai. University of California Publications in
American Archaeology and Ethnology 34(4):247-354.
1674

Gilbert, F. F. and E. G. Nancekivell
1982

Food Habits of Mink (Mustela vison) and Otter (Lutra canadensis) in
Northeastern Alberta. Canadian Journal of Zoology 60(6):1282-1288.

Gobalet, Kenneth W.
1989

Remains of Tiny Fish From a Late Prehistoric Pomo Site Near Clear Lake,
California. Journal of California and Great Basin Anthropology 11(2):231-239.

2003

Comment on “Size Matters: 3-mm Sieves Do Not Increase Richness in a Fishbone
Assemblage From Arrawarra I, an Aboriginal Australian Shell Midden on the
Mid-North Coast of New South Wales, Australia” by Vale and Gargett. Journal of
Archaeological Science 32(4):643-645.

Goertz, John W.
1970

An Ecological Study of Neotoma floridana in Oklahoma. Journal of Mammalogy
51(1):94-104.

Goetze, Jim R. and Jessie Jimenez
1999

Analysis of Mammalian Remains From Barn Owl Pellets From Webb County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 51(4):344-347.

Goldschmidt, Walter
1951

Nomlaki Ethnography. University of California Publications in American
Archaeology and Ethnology 42(4):303-443.

Graham, Russell W.
1976

Pleistocene and Holocene Mammals, Taphonomy, and Paleoecology of the
Friesenhahn Cave Local Fauna, Bexar County, Texas. Unpublished PhD
dissertation (Geology), University of Texas at Austin.
1675

1987

Late Quaternary Mammalian Faunas and Paleoenvironments of the Southwestern
Plains of the United States. Pages 24-86 in Russell W. Graham, Holmes A.
Semken, Jr., and Mary A. Graham (eds.), Late Quaternary Mammalian
Biogeography and Environments of the Great Plains and Prairies. Springfield,
Illinois State Museum, Scientific Papers 22.

Graham, Russell W. and Ernest L. Lundelius, Jr.
1995

Coevolutionary Disequilibrium and Pleistocene Extinctions. Chapter 11 (pages
223-249) in Paul S. Martin and Richard G. Klein (eds.), Quaternary Extinctions.
A Prehistoric Revolution. University of Arizona Press (third printing, original
1984).

Grange, Roger T., Jr.
1980

Salvage Archeology in the Red Willow Reservoir, Nebraska. Nebraska State
Historical Society, Publications in Anthropology 9.

Grant, W. E., P. E. Carothers and L. A. Gidley
1985

Small Mammal Community Structure in the Postoak Savanna of East-Central
Texas. Journal of Mammalogy 66(3):589-594.

Grayson, Donald K.
1984

Quantitative Zooarchaeology. Topics in the Analysis of Archaeological Faunas.
Academic Press, Inc.

Green, L. M. and Frank O. Green
1974

Notes on the Archeology of the Allen Ranch Rock Shelters, Terrell County,
Texas. The Artifact 12(1):1-29.

1676

Greenwood, Raymond J.
1981

Foods of Prairie Raccoons During the Waterfowl Nesting Season. Journal of
Wildlife Management 45(3):754-760.

1982

Nocturnal Activity and Foraging of Prairie Raccoons (Procyon lotor) in North
Dakota. American Midland Naturalist 107(2):238-243.

Hadly, Elizabeth A.
1999

Fidelity of Terrestrial Vertebrate Fossils to a Modern Ecosystem.
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 149(1-4):389-409.

Hafner, David J. and Carl J. Shuster
1996

Historical Biogeography of Western Peripheral Isolates of the Least Shrew,
Cryptotis parva. Journal of Mammalogy 77(2):536-545.

Hamilton, William J. Jr.
1934

Habits of Cryptotis parva in New York. Journal of Mammalogy 15(2):154-155.

1944

The Biology of the Little Short-Tailed Shrew, Cryptotis parva. Journal of
Mammalogy 25(1):1-7.

Harper, Craig A. and David C. Guynn, Jr.
1999 Factors Affecting Salamander Density and Distribution Within Four Forest Types
in the Southern Appalachian Mountains. Forest Ecology and Management 114(23):245-252.

1677

Harrell, Lynn L.
1988

Analysis of Animal Remains. Appendix E (pages E.1 to E.37) in Craig S. Smith
and Steven D. Creasman, The Taliaferro Site. 5000 Years of Prehistory in
Southeast Wyoming. Bureau Land Management, Wyoming, Cultural Resource
Series 6.

Harris, Arthur H.
1984

Neotoma in the Late Pleistocene of New Mexico and Chihuahua. Pages 164-178
in Hugh H. Genoways and Mary R. Dawson (eds.), Contributions to Quaternary
Vertebrate Paleontology: A Volume in Memorial to John E. Guilday. Carnegie
Museum of Natural History, Special Publication 8.

2003

The Pleistocene Vertebrate Fauna From Pendejo Cave. Chapter 4 (pages37-65) in
Richard S. MacNeish and Jane G. Libby (eds.), Pendejo Cave. University of New
Mexico Press.

Harris, Edwin S.
1985

An Archaeological Study of The Timmeron Rockshelter (41 HY 95), Hays County,
South Central Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, Special
Publication 4.

Harrison, Billy R. and Kay L. Killen
1978

Lake Theo: A Stratified, Early Man Bison Butchering and Camp Site, Briscoe
County, Texas. Archeological Investigations Phase II. Canyon, Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum.

Hartman, Gregory D., John O. Whitaker, Jr. and Jack R. Munsee
2000

Diet of the Mole Scalopus aquaticus From the Coastal Plain Region of South
Carolina. The American Midland Naturalist 144(2):342-351.

1678

Harvey, Michael J.
1976

Home Range, Movements, and Diel Activity of the Eastern Mole, Scalopus
aquaticus. The American Midland Naturalist 95(2):436-445.

Hay, Lawrence K.
1951

Home Ranges of Peromyscus maniculatus and Perognathus hispidus in a
Johnson-Grass Pasture. Unpublished MA thesis, the University of Texas at
Austin.

Hays, Horace A.
1958 The Distribution and Movement of Small Mammals in Central Oklahoma.
Journal of Mammalogy 39(2):235-244.

Hedges, R. E. M.
2002

Bone Diagenesis: An Overview of Processes. Archaeometry 44(3):319-328.

Hedges, Robert E. M. and Andrew R. Millard
1995

Measurements and Relationships of Diagenetic Alteration of Bone From Three
Archaeological Sites. Journal of Archaeological Science 22(2):201-209.

Heizer, R. F.
1954

Notes on the Utah Utes by Edward Palmer, 1866-1877. Anthropological Papers
17, Department of Anthropology, University of Utah.

1679

Hellier, Jana R., D. Gentry Steele and Cristi A. Hunter
1995

Analysis of Nonhuman Vertebrate Faunal Remains. Appendix C (pages 802-828)
in Anna Jean Taylor and Cheryl Lynn Highley, Archeological Investigations at
the Loma Sandia Site (41 LK 28) A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live
Oak County, Texas. Vol. 2. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin, Studies in Archeology 20.

Henderson, Jerry
2001

Excavations at the Rainey Site (41 BN 33), A Late Prehistoric Sinkhole Site in
Bandera County, Texas. Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental
Affairs Division, Archeological Studies Program, Report 5.

Hesse, Brian
1982

Bias in the Zooarchaeological Record: Suggestions for Interpretation of Bone
Counts in Faunal Samples From the Plains. Pages 157-172 in Douglas H.
Ubelaker and Herman J. Viola (eds.), Plains Indian Studies. A Collection of
Essays in Honor of John C. Ewers and Waldo R. Wedel. Smithsonian
Contributions to Anthropology 30. Smithsonian Institution Press.

Hester, Thomas R.
1978

A Summary of the 1975 Archaeological Investigations at Chaparrosa Ranch,
Southern Texas. Pages 40-46 in Thomas R. Hester, Background to the
Archaeology of Chaparrosa Ranch, Southern Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 6.

1983

Late Paleo-Indian Occupations at Baker Cave, Southwestern Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 53:101-119.

Hill, William H.
1971

Pleistocene Snakes From a Cave in Kendall County, Texas. The Texas Journal of
Science 22(2-3):209-216.
1680

Hill, W. W.
1982

An Ethnography of Santa Clara Pueblo New Mexico. Albuquerque, University of
New Mexico Press.

Hockett, Bryan S. and Nuno F. Bicho
2000

The Rabbits of Picareiro Cave: Small Mammal Hunting During the Late Upper
Paleolithic in the Portuguese Estremadura. Journal of Archaeological Science
27(8):715-723.

Hoditschek, Barbara and Troy L. Best
1983 Reproductive Biology of Ord’s Kangaroo Rat (Dipodomys ordii) in Oklahoma.
Journal of Mammalogy 64(1):121-127.

Hoffman, Rob
1988

The Contribution of Raptorial Birds to Patterning in Small Mammal
Assemblages. Paleobiology 14(1):81-90.

Hogan, Kelly M., Morgan L. Hogan, Jennifer Gable and Martin Bray
1996

Notes on the Diet of Short-Eared Owls (Asio flammeus) in Texas. Journal of
Raptor Research 30(2):102-104.

Holloway, Richard G.
1985

Diet and Medicinal Plant Usage of a Late Archaic Population From Culberson
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:319-329.

Holomuzi, Joseph R.
1989

Predation Risk and Macroalga Use by the Stream-Dwelling Salamander
Ambystoma texanum. Copeia 1:22-28.
1681

Holman, J. Alan
1962

Late Pleistocene Amphibians and Reptiles of the Clear Creek and Ben Franklin
Local Faunas of Texas. Southern Methodist University, Journal of the Graduate
Research Center 31:152-167.

1965

A Small Pleistocene Herpetofauna From Houston, Texas. The Texas Journal of
Science 17(4):418-423.

1995

Pleistocene Amphibians and Reptiles in North America. Oxford Monographs on
Geology and Geophysics 32. Oxford University Press.

Hovey, Kevin and Dominique Rissolo
1999 The Process and Sociocultural Significance of Gopher Trapping in a Modern
Yucatec Maya. Journal of Ethnobiology 19(2):261-276.

Howell, Doug L. and Brian R. Chapman
1998

Prey Brought to Red-Shouldered Hawk Nests in the Georgia Piedmont. Journal of
Raptor Research 32(3):257-260.

Hughes, Jack T. and Patrick S. Willey
1978

Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Office of
the State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report 24.

Hulbert, Richard C. Jr.
1985 Vertebrate Faunal Remains. Pages 209-215 in Stephen L. Black and Joachim
McGraw, The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity
Within the Upper Salado Creek Watershed, South-Central Texas. Center for
Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological
Survey Report 100.

1682

Hunter, Cristi A.
1988 Analysis of Faunal Remains. Appendix III (pages 295-317) in H. Blaine Ensor
and David L. Carlson, The Crawford Site, 41 PK 69, Central Trinity River
Uplands, Polk County, Texas. State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Highway Design Division, Contract Reports in Archaeology 4.
2001

Vertebrate Faunal Remains. Chapter 13 (pages 225-236) in Donny L. Hamilton,
Prehistory of the Rustler Hills Granado Cave. University of Texas Press.

Jaksic, Fabian M.
1983 The Trophic Structure of Sympatric Assemblages of Diurnal and Nocturnal Birds
of Prey. American Midland Naturalist 109 (1):152-162.

James, Steven R.
1997

Methodological Issues Concerning Screen Size Recovery Rates and Their Effects
on Archaeofaunal Interpretations. Journal of Archaeological Science 24(5):385397.

Johnson, Clifford W.
1952

The Ecological Life History of the Packrat, Neotoma micropus, in the Brushlands
of South Texas. Unpublished MA thesis, University of Texas at Austin.

Johnson, Eileen
1987 Vertebrate Remains. Chapter 7 (pages 49-89) in Eileen Johnson (ed.), Lubbock
Lake. Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern High Plains. Texas A&M
University Press.

1683

Johnson, Eileen, Susan Baxevanis, and Sarah Willett
2002

Taphonomy of the Armstrong Vertebrate Faunal Assemblage. Appendix E (pages
229-264) in Eric A. Schroeder and Eric R. Oksanen, Data Recovery at the
Armstrong Site (41 CW 54) Caldwell County, Texas. Vol. I: Background,
Methods, and Site Context. Paul Price Associates, Inc., PPA Cultural Resources
Report No. 0284.

Jolley, Ted W., Rodney L. Honeycutt and Robert D. Bradley
2000

Phylogenetic Relationships of Pocket Gophers (Genus Geomys) Based on the
Mitochondrial 12S rRNA Gene. Journal of Mammalogy 81(4):1025-1034.

Jones, Andrew K. G.
1986

Fish Bone Survival in the Digestive Systems of the Pig, Dog and Man: Some
Experiments. Pages 53-61 in D. C. Brinkuizen and A. T. Clason (eds.), Fish and
Archaeology: Studies in Osteometry, Taphonomy, Seasonality and Fishing
Methods. BAR International Series 294. B. A. R., Oxford, England.

Jones, Volney H.
1935

Report No. 70-A (report to A. T. Jackson on identification of material from Fate
Bell Shelter), University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology, Ethnobotanical
Laboratory. Copy on file at Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.

Karges, John P.
1978

Texas Amphibians and Reptiles: Some New Distributional Records, Part II.
Herpetological Review 10(4):119-121.

Kaufman, Donald W., Glennis Kaufman and James G. Wiener
1975

Energy Equivalents for Sixteen Species of Xeric Rodents. Journal of Mammalogy
56(4):946-949.
1684

Kaufman, Donald W., Sharon K. Peterson, Richard Fristik and Glennis Kaufman
1983

Effect of Microhabitat Features on Habitat Use by Peromyscus leucopus. The
American Midland Naturalist 110(1):177-185.

Kelly, Isabel T.
1964

Southern Paiute Ethnography. Anthropological Papers 69 (Glen Canyon Series
21), Department of Anthropology, University of Utah.

Kilham, Lawrence
1954 Cow-pasture Nests of Cryptotis parva parva. Journal of Mammalogy 35(2):252.

Kincaid. W. Bradley and Guyn N. Cameron
1982

Dietary Variation in Three Sympatric Rodents on the Texas Coastal Prairie.
Journal of Mammalogy 63(4):668-672.

Klein, Richard G. and Kathryn Cruz-Uribe
1984

The Analysis of Animal Bones From Archeological Sites. University of Chicago
Press.

Koon, H. E. C., R. A. Nicholson, and M. J. Collins
2003 A Practical Approach to the Identification of Low Temperature Heated Bone
Using TEM. Journal of Archaeological Science 30(11):1393-1399.

Korschgen, Leroy J.
1958

December Food Habits of Mink in Missouri. Journal of Mammalogy 39(4):521527.
1685

Korth, William W.
1979

Taphonomy of Microvertebrate Fossil Assemblages. Annals of Carnegie Museum
48(15):235-285. Pittsburgh, Carnegie Museum of Natural History.

Kress, Margaret K.
1931

Diary of a Visit of Inspection of the Texas Missions Made by Fray Gaspar José de
Solís in the Year 1767-68. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 35(1):28-76.

Lackey, James A.
1978

Geographic Variation in Habitat Use by the White-Footed Mouse, Peromyscus
leucopus. The American Midland Naturalist 100(1):171-178.

Lake, Robert G., Jr.
1982

Chilula. People From the Ancient Redwoods. Arcata, California, Humboldt State
University.

Lando, Richard and Ruby E. Modesto
1977

Temal Wakhish: A Desert Cahuilla Village. The Journal of California
Anthropology 4(1):95-112.

Landt, Matthew J.
2004

Investigations of Human Gnawing on Small Mammal Bones: Among
Contemporary Bofi Foragers of the Central African Republic. Unpublished MA
thesis (Anthropology), Washington State University.

Langley, Albert K., Jr. and Donald J. Shure
1988

The Impact of Climatic Extremes on Cotton Rat (Sigmodon hispidus)
Populations. The American Midland Naturalist 120(1):136-143.
1686

Lapena, Frank R.
1978

Wintu. Pages 324-340 in Robert F. Heizer (volume editor), Handbook of North
American Indians, Vol. 8, California.

Lay, Daniel W. and Rollin H. Baker
1938

Notes on the Home Range and Ecology of the Attwater Wood Rat. Journal of
Mammalogy 19(4):418-423.

Lewis, C. R.
n.d.

A Human Hunting and Fishing Camp in Texas With Mammoth and Pleistocene
Megafauna and Microfauna Dating From the Wisconsin Glacial Maximum of
18,000 Yr BP. Unpublished manuscript (October 1996, 20 pages) on file with the
author.

1988

A Possible 18,000-Year-Old Hunting and Fishing Camp on the Texas Coastal
Plain. Current Research in the Pleistocene 5:15-16.

Linse, Angela and James H. Burton
1990

Bone Solubility and Preservation in Alkaline Depositional Conditions.
Unpublished paper (11 pages) presented at the 55th Annual Meeting of the Society
for American Archaeology, Las Vegas.

López-González, Fernando, Aurora Grandal-d’Anglade and Juan R. Vidal-Romaní
2006 Deciphering Bone Depositional Sequences in Caves Through the Study of
Manganese Coatings. Journal of Archaeological Sciences 33(5):707-717.

1687

Lord, Kenneth J.
1981

Identification of Faunal Remains. Appendix IV (pages 420-432) in Grant D. Hall,
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River
Valley, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin,
Research Report 61.

1984

The Zooarchaeology of Hinds Cave (41 VV 456). Department of Anthropology,
Texas A&M University (distributed version of PhD dissertation, University of
Texas at Austin).

Lorrain, Dessamae
1966

Bonfire Shelter Fauna. Pages 221-226 in Dee Ann Story and Vaughn M. Bryant,
Jr. (assemblers), A Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad
Reservoir Area. Final Report of Research Under the Auspices of the National
Science Foundation (GS-667).

Lowery, George H. Jr.
1974

The Mammals of Louisiana and Its Adjacent Waters. Louisiana State University
Press.

Lowie, Robert H.
1924

Notes on Shoshonean Ethnography. American Museum of Natural History,
Anthropological Papers 20(3).

Lubinski, Patrick M.
2003

Rabbit Hunting and Bone Bead Production at a Late Prehistoric Camp in the
Wyoming Basin. North American Archaeologist 24(3):197-214.

1688

Lundelius, Ernest L., Jr.
1962 Appendix 2: Nonhuman Skeletal Material From the Kyle Site. Pages 111-112 in
Edward B. Jelks, The Kyle Site. A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill
County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin,
Archeology Series 5.
1972

Fossil Vertebrates From the Late Pleistocene Ingleside Fauna, San Patricio
County, Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas at Austin,
Report of Investigations 77.

1979

Post-Pleistocene Mammals From Pratt Cave and Their Environmental
Significance. Pages 239-258 in H. H. Genoways and R. J. Baker (eds.), Biological
Investigations in the Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas. National Park
Service, Proceedings and Transactions 4.

1984 A Late Pleistocene Mammalian Fauna From Cueva Quebrada, Val Verde County,
Texas. Pages 456-481 in Hugh H. Genoways and Mary R. Dawson (eds.),
Contributions in Quaternary Vertebrate Paleontology: A Volume in Memorial to
John E. Guilday. Carnegie Museum of Natural History, Special Publication No.
8.
1992

The Avenue Local Fauna, Late Pleistocene Vertebrates From Terrace Deposits at
Austin, Texas. Annales Zoologici Fennici 28:329-340.

Lyman, R. Lee
1994

Vertebrate Taphonomy. Cambridge University Press.

Lyman, R. Lee and Gregory L. Fox
1989

A Critical Evaluation of Bone Weathering as an Indication of Bone Assemblage
Formation. Journal of Archaeological Science 16(3):293-317.

Lyman, R. Lee, Emma Power and R. Jay Lyman
2003 Quantification and Sampling of Faunal Remains in Owl Pellets. Journal of
Taphonomy 1(1):3-14.
1689

Lynott, Mark J.
1980

Hypothesis Testing and Historic Preservation at Bear Creek Shelter, Hill County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 51:209-241.

McCarley, Howard
1952

The Ecological Relationships of the Mammals of Bryan County, Oklahoma. The
Texas Journal of Science 4(1):102-112.

1959

The Mammals of Eastern Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 11(4):385-426.

McClure, W. L.
1987

Snakes of Allens Creek Sites. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 88:910.

1989 The Vertebrates of 41 FB 32. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society
93:15-21.
1997

The Vertebrates of 41 CH 161, Second Season. Houston Archeological Society
Journal 119:19-22.

McCoig, G. M.
1983

Population Dynamics and Habitat Utilization by Dipodomys compactus in a
Beach Community on North Padre Island National Seashore. Unpublished MS
thesis, Southwest Texas State University.

McCulloch, Clay Y.
1961

Age Classification and Weight Variations of Ord’s Kangaroo Rat on the Southern
Great Plains. The Southwestern Naturalist 6(3-4):149-155.

1690

McCulloch, C. Y. and J. M. Inglis
1961

Breeding Periods of the Ord Kangaroo Rat. Journal of Mammalogy 42(3):337344.

McDonald, Jerry
1974

Non-Human Bones From the Loeve-Fox Site: A Preliminary Report. Appendix II
(pages 132-134) in Elton R. Prewitt, Archeological Investigations at the LoeveFox Site, Williamson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University
of Texas at Austin, Research Report 49.

McGuff, Paul R. and Billy Davidson
1978

Faunal Data From Sites Excavated During the 1974 Season at Palmetto Bend.
Appendix II (pages 216-232) in Paul R. McGuff, Prehistoric Archeological
Investigations at Palmetto Bend Reservoir: Phase I. Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin, Research Report 58; Palmetto Bend Reservoir
Series Vol. 3.

McKennan, Robert
1935 Hunting. Pages 61-70 in A. L. Kroeber (ed.), Walapai Ethnography. Memoirs of
the American Anthropological Association 42.

McKey, Doyle B. and Charles A. Fischer
1972

Notes on Food Habits of White-Tailed Kite (Elanus leucurus) in Jackson County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Ornithological Society 5(1):10.

McLendon, Sally
1977

Ethnographic and Historical Sketch of the Eastern Pomo and Their Neighbors, the
Southeastern Pomo. Contributions of the University of California Archaeological
Research Facility 37. Berkeley, University of California, Department of
Anthropology.
1691

McWilliams, Scott R. and Marilyn D. Bachmann
1988 Using Life History and Ecology as Tools to Manage a Threatened Salamander
Species. Journal of the Iowa Academy of Science 95(2):66-71.

Mabie, David W., M. Todd Merendino, and David H. Reid
1995

Prey of Nesting Bald Eagles in Texas. Journal of Raptor Research 29(1):10-14.

Malkin, Borys
1958

Cora Ethnozoology, Herpetological Knowledge; A Bio-Ecological and Cross
Cultural Approach. Anthropological Quarterly 31(3):73-90.

1962

Seri Ethnozoology. Occasional Papers of the Idaho State College Museum 7.
Pocatello, Idaho.

Mandelbaum, David G.
1979

The Plains Cree. An Ethnographic, Historical, and Comparative Study. Canadian
Plains Studies 9, Canadian Plains Research Center, University of Regina.

Mankin, Philip C. and Lowell L. Getz
1994

Burrow Morphology as Related to Social Organization of Microtus ochrogaster.
Journal of Mammalogy 75(2):492-499.

Marchbanks, Michael L.
1989

Lipid analysis in Archaeology: An Initial Study of Ceramics and Subsistence at
the George C. Davis Site. Unpublished MA thesis, University of Texas at Austin.

1991

Berger Bluff: Soil Lipid Analysis. A Preliminary Report. Unpublished manuscript
(5 pages, no pagination) on file with the author.
1692

Marsh, David C.
1964

Some Insects and Vertebrates Recovered From the Coprolites of Prehistoric
Indians of Southwestern Tamaulipas, Mexico. Unpublished MS thesis
(Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology), McGill University, Montreal.

Marshall, Fiona and Tom Pilgram
1993

NISP vs. MNI in Quantification of Body-Part Representation. American Antiquity
58(2):261-269.

Marti, Carl D.
1976

A Review of Prey Selection by the Long-Eared Owl. Condor 78(3):331-336.

Martin, Robert A.
1968

Further Study of the Friesenhahn Cave Peromyscus. The Southwestern Naturalist
13(3):253-266.

Mauk, Charlene L., Marilyn A. Houck and Robert D. Bradley
1999

Morphometric Analysis of Seven Species of Pocket Gophers (Geomys). Journal
of Mammalogy 80(2):499-511.

Mayhew, David F.
1977

Avian Predators as Accumulators of Fossil Mammal Material. Boreas 6(1):25-31.

Merkelz, Robert and Sara F. Kerr
2002

Demographics, Den Use, Movements, and Absence of Leishmania mexicana in
Southern Plains Woodrats (Neotoma micropus). The Southwestern Naturalist
47(1):70-77.
1693

Michelsen, Ralph C.
1967

Pecked Metates of Baja California. The Masterkey 41(2):73-77.

Millard, Andrew R. and Robert E. M. Hedges
1995 The Role of the Environment in Uranium Uptake by Buried Bone. Journal of
Archaeological Science 22(2):239-250.

Miller, Michael S., Kenneth R. Wilson and Douglas C. Andersen
2003

Ord’s Kangaroo Rats Living in Floodplain habitats: Factors Contribution to
Habitat Attraction. The Southwestern Naturalist 48(3):411-418.

Minton, Sherman A. Jr.
1972

Amphibians and Reptiles of Indiana. Monograph 3, Indiana Academy of Science,
Indianapolis.

Moisés, Rosalio, Jane H. Kelley, and William C. Holden
1971

A Yaqui Life. The Personal Chronicle of a Yaqui Indian. University of Nebraska
Press.

Moodie, Kevin B. and Thomas R. Van Devender
1979

Extinction and Extirpation in the Herpetofauna of the Southern High Plains With
Emphasis on Geochelone wilsoni (Testudinidae). Herpetologica 35(3):198-206.

Mook, Maurice A.
1935

Animal Foods. Pages 70-76 in A. L. Kroeber (ed.), Walapai Ethnography. By
Fred Kniffen, Gordon MacGregor, Robert McKennan, Scudder Mekeel and
Maurice Mook. American Anthropological Association, Memoir 42.
1694

Moon, Eugene L.
1940

Notes on Hawk and Owl Pellet Formation and Identification. Transactions of the
Kansas Academy of Science 43:457-466.

Morlan, Richard E.
1994

Rodent Bones in Archaeological Sites. Canadian Journal of Archaeology 18:135142.

Mulcahy, Daniel G. and Joseph R. Mendelson III
2000

Phylogeography and Speciation of the Morphologically Variable, Widespread
Species Bufo valliceps, Based on Molecular Evidence From mtDNA. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 17(2):173-189.

Murphy, Melvin F.
1952

Ecology and Helminths of the Osage Wood Rat, Neotoma floridana osagensis,
Including the Description of Longistriata neotoma n. sp. (Trichostrongylidae). The
American Midland Naturalist 48(1):204-218.

Murray, Scott, Scott Jinnette, and Frank Moseley
1976

Aquatic Ecology, Coleto Creek Project. Unpublished report prepared for Central
Power and Light Company. Copy on file with the author (used with permission).

Muths, Erin
1998

An Observation on Caching of Prey by a Long-Tailed Weasel (Mustela frenata).
The Southwestern Naturalist 43(1):106.

1695

Nagaoka, Lisa
2005

Differential Recovery of Pacific Island Fish Remains. Journal of Archaeological
Science 32(6):941-955.

Nash, Michael A., Robert M. Rogers, James R. Malmros, Eric Morley and Patricia E.
McCoy
2002

National Register Testing of Site 41 CL 76, Calhoun County, Texas. PBS&J
Document No. 991348.

Nash, Sean R.
2001

The Buckner Ranch Site (41 BE 2): A Re-Examination of the Data From the
1938-1941 Texas Memorial Museum Investigations. Unpublished MA thesis,
University of Texas at Austin.

Neck, Raymond W.
1981

Probable Native Population of Bullfrog, Rana catesbeiana, in South Texas.
Herpetological Review 12(2):68.

Nicholson, Rebecca A.
1996

Bone Degradation, Burial Medium and Species Representation: Debunking the
Myths, an Experiment-Based Approach. Journal of Archaeological Science
23(4):513-533.

Nielsen-Marsh, Christina M.
2000 Patterns of Diagenesis in Bone I: The Effects of Site Environments. Journal of
Archaeological Science 27(12):1139-1150.

1696

Noren, Carl R.
1941

A Preliminary Study of the Eastern Raccoon, Procyon lotor lotor (Linnaeus), in
Missouri: Population, Denning, and Food-Habits. Unpublished MA thesis,
University of Missouri.

O’Laughlin, Thomas C.
1977

Excavation of Two Caves in the Mountain Zone of Fort Bliss Maneuver Area II.
Appendix C (pages 169-189) in Michael E. Whalen, Settlement Patterns of the
Eastern Hueco Bolson. University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso Centennial
Museum, Publications in Anthropology 4.

O’Neal, Patrick R. and Donald W. Kaufman
2004 Eastern Moles on the Konza Prairie Biological Station. Transactions of the
Kansas Academy of Science 107(1/2):93-96.

Och, Joseph (Theodore E. Tretlein, translator, annotator)
1965

Missionary in Sonora. The Travel Reports of Joseph Och, S. J. 1755-1767. San
Francisco, California Historical Society.

Olendorff, Richard R.
1976 The Food Habits of North American Golden Eagles. The American Midland
Naturalist 95(1):231-236.

Otteni, Lee C.
1971

Predator-Prey Relationships and Reproduction of the Barn Owl in Southern
Texas. Unpublished MS thesis (Range Science), Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

1697

Page, L. Kristen, Robert K. Swihart and Kevin R. Kazacos
1998 Raccoon Latrine Structure and Its Potential Role in Transmission of Baylisascaris
procyonis to Vertebrates. American Midland Naturalist 140(1):180-185.
2001

Seed Preferences and Foraging by Granivores at Raccoon Latrines in the
Transmission Dynamics of the Raccoon Roundworm (Baylisascaris procyonis).
Canadian Journal of Zoology 79(4):616-622.

Parker, Melissa L. and Michael I. Goldstein
2004

Diet of the Rio Grande Leopard Frog (Rana berlandieri) in Texas. Journal of
Herpetology 38(1):127-130.

Parmalee, Paul W.
1975 Mole Food? Tennessee Archaeologist 31(1):37-40.

Parmalee, Paul W. and Anthony F. Opperman
1983

Animal Remains From the Williams Site, Red River County, Texas. Appendix A
(pages 79-84) in Gregory Perino, Archaeological Research at the Bob Williams
Site (41 RR 16), Red River County, Texas. Idabel, Museum of the Red River.

Parmley, Dennis
1990

Late Pleistocene Snakes From Fowlkes Cave, Culberson County, Texas. Journal
of Herpetology 24(3):266-274.

Parmley, Dennis and Russell S. Pfau
1997

Amphibians and Reptiles of the Late Pleistocene Tonk Creek Local Fauna,
Stonewall County, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 49(2):151-158.

1698

Paulson, Deborah D.
1988 Chaetodipus hispidus.
Mammalogists.

Mammalian

Species

320.

American

Society

of

Pennington, Campbell W.
1969

The Tepehuan of Chihuahua. Their Material Culture. Salt Lake City, University
of Utah Press.

1980

The Material Culture The Pima Bajo of Central Sonora, Mexico. Volume 1. Salt
Lake City, University of Utah Press.

Peter, Duane E. and Daniel E. McGregor
1988

Site 41 DL 148: The Cobb-Pool Site. Chapter 9 (pages 131-198) in Duane E.
Peter and Daniel E. McGregor, Late Holocene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek
Drainage. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and
Man, Southern Methodist University, Joe Pool Lake Archaeological Project,
Volume I.

Peterson, C. Bernard
1936

Cryptotis parva in Western New York. Journal of Mammalogy 17(3):284-285.

Petranka, James W.
1983

Fish Predation: A Factor Affecting the Spatial Distribution of a Stream-Breeding
Salamander. Copeia 3:624-628.

Pettus, D. and R. M. Robinson
1957

Records of the Deer Mouse on the Gulf Coastal Plain. Journal of Mammalogy
38(3):416-417.

1699

Pfefferkorn, Ignaz
1949

Sonora. A Description of the Province. Albuquerque, University of New Mexico
Press (translated and annotated by Theodore E. Treutlein from original 1794
edition, Beschreibung der Landschaft Sonora).

Pfingsten, Ralph A. and Floyd L. Downs (eds.)
1989

Salamanders of Ohio. Columbus, College of Biological Sciences, Ohio State
University and Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife.

Pinto Llona, Ana Cristina and Peter J. Andrews
1999

Amphibian Taphonomy and Its Application to the Fossil Record of Dolina
(Middle Pleistocene, Atapuerca, Spain). Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
Palaeoecology 149(1-4):411-429.

Polderboer, Emmett B., Lee W. Kuhn, and George O. Hendrickson
1941

Winter and Spring Habits of Weasels in Central Iowa. Journal of Wildlife
Management 5(1):115-119.

Porter, Linda S. W.
1976

Pleistocene Pluvial Climates as Indicated by Present Day Climatic Parameters of
Cryptotis parva and Microtus mexicanus. Unpublished MS thesis (Biological
Sciences), The University of Texas at El Paso

Pough, F. Harvey
1980

The Advantages of Ectothermy for Tetrapods. The American Naturalist
115(1):92-111.

1700

Presley, Anna L.
2003 Antiquity and Paleoenvironment of the Tamaulipan Biotic Province of Southern
Texas: The Zooarchaeological Perspective. Unpublished MA thesis
(Anthropology), Texas A&M University.

Price, Mary V. and Nickolas M. Waser
1985

Microhabitat Use by Heteromyid Rodents: Effects of Artificial Seed Patches.
Ecology 66(1):211-219.

Proudfoot, Glenn A., Sam L. Beasom and Felipe Chavez-Ramirez
1999

Biology of Ferruginous Pygmy-Owls in Texas and Application of Artificial Nest
Structures. Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research Institute, Texas A&M UniversityKingsville, Management Bulletin No. 5.

Quick, Horace F.
1951

Notes on the Ecology of Weasels in Gunnison County, Colorado. Journal of
Mammalogy 32(3):281-290.

Ramsey, Paul R. and Curtis J. Carley
1970

Additions to the Known Range and Ecology of Three Species of Dipodomys. The
Southwestern Naturalist 14(3):351-353.

Randolph, J. C., Guy N. Cameron and John A. Wrazen
1991

Dietary Choice of a Generalist Grassland Herbivore, Sigmodon hispidus. Journal
of Mammalogy 72(2):300-313.

1701

Raun, Gerald G.
1959

Terrestrial and Aquatic Vertebrates of a Moist, Relict Area in Central Texas. The
Texas Journal of Science 11(2):158-171.

1960

Barn Owl Pellets and Small Mammal Populations Near Mathis, Texas, in 1956
and 1959. The Southwestern Naturalist 5(4):194-200.

1966

A Population of Woodrats (Neotoma micropus) in Southern Texas. Texas
Memorial Museum, Bulletin 11. Welder Wildlife Foundation Contribution, Series
B, No. 4.

Raun, Gerald G. and Harold E. Laughlin
1972

Sub-Recent Vertebrate Remains From a Site in Southern Texas With Comments
on Microtus (Pedomys) ludovicianus. The Southwestern Naturalist 16(3-4):436439.

Rawn-Schatzinger, Viola
1981

Faunal Analysis. Appendix VII (pages 391-409) in D. William Day, Jane
Laurens-Day and Elton R. Prewitt, Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments
in Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Reports of Investigations 15.

Rea, Amadeo M.
1998

Folk Mammalogy of the Northern Pimans. University of Arizona Press.

Rebar, Cindy and Walt Conley
1983

Interactions in Microhabitat Use Between Dipodomys ordii and Onychomys
leucogaster. Ecology 64(5):984-988.

1702

Reynoso, Víctor-Hugo and Marisol Montellano-Ballesteros
2004 A New Giant Turtle of the Genus Gopherus (Chelonia: Testudinidae) From the
Pleistocene of Tamaulipas, México, and a Review of the Phylogeny and
Biogeography of Gopher Tortoises. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology
24(4):822-837.

Rhodin, Anders G. J.
1992

Chelonian Zooarchaeology of Eastern New England: Turtle Bone Remains From
Cedar Swamp and Other Prehistoric Sites. Bulletin of the Massachusetts
Archaeological Society 53(1):21-30.

Roberts, S. J., C. I. Smith, A. Millard and M. J. Collins
2002

The Taphonomy of Cooked Bone: Characterizing Boiling and its PhysicoChemical Effects. Archaeometry 44(3):485-494.

Romer, Alfred S.
1956

Osteology of the Reptiles. University of Chicago Press.

Rosenberg, Robert
1985

The Mammalian Fauna of Seminole Sink. Appendix I (pages 197-210) in Solveig
A. Turpin (compiler), Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical Shaft Tomb, Val
Verde County, Texas. The University of Texas at Austin, Texas Archeological
Survey, Research Report 93.

Ross, David A.
1989

Amphibians and Reptiles in the Diets of North American Raptors. Wisconsin
Endangered Resources Report 59. Bureau of Endangered Resources, Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources, Madison (33 pp.).

1703

Ruffer, David G.
1964

Studies on the Ethology of the Northern Grasshopper Mouse (Onychomys
leucogaster). Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Oklahoma.

Russell, Frank
1908

The Pima Indians. Twenty-Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, 1904-1905.
Washington, Government Printing Office.

Sagebiel, James C.
1998 Late Pleistocene Fauna and Environment at Zesch Cave, Mason County, Texas.
Unpublished MS thesis (Geology), University of Texas at Austin.

Satorius-Fox, Marsha R.
1982

Paleoecological Analysis of Micromammals From the Schmidt Site, A Central
Plains Tradition Village in Howard County, Nebraska. Technical Report 82-13,
Division of Archeological Research, Department of Anthropology, University of
Nebraska.

Scheck, Stephen H.
1982 A Comparison of Thermoregulation and Evaporative Water Loss in the Hispid
Cotton Rat, Sigmodon hispidus texianus, From Northern Kansas and SouthCentral Texas. Ecology 63(2):361-369.

Schmidly, David J.
1983

Texas Mammals East of the Balcones Fault Zone. College Station, Texas A&M
University Press.

2004

The Mammals of Texas. Revised Edition. Corrie Herring Hooks Series 59.
University of Texas Press.
1704

Schnell, Gary D., Robert D. Owen, Ronald K. Chesser and Paul G. Risser
1980

Populations of Small Mammals in North-Central Oklahoma. The Southwestern
Naturalist 25(1):67-80.

Schulte-Hostedde, A. I., J. S. Millar and G. J. Hickling
2001

Evaluating Body Condition in Small Mammals. Canadian Journal of Zoology
79:1021-1029.

Schultz, Gerald E. and Viola M. Rawn
1978

Faunal Remains From the Deadman’s Shelter. Pages 191-198 in Jack T. Hughes
and Patrick S. Willey, Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical
Commission, Office of the State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report 24.

Schwartz, Charles W. and Elizabeth R. Schwartz
1981

The Wild Mammals of Missouri. Revised edition, University of Missouri Press
and Missouri Department of Conservation.

Scott, Susan L. and Joel Dukes
2002

Vertebrate Fauna. Chapter 11 (pages 583-644) in Richard A. Weinstein (ed.),
Archaeological Investigations at the Guadalupe Bay Site (41 CL 2): Late Archaic
Through Historic Occupation Along the Channel to Victoria, Calhoun County,
Texas. Vol. II. Coastal Environments, Inc.

Semken, Holmes A. and Steven C. Wallace
2002

Key to Arvicoline (“Microtine” Rodents) and Arvicoline-Like Lower First Molars
Recovered From Late Wisconsinan and Holocene Archeological and
Paleontological Sites in Eastern North America. Journal of Archaeological
Science 29(1):23-31.

1705

Shaffer, Brian S.
n.d.

Analysis of the Vertebrate Faunal Remains Recovered From the Burris Site, 41
VT 66, Victoria County, Texas. Unpublished manuscript (May 25, 1988) on file
with the author.

1988

Late Prehistoric Faunal Subsistence on the South Texas Plains: Analysis of the
Vertebrate Faunal Remains From 41 VT 66, Victoria County. Plains
Anthropologist 34-124(Part 1):171-178.

1992a Quarter-Inch Screening: Understanding Biases in Recovery of Vertebrate Faunal
Remains. American Antiquity 57(1):129-136.
1992b Interpretation of Gopher Remains From Southwestern
Assemblages. American Antiquity 57(4):683-691.

Archaeological

1995 Faunal Analysis of the Vertebrate Remains From 41 CH 70, 41 CH 252, 41 CH
357, and 41 LB 4, Wallisville Lake Project, Southeast Texas. Appendix E in H.
Blaine Ensor, Archeological Test Excavations at Four Shell Midden Sites in the
Wallisville Lake Project Area, Chambers and Liberty Counties, Texas. GeoMarine, Inc., Wallisville Lake Project Technical Series, Reports of Investigations
2.

Shaffer, Brian S. and Barry W. Baker
1999

Comments on James’ Methodological Issues Concerning Screen Size Recovery
Rates and Screen Size Correction Factors. Journal of Archaeological Science
26(9):1181-1182.

Shaffer, Brian S. and Julia L. J. Sanchez
1994

Comparison of 1/8”- and 1/4”-Mesh Recovery of Controlled Samples of Small-toMedium-Sized Mammals. American Antiquity 59(3):525-530.

Shahack-Gross, Ruth
1997

Black-Coloured Bones in Hayonim Cave, Israel: Differentiating Between Burning
and Oxide Staining. Journal of Archaeological Science 24(5):439-446.

1706

Sheffield, Steven R. and Howard H. Thomas
1997

Mustela frenata. Mammalian Species 570. American Society of Mammalogists.

Shipman, Pat
1981

Life History of a Fossil. An Introduction to Taphonomy and Paleoecology.
Harvard University Press.

Shipman, Pat, Giraud Foster and Margaret Schoeninger
1984 Burnt Bones and Teeth: An Experimental Study of Color, Morphology, Crystal
Structure and Shrinkage. Journal of Archaeological Science 11(4):307-325.

Simonetti, Javier A. and Luis E. Cornejo
1991

Archaeological Evidence of Rodent Consumption in Central Chile. Latin
American Antiquity 2(1):92-96.

Simpson, J. H.
1876

Report of Explorations Across the Great Basin of the Territory of Utah for a
Direct Wagon-Route From Camp Floyd to Genoa, in Carson Valley, in 1859.
Engineer Department, U.S. Army. Washington, Government Printing Office.

Skelton, Duford W.
1981

A Reconnaissance and Assessment of the Prehistoric Resource. Pages 1-103 in
Duford W. Skelton, Martha A. Freeman, Nancy K. Smiley, John D. Pigott, and
David S. Dibble, A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of Dona Ana
Range, New Mexico. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 69,
University of Texas at Austin.

1707

Skinner, Alanson
1913

Notes on the Florida Seminole. American Anthropologist 15:63-77.

Smith, Anne M.
1974

Ethnography of the Northern Utes. Papers in Anthropology 17. Museum of New
Mexico Press.

Smith, Charles R. and Milo E. Richmond
1972

Factors Influencing Pellet Egestion and Gastric pH in the Barn Owl. The Wilson
Bulletin 84(2):179-186.

Smith, Clinton L. and Jefferson D. Smith
1977

The Boy Captives. Garland Library (reprint of original Frontier Times edition, J.
Marvin Hunter, publisher).

Smith, H. Duane, Gary H. Richins and Clive D. Jorgensen
1978 Growth of Dipodomys ordii (Rodentia: Heteromyidae). Great Basin Naturalist
38(2):215-221.

Smith, Herman
1986

Prehistoric Settlement and Subsistence Patterns of the Baffin Bay Area of the
Lower Texas Coast. Unpublished PhD dissertation (Anthropology), Southern
Methodist University.

Smith, Hobart M.
1934

The Amphibians of Kansas. The American Midland Naturalist 15(4):377-527.
1708

Smith, Philip W.
1961

The Amphibians and Reptiles of Illinois. Illinois Natural History Survey Bulletin
28(1).

Smith, Richard A., Michael L. Kennedy and George D. Baumgardner
1987 Food Habits of the Raccoon (Procyon lotor) at Land Between the Lakes. Journal
of the Tennessee Academy of Science 62(3):79-82.

Smoke, Naomi D. and Peter W. Stahl
2004

Post-Burial Fragmentation of Microvertebrate
Archaeological Science 31(8):1093-1100.

Skeletons.

Journal

of

Sobolik, Kristin D.
1988

Prehistoric Diet and Subsistence in the Lower Pecos as Reflected in Coprolites
From Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Unpublished version of MA thesis,
Texas A&M University, College Station (has some illustrations not reproduced in
the published version).

1996 Lithic Organic Residue Analysis: An Example From the Southwestern Archaic.
Journal of Field Archaeology 23(4):461-469.
1993

Direct Evidence for the Importance of Small Animals to Prehistoric Diets: A
Review of Coprolite Studies. North American Archaeologist 14(3):227-244.

Sparkman Philip S.
1908 The Culture of the Luiseño Indians. University of California Publications in
American Archaeology and Ethnology 8(4):187-234.

1709

Speth, John D.
2000

Boiling vs. Baking and Roasting: A Taphonomic Approach to the Recognition of
Cooking Techniques in Small Mammals. Chapter 10 (pages 89-105) in Peter
Rowley-Conwy (ed.), Animal Bones, Human Societies. Oxbow Books.

Stahl, Peter W.
1982

On Small Mammal Remains in Archaeological Context. American Antiquity
47(4):822-829.

Stangl, Frederick B., Jr., Jim R. Goetze and Kimberly D. Spradling
2004 Historical Zoogeography and Taxonomic Status of the Prairie Vole (Microtus
ochrogaster) From the Southern Plains of Texas and Oklahoma. Texas Tech
University, Occasional Papers 235.

Steele, D. Gentry
1986

Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains. pages 108-136 in Stephen L. Black, The
Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site, 41 JW 8: A Toyah Horizon Campsite in
Southern Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio, Special Report 18.

Steele, D. Gentry and Cristi Assad Hunter
1986

Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains From 41 MC 222 and 41 MC 296,
McMullen County, Texas. Appendix III (pages 452-502) in Grant D. Hall,
Thomas R. Hester, and Stephen L. Black, The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archeological Investigations.
Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Choke
Canyon Series, Vol. 10.

1710

Steele, D. Gentry and E. R. Mokry, Jr.
1985

Archeological Investigations of Seven Prehistoric Sites Along Oso Creek, Nueces
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:287-308.

Steele, D. Gentry, Anna L. Presley, David L. Carlson, Laurie S. Zimmerman and Bryan
Mason
1999

Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains From Six Archeological Sites in Calhoun
and Victoria Counties – 41 CL 9, 41 CL 70, 41 CL 75, 41 CL 77, 41 CL 78 and
41 VT 103. Appendix D (pages 305-341) in E. Frances Gadus, Marie E. Blake,
Martha D. Freeman and Karl Kibler, National Register Testing of Prehistoric and
Historic Sites and Survey of Placement Areas, Channel to Victoria, Calhoun and
Victoria Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations
121.

Stevenson, James O. and Logan H. Meitzen
1946

Behavior and Food Habits of Sennett’s White-Tailed Hawk in Texas. The Wilson
Bulletin 58(4):198-205.

Stevenson, Matilda C.
1894

The Sia. Pages 9-157 in J. W. Powell, Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution 1889-’90. Washington,
Government Printing Office.

Steward, Julian H.
1933

Ethnography of the Owens Valley Paiute. University of California Publications in
American Archaeology and Ethnology 33(3):233-350.

Stewart, Kenneth M.
1947

Mohave Hunting. The Masterkey 21(3):80-84.
1711

1968

Culinary Practices of the Mohave Indians. El Palacio 75(1):26-37.

Stiner, Mary C.
1994

Honor Among Thieves. A Zooarchaeological Study of Neanderthal Ecology.
Princeton University Press.

Stiner, Mary C., Steven L. Kuhn, Stephen Weiner and Ofer Bar-Yosef
1995

Differential Burning, Recrystallization, and Fragmentation of Archaeological
Bone. Journal of Archaeological Science 22(2):223-237.

Stock, Janet A.
1983

The Prehistoric Diet of Hinds Cave (41 VV 456), Val Verde County, Texas: The
Coprolite Evidence. Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
College Station (published version of MA thesis).

Stockrahm, Donna M. B., Lowell E. Schmitz, Jacquie R. Gerads, Denise E. W. Canfield
and Kari L. Andrew
1995 Ecology of the Northern Grasshopper Mouse (Onychomys leucogaster) and
Prairie Vole (Microtus ochrogaster) in Clay County, Minnesota. Conservation
Biology Research Grants Program, Division of Ecological Services, Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources.

Story, Dee Ann
1968

Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites. State
Building Commission Archeological Program, Report 13.

Sturges, Franklin W.
1955

Weasel Preys on Larval Salamander. Journal of Mammalogy 36(4):567-568.
1712

Suchecki, John R., Donald C. Ruthven III, Charles F. Fulhorst and Robert D. Bradley
2004

Natural History of the Southern Plains Woodrat Neotoma micropus (Rodentia:
Muridae) From Southern Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 56(2):131-140.

Suhm, Raymond W.
1980

The La Paloma Mammoth Site, Kenedy County, Texas. Pages 79-99 in Lynn
Highley and Thomas R. Hester (eds.), Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas
Coast. Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio,
Special Report 11.

Sutton, Mark Q.
1993

Midden and Coprolite Derived Subsistence Evidence: An Analysis of Data From
the La Quinta Site, Salton Basin, California. Journal of Ethnobiology 13(1):1-15.

Tate, William H., Jr.
1970

Movements of Neotoma floridana attwateri in Brazos County, Texas.
Unpublished MS thesis, Texas A&M University.

Terry, Rebecca C.
2004

Owl Pellet Taphonomy: A Preliminary Study of the Post-Regurgitation
Taphonomic History of Pellets in a Temperate Forest. Palaios 19(5):497-506.

Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
n.d.

Guadalupe River Delta Birds (10 page pamphlet for public distribution).

Thies, Randall M.
1990

The Archeology of the Stigenwalt Site, 14 LT 351. Kansas State Historical
Society, Contract Archeology Series, Publication 7.
1713

Thomas, David H.
1969

Great Basin Hunting Patterns: A Quantitative Method for Treating Faunal
Remains. American Antiquity 34(4):392-401.

1985

The Archaeology of Hidden Cave, Nevada. American Museum of Natural History,
Anthropological Papers 61(Part 1).

Thornton, Okla W., Jr. and J. R. Smith
1995

Late Prehistoric Snakes of E. V. Spence and O. H. Ivie Reservoir Basins of Coke,
Coleman, Concho, and Runnels Counties, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
47(4):295-307.

Toomey, Rickard S.
1993

Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal and Environmental Changes at Hall’s
Cave, Kerr County, Texas. Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Texas at
Austin.

Trippel, Eugene J.
1889

The Yuma Indians. The Overland Monthly (second series) 13:561-584 (first of
two parts). San Francisco, A. Roman and Company.

Trueman, C. N. and D. M. Martill
2002

The Long-Term Survival of Bone: The Role of Bioerosion. Archaeometry
44(3):371-382.

Trueman, Clive N. G., Anna K. Behrensmeyer, Noreen Tuross and Steve Weiner
2004

Mineralogical and Compositional Changes in Bones Exposed on Soil Surfaces in
Amboseli National Park, Kenya: Diagenetic Mechanisms and the Role of
Sediment Pore Fluids. Journal of Archaeological Science 31(6):721-739.
1714

Tucker, John K., Nirvana I. Filoramo and Frederic J. Janzen
1999 Size-Biased Mortality Due to Predation in a Nesting Freshwater Turtle,
Trachemys scripta. The American Midland Naturalist 141(1):198-203.

Turney-High, Harry H.
1941

Ethnography of the Kutenai. Memoirs of the American Anthropological
Association 56. Supplement, American Anthropologist 43(2), Part 2.

Turpin, Solveig A., Maciej Henneberg and David H. Riskind
1986

Late Archaic Mortuary Practices of the Lower Pecos River Region, Southwest
Texas. Plains Anthropologist 31-114 (Part 1):295-315.

Vale, Deborah and Robert H. Gargett
2002

Size Matters: 3-mm Sieves Do Not Increase Richness in a Fishbone Assemblage
From Arrawarra I, an Aboriginal Australian Shell Midden on the Mid-North
Coast of New South Wales, Australia. Journal of Archaeological Science
29(1):57-63.

Van Devender, Thomas R. and Richard D. Worthington
1977

The Herpetofauna of Howell’s Ridge Cave and the Paleoecology of the
Northwestern Chihuahuan Desert. Pages 85-113 in Roland H. Wauer and David
H. Riskind (eds.), Transactions of the Symposium on the Biological Resources of
the Chihuahuan Desert Region United States and Mexico. U. S. Department of
the Interior, Transactions and Proceedings Series 3.

Vermersch, Thomas G.
1992

Lizards and Turtles of South-Central Texas. Eakin Press, Austin.

1715

Vermersch, Thomas G. and Robert E. Kuntz
1986

Snakes of South-Central Texas. Eakin Press, Austin.

Walker, Danny N.
1975

A Cultural and Ecological Analysis of the Vertebrate Fauna From the Medicine
Lodge Creek Site (48 BH 499). Unpublished MA thesis, University of Wyoming.

Walker, Phillip L. and Jeffrey C. Long
1977

An Experimental Study of the Morphological Characteristics of Tool Marks.
American Antiquity 42(4):605-616.

Waller, David W.
1962 Feeding Behavior of Minks at Some Iowa Marshes. Unpublished MS thesis
(Animal Ecology), Iowa State University of Science and Technology, Ames.

Watson, J. P. N.
1972

Fragmentation Analysis of Animal Bone Samples From Archaeological Sites.
Archaeometry 14(2):221-228.

Watson, Patty Jo
1969 The Prehistory of Salts Cave, Kentucky. Illinois State Museum, Reports of
Investigations 16.

Weber, Steven A. and P. David Seaman (eds.)
1985

Havasupai Habitat. A. F. Whiting’s Ethnography of a Traditional Indian Culture.
Tucson, University of Arizona Press.
1716

Weinstein, Richard A.
1992

Archaeology and Paleogeography of the Lower Guadalupe River/San Antonio
Bay Region. Cultural Resources Investigations Along the Channel to Victoria,
Calhoun and Victoria Counties, Texas. Coastal Environments, Inc., prepared for
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District.

Werler, John E. and James R. Dixon
2000

Texas Snakes. Identification, Distribution, and Natural History. University of
Texas Press.

Westgate, James W.
1987

A Preliminary Report on a Large Concentration of the Remains of the Giant
Gopher Tortoise, Gopherus hexagonatus, in the Late Pleistocene Beaumont
Formation of Willacy County, Texas. Appendix 4 (pages 199-21& in Grant D.
Hall, Michael B. Collins and Elton R. Prewitt, Cultural Resources Investigations
Along Drainage Improvements, Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas: 1986
Investigations. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations 59.

Westgate, James W. and Elton R. Prewitt
1987

Analysis of Other Faunal Remains. Appendix 4 (pages 174-231) in Elton R.
Prewitt, Susan V. Lisk, and Margaret A. Howard, National Register Assessments
of the Swan Lake Site, 41 AS 16, on Copano Bay, Aransas County, Texas. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations 56.

Wheat, Margaret M.
1967

Survival Arts of the Primitive Paiutes. Reno, University of Nevada Press.

1717

Whyte, Thomas R.
1991

Small-Animal Remains in Archaeological Pit Features. Pages 163-176 in James
R. Purdue, Walter E. Klippel, and Bonnie W. Styles (eds.), Beamers, Bobwhites,
and Blue-Points. Tributes to the Career of Paul W. Parmalee. Illinois State
Museum Scientific Papers Vol. 23 and University of Tennessee, Department of
Anthropology Report of Investigations 52.

Wicknick, Jill A., Carl D. Anthony and Jaret S. Reblin
2005

An Amphibian Survey of Killbuck Marsh Wildlife Area, Ohio. Ohio Journal of
Science 105(2):2-7.

Wilke, Philip J.
1978

Late Prehistoric Human Ecology at Lake Cahuilla Coachella Valley, California.
Contributions of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility
38. Department of Anthropology, University of California at Berkeley.

Wilhelm, Robert B., Jerry R. Choate and J. Knox Jones, Jr.
1981

Mammals of Lacreek National Wildlife Refuge, South Dakota. The Museum,
Texas Tech University, Special Publication 17.

Williams, Lawrence R. and Guy N. Cameron
1984 Demography of Dispersal in Attwater’s Pocket Gopher (Geomys attwateri).
Journal of Mammalogy 65(1):67-75.
1986 Food Habits and Dietary Preferences of Attwater’s Pocket Gopher, Geomys
attwateri. Journal of Mammalogy 67(3):489-496.
1990

Dynamics of Burrows of Attwater’s Pocket Gopher (Geomys attwateri). Journal
of Mammalogy 71(3):433-438.

1991

Geomys attwateri. Mammalian Species 382. American Society of Mammalogists.

1718

Williams-Dean, Glenna J.
1978 Ethnobotany and Cultural Ecology of Prehistoric Man in Southwest Texas.
Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station
(published version of PhD dissertation, Botany).

Winans, Melissa C.
n.d.

Vertebrate Fauna of Kincaid Shelter, Val Verde County (sic), Texas. Unpublished
manuscript on file with the author (used with permission).

1981

Vertebrate Faunal Remains Recovered From Archeological Sites in the Palmetto
Bend Reservoir. Appendix III in Research Staff of the Texas Archeological
Survey, Phase III: Prehistoric Archeological Research Within Palmetto Bend
Reservoir, Jackson County, Texas. The University of Texas at Austin, Texas
Archeological Survey, Research Report 82. Palmetto Bend Reservoir Series Vol.
6.

Windberg, Lamar A.
1998

Population Trends and Habitat Associations of Rodents in Southern Texas. The
American Midland Naturalist 140(1):153-160.

Wolff, Ronald G.
1973

Hydrodynamic Sorting and Ecology of a Pleistocene Mammalian Assemblage
From California (U.S.A.). Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology
13(2):91-101.

Wood, John E.
1954

Food Habits of Furbearers of the Upland Post Oak Region in Texas. Journal of
Mammalogy 35(3):406-415.

1719

Wright, Jodi F.
1997 The Asa Warner Site (41 ML 46), McLennan County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 68:215-261.

Yates, Bonnie C.
1982

Observations on the Faunal Remains From the Lakeview Project: Phase One.
Appendix II (pages 241-246) in L. Mark Raab (Principal Investigator),
Archaeological Investigations at Lakeview Lake: 1979 and 1980. Southern
Methodist University, Department of Anthropology, Archaeological Monographs
2.

1987

Zooarchaeological Investigations at 41 CO 141. Chapter 4 (pages 87-100) in
Daniel J. Prikryl and Bonnie C. Yates (eds.), Test Excavations at 41 CO 141, Ray
Roberts Reservoir, Cooke County, Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, North
Texas State University, Contributions in Archaeology 4.

Yates, Bonnie C. and Ernest L. Lundelius, Jr.
2001

Vertebrate Faunal Remains From the Aubrey Clovis Site. Chapter 8 (pages 103119) in C. Reid Ferring, The Archaeology and Paleoecology of the Aubrey Clovis
Site (41 DN 479) Denton County, Texas. Center for Environmental Archaeology,
Department of Geography, University of North Texas.

Yates, Terry L. and David J. Schmidly
1977

Systematics of Scalopus aquaticus (Linnaeus) in Texas and Adjacent States.
Occasional Papers 45, The Museum, Texas Tech University.

Yohe, Robert M. II, Margaret E. Newman and Joan S. Schneider
1991

Immunological Identification of Small-Mammal Proteins on Aboriginal Milling
Equipment. American Antiquity 56(4):659-666.

1720

Young, Gwen
1980 Analysis of Faunal Remains. Chapter 6 in Linda S. Cordell (ed.), Tijeras Canyon.
Analyses of the Past Maxwell Museum of Anthropology and University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Zaldívar-Riverón, Alejandro, Virginia León-Regagnon and Adrián Nieto-Montes de Oca
2004

Phylogeny of the Mexican Coastal Leopard Frogs of the Rana berlandieri Group
Based on mtDNA Sequences. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 30(1):3849.

Zimmerman, Earl G. and Michael E. Nejtek
1977

Genetics and Speciation of Three Semispecies of Neotoma. Journal of
Mammalogy 58(3):391-402.

Zohar, Irit and Miriam Belmaker
2005

Size Does Matter: Methodological Comments on Sieve Size and Species Richness
in Fishbone Assemblages. Journal of Archaeological Science 32(4):635-641.

1721

