Chapter 11: Summary and Conclusions

Time sucks the meaning from many things, and the future finds the rind.
-- Wallace Stegner (1942, Mormon Country)

THE BENCH AT BERGER BLUFF
Berger Bluff (41 GD 30) is a nine-meter high sandy bluff on the southwest side
of Coleto Creek, which forms the northeastern boundary of Goliad County here. The city
of Victoria lies about 15.5 km to the east. The entire bluff is an exposed archeological
site. The uppermost 2.5 m of deposits were excavated in the summer of 1979,
approximately the lowest 2 m were tested during field visits between November, 1979
and April, 1980 (reported here), and the middle package of sediments, about 4.5 m thick,
have never been investigated.

The present work is a multiproxy study of paleoenvironmental change during the
transition from the Late Pleistocene to the early Holocene in the lowest package of
“bench” sediments, estimated to date approximately 11,000-8500 radiocarbon years
before present (RCYBP) or 13,000-9500 calendar years before present. The bench is so
called because frequent and robust groundwater recharge during the Late Pleistocene is
believed to have promoted steady groundwater seepage from the calcareous Goliad
Formation bedrock buried under the valley wall, infiltrating the floodplain sediments with
phreatic carbonate. The resulting weak carbonate cement has preserved the lowest
1722

package of sediments from subsequent erosion and reworking by Coleto Creek as it cut
down into its older sediments. The erosional bench that is the focus of this study consists
of two major sedimentary deposits, stratum 1 and stratum 2. A third unit, stratum 3, lies
above the others, has much less carbonate cement, and is much more eroded. It is really
transitional between the Pleistocene sediments below and the Holocene sediments (strata
4 and 5) above, but is tentatively considered part of the bench deposit.

The age estimate for the bench deposits is based on a set of eleven radiocarbon
assays (seven on wood charcoal, four on sediment humin; Table 5.1). None of these
come from the uppermost 80 cm or lowermost 60 cm, so the endpoints of 8500 and
11,000 RCYBP are simply guess dates based on radiocarbon assays clustered in the
middle part of the bench sediments. In terms of the European and North Atlantic climatic
chronology, the six assays that are considered most reliable fall into the Younger Dryas
and Preboreal periods (Fig. 5.6), but there is considerable accumulation of sediment
above that point, and the most significant stratigraphic change, at the top of stratum 3,
remains unassayed and its age can only be guessed to approximate 8500 RCYBP, or
midway in the Boreal period. Sources of uncertainty and inversions of radiocarbon assays
are discussed in Chapter 5. The boundary between the Pleistocene and the Holocene falls
somewhere in the middle of the bench deposits (perhaps near the top of stratum 2?) but
cannot be identified in section.

The Continental and Chronological Setting
At 18,000 RCYBP, the Laurentide ice sheet covered the entire northern extent of
the North American continent, including essentially all of Canada (Dyke 2004:377),
blocking frigid polar air from entering the continental interior. By 11,000 RCYBP,
1723

postglacial warming had removed about 40% of this ice, opening a narrow ice-free
corridor, but large air masses were still blocked (Dyke 2004:Fig. 5, 391). By 10,250
RCYBP, the Cordilleran ice sheet was nearly gone, and the western side of the continent
began to open to polar air masses (Dyke 2004:393). The Laurentide sheet continued to
retreat, despite the fact that cooling during the Younger Dryas actually led to readvance
of some of the smaller alpine ice sheets. By 8500 RCYBP, about 65% of the ice sheet
had been removed and ice had withdrawn from the United States, but the eastern half of
Canada was still covered (Dyke 2004:398).

Before 10,250 RCYBP, the enormous mass of the Laurentide ice sheet not only
blocked Arctic air from entering the continental interior, it also displaced the jet stream
far to the south of its current mean annual position. Under modern climatic conditions,
the jetstream is responsible for steering moist Pacific air into Texas from Baja California
in the winter. This winter rainfall tends to be prolonged, gentle, and geographically
widespread, often lasting for several days, rather than concentrated into short, intense
bursts. This kind of rainfall produces maximum groundwater recharge and minimum
runoff. In contrast, the intense convective thunderstorms that result from collision of fastmoving Arctic cold fronts with inland-moving moist Gulf air in the spring and fall here in
Texas tend to produce rapid, intense flashy runoff (Figs. 1.43, 1.44) that moves out of the
catchment before it can contribute much to aquifer recharge.

During the Younger Dryas, weather patterns may have resembled today’s
wintertime weather more or less year-round. Southward-plunging Arctic northers were
absent, blocked by the ice sheet. Pacific moisture from the west was probably present
more nearly year-round, and lower Gulf water temperatures suppressed the amount of
1724

Gulf moisture invading the interior of the state. The ratio of Pacific to Gulf atmospheric
moisture was probably much higher in the Pleistocene than today, and aquifer recharge
was probably constant year-round, unlike today’s strongly seasonal pattern. As the
Holocene developed, the zonal (west to east) atmospheric flow characteristic of the
Pleistocene gave way to a pattern in which meridional (north-south) flow became
dominant during certain seasons of the year, with cold, dry air moving southward in high
pressure cells, or warm, moist Gulf air moving northward into low-pressure cells.
The Gulf of Mexico is a key factor in regional climate, especially for the Texas
coastal plain. The Gulf shoreline is 82 km away from Berger Bluff now, but at the late
Glacial maximum, when so much oceanic water was locked in continental ice sheets, sea
levels were much lower and the shoreline was an additional 88 km away. At 8500-11,000
RCYBP, the level in the Gulf was about 40-75 m lower than at present.

Throughout the transition from the Late Pleistocene to the early Holocene, total
annual insolation at latitude N29° was above present levels (fig. 1.2, A), late summer
insolation was above present levels (and increasing steadily, Fig. 1.3), and winter
insolation was below present levels (Fig. 1.2, B). The seasonal contrast in insolation
peaked well above present levels at 10,000 RCYBP (Fig. 1.5, A). Despite this potential
for global warming, regional temperatures lagged behind insolation because of the
influence of the major ice sheets. As the Laurentide ice sheet continued to melt in the
early Holocene, draining into the Gulf through the Mississippi River, four very important
final flood events at 9970-9870, 9740-9660, 9450-92,90, and 9160-8900 RCYBP
occurred (Aharon 2003). These helped to keep water temperature in the Gulf cool
despite the solar maximum at 10,000 RCYBP, and this may have been the critical factor
1725

keeping regional climate cool well into the early Holocene. I have argued elsewhere that
major geomorphic changes in the Coleto Creek catchment were probably delayed some
1500 years into the Holocene as a result of the suppressing effect of these late meltwater
events. Hurricanes form in the Gulf of Mexico when water temperatures of 26° C are
sustained for several months, usually from July to October. Average Gulf temperatures
were probably not warm enough to sustain hurricanes until well into the Holocene,
perhaps after 9000 RCYBP, although uncertainty remains about the date. Once Gulf
water was sufficiently warm, however, early Holocene hurricanes may have been more
severe even than contemporary ones, because late summer insolation remained at peak
levels until 8000 RCYBP and later (Figs. 1.3, A, 1.4). These early Holocene hurricanes
had the capacity to do enormous amounts of geomorphic work in any catchment that lay
in their path.

Archeological sites are usually poor locations for doing paleoenvironmental
studies because of the propensity of humans for modifying their immediate habitat.
However, early in its history, Berger Bluff was never a base camp, and in fact this
locality was not used as a base camp by large numbers of people until late in the
Holocene. The sparse cultural debris and features buried in the bench deposits indicate
that throughout its early history, the site (or at least the part of it that is preserved now)
was visited only briefly, probably by small groups foraging outward from more
permanent camps located elsewhere. It seems clear that human visits to the site had
minimal impact on the immediate habitat in this early part of its history, and there is no
reason to suspect human impact has altered the paleoenvironmental profile that can be
reconstructed from the deposits.

1726

Substantive Findings
Some of the central paleoenvironmental questions asked in this project were: what
was the moisture history of the site in the Younger Dryas and the transition into the
Holocene? Was the Younger Dryas wetter or drier than the early Holocene? Can
evidence of submillennial climatic cycles be recognized? Is there a local stratigraphic
marker for the abrupt North Atlantic climate changes documented in the Greenland ice
cores? Are there extinct or extralimital species?

Some of these questions could be answered and others could not. None of the
proxy environmental indicators used in this project are particularly sensitive to
temperature change, with the possible exception of the cold-water spring snail Valvata
tricarinata. Absolute temperature changes can usually be assessed in continental interiors
only with fossil insects, noble gas paleothermometry, or (in a very crude fashion), stable
isotopes. Nevertheless, the sediments, snails, diatoms, vertebrates and (indirectly)
freshwater mussels reveal a fairly cohesive and clear picture of the moisture history of the
site, and indicate that during the Younger Dryas the catchment was much more wellwatered than today, although experiencing a slight long-term drying trend. Groundwater
recharge rates were much higher, and spring discharge much more significant. The ratio
of phreatic to meteoric water in Coleto Creek runoff was probably much higher than
today. Two kinds of data, diatoms and snails, were abundant enough to be examined with
quantitative methods (correspondence analysis and cluster analysis).

1727

Sediments and Stratigraphic History (Chapter 4)
Although present-day Coleto Creek is a bedload-dominated stream, from the
Younger Dryas into the early Boreal period the creek was a suspended load-dominated
stream. About 63% of the sediment in the bench is silt and clay. The presence of so much
fine-grained sediment indicates that out-of-bank flooding was a fairly common
occurrence, and floods were prolonged, not erosive in nature. There seem to be no
instances of eroded or truncated strata. The creek banks were cohesive and the channel
significantly deeper and narrower than at present, furnishing a good habitat for the large,
mature Amblema plicata mussels found in the deposits. A steeply banked, meandering,
muddy channel with a width/depth ratio of anywhere from 3:1 to 10:1 seems most
probable. Alternating muddy and sandy zones appear conspicuously in the cutbank (Figs.
4.21, 4.22), and grain size analysis shows that cyclic variation in grain size (Fig. 4.69) is
superimposed on a slight coarsening-upward trend (Fig. 4.70) that may represent climatic
changes associated with regional warming.

Abundant phreatic carbonate (appearing in the form of matrix cement,
rhizoconcretions, irregular pans, nodules, and encrustations on buried objects) is the
result of more or less constant, active groundwater discharge from nearby calcareous
Goliad Formation bedrock, recharged in turn by equable precipitation patterns in the
catchment. Matrix cement makes up about 18% of the sediment by weight. Above
stratum 2, phreatic carbonate is greatly reduced, suggesting that seepage was also
reduced, and above stratum 3, there is a major change in depositional style from cyclic
deposition in strata 1-3 to massive deposition in strata 4 and 5. Pockets of gravel and
coarse sand appear near the top of the bench (stratum 2E), representing coarse-grained
1728

bedload material lofted out of the channel and onto the floodplain surface by a major
flood event. This flood event may have been one of the first hurricanes to enter south
Texas from the Gulf as the Gulf waters warmed sufficiently in the early Holocene to
sustain hurricanes. Alternatively, the event might have been triggered by one of the first
Arctic cold fronts to penetrate south Texas after Laurentide ice retreat left the
midcontinent open to Arctic air. In either case, the reduction in carbonate and appearance
of flood markers are clues signaling the onset of Holocene weather patterns and marking
the crossing of a geomorphic threshold. Above this point, clay (and perhaps silt) content
is reduced as massive accumulation of stratum 4 begins.

Moving upward through the stratigraphic section, as carbonate content
diminishes, limited evidence for weathering in the form of microscopic sediment
fissuring (Figs. 4.86, bottom and 4.87, bottom) and argillans (Fig. 4.93) becomes
somewhat more common, indicating a long-term trend toward drying in the catchment.

The onset of Holocene conditions cannot be dated accurately. The top of stratum
3 is about 80 cm above radiocarbon sample AA 2831 (9880 ± 90 RCYBP), and the base
of stratum 2E is about 43 cm higher than the sample, so it can only be said that the onset
postdates that sample by some unknown length of time. I have somewhat arbitrarily
estimated a date of about 8500 RCYBP, or sometime early in the Boreal period. In any
case, it seems probably that the local onset of Holocene weather conditions was lagged
about 1500 (?) radiocarbon years behind the end of the Pleistocene as marked in the
Greenland ice cores, probably as a result of the regional buffering effect of Holocene
meltwater spikes in the Gulf.

1729

The cyclic bedding seen in the deposits may be due to submillennial climatic
events, with the muddy units accumulating during wetter periods (see Fig. 4-100 for a
proposed model), but it is difficult to demonstrate. Testing the hypothesis by looking for
quantitative variation in biota like diatoms or snails is hampered by preservation
gradients. Snails become infrequent with greater depth, diatoms with lesser depth,
making it difficult to assess variation across the full range of strata.

Pollen and Wood Charcoal (Chapter 6)
Pollen is very poorly preserved and only the most decay-resistant taxa are left.
Most charcoal fragments are too small for identification. Composites, oak, cottonwood,
willow, pecan and possibly Eastern red cedar are recognized among the pollen and
macrofossil samples, along with isolated pollen grains of pine and sweetgum.

Diatoms and Freshwater Sponge Spicules (Chapter 7)
Four kinds of biosilica (diatoms, freshwater sponge spicules, chrysophyte cysts,
and phytoliths) were found, but only the diatoms were studied systematically. The bench
deposits have a taxonomically diverse assemblage of at least 65 species (Table 7.2),
mostly from the lower part of the deposits. About half originated in aquatic habitats and
about half are more drought-adapted species that can be found either submerged in water
or in aerophilous, damp environments (mud, damp moss, or rocks). Most species are
alkaliphilous and epiphytic. Many are commonly found attached to Phragmites stems,
moss, or bryophyte mats. Cell counts and species richness peak in the sandy strata and
tend to be reduced in the muddy strata (Fig. 7.4). The percentage of aquatic diatoms
declines over time (Fig. 7.6). In general, diatom abundance and species richness show a
1730

fluctuating but persistent decline from the bottom to the top of the bench, and droughtadapted species become more common. Sponge spicules also appear to become less
common, although they were not studied quantitatively. This probably indicates that
aquatic habitat quality was diminishing in Coleto Creek because of increasing flood
force, low water levels, and possibly changing salt or alkalinity levels. How much of the
upsection decline in abundance is due to taphonomic decay or changing sedimentation
rates is unclear. Breakage of diatoms and sponge spicules also becomes more common
toward the top of the section. Many, perhaps most diatom species found in the bench are
rather catholic species with a global distribution. They are so eurytopic that it is difficult
to extract any environmental interpretation from them. Correspondence analysis of the
diatom data (Fig. 7.12) shows that each stratum has its own diatom signature, however,
and the principal axis is interpreted as duration of saturation of the substrate. Fig. 7.12
shows the strata generally tend to move from saturated (right side of X axis) to droughtprone (left side) as successively higher strata are added. In summary, the strata largely
differ from each other in composition, and the trend toward long-term drying clearly
emerges from the numerical analysis, but variations are not cyclic in nature. In fact, the
two muddy strata (2A and 2C) are at the extremes of the axis. In this respect, the strata
seem to fail the biological test as climatic in origin.

Snails (Chapter 8)
The bench deposits have a rather well-preserved and speciose snail fauna, at least
35 or 36 species (Table 8.11). Of the various proxy environmental indicators studied in
this project, the snails probably gave the most useful and interpretable results.
Microsnails, medium-sized, and large-bodied taxa each represent about a third of the
species list. Some 25 or 26 species are terrestrial snails (10 cosmopolitan, eurytopic,
1731

drought-adapted species and another 15 or 16 woodland species, including at least one
slug), two species are amphibious, and at least eight are aquatic. Three different recovery
methods were used: 1/4-inch screen (almost 9000 specimens, large and medium-bodied
taxa), fine sieving of two 25 x 25 cm matrix columns (4905 specimens, all sizes, but
especially microsnails), and selected levels from one entire excavation unit (all matrix
passing the 1/4-inch screen, mostly microsnails and juveniles of larger taxa; Appendix 5,
818 specimens to date). The snails have a distribution that is exactly opposed to that of
the diatoms – they decline in frequency with depth (Figs. 8.22-8.25). This seems to be
mostly due to a preservation gradient. Heavy carbonate deposits in the lower part of the
stratigraphic section resulted in severe shell breakage when sediment samples were
processed.

Many of the terrestrial species (e.g., Anguispira strongylodes, Euchemotrema leai,
Gastrocopta contracta, Gyphyalinia umbilicata, Mesodon roemeri, M. thyroidus,
Mesomphix friabilis) are inhabitants of wooded floodplains, either in deciduous leaf litter
or under downed wood. They are indicators of mature, deciduous riparian woodland
covering the floodplain and adjacent valley slopes. This is a mesic to dry woodland
fauna, but not a wet ground taxocene. A few other species (Carychium mexicanum,
Pupisoma dioscoricola) are characteristic of wetter floodplains, and two (Catinella
vermeta, Pomatiopsis lapidaria) are amphibious. In the bench deposits Gastrocopta
contracta, a mesic-adapted species, occurs in moderate numbers while G. pellucida, a
more xeric-adapted species, occurs only sparsely. In the modern snail fauna from the
nearby Preiss Ranch, the ratio is reversed, and the xeric-adapted G. pellucida are
dominant (Table 8.13).

1732

Two Pleistocene marker species now extirpated from Texas (Valvata tricarinata,
Fig. 8.96, and Pomatiopsis lapidaria, Fig. 8.7) are found in the bench deposits. Two
other species now greatly reduced in geographic range in Texas (Cincinnatia integra and
Gastrocopta tappaniana) also occur. Three species now characteristic of the Edwards
Plateau and beyond (Gastrocopta armifera, Glyphyalinia roemeri? and Mesodon
roemeri) are also found. Except for C. integra and M. roemeri, which are probably still
present in the area as small remnant populations, these species have vanished from the
area as result of northward and westward range contracts during the warming Holocene.
The most significant extirpation is Valvata tricarinata, an aquatic snail characteristic of
cold lakes and rivers in northern latitudes, or cold springs and ponds in the southern part
of its range, where it is usually found in water no warmer than 15° C (59° F). It is a
classic Pleistocene index fossil in alluvial terraces in Texas and the southern Plains. At
Berger Bluff, it may have occurred in a nearby perennial cold-water spring maintained by
constant discharge from the Evangeline Aquifer. Its extirpation from Texas could have
been caused by rising groundwater temperatures, increasingly irregular spring discharge,
or increasingly seasonal changes in hydrochemistry. The species of Valvata that live in
the northwestern quadrant of the U. S. are found in waters with a high concentration of
bicarbonate (HCO3) relative to calcium (Sharpe 2002:Fig. 3), and it is possible that
Valvata may not be able to tolerate a great deal of seasonal variance in solute
composition. Increasing seasonality in the Holocene may have driven solute variability
beyond the tolerance limits of the species. Other aquatic genera such as Gyraulus are
solute generalists (Sharpe 2002:Fig. 5) and have not been extirpated.

Correspondence analysis and cluster analysis were used for numerical studies of
the snail counts. Because 1/4-inch mesh and fines sieves capture different ratios of taxa,
1733

these two kinds of samples were analyzed separately. Correspondence analysis accounted
for only about 52-53% of the variance in the data, indicating that different taxa are not
strongly clustered (either stratigraphically or horizontally). For the 1/4-inch mesh sample,
the first axis extracted seems to represent aquatic and deciduous woodland taxa, and
when the case scores are plotted vertically (Figs. 8.83 and 8.84), a pattern of irregular
fluctuation superimposed on a trend of long-term decline is seen. The upward decline in
the first axis seems to indicate long-term drying of the habitat. In the correspondence
analysis of the fine-sieved matrix samples, the pattern is the same, but the first two axes
are reversed. The first axis seems to represent dry woodland, the second axis aquatic and
deciduous woodland taxa. Stratigraphic plots of Axis 1 show irregular fluctuation
superimposed on a long-term increase in one unit (Fig. 8.94), with mostly irregular
fluctuation in the other (Fig. 8.95). Again, this is taken to indicate a pattern of long-term
drying and replacement of mesic deciduous woodland with dry woodland or reduced
canopy cover in the catchment.

None of the case score plots show a consistent response to the stratigraphy as
recorded in the profiles. In other words, the scores for the “mesic deciduous” axis do not
show large positive spikes in the muddy units and negative spikes in the sandy units, as
might be expected if the muddy units represent wetter climatic intervals. In all of the
numerical studies, a trend toward long-term drying emerges more clearly than any
climatic pattern related to the muddy and sandy depositional couplets. On the other hand,
cluster analysis shows a fairly impressive amount of stratigraphic coherency for the
different strata (Fig. 8.89), indicating that, just as in the diatom analysis, each stratum has
its own distinctive snail taxonomic signature.

1734

Freshwater Mussels, Sphaeriid Clams and Peaclams (Chapter 9)
Single and clustered valves of Threeridge (Amblema plicata, mostly large adults)
and a single Giant Washboard (Megalonaias nervosa) fragment were found in the bench
deposits, evidently as a result of human predation. Many of them are clustered on a
buried surface in stratum 2A. A single Southern Mapleleaf (Quadrula apiculata) was
found over 20 m downstream at about the same level as stratum 2A. All three species are
often found in fairly deep water and can tolerate muddy bottoms and fairly turbid
conditions, although they do not prefer sluggish or turbid water. Threeridges are
particularly tolerant of high suspended loads. Peaclams (Cyclocalyx?), which are often
characteristic of deep water and tolerant of turbid conditions on mud or sand bottoms.

The Amblema plicata are mostly large individuals and many may have been as
much as 18-19 years old when they were collected from the creek. This may indicate that
the recurrence interval for major floods was greater than 18-19 years. These underlie and
predate the major flood event in stratum 2E. The Giant Washboard is a deep water
species, possibly imported from the Guadalupe River or from lower reaches of Coleto
Creek. It is a somewhat larger than average individual, probably 22-23 years old or
somewhat younger. Ethnographic studies show most shellfish collecting is done by
women and children, and that was probably the case at Berger Bluff.

Vertebrates (Chapter 10)
Animal bone is well-preserved in the bench deposits except for mechanical
breakage, and (tentatively) appears to have a preservation gradient (Fig. 10.3) similar to
1735

that of the snails. At least 31 taxa appear to be present (Table 10.1). Most are small
animals, regardless of whether they are fish, birds, amphibians, snakes, lizards, or
mammals. Reptiles and amphibians are especially well represented.

One probable extinct species is represented – giant tortoise, Gopherus
hexagonatus, tentatively recognized from a single small carapace fragment (Fig. 10.28)
recovered 50-55 cm below radiocarbon sample AA2831 (9880 ± 90 RCYBP). It shows
no evidence of reworking and appears to be contemporaneous with the rest of the fauna.

There are two basic categories of animal bone in the bench deposits: ambient
fauna, or isolated bone fragments scattered throughout the deposits representing
environmental

“background

noise,”

and

the

hearth

deposit,

a

concentrated

microvertebrate bone bed adjacent to Feature 5, a small fire-baked patch of floodplain
sediment. The ambient bone occurs in low density and is not abundant enough for
numerical analysis (except perhaps in bulk matrix samples from N109 E96, where
extraction and analysis is incomplete). The hearth deposit is tentatively interpreted as an
abandoned human latrine deposit, with the microvertebrates originating from
decomposed, no longer visible coprolites. The logic behind this interpretation (and other
competing models: fluvial lag deposit, raptor pellet midden, mustelid latrine) is discussed
at length in Chapter 10 and the reader is referred there for further details.

The animals found in the bench deposits are mostly small, reclusive and often
fossorial, with a heavy emphasis on amphibians and rodents. Regarding habitat
preference, there are two basic groups:

1736

1) A large group of riparian floodplain animals tethered to standing water or moist soils.
These include species found in standing water (gar, small fish, aquatic turtles, bullfrog,
Rio Grande leopard frog, water snake) or found near, and at times in lentic water bodies
(smallmouthed salamander, cricket or chorus frogs, toad), and the fossorial pocket
gophers, eastern mole, and small fossorial colubrid snakes (Virginia, Storeria and/or
Diadophis) found in moist or marshy soil.

2) A diverse but somewhat smaller number of animals from xeric upland habitats (giant
tortoise, Northern grasshopper mouse, Black-tailed jackrabbit, longnosed snake,
kangaroo rat) or cosmopolitan upland habitats in general (not necessarily xeric), such as
the Least shrew, Hispid pocket mouse, Hispid cotton rat, vole, and possibly woodrat
(Neotoma sp.). There are also some species that cannot be assigned to either group
because of identification ambiguities (small birds, Peromyscus sp., etc.).

The many amphibians in the fauna suggest the presence of small closed water
bodies on the floodplain, since most amphibians lay their eggs in floodplain ponds or
vernal pools that are too small and shallow to invite fish predation on the eggs. The finergrained sediments found on the floodplain in the Younger Dryas and Preboreal should
retain water better than the porous sands found there today. Flatter floodplain topography,
the presence of shallow closed depressions, more continuous tree canopy and more robust
groundwater supply all combined to maintain humidity levels and lentic water capacity in
the riparian corridor much higher than today.

1737

PALEOENVIRONMENTAL SUMMARY: COLETO CREEK CATCHMENT IN THE
YOUNGER DRYAS-EARLY HOLOCENE
The bench sediments and the biological organisms preserved in them present a
coherent picture of the catchment during the Younger Dryas and Preboreal. The
floodplain in the vicinity of the site was probably wider and flatter than today, because
the extensive, sloping, sandy terrace deposits on the north side of the creek appear to be
more recent and would have been absent in this earlier period. Deposition was dominated
by suspended load from Coleto Creek, so the floodplain was flatter and muddier, with
much better water retention capacity. Coleto Creek was narrow, deeper, more steeply
banked and sinuous, and streamflow was less variable because groundwater seepage
accounted for a higher percentage of runoff. Despite the increased presence of phreatic
water, streamflow may have been more turbid simply because of increased ground cover
in the catchment. At the site itself, deposition alternated between muddy and sandy units
over time spans amounting to some unknown number of centuries, either because of the
natural meandering of the creek toward and away from the site, or because of
submillennial climatic cycles. Significant numbers of pocket gophers and eastern moles
were found, so if the floodplain was at times too wet or fine-grained to provide good
habitat, they must have found higher ground somewhere in the floodplain or nearby. A
small perennial spring or seep existed near the site, harboring cold spring snails such as
Valvata tricarinata and other mollusks. Muddy ground and seeps were probably
widespread in the valley, attested to by many of the mud-dwelling diatom species.
Extensive, deciduous tree canopy was present in the riparian corridor, creating a heavy
carpet of leaf litter on the floodplain and valley slopes, attested to by many litter-dwelling
snail species. Mature deciduous forest also produces abundant downed wood, and this,
1738

too is indicated by many snail species and some of the reptiles and amphibians that
customarily use rotting logs and branches as refuges. Humidity levels in the riparian
corridor would have been much higher than today, both because there were so many
water sources on and in the ground, and because during the growing season the tree
canopy would have retained moisture, cut wind velocity, and reduced ambient
temperatures. Even in wintertime, with no foliage, humidity levels likely would have
been higher than today.

Flash flooding was rare or absent until early in the Holocene, and consequently
slower-growing tree species with longer maturation rates could have grown in the
floodplain, in a zone that today is dominated by fast-growing species with high turnover
rates. This is also attested to by the presence of animal species preferring downed wood,
as noted above. Living under or near this mature canopy was an interesting array of
animals, including many water-tethered amphibians, reptiles, fish, mussels, and snails.
Discharge in Coleto Creek was equable, less seasonally variable than today, and violent
flooding caused by hurricanes or thunderstorms triggered by invading Arctic airmasses
was absent, allowing freshwater mussels as well as trees to reach full maturity. Flooding
due to widespread convective thunderstorms was probably also absent, or at least rare.

Less information is available about the upland Quaternary terrace surfaces
adjacent to the riparian corridor. Along with the many mesic-adapted organisms in the
bench deposits, there is a secondary component of more xeric-adapted biota that must
have come from this upland habitat. There are several eurytopic diatoms, snail species (e.
g., Oligyra orbiculata, Praticolella pachyloma, Rabdotus sp., Helicodiscus singleyanus,
Gastrocopta pellucida), mammals (Onychomys leucogaster, Lepus californicus,
1739

Dipodomys) and a snake (Rhinocheilus lecontei) that can tolerate fairly dry conditions.
The diatoms and snails must have come from sheetwashing of open valley slopes leading
to the floodplain, but many of the vertebrates may have been introduced to the site from a
considerable distance by human predators.

It is clear that at least the second half of the Younger Dryas and the early part of
the Holocene were wetter than today, but experiencing a slow, long-term drying trend.
The drying trend is sufficiently subtle that it is apparent only from the various numerical
analyses that were done on sediments, diatoms and snails. The conspicuous reduction in
phreatic carbonate at the top of the bench suggests an acceleration of this drying trend
some unknown amount of time after 9880 RCYBP (AA2831), perhaps not long after the
last Gulf meltwater pulse at 9160-8900 RCYBP. Shortly after this, a major flood event in
the Coleto Creek drainage left pockets of gravel and stringers of coarse sand and pebbles
strewn across the floodplain, furnishing a conspicuous stratigraphic marker that probably
signals the onset of Holocene weather patterns in earnest (Fig. 11.1). It may well have
been one of the first hurricanes to cross the south Texas coast.

However, I believe this flood event did far more than simply transport coarse
sediment. It may have stripped out and destroyed the mature riparian habitat upstream. It
may have irrevocably altered the hydrology and biology of the floodplain, removing
breeding habitat for amphibians, displacing and destroying freshwater mussel beds, and
removing the mature forest canopy that sheltered a wide range of snails, mammals,
reptiles and amphibians. It is quite possible that the entire riparian habitat in the Coleto
Creek catchment could have been stripped out and left unable to reproduce itself in a
rapidly warming and drying Holocene climatic regime. It may well be that restoration of
1740

habitat in the valley did not approach anything like its Younger Dryas character until late
in the Holocene.

Figure 11.1. Advent of the Holocene at Berger Bluff. Looking southwest at Berger Bluff.
The voids are washed-out gravel pockets at about the same stratigraphic
level as stratum 2E in the bench area, out of view to the left. This is a
relabeled version of Fig. 4.20 Dark bands are muddy strata, not paleosols.

1741

This is probably impossible to prove with the data at hand, because essentially no
sampling was done above the flood markers, except for a column of phytolith samples
(now missing). Indeed, the Scope of Work for the bench project did not provide for
sampling this part of the section. Still, it remains a useful hypothesis that could be tested
by future research. As hurricanes and violent flooding became increasingly common on
the coastal plain in the early Holocene, mature riparian habitat was probably stripped out
of all of the small catchments inland from the coast, one by one as the vagaries of storm
tracks prescribed. I would argue that these floodplain forests could not regenerate in a
Holocene climatic regime, although there may have been some limited regeneration late
in the Holocene. I suspect that although incremental drying undoubtedly played a role in
early Holocene environmental control, the truly significant changes were due to the
geomorphic work done by increasingly flashy discharge regimes. Geology destroying
biology, if you will (cf. Starkel 2002). In my view, the first hints of an approaching
geomorphic threshold are provided by the coarse-grained deposits in stratum 2E, and the
threshold is finally crossed at the top of stratum 3. The large rivers (Nueces, San Antonio,
Guadalupe, Navasota, Brazos) passing through the region would have been buffered from
this kind of habitat deletion by their large size, which tends to smooth out flood peaks.
As local hunter-gatherer populations found riparian habitat increasingly disrupted in
small tributary catchments like the Coleto Creek drainage, they would have turned to the
larger river valleys, where they could have found the same resources that no longer
survived in the small catchments. The chief result might have been a movement of local
populations out of small coastal plain catchments and concentration in the larger river
valleys.

1742

COMPARISONS WITH OTHER SITES
Older texts on Pleistocene environments often portray the Late Pleistocene as cold
and dry. Cooler temperatures lowered evaporation rates, leading to reduced humidity and
precipitation in many parts of the world, with massive loess sheets as a testament
(Menking et al. 2004). This image is part reality and partly lack of research in tropical
and subtropical latitudes. However, the acceleration of paleoenvironmental research in
the last two or three decades has led to a new appreciation for regional variability, not
just on a continental scale, but variability within regions the size of the state of Texas. We
now know that antiphasing has been a common feature of Quaternary climates, and dry
periods in one area may correspond with wet periods in another. Some climatic changes
may have been time-transgressive. Below, I review the literature from Texas, New
Mexico, and northern Mexico, with emphasis on moisture history. These regions are
relevant because much of the weather in Texas probably arrived from the west during the
Pleistocene. Most (but not all) of the sites reviewed in the Southwest and northern
Mexico have evidence of wet conditions in the Late Pleistocene and early Holocene,
commonly attributed to southward displacement of storm tracks by latitudinal movement
of the jet stream (Benson, Kashgarian and Rubin 1995; Metcalfe et al. 2002:99; Enzel,
Wells and Lancaster 2003).

Paleoenvironmental Sites in Texas
Paleoenvironmental sites in the Guadalupe-San Antonio river basins were
reviewed in Chapter 2. The locations of some of the principal sites are shown in Fig.

1743

1.26. The most useful site for comparison is Hershop Bog in Gonzales County, which I
have reviewed at some length in Chapter 2 (see discussion and Figs. 2.13-2.17).

Hershop Bog
The lower part of the pollen core, the “birch pollen zone,” appears to match the
time span of the bench deposits. River birch is a riparian species growing where annual
rainfall ranges from about 71.5-162.0 cm. Riparian tree pollen peaks in the Younger
Dryas, then nearly vanishes at about 9171 RCYBP; upland trees reach a minimum at
about 8500 RCYBP. Species richness for all pollen types declines throughout the
Younger Dryas, reaching a minimum at about 8500 RCYBP (Fig. 2.14, A). Declining
tree pollen counts through the Younger Dryas at Hershop Bog probably track the same
regional drying seen in various numerical analyses from the bench deposits at Berger
Bluff. Given the limitations of the sampling interval and the limitations of absolute age
control at both sites, the pollen record at Hershop Bog seems consistent with the
paleoenvironmental reconstruction for Berger Bluff, but there is a real need for reanalysis
of this site, coupled with application of modern dating techniques.

Richard Beene Site
At the Richard Beene site, snail samples (samples 18-23) from the Elm Creek C
horizon and Perez Paleosol appear partly contemporaneous with the period of concern,
but Raymond Neck interprets precipitation as “low to moderate, and possibly seasonal”
(see discussion in Chapter 2). Soil carbon from C4 plants actually reaches a minimum at
about 11,500 RCYBP, then increases to a peak in early part of the Younger Dryas,
declines until 10,000 RCYBP, then shows a small increase (Nordt et al. 2002:Fig. 3). In
1744

any case, by the earliest part of the Younger Dryas, the local grasslands appear to have
had proportions of C4 plants within the range of variation characteristic of the first half
of the Holocene, but considerably less than at present (but photosynthetic pathways do
not directly address the issue of moisture).

Winston’s Cave
See Chapter 2 for discussion. Tree pollen drops to a minimum between 9900 and
9000 RCYBP, then generally increases after that (Hudler 2000:Fig. 4-22), which is
contrary to most of the other evidence presented here.

Wilson-Leonard Site
Collins (1998:127) recognizes marshy conditions in unit Ic1 at 11,000-10,600 BP
and increased effective moisture. Bousman (1998:164-165; Fig. 8-1) tentatively suggests
a change to somewhat drier conditions and a reduction in tree cover during the transition
from Unit I to Unit II at about 9550 BP. Aquatic snails are scarce, but most of the few
examples recovered occurred in units I and II. The lowest levels with preserved shells
(levels 32-39) indicate woodland with downed wood and relatively high soil moisture
(Shaw et al. 1998:1570). The earliest surviving phytolith assemblages, at about 10,0009500 BP, suggest more closed canopy woodland with cooler and more mesic conditions
than present. At 9500-8700 BP, xeric-adapted short grasses become more common
(Fredlund 1998:1649).

1745

Horn Shelter No. 2
Prochnow’s study of slackwater alluvial deposits in Horn Shelter includes 15
different stratigraphic units from the period of interest (units 1 to 14, assayed at 10,150 to
8440 RCYBP; Prochnow 2001:Fig. 26) and indicates infrequent flood deposits and low
severity of flooding during the Younger Dryas (11,000-10,000 RCYBP). He finds more
frequent flooding, with moderate severity, from 10,000-8000 RCYBP, then no record
from 8000-5000 RCYBP (Prochnow 2001:Fig. 38). The Younger Dryas deposits are
characterized by roof breakdown and less alluvium than is currently being produced by
the Brazos River. Prochnow attributes the scarcity of Younger Dryas alluvium to aridity.
Since the Brazos River heads on the Southern High Plains, the dry interval recognized by
Holliday (2000, see High Plains section below) at 10,900-10,200 RCYBP may be
responsible.

Fort Hood, Carbon Isotopes
The Late Glacial Jackson Alluvium at Fort Hood supported 50-60% trees and C3
grasses, 40-50% C4 grasses, indicating a cool and/or wet climate. The Georgetown
Alluvium at 11,000-8000 BP represents a transitional phase to warmer and drier
Holocene climate, with 50-60% C4 (warm season) grasses; after 8000 BP, 65-70% C4
grasses prevailed (Nordt et al. 1994:117). A gradual shift to warmer and drier conditions
is proposed.

1746

Aubrey Site
The Aubrey site has a pollen record, but it is no younger than 13,260 RCYBP.
According to Raymond Neck, snails from the pond deposits indicate that the climate at
11,000 RCYBP was cool, with moderate precipitation and effective moisture and relative
humidity classified as “moist.” Warming conditions during the Younger Dryas resulted in
warm temperatures, low precipitation, and effective moisture and relative humidity
classified as “dry” by 10,300 RCYBP. Unfortunately, there are no records for the
remaining three centuries of the Younger Dryas or for the Preboreal.

Hall’s Cave
Samples from about the 120-150 cm level, or 8630 ± 60 to 10,310 ± 70 RCYBP
(Cooke 2005:Table 2-1) in Hall’s Cave correspond to the interval of interest. Hall’s Cave
has no detectable Younger Dryas temperature signal in the fauna. A moisture index
provided by the Notiosorex/Cryptotis ratio shows increasing aridity beginning at about
11,310 RCYBP and peaking in the mid-Holocene at about 5400 RCYBP (Toomey
1993:Fig. 40). Several mesic-adapted species (Ambystoma sp., Scalopus aquaticus,
Blarina carolinensis, Microtus ochrogaster, Pitymys pinetorum and others) persist until
the mid-Holocene, when they are extirpated around 4200-5750 RCYBP (Toomey
1993:451). Remarkably, over 500 Ambystoma vertebrae are present in the catalogued
material alone (Toomey 1993:149).

Although both Berger Bluff and Hall’s Cave show a drying trend during the
period of interest, the histories of these two sites at opposite ends of the Guadalupe River
1747

basin are different. At Hall’s Cave the environment is fairly dry even before the Younger
Dryas, then becomes even drier right through to the mid-Holocene. At Berger Bluff, the
environment is wet but drying, then altered drastically by the crossing of a geomorphic
threshold.

Mustang Springs
Stratum 1 fines upward and resulted from high-energy spring discharge and/or
runoff, documenting a period of cooler temperatures and higher precipitation, but its age
is unknown, aside from being older than the overlying Stratum 2. Stratum 2 dates from
about 8080 RCYBP to 10,130 at the base. The lowest levels have diatoms from cool,
deep, lentic water, succeeded by an alkaline marsh after 10,000 RCYBP, then more cool,
deep lentic water from about 8500-8000 RCYBP. After 8000 RCYBP, the pond becomes
mostly shallow (Meltzer 1991:241-242). Stratum 3 records the onset of the Hypsithermal.

Southern High Plains
Lakes changed to marshy conditions at various times over the span 10,500-9000
RCYBP. Regional drying and widespread eolian sedimentation occurred between 10,900
and 10,200 RCYBP (spanning most of the Younger Dryas). Carbon isotopes suggest the
region was somewhat cooler during all or part of the span 10,000-8000 RCYBP (Holliday
2000:8), with the onset of Holocene warming at 8000 RCYBP. Among the playa lakes
studied by Holliday, Hovorka and Gustavson (1996:Table 3), there are eight lacustrine
mud samples with assays between 10,650 and 8640 RCYBP. The dry interval spanning
most of the Younger Dryas is not recognized at Berger Bluff or at most of the other sites

1748

reviewed here, except Horn Shelter, farther downstream on the Brazos River. This may
be an example of regional contrasts in climate patterns, but it needs explanation.

Diamond Y Cienega
Although the oldest radiocarbon assay from this Pecos County pollen site is 9570
± 80 RCYBP, the record for the analyzed core (Core 3) begins at 6730 ± 40 RCYBP.
Therefore, the record here does not begin until a couple of millennia after the period of
concern at Berger Bluff. However, it is of some interest because the pollen record
indicates average annual precipitation at about 6750-6000 RCYBP was about 10 cm
wetter than today, with predominant spring and summer precipitation and January
temperatures about 7° C lower than today (Hoyt 2000:170-173). Precipitation falls to
modern levels by about 5760 RCYBP (Hoyt 2000:Fig. 7.1).

Big Bend and Hueco Mountains, Packrat Middens
Van Devender (1990), speaking of the Chihuahuan Desert as a whole, says,
The late Wisconsin biotic record reflects strong summer cooling and substantial
rainfall with a strong shift to winter sources over the summer monsoon, and does
not support the cold-dry paleoclimatic model…. The climate of the early
Holocene was transitional between that of the late Wisconsin and more modern
regimes later in the Holocene. Winter rainfall continued to be greater than it is
today in the Chihuahuan Desert. The southern edge of the winter storm track
moved northward in the southern Chihuahuan Desert, resulting in an early (before
9.4 ka) onset of xeric conditions in the Bolson de Mapimi (Van Devender
1990:125-126).
Based on plant appearances and disappearances, Van Devender takes 11,000
RCYBP as the Pleistocene-Holocene boundary, and 9000 RCYBP as the beginning of the
Early Holocene. Different taxa enter and depart the record individualistically, making it
1749

difficult to generalize from plants to climate. In the Big Bend, some key Pleistocene taxa
(papershell pinyon, juniper, Hinckley oak) disappear at about 9000-11,000 RCYBP (Van
Devender 1990:Fig. 7.7), but other characteristically Holocene taxa (sotol, lechuguilla)
are present throughout much of the Pleistocene. In Maravillas Canyon, several Holocene
taxa (lechuguilla, honey mesquite, crucifixion thorn) make their first major appearance at
around 11,000 RCYBP, while several others (blind prickly pear, Mormon tea, Roemer
catclaw, creosote bush) make their first major appearance at about 9000 RCYBP (Van
Devender 1990:Fig. 7.5). In the Hueco Mountains, a major taxonomic turnover seems to
occur at about 8110 RCYBP (Van Devender 1990:Fig. 7.9). Because of elevation
differences, even where vegetation shifts can be recognized, they may be out of phase
with events in the Coleto Creek catchment.

Salt Basin Pluvial Lakes
The most recent highstand in the series of large pluvial lakes east of El Paso,
surrounding Van Horn and Dell City, has a black mat dated at 15,940 ± 320 RCYBP
(Wilkins and Currey 1997:Table 1). If there are any more recent black mats of Younger
Dryas or Preboreal age, they have not yet been reported.

Paleoenvironmental Sites in the Southwestern US

Carlsbad Cavern, Hidden Cave, Cave #10, Speleothems
Speleothems from these three caves in the New Mexican section of the Guadalupe
Mountains provide the best match for the paleoenvironmental history reconstructed at
Berger Bluff. Reconstructed moisture history is based on uranium series dating of
1750

speleothem growth (the speleothems in this area grow only during wet intervals). The Useries dates correspond to calendar years, so an approximate concordance was obtained
with the CALIB radiocarbon calibration program. Good evidence for growth of
speleothems from the second half of the Younger Dryas into the early Holocene was
found. Onset of the wet period occurs at 12,425 ± 520 cal BP (equivalent to about 10,505
RCYBP) and the end at 10,613 ± 498 cal BP (very roughly, about 9475 RCYBP).
Allowing for the standard error of about ± 500 calendar years, these dates indicate wet
conditions throughout most of the span of time represented by the Berger Bluff bench
deposits, but ending perhaps a millennium earlier than at Berger Bluff.

Lake Estancia
This large pluvial lake in central New Mexico is one of the most intensively
studied in the Southwest. Menking and others (2004) summarize recent modeling studies.
The final highstand in this basin has been dated between about 11,500 and 9650 RCYBP,
similar to the speleothem findings above, but with onset of the wet period about a
millennium earlier (Anderson, Allen and Menking 2002:377). Menking and others
estimate that the mean annual temperature was lowered by 5° C and precipitation
increased as much as 35-60% above contemporary levels during the Last Glacial
Maximum, but no estimates are given for the Younger Dryas.

Rough Canyon, Packrat Middens
Macrofossils indicate precipitation levels 20% above modern and July mean
maximum temperatures 3.5-5.0° C below modern. Postglacial warming and drying may
have started as early as 12,000 RCYBP and was complete by at least 10,540 RCYBP.
1751

However, there are no samples dated between 10,540 and 7610 RCYBP, so the
Preboreal, most of the Boreal, and second half of the Younger Dryas are unrepresented
(Betancourt et al. 2001).

Winsor Creek Bog B1
This bog in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains northeast of Santa Fe has evidence of
circque glaciation at the head of the valley during the Younger Dryas, implying both
cooling and an adequate supply of moisture. Four assays on wood and bulk sediment
(10,190 ± 60, 10,180 ± 50, 10,070 ± 60 and 9765 ± 55 RCYBP) date a post-Pinedale
readavance (Armour, Fawcett and Geissman 2002:725).

Lake Cochise
This pluvial lake in the Willcox Basin of southeastern Arizona has a highstand
dated 8900 RCYBP or before, followed by a period of desiccation until the later midHolocene (Waters 1989:7).

Stoneman Lake
Sedimentology, macrofossils, pollen and diatoms at this caldera lake in central
Arizona indicate cooler temperatures and greater effective temperature before 8500
RCYBP, followed by warmer and drier conditions (Hasbargen 1994).

1752

Montezuma Well
This is a collapsed travertine springmound, also located in central Arizona. Water
levels were deeper before 9000 RCYBP; a period of aridity followed at 8700-8400
RCYBP, then intermittently wet conditions at 8400-8200 RCYBP, followed by aridity
(Blinn, Hevly and Davis 1994:201).

Dry Lake
Located in the San Bernardino Mountains of southern California, this lake has a
continuous series of radiocarbon assays on charcoal extending from near-modern to 8090
± 40 RCYBP (Bird and Kirby 2006:Table 1). Sediment properties and charcoal content
were analyzed and indicate wetter conditions at about 9000-7500 cal BP (approximately
8070-6550 RCYBP), followed by drying.

Paleoenvironmental Sites in Northern Mexico

Lake Palomas Basin
The oldest highstand in Laguna El Fresnal and Laguna Santa Maria is dated at
8269 ± 64 to 8456 ± 97 RCYBP, based on assays of freshwater mussel shell (del

13

C

corrected, no reservoir correction?). An earlier and higher highstand is undated and is
assumed to be Late Pleistocene (Castiglia and Fawcett 2006:113-114).

1753

Laguna Babícora
At this large pluvial lake in Chihuahua, a Younger Dryas-early Holocene wet
period is represented by radiocarbon assays of 10,976 ± 115 RCYBP and 9614 ± 130
RCYBP on humic material from lake sediments (Ortega-Ramírez et al. 1998:Table 2),
followed by increasing aridification until about 6000 RCYBP. The sediments indicate a
shallow perennial lake and/or bog.

Alta Babícora
A deep, freshwater lake existed here during the late Pleistocene, and wet
conditions continued into the early Holocene (Metcalfe et al. 2002:99). Unfortunately the
period bracketing the Pleistocene/Holocene transition is poorly dated. A single assay of
9500 ± 930 RCYBP on bulk sediment is reported (Metcalfe et al. 2002:Table 1).

Lake Chapala
This large pluvial lake is located in the northern third of the Baja California
Peninsula. A large lake filled the basin sometime before 9070 ± 60 RCYBP (charcoal),
and falling lake levels thereafter ended in desiccation by about 7450 RCYBP (Davis
2003).

Paleoenvironmental Sites in Other Regions
The paleoenvironmental literature from the Great Basin is too voluminous to
summarize here, but some of the pluvial lakes there also show wet conditions in the
Younger Dryas (Oviatt et al. 2005) and early Holocene, while others do not. The Lake
1754

Bonneville basin was wet from before 13,000 to 8800 RCYBP (Oviatt, Madsen and
Schmitt 2003). Lake Lahontan experienced a Younger Dryas highstand between 10,850
and 9600 RCYBP (Benson, Kashgarian and Rubin 1995:24). In southern Nevada, organic
black mats and spring runs appear at 11,600 RCYBP, with spring activity peaking at
11,000-9500 RCYBP, followed by desiccation of most springs by 9500-7000 RCYBP
(Quade, Forester and Whelan 2003).

UNANSWERED QUESTIONS

Why Is the Bench Not a Calcareous Fen?
Fens are groundwater-supported wetlands (for examples, see Amon et al. 2002;
Miner and Ketterling 2003). They are often alkaline, unlike bogs, which are fed by
vadose water (precipitation and runoff) and are usually acid. Fens often have surface peat
layers, sometimes with over 90% organic matter (Moorhead, Moynihan and Simpson
2000:362). According to Bedford and Godwin (2003:612), “Fens receiving high flows of
calcium-rich water are called calcareous fens and support a distinct flora of plant species
called calcicoles because of their affinity for calcium-rich sites.” The bench deposits at
Berger Bluff have many of the characteristics of a calcareous fen: abundant base-rich
groundwater, carbonate deposits, slow internal drainage, high species diversity of
diatoms and snails, and possibly even calcicole flora (the plants contributing the abundant
rhizoconcretions have not been identified, but perhaps they were calcicole species).
Indeed, both the density and species richness of snails in the bench deposits are probably
owing to its resemblance to a calcareous fen. And yet there are no peat deposits, no
gyttja, and no black mats in the deposits. There are dark bands in the cutbank that
superficially resemble the Younger Dryas-aged black mats of the Southwest and Great
1755

Basin, but closer inspection shows these are fine-grained silt and clay strata, not organic
zones. Processing of sediment samples for humin assays showed that while inorganic
carbon content is high, organic carbon content in the bench sediments is very low. So
why is there no peat at Berger Bluff? Why does Berger Bluff not look like the Aubrey
site? I can only guess that topography must have been the critical factor. There were no
closed depressions at Berger Bluff, although there must have been many closed
depressions elsewhere on the floodplain at the time. Because there was no closed
depression, saturation was never maintained long enough to allow peat formation.
Another possibility is that the climate, although weakly seasonal, allowed the floodplain
sediments to dry out at times.

This problem highlights the importance of understanding topography when doing
geoarcheological interpretation. Topography is hard to judge when deeply buried sites
can only be examined in a cutbank, test pits, or a few backhoe trenches. The bench
project could have benefited greatly from some remote sensing surveys on the north side
of the creek.

How Does Autocyclic Bedding Develop in a Narrow Creek Valley?
In Chapter 4, I asked whether the cyclic bedding seen in the bench is allocyclic or
autocyclic in nature, and proposed that one test might be to look for stratigraphic
variations in biota that matched the muddy-sandy character of the couplets. Applying
these tests to diatoms and snails, biotic variation appears to be mostly long-term rather
than cyclic in nature. If bedding is autocyclic, then, how could Coleto Creek shift far
enough away from the site to create fine-grained floodbasin deposits? The valley is rather
narrow here. Here is another area of inquiry that could have been illuminated by remote
1756

sensing. Remote sensing was not included in the original budget or the scope of work,
and I do not know if permission could have been obtained to investigate deposits on the
opposite side of the creek.

How Representative Are the Bench Deposits?
The northern side of the Berger Bluff site was removed long ago by erosion from
Coleto Creek. But how much has been lost? Is it possible that what is preserved is really
just the outskirts of a denser archeological deposit, now vanished? If these deposits had
never been lost, would the early occupations look more like a base camp and less like a
diurnal way station?

Why Are There So Many Inversions Among the Radiocarbon Assays?
Many of the radiocarbon assays from the bench are in inverted stratigraphic
relationships, highlighting the difficulty in securing representative assays for very old
sites in alluvial context with a history of active groundwater. My assessment of
bioturbation in the bench deposits has always been that it was limited, but it is possible I
have underestimated the extent of bioturbation. Where there are features in place (such as
the microvertebrate bone bed, or an in situ chipping area discovered near the top of unit
N109 E103), they seem to show little evidence of disruption.

PROCEDURAL FINDINGS
In addition to the substantive findings that have been summarized above, a few
things have been learned along the way that relate to the practice of paleoenvironmental
studies.
1757

The Importance of Rare Species
For most archeologists, the greater the frequency of an object, the greater its
importance. A site with ten thousand pieces of chipping debris usually gets more
attention than a site with five flakes. This leads to the inevitable conflation of frequency
with significance. I would argue that it is often the rarest items that carry the highest
information payload, and this is never more true than when dealing with biological proxy
data.

A corollary is that when a species is common, archeologists may fall into the trap
of thinking commonness implies optimum environmental conditions. In many cases, the
opposite is true. Many organisms produce large numbers of offspring specifically because
the environment is hostile and few are likely to survive to adulthood (see Vermeij and
Herbert 2004). Species like these, usually with high fecundity and short lifespans, are
referred to as “weedy” species, and some examples might be the snails Oligyra
orbiculata (medium-bodied) and Helicodiscus singleyanus (a microsnail) or the soil
diatom Hantzschia amphioxys. These tend to occur in large numbers and be ubiquitous. If
these species are, in fact, adapted to stressful environments, their presence may carry
some useful information for habitat reconstruction, but their propensity for ubiquity often
makes it hard to detect trends.

Among some of the characteristics of rare species addressed by Gaston and Kunin
(1997:22) are the following; rare species tend to

•

have lower reproductive investment
1758

•

have poorer dispersal abilities

•

use less common resources and/or a narrower range of resources

•

be likely to occupy a higher trophic level

I would argue that rare species may often carry some of the highest
paleoenvironmental information payload. Examples are the snails Valvata tricarinata and
Pomatiopsis lapidaria, the freshwater mussel Megalonaias nervosa, and the extinct
tortoise Gopherus hexagonatus. In using correspondence analysis to examine the diatom
data, I found it necessary to simply delete some of the most abundant and cosmopolitan
species from the database, and it was only after these species were eliminated that useful
numerical analysis could proceed.

Archeology first emerged as a discipline from a fascination with the curious, the
odd, and the unique, and has since evolved, at times, into an obsession with the
commonplace and the abundant. I argue we must always ask why things are common,
especially when dealing with biological proxy data.

The Usefulness of Numerical Analysis
In this study, numerical analysis was applied to grain-size data, diatoms, and
snails, the things that could suitably be quantified. In all three domains, numerical
analysis succeeded in extracting trends and relationships that were never apparent from
simple inspection. When looking at the cutbank or the unit profiles, the depositional
strata I have defined for the site often appear obscure and nearly invisible. Contacts
between the units are extremely gradational, and the units themselves do not differ much
visually. Nevertheless, numerical analysis has demonstrated that each stratum has a
1759

unique grain-size signature, a unique diatom signature, and a unique snail signature (Fig.
11.2). Furthermore, there is a long-term signature of regional drying during the Younger
Dryas and early Holocene that crosscuts all the strata. A long-term trend toward
upsection coarsening of the sediments and upsection changes in mesic-adapted by xericadapted diatoms and snails is discernible only through numerical analysis.

The lesson to be learned is that even when stratigraphy is subtle (and, perhaps in
some cases bioturbated), careful study and numerical analysis may be able to extract
paleoenvironmental history from seemingly intractable dirt.

A Geologic Model for Finding the Next Berger Bluff
The bench deposits are exceptional in their preservation of bone, shell, diatoms,
freshwater sponge spicules, phytoliths, and chrysophyte cysts. This degree of
preservation seems to have resulted because the bench deposits are a carbonate island in a
sea of potentially acidic Miocene sand, and the carbonate has partly buffered the effects
of groundwater and acidity that might result from trace amounts of iron or sulfur. There
are, however, other localities where remnant down-dip outcrops of Goliad Formation
bedrock emerge from younger deposits. Some of these are large enough to appear on the
Geologic Atlas of Texas. One of these occurs downstream on Coleto Creek near Raisin,
and there are probably others. If sites like this can be located, they may prove to be
comparable archives for proxy paleoenvironmental data.

1760

Figure 11.2. Numerical Analysis Yields Stratigraphic Signatures. Simplified versions of
Figs. 4.68, 7.12, and 8.81 with axis scaling omitted.
1761

References for Chapter 11
Aharon, Paul
2003

Meltwater Flooding Events in the Gulf of Mexico Revisited: Implications for
Rapid Climate Changes During the Last Deglaciation. Paleoceanography
18(4):pages 3-1 to 3-13.

Amon, James P., Carol A. Thompson, Quentin J. Carpenter and James Miner
2002

Temperate Zone Fens of the Glaciated Midwestern USA. Wetlands 22(2):301317.

Anderson, Roger Y., Bruce D. Allen and Kirsten M. Menking
2002

Geomorphic Expression of Abrupt Climate Change in Southwestern North
America at the Glacial Termination. Quaternary Research 57(3):371-381.

Armour, Jake, Peter J. Fawcett and John W. Geissman
2002

15 k.y. Paleoclimatic and Glacial Record From Northern New Mexico. Geology
39(8):723-726.

Bedford, Barbara L. and Kevin S. Godwin
2003 Fens of the United States: Distribution, Characteristics, and Scientific Connection
Versus Legal Isolation. Wetlands 23(3):608-629.

Benson, Larry, Michaele Kashgarian and Meyer Rubin
1995

Carbonate Deposition, Pyramid Lake Subbasin, Nevada: 2. Lake Levels and Polar
Jet Stream Positions Reconstructed From Radiocarbon Ages and Elevations of
Carbonates (Tufas) Deposited in the Lahontan Basin. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 117(1-2):1-30.
1762

Betancourt, Julio L., Kate A. Rylander, Cristina Peñalba and Janet McVickar
2001 Late Quaternary Vegetation History of Rough Canyon, South-Central New
Mexico, USA. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 165(12):71-95.

Bird, Broxton W. and Matthew E. Kirby
2006 An Alpine Lacustrine Record of Early Holocene North American Monsoon
Dynamics From Dry Lake, Southern California (USA). Journal of
Paleolimnology 35(1):179-192.

Blinn, Dean W., Richard H. Hevly and Owen K. Davis
1994 Continuous Holocene Record of Diatom Stratigraphy, Paleohydrology, and
Anthropogenic Activity in a Spring-Mound in Southwestern United States.
Quaternary Research 42(2):197-205.

Bousman, C. Britt
1998

Late Paleoindian Archeology. Chapter 8 (pages 161-210) in Michael B. Collins
(assembler, editor), Wilson Leonard An 11,000-Year Archeological Record of
Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Volume I, Introduction, Background, and
Syntheses. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at
Austin, Studies in Archeology 31; and Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Department, Archeological Studies Program, Report 10.

Castiglia, Peter J. and Peter J. Fawcett
2006

Large Holocene Lakes and Climate Change in the Chihuahuan Desert. Geology
34(2):113-116.

1763

Collins, Michael B.
1998

Early Paleoindian Components. Chapter 7 (pages 123-159) in Michael B.
Collins (assembler, editor), Wilson Leonard An 11,000-Year Archeological
Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Volume I, Introduction,
Background, and Syntheses. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
University of Texas at Austin, Studies in Archeology 31; and Texas Department
of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Department, Archeological Studies
Program, Report 10.

Cooke, Mary C.
2005

Soil Formation and Erosion in Central Texas: Insights From Relict Soils and Cave
Deposits. Unpublished PhD dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.

Davis, Loren G.
2003

Geoarchaeology and Geochronology of Pluvial Lake Chapala, Baja California,
Mexico. Geoarchaeology 18(2):205-223.

Dyke, Arthur S.
2004

An Outline of North American Deglaciation With Emphasis on Central and
Northern Canada. Pages 373-424 in J. Ehlers and P. L. Gibbard (eds.),
Quaternary Glaciations – Extent and Chronology. Part II: North America.
Developments in Quaternary Science 2. Elsevier.

Enzel, Yehouda, Stephen G. Wells and Nicholas Lancaster
2003

Late Pleistocene Lakes Along the Mojave River, Southeast California. Pages 6177 in Yehouda Enzel, Stephen G. Wells and Nicholas Lancaster (eds.),
Paleoenvironments and Paleohydrology of the Mojave and Southern Great Basin
Deserts. Geological Society of America Special Paper 368.

1764

Fredlund, Glen
1998 Phytolith Analysis. Chapter 41 (pages 1637-1651) in Michael B. Collins
(assembler, editor), Wilson Leonard An 11,000-Year Archeological Record of
Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Volume V, Special Studies. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin, Studies in
Archeology 31; and Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs
Department, Archeological Studies Program, Report 10.

Gaston, Kevin J. and William E. Kunin
1997

Rare-Common Differences: An Overview. Chapter 2 (pages 12-29) in William E.
Kunin and Kevin J. Gaston, (eds.), The Biology of Rarity. Causes and
Consequences of Rare-Common Differences. Chapman & Hall.

Hasbargen, Jim
1994 A Holocene Paleoclimatic and Environmental Record From Stoneman Lake,
Arizona. Quaternary Research 42(2):188-196.

Holliday, Vance T.
2000

Folsom Drought and Episodic Drying on the Southern High Plains From 10,90010,200 14C Yr B. P. Quaternary Research 53(1):1-12.

Holliday, Vance T., Susan D. Hovorka and Thomas C. Gustavson
1996

Lithostratigraphy and Geochronology of Fills in Small Playa Basins on the
Southern High Plains, United States. Geological Society of America Bulletin
108(8):953-965.

Hoyt, Cathryn A.
2000 Grassland to Desert: Holocene Vegetation and Climate Change in the Northern
Chihuahuan Desert. Unpublished PhD dissertation, The University of Texas at
Austin.
1765

Hudler, Dale B.
2000

Modeling Paleolandscapes in Central Texas. Unpublished PhD dissertation, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Meltzer, David J.
1991

Altithermal Archaeology and Paleoecology at Mustang Springs, on the Southern
High Plains of Texas. American Antiquity 56(2):236-267.

Menking, Kirsten M., Roger Y. Anderson, Nabil G. Shafike, Kamran H. Syed and Bruce
D. Allen
2004

Wetter or Colder During the Last Glacial Maximum? Revisiting the Pluvial Lake
Question in Southwestern North America. Quaternary Research 62(3):280-288.

Metcalfe, Sarah, Alison Say, Stuart Black, Robert McCulloch and Sarah O’Hara
2002

Wet Conditions During the Last Glaciation in the Chihuahuan Desert, Alta
Babicora Basin, Mexico. Quaternary Research 57(1):91-101.

Miner, James J. and D. Bradley Ketterling
2003

Dynamics of Peat Accumulation and Marl Flat Formation in a Calcareous Fen,
Midwestern United States. Wetlands 23(4):950-960.

Moorhead, Kevin K., Rachel E. Moynihan and Shannon L. Simpson
2000

Soil Characteristics of Four Southern Appalachian Fens in North Carolina, USA.
Wetlands 20(3):560-564.

Nordt, Lee C., Thomas W. Boutton, Charles T. Hallmark and Michael R. Waters
1994

Late Quaternary Vegetation and Climate Changes in Central Texas Based on the
Isotopic Composition of Organic Carbon. Quaternary Research 41(1):109-120.
1766

Nordt, Lee C., Thomas W. Boutton, John S. Jacob and Rolfe D. Mandel
2002

C4 Plant Productivity and Climate-CO2 Variations in South-Central Texas During
the Late Quaternary. Quaternary Research 58(2):182-188.

Ortega-Ramírez, José R., Alfonso Valiente-Banuet, Jaime Urrutia-Fucugauchi, Carlos A.
Mortera-Gutiérrez and Guillermo Alvarado-Valdez
1998

Paleoclimatic Changes During the Late Pleistocene-Holocene in Laguna
Babícora, Near the Chihuahuan Desert, México. Canadian Journal of Earth
Sciences 35(10):1168-1179.

Oviatt, Charles G., David B. Madsen and Dave N. Schmitt
2003

Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene Rivers and Wetlands in the Bonneville
Basin of Western North America. Quaternary Research 60(2):200-210.

Oviatt, Charles G., David M. Miller, John P. McGeehin, Cecile Zachary and Shannon
Mahan
2005

The Younger Dryas Phase of Great Salt Lake, Utah, USA. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 219(3-4):263-284.

Polyak, Victor J., Jessica B. T. Rasmussen and Yemane Asmerom
2004

Prolonged Wet Period in the Southwestern United States Through the Younger
Dryas. Geology 32(1):5-8.

Prochnow, Shane J.
2001 Paleohydrology and Geoarchaeology at the South End of Horn Shelter Number 2
Along the Brazos River, Central Texas. Unpublished MS thesis, Baylor
University.

1767

Quade, Jay, Richard M. Forester and Joseph F. Whelan
2003 Late Quaternary Paleohydrologic and Paleotemperature Change in Southern
Nevada. Pages 165-188 in Yehouda Enzel, Stephen G. Wells and Nicholas
Lancaster (eds.), Paleoenvironments and Paleohydrology of the Mojave and
Southern Great Basin Deserts. Geological Society of America Special Paper 368.

Sharpe, Saxon E.
2002 Solute Composition: A Parameter Affecting the Distribution of Freshwater
Gastropods. In Spring-Fed Wetlands: Important Scientific and Cultural Resources
of the Intermountain Region (Conference Proceedings). Desert Research Institute.

Shaw, Leslie C., Raymond W. Neck, James L. Theler, and Michael B. Collins
1998

The Molluscan Paleoassemblage. Chapter 37 in Michael B. Collins
(assembler, editor), Wilson Leonard An 11,000-Year Archeological Record of
Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas. Volume V, Special Studies. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin, Studies in
Archeology 31; and Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs
Department, Archeological Studies Program, Report 10.

Starkel, Leszek
2002

Change in the Frequency of Extreme Events as the Indicator of Climatic Change
in the Holocene (In Fluvial Systems). Quaternary International 91(1):25-32.

Toomey, Rickard S., III
1993

Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal and Environmental Changes at Hall's Cave,
Kerr County, Texas. Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.

1768

Van Devender, Thomas R.
1990

Late Quaternary Vegetation and Climate of the Chihuahuan Desert, United States
and Mexico. Chapter 7 (pages 104-133) in Julio L. Betancourt, Thomas R. Van
Devender, and Paul S. Martin (eds.), Packrat Middens. The Last 40,000 Years of
Biotic Change. Tucson, University of Arizona Press.

Vermeij, Geerat J. and Gergory S. Herbert
2004 Measuring Relative Abundance in Fossil and Living Assemblages. Paleobiology
30(1):1-4.

Waters, Michael R.
1989 Late Quaternary Lacustrine History and Paleoclimatic Significance of Pluvial
Lake Cochise, Southeastern Arizona. Quaternary Research 32(1):1-11.

Wilkins, David E. and Donald R. Currey
1997

Timing and Extent of Late Quaternary Paleolakes in the Trans-Pecos Closed
Basin, West Texas and South-Central New Mexico. Quaternary Research
47(3):306-315.

1769

