BZT Cover.qxd

5/9/05

10:37 AM

Page 1

The BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman, Brazoria County, Texas

The
BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman
Brazoria County, Texas

d’Aigle, Bradle and Bernhardt

Robert P. d’Aigle
Michael R. Bradle
Gilbert T. Bernhardt
Archeological Resources Protection Act
April 2005

Geoarchaeological and Archaeological Investigations of The

BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman
Brazoria County, Texas

Prepared for:
The U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service
The Department of the Interior
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Archaeological Resources Protection Act Permit (ARPA)
Dated: 02-07-2003

Robert P. d'Aigle, RPA, Principal Investigator
CRC, International Archaeology & Ecology, LLC
7400 Jones Drive, Suite 313
Galveston, Texas 77551
And
Michael R. Bradle
Gilbert T. Bernhardt
American Archaeology Group, LLC
1211 W. Fourth Street
Lampasas, TX 76550
With contributions by:
Robson Bonnichsen, PhD
John Jones, PhD
Michael Waters, PhD
Jason Wiersema

April 2005

Geoarchaeological and Archaeological Investigations of The

BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman
Brazoria County, Texas

Robert P. d'Aigle, RPA, Principal Investigator
CRC, International Archaeology & Ecology, LLC
7400 Jones Drive, Suite 313
Galveston, Texas 77551
And
Michael R. Bradle
Gilbert T. Bernhardt
American Archaeology Group, LLC
1211 W. Fourth Street
Lampasas, TX 76550

April 2005

Acknowledgements
We express our appreciation to Bob Pickering, Ariane Pinson, Wera Schmerer, Michael Blum,
James Adovasio, Michael Faught, Ron Hatfield, and the staff at the San Bernard National
Wildlife Refuge for their personal assistance for this ARPA investigation. It must be noted that
CRC, International Archaeology & Ecology, LLC and American Archaeology Group, LLC
provided all of their effort, time, and expenditures, including the publishing of this report,
without reimbursement, payment, contributions, or financial support from any outside source.
Our special appreciation to Gilbert “Gib” Bernhardt for the generous donation of his time, effort,
expenditures, and co-authorship of this report and to Heidi Fuller for providing editorial
comments and for her assistance during the 2004 geoarchaeological investigation on behalf of
American Archaeology Group, LLC
To Natasha Hryshechko, Вы -лучший археолог и партнер! К Вам, моему сердцу, моей
любви, моей жизни.

Cocklebur Slough
San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge
Brazoria County, Texas
Cover photograph by
Ed Christman
Lake Jackson, TX

Abstract
In September 2002, Robert P. d'Aigle, RPA and Nataliya V. Hryshechko, CRC, International
Archaeology & Ecology, LLC (CRC) reported the discovery and partial excavation of a
prehistoric human skull approximately one mile inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Figures 1-2).
This location, designated as BZT-1, is within the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, (US
Fish and Wildlife Service) in southern Brazoria County, Texas. At the conclusion of the 2002
investigation, these human remains were designated by CRC as the site of the BZT-1 Prehistoric
Woman. This discovery resulted in an Archaeological Resources Protection Act (ARPA)
archaeological and geoarchaeological investigation at BZT-1 and BZT-2 in May 2003.
During the year 2003, a prehistoric and nearly complete, fragmented human skeleton of a young,
adult female was recovered from the locality known as BZT-1 in Brazoria County, Texas. There
was no evidence of a burial shaft or other soil disturbance. There were no grave goods or positive
evidence of occupation at BZT-1. This person, designated as the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman, does
not appear to have been intentionally buried.
The female skeleton was lying in a face down, extended position with her hands crossed in front,
beneath her waist, and with a complete absence of the right tibia, fibula, and foot. The person
represented by the human remains at BZT-1 appears to have been killed after her hands were tied
in front of her abdomen, and then discarded into the muddy west bank of a now extinct channel
of Cocklebur Slough. The BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman may have been mutilated but no strong
evidence was found. Since the remains were found lying on the edge of an extinct channel of
Cocklebur Slough, stream avulsion may instead account for the missing tibia, fibula, and foot.
The successful radiocarbon results obtained on the petrosal from the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman
by Tim Jull, NSF-Arizona AMS Facility and American Archaeology Group’s geoarchaeological
and geomorphological modeling and analyses completed in September 2004 support, at a
minimum, a late Pleistocene age of 10,740 years ±760 RC years BP or older for the BZT-1
Prehistoric Woman. The radiocarbon years BP were calibrated to 12,780 calendar years BP with
a 2 sigma (95% accuracy) range of 15,250 to 10,390 Cal BP making the BZT-1 Prehistoric
Woman one of the oldest, and probably the oldest, human remains ever discovered on the North
and South American continents.
The previous location of the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman is not recommended as eligible for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places. Under the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 (36 CFR 800.4), the skeletal remains of the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman, as a
collection, are recommended as eligible for immediate inclusion in the National Register of
Historic Places under Criteria D. The skeletal remains of the Prehistoric Woman will be
permanently curated at the Center for Archaeological Research, the University of Texas, San
Antonio, Texas.

i

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT

i

LIST OF PHOTOGRAPHS

ii

LIST OF TABLES

ii

LIST OF FIGURES

iii

CHAPTERS
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
XIII

INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND AND PREVIOUS INVESTIGATION
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
ENVIRONMENTAL DEFINITION OF THE STUDY AREA
METHODOLOGY OF THE 2003 ARPA INVESTIGATION
GEOLOGY OF BZT-1
THE HUMAN SKELETON
SKELETAL REMAINS
NON-HUMAN REMAINS AND ARTIFACTS
POLLEN ANALYSIS
INTERPRETATION OF BZT-1 DATA
CONCLUSION
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES

REFERENCES CITED

1
5
11
13
14
17
30
37
43
46
51
58
59
60

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I:
APPENDIX II:
APPENDIX III:
APPENDIX IV:

GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL MODEL STATISTICS
COMPLETE BZT-1 SKELETAL INVENTORY WITH PRESERVATION INDEX1
MEASUREMENTS TAKEN FROM BZT-1 SKELETAL REMAINS
CALIBRATION OF RADIOCARBON AGE TO CALENDAR YEARS

64
73
77
86

LIST OF PHOTOGRAPHS
PHOTOGRAPH 1:
PHOTOGRAPH 2:
PHOTOGRAPH 3:
PHOTOGRAPH 4:
PHOTOGRAPH 5:
PHOTOGRAPH 6:

SEDIMENT INSIDE SKULL
UNIT INUNDATION BY THE CURRENT GROUNDWATER KEVEL
STRATAGRAPHIC POSITION AND ORIENTATION OF THE HUMAN REMAINS AT BZT-1
AERIAL PHOTOGRAPH OF BZT-1 (2001)
VENTRAL VIEW OF BZT-1 REMAINS, LABORATORY EXTRACTION
LACK OF EVIDENCE OF BURIAL SHAFT, TOMB, OR OTHER DISTURBANCE IN THE
BTB-HORIZON
PHOTOGRAPH 7: LACK OF EVIDENCE OF BURIAL SHAFT, TOMB, OR OTHER DISTURBANCE IN THE
BASE OF THE BTB-HORIZON

7
14
16
22
32
34
35

LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1:
TABLE 2:
TABLE 3:
TABLE 4:
TABLE 5:
TABLE 6:
TABLE 7:
TABLE 8:
TABLE 9:

REGIONAL CHRONOLOGY
ABBREVIATED INVENTORY OF BZT-1 SKELETAL ELEMENTS RECOVERED
FAUNAL REMAINS FROM BZT-1
INVERTEBRATES FROM BZT-1 HORIZONS
POLLEN TAXA IDENTIFIED
POLLEN COUNTS AND PERCENTAGES
QUANTITATIVE AMINO ACID ANALYSES – PETROSAL
QUANTITATIVE AMINO ACID ANALYSES – TIBIA, HUMERUS, FEMUR
RADIOCARBON AGES FROM BZT-1 AND BZT-2

ii

12
38
44
45
48
49
52
54
55

LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1:
FIGURE 2:
FIGURE 3:
FIGURE 4:
FIGURE 5:
FIGURE 6:
FIGURE 7:
FIGURE 8:
FIGURE 9:
FIGURE 10:
FIGURE 11:

INDEX MAP
SITE LOCATION – TOPOGRAPHIC 1:20
SITE LOCATION – TOPOGRAPHIC 1:6
SITE LOCATION – 1940 AERIAL
TRENCHES AAG-BHT-3, BZT-1, AND BZT-2
CORE LOCATIONS A/B BH8 AND A/B BH9
PROFILE FOR A/B BH3, A/B BH9, AAG-BHT-3, BZT-1, AND BZT-2
STUDY AREA AND ABANDONED CHANNEL OF COCKLEBUR SLOUGH
REGIONAL CHRONOLOGY
PRONE FORM OF SKELETON AT BZT-1 LOCATED AT TOP OF UNIT 1
THE ELEMENTS OF THE HUMAN SKELETON

iii

3
4
8
9
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

Chapter I
Introduction
In September 2002, Robert P. d'Aigle, RPA and Nataliya V. Hryshechko, CRC, International
Archaeology & Ecology, LLC (CRC) reported the discovery of a prehistoric human skull
approximately one mile inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Figures 1-2). This location, designated
as BZT-1, is within the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, (U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service)
in southern Brazoria County, Texas. At the conclusion of the 2002 investigation, these human
remains were designated by CRC as the site of the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman. d’Aigle and
Hryshechko (2002) reported that the human remains are potentially date to the late Pleistocene.
A second location, a shell midden designated as BZT-2, is located approximately 66-meters
southwest of BZT-1.
This discovery resulted in an Archaeological Resources Protection Act (ARPA) archaeological
and geoarchaeological investigation at BZT-1 (41BO223) and BZT-2 (41BO215) in May 2003.
Subsequent to CRC’s filing an application for an ARPA permit with the U. S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, Albuquerque, New Mexico, Dr. Michael Waters of the Center for the Study of the First
Americans, Texas A&M University (CSF-TAMU) contacted CRC and requested that the CSFTAMU be allowed to participate in this ARPA investigation. As a result, the ARPA
investigation reported herein was a joint effort of CRC International Archaeology & Ecology,
LLC (CRC), American Archaeology Group, LLC (AAG), and the CSF-TAMU. Robert P.
d’Aigle, RPA, Michael R. Bradle, MA, Dr. Michael Waters, and Dr. Robson Bonnichsen were in
direct charge of the ARPA investigation.
The objectives of the May 2003 ARPA investigation were to:
1.

Excavate a large area surrounding the location of the BZT-1 human remains to ensure
that no other human remains are present.
2. Provide detailed analyses of the stratigraphy at BZT-1 and BZT-2.
3. Correlate the stratigraphy from BZT-1 to BZT-2.
4. Obtain additional paleoenvironmental samples.
5. Build a geomorphological model of soil development at the location of BZT-1 and BZT2.
6. Determine the stratigraphic position of the human skeleton at BZT-1.
7. Determine the stratigraphic position of the shell midden at BZT-2.
8. Excavate the skeleton at BZT-1.
9. Determine the method of deposition for the remains.
10. Conserve, rebuild, study, and determine the age of the skeleton.

In September 2004, Michael R. Bradle and Gilbert T. Bernhardt of AAG conducted an additional
geoarchaeological investigation at the location of BZT-I Prehistoric Woman. AAG’s
investigation, in a team effort with CRC, focused on excavating AAG-BHT-3, a 6-meter by 9meter by 1.65-meter deep trench, in order to expose a large expansive area. This approach to the
geoarchaeological investigation fulfilled the original scope of the ARPA permit that required the
excavation of a large area surrounding BZT-1 to ensure that no further human remains were
present.
Further, the AAG and CRC 2004 geoarcheological investigation included a detailed examination
of the soil and sediment stratigraphy in an attempt to identify any subsurface microtopography,
and to discern the soil composition and age of the soils and sediments. This effort was designed
1

to assimilate all of the previous data and conduct an additional, detailed geoarcheological
investigation.

2

3

4

Chapter II
Background and Previous Investigation
In April 1999, personnel of the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) at the San Bernard
National Wildlife Refuge (Refuge) in Brazoria County, Texas, encountered the top of a skull that
was exposed in the sidewall of an excavated borrow ditch. Concerned that the skull may be the
upper portion of a human skull, CRC was contracted in 2001 to conduct an intensive Survey and
site testing investigation of the remains (d'Aigle and Hryshechko 2002). Volume 1 of the 2002
final report, Intensive Survey and Site Testing At BZT-1, San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge,
Brazoria County, Texas, can be found at http://www.culturalresource.com/pan.html. Volume 2 of
this report contains restricted information and is not available for public distribution.
CRC personnel spent four days investigating this location in May 2001. In July 2001, CRC
returned to the location, now designated as BZT-1 and under the supervision of Dr. D. Gentry
Steele, Physical Anthropologist, Texas A&M University, portions of the skull, mandible, and
clavicle, two cervical vertebrae, and a number of partial and complete teeth were excavated
(d’Aigle and Hryshechko 2002). A Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) survey of the area was
undertaken to prospect for other possible human remains and other subsurface disturbances at the
location (ibid). Two geologists, Howell and Moya (Moya 2002), conducted geological studies,
which included backhoe trenching and coring.. In addition, numerous sediment and soil samples
were taken for analyses (Drees 2002). The recovered skeletal remains, sediment samples, and soil
samples were used in a number of analyses that included:
1. Radiocarbon dating and stable carbon isotope analysis of one petrosal and one complete
tooth (Jull 2002).
2. Analysis of a complete bicuspid for ancient DNA (Schmerer 2002).
3. Analysis of sediment samples circumambient to the skull for human protein residues
(Puseman 2002).
4. Soil and sediment samples for texture, chemical composition, and Munsell colors (Drees
2002).
5. Stable carbon isotope analysis of a partial tooth (Tykot 2002).
6. The examination of the partial human remains (Steele 2002).
In addition, one sediment sample was taken from inside the skull (Photograph 1) and one sample
from the Bt2-horizon ≈25-centimeters above the skull. The sediment inside the skull consisted of
5YR 4/6 yellowish red fluvial silty sand (Drees 2002:121), which is nearly identical to the B/Chorizon 5YR 4/3 silty sand and was dated at 5,135 ±40 RC years BP (CAMS-87685). The BP
(Before Present) indicates years before 1950 AD. The soil sample taken from Bt2-horizon, above
the skull, was dated at 4870 ± 40 RC years BP (CAMS-87686) (Stafford 2002).
In addition, d'Aigle and Hryshechko (2002) discovered and examined a shell midden found in
Trench 3 that is located approximately 66-meters southwest of BZT-1 (Figures 3 and 4). This
location was designated as BZT-2. Trenches 3 and 4 were excavated to determine if the extinct
meander of Cocklebur Slough traced out in Figure 3 could be confirmed. This extinct meander
was in line with the expected course and the west bank of the meander was exposed in both
trenches.
The Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) survey conducted at BZT-1 indicated no subsurface
anomalies at the location of the partial human remains or in the immediately adjacent areas.
Further, no evidence of other human remains was located in these areas (Moya 2002). Further
5

analysis of the GPR data, coupled with the partial excavation of the BZT-1 remains, indicated no
evidence of a burial shaft or tomb associated with the partial human remains.

6

Photograph 1: Sediment inside skull (d’Aigle and Hryshechko 2002)
7

8

9

Based on the presence of human protein in the soil surrounding the skull (Pusemen 2002) and no
apparent disturbance in the soil deposits, d'Aigle and Hryshechko (2002) determined that the
body decomposed in situ. Further, it was suggested that the remainder of the human skeleton may
be articulated and in a vertical position (ibid). DNA analyses on a tooth produced negative results
(Schmerer 2002).
These findings led d'Aigle and Hryshechko (2002:169) to suggest the preliminary excavations at
the location of the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman indicated "...a death by mishap as sinking and
suffocation in a muddy bog." After analysis of the skull and teeth recovered from the location,
Steele (2002) determined that the remains were probably those of a female approximately 20 to
30 years of age. No artifacts or grave goods were found with the BZT-1 skull and thus the
cultural affiliation could only be opined by Steele’s examination of an incisor.
Stable carbon isotope analyses of a tooth fragment suggested that the person represented by these
human remains might have been a resident of the Texas Gulf Coast with marine resources as part
of her diet (Tykot 2002). However, the stable carbon isotope value for the dated petrosal
suggested "this person was not from the Gulf Coast region and was instead from an inland,
tropical region significantly distant geographically from the ocean..." (d'Aigle and Hryshechko
2002:96). This data comports with what we know about Paleoindians and their ranging ability
across many environmental zones.
The age of a petrosal from BZT-1 was reported to be 10,740 ±760 14C yr BP (AA-45910) and
calibrated to 2-sigma (95% probability) Cal BP 15,250 to 10,390 calendar years.
The petrosal bone that was located inside the skull was 14C dated a minimum of
10,740 years ±760 RC years BP (AA45910) and yielded a bone collagen δ 13C of –
26.5‰. The soil inside the skull (BZT1L1S15) dated at a minimum of 5,135 years
±40 RC years BP (CAMS-87685) and yielded a δ13C value of –16.28‰. The soil
immediately above the skull (BZT1L2S1) dated at a minimum of 4,870 years ±40 RC
years BP (CAMS-87686) and yielded a δ13C value of –15.17‰. This indicates that
the δ13C of the bone collagen was not contaminated by the surrounding sediment
from inside or above the skull. These δ13C values are much more positive (heavier)
than the -26.5‰ value for the Arizona radiocarbon date on petrous bone. Therefore,
humic acid contamination of the bone organic carbon dated by Arizona is very
unlikely. Humate contamination of the bone would be indicated only if the δ13C
values of the humic acids were -25‰ to -30‰. If the bone is contaminated by
geologically younger carbon, the contamination is not from humates. ...the possibility
of degraded collagen skewing the results significantly (±0.5‰) is remote. The most
likely contamination of the bone would have been with soil and sediment humates.
Since we know the humic acids contain modern carbon, any humate contamination of
the bone would have caused the bone RC date to be too young. Therefore, the
University of Arizona bone date is either correct or the bone is even older than that
14
C age (Stafford 2002:165).

10

Chapter III
Archaeological Background
Archaeological Chronology In the Brazoria County Area
Brazoria County is located in the Central Coastal Plain cultural-geographical region as defined by
Biesaart et al (1985:76). This area is also referred to as the Southern Coastal Corridor as defined
by Bailey (1987) and addressed in more detail by Mercado-Allinger et al (1996). This area is still
poorly understood. The local cultural prehistoric chronology has been divided into the Historic,
Late Prehistoric, Archaic, and Paleoindian (Table 1). These periods reflect changes in subsistence
patterns, and technology (Patterson 1979; Aten 1983).
Historic Period
The early historic period in Texas began in the late 16th century with the first documented arrival
of Europeans. Brazoria County is situated within the historic range of the Karankawa Indians
who inhabited the area in the 16th Century (Newcomb 1986; Aten 1983). Contact period
occupations are often identified by the occurrences of glass beads, gun parts, gunflints, metal
projectile points, and European manufactured ceramics.
Ricklis (1996) provides a thorough synthesis of the history of the Karankawa Indians. European
contact with the Karankawa Indians occurred in 1528 when the Navarez Expedition became
shipwrecked on Brazoria Island, in present day Brazoria County, Texas. The Karankawa Indians
seized Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca and three other shipmates. Cabeza de Vaca actually lived
among the Karankawa for approximately 8 years before escaping to Mexico. His journal has
yielded valuable data on the Karankawa Indians (Newcomb 1986).
The Karankawa Indians did not see any other Europeans until February 20, 1685, when Rene
Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, a French explorer, anchored in Brazoria Bay with 300
colonists. LaSalle and his colonists moved north to Garcitas Creek in nearby Victoria County and
established a French Fort called Fort Saint Louis (41VT4). Currently, the Texas Historical
Commission is excavating this site, which should yield extremely valuable data on the early
European adaptations to this area and their interaction with the local Karankawa Indians.
Late Prehistoric Period
This period has been referred to as the Neo-American Stage (Suhm et al 1954). Technological
changes are the primary distinguishing characteristic of this stage. The most obvious changes that
emerged at the beginning of the Late Prehistoric period is the introduction of the bow and arrow,
decreased use of the atlatl or spear thrower, and the appearance of ceramic storage and service
vessels (Aten 1983). Aten identified six subperiods in the Galveston Bay area, based on his
ceramic seriation studies, but the Brazoria County area is still relatively unknown.
Archaic Period
The Archaic period is generally divided into three subperiods consisting of Early, Middle, and
Late. The Early Archaic period generally ranges from approximately 6,000 B.C. to 5,000 B.C.
During this time, it appears that the social organization remained similar to Paleo-Indian
traditions. Projectile point styles changed and included a number of stemmed points such as
Andice, Baird, Bell, and Wells (Wheat 1953; Turner and Hester 1985).
The Middle Archaic period generally ranges from approximately 5,000 B.C. to 1,500 B.C.
During this period, shellfish became a major source of food and indicates a seasonal collection
strategy. Populations begin to increase and regional variation in artifact styles and assemblages
11

denote the formation of group territoriality (Aten 1983:155). Projectile point types indicative of
this period are Bulverde, Carrollton, and Trinity (Patterson 1979).
The Late Archaic period generally ranges from approximately 1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100 when
ceramic storage and service vessels appear (Aten 1983:287). Populations increased significantly
at this time (Aten 1983:158-159), and it is postulated that seasonal movement occurred with
groups dispersing along the coastal areas during the summer months. Projectile point types
indicative of this period are Ellis, Gary, Kent, Palmillas, Refugio, and Yarbrough (Turner and
Hester 1985). Prehistoric cemeteries begin to appear during this time (Aten 1983).
Paleoindian Period
According to Willey and Phillips (1958:80), problems exist with the term “Paleoindian.” The
term Paleoindian is used in this discussion although the Native American Indian has not been
unequivocally proven the only Native American. Paleoindian typically refers to those cultures,
which were oriented toward big game procurement adaptation. However, it has also been argued
that subsistence in Clovis times, for example, Paleoindians exploited a diverse fauna base that not
only included large herbivores such as mammoth, bison, and horse but also included smaller
animals such as turtles, land tortoises, alligators, mice badger, and raccoon.
Generally, it is believed that this period lasted from about 10,000 B.C. until 6000 B.C.
Diagnostic artifacts of the period include dart types Angostura, Clovis, Folsom, and other
lanceolate projectile points as defined by Suhm and Jelks (1962) and Turner and Hester (1985).
These early sites are often found on old terraces of major river drainages and may be more distant
from major streams than some more recent occupations. Wheat (1953), and Aten (1983) report on
archaeological sites in the region representing this period.
Table 1: Regional Chronology
Regional Periods

Years Before
Present (BP)

1950 A. D.

Historic

0

500-1500 A. D.

Late Prehistoric

500-1,500

500 A.D. – 500 B. C.

Late Archaic

1,500-2,500

3000-500 B. C.

Middle Archaic

2,500-5,000

Calendar Years

Geologic Epoch

Late Holocene

6000-3000 B. C.

Middle Holocene

Early Archaic

5,000-8,000

9450-6000 B. C.

Early Holocene*

Paleoindian

8,000-11,450

13450-9450 B. C.

Late Pleistocene*

Early Paleoindian
Adaptations

11,450-15,450

(*Anderson and Smith 2003:349)

12

Chapter IV
Environmental Definition of the Study Area
General Overview
The San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge (Refuge) was established in 1968 and is administered
as an integral unit of the National Wildlife Refuge System, U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, for
the protection and preservation of nationally and internationally important species of wildlife and
their habitats. Acquisition of lands within the approved refuge boundary is not complete. As of
September 30, 1977, acreage in the refuge ownership totaled 21,865 acres. It is bordered on three
sides by fences and by Cedar Lake Creek on the southwestern boundary. This central Flyway
refuge is located in Brazoria County, Texas between the San Bernard River and Cedar Lake
Creek, approximately 70 miles southwest of Houston, Texas.
Physical features of southwestern Brazoria County are described as being flat coastal prairies,
drained by the San Bernard and Brazos River. Extensions of inland wooded areas reach toward
the Gulf of Mexico, along major drainage systems. The climate of the upper Texas Gulf Coast is
characteristic of the marine type, with comparatively uniform temperatures in all seasons and a
small diurnal range. There are several ecological units on the Refuge.
In the area of the current ARPA investigation, the two primary units are fresh marsh and
nonsaline prairie.
Fresh Marsh
Open water occurs mostly within the nonsaline prairie unit. They are often dry in mid-summer,
but exhibit a flora peculiar to them. The dominant species are California bulrush, longtom grass,
Mexican sprangletop, barnyard millet, purple pluchea, water-lettuce, burhead, and grassy
arrowhead.
Many low, wet, sluggish-flowing drains and swales occur on the Refuge. Plants, which are
present at this time, include Mexican devilweed, Drummond Sesbania, longtom grass, jointed
flatsedge, water panicum, and switchgrass. The deeper water depressions and drains consist
primarily of swamp smartweed.
Nonsaline Prairie
The principal ground cover on this unit consists of buffalograss, slimspike three-awn, oldfield
three-awn, silver bluestem, bushy bluestem, tumblegrass, smut grass, brownseed paspalum,
Texas wintergrass, and little bluestem. The dominant herbs are (the) western ragweed, narrowleaf
and seacoast sumpweed, purple pleatleaf, common brownweed, and green wild indigo. Shrubs
such as huisache and eastern baccaris are also found in this unit. (Reprinted with the permission
of the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Fleetwood, Nd).

13

Chapter V
Methodology of the 2003 ARPA Investigations
The ARPA investigations of BZT-1 and BZT-2 took place from May 6 to May 12, 2003. Project
personnel included Robert P. d'Aigle, RPA; Nataliya V. Hryshechko; Dr. Juan Moya; Dr.
Michael Waters; Dr. Robson Bonnichsen; William Dickens; Maria Parks, and Jason Wiersema.
In order to remove the bones as quickly as possible, to minimize bone exposure, most of the crew
generally worked 12-hour days. Personnel from the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge
assisted with the excavations. At BZT-1, a trackhoe was used to clear much of the overlying,
sterile, and younger sediments from the bank of the borrow ditch and the immediately
surrounding area to about 50-centimeters above the known position and elevation of the skull.
The grid system established by d'Aigle and Hryshechko (2002) was reestablished and four 1 X 1meter² units were excavated by hand. Once the skeleton was located, the remains were excavated
as a feature. Excavation was made difficult by the presence of a high water table. The swimming
pool pump that was brought to the investigation by Waters failed to keep water away from the
excavation area (Photograph 2). As specified in the terms of the ARPA permit application, a
trench box or cofferdam was to be installed to prevent water from inundating the excavations.
However, Waters and Bonnichsen decided, before excavation had commenced, that the trench
box installation would not be necessary. Unfortunately, rising water was a constant source of
interference with the excavation and necessitated cutting numerous small, hand-troweled trenches
to permit the excavation to continue.

Photograph 2: Unit inundation by the current groundwater kevel.
14

This excavation illustrated that the remains lay in a horizontal plane. Although Waters and
Bonnichsen stated that, “This skeleton was found to lie exclusively within the Btb horizon about
1-cm above the BC horizon.” (2005:4), it is obvious in Photograph 3 that the remains were lying
entirely within the B/C-horizon of Unit 1 and impressed approximately 1- to 2-centimeters into
the base of the overlying Btb-horizon of Unit 2. All excavation of the BZT-1 skeleton was
conducted with wooden hand tools to avoid causing any damage to the bones. All removed soil
and sediments were water-screened through 1/8th inch perforated aluminum screen; with the
exception noted below. Once the remains were uncovered, Waters and Bonnichsen dug an
approximately 46 X 46-centimeter by 46-centimeter deep hole in the same location from which
the skull had been removed in the 2001 excavation (Photographs 2 and 3).
Although it was previously known that not all of the braincase, mandible, and possibly additional
teeth, had been removed in the original investigation, (d’Aigle and Hryshechko 2002 and see
Chapter VIII, Skeleton Remains) the sediments removed from this “hole” by Waters and
Bonnichsen were not screened but instead were discarded. d’Aigle and Hryshechko inspected the
excavated hole and attempted to recover as much as possible of the discarded soil. Less than 10%
of the discarded soil was recovered. Several fragments of unidentified skull fragments were
recovered from the discarded soil. Bonnichsen indicated that this hole had been dug and the soil
discarded because he did not believe there were any additional remains associated with the
previously removed skull fragments.
The second hole, visible in top portion of the excavated unit in Photograph 3, was excavated
under the direction of Waters and Bonnichsen to determine if any elements of the right patella,
tibia, fibula, or foot were present. The sediment from this hole was water screened but no bone
samples were found.
The remains were too fragile to remove as individual elements because many of the bones
appeared to be crushed or broken. As a result, portions of the skeleton, namely the trunk of the
skeleton and the right femur, were pedestaled and wrapped in a hard protective plaster jacket.
This jacket was then transported to the Physical Anthropology Laboratory at Texas A&M
University.
Exploratory Backhoe Trench
In order to examine the stratigraphy adjacent to BZT-1, one mechanical trench was excavated;
not two as stated by Waters and Bonnichsen (2005:28). This trench, approximately 0.75 X 5meters and 1.5-meters deep, was excavated with a backhoe ≈20-meters behind BZT-1. The trench
quickly collapsed because of the high water table and the instability of the B/C-horizon, and
therefore could not be studied.
Additional trenches were excavated at BZT-2 under the direction of d’Aigle and Moya. The shell
midden previously discovered by d’Aigle and Hryshechko (2002) was relocated. A small portion
of the shell midden was examined. The shell midden occurs throughout portions of the Btbhorizon. In some places, the midden encounters the B/C-horizon at the base of the Btb-horizon to
approximately 1- to 2-cm into the B/C-horizon. The midden appears to be ≈16-meters² in
diameter. Rangia cuneata dominates the midden. After water screening about one-gallon of the
midden materials, a few fragments of non-human animal bones were found. A single Rangia
cuneata from the midden yielded a radiocarbon age of 5,585 +40 14C yr BP (CAMS-94573).
This is the only date obtained from BZT-2. Moya and Waters profiled the stratigraphy at BZT-2.
(See Chapter VI Geoarchaeology of BZT-1 for an explanation of the stratigraphic profiling.)

15

Photograph 3: Stratagraphic Position and Orientation of the Human Remains at BZT-1.
16

Chapter VI
Geoarchaeology of BZT-1
Introduction
The geoarchaeological investigation of the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman is located within the San
Bernard National Wildlife Refuge and is situated in southwestern Brazoria County, Texas. The
study area is situated on the western Coastal Plains approximately six kilometers inland from the
mid-Texas coast of the Gulf of Mexico. Modern major drainage in the area is provided by the
San Bernard River, located north and roughly parallel to the study area, and New Caney Creek,
located south and roughly parallel to the study area. Cocklebur Slough and Cedar Lake Creek
provide local drainage. The study area is located near the confluence of Cocklebur Slough with
Cedar Lake Creek and on the interfluve between Cocklebur Slough and Cedar Lake Creek.
Sediments associated with the Colorado River system, particularly those centered on the San
Bernard River, dominate the stratigraphy of the area. The ancestral Colorado River carved a
broad deep valley during the Late Pleistocene low-stand and then aggraded its lower valley to
roughly the elevation of the surrounding uplands in Late Holocene (Abbott 2001). This complex
valley fill subsumed multiple meander belts that documented a series of avulsions from Middle to
Late Holocene, and a series of older Deweyville terraces. Evidence of stream piracy dominates
the geomorphology of the study area. This was either the result of stream piracy by a headward
eroding coastal stream or by simple diversion into a relict coarse-grained meander belt associated
with the Beaumont deltaic system (Aslan and Blum 1999).
The objectives of the 2004 geoarchaeological investigation were twofold.
1. To spatially and chronologically delineate the alluvial environments of deposition, and
2. To assess the influences of these environments on the spatial and temporal distribution of
the archaeological record.
Methods
The late Quaternary record of the study area was constructed from the following sources:
1. Three backhoe trenches of which two were analyzed by CRC (BZT-1 and BZT-2) and
one analyzed by AAG (AAG-BHT-3) (Figure 5);
2. Two Cores (Figures 6 and 7) from a study by Aslan and Blum (1999);
3. The Cedar Lane NE 7.5 minute quadrangle topographic map (U.S. Geologic Survey
1972), The Cedar Lane 7.5 minute quadrangle topographic map (U.S. Geologic Survey
1972), and the Sweeny 7.5 minute quadrangle topographic map (U.S. Geologic Survey
1972);
4. The Geologic Atlas of Texas, Houston Sheet (Fisher 1982) and Geologic Atlas of Texas,
Beeville-Bay City Sheet (Fisher 1975);
5. The Soil Survey of Brazoria County, Texas (Crenwelge et al 1981); and,
6. The computer program EPIC, an erosion/productivity impact calculator (Williams et al
1984).
A large trench (AAG-BHT-3) 6-meters by 9-meters by 1.65-meters deep was excavated and
analyzed by AAG. The selected study localities are shown in Figures 1 and 2. The baseline for
the cross-section was established roughly along the interfluvial divide between Cocklebur Slough
17

and Cedar Lake Creek (Figures 6 and 7). The backhoe trenches were placed to sample the
differing stratigraphy and geomorphological features represented in the study area. The alluvial
stratigraphic chronology was based on modeling, the degree of soil development, topographic
location, and correlation to other coastal Texas alluvial stream histories.
Model Development
Agriculture Research Service of the United States Department of Agriculture (Williams et al.
1984) developed an Erosion/Productivity Impact Calculator (EPIC). They further developed a
Model 1 that achieved the following goals:
1. Physically based and capable of simultaneously and realistically simulating the processes
involved in erosion by using readily available inputs;
2. Capable of simulating the processes as they would occur over hundreds and thousands of
years;
3. Applicable to a wide range of soils, climates and crops encountered in the United States;
and,
4. Computationally efficient, convenient to use, and capable of assessing the effects of
environmental and ecological changes on erosion and soil productivity.
The Brazoria soil series were modeled for this study (Figure 5). The model duration was set for
1,450 years. The climate was set to mimic current conditions of upper central Coastal Texas
from statistical probabilities derived from long-term weather information at the Matagorda
Weather Station. The crop was set for range conditions with dense, high grasses and grazing set
at 20 % utilization. The grasslands were managed by periodic random burns and short periods of
over grazing. Actual model inputs and average annual outputs for a number of variables are
shown in Appendix I. Modeling indicated that the average rate of erosion for Brazoria soils for
upper central coastal Texas was 0.0012685 meters per year.
Stratigraphy
Modern evolution of the study site’s landscape began in late Pleistocene between 12,000 years
BP and 11,000 years BP (Before Present 1956) with the deposition of Holocene sediments on
Deweyville Strata. In the study area, these sediments were deposited upon the Deweyville
interfluve (Figure 7) between Caney Creek and the San Bernard River (Aslan and Blum 1999:
203). The boundary between the High Deweyville surface and Holocene deposits have been
denoted as the Post Deweyville stratigraphic boundary in Figure 7. The lower portion of the
Holocene sediments (denoted as Unit 1) probably accumulated rapidly under the influence of a
frequently shifting and avulsing channel, while the upper portion of the Holocene sediments
(denoted as Unit 2) accumulated more slowly due to more stable meandering channels (Figure 7).
General stratigraphic description of the Holocene sediments of Unit 1 (flood basin clay) and Unit
2 (bioturbated silt and sand) are based on cores 8 and 9 of a series of 12 cores (Figures 6 and 7)
taken along FM 521 west of Brazoria, Texas, by Aslan and Blum (1999: 203).
There are two basic soil series associated with their respective geomorphic locations found within
the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge study area (Figure 5):
1. Brazoria series consists of nearly level to gently sloping, somewhat poorly drained,
nonsaline soils. Brazoria soils formed in recent clayey fluvial deposits; and,
2. Surfside clay consists of deep, nearly level, poorly drained, saline soils. These soils
formed in marshes on recent clayey fluvial deposits (Crenwelge et al. 1981).
18

Unit 1, located lower in the Brazoria soil profile includes the Cb horizon of AAG-BHT-3, and the
B/C horizons of BZT 1 and BZT 2 and are described below. Unit 2 overlies Unit 1 and includes
horizons A, Btk1, Btk2, and Ab of AAG-BHT-3 (Figure 7) and horizons A, Bt1, Bt2, C, and Btb
of BZT 1 and BZT 2. The lithology of the three excavations are discussed below are described
below.
Lithology
Backhoe trench AAG-BHT-3 was described by Bernhardt (AAG) and is the locus of our recent
work. AAG-BHT-3 is adjacent to BZT-1. BZT-1, the location of the human remains, and BZT2, the location of the shell midden, were also described by Waters and Bonnichsen (2005). All
trenches were located within the Brazoria map unit. The Brazoria Series (Figures 1-3) was
described by the Soil Conservation Service as a thermic Typic Chromuderts (Crenwelge et al
1981).
At AAG-BHT-3, Unit 2, the 48 centimeter thick A-horizon consists of a reddish brown (5YR 3/2)
silty clay. The horizon has medium granular and medium subangular blocky structure with clear
smooth lower boundary. The A-horizon has a few pitted CaCO3 nodules. The A-horizon overlies
a 40-centimeter thick, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3), silty clay, Btk1-horizon, with medium
subangular blocky structure and abundant krotovina. The Btk1-horizon has a gradual smooth
lower boundary and a few CaCO3 filaments and nodules. The Btk1-horizon overlies a 26centimeter thick, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4), silty clay, Btk2-horizon with fine and medium
subangular blocky structure with a few slickensides and abundant krotovina. The horizon
contains few CaCO3 filaments and nodules. The Bt2-horizon has a wavy abrupt unconformable
lower boundary. The Btk2-horizon overlies a 20-centimeter thick, dark brown (7.5YR 3/2), silty
clay, Ab-horizon with a fine and medium prismatic structure and a few krotovina. This horizon
contains few CaCO3 filaments and nodules. The Ab-horizon has a clear wavy unconformable
lower boundary. The Ab-horizon overlies a 31-centimeter thick, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4),
silty clay, Cb-horizon, Unit 1, with fine and medium subangular blocky structure, and a few
slickensides. The horizon contains few to abundant CaCO3 filaments and nodules, dark clay filled
krotovina, and many tan mottles. The trench ended at 1.65-meters in depth below the surface.
At BZT-1 (Waters and Bonnichsen 2005), in Unit 2, the 2-centimeter thick A-horizon consists of
a dark gray (10YR 4/1), silty clay. The horizon has massive structure with clear smooth lower
boundary. The A-horizon has a few pitted CaCO3 nodules. The A-horizon overlies a 36centimeter thick, very dark gray (10YR 3/1), silty clay, Bt1-horizon with medium to coarse
subangular blocky structure and clay film on peds. The Bt1-horizon has a transitional lower
boundary and CaCO3 nodules. The Bt1-horizon overlies a 24-centimeter thick, dark grayish
brown (10YR 4/2), silty clay, Bt2-horizon with medium to coarse subangular blocky structure,
slickensides, and clay films. The Bt2-horizon has a transitional lower boundary. The Bt2horizon overlies an 11-centimeter thick, dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4), silty clay, B/Chorizon with massive structure. The B/C-horizon overlies a 20-centimeter thick, strong brown
(7.5YR 4/6), silty clay, C-horizon with micro granular structure, greenish gray (5 GY 5/1) redox
mottles, clay film on peds, and krotovina. The C-horizon overlies a gray (10YR 5/1), silty clay,
Btb horizon with massive structure, dark gray mottles, and clay film on peds. The Btb-horizon
overlies the Unit 1, 10-centimeter thick, yellowish red (5YR 4/6), silty clay, B/C-horizon, with
massive structure and krotovinas. The horizon contains 3 to 5 percent CaCO3 filaments and
nodules, dark clay filled krotovina, and many tan mottles. The excavation ended at 1.45-meters
below the surface.
19

At BZT-2 (Waters and Bonnichsen 2005), in Unit 2 the 4-centimeter thick A-horizon consists of
a dark gray (10YR 4/1) silty clay. The horizon has massive structure with transitional lower
boundary. The A-horizon overlies a 30-centimeter thick, very dark gray (10YR 3/1), silty clay,
Bt1-horizon with microgranular structure and a transitional lower boundary. The Bt1-horizon
overlies a 27-centimeter thick, dark gray (10YR 4/1), silty clay, Bt2 horizon with clay film on
peds and krotovina. The Bt2- horizon has a wavy, transitional, lower boundary. The Bt2-horizon
overlies an 18-centimeter thick, yellowish brown (10YR 5/8), silty clay, B/C-horizon with
massive structure and transitional lower boundary. The B/C-horizon overlies a 40-centimeter
thick, light brownish gray (10YR 6/2), silty clay, C-horizon with massive structure, red (10YR
4/8) redox mottles, fine clay film on peds, and many vertical krotovinas filled with clay from
above. The C-horizon overlies silty clay, Btb-horizon with granular structure, dark gray to dark
yellowish brown mottles, and clay film on peds. The Btb-horizon overlies the Unit 1, 11centimeter thick, dark brown (7.5YR 3/4), silty clay, B/C-horizon, with massive structure and
krotovinas. The trench ended at 1.75-meters below the surface.
Waters and Bonnichsen originally described Unit 1 and Unit 2 during the 2003 ARPA
investigation (ibid). They placed the division between the two Units at the top of the paleosol,
denoted with the lowercase letter b in the above soil descriptions. In this report, the bottom of the
paleosol defines the limits of Unit 1 and Unit 2. The bottom of the paleosol was chosen because
the sediments above and below this zone are separated by an unconformity discussed below.
Differences in the three trenches are due mainly to differences in interpretation of soil color and
differences in horizon nomenclature. There was general agreement between the three
descriptions on the location of the paleosol horizon, texture of the horizons, general solum
structure, clay film on peds, and krotovina. The main differences were in description of Unit 2.
This is due mainly to stratigraphy. Unit 2 at BZT-1 and BZT-2 is located in a clay plugged
meander channel. The evidence for the abandoned channel is seen in Photograph 4 and Figure 8.
The darker colors and redox features in the lower horizon of Unit 2 imply a reduced environment
due to water saturation. Unit 2 at AAG-BHT-3 is composed of overbank sediments. The redder
colors imply an oxidized environment and a more abundant presence of calcium carbonate
indicated water movement up and down the solum due to a fluctuating water table. The B/C
horizons described by Waters and Bonnichsen (2005) for BZT-1 and BZT-2 indicated a soil that
has not developed and a soil with both clearly defined B- and C-horizons, as found in AAGBHT-3 (Bettis 1992).
Chronology
Modeling of the Brazoria soils suggest modern evolution of the study site began with the
deposition of Unit 1 flood basin clays on the Deweyville Formation (Figure 7) approximately
11,360 years before present (BP). The regional chronology is shown in Figure 9. The
temperature of the upper Texas Coast was warm with warm temperate forest prevailing (Adams
2003). In addition, eustatic sea level was rising to an elevation approximately 63 meters lower
than present day elevations. This was followed by a sea level regression that reached an elevation
approximately 100 meters below present mean sea level around 8,000 years BP (Rice 1988;
Abbott 2001).
Modeling indicates that the division of Unit 1 flood basin silty clays found below the base of the
paleosol horizon and Unit 2 bioturbated silt and sand above the base of the paleosol occurred
about 8,000 years BP. The prone form of a human skeleton found in upper Unit 1 was located in
the upper B/C-horizon and impressed approximately 1 to 2-centimeters into the Btb-horizon at
the base of Unit 2 (Figure 10). Radiocarbon 14 dating of a human petrosal yielded an age of
10,740 ±760 14C yr BP (AA-45910). The intercept of a radiocarbon age with the calibration
20

curve for the petrosal bone yielded calibrated results of 12,870 calendar years BP. In addition,
Beta Analytic Radiocarbon Dating Laboratory gave a 95% probability that the petrosal bone has
a calibrated age ranging from 10,390 to 15,250 years Cal BP calendar years (Appendix III).
The soils around and in the upper skull in the Btb-horizon of BZT-1 yielded a 14C date of 5,135
years ±40 RC years BP and a Rangia Cuneata shell found in a midden within the Btb-horizon of
BZT 2 yielded a 14C date of 5,585 years ±40 RC years BP. The 14C dating difference implies that
an erosional unconformity of a minimum age of 3,000 years occurred between Units 1 and 2.
The unconformity lies between the Cb- and Ab-horizon of AAG-BHT-3 indicating that erosion
had removed approximately 3,000 years of soil deposits. Between 8,000 years and 5,000 years
BP, temperatures were warming and sea level was rising. Streams in the area were adjusting to
rising base levels and increased flow by meandering resulting in avulsion and redeposition of
sediments (Abbott 2001). Aronow suggested that present sea level is generally estimated to have
stabilized between 3,500 and 5,000 years BP (Crenwelge et al. 1981).
The sediments deposited from 8,000 years BP to 5,000 years BP were stripped down to the top of
Unit 1. This is the erosional unconformity discussed above. The unconformity was possibly due
either to avulsion by streams or erosion because of isostatic adjustment of the coast to basinal
deposition. The sea level stabilized and a thin alluvial veneer was deposited over Unit 1 and soil
developed (the paleosol) on the alluvial sediment veneer approximately 5,000 years ago. A
stream, probably a mid-Holocene channel of Cocklebur Slough, was located within a portion of
the study area. BZT-1 and BZT-2 were excavated within the channel of this slough. AAG-BHT3 was excavated on the ancestral floodplain of this channel and adjacent to BZT-1. Apparently,
additional alluvial deposition ensued. The mid-Holocene channel was pirated by the present
channel of Cocklebur slough. Evidence for the meander is seen in the aerial photograph of the
project area (Photograph 4). This channel and its mid-Holocene floodplain were then filled
slowly and continuously until present by silty clay flood sediments. Based on this evidence, there
does not appear to be a correlation between the human skeleton found in the very upper Unit 1 at
BZT 1 and the shell midden found at basal Unit 2 of BZT 2 as previously postulated by Waters
and Bonnichsen (2005).
Geoarchaeology
At the time of Unit 1 deposition, the sediments were probably deposited on a wide meander belt
of the ancestral Colorado River (Abbott 2001). These clay sediments were gently deposited and
were part of a floodplain environment. Therefore, they would have a high probability of
containing buried assemblages of Paleoindian sites. Unit 1 was found only in the subsurface of
AAG-BHT-3, BZT-1, and BZT-2.
Unit 2 is located on a silty clay interfluve between Cocklebur slough and Cedar Lake Creek.
Locally, especially areas adjacent to abandoned meanders, the sediments would have a high
probability of containing buried assemblages of artifacts ranging from Early Archaic to Historic
times. Because of the slow deposition of sediments during Unit 2, it is doubtful, that locally, the
surface would contain sites spanning Early Archaic to present. However, in undisturbed
topographically high areas within the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, it may be possible
to find intact, undisturbed, assemblages of artifacts dating to no later than late Prehistoric times.
Unfortunately, even this may not be likely due to high storm surge in the local area. U. S. Army
Corp of Engineers has reported storm surges that have elevated bay levels by almost 4.5 meters.
While a Category 5 hurricane could be expected to result in storm surge greater than six meters
(Abbott 2001).
21

BZT-1 (2001)

Photograph 4: Aerial Photograph of BZT-1 (2001).

22

Conclusions
The stratigraphic record in the study area conditions the spatial and temporal distribution of the
archaeological record, whereas environments of deposition influence site forming processes and
preservation potentials. Stratigraphy, modeling, and 14C dating have dated the upper portion of
Unit 1 to be minimally 8,000 years BP, while radiocarbon dating of a midden (BZT-2) and soil
humate from the paleosol at the base of Unit 2 (BZT-1) have yielded dates of approximately
5,000 years BP. The conclusion is there was an unconformity between the deposition of Unit 1
and Unit 2 that minimally spans 3,000 years indicating erosion of soil deposits located directly
above the BZT-1 human remains. This unconformity is most probably due to avulsion of
meandering stream channels. After sea levels stabilized at their current elevations around 5,000
years BP, deposition has continued uninterrupted to the present. The soil modeling parallels the
results of the radiocarbon date of the soils found within the cranium of the BZT-1 remains. The
avulsion process appears to explain the differences of radiocarbon dates from the soil within the
cranium and the petrosal recovered from the same cranium.
Unit 1 was found only in subsurface deposits. These sediments were deposited in large flood
basins. Due to marshy conditions within the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, where
accessible, it is possible to find buried assemblages of Paleoindian sites. Unit 2 is located on a
clayey interfluve between Cocklebur slough and Cedar Lake Creek. Locally, especially areas
adjacent to abandoned meanders, these deposits would have a high probability of containing
buried assemblages ranging from Early Archaic to Historic periods. Locating undisturbed
surface assemblages of deposits is problematic due to high storm surge along the coast.
Dating soil stratigraphy based on the degree of soil development, topographic location and
correlation to other coastal Texas alluvial stream histories are problematic. Future studies should
incorporate more computer modeling, additional radiocarbon dating, and more detailed soilstratigraphic descriptions from soil borings within the geographical region to help elucidate and
expand upon archaeological research and geoarchaeological theories. Larger and more expansive
areas should be excavated or cored to provide larger subsurface stratigraphic profiles. This will
allow for a more detailed analysis of localized soil development and depositional processes.

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

Chapter VII
The Human Skeleton
This section discusses the techniques used to preserve and analyze the human remains and is
followed by a discussion of mortuary characteristics (information regarding the deposition of the
remains) and the orientation of the remains within the sediment. An inventory of the remains and
a discussion of its taphonomy are then provided. This is followed by a discussion of the
biological characteristics of the remains, including sex, age, stature, and biological affinity.
Finally, the health of the individual is discussed, the stable carbon isotope results are evaluated,
and the geological age of the skeleton is projected. Figure 11, below, is provided as an aid to
understanding the elements of the human skeleton.

Figure 11: The Elements of the Human Skeleton.

30

Extraction, Preservation, and Analysis of the Human Remains
To facilitate the successful removal of the remains from the extremely wet sediment within which
they were embedded, the remains were excavated in the field only enough to account for each
skeletal element. The sediment surrounding the skeleton was removed leaving the skeleton
situated atop a pedestal. The entire pedestal was then encased in plaster. After the plaster was dry,
the pedestal was undercut and a piece of plywood was placed beneath it. Following their
recovery, the BZT-1 remains were delivered to the Physical Anthropology Laboratory on the
campus of Texas A&M University.
Waters and Bonnichsen removed the skeleton from the casing within which its was transported
from the field. d’Aigle, as the third Principal Investigator, was not notified or allowed to
participate. Removal of the remains from their plaster encasement commenced immediately after
their arrival at the lab to prevent further damage by the shrinking soils in which they were
embedded. A striker saw was used to cut through the plaster cast and expose the remains. Once
exposed, the remains were cleaned, and the exposed surface treated with PVA to prevent further
fragmentation. Samples for radiocarbon dating and other potential future analyses were removed
before the PVA was applied. After the exposed surface of the remains was consolidated, a layer
of thin plastic was laid over them. Sand was poured over the plastic and enclosed within it to
create sand "mattress" atop the bones. A layer of foam was laid on top of the sand layer, followed
by a second piece of plywood. The entire unit was wrapped in duct tape to facilitate its 180°
rotation.
After being rotated, the duct tape and plywood which was originally located beneath the skeleton,
was located above the skeleton, leaving approximately eight inches of silty clay from the B/Chorizon that was on the on top of the remains. This silty clay was removed with care to recover
any artifacts or skeletal elements that may have been present. Once these bones were fully
exposed, their surfaces were treated with PVA in the same way as the other side, again with the
exception of samples reserved for radiocarbon dating and other potential, future analyses. After
the appropriate remains were consolidated with PVA, all remains were photographed,
inventoried, and removed individually from the sand.
It is unknown, and remains unexplained, why Waters and Bonnichsen (2005) removed the left
tibia, fibula, and foot before encasing the remains in the plaster jacket (Photograph 5). Further,
there was no explanation given by Waters and Bonnichsen (ibid.) for cutting a section from the
right femur (Photograph 5) before the remains were removed from the case. Portions of the left
femur, tibia, and fibula were removed and sent to Stafford Research Laboratories for radiocarbon
dating (Michael Waters, Texas A&M University, per, comm. August 14, 2004). The remaining
bones were stabilized with Polyvinyl Acetate (PVA). Despite d’Aigle’s repeated requests to
Waters and Bonnichsen for photographs of the elements as they were removed from the case or
screened, Photograph 5 was the only photograph provided by Waters.
After the extraction of the bones from the plaster cast, extensive cleaning, and reconstruction
were undertaken for approximately four months. With the exception of the ribs, vertebrae,
sternum, and scapulae, every bone surface was cleaned of any adherent sediment to facilitate
trauma and pathological analysis. This process was not possible for the ribs, vertebrae, sternum,
and scapulae given their fragile condition, and as a result, those remains were left within the
sediments. Following reconstruction and inspection of the skeletal remains for evidence of
pathology, measurements were taken from the postcranial skeleton.
The data collected from the remains were used to develop a biological profile. Sex, age, and
stature were estimated using standard accepted osteological techniques. Because a portion of the
31

Photograph 5: Ventral view of BZT-1 remains, laboratory extraction.
32

diagnostic skeletal and all of the dental material recovered during the 2001 investigation had
previously been consumed by DNA, isotope, and radiocarbon analyses (d'Aigle and Hryshechko
2002), very few data were available for collection with regard to biological affinity. A few, very
small skull fragments were recovered during the 2003 investigation.
Deposition Characteristics
During the initial excavation in 2001, the arrangement of the cranial remains and their particular
association with the upper cervical spine, led Steele (2002) to suggest that the BZT-1 remains
may have been oriented in an upright position, perhaps with the legs flexed. Upon excavation of
the remainder of the skeleton in May 2003 however, it became evident that the remains were
instead oriented roughly north south, head to south with foot to north, in an extended, horizontal,
face down position, with the hands crossed beneath the abdomen. The orientation of the remains
correlates to the orientation and location of the west bank of the extinct channel of Cocklebur
Slough.
These and other characteristics of the deposition of the remains initially may have been
suggestive of a deliberate interment, rather than an accidental one as previously indicated
(d’Aigle and Hryshechko 2002). There were, however, no indications of a burial tomb, shaft, or
other prehistoric or historic disturbances during the 2001and 2003 investigation. (See Photograph
3 for the soil profile in which the skeleton lay and Photographs 6 and 7). The yellowish red (5YR
4/6) silty clay of the B/C-horizon in Unit 1 also can be seen in Photograph 7. Further, there were
no grave goods or positive evidence of occupation found during the 2001 or 2003 investigations.

33

Photograph 6:
Lack of evidence for burial shaft, tomb, or other disturbance in the Btb-horizon (Unit 2).

34

Photograph 7:
Lack of evidence for burial shaft, tomb, or other disturbance in the base of the Btb-horizon
(Unit 2).

35

Further, consultations with Dr. James Adovasio in regard to this issue led him to the conclusion
that,
I do not believe that water table movement alone would erase indications of a
burial shaft, nor do I believe that in that sort of environment a paleosol could be
reconstituted to the point that an intrusive pit was obscured. (James Adovasio,
Director, Mercyhurst Archaeological Research Institute, Mercyhurst College,
Pennsylvania, Pers. comm. February 9, 2005).

36

Chapter VIII
Skeletal Remains
Jason Wiersema
Department of Anthropology (Student)
Texas A&M University
(Edited by Robert P. d’Aigle, RPA, Principal Investigator)
A nearly complete but partially fragmented human skeleton was recovered over the course of two
separate archaeological excavations (Figures 13 and 14, and Photograph 7). During the
excavations of 2001, a portion of the skull and mandible, a number of partial and complete teeth,
two cervical vertebrae, and a small part of a clavicle were recovered. During the 2003
excavations, the remainder of the skeleton, with the exception of the right tibia, fibula, and foot,
was excavated. Table 2 provides a summary inventory of the skeletal remains recovered from the
2003 investigations and elements from the 2001 excavations that remained after submission of
portions of the skull and all of the teeth to various laboratories for DNA, human protein, isotope,
and dating analyses. A detailed skeletal inventory is given in Appendix II with measurements of
these remains provided in Appendix III.
The majority of the elements of the skeleton were in nearly anatomical position. However, the
right tibia, fibula, and foot were conspicuously missing at excavation. The partial absence of the
scapulae, sternum, small hand bones, and the small bones of the left foot probably resulted from
postmortem taphonomic influence.

37

Table 2: Abbreviated inventory of BZT-1 skeletal elements
Anatomical Region

Skeletal Elements

Cranium

Small isolated fragments of the frontal, parietals, occipital, temporals,
maxilla, zygomatics, and mandible.

Vertebral column

Fragmented portion of the cervical spine and complete but fragmented
thoracic and lumbar spine.

Thorax

Portions of most ribs and sternum

Pectoral girdle and
upper limbs

Fragments of both clavicles, and right scapula. Fragmented distal 2/3
of both humerii. Both radii and ulnae complete but fragmented.
Numerous elements of both hands (both almost completely
represented).

Pelvic girdle and
lower limbs

Complete, but fragmented left and right innominates and sacrum.
Complete but fragmented left and right femora. Fragmented left tibia
and fibula. The right tibia, fibula, and foot were missing. Most
elements of the left foot were represented but in fragmented condition.

Taphonomy
The high level of fragmentation of the remains probably are the result of postmortem expansion
and contraction from the clay matrix of the Btb-horizon of Unit 1 that overlaid the remains, as
well as their inundation by the rising and falling water table. There was no evidence of
scavenging by any animals. Root etching was noted to only a few skeletal elements, but resulted
in only minor damage to the bone surfaces. There was no evidence of burning or cremation on
the skull fragments recovered from the 2001 investigation (Steele 2002).
That a slight portion of the top of the cranium was protruding from the B/C-horizon of Unit 1 into
the Btb-horizon of Unit 2 appears to be evidence of stream avulsion and channel plug deposition.
The unconformity discussed in Chapter VI indicates that at least 3,000 years of sediments were
eroded, thus causing an erosional feature into the Btb-horizon and exposing a very small portion
of an intact human cranium.
Under magnification, the cortical surfaces of most of the skeletal elements display evidence of
long-term chemical and mechanical degradation. The articular ends of the each of the long bones
was less completely preserved than the diaphyseal portions due to the lesser density of the bone
in these areas. Little postmortem dislocation of skeletal elements was evident, even of the small
bones of the hands.
Although there was no visible evidence of trauma to the distal right femur, which is in close
anatomical proximity to the missing elements (right tibia, fibula, and foot), it should be noted,
however, that many of the joint surfaces were not sufficiently preserved to rule out the presence
of trauma. There were no observable cut marks or other trauma to the remainder of the skeleton.
Dark staining was present on numerous elements and was often associated with areas with
attached calcium carbonate concretions.
38

Biological characteristics
Sex
Sex estimation was made largely based on pelvic morphology, with supportive evidence from the
remainder of the skeleton, most notably cranial characteristics. The series of above mentioned
taphonomic factors complicated estimation of the sex of the skeleton from the coxal bones.
However, a number of important sex-related characteristics were available for analysis. The left
and right greater sciatic notches for example were very wide and shallow relative to both the
teaching and archaeological collections housed at Texas A&M University, a characteristic typical
of females. The rugosity of the auricular surface of the right innominate was also consistent with
a female. Additionally, a small pre-auricular sulcus was noted on the right innominate, another
trait most commonly associated with females. Analysis of the cranial remains also yielded
information regarding the sex of the individual. The overall muscularity of the skull, primarily of
the mastoid and occipital areas, was consistent with female. The upright profile of the frontal
bone was also suggestive of a female sex estimate. The extent of gonial eversion present on the
portion of the mandible was minimal and consistent with a female. Finally, the supra-orbital
margin was fairly narrow and sharp lending further support to the female sex interpretation.
Measurement of the maximum femoral head diameter yielded a value considerably below the
threshold for distinction between males and females, providing further support of a female sex
determination. These individual characters are all supported by the relatively small size and
nominal muscularity of the remains as a whole.
Age
As indicated by the complete fusion of all of the available epiphyses in the skeleton, the BZT1
remains are those of an adult. Few elements were available to narrow the age range. The sternal
rib ends and the pubic symphysis for example, sustained sufficient postmortem damage to
preclude their use in age estimation. The right auricular surface, however, was carefully extracted
from the fragmented remains of the pelvis. The technique devised by Lovejoy et al (1985) for age
estimation from the auricular surface was utilized. The result was the classification of the BZT-1
remains into phase two.
According to Lovejoy et al (1985), this stage of degeneration is typical of individuals between
the ages of 25 and 29. The lack of degenerative changes to the joint surfaces supports the notion
that the BZT-1 remains are those of a young adult within this age range. The extent of occlusal
dental wear apparent on the dentition, though severe, is consistent with other central and
southeast Texas Archaic skeletal remains of the same approximate age. A reasonable age
estimate of the individual, based collectively on all indicators, is between the ages of 20 and 30
years.
Stature
The size and stature of the BZT-1 skeleton is, even upon cursory visual inspection very small.
However, reliable estimation of the stature of the individual was made difficult by the fragmented
condition of the bones. Stature was estimated using measurements of the nearly complete left
femur. The estimate was made utilizing Steele (1970) in conjunction with Genovese's (1967)
formula devised for stature estimation of Mesoamerican females. For comparative purposes, the
maximum length of the left femur was calculated three times using the three available segments
(segments 1, 2, and 4). In each case, the maximum length of the femur was extrapolated using
discriminate functions derived by Steele (1970) from a sample of Anglo American females:
39

Segment 1: 0.62 (6.8) + 38.21 = 42.426 + 2.15 centimeters
Segment 2: 0 .93 (21.9) + 19.05 = 39.417 + 1.03 centimeters
Segment 4: 4.23 (4.3) + 27.63 = 45.819 + 2.49 centimeters
Segments 1-2: 1.04 (6.8) + 1.04 (21.9) + 8.80 = 38.648 + 0.63 centimeters
The results differed within a range of approximately 7-centimeters depending on the segments
used. The final stature was calculated from the function which incorporated both segments 1 and
2 because the margin of error is smaller, and the result is likely most reflective of true stature.
Genovese's (1967) formula derived for use with Mesoamerican females was then used to
calculate the stature of the individual: -2.59 (38.638) + 49.742 = 149.792 + 3.816-centimeters.
Because Genovese' formula is based on a cadaveral sample, 2.5-centimeters were subtracted from
the value that resulted from Genovese' formula to account for the postmortem change in stature
that noted by Trotter and Gleser (1952) in cadaver populations. Following this correction, the
living stature of the BZT-1 female is estimated to have been approximately 1.47-meters ±5.2centimeters, or approximately 4.8-foot tall. The result compares favorably to the females in
Genovese's Mesoamerican sample, but should be considered a rough approximation given the
unknown membership in the reference populations.
Biological affinity
Assessing the specific ancestry of ancient remains is often a population rather than an individual
level concern. Thus, comparison of the ancestral traits of a single specimen to multiple other
individuals of similar geographic and temporal affiliation is the most favorable means to shed
light on the likely affinity of a single individual. Skeletally, ancestry is a characteristic that is
nearly completely limited to variation in cranial shape and dental form. Ideally, comparison of 11
the BZT-1 cranial and dental remains to others of similar affiliations might have shed light on its
own place in the classification of early Americans. Unfortunately, the fragmentary condition of
the cranial remains precluded the meaningful evaluation of these variables. Even following
reconstruction of the available cranial elements, ancestry estimation was impossible due to the
absence of metric and non-metric variables available for evaluation.
No dental material was available at the time of analysis for morphologic and morphometric
analysis. However, Steele (2002:150) reports that one of the lateral incisors showed "...extreme
shoveling..." typical of North American Indian or Asian population affinity.
Osteopathology
Degenerative disease
Degenerative joint disease is the most common disorder afflicting joint surfaces in both
archaeological and contemporary populations (Ortner and Putschar 1981). Thorough inspection
of all of the available joint surfaces revealed no evidence of arthritic activity or other
degenerative disease including lipping, eburnation, porosity, or new bone deposition. It should be
noted, however that many of the joint surfaces were not preserved sufficiently to rule out the
presence of minute degenerative changes. It should also be noted that the vertebral column, a
frequent site of degenerative disease including arthritis and others, was not preserved sufficiently
to evaluate its condition with regard to these types of changes.
Metabolic and Hematologic Disorders
The skeletal material was generally free of evidence of either metabolic or hematologic disorders
including scurvy, rickets, or anemia, with the exception of areas of porotic hyperostosis lesions
and minimal thickening of portions of the frontal bone. The appearance of the lesions was
40

consistent with having resulted from a past insult from which the individual fully recovered. The
presence of lesions of this type is increasingly thought to be indicative of an individual who
underwent an episode of iron-deficient anemia as a child sufficient to result in the proliferation of
marrow cavities within the diploe of cranial bones (Stuart-MacAdam 1989).
Infection
Periostitis and osteitis are indicators of localized trauma or infection that are often used to make
generalized inferences about stress level. Periosteal lesions appear as plaques or abnormally
porous deposits on bone surfaces, and osteitis as areas in which the bone has itself responded to
local trauma or infection with swelling, and often associated periostitis. Lesions of this type are
most commonly noted on the bones of the skull (often sinuses), as well as the bones of the lower
legs, which are unusually prone to local trauma. Complete inspection all of the BZT-1 skeletal
elements yielded no evidence of localized infection in the form of periostotic bone growth. There
was also no evidence of bony response in the form of osteitis.
Trauma
A thorough inspection of the available skeleton was undertaken in an attempt to locate any
evidence of antedeposition trauma, blunt force, and sharp projectile whether accidental or
otherwise. Included in this assessment was a visual examination for evidence of both deliberate
violent trauma and accidental trauma including occupation or activity related fractures. No
evidence of trauma was noted on any element of the skeleton. However, many of the joint
surfaces were not preserved sufficiently to rule out the presence of minute evidence of
antedeposition trauma.
Neoplasms, Improper Ossification
Detailed inspection of the entire BZT-1 skeleton revealed no evidence of neoplastic bone growth,
benign or malignant. There also was no evidence of abnormal bone growth in terms of
ossification, or in the age-related closure of the various long bone diaphyses.
Dental health
All pathologic inferences made from the teeth were based on photographs taken by d'Aigle
because all teeth removed during the 2001 investigation were submitted for either dating or DNA
analysis (d'Aigle and Hryshechko 2002:88).
Dental Wear
A large number of the teeth showed signs of extensive use wear as indicated in photographs taken
in 2001 (d’Aigle and Hryshechko 2002:88). In spite of the extensive wear to each of the teeth,
little resorption to the recovered alveolar bone was noted suggesting that the individual likely
maintained much of her adult dentition at the time of her death. The wear to the 1st and 2nd left
maxillary premolars and the left 1st and 2nd maxillary molars was sufficient to completely
penetrate the enamel and expose the underlying dentin. The degree of wear was greater in the
premolars and the 1st molar than in the 2nd molar. This may be due to their more lengthy
exposure to abrasive agents related to their earlier eruption. The third molar showed little or no
signs of wear in contrast to the remainder of the dentition. The posteriorly increasing degree of
wear lends support to the age estimate made above.
Dental Calculus and Caries
It was not possible to definitively evaluate the extent to which the teeth displayed evidence of
caries lesions or calculus accumulations in the photograph of the teeth. However, no significant
41

calculus was clearly visible on the BZT-1 dentition, which would indicate that minimal if any
calculus was present. Steele reports that no evidence of hyperplasias or caries was observed on
the teeth (2002:160).

42

Chapter IX
Non-Human Remains and Artifacts
Vertebrate Faunal
Non-human vertebrate faunal remains were recovered during the excavation and delivered to the
Physical Anthropology Laboratory at Texas A&M University. Jason Wiersema, using the
zooarchaeology comparative collection housed at Texas A&M University, identified the
elements. Identification was made to the lowest specific level of taxonomy. Each specimen was
inspected thoroughly for any evidence of cultural modification, including cut marks, other
trauma, and discoloration from exposure to fire.
Approximately 150 skeletal fragments representing a variety of mammal species were recovered
and analyzed from the Bt1-, Bt2-, and C-horizons of Unit 2 (Table 3). The majority of the
elements represented small mammal species. Large mammals, including members of the cervidae
family were also well represented. The remains showed no signs of cultural modification such as
cut marks or breakage. Six fragments from the Bt1-, Bt2-, and C-horizons of Unit 2 were calcined
(heated until it oxidized).
Invertebrate Remains
Fourteen invertebrate remains were recovered during the 2003 excavation (Table 4). D. Gentry
Steele identified these remains. One terrestrial/freshwater gastropod was located in the C-horizon
of Unit 2. Twelve specimens came from throughout the Btb-horizon of Unit 2. These included
both gastropods and pelecypods. The gastropods are found in terrestrial and freshwater
environments and the pelecypods are found in freshwater. Of these 12 specimens, three brackish
water Rangia cuneata were recovered from the Btb-horizon of Unit 2. One unidentifiable,
fragmented freshwater gastropod was recovered from the upper 2- to 3-centimeters of the B/Chorizon of Unit 1 and parallel to the left shoulder of the remains (Photograph 3).
Artifacts
Two small flakes of chert were found during the 2003 excavation. Both are secondary interior
flakes measuring 5 X 12-mm and 6 X 10-mm with a thickness of less than 0.5-mm. Both flakes
came from the Btb-horizon of Unit 2. One flake was found while screening and the other was
found close to the human remains. These lithic flakes appear to have been produced during tool
resharpening. These flakes were found in a fluvial zone, and considering the large area excavated
at BZT-1 with no other lithics or other artifacts found, their presence is probably fluvial
redeposition. Small pebbles of the same approximate weight as the two small lithic flakes were
found in the C- and Btb-horizons of Unit 2 and the B/C-horizon of Unit 1.

43

Table 3: Faunal remains from BZT-1
Unit 2: Bt1- and Bt2-horizons
Taxonomic Classification

Number

Element

Remarks

Cervidae (family)

1

Fragment of proximal tibia

Small mammal

2

Distal ½ of femur (right)

1

Long bone shaft fragment

2

Cranial fragment

65

Unidentifiable

3

Unidentifiable

Calcined

1

Cranial fragment

Calcined

3

Long bone shaft fragment

Calcined

Small/Medium Mammal

2

Long bone shaft fragment

Medium mammal

2

Long bone shaft fragment

1

Rib fragment

2

Long bone shaft fragment

Medium/Large Mammal

3

Unidentifiable

Large mammal

1

Cranial bone fragment

4

Vertebral fragment

Taxonomic Classification

Number

Element

Cervidae (family)

3

Fragments of ilium and ischium

Calcined
Calcined

Unit 2: C-Horizon
Remarks

(adult, left)
1

Distal 1/3 of femur (no epiphysis)
(juvenile, right)

1

Proximal 1/3 of ulna (adult, right)

28

Unidentifiable

4

Unidentifiable

1

Vertebra fragment

2

Rib fragments

Small mammal

1

Long bone shaft fragment

Crawfish hole

Small mammal

4

Unidentifiable

Spoil

Medium mammal

6

Rib and Long bone fragments

Spoil

Medium-Large mammal

2

Long bone shaft fragments
44

Spoil

Small mammal
Medium mammal

Calcined

Out of Context:

Table 4: Invertebrates from BZT-1 Horizons
Unit 2: Above Btb-Horizon
Taxonomic Classification

Number

Remarks

1

Terrestrial/Freshwater

Number

Remarks

Rhabdotus (formerly Bulimulus)

3

Terrestrial

c.f. Mesodon

1

Terrestrial

Polygyra

1

Terrestrial

Helisoma

1

Freshwater

Unidentified

1

Terrestrial/Freshwater

Quadrula

1

Freshwater

Unionidae (family)

1

Freshwater

Rangia cuneata

3

Brackish

Number

Remarks

1

Freshwater

Gastropod:
Unidentified fragment

Unit 2: Btb-horizon
Taxonomic Classification
Gastropod:

Pelecypod:

Unit 1: B/C-horizon
Taxonomic Classification
Pelecypod
Unidentified fragments

45

Chapter X
Pollen Analysis
John G. Jones, Ph.D.
Department of Anthropology
Washington State University
A series of four pollen samples collected around the skeleton of the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman
were examined for fossil pollen content. These samples were collected from various locations in
and around the skeleton, including the pelvic region (Sample No. 1), near the distal left humerus
(Sample No. 3), between the midshaft of the left and right femurs (Sample No. 4), and from the
presumed colon area (Sample A). It was anticipated that these samples might provide insights
into past environmental conditions in the area, and possibly shed some light on the prehistoric
diet of the individual.
Previous pollen studies in this region are largely lacking, due to the highly oxidizing environment
of Brazoria County. Here, cycles of wetting and drying of soils provides conditions favorable for
bacteria and fungi known to destroy organic remains, including pollen. In fact, most soils from
this type of environment are barren of fossil pollen grains, making these types of analyses
impossible. Still, sediments that have remained permanently wet or dry, and occasionally
sediments composed of heavy clays do contain some fossil pollen grains, thus we believed that an
attempt to identify fossil pollen in the sediments was warranted.
Methodology
Recognizing that less than ideal pollen preservation was to be expected, a conservative extraction
technique was employed. The BZT-1 pollen samples were first quantified (3-5 mls), placed in
sterile beakers, and a known quantity of exotic tracer spores was added to each sample. Here,
European Lycopodium spp. spores were chosen as an exotic, because these spores are unlikely to
be found in the actual fossil pollen assemblages from this region. Tracer spores are added to
samples for two reasons. First, by adding a known quantity of exotic spores to a known quantity
of sediment, fossil pollen concentration values can be calculated. Second, in the event that no
fossil pollen is observed in the sediment sample, the presence of Lycopodium tracer spores
verifies that processor error was not a factor in the pollen loss.
Following the addition of the tracer spores, the samples were washed with concentrated
Hydrochloric Acid. This step removed carbonates and dissolved the bonding agent in the tracer
spore tablets. The samples were then rinsed in distilled water, sieved through 150 micron mesh
screens, and swirled to remove the heavier inorganic particles. Next the samples were
consolidated, and 50% Hydrofluoric Acid was added to the residues to remove unwanted
silicates. After the silicates had been removed, the residues were rinsed thoroughly, and sonicated
in a Delta D-5 sonicator for 30 seconds. This step deflocculated the residues, effectively
removing all colloidal material smaller than two microns.
Next, the samples were dehydrated in Glacial Acetic Acid, and were subjected to an acetolysis
treatment (Erdtman 1960) consisting of 9 parts Acetic Anhydride to 1 part concentrated Sulfuric
Acid. During this process, the samples were placed in a heating block for a period not exceeding
8 minutes. This step removed most unwanted organic materials, including cellulose, hemicellulose, lipids and proteins, and converted these materials to water-soluble humates. The
samples were then rinsed in distilled water until a neutral pH was achieved.
46

Following this treatment, the samples were next subjected to a heavy density separation using
Zinc Bromide (Sp.G. 2.00). Here, the lighter organic fraction was isolated from the heavier
minerals. After this treatment, the lighter pollen and organic remains were collected and washed
in 1% KOH to remove any remaining humates. The residues were then dehydrated in absolute
alcohol, and transferred to a Glycerin medium for curation in glass vials.
Permanent slides were prepared using Glycerin as a mounting medium, and identifications were
made on a Jenaval compound stereomicroscope at 400-1250x magnification. Identifications were
confirmed by using the Texas A&M University Palynology Laboratory's extensive pollen
reference collection. Minimum 200-grain counts, standard among most palynologists (Barkeley
1934), were made for each sample when pollen was preserved in the sediments. 200-grain counts
are thought to be fairly reflective of past vegetation and paleoenvironmental conditions.
Concentration values were calculated for all samples. Hall (1981) and Bryant and Hall (1993)
note that concentration values below 2,500 grains/ml of sediment may not be well reflective of
past conditions, and usually record a differentially preserved assemblage. As a result, counts with
low concentration values should be viewed with caution.
Results
Well preserved pollen was identified in all of the BZT-1 samples, and concentration values
ranged from 3,327 to 11,868 grains/ml of sediment, values considered to be low to moderate. A
minimum of 23 different pollen taxa was identified in the assemblages in Table 5, and counts and
percentages are presented in Table 6.
All identified pollen taxa represent species found in the vicinity today. As a whole, the
assemblages are dominated by grains from low spine Asteraceae (ragweed or goldenrod group),
Cyperaceae (sedge), Poaceae (grass), Typha (cattail), Juniperus/Taxodium (cedar or bald
cypress), Pinus (pine) and Quercus (oak). These types are frequently encountered in
archaeological assemblages in high percentages for several reasons. First, these pollen types are
all wind-pollinated and rely on chance for pollination, thus their grains are produced in large
numbers. Most of these grains are also quite durable, and are frequently preserved, even in
degraded pollen assemblages. Finally, most of these pollen types possess diagnostic features
making them readily identifiable, even when distorted or degraded.
Other pollen types identified in the assemblages represent marshy or semi-aquatic environments,
and include Alismataceae (pickerelweed family), Apiaceae (umbel or parsley family),
Polygonaceae (knotweed family), and Platanus (sycamore) and Salix (willow), both of which
favor moist bottomland or riverside settings. Probable upland taxa identified in the assemblages
include several members of the Asteraceae family, including high spine Asteraceae (Sunflower
group), Liguliflorae (dandelion-type) Cirsium (thistle), as well as Cheno-Ams (goosefoot,
pigweed), Cnidoscolus (bull nettle), and members of the Euphorbiaceae (spurge), Fabaceae
(legume), Malvaceae (mallow) and Nyctaginaceae (Four O’clock) families. Carya (hickory or
pecan) and Ulmus (elm) pollen were represented by single grain occurrences in three samples,
and likely represent pollen grains blown into the area from some distance away. All of these taxa,
however, can also be found in a marshy environment.

47

Table 5: Pollen Taxa Identified
Pollen Taxa
Non-Arboreal

Common Name

Alismataceae

Pickerelweed Family

Apiaceae

Umbel or Parsley Family

Low Spine Asteraceae

Ragweed Group

High Spine Asteraceae

Sunflower Group

Liguliflorae

Dandelion-Type

Cirsium

Thistle

Cheno-Ams

Goosefoot, Pigweed

Cnidoscolus

Bull Nettle

Cyperaceae

Sedge Family

Euphorbiaceae

Spurge Family

Fabaceae

Legume Family

Malvaceae

Mallow Family

Nyctaginaceae

Four O’clock Family

Poaceae

Grass Family

Polygonaceae

Knotweed Family

Typha

Cattail

Arboreal

Common Name

Carya

Hickory, Pecan

Juniperus/Taxodium

Cedar/Bald Cypress

Pinus

Pine

Platanus

Sycamore

Quercus

Oak

Salix

Willow

Ulmus

Elm

Indeterminate

Too poorly preserved to identify

48

Table 6: Pollen Counts and Percentages
Sample Taxa

1

Alismataceae

1 (0.5)

3

4

Apiaceae

5 (2.5)

Low Spine Asteraceae

100 (50.0)

91 (45.5)

107 (53.5)

High Spine Asteraceae

1 (0.5)

1 (0.5)

1 (0.5)

Liguliflorae

7 (3.5)

11 (5.5)

23 (11.5)

Cirsium

3 (1.5)

5 (2.5)

1 (0.5)

Cheno-Ams

1 (0.5)

4 (2.0)

4 (2.0)

124 (62.0)

1 (0.5)

1 (0.5)

Cnidoscolus
Cyperaceae

A

4 (2.0)

6 (3.0)

Euphorbiaceae

13 (6.5)
1 (0.5)

Fabaceae

3 (1.5)

Malvaceae

1 (0.5)

Nyctaginaceae

3 (1.5)
1 (0.5)

1 (0.5)
14 (7.0)

1 (0.5)

Poaceae

23 (11.5)

45 (22.5)

15 (7.5)

Polygonaceae

3 (1.5)

2 (1.0)

Typha

23 (11.5)

10 (5.0)

Carya

1 (0.5)

1 (0.5)

Juniperus/Taxodium

8 (4.0)

10 (5.0)

6 (3.0)

4 (2.0)

Pinus

5 (2.5)

4 (2.0)

5 (2.5)

6 (3.0)

Platanus

2 (1.0)

Quercus

5 (2.5)

2 (1.0)
20 (10.0)

1 (0.5)
1 (0.5)

1 (0.5)
2 (1.0)

5 (2.5)

18 (9.0)

Salix

2 (1.0)

Ulmus

1 (0.5)

Indeterminate

9 (4.5)

12 (6.0)

3 (1.5)

5 (2.5)

Total

200 (100)

200 (100)

200 (100)

200 (100)

Concentration Values

3956

3327

4018

11,868

(Grains/ml)

49

Discussion and Summary
Discussion
The well-preserved pollen grains identified in the BZT-1 sediment samples are likely to be
modern contaminant grains introduced into the sediments through bioturbation. Pollen types
identified in the assemblages represent species likely to be found in areas favored by crawfish,
and variations in species composition and percentages probably represent pollen-bearing anthers
introduced into the sediments either through natural means or by crawfish activity. Further, the
pollen assemblages from samples 1, 3 and 4 appeared to display the same quality of pollen
preservation, generally good, suggesting that the grains were all introduced into the sediments at
the same time, while sample A from the colon region, displayed excellent preservation, possibly
indicating that these grains are younger or have been exposed to less oxidation. Owing to the
general oxidizing conditions of the location area, it seems likely that all of the grains identified in
the BZT-1 samples are probably quite young relative to the skeleton, although it is impossible to
safely assign an age to the pollen.
Summary
Four sediment samples associated with the BZT-1 location were examined for fossil pollen
content. These samples were collected from various locations among the skeleton, and it was
anticipated that some insights into past environmental conditions or prehistoric dietary practices
might be gained from this type of study.
Well-preserved fossil pollen was present in all of the samples, and 200 grain counts were
achieved for each sample. Evidence suggests that these grains are not associated with the
deposition of the BZT-1 human remains, but rather were introduced into the sediments from
crawfish burrows. Vegetation recorded by the pollen assemblages is consistent with a marshy
area favored by crawfish. The pollen from samples 1, 3 and 4 displayed some degree of
oxidation, but was still very good, while sample A from the colon region displayed excellent
preservation. The fact that two distinctive suites of pollen were found from the same internment
again argues for multiple episodes of post- depositional introduction of pollen. Without
radiocarbon dating the pollen assemblages, it is not possible to know the actual ages of these
pollen suites, but it is likely that they are fairly modern.

50

Chapter XI
Interpretation of the BZT-1 Data
Geological Age of the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman
d'Aigle and Hryshechko (2002) reported that the human remains from BZT-1 dated to the Late
Pleistocene. This was based primarily on two radiocarbon ages obtained from the NSF-Arizona
AMS Facility at the University of Arizona. One date on a human tooth yielded an age of 8,700
±2,300 14C yr BP (AA-45909) and a human petrosal yielded an age of 10,740 ±760 14C yr BP
(AA-45910). The 14C yr BP age for the petrosal were calibrated to 12,780 calendar years BP with
a 2-sigma (95% accuracy) range of 15,250 to 10,390 Cal BP (Appendix III).
As previously stated in this report, the BZT-1 human remains were located entirely within the
B/C-horizon of Unit 1 and impressed approximately 1-2 centimeters into the bottom of the Btbhorizon of Unit 2. Ages on sediment humic acids derived from the Bt2-horizon as well as the
shell carbonate fraction of a Rangia cuneata shell from the Btb-horizon range from about 5,000
to 5,600 14C yr. BP. These dates are similar to the age of ca. 5,600 14C yr BP obtained from the
BZT-2 shell midden in a similar stratigraphic context. BZT-2 is approximately 66 meters
southwest of the deposition of the BZT-1 human remains.
The humate and shell age are significantly different than the dates derived from a petrosal and
tooth from the human skull excavated during the 2001 investigation. These shell and humate
dates suggest a middle Holocene age while the 2001 bone dates suggest a significantly older, late
Pleistocene age. The primary reason for the difference in the sediment humic acids, shell
carbonate fraction of a Rangia cuneata shell, and the dates and the human tooth age of 8,700
±2,300 14C yr BP (AA-45909) and the human petrosal age of 10,740 ±760 14C yr BP (AA-45910)
has previously been explained Chapter VI: Geoarchaeology of BZT-1 of this report.
A second petrosal sent to Stafford Research Laboratories from the 2001 investigation had a
noncollagenous amino acid composition (Table 7) and accordingly was not dated. A noncollagenous amino acid composition can result from at least three different geochemical
pathways: (1) the degradation of collagen whereby amino acids are differentially leached from
the bone, (2) the amino acids are derived from bacterial and other foreign biological materials
that have a similar amino acid spectrum, or (3) a combination of both collagen-derived and
bacteria-derived protein residues. In May 2003, three additional samples obtained from the left
humerus, femur, and tibia were analyzed at Stafford Research Laboratories. The amino acid
assays showed a non-collagenous composition of the organic matter (Table 8). No teeth remained
from the 2001 investigation and consequently their amino acid composition could not be
determined.

51

Table 7: Quantitative Amino Acid Analyses - Petrosal
Comparing BZT-1 Homo sapiens petrosal bones to Modern Bone.
Values are expressed in residues per 1000 (R/1000). Protein content is expressed as nanomoles
of amino acids per milligram of bone (nm AA/mg bone). Bone with less < 100 nm AA/mg bone
are considered not dateable. The five amino acids marked with an asterisk (*) are those most
important for assessing protein degradation. Is the protein composition collagenous or noncollagenous?
MODERN
Bovid Bone
AAA-1235
(R/1000)
81

SR-6206
Petrosal
AAA-1232
R/1000)
0

SR-6207
Petrosal
AAA-1233
(R/1000)
0

SR-6207
Petrosal
AAA-1234
(R/1000)
0

Aspartic Acid*

49

238

216

195

Threonine

18

27

27

27

Serine

19

26

33

26

Glutamic Acid*

79

146

162

136

Proline*

119

28

30

27

Glycine*

325

203

202

190

Alanine

115

93

90

108

Valine

25

55

50

93

Methionine

5

0

0

0

Isoleucine

13

30

30

30

Leucine

30

49

57

47

Tyrosine

5

7

12

4

Phenylalanine

15

18

22

13

Histidine

7

16

10

34

Hydroxylysine

11

0

0

0

Lysine

30

29

25

0

Arginine

52

34

33

68

Total R/1000

998

999

999

998

nm amino acids/mg of bone

2369

2

2.3

1.9

% protein vs modern bone

100%

0.08%

0.10%

0.08%

AMINO ACID
Hydroxyproline*

52

Stafford's results indicate that the amino acid spectrum of the bone organic matter from the 2003
investigation is not that of collagen. The samples that were prepared and dated by the NSF
Arizona AMS Facility were extremely small and their carbon yields were equally low. The tooth
yielded five æg (a metric unit of mass equal to one thousandth (10-3) of a kilogram). of carbon,
while the petrosal yielded 40 æg of carbon. Detailed amino acid analyses of both petrosals (Table
8) indicated the presence of 1.9 to 2.3 nm of amino acids/mg of bone; 1/1000 of modern bone
(ca. 2500 nm of amino acids/mg of bone).
Samples from the left tibia, humerus, and femur that were sent to Stafford Research Laboratories
from the 2003 investigation yielded similar, very low amino acid contents. The tibia, humerus,
and femur contained 1 to 2 nm of amino acids/mg of threshold needed for accurate dating.
Samples yielding less than 0.05 mg (50 æg) of carbon are difficult to date accurately because
geological processes have proportionately greater effect on the measurement's accuracy while
measurement precision becomes increasingly large.

53

Table 8: Quantitative Amino Acid Analyses – Tibia, Humerus, Femur
Comparing BZT-2 Homo sapiens Tibia, Humerus, and Femur Bones to Modern Bone. Values
are expressed in residues per 1000 (R/1000). Protein content is expressed as nanomoles of amino
acids per milligram of bone (nm AA/mg bone). Bone with less < 100 nm AA/mg bone are
considered not dateable. The five amino acids marked with an asterisk (*) are those most
important for assessing protein degradation — is the protein composition collagenous or noncollagenous?
MODERN
Bovid Bone
Bos taurus
Femur
(R/1000)
93

SR-6396
Tibia
Homo sapiens
AAA-1306
R/1000)
0

SR-6397
Humerus
Homo sapiens
AAA-1307
(R/1000)
0

SR-6398
Femur
Homo sapiens
AAA-1308
(R/1000)
0

Aspartic Acid*

50

276

264

224

Threonine

19

32

29

22

Serine

33

31

31

25

Glutamic Acid*

79

175

167

179

Proline*

115

31

22

25

Glycine*

327

153

176

224

Alanine

113

67

88

90

Valine

20

55

44

22

Methionine

11

0

0

0

Isoleucine

14

31

29

29

Leucine

31

55

55

49

Tyrosine

6

4

11

45

Phenylalanine

14

12

33

9

Histidine

8

8

9

9

Hydroxylysine

8

0

0

0

Lysine

28

31

22

22

Arginine

31

39

22

27

Total R/1000

1000

1000

1002

1001

nm amino acids/mg of bone
% protein vs modern bone

2500
100%

1.7
0.07%

1.4
0.0.6%

2.2
0.09%

AMINO ACID

Hydroxyproline*

54

Sediment-derived older carbon is an unlikely contaminant for two reasons. First, the organic
matter would have to be chemically similar to the fraction dated. Particulate plant organic matter,
kerogen or refractory and geologically ancient (>50,000 yr BP) carbon would have been
eliminated during the chemical purification steps. These types of organic compounds would have
been excluded chemically from amino acids that were dated. Second, the contaminants most
likely to have affected the tooth and petrosal dates are humic or fulvic acids, predominately the
latter. To test the probability that ancient humates were present in sediments, humates from
sediments enclosing the bones were dated. The resulting ages were ca. 5,600 14C yr BP (Table 9).
Consequently, it is unlikely that sediment-derived, ancient carbon contaminated the teeth and
petrosal samples.
Table 9: Radiocarbon ages from BZT-1 and BZT-2.
BZT-1
Date (14C yr BP)

Laboratory Number

Remarks

4,870 +40

CAMS-87686/SR-6210

humic acids (above skull) (d’Aigle
and Hryshechko 2002)

5,135 +40

CAMS-87685/SR-6211

humic acids (inside skull) (d’Aigle
and Hryshechko 2002)

5,590 +40

CAMS-101892/SR-6590

Rangia cuneata

8,700 +2,300

AA-45909

human tooth (d’Aigle and
Hryshechko 2002)

10,740 +760

AA-45910

human petrosal (d’Aigle and
Hryshechko 2002)

Date (14C yr BP)

Laboratory Number

Remarks

5,585 + 40

CAMS-94573/SR-6210

Rangia cuneata

BZT-2

Inherent problems in measuring the concentrations of carbon isotopes in very small samples also
resulted in the large standard deviations associated with the two ages generated by the NSF
Arizona AMS Facility. The tooth had a 1-sigma error of 2,300 years and the petrosal had a onesigma error of 760 years. The tooth sample has such a wide standard deviation that it could either
date to the late Pleistocene or to the middle Holocene very close to the ages generated by the
shell and humate samples.
In summary, human bones from BZT-1 that were submitted to Stafford Research Laboratories
had a non-collagenous amino acid composition and less than 1/1000th their original organic
matter content. Bone samples analyzed by Stafford Research Laboratories all had very low
organic matter contents and non-collagenous compositions. The collagen from the samples
submitted to Stafford may have been destroyed by fluctuating, oxidizing water tables, as
indicated by the bones' high ferric iron and manganese contents.
The non-collagenous amino acid composition, the low organic matter content, and the microgram
yields from samples submitted to Stafford Research Laboratories from the 2001 and 2003
investigations precluded the bones from yielding accurate radiocarbon or stable isotope
measurements. Finally, it is probable that the measured ages on the BZT-1 petrosal and tooth
55

excavated during the 2001 investigation are correct because no indications have been presented
that would indicate that ancient carbon was incorporated into the sample by soil humates or
during laboratory processing at the University of Arizona.
The following are Stafford’s 2002 interpretations for AMS radiocarbon analyses he performed on
sediments from site BZT-1 as well as laboratory observations on BZT-1 human bone that was
14
submitted, but not processed for C dating.
The bone received from BZT-1 comprised two human petrous bones, one of which
the University of Arizona had dated. A total of 892.8 mg were chemically processed
14
at SRL, Inc., with the eventual decision being not to date the specimen by AMS C
methods. The bone was white, soft, and porous. The decalcification solution was
pale yellow, an indication of ferric iron. Upon freeze-drying, the HCl-insoluble
residue showed the dominant presence of salts and oxides of iron and manganese.
Consequently, the bone was termed not suitable for radiocarbon dating by definitions
used by SRL, Inc. and chemical processing was terminated.
Two sediment samples — one from a stratum outside the human cranium (SR-6210)
and sediment within the skull (SR-6211) were processed for humic acid dating.
Humic acids were chosen as the target compound because 1) bulk sediments would
have contained recent plant and other organic matter, 2) the humic acids were
considered coeval with the sediment's deposition adjacent the skull, 3) sediment
within the skull was believed to have an even greater chance for retaining original
carbon, and 4) the chemical processing of humic acids would be preferable to dating
bulk sediment or humin organic matter.
The AMS radiocarbon results from dating the two BZT-1 sediment samples are:
13

14

SR-6210 Humic Acids, BZT1L2S1 4870±40 RC yr. BP, δ C = –16.28‰ C = 454.5±2.4‰, Fm = 0.5455±0.0024 (CAMS-87686)
13

14

SR-6211 Humic Acids, BZT1L1S15 5135±40 RC yr. BP, δ C = –16.28‰, C = 472.3±2.3‰, Fm = 0.5277±0.0023 (CAMS-87685)
I interpret the above observations and radiocarbon results as follows:
1. The petrous bone dated by the University of Arizona had very low protein
content and therefore low carbon content. Although the carbon yield was
very low, the resulting age measured by UA agrees with the human's
stratigraphic position and the age assigned for the disconformity (erosional
unconformity) overlying the human remains. Because the organic matter
content was so low, the bone's age could be either an exact or a minimum age
for the human skeleton.
2. The humic acids from sediments enclosing the human remains and within the
individual's cranial cavity have nearly identical radiocarbon ages. The
significance is that rather than reflecting the geologic age of the sediments'
and the human's deposition, the humic acids' radiocarbon "ages" actually
reflect intensive, thorough and pervasive contamination of sedimentary humic
acids with more modern humates. This postdepositional contamination by
percolating surface and groundwater is corroborated by the large amount of
oxidation evident in the bones and sediments. The bones and sediments
contain abundant limonite and pyrolusite, both of which are deposited by
56

oxidizing waters. The extensive oxidation by waters circulating through the
site is the primary reason why the human bone contains such low amounts of
organic carbon.
3. The presence of geologically young radiocarbon ages for the humic ages
further strengthens the conclusion that the single radiocarbon age on the
human remains is either its absolute age or is a minimum geologic age. The
most likely contaminant for a bone radiocarbon date is humates. If traces of
humates, or especially the high molecular weight humins, were still present
after chemical purification, the geologic age for the human bone would be
older than the age measured by the University of Arizona. Therefore, the
geologic age for the human remains is at least as old as the overlying
disconformity (erosional unconformity), and possibly older if humic acid
contamination still affected the bone sample.
...My opinion is the BZT-1 human remains have the greatest chance of any
Paleoindian skeleton in the United States to be Clovis-age or older. The BZT-1
remains are older than the Anzick Site, Montana human remains, dated by this lab at
10,750 RC yr. BP. Finally, the BZT-1 remains are either coeval with or older than the
Arlington Springs, CA human remains, also dated by this lab, and which are assigned
an age of 10,850 RC yr (Stafford 2002:164-165).
Stable Carbon Isotope Analyses
Two stable carbon isotope values were reported by d'Aigle and Hryshechko (2002). These were
used to interpret the diet of the individual and provide data on the origin of the person. Tykot
analyzed one sample of tooth enamel from a partial tooth root (2002). He obtained a value on the
enamel of -10.5%. Tykot (2002:167) concluded that C4 plants contributed "25% of the diet at the
time of crown formation." He also concluded "marine foods from the Gulf may have contributed
significantly to this individual's diet." Tykot concluded, "...the isotope result obtained on this
single tooth is consistent with residency along the Gulf Coast."
A stable carbon isotope value of -26.5% was obtained by the NSF-Arizona AMS Facility on the
petrosal dated to 10,740 ±760 14C yr BP (AA-45910). Tykot (2002) noted that this value was not
consistent with the isotope value obtained for the tooth. Tykot (2002:167) comments, "...if done
on a sample of intact collagen . . . [the stable carbon isotope value] . . . is not consistent with any
marine food or C4 resource consumption, and suggests residence in an environment in which
there was no free circulation of atmospheric carbon dioxide such as under the canopy of a
tropical forest." However, the noted difference may represent a truly nomadic Paleoindian that
had traversed through multiple environments.

57

Chapter XII
Conclusion
During the years of 2001 through 2003, a prehistoric and nearly complete, partially fragmented,
human skeleton of a young, adult female was recovered from BZT-1 in Brazoria County, Texas.
An analysis of the GPR data completed in the 2001 investigation indicated no evidence of a
burial shaft associated with the human remains. Further, during the 2003 ARPA excavation of
BZT-1, there was no evidence of a burial shaft or other soil disturbance in the B/C-horizon of
Unit 1, or in the Btb-horizon of Unit 2 that is immediately above the human remains. There were
no grave goods or positive evidence of occupation at BZT-1. This person, designated as the BZT1 Prehistoric Woman, does not appear to have been intentionally buried.
The female skeleton was lying in a face down, extended position with her hands crossed in front,
beneath her waist, and with a complete absence of the right tibia, fibula, and foot. The person
represented by the human remains at BZT-1 appears to have been killed after her hands were tied
in front of her abdomen, and then discarded into the muddy west bank of a now extinct channel
of Cocklebur Slough. The BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman may have been mutilated but no strong
evidence was found. Since the remains were found lying on the edge of an extinct channel of
Cocklebur Slough, stream avulsion may instead account for the missing right tibia, fibula, and
foot.
The successful radiocarbon results obtained on the petrosal from the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman
by Tim Jull, NSF-Arizona AMS Facility and American Archaeology Group’s geoarchaeological
and geomorphological modeling and analyses completed in September 2004 support, at a
minimum, a late Pleistocene age of 10,740 years ±760 RC years BP or older for the BZT-1
Prehistoric Woman. The radiocarbon years BP were calibrated to 12,780 calendar years BP with
a 2-sigma (95% accuracy) range of 15,250 to 10,390 Cal BP making the BZT-1 Prehistoric
Woman one of the oldest, and probably the oldest, human remains ever discovered on the North
and South American continents.
As Tom Stafford, Stafford Research Labs, stated in CRC’s final report for the 2002 investigation,
“Therefore, the University of Arizona bone date is either correct or the bone is even older than
that 14C age. ...My opinion is the BZT-1 human remains have the greatest chance of any
Paleoindian skeleton in the United States to be Clovis-age or older. The BZT-1 remains are older
than the Anzick Site, Montana human remains, dated by this lab at 10,750 RC yr. BP. Finally, the
BZT-1 remains are either coeval with or older than the Arlington Springs, CA human remains,
also dated by this lab, and which are assigned an age of 10,850 RC yr”.

58

Chapter XIII
National Register of Historic Places Recommendations
Under the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (36 CFR 800.4), buildings, structures,
objects, and historic districts that are shown to meet Criteria A, B, C, or D for archaeological
districts and sites must retain enough elements of integrity or its historic fabric and character to
be eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). Elements of integrity
include integrity of location, design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling, and association.
Typically, an eligible property need not possess all seven integrity factors, but must at least meet
more than one.
In October 2002, the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) acting under 36 CFR 800.4
confirmed that the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman site is eligible for inclusion the National Register
of Historic Places (NRHP). However, in accordance with the above stipulations, and considering
that all known or suspected elements have been removed or destroyed at the previous location of
the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman, BZT-1 is not recommended as eligible for inclusion in the
National Register of Historic Places.
The skeletal remains of the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman, as a collection, are recommended as
eligible for immediate inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places under Criteria D. The
skeletal remains of the BZT-1 Prehistoric Woman will be permanently curated at the Center for
Archaeological Research, the University of Texas, San Antonio, Texas.
In CRC’s 2002 Final Report, archaeological site BZT-2 was recommended as eligible for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (d’Aigle and Hryshechko 2002:174).

59

References Cited
Aten, L. E.
1983 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
Abbott, J. T.
2001 Houston Area Geoarchaeology: A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program Report no. 27. Texas Department of Transportation,
Austin, Texas.
Adams, J.
2003 North America During the Last 150,000 Years; Environmental Sciences Division, Oak
Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tenn., p. 15.
Anderson, D. G. and Smith S. D.
2003 Archaeology, History, and Predictive Modeling; Research at Fort Polk 19722002.University of Alabama Press p. 349.
Anderson, J. B., A. Rodriguez, K. C. Abdulah, R. H. Fillon, L. A. Banfield, H. A.
McKeowan, and J. S. Wellner
2004 Late Quaternary Stratigraphic Evolution of the Northern Gulf of Mexico Margin: A
Synthesis. In Late Quaternary Stratigraphic Evolution of the Northern Gulf of Mexico
Margin. Edited by J. B. Anderson and R. H. Fillon, pp. 1-23. SEPM Special Publication
No. 79, Society for Sedimentary Geology, Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Aslan, A. and M. D. Blum
1999 Contrasting styles of Holocene avulsion, Texas Gulf Coastal Plain, USA; Special
Publication of Ass. Sediment, vol. 28, pp. 193-209.
Barkeley, F.A.
1934 The statistical theory of pollen analysis. Ecology, 47, 439-447.
Bailey, G. L.
1987 Archeological Bibliography of the Southern Coastal Corridor Region of Texas. Office of
the State Archeologist, Special Report 29, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Bettis, E. Arthur
1992 Soil Morphologic Properties and Weathering Zone Characteristics as Age Indicators in
Holocene Alluvium in the Upper Midwest: In Soils in Archaeology; Landscape Evolution
and Human Occupation; Vance T. Holliday, ed.; Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington D. C., p. 254.
Blum, M. D.
1990 Climatic and Eustatic Controls on Gulf Coastal Plain Fluvial Sedimentation: an Example
from the Late Quaternary of the Colorado River, Texas; GCSSEPM Foundation Eleventh
Annual Research Conference Program and Abstracts, Sequence Stratigraphy as an
Exploration Tool, pp. 71-83.
Biesaart, L. A., W. R. Roberson, and L. C. Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in Texas: A statistical Overview. Office of the State
Archaeologist, Special Report 28.

60

Bryant, V. M., Jr. and S. A. Hall
1993 Archaeological Palynology in the United States: A Critique. American Antiquity, 58, 277286.
Crenwelge, G. W., J. D. Crout, E. L. Griffin, M. L. Golden, and J. K. Baker
1981 Soil Survey of Brazoria County, Texas: United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station; p.
140.
d'Aigle, R. P., and N. V. Hryshechko
2003 Paleoindian Remains from the East Texas Gulf Coast. Current Research in the
Pleistocene 20:89-91.
d'Aigle, R. P., and N. V. Hryshechko
2002 Cultural Resource Investigation Intensive Survey and Site Testing at BZT-1, San Bernard
National Wildlife Refuge, BZT-1 County, Texas. Volume 1. CRC International
Archaeology and Ecology LLC, Spring, Texas
Drees, R.
2002 Soils Analysis. Cultural Resource Investigation Intensive survey and Site Testing at BZT1, San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, BZT-1 County, Texas. Volume 1. CRC
International Archaeology and Ecology LLC, Spring, Texas
Erdtman, G.
1960 The acetolysis method: a revised description. Svensk Botanisk Tidskrift 54:561-564.
Fisher, W. L.
1975 The Geologic Atlas of Texas, Beeville-Bay City Sheet; Bureau of Economic Geology, the
University of Texas at Austin.
1982 The Geologic Atlas of Texas, Houston Sheet; Bureau of Economic Geology, the
University of Texas at Austin.
Fleetwood, Raymond J.
(Nd) Plants of Brazoria/San Bernard National Wildlife Refuges, Brazoria County, Texas.
United States Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service.
Fritz, G., and T. Dillehay
1975 Matagorda Bay Area Texas: A Survey of the Archeological and Historical
Resources. University of Texas, Austin, and General Land Office.
Genovese, S.
1967 Proportionality of the Long Bones and Their Relation to Stature Among Mesoamericans.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 26:67-78.
Hall, S. A.
1981 Deteriorated pollen grains and the interpretation of Quaternary pollen diagrams. Review of
Paleobotany and Palynology, 32, 193-206.
Jull, T.
2002 AMS Radiocarbon Analysis. Cultural Resource Investigation Intensive Survey and Site
Testing at BZT-1, San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, BZT-1 County, Texas. Volume
1. CRC International Archaeology and Ecology LLC, Spring, Texas

61

Lovejoy, C. O., R. S. Meindl, T. R. Prysbeck, and R. P. Mensforth
1985 Chronological Metamorphosis off the Auricular Surface of the Ilium: A New Method for
the Determination of Adult Skeletal Age at Death. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 68:15-28.
Mercado-Allinger, P. A., N. A. Kenmotsu, and T. K. Perttula, (Editors)
1996 Archeology in the Central and Southern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 35 and the Department of
Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource Management Report.
Moya, J. C.
2002 Remains and soil samples description and analysis. In Cultural Resource Investigation
Intensive Survey and Site Testing at BZT-1, San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, BZT1 County, Texas. Volume 1, CRC International Archaeology and Ecology LLC, Spring,
Texas.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1986 The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The University of Texas Press.
(Seventh Paperback Printing).
Patterson, L. W.
1979 A Review of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas Coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 50:103-124.
Ortner, D. and W. G. J. Putschcar
1981 Identification of Pathological Conditions in Human Skeletal Remains. Smithsonian
Contributions to Anthropology no. 28. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Pons, A., de Beaulieu, J. -L., Guiot, J., and M. Reille
1987 Abrupt Climatic Change Evidence and Implications. Berger, W. H., and L. D. Labeyrie,
editors. D. Reidel Pub. Co., Boston pp. 195-208.
Puseman, K.
2002 Protein Residue Analysis of a Bone Fragment and Soil Samples From Brazoria County,
Texas. Cultural Resource Investigation Intensive Survey and Site Testing at BZT-1, San
Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, BZT-1 County, Texas. Volume 1., CRC International
Archaeology and Ecology LLC, Spring, Texas.
Rice, R. J.
1988 Fundamentals of Geomorphology, Second Addition; Longman Scientific and Technical;
pp.420.
Ricklis, R. A.
1996 The Karankawa Indians of Texas: An Ecological Study of Cultural Tradition and Change.
University of Texas Press. Austin.
Schmerer, W. M.
2002 DNA Analysis. Cultural Resource Investigation Intensive Survey and Site Testing at BZT1, San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, BZT-1 County, Texas. Volume 1., CRC
International Archaeology and Ecology LLC, Spring, Texas.

62

Stafford, T.
2002 Interpretations for AMS Radiocarbon Analysis. Cultural Resource Investigation Intensive
Survey and Site Testing at BZT-1, San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, BZT-1 County,
Texas. Volume 1. CRC International Archaeology and Ecology LLC, Spring, Texas.
Steele, D. G.
2002 Osteological Analyses. In Cultural Resource Investigation Intensive Survey and Site
Testing at BZT-1, San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, BZT-1 County, Texas. Volume
1. CRC International Archaeology and Ecology LLC, Spring, Texas.
Stuart-MacAdam, P.
1989 Nutritional Deficiency Diseases: A Survey of Scurvy, Rickets, and Iron Deficiency
Anemia. In Reconstruction of Life From the Skeleton, edited by M. Y. Iscan and K. A. R.
Kennedy, pp. 201-222. Alan R. Liss, New York. Trinkaus, E. n.d. Unpublished List of
Skeletal Measurements. Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri.
Suhm, D. A., and E B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 25. (Entire volume).
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 25. (Entire volume). Publication Number 1 and Texas Memorial Museum,
Bulletin Number 4.

Trotter, M., and G. Gleser
1952 Estimation of Statue From Long Bones of American Whites and Negroes. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 10:463-514.
Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press.
Tykot, R. H.
2002 Stable Isotope Analysis of a Tooth Enamel Sample from the Gulf Coast of Texas. In
Cultural Resource Investigation Intensive Survey and Site Testing at BZT-1, San Bernard
National Wildlife Refuge, BZT-1 County, Texas. Volume 1. CRC International
Archaeology and Ecology LLC, Spring, Texas.
Waters, M. R. and Bonnichsen, R.
2005 Archaeological and Geomorphological Investigations of BZT-1 and BZT-2. Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas.
Wheat, J. B.
1953 The Addicks Dam Site: An Archaeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, southeast
Texas. River Basin Survey Papers 4:1, In: Bulletin of the Bureau of Ethnology 154:143252. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American Archeology. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Williams, J. R., Jones, C. A., and P. T. Dyke
1984 A modeling approach to determine the relationship between erosion and soil productivity:
Transactions ASAE; pp. 129-144.
63

Appendix I:
Geoarchaeological Model Statistics
EPIC

3270 VERSION

2/11/05

San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge

12:34:30

12:34 11feb 5

brazoria.dat
Wea:

46 TX MATAGORDA

wi:

46 TX MATAGORDA

soil:

00 BRAZORIA

C

____________________GENERAL INFORMATION_____________________

SIMULATION DURATION = 1450 Y
BEGINNING DATE =

1- 1- 1

LEAP YEAR CONSIDERED
DRAINAGE AREA =
LATITUDE =

134.64 HA

29.16

ELEVATION =

DEG

1.8 M

CHANNEL
LENGTH =

1.90 KM

GRAD =

.0002 M/M

MANNINGS N =

.075

DEPTH =

.500 M

LAND SLOPE
LENGTH =

318.0 M

GRAD =

.0002 M/M

MANNINGS N

=

.150

WATER EROSION FACTORS--DRIVING EQ = USLE
LS=

.112

P =

TIME OF FLOW CONC =

.600

7.18 H

DAILY CN--STOCHASTIC
PEAK RATE EST WITH MOD RATIONAL EQ
PEAK RATE-EI ADJ FACTOR = 1.000
INITIAL WATER CONTENT OF SNOW =

.0 MM

CULTIVATION PERIOD BEFORE SIMULATION = 100.0 Y
AVE N CONC IN RAINFALL =

.80 PPM

CONC OF SALT IN IRRIGATION WATER =

.0 PPM

COSTS
N FERT =

.51 $/KG

P FERT =

.57 $/KG

LIME = 31.00 $/T
IRR WATER =

EPIC

.04 $/MM

3270 VERSION

2/11/05

San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge

12:34 11feb 5

brazoria.dat
Wea:

46 TX MATAGORDA

wi:

46 TX MATAGORDA

soil:

00 BRAZORIA

____________________WEATHER DATA_______________________

CO2 CONC IN ATMOSPHERE =

330. PPM

PERIOD OF RECORD FOR P5MX = 10. Y

**********RAIN, TEMP, RAD, WIND SPEED, & REL HUM ARE GENERATED**********

64

C

12:34:30

WET-DRY PROB COEF =

.750

RAINFALL DIST IS SKEWED NORMAL
1.00

1.03

1.15

.99

1.22

1.07

********** PENMAN-MONTEITH

1.10

1.05

1.05

1.01

1.02

.98

EQ USED TO EST POT ET **********

VERNALIZATION TIME =

33. D

ANNUAL HEAT UNITS =

7498. C

-----AVE MO VALUES
1450
JAN

FEB

MAR

APR

MAY

JUN

JUL

AUG

SEP

OCT

NOV

DEC

YR

TMX

17.64

19.04

21.91

25.23

28.55

31.40

32.64

33.07

31.34

28.07

22.89

19.33

25.93

TMN

7.95

9.41

12.69

16.96

20.72

23.85

24.88

24.44

22.03

17.41

12.32

9.02

16.81

SDMX

5.61

4.76

3.77

2.63

1.91

1.58

1.52

1.64

2.41

3.07

4.68

4.98

SDMN

6.34

5.67

5.50

4.61

3.33

2.37

1.55

1.89

3.31

4.94

6.08

5.94

PRCP

72.9

69.2

54.8

79.9

104.5

92.2

85.4

91.7

142.1

88.1

84.6

89.8

SDRF

15.7

16.5

21.6

26.4

39.6

30.5

25.7

21.6

32.5

26.7

24.4

17.8

SDRF

SKRF

2.27

1.69

4.95

2.05

4.39

3.17

2.98

3.00

3.81

3.71

2.46

1.64

SKRF

PW/D

.170

.150

.130

.120

.120

.110

.120

.150

.170

.120

.140

.170

PW/D

PW/W

.380

.400

.270

.250

.270

.410

.390

.390

.450

.380

.320

.380

DAYP

6.67

5.80

4.69

4.14

4.38

4.71

5.10

6.12

7.08

5.03

5.12

6.67

P5MX

18.5

15.2

25.7

43.4

53.6

44.5

33.5

46.2

41.1

40.6

28.2

22.1

RAD

12.2

14.3

17.1

19.0

23.7

25.7

25.9

23.8

19.8

17.2

12.2

11.1

RAMX

16.3

19.0

23.2

27.9

31.1

32.6

32.7

31.4

28.5

24.3

19.7

16.7

RAMX

HRLT

10.27

10.75

11.52

12.45

13.30

13.90

13.98

13.52

12.69

11.79

10.92

10.35

HRLT

RHUM

.74

.76

.70

.73

.76

.74

.71

.69

.72

.70

.68

.72

RHUM

ALPH

.27

.22

.36

.38

.38

.38

.33

.45

.33

.38

.29

.27

WSPD

5.02

5.24

5.45

5.74

5.66

5.39

5.07

4.66

4.38

4.49

4.88

4.73

FIELD WIDTH =
FIELD ANGLE =

SDMN
1055.2

EPIC

.50

500. UM
.000

3270 VERSION

2/11/05

San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge

12:34 11feb 5

brazoria.dat
Wea:

46 TX MATAGORDA

wi:

46 TX MATAGORDA

soil:

____________________SOIL DATA____________________

SOIL ALBEDO =

.06

MAX NUMBER SOIL LAYERS = 10.

65

00 BRAZORIA

C

RAD

ALPH
5.06

0. DEG

ACCELERATE WIND EROS FACTOR =

DAYP
P5MX

18.5

.63 KM

SOIL PARTICLE DIAM =

PRCP

PW/W
65.50

.32 KM

WIND SPEED MOD EXP POWER PARM =

TMN
SDMX

-----WIND EROSION DATA
FIELD LENGTH =

TMX

12:34:30

WSPD

MIN THICKNESS FOR LAYER SPLITTING =

.10 M

MIN PROFILE THICKNESS--STOPS SIMULATION =
SPLITTING PRIORITY THICKNESS =

.10 M

.15 M

WATER TABLE DEPTH
MIN =

50.00 M

MAX = 100.00 M
INITIAL =

75.00 M

WEATHERING CODE =

0.

RETURN FLOW TT =

10.00 D

CN SCRV SCRP(14) =

50.

10.

RUNOFF CN2 = 74.0
SLP ADJ CN2 = 69.3
CN SCRP(4) =

.42377E+01

.10516E-01
SOIL LAYER NO

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

3

3

3

.01

.13

.26

.38

.51

.65

.79

.94

1.08

1.65

POROSITY(M/M)

.630

.630

.630

.630

.630

.547

.547

.547

.547

.547

.573

FC SW(M/M)

.520

.520

.520

.520

.520

.492

.492

.492

.492

.492

.501

WP SW(M/M)

.360

.360

.360

.360

.360

.382

.382

.382

.382

.382

.376

SW(M/M)

.447E

.447E

.447E

.447E

.447E

.442E

.442E

.442E

.442E

.442E

.444

SAT COND(MM/H)

.20

.20

.20

.20

.20

.20

.20

.20

.20

.20

SAT COND(MM/H)

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

BD 33KPA(T/M3)

.98

.98

.98

.98

.98

1.20

1.20

1.20

1.20

1.20
1.54

DEPTH(M)

BDD OV DRY(T/M3)

1.54

1.54

1.54

1.54

1.54

1.54

1.54

1.54

1.54

SAND(%)

9.8

9.8

9.8

9.8

9.8

8.9

8.9

8.9

8.9

8.9

SILT(%)

22.7

22.7

22.7

22.7

22.7

21.1

21.1

21.1

21.1

21.1

CLAY(%)

67.5

67.5

67.5

67.5

67.5

70.0

70.0

70.0

70.0

70.0

ROCK(%)

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

7.9

7.9

7.9

7.9

7.9

7.9

7.9

7.9

7.9

7.9

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

45.6

45.6

38.7

38.7

38.7

38.7

38.7

PH
SM BS(CMOL/KG)
CEC(CMOL/KG)

.0E
45.6

.0E
45.6

.0E
45.6

AL SAT(%)

.0E

.0E

.0E

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

CACO3(%)

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

LAB P(G/T)

30.

30.

30.

30.

30.

10.

10.

10.

10.

10.

P SORP RTO

.50E

.50E

.50E

.50

.50

.50

.50

.50

.50

.50

TOT

287.

MN P AC(G/T)

30.E

30.E

30.E

30.

30.

10.

10.

10.

10.

10.

287.

MN P ST(G/T)

120.E

120.E

120.E

120.

120.

40.

40.

40.

40.

40.

1147.

ORG P(G/T)

291.E

291.E

291.E

291.

291.

291.

291.

291.

291.

291.

5440.

NO3(G/T)

10.

10.

10.

10.

10.

5.

5.

5.

5.

5.

118.

ORG N AC(G/T)

291.E

291.E

291.E

291.

291.

117.

117.

117.

117.

117.

3051.

ORG N ST(G/T)

40469.

2039.E

2039.E

2039.E

2039.

2039.

2213.

2213.

2213.

2213.

2213.

ORG C(%)

2.32

2.32

2.32

2.32

2.32

2.32

2.32

2.32

2.32

2.32

CROP RSD(T/HA)

1.00E

.08E

.08E

.08

.08

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

1.34

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

RWT(T/HA)

____________________MANAGEMENT DATA____________________

DRYLAND AGRICULTURE
AUTO FERT
N STRESS TRIGGER =
MIN APPL INTERVAL =
APPLICATION RATE =

.80
0 D
0. KG/HA

66

MAX N FERT/CROP =

500. KG/HA

FLEXIBLE APPLICATIONS
NO LIME APPLICATIONS

-----OPERATION SCHEDULE FOR 20 YR ROTATION

YR 1

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

1

1

NO
3

NAME

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

PLANT DR 17.54

.25

10.

40.

25.

.17

0.

.00

6

.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.000

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000
+

RNGE

YR 2

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR 3

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR 4

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

IRR

Q/

HU

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.000

YR 5

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

.00

.00

0.

DP

RHT

(MM)

(MM)

-50.

RIN
(M)
0.

DKH
(MM)
.00

DKI
(M)
0.

OP

HV

CD
.00

EF
2

HV
IDX
1.00

MAT
CROP

(Y)

.005

SCS
CN
0

69.3

.00

.00

IRR

Q/

HU

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.000

YR 6

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

.00

.00

0.

DP

RHT

(MM)

(MM)

-50.

RIN
(M)
0.

DKH
(MM)
.00

.000

67

DKI
(M)
0.

OP

HV

CD
.00

EF
2

HV
IDX
1.00

MAT
CROP
.005

(Y)

SCS
CN
0

69.3

.00

.00

YR 7

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR 8

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR 9

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR10

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR11

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR12

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR13

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

.000

68

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP
.005

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

0

69.3

.00

.00

YR14

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR15

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

65

GRAZE1

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

.15

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.050

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR16

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR17

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR18

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR19

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

.005

0

69.3

.00

.00

.000

YR20

TILLAGE OPERATIONS
ID
MO

DA

NO

NAME

1

1

66

GRAZE2

COST

MX

RR

DP

RHT

RIN

DKH

DKI

OP

HV

HV

($/HA)

EF

(MM)

(MM)

(MM)

(M)

(MM)

(M)

CD

EF

IDX

.00

.00

0.

-50.

0.

.00

.000

69

0.

.00

2

1.00

CROP
.005

MAT

SCS

IRR

Q/

HU

(Y)

CN

TRGR

VIRR

SCD

0

69.3

.00

.00

____________________CROP PARAMETERS____________________

RNGE
WA

30.0

HI

.01

TB

25.0

TG

8.0

DMLA

5.0

DLAI

.99

LAP1

15.010

LAP2

50.950

FRS1

5.010

FRS2

15.100

RLAD

1.00

RBMD

1.00

ALT

2.0

CAF

.85

GSI

.0050

WAC2

660.33

WAVP

6.0

VPTH

.5

VPD2

4.75

SDW

5.0

HMX

1.00

RDMX

2.00

RWP1

.400

RWP2

.200

CVM

.003

CNY

.0234

CPY

.0033

WSYF

.0100

PST
COSD

.60
.31

PRY

20.00

PRY

.00

WCY

.10

BN1

.0600

BN2

.0231

BN3

.0134

BP1

.0084

BP2

.0032

BP3

.0019

BW1

3.390

BW2

3.390

BW3

3.390

IDC
.43882E+01
.23166E+01
PHU

6
.12835E+02

.13400E-01

.60000E-01

.87920E+01

.19000E-02

.84000E-02

4023.

____________________CROP PARAMETERS____________________

70

RNGE
LAP1

.541E+01

LAP2

.181E+02

FRS1

.685E+01

FRS2

.130E+00

WAC1

.380E+01

WAC2 -.118E-02

____________________FINAL SOIL DATA____________________

SOIL LAYER NO
3

3

3

.01

.03

.10

POROSITY(M/M)

.541

.547

.547

.547

FC SW(M/M)

.487

.492

.492

.492

WP SW(M/M)

.377

.382

.382

.382

1.467E

.515E

.536E

.625

.20

.20

.20

DEPTH(M)

SW(M/M)
SAT COND(MM/H)
SAT COND(MM/H)

.00

.00

.00

BD 33KPA(T/M3)

1.20

1.20

1.20

BDD OV DRY(T/M3)

1.54

1.89

1.54

SAND(%)

8.9

8.9

8.9

SILT(%)

21.1

21.1

21.1

CLAY(%)

70.0

70.0

70.0

ROCK(%)

.0

.0

.0

7.9

7.9

7.9

PH
SM BS(CMOL/KG)

.0E

CEC(CMOL/KG)

45.6

.0E
38.7

.0E
38.7

AL SAT(%)

.0E

.0E

.0E

CACO3(%)

.0

.0

.0

LAB P(G/T)

0.

0.

0.

P SORP RTO

.50E

.50E

.50E

0.E

0.E

0.E

MN P AC(G/T)
MN P ST(G/T)
ORG P(G/T)

TOT

0.

0.

0.E

0.E

0.E

0.

14.E

19.E

19.E

23.

NO3(G/T)

0.

0.

0.

0.

ORG N AC(G/T)

8.E

10.E

10.E

11.

ORG N ST(G/T)

219.E

310.E

315.E

365.

ORG C(%)

.23

.32

.32

CROP RSD(T/HA)

.00E

.00E

.00E

.00

RWT(T/HA)

.00

.00

.01

.01

-.183420E+03

.731941E+03

.135415E+07

.000000E+00

.000000E+00

.000000E+00

.322918E+06

SOIL WATER BALANCE

= -.183420E+03

ERODED SOIL THICKNESS

= 1550.1 MM

AVG. YEARLY EROSION

= .0012685 M/YR

.658572E+06

.887164E+02

.624578E+02

.373422E+06

-----AVE MO VALUES
1222

TMX

JAN

FEB

MAR

APR

MAY

JUN

JUL

AUG

SEP

OCT

NOV

DEC

YR

17.59

19.09

21.91

25.27

28.53

31.41

32.63

33.06

31.35

28.07

22.92

19.28

25.92

71

TMX

TMN

17.59

19.09

21.91

25.27

28.53

31.41

32.63

33.06

31.35

28.07

22.92

19.28

16.74

TMN

PRCP

77.3

74.8

57.3

83.8

118.7

98.9

92.0

92.8

143.5

88.7

86.5

94.0

1108.1

PRCP

TMX

17.59

19.09

21.91

25.27

28.53

31.41

32.63

33.06

31.35

28.07

22.92

19.28

25.92

TMX

TMN

7.71

9.38

12.58

16.85

20.67

23.84

24.89

24.42

22.06

17.40

12.22

8.91

16.74

TMN

DAYP

6.78

5.60

4.83

4.16

4.43

4.74

5.20

6.06

7.15

5.18

5.10

6.73

65.97

DAYP

PRK

34.5

30.6

19.5

21.5

25.2

22.3

19.9

17.6

27.5

24.5

26.5

36.0

305.6

PRK

Q

13.1

12.9

12.5

17.5

40.0

27.2

19.7

16.0

44.2

23.3

19.9

18.0

264.3

Q

RZSW

131.68

130.91

121.63

120.17

118.54

113.96

110.02

108.42

117.74

119.03

123.23

130.94

120.52

RZSW

EI

43.

42.

59.

89.

208.

130.

93.

88.

181.

99.

79.

56.

1168.

EI

C

.46

.48

.51

.54

.53

.52

.49

.49

.46

.44

.45

.46

.49

C

USLE

.49

.51

.75

1.21

2.75

1.67

1.15

1.09

2.08

1.10

.90

.65

14.35

USLE

WSPD

5.04

5.28

5.47

5.76

5.72

5.43

5.09

4.69

4.39

4.52

4.90

4.78

5.09

WSPD

WSPD

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

DAYW

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

.0

DAYW

RHTT

.1

.1

.1

.1

.1

.1

.1

.1

.1

.1

.1

.1

.1

RHTT

RRUF

1.2

1.3

.5

1.1

1.2

1.2

1.1

1.0

1.8

1.1

1.3

1.6

.0

RRUF

STL

.23

.31

.39

.50

.65

.76

.86

.87

.76

.74

.63

.32

YW

0.

0.

0.

0.

0.

0.

0.

0.

0.

0.

0.

0.

QIN

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

.00

PET

96.

105.

159.

183.

234.

257.

274.

253.

193.

164.

116.

RAD

12.

14.

17.

19.

24.

26.

26.

24.

20.

17.

HRLT

10.27

10.75

11.52

12.45

13.30

13.90

13.98

13.52

12.69

11.79

264.25

SSF

.07

12.48

YP

WSPD

STL
0.

YW

.00

.00

QIN

94.

2128.

PET

12.

11.

18.

10.92

10.35

RAD
HRLT

-----AVE ANNUAL VALUES

1222
2.78

SNOW

.44

USLE

14.35

Q
YON

PRK

1.25

305.58

ET

538.93

.00

AVOL

.00

NFIX

PET 2128.07
IRGA

.00

C

.49

YW

.00

MUST

FNO3

.00

FNH3

.00

FNO

.00
FPL

.00

YNO3

FPO

.0862 SSFN

.00

CN

.5082 PRKN

75.31

LIME

.00

1.4462

YAP

.0342

ER

3.50

WUEF

CAW

COST

.89

RTRN

.00

-----AVE ANNUAL CROP YLD DATA
CROP

YLD

BIOM

AVE STRESS DAYS
YLN

RAD

HU

RD

------------BIOMASS-----------

---ROOT GROWTH--

(T/HA)

(T/HA)

(KG/HA) (MJ/M2)

(C)

(M)

(KG/MM)

(MM)

WATER

N

P

TEMP

AIR

BD

ALSAT

TEMP
RNGE

.0/

.6

1.09

28.

67844.

1239.

1.09

.00

Beginning Time: 12:34:30.47
Ending

Time: 12:38:23.51

---------------------------Total Run Time:

3:53.04

72

9509.

3.6

17.8 147.4

37.1

69.1

.0

.0

14.8

Appendix II:
Complete BZT-1 Skeletal Inventory with Preservation Index1
Preservation Index1 (percent of bone preserved): 1= >75%, 2= 25
Cranial Bones
Element

Left

Right

Frontal

2

2

Parietal

3

3

Occipital

3

3

Temporal

3

3

Sphenoid

3

3

Zygomatic

3

3

Maxilla

3

3

Palatine

3

3

Mandible

2

2

Vertebral Column
Element

Centrum

Neural Arch

Cervical 1

-

2

Cervical 2

-

-

Cervical 3

-

-

Cervical 4

-

-

Cervical 5

-

-

Cervical 6

-

-

Cervical 7

-

-

Thoracic 1

-

-

Thoracic 2

-

-

Thoracic 3

-

-

Thoracic 4

-

-

Thoracic 5

-

-

Thoracic 6

-

-

73

Vertebral Column (continued)
Element

Left

Right

Thoracic 7

-

-

Thoracic 8

-

-

Thoracic 9

2

-

Thoracic 10

2

2

Thoracic 11

2

2

Thoracic 12

2

2

Lumbar 1

2

2

Lumbar 2

2

2

Lumbar 3

2

2

Lumbar 4

2

2

Lumbar 5

2

2

Sacrum

1

2

Scapula

-

3

Clavicle

3

3

Proximal epiph.

-

-

Proximal third

-

2

Middle third

2

1

Distal third

1

1

Distal epiph.

1

1

Proximal epiph.

1

1

Proximal third

1

1

Middle third

1

1

Distal third

1

1

Distal epiph.

2

1

Humerus

Ulna

74

Element

Left

Right

1

3

Proximal third

1

1

Middle third

1

1

Distal third

1

3

Distal epiph.

1

1

Radius
Proximal epiph.
Radius

Hand
Element

Left
No. Present/No. Complete

Right
No. Present/No. Complete

Carpals

8/6

8/5

Metacarpals

5/1

5/1

Phalanges

10/1

14/5

Thorax
Element
Ribs

Left
No. Present/No. Complete

Right
No. Present/No. Complete

12/0

Sternum

12/0
Present but fragmentary

Pelvic Girdle
Element

Left

Right

Ilium

1

1

Ischium

1

1

Pubis

2

2

Acetabulum

1

1

Auricular surface

3

1

Lower Limb
Element

Left

Right

3

1

Femur
Prox. epiph.

75

Lower Limb (Continued)
Proximal third

1

1

Left

Right

1

1

Distal third

1

1

Distal epiph.

1

3

Prox. epiph.

2

-

Proximal third

1

-

Middle third

1

-

Distal third

1

-

Distal epiph.

2

-

Prox. epiph.

2

-

Proximal third

3

-

Middle third

3

-

Distal third

3

-

Distal epiph.

3

-

Element
Femur (continued)
Middle third
Femur

Tibia

Fibula

Feet
Element

Left

Right

Talus

-

1

Calcaneus

-

-

Element

Left
(No. present/No. complete)

Right
(No. present/No. complete)

Other tarsals

1/1

0/0

Element

Left

Right

Metatarsals

1/1

0/0

Phalanges

0/0

0/0

76

Appendix III: Measurements Taken From BZT-1 Skeletal Remains
Value (mm)
Reference

Element
Left

Right

M1/M2 Height

29

-

Martin 1928

M1/M2 Breadth

20

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Ramus Minimum Breadth

40

-

Martin 1928

Mandible

Thoracic Vertebra 12
Body Ventral Height

24

Martin 1928

Body Dorsal Height

24.5

Martin 1928

Body Median Height

22.5

Martin 1928

Body Superior Transverse Diameter

38

Martin 1928

Body Inferior Transverse Diameter

41

Martin 1928

Humerus
Midshaft Maximum Diameter

19

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Minimum Diameter

15

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Circumference

61

-

Martin 1928

Distal Minimum Circumference

60

-

Martin 1928

Supracondylar Ant-Post Diameter

12.7

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Epicondylar Breadth

54.5

-

Martin 1928

Distal Articular Breadth

39.5

-

Martin 1928

Capitular Breadth

25.1

-

Martin 1928

Trochlear Breadth

13.8

-

Martin 1928

Trochlear Maximum Ant-Post Diameter

21.1

-

Martin 1928

Capitular Ant-Post Diameter

20.7

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Trochlear Minimum Circumference

48.1

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Capitular Circumference

50.5

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Medial Epicondyle Projection

16.74

-

Trinkaus n.d.

77

Value (mm)
Reference

Element
Left

Right

Humerus (continued)
Lateral Epicondyle Projection

-

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Olecranon Fossa Breadth

25.8

-

Martin 1928

Olecranon Fossa Depth

14.4

-

Martin 1928

-

Yes

Trinkaus n.d.

Maximum Length

264.2

-

Martin 1928

Articular Length

225.2

-

Martin 1928

Crest Ant-Post Diameter

14

-

Martin 1928

Crest Med-Lat Diameter

11

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Ant-Post Diameter

14

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Midshaft Med-Lat Diameter

11

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Midshaft Circumference

40

-

Trinkaus n.d.

32.4

-

Martin 1928

Pronator Quadratus Maximum Diameter

12

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Pronator Quadratus Minimum Diameter

10

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Olecranon Length

21

-

Martin 1928

Olecranon Height

27

-

Martin 1928

Olecranon Breadth

21

-

Martin 1928

Olecranon Depth

16

-

Mchenry et al 1976

Coronoid Height

-

13

McHenry et al 1976

Radial Facet Maximum Diameter

-

13.1

Trinkaus n.d.

Radial Facet Minimum Diameter

-

6.7

Trinkaus n.d.

Head Breadth

14

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Distal Maximum Depth

16

-

Trinkaus n.d.

-

6.7

Trinkaus n.d.

Perforation Of The Olecranon Fossa (Septal
Aperture)
Ulna

Distal Minimum Circumference

Distal Radial Maximum Length
78

Value (mm)
Reference

Element
Left

Right

Maximum Length

247.5

-

Martin 1928

Articular Length

231

-

Martin 1928

Lateral Curvature Chord

130

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Ant-Post Diameter

10.8

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Med-Lat Diameter

9.8

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Circumference

35

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Crest Ant-Post Diameter

10.1

-

Martin 1928

Crest Med-Lat Diameter

14.1

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Ant-Post Diameter

9.9

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Med-Lat Diameter

12.1

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Circumference

36

-

Martin 1928

Distal Minimum Circumference

35

-

Martin 1928

Head-Neck Length

27.7

-

Martin 1928

Head Ant-Post Diameter

20.2

-

Martin 1928

Head Med-Lat Diameter

18.8

-

Martin 1928

63

-

Martin 1928

Neck Ant-Post Diameter

13.4

-

Martin 1928

Neck Med-Lat Diameter

12.5

-

Martin 1928

47

-

Martin 1928

Tuberosity Length

26.4

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Tuberosity Breadth

13.8

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Tuberosity Projection

14.2

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Shaft Diameter At Tuberosity

13.3

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Distal Breadth

27.3

-

Martin 1928

Distal Depth

16.8

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Carpal Articular Breadth

24.7

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Radius

Head Circumference

Neck Circumference

79

Value (mm)
Reference

Element
Left

Right

Radius (continued)
Carpal Minimum Articular Depth

11.5

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Carpal Maximum Articular Depth

14.9

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Distal Ulnar Maximum Proximo-Distal Length

5.1

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Articular Length

-

19

Martin 1928

Maximum Breadth

-

13

Martin 1928

Maximum Height

-

17

Martin 1928

Proximal Articular Height

-

12.5

Martin 1928

Proximal Articular Breadth

-

12

Martin 1928

Scaphoid Articular Length

-

7

Trinkaus n.d.

Scaphoid Articular Height

-

10

Trinkaus n.d.

Hamate Articular Length

-

11

Martin 1928

Hamate Articular Height

-

7

Martin 1928

MC2 Articular Height

-

11

Martin 1928

MC2 Articular Depth

-

1

Martin 1928

Maximum Length

-

10

Martin 1928

Maximum Breadth

-

11

Martin 1928

Maximum Height

-

16.5

Martin 1928

Capitate

Trapezoid

Metacarpal 1
Distal Height

-

11.5

Trinkaus n.d.

Distal Maximum Breadth

-

15

Trinkaus n.d.

Distal Articular Height

-

11

Trinkaus n.d.

Distal Maximum Shaft Breadth

-

12.5

Trinkaus n.d.

Distal Radial Height

-

12

Trinkaus n.d.

Distal Ulnar Height

-

10.5

Trinkaus n.d.

80

Value (mm)
Reference

Element
Left

Right

Metacarpal 3
Midshaft Height

-

8.5

Trinkaus n.d.

Midshaft Breadth

-

7

Trinkaus n.d.

Midshaft Circumference

-

29

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Maximum Height

-

18.5

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Maximum Breadth

-

12

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Articular Height

-

12

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Articular Breadth

-

9.5

Trinkaus n.d.

MC2 Articular Breadth

-

5

Trinkaus n.d.

MC4 Articular Breadth

-

6

Trinkaus n.d.

Distal Phalanx 1
Maximum Length

-

21.5

Martin 1928

Articular Length

-

20

Trinkaus n.d.

Midshaft Height

-

4.5

Trinkaus n.d.

Midshaft Breadth

-

7

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Maximum Height

-

7

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Maximum Breadth

-

13

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Articular Height

-

5

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Articular Breadth

-

11

Trinkaus n.d.

Distal Height

-

3.5

Trinkaus n.d.

Distal Maximum Breadth

-

7

Trinkaus n.d.

Flexor Fossa Length

-

5.5

Trinkaus n.d.

Flexor Fossa Breadth

-

4

Trinkaus n.d.

43

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Greater Sciatic Notch Height

-

-

Martin 1928

Greater Sciatic Notch Breadth

-

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Os Coxae
Acetabular Height

81

Value (mm)
Reference

Element
Left

Right

Os Coxae (continued)
Auricular Surface Height

55

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Auricular Surface Breadth

41

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Ischial Tuberosity Breadth

25

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Trochanteric Length

404

-

Martin 1928

Bicondylar Trochanteric Length

397

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Ap Diameter

26

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Ml Diameter

23

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Circumference

80

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Ml Diameter

62

-

Martin 1928

Proximal Anterior/posterior Diameter

32

-

Martin 1928

Head And Neck Length

-

78

Trinkaus n.d.

Anatomical Biomechanical Neck Length

-

55

Trinkaus n.d.

Trochanteric Biomechanical Neck Length

-

73

Lovejoy et al 1973

Anterior/posterior Head Diameter

-

38

Martin 1928

Si Head Diameter

-

32

Martin 1928

Vertical Neck Diameter

-

28

Martin 1928

Neck Circumference

-

84

Martin 1928

Greater Trochanter Depth

35

-

Martin 1928

Lateral Condylar Breadth

18

-

Martin 1928

Lateral Patellar Projection

52

-

Martin 1928

Median Patellar Projection

48

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Patellar Surface Circumference

24

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Height

32

-

Martin 1928

Breadth

38

-

Martin 1928

Femur

Patella

82

Value (mm)
Reference

Element
Left

Right

Patella (continued)
Thickness

18.6

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Articular Breadth

37.2

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Articular Depth

8.6

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Medial Facet Breadth

20.1

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Lateral Facet Breadth

22.5

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Midshaft Ap Diameter

22

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Ml Diameter

16

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Circumference

70

-

Martin 1928

Proximal Ap Diameter

30

-

Martin 1928

Proximal Ml Diameter

19.5

-

Martin 1928

Proximal Circumference

79

-

Martin 1928

Distal Maximum Breadth (M-6)

44

-

Martin 1928

Distal Maximum Depth (M-7)

29

-

Martin 1928

Talar Articular Breadth

32

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Medial Talar Articular Depth

18

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Lateral Talar Articular Depth

23.5

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Midshaft Maximum Diameter

16

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Minimum Diameter

10

-

Martin 1928

Midshaft Circumference

57

-

Martin 1928

Neck Maximum Diameter

11.5

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Neck Minimum Diameter

9

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Neck Circumference

34

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Tibia

Fibula

83

Value (mm)
Reference

Element
Left

Right

Length

-

49.5

Martin 1928

Articular Height

-

22

Martin 1928

Articular Breadth

-

38.5

Martin 1928

Trochlear Length

-

32.8

Martin 1928

Trochlear Breadth

-

28.3

Martin 1928

Trochlear Height

-

11.7

Martin 1928

Lateral Malleolar Height

-

23.6

Trinkaus n.d.

Lateral Malleolar Breadth

-

21.3

Martin 1928

Lateral Malleolar Oblique Height

-

17.3

Martin 1928

Head and Neck Length

-

22.2

Martin 1928

Head Length

-

16.4

Martin 1928

Head Breadth

-

28

Martin 1928

Posterior Calcaneal Length

-

29

Martin 1928

Posterior Calcaneal Breadth

-

19

Martin 1928

Height

20

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Medial Length

31

-

Martin 1928

Lateral Length

28

-

Martin 1928

Calcaneal Height

11.5

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Calcaneal Breadth

20

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Metatarsal 4 and 5 Articular Height

13.5

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Metatarsal 4 and 5 Articular Breadth

20.5

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Talus

Cuboid

Navicular
Maximum Thickness

15

-

Martin 1928

Minimum Thickness

8

-

Martin 1928

Breadth

31

-

Martin 1928

84

Value (mm)
Reference

Element
Left

Right

Navicular (continued)
Height

20

-

Martin 1928

Talar Length

20.5

-

Martin 1928

Talar Height

15

-

Martin 1928

Metatarsals (left fifth metatarsal)
Maximum Length

68

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Shaft Height

11

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Shaft Breadth

7

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Circumference

29

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Maximum Height

20

-

Martin 1928

Proximal Maximum Breadth

12.5

-

Martin 1928

Proximal Articular Height

14.5

-

Trinkaus n.d.

Proximal Articular Breadth

11

-

Trinkaus n.d.

11.5

-

Martin 1928

Distal Maximum Breadth

11

-

Martin 1928

Medial Facet Height

7

-

Martin 1928

Medial Facet Length

12.5

-

Martin 1928

Distal Height

85

Appendix IV:
Calibration of Radiocarbon age to Calendar Years

86

87

