CULTURAL RESOURCE INVESTIGATION
INTENSIVE SURVEY AND SITE TESTING AT

BZT-1
SAN BERNARD NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE, BRAZORIA
COUNTY, TEXAS
VOLUME 1 OF 2
(REVISED 20 DECEMBER 2002)

PREPARED FOR:

THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
SOUTHWEST REGION
ALBUQUERQUE, NEW MEXICO

ORDER NO. 201811M159
BY:

CRC, INTERNATIONAL ARCHAEOLOGY & ECOLOGY, LLC
SPRING, TEXAS 77388

ROBERT P. D'AIGLE, RPA
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR
NATALIYA V. HRYSHECHKO, MS
DIRECTOR OF LABORATORY SERVICES
ARCHAEOLOGIST
WITH CONTRIBUTIONS BY:

RICHARD DREES, PHD
JUAN-CARLOS MOYA, PHD
JOSEPH POWELL, PHD
WERA SCHMERER, PHD
THOMAS STAFFORD, PHD
GENTRY STEELE, PHD
ROBERT TYKOT, PHD
JULY 2002
i

CRC PROJECT NO. 010407

CULTURAL RESOURCE INVESTIGATION
INTENSIVE SURVEY AND SITE TESTING AT

BZT-1
SAN BERNARD NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE, BRAZORIA
COUNTY, TEXAS
VOLUME 1 OF 2
(REVISED 20 DECEMBER 2002)

CRC, INTERNATIONAL ARCHAEOLOGY & ECOLOGY,
LLC
SPRING, TEXAS 77388

ROBERT P. D'AIGLE, RPA
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR

ii

iii

The original of this Final Report is printed on Epson® Professional Media Archival
Matte Paper and with Epson® Durabrite™ archival ink (pigment base.)

iv

Whence did I come?
I know not.
Whencesoever shall I return?
It concerns me not.
I exist to be
In my fullness and glory
Not to explain
But to discover me.

v

Acknowledgements
What a consortium of expertise! During this investigation, we have had the opportunity and
pleasure of working with a superb, dedicated team of professional collaborators. Many, if not
most, have contributed their time, effort, and expertise at reduced fees and in some instances
pro bono. To all of you who have labored with us during this investigation, we offer a sincere
and well deserved, “Thank you.”
We do especially acknowledge some of the individuals who participated in the completion of
this project:
Bruce Benner, PhD, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Maryland
George Burr, PhD, and Tim Jull, PhD, University of Arizona-Tucson, Arizona
Richard Drees, PhD, Department of Soil & Crop Sciences, Texas A&M University, Texas
James Mauseth, PhD, Mauseth Laboratory, University of Texas-Austin, Texas
David Meltzer, PhD, Professor of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Texas
Juan-Carlos Moya, PhD, Quaternary Geologist, Austin, Texas
Joseph Powell, PhD, Professor of Anthropology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque
Mason Rankin, Professional Photographer, Houston, Texas
Linda Richardson, Transcriptionist and Proof Reader, sans la comparaison, Houston,
Texas
Mustafa Sarabudak, PhD, Geophysicist, Houston, Texas
Wera Schmerer, PhD, Ancient DNA Specialist-Physical Anthropologist, US Armed
Forces DNA Identification Laboratory, Maryland
Gentry Steele, PhD, Forensic Anthropologist, Texas A&M University, Texas
Hugh Tuller, MS, Forensic Anthropologist, Oklahoma
Robert Tykot, PhD, Department of Anthropology, University of South Florida, Florida
Tom Stafford, PhD, Stafford Research Laboratories, Colorado. Tom, you have been very
generous with your knowledge. That is the quintessence of a scholar and in the true spirit of a
zetetic.
Ben New, heavy equipment operator at the Refuge, is the best we have ever worked with. I
almost believe Ben could expertly excavate a 1-meter archaeological unit with a 1-yard
bucket. Thanks for your patience and availability, Ben.
Robert Pickering, GIS, AutoCAD, and Cartography, for his long-suffering dedication to detail,
many, many revisions, and our constant requests for “more stuff.” To you, Bob, our gratitude
for staying the course.
Our appreciation to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and David Siegel for your generous
allowance of additional time for the completion of this project.
Nataliya Hryshechko, Вы - лучший археолог и партнер! К Вам, моему сердцу, моей
любви, моей жизни.
CRC is solely responsible for the specific content and any inadvertent errors contained herein.
vi

ABSTRACT
Although this process was called an archeological investigation, that is only part of the story.
This investigation was a collaboration of many scientific disciplines and included quaternary
geologists, forensic anthropologists, soil scientists, forensic and geologic laboratories, DNA
specialists, GIS specialists, and many others. All were required and no one specialty was more
important than another was.
This monograph presents an interpretation of the partial human remains excavated from an
inhumation that does not have the appearance of a formal burial. Findings from this
preliminary excavation of human remains (BZT-1) in the San Bernard National Wildlife
Refuge in Brazoria County, Texas shed light on the human occupation of the central Texas
gulf coast shortly after the last ice age (Younger Dryas.) Radiocarbon dating on one of the
petrosal bones provided a minimum date of 10,740 years, ±760 RC years B.P. (AA45910.)
Radiocarbon dating on the coeval stratum immediately above the remains provided a
minimum radiocarbon date of 4,870 ±40 RC years B.P. (CAMS-87686.) Soil from within the
skull was radiocarbon dated to a minimum of 5,135 ±40 RC years B.P. (CAMS-87685.)
Testing for DNA was unsuccessful. The δ13C analysis of the petrosal coupled with the
contrasting δ13C analysis of the soil from within and immediately above the skull, and the
AMS apatite δ13C analysis of the crown from a single premolar presents a probability that the
person represented at BZT-1 was not a native of North America. Further, sufficient evidence
provides for a distinct probability that this person died after sinking in a bog area. The
individual appears to have been a 20-30 year old female.
This investigation was designed with a very narrow Scope of Work; hence, the interpretations
and probabilities provided are intended to present preliminary results. While these
interpretations are supported by solid, objective analyses, they cannot tell the entire story of
this individual. A further investigation of these remains is recommended in order to expand
our knowledge of the first known visitors/inhabitants of the Texas coast subsequent to the
Pleistocene era and to test the hypotheses generated in this report.
An additional, unexpected benefit of this investigation was the discovery of a regional,
unrecorded unconformity, or erosional feature, in the stratigraphy. This feature was
immediately above the remains and will be further investigated as a possible transition from
the Pleistocene to the Holocene eras.
A prehistoric shell midden (BZT-2) is located in Trench 3, approximately 66 meters southwest
of BZT-1. While BZT-1 and BZT-2 share a strikingly similar statigraphic position, they do not
have any shared features that can be considered as relating one to the other and no other
evidence has been established. Analyses should be conducted on the midden sample.
Radiocarbon dating and ecofact analysis will help determine whether BZT-2 is eligible for
nomination to the NRHP.
In accordance with the Texas Antiquities Code (as amended,) BZT-1 is not recommended for
recording as an archaeological site for the State of Texas. BZT-1 is recommended for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. BZT-2 is recommended for recording
as an archaeological site for the State of Texas. The status of BZT-2 for nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places is not known at the time of this report.

vii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

iii

ABSTRACT

iv

LIST OF FIGURES

v

LIST OF TABLES

vi

INTRODUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

1

ENVIRONMENTAL DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA

4

RESEARCH DESIGN

15

CULTURAL CONTEXT AND PREVIOUS ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

17

INVESTIGATIVE METHODOLOGY

19

PHOTOGRAPHS – INITIAL SITE VISIT AND RECONNOITER

21

PHOTOGRAPHS – FIELD INVESTIGATION DAYS 1-3

39

PHOTOGRAPHS – FIELD INVESTIGATION DAY 4

65

PHOTOGRAPHS – RETURN TO LABORATORY

75

PHOTOGRAPHS – FIELD INVESTIGATION DAY 5

87

ANALYSIS AND CODIFICATION OF RESULTS

90

GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE FOR CULTURAL HISTORY

98

REMAINS AND SOIL SAMPLES DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

101

INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS

169

CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

172

REFERENCES

177

ADDENDA

VOLUME 2

LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE: 1

BZT-1 INDEX MAP

VOLUME 2-2

FIGURE: 2

SITE LOCATION – TOPOGRAPHIC (LARGE SCALE)

VOLUME 2-3

FIGURE: 3

SITE LOCATION – TOPOGRAPHIC (SMALL SCALE)

VOLUME 2-4

FIGURE: 4

SITE LOCATION – TOPOGRAPHIC (SITE FEATURES)

VOLUME 2-5

FIGURE: 5

SITE LOCATION – 1940 AERIAL

VOLUME 2-6

FIGURE: 6

SITE LOCATION – 1999 AERIAL

VOLUME 2-7

FIGURE: 7

PRERECORDED SITES LOCATIONS - TOPOGRAPHIC

VOLUME 2-12

FIGURE: 8

SITE LOCATION – SURVEY PLAT (LARGE SCALE)

VOLUME 2-14

FIGURE: 8A

SITE LOCATION – SURVEY PLAT (SMALL SCALE)

VOLUME 2-15

FIGURE: 9

SITE LOCATION – GPR AND TRENCHES 3-4 (LARGE SCALE)

VOLUME 2-17

FIGURE: 9A

SITE LOCATION – GPR AND TRENCHES 3-4 (SMALL SCALE)

VOLUME 2-18

FIGURE: 10

SITE LOCATION – 1940 AERIAL WITH SITE FEATURES

VOLUME 2-19

FIGURE: 11

SITE LOCATION – 1999 AERIAL WITH SITE FEATURES

VOLUME 2-20

FIGURE: 12

PROFILE OF STRATA RELATIVE TO POSITION OF HEAD

34

FIGURE: 13

CROSS SECTION LOOKING WESTERLY – EXCAVATED REMAINS

35

viii

LIST OF TABLES
TABLE: 1

PROJECT FEATURE COORDINATES

VOLUME 2-8

TABLE: 2

ALL SURVEY COORDINATES

VOLUME 2-16

TABLE: 3

SAMPLES – INITIAL DAY OF EXCAVATION

37

TABLE: 4

UNIT 1 SAMPLES

52

TABLE: 5

δ C ISOTOPE VALUES FOR COMMON NATURAL MATERIALS

93

TABLE: 6

SAMPLES REMAINING IN INVENTORY AT JULY 01, 2002

97

13

ix

INTRODUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
In April 1999, during the construction of a levee system, staff members at the San Bernard
Wildlife Refuge (Refuge,) Brazoria County, Texas discovered a partially exposed skull and
bone fragments in the sloping wall of a borrow ditch (Addendum 1 - Figures 1-6.) At that
time, it was generally assumed to be a human skull. After photographing the skull remains, a
protective cap of two sheets of heavy plastic with approximately six inches of clay soil
between the sheeting and 1-1.5 foot of clay soil on top of the second sheet of plastic was
placed over the remains.
The National Historic preservation Act of 1966 (NHPA,) and the Secretary of the Interior’s
Regulation 33 CFR 800, Protection of Historic Properties, Section 106 (as revised) required
that an investigation be conducted on the remains and the immediately surrounding area. A
contract to conduct an archaeological investigation was awarded to CRC in April 2001.The
contracted Scope of Work (SOW) was brief and dealt with the essential requirements of a
typical archaeological investigation. The primary elements of the SOW were:
Utilizing the existing soil profile, (CRC) shall take samples of soils, identify the
soils, and screen the sampled soils for evidence of archaeological remains. (CRC)
shall prepare a statigraphic profile map of the skeletal locus. The number and
location of the samples shall be at the discretion of (CRC,) except that no less than
10 cubic feet of soils shall be screened for archaeological remains. (CRC) shall
remove a sample of the exposed skeletal remains and obtain a radiocarbon date of
the sample from a qualified laboratory.
As appropriate, (CRC) shall record the location, assign a site number if necessary,
and enter the site into the statewide archaeological records management system of
the State of Texas.
…The final report of the profile mapping and sampling shall include a description
of the location; a description of the sampling and screening procedures; and the
following information as applicable: a brief cultural history of the region; a brief
review of prior research in the region; descriptions of site stratigraphy and all
cultural components identified (if any); interpretation of those components within
the framework of the cultural history; assessment and opinion regarding site
significance, and observations regarding future research. With the exception of the
human remains to be submitted for radiocarbon analysis as described above, all
collections shall be curated at a public repository (museum) within Texas, after
analysis and reporting. The human remains shall also be curated at the same
repository, unless a claim for them is made pursuant to NAGPRA.
The investigation was initiated in May 2001. After a preliminary tour of the Refuge and the
site of the remains, work was scheduled to begin on May 14, 2001. A Research Design (RD)
was prepared prior to beginning the fieldwork. The main research questions included in the
RD were as follows:
1. Are the remains human?
2. In what approximate anatomical position are the remains assembled?
3. Are there other inhumations present in the immediate area?
4. Is there an identifiable, formal burial shaft or tomb for the remains?
1

5. In what manner were the remains entombed?
6. Are there cultural artifacts, features, or components associated with the remains?
7. What is the age of the remains?
8. Is DNA identification possible?
9. Can a probable cause of death be established?
10. Was this an isolated death by mishap?
11. Did the remains decompose in situ?
12. Can age, sex, or cultural affiliation be determined?
13. What is the definition of the geomorphologic setting?
14. Can the ecological environment at the time of inhumation be determined?
15. What is the probability that this individual was or was not a permanent resident of the
Texas gulf coast?
When considering the original SOW, this appears as a rather ambitious RD. We determined
that if we would err, it would be on the side of the pursuit of the full potential of this
investigation. As seen in this report, the RD was ambitious but not completely unachievable.
Although the costs of this investigation far exceeded the contracted sum, the decision to
expend these additional sums was a professional choice determined solely by CRC.
When our first laboratory submission for 14C dating of skull fragments could not provide a
date for the fragments we supplied, Fish and Wildlife determined that we had made a
sufficient effort to get an age for the remains. Since that apparently was not going to happen,
they requested that we complete the report as is and finalize our contractual responsibility.
This would have ended CRC’s responsibility under our contract with Fish and Wildlife – but
not our professional responsibility. The onus on CRC’s position was that although we felt a
professional obligation to pursue further analysis, there would be no additional funds provided
by Fish and Wildlife. Had we complied with Fish and Wildlife’s initial conclusion, we would
not have the discovery and results we are presenting in this report. However, while Fish and
Wildlife would/could not commit any additional funds for this project, it must be
acknowledged that they did provide considerable, additional time for us to pursue our goal.
Without this additional time, again, we would not have the scope of information available in
this report. We cannot apologize if some information that possibly could have been presented
is not. We applied all available federal funds and substantial funds from CRC’s coffers. It is
important to remember the original SOW, and that federal funds allocated to this initial SOW
were adequate. It’s in the nature of the beast - there is always more science than available
funds.
The Sections of this report have been slightly modified from the typical archaeology
investigation report. As required, we have prepared a brief synopsis of the cultural history for
this region of Texas and listed prehistoric, prerecorded sites within approximately five
kilometers from the location of the remains. The location of the remains was given a
temporary site number, BZT-1, which translates into Brazoria Temporary Site No. 1. When
considering the extreme age of the remains, there is no cultural history or pre-recorded sites in
Texas with which BZT-1 may be compared. Instead, we requested that Joseph Powell,
Professor of Archaeology at the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM provide CRC
with a capsulated ’’world-view” of other discoveries of human remains on the North and
2

South American continents in relation to the remains found at BZT-1. The current ecological
and geomorphic setting is included in the appropriate section, but may have very little in
common with the environment that actually existed during the lifetime of the individual
located at BZT-1.
The field and laboratory procedures employed by CRC are detailed in the Investigative
Methodology section. In the following section, Remains and Soil Samples Description and
Analysis, we have included the individual specialist analysis reports exactly as presented to
CRC. The purpose of presenting these as individual reports is in recognition that, despite our
conclusions and proposed hypotheses, the final analysis of the information presented in this
report will be by a consensus of our archaeology peers and other scientists. The Interpretation
of Results section is a presentation of probabilities – probabilities that have been drawn
directly from the expert analyses of the contributing individuals or organizations and applied
to the RD questions mentioned above. These interpretations are clearly intended to present
preliminary hypotheses based on an initial investigation with incomplete information. The
litmus test for these initial hypotheses will develop during any further investigations that may,
but should, take place at BZT-1 in the near future. We have made every effort to comply with
an astute comment by one of our peers to, “Separate what we think we know from what we
really know.”
We have attempted to construct this report with a minimum of archaeological jargon or ultrascientific terms, with references that will provide readers with further information instead of
just the routine, required justification for statements provided by the individual contributors,
and with the applicable photographs following each sub-section. The photographs are arranged
in this fashion because each is self-explanatory and the narrative can be told in pictures and
words.
This discovery is a part of the world heritage of every citizen. As such, we have endeavored to
produce a reliable and reproducible interpretation of our findings and discoveries, which will
appeal to, and elucidate, the ultimate recipient – the public.

3

ENVIRONMENTAL DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
The San Bernard Refuge was established in 1968 and is administered as an
integral unit of the National Wildlife Refuge System for the protection and
preservation of nationally and internationally important species of wildlife and
their habitats. Acquisition of lands within the approved refuge boundary is not
complete. As of September 30, 1977, acreage in the refuge ownership totaled
21,865 acres. It is bordered on three sides by fences and by Cedar Lake Creek
on the southwestern boundary. This central Flyway refuge is located in Brazoria
County, Texas between the San Bernard River and Cedar Lake Creek,
approximately 70 miles southwest of Houston, Texas.
Physical features of southwestern Brazoria County may be described as being
flat coastal prairies, drained by the San Bernard and Brazos River. Extensions of
inland wooded areas reach toward the Gulf of Mexico, along major drainage
systems. The climate of the upper Texas Gulf Coast is characteristic of the
marine type, with comparatively uniform temperatures in all seasons and a small
diurnal range.
There are several ecological units on the refuge(s.) In the area of the current project, BZT-1,
the two primary units are “Fresh Marsh” and “Nonsaline Prairie.”
6. Fresh Marsh
Open water occurs mostly within the Nonsaline prairie unit. They are often dry
in mid-summer, but exhibit a flora peculiar to them. The dominant species (are)
California bulrush, longtom grass, Mexican sprangletop, barnyard millet, purple
pluchea, water-lettuce, burhead, and grassy arrowhead.
Many low, wet, sluggish-flowing drains and swales occur on the San Bernard
Refuge. Plants, which are present at this time, includes Mexican devilweed,
Drummond sesbania, longtom grass, jointed flatsedge, water panicum, and
switchgrass. The deeper water depressions and drains consist primarily of
swamp smartweed.
7. Nonsaline Prairie
The principal ground cover on this unit consists of buffalograss, slimspike threeawn, oldfield three-awn, silver bluestem, bushy bluestem, tumblegrass, smut
grass, brownseed paspalum, Texas wintergrass, and little bluestem. The
dominant herbs are (the) western ragweed, narrowleaf and seacoast sumpweed,
purple pleatleaf, common brownweed, and green wild indigo. Shrubs such as
huisache and eastern baccaris are also found in this unit. (Reprinted with
permission of the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Fleetwood, Nd)

4

BZT-1

(Reprinted with permission of the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
Fleetwood, Nd)

5

Regional Geologic Setting
The study area is located in southeastern Brazoria County on the lower portion of the Western
Gulf Coastal Plain. Geologically, the surficial sediments within the area consist of Holocene
alluvium of the Brazos River floodplain. The alluvium consists of fluviatile sediments
consisting of channel, point bar, levee and flood basin deposits. The Brazos floodplain has
incised the local Pleistocene Beaumont surface. The meandering Brazos River has scalloped
the edge of the Beaumont upland. The Brazos sediments have an overall reddish-brown to
yellowish-red color derived from Triassic and Permian “red beds” in the upper portion of the
Brazos drainage basin in northwest Texas. The channel of Oyster Creek represents the most
continuous of the abandoned Holocene courses of the Brazos. Previous work by Bernard and
others, 1970, suggest that Oyster Creek was occupied for about 3000 years and abandoned
about 1000 years ago. Sea level probably reached its present stand between 2,500 to 4,500
years B.P. rising from a lowstand about 18,000 years B.P., estimated at 250 to 450 feet below
present sea level. Backfilling and alluviation of the wide Brazos River alluvial plain
intermittently kept pace with the rise in sea level.

(Adapted from: http://gulf.rice.edu/eTexasBraz_Col.html)
The recent and Pleistocene (interglacial) sediments in coastal Texas are separated by a
prominent unconformity (Bernard, 1965.) Because of weathering during sea level low stands,
the Pleistocene sediments at the contact are relatively stiff and mottled, oxidized, and/or
leached. Lime nodules, caliche, and iron oxide concretions frequently occur in the
Pleistocene. The overlying Recent sediments have relatively greater moisture content; are
soft; consist of silt, sand, and clay; and contain abundant organic material. The Recent clay
and silt are commonly olive gray in color. The Recent-Pleistocene unconformity is easily
recognized at many locations.

6

Pertinent Environmental Improvements Impacting the Refuge
The remains are located in an area designated by the Refuge as The Wolfweed Wetland
Complex. The Complex is a wetland development project on the San Bernard Wildlife Refuge
in Brazoria County, Texas. The project consists of three moist soil management units totaling
471 acres and three reservoir compartments with a surface area of 409 acres. The project,
which is approximately 90% complete, also has the capability of supplying water to the 366acre Moccasin Pond when operational.
The partially completed reservoir and moist soil units provide habitat for literally tens of
thousands of waterfowl, shorebirds, wading and water birds, and was even more valuable
when completed. This habitat is critical in times of drought such as has been experienced in
recent years and is vital to meeting the objectives of the wildlife refuge.
Work on the three moist soil units began in 1988. These units required 4.2 miles of levee and
are now completed. A Corps of Engineers (COE) permit was obtained for that work and the
area of levee construction was inspected by two COE archaeologists before the work began.
This work was also supported by a COE wetlands permit. Construction of the larger levees for
the reservoir began May 1993 and has continued as funding, weather, and other work priorities
allowed until the human remains were found in April 1999.
The excavation/levee work was done with a track-mounted excavator with one-yard bucket.
Before the levee is built, the surface is disked to a depth of 6-8 inches to permit the levee to
seat well to avoid seepage. The excavated soil is placed in the area of levee construction and
shaped with a dozer. The levees are built to a height of approximately seven foot with a 12foot crown width and a 3:1 slope on each side.
Presently, only one reservoir compartment of 109 acres is operational. The second
compartment of 178 acres is encompassed by 2.5 miles of completed levee with less than .025
needed to complete that reservoir unit mile of levee (Point B to Point C) and see the below
“Borrow Ditch Completion from Point B to C” and Photographs 1-4.) The third reservoir unit
of 122 acres will then require 1.1 miles for completion of Point A to Point E to Point D. In
summary, less than 0.25 mile of levee was required to complete a second reservoir unit and
then 1.1 miles of levee is needed to complete the entire project. To date, 8.2 miles of levee
have been constructed exposing borrow ditch areas to depths of 4-6 feet, depending on
whether material was dug (borrowed) from one or both sides of the levee. This recent
exposure of human skeletal material has been the only archaeological evidence noted in over
nine miles of borrow area excavated. The excavation had progressed more than 30 meters
beyond the remains before they were observed. At that point, levee construction was halted
and did not proceed again until May 2002.
In May 2002, the levee construction from Point B to Point C was initiated. CRC was
contracted to monitor the excavation of the borrow ditch and the construction of the levee for
the presence of any cultural remains. A 10-foot section (dam) was left in place at Point B. This
dam is intended to maintain the natural water level that had filled the borrow ditch to
approximately 4.5-6 foot of water depth. The water had gathered in the ditch from the
surrounding water table. With this amount of water in the borrow ditch, the location of the
human remains are now under about 1.5-2 foot of water (Photograph 8.)

7

8

Borrow Ditch Completion from Point B to C
In May 2002, the levee construction from Point B to Point C was initiated. CRC was
contracted to monitor the excavation of the borrow ditch and the construction of the levee for
the presence of any cultural remains. A 10-foot section (dam) was left in place at Point B. This
dam is intended to maintain the natural water level that had filled the borrow ditch to
approximately 4.5-6 foot of water depth. The water had gathered in the ditch from the
surrounding water table. With this amount of water in the borrow ditch, the location of the
human remains are now under about 1.5-2 foot of water. (Photograph 8.)
Investigative Methodology
During the period of May 13-16, 2002, Robert P. d’Aigle, Principal Investigator and Nataliya
Hryshechko, Archaeologist, monitored the excavation of the two borrow ditches of the APE.
The purpose of this investigation was to determine if there were any significant cultural
remains in this APE. Hryshechko maintained a constant presence at the “south” borrow ditch
while d’Aigle remained at the “north” borrow ditch. Two track-mounted excavators with 1yard buckets were employed simultaneously in the construction of the levee (Photographs 14.)
The purpose of the borrow ditches is to provide sufficient soil to build a levee system. The
completed reservoirs within the levee system and moist soil units provide habitat for literally
tens of thousands of waterfowl, shorebirds, wading and water birds, and will be even more
valuable when completed. This habitat is critical in times of drought such as has been
experienced in recent years and is vital to meeting the objectives of the wildlife refuge. The
water used to flood these units will be taken from a nearby water well. The pump at this water
well is capable of providing in excess of 20,000 gallons of water per minute.
A profile was taken at the beginning of each trench (Photographs 5 and 6, and Addendum 2 Figure 3.) The profiles remained remarkably consistent for the entire length of the two borrow
ditches. At approximately the halfway point of the north trench, the operator was asked to
continue down in the excavation until a depth of three meters was reached. The red silty clay
from the lowest stratum of the beginning wall soil profile continued to the bottom of the 3meter excavation. No high-energy sands or meander relics were located.
Results
No historic or prehistoric cultural remains or features were located. The soil profile in the
borrow ditch compared favorably with the soil profile at BZT-1. A small dam was left in place
between the borrow ditch containing BZT-1 and this new borrow ditch excavation
(Photograph 7.) The purpose of the dam is to maintain the natural water level that had
accumulated and inundated the area of BZT-1.
Recommendation and Conclusion
There was no evidence found of midden deposits, significant structural features, or cultural
deposits during this survey. This investigation indicates there are no intact deposits, potential
research value, or significance as defined by Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation
act of 1966 (as amended.) Further, CRC investigators found no evidence to indicate that this
proposed Project would encroach upon or endanger any historically significant cultural
remains. It is our conclusion and recommendation that no further archaeological investigations
be required for this proposed Project.

9

10

1

2

3

4

11

5

6

13

7

8

14

RESEARCH DESIGN
Global Requirements
1.

Determine if Remains are Human – Paleo Research Laboratories.
1.1
Protein residue analysis
1.2
Forensic Analysis – Gentry Steele

2.

Determine Age of Remains – University of Arizona – Tucson and Stafford
Laboratories.
2.1
Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) with bone collagen extraction

3.

Soil Aged – Stafford Laboratories.

4.

DNA Analysis – Armed Forces DNA Identification Laboratory.

5.

Soil Analysis for Immediate Area – Multi-source.
5.1
Protein Extraction Analysis – Paleo Research
5.2
X-ray Florescence (SRF) 31 elements – Texas A&M Soil & Crop Sciences
5.3
X-ray Diffraction (XRD) mineral analysis – Texas A&M Soils Lab
5.4
Scanning Electron Microscope – open to results – Texas A&M Soils Lab

6.

Soil Analysis for Adjacent Area – Texas A&M Soil & Crop Sciences.
6.1
X-ray Florescence (XRF) 31 elements – Texas A&M Soil & Crop Sciences
6.2
X-ray Diffraction (XRD) mineral analysis – Texas A&M Soils Lab
6.3
Scanning Electron Microscope – open to results – Texas A&M Soils Lab

7.

Geomorphologic Investigation.
7.1
Soil profile
7.2
Soil series typing
7.3
Epoch determination
7.4
Hydrographic research

8.

Aerial Photography – Pro-Aire, Inc., Spring, TX.
8.1
Complete low-level aerial coverage with four white visible ground coordinates.

9.

Professional Photography – Mason Rankin, Professional Photographer.
9.1
All photography including infrared, ultraviolet, macro and high definition

10.

Surface Survey – Charles Kalkomey, Professional Surveyors, Inc. Rosenberg, TX.
10.1 Unit location and 40 meter grid – sub-centimeter accuracy
10.2 Coordinate markers
10.3 Skeletal remains Datum Centroid

11.

Survey in APE on ditch edge – one (1) meter apart for six (6) meters.

12.

Survey in 1 x 1-meter unit around remains.

13.

Survey in the center of exposed skeletal remains.

14.

Survey in ten (10) meter area above remains.

15.

Survey in four (5) paper markers for Rastering/Digitizing aerial photography for
cartography.

16.

Remove overburden placed by F & W with backhoe until plastic barrier.
15

17.

Remove remaining soil to remains by trowel –screen.

18.

In a clockwise series, beginning at the 12 o’clock position, remove twelve (12) soil
samples immediately surrounding the remains.
18.1 Four (4) for U of A - Tucson (5-20 grams each),
18.2 Four (4) for Paleo Research Labs (5-20 grams each),
18.3 Four (4) for Texas A&M Soil & Crop Sciences (5-10 grams each.)

19.

Remove two (2) soil samples from each stratum with soil probe 0.20 meters left or
right of remains.
19.1 One (1) liter soil each sample – Paleo Research
19.2 Twenty (20) grams soil each sample – Texas A&M Soil & Crop Sciences

20.

Remove a minimum of seventy-five (75) grams of bone from skull.
20.1 Twenty (20) grams for Paleo Research
20.2 Forty (40) grams for U of A - Tucson
20.3 Ten (10) grams for Texas A&M Soil & Crop Sciences

21.

Complete geomorphology for adjacent and skeletal deposition.
21.1 Soil stratigraphy
21.2 Soil series type
21.3 Soil formation epoch
21.4 Soil particle size
21.5 Soil high or low energy deposition

22.

Remove three (3) cubic meters of soil, one (1) meter out on each side of skeletal
remains. Complete soil profile and analysis on both trenches. Water screen through
6.25 mm mesh.

23.

Photograph of each of the above and below procedures. Multiple action shots as
required and not included on photo log as individual photos.

24.

Cover remains with plastic and cover with a least one (1) foot of soil.

25.

Remove skull for forensic analysis and further 14C testing by the University of
Arizona-Tucson Physics laboratory.
25.1 Analysis by Gentry Steele, PhD, Texas A&M University.

16

CULTURAL CONTEXT AND PREVIOUS ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Cultural Context
The cultural chronology for the southeast Texas Archeological Region proposed by Story
(1990) includes both the coastal margin and the inland archeological manifestations and is
separated into three divisions, as described by Perttula (1993:211): Early Cultures (9500 BC to
7000 BC); Archaic Cultures (7000 BC to AD 100), and Late Cultures (AD 100 to about AD
1840.) The Late Cultures Period in southeast Texas, including the current Project area, is
identified as the Mossy Grove Tradition (or Culture), and the inland sites are further divided
into the Early Ceramic period (about 100 BC to AD 900) and the Late Ceramic period (about
AD 900 to AD 1700.)
The Late Ceramic Period likely was followed by a Proto-historic period, representing the
initial effects of European contact on local inhabitants, then by the historic period, when local
populations were diminished or displaced completely by European settlers. It is possible that
one or both of these periods were represented at in this APE. With reference to the lower part
of this area, from about 1.65 to 2.68 meters, the cultural materials could represent the Archaic
Cultures period or even earlier. Patterson (1995:240), for example, states that cultural
materials dating from 11,000 to 10,000 years ago (the Paleo-Indian Period) have been found
on the surface of the Beaumont clay
The inhabitants of the area from about 7000 BC until the time of contact with European
groups were considered to represent a foraging-gathering-hunting adaptation that included a
seasonal round between occupation of the Texas coastal margin and the inland areas (Perttula
1993:212.) Patterson (1995:243-246) discusses possible models for describing the mobility
and settlement patterns for people occupying the inland portions of southeast Texas, and
suggests that they fall somewhere between a “forager” model and a “collector” model.
Patterson (1995:243) provides a chronological sequence for southeast Texas that extends from
10,000 BC, the Early Paleo-Indian Period, to the Historic Period, ending about AD 1800, with
somewhat varying names and date ranges relative to those cultural periods that were suggested
by Story (1990.) For example, Patterson (1995:243) indicates that the Archaic period ended
about AD 100, followed by an Early Ceramic Period (AD 100 to AD 600) and a Late
Prehistoric Period (AD 600 to AD 1500.) The two latter periods occur within the Late
Cultures Period suggested by Story (1990), but the inland Mossy Grove tradition extends from
Patterson’s Late Archaic through his Late Prehistoric Period and beyond. Included in the
Patterson chronology is a Proto-historic period ranging from AD 1500 to AD 1700 (Patterson
1995:243.) He suggests (ibidem: 257) that the proposed Mossy Grove cultural tradition is
problematical, based on limited traits contained in the archeological record. Consequently,
further investigations and analyses of the cultural remains in this region will be needed to
better define the chronology of occupation by the earliest inhabitants as well as their
subsistence and settlement patterns.
In this report, minimum effort has been applied to constructing the pre-recorded sites section
for this project. Due to the extreme age of the human remains at this site, a determination was
made to put BZT-1 in the “big-picture” context of other discoveries of its nature in the
Americas and can be found in the Global Interpretation of Findings in This Report section.
The sites listed are located within a 5 km radius of BZT-1 (Addendum 3 - Figure 7.)

17

Previous Archaeological Investigations

County: Brazoria
Site No.: 41BO18
Type of Site: Rangia and oyster shell midden
Cultural Affiliation: Neo-American and Historic
The results of a cultural resources investigation conducted in March 1997 at the request of the
City of West Columbia, Texas. The survey area consisted of a small tract of land about 1.3 km
north of the City proposed for development as a municipal park. The investigation was
performed in order to locate, describe, document, and assess all existing cultural resources that
might be impacted by the proposed project. The field investigation was performed by Michael
Nash in 1.25 person days on March 4 and 5, 1997. The total survey area was approximately
22.5 acres (9.1 hectares (ha).) Two isolated finds representing locations of past historic
activity were the only cultural resources located by the investigation. Of these finds, neither is
thought to neither be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or warrant
designation as a State Archeological Land mark (SAL.) No further investigation is
recommended for the present project.
County Matagorda
Site No.: 41MG29
Type of Site: Indian campsite.
Cultural Affiliation None Indicated
This site is an area where farming operations in this century turned up many rangia clamshells
but no reported artifacts. Today the shells are rare on the surface.

18

INVESTIGATIVE METHODOLOGY
Original Site Visit and Reconnoiter
After arriving at the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge (Refuge) on April 18, 2001, Robert
P. d’Aigle, Principal Investigator and Nataliya Hryshechko, Archaeologist met with Jack
Crabtree, Refuge Superintendent. We reviewed available maps, current aerials, and
photographs taken at the time the remains were found. The remains are located in the north
side of a borrow ditch in the Wolfweed Unit of the Refuge. Several photographs taken when
the remains were discovered portrayed an unbroken soil profile and what appeared to be the
“rim” of a skull. Although the Refuge personnel assumed the remains were human, this
contention was not certain. Refuge personnel had also placed random fragments of bone found
near the skull on top of the skull prior to the photography.
Crabtree considered the exposed bone to be part of a skull that was exposed and thought that
the crown of the head had been knocked off. David Siegel, supervising archaeologist in
Albuquerque, NM indicated he thought it might be the side of a face. The skull profile was
noticed in the wall of the borrow ditch after the excavation crew was 80-100 meters past the
remains. Crabtree had discussed the situation with Siegel and he recommended covering it up
with some 3-4’ of compact clay soil. After consultations with the Texas Historical
Commission, they determined it was going to be a while in getting things done, so they put
two plastic sheets over the remains and then covered that with approximately 1-2 feet of soil.
Following this document review, we proceeded to the location of the remains. The borrow
ditch on the north, where the remains were found, and its twin, located on the south side of the
levee, had been excavated to construct part of a levee system to allow flooding of certain areas
of the refuge. Most of the accumulated water had been pumped from the north ditch just prior
to our arrival. The slopes of the ditch rose at a very constant 45° angle and had been superbly
excavated for a clean stratigraphy and constant depth. The location of the remains was pointed
out and we were informed that there was approximately two foot of clay overlying the
remains. As can be seen from the photographs following this section, we have taken a number
of profiles straight across and at different angles with the remains at about the center of the
bulge in the wall. This was where the extra soil was piled on top of it. It is approximately five
feet straight down from surface level, the edge of the borrow ditch, or cusp, and is probably
1.5 - 2 meters out.
The remains are located approximately 300 foot northeast of the temporary termination of the
borrow ditch. The somewhat visible stratigraphy appeared to be of the Asa, Pledger, or
Norwood soil series. It is dark, dense, silty clay from the surface to about 4 feet and then
becomes reddish-brown silty clay.
We had decided that New would put a U-shaped retaining wall, a cofferdam, surrounding the
area that we are going to excavate. The cofferdam was on the east, west, and south. The wall
of the borrow ditch was on the north side and the dam was approximately three meters across
and half way across the ditch allowing the water to continue around it. In case of heavy rains,
we would have had a small lake in the work area, so we covered the proposed work area with
slanted tarps to avoid having to pump the work area dry prior to excavation.
Once we had the cofferdam in place, Crabtree had a surveyor come out to put in six
coordinates, one meter apart, at approximately 0.25 meters south from the cusp on the north
edge of Trench 1. He gave us the coordinates and the elevations for all four locations. Crabtree
was relatively certain about where the exposed portion of the remains is located. We (the
19

archaeology crew) put in two shallow trenches 0.75 meters wide and 2.0 meter out from each
side of the remains. These two trenches allowed us to have a clean stratigraphy to work with,
and an opportunity to screen soil from near the remains without disturbing them. The
overburden that they had placed on top of the plastic was removed with a backhoe until we
reach the second sheet of plastic that was directly on top of the remains. Once that was
removed, we used shovel skimming and/or a trowel to reach the target.
Prior to beginning the excavation, we had the site and all elevations surveyed to subcentimeter accuracy. The area was surveyed into 1-meter units within a 40-meter grid. The
entire grid was centered on the center of the skull (Datum Centroid.) We had planned to take
soil samples from each level of Trench 1 (west trench to the left of the remains) and from 20
cm out from and parallel to the skull. Soil samples were also taken from 12 locations
circumambient to the outside of the skull and at least one sample from within the skull. We
were not planning to excavate or remove any portion of the skeleton other than enough clean
skull fragment samples to send in for radiocarbon dating (14C) samples and analysis for human
protein. The 14C samples were sent to Beta Laboratories in Florida and one skull fragment was
sent to Paleo Research Laboratory in Colorado. We didn’t expect to have any forensic analysis
completed at this time. Arlin Howles, Richmond, Texas, was our geomorphologist at that
time. We also had the service of a professional photographer, Mason Rankin, Houston, Texas
who was present at all times. Numerous photographs were taken of the work and surrounding
area.
We used the information gained that day to prepare a short Research Design to submit to
Siegel in Albuquerque. We received copies of all available correspondence between David
Siegel, Jack Crabtree, and other interested parties with U. S. Fish and Wildlife (F&W) and
their correspondence exchange with the Texas Historical Commission (THC.) I spoke to
Siegel about correspondence with THC and ascertained that F&W is responsible for all
communications with THC and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (ACE.) All policy
regulations and legal requirements, including the Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act (NAGPRA,) was within the province of F&W. Our next step was to meet
with Bob Pickering to arrange to do the cartography so we can locate it on a topographic
quadrant and on the 1999 aerial photograph that was previously provided to us by Crabtree.
That day, we spent about four hours reconnoitering and assessing the site. Crabtree agreed to a
starting date of May 14, 2001.

20

Original Site Visit and Reconnoiter Photographs

21

23

24

25

Flooded Unit

Flooded Unit

Cocklebur Slough

Cocklebur Slough

27

Preparations for the Investigations
On May 3, 2001, we contacted Ms. Debbie Thomas, representative for the Alabama Coushatta
Tribe near Livingston, Texas. I talked to her about any special ceremony that we should
perform before disinterring any portion of the deceased. Ms. Thomas said there was none, but
she appreciated our telephone call and suggested a prayer or something simple. She also
indicated that they do not know which Native American group with whom the remains might
be affiliated. I also talked to Father Lubimer Kupec, Pastor at the Russian Orthodox Church in
Houston to ask him if there was anything that a Christian should do before disinterring a burial
and in particular, a burial that was so isolated. Since it was possible that the person died alone
or was left behind, this wouldn’t appear to be a pleasant death, accident, or injury. Father
Lubimer said no, but just to say a simple prayer and that we ask forgiveness for disturbing the
remains. He indicated there is nothing special prescribed by the Church. We have conferred
just to make sure - from a Christian and a tribal/non-tribal point of view.
We had planned to start on Monday, May 14, 2001. At that time, Hryshechko and I drove to
the site. Ben New, the backhoe operator, removed the soil down to the plastic covering. From
there, we excavated by shovel skimming and/or trowel. We set up a 1-meter x 1-meter unit
centered on the skull on the slope. We went down to expose the skull and then covered it back
up and wait until Tuesday when the geomorphologist and photographer was present. We
removed soil samples for pollen, ecofact analysis, and for C-14 dating. We also removed soil
for human protein extraction analysis to determine if the remains decomposed in place. This
human protein analysis on soil was a unique experiment by CRC to determine whether human
protein would remain in the soil for such an extended period. We expected to remove 5-10
skull fragments for human protein analysis and radiocarbon dating. For the following Tuesday,
May 15, we had a fly-over scheduled by an aerial photographer to take photographs of the
general area, the entire length of the borrow ditch, and also of the site.
Field Investigation – Day 1
We arrived at the Refuge on Monday, May 14 at 8:00 AM. We placed six white paper marker
crosses (1m x 3m x 3m) at strategic locations across and northwest of the site. Each of these
markers was surveyed in with a Trimble unit and the coordinates were used to raster and
digitize the aerial photographs and for coring locations. We then measured off a transect 10
meters long across the cusp of the north borrow ditch. This transect was used later for a GPR
survey. When we located the remains, we centered this 10 meter transect on the remains. We
then set up a one-meter grid around and centered on the remains. Since we were on a slope, we
used the actual, surveyed, above mean sea level (amsl) for all elevations.
We also had the surveyor center a 40-meter², one-meter grid on the skull remains (Addendum
4 -Figures 8-8A.) Once that was completed, we put additional soil below the remains and at
the wall of the cofferdam and placed a pallet with boards on top of it in order to provide safe
footing to work on the remains. The geomorphologist arrived on Tuesday to profile the
trenches and assist us with the soils description across the area and at the remains. The
photographer was also on site on Tuesday to take action photographs during the excavation
procedures and macro photographs when directed to do so by the Principal Investigator.
We planned to take 1-liter soil samples for Linda Scott Cummings at Paleo Research Labs.
Cummings did the fine screening and the phytoliths, pollen and macro floral. Further, we took
a small sample with the soil probe, 5-20 grams at each level. These were sent to the Texas
A&M Soil & Crop Sciences (A&M) where they were to do XRD and XRF on the soils to
28

determine soil properties. We took 12 soil samples in a clockwise direction beginning at the 12
o’clock position. These samples were circumambient to the exterior of the skull. Three of the
samples were sent to Linda Scott Cummings for human protein extraction analysis to
determine if there was human protein remaining in the soil.
We planned also to send at least three soil samples from the stratums of Trench 1 (left and to
the west) to A&M to do a contrast with the soil sample from 20 cm to the left of the skull. Of
the soil samples that we are taking from immediately outside of the skull, three of those were
sent to A&M where they completed an XRD and XRF to determine if the soils appear to be
the same. We were taking 5 to 10 grams of soil at each one of the 12 locations around the
skull. We also removed 10-50 grams of the bone material, which was sent to Beta Analytic for
radiocarbon dating, and 5-12 grams was sent Paleo Research for human protein extraction
analysis.
First, with the human protein analysis we were able to determine if the remains are indeed
human and if they decomposed in place. If they were, we could hypothetically be able to make
one of three determinations:
1. If the soil outside and adjacent to the skull, or skull, contains human protein in the
extraction at only one area of the skull then this individual is in a prone position and
was entombed in situ by accumulated soil accretion.
2. If the soil were placed on top of and around the body, the bodily deterioration would
not have sloughed off to the bottom and some trace of the bodily fluid proteins from
the decomposition would have remained held in place by the soil all around the
remains. If we get identical or similar protein profiles from all the way around the
skull, then that individual was entombed in situ.
3. If we do not get any protein attributable to human from anywhere around the skull, this
indicates that the body is not in situ or has been buried after the initial decomposition
By comparing a soil sample from Trench 1 and the soil sample taken 0.20 meters out from the
skull, both samples being from the same elevation and stratum, we had hoped to be able to
make one of the following assumptions.
1. If the soils are similar in particle size and chemistry, then there is no burial shaft
2. If these same soil samples vary significantly in composition and/or color, then there is
a burial shaft.
These assumptions were predicated on any visual and surface observations to determine
whether or not there is an apparent burial trench or shaft.
The photographer took photographs of every step as we proceeded. He then took macro
photographs of the remains, of all soil sample locations including the soil samples around the
skull, and the soil samples 0.20 meters off to the side of the skull. The surveyor completed his
survey for all points in to sub-centimeter accuracy. The aerial photographer took pictures of
the entire borrow ditch. We had the six white crosses in these photographs for coordinates to
assist us in digitizing our aerial photographs and positioning the project area on these
photographs.
Once we completed the extractions of the soil and bone samples, we finished our
measurements and sketched the soil profiles. We covered the remains with plastic and at least
a foot of soil. The cofferdam was now in place. It was U-shaped, and begins on the same bank
29

where the remains are located. It goes out approximately three-quarters of the way across the
borrow ditch and makes a “U” and comes back on the other side of the remains. This was built
up to the level of the surrounding natural surface. With this configuration, we could have
standing water, but we did not have water running inside of the cofferdam. Once we had
completed these preparations, we left the site and formulate our logistics. We were to start at
10 o’clock on Tuesday morning, May 15, 2001.
Field Investigation – Day 2
We were at the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge south of Lake Jackson and near Cedar
Lake, Texas (Addendum 4 - Figures 9-11.) We have driven out to the borrow ditch. New came
out with the backhoe. We went to the area and removed approximately one foot of soil that
had been placed over the skeletal remains. This was still somewhat above the level of the
sloping wall to the borrow ditch. We moved off one meter to the north (right) and west (left)
of the remains and removed approximately 0.48 meters of natural soil from the wall of the
borrow ditch from the top to the waterline, ≈2 meters down the slope. Our intent was to clear a
good soil profile for the geomorphologist. We called the trench to the west (left) Trench 1 and
the trench to the north (right) Trench 2. The backhoe went down into the natural soil in both
trenches. It appears to have four stratums: a dark black, then reddish mottled, another dark
black and then red clay. They all appear to be very stiff clays.
We began our initial excavation of the remains on May 15, 2002. Present were Robert P.
d’Aigle, Principal Investigator, Nataliya V. Hryshechko, Archaeologist, Arlin Howles,
Geomorphologist, the survey crew, Ben New, equipment operator, and Jack Crabtree, Refuge
Supervisor. Since we suspected that the remains were probably human, we began with a small
prayer ceremony for the deceased individual represented by the remains. We blessed the
immediate area with incense and holy water from the Russian Orthodox Church and said this
prayer at the same time.
My brother or sister: We have come here today to disturb the eternal resting place
of your mortal remains. We beg your forgiveness for this intrusion into your rest.
Your death is a mystery to us. Our effort today is a simple method of learning
more about your life and your fate. Please guide us in this task. We mean no
disrespect and will not desecrate your resting place. With your spirit, please guide
us in our undertaking. We pray that your earthly prayers were answered and that
your reward in the afterlife is great. We offer you this gift of incense and the
cleansing of its smoke. We hope that you will find this gift pleasing and
acceptable.
Then we returned to the area that was supposed to contain the skeletal remains. We went down
about 3-4" each time with the backhoe and went down very slowly. New is a very efficient
operator. We had been told that there was plastic covering the remains, then approximately
one foot of soil was put on top of that plastic, another sheet of plastic was laid down and about
another foot of soil was put on top of that second layer of plastic. We reached the first layer of
plastic and we pulled it back. It was a 0.5 x 0.5 meter² plastic sheeting. Once we removed the
plastic, we had very slick clay because of the plastic lying on top of it. We proceeded to cut
that away with a trowel, but it was obvious that it was disturbed soil. We had New continue
and remove a little more soil overburden for us. We went down about another four inches.
Then we started removing it by hand because the soil that had been put on top to protect the
remains would easily separate from the natural soil. The undisturbed soil had a crumbly
texture. The clay that had been put on top of it was very stiff and would peel back in clumps if
30

you put a shovel blade underneath. So little by little, we broke off pieces and peeled it back
until we got to the natural soil where the remains were supposed to be. We then worked our
way down going back and forth about 4-5 inches at a time. We worked down approximately
0.45 meters over an area of approximately 1.5 meters wide removing the overburden. We then
reached a corner of plastic and Jack Crabtree said, “Yes, that is the second plastic.” We
removed some of the soil off one corner of the plastic, pulled it back about 8-10 inches and
immediately underneath the plastic was the skull rim or skull.
Crabtree showed us several slides this morning. From the slides, it appeared that the bone of
the top of the head had been taken off. He mentioned there were many tiny pieces of bone
scattered all through the soil that they had removed and placed on the side of the borrow ditch.
In addition, when we were cleaning out the profile on the south side of the remains a single
piece of fractured stone was found that did not have any identifying shape to it and did not
appear to have been worked. It looked like it just snapped down the middle. However, this was
located in the disturbed soil that had been placed on top of the remains. It did not appear to be
worked, so there was not anything diagnostic.
Once we discovered the remains underneath the plastic, we covered it back up in the same
manner as previously described. We placed a wooden pallet over it to conceal the excavation
in the event somebody did wander through there tonight. We seriously doubt if anybody
would because we were out in the middle of the marshes, there is no way in except one road,
and it has a gate that is locked. It is miles back in there. Once we covered it back up, we called
it day. We loaded up and were heading back out here at 9:00 tomorrow morning.
The next day, after the geomorphologist finished his profiles on the two trenches we cut into
the borrow ditch wall. We had New take out one stratum at a time going back in about one
foot. The bucket is two feet wide. Therefore, they were taking out one foot deep, two foot
wide and however high the stratum is. We did this that for each stratum until we get down the
slope to the water. First, we completed Trench 1 and then Trench 2. The soil from those two
trenches was water screened. We had a water pump that can pump water right out of the
borrow ditch through a 6.35 mm mesh screen.

31

Field Investigation – Day 3
We returned to the site on May 16, 2001. Mason Rankin, the photographer, joined the same
crew as was here yesterday. The surveyors arrived and had their base station locations logged
in for the Trimble unit. The geomorphologist arrived at approximately 11:30 AM. Rankin took
several pan photographs as the unit was established. We had one three-foot long, 0.25 inch
white rod on either side of where the remains are located. We are using a one-meter measure
stick. All measurements for this project were based in metric. We had two trenches open
where the geomorphologist worked - one on each side of the remains at approximately two
meters to right and to the left. We had previously pumped those dry. We were prepared to
water screen the spoil through 6.35 cm mesh with water out of the ditch. It was very heavy
clay.
Beginning at the center of the skull, the surveyors measured in the one-meter units. The unit
around the skull was labeled Unit 1. From that one-meter unit they went to the top of ditch and
surveyed in a 10-meter area so that the unit fell into a one-meter grid system. Then we shot in
the corners and elevations of the unit and the center of the skull. When this was completed, we
surveyed in a 40-meter x 40-meter area around the unit, which is what we considered the
estimated site boundary.
We then uncovered the remains in Unit 1 and took macro and action photographs. There
were12 indicated locations around the head starting at 12 o’clock going in clockwise direction.
We put white dots where each one of the soil samples was to be removed from around the
skull. These samples were labeled Lot 1 Samples 1-12. In the macro pictures, the white dots
indicate where the soil samples came from. The dot that is 20 cm to the left is the soil sample
that was used for comparison between the skull area and the same stratum in Trench 1. This
sample was labeled BZT-1 Lot 1 Sample 13.
We removed five samples (fragments) of the skull as indicated by the green flags in the
photograph. All of the bone fragments that had been placed on top of the skull by Refuge
personnel at discovery were removed and placed aside. The skull was in remarkably good
shape. As I removed fragment samples there was no crumbling, the fragments were firm, and
appeared to be somewhat well preserved. The skull samples that were removed for analysis
were still in situ. The skull fragments were removed with large tweezers, placed directly in
aluminum foil, and then sealed in individual plastic, prescription type bottles. The bone
samples were labeled BZT-1 Lot 3 Samples 1-5.
All samples taken from skull and soil were kept refrigerated until shipped and they were
shipped overnight. None of the samples was air-dried. We packaged all samples in vacuumsealed containers to maintain them as they came out of the ground and with approximately the
same moisture content.
After we removed the 13 soil samples, 12 around the skull and one that is 20 cm to the left,
and the skull fragments, a decision was made to remove the small amount of overburden that
was still on top of the skull and to a level consistent with the surrounding unit elevation. We
wanted to reach a part of the skull that had not been damaged by the original excavator. We
were planning to remove two samples of soil from inside the skull. These was soil samples
BZT-1 Lot 1, Samples 14 and 15.
It was difficult to tell whether the skull was sitting perpendicular to the ground or lying on its
side. We removed the soil cap off the skull and inside the skull we found a soil which was
very different and in sharp contrast to the surrounding soils. It was reddish, sandy clay rather
32

than the gray, heavy clay around it. We were now level with the original surface of the borrow
ditch wall slope. Above were the shattered pieces we had removed and placed aside, below
was intact skull. The pasty soil inside the skull was a rust color, somewhere between silty clay
and clayey silt. Once the “cap” with all the broken fragments had been removed, we took soil
samples BZT-1 Lot 1 Sample 14 and 15 from in the center. It appeared to have tiny bone
fragments in the reddish soil. We took photographs with the skull with an inch/centimeter
scale. It is easy to distinguish the different colors because the reddish soil was inside the skull
and the dark gray silty clay soil is outside and around the skull.
While we were not permitted to go any further than what we had so far accomplished in order
to determine the possible position of the skull, I cleared some of the soil from around the skull.
The skull appeared to be going into a rounded position. We could not see a jawbone and it
appears to be upside down. It was a smooth transition and it looks like the very top of the
skull. It was a very small skull. As you can see in the macro, the skull itself at the top
measured 15 cm, but because of the soil and the compression it has been spread out a little bit
and it is cracked at the very top. When we went down 4 cm it reduces from 15 cm wide to
approximately 12 cm. Therefore, down 4 cm the skull diameter decreased three cm in
diameter. We do not see a jaw line. It seemed to be a smooth transition and I probed
underneath the skull without removing it to determine if it continued as a semi-circle. The
skull continues at the same rate of curve and appeared to be upside down. That was the extent
of our initial examination of the skull and the removal of soil and bone samples.
We removed the soil from the two trenches so the geomorphologist would have a fresh view of
the stratigraphy and for water screening. We now had two trenches cut into the wall of the
borrow ditch. The geomorphologist inserted large nails to demarcate the different stratums.
After completing Trench 1, Trench 2 was profiled. There were four stratums, with Stratum 3
being an erosional feature (unconformity.) We took soil samples out of Trench 1 with a oneliter sample from each of the four stratums. There was dark black, a red below that, a
transition zone and the fourth was the dark red-gray at the bottom. The dark red-gray was the
same stratum that the remains are located. We removed one-liter soil samples for pollen,
phytolith, macrofloral, and soil analysis. These were labeled BZT-1 Lot 4, Samples 1-4. We
also removed two small samples of about 10 grams each that were labeled BZT-1 Lot 2,
Sample 1 (stratum level 3) and Sample 2 (stratum level 4.) The elevations were shot in by the
surveyor for each stratum marked by the geomorphologist (Figures 12-13.) Each trench had
been profiled independently. When we finished profiling the trenches, we took a string and
went from the stratum nails in Trench 1 to the stratum nails in Trench 2. The stratigraphy in
Trench 2 mirrored Trench 1 and the unconformity could be visually seen as continuous across
and immediately above the skull. Approximately two cubic feet of soil was removed from
each trench by backhoe. All soil excavated was screened or inspected with trowel and shovel.
We were not able to screen approximately 95% of the spoil because it was too dense.
The four anodized aluminum corner nails of the unit were left in place. The remains were then
covered by one of the sheets of plastic, one-foot of clay soil from the trench spoil, another
sheet of plastic and then an additional two-foot of soil. After the remains were covered, we
removed an additional three cubic foot of soil from each trench with 20 shovels from each
stratum for water screening. Screening the soil was impossible and it was eventually inspected
with a trowel and shovel. No cultural remains were found in any of the spoil. We requested
that the cofferdam be left in place until our investigation was completed and the report
finished. We were finished for the day and closed up the site. Nothing remained that could
indicate the location of the remains. We completed all lab work and reports the next morning.
33

34

35

Reconciliation of the Three Days of Field Investigation– May 19, 2001
We had two open trenches, one trench two meters to the left and one trench two meters to the
right of the remains. All locations had been shot in with subcentimeter accuracy using a
Trimble unit and a total station. We developed quite a number of excellent aerial and on-site
photographs, and on-site macro photographs. The six white crosses that we had surveyed as
coordinates for digitizing the area photographs are excellent. We have a few low altitude,
probably 500 feet, photographs of the unit and the surrounding area, probably 100 meters x
100 meters. We have photographs of the entire borrow ditch, which is about 0.75 mile long
and includes the area up to Cedar Lake Creek to the west, about 1,500 feet away, or
approximately 500 meters.
We took 12 soil samples from around the skull. Rankin photographed the white dots indicating
where these 12 samples came from. The dot at 12 o’clock is No. 1 and goes around to No. 12.
There is also a white dot 20 centimeters to the left. This was also a soil sample. We took two
soil samples from the center of the skullcap, which is the rust colored, pasty soil. We have
macro photographs of the area of the skull and around the skull within the one-meter unit that
we had set up. We had not fully determined which way the skull was laying because,
according to our scope of work, we are not allowed to unearth any further remains. At this
time, we did not have any idea if the remainder of the skeleton is still in place. We did not
remove the skull. I removed the soil from around the skullcap on the left side, which is toward
the west, in order to get an idea of the slope of the skull. I measured the skull at 15
centimeters. At 4 cm down, the skull had diminished to approximately 12 cm. We are not
allowed to unearth the skull and we did not remove anything other than the five fragments that
were cracked, but still attached the skull. We took 1-liter soil sample from each stratum of
Trench No. 1 to the left. These samples were sent for pollen, macro floral and phytolith
analysis. We also took a small sample, probably 25-50 grams, of soil from Trench No. 1 from
the same stratum that the soil cap was located. We had sub-centimeter coordinates and
elevation for each stratum in Trench No. 1 and 2.
Using a flexible stadia rod, we have provided the measurements in both trenches. At this time,
it appears that the stratum continues straight across in a level line and we could understand
where the remains lie when we get those measurements back. From a visual viewpoint, the
remains lie in what we called the fourth stratum. There are four stratums. The first two are
distinct stratums, then an unconformity transition occurs and then another stratum. It does
appear the skullcap was lying at the top of the bottom stratum. The geomorphologist has
indicated that all of the soil was deposited with low-energy deposition. There are no pebbles,
rocks, or concretions.
In accordance with the research design, we planned to take soil samples from underneath and
around the remains. That was not possible because the skullcap was facing down, the head
was inverted, and the top of the skull was facing down. Apparently all of the jawbone and eye
socket canals were sheared off by the equipment they were using to excavate the borrow ditch.
All that was left was the top part of the skull. Before we had any of the other laboratory work
done, we are sending one fragment, approximately five grams, to Paleo Research for a protein
extraction analysis to confirm the remains are human, although we were 95% sure that it is
human. Since all we had was a skullcap, we needed to verification. If it had been determined
that it is not human, we would have discussed this with Fish and Wildlife on how to proceed.
If it were determined to be human, we would send two 5-gram samples of the skull to Beta
Analytic along with one sample of the soil immediately adjacent to the skull and one sample
of the soil three meters away from the same stratum. Beta had the soil and skull fragments
36

radiocarbon dated. We also sent a sample of the soil immediately adjacent to the skull to Paleo
Research for protein extraction analysis. We also sent a soil sample immediately adjacent to
the skull, a portion of the soil sample 20 cm away, and a portion of the soil sample from
Trench No. 1 stratum 4 was send to the Texas A&M soil laboratory. We had XRD, XRF, and
SMA, spectral microscope analysis completed to determine the mineral and chemical contents
of the soil to do a comparative analysis of the soil immediately adjacent to the skull, 20 cm
away and from two meters away.
Utilizing the analyses from Paleo Research, the soil laboratory analysis, and the radiocarbon
dating, we were able to do our analysis and formulate hypotheses or probabilities. All soil
samples and skull fragments were placed in aluminum foil and were not touched by hand.
They went directly from the source into the aluminum foil and the foil into a sealed plastic
bottle. The sealed bottle was put inside of a plastic bag. After we returned to the lab, each
bottle was sealed in a vacuumed sealed container. There is a label on the outside of the plastic
bottle that identifies the lot number and the weight. There is also a label placed inside of the
vacuum bag. The 1-liter soil samples were also placed in vacuum-sealed bags with another
label inside the bag. The label is sealed between plastic laminated sheets so there should not
be any moisture deterioration of the labels. These were all done by lot numbers and copies of
the site forms and of the lotting sheet were sent to the laboratories.
Rankin had indicated that he would have his photography ready the week of May 21. The
geomorphologist was provided with the aerial photographs in order to make a geomorphic
analysis of the area where the burial or death occurred. He had his research done this same
week. The surveyor, Charlie Kalkomey of Rosenberg, had his information to us by Friday of
this same week. Once we had all of that together and confirmed that the one skull fragment
was definitely human, we proceeded. All remains and samples were sealed inside a vacuum
bag, in the original plastic bottle and original aluminum foil, and refrigerated until shipped by
express delivery to the contract laboratories. At this point, we were considering DNA analysis,
but had not confirmed that they were able to do a population comparison.
Table: 3 Samples – Initial Excavation
BZT-1 Sample No. Type Sample
Lot 1 Samples 1-12
Soil
Lot 1 Sample 13
Soil
Lot 1 Samples 14-15
Soil
Lot 2 Samples 1-2
Soil
Lot 3 Samples 1-5
Skull Fragment
Lot 4 Samples 1-4
Soil

Derived Location
Circumambient and immediately outside of skull
20 cm left of and parallel to the skull
Inside skull
One liter from Trench 1, Stratums 3-4
In situ and circumambient from skull
One liter from each stratum of Trench 1

Laboratory Analysis
We reviewed the aerial photographs that were taken during the first day of excavation. We
were able to see a darker green area leading “away” from the site and this appeared to be a
crevasse splay leading to and ending at the site. If this were correct, then the remains would
have been located directly at the “mouth” of the crevasse. Now, everything indicated that the
remains had been reworked and fluvially deposited at the present location.

37

During the following weeks, the samples were packaged and refrigerated. Skull fragment
BZT-1 Lot 3 Sample 2 and soil samples BZT-1 Lot 1 Samples 2, 5, and 9 were sent to Paleo
Research Laboratory, Boulder Colorado for human protein extraction analysis. Soil samples
Lot1 Samples BZT-1 1-15, Lot 2 Samples 1-2, and BZT-1 Lot 4 Samples 1-4 were delivered
to Texas A&M Soils Sciences Center, College Station, Texas. Subsequent to receiving the
skull fragment and soil sample analysis from Paleo Research (see Remains and Soil Samples
Description Analysis section,) Skull fragment BZT-1 Lot 3 Sample 2 was returned to CRC.
Skull fragments BZT-1 Lot 3 Samples 1-5 were then sent to Beta Analytic, Miami, Florida for
radiocarbon dating.
On June 12, 2001, we received email and telephone confirmation from Paleo Research of
positive results for human protein extraction analyses on the soil samples and skull fragment.
With the soil sample from outside the skull testing positive for human protein, we had a very
strong indicator that the body, or at least the skull, has decomposed in place. We could not
find that this procedure for determining decomposition in place has ever been attempted. After
we received the positive result on the soil, we talked to Wera Schmerer, DNA Research
Scientist. Wera said that if there was a positive test for human protein in the soil it would
undoubtedly come from the decomposition of muscle tissue and there was very little
likelihood of the protein leaching from the skull bone.
On July 7, 2001, we had six corings completed across the site, BZT-1 Lot 6, Samples 1-6.
BZT-1 Lot 6 Sample 6 was immediately behind and above the slope in the wall where the
remains were found. We split coring sample BZT-1 No. 6 (Lot 6 Sample 6) in half, with half
shipped to the lab at Texas A&M and the geomorphologist retaining half. The other five
corings were initially analyzed by our geomorphologist. We asked him to return the coring
samples but when we got the corings back, all of them of had been ruined. The individual
packages of the corings had been ripped, the corings had been damaged, and the labels were
torn and smudged. We could not even read what was on some of the labels and decided to
discard all of BZT-1 Lot 6 Samples 1-5, and the half of BZT-1 Lot 6 Sample 6. We decided if
more were required, we would extract new cores.
On July 9, 2001, we received notification from Beta Analytic that they were unable to extract
sufficient collagen for radiocarbon dating for any of the five samples that we had originally
taken from the skull. We discussed returning to the site and removing the remainder of the
skull with David Siegel (F&W.) He agreed that we might be able to retrieve teeth or some
more suitable bone specimens for 14C dating. Although Siegel was originally of the opinion
that since we did not get any 14C results with Beta that we should just end the project and
submit our report, he subsequently agreed that it would be worth the effort to continue with
better samples. We further agreed that these skull samples would go to Tim Jull, Physics
Laboratory at the University of Arizona – Tucson.

38

Photographs – Field Investigation Days 1-3

39

41

Trench 1

Trench 2

Trench 1

42

Trench 2
43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

N3
51

N5

N1

N2

N4

N3

Project 010407
Catalog No. BZT1-L3-N1/N5
May 19, 2001

Note: N5 is white = Protein Extraction

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

Trench 3

60

Field Investigation – Day 4
On July 14, 2001, we returned to the site. Gentry Steele, PhD, a forensic anthropologist,
currently with Texas A&M Anthropology Department, arrived to assist us in the removal of
the skull. Ben New was the backhoe operator and Mason Rankin was our professional
photographer. Also present was Nataliya Hryshechko, Jack Crabtree, Patty Steele, and
d’Aigle. New has taken off the soil we put on top of the skull. We continued down until he got
to the plastic and after removing the plastic we proceeded by shovel. The water in the borrow
ditch was over the cofferdam so we had water right up to the skull. The water that had
collected in the ditch was simply seeking the natural water level for this area – about 0.5
meters below surface. We had New put a small backhoe hole, not a trench, at the very bottom
of the cofferdam and in the approximate center of the borrow ditch to drain some of the water
off. He had gone down about two feet when he hit the high-energy sands from a former
meander of Cocklebur Slough and most of the water slowly drained away.
After New had removed some of the water, we went down and located the skull underneath
the plastic. Gentry Steele and I agreed that a controlled excavation was not possible at that
time, because of the mud, water, and sloppy working surface so we determined the best way to
remove the skull was with a spade. We brought along plastic bags and new cardboard boxes to
put the remains in. We proceeded to remove the skull with the spade. We made incisions in
the soil surrounding the skull and then inserted the spade to approximately where the skull
should end. We were able to remove the skull in two spades full. We removed approximately
1" of soil around the skull. We removed the skull from the spade and put it into two different
boxes. It looked solid when we were removing it but once we got it out, we found that the
skull was shattered. It appeared intact and in place in the ground, but apparently the expansion
and contraction of the clay soils had shattered the skull.
We had a photographer take a picture before and after we removed the skull. After we
removed it, we could see the reddish soil inside the skull continued below the skull. It was not
as distinct or as pure as inside the skull. It was more an admixture and mottling. That could be
because of spade action or because that’s the way it is. We decided to determine that if or
when we remove the rest of the remains. We did not see any visual indication of a burial shaft
or tomb of any type.
We did water screening in the creek using a fine screen. I did the water screening myself and
got a number of pieces of fragmented jaw. One of the mandibles still had two teeth in place.
We found a number of teeth and the petrosal bones (located in the temporal region of the
skull.) We brought everything we had recovered to the field table and displayed them. Steele
did an initial examination and then we boxed them for transport to CRC’s laboratory. We took
photographs as we did these procedures including setting up on the table. We did not find any
artifacts or grave goods.
We replaced the plastic sheet over the remains and covered it with two feet of clay soil. After
we had finished packing the samples, we took the remains back to the CRC lab.
A Return to the Laboratory
On July 15, 2001, we did water screening at the CRC laboratory - again with fine screen. We
removed all of the fragments that we could find in the fine screen. We placed those into
samples that matched the same lot, i.e. skull fragments in one sample, teeth in another sample,
petrosals in another sample, etc. We packaged all of the samples in airtight plastic containers
61

and every sample or remains fragments was refrigerated. The following are a listing of all
samples recovered from the second excavation of the skull.
Table: 4 Unit 1 Samples
BZT-1 Sample No.

Type

Number Items

Lot 3 Sample 6

Petrosal

2

Lot 3 Sample 7

Occipital Lobe
Fragment

1

Lot 3 Sample 8

Teeth and Mandible
fragments

28 Teeth/2 mandible Fragments

Lot 3 Sample 9

Plant Fibers*

16

Lot 3 Sample 10

Unknown bone
fragments

4

Lot 3 Sample 11

Limestone
Fragments**

8

Lot 3 Sample 12

Skull/jaw fragments

174

* These samples were later discarded after analysis determined that the plant fibers are recent
(possibly wind-blown contamination.)
**The limestone fragments are a very common occurrence in the soils in this area.
On August 7, 2001, we met with Gentry Steele at his laboratory to do an examination of the
excavated remains. He completed the examination and analysis while I took notes. Subsequent
to that, I typed the notes and mailed the original handwritten and typed notes to him. He issued
a report that the remains are probably of a female 20-30 years old (see Remains and Soil
Samples Description and Analysis section.) He examined the teeth and found there was no
hyperplasia in the teeth. Hyperplasia indicates poor nutrition at some time in the formation of
the teeth. We found no caries. We also learned that the remains were in a vertical position,
were probably still articulated, and that the top of the skull was up and at an approximately 810° angle. Steele also believes there is a probability that the rest of the remains are still in
place.
On August 12, 2001, we received a preliminary report from Richards Drees, PhD at the Soils
Science Laboratory at Texas A&M. Our geomorphologist pointed out that the BZT-1 Lot 4
Sample 4 Trench 1, Stratum 2) and BZT-1 Lot 1 Sample 13 (soil sample from 20 cm out from
and parallel to the skull) were probably the same soil since the soil characteristics were very
similar.
During August 2001, we went to the Brazoria Engineers Office, County of Brazoria, and
Larrie helped us locate a 1940 aerial photograph of the area around BZT-1. This aerial shows
the current meander of Cocklebur Slough and an extinct meander that has been shut off from
Cocklebur Slough. The extinct meander appears to be contiguous with BZT-1 and continues
south to merge again with the current Cocklebur Slough. At that same time, the
geomorphologist and I went 100 yards south of BZT-1 to where we had seen remnants of a
meander of some type to determine if it was in fact a meander. We put in Trench No. 3
(Addendum 1-Figure 6) approximately 70 meters southwest of the BZT-1. The trench was
62

approximately 15 meters long, one-meter wide and around two meters deep and parallel to the
borrow ditch. We went down about 1.1 meters into clay and we found remnants of a shell
midden. Immediately after the shell midden and to the north, we came into the high-energy
sands. We then put in Trench 4 at approximately 40 meters south of and centered on the site.
The sole purpose of Trench 4 was to determine if the meander did pass immediately by the site
and determine if the shell midden continued toward the site. The meander did continue and
appeared to pass right at the northern edge of the site. The shell midden did not continue.
Now we had five lines of evidence as to how these remains came to be entombed in the
present location. The following were good probabilities at this time:
1. The remains are in a vertical position.
2. The remains are apparently articulated.
3. The remains decomposed in place.
4. There is no visual or soil comparison evidence for a burial shaft or a tomb.
5. The soil inside the skull compares favorably with the high-energy sands from below
the skull.
With this evidence, and a bit of serendipity, we began to assemble a different scenario of how
these remains came to be as and where they are. Our new working hypothesis was:
If the remains are in a vertical and articulated anatomical position, have decomposed in
place, and there is no evidence of a burial shaft or tomb, then this individual was entombed by
mishap.
We sent three entire teeth and 26 tooth fragments from BZT-1 Lot 3 Sample 8 to Beta Labs,
Miami on September 22, 2001. We requested that Beta use these samples for radiocarbon
dating and DNA analysis and to make the determination of which samples to use for each
analysis. Three weeks later, we were notified by Beta Labs that they were unable to obtain a
radiocarbon date or DNA analyses on any of the samples provided.
On November 7, 2001, with written permission from Siegel with Fish and Wildlife in
Albuquerque, we sent all of the BZT-1 Lot 3 Sample 12 and Lot 3 Sample 7 fragments of the
skull and one tooth (right No. 1 premolar) from BZT-1 Lot 3 Sample 8 to the Armed Forces
DNA Lab in Rockville, Maryland. Siegel (F&W) wrote a letter authorizing them to do the
DNA analysis. We sent one tooth (M-3) from BZT-1 Lot 3 Sample 8 and the two petrosal
bones, BZT-1 Lot 3 Sample 6 to Tim Jull at the University of Arizona - Tucson for
radiocarbon dating. We had the petrosal and teeth at University of Arizona Tucson,
radiocarbon dating lab, the bone fragments are at Armed Forces DNA lab, and we have the
soil samples at Texas A&M with Richard Drees.
On May 8, 2002, we received notification from George Burr, PhD, University of ArizonaTucson that they were successful in obtaining a date from the tooth and one of the petrosals
(see Remains and Soil Samples Description and Analysis section.) The tooth only had five
micrograms of carbon and was dated at 8,300 years plus or minus 2,700. They were not able to
use the ¹³C clarification. Burr was able to extract 40 mcg of carbon from one of the petrosals.
The petrosal was dated to a minimum of 10,740 years ±765 RC years B.P. During the process,
the tooth was destroyed and 50% of one petrosal had been destroyed.
We received the formal report from the University of Arizona on Friday, May 10, 2002. We
sent a copy of that to Siegel, U. S. Fish and Wildlife, Albuquerque. Siegel indicated that he
63

wanted the supporting radiocarbon dating completed. In May 2002, we had the University of
Arizona deliver the 1½ petrosal bone to Stafford Laboratory in Boulder Colorado for
additional radiocarbon dating.

64

Photographs - Field Investigation – Day 4

65

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

Present Condition of BZT-1

74

Photographs - Return to the Laboratory

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

Bob d’Aigle

Texas A&M Archaeology Laboratory

83

Dr. Gentry Steele

Field Investigation – Fifth Day
On Saturday, May 24, 2002, we met with our new geomorphologist consultant, Juan-Carlos
Moya, PhD, Quaternary Geologist for the reopening of Trench 3 and with Mustafa Sarabudak,
PhD, Geophysicist for the Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) survey. We wanted to redo the
examination of Trench 3 to help determine if we had all the necessary items to produce
spontaneous liquefaction. Moya has issued an opinion report, which indicates that from the
1940 photograph, and some other information he has gotten from the General Land Office in
Austin, that we have all the indications that spontaneous liquefaction could have happened in
this area. We reopened Trench 3 and Trench 4. Trench 4 was five meters south of the south
borrow ditch, centered on BZT-1, and was approximately 15 meters long and six foot deep.
The sole purpose of Trench 4 was to determine if the meander we found in Trench 3 and/or the
shell midden continues towards the site of the remains. We did an extension of Trench No. 3
on the northwest end and went gone down approximately 15 feet. Moya was writing all
geomorphologic field notes.
We then moved to the southwest end of the same trench and photographed everything. We
wanted to clean off the trench wall here and look at the unconformity and while doing that we
uncovered a shell midden that appears to be approximately 3” deep and of undetermined
width. After we located the midden remnants and reached the high-energy sands, the walls of
the trench began collapsing. We attempted to excavate deeper into the sands but the walls
continued to collapse. The top of the reddish low-energy sand is at approximately 1.5 meters
and is overlaid by an erosional feature. Below the reddish low-energy sands, we reached the
iron oxide saturated heavy sands. We used Juan Moya’s report for any further description (see
Remains and Soil Samples Description and Analysis section.) The sample we removed from
the shell midden (BZT-2 Lot 1 Sample 1) contained at least one fingernail size piece of bone,
burnt rangia shell, and charcoal. This midden (BZT-2) is stratigraphically located at the
approximate position of the skull at BZT-1. BZT-2 will not be recorded as a contemporary site
of BZT-1. It is approximately 66 meters southwest and away from BZT-1, and other than the
stratigraphy, does not have any locational definition to be considered as relating to the BZT-1.
The unconformity appears to be a regional feature and was present immediately above the
skull at BZT-1 and the shell midden, and is found in the entire length of both of the recent
borrow ditch extensions that are discussed in the Environmental Definition of Study Area
section of this report.
We can use samples of the shell and soil matrix (BZT-2 Lot 1 Sample 1) with the charcoal and
bone for later, possible phytolith, pollen, and macro floral analysis. We also had a one-liter
sample (BZT-1 Lot 2 Sample 1) of the unconformity that we sent to Stafford Laboratories for
14
C dating.
It’s about 3:30 PM, and we had just completed the last of Trench 3. We did not physically
examine trench No. 4. In Trench 3, there are two different sets of soil stratigraphy because the
erosional feature, or unconformity, present in the southwest portion of the trench is not present
in the northeast half of the trench. In the northeast half of the trench, the C-horizon is much
deeper than it is in the southwest half of the trench. Therefore, we had two different sets of
stratigraphy. The erosional feature is probably 20-30 centimeters thick. It is very crumbly with
significant amount of organics and just above the shell midden. The shell midden was labeled
BZT-2.

84

Today, while working on Trench 3, I talked with Doug Owsley, curator with Smithsonian
Institute, Washington, D.C. I explained that the remains appear to have been in a saturated
condition since they were entombed. He recommended leaving the water in the borrow ditch
because it is a natural accumulation of ground water and not rain and the remains would be
better protected in a familiar, moist condition.
Mustafa completed the GPR survey (see the Remains and Soil Samples Description and
Analysis section.) There were four transects of 45-foot length, spaced 2.5 foot apart. Readings
were taken each 2.5-foot. We used a GSSi GPR instrument with 400 MHz antenna.

85

Photographs - Field Investigation – Day 5

86

Trench 3 South Wall SW End

Trench 3 South Wall SW End

Trench 3 South Wall NE End

Trench 3 South Wall NE End

87

Trench 3 Shell Midden SW End

Trench 3 252°M

Trench 3 SW End
88

GPR Survey

89

ANALYSIS AND CODIFICATION OF RESULTS
In order to position the skull and the expected torso and limbs of the remains, we referred to a
study by Robert Ricklis, Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology
at the Mitchell Ridge Site, 41GV66, Galveston Island (1994.) This investigation provided us
with significant background on human remains buried over the past 200-1,800 years. We used
the average height of mature females from this study to determine a height for the BZT-1
remains (Figures 12-13.) The estimated height for the BZT-1 remains was calculated using
Nataliya Hryshechko as a model. She is 1.7 meters tall, her trunk is 0.9 meters, from sternum
to floor, in the position I suggested in Figures 12 and 13, is 0.3 meters. The average height for
an adult female aboriginal from Ricklis’ study is 1.585 meters (Ricklis 1994.) Using the ratio
from Hryshechko’s and Ricklis’ measurements, this computes to an estimated vertical
measurement for the selected semi-flexed skeletal position of 1.118 meters for the BZT-1
skeleton.
Another set of human bones, the Arlington Springs Woman in California, was discovered in
1956. At that time, instead of excavating them, they took out the entire block of soil with the
bones still in place and brought it into the Santa Clara Museum of Natural History. However,
since the Arlington Springs Woman remains were reworked (not in situ) and the 10,000+
years B.P. radiocarbon dating was done on collagen, a question remains as to the validity of
the 14C dates for these remains. John Johnson, Curator, has agreed to provide two soil samples
from an unexposed portion of the soil from adjacent to the bones to Stafford Laboratory for
human protein extractions analysis. The purpose of this protein analysis is to determine if
sufficient human protein can leech from bone to test positive for protein extraction analysis.
The dates are very similar for both sets of remains (BZT-1 and Arlington Springs Woman) and
we know the remains of the Arlington Springs Woman have been reworked and are not in situ.
We used the results of this analysis to support or contradict our hypothesis for in situ
decomposition of the remains at BZT-1. (www.friendsofpast.org/01/scenes-010731.html.)
I also contacted Doug Owsley, preservationist at the Smithsonian Institute, Washington D.C.,
about a prehistoric human burial that came from Utah in a block of soil that they are
excavating in controlled conditions. These remains date around 10,000 years. We will take soil
samples if we can get them from the excavation at the Smithsonian Institute to determine if we
can also get human protein from those soil samples. Since we know the remains from the
Smithsonian are in situ, we should get results similar to BZT-1. These samples were not
available.
I spoke with Alan Schneider, an attorney that specializes in NAGPRA and ARPA issues, to
get assistance with how to proceed and for personal protection. We then talked to Siegel
numerous times since May 9, 2002, and he assured us that only he and his immediate
supervisor are aware of these dates. CRC does not plan to release any information concerning
BZT-1 until we are confident that the remains are not endangered by a public announcement.
At present, we are in compliance with NAGPRA and ARPA. The U. S. Fish and Wildlife is
solely responsible for that aspect. We are to provide expert opinion and testimony on
NAGPRA issues, only. We have retained Alan Schneider, Attorney, for that purpose.
Richard Drees sent soil samples BZT-1 Lot 4 Samples 1 and 4 and BZT-1 Lot 1 Sample 12-13
to Stafford Laboratories in Boulder, Colorado for possible radiocarbon dating, protein
analysis, and amino acid analysis. We asked Stafford Laboratory to do the radiocarbon testing
on the soil. We plan to do a chemical analysis on the soil in-house if we cannot get it done
elsewhere. Since we already know the calcium, we were looking for potassium, phosphates
90

and nitrogen to determine the available amount of these chemicals for variation in the soil that
was around the skull and soil away from the skull. We wanted to eliminate the possibility of
enough protein leaching from the bone to be detectable in the soil. This has been done at
recent burials at Kosovo in Bosnia for the mass murder graves. Hugh Tuller from LSU
completed his Masters’ thesis in December 2001 and was very successful in using the same
human protein extraction analysis we completed (http://etd.lsu.edu: 8085/docs/available/etd0131102-125405/ [03/14/02].)
Vera Schmerer, Armed Forces DNA Identification Lab in Washington, D.C. called us today to
say that she would like to conduct further tests on the samples and see if she can locate
mitochondrial DNA. She is going to keep the samples for a while longer.
We have every reason to believe that the rest of skeleton is still in the ground since when we
removed the skull it was in a vertical position and the first two vertebrae and a ≈3 cm long
section of the clavicle were directly underneath the skull. We do not have any indications,
visual or from the soil analysis, that there is any type of burial shaft. We had the reddish, silty
sand inside the skull. The remains appear to be in an upright position and we do have human
protein in the soil. We do not know which amino acid was present in the soil, but we are going
on the assumption it was decayed muscle tissue and indicates the remains decayed in place.
On June 4, 2002, we returned to the Refuge to take photographs of Cocklebur Creek, and two
pictures of a typical marsh bog/flooded unit. We also took 2-3 pictures from on top of the
levee of the site BZT-1 with the current water level in the borrow ditch at BZT-1 as it exists
today.
We talked to Ben New and a couple of the other personnel at the Refuge and they explained
that around Cow Trap Lake, and another location called South Marsh, there are many such
bogs that are so huge and dangerous even an amphibious marsh buggy cannot get through.
This particular marsh buggy, a Polygon 4450, has 40” wheels. It was bogged down at Cow
Trap Lake and had to have another marsh buggy pull it out to safety. This huge marsh buggy
looks like one of the “monster trucks.” In addition, New told us of an incident that happened
in the late 1960’s. A grandfather and his son were fishing in a boat at Cow Trap Lake, about
0.5 miles south of BZT-1, and were stranded when the tide went out. They were still in the
marshes and they tried to walk out. The grandson made it. The grandfather didn’t. His would
be rescuers went back to assist him and found the grandfather had been trapped in a bog and
died.
On June 22, 2002, we sent a 1-liter soil sample from the erosional feature in Trench 1, BZT-1
Lot 2 Sample 1 and BZT-1 soil sample Lot 1 Sample 15 to Stafford Laboratory for
radiocarbon dating. We expected the soil from the erosional feature, which was immediately
above the skull and the shell midden to provide a minimum date for the remains and the
midden. Soil sample BZT-1 Lot 1 Sample 15 comes from inside the skull. The soil inside the
skull may have been saturated with a rich “soup” of decaying brain material and might have
been protected from outside contamination by the skull. If this was the situation, we should
expect the radiocarbon date from BZT-1 Lot 1 Sample 15 to be comparable to the radiocarbon
date for the petrosal and BZT-1 Lot 2 Sample 1 from the erosional feature date postdating that
of the petrosal.
On July 8, 2002. We requested that Wera Schmerer, Armed Forces DNA Identification
Laboratories (AFDIL,) send the one remaining tooth crown, a premolar, to Robert Tykot, PhD,
Department of Anthropology, University of South Florida. Tykot removed 10-20 mg of clean
enamel powder from the crown and subjected the resultant apatite to accelerated mass
91

spectrometry (AMS.) This process provided data on the diet at the time of the enamel
formation and reflected the whole diet rather than emphasizing protein contribution (δ13C.)
The results were compared to the δ13C of the petrosal and to the soil from inside the skull (Lot
1 Sample 15.) These analyses helped determine a probability of the BZT-1 individual being a
native inhabitant of the Texas gulf coast or elsewhere.
A Brief on the Principles of Stable Isotope Analysis
Carbon and nitrogen isotope ratios in human bone may be used to reconstruct
prehistoric diet because of differential fractionation, between certain plant groups,
of atmospheric carbon dioxide during photosynthesis and of nitrogen during
fixation or absorption. …Experimental data have indicated that different bone
tissues reflect different components of the diet (Ambrose and Norr 1993; Tieszen
and Fagre 1993). In general, bone collagen is disproportionately produced from
the protein portion of the diet, while bone carbonate and tooth enamel carbonate
(both a calcium hydroxyphosphate, called apatite) are produced from a mixture of
dietary protein, carbohydrates and fats. Stable isotope analysis of both bone
collagen and apatite thus permits quantitative estimates of several dietary
components. Both bone collagen and bone apatite are constantly being resorbed
and replenished, so that their isotopic composition reflects dietary averages over at
least the last several years of an individual's life, while the composition of tooth
enamel will reflect diet during the age of crown formation.
Typically, grasses originally native to hot, arid environments follow the C4
(Hatch-Slack) photosynthetic pathway, and will have δ13C values averaging about
-12.5‰; trees, shrubs, and grasses from temperate regions, which follow the C3
(Calvin-Benson) photosynthetic pathway, will have δ13C values averaging about 26.5‰. In some forested areas, a canopy effect occurs due to incomplete
atmospheric mixing, resulting in even more negative carbon isotope ratios (van der
Merwe & Medina 1991). Empirical data for large mammals combined with
experimental data for rats and mice indicate that bone collagen is enriched about
+5‰ relative to diet, although this value is affected by the proportion of protein in
the total diet and differences in δ13C values between protein and energy sources
(van der Merwe 1989; Ambrose & Norr 1993; Tieszen & Fagre 1993). (Adapted
from Principles of isotope Analysis, Robert Tykot, http://luna.cas.usf.edu
/~rtykot/Bone.html 07/10/02)
Robert Ricklis’ analyses on seven male and four female human remains at prehistoric site
41GV66 on Galveston Island, Texas provided collagen δ13C values that varied from
approximately -16.2‰ to –10.4‰, with a mean δ13C value of –13.2‰ ±2.02‰. After
accounting for fractionation between dietary assimilation and bone collagen, the average
collagen δ13C was estimated at –19.02‰. “This value is consistent with the archaeological and
ethnohistorical context for 41GV66 and is indicative of a diet that consisted of both terrestrial
and marine components.” Further,
The overall δ13C data for the Mitchell Ridge human samples are congruent with
expectations for a population relying to a considerable degree on marine resources,
as reflected in the generally positive δ13C values. This is in keeping with the
findings presented…(which) indicate that a very significant part of the aboriginal
diet was provided by fish. These findings are also in accord with those on human
bone samples from coastal sites in the Corpus Christi Bay area: the average δ¹³C
92

from Mitchell and the Corpus Christi area sites are -13.2‰ ±2.10‰ and -13.0‰
±1.78‰, respectively. (Ricklis, 1994, p. 419)

(CRC note: The Mitchell Ridge site is 70.5 kilometers (44.1 miles) at 60.4˚ T
and the Corpus Christi Bay sites are approximately 207 kilometers (168.6 miles) at
233.1˚ T from BZT-1.)
Table 6: δ13C Isotope Values for Common Natural Materials

δ13C (‰)

Material
Soil CO2 and secondary bone carbonate

-5±3

Bone apatite and original carbonate

-12±3

C-4 plant (Grains, seeds, maize and millets)

-10±2

Grasses arid zone, sedges

-13±3

Marine organisms (organic)

-15±3

Freshwater plants (submerged)

-16±4

Succulents (Cacti, pineapple, etc)

-17±2

Bone collagen (C3 diet), wood cellulose

-20±2

C3 plants, Grains (wheat, etc)

-23±3

(Adapted from: http://www.c14dating.com/isotope.html)
The bone (petrosal) collagen for the BZT-1 remains was δ13C –26.5‰ (See letter of
confirmation from University of Arizona in the Remains and Soil Samples Description and
Analysis section.). After correction for the bone collagen enrichment of +5‰ relative to diet,
this results in diet source corrected fractionation of –31.5‰ (-26.5‰)+(-5‰.) As indicated in
Table 6, this is comparable to the “C3 plants, Grains (wheat, etc)” of -23±3‰. C3 grasses or
grains would not be expected to be available in the area of BZT-1, or any other possible
resource for the region of BZT-1. When compared to the “Marine organisms (organic)” δ13C
value of -15‰ ±3‰ and corrected fractionation (+5‰) resulting in an approximate collagen
13
δ C value of -10 ±3‰, the difference is even more striking. Further, a comparison with
Ricklis’ findings, “the average δ13C from Mitchell and the Corpus Christi area sites are
93

-13.2‰ ±2.10‰ and -13.0 ±1.78‰, respectively” (Ricklis, ibid.), and the differences cannot
be reconciled except for diet.
Taken literally, the δ13C -26.5‰ value is an indication of a diet whose average δ13C value
would have been approximately -31.5‰. There is a +5‰ fractionation between diet and bone
collagen because bone collagen is five per mil more positive than that of the diet. If the diet
consists of 100% C3 plants with a δ13C -25‰, the bone collagen will have a δ13C value of (25‰) + (+5‰) = a δ13C value of -20‰. The reverse is: if bone collagen δ13C is -10‰, the
person's average diet had a δ13C of (-10‰) + (-5‰) = δ13C -15. The δ13C -15‰ value is
exactly that expected for a C4 plant. A diet of δ13C -31.5‰ would contain no measurable
amounts of marine foods, which have δ13C values similar to C4 plants. C4 plants have an
average δ13C value of -14.5‰. A diet of δ13C –31.5‰ would have to be derived from eating
C3 plants exclusively, and especially plants and animals from tropical forests or forested
grassland (a canopy effect occurs due to incomplete surface air and atmospheric mixing,
resulting in even more negative carbon isotope ratios.) A person’s bone collagen δ13C is set
during adolescence, and because bone collagen has a turnover rate of about 20 years, a person
eating marine foods between the ages of 20-30 years old would not have their bone collagen
isotopes changed appreciably by the diet (Tom Stafford, personal communication.)
The δ13C -26.5‰ value for bone collagen from the BZT-1 individual was a definite anomaly
for the area of BZT-1. There are at least three possible explanations for this δ13C:
1) Foreign contamination from soil and sediment derived organic matter during the
radiocarbon dating sequence at the University of Arizona. We had the utmost faith in
the results from the University of Arizona; however, we decided that every precaution
should be exercised before relying on the collagen δ13C –26.5.
2) The δ13C value was altered significantly by diagenesis of the protein.
3) The BZT-1 individual’s collagen δ13C –26.5‰ is reliable.
To account for Item 1, we had the soil inside and immediately above the skull radiocarbon
dated, which also yielded the δ13C of the soil. The petrosal bone that was located inside the
skull was 14C dated a minimum of 10,740 years ± 760 RC years B.P. (AA45910) and yielded a
bone collagen δ13C of –26.5‰. The soil inside the skull (BZT1L1S15) dated at a minimum of
5,135 years ±40 RC years B.P. (CAMS-87685) and yielded a δ13C value of –16.28‰. The soil
immediately above the skull (BZT1L2S1) dated at a minimum of 4,870 years ±40 RC years
B.P. (CAMS-87686) and yielded a δ13C value of –15.17‰. This indicates that the δ13C of the
bone collagen was not contaminated by the surrounding matrix from inside or above the skull.
These δ13C values are much more positive (heavier) than the -26.5‰ value for the Arizona
radiocarbon date on petrous bone. Therefore, humic acid contamination of the bone organic
carbon dated by Arizona is very unlikely. Humate contamination of the bone would be
indicated only if the δ13C values of the humic acids were -25‰ to -30‰. If the bone is
contaminated by geologically younger carbon, the contamination is not from humates. For
Item 2 above, the possibility of degraded collagen skewing the results significantly (±0.5‰) is
remote.
At present, Stafford Research Laboratories argues that the Arizona age is either correct, or if
not, the bone is older than their 14C measurement indicates. Since the results of these two
probable causes, humic contamination and degraded collagen did not have an apparent impact
on the δ13C of the bone collagen, the results of the original δ13C –26.5‰ appear acceptable for
the purposes of this investigation.
94

The type and cause of degradation is very different for organic (collagen or dentin)
and inorganic (bone apatite or tooth enamel).
Collagen, like any protein, is a mixture of many amino acids, each one a very
complex molecule. After death and with the help of groundwater, bacteria, etc., the
collagen will begin to dissolve away. Eventually there may be some collagen
components left, but not in the same proportions as in intact collagen. Since each
component is formed through separate chemical processes, each component (i.e.
amino acid) may have a different carbon isotope value, so the unidentified organic
material then tested will have a value which is different from intact collagen with
all its components in proper proportion. The variation in carbon isotope ratios
between different amino acids has been demonstrated in studies which have
separated the amino acids in the collagen (using gas chromatography or HPL
chromatography). When doing stable isotope analysis on collagen, we generally
reject any sample which has less than 1% collagen (i.e. starting with a clean bone
sample of 1 gram, if we get less than 10 milligrams we deem it to not be intact
enough for stable isotope analysis), although it would produce a reliable
radiocarbon date (since the carbon in all amino acids would be of the same age).
Also, with any reasonable treatment procedure (e.g. removing humic acids), there
is little chance of contamination of organic material in bone by something coming
from the soil (not many free-floating amino acids there!). The tiny bit of organic
material that the C14 labs were able to obtain strongly supports my interpretation
that the collagen was too degraded for reliable carbon isotope ratios.
In contrast, the carbon in bone apatite and tooth enamel is part of a far less
complex inorganic compound, a calcium hydroxy phosphate which has some
carbonate (CO3) in place of the phosphate (PO4). Carbonate of course is a
common component of limestone and marble(CaCO3) as well as coral and shell,
and is therefore commonly present in groundwater. Whereas amino acid carbon is
bound by covalent bonds and does not easily dissolve and reattach itself, carbonate
ions from groundwater are commonly adsorbed onto the surface of bones and
other materials, and over long spans of time will even chemically exchange with
carbonates originally part of the bone. Experiments by Koch et al. (1997), which
have been replicated in my lab and others as well, show that it is fairly easy to
remove the adsorbed non-biogenic carbonates from both bone and tooth enamel.
The hard tooth enamel is also quite impervious to the chemical exchange and is
thus preferred over bone apatite for skeletal materials of significant age (e.g. more
than 10 kya). Reliable results have been obtained on enamel millions of years old
in my lab and others (Robert Tykot, University of Southern Florida, personal
communication.)
The results obtained for the tooth enamel sample are not consistent with those reported for a
sample submitted for radiocarbon dating. Typically, it would have been the organic fraction of
a bone or tooth sample that would be radiocarbon dated, and the usual C3 endpoint for
collagen is about -21‰. The reported value of -26.5‰, if done on a sample of intact
collagen, therefore certainly is not consistent with any marine food or C4 resource
consumption, and suggests residence in an environment in which there was not free circulation
of atmospheric carbon dioxide such as under the canopy of a tropical forest (Tykot’s “Stable
Isotope Analysis of a Tooth Enamel...” report in the Remains and Soil Samples Description
and Analysis section.)
95

Since the δ13C -26.5‰ appears to perhaps reflect accurately the bone collagen’s δ13C and the
BZT-1 individual’s diet, we conclude that this person was not from the Gulf Coast region and
was instead from an inland, tropical region significantly distant geographically from the ocean.
While this may appear to fly in the face of the tooth apatite, we believe that the tooth enamel
was further degraded than it appears. This is a determination that is not taken lightly, but since
none of the 26 (eight intact) teeth was a suitable candidate for radiocarbon dating because of
the essential absence of protein carbon, and a single, intact tooth was not suitable for DNA
extraction, we ascribe to a theory that the teeth were further degraded than the dated petrous
bone. Further clarification of these probabilities will require, a) δ15N isotope data, b) analysis
of additional bones to assess their protein content and degree of preservation, and/or, c)
additional isotopic data from tooth enamel and dentine.
A bone collagen of δ13C -26.5‰ would indicate that the BZT-1 skeleton (individual) was not
from the continental United States. Because bone collagen has such a long turnover rate, the
isotope composition is an indication of human's place of origin. Regardless if the person was
traveling through the present Texas region or was living there, the BZT-1 individual's
geographic place of origin probably would not be where the BZT-1 remains are/were located.
14

C Analyses on Petrosal Bone BZT1L1S6 and Soil Samples BZT1L1S15 and BZT1L2S1

Radiocarbon dating of the BZT-1 human petrosal bone (BZT1L1S6) was terminated before an
AMS 14C date was measured because the chemical preservation of organic matter was too low
a concentration and too degraded chemically to assure an accurate radiocarbon measurement.
Stafford Research Laboratories terminated the chemistry purification after the weak HCl
decalcification step. The HCl-insoluble residue was entirely inorganic detritus and with no
measurable amount of organic carbon. The insoluble residue comprised hematite and MnO2
that would have been deposited within the bone during burial. The almost total loss or organic
matter (bone protein) matches the presence of abundant iron and manganese mineralization,
which would have resulted from considerable oxidizing ground water percolating over and
through the human bones. The dating process on bones is routinely terminated if they have a
non-collagenous amino acid composition, if the yield of protein is less than 2% that of modern
bone, and if there is considerable evidence for aqueous oxidation of the fossil bone (Tom
Stafford, personal communication.)
Soil sample BZT1L1S15 came from within the skull. Soil sample BZT1L2S1 came from the
unconformity directly above the skull. The radiocarbon analyses were completed by Stafford
Research Laboratories, Boulder Colorado. The full data for the two samples are:
BZT1L1S15: 5,135 ±40 RC years B.P., δ13C= –16.28‰, ∆14C=-472.3 ±2.3, Fm=0.5277
±0.0023, SR-6211, Humic Acids. (CAMS-87685)
BZT1L2S1: 4,870 ±40 RC years B.P., δ13C = –15.17‰, ∆14C=-454.5 ±2.4, Fm=0.5455
±0.0024, SR-6210, Humic Acids. (CAMS-87686)
The petrosal bone dated by the University of Arizona has very low protein or carbon content.
However, the age measured agrees with the skeleton's stratigraphic position as being below the
well-dated erosional surface and the 14C ages on humic acids from sediments enclosing the
human remains and within the individual's cranial cavity have nearly identical radiocarbon
ages.
These carbon compounds (humic acids) have specific ∆14C content. This value is
expressed either as Fraction Modern (Fm) or as ∆14C. The humic acids as materials with X
amount of 14C is a positive indicator that the results are not geologic ages, but rather are
96

geological materials that have experienced considerable post-depositional geochemical
modification.
Rather than consider the materials with a geologic age, think of the samples as materials
showing that the mass balance of old and young carbon is being determined. The discussion
becomes one of geochemical processes, not geologic times of deposition. We interpret the
results as meaning that considerable modern or more geologically recent 14C has been added to
the original humic acids. This supplementation was caused by groundwater percolating
through and over the sediments and bone and occurred during the period of inhumation. The
abundance of groundwater alteration is also indicated by the prevalence of iron and
manganese oxides, which would have been deposited by the oxidized groundwater.
The most likely contamination of the bone would have been with soil and sediment humates.
Since we know the humic acids contain modern carbon, any humate contamination of the bone
would have caused the bone RC date to be too young. Therefore, the University of Arizona
bone date is either correct or the bone is even older than that 14C age (See Stafford Research
Laboratories report in the Remains and Soil Samples Description and Analysis section.)
Table 6: Samples Remaining in Inventory at July 01, 2002
Catalog
No.

Number, Weight, or Volume (grams)

Location

Condition

BZT1L1S1

Soil - 16 g

Texas A&M

excellent

BZT1L1S3

Soil - 17 g

Texas A&M

excellent

BZT1L1S4

Soil - 25 g

Texas A&M

excellent

BZT1L1S6

Soil - 26 g

Texas A&M

excellent

BZT1L1S7

Soil - 33 g

Stafford
Laboratory

excellent

BZT1L1S8

Soil - 37 g

Texas A&M

excellent

BZT1L1S9

Soil - 45 g

Texas A&M

excellent

BZT1L1S10

Soil - 23 g

Texas A&M

excellent

BZT1L1S11

Soil - 21 g

Texas A&M

excellent

BZT1L1S12

Soil - 34 g

Stafford
Laboratory

excellent

BZT1L1S13

Soil - 3 g

Stafford
Laboratory

excellent

BZT1L1S14

Soil - 5 g

Stafford
Laboratory

excellent

BZT1L1S15
BZT1L3S6

Soil - 31 g

Texas A&M

excellent

vertebrae – 1 complete, 1-33% complete

AFDIL

good

BZT1L3S10

Unidentified bone fragments – 3 ea.

AFDIL

good

BZT1L3S12

various skull fragments – 173 ea.

AFDIL

good

BZT2L1S1

Soil sample containing small “bone” fragment, charcoal, and
burnt and unburned rangia shell. 1 liter

Stafford
Laboratory

excellent

97

GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE FOR CULTURAL HISTORY
Contextual Analysis of Human Remains at the BZT-1 Locality
Joseph F. Powell, Ph.D.
Associate Professor of Biological Anthropology,
And Consulting Bioarchaeologist
University of New Mexico
12 July 2002

Credentials
I have conducted examinations of over 100 forensic anthropology cases for law enforcement
agencies in New Mexico and elsewhere; was the part of the NAGPRA scientific team in the
earlier stages of the Kennewick case. I have also developed a forensic taphonomy database in
conjunction with the UN War Crimes Tribunal (Dr. Debra Komar, DBFA) and databases from
police agencies, including published data from forensic scientists in the Pacific Northwest (the
Seattle Police department taphonomy database provided by Dr. Bill Haglund); and in the far
southeast US (Dr. Chris Stojanowski, Florida State University) I have also examined over 500
individuals in North, South and Central America older than 8500yr B.P. (early
Holocene/Paleoamerican) several as old as 10,600 or more yr B.P. (Folsom age) in the
Americas and several central Asian Upper Paleolithic skulls once on loan to Dr Walter Neves,
(Laboratory for the Study of Human Evolution, Universidade of San Paulo, Brazil.) I now
serve as a NAGPRA consultant to the Maxwell Museum for repatriation claims for Museum
collection human remains and items of cultural patrimony. I have served as field director for
excavation of cemetery sites in Texas, Illinois, and New Mexico. My current appointment is as
an Associate professor of Anthropology and consulting Bioarchaeologist for the Office of
Contract Archaeology and Maxwell Museum of Anthropology at the University of New
Mexico main campus.
Scientific relevance of BZT-1 remains
If the position of the human skeleton in Addendum 4-Figure 12-13 is an accurate reflection of
the body’s position in the BZT-1 deposits at time of death; then the hypothesis of liquefaction
would be correct. However it would be the only Western Hemisphere example of this type of
unintentional inhumation of a human body in prehistoric, or forensic contexts that I and
several bioarchaeological colleagues whom I consulted have ever seen.
Also if the dating and geomorphic association of the skeleton is also accurate, this would
makes the BZT-1 remains among the few Texas sites to produce Paleoamerican or Early
Archaic human remains (HornSleltern=2; Wilson Leonard=1; Shifting Sands; a few possibly
at the base of Morhiss Mound Victoria Co, TX.) Because ancient remains are so rarely
discovered or scientifically analyzed prior to repatriation and reburial, the BZT-1 skeleton
may be quite important for the progress of knowledge about the First Americans despite its
fragmentary nature. I strongly suggest obtaining molecular DNA from this person to help
determine sex and biological affinity in the absence of an undamaged skull. I could not
determine from the materials I received from CRC if teeth were discovered by Drs. d’Aigle
and Steele; if teeth were recovered, these would be very important for assessment of where the
BZT-1 remains fits into our overall understanding of the First Americans. Teeth provide
important morphometric data and are the best site for sampling DNA and other molecular
98

markers, due to tissue and cell preservation inside the tooth pulp chamber (A. Merriwether, A.
C. Stone, personal communications.) (CRC note: See DNA and Forensic Analysis sections
and Table 5. Intact teeth were found and analyzed by CRC consultants for forensic detail and
DNA)
From studies of the other skulls and teeth of the First Americans we know see a consistent
pattern of craniofacial difference between the ancients and living American native peoples
(Jantz and Owsley, 1999; Steele and Powell, 1992; Powell and Neves, 1999, although Ychromosome (Y-chrx) and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences and human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) data for most of the Paleoamerican samples thus far examined are classified as
either the Y-chrx F1 haplogroup or mtDNA haplogroups B or X or as HLA*A2 or *B2 types;
all now common among living native peoples in Southeast Asia, Polynesia, or central America
(or western Europe and North. Africa in the case of haplogroup X. Dental variation also
indicates strong differences between Paleoamericans and living Indian tribes. (In review) have
found dental evidence of founder effect in the dentition of ancient Americans, in the form of a
unique dental morphological patterning that is neither Sinodont (NE Asian) nor Sundadont
(SE Asian), contra Turner (1985.) Powell Neves and Ozolins also observed of a high
frequency of a rare dental morphological feature: UP3Distosaggital ridge, better known as the
Uto-Aztecan premolar, so named for the living American Indians who are members of this
language group that still exhibit this feature (1% of U-A speakers today have the UP3 DSR
dental feature.) Nearly 18% of Paleoamerican skeletons also exhibit theUP3 DSR, as do 0.1%
of living peoples in East Asia and Polynesia.
Possible Cultural Context
During the early Holocene, southern US prehistoric peoples seem to give great attention to wet
deposits or localities such as ponds, bogs, and springs. Examples include bog burials at the
Archaic Windover pond, Florida; burials within the bog adjacent to Little Salt Spring Florida,
as well as an accidental death of a male who fell into the vertical opening to the Spring at this
site and was unable to extract himself before death from dehydration;1 along with cavern
burials (n=3) within the vertical shaft cave forming the nearby Warm Mineral Springs site
(11,000-8,000 yr B.P.) Possible incised stones with representations of Pleistocene megafauna
along with “offerings” of Paleoamerican projectile points were recovered by Hester and
Shaffer at the Pleistocene spring at the Gault site in central Texas. The east Wenatchee WA
Clovis cache may also be associated with a Younger Dryas age Spring, and is thought by some
archaeologists to be evidence of an “offering” to the spring or to have accompanied a human
burial in or at the spring (B. Huckell, pers. comm.)
Alternative Explanations
If the BZT-1 remains are not directly associated with Pleistocene deposits, another possibility
is that they represent a protohistoric Gulf-coast specific cultural treatment of human remains.
After having examined skeletons and original field notes from the “Caplen Burial Mound”
(41GV1) at the mouth of Galveston Bay in Galveston county; and the related site of “Mitchell
Ridge” (41GV66), on the north side of Galveston Island (see Ricklis, et al, 1995) many of the
remains include skeletal elements in a secondary context as result of the use of either charnel
houses or trophy taking. For example, the Caplen site included many skulls with only cervical
vertebrae clavicles and/or ribs2, with little or no evidence of grave offerings; at in a shallow

99

interment feature with skulls resting on their bases, as could be the case for the BZT-1
remains. Many of the Caplen bodies were buried in unusual positions, based on the photo
documentation and records housed at TARL (in fact, at least one Caplen skeleton appeared to
have been buried in a kneeling position, based on field sketches and photographs from the site.
The Mitchell Ridge site (41GV66) Ricklis and crew discovered pit features containing the
hand bones for several individuals, which is consistent with behavior related to historical
accounts by early Spanish explorers (Oviedo, Cabeza de Baca) as well as descriptions of
human body part decorations (“’necklaces of human hands” in the or skulls decorating the
entrances to “villages and huts” of the “warlike cannibals” (the Karankawa people whose
territory, according to Aten came as far North as the western end of Galveston Island) or such
disparaging comments made to dehumanize native peoples in order for Austin and his
colonists to justify their extermination by early Texas settlers. However these early historic
descriptions, though tainted by political motives of the writers, may actually contain a nugget
of truth, and may describe mortuary treatments and cultural practices related to social beliefs
and mortuary behaviors related to the possession of the deceased’s power, and for the
remembrance of loved ones.
Summary
Given the lack of biological data available for the BZT-1 skeleton it would be worthy of
further bioarchaeological and biological investigation for the following:
•

Needs direct AMS dates on bone collagen. (CRC note: Completed, see University of
Arizona confirmation letter)

•

Sampling bones or teeth for Y-chrx, mtDNA and HLA typing. (CRC note: mtDNA
completed, see Armed Forces DNA Identification Laboratories [AFDIL,] Wera
Schmerer DNA Analysis report.)

•

A thorough examination of morphometric features that I understand was not possible
during Dr. Steele’s site visit due to wet condition of the BZT-1 deposits.

If the assessment of liquefaction and death in situ due to such a process can be further
documented, this would make BZT-1 a rare bioarchaeological find.
In fact, the rarity of Paleoamerican skeletons makes the site worthy of a very complete
archaeological investigation, unlike the cursory examination at the Kennewick discovery site
rather than grid sampling would not provide the necessary data to interpret the geological, and
potential cultural (if any) context of the skeleton. However personal experience with ancient
remains in NAGPRA situations warrants that these recommendations be carried out under full
disclosure (ARPA Section 2) to avoid any appearance of improper handling of such a delicate
and potentially volatile situation.
i.

The spring water is mixed with seawater due to an underground feeder from the nearby Gulf Coast.

ii.

My experience with decomposing bodies is that the muscles and tendons connecting these elements to others
are often difficult to remove, even after long periods of tissue maceration and the application of a scalpel.

100

REMAINS AND SOIL SAMPLES DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

101

Preliminary Geologic and Geomorphologic Assessment
Of the BZT-1 Archeological Remains
San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge
Brazoria County, Texas
Juan-Carlos Moya, PhD
Quaternary Geologist
Introduction
The purpose of this study is to identify the geomorphologic setting that is associated with the
origin of the human remains found at the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge (SBNWR,)
Brazoria County, Texas. It includes the stratigraphic, geomorphologic, and environmental
characterization of the conditions associated with the origin of the human remains.
Preliminary observations suggest that the human remains probably originated in the Holocene.
These remains are covered by two well-developed soil horizons, which include a buried soil
located at about 1.4 meters deep and the modern soil more than a meter thick. The presence of
the buried soil covering the remains suggests that the remains have been in place and
concealed for at least several thousand years.
Environmental Changes during the Holocene and Late Pleistocene
The study area is located in southeastern portion of Brazoria County, Texas, specifically on
the lower portion of the Western Gulf Coastal Plain (Figure 1.) Geologically speaking, the
Texas coastal environments have been changing during the last 18,000 years, from the Late
Pleistocene to the Present. The coastal shorelines have responded to the sea level rise and have
modified the coastal geomorphology, creating very diverse environments, which can be
interpreted using the geologic record (Rodriguez et. al., 2001.) From 18,000 to 4,500 years
B.P., the sea level rose and reached its present position. All the geologic deposits and the
geomorphologic units have remained without any significant changes around the SBNWR for
the last 4,500. Only shoreline erosion has been the more dynamic process (McGowen et. al.,
1976.) These geologic environments have been called Modern or Late Holocene units
(McGowen et. al., 1976.) Geologic evidence suggest that the Late Pleistocene systems have
been superimposed by different Modern environments while others have just continued under
the same regime but have received more recent depositions.
Geologic Evolution of the Coastal Plain
The geologic framework that characterizes the entire SBNWR region has consisted of a
depositional environment constituted by a fluvial-deltaic system associated to the dynamics of
the Brazos River and more recently the San Bernard River (McGowen et. al., 1976.) This
fluvial-deltaic system created the coastal uplands, which were situated at elevations greater
than 5 feet above present sea level where the SBNWR is now situated. The fluvial-deltaic
system consists of 12 main geologic units (McGowen et. al., 1976.) These units include units
that were created during the Late Pleistocene and units created in the Holocene and HoloceneModern time. These units reflect clearly the fluvial-deltaic conditions developed during the
last 18,000 years and include:
1. Distributaries, fluvial sand, and silt,
2. Interdistributary mud with sand veneer,
102

3. Interdistributary mud,
4. Distributary and fluvial sand with oak mottles,
5. Circular to irregular depressions on distributary-fluvial sand,
6. Marine deltaic sand,
7. Mud veneer over marine deltaic sand,
8. Abandoned channel and course mud filled,
9. Abandoned channel and course, swamp and marsh covered,
10. Tidal creek, fresh to brackish water marsh
11. Tidal creek, mud filled, and
12. Beach sand.
Many of these units consisted of Pleistocene interdistributary mud that has been called the
Beaumont Formation, which extends from the central to the north Texas coast.
The Holocene geologic units and sub-units that are observed in the SBNWR are (Figure 2):
A. Fluvial sand and flood basin mud
B. Interdistributary silt and mud
C. Fresh to brackish water marsh
D. Abandoned channel mud-filled
E. Levee and crevasse deposits, silt mud and sand, barren
More specific for the SBNWR is the presence of units characterized by silt, sand, and clay in
the whole environment. These units were accumulated in interdistributary bays, lakes, and in
general, on sub-aerial delta plains that were covered frequently by floodwaters that overflowed
distributary channels and breached levees to form crevasse spays (McGowen et. al., 1976.)
Drastic geographic boundaries in some recent coastal morphologies suggest that many of these
features could have inherited the boundaries of previously developed Pleistocene units. That
means that some features were deposited under high-energy conditions and later covered by
modern low-energy deposits. For that reason, the units on the surface and on top of the
stratigraphic sequence may be very different from units a few feet deeper.
Surficial Geology
The alluvium and fluviatile sediments consist of channels, point bar, levee and flood basin
deposits. The Brazos floodplain has incised the local Pleistocene Beaumont surface and the
meandering Brazos River has scalloped the edge of the Beaumont upland. The Brazos
sediments have an overall reddish-brown to yellowish-red color derived from Triassic and
Permian “red beds” in the upper portion of the Brazos drainage basin in northwest Texas. The
channel of Oyster Creek represents the most continuous of the abandoned Holocene courses of
the Brazos. Previous work by Bernard and others (1970), suggest that Oyster Creek was
occupied for about 3000 years and abandoned about 1000 years ago. Geologic evidence
suggests that sea level probably reached its present stand between 2,500 to 4,500 years B.P.,
rising from a low stand about 18,000 years B.P., estimated at 250 to 450 feet below present
sea level (McGowen et. al., 1976.) Again, geological evidence shows that backfilling and
103

alluviation of the wide Brazos River alluvial plain intermittently kept pace with the rise in sea
level.
The Recent and Pleistocene (interglacial) sedimentary sequence in the Texas coast has been
apparently separated by a prominent regional unconformity (Bernard and LeBlanc, 1962.) The
origin of this unconformity is not well explained, but may be the result of weathering during
sea level low stands. This unconformity is expressed in the Late Pleistocene or maybe Early
Holocene sediments as a sharp geologic contact. The surface seems to be relatively stiff and
mottled, oxidized, and/or leached (Howles, 2002.) Lime nodules, caliche, and iron oxide
concretions frequently occur in the Pleistocene unit. The unconformity creates a sharp contact
where the overlying Recent sediments are looser and have relatively greater moisture content;
are softer consisting of silt, sand, and clay; and contain abundant organic material. The Recent
clays and silts developed on top of the unconformity and located close to the surface are
commonly olive gray in color. In addition, this Recent-Pleistocene unconformity is easily
recognized at some locations as a buried soil. For the purpose of this report, the term “buried
soil” is applied to the buried soils that were formed on some ancient land surface, were
subsequently buried by younger deposits, and generally are far enough below the present land
surface not to be affected by present pedogenic processes (Birkeland, 1984.) Below the
oxidized zone, the Pleistocene is very similar to the Recent and in many cases cannot be
differentiated lithologically or paleontologically, except perhaps by the higher contents of
clays associated with local weathering.
Engineering Properties and Soils
McGowen et. al., (1976) correlated all the geologic units with the physical (soil engineering)
properties of these materials (Figure 3.) Unit B in Figure 3 has been defined as Group I and
contains the materials in the study area. Group I includes: Dominantly clay and mud with low
permeability, high water-holding capacity, high compressibility, high to very high shrinkswell potential, poor drainage, level to depressed relief, low shear strength, and high plasticity.
The importance of this Group I classification is the direct correlation between the origin of the
deposits and the behavior of these materials from the engineering point of view. The high to
very high shrink-swell potential and high plasticity materials combined with very poor
drainage shows that there are extremely good conditions for the formation of water saturated
muddy swamps.
Field Methods
The field investigations consisted first of a Ground Penetration Radar (GPR) survey to define
potential anomalies in the ground (Attachment I,) which could be associated with the human
remains. Second, some coring and three exploratory trenches in the area, and the interpretation
of geologic profiles observed in a borrow ditch. In general, the location of the human remains
lies near the present day coastline. In a recent oblique aerial photography (Figures 4A and 4B,)
the location of the site appears near to an abandoned and intermittent fluvial channel. The
remains were found during the construction of a borrow ditch.
This borrow ditch offered a unique opportunity to view the general stratigraphy and the origin
of the area. A borrow ditch for a levee being constructed in the area served as source of
information because showed a good stratigraphic profile. After the remains were found,
Howles (2002) developed a field analysis where six borings were drilled, in 1-foot increments,
to a depth of eight feet in locations that transected what he interpreted as an surficial alluvial
fan (see Figure 5 for the location of the cores and Attachment II for data in the cores.) The
104

samples were submitted to the Texas A&M Soil Characterization Laboratory for particle size
analysis and physical testing.
Howles examined the lithology in the cores and interpreted that borings B-1 and B-5 were
located at the distal portions of the fan, B-6 (and the skull location) was located almost in the
center of the channel throat, and borings B-2, B-3 and B-4 were in locations off center of the
throat. Boring B-6 was drilled near the location of the skull. The eight, one-foot segments of
Core 6 were also submitted to the Texas A&M Soil Characterization Laboratory for particle
size analysis and physical testing. The Soil Characterization Laboratory analysis of the soil
sample from within the skull, BZT-1 Lot 1, Sample 15, and the Core 6 analyses are presented
also on Attachment II.
Two small exploratory trenches were also opened by Howles (2002.) The idea was to explore
the spatial stratigraphic changes and sequences found next to the remains (Figure 6.) The
trenches were located 2 meters (Trench 1) out to the west of the skull and 2 meters on the
north (Trench 2.) One, 1-liter soil sample was taken from each level of Trench 1 and were
labeled BZT-1 Lot 4 S1-4. One additional sample was taken from Levels 3 and 4 of Trench 1.
The sample from Level 3 was labeled BZT-1 Lot 7 S1. The sample from Level 4 was labeled
BZT-1 Lot 7 S2. One soil sample was taken from parallel and 20 cm to the west from the skull
towards Trench 1. This sample was labeled BZT-1 Lot 1 S13. Two soil samples were taken
from the interior of the skull and were labeled BZT-1 Lot 1 S14 and BZT-1 Lot 1 S15. The
results of the materials collected in both cores are presented in the Attachment II.
The data obtained from the GPR surveys have been included in Attachment I. In general, the
survey shows that the general geology of the area consists of horizontal layers that are sorted
parallel to the ground. The data shows that these horizontal layers go down to about 2.5 meters
and after that depth, the data starts to be affected maybe by the presence of ground water. Very
important is an anomaly observed at the center of the image. This anomaly appears as a
change in the general physical conditions of the layers (See Attachment I.) The anomaly
literally breaks the horizontal layers and produces a different response to the signal. The
anomaly appears as part of the area that surrounds the remains. The anomaly is observed in the
images as a rounded feature, which was analyzed in detail in the future. Perhaps the most
important feature associated with the anomaly is that this feature has deformed some
horizontal layers in contact with it, mainly at the bottom. The layers appear to be folded
downward, which suggests that the deformation could be related to a gravitational
deformation, perhaps associated with the weight of the anomaly. That means that the anomaly
sank after the formation on the horizontal layers. At this moment, since the remains cannot be
removed from the area, the investigation of this anomaly cannot be complete but it will part of
future investigations.
However, the stratigraphic sequences observed in the two small trenches and the borrow ditch
provided a general description of the geologic units at the site. After comparing these units,
Howles (2002) observed a stratigraphic unconformity in the soil profile (Figure 7.) Howles
described that the skull was depicted with approximately 10 centimeters removed from the
crown of the skull. Strata 1 and 2 in Figure 8 represents the Holocene sediments (Surfside
clay,) the 0.25 meter thick zone represents the unconformity and Strata 3 shows potential
Pleistocene sediments. After field measurements and observations, Howles placed the top .05
meters of the skull within the bottom portion of the unconformity. This unconformity may
represent the contact between the Pleistocene and Holocene sediments or possibly a Holocene
erosional event. Radiocarbon and paleontological samples were collected and the dating is
progress should help in the dating of the skull, and associated sediments.
105

The third trench was re-opened and extended by Moya (this report) and a more detailed
description was developed to understand in detail the stratigraphic location of the remains in
time and space.
Analysis on Trench 3
Trench 3 was located about 66 meters south from the location of the remains (Figures 4A and
9.) The units observed in the trench were described using the physical characteristics of the
soils and lithologic horizons, which included location, color (using the Munsell color scale,)
grain size, thickness, and some other general descriptions. Trench 3 was about 35 meters long
by 2 meters wide and had an average depth of 1.5 meters. The orientation of Trench 3 was
NW-SE. Two profiles were described on both ends of the Trench 3 (Figures 10, 11, 12, and
13.) Trench 3 was deepened locally at the end of the survey for better exposure of the
horizons.
Northwestern End of Trench 3
The northwest end, south wall, of Trench 3 was described in the first 1.60 meters (Figures 10
and 11.) After the description of the horizons, the trench was dug 3 meters deep to check the
continuation of the units is depth. The profile shows that from about 3.0 to about 2.03 meters,
the material consist of a 5YR 5/6 yellowish-red alluvial deposits composed by fine sand and
silty-sand. The unit has been called the parent material or the C-horizon, and contains sand
pockets and rounded gravels showing the laminar sedimentation of its fluvial origin.
From 2.03 to 0.87 meters, the unit consists of a B-C horizon, which is 2.5 Y 4/1 dark gray with
orange mottles. This horizon is a massive silty clay material with small flat pockets of very
fine sand. Some rounded small pebbles are also observed and some clay films appear
surrounding the peds. From 0.87 to 0.38 meters, a well-developed thick B-horizon appears
with high organic content. The color of this horizon is 10YR 4/1 dark gray with beige mottles.
The texture is clay rich with granular peds and clay films surrounding the peds. Some root
casts and roots are clear in the horizon. Further, some rounded grains of coarse sand and small
pebbles appear randomly. This horizon is very hard when dry. Finally, the top of this is soil
profile from 0.30 to 0.0 meters consist of an A-horizon. This is a dark gray 5Y 4/1 Dark gray
horizon. Consist of clay to silty clay with a prismatic structure. The horizon is very organic,
contains more than 10% of roots, and is very hard when dry.
Southeastern End of Trench 3
The southeastern end, south wall, of the trench was also described in the first 1.60 meters
(Figures 12 and 13.) In addition, after the description of the horizons, the trench was dug 2.2
meters deep to check the continuation of the units is depth. The profile shows that from about
2.2 to about 1.42 meters, the material consist of a 5YR 5/6 yellowish-red alluvial deposits
composed by fine sand and silty-sand. The unit has been also called the parent material or the
C-horizon, and contains sand pockets and rounded gravel showing the laminar sedimentation
of its fluvial origin.
From 1.42 to 1.32 an organic buried soil appears on top of the C-horizon. This buried soil
consist of an Ab horizon which is dark gray 10YR 4/1, clay and silty clay, prismatic, very
organic with roots. Some sand grains and medium rounded pebbles are observed randomly. A
small burned piece of bone and many baked and burned shells were in the lower to bottom of
this horizon, which were collected for dating and laboratory analysis. Covering this buried
soil, from 1.32 to 0.60 meters, another fluvial horizon appears in the profile and has been
106

called a second C horizon. This unit consists of a yellowish red 5YR 5/6 fluvial sand and silty
sand. The horizon is massive and has some thin layers and pockets of very fine sand showing
its fluvial origin. This material is very soft when wet. From 0.60 to .15 meters, a welldeveloped B-horizon appears on top of the fluvial unit or C-horizon. This is a dark gray 10YR
4/1 clay rich horizon. Some beige and olive mottles appear in the peds, which are also granular
and shows important amounts of fine roots. This horizon is very hard when dry. Finally, on top
of the profile, from 0.15 to 0.0 meters, a very organic A horizon appears, which is dark gray
5Y 4/1 clay and silty clay, with a prismatic structure with high amount of roots. This horizon is
very hard when dry.
General Interpretation of Trench 3
Based on the geologic survey and interpretation of Howles (2002) on the information available
from the borrow ditch and the small trenches 1 and 2 next to the skull (Figure 8), and the
information collected from Trench 3, this author has developed a more comprehensive
interpretation from the area. First, it is clear that in both profiles in Trench 3, the origin of the
C-horizons is a fluvial deposit. To define better the stratigraphic relationship between the
units, I have called the C-horizons or fluvial deposits fluvial unit A (FLU-A) and fluvial unit B
(FLU-B) (Figure 14.) Fluvial unit B consists of the horizon located between 2.2 and 1.42
meters and appears to be the oldest unit in the profile. On top of these units, a piece of a
burned bone, some charcoal, and some baked and burned shells were collected. Fluvial unit A
is the unit a covering the buried soil on the southeast side of the trench (see Figure 14.)
These two profiles present different sedimentary units in the recent times. Unit FLU-A does
not appear in the northwest side of the trench. The sequence of events on the profile of the
southeastern segment of the trench suggests that unit FLU-B consisted of a major fluvial
depositional event. The development of the buried soil on top of it suggests that the deposition
of FLU-B was halted and conditions for soil development began to exist. The buried soil is
just about 0.10 meters thick, which suggests that the soil conditions did not last for long time,
perhaps a few hundred years or the soil was partially eroded. Detail analysis of the top of the
buried soil did not provide evidence of its erosion on the upper part, only sudden fluvial
deposition called here the FLU-A unit. This unit represents the return of the fluvial conditions
to the system. Then, after more than 1 meter of fluvial deposition, the environmental
conditions changed again allowing the formation of a new soil profile, which has continued
under development until our days.
However, the buried soil does not appear in the northwestern side of the trench. After the
deposition of FLU-B, just the modern soil profile was developed in that side, which did not
include the development of the FLU-A unit. Correlation among these two soil profiles
suggests that the northwestern side of the trench has been more subject to recent channel
erosion and deposition where the buried soil was eroded. The southeastern side is very similar
to the stratigraphic record in the borrow ditch and Trenches A and B, meaning that has been
protected from channel erosion. Based on the stratigraphy observed in these three areas, it is
suggested here that the profile in the southeastern side should be considered as the normal
stratigraphic profile for the area, if channel erosion has not occurred. The buried soil and the
suggested unconformity are well preserved in the geologic record and can be used as
stratigraphic markers for the skulls and other future studies in the area.
Further, a channel deposit is observed next to the profile described on the Southeastern side of
the trench. The presence of the channel deposits suggests that the small piece of burned bone,
the charcoal, and the baked and burned shells located on top of the FLU-A unit were not
107

affected of recent channel erosion. These materials have been interpreted as human related
materials, probably food remains in a shell midden. The materials were located on top of the
FLU-B unit before the development of the buried soil, but were not affected by the small
channel next to them. It is suggested that the materials were deposited in a small bank next to
the small fluvial channel. As mentioned, the human materials have been submitted for
identification and dating. To review one more time the general history of the area, this would
be the suggested general sequence: a fluvial environment was developed where people came
up to eat and left food in a channel bank. Then, an incipient soil profile was developed for a
short period of time. Posterior to the soil formation, a sudden fluvial deposition came back
covering the entire area with more than a meter of fluvial deposits. If the suggested regional
unconformity suggested by Bernard and LeBlanc (1962,) and re-proposed by Howles (2002)
exists in the area that should be placed on top of the buried soil and at the bottom of the FLUA unit. After the fluvial deposition of the FLU-A unit concluded, the modern soils began to
form and have continued their development until our days. So far, it is not clear the absolute
timing of these events.
Based on the correlation between the stratigraphic record in the borrow ditch and the trench 3,
it is suggested here that the human remains found in the borrow ditch are located on top of unit
FLU-B, and were also affected by the development of the buried soil as observed by Howles
(2002.) Based on the vertical location of the skull in the borrow ditch and in Trench 3, it is
suggested that the remains cannot be connected to the modern surficial soil. The remains
should pre-date the modern soil and should pre-date the buried soil. Both, the human related
materials and the human remains appear to be deposited at the end of the deposition of unit
FLU-B, before the formation of the buried soil and the development of the unconformity reproposed by Howles (2002.)
Interpretation of the origin of the remains in the geologic context
Howles (2002) has presented the hypothesis for the origin of the archeological remains in the
SBNWR. Howles suggested that the individual was walking on the surface of the alluvial fan,
or perhaps in a swamp, in a tidal area, or perhaps in other unit of the interdistributary silt and
mud zone. Then suddenly, the person sank in the mud or perhaps in a pond induced by
spontaneous liquefaction.
Conditions or evidence of liquefaction was searched in Trench 3, mainly in FLU-B. This
search intended to confirm the hypothesis that the person sank suddenly in the ground by
quick liquefaction. No evidence of such conditions or liquefaction related features were
observed in the profiles or any kind of soft sediment deformation suggesting evidence of local
deformation. The core investigation showed that in many samples the sand content is in
average less than 50 percent, and the horizons have high contents of silt and clay (See results
in Attachment II.) The soil samples collected next to the skull (Attachment II: BZT-1 Lot 1
S13 and BZT-1 Lot 4 S4 samples) show that the materials are similar in grain size as well. The
percentage of clay and silt together is very high, reducing the chances for liquefaction. The
core information suggests that in general, that the area presents a low to moderate amount of
“clean” sand in the geologic environment. Normally the sand is mixed with fines, mostly silt.
Again, it is important to notice that no soft sediment deformation has been observed next to
the skull, which suggests that there is no evidence of sin- or post-deformation after the
establishment of the remains.
After considering all information collected in the area, it is suggested here that the origins of
the remains fit more in a hypothesis where the person was walking in a fluvial environment
108

and got mired in a very saturated mud (the FLU-B unit.) As an example, after the saturation of
the ground by water during the work in Trench 3, this author was in trouble trying to move and
walk around due to the muddy conditions of the ground. For sure, the same conditions were
found by the person several thousand years ago but in open swamps. Once the body was
entombed in the mud, more flooding events apparently covered the remains and preserved
them.
It is not clear at this moment if the buried soil is related to the suggested regional
unconformity defined by Bernard and LeBlanc (1962,) and re-proposed by Howles (2002), but
this buried soil is definitely a very important stratigraphic marker in the area. If the
unconformity exists in the area, that should be placed on top of the buried soil and at the
bottom of the FLU-A unit.
Since it is very hard to preserve a unique and regional stratigraphic marker in coastal areas,
this buried soil and the potential unconformity should be analyzed more in detail to be used as
a timing maker for other archeological discoveries in the area. If confirmed in other areas,
these stratigraphic markers could be applied to other archeological discoveries in the coastal
plains of Texas. Once the samples collected at the base of the buried soil are dated, they will
provide more precise absolute determination of the time of the environmental changes
observed at the site. At this time, the field data suggests that the buried soil apparently postdate the human remains found in the site.
Conclusion
This report has presented an interpretation of the recent geologic history in the San Bernard
Nation Wildlife Refuge. The stratigraphy collected at the borrow ditch and along the trenches
has allowed the definition of a good stratigraphic profile where the human remains can be
situated in time.
The geologic profiles described and analyzed suggest that there is a local stratigraphic marker
in the area, which consists of a buried soil, located about 1.30 to 1.40 meters deep. This buried
soil may be part of a regional unconformity suggested by Bernard and LeBlanc (1962,) but
this is not conclusive at this time in this report. If the suggested regional unconformity exists
in the area, that should be placed on top of the buried soil and at the bottom of the FLU-A unit.
The geologic record also confirms that the depositional conditions in the area have been
related to a Holocene Modern delta and fluvial environments, which have been there at least
for the last 4,500 thousands years, based on the events associated with the sea level rise. The
soil profiles observed in the trenches confirmed that sand, silt and clay were accumulated in a
sub-aerial fluvial environment and have characterized the area during the Holocene.
In general, the physical properties of the modern soils are characterized by low permeability,
high water-holding capacity, high compressibility, high to very high shrink-swell potential,
poor drainage, level to depressed relief, low shear strength, and high plasticity. This means
that under saturation, the clays and silts can develop high plasticity and swelling. Under these
conditions, we can explain that the remains could be related to a person that was mired in the
mud in the middle of an open swamp. No evidence of spontaneous liquefaction was observed
in the soil profiles in the trenches.
The stratigraphic profiles observed in the trenches suggest that the human remains cannot be
associated with the modern soil. These remains are related in time to the fluvial event that predates the formation of the buried soil. In addition, the small burned piece of bone, charcoal,
and baked and burned shells were found on top of the fluvial unit and below the buried soil.
109

This suggests the area where trench 3 was located, was in the past a channel bank and was
located close to a very important source of food for ancient people. Field evidence suggests
that people came up to eat and left residues of their meals. The dating of these materials will
help make a more precise determination of the timing of these events found in the profiles.

110

References
Allen, J.R.L. 1982. Sedimentary Structures: Their character and physical basis. Chapter 8;
Liquidization, liquidized sediment, and the sedimentation of dense particle dispersions.
Volume II. 663 pp.
Bernard, H.A., and LeBlanc, R.J. 1962. Resume of the Quaternary geology of the
northwestern Gulf of Mexico province, in Wright, H.E., and Frey, D.G., editors, The
Quaternary of the United States: Princeton, Princeton University Press, pp. 137-186.
Bernard, H.A., Major, C.F., Parrott, B.S., and LeBlanc, R.J. 1970. Recent sediments of
southeast Texas, a field guide to the Brazos alluvial and deltaic plains and the Galveston
barrier island complex. University Texas Bureau of Economic Geology Guidebook 11.
Birkeland, P.W. 1984. Soils and Geomorphology. Oxford University Press. 372 pp. New
York.
Crenweige, G.W., et al. 1981. Soil survey of Brazoria County, Texas. Washington, D.C., Soil
Conservation Service, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture.
Howles, A.C. 1987. Editor. Guidebook of environmental geology field trip. West Harris
County, Published by the Houston Geological Society, Environmental Committee.
Howles, A.C. 2002. Regional Geologic and Geomorphic Setting for the Sand Bernard Wildlife
Refuge, Brazoria County, Texas. Internal Report for Cultural Resources.
McGowen, J.H., Brown, L.F. Evans, T.J., Fisher, W.L., and Groat, C.G. 1976. Environmental
Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal Zone: Bay City-Freeport Area. 96 pp. and 12 Maps.
University of Texas Bureau of Economic Geology. Austin, Texas.
Rodriguez, A.B., Hamilton, M.D., and Anderson, J.B., 2001 in press, Evolution and facies
architecture of the Brazos Delta, Texas: wave versus flood influence. Journal of Sedimentary
Research.
Univ. of Texas Bureau of Economic Geology. 1975. Geologic atlas of Texas—Beeville-Bay
City Sheet, scale, 1:250,000.
Van Siclen, D.C. 1985. Pleistocene meander belt ridge patterns in the vicinity of Houston
Texas. Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies Transactions, vol. 35, pp. 225-232.
Youd, T. L. and Perkins, D.M. 1978. Mapping Liquefaction-Induced Ground Failure
Potential. Journal of Geotechnical Engineering. P. 433-466. Vol. 104.

111

Attachment I
A Ground Penetration Radar (GPR) Investigation was developed close to the human remains
to explore; 1) the general characteristics of the area, and 2) the definition of some potential
indicators of other human remains, the presence of a shaft, or artifacts associated with the
remains.
The survey consisted of four cross sections, which were displayed crossing the remains from
the Northwest to the Southeast. Lines 3 and 4 appear to be the best to develop a general
interpretation of the characteristics of the ground next to the human remains.
From the profiles and data showed above, we can conclude the following statements.
1. There is an anomaly in the GPR images. This anomaly is apparently very shallow and does
not show sharp or flat borders. In addition, the anomaly is not symmetric, presenting a
very amorphous shape.
2. The layers on top of the anomaly suggest that the anomaly has been covered with more
recent horizontal layers. This has to be confirmed in the field by trenching excavation. The
white layers appear to be the modern soil profile in the area.
Line 3.
3. There is an anomaly left of the main anomaly. This consist anomaly appears as a vertical
column which appears with white colors in the image. This anomaly was analyzed in
future work. No interpretation is proposed for this anomaly.
Line 4.
4. The dragged soil layers observed in Line 4, suggests that the anomaly sank and induced
negative deformation in the surrounding layers located to the southwest of the anomaly.
5. The anomaly in Line 4 extends deep in the horizontal layers. It is possible that water
saturation is affecting the record of the horizontal layers next to the anomaly inducing poor
resolution around the anomaly. That should be the reason why the anomaly has a better
definition in the image. It is suggested that the anomaly has not been affected by water and
has differences in permeability and resistivity than the surrounding layers.
6. Also, in Line 4, two small anomalies are located next to the main anomaly (marked in
yellow) that appears to be associated to changes in horizontal deposition. Out of the
anomaly area, the horizontal layers suggest that the site has been subject to the processes
associated with a low energy environment, where horizontal deposition has been the
common process.
The anomaly varies from 1.5 to 2.10 meters deep and gets bigger on lines 3 and 4. The
anomaly is a very amorphous feature that has to be investigated and verified by fieldwork and
trenching in the future.

112

Attachment I. Line 1. BZT-1
Anomaly in the Group Penetration Data next to the Remains.
113

Attachment I Line 2. BZT-1
Second profile showing the Ground Penetration Radar data and the anomaly in the data.
114

Attachment I Line 3. BZT-1
Third profile showing the Ground Penetration Radar data and the anomaly in the data.
115

Attachment I Line 4. BZT-1
Fourth profile showing the Ground Penetration Radar data and the anomaly in the data.
ATTACHMENT II.
116

This attachment provides the information developed by Howles (2002) on the soil and
sedimentological analysis of BZT-1. Some samples were collected to analyze the grain size,
color, and general composition of the materials. See Figure 5 to check the location of the areas
sampled.
Particle Size Analysis and Total Carbonates
- - - - - - - - - - - - - Percent - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Sample No.

Sand

Silt

Clay

CaCO3

Core 6 - 1’

8.2

33.9

57.9

2.0

Core 6 - 2’

6.1

32.4

61.5

5.3

Core 6 - 3’

7.3

33.1

59.6

6.2

Core 6 - 4’

3.3

32.3

64.4

15.7

Core 6 - 5’

24.7

33.7

37.6

4.8

Core 6 - 6’

25.3

49.0

25.7

10.4

Core 6 - 7’

29.3

46.4

24.3

10.3

Core 6 - 8’a

60.8

26.4

12.8

5.5

Core 6 - 8’b

23.4

55.5

21.1

10.2

Lot 1 S15*

35.3

36.6

25.1

5.4

*Sediment within the skull
The unconformity was very obvious in the field excavations, but was not as apparent within
the Core 6 samples. The unconformity was measured in the field excavations between 1.6 to
1.7 meters (5.25 to 5.6 feet) below grade level. Note the change in particle size content within
the five-foot sample (probable unconformity.) The five-foot sample was also determined to
have a calcium carbonate content of 4.8%. The samples above (4 foot) and below (6 foot)
have calcium carbonate contents of 15.7% and 10.4 %, respectively.
Next, a comparison was made between the Core 6 – 5’ boring sample and the sediment within
the skull. The particle size analysis for the skull sediment does not exactly match any of the
other samples from the boring. However, it is more similar to the Core 6’, Core 7’, and Core
8’ samples. In addition, the calcium content of the skull sediment almost exactly matches the
Core 8a’ sample.
Beneath the skull, the first two cervical vertebrae of the neck and a fragment
of the left clavicle were recovered. Their presence beneath the skull
indicated that at least the head, neck, and the clavicle appeared to be
positioned in a vertical and approximate anatomical position to one another.
The position of these bones to one another indicates that the body of the
individual was entombed in an erect position before the soft tissues had
decayed. Although not recovered, the position of the body suggests the legs,
if present, were in some flexed position. (Osteological Analysis – Final
Report, Dr. Gentry Steele, Forensic Anthropologist, Texas A&M University,
Austin, Texas.)
Due to the presence of the intact skull, the vertical position of the skeleton, and the lack of a
burial shaft, the working hypothesis is that the person was walking on the surface of the
117

alluvial fan and was instantly buried by spontaneous liquefaction. If the silty sand sediment
between six and eight feet was disturbed by this action, then the particle size analysis may
represent a composite mixing of the underlying sediment.
A third backhoe trench was dug across the channel neck to provide conclusive evidence of a
channel. While excavating the area on the natural clay levee (light green in the aerial
Photographs) a shell mound was found at a depth of 1.55 meters. The shell mound confirmed
the location as a natural levy. The trench was extended another five or six meters when moist
sand and silt sediment was encountered and the trench started to cave in. The trench was
deepened and yellowish red-brown (5YR 6/6) silty sand was encountered at an approximate
depth of 2.2 meters. Included is a view of the high-energy sands from the top of the
excavation. The sand was visually confirmed to be within the suspected channel outline
indicated in the aerial photographs.

118

Soils Analyses
Soil Characterization Laboratory
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
Richard Drees, PhD
CRC Project No. 010407
BZT-1
August 28, 2001
Samples Submitted by:
Robert P. (Bob) d’Aigle, RPA
Cultural Resource Consultants
Spring, Texas
Talked with Bob on 8-2-01 in lab and he explained the research and that samples had been
collected in connection with current research on skeletal remains in Brazoria Co, TX (Sheet
110 of Brazoria County Soil Survey.) Soil is probably Surfside or Brazoria clay.
Some decisions on analysis of soil material:
• Clay mineralogy may not show much difference in the profile, but do preliminary analysis
on strata nearest Sample of skull to compare mineralogy.
• Characterization may show more differences between strata.
• Particle size distribution.
• Carbonate analysis.
• Look at particle size on a carbonate-free basis.
Soil material in skull:
• Mineralogy.
• Particle size distribution.
• Carbonate analysis.
Samples taken for analysis (8-3-01)
Lot 4 (100g each, dried at 45OC)
• Lot 4 S1
10YR 3/1
• Lot 4 S2
10YR 3/3
calcareous
• Lot 4 S3
10YR 4/1
calcareous
• Lot 4 S4
5YR 3/3
slightly calcareous
• Lot 1 S13
10YR 3/3
calcareous
(38 g)
• Lot 1 S14
2.5YR 4/4
calcareous
(40g for characterization, 10g for mineralogy)

119

Soils Analyses
Soil Characterization Laboratory
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
Richard Drees, PhD
CRC Project No. 010407
August 28, 2001
.
Munsell Values – Wet
The following was obtained outside on a partly cloudy day. Colors may vary with bright
sunlight:
Core 6 1' - 10YR 3/1
Core 6 2' - 10YR 3/1 but zones of 7.5YR 4/4
Core 6 3' - 10YR 4/2 but portions have 7.5YR 4/3
Core 6 4' - 5YR 5/5 and portions of 10YR 3/1 and 7.5YR 4/6
Core 6 5' - 10YR 3/1 and portions of 7.5YR 4/4
Core 6 6' - 5YR 4/6
Core 6 7' - 5YR 4/6
Core 6 8a' - 5YR 5/6
Core 6 8b' - 5YR 4/6

Lot 4 S1 - 10YR 3/1
Lot 4 S2 - 10YR 3/3 and 5YR 4/4
Lot 4 S3 - 10YR 3/1 and 5YR 4/6
Lot 4 S4 - 5YR 3/3
Lot 1 S1- 5 5YR 4/4
Lot 1 S13 - 7.5YR 4/2 and 7.5YR 3/2
Lot 1 S14 - 5YR 4/6

120

Samples Dried at 45OC
Took 50g from each sample of Core 6 for analysis:
Core 6 1’ - 10YR 4/1
Core 6 2’ - 10YR 4/1 but zones of 10YR 5/3
Core 6 3’ - 10YR 4/1 but portions have 7.5YR /3
Core 6 4’ - 5YR 5/6
Core 6 5’ - 10YR 4/1 and portions 5YR 4/4
Core 6 6’ - 2.5YR 4/4
Core 6 7’ - 5YR 5/4
Core 6 8a’ - 2.5YR 5/6
Core 6 8b’ - 2.5YR 5/6
Additional samples
Lot 1 S15 - 5YR 4/3 (30g)

calcareous
calcareous
slightly calcareous
calcareous
non calcareous
calcareous
calcareous
calcareous
calcareous

new sample from skull interior

calcareous

NOTE – carbonate status estimated by 1M HCl test, no quantitative estimate

121

Soil Characterization Lab, Texas A&M University
Particle Size Analysis and Total Carbonates
October 16, 2001
CRC Project No. 010407

Sample
Core 6 1’
Core 6 2’
Core 6 3’
Core 6 4’
Core 6 5’
Core 6 6’
Core 6 7’
Core 6 8’a
Core 6 8’b

- - - - - - - - - - - - - Percent - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Sand
Silt
Clay
CaCO3
8.2
33.9
57.9
2.0
6.1
32.4
61.5
5.3
7.3
33.1
59.6
6.2
3.3
32.3
64.4
15.7
24.7
37.7
37.6
1.8
25.3
49.0
25.7
10.4
29.3
46.4
24.3
10.3
60.8
26.4
12.8
5.5
23.4
55.5
21.1
10.2

Lot 1 S13
27.8
Lot 1 S14 (interior) 36.8
Lot 1 S15 (interior) 35.3

34.4
35.3
39.6

37.8
27.9
25.1

6.5
5.0
5.4

Lot 4 S1
Lot 4 S2
Lot 4 S3
Lot 4 S4

28.3
31.3
29.8
39.0

65.2
61.9
57.0
37.9

4.5
8.8
5.0
1.0

6.5
6.8
13.2
23.1

NOTE 1 – In all samples the vast majority (>80%) of sand was in the very fine fraction (0.10.05mm)

122

Soil Characterization Lab, Texas A&M University
Particle Size Analysis and Total Carbonates
October 16, 2001
CRC Project No. 010407

Sample
Core 6 1’
Core 6 2’
Core 6 3’
Core 6 4’
Core 6 5’
Core 6 6’
Core 6 7’
Core 6 8’a
Core 6 8’b

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Percent - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - vfs
Sand
fsi
Silt
fc
Clay
5.4
8.2
23.9 33.9
34.3 57.9
4.2
6.1
24.4 32.4
37.1 61.5
4.9
7.3
24.9 33.1
34.5 59.6
1.8
3.3
27.1 32.3
32.5 64.4
19.1 24.7
23.0 37.7
24.2 37.6
20.8 25.3
30.7 49.0
14.5 25.7
26.9 29.3
25.7 46.4
13.5 24.3
57.2 60.8
9.7 26.4
7.4 12.8
21.8 23.4
31.5 55.5
11.2 21.1

% CaCO3
Equivalent
2.0
5.3
6.2
15.7
1.8
10.4
10.3
5.5
10.2

Lot 1 S13
Lot 1 S14
Lot 1 S15

18.5
31.7
30.6

27.8
36.8
35.3

23.5
19.7
19.5

34.4
35.3
39.6

23.4
15.9
14.2

37.8
27.9
25.1

6.5
5.0
5.4

Lot 4 S1
Lot 4 S2
Lot 4 S3
Lot 4 S4

3.7
4.3
10.2
18.1

6.5
6.8
13.2
23.1

22.8
25.7
22.2
25.4

28.3
31.3
29.8
39.0

36.9
37.8
33.6
24.8

65.2
61.9
57.0
37.9

4.5
8.8
5.0
1.0

NOTE – vfs = very fine sands (0.1-0.05mm); Sand = total sand (2-0.05mm)
fsi = fine silt (0.02-0.002mm); Silt = total silt (0.05-0.002mm)
fc = fine clay (<0.0002mm); Clay = total clay (<0.002mm)

123

Study Area

N

Gulf of Mexico

Figure 1:. Location of the San Bernard Wildlife Refuge, Brazoria County, Texas.

124

A
Area of
Study

B
E

D
C

GEOLOGIC UNITS:
A. Fluvial sand and flood basin mud
B. Interdistributary silt and mud
C. Fresh to brackish water marsh
D. Abandoned channel mud-filled
E. Levee and crevasse deposits, silt mud and sand, barren
Figure 2:
Geologic Units of the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge Area (From McGowen et.
al., 1976.)
125

Study Area

Group I

Figure 3:
Map of the Physical Properties of the geologic materials and soils located in the study
area (From McGowen et. al., 1976.) Area corresponds to Group I. See text for details.
126

A

Borrow
Ditch

Intermittent
Channel

Location of
the Human
Remains

Irrigation
Channel

Figure 4A:
This oblique aerial photography shows the general location of the human remains at he
BZT-1 site in the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge. It also shows the relationship
between the location of the human remains and an intermittent channel in the area.

127

B

A pp rox im ated
location o f
T ren ch 3

Inte rm itten t
C h an n el

L o catio n o f the
H u m an R e m ain s
and T renches 1 A
and 1 B

Figure 4B:
Figure 4B shows an oblique aerial photography showing the specific location of the
Human Remains and the Trench A and B. Also, notice approximate location of Trench 3.
128

B--5
B-5

B--6
B-4
B--4
B-6

B--3

B--2

B--1

Figure 5:
Location of the cores collected close to the human remains at BZT-1 site. See attachment
II for the data.
129

Figure 6:
Photo of Trench A showing the stratigraphy close to the human remains at site BZT-1.
Notice the high clay content in the walls of the trench.
130

Strata 1

Strata 2

Skull

Suggested
Unconformity
Strata 3

Figure 7:
Photography from the borrow ditch showing the strata found in the area and the
location of the skull (BZT-1.) Notice the position of the skull in the unit called
“unconformity” by Howles (2002.)
131

Figure 8:
Stratigraphic profile developed by Howles (2002) defining the strata next to the human
remains at the NZT-1 site. Notice the location of the skull in the profile.
132

Figure 9:
Photo of Trench 3. Picture was taken from the Northwest. Cars are located on the
Southeast.
133

Figure 10:
Photography shows the profile observed on the northwestern side of Trench 3. Trench
was about 3 meters deep. Notice the FLU-B unit in occupying the bottom of the profile.
134

Norwest Side of Trench 3

NW
0.0
cm

0-38 cm: A Horizon. Dark gray 5Y 4/1, clay and clay loam,
prismatic, very organic with roots. Very hard when dry.

38-87 cm: B Horizon. Dark gray 10YR 4/1, clay rich, with
granular peds with clay films and beige and olive mottles,
very organic with roots. Some rounded grains of sand and
small pebles. Very hard when dry.

50

100

87-203 cm: B-C Horizon. Dark gray 2.5Y 4/1, massive silty
clay and silt with red mottles, thin pockets of very fine sand,
some rounded grains of small pebles. Very soft when wet.
150

FLU-B
300

203-300> cm: C Horizon. Yellowish red 5YR 5/6, fluvial sand
and silt. Massive with layers and pockets of very fine sand and
rounded gravels. Very soft when wet.

Figure 11:
Soil and Geologic Profile of the Northwestern portion of Trench 3. Notice the location of
the FLU-B unit.

135

FLU-A

Suggested
Unconformity

Buried Soil
FLU-B

Figure 12:
Photography from Trench 3 shows the stratigraphic profile on the wall of the trench.
The white spots are the areas where some charcoal and baked shells were collected for
analysis (BZT-2.) Notice the muddy conditions at the bottom of the FLU-B unit.
136

Southeast Side of Trench 3
SE
0.0
cm

0-15 cm: A Horizon. Dark gray 5Y 4/1, clay and silty-clay,
prismatic, very organic with roots. Very hard when dry.

50

15-60 cm: B Horizon. Dark gray 10YR 4/1 clay with beige
mottles, clay rich and granular peds with clay films, granular,
very organic with roots. Some rounded grains of sand and
small pebles. Very hard when dry.

100

60-132 cm: C Horizon. Yellowish red 5YR 5/6 fluvial sand and
silt. Massive with layers and pockets of very fine sand and
rounded gravels. Very soft when wet.

FLU-A

132-142 cm: Buried A Horizon. Dark gray 10YR 4/1, clay,
silty-clay, prismatic, very organic with roots. Sand grains and
medium pebbles. Also, burned bone, charcoal, and baked
shells at the base.
150

FLU-B

142-160> cm: Buried C Horizon. Yellowish red 5YR 5/6
fluvial sand and silt. Massive with layers and pockets of very
fine sand and rounded gravels. Very soft when wet.

300

Figure 13.
Soil and Geologic Profile of the Southeastern portion of Trench 3. Notice the location of
the FLU-A and FLU-B units.
137

NW

SE

0.0
cm

0.0
cm

50

50

100

100

FLU-A

150

150

FLU-B

FLU-B
300

300

Figure 14.
Comparison of the Soil and Geologic Profiles of the Northwestern (NW) and
Southeastern (SE) portions of Trench 3. Notice the location of the FLU-A and FLU-B
units in both profiles. FLU-A does not appear in the Northwestern side.
138

Preliminary Ground Penetrating Radar Analysis

Mustafa Sarabudak, PhD
Geophysicist
February 2002
BZT-1
GSSi GPR instrument with 400 MHz antenna
Profile at each 2.5 feet interval. Four transects

139

Preliminary GPR Recordings

140

141

142

143

Soils Analyses
Soil Characterization Laboratory
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
Richard Drees, PhD
CRC Project No. 010407
BZT-1
August 28, 2001
Samples Submitted by:
Robert P. (Bob) d’Aigle, RPA
Cultural Resource Consultants
Spring, Texas
Talked with Bob on 8-2-01 in lab and he explained the research and that samples had been
collected in connection with current research on skeletal remains in Brazoria Co, TX (Sheet
110 of Brazoria County Soil Survey.) Soil is probably Surfside or Brazoria clay.
Some decisions on analysis of soil material:
• Clay mineralogy may not show much difference in the profile, but do preliminary analysis
on strata nearest Sample of skull to compare mineralogy.
• Characterization may show more differences between strata.
• Particle size distribution.
• Carbonate analysis.
• Look at particle size on a carbonate-free basis.
Soil material in skull:
• Mineralogy.
• Particle size distribution.
• Carbonate analysis.
Samples taken for analysis (8-3-01)
Lot 4 (100g each, dried at 45OC)
• Lot 4 S1
10YR 3/1
• Lot 4 S2
10YR 3/3
calcareous
• Lot 4 S3
10YR 4/1
calcareous
• Lot 4 S4
5YR 3/3
slightly calcareous
• Lot 1 S13
10YR 3/3
calcareous
(38 g)
• Lot 1 S14
2.5YR 4/4
calcareous
(40g for characterization, 10g for mineralogy)

144

Soils Analyses
Soil Characterization Laboratory
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
Richard Drees, PhD
CRC Project No. 010407
August 28, 2001
.
Munsell Values – Wet
The following was obtained outside on a partly cloudy day. Colors may vary with bright
sunlight:
Lot 6, Samples 1-8
Core 6 1' - 10YR 3/1
Core 6 2' - 10YR 3/1 but zones of 7.5YR 4/4
Core 6 3' - 10YR 4/2 but portions have 7.5YR 4/3
Core 6 4' - 5YR 5/5 and portions of 10YR 3/1 and 7.5YR 4/6
Core 6 5' - 10YR 3/1 and portions of 7.5YR 4/4
Core 6 6' - 5YR 4/6
Core 6 7' - 5YR 4/6
Core 6 8a' - 5YR 5/6
Core 6 8b' - 5YR 4/6
Lot 1 S1- 5 5YR 4/4
Lot 1 S13 - 7.5YR 4/2 and 7.5YR 3/2
Lot 1 S14 - 5YR 4/6
Lot 4 S1 - 10YR 3/1
Lot 4 S2 - 10YR 3/3 and 5YR 4/4
Lot 4 S3 - 10YR 3/1 and 5YR 4/6
Lot 4 S4 - 5YR 3/3

145

Samples Dried at 45OC
Took 50g from each sample of Core 6 for analysis:
Lot 6 Samples 1-8
Core 6 1’ - 10YR 4/1
Core 6 2’ - 10YR 4/1 but zones of 10YR 5/3
Core 6 3’ - 10YR 4/1 but portions have 7.5YR /3
Core 6 4’ - 5YR 5/6
Core 6 5’ - 10YR 4/1 and portions 5YR 4/4
Core 6 6’ - 2.5YR 4/4
Core 6 7’ - 5YR 5/4
Core 6 8a’ - 2.5YR 5/6
Core 6 8b’ - 2.5YR 5/6

calcareous
calcareous
slightly calcareous
calcareous
non calcareous
calcareous
calcareous
calcareous
calcareous

Additional samples
Lot 1 S15 - 5YR 4/3 (30g) new sample from skull interior

calcareous

NOTE – carbonate status estimated by 1M HCl test, no quantitative estimate

146

Soil Characterization Lab, Texas A&M University
Particle Size Analysis and Total Carbonates
October 16, 2001
CRC Project No. 010407

Sample
Core 6 1’
Core 6 2’
Core 6 3’
Core 6 4’
Core 6 5’
Core 6 6’
Core 6 7’
Core 6 8’a
Core 6 8’b

- - - - - - - - - - - - - Percent - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Sand
Silt
Clay
CaCO3
8.2
33.9
57.9
2.0
6.1
32.4
61.5
5.3
7.3
33.1
59.6
6.2
3.3
32.3
64.4
15.7
24.7
37.7
37.6
1.8
25.3
49.0
25.7
10.4
29.3
46.4
24.3
10.3
60.8
26.4
12.8
5.5
23.4
55.5
21.1
10.2

Lot 1 S13
27.8
Lot 1 S14 (interior) 36.8
Lot 1 S15 (interior) 35.3

34.4
35.3
39.6

37.8
27.9
25.1

6.5
5.0
5.4

Lot 4 S1
Lot 4 S2
Lot 4 S3
Lot 4 S4

28.3
31.3
29.8
39.0

65.2
61.9
57.0
37.9

4.5
8.8
5.0
1.0

6.5
6.8
13.2
23.1

NOTE 1 – In all samples the vast majority (>80%) of sand was in the very fine fraction (0.10.05mm)

147

Soil Characterization Lab, Texas A&M University
Particle Size Analysis and Total Carbonates
October 16, 2001
CRC Project No. 010407

Sample
Core 6 1’
Core 6 2’
Core 6 3’
Core 6 4’
Core 6 5’
Core 6 6’
Core 6 7’
Core 6 8’a
Core 6 8’b

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Percent - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - vfs
Sand
fsi
Silt
fc
Clay
5.4
8.2
23.9 33.9
34.3 57.9
4.2
6.1
24.4 32.4
37.1 61.5
4.9
7.3
24.9 33.1
34.5 59.6
1.8
3.3
27.1 32.3
32.5 64.4
19.1 24.7
23.0 37.7
24.2 37.6
20.8 25.3
30.7 49.0
14.5 25.7
26.9 29.3
25.7 46.4
13.5 24.3
57.2 60.8
9.7 26.4
7.4 12.8
21.8 23.4
31.5 55.5
11.2 21.1

% CaCO3
Equivalent
2.0
5.3
6.2
15.7
1.8
10.4
10.3
5.5
10.2

Lot 1 S13
Lot 1 S14
Lot 1 S15

18.5
31.7
30.6

27.8
36.8
35.3

23.5
19.7
19.5

34.4
35.3
39.6

23.4
15.9
14.2

37.8
27.9
25.1

6.5
5.0
5.4

Lot 4 S1
Lot 4 S2
Lot 4 S3
Lot 4 S4

3.7
4.3
10.2
18.1

6.5
6.8
13.2
23.1

22.8
25.7
22.2
25.4

28.3
31.3
29.8
39.0

36.9
37.8
33.6
24.8

65.2
61.9
57.0
37.9

4.5
8.8
5.0
1.0

NOTE – vfs = very fine sands (0.1-0.05mm); Sand = total sand (2-0.05mm)
fsi = fine silt (0.02-0.002mm); Silt = total silt (0.05-0.002mm)
fc = fine clay (<0.0002mm); Clay = total clay (<0.002mm)

148

Osteological Analysis
D. Gentry Steele
Department of Anthropology
Texas A&M University
June 24, 2002
BZT-1
The partial skeleton of one prehistoric human remains was discovered in a borrow ditch
construction area at San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge, Angleton, Texas. In addition to
these remains, a metapodial was recovered in the vicinity of the partial skeleton. This
metapodial could not be assigned with any assurance to this one individual.
The Skeletal Remains
After the inadvertent discovery of the remains in 1999, a photograph was taken with a
recovered metapodial fragment and other unidentifiable bone fragments placed on top of the
skull. From this photograph, the metapodial could not be more precisely identified nor could it
be unequivocally assigned to the same individual as represented by the partially exposed skull.
An initial examination of the photographs of the superior view of the skull, taken when the
skeletal remains were first exposed by a controlled archaeological excavation in May 2001,
documented that at least one individual was present at the site and represented minimally by
an articulated braincase.
After examining Photograph: 2 and five fragments of the braincase (Photograph: 3,) the site
was reopened in August 2001 to determine if the partially exposed skull was part of an
intentional burial, or if the skull had been transported to the area by some natural cause, such
as flooding, and was then covered by the naturally occurring processes of sedimentation in the
area. During this visit to the site, additional fragments of the braincase and of bone and teeth
beneath the braincase were recovered and initially examined in the field to avoid unnecessary
disturbance of the remains. In addition to the bones of the braincase, fragments of the maxilla
and mandible and associated teeth, the left clavicle and the first two vertebrae of the neck were
recovered (Tables: 1 and 2) (Photographs: 4-10.)
State of Preservation
In August 2001, the recovered human remains were transported to the archaeology laboratory
at Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas for in-depth analysis. The cranial elements
surrounding the braincase were complete but thoroughly fragmented. The left maxilla was
represented by one small fragment with the two premolars, and the first and second molars
still imbedded in their sockets. A fragment of the right horizontal ramus and three small
fragments of the ascending ramus of the mandible represented the mandible. The clavicle was
represented by a short segment of the shaft, and two single elements represented the two
vertebrae. The rest of the bones recovered were small unidentifiable fragments typically 1.0
cm in diameter or less. Four of the teeth were recovered in the maxilla and were complete.
Their complete crowns and portions of their roots represented three additional teeth. In
addition to the complete teeth, three fragments of enamel were found (Photographs: 4-10.) The
recovery of fragments of the maxilla with some of the teeth still embedded in the bone,
fragments of the mandible, and four teeth indicated that the skull was present and appeared to
be at least partially intact.
Beneath the skull, the first two cervical vertebrae of the neck and a fragment of the left
clavicle were recovered. Their presence beneath the skull indicated that at least the head, neck,
149

and the clavicle appeared to be positioned in a vertical and approximate anatomical position to
one another. The position of these bones to one another indicates that the body of the
individual was entombed in an erect position before the soft tissues had decayed. Although
not recovered, the position of the body suggests the legs, if present, were in some flexed
position.
The fragmentation of the skeletal remains occurred post mortem. The swelling and shrinking
of the surrounding clay matrix and possibly the compacting of the overlying sediments from
human and nonhuman foot traffic, or from heavy farm machinery, are plausible causes of the
fragmentation. Root damage in all probability also played a role in the fragmentation of the
skeletal elements.
No gnaw marks by rodents were observed nor was there any evidence of other scavengers
having gnawed on the bone. Similarly, no cut marks were noticed. Further, based on the
condition of the skull, two vertebrae elements, and clavicle fragment, there is no indication of
cremation.
Characteristics of the Individual
During the initial investigation, I estimated the sex of the individual to be a male. This
preliminary assessment was based upon the relatively prominent muscle markings on the
occipital fragment that was available at that time. After a later examination of more fragments
of the cranium, I concluded the individual was more likely a female. My revised estimate as
female is based upon the relatively small size of all of the skull fragments recovered
suggesting a cranium of modest size, a reassessment of the markings where the muscles of
the neck attach to the occipital region of the skull as being more moderate than previously
thought, and the slight development of the brow ridge indicated on the recovered frontal
fragment. Because of the small amount of the cranium recovered and its highly fragmented
state, the assessment of the individual as being a female is equivocal.
The individual appeared to have been an adolescent or early adult based upon the observation
that the sutures uniting the superior portion of the braincase appeared to have been unfused or
in an early stage of fusing. The presence of extreme shoveling of one lateral incisor is
indicative of North American Indian or Asian population affinity. Currently, there are not
enough skeletal remains to assess whether the individual more closely resembled previously
recovered Paleo-Indian of similar antiquity or recent Native Americans. No medical disorders
were observed on the bone, nor were caries or dental hyperplasia observed on the teeth.

150

TABLE 1:
BONE INVENTORY OF THE HUMAN REMAINS RECOVERED.
Parietals: right and left
Temporal: right and left
Frontal
Occipital
Maxillary fragment with left M2, M1, P2, P1
Mandible fragment
Cervical vertebrae 1 and 2
Clavicle fragment
166 unidentified bone fragments
TABLE 2:
TEETH RECOVERED FROM AREA BENEATH SKULL
Left maxillary second molar
Left maxillary first molar
Left maxillary second premolar
Left maxillary first premolar
Left maxillary canine
Right maxillary second incisor
Right first premolar
Right second premolar
Mandibular premolar fragment, side and number indeterminate
Enamel fragment of premolar or molar
Two fragments of a single rooted tooth

151

PROTEIN RESIDUE ANALYSIS OF A BONE FRAGMENT AND SOIL SAMPLES
FROM BRAZORIA COUNTY, TEXAS

By
Kathryn Puseman
Paleo Research Institute
Golden, Colorado

Paleo Research Institute Technical Report 01-60

Prepared For
Robert P. d’Aigle, RPA
CRC, International Archaeology & Ecology, LLC
Spring, Texas
August 2001

152

Introduction
A bone fragment recovered from a possible human cranium found at Site BZT-1 in
Brazoria County, Texas, and soil samples from areas adjacent to the cranium were tested for
the presence of human proteins.
Methods
The bone fragment and soil samples analyzed for protein residues were tested using an
immunologically based technique referred to as cross over immunoelectrophoresis (CIEP or
COE.) The method for CIEP is based on forensic work by Culliford (1964, 1971) with
changes made by Newman (Newman and Julig 1989) following the procedure used by the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police Serology Laboratory in Toronto, Canada. Further changes
were made at Paleo Research Labs following the advice of Dr. Richard Marlar at the
Thrombosis Research Laboratory in the Denver VA Medical Center and the University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center.
The bone fragment (sample BZT-1/010407-L3-S5) was added to 1.5 ml of a 0.02M
Tris hydrochloride, 0.5M sodium chloride, and 0.5% Triton X-100 solution, then refrigerated
for approximately 2 weeks prior to testing. A portion of soil samples BZT-1/010407-L1-S2,
BZT-1/010407-L1-S5, and BZT-1/010407-L1-S9 were combined into a single sample and
added to 5 ml of the Tris/NaCl/Triton solution, then refrigerated for several days prior to
testing.
The residues extracted from the bone and soil control first were tested against preimmune goat serum (serum from a non-immunized animal) to detect non-specific binding of
proteins. Both samples yielded negative results to pre-immune serum. The samples then were
tested against prepared animal antisera obtained from ICN Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and Sigma
Chemical Company. Appropriate positive and negative controls were run for each gel. A
positive control consists of the blood of each species tested, and a negative control consists of
the blood of the species in which the antiserum was raised.
CIEP is performed using agarose gel as the medium. Two holes are punched in the gel
about 5 mm apart. The protein extract from the artifact is placed in the cathodic well and the
antiserum is placed in the anodic well. The sample is electrophoresed in Barbital buffer (pH
8.6) for 45 minutes at a voltage of 130v to drive the antigens and antibodies towards each
other. Positive reactions appear as a line of precipitation between the two wells. Gels are
stained with coomassie blue to make the precipitate line easier to see. Positive reactions were
re-tested with dilute antisera that are diluted to increase specificity of reactions, usually 1:10
or 1:20.
Discussion and Conclusion
A small portion of bone from a possible human cranium (sample BZT-1/010407-L3S5) found in Brazoria County, Texas, was submitted for protein residue analysis (Table 1.)
Soil samples BZT-1/010407-L1-S2, BZT-1/010407-L1-S5, and BZT-1/010407-L1-S9 were
collected from areas adjacent to the cranium and combined to create a single sample. Both of
these samples were tested against the various antisera listed in Table 2. The extract from the
bone fragment (sample BZT-1/010407-L3-S5) yielded a positive result to straight, undilute
human antiserum. The soil sample also yielded a positive result to human antiserum, both
straight and diluted 1:20, indicating the presence of human proteins for both the bone fragment
153

and the soil sample.
TABLE 1
PROVENIENCE DATA FOR SAMPLES FROM BZT-1, TEXAS

Sample No.

Description

Analysis

BZT-1/010407-L3-S5

Bone fragment from northern Protein residue
portion of a possible human cranium

BZT-1/010407-L1-S2

Soil samples from areas adjacent to Protein residue
the cranium combined to create a
single soil sample for analysis

BZT-1/010407-L1-S5
BZT-1/010407-L1-S9

TABLE 2
LIST OF ANTISERA USED IN TESTING A BONE FRAGMENT AND
SOIL SAMPLES FROM BRAZORIA COUNTY, TEXAS

ANTISERA

SOURCE

ANIMALS:
Bear

ICN Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

Bison

Prepared under the direction of Dr. Richard
Marlar at the University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center

Bovine

Sigma Chemical Company

Cat

Sigma Chemical Company

Deer

ICN Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

Dog

Sigma Chemical Company

Goat

Sigma Chemical Company

Guinea pig

Sigma Chemical Company

Human

ICN Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

Rabbit

Sigma Chemical Company

Sheep

ICN Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

154

REFERENCES CITED
Culliford, Brian J.
1964

Precipitation

Reactions

in

Forensic

Problems. Nature 201:1092-1094.
1971 The Examination and Typing of Bloodstains in the Crime Laboratory.
US Department of Justice, US Government Printing Office, Stock 2700-0083,
Washington, D.C.
Newman, M. and P. Julig
1989 The Identification of Protein Residues on Lithic Artifacts from a Stratified Boreal
Forest
Site. Canadian Journal of Archaeology 13:119-132.

155

DNA Analysis
Human Remains, San Bernard National Wildlife Reserve, Brazoria County, Texas
Wera M. Schmerer, PhD,
Doctrix Rerum Naturalium
Armed Forces DNA Identification Laboratory
Rockville, MD
The human remains as found in the National Wildlife Reserve, Brazoria County, Texas, were
submitted to the Armed Forces DNA Identification Laboratory (Rockville, MD) for DNA
detection and analysis respectively.

The human remains
The human remains are represented by a partial skeleton consisting of a fractured cranium
(BZT1L3I12), a premolar (BZT1L3I8), an Axis vertebra (BZT1L3I7) in original condition –
with soil traces attached - and two further – cleaned – cranial fragments (BZT1L3I4 and
BZT1L3I5).
For DNA analysis the samples showing the best state of bone preservation – with the therefore
comparably highest probability to contain DNA in analyzable state of preservation - were
selected, as represented by sample BZT1L3I7 (sample 7 – picture 1), BZT1L3I8 (sample 8 –
picture 2), and a sub-sample of BZT1L3I12 represented by a single cranial fragment (sample
12.1 – picture 3).

State of Preservation and Visual Aspect
Samples in general were wet, soft and easily deformable to the touch. Hence, material selected
for DNA analysis was dried prior to further processing.
Removal of adhering soil and exposed surfaces of these samples reveled dark brownish-black
patches, representing sites of intense decomposition.
Sample Preparation
In the case of samples 7 and 12.1, sampling was carried out using a saw-bow. With sample 8,
the crown was separated from the root using a scalpel, and only the root – the DNA containing
part of the tooth – was subjected to further processing.
Adhering soil and exposed surfaces were removed using a sterile scalpel, and the bone or tooth
was UV-irradiated for additional decontamination. The samples were then ground in a mixermill (MM200, Retsch) to a fine powder.
156

Preparation and analysis of nucleic acids
DNA Extraction
For DNA isolation from several aliquots, each pulverized bone or tooth sample the following
two protocols were applied:
1.The AFDIL forensic standard protocol for extraction of DNA from dried bone (e.g. Gabriel
et al. 2000):
0.3g bone or tooth powder was incubated at 56°C overnight with extraction buffer and
proteinase K. DNA was extracted with phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol, then extracted
with n-butanol, and subsequently purified and concentrated using Centricon-30 concentrators.
2. An ancient DNA research protocol optimized for extraction of DNA from historical and
ancient skeletal remains (Schmerer et al. 1999, Schmerer 2001):
0.3g bone or tooth powder was decalcified in EDTA solution for four days. The resulting
liquid was subjected to proteinase K incubation, extraction with phenol/chloroform/isoamyl
alcohol, extraction with chloroform, and DNA precipitation in the presence of isopropanol,
sodium acetate and silica, followed by purification with ethanol.
Depending on the amount of powder derived from grinding the material, one to five extracts
each sample was prepared.

DNA Amplification and
Analysis of Amplification Products
For detection and analysis of potentially preserved DNA respectively, a number of protocols
designed for the detection of trace amounts of severely degraded DNA were applied, targeting
both, chromosomal and mitochondrial DNA:
1. Chromosomal DNA:
The forensic STR (Short Tandem Repeat) locus HUMVWA (Kimpton et al. 1992) was
amplified using an ancient DNA research protocol (Schmerer et al. 1999) optimized following
the recommendations given in Schmerer (2000 and in press) for further improvement of STR
amplification from highly degraded DNA.
Furthermore a commercial forensic multiplex kit (ProfilerPlus, Applied Biosystems) and a
second multiplex reaction composed of STR (Short Tandem Repeats) primers re-designed for
the amplification of small amplicons from degraded DNA (Butler & Becker 2001) were
applied.
157

In addition a single-plex amplification using re-designed primers for the locus TH01 (Butler &
Becker 2001) was applied using a protocol adapted for the amplification of this locus from
ancient DNA (Schmerer et al. 1999).
Products of these amplifications were analyzed by capillary electrophoretic separation using a
3100 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). The resulting data was processed with
Genescan 3.7 (Applied Biosystems) and Genotyper 3.7 (Applied Biosystems).
2. Mitochondrial DNA:
For the amplification of mitochondrial DNA a so-called mini-primer set (Gabriel et al. 2001;
MPS3A) was applied. Primer sets like this were designed with special emphasis to
amplification of short mitochondrial DNA sequences. These are used when severe degradation
prevents the detection of sequence fragments in a size as targeted by primer systems
commonly used in forensic mtDNA analysis.
Products of these amplifications were analyzed by electrophoretic separation in agarose gels,
DNA specific stained with ethidium bromide and visualized by UV-transillumination.
Each extract was amplified in multiple aliquots per locus or multiplex system applied.

Results and Perspectives
Examples for amplification products as derived from extracts of the human remains
investigated are shown in pictures 4 and 5.
Though multiple extracts each sample were subjected to a variety of PCR-based protocols as
applied in the forensic and “ancient DNA” context, the presence of detectable DNA could not
be proven. Among the protocols applied, the two shown in pictures 4 and 5 represent
amplifications of one locus per reaction, targeting very small DNA sequences and therefore
generally are the most promising protocols for the analysis of highly degraded DNA.
In context with these results it has to be kept in mind, that the preservation of DNA in bone is
related to the compactness (portion of substancia compacta; dense compact bone structure) of
the respective skeletal element. Within a skeleton, the femur and humerus represent the most
compact structures. Here especially the mid shaft region is built up by a comparably thick,
dense layer of compact bone, which is less prone to infiltration from the environment and
therefore generally shows the best conditions for DNA preservation. In comparison to these,
the skeletal elements accessible for analysis represent those of low density or compactness.
Consequently the possibility for a successful detection and analysis of DNA from the human
remains would be significantly increased with access to the long bones - femur or humerus -

158

belonging to the skeleton; thus opening up a possibility for a DNA-based affiliation of this
individual to its population of origin.

Picture 1: BZT1LI317 (S7)

159

Picture 2: BZT1LI318 (S8)

Picture 3: BZT1LI3I12 (S12.1)

160

Allelic Ladder

No-template Control

Sample 7 – Extract 1

Sample 7 – Extract 2

Sample 12.1 – Extract 1

Sample 12.1 – Extract 2

Sample 12.1 – Extract 3

Positive Control

Picture 4: Amplifications results for multiple extracts of two samples at the STR locus HUMTH01
using a small amplicon primer pair. Capillary electrophoresis, 3100 Genetic Analyzer (ABI). Locus
specific products are represented by labeled peaks. The first lane shows a ladder of all observed alleles
at this locus, while the last lame contains a standard DNA sample used as positive control for the
amplification reaction. Lane two contains a no-template control proving the absence of contamination
in the reaction set-up. Lanes three to seven show amplifications from multiple extracts prepared from
the human remains investigated.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

← locus specific product

Picture 5: Results of the amplification of a 126bp mitochondrial DNA fragment from the
hypervariable region 2 (HV2). Agarose gel electrophoresis, ethidium bromide staining. Locus

161

specific products are represented by bands as indicated. Again, lane 1 shows a DNA fragment ladder
used as size standard. Lane 9 contains the positive control. No-template controls are to be found in
lanes 7 and 8 proving the absence of contaminating DNA. Lanes 2-6 show amplification products
derived from the human remains.

Literature cited:
Butler JM, Becker CH (2001) Improved analysis of DNA short tandem repeats with time-offlight mass spectrometry. Science and technology research report, NIJ, NCJ 188292
Gabriel MN, Huffine EF, Ryan JH, Holland MM, Parsons TJ (2001) Improved mtDNA
sequence analysis of forensic remains using a "mini-primer set" amplification strategy.
Forensic Sci 46(2): 247-53
Schmerer WM (2000) Optimierung der STR-Genotypenanalyse an Extrakten alter DNA aus
bodengelagertem menschlichen Skelettmaterial. Cuvillier, Göttingen
Schmerer WM (2001) Optimized DNA extraction from ancient human bones improves
reproducibility of STR-genotyping of highly degraded ancient DNA. Technical Tips Online
1(116):T02124 (http://www.elsevier.com/locate/tto)
Schmerer WM (in press) Reduction of shadow band synthesis during PCR amplification of
repetitive sequences from modern and ancient DNA. In: Bartlett JMS, Stirling D (eds.) PCR
protocols: Methods & applications. 2nd edition. Humana Press, Totowa, NY
Schmerer WM, Hummel S, Herrmann B (1999) Optimised DNA extraction to improve
reproducibility of STR genotyping with highly degraded DNA as target. Electrophoresis
20(8): 1712-1716

162

Table 1:
163

July 28. 2002

Robert P. d'Aigle, RPA
CRC, International Archaeology & Ecology. LLC
19700 Hickory Twig Way, Suite M-76
Spring, Texas 77388-6250
Dear Mr. d'Aigle:
The following are my interpretations for AMS radiocarbon analyses I performed on
sediments from site BZT-1 as well as laboratory observations on BZT-1 human bone that was
submitted, but not processed for 14C dating.
The bone received from BZT-1 comprised two human petrous bones, one of which the
University of Arizona had dated. A total of 892.8 mg were chemically processed at SRL, Inc.,
with the eventual decision being not to date the specimen by AMS 14C methods. The bone
was white, soft and porous. The decalcification solution was pale yellow, an indication of
ferric iron. Upon freeze-drying, the HCl-insoluble residue showed the dominant presence of
salts and oxides of iron and manganese. Consequently, the bone was termed not suitable for
radiocarbon dating by definitions used by SRL, Inc. and chemical processing was terminated.
Two sediment samples — one from a stratum outside the human cranium (SR-6210)
and sediment within the skull (SR-6211) were processed for humic acid dating. Humic acids
were chosen as the target compound because 1) bulk sediments would have contained recent
plant and other organic matter, 2) the humic acids were considered coeval with the sediment's
deposition adjacent the skull, 3) sediment within the skull was believed to have an even
greater chance for retaining original carbon, and 4) the chemical processing of humic acids
would be preferable to dating bulk sediment or humin organic matter.
The AMS radiocarbon results from dating the two BZT-1 sediment samples are:
SR-6210 Humic Acids, BZT1L2S1 4870±40 RC yr. B.P., δ13C = –16.28‰
∆14C = -454.5±2.4‰, Fm = 0.5455±±0.0024 (CAMS-87686)
SR-6211 Humic Acids, BZT1L1S15 5135±40 RC yr. B.P., δ13C = –16.28‰,
∆14C = -472.3±2.3‰, Fm = 0.5277±0.0023 (CAMS-87685)
I interpret the above observations and radiocarbon results as follows:
1. The petrous bone dated by the University of Arizona had very low protein content
and therefore low carbon content. Although the carbon yield was very low, the resulting age
measured by UA agrees with the human's stratigraphic position and the age assigned for the
164

disconformity overlying the human remains. Because the organic matter content was so low,
the bone's age could be either an exact or a minimum age for the human skeleton.
2. The humic acids from sediments enclosing the human remains and within the
individual's cranial cavity have nearly identical radiocarbon ages. The significance is that
rather that reflecting the geologic age of the sediments' and the human's deposition, the humic
acids' radiocarbon "ages" actually reflect intensive, thorough and pervasive contamination of
sedimentary humic acids with more modern humates. This postdepositional contamination by
percolating surface and groundwater is corroborated by the large amount of oxidation evident
in the bones and sediments. The bones and sediments contain abundant limonite and
pyrolusite, both of which are deposited by oxidizing waters. The extensive oxidation by
waters circulating through the site is the primary reason why the human bone contains such
low amounts of organic carbon.
3. The presence of geologically young radiocarbon ages for the humic ages further
strengthens the conclusion that the single radiocarbon age on the human remains is either its
absolute age or is a minimum geologic age. The most likely contaminant for a bone
radiocarbon date is humates. If traces of humates, or especially the high molecular weight
humins, were still present after chemical purification, the geologic age for the human bone
would be older than the age measured by the University of Arizona. Therefore, the geologic
age for the human remains is at least as old as the overlying disconformity, and possibly older
if humic acid contamination still affected the bone sample.
Additional tests are suggested by the preceding results and these next analyses should
better assist in determining more precisely a geologic age for the BZT-1 human remains.
Although petrous bone is preferable due to its density, major post-cranial bones should be
assayed for their protein (collagen) content. The varying sediment types and position of
different skeletal elements could yield different bones having better chemical preservation of
protein than bones only a few tens-of-centimeters higher or lower. Harder skeletal material
such as teeth, specifically dentine, should be examined to determine if the enamel has
protected dentine protein from oxidation.
All sediments associated with the human remains should be examined to determine if
there are strata that are better protected from groundwater effects. The most dense and clay
rich sediments are those with the greatest chance for avoiding oxidation.
My opinion is the BZT-1 human remains have the greatest chance of any Paleoindian
skeleton in the United States to be Clovis-age or older. The BZT-1 remains are older than the
Anzick Site, Montana human remains, dated by this lab at 10,750 RC yr. B.P. Finally, the
BZT-1 remains are either coeval with or older than the Arlington Springs, CA human remains,
also dated by this lab, and which are assigned an age of 10,850 RC yr.

165

Stable Isotope Analysis of a Tooth Enamel Sample from the Gulf Coast of Texas
Robert H. Tykot, University of South Florida
A single molar tooth sample was provided by Robert P. d'Aigle of CRC in Spring, Texas. The
sample was identified as coming from a 20-30 year old female and has been radiocarbon dated
to more than 10,000 BP. The pieces submitted to me were too fragmentary to identify which
molar it was. The purpose of the stable isotope analysis was to provide insight into the diet of
this prehistoric individual and whether that diet was consistent with residence along the Gulf
Coast or whether the individual might have been a seasonal visitor or recent immigrant.
Stable isotope analysis of carbon and nitrogen in skeletal tissues is a well-established
procedure for reconstructing prehistoric diets. There are significant differences in carbon
isotope ratios between plants which follow different photosynthetic pathways, and these
differences are passed on to their consumers. Maize and other grasses native to hot or arid
environments frequently follow the C4 photosynthetic pathway and may be identified in diets
otherwise dependent on C3 plants. In most environments, C3 plants have average carbon
isotope ratios of about -26‰ and consumers of C3 plants have carbon isotope ratios of -16
to -14‰. C4 plants have average carbon isotope ratios of about -12 to -10‰, and many
marine resources in the Gulf also have carbon isotope ratios in this range (Tykot et al. 1996).
It is unlikely at 10,000 BP that any C4 plants were directly consumed to any significant
degree, although it is possible that a partial C4 signature could have been acquired by humans
who hunted grazing animals (e.g. bison) that consumed C4 grasses. Modern bison in the Great
Plains frequently consume a significant amount of C4 plants, especially in the more southern
areas of Kansas, Nebraska, and Texas (Tieszen 1994). Carbon isotope ratios in marine foods
also tend to be higher than for C3 plants, thus allowing the identification of individuals who
consumed marine foods when no significant contribution of C4 plants is present. In cases
where both marine and C4 resources may have been consumed, there is typically a difference
in nitrogen isotope ratios in bone collagen. Carbon isotope ratios may be determined in bone
collagen (a protein), bone apatite (a mineral), and in tooth enamel. While the bone collagen
and apatite reflect dietary averages over the last several years of an individual's life, enamel
samples reflect diet at the age of crown formation. Experimental studies have demonstrated
that bone apatite and tooth enamel samples reflect the entire diet, while collagen samples are
heavily biased towards protein contributions to diet (Ambrose and Norr 1993). Since enamel
from many teeth form at young ages prior to weaning, the carbon isotope ratios often reflect a
trophic level effect of about +2‰ relative to the mother (Wright and Schwarcz 1998).
While it is possible for bone apatite and tooth enamel to exchange carbonates with the burial
environment and thus produce unreliable isotope results, experimental studies have developed
procedures that remove non-biogenic carbonate without altering the biogenic carbon isotope
values in both bone apatite and tooth enamel (Koch et al. 1997), and tooth enamel carbonate
has produced reliable carbon isotope ratios even in samples millions of years old (e.g. LeeThorp 2000).
At the Archaeological Science Laboratory of the University of South Florida, enamel was
removed from the tooth sample provided, and was carefully cleaned and pulverized.
Approximately 10 mg of enamel powder was immersed in 2% sodium hypochlorite to dissolve
organic components for 24 hours. Non-biogenic carbonates were then removed in 1.0 M
buffered acetic acid for 24 hours. Carbon dioxide gas was produced by reaction with 100%
phosphoric acid in an automated individual acid-bath system coupled to a Finnegan Mat Delta
Plus stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer. Analytical precision is ± 0.1‰ (parts per mil) for
166

δ13C and results are reported relative to the PDB standard. The carbon isotope ratio obtained
for this enamel sample is -10.5 ‰.
Using endpoints of -14 and 0‰ for consumption of 100% C3 and 100% C4 plants, the result
obtained, if from a molar formed after weaning, would be consistent with C4 plants having
contributed directly or indirectly about 25% of the diet at the time of crown formation.
Alternatively, and more likely given the location where this individual was recovered, marine
foods from the Gulf contributed significantly to this individual's diet. Since there is greater
variation in the carbon isotope ratios of marine resources than within the C3 or C4 plant
communities, it would be necessary to obtain an isotopic profile of the marine foods in this
particular area in order to provide a real estimate of their contribution to the diet. But the value
obtained certainly suggests that marine foods were a significant but not predominant
component of the diet. If terrestrial animals that grazed on C4 plants were also available, then
the isotope ratio obtained would likely reflect a combination of both marine source
exploitation and grazing animal hunting. If the tooth crown from which the sample came was
formed prior to weaning, then the contribution of these food resources to the mother's diet
would have been somewhat less. In all cases or combinations, the isotope result obtained on
this single tooth is consistent with residency along the Gulf Coast.
The results obtained for the enamel sample are not consistent with those reported for a sample
submitted for radiocarbon dating. Typically, it would have been the organic fraction of a bone
or tooth sample that would be radiocarbon dated, and the usual C3 endpoint for collagen is
about -21‰. The reported value of -26.5‰, if done on a sample of intact collagen, therefore
certainly is not consistent with any marine food or C4 resource consumption, and suggests
residence in an environment in which there was not free circulation of atmospheric carbon
dioxide such as under the canopy of a tropical forest. Considering the age of the sample,
however, it is very possible that while datable organic material was obtained, it was not intact
collagen but only certain amino acids and therefore the radiocarbon date may be reliable while
the stable isotope ratio may not be indicative of diet.
References
Ambrose, S. H. & Norr, L. 1993. Experimental evidence for the relationship of the carbon
isotope ratios of whole diet and dietary protein to those of bone collagen and carbonate. In
Prehistoric Human Bone: Archaeology at the Molecular Level. Edited by J. B. Lambert and G.
Grupe, pp. 1-37. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Koch, P. L., N. Tuross and M. L. Fogel. (1997). The effects of sample treatment and
diagenesis on the isotopic integrity of carbonate in biogenic hyroxylapatite. Journal of
Archaeological Science 24: 417- 429.
Lee-Thorp, J.A. (2000). Preservation of Biogenic Carbon Isotopic Signals in Plio-Pleistocene
Bone and Tooth Mineral. In Biogeochemical Approaches to Paleodietary Analysis. Edited by
S.H. Ambrose and M.A. Katzenberg, pp. 89-116. New York: Plenum.
Tieszen, L.L. (1994). Stable isotopes on the plains: vegetation analyses and diet
determinations. In Skeletal Biology in the Great Plains: Migration, Warfare, Health, and
Subsistence. Edited by D. Owsley and R.L. Jantz, pp. 261-282. Washington, DC: Smithsonian
Institution Press.
Tykot, R.H., N.J. van der Merwe and N. Hammond. (1996). Stable isotope analysis of bone
collagen, bone apatite, and tooth enamel in the reconstruction of human diet. A case study
167

from Cuello, Belize. In Archaeological Chemistry: Organic, Inorganic and Biochemical
Analysis. Edited by M.V. Orna, pp. 355-365. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.
Wright, L.E. and H.P. Schwarcz. (1998). Stable carbon and oxygen isotopes in human tooth
enamel identifying breastfeeding and weaning in prehistory. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 106: 1-18.

168

INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS
The interpretations we propose are supported by the objective analyses of outside specialists
and professionals. These probabilities, however strong or positively stated, must be considered
in the full context of this investigation. This was a partial exhumation of prehistoric human
remains. Although this was a controlled excavation, because of uncontrollable Nature and its
processes, we were forced to remove a portion of the skull by spade. We did as much damage
control and element testing as was feasible prior to removing the last of the skull. While there
is no way to calculate how much, if any, information was lost during the removal, we are
confident in the results and our interpretation of probabilities.
Since we were conducting preliminary testing only, with the greatest part left for future
mitigation, we have simplified the process by listing our original research goals, as described
in the Introduction section. With each goal stated, we contribute our interpretation and
definition of probability.
The main research questions included in the RD were as follows:
1. Are the remains human?
a)

Human protein extraction analysis has confirmed that the remains are
human.

2. In what approximate anatomical position are the remains assembled?
a)

The forensic analysis indicates a strong possibility that the remains,
or at least the torso, are in a vertical position, with the limbs in some
flexed position.

3. Are there other inhumations present in the immediate area?
a)

Although three trenches, two 4-6 foot deep by 20-25 foot wide by
2,500 foot long borrow ditches, six coring tests, and the preliminary
GPR investigation do not reflect any other burials, there is always a
possibility that other remains are in the immediate or adjacent area.

4. Is there an identifiable, formal burial shaft or tomb for the remains?
a)

There was no visual, surface, or soils analysis evidence of a burial
shaft or tomb.

5. In what manner were the remains entombed?
a)

After considering the geomorphologic analysis, the presence of iron
oxide saturated clayey silt inside the skull in contrast to the dark
gray, heavy silty clay outside the skull, the absence of an apparent
burial shaft, the presence of suitable environment for wet, marshy,
bog conditions, the decomposition of the remains in place, and the
articulated feature of the skeletal remains, a definite probability
exists that this was a death by mishap as sinking and suffocation in a
muddy bog.

6. Are there cultural artifacts, features, or components associated with the
remains?
a)

None were found.
169

7. What is the age of the remains?
a)

Radiocarbon dating on one petrosal bone by the University of
Arizona-Tucson Physics laboratory determined the date of the
remains to be a minimum of 10,740 ±760 RC years B.P. “…the
BZT-1 human remains have the greatest chance of any Paleoindian
skeleton in the United States to be Clovis-age or older” (Tom
Stafford, Stafford Research Laboratories, Remains and Soil Samples
Description and Analysis section.)

8. Was DNA extraction possible?
a)

No. (see DNA Analysis Results in Remains and Soil Samples
Description and Analysis section.)

9. Can a probable cause of death be established?
a)

Since there is no identifiable burial shaft or tomb; the remains appear
articulated, in an erect posture, and have decomposed in place; there
were no burial goods found; and the location at the time of death was
very likely a marshy bog area, then a definite probability exists that
this was a death by mishap by sinking and suffocation in a muddy
bog.

10. Was this an isolated death by mishap?
a)

As above, a definite probability exists that this was a death by
mishap by sinking and suffocation in a muddy bog.

11. Did the remains decompose in situ?
a)

Human protein extraction analysis performed on soil samples taken
from immediately outside and circumambient to the skull tested
positive for human protein. This was an experiment to determine if
human protein could be found for such an ancient death. It has been
used successfully to confirm the presence of human protein in soils
that recently (1-3 years) had held human bodies that were no longer
in several of the makeshift, mass burial sites in Bosnia. When we
initiated these tests in June, the tests in Bosnia had not taken place
and there is no evidence found that this procedure had been utilized,
for this purpose, prior to CRC’s analysis in June 2001. The remains
are considered to have decomposed in situ.

12. Can age, sex, or cultural affiliation be determined?
a)

Based on features of the skull and braincase, a preliminary
determination indicates that the remains are female and
approximately 20-30 years of age. Cultural affiliation could not be
determined at this time.

13. What is the definition of the geomorphologic setting?
a)

An excellent description can be found in the Environmental
Definition of Study Area section of this report. This analysis was
undertaken and completed by Juan-Carlos Moya, PhD, and
170

Quaternary Geologist. This definition was a critical aspect of this
investigation.
14. Can the ecological environment at the time of inhumation be determined?
a)

15.

An excellent description can be found in the Environmental
Definition of Study Area section of this report. Funds were not
available to complete the radiocarbon dating and ecofact analyses of
the shell midden sample from BZT-2. This sample appears to be
stratigraphically contemporary with the human remains in BZT-1
and contains at least one fingernail sized piece of “bone,” burnt and
unburned rangia shells, and charcoal. This sample is currently at
Stafford Laboratory and will remain there until internal (CRC) funds
become available in the near future (hopefully.)

What is the probability that this individual was or was not a
permanent inhabitant of the Texas gulf coast?
a)

If the δ13C -26.5‰ accurately reflects the bone's collagen and the
BZT-1 individual’s diet, we conclude that this person was not from
the Gulf Coast region and was instead from an inland, tropical
region significantly distant geographically from the ocean. This
would mean that the BZT-1 skeleton (individual) was not from the
continental United States.

The remaining soil samples are distributed between Stafford Laboratory, Colorado and the
Texas A&M Soil & Crop Sciences, College Station, Texas. All of the remaining skull
fragment samples are at the Armed Forces DNA Identification Laboratory, Rockville,
Maryland (see Table 6 inventory at the conclusion of the Investigative Methodology section in
this report.) We have decided these locations are secure and the samples are in a safe
environment. For these reasons, these samples will remain at their respective locations until
we receive further instructions from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
We have provided these explanations and probabilities with the caution stated in our
Introduction. To wit,
…(W)e have included the individual specialist analysis reports exactly as
presented to CRC. The purpose of presenting these as individual reports is in
recognition that, despite our conclusions and proposed hypotheses, the final
analysis of the information presented in this report will be by a consensus of our
archaeology peers and other scientists. The Interpretation of Results section is a
presentation of probabilities – probabilities that have been drawn directly from the
expert analyses of the contributing individuals or organizations and applied to the
RD questions mentioned above. These interpretations are clearly intended to
present preliminary hypotheses based on an initial investigation with incomplete
information. The litmus test for these initial hypotheses will develop during any
further investigations that may, but should, take place at BZT-1 in the near future.

171

Conclusion and Recommendations
Conclusion
A project that started as a routine, straightforward archaeological investigation became a
complex situation. When the stratigraphy was first viewed, we felt an inclination that this was
not going to be as simple as first believed. The intuition proved to be valid.
From the first view of the skull remains in situ, throughout the excavation and subsequent
laboratory analysis, and with the final radiocarbon dating sequence, the primary consideration
was that these mortal remains represent the life of an individual. An individual of whom we
have very little knowledge of the lifestyle, environment, or of her or his road to destiny. We
will never know, with certainty, if this person was a visitor, a traveler from a distant place, or a
resident of the Texas gulf coast. What we do know is that this was a very different
environment from the present. The quest now is to expand our knowledge with a thorough
analysis of the remains and the geomorphologic evidence.
This investigation and resultant analyses was, by intent, an incomplete analysis of the remains
and BZT-1. In accordance with generally accepted archaeological practice, we disturbed the
minimum required to answer pertinent research questions. We believe we were successful in
fulfilling our contractual obligation and then some. However true this may be, we state
emphatically that this was a limited investigation with specific goals. A further, in depth
excavation and analyses of the balance of the remains, which we have every reason to believe
is still in situ, should provide the rest of the story.
These are human remains and subject to proper respect. Any future excavation also must
comply with federal statutes already in place to protect the dignity of the deceased and the
heritage of the related, subsequent generations. A major issue currently being debated among
scholars, state and federal state jurisdictions, and the federally recognized Indian organizations
is the issue of scientific analysis vs. immediate re-inhumation of the remains. While we do not
believe an opinion is here appropriate, we firmly believe that the public’s heritage at large
should be considered – in the United States and the world.
Everyone comes from somewhere. What a simplistic but extremely logical statement. To
reiterate our above statement; was this person a visitor, traveler, or a native of the Gulf Coast?
We cannot know without the evidence we can glean from each and every archaeological
investigation. That is the crux and the promise of modern, scientific archaeology. Should we
be denied the opportunity to investigate fully the origins of our national heritage? Can our
investigations and analyses be completed with respect for the living and the dead? Should we
declare that certain segments of our population are not deserving of participating in our quest
for knowledge of our humanness and an antiquity that belongs to every citizen of the world? Is
a person a native of the place she or he is born – or the place of their death? Everyone comes
from somewhere.
Recommendations - Federal
In accordance with the National Register Criteria for Evaluation (1972,) Criterion D, we
recommend that the project area we have referred to as BZT-1 is considered as eligible for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP.) Criterion D is defined as,
Properties may be eligible for the National Register if they have yielded, or may be likely to
172

yield, information important in prehistory or history. In addition, “…burial places nominated
under Criterion D need not meet the special requirements of the Criteria Considerations.”
(http://www.cr.nps.gov/nr/research.html [07/01/02].) This location must be considered as a
national treasure and the derived information available to all persons.
Further, we recommend that an in-depth, controlled mitigation be accomplished. The research
design for any future investigation must consider the location, vulnerability of the remains,
and protection from the elements and unscrupulous “pothunters.” In the interim, all measures
possible should be made to maintain the remains in status quo and to prevent the damage or
looting of the area. We specifically will not recommend any actual preventive or maintenance
procedures other than what is stated in this conclusion. We believe that our personal
responsibility for the safe keeping of these remains ends with the submittal of our final report
for this contract. Our concerns will continue.
The current inhumation of the expected torso and limbs of this individual is in a watersaturated environment and probably has been for most, if not all, of its existence. It was for
this reason that we decided to let the water in the borrow ditch reach its natural level and in the
process inundated the location of the remains with approximately 0.75 meters of standing
water above the remains. The remains are extremely fragile and require the greatest of care.
We believe the only remedy to this situation is to remove the entire block of soil, with the
remains in situ, and transport the entire block to a facility with a controlled atmosphere. The
remains could then be excavated as necessary without the difficult, wet-dry, wet-dry scenario
of an in-place excavation. This controlled atmosphere would permit the meticulous
examination and removal of the necessary portions of the remains with a very detailed
examination and analysis of the geomorphology and ecofacts within the block of soil.
The process of removing an entire block must require a thorough investigation of the area
surrounding the remains to eliminate or confirm the existence of other burials or inhumations.
Although we have completed a preliminary GPR survey, excavated two trenches adjacent to
the remains, and completed a series of corings that have not provided any evidence of other
burials, this is certainly a first effort only. We have indicated the strong probability that this
person died by mishap, suffocation, and inhumation in a bog location, but this was not
conclusive and therefore subject to further analysis – as are all of the probabilities we have
suggested. If further burials or inhumations are found, the decision to remove the entire block
with the current remains intact must be revisited.
In addition, it is highly recommended that any future subsurface soil displacement at the San
Bernard National Wildlife Refuge be preceded by an in-depth geologic, geomorphologic, and
intensive archaeological survey. The scope of work for any future archaeological survey
should be premised upon a combined geologic, geomorphologic, and soil stratigraphy analysis
for high probability areas such as extinct waterways, relic meanders, and former locations of
potable water resources that currently may or may not be visually evident on the living surface
or from archival documents and/or photographs.
Finally, we recommend that the BZT-1 individual not be recognized as a Native American and
that the remains are not subject to any provisions of the Native American Graves Protection
and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA.) Substantial evidence has been scientifically derived from
the BZT-1 remains by three highly qualified and nationally recognized research laboratories.
The evidence provided indicates that this individual may not be from the continental United
States, and further, may not be from anywhere in North America.
173

Recommendations - Texas
The BZT-1 project area is not recommended for recording as an archaeological site in the
State of Texas. The Antiquities Code of Texas (as amended) provides the following definition
of archaeological burial sites eligible for recordation in the State of Texas.
Texas Historical Commission, Chapter 26, Rules of Practice and Procedures for
the Antiquities Code of Texas (Amended 09/01/97), 26.5(A)
(v) Cemeteries and burials, marked or unmarked, are special locales set aside for
burial purposes. Cemeteries contain the remains of more than one individual
placed in a regular or patterned order. Burials, in contrast, may contain the remains
of one or more individuals located in a common grave in a locale not formerly or
subsequently used as a cemetery. The site may encompass the human remains
present and also gravestones, markers, containers, coverings, garments, vessels,
tools, and other goods, which may be present. Cemeteries and burials that are
publicly owned and are of prehistoric origin (i.e., dating prior to A.D. 1500), or
classified as historic, are protected under the Antiquities Code. Cemeteries are
considered historic if entombed within the cemetery occurred at least fifty (50)
years ago. Individual burials within a cemetery are not considered historic unless
the inhumations occurred at least fifty (50) years ago. (http://www.thc.state.tx.us/
rulesregs/RulesRegsPDF/AntiqCode.pdf [09/04/01])
We consider the above Rules of Practice as referring to an intentional act of burying “…what
is dead, lost, or past.” We found no evidence to indicate that this was an intentional burial.
Quite to the contrary, in this report we have suggested the strong probability of the manner of
death as that of an individual becoming mired and sinking in a bog, suffocating, and
subsequently entombed by the surrounding mud.
The shell midden in Trench 3, labeled BZT-2, was recorded with the State of Texas as a
prehistoric midden. Further analysis should be conducted on the midden sample that is stored
with Stafford Laboratory. Information from this radiocarbon dating and ecofact analysis
should determine whether BZT-2 could also be recommended as eligible for nomination to the
NRHP. Although stratigraphically situated as a possible contemporary of BZT-1, no evidence,
other than statigraphic similarity, has been established. For these reasons, BZT-1 and BZT-2
are not considered as one site or intra-related at this time.
Recommendations - General
Since each Principal Investigator must have the authority, responsibility, and enjoyment of
constructing an appropriate Research Design for each of her or his investigations, we prefer
not to make any recommendations as to processes we might believe should be required for a
future investigation. Instead, we have presented a non-inclusive list of tests and/or analyses we
would have preferred to complete during this investigation had funds been available. These
procedures would include:
1. Soil chemistry analysis on all currently available soil samples.
2. Determine the 14C date and ∆14C value of the unconformity (or erosional) feature
with a series of 5 cm cube samples from the top to bottom of the unconformity.
3. Additional deep probe excavations, across the general area, for further clarification
and extent of the unconformity (or erosional) feature.
174

4. Pollen, Phytolith, macro floral analysis, 14C, and species protein extraction analysis
of the shell midden sample from BZT-2.
5. An in-depth analysis of the coastal and riverine position of BZT-1 during the
lifetime of this individual and the probability of cultural deposits on the inundated
former riverbeds (incised valleys) of this region.
6. An in-depth GPR survey of the borrow ditch slope and within a 40 meter radius of
the remains.
Finally, we recommend that the issue of informed and adequate sub-surface testing be
readdressed and in particular for areas of substantial and consistent alluvial accretion. What
we have learned from BZT-1 positively indicates that "they" were here at least 12-10,000
years ago. Why have we only located human remains of less than 3,000 years in the coastal
areas of Texas and Louisiana? Why do we have this tremendous, multi-millennium gap in
recovered prehistoric human remains? What now for archaeological subsurface testing?
Certainly, we don’t have all the answers, but we would like to contribute a few suggestions.
To wit:
1) It will take extensive coring, trenching, and remote sensing (GPR, etc.) to adequately
describe a region’s potential for sites buried more than one meter with Holocene
deposits, and
2) Subsurface testing (shovel/auger, mechanical deep probe, and unit tests, etc.) should
start with a knowledge of the region’s fundamental Late Quaternary geology, i.e.,
a) Are thick alluvial fills present?
b) Is there a strong potential for anastomosing, meandering, and/or agrading streams?
c) Is there a clear interrupted soil stratigraphic record prominent enough to search for
gaps in the geologic time sequence and potential human and/or cultural remains in
the area?
d) Are there prominent disconformities, soils, or other stratigraphic marker horizons
that have regional extent and which are easily recognized once field personnel are
adequately trained?
3) Are field crews adequately trained and qualified – and how are they qualified and by
whom?
Considering the variability of topographic choices and their availability to native Americans
and travelers, it is crucial that a degree of accuracy for site predictability be employed. Story
correctly states that while,
Vast amounts of archaeological information have been amassed from prehistoric
sites in the Gulf Coastal Region over the past 20 (then) years as a result of
markedly increased public…funding and improved field and research methods,
…(and) given the magnitude of the effort, the gains in understanding the
archaeological method have been disappointing (Story 1990:365.)
Of the eight suggestions given by Story for improving this situation, No. 3 deals explicitly
with the thrust of these current comments and states that;
Intensive archaeological surveys and tests carried out to meet CRM laws and
mandates, on the whole, are producing relatively little useful information. While
it may be counter-argued that these surveys and tests serve planning and
ultimately facilitate more intensive data collecting through excavation, I did not
175

find this often to be the case. Survey methods as well as funding priorities
should be reassessed (Story ibid.)
Hard work and “plenty of shovel tests” are not the answer to Story’s contentions, and a
“shotgun” approach is wholly inadequate. Over the long haul, working smarter will always
pay more dividends than simply working harder. Just as any report ultimately is based on the
findings of the person on the ground, if the available cultural resources haven’t been heard,
smelled, seen, and/or felt, and recorded, the essential information, and probably the entire
project, rarely will culminate in contributing anything substantial to the archaeological record.
Adequate effort must be made for the initial discovery, to a theory of discovery, in order to
provide a solid grounding for overarching theory. How can we postulate mid-range or
metatheory if we do not use the scientific process to locate sufficient data to support the
underlying theory? The USACERL, Special Report 96/40 effectively elaborates on this
suggestion;
The dual goals of legal compliance and proactive long-term stewardship
must be carried out in accordance with methodological and technical norms
and strictures of contemporary archaeology as an academic and (scientific)
discipline. The issues of survey intensity and site definition are particularly
relevant here as they are still hotly debated topics in current archaeological
literature. Both the CRM and academic communities recognize the need to
conduct more through inspections of surface and subsurface landscapes in
the search for prehistoric and historic sites and to make objective bias
assessments of past surveys. Likewise, both communities recognize a need
to devise meaningful spatial units of analysis that permit efficient
management and preservation of archaeological resources in discrete
"packages" (i.e., the archaeological site.) (Zeidler 1995:9)
Theory based on inadequate evidence is intolerably worse than no theory. Using current
methodologies, we would not have reached the unconformity at BZT-1, let alone the remains,
and using a backhoe for deep probing is like looking for a needle in a haystack. The BZT-1
discovery is absolutely the best evidence that inadequately informed or indiscriminate shovel
testing and/or backhoe tests perhaps have been inadequate.
End Note
We have appreciated the opportunity and the learning experience afforded us in this endeavor.
Our personal investment and that of our contributors, in time, effort, and money was well
worth the additional expense. Although the Fish and Wildlife Service was unable to increase
funding for this contract, we have received their wholehearted support for continuing this
investigation to fruition. The staff at the San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge always stood
ready to assist in any way possible. Moreover, every archaeologist and geologist understands
the enormous benefit of a competent heavy equipment operator in pursuing and understanding
the natural, subterranean environment. At San Bernard, we had the best.
We hope that someday soon, the public will come to realize and understand the value of
research under the National Historic Preservation Act and Section 106. It is anticipated that
this investigation will greatly assist the past to speak to the present. The goal of this report is
to make some aspects of Texas prehistory come alive for the public, and assuredly to
contribute new information to the study of the complex interactions that took place on the prehistoric Texas gulf coast and in the Americas.
176

REFERENCES
Fleetwood, Raymond J.
(Nd)

Plants of Brazoria/San Bernard National Wildlife Refuges, Brazoria County, Texas.
United States Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service.

Patterson, Leland W.
1995

The Archaeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Perttula, Timothy K.
1993

Regional Preservation Plan for Archeological Resources, southeast Texas
Archeological Region: Section IV. In Archaeology in the Eastern Planning Region,
Texas: A Planning Document, edited by Nancy Adele Kenmotsu and Timothy K.
Perttula, pp. 205-213. Cultural Resources Management Report 3, Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas historical Commission, Austin.

Ricklis, Robert A.
1994

Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GV66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc. Corpus
Christi, Texas. Prepared for the Woodlands Corporation, Texas. Volumes 1 and 2.

Story, Dee Ann, et al
1990

Cultural History of the Native Americans. In Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman,
J.C.
Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Research Series No.
38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Tykot, Robert
2002

Principles of isotope Analysis, http://luna.cas.usf.edu /~rtykot/Bone.html (07/10/02)

Zeidler, James A. (Prepared by)
1995

Archaeological Inventory Survey Standards and Cost-estimation Guidelines for the
Department of Defense, USCERL Special Report 96/40, Volume 1, December 1995,
U.S. Army Environmental Center Legacy Program, Aberdeen Proving Ground,
Maryland.

Cross Archive Searching Service
http://etd.lsu.edu:8085/docs/available/etd-0131102-125405/. Dirty Secrets: Blood
Protein and VFA Analysis of Soil From Execution and Grave Sites in the Former
Yugoslavia. Creator: Tuller, Hugh. (03/11/02)
National Park Service
http://www.cr.nps.gov/nr/research.html. National Register Research. (07/17/01)
Rice University
http://gulf.rice.edu/eTexasBraz_Col.html. East Texas, Colorado and Brazos Rivers.
177

Statistical Laboratory at Iowa State University
http://www.statlab.iastate.edu//soils/osd/. Official Soil Survey Descriptions. USDANRCS Survey Division - Data Access. (05/10/01)
Terra Server – Microsoft
http://terraserver.homeadvisor.msn.com/default.asp. Landsat 5 photographs. (20012002)
Texas Historical Commission
http://www.thc.state.tx.us/rulesregs/RulesRegsPDF/AntiqCode.pdf.
of Texas. (07/01/02)

Antiquities Code

Texas Historical Commission
http://www.pedernales.thc.state.tx.us. Texas Archeological Sites Atlas-Restricted
Information Access. (04/07/01)
Waikato University (NZ) and Oxford University (UK)
http://www.c14dating.com/isotope.html. Sample Fractionation. (06/13/02)

178

