Cultural Resources Surveys of the Gates F
3H and Gates D 5H Pipelines in Webb
County, Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd., San
Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations Report #129
August 2012

Abstract
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. of San Antonio, Texas contracted with Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations (TAAI) to conduct cultural resources surveys of the 130meter Gates F 3H and the 920-meter Gates D 5H pipelines to be developed by Mockingbird
Midstream Gas Services, L.L.C. (Mockingbird) in northwestern Webb County, Texas. The
project was entirely privately funded, and the properties are privately owned; therefore, no Texas
Antiquities Permit was required.
Full pedestrian surveys of these upland areas with shallow soils were conducted by two
archaeologists on January 17, 2012. The surveys revealed that nearly 100 percent of the pipeline
right-of-ways had been mechanically disturbed in the recent past. No evidence of either historic
or prehistoric cultural materials was observed during the surveys.
As such, Tierras Antiguas recommended that the development of both pipelines be allowed to
proceed as planned. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommended that if any additional,
undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development, such finds should be
examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.

Acknowledgments
There are mainly four individuals who are greatly appreciated, and whose efforts contributed to
the successful planning, organization, and completion of this project. They are Mr. David Black,
Ms. Judy Vader, and Mr. Ryan Debarros, Project Managers at Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd., and Mr. Ronnie Glenewinkel, Environmental Coordinator at Mockingbird
Midstream. All were extremely amiable and helpful throughout, and their overall knowledge of
the project contributed significantly to our understanding of the project’s scope of work.
In addition, I express my sincere gratitude to Tierras Antiguas staff archaeologist Belisario Silva,
who worked hard, long hours, and expressed an attitude and work ethic that ensured this survey
was conducted in a thorough and professional manner.

Cover Photo: Gates D 5H right-of-way from N3119482 E417200; facing south.

i

Table of Contents
Title
Page
Abstract.......................................................................................................................................i
Acknowledgments........................................................................................................................i
List of Figures.............................................................................................................................ii
Introduction................................................................................................................................1
Modern Environmental Setting....................................................................................................1
Paleoenvironment........................................................................................................................4
Cultural Chronology....................................................................................................................4
Webb County Prehistory and History...........................................................................................9
Site Types to be Expected Along the Project Area.....................................................................10
Cultural Resources Background Review....................................................................................13
Soils..........................................................................................................................................15
Survey Goals and Methodology.................................................................................................16
Results, Summary, and Conclusions of the Investigations......................................................16
References Cited........................................................................................................................17

List of Figures
Figure

Page

1. Webb County and project location......................................................................................1
2 Project Area location on large topographic map.................................................................1
3. Project Area shown on local topographic map....................................................................2
4. Physiographic regions of Texas...........................................................................................3
5. Biotic provinces of Texas....................................................................................................3
6. South Texas cultural chronology.........................................................................................5
7. Soils map...........................................................................................................................15
8. Photo of Gates D 5H right-of-way.....................................................................................16

ii

Introduction
Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd., requested
cultural resources surveys of the
130-meter Gates F 3H and the
920-meter Gates D 5H pipelines
in northwestern Webb County,
proposed for development by
Mockingbird Midstream Gas
Services, L.L.C. (Mockingbird),
and hereinafter occasionally
referred to as the Project Area
(PA) (Figures 1 - 3). Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations (TAAI)
conducted pedestrian surveys of
the pipeline right-of-ways on
January 17, 2012.

Modern
Environmental
Setting

Figure 1. Location of Webb County and the Project Area in
Texas.

Climate
Webb county is located
in south-central Texas
along its southern
border with Mexico (see
Figure 1). The Rio
Grande forms the
western border of Webb
County. Its current
political boundary
encompasses 3,363
square miles. The gently
sloping terrain ranges in
elevation from about
400-700 feet above
mean sea level. Clayey Figure 2. Project Area on large topographic map.
and loamy soils support
1

the growth of predominately mesquite
and thorny shrubs with assorted cacti
and grassy understory. A subtle divide
through the county causes numerous
intermittent creeks to flow north into
the Nueces River, and numerous others
of the same type to drain southward
into the Rio Grande. With its semi-arid
environment, the average annual rainfall
is only 20 inches per year, the average
high temperature is 1000F in July and
430F in January. These equate to a
growing season of 314 days per year
(Leffler and Long 1996; Sanders and
Gabriel 1985).
However, rainfall amounts vary
significantly from year to year, and the
high evapotranspiration effects in the
area effectively offset any beneficial
surplus of annual rainfall. This is
another reason irrigation systems are so
necessary, and commonly found in use
today throughout the area. Summers Figure 3. Project Area on Landrum Tank (1982) 7.5'
are indeed hot and dry, with USGS topographic map.
temperatures consistently hovering
above 1000F, although humidity is generally low compared to environments closer to the Gulf
Coast. Overall, the county’s climate can be classified as subtropical steppe (Leffler and
Long1996; Sanders and Gabriel 1985).
Hydrology
The Nueces River and the Rio Grande are the major southeasterly trending rivers draining the
South Texas region. Many drainages intermittently flow into both rivers during infrequent
seasonal periods of abundant rainfall. Although there are many springs in Webb county, very few
are active due primarily to the dip of the substrate shales which carry these subterranean seeps
to the south and east. As a result, some of these active seeps/springs can be found on the Mexican
side of the national border. Ancient springs that may have existed in the area at one time have
likely succumbed to overgrazing and irrigation pumping during modern times (Brune 1981).
During our investigation of the project area in January 2012, we observed no probable flowing
streams either intermittently today, or within the past.
Flora and Fauna
The project area lies within the South Texas Plain/Brush Country vegetation area as defined by
Gould (1975), and the regional flora of South Texas has been classified as being part of the
Tamaulipan biotic province extending out from northeast Mexico (Figures 4 and 5). This is the
2

only part of Texas where some
vegetation exhibits growth throughout
the year (Blair 1950; Map 2011).
Thorny brush is the dominant
vegetation today, but this is a relatively
recent occurrence, with a mix of woody
and grassland species providing a
savanna environment during prehistoric
times (Archer 1995; Black 1989; Hester
1980; Inglis 1964).
The original vegetation was an open
grassland mixed with brushy chaparral.
Oaks, pecan, and ash were common
along perennial streams. Due in part to
overgrazing and the exclusion of fire,
the invasion of woody species has
changed the vegetation into “Texas
brush country” dominated by mesquite,
acacia, spiny hackberry, brazil,
whitebrush, lotebrush, and others
(Diamond et al. 1987:203-221). On
sandy soils, the brush includes mesquite Figure 4. Physiographic regions of Texas
with mixed grasses. In contrast, clay (http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/pics/txphysio.jpg)
soils support mesquite (Proposis
juliflora), various species of Acacia,
and mimosa, granjeno or desert
hackberry (Celtis pallida), lignum vitae
(Porliera angustifolia),lindheeimeri),
tasajillo (Opuntia leptocaulis), and
species of Condalia and Castela (Blair
1950).
The South Texas Plains/Brush Country
exhibits some of the greatest
mammalian species diversity in the
state. Sixty-one species of mammals, 36
snakes, 19 lizards, and several species
of turtles, salamanders, and frogs are
present in the region (Blair 1950).
Approximately 50 species of fish have
been identified in the lower Rio Grande
(Lee et al. 1980).
Figure 5. Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces of Texas.

3

Paleoenvironment
The paleoenvironment of south Texas is as varied as the landscape, and the South Texas
Paleoclimatic record contains significant gaps primarily due to the scarcity of deep, finely
stratified, and well-dated deposits (Stahle and Cleaveland 1995:51). To date, the best record of
paleoenvironmental reconstruction in South Texas has been accomplished by Robinson (1982)
from analysis of phytoliths from three archaeological sites in Live Oak County. Overall, the data
there along with data from other sites in Texas suggest that the waning of the Pleistocene, or lateglacial period, marked a transition from a cooler, wetter environment to one that steadily grew
warmer and drier, and cenizo (Leucophyllum texanum), white brush (Aloysia texana), prickly
pear (Opuntia) more seasonal, with intermittent moist periods through about 6,000 years ago.
Most researchers then generally agree that the period between 6,000 and 3,000 years ago was
much warmer and drier than today. Since that time, intermittent moist and dry intervals have
occurred over the past 3,000 years.
It is unlikely that the climate has changed significantly in the past few thousand years in the area
that would significantly induce vegetation changes. The greater changes have been induced by
human intervention through the clearing of wooded areas along the river and streams for
construction purposes, pumping more water for irrigation which has lowered water tables, and
overgrazing by livestock. Although there are still many seeps, springs, and streams in the area,
they most probably flowed with greater abundance during wetter intervals than exist at the
present time, providing an abundant resource for prehistoric occupants.

Cultural Chronology
The Project Area lies within the South Texas Archaeological region as defined by Hester (1980,
1995, 2004; Figure 6). Refining a cultural chronology for south Texas is problematic, due to the
compressed nature of the archaeological record and the scarcity of stratified sites excavated
within the region. Hester (1995:433) acknowledges the paucity of information that exists for
south Texas and as such offers only a “general framework” for prehistoric periods particular to
the region (Figure 6). All dates are given as approximate years before present (B.P.), i.e., before
1950.
Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950 B.P.)
This period is estimated at between ca.11,200–7950 B.P. in south Texas (Hester 1995). The
Paleoindian period began toward the close of the Pleistocene. Diagnostic artifacts of the early
Paleoindian interval include Clovis and Folsom projectile points. The wide distribution of
dispersal and interaction of the people who made them. Other artifacts associated with the Clovis
culture include bifaces and prismatic blades, engraved stones, bone and ivory points, stone bolas,
ochre, and shaft straighteners. During the late Paleoindian interval, the first stemmed lanceolate
points, such as Angostura, Golondrina, St. Mary’s Hall, and Barber (among a few others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian adaptation has been considered to be one of small bands of nomadic,
big-game hunters following herds of Late Pleistocene fauna, including mammoth, mastodons,
4

bison, camel, and horse, across
North America (Black 1989).
More recently, emphasis has
been placed on the wide
diversity of plants and animals
used for subsistence by these
early Americans, such as turtles
and tortoises, alligators, mice,
badgers, and raccoons, although
they undoubtedly hunted the
large animals as well (Collins
1995:381). Known Clovis sites
include killsites, quarries,
caches, open campsites, ritual
sites, and burials (Hester
1995:433–436). A Folsom
interval follows the Clovis.
Folsom artifacts are fairly
common in south Texas;
however, no camp sites or
killsites have been found south
of a large workshop, Pavo Real
(41BX52), in Bexar County
(Hester 1995:434–435). Most
Paleoindian finds in south Texas
have consisted of surface lithic
scatters on upland terraces and
ridges (Black 1989).
As the warming that marks the
transition from Pleistocene to
Holocene climates began to take
effect in Texas, prehistoric
inhabitants adapted with changes
in lifestyle. This climatic shift is
also marked by the decline and
extinction of mammoth,
mastodon, horse, camel, and
giant bison (Bison antiquus).
Large gregarious game animals
were perhaps extinct in Texas.
Human hunters were forced to
concentrate on deer, antelope, Figure 6. South Texas cultural chronology.
and other medium-size or smaller
5

game. Changes in the subsistence base required technological shifts that mark the beginning of
a new cultural period known as the Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450 B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438) identifies the Early Archaic, with Early Corner Notched and Early Basal
Notched dart points, as roughly dating between 7950 to 4450 B.P. The extinction of large herds
of megafauna and the changing climate at the beginning of the Holocene stimulated a behavioral
change by the Prehistoric inhabitants of south Texas (McKinney 1981). While the basic huntergatherer adaptation probably remained intact, an economic shift away from big game hunting was
necessary. In general, more intensive exploitation of local and smaller resources such as deer, fish,
and plant bulbs is indicated by greater densities of ground-stone artifacts, fire-cracked rock
cooking features, and more specialized tools. Weir (1976) speculates that Early Archaic groups
were small and highly mobile, an inference based on the fact that Early Archaic sites are thinly
distributed and that diagnostic projectile point types are seen across a wide area, including most
of Texas and northern Mexico. Story (1985) believes that population densities were low during
the Early Archaic, and that groups consisted of related individuals in small bands with “few
constraints on their mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their economy was based on the utilization of a
wide range of resources, especially such year-round resources as prickly pear and lechugilla, as
well as rodents, rabbits, and deer.
Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350 B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests that the period between 4450 and 2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The Middle Archaic appears to have been a time of increased population,
based on the large number of sites from this period (Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125, 128). On the
South Texas Plains, exploitation of widely scattered, year-round resources such as prickly pear
continued (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–15), as did hunting deer and rabbit. Weir (1976)
believes that the widely scattered bands prevalent in the Early Archaic now began to coalesce, at
least during the acorn-gathering season, into larger groups who shared the intensive work of
gathering and processing the acorn harvest (Weir 1976:126). Many researchers believe burned
rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991; Weir 1976). The common
presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view that deer processing took
place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in archaeological sites in south
Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the Middle Archaic (Dillehay 1974).
Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period, suggesting a movement toward less
mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest occurrences dating to the south Texas
Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County, which dates between ca. 2550 and 2750
B.P. (Taylor and Highley 1995).
Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic in south Texas may be defined as between 2350–1250 B.P,
Some researchers believe populations increased throughout the Late Archaic, while others feel
populations remained the same or fell during this period (Black 1989:30). Subsistence is assumed
to have become less specialized on acorns, in favor of a broad spectrum subsistence base (Black
1989:30). Story (1985:44–45) believes the presence of cemeteries indicates that Late Archaic
6

populations in central and south Texas were increasing and becoming more territorial. Although
inhabitants of the South Texas Plain near Brownsville and Rockport had begun to make pottery
by about 1750 B.P., the northern part of the plain was still “pre-ceramic” until 1,000 years later
(Story 1985:45–47). Late Archaic points tend to be much smaller than Middle Archaic points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 - 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the Late Archaic is frequently referred to as the Terminal Archaic
or Transitional Archaic. Turner and Hester (1999) cite data placing the Transitional Archaic as
2250–1250 B.P. Although Hester may lump current data into a Late Archaic period, he cautions
that more evidence will likely result in what may be termed as a “Terminal Archaic” period during
the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic period is represented
by diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to overlap the Late
Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442). Weir (1976) believes this marked a
transition period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and bison, and
a reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw 1985; Peter
1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not disappear and sites
were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.
Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period
between A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995]). A series of distinctive traits mark
the shift from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift to the
bow and arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South Texas
Plain (Black 1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late
Prehistoric are the Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle
transition from expanding stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well
as early arrow points. The most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow
point. Settlement shifts into rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et
al. 1978) and Classen Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been
noted. Cemeteries from this period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a nonstandard
manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the ones that best
suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core reduction and
the manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology is a continent-wide
7

phenomonon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468).
Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas has not been
documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a significant
presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally sending
a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near
each other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other
succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).
Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans were
rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.
The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then, is
generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.
Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
8

with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

Webb County Prehistory and History
“Artifacts dating from the Paleo-Indian period demonstrate that humans have lived in the area
around Webb County for perhaps 11,000 years. Evidence suggests that various Indian groups,
including the Carrizo, Pacuache, Pastaloca, and Pitalac peoples, lived in the region during the
Late Prehistoric period. By the early 1800s, however, these Coahuiltecan groups were being
squeezed out by Comanches, Lipan Apaches, and other Indian groups and by the Spanish, who
were moving up from the south” (Leffler and Long 2012). Early Spanish explorers traveled
through the area on their journeys north of the Rio Grande as early as the 1680s.
“In 1749, Jacinto De León, a Spanish army officer, established a ford, later known as the Paso
de Jacinto, a mile north of the site of present-day Laredo. In 1755, Laredo was established, but
was actually little more than a ranch in its first years of existence. In 1767, a royal commission
visited Laredo and arranged for the survey of a formal townsite, inaugurated a government, and
assigned land grants to families who had settled in the area. The commission also extended the
jurisdiction of the town north to the Nueces River so that it eventually included all of the area of
present Webb County as well as parts of modern La Salle, Dimmit, and Zapata counties” (Leffler
and Long 2012).
“The area's ranching potential was its primary attraction for the early Spanish settlers, and
ranching operations dominated the economy from the first years of settlement. Food and other
necessities imported from the south were bought with profits derived from cattle, sheep, and
other livestock. By the early 1800s at least forty ranches had been established around Laredo.
Settlement in the outlying areas was hindered, however, by the continual threat of Indian raids.
Comanches and Lipan Apaches moving in from the north drove many ranchers off their lands and
dissuaded others from attempting to establish operations in the countryside. As early as 1819
thirty-seven of the forty-four ranches in the vicinity of Laredo had been abandoned for fear of
Indian attack; and in 1828, in the midst of the sheep-ranching expansion, many ranch workers
refused to leave Laredo to work on the ranches farthest from town” (Leffler and Long 2012).
“The area suffered most from Indian attacks during the 1830s, especially after 1835 when the
Texas Revolution diverted the attention and resources of the Mexican government away from the
growing Indian menace. Receiving no help from the Tamaulipas state government, the alcalde of
Laredo petitioned Mexican president Antonio López de Santa Anna for help and suggested that,
in the face of continuing Comanche attacks, the town might have to be abandoned. Preoccupied
with their own problems, and content for the moment to remain within the Republic of Mexico,
the people of Laredo and the surrounding area played only a small role in the Texas Revolution.
Mexican commanders passing through the area en route to and from Texas battlefields
requisitioned livestock from local citizens and sometimes stopped in Laredo, but the citizenry
remained largely uninvolved in political issues” (Leffler and Long 2012).

9

“Between 1836 and 1848 the area that is now Webb County was part of the disputed strip of land
between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River claimed by both Mexico and Texas. Despite the
hopes of prominent Laredo citizens, who petitioned to remain part of Mexico, the area was
formally incorporated into the United States in May 1848. Worried about their future after
annexation, many residents moved to the Mexican side of the river and established Nuevo Laredo;
others moved into the surrounding Texas countryside. Suspicions that land titles would not be
respected under the new government were soon put to rest. The Bourland-Miller Commission,
which inspected Spanish and Mexican land titles in South Texas, proved to be fair and impartial
in its assessment of land records. Local landholders therefore found it easier to accommodate
themselves to the new political situation. Federal soldiers stationed at Fort McIntosh patrolled
the area for bandits and hostile Indians” (Leffler and Long 2012).
“Around 1882 numerous mines were started, and a thriving mining industry grew up, giving rise
to the communities of Carbon, Islitas, and Joyce. In the middle 1880s the Rio Grande and Eagle
Pass Railway was built to ship the coal out of the county. The number of ranching operations in
the county increased between 1880 and 1890, as the railroad spurs opened the area to more
intensive development and Indian and bandit raids were curtailed. By 1900, the introduction of
water pumps powered by wind, gas, and electricity for the first time allowed for large-scale
irrigation along the Rio Grande. Cotton also began to be grown around the turn of the century.
At this time the discovery of oil helped spur the economy. Gas was found in 1908, in 1921the first
producing oil well prompted a boom. Coal mining declined during the 1930s, falling victim to
competition from other Western mines and from increasing transport costs. In 1939 the Cannel
Coal Company, the area's largest producer, ceased operations. As a result, most of the coal towns
declined or were abandoned. A few families stayed to try their hands in farming, but most moved
to Laredo or out of the county” (Leffler and Long 2012).
“By the 1980s leading industries in Webb County included tourism, oil and gas extraction, general
and heavy construction, meat packing, soft-drink bottling and canning, trucking, and the
manufacture of clothing and leather shoes. Cattle ranching was also very much a thriving
operation at that time. Principal agricultural crops included sorghum and hay, and oil and gas
continued to account for an important part of the county's income” (Leffler and Long 2012).

Site Types That Could be Expected Along the Project Area
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in Webb County are prehistoric open campsites ranging
in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure 6). Some of these
represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may have camped for
one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large groups of
people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning to these
same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found at these
large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks representing
multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that results from
10

making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal remains from
terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel and snail shells.
Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush riverine
environment that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the uplands
away from flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, and cacti offered a
different food source that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite beans, prickly
pear pads and tunas, and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were known to graze
on the northern South Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food, hides, and bone
tools (Dillehay 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients
that can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a wellpreserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most frequently
occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in upland settings
where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients that archaeologists
look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic preservation in the form of
charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation, temporally diagnostic stone tools or
ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that could be expected
within the PA. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and broken tools that were
left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their old ones. The general
absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found at open campsites
suggest that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period of time (however,
small camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles to make them more
knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the natural outcroppings
or surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite cobbles. Examples
of chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with one or two flakes
removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from experience the quality
of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool production, so they ‘tested’
the cobble to judge whether it was usable or not. If the quality was judged to be inferior, then the
cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles found on these sites are of
poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool products are carried away
from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the manufacturing process, and the
thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular debris. Also unique to lithic
scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’. These are simply cobbles
flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that can be used to further
reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The unbroken quarry
blanks are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off, presumably to
areas of south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or broken quarry
blanks are of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
11

Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in Webb County have been documented
along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.
Prehistoric Quarries
Prehistoric quarries can also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic periods, but
differ from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose gravels, but at
times they specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or quartzites were
not yet freed from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’. These types
of sites are rare in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally do not
present themselves, and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to pick up
gravels from the surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped stone
remains likely to be found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or quartzites, as
well as parent material detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also be expected.
Although a handful of prehistoric quarries or procurement sites have been recorded in south
Texas, they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
There is only one documented burned rock midden in Webb County. Burned rock middens result
from a series of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much like modern-day roasting
pits are dug into the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that serve
as heating elements in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less effective as a thermal source,
they are ‘pitched out’ around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes unusable, another is dug
near by, and the procedure repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ firecracked rocks coalesce together, obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the
formation of burned rock middens and their documented presence in Texas, see Leach and
Bousman 2001; Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in south
Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites in both
upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric cemetery
found in proximity to the PA is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of
permanent structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992). The area was generally
12

not considered safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers
then began establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Leffler 1996).
Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site types
most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and foundation
remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional family burial
or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related structures or
construction projects. In general, the area has been historically used predominantly as ranchland
pasture, with no development other than associated ranching activities such as windmills, stock
tanks, corrals, and sparsely scattered outbuildings. site of significance from the 1500s through the
mid-1900s along the line were minimal.

Results of A Cultural Resources Background Review
The research by TAAI included:
1) A review of the most current literature documenting the prehistory and history of the
immediate area
2) A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas to identify
what cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been
documented within one mile of the project area
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe
the types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the
types of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
5) A review of a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
We preface this section by stating that although it presents the number of sites and their types
documented within each of the counties, the results simply provide the data that is available. In
reality, the number of documented sites and their types are very heavily skewed based upon the
types of cultural resource surveys, and the areas of those surveys. That said, the data that is
available on the Texas Atlas is only as good as the areas of south Texas that the surveys represent.
13

Most of south Texas has never been subjected to formal cultural resource surveys, so it is
conceded that the true character of the archaeological record is very poorly understood.
Nevertheless, the few surveys that have been accomplished provide at least some aspect of what
the region looks like from an archaeological perspective.
Webb County
Many large-scale archaeological surveys have been conducted in Webb County, such as the
Bromley Cooper Surface Survey in 1970, the Chupadera Ranch Survey in 1974, the Trevino
Mining Permit Area Survey in 1991, the Killam Ranch Survey in 1991, and the Joint Task Force-6
Survey in 1997. Large-scale surveys such as these clearly demonstrate the density, as well as the
diversity of archaeological site types that exist in this area of Texas. As a result of surveys such
as these, Webb County now has 664 professionally documented archaeological sites.
Of the prehistoric sites, 329 are open campsites, 236 are lithic scatters, and 76 are lithic
procurement sites. At one of the open campsites a skeletal burial has been found, one site has a
likely burial, and a possible cremated burial is suspected at a third site. Another suspected, heavily
disturbed prehistoric burial was recorded as an isolated site. The only prehistoric burned rock
midden site recorded in the county is located on sandstone outcrops along the Rio Grande.
Pictograph carvings have been recorded at one site. Protohistoric occupations are represented at
two sites by the presence of lithic debitage along with early period glass, ironstone, square nails,
etc. At a third site, Spanish Colonial ceramics have been found.
Historically, there are only 49 sites, or components of sites, documented in the county. This seems
to be a small number of sites given the county’s historical richness. Nevertheless, among those that
have been documented are four adobe lime kilns, Fort McIntosh (1849-1947), 1800s and 1900s
house structures near the approach to the International Bridge in Laredo, the Laredo Cemetery,
a stone pumping station, irrigation tanks, cisterns, military encampments, the Darwin Community
town, coal mine, and cemetery, the Delores Mining Community cemetery, rural and generally
abandoned cemeteries, six structures and a cemetery on a private ranch, and multiple other 19th
and 20th century rural house sites and ranching activity sites.
Surveys and Sites within One Mile of the Current Project Area
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicated that
no professional archaeological surveys had been conducted within one mile (1,609 meters), and
no archaeological sites had been recorded. However, as shown in Figure 3, TAAI conducted a
survey of the Dos Hermanos Trunkline in January 2011, resulting in the discovery of no
archaeological material (Nickels 2011).
Historic Site Potential
A standard source of research is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs
available at the Perry Casteñada Library at the University of Texas at Austin (Perry Casteñeda
Library 2011). In this case, the only map found was a 1943 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
topographic map, which showed no structures at that time in the area of the proposed Gates F 3H
and D 5H right-of-ways. Otherwise, the Project Area appears to be in a rural area of Webb County
that either warranted little attention, or the area was void of historic structures.
14

Nevetheless, the lack of comprehensive historic map and aerial information, coupled with the
paucity of cultural resources surveys within the area is possibly, and perhaps probably, why no
information is available regarding the presence of historic structures, ranching or industrial
activities, or persons of historic significance to the immediate area. Historic sites recorded in Webb
County consist of local family cemeteries with just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads
from as early as the 1850s, and trash scatters. Technically, any structures old than 45 years are
now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be considered
when the Project Area is developed.

Soils
As illustrated in Figure
7, there are two soil
types along the Project
Area. The first is
Catarina clay, deep,
calcareous and saline
clay on valley floors and
sides in this area of
Webb County Sanders
and Gabriel 1985; Web
Soil Survey 2011).
There is at best a
minimal probability that
intact archaeological
deposits exist Catarina
clay in these settings,
and these would be in
the upper 14 inches. The
second soil type is
Maverick-Catarina
complex (MCE), deep
clay on interfluve ridges
and summits, but with
minimal expectations to
discover intact cultural
deposits to about 6
inches below the surface.
Figure 7. Soils to be dissected by the Gates pipelines.

15

Field Survey Goals, Methodology, and Levels of Effort
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey. The topics addressed were site type, distribution, density,
size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework is structured around patterns of
settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the South Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)

locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic
survey methodology;

2)

quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,

3)

place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.

Methods and Levels of Effort
Two archaeologists conducted a pedestrian survey of the pipeline, meandering back and forth
across the right-of-way. Surface visibility ranged from 80 to 100 percent, and all cutbanks, and
rodent and mammal backdirt piles were thoroughly examined.

Results, Conclusions, and Recommendations
In general, disturbed
o r d efl at ed and
shallow soils were
prevalent across the
entire length of the
pipeline (see cover
photo, and Figure 8),
and no prehistoric or
historic cultural
materials were
observed. As such,
Ti erras Ant i guas
recommends that the
Gates F 3H and D 5H
pipelines be allowed to
be constructed as
currently planned, with
n o
f u r t h e r Figure 8. Gates D 5H Pipeline right-of-way from N3119550 E417200
a r c h a e o l o g i c a l (NAD83); facing south.
investigations. However,
16

Tierras Antiguas further recommends that if any additional, undiscovered cultural resources were
encountered during development, such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras
Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.

17

References Cited

Archer, S.
1995

Tree-grass Dynamics in a Prosopis-thornscrub Savannah Parkland:
Reconstructing the Past and Predicting the Future. Ecoscience 2(1):84-99.

Atlas
2011

Black, S. L.
1989

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
December 31, 2011].

Environmental Setting. In From the Gulf Coast to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in the Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.
L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C.
Bement, pp. 5-17. Research Series No. 33, Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Black, S. L., and A. J. McGraw
1985 The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity in the Upper
Salado Creek Drainage, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report,
No. 100. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.
Brune, G.
1981

Springs of Texas. Branch-Smith, Fort Worth.

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archaeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:361–400.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier
Books, New York.

18

Creel, D. G.
1986

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.

Diamond, D.D., D. H. Riskind, and S. L. Orzell
1987 A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas.
The Texas Journal of Science 39(3):203-221.
Dillehay, T.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas. Choke Canyon Series, Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Fox, A. A., and D. E. Fox
1967 The Classen Rockshelter, 41BX23. Manuscript on file. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Gould, F. W.
1975 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural
Experimentation Station, College Station.
Hall, G. D., T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black
1981 The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas: Results of
Phase II Archaeological Investigations. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 10.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hallenbeck, C.
1971 Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca: The Journey and Route of the First European to
Cross the Continent of North America, 1534-1536. Kennikat Press Scholarly
Reprints, Port Washington, New York.
Hester, T. R.
2004 The Prehistory of South Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, pp. 127-154. Edited
by T. K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
1995 The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.
1980 Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.

19

Highley, L., C. Graves, and G. Judson
1978 Archeological Investigations at Scorpion Cave (41ME7), Medina County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:139–194.
Inglis, J. M.
1964

A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin #45. Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department, Austin.

Leach, J. D., and C. B. Bousman
2001 Cultural and Secondary Formation Processes: On the Dynamic Accumulation of
Burned Rock Middens, Chapter 7. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek
Site, 41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D.
Leach, and D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265,
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio
and Archeological Studies, Report 3, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Leach, J. D., D. L. Nickels, B. K. Moses, and R. Jones
2001 Appendix D. Estimating Rates of Burned Rock Discard: Results from an
Experimental Earth Oven. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site,
41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach,
and D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265, Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio
Lee, D. S., C. R. Gilbert, C. H. Hocutt, R. E. Jenkins, P. E. McAllister, J. R. Stauffer, Jr.
1980 Atlas of North American Freshwater Fishers. North Carolina Biological Survey
Publication 1980-12, North Carolina State Museum of Natural History.
Leffler, J. and C. Long
1996 Webb County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 6, pp 864-866.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Map
2011

Biotic Provinces of Texas.
http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/landwater/land/maps/gis/map_downloads/images/p
wd_mp_e0100_1070ae_6.gif. [Accessed November 9, 2011].

Mauldin, R. P., D. L. Nickels, and C. J. Broehm
2003 Archaeological Testing to Determine the National Register Eligibility Status of
18 Prehistoric Sites on Camp Bowie, Brown County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report, No. 334, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio and the Adjutant General’s Department of Texas,
20

Department of Facilities and Engineering Environmental Branch, Austin, Texas.
McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southern Texas: The Problem of the
Paleo-Indian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:91–120.
Nickels, D. L.
2011 A Cultural Resources Survey of 3.7 Miles on the Dos Hermanos North Trunk
Line in Northwestern Webb County, Texas. Archaeology Report #26. Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.
Perry Castañeda Library
2011 Velenzuela Creek Topographic Map (1943). Perry Castañeda Maps.
Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed December 31, 2011].
Peter, D. E.
1982

Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens, In Archaeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 2,
compiled and edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 20.1–20.15. Archaeology Program,
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

Prewitt, E. R.
1991 Burned Rock Middens: A Summary of Previous Investigations and
Interpretations. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological
Symposium, edited T. R. Hester, pp. 25–32. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Robinson, R. L.
1982 Biosilica Analysis of Three Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in the Choke
Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak County, Texas: Preliminary Summary of Climatic
Implications. In Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
South Texas: The Phase I Findings, edited by G. D. Hall, S. L. Black, and C.
Graves, pp. 597-610. Choke Canyon Series, No. 5. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Sanders, R. R., and W. J. Gabriel
1985 Soil Survey of Webb County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment
21

Station, College Station, Texas.
Skelton, D. W.
1977 Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project, Fayette County,
Texas. Research Report 60. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Stahle, D. W. , and M. K. Cleaveland
1995 Texas Paleoclimatic Data from Daily to Millennial Time Scales. In The
Changing Climate of Texas: Predictability and Implications for the Future,
edited by J. Norwine, J. R. Giardino, G. R. North, and J. B. Valdes, pp. 49-69.
GeoBooks, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Steele, D. G., and C. Assad Hunter
1986 Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains from 41MC222 and 41MC296,
McMullen County, Texas. In The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological Investigations, edited by
G. D. Hall, T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black. Choke Canyon Series, No. 10. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Story, D. A.
1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp.
19–56. Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Taylor, A. J., and C. L. Highly
1995 Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A
Prehistoric Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. 2 volumes. Studies in
Archeology No. 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1999 A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Gulf Publishing.
Houston, TX.

22

Web Soil Survey
2011 Webb County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed
December 29, 2011].
Weir, F. A.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Anthropology
Department, Washington State University.

23

