Since 1976

CONCHO VALLEY
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
SAN ANGELO, TEXAS
www.cvassa.org
Steward eal Stilley at the
Graph Ranch Petroglyphs

EWSLETTER
ovember-2007
Tommy Garrison to Present ovember Program on the Lost Gidding’s
Station In Pecos County.
Tommy Garrison of the Iraan Archeological Society will give the November program on the “Lost Giddings Station” located
near Iraan on the Pecos River. The presentation will include information of the prehistoric use of the area, the Spanish Expeditions
through there in the 15th and 16th centuries,
and the building of this stagecoach station and
subsequent destruction of the station by Indians.

Member
Southwest Federation of
Archeological Societies

Rock Art Foundation White Shaman Thanksgiving Weekend
The RAF will host an open house at
the White Shaman Preserve during the
Thanksgiving 2007 holiday weekend.
RAF guides will be on duty for tours
both Friday and Saturday. Fees for tours
are waived during this time.

Election of ew CVAS Officers
It is that time again to elect new officers. The following members are running
unopposed.
President
Vice President
Treasure
Secretary
Outings
Key to building.

Sue Meacham
OPEN
Ward Gregory
Jo Riemenschneider
Jack Woodrow
Claude Hudspeth
Diane Fiveash
Tommy Deering

Tours are at 10:00 AM and 12:30
PM on both Friday and Saturday. No reservations are needed. Meet the guide at
the gate along Highway 90 West about
one mile west of Seminole Canyon State
Park. From the gate it is a short drive
over a maintained gravel road to the
parking area. The 1-1/2 mile round trip
hike into a side canyon along the Pecos
River is over a rough, rocky, and steep
trail. Wear sturdy shoes, dress in layers
according to the weather, and bring
drinking water. No pets.
Page 1

Archeological Legacy
Institute
Friends and colleagues: Field archaeologists spend lots of their down time swapping
stories and sharing laughs about events and circumstances on field projects. We're happy to
share some of these laughs with you in Shovel
Bum Joins the Army, the latest video feature on
our nonprofit streaming-media Web site, The
Archaeology
Channel
(http://
www.archaeologychannel.org).

Christmas Party
The CVAS Christmas party will be
Thursday, December 13th at 6:30 PM at the
Commissary Building. CVAS will be furnishing the meats. For side dishes, Sue
Meacham requests that if your last name begins with A through D, bring a desert. From
E through K, bring a salad. From L through
Z, bring a vegetable. Ice House Band

will be there. Bring your family

The Shovel Bum saga moves into its third
installment, produced by ALI's Guy Prouty and
featuring Trent de Boer's drawings and real
voice. T-Bone and Betsy have forsaken Arkansas and moved to Washington. T-Bone now
runs survey crews on the US Army's Yakima
Training Center. Defying unexploded ordnance,
flat tires, rattlesnakes, unfriendly MPs, suspicious Canadian soldiers, closed roads, and tank
caravans, the crew finds some remarkable prehistoric sites and lost Army gear while enjoying
the rugged landscape and winning bowling trophies.
This and other programs are available on
TAC for your use and enjoyment. We urge you
to support this public service by participating in
our
Membership
(http://
www.archaeologychannel.org/member.html)
and
Underwriting
(http://
www.archaeologychannel.org/sponsor.shtml)
programs. Only with your help can we continue
and enhance our nonprofit public-education and
visitor-supported programming. We also welcome new content partners as we reach out to
the world community.
Richard M. Pettigrew, Ph.D., RPA
President and Executive Director
Archaeological Legacy Institute
http://www.archaeologychannel.org

Lost Gidding Stage Station
Mark Your Calendars
ovember 15
Meeting
December 13
Christmas Party
Last minute changes will be posted to the web
site at: www.cvassa@org
♦
♦

The Concho Valley Archeological Society is a non
profit organization. Meetings are held on the
fourth Thursday of every month except July, November and December. We meet in the commissary building located at Ft. Concho, at 7 PM. Refreshments are offered. Dues are $15 for singles,
and $20 for families. Students and military personnel dues are free. Visitors are always welcome.
This newsletter is edited/published by Claude
Hudspeth 325-949-9077 cbhiii@aol.com
Check Web site www.cvassa.org for latest information and changes.
Page 2

