Since 1976

CONCHO VALLEY
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
SAN ANGELO, TEXAS
www.cvassa.org
Apache Canyon-Big Bend P

EWSLETTER
June-2007

Member
Southwest Federation of
Archeological Societies

CVAS Meeting
June 28 Program– Presented by
Larry Riemenschneider, on the
Ft. Chadbourne Excavations.
In March 2007 the Special Military
Active and Retired Travel Club (SMART)
group, along with the Concho Valley Archeological Society (CVAS), was asked
by Garland and Lana Richards of the Fort
Chadbourne Foundation to help with an
archeological project which would involve the excavations of an officers’ quarters (built in the late 1850’s) and later
used as a ranch headquarters. Sometime
during the 1920’s the ranch house burned
and, during the following years, the walls
crumbled into ruins.
The Fort Chadbourne Foundation received a grant to re-build the building, but
sketchy archival information and the lack
of photos created a problem as to the exact rebuilding of the structure. The objective of this project was to excavate the
rooms of the building in hopes of providing information for reconstruction.
Continued on page 3

Texas Archeological Society
Field School-Menard
The 2007 TAS Field School at Menard
was a huge success with over 460 paid
attendees. Considering that two previous
Field Schools had been held there, this
has set a record for return attendance.
The Field School coincided with
Menard’s celebration of 250 years since
the founding of the Presidio de San Saba
and the Mission located four miles downstream.
CVAS’s Jack Pool was the Camp Director (camp boss) and attending the Field
School from CVAS were Bill Yeates (who
gave a program on Paint Rock), Brownel
Roberts, Arnetta Cooper, Alice Stultz,
Continued on page 2

Page 1

Punching Western Clovis – YouTube
By Tom Ashmore
Believe it or not, the newest technology is
now giving insights into the oldest technology. YouTube is becoming something you
need to pay attention to for archeology related learning. I am fairly new to archeology
and the study of Indian stone artifacts. When
I first came into the area and started finding
stone tools and points at Dove Creek I kept
wondering how they knapped these
stones. As I went out to events sponsored by
CVAS I began to learn more by watching
some local knappers, but I couldn’t spend
enough time to see the process up close from
beginning to end. Then I stumbled onto an
instructional video that shows a very good
knapper working a Clovis point from beginning to end. It is put together in five separate
video chapters. The camera is focused on a
close up of the stone work the entire time
with the knapper explaining his strikes and
reasons for choosing the types of tools for
the types of strikes he is making. He uses
antler and hammer stones – no copper – so it
is a very authentic technique. You can view
Chapter one by going to the following link.
h t t p : / / w w w. y o u t u b e . c o m / w a t c h ?
v=Smt6NvMjZ9Q&mode=related&search=
Or you can go to www.youtube.com and type
into the search area “punching clovis”
Mark Your Calenders
July 14
Picnic State Park
August 23
Meeting
September 27
Meeting
October 13
Archeological Fair
October 25
Meeting
ovember 15
Meeting
December 15
Christmas Party
Last minute changes will be posted to the web

♦
♦
♦
♦
♦
♦
♦

Page 2

C. A. Maedgen

Black Jack Ranch
Archeological Survey
On May 5, 2007 several members of the
Concho Valley Archeological Society met
at the Black Jack Ranch near Knickerbocker to survey 1000 acres of the ranch
owned by Mr. & Mrs. Tom Thornton. The
group divided into two teams. One led by
Claude surveyed the upland areas of the
ranch and the other led by Larry surveyed
the lowland area along Dove Creek. No
sites were located in the upland areas. Three sites were recorded in the lowland areas along Dove Creek. These sites
consisted of open prehistoric camp sites of
unknown occupation and historic lithic
scatters. The best find of the day goes to
C.A. Maedgen who came up with a large
bi-face. Very exciting time for C.A. as this
was one of his first artifact finds. Thanks
to the Thorntons for allowing the CVAS to
survey on their property. A return trip may
be merited in the winter as the growth from
the recent rains made it nearly impossible
to see the surface.
TAS Field School
Tim Brewster, Marsi Marcia, Tom Deering, and former member Royce Baker,
now of Tarrant Co. Archeological Society.
From page 1

Archaeological Legacy
Institute
Friends and colleagues: Digital laser imaging technology now has been applied
to one of the founding sites of the Andean Civilization. You can see how 3D
imaging reveals remarkable architectural complexity in Chavin de Huantar: A
CyArk Case Study, the latest video feature on our nonprofit streaming-media
Web site, The Archaeology Channel
(http://www.archaeologychannel.org).
Chavin de Huantar exemplifies CyArk, a
project of the Kacyra Family Foundation
that is preserving the world's most valued cultural heritage sites in threedimensional digital form. Between 800
and 300 BC, during the Chavin Horizon,
the site was the ceremonial center of
the Peruvian Andes and the location of
the "Smiling God" of the Lanzon, represented by the Lanzon Monolith. Chavin's advanced textiles, metallurgy and ceramics changed traditional
methods throughout South America. This video shows how CyArk is
preserving the site in digital imagery
through laser-scanning technology and
the most accurate 3D models possible
today.
This and other programs are available
on TAC for your use and enjoyment. We urge you to support this public service by participating in our Memb e r s h i p
( h t t p : / /
w w w. a r c h a e o l o g y c h a n n e l . o r g /
member.html) and Underwriting (http://
w w w. a r c h a e o l o g y c h a n n e l . o r g /
sponsor.shtml) programs
Continued →
Page 3

. Only with your help can we continue
and enhance our nonprofit publiceducation and visitor-supported programming. We also welcome new content partners as we reach out to the
world community.
Please forward this message to others
who may be interested and let us know
if you wish to be removed from our
mailing list.
Richard M. Pettigrew, Ph.D., RPA
President and Executive Director
Archaeological Legacy Institute
http://www.archaeologychannel.org
Editors note: This is the organization
we have supported in the past and we
must approve by vote to continue to
support. I think we should.
Continued from page 1

Riemenschneider
This proved to be a very interesting project. When the building burned it created a
mini-time capsule which helped answer
many of the questions in needed to be answered before rebuilding. Many interesting
artifacts were recovered.

The Concho Valley Archeological Society is a non
profit organization. Meetings are held on the
fourth Thursday of every month except July, November and December. We meet in the commissary building located at Ft. Concho, at 7 PM. Refreshments are offered. Dues are $15 for singles,
and $20 for families. Students and military personnel dues are free. Visitors are always welcome.
This newsletter is edited/published by Claude
Hudspeth 325-949-9077 cbhiii@aol.com
Check Web site www.cvassa.org for latest information and changes.

TAS Field School-07

Annual Picnic-July 14
Meet at the South Entrance to San Angelo
State Park at 8 AM. Some hiking. Lunch
will be at the orth Pavilion.

Answers

A. What kinds of leases on Native American lands were first made to white-owned
companies in 1902?
B. The U.S. Mint issued the famous Buffalo Head nickel in 1913. Chiefs of which
three tribes were used in the composite
portrait on the reverse side from the buffalo?
C. Why was Jim Thorpe, who was part
Sauk, forced to return the decathlon and
pentathlon medals he had won in 1912 at
the Olympic Games in Stockholm?
D. Did any Native Americans fight in
World War I?

Page 4

A. Oil and gas leases were made by the
secretary of the interior on land in Oklahoma
B. Chiefs of the Cheyenne, the Seneca,
and the Sioux.
C. It was discovered that he had briefly
played semipro baseball. Thorpe, a product of the famous Carlisle Indian School,
nevertheless entered into legend as perhaps the greatest male athlete of all time
in the United States. His medals were restored posthumously in 1983.
D. Yes, they enlisted in considerable
numbers. It was partially as recognition
of their contributions that the Citizenship
Act was passed in 1924, making all Native Americans citizens of the land they
had once ruled.

Larry’s Corner

