PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Eight, Number Nine, December 2018

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Andy Burchard
Miranda Bible
Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Upcoming Events

2b

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Program Information:

4

Studer Banquet Registration Form

5

From the Editor’s Desk
We must help each other to de-clutter our houses!
Bring anything that’s useful, beautiful, strange, or just plain
wonderful for the silent Auction at the Studer Banquet.

Psst! Legal Tender of Any Size
will be accepted.
This is the PAS’ only fundraiser of the year!
UPCOMING EVENTS
December 8 , 2018

Studer Banquet (See page 5.) Membership and Banquet costs may
be combined or separate.

March 29-30, 2019

Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies
Midland College, Midland Tx
Activity Friday evening, Symposium Saturday. Be sure to plan to attend, and
please be thinking of making a presentation.
Jack Lowder [mailto:jacktlowder@att.net]

April 10-14, 2019

Society for American Archaeology 84th Annual Meeting

Albuquerque, New Mexico http://saa.org/AbouttheSociety/AnnualMeeting/
tabid/138/Default.aspxhttp://saa.org/AbouttheSociety/AnnualMeeting/tabid/138/Default.aspx

2

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of November 14, 2018
The meeting was called to order by President Veronica Arias at 7 p.m. in the Amarillo Downtown Library.
There were 12 persons in attendance.
PROGRAM: The program for the evening was given by Joe D. Rogers. Joe’s topic was: Mission San Lorenzo de la Cruz
(1762-1768) - Recent excavations and observations on the construction and architecture of a Spanish Colonial Mission.
Both Texas Tech University and TAS had 2017 & 2018 summer Field Schools at this Mission. Prior excavations were
done by Curtis Tunnel in 1962.
Interesting excavation photos showed a variety of construction features at the Mission. Exterior walls and the Granary
building had more robust foundations and walls than the interior walls dividing living spaces. The 2018 excavations revealed a previously unknown “water gate” entrance near the eastern end of the north wall. Site disturbances after the Mission was abandoned challenged the interpretation process. The disturbances included bulldozer work, removal of some
original construction materials, adjacent construction of the Camp Wood military post, and foreign materials brought in for
partial Mission wall reconstruction.
MINUTES: Following a motion by Rolla Shaller and second by Joe Rogers, the minutes from the previous meeting were
accepted as printed in the PASTIMES newsletter.
TREASURER’S REPORT: No report was available.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported ending October balances of $2,490.41 in the Money Market Account, and $5,147.42 in the Certificate of Deposit.

OLD BUSINESS: No items were discussed.
NEW BUSINESS:
Scott Brosowske reported that preparations for the 2019 TAS Annual Meeting (to be held in Amarillo) continue on-track.
Discussions regarding meeting plans for 2019 were held at the recent San Antonio meeting. Scott mentioned that many
people (at the San Antonio meeting) told him they would volunteer to help with this event in Amarillo. There will be a previsit in April 2019 by several TAS leaders to check out the Amarillo meeting facilities in the Downtown Embassy Suites.
Rolla Shaller suggested that an outing to the Big Texan be considered for the Thursday or Friday evening as the 2019 TAS
event begins.
The annual Studer Banquet will be held at 6pm on December 8 in Youngblood’s Café (620 SW 16th Avenue). Members are
reminded to RSVP for this event by December 4 to Pam Allison or Rolla Shaller. Also, please bring donation items for the
Silent Auction fundraiser.
Scott Brosowske announced that Bonnie Pitblado of Oklahoma University will be speaking about her Paleo-Indian Research at the Studer Banquet.
Other pending events were mentioned as follows:
The Sesquicentennial (150th Anniversary) of the Battle of the Washita will be November 27, 2018. Commemorative events
will be held from 7am-2pm November 27 at the Washita Battlefield National Historic Site near Cheyenne, Oklahoma.
GeoArcheologists, THC Archeologists, and TAS personnel will be visiting PaloDuro Canyon State Park the week after
Thanksgiving. Several pre-planning visits will be needed for the upcoming TAS Field School in June, 2019.
PPHM will be hosting Christmas Open House from 6-9pm on November 30, and 1-5pm December 1. Admission will be
free, but a canned food donation is requested.
The 2019 Stone Age Fair in Perryton is scheduled for the third weekend in April.
Papers are needed for the upcoming 2019 Southwest Federation Meeting on March 30 at Midland College.
The meeting adjourned at 8:15 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Andy Burcham, Secretary

3

PROGRAM INFORMATION
STUDER BANQUET SPEAKER
Title: Peopling of the New World:
Central Controversies of the 21st Century
Abstract: Dr. Pitblado's talk will explore three of the major debates currently driving the field of the peopling of the New World. She will first discuss
why 35 genera of megafauna (in North America alone) went extinct at the
end of the Ice Age, focusing in particular on the roles that climate change and
(or) humans played in the extinction process. Next, she will identify and
evaluate the route or routes colonizing people followed to reach the Pleistocene Americas. Finally, she will touch on the timing of the initial peopling of
the New World. The presentation is designed to welcome interaction with the
audience, to help keep everyone awake after dinner!
Bio: Dr. Bonnie Pitblado is the Robert E. and Virginia Bell Endowed Professor of Anthropology at the University of Oklahoma, a

position she has held since 2012. Her research interests focus on the peopling of the New World more than 13,000 years ago, and
most especially on the initial human occupation of the Rocky Mountains. She recently initiated a complementary research program
in Oklahoma, which she and her co-principal investigators have dubbed "GOFAR" (short for "Gang of Oklahoman First Americans
Researchers"). That new research agenda focuses for now on the high(ish) country of eastern Oklahoma, although over time it may
expand to include work in each of Oklahoma's six (!) mountainous regions. Most importantly from her perspective, Dr. Pitblado has
had a career-long passion for public archaeology. She directed the Utah State University Museum of Anthropology for a decade, and
two years ago she founded the Oklahoma Public Archaeology Network (OKPAN). OKPAN offers a variety of publicoriented programs (visit okpan.org for details) and has an active presence on Facebook and Twitter. She encourages everyone to
follow the organization on the social media platform of their choice.

4

41st ANNUAL FLOYD V. STUDER
BANQUET AND LECTURE
6:00 PM DECEMBER 8, 2018 (SATURDAY)
YOUNGBLOOD’S CAFÉ
620 SW 16th St. at Madison
AMARILLO, TEXAS
……………………………CUT HERE……………………………………..
Reservations & RSVP
Please return by December 4, 2018
NAME………………………………………………………………….
ADDRESS……………………………………………………………..
EMAIL…………………………………………PHONE………………

NUMBER OF RESERVATIONS $25.00 EA.

$................
2018 PAS Membership Dues

$ 15.00 Individual

$................

$ 20.00 Family

$................

$ 10.00 Student w/ID

$................

TOTAL AMOUNT ENCLOSED

$..................

Panhandle Archaeological Society
P.O. Box 814 Amarillo, Texas 79105
rsvp
5

