Cultural Resources Monitoring Report for Cimarex Energy's
Rivers Edge 3D Seismic Survey Outside of the Big Thicket National
Preserve in Hardin, Jasper, Jefferson, and Orange Counties, Texas

Permit Number
SWG-2011-00570

By
Edward P. Baxter and Exa M. Grubb

2014

Cultural Resources Monitoring Report for Cimarex Energy's Rivers Edge 3D
Seismic Survey Outside of the Big Thicket National Preserve in Hardin, Jasper,
Jefferson, and Orange Counties, Texas

Permit Number
SWG-2011-00570

Prepared for
Cimarex Energy Company
1700 Lincoln Street
Denver, Colorado 80203

Prepared by
DESCO Environmental Consultants, LP
P.O. Box 1490
Magnolia, Texas 77353

2014

ABSTRACT
The Rivers Edge 3D project area encompasses an 88.8 square mile (56,832 acre)
area in Hardin, Jasper, Jefferson, and Orange counties, Texas. Part of this area is
within The Big Thicket National Preserve overseen by the National Park Service.
This report addresses the cultural resources monitoring during the seismic survey
on the USACE permitted portion outside of the Big Thicket National preserve. The
report is patterned after the Council of Texas Archaeologists’ (CTA) Short Report
Format since no additional cultural resource sites were discovered. Prior to
fieldwork, an Avoidance Plan entitled “Avoidance Plan and Monitoring Methods for
Cimarex Energy's Rivers Edge 3D Seismic Survey Outside of the Big Thicket
National Preserve in Hardin, Jasper, Jefferson, and Orange Counties, Texas”
(Moore et al. 2011) was submitted to the USACE, Galveston District and the Texas
Historical Commission (THC) and was approved in February 2012. The field survey
and drilling operations were carried out in summer and fall of 2012. DESCO
archaeologist, John Hogg, assisted seismic operatives as per the monitoring and
avoidance methodology laid out in the Avoidance Plan. In general, monitoring
consisted of an archaeologist being present when any drilling was performed near a
cultural resource buffer and visual inspections and shovel testing of any source point
placed within the High Probability Areas (HPA). In total, 62 source points were
investigated, and all were negative for cultural resources. Seismic activities had no
adverse impact on cultural resources within the project area.
Portions of the Avoidance Plan are included in this report. The Avoidance
Methodology and Monitoring Methods were framed for seismic operatives and field
archaeologists. The logic that built the avoidance areas are found in Research
Methods and High Probability Areas chapters. The archaeological setting of the
project area is found in Prehistoric Chronology and Historic Chronology chapters.
The cultural resources overview of the entire project area is in chapters: Surveys in
the Project Area Depicted in the Atlas and Archaeological Sites in the Project Area.
There are twenty-three previously recorded archaeological sites in the project
area. Five are in Hardin County (41HN3, 41HN53, 41HN54, 41HN55 and 41HN56),
one is in Jasper County (41JP142), eight are in Jefferson County (41JF1, 41JF2,
41JF3, 41JF46, 41JF59, 41JF63, 41JF67, and 41JF72), and nine are in Orange
County (41OR4, 41OR5, 41OR6, 41OR66, 41OR84, 41OR93, 41OR94, 41OR95,
and 41OR96). Fourteen sites are prehistoric, and nine sites are historic. The
prehistoric sites date to the Early Ceramic period and Late Prehistoric period, and
the historic sites vary in age from the nineteenth to the twentieth centuries. There is
one National Register of Historic Places property in the project area, which is the
French Home trading Post (41JF46). In addition to these recorded sites there are
eight historic wrecks noted in the Neches River by the THC.

i

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Cimarex Energy Company of Denver, Colorado is the client for this project.
Our contact with this firm is Tanya Matherne Matcek of DESCO Environmental
Consultants (DESCO) who acted as the project principal for DESCO. The
Regulatory Permit Coordinator and agent for DESCO is Justin Rowland. Support
was also provided by Jerry L. Androy who is a staff archaeologist at the United
States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), Galveston District. Jean Hughes is the
Records Conservator at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) on
the campus of The University of Texas at Austin. She checked the site files and
other records at that agency for previously recorded sites and cemeteries. Jonathan
Jarvis (TexSite and Atlas Coordinator at TARL) provided us with shapefiles that
depicted known sites in the project area. Lili G. Lyddon drafted the figures in the
report. John Hogg was the field archaeologist for DESCO.

ii

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENT ................................................................................................... 4
RESEARCH METHODS ....................................................................................... 4
AVOIDANCE METHODS ..................................................................................... 5
PREHISTORIC CHRONOLOGY........................................................................... 6
HISTORIC CHRONOLOGY ................................................................................ 10
SURVEYS IN THE PROJECT AREA DEPICTED ON THE ATLAS .................... 12
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES IN THE PROJECT AREA ...................................... 16
HIGH PROBABILITY AREAS ............................................................................. 24
MONITORING METHODS .................................................................................. 24
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................ 25
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................ 27

FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location ................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Topographic Quadrangles in the Project Area ....................................... 3
Figure 3. Southeastern Region of Texas ................................................................ 7

TABLE
Table 1. Unrecorded Wrecks .............................................................................. 24

APPENDICES
Appendix I: Project Area Map
Appendix II: Total Points Investigated

iii

INTRODUCTION
Cimarex Energy Company of Denver, Colorado is the client for the seismic
survey that is designed to provide a high-resolution image of the subsurface
geological features. Cimarex applied to the United States Army Corps of Engineers,
Galveston District (USACE) for a permit (SWG-2011-00570) to perform this seismic
survey. The client retained DESCO Environmental Consultants, LP (formerly Dixie
Environmental Services Co., LP) to provide the environmental services required for
this permit.
Monitoring consisted of an archaeologist being present when any drilling was
performed near a cultural resource buffer and visual inspections and shovel testing
of any source point placed within the high probability areas identified during pre-field
tasks as discussed in the Research Methods of the Avoidance Plan (Moore et al.
2011) and depicted in the Appendix I map. When a source point was surveyed in
the high probability area, the archaeologist recorded their findings in an investigation
log which is included as an appendix in this report. In total, 62 source points were
checked and were negative for cultural resources. No new cultural resource sites
were found.
Prior to field operations, an Avoidance Plan (Moore et al. 2011) was prepared
laying out the methodology for the field survey (Avoidance Methodology and
Monitoring Methods) and presenting the logic that built the avoidance areas
(Research Methods and High Probability Areas). The Avoidance Plan included a
comprehensive archaeological setting (Prehistoric Chronology, Historic Chronology,
Early Towns and Communities) and cultural resources overview (Surveys in the
Project Area Depicted in the Atlas and Archaeological Sites in the Project Area) of
the entire project area. The background sections of this management summary
report are from the Avoidance Plan.
A portion of the project area is within the boundaries of the Big Thicket
National Preserve which was permitted by that federal agency. The entire Big
Thicket area was treated as a high probability area, and all proposed source points
and drill access routes were surveyed (Moore et al. 2013). Approximately 3.52
square miles of Village Creek State Park were surveyed under Texas Antiquities
Permit 6215 by DESCO for this seismic survey (Baxter and Grubb, 2012). DESCO
recorded three prehistoric sites (41HN54, 41HN55 and 41HN56) which were
monitored. DESCO monitored all drilling within the Big Thicket boundaries in
concurrence with surveying and drilling covered in this report to help ensure site
avoidance and clear any source point moves or new access.
The project area is located in the southeastern portion of Hardin County, the
southwestern portion of Jasper County, the northeastern portion of Jefferson
County, and the western portion of Orange County (Figure 1). The size of the
project area is 88.8 square miles (56,832 acres), of which 61.59 square miles
1

(39,418 acres) are under the jurisdiction of the USACE. The Neches River is the
major source of fresh water, and there are numerous streams present (see
Environment below). Topographic coverage of the project area is provided by six
United States Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5’ topographic quadrangles. They are
Beaumont East (3094-111), Beaumont West (3094-112), Evadale (3094-141), Pine
Forest (3094-114), Silsbee (3094-142), and Voth (3094-113). The project area and
its relationship to the topographic quadrangles are illustrated in Figure 2.

Figure 1. General Location
2

Figure 2. Topographic Quadrangles in the Project Area

3

ENVIRONMENT
The project area is located in the extreme southeastern part of Texas. It is
bordered on the northwest by Hardin County, on the northeast by Jasper County, on
the south and east by Orange County, and on the south and west by Jefferson
County. The project area is located in the extreme southeastern part of Texas in the
area known as the West Gulf Coastal Plains. The landscape of the region generally
consists of a rolling to hilly terrain covered with pine forests and hardwoods. Further
west, the pine forests give way to flat land covered with brush and prairie grass due
to a more arid climate. To the south, the elevation can be as low as sea level and
marshy areas are common.
Sources of water in the project area are varied and consist of Turkey Baygall,
Banks Bayou, Brakes Bayou, Hillebrandt Bayou, Lake Bayou, Pine Island Bayou,
Walker Branch, The Cutoff, Bear Woods Creek, Boggy Creek, Ten Mile Creek,
Village Creek, Big Mac Lake, Cooks Lake, Four Mile Lake, Laurel Lake, Little Mac
Lake, Long Lake, Sandy Lake, Scatterman Lake, Shinny Lake, Rice Marsh, Jinks
Pond, Neches River, Walnut Run, Cane Slough, Little Bellrose Slough, Maple
Slough, Sandy Slough, and Village Slough. The following information was taken
from the 1928 Texas Almanac, the 2004-2005 Texas Almanac, and the Handbook of
Texas Online (searched for counties by name).
RESEARCH METHODS
The first step in this project was a review of the Texas Archeological Sites
Atlas (hereafter referred to as the Atlas), a restricted website that contains
archaeological site data for the entire state of Texas, and the Texas Historical
Commission’s (THC) public website that contains cemetery data for the entire state
of Texas. Relevant reports were identified, and site forms were copied and
reviewed in order to better understand the types of archaeological sites present in
the area and where they are likely to be found. The Handbook of Texas Online was
used to obtain historical information. Jean Hughes checked the topographic maps
at that agency for previously recorded sites that might not be depicted on the Atlas.
Jonathan Jarvis provided shapefiles of areas examined by archaeologists, and they
were downloaded and incorporated into the project area map (Appendix I). This
allowed us to identify areas that have been surveyed or otherwise examined by
professional archaeologists. Previously recorded sites are discussed in detail in the
section entitled Archaeological Sites in the Project Area. Past surveys and other
projects are discussed in the section Surveys in the Project Area Depicted on the
Atlas.
Historic overlay maps found on the Texas Natural Resources Information
System (TNRIS) website (ftp://ftp2.tnris.org/Imagery/THO/) were downloaded and
used to determine the historic high probability areas. The agencies that prepared
these maps are the Army Military Service, the Tennessee Valley Authority, and the
4

United States Geological Survey. The maps used include eight topographic
quadrangles. They are Beaumont (1:62,000) dated 1932; Beaumont East
(1:24,000) dated 1943; Beaumont East (1:24,000) dated 1960; Lakeview (1:31,000)
dated 1946; Pine Forest (1:24,000) dated 1960; Silsbee (1:62,000) dated 1955;
Voth (1:31,000) dated 1946; Voth (1:24,000) dated 1960; a soil map for Jefferson
County (1:63,000) dated 1913; a Controlled Reconnaissance Map of Jefferson,
Orange, Hardin, and Jasper Counties dated 1911; the Lakeview Tennessee Valley
Authority map dated 1946; a Railroad Map of Texas published in 1873; and Bissell’s
Railway Junction-Point Map of Texas dated 1891. The results of this research were
then used to plot previously recorded archaeological sites, historic structures,
properties listed in the National Register of Historic Places, and cemeteries on
project maps for avoidance. High probability areas were identified from maps and
reports, and these areas were marked for avoidance.
Location data for high probability areas and points investigated, area projects,
linear projects, previously recorded prehistoric and historic sites, and the cemeteries
in the project area are depicted on the map that accompanies this report (Appendix
I). The avoidance map was compiled with the project boundary superimposed over
USGS 7.5’ topographic quadrangles.
AVOIDANCE METHODS
This section was included in the Avoidance Plan and describes the
methodology for archaeologists and seismic operatives to follow during survey and
drilling.
Drilling activities will avoid the known archaeological sites, cemeteries, all
historic standing structures, and properties listed in the National Register of Historic
Places. A buffer of 164 feet (50 meters) will be placed around these resources. The
50 meter buffer was set by the THC. No drilling is allowed inside the cultural
resource buffer so no direct impact is anticipated. The direct impact of seismic
activities is regarded as being confined to the source point location during drilling.
Indirect impact is not a factor since the drill spends approximately 20-30 minutes at
the source point location and then moves on. All that remains at the surface of the
source point location is a wooden lath that will be removed once the charge is
detonated. Receiver points are allowed within the buffered areas since no ground
disturbing activities are associated with this operation. Geophone locations are
marked with a lath and the receiver geophones and connecting cables are stretched
along the ground surface for a short period of time and then removed. Indirect
impacts are not applicable.
Several environmental settings in the project area are likely to contain
significant archeological sites, and they have been marked on the attached map as
high probability areas. These include a buffer of 98 feet (30 meters) around streams,
lakes, marshes, ponds, the banks of all major waterways, selected topographic
5

features, and areas of historic interest found during research. High probability areas
will be avoided to the greatest extent possible unless a cultural resource survey with
adequate field methods has been previously conducted. If these areas cannot be
avoided, drilling will be allowed only after an archaeological monitor has investigated
the proposed source point locations, and all sites found during these investigations
are marked for avoidance. These investigations will be carried out according to the
methods described in the Monitoring Methods section.
Vehicles and heavy equipment will be restricted to existing roads and trails
and will be prohibited from encroaching on all archaeological sites and cemeteries
as plotted on the attached map. Highland drilling rigs and all-terrain vehicles will be
utilized off-road to accomplish objectives on land. Airboat drills and/or pontoon drills
will be utilized to drill in marshes. The placement of seismic receivers and cables
will be conducted on foot, and areas will be cleared of vegetation at ground level
without use of mechanized equipment. The locations of proposed source points will
be investigated by archaeologists within the High Probability Avoidance Area
according to the Scope-of-Work in the Monitoring Methods section below.
PREHISTORIC CHRONOLOGY
The project area is located in the Southeastern Region of Texas as defined
by the THC (Figure 3). Detailed summaries of Southeast Texas prehistory have
been prepared by various researchers with the most notable examples being the
scholarly works by Lawrence E. Aten (1983a, 1983b) and Dee Ann Story, et al.
(1990). In Ensor’s (1991) prehistoric overview prepared for the Cypress Creek
study, he states that the best chronological and stratigraphic data currently available
for interpreting the successive cultural adaptations in Southeast Texas are found in
works by Wheat (1953), Shafer (1968, 1974, 1975, 1988), Patterson (1979, 1983),
Hall (1981), Aten (1983b), and Ensor and Carlson (1988, 1989). It is generally
accepted by most archaeologists that Southeast Texas prehistory is divided into
three basic prehistoric periods: Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric. Kotter
(1981) believes that there was a Formative Period that existed prior to Historic
contact. More specific to the project area, however, is the chronology discussed by
Ambler (1970:4-7). His comments are inserted into the general chronology below.

6

Figure 3. Southeastern Region of Texas (after Moore 1989)

7

Paleo-Indian Period
The common conception of the Paleo-Indian period is the time following the last
ice age in North America when man wandered about the continent in pursuit of mega
fauna such as mammoth, mastodon, and now-extinct species of bison. Although not
much is known about their diet, plants and other smaller animals were probably as
important to the Paleo-Indians as an occasional mammoth or other large animal. Sites
with in situ deposits dating to this period are few in number in Southeast Texas.
Paleo-Indians are also noted for the manufacture of unique and distinctive projectile
points. In Southeast Texas, a variety of Paleo-Indian points have been found, with
most of the specimens obtained through surface collections. Two of the best-known
types associated with this period in Southeast Texas are Clovis and Folsom.
Angostura, Meserve, Plainview and Scottsbluff are other types found in the area that
date to this period. The San Patrice point is viewed as a transitional type between the
Paleo-Indian period and the emerging Archaic Period. Descriptions of these and other
types discussed in this report are described in Turner and Hester (1985) and Suhm
and Jelks (1962). In Southeast Texas, the Paleo-Indian period is thought to have
lasted about 2000 years, from 10,000 B.C. to 8000 B.C. (Ensor 1991:8). McFaddin
Beach (41JF50) in Jefferson County is the only site in the area that dates to this
period. Paleo-Indian points have been found on the shore, and it is assumed by
several archaeologists (Long 1977; Turner and Tanner 1994; Stright et al. 1999) that
they washed up from the main site area that is now under the waters of the Gulf of
Mexico. There are no known Paleo-Indian sites in the current project area.
Archaic Period
The Archaic period is generally defined as the period following the extinction of
Pleistocene megafauna during which small bands of hunters and gatherers roamed
the countryside in search of plants and animals. During this time, the overall
population increased as evidenced by a greater number of sites. This period is divided
into the Early, Middle, and Late periods. According to Dippel (2001:4-2), the Archaic in
East Texas lasted from 6000 B.C. to 200 B.C. Duffield (1963) views the Early Archaic
as a transitional period from Paleo-Indian to Archaic times, based on a marked change
in technology rather than subsistence. Coleman et al. (1984) believe that these
changes may have been the result of population increases that produced a greater
emphasis on territoriality and a greater reliance on the inferior local lithic resources.
Research by some archaeologists (Perttula and Skiles 1987; Story 1985; Perttula
1995) at Early Archaic sites indicates that these groups tended to be small, highly
mobile, and widely scattered with recurrent occupations centered on terrace and
upland projections within major river basins. According to Dippel (2001:4-2), the
Middle Archaic is the first well-documented period in the region. According to her, “the
distribution of these sites tends to indicate a settlement system based along the major
basins and more limited use of smaller tributaries and headwater areas.” Dippel states
that subsistence strategies still depended on a hunting and gathering economy, but
there was a greater reliance on native plants. Dippel (2001:4-3) states that the Late
Archaic period is the best documented Archaic component in the Piney Woods of East
8

Texas. Late Archaic sites are more widely distributed throughout the region and are
found on sandy knolls and other elevated areas along rivers, major streams, near
springs, and on spring-fed branches and tributaries (Shafer 1975; Perttula 1995).
Although Gary and Kent are viewed by some archaeologists as the major projectile
points used during this period in Southeast Texas, other types such as Bulverde, Ellis,
Morrill, Neches River, Palmillas, Wells, and Yarbrough have been reported. There are
no known sites dating to this period in the current project area.
Late Prehistoric Period
This period, also referred to as the Neo-Archaic, is marked by the addition of
arrow points and the use of ceramics. Kotter (1981:33) believes few (if any) changes
in subsistence strategies occurred during this time. The association of Gary points and
ceramics strengthens his argument. No direct evidence of horticulture is known from
this region. He also states that the Late Prehistoric period probably continued to the
time of Historic contact. Ensor (1991) separates the Neo-Archaic into Early and Late
Ceramic periods with the Early Ceramic Period dating from A.D. 400 to A.D. 800, and
the Late Ceramic Period dating from A.D. 800 to A.D. 1750. Cultural materials
diagnostic of this period are common in the region. Late Prehistoric sites are found
both along mainstream riverine and tributary environments indicating the same
localities that were exploited during the Late Archaic Period were utilized.
According to Ensor (1991), the Early Ceramic Period combines ceramics with
Godley, Gary, and Kent dart points. Arrow points appeared during the latter part of the
Late Prehistoric period beginning with Catahoula and Friley types. Later, other types
(from oldest to youngest) such as Alba, Bonham, Scallorn, Perdiz, and Cliffton were
utilized. Pottery found at Late Prehistoric sites in the area consists of decorated and
undecorated types with undecorated sandy-paste types being the most common.
Dates for this period are estimated at A.D. 100 to A.D. 1500 or later (Ambler 1970).
Ten of the previously recorded sites in the current project area date to this period
based on the presence of ceramics, and a possible Kent dart point and a Friley arrow
point recovered in association with ceramics.
Formative Period
This stage is viewed by Kotter (1981:34) as a time when changes in social
and economic organization occurred. These changes were accompanied by a
dependence on agriculture. The presence of mound and village sites in the area is
viewed as evidence of this period. However, if agriculture was practiced in the
region it was probably not widespread. Sorrow and Cox (1973) believe that
evidence of this stage in the region may exist due to the large number of sites in the
Navasota River Basin containing ceramics. There are no sites associated with this
period in the project area.

9

HISTORIC CHRONOLOGY
The first non-Indian to lay a personal claim to the area was Lorenzo de
Zavala whose 1829 Mexican land grant was in the nearby Big Thicket. The first
settlers to move into the area were Anglo-Americans who came to East Texas in the
1830s and established their homes on the eastern edge of the Big Thicket. The
early economy was based on survival from the land in methods similar to their
Indian neighbors. According to Meining (1988:Map 6), the early settlers came from
various parts of the country such as the North, Upper South, Lower South, and
Europe. He states that the early Texans were more likely to have come to Texas
from states such as Alabama and Tennessee, and that it was common for them to
pass through the established towns of Jefferson or Nacogdoches on their way to
land grants and other destinations.
When the Republic of Texas gained its independence in 1836, there were
twenty-three Spanish municipalities. As Texas began to organize and population
increased, these areas became the first counties and some were later divided into
new counties. Of the four counties in the project area, Jasper and Jefferson were
two of the twenty-three original counties. Orange County was created in 1852 from
Jefferson County, and Hardin County was created in 1858 from Jefferson and
Liberty counties.
The economic history of the area is much the same as that of the rest of East
Texas. Until the 1880s, the inhabitants were scattered throughout the area and lived
on subsistence farms. They let their hogs and cattle range rather freely, and they
hunted small game as well as deer and bear. According to a historic marker entitled
“Beaumont: Lumber Mill City of the Nineteenth Century – Beaumont, Jefferson
County, Texas,” Beaumont was a “timber town at birth” because of its location in
vast forests. The practice of cutting timber began as early as 1840 when Lucien
Hopson had a sawpit on a canal near Beaumont. The canal was used to float logs
to the mill and transport finished lumber out to the market. In the 1850s, steam mills
and steam power for the logging operations were initiated. A publication by The
Logging Machinery Department at Lidgerwood Manufacturing Company (1905)
discusses the practice of using steam for logging, and an early account of logging
methods in the United States was written by Bryant (1913). Following the Civil War,
the mills helped the city recover. One of the major sawmills was named Voth
(41JF72), and it is in the current project area. By 1877, the Beaumont Lumber
Company (among others) was in operation.
By the 1880s, the lumber industry had created a new and vibrant economy in
the area. As a result, virgin pine trees were cut and more land was opened for
farming and grazing. According to Block (1972), Mark Wiess, William Wiess, and
Valentine Wiess became an “indispensable trio among the top ten lumber barons” of
what was referred to as “Sawdust City.” In 1881, the three Wiess brothers created
the Reliance Lumber Company.
10

By the 1920s, the practice of floating logs on the Neches River gave way to
hauling them by rail. Sawmills in the city were phased out in favor of those in the
woods closer to the timber. Some towns such as Lumberton received their names
based on logging. Today one can see evidence of this industry in a series of now
abandoned trams and canals. Trams and canals were the principal means of
moving timber from the forest to the sawmill. The trams also served as a basic
system of transportation for the front camp workers. Some of the early lumbermen
were J. Frank Keith who founded the J. F. Keith Company in the early days of the
twentieth century and John Henry Kirby who created the Kirby Lumber Company at
Silsbee. Other notable lumbermen of that period included members of the Carroll
and Long families, John W. Keith, J. N. Gilbert, J. F. Ward, and W. A. Fletcher.
There were numerous smaller sawmills throughout the area such as the one at
Wiess Bluff because of its proximity to the forests of Hardin and Jasper counties and
the Neches River that was used for transporting logs. In the early days, timber was
transported on tram roads. By 1890, it had become profitable to erect sawmills
along the line of the Sabine and East Texas Railroad.
In 1901, oil was discovered, and a new source of income was realized.
Places such as the Sour Lake oilfield brought outsiders to the area seeking work.
This new means of income helped revitalize communities such as Village Mills that
had suffered when the Kirby Lumber Company closed its mill. The discovery of
nearby deposits of oil and natural gas in 1945 brought new jobs to those displaced
by the end of the lumber boom. J. Frank Keith owned some of the land where the
Spindletop oil field was discovered. After that, most of his interests centered on oil
exploration and in organizing and directing several business firms and banks. In
1902, Kirby took over the Higgins Oil and Fuel Company owned by Pattilo Higgins.
In 1921, he established the Kirby Petroleum Company, which operated as a
Houston-based oil and gas exploration company. Following the boom of these new
industries, life returned to its normal, rural pace and remained that way through the
1930s. World War II created a change that was never overcome. Locals left to serve
in the military or work in the shipyards, and many of them never returned. Following
the war, the area changed with the creation of paved roads and power lines. As the
area developed, population centers such as Beaumont, Vidor, Orange, and Silsbee
emerged.
One of the by-products of the lumber boom was the arrival of the railroad in
East Texas and the Big Thicket. The nearest railroad to the project area was the
Texas and New Orleans Railroad Company. This railroad was first chartered in 1856
as the Sabine and Galveston Bay Railroad Company for the purpose of constructing
a railroad from Madison, Texas (now Orange) in Orange County to Galveston Bay.
Other railroads in the area were the Sabine and East Texas, the Texas and NorthEastern Railway, the Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railroad, the Beaumont, Sour
Lake and Western Railroad, and the East Texas and Gulf Railway. When the mills
closed, some of the rail lines were abandoned.

11

SURVEYS IN THE PROJECT AREA DEPICTED ON THE ATLAS
In 1978, an archaeological survey was conducted for the Environmental
Protection Agency between United States Highway 75/69 and Sherwood Avenue in
north Beaumont (Jefferson County). No report was available.
In 1980, an archaeological survey was conducted for the USACE (no report
available). The area investigated is long and narrow and begins near the Temple
Inland outflow settling basin and continues to the Neches River 3.34 miles to the
south. The northern part of the survey is within the Beaumont Unit of the Big
Thicket in Orange County, Texas. No other information was available.
In 1980 an archaeological survey was conducted for the USACE (no report
available). A historic shipwreck was located in the Neches River, but no additional
information was present. This site was officially recorded as 41JF59 in 1981 by
Alen Saltus as a historic shipwreck in the Neches River. The survey was in
Jefferson County, Texas.
New World Research, Inc. (EMANCO 1983) conducted a survey for a
proposed seismic line that recorded site 41JF63 in 1983. A small portion of this site
is located in the Beaumont Unit of the Big Thicket National Preserve, but the
majority of the site is on private property.
Steven M. Kotter (1984) surveyed a proposed seismic line in Hardin County.
It is 1.2 miles long and within Village Creek State Park and Village Creek Corridor
Unit of the Big Thicket. The field methods consisted of a pedestrian survey and
access routes. Stream banks and levee slopes where good ground surface visibility
was present were inspected, and shovel tests were excavated in areas of poor
ground surface visibility. No sites were found and Kotter recommended clearance
for the project.
Frank Weir (1985) of the Texas Department of Transportation surveyed a 6.2mile area of United States highways 69, 96, and 287 from State Highway 105 north
to the United States Highway 69-96 interchange in Jefferson and Hardin counties.
No sites were found.
J. Phil Dering (1990), working with Texas A&M University, conducted a
cultural resources survey of two proposed seismic lines in the Beaumont Unit of the
Big Thicket National Preserve. The two lines were 2.4 miles long and 5.3 miles long
with an easement of 100-200 feet. No sites were found.
William E. Moore (1991) surveyed a seismic line (6600 feet) in Village Creek
State Park (Hardin County). The ground surface visibility was poor, so shovel tests
were excavated at stream crossings and randomly along the proposed seismic line.
No sites were found. The report mentions a discussion with the park manager (John
C. Parker) who stated that Margaret E. Leshikar had visited the location of a dugout
12

canoe in 1983. There is no evidence that this visit took place, and Parker believes
the canoe is not on park property.
Roger G. Moore (1992) performed a survey for the proposed Temple Inland
effluent discharge pipe system in Orange County. The survey area was small (100
x 200 feet), and no sites were found. This area is located near the Beaumont Unit of
the Big Thicket.
Christopher Jurgens (1992) supervised an archaeological survey that was
conducted by staff archaeologists from the Texas Water Development Board
designed to identify and assess cultural resources that might be affected by the
proposed Lumberton Municipal Utility District State Water Pollution Control
Revolving Fund wastewater project. No evidence of cultural resources was
encountered during the survey. The project is in Hardin County.
BVRA (Moore and Aronow 1993) conducted an archaeological survey for the
proposed Colliers Ferry Wetlands Recreational Area for the city of Beaumont in
Jefferson County. The records check revealed that prehistoric site 41JF1 had been
recorded within the boundaries of the project area. A pedestrian survey not only
failed to locate the site but also was negative in finding any previously unrecorded
sites. The size of the project area was 80-85 acres.
In 1993, archaeologists from Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. conducted a
magnetometer survey of four saltwater barrier locations in the Neches River and
Pine Island Bayou (Bond and Foster 1993). Their project area was in Hardin,
Jefferson, and Orange counties and it was regulated by the USACE. Three of the
barrier sites are in the lower Neches River approximately 7-10 kilometers above the
confluence of the river and the bayou. The fourth barrier is in Pine Island Bayou
about 600 meters east of the Lower Neches Valley Authority siphon. The survey
identified several anomalies, but not one is characteristic of a historic shipwreck. It
was recommended that the proposed project be allowed to proceed as planned.
This area is in the Beaumont Unit, the Lower Neches River Corridor Unit, and the
Little Pine Island/Pine Island Bayou Unit of the Big Thicket and is in the current
project area.
In 1993, archaeologists from the Texas Department of Transportation
(TxDOT) conducted a .053-mile by 30-foot archaeological survey along Marina Drive
over Brakes Bayou. No sites were found. A letter report is on file at TxDOT (1993).
In 1994, two small linear surveys were conducted for the Federal Energy
Regulatory Agency. One area was in Hardin County 0.13 miles south of the Neches
River. The other was in Jasper County .02 miles north of the river. No other
information was available.
In 1997, archaeologists from Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. conducted a
magnetometer survey of Neches River Salt Water Barrier just above Beaumont
(Hoyt et al. 1997). Their project area was in portions of Hardin, Jefferson, and
13

Orange counties, and it was regulated by the USACE. The investigations consisted
of archival research, terrestrial survey using a geomorphologist, and a marine
remote-sensing survey. The area investigated consisted of about 2.4 kilometers of
river channel, 27.3 hectares of swampy land adjacent to the west side of the river,
and 0.87 hectares of land on the east side of the river. Private individuals owned
property on the shore, areas in the river bottoms were owned by the State of Texas,
and part of the project area is in the Beaumont Unit of the Big Thicket National
Preserve owned by the federal government. Archival research identified one historic
structure in the project area, a navigation light at the confluence of the Neches River
and Pine Island Bayou that dates to 1898. No evidence of this structure was found
during the survey. It was learned that the landforms in the project area are
composed of Holocene clay with little or no recent overbank deposits. No sites were
found on any of the elevated landforms during the survey, and no evidence of
submerged sites was found as a result of the remote-sensing survey. It was
recommended that the proposed project be allowed to proceed as planned.
In 1998, the National Park Service contracted with Moore Archeological
Consulting to compile an accurately mapped Geographical Information System
(GIS) inventory of archaeological sites within the Big Thicket National Preserve and
within a buffer zone around the preserve. At that time, site forms were submitted to
TARL for the sites found by Dethloff and Treat in 1975. The sites they inventoried
within the current project area were the Voth sawmill (41JF72), Wiess Bluff
(41JP142), and four Late Prehistoric sites (41OR4, 41OR5, 41OR6, and 41OR66)
that are located in the current project area.
In 1999 an archaeological survey was conducted at three lift stations and a
1524 meter 18-inch force main within the Lumberton Municipal Utility District in
Hardin County (Murin 1999). The work was conducted for Schaumburg & Polk, Inc.
by Horizon Environmental Services Inc. The investigation consisted of a records
search at TARL and an intensive survey that included a pedestrian survey and
shovel testing. No sites were found, and no further investigations were
recommended.
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Brownlow and Owens 2005)
conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of portions of the Brakes Bayou
Flood Mitigation Project in Beaumont (Jefferson County). The entire project area
was found to be disturbed by an existing large buried drainage pipe. No sites were
found, and the area was considered an unlikely spot for a prehistoric site.
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Brownlow 2005) conducted an
intensive cultural resources survey of the proposed widening of Jefferson County
drainage District Number 6 Griffin Ditch in Beaumont (Jefferson County). The survey
covered 34.4 acres, and no sites were found.
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Brownlow 2006) conducted an
intensive cultural resources survey at the site of the proposed Ridgewood Detention
14

Basin Flood Mitigation Project, Jefferson County Drainage District Number 6. The
project covered 13.88 acres of proposed detention basin north of the Ridgewood
Retirement Home. No sites were found.
An archaeological survey was conducted at Village Creek State Park in
Hardin County by Ecological Communications for the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department (Feit et al. 2008). The area investigated covered 1090 acres and was
surveyed by a crew walking in intervals of thirty meters where possible and
excavating shovel tests (n=507). No previously recorded sites were revealed
through their background research, and no new sites were found.
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Brownlow 2008) conducted a cultural
resources survey of the Orange County Water Control and Improvement District
Number 1 Oak Lane wastewater treatment plant improvement project. This survey
investigated the 15-acre wastewater treatment plant site and approximately 1.9
miles of wastewater line. The project was funded by the Texas Water Development
Board. No sites were found.
Environmental Services, Inc. (Owens 2009) conducted an intensive cultural
resources survey for the Lumberton Lift Station Rehabilitation Project in Loeb
(Hardin County). The project area consisted of a proposed lift station. The area
investigated consisted of an approximate 24 square meters (80 square foot) area
and a 76-meter (250 feet) long segment of proposed pipeline (total area surveyed
approximately 0.6 acres). No sites were found.
Moore Archaeological Consulting (Mangum and Moore 2011) conducted an
archaeological survey of a proposed well pad (1.15 hectares) and pipeline (555
meters long by 6 meters wide) at Village Creek State Park in Hardin County. The
total project area is approximately 1.6 hectares. The project was conducted under
Texas Antiquities permit number 5605. No sites were found.
DESCO conducted an archeological survey for Century Exploration Houston,
Inc.’s Rivers Edge 3D Seismic Project within Village Creek State Park in Hardin
County, Texas (Baxter and Grubb 2012). The archaeological survey was conducted
for the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD) under TAC Permit 6215 for
the purpose of identifying all prehistoric and historic archeological sites in the Area
of Potential Effect (APE) for avoidance during seismic drilling operations. The
APE was defined as the location of proposed source points where seismic drilling
is to take place. Three prehistoric sites (41HN54, 41HN55 and 41HN56) and one
prehistoric isolated find were recorded.

15

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES IN THE PROJECT AREA
There are twenty-three previously recorded archaeological sites in the project
area. Five are in Hardin County (41HN3, 41HN53, 41HN54, 41HN55 and 41HN56),
one is in Jasper County (41JP142), eight are in Jefferson County (41JF1, 41JF2,
41JF3, 41JF46, 41JF59, 41JF63, 41JF67, and 41JF72), and nine are in Orange
County (41OR4, 41OR5, 41OR6, 41OR66, 41OR84, 41OR93, 41OR94, 41OR95,
and 41OR96). Fourteen sites are prehistoric, and nine sites are historic. The
prehistoric sites date to the Early Ceramic period and Late Prehistoric period, and
the historic sites vary in age from the nineteenth to the twentieth centuries. There is
one National Register of Historic Places property in the project area, which is the
French Home trading Post (41JF46). In addition to these recorded sites there are
eight historic wrecks noted in the Neches River by the THC.
These sites were recorded by individuals and professional archaeologists.
Several sites were recorded by G. E. Arnold (an employee of The University of
Texas in Austin) in 1940 during his visits to sites in East Texas. Arnold’s work is
considered significant because he was able to document sites on private land,
something not always available to today’s archaeologists. He wrote no formal
report, and his notes are sometimes unclear. Additional information regarding
Arnold’s East Texas survey can be found in a thesis by Hyo-Jai Im (1975). Some of
these sites have been accurately plotted on topographic quadrangles, and the
location of others is still in doubt. Other sites were recorded by archaeologists from
Texas A&M University during a survey of the proposed Big Thicket National
Preserve in 1975 (Shafer et al. 1975) and a separate historical site survey by Henry
C. Dethloff and Victor H. Treat in 1975, also for Texas A&M University. From 1997 to
1999, Moore Archeological Consulting conducted a Big Thicket Inventory. The
purpose of this project was to identify known cultural resources in the preserve and
document their current status. In 1983, New World Research, Inc. recorded one site
(41JF63) during a seismic survey (EMANCO 1983). Site 41OR84 is a shipwreck
that was recorded by Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. in 1992 during a
magnetometer survey of four salt water barrier locations in the Neches River and
Pine Island Bayou (Bond and Foster 1993) for the Lower Neches River Authority.
The survey of the Rivers Edge Seismic project in the Big Thicket (Moore et al. 2011)
recorded five sites for this seismic project (41HN53, 41OR93, 41OR94, 41OR95,
and 41OR96).
Hardin County
G. E. Arnold visited site 41HN3 in 1940. He described it as a prehistoric
campsite about three miles upstream on the Neches River above Collier’s Ferry on
the north bank of the mouth of Pine Island Bayou. The east side of the site drops
into the Neches River, the south and west side slopes into the bayou, and the north
side gradually slopes into a swamp. Arnold collected pottery fragments and a broken
arrow point. Evidence of subsistence was observed by the presence of clamshells.
He estimated the size of this site to be about one acre. This site is in the Beaumont

16

Unit of the Big Thicket National Preserve, and it is depicted on the Pine Forest
topographic quadrangle.
Site 41HN53 is a historic site recorded during the survey of the Rivers Edge
Seismic project in the Big Thicket (Moore et al. 2011). It is a canal dug by a logging
company for the purpose of removing logs from the swamp and to provide access
for steam powered machinery. Part of the site is on an overbank deposit at ten feet
AMSL, and part is in a baygall at a maximum elevation of five feet AMSL. This canal
originates on the west bank of the Neches River and extends to the west for a
distance of 1600 meters. The western part of the canal (1400 meters) is on private
property, and the eastern part (200 meters) is in the Lower Neches River Corridor
Unit of the Big Thicket National Preserve. The canal width is approximately twelve
meters, and the dredge spoil on the banks is a low berm that is approximately six
meters wide on each bank. It is cut into an elevated landform that is approximately
2.5 meters high adjacent to the river. Only the portion of the canal within the Big
Thicket boundaries was investigated and included in the site boundary. That portion
on private property was not investigated because it was outside of the project area.
This site is in the Beaumont Unit of the Big Thicket National Preserve, and it is
depicted on the Pine Forest topographic quadrangle.
Site 41HN54 was delineated during DESCO’s Village Creek State Park Survey as a part of
this seismic survey. It is an unknown prehistoric site based on the presence of two Tertiary
flakes. One positive shovel test was deep auger tested, revealing sand to a depth of
220 cmbs where the water table level terminated the test. Since other shovel tests
found clay at higher levels, it is believed that shovel test five lies over an old filled-in
channel or point bar. Since the two artifacts were found 20 meters apart and at
different depths, the TPWD archaeologist, Ms. Ruth Mathews, decided the area be
recorded as a site and be avoided by seismic activities.
Site 41HN55 was delineated during DESCO’s Village Creek State Park Survey as a part of
this seismic survey. One Primary flake was found in sand in level 5 (40-50 cmbs) and a
second positive yielded a projectile point base typed as an Alba in silty sand in level 4
(30-40 cmbs). This shovel test was then deep auger tested to a depth of 300 cmbs
in sand and terminated at water table. The site type was determined to be Late
Prehistoric based on the Alba point base. The site is not recommended as eligible
for the NRHP listing or as a SAL at this time. It could, however, be a part of site
41HN56 that is 110 meters (361 feet) to the north that is potentially eligible.
Site 41HN56 was delineated during DESCO’s Village Creek State Park Survey as a part of
this seismic survey. Delineation yielded lithics, diagnostic ceramics, and buried charcoal.
One shovel test was deep auger tested in sand to a depth of 110 cmbs, where very
dense Pleistocene clay was encountered. Two periods of occupation were identified
from the ceramics (Goose Creek sandy paste and Baytown Plain). The site is
recommended as potentially eligible for the NRHP and as an SAL. Further testing is
needed for this determination. The scope of this project called for delineation testing

17

only since all resources found would be avoided. This may integrate it with site
41HN55 that is 110 meters (361 feet) to the south.
Jasper County
Site 41JP142 was recorded by Henry C. Dethloff and Victor H. Treat (1975)
during their historical survey of the Big Thicket National Preserve that was
sponsored by Texas A&M University. This site represents the location of the former
town of Weiss Bluff that was situated on a high bank on the east side of the Neches
River at an elevation of 35 feet. At the time of their visit, the site was on private
property and there were no ruins or structures present. The size of the site was not
determined. No recommendation was made regarding its potential for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places, but the recorders suggested that it be revisited,
mapped, and photographed. This site is depicted on the 7.5’ USGS Evadale
topographic quadrangle.
Jefferson County
Site 41JF1 was recorded by G. E. Arnold in 1940. He described it as a
village on a flat-topped ridge covered with dense vegetation. The nearest sources
of water are the Neches River about 150 yards to the east and a slough adjacent to
the site. He observed three ceramic sherds in a ditch and back slope of a small
road that traverses the ridge. Arnold states on the site form that the “ridge is the
highest land for some distance along the Neches.” He estimated the size of this site
to be 1.5 acres. The Beaumont Country Club is 0.25 mile to the north. This site is
depicted on the 7.5’ USGS Pine Forest topographic quadrangle.
Site 41JF2 was recorded by G. E. Arnold in 1940. On the site form it is
described it as a “shell heap” located “on the west side of the Neches River at
Collier’s Ferry and about 100 yards to the north”. At the time of his visit, the major
portion of the site was under water except during extremely low tide. He collected
33 pieces of prehistoric pottery and observed bone and clamshells. The soil was
sand and sandy loam. This site is depicted on the 7.5’ USGS Pine Forest
topographic quadrangle.
Site 41JF3 was recorded by G. E. Arnold in 1940. He described it as a “very
small campsite and shell heap” located about 1.5 miles downstream of Collier’s
Ferry on the Neches River at the mouth of a small bayou. He collected one piece of
prehistoric pottery and observed clamshells. This site is depicted on the 7.5’ USGS
Beaumont East topographic quadrangle.
Site 41JF46 was recorded by R. D. Brooks in 1975 as the location of the
John J. French home at 2995 French Road in the city limits of Beaumont, Texas.
This house is located on a 1.25-acre tract and contains the residence, detached
kitchen, barn, smokehouse, wine house, washhouse, tannery, and miscellaneous
outbuildings. It was constructed in 1845 and known as “French Settlement.” The
18

site is owned by the Beaumont Heritage Society. It is depicted on the 7.5’ USGS
Beaumont West topographic quadrangle.
Site 41JF59 is a historic shipwreck that was located by the Research
Institute, College of Pure and Applied Sciences, Northeast Louisiana University,
Monroe, Louisiana during a survey of the proposed Neches River Saltwater Barrier
and Discharge Canal (Heartfield and Maddon 1981). The shipwreck was located
along the western bank of the Neches River approximately 1.25 kilometers north of
the United States Highway 90 Bridge over the river. At the time it was identified in
1981 by Allen Saltus, it was situated in the outward edge of a bend in the river and
covered at one end by a small point bar. The wreck was identified as a vessel with
a wooden hull. Part of the ship was exposed, and the diagonal iron bracing
observed was a type used in the construction of steamships as early as 1848. Its
condition was noted as good with about eleven feet of river sediments in and around
the hull. It was recommended that the site be tested if it is to be impacted. It is
depicted on the 7.5’ USGS Beaumont East topographic quadrangle.
Site 41JF63 was recorded by New World Research, Inc. in 1983 during a
survey for a proposed seismic line (EMANCO 1983). It is described on the site form
as a possible barn that was probably associated with a rural homestead that was
occupied in the early part of the twentieth century. This site is located on a terrace
of Pine Island Bayou, and its size was estimated at approximately twenty meters in
diameter based on positive shovel tests. Shovel testing was conducted at variable
intervals (see map attached to site form), and glass, metal, and brick were collected.
The bayou is approximately 600 feet to the north. A small portion of the site is
located in the Beaumont Unit of the Big Thicket National Preserve, but the majority
is on private property. At the time it was recorded, there was a very dense
secondary growth that resulted from the area being logged within the past three
years prior to this visit. According to the site form, this site’s eligibility for listing in
the National Register of Historic Places is unknown. Additional research and
fieldwork was recommended. It is depicted on the 7.5’ USGS Voth topographic
quadrangle.
Site 41JF67 was recorded by Charles N. Bollich in 1991 as the site of the
David French House located on a 2.3 acre lot northeast of the junction of Arbor Lane
and French Road in the city limits of Beaumont. It is across Arbor Lane from the
John J. French home and trading post (41JF46). The house was constructed about
1850, but it has been modified several times and the Beaumont Heritage Society
now owns it. At the time it was recorded, the site was being excavated and six
excavation units had yielded numerous cut nails, brick fragments, historic ceramic
sherds, and brass ammunition casings. It is on the 7.5’ USGS Beaumont West
topographic quadrangle.
Site 41JF72 is the abandoned Voth sawmill located at the southeast corner of
the point where United States Highway 69 crosses Pine Island Bayou. It was
recorded by Henry C. Dethloff and Victor H. Treat (1975) during their historical
19

survey of the Big Thicket National Preserve that was sponsored by Texas A&M
University. It is partially within the Beaumont Unit of the Big Thicket National
Preserve and depicted on the 7.5’ USGS Voth topographic quadrangle. In 1998,
personnel from the National Park Service visited the site, and they observed one
standing structure that they described as “box-like” and made of concrete. They
also observed dozens of pyramidal concrete piers, ruins of concrete and brick walls,
wooden pilings and other dock-related structures, ditches, berms, and decomposed
metal and wood fragments. According to the Handbook of Texas (Webb 1952), the
Voth sawmill was established in 1902 by the Keith Lumber Company of Beaumont
and named for Henry Voth, a logging team foreman of Ariola. In 1922, it was
acquired by the Kirby Lumber Company who added a hardwood mill. The hardwood
mill closed in 1930, but the original mill continued to cut pine. In 1949, the sawmill
town had a population of 1000. The mill closed in 1952. Its equipment, buildings,
and much of the company owned town was moved to the Silsbee plant in 1954.
This site was visited by DESCO archaeologists during the Rivers Edge 3D
archaeological survey within the Big Thicket National Preserve (Moore et al. 2011).
The portion of the site within the boundaries of the Big Thicket was photographed,
and the images are part of the records curated.
Orange County
Site 41OR4 was recorded by G. E. Arnold in 1940. He described it as a
“campsite” located about 4.5 airline miles “east of north of Collier’s Ferry and about
1.5 miles east of the Neches River” and adjacent to an unnamed bayou. He
estimated its size as about 1.5 acres and on a sand hill about twenty feet high. The
north side of the site drops abruptly into a swamp. He collected nine prehistoric
ceramic sherds from a road cut and observed mussel shell. Arnold commented that
this might be an extensive site as it is one of the highest and most favorable looking
campsites for miles around. The location described by Arnold was visited by
DESCO archaeologists during their survey of the Big Thicket National Preserve for
the Rivers Edge 3D seismic project (Moore et al. 2011) and no artifacts were
observed. A portion of this site is within the Beaumont Unit of the Big Thicket
National Preserve and depicted on the 7.5’ USGS Pine Forest topographic
quadrangle.
Site 41OR5 was recorded by G. E. Arnold in 1940. He described it as a
“campsite” located about 4.73 airline miles “east of north of Collier’s Ferry”. He
estimated its size as about one acre and on a sandy ridge about fifteen feet above
the adjacent bayou. He collected two prehistoric ceramic sherds from a road cut.
The soil was described as sandy clay and loam. The location described by Arnold
was visited by DESCO archaeologists during their survey of Big Thicket National
Preserve for the Rivers Edge 3D seismic project (Moore et al. 2011) and no artifacts
were observed. It is partially within the Beaumont Unit of the Big Thicket National
Preserve and depicted on the 7.5’ USGS Pine Forest topographic quadrangle.

20

Site 41OR6 was recorded by G. E. Arnold in 1940. He described it as a
“campsite” located about five airline miles “east of north of Collier’s Ferry and
southwest of a fork in the road leading to Old Lake Village, an abandoned lumber
camp”. He estimated its size as about one acre disturbed by “deep erosion.” Arnold
collected four prehistoric sherds in a ditch associated with the road, and he
observed “flint chips and flakes” that were not collected. This site is adjacent to an
unnamed bayou. At the time of his visit, the site was fifteen feet above the normal
water level of the bayou. The soil was sand and clay. He commented that much of
the occupational material had probably been “swept away during excessive
erosion.” It is on the 7.5’ USGS Pine Forest topographic quadrangle.
Site 41OR66 was recorded by Edward P. Baxter in 1975 during a survey and
assessment of the Big Thicket National Preserve (Shafer et al. 1975). It was
described in the report as a late Prehistoric habitation site based on the presence of
ceramic sherds collected by Charles N. Bollich. At the time it was recorded, the site
was on a small rise near Wadell Lake. The nearest source of water was Waddell
Lake (a former slough) about fifty meters to the west. The site was located on
private property in the Wadell Lake subdivision, and its size was estimated as 600
square yards. It is depicted on the 7.5’ USGS Pine Forest topographic quadrangle.
Site 41OR84 is a historic shipwreck that was recorded by Clell L. Bond of
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. in 1992 during a project for the Lower Neches
Valley Authority (Bond and Foster 1993). It is described on the site form as a
shipwreck located ten meters offshore of the eastern bank of the Neches River
approximately 1830 meters above the confluence of the Neches River and Pine
Island Bayou. The hull, deck, and wheelhouse are constructed of wood. Its size
was estimated as 30 meters long and 4-5 meters wide. The ship was observed from
another vessel but not boarded. The date of construction of this wreck was
estimated at sometime between 1920 and 1930, and it probably sank between 1970
and 1980. The percentage of site remaining intact was estimated at 70%.
According to the site form, there is some research value in a study of ships of this
period and the use of wooden vessels in the Galveston Bay area in terms of
adaptive changes to wooden boats. The site was not recommended for further
work. Disturbance in the form of water-borne debris, vandalism, and natural
deterioration was noted. This site is in the Beaumont Unit of the Big Thicket
National Preserve, and it is depicted on the 7.5’ USGS Pine Forest topographic
quadrangle.
Site 41OR93 is a Late Prehistoric site at the eastern edge of a slightly
elevated area above a marsh to the east at an elevation of about five feet AMSL. It
was recorded during the survey of the Rivers Edge Seismic project in the Big
Thicket (Moore et al. 2011). Artifacts recovered consisted of ceramics, a Kent dart
point, flakes, and miscellaneous debitage. The size of this site is estimated at 130
meters north south by 90 meters east west based on the pattern of positive and
negative shovel tests. The field survey crew estimated that 50-75% of the site was
intact at the time of their visit. Historic logging activities constitute the main form of
21

disturbance. Based on the ceramics recovered, this site was occupied sometime
between 2500 and 1500 years B.P. No floral or faunal remains were recovered
during shovel testing or ceramics analysis. Although the assemblage does not
provide a definitive conclusion on site function, the site probably served as a
seasonal camp for exploiting local resources. This site is in the Beaumont Unit of
the Big Thicket National Preserve, and it is depicted on the 7.5’ USGS Pine Forest
topographic quadrangle.
Site 41OR94 is a Late Prehistoric site is located at the eastern edge of a
slightly elevated area above a marsh at an elevation of approximately five feet
AMSL. It was recorded during the survey of the Rivers Edge 3D Seismic project in
the Big Thicket National Preserve (Moore et al. 2011). The nearest stream is a relict
creek channel of Tenmile Creek 70 meters to the east. This creek channel is
submerged beneath a brackish marsh at the edge of the landform. During the
recording and delineation phase, fifty-five shovel tests were excavated, and twentyseven were positive. Artifacts were fairly numerous and included an arrow point,
distal tip of a probable projectile point, 57 sherds, and 30 pieces of lithic debitage.
Four pieces of fired clay were also present. One fragment of historic glass was
found in Level 1 of a shovel test. This specimen is not considered enough evidence
to justify the presence of a historic component. The depth of the positive tests
across the site ranged from 0 cm to 100 cm. The size of this site was estimated at
120 meters north south by 100 meters east west based on the pattern of positive
and negative shovel tests and surface features. The field survey crew estimated that
50-75% of the site was intact at the time of their visit. Logging activities had
disturbed the area. The oldest deposits at this site were believed to date to
sometime before A.D. 500, and the youngest deposits probably post-dated A.D.
900. A sherd from a Marksville Incised vessel was believed to date from circa 100
B.C. to A.D. 300. Friley is one of the earliest arrow point types in Texas with an
estimated date of A.D. 700 to A.D. 1100 (Turner and Hester 1985). The number of
flakes (n=30) was not large enough to allow for any meaningful statements
regarding the lithic industry at this site except that it was obvious that the occupants
appeared to rely on local materials such as quartzite and chert for tool making. No
floral or faunal remains were recovered during shovel testing or ceramics analysis.
Although this assemblage does not provide a definitive conclusion on site function,
41OR94 probably served as a seasonal camp for exploiting local resources. This
site is in the Beaumont Unit of the Big Thicket National Preserve, and it is depicted
on the 7.5’ USGS Pine Forest topographic quadrangle.
Site 41OR95 is a historic site that consists of a series of nine dredged canals,
small ponds connected to the canals, and dredge spoil that lines the sides of the
canals. It was recorded during the survey of the Rivers Edge 3D Seismic project in
the Big Thicket National Preserve (Moore et al. 2011). It is in a swamp at a
maximum elevation of five feet AMSL. This site was first identified through historical
research that involved an inspection of historic and modern topographic
quadrangles and aerial photography. The boundaries of the sections at the site were

22

established by field observations and examination of the topographic quadrangle
and aerial photography.
The canals were probably constructed by a steam powered dipper dredge to
facilitate the removal of logs from the surrounding swamp in the early part of the
twentieth century. They are tied to existing waterways that include Lake Bayou and
the current and relict channels of Tenmile Creek and Candy Creek. This site is in the
Beaumont Unit of the Big Thicket National Preserve, and it is depicted on the 7.5’
USGS Pine Forest topographic quadrangle. A more detailed discussion of the site
and the results of the archival research are presented in the survey report by Moore
et al. (2011).
Site 41OR96 is a Late Prehistoric site is located on a low rise at the five-foot
contour and surrounded by marsh. It was recorded during the survey of the Rivers
Edge 3D Seismic project in the Big Thicket National Preserve (Moore et al. 2011).
Tenmile Creek flows into the marsh from the northeast. During the recording and
delineation phase, twelve shovel tests were excavated, and four were positive.
Twenty-two sherds and two flakes were recovered. The depth of the positive tests
across the site ranged from 30 cm to 100 cm. The size of this site is estimated at 40
meters north south by 30 meters east west based on shovel tests and surface
features.
The field survey crew estimated that > 90% of the site was intact at the time
of their visit, and very little disturbance was observed. Based on ceramics present,
the age of this site is estimated to be sometime after circa A.D. 950-1000. The
sample of flakes (n=2) is too small to make any meaningful statements regarding
lithic technology at the site. No floral or faunal remains were recovered during
shovel testing or ceramics analysis. Although assemblage does not provide a
definitive conclusion on site function, the high ground probably served as a seasonal
camp for exploiting local resources. This site is in the Beaumont Unit of the Big
Thicket National Preserve, and it is depicted on the Pine Forest topographic
quadrangle.
Several historic wrecks were noted in the Neches River by the THC, Table 1
below. These wrecks have not been investigated in the field but were discovered
through examination of historic aerial photographs. They were plotted on the
Appendix I avoidance map and given a 50 meter (164 feet) buffer.

23

Table 1. Unrecorded Wrecks

THC NO.
Name
2359
unknown
2360
unknown
2361
unknown
2362
unknown
2363
unknown
2364
unknown
2365
unknown
2366
unknown

Year Lost

NAD

pre-1950

27

pre-1951

27

pre-1952

27

pre-1953

27

pre-1954

27

pre-1955

27

pre-1956

27

pre-1957

27

Latitude

Longitude

Accuracy

30.1113

-94.0753

0.25 Miles

30.1096

-94.0771

0.25 Miles

30.109

-94.0775

0.25 Miles

30.108

-94.0783

0.25 Miles

30.1073

-94.0782

0.1 Mile

30.1072

-94.0785

0.1 Mile

30.1068

-94.0786

0.1 Mile

30.1063

-94.0788

0.1 Mile

Table 1. Unrecorded Wrecks

HIGH PROBABILITY AREAS
The project area map (Appendix I) that accompanies this report depicts all
source points drilled within the project area and source points checked within the
high probability areas for cultural resources within the current project area. These
designations are based on features found on topographic maps, previous
archaeological surveys, and the identification of geomorphic features.

MONITORING METHODS
This section was included in the Avoidance Plan and describes the
methodology for archaeologists and seismic operatives to follow during survey and
drilling.
The proposed monitoring will consist of an archaeologist being present when
any drilling is performed near any cultural resource buffer and visual inspections
and/or shovel testing of any source point placed within the high probability areas
identified during pre-field tasks as discussed in the Research Methods above and
depicted in the Appendix I map.

24

As per the Avoidance Plan, the source point investigation portion of the
monitoring activities will be performed in accordance with criteria established by the
Council of Texas Archeologists. At each proposed source point location, field crews
will visually inspect the ground surface and (where appropriate) excavate one shovel
test to determine if buried cultural materials exist. Shovel tests will be excavated to
a depth of one meter or until water or clay is encountered. Where cultural materials
are recovered at these proposed source point locations, crews will perform
delineation activities to determine the site boundaries by excavating additional
shovel tests in all four cardinal directions at intervals of ten meters (33 feet). A site
boundary will be determined when two consecutive, negative shovel tests are
excavated in each of the four directions or where water bodies prohibit testing.
Shovel tests will be excavated by 10-centimeter levels to a depth of one meter or
until water or clay is encountered. Archeological site boundaries will be buffered by
50 meters (164 feet), and any source point (unless previously drilled) within these
buffers will be relocated. A shovel test will be excavated at any of the relocated
source points moved within the high probability area and the process mentioned
above will be repeated if artifacts are found.
A field number will be assigned to any newly discovered site, and a site form
will be submitted to the TARL so a State of Texas site number can be assigned. All
newly discovered cultural resource sites would be avoided by the project so any
National Register eligibility determinations will not be needed. A monitoring report
will be prepared and submitted to the USACE and the THC when the seismic project
is completed.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
As per the Research Design in the Avoidance Plan, the following addendum
of monitoring actions during drilling and recording phases of the Rivers Edge 3D
Seismic Survey is included. Archaeologist John Hogg was present over the course
of survey and drilling from May 25th, 2012 to October 6th, 2012. During this time he
assisted seismic operatives to avoid cultural resources and he surveyed any source
point locations placed within the established HPA in the area to be affected by the
Cimarex’s Rivers Edge 3D Seismic Survey activities outside of the Big Thicket
National Preserve.
As per the Avoidance Plan, titled Avoidance Plan and Monitoring Methods for
Cimarex Energy's Rivers Edge 3D Seismic Survey Outside of the Big Thicket
National Preserve in Hardin, Jasper, Jefferson, and Orange Counties, Texas,
submitted and approved by the USACE, Galveston District and THC, Cimarex was
allowed to carry out the survey, drilling, and recording operations concurrently.
DESCO Archaeologist John Hogg was present during the surveying and drilling
phases of the seismic activities within lands under USACE jurisdiction from May to
October of 2012. He cleared 62 source point locations surveyed within the HPA
25

and moved zero. A shovel test log of all investigations is included within Appendix
II. No new sites were recorded and all tests were negative for cultural resources.
Within the boundaries of the project area are fourteen towns and communities and
eleven cemeteries. The sites and cemeteries were marked for avoidance by a
buffer of fifty meters (164 feet). The historic communities, houses depicted on the
historic maps, and certain topographic features that are believed to be high
probability areas for the presence of prehistoric sites were incorporated into the
HPA shown on the Project Area Map (Appendix I).
Since no cultural resource site was impacted by the seismic operations within the
project area it is recommended that the archaeological portion of Permit Number
SWG-2011-00570 be approved and finalized.

26

REFERENCES CITED
Ambler, J. R.
1970 Additional Archeological Survey of the Wallisville Area, Southeast
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Report 6. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983a Analysis of Discrete Habitation Units in the Trinity River Delta,
Upper Texas Coast. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
Occasional Papers Number 2, Austin.
1983b Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press.
Baxter, Edward P. and Exa M. Grubb
2012 Century Exploration Houston, Inc.’s Rivers Edge 3D Seismic
Project in Village Creek State Park in Hardin County, Texas. Report
prepared by Dixie Environmental Services Company, LP (DESCO)
for Texas Parks and Wildlife Department. Texas Antiquities Permit
6215.
Block, W. T.
1972 From Cotton Bales to Black Gold: A History of the Wiess Families
of Southeastern Texas, Texas Gulf Historical and Biographical
Record
Bond, Clell L., and Eugene Foster
1993 Magnetometer Survey of Salt Water Barrier Locations, Pine Island
Bayou and Neches River, Jefferson, Hardin, and Orange Counties,
Texas. Report prepared by Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. for
the United States Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District.
Document Number 930076. Job Number 14509.
Brownlow, Russ
2005 An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Widening
of Jefferson County Drainage District No.6’s Griffin Ditch,
Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas. Horizon Environmental
Services, Inc. Austin, Texas. Report number HJN 060014.
2006 An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Ridgewood Detention Basin, Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas.
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. Austin, Texas.

27

Brownlow, Russ (continued)
2008 An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of Orange County’s WCID
No. 1’s Oak Lane Waste Water Treatment Plant (WTTP)
Improvements, Orange County, Texas. Horizon Environmental
Services, Inc. Austin, Texas. Report number HJN 080006 AR
Brownlow, Russ, and Jeffrey D. Owens
2005 An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Portions of the
Brakes Bayou Flood Mitigation Project, Beaumont, Jefferson
County, Texas. Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. Austin,
Texas. Report number HJN 050149.
Bryant, Ralph Clement
1913 Logging: The Principles and General Methods of Operation in the
United States. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., London.
Coleman, Roger E., Shawn B. Carlson, and David L. Carlson
1984 An Archeological Reconnaissance in Selected Areas of Western
Shelby County, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory,
Archeological Surveys Number 3, Texas A&M University.
Dallas Morning News
1928 The 1928 Texas Almanac. Published by the A. H. Belo Corporation of
the Dallas Morning News.
2004 The 2004-2005 Texas Almanac. Published by the A. H. Belo
Corporation of the Dallas Morning News.
Dering, J. Phil
1990 Cultural Resources Survey of Two Seismic Lines in the Beaumont
Unit of the Big Thicket. Texas A&M University, College Station.
Dethloff, Henry C., and Victor H. Treat
1975 A Historical Survey of the Big Thicket National Preserve. Texas A&M
University, Research Foundation, College Station.
Dippel, Michelle R.
2001 A Class III Inventory of a Proposed Pipeline and Well Pad,
Marathon Zap No. 1, Shelby County, Texas. Unnumbered report
prepared by PBS&J. (Document Number 000390)
Duffield, L. F.
1963 The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic Neo-American Site in San
Augustine County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 34:83-141.

28

EMANCO
1983 Plan of Operations for geophysical Exploration, Beaumont Unit, Big
Thicket National Preserve, Texas. Report prepared for Minerals
Search, Inc. by EMANCO with a contribution on the archaeological
survey by Prentice M. Thomas of New World Research.
Ensor, H. Blaine
1991 Archeological Survey of Cypress Creek from Spring Branch to
Kuykendahl Road, Harris County, Texas. Archeological Surveys
Number 8, Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Ensor, H. Blaine, and David L. Carlson
1988 The Crawford Site, 41PK69, Central Trinity River Uplands, Polk
County, Texas. Contract Reports in Archaeology Number 4,
Highway Design Division, Texas State Department of Highways
and Public Transportation, Austin.
1989 Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptation to Inland
Coastal Prairie Zone, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations
Number 8, Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

Feit, Rachel, David L. Nickels, and Richard Jones
2008 Archeological Survey of Village Creek State Park, Hardin County,
Texas. Unnumbered report prepared by Ecological
Communications Corporation for the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department.
Hall, Grant D.
1981 Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower
Brazos River Valley, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research
Report 61, The University of Texas at Austin.
Heartfield, Lorraine, and Michael R. Madden
1981 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Neches River
Saltwater Barrier and Discharge Canal In the Vicinity of Beaumont,
Texas. The Research Institute, College of Pure and Applied
Sciences, Northeast Louisiana University, Monroe.
Hoyt, Steven D., Eugene Foster, James S. Schmidt, Michael Nash, Saul Aronow,
and Robert Rogers.
1997 Initial Investigations: Archival Research, Remote Sensing, and
Terrestrial Survey, Neches River Saltwater Barrier, Beaumont,
Jefferson, Orange, and Hardin Counties. Report prepared by l
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. for the United States Army Corps
29

of Engineers, Galveston District. Document Number 980006. Job
Number19087.
Im, Hyo-Jai
1975 An Analysis of the G. E. Arnold Survey of East Texas. Masters
thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Jurgens, Christopher J.
1992 Archeological Survey of Proposed Wastewater Facilities,
Lumberton Municipal Utilities District, Hardin County, Texas. Texas
Water Development Board, Austin. SWPCRF Project No. 3114-001
Kotter, Steven M.
1981 A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources within the
Millican Project, Navasota River Basin, Brazos, Grimes, Leon,
Madison, and Robertson Counties, Texas. Prewitt & Associates,
Inc., Reports of Investigations Number 19. [According to the spine
the date for this report is 1981, but on the title page the date is
1982]
1984 Archeological Survey of a Proposed Seismic Line through Village
Creek State Park, Hardin County, Texas.
The Logging Machinery Department
1905 Logging by Steam: Employing Improved Systems under the
Patents of Baptist, Beekman Miller, Dickinson and Others.
Published by The Logging Machinery Department of the
Lidgerwood Manufacturing Company, New York.
Long, Russell J.
1977 McFaddin Beach. The Patillo Higgins Series of Natural History and
Anthropology Number 1. Spindletop Museum, Lamar University.
Mangum, Douglas and Roger Moore
2011 Archeological Survey of the Proposed Village Creek State Park
Well Pad and Pipeline, Hardin County, Texas. Moore
Archaeological Consulting, Houston. Report of Investigations
Number 578
Meining, D. W.
1988 Imperial Texas: An Interpretive Essay in Cultural Geography.
University of Texas Press, Austin.

30

Moore, Roger G.
1992 An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Temple-Inland Effluent
Discharge Pipe System, Orange County, Texas. Moore
Archeological Consulting. Letter report on file at the United States
Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District.
Moore, William E.
1975 Guide to Texas Counties. Tejas Publishing Company. Houston and
Huntsville.
1989 Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern Region of Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 31, Texas Historical
Commission.
1991 An archaeological survey along a Seismic Line in Village Creek State
Park, Hardin County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates,
Contract Report Number 15
Moore, William E., and Saul Aronow
1993 An Archaeological Survey of the Proposed Colliers Ferry Wetlands
Recreational Area and Nature Preserve, Jefferson County, Texas.
Brazos Valley Research Associates, Contract Report Number 25.
Moore, William E., Exa M. Grubb, and Edward P. Baxter
2011 Avoidance Plan and Monitoring Methods for Cimarex Energy's
Rivers Edge 3D Seismic Survey Outside of the Big Thicket National
Preserve in Hardin, Jasper, Jefferson, and Orange Counties,
Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates Projectr Number 11-10
Moore, William E., Exa M. Grubb, and Edward P. Baxter
2013 An Archaeological Survey for the Cimarex Energy Company’s
Rivers Edge 3D Seismic Project within the Big Thicket National
Preserve in Hardin, Jasper, Jefferson, and Orange Counties,
Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates, Contract Report
Number 254.
Murin, Mickie
1999 Cultural Resources Survey in the Lumberton MUD, Hardin, County,
Texas. Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. Austin, Texas.
Owens, Jeffrey
2009 Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Lumberton Lift Station
Rehabilitation Project, Loeb, Hardin County, Texas. Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. Austin, Texas. Report number HJN
080008 AR

31

Patterson, Leland W.
1979 A Review of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas Coast. Houston
Archeological Society, Special Publication 6.
Patterson, Leland W.(continued)
1982 Prehistoric Settlement and Technological Patterns in Southeast
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:253-270.
Perttula, Timothy K.
1995 The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savannah of
North East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:331-350.
Perttula, Timothy K., and Bob D. Skiles
1987 Cultural Resources Survey of the Darco Mine Permit Extension
Area, Harrison County, Texas. Prewitt & Associates, Inc., Reports
of Investigations 58.
Shafer, Harry J.
1968 Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin,
Montgomery County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project 13. The University of Texas at Austin.
1974 Archeology and Indians of Southeast Texas. In The Big Thicket:
Participants Handbook for the Contemporary Science Seminar,
Spring 1974. Prepared by the Houston Museum of Natural Science
and the University of Houston.
1975 Comments on Woodland Cultures of East Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 46:249-254.
1988 Archaeology in the San Jacinto River Basin: A Look Back After 20
Years. In A Collection of Papers Reviewing the Archeology of
Southeast Texas, edited by Patricia Wheat and Richard L. Gregg,
pp. 17-21. Houston Archeological Society, Report Number 5.
Shafer, Harry J., Edward P. Baxter, Thomas B. Stearns, and James Phil Dering
1975 An Archeological Assessment; Big Thicket National Preserve.
Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Report Number
19, College Station.
Sorrow, William M., and Wayne N. Cox
1973 A Reconnaissance of the Archeological and Historical Resources of
the Navasota River Basin, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report 26, The University of Texas at Austin.

32

Story, Dee Ann
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal
Plain. In Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R.
I. Ford. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan,
Anthropological Papers Number 75.
Story, Dee Ann, Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha Doty Freeman,
Jerome C. Rose, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl G. Reinhard
1990 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Research Series Number 38,
Fayetteville.
Stright, Melanie, Eileen M. Leer, and James F. Bennett
1999 Special Data Analysis of Artifacts Redeposited by Coastal Erosion:
A Case Study of McFaddin Beach, Texas. Department of the
United States Department of the Interior, Minerals Management
Series. (Volume I).
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas
Archeological Society Special Publication Number 1, and Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin Number 4.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly
Press, Austin.
Turner, Ellen Sue and Paul Tanner
1994 The McFaddin Beach Site on the Upper Texas Coast. In Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 65:319-336.
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT)
1993 Archaeological Resources Survey Report; Marina Drive over
Brakes Bayou, Jefferson County. Report on file at the Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Webb, Walter Prescott
1952 The Handbook of Texas. (Volume I). The Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.
Weir, Frank A.
1985 Letter Report: Jefferson and Hardin Counties, US 69, 96, and 287
from SH105 North to the 69-96 Interchange-6.2 Miles, Cultural
Resources Assessment. SDHPT, Austin

33

Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin 154:143-252.

34

APPENDIX I
PROJECT AREA MAP

Gist

1098-049

Evadale
Silsbee

Jasper

Nelson Barn

41HN56
41HN55
41HN54
41HN53

Hardin

41OR6

41OR5

41OR4

Pine Forest

Voth

41OR84
41JF72
41OR66

Orange

41HN3

41JF63

41OR93
41OR94

41OR95
41OR96

41OR95
41OR95

41OR95
41OR95

41JF2

41OR95

41OR95

41JF1
41OR95

Jefferson

41JF67
41JF46
41JF59

Beaumont East
Beaumont West

Legend

Archaeological Site Boundary

Seismic Project Boundary

Post Plot Source Points

Cemetery Boundary

Big Thicket National Preserve Boundary

Total Monitored Points (BTNP)
!

±

Total Monitored HPA Sources (USACE)

Village Creek New Sites Buffer Line
Linear Archaeological Project
Area Archaeological Project

Archaeological Site Buffer
Cemetery Buffer

High Probability Area

1:30,000

Village Creek State Park (TAC6215)

0

County Boundary

USGS Quadrangle Boundary
Map Date; November 22, 2013

0

0.5

0.5

1

2
Kilometers

1

2
Miles

Appendix I: Monitoring Map
Rivers Edge 3D Seismic Survey
COE/THC COPY

APPENDIX II
TOTAL POINTS INVESTIGATED

APPENDIX II
TOTAL POINTS INVESTIGATED
Excavator

Date

Comment

Latitude

Longitude

54811118
54491094

Depth of
test cm)
100
32

John Hogg
John Hogg

May 24, 2012
May 24, 2012

30.26316
30.26442

-94.13501
-94.11868

54491086

34

John Hogg

May 24, 2012

30.27144

-94.11475

54731184

40

John Hogg

May 25, 2012

30.20526

-94.15561

54971200

45

John Hogg

May 25, 2012

30.20626

-94.16563

55131205

56

John Hogg

May 25, 2012

30.20859

-94.17676

53291129

60

John Hogg

May 26, 2012

30.17177

-94.09508

52411079

32

John Hogg

May 26, 2012

30.16249

-94.05249

52411078

28

John Hogg

May 26, 2012

30.16294

-94.05277

53451149

26

John Hogg

May 26, 2012

30.16349

-94.10516

54331161

0

John Hogg

June 14, 2012

30.20157

-94.13607

53771183

100

John Hogg

June 21, 2012

30.15325

-94.12684

53931199
54091195
54091197
54091198
54091202

0
0
0
0
45

John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg

June 21, 2012
June 29, 2012
June 29, 2012
June 29, 2012
July 7, 2012

30.15116
30.16208
30.16147
30.16072
30.15462

-94.13303
-94.13802
-94.13648
-94.13650
-94.14523

52171113
52171114
52171115
52171116
52171117
52151124
52151123
52251122
52251121
52251120
54011199
54011198
54011197
53291101

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
55

John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg

July 9, 2012
July 9, 2012
July 9, 2012
July 9, 2012
July 9, 2012
July 9, 2012
July 9, 2012
July 9, 2012
July 9, 2012
July 9, 2012
July 10, 2012
July 10, 2012
July 10, 2012
July 10, 2012

30.12276
30.12225
30.12190
30.12096
30.12032
30.11784
30.11867
30.11940
30.12012
30.12089
30.15347
30.15400
30.15454
30.19354

-94.05462
-94.05426
-94.05355
-94.05422
-94.05414
-94.06184
-94.06151
-94.06128
-94.06118
-94.06067
-94.13956
-94.13987
-94.14004
-94.08440

54491225
53611180

15
10

John Hogg
John Hogg

July 11, 2012
July 11, 2012

30.15934
30.14693

-94.16094
-94.12106

53611173
53611175

0
20

John Hogg
John Hogg

July 11, 2012
July 11, 2012

30.15268
30.14685

-94.11862
-94.12004

52251113
52251114
52251115
52251116
52251117

0
0
0
0
0

John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg

July 17, 2012
July 17, 2012
July 17, 2012
July 17, 2012
July 17, 2012

sandy loam to sand at 100 cmbs
clay silt loam to clay silt to clay at
28 cmbs
silty clay loam to mottled clay at
30 cmbs
silty clay loam to silty clya to clay
at 36 cmbs
sandy loam to sandy clay to clay
at 40 cmbs
sandy loam to sandy clay to clay
at 52 cmbs
sandy silt loam to sandy silt to
clay silt to clay at 55 cmbs
silty clay loam to silty clay to
mottled clay at 28 cmbs
silty clay loam to silty clay to
mottled clay at 26 cmbs
sandy loam to sandy clay to clay
at 22 cmbs
Roadside / disturbed / slope /
erosional
Sandy silty loam to sand at 100
cmbs
in 20" of water
gravel road ditch
gravel road ditch
gravel road ditch
silty clay loam to silty clay to clay
at 42 cmbs
road ditch / distrubed
sandpit - distrubed
sandpit - distrubed
sandpit - distrubed
low / wet
sandpit road / disturbed
sandpit road / disturbed
sandpit road / disturbed
sandpit road / disturbed
sandpit road / disturbed
gravel road ditch
gravel road ditch
gravel road ditch
sandy clay loam to clay at 50
cmbs
silty clay loam to water at 15 cmbs
silty clay loam to silty clay to
mottled clay at 10 cmbs
berm / disturbed
silty clay loam to silty clay to
mottled clay at 15 cmbs
on road in sandpit - destroyed
on road in sandpit - destroyed
on road in sandpit - destroyed
on road in sandpit - destroyed
on road in sandpit - destroyed

30.12306
30.12268
30.12235
30.12205
30.12169

-94.05640
-94.05697
-94.05756
-94.05811
-94.05872

Source Point

APPENDIX II

Page 1 of 2

Excavator

Date

Comment

Latitude

Longitude

52251118
52251119
53371109

Depth of
test cm)
0
0
80

John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg

July 17, 2012
July 17, 2012
July 20, 2012

30.12138
30.12116
30.19100

-94.05935
-94.05999
-94.09026

54731197
54651190
52251081
55211250
55211255
55451183
53131082
53771099

0
0
0
32
0
100
<10
50

John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg

July 20, 2012
July 20, 2012
July 23, 2012
July 30, 2012
July 30, 2012
July 30, 2012
August 5, 2012
August 5, 2012

30.19887
30.20018
30.15073
30.18152
30.18228
30.23913
30.19535
30.20227

-94.15930
-94.15450
-94.04681
-94.19372
-94.19332
-94.17186
-94.07475
-94.08840

55211173
55211172
55211171
53371101
53371102

0
0
100
<10
12

John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg
John Hogg

August 10, 2012
August 10, 2012
August 10, 2012
August 20, 2012
August 20, 2012

30.24010
30.24068
30.24109
30.20108
30.20091

-94.16635
-94.16677
-94.16739
-94.08888
-94.08969

53451163

22

John Hogg

August 28, 2012

30.15278

-94.10871

53451164

20

John Hogg

August 28, 2012

30.15220

-94.10829

53531191
53451186

100
85

John Hogg
John Hogg

September 19, 2012
September 19, 2012

30.13403
30.13210

-94.12162
-94.12147

53451187
53451188

0
25

John Hogg
John Hogg

September 19, 2012
September 19, 2012

on road in sandpit - destroyed
on road in sandpit - destroyed
drilled sandy loam to sand to
sandy clay to clay at 80 cmbs
erosional / drainage
disturbed cutover
disturbed pond levee
silty clay loam to clay at 28 cmbs
marsh / low / water
sandy loam to sand at 100 cmbs
hydric clay at surface
sandy silty loam to sandy silt to
sandy clay to clay at 50 cmbs
dozed fire break / planted pine
dozed fire break / planted pine
sandy loam to sand at 100 cmbs
hydric clay at surface
silty clay loam to mottled clay at
10 cmbs
silty clay loam to silty clay to
mottled clay at 18 cmbs
silty clay loam to silty clay to
mottled clay at 15 cmbs
sandy loam to sand at 100 cmbs
sandy loam to sand to water at 85
cmbs
disturbed / slope / erosional
silty clay loam to silty clay to water
at 25 cmbs

30.13161
30.13098

-94.12092
-94.12087

Source Point

APPENDIX II

Page 2 of 2

