A Cultural Resources Survey of the
Gallup Marsh in
Ellis County, Texas

Prepared for:
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services,
Ecological Services

Prepared by:
Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultants
4215 Red Oak
Nacogdoches, TX

Principal Investigator and Report Author
Victor Galan

Project Number 234

February 2010

ABSTRACT
On 7 September 2007 Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultant (DETAC) conducted a
cultural resource management survey of the proposed wetland habitat restoration for the
Gallup marsh in Ellis County, Texas for U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. The landowner
plans to bulldoze two areas to create shallow dams adjacent to improved gravel roads and
plant water tolerant grasses. Excavation of two test pits to look for colluvially deposited
sands and surface inspection of found no cultural material. The profiles from the test pits
revealed the area along the southern edge of the proposed pond does have some
colluvium; however, like the adjacent slopes and summit, it is on the surface and consists
of clay material. DETAC is requesting a concurrence with the determination of “no
effect” on NRHP eligible properties for the proposed project areas. Cultural resource
clearance is requested.

ii

TABEL OF CONTENTS
Section

Page

Abstract
Table of Content
List of Figures
Lit of Tables

ii
iii
iv
iv

INTRODUCTION
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
CULTURAL HISTORY
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
RESULTS
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES

1
1
3
5
7
10
11

iii

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure
1.
2.

Page
Project Area on Avalon 7.5’ Quad
Project area test pit locations and soils (NRCS 2004).

iv

2
8

INTRODUCTION
On 7 September 2007 Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultant (DETAC) conducted a
cultural resource management survey of a proposed wetland habitat restoration area on
the Gallup property in Ellis County, Texas for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(USFWS).

The survey was conducted under Section 106 of the National Historic

Preservation Act. The report was reviewed by the Texas Historical Commission.
The proposed project focused on wetland habitat restoration by constructing a low berm
to induce ponding in an agricultural field in the Mill Creek floodplain. The purpose of
this survey was to locate, describe and record any cultural resources within the project
area boundaries. The report was prepared following the short report format outlined by
the Council of Texas Archaeologist (CTA) (1995a) with modifications requested by the
THC (Martin 1999).
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
The project included approximately 36.4 hectares (89.9 acres) on the Gallup property
approximately 7 kilometers (4.3 miles) south of Avalon, Texas (Figure 1). The proposed
pond area is an active agricultural field adjacent to an excavated drainage channel.
Vegetation was recently harvested corn. The property owner planned to bulldoze a
shallow area near White Rock and Schield roads to create two berms to hold water in the
existing drainage basin and plant water tolerant grasses in the immediate area. The area
was topographically bound by natural slopes to the south west.

1

0

0.5

1

2

3

Project Area
0 0.25 0.5

1

1.5

Figure 1. Project Area on Avalon 7.5' Quad.
2

2

4
Kilometers
Miles
2.5

©

CULTURAL HISTORY
Ellis County is in the Savanna Prairie Planning Region (Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993).
This region included populations ranging from the Paleo-Indian (prior to 6000 B.C.)
through the Archaic (6000 B.C. – 700 B.C.), Late Prehistoric (700 B.C – A.D. 1700), and
Historic (A.D. 1700 – present). These stages were based on changes in environment,
technology, and/or population requiring cultural adaptations to meet varying circumstances.
The Paleo-Indian period (prior to 6000 B.C.) was the earliest generally accepted cultural
period in the New World and included populations that inhabited North America from the
Late Pleistocene to the early Holocene.

Paleo-Indians were thought to have been

organized into small, mobile bands of hunters and gatherers that consumed a variety of
plants and animals (Story 1990). Paleo-Indian artifacts found in the region include Clovis,
Plainview, Scottsbluff, and Folsom. Toward the end of the Paleo-Indian period, point
styles gradually changed to more stemmed and barbed varieties.
The Archaic refers to hunter-gatherers who implemented more regionally specialized
approaches toward exploiting their environment but retained a hunting-gathering
subsistence (Story 1990). The Archaic was further divided into Early, Middle, and Late
divisions (Prikryl 1990).

Early Archaic included Angostura, Bower, Martindale, and

Uvalde. Middle Archaic costal phases are expressed by Carlton, Morrill, Wells, Calf
Creek, Bell, and Andice. The Late Archaic understanding of the region includes a dramatic
increase in population and local materials were exploited (McGregor 1987).
The Late Prehistoric in the region showed the gradual adaptation of the bow and arrow,
horticulture/agriculture, and the spread of ceramics. Projectile points were predominantly
Scallorn, Alba, Steiner, and Catahoula arrow points and later, Washita, Harrell, and
Fresno points suggested an emphasis on buffalo hunting (Prykryl 1990).
Historic occupation began with the exploration of the area by the Spanish and French
during the 16th and 17th centuries. However, settlement in the area did not begin in earnest
until American expansion in the 1830’s along the Trinity River. In 1849 Ellis county was

3

extracted from adjacent Navarro County and established in December of that year. Cattle
ranching dominated the economy; however, this changed to agriculture as the railroad
entered the region in 1870’s and cotton dominated the market. Ellis County remained
largely agricultural and rural into the 20th century until the Great Depression. Ellis County
farmers effectively altered crops to include small grains and corn. Ranching eventually
regained a foot hold in the county. This new diversity and the spread of electric power
through out the county encouraged a population increase although the number of farms
dropped dramatically since the depression. Today, Ellis County enjoys a mixture of
agriculture and industrial progress (Webb 1952).

4

RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
The investigations were performed in compliance with the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 (PL89-665), as amended in 1974, 1976, 1980, and 1992; the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (PL91-190, 83 Stat. 915, 42 USC 4231, 1970), the
guidelines set forth by the CTA (1995b), and the Register of Professional Archaeologists.
The program of site definition was conducted in accordance with the National Park
Service criteria (36 CFR, part 60.4) which present the guidelines for determining
eligibility of a cultural resource for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP). The objectives of the survey were to locate prehistoric and historic cultural
resources sites within the survey areas. If sites were found, then the investigations were
to delineate the vertical and horizontal extent of each site, determine each site’s integrity,
and provide a preliminary evaluation of each site’s potential for NRHP eligibility.
Before initiating fieldwork, DETAC conducted a records and literature review using maps
and files at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), J.J. Pickle Research
Campus, UT and at the Texas Archaeological Site Atlas (THC 2007). The site location
maps and cultural resources records at TARL were consulted to identify the location and
types of both State Archaeological Landmarks (SAL) and NRHP sites within or in close
proximity to the project area. The Site Atlas was consulted for published and unpublished
data regarding cultural resource surveys (THC 2007).
DETAC consulted with the Texas Historic Commission before starting the field work
(Martin 2007 personal communication). A visual examination of the area revealed no
natural rises in the project area. DETAC focused on subsurface testing of the southern
boundary of the project area closest to the toe slope and visually examining the area near
the drainage ditch to the north and along the roads for surface artifacts because the area was
frequently flooded and there were no natural rises to examine as potential locations for
archaeological sites. The test pits included excavating areas roughly 80 cm long and 40 cm
wide to 70 cmbs to examine the profiles for the potential for buried soils from the adjacent
slope. The excavated matrix was trowled in a 0.635 cm (0.25 inch) wire mesh screen for

5

artifacts. The depth of horizons, soil type, and soil color of each test were recorded and
photographs were made of each pit. Visual examination of the exposed subsurface was a
continuous effort between test pits and along the boundary of the project area.

The

entire project area had roughly 50% ground surface visibility and was easily accessible
with the recent removal of the corn.
Soils in the project area were described as Trinity clay in the floodplain with Houston
clay on the adjacent slopes and ridge summit (NRCS 2004). The property owner plans to
create dam by bulldozing the floodplain soil to pile the matrix. The remainder of the
pond areas will not altered by machine. None of the NRCS information on the project
area suggested the area contained buried soils or recent massive erosion. Beyond the
construction of the berm, the remainder of the pond area will not be impacted by the
bulldozing. According to the NRCS soil description and Test Pit 1 profile, the Trinity
soils showed a profile of very deep dark grayish brown to black clay over olive gray and
olive yellow clays with a very slow permeability which easily flood because of their
topographic location in floodplains. Areas with low permeability and continual wetness
are typically considered low probability areas for cultural resources. The NRCS soil
description of the Houston clay and Test Pit 2 indicates a profile including very dark gray
clay over olive gray and olive yellow clays (NRCS 2004). As with the Trinity series, the
Houston soil is slowly permeable creating a high runoff along the slopes. The Houston
soil had a higher probability than the Trinity soils for containing cultural resources
because of their location on slopes of elevated land forms. The proposed pond will only
impact the Trinity soils.

6

RESULTS
The previous investigation research found the closest cultural resource was 41NV688 and
41NV669 roughly 2.2 km (1.4 miles) east of the project area.

These sites were

documented by Wernecke (2006) and Sanders (1995) respectively as Late Prehistoric
sites with shell and bone midden. Other sites 41NV668, 41NV669, 41NV670, and
41NV671 were also documented along Mill Creek further east of the project area and
included a range of Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric artifacts with shell and bone
fragments. The closest documented archaeological investigation was conducted by GeoMarine in 2004 for TxDot at the Chambers Creek Bridge for Hwy 55 to the northeast
along Hwy 34. Large scale investigations to the project area were conducted for the
Super Collider around Waxahachie (Adovasio et al. 1998).

King and Cliff (2003)

conducted a survey west of Ennis, Tx. and Jurney (1995) surveyed a park for the City of
Ennis. Beyond these investigations, little work is documented near the current project
area.
The Gallup marsh will be constructed by damming the existing manmade drainage at a
road intersection. The land owner will use a bulldozer to scrape areas near the proposed
dam then pile the matrix to construct the dams. Human modification to the property
included regular agricultural plowing. Soils in the dam areas were described as Trinity
clay and Houston clay on the adjacent slopes. The Trinity soil will be stripped in along
the dam locations and mounded to create the dams. The remainder of the pond areas was
not altered by machine, but adjacent areas will be planted with water tolerant grasses and
hardwood trees. The pedestrian survey found that much of the area to be flooded was
level with little ground cover. The visual examination focused on the area near the
modern drainage channel, the area where the berm will be constructed, and the toe slope
of the ridge to the south. Test pits were excavated near the toe slope in two locations to
look for buried soils (Figure 2). The test pits found the area delineated as Trinity Clay
included very dark gray clay in the upper part and dark gray with olive gray mottles and
olive yellow in the lower part similar to the description by the NRCS. Test pit 2 was
excavated on the southern edge of the project area closest to the toe slope and found olive
soil to a depth of 20 cm (8 inches) over 30 cm (12 inches) of dark grayish brown clay

7

8

"

Project Area

Test Pit

HaB

HsD3

DAM

"

2

0

0

HbA

HaB

400

125

HcC2

800

250

HaB

Figure 2. Project area test pit locations and soils (NRCS 2004).

HaB

HaB

LeC2

Tc

W

1,600

500

1

"

2,400

750

Feet
3,200

1,000
Meters

To

©

HbB

over grayish brown clay and olive gray clay with mottles in the lowest portion of the
profile. The upper olive soil is believed to be colluvial deposits from the adjacent slopes
and uplands which are also Houston clay. No artifacts were found in either the visual
examination of the toe slope, the drainage ditch, or the excavated test pits.

9

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The proposed wetland habitat restoration project areas will utilize an agricultural field in
a lowland to create a wetland habitat. The Gallup property has poorly drained soils as
described in the NRCS soil survey and as discovered in the tests pits. The property
owner will create a marsh by bulldozing the area near the proposed berm and piling the
matrix.

With open areas and shallow soils, the investigations relied on surface

inspections and test pits to look for buried soils. No cultural material was found in either
the surface inspection or the test pits.
In conclusion, the excavation of two test pits and surface inspection found no culturally
modified material. Based on the investigations, there is little chance of encountering
cultural resources in the project areas. DETAC is requesting a concurrence with the
determination of “no effect” on NRHP eligible properties for the proposed project area.

10

REFRENCES
Adovasio, J., J. Yedlowski, K. Shaunessey, And D. Jurney
1998 Archaeological Investigations in Support of the Superconducting Super
Collider, Ellis County, Texas. Archaeology Research Program,
Mercyhurst College, Erie, Pennsylvania
Council of Texas Archaeologists
1995a Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports in Council of
Texas Archaeologists Guidelines.
1995b Guidelines for Professional Performance Standards in Council of Texas
Archaeologists Guidelines.
Jurney, D.
1995

Archaeological Survey and Historical Background of the Proposed Ennis
Community Park, Ellis County, Texas. TAP 1502. Consulting
Archaeologist. Waxahachie.

King, F. and Cliff. M.
2003 A Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed Oncore Electric Delivery
Company Ennis to Ennis West 138 K Transmission Line Ellis County,
Texas. Document No 030031. PBS&J. Dallas.
Kenmotsu, N. and T. Perttula
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document.
Cultural Resources Management Report 3. Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historic Commission, Austin.
Martin, W.
1999 Letter to author 15 September
2007 Phone interview 5 September
McGregor. D.
1987 Lithic Raw material Utilization. In Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along
the Prairie Margin: site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric
Archaeology, edited by .d McGregor and J. Bruseth, pp. 185-195.
Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume III. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Natural Resource Conservation Service
2004 Soil Survey of Ellis County, Texas. In cooperation with the Texas
Agriculture Experiment Station. Data downloaded from
http://www.ftw.nrcs.usda.gov/ssur_data.html

11

Prikryl, D.
1990

Sanders, C.
1995
Story, D.A.
1990

Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and
Chronologies along the Trinity River, North-Central Texas. Report 37.
Office of the State Archaeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Texas Archaeological Site form 41NV669. Accessed via the Texas
Archaeological Site Atlas 20 August 2007.
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In: The Archaeology and
Bioarchaeology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, vol. 1. Arkansas Archaeological
Survey Research Series No. 38.

Texas Historical Commission
2007 Texas Archaeological Site Atlas.
http://pedernales.thc.state.tx.us/index.html (20 August 2007).
Webb, W.P. (editor)
1952 The Handbook of Texas History, Vol. I and II.
Association, Austin.

Texas Historical

Wernecke, D.
2006 Texas Archaeological Site forms 41NV688 and 41NV689. Accessed via
the Texas Archaeological Site Atlas 20 August 2007.

12

