A Cultural Resources Survey of the
Improvement to the
City of Marlin
Water Distribution System
In Falls County, Texas

Prepared for:
KSA Engineers
107 West Lufkin Ave., Suite 200
Lufkin, Texas 75904
And
The City of Marlin
101 Fortune Street
Marlin, Texas 76661

Prepared by:
Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultants
4215 Red Oak
Nacogdoches, TX
Principal Investigator and Report Author
Victor Galan

Project Number 179

January 2008

ABSTRACT
On 19 March 2006 Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultant (DETAC) conducted a
cultural resource management survey of the proposed water distribution improvements
for the City of Marlin, Texas under the direction of the Texas Water Development Board.
Texas Antiquities Permit #4059 was acquired and all conditions of the permit were
fulfilled. Proposed improvements include replacing or improving 7.4 kilometers (4.6
miles) of pipeline along with replacing eight valves and one elevated storage tank.
Careful visual inspection of the proposed excavation right-of-ways confirmed that no
new areas will be impacted and that the project will be in heavily disturbed urbanized
areas. None of the planned excavations will impact the previously documented historical
structures within the city limits. No artifacts were collected. DETAC is requesting a
concurrence with the determination of “no effect” on NRHP eligible properties for the
proposed project areas. Cultural resource clearance is requested.

ii

TABEL OF CONTENTS
Section

Page

Abstract
Table of Content
List of Figures
Lit of Tables

ii
iii
iv
iv

INTRODUCTION
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
CULTURAL HISTORY
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
RESULTS
Segment 1
Segment 2
Segment 3
Segment 4
Segment 5
Segment 6
Segment 7
Segment 8
Segment 9
Segment 10
Segment 11
Segment 12
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES

1
1
3
5
6
7
7
7
9
9
10
10
10
12
12
12
13
15
16

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure
1.
2.
3.
4.

Page
Project Area on Marlin 7.5’ Quad
Segments 1 through 5
Segments 6 through 11
Segments 12

2
8
11
14

iii

INTRODUCTION
In March 2006 Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultant (DETAC) conducted a
cultural resource management survey of proposed water system replacement and
improvements for the City of Marlin, Texas. Cultural resource management was required
because the Texas Water Development Board delegated the responsibility to the
consulting engineering company to contract a cultural resource specialist.

Texas

Antiquities Permit #4059 was obtained and all terms of the permit were carried out.
The proposed water system follows existing buried pipelines along paved and improved
gravel roads within the city boundaries.

A combined length of approximately 7.4

kilometers (km) (4.6 miles) of pipelines will be replaced or improved. In addition, eight
valves and an elevated water storage tank will be replaced. The purpose of this survey
was to locate, describe and record any cultural resources along the pipelines. Due to the
project area size and negative findings, the report was prepared following the short report
format outlined by the Council of Texas Archaeologist (CTA) (1995a) with modifications
requested by the THC (Martin 1999).
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
The proposed water system was located along paved and improved gravel city streets in
Marlin, Texas (Figure 1). The proposed water system will include 4148 m (13900 ft) of 8
inch improvement pipe, 2379 m (7800 ft) of 12 inch replacement main line, and 763 m
(2500 ft) of 18 inch main line replacement pipelines. All pipelines will be placed in
trenches along existing roads inside existing fence lines and under road surfaces. The
valves are all cut in valves between 6 and 8 inches. The water tank will replace a 1968
metal structure. No new right-of-way was acquired. Precise locations are discussed in
the results section.

1

2

CULTURAL HISTORY
Falls County is in the Savanna Prairie Planning Region (Kenmotsu and Pettula (1993).
This region included populations ranging from the Paleo-Indian (prior to 6000 B.C.)
through the Archaic (6000 B.C. – 700 B.C.), Late Prehistoric (700 B.C – A.D. 1700), and
Historic (A.D. 1700 – present). These stages were based on changes in environment,
technology, and/or population requiring cultural adaptations to meet varying circumstances.
The Paleo-Indian period (prior to 6000 B.C.) was the earliest generally accepted cultural
period in the New World and included populations that inhabited North America from the
Late Pleistocene to the early Holocene.

Paleo-Indians were thought to have been

organized into small, mobile bands of hunters and gatherers that consumed a variety of
plants and animals (Story 1990). Paleo-Indian artifacts found in the region include Clovis,
Plainview, Scottsbluff, and Folsom. Toward the end of the Paleo-Indian period, point
styles gradually changed to more stemmed and barbed varieties.
The Archaic refers to hunter-gatherers who implemented more regionally specialized
approaches toward exploiting their environment but retained a hunting-gathering
subsistence (Story 1990). The Archaic was further divided into Early, Middle, and Late
divisions (Prikryl 1990).

Early Archaic included Angostura, Bower, Martindale, and

Uvalde. Middle Archaic costal phases are expressed by Carlton, Morrill, Wells, Calf
Creek, Bell, and Andice. The Late Archaic understanding of the region includes a dramatic
increase in population and local materials were exploited (McGregor 1987).
The Late Prehistoric in the region showed the gradual adaptation of the bow and arrow,
horticulture/agriculture, and the spread of ceramics. Projectile points were predominantly
Scallorn, Alba, Steiner, and Catahoula arrow points and later, Washita, Harrell, and
Fresno points suggested an emphasis on buffalo hunting (Prikryl 1990).
Historic occupation began with the exploration of the area by the Spanish as they followed
prehistoric trails to ford the Brazos River. One of these natural fords was southwest of
modern day Marlin at “The Falls”. As an important camping and fording location, the first

3

Americans established Sarahville de Viesca in 1834 on the west side of the river. This
settlement was renamed Fort Viesca and later Fort Milam by 1836. After the Runaway
Scrape, during the fight for independence, the families that returned, Marlin and Morgan
most notably, settled on the east side of the river.

This short-lived but booming

community, Bucksnort, was south of modern day Milam. It was not until 1850, when the
Indian threat was calmed, that Falls County was formed from Milam and Limestone
counties and Adam, later Marlin, was named the county seat. Early American settlers
brought their southern traditions of slavery and cotton plantations with them, but they
planted a diverse crop and relied on cattle as well. The broad scope of agricultural
products, cotton seed oil manufacture, and the development of a tourist industry around
mineral springs found in 1892 spared the area during Reconstruction and the Great
Depression. To this day, Falls County retains a diverse economy with cotton, wheat, oats,
sorghum, soybeans, as well as a variety of livestock and small industry as the backbone of
the economy (Webb 1952).

4

RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
The investigations were preformed in compliance with the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 (PL89-665), as amended in 1974, 1976, 1980, and 1992; the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (PL91-190, 83 Stat. 915, 42 USC 4231, 1970); and the
guidelines set forth by the CTA (1995b), the Texas Antiquities Code, and the Register of
Professional Archaeologists.
The program of site definition was conducted in accordance with the National Park
Service criteria (36 CFR, part 60.4) which present the guidelines for determining
eligibility of a cultural resource for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP). The objectives of the survey were to locate prehistoric and historic cultural
resources sites within the survey areas. If sites were found, then the investigations were
to delineate the vertical and horizontal extent of each site, determine each site’s integrity,
and provide a preliminary evaluation of each site’s potential for NRHP eligibility.
Before initiating fieldwork, DETAC conducted a records and literature review using maps
and files at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) and at the Texas
Archaeological Site Atlas (THC 2006). The site location maps and cultural resources
records at TARL were consulted to identify the location, types, and both State
Archaeological Landmarks (SAL) and NRHP eligibility of previously recorded sites within
or in close proximity to the project areas. The Site Atlas was consulted for published and
unpublished data regarding cultural resource surveys.
DETAC conducted a 100 percent pedestrian survey of the areas. To locate sites, the
pedestrian survey relied on visual examination. Shovel testing was not reasonable as the
soils were shallow, generally clayey and all proposed excavations were to take place
along highly disturbed city streets.

5

RESULTS
The Texas Archaeological Site Atlas (THC 2006) revealed no archaeological sites were
near the proposed improvements; however, the courthouse in Marlin is a NRHP and there
are six Historic Markers within the Marlin city limits. The community of Bucksnort was
commemorated in 1989 with a marker south of town. Neither the Court House nor any of
the marked properties will be impacted by the proposed improvements. The closest marker
to a survey area is the Captain Henry Gray Carter house built in 1871. A Civil War
veteran, Captain Gray was a prominent individual in local economics and politics.
Previous archaeological surveys within the City of Marlin include two surveys for water
lines (Lohse and Jones 1995; Briggs 1991) and a TxDot survey along a road in
northeastern Marlin. None of the previous work found evidence of cultural resources.
Based on the previous research, the toe slopes and low ridges adjacent to the Brazos
River floodplain and those similar landforms overlooking streams had a higher potential
for containing archaeological sites than the remainder of the area. Using this model, high
probability areas for this project were limited to areas adjacent creeks and the floodplain.
Unfortunately, several factors limited the survey effort. Buried utility lines, residential
and business property cutting and filling, and a narrow project area and slope cutting and
ditch excavations for road construction already impacted most of these areas. Among the
impacts, ditch excavation and the narrow width of the right-of-way were the largest
factors limiting the investigations. With no new right-of-way acquisition, all of the
proposed improvements waterlines were in previously disturbed trenches, landscaped
yards, or in cut areas along high probability slopes. For this report, pipeline segments
were grouped by geographical proximity.

Each segment was described with its

relationship to the road surface, existing disturbances, soils, vegetation, topographic
setting, and probability of encountering cultural resources, visual examinations, and
segment recommendations.

6

Segment 1
Planned excavations include replacing 885 m (2900 ft) of 8” pipeline (Figure 2).
Vegetation within the proposed construction area consist entirely of domestic grasses.
Soils are Wilson loam with 13 cm of silt loam over silty clay (NRCS 2006). Visual
examination revealed the segment was adjacent to a paved road. Fire hydrants delineated
the existing line. Based on the location on the land form, the shallow soils, and previous
disturbances by domestic activities, the potential for encountering undisturbed cultural
resources was low. No high probability areas were established and no shovel tests were
excavated. No further work is recommended for this segment.
Segment 2
Planned excavations include improving 488 m (1600 ft) of 8” pipeline (Figure 2).
Vegetation within the proposed construction area consists entirely of domestic grasses.
Soils are Silawa fine sandy loam with 35 cm of fine sandy loam over clay loam (NRCS
2006). Visual examination revealed the segment was adjacent to a paved road. The area
was heavily urbanized although it is not shown on the topographic map. Based on the
location on the land form, and previous disturbances by domestic activities, the potential
for encountering undisturbed cultural resources was low. No high probability areas were
established and no shovel tests were excavated. No further work is recommended for this
segment.
Segment 3
Planned excavations include improving 1830 m (6000 ft) of 8” pipeline (Figure 2).
Vegetation within the proposed construction area consists entirely of domestic grasses.
Soils are predominantly Heiden clay on the eastern end with Lewisville silty clay on the
slopes and Gowen clay loam in the floodplain (NRCS 2006).

Visual examination

revealed the segment was adjacent to a paved road with landscaped house lots extending
to the annual floodplain. Fire hydrants delineated the existing line. Based on the location
on the land form, and previous disturbances by domestic activities, the potential for
encountering undisturbed cultural resources was low. No high probability

7

8

areas were established and no shovel tests were excavated.

No further work is

recommended for this segment.
Segment 4
Planned excavations include improving 1525 m (5000 ft) of 8” pipeline (Figure 2).
Vegetation within the proposed construction area consists of domestic grasses on the
uplands and the slopes with shin-high grasses, bushes, and trees in the annual floodplain.
Soils are predominantly Heiden clay on the eastern end with Lewisville silty clay on the
slopes Gown clay loam in the floodplain, and Wilson silty clay loam on the western end
(NRCS 2006). An examination of a cutbank along the creek bed revealed clayey matrix
with abundant stream gravels. Visual examination revealed the segment was adjacent to
a paved road with landscaped house lots extending to the annual floodplain. Based on the
location on the land form, and previous disturbances by domestic activities, the potential
for encountering undisturbed cultural resources was low. No high probability areas were
established and no shovel tests were excavated. No further work is recommended for this
segment.
Segment 5
Planned excavations include improving 1678 m (5500 ft) of 12” pipeline from a new
elevated water tank at the north eastern extent to the downtown area to (Figure 2). The
existing water tank is an all metal structure built in 1968. The preferred route is along an
improved gravel road with an alternative route along a paved street. Vegetation within
the proposed construction areas consists entirely of domestic grasses. Soils are Heiden
clay with lesser amounts of Wilson silty clay loam and Gowen clay (NRCS 2006). The
primary route will be constructed in the centerline of the gravel road. Fire hydrants
delineated the existing line along the alternative route. Based on the location on the land
form, the shallow soils, and previous disturbances by domestic activities, the potential for
encountering undisturbed cultural resources was low. No high probability areas were
established and no shovel tests were excavated. No further work is recommended for this
segment.

9

Segment 6
Planned excavations include improving 763 m (2500 ft) of 18” pipeline (Figure 3).
Vegetation within the proposed construction areas consists entirely of domestic grasses.
Soils are Heiden clay (NRCS 2006). Visual examination revealed the segment was
adjacent to a deep drainage ditch with buried cables adjacent to the waterline and several
driveways crossing the right-of-way. Fire hydrants delineated the existing line. Based on
the location on the land form, the clayey soils, and previous disturbances by domestic
activities, the potential for encountering undisturbed cultural resources was low. No high
probability areas were established and no shovel tests were excavated. No further work
is recommended for this segment.
Segment 7
Planned excavations include replacing 610 m (2000 ft) of 12” pipeline (Figure 3).
Vegetation within the proposed construction area consists entirely of domestic grasses.
Soils are Wilson silty clay loam (NRCS 2006). Visual examination revealed the segment
was adjacent to a paved road. Fire hydrants delineated the existing line. Based on the
location on the land form, the shallow soils, and previous disturbances by domestic
activities, the potential for encountering undisturbed cultural resources was low. No high
probability areas were established and no shovel tests were excavated. No further work
is recommended for this segment.
Segment 8
Planned excavations include pipeline improvements to 366 m (1200 ft) of 8” pipeline
(Figure 3).

Vegetation within the proposed construction area consists entirely of

domestic grasses. Soils are Wilson loam with 13 cm of silt loam over silty clay (NRCS
2006). Visual examination revealed the segment was adjacent to a paved road. Fire
hydrants delineated the existing line. The eastern end of Segment 8 is roughly 50 m (164
ft) north of the Captain Henry Gray Carter house. This house was built by Captain Carter
in 1871. After serving in the Civil War, he became a local business leader. The proposed
pipeline will not impact the structure or the property around the house. Based on the

10

11

location on the land form, the shallow soils, and previous disturbances by domestic
activities, the potential for encountering undisturbed cultural resources was low. No high
probability areas were established and no shovel tests were excavated. No further work
is recommended for this segment.
Segment 9
Planned excavations include replacing 976 m (3200 ft) of 8” pipeline (Figure 3).
Vegetation within the proposed construction areas consists entirely of domestic grasses.
Soils are Wilson silty clay loam (NRCS 2006). Visual examination revealed the segment
was adjacent to a paved road with buried cables adjacent to the waterline. Fire hydrants
delineated the existing line. Based on the location on the land form, the shallow soils,
and previous disturbances by domestic activities, the potential for encountering
undisturbed cultural resources was low. No high probability areas were established and
no shovel tests were excavated. No further work is recommended for this segment.
Segment 10
Planned excavations include improvements to a 1159 m (3800 ft) of 12” pipeline (Figure
3). Vegetation within the proposed construction areas consists entirely of domestic
grasses. Soils are Wilson loam with 13 cm of silt loam over silty clay on the northern
half and Crockett fine sandy loam with 20 cm of fine sandy loam over clay on the
southern half of the pipeline (NRCS 2006). The northern half of the segment is adjacent
to a paved road with a drainage ditch. The southern half is under an improved gravel
road. The entire segment is flanked by private resides with buried cables paralleling the
right-of-way and driveways crossing to the road surface. Based on the location on the
land form, the shallow soils, and previous disturbances by domestic activities, the
potential for encountering undisturbed cultural resources was low. No high probability
areas were established and no shovel tests were excavated.

No further work is

recommended for this segment.
Segment 11
Planned excavations include replacement of 1373 m (4500 ft) of 8” pipeline (Figure 3).
Vegetation within the proposed construction areas consists entirely of domestic grasses.

12

Soils are Wilson loam with 13 cm of silt loam over silty clay on the northern two-thirds
and Crockett fine sandy loam with 20 cm of fine sandy loam over clay on the southern
one-third of the pipeline (NRCS 2006). The northern most street of the segment is a
paved road while the other roads are improved gravel surfaces. The entire segment is
flanked by businesses and private resides with buried cables paralleling the right-of-way
and driveways crossing to the road surface. Based on the location on the land form, the
shallow soils, and previous disturbances by domestic activities, the potential for
encountering undisturbed cultural resources was low. No high probability areas were
established and no shovel tests were excavated. No further work is recommended for this
segment.
Segment 12
Planned excavations include replacing 1220 m (4000 ft) of 12” pipeline along a
neighborhood street with an alternative paralleling the preferred route (Figure 4). Both of
the routes are along improved gravel roads with adjacent drainage ditches. Vegetation
within the proposed construction areas consists entirely of domestic grasses. Soils are
Wilson loam (NRCS 2006). Fire hydrants delineated the existing lines. Based on the
location on the land form, the shallow soils, and previous disturbances by domestic
activities, the potential for encountering undisturbed cultural resources was low. No high
probability areas were established and no shovel tests were excavated. No further work
is recommended for this segment.

13

14

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The proposed water system improvements will follow existing pipeline right-of-ways
along city streets in Marlin, Texas. Roughly 7.4 km (4.6 miles) of pipeline will be
replaced or improved along with the replacement of eight valves and one elevate storage
tank. The investigations relied on surface inspections to insure no new right-of-way was
acquired and that any high probability areas along the existing right-of-ways had either
been disturbed or that all areas were adequately investigated prior to requesting cultural
resource clearance. Only Segment 8 was within 50 m of a house designated as a historic
property. Careful inspection of this, and all other segments found that none of the
proposed excavations will impact historic properties and that the proposed excavations
will be entirely within previously disturbed areas.
In conclusion, the investigations did not find any undisturbed areas. Given the dense
clayey nature of the soils and the previous disturbance from utility excavations and urban
development, there is little chance of encountering cultural resources in the project areas.
DETAC is requesting a concurrence with the determination of “no effect” on NRHP
eligible properties for the proposed project areas.

15

REFRENCES
Briggs, Alton K.
1991 An Archeological and Historical Survey of the Proposed City of Marlin
Water Transmission Trunk Main, Phase I, Falls County, Texas. Lone Star
Archeological Services. Austin.
Council of Texas Archaeologists
1995a Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports in Council of
Texas Archaeologists Guidelines.
1995b Guidelines for Professional Performance Standards in Council of Texas
Archaeologists Guidelines.
Kenmotsu, N. and T. Perttula
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document.
Cultural Resources Management Report 3. Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historic Commission, Austin.
Lohse, Jon C. and James T. Jones
1995 Archeological Survey of a Proposed Wastewater Line in the City of
Marlin, Fall City, Texas. Archeology Series No. 49. Hicks & Company.
Austin.
Martin, W.
1999

Letter to author 15 September

McGregor. D.
1987 Lithic Raw material Utilization. In Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along
the Prairie Margin: site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric
Archaeology, edited by .d McGregor and J. Bruseth, pp. 185-195.
Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume III. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Natural Resource Conservation Service
2006 Soil Survey of Falls County, Texas. In cooperation with the Texas
Agriculture Experiment Station. Data downloaded from
http://www.ftw.nrcs.usda.gov/ssur_data.html
Prikryl, D.
1990

Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and
Chronologies along the Trinity River, North-Central Texas. Report 37.
Office of the State Archaeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

16

Story, D.A.
1990

Cultural History of the Native Americans. In: The Archaeology and
Bioarchaeology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, vol. 1. Arkansas Archaeological
Survey Research Series No. 38.

Texas Historical Commission
2006 Texas Archaeological Site Atlas.
http://pedernales.thc.state.tx.us/index.html (10 March 2006).
Webb, W.P. (editor)
1952 The Handbook of Texas History, Vol. I and II.
Association, Austin.

17

Texas Historical

