A Cultural Resources Survey of the
Long Marsh in
Fannin County, Texas

Prepared for:
Ducks Unlimited
East Texas Field Office
3334 SW Loop 323, Ste. #110
Tyler, TX 7501

Prepared by:
Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultants
4215 Red Oak
Nacogdoches, TX

Principal Investigator and Report Author
Victor Galan

Project Number 153

February 2010

ABSTRACT
On 29 May 2005 Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultant (DETAC) conducted a
cultural resource management survey of a proposed wetland habitat restoration marsh
approximately 4.5 hectares (10 acres) in size on the Long property in Fannin County,
Texas for Ducks Unlimited (DU). DU plans to bulldoze an area to create shallow ponds
by building berms to hold water. Excavation of nine shovel tests and a visual inspection
found no cultural material. No cultural resources were found during the survey. DETAC
is requesting a concurrence with the determination of “no effect” on NRHP eligible
properties for the proposed project areas. Cultural resource clearance is requested.

ii

TABEL OF CONTENTS
Section

Page

Abstract
Table of Content
List of Figures

ii
iii
iv

INTRODUCTION
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
CULTURAL HISTORY
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
RESULTS
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES

1
1
3
6
8
11
12

iii

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure
1.
2.

Page
Project area on Gober 7.5’ Quad
Project area shovel tests

2
9

LIST OF TABLES
Table
1.

Page
Shovel test data

10

iv

INTRODUCTION

On 29 June 2005 Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultant (DETAC) conducted a
cultural resource management survey of a proposed wetland habitat restoration area in
Fannin County, Texas for Ducks Unlimited (DU) on the Long property.

Federal

regulations concerning the use of federal funding from National Resource Conservation
Service (NRCS) required cultural resource management. The surveys were conducted
under the authority of the National Historic Preservation Act as explained in Section 106.
In response to a letter requesting cultural resource clearance, the Texas Historical
Commission (THC) requested DU conduct a cultural resources survey for the area
investigated in this report.

The proposed project focused on wetland habitat restoration by constructing a berm to
slow drainage in an unnamed tributary to the North Sulphur River leaving approximately
60 centimeters (24 inches) of standing water. The areas were located on private property
south of Gober, TX. The purpose of this survey was to locate, describe and record any
cultural resources within the project area boundaries. The report was prepared following
the short report format outlined by the Council of Texas Archaeologist (CTA) (1995a)
with modifications requested by the THC (Martin 1999).

DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
The project areas encompasses approximately 3.2 hectares (10 acres) along an
intermittent drainage (Figure 1). The areas were dominated by pasture grasses and clayey
soils. The marsh was topographically bound by the tow slope of a ridge to the east and
the proposed DU berm to the north, west, and south. DU plans to bulldoze an area along
the proposed berm allowing the up-slope area to flood. A variety of water-tolerant plants
will be introduced to the areas to further develop the wet lands and act as feed for ducks.

1

2

CULTURAL HISTORY
Fannin County is at the boundary of the Eastern Archaeological Planning Region with the
Plains Archaeological Planning Region in the North-Central Texas culture area as
defined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954). This ecological and cultural boundary
included populations ranging from the Paleo-Indian (pre 6000 B.C.) through the Archaic
(6000 B.C. – 700 A.D.), Late Prehistoric (A.D. 700 – A.D. 1700) into the Historic (A.D.
1700 – present). These periods were based on changes in environment, technology,
and/or population requiring cultural adaptations to meet varying circumstances.

The Paleo-Indian period (prior to 6000 B.C.) is the earliest generally accepted cultural
period in the New World and includes populations that inhabited North America from the
Late Pleistocene to the early Holocene. Paleo-Indian sites are rare and generally consist of
isolated finds artifacts recovered in the region suggest that early occupations were
principally distributed in the valleys of major stream basins (Prikryl 1990:68). These sites
are typified by scattered Clovis, Scottsbluff, Dalton, San Patrice, and Plainview projectile
points and are considered rare in the region. Toward the end of the Paleo-Indian period,
point styles gradually changed to more stemmed and barbed varieties. Overall, tool types
are generally carefully fashioned bifacial and unifacial tools.

The use of non-local

materials and recycling lead Story and others (1990) to suggest this population was
organized into small, mobile bands of hunters and gatherers that consumed a variety of
plants and animals (McGregor 1987:192; Prikryl 1990:66). This view is supported by
Ferring (1989) and Ferring and Yates (1997) who investigations at the Aubrey site
(41DN479) found a wide variety of faunal remains.

The Archaic (6000-700 B.C.) refers to hunter-gatherers who implemented more
regionally specialized approaches toward exploiting their environment. When compared
to Paleo-Indian artifacts, Archaic lithic assemblages are more functionally varied;
however, tool types are generally less well made and of more local materials than the
Paleo-Indian period. Stone-lined hearths, baking pits, milling implements, and polished
stone serve as indicators of new technologies (Story et al. 1990:213). Cemeteries date to
the Archaic period as well (Story et al. 1990). The Archaic period is represented by three

3

divisions: the Early, Middle, and Late Archaic during which tool technology progressed
from the large point that typify the Paleo-Indian period to the use of sand and grog
tempered ceramics and the bow and arrow in the Late Prehistoric. Later Archaic sites are
more abundant than earlier sites along with a shift from major streams to minor streams and
natural springs (Prikryl 1990; Ferring 1990:51). This greater number and distribution of
Late Archaic sites suggesting the successful adaptation to the environment lasting until the
development of pottery and/or the development of the bow and arrow. The dominant
cultural foci are the Carrollton and Elam Foci. The Carrollton is older with Carrollton
and Trinity dart points while the Elam focus is typified by Elam, Ellis, Yarbrough, and
Gary dart points. Both cultural foci include seasonal camps and specific activity sites
found on the first terraces above the junction of minor and major drainages (McCormick
1976).

The Late Prehistoric in north central Texas is defined by the widespread use of the bow
and arrow (A.D. 700 – 1600). Subsistence remains unchanged between the Late Archaic
and Late Prehistoric with foraging and big game hunting. Bands in the area were heavily
influenced by the Southern plains cultures further west.

Early sites from the Late

Prehistoric have sand and grog tempered pottery along with Scallron, Catahoula, and
Alba arrow points (Lynott 1977; Prikryl 1990). Later, after 1200 A.D. (Lynott 1977;
Prikryl 1990), evidence of horticulture (Haris and Harris 1970; Morris and Morris 1970)
along with Fresno, Maud, Washita, Harrell projectile points and Nocona plain ceramics
dominate the archaeological record (Prikryl 1990).
The Historic period (1880-present) describes the history behind the current cultural
setting of the area and marks a transition from the native populations’ domination of the
area to the European immigrants’ establishment of farms, towns, and counties (Webb
1952). Fannin County was first settled in 1836 by white settlers from Red River County.
In 1837 it was approved as a county and in 1846 the boundaries were set by the Texas
Congress. In 1848 the county seat, Bois D’Arc was renamed Bonham. The early settlers
were under constant raids from the Cherokee as white settlers brought livestock into the
region. The remainder of the economy relied on cotton and corn crops peaking in

4

production around the turn of the century. The Great Depression brought about a shift in
economic staples from agriculture to ranching. Industry was introduced early to Fannin
County; however, manufacturing did not make a strong economic impact until the mid
20th century.

5

RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
The investigations were preformed in compliance with the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 (PL89-665), as amended in 1974, 1976, 1980, and 1992; the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (PL91-190, 83 Stat. 915, 42 USC 4231, 1970); and the
guidelines set forth by the CTA (1995b), the Texas Antiquities Code, and the Register of
Professional Archaeologists.

The program of site definition was conducted in accordance with the National Park
Service criteria (36 CFR, part 60.4) which present the guidelines for determining
eligibility of a cultural resource for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP). The objectives of the survey were to locate prehistoric and historic cultural
resources sites within the survey areas.

Sites were then delineated vertically and

horizontally to determine each site’s integrity, and provide a preliminary evaluation of
potential for NRHP eligibility.

Before initiating fieldwork, DETAC conducted a records and literature review using the
Texas Archaeological Site Atlas (THC 2005) based on maps and files at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), J.J. Pickle Research Campus, UT. The site
location maps and cultural resources records at TARL were consulted to identify the
location, types, and both State Archaeological Landmarks (SAL) and NRHP eligibility of
previously recorded sites within or in close proximity to the project areas. The Site Atlas
also contains information about published and unpublished data regarding cultural resource
surveys.

DETAC conducted a 100 percent pedestrian survey of the marsh area. To locate sites, the
pedestrian survey relied on visual examination and shovel testing. Visual examinations
were conducted in areas with exposed soil surfaces in a continuous effort between shovel
tests at all locations with exposed surfaces. Visual examinations also attempted to find
shallow rises in the marsh area as these areas were seasonally used by prehistoric
populations in drier times of year. Shovel testing was conducted based on the probability
of encountering cultural resources.

Shovel testing included excavating an area

6

approximately 30 cm (12 inches) in diameter in 10 cm (4 inch) levels down to the clay
substrate or 90 cm (35 inches). The excavated matrix was screened through a 0.635 cm
(0.25 inch) wire mesh screen. The depth, soil type, and color of each shovel test was
recorded. Shovel test locations focused on investigating the areas impacted by the berm
as most of the area to be flooded was seasonally wet and therefore had a low potential for
containing cultural resources.

7

RESULTS
The previous investigation research found no prior surveys or evidence of previously
recorded sites in or near the project area. The closest historical markers to the project area
were the Gober Public School and Gober Baptist Church roughly 2 km (1.2 miles) north of
the project area (THC 2005). Otherwise, the closest documented cultural resources are
over 4 km (2.5 miles) away.

The area was on the tow slope of an upland ridge overlooking an intermittent drainage
channel. The channel embankment was roughly 4 m (13 ft) deep. Vegetation in the
proposed marsh area was dominated by pasture grasses. Soil in the marsh was described
as Tin clay. Tin soil consists of a shallow layer of black clay over clay parent material
(NRCS 2001). Tin soil has a flooding hazard for urban development. An inspection of a
cut bank along a cattle pond drainage revealed the landform for the marsh is roughly 1 m
(3 ft) of black clay over light grayish brown clay over indurated sandstone. In addition,
the eastern slope of the project area was terraced.

Given the clayey soil in the proposed marshes and the terracing along the eastern limit of
the project area, shovel testing focused on finding low sandy rises that may contain
cultural resources along the proposed berm (Figure 2). All tests contained clay from the
surface and each test was terminated at the dense Bt horizon roughly 20 cm (8 inches)
below the ground surface. The shovel tests data for the project area are presented in
Table 1.
ST Number Depth Soil Color and Texture
1
20
Black Clay
2
20
Black Clay
3
20
Black Clay
4
20
Black Clay
5
20
Black Clay
6
20
Black Clay
7
20
Black Clay
8
20
Black Clay
9
20
Black Clay
Table 1. Shovel test data.
No artifacts were founding any of the shovel tests. No shovel tests contained sandy soils.

8

9

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The proposed wetland habitat restoration project area will utilize undeveloped lowlands.
This area was characterized by poorly permeable soils. Ducks Unlimited will only
construct a berm to inhibit drainage. A total of nine shovel tests were excavated. Tests
focused on the berm as this location was closest to the creek and outside of the effect of
the agricultural terracing along the slope. The remainder of the area was explored for
isolated areas of sandy soil. No cultural materials were recovered from the shovel testing
in the marsh area and no sandy soils were found.

In conclusion, the shovel testing and surface inspection found no evidence of either
prehistoric or historic occupations. The eastern limit of the project area was severely
disturbed prior to the survey by the terracing. Given the negative shovel test results and
clayey soils in the project area, DETAC is requesting a concurrence with the
determination of “no effect” on NRHP eligible properties for the proposed project area as
defined by the National Historic Preservation Act.

10

REFRENCES

Council of Texas Archaeologists
1995a Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports in Council of
Texas Archaeologists Guidelines.
1995b Guidelines for Professional Performance Standards in Council of Texas
Archaeologists Guidelines.
Ferring, C.R.
1989 The Aubry Clovis Site: A Paleoindian Locality in the Upper Trinity River
Basin, Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:9-11.
Ferring, C.R. and Yates
1997 An Archaeological Survey of Portions of the Proposed Upper Trinity
Regional Water District, Phase 1C Project, Water System Improvements,
Denton, County, Texas. Geoarch Consultants.
Harris, R.K., and I.M. Harris
1970 A Bison Kill Dixon’s Branch, Site 27A2-5, Dallas county, Texas. The
Record 27(1):1-2.
Lynott, M. J.
1977
A Regional Model for Archaeological Research in North central Texas.
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Martin, W.A.
1999 Letter to author 15 September
McCormick, O.F.
1976 The Archaic Period in North Central Texas. In Thomas R. Hester, ed.
The Texas Archaic: A Symposium, pp. 39-45. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report, No. 2.
McGregor, D. E.
1987 Lithic Raw Material Utilization. In Hunter-Gatherer adaptations Along the
Prairie Margin, Site Excavations and Synthesis for Prehistoric Archaeology,
edited by D.E. McGregor and J.E. Brusheth, pp. 185-196. Richland Creek
Technical Services, Vol. 111. Archaeology Research Program, Institute of
the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

11

Morris, V. and B. Morris
1970 Excavation of Bison Remains in Northwest Dallas County. The Record
27(1):2-5. Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS), U.S.
Department of Agriculture
Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS), U.S. Department of Agriculture
2001 Soil Survey for Fannin County, Texas. In cooperation with the Texas
Agriculture Experiment Station.
Prikryl, D.J.
1990

Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and
Chronologies along the Trinity River, Northcentral Texas. Office of the
State Archaeologist Report 37, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Story, D.A. J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive
and K.J. Reinhard
1990 The Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, vols. 1 and
2. Arkansas Archaeological Survey Research Series No. 38. Fayetteville,
Arkansas.
Suhm, D. A., A.D. Krieger, and E.B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archaeological Society 25.
Texas Historical Commission
2005 Texas Archaeological Site Atlas. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ (23 June
2005).
Webb, W.P. (editor)
1952 The Handbook of Texas History, Vol. I and II.
Association, Austin.

12

Texas Historical

