A Cultural Resources Survey and
Backhoe Trenching of the
Daisetta Wetland Mitigation Bank
Liberty, Texas

Prepared for:
Advanced Ecology, Inc.
2557 State Highway 7 E
Center, TX 75935
Prepared by:
Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultants
4215 Red Oak
Nacogdoches, Texas 75965

Principal Investigator and Report Author
Victor Galan

Project Number 309
February 2010

ABSTRACT
In September 2009 Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultant (DETAC) conducted a
cultural resource management survey of the proposed Trinity Gardens apartments for
Advanced Ecology, Inc in Liberty, Texas. The pedestrian survey was conducted with a
combination of visual examination and backhoe trenching. A visual examination
revealed the area was used for rice agriculture and crawfish farming in the recent past.
Backhoe trenching along an abandoned creek bed did not find evidence of buried soil
horizons or other features indicative of deeply buried cultural resources. No further
investigations are recommended however, if any cultural material is recovered during
construction, than excavation should stop and a qualified archaeologist contacted to
evaluate the impact. DETAC is requesting concurrence with the determination of “no
effect” on NRHP eligible properties for the proposed project area.

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Section

Page

Abstract
Table of Contents
List of Figures

i
ii
ii

INTRODUCTION
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
PREVIOUS RESEARCH AND CULTURAL HISTORY
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
RESULTS
Surface Inspection
Backhoe Trenching
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES

1
1
3
5
6
6
8
11
12

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure

Page

1. Project Area on Hardin 7.5’ Quad
2. Surface features and backhoe locations
3. Backhoe trenches

2
7
9

iii

INTRODUCTION
In September 2009, DETAC (Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultants) conducted a
cultural resources survey of the proposed Daisetta Wetland Mitigation Bank in Liberty,
Texas (Figure 1). The survey was conducted upon request of the Galveston District
Corps of Engineers (CoE) following 33 CFR Part 325, Appendix C and with consultation
by the Texas Historical Commission (THC). The report was reviewed by the CoE and
the THC under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.

The purpose of this survey was to locate, describe and record any cultural resources
within the project area boundaries. The report was prepared following the short report
format outlined by the Council of Texas Archaeologist (CTA) (1995a) with modifications
requested by the THC (Martin 1999). No cultural resources were found during the
surface inspection or backhoe trenching of the project area. No buried soils or sediments
were uncovered that would suggest a higher potential for buried archaeological sites.
Based on fieldwork, DETAC recommends a determination of “no effect” to cultural
resources for the project area.

DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
The project included a 324 hectare (800 acre) tract bordering the Daisetta Swamp. The
previous landowner used the property for rice and leased a portion as a crawfish pond.
Elevation change from the north end of the property to the south end is less than one
meter (3.3 ft) in 2450 m (8038 ft) with the exception of raised roads, a rail road, and fill
adjacent to irrigation ditches and the rerouted Walker Creek. Beyond agriculture, the
property has several pipelines and a small complex with a garage, a mobile home, and
associated structures for a crawfish farm. Project area boundaries were fence lines to the
north and northeast, the rerouted Walker Creek to the west, and Daisetta Swamp to the
southwest.

1

0 0.5 1

2

3

4

5

Project Area
0

0.5

1

2

3

Figure 1. Project area on Hardin 7.5' Quad
2

6
Kilometers
Miles
4

©

PREVIOUS RESEARCH AND CULTURAL HISTORY
Overall, Liberty County has been studied primarily by numerous linear and small area
surveys. The linear investigations focused on stream channels for the Corps of Engineers
and road improvements for TxDot across the county. Linear investigations generally
show that both prehistoric and historic sites were found adjacent to stream channels in the
floodplains on first terraces or along the toe slopes of higher ridges.

Small area

investigations ranging across the county were conducted primarily for oil interests or
preservation, e.g., Shafer and others 1975 survey in the Big Thicket National Preserve.
Closer to Liberty, Baxter surveyed ten areas totaling 24 hectares (60 acres) northwest and
northeast of Liberty in 2003 for the US Fish and Wildlife Service. No new sites were
documented (Baxter and Moore 2003). In general, areas around stream confluences and
on small rises within floodplains had a good to excellent chance of containing prehistoric
cultural resources while historic resources can be in more diverse conditions, including
areas away from water.

In addition to the fieldwork referenced above, several documents have added significantly
to available information on the archaeological record in this region. The documents of
primary importance are D.A. Story's (1990) and J.A. Guy's (1990) discussions of the Gulf
Coastal Plain. Additionally, the Texas Historical Commission, Department of Antiquities
Protection developed a document for the eastern Texas portion of the Texas State Plan
(Perttula and Kenmotsu 1993). This document includes several historic contexts, each of
which deals with a particular facet of northeast Texas prehistory. This plan serves to
synthesize the current state of archaeological research in the region and identify problems
and objectives to be addressed in future research and cultural resources management.
Several weak areas in archaeological knowledge of the region are identified in these
studies. Cultural chronology, aboriginal settlement patterns and subsistence, and historic
continuities are some of the general research directions that these recent studies emphasize
as important for developing future archaeological research designs. More recently, Ricklis
(2004:181-204) includes the most up to date description of region for southeast Texas
which extends from the Gulf Coast to Angelina County.

3

The occupation of the area ranges from the Paleoindian (ca. pre-7000 B.C.) to Archaic
foraging cultures (ca. 7000-200 B.C.), Early Ceramic Period groups (ca. 100 B.C. - A.D.
600), the more sedentary Late Prehistoric occupations (A.D. 800 - 1680), and ends in the
historic Euro American settlement (Perttula and Kenmotsu 44:1993). The Paleo-Indian
period (ca. 10,000-7000 B.C.) is characterized by small, mobile bands of hunters and
gatherers that consumed a variety of native plants and animals principally distributed in the
valleys of major stream basins (Ricklis 2004:184). The Archaic (7000-200 B.C.) refers to
hunter-gatherers who implemented more regionally specialized approaches toward
exploiting their environment (Story 1990). When compared to Paleo-Indian artifacts,
Archaic lithic assemblages are more functionally varied; however, tool types are
generally less well made and of increasingly more local materials than the Paleo-Indian
period and earlier Archaic (Ricklis 2004:184). Cemeteries date to the Archaic period as
well (Story 1990) and become an integral part of the late Archaic (Ricklis 2004:186).
The Early Ceramic (100 B.C.-A.D. 600) period represents the diffusion of Tchefuncte
ceramics and later Goose Creek ceramic technology into the area from the Texas-Louisiana
coastal area (Aten 1983:297; Ricklis 2004:189). The late prehistory of south east Texas
began with the arrival of the bow and arrow and the wide spread of the grog tempered
pottery, e.g., San Jacinto Plain and Baytown Plain ceramics although earlier varieties
continued (Ricklis 2004:200). Larger aggregates of people became increasingly sedentary
with the introduction of the bow and arrow and populations specializing in environmental
zones (Aten 1983:91). The Historic period (1680-present) describes both the history
behind the current cultural setting of the area and marks a transition from the native
populations domination of the area, to the American immigrants establishment of farms,
towns, and counties. Liberty County was formed in 1836 and the city of Liberty was
incorporated as the county seat in 1837. Initially, cotton and other valuable crops were
grown on plantations but cattle and lumber industries moved in quickly. Oil increased the
county revenue as prospecting began in the early part of the twentieth century and
continues today (THA 2009).

4

RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
The investigations were preformed in compliance with the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 (PL89-665), as amended in 1974, 1976, 1980, and 1992; the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (PL91-190, 83 Stat. 915, 42 USC 4231, 1970); and the
guidelines set forth by the CTA (1995b), and the Register of Professional Archaeologists.
The program of site definition was conducted in accordance with the National Park Service
criteria (36 CFR, part 60.4) which present the guidelines for determining eligibility of a
cultural resource for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). The
objectives of the survey were to locate prehistoric and historic cultural resources sites
within the survey areas. If sites were found, then the investigations were to delineate the
vertical and horizontal extent of each site, determine each site’s integrity, and provide a
preliminary evaluation of each site’s potential for NRHP eligibility.

Before initiating fieldwork, DETAC conducted a records and literature review using maps
and files at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) and at the Texas
Archaeological Site Atlas (THC 2009). The site location maps and cultural resources
records at TARL were consulted to identify the location, types, and both State
Archaeological Landmarks (SAL) and NRHP eligibility of previously recorded sites within
or in close proximity to the project areas. The Site Atlas was consulted for published and
unpublished data regarding cultural resource surveys.

DETAC conducted a 100 percent pedestrian survey of the area. To locate sites, the
pedestrian survey relied on visual examination and backhoe trenching.

The visual

examination was conducted across the entire project area with emphasis along an
abandoned stream channel of East Fork Long Island Bayou. Backhoe trenches were
excavated to assess the potential for buried cultural resources using surface inspection as a
guide to trench placement.

A GPS position was taken for each trench and profile

descriptions, sketches, and photos were made to illustrate the sediment and soil formation
in areas most likely to contain buried cultural resources.

5

RESULTS
The literature search and records review at TARL and Texas Archaeological Site Atlas
(2007) revealed the closest surveys were 2.2 km (1.4 miles) and 2.5 km (1.6 miles) east
and northeast of the project area (Brownlow 2006). Neither survey documented any
cultural resources. The closest documented sites are roughly 10 km (6 miles) westsouthwest of the project area near the city of Liberty.

Soils in the project area were described as Beaumont clay over most of the project area
with isolated areas of Aldine-Aris complex in the northeast corner and League clay
adjacent to the swamp in the southeast corner (NRCS 2009).

Beaumont and League

clays include clay in excess of 130 cm (60 inches). Aldine-Aris complex includes small
rises and mounds of very fine sandy loam roughly 70 cm (29 inches) high over clay and
low areas of silt loam over clay. The visual examination of the property found no
evidence of sandy soil. Soil probes in the area of Aldine-Aris complex found clay soil
from the surface down to the maximum prob depth.

Parent material for all three soil

series is clayey fluviomarine deposits from the late Pleistocene. The late Pleistocene
spans the time from 126,000 to 10,000 years ago. Given the relative location of the
project area the sediments are most likely from earlier than later in the epoch. This limits
the potential for Paleo-indian sites to the surface or near surface over most of the project
area and within any buried deposits along stream channels.

Surface Inspection
The visual inspection of the project area found that the property was flat with only a
slight depression and vegetation change to signify where an abandoned stream channel
was located (Figure 2). The vegetation change began near the northwest corner of the
project area where the rail road enters the property. The stream was diverted along the
west edge of the property while the natural stream channel was visible in a vegetation
change across the western half of the project area. The visual inspection of the ground
surface began along the vegetation changes and expanded outward to encompass the

6

BHT 4BHT 5

"

"

BHT 3

"

BHT 2

"

BHT1

"

Abandond Stream
"

Backhoe

0

150

300

600

900

0

500

1,000

2,000

3,000

Pond
Project Area
Crawfish Pond
Figure 2. Surface featues and backhoe locations
7

1,200
Meters
Feet
4,000

©

project area except for the southeast corner of the property.

As described in the

Definition of the Study Area, the property was exceptionally flat and level with less than
one meter (3 ft) in 2450 m (8038 ft) from north to south. The initial inspection of the
property found a raised railroad and both improved and unimproved dirt roads dividing
the property into fields. All of the fields had been used for rice in the recent past and the
southeast field was used for crawfish farming. In preparation for the sale of the property,
the landowner disked the fields except for the crawfish farm which was left as a
submerged field. Vegetation had begun to grow on the surface leaving roughly 50%
surface visibility. Vegetation was predominantly grasses but included various bushes and
shrubs along with scattered sapling trees.

Vegetation along the abandoned stream

channel was generally shorter and consisted of different species of grasses and bushes.
Other features include drainage ditches and pumps adjacent to every field, a small pond
adjacent to an improved gravel road, a large pond that was remnant of a oil tank storage
facility, several pipelines that limited access to sub-surface excavation, and a mobile
home with a large garage and associated crawfish farming equipment storage area near
the north end of the property. No cultural material was observed during the surface
inspection that could not be related to modern use.

Backhoe Trenching
Backhoe trenches were excavated in two areas to examine the potential for buried
cultural resources or buried soils that would be indicative of archaeological sites below
the ground surface. Trench placement was partially dictated by the abandoned stream
channel and pipelines that crossed the area (Figure 3). Trenches 1, 2, and 3 were
excavated across the vegetation change between the abandoned channel and the adjacent
area close to the crawfish pond while Trenches 4 and 5 were excavated closer to the
origin of the channel near the northwest corner. Each line of trenches was excavated
perpendicular to the channel to provide a longer profile extending from the stream
channel to potential higher ground adjacent to the stream.

8

9

Figure 3. Backhoe trenches

Trench 1

Trench 4

Trench 2

Trench 5

Trench 3

The profile provided by Trenches 1, 2, and 3 found the ground surface was the only
surface horizon. The profiles included an Ap horizon roughly 40 cm (16 inches) deep of
dark gray loamy clay over an A horizon extending to roughly 110 cmbs (43 inches) of
grayish brown to brown clay. Below is a Bk horizon pale brown clay to the floor of each
trench. These three profiles are typical of the Beaumont clay in an agricultural setting
with well developed horizons and no buried soils.

The profile provided by Trenches 4 and 5 found the modern surface was the only visible
surface horizon. Both trenches had walls that collapsed before a profile could be cleaned
and described as both areas were almost saturated at the time of excavation. Photos taken
of Trench 4 revealed a deep saturated zone more than 1 m (3.3 ft) deep with common
mottles and dark clay loam over grayish brown to brown clay. Trench 5 was similar but
the depth of the saturated zone was slightly less than 1 m (3.3 ft). Characteristics of
Trenches 4 and 5 were similar to Trenches 1, 2, and 3; however, their location closer to
the stream channel gave a deeper level of saturation.

Combined, the five trenches show a similar setting with a disturbed upper horizon of dark
gray loamy clay over grayish brown to brown clay. No buried soils or stratigraphic
discontinuities were obvious. Deep abundant redox concentrations in the Ap from the
rice fields are evident of the modern disturbance to the project area.

10

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The archaeological survey of the proposed Daisetta Wetland Mitigation Bank was
conducted upon request of the Galveston District Corps of Engineers for Advance
Ecology, Inc. Because the area was recently disked and only scattered vegetation had
regrown, a combination of visual examination and backhoe trenching was used to
examine the area for archaeological sites and determine the potential for buried cultural
resources. The surface inspection was completed over the entire area while backhoe
trenching focused on an abandoned stream channel that crossed the area. The surface
inspection found evidence of rice farming and a crawfish farm along with several
pipelines that crossed the property. Backhoe trenching did not find evidence of buried
soils or other stratigraphic discontinuities that would suggest a buried surface.

In conclusion, the investigations did not document any cultural resources. Based on the
investigations, there is little chance of encountering cultural resources in the project area
because of the modern agricultural use of the property. Backhoe trenching could not find
evidence of sediment deposition over old surfaces or landforms indicative of prehistoric
settlement. DETAC is requesting a concurrence with the determination of “no effect” on
NRHP eligible properties for the proposed project area.

11

REFRENCES CITED
Aten, L.
1983

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press. New York.

Baxter, Edward P. and William E. Moore
2003 An Archeological Survey of Ten Selected Landforms in the Trinity River
National Wildlife Refuge, Liberty County, Texas. Contract Report 2003-1
Ed Baxter, Consulting. College Station.
Brownlow, R. and r. Clark
2006 An Intensive Cultural Resources survey of the USACE Jurisdictional
Areas within the Proposed 33-Mile Hull to Mont Belvieu Pipeline Rightof-Way, Liberty county, Texas. HJN 060067. Horizon Environmental
Services, Inc. Austin.
Council of Texas Archaeologists
1995a Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports in Council of
Texas Archaeologists Guidelines.
1995b Guidelines for Professional Performance Standards in Council of Texas
Archaeologists Guidelines.
Guy, J.A.
1990

Previous Archaeological Investigations. In The Archaeology and
Bioarchaeology of the Gulf Costal Plain, D.A. Story, Ed. Research
Series No. 38. Arkansas Archaeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Martin, W.A.
1999 Letter to author 15 September
Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS), U.S. Department of Agriculture
2009 Web Soil survey. Unites States Department of Agriculture. Web page
visited 30 August 2009. http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoil
survey.aspx
Perttula, T.A. and N.A. Kenmotsu
1993 Archaeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Edited by Nancy Adele Kenmotsu and Timothy K. Perttula.
Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resources Management.
Report 3. p 44.
Ricklis, R.A.
2004 The Archeology of the Native American Occupation of Southeast Texas.
In The Prehistory of Texas. Timothy K. Perttula editor. Texas A&M
University Press. College Station.

12

Shafer, H.J., E. Baxter, T. Sterns, and J. Dering
1975 An Archaeological Assessment o the Big Thicket National Preserve.
Texas A & M University, Archaeological Laboratory, Report 19. College
Station.
Story, D.A. J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive
and K.J. Reinhard
1990 The Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, vols. 1
and 2. Arkansas Archaeological Survey Research Series No. 38.
Fayetteville, Arkansas.
Texas Historical Commission
2009 Texas Archaeological Site Atlas. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ (7
September 2009).
Texas Historical Association (THA)
2009 The Handbook of Texas Online. Texas Historical Association, Austin.
http://www.tshaonline.org/

13

