A Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Marlin
Wastewater And Sewage Sludge
Disposal Site
In Falls County, Texas
Antiquities Permit #4060
Prepared for:
KSA Engineers
107 West Lufkin Ave., Suite 200
Lufkin, Texas 75904
And
The City of Marlin
101 Fortune Street
Marlin, Texas 76661

Prepared by:
Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultants
4215 Red Oak
Nacogdoches, TX
Principal Investigator and Report Author
Victor Galan

Project Number 180

January 2008

ABSTRACT
In March 2006 Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultant (DETAC) conducted a
cultural resource management survey of the proposed improvements to the existing waste
disposal area and acquisition of a 203 hectare (500 acre) sludge disposal area for the City
of Marlin, Texas under the direction of the Texas Water Development Board. Texas
Antiquities Permit #4060 was acquired and all conditions of the permit were fulfilled.
Proposed improvements to the disposal facility include demolition of an existing filter
plant and maintenance of the existing facilities. The sludge disposal areas are plowed
fields the city will acquire for sludge distribution and disking into the existing ground
surface. Careful visual inspection of the areas found no archaeological sites. No artifacts
were collected. DETAC is requesting a concurrence with the determination of “no
effect” on NRHP eligible properties for the proposed project areas. Cultural resource
clearance is requested.

ii

TABEL OF CONTENTS
Section

Page

Abstract
Table of Content
List of Figures
Lit of Tables

ii
iii
iv
iv

INTRODUCTION
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
CULTURAL HISTORY
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
RESULTS
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES

1
1
3
5
6
8
9

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure
1.

Page
Project Area on Marlin 7.5’ Quad

2

iii

INTRODUCTION
In March 2006 Deep East Texas Archaeological Consultant (DETAC) conducted a
cultural resource management survey of proposed improvements to the existing waste
water treatment plant and addition of a sewage sludge disposal site for the City of Marlin,
Texas.

Cultural resource management was required because the Texas Water

Development Board delegated the responsibility to the consulting engineering company
to contract a cultural resource specialist. Texas Antiquities Permit #4060 was obtained
and all terms of the permit were carried out.
The proposed improvements to the existing sewage disposal site and the acquisition of
two sludge disposal areas. Combined, these areas encompass 243 hectare (600 acre).
The purpose of this survey was to locate, describe and record any cultural resources
within the areas. Due to the project area size and negative findings, the report was
prepared following the short report format outlined by the Council of Texas
Archaeologist (CTA) (1995a) with modifications requested by the THC (Martin 1999).
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
The proposed developments are located roughly 2.8 kilometers southwest of Marlin,
Texas (Figure 1). Proposed developments are minimal: improvements to the existing
facility include demolishing an old filter plant and maintenance of existing ponds and
fence while the sludge disposal areas will be used to dispose of sludge by spreading it
over the areas and disking it into the surface. Impacts will be no deeper than the plowing
observed on the property during the pedestrian survey.

1

2

CULTURAL HISTORY
Falls County is in the Savanna Prairie Planning Region (Kenmotsu and Pettula (1993).
This region included populations ranging from the Paleo-Indian (prior to 6000 B.C.)
through the Archaic (6000 B.C. – 700 B.C.), Late Prehistoric (700 B.C – A.D. 1700), and
Historic (A.D. 1700 – present). These stages were based on changes in environment,
technology, and/or population requiring cultural adaptations to meet varying circumstances.
The Paleo-Indian period (prior to 6000 B.C.) was the earliest generally accepted cultural
period in the New World and included populations that inhabited North America from the
Late Pleistocene to the early Holocene.

Paleo-Indians were thought to have been

organized into small, mobile bands of hunters and gatherers that consumed a variety of
plants and animals (Story 1990). Paleo-Indian artifacts found in the region include Clovis,
Plainview, Scottsbluff, and Folsom. Toward the end of the Paleo-Indian period, point
styles gradually changed to more stemmed and barbed varieties.
The Archaic refers to hunter-gatherers who implemented more regionally specialized
approaches toward exploiting their environment but retained a hunting-gathering
subsistence (Story 1990). The Archaic was further divided into Early, Middle, and Late
divisions (Prikryl 1990).

Early Archaic included Angostura, Bower, Martindale, and

Uvalde. Middle Archaic costal phases are expressed by Carlton, Morrill, Wells, Calf
Creek, Bell, and Andice. The Late Archaic understanding of the region includes a dramatic
increase in population and local materials were exploited (McGregor 1987).
The Late Prehistoric in the region showed the gradual adaptation of the bow and arrow,
horticulture/agriculture, and the spread of ceramics. Projectile points were predominantly
Scallorn, Alba, Steiner, and Catahoula arrow points and later, Washita, Harrell, and
Fresno points suggested an emphasis on buffalo hunting (Prikryl 1990).
Historic occupation began with the exploration of the area by the Spanish as they followed
prehistoric trails to ford the Brazos River. One of these natural fords was southwest of
modern day Marlin at “The Falls”. As an important camping and fording location, the first

3

Americans established Sarahville de Viesca in 1834 on the west side of the river. This
settlement was renamed Fort Viesca and later Fort Milam by 1836. After the Runaway
Scrape, during the fight for independence, the families that returned, Marlin and Morgan
most notably, settled on the east side of the river. The short-lived but booming community,
Bucksnort, was south of modern day Milam. It was not until 1850, when the Indian threat
was calmed, that Falls County was formed from Milam and Limestone counties and Adam,
later Marlin, was named the county seat. Early American settlers brought their southern
traditions of slavery and cotton plantations with them, but they planted a diverse crop and
relied on cattle as well.

The broad scope of agricultural products, cotton seed oil

manufacture, and the development of a tourist industry around mineral springs found in
1892 spared the area during Reconstruction and the Great Depression. To this day, Falls
County retains a diverse economy with cotton, wheat, oats, sorghum, soybeans, as well as a
variety of livestock and small industry as the backbone of the economy (Webb 1952).

4

RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
The investigations were preformed in compliance with the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 (PL89-665), as amended in 1974, 1976, 1980, and 1992; the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (PL91-190, 83 Stat. 915, 42 USC 4231, 1970); and the
guidelines set forth by the CTA (1995b), the Texas Antiquities Code, and the Register of
Professional Archaeologists.
The program of site definition was conducted in accordance with the National Park
Service criteria (36 CFR, part 60.4) which present the guidelines for determining
eligibility of a cultural resource for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP). The objectives of the survey were to locate prehistoric and historic cultural
resources sites within the survey areas. If sites were found, then the investigations were
to delineate the vertical and horizontal extent of each site, determine each site’s integrity,
and provide a preliminary evaluation of each site’s potential for NRHP eligibility.
Before initiating fieldwork, DETAC conducted a records and literature review using maps
and files at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) and at the Texas
Archaeological Site Atlas (THC 2006). The site location maps and cultural resources
records at TARL were consulted to identify the location, types, and both State
Archaeological Landmarks (SAL) and NRHP eligibility of previously recorded sites within
or in close proximity to the project areas. The Site Atlas was consulted for published and
unpublished data regarding cultural resource surveys.
DETAC conducted a 100 percent pedestrian survey of the areas. To locate sites, the
pedestrian survey relied on visual examination using transects at 30 m intervals.
Individuals walked transects looking for prehistoric and historic items on the surface.
Control was maintained with GPS units to insure no areas were missed. Shovel testing
was not necessary as the areas are within plowed fields, the area of potential effect is
already disturbed, and ground surface visibility is 100%.

5

RESULTS
The Texas Archaeological Site Atlas (THC 2006) revealed no archaeological sites were
near the proposed developments. The closest documented site is 41FA2 (the Falls) on the
Brazos River roughly 1.6 km (1 mile) south of the project area. Three other sites 41FA4
(reported location of Ft. Milano), 41FA6 (location of the Ft. Milam marker), and 41FA7
(prehistoric surface scatter of arrow and dart points) are roughly 3.5 km (2.2 miles) south of
the project area. The closest historical marker is for the historical community of Bucksnort,
roughly 1.4 km (0.9 miles) east of the survey area. The Bucksnort marker is on the same
terrace as the City of Marlin. The closest archaeological surveys in the area include two
surveys by TxDot in 1975 and 2001 near the Falls. Neither survey documenting any
cultural resources along their survey areas.
Based on the previous research, the toe slopes and elevated landforms adjacent to the
Brazos River floodplain have a higher potential for containing archaeological sites than
the floodplain. Using this model, there are no high probability areas within the project
area. The banks along McCulough Slough and its tributary that create the southern
border to the sludge disposal area are the next highest probability areas; unfortunately,
McCulough Slough was straightened and the tributary contains several years of modern
dumping. Additionally, plowing the fields in the proposed sludge areas is within 5 m (16
ft) of the slope to both drainages.
Planned improvements to the sewage disposal area include demolishing an old filter plant
and maintenance of existing ponds and fence. Vegetation in the project areas is limited to
pasture grass between buildings and existing ponds. Soils are Ships clay with roughly 35
cm (14 inches) of clay over a B horizon with slick-n-slide features and a calcareous clay
horizon roughly 130 cm (54 inches) below ground surface. Visual examination of the
area revealed several existing ponds and structures. None of the planned activities will
impact undisturbed ground surface. No further work is recommended for the sewage
disposal area.

6

The slugged disposal areas will utilize existing plowed fields to distribute and disk the
sludge into the ground surface. No crops were growing during the survey. The only
vegetation was various trees, bushes and shrubs along the slopes of the slough and
tributary. Soils are predominantly Ships clay with Highbank silty clay along the slough
and Westwood silt loam near the southern end of the area.

Both Highbank and

Westwood soils include silty clay loam less than 30 cm (12 inches) deep over B horizons
of silty clay. Both areas are currently plowed fields with rows roughly 30 cm (12 inches)
deep. Surface inspections of the areas focused on finding prehistoric artifacts or historic
debris more than 50 years old. As plowed fields, most of the surface was clear of any
large debris. Clear molded bottle glass, a red cowboy boot, and plastic tubing was found
near the northeast corner of the area within 100 m (330 ft.) of a barn in the adjacent field.
The tributary dividing the sludge areas contained large appliances and farm related refuse
near the northern and central parts of the survey area. It is assumed that, as is typical in
rural settings, large debris is often deposited in the headwaters of drainages to control
erosion.

7

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The proposed sewage disposal improvements include renovations to existing structures
and maintenance of the facility and the addition of roughly 203 ha. (500 ac) in two
existing agricultural fields for sludge disposal. The disposal area improvements will be
in an area already disturbed by the current facility and the sludge disposal will be in two
existing plowed fields. The investigations relied on surface inspections as the probability
of encountering cultural resources was low and ground surface visibility was 100%.
Careful inspection using transects 30 m apart found no evidence of prehistoric or historic
cultural resources. DETAC is requesting concurrence with the determination of “no
effect” on NRHP eligible properties for the proposed project areas.

8

REFRENCES
Council of Texas Archaeologists
1995a Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports in Council of
Texas Archaeologists Guidelines.
1995b Guidelines for Professional Performance Standards in Council of Texas
Archaeologists Guidelines.
Kenmotsu, N. and T. Perttula
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document.
Cultural Resources Management Report 3. Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historic Commission, Austin.
Martin, W.
1999

Letter to author 15 September

McGregor. D.
1987 Lithic Raw material Utilization. In Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along
the Prairie Margin: site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric
Archaeology, edited by .d McGregor and J. Bruseth, pp. 185-195.
Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume III. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Natural Resource Conservation Service
2006 Soil Survey of Falls County, Texas. In cooperation with the Texas
Agriculture Experiment Station. Data downloaded from
http://www.ftw.nrcs.usda.gov/ssur_data.html
Prikryl, D.
1990

Story, D.A.
1990

Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and
Chronologies along the Trinity River, North-Central Texas. Report 37.
Office of the State Archaeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In: The Archaeology and
Bioarchaeology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, vol. 1. Arkansas Archaeological
Survey Research Series No. 38.

Texas Historical Commission
2006 Texas Archaeological Site Atlas.
http://pedernales.thc.state.tx.us/index.html (10 March 2006).
Webb, W.P. (editor)
1952 The Handbook of Texas History, Vol. I and II.
Association, Austin.

9

Texas Historical

