Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

October 16, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report #2012-53: A Cultural Resources Background Review and Field Survey
of the Re-Aligned 3.5-Mile Dilley TexStar B Pipeline in Southwestern Frio County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our background review and cultural resources field survey of
the re-aligned Dilley TexStar B Pipeline (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Dilley TexStar B Pipeline on county-wide topographic map.

Figure 2. Dilley TexStar B Pipeline right-of-ways on Woodward NE (1974) USGS 7.5'
topographic map.

Frio County Prehistory and History
Temporally diagnostic stone tools found in Frio County indicate that the area has been occupied over
the past 11,000 years. Not unexpectedly, these ancient inhabitants lived for extended periods along
the Frio River and its many tributaries as they alternately flowed for several millennia in the past. They
exploited the abundance of wild game and fish, fruit and nut trees along the riverine environments.
But during periods of drier climatic periods they managed to take advantage of those plants and
animals that thrived, such as rabbits, lizards, snakes, and assorted cacti.
The stone tools, animal bones, and fire-cracked rocks from campfire they left behind are basically all
that survive from the earlier periods. But, about 1,200-1,300 years ago they began making clay pots,
with some sherds from broken pots still surviving in the archaeological record. About that same time
period, they began using a new hunting technology - the bow and arrow - effectively replacing the
spear and atlatl. This later period in Frio County prehistory is probably the best understood
archaeologically because of the remains that are still fairly well preserved, and provide transitional
information to the historic accounts of Native American lifeways in Frio County.

Spanish Catholic church records indicate that Frio County was periodically inhabited by the Payaya
and Pachal Indians, Coahuiltecan groups who are listed among those who entered the missions in San
Antonio. Other than the written records of Spanish priests, the earliest historic accounts of Frio
County are those of Frenchman René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle who traversed the
northwestern part of the county in 1685. Next was Domingo Terán de los Rios who traveled the Old
Presidio Road, a camino real, in 1691. Canadian Louis Juchereau de St. Denis subsequently crossed
through the county in 1714 along the same road, followed by a Spanish entrada by Martín de Alarcón
in 1718, and another entrada by the Marques de Aguayo in 1720. Early wildlife encountered included
wild mustangs, mountain lions, black bears, wolves, buffalo, antelope, whitetail deer, and feral
longhorn cattle.
By 1840, Republic of Texas headright land grants were numerous the Frio and Leona rivers.
However, Comanches continued to threaten white settlement through the 1860s. In 1871, Frio
County was organized from land that was previously parts of Atascosa, Bexar, and Uvalde counties,
and in the ensuing decade the population increased by over 700 percent. Sheep and cattle ranchers
with large land holdings were most common. Even then, Comanche raiding parties were constant
threats, and Ranger camp was established three miles southwest of Frio City in 1876 for protection.
Ultimately, the last Indian raid in Frio County took place in 1877. New roads to Laredo, San Antonio,
and Pleasanton as well as the arrival of the International-Great Northern Railroad in the early 1880s
opened up the county to a strong beef exportation market.
Irrigation from artesian wells spurred the production of cotton, hay and forage crops, corn citrus, and
nut trees in the early 1900s. However, the arid climate prevailed so that crops and grassland was
depleted, and the raising of beef cattle and goats became more profitable by about 1930. As with
much of the rest of Texas, small farms were no longer prevalent in Frio County. The discovery of oil
reserves created a whole new economic boom in Frio County that continues through today. In
addition to oil and gas, the economy is stimulated by hunting and agribusiness in peanuts, beef cattle,
vegetables, (mainly Irish potatoes and spinach), cotton, and hogs (Ochoa 1996).

Background Review
Old Maps, Aerial Photographs, Historic Research
A standard source of review is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs
available at the Perry Castañeda Library at the University of Texas at Austin (Perry Castañeda Library
2012). The earliest map found is a 1942, Woodward NE, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers topographic
map; no structures are shown along the proposed Dilley TexStar B pipeline. Nevertheless, the lack
of comprehensive historic map and aerial information, coupled with the paucity of cultural resources
surveys within the area is possibly, and perhaps probably, why no information is available regarding
the presence of historic structures, ranching or industrial activities, or persons of historic significance
to the immediate area. Technically, any structures older than 45 years are now considered of interest
by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be considered when the pipeline right-of-way
is excavated. Historic sites recorded in Frio County consist of local family cemeteries with just a few
burials in each, house sites, and farmsteads from as early as the 1850s, and trash scatters.

Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Out of the 60 documented archaeological sites in Frio County, 39 have cultural remains that indicate
they were used in prehistory as open campsites, and they have been found in both upland and stream
terrace settings. A human burial was found at one of those campsites, and a nearby burial is suspected
at another of those campsites. Temporally diagnostic artifacts found at these sites further indicate that
Frio County was occupied from the Paleoindian through Historic periods. There are also 20 lithic
scatters documented in the county, and once again the diagnostics found at these sites indicate that
the landscape was widely exploited from the Paleoindian through Historic periods. A unique historic
site is the Buckhorn Cemetery, with burials dating from the 1880s through the 1930s. In addition, the
old Frio County Jail has been designated as a State Archaeological Landmark. As of October 10,
2012, there were no archaeological sites recorded within one mile of the Project Area (Atlas 2012).
Previous Archaeological Surverys
A review of the Texas Atlas online (Atlas 2012) revealed no professional archaeological surveys had
been conducted within one mile of the Project Area. However, privately funded surveys are generally
not recorded on the Texas Atlas. As shown in Figure 2, in September 2011, TAAI conducted a field
survey of the Dilley to Gardendale Oil Pipeline, resulting in the discovery of no cultural material
within one mile of the current Project Area (Nickels 2011a). TAAI then conducted a cultural
resources background review of the Brundage Dilley Oil Interconnect in November 2011, and
recommended that the project be allowed to proceed without further archaeological investigations
(Nickels 2011b).
Soils
Construction of the
Dilley TexStar B
Pipeline will impact
five soil types, or
classifications
(Gabriel et al. 1992).
Each have formed in
different settings,
most generally either
pedogenic, or as a
result of flood
o v e r b u r d e n . In
upland settings, the
sequential layering
of soils and
sediments (and by
i n f e r e n c e ,
archaeological
deposits) can be
temporally reversed
due to slope erosion, Figure 3. Soils map of the Dilley TexStar B re-aligned right-of-way.
and in floodplain
areas, the sequence can be obscured by truncation.
In other words, the topographic setting of these soils also infers the potential for deeply buried and

intact archaeological deposits to be extant, but we caution that these are only one factor that should
be considered in predicting site significance across any landscape. That said, Figure 3 illustrates the
soil types to be dissected by construction of the Dilley TexStar B Pipeline, and Table 1 briefly
describes each soil type and their predicted capacity to contain significant archaeological deposits.
Table 1. Soils to be Dissected by the Dilley TexStar B Pipeline.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact
Archaeological Potential

Duval loamy fine sand, 0-5%
slopes (DuC)

Deep, sandy soil on broad plains and
footslopes

Moderate to about 36 inches
below the surface

Duval very fine sandy loam, 01% slopes (DvA)

Deep, loamy soils on broad, smooth plains

Moderate to about 45 inches
below the surface

Duval very fine sandy loam
(DvB)

Deep loamy soils on convex uplands

Minimal to moderate to about
14 inches below the surface

Poteet very fine sandy loam,
occasionally flooded (Pe)

Deep loamy soil along narrow upland
drainages

Minimal to Moderate to about
34 inches below the surface

Tiocano clay (Tc)

Deep, calcareous clay formed in depressed,
intermittent lake beds

Minimal to about 12 inches
below the surface

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Our observation of the Project Area
on October 15, 2012 was that
approximately 80 percent of the
right-of-way courses through either
previously cultivated fields, or
fields with existing crops (see for
example, Figure 4). The remaining
approximately 20 percent of the
right-of-way courses through areas
of secondary growth dense
mesquite brush, with assorted
thorny bushes and cacti, suggesting
that these areas have been cleared
in historic times, allowing for regrowth in disturbed and shallow
soils.

Figure 4. Re-aligned Dilley Texstar B Pipeline right-ofway from N3173847 E466287 (NAD 83); facing south.

One area targeted for examination
during this survey was the Dry Cibolo Creek crossing. At this point Dry Cibolo Creek is very shallow,
broad and ephemeral, with no terrace deposits (Figure 5). No evidence of cultural material was

observed, the approaches to
the crossing are eroded to
dense clay, and our
assessment is that there is at
best a minimal potential for
buried archaeological
deposits to exist in this area.
Based upon the absence of
cultural materials, and the at
best moderate potential for
significant archaeological
deposits to exist in the
upland and plains soils in the
area, we recommend that
construction of the Dilley
TexStar B Pipeline as
currently planned be allowed Figure 5. Dilley TexStar B Re-alignment Pipeline crossing at Dry
to proceed, with no further Cibolo Creek; facing west.
archaeological investigations.
However, we further advise that if any previously undiscovered cultural resources are encountered
during development of the pipeline, such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas,
or by any qualified archaeological consultant.

If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
October 10, 2012].

Gabriel, W. J., J. M. Galbrath, and J. A. Groves III
1982 Soil Survey of Frio County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation with the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.
Nickels, David L.
2011a A Cultural Resources Field Survey of the 18.7-Mile Dilley to Gardendale Oil
Pipeline in Frio and La Salle Counties, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report #50.
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.
2011b A Cultural Resources Background Review of the Brundage Dilley Oil Interconnect,
from the Brundage Oil Terminal to the Betty Wilson Lateral in Northeastern Dimmit
County, Texas. Letter Report submitted to Flatrock Engineering and Environmental,
Ltd., San Antonio, Texas by Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations,
Martindale, Texas (November 2011).
Ochoa, R. E.
1996 Frio County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 3, pp. 5-8. Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.
Perry Castañeda Library
2012 Perry Castañeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed October 10, 2012].

