ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION
OF TWO BRIDGE REPLACEMENTS
IN HARRIS AND WALLER
COUNTIES, TEXAS

Joel Butler, Jon J. Dowling, and Maggie L. McClain

TxDOT CSJ No. 0912-72-056 and 0912-72-057

Ecological Communications Corporation

May 2010

Texas Antiquities Permit 5586

Texas Department of
Transportation
Houston District

ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION
OF TWO BRIDGE REPLACEMENTS
IN HARRIS AND WALLER
COUNTIES, TEXAS
by

Joel Butler, Jon J. Dowling, and Maggie L. McClain

Joel Butler, Principal Investigator

Texas Antiquities Permit 5586
CSJ No. 0912-72-056 and 0912-72-057

Prepared for

Klotz Associates, Inc.
and

Texas Department of Transportation–Houston District
by

Ecological Communications Corporation
Austin, Texas

May 2010

© 2010 by Ecological Communications Corporation
4009 Banister Lane, Suite 300
Austin, Texas 78704
Ecological Communications Corporation Project No. 185-001
Cover photograph: Spring Creek at Hegar Road.

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Management Summary
In April of 2010, Ecological Communications Corporation conducted an archeological
survey of two proposed bridge replacement locations on the county line between Harris and
Waller counties, Texas. Pedestrian survey and shovel testing were carried out on behalf of the
sponsor, Klotz Associates, Inc., to locate, record, and assess any possible cultural materials
within the project areas. This project was planned and regulated by the Texas Department of
Transportation, Houston District. Archeological survey work indicated that no prehistoric or
historic cultural material was present within the project area. Jon J. Dowling served as Project
Archeologist, Joel Butler was Principal Investigator, and Maggie McClain assisted in writing
and editing the report. Archeological work was carried out under Texas Antiquities Permit
5586. A total of 12 person hours were expended in support of fieldwork. The project areas were
subject to 100 percent pedestrian survey, and each crossing received two backhoe trenches
and two shovel tests in support of the investigations at each APE, for a total of four trenches
and four shovel tests. No archeological sites were identified within the project areas, and no
artifacts were collected, as this was a non-collection survey.
Because no cultural resources were identified that could meet eligibility requirements
for designation as a State Archeological Landmark according to 13 Texas Administrative
Code 26, additional archeological work in connection with the proposed undertaking is not
recommended. Ecological Communications recommends that the proposed project should
proceed to completion.

Ecological Communications Corporation

iii

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Table of Contents
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY.............................................................................................. iii
LIST OF FIGURES..................................................................................................................v
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION............................................................................................1
CHAPTER 2. PROJECT AREA BACKGROUND...............................................................4
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY...........................................................................................8
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS OF SURVEY...................................................................................9
CHAPTER 5. ARCHEOLOGICAL RECOMMENDATIONS..........................................15
REFERENCES........................................................................................................................16
APPENDIX A. CURRENT ENGINEERING PLANS........................................................19

iv

Ecological Communications Corporation

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

List of Figures
Figure 1. Project area location on Waller and Hockley USGS 7.5’ topographic quadrangles..................................2
Figure 2. Excavations at Hegar Road.....................................................................................................................10
Figure 3. Buried utilities at Hegar Road, facing south...........................................................................................11
Figure 4. Excavations at Kickapoo Road................................................................................................................12
Figure 5. Buried utilities at Kickapoo Road, facing north......................................................................................13
Figure 6. Soil profile of Backhoe Trench 4.............................................................................................................14

Ecological Communications Corporation

v

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

vi

Ecological Communications Corporation

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Chapter 1

Introduction
In April of 2010, archeological survey at two bridge crossings over Spring Creek was conducted
on behalf of the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT), Houston District Office by
Ecological Communications Corporation (Ecomm) in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas.
The proposed project would provide structurally sufficient bridges over Spring Creek along
Kickapoo Road (CSJ: 0912-72-056) and Hegar Road (CSJ: 0912-72-057), where the existing
bridges are growing functionally inadequate. The undertakings are located on the Waller and
Hockley USGS 7.5’ topographic quadrangles (Figure 1). Each of these bridge replacement
undertakings would require small amounts of new Right of Way (ROW) within an overall Area
of Potential Effects (APE) of less than one acre each. Appendix A contains current engineering
plans of both bridge replacement projects.
The existing bridge structure along Kickapoo Road at Spring Creek is a five-span pier and
beam bridge measuring 85 x 20 feet (ft). The existing ROW varies from 80 to about 100 ft.
The project is situated on the Waller USGS 7.5’ topographic quadrangle. The proposed bridge
will be a three-span pier and beam bridge measuring 135 x 40 ft. Typically the bridge would be
supported at each end on bridge abutments that would extend beyond the width of the bridge
and extend into hard geologic deposits. Approximately 13 ft of new ROW would be required
on the east side of the bridge and on the south side of Spring Creek to accommodate those
changes. The APE at this locality is defined as the footprint of these proposed improvements
within both existing and new proposed ROW. The project length is 435 ft, and the width of the
proposed ROW varies from 80 to 100 ft. The total APE is approximately 0.7 acres, less than
0.05 of which accounts for new ROW. Vertical impacts are expected to be in excess of 20 ft.
The existing bridge structure at Hegar Road at Spring Creek is a 120 x 20-ft, functionally
obsolete, seven-span pier and beam bridge. The existing ROW varies from 60 to about 100
ft at one place. The project is situated on the Hockley USGS 7.5’ topographic quadrangle.
The proposed structure is a five-span pier and beam bridge, measures 155 x 40 ft, and is in
accord with current functional standards. Features of this bridge include: 12-ft wide lanes,
8-ft shoulders, a guardrail on both sides, and a 3.5-ft cleared area adjacent to both guardrails.
Proposed new row would be approximately 115 feet, adding 15–45 feet of width onto the
existing ROW. A schematic plan for construction is attached. The APE at this locality is defined
as the footprint of these proposed improvements within both existing and new proposed ROW.
The project length is approximately 455 ft, and the width of the proposed ROW varies from
100 to 115 ft. The total APE is approximately 1 acre, less than 0.2 acres of which accounts for
new ROW. Vertical impacts are expected to be in excess of 20 ft.
Personnel from EComm were tasked with the following objectives. First, intensive pedestrian
survey, backhoe excavation, and spot-check shovel testing of the project areas was required
to locate possible archeological deposits resting within the APE, and to establish vertical and
horizontal boundaries if such deposits were found. Secondly, a report summarizing the results
Ecological Communications Corporation

1

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Kickapoo Road
Crossing

Waller
Quadrangle

Hockley
Quadrangle

Hegar Road
Crossing

0

1,000

2,000
Meters

Figure 1. Project area location on Waller and Hockley USGS 7.5’ topographic quadrangles.

2

Ecological Communications Corporation

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

of archeological investigations and recommendations was to be generated for submission to
TxDOT and the Texas Historical Commission (THC).
Ecomm personnel carried out an intensive archeological survey of both APEs, consisting
of pedestrian survey and excavation of four shovel tests and four backhoe trenches. No
archeological sites were identified within the project area, and no artifacts were collected, as
this was a non-collection survey. Survey work adhered to 13 Texas Antiquities Code (TAC) 26,
which outlines the regulations for implementing the Antiquities Code of Texas, and followed
the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) guidelines for surveys in Texas. Field investigations
were conducted on March 31st and April 1st of 2010 under Texas Antiquities Permit 5586.
Joel Butler was Principal Investigator, and Jon J. Dowling served as Project Archeologist. A
total of 12 person hours were expended in support of the field survey. Buddy Nelson provided
valuable backhoe assistance, and Maggie McClain edited and formatted this report. Joel Butler
generated the graphics presented herein.
This report is divided into five chapters. The project area background, including the setting,
cultural overview, and previous archeology, is discussed in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 includes the
field methodology used during the project; the results of field investigations are discussed
in Chapter 4. Chapter 5 presents the summary and recommendations. The References Cited
are followed by Appendix A, which presents the current engineering plans for the bridge
replacements.

Ecological Communications Corporation

3

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Chapter 2

Project Area Background
2.1	Project Setting
The project area lies within the Gulf Coast Prairies and Marshes ecoregion, which occupies
approximately 9.5 million acres of Texas (Alvarez 2010). This region is characterized by rolling
hilly surfaces covered with heavy growths of pine and hardwoods (Alvarez 2010). Westward,
these forests increasingly turn to secondary growth and then prairies and brushlands. Vegetation
is primarily grassland types but with extensive oak mottes and salt marshes including sacaton
and small areas of brush. Much of the area has been invaded by trees and brush such as mesquite,
prickly pear, oaks, and acacias. Native grasses include: big bluestem, seacoast bluestem, Indian
grass, and Eastern gamagrass. Grasses such as Bermuda and carpet grass have been introduced
to the region. Economically, this area is utilized for cattle-ranching. In upland zones, however,
ranching is interspersed with farming (Alvarez 2010).
Geologically, the APE is associated with the Willis formation (PoW). The Willis formation
dates to the Pliocene Epoch (5–2.5 million years ago) and will therefore not contain in situ
archeological deposits. Primary rock types in this formation are clay or mud (Bureau of
Economic Geology 1992). In terms of soils overlying the local Willis formation, the APE is
made up of Nahatche series, which consist of nearly level, loamy, stratified soils on bottom
lands that are of Holocene age. The Houston PALM (Abbott 2001) indicates that the APE at
both locations is associated with Map Unit 1, for which surface survey is recommended that
includes deep reconnaissance.

2.2

Culture History

The project area is situated within Southeast Texas, a buffer zone between the Southern Plains
and the Southeast Woodlands (Patterson 1995). This culture history will reference the limited
data on Southeast Texas trends when possible, supplemented by inland Central Texas regional
patterns and coastal margin trends as well. However, it is important to note that cultural trends
may be better conceptualized within smaller biogeographical areas or drainage basins rather
than through broad homogenous regions (Black 1989). For a more elaborate post-Archaic
summary of the Texas Woodland region, see Aten 1984.

2.2.1 Paleoindian
The earliest evidence of human activity in Texas falls within what archeologists call the
Paleoindian period, which dates from 11,500 to 8800 BP in Central Texas (Collins 1995).
Paleoindian sites located along the Texas coast littoral are also considered to represent
more inland exploitation trends due to lower sea levels and receding shorelines. Diagnostic
4

Ecological Communications Corporation

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Paleoindian materials in the form of Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview projectile points appear in
the archeological record from sites that date to the end of the Pleistocence epoch. These points
were lanceolate-shaped and fluted for hafting to wooden spears. Using the launching momentum
from atlatls (spear-throwers), Paleoindians hunted large game such as mammoth, mastodons,
bison, camel, and horses (Black 1989). In addition to megafauna, Paleoindian groups likely
harvested less daunting prey including antelope, turtle, frogs, etc. Stylistic changes in projectile
point technology occurred during this later portion of the period, eventually shifting to Dalton,
Scottsbluff, and Golondrina traditions. While widespread in geographic range, these types
occurred in high densities in the High Plains and Central Texas (Meltzer and Bever 1995).
One of the oldest confirmed Clovis sites in North America is arguably the Aubrey Clovis Site
(41DN479) in Denton County, Texas, with a carbon date assay of 11,550 BP (Ferring 2001).
Environmental studies suggest that Late Pleistocene climates were wetter and cooler (Mauldin
and Nickels 2001; Toomey et al. 1993), gradually shifting to drier and warmer conditions
during the Early Holocene (Bousman 1998). As megafauna gradually died off during the shift
to warmer climates, prehistoric people’s subsistence patterns shifted toward smaller game and
plant foraging.

2.2.2 Archaic
The Archaic period, broadly divided into the Early, Middle, and Late Archaic subperiods,
signifies a more intensive reliance on local floral and faunal resources with an increase in the
number of projectile point styles (Collins 1995). The archeological record begins to indicate
more widespread use of burned rock middens (particularly in Central Texas), a wider variety
of site functions, and more localized geographic distributions of these materials.

Early Archaic
Based on projectile point technology of prehistoric Southeast Texas, Culberson (1993) places
the beginning of the Early Archaic at 8000 BP. Hester (1995:436–438) places the Early Archaic
between 7950 and 4450 BP based on Early Corner Notched and Early Basal Notched projectile
points. Collins’ (1995:383) dating of the Early Archaic period to 8800–6000 BP in Central
Texas is founded on unstemmed point types. As the extinction of megafauna herds took hold,
a subsistence shift towards heavier reliance on deer, fish, turkey, aquatic species, and plants
became necessary. In the archeological record, this trend equates to a wider diversity of tools.
Population densities were relatively low and consisted of small bands with a fairly high degree
of mobility (Story 1985).

Middle Archaic
Middle Archaic materials begin to appear at 6000 BP (Bement 1987; Brownlow 2003) and
range from about 6000 to 4000 BP (Collins 1995:383). Diagnostic points from this period
include Yarbrough, Palmillas, Kent, Carrollton, and Elam styles. According to Collins (1995)
the beginning of the Middle Archaic still exhibited large-game hunting of bison. However,
the climate became much drier towards the end of the Middle Archaic, necessitating a heavier
reliance on aquatic and riparian resources. This period also experienced population increases,
Ecological Communications Corporation

5

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

and it is possible that previously scattered bands of hunter-gatherers began to combine for
harvesting and processing efforts in some areas of Texas (Weir 1976:126).

Late Archaic
The last subperiod of the Archaic begins at 3500 BP (Brownlow 2003). Dart point diagnostics
of the Late Archaic consist of Gary, Shumla, Morhiss, Marcos, Wells, Kent, Hale, and Ellis
styles. Population densities increased in Southeast Texas (Aten 1984; Culberson 1993), which
was conducive to intensified contact and exchange between regions. Groups became more
socially complex. A “Lapidary Industry” took shape as exotic raw lithic materials (jasper,
quartz, hematite, etc.) were traded from distant regions to make more complex tools (Culberson
1993:55). Subsistence practices were scheduled around the seasonal availability of deer, nuts,
riparian, and plant resources.

2.2.3 Late Prehistoric
A commonly held date for the beginning of this interval is 1900 BP, when ceramic vessels
become commonplace (Aten 1983:287). Eighteen different styles of ceramics, based on temper,
paste, and design, have been documented along the Texas coast in a Late Prehistoric context
(Aten 1984). The Late Prehistoric period in Texas brought intensified group dynamics across
the state. As village sites appeared in the lower Pecos valley in the west, the preliminary stages
of Caddo development took place in the east (Turner and Hester 1999). Another hallmark
transition for this period is the introduction of the bow and arrow, which enabled prehistoric
hunters to harvest prey from greater distances with a lesser need for the brushless, wide open
spaces required for atlatl maneuverability in hunting. The practice of bow and arrow hunting is
indicated by smaller-sized projectile points such as the Perdiz and Scallorn. Other diagnostic
points in this region include the Catahoula, Alba, Bonham, and Friley styles. The culturally
and materially definable manifestations of the Caddo, Atakapan, and Bidai appear during this
interval. Historical sources identify the Hasinai as one of the main groups composing the Caddo
culture in the Piney Woods area (La Vere 1998). There is also evidence of early horticulture as
Woodland sites continue to grow and Caddo communities thrive in East Texas (Perttula 1995).
The transition from the Late Archaic Woodland to the Cadddoan is evidenced by significant
changes in technology and subsistence. Distinctive ceramic vessels and decorative styles,
burial practices, mound architecture, and agriculture subsistence are seen in the subdivisions
of the Caddoan era. Caddoan lithic tool kits consisted primarily of arrow points, drills, utilized
flakes, and celt fragments (Story 1990).

2.2.4 Historic
Since the late AD 1500s, Europeans entered Southeast Texas only sporadically and did not
settle there until around AD 1700 (Webb 1952). The first Europeans to enter Waller and Harris
counties were likely French traders (Henson 2010). The short-lived presence of the French in
Texas was enough to serve as a catalyst to hasten Spanish exploration, although their presence

6

Ecological Communications Corporation

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

in the region was limited. Geographically isolated from the battlefield of San Jacinto and
bustling Houston, the project area’s recent history is exclusively one of farming and ranching.

2.3	Previous Archeology
According to the online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (2010), there are no previously
recorded sites within the limits of or within one kilometer of this project’s APE. In addition,
neither the 1940 nor the 1961 General Highway Maps of Harris County, Texas, show any
previous structures in the vicinity of the APE. Aerial photographs show cultivated fields north
and south of the APE, a stock tank 0.11 miles northwest of the APE, and a structure located
0.28 miles northwest of the APE.

Ecological Communications Corporation

7

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Chapter 3

Methodology
All survey procedures complied with THC/CTA standard survey methods. The APE of each
bridge replacement location was intensively surveyed through visual inspection of the entire
APE and excavation of backhoe trenches and shovel tests. Testing was conducted in each of
the four corners at both locations. The APE consisted of both public and private land. Right-ofentry was obtained for all of the Kickapoo Road APE and 75 percent of the Hegar Road APE.
Backhoe trenches were excavated in areas with potential for intact archeological deposits.
Trenching was closely monitored, and samples of excavated soil were screened through ¼-inch
hardware cloth for artifacts. Each backhoe trench was excavated to culturally sterile soils,
bedrock, or the water table. Backhoe trenches were documented on standardized forms and
profiles drawn of each trench.
Shovel tests were employed in areas where backhoe trenching was not possible and also to
delineate any site boundaries. A shovel test was defined as 30 cm in diameter, excavated and
recorded on standardized forms in 20-cm increments to culturally sterile soil or 80 cmbs,
whichever was encountered first. Soils of each 20-cm level were screened through ¼-inch
hardware mesh.
Site definitions complied with THC/CTA standards and policies. Any sites encountered were
to be delineated using no fewer than six shovel tests to define the site boundaries relative to the
APE. Sites were to be documented using standardized forms. Archival research of any historic
sites was to be conducted to determine history of ownership and land use for each site. Sites
were to be assigned trinomials by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
The location of each backhoe trench, shovel test, and archeological site was recorded using a
hand-held GPS. Any artifacts encountered were to be recorded, photographed, and returned to
their original location. No artifacts were to be collected during this survey. All records were
curated at the EComm laboratory in Austin, Texas.
All work was conducted under the terms and conditions of the First Amended Programmatic
Agreement (2005) among the Federal Highway Administration, TxDOT, the THC, and the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation and the Memorandum of Understanding between
TxDOT and the THC. This report adheres to Chapter 26 of the THC’s Rules of Practice and
Procedure and is in conformance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act
(1966, as amended).

8

Ecological Communications Corporation

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Chapter 4

Results of Survey
This chapter presents the findings of the archeological survey conducted by EComm personnel
prior to the proposed bridge replacements at Hegar Road over Spring Creek and Kickapoo
Road over Spring Creek in Harris and Waller counties, Texas. Four shovel tests and four
backhoe trenches were excavated.
The APE at Hegar Road rested within the ROW on a floodplain straddling Spring Creek (Figure
2). No cultural resources were observed on the landscape of the APE, or within the exposed
cutbanks of Spring Creek. Cutbanks of Spring Creek did not reveal any intact deposition that
could be correlated to soil zones observed within the profiles of excavated backhoe trenches.
Underground utilities flanked both sides of Hegar Road, limiting portions of the APE with
intact deposition (Figure 3). The southeast and southwest portions of the APE received a single
shovel test each. Both shovel tests were excavated to negative results. The north side of the APE
exhibited more area between the ROW boundaries and the margins of existing underground
cables; therefore, it was subject to two backhoe trenches. Backhoe Trench 1 exhibited sands
and sandy clays with few pedogenic features. No cultural materials were observed within the
profile of the backhoe trench or backfill. Backhoe Trench 2 also exhibited sands and sandy
clays. The overlying soil zone of Backhoe Trench 2 was clearly disturbed and contained modern
debris from the construction of the existing bridge. The deepest soil zone demonstrated an
inclined stratum with redoximorphic features, and was likely dislocated by subsequent erosion.
The APE at Kickapoo Road rested on a slightly more elevated floodplain, as compared to
the crossing at Hegar Road, straddling Spring Creek (Figure 4). No cultural resources were
observed on the landscape of the APE, or within the exposed cutbanks of Spring Creek.
Cutbanks of Spring Creek did not reveal any intact deposition that could be correlated to
the stratigraphy observed in excavated backhoe trenches. The southwest corner in particular
consisted entirely of rip rap and construction debris, completely absent of soils. Underground
utilities flanked both sides of Kickapoo Road as well, limiting portions of the APE with intact
deposition (Figure 5). The northeast and southwest corners of the APE received a single shovel
test each. Both shovel tests were excavated to negative results. The shovel test in the southwest
corner of this APE was positioned slightly within the creek, where soil deposits were still in
place. The northwest corner and southeast corner of the APE exhibited more area between the
ROW boundaries and the margins of existing underground utilities, and were therefore each
subject to a backhoe trench. Backhoe Trench 3 in the southeast corner of this APE exhibited
sands and silty sandy clays with few pedogenic features. No cultural materials were observed
within the exposed backhoe trench profile or its backfill. Backhoe Trench 4 exhibited sands and
sandy clays. The deepest soil zone within Backhoe Trench 4 demonstrated a high proportion
of mottled, sandy clays and redoximorphic features. Because the stratigraphy encountered in
Backhoe Trench 4 was intact and well defined, it is represented in Figure 6 as a typical cross
section of the sediments surrounding Spring Creek within the project areas.
Ecological Communications Corporation

9

Hegar Road

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

BHT 2
BHT 1
Proposed ROW

ST 2

ST 1

Sp
rin
gC

ree

k

Backhoe Trench Location

0

50

Negative Shovel Test

100
Meters

Existing ROW

Figure 2. Excavations at Hegar Road.

10

Ecological Communications Corporation

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Figure 3. Buried utilities at Hegar Road, facing south.

Ecological Communications Corporation

11

Kickapoo Rd

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Sp

g
rin
Cr
k
ee

BHT 4

ST 4

ST 3

BHT 3

Proposed ROW

Backhoe Trench Location

0

50

Negative Shovel Test

100
Meters

Existing ROW

Figure 4. Excavations at Kickapoo Road.

12

Ecological Communications Corporation

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Figure 5. Buried utilities at Kickapoo Road, facing north.

Ecological Communications Corporation

13

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Backhoe Trench 4
Hegar Road
East Wall Profile
cmbs
0

A

Sandy Clay 10YR 4/3

B

Sand 10YR 5/4

C

Sandy Clay 10YR 4/4

50

100

150

Spring
Creek

200
50

100 cm

Figure 6. Soil profile of Backhoe Trench 4.

14

Ecological Communications Corporation

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Chapter 5

Archeological Recommendations
Based on the results of a 100 percent pedestrian survey of the entire APE and the negative
results of four shovel tests and four backhoe trenches, EComm recommends that no further
archeological work is required prior to the construction of bridge replacements at Hegar
Road and Kickapoo Road over Spring Creek in Harris County, Texas. No archeological sites
were observed to rest within the APE. Since no cultural resources were identified that meet
eligibility requirements for designation as a State Archeological Landmark according to 13
TAC 26, additional archeological work in connection with the proposed undertaking is not
recommended. EComm recommends that the proposed bridge replacement projects proceed
to completion.

Ecological Communications Corporation

15

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

References
Abbott, J. T.
2001

Houston Area Geoarcheology: A Framework for Archeological Investigation, Interpretation,
and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District. Report 27. Archeological
Studies Program, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.

Alvarez, E. C. (editor)
2010

Texas Almanac 2010–2011. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

Aten, L. E.
1983

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.

1984

Woodland Cultures on the Texas Coast. In Perspective on Gulf Coast History, edited by D. D.
Davis, pp. 72–93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5. Florida
State Museum, University Presses of Florida, Gainesville.

Bement, L. C.
1987

Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology of Lake Creek Reservoir, Montgomery County, Texas.
Research Report 97. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Black, S. L.
1989

Central Texas Plateau Prairie. In From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in
Central, South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S. L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 17–36. Research Series No. 33. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Bousman, C. B.
1998

Paleoenvironmental Change in Central Texas: The Palynological Evidence. Plains
Anthropologist 43(164):201–219.

Brownlow, R.
2003

An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey and Subsequent Testing of the Proposed Woodlands
Southwest Detention Pond, The Woodlands, Montgomery County, Texas. Horizon Environmental
Services, Inc., Austin, Texas.

Bureau of Economic Geology
1992

Geologic Map of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Collins, M. B.
1995

16

Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:361–400.
Ecological Communications Corporation

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Culberson, L. C.
1993

Arrowheads and Spear Points in the Prehistoric Southeast: A Guide to Understanding Cultural
Artifacts. University Press of Mississippi, Jackson.

Ferring, C. R.
2001

The Archeology and Paleoecology of the Aubrey Clovis Site (41DN479), Denton County,
Texas. University of North Texas Denton Center for Environmental Archeology, Department
of Geography.

Henson, M. S.
2010

The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Harris County,” http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/HH/hch7.html (accessed April 4, 2010).

Hester, T. R.
1995

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:427–459.

La Vere, D.
1998

The Caddo Chiefdoms: Caddo Economics and Politics, 700–1835. The University of Nebraska
Press, Lincoln.

Mauldin, R. P., and D. L. Nickels
2001

An Archeological Survey of Twin Buttes Reservoir, Tom Green County, Texas. Archeological
Survey Report, No. 300. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Meltzer, D. J., and M.R. Bever
1995

Paleoindians of Texas: An Update on the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 66:47–81.

Patterson, L. W.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:239–264.

Perttula, T. K.
1995

The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 66:331–359.

Story, D. A.
1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Food
Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19–56. Anthropological Papers No. 75.
Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

1990

Culture History of the Native Americans. In Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, Volume I, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G.

Ecological Communications Corporation

17

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163–366. Research Series Number 38. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2010

Texas Archeological Sites Atlas. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us (accessed March 2010).

Toomey, R. S., M. D. Blum, and S. Valastro, Jr.
1993

Late Quaternary Climates and Environments of the Edwards Plateau, Texas. Global and
Planetary Change 7:299–320.

Turner, S. E., and T. R. Hester
1999

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. 2nd ed. Texas Monthly Field Guide Series,
Gulf Publishing, Houston.

Weir, F. A.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished PhD dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
Washington State University, Pullman.

Webb, W. P. (editor)
1952

18

The Handbook of Texas. 2 Vols. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Ecological Communications Corporation

Archeological Investigation of Two Bridge Replacements in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas

Appendix A

Current Engineering Plans

20

Ecological Communications Corporation

