Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

March 20, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2012-6: A Cultural Resources Background Review of the 1,100Meter Edwards B 1H Pipeline in Western LaSalle County, Texas
Mr. David Black
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Mr. Black,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during cultural resources background review of
the Edwards B 1H Pipeline right-of-way (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Edwards B 1H Pipeline on county-wide topographic map.

Figure 2. Edwards B 1H Pipeline on Artesia Wells (1982) topographic map.

Background Review
Old Maps, Aerial Photographs, Historic Research
Indian artifacts found in La Salle County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable.
Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes, and
a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their
spears (Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery and to hunt
with bows and arrows. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians
native to La Salle County were squeezed out by other Indian who were migrating into the area and
by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San
Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place (Leffler 1996).
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the La Salle County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-

gatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences in
1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending a hunting
party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each other in the
semiarid environs of south Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents (Campbell and
Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced Native American groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. Beginning in the late
1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio Road, a camino real, to
and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are documented accounts
of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to establish any sort of
permanent bases in present-day La Salle County (Chipman 1992)
After the Mexican War of Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its
citizens to settle in Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that
included territory now in La Salle County. None of the recipients seem to have made use of the land,
however. By 1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated
almost solely by Indians (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of La Salle County lay in the
disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for desperate
characters until about 1865. New settlers who lived in jacals or dugouts were frequently being
harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part to being pursued by the Texas Rangers, and
being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave La Salle County by 1877. By 1880,
cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an important part of
the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators combined to make
sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
As with rest of the nation, during the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced
to cut back their once-lucrative vegetable production, and they fell back on raising poultry, hogs, and
dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county in the 1950s
certainly bolstered La Salle County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim to most of the
land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively increasing part of the
county’s development (Leffler 1996).
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Very few, and sparsely scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in La Salle County.
There are only 99 archaeological sites recorded within the county, and a large number of those were
found on pipeline surveys. Nevertheless, the time-diagnostic artifacts discovered in La Salle County
provide evidence that the landscape was occupied as early as 11,000 years before the present.
The site types are as varied as the landscape. Large open campsites with numerous hearths, or
campfires, a wide assortment of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal
remains are most commonly located along stream or river terraces. Where gravels outcrop, either

along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are sometimes exposed
in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric quarries (Atlas 2012).
Of the 99 sites, 54 are prehistoric open campsites, and 45 are prehistoric lithic scatters. The more
significant and deeply buried open campsites with archaeological research potential lie close to
streams. Historic components on these same prehistoric sites include historic windmills and areas
of scattered glass and ceramic sherds, or in some cases there are large trash dumps. One unique
historic site is Fort Ewell (41LS19), an adobe structure located on the old Laredo to San Antonio
Road, and that served the U.S. Army from 1852-1854. The only State Archaeological Landmark
(SAL) recorded in La Salle County is the County Courthouse in Cotulla (Leffler 1996; Atlas 2012).
Finally, one of the more potentially significant archaeological sites in the South Texas archaeological
region is located in La Salle County; this being the Oulline Site (41LS3), located approximately 1.35
miles north-northeast of the PA. The Oulline Site covers approximately 40 acres, about eight miles
north of Cotulla, Diagnostic artifacts recovered from this large open campsite range in age from
Paleoindian through the Late Prehistoric periods, and demonstrate the potential for other significant
archaeological sites to exist in the area (Hester et al. 1969).
Surveys and Sites within One Mile of the Current Project Area
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicates that no
professional archaeological surveys have been conducted within one mile (1,609 meters), and no
archaeological sites have been recorded within one mile. However, as shopwn in Figure 2, TAAI has
recently conducted surveys of the Edwards A 1H, the Five F Lateral, and the Leona East Trunkline.
In all cases, no archaeological sites were found within one mile of the current PA (Nickels 2011,
2012).

Soils Map
The Edwards B 1H Pipeline crosses two soil types that vary in depth. Table 3 shows the soils that
there are to be intersected by the Edwards B 1H Pipeline, as well as a surrounding soil type (Web
Soil Survey 2012). Table 1 then presents a brief description of each type, and their potential to
contain buried and intact cultural deposits.
Table 1. Soils Dissected by the Edwards B 1H Pipeline.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact Archaeological
Potential

Duval fine sandy loam (DvC)

Deep loamy soils on convex uplands

Minimal to moderate to about 14
inches below the surface the surface

Poteet very fine sandy loam (Pt)

Very deep loamy soils in narrow

Minimal to Moderate to about 34

drainageways on uplands

inches below the surface

Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the Edwards B 1H Pipeline.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations

Based upon the negative findings of known archaeological sites within the area, and the at best
moderate potential for significant archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area, we
recommend that construction of the Edwards B 1H Pipeline as currently aligned be allowed to
proceed as planned, with no further archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that
if any previously undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development of the
pipeline, such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified
archaeological consultant.

If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited

Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
March 19, 2012].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981

Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Leffler, J.
1996

La Salle County. The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 4, pp. 83-86.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Nickels, D. L.
2011

A Cultural Resources Field Survey of the 8.5-Mile Leona East Trunkline in La
Salle County, Texas. Archaeological Report #44. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations, Martindale, Texas.

2012

Cultural Resources Surveys of the Edwards A 1H Pipeline and the Five F Lateral
in Western La Salle County, Texas. Archaeological Report #81. Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.

Perry Casteñeda Library
2012

Perry Cesteñeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed March 19, 2012].

Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2012 McMullen County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed March 19,
2012].

