r. 'l:,1/il/r,.
,O,/

Sp

in~

Ga1• en.
1'. J. 1 alum

Te;r_,. !2lrcli, 2?.__esearcfi La6,
£i6rary

Document No. 020018
PBS&J Job No. 447212

ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION.REPORT
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE~886")
HOUSTON, HARRIS COUNTY, TEXA<
Texas Antiquities Permit

Nos(i6~~nd(:_o3~)

Prepared for:
The Housing Authority of the City of Houston
2640 Fountainview, Suite 400
Houston, Texas 77057

Prepared by:
PBS&J
206 Wild Basin Road
Suite 300
Austin, Texas 78746-3343

Principal fuvestigators:
Clell Bond
Steven D. Hoyt

Compiled and Edited by:
Eugene Foster
Linda A. Nance

June 2002

Printed on recycled paper

CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

Ed Baxter
Sharon Derrick, Ph.D.
Eugene Foster
Victor Galan
Derek Green
Glen S. Greene, Ph.D.
Steven D. Hoyt
J.K. Wagner & Company, fuc.
Marianne Marek
Allan Meyers, Ph.D.
Linda A. Nance
Michael Nash
D. Gentry Steele, Ph.D.

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

List of Figures
List of Tables
Abstract
Management Summary
Aclmowledgments
Acronyms and Abbreviations

vi
viii
ix
x
xi
xiv

CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER II: ENVIRONMENTAL AND IDSTOR1CAL BACKGROUND
PHYSIOGRAPHY
CLIMATE
GEOLOGY
SOILS
VEGETATION
WILDLIFE
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

CHAPTER III: RESEARCH DESIGN
HISTORIC CONTEXT
ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONTEXT
PERIOD OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE
PHASE 1-A ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY AND MONITORING

Mechanical Survey
Excluded Areas
ARCHAEOLOGICAL MONITORING
SURVEY PHASES 1-B AND 1-C

Phase 1-B Survey
Phase 1-C Mechanical Survey
Excavation and Analysis of Third New City Cemetery Remains

CHAPTERIV: SURVEYRESULTS
PREFIELD RESEARCH
PHASE 1-A, PREDEMOLITION MECHANICAL SURVEY

7
7
7
7
7
8
8
9
17
17
19
19
19

21
25
25
26
26
26
27
31
31
31
39
39

Methods
Results
Summary of Phase 1-A

47

PHASE 1-B, POSTDEMOLITION MECHANICAL SURVEY

47

Methods
Results
Summary of Phase 1-B

50
52
55

PHASE 1-C, LIMITED INVESTIGATIONS IN THE REHABILITATION

ZONE

58

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Methods
Results
Summary of Phase 1-C
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

58
58
64
64

CHAPTER V: MONITORING
ARCHAEOLOGICAL METHODS
HISTORIC ARTIFACT ANALYSIS
Container Glass
Ceramic Wares
Ceramic Decoration
Architectural Materials
Personal Items
Miscellaneous
CULTURAL LOCUS DESCRIPTIONS
Locus 1
Locus 2
Locus 3
Locus 4
Locus 5
Locus 6
Locus 7
Locus 8
Locus 9
Locus 10
Locus 11
Locus 12
Locus 13
Locus 14
Locus 15
Locus 16
Locus 17
Locus 18
Locus 19
Locus 20
Locus 21

iv

69
72
72
74
75
76
76
77
78
78
78
81
81
81
82
82
83
83
85
85
87
87
89
89
91

93
93
93
94

99
100
100
102
104
105

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

CHAPTER VI: EXCAVATION AND ANALYSIS OF THE THIRD NEW
CITY CEMETERY
FIELD METHODOLOGY
Initial Discovery and Testing Phase
Burial Identification Phase
Burial Excavation Phase
Field Laboratory Procedures
OSTEOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
Introduction
Condition of the Remains
Analytical Methods
Demography of the Third New City Cemetery Population
Ethnicity
Dental Discrete Traits.
Health Status of the TNCC Population
Summary
COFFIN HARDWARE AND PERSONAL EFFECTS ANALYSIS
Laboratory Methods
Coffin Data
Decorative Coffin Hardware
Utilitarian Coffin Hardware
Personal Effects
Miscellaneous Items
Interpretations
Determination of Gender
Determination of Age
Ethnic and Status Indicators
Identification of Family Units
Temporal Evidence
Conclusions

CHAPTER VII: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
CHAPTERVIII: REFERENCES
APPENDICES (VOLUME II):
A 1939 Streetscape Photo Project (Allen Parkway Village)
B Phase 1-A, Trench Profile Descriptions
C Artifacts from Phase 1-A Testing
D Artifacts from Monitoring Phase
E Osteological Data
F Coffin Hardware Types
G Miscellaneous and Personal Effects

v

'

107
107
107
111
112
113
113
113
115
117
119
130
130
132
147
148
148
150
150
152
153
157
157
157
162
168
169
169
175
177
181

LIST OF FIGURES
Page

~

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12a
12b
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

Project Location
1944 Aerial View of Allen Parkway Village
Demolition and Rehabilitation Zones
Three-Dimensional Cut-and-Fill Landform Model
Fill-Depth Contour Map
Proposed Shovel Test and Backhoe Trench Locations
Approved Backhoe Trench and Gradall Locations
Burial Excavation Form
1869 'Wood Map' of Fourth Ward
Hardcastle's 1875
1891 Burton Subdivision Plat
1939 Boyles Property Map
1939 Boyles Topographic Map
Phase 1-A Backhoe Trench and Gradall Trench Locations
Gradall Cut I, North Wall Profile
Backhoe Trench 13, North Wall Profile
Backhoe Trench 6, North Wall Profile
806 Crosby Street (ca. 1939)
Backhoe Trench 27, Outer Wall of Cistern
Representative Artifact Collection
Phase 1-B Survey
Phase 1-B Trench Profiles, Trenches 1-4
Phase 1-B Trench Profiles, Trenches 5 and 6, and Plan View of Cistern 3
Phase 1-B Trench Profiles, Trenches 7 and 8, and Plan View of Trench 8 and
Cistern 2
Phase 1-B Trench Profiles, Trenches 9 and 10
Phase 1-C Survey Map
Phase 1-C Survey, Test Trenches 1 and 2
Phase 1-C Survey, Test Trenches 3, 4, and 5
Building Demolition and Debris Removal, Allen Parkway Village
West Side Grading Activity, Allen Parkway Village
Sewer-Disconnect Trench Locations
West Side Drainage Trench, Allen Parkway Village
Cultural Locus Map, Allen Parkway Village
Locus 1, East SD #4, North Wall Profile
Locus 4, View to West
Locus 6, Testing oflsolated Bone Recovery Area
Locus 8, View to North
Locus 8, East SD #44, South Wall
Locus 12, East SD #38, Southeast Wall Profile

vi

2
3
4
18
22
23
24
28
32
33
34
35
37
40
42
43
45
46
46
50
51
53
54
56
57
59
63
65
70
71
map pocket
73
79
80
82
84
84
86
88

LIST OF FIGURES
Page

Figure

39
40
41
42
43

44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

72
73
74
75
76
77

Locus 13, East SD #45, South Wall Profile
Locus 15A and Locus 15B
Locus 15, Detail of Artifact Scatter
Locus 18, Detail of Refuse Pit
Locus 19. (a) View to west; (b) Detail of shovel test
Locus 19, East SD #85, North Wall Profile
Locus 19, East SD #85, South Wall Profile
Locus 22, East SD #83, North Wall Profile
Locus 23, East SD #78, North Wall Profile
M.J. Sullivan Map, 1914
Cemetery Zone, Ca. 1916
Cemetery Zone, Ca. 1939
Allen Parkway Village Cemetery Excavation Map
Completed Burial Form
Third New City Cemetery, Completeness of Individuals
Third New City Cemetery, Sex Distribution Map
Third New City Cemetery, Age Distribution Map
Age Comparison of TNCC with TNCC Death Records
TNCC Age Comparison Including Coffin Size Data
TNCC Age Comparison Divided by Sex
Comparison ofTNCC Age Categories with Other Cemeteries
Age by Sex Comparison of Larger Cemeteries
Crenulated Crowns on Left Mandibular Molars of Burial 157
Left Upper Canine Exhibiting a Canine Mesial Ridge from Burial 157
Anterior Left and Posterior Right Upper Tricuspid Premolars from Burial 42
Comparison of Stature Means Among Cemeteries
Sexual Dimorphism in Mean Dental Crown Measurements
Sexual Dimorphism in Mean Dental Cervical Measurements
Comparison of Linear Enamel Hypoplasia Frequencies Among Cemeteries
Cusp Within a Cusp Anomaly in Left Upper Molar of Burial 157
Dental anomaly present in the anterior portion of the mandible of Burial 90.
Healed Periostitis on the Tibial Shaft of Burial 30
Active Treponemal Infection of the Tibia of Burial 73
Lower Right First Molar of Burial 73 Exhibiting Mulberry Morphology
Right Lower Lateral Incisor of Burial 115 with Prepared Dental Filling Sites
Gold Post and Core Dowel Crown Bridge from Burial 241
Evidence of Cribra Orbitalia in the Eye Orbit of Burial 331
Comparison of Degenerative Joint Disease Frequency
Neoplastic Growth on the Internal Table of the Occipital of Burial 338

Vll

90
91
92.
94
95
97
98
101
103
108
109
110
map pocket
114
116
121
122
124
125
126
128
129
130
131
131
134
136
137
139
138
140
140
141
142
143
143
144
145
146

LIST OF TABLES
Page

Table

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

Hollingsworth Survey
Products of Industry, 1850 and 1860
Previously Recorded Archaeological Sites Within Loop 610, City of
Houston, Texas
Artifacts Collected During Phase 1-A Mechanical Survey
Assessment of Historical Localities for Phase 1-C Survey Investigations
Artifacts from Loci ISA and lSB
Artifacts from Locus 16
Artifacts from Locus 18
Artifacts from Locus 19
Artifacts from Locus 20
Artifacts from Locus 22
Miscellaneous Artifacts Recovered
Demography of the Third New City Cemetery Skeletal Samples
Older Adolescents and Adults in the Skeletal Samples Assigned to Narrow
Age Ranges
Third New City Cemetery Demography as Recorded in City of Houston
Death Records
Dental Discrete Traits
Third New City Cemetery Population Stature
Comparison of Postcranial Indices as a Measure of Body Size and Shape
Health Disorders at TNCC (Per Individual Case)
Count of Linear Enamel Hypoplasias in the TNCC Population
Cusp Within a Cusp Anomaly
Frequency of Selected Disorders in Comparison Populations
Categories and Types for Analysis of Coffins and Personal Effects
Coffin Data
Decorative Hardware Data
Utilitarian Hardware Data
Clothing Data
Jewelry Data
Personal Items
Miscellaneous Items
Interpretations from Selected Coffin and Personal Effects Data
Correlation of Coffin Length With Skeletal Age
Estimated Dates for Features

viii

11
14
20
48
60
92
93
94
99
100
102
105
120
120
120
131
132
133
135
138
138
141
149
150
151
152
153
155
156
157
158
163
170

ABSTRACT

This report documents archaeological survey, monitoring, and cemetery removal investigations
conducted at Allen Parkway Village, Site 41HR886, a redeveloped public housing project in downtown
Houston, Texas. The investigations included archival and historical research to predict pre-1880 site
localities across the 36-acre site. A multiphase program of geomorphological and archaeological testing
confirmed widespread destruction of homes and associated surficial and shallowly buried cultural
deposits during the 1939-1940 demolition of an African American neighborhood that developed across
the site in the late nineteenth century. However, machine-aided testing also confirmed that potentially
significant cultural deposits do survive in former drainages and cisterns buried beneath the intensively
redeveloped complex of public housing and community buildings. All occupation-related features and
deposits identified during the survey and monitoring phase either did not warrant further testing or were
located outside the zone of impact for the current project. However, extensive remains of a latenineteenth-century cemetery were discovered in a 3.5-acre corner of the site. More than 400 possible
burial features were excavated and analyzed, resulting in bioarchaeological identification of a
predominantly African American population. Basic demographic data, including stature, sex, ethnic
affiliation, and health disorders, were analyzed for the population and compared to other similar southern
cemetery populations. The cemetery investigation also included material culture analysis of burial
containers, hardware, and personal effects recovered in association with individual burial features. An
extensive set of appendices accompanies the report, including historical photographs, an archaeological
and geomorphological assessment report, artifact analysis forms, osteological assessment data, and
material culture analysis data.

1X

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY.
This report is one of two volumes documenting historical and archaeological investigations (Texas
Antiquities Permit No. 1684) into Allen Parkway Village (APV), Site 41HR886. This volume reports the
research goals, methods, results, and assessments of archaeological survey, monitoring, and cemetery
removal efforts conducted to meet Section 106 requirements for a U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development-sponsored urban revitalization project in downtown Houston, Harris County, Texas. The
project area has historically been associated with Freedmen's Town, Houston's most important African
American community in the late-nineteenth to early-twentieth-century period. However, at the outset of
this investigation, the project area was one of few areas available for investigation of Houston's earlier
history prior to intensive development during Reconstruction. Because few prior investigations had
adequately addressed this early period in Houston's history, a pre-1880 period of archaeological
significance was defined by the Texas Historical Commission for this investigation.
Preliminary research into the project area revealed that redevelopment of the former Freedmen's
Town neighborhood during a federal "slum clearance" program in the 1939-1940 period resulted in the
complete demolition and removal of buildings and the reconfiguration of landforms across the entire
project area. Thus, the survey and monitoring phases of the investigation were designed to assess the
potential for locating intact cultural deposits, and to identify specific cultural sites and features that might
be impacted by the currently proposed redevelopment project. Of the many occupation-related features
and deposits identified within the 36-acre APV tract, none of those within the proposed impact areas
warranted further investigation to determine National Register eligibility under the period of significance
defined for this project. All survey and monitoring findings and assessments were reported and approved
by the Texas State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) on an interim basis. Chapters III, IV, and V of
this report document in greater detail the historic background, research strategies, archaeological
methods, and results of those survey and monitoring investigations.
Throughout the survey and monitoring investigations, attention was focused on the location of the
former Third New City Cemetery, a mid-to-late-nineteenth-century city cemetery and hospital tract that
had been redeveloped in the early twentieth century and later incorporated into the ca. 1940 APV housing
project. Historical and archaeological research for this project initially reported that all burials appeared to
have been removed from the cemetery area during the original 1939-1940 APV site preparations.
However, continued monitoring of utility trenches in the cemetery zone revealed evidence of additional
burials present in an area targeted for redevelopment. Accordingly, an approved program (Texas
Antiquities Permit No. 2031) was developed and implemented to archaeologically locate, excavate, and
analyze all remaining burials from the cemetery zone. That work was conducted in the late summer of
1998. The bioarchaeological analyses of the burial remains were reported and approved by the SHPO and
have been incorporated in their entirety into Chapter VI of this report according to comments received
from the SHPO. Also presented in Chapter VI is a detailed analysis of material culture items recovered
and reburied with the human remains from the Third New City Cemetery.
Finally, this report concludes with a brief summary of the investigations, findings, and
recommendations for future protection of archaeological resources identified across the project area. A
recommendation is also provided for developing an interpretive historical exhibit in accordance with
stipulations contained in the Programmatic Agreement for this project. Volume II of this report presents
extensive appendices with detailed reports and assessments prepared during various phases of survey,
monitoring, and cemetery investigation.

x

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Any urban revitalization project as large and complex as that undertaken at Allen ParkwaY. Village
inherently requires a significant level of commitment and participation by many individuals and
organizations. For the Allen Parkway Village/Hope VI - URD project, the foremost of these are the key
federal, state, and local agencies that sponsored, reviewed, and directed the project from its beginnings.
Particularly with regard to the unusually extensive cultural resource management considerations required
by this project, key staff members with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, the
Advisory Council for Historic Preservation, the Texas Historical Commission, and the City of Houston's
Housing Authority deserve special consideration for their dual commitment to fulfill their respective
agencies' missions and to serve the public interest - especially when the public's interest is expressed
from widely divergent points of view. Notable among these are the following remarkable individuals:
Charlene D. Vaughn and Laura Dean of the Advisory Council; Jim Bruseth, Mark Denton, and Steve
Hoyt of the Texas Historical Commission; and the Houston Housing Authority's Joy Fitzgerald, Ernest
Etuk, and Horace Allison. Prior to assuming his current position with the Texas Historical Commission,
Mr. Hoyt played a lead role in the APV project as the Principal Investigator directing the first phases of
archaeological research and planning. Thus, he also deserves credit for preparing large portions of
Chapters ill and IV. There are certainly other individuals within those agencies who provided equally
necessary services but few who have been as directly involved in resolving the many difficult issues that
arose around concerns for protection of historic and archaeological resources at the APV project site.
Members of the consulting team that provided technical and professional services also deserve a
great level of respect and appreciation. The investigations required specialized skills not available in any
one individual or organization. Thus, each of the consultants contributed in their own way to the overall
success of the project. During the initial research de.sign phase, when assessment of archaeological site
potential was a primary concern, J.K. Wagner & Company, Inc. provided invaluable historical research
services. Thus, much of the written historical background and data presented throughout the report derive
from research J. K. Wagner & Company, Inc. conducted during this and prior stages of the project.
J.K. Wagner's efforts provided the data that guided Dr. Glen Greene's Phase 1-A archaeological and
geomorphological assessments across the project area. Dr. Greene's Phase 1-A survey report and
illustrations have been incorporated into Chapter IV and Appendix B. Dr. Greene's survey efforts were
followed in turn by Ed Baxter's Phase 1-B and 1-C survey efforts. The results of Mr. Baxter's field
investigations are described and illustrated by him in Chapter IV. Throughout each of the survey phases,
and the following cemetery removal phase, Dr. Roger Moore provided unmatched expertise in
interpreting Houston's urban archaeological contexts. Dr. Moore also provided vital members of his staff
at some of the most critical moments; most notably, Allan Meyers, Ph.D., and Connie Judkins who made
the initial discoveries of human remains from the Third New City Cemetery. Dr. Meyers also deserves
credit for leading and reporting the monitoring phase investigations (Chapter V), for analyzing artifacts
collected in the field (appendices C and D), and for directing the initial burial identification efforts in the
cemetery area.
Few individuals provided more vital services than the team of archaeologists and osteologists who
worked with amazing diligence and skill throughout the cemetery excavation and analysis process. The
sheer number of crew members involved in this part of the project is too great to provide the personal
level of recognition each deserves. The following list attempts to identify all those who participated and
persisted through 45 very trying days in the late summer of 1998:

xi

Barbara Bartholomew
Jarvis Beck
John C. Bennett
Dan Brandon
CoryBroehm
Russ Brownlow
Adrian Camacho
Pablo Casas
Michael Chavez
Eleanor S. Dahlin
Kyle Day
Shawn Doctor
Rachel Feit

Pamela Folds
Owen Ford
Tim Gibbs
Jennifer Giesecke
Melinda Tate Iruegas
Hedy Justus
Sharon King
Warren Kinney, Jr.
Richard Mahoney
Ruth Marie
Thomas McWhorton
Jowizza Medina

Frank Mitchell
Jason H. Moore
Sophi Petrovich
Susan Pierce-Rimbey
Alex Pugh
Lisa Rodriquez
David Sherman
C. Russ Shortes
Andrea Stahman
Pamela Steger
lbrahima Thiaw
Courtney Waugh

An exceptionally high level of gratitude is due to Sharon Derrick, Ph.D., who not only served as the
lead osteologist overseeing all burial excavations in the field and analysis in the lab, but also prepared the
detailed bioarchaeological data and reporting presented in Chapter VI and Appendix E. Dr. Derrick's
counterpart conducting and reporting the material culture analysis presented in Chapter VI and
Appendices F and G was Marianne Marek. Especially notable for their high level of performance and
sensitivity in handling and analyzing the burial remains, key leaders in the field and in the lab included
Michael Nash, Victor Galan, Jim Malmros, Amy Sullivan, and Joan Baker. Michael Nash and Victor
Galan contributed both in the field and in the office by supervising the large number of field crews, and
then preparing written and graphic portions of Chapter VI.
Among the most important, although invisible, members of the consulting team were James
Davidson and Victoria Owens, both of whom brought special technical expertise in the realm of burial
hardware and personal effects analysis. Each of these terrifically dedicated individuals provided a wealth
of information that was relied on during the material culture analysis. Information they provided is cited
in various portions of the report, but their willingness to be available to answer questions as needed
deserves special attention here.
Perhaps the greatest expressions of appreciation are due to two special advisors, D. Gentry Steele,
Ph.D., and Warren T.D. Barbour, Ph.D., whose depth of technical expertise is surpassed by the breadth of
their ability to educate and advise all kinds of people under all types of circumstances. It is not an
exaggeration to say that the tremendous commitments made to carry out the cemetery investigations in a
respectful and professional manner could not have been upheld without the participation of these two
remarkable individuals. Dr. Steele and Dr. Barbour are the best kinds of consultants, ones who maintain
the highest moral and ethical standards despite the sometimes extreme levels of adversity encountered in
such a highly sensitive project.

xii

Finally, credit is offered where credit is due for the often thankless -duties of staffing a project like
this and then preparing a technical report of this magnitude. A truly complete list of personnel involved
probably cannot be achieved, but the following individuals have contributed in very substantial ways:
Wayne Glander, Staffing
Linda Nance, Document Preparation and Editing
James S. Schmidt and Andrea Stahman, Historical Research and Analysis
Meg Cruse and Laura Acuna, Artifact Curation and Analysis
Ruth Marie, Records Curation and Analysis
Sally Victor, Reburial Documentation and Oversight
Ardi Eggleston, Burial Artifact Analysis and Interpretation
Bob Bryant and Cindy Miller, Word Processing and Document Formatting
Brian Shirley, Ty Summerville, and Alex Pugh, Cartography
Bill Hailey and David Kimmerling, Graphic Illustrations

Cover illustration: 1869 Wood Map of Houston, Texas.
Photograph courtesy of Houston Metropolitan Research Center, Houston Public Library.

xiii

ACRONYMS
ACHP

Advisory Council on Historic Preservation

APV

Allen Parkway Village

:mJD

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

OSHA

U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration

SCS

Soil Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources Conservation
Service)

SHPO

Texas State Historic Preservation Officer

TARL

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory

THC

Texas Historical Commission

TNCC

Third New City Cemetery

TSHA

Texas State Historical Association

USDA

U.S. Department of Agriculture

xiv

TERI

TRODUCTION

This report has been prepared to document the
urpose, process, and results of historical and
haeological investigations undertaken at the Allen
kway Village public housing redevelopment project
te in downtown Houston, Texas (Figure 1). The
vestigations were conducted between February 1996
nd December 1998 by PBS&J (formerly Espey, Huston
Associates, Inc.) under the terms of a professional
consulting services agreement with the project sponsor,
the Housing Authority of the City of Houston (the
Housing Authority). The investigations were performed
to assist the Housing Authority in meeting its cultural
resources management obligations under Section 106 of
the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as
amended, and the Texas Antiquities Code.
The Allen Parkway Village (APV) project area
included a 36-acre (ac) tract of land completely
developed with a World War II-era public housing
project (Figure 2). The entire 36-ac tract was scheduled
for redevelopment under a federally funded urban
revitalization plan that had been heavily negotiated and
codified in a formal Programmatic Agreement among the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD), the President's Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation (ACHP), and the Texas Historical
Commission (THC). The approved plan stipulated that
approximately three-quarters of the old apartment
buildings and site improvements would be removed and
replaced by newly constructed low to moderate income
public housing. The plan also called for rehabilitation of
the remaining one-quarter of the apartment complex
located centrally within the 36-ac tract (Figure 3).
In accordance with the terms of the Programmatic
Agreement, the Texas Historical Commission was
consulted for approval of a research design for intensive
archaeological survey and construction monitoring in the
areas scheduled for building demolition and
construction-related excavation. The primary concern in
the demolition and excavation areas was the potential for
impacts to possible archaeological deposits deriving
from an extensive period of occupation and land use in
the area, including the development of one of Houston's
earliest and most-prominent African American
communities, called Freedmen's Town. Construction
monitoring and subsurface testing were less intensive in
the rehabilitation zone because the extent of subsurface
impact in this area was less extensive than in the

surrounding area. Evaluation and analysis of a large
number of human burials became necessary when project
plans required relocation of a former city cemetery
discovered in the northwestern comer of the project area.
The THC's primary point of contact for review and
coordination of the project was Mark Denton. The
Principal Investigator responsible for directing and
overseeing all aspects of the intensive archaeological
survey and construction monitoring was Steven Hoyt,
PBS&J Senior Staff Archaeologist. Mr. Hoyt was
assisted by Eugene Foster, PBS&J Senior Staff
Historian, who served as Project Manager for all phases
of the project. Mr. Hoyt was succeeded as Principal
Investigator for the cemetery removal phase of the
project by Clell Bond, Manager of PBS&J's Cultural
Resources Division. Key subconsultant personnel
included J.K. Wagner, Glen S. Greene, Ph.D., Roger
Moore, Ph.D., Allan Meyers, Ph.D., Warren T.D.
Barbour, Ph.D., Sharon M. Derrick, Ph.D., D. Gentry
Steele, Ph.D., Joan Baker, and Amy Sullivan.
The investigations included three major phases:
archival and historical research to predict archaeological
site potential; archaeological survey and monitoring to
determine the presence and integrity of archaeological
site localities; and archaeological removal of remaining
portions of the former Third New City Cemetery
(TNCC). The first two phases were conducted under
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 1684 between February
1996 and January 1998. The third phase was conducted
under Permit No. 2031 between January 1998 and
December 1998. Additional survey phase investigations
are underway for a portion of the nearby Freedmen's
Town Historic District under Permit No. 2683 and will
be reported separately.
The first major phase of investigation included
archival and historical research directed toward
predicting pre-1880 site localities across the project area,
and toward assessing their potential for survival as
potentially significant archaeological deposits. Prior
demolition, landscape modification, and construction
activities that occurred in the 1940s were thought to be a
significant factor that greatly reduced the potential for
intact archaeological deposits across much of the project
area, including the former TNCC. However, portions of
the project area were identified as having a positive
potential for containing intact buried deposits. Notable

N

Austin, Texas 78746-3343
Phone: (512) 329-8342 FAX: (512) 327-2453
){

Figure 1
Project Location

Project Location
1000
..

Prepared for: HACH
Job No.: 777212.00
Drown by: A. Pugh
File: N:447212\cad\tx27sc\fig_ 1.dgn

O

Scale: 1" =2000' for 8.5"x11" Sheet

I Dote:

3/26/02

250

l"'W""--

2000 FT
I

500 m

N
0

;;:;.
N

'-

"'

2
0

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

0

c

"'

~
~I

"'

Figure 2

~
"1$
N

0
0

.<:

N
C::.

()_

g'

""
"

<(

z

c

.D

~

0

!5

>-

.D

~

0

1944 AERIAL VIEW OF
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

.:;;
0

u

.c:;
C::.

"......

z
;;
i;:

Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture
l:\projects\he1\clients\hach\cadlflgure2.al

3

n Zon

Reh

.i::..

NOTE: All buildings outside of rehabilitation zone
approved for demolition.

206 Wild Basin Rd., Ste. 300
Austin, Texas 78746-3343
Phone: (512) 329-8342 FAX: (512) 327-2453

./{

Figure 3
0

500 Ft
0

100m

Allen Parkway Village
Building Footprint

Demolition and Rehabilitation Zones
Allen Parkway Village'
Prepared for: Housing Authority of the City of Houston

Typical Sidewalk/Porch Layout

Job No.: 447212.00

Scale: 1'' =250' for 8.5"x11" Sheet

Drown by: A. Pugh

Dote: 6/14/02

File: N:447212\cod\ totol_stotion\Fig_3.dgn

CHAPTER I:

Introduction

among these high sensitivity areas was the former TNCC
and a series of old drainages or gullies that had been used
in the nineteenth century for trash disposal.

construction work in the cemetery was ordered by the
Housing Authority tmtil all human remains could be
removed.

The second major phase of investigation included a
phased sequence of mechanical archaeological surveys to
assess the predicted high sensitivity areas. The first of
the mechanical surveys was limited to the accessible
areas within the grass courtyards and open park spaces,
between the then-extant apartment buildings. Although
no intact· deposits from the pre-1880 period of
archaeological significance were identified in the 27 test
trenches, archaeological and geomorphological analyses
of the mechanical survey trenches indicated that intact
buried deposits could exist, particularly within the old
gullies below the 4- to 5-foot (ft) depth limit of the test
trenches. 1 A recommendation was made accordingly to
monitor all building demolition, as well as any
construction-related utility trench excavations deeper
than the demolition impact zone.

To assess the complete extent of human remains in
the project area, a full-scale mechanical archaeological
scraping program was conducted across approximately
3 .5 ac in the extreme northwestern comer of the APV
property. Historical records indicate that the former
cemetery occupied this portion of the project area and
probably extended beyond the project area boundaries to
the north and west. Beneath a layer of building rubble
that was left from the demolition activities, 430 possible
burial features were initially identified by the
archaeological excavation team. Following intensive
coordination with all parties to the Programmatic
Agreement and interested members of the public, a plan
was developed to archaeologically remove and analyze
all of the human burial features within (he cemetery area.
The archaeological excavation and on-site analysis of
over 400 human burial features comprised the third and
final phase of archaeological investigation at APV.

Two additional phases of mechanical. survey were
conducted following approved demolition activities in
the eastern and western portions of the project area. The
first of these focused additional attention on the
northwestern comer of the project area to further assess
the potential for buried remains of the former Third New
City Cemetery. The trench locations were intentionally
placed beneath former building locations because the
prior phase of testing in the open courtyard spaces had
yielded no evidence of the cemetery or any human
remains. Again, no evidence of the former cemetery was
observed.

The entire Allen Parkway Village project area has
been officially recorded with the Texas Archaeological
Research Laboratory as Site 41HR886, the Allen
Parkway Village Site. It was felt that the entire project
area warranted inclusion in the boundaries for this site
because the investigations to date have demonstrated a
variable but widespread distribution of cultural materials
across the entire area. Though many of the deposits have
been heavily disturbed, other intact features are present
below the zone of impact for this project. Thus, by
recording the entire project area as a large, redeveloped
urban neighborhood, all cultural deposits, features, and
loci identified and reported in this document are included
within the 41HR886 site boundaries. For brevity and
ease of reading, this report does not repeatedly refer to
the official site number. Instead this report typically
refers to the site by its common name, Allen Parkway
Village, or simply abbreviated as APV.

The third and final phase of mechanical survey was
conducted at selected pre-1880 occupation sites within
the central rehabilitation zone. Selected target areas appeared to have a reasonably high potential for survival
and a corresponding potential for impact by utility construction. Because no evidence of intact archaeological
deposits was encountered, clearance was received for
construction of utility improvements with the understanding that periodic monitoring of those activities
would be conducted by an archaeologist.

Detailed discussions of the APV archaeological
investigations are presented within the following
chapters. Following a prerequisite chapter on the
environmental and historical context of the project area
(Chapter 2), additional chapters are provided to more
fully address:

While conducting the required archaeological
monitoring, human remains were discovered irI a major
utility excavation trench, necessitating a temporary
stoppage of construction irI the former cemetery area.
Further archaeological monitoring yielded discoveries of
additional human remains in conjunction with other
u~lity trenches in the same area. A complete stoppage of
1

The depth of the test trenches was limited according to the
planned depth of utility line excavation activities, approximately
4 feet, across the project area.

5

•

Research designs and methodologies used in
pursuit of the research goals (Chapter 3);

•

Results of the mechanical survey (Chapter 4);

•

Results of the monitoring (Chapter 5);

•

Results of the cemetery irivestigations
(Chapter 6);

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
•

Conclusions and recommendations (Chapter 7);
and

•

References cited in this report.

from the burials removed from the Third New City
Cemetery. Finally, Appendix F is a, catalog of coffin
hardware types recovered, and Appendix G is a catalog
of the miscellaneous and personal items associated with
the burials.

Seven appendices complete this report. Appendix A
consists of streetscape photographs taken in 1939 showing standing structures in the project area prior to demolition and construction of APV. Appendix B presents
profile descriptions and drawings documenting the geomorphological work conducted during the Phase I-A
mechanical survey. Appendix C contains the analysis of
all artifacts recovered during Phase I-A, and Appendix D
describes the artifacts recovered during the ongoing
monitoring of utility trench and sewer-disconnect excavations. Appendix E contains tabulated osteological data

By prior agreement, all human remains recovered
during the cemetery removal were reburied with their
associated artifacts in a memorial cemetery park in the
northeastern comer of the APV project area. Records
documenting the excavation and analysis are pennanently curated at the Texas Archaeological Research
Laboratory (TARL). TARL, located at The University of
Texas's J. J. "Jake" Pickle Research Center in Austin, is
an officially authorized repository for archaeological
records and materials.

6

NvIRONMENTAL AND HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

SOILS
The following discussion provides a baseline overview for the soils of the project area. A more comprehensive description of the soils is provided in Chapter N
based on Dr. Glen Greene's analysis of subsurface
trenches excavated during the first phase of the archaeology survey program. Full profile descriptions are
presented in Appendix B.

The APV project area is located in the Gulf Coastal
lain Physiographic Province, which extends from the
Sabine River in the northeast to the Rio Grande in the
'southwest (Swanson 1995). The Gulf Coastal Plain was
:formed during the Cenozoic Era by rivers transporting
sediment from eroding mountains in the west and is part
of a partially emerged continental shelf that stretches
from New England to the Yucutan Peninsula (Sellards et
al. 1932). In Texas, the topography of this plain is flat,
dipping slightly toward the Gulf of Mexico, with elevations reaching 500 ft above sea level in the northeastern
and central parts of the province to 1,000 ft near Del Rio
(Bureau of Economic Geology 1977).

The soils within the project area are mapped as
Urban Land (USDA-SCS 1976:Sheet 22). Rather than a
soil series classification based on taxonomic characteristics, this category is provided for soils that have been
altered by historic land use to such an extent that they
have lost their original distinguishing characteristics. An
idea of the soil characteristics prior to historic disturbance of the project area is afforded by soils described
for topographically similar locations to the north and
west of APV. The soils of two series, Vamont and
Atasco, occur in these areas. Vamont soils have been
mapped along Buffalo Bayou north of APV; Atasco soils
have been mapped adjacent to the Vamont soils at a
greater distance from the bayou.

CLIMATE
Harris County is characterized by a humid subtropical climate that is predominantly marine. Numerous
small streams and bayous, along with the nearness of
Galveston Bay and the Gulf of Mexico, contribute to the
development of fogs, with heavy fogs occurring on an
average of 16 days a year and light fog occurring about
62 days a year. Summers are long and hot and winters
are relatively mild, with temperatures being moderated
by winds from the Gulf. Precipitation is fairly heavy and
uniform throughout the year, with about 75 percent of
the years receiving total rainfall between 30 and 60
inches. Since thunderstorms are the main source of rainfall, precipitation varies considerably in different sections of Houston on a day-to-day basis (U.S. Department
of Agriculture-Soil Conservation Service [USDA-SCS]
1976:2).

Vamont soils are taxonomically classified as fine,
montmorillonitic Aquentic Chromuderts. These are wet,
very clayey Vertisols found on gently sloping uplands.
Vertisols are clay-rich soils that often display large
cracks on the surface and are subject to shrinking and
swelling. This action occurs in response to wet and dry
cycles, when the clay particles (slickensides) slide
against each other in an upward/downward motion. This
movement is detrimental to archaeological sites as it
results in the vertical displacement of materials.

GEOLOGY
Vamont soils formed in thick beds of alkaline
marine clay. They are somewhat poorly drained with
very slow permeability. In a typical profile they have a
very dark grayish brown clay A horizon underlain by
brownish gray clay AC horizons. The C horizon is within
about 2 meters of the ground surface and consists of a
mottled light gray and brownish yellow clay.

Surface geologic deposits within APV have been
mapped as belonging to the Beaumont Formation
(Bureau of Economic Geology 1982). The Beaumont
Formation occurs as a surface outcrop along a vast arc
that parallels the northwestern Gulf Coast from east of
the Mississippi River in Louisiana to about Kingsville,
Texas, where it is covered by the sands of the South
Texas Sand Sheet. It was deposited as an overlapping
series of deltaic or alluvial plains by ancient river
systems, the descendants of which are still draining into
the Gulf of Mexico. The sediments of the formation were
carried suspended in these streams.

Atasco soils are deep, acid soils that formed in
clayey sediments and occur along natural drainages.
Taxonomically, they are classified as fine, mixed,
therrnic Aquic Glossudalfs, which are Alfisols that have
a high clay content and high moisture regimes that have
7

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
led to the formation of argillic horizons.

tion is typical ofresidential areas: a mix of native species
and introduced species. Prior to the partial demolition of
the .APV project buildings in 1997, native vegetation
included trees such as live oak (Quercus virginianus),
white oak (Quercus alba), hackberry (Ce/tis
occidentalis), cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia), American
elm (Ulmus americana), slippery elm (Ulmus rubra),
pecan (Carya illinoensis), black walnut (Jug/ans nigra),
southern magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora), cottonwood
(Populus deltoides), red mulberry (Morus rubra), redbud
(Cercis canadensis), ironwood (Carpinus caroliniana),
box elder (Acer negundo ), American elder (Sambucus
canadensis), eastern red cedar (Juniperus virginiana),
Ashe juniper (Juniperus ashei), and retama (Parkinsonia
aculeata). Brush species included eastern baccharis and
yaupon (!lex vomitoria). Introduced species included
trees such as Chinese tallow (Sapium sebiferum),
mimosa (Albiziajulibrissin), common fig (Ficus carica),
golden rain tree (Koelreuteria paniculata), weeping
willow (Salix babylonica), Chinese elm (Ulmus pumila),
common crepe-myrtle (Lagerstroemia indica), shrub
althea (Hibiscus syriacus), and oleander (Nerium
oleander). Since demolition, however, very little of this
vegetation remains. Before new buildings were
constructed on the project site, colonizing species typical
of disturbed areas, such as rattlebush (Sesbania sp.),
were dominant across the demolition zones.

Atasco soils are moderately well drained and have
very slow permeability. During wet periods they are
saturated in the lower part of the profile for 2 to
4 months. In a typical profile they have a dark grayish
brown fine sandy loam A horizon, underlain by mottled
yellowish brown and red or gray B horizons to depths of
over 150 centimeters.
VEGETATION .
The .APV project area is located in the Gulf Prairies
and Marshes vegetational area of Texas as delineated by
Hatch et al. (1990). The Gulf Prairies cover approximately 9 million ac and include the nearly flat plain
extending 30 to 80 miles inland from the Gulf Marshes;
the Gulf Marshes are on a narrow strip of lowlands
adjacent to the coast and barrier islands extending from
Louisiana to Mexico and cover approximately 500,000
ac (Hatch et al. 1990). Streams flowing into the Gulf of
Mexico dissect the area, resulting in level grasslands and
low flat woodlands, especially along streams, swamps,
and freshwater marshes (Correll and Johnston 1979;
Thomas 1975).
The climax vegetation of the Gulf Prairies is largely
grassland (tallgrass prairie), although tree and brush
species such as honey mesquite (Prosopis glandu/osa),
oaks (Quercus spp.), pricklypears (Opuntia. spp.),
McCartney rose (Rosa bracteata), eastern baccharis
(Baccharis halimifolia), and acacias (Acacia spp.) have
invaded much of the area. Principal climax grasses
include gulf cordgrass (Spartina spartinae), big bluestem
(Andropogon gerardii), little bluestem (Schizachyriilm
scoparium), yellow Indiangrass (Sorghastrum nutans),
eastern gamagrass (Tripsacum dacty/oides), gulf muhly
(Muhlenbergia filipes), and species of Panicum and
Paspalum, among others. In addition to brush species
noted above, invading herbaceous plants include
yankeeweed (Eupatorium compositifolium), broomsedge
bluestem (Adropogon virginicus), smutgrass (Sporobolus
indicus), western ragweed (Ambrosia psilostachya),
tumblegrass (Schedonnardus paniculatus), threeawns
(Aristida spp.), and many annual forbs and grasses.
Introduced grasses, such as bermudagrass (Cynodon
dactylon) and King Ranch (K-R) bluestem (Bothriochloa
ischaemum), are common in managed pastures and have,
in many cases, escaped into uncultivated areas (Thomas
1975).

WILDLIFE
The project area lies along the western edge of the
Austroriparian Biotic Province near its junction with the
Texan Biotic Province. The Austroriparian Biotic
Province stretches from the Pineywoods of eastern Texas
through the southeastern United States to the Atlantic
Ocean. It is characterized by extensive pine and hardwood forests, swamps, marshes, and other hydric
communities (Blair 1950). The Texan Biotic Province
represents the broad ecotone between the forests of the
Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces of eastern Texas
and Oklahoma to the east and the grasslands of the
western parts of these states. No endemic wildlife species
occur within or near the project site, the vertebrate fauna
in the region being typical of that found in urban areas
over most of the Austroriparian province to the east.
Although .APV is located in an urbanized area,
sufficient habitat occurred at the site prior to demolition
to support some wildlife, particularly birds, and
particularly those adapted to live in association with
humans. Amphibians expected to have occurred at or
near the project site prior to demolition include
Blanchard's cricket frog (Acris crepitans blanchardi)
and the Gulf Coast toad (Bufo valliceps). Reptiles
expected to have occurred include lizards such as the

While the .APV project area lies within the Gulf
Prairies and Marshes vegetational area, the project site
itself is in a highly urbanized area, with very little of the
original vegetation remaining. In this regard, the vegeta8

CHAPTER II:

Environmental and Historical Background

cinereoargenteus), striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis),
bobcat (Pelis rufus), and white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
virginianus) would also have occurred (Davis and
Schmidley 1994).

green anole (Ano/is carolinensis), six-lined racerunner
(Cnemidophorus sexlineatus sexlineatus), Mediterranean
gecko (Hemidactylus turcicus), northern fence lizard
(Sceloporus undulatus hyacinthinus), and ground skink
(Scincella Zateralis); and snakes such as the Texas rat
snake (Elaphe obsoleta lindheimerii), brown snake
(Storeria dekayi), eastern garter snake (Thamnophis
sirtalis sirtalis), and rough earth snake (Virginia
striatula) (Dixon 1987; Garrett and Barker 1987;
Tennant 1984, 1998).

During demolition, some of the less-mobile wildlife
mentioned above may have suffered some mortalities,
although the majority would have moved out of the area.
Now that new construction has occurred, the wildlife
may return to the same predemolition levels. Thus,
amphibians such as the Gulf Coast toad; lizards such as
the ground skink and northern fence lizard; resident birds
such as the American robin, northern mockingbird,
European starling, great-tailed grackle, and, house
sparrow, as well as summer/winter residents and
migrants; and mammals such as bats, the house mouse,
black rat, and common raccoon would all be expected to
occur at the site in the future. As the vegetation continues
to increase at the project site, so will the amount of
wildlife.

Numerous birds likely occurred at the APV project
site prior to demolition. They include year-round
residents such as the rock dove (Columba Zivia),
mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), blue jay
(Cyanocitta cristata), American crow (Corvus
brachyrhynchos), tufted titmouse (Parus bicolor),
Carolina wren (Thryothorus Zudovicianus), American
robin (Turdus migratorius), northern mockingbird
(Mimus polyglottos), European starling (Sturnus
vulgaris), northern cardinal (Cardinalis cardinalis),
great-tailed grackle (Quiscalus mexicanus), brownheaded cowbird (Molothrus ater), and house sparrow
(Passer domesticus).

IDSTORICAL BACKGROUND
The City of Houston was first established on
August 30, 1836, on the banks of Buffalo Bayou in the
middle of future Harris County by the brothers Augustus
Chapman Allen and John Kirby Allen. They named the
town after Sam Houston and had it designated as the
temporary capital of the new Republic of Texas, which
convened its first legislature there on May 1, 1837.
Incorporation of the city was granted by the legislature
on June 5, 1837, and Houston became the county seat of
Harrisburg County in that same year. In 1839, the county
was renamed Harris County and the Texas government
moved to Austin.

Many other species of birds would have migrated
through the area in the spring and fall, or have spent
winter or summer there. Summer residents include the
common nighthawk ( Chordeiles minor), chimney swift
(Chaetura pelagica), eastern kingbird (Tyrannus
tyrannus), scissor-tailed flycatcher (Tyrannus forjicatus),
purple martin (Progne subis), barn swallo·w (Hirundo
rustica), and painted bunting (Passerina ciris).
Migrants/winter residents of the area include the rubycrowned kinglet (Regulus calendula), cedar waxwing
(Bombycilla cedrorum ), orange-crowned warbler
(Vermivora celata), yellow-rumped warbler (Dendroica
coronata), vesper sparrow (Pooecetes gramineus), whitethroated sparrow (Zonotrichia albicollis), dark-eyed
junco (Junco hyemalis), and American goldfinch
(Carduelis tristis) (Scott 1987; Texas Ornithological
Society 1995).

Although the Allen brothers' entrepreneurial spirit
prompted them to advertise that steamships could come
from New York and New Orleans and sail up Buffalo
Bayou directly to the city, the Laura, the first small
steamship to reach Houston, in January 1837, found the
bayou to be obstructed with branches. The town
consisted of only 12 residents and one log cabin;
however, within a few months there were 1,500 people
and 100 houses (Texas State Historical Association
2002a). Even though the bayou was difficult to navigate,
small ships continued to ply the bayou bringing finished
and exotic goods from Galveston to Houston and taking
cotton, corn, and hides back to Galveston for shipment to
New Orleans, New York, and Europe. Plans begun after
the Civil War to dredge a better channel culminated in
1914 when the Houston Ship Channel opened, and
Houston finally became the deepwater port that the Allen
brothers had envisioned back in 1836.

Apart from the house mouse (Mus musculus) and
black rat (Rattus rattus) that are typically associated with
urban areas, several mammalian species, including the
Brazilian free-tailed bat (Tadarida brasiliensis), eastern
fox squirrel (Sciurus niger), common raccoon (Procyon
Zotor), and Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana)
would have been expected to occur at the project site
prior to demolition. In more-rural areas of the region, the
eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus floridanus), Baird's pocket
gopher (Geomys breviceps), northern pygmy mouse
(Baiomys taylori), hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus),
coyote (Canis latrans), common gray fox (Urocyon
9

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
The APV property is situated along the south bank
of Buffalo Bayou within a 2-league grant that was
surveyed in 1824 as part of an 11-league grant for John
Punderson Austin. The initial 11-league grant was
eventually reduced by the General Land Office to the
2-league John Austin grant. Austin had a house and a
sawmill somewhere on the property by 1825. A public
road laid out in 1829 from San Felipe de Austin running
eastward to Harrisburg on Buffalo Bayou passed south of
the John Austin 2-league grant and ran 4 more miles to
Harrisburg. When Houston was founded in 1836, the
Allen brothers purchased the western league and the
southern half of the eastern league from Austin, and the
tract was incorporated into the original Houston city
limits. At that time, San Felipe Road was realigned along
the south line of the Austin league and with the present
alignment of West Dallas Street (J.K. Wagner &
Company 1994).

graveyard. In i879, the Houston City Council declared
the cemetery in the northwestern cor:qer of APV as a city
graveyard. City maps and directories that year describe
the tract as the "New City Cemetery and Pottersfield"
(J.K. Wagner & Company 1994).
Yellow fever and smallpox epidemics occurred
frequently enough that the city constructed quarantine
stations on the property and gave permission for paupers
to be buried there. General public burials decreased
between 1905 and 1910. The hospital remained in
operation through 1927. Any burials in the cemetery
after 1910 would mostly be for people who died in the
hospital from infectious diseases (J.K. Wagner &
Company 1994).
The APV project area falls within Houston's
historic Fourth Ward, also known as Freedmen's Town,
one of Houston's most important African American
communities. Many of Houston's earliest settlers were
from the South and endorsed the system of slavery. Slave
life in the city differed from that on the plantation. Urban
slaves had generally more freedom and a somewhat
easier, more-rewarding life than their counterparts on the
plantations. Many slaves in Houston worked as house
servantS; others found employment as cooks and waiters
in hotels, as teamsters, or as laborers on the docks and in
the warehouses. Although they had to obtain permission
from their owners to seek employment, they were often
required to hand over a percentage of their pay. Slave
labor helped build the plank roads and railroads by which
the produce of the plantations flowed into the city, and
helped erect the buildings that housed the city's
merchant activity. There were few free blacks in Houston
until after the Civil War, when freed slaves poured into
Houston from plantations in Brazoria, Fort Bend, and
other neighboring counties. The general inability of
federal authorities to provide for the needs of the former
slaves who came to the city after the war forced the
members of Houston's developing black community to
tum inward, organize, and rely on themselves.

In April 1838, Stephen B. Hollingsworth surveyed
both the north and south sides of Buffalo Bayou,
including the APV project area, to clear and develop city
land as·part of Houston's westward expansion. Most of
the lots were long, fronting on the bayou, with the
southern tracts running to the south line of the original
Austin grant. Block 1, Lots 16, 17, and 18, and Block 2,
Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, of the Hollingsworth survey fall
within the APV, which comprises approximately
51 percent of the original Hollingsworth survey on the
south side of Buffalo Bayou (J.K. Wagner & Company
1994). Table 1 presents information on the earliest
ownership of these lots.
The northwest comer of the APV property is a
portion of a tract of land purchased by Jacob Croft in
1847. A sawmill built by M.T. Rodgers, perhaps as early
as 1839, on Buffalo Bayou at the end of Montgomery
Road and two houses were present on the tract at that
time. Croft operated the mill until the scarcity of timber
and competition from several other mills on White Oak
Bayou caused him to move his family to Spring Creek by
1850. The Croft sawmill and grist mill last appears in ~e
U.S. Census of Industry in 1850 (Table 2), the same year
that W.R. Baker foreclosed on the Croft tract. Baker then
sold the tract in a sheriff's sale to Garrett S. Hardcastle,
to whom he had previously sold 8 ac adjoining the Croft
tract on the east. Although the Croft mill burned in 1853,
its access road from the south was still recognizable in
the 1890s as a large erosional gully. Also in 1853,
Hardcastle sold the portion of the Croft tract containing
the houses and outbuildings and a portion of the 8-ac
Baker tract to the City of Houston for a hospital. The
resulting Croft/Baker City Hospital tract comprises
approximately 4.6 ac that includes the northwestern
comer of APV. The city used the tract for a hospital and

Some quickly acquired land and built their own
homes. As early as the fall of 1865, several blacks had
bought property in Freedmen's Town, and more did so
during the next several years. One former slave owner,
Charles ·S. Longcope, who lived in a mansion in the
Second Ward, offered each of his emancipated slaves a
building lot in the Fourth Ward (Texas State Historical
Association 2002b). By 1870, one black out of 25 living
in the Fourth Ward owned a home; by the end of the
century, the number had risen to about one in eight
(Beeth and Wintz 1992:22).
None of the areas where blacks settled in the

10

go

v~B"~

Block
Location

e?..;..

I

g-~~

Lot No.

0 E..8

I

I 611511838

16

I 111711838

I 511111839
I 211911839

6/29/1841

16

CD

~

o.. o

M,

Date

18

16

0

P

Cl.l

~

~

Grantor

'""'

....,.

....,..

-

--

~-

Grantee

Instrument

McNeill, A., A.C. Allen and J.S.
Holman

Mulanye, Thomas H.

Deed

Mulayne, Thomas H.

Williams, Eli

Deed

Randall, John T.

Jacobs, Thomas

Warranty
Deed

Jacobs, Thomas

Pestard, Phoenix

Deed

Randall, John T.

Randall, Jesse F.

Deed

I 2 acres; $100
I HCDRG:257
I 68-x-200 ft on west line oflot, $100 I HCDRD:228
I 68-x-200 ft; $1 oo
I west Y, oflot, except one parcel

I HCDRD:265

I HCDRC:425

belonging to Thomas Jacobs and
Gracie McRae; indenture adjoining
William Punchard's lot

.....

I

16

2/21/1839

Randall, John T. and Sarah

McRae, Gracie

Deed

68-x-200 ft; $200

HCDRC:427

16

2/22/1842

Randall, Jesse F.

Hopson, C.R. and J.J. Cain

Deed

1-_ acres; $50; indenture; less 5/8
acres sold to Thomas Jacobs and
Gracie McRae

HCDRH:34

I HCDRH:404
I HCDRP:749

16

3/17/1843

McRae, Gracie

Hopson, C.R. and J.J. Cain

Deed

$300; house and two lots

16

5/6/1857

Hopson, C.R.

Hardcastle, G.S.

Deed

3 1110 acres; $700; included 9 acres
in Lot 1, Block 2

16

6/3/1858

Hardcastle, G.S.

Sabine and Galveston Bay
Railroad & Lumber Co.

Deed

5 acres; land for a depot; included Lot I HCDR V:377
1, Block 2

16 E Y.

5/2/1838

Allen, A.C. et al.

Davenport, William

Deed

$150

16 E Y.

1/4/1840

Davenport, William

Randall, John

PIA

I

HCDRA:440
HCDRF:51

16 E Y.

11/20/1838

Randall, John et ux.

Punchard, Samuel W.

NA

John Randall deceased

HCDRC:424

16 E Y.

2/19/39

Punchard, Samuel W. and Mary C.

Punchard, Julianna

NA

$1000

HCDRD:21

16 E Y.

3/4/1841

Campbell, R.C. vs.

Punchard, William

NA

2 acres; $117 note

HCDRS:188

16 E Y.

5/4/1841

Punchard, William by sheriff

Campbell, R.C.

Sheriff's
Deed

2 acres; $66

HCDRG:l87

12/2/1841

Campbell, R.C.

Cain, J .J. et al.

Special
Warranty
Deed

Allen, H.R. and S.L., and J.S.
Holman

Holman, James S., Trustee

Trust Deed

2 acres in Lot 17 of Block 1 and 2
acres in various lands

Holman, J.S. Trustee for Allens

Hopson, C.R. and J.J. Cain

Deed

4 acres; $50

Hopson, C.R. by William Anders
(Agent)

Hardcastle, G.S.

Deed

3-1110 acres; $31 O; 155 feet along
San Felipe Road on the Hardcastle
east line

Mulayne, Thomas H.

Deed

3-% acres; $300

16 E Y.

I

17

I 4/2/1840

17

I 312511843
I 121511851

18

I 6/15/1838

17

I McNeil, A., J.S. Holman and H.R.
Allen

I 2 acres

I HCDRG:476

I HCDRH:406

I HCDRH:406
I HCDR T:431'
I HCDRC:263

TABLE 1: Hollingsworth Survey (cont'd)
Block
Location

Lot No.

Grantee

Grantor

Date

Instrument

Source Document

l

8/22/1838

Mulayne, Thomas H.

Harris, Ira A. and John
Clark

Deed

50-ft2 parcel out of:Y.-acre tract in Lot
18, Block 1 and Lot 3, Block 2

I

18

12/1838

Mulayne, Thomas H. and Martha

English, William F., R.W.
Cussans and Stuart Peny

Indenture

50-x-50 ft; $1000

I

18

12/1838

Mulayne, Thomas H. and Martha

English, William F., R.W.
Cussans and Stuart Peny

Indenture

3-3!. acres; Lot 3 (Block 2); plus I
acre; Lot 18 (Block I)

HCDRC:281

1

18

5/4/1841

English, WilliamF. and R.W.
Cussans by Bushby (Constable)

Shroeder, L.I.W.

District
Court Suit

3-:Y. acres; $95; except 50-x-50 ft
previously sold

HCDRI:266

1

18

7/111841

Shroeder, L.I.W.

Williams, Eli

Deed

3-:Y. acres less 50-x-50 ft previously
sold (included Lot 3, Block 2)

HCDRG:271

1

18

9/29/1842

Harris, Ira A. and John Clark

Kelly, Jane and Catherine

Deed

50-ft2 parcel out of:Y.-acre tract in Lot
18, Block I and Lot 3, Block 2

HCDRH:248

1

18

2/20/1844

Williams, Eli

Hopson, C.R. and J.J. Cain

Deed

3 :Y. acres plus 2 acres in Lot 3, Block
l, next to Hopson and Cain's tallow
factory

HCDRI:264

1

18

2/2111844

Kelly, Jane and Catherine

Hopson, C.R. and J.J, Cain

Deed

50-ft2 parcel out of:Y.-acre tract in Lot
18, Block I and Lot 3, Block 2

HCDRJ:24

l

18

4/1859

Hopson, C.R. (Deceased)

DeEnde, Benjamin F.

Deed

3 acres, Lot 18, Block 1 (partial tract)
and lots l and 3, Block 2

HCDRV:568

l

18

7/20/1859

DeEnde, Benjamin

F.Hardcastle, G.S.

Deed

$350; 3 acres, Lot 18, Block 1
(partial tract) and lots 1 and 3, Block
2

HCDRV:568

2

5

6/15/1838

Holman, J.S. for A.C. Allen and A.
McNeil

Baker, W.R.

Deed

Also includes lots 8, 9, and 10; $550

HCDRK:548

2

5

12/17/1838

Holman, J.S.

Baker, W.R.

Release

Lot 2 (12 acres), Lot 3 (13 Yz acres),
Lot 4 (12 acres) and Lot 5 (13-\4
acres)

HCDRC:258

2

5

2/28/1849

Baker, W.R.

Croft, J.

Deed

15-1/5 acres; $531

HCDRP:6

2

5

2/28/1849

Croft, J.

Baker, W.R.

Mortgage

15-115 acres; $531

HCDRN:227

2

5

7/5/1853

Croft, J.

Hardcastle, G.S.

Deed

15-1/5 acres; includes improvements

HCDRS:ll5

2

5

8/10/1853

Hardcastle, G.S.

Palmer, E.A.

D/T

15-115 acres; mortgage to secure 60day note for $435

HCDRQ:522

2

5

9/4/1855

Croft, J.

Hardcastle, G.S.

Judgement

15 acres; second filing; $100

HCDRS:538

2

5

9/22/1858

Hardcastle, G.S.

City of Houston

Deed

12-_ acres; $2500 plus improvements

HCDRU:456

2

3

8/22/1838

Mulayne, Thomas H.

Harris, Ira A. and John
Clark

Deed

50-ft2 parcel out of:Y.-acre tract in Lot
18, Block l and Lot 3, Block 2

HCDRH:247

2

3

7/111841

Shroeder, L.I.W.

Williams, Eli

Deed

3-:Y. acres less 50-x-50 ft previously
sold (included Lot 18, Block 1)

HCDRG:271

2

3

9/29/1842

Harris, Ira A. and John Clark

Kelly, Jane and Catherine

Deed

50-ft2 parcel out of:Y.-acre tract in Lot
18, Block 1 and Lot 3, Block 2

HCDRH:248

......
N

Notes

18

HCDRH:247
,HCDRC:280

I

Location

w

Date

Lot No.

Hopson, C.R. and J.J. Cain

Deed

2 acres plus 3-* a~eitiiitofat18~'
Block 1, next to Hopson and Cain's
tallow facotry

Hopson, C.R. and J.J, Cain

Deed

50-f\2 parcel out of:Y.-acre tract in Lot I HCDR J:24
18, Block 1 and Lot 3, Block 2

I Hopson, C.R. (Deceased)

DeEnde, Benjamin F.

Deed

3 acres, Lot 18, Block 1 (partial tract)
and lots 1 and 3, Block 2

I DeEnde, Benjamin

F.Hardcastle, G.S.

Deed

$350; 3 acres, Lot 18, Block 1
I HCDRV:568
(partial tract) and lots 1 and 3, Block
2

McNeil, A. A.C. Allen and J.S.
Holman

Holman, J.S.

Deed

I HCDRC:273

Holman, J.S.

Baker, W.R.

Deed

Baker, W.R.

Baker, Asa

Deed

6/11/1846

Baker, Asa by Attorney

Davis,N.T.

Deed

$1000

HCDRM:53

6/11/1846

Davis,N.T.

Baker, W.R.

Deed

$1000

HCDRM:72

2/20/1844

Williams, Eli

2

3

2

I 3

I 2/21/1844. I Kelly, Jane and Catherine

2

I 3

I 4/1859

2

I 3

I 7/20/1859

2

I 2,3,4

I 6t16t1838

2

I 2,3,4,5

I

2

2,3,4

2

2,3,4

2

2,3,4

1211711838

Lots 2, 3,4 and 5 plus other land;
$11,000

I

HCDR V:568

I HCDRC:258
HCDRG:493

2

2,3,4

1117/1857

Baker, W.R.

Hardcastle, G.S.

Deed

20 acres; $500

HCDR T:398

I2

2,3,4

1117/1867

Baker, W.R.

Hardcastle, G.S.

WD

20 acres; $500

HCDR3:525

2

1

6/15/1838

McNeil!, A., A.C. Allen, J.S.
Holman

Green, John

Deed

9 acres; $675 and other lands

HCDRC:l75

2

1

11119/1838

Green, John Jr.

Brooks, Samuel

Deed

9 acres; $675; indenture

HCDRC:l79

2

1

11119/1838

Hodge, A. Jr. vs.

Green, John Jr.

Suit

Lot

DCMD:207

2

1

6/6/1843

Green, John Jr. by Sheriff

Hopson C.R. and J.J. Cain

Deed

9 acres; $100 and other lands

HCDRH:532

2

1

5/6/1857

Hopson, C.R.

Hardcastle, G.S.

Deed

9 acres with improvements, houses
and outhouses (known as the Hopson
Place); $700; included 3 1/10 acres in
Lot 16, Block 1

HCDRP:749

2

I 1

I 6/3/1858

Sabine and Galveston Bay
Railroad & Lumber Co.

Deed

5 acres; land for a depot; included Lot

I HCDR V:377

DeEnde, Benjamin F.

Deed

I Hardcastle, G.S.

2

I 1

I 4/1859

I

Hopson, C.R. (Deceased)

2

I 1

I 7/20/1859

I

DeEnde, Benjamin

I

F.Hardcastle, G.S.

16, Block 1

I Deed

3 acres, Lot 18, Block 1 (partial tract) I HCDR V:568
and lots 1 and 3, Block 2

I $350; 3 acres, Lot 18, Block 1
(partial tract) and lots 1 and 3,
Block2

Source: Records research by J.K. Wagner & Co., Inc.

I HCDR V:568

TABLE 2.

Name of
Business of
Manufactured
Products

Capital
Investment in
Real or Personal
Estate

J. Croft

Sawmill and
Grist Mill

J. Richardson

Products oflndustry, 1850and1860
Average Nwnber
of Hands
Employed

Raw Material Used Including Fuel

Wages

Quantity & Kind

Value

Kind of
Motive
Power

$3,000

600MLogs
1000 Bushels Com

$1,000

Water

4

$100

Sawmill

$2000

400MLogs
500 Cord Wood

$1.600
$1,000

Steam

6

G. Sheppard

Sawmill and
Grist Mill

$2,000

750MLogs
600 Cord Wood
1500 Bushels Com

$3,000
$1,200
$1,500

Horses and
Steam

Chas. Speers

Sawmill

$3,000

800MLogs
1000 Cord Wood

$3,200
$2,000

Brown&
Hand

Sawmill

$3,000

600MLogs
700 Cord Wood

Name of
CoipOration or
Individual

Male

Female

Average
Monthly Cost
Male Labor

Average Monthly
Cost Female
Labor

Annua\Product

Quantity & Kinds

Value

No data avail.

600MLogs
1000 Bushels Com

$9,000
$1,500

$150

No data avail.

400MLmnber

$6,000

6

$120

No data avail.

750 M Lwttber
1880 Bushels Meal

$11,250
$2,350

Steam

6

$150

No data avail.

800 M Lwttber

$14,000

$2,400
$1,400

Steam

6

$108

No data avail.

600 M Lwttber

$9,000

1850

-"""

A.J.?

Gristmill

$1,000

1500 Bushels Com

$1,500

Water

2

$70

No data avail.

1880 Bushels Meal

$2,350

J. Crawford

Sawmill

$2000

500MLogs
600 Cord Wood

$1,500
$1,200

Steam

5

$90

No data avail.

500 M Lwttber

$7,500

Robert Lewis

Sawmill

$2,000

300MLogs
180 Cord Wood

$1,200
$360

Steam

6

$104

No data avail.

300 M Lwttber

$4,500

Wescott

Sawmill

$2,500

700MLogs
250 Cord Wood

$700
$300

Steam

6

$84

No data avail.

700 M Lwttber

$10,500

H. George

Sawmill

$1,000

300MLogs

$450

Not Given

4

$100

No data avail.

300 M Lwttber

$4,500

GavySeth

Sawmill

$4,000

5,400 Logs per day
Pine&Oak

$14,000

Steam

4

$120

No data avail.

1878,000 Ruff'Lwttber
per year

$28,000

W. Hutchinson

Sawmill

$3,000

5,400 Logs
Pine&Oak

$14,000
$6,000

Steam

5

$150

No data avail.

1878,000 Ruff'Lwttber
per year

$28,000

WmLubboch

Sawmill

$12,000

5,700 Logs

$12,000

Steam

7

$140

No data avail.

1565,000peryear

$24,000

J.W.Bergin

Sawmill

$4,000

3,000 Logs

$8,000

· Steam

6

$175

No data avail.

939,000 per year

$16,000

J.W. Harris

Sawmill

$13,000

9,000Logs

$12,000

Steam

14

$560

No data avail.

1408,000 per year

$24,000

1860

Source: Records research by J.K. Wagner & Co., Inc.

CHAPTER Il:

Environmental and Historical Background

burial insurance ·often was the first to be taken out and
the last to be relinquished when times grew hard (Wright
'
and Hughes 1996:268).

post-Civil War period were completely segregated, and
blacks were fairly evenly distributed throughout the city
in the late nineteenth century. Approximately 50 percent
of black families in the Fourth Ward resided next to
whites. Although never more than 36 percent of the
city's black population resided in the Fourth Ward, it
housed a disproportionate share of black professionals
and contained most of its significant institutions. "By
1915, all but one of the black doctors and dentists in
Houston, as well as 75 percent of the black lawyers, had
offices in the Fourth Ward" (Texas State Historical
Association 2002b).

The Fourth Ward's ability to expand was limited
because it was bounded on the south and west by other
developments. In the 1920s, the Third Ward passed the
Fourth Ward in population and began attracting more
black institutions and new residents. The Fourth Ward
began losing its more prosperous residents to new
housing developments. By the 1930s, black residents
were being displaced as land was cleared for a City Hall
complex, and white businesses and institutions began
moving into the area. And then, in the early 1940s,
37.5 ac of the Fourth Ward was cleared to build San
Felipe Courts (later renamed Allen Parkway Village).
Originally planned as a public housing project, the
project was reassigned to the War Department during
World War IL When completed in 1944, the project
served white defense workers and veterans returning
home after World War IL

Fraternal orders, mutual aid societies, and social
and civic clubs that emerged immediately following
emancipation played an important role in the community.
In addition to the social services they sponsored, these
fraternal orders provided members with death and burial
benefits, often the only insurance that members
possessed (Beeth and Wintz 1992:94). These institutions
contracted to guarantee a proper funeral and burial for
their dues-paying members, a function so important that

15

CH DESIGN

project area. To accomplish this, a three-dimensional
geoarchaeological model was developed (Figure 4)
depicting landform alterations that would have affected
site preservation across the project area. Possible site
locations, derived from historical records research, could
then be overlaid on the "cut-and-fill" background to
predict localities with the highest potential for survival.
The geoarchaeological model was then tested in the field
during the first phase of archaeological field survey
across the project area. The strategy for testing the model
was to focus on areas where planned construction-related
activities, such as building demolition and utility
excavation, could impact potentially significant cultural
deposits.

chapter provides a summary of the research
strategies as they were developed and refined
veral phases of archaeological investigation at
h phase was designed and approved through
rdination with the THC prior to implementing
e recommended field investigation procedures.
tratively, the primary purpose of the archaeology
throughout all of its phases, was to assist the
Authority in meeting its cultural resources
ent requirements as stipulated by the
atic Agreement for the project.
long with other detailed stipulations regarding
architectural resources, the Programmatic
nt stipulated that a research· design would be
ed and used to guide archaeological investigathe project area. The Programmatic Agreement
ulated that a plan for archaeological monitoring
truction activities would be developed, as would a
or removal and treatment of any human remains if
ere discovered on the project site. Following initial
ltation with the THC, a preliminary phase of archid historical research was conducted and used as a
odevelop the research design that would guide the
uent archaeological field investigations. Close
ination of the archaeology program with the demoand construction schedule required that field
'gations be conducted in a phased sequence. Ultily, the field investigations included three phases of
hine-aided archaeological survey, monitoring of
ing demolition and utility excavation activities,
mination of numerous archaeological deposits and
es, and eventually a major bioarchaeological exca. n project to remove and analyze cemetery remains
overed in the northwestern comer of the project area.
ese phases of research were conducted under two
parate Texas Antiquities permits: the first (Permit No.
84) for archaeological survey and monitoring activis, the second (Permit No. 2031) for excavation and
alysis of the cemetery remains.

IDSTORIC CONTEXT
Detailed research into previous historical reports
and public records indicated that the APV project area
was owned and occupied by a large number and variety
of people since the earliest period of Houston's
existence. In the period from the 1820s to the 1850s, the
project area was owned primarily by Anglo-Americans
and other European immigrant groups. Site types
anticipated for this period included scattered residential
occupations that were more concentrated in the eastern
part of the project area. An early (pre-1856) industrial
sawmill operation was also identified in the northwestern
comer of the project area. Elsewhere across the project
area, unoccupied land was undeveloped or used
agriculturally in this time period.
In the subsequent period between about 1860 and
1880, the early landowners gradually subdivided their
landholdings and began selling individual house lots.
With Emancipation and Reconstruction came intensified
African American settlement, particularly in an area
platted as Freedmen's Town. In this period, the pattern of
occupation and land use intensified to include small,
cottage-based industries and increasing numbers of
individual house sites, as well as a recreational park area,
called Vauxhall Gardens, located along the south bank of
Buffalo Bayou (J.K. Wagner & Company 1994).
Although Vauxhall Gardens appears to have existed for
only a short time, the African American neighborhood
that developed across the project area thrived between
1880 and 1900, when the area reached its maximum
density. It is notable, however, that substantial portions

Archaeologically, the primary goal of the
vestigation was to identify cultural deposits subject to
pact within the APV project tract and to assess their
otential archaeological and historical significance.
Considering the degree of prior construction-related
disturbance across the project area, the first task
undertaken toward that goal was to assess the pattern and
degree of archaeological site potential across the entire

17

~

.2.
ID

~~

§:

rn·

"
~
~

~

:::;

~

"'

~
'°~.
c:
Ql

.,..

~

µ~

~

~

,__..
00

PBSJ

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
·Surveying

1939 SURFACE AS SURVEYED BY J.S. BOYLES P.E.
Figure 4

ljl,,

1981 SURFACE AS SURVEYED BYWILLIAM MILLER R.P.S.

3-D CUT AND FILL
LANDFORM MODEL
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

CHAPTER ill: Research Design

the land in this neighborhood continued to be owned
y absentee landlords.

Considering the widespread impact of the ca. 1940
demolition, excavation, and construction activities, the
most likely types of intact archaeological deposits would
include deeply excavated features of historic occupation
sites (such as building foundations, cisterns, wells, and
privy pits) and refuse deposits in any of several ravines
or gullies that once drained the project area. Contributing
to this assessment was archival evidence that disposal of
trash within the gullies was prohibited by city ordinance
in the late nineteenth century and that the old gullies
were backfilled in the very early part of the twentieth
century (Houston City Council Minutes: 1890 and 1910).
Thu~, historic occupation sites and trash disposal areas
identifiable through historical/archival research became
focal points for further investigation and assessment-particularly where such features might be impacted by proposed construction activities.

Dense development and occupation of the area
·ontinued into the early twentieth century, a period when
reedmen's Town was the economic and cultural center
r Houston's African American community. By the late
930s, the city sought federal assistance to develop
ublic housing in the area designated as the city's Fourth
ard. Under that program, the APV project area was
entified as a "slum clearance" zone, and the project site
as cleared of all buildings and improvements (see
ppendix A for streetscape photographs of the buildings
rior to development of APV). The only exception to the
estruction or removal of buildings was a large boarding
ouse that was temporarily occupied by the construction
company for use as a headquarters building. Detailed
topographic maps prepared before and after the clearance
. activities indicate that substantial alterations (cutting and
filling) of the landscape occurred across the project area
in preparation for construction of the public housing
buildings.

PERIOD OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL
SIGNIFICANCE
Based on the archaeological and historical context
data assembled during PBS&J's efforts to develop and
coordinate the initial research design, the pre-1870/1880
period was selected as the period of archaeological
significance for the APV archaeological program. This
period was selected, in coordination with the THC, partly
because the project area is located within the pre-1880
occupation and land-use zone for Houston, but also
because sites of this early historical period are
exceedingly rare in Houston's intensely developed urban
landscape. This period was also selected because
historical records documenting post-1880 cultural
developments are abundant and readily available for
research.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONTEXT
Research into previous archaeological investigations within the Loop 610 portion of the City of Houston
revealed two important patterns. First, only about 16
known or possible historic period archaeological sites
had been identified at the time of the investigation
\Table 3). Of those, only four (41HR575, "Brown Convention Center,'' "Fire Station Maintenance Facility,''
and "Block 12") had been more thoroughly investigated,
and those sites were largely associated with Anglo. American occupation of the area.
Second, as a result of the intensive degree of urban
development in the downtown area, only a very small
percentage, approximately 3 percent, of the city's
original 9-square-mile core retained potential for
additional discovery of intact archaeological remains
(Dr. Ken Brown, personal commullication 1996). Of that
3 percent, the nearby Freedmen's Town Historic District2
presents the highest potential for undisturbed
archaeological deposits. However, despite construction
activities in the 1940s that caused a substantial degree of
ground disturbance, the APV project area was also
assessed as having a limited potential for discovery of
intact archaeological resources (J.K. Wagner &
Company 1994).

In addition to possible sites of the pre-18 80 period,
the historical presence of a post-1880 cemetery, the
Third New City Cemetery, in the northwestern comer of
the property was considered to be an area of special
archaeological sensitivity. While the research team
anticipated that redeposited remains of the cemetery
could occur almost anywhere in the APV project area as
a result of the ca. 1940 landscape cutting and filling
activities across the project area, it was recognized that
discovery of intact remains from this cemetery would
require
extensive
archaeological
consideration.
Discovery of such remains would require mitigative
measures to avoid or relocate the remains.

PHASE 1-A ARCHAEOLOGICAL
SURVEY AND MONITORING

2

Freedmen's Town Historic District was nominated and listed
in the National Register ca 1985 for its remarkable array ofhomes,
churches, and businesses representing Houston's historic African
American community.

As noted in the introduction to this chapter, the
approved research design for the first major phase of
19

TABLE 3. Previously Recorded Archaeological Sites
Within Loop 610, City of Houston, Texas

SITE NO.

CONTEXT

INVESTIGATION

INFORMANT

DATE

41HR116

no data

survey

Neyland

1956

41HR117

no data

survey

Neyland

1956

41HR314

early 20th C.
institutional

survey

W. McClure

1976

41HR409

1837-1984
urban commercial

salvage

R. Moore

1984

41HR425

late 19th C.
urban domestic

testing

R. Mcintosh

1984

41HR508

1860s military
1880s domestic

surface collections
and testing

Houston
Archeological
Society/
R. Moore

1983/2001

41HR525

minimal
late 19th C.
rural domestic

survey

McClure

1983

41HR575

1837-1984
urban commercial/
domestic

testing and data
recovery

R. Moore

1986

41HR614

historic

survey

R. Moore

1989

41HR623

early to mid19th C. industrial
and militarv

visual inspection

C. Ebersole

1989

41HR637

1924-1984
urban domestic

auger tests

P. Wheat

1990

41HR638

1924-1984
urban domestic

auger tests

P. Wheat

1990

41HR747

late 19th to early
20th C. industrial
and domestic

monitoring

R. Moore

1994

Brown

Brown Convention Center
(early to late 19th C. commercial and residential)

Brown

Fire-Station Maintenance Facility
(Old City Cemetery and possible English Colonial cemetery)

41HR787

pre-Civil War
testing and data
domestic, commerrecovery
cial & religious
Source: R. Moore Archaeological Consulting, Inc.

20

Brown and Taylor

1994-1995

CHAPTER Ill:

Research Design

geoarchaeological subconsultant was employed to direct
the first phase of mechanical testing.

al field survey at APV was developed acultural resource management requirements
· the Programmatic Agreement for the APV
as recognized from the beginning that reguirements for the project derived from the
Section 106 of the National Historic PreserHowever, because the project was being
t by a chartered political subdivision of the
exas and was being conducted on publicly
d, compliance with the Antiquities Code of
also required. The latter required that a permit
ological investigation be acquired prior to
ment of any archaeological field investigails of the proposed investigations were clarigh early and ongoing coordination with the
. uthority and the THC.

It was hoped that this methodology would provide
an adequate means of a) testing the accuracy of the cutand-fill model, b) assessing archaeological site potential
across the project area, c) identifying discrete cultural
features and deposits, and d) seeking approval for
building demolition in areas where significant cultural
resources would not likely be impacted by the demolition
activity. It was anticipated that the areas most suitable
for such approval would be areas where more than 4 ft of
fill could be shown to overly any possible intact cultural
deposits. A depth of 4 ft was selected because the actual
zone of demolition impact was estimated to have a
limited vertical depth of 2 ft or less below the ground
surface. Thus, the proposed mechanical excavation depth
enabled examination of the actual impact zone, as well as
an additional buffer zone. To comply with specific U.S.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
guidelines, a maximum depth of 5 ft was established for
the mechanical trench excavations.

S&J's first draft of the research design included
terized cartographic overlay of detailed historimodem topographic maps to preliminarily assess
t and patterning of landscape modifications
e project area. Areas of cutting and filling across
ct area were depicted in a cut-and-fill model
e 4; Figure 5). In theory, the "fill" areas were
to have a greater potential for containing uncultural deposits; cut areas would have less.
and-fill model was then displayed in conjunction
locations of fomer gullies and ravines, privies
ems, and the existing APV building locations and
develop an array of proposed mechanical and
g archaeological test locations within accessible
ross almost the entire 36-ac APV property tract
6). Also included within this first draft of the
h design were recommendations for archaeologinitoring to ensure that approved construction acdid not destroy previously unidentified resource

It was recognized that further mechanical survey
and testing could be necessary to more fully identify and
assess the archaeological integrity and research potential
of specific areas and/or cultural features discovered
during the preliminary mechanical survey program.
Observations that would suggest a need for further
investigation, and possible stoppage of demolition, in a
given area would include a) apparently intact
geomorphological strata indicating a high potential for
intact shallowly buried deposits within 4 ft of the ground
surface, and/or b) positive identification of in situ
cultural deposits or features that fit within the
archaeological research interests defined for this
investigation. The Housing Authority required that any
plan for further testing and possible mitigation of
archaeological resources would be developed and
approved rapidly in order to meet project goals in a
timely manner.

Following review and coordination of PBS&J's
research design, the THC approved an alternate
am emphasizing mechanical excavation instead of
-dug tests for the first phase of archaeological
ey (Figure 7). Mechanical excavation was favored
hand excavation as a more effective and efficient
ns to examine geomorphological conditions across
entire project area. While a backhoe was to be used
oss most of the area, excavation by means of a
dall was recommended in the northwestern comer of
project area to enable a more controlled examination
possible burial remains in the vicinity of the former
'd New City Cemetery. To ensure appropriate
oarchaeological interpretation and assessment of the
oposed mechanical trenching program, an expert

As noted above, special Gradall excavation
procedures were recommended for the former TNCC
cemetery area in the northwestern comer of the project
area. If soil variations or other evidence indicating
possible burial pits were encountered during testing of
the cemetery area, the recommended procedure to be
followed was a) to record such features immediately
using a surveyor's transit and appropriate benchmarks, b)
to mechanically excavate one possible burial pit to
determine the presence or absence of intact human burial
remains, and c) if intact human burial remains were
encountered, the burial feature would be backfilled.
Depending upon the extent, actual or projected, for other
21

.g:
.Q.

~
~

12:

10

.-.-··-··-··
-··-··-.
··--··-··'.\)-··~··
.....
~ d
:I I ·-··-··-··-··-··-·
1 l=
J C::

~
~

~

~

~

~
cO
c:

~
E!.

•

~[

:

.
:
.

I

I

~t

I

•
II

IC

II

c
1..-

•

I

•

~ (!:

:J I

\d
.
:
.

!]
.

~

~

30

II

:J(

:IL

~~·...... ...
,•-.

c-ti
1 c:
c
:P
J

'~

.....

..........

I

I

:

... l

p

I

.

I

I

:

......I·-··--··-··-··-··-··-··-·
t
C
:iJ:.

'

:J

~ q:
•.

~&

I

:It

IL

:JI

1[

1

11

II

B

I

I

I

I

~-

[

i:l

I

....·-··-··-··-..-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-.. -··-··-··-··:,;;

.

1[

· -. I
.~.

.

I

JC.

I

I

C

•

§

<2

FT.FLL

CJ

1111

4-8 FT. FILL

>8 FT. FLL

I

j]~

• Engil"}eering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

e 1 McBRIDE-RATCLIFF CORE BORES, FEB 1992 <APPROX. LOCATION>
NO FILL

22

.
!)~

;
r··-··-··-··-··-··.J,
·-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-·

PBSJ

LEGEND

:

L.:::::r'

~-1

JC--

1r:

I

c:=lJ • :
:
I
I c::::P
..
----. ---·· c:=ti :
.:___n

t

..

I

400

16 •

rr=:i -c---., .c----27•:P
n._..,~
][
---1 r:
.....~--~
~.[

I

200

1''•200'

.
--··-~·-/

.· ·

u:==ic: . ] t
(b·. c . l -r:::-__,i]

I

50 '

I

·:,~...
,>~... <f".

I

I

N
N

!

1

:::>

Figure 5
FILL-DEPTH CONTOUR MAP

2-4 FT. FILL

ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

/
11•
'.- 11 •11•11

i ~=

11
1!=

~~I

•rt•••• I I •

:i

.

t ••

1
1f• 1•

1• •

•

••1l• -~'l•

c=J

HO

Rehabilitation Zone
ehabilitation Zone

c ' . J ..,,..,,
7,t..

••

•

J

•

,,_,,

I

. .,,._

$

=

'

~,,..__

$

~-

•

'"

I

, ._" ... .. - L

1~''-.,,.._ 1

I
I

, ~,,

,,._~,

•

Property Boundary

.,..,

'•t1Sl!I' '•rr•11•11•11•11•11•11•11•11•1

I

L

~

I

J=I

~I

I

w

<r,,

...•."<s-

.'lli..,. . . .~"' =
I

I

N

C,.

I
I

I

I

I

I
I

I

I
. I

I

t

I
I

-

~

-.-...

~

..;.

I
=..11•11•11•11• • ••_i.il

·- ··-

$

-J.1-·u·--1fmf1 •Yr•·11.J.

1t•11•11•1t•11•1t••1•tl . .

206 Wild Basin Rd., Ste. 300
Austin, Texas 78746-3343
Phone: (512) 329-8342 FAX: (512) 327-2453

Buried Utility Corridor
.){

Buried Drainage
Approximate Backhoe Trench Location

~

s=H . . ;J~

.....

................................................................

~

~!

Figure 6
Proposed Shovel Test and Backhoe
Trench Locations
Allen Parkway Village

Approximate Shovel Test Location

Prepared for: Housing Authority of the City of Hou.;;ton

Cemetery Boundary

Job No.; 447212.00
Drown

by: A. Pugh

File: N:447212\ cod\ Figure_ 6.dgn

I

Scale: 1"=250' for 8.5.. x11" Sheet

Dote: 6/14/02

~

Approximate BackhoeTrench Location

Predicted
Pre-1880 Localities
1869 Wood Map

Approximate Gradall Location

1870 Census

Cemetery Boundary

1880 Census

206 Wild Basin Rd., Ste. 300
Austin, Texas 78746-3343
Phone: (512) 329-8342 FAX: (512) 327-2453

j{

Figure 7
Approved Backhoe Trench and
Gradall Locations,
Allen Parkway Village
Prepared for: Housing Authority of the City of Houston
Job No.: 447212.00
Drown by: A. Pugh
File: N:447212\cod\Fi_gure_7.dgn

I

Scale: 1" ==250' for 8.5"x11" Sheet

Dote: 6/14/02

CHAPTER ID:

Research Design

these spaces was subject to demolition activity, and each
was to be retained as ·a park space. It was recognized that
further survey of these areas could be conducted if
portions of these areas would be impacted by future
phases of site improvement or construction.

s in the project area, a plan for further testing,
ation, and reburial of human remains would be
()ped before archaeological excavation of such
es. Under this plan, further coordination with the
and county officials, as well as descendants of the
sed, if any could be identified, would be
ken before implementing data recovery or
'al procedures. Under the plan, any human burial
· s encountered during the mechanical survey
am would be treated respectfully. And finally,
the plan, any in situ analysis and/or later removal
laboratory analysis would be coordinated with the
l County Coroner's office and the Housing
ority.

Fourth, mechanical trenching was excluded along
existing buried utility corridors, except in special cases
where a particular cultural feature of interest had been
identified through archival research in close proximity to
an old utility excavation trench. Avoidance of the utility
trenches was recommended during the preliminary
survey phase for three reasons: a) to ensure personnel
safety; b) because the excavation of the utility trenches
would have impacted and possibly destroyed the
integrity of any cultural deposits within the trench itself;
and c) because mechanical survey of nearby accessible
areas would adequately assess the potential for impact to
any shallowly buried cultural deposits in these areas. It
was recommended that any additional testing of
particular cultural resource localities along previously
excavated utility corridors be conducted after demolition.
The purpose of additional testing would be to assess
possible impacts to cultural resources as a result of
deeper construction activities (e.g., installation of new
utilities within old utility corridors).

Four portions of the project area were excluded
om the Phase 1-A mechanical excavation program due
one or more of four factors: a) inaccessibility by
echanical excavation equipment; b) exclusion from
act during the. demolition process; c) probable
clusion from subsequent developmental impact; and d)
evious disturbance by mechanical excavation of utility
rridors. The first excluded portion of the project area
as the northwestern parking lot in the former cemetery
ea, where the reinforced concrete construction of the
king lot precluded testing using the mechanical
ethods recommended. Instead, testing of the former
· emetery area was focused within the grass-covered
eas of the adjacent residential courtyards. Further
inspection of the former cemetery area beneath the
parking lot would be conducted later, during demolition
monitoring, when specialized heavy equipment would be
on-site and readily available for removal of the concrete
parking surface.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL MONITORING
During the Phase 1-A archaeological survey effort,
a supplemental program of archaeological monitoring
was also developed to further ensure that approved
demolition and construction activities did not destroy
unidentified cultural features, and to allow for
archaeological examination of subsurface impacts deeper
than the 4- to 5-ft zone established for the Phase 1-A
survey program. Monitoring was initially recommended
for the following locations and situations: a) the first few
sewer-disconnect locations; b) all utility excavations
within the cemetery area; and c) any excavations that
might extend outside of original utility trench corridors.
Monitoring was also recommended beneath building
superstructures and parking lots, and in areas identified
as having potential for existence of intact, shallowly
buried archaeological resources. It was recommended
that appropriate authority and chain-of-command
stipulations be included in the demolition contract
documents to ensure that the archaeological monitoring
team had the authority to temporarily halt the demolition
contractor's activities at the location of possible
archaeological deposits.

The second area excluded from the mechanical
trenching program was the central rehabilitation zone,
where the buildings and site conditions would remain
largely undisturbed by demolition activities. Grounddisturbing activities in this area were expected to be very
limited in area and depth, and could be readily monitored
by archaeological personnel. As more-specific plans
were developed for deeper, construction-related
improvements in this area (buried utility lines, etc.), a
suitable mechanical or other archaeological survey
program could be developed and implemented using
information and knowledge gained from the Phase 1-A
mechanical investigative program.
The third area excluded from the mechanical
trenching program included two of the open park spaces
located along the Allen Parkway access road, in front of
the Community and Administration buildings. Neither of

Observations of the actual building demolition and
clean-up procedures resulted in a recommended change
in the monitoring methodology. The recommended
25

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
change was to cease monitoring of the building
demolition activities and to focus instead on the final
clean-up of the site after the upper layer of demolition
debris had been cleared. The THC approved the
recommended change with the understanding that a
smooth-bladed device would be used for final clean-up,
thus allowing adequate archaeological examination of
the ground surface beneath the demolition debris.

site would be provided based on the apparent integrity of
archaeological features observed in the mechanical
excavation units, but such testing was not included as
part of the Phase 1-B proposal.
As with Phase 1-A, the Phase 1-B survey would be
conducted mechanically to address shallow impacts less
than 4 ft in depth. Deeper impacts, such as those
associated with deep utility trench emplacements, would
be considered under the ongoing archaeological
monitoring program. The 4- to 5-ft-depth limit was
selected, again, as a matter of OSHA regulations
regarding workers in confined spaces. Otherwise, the
size of the mechanical excavations were limited to 100
square ft or less, and 20 cubic yards or less in accordance
with the Housing Authority's specification for this phase
of work.

SURVEY PHASES 1-B AND 1-C
Two subsequent phases of mechanical archaeology
survey were proposed and conducted to follow up on the
results of the Phase 1-A survey and the monitoring
investigations. The need for these additional phases of
archaeological survey was determined through interim
progress meetings and reports presented to the THC,
which determined that previously inaccessible areas
beneath demolished buildings and paved areas should be
more closely examined. The proposed Phase 1-B
archaeological test locations were planned accordingly to
address broad geomorphological issues and specific site
localities that had not been addressed in the prior
investigations. The central "rehabilitation zone" was
excluded from the Phase 1-B survey because plans had
not been completed indicating where utility impacts
would occur between the buildings saved for
rehabilitation. Once those plans were more fully
developed, the final phase of field survey, Phase 1-C,
was planned and conducted to address possible impact
areas within the rehabilitation zone. The following
discussion summarizes the research designs that were
proposed and approved for both Phase 1-B and
Phase 1-C of the archaeology survey program at APV.

Phase 1-C Mechanical Survey
The purpose of this third phase of archaeological
survey at APV was to explore selected utility
construction areas within the rehabilitation zone, a
portion of the project area that had not been examined
under any of the previous archaeological survey
investigations (phases 1-A and 1-B). These locations
were chosen on the basis of historic maps and archival
sources as possibly containing the remains of ca.
1870-1880 houses. The Phase 1-C field investigations
would involve mechanical scraping of shallow trenches
where planned utility construction might impact the
predicted resource localities. The trenches were to be
excavated using a small mechanical backhoe fitted with a
telescoping arm and a smooth-bladed bucket. The
trenches were to be excavated to the maximum depth of
the planned utility construction trench unless a culturally
sterile clay stratum was encountered before reaching
maximum construction depth. In such cases, the test
trench excavation was to be terminated at the level of the
culturally sterile clay.

Phase 1-B Survey
Previous phases of archaeological investigation,
including the ongoing archaeological monitoring and the
Phase 1-A mechanical survey, confirmed the potential
for buried archaeological resources within the APV
project area. However, the degree of archaeological
potential varied across the project area, ranging from low
in areas subjected to extensive landform removal, or
"cutting," to high in areas where low-lying landforms
were filled prior to or during the ca. 1940 APV site
development. With the archaeological potential
confirmed for the fill areas, the primary goal of the
proposed Phase 1-B investigation was to locate and
examine a selected group of previously inaccessible pre1880 occupation localities, typically located within fill
areas that might be impacted during construction.
Recommendations for National Register testing at each

If the trench depth would exceed 4 to 5 ft below
ground surface, the archaeological examination was to be
continued but visual inspection and recordation would be
from the adjacent ground surface for safety and health
reasons. In the event that potentially significant cultural
deposits were observed below the 4- to 5-ft safety zone,
the Housing Authority was to be contacted regarding the
necessity of direct physical examination. In such cases it
might be necessary to expand the excavation laterally to
allow for implementation of proper safety and health
precautions before the archaeological assessment could
be completed.

26

CHAPTER ID:

Research Design

during the testing effort indicated that the condition of
the skeletal remains would probably be fragmentary in
most (approximately 80 percent) of the cases, with
relatively few (approximately 20 percent) containing
better-preserved skeletal remains. However, the testing
effort also indicated that limited but significant
demographic data could be retrieved from many of the
burial features, particularly by emphasizing analysis of
dental remains. To facilitate the recovery of information
that otherwise might be destroyed during excavation and
removal of the dense clay soil, a team of trained human
osteologists would be assigned to oversee the excavation
process and to conduct in situ documentation before
removal of the skeletal remains. More-detailed
osteological analysis would then be conducted by the
osteology team in an on-site laboratory after the remains
from each burial feature were carefully washed and
stored in separate containers. Material culture items (e.g.,
personal effects and/or coffin hardware) were to be
collected, washed, and stored together with their
associated skeletal remains.

e discovery of buried cemetery remains during
ogical monitoring of utility excavation activities
orthwestem corner of the project area prompted
ive archaeological program to identify the
f the cemetery remains. In accordance with the
tic Agreement for the project, the discovery
mpted the development of a treatment plan that
rovide for respectful exhumation, analysis, and
1 of the cemetery remains. Under the treatment
detailed plan for archaeological excavation and
, entitled "Implementation Procedures for the
t of Human Remains Discovered at Allen
Village," was developed by PBS&J and
d by the THC following detailed review and
ent by the ACHP, HUD, and the public.
·ssion was sought and received in federal court to
r all burial remains within the project site following
letion of the exhumation and analysis.

Using the information gained during the test
excavations, the detailed implementation plan was
finalized and used to train a large archaeological field
crew that included approximately 30 archaeologists,
osteologists, and laboratory staff. With more than 400
burial features to be excavated and analyzed, it was
estimated that that number of personnel would be
necessary to complete the work within the time available.
The schedule available for excavation and removal of the
burial features was limited to 45 calendar days.

While the implementation plan was not scoped as a
l data recovery investigation, as directed by the
, the primary goals of the approved plan did
e a) careful hand excavation of all identifiable
s; b) nondestructive osteological documentation
nalysis of the remains to gather basic demographic
(age, sex, ethnicity, and pathology); and
spectful reburial of all excavated remains.
'onally, the plan called for documentation of a
ntative sample of nonhuman remains (e.g.,
casket hardware, personal effects, etc.). All
logical and material culture analysis was to · be
ducted on-site, within a laboratory facility set up very
the cemetery excavation site.

Training of the archaeological field crew included
training in the standard procedures established for
archaeological excavation, documentation, and removal
of each burial feature. Those standards included
preparation of a scaled sketch before removal of the
excavated remains, as well as various notations in each
of several information categories (e.g., excavators'
names, date of excavation, description of materials
observed, zone where the items were observed, coffin
length and width, etc.). Collection of excavated skeletal
remains and material culture items was to be conducted
carefully and the materials placed in clean bags, each
labeled with the burial feature number, date of
excavation, excavator's name, and the zone from which
the material was collected. Figure 8 shows a sample form
used for documentation of each burial feature.

To provide expert consultation and guidance
oughout the process of planning and implementing the
metery removal program, expert advisors were enlisted
m the fields of bioarchaeology and material culture
lysis. To further ensure that the excavation
cedures would be adequate and appropriate for
.'eving the research goals, the recommended
cedures were first tested on a limited number of burial
tures (5 out of more than 400 possible burial features).
ifficulties anticipated and assessed by the testing effort
eluded a) previous construction-related impacts that
d physically damaged many of the burial features to
arying degrees; b) heavy clay soils that would adhere
naciously to the bone material and associated cultural
µtaterial; and c) a very limited schedule for excavation
and removal of more than 400 possible burial features.

One or two senior archaeological personnel were
assigned to direct and supervise the two-person
archaeological excavation crews. As noted above,
osteology specialists were also assigned to assist the
excavation crews in identifying, excavating, and

Excavation of the five representative burial features
27

BURIAL NO.
NOTES:
Grave goods:

Window Shape: (Sketch)
Long bar Length:
Position of Body: (le, arms crossed)

Coffin Box: Vault/Rec/Hex/Unid/None
Coffin Shape: Unid

VVLJ
(Circle One)

(Other)

Length:
Width:

Excavators/Date(s): - - - - - - Start Time: ____________
Finish T i m e : - - - - - - - - - - Start Photo: Roll - - 1 Frame _ __
Exposed Photo:

/ ----

Additional Photo:

/ _ _ __

Distance Nail to Nail:
(real)
Distance Nail to Nail: - - - - - - (drawing)
Zone A=
Zone B =
Zone C =
Zone D =
Zone E =
Zone F =
Zone G =

Head
Right Chest & Arm
Left Chest & Ann
Right Pelvis & Leg
Left Pelvis & Leg
Right Foot
Left Foot

0

north

Scale: 5 cm= ____
In Situ Viewing'(% remaining) - - - - - - - - - (Osteologist Initials and Date)

PBSJ

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 8
SAMPLE
EXCAVATION FORM
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE
l:\projects\he1\clients\hach\cadlfigure8.ai

28

CHAPTER ID:

oving skeletal remains. The overseeing osteologist
uld also make brief notes on the archaeological
cumentation form concerning in situ conditions for
fer reference in the laboratory analysis.

Research Design

would serve as a basis for assessing the efficiency and
effectiveness of the program, and as a basis for
developing modified procedures, if necessary, to keep
the process on schedule. Upon completion of all
osteology and material culture analyses, a formal
technical report was specified to describe the results of
the osteological analyses within the context of the
research goals established for the cemetery excavation
and removal program After THC review and approval,
the osteological report was to be incorporated into the
overall technical report for all archaeological
investigations conducted at the APV project area.

The plan also specified laboratory analysis
ocedures to be followed by the examining osteologist
d the material culture analyst. Again, all osteology
for each burial feature were to be recorded on a
·es of standardized forms developed by the osteology
isors for this project. Photography of distinctive
ological conditions was to be conducted at the
;scretion of the senior osteology advisor. Similarly, the
terial culture analyst was to prepare a detailed
tabase of artifactS associated with each burial feature,
d develop a photographic catalog of distinctive or
iagnostic material culture items.

Finally, the treatment plan also specified that the
Housing Authority would provide for respectful
reinterment of the human remains removed from the
former Third New City Cemetery site. The reinterment
site was specified to be located within another portion of
the APV project area. The reinterment process was to be
marked with an official ceremony and a permanent
commemorative marker or monument.

The treatment plan also required frequent, periodic
reporting of progress made during the excavation,
:removal, and analytical process. Interim progress reports

29

This chapter presents the methods and results of the
echanical survey conducted across the APV project
ea. Archaeological monitoring conducted concurrently
uring the mechanical survey program is reported in
Chapter V and is discussed here only where specifically
elevant. As described in Chapter III, an initial phase of
'storical research was followed by three phases of
mechanical survey. Phase 1-A consisted of the
excavation of selected backhoe trenches in accessible
areas around buildings to be demolished and Gradall
trenches in accessible areas within the location of the
former TNCC in the northwest comer of the project area.
In addition to the inaccessible areas beneath buildings,
four other locations were excluded from the Phase 1-A
testing: 1) the northwestern parking lot in the former
cemetery area, which was covered with reinforced
concrete; 2) the central rehabilitation zone, which would
remain largely undisturbed during demolition; 3) two
open park spaces along the Allen Parkway access road,
both of which were to be retained as parks and would not
be disturbed by demolition; and 4) buried utility
corridors, except where a cultural feature had been
identified in close proximity through archival research.
Phase 1-B occurred after demolition of the buildings and
entailed mechanical excavations in areas that were
previously inaccessible to heavy equipment (i.e., under
buildings and parking lots) and areas that were identified
during the archival research and monitoring programs as
potential locations for the existence of intact pre-1880s
site localities. Phase 1-C was directed toward
investigations in the rehabilitation zone, an area that had
not previously been inspected; these investigations
consisted of mechanical testing of selected areas where
planned utility construction might impact predicted pre1880 cultural resources localities.

Subdivision map (Figure 10) dated July 1875 (surveyed
1866); and the Burton Subdivision map dated 1891
(Figure 11 ). The Burton Subdivision map provides
detailed and accurate representations of several early
dwellings and major drainages present prior to that time.
Haidcastle's plat was also important for its
representation of how the project area was subdivided
just prior to intensive settlement in the Reconstruction
era.
Of particular importance were the Boyles maps of
1939 (figures 12a and 12b). Figure 12a represents in
great detail the array and density of development and
occupation across the project area in the months just
prior to the ca. 1940 demolition and landscape
modification activities. Figure 12b provides detailed
topographic survey data and shows the locations of
several key archaeological targets, cisterns, and privies
scattered across the project area.
Topographic data collected from the 1939 Boyles
map (see Figure 12b) were computerized for comparison
with 1981 APV postconstruction topographic data. The
two topographic data sets were adjusted for land
subsidence that has occurred in the area and merged to
create a three-dimensional cut-and-fill model (see
figures 4 and 5). This model estimates the pattern and
extent of landform modification carried out in
preparation for construction of APV. The only portion of
the project area not covered by the cut-and-fill model
was the former cemetery tract in the northwestern corner
of the APV property. This was the only area not included
in Boyles's 1939 topographic survey.
PHASE 1-A, PREDEMOLITION
MECHANICAL SURVEY

PREFIELD RESEARCH

Research into the initial APV site development and
construction process indicated that all but one of the
historic occupation sites in the project area were
completely destroyed in 1939 during "slum clearance"
activities. In addition, landscape modifications at that
time included cutting and leveling of higher areas to
achieve a degree of uniformity of elevation across the
project area. The extent of the demolition, excavation,
and construction work that occurred during development
of APV in the 1940s suggested there was a low potential
for survival of most if not all near-surface cultural
resources sites. Thus, survey efforts were focused on

Prior to beginning archaeological fieldwork,
historic documents relating to prior occupation and use
of the APV site were collected and examined.
Information on land use was digitized from historic maps
and plats to construct a computerized overlay map that
shows the locations of possible historic structures in
relation to the current buildings and streets at APV.
Historical maps especially helpful included the "Wood
Map" (Figure 9), which shows specific locations of
dwellings and other improvements across the project area
ca. 1869; Garrett S. Hardcastle's "Freedmantown"
31

l

~

]

I

a

' . "- '.
I

;il
...
l, £ ]
··~·7·
'·

5:
<II
6

IC

•

I

I

!

-'I

".

'

I

1

'~I

.r.t

HIOAl1ACUA

~

f'"
l.::.Y·

l:.;o
',
I. :.Et80N

i6'

:a

5:

•/:;;-

I[" ·1 ·1j]T;'
_7,,L_LL

I~

<:.

7

1

-?..;.~

~

01:,Jfil/e,.
.o.:J

I

{•'>

fil:
.o·
c
~

<O

~-

\·

Sp in~
Gar rot..

,
\

Vl

N

PBSJ

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
• Surveying •

Figure 9
1869 "WOOD MAP".
OF FOURTH WARD
Photo courtesy of Houston Metropolitan
Research Center, Houston Public Library

ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

ID
1

·1

,

x 10X
fl

.,:

to:·!

It">

W) :
·~

'!

5

-.i·~t'

~

FELJ1'£

•

PBSJ

.·f,:1;. I:

t

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 10
HARDCASTLE'S 1875
"FREEDMANTOWN"
SUBDIVISION PLAT
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

Source: Harris County Deed Records (Vol. 15, p. 23)
l:\projects\he1\clientslhach\cad\figure10.ai

33

·t

...

30
!.

~~nti·i;~"~: Mr.z.,.cir_ SP.>:F1sst .,_~"1· · .r- P.M.-· ··-TH~

!•·

I

.

l'l<..c.cl"Cl.'-4 ~a,.ck..-':~
.

8

o~"

1v.1s1 o N ..

UR T·O N

.'

I fl/31 t;d. '1 ~.

Sitt.a

·-

1·

4f

llousTON.

4-4 Yr'/\~ D-S <> UIH.

M.
·~

Io.,, r'"" I /Nd,

PR.o·p It lt"tY-·-,'

8<~1y MN1~.ttt..n.d
~4<>NN. <.NUL 'fl.a- of
;i'<tJ.:-1 ..m.:d 8~·'""' 2ii. rht.HPJ•~C<Uth. Pro1>t~!'/
C'luzc...

•

•

Hartf,c.~1t!l<..

I
I •

IJ>.'- •·~I

• ,w.c.woo

-----·----

'

'

i-l_
___ _.......~:-<'.
;

. A•.

.

. .

.r

:'a ·::

.

. i

'. x ...~"'

-·.-~_,.~--,-~~

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 11
1891 BURTON SUBDIVISION PLAT
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE
Source: Harris County Deed Records (Vol. 55, p. 230)
l:\pro)ects\he1\clients\hach\cad\figure11.ai

34

·.':-'

AREA IN PRESEN'T SITE
ARE;A IN EXTENSION
AREA IH EXTENSION
649573.9
MEA IN STREETS •• '51460'SO.FT.
AREA IN ORIGINAL SITE \280346.6
AREAIN',PROPEllTY 618113,9 SQ.FT,
TOTAL AREA
1929920.5
AREA IN SITE
649573,9SQ·FT. •
LESS AREA EA&T CROSBY ST·20llO 0 SQ.FT.
AREA IN ORIGINAL siTE
TOTAL AREA PRESENT SITE 1728820.SS,Q.fT,AREA IN 'flREETS
27437L2 SQ, FT.
M'£A IN f'llOPEllTY
I OOl707.4
SQ, FT.
AREA IN ~,UE\'s
42680 SQ. F7.
fJS?£A 1N 5ifT'E
l280346.~ SQ. FT.

·~·-·-·-~·.... -·~---/1----1

I
I

I

1

CITY

t:IY>' ~lf1."!/~:ffN

(I, HCIVSTMI

_.Al:!.-140

'3.Ho.Jt.//,

IJ,3ooS,.1(.

e~n;.~1,1/.f!?r"
.f#,••O

II

.:r,,ll~

-;.:

[) C'

"'"'''

)

J
4

.,.

"'0x·

,.>z
=>

rn

0

">-

<I ry

o~

•'·•
HOUSTON

....1-i,:,~-:~..1' ,,,rt.

.

"

0

.;.::i

./

,
I

I

I

I

.;:·

I

i
"'
>-

I

"'0

I
I'
I
I·

0

.,

[I]
. '

:r
0

1:

I

>-

(.

I-

I

0

LOT'

'BL K,

:21

LOT

l 0 T

I

(j}

PROJECT TEX·

BL K.

.,.
0

2

LOT

~-

4

PROPERTY LINE MAP
LOW RENT HOUSING
PROJECT
HOUSING AUTHORITY
OF THE
CITY OF HOUSTON
ttOUSTON, HARRIS COUNTY, T=s
OFFICE Of J. S: BOYloS C. E. HOIJf!Otl•
SC.OU: 40' TO I"
DATO 11-27-39

2

~
:r.

~

~

I

BL K.

m

®
H

0

L

L

I

N S

W

~

HOWARD

<D
T

H

.SUBOIVISION

--·--·....Z!!£-·--·
WEST DALLAS

JOHN·

·--r:-;i 0

T

AUSTIN

2

8 L K.

2

2

,.~

IL

l'

C R'A

E A GU

T

©
L 0 T

B, LI<.

2

·-L,-·i..- - - - - : •• - '

viI
. ·•.- •

WEST
.:..~

.• t~- .... .:....

DALLAS
.~.;·,i

J.

~

AVE

-·

~

_, .•.•. ~ . '•..

. -----..----"

:::-.:* •

PBSJ

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 12a
1939 BOYLES PROPERTY MAP
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE
Source: Housing Authority of the City of Houston
l:lprojectslhe1\clientslhach\cad\figure12a.ai

35

. ,;,

,·ue:i <

-.·~

:.· · ·· ·. · -· •··· ""'"(:) •·

' ·> :.·.·"': ::;:;:~:.~~ ~.::,:~~:::~;~~~i;i;;J~~~~~~~;~
·.·.

rce: Housing Authority of the City of Houston
lects\he1\clients\hach\cad\figure12b.ai

CHAPTER IV:

Survey Results

sheeting as necessary to minimize airborne dust, and
lining the excavated trench with plastic sheeting prior to
backfilling.

re deeply buried features, such as cisterns, wells, and
·vy pits in the estimated fill areas, as well as refuse
osits that might be found in the locations of prior
· es and gullies that had been filled in prior to the
40s APV construction. The primary goals of
ase 1-A were to locate and preliminarily evaluate
toric resources that might be impacted by demolition
tivities, and to determine whether burials remained in
e abandoned cemetery in the northwestern comer of
property.

A backhoe was used to excavate trenches outside
the boundaries of the former cemetery. These trenches
were systematically placed across the project area in
locations selected for machine accessibility and to
investigate areas identified as potentially significant
during the historical background research conducted
prior to initiation of fieldwork. As for the Gradall
trenches, all backhoe trenches were excavated to a
maximum depth of 5 ft and were backfilled following
inspection and recording. Trenches were typically
excavated to approximately 20 ft in length. One Gradall
trench in the cemetery area was extended more than 40 ft
in length to test for any changes in conditions across the
eastern boundary of the cemetery.

Backhoe trenching was employed to test most
cessible areas of APV, although larger Gradall
enches were used in the northwestern comer of the
operty to better examine the prior cemetery location
igure 13). In areas where the landscape had been cut
d leveled, it was thought that the potential for intact
sources would be small; therefore, those areas with fill
verlying possible intact cultural deposits were
onsidered high priority for mechanical survey. Because
e zone of subsurface impact during the planned
emolition was estimated to be approximately 2 ft or
ess, it was felt that archaeological deposits located at or
eneath 4 ft of fill would be safe from demolition
acts. For this reason and because of OSHA safety
idelines, it was determined that 5 ft would be the
ximum depth for the mechanical trench excavations.
r. Glen S. Greene, a geomorphologist with extensive
xperience in Gulf Coast states, directed and examined
11 exposures, describing the soils and sedimentary
'story of the materials and drawing profiles. Dr. Roger
Moore, an archaeologist with experience in Houston's
urban archaeology, also examined each trench and
assisted Dr. Greene in the identification of historic
remains. Dr. Greene was supported in the field
documentation by an archaeological crew chief and two
archaeological technicians. Fifteen days were allotted for
the Phase 1-A fieldwork; 1 day was lost to rain.

Dr. Greene's assessment report (Greene 1996)
notes that in areas such as Houston where there is high
precipitation, high soil heat index, and high microbial
action, soil horizon boundaries are often so difficult to
discern that even the boundaries between cutting and
filling episodes of 55 years ago are difficult or
impossible to see. Most frequently these boundaries were
identified by texture rather than vision. Principally, this
boundary blurring is caused by the process of eluviationilluviation (the transfer, mostly of clays, downward
through the profile).
Formal descriptions, applying the standard format
of the Soil Conservation Service, were developed for
almost all of the Gradall cuts and backhoe trenches.
However, due to redundancy among the exposures and
the lack of identifiable cultural deposits, less-formal
and/or partial descriptions were made for some of the
exposures. The descriptions of each exposure are
presented in detail in Appendix B. Selected profile
drawings are provided for reference.

Because it was felt that any graves would probably
be oriented east-west, in the manner traditional to the
American South, the Gradall trenches were oriented
north-south whenever possible to increase the likelihood
of encountering graves. These trenches were excavated
with a 4-ft-wide bucket to a maximum depth of 4.5 to 5
ft. After each trench was examined and recorded, it was
backfilled. Safety precautions were established and observed to minimize personnel exposure to possible soil
toxins and to prevent the spread of possibly contaminated soil. These precautions included monitoring the air
for airborne toxins in the dust, covering the ground with
plastic sheeting prior to placing excavated soil on the
ground, covering any exposed soil piles with plastic

Gradall Trenches in Cemetery Area

Investigations during the first week of survey
concentrated on accessible portions of the known
cemetery area in the northwestern comer of the APV
property. Eight Gradall trenches were excavated to locate
any burials that might remain after construction activities
in the early 1940s. These trenches, however, produced no
evidence of burials remaining on the site. The lack of
evidence for burials was not surprising because
construction records had noted the removal of more than
900 burials in the 1940s. The soils appeared to be
39

..i::..

0

206 Wild Basin Rd., Ste. 300
Austin, Texas 78746-3343
Phone: (512) 329-8342 FAX: (512) 327-2453

0

500 Ft
0

100m

D

Figure 13
CUT AREA

FILL AREA

1

Approximate Backhoe Trench Location

Al

Approximate Gradal I Locations

Phase 1 -A Backhoe Trench and
Gradall Locations
Allen Parkway Village
Prepared for: Housing Authority of the City of Houston
Job No.: 447212.00

Drown by: A. Pugh

I Scale:

1"=250' for 8.5"x11" Sheet

Dote: 6/14/02

File: N:447212\cod\tot0Lstotion\Fi9ure_ 13.dgn

CHAPTER IV:

Survey Results

Backhoe Trenches

truncated natural soils suggesting that this area was
probably a high point that was cut down to reduce the
elevation during the preconstruction landscape
modifications for APV. Further archival research carried
out during the fieldwork appeared to corroborate this
conclusion. While the cut-and-fill model, based on a
1939 topographic survey compared with a 1981
topographic survey (see Figure 4), does not extend into
the cemetery due to a lack of 1939 topographical data in
that area, construction records from APV further
indicated that a subcontractor removed 40,000 cubic
yards (yd3) of soil from the high ground at the
northwestern corner of the property to redeposit behind
the administration building near the north-center of the
property. If limited to the cemetery area, 40,000 yd3 of
soil would have covered the cemetery to a depth of
nearly 5 ft. By city ordinance, burial depth was 3.5 ft
from 1840-1905 and 5 ft after 1905, by which time this
cemetery was not generally in use.

West Side
Thirteen backhoe trenches were excavated outside
the cemetery area in the western portion of the property
during the second week of fieldwork (see Figure 13). In
the southwest corner of the property, less soil appeared
to have been removed than in the cemetery area,
although for the most part the original 1940s ground
surface (A horizon) was gone, creating a truncated
profile with no A or B horizons. A layer of fill had been
placed over this truncated profile for landscaping
purposes at the time of APV's construction. This fill
contained machine-made bricks and miscellaneous post1880s artifacts, including fragments of the distinctive
brick types used in construction of APV. Indications of
old street surfaces were found in backhoe trenches 13
and 25, but no other features such as privies, building
foundations, or cisterns were seen.

The most noteworthy discovery in the cemetery test
trenching effort occurred in Gradall Cut I (see
Figure 13), where a soils change occurred at the
suspected location of the eastern cemetery boundary. The
soils lost the high chroma common to Vamont Series
soils, and the lighter matrix was comparable to the
pedological characteristics of the Atasco Series. The only
cultural feature found in the cemetery area was observed
in this exposure. This feature consisted of a pit identified
by lighter-colored soil than the surrounding matrix. The
pit was bowl shaped, approximately 1 m across at the
top, and extended approximately 1.5 m below the surface
(Figure 14). This pit contained miscellaneous scattered
artifacts distributed throughout, including iron straps, fire
brick fragments, ceramics, and glass objects. Three
objects are easily diagnostic: a complete stoneware jug
and fragments of a second jug, found near the bottom of
the pit; a complete medicine bottle; and the neck of a
larger bottle. The complete stoneware jug bears no marks
but is typical of 1-gallon shouldered jugs from the late
1800s/early 1900s. The partial jug was identified by
marks as from the Buckeye Pottery, Macomb, Illinois.
The Buckeye Pottery was in service between 1882 and
1941 (Lehner 1988:63). The medicine bottle and the
bottle fragment are also typical of the 1880-1900 period.
The bottle fragment, in particular, is easily dated by the
visible mold lines on the neck in association with an
applied lip. The pit feature does not appear to be a privy
as it is very irregular, nor is it strictly a trash pit as
relatively few artifacts were found. It may simply be an
available hole from the fall of a dead tree that was used
for trash disposal. The items recovered from this pit
predate APV development, but postdate the pre-1880
period of archaeological interest defined for nonburial
sites or features.

In the far southwest corner, outside of the area of
the cut-and-fill model, the remnants of Timpson Street
were visible in the profile of Backhoe Trench 13
(Figure 15). The historic map data for this feature were
highly accurate, and the entire width of the street was
found. No asphalt was present, and the street appeared as
a dense colluvium containing tar and brick fragments.
The street was buried 30-35 cm below the current
ground surface. Timpson Street (previously 4th Street) is
part of the street grid recorded within the Hardcastle plat.
Although the plat was not officially recorded until 1875,
lots were sold along these streets as early as 1867.
Timpson Street may predate this grid, however,
appearing as an access road to the City Hospital of 1859
and possibly the Croft's Mill of 1839, both of which
were near the south bank of Buffalo Bayou (J.K.
Wagner, personal communication 1996). Other streets in
this grid were probably constructed much later. Historic
research has not identified any specific uses of this
property prior to 1880 or any structures built along the
street. Records indicate that the early property owner was
a slave owner; however, he owned several pieces of
property around Houston, and there is no indication that
slaves were maintained on this property. An 1869 map,
the 1870 census, and the 1880 census show no structures
in this area.
Again the historical map data were important at
Backhoe Trench 25 where the jumbled remains of Nash
Street lay to the west and the domiciliary midden
remains from a historic house lay to the east. The
physical appearance of this street was the same as that of
Timpson Street in Backhoe Trench 13. Trench 25 was
placed to investigate the soil geomorphology and the
41

24

22

20

16

18

VAMONT SERIES
CHARACTERISTICS

14

TRANSITION
I
I• APPROX.
CEMETERY
BOUNDARY
•

.66m
below datum

TRENCH FLOOR

4

6

8

10

12

mete rt?

2

-- ~------~
r PIPE - - -M- - - - -~-~- - - - - - - - - - ' . l- SLAB -j::: l .~ eSLAB
7 REFUSE PIT
o
a:~
-A-c--1:\ . o LS ~
--.......
-··.
...,
1

0

/ ' -------c- . . . .r:;··············

:-....

CJ v : '

'-:::-,...;:;,.._c._....,.,.,,~-..... '-_...

.66 m
below
datum

' -------

TRENCH FLOOR

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 14

0

2

I

4 meter

GRADALL CUT I,
NORTH WALL PROFILE

I

ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE
l:lprojects\he1\clients\hach\447212\cad\figure14.ai

42

.g:
2.
~

S=
6"'

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

I

I

I

I

I

I

1

......- meters

;:~

~

~
gc

Aa - - - - - - - - - ·-----------....;.._--------------=.-==.---=...-=...--:=..-:;:;:=::-__
..
....
....
..
-:--: .. _.....,._ .. ·· . ·.•.,.. ;)
,,~v}
~::.:-::;;..·.~.:.:::::~··TIMPSON.STREET ROAD METAt:.7.FLOAT:.·::::;••·.-?.=:·.:.:::·:: ;;··:;
AC
\.'\~.
'-·.:...:.:.-:.·-=..:.:~·-· .....:-:....t..-a:- ......."'7-._._.. ~. ...a..t....l~~---:.....:.:.::...:....:.:.:::.:...·:· .··:·:·.•·.::-•. :;..
.-:-;--.-------.._-~ ~-

I)

i'/

M

~~

I

-

-=..·.:..:::.:.- .....

-----J..°l1A. SS !:A'/.-------"'---------------------

!.
Ul

ff \ __'<,~~~../--

~.

94.55mamsl~-- c,t

- -·- --

------~----------.
>..--':

~ TRENCH. .............._
-·
~~~
t-LUUM

:WA@?

"'

~

<.:.
.i:::..

VJ

fAc.KEl:>

'\~l:.~11~f

"'•o··~·

~

--._

°' _.._~

...!'• o::~
•;.,91>
~ 'Of"l..lJltr
•

(:;f5v7 r\-.-,X,Ac

C.i

~L1c..J!.1bes

--y: -

CJU:tl

-:m::,, AL

C.i

..SL1cl<~~ ll:>E.S

~
~

A 5'.iALi

_..,,fl

~=-~·.:.;.~;l;;i':i

~H~µ. ;~-r~o~·
Hl>AT

• ,

•

"

..

.ACS<_<(l~W
c: i St.tc.l<~1J;Y£6

·

(:J

A. "
~:~
,I

'

J.

·~

f lo-l DA r

l

'

I

- - - - l!'Ol
• ~ • ~- •"' • .c. f!?
eZ1.

O
O .. "'Oe>.P·.,:

0( ~\/;£-/{~
C,. 1.

SS = Slickensides Zone,
a Udert characteristic

S'Ltc.k'&~:5l't>E5

O

1 meter

I

I

PBSJ

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 15

BACKHOE TRENCH 13,
NORTH WALL PROFILE
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
Two featui:es were located in the fill zones. Several
possible brick building piers were observed at the lowest
level of Backhoe Trench 6 in deep fill (Figure 16). This
trench, as all others, was excavated to the maximum
allowable depth of 5 ft. Possible piers of machine-made
bricks and mortar were recorded, in conjunction with a
1.5-inch-diameter pipe that appeared to rest on the top of
two piers. No wooden structural remains were visible,
although charcoal between the piers may indicate the
structure was burned. Historic research for this section of
APV shows this locality to be on the west side of Crosby
Street, probably 806 Crosby on the 1927 Sanborn map
and the 1939 Boyles map.

possible evidence of a structure indicated on the 1870
census. The presence of an unrecorded gas line at this
location, however, forced the geomorphologist to shift
the trench slightly north and west into Nash Street.
Although vertically displaced cultural debris was
recovered, no evidence of the 1870s structure was
observed.
The results of the testing done in the cemetery and
the west side of APV were reported to the THC and
approval was given for demolition to proceed across the
western part of the project area. The appoval was
contingent upon follow-up monitoring and additional
testing of areas beneath demolished buildings and
parking lots (THC 1996a).

Two possible structures are recorded in the area,
one from the 1870 census and another in existence in
1939 when the neighborhood was demolished to
construct APV. Photographs of the buildings standing in
1939 were assembled from APV records (see Appendix
A). The building at 806 Crosby is a two-story frame
structure typical of the type built around the turn of the
twentieth century (Figure 17). The only artifacts
recovered in the vicinity of the piers are consistent with a
post-1880 date. Because these piers are buried at a depth
of approximately 4.5 ft, they will not be impacted by
APV construction.

East Side
Fourteen backhoe trenches were excavated in the
east side of the property; these were directed toward
locating possible historic occupation sites and buried
gullies that might contain trash deposits, as well as
exploring the geomorphology of the area. As indicated in
the cut-and-fill model, the soils in the northeast corner of
the property had been removed down to dense clay with
no indications of a historic occupation indicated on pre1880 maps. Other portions of the eastern side of the APV
property, as expected, proved to be fill over the original,
pre-APV topography. For example, the soils in Backhoe
Trench 12 are not comparable to a known series (see
Appendix B), and it seems likely that the material is an
imported fill. Examination of backhoe trenches revealed
areas of gradual transition from cut to fill zones.

The second feature in the fill zone is a cistern
encountered in Backhoe Trench 27 (Figure 18). This
cistern is shown on the 1939 Boyles map of the area
made as part of the preconstruction topographic survey
for APV. Thus, the cistern obviously had surface
visibility at the time of the topographic survey. This
surface visibility probably consisted of the shoulders and
narrow neck of a typical bottle-shaped cistern, a very
common form in this area. The shoulders and neck of the
bottle would typically have extended several ft above the
ground surface (Moore 1996). At the time of exposure,
however, the top of the preserved portion of the cistern
was approximately 1 ft below the current ground surface.
The absence of the neck and shoulders along with the
rough, unfinished character of the top course of
preserved bricks indicates that the cistern was partially
demolished, probably during APV construction.

Backhoe trenches 5, 9, 10, and 11 revealed trash
deposits in buried gullies, precisely where the historic
map data had predicted. It is known that gullies and
ravines were used as neighborhood dumps until the
Houston City Council passed a law against this practice
in the 1890s. Following implementation of this
ordinance, the ravines were filled or capped. Prior to this
time, rapid drainage during precipitation produced
convoluted deposits of multienergy alluviation. These
deposits are complicated by the addition of historic
refuse. Although Backhoe Trench 8 lies south of the
ravine exposed in backhoe trenches 10 and 11, some of
these complex deposits were evident there as well. In
addition, Backhoe Trench 9 lay not only in a mix of
ravine deposits but also at the intersection of Arthur and
Hardcastle Streets. The result is a morass of jumbled
historic materials, all from the post-1880 period. These
artifacts include bricks made by Coffeyville Vitrified
Brick and Tile dating approximately 1905 (Steinbomer
1982) and ceramic and glass fragments.

On the 1939 map, the cistern bears the label "old
cistern." It correlates to lot 12, Block A of the
Burton/Crosby tract, later within the "Reservation"
district boundary (J.K. Wagner & Company 1994).
Whether "old" means "no longer in use" or simply "of
old construction but still in use" is unclear, particularly
as other cisterns on the map are labeled "abandoned
cistern." Although some residents dug wells, this and
other cisterns may still have been in use until water was
piped in by the city in the early 1900s (J.K. Wagner,
44

~

12:

or
::>

;;
{?l

~

~

~

~

"'~
c

e."'

------------------------------.
------------------=-----~----------------------~-"""'·--"'~=""··-=··-···"""'··
- ~----------~~4-•-···~·~ ,.. - / ,',<~(1:7.·;i:. :.;_, :,<J.-1~
. ~·:- .~-.L.-C:r-J- --~-------~--Aa1

,_

2

--------- - - - -

----

-

Aa3

11

I

I

+>VI

12

13

14

I

__

- - - - - - -.----______ : : : : : - - - - - - - - -------------....,._

r

.,.,,.---

~~

15

16

17

I

I

I

18
I

19
I

Aa1

~
.
- - - -- Aa2
-- - - - -- - - - ------------=---=-----~-p IPE
---BRIC
----------

- - - - / .- - - - BRICK
- - -PIER
- - -._
i:::::::r 0
l--T1-i \
./\
•
./"\ 0
/
\/'

0

~

..
'

TRENCH FLOOR

10

----------------:_---=-~--=-~
---

~

o
NORTH & SOUTH

b::I

D

y

WALL

-~
o_1j_o
__
fJ
_____
_
.-----~7. ~~
~
K PIER

0

0

·

Ca

PBS/

Aa3

----_

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
·Surveying

Figure 16
0

1

2m~ITT

.

BACKHOE TRENCH 6,
NORTH WALL PROFILE
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

20
I

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

FIGURE 17.

FIGURE 18.

806 Crosby Street (ca. 1939)

Backhoe Trench 27, Outer Wall of Cistern

46

CHAPTER IV: Survey Results

ersonal communication 1996). If that were the case, any

the cistern would have been available for the casual
discard of trash. If this were the case, the locus of any
artifacts intentionally discarded into the ci~tern would
most likely be at the base of the cistern, a base that is
probably 8 to 10 ft below its current apex. The date of
abandonment can only be determined through excavation
of the cistern's interior; however, since the depth of
disturbance associated with the APV demolition is
limited to 4 ft below the current surface and only brick
rubble from the cistern itself and from APV construction
materi;ils was found in the 4 ft of cistern fill examined, it
is highly unlikely that demolition would impact any
deposits that might be present. It was recommended that
the cistern be protected during demolition of Building
113, which partially covers the cistern.

fill in the cistern would postdate the arrival of city water.
The cistern is made of low-fired, hand-made bricks
and is lined with a thin coat of plaster. Approximately
one-third of the cistern is probably missing, as it extends
under an existing building for which foundation
excavations would have impacted the cistern. Limited
investigations inside the cistern to a depth of
approximately 4 ft revealed only brick rubble from both
the neck of the cistern and from APV construction
material.
The results of the Phase 1-A survey efforts across
the eastern side of APV were reported to the THC. The
THC (1996b) acknowledged its concurrence with the
findings as reported. Clearance for demolition was given,
again contingent upon follow-up monitoring and
additional testing in previously inaccessible areas.

Backhoe Trench 9, which had revealed trash
deposits in a buried gully, was excavated to a depth of
5 ft, the maximum allowed, but did not reach the bottom
of cultural fill. Although only post-1880 artifacts were
located within the 5 ft excavated, older deposits may
exist below that level. These potential deposits fall well
below the area of demolition and construction impact.

Summary of Phase 1-A
Surface disturbance was extensive although
variable across the project area, as predicted by the cutand-fill model. Soils had been subjected to
argilliturbation as well as cutting and filling from both
natural and human activities. Eluviation-illuviation
blurred both natural and historic matrix boundaries.
Numerous soil profiles were truncated, with disturbed
fills generally overlying natural clay soils. Intact or
partially intact pre-APV surfaces were, however, found
in other trenches that exposed a limited number of
features, including old road surfaces and architectural
elements including foundation piers and a brick cistern.
None of the features or deposits exposed was considered
to have significant research potential, and only one of the
features, the cistern, correlated to a pre-1880 occupation
area. The foundation piers were all composed of highfired, factory-made bricks and are thus unlikely to date to
the target period. No artifacts were observed within any
of the intact deposits that could be diagnostically
ascribed to the pre-1880 period of archaeological
significance.

Gradall excavations in the northwest corner of the
property had revealed no evidence of any graves
remaining in the cemetery. Potentially significant
cultural resources that were identified during subsequent
monitoring are discussed fully in Chapter V. The entire
APV area, with the exception of the central rehabilitation
zone, was thus recommended for and received clearance
for demolition work to proceed, with the requirement
that monitoring continue during the demolition period
(see Chapter V).
Although the artifacts noted on the surface and in
excavations throughout the project area all appeared to
be post-1880, and thus did not date to the target period of
significance, a small collection of artifacts (Table 4;
Figure 19) was made for further analysis and to assist the
Housing Authority in developing an interpretive exhibit
documenting the history of APV.
PHASE 1-B, POSTDEMOLITION
MECHANICAL SURVEY

While it is possible that the cistern was constructed
prior to 1880, the cistern itself was not considered to be
archaeologically significant. National Register significance of the cistern would derive instead from artifacts
discarded into it after its abandonment. It is reasonable to
expect that the cistern would not have been abandoned
until an alternative source of water was available. Given
that piped city water is a tum-of-the-century development, it is unlikely that pre-1880 artifacts would have
been discarded in the cistern. However, if the structure
associated with the cistern was abandoned prior to 1880,

Previous phases of archaeological investigation,
including the preliminary Phase 1-A mechanical survey
and the ongoing archaeological monitoring, indicated
that the potential for buried archaeological resources
varied across the project area, ranging from very low in
areas subjected to extensive landform removal, or
cutting, to high in areas where low-lying landforms were
filled prior to or during the ca. 1940 APV site
development. The Phase I-A investigations had shown

47

TABLE 4. Artifacts Collected During Phase 1-A Mechanical Survey
Provenience

No.

Description

Gradall Cut D

1
1
1
5
2
1
1
1
1
1
1

bottleneck, machine-made emerald green glass
soda bottle base
perfume bottle, body and base
marbles
plain whiteware sherds
green-glazed whiteware sherd
whiteware sherd with maker's mark, ca. 1930s
decal-printed whiteware sherd
whiteware sherd with black geometric design
ceramic cylinder stamped with "Thomas"
brick

Gradall Cut E

1

marble

Gradall Cut I

1
2
1
1
1
1
4
1
1
1
1
1

bottleneck, amber glass
bottle base fragments, light green glass
bottle fragment, emerald green glass
bottle base fragment, amber glass
milk glass handle
patent medicine bottle, complete
ceramic sherds, porcelain
ceramic sherd
ceramic sherd, terra cotta earthenware
stoneware jug in multiple pieces
button
hoe blade and associated metal fragments

Backhoe Trench 2

1
1
1
1

plain porcelain sherd
stoneware sherd
bottle glass fragment, cobalt
bottle glass fragment, clear and embossed

1
1

cut nail
wire nails
metal band fragment

Backhoe Trench 6

1
1
1
1

cologne bottle, complete, machine-made
plain whiteware sherd
embossed whiteware sherd
light green tint flat glass

Backhoe Trench 8

1
1
1

cosmetic container, half
blue-glazed stoneware sherd
clear glass bottleneck
clear stemmed glass base fragment
clear embossed glass container fragment
plain whiteware sherd
ceramic cylinder
spoon
wire nail

Backhoe Trench 4

4

1
1
1
1
1

1

447212/020018

48

TABLE 4. Artifacts Collected During Phase 1-A Mechanical Survey (concluded)

Provenience

No.

Description

Backhoe Trench 10

2

bricks, ca. 1905

Backhoe Trench 11

2
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
5

plain whiteware sherds
gray-slipped stoneware sherd
2-holed shell button
wire nails
pharmaceutical bottle, panel fragment
aqua glass bottle fragment
olive-green glass bottle fragment
clear glass bottle fragment
yellow glass bottle fragment
light green tint flat glass

Backhoe Trench 17

1

unidentifiable coin (rusted)

Backhoe Trench 19

1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1

decal-printed whiteware sherd
plain whiteware sherd
porcelain sherd with blue decoration
ceramic sherd
inilk glass container fragment
clear glass container fragment
brick fragment
nails (1 unspecified and 1 wire)
unidentified metal object

Backhoe Trench 20

1
2

plain whiteware sherd
wire nails

Backhoe Trench 22

1

soda bottle, complete

Backhoe Trench 25

1
1
1
1
1
1

amber glass bottle base fragment
stoneware sherd
plain porcelain sherd
annular whiteware sherd
whiteware sherd with polychrome floral decoration
plain whiteware sherd

Miscellaneous

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

patent medicine bottle, complete
bottleneck, machine-made
wine/champagne bottle, base
1943 dime
liquor bottle, complete
cartridge, .32 Smith & Wesson long
stoneware jug, complete
brick

1

447212/020018

49

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
that the filled areas ranged in depth from
less than 2 ft in some portions of the
project area to very deep (greater than
20 ft) in other areas, such as the major
drainage channels that once cut across
the project area. Notably, one predicted
cistern and several other predicted
occupation areas were identified below
the zone of demolition disturbance in
deep fill areas east of the central
rehabilitation zone.
Following SHPO concurrence with
the results and recommendations for the
Phase 1-A mechanical survey (Texas
Historical Commission 1996a), archaeological monitoring of demolitionrelated grading activities identified 24
possible archaeological features. These
features were marked for avoidance to
allow an assessment of the age and
nature of each. All but one of these was
determined to be post-nineteenth century and they were
cleared for continued demolition activities. Descriptions
and assessment of these features (cultural loci) are provided in Chapter V. The one possible pre-1870 archaeological feature consisted of artifacts exposed by heavy
rains in the backdirt of a sewer-disconnect trench on the
north side of Building 149. Artifacts included a clay
tobacco pipe (kaolin), glazed earthenware sherds, and
bottle fragments. Since these artifacts had the potential to
date to the pre-1880 period of significance, this feature
was targeted for more-intensive investigation during
Phase 1-B, per Texas Historical Commission (Texas
Historical Commission 1996a).

FIGURE

19: Representative Artifact Collection

a 4-ft-wide smooth-bladed bucket. The targeted locations
were scraped to a depth of approximately 4 ft. This depth
was selected to conform with OSHA regulations
regarding workers in confined spaces. The size of the
mechanical excavations was limited to 100 ft 2 or less and
20 yd3 or less. All excavations were backfilled after recording and documentation.
In a further search for any graves that might remain
in the project area, four trenches were placed within the
footprints of apartment buildings that were demolished
within the boundaries of the abandoned cemetery in the
northwest corner of APV (see Figure 20). These were
plotted on the field map as cemetery targets 1--4. The
surveyors had staked these areas on the ground and had
mislabeled targets 3 and 4-Target 3 was labeled as
Target 4 and vice versa. The old building piers were
marked with flagging. The buildings had been oriented
east-west, as presumably were the graves. In light of this,
the backhoe trenches were excavated in a north-south
direction in an attempt to work between the building
piers and crosscut any remaining graves. The trenches
were to be 4 ft wide (the width of the machine bucket)
and 25 ft long, resulting in 100 ft 2 of 4-ft-deep trench.
Survey stakes marked the remaining six survey targets.

In addition, the historical research had identified
certain predicted cultural resource localities beneath
standing structures and thus were not accessible during
the previous mechanical investigations conducted during
Phase 1-A. As a result of the demolition and cleanup of
the APV apartment buildings, such areas were now
available for investigation. Site localities predicted in the
rehabilitation zone were excluded from this phase of
investigation. In accordance with the SHPO-approved
research design for the Phase I-B survey, 10 areas were
targeted for investigation (Figure 20). Recommendations
for National Register testing would be made, if
necessary, but any such testing was not included as part
of Phase 1-B.

All four cemetery target trenches, trenches 1--4,
were performed by the backhoe carefully scraping
approximately 4 to 6 inches deep at a time for a linear
distance of 12 ft. When the required 4-ft depth was
reached, the machine was moved back and the second
half of the 25-ft trench was excavated. Each scrape was
monitored and the floor, walls, and backdirt were

Methods
The Phase 1-B mechanical survey trenches were
dug with a backhoe equipped with a telescoping arm and
50

n

e

PARKWAY

VI

"""""

r:

c

:J c:=:J

,

1869 Wood Map

~

1880 Census

Predicted Pre-1880 Localities

0

500 Ft
0

100m

1870 Census

-

Estimated Cemetery Boundary

-

Approximate Phase 1-B Trench Location

:--i

206 Wild Basin Rd., Ste. 300
Austin, Texas 78746-3343
Phone: (512) 329-8342 FAX: (512) 327-2453

.)(

Figure 20
Phase 1-B Survey
Allen Parkway Village
Prepared for: Housing Authority of the City of Houston
Drawn by: A. Pugh

Date: 6/14/02
File: N:447212\cad\totaLstatian\Figure_20a.dgn

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
No indication of graves or human remains was
observed in any of these trenches. Thus, as during Phase
1-A, it was assupied that all graves had been removed in
the 1940s.

examined for artifacts and/or features. The west wall of
each trench was profiled, and color photographs were
taken. A surveyor's rod marked in 1-ft ncrements was
placed in each for a vertical scale, and each photograph
was documented on a photographic record form.
Photographs were also taken of the trenches after
backfilling. At all times when the trenches were not
actually being worked on with personnel present, they
were surrounded by high backdirt on one side and
marked by orange plastic fencing on all other sides to
prevent accidents. The remaining trenches outside the
cemetery area were treated in the same way except that
the target was excavated and in two cases different walls
were profiled. Ed Baxter served as the archaeological
consultant directing the Phase 1-B fieldwork, and all
trenches were also inspected and evaluated by Dr. Roger
Moore.

Trench 5
Trench 5 was excavated at the location of Survey
Target Building 25. This occupation site is shown on the
ca. 1869 Wood map as located in Block 12, Lot 6 (north
half) of Hardcastle's "Freedmantown" Subdivision. It
correlates to 1870 Census House No. 417, which was
owner-occupied by Monday Maxey (Sewell), a 37-yearold black laborer from South Carolina.
Trench 5 was oriented southeast-northwest due to
the presence of a fence protecting a tree root at the edge
of the target (Figure 22, Profile A). The northwest wall
was profiled and photographed. A suspected human first
metatarsal was found in the very top mixed rubble layer
next to plastic and broken beer bottle glass. No other
bones were present with the exception of cow bones with
sawn ends that were found at the other end of the trench
in the same rubble layer. The second layer consisted of a
dark brown clay mixed with caliche; the bottom of this
layer created a wavelike pattern that may have been the
result of the APV construction dragline cutting into the
third layer, which is a sterile orange clay with caliche.
Layer 2 would then ha.ve been redeposited over the
dragline marks. There was no indication of an early
building. The suspected human metatarsal was collected.
It was sent to Gary Rutenberg for analysis but was
determined to be nonhuman (Rutenberg 1996).

Results

Survey Targets 1-4, Cemetery Area
Trench 1 was located south and east of Survey
Target 3 on the map location but was indicated as Target
4 on the survey stake. Its northwest comer was 10 ft east
of PT604 Building 163 and its southwest comer was
10 ft east of PT607 Building 163. Its profile indicated a
top layer of dark brown clay mixed with APV rubble.
The next and last layer exposed was a sterile orange clay
(Figure 21, Profile A).
Trench 2 was listed as Survey Target 4 on the map
and Target 3 on the survey lath. Its northwest comer was
located 10 ft east of PTl 011 Building 173 and its
southwest comer was 11 ft east of PT579 Building 173.
The profile indicated three layers, a dark brown clay with
mixed rubble over a gray clay over a mottled orange
clay. There was a 4-ft-square concrete pier pad in the
bottom center of the trench (Figure 21, Profile B).

Trench 6
Trench 6 was excavated over Survey Target 8, a ca.
1869 cistern (Cistern 3) that is shown on the 1939 Boyles
Map as an "old cistern" and correlates to Block A, Lot
13 in the Burton/Crosby Tract, later located within the
"Reservation" district boundary (Figure 22, Profile B).
The trench was oriented in a north-south direction, with
the survey target in the center of the trench. The profile
showed a thin layer of dark clay and mixed rubble over a
sterile orange/yellow mottled clay. No indications of a
cistern were observed.

Trench 3 was located east and south of Survey
Target 2. Its northwest comer was 8 ft east of PT557
Building 161 and its southwest comer was 8 ft east of
PT556 Building 161. Its top layer consisted of a dark
brown clay mixed with APV-era rubble, and the second
layer was an undisturbed mottled orange clay (Figure 21,
Profile C).

Realizing that the cistern might not necessarily be
under the target and that it would probably be close to
the surface, a shallow scrape was made in the area east of
Trench 6. Cistern 3 was found there. It is a large (9 ft in
diameter) brick cistern that had been disturbed on its
north and south sides by APV concrete piers. A
horizontal drawing of Cistern 3 (Figure 22, Plan View of
Cistern) was made and the cistern was photographed. A
single backhoe bucket scoop was removed from the

Trench 4 was located east and south of Survey
Target 1. Its northwest comer was 10 ft east of PT543
Building 171 and its southwest comer was 10 ft east of
PT995 Building 171. The profile showed a shallow
disturbed top zone of APV rubble and dark brown clay, a
deeper disturbed mottled brown clay mixed with caliche,
and an undisturbed mottled orange clay. A 4-inch sewer
pipe was noted in layer 2 (Figure 21, Profile D).
52

PROFILE A (TRENCH 1)
WEST WALL
mixed rubble dark brown clay

orange clay (sterile)

PROFILE B (TRENCH 2)
WEST WALL
mixed rubble dark brown clay

~

i-..

gray clay

-

concrete
pier
mottled orange clay

PROFILE C (TRENCH 3)
WEST WALL

mottled orange clay (sterile)

PROFILE D (TRENCH 4)
WEST WALL
disturbed brown
mottled clay and caliche
mottled orange clay
(sterile)

0
4" sewer pipe

@

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
·Surveying

Figure 21

north
0

disturbed top zone

4feet

PHASE 1-8 TRENCH PROFILES,
TRENCHES 1-4
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

1:\projects\he1 \clients\hach\447212\cad\figure21.al

53

mixed glass, plastic,
beer bottles, metal, bone

PROFILE A (TRENCH 5) .
SOUTHWEST WALL
dark brown clay with caliche, wavy pattern, could be
the result of a drag line

PROFILE B (TRENCH 6)
WEST WALL
dark clay mixed rubble

-

orange/yellow mottled clay (sterile)

PLAN VIEW OF CISTERN 3
cistern brick and mortar

oooocoto ploc ~

disturbed

sandy
clay fill

PBSJ

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 22

0

PHASE 1-B TRENCH PROFILES
TRENCHES 5 AND 6,
AND PLAN VIEW OF CISTERN 3

4 feet

ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE
l:\projects\he1\clients\hach\447212\ca<Nigure22.ai

54

CHAPTER IV:

Survey Results

Trench 9

center of Cistern 3 and a yellow sandy clay fill was
found. Brick and mortar samples were collected from
Cistern3.

Trench 9 explored Survey Target 6, a building
shown on the 1869 Wood map (Occupation Site No. 39),
located in Block 5, Lot 4 of Hardcastle's "Freedmanstown" Subdivision. It correlates to 1870 Census House
No. 433 that was owner-occupied by Robert Griffin, a .
50-year-old black cook from Virginia. The trench was
oriented north-south with the target on the north end. The
profile revealed a 2-ft layer of dark brown clay and
mixed rubble over orange clay (Figure 24, Profile A).
The trench cut across a tile sewer pipe, and a building
pier made ofpost-1900 three-hole bricks with rebar running through them was found.

Trench 7

Trench 7 examined Survey. Target 9 (ca. 1869
Wood Map Occupation Site No. 45). It was located in
Block A of the Burton/Crosby Tract, and also on Lot 10
of the later "Reservation" subdivision; it correlates to
1870 Census House No. 364 that was occupied by Peter
Rile [sic], a black stock tender of unspecified age and
place of origin.
The trench was oriented north-south, and the target
was located in the north end of the trench over a 4-ftsquare buried concrete pier pad. The profile showed a
top layer of mixed rubble and dark clay over a sterile
orange clay (Figure 23, Profile A). At the south end, the
orange clay was broken by a sandy clay filled shaft with
early 1900s artifacts and a handmade brick. The shaft
later proved to be the result of a utility trench in which
an APV storm drain had been placed. This appears to be
the same utility trench found beside Cistern 2 in Trench
8. It lined up with manholes on both sides of the trench.
No indication of the ca. 1869 building was found.

Trench JO

Trench I 0 was excavated over Survey Target
Feature 16, a trash pit found during the west side
demolition monitoring that had contained a kaolin clay
pipe fragment, suggesting a possible pre-1880 deposit.
The trench was oriented north-south. Many turn-of-thecentury artifacts were found, consisting of broken
bottles, glass, six clay pipe stem fragments, a china doll's
leg, cut bone, iron, ceramics, and some more-modem
artifacts including plastic, a domino, cat's eye marbles,
and beer bottle fragments. These were all found in the
thin upper layer. Beneath this was sterile dark brown
clay (Figure 24, Profile B). Overall, the mixed artifact
inventory did not appear to predate 1900; however, the
pipe stems and china doll's leg were collected for further
analysis in the laboratory.

Trench 8

Trench 8 was excavated over Survey Target 7, a ca.
1869 cistern (Cistern 2) that is shown on the 1939 Boyles
topographic map as an "old cistern" located in Block A,
Lot 9, later located within the "Reservation" district
boundary. Due to the proximity of a dangerous
uncovered storm drain manhole and numerous APV
building piers, this trench was oriented in an east-west
direction with the survey target at the west end of the
trench (Figure 23, Profile B). The trench uncovered the
north side of a large brick cistern, 9 ft in diameter, just
below ground level. The trench was stopped short at only
12 ft in length. The backhoe was then used to scrape
away the mixed rubble layer over the rest of the cistern,
revealing an east-west-running utility trench cut into the
south side. This is the same utility trench seen in
Trench 7.

Summary of Phase 1-B
Four trenches were excavated in the northwestern
quadrant of the project area within the boundaries of the
former cemetery. None of these trenches revealed any
evidence of grave pits or human remains. Each trench
profile and floor disclosed only undisturbed natural soil
except in minor areas of APV-related construction
intrusions. Further, no bones or coffin hardware were
observed from these trenches.
Two "old cisterns" that were plotted on the 1939
preconstruction map of the APV project area were
successfully located by means of backhoe trenching and
subsequent thin, areal surface stripping. Each of these ·
bottle-shaped cisterns was constructed of low-fired
bricks, and they were essentially identical to the cistern
discovered in Backhoe Trench 27 during Phase 1-A. The
neck and shoulders of both cisterns had been truncated
by APV construction. Each was backfilled with sandy
clay, again probably during preconstruction demolition
for APV.

A 12-ft-long trench was then excavated on the
south side of Cistern 2. The interior fill of the cistern was
a sandy clay mixture the same as in the adjacent utility
trench and the same as the fill in Cistern 3 (see Trench 6
above). A screw-lid bottle, some rusty iron spikes, and
three pieces of whiteware were found in the interior fill.
A horizontal view of the cistern was drawn (Figure 23,
Plan View), and the cistern and the two profiles were
photographed. Brick and mortar samples were collected.
55

PROFILE A (TRENCH 7)
WEST WALL
brick~

mixed rubble and brown clay
sand>.'. clay

fill

orange clay (sterile)

orange clay

yellow
sandy clay
utility trench

concrete pier

PROFILE B (TRENCH 8)
edge
of cistern

NORTH TRENCH
SOUTH WALL PROFILE

brick cistern wall
brown
clay

brown
clay

PLAN VIEW OF CISTERN 2 (TRENCH 8)
storm
drai

:I:

0

zw

a:

I:I:
I-

::::>
0

en

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I sandy
I clay
I
I
I "C.C:
I ~~
I "g.£
(/)5
l

:I:

0

z

w
a:

I:I:
I-

a:
0

z

cistern bricks and mortar

«l :-::

PBSJ

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 23

0

PHASE 1-B TRENCH PROFILES
TRENCHES 7 AND 8, AND
PLAN VIEW OF TRENCH 8 AND CISTERN 2

4 feet

ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE
l:\projects\he1\clients\hach\447212\cad\figure23.ai

56

PROFILE A (TRENCH 9)
WEST WALL
mixed rubble

orange clay

PROFILE B (TRENCH 10)
WEST WALL

steril dark brown clay

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 24

0

4 feet

PHASE 1-8 TRENCH PROFILES
TRENCHES 9 AND 10
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

1:\projectslhe1\clientslhach\447212\cadlfigure24.ai

57

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
Detailed analysis also was not conducted for possible resource localities located in the fill area along old
Valentine Street because these resource localities were
probably destroyed ca. 1940 by the excavation of a large,
deep storm sewer corridor beneath Valentine Street,
leaving little or no potential for intact archaeological
remains. Such resource localities also would have been
located beneath the root zones of several live oak trees
specified for protection from construction-related impacts. Utility construction in the vicinity of these trees
was limited to either hand excavation or mechanical
boring. Mechanical archaeological investigation was not
feasible in these areas considering the requirement to
protect the live oak trees.

The final trench, excavated at a location that had
produced nineteenth-century artifacts during Phase 1-A,
again yielded a few such artifacts (principally clay
smoking pipe stems). However, the SHPO concurred that
these artifacts were recovered from thoroughly mixed
deposits also yielding plastics and other modem debris
(Texas Historical Commission 1997a). Thus, no further
testing was warranted. All other trenches produced ambiguous or negative results. No features were associated
with these test locations targeted at pre-1880 house sites.
These tests produced only evidence of extensive disturbance overlying undisturbed sterile natural soils.
In conclusion, the results of the Phase 1-B investigations are consistent with those observed during Phase
1-A. Disturbance is both extensive and widespread
within the shallow impact zone defined for the proposed
APV redevelopment project. Nothing found during Phase
1-B appeared to require further archaeological investigation. A letter report documenting the findings of the
Phase 1-B testing was submitted to and approved by the
THC (1997).

The four locations where planned utility
construction might impact possible pre-1880 historic
remains that had been identified through documentary
sources (see Table 5) were investigated. In addition,
monitoring of sewer-disconnect trenches was ongoing
through Phase 1-C. The results of this monitoring are
reported in Chapter V.

PHASE 1-C, LIMITED INVESTIGATIONS
IN THE REHABILITATION WNE

Methods

Phase 1-C was directed toward investigations at
selected areas within the rehabilitation zone, an area of
APV where no previous archaeological investigations
had been undertaken. Figure 25 illustrates the locations
ofpre-1880 site localities identified within the rehabilitation zone from archival sources. These predicted site
localities were proposed and approved by the SHPO for
testing based on their relation to the geomorphological
cut-and-fill model and the new underground utility
systems (water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer) planned
for construction in the APV rehabilitation zone.

Five backhoe trenches were excavated in four areas.
A backhoe/front end loader with a telescoping bucket
arm was used to excavate these trenches to either the
bottom depth of proposed disturbances or to sterile clay.
The four target locations were plotted on the field map
and staked on the ground measuring from known points
such as building comers. When it was necessary to leave
a trench open overnight, it was fenced off with protective
orange mesh and T-posts and flagging tape. Ed Baxter
was the archaeological consultant directing the Phase
1-C work, and Roger Moore assisted in inspecting and
evaluating each trench.

Archival data and recommendations for investigation of these selected localities are presented in Table 5.
These possible resources were selected for detailed
analysis largely because they were located in shallow fill
areas, and thus appeared to have a better chance of
survival as intact archaeological deposits that could be
affected by the planned utility construction activities.
Conversely, other predicted resource localities were not
recommended for Phase 1-C field investigations because
they were either located within cut areas, and thus had a
very low likelihood of survival as a result of the extensive landscape alterations that occurred ca. 1940-1944,
or they were buried beneath more than 4 ft of fill. These
assumptions were based on the results of the Phase 1-A
and 1-B investigations, as well as the ongoing program
of archaeological monitoring.

Trench 1 (Building 26) was excavated to
investigate the location of a ca. 1880 residence in
Block 1, west Y2 of Lot 9 of the Hardcastle Addition. The
trench was oriented north-south; it was 29 ft long and
reached a maximum depth of 4 ft. The area had been
trenched previously as indicated by a north-southrunning 4-inch clay pipe at a depth of 2 ft, a 4-inch black
iron pipe running east-west at a depth of 2 ft, and a
6-inch concrete pipe running east-west at a depth of 4 ft.
The east wall was profiled and shows the locations of the
pipes (Figure 26, Profile A). The profile consisted of a
top layer of mixed rubble and dark brown clay fill
overlying a sterile dark brown clay that overlies a sterile

58

Rehabilitation Zone

Lr::::::::=::::::=:::=======::.. "
~~~
lfi

~"
46

l

lli
!l1

"'

Vi

"°

1=

Predicted
Pre-1880 Localities
~

0

500
Ft
100
0
,..--.--..---.--.-....., rn

~
Fill Area

1869 Wood Map

206 Wild Basin Rd., Ste. 300
Austin, Texas 78746-3343
Phone: (512) 329-8342 FAX: (512) 327-2453

J(

1870 Census

Figure 25

1880 Census

Phase 1-C Survey Map

~

Allen Parkway Village
Cut Area

Phase 1-C Trench Locations

Prepared for. Housing Authority of the City of Hou.i.ston

Job No.: 447212.00

Scale: 1"=250' for 8.5"x11" Sheet

Drown by: A Pugh

Dote: 6/14/02

Flle: N:44721 2\cod\ totol_stot;on\Flg_25.dgn

TABLE 5. Assessment of Historical Localities for Phase 1-C Survey Investigations

Resource No.

Description

Locations Recommended for Further Field Investigation
31/15

Block 7, Lot 11 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1870-1880 residence with cistern, owneroccupied by Archy Crutcher, a 27-year-old black farmer from Texas. This structure is
in a shallow fill area (0 to 1 ft deep) and partially (25 percent) under the south side of
existing SFC/APV Building No. 146. No protected trees are in the vicinity. No old
utilities appear to cross the structure. However, new utilities will impact the structure
and its associated cistern, including an 8-inch sanitary sewer line (6 ft deep) and a
3-inch water line (3 ft deep).

26

Block 1, West Yz of Lot 9 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1880 residence, owner-occupied
by Edmund Johnson, a 44-year-old black carpenter from Georgia. The structure is
outside of the cut-and-fill model but probably in an area of shallow fill (0 to 2 ft deep)
south of existing SFC/APV Building No. 137, and partially beneath an old sidewalk.
No protected trees are in the vicinity. There appears to be no direct impact from old
utilities construction, but new 6-inch sanitary sewer lines ( 5 to 8 ft deep) are planned
along both the east and west sides of the structure.

41/11

Block 2, Lot 6 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1869 residence, owner-occupied by John
Merchison, a 40-year-old white railroad worker from North Carolina. The structure is
outside of the cut-and-fill model but probably in an area of shallow fill and very near a
protected tree at the east end of SFC/APV Building No. 148. Old utilities cut across the
northeastern comer of the structure and correlate partially with an 8-inch water line
(6 ft deep) running through the middle of the structure. Another 3-inch water line (3 ft
deep) cuts just across the northwestern comer of the structure. Also, a proposed new
street will cover the structure location and could impact associated archaeological
deposits.

65/13

Block 7, Lot 3 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1869 residence, renter-occupied in 1870 by
Henry Johnson, a 27-year-old black drayman from Louisiana; then owner-occupied in
1880 by Simeon Willis, a 59-year-old black gardener from Georgia, and his family.
The structure is in a shallow fill area (0 to 1 ft deep) south of SFC/APV Building No.
147. No protected trees are in the vicinity. The southern half of the structure is within
an old utility corridor with multiple gas, sanitary sewer, and water lines and branches
of those lines that go to Building No. 147. The planned new utilities (a 6-inch sanitary
sewer line 5 ft deep and an 8-inch roof drain 3 to 5 ft deep) correlate to the location of
the old corridor and lateral branches. However, the actual location of this old utility
corridor has not been confirmed by any previous investigation.

Locations for Which No Further Work is Recommended (reason for recommendation is underlined)
36

447212/020018

Block 10, Lot 4 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1870 residence, owner-occupied by Mary
Robinson, a 40-year-old black domestic servant from Virginia. This structure is in the
fill zone beneath approximately 7 ft of fill and is not in the vicinity of protected trees.
The south side of the structure is under SFC/APV Building No. 128. Old utility
impacts include possible gas/sewer/water lines cutting across the northern portion of
the building. New utility impacts include a 6-inch sanitary sewer line within the old
utility corridor and a later branch 4 to 5 ft deep in a previously undisturbed area.

60

TABLE 5

(cont'd)

Description
Block 10, Lot 3 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1870-1880 residence, owner-occupied by
Arthur Lucas, a 40-year-old black woodchopper from Louisiana. This structure is in
the fill zone beneath approximately 7 ft of fill and is not in the vicinity of protected
trees. The structure is immediately adjacent to or partially under the south side of
SFC/APV Building No. 128. Previous utility impacts may include a shallow electrical
conduit for yard lighting. New utility impacts include a 3-inch water line (3 ft deep), an
8-inch roof drain (3 to 5 ft deep), and a 12-inch storm sewer (5 ft deep).
Block 10, Lot 2 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1870 residence, owner-occupied by
Fountain Grimmes, a 46-year-old black laborer from Tennessee. This structure is in the
fill zone beneath approximately 7 ft of fill and is not in the vicinity of protected trees.
The south side of the structure is under SFC/APV Building No. 129. There are no
known utility impacts from previous phases of construction. New utilities include a
3-inch water line (3 ft deep) running close to the existing building foundation and an
8-inch roof drain (3 to 5 ft deep).
25/8

Block 1, Lot 8 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1870-1880 residence, owner-occupied by
James Darling, a 70-year-old black laborer from Georgia, and his family. The structure
is outside the cut-and-fill model but is probably in a zone of shallow fill (0 to 2 ft deep)
and near the root zone of a protected tree on the west side of Valentine Street. The
north side of the structure may be partially covered ( 1 to 15 percent) by existing
SFC/APV Building No. 137, and the remainder of the structure is beneath multiple
sidewalk locations. Old utility impacts through the structure include possible gas,
water, and sanitary sewer line branches that correlate closely with the planned location
of a new 8-inch sanitary sewer line (4 to 8 ft deep). The location of this old utility
corridor was confirmed during previous archaeological monitoring of sewer-disconnect
activities during the demolition phase.

17/9

Block 1, Lot 10 ofHardcastle Addition. Ca. 1870-1880 residence, renter-occupied in
1870 by Ann Thomas, a 24-year-old black domestic servant from Mississippi; renteroccupied in 1880 by Albert Perkins, a 45-year-old black laborer from Virginia, and his
family. The structure is outside the cut-and-fill model but probably in an area of
shallow fill south of existing SFC/APV Building No. 137. No protected trees are in the
vicinity. Old utilities include gas, sanitary sewer, and water lines that correlate closely
with the location of planned new utilities, including 6-inch and 8-inch sanitary sewer
lines (5 to 8 ft deep). The location of this old utility corridor was confirmed during
previous archaeological monitoring of sewer-disconnect activities during the
demolition phase.

70/4

Block 11, Lots 4 and 5 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1870-1880 Antioch Baptist
Church. The structure is almost entirely in the cut zone except at the northeastern
comer. The central part of the structure is covered by existing SFC/APV Building No.
133. Unidentified old utilities pass through the structure on both the north and south
sides of Building No. 133. Protected trees cover most of the structure on the north side
of Building No. 133. The only new utility construction on the north side of Building
No. 133 is a 3-inch water line (3 ft deep), which will have minimal impact. This line
will probably be excavated by hand in the root zone of the protected trees. On the south
·side of Building No. 133, new utilities include sanitary and storm sewers, but this part
of the building is within the cut zone. Historical data may provide more-useful
information than field investigations.

447212/020018

61

TABLE 5 (concluded)

Resource No.

Description

10/40

Block 6, north~ of Lot 1 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1870-1880 residenc0, owneroccupied in 1870 by Richard Nixon, a 70-year-old black laborer from North Carolina;
renter-occupied in 1880 by Nelson Merle, a 57-year-old black farm laborer from
Virginia, and his family. The structure is in potentially deep fill along the east side of
Valentine Street and, except for the very southeastern comer, is in the old utility
corridor along Valentine Street The structure is within the root zone of protected trees
along the east side of the street. A sanitary sewer planned through the structure is
scheduled to be bored through the root zone rather than excavated from the surface.

33/35

Block 6, Lot 3 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1870-1880 residence, vacant at the time of
census in 1870 but renter-occupied in 1880 by Mary Polly, a 35-year-old black
gardener from Louisiana. The structure is within the cut zone except for the
northeastern comer. Old utilities include possible gas, water, and sanitary sewer lines
going to existing SFC/APV Building No. 136 and in a utility corridor parallel to the
north side of Building No. 136. New utilities include sanitary sewer and storm sewer
lines. The structure is near the root zones of protected trees along the west side of
Valentine Street.

44

Block 7, Lot 2 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1880 residence, owner-occupied by Preston
Corals (Kyles), a 53-year-old black laborer from Virginia. This structure is almost
completely under the east end of existing SFC/APV Building No. 147; only the
southwestern comer of the historic structure is exposed, and this comer protrudes into
the edge of the fill area. No old utilities cross the structure. New utilities include an
8-inch sanitary sewer line (4 ft deep). No protected trees are in the vicinity.

16/30

Block 7, Lot 10 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1870 residence, renter-occupied in 1870
by Rody Smith, a 50-year-old black domestic servant from North Carolina, and later
renter-occupied in 1880 by Dick Wascbke, a 52-year-old black gardener from Virginia.
More than half of this ca. 1869 structure (the northern portion) is in the cut zone under
existing SFC/APV Building No. 145. The southwestern comer is in fill and partially in
an old utility corridor. New utilities are an 8-inch sanitary sewer line (4 ft deep).

46

Block 7, Lot 4 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1880 residence, renter-occupied in 1880 by
Maggie Farmer, a 27-year-old black washerwoman from Texas. This structure is
almost entirely in the cut zone south of existing SFC/APV Building No. 147, except for
the northeastern comer, which extends slightly into the fill zone. The south half of the
structure is also in an old utility corridor where new utilities include a 6-inch sanitary
sewer line (5 ft deep) that follows the south edge of the structure.

24/7

Block 1, Lot 7 of Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1870 residence, renter-occupied in 1870 by
America Hair, a 22-year-old black domestic servant from Texas, and later renteroccupied in 1880 by Emily Banks, a 38-year-old black washerwoman from Texas. This
structure is located in shallow fill near the eastern end of existing SFC/APV Building
No. 137 but is entirely within the root zone of protected trees along the west side of
Valentine Street. New utilities include an 8-inch sanitary sewer (4 ft deep).

9

Block 5, Lot 3, of the Hardcastle Addition. Ca. 1880 residence, renter-occupied by
Sam Jackson, a 36-year-old mulatto laborer from Georgia. This structure is in a fill
area located south of existing SFC/APV Building No. 131. It is almost entirely within
an old utility corridor, with only the northern edge extending beyond the corridor.
There are no protected trees in the vicinity. New utilities include a sanitary sewer line
that extends along the northern edge of the structure.

Note: Water line, electric line, and gas line construction is assumed to pose minimal impact (e.g., shallow, narrow trenches) unless
buried in the same trench. Historical data are synthesized from official Harris County deed, tax, and census records as well as various
cartographic sources. Utility construction depths are estimated from typical case data provided by Carter and Burgess, Engineers.
447212/020018

62

.g:

i5:

PROFILE A (TRENCH 1)
EAST WALL

s.
6

~

;;.

5:

i

j;j

4" iron pipe

pipe trench mixed fill dark brown clay

~old clay pipe

Q 8" clay pipe

~~

.,.
c:

~

9>
!!!.

sterile dark brown clay
sterile yellow clay _

'-

4\

--

__,

6" concrete pipe

root protection
pole

PROFILE B (TRENCH 2)
EAST WALL

~

sidewalk
mixed dark brown clay fill

sterile yellow clay

PBSl

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 26

0

2 feet

PHASE 1-C SURVEY
TESTTRENCHES1AND2
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
The trench profile shows a mixed dark clay fill overlying
gray clay. No features or older artifacts were
encountered.

yellow clay. The two bottom layers had intrusive utility
trenches cut into them. No early building features such as
piers or other foundation features were noted. No early
artifacts were found.

Summary of Phase 1-C
Trench 2 (Building 41/11) was excavated to
investigate the location of a ca. 1869 residence in
Block 2, Lot 6 of the Hardcastle Addition. It was planned
for a location that conflicted with an area set aside to
protect a large oak tree's root system. A short, 13-ftlong, north-south-running trench was dug starting at the
root protection boundary and ran south. A surface
sidewalk was cut through, and a 1.5-inch east-westrunning copper pipe was found at 2.5 ft (Figure 26,
Profile B). The east wall was profiled and shows the
location of the sidewalk and pipe. Soils consist of a
mixed dark brown fill overlying a sterile yellow clay. No
early features or artifacts were found.

The profiles of each of the five backhoe trenches
excavated during Phase 1-C revealed evidence of
pervasive ground-surface disturbance during APV
construction in the 1940s. The disturbance extends to a
sufficient depth that no in situ archaeological remains or
features were preserved. All five trenches can be
generally characterized as exhibiting surface zones of
highly disturbed soils containing miscellaneous debris.
These surface zones overlay, at variable depths,
undisturbed natural clays that were culturally sterile.
Moreover, several of the trenches exhibited disturbance
from undocumented utility line excavation. In summary,
no potentially significant archaeological remains were
observed in any of the trenches, and no further
archaeological investigations were recommended at these
localities. The SHPO concurred with these findings and
recommendations (Texas Historical Commission 1997b).

Trench 3 (east of Building 31/15) was excavated to
investigate a ca. 1870-1880 residence with a cistern
located in Block 7, Lot 11 of the Hardcastle Addition. It
is in an area to be impacted by a 3-ft-deep east-westrunning water line and is located where an old cistern
was reported. A small area, 9 ft north-south by 6 ft eastwest by 3 ft deep, was scraped at the proposed water line
location. A small 1-x-1.5-x-0.5-ft section of cistern side
was found in the southern part of the trench. It was not in
situ, and no other part of the cistern was found. This
section probably represents a fragment reburied after past
construction destroyed the cistern. A 4-inch section of
ceramic pipe was also found. The east wall profile shows
these items (Figure 27, Profile A). Soils consisted of a
thin mixed dark clay fill overlying sterile yellow clay.
No other artifacts or features were observed.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
During the first week of survey, investigations
concentrated on the known cemetery area in the
northwest comer of the APV property. Eight Gradall
trenches were excavated to locate possible burials
remaining after construction activities removed between
900 and 1,000 burials in the early 1940s, when APV was
built. The archaeological investigations found no
indications of remaining burials. Examination of the
trench soils, in conjunction with historical data regarding
landscape modification at the time APV was built,
indicates that a layer of soil averaging almost 5 ft deep
was removed from the cemetery area prior to
construction of the buildings in this area. Only one
feature was recorded during these investigations-a
small trash pit containing miscellaneous artifacts such as
ceramics, glass, and nails. All diagnostic artifacts dated
to the post-1880 period of occupation.

Trench 4 (Building 31/15) also was designed to
investigate the ca. 1870-1880 residence searched for in
Trench 3. It was oriented east-west and was excavated to
21 ft in length and 3 ft in depth. Two modem bricks were
found. The north wall profile (Figure 27, Profile B)
showed 1.5 ft of a dark brown mixed clay fill overlying
sterile yellow to gray clay. No features or older artifacts
were found.

During
the
second
week,
investigations
concentrated on the southwest portion of the property,
south of the cemetery. Again, geomorphological
examination indicated removal of the original upper soil
levels, although not as deeply as within the cemetery.
Indications of two old road surfaces were located, but no
indications of other historic features such as privies,
buildings, or cisterns were found.

Trench 5 (Building 65/13) was excavated to
investigate the location of a ca. 1869 residence in
Block 7, Lot 3 of the Hardcastle Addition. It was
oriented north-south, was 20 ft long, and was dug 3 ft
deep (Figure 27, Profile C). The location had already
been trenched twice to install sewer pipes. A 3.5-inch
black cast iron pipe came out of the building for 4 ft and
a later replacement 3.5-inch PVC pipe had been added to
it. This pipe was in the center at the bottom of the trench.

The final week of investigations examined the east
side of the APV property. As in previous weeks, backhoe

64

PROFILE A (TRENCH 3)
EAST WALL

j
l1
S:

dark clay fill

<I>

~

~-

Area where dislocated piece
of cistern was found; brickmortared and curved

4" ceramic pipe

S:

I

sterile yellow clay

~
~c::
~

PROFILE B (TRENCH 4)
NORTH WALL

"

~-

~brick
dark mixed clays

...... ..

sterile grayer clay

,
,;

,;

,;

.... .
yellow sterile clay

.-'

0\
VI

PROFILE C (TRENCH 5)
WEST WALL
mixed dark clay fill

gray clay
3-1/2" pvc pipe

sterile clay gray

3-1/2" "
iron pipe

PBSJ

~

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 27

0

2 feet

PHASE 1-C SURVEY
TEST TRENCHES 3, 4, AND 5
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
Although these cisterns may have been constructed
prior to 1880, the cisterns themselves are unlikely to be
archaeologically significant. National Register significance, however, may be assigned to artifact deposits
within them City water was not piped into the area until
the early 1900s and it is unlikely that the cisterns were
abandoned prior to that time; however, the date of abandonment can only be ascertained through excavation of
the cisterns' interiors. It is estimated that the bottom of
the cisterns may be 8 to 10 ft below the current rim, and
thus, if they were abandoned prior to 1880, any pre-1880
artifacts that might exist inside them are well below the
zone of impact for the APV project.

trenches were positioned to examine not only the
geomorphology, as part of the verification of the cut-andfill model, but also to locate possible remains of known
historic structures and buried gullies that might contain
trash deposits. As indicated in the cut-and-fill model, the
soils in the northeast corner of the property were
removed down to a dense clay with no indications of a
historic structure indicated on pre-1880s maps. Other
portions of the eastern side of the APV property, as
expected, proved to be fill over the original, pre-APV
topography.
Four trenches revealed trash deposits in buried
gullies, exactly as the composite map overlays had
predicted. These artifacts included bricks made by
Coffeyville Vitrified Brick and Tile ca. 1905, ceramic
fragments, and glass fragments. One trench, although
excavated to a depth of 5 ft, the maximum allowed, did
not reach the bottom of cultural fill. Although only post1880 artifacts were located within the 5-ft excavation,
older deposits may exist below that level.

These three cisterns are distinctive in the project
area because all three are clustered together within the
Burton/Crosby Tract, which is one of the oldest occupied
tracts in the project area and a tract that was not
intensively developed until the tum of the century or
thereafter. In addition, the number of "old cisterns" in
this area correlates with the number of principal
landowners appearing in the historical record for this
tract: Hopson, Burton, and Crosby. This suggests that the
old cisterns may correlate to respective phases of
occupation by the major landowners, spanning in time
from ca. 1830 to 1890 and later (see Figure 11).
Conversely, they may all be related to the period
between about 1900-1920 and later when this block
became intensively occupied and before the city supplied
water to this area. However, no evidence was found of
unmixed deposition of nineteenth-century artifacts in the
proposed project impact zone within these cisterns, and it
is felt that the cisterns themselves are not archaeologically significant.

Two features were located in the fill zones. In one
trench, several possible brick building piers were
observed at the lowest level of the trench in deep fill.
This trench, as all others, was excavated to a depth of 5 ft
as per the original research design and safety plan. Piers
of machine-made bricks and mortar were recorded, in
conjunction with a 1.5-inch-diameter pipe that appeared
to rest on the top of two piers. No wooden structural
remnants were visible, although charcoal between the
piers may indicate the structure was burned. Historic
research for this section of APV shows this locality to be
on the west side of Crosby Street, probably 806 Crosby.
Two possible structures are recorded in the area, one
from the 1870 census and another in existence in 1939
when the neighborhood was demolished to construct
APV. Only post-1880 artifacts were recovered in the
vicinity of the piers. Because these piers are buried at a
depth of approximately 4.5 ft, they will not be impacted
by APV demolition.

Throughout the three phases of archaeological
survey, findings and recommendations were presented to
the SHPO through interim progress reports and
coordination meetings. Each phase of survey was
carefully designed and submitted for approval by the
SHPO before the proposed investigations were actually
conducted. Suggested revisions to the proposed survey
design were incorporated and implemented to ensure
compliance.

The partially demolished remains of three cisterns
were found; these "old cisterns" are shown on a 1939
surveyor's map of the area made as part of the
preconstruction study for APV. The fill inside the cistern
found in Backhoe Trench 17 during Phase 1-A was
examined to a depth of approximately 4 ft; only brick
rubble from both the neck of the cistern and from APV
construction material was found. The two other cisterns
were found during Phase 1-B and were essentially
identical to the cistern found during Phase 1-A; both had
been backfilled with a sandy clay, probably during
construction of APV.

In the end, a limited number of deposits were
identified that might contain significant archaeological
data. However, in all cases these potentially significant
deposits were located at depths beyond the impact zone
for the planned demolition and construction-related
activities. In this sense, the potentially significant
cultural deposits were considered to be protected from
damage during the APV redevelopment project, but.
should be considered before any future redevelopment
activities are planned.

66

CHAPTER IV: Survey Results

Key areas of concern in this regard include the
following:
•

•
•

•

Figures 6 and 7 show the locations of these features
in relation to the original APV building locations.
Notably the drainage gulley identified in· Phase 1-A
Trench 9 extends westward toward Valentine Street. It
may be expected that deeper deposits could occur in this
western reach of the old drainage. Similarly, other
drainage gullies are probably deeply buried beneath
rehabilitated APV buildings east of Valentine Street and
beneath the northern rows of demolished APV buildings
west of Valentine (see figures 6 and 7). Based on the
current level of knowledge about these localities, future
ground-disturbing impact in these areas should be
planned with appropriate SHPO coordination.

"Old Cistern" in Lot 12, Block A, Burton/Crosby Tract (found in Phase 1-A Trench
27 near former APV Building 113);
Former drainage gully found in Phase 1-A
Trench 9, north of former APV Building 122;
"Old Cistern" in Lot 13, Block A, Burton/Crosby Tract (found in Phase 1-B Trench 6
near southeast comer of former APV Building
118);
"Old Cistern" in Lot 9, Block A, Burton/Crosby
Tract (found in Phase 1-B Trench 8 along south
side of former APV Building 117).

67

CHAPTERV

MONITORING

Archaeological monitoring of demolition activities
at APV entailed close observation of five primary
activities: superstructure demolition, debris loading and
removal, surface grading, street and sidewalk surface
removal, and trench excavations for disconnecting
existing sewer lines. While there is a certain logistical
order to the first three of these activities, several of them
often occurred within the same day (or occasionally at
the same time). After the first several structures had been
removed, the activities could have occurred in any order
on any given day. Below is a brief description of the
demolition contractor's activities, the nature of impacts
to archaeological resources, and the methods employed
by the two archaeological monitors in examining and
recording potentially significant cultural resources.

been dismantled. Such paved surfaces, including parking
lots and a basketball court, were fractured and then lifted
from the surface by trackhoes. Once the paved surfaces
were removed, the areas beneath them provided the best
opportunities to identify cultural resources at the surface
level, primarily because the ground surfaces under the
pavement were level and had been largely undisturbed
by structural foundations. Moreover, the actual process
of breaking and removing the paved surfaces had little
impact on archaeological deposits. Archaeological
monitors closely observed these removal activities and
discovered numerous cultural loci in the process.
Surface grading was conducted after a large area of
structures had been demolished and the resulting debris
had been cleared. Grading activities were intended to
level the project area, and they usually exposed any
hitherto unexposed ground surfaces. Grading typically
involved two sequential steps. First, a large bulldozer
broke the surface with a serrated front end loader. The
bulldozer operator frequently accomplished this without
following any specific pattern. Second, after the soil was
broken and scattered, a smaller bulldozer with a straight
blade leveled the specified area (Figure 29). The
bulldozer proceeded in a linear fashion back and forth,
distributing soils around the project area until the surface
was level. Grading activities did not necessarily expose
any artifacts. Rather, the machinery typically pressed
artifacts (and the soils containing them) down into the
ground surface, making the identification of features or
artifact concentrations very difficult. This was especially
true when the surface soils were saturated. Grading
activities were constantly monitored, and they rarely.
revealed any new features or artifact concentrations.

Superstructure demolition encompassed the dismantling of building exteriors (e.g., roofs, walls, and
foundations) with the use of large trackhoes. Because
this activity generally occurred above surface, its impact
on buried archaeological resources was minimal. The
primary concern during this activity was the removal of
structural foundations and footings that would impact the
surface. Because the original APV construction in the
1940s disturbed the subsurface context around these
foundation features, the demolition impacts were largely
insignificant. Archaeological monitors observed and
photographed the superstructure demolition. Demolition
debris often covered the area immediately under the
structure, and few attempts were made to identify cultural resources at that stage.
Debris loading and removal generally occurred
immediately after demolition, though a considerable
amount of time elapsed before some of the debris was
removed. Bulldozers and trackhoes worked concurrently
to pick up large pieces of loose debris (Figure 28) and
load them onto hauling trucks for removal. This activity
cleared the immediate surface area under buildings for
closer inspection. More importantly, it often exposed a
considerable amount of the adjacent yard areas. After
most of the debris had been cleared, the monitors walked
over the exposed surface areas and closely examined
them for the presence of any archaeological materials.
Several artifact concentrations were observed during
such inspections, including large brick scatters.

Trench excavations were conducted throughout the
demolition phase in an attempt to locate and disconnect
the existing sewer lines. Some of the trenches were
partially excavated in disturbed fill due to the presence of
the subsurface pipelines. However, because the trenches
exposed relatively deep (1.0-1.7 m below surface)
stratified deposits, these excavations proved to be the
most useful activity for identifying and assessing
archaeological materials. Archaeological monitors
recorded 158 sewer-disconnect trenches (Figure 30, map
pocket). The eastern and western sides of the APV
project area contained 88 and 70 trenches, respectively.
No sewer-disconnect trenches were excavated in the
rehabilitation zone. Moreover, on at least 19 occasions, a

Street and sidewalk removal was generally
conducted after most of the structures in an area had

69

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 28
BUILDING DEMOLITION AND
DEBRIS REMOVAL, VIEW TO NORTHEAS
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE
l:\projects\he1\clients\hach\cad\figure28.ai

70

C>
c

~·

'S(/)

>

:;:::

C>c
cO
·cU

g>E ~

wc<n
• 0.

·~

w

~

g>

<ll-·<1>.E ~
cc>
·- <ll

<( I(!) (f)

0)

C\J

~

::l

O>

u::

...J

-$ ~
00

~

C2 I<.!J$ a:
w UJ cf
g> z
I(f)

w

$

71

~

. zW >

(f)

rojacts\he1\olients\hach\447212\oad\flgure29.al

LU

LU

...J
...J

<(

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
The size, maximum depth, orientation, and basic
soil composition of each sewer-disconnect trench was
also recorded in field notebooks. When archaeological
monitors identified subsurface cultura! deposits in the
excavated trenches, they sketched, photographed, and
described the wall profiles according to standard
archaeological procedures. This included the clear
delineation of soil horizons in the profile and their
relation to the archaeological deposits. Monitors
sequentially numbered sewer-disconnect trenches as the
trenches were excavated. Separate numbering sequences
were maintained for the east and west sides of the APV
project area. All sewer-disconnect trench locations were
plotted on the 1" = 300' plan of the APV project area (see
Figure 30).

second trench was excavated on top of an original
backfilled trench. This is because sewer lines were often
not located in the initial trench. Taking this into
consideration, no more than 139 original locations were
subjected to sewer-disconnect trenching.
Trench dimensions varied depending on the
excavation equipment as well as when (and if) the sewer
line was encountered. Two types of excavation
machinery were employed in the excavations: 1) a small
backhoe that excavated a trench approximately 0.5 m
wide, and 2) a large-model trackhoe that excavated a
trench approximately 1.2 m wide. Machine operators
terminated excavation upon encountering the sewer line.
Consequently, shallow trenches were excavated in
locations where the depth of the sewer line was shallow.
Deep trenches frequently exposed stratified soil deposits
in the wall profiles. They occasionally revealed cultural
manifestations such as structural features or midden
deposits. Sewer-disconnect trenches were typically
backfilled immediately. In cases where cultural resources
were present, the trenches were not backfilled until the
archaeological monitor determined the significance of
the identified resources.

Archaeological monitors conducted an on-site
inventory of the artifactual remains at each cultural
locus. As a rule, monitors did not collect artifacts known
to postdate 1880. However, a small representative
sample of artifact&-typically complete, potentially
diagnostic, or unidentified specimens--was recovered
for further laboratory analysis. Included among the
collected materials were several miscellaneous artifacts
that were apparently not associated with any distinct
cultural locus. Assessments of the cultural loci entailed
determining a pre- or post-1880 period of deposition
based on the presence of;temporally diagnostic artifacts.
Such a determination was accomplished shortly after the
initial identification ~t some loci. Other loci required
more definitive laboratory analysis of recovered
materials before an assessment could be made.

In addition to the 158 sewer-disconnect trenches, a
long and relatively straight drainage trench was
excavated by the demolition contractor near the western
limits of the rehabilitation zone (figures 30 and 31). This
trench, approximately 185 m long (north-south) and 1.2
~- wide, was dug solely for draining excess standing
water from the west side. Archaeological monitors
closely examined the profiles of the trench walls.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL METHODS

IDSTORIC ARTIFACT ANALYSIS

During the archaeological monitoring investigations, monitors identified 24 surface and subsurface
locations as potentially significant cultural resources.
These locations typically comprised dense artifact concentrations and/or features, termed "cultural loci" for the
purpose of clarifying potentially confusing terminology
in this report. Once identified in the field, the boundaries
of each cultural locus were marked with flagging tape or
construction fencing. Monitors notified the machine
operators for the demolition contractor of each cultural
resource location. The surface manifestation was measured, sketched, photographed, and described in field
notebooks. The location was plotted on a copy of the
l" = 300' plan of the APV project area. Monitors
occasionally excavated shovel tests (approximately 30 x
30 cm) to further evaluate the subsurface contexts of
ambiguous cultural loci. The excavated soils of shovel
tests were screened when possible through 114-inch wire
mesh.

Selected historic-period artifacts were collected
during the monitoring and survey phases of the APV
project as an aid in assessing the age of cultural deposits.
These materials were initially transported to the
laboratory facilities at Espey, Huston & Associates (now
PBS&J) in Austin, and later to Texas A&M University in
College Station, for analysis. Artifacts were cleaned,
sorted, provenienced, and systematically identified
according to standard laboratory procedures. Complete
inventories of the artifacts collected from the cultural
loci are presented with the loci descriptions.
The materials, characteristic of the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries, may be grouped into the
following broad analytical classes: container glass,
ceramics, architectural materials, personal items, and
miscellaneous artifacts. These categories, and the
methods of sorting and identifying artifacts within them,
are discussed below.
72

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 31
WEST SIDE DRAINAGE TRENCH,
VIEW TO SOUTH
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE
l:\projects\he1\cllents\hach\cad\figure31.ai

73

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
other words, more-recent bottles possessed mold seams
closer to the lip. While this pattern exists on a coarse
level, certain fi:pishing tools and polishing techniques
(e.g., tum-molded bottles) erased mold seams from the
bottle (Deiss 1981:7). Hence, mold seam height is not
necessarily a reliable chronological indicator.

Container Glass
Container glass, including 33 complete or nearly
complete bottles, predominates among the materials
recovered during the monitoring phase. Several studies
(e.g., Deiss 1981; Jones and Sullivan 1985; Rosenberg
and Kvietok 1981) trace the development ofnineteenthcentury glass technology and generate fairly reliable
chronological correlates for specific features of glass
containers. The present analysis closely follows these
authoritative studies, including the use of terminology
and dating keys. In general, fragments of container glass
were sorted by color and then systematically examined
for diagnostic traits typical of specific manufacturing
methods.

Machine-made bottles were first designed in the
1880s, using semiautomatic equipment (Rosenberg and
Kvietok 1981:10). However, semiautomatic bottles were
not commercially produced until 1893. Michael Owens
developed fully automatic bottle production in 1903, and
the process was introduced commercially a year later
(Jones and Sullivan 1985:39). By 1917, 50 percent of all
bottles in the United States were the product of fully
automatic production (Barnett 1926 in Rosenberg and
Kvietok 1981:11). Machine-made bottles are distinguished from mold-blown bottles by a seam that extends
over the lip of the finish. In most cases, semiautomatic
and fully automatic bottles cannot be distinguished from
one another. Two exceptions, noted by Jones and Sullivan (1985:39), are the presence of an additional "ghost
seam" on the body of Owens-type bottles (left by the
parison mold halves) and the Owens suction scar on the
base of fully automated bottles (left by glass shearing).
In the 1920s, the continuous thread finish was introduced
on machine-made bottles (Rosenberg and Kvietok
1981:Figure 17). The continuous thread is an unbroken
spiral projection on the finish exterior that meshes with
screw cap closures.

Glass manufacturing prior to the nineteenth century
was generally the product of free blowing techniques.
Mold-blown glass became popular after about 1810, and
in 1893, the commercial production of machine-made
bottles was introduced. Mass production of machine,
made bottles using fully automatic equipment began in
1904. As one might expect, all of the collected glass
containers from the APV project area exhibit the general
characteristics of either mold-blown or machine-made
bottles.
The bodies of mold-blown bottles are formed after
air pressure from the mouth, a machine, or a plunger
forces hot glass into the outer extremities of the mold
interior (Jones and Sullivan 1985:23). Glass manufacturers employed one-piece, two-piece, and multiple-piece
molds for bottle production throughout the nineteenth
century. Early mold-blown bottles possessed a simple cut
lip that was finished by polishing. A lipping device was
used to apply the finish on later mold-blown bottles.
Molds with incorporated finishes were popular by the
late 1800s (Deiss 1981:58-59).

Rosenberg and Kvietok (1981:28) discuss how the
color of container glass can be a chronological indicator.
Amethyst-colored glass is generally indicative of the
period 1880-1918. Manufactured beginning in 1879, this
glass was initially intended to be fully colorless, using
manganese dioxide as a decoloring agent. However,
when exposed to sunlight or intense heat, manganese
dioxide turns the glass to a light purple color. Manganese
was largely imported from Germany and was
unattainable during World War I. The presence of this
material generally ends after ca. 1918. After manganese
became unavailable, selenium was employed as a
decoloring agent. When exposed to sunlight, however,
selenium turns glass to a honey or yellow tint. It
generally indicates the period 1914-1930 (Rosenberg
andKvietok 1981:28).

Mold-blown bottles may serve as good chronological indicators for historic sites or features because they
often predate the mass production of machine-made
bottles. Mold-blown bottles are easily recognized by the
mold seams that extend up the sides of a bottle and
disappear on the neck. Because discerning a bottle's
specific mold type from fragmentary archaeological
remains is difficult, the bottleneck is often the most
diagnostic trait. For example, applied-tooled finishes (ca.
1825-1875) have a ridge on the inner surface (i.e., bore)
of the bottleneck where the lip was applied. They may be
distinguished from later improved-tooled finishes (ca.
1870-1915), which lack this ridge and exhibit more
uniformity. Several studies (e.g., Kendrick 1966:45-48;
Santeford 1981 :63) once held that mold seam height on a
bottleneck could be used as a chronological indicator. In

While bottle morphology may be broadly
diagnostic of certain time periods, embossing is the most
diagnostic trait that the glass containers from APV
exhibit. Embossing became quite popular after 1860, and
all bottle types exhibit the trait. Towards the end of the
nineteenth century, embossed patent and proprietary
medicine bottles were particularly common, and these
74

CHAPTERV: Monitoring

Little consensus exists among archaeologists regarding the identification and classification of whiteware
and ironstone ceramics (Majewski and O'Brien
1987:105, 112-114; Price 1981:26-27). Both exhibit a
white paste and clear glaze that often cracks. Ironstone,
or "stone china," is traditionally considered to· have a
harder paste and a more highly vitrified body than regular whiteware. However, judgments surrounding the
degree of paste hardness are largely arbitrary, and such a
criterion is presently an unsatisfactory distinction.
Hence, following South (1974) and Price (1981:27), all
ironstones and other semivitreous wares are here considered whitewares.

often yield very specific dates of manufacture (Santeford
1981). Numerous sources are now available for
determining use dates for embossed bottles (Baldwin
1973; Fike 1987; Munsey 1970; Toulouse 1971; Wilson
1981), all of which were consulted in the present
analysis.
Several pieces of glass tableware were also recovered during the morutoring phase of the APV investigation. Most glass tableware, which generally includes
tumblers, bowls, stemware, and flatware, was manufactured by press-molding in the last half of the nineteenth
century. The process left the vessel exterior with a
pressed pattern while the interior remained smooth and
rounded (see Jones and Sullivan 1985:33-35). The glass
tableware pieces lack specific diagnostic traits, and there
is no reason to believe that they date earlier than the
container glass artifacts.

Porcelain is a vitrified and translucent white-paste
ceramic (1350-1550°C) exhibiting glaze that cannot be
observed in cross section. As a vitrified ceramic
comprised of kaolin clay, feldspar, and flint, porcelain
absorbs little or no water and possesses a sharp edge
when broken. True, hard-paste porcelain is generally
fired twice-once at low temperature and then once at
high temperature (Majewski and O'Brien 1987:125).
However, like other earthenwares, variations in porcelain
pastes exist. Soft-paste porcelain is a semivitreous
tableware "which consists primarily of an opaque glass
and in some cases very little clay" (Majewski and
O'Brien 1987: 125). Soft-paste porcelain is more porous
than true porcelain, and the former may be more granular
than the latter. Late-nineteenth- and early-twentiethcentury semiporcelain even possesses a glaze that is
observable in cross section.

Ceramic Wares
A small collection of ceramic wares was made
during the monitoring of demolition activities at APV.
The recovered ceramics have been grouped into four
classes based on paste distinctions: coarse earthenwares,
refined earthenwares, porcelains, and stonewares.
Several ceramic types common to other historic sites in
the United States, including creamwares, pearlwares, and
yellowwares, were not encountered during the monitoring phase. Detailed discussions of these wares may be
found in other studies (e.g., Majewski and O'Brien 1987;
Noel Hume 1969; Price 1981). Only the materials
encountered during the present study are discussed
herein.

Stoneware, a thick utilitarian ware manufactured
locally throughout the United .States, is a vitrified
ceramic fired at temperatures of 1200-1300°C (Ketchum
1991:1). Dense, siliceous clays used to manufacture
stoneware produce low porosity and nonabsorbency.
Stonewares exhibit a variety of slips and glazes.
Impermeable salt glazes, which appear as an orange-peel
texture on the vessel surface, are some of the oldest and
most common glazes used. Alkaline glazes, made of
wood ash, sand, and clay mixtures, were common in the
Deep South for most of the nineteenth century (ca.
1820s-1890s). Albany slip, made from a rich, dark
broWn clay mined initially in New York, has been
common on stoneware from the 1800s to the present
(Ketchum 1991:161). Bristol slip, a white or creamcolored clay and chemical slip, became popular after
1884. It was used with increasing frequency after the
1920s.

Coarse earthenwares are relatively low fired
(800-1000°C) ceramics exhibiting a soft paste. They
have been manufactured for centuries, and nineteenthand early-twentieth-century varieties serve primarily
utilitarian functions. The pastes of coarse earthenwares
are typically red, white, brown, or yellow, and surfaces
may exhibit lead, tin, or alkaline glazes. The undiagnostic coarse earthenwares encountered during the monitoring phase are characterized by white paste and handpainting, as well as red paste with lead glazing.
Refined earthenwares are fired at moderately high
temperatures (1100-1250°C), exhibit variable vitrification, and reflect a wide range of decorative techniques.
Though manufactured in a variety of forms, they generally served as tablewares throughout the nineteenth
century. Included among refined earthenwares are the
aforementioned pearlwares and creamwares, as well as
whitewares, and ironstones.

Among the numerous complete artifacts recovered
during the monitoring phase are two stoneware jugs.
These vessels, characterized by a single spout and handle, were manufactured in the United States beginning in
75

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
the early nineteenth century. Early stoneware jugs
(1800-1900) typically had a shoulder circumference that
was wider than the base circumference (Rosenberg and
Kvietok 1981:65). After 1900, stoneware jugs were more
cylindrical, with a shoulder circumference equal to that
of the base. In addition, stoneware jugs after 1890 were
characterized by both interior and exterior slips or glazing.

motifs, can be felt when scratched.

1.

Edge decoration involved the application of ink to
the outer edge of a plain or molded rim

Ceramic Decoration

2.

Annular/banding consists of one or more colored
bands around the rim of a cup or the edge of a plate.
Annular/banding was common throughout the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in a variety
of forms.

3.

Sponged decoration entails the application of a
pigment to the ceramic with a sponge (see Robacker
and Robacker 1978). It is found on various
utilitarian and tableware vessel forms, and was
generally produced from 1860-1935 (Ketchum
1983:178, 228-229).

4.

Floral design, the most common hand-painted
decoration, includes stylized motifs in broad painted
strokes (i.e., peasant style) and small scattered
motifs in thin strokes (i.e., sprig). Hand-painted
floral designs were most popular during the period
1840-1860 (Majewski and O'Brien 1987:159).

Several ceramic pieces with hand-painted decorations were recovered during the monitoring phase of
investigations at APV:

Many of the ceramic artifacts exhibit decoration,
some of which may be considered broadly diagnostic or
indicative of socioeconomic position (Miller 1980;
Samford 1997). For example, underglaze transfer-printed
decorations appear on several whiteware sherds.'
Transfer-prints were produced by transferring an
engraved motif from a copper plate to an inked piece of
paper. The inked paper was then applied to the surface of
a vessel, either before or after the application of the
glaze. The decoration, including geometric, floral, and
historical scenes, was initially applied to late-eighteenthcentury pearlwares. However, because they were
expensive to produce, transfer-printed wares did not
become widely popular until after the War of 1812
(Samford 1997:3). Transfer-prints were initially
produced with only cobalt blue pigments. By the mid
nineteenth century, however, prints on the ceramics were
manufactured in black, brown, green, red, or purple inks.
The popularity of the design decreased after 1860 but
was revived on semivitreous whitewares near the turn of
the century (Majewski and O'Brien 1987:145; Samford
1997).

A few ceramic pieces exhibit trademarks that, like
embossed bottles, are very useful in determining precise
dates for historic-period sites. Several good sources are
available for identifying ceramic marks (Barber 1971;
Kovel and Kovel 1953, 1986), all of which were
consulted during the present analysis.

A variation of transfer-printing decoration is flow
blue. Around 1825 it was discovered that the cobalt blue
coloring of transfer-prints could be made to blur, or flow,
intentionally, resulting in a softer image (Williams
1971:7). These "flow blue" decorations became available
in the United States in the 1840s and were widely
distributed throughout the nineteenth century (Miller
1991:9). Two periods of popularity are associated with
flown-decorated ceramics: 1840-1860 and 1890-1904
(Samford 1997:24). Although some flow blue china is
still produced (Williams 1971 :iii), its popularity and
production largely ceased after 1920.

Architectural Materials
Three artifact classes comprise nearly all of the
architectural materials recovered during the monitoring
phase: nails, flat glass, and bricks. Archaeologists
recognize three basic nail types on historic sites in the
United States (Edwards and Wells 1993:2; Wells 1998).
Wrought iron nails are the earliest type, most common
before the 1830s. Handwrought nails lack uniformity and
are tapered on all sides. Nineteenth-century machine-cut
(or simply 'cut') nails are a second type, characterized by
a square head with two tapered and two parallel edges.
Machine-cut nails were manufactured as early as 1790,
and machine-headed nails were first produced around
1825 (Rosenberg and Kvietok 1981:84). However, cut
nail production did not reach its peak until the period
1850-1888 (Orser 1988:191). Cut nails were gradually
replaced by a third type, wire nails, which are round
headed and processed from metal cylinders. First

Decal-printing, whereby "multicolored paper
patterns are transferred directly onto the surface of a
glazed ceramic" (Haskell 1981:23), was developed in
France around 1850. Decal-printed ceramics were
uncommon in the United States before 1900, but they
quickly rose in popularity in the early twentieth century
(Majewski and O'Brien 1987:147). The edges of these
decorations, which generally comprise polychrome floral
76

CHAPTER V:

Monitoring

(1964) developed a brick index dating technique based
on the overall size of a brick. In theory, large index value
increases represent early bricks and vice versa. However,
Fawcett (1980:114) notes that this dating technique "can
be biased by [variations in brick form resulting from]
specific functional construction needs." Noel Hume
(1969:80) also observes that ''individual bricks are not
nearly as informative as we are often led to believe ...."
The lack of information owes primarily to inconsistencies in the color, shape, and hardness of bricks between
kilns of the same period, or even within a single kiln at
one point in time. Many of the bricks recovered during
the monitoring phase included makers' marks, and such
marks have proven to be the most useful diagnostic
traits. The most complete review of Texas brickmaking,
bricks, and makers' marks has been compiled by Steinbomer (1982).

introduced in France in the early 1800s, wire nail
production in the United States began about 1855
(Shepard 1981:81) .. Wire nails were not widely
distributed until the late 1880s, though by 1902 wire
nails accounted for nearly 100 percent of nail production
(Fontana and Greenleaf 1962).

In their discussion of nail types, Fontana and
Greenleaf (1962) claim that the relative proportion of cut
nails to wire nails can provide a chronological index for
nineteenth-century structures or sites. They suggest the
following five-period chronological scheme: (1) sites
containing exclusively cut nails will tend to predate
1887; (2) sites with 80-99 percent cut nails will
generally date from 1887-1889; (3) sites with 25-79
percent cut nails will date to the period 1889-1895; (4)
sites featuring 1-24 percent cut nails will date to
1896-1902; and (5) sites featuring exclusively wire nails
will postdate 1902. Orser and colleagues (1987:549-588)
present a similar dating key, based on the estimated ratio
of cut to wire nails. However, this chronological index
seemingly relies too heavily on technology dates rather
than discard dates.

Personal Items
This category is associated with clothing, personal
maintenance, adornment, and recreation, and it includes
only a few items from among the materials recovered
during the monitoring phase. The most noteworthy
artifacts in the group are a one-piece, bowl-and-stemstyle, white clay pipe bowl and two white clay pipe stem
fragments. White clay pipes were common in the United
States from early colonial times until the early 1900s.
They often include stamped makers' marks, which are
very useful in providing diagnostic information (Noel
Hume 1969; Shepard 1981:87). Unfortunately, the
molded and fluted pipe bowl recovered does not exhibit a
mark, so that it is largely nondiagnostic.

Flat glass· fragments from window panes are
another major category of architectural materials. The
thickness of flat glass gradually increased throughout the
nineteenth century as the technology for producing larger
and larger sheets of glass emerged (Roenke 1978:
116-117). However, there has been some discussion
over the last 20 years as to whether nineteenth-century
flat glass is a reliable chronological indicator for archaeologists (Moir 1987; Orser 1988; Roenke 1978). The
consensus now seems that flat glass can generate a reliable estimate for site occupation in the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, given an adequate sample and
the presence of other diagnostic artifacts (Orser
1988:191). There are two popular methods for dating flat
glass according to thickness. The first, developed by
Roenke (1978:Table 30) from historic site data in the
Northwest, employs the primary mode of the thickness
data as the chronological determinant. The second, proposed by Moir (1987:Table 5-4) for sites east of the
Continental Divide, employs the mean thickness of the
flat glass data as the indicator. Because none of the flat
glass samples recovered from the monitoring phase are
large, the Roenke model was employed herein to provide
the broadest possible date range rather than any specific
date or date range.

Aside from manufacturers' marks, clay pipe stems
provide chronological information for early historicperiod sites. This is because the bore diameters of clay
pipe stems became increasingly smaller over time
(Harrington 1954). Binford (1961) developed a linear
regression formula for pipe stem dating, so that the mean
bore diameter for pipe stems at a site would yield a
single estimated date. There has been some debate over
the usefulness of Binford's formula, including the claim
that an exponential curve better reflects the trend in bore
diameters than does the straight line model (see Heighton
and Deagan 1972). In either case, the dating of pipe
stems is unreliable after about 1800 when stem diameters
stopped decreasing. The application of such dating
techniques to the recovered pipe stems is not appropriate.

Bricks and brick fragments comprise the last major
constituent of architectural materials. Hand-made bricks
of the nineteenth century are generally earlier than the
more uniform machine-made varieties. In addition, brick
size can be a coarse chronological indicator. South

Numerous shell buttons were also collected during
the monitoring phase, including two-holed, four-holed,
and disc varieties. Commercial production of some shell
and pearl button forms began in the early 1800s (Shepard
1981:83). Prior to the mid nineteenth century, however,
77

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
most pearl and shell buttons were produced in England
(Pool 1987:283). The manufacture of shell buttons
increased rapidly in the United States during the late
nineteenth century, and by 1900, the United States no
longer imported them. Shell buttons were common
throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
as "utilitarian fasteners for shirts, undergarments, and
children's clothes" (Pool 1987:283). Cheaper and moredurable synthetic plastic buttons replaced shell varieties
before World War II.

of a sewer-disconnect trench (East SD #4) between
buildings 105 and 106 in the southea!),tem comer of the
APV project area (see Figure 30; Figure 32). The trench,
located just north of the street that ran between the two
buildings, was approximately 11 m long and 1.2 m wide
along an east-west axis. It reached a maximum depth of
2.7 m below surface at the western end. The eastern end
of the trench was excavated to roughly 1-1.8 m below
surface. Compared to most of the sewer-disconnect
trenches, East SD #4 exposed an exceptionally long and
deep wall profile due to the fact that the sewer line could
not be located.

Several other artifacts may be classified as personal
items for the purposes of this analysis. Included among
these are a porcelain doll head, a metal cosmetic case, a
metal fork fragment, and several marbles.

Five distinct soil horizons were observed in the
trench's north wall during the course of excavation
(Figure 33). A composite profile was recorded as
follows: zone I, 0-46 cm below surface (cmbs), dark
grayish brown loam; zone II, 46-75 cmbs, mottled
strong red and medium brown loam; zone III, 75-195
cmbs, medium brown silt loam; zone IV, 195-235 cmbs,
mottled strong red and medium brown loam with visible
clay inclusions; zone V, 235-270 cmbs, very dark brown
loam with charred wooden timbers. All five depositional
layers contained cultural materials. However, at least
zones II and IV are apparently intentional fill layers, as
evidenced by their drastically mixed and inconsistent
composition.

Miscellaneous
This catch-all group consists of undiagnostic items
such as a horseshoe, a glass insulator, and what appears
to be a physician's reflex hammer. Several other small
unidentified metal fragments are also included.
CULTURAL LOCUS DESCRIPTIONS
The sections that follow describe the archaeological
deposits identified within the APV project area during
the monitoring phase. Because the deposits were often
little more than redeposited concentrations of artifacts
amid construction debris, the term locus was adopted to
reflect the indistinct nature and limits of these areas. The
loci were numbered sequentially in the field as they were
discovered (Figure 32). Their presentation here follows
this numerical order and does not -correspond to their
locations within the project area. Locus descriptions are
presented in a straightforward and standardized format.
The opening paragraph identifies the location and nature
of the archaeological deposit. Information pertaining to
soil composition and site disturbances, when applicable,
is then presented. The observed artifact assemblages are
discussed in terms of diagnostic evidence, including an
inventory of recovered specimens. Since none of the
archaeological loci discovered during monitoring date to
the pre-1880 period of significance as set forth in the
Research Design, they were not formally recorded as
features and are discussed only briefly here. Lastly,
possible interpretations of each locus are suggested, with
specific reference to the chronological evidence and
archival map resources.

Two vertically oriented brick foundation pier
features were also present in the north wall profile.
Feature A, near the east end of the trench, was impacted
by the backhoe during excavation and immediately
identified. This pier (Feature A) was associated with
zone III and measured approximately 70 cm vertically by
25 cm horizontally. It evidently did not extend into the
south profile wall. The bricks in Feature A were
mortared, well-fired, and one was legibly stamped with
the letters 'CORS.' The stamp presumably indicates one
of two twentieth-century Texas brick manufacturers with
similar company names: the Corsicana Press Brick
Company, 1907-1925, or the Corsicana Brick Company,
1912-1934 (Steinbomer 1982).
Feature B, positioned near the midpoint of the
trench's north wall, was subsequently identified after
overnight rains washed the loose soil from the profile.
This pier was additionally present in zone III, though it
did not appear to have been impacted by the excavation.
Feature B exhibits a similar method of construction to
Feature A, though its observable vertical length was
110 cm. Feature B did not extend into the south wall, and
its bricks were not definitively identified.

Locus 1
Locus 1 is an area containing two brick foundation
piers within several strata of archaeological deposition.
The locus was identified during the backhoe excavation

All of the material remains revealed by the trench
excavation, regardless of depositional layer, may be
78

R hob

tian Zone

c

~

101

~

....:i
l,o

206 Wild Basin Rd., Ste. 300
Austin, Texas 78746-3343
Phone: (512) 329-8342 FAX: (512) 327-2453
j(

Figure 32
0

500
Ft
100
0
r---...r---...r-..., m

Cultural Locus Map
Allen Parkway Village

Archaeological Locus

Prepared for. Housing Authority of the City of Houston
Job No.: 447212.00

I Scale: 1"=250'

Drawn by: A Pugh

Date: 5/06/02

File: N:447212/cad/total_station/Fig_32.dgn

-6

.2.
Cl)

~
Cl)

..

§'.
,a

5:

~:!'j

~
1)3

i

W

E

APPROXIMATE SURFACE LEVEL

0-r---~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

'°
c:

~

DARK GRAYISH BROWN LOAM

!!?.

50 -

I._.:.-:_··.·.:.·..::: .-:.·0:·_·._-.:

(I)

·?:·..:.- :.·.·..·. :_.: :~·- .:.-·:.· :.: .·. <_..Mprr~E_D.RF~p!S< ~~OllfN_ ~-o~~-. (II):.-:.··:.:.··..:_.:_:_.:".-:.-:.··:.:.··..:_::_.-:-·.·.:.-

100 MEDIUM BROWN SILT LOAM

150 -

200 ~

I

r.·.· · · · · · · · · ·

. · ... ··MOTTLED RED & BROWN LOAM

(III)

...

250 -

FEATUREB

FEATURE A

PBSJ
O

50

100

150 centimeters

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
• Surveying

Figure 33
LOCUS 1, EAST SD #4
NORTH WALL PROFILE
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

CHAPTER V:

dated to the early twentieth century. In addition to the
brick piers, numerous machine-made bottle fragments,
whiteware sherds, wire nails, and an improved-tooled
bottleneck were observed. Several of the more complete
specimens were collected; these are one miniature
stoneware jug, two clear Gebhardt Eagle Chili Powder
bottles (ca. 1924), and one gilded annular and blueglazed whiteware sherd (post-1900).

Monitoring

clay in the vicinity. Its dimensions measured approximately 30 x 30 cm. The presence of melted glasswares
(clear, amber, and light green), plain whiteware, some
metal fragments, and a presumably butcher'ed bone suggested that Feature C may have been a refuse pit. A
sample of specimens was exposed after a brief shovel
probe into the feature. Most of the material was definitively identified on-site, all of which suggested an earlytwentieth-century derivation. Hence, no further examination of the feature was conducted.

All of the available evidence suggests that the
archaeological remains at Locus 1 represent an earlytwentieth-century context that existed prior to the APV
development in the early 1940s. The foundation piers
and artifacts likely derive from either of the residences at
712 and 714 Hopson Street on the Phillips (parcel 90) or
Trapolino (parcel 91) properties, as indicated on the 1939
Boyles map. Neither nineteenth-century cartographic
sources nor the present artifactual evidence present any
reason to believe that the Locus 1 context predates 1900.

Laboratory analysis of the collected materials (one
unmarked brick, one metal fragment, one melted light
green bottle fragment, and one horseshoe) indicates that
the Locus 3 artifact concentration, including Feature C,
is most likely derived from the early twentieth century.
The high quality of the container glass suggests that
Locus 3 most probably was not associated with the City
Detention Hospital. The artifacts were probably
deposited some time just prior to or during the
redevelopment of the APV area in the 1940s.

Locus 2
Locus 2 was originally recorded as "Feature 2," a
brick foundation pier located during excavation of a
sewer trench at the southeastern comer of Building 105.
This feature was eventually associated \vith Locus 1 and
is incorporated as Feature A in the Locus 1 description.

Locus 4
Locus 4 is a linear brick formation and associated
artifacts on the northern side of Building 157, in the
southwestern portion of the APV project area (see
Figure 32). The bricks were revealed after the demolition
of Building 157, when a bulldozer scraped away
excessive debris from the yard area adjacent to the
foundation. The scattering of bricks formed a consistent
and relatively straight east-west line, just under the yard
surface (10 cmbs) and parallel to both the street north of
Building 157 and the Building 157 foundation
(Figure 34). Depending on the observer, the brick
concentration measured from 18-20 m in length and was
an estimated 80 cm wide. The bricks were closely
aggregated, resting largely on or next to one another.
However, none of the bricks were visibly mortared
together, even though mortar was observed on the
surface. Various similar bricks and a few other artifacts
were observed around the area where Building 157 had
been located, presumably scattered by the demolition and
debris-removing activities.

Locus 3
Locus 3 is a concentration of artifacts near the
eastern end of Building 172, in the northwestern comer
of the APV project area (see Figure 32). The primary
focus of Locus 3 was a possible refuse pit roughly 10 m
south of Building 172, though a scattering of surface
artifacts at and just north of Building 172 was also
included. Artifacts were first exposed during the
demolition of Building 172, when a backhoe track cut a
deep gouge in the surface on the northern side of the
structure. The artifact concentration was relatively
sparse, and judging from the position of the sidewalk to
the south, all of the materials were located within the
first 20 cmbs. Early cartographic documentation of the
area suggested that the materials may have been
associated with a mid- or late-nineteenth-century context.
Considering this possibility, the archaeological monitor
proceeded to record the artifactual remains and recover a
small representative sample for subsequent and moredefinitive identification.

All of the bricks in the aggregate were large, red,
and well fired. The majority were either embossed or
stamped with the name "THURBER BRICK CO."
· According to Steinbomer (1982), the Thurber Brick
Company ofErath County, Texas, was in operation from
1900-1933. This places Locus 4 securely within the
early decades of the twentieth century. Among the other
materials observed were wire nails, blue-glazed
stoneware, embossed clear glass bottle fragments, and an
aqua-colored, improved-tooled bottleneck. A complete

During the subsequent removal of the street
between buildings . 172 and 173, a small feature
(Feature C) was revealed about 30 cmbs. Feature C was
identified as a dark brown, organic silt soil discoloration
that contrasted sharply with the strong yellow and red
81

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
Locus 5

improved-tooled soda bottle was recovered from just
below the surface of the Locus 4 area several weeks
later, after a drainage trench was excavated by the
demolition contractor. It is an aqua-colored Star Bottling
Works soda bottle with a Hutchinson's Spring Stopper
dating to 1880-1915. All of this artifactual evidence
supports the dating of the brick concentration to the post
1900 period.

Locus 5 is a surface and partially subsurface artifact
concentration under the western end of Building 174.
The locus was located just north of the second parking
lot on the extreme western side of the APV project area
(see Figure 32). The artifact scatter was identified after
demolition of Building 174 when a bulldozer cleared the
large pieces of debris and exposed the underlying
surface. Artifacts were scattered over an area measuring
approximately 3 x 3 m. Exploratory probing with a
shovel and trowel indicated that the artifacts extended
below the immediate surface, but did not appear to
extend to any greater depths.
All of the artifactual remains with temporally
diagnostic features indicated a post-1900 (probably post1920s) deposition. The predominant material was
glassware, mainly machine-made bottle fragments of
various colors. Several ceramic specimens, mostly plain
whitewares and senuv1treous wares, and some
unidentified metal fragments were additionally observed
at the location. Nothing was collected from Locus 5.
The tenuous nature of the artifact scattering
precludes any definitive explanation of its depositional
context. However, the 1939 Boyles map does indicate
that the Kapner (parcel 146) and Binz (parcel 147)
properties, as well as a car shed on City of Houston
property, were located off old Timpson Street near the
present area of Locus 5. The material culture may have
had some association with any of these historically
documented properties.
Locus 6
Locus 6 is the location of a human bone recovery in
demolition debris under Building 170, in the extreme
northwestern comer of the APV project area (see
Figure 32). The bone (humerus fragment) was
discovered after the footings under Building 170 were
extracted from the ground. The bone was found eroding
from the north edge of the footing hole, approximately 5
cm below the postdemolition surface level. The footing
hole was obviously disturbed, and recent demolition
debris was scattered throughout the area at the time of
discovery. It was not clear if the bone had been in situ in
the clay matrix or simply lying on top of the clay along
with the other debris. Several additional bone fragments,
which were later determined to be nonhuman, were also
recovered, though no artifactual remains were observed
near the discovery. Because the old city cemetery once
occupied this location, the archaeological monitor
considered the possibility that the bone may have derived
from a nearby burial context.

FIGURE 34. Locus 4, View to West

According to the 1939 Boyles map, the present
location of Building 157 was at or near the intersection
of old Howard and Lamb Streets. Perhaps Locus 4
represents part of a wall or foundation of one of the
structures that occupied the residential zones around this
intersection. The Candela property (parcel 55 on the
Boyles map), located north of Howard Street and west of
Lamb Street, contained numerous structures near the
present Locus 4 area. Brick fall from any of these
buildings was possibly pushed into the area when the
structures were razed for APV development in the 1940s.

82

CHAPTERV:

In an effort to further assess the context of the bone
discovery, a 3-x-3-m excavation unit was established
along a north-south axis with the discovery location as
the center (Figure 35). The unit was manually cleared of
the larger modem debris such as brick fragments, plastic,
and floor tiles. A visual inspection of the area revealed
0 evidence of features resembling a grave pit. A 10-cm
evel was excavated with shovel and trowels within the
-x-3-m square, and the contents were screened (when
ossible) through 1/4-inch wire mesh. The floor of this
vel was inspected, but ·again no evidence of an
tennent was observed. A few small bone fragments,
bsequently identified as fauna! remains, were
covered in the disturbed debris that filled the footing
ole. Removal of this initial 10-cm level exposed a
terile orange clay matrix surrounding the footing hole.

Monitoring

Many of the bricks were firmly set into a layer of
clay, and it was initially believed that they represented a
remnant sidewalk or ~ven a structure floor. While this
may be the case, further field investigations at this
location were not warranted, leaving these initial
impressions unsubstantiated. Unlike the bricks
encountered at Locus 4, none of the bricks in the Locus 7
aggregation appeared to have included a maker's mark.
Their formal characteristics did, nonetheless, suggest
twentieth-century craftsmanship.
Most of the remaining cultural materials, including
plain whiteware, various metal objects, and glass fragments, were undiagnostic. However, several machinemade bottlenecks and wire nails placed the materials in a
context of at least the 1890s, if not the early twentieth
century. Two improved-tooled bottlenecks, exposed
when the yard area south of the brick aggregation was
graded, also indicated a post-1880 context. One of these
is amethyst colored (1880-ca. 1915) and the other is
aqua colored (1870-1915); both were collected. One
18.6-cm-long metal hammer, morphologically similar to
a physician's reflex hammer, was also collected as an
example of one of the more unique items.

Given the sterile clay matrix and lack of burial
vidence, a second 10-cm level was excavated only
ound the immediate area of the footing hole. The floor
f this level revealed no indication of a feature. The pier
ole was then excavated to a maxium depth of 73 cmbs.
he contents of the hole continued to be mixed modem
ash, probably deposited as the demolition debris was
· teared and the surface leveled. The negative results
arranted termination of the unit excavation. All stages
the excavation were photographed, sketched in plan
iew, and described in field notes.

While it is difficult to establish the precise
historical connection to the archaeological remains at
Locus 7, the 1939 Boyles map does show the present
area to have been in the middle of the intersection of old
Timpson and Howard Streets. Both the Palazo property
(parcel 131 ), to the northwest of the intersection, and the
Candela property (parcel 55), to the northeast of the
intersection, included several structures in this general
area. Any of these may have been associated with the
archaeological materials at Locus 7.

Discovery of isolated and fragmentary human
nes was expected due to the removal in 1939,
parently by dragline, of between 900 and 1,000
dividuals from the public cemetery that once occupied
e site. The use of soil from the cemetery as fill material
r low areas of the APV property may have also
attered fragmentary remains, such as that found at
ocus 6, throughout the project area. All other remains
countered at Locus 6 were determined to be
nhuman, and the locus is thus not believed to possess
ny significant cultural resources.

Locus 8
Locus 8 contained a surface brick concentration and
a stratigraphically sealed layer of archaeological
deposition. The surface scatter was initially revealed
when the paved street surface south of buildings 165 and
176 (on the western side of the APV project area) was
removed (see Figure 32). The scatter was located under
the street at a point approximately midway between the
parking lot to the west and the street's cul-de-sac to the
east. The brick aggregate extended across the entire
width of the street and under the sidewalk and yard areas
between buildings 165 and 176. Although the limits of
the artifact concentration were blurred to some extent in
the yard area (Figure 36), the most visible area of surface
scatter was contained within an estimated 16-x-12-m
area. At least a minimal dark soil discoloration
characterized this area. Despite the closely aggregated

Locus 7 is a surface concentration of bricks and
ther associated artifacts between Buildings 178 and
79, near the southwestern comer of the APV project
ea (see Figure 32). The bricks were located under the
eet that ran between the two structures, approximately
7 m east of the nearby parking lot; they were exposed
hen the paved road surface was removed. The brick
gregate extended across the entire width of the street,
d the roughly circular scatter comprised an estimated
meter of 4 m. Several bricks and many of the smaller
rtifacts were scattered on both sides of the street when
e pavement was removed.
83

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

FIGURE 35.

Locus 6 Testing of Isolated Bone Recovery Area

FIGURE 36.

Locus 8, View to North

84

CHAPTER V:

nature of the bricks under the street, no intact brick-andmortar features were observed.

Monitoring

This area corresponds to the present location of Locus 8
and thus is the most probable historical connection to the
archaeological remains,

All of the bricks within Locus 8. were large, dark
red, and well fired. Several of them were either
embossed or stamped with the. aforementioned
"THURBER BRICK CO." According to Steinbomer
(1982), the Thurber Brick Company of Erath County,
Texas, was in operation from 1900-1933. This places
Locus 8 firmly within the first few decades of the
twentieth century. No other artifact types were
encountered during the initial recording of the Locus 8
area.

Locus 9
Locus 9 is a surface concentration of fauna! remains between the southwestern comer of Building 172
and the street to its south (see Figure 32). The bone
scatter was exposed after the demolition of Building 172,
when a bulldozer scraped away excessive debris from the
yard area. Because of its proximity to the old public
cemetery, Locus 9 was initially considered to. be a possible human bone concentration. A representative sample
of the bones was collected for more-definitive identification. Results of the laboratory analyses indicated that no
human bones were present among the scattered faunal
remains. No other artifacts or cultural features were
observed within or near the boundaries of Locus 9. It is
believed that no significant cultural resources exist in
this vicinity.

Several weeks after the initial identification of
Locus 8, a sewer-disconnect trench (West SD #44) was
excavated by a backhoe within the delimited area. The
trench, located just north of the former street at the
southwestern end of Building 165, was 10 m long and
1.2 m wide along an east-west axis. It reached a
maximum depth of 95 cmbs and, in the process, yielded
an adequate subsurface cross section of the Locus 8 area.

Locus 10
Five distinct soil strata were observed in the south
wall profile during the course of the excavation
(Figure 37). A composite soil profile is as follows:
zone I, 0-30 cmbs, recently graded debris in brown silt;
zone II, 30-35 cmbs, tan sand lens; zone III,
35-60 cmbs, dark brown silt; zone IV, 60-80 cmbs, gray
clay loam; zone V, 80-95 cmbs, strong yellow clay.
Zone I was clearly the result of recent demolition and
grading activities in the proje.ct area. Zone III, on the
other hand, was a strongly organic and artifactually rich
layer of cultural deposition. An additional artifact present
near the base of zone II presumably entered the stratum
via some postdepositional formation process. Zones IV
and V, located beneath the artifact-bearing horizon, were
completely devoid of artifacts.

Locus 10 is a buried refuse stratum and a
widespread scatter of surface artifacts between the
eastern ends of buildings 139 and 140 in the
northwestern ·section of the APV project area (see
Figure 32). The archaeological deposit was identified
during the excavation of a sewer-disconnect trench (West
SD #9) by a small backhoe (see Figure 30). The trench,
located southeast of Building 139, was roughly 12 m
long and 0.5 m wide along an east-west axis. It reached a
maximum depth of 78 cmbs. Like the backhoe trench at
Locus 1, SD #9 exposed an exceptionally long wall
profile due to the fact that the sewer line could not be
located.

Several classes of artifacts were observed within
the artifact zone, all of which corroborate the post-1900
context indicated by the surface bricks. The materials
observed included plain whiteware, wire nails, various
bottle glass fragments (clear, aqua, and light green),
complete and fragmented bricks, and unidentified metal
pieces. None of the artifacts were collected.

Four soil horizons were observed in the south wall
profile during the course of the excavation. A composite
profile was recorded as follows: zone I, 0-30 cmbs,
mottled light brown loam; zone II, 30-50 cmbs, dark
brown silt lens; zone III, 50-55 cmbs, gray sand; zone
IV, 55-78 cmbs, dark brown silt loam. Zone II, the only
artifact-bearing stratum, was about 5 m long in the
profile and appeared to have been part of a buried
midden. It is now designated as Feature D.

Given an early-twentieth-century context, the
archaeological remains at Locus 8 likely derive from one
of several residences near the intersection of the old
Timpson and Chambers Streets as indicated on the 1939
Boyles map. The Nash property (parcel 54), in particular,
contained two private residences (807 Timpson Street
and 1315 Chambers Street) and several small
outbuildings on the southeast comer of this intersection.

Nearly all of the material remains revealed by the
trench excavation, including those observed in Feature
D, the excavated backdirt, and the surrounding surface,
firmly indicate an early-twentieth-century context. One
anomaly was the presence of a brown and red transferprinted whiteware sherd. Such an artifact typically
predominates on mid-nineteenth-century archaeological
85

w

E

10
20
30
40
BRICK

50
60
70

GLASS & CERAMIC
FRAGMENTS
NE

NW

0

10

20

30 centimeters
SW

'--v--'

SE

Prome
Alea

a) Profile

b) Photo

PBSJ

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 37

LOCUS 8, EAST SD #44
SOUTH WALL
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE
l:lprojects\he1\clients\hachlcadlfigure37.al

86

CHAPTERV: Monitoring
sites, though its continued use into the turn of the century
is well documented (e.g., Henry and Garrow 1982). A
representative sample of the artifacts observed in
Feature D and the nearby surfaces was recovered for
definitive identification and laboratory analysis: one
brick (Thurber, 1900-1933); one clear glass machinemade pill bottle (1916-1929); one aqua glass machinemade pharmaceutical bottle (post-1893); one aqua glass
.bottle base fragment; one Bristol-slipped stoneware
sherd with blue sponge decoration (post-1900); and one
brown and red transfer-printed whiteware sherd.

Locus 12
Locus 12 is a brick foundation pier among several
sterile strata of soil deposition. The pier was identified
during the backhoe excavation of a sewer-disconnect
trench (East SD #38) at the southeastern end of Building
124 on the eastern side of the APV project area (see
figures 30 and 32). The trench, located just west of a culde-sac, was approximately 4 m long and 1.2 m wide
along a northeast-southwest axis. It reached a relatively
consistent maximum depth of 1.35 m below the surface.
Four distinct soil horizons were observed in all of
the wall profiles during the course of excavation
(Figure 38). The depths of each soil horizon were
remarkably uniform from one side of the trench to the
other, facilitating observation and subsequent profile
recording. Soil stratification was observed as follows:
zone I, 0-45 cmbs, medium brown silt loam; zone II,
45.,..55 cmbs, mottled yellow and brown clay loam; zone
III, 55-85 cmbs, gray clay loam; zone IV, 85-135 cmbs,
strong yellow clay. Beyond the brick foundation pier,
none of the soil horizons contained any cultural
materials.

The 1939 Boyles map indicates that no structures
were standing in the Locus 10 area prior to the APV
development. The property, owned by the City of
Houston, was apparently a vacant lot in the late 1930s. A
small refuse disposal pit may have been utilized in that
vicinity.
Locus 11
Locus 11 is an extremely dense surface artifact
concentration beneath the street and parking lot area west
of Building 172 in the northwestern comer of the APV
project area (see Figure 32). The scatter was identified
after the western side of the parking lot pavement was
removed. Located in soil that was considerably charred,
the artifact concentration covered an approximate surface
area of 18 x 12 m. Shovel probing within this delimited
area did indicate, however, that the deposit was rather
shallow, extending only 10-20 cmbs.

The intact brick-and-mortar foundation pier, now
identified as Feature E, was observed near the northern
end of the trench's southeastern wall. Though it
protruded slightly from the wall, it appeared to have
suffered only minor impact by the backhoe excavation. It
was securely positioned in the clay loam of zone III and
measured 30 cm vertically by about 50 cm horizontally.
Evidently, Feature E extended neither downward into
zone IV nor across the trench into the northwestern wall.
It did appear to have once extended upward into what is
now zone II. However, the top of the pier may have been
dismantled during the original development of APV, and
the area was then likely capped with a dense layer of clay
loam fill. The bricks in Feature E were well fired, and the
mortar appeared to have been refined to a high quality.
No makers' marks were observed on the bricks.

While several different · artifact classes were
observed within the Locus 11 area, the predominant
category was container glass. All of the observed
glassware, including bottlenecks, body fragments, and
bases, was clearly machine-made. Many of the glass
fragments had melted. In addition, plain semivitreous
ceramic sherds, various unidentified metal fragments,
and several battery cores were present at the location.
Like the glassware, many ceramic specimens were
charred from fire. All of the material culture evidence
indicates a twentieth-century deposition. No complete
specimens were encountered and none of the artifacts
were
collected.
The
clear
twentieth-century
characteristics of the Locus 11 area did not warrant any
further investigations.

Lacking manufacturers' marks on the bricks and
any other cultural material, it is difficult to deduce a precise chronological penod for !he placement and use of
Feature E. Nonetheless, the formal characteristics of the
bricks and mortar suggest twentieth-century craftsmanship. The bricks looked very similar to those manufactured by the Thurber and Corsicana Brick Companies in
the first three decades after 1900. The foundation pier
most likely derives from one of the structures that stood
in the area prior to the APV development in the early
1940s. Indeed, the 1939 Boyles map shows a structure on
the Fillipone property (parcel 76) at this precise location,
at 838 Arthur Street.

Locus 11 is obviously a burned refuse area. The
material was likely deposited and burned just before or
during the APV development in the 1940s. Proir to that
time, the Locus 11 property was owned by the City of
Houston and was the site of the old cemetery.

87

-6

l5:

s

N

6"'
[

5:

i

i\l

I

"'c:

i

~.

r
50 --1

MOTTLED YELLOW & BROWN CLAY LOAM

I

(II)

I · ··· · · · · · .. ·· · ·· · . · · ··..: '.

I

00
00

go100- I
FEATUREE
(BRICK PIER)

110-

STRONG YELLOW CLAY

(IV)

120130-

NW

0

10

!ltl.~1\'.4~':11

20

Pro~le

30 centimeters

/l

(/P~~ea

!~!

SW

SE

PBSJ

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 38
LOCUS 12, EAST SD #38
SOUTHEAST WALL PROFILE
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

CHAPTERV: Monitoring

Locus 13

APV project area, few container glass fragments were
observed at Locus 13: Such glasswares generally serve as
the most reliable chronological indicators for latenineteenth- and early-twentieth-century ~chaeological
sites.

Locus 13 contains a brick foundation pier within a
subsurface stratum of archaeological deposition. The
locus was identified during the excavation of a sewerdisconnect trench (East SD #45) near the northeastern
corner of Building 118 on the eastern side of the APV
project area (see figures 30 and 32). The trench, located
just south of the street that ran between Buildings 117
and 118, was excavated by a small backhoe. The trench
measured approximately 5 m long and 0.5 m wide along
an east-west axis. The trench also reached maximum
depths of 80 cmbs and 20-60 cmbs at the eastern and
western ends, respectively.

Given the nature of the brick pier and the sparse
artifact remains, it is believed that Locus 13 is associated
with an early-twentieth-century context. That being the
case, Locus 13 likely derives from one of the structures
that stood in the area prior to APV development in the
early 1940s. Interestingly, the 1939 Boyles map indicates
a privy near the present location of Locus 13. The privy
is shown to be behind the structure at 837 Arthur Street
on the Taylor property (parcel 82). However, the on-site
observations of Locus 13 do not necessarily corroborate
such a historical connection.

Due to the relative shallowness of SD #45, only
two soil horizons were visible in the wall profiles
(Figure 39). The depths of the two strata varied
dramatically from one end of the trench to the other.
Most importantly, the artifact-bearing zone (I) extended
into considerably deeper levels at the western end of the
trench. Conversely, the second stratum, which was so
prominent at the eastern end of the trench, was not even
encountered at the trench's western end. A composite
soil profile may be offered as follows: zone I, 0-10 cmbs
(east) and 0-60 cmbs (west), medium brown loam;
zone II, 10-80 cmbs (east) and unknown (west), tan clay.

Locus 14

Locus 14 is a sparse surface artifact scatter beneath
the parking lot on the extreme western side of the APV
project area (see Figure 32). The scatter was exposed
when the paved surface south of Building 174 and west
of Building 175 was removed. Once exposed, the ground
surface at Locus 14 was quickly saturated with nearby
standing water. Indeed, much of the area became largely
inundated. Given the poorly drained surface condition, it
was not possible to adequately discern the limits of the
artifact scatter. Nonetheless, the area was roughly
approximated to be 10 x 10 m. Early cartographic documents suggested that the materials may have been associated with a nineteenth-century context. Considering
this possibility, the archaeological monitor proceeded to
record the area and to recover a small representative
sample for subsequent and more-definitive identification.

The primary focus of Locus 13 was an intact brick
foundation pier, now referred to as Feature F. This
structural feature, near the center of SD #45, was
impacted by the backhoe during excavation and immediately identified. Feature F was encountered at about
20 cmbs and was still intact at the base of the trench,
indicating that it extended to a depth greater than that
which had been exposed. The feature measured
approximately 1 m wide near the base of the trench.
Several bricks were dislodged from the upper portion of
the pier during excavation, providing an opportunity to
examine them for maker's marks. Unfortunately, none of
the inspected bricks included marks, though their formal
characteristics were consistent with those of twentiethcentury manufacturers.

No data on the soil composition of the immediate
Locus 14 area could be collected under the circumstances of inundation. However, a sewer-disconnect
trench (West SD #36) excavated at the northwestern end
of Building 175 provides a relatively good example of
soil deposition in the general vicinity. The east-westoriented trench reached a maximum depth of 115 cmbs;
and a composite soil profile was observed as follows:
zone I, 0-30 cmbs, gray sand (intentional fill); zone II,
30-70 cmbs, mottled red and yellow clay loam; zone III,
70-90 cmbs, dark grayish brown silt loam; zone IV,
90-115 crnhs; strong yellow clay. None of the soil horizons in West SD #36 yielded any cultural materials.

In addition to Feature F, a few other artifacts were
exposed during the trench excavation. As none of the
artifacts were immediately identified as being temporally
diagnostic, a small representative sample was collected
for laboratory analysis-one unmarked brick, one
molded blue-edged whiteware sherd, one charred plain
whiteware sherd, and one clear glass rod fragment.
Unfortunately, none of the collected items are strongly
diagnostic, though the glass rod appears to be too refined
for a pre-1900 manufacture date. Interestingly, and in
contrast to most of the other cultural loci identified in the

Despite the sparse nature of the surface scatter,
several different artifact classes were observed at
89

1
~

~

CD

~

ii>

"~

~

~
~

"'
c:

~

!"

!!?.

E

w

SURFACE

20
40

TAN CLAY

(II)

PIER
FEATUREF

60
\0

so-1.~~~~~~~~~~-,---~~~~'--~~~---

0

SEWER LINE

BRICK LENS

PBSJ
0

20

40

60 centimeters

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure 39
LOCUS 13, EAST SD #45
SOUTH WALL PROFILE
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

CHAPTER

v:

Monitoring

the location predates 1880. The material most likely
derived from a slightly later occupation of the area. A
structure at 1410 Chambers Street on the Kapner
property (parcel 146) existed in this vicinity, as indicated
on the 1939 Boyles map. The same map also identifies
the Binz property (parcel 147) and a car shed near the
location.

cus 14. A representative sample of this material was
ecovered: three clear glass machine-made bottlenecks
ost-1893); one aqua glass patent medicine bottle panel
agment; one blue transfer-printed whiteware sherd
1820s-ca. 1900); one flow blue whiteware sherd
1840-ca. 1920); one cosmetic case; and two twentiethqentury plastic buttons.
With the exception of the two plastic buttons, all of
artifacts can be dated to the tum of the nineteenth
tury (ca. 1890-1910). Three bottlenecks firmly place
e material in at least the 1890s, if not the early
entieth century. The popularity of patent medicine
ttles at the tum of the century is also well established.
oth of the ceramic types recovered, transfer-print and
w blue, were popular in the mid nineteenth century.
et, the use of these ceramic types did not diminish until
e early twentieth century.

Locus 15

Locus 15 is a widespread surface scatter of artifacts
under the western two-thirds of Building 111 on the
eastern side of the APV project area (see Figure 32). The
locus was revealed after the demolition of Building 111,
when a bulldozer cleared excessive debris from the
foundation area (Figure 40). Two dense artifact
concentrations, designated A and B, are contained within
the larger area of surface scatter. Locus 15A was initially
revealed near the middle of the former structure and
encompassed a 9.5-x-5.5-m rectangular area. Locus 15B,
a 5-x-5-m area originally designated Feature 17 (Locus
17), was identified roughly 50 m west of Locus 15A,
near the western end of Building 111. Though these
areas were clearly distinguished by dense concentrations
of materials, a consistent low density surface scatter
visibly linked them.

All of the archaeological evidence does, therefore,
ggest that Locus 14 represents a tum-of-the-century
ntext, possibly as much as 50 years prior to the APV
elopment. It is unlikely that the materials represent
ything later than 1920. The 1880 census map does
dicate an unspecified structure at or near the present
cation of Locus 14. However, no structural features
re observed, and there is little material indication that

FIGURE 40. Locus 15A and 15B

91

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
The preliminary report on the Phase 1-A investigations indicated that Locus 15 corresponds to test trench
6, which had revealed two intact brick buiding piers and
a large quantity of artifacts. As cited in the preliminary
report, historical documentation (1870 census) suggested
that a nineteenth-century structure once stood in the present vicinity. Later maps, including the 1927 Sanborn
and 1939 Boyles maps, indicated that the Locus 15 area
was probably the former location of a house at 806
Crosby Street. Considering these findings, the area was
determined to have the potential for remnant middle- or
late-nineteenth-century contexts. Concurrently, the
trench 6 investigations suggested that the surface scatter
derived from highly disturbed contexts. The data from
trench 6 indicated that any in situ, undisturbed features
should have been deeply buried at this location.
The artifactual remains for Locus 15A and Locus
15B were recorded separately for comparative purposes.
In addition, a small representative sample was recovered
from each high density location for definitive
identification of temporally diagnostic materials. These
artifacts are listed in Table 6.
TABLE

Count

6: Artifacts from Loci 15A and 15B
Artifact

Locus 15A
1
Soda bottle, aqua [Houston Coca
Cola Bottling Co.]

Dates
1892-ca. 1920
FIGURE 41. Locus 15 Detail of Artifact Scatter

Machine-made bottle, clear

post-1893

2

Improved-tooled bottlenecks, clear

1870-1915

2

Improved-tooled bottlenecks, amber

1870-1915

1

Improved-tooled bottleneck, aqua

1870-1915
post-1886

Bottle base fragment, amber
Flow blue whiteware

In addition to the collected items, several artifact
classes were observed within the delimited areas of high
artifact concentration. At Locus 15A, such items
included plain whiteware, Albany-slipped stoneware,
olive-green bottle glass, amethyst glass (1880-ca. 1918),
wire nails, and assorted faunal remains. One particularly
noteworthy item was a well-fired brick with the
trademark "FERRIS HOUSTON."

1840-ca. 1920

Locus 15B
Improved-tooled bottleneck, clear
Flow blue whiteware

1870-1915
1840-ca. 1920

The mark is that of the Ferris Brick Company,
which operated in Houston from 1936-1938 (Steinbomer
1982). At Locus 15B, plain whitewares, container glass
:fragments (olive-green, amber, milk, and light green), a
metal fork :fragment, and numerous unidentified metal
:fragments were observed.

Hand-painted earthenware, polychrome

All of the available evidence from the recovered
materials suggests that Locus 15A and Locus 15B were
contemporaneous. The widespread surface scatter under
Building 111 apparently derives from the tum of the
nineteenth century, with emphasis on the first two
decades of the twentieth century (ca. 1895-1915). As is
often the case, the numerous bottle :fragments throughout
Locus 15 proved to be the most reliable chronological
indicators. The ceramics and flat glass :fragments were
too few to provide any precise chronological information
(Figure 41).

With the exception of the brick, the material
remains consistently indicate an early-twentieth-century
deposition. Little evidence exists to support a date prior
to 1890. Taken with the data recovered from Trench 6 of
the Phase 1-A investigations, Locus 15 appears to be in a
highly disturbed context and disassociated :from the
deeply buried structural features.
92

CHAPTERV: Monitoring
indicates either a mixed or post-1880 context. The
available evidence, including the lack of stratigraphic
information, thus pre~luded any definitive dating of
Locus 16 at the time. It should be noted that the 1907
Sanborn map does indicate a residence at 909 Lamb
Street, in the present vicinity of Locus 16. Because a
definitive association between Locus 16 and the structure
was undetermined, this locus was recommended and
approved by the SHPO for further investigation during
the Phase 1-B survey efforts (see Chapter IV, Survey
Results, for Phase 1-B Trench 10).

Locus 16 is a high-density subsurface artifact
concentration at the northwest end of Building 149 near
the southern boundary of the APV project area (see
Figure 32). The artifacts were exposed during the
backhoe excavation of a sewer-disconnect trench (West
SD #56) in the yard area between buildings 148 and 149.
e trench was oriented east-west and measured
pproximately 4 m long and 1.2 m wide. Because the
ewer line was encountered at a relatively shallow depth,
e trench extended to only 50 cmbs. The single soil
tratum exposed may be described as dark brown silt

Locus 17

foam.
Locus 17 was originally recorded as Feature 17 and
later combined with Area B of Locus 15, described
above .

During excavation, numerous artifacts were evident
in the backdirt and scattered throughout the shallow
•trench. Most of the material was whiteware, though a
wide variety of fragmented glassware (aqua, amber, and
clear) was also observed. No diagnostic artifacts were
intially observed. Over the next 4 days, rain showers
exposed an even larger number of artifacts at Locus 16,
and this provided a better opportunity for closer
inspection.

Locus 18
Locus 18 contains a refuse pit feature and a widely
scattered surface artifact concentration. The locus was
encountered less than 10 m west-southwest of Building
146 at the western boundary of the rehabilitation zone
(see figures 30 and 32). The refuse pit was exposed
during the backhoe excavation of a long drainage trench
running north and south along the western edge of the
rehabilitation zone. The trench was excavated to variable
depths, but at the Locus 18 location it measured
approximately 1.2 m wide and 1.3 m deep. Artifacts
believed to be associated with the refuse pit were
subsequently observed in the backdirt piles and the
surrounding ground surfaces. Artifacts were identified on
both the eastern and western sides of the trench in a
roughly 15-m2 area.

Upon further examination, several interesting items
were discovered and then collected from the scattered
packdirt (Table 7). Foremost among these were an intact
olin pipe bowl and two kaolin pipe stem fragments.
though the pipe bowl and pipe stems cannot be
urely dated, they are similar to pipes that were
mmon in the mid nineteenth century. Two other
'fact types common in the mid 1800s, transfer-printed
\Vhiteware and shell buttons, were also collected.
TABLE 7.

Count

Artifacts from Locus 16
Artifact

Two distinct soil zones were observed in the wall
profiles of the drainage trench (at the immediate
Locus 18 area) during the course of excavation. A
composite profile was recorded as follows: zone I, 0-30
cmbs, medium brown loam including recently graded
debris; zone II, 30-130 cmbs, mottled red and gray clay
subsoils. An occasional artifact was observed in zone I,
probably trampled into the ground surface with the
graded debris. Zone II, however, was completely devoid
of artifacts. Because the trench was intended to drain the
excess standing water from the western side of the APV
project area, it quickly filled with water. This made
examination of the more deeply exposed wall profiles
rather difficult.

Dates

White clay pipe bowl
2
1

White clay pipe stems
Brown transfer-print whiteware sherd

ca. 1830-1900

Lead-glazed red earthenware sherd
Pharmaceutical bottle
2

post-1903

Shell buttons
Annular stoneware sherd
Plain whiteware

The recovery of these items at the same location
suggested the strongest possibility of a pre-1880
component during the monitoring phase. However, all of
these items have use date ranges that extend into the late ·
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The presence of
a twentieth-century pharmaceutical bottle also clearly

The refuse pit, designated as Feature G, was clearly
revealed in the west wall of the drainage trench
(Figure 42). The richly organic dark brown silt
contrasted sharply with the surrounding gray and red
93

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
clay matrix. The feature's appearance in the profile was
rectangular, and its vertical orientation extended the
entire length from surface to the base (as far as it could
be observed). It measured nearly 50 cm wide and
approximately 130 cm deep.

loose soil from the backdirt piles. The initial inspection
of the area generated suspicion that some of the surface
artifacts may have predated those in Feature G.
Therefore, a small representative sample was collected
for further laboratory analysis and· definitive
identification (Table 8). The results of the artifact
analysis, based primarily on bottle morphology, suggest
an early-twentieth-century derivation for the recovered
materials, perhaps 1900-1915. In addition, at least 20
wire nails were observed but not recovered from the area
of surface scatter. The predominance of wire nails on
historic archaeological sites is generally indicative of the
period after 1902.
TABLE 8:

Count

Artifacts from Locus 18
Artifact

Improved-tooled bottleneck, selenium
treated
Improved-tooled bottleneck, aqua
Improved-tooled bottleneck, amethyst

2

Dates
ca. 1914-1915
1870-1915
1880-ca. 1915

Improved-tooled bottleneck, clear

1870-1915

Machine-made bottleneck, clear

post-1893

Bottle fragment, amethyst

1880-ca. 1918

Glass tableware fragment, amethyst

1880-ca. 1918

Beer bottle base, amber
Plain whiteware [Alfred Meakin]
3

Whiteware, decoration indeterminate

3

She11 buttons

post-1880

Ceramic figurine fragment

FIGURE

Based on the observed and recovered materials
from Locus 18, there is little evidence to support a pre1900 date for either Feature G or the associated surface
scatter. Given an early-twentieth-century context, it is
probable that the area was associated with the
neighborhood that existed prior to the APV development
in the 1940s. Two residences on the Candela property
(parcel 55)-located at 814 and 816 Lamb Street-are
shown to be in this precise location on the 1939 Boyles
map. Each of the structures possessed adequate rear yard
space, and either such area may have served as a viable
location for a refuse pit like Feature G.

42. Locus 18, Detail of Refuse Pit

A large quantity of artifacts was observed in situ
throughout what was, essentially, a cross section of the
midden feature. Among the observed materials were
unmarked bricks and brick fragments, wire nails, plain
whitewares, a machine-made bottleneck, and an
assortment of bottle glass fragments (clear, amber, and
light green). The bottle glass was characterized by the
refined and consistent qualities of machine-made bottles
after 1920. None of the other in situ material was
considered strongly diagnostic, and there was no
indication that earlier materials were subpositioned to
these post-1900 artifacts.

Locus 19
Locus 19 is a subsurface midden feature and a
widespread scatter of surface and subsurface artifacts
between buildings 120 and 121 (see Figure 32). The
surface scatter was initially identified at the eastern end
of Building 121, after the structure had been demolished
and its debris had been cleared by a bulldozer
(Figure 43a). Because several of the specimens

The examination of the nearby surface scatter was
conducted over several days, as it was facilitated by
occasional rain showers that washed away much of the
94

CHAPTER V:

a

b
FIGURE 43.

Locus 19. (a) view to west; (b) detail of shovel test.

95

Monitoring

CHAPTER V:

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
clay matrix. The feature's appearance in the profile was
rectangular, and its vertical orientation extended the
entire length from surface to the base (as far as it could
be observed). It measured nearly 50 cm wide and
approximately 130 cm deep.

Monitoring

loose soil from the backdirt piles. The initial inspection
of the area generated suspicion that some of the surface
artifacts may have predated those in Feature G.
Therefore, a small representative sample was collected
for further laboratory analysis and definitive
identification (Table 8). The results of the artifact
analysis, based primarily on bottle morphology, suggest
an early-twentieth-century derivation for the recovered
materials, perhaps 1900-1915. In addition, at least 20
wire nails were observed but not recovered from the area
of surface scatter. The predominance of wire nails on
historic archaeological sites is generally indicative of the
period after 1902.
TABLE 8:

Artifacts from Locus 18
Artifact

Count

Improved-tooled bottleneck, selenium
treated
Improved-tooled bottleneck, aqua
Improved-tooled bottleneck, amethyst

2

Dates
ca. 1914-1915
1870-1915
1880-ca. 1915

Improved-tooled bottleneck, clear

1870-1915

Machine-made bottleneck, clear

post-1893

Bottle fragment, amethyst

1880-ca. 1918

Glass tableware fragment, amethyst

1880-ca. 1918

a

Beer bottle base, amber
Plain whiteware [Alfred Meakin]
3

Whiteware, decoration indeterminate

3

Shell buttons

post-1880

Ceramic figurine fragment

FIGURE 42.

Based on the observed and recovered materials
from Locus 18, there is little evidence to support a pre1900 date for either Feature G or the associated surface
scatter. Given an early-twentieth-century context, it is
probable that the area was associated with the
neighborhood that existed prior to the APV development
in the 1940s. Two residences on the Candela property
(parcel 55)-located at 814 and 816 Lamb Street-are
shown to be in this precise location on the 1939 Boyles
map. Each of the structures possessed adequate rear yard
space, and either such area may have served as a viable
location for a refuse pit like Feature G.

Locus 18, Detail of Refuse Pit

A large quantity of artifacts was observed in situ
throughout what was, essentially, a cross section of the
midden feature. Among the observed materials were
unmarked bricks and brick fragments, wire nails, plain
whitewares, a machine-made bottleneck, and an
assortment of bottle glass fragments (clear, amber, and
light green). The bottle glass was characterized by the
refined and consistent qualities of machine-made bottles
after 1920. None of the other in situ material was
considered strongly diagnostic, and there was no
indication that earlier materials were subpositioned to
these post-1900 artifacts.

Locus 19
Locus 19 is a subsurface midden feature and a
widespread scatter of surface and subsurface artifacts
between buildings 120 and 121 (see Figure 32). The
surface scatter was initially identified at the eastern end
of Building 121, after the structure had been demolished
and its debris had been cleared by a bulldozer
(Figure 43a). Because several of the specimens

The examination of the nearby surface scatter was
conducted over several days, as it was facilitated by
occasional rain showers that washed away much of the
94

b
FIGURE 43.

Locus 19. (a) view to west; (b) detail of shovel test.

95

;I

Ii
I!

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

Nine distinct soil zones were observed in the north
wall once the new profile had been exposed (Figure 44).
The depths of these zones varied, but a composite profile
may be offered as follows: zone I, 0-20 cmbs, grayish
brown loam; zone II, 20-30 cmbs, strong yellow sand;
zone III, 30-45 cmbs, medium brown loam; zone IV,
45-55 cmbs, light gray sand; zone V, 55-60 cmbs,
strong yellow sand loam; zone VI, 60-110 cmbs, dark
brown silt (Feature H); zone VII (intrusive), 90-110
cmbs, grayish brown loam; zone VIII, 110-125 cmbs,
dark tan sand; zone IX, 125-145 cmbs, gray clay.
Artifacts were sparsely scattered throughout the upper
five zones, all of which appeared to exhibit some degree
of disturbance. Zone VI (Feature H) was the true artifactbearing midden, and a very dense concentration of
artifacts existed in this richly organic layer. Feature H
was also clearly visible in the south wall of East SD #85
(Figure 45). However, it was located considerably deeper
in the profile (110-130 cmbs), possibly indicating a
north-to-south downward-sloping orientation for this
depositional stratum. No cultural materials were
observed in zones VII, VIII, and IX.

When first observed, the surface artifact scatter
appeared to have been concentrated within an
approximate 5-x-5-m area. Much of this material,
including an applied-tooled bottleneck, an improvedtooled bottleneck, stoneware, and whiteware probably
surfaced during the foundation removal at the eastern
end of Building 121. However, continuous monitoring of
the location later suggested that both surface and
subsurface deposits extended over an area approximately
30 m (north-south) by 15 m (east-west).
The shovel test provided an initial view of the
subsurface soil composition and stratification. The
results of the test were as follows:
0-30 cmbs
30-50 cmbs
50-60 cmbs

S:

assistance of one of the backhoe operators. The south
wall suffered less erosion, and the eastern end of the
profile needed only to be shaved clean with a flat-head
shovel and trowel.

possessed formal characteristics that typify nineteenthcentury manufacture, a 30-x-30-cm shovel test was
immediately conducted to investigate the potential for
more deeply buried deposits. The shovel test indicated
that buried deposits did, in fact, exist (Figure 43b). Two
sewer-disconnect trenches (East SD #84 and East SD
#85) were subsequently excavated between buildings
120 and 121, and these exposed a considerable amount
of buried materials. In fact, East SD #85 exposed a very
clear cross section of the buried midden, and this proved
to be essential to determinations of chronology and
historical significance.

As previously mentioned, both surface and
subsurface artifact densities at Locus 19 were quite high.
The early discovery of an applied-tooled bottleneck (ca.
1825-1875) on the surface warranted the recovery of a
representative artifact sample for further laboratory
analysis and definitive identification. The extensive and
relatively intact nature of the midden deposit also yielded
several complete cultural items that were also recovered.
All of the collected materials from Locus 19 are listed in
Table 9.

grayish brown loam: bottle glass, flat
glass, and whitewares
brown clay loam: stoneware, whiteware
soup tureen lid
strong yellow sand loam: bottle glass,
utility glass, stoneware

While it was believed that the area contained a
buried refuse deposit, the midden feature was not readily
discernible in the shovel test. Hence, the feature was not
formally identified until the subsequent excavation of
East SD #85.

;:jQ

With the exception of the applied-tooled bottleneck,
all of the material remains in the Locus 19 vicinity
(regardless of depositional stratum) may be confidently
dated to the early twentieth century. The diagnostic
materials consistently indicate the period of 1900-1920
as the likely time bracket for deposition. Moreover, the
vast majority of the materials derive from a domestic, or
kitchen group (see South 1977), assemblage rather than
architectural or personal group categories. This supports
the notion that Feature H was an intentional site for the
disposal of domestic refuse and not the remains of a
96

irl~

~~

(!)~

Ol

>-:6

;:

6~

Ole

c:

(!) _,

60

g:

:;
VI

g: 0

CJ)

LOW

~
0

c: 0

·;;:U g>

CJ)

w

w CCI)
• 0.

...

I II II I

§
Ci)

s:

~

C§
-.J

~

c

~

~
<:

~

~
ti

~

(!)

0

C')

0

'<t"

0

LO

0

<D

0

t--

0

co

0

0)

0

0
.,._

....

<(

1

u::

00

_Jz

w

z

~-io
of!

z

0
.,._
.,._

0
C\J
.,._

0

C')

.,._

0

'<t"
.,._

97

$:

U)

I ; I; I; I
I II II I
I I I
I II I I I
I II II I
II II I
II II I
II I I
I I II
I II II
I II II
I II I I

w

U)

it..:

~

(])

(])

E

:;:::;

c:

(])

(.)

0

C')

0
C\l

6
.,._
0

l:\projects\he1\clients\hach\447212\cadlfigure44.ai

0)-~
.,._
(/) :r:
:J I() cc

C>

$:

I; I; I; I

_J

w...J

:J

1

>-1 I I
"t: I
I (3 I I I
11 ~111
I ~1 1

II I I II I
II I I II I
I I II I
I I II I
I II I
I I I
I II I

co
~
s;:

I- cc
(/) £L

(])

I II
I I I I
I I I II
I I I I
I I II
I II II I
I II II I
I II II I
I I I I I ·1
1
II II II I
I ~1 1 1

I I; I; I ; I; I

a
a:

0
C\l

;:::::

I ; I ; I; I; I
II I I II II I
I I I I I
I II II II I I I
II I I II II II I
II I I II II II I
1
1 1 1 1
1b 1 1 1
I cl I I 1
I I I f- ij3 I I I I
:::::!-o I I I
I I I I Cf.l~ I I I I I I I
11111~:Z::l1111 I
I I I I I I a?~ I I I I I; I
I I I I I I cx:i 'fil I I I I
1
1
1
1
I I I I ~~1 1 1 1
1111111ti'11111111
II II II II I I II II I II I
I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I .1
I I II II II II II I
II II II II II I

~

0
.,._

-;:;-

u:::

'<t"
'<t"

w

II

I; I; I; I
I I I I
I I I II II I

~

~

_J

(/) 0

<I>-·-

<1>.E ~
.E
c: >
O)<I> ...
c: E ::i

Among those items observed but not collected were
numerous machine-made bottle fragments (amber, clear,
and. milk glass), plain whitewares, semivitreous ceramics, shell buttons, unidentified brick and metal fragments,
and assorted small-bodied faunal remains.

The buried midden, designated as Feature H, was
fully exposed during the backhoe excavation of East SD
#85. The trench, located at the northeastern end of
Building 121 (just west of the cul-de-sac), was
approximately 5 m long and 1.5 m wide along an eastwest axis. It reached a maximum depth of 145 cmbs. The
trench was excavated during heavy rains, and it was
filled with standing water by the following morning.
Given these circumstances, precise recording of the wall
profiles and artifact recovery were postponed for several
days. The rains had eroded part of the initially exposed
north wall, so that once the standing water subsided, the
east end of the north wall was cut back about 20 cm to
expose a clean profile. This was accomplished with the

S:

_,o~

0

UJ

0

<(
_J
_J

>

~

5

:::.:::

a:

Cf
2

UJ

_J
_J

<(

CHAPTER V: Monitoring
O>

c

:;::

s

=II:_

<D-·<D.E ~
cc>
'6> <D ...

Cl)

0

·;:: () c

c E:i
WcCI)

· .......·..
. . .... .·...
'
.:
. . "'.:: ·. •,'.'
.. · .... . ..
· ..
. ..... .
. '.· ....
.: : ·. . .
· .. ·· ..
....
·.·· . ·..
....
.· .. ·..

.
. ·........ .
... ·.·
.........
·. " .. . . .
. . ·:....

~

(§

··".

·:

. . .· .· ..
...J
" •
~ .. : ". :
c:.i . . '',. .""..
S:

~ .::_-,: ..-.·:....:·.::
I I
I I

~

.... :°S'" .. ..

o(j

• ::

~

I

~ .....

...J

~

< ,'•
0 ,"

""··s:
o:
.'.:a~.

i=:: .

6

d1
.:>~ .' . <:'_': ;.
>~I

,<!J I

:

I

l~I

~0::

I I I
I I

-l

s:
1::::..1

I

I ~

I'SC 1
131

1

::i ·.

.· .. " .
...
. " ...
..· .·
... ·· ..

1

O>

u:::

~

a)~

~0:

;; I
:J I-

z

00
_J Cl)

-I
-I
<(

() :J

ct

UJ

TABLE 9:

Count

Artifacts from Locus 19
Artifact

Applied-tooled bottleneck, olive green

Patent medicine bottle, clear

w

z

w

oui

5:
z

CJ)

5:
CJ)

1916-1929
1880-1920

Wide-mouth bottle, clear [Premier]

1911-1929
1870-1915

2

Improved-tooled bottlenecks, aqua

1870-1915

2

Improved-tooled bottlenecks, amethyst

7-35 cmbs

1880-ca. 1915

Machine-made bottleneck, clear

post-1893

Machine-made bottleneck, cobalt

post-1893

1

Patent medicine bottle fragments, clear
post-1874

T'"

0
C\J

0
(')

0

"<!'

0
<O

0
I"-

0
00

Drinking glass, light green

0

0
0

,...

Flat glass, light green

0

0

0

T'"
T'"

T'"

T""

C\J

(')

3

2

1830s-ca. 1900

Bristol-slipped stoneware, blue
sponging

post-1900

Bristol-slipped stoneware, green
sponging

post-1900

Salt-glazed stoneware

Decal-printed and gilded annular
whiteware

post-1900

Modern light blue transfer-print
whitewares

post-1900

Japanese Imari porcelain

1868-1912

99

98

35-49 cmbs

mottled light brown coarse sand and
gray clay loam

49-68 cmbs

grayish brown clay loam with brick and
concrete fragments

A representative sample of the material remains
from the shovel test and the surface scatter was collected
(Table 10). Among the materials observed but not
collected were plain whitewares, semivitreous wares,
wire nails, a machine-made bottle, and various container
glass fragments (clear, amber, light green, olive green,
and milk). Taken together, the observed and recovered
materials roughly suggest the time period of ca.
1890-1910. Several broadly diagnostic artifacts (i.e.,
transfer-printed whiteware and flat glass) do suggest that
at least some late-nineteenth-century materials are
present. However, two marked ceramic sherds and the
machine-made bottle securely place Locus 20 in the
post-1880 period.

post-1850

Brown transfer-print whiteware

Blue-banded slipware

l:\projectslhe1\clientslhach\447212\cad\figure45.ai

grayish brown clay loam

Flat glass, nonwindow, light green
3

1 1 1~1

0)

charred medium brown loose silt

All of the soil strata, including the charred refuse
area, appeared to be heavily disturbed. The soil stain,
now designated as Feature I, was very shallow, and all
cultural materials were recovered from the first 15 cmbs.

Whiteware soup tureen lid, 4 pieces
0

Locus 20 is a small area of burnt refuse deposition
and surface artifact scatter north of Building 111 on the
east side of the APV project area (see Figure 32). The
archaeological deposit was revealed when the paved
street surface running between Buildings 110 and 111
was removed. A charred soil stain, measuring roughly 50
x 100 cm, clearly contrasted with the surrounding matrix.
Moreover, numerous artifacts were visibly present at the
surface level of the refuse pit. Several items possessed
the formal characteristics of certain nineteenth-century
artifact types. Recognizing that the potential existed for
recovering pre-1900 materials, a shovel test was
excavated to further assess the location.

0-7 cmbs

Wine/champagne bottle base, olive
green

I I I I<.!J I
I I I

en

1893-ca. 1920

Pharmaceutical bottle, clear

Bottle fragment, aqua [Star Bottling
Works]

l~I
I I I I>-- I

w

1916-1929

Wide-mouth bottle, clear, tum-molded

Locus 20

During the course of street removal, the top portion
of the ground surface had also been removed. Judging
from a nearby sidewalk (still in place), approximately 25
cm of topsoil was scraped away by the backhoe, creating
a new surface level at that depth. All of the shovel test
measurements were recorded from this new surface
level. The results of the shovel test were recorded as
follows:

1892-ca. 1920

Improved-tooled bottlenecks, clear

2

I

1

Dates
1825-1875

4

..

'•

I

l~I

I:

..

(U·. ·.,.:

:.::.:,:;§·".: :·. "··".'

IO I I

1

Lu

<( _J

~.:
-0
...

~ Q)·."
..... ·o::
u: . : .

1~11
1~11

... .. ·.. . ....
....

:

. ,' 0::

·.:-:.co

~I

1 1

.. -!

"· .. $J: ... .
..... : 0 ~· ..... ..

1-t I I

........ >:
~·~ ..... .
... .

~

w...J

:::i

Prior to APV development, two residences
occupied the Locus 19 area. The 1939 Boyles map
indicates a structure at 818 Rosette Street, on the comer
of old Rosette and Arthur Streets. This was part of the
Shiller property (parcel 52). A second building, at 820
Rosette Street, was located on the Guarino property
(parcel 51 ). Either or both of these residences may have a
historical connection to archaeological materials at
Locus 19.

Pharmaceutical bottle, light green
[Groves Tasteless Chill Tonic]

.....:.....'. Ci5 :Q :"·"""
.·· ··< ~ :"'.

l;::;--1

·"J:~"

)..:

:

rI
I I
I I I

. ·: CQ 0:: "

I I,,.....,I

.· ... ·f-

I

...... Ci5 Kl .
...... 0::

"""'
~

Cl) CL

-I

>

·:.:·:. . ~><:

a·.·;;:: f- .

~

~w

I-

Beer/soda bottle, amber

.

·........ ~ ·.: .........
,"'-!

• 2.

0
a:

lO

...

ct ": ·O ;-,._.'.'
<!J· .. ·-illJ .. '
@ .... f-

I I I
I II
I I
I II
I II

w w
~
LL -I

lO
00 _J

fl)

Ole
c 0 O>

razed structure or alternative explanation. Early
cartographic sources additionally indicate a drainage
traversing this location, and such drainages were (and
still are) common areas of intentional discard.

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

O>
c

:;::

TABLE

Count

Artifact

Dates

Improved-tooled bottleneck,
cobalt

1870-1915

Improved-tooled bottleneck,
aqua

1870-1915

Improved-tooled bottleneck,
light green

1870-1915

Improved-tooled bottleneck,
clear

1870-1915

Pharmaceutical bottle, amethyst

1880-1915

0-23 cmbs
23-70 cmbs

2

post-1891

Whiteware jar base, "Germany"
mark

post-1885

Handpainted white paste
earthenwares
Flat glass, light green

gray sand loam

ca. 1860-1900

Porcelain doll head

The proximity of Locus 20 to the expansive Locus
15 is notable, though the former seemingly predates the
latter by at least a decade. The 1870 census map shows a
structure in the vicinity, and there may have been some
association between it and the· locus. The 1939 Boyles
map also indicates a residence at the present location of
Locus 20. The house at 802 Crosby Street was located on
the Rankin property (parcel 80). There may have also
been historical association between that or nearby
residences and the recently encountered archaeological
remains.

c.o

·-~ >

'<;j-

g>E:; ~
We(/)
• 0.
Ol
...
·:;;
u::
c
w

Locus 21
Locus 21 is a surface and subsurface artifact
concentration just north of the northwestern comer of
Building 122 (see Figure 32). The remains were exposed
when the paved sidewalk surface north of Building 122
was removed. The area, approximately 100 cm east-west
by 60 cm north-south, was accompanied by a slight soil
discoloration that contrasted with the lighter orangebrown loam matrix. Artifacts were observed both within
the stained soil and scattered about the surrounding
surface. In an effort to assess the nature of subsurface
deposits and the degree of soil disturbance, a shovel test
was excavated.

Detailed examination of the north wall profile after
excavation indicated a surface layer of recently graded
fill (0-15 cmbs) and seven underlying soil horizons
(Figure 46). These may be summarized as follows: zone
I, 15-25 cmbs, light brown loam; zone II, 25-40 cmbs,
dry cement rubble; zone III, 40-50 cmbs, tan sand; zone
IV, 50-53 cmbs, dark gray silty sand lens; zone V,
50-60 cmbs (east end) and 53-110 cmbs (-..yest end),

Two distinct soil strata were evident in the shovel

~

Q)

Q)

E

+::

c:
Q)

()

0

Ct)

0
C\J
0
,....

0
C\J

0

Ct)

0
'<::f"

0
LO

0

co

0
,....
,....

0
,....
0

l:\projects\he 1\clients\hach\447212\cad\f/gure46.ai

101
100

I(f)

<(

UJ

C\J"
C\J

a..

_J
_J

w

0

<(
_J
_J

>

~

~
~ a:

:c rt
(f) Iz
:'.) er: w

Oo

_J
_J

_J

<(

Oz

Locus 22
Locus 22 is an extensive buried midden feature at
the northwestern end of Building 106, near the
southeastern comer of the APV project area (see
Figure 32). The archaeological deposit was identified
during the backhoe excavation of a sewer-disconnect
trench (East SD #83) between Building 106 and the
street just north of it (see Figure 30). The trench was a
rough square with approximately 3-x-3-m dimensions. It
reached a consistent maximum depth of 110 cmbs. The
trench's exceptional.width resulted from the fact that the
sewer line could not be initially located.

ou..
0
er:

(f)

The disturbed context and relatively few diagnostic
artifacts at Locus 21 preclude any definitive dating of the
materials. However, the improved-tooled bottlenecks
indicate a broad tum-of-the-century date range, and the
predominance of wire nail fragments is generally
indicative of the post-1900 period. If the assumption of
early-twentieth-century context is correct, the materials
may be derived from the residence at 850 Arthur Street
on the 1939 Boyles map. This house, on the comer of old
Arthur and Hardcastle Streets, was located on the
Fillipone property (parcel 75).

Salt-glazed stoneware

5

mottled medium brown loam

::jj::

~

l 820s-ca. 1900

Plain whiteware [Crown
Pottery]

~UJ
=!

Cl)

O>c
cO
·;::O g>
m-mo>
c .. m

Both of the soil strata appeared very disturbed, judging
from the amount of mottling and inconsistency. A variety
of artifacts was encountered in the upper stratum,
including plain whiteware, bottlenecks, a cut nail, wire
nail fragments, flat glass, and various bottle glass
fragments (clear and light green). Five of these
specimens were recovered for laboratory analysis; these
are one clear and one amber-colored improved-tooled
bottleneck (1970-1915), two pieces of light green flat
glass, and one small piece of butchered bone. Only four
artifacts (i.e., whitewares, clear glass, light green glass)
were encountered in the lower stratum, and these may
well have fallen in from zone I. Nothing was discovered
beyond 30 cmbs in the lower zone.

Pharmaceutical bottle panel
fragment, amber
Blue transfer-print whiteware

:;

test, and a composite profile was recorded as follows:

10: Artifacts from Locus 20

z

w
w
a:
CJw
_J

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

dark brown silt midden; zone VI, 60-65 cmbs, rustcolored silt lens; zone VII, 65-110 cmbs, gray sand. The
upper three strata were largely disturbed and contained
noticeable modem debris. Zones V and IV exhibited no
artifacts in the profile and appeared to have sealed the
artifact-bearing zone V midden. Zones VI and VII
beneath the midden also appeared sterile, though at least
zone VII was likely to have been late-nineteenth- or
early-twentieth-century fill.

TABLE

11: Artifacts from Locus 22

~

~

WI;::: I...J

er: ;::::;-

a:
co

Oco

c5

:2

() <(
CJ
a: a:

()

0

a;:::::

z
w

()

~

Cl)

~

!-!.

-

:::i

CO LL

c.

er:

w

Artifact

Dates

Patent medicine bottle, aqua
[Chamberlain's Colic, Cholera, and
Diarrhoea Remedy]
Patent medicine bottle, clear [Sauer's
Extracts]

1880-1915

Count

The exposed midden, now referred to as Feature J,
was most recognizable in the north wall of SD #83. It
was more vaguely defined in the east wall but was not
apparent in either the south or west walls. The feature
was about 60 cm deep at its maximum extension, though
it presumably extends to a depth greater than what was
exposed. The richly organic midden was remarkably well
preserved, as evidenced by soil consistency and the intact
nature of nearly every observed artifact. Considering
APV development and maintenance over the last half
century, the midden showed no signs of major
disturbances or intrusions.
The midden contained a wide variety of material
culture. Field observations included the presence of plain
whitewares, salt-glazed stonewares, wire nails, brick
fragments, and assorted metal fragments. However, the
predominant artifact class in Feature J was container
glass. Numerous complete beverage bottles and a
stoneware jug were knocked out of the midden profile
during excavation. A representative sample of the
improved-tooled bottles and several other items was
recovered for further identification (Table 11 ). Many
machine-made bottles without · marks and one
presumably complete, in situ stoneware jug were not
collected.

I

location to be at the northeastern comer of old Crosby
and Hopson Streets. By 1939, a church was occupying
the lot on this comer.

@

(f)

I-

0)

c:

E

:J

c:o w
l;j; ::!

"'

O)c:

.s8
~-.E
CD 0 >c: c CD
- CD>

0)

Cl LL
(f)

I'-

"<!"

g>E 5 ~
w c:U)
• E. :J
Cl
i.I
~
w

z

.. ..

1880-1900

S:
~

Q

d

~

S:

d

-.J

Pharmaceutical bottle, amber

1870-1915

0

Milk bottle, light green

1870-1915
post-1900

qj

~

-.J

-.J

>-

>=

~

.: : .

~

~

.. ··.
..
..

~
Cl)

Bristol-slipped stoneware jar lid

0

a:
CQ

vs
s::

Locus 23

Locus 23 contains two subsurface strata of
archaeological deposition. The material remains were
revealed during the backhoe excavation of a sewerdisconnect trench (East SD #78) between Buildings 105
and 106 in the southeastern comer of the APV project
area (see figures 30 and 32). Locus 23 is just west of
Locus 1 and may be an associated context. It is also
closely located to Locus 22, and the possibility that these
two loci are associated must also be considered. The
excavated trench, located just north of the street that ran
between Buildings 105 and 106, was approximately 4 m
long and 1.3 m wide along an east-west axis. It reached a
maximum depth of 143 cmbs.

Several of the recovered items have yielded
relatively specific chronological information, and this
generally points to a depositional period of 1890-1910.
The presence oflarge quantities of both improved-tooled
and machine-made bottles is usually indicative of the
first or second decade of the twentieth century. The
complete lack of cut nails is similarly indicative.
However, at least one improved-tooled bottle can be
definitively dated to the late nineteenth century
(1880-1900). There is no reason to believe, given the
observed and recovered material evidence, that Feature J
represents a pre-1880 context.

Close examination of the north and south wall
profiles indicated eight soil strata under a surface layer of
graded demolition debris. On-site recording was directed
primarily to the north wall, for it suffered less damage
from the excavation than did the south wall. The north
wall strata were generally at a higher elevation toward
the eastern end of the trench and sloped downward to the
west. Nonetheless, a composite (Figure 47) may be
offered as follows: zone I, 30-55 cmbs, strong yellow
loam; zone II, 55-70 cmbs, dark brown silt; zone Ill,
70-85 cmbs, grayish brown clay loam; zone IV, 85-95

Early map resources suggest a logical placement for
Feature J. These sources indicate a drainage traversing
the present location of Locus 22, and such drainages
were (and still are) common areas of intentional refuse
disposal. The 1939 Boyles map additionally shows this

~

(!)

~

2Q)

E

E

II
II
II
II
0
,....

0
C\I

0
(')

0

"<!"

0

IQ

0

co

0
I'-

0

c:o

0

0)

0

0
,....

Q)

(.)

0

(')

0
C\I
0
,....
,....

0

C\I
,....

0

(')
,....

0

"<!"
,....

0
,....
0

l:\pro)ects\he1\clients\hach\447212\cadlligure47.al

103
102

<( ...J

:s
_J

>

~

w ...J ~

ct)~

C\I
(f)

I

:::>I-

() a:

...J

Pharmaceutical bottle, clear [Ramey
C. &R. Co.]

Stoneware jug
Milk bottle closure, clear glass

(f)

a:
a..

00

Bourbon flask bottle, amethyst
[Bonnie Bros.]
Sauce bottle, light green [Lea &
Perrins]
Beer bottle, light green [Houston
Bottling Company]

I-

0

UJ

(!}

z

r:c

a:
z

UJ

_J
_J

<(

~~-----------------------CHAPTERV: Monitoring

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
cmbs, mottled yellow and gray clay; zone V, 95-110
cmbs, tan sand loam; zone VI, 110-130 cmbs, dark
brown silt; zone VII, 120-130 cmbs (east end), gray
sand; zone VIII, 130-143 cmbs, rust-colored sand. While
it appeared that all of the exposed strata were non-natural
fill, only zones II and VI clearly exhibited an artifact
presence.
Zones II and VI have been designated Features K
and L, respectively. Feature K, the upper artifact-bearing
zone, is richly organic with a lot of charcoal and ash. It
contained a variety of materials including semivitreous
whitewares, thick flat glass, unmarked bricks and brick
fragments, unidentified metal fragments, and a complete
wine/champagne bottle. The wine/champagne bottle was
collected; it is olive green, turn molded, and dates to
1880-1920. Feature L, the lower artifact zone, was also
highly organic and contained a considerable amount of
charcoal. However, it revealed predominantly construction-type materials, such as flat glass, wire nails, and
unmarked bricks. Indeed, all of Feature L rested on a bed
of crushed bricks. No artifacts were recovered from ·
Feature L.
Nearly all of the observed materials indicated a
twentieth-century context for Features K and L. The
exclusive appearance of wire nails and thick flat glass
generally indicates post-1900 deposition. Though unmarked, the bricks were well made and were consistent
with the previously observed bricks manufactured by the
Thurber and Corsicana Brick Companies. The only
possible indication of a pre-1900 context is the turnmolded wine bottle, even though its production is clearly
documented to ca. 1920.

(north-south), was accompanied by a soil discoloration
slightly darker than the surrounding matrix. No features
were observed. In an attempt to determine whether
subsurface deposits existed at the location, a shovel test
was excavated near the western end of Locus 24.
The shovel test was excavated to a maximum depth
of75 cmbs and revealed five soil strata. A composite soil
profile was recorded as follows:
0-15 cmbs
15-19 cmbs

gritty grayish brown loam
light grayish brown coarse sand

19-24 cmbs
24-53 cmbs
53-74 cmbs

black silt
gray clay loam
mottled strong yellow and gray clay

The shovel test yielded a small amount of cultural
material, nearly all of which derived from the first three
shallow strata. A few brick fragments were contained in
zone IV, and zone V was sterile. The upper four zones
appeared disturbed to some degree.

Kovel 1986:183 ' 233) . The pre donunance
.
of
hin
ma de bottles also suggests the
.mac ethan pre-1900. Locus 24 thus l~o~t-1900 penod rather
nineteenth-century and
l
e ~ reflects both lateti
ear y-twentieth-century d
·
epos1ons, apparently from a disturbed context.
A relationship between Locus 2
documentary record is uncerta.
.
4 and the
the potential for late-run· t thm, given the location and
e een -century d
..
eposition. The
1880 census map does t . d'
. . .
no m icate any stru tur . th
c es m e
vicllllty of Locus 24 The 1939 B
other hand, indicate ~t least thr oyles map does, on the
Phillips property (parcel 132 ee small structures on the
evidently located behind th ). The~e structures were
909 Crosby Street. In a~:o residences at 907 and
sources indicate a natural dr . tion, early cartographic
~mage close to the present
location of Locus 24 Th
. e suriace scatter may have been

Early mapping of the area indicates that the sam~
drainage traversing Locus 22 also traverses the location
of Locus 23. This drainage may have served as a
common area of early-twentieth-century refuse disposal.
The architectural group materials encountered in Feature
L suggest that the remains of a razed structure may have
been pushed into the drainage area. A church once
occupied this location (on the northeastern corner of old
. Crosby and Hopson Streets), as indicated by the 1939
Boyles map. The Boyles map identifies this lot as part of
the Golden Shield property (parcel 89).

Complete and identifiable nails were numerous
enough on the surface that a convenience sample was
taken on site (though not collected). A total of 38 nails
were counted, including 21 wire nails (55 percent) and
17 cut nails (45 percent). Although the sample was small,
the relative proportion of the two nail types may be used
as a broad chronological marker for Locus 24. According
to the index devised by Orser and colleagues
(1987:549-558), a date range of 1880-1890 is suggested. The index cited by Rosenberg and K vietok
(1981 :86) suggests a similar but slightly more recent date
range of 1889-1895.

Locus 24

Most of the material observed, including the transfer-printed ware and improved-tooled bottle, would fit
into the chronological period suggested by the relative
nail type proportions. However, the maker's mark on the
whiteware sherd definitively post-dates 1901, and it
reached its widest distribution around 1925 (Kovel and

Locus 24 is a surface and shallow subsurface
artifact concentration at the extreme southeastern comer
of the APV project area (see Figure 32). Located south of
Building 107, this locus was exposed after the paved
street surface was removed. The artifact scatter,
measuring approximately 7-10 m (east-west) by 5 m

104

MISCELLANEOUS ARTIFACT
RECOVERY
Numerous artifacts exposed durin
. .
phase were not associated with an
~ !he momtonng
artifact concentration. Most of th y distinct feature or
the ground surface after demoliti~~e were ?bserved on
though a few individual s
.
or dunng grading,
subsurface levels. Some p:;i;;;ns w~re observed at true
possessing diagnostic tr 'ts
se rmscellaneous items,
identification and analys~i (Ta~~;el;ecovered. for further
no. evidence to suggest that an
There ~s, however,
artifacts pre-date 1880.
Y
the rmscellaneous

jf

TABLE 12. Miscellaneous Artifacts R ecovered

Location
(Building #)

Count

112
Numerous artifact classes were observed at the
surface and shallow subsurface levels, all of which suggest a late-nineteenth- to early-twentieth-century context.
Among the items identified on-site were plain whitewares, a green transfer-printed whiteware sherd, wire
nails, cut nails, machine-made bottles and bottlenecks,
one improved-tooled bottle, and a horseshoe. Two items,
a whiteware sherd and a bottle, included makers' marks,
and these were collected for more-definitive identification. One is a light green glass bottle (Three in One Oil
Co.), and the other is a plain whiteware sherd with the
Knowles, Taylor & Knowles mark (ca. 1925).

associated with ·refuse .
drainage.
mtentionally discarded in the

112

Artifact
Plain whiteware saucer
Beer bottle,.aqua [Adolphus Busch Glass
M anufacturing Co.]

119

~eer bottle,.aqua [Adolphus Busch Glass
anufacturing Co.]

122

P~tent medicine bottle, aqua [Dr. S.
Pitcher's Castoria]

150

1

Patent medicine bottl (fr
. ,
. e agmented), aqua
[Chamb
.
er1am s Colic, Cholera, and
Diarrhoea Remedy]

150

2

Machine-made bottlenecks, clear

150

1

Lotion bottle, clear [Jergens]

150

1

Shell button

150

1

Glass insulator, aqua

159

1

Milk bottle, clear [Bordens]

159

5

Glass marbles

161

1

Improved-tooled bottleneck, aqua

161

1

Improved-tooled bottleneck, amber

161

1

Hand-painted Mexican ware

161

1

Brick fragment

167

1

Patent medicine bottle, clear

167

1

Wide-mouth bottle, clear [Lone Star
Creamery]

167

1

Wooden utensil handle

105

Dates
ca. 1925
1904-1907
1904-1907
ca. 1880-1881
1880-1915

post-1893

1870-ca. 1918
1870-ca. 1918
20th century

1916-1929

CHAPTER VI

EXCAVATION AND ANALYSIS OF THE THIRD NEW CITY CEMETERY

The location of the Third New City Cemetery was
known from historical records to extend into the
northwestern comer of the APV tract, and thus this part
of the project area was given special attention. The City
originally purchased the 12-ac tract from Garrett S.
Hardcastle in 1859 for the intended use as a city hospital.
The portion of the original 12-ac tract that came into use
as a cemetery and that falls within the APV property was
approximately 4.5 ac in size, with undefined portions
possibly extending beyond the APV boundaries to the
north and west. Both the south and east sides of the
cemetery have either been fenced or had perimeter
occupation by residential structures since about 1880.
Since an early city ordinance allowed burials in the
yards of city hospital facilities, particularly during
epidemic times, it is possible that the city could have
used the hospital grounds for burials as early as 1859. In
1879, the city formally declared the cemetery on the city
hospital grounds as the "New City Cemetery." The
cemetery was used intensively into the early twentieth
century. While a 1914 map (Figure 48) shows separate
"White" and "Negro" facilities, by 1916 (Figure 49) the
"Negro" facility, located north of the APV project area in
the vicinity of Allen Parkway, was no longer present and
only a single "City Detention Hospital" survived in the
northern portion of· the cemetery zone. An expanded
nurses quarters, designed by City Architect M.J.
Sullivan, also survived in the cemetery immediately east
of the detention hospital. Also present was a separate
"Fumigator" building with a dressing room and a
fumigation room By 1939, just prior to the original
construction of APV, the Boyles map (Figure 50) shows
the old cemetery area had been developed with
additional city buildings, including a partially
constructed "Veteran's Building," a repair shop, a mule
barn, two car sheds, and various other storage sheds. All
of these buildings were tom down in 1940-1941 for the
original APV construction.
Construction records reviewed from the original
APV redevelopment project include a Proceed Order on
March 6, 1941. On May 14, 1941, Brookside Mortuary
Company disinterred Earl Yoist from the property. The
tombstone on his grave reportedly was the only marked
grave in the cemetery. On May 31, when earth was being
moved from the high ground in the northwestto south of
the planned Administration Building along Valentine
Street, bodies were immediately encountered. By the

time earthmoving and construction was completed, APV
construction records indicate more than 900 human
burials had been recovered and turned over to Brookside
Mortuary Company for reburial. Earl Yoist was the only
burial identified by name.
When the current work at APV began in 1996,
several phases of archaeological investigation were
conducted to identify possible burials that might still
exist in the former cemetery zone. Because of the
possibility that some burials might have been missed,
however, the utility trenches excavated in the
northwestern comer of the property were carefully
monitored by an archaeologist with the express purpose
of attempting to identify any human remains that might
still exist in the cemetery area. On January 9, 1998,
several human bones were discovered during excavation
of a trench for a water utility line near the western edge
of the northwestern portion of the cemetery zone.
On January 19, 1998, PBS&J conducted a preliminary investigation of the area where the human remains
were encountered. The goal of the investigation was to
determine whether in situ burials were present or
whether the discovery represented scattered remains of
burials removed prior to construction of APV. Additionally this preliminary investigation was designed to
facilitate development of a plan for treatment of any
burials once their presence was established. Following
the procedures outlined in PBS&J's discussions with the
THC, the investigations involved mechanical removal of
the clay soil matrix above the area of the discovery, with
the intent of identifying possible burials or burial shafts.
Excavations conducted during this operation were intentionally limited in order achieve minimal disturbance of
any located burials. The remains of several burials were
identified in this effort, prompting a series of efforts
described below to archaeologically remove and analyze
all remaining burials within the project area.
FIELD METHODOLOGY
Initial Discovery and Testing Phase
As noted above, a preliminary testing effort was
conducted in response to the initial discovery of human
remains on January 9, 1996. Mechanical scraping was
planned and conducted using a backhoe with a smooth-

107

':;i/1.le .
[ifl'~l.rr:n

End [ievat1on

.··•. .. \ l
I

/

·--·--#-

, r:c.,...... c '-'

/

f

J
.J

'\

--------ti - - - I f

Lo

rrT/OIV

PLntr

PBSJ

@

• Enginteael ~JJnsulting
· onmen
• Env1r • Surveying

Figure 48

north

M.J. SULLIVAN MAP, 1914

• Engineering
.
• Envlronmenta~ Consulting
• Surveying

@

Figure 49

north

CEMETERY ZONE
CA. 1916
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE
l:\projectslhe1\clientslhach\cad\figure4 9.ai
l:lprojectslhe1\clientslhach\447212\cad\figure48.al

109

108

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery

al.If F.M.0

z.'

....

t:,-ry

fil~

Three burials were encountered in the vicinity of
the initial discovery. The features were hand excavated
only to the point when it could be confirmed with
relative certainty that the anomalies were indeed in situ
burials rather than scattered remains left by the original
removal of graves during the initial cemetery relocation
in the early 1940s. These burials were distinguished by
the presence of gray-colored sandy soil matrix,
decomposed wood fragments, and, in two cases, bones or
bone fragments. Notably, none of the burials exhibited
any discernible grave shaft, i.e., there was no significant
difference in the color or texture of the soil matrix above
the features until the level of the remains was reached.

;i-141tillJ!'•"'1

'"'"' ·'"" .fr.
-~.

,, .. Cl'

Ill.

.....

{

l

To determine the extent of the remaining burials in
this area, four additional areas were excavated a short
distance to the north, south, and west of the initial
machine excavation but yielded no additional human
remains: Upon the completion of investigations, the
identified burials were covered with plastic sheeting and
capped with a thin layer of loose fill for protection.
Based on the results of the initial discovery and testing
effort, the Housing Authority developed a plan for the
treatment of human remains. In accordance with
stipulations of the Programmatic Agreement, the plan
called for respectful removal of human remains by
archaeological hand excavation with nondestructive
laboratory analysis of remains. The plan also called for
reburial of all cemetery remains on-site within the
overall APV project area.

r
....
I

i
1

ffi~
..
PBSJ

@

bladed bucket. Soil above the strata that produced the
human remains was removed in shallow scrapes,
typically about 10 cm in thickness, until indications of a
burial were visible or until the depth was greater than the
maximum potential depth of burials. When indications of
a possible burial feature were observed, the area was
carefully cleaned by hand excavation to confirm or
disprove the feature as a burial.

• Engineering
.
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Because prior phases of monitoring and testing in
the cemetery area had yielded no intact human remains
other than the January 9 discovery area, archaeologists
from PBS&J and the THC still felt that the located
burials were an isolated occurrence and that few, if any,
additional burials would be located. Consequently, there
was no change in the ongoing utility monitoring strategy
after the initial discovery. The monitoring strategy called
for intermittent monitoring of ground-disturbing
construction activities.

Figure 50
CEMETERY ZONE
CA. 1939

north

ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

However, on February 27, 1998, additional human
remains were encountered during examination of a previously excavated storm sewer line in the southwestern
central part of the cemetery area. The burial remains

were distinguished. by the presence of coffin wood, coffin hardware, human bones, or some combination of
these materials. Varying degrees of grarsandy soil discoloration often accompanied the burial features, which
stood in contrast to the fairly consistent strong yellow
clay matrix surrounding the burial. The state of wood
and bone preservation was good in several features and
indeterminate at numerous other features. PBS&J
archaeologists also examined the trench backdirt and
collected apparent burial remains scattered in the loose
dirt.
To maintain the project schedule, the construction
contractor had immediate plans to install more utility
lines. Through consultation with the THC, it was decided
that prior to any further construction excavations within
the cemetery zone, the utility impact area would be
mechanical stripped in thin layers to a depth below the
elevation of potential burials. A backhoe with a smoothbladed bucket was used for this activity. The stripped
areas along proposed utility lines were approximately
3.7 min width.
Initially the backhoe removed demolition rubble fill
from the surface of proposed uti.lity alignments. The
depth of rubble ranged from about 10 to 60 cm After the
rubble fill was removed, the backhoe operator carefully
peeled back the natural yellow clay subsoil in
approximate 10-cm levels to a depth of about 100 cm
The objective of the stripping was to expose burial shafts
or human remains so that they could be identified before
trench excavation was carried out.
The mechanical scraping of proposed utility lines
resulted in the identification of 17 new and relatively
intact burial features. Confronted with the possibility of
numerous remaining intact burials, the Housing Authority, in consultation with the THC, instructed PBS&J to
forego the remaining utility line scraping in lieu of
scraping the entire cemetery zone. The Housing Authority enclosed the entire cemetery zone with orange
construction fencing, approximately 5 m beyond the
limits of the cemetery as defined by archival research.
The Housing Authority further instructed the construction contractor not to work within those designated
limits.
Burial Identification Phase
This phase of investigation was designed to locate
all in situ burials that remained within the cemetery zone.
Between March 19 and March 28, 1998, the entire
cemetery zone was scraped by four large trackhoes
moving in broad east-west strips. The excavation of each
trackhoe was monitored by one or more archaeologists at

Source: J.M. Boyles Property Line Map, 1939
l:\projects\he1\cllents\hach\cad\figure50.ai

111

110
'I

J

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New C'ty C

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

I

•

all times. All excavated soil was removed and temporarily deposited in a large spoil pile to the east of the cemetery zone.

3.

The trackhoes scraped the area in relatively thin
levels, generally 5 to 10 cm in thickness. When a possible burial was observed, machine construction was
temporarily halted and limited hand excavation of the
feature was conducted to determine whether or not the
anomoly was a burial. Since actual burial excavation was
not anticipated in the immediate future, the archaeologists identifying burials were reluctant to expose features
beyond the minimum needed for probable identification
and designation as a burial. For this reason, some
features that were originally identified as burials were
later determined to be nonburial features during complete
hand excavation.

Generally, the procedure for field excavation of
features was as follows. All excavators were divided into
two-person crews, normally combining persons of
greater and lesser experience. Each two-person excavation crew first reported to the Laboratory Director or
Laboratory Assistant to be assigned a burial. The crew
was provided with a burial box and burial folder that
were prelabeled with the feature number. The folder
contained an inventory of forms sheet, a field recordation
form, and continuation sheets for providing further
information. Next, the two-person crew filled out a
single line on a tracking list, indicating that they had
checked out a particular burial, located the burial on the
master site map in the lab, and highlighted it in pink to.
indicate that the excavation of that particular burial was
in progress. When the burial excavation and all forms.
and notes were completed, the burial box with all
remains, field recordation form, and any continuation
sheets was turned in, the line on the tracking list was
completed, and the burial on the master site map was
highlighted in green over the pink. Only then was the
crew assigned to another burial.

Several basic procedures for burial excavation were
recommended by the THC and incorporated into a draft
implementation plan outlining the goals and methods to
be used in the overall cemetery removal process. Key
elements of the draft implementation plan included:

2.

Documentation of in situ burials through
•
in situ photographs
•
in situ measured drawings
• physical documentation to gather basic demographic data (e.g., age, sex, ethnicity, and
pathology)
• recovery of a sample of casket hardware

Removal of human remains to an on-site laboratory
and storage facility for noninvasive physical
examination by a physical anthropologist before
reburial by a professional mortician.

The cemetery excavation phase was conducted
between August 6 and September 18, 1998. It was conducted by approximately 30 professional archaeologists.
The first day consisted primarily of orientation and
training in the burial excavation procedures. Special advisors in the fields of bioarchaeology and African
American material culture were present to assist in the
training efforts.

Burial Excavation Phase

Hand excavation of each burial feature by
professional archaeologists to determine if human
remains are present.

complete excavation and removal within the
same working day.

On June 4, 5, and 11, 1998, PBS&J used the draft
implementation plan to conduct a limited excavation of
four burials in order to a) better understand the condition
of the burial features and b) develop a refined set of
archaeological and osteological procedures that would
provide for the most efficient and cost effective burial
removal program. This preliminary excavation provided
information important to receiving final approval from
the THC, HUD, and the ACHP for procedures to be
followed by the main excavation. Excluded from the
approved plan were the in situ photographs.

Once an anomoly was identified as a probable
burial, it was assigned a unique number and the feature
was briefly described through a tabular inventory of
observed remains. Nails were placed at the east and west
ends of the feature along the approximate center axis of
the feature. For each burial feature, the location of the
feature was accurately recorded both horizontally and
vertically by means of a surveyor's total station placed at
a central location within the cemetery (Figure 51, map
pocket). The two associated nails were mapped in for
each feature. To aid in relocation and reidentification,
flagging tape was tied to the two nails with the burial
number written on the tape, a string was tied between the
two nails, and a penflag with the identifying feature
number was placed beside the westernmost nail of the
feature. Plastic sheeting was placed over each feature or
cluster of features as a protective measure.

1.

amount~ of water were applied to the feature prior to
excavation
to. soften the soil matrix· In many cases, the
.
out1me or stam
. was no longer discerru'ble . T rowe1'mg or
sho:el scrapmg over the entire feature area continued
until. the casket edges or the stain indicating the feature
location were identified. At this point th .
. d
.
,
e crew
continue
. . trowelmg down the inside of the casket or the
sta~ Just ~e~t of the midpoint. This general area
typically comc1ded
with the upper abdominal area where
..
the 1eas t sensitive
osteological remains would likely be
encounte:ed. Because the extremely clayey matrix did
not lend itself to dry screening, the feature remains were
generally not screened.

After locating the feature and confirming that they
had the correct feature through comparision of feature
numbers, the excavation crew hand troweled or shovel
scraped the ground surface in an effort to discern the
casket outline or soil stain. In some instances, limited

112

Once the depth of remains had been established the

cr~w worked laterally to the east and west, removin~ the
soil fill and exposing the casket lid. When the lid was
~ompletely exposed, any casket hardware on top of the
hd was. plotted on a burial drawing on the field
recordation form and collected and the lid was carefully
removed to expose the inside of the box Oft
th
d 1'
.
en, e
woo en id had conformed closely to the bone remains
a~d separating the bone from wood was extreme!;
difficult. O~casionally, the bones were within a soil lens
a few centimeters thick between the lid and the casket
bottom and the bones could be exposed.
:wiien bones were exposed, the field osteologist
exammed the f~ature and provided guidance on how to
?roceed .to obtam the maximum amount of osteological
info~tion from the bones while in situ. Usually, when
the entire skeleton or a workable portion was exposed
the osteologist took field measurements from the bones'.
Whe.n all useful field measurements that could be
obtamed had been recorded, the osteologist approved
removal of the bones. All remains were collected by
zone (A:-G) and plotted in a burial drawing on the field
recordation form (Figure 52). Sometimes, specific bones
were collecte~ and bagged individually or in discrete
groups ~ccording to the instructions of the supervising
osteolog1st.
. . When all of the bones and other remains from
ms1de the casket had been collected, the remaining wood
was ·scraped up and any remaining hardware outside of
casket was plotted in and collected by zone. Two
~ll s~ovel excavations were then dug to an additional
cm m depth to ensure that a second burial was not
~resent beneath the feature. When fmal notes on the
~ture ~ere completed, the feature box and all written
0 rmation were checked in.

:e

4

~are, and. other ·associated grave goods such as rings

Jewe~, pins, buttons and other remains associated with
a. bunal feature, arrived into the field laboratory within a
smgle b?x. All paperwork and field notes associated with
that bunal feature were turned in at the same t.ime.
.As soo~ as the paperwork or paperwork and burial
remams . amved in the field laboratory, they were
checked m on a master list. This ensured that none of th
paperwork and/or artifacts would be lost and als~
ensur~d that all features were excavated. The information
on ~s master laboratory list included 1) whether any
matenals re~overed from the burial feature needed to be
pr?~essed m the laboratory, 2) whether all of the
mmrrnum paperwork had been turned in, 3) the date that
the pap.erwork and/or paperwork and artifacts were
turne~ m to the laboratory, 4) the individual who
submitted them, and 5) any additional comments.
.
Once the burial remains and paperwork were signed
mto . the laboratory, the paperwork was placed into a
~Ia file folder. All paperwork associated with a
partic~ar feature was kept in this folder, including the
field. m~entory of forms sheet, recordation form,
~ontinuation sheet(s), and, -as completed, specimen
mventory and osteological analysis forms.
OSTEOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
Introduction

1:his section presents the results of osteological
analysis conducted on human skeletal remains recovered
from the former TNCC, located in downtown Houston,
Texas. As noted above the human remains· w
'
ere excavated under a federally and state-approved archaeological. research program conducted in conjunction with a
maJo~ urban redevelopment and revitalization project
that ~eludes the former Allen Parkway Village public
housmg .tract. The archaeological research program and
osteolog1cal . an~lysis were designed and approved in
close coordination with appropriate officials of the
ACHP and the Texas State Historic Preservation Officer
(S~O). The project sponsor was the Housing Authority
usmg funds provided by HUD.
'
The os~eological analysis was performed on-site by
a. tea1?' of b1oarchaeology specialists working under the
directio~ of Dr. D. Gentry Steele. The lead osteologist
co~d~~ting
overseeing archaeology and osteology
activities on-site was Sharon M. Derrick, Ph.D. The
osteology team provided their services as approved
subconsultants to PBS&J (formerly Espey, Huston &

an?

Field Laboratory Procedures
All burial remains, including bone, casket hard-

113

emetery

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Associates, Inc.), the lead archaeology consultant for the
project. A Report of Findings was prepared and approved
by the THC in compliance with the terms of Texas
Antiquities Permit No. 2031, issued August 17, 1998,
and stipulations of a 1995 Programmatic Agreement
among HUD, the ACHP, and the SHPO. That report is
incorporated herein in response to the SHPO's only
comment on the report. All burial remains recovered and
analyzed under this project were reburied individually in
memorial cemetery created in the northeastern comer
fthe original 36-ac Allen Parkway Village tract.

BURIAL NO. _....._/_fo__..:J_._
NOTES:
t. e {1· h~1"~:rv5 er

Grave goods:

1()

<!rc.._:..Cl \
ti<--,:...tids

_W~in_d_ow_s_ha-=-p_e_:_,_(S_k_et_
ch....:.>.:.....·'_
1

_;;l(J::....ifi;J...'/...L..f _ _

Long bar Length:

5tf"'
~""<ih"""I!..
·f-r.~s-w.e . . .+·
.

.. 2<HJE.

Coffin Box: Vault/Rec/HeX/Uni~
Coffin Shape; Unid

Ch

JO

Length:

0
t!/lt

<!,I\

Excavators/Date(s): _.'3+'/;i,.,..S'+l-1.7-='2?_ _ __
StartTime: ,:304 11\. r I
Finish Time:

~

...

1•10 •

cw-..

.7oA"- f!?.enti~'tf W<'<-<'<"~"- 1<...{'""-"{ :S-1'.,

1(0

1).0.

!<7 3

iJ 30

.4.frl..

~---~~~~~~~~-

Start Photo: Roll

N;fr /Frame _ _

Exposed. Photo:

/ ----

Additional Photo:

/ ----

Oi

150 -·
CJ(.

!60

Distance Nail to Nail:

! 13 <!.Yr\..

(!JI(.

{real)

170 .__

, ~""!>hone,

~'"'"'"'""'
. t10e. ...-

Distance Nail t6 Nail:

=

=

=

Zone G

In Situ Viewing (% remaining)

::{'.P

?: · -..;/ g. 7 :7:'

v1. 3 Ck,
(drawing)

ZoneA = Head ..
Zone 8
Right Chest & Arm
Left Chest & Arm
Zone C
Zone D ::: Right Pelvis & Leg
Zone E = Left Pelvis & Leg
Right Foot
Zone F

= Left Foot

Scale: 5 cm=

(Osteologist lntials and Date)
l:lprojects\he1\clients\hach\ 447212\cadlligure52.ai

The TNCC excavation site encompassed 4.5 ac of
nd located in the northwestern comer of the 36-ac tract
reviously occupied by the Allen Parkway Village public
ousing project. The cemetery, referred to in City of
ouston records as either the Third New City Cemetery
Potter's Field, was officially opened in the late
· · eteenth century, ca. 1880. A portion of the cemetery
act had earlier served as the location of a city hospital,
nd some of the land surrounding that facility may have
used as a burial ground for people who died in the
spital. Graves associated with that facility could have
en constructed as early as the late 1850s. However,
en following the official establishment of the land as a
cemetery, portions of the cemetery were used by the
as locations for detention hospitals constructed to
antine people infected during epidemics. Yet the
etery never was a repository solely, or even
rily, for deceased hospital patients. City death
rds from the year 1900 describe a variety of causes
eath for those buried in the cemetery and show heavy
of the cemetery during that year. The ethnic
osition of the cemetery was reported to be largely
an American, and the available city death records
1900 confirm that description. The TNCC was
1cially closed in 1904, but it was probably used for
interments for a short period of time thereafter. A
e of 1910 attributed to a burial from the TNCC
cavation supports that premise.
Development of the Allen Parkway Village housing
unity took place in the early 1940s, years after the
ce of the cemetery area had been virtually
rated by construction of miscellaneous . city
tenance buildings. During the original construction
e Allen Parkway Village (originally named San
e Courts) housing project, more than 900 burials
e recovered and then released to Brookside Mortuary
any for reburial in Brookside Memorial Park.
ever, a large number of grave features apparently
e overlooked, and it was this portion of the cemetery
required excavation and analysis in the summer of
. 8.

Figure 52. Completed Burial Form - Allen Parkway Village

114

115

Scope of the Osteological Analysis

The scope of the osteological and dental analysis
program was designed to return the maximum amount of
data possible, given the constraints' of time and
restrictions on both the location of analysis and types of
analytic procedures permitted. For example, analysis of
the remains was performed only on-site, no techniques
destructive to bone such as sectioning or chemical
analysis were authorized, and only minimal statistical
manipulation of data was sanctioned. The primary goals
of the osteological analysis were to determine the
number of individuals recovered, provide a demographic
picture of age and sex categories represented, determine
ethnicity where possible, and provide an overall health
assessment of the cemetery population. The health
assessment included an examination of body size and
robusticity, health disorders impacting the skeleton, and
health disorders of the dentition and dental arcade.
Condition of the Remains
The skeletal remains recovered from the TNCC
varied by feature in the quality of preservation, although
bone preservation throughout the site was poor
(Figure 53). The poor preservation was primarily due to
the impact of previous construction projects on the
cemetery through time and the close proximity of the site
to a system of bayous. Heavy equipment, building
foundation pillars, flooding and subsequent erosion,
multiple interments, wooden coffin collapse, and root
growth were the chief factors causing disruption of
discrete features at the TNCC, resulting in breakage and
scattering of bone. Dispersed concrete pillars and utility
excavation trenches in the center of the site truncated
some of the features. Burials impacted by these
construction-related structures and activities usually
contained only the upper or lower half of the skeleton.
Preservation of skeletal elements was also adversely
affected by running water produced during bayou
overflow, and by standing rainwater that accumulated on
the clay-rich soil after deluges common to the Houston
area. The far southwest comer of the site exhibited some
of the poorest preservation and, indeed, portions of the
southwest comer were under water after every rain that
occurred during the excavations. The best overall
preservation occurred in the northwest corner of the site
where the soil remained drier, though other factors such
as date and depth of burial may have influenced
preservation in that area. Compaction and cracking of the
clay soil during dry periods may also have been
detrimental to preservation and, along with previous use
of heavy machinery, resulted in the exposure of bone to
surface erosion in some areas. The quality of the bone
found on the surface ranged from highly friable and sun
bleached to very good condition.

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Grave construction and type of coffin also affected
the degree of preservation. Five features held more.than
one burial, resulting in breakage and mixing of remains.
All of the coffms were constructed of wood that had
collapsed on the skeletons. Thirty-eight of the coffins
contained viewing windows that had been smashed,
crushing the head and chest area of the skeletal material
and maintaining a damp environment that can exacerbate
bone destruction (Dockall and Baker 1996).

.•
N

0

i

0

,

,6

!
I

0

49

6

s

0

66

20

0

6'*

0

5

40
10

60
15

BO feet

Roots had grown through a large number of the
features, both in the coffm area and through individual
bones. Large roots moved the skeletal elements about
and broke bone when they grew through the marrow
cavity of the long bones. Some minor root etching was
present on individual elements. Rodent tooth marks were
occasionally observed during analysis, but rodent activity
did not appear to be a major cause of bone destruction in
the TNCC skeletal assemblage.

20 meters

I
\
\

\
\
\
\
\
I
6
6

'

6

I
I
I

0
0
66
6

6
6

6

~&6 ~

§!

6
6

6
6

6

6

6

666

~

~6

6

, .........

6
66
6

IS

~Is~ 6 c.6
6

6

t':t'::.

*

6

6

fr

25/. or
o 25-50/.
o 50- 75/.
* 75/. or

I

~~

-·

·-·-·

·-1-•
206 Wild Basin Rd., Ste. 300
Austin, Texas 78746-3343
Phone: (612) 329-8342 FAX: (512) 327-2463

Indeterminate Age Cotogories "0-24'', "O-Adult"
and "Undetermined Adult" Are Not Shown.
6

I

6

6

Less Complete (299)
Complete (32)
Complete (14)
More Complete (10)

Figure 53
Third New City Cemetery
Completeness of Individual~
Prepared for: Housing Authority of the City of Houston

Preservation ofIndividual Remains
The preservation status of individual remains was
assessed by calculating the percentage of identifiable
skeletal elements recovered and inventoried for each
individual (see Appendix E, Table E-1). Only 10
skeletons, of the 355 individuals for which any
provenienced osteological material was preserved, were
considered to be 75 percent or more complete. Fourteen
skeletons were 50-75 percent complete and 32 were
25-50 percent complete. The majority of skeletons, 299,
were represented by 25 percent or fewer of the skeletal
elements (299/355). Many older subadult and adult
skeletal elements, especially those of the face, were
either missing or extremely fragmented. Vertebrae were
usually represented by centra and arch fragments, pelvic
bones were highly fragmented, and few long bones
included both articular ends. However, the quality of the
cortical bone in those elements that were preserved
tended to be good.
There was little difference in preservation between
young adult and old adult skeleton groups, but
differential preservation occurred between adults and
subadults. Subadults in general were very poorly
preserved and were most often represented only by the
dentition and tiny crushed bone fragments. There was no
statistically significant difference between preservation
of male and female skeletons.
Analytical Methods

Excavation Boundary
Drown by: A. Pugh

file: N:4472 t 2/cod/new_dislribution_mops/completeness_s mb.dgn

Members of the osteological team, composed of
four bioarchaeologists, were present on-site during the
excavation of all remains. The skeletal material was

116
117

examined by members of the team in the laboratory each
day while one osteologist was present in the field to aid
in documentation and recovery of the remains. The
. osteologists were supported by a team of archaeological
technicians who collated data and cleaned and boxed the
remains for analysis.
Field Procedures
Upon exposure during excavation, the skeletal
elements of each burial were divided for collection into
seven zones labeled A through G. If the body had been
placed in the coffm in a supine position and the skeletal
elements had not been subsequently dislocated, Zone A
would contain the head and superior portion of the neck,
Zones B and C would contain the right and left shoulder
and arm, respectively, Zones D and E would contain the
right and left pelvis and leg, and Zones F and G would
contain the right and left foot. The axial portions of the
torso, such as the vertebrae and sacrum, were assigned to
the zone to which they were in closest proximity.
Before removal from the ground, the field osteologist examined each skeleton, took field measurements,
and made notes concerning the elements that would not
remain intact after removal and, when possible, estimated sex and age of the individuals. The excavators
then removed the skeletal elements, bagged the remains
by zone, and placed the remains of each individual in a
separate burial box. The boxes were taken to the washing
station for cleaning. After the elements were cleaned and
dried, they were put in new paper bags labeled with the
original provenance and replaced in the burial boxes.
These boxes were then stored in a secure facility to await
analysis by the osteological team in the field laboratory.
Laboratory Procedures
The field laboratory, located in a temporary office
facility at the periphery of the construction site, provided
a well-lit, temperature-controlled environment for the
detailed examination of the skeletal remains. Information
was recorded for each burial using a version of the Texas
A&M University Physical Anthropology Laboratory
Data Form Set comparable to the Standards for Data
Collection from Human Skeletal Remains (Buikstra and
Ubelaker 1994). The data form set was tailored for the
scope and time limitations of the TNCC project and
included a detailed skeletal and dental inventory, dental
measurements, 34 dental discrete traits, 35 cranial and
postcranial measurements, and 9 skeletal nonmetric
traits. In addition, sex and age assessment data and
detailed information on pathological conditions were
recorded on the appropriate data forms. The information
on the data forms was entered into categorically separate

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
databases for mathematical manipulation and analysis.

but for whom such a distinction could not be made, and
an indeterminate adult category (25-49+ years).

burial box with the associated skeletal remains for
re interment.
Spatial and Comparative Analysis

Forensic Data
Identification· of biological affinity, always an
equivocal task, was made more difficult by the poor
condition of the remains. Consequently, the osteologists
established the standard that at least two supporting
diagnostic anatomical features must be present for
assessment of biological affinity. Features of the teeth
and cranium were used most often in this type of analysis
(Rhine 1990), and brachial and crural indices calculated
from long bone measurements were used when possible
(Krogman 1962; Steele and Bramblett 1988). In one
case, discriminant function analysis using cranial
measurements was employed to identify the biological
affinity of an adult female (Giles and Elliot 1962).
Children with no permanent teeth present were not
identified as to biological affinity.

The sex of adult individuals was assessed when
possible using visual observation and statistical techniques. These techniques include discriminant function
equations employing cranial, dental, and talus and calcaneus measurements (Ditch and Rose 1972; Giles 1970;
Steele 1976), pelvic assessment techniques (Kelley
1979a, 1979b), femur head diameter and shaft circumference size, and nonmetric characteristics of the skull and
pelvis (Ascadi and Nemeskeri 1970). Unfortunately, the
more sexually diagnostic elements such as the skull and
pelvis were usually crushed and provided little information. In many cases, it was necessary to rely upon a suite
of less-diagnostic indicators. Dental metrics, femur head
diameter and shaft circumference, mandibular shape,
mastoid process and supraorbital rim morphology, and
talus measurements were the sex indicators most often
used. Overall robusticity was not a good sex indicator for
this population as the skeletal elements of both males and
females tended to be large in transverse and circumference dimensions, and typically had prominent markings
at the points of origin and insertion of the muscles.
Therefore, subjective body-size judgments alone were
not relied upon, and a standard was established that more
than one indicator was required to assess sex. Sex was
only assessed for subadults when the dental metric equation results were also supported by very strong evidence
of gender-diagnostic artifacts.

Metric and Nonmetric Analysis
Although a total of 35 cranial and postcranial
measurements were included on the data forms, poor
preservation limited the number of measurements that
could be taken for a given skeleton (see Appendix E,
Tables E-2 through E-4). The majority of the recorded
skeletal metric data consists of long bone dimensions.
Only one individual cranium was preserved sufficiently
to allow for the entire battery of cranial measurements.
Cranial and postcranial measurements and calculation of
indices followed definitions provided by Bass (1987),
Fazekas and Kosa (1978), and Steele and Bramblett
(1988). Stature estimations were calculated from femur,
tibia, and/or humerus dimensions, and the stature
regression equations followed Trotter (1970). Dental
metric data were also recorded for the mesio-distal and
buccal-lingual dimensions of the crown and cervical
margin of all measurable adult teeth (cf. Olivier 1969).

Age estimation was based on dental development,
eruption, and wear (Scott 1979; Smith 1984; Steele and
Bramblett 1988), measurement of the petrosal for young
infants (Fazekas and Kosa 1978), epiphyseal fusion
(Bass 1987; Steele and Bramblett 1988), pelvic changes
(Gilbert and McKern 1973; Katz and Suchey 1986;
Lovejoy et al. 1985; McKern and Stewart 1957; Suchey
et al. 1986), generalized age-related arthritic changes,
and degree of cranial suture fusion (Meindl and Lovejoy
1985). Due to poor preservation, most of the subadults
were assigned to one of five age categories ranging from
fetus through late adolescent. Age assessments of
subadults were typically based on dental development
and eruption of the teeth, but three cases of fetus/neonate
age were assessed based on measurement of the petrosal.
Adults were identified as young adult (25-49 years) or
old adult (50+ years) primarily based on dental eruption
and wear, cranial suture fusion, epiphyseal fusion,
auricular surface morphology, and extent of age-related
osteoarthritis. Three additional age categories were used,
indeterminate subadult (0-24 years), an indeterminate
subadult/adult category for those individuals who may
either have been an older subadult or an adult at death

Nonmetric data (beyond those data required for age
and sex assessment) were also collected (see
Appendix E, Table E-5). Pathological conditions were
noted and described in terms of location on the skeletal
element, type of bony response, and possible diagnosis
of condition. Presence/absence and location of a small
cross section of nonmetric or discontinuous traits (9)
were recorded. All dentition, including loose teeth, were
mapped on a dental chart. Dental nonmetric data
gathered included information concerning development
and eruption (Steele and Bramblett 1988), modification
(both pathological and cultural), and presence/absence
and type of dental discrete traits as described by T~er
et al. (1991). Additionally, two brain casts were
recovered but no actual soft tissue was preserved with .•
them These casts were not studied but were placed in the

The age and sex of each skeleton, as well as the
occurrence per skeleton of diseases, traumatic injuries,
and traits suggestive of familial affinity were individually plotted onsite maps to determine whether any pattern
in the interment of the deceased could be recognized.
These maps were then used in the subsequent data analysis phase.
. The ~esults of the TNCC analysis were compared
with the City of Houston death certificate records for the
year 1900. These records, recovered from the Clayton
Library's Geneology Collection in Houston, Texas listed
the Third New City Cemetery, or Potter's Field 'as the
burial location for some 245 individuals from J~uary 1,
1900, to August 31, 1900. The demographic distribution,
ethnic make-up, and causes of death for these
documented individuals were compared with the findings
based on the TNCC skeletal sample to determine if the
recovered sample accurately reflected the individuals
buried in the cemetery. The TNCC results were also
compared with reported data from seven excavated
cemeteries: Phillips Memorial Cemetery (Dockall and
Powell 1996), Dallas's Freedman's Cemetery (Condon et
al. 1998), Cedar Grove Baptist Church (Rose 1985; Rose
and Santeford 1985), St. Peter/Toulouse Street Cemetery
(Owsley et al. 1987), First African Baptist Church
(Angel et al. 1987; Rankin-Hill 1997), the Mother
DAME Church Cemetery (Thomas et al. 1998), and
38CH778, a South Carolina plantation site (Rathbun
1987). Because of differences in the published
presentation of the data from the seven sites not all of
th~ sites were used in each point-by-point ~omparison
with TNCC results. However, these particular studies
were chosen for comparative purposes from a larger field
of African American cemetery reports for the following
reasons.
~chaeological investigations at the Phillips
Memonal Cemetery in La Marque, Texas (now within
~e. ~oundaries of Texas City, Texas) recovered 43
mdiv1d~ls fro~ 53 burial features. This cemetery
population consisted of African American individuals
from the surrounding rural communities who died
be~~en 1884 and 1927 (Dockall and Powell 1996). The
Phillips Memorial Cemetery was chosen for comparison
beca_use .of its geographic proximity to the TNCC site
and its comparable antiquity.

The Freedman's Cemetery, a large African
American burial ground located in Dallas, Texas, was in
use from 1869 to 1907, approximately the same time

.
The Cedar Grove Baptist Church cemetery, located
m southern Arkansas, was primarily composed of rural
African Americans buried between 1890 and 1927. The
excavation recovered 84 individuals. Data on 80
individuals reported by Rose (1985) were compared with
the TNCC population because the skeletal assemblage is
large, the data are reported in detail, and the cemetery is
of comparable antiquity and from the same general
region of the United States.
Excavations of the St. Peter/Toulouse Street
Cemetery in New Orleans recovered 29 urban African
American slaves interred sometime between 1720 and
1725 through ca. 1810 (Owsley et al. 1987). The St.
Peter/Toulouse Street study permits comparison of an
urban African American cemetery located in a Gulf
Coast city with the TNCC.
Excavations at the 8th Street First African Baptist
Church cemetery in Philadelphia resulted in the removal
and detailed reporting of 135 skeletons from 144 burial
features. This sample was chosen because these
individuals, buried from 1823-1841, permit comparison
o~ the TNCC site with an urban population comprising a
mtxture of ex-slave and freeborn African American
people (Rankin-Hill 1997).
The Mother UAME Church Cemetery skeletal
assemblage of 339 individuals represents a tum-of-thecentury urban African American population from
Wilmington, Delaware (Thomas et al. 1998). The data
recovered from analysis of these remains provide a
comparis~n of the ~CC population with another large
urban bunal population from the same time period.
The recovered remains of 36 individuals from a
plantation cemetery near Charleston, South Carolina (site
number 38CH778) likely represent a rural African
American slave community (Rathbun 1987). This
cemetery population was chosen for comparison with the
TNCC population to examine possible parallels in the
effects of hard physical labor and diseases.
Demography of the Third New City
Cemeterv Population
The 446 possible burial features excavated at the
TNCC yielded skeletal remains of 355 individuals.
Although the majority of the burial features contained

119
118

period as the TNCC (Condon et al. 1998). Excavations at
the Freedmen's Cemetery recovered 1 157 individuals
providing a quantity of osteological ~formation abou;
African Americans living in Texas in the late nineteenth
century.

·-·-·===·===·-=·==-·-·-·

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
TABLE 13: Demography of the Third New City
Cemetery Skeletal Samples

single inhumations delineated by a collapsed coffin, four
features contained the ruins of more than one coffin and
held commingled remains, most of which were assigned
to individual skeletons in the field laboratory. Additionally, Feature 62 contained an adult male and an infant
who were interred together within the same coffin. A
small number of skeletal elements, representing at least
five individuals, were found on the surface with no associated burial feature after demolition of the Allen Parkway Village apartment buildings, and 96 features held
neither skeletal nor dental remains. The nonassociated
remains, although cataloged and examined, were not
included in the summary analysis.

Unknown
Sex

Age
Fetus/Neonate
0-2 years
3-5 years
6-12 years
13-24 years
0-24years
Older Subadult/Adult
Indeterminate Adult
25-49 years
5o+years
Totals

7
12
10
8
4
2
26
90
9

5
173

Males

4

55
17
16
92

.•
N

x

Females

Totals

4
1
2
40
19
9
76

7
12
10
9
12
3
28
185
45
30
341

9

x

x

J

*

x

x

,

0

x

0

s

0

20

Sex

Age (years)
15-25
25-30
3o-40
35-45
40-50
50-60
Totals

Unknown
Sex

0 0

do

2
2
2
2
8

Females
2
2
2
2

3
11

Totals

0

x

5
2
4
4
2
6
23

x x x
x
0

x

0

OOX ~

8

Comparison With Death Records

The majority of the individuals from the TNCC
(341/355) were assigned to one of 10 age categories,
although 114 individuals were not sufficiently preserved
to allow for even a broad age assessment (see Table 13;
Figure 55). The largest number of individuals, a total of
216, were placed into the three most general age
categories, that of indeterminate subadult, indeterminate
older subadult/adult, and indeterminate adult. Poor
preservation prevented finer age resolution for the
individuals assigned to these categories, but the
remaining 125 individuals were assigned to morespecific age categories. The osteologists assessed 7
fetus/neonates, 12 infants, 10 young children, 9 older
children, 12 adolescents, 45 young adults, and 30 old
adults. Furthermore, 23 of the older adolescents and
adults included in the broad age categories were assigned
a more-precise age range based on dental eruption, pubic
symphysis and auricular surface morphology, epiphyseal
fusion, and cranial suture closure (Table 14).

TABLE 15: Third New City Cemetery Demography as
Recorded in City of Houston Death Records
Age

Unknown
Sex

Fetus/Neonate
0-2 years
3-5 years
6-12 years
13-24 years
Indetenninate Adult
25-49 years
5o+years
Totals
2

120

io
·x

r

c·X

lg
jo

0

x

Xo

~

x

~Xx
0

x

0

0

Ix

b
x

ff

0

Sex and age data from the TNCC population were
compared with City of Houston death certificate records
from 1900. The death certificate records indicate that
during the first 8 months of the year 1900, 140 males and
103 females were buried on the site of the TNCC,
resulting in an overall sex ratio of 0.74 for that
chronological period (Table 15). When children under
the age of i3 years are factored out, the ratio drops to
0.66 (53/80). This low sex ratio for documented
individuals substantiates the low ratio of 0.83-0.94
calculated for the skeletal population from TNCC.

6

x

0 0 0

0

Age

80 feet

20 meters

lo
Males
2

1
4

60
15

0

0

x

TABLE 14: Older Adolescents and Adults in the Skeletal
Samples Assigned to Narrow Age Ranges

Sex was determined for 168 individuals recovered
from the TNCC, including one older child (6-12 years at
death) who was assessed as a female (Table 13;
Figure 54). This individual was buried with an
assortment of typically feminine jewelry and a porcelain
baby doll, artifacts suggestive of female sex. Dental
discriminant function analysis performed on the
permanent teeth also indicated that the individual was a
female. There were 92 males and 76 females in the
TNCC sample, resulting in a sex ratio of 0.83, below the
expected ratio of 1.0 (Weiss 1973). Weiss (1973) reports
that there is a tendency to overestimate males in skeletal
analyses and that a 12 percent correction to the male total
may be used to factor out that bias. If the 12 percent
correction is applied to the TNCC sample, the resulting
sex ratio is 0.94, still well below unity in distribution.

40
10

0
0

0

x x
xx x
x
0
x
x
x

0
0

p

x
cP
x

0
0

x

0x ~,x0 ~
x ~
x
x 2i 0

*z

S?

0

d

0

x

x
0

0

0

x

x
0

0

x x

*

0

x

x

x

cf~

·-·-·-·-·-·-·
206 Wild Basin Rd., Ste. 300
Austin, Texas 78746-3343
Phone: (512) 329-8342 FAX: (512) 327-2453

Distribution of skeletol remains identified
as mole or female.
Males

Females

Totals

22
33
2
3
15

29
17
2
2
9
3
22
22
103

52
51
4

34
28
140

5

Figure 54
Third New City Cemetery
Sex Distribution MaP.

x Male
o Female
Excavation Boundary

24
3
56
50
245

Prepared for: Housing Authority of the City of Houston
Drown by: A Pugh

Dote: 6/14/02

File:N:44 7212/cod/new_distribution_mops/gender_symb.dgn

121

·-·-·==·==· ==·-·-·

==·"""""""·-·-·-·=--· -·-·-·-·

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
To facilitate further comparisons of age frequency
and age frequency by sex of the 1NCC sample with the
death certificate records, individuals in the latter were
assigned to the same age categories used for the 1NCC
analysis. The three indeterminate age categories (0-24
years, older subadult/adult, and indeterminate adult)
were not included in the comparison.

.•
N

~

,

x

I? •

Qj

~

0

s

•
0

• \j

a
:

20

40

5

10

80 feel

60
15

20 meters

0

0

X A

0

A

A

0

~

r!.

x

• •

A

0

0

•

x

•

A

•0

0

6x
0

•

·o

•

0

~ 9<

•

·-·-·

ln.;;r~diate

0
0

•x

0

00

0

0

0
0

0 0
0

•

•
r:P

o
A

o
x

g

0

•

·-·- ·-·-·

-·-·-·

·-·- ·-· -·-· -. -=-·- - - - - : - : : - - - - - ,
206 Wild Basin Rd., Ste. 300
Austin Texas 78746-3343
PhOne; (512) 329-8342 FAX: (512) 327-2453

Age Catagories (Q-24, 0-Adult
and Undetermined Adultl Not Shown

•

0

0

0

ao

x 0 .o

I

A

x

oD
•

io

0

0

·e
I
0

x
0
0

Inf ant <0-2 years)
Child (3-12 years)
Adolescent (13-2 4 years)
Young Adult (25-49 years)
Old Adult (50+ years)
. _ Excavation Boundary

Figure 55
Third New 9ity. Cemetery
Age Oistnbut1on Map
.
rit of the city of Houston
..
,
8 5" 11" Sheet
Prepared for: Housing Autho y
Scale: 1 =70 for · x
Job No.: 447212.00
Dote:
6/14/02
Drown by: A. Pugh
File: N:447212/cod/ new_dlslribution_mops/oge_symb.dgn

The city death certificate records show a large
percentage of stillbirth and young infant deaths in the
first 8 months of 1900 (42 percent, N = 242), with
decreasing deaths in the middle childhood and adolescent
ages, and then a higher frequency (44 percent) for the
adults (Figure 56). This U-shaped type of demographic
pattern, although typical of nineteenth-century mortality
patterns (Weiss 1973), can also represent a population
experiencing recurring infectious disease epidemics with
increased susceptibility for older adults and the very
young (Thornton 1987; Thornton et al. 1991). Indeed,
1900 was an epidemic year in the Houston area. There
were outbreaks of smallpox, cholera, and malaria in
Houston that year, and these diseases are all listed as
causes of death in the death certificate records. By comparison, infants (15 percent, N = 125) are underrepresented in the 1NCC skeletal sample, while young adults
from 25-49 years predominate (36 percent). Adults in
the age category of 50+ (24 percent) are present in the
next highest frequency (see Figure 56).
The low frequency .of subadults found in the 1NCC
skeletal sample is probably not chiefly a result of bias
due to poor preservation of fragile infant bone, although
that is a common problem in archaeological demographic
studies (Corruccini et al. 1982; Rathbun 1987; Waldron
1994; Weiss 1973). Unless a large number of infants
were buried in the 1NCC without coffins, at least some
evidence of all infant interments in the excavation area
should have been retrieved. An analysis of the coffin
sizes at the 1NCC reveals a strong correlation between
coffin sizes and maturity of the individuai' (Marianne
Marek, personal communication 1998). There were 15
coffins of the size typically used for infants that
contained no osteological remains. When these 15
individuals are added to the sample as infants, the
frequency of infants in the 1NCC population is still
lower than would be expected in a mortuary assemblage
from a stable population (Waldron 1994; Weiss 1973),
and much lower than that of the 1900 death certificate
record sample (Figure 57).
There are several possible explanations for the
underrepresentation of infants in the 1NCC population.
For example, a number of stillborn and very young
infants may have either been buried at home or disposed
of in some other way, perhaps for ceremonial purposes

122

or to avoid the cost of a funeral. Home burial of infants
was fairly common in late-nineteenth-century Texas
rural communities, and although the 1NCC was located
near downtown, Houston was not the metropolitan area
in the period between 1850 and 1910 that it became
afterward. Downtown Houston was surrounded by
undeveloped areas, and many of the populace certainly
still carried rural traditions with them. In support of this
argument, some of the neonates who were ultimately
buried in the cemetery, as recorded in the city death
certificates for 1900, were found dead on the street or in
the nearby woods.
Another factor contributing to infant underrepresentation may be the historical u~e of the cemetery as a
hospital burial ground, possibly skewing the age distribution toward the adults who were hospitalized or who
consented to be quarantined in the so-called "pest house"
hospital facilities. Dr. Max Urwitz (1891), in a report
following the 1890-1891 smallpox epidemic, stated that
many African American citizens living in the nearby
neighborhoods would not bring their families to the
smallpox hospital located on the cemetery site for quarantine. Instead, they remained at home without proper
treatment. His report did not explicitly refer to the ages
of individuals under his care, but he implied that most of
the patients were not children.
Finally, although the spatial distribution of graves
excavated at the 1NCC does not show any clustering of
subadult burials, there may have been a children's
section of the cemetery at one time, and these children's
graves could have been among those removed in the
1940s .
The above points address the possible reasons for
the underrepresentation of the young within the TNCC
site assemblage. It is also possible, however, that the
large discrepancy between the death certificate records
and the 1NCC skeletal assemblage could occur because
the death records may represent a short period in time
when there was an unusually large number of infant
deaths in the surrounding community.
When the age comparison is divided by sex
(Figure 58), the 1NCC population exhibits an equal
number of males and females in the adolescent ages and
a nearly equal number in the young adult ages. Males
predominated in the old adult category. This pattern is
not improbable because even as late as the turn of the
century in America, women were more likely to die
during their childbearing years, and as a consequence
men often outlived several wives. Therefore, a larger
number of men who reached the age of 50 would be
expected, although there should be more disparity in the

!

:1

!

i

'1
!

123

'

'
I
!

Figure 56. Age Comparison of TNCC with TNCC Death Records
40.00%

35.00%

30.00%

25.00%

•TNCC

~

=
~

N

.j::..

ra TNCC Death Records

&20.00%

~

r.;

15.00%

10.00%

5.00%

0.00%
~~

~q,~

"1

t;-&<>'

\:frv

~~

~~

~~~
'?<-,"1

b<.4i~<§-~

. .rv4i~

,,.,,rv

fo'"

4i~<§-~
~
{>

4i~<§-~
~x

~

Age Categories

Figure 57. TNCC Age Comparison Including Coffin Size Data

45.00%

·~

~~~

...- . . . -......

......

N

Vl

40.00% I

I

35.00% I

t

30.00% f

(

~-- ~

................

.........

~~

.........-..........

. . . .JU.;>...._ _

,,_,,...,.~~.Jy~~-,._-~,........~.............................._~......~-~-~~

"""

~ 25.00%
~

=

•rncc

C"

~

~

20.00%

ra TNCC Death

15.00%

Records

10.00%
5.00%
0.00%
Infants

3-5 years

6-12 years

13-24 years

Age Categories

25-49 years

50+years

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
frequencies of women and men in the young adult age
category. The age by sex comparison as reported in the
city death records shows higher male mortality in all of
the three age categories compared, and a particularly
obvious predominance of males in the young adult
category. This evidence suggests an overall higher death
rate for men from the community who were buried in the
TNCC. Reasons for a higher death rate among African
American males in downtown Houston at the turn of the
century are only speculative but may include a greater
risk of exposure for men to occupational trauma and
interpersonal violence. Although the cause of death listed
in the city records may not be totally reliable, the records
for 1900 show that eight males died from trauma or
complications of trauma, but only three females died as a
result of trauma. Traumatic causes of death listed for the
males include gunshot wounds, burns, beatings, exposure
to the elements, shock from injuries, and tetanus. All
three females were burned. As is described further under
the health disorders section, various forms of trauma
were also observed in the TNCC skeletal population.

00

N

Comparison With Other Cemeteries
00

~
d)
;::....

°'

'tjI

l(')

N

Ir)

126

0

0

~
~

°'
~

'tj("()

N
N

Previous studies of osteological material from
historic African American burial assemblages have
documented that these populations in general were
adversely affected by malnutrition, disease, and the
traumatic and degenerative results of physically
strenuous labor (Rankin-Hill 1997). The impact of these
factors on demographic distribution is not easily
measured in archaeological samples due to the
incomplete nature of the skeletal assemblage.
Consequently, demographic data. from various cemetery
excavations often show differences in age-specific
mortality rates and overall longevity of individuals
within the demographic classes when the optimal result
would be to discover a general pattern.
The demographic data retrieved from the TNCC
population were compared with data from the Cedar
Grove (N = 80), First African Baptist Church (FABC,
N = 135), UAME (N = 159), Phillips Memorial (N = 10),
and St. Peter!foulouse Street (N = 26) cemeteries.
Unfortunately, most of the individuals were represented
at the Phillips Memorial cemetery , by nondiagnostic
elements and fragments of elements inadvertently left
behind during the first relocation of these individuals in
the 1920s when the cemetery was first impacted by the
expansion of the adjacent roadway. The majority of the
individuals recovered from Phillips Memorial were
assigned to the broad age categories that have been
excluded from this analysis. Therefore, the comparison
with Phillips Memorial only addresses a small portion of
the mortuary assemblage of 43 individuals. Due to

127

incompatibility in reported age categories, data from the
South Carolina pfantation sample are compared with
TNCC demographic data in summary fa~hion only and
are not included in the figures.
The distribution of age categories for TNCC and
the comparison cemeteries follows a similar curve but
with idiosyncrasies in certain categories per site
(Figure 59). In general, there are more adults than
subadults represented and the age categories with the
lowest frequencies overall are those of early and late
childhood. The highest frequencies for the cemeteries are
found in the young adult category, with an especially
high representation of young adults in the St. Peter
cemetery (53.85 percent). Cedar Grove exhibits the
highest frequency of infants (42.5 percent) and the
lowest frequency of adolescents (3.75 percent) and old
adults (6.25 percent). Old adults are found in the highest
frequencies at TNCC (24 percent) and Phillips Memorial
(25 percent). Interestingly, Cedar Grove and FABC are
strikingly similar in age distribution with the exception
of some incongruity in the adolescent and old adult
categories. These two populations represent church
burial grounds in ethnically similar communities, but the
cemeteries were in active use during different decades of
the nineteenth century in disparate locales of the United
States. The TNCC age category frequencies seem to fall
between the distributions of the other cemeteries but
appear most similar to FABC in all but the infant and
early childhood categories.
Sex differential in mortality is evident in the age by
sex comparison of the TNCC population with the Cedar
Grove and F ABC samples. The TNCC and FABC
assemblages contained a large number of males over the
age of 50 relative to females in that age category, but old
adults from the Cedar Grove cemetery were almost equal
in sex distribution (Figure 60). Conversely, females were
present in larger numbers than males in the adolescent
and young adult age categories from both F ABC and
Cedar Grove, evidence that females had an earlier and
higher mortality rate than males. However, the number
of females and males in these categories from TNCC
were almost equal. The form of the data reported from
UAME cannot be directly compared in Figure 60, but the
assemblage did contain more males than females over
the age of 50 years and there were more males than
females in the young and old adult age categories. One
explanation for this discrepancy may be bias introduced
by the small sample sizes of individuals from TNCC and
UAME who could be assessed for both age and sex. The
large number of individuals who were assigned to the
indeterminate adult category may mask the true
proportion of young adults in the TNCC sample and

Figure 59. Comparison of TNCC Age Categories with Other Cemeteries

60.00% ·····························································································································································································································································i
.-~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

-+-TNCC

-W- Cedar Grove

50.00%.J__~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~r-~~~~~~-,

_._FABC

-e- Phillips

40.00% L-----------------------JL_-Yz-~---1

--*'- St. Peter

t>

=

-

Q.l

&30.00%

N

Q.l

00

r..""
20.00%

I

• ------- 7/'""'\.

10.00%

I K. ~""" ~~·

0.00% I

Pf'

~

I

~({)

~e.c

~

,' "-

~

i

<

··
i

~

.,

~i~

,.,,~

\::frv

~#'

I

ff'
ur

~;;;4./

~<b~"".

$

!<-w<b

~

r /-JZ>

rS>-""
~q;
':><

CV

,.,,r:v

ic'

'

~<b$

~""

~({)

")~

lf'
r?

Age Categories

Figure 60. Age by Sex Comparison of Larger Cemeteries

30
25

-==
Q

u

-

20
15
10

N

\0

•

5

oI

BFABCMales

4
4
1
2
2

[i]FABC Females

8

aTNCCMales
0 TNCC Females

mCedar Grove Males
ISi Cedar Grove Females

I

.

'•'•'
,•,•,
,•,•,
,•,•,
,•,•,
.................... '·'
13-24

I I I
1 1
1 1 1

25-49

50+

17
19
12
16
20
27

16
9
2
3
14
4

CHAPTER VI:

Excava fion an d Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery

Theref~re, dental discrete traits, in concert with other
anat~mical features, may be useful in determining ethnic
af~mty of human skeletal remains. A sequence of 34
trai~s and the~ variations were recorded for the TNCC

virtually confined to the upper mcisors
· ·
and only
minimally expres.sed, may be a
I
f
admixture.
resu t o genetic

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
thereby mask the number of females dying before age
50. However, it is also possible that young males in these
communities were affected by cultural factors that
exposed them to accidental death and violence or left
them more susceptible to dying from infectious diseases.
Rathbun (1987) reported that females tended to live
longer than males on the South Carolina plantation
(38CH778) where he found virtually universal skeletal
changes related to hard labor coupled with a higher
incidence of childhood metabolic stress in males.
Ethnicity
The TNCC site lies in the heart of historic
Freedmen's Town, a community settled by freed African
American slaves in the late nineteenth century. Oral
tradition in the Houston neighborhoods surrounding the
TNCC site describes the ethnic composition of the
TNCC as primarily African American. As noted above,
the city death records support this reported affiliation,
with only a very few non-African Americans appearing
in the available records.
However, identification of biological affinity of
individuals from the TNCC site was difficult because of
the incompleteness of the remains and their poor state of
preservation. There was only one intact skull present,
and the other cranial bones that did preserve were usually
highly :fragmented. Therefore, use of discriminant
function analyses was limited because such statistical
techniques require large amounts of data that incomplete
remains could not provide. Qualitative assessment of
diagnostic features was hampered for the same reasons.
The most often used criteria were multiple crenulations
of the molar crown (Figure 61); presence of the Inca
bone, os japonicum, and inion hook; orbital shape; nasal
morphology; prognathism; presence of a canine mesial
ridge and/or a tuberculum dentale on the upper canines;
and incisal shoveling (Giles and Elliot 1962; Krogman
1962; Rhine 1990).

A full battery of measurements was taken on the one
intact female skull, and the brachial and crural indices
were calculated for two other individuals. The
discriminant function score calculated from cranial
measurements that typically indicate African American
descent exceeds 9.22 for females (Steele and Bramblett
1988). The score calculated for the intact skull was
10.698, strong evidence for African American descent.
Morphological features of the face and teeth supported
the metric assessment. The brachial and crural indices
that were calculated for two other individuals supported
dental evidence that one individual was of African
American descent and the other was of possible Native
American descent (Krogman 1962).
There were 96 individuals from the TNCC
population assessed as being of African American
descent and 2 assessed as possibly of Hispanic or Native
American descent. A strong assessment of biological
affinity was not attainable for the remaining 257
individuals. Since the majority of the identifiable
individuals were determined to be African Americans, it
is likely that the majority of the unidentified individuals
were also African American, but to remove 257
individuals from the equation would render the resulting
:frequencies suspect.
An examination of the death certificate records
from 1900 substantiates that a large proportion of the
individuals interred in the cemetery, at least in that year,
were African American, but the records also show that
there were people of other ethnicities buried in the
cemetery. The death certificate records identified 243
individuals as to ethnicity; of these, 78 percent were
African American, 21 percent were Anglo-American,
and 1 percent were of Hispanic descent. These frequencies are supportive of the TNCC skeletal data.
An attempt was made to ascertain if there was an
identifiable spatial distribution to the African American
graves. One reason for this attempt was to try to identify
more individuals as to ethnicity and possible familial
relationships. Another was to look for any possible
segregation of grave construction by ethnicity. However,
although graves containing African Americans were
often found in close proximity to others of the same
ethnicity, there was no significant clustering of identified
African Americans across the excavation site.
Dental Discrete Traits
A number of distinctive morphological traits are
present in the permanent dentition of humans and some
of these traits appear to occur in higher :frequencies
within genetically related groups (Turner et al. 1991).

FIGURE 61. Crenulated crowns on
left mandibular molars of Burial 157.

130

bunal populat10n using standards casts obtained fr
D
Chr'
G
om r.
isty . . Turner II, Arizona State University. Trait
frequencies are reported in Appendix E, Table E-5.
Alth?~gh many of the traits were absent from the TNCC
dentit10n. and others were present only in low
:freq~e~cies, ~ert~in traits are of particular interest and
ment discuss10n m the text (Table 16).
TABLE 16: Dental Discrete Traits

Shoveling
Lingual marginal ridges of anterior teeth

Exp~ession of a developed canine mesial ridge was
observed m 21 perc.ent of the canines examined, and 44
percent. of the canmes exhibited from faint to strong
exp~ess10n .of a. tuberculum dentale (Figure 62). The
?an.m_e mesial ndge has been strongly associated with
of
d h
mdividuals
.
f African ancestry (Rhine 1990) ,ante
express10n o the tuberculum dentale appears to b
related to the mesial ridge development in the canine:
(Turner et al. 199.1). The canine distal accessory ridge is
also developed m about 50 percent of the
observed.
canines

Tuberculum Dentale
Ridge on labial surface ofupper incisors and c .
'bl
anmes,
possi e cusp formation
Canine Distal Accessory Ridge
Presenc~ and. development of a distal accessory ridge
on the disto-lingual surface of the canine
Carabelli's Trait
An accessory cusp rising from the protocone (cusp 2)
of the upper molar

Double Shoveling
Labial marginal ridges of anterior teeth
FIGURE 62. Left upper canine exhibiting
a canine mesial ridge from Burial 157.

Canine Mesial Ridge
Increased size of the mesial ridge on the lingual surfl
of the canme,
· possi'bly terminating in a tuberculum ace
dentale.

Tricus~id premolars are an exceedingly rare
occurrence m n:ost populations (Turner et al. 1991) but
were observed m ~o~ t~e anterior and posterior upper
premolars of one mdividual in the TNCC
I t'
(Figure 63).
popu a ton

Tricuspid Premolars
Extra distal cusp on the upper premolars
Premolar Lingual Cusp Variation
Differences in number and size of the lingual cusp of
the upper premolars
Shoveling of the upper incisors was present in some
rm o:er 50 percent of the time; the most common
r~~sion .w~s a faint marginal ridging. Upper canines
ovel:ver m~isors were rarely shoveled, and the double
mg trait was an uncommon observation occurring
~nly about. 2 percent of each of the upper anterior
·ci E~press10n of the shoveling trait is :frequently used
·~ e~ttfy individuals of Native American ancestry
I e mdividu~ls .of African ancestry tend to have more~
e.-s.haped mcisors (Gill 1986· Rhine 1990) It .
'
·
is
nsm t fi d
TNC~ o m s.uch a large frequency of shoveling in
Africanpopula~10n that appears to contain a majority
Americans. However, the shoveling trait,

. FIGURE 63. Anterior left and posterior
right upper tricuspid premolars from Burial 42.

Carabell!'s Trait, associated with Euro-American
ancest~ (Rhine 1990) was prevalent in the TNCC

populat10n and was expressed in some form in 55 percent

131

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
of the upper first molars, 16 percent of upper second
molars, and 17 percent of upper third molars. Although
the frequency of this trait in the 1NCC dentition would
appear to suggest a large Euro-American presence in the
cemetery, a portion of the Carabelli's Trait frequency,
like that of the shoveling trait frequency, is probably the
result of a mixture of ethnic affinity in the ancestry' of
some of the individuals.
The lingual cusps of the lower premolars are
usually variable in morphology, and those in the 1NCC
population varied greatly over the standard range.
Lingual cusps were absent in 37 percent of the anterior
premolars and 30 percent of the posterior premolars. One
or two equal-sized cusps were present in 20 percent of
the anterior premolars and 36 percent of the posterior
premolars. The next most frequent occurrence was two
lingual cusps with a much larger mesial cusp, and this
variation was found in 16 percent of both the anterior
and posterior lower premolars.
Health Status of the TNCC Population
The skeleton grows and develops, reacting to
physiological, behavioral, and environmental influences
throughout the life of the individual. Skeletal remains
provide direct evidence of the health status of the
deceased prior to death because the bone reacts in
characteristic fashion to various levels of nutrition,
physical activity, assaults by infections and other
stresses, and metabolic processes, both normal and
abnormal. Examination of stature and robusticity,
identification of developmental disorders, infections and
trauma, recognition of bone responses to occupational
and habitual biomechanical stresses, and inspection of
the teeth and dental arcade were used to assess the health
status of the 1NCC burial population.
Stature and Robusticity
Standardized anthropometric measurements of
skeletal elements provide data that can be compared with
standards from other populations to assess overall health.
Normal stature growth, the achievement of average
height in comparison with other populations with the
same genetic potential, is one indicator of population
health.

Stature was calculated from the stature formulae for
American blacks following Trotter (1970). These
formulae were based on measurements of cadavers from
a Korean War military series and the Terry Collection at
the Smithsonian Institution. The Terry Collection is
comprised of 1,636 macerated cadavers representing a
combination of rural and urban individuals from the
antebellum and postbellum periods in the United States.
Trotter (1970) included 537 African American cadavers
from the Terry Collection in the development of the
American black stature formulae. Birth dates for the
individuals measured in both the Korean War and Terry
series ranged from 1840 to 1924, overlapping in secular
trend with the 1NCC population (Trotter 1970). The
American black formulae were chosen for the 1NCC
study because the individuals of known ethnicity in the
1NCC population were predominantly African
American, although use of these formulae may assume
incorrectly that the unidentified skeletons were also
African American.
Stature estimations were made for 15 males, 14
females, and 3 individuals of indeterminate sex
(Table 17). Of these 32 stature estimations, 23 were
calculated from femur segment measurements following
Steele and Bramblett (1988). Length measurements for
the remainder of the stature estimations were taken from
two complete femora, eight tibiae, and one humerus. The
mean stature for males in the 1NCC cemetery population
was 166.09 ± 7.17 (5'6") and mean stature for females
was 155.56 ± 7.5 (5'2").
There was considerable variation in stature within
sex categories at 1NCC, with some males similar in
stature to the most diminutive females and with some
females approaching the height of the tallest males. This
variation in height could be the result of certain health
and genetic factors particular to the settlement of
Freedmen's Town and the diversity of people who were
interred in the Third New City Cemetery. Many of the
early African American inhabitants of Freedmen's Town
in the late 1860s to early 1870s immigrated from other
parts of the state and country, building a heterogeneous
population that reflected different genetic and nutritional
backgrounds. Additionally, analysis of biological affinity
for the 1NCC population shows that there were
individuals of more than one ethnicity buried in the

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
cemete1?' over time. This genetically diverse burial
population also varied in socioeconomic status. The
TNCC mo~ary assemblage includes some individuals
~h~s~ bunal goods indicate material wealth and some
~diVIduals . who were probably quite poor. These
diff~r~nces m family background and access to sufficient
nutntion and medical care very likely played a part in the
overall health of the cemetery population and resulted in
so~e of the variation seen in the range of stature
estimates for the TNCC.
A comparison of mean stature from the TNCC with
mean stature estimates from FABC, DAME, Freedmen's,
and 38CH778 shows that both males and females from
the TNCC were shorter on the average than others of the
sa?1e sex fr~m . the other skeletal assemblages
(Figur~ 64). This difference in mean stature may be a
reflection of the small number of individuals for whom
stature co~ld be calculated in the TNCC skeletal sample
or a ge~etic p~edisposition toward shorter stature in this
popu~ation. It Is also possible that the people represented
by this skeletal sample were, for some unknown reason
under heavier environmental stresses than thos~
represented by the comparison populations.
In addition to stature, the shape and robusticity of
skeletal ele~ents are .possible indicators of overall health
status. Metnc analysis shows that in general both males
and females from the TNCC population had lar
d ·
ge
tr
ansverse an crrcumference dimensions of the long
.bo.n~s with ~ro~ent muscle markings at the points of
?n~m and msertion (Appendix E, Table E-4). This
md1cates well-developed neck and shoulder muscles and
robust ~ and legs, a type of body build that is
charactenstic of people who work hard at physical labor.

Index

Robusticity

Pi!astric

Cnemic

Male
Female
Indeterminate

Median Stature

166.09 ± 7.17, N=15
155.56 ± 7.5, N=l4
156.35 ± 8.08, N=3

164.51±3.94
153.79 ± 3.41
154.86 ± 3.94

132

Range
155.63-178.41
146.31-175.65
149.11-165.07

The pilastric index of the femur was calculated for
the TNCC population rather than the meric index
because ~e poor condition of the remains resulted in few
femora With the preserved subtrochanteric diameters that
are
for the meric calculations · The p1'las tn'c
· d necessary
·
Ill e~ of the fe.mur is calculated from comparison of the
antenor-postenor and mesio-lateral midshaft measurements and illustrates the development of the linea aspera
of the femur and the relative shape of the femur at midshaft. A smaller pilastr!c ~dex denotes an upper portion
?fthe femW: shaft tha! Is Wider mesio-laterally and flatter
Ill the antenor-postenor plane. Differences in the index
values between ~les and females within populations
have b~en .associated with sexual dimorphism. The
assumption Is ~t the greater muscle development of the
u?per .le~ typically seen in males results in a larger
pdastric mdex (Steele and Bramblett 1988). A comparison of ~ve~age male and female pilastric indices from the
TNCC mdicates that males in this population do not have
greater development of the linea aspera than females (see
T~ble 18). How~ver, femora that are rounder at midshaft
~th less. ant~n~r~posterior flattening have also been
linked With mdiVIduals of African descent (Stewart

TABLE 18. Companson
.
of p ostcranial Indices as a Measure of Body Size and Shape
Sex

TNCC

Phillips

FABC*

20th Century*

78.1±0.0
(N=l)

104.3 ±9.4
(N=30)

115.9 ± 9.3
(N=17)

104.1±10.8
(N-102)

106.9 ± 0.0
(N 1)

109.1±8
(N 29)

111.4±7.6
(N 31)

F

75.6 +6.9
(N=l9)

74.6 ± 10.9
(N=3)

74.7 ±6.3
(N=25)

74.0±5.8
(N=l5)

72.2 ± 6.8**

M

74.6±10.0
(N 38)

72.7±7.2
(N 2)

71.2 ± 5.4
(N 25)

73.8 ±6.0
(N 29)

72.2 ± 6.8**

F

12.3 ±0.0
(N=l)

M

14.6 ±0.3
(N-2)

13.6 ±0.0
(N 1)

F

107.7±9.6
(N=69)

M

TABLE 17. Third New City Cemetery Population Stature
Mean Stature

The robusticity index, usually calculated for the
humerus and. femur, ~s 'used to illustrate the size of a long
bone shaft Ill relation to its length, quantifying the
robustness of the long bone. Robusticity indices were
calculated for the three individuals (one female and two
males) repr~sented by complete femora (Table 18). The
female, Bunal 206, is an unusually gracile individual for
~e TNCC population and exhibits a low robusticity
md~x. The robusticity indices of the males Burial 79 d
Bunal 198, indicate a large shaft dimensio~ in relatio::o
femur length.

"' After Angel et al. (1987).

** Male and female averaged together; no significant difference between sexes.

133

DAME

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
1979). The TNCC pilastric indices are similar to those of
the African American comparison populations (see
Table 18).
00

t-

I~

~

a- -

\

I

I\

~'

-~

0

.§

C'i

Q)
Q)

I-<

~

4~

0

~

-t-

~

'\
f\

.......

~
0

0

t-

"!

t.......

.......

l£)

0

t-

I\

0
0
00

\0
.......

I\•

~

0

C!
\0
\0

.......

0
0

~

\0
.......

0

0

C'i

0

.......

.......

00
in

0
0
\0

134

C!

\0

C!

.......

u
u

~

0

0
0

\0

~

C!
l£)

.......

l£)

.......

0
0

C'i
tr)

0

C!

0

l£)

.......

.......

00

00
OI

c;.;

.......

.......

\0

0
N

.......
l£)

0

.......

C'i

o\

.......

.......

t-

N

l£)

\0

t°"': "!
l£)

l£)

\0

.......

l£)

.......

Q)

~

::E

~

ca

The cnemic index quantifies the mesio-Iateral
flattening of thc:i tibia. Both males and females from the
TNCC are in the eurycnemic range, exhibiting broadness
of the tibia shaft at the nutrient foramen. The TNCC
cnemic indices are quite similar to those from the
African American comparison populations, which are all
in the eurycnemic range (see Table 18). The causes of
tibial roundness vs. flattening are uncertain at this time,
although it has been suggested that there are both genetic
and environmental influences on this index (Angel et al.
1987; Bass 1987; Thomas et al. 1998).

00

i;...

~\

N

\0

rl)

u

~
t-

\0

ff)

.~

0
0

0

'<:f"
~

00

~

0
0

0

e

++

Sexual Dimorphism in Tooth Measurements
Mean crown and cervical measurements from six
categories of tooth present in the TNCC dentition show
that sexual dimorphism in tooth size occurs in this
population (figures 65 and 66). The mean buccal-lingual
(BL) and mesio-distal (MD) measurements of the crown
and of the cervical margin at the cemento-enamel
junction are compared by sex for the upper and lower
canines, upper and lower anterior premolars, and the
upper and lower first molars. Teeth from male
individuals are larger on average in both length and
width than those from female individuals.
The most notable differences in size between male
and female teeth are present in the BL crown
measurements of the lower canines. The average male
lower canine BL crown measurement is 8.16 mm in
comparison with 7.43 mm for female lower canines (see
Figure 65). The upper canines are mildly dimorphic in
BL crown measurements, while the lower first molars
exhibit dimorphism in both BL and MD crown
measurements (see Figure 65). The lower canines are
slightly dimorphic in crown MD measurements.
The cervical measurements are sexually dimorphic
in at least one dimension for all of the tooth categories
(see Figure 66). The cervical measurements of the lower
Canines are the most dimorphic at 7 .98 mm for males and
7.17 mm for females (see Figure 66). These results
support the value of investigating the use of cervical
measurements as a contributing method for sex
assessment of skeletal remains.

The individuals recovered from the TNCC were
affected by numerous health disorders that left evidence
on the skeletal remains (see Appendix E, Table E-1).

Developmental disorqers, infections, dental caries and
abscesses, hemopoietic disorders, circulatory and
hormonal dysfunction, traumatic injury, degenerative
joint diseases, and tumors and other neoplasms were all
noted (Table 19). There was no apparent pattern to the
burial distribution of these health disorders across the
cemetery site.
TABLE 19. Health Disorders
at TNCC (Per Individual Case)

Disorder
Hip dysplasia
Talus malformation
Cortical defects
Sinusitis
Upper respiratory infections
Scalp infections
Mastoiditis
Treponemal infections
Tuberculosis
Cribra orbitalia
Porotic hyperostosis
Osteochondritis dissecans
Hyperostosis frontalis interna
Osteoporosis
Fractures
Gunshot wound
Muscle pull
Tom ligament
Shoulder trauma
Wasted elements
Enthesopathy
Schmorl's nodes
Vertebral joint disease
Diarthrodial joint disease
Bone cyst
Osteoma
Other neoplasms

Male

Female

2

lndeterminate

Totals

I
6

6
2

3

3
13
3
2
I
6
I

2
3

4
2

17
2

*

2
2
2
4

4
5
6

2

3
3

22
2

3

4

2

2
I
2

7

1

2
4
10

9

21
9
3

**

2

2

10
3
14

2

33
9
3
2

* One male had four fractures; two males had two fractures; total
males with fractures = 12.
** One male had two bone cysts in different elements; total males
with cysts= 8.
Developmental Disorders of the
Skeleton
The frequency of skeletal developmental disorders
was low (1.4 percent, 5/355) in the TNCC population,
although the presence of linear enamel hypoplasias in
many of the dental arcades suggests that microscopic
examination for growth arrest lines of the long bones
might have produced additional data.
One case of bilateral congenital hip dysplasia in
which the acetabulae were extremely shallow and the

135

Figure 65
Sexual Dimorphism in Mean Dental Crown Measurements
13.00
12.50
12.00 ~
11.50
11.00
10.50
10.00 I
9.50

~
.s.....
=

-

~

5

0\

"'
=
~

:g

•

~

x

D

/::;.

~

t

-=

w

~

/::;.

8.50
9.00
8.00
7.50
7.00
6.50
6.00 I5.50
5.00
4.50
4.00
3.50
3.00·
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00

x

~

l:;.

•

•

x

D

•
D

l!

I-

I

Upper First Molar

Lower Anterior
Premolar

Upper Anterior
Premolar

Lower Canine

Upper Canine

Lower First Molar

Tooth
• Male MD Crown

D

Female MD Crown

t::;.

Male BL Crown

X

Female BL Crown

Figure 66

Sexual Dimorphism in Mean Dental Cervical Measurements

t

13.00
12.50
12.00
11.50

~
~

w

....;i

........=
=
=
~

-==
~

"'
~

~

11.00
10.50
10.00
9.50
9.00
8.50
8.00
7.50
7.00
6.50
6.00
5.50
5.00
4.50
4.00
3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00

~

~

.

A

l:;.

x

A

A

x

•
D

•

D

x

a
x

x

•

•

D

~

•

Upper Anterior
Premolar

Lower Anterior
Premolar

D

[
'

I

Upper Canine

I

Lower Canine

Upper First Molar

Tooth
• Male MD Cervical

D

Female MD Cervical

l'l

Male BL Cervical x Female BL Cervical

Lower First Molar

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
femoral heads were flattened in the anterior-posterior
plane was present in a male individual. The femora were
slightly bowed anteriorly but did not exhibit any
evidence of wasting or other indications of atrophy.
Therefore, the individual was apparently able to walk but
probably needed the support of crutches or a cane. Other
developmental disorders present in the population
included three cortical defects, occurring on the femur of
one female and the foot bones of two male individuals,
and one slightly malformed talus from a male skeleton.
Developmental Disorders of the
Dentition
Linear enamel hypoplasias (LEH) signal
suspensions in the development of the tooth enamel and
have been associated with growth arrests in children. A
variety of stressers including malnutrition and infection
have been named as causes for LEH (Skinner and
Goodman 1992). Both malnutrition and tuberculosis, one
infectious disease that is believed to be responsible for
multiple hypoplastic lines in the tooth enamel (Ortner
and Putschar 1985), were listed in relatively high
frequencies as causes of death in the rnee death
certificate records.
The overall frequency of LEH in the permanent
teeth of the rnee population was 50 percent (N = 227)
of individuals represented by permanent teeth (Table 20).
Two cases of single LEH occurred on deciduous teeth.
One of those cases was a lower right premolar that had
been retained in an adult dental arcade. The other case
was found in the upper and lower deciduous canines of a
9-month-old infant. This case was probably not related to
stress in utero, but occurred as the canines developed
during the first few months after birth. It is likely that the
stress that produced the LEH was instrumental in the
death of the infant. Interestingly, this infant, Burial 62.l,
was buried in the same coffin with an adult male
individual who suffered from nonspecific bone infection.

The frequency of LEH in males was 46 percent
(35176) and the female frequency was 64 percent (44/69).
Multiple occurrences of growth arrests were often
observed, with 38 percent (29176) of males and 46
percent (32/69) of females experiencing at least two
arrests (see Table 20). The frequencies by sex of LEH
found in the rnee population are similar to those
reported for the FABe and UAME skeletal assemblages
but much lower than those reported from 38eH778

<<<<<<<-:··.·.·.·.·.·.·.·
.·.·.· .· ·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·
·.·.·.·.·.·.·:·.·....
·.· ·.·.
. . . .·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·
...·..·.·
. ..·..·.·.·.··.·.·.·
.·.......
.·.·. ·.·.· .·.··.·.·.·.·.·.·.·
.·.· .·.·.· .·.·.· ·.·.·.·.·.·.· .· ..
.·.·.·.·. ·.·.·.· ..
0

35

0

0

0

Unk.
34

113
79
51

Multiple LEH per tooth (2 arrests)

29

32

Multiple LEH per tooth (3 arrests)

12

29

10

8

9

7

~

~

~~

(Table 21).

~

TABLE 21. Cusp Within a Cusp Anomaly
Teeth
Affected

Burial
Number

Sex

34

M

20,29

157

F

158

Teeth with
Multiple LEH

~

Infected
Bone

22,27

No

2, 3, 5, 14, 16,
20,30,31

4,21,22,27

Yes

F

3,14

None

No

F

2

None

No

195

F

3, 14, 30

Yes

257

6,8,20,29

F

28

None

No

257.l

3, 5, 12,21
28,30

4,6, 7, 12,
20, 21, 29

No

362

F

"'
·i::
~

ju
·:·:·:·:·:·:·:· .·.·.......
·.·.·.·.·.·.·.
. ·.·. ·.·.·.·.·.·

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::·:·: :
... ·.·.·.·.·:·:·:· ·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·. ·. : : : :
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

I

0

~

~

D

b
~

;::::

~

~

~~
~

Tooth number corresponds to standard dental numbering system;
I = upper right third molar; 32 = lower right third molar

~
~

.·.· .·.·.·.·. ·.· ................. .

.·.·.·.·.·.·. ·.·.·:·:·:·:·:··.·.·.·.·.·.·. ·.·.· ..
-:

-:
0

-:
I

-:
0

-:
0

-:
0

-:
0

-:

0

0

0

f

0

0
0

t

0
0

0

0
0

0

..
0

0

:- :- :-

0

t

0

0

:

-:
0

-:
0

-:
I

0

0

I

0

0
0

0

0

0

Total
LEH

44

~
;::::

........
·.·.·.·.-.·.·.·.<<<<<<·>'·
...................
........................... .......
....
...................
....................
. . . . ...
.......................·......

.·.·.·.·.·.·. ·.·:·:·:·:·:·:·:··.·.·.·.
·.·:·:·:·:·· .·
.........

18

Multiple LEH per tooth (4+ arrests)

I

0

b

A developmental anomaly that can best be
described as a "cusp within a cusp" pattern occurred
several times in the TNee population (Figure 68). This
anomaly (eWe), observed only on individuals assessed
as African American, appeared in higher frequency on
the molar teeth but was also observed on premolars

TABLE 20. Count of Linear Enamel
Hypoplasias in the TNCC Population

Number ofhypoplasias

0

(Figure 67).

0

Male Female

I

FIGURE 68. Cusp within a cusp anomaly
in left upper molar of Burial 157.
'$.

ewe is characterized by enamel growth that
appears to be erupting through the enamel surface of the
cusp. When ewe occurred on a highly crenulated molar,
the appearance was similar to that of the mulberry molar

24

N = 227 individuals represented by permanent dentition, 76 males,

0
0

0

0

......

'$.
0
0

0

0\

'$.

'$.

0
0

0

0

00

C!

0

t--

'$.
0
0

0

\0

'$.
0
0

0I(')

A:manba.IJI

69 females, 82 of undetermined sex.

139
138

'$.

'$.

0
0

0
0

0

"""

0('<)

'$.
0
0

0

N

~

'$.

0......

0

0
0

0
0

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Th'Ir d N ew City
. Cemetery

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
associated with congenital syphilis (Hillson et al. 1998).
Yet there was no associated evidence of congenital
syphilis in the incisors of individuals with CWC. There
was, however, an apparent association of ewe with
stress and poor health. Seven individuals exhibited CWC
(one male, six females). Four of the individuals
experienced multiple growth arrests and one experienced
a single growth arrest during development of the upper
and lower incisors. Two of the individuals with multiple
growth arrests also exhibited nonspecific bone infection.
Two pairs of these individuals exhibiting CWC were
buried in close proximity to each other, but the other
burials were not clustered.
An unusual anomaly of the dental arcade occurred
in the mandibular alveolar bone of one indeterminate
adult individual, Burial 90 (Figure 69). There was an
almost mushroom-shaped mass of what appeared to be
root material jutting out of the alveolus at the position of
the lower left first incisor. The superior portion of the
mass was rounded and bulbous and the inferior portion
was embedded in the alveolus as if the anomaly were a
tooth. More of this material extended toward the lower
right first incisor, producing a small and irregularly ·
shaped mass. The use of radio graphs would be necessary
to discover the structure of this atypical formation, but it
may actually be an "upside down tooth" in which the
root material protrudes above the alveolus and the crown
is within the alveolus.

with formation of cloacae was observed bilaterally on the
tibiae of one female individual. A more moderate and
healed form that had caused narrowing of the medullary
cavity was found unilaterally on the femora of two other
females. Three crania (ty,ro males, one female) exhibited
focal lytic lesions of unknown etiology on the outer table
of the frontal and parietals. Six other crania (four males,
one female, and one individual of indeterminate sex)
exhibited sclerotic deposits endocranially accompanied
by increased vascularization. The remaining cases of
nonspecific bone infection (67) were expressed as typical
periostitis (inflammation of the periosteum), ranging
from active to healed, and occurring primarily on the
tibiae, followed in frequency by the femur and humerus
(Figure 70). One child (11-12 years old at death) exhibited periostitis on the left humerus, but the balance of the
bone infection occurred on adult skeletons, possibly a
reflection of bias in preservation of subadult elements.
The rates of nonspecific infection reported for the comparison populations were similar for TNCC, FABC,
UAME, and St. Peter/Toulouse, ranging from 22-28
percent. Cedar Grove and 38CH778 had very high infection frequencies at 80 percent and 70 percent, respectively (Table 22).

TABLE22. F requency of Selected Disorders in Comparison Populations
TNCC

F ABC

UAME

St. Peter

38CH778

Ced. Gr.

Cribra Orbitalia

3.0%

4.0%

6.0%

12.5%

Porotic Hyperostosis

43.0%

28.0%

4.0%

31.0%

4.6%

NA

36.0%

16.0%

22.0%

25.0%

28.0%

24.0%

70.0%

80.0%

5.0%

10.0%

4.0%

NA

16.0%

12.0%

Nonspecific Infection
Fractures

in an adult
· female (Burial 331 ) was attr1'buted to
tub ercu1os1s .based on lytic destru ct'ion of thoracic
.
b
1
b
d
verte
ra
o
ies
and
accompany1'ng
.
1
'b
mvo vement of the
n s (Ortner . and .Putschar 1985) · s·ix cases of active
.
treponema1 mfect10n, probably tertiary
hil'
diagnosed based
th
. . syp is, were
.1 1
on e charactenstw expression of
cr~a '
ong bone, and Clavicular involvement
(Stembock1 1976). The affected skeletons represented
thr
. ee m~ es, two females, and one individual of
mdeterrruh nate sex. One of these individuals Burial 73
may
ave been the victim
· ·
'
.
of congenital
syphilis'
(F1~e 71). Although there was no evidence of classic
anterior tooth malformation (i.e., Hutchinson's incisors)
:~ few teeth available for analysis were unusual i~
. rphology and the cusp development of the lo
. h
lb wer ng t
first molar was very similar to that of th
. d .
e mu erry molar
associate with congenital syphilis (Figure 72).
Dental Wear. Caries, and
Infection of the Dental Arcade
d . '!"ear on the occlusal surface of the permanent
;ntlt10n .was scored following Smith (Smith 1984) fl
e antenor dentition and Scott (Scott 1979) fl ;:r
molar teeth. Dental wear is used in analysis ofo~om:

burial populations whose diet in life incorporated fl
processed foods or who were known t
.
ew
:ools in
labor. Chewing of
as
.ea~er with teeth, and manipulation of objec;s wit~n:g
mc1sor
.
e
· · teeth results in enamel attr't'
1 10n over time
miru~al wea~ is ass~ciated with the young and ma;k;~
wear is associated with the aged. This type of
. .
:Va~ ?ot possible for the TNCC population Vsena~on
md1v1duals in the TNCC
.
· ery ew

d~ily

.o~d

Healed Periostitis on the
Tibial Shaft of Burial 30

Infections
Nonspecific bone infection was the most frequent
form of infection observed (22 percent, 79/355). Bone
infection is considered to be nonspecific if the infecting
bacterial agent cannot be identified (Ortner and Putschar
1985; Thomas et al. 1998). Three cases of nonspecific
bone infection were expressed as osteomyelitis (inflammation of the medullary cavity). Severe osteomyelitis

Some instances of nonspecific bone infection could
be associated with particular disease syndromes. There
were 13 cases of sinusitis (6 male, 6 female, 1
indeterminate) caused by chronic infection of the
maxillary sinuses due to respiratory ailments. Chronic
upper respiratory infection was also probably responsible
for three cases of periostitis found on the ribs. Two
individuals with diffuse but healed cranial periostitis may
have had some type of scalp infection. Finally, one adult
male exhibited the kind of healed lesions on the temporal
that typically result from a severe ear infection
(mastoiditis).
Specific bone infection was noted for seven
individuals. One case of ankylosis of the spinal column

140

FIGURE 71 .

Acfive t reponemal mfection
.
of the tibia of Burial 73.

141

exa::~~:~o~f 0~::~k!~:~

adults by
identified as
features, exh1b1ted marked or severe occlusal wear Th
mean wear score for the anterior teeth was 2 3
. le
of 1 to 8 'th
.
· on a sea e
' WI
a median score of 2 o The
:~ore~~ the po~terior dentition was 9:8.on a s:~::f~e:
' wit ~ m.edian score of 10.0. Based on these results
and qu.aht~tive assessment of the teeth, the TNCC
populat10n
. . 1 to moderate
1 1 m general
. . experienced mm1ma
occ usa wear, md1cating that the typical diet conta' d
processed foods that were low . . b .
me
A t' ·
m a ras1ve materials
c 1v1ty-related wear was also tniru' ma1 and d'1d not.
appear to pr?~uce excessive wear on the occlusal surface
o~ ~e dentit~on. Observations of activity-related wear
c e y consISted of anterior interproximal groo .
(':"ear between the teeth) caused by the habitu 1
v1fng
pipe.
a use o a

FIGURE 70.

FIGURE 69. Dental anomaly present in the
anterior portion of the mandible of Burial 90.

abrasi~eu;:o:e~:;e~

CHAPTER VI:

Excava f ion an d Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
The total caries rate for adults in the TNCC
population was 16.6 percent (545/3,286). Of the affected
teeth, the posterior dentition exhibited 70 percent of the
carious lesions. The most common locations for caries
were the interproximal surfaces at 60 percent, followed
by pit and groove caries (27 percent), gross caries
(10 percent), and root caries (3 percent). Individuals with
LEH did not have significantly higher incidence of
caries.

FIGURE 72. Lower right first molar of
Burial 73 exhibiting mulberry morphology.

Cornbread or grits and syrup were used by many in
the late-nineteenth-century southern United States as
staple foods. A diet incorporating such soft and sugary
foods that produce minimal tooth wear often results in
increased dental calculus. Dental calculus deposits,
commonly called plaque, are a solidified mixture of
saliva and bacterial growth that is most often found on
the buccal surfaces of the maxillary teeth and the lingual
and distal surfaces of the mandibular teeth (Thomas et al.
1998). Calculus provides an atmosphere in which
bacteria can grow and exacerbate the development of
caries and/or abscesses. Calculus deposits ranging from
slight to severe were found on 251 permanent teeth of
adults at the TNCC, a frequency of 7 .6 percent
(25113,286). This is a low calculus rate in a population
with low tooth wear, suggesting that many individuals
took care of their teeth and cleaned them regularly.
Caries, cavities in the tooth enamel caused by
bacterial action, can be a painful condition and if left
untreated will lead to tooth loss and bone infection.
Subadults often develop caries in the deciduous
dentition, sometimes leading to carious destruction of the
permanent teeth within the alveolus. In the TNCC
population, the deciduous caries rate was low. Only 11
caries were observed for 40 subadults represented by 273
deciduous teeth, a caries rate of only 4 percent. Of those
subadults with deciduous caries, the average number of
caries was 1.4 per dental arcade. The caries rate for the
permanent dentition in subadults was strikingly low at
seven caries for the 33 subadults that were represented
by 572 permanent teeth (1 percent). Twenty-five
subadults had mixed dentition, and eight exhibited caries
on either the deciduous or the permanent teeth, for an
average of 3.1 caries per mixed dental arcade. None of
the subadults with caries exhibited linear enamel
hypoplasias.

Abscesses, which are caused by an infection of the
tooth root and socket, are the most serious of the dental
disorders and can even result in systemic infection if not
treated. The number of abscesses recorded for the TNCC
population was exceedingly low, with only 22 alveolar
forms present in seven individuals and 9 apical forms
observed in eight individuals. Due to the poor
preservation of the maxillary and mandibular alveoli,
assessment of the number of root sockets was
problematic. The relative number of teeth present in bone
was small, and there were no complete maxillae or
mandibles of old adult individuals. Therefore, the
assessment of abscesses was based only on the number
of the disorders observed rather than on an estimation of
the number of tooth sockets available in the sample. The
incomplete nature of the assemblage has resulted in a
lower estimate of abscesses than probably were present
in the living, but the low frequency of caries present in
the sample suggests that the abscess rate may have also
been low in the TNCC population.
The overall dental health at the TNCC was
relatively good, and a number of individuals displayed
evidence of competent professional dental care. A total
of 58 dental fillings, in a combination of either gold or
silver amalgam, were recorded. The lower lateral incisor
of Burial 115 had been prepared to accept fillings, but
the final work was not accomplished before the
individual's death (Figure 73). A partial denture plate
had replaced the upper central incisors and the left upper
canine of a female adult, Burial 259. Burial 329, also a
female adult, was recovered with an upper denture plate
made of vulcanized rubber and what appeared to be
plastic pink gum inserts in which the porcelain teeth
were set. The denture teeth were very small, and were
not anatomically correct for maxillary dentition. Burial
241, an adult of indeterminate sex, had extensive dental
work including 18 gold fillings, 2 silver amalgam
fillings, and a gold post and core bridge with dowel
crown that was inserted into the root canal of the left
upper posterior premolar (Figure 74). The post and core
dowel crown bridge was used from the late 1800s up to
the early years of the twentieth c'entury (Dr. Barbara
Burakowski, personal communication 1998).

142

FIGURE 74.

Gold post and core dowel crown bridge from Burial 241.

FIGURE 73.

Right lower lateral
incisor of Burial 115 with
prepared dental filling sites.

Hemopoietic Disorders
.

~orotic h~erostosis,

the lack of specific stressers causing anemia m the
TNCC population.

an expansion of the cranial

d1~loe acc~m~amed by porosity of the cortical bone, and
cnbra orb1t~ha,. a porous lesion of the superior orbital

Nonspecific bone infection was associated with
hyperplasia in the F ABC skeletal series (RankinHtll 1997!- On the basis of healed vs. active maiTow
hype1:Plas~a observed in individuals with periostitis,
Rankin-Hill. (1997) concluded that anemia had probably
~cc?17ed pnor to the bone infection and may have left
md1v1~uals ~ore susceptible to infectious disease. Active
bon~ mfection was present in five of eight cases of
cramal marrow hyperplasia (63 percent) in the TNCC
population. Burial 331, assessed as having tuberculosis
was o~e o~ these cases, and the other two were amon~
those identified as having treponemal infection Of th
fi · d' 'd
·
ese
ve m 1v1 uals, only one had an active case of cranial
marrow hyperplasia (a child with cribra orbitalia)
Althou~h these findings lend support to Rankin-Hill'~
conclus10ns for the FABC population, it is difficult to
say w~at role p.orotic hyperostosis and cribra orbitalia
ful~ll. m the etiology of infection at the TNCC. The
maJon~ of individuals experiencing bone infection at
death did not exhibit bony evidence of anemia.
m~rrow

rface ":'h!ch is usually only active in children, are
.aractensti.c of cranial marrow hyperplasia associated
ith anemias and hemolytic disorders (Mann and
urphy 1990; Ortner and Putschar 1985; Rankin-Hill
97; Thomas e~ al. 1998). Iron deficiency anemia,
us~d ~y a va~1ety of factors, including nutritional
pnvatio~ and immune response disorders, and sickle
11 an~mta, a hereditary ailment most often seen in
pul.ations of African descent, are likely causes of
rotic .hyperostosis and cribra orbitalia in the TNCC
pulat10n. Previously reported frequencies of cranial
rrow. hyperplasias for African American burial
pulattons are typically much higher than those
served at TNCC, although the DAME results are also
(see Table 22). There were 136 individuals from the
CC represented by the frontal bone and of these
~r~ent (4) exhibited cribra orbitalia and 4 percent (5)
b1ted strong evidence of porotic hyperostosis
gure 75).

Circulatory and Hormonal
Dysfunction

Alt~ough thickening of the frontal and parietal

es w1th?ut expansion of the diploe was a common
urrence m the TNCC population, these manifestations
e not scored as marrow hyperplasia because they
e.bnot strongly diagnostic of hemopoietic disorders
1 le exp 1anat10ns
·
for the difference in frequencies·
een the
TNCC
·
and the comparison
.
popu1at10n
1etal senes could be use of radiographic assessment
some samples, differences in criteria for diagnosis, or

Six ~ases of osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) were
recorded m ~e TNCC sample (2 percent). OCD is the
result of an ~nterference in circulation and manifests as
bone necrosis on the articular surface of large joints
u~ually the knee (Ortner and Putschar 1985). As a small
bit of. bone dies from the lack of blood supply, it will
sometimes move about the joint capsule, often coming to

143

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
t/.l
(!.)

t/.l
(!.)

ca

~
CJ
CJ

~

•

FIGURE 75.

ca

~
0

~
0

~
µ.,

CJ

CJ

CJ

ca
t/.l
(!.)

~

~

•

m

0

ca

~

~
µ.,

t/.l

t/.l

~

~

00

t--t---

~[3 ~m ~13

(!.)

CJ~CJµ.,µ.,

[J

~

CJ

ca "O s ~
(!.)

ca

~
µ.,

~ ~ ~ca CJ

"O
(!.)

t/.l
(!.)

ca

t/.l
(!.)

t/.l
(!.)

t/.l
(!.)

t/.l
(!.)

00
I:"--

t/.l
(!.)

a

::o
ca
CJ s

('f')

('f')

111

ra

00

t---

00

(!.)

µ.,

Evidence of cribra orbitalia in the eye orbit of Burial 331.

rest in a different location. This ousted bone fragment
leaves a characteristic scar on the articular surface. The
etiology of OCD can be congenital, developmental, or
traumatic. Although OCD typically predilects males, the
sex ratio in the TNCC population is 2:2, with two
indeterminate individuals also affected.
The bone response to hyperostosis frontalis intema
(HFI) appears as an uneven excrescence of the
endocranial aspect of the frontal bone. HFI, most often
recognized in postmenopausal women, is believed to be
caused by a disturbance of the pituitary gland output and
is essentially the result of a hormonal imbalance
(Thomas et al. 1998). The resulting syndrome is
neurological in nature and can produce aberrant
behavior. Three female individuals (0.8 percent) in the
TNCC population exhibited bone remodeling characteristic ofHFI.
Another syndrome that is associated with
postmenopausal women is osteoporosis. The leaching of
calcium due to hormonal imbalance can cause this
rarefaction of bone. Three cases of osteoporosis were
noted, two in female skeletons and one in a male
individual. The affected elements were thoracic
vertebrae, a femur, and a humerus.

found in the chest cavity of Burial 8, and one 10.5-mm
lead bullet was found in the chest cavity of Burial 391,
leaving little doubt that these male individuals had been
shot (see Table 19).

Cl:!

1d

~

The fracture rate at TNCC is low, with a total of22
fractures observed for 355 individuals. However, it is
possible that poor preservation may have masked the true
fracture rate. Most of the fractures occurred on male
skeletons and could be attributed to work-related or
accidental injuries because they appeared in the
vertebrae, femora, hands, and feet. There was one broken
nose (female), one complete fracture of the distal ulna
(male), and several rib fractures (males) that might
possibly be attributed to interpersonal violence. One
male individual, Burial 372, exhibited avulsion fractures
of the vertebrae, dislocated vertebrae, and myositis
ossificans pursuant to fracture in both tibiae. A healed
greenstick fracture of the tibia was noted for one adul
male, Burial 264, who probably experienced the injury a
a child.

t/.l
(!.)

t/.l

~
0

~

U'..l

Traumatic Injury
Evidence of traumatic mJury is present in the
TNCC skeletal assemblage in the form of fractures,
dislocations, muscle and ligament pulls, and minor
injuries of the shoulder, wrist, knee, and shin. Although
there was no bone involvement, two lead slugs were

144

6'
a]
&
(!.)

~

~

N

Degenerative Joint Diseases
Previously reported rates of degenerative jo'
disease from comparison African American skele
series show a high frequency of osteoarthritic patholo
but these types of bone changes were present in lo
than expected frequency at the TNCC (Figure 7
Fourteen individuals exhibited vertebral joint dise
(VJD), three of which also exhibited Schmorl's nod
depressions caused by herniations of the interverteb
disks, on cervical and thoracic vertebrae (see Table 1
VJD, expressed as osteophytosis of varying severi

0

z
g II

"O

~

In

t---

~

0

t---

~ ~ ~

In
\0

0

\0

In
In

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

0

In

In

0

In

('f')

0

('f')

""".A~uanb~'.Ui[
"""
145

In

N

0

N

In
,........

0,........

In

0

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
occurred on 19 cervical vertebrae, 10 thoracic vertebr~e,
and 6 lumbar vertebrae. Only one young adult, Bunal
219, exhibited VID. The remainder of the cases were
observed in old or indeterminate adults. However, m~st
vertebrae from the TNCC were in small fragme.nts with
few articular surfaces intact so VID might be
underrepresented in the sample. VJD occurred most
often in males (4:1 ratio).
Diarthrodial joint disease (DID) was found in ,3,3
individuals and was expressed most often as arthritic
lipping, followed in frequency by ebumatio~, with fewer
instances of articular porosity. Elements m the lower
body were most often affected (25 individuals),
especially the foot, although wrists and hands were also
predilected (12 individuals). All of t~e skel~tons
exhibiting DID were those of either old or mdet~rmmate
adults. DID was found most often in males with a 2: 1
ratio of occurrence.
Enthesophytes, enlargement of. mus~le and
ligament insertions caused by chrome stram, .were
observed in 10 individuals (7 males) and occurred m the
areas of the neck, upper arm, hand, knee, and foot.
Enthesopathy is indicative of repetitive hard ~~bor. ~he
documented occupant data for the TNCC neighbonng
area from 1860-1880 (developed from of~cial census
records) shows that many of the inhabitants were
working at repetitive physical work (e.g., as laborer~,
bricklayers, blacksmiths, carpenters, draymen, domestic
servants, etc.). Although the majority of en~~sophytes
were found in male skeletons, overall robusticity of the
females in the TNCC population indicates that ?1any
women were also employed in some type of physically
demanding work.
Neoplasm
The incidence of neoplastic activity, although not
high, is important in the TNCC population because all of

FIGURE 77.

the individuals affected were males. There were nine
bone cysts occurring in disparate elements of the body
ranging from the parietals to the foot phalan~e~. Three
button osteomas were observed, one on an occipital, one
on a parietal, and one on a rib. Additionally, two
neoplastic growths of unknown cau~e. were. present, one
on the endocranial surface of an occipital (Figure 77) and
one on an acetabular fragment.
Comparison with Causes of
Death in 1900
The available City of Houston death certificate
records from 1900 show that infection w~s a ~ajor cause
of death in the community. The overall mfection rate, at
43 percent (106/245), was virtually twice the 22 pe:cent
rate observed in the skeletal remains. A higher
documented infection rate was to be expected, however,
because the majority of infections do not progress to
bone involvement. Recorded causes of dea~ from
infection included bronchitis, cholera, di~rr~~a,
endocarditis influenza, malaria, measles, menmgitis,
pneumonia, 'scarlet fever, septicemia'. ~mallpox, neon~tal
tetanus, tuberculosis, typhoid, syphilis, and ~hoopmg
cough. More males (68 percent, 72/106) died from
infection than females (32 percent, 34/106). Cholera was
epidemic in the area in 1900, and the records show one
death of an old adult female and the loss of 10 male
infants. Among older adolescent and a~ult males the
most prevalent infection was tuberculosis (20 perce~t,
16180), followed by pneumonia and malana.
Tuberculosis was also the most prevalent mortal
infection among older adolescent and adult femal~s ~t 19
percent (10/53). Most of the cases of tuberculosis hsted
in the records were probably of the pulmonary form and
had not progressed to bone infection, alt~ough .no
distinction was made. However, given the relatively ~igh
incidence of tuberculosis in the documented population,
it is surprising that more skeletal evidence was not found
in the burial population.

Neoplastic growth on the internal table of the occipital of Burial 338.

146

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
The largest frequencies of deaths for subadults prior
to adolescence occurred as the result of stillbirth and
premature birth (34 percent, 38/112) and the interrelated
syndromes of diarrhea and nutritional deficiencies (18
percent, 20/112). Two stillborn infants, both of them
female, were found dead and were later buried in the
cemetery by the city. This lends support to the proposal
that some infants, perhaps those of lower perceived
status, may have been buried in some location other than
the cemetery.
Eleven individuals (nine adults and older adolescents, one young child, and one infant) died as the result
of traumatic injury. The cause of death listed for the
infant was smothering. Without more information,
smothering cannot necessarily be related to interpersonal
violence or even to trauma in the strict sense. Instead,
smothering might have been used to describe the result
of another disorder, such as sudden infant death syndrome. Interpersonal violence caused the majority of the
trauma listed as cause of death for the male individuals
(417). Two adolescent males and one young adult male
died from gunshot wounds, and one young adult male
died as the result of being "beaten to death by mob." Of
the remaining males, one young adult was severely
burned, one young adult died from tetanus pursuant to
injury, and one old adult died from injuries sustained in a
train crash. The two female individuals and the young
child died from bums.
In the death record sample, cholera appeared to
produce higher mortality among male infants, and
malaria appeared to affect more adult males than
females. The tuberculosis mortality rate was similar
between the sexes but the frequency of male death was a
bit higher. Violent death was exclusively associated with
either adolescent or young adult males, supporting the
assumption that young adult males were at higher risk
than young adult females for death caused by interpersonal violence. This may partially explain the demographic results that show a relatively high number of
young adult males present in the skeletal assemblage.

The Third New City Cemetery excavation project
provided an opportunity to retrieve valuable biological
data regarding tum-of-the-century inhabitants of
Houston, Texas. A large number, if not the majority, of
the 355 individuals whose remains were studied were
probably African Americans. The data recorded from
these individuals can now be added to a growing body of
demographic and health-related information about
African Americans from this region and time, and can
serve as a significant source of information for African
147

Americans of this generation.
The demographic pattern of the TNCC skeletal
assemblage shows a larger number of males in relation to
females, with more males represented in the old adult
age category than would be expected in a nineteenthcentury population, but with nearly equal representation
of males and females in the adolescent and young adult
categories. These results indicate that there was a higher
mortality rate for males during the period of the
cemetery's use, especially for older adolescent and
young adult males who, at the tum of the century,
typically had fewer health problems than did women in
their childbearing years. City of Houston death
certificate records support the osteological evidence for
higher mortality of young males for the first eight
months of 1900, and also show that young males were at
increased risk for mortal traumatic injury. In fact, males
did exhibit a higher frequency of trauma in the TNCC
skeletal assemblage than did females. The types of
trauma seen in the TNCC population are similar to those
reported in the death records, indicating that some young
men died from interpersonal violence, but that some may
have been injured at work or in other types of accidents.
Another notable facet of the TNCC demographic
pattern shows that fewer infants were recovered than
expected in comparison with both the other African
American cemetery skeletal assemblages and the 1900
TNCC death certificate records. One possible
explanation for the lower frequency of infants in the
TNCC skeletal assemblage may be that over time a
significant proportion of young infants was buried in
another location.
The general health status of the TNCC burial
population was good. Both males and females on the
average appeared strong and muscular. Although the
average stature for both sexes was a bit shorter than that
of the comparison populations, the robusticity of the long
bones and low frequencies of other stress indicators, such
as hemopoietic disorders, nonspecific bone infections,
and dental diseases, suggests that the genetic potential of
these people may have been a factor in the stature results.
Certain health disorders were detected in the skeletons,
however, and they included hip dysplasia, tuberculosis,
syphilis, anemia, osteochondritis dissecans, hyperostosis
frontalis intema, osteoporosis, fractures, muscle and
ligament damage, degenerative arthritis, and tumors.
There was evidence that some individuals suffered stress
during development based on the incidence of linear
enamel hypoplasias. Other dental disorders included
caries, and alveolar and apical abscesses of the maxilla
and mandible. The low caries rate and the presence of
well-crafted fillings and bridgework suggest that many of

CHAPTER VI: E xcava f ion and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
the TNCC individuals bad access to professional dental
care.
The osteological results of the TNCC excavation
support artifactual and documentary evidence that the
Third New City Cemetery was not used primarily as a
pauper's or hospital quarantine cemetery, but rather as a
repository over time for a mixture of people from
different ethnic and socioeconomic backgrounds.
COFFIN HARDWARE AND PERSONAL
EFFECTS ANALYSIS
This section presents the results of analysis for
coffin hardware and personal effects recovered from the
former Third New City Cemetery in downtown Houston,
Harris County, Texas. This aspect of the analysis of the
burial features was intended to generally aid the research
team in interpreting and dating the individual burial
features, but was not intended to meet detailed data
recovery standards used in formal archaeological data
recovery investigations. The archaeological excavation'
and removal of the burial remains were conducted in
compliance with federal and state antiquities laws under
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 2031, and were designed to
provide respectful treatment of all individuals in
accordance with standards established in the
Programmatic Agreement and treatment plan for this
project
As described earlier in this chapter, the primary
goals of the cemetery removal plan were to a) gather
basic demographic data through careful but limited
scientific analysis of the burial remains, and b) prepare
all of the individuals for respectful reburial within the
local neighborhood. Implementation of the archaeological excavation plan revealed a total of 446 possible features (see Figure 52). As the individual features were
excavated, skeletal remains and nonskeletal artifacts
were documented in situ by each excavation team prior
to removal and transfer to an on-site laboratory facility.
Once in the lab, the skeletal remains were analyzed by a
team of human osteologists to identify demographic
characteristics of ethnicity, gender, age, stature, and
health. Additional analysis of the nonskeletal artifacts,
including coffin remains and personal effects, was conducted to assess the approximate date of interment for
the individual burial and to document other material
culture characteristics.

from the remains of other features. These boxes were
then kept on-site in a secure, insulated, 8-x-8-x-40-ft
storage container, from which they were only removed
for purposes of cleaning and analysis. The contents of
each field bag was inspected and human bone was
separated from personal effects and casket hardware if it
had not already been done in the field. Human bone was
washed in a dilute solution of bleach and tap water.
Hardware and personal effects were washed in a dilute
solution of a mild abrasive cleanser (i.e., Bon Ami) and
tap water. Both bone and artifacts were rinsed with plain
water and placed on racks to air dry. Each item was kept
with its original field bag to maintain provenience. Items
that could not be washed were removed from their
packaging and allowed to air dry. Once items were
completely dried they were repackaged in their original
field bags and boxes, if possible, and returned to the
storage container to await analysis.
The hardware and personal items recovered from
each feature were analyzed separately from items
associated with other features. During analysis, the
contents of each bag were inspected and interpretations
were recorded on standardized forms. The data on the
standardized forms were then entered into a database that
could be queried to answer various analytical questions.
The database was further organized into a format that.
allowed for graphic display of artifact distributions
across the site through a geographic
mapping system developed for this project.
For analytical purposes, personal and
elements were grouped into a series of standardize
functional "Items." Each "Item" was further subdivide
into stylistic "Types" (Table 23). The quantity of ite
for each "Type" was recorded along with tempora
"Dates" information where available. Addition
"Comments" allowed for the recording of additiona
information not contained within the standardized data. ·
A photographic catalog of each distinct type of ite
was prepared and is presented in appendices F and G. T:
develop this catalog, apparently unique or distinctivel
different item types were photographed as they wer
identified during the analysis of each burial feature.
additional examples of a particular type of item w
documented, the photographic records of other s · ·
items were reviewed to identify the best and m
distinctive type of item. When the analysis of
nonskeletal burial material was completed, the compl
photographic catalog was reviewed and edited to re
the array of distinguishable types of items present am
the nonskeletal artifacts recovered from the cemet
This catalog serves as an accessible record of
mortuary material culture present in the TNCC.

Laboratory Methods
Upon removal, the excavated remains of each burial
feature were bagged according to a zonal system (see
Figure 52) and placed in individual burial boxes separate

TABLE 23. Categories and Types for Analysis of Coffins and Personal Effects
"Items"
Decorative Coffin
Hardware
plaque
escutcheon
caplifter
ornament

Functional Coffin Hardware
nails
corner brace
casket rest
closure
box hook
hinge
latch
hardware

Feature and Coffin Data
coffin box
coffm shape
exterior finish
window
coffmlength/width

cloth
safety pin
buckle
shoe
Personal Items
jewelry

"Types"
handle
type number or indeterminate
thumbscrew .
type numb er or mdeterminate
.
~e number, mdet. copper, or
mdet. lead
type number, or indeterminate
type number, or indeterminate
~e number, indet. copper, or
mdet. lead
tack
lining tacks, or decorative copper,
lead, or iron
cut~ wire, cut and wire, indeterminate
assigned type number or indeterminate
onl~ one type number was assigned
assigned type number or indeterminate
only one was present
assigned type number
assigned type number
Miscellaneous Type 1 or 2 screws
indeterminate, or other '
'

% remaining
· of feature that remains
portion
presence or absence and shape
hexagonal, rectangular rounded
painted or cloth cover;d
type number or indeterminate
in centimeters if available
button
. type - shell bone.
bb
matenal
porcelain, glass (additional information
,
' ru er,
recorded in comments)
clothing, coffm lining, or indeterminate
type number or indeterminate
type number or indeterminate
leather, buckle, button
personal
.b
ocketknife t-'"' b 1
vana le - bowl, doll, pencil,
, 1\.lille, ott e, etc.
P.
nng,. necklace, lapel pin, cufflink,
earrmg, etc. (additional information
recorded in comments)
miscellaneous

bullet, slug, possible embalming items

149
148

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
nonskeletal objects recovered and analyzed from the
TNCC were reburied along with their associated s~eletal
remains in the new memorial cemetery park in the
northeastern comer of the project area.
Coffin Data
The terms "coffin" and "casket" can be used
interchangeably to refer to any burial container. A true
coffin, however, is defined as a six-sided or hexagonalshaped box that is widest at the shoulder and tapers
towards the head and feet (Davidson 1998a). Rectangular
boxes with canted comers are also considered coffms.
"Caskets" are specifically defined as a rectangularshaped box, although rectangular boxes with rounded
ends are also considered to be caskets. Rectangular
caskets became common after the mid-nineteenth
century. Hexagonal coffins, however, con~ued to be
manufactured and used into the twentieth century
(Davidson 1998a). For purposes of this report, the term
"coffin" is used to refer to any burial container.
Some degree of coffin preservation was observe~ in
a total of 320 features. It was possible to determme
coffin shape for a total of229 features. Of these, 98 were
hexagonal, 113 were rectangular, and 18 were rounded
(Table 24).
TABLE 24.

Item
Viewing Window
Coffin Box, present
Coffin Box, absent
Coffin Box, indeterminate
Coffin Shape, hexagonal
Coffin Shape, rectangular
Coffin Shape, rounded
Coffin Shape, indeterminate
Lining, cloth
Finish, cloth
Finish, paint
Finish, indeterminate

Coffin Data

#of
Features

#of
Types

#Per
Feature

1O& indeterminate
38
67 hexagonal or rectangular
NA
NA
155
NA
NA
104
NA
98
NA
113
NA
18
1
NA
91
NA
NA
2
NA
NA
44
NA
NA
70
NA
NA
214

Coffin boxes are the crates in which coffins were
shipped from the manufacturers. Coffins were commonly
buried inside of their coffin boxes, either as a me~ns of
disposing of the coffin box, or to aid in the protection of
elaborate coffins (Rabenstein and Lamers 1995).
Occasionally the coffin box conformed to the shape of
the coffin. More commonly however, the coffin box was
simply rectangular. A total of 67 features were
determined to have coffin boxes. Of these, 18 were
hexagonal and 42 were rectangular. One hundred fiftyfive features did not have coffin boxes (see Table 24).

Viewing windows allowed mourners to see the
body while containing the body in an airtight
environment. Airtight coffms served to prev~nt
decomposition of the body, . as ":'ell as protec~g
mourners from potential contagious diseases (Rabenstein
and Lamers 1995). Evidence of viewing window~ was
preserved for a total of 38 features. Of these, wmdow
shape was identifiable for 25 features. ~ total of .10
different window shapes were recorded, with oval being
the most common (see Appendix F, pages F-223 through
F-227).
Coffms in the late nineteenth and early twenti~th
centuries were either painted, varnished, or covered with
fabric (Davidson 1998b). At the TNCC, evidence for the
type of coffin finish was often prese~ed .on th~ backs of
hardware and occasionally on the v1ewmg wmdows or
the surfa~e of the coffin wood itself. Painted co~ins were
indicated by the presence of either. a red. pnmer or a
yellowish white paint. White was an increa.singly popular
coffin color during this time, and the pnmer coat was
normally red (Davidson 1998b). A total of 70 coffins
exhibited evidence of being painted (see Table 24).
Cloth-covered coffins came in a variety of colors.
The cloth was simply stretched over the coffin lid and
sides and then glued into place (Davidson 1998b). Fortyfour features at the TNCC exhibited evidence for cloth
finishing (see Table 24).
Decorative Coffin Hardware
Coffin handles were located on the sides of the
coffin and were the means by w!rlch the ~offin was
carried. Swing bails (see examples in Appendix F, pages
F-131 and F-133 through F-149) and short bars (see
examples, pages F-132, F-150, and F-178) are the two
basic types of handles found at the TNCC. Normally, a
single coffin would only have one type of handle.
Occasionally, however, two different handle types were
present on the same coffin. The coffins for features 64,
117 and 361 had one type of swingbail handle on one
sid; of the coffin and a different swingbail han~e typ~
on the other side. Feature 274 had one type of swmgbail
handle at the head of the coffin and a different type of
swingbail handle at the foot. Mixing of different handle
types was not always symmetrical. Feature 114 had a
swingbail handle with mismatched lugs, one lug was a
Type 8 while the other lug and bail were Type 13. It
appears that part of one handle was simpl~ subs~tuted as
necessary. Other instances of mixed swmgbail handle
types do occur (features 7, 266, and 428) and may have
been caused by similar circumstances.
Statistics for the various types of decorative
150

hardware are presented in Table 25. This table shows
that swing bails were definitely more prevalent than
short bars. For short bars, the bar itself was normally not
preserved, and only pairs of the hard metal lugs and tips
were present. However, cupreous bars were preserved for
the handles of Feature 185 (page F-176).

one type of thumbscrew for the entire coffin, he simply
used whatever he had on hand to finish the job.
Escutcheons are the decorative base plates found
associated with caplifters and thumbscrews. Escutcheons
primarily served a decorative function, though they also
protected the surface of the coffin from marring by the
tightening of thumbscrews and caplifters. Most of the
escutcheons recovered from the TNCC were constructed
of hard, nonferrous metal. However, one ferrous metal
(Type 11) and two poorly preserved cupreous metal
(types 13 and 22) escutcheons were encountered.
Escutcheon statistics are presented in Table 25. The
small number of features with escutcheons might be
attributed to the poor preservation of cupreous
escutcheons.

Caplifters are screws with decorative heads that
served to attach the viewing window cover to the coffin.
Caplifters are normally made of white metal (Davidson
1998a) and are commonly associated with a base plate or
escutcheon (described below). Coffin catalogs from the
period indicate that caplifters and thumbscrews
(described below) were sometimes used interchangeably.
Caplifter statistics .are presented in Table 25. No more
than two features were observed to have the same
caplifter type. The small sample of caplifters can be
attributed to modem disturbances at the site, which
frequently removed the upper portions of the coffins.
TABLE 25.

Item
Handles
Short Bars
Swing Bails
Caplifters
Thumbscrews
Escutcheons
Plaques
Ornaments

Intentional mixing of escutcheon types on the same
coffin did occur, and was observed in features 182, 205,
373, and 435. As stated above, although escutcheons and
thumbscrews or caplifters were sold in matched sets,
local undertakers commonly switched elements, which
resulted in one escutcheon type being found with a
variety of different thumbscrew and caplifter types.

Decorative Hardware Data

N
927
71
856
28
433
123

NA
NA

Decorative Tacks, copper 258
Decorative Tacks, lead
92
Decorative Tacks, iron
24

#of
Features

#of
Types

#Per
Feature

241
14
200
17
173
47
45
35
106

56
10
45
14
43
27
31
7

1-8
4-6
1-8
1-8
1-7
1-7
1-2
varies
1-5
1-6
1-2

55

20

NA
NA
NA

Plaques and coffin ornaments both served a
decorative function. They are differentiated, however, by
plaques having some type of written inscription, and
ornaments having no inscription. Most of the coffins
from the TNCC appear to have had some type of
ornamentation, the majority of which were not preserved
and are only indicated by a cupreous stain on the coffin
wood.

Decorative thumbscrews are the means by which
the lid of the coffin was securely closed. Thumbscrews
were normally sold with matched escutcheons (see
below). Local undertakers, however, appear to have
rarely kept matched sets intact, and a single thumbscrew
type could be found paired with a variety of escutcheon
types. Occasionally two different types of thumbscrews
were present in the same feature. This was sometimes
caused by mixed contexts; however, there are instances
where different types were intentionally used on the
same coffin. For Feature 313, one type of thumbscrew
was used on the viewing window and a different type
was used on the body of the coffin. Other possible
intentional mixing of thumbscrew types occurred in
features 26,.43, 53, 140, 205, 265, 308, 366, 381, 382,
and 428. The best explanation for the mixing of ·
thumbscrew types comes from the concept that coffms
and hardware were shipped separately and assembled by
the undertakers. If an undertaker did not have enough of
151

Each feature at the TNCC normally had only one
plaque, although features 235 and 397 each had two
inscribed plaques. "AT REST" was the most popular
inscription (see pages F-1 through F-33). Other
inscriptions included a single "REST IN PEACE" and a
single "MOTHER." "OUR LOVED ONE" was an
inscription commonly found with younger adults. "OUR
DARLING" was the most popular inscription for
children, and "OUR BABE" was also used exclusively
with subadult remains. Plaques from the 1NCC were
constructed of either a hard nonferrous metal, lead, or a ·
cupreous metal. Many cupreous plaques were very
poorly preserved, fragmentary, and not recoverable. This
suggests that many more cupreous plaques had been
present on the coffins but were not preserved.
A variety of decorative tacks was recovered. They
came in numerous shapes of stars, flowers, and domes.
The majority of these tacks, however, were in extremely
poor condition and were therefore not typed. Tacks were
simply recorded according to metal type (cupreous, iron,

CHAPTER VI:

Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
or lead) and whether they were decorative or utilitarian
(see Table 25).

objects were recovered from beneath the skeleton. Coffin
paint on the flat surface, indicates that they were located
beneath the coffm with the flat side against the bottom of
the coffin. The location and position of these objects
suggest that they functioned as casket rests (see
·Table 26).

Utilitarian Coffin Hardware
Only one box hook (page F-193) was recovered
from the TNCC investigations (Table 26). Box hooks
were constructed from iron wire, bent to form an angular
"U" shape, and used as simple handles on the outer (or
shipping) boxes (Davidson 1998a).
TABLE 26.

Item

Utilitarian Hardware Data
N

#of
Features

41

21

#of
Types

#Per
Feature
I

Box Hook
Casket Rests

1-3

Closures

36

16

3

1-8

Comer Braces

72
4
14

19

9

1-7

2

2

2

3

1-4

I

I

Hinges
Latches

Casket rests served as a separator between the
coffin box and the coffin to facilitate the easy removal of
the straps used to lower the coffin (Davidson 1998a).
From Davidson's (1998a) description, we assume that
the coffm box was placed in the grave prior to the burial
ceremonies. During the actual burial ceremony, the
coffin was then lowered into the coffin box. It must be
noted that the TNCC casket rests do not resemble those
recovered from the Freedmen's Cemetery excavations
(Davidson 1998a). The TNCC specimens were normally
positioned with one casket rest in the upper right section
of the coffin box, and another located in the lower left
section.

Misc. Type 1

I

7
I

Misc. Type2

4

4

Escutcheon Pins

9
2

6

NA

1-2

Corrugated Fasteners
Lining Tacks

83

30

NA

I-II

Iron Screws

144

74

NA

1-9

Brass Screws

6

NA

6
1-60

Only two types of hinges were recovered from the
TNCC (see Table 26). Type 1 was a large iron hinge that
was attached to the coffin with six large nails (page
F-208). Two of these hinges were recovered from
Feature 39, and both were located inside the coffin, one
positioned in the upper right comer and the other located
in the lower right comer. It is assumed that these hinges
served as a means of opening and closing the lid of the
coffm. Type 2 hinges were much smaller, iron, and
attached with four screws (page F-209). Two of these
hinges were recovered from the viewing window area
and are therefore indicated to have served as a means of
opening and closing the viewing window cover. Similar
hinges were observed on coffms at the Houston Museum
of Funeral History, Houston, Texas.

2

Cut Nails

2379

154

Wire Nails

1136

105

NA

1-45

Cut/Wire Nails

960

99

NA

2-45

NA

Closures are commonly found at the interior
comers of coffins where they were used to join the two
side boards to the head board (Davidson 1998a). Three
types of closures (pages F-195 through F-198) were
recovered from the TNCC investigations (see Table 26).
All of the types were constructed from iron and were
attached with iron screws. Two of these closure types are
identical to ones recovered from excavations at
Freedman's Cemetery in Dallas (Davidson 1998a).

Three types of window latch devices were
recovered (see Table 26 and pages F-210 through F-217).
The presence of all three types within Feature 435
suggests that they all may be part of the same latch
mechanism. The presence of window latches suggests
that a coffin possessed a sliding glass window that could
be opened for access to the deceased (Davidson 1998a).
Sliding windows are more elaborate and more expensive
than regular "static" windows (Davidson 1998a).

Comer braces served as a means of holding the
walls of the coffin together. A total of nine types of
comer braces (pages F-200 through F-208) were
recovered during the TNCC investigations (see
Table 26). All of the recovered comer braces were
constructed of iron and attached with iron screws. The
shape of Type 8a and 8b comer braces suggests they
were associated with round coffins.

Miscellaneous Hardware Item Type 1 was a hard
rubber, doughnut-shaped object with a small hole in ~e
center (page F-218). This object was found embedded m
the lid of Feature 116's coffin at approximately
abdominal level. The location of this object suggests it
may have served as the portal for a life signal device,
such as the one described in Rabenstein and Lamers
(1995:Plate 34).

A flat, rectangular section of iron with four iron
screws (page F-194) was found in association with 21
different burial features. One to three of these objects
were found with each feature. In each instance, the

Miscellaneous Hardware Item Type 2 was a large,
12-cm-long, ferrous flange bolt (pages F-219 through
F-222) recovered from four separate features (see
Table 26). In every instance, this bolt was located
beneath the pelvic area of the skeleton, and possibly
beneath the floor of the coffin. The function of this bolt
is unknown.
Corrugated fasteners are corrugated strips or
segments of sheet metal used to join two pieces of wood
(Davidson 1998a). Corrugated fasteners were simply
driven into the wood with a hammer. They were used
after the turn of the century and are found in caskets,
outer boxes, and occasionally in coffins (Davidson
1998a). At the TNCC, corrugated fasteners were only
recovered from Feature 446.
Lining tacks served to hold the interior coffm lining
in place. Lining tacks from the TNCC were fairly small
(less than Yz inch), and were made exclusively of iron.
Lining tacks were recovered from a total of 30 features
(see Table 26). The small sample of lining tacks can be
attributed to their small size, which made recovery
difficult.
Escutcheon pins are small, copper brads used to
hold escutcheon plates in place. Escutcheon pins were
recovered from a total of six features (see Table 26). The
small sample of escutcheon pins can also be attributed to
difficulties in recovering these small items.
The majority of screws recovered from features at
the TNCC were made of iron. One exception, however,
was six brass screws recovered from Feature 359. Screws
were utilized to secure coffin handles, to attach the coffm
lid to the base, and as the utilitarian parts of thumbscrews
and caplifters (Davidson 1998a).

TABLE 27.

Item
Safety Pins
Buckles
Cuff Holders
China Buttons
Shell Buttons
Rubber Buttons
Metal Buttons
Bone Buttons
Glass Buttons
Hooks&Eyes
Eyelets
Snaps
Rivets
Clothing
Dress Beads

Clothing Data

N

#of
Features

41
55
5
389
4
29
142
16
5

26
38
4
135
4
8
51
8
3

26
7
13
6
NA
indet.

8
3
4
5
12
2

Shoe Parts

11

6

Cuffiinks, Porcelain
Cuffiink, Bone
Cuffiink, Wood

66

42
I

#of
Types

#Per
Feature

9
1-4
12
1-6
Paris
1-2
NA
1-27
NA
I
NA
1-7
NA
1-9
NA
1-4
blown&
1-2
black
NA
1-8
NA
1-3
NA
1-8
NA
1-2
NA
NA
clear&
indet.
black
leather, buckle, 1-4
buttons
NA
1-4
NA
NA

Nine types of safety pins were present (see
Table 27 and Appendix G, pages G-23 through G-27).
Safety pins were recovered from a variety of locations
throughout the grave, and they may have served various
functions from diaper pins to replacing missing buttons.
Complete safety pins were rarely found. Therefore,
different types were assigned to both the head and spring
sections. Patent dates were available for most of the
recovered safety pin types (Owens 1998a), and they were
used to assist with dating the features from which they
were recovered.

Nails from the TNCC were simply identified as
either cut or wire and counted (see Table 26). Although
wire nails typically postdate cut nails, cut nails continued
to be used for as long as they were in stock. Furthermore,
coffms were mass produced and frequently stored in
warehouses for long periods of time, whereas shipping
crates were commonly built just prior to shipping.
Therefore, a coffm and its outer box could have been
built at different times (Davidson 1998a). It is not
uncommon to fmd cut and wire nails in the same feature.
The coffin box may have a different type of nail than the
coffm, or nail types may be mixed within either the
coffin or coffin box.

Fifty-five buckles of various types were recovered
from 38 features (see Table 27 and pages G-9 through G21). The function of some of these buckles could be
identified. There were four suspender buckles, one
suspender hook, and four belt-type buckles. Suspender
and belt buckles are usually considered male items,

Personal Effects
Personal items recovered from graves at the TNCC

I

153
152

included various articles of clothing, jewelry, and other
offerings that were · placed in the coffin with the
deceased. Cloth was preserved in a total of 52 features.
While the majority of this cloth was not identifiable,
fabrics associated with clothing were identified for
features 52, 58, 63, 75, 120, 129, 134, 168, 259, 308,
365, 367, and 372. Limitations on the laboratory analysis
program, however, did not permit a detailed analysis of
clothing remains. A variety of clothing hardware was
recovered and grouped into the categories presented in
Table 27.

I

I

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
although these types of items are not uniquely associated
with males. These types of items were used in
conjunction with other indicators to make gender
determinations.
Cuff holders (see Table 27 and page G-22) served
to keep shirt cuffs in place. These items are also often
associated with males and were used in conjunction with
other indicators to assist with gender determinations. All
of the recovered cuff holders were of the "Paris" type
(Gramercy Books 1993; Dover Publications 1969).
A large number of buttons were recovered from
features at this site (see Table 27). The most common
type was the "china" button. They were normally white,
with four holes, and ranged in size from 3/8 to 3/4 inch.
Two-hole buttons and other colors (such as blue and
brown) were also present.
Shell buttons were recovered from features 172,
207, 404, and 411 (see Table 27). It was not possible to
distinguish between marine or freshwater shell. The
buttons ranged in size from 3/8 to 9/16 inch, and three of
the buttons were of the two-hole type.
Hard rubber buttons were recovered from a total of
eight features (see Table 27). A maker's mark was
present on only one button from Feature 162. This mark
was "I.R.C. Co. 1851 GOODYEAR," indicating that the
button was manufactured by the India Rubber Comb
Company of New York, which manufactured buttons and
articles of hard rubber under license from Goodyear's
patents (Hughes and Lester 1991; Pool 1991). Other
rubber buttons from the site are unmarked, indicating
that they were produced by other companies after the
expiration of Goodyear's patent in the 1870s (Victoria
Owens, personal communication 1998; Hughes and
Lester 1991). Both two-hole and four-hole rubber
buttons were present, and the buttons ranged in size from
1/2 to 5/8 inch. Most of the buttons were black rubber;
however, a brown, flower-shaped, rubber button was
recovered from Feature 347 and six white rubber buttons
were recovered from Feature 396.

are illustrated in Appendix G (pages G-35, G-45, G-58,
and G-59).
Sixteen bone buttons were recovered from features
192, 203, 210, 219, 243, 354, 427, and 429 (see
Table 27). Bone buttons were frequently home-made,
readily available, and often served as common utilitarian
buttons on undergarments (Owens 1998b; Pool 1991).
Five glass buttons were recovered from features
163, 211, and 220 (see Table 27). The buttons from
features 163 and 220 were black in color and may have
been "mourning" buttons (Owens 1998b). The other type
of glass button was recovered from the left and right
wrists of Feature 211 and appeared to be made of an
opaque white blown glass. It is bubble shaped and
hollow in the center, with a glass loop on the open end
(page G-51).
Hooks and eyes (page G-43) were recovered from
Features 45, 106, 123, 175, 178, 182, 242, and 404 (see
Table 27). Hooks and eyes are common closures
normally associated with female clothing (Owens 1998b)
and can usually be used to assist with gender determinations.
Eyelets were recovered from Features 175, 243, and
356 (see Table 27). They are normally associated with
"laced" items and were recovered exclusively from the
upper torso area of these features.
Snaps were recovered from Features 75, 272, 382,
and 441 (see Table 27). Rivets were recovered from
Features 1, 43, 162, 234, and 259 (see Table 27). Rivets
are found in various clothing items such as pants.
Riveted clothing came into use at the turn of the century
(Owens 1998b) and can therefore be used to assist with
temporal designations for these features.
Numerous small beads were recovered from
Features 182 and 367 (see Table 27 and pages G-43 and
G-71). Feature 367 had thousands of tiny black beads
recovered from throughout the burial fill. During
excavations, these beads were observed to form
decorative patterns indicative of a beaded dress. Feature
182 had numerous, clear, opaque beads associated with
hooks and eyes. Beaded clothing is usually indicative of
female attire and was used in conjunction with other
indicators to assist in gender determinations.

Metal buttons are the second largest category of
buttons from the TNCC (see Table 27). They came in a
variety of styles, such as inlaid, shank-type, and two-part
buttons. Self-shank pants buttons were the most common
type of metal button encountered. These types of buttons
were common on men's pants at the time (Owens 1998b;
Pool 1991) and were used in conjunction with other
indicators to assist with gender determinations. Partially
decipherable inscriptions were found on metal buttons
from Feature 356 (page G-69). Other types of metal
buttons recovered from features 93, 191, 271, and 272

Shoe parts were recovered from features 123, 169,
312, 315, 356, and 387 (see Table 27). The scarcity of
shoe remains may be attributed to a practice of burying
individuals without shoes (since the feet would rarely be
seen by mourners). The preserved shoe parts were

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third N
C"
.
ew 1ty Cemetery
compnsed mainly of leather fragments. A total of fl
was present, such as gold-filled loops that are still wo
!ome;haped, white china shoe buttons were recove~:
today (Feature 418, page G-75)· diamond
I
m
fr om Feature 312. A single shoe buckle was recovered
(Featur 404) · ·
'
or g ass studs
e
; an ir~n and turquoise hoop (Feature 121
om eature 169 (page G-12).
page G-37)· an earnng ·
'th .
'
(Feature 200)· and a pl~e WI . a s":1gle turquoise bead
.
'
am eamng wrre from which th
.
Utilitarian cuffl'collar closures were common items
decorative part has been lost (Feature 46).
e
m graves at the TNCC (see Table 27) Th
II I
·
·
ey were
no~ y ocated m the neck area and at the wrists The
TABLE 28. Jewelry Data
Illll.JOn~ of ~ose recovered were made of porcela~ and
ranged m sJZe from 3/8 to 1/2 inch. Several differe
#of
#of
#Per
Item
N
styles were observed. In addition, one bone cuff closur~
Features
Types
Feature
was recovered from Feature 191 and one wooden cuff
Rings - plain
25
16
metal & rubber 1-3
c1osure was recovered from Feature 259.

A variety of decorative jewelry items was r
er.ed (Table 28), with rings being the most com:~:Rings recovered from the left hand of features 53 99.
193, and
'. '
I ·288 may have been wedding bands. Most nngs
were p am ~upreous alloy bands, and others were made
of gold or silver. A gold ring on the right hand of Feature
288 had a maker's mark on the interior H
make '
k ~
.
· owever
rs 1?ar ~ ior gold Jewelry are commonly unidenti~
fiable (V1ctona Owens, personal communication 1998)
'
and attempts to track down this maker's m k
unsuccessful . Features 79 and 99 (both I ) har d were
m tal d.
b
ma es a omaen ' a ~usta le, silver bands (pages G-33 and G-36)
recovered from the right and left h d
.
an s, respectively A
third ·1
st ver band with an incised leaf d .
.
·
es1gn was recovd fr
ere om the nght hand area of Feature 172. Rin s with
s~ones were found with features 168, 393 and !04 A
nng recovered from the left hand area of Feature i68
was a cupreous metal band with what a eared
chalcedony st~ne. This individual was id::tified a!o!~e~
h
· f4emmme
· · m
. appearance (page G-42) '
Fowever' the nng ts
.
eature 404 (a female) had a silver ring with
~ped stone and five baguettes on the side (pagead-;~e stones
. wh en It. was.
d were not present in the nng
reco~ere . The skeleton was very poorly preserved but
the nng was recovered from the left side of the bod ' d
may have been a wedding ring The nn' fr
F y an
393
·
g om eature
was poorly preserved and fused to a piece of ir
~ecovered from the left side of the coffin. It had thr~~
~l r.ed stones set in an oblique line. Th . . ~ .
rune m
e nng ts iemtthi . d' a~pearance, and osteological analysis identifies
· dis m· iv1dual as a female · Clothing hardware from thi·s
: v1duall, however, suggests that the person may have
een ma e. Features 348 and 349 both had nn· . th
form of s · 1 b d
gs m e
Imp e an s of hard rubber (page G-68) F
ture 348 was I'dentified
·
as an adult of ind t · . eagender, with one ring on the . h han
e ermtnate
ng t
d. Feature 349 was
identified
d
as an a ult female with two .
have been on the left hand. '
nngs that may

E .

. arnngs (see Table 28) are presumed to have b
associated exclusively with females A v . ty f een
·
ane o styles
155

154

Rings - ornamental
Earrings

.

5

5

6

6

Lapel, Lace, and Colar Pins
6
Necklace/Pendants
2
Necklace Beads
175
Collar Stud
2
Inlay
2
Bracelet
Cuffiinks, metal
11
Cuffiinks, shell
2

5

2
4
2
2
1
5

NA
NA
I
NA
1
NA
NA
12-89
NA
stone & metal
NA
NA
2-3
NA
2

A smg
. 1e metal, cloverleaf-shaped pendant was
recovered from the neck area of Feature 121
and osteological
ermtned this mdiVIdual to be a female child.

~;;:~~ Oth~r asso~i~te~ j~welry

an~;!:

fr

AF matching bracelet and necklace were recovered
om eature 195 (a young female) Both th
kl
·
e nee ace
and br I t
ace e were a silver chain with a h art h d
locket (pages G-47 and G-48).
e -s ape
53

Necklace beads were recovered from features 23
' 121, and 295 (see Table 28). Eighty-nine smali
:'aque beads of different shapes were recovered from
e neck area of Feature 23. Features 53 and 295 had
~~~~ace~ made of larger, multicolored beads (pages
63 ). Necklaces of this type are believed to
b . ~
e md1cative of African American heritage (Warren
Barbour, personal communication 1998). In addition, the
necklace for Fea~e ~3 also contained a pierced coin
(p a~e G-30), which IS a common African Am .
design _(Adams 1993). Feature 121, a female chil~~~
approXImately 12 white celluloid beads (page G-38)
recovered from the neck area Th
b ds
fragile and fragmentary.
.
ese ea were very

?-

Lap~I and lace pins have a safety pin-type attachment, while collar studs have either a corkscrew-type or
stuld-~e attachment (see Table 28). Lapel lace and
co ar ptns were recovered from features 87 ' 121 ' 187
193, 237, and 280 (pages G-40, G-44, G-55: G-60, and
G-62). Most of these features have been identifi d
females, while the gender of Feature 193 is indet:m:~

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
nate. A screw-type collar stud (page G-49) was recovered from Feature 198 (a male). A stud-type collar stud
(page G-61) was recovered from Feature 288 (a female).
Feature 193 (a male) had one square, domed, pink
stone inlay recovered from the right side ?f the l~wer
shieldtorso. F eature 409 (a male) had a small silver,
th
· ht
shaped inlay (page G-74) recovered from e ng
abdominal area.
Decorative cufflinks were recovered from features
189, 198, 259, 286, and 291 (see Table 28). Most of
these features have been identified as males, and
decorative cufflinks were used to assist in the gender
determinations. The cufflinks for Feature 189 . were
covered with gold foil. Feature 259 had two pa~s of
decorative cufflinks. One was covered with gold foil and
the other was made of shell (page G-56). Feature 2?1
also had two pair of cufflinks. One set was covered with
gold foil, and the other had inlays of purple stone. The
cufflinks associated with Feature 198 w~re made of a .
cupreous metal with an orange and brown inla~ (page G50). They are identified as "lever top" cuftlinks. (Pyne
Press 1971). For Feature 286, only the clasp po~ons of
the cufflinks were preserved, and they are identified as
"loop-prong" type cufflinks (Bell 1994).
Other items such as hair ornaments, pocketknives,
dentures, and other personal possessions were oft~n
placed in the grave with the deceased (Table 29). Certam
categories of grave offerings, such as bowls'. cu~lery, and
medicine bottles, have been identified as mdicators of
African American origins (Warren Barbour, perso~l
communication 1998). Personal possessions are placed.1:1
the grave for use by the deceased and to prevent the s~mt
from returning to this world in search of them (Wnght
and Hughes 1995:20).
TABLE 29.

Item
Hairpins

Personal Items

N

#of
Features

4

#of
Types

#Per
Feature

NA

4

Coins or tokens were recovered from eight features
(see Table 29). Coins were often placed over the ~yes to
keep them shut. But coins were also placed with ~e
deceased as the person's contribution to th~ commumty
of ancestors, or perhaps as a token for admittance to the
spirit world (Wright and Hughes 1995:20).
Coins from features 25, 140, and 329 were
.d tifiable as "Seated Liberty" dimes (Yeoman
1 en
1994:126). Feature 25 (a female) had a d'rme recovered
from the pelvic area with a partly legible date of 1888 or
1883. Feature 140 (a male) had a dime with a date ~f
1877 recovered from the right hip and femur area. This
dime had a square nail hole through the center. (page
41) a distinctive· feature believed to be associated with
Arrlcan American customs (Adams 1993). Featur~ 329
(a female) had three dimes (page G-65) loc~ted m the
right hip region. One of these dimes had a legible ~te of
1875. Feature 54 (a male) had two cupreous c01ns or
tokens located in the right upper chest area. Th~ ~urfaces
of these coins were very corroded and no wnting was
legible. They were partially overlapped ~d fus~d
together (page G-32), as if they had be~n ~ ~ shirt
pocket. Feature 337 (a female) had two co~ lllStde her
mouth. No writing was legible on these colllS; however,
their sizes are comparable to that of nickels. Feature ~ 18
(a female) had two illegible coins located ~n the nght
side of the cranium. Feature 180 (indeterrrunate adult)
had two illegible coins located at the left. should.er.
Feature 9.1 (possible male) had two illegib~e co~
located in the pelvic area. All of the features with c01ns
were identified as adults, and there are no other apparent
patterns for the gender or location of coins.

?-

Dental appliances were recovered from features
241, 259, and 329 (see Table 29). Feature ~41 wa~ a
possible male with four gold_ fillings and an rmpres~ive
maxillary bridge made of gold. Feature 2~9 .Ca possible
male) had a maxillary partial with four mcisors (pag~
G-57) located near the left humerus. The palate .an
alveolus of the partial were constructed o~ vulcamzed
rubber and the teeth were made of porcelam (Do~kall,
B d et al. 1996:158). A complete set of maxillary
oy
dentures
was recovered from near the 1ef t hip ofF
. e ature

329 (female). The context of this skeleton was d1sturbe~,
and the dentures are apparently moved from their
original location. These dentures are also constructed of
vulcanized rubber with porcelain teeth (page G-64).

NA

Hair Comb
Medicine Bottle

l

NA

Ceramic Bowls

2

2

2

Coins

15

8

NA

1-3

Pencils

4

4

NA

l

Doll

1

Dental Appliances

3

Cutlery

1

Pocketknife

1

Glass Lens

·1

A stamped whiteware bowl (page G-53) was
located on the left knee of Feature 233 (an adult fernale)i
A maker's mark was present on the bottom of the bow
(page G- 54), enabling the vessel to be dated b~tween
1891 and 1920 (Godden 1964). An unmarked~ whit~ware
bowl (page G-66) was located near the nght hip of

NA

3

3

Feature 349 (adult female). Her right hand was
positioned on top of the bowl. Feature 365 (an adult
male) had a kitchen knife (page G-70) located exterior to
the left ankle. The practice of placing bowls and cutlery
into the grave may be attributed to a folk belief that
placing items last used by the individual in the grave will
appease the spirit (Owens 1998b).
Feature 87 (an adult female) had a small medicine
bottle (page G-34) located near the left femur. The bottle
is mold-made and has no markings. A similar bottle was
recovered from a grave in Lafayette County, Arkansas
(Rose 1985:42), and the author cites that the medicine
bottle may have been placed in the grave with the cork
loosened so the medicine could soak into the grave and
heal the individual in the afterlife (Owens 1998b; Puckett
1926:104).

Bullets and other types of small ordnance were
recovered from features 8, 194, 201, 285, 391, 403, and
422 (Table 30). An analysis of the context from which
the ordnance was recovered enables one to conclude that
only the bullets from features 391 and 8 may have
contributed to the death of the individuals (both male).
Feature 8 had two lead slugs located in the upper left
chest region. Feature 391 had two lead bullets (page G-3)
located in the right chest area.
TABLE 30.

Miscellaneous Items

Item

N

#of
Features

#of
Types

#Per
Feature

Bullets/Slugs/Shot

13

7

4

1-6

Embalming Needle

A rubber hair comb (page G-67) was recovered
from the right cranial region of Feature 349. Four rubber
hairpins (page G-29) were recovered from the cranial
region of Feature 39. Three were on the left.side of the
skull and one was on the right. The presence of hairpins
and a hair comb suggests that the deceased were females,
and osteological analysis supports this interpretation.
An iron pocketknife (page G-72) was located
exterior to the left pelvis of Feature 370. The pocketknife
suggests that the interred individual probably was a male.
Osteological analysis confirms this identification in this
case.
The head and arms of a porcelain doll (page G-46)
were found on the left side of Feature 195. A maker's
mark on the back of the doll reads "Made in Germany."
The doll suggests that the deceased was a young female.
Osteological analysis supports this determination.

Rubber Nipple

Feature 381 (young adult male) had a large, curved,
iron, needlelike object (page G-4) located to the left of
the humerus against the wall of the coffm. This needle
may be an embalming item accidentally left in the coffin
by the undertakers (Owens 1998b).
Feature 183 had a rubber, nipplelike object (page
G-5) located in the right hip region. This individual is
identified as an small infant; therefore, the nipple may
have been from a baby bottle (D.B.I. Books, Inc.
1969:794). The object could also be a rubber nipple from
a bottle of embalming solution left in the coffm by the
undertaker (Durfee Embalming Fluid Company ca.
1901:No. 941).
Interpretations
Analysis of material goods associated with each
individual often enabled interpretations of the gender,
age, ethnicity, and general wealth of the individual
(Table 31). The results of these materialistic interpretations were compared with information gained through
osteological analyses and shown to have a high percentage of agreement. It is therefore indicated that material
items might reasonably be used to provide information
about the individual in instances where osteological data
are lacking.

A glass lens was located beneath the bones of the
left hand on the right side of Feature 259. The function
of this lens in uncertain; however, it may have served as
a reading lens.
Lead pencils were recovered from features 93, 203,
221, and 259 (see Table 29). Three of these individuals
were adult males, and one is of indeterminate sex. For
Feature 93, the pencil was located near the left pelvis, as
if it had been in the pants pocket of the deceased. In
Feature 203, only the pencil lead was recovered and it
was located in the left abdominal area. In Feature 221,
both the lead and fragments of wood with green paint
were preserved, and the pencil was located at the right
shoulder. For Feature 259, the pencil was located above
the right ribs and next to the left hand. The purpose of
including pencils in the grave is unknown.

Determination of Gender
Coffm hardware and personal effects recovered
from each grave occasionally enabled a determination of
gender for the individual (see Table 31). Plaque Type 6b
was inscribed with "MOTHER" (page F-5). Certain
articles of clothing and jewelry could also be used to
157

156

Miscellaneous Items

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

TABLE 31. Interpretations from Selected Coffin and Personal Effects Data (cont'd)

TABLE 31. Interpretations from Selected Coffin and Personal Effects Data
Burial
Number

Osteology Results

Basis

Interpretation

10
21

sub adult

small coffin handle

male

24
28

subadult
sub adult

cufflink, buckle
coffin length - 98 cm
small handle

indeterminate
male, old adult, so+ years
infant, 0-2 years
African American child, 6-12 years
African American, female, old adult, So+ years
African American, female, older subadult/adult indet.

39
46
47

female
female
sub adult

hairpins
earring
coffin length- 71 cm

48
49
S3

male
male
African American

S7

subadult

cufflinks
pants buttons
necklace
coffin length - 87 cm
plaque = "Our Darling"

S9
61
63
64

subadult
possible pauper

coffin length - 78 cm
buried in a box without hardware

indeterminate
African American, female, adult, 2S-So+ years

male
male

cufflink

African American, male, 2S-SO+ years
African American, male, adult, 2S-SO+ years

indeterminate
African American, male, young adult, 2S-49 years

cufflink
coffin length - 7S cm

168

7S

male

cufflink, pants buttons

77
78
79
82
86
88
91
93
103
106
108
110
111
114
116

subadult

coffin length - 90 cm

subadult, 0-24 years

subadult
male
male

coffin length - 100 cm
cufflinks, cuffholder, buckles

infant, 0-2 years
African American, male, adult, 2S-SO+ years

pants button, buckle
coffin length - 113 cm

male, adult, 2S-SO+ years

120
121
124

male
male
female
male
male
male
disturbed context
disturbed context
not poor
male
female
sub adult
subadult

indeterminate
male, adult, 2S-So+ years

cufflink
cufflink
cufflink, pants buttons
cuffiink, pants buttons

lSl

infant, 0-2 years

72

subadult
male
male

14S
148

1S3
1S4
ISS

sub adult
male
male

pants button
pants button, buckle

137
140
143
144

male, young adult, 2S-49 years
African American, adult, 2S-So+ years

indeterminate
male, adult, 2S-So+ years
African American, adult, 2S-So+ years
African American, male, adult, 2S-So+ years

67
70

Burial
Number

hooks and eyes

adult, 2S-So+ years
African American, male, adult, 25-SO+ years
male, African American, adult, 25-50+ years
African American, female subadult, 0-24 years

cufflink
plaque

young adult, 2S-49 years
African American, adult, 2S-5o+ years

buckle
small thumbscrew
small thumbscrew and escutcheon
possible life device

male, adult, 25-So+ years

cufflink
jewelry
coffin length- 137 cm
coffin length - S9 cm

male, African American, adult, 25-SO+ years

adult, 25-So+ years
adult, 2S-5o+ years

female, child, 6-12 years
indeterminate

Interpretation

Basis

male

buckle
pierced coin

African American
older subadult/adult
subadult
subadult

coffin length - 168 cm
coffin length - 68 cm
coffin length - 60 cm

sub adult

coffin length - 148 cm

adult, 2S-SO+ years
male, African American, adult, 2S-SO+ years
indeterminate
indeterminate
indeterminate

older subadult/adult coffin length - 167 cm
small thumbscrew - ''National
Biscuit Co."
subadult
coffin length - 69 cm
subadult
subadult
male

coffin length - 84 cm

17S

male

coffin length - 112 cm
clothing, cuftlink
w/female ring
cufflink

178
179
181
182
183
184
18S

male
sub adult

cufflink, pants button
coffin length - 69 cm

subadult
female
subadult
subadult
female?
not poor
female

coffin length - 60 cm

187
189
192
19S

Osteology Results

male
male
subadult female
male

indeterminate
indeterminate
indeterminate
adult, 2S-So+ years male, African American
African American, young adult, 2S-49 years
male, adult, 2S-SO+ years
fetal/neonate
fetal/neonate

beaded dress, hook and eyes
coffin length - 86 cm
coffin length - 76 cm
coffin decorations
gold fillings
jewelry

female, African American, young adult, 2S-49 years
fetaVneonate
fetaVneonate
female, African American, adult, 2S-So+ years
female, adult, 2S-So+ years

cuftlinks

male, African American, adult, 2S-So+ years
male, African American, adult, 2S-So+ years

-pants buttons
doll, jewelry

198
200
203

female
male

207
208

sub adult
sub adult

coffin length - 149 cm
small thumbscrew
coffin length - 9S cm

209
211
212
216
219
220

sub adult
female

coffin length - 64 cm
buttons

male
subadult
possible pauper
subadult

cuftlink, cuff holder
coffin length - 62 cm
buried in a box without hardware
coffin length - 129 cm

221
224

male
male

pants button
cufflink

cufflinks, pants buttons, buckles
earring
pants button, buckle

female, African American, adolescent, 13-24 years
male, young adult, 2S-49 years
female, adult, 2S-So+ years
male, old adult, SO+ years
child, 6-12 years
infant, 0-2 years
fetaVneonate
female, young adult, 2S-49 years
male, young adult, 2S-49 years
fetaVneonate

159
158

adult, 24-So+ years
indeterminate

male, African American, young adult, 2S-49 years
old adult, so+ years (discrepancy due to
individual being flexed within coffin).
male, adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

TABLE 31. Interpretations from Selected Coffin and Personal Effects Data (cont'd)

TABLE 31. Interpretations from Selected Coffin and Personal Effects Data (cont'd)
Burial
Number
227
229
233
234
23S
236
237
239
240
241
243
251
259
26S

266
269
271
272
276

Burial
Number
Interpretation
subadult
male
female
male
female
male?
female
subadult
male
male
not poor
male
male?
male?
male
not poor
subadult
female?
male
subadult

285
286
291
295
297
298
300
303
305
307
308
309
312
313

male
male
male
African American
subadult
subadult
subadult
male
older child/adult
subadult
subadult
male
subadult
subadult

314

sub adult

318

subadult

Basis

Interpretation

Basis

Osteology Results

coffin length - 94 cm
cufflink
bowl
clothing
plaque inscription - "Mother"
clothing
jewelry
plaque
coffin length - I lS cm
cufflinks
pants button
gold bridge
pants button, cufflinks
cufflinks
cufflinks
coffin length - 104 cm ·
pants button, buckle
gold filling
handle type - lamb
button
cufflink
coffin length - 110 cm
small thumbscrew and
escutcheon
pants button
cufflinks, cuffholder
cufflinks, pants button
necklace beads
coffin length - 72 cm
coffin length - 71 cm
coffin length - 70 cm
pants button
coffin length - lSO cm
coffin length - 77 cm
coffin length - 130 cm
cufflink
coffin length - 90 cm
coffin length - 77 cm
small handle
coffiri length - 103 cm
plaque - "Our Babe"
coffin length - 110 cm

160

older subadult/adult indet.
adult, 25-50+ years
female, African American, adult, 25-50+ years
adult, 25-So+ years
female, adult, 25-50+ years
adult, 25-So+ years
female, adult, 25-50+ years
African American, child, 3-5 years
male, adult, 25-So+ years
adult, 25-50+ years
male, old adult, SO+ years
adult, 25-So+ years
African American, adult, 25-50+ years
male, adult, 25-SO+ years
female, African American, adult, 25-SO+ years
infant, 0-2 years
old adult, SO+ years
male, adult, 25-SO+ years
African American, child, 3-5 years

male, adult, 25-SO+ years
male, African American, young adult, 25-49 years
male, African American, young adult, 25-49 years
older subadult/adult indet.
indeterminate
indeterminate
indeterminate
adult, 2S-50+ years
indeterminate
indeterminate
child, 6-12 years
male, African American, adult, 2S-5o+ years
infant, 0-2 years
indeterminate
child, 3-5 years

319
324
326
328
331
332
343
347
348
349
3S2
3S4
3S6
358
3S9
361
365
368

369
370
37S
377
379
381
382
385
386
387
391
393
397

398
399
401
404

subadult
subadult
male
subadult
subadult?
male
subadult
adult
not poor
female
male
male
male
subadult
not poor
male
male
subadult

female
male
subadult
subadult
possible pauper
male
male
subadult
subadult
female
young person
male?
young person
not poor
subadult
subadult
male
female
not poor
subadult

coffin length - 112 cm
coffin length - 129 cm
cufflink
handle type - lamb
small escutcheon
pants buttons
coffin length - ca. 80 cm
coffin length - ca. 213 cm
round coffin
hair comb
buckle, cufflink
buckle

Osteology Results
child, 3-S years
older subadult/ adult indet.
adult, 25-SO+ years
African American, child, 6-12 years
old adult, 50+ years
male, adult, 2S-So+ years
indeterminate
indeterminate
adult, 2S-SO+ years
female, African American, adult, 25-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
male, African American, old adult, So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

pants buttons
small handle
brass screws
cufflinks
cufflinks

female, adult, 2S-So+ years
older subadult/adult indet.

small handle
plaque - "Our Loved One"
coffin length - 120 cm
beaded dress
pocketknife
coffin length - 8 I cm
coffin length - 83 cm
buried in a plain box
without hardware
pants buttons, buckle
buckle, pants buttons
small thumbscrew
coffin size - 118 cm
ornament

male, African American, adolescent, 13-24 years
male, African American, adult, 25-So+ years
infant, 0-2 years

adult, 2S-SO+ years
male, young adult, 2S-49 years
indeterminate
infant, 0-2 years
female, African American, young adult, 25-49 years
male, young adult, 25-49 years
male, adult, 2S-So+ years
older subadult/adult indet.
child, 3-S years

plaque = "Our Loved One"
cufflink, buckle, pants buttons
plaque - "Our Loved One"
caplifter type - dove
round coffin
small handle
coffin length - 141 cm
cufflink, pants button
ring and earring
gold fillings
coffin length - 1OS cm

female, old adult, so+ years
male, adult, 2S-So+ years
female, African American, adult, 2S-So+ years
child, 3-5 years

indeterminate
child, 3-S years
male, adult, 25-So+ years
female, young adult, 2S-49 years

child, 3-S years

161

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
TABLE 32. Correlation of Coffin Length With Skeletnl Age
TABLE 31. Interpretations from Selected Coffin and Personal Effects Data (concluded)
Burial
Number

Feature
124

Osteology Results

Basis

Interpretation

Coffin Length/Width
Metric (cm)
English
59/20

Skeletal Age (yrs)

l '11"

181

60/15

409

male

cufflink

male, African American, young adult, 25-49 years

145

60/16

410

male

cufflink

adult, 25-5o+ years

indeterminate

216

62/16

413

male

cufflink

young adult, 25-49 years, African American

fetal/neonate

209

64/11

414

male

buckle

indeterminate

fetal/neonate

432

67/13-18

418

female
young person

earrings
plaque - "Our Loved One"

fetal/neonate

419

421
422
423

subadult

sub adult

African American, young adult, 25-49 years
child, 3-5 years

handle type - lamb
plaque - "Our Darling"
small escutcheon
coffin length - 148 cm

144

68/15

153

69/10-15

179

69/17

300
infant, 0-2 years

small handle
caplifter type - dove

indeterminate
2'3"

indeterminate
fetal/neonate

70/22

indeterminate
indeterminate

298

71128

indeterminate

297

72/27

indeterminate

75/6-14

indeterminate
fetal/neonate

older subadult/adult
not poor

coffin length - 184 cm
round coffin

indeterminate

female

button

female, young adult, 25-49 years

184

76/21
77/23

indeterminate

77/ca. 22

indeterminate

67

427

sub adult

small handle

male, adult, 25-5o+ years

307

429

male

buckle, pants button

male, adult, 25-5o+ years

313

432

subadult

coffin length - 67 cm

fetal/neonate

437

subadult

handle type

indeterminate

441

male

pants button

445

fetal/neonate

71115-25

47

subadult

handle type - lamb

59

78/20-22

indeterminate

343

ca. 80/39

indeterminate

male, young adult, 25-49 years

375

81127-30

indeterminate

377

83/23

infant, 0-2 years

154

84/25

indeterminate

adolescents and adults were more frequently found in
coffins over lSO cm in length. There are exceptions,
however. Feature 220 appears to be an adult that was
flexed to fit into a smaller coffm. There is some overlap
in coffin size during the 6-12-year age category.
Children 6 years and older tend to be buried in coffms
over lSO cm in length, with children in this age category
interred in coffins up to 17S cm in length (see Table 32).

determine gender with reasonable accuracy. For
example, suspender buckles, pants buttons, cufflinks, and
cuff holders may be assumed to be articles of male
clothing, while hooks and eyes, beaded clothing, and
certain "female-looking" ornate buttons may be
considered to be associated with female clothing (Pool
1991).
Female jewelry included earrings, feminine-style
rings, necklaces or pendants, and lapel or lace pins ..
Other personal items, such as hair combs and hairpins
and a doll, can reasonably be attributed to the female
gender. A pocketknife with Feature 370 suggests that the
individual may have been male, although some females
also carry pocketknives.

Further determinations of age could be estimated
from the ornamental coffin hardware. Certain hardware
types were more frequently associated with subadults
and therefore could be utilized to interpret the relative
age of unknown individuals (see Table 31). Plaque types
3 and 16 ("OUR DARLING") and types 4 and 29 ("OUR
BABE") were found exclusively with subadults. Plaques
with the inscription "OUR LOVED ONE" were
frequently associated with young adults as a plaque
parents apparently picked for their older children (plaque
types 6c, 20, and 3S). The dove shape of Caplifter Type
2 was found exclusively with children. Handle types Sa,
Sb, and 36 were all associated with children and are of
the single-lug swingbail type with a "lamb" motif.
Handle Type 37 contains the "OUR DARLING"
inscription. It may therefore be concluded that the abovementioned inscriptions and the lamb and dove motifs ar

Determination of Age
The relative age of certain individuals can
sometimes be inferred from coffin data and personal
effects (see tables 31 and 32). For example, a comparison
of coffin length with skeletal age determinations made
by the project osteologists shows a somewhat direct
correlation with relative age (see Table 32). Coffins
under ISO cm in length (4'11 ")were normally associated
with juveniles under 6 years of age. Conversely,

2'8"

indeterminate

183

86/26

57

fetal/neonate

87/30

infant, 0-2 years

77

90/30-35

312

90/31

227

94/30

208

95120

24

98/19

78

100/24-27

2'11"

subadult, 0-24 years
infant, 0-2 years
older subadult/adult indeterminate
infant, 0-2 years
infant, 0-2 years

3'3"

infant, 0-2 years

314

103/22

259

child, 3-5 years

104/42

adult, 25-50+ years
young adult, 25-49 yrs

404

105150

276

110/20-24

318

child, 3-5 years

110/35

child, 3-5 years
indeterminate

155

112/20

319

112/32

86

child, 3-5 years

113/21

239

indeterminate

115/26

386

child, 3-5 years

118/25

child, 3-5 years

163
162

Comments

indeterminate

flexed in coffin

..

;_.'•
·i
.LI
1!j·:·I

<

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

TABLE 32. Correlation of Coffin Length With Skeletal Age (cont'd)

TABLE 32. Correlation of Coffin Length With Skeletal Age (cont'd)
Feature
Feature
368
324
220
308
121

Coffin Length/Width
English
Metric (cm)

infant, 0-2 yrs
older subadult/adult indeterminate

120/4S
129/27
129/Sl
130/37

399
148

137/S2
141/30
148/40

419
207

148/4S
149/26-36

Skeletal Age (yrs)

old adult, so+ years

4'7"

child, 6-12 yrs
child, 6-12 yrs
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
child, 3-S years

4'11"

child, 6-12 yrs
young adult, 2S-49 years

291

IS0/22-42

28
30S

1S0/2S
IS0/40

139
91
233
384
284
334

lS0/47
lSO/SO
1Sl/4S
1S216S

child, 6-12 years
indeterminate
young adult, 2S-49 years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
adult, 2S-SO+ years

1S3/44
lSS/18-38

adult, 2S-SO+ years
adolescent, 13-24 years

430
240
129
428
372
61
113
106
137
396
442

lSS/32

adolescent, 13-24 years

lSS/40
1S8/20-43

adult, 2S-SO+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

1S8/33
1S8/37
1S9/41

old adult, SO+ years

160/3S
161/32
161/43

S'3"

old adult, SO+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
subadult, 0-24 years
adult, 2S-So+ years

16l/4S

child, 6-12 yrs

162138
162144

adult, 2S-So+ years
older subadult/adult indeterminate

130
31
12S
423
S3

162164
163/20-43
163/36
163/Sl
ca. 163/ca.43
ca. 163/ca. S4

adult, 2S-So+ years
old adult, SO+ years
older subadult/adult indeterminate

206
114
lSl

16S/20-3S
16S/40
167/37

128
143
263

168/33
168/40
168/48-SO

118
234

adult, 2S-So+ years
young adult, 2S-49 years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

5'7"

adult, 2S-So+ years
indeterminate
old adult, so+ years
indeterminate
old adult, SO+ years

Comments

104
172
40
177
176
37

Coffin Length/Width
Metric (cm)
English

adult, 2S-SO+ years

169/33
170/32

adolescent, 13-24 years
adult, 2S-So+ years

170/32

adolescent, 13-24 years
old adult, SO+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

412
111
38
349

170/3S
ca. 170/38
ca. 170/ca. S6
171132
17l/S-30
172/40

31
62
117

ca. 1721indeterminate
173/30
173/37

103
30

173/43-33
173/44
174/SO

72
19S
1S6
1S9
338
4S
191
193
203
302
36S
108
27
140
413
1S7
274
ISO
278
109
202
158

Skeletal Age (yrs)

169/31

young adult, 2S-49 years
adult, 2S-So+ years
old adult, so+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
old adult, so+ years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
old adult, so+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

174/SS
17S/20-3S
17S/20-3S

old adult, SO+ years

17S/20-SS
17S/39
17S/4S
17S/4S
17S/4S

old adult, so+ years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
adolescent, 13-24 years
adult, 2S-So+ years
old adult, SO+ years

ca. 17S/30
ca. 17S/40
176/31
176/4S
177/42

young adult, 2S-49 years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
young adult, 2S-49 years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

177/43
178/24-44

young adult, 2S-49 years
old adult, So+ years

178/3S-40
ca. 178/SO
179/39
179/43
179/68

older subadult/adult indet
adult, 2S-SO+ years
old adult, SO+ years
adult, 2S-SO+ years

JOO
115

180/IS-37
180/2S-SS
180/30

S4
31S
290

180/38
180/40
180/44

adolescent, 13-24 years
child, 6-12 years

S'll"

adult, 2S-5o+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
young adult, 25-49 years
young adult, 25-49 years
adult, 2S-So+ years
older subadult/adult indeterminate
young adult, 25-49 years

165

164

Comments
mixed w/subadult

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

TABLE 32. Correlation of Coffin Length With Skeletal Age (cont'd)

TABLE 32. Correlation of Coffin Length With Skeletal Age (cont'd)
Feature
Feature
so
237
199
323
42
3S4
S8

Coffin Length/Width
English
Metric (cm)
180/4S
180/4S
180/46
180/47
180/48
180/SO
180/SS

Skeletal Age (yrs)
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adolescent, 13-24 years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
old adult, SO+ years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
young adult, 2S-49 years

194
241

180/61
ca. 180/20-40

2SO
79
218
138
212

181/lS-32

adult, 2S-SO+ years
old adult, SO+ years

181/40
181/43
181/49
182/16-3S

adult, 2S-So+ years
old adult, SO+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
young adult, 2S-49 years

272
3SO
49
266

182/46
182/SO
182/SS

adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
young adult, 2S-49 years

182/SS
183/41

adult, 2S-So+ years
young adult, 2S-49 years

183/4S
184/38-40

young adult, 2S-49 years

197
264
422
26
441
337
25
48
210
296
219
126
81
21
440
7S
92
429
90
132
20S
260
406
64

184/44
184/ca. 41
18S/18-4S
18S/30
18S/38
18S/40
18S/44
18S/47
18S/S4
18S/SS-60
ca. 18S/1S-3S
ca. 18S/20
186/S4
186/SS
187/34
188/40-SS
188/SS
189/38
189/41
189/46
198/48

indetenninate
adult, 2S-SO+ years
young adult, 2S-49 years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
young adult, 2S-49 years
old adult, so+ years
young adult, 2S-49 years
young adult, 2S-49 years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
old adult, so+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adolescent, 13-24 years
adolescent, 13-24 years
young adult, 2S-49 years
adult, 2S-So+ years

Comments

76
382
286
228
110
46
388
249
198
288

Coffin Length/Width
Metric (cm)
English
189/48
189/S4
190/3S

Skeletal Age (yrs)
adult, 2S-SO+ years
adult, 2S-SO+ years

6'3"

young adult, 2S-49 years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

190/36
190/40-SO
190/40
190/40
190/46

older subadult/adult indetenninate
indetenninate
adult, 2S-So+ years
young adult, 2S-49 years

190/47
190/S-20

young adult, 2S-49 years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

60
66
391
171
180
211
379
420

191/S4
ca. 191/24-6S
ca. 191/ca. S0-60

116

192/39

older subadult/adult indetenninate
adult, 2S-So+ years

3Sl
74
169

192/40
192/S6

older subadult/adult indetenninate
indetenninate

193/10-47
193/40
193/SI
193/62

old adult, SO+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

162
43S
196
426
418
182
88
29
73
370
93
320
39
3S8
201
367
2S7
189
26S
336

190/SO
190/SO
ca. 190/ca. 34

adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

191/20-40
191/30

young adult, 2S-49 years
young adult, 2S-49 years

adult, 2S-So+ years

adult, 2S-SO+ years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
young adult, 2S-49 years
young adult, 2S-49 years
adult, 2S-SO+ years
old adult, SO+ years

194/40
194/47-SS
194/S8
194/70
19S/38
19S/43-2S

older subadult/adult indetenninate
young adult, 2S-49 years
indetenninate

196/3S-SO
196/41
196/S8

adult, 2S-So+ years

196/67
198/S4

old adult, SO+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years

198/62
199/S2
200-210/SO-SS
200140-60
200/40
200/S9

young adult, 2S-49 years
old adult, So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
adult, 2S-So+ years
old adult, So+ years

6'7"

167
166

.

Comments

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
A variety of items can be used to help assess the
economic status of deceased individuals. Rounded
coffms, short bar handles, and sliding viewing windows
are all indicative of "expensive" coffins. Similarly,
certain personal effects, such as gold dental appliances
and fillings, a doll imported from Germany, and gold and
diamond jewelry, all indicate individuals with some
wealth. Cemeteries may choose to segregate individuals
according to wealth so that individuals of wealth would
be given more "choice" burial plots. Although persons of
greater and lesser wealth were identified at this cemetery
(see Table 31), the distribution of key status indicators
across the site did not reveal any spatial "status"
divisions.

TABLE 32. Correlation of Coffin Length With Skeletal Age (concluded)

Feature
262
185
243
87
41
409
356
339
101
43
65
146
187
273
20
63
347
192
381
373
178
175
366

Coffin Length/Width
Metric (cm)
English

201/58
202/50
202152
203/30-52

adult, 25-So+ years
indeterminate
adult, 25-So+ years
old adult, 50+ years
adult, 25-So+ years
young adult, 25-49 years

6'10"

212/54
ca. 213/ca. 55
215/61
217/27-81
220/50
220/65
230/54
253/60

Comments

adult, 25-So+ years
adult, 25-50+ years
old adult, so+ years
adult, 25-So+ years
adult, 25-So+ years
young adult, 25-49 years

200/60
200/66
ca. 200/12-70

203/44
204/4o-45
204/60
206/64
207/62
208/30-40
210/35-45
ca. 210/35-55

Skeletal Age (yrs)

adult, 25-50+ years
adult, 25-50+ years
adult, 25-50+ years
adult, 25-50+ years

normally found with subadult remains and may there~y
be utilized to interpret relative age. of the_ deceased m
instances where skeletal evidence is not available.
An analysis of the relative size of ornamental
hardware showed a slight correlation between h~d';~)e
size and age of the interred individual (see Ta e
.
15
were
smaller
and
5
and
1
S
Escutcheon typ e
' '
s ll
. t d wi"th subadults in 50 percent of cases. ma
associa e
· ted
5 33 37 40 were assoc1a
thumbscrew types 11 , 24' 2 ' ' '
with subadults in 50 percent of cases. This pe~,ce~tag~
increases when omitting thumbscrews from mixed
archaeological contexts. Smaller handles Type 4 smal~
Type 6 Type 11 small, Type 29 small, Type 32, an
Type 34 were associated with subadults 66 p~rcent of the
time (33 percent were indeterminate). It is ther~fore
eluded that smaller coffm hardware may tentatively
~c:1used to indentify subadult individuals in cases where
osteological age indicators are absent. It must be noted,
however, that many subadults from the TNCC were
.
d . offins wi"th full-sized hardware. Therefore,
·1
mterre m c
the presence of larger hardware does not necessan y
mean the interred is an adult.

An alternative (but less favored) hypothesis for
these apparently paired burials might be attributed to
chance. These burials could have been simply interred at
the same time by the same undertaker who chose similar
coffins and hardware based upon what he had in stock at
the time.

Temporal Evidence

adult, 25-5o+ years

Ethnic and Status Indicators
Cultural materials from the wee were a:ralyzed
for clues to the ethnicity and status of the mterr:
individuals. Placement in the grave of blue b~a '
ierced coins, bowls, bottles, cutlery, and. o1?er .items
p ed by the deceased are believed to be md1cativ~ of
us
b . f1
d burial practices
African American cultural e1ie s an
l
(see Table 31) (Adams 1993; Warren Barb~ur'. pe~sona
. ti" 1998) An analysis of the distnbution of
commuruca on
·
d · an
h ethnic indicators across the site was conducte m
sue
.1
tion of grave
effort to identify possible spatia segrega
. did
sites according to ethnicity.3 However, the ~lys1:Cent
not reveal any such divisions at the TNCC. This a:t the
lack of ethnic segregation may reflect the fa~t d "th
cemetery was a public burial ground not ~ffihate W1 r
any particular cultural group or commumty. :ow_e~: ;
s atial atterning in the cemetery may not e v1s1
tecaus: of the substantial portion of the cemetery that
was removed in the 1940s.

1

3 Southern folk cemeteries in Texas are often segr)egated spatially according to the race of the d~ (Jordan 1982.

168

Features 92 and 93 may have been related. The
graves were parallel and next to each other. Both coffins
were hexagonal in shape with Type 28 handles and Type
8 thumbscrews. Feature 93 was identified as an African
American male between 25 and 50+ years of age.
Feature 92 was an individual of indeterminate gender
between 25 and 50+ years of age.

Identification of Family Units

adult, 25-50+ years
adult, 25-5o+ years
young adult, 25-49 years

8'2"

Features 15 and 319 may have been related. The
graves were parallel and next to each other. Both had
rectangular, painted coffms with Type 20 handles and
Type 15 thumbscrews. Feature 15 was identified as a
female, and the remains from Feature 319 were not
identifiable.

Three individuals (features 61, 219, and 379) were
tentatively identified as low-wealth burials because they
were found to be interred in plain boxes with no burial
hardware. A lack of personal items included within the
cofflllS further suggested the ·poverty of the interred
individuals, with the exception of a "cache" of buttons
associated with Feature 379. It is also possible these
individuals were provided with burial services by the city
in the absence of family members to provide for moreelaborate burial arrangements.

indeterminate
adult, 25-50+ years
young adult, 25-49 years
7'2"

21 handles. Feature 64 had different{Type 10) handles
on one side of the coffin. Osteological analysis indicates
that both features were African American males between
25 and 50+ years of age.

A distribution of ornamental hardware types across
the site was utilized in an attempt to identify related
individuals or family groups. It is known that coffins
were shipped from the manufacturer without decoration,
and family members would be required to choose the
cofflll, linings, and exterior hardware during funeral
preparations (Knesek and Sons, personal communication
1999). It is also likely that the epidemics of the 1890s
and 1900s could strike several family members at once.
We may therefore surmise that family members who
were interred at the same time might have matching
coffins and be buried next to each other.

The relative ages of various ornamental hardware
types could be estimated from a comparison with
hardware catalogs of the period. This process is often
complicated due to the difficulty in fmding a good
collection of old coffin hardware catalogs. It is further
complicated by the fact that certain hardware styles were
produced over extremely long periods of time, and
designs were often copied or bought by other hardware
companies. Often, part numbers found on the back of a
piece of hardware would match the part number printed
in a catalog. More rarely, the manufacturer's name
and/or patent date will be printed on the back of the
hardware (such as for Handle Type 10). Because coffins
and hardware were ordered separately, undertakers
commonly had a stockpile of materials that may have
been kept in storage for decades before being used
(Hacker-Norton and Trinkley 1984). Coffins, shipping
boxes, and boxes of hardware from the 1890s era were
observed still in storage at a local funeral parlor.

The distribution of coffm hardware strongly
suggests that features 412 and 413 were related. The
graves were parallel and next to each other. Both had
rounded coffins with Type 7 handles, and these are the
only instances of Type 7 handles in the entire cemetery.
Osteological interpretations indicate Feature 413 was an
African American male between 25 and 50+ years of
age, and Feature 412 was possibly African American of
indeterminate gender between 25 and 49 years of age.

With the above difficulties in mind, a relative range
of dates was established where possible utilizing
hardware dates as obtained from the hardware catalogs
(Table 33). Additional temporal information was
obtained from safety pin patent dates (Owens 1998a),
patent dates found on the back of hardware, and dates

The distribution of ornamental hardware suggests
that features 6_3 and 64 may have been related. Their
graves are parallel and next to each other. Both had
rectangular coffins, with Type 10 thumbscrews and Type
169

,

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

TABLE 33. Estimated Dates for Features (cont'~)

TABLE 33. Estimated Dates for Features
Feature
Number

Feature
Number

Basis for Estimate

Estimated Date

**

93

Estimated Date

Basis for Estimate

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1907-1908

excavation report

6

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

99

8

**

ca. 1905
ca. 1910-1925

coffin hardware catalog
excavation report

106

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

**

ca. 1895-1905

coffin hardware catalog

116

*

ca. 1879-1880

13

coffin hardware catalog

*

ca. 1880-1881

coffin hardware catalog

117

**

ca. 1893

15

coffin hardware catalog

>1870

rubber button

123

**

ca. 1905
ca. 1907-1908

coffin hardware catalog
excavation report

132

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

139

**

ca. 1905
ca. 1890-1907

**

ca. 1905
>1877

coffin hardware catalog
J.M. Davidson, personal communication, Dallas Freedman's Cemetery
coffin hardware catalog
coin

21
25

**

>1888
>1890

coin
safety pin patent date

26

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

28

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

140

31

ca. 1895

safety pin type

146

>1878

safety pin patent date

32

>1878

safety pin patent date

148

ca. 1895

safety pin type

>1849

rubber hairpins

149

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

159

**

ca. 1893

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1890-1907

J.M. Davidson, personal communication - Dallas Freedman's Cemetery

162

>1851

rubber button w/patent date

ca. 1895-1897

Paris cuff holder, clothing catalogs

165

**

ca. 1893

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

168

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

57

ca. 1890

safety pin type

172

>1855,>1888

shell buttons

59

ca. 1880-1905

coffin hardware catalog

175

ca. 1880-1905

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

176

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

178

**

ca. 1907

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1895-1905

coffin hardware catalog

180

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

182

**

ca. 1905
ca. 1890-1907

185

**

coffin hardware catalog
J.M. Davidson, personal communication, Dallas Freedman's Cemetery

ca. 1890-1907

J.M. Davidso~, personal communication, Dallas Freedman's Cemetery

187

**

ca. 1895-1905

coffin hardware catalog

195

**

ca. 1896
ca. 1905

safety pin type
coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1895
ca. 1895

screw-type collar stud, dry goods catalog
lever-top cuftlink, dry goods catalog

ca 1895

coffin hardware catalog

39
41

**

43

**

49
53

**

60
64
65

**
**
**

72

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

73

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

75

**

>1900

Snaps

ca. 1895-1897

Paris cuff holder, clothing catalogs

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1895

safety pin type

79
80

**

87

198

90

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

92

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

201

**

171
170

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
TABLE 33. Estimated Dates for Features (cont'd)
TABLE 33. Estimated Dates for Features (cont'd)
Feature
Number

Feature
Number
286

**

Estimated Date

Basis for Estimate

> 1880, ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

206

ca. 1895

safety pin type

288

**

ca. 1905
ca. 1897
ca. 1885-1899
ca. 1905

207

>1855, >1888

shell buttons

295

**

>1890

safety pin patent date

212

ca. 1895-1897

Paris cuff holder, clothing catalogs

297

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1895-1905
ca. 1907-1908

coffin hardware catalog
excavation report

298

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

228

ca. 1907-1908

excavation report

302

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

229

ca. 1907-1908

excavation report

305

**

ca. 1907

coffin hardware catalog

233

>1891, <1920

ceramic bowl with maker's mark

306

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

308

*

ca. 1879-1881

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1880-1895

coffin hardware catalog

313

*

ca. 1879-1881

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1880-1897

coffin hardware catalog

205

226

234

**

**

**

235

Basis for Estimate

Estimated Date

240

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

241

**

ca. 1900

gold dental bridge

248

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

249

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

250

*

ca. 1880-1883

coffin hardware catalog

251

**

ca. 1895-1905

coffin hardware catalog

257

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

260

**

ca. 1905

263

**

267

*

*

>1880-1881

coffin hardware catalog

323

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

>1875

coin

329

ca. 1879-1880

coffin hardware catalog

332

*

ca. 1879-1880

coffin hardware catalog

334

**

>1870
ca. 1905

rubber buttons
coffin hardware catalog

coffin hardware catalog

336

*

ca. 1879-1881

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

344

>1880, ca. 1895

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1879-1881
ca. 1907-1908

coffin hardware catalog
excavation report

345

> 1879, ca. 1875

coffin hardware catalog

>1870

rubber buttons

ca. 1880

coffin hardware catalog

>1870

rubber buttons

ca. 1895

coffin hardware catalog

269

*

ca. 1880, >1881

coffin hardware catalog

274

319

*

**
**

c~ffin hardware catalog

331

268

272

318

coffin hardware catalog
Paris cuff holder
loop prong cuffiink

ca. 1905
>1900

coffin hardware catalog
snaps

ca. 1907-1908

excavation report

276

**

>1880
>1890

280

**

ca. 1905
ca. 1890

patent date on hardware
safety pin patent date
coffin hardware catalog
safety pin type

282

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

*

347
348

*

!

349
351

*

ca. 1875

coffin hardware catalog

352

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

358

*

ca. 1880

coffin hardware catalog

359

*

ca. 1880

coffin hardware catalog

173
172

!

CHAPTER VI: Excavation and Analysis of the Third New City Cemetery
Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

TABLE 33. Estimated Dates for Features (con~luded)

TABLE 33. Estimated Dates for Features (cont'd)
Feature
Number
361
362

ca. 1895-1905
ca. 1907-1908

**

ca. 1905

Estimated Date

Basis for Estimate

428

*

>1880

coffin hardware catalog
excavation report

435

**

ca. 1890-1907

coffin hardware catalog

436

**

ca. 1890-1907

J.M. Davidson, personal communication, Dallas Freedman's Cemetery

**

ca. 1895-1905

coffin hardware catalog

Ba.Sis for Estimate

Estimated Date

**

Feature
Number

coffin hardware catalog
J.M. Davidson, personal communication, Dallas Freedman's Cemetery

365

**

ca. 1893-1905

coffin hardware catalog

440

**

ca. 1895

coffin hardware catalog

442

*

ca. 1875

368

coffin hardware catalog

*

ca. 1875-1880

coffin hardware catalog

445

*

>1881

370

coffin hardware catalog

373

*

ca. 1880

coffin hardware catalog

446

ca. 1907-1908
> 1900

excavation report
corrugated fastener

377

**

>1888

safety pin patent date

Temporal categories:

ca. 1880-1905

coffin hardware catalog

>1870
>1900
ca. 1905

rubber buttons
snaps
coffin hardware catalog

381
382

**

386

*

ca. 1880

coffin hardware catalog

387

**

ca. 1880-1905
ca. 1907-1908
>1896

coffin hardware catalog
excavation report
safety pin patent date

388

**

ca. 1893-1905

coffin hardware catalog

390

**

ca. 1893

coffin hardware catalog

392

**

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

393

>1870

rubber buttons

396

>1870

rubber buttons

397

ca. 1880-1895

coffin hardware catalog

ca. 1905

coffin hardware catalog

>1855,>1888

shell buttons

403

**

404
406

*

>1879

patent date on handle

409

**

ca. 1895-1905
ca. 1907-1908

coffin hardware catalog
excavation report

>1855, >1888

shell buttons

ca. 1880-1883

coffin hardware catalog

>1879
ca. 1880-1895

coffin hardware catalog

411
418

*

421
422

*

ca. 1875-1883

coffin hardware catalog

426

*

ca. 1875

coffin hardware catalog

*Early, ca. 1875-1881

**Late, ca. 1890-1905

found on coins within features (features 25 and 329).
Less reliable but also utilized were the patent date for
rubber and the date the rubber patent expired, beginning
manufacturing dates for shell buttons and jewelry, a date
for the gold dental appliance (Feature 241), and dates
from clothing hardware, ceramic, and jewelry types.
Also considered were dates for hardware types similiar
to those from the excavations at Freedman's Cemetery in
Dallas (James M. Davidson, personal communication
1998) and dates obtained from similar hardware at other
cemetery relocation projects (Dockall, Boyd et al. 1996;
Dockal!, Powell, and Steele 1996; Hacker-Norton and
Trinkley 1984; Lebo 1988; McReynolds 1981; Rose
1985; Taylor et al. 1986; Trinkley and Hacker-Norton
1984).
The available dates for each feature were examined,
and "less reliable" dates were excluded from the sample.
The temporal data were divided into "early"
(1875-1883) and "late" (1890-1905) time periods.
Overlapping dates were eliminated from the sample. The
distribution of early and late time periods indicates most
of the "early burials" to be located in the center and
southeastern portion of the cemetery. A large
concentration of "late burials" is found in the
southwestern portion of the cemetery. A comparison
with the historic records from this time period indicates
the "early burials" to be associated with the opening of
the cemetery. "Late burials" are seen to be associated
with the epidemics in the 1890s and 1900s before the
cemetery was closed in 1904. This temporal distribution
of graves may be an artificial reflection of whatever
factor caused these graves to be left behind during the
relocation of the cemetery in the 1940s. Virtually all of
the tombstones had been removed from the· cemetery
prior to the 1940 relocation. Therefore, the temporal

175
174

distribution may simply be an artificial factor of which
graves were missed.
Conclusions
While a detailed analysis of the material culture
remains from the TNCC was not a required component
of the scope of work for this project, it may be said that
analysis of the material data recovered from the TNCC
proved useful in developing the required demographic
profile of the cemetery in terms of the ethnicity, age, and
sex of the individuals interred therein. This evidence
was considered in combination with the osteological data
in order to obtain a more complete and reliable
interpretation of those who were buried in this cemetery.
In addition to the basic demographic profile of the
individuals, reviews of previous cemetery research and
mortuary catalogs from the late nineteenth century also
provided an opportunity to develop approximate dates of
interment for many of the individual burials at the
TNCC. While a precise date of interment could not be
determined for the vast majority of the burials, the
temporal analysis of the data does seem to correlate well
with the historic records of the cemetery and thus
provides archaeological corroboration of records that are
far from complete for this cemetery.
The temporal data yielded by the analysis of
artifacts found with the burials suggest a clustering of
"Early Burials" (1875-1883) in the center and southeast
of the cemetery and a clustering of"Late Burials" (18901905) in the southwestern portion of the cemetery.
These two ranges seem to be the closest estimate of a
meaningful statistic to represent the periods of use of this
cemetery. This is due to the fact that estimated usage
dates for the associated artifacts, in most cases, cannot be

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

CHAPTER VII
the population at TNCC was proba?ly of Afric~n
American descent, this evidence of higher economic
status supports historical accounts o~ the ~resence. of a
rising middle class of African Amenca~ m the city of
Houston at this time. In this sense, it broade~ the
current interpretation of the TNCC be~ond previous~y
limited characterizations of TNCC as strictly a pauper s
graveyard or a "Potter' s F'ield"
·

narrowed to specific years. Instead, the usage dates, as
derived from the various information sources, can only
be described in terms of date ranges or only as ~ low~r
boundary limit.
Thus, it is not possible, Ill this
circumstance, to construct an accurate mea~ date of the
interments at this site based on the date estimates from
the associated artifacts. Notably, these "EarIY." and
"Late" clusters do appear to correlate to the archivally
documented periods of intensive use of the cemetery.

An alternative explanation may also be put forth
regarding .the relatively high level of wealth ind~cated ~y
grave goods observed at TNCC. A~ me~ti~ned m
Ch pter II fraternal orders and mutual aid societies were
to' have provided death and burial
for
members in the local area (Beeth and Wmtz 1992).
Notably, findings reported . from thr~e other
contemporaneous African Amencan c.em~tenes, Cedar
Grove in Arkansas, Phillips Memonal m ?alveston
County, Texas, and Freedman's Cemetery m ~allas,
suggest that fraternal orders also played a role m .the
caliber of some of the funeral ceremonies at those sites
(Dockall et al. 1996; Peter et al. 2000; Rose ed. 19~5).
Fraternal orders are also known to have been responsible
for the degree of wealth apparent in burials of many of
the Confederate veterans from the Confederate Home
interred in the Texas State Cemetery at the turn o~ ~e
century (Dockall, Boyd et al. 1996). Although it is
outside the scope of the current investigation, th.ese
findings support the potential for future archae~logical
research into the role these societies played m both
African American and Anglo-American interments from
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

Although beyond the scope of analysis required for
this investigation, the array of coffin hardware recovered
from TNCC was compared and found to be g~nerally
similar to that recovered from the Freedman s, Mt.
Pleasant, Morgan Chapel, Tucker, Laredo, Texas Sta~e,
Cedar Grove, and Phillips Memorial cemetenes
(Dockall, Boyd et al. 1996; Dockall, Powell, and Steel~
1996· Lebo 1988; McReynolds 1981; Peter et al. 2000,
Rose' ed. 1985; Taylor et al. 1986; Trinkley and HackerNorton 1984). Useful in this regard is a thorough
intersite comparison of the hardware recovered from all
of these sites, except Freedman's Cemetery, ~at 'Yas
presented by Dockall, Boyd et al. (1996) in therr ~e~ort
on the Texas State Cemetery. Unfortunately, a SlIDllar
co~arison using percentages of the various mortuary
hardware types present at TNCC is not feasible ?ue. to
roblems constructing the percentage values for this site.
difficulty arises because the
disturbed and
fragmentary condition of most bunals at TNCC
precludes an accurate detennination of the total number
of burial features recovered from TNCC. Of the total
446 possible burial features excavated at TNCC, 355
contained identifiable human remains, yet another
number contained funerary hardware and perso~al
effects, and yet another array of skeletal ~d m:1tenal
culture items lacked association with any i~entifiable
. I fieature. In the absence of more fimte .values
buna
.
needed for this type of comparison, cursory exammation
of the types and occurrence of mortuary hardware from
TNCC suggests that the overall assemblage most
resembles that from the Cedar Grove Cemetery, a
contemporaneous rural African American cemetery from
southern Arkansas.

~his

~enefits

kn:wn

heavi~y

In the interest of future historical and
archaeological research, it is hoped that the analyses
conducted and reported for the TNCC burial ~ardw~e
and personal effects may be useful for companson with
other nineteenth-century cemetery sites in. Houston ~d
elsewhere. For example, the information pr~sented. m
this report may provide data useful for an mteresting
.
companson
wi'th the results of an as yet unreported
4 Wh
investigation of Houston's Old
Cemetery. .
en
reported, the analy,sis of the Old City Ce~etery .win help
fill a gap in the archaeological information available. for
downtown Houston in its earliest decades of formation,
and may help place the results of the TNCC
investigations into a broader and more well defined
historic context for Houston in the nineteenth century.

qty

The preserved coffin data and associated funerary
items from TNCC also suggest that the interred
individuals and their families had, in some cases, a level
of personal wealth beyond that which was .exp~ct.ed at
the outset of the investigation. Because the maJonty of

At the time of publicati?n, .no rublished inf~rrnation was
ailable for Dr Brown's investigations mto the Old City Ceme~,
~ investigation' condudted ~.connection with development of a city
fire-station maintenance fac1hty.
4

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

This chapter presents conclusions and recommendations for the archaeological investigations conducted at
Allen Parkway Village, Site 41HR886. More-detailed
discussions summarizing the results of each major aspect
of the investigations are included in their respective
chapters. However, salient observations regarding those
results and other concluding thoughts on this project are
provided in the following discussion. Recommendations
for completing additional tasks stipulated by the Programmatic Agreement for this project are also presented.
The archaeological investigations conducted in the
APV project area between February 1996 and December
1998 were required under Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act because the Housing Authority
of the City of Houston sought and received federal
funding through the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's HOPE VI - Urban Revitalization
Demonstration Program. A variety of cultural resource
management requirements, including archaeological investigations and the possible need for cemetery removal,
were stipulated within a Programmatic Agreement
developed among HUD, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, and the Texas State Historic Preservation Officer. The Housing Authority served as HUD's
local project sponsor and was directly responsible for
ensuring that the requirements. of the Programmatic
Agreement were fulfilled.
The Housing Authority, in cooperation with the
signatories to the Programmatic Agreement, also organized and directed the public involvement efforts for the
project. Planned approaches, results, and assessments of
the archaeological investigations were presented to the
public in a series of public hearings and meetings. Oral
presentations illustrated by slideshows were made to the
public by one or more members of the archaeological
team as well as key Housing Authority and agency representatives. Comments from the public were considered
and, as appropriate, incorporated into the archaeological
program. Thus, the public involvement requirements
under Section 106, prior to their revision in 2001, were
met.
The archaeological investigations reported herein
fulfill only one of many requirements stipulated by the
Programmatic Agreement. Other cultural resource management requirements include extensive architectural
documentation of San Felipe Courts (Allen Parkway

177
176

Village) Historic District, creation of an interpretive
historical exhibit, as well as respectful treatment and
reburial of any human remains discovered within the
project area. An additional requirement that the new
cemetery be located within the local community was
established through the public involvement program. In
the period of time since the archaeological investigations
and analyses were completed, all human remains recovered from the former Third New City Cemetery have
been reburied in a specially dedicated memorial cemetery park located in the northeast comer of the project
area.
The major components of the archaeological investigations included research design development, surveyphase site identification, demolition and excavation
monitoring, and cemetery removal and analysis. Results
and recommendations for each of these components were
coordinated with the State Historic Preservation Officer
through interim letter reports produced and reviewed
during the project. When the nature of those results and
recommendations warranted further consideration,
particularly regarding the treatment and removal of the
Third New City Cemetery remains, they were presented
for comment to the official signatories to the Programmatic Agreement and the public through the public
involvement program described above. Thus, each of the
major components of the archaeological program have
previously been reviewed and approved. The only major
element that has not been previously reported is the
material culture analysis from the cemetery removal that
is presented in Chapter VI and appendices F and G.
While the APV archaeological survey and monitoring investigations did detennine that surficial and
shallowly buried cultural deposits were destroyed during
the ca. 1940 demolition and clearance of the entire APV
project area, a notable fmding of the APV investigation
is that limited portions of the project area still have the
potential for containing significant archaeological
deposits in deeply buried settings. This potential was
demonstrated through the APV archaeological survey
and monitoring efforts, and corresponded in part with the
patterns of site preservation predicted by the research
design and the "cut-and-fill" model. In this regard,
potentially significant archaeological deposits that may
have survived the ca. 1940 demolition and site clearing
activities are most likely located within several old
cisterns and backfilled ravines and gullies that also

CHAPTER VII: Conclusions and Recommendations

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
extended beneath the zone of impact and investigation
for the current project.

Among these, sites 41HR409, 41HR508, and
41HR787 all yielded information useful for documenting
and understanding the potential for archaeological
research into Houston's early period of development.
But, all of these sites have since been destroyed during
the course of commercial and city improvement projects.
Similarly, archaeological information gathered but not
yet reported from the Brown Convention Center and the
Fire Station Maintenance Facility projects may contribute greatly to future research of Houston's early history,
particularly considering that the project impacts will
have completely destroyed all archaeological deposits in
the project areas. Considering the pervasive pattern of
site destruction across the earliest settled portion of
downtown Houston, the relatively high degree of site
preservation noted at Market Square (41HR575) and at
Site 41HR623, the Harrisburg Depot, certainly raises
their level of importance for future research.

This potential for archaeological discoveries at the
APV project area confirms what has been reported at a
few other sites dating from Houston's earliest phases of
development. Unfortunately, many of these have been
completely destroyed by recent development projects
with deep subsurface impacts. Among the most important investigations to date for Houston's early era of
development is Roger Moore's archaeological testing
and data recovery at Market Square (41HR575). This
investigation provided extensive archaeological insight
into Houston's early urban residential and commercial
development, particularly as it relates to wealthy AngloAmerican residents. Reported as his doctoral dissertation, Dr. Moore's work at Market Square is one of the
best documented archaeological investigations into
Houston's early history.

Although the APV survey and monitoring investigations yielded only limited archaeological evidence of
intact pre-1880 deposits at the site, a significant discovery was made in the northwestern comer of the project
area where more than 400 possible burial features were
identified in the area of the former Third New City
Cemetery. As described above, this discovery necessitated intensive public and agency coordination to
develop an appropriate treatment plan that included
archaeological excavation, nondestructive analysis, and
respectful reburial of all human remains. While past and
present construction-related activities had a devastating
effect on the condition of the burial remains and
prolonged the efforts to identify the cemetery remains,
the entire cemetery zone was intensively examined to
identify all possible remaining burial features. Approved
implementation procedures provided for careful
archaeological band excavation of each burial feature,
supplemented by in situ documentation, cleaning, and
laboratory analysis.

Other pre-1880 sites that have presented opportunities to investigate and better understand Houston's urban
archaeological context include:
•

•

•

Site 41HR409, 200 Main Street, multicomponent prehistoric and historic site with urban
commercial and residential occupation as early
as ca. 1837; probably destroyed since 1984 by
modem commercial development
Site 41HR508, Trimble/Block 278, multicomponent historic site with Civil War-era
munitions deposit and pre-1870/1880s residential deposits; entire block probably will be
destroyed by new hotel construction
Site 41HR623, the Harrisburg Depot Site,
reportedly containing deposits that date from the
pre-Republic-era founding of the city along the
banks of Buffalo and Brays bayous; possibly 75
percent intact beneath an industrial building
complex when recorded about 1989

•

George R. Brown Convention Center Site,
early- to late-nineteenth-century commercial
and residential deposits; destroyed by convention center construction

•

Site 41HR787, Block 12, contains ca. 1860 to
late-twentieth-century residential, ecclesiastical,
and commercial deposits for Anglo- and African
American occupations in the area; probably
destroyed by new Harris County Justice Facility

•

Historic Rental Initiative, Blocks 28, 29, 83, and
86, potential for ca. 1870 to present-day sites
representing urban African American occupation in Freedmen's Town Historic District

Ultimately, the implementation procedures applied
in the field and in the laboratory enabled the bioarcbaeology team to gather the required level of demographic
data about the population represented by the individual
burial features removed from the cemetery. Detailed
documentation of the bioarchaeological analyses and
assessments conducted for the Third New City Cemetery
remains are presented in detail in Chapter VI and appendices E through G of this report. Overall, the bioarcbaeology analyses indicate that the population examined
from TNCC included physically robust, hard-working
African Americans who may have suffered from the
effects of repeated epidemics in the late nineteenth to
early twentieth century. However, the TNCC population
probably was not exclusively African American, an
178

assessment supported by city death records that also
document the effects of cholera, yellow fever, malaria,
and other epidemics on Houston's non-African American
citizens. Instead, the TNCC seemed to have served the
city at large, rather than just those of lower economic
status or any particular ethnic affiliation.
The TNCC demographic data analysis also
included comparisons to other relevant cemeteries of the
same general era and cultural affiliation. While the
osteological data show a variety of similarities and
differences between each of the cemetery populations,
the analysis of funerary objects provided some notable
similarities. Of the other cemeteries compared to the
TNCC population based on funerary hardware, the most
similar are the Freedman's Cemetery in Dallas, Phillips
Memorial in Galveston County, and the Cedar Grove
Cemetery. These cemeteries were selected for comparison in large part because they all share a contemporaneous period of use and southern African American
cultural affiliation. A notable similarity between these
cemeteries is that participation in funerary societies
appears to have influenced the level of material wealth
displayed in some burials from each case. This observation was noted as well in recent well-documented
analyses of burials from the Texas State Cemetery in
Austin.
Apart from these synchronic comparisons,
Houston's Old City Cemetery, which preceded TNCC's
creation and use as the city's public burying ground,
appears to present another, perhaps more important,
opportunity for documenting and understanding changes
in burial practices and cultural conditions within
Houston's local historical context. Investigated in
connection with the development of a new fire station
maintenance facility along the north bank of Buffalo
Bayou, the Old City Cemetery has probably been
destroyed by the modem city support service improvements. Thus, any further comparative analysis of these
two important pieces of Houston's early history is
dependent on the publication of as yet unreported data
recovered from the Old City Cemetery.

Because the· archaeological investigations planned
and conducted for the APV redevelopm~nt project identified no National Register-eligible sites requiring further
archaeological testing or data recovery, there is no regulatory requirement for further archaeological research at
APV, at least for purposes of the present project. The
investigations did, however, identify several cisterns and
gullies that may contain deposits extending beneath the
impact zone of the present project. Consequently, a
recommendation is offered that the Housing Authority
remain aware of the historical sensitivity of the archaeological deposits that probably remain buried beneath the
current public housing complex. These resources are for
the moment protected from further disturbance, but
future utility repairs and modifications, as well as any
other type of deep ground-disturbing activity, should be
planned with appropriate consideration to these potentially significant resources.
Furthermore, public awareness of APV's place in
Houston's history can be facilitated through development
of an interpretive historical exhibit. With sufficient
curatorial space for records of this and a separate historic
architectural study, the exhibit facility could fulfill
stipulations established under the Programmatic Agreement. The APV historical exhibit site could also serve as
a remote interview facility for a long-term oral history
program. Such a program might be developed through
cooperation with the Houston Public Library's Houston
Metropolitan Research Center.
It is hoped that the information generated during all
phases of the investigations will be of use to future
scientific researchers. For this purpose, extensive but
pertinent portions of the data assembled and analyzed
have been incorporated into this report and its appendices. Perhaps of equal value are the archaeological
records assembled throughout the investigations. These
records have been permanently archived at The University of Texas's Archaeological Research Laboratory in
Austin. For those interested in conducting more-detailed
analysis of the osteological data assembled from TNCC,
a complete set of osteological databases is included on a
CD-ROM enclosed in the rear cover of this report.

179

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
extended beneath the zone of impact and investigation
for the current project.
This potential for archaeological discoveries at the
APV project area confirms what has been reported at a
few other sites dating from Houston's earliest phases of
development. Unfortunately, many of these have been
completely destroyed by recent development projects
with deep subsurface impacts. Among the most important investigations to date for Houston's early era of
development is Roger Moore's archaeological testing
and data recovery at Market Square (41HR575). This
investigation provided extensive archaeological insight
into Houston's early urban residential and commercial
development, particularly as it relates to wealthy AngloAmerican residents. Reported as his doctoral dissertation, Dr. Moore's work at Market Square is one of the
best documented archaeological investigations into
Houston's early history.

CHAPTER VII: Conclusions and Recommendations
Among these, sites 41HR409, 41HR508, and
41HR787 all yielded information useful for documenting
and understanding the potential for archaeological
research into Houston's early period of development.
But, all of these sites have since been destroyed during
the course of commercial and city improvement projects.
Similarly, archaeological information gathered but not
yet reported from the Brown Convention Center and the
Fire Station Maintenance Facility projects may contribute greatly to future research of Houston's early history,
particularly considering that the project impacts will
have completely destroyed all archaeological deposits in
the project areas. Considering the pervasive pattern of
site destruction across the earliest settled portion of
downtown Houston, the relatively high degree of site
preservation noted at Market Square (41HR575) and at
Site 41HR623, the Harrisburg Depot, certainly raises
their level of importance for future research.
Although the APV survey and monitoring investigations yielded only limited archaeological evidence of
intact pre-1880 deposits at the site, a significant discovery was made in the northwestern comer of the project
area where more than 400 possible burial features were
identified in the area of the former Third New City
Cemetery. As described above, this discovery necessitated intensive public and agency coordination to
develop an appropriate treatment plan that included
archaeological excavation, nondestructive analysis, and
respectful reburial of all human remains. While past and
present construction-related activities had a devastating
effect on the condition of the burial remains and
prolonged the efforts to identify the cemetery remains,
the entire cemetery zone was intensively examined to
identify all possible remaining burial features. Approved
implementation procedures provided for careful
archaeological band excavation of each burial feature,
supplemented by in situ documentation, cleaning, and
laboratory analysis.

Other pre-1880 sites that have presented opportunities to investigate and better understand Houston's urban ·
archaeological context include:
•

•

•

Site 41HR409, 200 Main Street, multicomponent prehistoric and historic site with urban
commercial and residential occupation as early
as ca. 1837; probably destroyed since 1984 by
modem commercial development
Site 41HR508, Trimble/Block 278, multicomponent historic site with Civil War-era
munitions deposit and pre-1870/1880s residential deposits; entire block probably will be
destroyed by new hotel construction
Site 41HR623, the Harrisburg Depot Site,
reportedly containing deposits that date from the
pre-Republic-era founding of the city along the
banks of Buffalo and Brays bayous; possibly 75
percent intact beneath an industrial building
complex when recorded about 1989

•

George R. Brown Convention Center Site,
early- to late-nineteenth-century commercial
and residential deposits; destroyed by convention center construction

•

Site 41HR787, Block 12, contains ca. 1860 to
late-twentieth-century residential, ecclesiastical,
and commercial deposits for Anglo- and African
American occupations in the area; probably
destroyed by new Harris County Justice Facility

•

Historic Rental Initiative, Blocks 28, 29, 83, and
86, potential for ca. 1870 to present-day sites
representing urban African American occupation in Freedmen's Town Historic District

Ultimately, the implementation procedures applied
in the field and in the laboratory enabled the bioarchaeology team to gather the required level of demographic
data about the population represented by the individual
burial features removed from the cemetery. Detailed
documentation of the bioarchaeological analyses and
assessments conducted for the Third New City Cemetery
remains are presented in detail in Chapter VI and appendices E through G of this report. Overall, the bioarcbaeology analyses indicate that the population examined
from TNCC included physically robust, hard-working
African Americans who may have suffered from the
effects of repeated epidemics in the late nineteenth to
early twentieth century. However, the TNCC population
probably was not exclusively African American, an
178

assessment supported by city death records that also
document the effects of cholera yellow feve
1 .
and th
"d .
'
r, :ma ana,
o
er
ep1
em1cs
on
Houston's
non-Afric
Am
.
··
an
encan
c~tizens. Instead, the TNCC seemed to have served the
city at large, ra~er than just those of lower economic
status or any particular ethnic affiliation.
.
The TNCC demographic data analysis also
mcluded comparisons to other relevant cemeteries of the
same general era and cultural affiliation Whil th
'l
·
ee
o~ teol og1ca data show a variety of similarities and
difference~ between each of the cemetery populations
tJ;ie .an~l~sis of funerary objects provided some notabl~
Slmllanties. ~f the other cemeteries compared to the
~~C population based on funerary hardware, the most
similar .are .the Freedman's Cemetery in Dallas, Philli s
Memonal m Galveston County, and the Cedar Gro~e
Ce~etery. These cemeteries were selected for comparison m la.rge part because they all share a contemporaneous penod of use and southern African Am .
cultural . affiliation.
A notable similarity b etween ethncan
.
ese
cemetenes ts that
participation
in funerary socie
. ti'es
.
a~pears to. have influenced the level of material wealth
displayed m some burials from each case This b
OS~
ti
·
va on was noted as well in recent well-documented
anal~ses of burials from the Texas State Cemet
.
Austm.
ery m
H

Apart from these synchronic comparisons
ou~ton's Old City Cemetery, which preceded TNCC'~
creat10n and use as the city's public burymg
. ground,
appears ~o present another, perhaps more important
?PPO~ty for ~ocumenting and understanding change~
m bunal practices and cultural conditions
.thin
Housto~' s lo~al historical context. Investigat: in
co~ection with the development of a new fire station
mamtenance facility along the north bank of B ff; 1
Bayou, the Old City Cemetery has probably \e:~
destroyed by the modern city support service improvemen~. Thus, any further comparative analysis of these
two important pieces. of Houston's early history is
dependent on the publication of as yet unreported data
recovered from the Old City Cemetery.

179

Because the archaeological investigations pl
d
and conduc~ed for the APV redevelopment project i=~­
fied no National Register-eligible sites requiring furth
archaeological testing or data recovery th
.
er
lat
.
, ere 1s no reguAPory requrrement for further archaeological research at
. V,. at ~east ~or purposes of the present project. The
mve.stigations did, however, identify several cisterns and
~hes that :may contain deposits extending beneath the
Impact zone of the present project. Consequently
reco~endation is offered that the Housing Authorl a
h ty
remam aware of the historical sensitivity of the
· th
arc aeologic 1 d
a epo~its at probably re:main buried beneath the
~urrent pubhc housing complex. These resources are for
e moment protected from further disturb
b
T
.
ance, ut
futur
e uti ity reparrs and modifications, as well as any
other type .of deep gr~und-disturbing activity, should be
~lanne~ ~th appropnate consideration to these potentially sigruficant resources.
Furthei:more, public awareness of APV's place in
Houston's
f
· history
. can .be facilitated through deve1opment
o an . mterpretive historical exhibit. Witlt sufficient
cura~onal space for records of this and a separate historic
ar.chite~tural study, the exhibit facility could fulfill
stipulations estab~ishe~ under the Programmatic Agreement. The.APV.histoncal exhibit site could also serve as
a remote mteIVIew facility for a long-term oral history
program.. Sue~ a program might be developed tlrrough
cooperatt?n with the Houston Public Library's Houston
Metropolitan Research Center.
It is hoped. that ~e information generated during all
p~ase~ of the mvestigations will be of use to future
sc1e~tific res~archers. For this purpose, extensive but
pertinent P?rtions of the data assembled and analyzed
have been mcorporated into this report and its appendices. Perhaps of equal value are the archaeological
records assembled throughout the investigations. These
r~cords have been permanently archived at The University ?f Texas's AI:chaeological Research Laboratory in
Austm: For those mterested in conducting more-detailed
analysis of the osteological data assembled from TNCC
a complete set of osteological databases is included on ~
CD-ROM enclosed in the rear cover of this report.

CHAPTER VIII

REFERENCES CITED

Adams, Eric
1993

Binford, L. R.

Religion and Freedom: Artifacts Indicate
that African Culture Persisted Even in
Slavery. Omni Magazine 16(2):8.

1961

Angel, J. L., J. 0. Kelley, M. Parrington, S. Pinter
1987
Life Stresses of the Free Black Conununity as Represented by the First African
Baptist Church, Philadelphia, 1823-1841.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 74:213-229.

Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas
Journal ofScience 2:93-117.
Buikstra, J. E., and D. H. Ubelaker

Ascadi, G. Y., and J. Nemeskeri

1994

History of Human Life Span and Mortality. Akademiai Kiado, Budapest.
Baldwin, J. K.
1970

1973

Marks of American Potters. Originally
published 1904. Reprinted, Cracker Barrel
Press, Southampton, New York.
Barnett, George E.

1977

Land Resources of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas
at Austin.

1982

Geologic Atlas of Texas, Houston Sheet.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.

1971

Clark, J. W.
1984
Archaeological Test Excavations at an
Early Twentieth Century Dump in North
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report No. 26.
Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, Austin.

Chapters on Machinery and Labor. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
·

Bass, W.M.
1987
Human Osteology: A Laboratory and
Field Manual. 3rd ed. Special Publication
No. 2. Missouri Archaeological Society,
Columbia.

Condon, C. G., J. J. Becker, H. J. H. Edgar, J. M.
Davidson, J. R. Hoffinan, P. Kalima, D. Kysar, S.
Moorhead, V. M. Owens, and K. Condon

Beeth, Howard, and Cary D. Wintz (editors)

1998

Black Dixie: Afro-Texan History and Culture in Houston. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.
Bell, H. L., Jr.
1992

1994

Standards for Data Collection from
Human Skeletal Remains. Research Series
No. 44. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Bureau of Economic Geology

A Collector's Guide to Patent and
Proprietary Medicine Bottles of the Nineteenth Century. Thomas Nelson, Inc.,
Nashville.

Barber, E. A.

1926

A New Method of Calculating Dates from
Kaolin Pipe Stem Samples. Southeastern
Archaeological Conference Newsletter
9:19-21.

Freedman's Cemetery: Site 41DL316,
Dallas, Texas, Assessments of Sex, Age at
Death, Stature, and Date of Interment for
Excavated Burials. Texas Department of
Transportation, Austin.

Correll, D.S., and M. C. Johnston

Cuff Jewelry: A Historical Account for
Collectors and Antique Dealers. Millennium Technologies Inc. Blue Springs,
Missouri.

1979

Manual of the Vascular Plants of Texas.
The University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson.

Bernard, H. A., and R. J. LeBlanc
1965

Resume of the Quaternary Geology of the
Northwestern Gulf of Mexico Province. In
The Quaternary of the United States,
edited by H. E. Wright and D. G. Frey.
Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Corruccini, R. S., J. S. Handler, R. J. Mutaw, and F. W.
Lange
1982

181

Osteology of a Slave Burial Population
from Barbados, West Indies. American
Journal ofPhysical Anthropology 59:443459.

CHAPTER VIU:

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
Garrett, J. M., and D. G. Barker
(41GV125), by H. D. Dockall, J. F.
Powell, and D. G. Steele, pp. 87-103.
Reports oflnvestigations No. 5. Center for
Environmental Archeology, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

Davidson, James M.
1998a A Primer of Coffins, Caskets, and Associated Hardware. Document on file at
PBS&J, Austin, Texas.
1998b

Basic Guidelines to be Cognizant of When
Excavating and Recording an Historic
Burial. Document on file at PBS&J,
Austin, Texas.

Dockall, H. D., J. F. Powell, and D. G. Steele
1996
Home Hereafter: An Archaeological and
Bioarchaeological Analysis of an Historic
African-American Cemetery (41GVJ2 5).
Reports oflnvestigations No. 5. Center for
Environmental Archaeology, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

Davis, W. G., and D. J. Schmidly
The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and
1994
Wildlife Department, Austin.
D.B.I. Books, Inc.
1969
1908 Sears, Roebuck Catalogue No. 117.
D.B.I. Books, Inc., Northbrook, Illinois.

Dover Publications, Inc.
1969
Montgomery Ward & Co. Catalogue and
Buyers Guide No. 57, Spring and Summer
1895. Dover Publications Inc., New York.

Deiss, Ronald William
1981
The Development and Application of a
Chronology for American Glass. Midwestern Archaeological Research Center,
Illinois State University, Normal.

1988

Ditch, L. E., and J. C. Rose
1972
A Multivariate Dental Sexing Technique.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 37:61-64.

Bloomingdales Illustrated 1886 Catalogue: Fashions, Dry Goods, and Housewares. Dover Publications, Inc., New
York.

Durfee Embalming Fluid Company
ca. 1901 Durfee Embalming Fluid Company Catalog. Grand Rapids Engraving Company,
Grand Rapids, Michigan.

Dixon, J. R.
1987
Amphibians and Reptiles of Texas. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Edwards, J. D., and T. Wells
1993
Historic Louisiana Nails: Aids to the Dating of Old Buildings. Geoscience Publications, Louisiana State University, Baton
Rouge.

Dockall, H. D., and J.E. Baker
1996
Analysis ofOsteological Remains. In Confederate Veterans at Rest: Archeological
and Bioarcheological Investigations at the
Texas State Cemetery, Travis County,
Texas, by H. D. Dockall, D. K. Boyd, M.
D. Freeman, R. L. Garza, K. E. Stork, K.
W. Kibler, and J. E. Baker, pp. 173-216.
Reports of Investigations No. 107. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.

Harrington, J. C.

A Field Guide to Reptiles and Amphibians
of Texas. Texas Monthly Press, Inc.,
Austin.

1987

A Method for Aging the Female Os Pubis.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 38:31-38.

Giles, E.
1970

Dockall, H. D., D. K. Boyd, M. D. Freeman, R. L.
Garza, K. E. Stork, K. W. Kibler, and J. E. Baker
1996
Confederate
Veterans
at
Rest:
Archaeological and Bioarcheological Investigations at the Texas State Cemetery,
Travis County, Texas. Report of Investigations No. 107. Prewitt & Associates,
Inc., Austin, Texas.

Fazekas, I. Gy., and F. Kosa
1978
Forensic Fetal Osteology.
Kiado, Budapest.

1962

Race Identification from Cranial Measurements. Journal of Forensic Sciences
7:147-157.

Gill, G. W.
1986
Craniofacial Criteria in Forensic Race
Identification. In Forensic Osteology:
Advances in the Identification of Human
Remains, edited by K. J. Reichs. Charles
C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinois.
1964

Encyclopedia of British Pottery and
Porcelain Marks. Bonanza Books, New
York.

Dockall, H. D., and J. F. Powell
1996
The Phillips Memorial Cemetery Population. In Home Hereafter: An Archaeological and Bioarchaeological Analysis of an
Historic African-American
Cemetery

1993

1996

Fontana, B. L., and J.C. Greenleaf
1962
Johnny Ward's Ranch: A Study in Historic
Archaeology. The Kiva 28(1):1-115.

A. New Formula for Dating Kaolin Clay
P1pestems. The Conference on Historic
Site Archaeology Papers 197I 6:220-229.

Henry, S. L., and P. H. Garrow
1982

Part II. The Historic Component. In City of
Phoenix, Archaeology of the Original
Townsite: Blocks 1 and 2, edited by J.
Cable, S. L. Henry, and D. Doyel, pp.
183-382. Publications in Archaeology
No. 1. Soil Systems, Phoenix.

Hillson, S., C. Grigson, and S. Bond, S.
Dental Defects of Congenital Syphilis.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 107(1):25-40.

Houston, City of(Texas)
1890
City Council Minutes.
1910

City Council Minutes.

Hughes, Elizabeth, and Marion Lester
Rabenstein, R. W., and W. M. Lamers
1995

1991

The History of American Funeral Directing'. 3rd ed. Edited by Howard C. Raether,
National Funeral Directors Association.
Burton and Mayer, Inc., Brookfield
Wisconsin.
'

The Parks Canada Glass Glossary for the
Description of Containers, Tableware,
Flat Glass, and Closures. Studies in
Archaeology, Architecture, and History.
Minister of the Environment, Ottawa.
Jordan, T. G.
1985

Hacker-Norton, D., and M. Trinkley
1984

The Big Book of Buttons. New Leaf
Publishers, Sedgwick, Maine.

Jones, 0., and C. Sullivan

Remember Man Thou Art Dust: Coffin
Hardware of the Early Twentieth Century.
Research Series 2. Chicora Foundation,
Inc., Columbia, South Carolina.

1982

183
182

1972

1998

The Geoarchaeological Assessment of the
Allen Parkway Village Deposits. Ms. on
file, PBS&J, Austin.

Checklist of the Vascular Plants of Texas.
MP~1655. Texas A&M University, Texas
Agncultural Experiment Station, College
Station.

Heighton, R. F., and K. A. Deagan

The 1902 Edition of the Sears, Roebuck
Catalogue. Gramercy Books, New York.

Greene, G.S.

The Middleton Place Privy House: An Archaeological View of Nineteenth Century
Plantation Life. Popular Series I. Institute
o.f Archeology and Anthropology, University of South Carolina, Columbia.

Hatch, S. L., K. N. Gandhi, and L. E. Brown

Godden, Geoffrey A.

Akademiai

Fike, R. E.
The Bottle Book. Gibbs M. Smith, Salt
1987
Lake City.

Haskell, H. W.

1990

Giles, E., and 0. Elliot

Dating Stem Fragments of Seventeenth
ai;td Eighteenth Century Clay Tobacco
Pipes. Quarterly Bulletin of the Archaeological Society of Virginia 9:9-13.

Harris County (Texas)
Deed Records
1981

Discriminant Function Sexing of the
Human Skeleton. In Personal Identification in Mass Disasters, edited by T. D.
Stewart, T. D., pp. 99-109. National
Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, D.C.

Gramercy Books
Fawcett, W. B., Jr.
1980
Archeological Investigations at Historic
Sites. In The Antebellum Period in the
Stephen F. Austin Colony: Historical and
Archeological Research in the Palmetto
Bend Reservoir Area, Jackson County,
Texas. Research Report No. 70, Palmetto
Bend Reservoir Series Vol. 5. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.

1954

Gilbert, B. M., and T. W. McKern
1973

References

Tex_as C:raveyards: A Cultural Legacy.
Uruvers1ty of Texas Press, Austin.

.............._

~~~------------------

CHAPTER VIII:

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
Katz, D., and J. M. Suchey
1986
Age Detennination of the Male Os Pubis.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 69:427-436.
Kelley, M. A.
1979a Parturition and Pelvic Changes. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 51:541546.
1979b

Majewski, T., and M. J. O'Brien
1987
The Use and Misuse of NineteenthCentury English and American Ceramics
in Archaeological Analysis. In Advances
in Archaeological Method and Theory,
edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp. 97-209.
Academic Press, San Diego.

Sex Detennination with Fragmented
Skeletal Remains. Journal of Forensic
Sciences 24:154-58.

Kendrick, G.
1966
The Antique Bottle Collector. Western
Printing and Publishing Company, Sparks,
Nevada.

Mann, R. W., and S. P. Murphy
Regional Atlas of Bone Disease: A Guide
1990
to Pathologic and Normal Variation in the
Human Skeleton. Charles C. Thomas,
Springfield, Illinois.

Ketchum, W. C., Jr.
1983
Pottery & Porcelain: The Knopf Collectors' Guides to American Antiques. Alfred
A. Knopf, New York.
1991
Koch, A.
1891

McKern, T. W., and T. D. Stewart (editors)
1957
Skeletal Age Changes in Young American
Males: Analysed From the Standpoint of
Age Identification. Technical Report No.
EP-45. Environmental Protection Research
Division Quartermaster Research and Developme~t Center, U.S. Army, Natick,
Massachusetts.

American Stoneware. Henry Holt and,
Company, New York.
"Birdseye View of Houston, Texas." Map
on file at Houston Public Library.

Kovel, R., and T. Kovel
1953
Dictionary of Marks-Pottery and Porcelain. Crown, New York.
1986

Prairie Margin: Architecture, Artifacts,
and Synthesis of Historic Archaeology,
edited by D. H. Jurney and R. W. Moir,
pp. 73-81. Richland Creek Technical
Series, Vol. V. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and
Man, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.

Lovejoy, C., R. Meindl, T. Pryzbeck, and R. Mensforth
1985
Chronological Metamorphosis of the
Auricular Surface of the Ilium: A New
Method for the Detennination of Age at
Death. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 68:15-28.

McReynolds, Mary Jane
1981
Archeological Investigations at the Laredo
Cemetery Site (41WB22), Webb County,
Texas. Report of Investigations No. ~1.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin,
Texas.

Kovels' New Dictionary of Marks. Crown,
New York.

Krogman, W. M.
1962
The Human Skeleton in Forensic Medicine. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield,
Illinois.

Meindl, R. S., and C. 0. Lovejoy
1985
Ectocranial Suture Closure: A Revised
Method for the Detennination of Skeletal
Age at Death Based on the Lateral-~te­
rior Sutures. American Journal ofPhysical
Anthropology 68:57--66.

Lebo,S.A.
1988
An Archaeological and Bioarchaeological
Perspective: The Tucker (41DT104) and
Sinclair (41DT105 Cemeteries of Delta
County, Texas. Institute of Applied
Sciences, University of North Texas,
Denton. Report submitted to the U.S.
Department of the Army, Fort Worth District, Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth,
Texas, Contract No. DACW63-85-D0066, D.O. No. 11.
Lehner, L.
1988
Lehner 's Encyclopedia of U.S. Marks on
Pottery, Porcelain and Clay. Collector
Books, Paducah, Kentucky.

A Revised Set of CC Index Values for
Classification and Economic Scaling of
English Ceramics from 1787 to 1880.
Historical Archaeology 25(1):1-25.

Moir,R. W.
1987
Socioeconomic and Chronometric Patterning of Window Glass. In Historic Buildings, Material Culture, and People of the

184

.

1998a

Allen Parkway Housing Project Cemetery
Safety Pin Dates. Ms. on file: PBS&J,
Austin, Texas.

1998b

Of Viewing Windows, Safety Pins, and
Other Delightful Things. Document on
file, PBS&J, Austin, Texas.

Moore,R.
1996
Letter from Roger Moore, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas, to
Eugene Foster, Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas, dated July 23,
1996.

Owsley, D. W., C. E. Orser Jr., R. W. Mann, P. H.
Moore-Jansen, and R. Montgomery

Munsey,D.
1970
The lllustrated Guide to Collecting Bottles. Hawthorn Books, New York.

Pool, J.C.
1987 Fanthorp Inn: A Study of Nineteenth and
Twentieth Century Buttons. In Archeological Excavations at Fanthorp Inn State
Historic Site (41GM79), Grimes County,
Texas: Spring and Fall 1982, by J. D. Ing
and J. Hart, pp. 277-293. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department, Historic Sites and
Restoration Branch, Austin.

Noel Hume, I.
1969

A Guide to Artifacts of Colonial America.
Alfred A. Knopf, New York.

Oaks, F.L.
2000
Letter dated October 19, 2000, from F.L.
Oaks, Executive Director, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin, to E.R. Foster,
PBS&J, Austin.
Olivier, G.
1969
Practical Anthropology. Charles
Thomas, Springfield, Illinois.
1988

C.

The Material Basis of the Postbellum
Tenant Plantation: Historical Archaeology
in the South Carolina Piedmont. University of Georgia Press, Athens.
Exploring Rustic Life: Multidisciplinary
Research at Millwood Plantation, a Large
Plantation in Abbeville County, South
Carolina and Ebert County, Georgia.
Russell Papers 1987. Mid-American Research Center, Loyola University of
Chicago. Submitted to the United States
National Park Service Interagency Archaeological Services Division, Atlanta.

An Overview of Nineteenth and Twentieth
Century Buttons. Research Notes, Historic
Sites and Materials No. 1. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department, Austin.

1981

Early to Mid-Nineteenth Century Refined
Earthenwares. In A Guide for Historical
Archaeology in Illinois, edited by C. E.
Orser, Jr., pp. 24-48. Research Paper No.
1. Mid-American Research Center, Illinois
State University, Normal.
Puckett, N. N.

Identification of Pathological Conditions
in Human Skeletal Remains. Smithsonian
Contributions to Anthropology No. 28.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington
D.C.

Folk Beliefs of the Southern Negro.
University of North Carolina Press, Chapel
Hill.

Pyne Press, The
1971

E.V. Roddin & Co. 1895 lllustrated Catalogue and Historical Introduction. Historical Catalogue Collection, Princeton, New
Jersey.

Rankin-Hill, L. M.
1997

Ortner, D. J., and W. G. J. Putschar
1985

Demography and Pathology of an Urban
Slave Population from New Orleans.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 74:185-197.

1991

1926

Orser, C., Jr., A. M. Nekola, and J. L. Roark
1987

1987

Price, C.R.

Orser, C., Jr.

Miller, G. L.
1980
Classification and Economic Scaling of
19th Century Ceramics. Historical Archaeology 14:1-40.
1991

Owens, Victoria M.

References

A Biohistory of 19th-Century Afro-Americans. Bergin and Garvey, Westport, Connecticut.

Rathbun, T. A.
1987

185

Health and Disease at a South Carolina
Plantation: 1840-1870. American Journal
ofPhysical Anthropology 74:239-253.

CHAPTER VIlI: References

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas
. Rhine, S.
1990

Non-Metric Skull Racing. In Skeletal
Attribution of Race, edited by G. W. Gill
and S. Rhine, pp. 9-20. Anthropological
Papers No. 4. Maxwell Museum of
Anthropology, Albuquerque.

Robacker, E. F., and A. F. Robacker
Spatterware and Sponge. A.S. Barnes and
1978
Company, Cranbury, New Jersey.
Roenke, K. G.
1978
Flat Glass: Its Use as a Dating Tool for
Nineteenth Century Archaeological Sites
in the Pacific Northwest and Elsewhere.
Northwest Anthropological Research
Notes 12(2:2):1-128.
Rose, J.C. (editor)
1985
Gone to a Better Land: A Biohistory of a
Rural Black Cemetery in the Post-Reconstruction South. Research Series No. 25.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Rose, J. C., and L. G. Santeford
1985
Cedar Grove Burial Interpretation. In
Gone to a Better Land: A Biohistory of a
Rural Black Cemetery in the Post-Reconstruction South, edited by J. C. Rose, pp.
130-145. Research Series No. 25. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Rosenberg, R. G., and D. P. Kvietok
1981
A Guide to Historic Artifacts. Ms. on file,
PBS&J, Austin, Texas.
Rutenberg, Gary W.
1996
Skeletal Remains Recovered from Harris
County, Texas (November 1996). Report
on file, PBS&J, Austin, Texas.
1997a

1997b

Skeletal Remains Recovered from Allen
Parkway Village (APV) Archeological
Monitoring. Report on file, PBS&J,
Austin, Texas.

Palmetto Parapets: Exploratory Archaeology at Fort Moultrie, South Carolina
38CH50. Occasional Papers No. 1. Insti~
tut~ of. Archaeology and Anthropology,
Uruvers1ty of South Carolina, Columbia.

1974
Santeford, L. G .
1981
Medicine Bottles: One Man's (or
Woman's) Cure Becomes the Archeologist's Tool. In. A Guide for Historical
Archaeology in lllinois, edited by C. E.
Orser, Jr., pp. 60-77. Research Paper, No.
1. Mid-American Research Center, Illinois
State University, Normal.
Sargent and Company (New Haven, Connecticut)
Casket Hardware. Chicora Foundation,
1920
Columbia, South Carolina.
Scott, E.
1979

Dental Wear Scoring Technique. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
51:213-218.

Sellards, E. H., G. L. Lewis, and G. E. Meade
1932
The Geology of Texas. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Shepherd, S. J.
1981
Nails, Buttons, Tobacco Pipes, and Dolls:
Remnants of Historic Occupation. In A
Guide for Historical Archaeology in
Illinois, edited by C. E. Orser, Jr., pp. 7899. Research Paper No. 1. Mid-American
Research Center, Illinois State University,
Normal.
Shideler, G. L.
1986
Stratigraphic Studies of a Late Quaternary
Coastal Complex, South Texas: Introduction and Geologic Framework. United
States Geological Survey Professional
Paper 1328A.
Skinner, M., and A. H. Goodman
1992
Anthropological Uses of Developmental
Defects of Enamel. In Skeletal Biology of
Past Peoples: Research Methods, edited
by S. R. Saunders and M. A. Katzenberg,
pp. 153-174. Wiley-Li.ss, New York.
Smith, B.
1984

Samford, Patricia
1997
Response to a Market: Dating English
Underglaze Transfer-Printed Wares. Historical Archaeology 31 (2):1-30.

South, S.
1964

Patterns of Molar Wear in Hunter-Gatherers and Agriculturalists. American Journal
ofPhysical Anthropology 63(1 ):39-56.
Some Notes on Bricks.
Anthropologist 17(2):67-74.

Florida

The Anatomy and Biology of the Human
Skeleton. Texas A&M University Press
College Station.
'

Steinbock, R. T.
1976
Paleopathological
Diagnosis
and
Interpretation: Bone Diseases in Ancient
Hu"!an Populations. Charles C. Thomas
Spnngfield, Illionois.
'

l 996b

1997a

Stewart, T. D.
1979
E~sentials ofForensic Anthropology Especially as Developed in the United States.
Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinois.
Evaluation of the Todd and McKemSte~art Methods for Aging the Male Os
Pubis,. In Forensic Osteology, edited by K.
J. ~e1chs, pp. 33-67. Charles C. Thomas
Spnngfield, Illinois.
'

Swanson, E. R.
1995

Htstoncal Commission, Austin, from S.D.
Hoyt, Espey, Huston & Associates Inc
Austin. Concurrence dated Octob~r 1
1997.
'

s'

1997b

Stamp of concurrence on letter dated

D~ce~ber 3, 1997, to Mark Denton, Texas

Htstoncal Commission, Austin, from S.D.
Hoyt, Espey, Huston & Associates Inc
Austin. Concurrence dated December
1997.
'

9'

Texas Ornithological Society
1995

Checklist of the Birds of Texas. 3rd ed
·
Capital Printing, Inc., Austin.

2002a

"HOUSTON, TX." The Handbook of
Texas Online. <http://www.tsha.utexas.
edu/handbook/online/articles/view/HH/hd
h3.html> [Accessed Wed Mar 6 15:00:06
US/Central 2002 ].

2002b

"FOURTH WARD, HOUSTON." The
of
Texas
Onl.
Handbook

::=http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/:~

Geo-Texas. Texas A&M University Press
College Station.
'

me/articles/view/FF/hpfl .html> [Accessed
Wed Mar 6 15:01:35 US/Central 2002 ].

Taylor, A. J., A. A. Fox, and I. W. Cox
1986

Stamp of concurrence on letter dated Sep-

Texas State Historical Association

Suchey, J.M., D. V. Wiseley, and D. Katz
1986

Stamp of concurrence on letter dated
A?gus.t 21, 1996, to Mark Denton, Texas
Htstoncal Commission, Austin, from E
Foster, Espey, Huston & Associates Inc .
Austin. Concurrence dated March 22'
1996.
'
te~be~ 23, 1997, to Mark Denton, Texas

Brickmaking in Texas: A History of the
Industry. an~ Its Product. Ms. on file,
Texas Histoncal Commission, Austin.

Archaeological Investigations at Morgan
Chapel C~metery (41BP200), a Historic
Cemetery_ m Bastrop County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report No. 146.
Cei;iter ~or Archaeological Research, The
Uruvers1ty of Texas at San Antonio.

Thomas, G. W.
1975

Tennant, A.
1984
The Snakes of Texas. Texas Monthly
Press, Austin.
1998
A Field Guide to Texas Snakes. 2nd ed
Gulf Coast Publishing, Houston.
·

Texas Plants: An Ecological Summary. In
Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological
Summary, ~y F. W. Gould. MP-585/Rev.
Texas Agncultural Experiment Station,
College Station.

Thomas, R., B. Zooker, C. Hazel, and D. Weinberg
1998
Archaeological Investigations at the
Mother
UAME
Church
Cemetery
Wilmington, Delaware. Draft report pre~
pared for Mother DAME Church and

187
186

&

Steinbomer, R. A.
1982

Letter of concurrence dated July 15 1996
fr?m J,.E. Bruseth and T.K. Perttula' Texa~
~1stoncal Commission, Austin, ' to J.
Fitzgerald, Houston Housing Authority
with ~opy to S. Hoyt, Espey, Huston
Associates, Inc., Austin.

1996a

Method and Theory in Historical Archaeology. Academic Press, New York.

Steele, D. G.
1976
The Estimation of Sex on the Basis of the
Talu~ and Calcaneus. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 45:581-58 8.
Steele, D. G., and C. A. Bramblett
1988

Scott, S. L. (editor)
Field Guide to the Birds of North America.
1987
2nd ed. National Geographic Society,
Washington, D.C.

Skeletal Remains Recovered from Allen
Parkway Village (APV) Archeological
Monitoring (November 5, 1997). Report
on file, PBS&J, Austin, Texas.

1977

Texas Historical Ct;immission (THC)

CHAPTER VIII:

Allen Parkway Village, Houston, Texas

Wright, R. H., and W. B. Hughes
copy 432, Roll 911 (1965). National
Archives, National Archives and Records
Service, General Services Administration,
Washington, D.C.

MBNA Bank, N.A., Wilmington, Delaware, by MAAR Associates, Newark,
Delaware.
Thomton,R.
American Indian Holocaust and Survival:
1987
A Population History Since 1492. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

1880

Thornton, R., T. Miller, and J. Warren
1991
American Indian Population Recovery
Following Smallpox Epidemics. American
Anthropologist 93(March):28-45.

Trinkley, M., and D. Hacker-Norton
Analysis of Coffin Hardware from
1984
38CH788, Charleston County, South
Carolina. Research Series 3. Chicora
Foundation Inc.,
Columbia,
South
Carolina.

Population Schedule of the Tenth Census
of the United States, 1880, Texas. Microcopy 773 (1962). National Archives,
National Archives and Records Service,
General Services Administration, Washington, D.C.

Urwitz, M., M.D.
1891
Report in Detail: A Very Interesting
Report, Showing the Number of Cases
Treated, Their Character, Number of
Deaths, Percentage of Convalescents, etc.,
etc. Houston Daily Post. Sunday Morning,
March 29, 1891. Houston, Texas.

Trotter, Mildred
1970
Estimation of Stature from Intact Long
Limb Bones. In Identification in Mass
Disasters, edited by T. D. Stewart, pp. 7183. National Museum of Natural History,
WashingtonD.C.

Wagner, J. K. & Company, Inc.
1994
Previous Land Use: Allen Parkway
Village. Report submitted to the Housing
Authority of the City of Houston by J. K.
Wagner and Company, Inc., Houston.

Turner, C. G.,.11, C. R. Nichol, and G. R. Scott
1991
Scoring Procedures for Key Morphological Traits of the Permanent Dentition: The
Arizona State University Dental Anthropology System In Advances in Dental
Anthropology, edited by M. A. Kelley and
C. S. Larsen pp. 13-31. Wiley-Liss, New
York.

Waldron, T.
1994
Counting the Dead: The Epidemiology of
Skeletal Populations. John Wiley & Sons,
New York.
Weiss, K. M.
1973
Demographic Models for Anthropology.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology No. 27.

United States Census
1850
Schedules of Manufacturer, Schedule No.
5. Products of Industry in the City of
Houston, County of Harris, State of Texas,
During the Year Ending June 1, 1850.
Texas State Library Archives, Austin.

1870

Yeoman, R. S.

Lay D_own Body: Living History in African
American Cemeteries. Visible Ink p
ress,
D etr01't, M'ichigan.

United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (USDA-SCS)
Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. U.S.
1976
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with the
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station and
the Harris County Flood Control District.

Toulouse, J. H.
1971
Bottle Makers and Their Marks. Thomas
Nelson, Inc., New York.

1860

1995

Wells, T.
1998

Population Schedule of the Eighth Census
of the United States, 1860, Texas. Microcopy 653, Roll 1296 (1967). National
Archives, National Archives and Records
Service, General Services Administration,
Washington, D.C.

Nail Chronology: The Use of Technologically Derived Features. Historical Archaeology 32(2):78-99.

Williams, P.
Flow Blue China: An Aid to Identification.
1971
Fountain House East, Jeffersontown,
Kentucky.
Wilson, R. L.
1981
Bottles on the Western Frontier. University of Arizona Press, Tuscon.

Population Schedule of the Ninth Census
of the United States, 1870, Texas. Micro-

189
188

References

1994

A Guide Book of United States Coins.
We~tem . Publishing Company, 1
Racme, Wisconsin.
nc.,

Appendix A
1939 Streetscape Photo Project
(Allen Parkway Village)
by
J.K. Wagner & Company, Inc.

1939 STREETSCAPE PHOTO PROJECT
(ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE)

Commissioned by

ESPEY, HUSTON AND ASSOCIATES, INC.

FOR

THE HOUSING AUTHORITY
OF THE CITY OF HOUSTON

April, 1996

Prepared By

J. K. WAGNER & COMPANY, INC.
HISTORICAL RESEARCHERS

12200 NORTHWEST FREEWAY, SUITE 556
HOUSTON, TEXAS, 77092-4926

A-i

TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
i

BURTON STREET

55

iv

EAST VALENTINE STREET

57

BUFFALODRIVE(ALLENPARKWAY)

1

WEST VALENTINE STREET

60

NORTH ERICKSON STREET

7

EAST NASH STREET

61

SOUTH ERICKSON STREET

8

WEST NASH STREET

64

ERICKSON STREET ALLEY

13

EAST LAMB STREET

68

NORTH ROSETTE STREET

15

WEST LAMB STREET

73

SOUTH ROSETTE STREET

18

ADDIDONAL VIEWS

75

NORTH CHAMBERS STREET

21

SOUTH CHAMBERS STREET

27

NORTH HARDCASTLE STREET

29

SOUTH HARDCASTLE STREET

32

NORTH HOPSON STREET

34

SOUTH HOPSON STREET

35

NORTH HOWARD STREET

36

HEINER STREET

42

EAST CROSBY STREET

45

WEST CROSBY STREET

49

WEST ARTHUR STREET

52

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION

JKW&CO: 9618

A-ii

INDEX A: BY STREET NAME

Arthur Street
Buffalo Drive (Allen Parkway)
Burton Street
Chambers Street
Crosby Street
Erickson Street
Hardcastle Street
Heiner Street
Hopson Street
Howard Street
Lamb Street
Nash Street
Rosette Street
Valentine Street

JKW&CO: 9618

A-iii

52-54
1-6
55-56
21-28
45-51
7-14
29-33
42-44
34-35
36-41
68-74
61-67
15-20
57-60

INDEX B: BY BLOCK NUMBER
Burton Addition:

INTRODUCTION
51
36, 53, 54

Block A
BlockB
Hardcastle Addition:
Block 5
Block 6
Block 7
Block 10
Block 11
Block 12
Block 13
Block 16
Block 17
Block 27
Block28
Block 44
Block 45
Block 46

58,59
27, 37, 38, 39, 63
28, 40, 41, 67, 72
8, 55, 56, 57
9,10,11,13,14,21,22,60,61,62
12,23,24,25,65,66,70,71
26,74
3, 7, 64, 68, 69
4,73
2,15,16,17,18,19,20,30,31,49
33, 50, 52
35,44,48
32, 34, 43, 46, 47
1, 29, 42, 45

Each page represents a standing viewpoint of an unknown photographer. The pages
follow in an order beginning in the northeastern portion of the project and continue
west along each street. The addresses on the north side of each street are grouped
together, and addresses on the south side follow in a second group. The streets that
run from east to west include, consecutively, Buffalo Drive (now Allen Parkway),
Erickson Street and Alley, Rosette Street, Chambers Street, Hardcastle Street,
Hopson Street, and Howard Street.
Similarly, the streets that run from north to south begin in the northeastern portion of
the project. East side addresses are grouped first, and west side addresses follow in a
second group. The streets include, consecutively, Heiner Street, Crosby Street,
Arthur Street, Burton Street, Valentine Street, Nash Street, and Lamb Street.
Additionally, photographs taken from the rooftop of the old city incinerator, located
on the west side of the project area, are included after the Lamb Street photographs.
Each label, read from the top, indicates an arbitrary sheet number, a parcel number and
the owner's name, a street address or location description, block and lot numbers, and
a page number. The addresses and parcel numbers originate from a property line map
made by the office of J. S. Boyles, C.E., Houston (HACH: "Property Line Map, Low
Rent Housing Project, 11-27-39). The labels additionally note whether each site is
within the Hardcastle Addition or the Burton Addition.
Photographs of some portions in both Hardcastle and Burton Additions unfortunately
were not available. These include Blocks C, D, and the western half of Block A of the
Burton Addition, and Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 14, 15, and the southern halves ofBlocks
5 and 10 of the Hardcastle Addition.
A map of the 1875 Hardcastle and Burton Additions, designating blocks and lots, has
been reproduced for use with the photographs. The photographs are the sole property
of the Housing Authority of the City of Houston (HACH).

JKW&CO: 9618

JKW&CO: 9618

A-iv

A-v

W

BLOCK TWO

,:.

I

5

4

3
10 I 9

:1

e

I
I"• UX1

BUFFALO DR
IO
9: a 7

d!

II

:

2

ii'

ST.

11

I

7

""'

If)

~

II

10

I

iO I

8

a

I 1

I

11

I

I

I

10

I

t

l

11 e I

1

g
4

II 3

IQ

9

: 8

I

2

I

I

12

II

121

I

ts

12

I II

's-

IS

::::.

4

10

.St

,

7

~a
t
r-----l----l'I-'
~ z
~ ••
f5

6

I -s I 2 j

r

3 I 2

5

2

i-.
__
-- ___.=.l:

V>

~
(/)

~
..J

:t

II

12

~..J

~

•

i-

2

:
a

12

za

JI" ' '

5

~i!=

5

4

10

9

: 3
.- -

2

7

I

-."

II

12

i

I. --

jl

: •

5

5

5

4

2
7

8

9

BUFFALO DRIVE - 1
(ALLEN PARKWAY)
PARCEL#46-ANDERSON
MAGNOLIA STATION
BLOCK 46, LOTS 6, 7
)>

I
_..

Page 1

' i1

!I:!

~ l'l'n-i-:..-r~.-::.....,....~
.
I - I
1,

H
I

5

\
~.

l~ISl~l-

II

3

gj,.

i - - - - - 1 ct.

g

~I

18

•

4

4

17

16

7

12

111 I
6

"''t.r,:, "

ST.
11,

9

I

11!1 •o I 11I1 I 1 I I ~

~1~

5

9

2

12

~

2

I

3

•

It

I Cl>

a.
3

•

I~

i-=

§111

9

g

J

5

I

CH~S

\

7 I ts

II

BLOCK ONE

8

13 3

I

l.

l

I

!,II D

1J(
SC.ALE

I

1/2

+

I 1

:.I

I

5YMBOLS

J:

17

II

10

- - · · · - - · IQ.LINGSWORTH SURVEY LDT LINES
- - - - - HAROCASTI..E AOOITION BLOCK a LOT LINES
- - - - - - "11£ REsERVATION" BOUNDARY

j'

IO

I

I

I

I

I

~I
~,,__..__-'-.,--J'--..L.---l

~ 5•

i: : : I
I

I

5

I . I - I - I .

l

BUFFALO DRIVE - 2
(ALLEN PARKWAY)
PARCEL #40 - GUARINO
805, 807 BUFFALO DRIVE
BLOCK 27, LOTS 15, 16
)>
I
f\J

Page 2

BUFFALO DRIVE - 3
(ALLEN PARKWAY)
PARCEL #3 - DUPREE
1215 BUFFALO DRIVE
BLOCK 16, LOT 9
)>

I

Page 3

(0

r=~---c_-~--

_-

BUFFALO DRIVE - 4
(ALLEN PARKWAY)
PARCEL# 1 - WHISENANT
FILLING STATION
BUFFALO DRIVE
BLOCK 17, LOT 5
Page 4

)>
I
..j)..

/

BUFFALO DRIVE - 5
(ALLEN PARKWAY)
PARCELS #140, 143 - CITY OF HOUSTON
LOOKING NORTH FROM ROOFTOP OF OLD
INCINERATOR

Page 5
)>

I
01

BUFFALO DRIVE - 6
(ALLEN PARKWAY)
PARCELS #141, 142 - CITY OF HOUSTON
LOOKING NORTH FROM ROOFTOP OF OLD
INCINERATOR
CAFE ON GILLETTE STREET
Page 6

)>
I

(J)

NORTH ERICKSON STREET - 1

PARCEL #8 - CITY OF HOUSTON
1216 ERICKSON STREET
BLOCK 16, LOT 4

)>

I

"-...]

PARCEL #7- TRONCALE
1218, 1218 i/2 ERICKSON STREET
BLOCK 16, LOT 5

Page 7

SOUTH ERICKSON STREET-1

PARCEL #31 - SASSER
TWO REAR VIEWS OF 400 BURTON STREET
BLOCK 10, LOT 1
)>
I

Page 8

CX>

SOUTH ERICKSON STREET - 2

PARCEL #27 - JUNGMAN
VACANT LOT
BLOCK 11, LOT 6
)>
I

co

-

Page 9

SOUTH ERICKSON STREET- 3

PARCEL #26 - WHISENANT

1107, 1109, 1111 ERICKSON STREET
BLOCK 11, LOTS 7, 8, 9
Page 10
)>
I
--'-

0

SOUTH ERICKSON STREET - 4

PARCEL #25 - PICKETT
SHACK
BLOCK 11, LOT 10

)>
I

-1.

--'-

Page 11

SOUTH ERICKSON STREET - 5

PARCEL#18-DeGEORGE

1207, 1211, 1215 ERICKSON STREET
BLOCK 12, LOTS 7, 8, 9
)>
_.I

Page 12

f\)

ERICKSON STREET ALLEY - 1

PARCEL #26 - WHISENANT

1101, 1103, 1105,
1107, 1109 ERICKSON STREET ALLEY
)>
I
-..!.

w

BLOCK 11, LOTS 7, 8, 9
Page 13

ERICKSON STREET ALLEY - 2

PARCEL #26 - WHISENANT

1108 ERICKSON STREET ALLEY
BLOCK 11, LOT 11, i 2
Page 14

)>
I
__,_
..J:=>.

NORTH ROSETTE STREET - 1

PARCEL #43 - KELLER

800, 802 ROSETTE
BLOCK 27, LOTS 3, 4
)>
I
__....
01

Page 15

NORTH ROSETTE STREET - 2

PARCEL #42 - GUARINO
811 ROSETTE STREET
BLOCK 27, LOT 18
PARCEL #41 - CONWELL
8111/2, 813 ROSETTE STREET
BLOCK 27, LOT 17

:r

Page 16

__._
m

# / -?111i.

NORTH ROSETTE STREET - 3

PARCEL #40 - GUARINO
815, 817 ROSETTE STREET
BLOCK 27, LOT 15, 16

)>

I

-L

~

Page 17

...
·\
rf' 1'·~
·"".··

.

·~··

·

...

·

i:·' L !}

•.. :. <· ~:ii/.U<~ !
.. <

. · ·..• '.

..

:(.t.'.·.;.~:·.·1 .1·,.·~1<·.':. ~.
>'i-

',_-,, __

,\.

'\'.''

l

•.f.

.· ...'"' . .
.. . ....
J;&:::
lf:I

1;~

.

<

k•V

"

' •

~-,_

•

NORTH ROSETTE STREET - 4

PARCEL #39 - DUPREE
819, 821, 823 ROSETTE STREET
BLOCK 27, LOTS 7, 8
)>

Page 18

I
_..
OJ

SOUTH ROSETTE STREET - 1

PARCEL #53 - GUARINO
810, 812 ROSETTE STREET
BLOCK 27, LOT 14
)>
I
-l.

cD

Page 19

SOUTH ROSETTE STREET - 2
PARCEL #52 - SHILLER
818 ROSETTE STREET - BLOCK 27, LOT 14
PARCEL #51 - GUARINO
820 ROSETTE STREET- BLOCK 27, LOTS 9, 10

)>

I

PARCEL #50 - NORWOOD
822 ROSETTE STREET - BLOC_K 27, LOTS 9, 10
Page 20

f\)

0

NORTH CHAMBERS STREET - 1

PARCEL #30 - DUPREE
1104 CHAMBERS STREET
BLOCK 11, LOT 1
)>

I

f\)
-I.

Page 21

NORTH CHAMBERS STREET - 2

PARCEL #28 - CORBETT
1114 CHAMBERS STREET - BLOCK 11, LOT 3
PARCEL #26 - WHISENANT
1116, 1118 CHAMBERS STREET
BLOCK 11, LOT 4
Page 22

)>

I

N
N

NORTH CHAMBERS STREET - 3
PARCEL#21-TRONCALE
1204, 1206 CHAMBERS STREET - BLOCK 12, LOT 1
PARCEL #24 - JONES
1208 CHAMBERS STREET - BLOCK 12, LOT 2

)>

I
N
(.0

PARCEL#21-TRONCALE
·1210, 1212 CHAMBERS STREET - BLOCK 12, LOT 3
Page 23

NORTH CHAMBERS STREET - 4
PARCEL#23-SETTEGAST
1214, 1216 CHAMBERS STREET
BLOCK 12, LOT 4
Page 24

)>
I

['.)

-f:>..

NORTHCHAMBERSSTREET-5
PARCEL#22-SETTEGAST
1218, 1220 CHAMBERS STREET
BLOCK 12, LOT 5

)>
I

I\.)

01

Page 25

NORTH CHAMBERS STREET - 6

PARCEL#16 - SHIRO
1304, i310, 1314 CHAMBERS STREET
BLOCK 13, LOT i

Page 26
)>
I

f\)
0)

SOUTH CHAMBERS STREET - 1

PARCEL #67 - TOLAND
1113 CHAMBERS STREET - BLOCK 6, LOT 8

)>
I
f\.)

--i

PARCEL#66-SASSER
803 NASH STREET - BLOCK 6, LOTS 9, 10
(CORNER OF NASH AND CHAMBERS STREETS)

Page 27

SOUTH CHAMBERS STREET - 2

PARCEL#59-SASSER

1207 CHAMBERS STREET
BLOCK 7, LOT 7

Page 28
)>
I

f\)

co

NORTH HARDCASTLE STREET - 1

PARCEL #48 DANI GAN

720 HARDCASTLE STREET
BLOCK 46, LOT 5

)>
I
f\)

<.O

Page 29

NORTH HARDCASTLE STREET - 2

PARCEL #53 - GUARINO
802, 806, 808 HARDCASTLE STREET
BLOCK 27, LOT 1
)>

Page 30

I

(A)

0

NORTH HARDCASTLE STREET - 3

PARCEL #52 - SHILLER
702 HARDCASTLE STREET - BLOCK 27, LOT 14
PARCEL #51 - GUARINO
REAR OF 820 ROSETTE STREET
BLOCK 27, LOT 10
)>
I

(A)
-->.

Page 31

SOUTH HARDCASTLE STREET - 1

PARCEL #87 - MORTELLARO
715, 717 HARDCASTLE STREET- BLOCK 45, LOT 8
PARCEL #86 - SACCO

719 HARDCASTLE STREET - BLOCK 45, LOT 9
Page 32

)>

I

w

f\)

s' ·?If

SOUTH HARDCASTLE STREET - 2

PARCEL #80 - RANKIN

815 HARDCASTLE STREET
BLOCK 28, LOT 2
)>

I

w
w

Page 33

NORTH HOPSON STREET - 1

PARCEL #91 - TRAPOLINO
710, 712 HOPSON STREET
BLOCK 45, LOT 3

Page 34
)>
I

w

+:>-.

SOUTH HOPSON STREET - 1

PARCEL #129 - C. A. PHILIPS
711 HOPSON STREET
BLOCK 44, LOT 9

)>

I

w
()1

Page 35

NORTH HOWARD STREET - 1

PARCEL #78 - DUPREE
908 HOWARD STREET
BLOCK B - BURTON ADDITION, LOT 1
Page 36
)>

I

G0
CJ)

NORTH HOWARD STREET - 2

PARCEL #68 - WOLTMAN
1102 HOWARD STREET - BLOCK 6, LOT 1
1104 HOWARD STREET - BLOCK 6, LOT 2
PARCEL #73 - SASSER
1110 HOWARD STREET - BLOCK 6, LOT 3
)>
I
G0
'4

Page 37

NORTH HOWARD STREET- 3

PARCEL #72 - SERCOMB
11i4 HOWARD STREET - BLOCK 6, LOT 4
PARCEL#71-JACKSON
i 118 HOWARD STREET - BLOCK 6, LOT 5
)>

Page 38

I

(>.)

co

NORTH HOWARD STREET - 4

PARCEL #72 - SERCOMB
ADDITIONAL VIEW OF 1114 HOWARD STREET
BLOCK 6, LOT 4
)>

I

(>.)
(l'.)

Page 39

NORTH HOWARD STREET - 5

PARCEL #65 - WOLTMAN
1202, 1204 HOWARD STREET
BLOCK 7, LOT 1
)>
I

Page 40

-1:>-

o

~
.

NORTH HOWARD STREET - 6

PARCEL #64 - DANNA
1206, 1208, 1210, 1212 HOWARD STREET
BLOCK 7, LOTS 2, 3

)>
I

PARCEL #63 - FENNER
1214 HOWARD STREET- BLOCK 7, LOT 4

-I:>_..

Page 41

~.

HEINER STREET - 1

PARCEL#47-BUTERA
710 HEINER STREET- BLOCK 46, LOT 12
REAR TWO-STORY GARAGE

716 HEINER STREET - BLOCK 46, LOTS 1, 2
)>

CORNER GROCERY STORE
Page 42

I
.f::>..

)\)

ij"

i

HEINER STREET - 2

PARCEL #87 - MORTELLARO
800, 804, 806, 808, 810, 812 HEINER STREET
BLOCK 45, LOTS 6, 7, 11
PARCEL#93-SANFORD
820 HEINER STREET - BLOCK 45, LOTS 1, 2
)>

I
.f::>..

(0

Page 43

HEINER STREET - 3

PARCEL#131 - FONSWORTH
902 HEINER STREET - BLOCK 44, LOT 6
FONSWORTH BROTHERS AUTOMOTIVE
PARCEL #133 - MASH
910 HEINER STREET - BLOCK 44, LOT 11
Page 44
)>
I

.j:::..
.j:::..

EAST CROSBY STREET - 1

PARCEL #44 - DANIGAN
701, 705 CROSBY STREET - BLOCK 46, LOT 10
PARCEL #47 - BUTERA
707, 709 CROSBY STREET- BLOCK 46, LOT 12
)>
I

.j:::..
(Jl

Page 45

EAST CROSBY STREET - 2

PARCEL #85 - A. PHILIPS
803, 805 CROSBY STREET- BLOCK45, LOT 10
PARCEL#86- SACCO
REAR OF 719 HARDCASTLE- BLOCK 45, LOT 9
Page 46

)>
I
..j:::..
(J)

EAST CROSBY STREET - 3

PARCEL #88 - C. A. PHILIPS

807, 807 1/2 CROSBY STREET
BLOCK 45, LOT 12
)>
I

..j:::..
-.,J

Page 47

L

EAST CROSBY STREET - 4

PARCEL #129 - C. A PHILIPS

901, 905 CROSBY STREET
BLOCK 44, LOT 10
Page 48

)>
I

.f;>.

o::>

WEST CROSBY STREET - 1

PARCEL #53 - GUARINO

706 CROSBY STREET
BLOCK 27, LOT 2
)>
I

.f;>.

co

Page 49

WEST CROSBY STREET - 2

PARCEL #80 - RANKIN
800, 802, 804 CROSBY STREET
BLOCK 28, LOT 1

Page 50

)>
I

Ol

0

WEST CROSBY STREET - 3

PARCEL #83 - SCHWEND
806, 808 CROSBY STREET
BLOCK A - BURTON ADDITION, LOT 7
)>
I
01
-l.

Page 51

WEST ARTHUR STREET - 1

PARCEL #75 - FILLIPONE
848, 850 ARTHUR STREET
BLOCK 28, LOTS 6, 7
Page 52

)>
I

(Jl
f\)

WEST ARTHUR STREET - 2

PARCEL #76 - FILLIPONE
840, 842, 844, 846 ARTHUR STREET
BLOCK B - BURTON ADDITION, LOTS 3, 4, 5
)>

I

(Jl
(;)

Page 53

WEST ARTHUR STREET - 3
PARCEL #76 - FILLIPONE
836, 838 ARTHUR STREET - BLOCK B, LOT 3
PARCEL #77 - GUARINO
834 ARTHUR STREET- BLOCK B, LOT 2
PARCEL #78 - DUPREE
830 ARTHUR STREET- BLOCK B, LOT 1
Page 54

)>

I

()1

..j::>.

BURTON STREET - 1

PARCEL#31-SASSER
400 BURTON STREET - BLOCK 10, LOT 1
PARCEL #32 - PUMILIA
402, 4021/2 BURTON STREET- BLOCK 10, LOT 2
)>
I

()1

U1

Page 55

BURTON STREET - 2

PARCEL #32 - PUMILIA
404 BURTON STREET - BLOCK 10, LOT 3
PARCEL #34- GUARINO
416, 420 BURTON STREET - BLOCK 10, LOT 4
)>

Page 56

I

01
().!

EAST VALENTINE STREET - 1

PARCEL #33 - DUPREE
721, 723 VALENTINE STREET- BLOCK 10, LOT 4
PARCEL #35 - COHN
725 VALENTINE STREET - BLOCK 10, LOT 5
)>

I

01

"-...J

Page 57

EAST VALENTINE STREET- 2

PARCEL#37-CHURCH
CHURCH ON VALENTINE STREET - BLOCK 5, LOT 2
PARCEL #111 - FILLIPONE
SHACK RESIDENCE AND GROCERY STORE
BLOCK 5, LOT 3
)>
I

Page 58

01

CX>

EAST VALENTINE STREET- 3

PARCEL #i 12 - RANKIN
903, 905 VALENTINE STREET
BLOCK 5, LOT 4
)>
I

()l

CD

Page 59

WEST VALENTINE STREET-1

PARCEL#30-DUPREE
716, 718 VALENTINE STREET
BLOCK 11, LOT 1

)>

Page 60

I

0)

0

EAST NASH STREET - 1

PARCEL #26 - WHISENANT
711 NASH STREET
BLOCK 11, LOT 11
)>

I

0)
-'-

Page 61

EAST NASH STREET - 2

PARCEL #26 - WHISENANT
713, 715, 717, 719 NASH STREET
BLOCK 11, LOT 5
)>
I

Page 62

CJ)

I'\)

EAST NASH STREET - 3
PARCEL #66 - SASSER
803 NASH STREET - BLOCK 6, LOTS 9, 10
PARCEL#69-CHAMBERS
VACANT LOT - BLOCK 6, LOTS 9, 10
)>
I

CJ)

VJ

PARCEL #70- DENTON
807, 809 NASH STREET - BLOCK 6, LOT 11
Page 63

WEST NASH STREET - 1

PARCEL #6 - WHISENANT

606, 608 NASH STREET
BLOCK 16, LOT 12

Page 64

)>

I

())
~

lb

WEST NASH STREET - 2

PARCEL #19 - LOMAX
702, 704, 706 NASH STREET - BLOCK 12, LOT 6
PARCEL#21-TRONCALE
708, 710, 712 NASH STREET- BLOCK 12, LOTS 1, 12
)>
I

())

CJ1

Page 65

WEST NASH STREET - 3

PARCEL#21-TRONCALE
708 1/2, 710 1/2, NASH STREET
REAR RESIDENCES
BLOCK 12, LOTS 3, 12
)>
I

Page 66

(J)

(J)

WEST NASH STREET - 4

PARCEL#61-DATTNER
814, 816 NASH STREET- BLOCK 7, LOT 12
PARCEL #65 - WOLTMAN
818 NASH STREET - BLOCK 7, LOT 1
)>

I

(J)

"1

Page 67

EAST LAMB STREET - 1

PARCEL #3 - DUPREE
PARCEL #5 - KING

601 THROUGH 609 LAMB STREET
BLOCK 16, LOTS 10, 11
)>•
I

Page 68

())

OJ

EAST LAMB STREET - 2

PARCEL#7-TRONCALE
611, 613 LAMB STREET
BLOCK 16, LOT 5
)>
I

m

co

Page 69

EAST LAMB STREET - 3

PARCEL#18-DeGEORGE
REAR VIEW
BLOCK 12, LOT 9

Page 70

)>
. I
--..)

0

j,/-/<.e4Y

EAST LAMB STREET - 4

PARCEL #20 - PALAZZO
REAR VIEW
BLOCK 12, LOT 11
)>
I

'-J
........

Page 71

EAST LAMB STREET - 5

PARCEL #61 - DATTNER

815, 817 LAMB STREET
BLOCK 7, LOT 11
Page 72

)>
I

-.,)
('\)

WEST LAMB STREET - 1

PARCEL #2 - KING
612 THROUGH 618 LAMB STREET
BLOCK 17, LOTS 1, 2

Page 73
)>
I

-.,)
(0

- b / 0 - i-1

h /-) /f

WEST LAMB STREET - 2
PARCEL #13 - COLEMAN
708 LAMB STREET - BLOCK 13, LOTS 4, 5
PARCEL #14 - WILSON
710 LAMB STREET - BLOCK 13, LOT 3
PARCEL #15 - WHISENANT
712 LAMB STREET- BLOCK 13, LOT 3

Page 74

)>

~

ADDITIONAL VIEW - 1

LOOKING EAST DOWN HOWARD STREET
TAKEN FROM ROOFTOP OF OLD INCINERATOR

Page 75

)>
I
--...!

(Jl

:

~.

AppendixB
<!)

Phase 1-A
Trench Profile Descriptions

I'())
0)

o::'.

l-0
WlW<(
o::'. 0:::
l-W
(j)

z

u
o::'.z

(j)

N
I

sw

>
.....J

w-

roo
2 ...J

<(0

I u..

C1l

oo
l- loo
II

lL lL

oo
ww
oo
U5 U5

E
0

(j)

<(
0
0

<(

l- 0

.....J-

~2

I

0:::

(")

I

0:::

(9 0

zO:::
_u..

~z

Ow

o~
...J <(

by
Glen S. Greene, Ph.D.

(L (L

oo oo
zz
zCL <( <(
so I I
lot lI
oo lL
w (9

z

(L

.....-m
~~

00

00
_J .....J

ro

o:::i

l-

A-76

APPENDIXB
PHASE 1-A TRENCH PROFILE DESCRIPTIONS
This appendix includes profile drawings, descriptions, and comments about the 8 gradall
27 backhoe trenches examined at Allen Parkway Village. All of the gradall cuts and 13 of the
;are in the west side of Allen Parkway Village, and 14 trenches are located in the east side of the
These locations are not described numerically; rather, each is presented in the order in which it
ined in the field. Profiles at many of the locations were both described in detail and drawn but,
of redundancy and limited field time, some of the profiles are only commented upon.

The most common horizons observed in the gradall cuts and trenches of the Allen
ay Village are Aa-AC-C horizon sequences. In the "Aa" horizon, the upper case "A" is the master

h; that is, a horizontal zone of major organic accumulation. The lower case "a" is used as an
ial designation for an anthropic epipedon; that is, a surface pedon (soil body) that is significantly
by humans or human-related activity. The "a" designation is used because there is no official
subhorizon designation for an anthropic epipedon. This creates a problem for archaeologists
bing soils in archaeological sites.
The AC is a horizon designation that is transitional between the organic A and the C
The C horizon is parent material. Parent material is the mineral material from which the solum,
er horizons, are derived.
In the soils descriptions, the lower case ''t" designates a high clay content. Lower case

designates a high sesquioxide content or gleying factor. There may also be the appearance of iron
ganese concretions in gleyed soils. The manganese concretions and the gleyed color indicate water
ation in the past, which produced the reduction of irons.

There are eight gradall cuts. Gradall cuts D, E, F, and Gare in an Allen Parkway Village
rtyard corridor. The remainder of the cuts are in the building block north of the D, E, F, and G line of
dall cuts. All of the gradall cuts are believed to be within the boundaries of the cemetery that predates
construction of Allen Parkway Village.

B-1

O>

c:

:;::

Gradall Cut D (Figure B-1)

'SCl)

w

Ole:

c:

0 C>
'i: (.) c:
CD-CDC >-

Aa horizon 0-1 cm. Brown (7 .5YR 5/3m) silt loam; moderate fine to medium crumb;
firm, sticky, plastic; continuous, moderately thick to thick cutans on ped faces; strongly acid (pH= 5.1);

I
I
I
l
(

Act horizon 10-40 cm. Dark brown (7.5YR 3/3m) silty clay loam; moderate medium to
coarse angular blocky; firm, sticky to very sticky, plastic; cutans continuous, moderately thick to thick on

<O-

ped faces; strongly acid (pH= 5.1); no carbonates; gradual smooth boundary.
Ctg horizon 40-60 cm (trench floor).

White (7.5YR 8/0m) to reddish yellow

I

co
~

:::i
Ol

~

I
I

u::

w

)

J

I

l I
\
J

{

f

I

I

(
(

)

LO -

In this profile, the first observed in Allen Parkway Village, the soil appears to be similar

)

to the V amont Series but disturbed by urban development.

~

The cultural inventory from Cut D consists of concrete chunks, plastic toy fragments,
broken glass, marbles, fragments of rusty metal, and pieces of rubber. All of the materials date from the

\

(
l

\ ... ', ..,f!

mid to late twentieth century. No earlier remains were recovered.

{

>o

I

cq~ < l

Gradall Cuts E, F, and G

<t

\

)
~

(

(

The soils exposed in these cuts are comparable to Gradall Cut D. Each exposure exhibits
the Aa-AC-C horizon sequence with horizon boundaries at slightly varying depths. The soils may be
placed within the Vamont-like Series.

(\J-

J

)
(

Cultural materials in these three gradall cuts also date from the mid to late twentieth

.....
Q)
Q)

)

E

I
\

I

\

~ (

century.

\

Gradall Cuts A and C

?

t

The exposure in Gradall Cut A is similar to the profile described for Gradall Cut D with .
the exception of a subhorizon designation of Cc.

The lower case "c" refers to clusters of calcium

(./)

.....

carbonate concretions. Gradall Cut C is comparable to Gradall Cut D. Both A and C meet the description

Q)

Qj.

for the Vamont-like Series.

(
(

l

0

I

I

I
I
l

{

E

Gradall Cut B and Cut I Extension (Figure B-2)
Gradall Cut B was extended to the east, and the additional extension was named Gradall
Cut I. This exposure (Gradall Cut B and Cut I Extension ) was longer than the others, being 24 m in

l:\projects\he1\clients\hach\447212\cad\figureb-1.ai

B-2

B-3

•

f-

UJ

(!)

u: :5

0

_J

er: >
oa. ~
_J _J
:::>

_J _J

C§ ~
<(

er:

f-

Cl)

CJw
$

}
I

(
\

strongly acid (pH= 5.1).

447212/020018

T-

• 0.

I

{

(7 .5YR 7/6m) to light red (1 OR 6/8m) common fine to large prominently mottled clay; strong medium to
coarse angular blocky; extremely firm, very sticky, very plastic; continuous thick cutans on ped faces;

0

c:'E ~
0,CD ...
c: E :::i
w c:(I)

I I
I I

gradual wavy boundary.

• _J

~

a:

a:z

UJ

_J
_J

<(

20

22

24

14

16

18

gth, and divisible into three parts: the eastern portion, a transitional zone, and the western portion.
VAMONT SERIES
CHARACTERISTICS

e eastern portion, 14 m in length, was noticeably darker in color (dark brown 7.5YR 4/4m) than the

TRANSITION
I
I• APPROX.
CEMETERY
BOUNDARY
•

m transition zone and the remaining western portion of the trench. The exposure was prof1led but not
scribed before it was filled by a torrential rain. The trench was backfilled before description could be
· mpleted. The soils in the eastern section of this trench appear to be comparable to Atasco Series soils
'th a gradational transition facies change that coincides with the suspected location of the cemetery

.66m
below datum

undary.
The western portion of the exposure retained Vamont-like Series characteristics.
gilliturbation is still a factor in the upper part of the profile .
The "slab" reference in Figure B-2 refers to a protective concrete sleeve placed over a
ble servicing the courtyard lighting system. The "refuse pit" in Figure B-2 is a pink (7.SYR 7/3m)
andy loam intrusion filled with historic debris. These materials were collected but none predates 1880.

TRENCH FLOOR

Trench 24 East and Trench 24 West (Figure B-3)

4.

6

8

10

12

2

....
~!---

Aa horizon 0-15 cm. Dark brown (7.5YR 4/3m) sandy loam; weak fine to coarse
subangular blocky; loose, noncoherent, slightly sticky to sticky, slightly plastic; few thin colloid stains on
mineral grains; strongly acid (pH= 5.1): clear wavy boundary .

metert?

ACt horizon 15-40 cm. Light olive brown (2.5YR 5/6m) to light reddish brown
'.(5YR 6/4m) silty clay to clay; moderate to strong medium to coarse angular blocky; firm, very sticky,
Very plastic; continuous moderately thick to thick cutans on ped faces; strongly acid (pH= 5.1); clear
Wavy boundary.

----- - - - - - - ---- -------r PIPE - - -~
---'

l-

,..--/ /

SLAB

----....'

•:::/?=
.

SLAB
-]:::: ( .~ e"
a,

-A-C--:\.

O

rs O·~

REFUSE PIT

""' =""' '
Q I-":
. . . .____,---- - c - - ··••.. ···-:•0 ...........
: ,....._ _____ _

.66 m
below
datum

Cg horizon 40-150 cm (floor of trench). Pink (7.SYR 7/4m) to white (7.5YR 8/0m)
many medium to large prominently mottled silty clay; moderate to strong fine to coarse angular blocky;
. firm, sticky to very sticky, plastic to very plastic; very few thin colloid stains on mineral grains; strongly
· alkaline (pH= 8.5); violently effervescent.
Argilliturbation is strongly evident in the upper part of the profile.

~Y)/)
TRENCH FLOOR

PBSJ

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure B-2

0

2

I

4 meter

Aa horizon 0-20 cm. Pink (7.5YR 8/4m) sandy loam; weak fine to medium subangular
blocky; friable, sticky to very sticky, plastic to very plastic; common to many moderately thick cutans on
ped faces; strongly acid (pH= 5.1); no carbonates; abrupt smooth boundary.
AC horizon 20-70 cm (floor of trench). Dark brown (7.SYR 4/4m) to reddish yellow
(7.5YR 7/8m) to strong brown (7.5YR 5/6m) clay to silty clay; moderate to strong medium to coarse

GRADALL CUT I,
NORTH WALL PROFILE

I

ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE
l:lprojects\he1\clients\hach\447212\cad\figureb-2.ai

B-4

447212/020018

B-5

C)
c:

:;::

:;
(/)

t-

z

w _J

:::::'!

\

Q)

"
\

~ I
\

~ (
\

)

\

C\J -

\

"-'
(

/

/

"

I
0

t-

Q)

Q5

E

I

Trench 20
0

I

The profile exposed in Trench 20 conforms with the exposure in Trench 19.
Trench 17 (Figure B-5)

(
)

(

Aa horizon 0-20 cm. Strong brown (7.5YR 5/6m) to dark brown (7.5YR 4/4m) common
fine to large distinctly mottled sandy clay loam; weak fine to medium subangular blocky; friable, sticky,
plastic; common thin cutans on ped faces; strongly acid (pH = 5.1); slightly effervescent; clear wavy
boundary.

~

,,; ~~

\

AC-C horizon 40-120 cm.
Reddish yellow (7.5YR 7/6m) to reddish yellow
(7.5YR 6/6m) to dark brown (7.5YR 4/4m) to strong brown (7.5YR 5/6m) to olive (7.5YR 4/6m) fine to
large prominently mottled silty clay to clay; fine to medium angular blocky; firm, very sticky, very
plastic; continuous thick cutans on ped faces; very strongly acid (pH= 4.5).
Strong argilliturbation was evident in the upper profile.

I
I

)
)

subangular blocky; very friable, sticky, plastic; many moderately thick cutans on ped faces; mildly
alkaline (pH= 7.4); very slightly effervescent; gradual wavy boundary.

z
w
a:

I

l,

c:

\

I

I

\
l

(

LL

(

~.......
-.::t" -

}

,_

\

I
)

Aa horizon 0-40 cm. Dark brown (7.5YR 3/2m) to light brown (7.5YR 6/3m) to pink
(7.4YR 7/4m) many fine to medium prominently mottled silty clay loam; weak fme to medium

g

\

I
(

I

TrenchN

-'
-'
<(

the boundaries of the cemetery. The profile exposed reflected the characteristics typically observed in the
Vamont-like Series exposures previously described. However, a deposit of modern oyster shell was
exposed near the surface at one location in the trench.

a:

I

)

w

z
w

Moderate argilliturbation occurs in the upper profile. The soils of Trench 21 conform
very well with the Vamont-like Series soils.

This was a shallow trench dug for a group of visitors from Espey, Huston & Associates,
Inc. and the Texas Historical Commission. The location was chosen because it was believed to be beyond

0

J

(

0$ rf
I t-

angular blocky; firm, sticky to very sticky, plastic to very plastic; continuous thick cutans on ped faces;
moderately alkaline (pH = 7.9); strongly effervescent.

Trench 19 (Figure B-4)

\)

<..

::J ~
W<l:;
a:

t-

~Cf)

0

I

(

:s-'

a: a.. ~

0 ct:

\

)

co-

0)

(

I

\

LO -

~

~

w

(.!)

zo
w a: >

ct:
co

\

)

-

::i

i.I

I

---- -

l

l
I

E

(")

• 0.

(")

w

\

-

OLL

co

...

...."'

,...

I-

~,g ~
c: c: >
...
c: E :::i
w c:CI)
'6>~

ctct:

i

C\J _J

~--

_J

6: ~

....
Q)

.,f w

C)c:
c: 0 C)
'i: () c:

~~

AC horizon 20-80 cm. Very dark brown (7.5YR 2/lm) to dark brown (7.5YR 4/2m) to
light brown (7.5YR 6/3m) common fine to large distinctly mottled silty clay; moderate medium to coarse

i

l:\projects\he1\clients\hach\447212\cad\figureb-3.al

447212/020018

B-6

B-7

J

~.

.g:
.2.

~

"'~

(ii'

a

5'

~
~

~

~

05·
c

~
;.
!!?.

5

6
I

-----

4

3

r

I

I

I

Aa
- . . .__,, -. . . . . ...----....... '-,,,___,. . .-. . . . ___ . . _ _.,,.,,--- .----...-- _ _,, . -------AC

_.,-

..--- meters

1

2

"-' - - - '"'--..__ __ __,r--------

'--~~

------------~~-----

-----------------~--~-------Cc
to
I

00

TRENCH FLOOR

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
·Surveying

PBSJ
0

1 meter

I

I

Figure B-4
BACKHOE TRENCH 19,
SOUTH WALL PROFILE
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

f

tr"'

~

;

~

6

5

4

3

I

2

I

ii!

z;

~.

...

meters

I

~

~c

1

_
'/~~\:.: :~very·fi~e· s~~d-::.f.:J

Aa
-------------" •• •• •••• ••• • • • • ·1
------------~~
4-~ --·~'-::·:.. .·:·.::-:·:··=,
/~~
.
.
. . :::·:r--·.·.
.
.
.
.
.
_
~~.: ......
---------

'--~----_....--~
......: ...........
·: ;1•• ....-:-."7"'r-- - ~

feature

\•::

----

AC

:

·/

......;:'.1Y

TRENCH FLOOR

to
I

b::1

\0

11
I

10
I

8

9

I

l.>J

7
I

--------------

Aa

---, ------O

AC

I

-------- -----..........__--c
~~
TRENCH FLOOR

PBSJ

1 meter

I

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

Figure B-5
BACKHOE TRENCH 17,
SOUTH WALL PROFILE
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

0)

c

:;:

angular blocky; very firm, very sticky, very plastic; continuous thick cutans on ped faces and as bridges
holding mineral grains together; moderately alkaline (pH = 8.1 ); violently effervescent; gradual wavy
boundary.
C horizon 80 cm (trench floor).

Strong brown (7.SYR 5/8m) to light brown

:;

Cf)
.....

(/)

Q)

Ci)

E
(.)

i

(7.SYR 6/3m) to pink (7.SYR 7/3m) to strong brown (SYR 4/6m), many fine to large prominently mottled
clays, strong fine to coarse angular blocky; extremely firm, very sticky, very plastic; continuous thick

+::

" en

Q) ·;::
Q)

c

o-

Nu
~
en Ctl

o

cutans on ped faces and as bridges holding mineral grains together; strongly alkaline (pH= 8.9).

pink (7.SYR 7/4m) very fine sand feature, devoid of cultural remains. It may be the remains of a historic

I
I
I
I.

~
E

V amont-like Series soils and moderate argilliturbation is evident.

·II

en
en

I
I

I

<O-

I

I

Trench 13 (Figure B-6)

J

Aal horizon 0-10-20 cm. Dark brown (7.SYR 3/2m) sand to sandy loam; weak fine to

\"

I ~
/9
I ~

LO-

coarse subangular blocky; very friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; very few thin cutans on ped faces;
moderately alkaline (pH= 7.9); strongly effervescent; abrupt smooth boundary.

I ~

I

Aa2 horizon (Timpson Street intrusion) 30-60 cm. Light brown (7.SYR 5/4m) to reddish

f

yellow (7.SYR 6/6m) to yellowish red (2.SYR 4/6m) to light yellowish brown (lOYR 6/4m) many fine to
coarse prominently mottled common fine to large distinctly stony cobbly gravelly very coarse and coarse
sand and sandy clay loam; weak very fine to very coarse single grain and crumb; loose, noncoherent,

I v

w

IE

\

nonsticky, nonplastic; no cutans; mildly alkaline (pH= 7.4); very slightly effervescent; abrupt smooth
boundary.
The material described as the Timpson Street intrusion is "Float," a term used by
contractors denoting a mix of sand, clay, silt, and shell. In areas of high precipitation it hardens with age.
The Timpson Street intrusion intrudes into the upper portion of the AC horizon. Just below the Timpson
Street deposit on the east end of the trench is an intense slickensides zone.

C\J-

AC horizon 20-70 cm. Dark gray (7.SYR 4/0m) to very dark gray (7.SYR 3/0m) few
fine to medium faintly mottled clay loam; moderate to strong fine to medium angular blocky; firm, sticky,
plastic; many thick cutans on ped faces; neutral (pH= 6.6); abrupt smooth boundary.

,.... -

l:\projects\he1\clients\hach\447212\cad\figureb·6.ai

447212/020018

B-10

Q)

E
..--

B-11

·;::;O g>
<I>--

0

(J)

>-

.s'E
~
O)<I> ..
c E:i
We(/)

.

~.

~
w

~~

I

u.

uO
z a:
9. w
a..
c:o
~

::::i

OJ

i.I

a:

I-

_J
_J

~~
: .: : h:

II

Si 0z

Q)

c:o

.5:2::)

U5

I

~

Trench 18
The profile exposed in Trench 18 conforms with the exposure in Trench 17.

Q)

I
I

~

Q)

~'O

iii

excavation that was never used, perhaps for a pipe. With that exception, Trench 17 conforms well with

"-

~ .c
·(.)
en ......
c "-

/\l

There is a strongly pronounced anomaly in the AC and C horizons in this trench. It is a

"W

O>c
cO

Ctl

0

UJ
(.!J

::5

_J

>

~

s

:::.:'.

a:

~

z

UJ

_J
_J

<(

(/)

......

<!)

Q5

E
Clt horizon 70-130 cm. Very dark gray (7.SYR 3/0m) silty clay; strong fine to coarse
angular blocky; very firm, very sticky, very plastic; continuous thick cutans on ped faces; strongly acid
(pH= 5.1); clear wavy boundary.

i

~w

LO ...J
C\J -

I

C2tg horizon 130 cm (trench floor). Light yellowish brown (2.SYR 6/4m) to light cilive

~I-

C\1-

(\')

-

description is a composite.
Aa horizons average 10-30 cm in depth. Pinkish gray (7.5YR 7/2m) to light brown
(7 .5YR 6/3m) few fine to coarse faintly mottled sandy loam or silt loam; weak fine to medium subangular

a:

blocky; very friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic with clear smooth boundaries.

g

0

u..
I

The boundaries have been blurred by eluviation-illuviation processes, but are still so

0

z
w

a:

t.O-

I-

in 1940-1941 to secure a solid grass lawn cover. This regularity is a constant everywhere.
Brown (7.5YR 5/3m) to strong brown

.._

(7.5YR 5/6m) few fine to medium faintly mottled silty clay loam; moderate to strong angular to
subangular blocky; firm, sticky, plastic; clear to gradual wavy boundaries. Slight gleying is denoted by
the presence of iron manganese concretions.

*

<O-

E

Calcareous concretions occur infrequently. There is

evidence of cutting and filling in the AC horizons of these four trenches.
C horizon. A range of lights and darks from pinkish white (7 .5YR 8/2m) to dark brown
0

(7.5YR 3/3m) and faint to prominently mottled clays; strong fine to coarse angular blocky; extremely
firm, very sticky, very plastic; with or without various concretions. This horizon is rarely disturbed by

I-

co-

I- w
z~ (1)0

Argilliturbation is evident in all four of these trenches, but is especially evident in the
upper profile of Trench 22.
Trench 25 (Figure B-7)

O>-

Aal horizon 0-10 cm. Dark brown (7 .5YR 4/2m) cobbly gravelly sandy loam; weak fine
to coarse subangular blocky; very friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; few thin cutans on ped faces;
0l·lpr
·
\h el\clients\hach\447212\cad\figureb-7.ai
· OJects

447212/020018

Cf)

W-

I W a:

(/) a: (()

cutting and filling.

B-12

~

...J

ft

z

oa: w
~o
....J
(() z <i!

The profiles in these four trenches are comparable and all conform to the Vamont-like

AC horizons range 40-75 cm in depth.

I-

:CI

Trenches 14, 15, 16. and 22

young (55 years) that it is possible to see the regularity with which they were deposited by the contractor

....J

~ ~ a:

brown (2.5YR 5/4m) few fine to medium faintly mottled clay; strong fine to medium angular blocky;

Series descriptions. The sequence of the horizons in each of these trenches is Aa-AC-C. The following

oO

z a: >
w a.. ?;:
a:
...J
,.....

T--.

firm, very sticky, very plastic; continuous thick cutans on ped faces; strongly acid (pH= 5.1).

u..

w

(!J
<C
-1

B-13

moderately alkaline (pH = 7 .9): slightly effervescent; abrupt smooth boundary. Abundant glass, brick,
metal, and plastic fragments were observed.

. ACt horizon. 5-45 cm. Pale olive (SY 6/3m) clay; moderately strong fine to medium
angular bl~cky, firm, very sticky, very plastic; continuous moderately thick to thick cutans on ed faces·
·
p
'
strongly acid (pH = 5.1 ); clear wavy boundary.

Aa21 horizon 10-20 cm. Pink (7.SYR 7/4m) loamy sand; structureless to weak fine
crumb; very friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; no cutans; moderately alkaline (pH= 8.1); violently
effervescent; abrupt wavy boundary. Glass, brick, metal, and plastic fragments are evident.
Aa22 horizon 20-70 cm. Brown (7 .SYR S/3m) to dark reddish brown (7.SYR 3/4m) few
fine to medium faintly mottled cobbly gravelly loamy coarse sand; weak fine to coarse subangular
blocky; very friable, nonsticky, nonplastic; few thin cutans on ped faces; moderately alkaline; strongly to
violently effervescent; clear wavy boundary.
Approximately the western one-third of this horizon appears to be debris from Nash

.
Cltg horizon 45-70 cm. Pale olive (SY 6/3m) to light red (IOR 6/8m) many medium to
large promment mottled clay; weak to moderately strong fine to medium angul bl ky· fi
. ky
1 .
.
ar oc ' irm, very
stic ,. very P astic; contmuous moderately thick to thick cutans on ped iaces,
.c.
• strong1y acid
· (pH = 5 1)·
many iron manganese concretions.
· '
C2tg horizon 70 cm (trench floor). Pale yellow (SY 6/3m) to red (lOR s18m) to reddish
blac~ (lOR 2.5/lm) many fine to large prominently mottled clay; weak to moderately strong fine to coarse
angu ar bl~cky; firm, very stic1:', very plastic; continuous moderately thick to thick cutans on ped faces;
strongly acid (pH = S.1 ); many iron manganese concretions.

Street containing some float fragments and asphalt chunks. The eastern portion of the horizon appears to

This profile appears to be a truncated remnant of the Vamont-like Series.

be domiciliary midden deposit. Maps show a historic house at this location, a comer on Nash Street.
ACg horizon 70 cm (trench floor). Olive (SYR S/3m) silty clay; strong medium to coarse
angular blocky; very firm, very sticky, very plastic; many moderately thick cutans on ped faces; medium
acid (pH= S.6)

Trench 9 (Figure B-8)
Aal horizon
·
b
. 0-10 cm. Light brown (7.SYR 6/3m) si·it 1oam,. we ak fine to medmm
su angular blocky; very friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic· few thin bridges hold"
·
l
·
t th
l"gh 1 ·
'
mg mmera grams
oge er; s i t y acid (pH= 6.1); abrupt wavy boundary.

EAST SIDE

!::

Trench 12
Aa horizon 0-10 cm.

Dark brown (7.SYR 4/2m) silt loam; weak fine to medium

subangular blocky; very firm, very sticky, very plastic; few thin cutans on ped faces; strongly acid
(pH= S.l); clear wavy boundary.
ACt horizon 10-SO cm. Pale yellow (SY 7/3m) to olive yellow (2.SY 6/6m) common
fine to medium distinctly mottled silty clay; strong fine to coarse angular blocky; very firm, very sticky,
very plastic; few moderately thin cutans on ped faces; mildly alkaline (pH = 7.4); common iron
manganese concretions; clear wavy boundary.

~a2 ho~izon 0-10/35 cm. Reddish yellow (7.SYR 7/6m) to olive yellow (7.SYR 616m)
fi~e to me~mm famt ~ottled silty clay loam; moderately strong to strong fine to medium angular
. ky, firm, sticky, plastic; many moderately thick cutans on ped faces; mildly alkaline ( H = 7 4)·
p
. '
slightly effervescent, abrupt wavy boundary.

Aa31 horizon 35-lOS cm. Gray (7.SYR 4/0m) to dark gray (7.SYR S/Om) silty cla
moderately strong to strong fine to medium angular blocky; firm, sticky, plastic; many moderatet
thick cutans on ped faces; neutral (pH= 7.1); abrupt wavy boundary.
y

lo~m;

Aa32 horizon 105 cm to trench floor. Historic rubble: brick, whiteware bottle fragments
rusty metal observed to within 5 cm to the floor.
'
'

This profile does not meet the description ofVamont-like Series soils.

This exposure appears to be in a debris-filled ravine at the intersection of Hardcastle and
Arthur streets.

Trench26
Aa horizon 0-S cm. Dark gray (7.SYR 4/0m) silt loam; weak very fine to fine crumb;
loose, noncoherent, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; very few thin bridges holding mineral grains together;
strongly acid (pH= S.l); clear wavy boundary.

447212/020018

B-14

447212/020018

B-15

Cl

c

;::

"5II>
Cle
0

c Cl
o:Oc
G>-a>.E ~
'8cc>
> G> ...
c E:::i
ween
• 0.

<.0-

LO-

...

~w

\
\
I

co
I

co
~

::l
O>

u:

-

\~

l \~
I \
I l
f -;, I 0·
I cu I

I

I
I

f
I
I /'4:1

I

I f

II lI

I

/

1
en

l)

~

coarse subangular blocky; friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; common thin bridges holding mineral
grains together; medium acid (pH= 5.6); clear wavy boundary.

~~ a:ct
II

5b:0

I

I I ·I Q
I I DI t!!J
I I I ~..
I\ loV
I J I
\ {0
II

zw

.....J
.....J
<(

Aa2 horizon 50-140 m (trench floor). Dark brown (7.5YR 3/2m) silty clay loam; friable
slightly sticky, slightly plastic; many moderately thick cutans on ped faces; moderately alkaline (pH
= 7.9); strongly effervescent.

Aal horizon 0-20 cm. Brown (7.SYR 5/3m) silt loam; weak fine to medium subangular
blocky; friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; few thin cutans on ped faces; slightly acid (pH = 6.1);
abrupt smooth boundary.

a:
0

g
:r:
0
z
w
a:
I-

I
I

I I
f

..-.-

Aal horizon 0-50 cm. Dark brown (7.5YR 4/3m) silt loam; weak to moderate fine to

z a: >
W CL
a: _J ~
I- _J

Trench 10 (Figure B-9)

Aa2 horizon 20-110 cm.

LL

I

I I

C\J-

::i
.....J

CJ

Historic rubble; brick, metal, whiteware, and glass are abundant in the Aal and Aa2
horizons. This appears to be the location of a ravine that filled with trash.

\~ \
I \ \

(")

IU::::

00

co z

~(t'i\

~-

w

<(

\
\
\ \
~ I \ I

Trench 11

-W

0) _J

10

Pinkish gray (7.5YR 6/2m) sandy loam, dark brown

(7.5YR 3/2m) silt loam, pink (7.5YR 8/4m) medium sand, reddish yellow (7.5YR 8/6m) fine sand, strong

.....

brown (7.5YR 5/6m) sand. This horizon is a convoluted interfingering, intertonguing, multienergy level
deposit; evidence of a ravine.

1i5
E

C horizon 110-130 cm (trench floor). Pinkish white (7.5YR 8/2m) clay loam; strong fine

Q)

to medium angular blocky; very firm, very sticky, very plastic; many thick cutans on ped faces; mildly
alkaline (pH= 7.4).
Trench 8
0

The Aal horizon is a sandy loam, 0-10 cm in depth. Pinkish gray (7.5YR 6/2). Historic
debris is visible in the profile.

1

I\ \

The Aa2 horizon is a mottled fill of clay loam, 10-50 cm. Strong brown (7.5YR 5/6),
light gray (7.5YR 7/10), red (lOR 4/8). Historic debris litters the profile.

I

The Aa3 horizon is a sandy clay loam with historic debris; 50-85 cm in depth. Brown
(7.5YR 5/2), dark brown (7.5YR 4/20), and light brown (7.SYR 6/4).
The Aa4 horizon is a silty clay with historic debris; 85-100 cm.
(7.5YR 7/2). Glass and brick are especially notable in this horizon.

447212/020018

l:\projects\he 1\cllents\hach\447212\cad\figureb·8 .ai

B-16

B-17

Pinkish gray

0)

c:

:;:::

3(I)

co -

O)c:
c: 0

~

i:o
c:
(J)--

<DO>

c:c

(J)

I

en

co

w c: (/)
• 0.
....

~

g>E~

I
\
l
I

:C LL

>

·-(J)

~

I

::l
0)

u::

w

I
I
I

0
0_J

I

:r:
0

z
L1J
a:

I @

~
\;<
\ ~
\ ~

I

Cf)

\

,_
Q)

(i)

E

{ ~

I z

8

0

I

t...
Cf)

~

co

Cf)

Trench 7

:::.:::

a:
~

z

w
_J
_J

<(

The horizon sequence in this trench is Aa-AC-C. The Aa is 0-5 cm in depth, Light gray
(7.5YR 6/0). The AC is from 5-55 cm, reddish yellow (7.5YR 7/8), very firm with calcium carbonate
concretions. The underlying C horizon, 55-140 cm (floor of the trench), is pink (7.5YR 7/4), a silty clay

Aa3 horizon 40/50-80 cm. Dark brown (7 .5YR 4/2m) silty clay loam; moderate fine to
coarse angular blocky; firm, sticky, plastic; common moderately thick cutans on ped faces; moderately
alkaline (pH= 7.9).
Cc-Ca horizon 80-12 cm (trench floor). Pink (7.5YR 7/3m). Matrix in this horizon is so
densely infused with mortar, brick fragments, and historic rubble that the characteristics are hard to
identify. The western 7 m is relatively free of introduced cultural debris. The matrix is light brown

0

}g

(7.5YR 6/3m) to pink (7.5YR 7/3m) silt loam; weak fine to coarse subangular blocky; friable, slightly
sticky, slightly plastic; few thin cutans on ped faces; strongly alkaline (pH= 8.5); violently effervescent.
Trench 5

I
\
,... IN
co

I-

~

Aa2 horizon 10/30-40/50 cm. Pinkish gray (7.5YR 6/2m) silt loam; weak fine to coarse
subangular blocky; friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; few thin cutans on ped faces; slightly acid
(pH= 5.1); abrupt smooth boundary.

0

I ~
I >-<9 II ffi 00
\ zO
~ fu
} ~ 0
( ~

-

~

~

I-

I

,...

~~
:r: :r:

_J

>

Aal horizon 10-10/30 cm. Brown (7.5YR 5/3m) silt loam; weak fine to medium
subangular blocky; friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; few thin cutans on ped faces; mildly alkaline
(pH= 5.6) very slightly effervescent: abrupt smooth boundary.

LL

I

I
I

_J
_J

:5

The exposure in Trench 8 may be a sinkhole that Broyles documented on the 1939
topographic map.

Trench 6 (Figure B-10)

a:

I

C\1-

a:
I-

w

(!}

loam with a high concentration of calcium carbonate concretions. This exposure appears to be a truncated
profile of the Vamont-like Series.

I

LO -

oO
zL1J a:
a..

0 :::>
<( 0

I

c.o-

L1J

~::::!

0)

w

z
>
<(

I CO

<I <

The profile exposed in this trench appears to be an Aal-Aa2-C. It is a fill area, disturbed
by a cement-encased cable with brick and other historic debris scattered throughout.

a:

I

Trench 4 (Figure B-11)

I

I

The profile exposed in this trench is typical for the trenches in the far south of the east
side of Allen Parkway Village. Two subordinate horizons of an anthropic A, an Aal, and an Aa2 overlie

E

a transitional AC horizon, which overlies a C horizon. In the central portion of the trench and within the

l:\projects\he1\clients\hach\447212\cadlfigureb-9.ai

B-18

447212/020018

B-19

!

meters__.. 1

~

3

2

I

ii"'

4

5

I

I

7

6
I

8

9

I

I

a;·

a

~

l ~---------- --------------=----------------- ---------=--=-----=------=-=-=--=--=---=-=--=---=--=--=
---=-~
--------"-.~'W"l"l?.';;:?-"7."~""''
-----=--=~~..:::===----=--=-~_:----------------------~
~,
~
~

lll

Aa1
---- ----

Aa2

"'cm

Aa3

~

Cc

'.?:

?

!!!.
·~

TRENCH FLOOR

10

12

11

I

to
I

13

14

15

16

17

I

I

I

I

I

20

19

18
I

I

I

~

Aa1

-

~--~------------~--~-~~--------~-- - - - - - ~~---,,.,.-----~-------------------..._
Aa2 __________~--------__. ____ __......_ __ _

---

-----

-=----;.-___ _'.'.RICK:~~~
..,_.,,,,

(> ~ ~-

.

CJ~ ~

L

rPIPE

E::3 ~

J

\'~/

-------

r-1

,/

FJa7 Cl

-

B~CK_".IER____ _"8~-------0

.A.Ca D

NORTH & SOUTH
WALL

.n

CJ

_

fl

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
•Surveying

PBSJ

Figure B-10
O

1

2 meter

BACKHOE TRENCH 6,
NORTH WALL PROFILE
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

.g.
0

1·
Cl>

§'.
(ij"

"

~

~

~

j
c

a
'.?:

meters--.

1

2

I

~.

3

4

5

6

I

7
I

Aa1

----~:..:;.~~~~~ Q
----~--- - - - - - - ----------------------------------~c
------------BURNING

~-.;::

-----------~- - - - -.......__ - -- --- - - I- - - - - - - - - - - - - ''~z,,
~~ff
Aa2
.::d..,.;..
I•\

- -

.

to
I

N

.... m&9

EPISODE.

~~

-~

,~ ~'W

~~

-?ft'~
.

TRENCH FLOOR

*

ARTIFACT CLUSTER
METAL
CERAMIC
TILE

PBSI
0

I

1 meter

I

• Engineering
• Environmental Consulting
·Surveying

Figure

B-1~

BACKHOE TRENCH 4,
SOUTH WALL PROFILE
ALLEN PARKWAY VILLAGE

;.

"

Aa2 horizon is evidence of a burning episode. This feature is slightly greater than 1 m in length. West of
the burned feature and at the same elevation is a small cluster of historic debris. The Aal and Aa2
horizons are brown (7 .5YR 5/3m) silt loams, weak fine to medium subangular blocky; slightly sticky and

r--

C\I
T"" •
I

I
I
I
I

slightly plastic. The AC horizon has more clay content than the horizons above: pink (7 .5YR 7/3m) silty
clay loam; moderate fine to medium angular blocky; sticky and plastic. The C horizon is a reddish yellow.
silty clay (7 .5YR 6/6m), strong medium to coarse angular blocky, very sticky and very plastic. The

a:i

~

:J

O>

u:::

I
I
I\
I\

exposure appears to be a disturbed Vamont-like Series soil.
Trenches 2 and 3

I \

I \

{

With the exception of the burning episode shown in Figure B-11, the exposures in
trenches 2 and 3 are comparable to Trench 4 and are believed to be V amont-like Series soils.

LO -

Trench 1 (Figure B-12)
Aall horizon 0-10 cm. Brown (7.5YR 5/2m) silt loam; fine to medium subangular

0
0

'I\
\ \\
l \ \
I \ en \
I \ r

LL

l
I
\

blocky; friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; few thin cutans on ped faces; mildly alkaline (pH= 7.4);

a:

l

....J

I

0

zw

a:

I-

\I

I ('I
.,.. l1

'

very slightly effervescent; abrupt smooth boundary.

I ~ I
I
I ·I
I I
\ I
I 1<;1

I

Aa12 horizon 10-30/60 cm. Light gray (7.5YR 7/0m) to gray (7.5YR 5/0m) to light
brown (7.5YR 6/4m) few fine to medium faintly mottled silty clay loam; friable, sticky, plastic; common
moderately thick cutans on ped faces; slightly acid (pH= 6.1); abrupt smooth boundary. Lenticular body

.Q

11<

1 m long at 50 cm ofreddish yellow (7.5YR 6/8m) high sesquioxide silty clay loam.
Aa2 horizon 10-30/-120 cm (trench floor). White (7.5YR 8/0m) to brown(7.5YR 5/4m)
to strong brown (7 .5YR 5/6m) silty clay; strong fine to coarse angular blocky; very firm, very sticky, very
plastic; continuous thick cutans on ped faces; strongly alkaline (pH = 8.5); violently effervescent; abrupt

E

co

C\i' -

I I
I I
I I.
\I ~

0

........
C\I

w

0

0

.,..V

CJ)

a:w

.... 1

smooth boundary.

~I

z
z

l

Within the Aa2 horizon is evidence of a burning episode, 2-4 cm in thickness; black
(7 .5YR 2/0m); some fibrous unburned, woody cellulose tissue visible to naked eye.

~

,,...

a:

§'
(.)

£"(i)

firm, very stick, very plastic; continuous thick cutans on ped faces; strongly alkaline (pH= 8.5); abrupt

0-

en
Q)
en

..r:
.Ql
..r:
II
CJ)

t
<I>

Q)

C horizon 60 cm-trench floor (130 cm). Brown (7.5YR 5/2m) clay; strong medium to

E

coarse angular blocky; extremely firm; very sticky, very plastic; continuous thick cutans on ped faces;
strongly alkaline (pH= 8.5).
The exposure in Trench 1 appears to be an in-filled ravine.

l:\projects\he1\clientslhach\447212\cad\ligureb·12.ai

447212/020018

B-22

B-23

Q)

E

"§
·s

cc

(J)
.....

smooth boundary.

Q)

Q)

-IC

AC horizon 5-100 cm. Light brown (7.5YR 6/2m) clay; strong medium to coarse; very

-

"O

::::>

-

,_

0

Trench 27 (The Cistern)
Aa horizon 0-50 cm. Reddish yellow (7.SYR 7/6m) silt loam; weak fine to coarse
subangular blocky; friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic. This trench exposed the remains of a circular
cistern of undetermined date. A few backhoe loads of fill were taken from the interior revealing only
brick fragments. The decision was made to monitor the fill removal during demolition.

Appendix C

Artifacts from Phase 1-A Testing
by
Allan Meyers, Ph.D.

447212/020018

B-24

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Trench #2
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 1

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

Recorder: A. 1\1eyers
Date: 5/31/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

Ceramic sherd

Plain semiporcelain

2

1

Ceramic sherd

Gray-slipped and salt-glazed stoneware

3

1

Bottle fragment

Cobalt

4

1

Bottle fragment

Clear and embossed

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Date: 5/31/97

C-1

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 4IHR886
Provenience: Trench #4
LeveVZone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 2

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

I

I

Cut nail

2

I

Wire nail

3

I

Metal band :fragment

Project Number: EH&A I 72I2
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 4IHR886
Provenience: Trench #6

Recorder: MP
·Date: 7/4/96

LeveVZone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 3

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

Recorder: MP
Date: 7/3/96

Comments

Semi-circle shape

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

Ceramic sherd

Plain whiteware

I

1

Ceramic sherd

Embossed whiteware

I

I

Flat glass

Light green tint
Thickness: 3.0 mm (.120 in)
Estimated use date range: post I915

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Date: 5/31/97
Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

C-2

447212/020018

Date: 5/31/97

C-3

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Trench#6E

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 4

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Trench #8
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 5

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 7/3/96

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

Recorder: MP
Date: 7/4/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

Bottleneck

Machine-made, clear glass with
opalescence: brandy finish, tapered neck

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

Cologne bottle, complete

Machine-made, clear glass: patent lip finish,
cylindrical neck, sloped shoulders,
cylindrical body

2

1

Stemmed glass, base
fragment

Clear glass

Embossing on body:

3

1

Glass container

Clear glass, embossed

1

Ceramic sherd

Plain whiteware

1

Wire nail

1

Ceramic cylinder

Broken and hollow

1

Spoon

Silverware tablespoon

E WHoyt&Co
Lowell
Mass
Embossing on base: a diamond intersecting
an oval with an "I" inside; the number"'lO"
is outside the mark

4
5
6
7

Product: E.W. Hoyt's German Cologne,
introduced in 1897.
Analyst: Allan Meyers

Date: 5/31/97

Manufacturer: Owens-Illinois Glass Co.,
Toledo, OH, 1929-1966
Use Dates:1929-1954

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Date: 5/31/97

C-4

447212/020018

C-5

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
· Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Trench #8
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 6

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Trench #10

Recorder: MP
Date: 7/4/96

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 7

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

Recorder: SC
Date: 7/3/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

Cosmetic container

Milk glass, embossed with ''Nadinola"

1

1

Bricks

Stamped:

2

1

Ceramic sherd

Blue-glazed stoneware

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Vitrified Brick
Co.
Coffeyville

Date: 5/31197
Use Dates: ca. 1905 (Steinbomer 1982)

Date: 5/31/97

4472121020018

C-6

4472121020018

C-7

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Trench #11
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 8

Lot

Count

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Trench #11
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 8 (Cont'd)

Recorder: MP
Date: 7/4/96

Comments

Artifact Category

1

2

Ceramic sherds

Plain whiteware

2

1

Ceramic sherd

Gray-slipped stoneware

3

1

Shell button

Two-holed

4

1

Wire nails

1

Pharmaceutical bottle,
panel fragment

5

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Lot

Count

10

5

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

Recorder: MP
Date: 7/4/96

Artifact Category

Comments

Flat glass

Light green tint
Thickness:2.4 mm (.097 in) 1870-1900
2.7 mm (.107 in)
2.7 mm (.107 in)
2.9 mm (.117 in)
3.0 mm (.119 in)

Aqua glass, embossing:
"?wamp Roo?"
"and Bladder Cure"

Estimated use date range: post 1900
(Roenke 1978:116)

Manufacturer: Dr. Kilmer's Swamp Root
Kidney Liver and Bladder Cure,
Binghamton, New York. Extremely popular
firm that produced a variety of medicinal
products.

Date: 5/31/97

Use Dates: ca 1894 (see Baldwin 1973:291
for an illustration of the complete bottle)
6

1

Bottle fragment

Aqua glass

7

1

Bottle fragment

Olive green glass

8

1

Bottle fragment

Clear glass

9

1

Bottle fragment

Yellow glass, Selenium additive
Use dates:1914-1930 (Rosenburg and
Kvietok 1981 :28)

4472121020018

C-8

4472121020018

C-9

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A I 72I2
Official State Site Number: 4IHR886
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing
Provenience: Trench I 7, Elevation: 99.73 AMSL
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 9

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A I 72 I2
Official State Site Number: 4IHR886
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing
Provenience: Trench #I9, Elevation: 99.73 AMSL

Recorder: MP
Date: 6/25/96

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: I 0

Recorder: MP
Date: 6/25/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

I

I

Coin

Unable to identify, too rusted

I

I

Ceramic sherd

Whiteware, blue decoration

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Date: 5/31/97

C-10

Date: 5/31/97

447212/020018

C-11

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Trench #19, Elevation: 99.73
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 11

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A 17212
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing
Provenience: Trench #19, Elevation: 99.73 AMSL

Recorder: MP
Date: 6/25/96

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 54 inches
Bag Number: 12

Count

Artifact Category

1

1

Wire nail

2

1

Ceramic tile

Ironstone whiteglazed

3

1

Metal object

Unidentified

Date: 5/31/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

Ceramic sherd

Decal-printed whiteware, leaf design
Use Dates: ca. 1885-present (Haskell
1981:23; Rosenberg and Kvietok 1981:65)

2

1

Ceramic sherd

Plain whiteware

3

2

Glass container fragment

Milk-glass

4

1

Glass container fragment

Clear glass

5

1

Brick fragment

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Recorder: SO
Date: 6/25/96

Comments

Lot

Analyst: Allan Meyers

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

C-12

4472121020018

Date: 5/31/97

C-13

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A I 72I2
Official State Site Number: 4IHR886
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing
Provenience: Trench 22, Elevation: 99. 73 AMSL

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A I 72I2
Official State Site Number: 4IHR886
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing
Provenience: Trench #20, Elevation: 99.73 AMSL

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 13

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 34 inches
Bag Number: I 4

Recorder: MP
Date: 6/25/96
;

·•· Lot
Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

I

I

Ceramic sherd

Plain whiteware

2

I

Wire nails

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Recorder: MP
Date: 6/25/96

I

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

I

Soda bottle, complete

Machine-made, light green glass: crown
finish, tapered neck, sloped shoulders,
cylindrical body
Embossing on body: "RC" in a polygon
with a star above it; also near base "NEHI
Bottling Co.

Date: 5/31/97
Embossing on base: a diamond intersecting
an oval with an "I" inside
Manufacturer: Owens-Illinois Glass Co.,
Toledo, OH, I929-I966
Use Dates: I929-I954 (Rosenburg and
Kvietok: I98I :29)

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

C-14

447212/020018

Date: 5/31/97

C-15

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Trench #25
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 15

Lot

Count

1

1

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

Recorder:
Date:

roject Name: Allen Parkway Village
fficial State Site Number: 41HR886
rovenience: Scrape D
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 16

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

Recorder:
Date: 6/18/96

Artifact Category

Comments

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Bottle, base fragment

Amber glass, rectangular base, embossing:
"989" in a diamond

1

Ceramic sherd

Whiteware, black geometric design near rim

1

brick

Stamped:

2

1

Ceramic sherd

Stoneware

3

1

Ceramic sherd

Plain semi-porcelain

4

1

Ceramic sherd

Annular (green and red) whiteware

5

1

Ceramic sherd

Whiteware, polychrome floral decoration

6

1

Ceramic sherd

Plain whiteware

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Buffalo
Buffalo Ka?
Block

Date: 5/31/97

Date: 5/31/97

C-16

447212/020018

C-17

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Scrape D

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Scrape D

Recorder:
Date: 6/18/96

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 0-20cmbs
Bag Number: 17

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

bottleneck

Machine-made, emerald green glass: crown
finish

2

1

Soda bottle, base

light green glass, probably machine-made,
round base.

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 0-20cmbs
Bag Number: 17 (Cont'd)

9

1

Recorder:
Date: 6/18/96

Ceramic sherd

Decal-printed semi-porcelain, floral,
polychrome motif
Use Dates: ca. 1885-present (Haskell
1981 :23; Rosenburg and K vietok 1981 :65)

10

1

Ceramic cylinder

Stamped with "Thomas"

Embossing on base: "Houston, Tex."
3

1

Perfume bottle, body and
base

Clear glass, embossing on base: "W" and
"T" inside a triangle. A "C" outside the
triangle

4

5

Marbles

Glass - yellow in clear; light blue in clear;
orange in clear; green & white in clear; blue
& white in clear

5

1

Ceramic sherd

Plain whiteware

6

1

Ceramic sherd

Plain whiteware

7

1

Ceramic sherd

Green-glazed whiteware

8

1

Ceramic sherd

Whiteware with blue maker's mark:
A circle with "?er"
"?otel" [Hotel]
"?hina" [China]
"?in U.S.A." [Made in USA]
"?24"
Manufacturer: Unknown
Use Dates: post 1887, prbably ca. 1930s
(Kovel and Kovel 1986:231)

447212/020018

C-18

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Date: 5/31/97

C-19

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Scrape E
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 18

Lot
1

Count
1

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Scrape I, Elevation: 99.73

Recorder:
Date: 6/18/96

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 19

Recorder: MP
Date: 6/25/96

Artifact Category

Comments

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Marble

Large glass marble; green & red and clear

1

1

Ceramic sherd

Plain semiporcelain, embossed with
geometric motif

2

1

Ceramic sherd

Whiteware, blue oriental motif transfer print

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Date: 5/31/97
Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

C-20

4472121020018

Date: 5/31/97

C-21

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A 17212
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing
Provenience: Scrape I, Elevation: 99. 73 AMSL
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 20

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Scrape I
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 21

Recorder: MP
Date: 6/25/96

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 6/22/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

Bottle base fragment

Machine-made, amber glass, Owens scar on
the base

1

1

Ceramic sherd

Plain porcelain

2

1

Ceramic sherd

White pasete earthenware, brown glaze

Use Dates: post 1903
2

1

Milk glass handle

From a mug or cup

3

1

Ceramic sherd

Terra cotta earthenware

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Date: 5/31/97

Date: 5/31/97

C-22

447212/020018

C-23

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Cut I
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 32 inches
Bag Number: 22

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Cut I

Recorder:
Date: 6/20/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

Ceramic sherd

Plain porcelain

2

1

Button

Glass, 4-holed

Analyst: Allan Meyers

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 32 inches
Bag Number: 23

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

Recorder:
Date: 6/20/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

Bottleneck

Improved tooled design, amber glass: brandy
finish, tapered neck, sloped shoulders, mold
seams very prominent

2

2

Bottle base fragments

Light green glass with opalescence, embossing
on round base: "890"

3

1

Bottle fragment

Emerald green glass

Date: 5/31/97

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

C-24

447212/020018 .

Date: 5/31/97

C-25

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Cut I

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase lA Testing

Comments

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

1

1

Hoe blade and associated
metal fragments

Recorder:
Date: 6/20/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

Stoneware jug, multiple
pieces

Salt-glazed, brown mineral slip above the
shoulder
Stamped on base:
The Buckeye Pottery Co.
Macomb, Ill.
Manufacturer not located, but Macomb was
the home to several small stoneware
manufactories from ca. 1880-1910
(Ketchum 1991: 13 6)

Date: 5/31/97

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

· Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): Below 32 inches
Bag Number: 25

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 6/20/96

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 32 inches
Bag Number: 24

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Cut I

C-26

447212/020018

Date: 5/31/97

C-27

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 4 IHR886
Provenience: Cut I
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 26

Project Number: EH&A I72I2
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 4IHR886
Provenience: No provenience given

Recorder:
Date: 6/2/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

I

I

Patent medicine bottle,
complete

Improved tooled design, clear glass with
opalescence: prescription finish, cylindrical
neck, sloped shoulders, six-sided body,
mold seams run diagnolly up the body an
disappear on the neck

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 27

Project Number: EH&A I 72I2
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

Recorder:
Date:

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

I

I

Patent medicine bottle,
complete

Improved tooled design, aqua glass with
heavy opalescence:extract finish, cylindrical
neck, sloped shoulders, cylindrical body,
round base

. on1y on b ase: "I"
Emb ossmg

Analyst: Allan Meyers

embossing on body (vertically around the
bottle in four lines):
Mrs. Winslow's
Soothing Syrup
The Anglo-American Drug Co.
Successors To
Curtis & Perkins
Proprietors

Date: 5/3 I/97

Embossing on base: "37"
Use Dates: ca. I843-I895 (Baldwin
I 973 :529; Wilson I 98 I: I 40)
2

I

Bottleneck

Machine-made, clear glass with
opalescence: reinforced prescription finish,
tapered neck, sloped shoulders
Embossing near neck: "?lity"

447212/020018

C-28

3

I

Wine/champagne bottle,
base

Olive green glass, large mamelon base

4

I

I943 dime

Silver

447212/020018

C-29

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 4IHR886
Provenience: No provenience given

Project Number: EH&A I 72I2
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

Level/Zone:
Depth ( cmbs):
Bag Number: 27 (Cont'd)

Recorder:
Date:

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

5

I

Liquor bottle, complete
(broken neck)

Machine-made, clear glass with
opalescence: brandy finish, tapered neck,
"Olympic" body shape (Rosenberg:4 7),
Owens scar on base

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
oject Name: Allen Parkway ViUage
fficial State Site Number: 4 IHR886
;rovenience: No provenience given

Project Number: EH&A I 72I2
Type of Work: Phase IA Testing

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 27 (Cont'd)

I

Recorder:
Date:

bricks

Stamped:
Thurber ( and a triangle). Or
Thurber
[triangle]
Brick

Embossing on base only: a dot (probably an
"I" inside a diamond, a "b" is to the side of
it

Manufacturer: Thurber Brick Company,
Erath County, Texas, I900-I933

Manufacturer: probably Illinois Glass Co.

Use Dates: I900-I933

Use Dates: post 1903, probably 1916-1929
6

1

Cartridge (from gun)

alyst: Allan Meyers

Date: 5/31/97

Rimmed, .32 Smith & Wesson Long;
appears to be internal centerfie
Use Dates: l 860s-l 890s (Rosenberg:78-80)

7

1

Stoneware jug, complete

Albany slip on neck and handle, shoulder
circumference is less or equal to base
circumference
Use Dates: post 1900 (Rosenberg: 65)

447212/020018

C-30

C-31

REFERENCES CITED

Baldwin, J. K.
1973 A Collector's Guide to Patent and Proprietary Medicine Bottles of the Nineteenth
Century. Thomas Nelson, Inc., Nashville.
Haskell, H. W.
1981 The Middleton Place Privy House: An Archaeological View of Nineteenth Century
Plantation Life. Popular Series 1. Institute of Archeology and Anthropology,
University of South Carolina, Columbia.
Ketchum, W. C., Jr.
1991 American Stoneware. Henry Holt and Company, New York.
Kovel, R., and T. Kovel
1986 Kovels' New Dictionary ofMarks. Crown, New York.
Rosenberg, R. G., and D. P. Kvietok
1981 A Guide to Historic Artifacts. Ms.on file, PBS&J, Austin, Texas.

AppendixD
Artifacts from Monitoring Phase
by
Allan Meyers, Ph.D.

Steinbomer, R. A.
1982 Brickmaking in Texas: A History of the Industry and Its Product. Ms. on file, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Wilson, R. L.
1981 Bottles on the Western Frontier. University of Arizona Press, Tuscon.

447212/020018

C-32

J

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A 17212
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Monitoring
Provenience: Locus 1, SD #4 (east), backdirt
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 1

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 8/23/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

miniature stoneware jug,
complete

R.E. Bell, 719 Travis St"

brown glaze, engraved: "Compliments of

2

1

beer bottle, complete

(missing)

3

2

condiment bottles,
complete

machine-made, clear glass with some
opalescence (one is twice as large as the
other): continuous thread finish with a
'bead' string rim, cylindrical neck, sloped
shoulder, rectangular and paneled body
embossing on shoulder, embossing on front
panel (only on the large bottle): an eagle
above the word "Trademark"; embossing on
side panels: "Gebhardt Eagle" and "Chili
Powder"; embossing on larger bottle base:
Design
4
Patented
embossing on smaller bottle base: "2"
Manufacturer: Unknown
Use Dates: post 1893, ca. 1924 (Rosenberg
and K vietok 1981 :Figure 17L)

5

1

ceramic sherd

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

whiteware (rim), embossed gilded annular
and blue-glazed
Date: 5/25/97

D-1

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Number: EH&A 17212
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Monitoring
Provenience: Locus 3, Building # 172, 10 m northwest of east end
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 20
Bag Number: 2

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A 17212
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Monitoring
Provenience: Locus 4, east wall of drainage trench, just west of SD# 53 (west)

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 9/20/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

brick

no stamp

2

1

metal fragment

probably a screw

3

1

bottle fragment

light green glass, melted

Level/Zone: - - - Depth (cmbs): approx. 20
Bag Number: 3

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 1129/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

soda bottle, complete,
some embossed lettering
has recently chipped off

improved tooled design, aqua glass with some
opalescence: soda or blobtop finish, short
and cylindrical neck, rounded shoulder,
straight and cylindrical body
6 stars embossed on shoulder, a large star
embossed on body and a star embossed on the
base. Lettering embossed on body: "Star
Bottling Works Co., Houston, Texas"

Provenience: Locus 3, after scraping
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 2

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

4

1

horseshoe

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 11/18/96

Hutchinson's Spring Stopper is wedged in the
bore. This stopper type was patented
4/8/1879.
Comments
Use Dates: 1880-1915 (see Rosenberg and
Kvietok 1981 :Figure l 6d)

Date: 5/25/97

D-2

Analyst: Allan Meyers

4472121020018

Date: 5/25/97

D-3

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A 17212
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Monitoring
Provenience: Locus 7, west end of Building #179, exposed after grading
Level/Zone: surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 4

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 9, Building #171 area

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 12/11/96

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 5

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 11/8/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, amethyst glass:
brandy type finish, tapered neck, seam is
not readily evident.

1

1

ceramic sherd

decal-printed semi-porcelain, polychrome
floral design

2

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, aqua glass: patent
lip finish, cylindrical neck.

Use dates: 1900-present (Haskell 1981:23)

Analyst: Allan Meyers
Provenience: Locus 7
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 4

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 12/10/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

3

1

metal hammer, complete

18.6 cm long

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Date: 5/25/97

Date: 5/25/97

D-4

447212/020018

D-5

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 10, Building #139
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
B~gNumber: 6

Lot

Count

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 10, Building #139

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 10/1/96, 11/8/96, 12/5/96

Comments

Artifact Category

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 6

..

6

1

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 10/1/96, 11/8/96, 12/5/96

brick

stamped:

·•

1

1

bottle base fragment

aqua glass, rectangular, embossed with an
"8"

2

1

ceramic sherd

Bristol-slip stoneware (rim), blue sponging
(see Robacker and Robacker 1978:118,
120)

3

1

1

Manufacturer: Thurber Brick Company,
Erath County, Texas, 1900-1933
Use Dates: 1900-1933 (Steinbomer 1982)

brown and red transfer-print whiteware

ceramic sherd

Use Dates: ca. l 840s-1900 (Price 1981 :36)
4

Thurber (and a triangle)

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Date: 5/25/97

machine-made. aqua glass: wide mouth,
cylindrical neck, rounded shoulders,
cylindrical body.

pharmaceutical bottle,
complete

embossing on base only: "3"
5

1

machine-made, clear glass with
opalescence: extract finish, short and
cylindrical neck, sloped shoulders,
cylindrical body.

pill bottle, complete

embossing on base: an "I" inside a diamond
Manufacturer: Illinois Glass Company,
Alton, IL, 1873-1929. Founded by William
E. Smith and Edward Lewis in 1873, it
maintained bottling plants nationwide in the
early 20th century. It merged with Owens
Bottle Co. in 1929
Use Dates: 1916-1929 (Toulouse 1971)

447212/020018

D-6

447212/020018

D-7

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 13, SD #45 (west)
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 7

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 14

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 1/8/97

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 8

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring .

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 1/23/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

ceramic sherd

whiteware rim sherd, floral embossed
decoration with blue edging

1

1

bottleneck

machine-made, clear glass: reinforced
extract finish, tapered neck, fluted shoulders

2

1

ceramic sherd

plain whiteware, charred

2

1

bottleneck

3

1

glass rod fragment

clear glass with opalescence

machine-made, clear glass: variant of the
brandy finish

1

brick

no stamp

3

4

1

bottleneck

machine -made, clear glass: unspecified
stopper finish, tapered neck

4

1

patent medicine bottle,
panel fragment

aqua glass, embossed:
amschinsky [C. Damschinsky]
uid Hair Dye [Liquid Hair Dye]
New York
Manufacturer: Carl Damschinsky
Use Dates: post 1890 (Fike 1987:122)

5

2

buttons

plastic

6

1

ceramic sherd

blue transfer-print whiteware, floral motifs
on interior and exterior

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Date: 5/25/97

Use Dates: 1820s-1900 (Price 1981:26)
7

1

ceramic sherd

flow blue whiteware
Use Dates: 1835-1910 (Williams 1971:7-8)

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

D-8

447212/020018

Date: 5/25/97

D-9

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A 17212
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Monitoring
Provenience: Locus 14, south of Building #174
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 8

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 15 A

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 1123/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

8

1

cosmetic case, or mirror,
complete

Fairy or angel figure over a branch

Analyst: Allan Meyers

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 9

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 1/29/97, 2/7/97, 3/31197,
4/2/97, 2/11/97

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, amber glass:
brandy type finish, no seam evident on the
upper neck.

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, clear glass: patent
lip finish, cylindrical neck, rounded
shoulder.

1

ceramic

flow blue whiteware with floral motif.

Date: 5/25/97

Use Dates: 1835-1910, floral pattern
suggests ca. 1860-1910 (Williams 1971:78)

1

soda bottle, complete

improved tooled design, aqua/light green
glass with heavy opalescence: crown finish,
tapered neck, sloped shoulder, straight and
cylindrical body
Embossing on body near the base:
"Coca-Cola" and "Trademark Registered
Property of the Houston Coca Cola Bottling
Co Houston, Tex."
Use Dates: 1892- ca. 1920 (see Deiss
198l:Table 1)

447212/020018

D-10

5

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, clear glass: brandy
type finish, tapered neck, seam extends
nearly to the string rim.

6

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, amber glass:
extract type finish, cylindrical neck

447212/020018

D-11

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 15 A
LeveVZone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 9
7

1

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 15B
LeveVZone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 10

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 1/29/97, 217/97, 3/31/97,
4/2/97' 2/11/97
machine-made, clear glass with
opalescence: extract finish, cylindrical ball
neck, sloping shoulders, cylindrical body,
round base, no embossing

bottle, complete

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 4/3/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, clear glass with
opalescence: reinforced prescription finish,
tapered neck

2

1

ceramic sherd

Flow blue whiteware, floral motif

Use Dates: post 1893
8

9

1

1

improved tooled design, aqua glass with
opalescence: patent lip finish, cylindrical
neck, sloping shoulders, mold seams are not
readily evident

bottleneck

amber glass, embossing on the base:
Pat4. Aug. 24
38.
1886

bottle base fragment

Use Dates: post 1886

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Use Dates: 1835-1910
floral motif suggests ca. 1880-1910
(Williams 1971 :7-8)
3

1

ceramic sherd

Analyst: Allan Meyers

handpainted, polychrome earthenware

Date: 5/25/97

Date: 5/25/97

D-12

447212/020018

D-13

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A 17212
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Monitoring
Provenience: Locus 16, SD# 56 (west), backdirt
Level/Zone: surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 11

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 1/31/97

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
~ect Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A 17212
1cial State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Monitoring
venience: Locus 16, SD# 56 (west), backdirt

Level/Zone: surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 11

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 1/31197

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

ceramic sherd

1

1

kaolin pipe bowl

one-piece bowl and stem style, molded,
fluted on the lower half of the bowl, and
exhibits a spur

wheel-turned, lead glazed red earthenware
(no sand in clay)

1

ceramic sherd

brown transfer-print whiteware, floral
design, possible outer glaze

Use Dates: Unknown, possibly early 19th
century (Noel Hume 1970:Figure 97)
2

2

kaolin pipe stems

3

2

shell buttons

4

1

1 four-hole design; 1 no-hole design
Commercial production of four- and fiveholed shell buttons began in the early 19th
century

Use Dates: ca. 1830- 1900 (Price 1981:36)

1

ceramic sherd

annular stoneware (yellowish-brown on
gray)

1

ceramic sherd

plain whiteware

alyst: Allan Meyers

Date: 5/25/97

machine-made, clear glass with some
opalescence: reinforced prescription finish,
tapered neck, fluted shoulder, straight body,
Philadelphia oval base.

pharmaceutical bottle,
complete

embossed on front panel near shoulder:
"3ii"; embossed measurement markings on
both sides of front panel; embossing on
base: "Owens" above a diamond
intersecting an oval with "18" to left and
"3" to the right
Manufacturer: either Owens Bottle Machine
Co (1903-1911), Owens Bottle Co. (19111929), or Owens-Illinois Glass Co. (19291966).
Use Date range: 1903-1954 (Toulouse
1971)
447212/020018

D-14

D-15

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 18, backdirt

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
BagNumber: 12

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 4/10/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, aqua glass: patent
lip finish, cylindrical neck

2

1

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
roject Name: Allen Parkway Village
fficial State Site Number: 41HR886
rovenience: Locus 18, backdirt

LeveVZone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
BagNumber: 12

1

4

1
1

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 4/10197

bottle fragment

amethyst glass, embossed on body: "F&P
Co." and "ade Mar," [Trademark]
Manufacturer: Unknown
Use Dates: 1880-ca.1918 (Deiss
1981 :Table 1)

improved tooled design, amethyst glass:
patent lip finish, cylindrical ball neck

bottleneck

1

Use Dates: 1880- ca.1918 (Deiss
198l:Table 1)
3

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

amethyst glass, fancifully embossed
Use Dates: 1880- ca.1918 (Deiss
1981:Table 1)

improved tooled design, clear glass: brandy
type finish, tapered neck

bottleneck

tableware glass

1

ceramic plate fragment

improved tooled design, yellow-tinted clear
glass (Selenium-treated): brandy finish.

bottleneck

Use Dates: 1914-1930 (Rosenberg and
Kvietok 1981:28)
5

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, clear glass: double
ring finish, cylindrical neck, rounded
shoulders

6

1

bottleneck

machine-made design, clear glass:
reinforced extract finish

Manufacturer: Alfred Meakin (Ltd.),
Tunstall, Staffordshire, England, 1873present (Kovel and Kovel 1986:12, 229)
Use Dates: post 1880

I

ceramic sherd

amber glass, cylindrical body and round
base, mold seams run up the sides

whiteware with green maker's mark:
"A"
"Cast"
"China"
"Second"

small embossing at the base: "263"

Manufacturer: Unknown

Use Dates: post 1893
7

1

beer bottle base

1

447212/020018

D-16

plain whiteware with black maker's mark:
"Royal Iro"
[lion and unicorn crest]
"Alfred M"
"Engla"

ceramic sherd

whiteware, blue geometric pattern

D-17

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 18, backdirt

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 12

13

1

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 4/10/97

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 13

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow/ A. Meyers
Date: 2/3/97, 2/10/97, 4/1/97

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

bottleneck, wine or
champagne

Use Dates: 20th century (S. Carlson,
personal communication)

Applied tooled design, olive green glass~
slight buckling (or ridge) on the bore where
the lip was fused with the neck surface,
detected by running a finger inside the lip;
string rim also present
Use Dates: 1825-1875 (Deiss 198l:Table 1)

earthenware, white paste, handpainted
polychrome, floral motif

ceramic sherd

14

1

ceramic figurine

torso & thighs

15

3

shell buttons

two 2-holed and one 4-holed

Analyst: Allan Meyers

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

1

wide mouth bottle,
complete

improved tooled design, clear glass with
heavy opalescence:. prescription finish,
cylindrical neck, rounded shoulders,
cylindrical body, round base

Date: 5/25/97

Diagonal striations and lack of mold seams
on neck indicate tum-molded design
Use Dates: 1880-1905 (Munsey 1970:40)
1880-1920 (Rosenberg and
K vietok 1981 :26)
1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, amethyst glass: oil
finish, tapered neck
Use Dates: 1880- ca. 1918 (Deiss
198l:Table 1)

447212/020018

D-18

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, clear glass: brandy
type finish, ball neck

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, clear glass: PerryDavis finish, tapered neck

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, clear glass:
prescription finish, cylindrical neck

D-19

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 19
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 13

7

1

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 19

Recorder: R. Brownlow/ A. Meyers
Date: 2/3/97, 2/10/97, 4/1/97

machine-made, cobalt glass: patent lip
finish, cylindrical nee~, rounded shoulder

bottleneck

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 13
15

1

Recorder: R. Brownlow/ A. Meyers
Date: 2/3/97, 2/10/97, 4/1/97

wide mouth bottle,
complete

machine-made, clear glass, embossing on
shoulder: "Premier"; embossing on round
base: a circle within a square and the
number 3 to the right

Use Dates: post 1893
8

1

bottleneck

improved tooled, aqua/light green glass

9

1

wine/champagne bottle,
base fragment

olive green glass, large mamelon base (or
kick-up)

10

1

beer/soda bottle fragment

aqua glass, embossed:
ttling Work
Houston
Texas

11

2

blue transfer-printed whiteware

ceramic sherds

Manufacturer: Owens Bottle Co., Toledo,
OH, and Fairmont, WV, 1911-1929.
Employed the Owens automatic Bottle
Machine, and later merged with the Illinois
Glass Company.
Use Dates: 1911-1929 (Toulouse 1971 :343)
16

1

stoneware jug fragment

interior and exterior salt glaze

17

1

bottleneck

machine-made, clear glass: three-part
variant of the prescription finish, tapered
neck

Use Dates: 20th century (S. Carlson,
personal communication)
12

1

ceramic sherd

green-glazed whiteware

13

1

ceramic sherd

Japanese Imari porcelain, blue on white

Use Dates: post 1893
18

1

patent medicine bottle,
complete

machine-made, clear glass with some
opalescence: patent lip finish, cylindrical
ball neck, rectangular paneled body, mold
seams run up the sides (no side panels).

Use Dates: 1868-1912 (S. Carlson, personal
communication)
14

1

Only base is embossed: "G.8"

Bristol-slip stoneware (rim) with green
sponging (see Robacker and Robacker
1978:118, 120)

ceramic sherd

Use Dates: 1893- ca.1920 (Santeford
1981:61)

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

D-20

447212/020018

Date: 5/25/97

D-21

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 19

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 19

Recorder: R. Brownlow/ A. Meyers
Date: 2/3/97, 2/10/97, 4/1/97

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 13

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 13

l
7

1

machine-made, cobalt glass: patent lip
finish, cylindrical nee~, rounded shoulder

bottleneck

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

15

1

Recorder: R. Brownlow/ A. Meyers
Date: 2/3/97, 2/10/97, 4/1/97

wide mouth bottle,
complete

machine-made, clear glass, embossing on
shoulder: "Premier"; embossing on round
base: a circle within a square and the
number 3 to the right

Use Dates: post 1893
8

1

bottleneck

improved tooled, aqua/light green glass

9

1

wine/champagne bottle,
base fragment

olive green glass, large mamelon base (or
kick-up)

10

1

beer/soda bottle fragment

aqua glass, embossed:
ttling Work
Houston
Texas

11

2

blue transfer-printed whiteware

ceramic sherds

Manufacturer: Owens Bottle Co., Toledo,
OH, and Fairmont, WV, 1911-1929.
Employed the Owens automatic Bottle
Machine, and later merged with the Illinois
Glass Company.
Use Dates: 1911-1929 (Toulouse 1971 :343)
16

1

stoneware jug fragment

interior and exterior salt glaze

17

1

bottleneck

machine-made, clear glass: three-part
variant of the prescription finish, tapered
neck

Use Dates: 20th century (S. Carlson,
personal communication)
12

1

ceramic sherd

green-glazed whiteware

13

1

ceramic sherd

Japanese Imari porcelain, blue on white

Use Dates: post 1893
18

1

patent medicine bottle,
complete

machine-made, clear glass with some
opalescence: patent lip finish, cylindrical
ball neck, rectangular paneled body, mold
seams run up the sides (no side panels).

Use Dates: 1868-1912 (S. Carlson, personal
communication)
14

1

Only base is embossed: "G.8"

Bristol-slip stoneware (rim) with green
sponging (see Robacker and Robacker
1978:118, 120)

ceramic sherd

Use Dates: 1893- ca.1920 (Santeford
1981:61)

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

D-20

447212/020018

Date: 5/25/97

D-21

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 19, SD #85 (east)
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 14

Lot
1

Count
1

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

roject Name: Allen Parkway Village
fficial State Site Number: 41HR886
rovenience: Locus 19, SD #85 (east)

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 5/1/97

Artifact Category

Comments

beer/soda bottle, complete

improved tooled design, dark amber glass:
crown finish, tapered neck, sloped shoulder,
body slightly tapered in, round base.
Striations on neck suggest a possible turnmolded design.
Embossing only on base: "B" above the
Greek "delta" (8) symbol.

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 14

1

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 5/1/97

pharmaceutical bottle,
complete

machine made, light green glass:
prescription finish, cylindrical neck,
rounded shoulders, straight body,
Philadelphia oval base with an apparent
Owens scar (post 1903), a ghost seam is
present on one side
Body embossed: "Groves Tasteless Chill
Tonic Prepared by Paris Medicine Co., St.
Louis."

Manufacturer: Unknown
Use Dates: 1892-ca. 1920 (see Deiss
198l:Table 1)
2

1

bottle neck

improved tooled design, aqua glass: PerryDavis type finish, cylindrical neck, seams
evident

3

1

ceramic sherd

brown transfer-print whiteware, rim
:fragment; floral design

Based embossed: an "I' in a diamond
(typical of Owens bottles) and the number
"13" outside the diamond

Groves Tonic, sold as early as 1899, was
intended for sufferers of malaria, chills, and
fever (Baldwin 1973:215).
Manufacturer: Illinois Glass Company,
Alton, IL, 1873-1929
Use Dates: 1916-1929 (Toulouse 1971 :264)
5

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, amethyst glass:
prescription finish, tapered neck
Use Dates: 1880- ca.1918 (Deiss
1981 :Table 1)

6

447212/020018

D-22

447212/020018

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, clear glass with
opalescence: reinforced prescription finish,
fluted shoulder
D-23

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 19, SD #85 (east)
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 14

7

1

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 5/1/97

drinking glass, nearly
complete

light green glass with opalescence, fluted
body

8

1

ceramic

Bristol-slip stoneware (rim), blue sponging
(see Robacker and Robacker 1978:118,
120)

9

1

ceramic

blue-banded slipware

10

1

ceramic

decal-printed and gilded annular whiteware,
polychrome floral motif

·ect Name: Allen Parkway Village
1cial State Site Number: 41HR886
venience: Locus 19, shovel test

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Level/Zone: 1
Depth (cmbs): 0-30
Bag Number: 15

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 4/3/97

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

pharmaceutical bottle,
nearly complete

machine-made, clear glass with some
opalescence: reinforced prescription finish,
tapered neck, rectangular body and base;
mold seams run diagonally up to and
encircle the lip.
embossed on front shoulder: "2" in a circle;
empty circle embossed on rear shoulder
'
embossed measurement marks on both sides
of the front panel; embossing on base: "I" in
a diamond, with "1" to the left and "5" to
the right, underneath is embossed "Lyric"

Use Dates: 1900-present (Haskell 1981:23)
11

1

whiteware, blue decoration

ceramic

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Manufacturer: Illinois Glass Company,
Alton, IL, 1873-1929

Date: 5/25/97

Use Dates: 1916-1929 (Toulouse 1971 :264)
3

flat glass

light green tint
thickness: 1.8 mm (.072 in)
1.8 mm (.072 in)
3.0 mm (.119 in)
Estimated use date range: ca.1850 - post
1915 (Roenke 1978:116)

Date: 5/25/97

4472121020018

D-24

D-25

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 19, shovel test
Level/Zone: 3
Depth (cmbs): 50-60
Bag Number: 16

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 4/17/97

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
roject Name: Allen Parkway Village
fficial State Site Number: 41HR886
rovenience: Locus 19, shovel test

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Level/Zone: 2
Depth (cmbs): 30-50
Bag Number: 17

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 4/3/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

2

patent medicine bottle,
panel fragments

clear glass with opalescence: rectangular
body paneled on all sides; no embossing

4

ceramic, soup tureen lid
fragments

whiteware, embossing around the rim
exterior

front panel, clear glass, embossed:
"McCormick & C" above "Baltimore"

1

ceramic sherd

salt-glazed stoneware

Use Dates: Unknown
2

1

utility glass

light green tint, grooves on one side

3

1

ceramic sherd

stoneware, probably from large jug, brown
interior glaze and exterior salt glazing

Date: 5/25/97

Use Dates: post 1890 (Rosenberg and
Kvietok 1981:65)

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Date: 5/25/97

D-26

447212/020018

D-27

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 20
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 18

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 4/17/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

pharmaceutical bottle,
nearly complete

improved tooled design, amethyst glass:
extract finish, tapered neck, rectangular
body with one front panel, Philadelphia
oval base

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
roject Name: Allen Parkway Village
fficial State Site Number: 41HR886
rovenience: Locus 20
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 18

embossing on front near shoulder: "2";
measurement marks embossed on both sides
of front panel

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 4/17/97

1

ceramic pitcher base

handpainted, polychrome white paste
earthenware

1

cermic sherd

handpainted white paste earthenware with
brown exterior and green interior

1

ceramic figurine

porcelain doll head, hollow

Date: 5/25/97
Use Dates: 1880- ca.1915 (Deiss
1981 :Table 1)
2

1

improved tooled design, light green glass:
crown finish, tapered neck

beer or soda bottleneck

Use Dates: 1892- ca.1920 (Deiss
1981 :Table 1)
3

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, aqua glass: oil
finish, cylindrical neck, rounded shoulders

4

1

bottleneck

improved tooled finish, clear glass:
prescription finish, tapered neck

5

1

pharmaceutical bottle,
panel fragment

amber glass, embossed on panel: "Wal?"
above "Family Medic[ine]"
Manufacturer: Unknown

6

1

whiteware with blue floral (stencil?) design.
Blue maker's mark indicates "Germany"

ceramic jar base

Use Dates: post 1885 (Kovel and Kovel
1986:229)
447212/020018

D-28

447212/020018

D-29

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 20, shovel test
Level/Zone: 1
Depth (cmbs): 0-15
Bag Number: 19

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 21, shovel test

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 4/23/97

Level/Zone: 1
Depth (cmbs): 0-23
Bag Number: 20

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 4/21/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, cobalt glass:
extract finish, cylindrical neck

1

bottleneck

2

1

ceramic sherd

plain whiteware with blue maker's mark:
"Warranted" and lion's crest

improved tooled design, amber glass:
extract type finish, cylindrical neck,
rounded shoulder, seam only to base of the
neck.

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, clear glass:
prescription finish, tapered neck.

2

flat glass

light green color
thickness: 1.7 mm (.069 in)
1.9 mm (.077 in)

Manufacturer: Crown Pottery Company,
Evansville, IN
Use Dates: post 1891 (Barber 1971
[1904]:163; Kovel and Kovel 1953:154)
3

1

ceramic sherd

salt-glazed stoneware, interior brown glaze

4

1

ceramic sherd

blue transfer-print whiteware
Use Dates: 1820s-1900 (Price 1981:26)

5

5

light green tint
Thickness: 2.4 mm (.097 in)
2.3 mm (.094 in)
2.0 mm (.079 in)
2.1 mm (.086 in)
1.3 mm (.051 in) 1835-1845

flat glass

Estimated use date range: ca. 1850-1870
(Roenke 1978:116)
4

1

bone fragment

Analyst: Allan Meyers

piece of butchered animal bone covered
with iron oxide

Date: 5/25/97

Estimated use date range: ca. 1860-1900
(Roenke 1978:116)

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Date: 5/25/97

D-30

447212/020018

D-31

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 22, SD #83 (east)
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 47-92
Bag Number: 21

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 22, SD #83 (east)
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 47-92
Bag Number: 21

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 4/28/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

patent medicine bottle,
complete

improved tooled design, aqua glass: oil
finish, tapered neck, sloped shoulders,
rectangular paneled body, mold seams run
diagonally up the bottle and disappear on
the neck.
Embossing front:
Chamberlain's
Colic Cholera and
Diarrhoea Remedy
side: "Des Moines, IA. U.S.A."
side: "Chamberlain's Med. Co."
base: "5"
Manufacturer: Davis L. and Izanna L.
Chamberlain began their business in
Marion, IA. They moved to Des Moines
and formulated a famous cough remedy in
1881. Their medicines reached nationwide
distribution.

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

1

2

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 4/28/97

patent medicine bottle,
complete

Embossing on both side panels reads:
"Sauer' s Extracts"
Manufacturer: Unknown
3

1

beer bottle, complete

improved tooled design, light green glass:
crown finish, tapered neck, sloped
shoulders, cylindrical body and round base.
embossing on body:
Houston Bottling Co.
Incorporated
Houston, Texas
embossing on base: "F"

4

1

whiskey bottle, complete

Use Dates: 1880-1915 (Rosenberg and
Kvietok 1981:34)

447212/020018

D-32

improved tooled design, clear glass: patent
lip finish, cylindrical ball neck, sloped
shoulders, rectangular paneled body, mold
seams run diagonally up bottle and
disappear on neck.

improved tooled design, amethyst glass:
brandy type finish, tapered neck, sloped
shoulders, rectangular body and base.
Embossing on body:
Bonnie Bros.
BONNIE [in circular design]
Louisville, KY.

447212/020018

D-33

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 22, SD #83 (east)
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 47-92
BagNumber: 21

5

1

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Locus 22, SD #83 (east)

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 4/28/97

sauce bottle, complete

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs): 47-92
Bag Number: 21

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 4/28/97

improved tooled design, light green glass
with heavy opalescence: club sauce finish,
cylindrical neck, rounded shoulders,
cylindrical body, round base.

1

milk bottle, complete

improved tooled design, light green glass
with heavy opalescence: wide mouth,
cylindrical neck, sloped shoulders, no
embossing.

embossing on body: "Lea & Perrins
Worcestershire Sauce"
embossing on base [serial number of the
mold that made the bottle]: J32D

1

stoneware jug, complete

Salt-glazed, light brown mineral slip above
the shoulder, interior glazing (post 1890).
Cylindrical body and shoulder with
circumference equal to the base (post 1900)
(Rosenberg and Kvietok 1981:65).

Manufacturer: John Duncan & Sons, New
York, NY, 1877-1920. American importer
of Lea and Perrins Sauce.

1

milk bottle top, complete

clear glass

1

stoneware lid (for a large
jar), 3/4 complete

salt-glazed, handle on top, embossed

s

Use Dates: ca. 1880-1900 (Toulouse
1971:277)
6

1

pharmaceutical bottle,
complete

improved tooled design, amber glass:
extract finish, cylindrical neck, rounded
shoulders, cylindrical body, round base.
embossing only on base: "463"

7

1

pharmaceutical bottle,
complete

improved tooled design, clear glass with
heavy opalescence: prescription finish,
scooped neck, 6-sided polygonal body.

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Date: 5/25/97

embossing on shoulder: "iii"
embossing on base:
Ramey
C. &R. Co.
Manufacturer: Unknown

4472121020018

D-34

447212/020018

D-35

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A 17212
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Monitoring
Provenience: SD#78 (east), North profile wall, Locus 23A
Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 22

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 5/1/97

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

wine/champagne
bottle, complete

tum-molded bottle design, olive green glass:
champagne finish with sloped top; tapered
shoulder; unembossed and cylindrical body;
large mamelon or kick-up base

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
dect Name: Allen Parkway Village
1cial State Site Number: 41HR886
venience: Locus 24

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 23

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 5/5/97

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

patent medicine bottle,
complete

improved tooled design, light green glass
with some opalescence: extract type finish,
cylindrical neck, rounded shoulder,
rectangular body with side panels (no front
panels), mold seams run diagonally and
disappear at neck.

striations on neck and finish indicate turn
molding; no seams evident

embossing on side panels: "Three in One
Oil Co." and '"Three in One"'

Use Dates: 1880-1905 (Muncy 1970:40)
1880-1920 (Rosenberg and
K vietok 1981: 26)

Manufacturer: Unknown

1

ceramic

whiteware with blue maker's mark:
K.T. & ?
S------V
CH? [China]

Date: 5/25/97

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Manufacturer: Knowles, Taylor, &
Knowles, East Liverpool, OH, 1870-1929
Use Dates: post 1901, ca. 1925 (Kovel and
Kovel 1986:183, 233)

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

D-36

447212/020018

Date: 5/25/97

D-37

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: SD #6 (east)

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 8/23/96

Level/Zone:
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 24

oject Name: Allen Parkway Village
Project Number: EH&A 17212
1cial State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Monitoring
ovenience: East side of Building 119, exposed after grading
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 25

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 2/7197

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

1

ceramic saucer, complete

plain whiteware,
blue maker's mark on bottom:
K.T.&K.
S-----V
CHINA
Manufacturer: Knowles, Taylor, &
Knowles, East Liverpool, OH, 1870-1929

1

beer bottle, complete

improved tooled design, aqua glass with
some opalescence: crown finish, bulged
neck, rounded shoulder, cylindrical body,
round base.
embossing only on base: "AB" (dipthong)
above "R 2"
Manufacturer: Adolphus Busch Glass
Manufacturing Co., Bellville, IL 18861907; St. Louis, MO, 1904-1928.

Use Dates: post 1901, ca. 1925 (Kovel and
Kovel 1986:183, 233)
2

1

improved tooled design, aqua glass with
some opalescence: crown finish, bulged
neck, rounded shoulder, cylindrical body,
round base.

beer bottle, complete

Use Dates: 1904-1907 (Toulouse 1971 :26)

Date: 5/25/97

embossing only on base:
AB (dipthong)
A 17
Manufacturer: Adolphus Busch Glass
Manufacturing Co., Bellville, IL 18861907; St. Louis, MO, 1904-1928.
Use Dates: 1904-1907 (Toulouse 1971:26)

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

Date: 5/25/97

D-38

447212/020018

D-39

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Number: EH&A 17212
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Type of Work: Monitoring
Provenience: South of Building #122, near SD #19 (east)
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 25

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Building #150 area

Recorder: A. Meyers
Date: 1/3/97

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 25

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 9/10/96, 11/21/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

2

1

patent medicine bottle,
complete

improved tooled design, aqua glass with
heavy opalescence: Perry Davis finish,
tapered neck, rectangular paneled body,
mold seams run diagonally and disappear
on neck, plate molds.

3

1

patent medicine bottle,
complete but broken

improved tooled design, aqua glass: oil
finish, tapered neck, sloped shoulders,
rectangular paneled body, mold seams run
diagonally up the bottle and disappear on
the neck.
Embossing: front:
Chamberlain's
Colic Cholera and
Diarrhoea Remedy
side: "Des Moines, IA. U.S.A."
side: "Chamberlain's Med. Co."
base: "4"
Manufacturer: Davis L. and Izanna L.
Chamberlain began their business in
Marion, IA. They moved to Des Moines
and formulated a famous cough remedy in
1881. Their medicines reached nationwide
distribution.

embossing on side panels: "Dr. S. Pitcher's"
and "Castoria". On base: "B.13."
Manufacturer: Samuel Pitcher, Barnstable,
MA. Pitcher's Castoria wa.S a children's
medicine as early as 1868
Use Dates: ca. 1880-1881 (Baldwin
1973:390; Wilson 1981:139)

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Date: 5/25/97
Use Dates: 1880-1915 (Rosenberg and
Kvietok 1981 :34)

447212/020018

D-40

4

1

bottleneck

machine-made, clear glass with
opalescence: prescription finish, cylindrical
neck.

5

1

bottleneck

machine-made, clear glass with
opalescence: patent lip finish, tapered ball
neck

447212/020018.

D-41

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Building #150 area
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 25

6

1

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

oject Name: Allen Parkway Village
1cial State Site Number: 41HR886
rovenience: Building #159
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 26

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 9/10/96, 11/21/96

machine-made, clear glass with
opalescence: continuous thread finish,
sloped shoulders, rectangular body

lotion bottle, complete

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 9/10/96

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

1

milk bottle, complete

improved tooled design (presumably), clear
glass with opalescence: wide mouth,
tapered neck, sloped shoulders, cylindrical
body

embossing on base:
3 Jergens 4
Lotion

embossing on body near base: "One Quart"
and "Reg. Cal." and "L-C A-1033-2"

Use Dates
7

1

aqua color, embossed:

glass insulator

embossing on base:
Patented No. 2075124
Bordens
46

mgray
9
8

1

four-hole type

shell button

5

Analyst: Allan Meyers

marbles

Date: 5/25/97

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

glass marbles; yellow; clear with lime
green; 2 clear with yellow; clear with blue,
white, yellow & brown

D-42

447212/020018

Date: 5/25/97

D-43

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
Project Name: Allen Parkway Village
Official State Site Number: 41HR886
Provenience: Building #161 area
Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 26

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS FORM
~ect Name:

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Allen Parkway Village
1cial State Site Number: 41HR886
venience: Building #167 area

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 9/24/96

Level/Zone: Surface
Depth (cmbs):
Bag Number: 27

Project Number: EH&A 17212
Type of Work: Monitoring

Recorder: R. Brownlow
Date: 12/5/96

Lot

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

Count

Artifact Category

Comments

3

1

bottleneck

improved tooled design, aqua glass: patent
lip finish, cylindrical neck, rounded
shoulders

1

patent medicine bottle,
complete

4

1

bottleneck

machine-made, amber glass: prescription
finish, cylindrical neck

machine-made, clear glass with
opalescence: patent lip finish, cylindrical
ball neck, rectangular body with three
panels.
embossing only on base: an "I' within a
diamond, and a 6 or 9 outside the diamond.

Use Dates: post 1893
5

1

Manufacturer: Illinois Glass Co., 18731929, Alton IL. In 1929 it merged with the
Owens Bottle Co. and became OwensIllinois Glass Company.

Modem handpainted Mexican ware,
polychrome

ceramic

Use Dates: 20th century (S. Carlson,
personal communication)
6

1

stamped: "ton" [Houston?]
"os."

brick fragment

Analyst: Allan Meyers

Use Dates: 1916-1929 (Toulouse 1971)
1

wide mouth bottle,
complete

clear glass with opalescence, embossed:
One Half Pint
Liquid
Lone Star Creamery Co.
[embossed star]
Phone P. 1931
Houston, Tex.

Date: 5/25/97

embossed on base: "L" within a circle
3

1

wooden utensil handle

Analyst: Allan Meyers

447212/020018

D-44

447212/020018

possible toothbrush

Date: 5/25/97

D-45

REFERENCES CITED

Baldwin,.J. K.
1973 A Collector's Guide to Patent and Proprietary Medicine Bottles of the Nineteenth
Century. Thomas Nelson, Inc., Nashville.
Barber, E. A.
1971 Marks ofAmerican Potters. Cracker Barrel Press, Southampton, New York.
[1904]
Deiss, Ronald William
1981 The Development and Application of a Chronology for American Glass. Midwestern
Archaeological Research Center, Illinois State University, Normal.
Haskell, H. W.
1981 The Middleton Place Privy House: An Archaeological View of Nineteenth Century
· Plantation Life. Popular Series 1. Institute of Archeology and Anthropology,
University of South Carolina, Columbia.

Santeford, L. G.
..
1981 Medicine Bottles: One Man's (or Woman's) Cure Becomes the Archeologist's Tool.
In A Guide for Historical Archaeology in lllinois, edited by C. E. Orser, Jr., pp. 6077. Research Paper, No. 1. Mid-American Research Center, Illinois State University,
Normal.
,
Steinbomer, R. A.
1982 Brickmaking in Texas: A History of the Industry and Its Product. Ms. on file Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
'
Toulouse, J. H.
1971 Bottle Makers and Their Marks. Thomas Nelson, Inc., New York.
Williams, P.
1971 Flow Blue China: An Aid to Identification. Fountain House East, Jeffersontown,
Kentucky.
Wilson, R. L.
1981 Bottles on the Western Frontier. University of Arizona Press, Tuscon.

Fike, R. E.
1987 The Bottle Book. Gibbs M. Smith, Salt Lake City.
Kovel, R., and T. Kovel
1986 Kovels' New Dictionary ofMarks. Crown, New York.
Munsey, D.
1970 The lllustrated Guide to Collecting Bottles. Hawthorn Books, New York.
Noel Hume, I.
1969 A Guide to Artifacts of Colonial America. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
Price, C.R.
1981 Early to Mid-Nineteenth Century Refined Earthenwares. In A Guide for Historical
Archaeology in Illinois, edited by C. E. Orser, Jr., pp. 24--48. Research Paper No. 1.
Mid-American Research Center, Illinois State University, Normal.
Robacker, E. F., and A. F. Robacker
1978 Spatterware and Sponge. A.S. Barnes and Company, Cranbury, New Jersey.
Roenke, K. G.
1978 Flat Glass: Its Use as a Dating Tool for Nineteenth Century Archaeological Sites in
the Pacific Northwest and Elsewhere. Northwest Anthropological Research Notes
12(2:2): 1-128.
Rosenberg, R. G., and D. P. Kvietok
1981 A Guide to Historic Artifacts. Ms.on file, PBS&J, Austin, Texas.

447212/020018

D-46

447212/020018

D-47

AppendixE

Osteological Data
by

Sharon M. Derrick and D. Gentry Steele

I'

AppendixE

This appendix (tables E-1 through E-5) contains data too detailed and volumino!-ls to be
incorporated into the text portion of this report. This detailed information is provided to assist
ther researchers in conducting comparative analyses between the TNCC population data and
that which may be obtained during future bioarchaeological studies. To facilitate such research,
complete Microsoft Excel spreadsheet files for each table are provided on a compact disc
enclosed inside the rear cover of this report.
Table E-1 is an inventory by burial number of the skeletal elements that were recovered
for each burial feature. This table is so extensive, only the first few pages have been formatted
and printed for presentation this report. As noted above, the entire appendix has been provided
in its original form as a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet located on a CD-ROM located inside the
rear cover of this report. Table E-2 lists the sample means for all cranial measurements taken for
the TNCC skeletal population. Table E-3 contains dental measurement means used to measure
sexual dimorphism in the TNCC population. Table E-4 lists the sample means for all postcranial
measurements taken for the TNCC skeletal population. Table E-5 provides a listing of discrete
trait observations made after examination of the crania and the dentition.

447212/020018

E-1

"

Surface Collection
ELEMENT
BURIAL QTY
0.1
I tibia
0.1
I femur
0.1
1 femur
I ulna
0.1
0.1
1 tibia
0.1
I tibia
foot prox. phalanx I
0.1
I
1 hand distal phalanx I
0.1
metacarpal 1
0.1
I
0.1
I calcaneus
I humerus
0.1
0.1
I radius
0.1
I femur
0.1
I femur
0.1
I
intemied. cuneiforme
0.1
I
femur
0.1
I humerus
0.1
I
femur
0.1
hand
phalanx
2
0.1
I tibia
0.1
1 femur
0.1
1 ulna
0.1
2 femur
0.1
femur
I
femur
0.1
I
humerus
0.1
I
0.1
I humerus
0.1
1 radius
0.1
I tibia
0.1
2 humerus
0.1
I metatarsal indet.
0.1
1 femur
0.1
1 hand phalanx

447212/020018

PORTION OF ELEMENT
complete
complete
complete shaft
minus distal end
complete shaft
diaphyseal fragment
complete
complete
minus proximal end
fragment
proximal end with articulation
complete
proximal end with articulation
diaphyseal fragment
fragment
distal shaft no articulation
diaphyseal fragment
diaphyseal fragment
complete shaft
diaphyseal fragment
proximal shaft no articulation
proximal end with articulation
diaphyseal fragment
diaphyseal fragment
proximal end with articulation
proximal shaft no articulation
distal shaft no articulation
distal end w/articulation
proximal shaft no articulation
distal shaft no articulation
complete shaft
proximal end with articulation
minus proximal end

SIDE
left
left
right
right
right
indet.
indet..
indet.
right
ind et.
indet.
left
ind et.
ind et.
indet.
left
indet.
indet.
indet.
indet.
left
left
indet.
ind et.
ind et.
left
left
left
right
indet.
indet.
indet.
indet.

AGE
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult 25-49
adult 25-49
adult25-49
older subadult/adult indet.
older subadult/adult indet.
older subadult/adult indet.
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
older subadult/adult indet.
adult25-49
adult 25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
subadult 0-24 years
older subadult/adult indet.
subadult 0-24 years
adult25-49
subadult 0-24 years
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
subadult 0-24 years
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49

SEX

·----

--------

indet.
female
female
-ind et.
indet.
indet.
ind et.
ind et.
ind et.
indet.
indet.
female
male
indet.
ind et.
male
ind et.
male
indet.
indet.
indet.
ind et.
indet.
ind et.
ind et.
ind
et.
-----·---ind et.
ind et.
indet.
indet.
indet.
ind et.
indet.

TableE-1
Human Remains Inventory by Burial Number

Page2of 654

Surface Collection
ELEMENT
BURIAL QTY
1 femur
0.1
0.1
1 humerus
0.1
1 femur
0.2
1 penn tooth
1 humerus
0.2
1 radius
0.2
0.2
1 tibia
0.2
1 femur
I
radius
0.2
1 ulna
0.2
0.2
1 metacarpal 2
0.3
1 tibia
0.3
1 tibia
1 humerus
0.4

!BURIAIJ OTY

ELEMENT

PORTION OF ELEMENT
proximal end with artic!llation
distal shaft no articulation
complete shaft
upper canine
complete shaft
distal end w/articulation
-·
complete shaft
proximal end with articulation
distal end w/articulation
minus proximal end
complete
proximal end with articulation
proximal shaft no articulation
distal shaft no articulation
--

PORTION OF ELEMENT

SIDE

calcaneus

complete or nearly com~_lrigbt

calcaneus

comolete or nearly comolete

caoitate

comolete or nearlv comolete

-------

AGE

SIDE
right
right
right
right
right
right
left
indet.
right
right
left
left
left
left

AGE CRITERIA

_ -~It (25-50+ year~)_Jbol!e texture and/or size

AGE
adult25-49
----- ---- -----adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49
adult25-49

-·-

-

-

----··

--

-

SEX
Jindeterminate

Jnon-applicable or indeterminate

left

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indetenninate

left

adult (25-50+ Years) [bone texture and/or size

lindetenninate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

ri

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

fragment

indetenninate

Iadult (25-50+ Years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindetenninate

lnon-aoolicable or indetenninate

cuboid

comolete or nearly comolete

left

adult (25-50+ Years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

femur

distal end with articulation

indetenninate

Iadult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

femur

comolete minus distal end

adult (25-50+ Years) [bone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

Inon-applicable or indeterminate

femur

distal end with articulation

adult (25-50+ Years) Ibone texture and/or si7.e Iindeterminate

lnon-apolicable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ Years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-apoJicable or indeterminate

gment
6

comolete or nearly comolete

femur

ent indeterminate

SEX
male
indet.
indet.
indet.
indet.
indet.
indet.
female
indet.
indet.
indet.
indet.
indet.
indet.

non-appltcable or
indeterminate
distal asoect
non-applicable or
indetenninate
·ct
non-app11cable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate

subchondral surface, or external
table
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
lipping is a sharp ridge,
sometimes curled with soicules
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate

femur

comolete minus proximal end

adult (25-50+ Years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

fibula

complete or nearly complete

adult (25-50+ years) [bone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indetenninate

fibula

comolete minus Proximal end

adult (25-50+ Years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-apolicable or indeterminate

fragment

adult (25-50+ Years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-apolicable or indeterminate

comolete

adult (25-50+ Years) lbone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

4

comolete or nearly comolete

adult (25-50+ Years) lbone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

2

complete or nearly complete

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

comolete or nearly comolete

adult (25-50+ years) [bone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoplicable or indeterminate

lipping is a sharp ridge,
sometimes curled with soicules

comolete or nearly comolete

adult (25-50+ Years) lbone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

lipping is a sharp ridge,
sometimes curled with spicules

coml'lete or nearly complete

adult (25-50+ Years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-apolicable or indeterminate

comolete minus distal end

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

comolete or nearly complete

adult (25-50+ Years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

9 Iflat bone indeterminate

foot proximal phalanx 1

4

.anx
4

harnate
harnate

447212/020018

comolete or nearly comolete

adult (25-50+ Years) lbone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

lnon-aoolicable or indeterminate

non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-app11cable or
indeterminate
non-appltcabJe or
indeterminate
non-appJtcabJe or
indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apolicable or indetenninate
non-aoPlicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

non-appltcabJe or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

osterior asoect

lipping is a sharp ridge,
sometimes curled with soicules

non-apolicable or indeterminate

Table E-1
Human Remains Inventory by Burial Number

Page4 of 654

l'UKHUNUJ<

BURIAL QTY

PORTION OF ELEMENT

ELEMENT

SIDE

AGE

AGE CRITERIA

SEX

SEX CRITERIA

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

left

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

proximal end with articulation

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

complete or nearly complete

left

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

distal end with articulation

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

1

---1

1

1

1

1

hand distal phalanx 1
hana a1sta1 phalanx
indeterminate
hana a1sta1 phalanx
indeterminate
bana 1D1arue pnruanx
indeterminate
bana llllame phalanx
indeterminate
hanCI nuaa1e phalanx
indeterminate
hand-iiiiCIC11e pnruanx
indeterminate
ihana 1D1ame pna1anx
indeterminate

I

I

hand oroximal ohalanx I

comolete or nearlv complete

left

adult .G1:5fuears)

indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
bone texture and/oi:_ si~ ------------

1

I

hand oroximal phalanx 2

complete or nearlv comolete

left

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

I

I

complete or nearly complete

left

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

1

1

diaohyseal fra1!111ent

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

1

4

distal end with articulation

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ Years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

1

1

hand proximal phalanx 3
hana proxnnal phalanx
indeterminate
nana pro,unra.i pnruanx
indeterminate
hana proxunru phalanx
indeterminate

comolete or nearlv comolete

left

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

1

1

intermediate cuneiforme

comolete or nearly complete

left

adult (25-50+ Years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

I

1

intermediate cuneiforme

comolete or nearly complete

right

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

1
1
1

1
1

1

1

2
1

1
1

1

complete or nearly complete
complete or nearly complete
distal end with articulation
distal end with articulation

-

~ ~lete

or nearlv comolete

lateral cuneiforme

complete or nearly comolete

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

right

adult (25-50+ Years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

long bone fra1!111ent indeterminate indeterminate

adult (25-5o+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aPolicable or indeterminate

I

1

lateral cuneiforme

complete or nearly complete

I

5

long bone indeterminate

diaphyseal fra1!111ent

1

13 long bone indeterminate

1

1

lunate

complete or nearlv complete

right

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

1

1

medial cuneiforme

complete or nearly complete

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

1

1

medial cuneiforme

comolete or nearly comolete

right

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

1

1

metacarnal 1

complete or nearly complete

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

1

1 metacarnal 2

complete or nearlv complete

right

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

1

I

metacamal 3

comolete minus distal end

left

adult (25-5o+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

1

1

metacarpal 4

complete or nearly complete

right

adult (25-5o+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

1

1

metaMmalS

comolete or nearlv comolete

rieht

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

Human R~mains l~~entory
BURIAL OTY

ELEMENT

I

I

meta~ 0 mal

1

I

1

PORTION OF ELEMENT

indeterminate

SIDE

AGE

AGE CRITERIA

posterior asoect
non-appllcable or
indeterminate
non-appllcable or
indeterminate
non-appllcable or
indeterminate
non-appucao1e or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-appltcao1e or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate

ruKllUNUl<'

SEX

SEX CRITERIA

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ Years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

metacarpal indeterminate

distal end with articulation

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

3

metaoodial indeterminate

fraoment

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

I

5

metaoodial indeterminate

fra1!111ent

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ Years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-annlicable or indeterminate

1
1

I
1

metatarsal I
metatarsal 1

complete or nearlY comolete
complete or nearly comolete

right
left

adult (25-So+ Years)
adult (25-50+ Years)

bone texture and/or size
bone texture and/or size

indeterminate
indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate

I

1

metatarsal 2

complete or near!Y comnlete

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

I

1

metatarsal 2

comolete minus distal end

right

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aonlicable or indeterminate

I

1

metatarsal 3

comolete or nearly comolete

left

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

1

1

metatarsal 3

comolete minus distal end

right

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

I

1

metatarsal 4

comolete minus distal end

left

adult (25-50+ Years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

I

1

metatarsal 4

comolete minus distal end

right

adult (25-50+ Years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-annlicable or indeterminate

I

1

metatarsal 5

comolete or nearlv comnlete

left

adult (25-50+ Years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-annlicable or indeterminate

I

1

metatarsal 5

comolete minus distal end

riglit

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

1

I

navicular

complete or nearly comnlete

left

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aonlicable or indeterminate

I

I

navicular

comolete or nearlv comnlete

right

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-anolicable or indeterminate

I

9

os coxa

os coxa fra1!111ent indeterminate

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

1

18 os coxa

os coxa fra!!.Illent indeterminate

indeterminate

adult (25-5o+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

1

1

oscoxa

acetabulum with oortion of ilium ar left

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

I

I

os coxa

- - _!schi~ent

left

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

1

I

os coxa

ischium fraoment

right

adult (25-50+ vearsl

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

447212/020018

non-appllcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-appucable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-appucable or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-appucable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applica6le or
indeterminate
non-appucable or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-appllcable or
indeterminate
non-appucable or
indeterminate
non-appllcable or
indeterminate
non-appltcao1e or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate

11rL ur·

l'ATnu-

LOGICAL EVIDENCE

non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoplicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoplicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoo!icable or indeterminate
lipping is a sharp ridge,
sometimes curled with soicules
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate

by Bu'rial Number

diaohyseal fra1!111ent

---

ELEMENT AFFECTED

ELEMENT AFFECTED

non-appllcao1e or
indeterminate
non-app11caole or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
distal epiphysis
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-appllcable or
indeterminate
non-appllcao1e or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-appllcable or
indeterminate
non-appJ1cao1e or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-appncan1e or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-appncao1e or
indeterminate
non-appncame or
indeterminate

i

x.- .... ur PATttu-

LOGICAL EVIDENCE

non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-annlicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-annlicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
compression fracture
non-aonlicable or indeterminate
non-annlicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-annlicable or indeterminate
non-annlicable or indeterminate
non-annlicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aonlicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-annlicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate

Table E-1
Human Remains Inventory by Burial Number
BURIAIJOTY

PORTION OF ELEMENT

ELEMENT

os coxa

SIDE

Iright

ischium fragment

AGE

AGE CRITERIA

Iadult (25-50+ years)

os coxa

SEX

Page 6 of 654

SEX CRITERIA

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-a licable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

os coxa

old adult (50+ xears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

oscoxa

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

,ateIla

complete or nearly complete

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

'ateIla

complete or nearlv complete

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

faiform

complete or nearlv complete

left

adult (25-50+_years) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

radius

distal end with articulation

left

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

radius

distal portion of shaft without artic1l left

adult (25-50+ vears) lbone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-aoplicable or indeterminate

scaphoid

complete or nearlv complete

left

Iadult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-apolicable or indeterminate

sesamoid

complete or nearlv complete

indeterminate

Iadult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-apolicable or indeterminate

2 lsesamoid

complete or nearly_c:o_111pl~

indeterminate

adult 25-50+ ears

non-a licable or indeterminate

complete or nearly complete __

rigllt_

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Imale

bone measurements

jleft

jadult (25-50+ years) jbone textur_e_ and/or size

indeterminate

non-a licable or indeterminate

indeterminate

Iadult (25-50+ vears) lbone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

talus

I . I.

I Icomplete or nearly complete

ltalus

mximal end with articulation

tibia
5 ltibia

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

ent indeterminate lleft

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate

11oia

mximal end with articulation

Ileft

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

11oia
tibia

complete or nearly complete
complete minus proximal end

rfaht
left

adult (25-50+ vears
adult (25-50+ vears

indeterminate
indeterminate

non-aoplicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate

traoezium

complete or nearlv comolete

left

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size !indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

distal portion of shaft without artic1lleft

adult (25-50+ vears

bone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

ulna
articular facet
indeterminate

fragment

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears

bone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

calcaneus

complete or nearly complete

left

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Ifemale

bone measurements

3

calcaneus

complete or nearly complete

adult (25-5o+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size !female

bone measurements

3

cuboid

complete or nearlv complete

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

cuboid

complete or nearlv complete

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

femur

ent

adult (25-50+

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

14 \femur

ent

adult (25-50+

indeterminate

licable or indeterminate

bone texture and/or size
bone texture and/or size

ELEMENT AFFECTED

LOGICAL EVIDENCE

non-a licable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-appllcable or
indeterminate
medial aspect
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate

licable or indeterminate
cortex, trabeculae
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoPlicable or indeterminate
non-aoplicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-a licable or indeterminate

subchondral surface, or external
table
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-appliCableOi'
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
anterior portion of shaft
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-appl1cable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-appllcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-appllcabte or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoplicable or indeterminate
non-aoplicable or indeterminate
both woven and sclerotic bone
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate

Human Remains Inventory by BuriafNuniber
IBURIAIJ QTY

ELEMENT

PORTION OF ELEMENT

I

SIDE

AGE

I

AGE CRITERIA

... _ ...,1-1uN vr

SEX

SEX CRITERIA

3

I I

lfibula

diaphyseal fragment

Iindeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) lbone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aPolicable or indeterminate

3

I I

!fibula

complete minus proximal end

Ileft

adult (25-50+ years) lbone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

I 4 lfibula

diaPhvseal fral!Inent

l!eft

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

I I

complete minus proximal end

Iright

adult {25-50+ years)

Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

lfibula

3

I 11 lfibula

diaphyseal fragment

Iricltt

adult (25-50+ years) lbone texture and/or size

indeterminate

3

I I

non-applicable or indeterminate

complete or nearlv complete

Ileft

adult (25-50+ vears) lbone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

complete or nearly complete

Iindeterminate

adult (25-50+ years)

Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

IProximal end with articulation

Iindeterminate

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

complete or nearlv complete

Ileft

adult (25-50+ years) /bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3
3

3

I 2
I I

indeterminate
oot 1st p afanx
indeterminate
oot 1st p alanx

I I

3

I 3

complete or nearly complete

Iindeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears)

Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

I I

indeterminate
oot !Ill e p alanx
Iindeterminate

3

complete or nearly complete

lleft

adult (25-50+ years) lbone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

I I

Ifoot proximal phalanx I

complete ornearlv complete

lleft

adult (25-50+ years) lbone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

I 1 Ifoot proximal phalanx I

complete or nearly complete

Ileft

adult (25-50+ years) !bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

:~w,.;. ....;

vu.; w;m articulation

vvu.1v:..,""' Vl U~auy ~Qffiplete

lleft

"'VIUl-'~'"'L"'

~omolete

lleft

m;;;41.~y ~Qffiplete

Ileft

Ifoot
foot proxun31
proximal phalanx
I !complete ornearly complete
ph31anx

jleft

jadult (25-50+ years)

distal end with articulation

indeterminate

distal end with articulation

indeterminate

VI

I I

3

I I

3

I

3
3

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate

Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

adult 25-50+ ears

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

adult 25-50+ ears

]bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

Iproximal oortion of shaft without rulright

adult (25-50+ vears)

Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

complete or nearly complete

left

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

Ibone texture and/or size indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

5

indeterminate

I 1 Ihumerus
I I

m;;auy

indeterminate

vv.a.u .... ~ .... LV VI

3

lriJlht

Iintermediate cuneiforme

3

I I

Iintermediate cuneiforme

complete or nearlv complete

right

adult (25-50+ Years)

3

I I

Ilateral cuneiforme

complete or nearly complete

left

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

I I

/lateral cuneiforme

complete or nearlv complete

ricltt

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

I I 0 /long bone indeterminate

diaphyseal fragment

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ years)

Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

I I

!medial cnneiforme

complete or nearly complete

left

adult (25-50+ vears)

Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable-or indeterminate

3

I I

Imedial cuneiforme

complete or nearly complete

right

adult (25-50+ vears)

Ibone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

3

I 1 Imetacamal indeterminate

diaphvseal fral!lllent

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/nr size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

447212/020018

111"1' u~· l"AlHU-

ELEMENT AFFECTED
LOGICAL EVIDENCE
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-aoplicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-appbcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-apolicable or indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applica@e or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-appbcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-appl!cable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-appl!cable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate

Page8 of 654

Table E-1
Human Remains Inventory by Burial Number
I

AGE

SIDE

PORTION OF ELEMENT

ELEMENT

BURIAI.lQTY

AGE CRITERIA

I

SEX

SEX CRITERIA

LOGICAL EVIDENCE

ELEMENT AFFECTED

non-apphcable or
indetenninate
non-applicable or
indetenninate
non-applicable or
indetenninate
non-apphcable or
indetenninate
non-apphcable or
indetenninate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indetenninate
non-apphcable or
indetenninate
non-applicable or
indetenninate
proxunal end and portion o

non-aoplicable or indetenninate

3

I 4 lmetaoodial indetenninate

complete or nearly complete

indetenninate

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size

\indetenninate

non-aoolicable or indetenninate

3

I 5 lmetaoodial indetenninate

fra~ent

indetenninate

adult (25-50+ years) \bone texture and/or size !indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

3

I I

Imetatarsal 1

comolete or nearly comolete

left

adult l25-5o+ years) Ibone texture and/or size

lindetenninate

non-aoolicable or indetenninate

3

I I !metatarsal I

complete or nearlv comolete

adult (25-50+ years) \bone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aoolicable or indetenninate

I I

!metatarsal 2

complete or nearlv comolete

adult 125-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aoolicable or indetenninate

3

I I

!metatarsal 2

complete or nearlv comolete

adult 125-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

3

I 1 !metatarsal 3

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

3

3

I I

Imetatarsal 3

comolete or nearlv complete

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-aoplicable or indetenninate

3

I I Imetatarsal 4

complete or nearlv comolete

ri

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-aPolicable or indetenninate

left

adult 25-50+ ears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-a licable or indetenninate

com lete or near! com lete

left

adult 25-50+ ears

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-a licable or indeterminate

complete ornearly com lete

!!~- ··--rn _adult (25-50+ years) bone_~exture and/or size

indeterminate

non-a lieablc or indeterminate

indetenninate
non-app tea e or

non-a licable or indeterminate

com lete ornearl com lete

left

adult (25-50+ ears)-- bone
texture
--·----·
· -and/or
- - -size
- - - indeterminate

non-a licable
or indeterminate
---··--·----

non-a lieable or indetenninate

complete or nearlv comolete

ri

adult (25-50+ vears

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoplicable or indeterminate

indetenninateeor
non-apptca
indeterminate
non-app tea e or

lfra1m1ent
com lete or nCiirl com lete

1right
left

adult 25-50+ ears

atella

bone texture and/or size
•-~·- .......u............;.....

indeterminate
~n..i ... t,..nnin~tP:

non-a licable or indeterminate
non-a licable or indetenninate

indeterminate
~steri~~~ect

non-a licable or indetenninate
woven bone fonnation

'roximal end with articulation

I~ metatarsal 4
3

I

3
3

I 1 Imetatarsal 5
1 navicular

3

I 1 lnavicular

~

1

roxim!!l_end ~'!!_articulation

metatarsal 5

1 lno•-"•

I

-n • ------'

i.. ___

VVll~

3

1

3

I I

Isesamoid

complete or nearlv comolete

indetenninate

adult (25-50+

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

3

I 3 Isesamoid

comolete or nearlv comolete

indetenninate

adult (25-50+

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

3

I 1 ltalus

complete or nearlv comolete

left

adult 125-50+ vears) lbone texhire and/or size !female

3

I 1 ltalus

complete or nearlv comolete

ril!ht

adult (25-50+ years) \bone texture and/or size \female

3

I 1 ltibia

complete minus oroximal end

left

adult (25-50+ years) \bone texture and/or size !indeterminate

3

I 17 ltibia

left

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size \indeterminate

3

I 1 ltibia

,roximal end with articulation

left

adult (25-50+ vears) \bone texture and/or size lindetenninate

3

I 1 ltibia

'roximal end

3

4 ltibia

3

tibia

3

4

ent

adult 25-Jv•

!;OJ.;)

""'hU.U. ...

am.uv-.. .,54.o_

adult 125-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size

2 ltibia
articular tacet
2 Iindeterminate

a-. ..... - .... - - - - - - - - -

lindetenninate

non-aPolicable or indeterminate
non-aPolicable or indetenninate
non-aoolicable or indetenninate

ELEMENT

PORTION OF ELEMENT

SIDE

non-annlicable or indeterminate
non-aPnlicable or indeterminate

woven bone formation

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

non-aoplicable or indeterminate

AGE

AGE CRITERIA

SEX

SEX CRITERIA

1

epiphvsis indeterminate

fra~ent

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ years) bone texture and/or size

indetenninate

non-applicable or indeterminate

4

2

epiphysis indeterminate

fragnient

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indetenninate

4

I

eoiohvsis indeterminate

os coxa fral!lllent indeterminate

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aPPlicable or indeterminate

4

1

femur

complete shaft (no epiphyses)

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

male

bone measurements

4

1

femur

diaphyseal fra~ent

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

4

I

femur

distal end with articulation

indeterminate

adult 125-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aPPlicable or indeterminate

4

1

femur

diaphyseal fragment

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

4

4

fibula

diaohyseal fragment

indeterminate

adult (25-5o+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

4

1

fibula

distal end with articulation

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

4

I

fibula

distal end with articulation

right

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

4

1

foot nroximal ohalanx 1

proximal end with articulation

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

fral!lllent

rildlt

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

4

5

long bone indetenninate

diaohvseal fra""'ent

indeterminate

4

4

long bone indeterminate

dianhvseal fral!lllent

left

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

4

1

medial cuneifonne

fragment

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

____£_

I

medial cuneifonne

~gment

ril!ht

adult (25-5o+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoplicable or indeterminate

4

2

metacarnal indeterminate

dianhvseal fra2111ent

indeterminate

adult 125-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

4

1

metatarsal 1

distal end with articulation

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

4

2

metatarsal indeterminate

Iproximal end with articulation

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

4

2

navicular

fragment

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

4

1

navicular

fra1m1ent

right

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

4

1

patella

complete or nearly complete

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

4

1

patella

fragment

left

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aonlicable or indeterminate

fra~ent

left

adult (25-50+ years)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

fraIDDent

ril!ht

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-aoPlicable or indeterminate

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

bone texture and/or size
bone texture and/or size

indeterminate
indetenninate

non-aPolicable or indeterminate
non-anolicable or indeterminate

4

2

tibia

distal end with articulation

left

adult (25-50+ years)

4
4

I
1

tibia
tibia

diaphyseal fragment
dianhvseal fra~ent

right
left

adult (25-50+ Years)
adult <25-50+ vears)

447212/020018

non-anPlicable or indeterminate

non-applicable or indetenninate

4

talus

non-aoplicable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ years) \bone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

1

non-aoolicable or indetenninate

non-annlicable or indeterminate

indeterminate

4

non-applicable or indetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

bone texture and/or size

talus

non-applicable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

adult !25-50+ years)

I

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

indeterminate

4

non-a plieable or indetenninate
-

non-annlicable or indeterminate

fra1m1ent

_

non-aoolicable or indetenninate

adult 125-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

canceuous oone rragment
indeterminate

intennediate cuneiforme

non-applicable or indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

non-apolicable or indeterminate 1 lindeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indetenninate
bone measurements
non-applicable or
indetenninate
bone measurements
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-aoplicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indetenninate
non-annlicable or indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-annlicable or indeterminate

7

I

non-applicable or indeterminate

nu11-ap11u"'ci'

4

4

non-aoplicable or indeterminate

sim le fracture

r•-----~~ Vl"

BURIAL QTY

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

ELEMENT AFFECTED

non-appllcao1e or
indeterminate
non-appucable or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indetenninate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-appllcao1e or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-appltcao1e or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-app11cable or
indeterminate
non-appllcaote or
indeterminate
non-app11cao1e or
indeterminate
non-app11came or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-appucao1e or
indeterminate
non-appucaote or
indeterminate
non-appucatlle or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-appllcao1e or
indeterminate
non-appl1cao1e or
indeterminate
non-appllcao1e or
indeterminate
non-appl1cable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
anterior oortion of shaft

i Ir.<. VI' .-;unvLOGICAL EVIDENCE

non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-anPlicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-apolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aPolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aPPlicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
sclerotic bone formation

Page 10 of 654

Table E-1
Human Remains Inventory by Burial Number

ELEMENT

BURIALIQTY

distal oortion of shaft without artictlri

5

humerus

5

humerus

5

lon_g bone indeterminate

diaphyseal fragment

long bone indeterminate_

_,dltiJlhys~al fragit1ent

. ?... -~

.ent indeterminate
indeterminate
jtight

!om: bone fragment indeterminate lleft

5

radius

5

radius

rnximal oortion of shaft without

5

scanula

:lenoid fossa onl

5

ulna

roximal end with articulation

5

ulna

rnximal nortion of shaft without

6

lone bone indeterminate

I

AGE CRITERIA

I

SEX CRITERIA

SEX

adult (25-50+ vears) \bone texture and/or size

!indeterminate

non-a· licable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-a· •licable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

!indeterminate

non-a· licable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-a' •licable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-a' •licable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-a1 licable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

\indeterminate

non-a licablc or indeterminate

adult 25-50+ ears

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-a licable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears)

bone texture and/or size

indeterminate

non-a •licable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-a Hcable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size \indeterminate

non-a Hcable or indeterminate

indeterminate

older subadult/adult in, bone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-a licable or indeterminate

indeterminate

older subadult/adult in' bone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-a licable or indeterminate

indeterminate

older subadult/adult in' bone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-a· •licable or indeterminate

indeterminate

older subadult/adult in' bone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-a· •licable or indeterminate

fra!lll1ent
shaft fragment

indeterminate

older subadult/adult inlbone texture and/or size

!indeterminate

non-a· •licable or indeterminate

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-a· •licahle or indeterminate

fra!lll1ent

indeterminate

non-a- licable or indeterminate

fra!lll1ent

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size !indeterminate

8

rib indeterminate
art1ciilar fucet
indeterminate
articular facet
indeterminate

fra!lll1ent

left

non-a1 •licahle or indeterminate

calcaneus

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size !indeterminate

8

rii:ht

non-•

ca:lcaneus
cancellous bone
indeterminate
cancellous bone
indeterminate
cancellous bone
indeterminate
cancellous oone
indeterminate
cancellous bone
indeterminate
cance
ous one agment
indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) \bone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

8

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

ent

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) \bone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

ent

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

ent

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size !indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

ent

indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) \bone texture and/or size

!indeterminate

non-aoPlicable or indeterminate

fra"111""'
-··-···
fragI!lent

indeterminate

adult 25-50+ ears

indeterminate

non-a licable or indeterminate

I 7

6

radius

6

ulna
craruaJ fragment
indeterminate

I 3

7
7

8

8
8

I

AGE

SIDE

humerus

I 3

5

I
left

fra!lll1ent

calcaneus

5

PORTION OF ELEMENT

8

I 2

8

I 2

8
8

I 3
) 4

ent

ent

bone texture and/or size

licable or indeterminate

ELEMENT AFFECTED

distal asEect
non-app!cable or
indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable 0r
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-apphcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate

LOGICAL EVIDENCE

lipping is a sharp ridge,
sometimes curled with soicules
non-aimlicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-apolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aPolicable or indeterminate
non-aPolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate.
nnn-ann1icable

non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aPolicable or indeterminate
non-apolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aPolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-apolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-apolicable or indeterminate
non-aPolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-a licable or indeterminate
- - - ---1:--1..1 .... __ ;..,..1,.,.,.,.....,.;n'2fl!I

IBURIAJiQTYI__

_f!'.1:'.f'.~~NT

11

PORTIONOFELEMENT

I

SIDE

AGE

AGE CRITERIA

I

SEX

I

SEX CRITERIA

I Inon-applicable
ELEMENT AFFECTED I
or

8

2

centrum

axial

adult (25-50+ vears) \bone texture and/or size \indeterminate

8

cervical vertebra
7 Iindeterminate

nerual area (arch structure

axial

adult (25-50+ vears) lbone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

left

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

indeterminate
non-applicable· or --indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applICable or
indeterminate

ent

non-applicable or indeterminate

8

clavicle

8

clavicle

8

clavicle

adult (25-50+ vears) \bone texture and/or size

!indeterminate

non-apolicable or indeterminate

inferior asoect

8

clavicle

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

inferior aspect

8

clavicle

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-aPolicable or indeterminate

inferior aspect

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-aoplicable or indeterminate

8

2

8

4

distal portion of shaft without artictlrii:ht

ent
axial
indeterminate

Iadult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size !indeterminate

non-aPolicable or indeterminate

ent

indeterminate

\adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

fral!lllent

indeterminate

ladult(25-50+ vears) !bone texture and/or size

!indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

fral!lllent

axial

Iadult (25-50+ vears) lbone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

fral!lllent

axial

!adult (25-50+ vears) !bone texture and/or size

!indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate

8

4 Iindeterminate

8

cortical.bone
9 !indeterminate
craruaJ. tragment
5 \indeterminate
craruaJ. tragment
17 !indeterminate

8
8

8

I

adult (25-50+ vears

left

fragment

8

8

femur

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size

Imale

bone measurements

8

4 !femur

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

\indeterminate

non-aoplicable or indeterminate

8

4 !femur

adult (25-5o+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

!indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

8

femur

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-apolicable or indeterminate

8

4 lfemur

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

8

3 !femur

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size \indeterminate

non-apolicable or indeterminate

jadult (25-50+ years) jbone texture and/or size

non-applicable or indeterminate

,roximal portion of shaft without
distal end with articulation
•roximal portion of shaft without

jfemur

I jproxirilal end with articulation

8

femur

rnximal end with articulation

8

femur

8

femur

8

2 \femur

8

fibula

8

I

distal end with articulation

I

jleft

ent

jindeterminate

bone measurements

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

bone measurements

Imale

Ibone texture and/or size \indetei:minate

adult(25-50+ vears)

non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
,Jicable or indeterminate

non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-appucable or
indeterminate
non-appllcable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate

non-apolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoplicable or indeterminate
non-aoplicable or indeterminate
non-applicable or indeterminate
non-aoPlicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate
non-apolicable or indeterminate

distal portion of shaft without articdrii:ht

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

adult (25-50+ vears) \bone texture and/or size

Iindeterminate

non-aoPlicable or indeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

8

fibula

roximal end with articulation

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size

!indeterminate

non-aoPlicable or indeterminate

8

fibula

rnximal portion of shaft without

adult (25-50+ vears) \bone texture and/or size Iindeterminate

non-applicable or indeterminate

447212/020018

\

ae
adult (25-5o+ vears) .I bone texture and/or size \male

distal

roximal end with articulation

LOGICAL EVIDENCE

non-applicable or
indeterminate
non-applicable or
indeterminate

non-aPolicable or indeterminate
non-aoplicable or indeterminate
non-aoolicable or indeterminate

Table E-1
Human Remains Inventory by Burial Number

mximal Dortion of shaft without ail left

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aDDlicable or indetenninate

ELEMENT AFFECTED
non-app11cable or
indetenninate

left

adult (25-50+ vears) lbone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aDDlicable or indetenninate

complete shaft

fibula

distal Dortion of shaft without articuleft

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aDDlicable or indetenninate

complete shaft

8

fibula

distal portion of shaft without articuleft

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

complete shaft

8

fibula

distal Dortion of shaft without artictlrieht

adult (25-50+ vears) lbone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

4

anterior aspect

axial

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size Imale

gualitatiYe momholo

I_

complete or nearly complete

indetenninate

Iadult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

8

indetenninate

Iadult (25-50+ years) lbone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

8

indetenninate

Iadult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

I Icomplete ornearly complete

findetenninate

fadult (25-50+ years) lbone texture and/or size )indeterminate_ ---lno11_:'1l'Pl~~able or indetenninate

I Icomplete omearly complete

Iindeterminate Iadult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size Iindeterminate Inon-applicable or indetenninate

BURIAUOTY

fibula

8

3 lfibula

8

8

I

8

I

8

I

8

I

PORTION OF ELEMENT

ELEMENT

8

ent

I

I lindetenninate

I

1

anx

Iindeterminate
c_

'

SIDE

UH

LL

'

8

AGE

AGE CRITERIA

Page 12 of 654

SEX

SEX CRITERIA

comolete or nearly complete

indetenninate

Iadult (25-50+ years) lbone texture and/or size lindetenninatc

non-applicable or indetenninate

distal end with articulation

indetenninate

Iadult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

rieht

adult (25-50+ vears) lbone texture and/or size Imale

bone measurements

left

adult (25-5o+ years) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

left

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aoolicable or indetenninate

distal Dortion of shaft without articuleft

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aoplicable or indetenninate

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

anx

8

humerus

8

2 !humerus

8

2 !humerus

8

humerus

'roximal end with articulation
en!

distal end with articulation

8

humerus

8

4 !humerus

adult (25-5o+ years) Ibone texture and/or size

lindetenninate

non-apolicable or indetenninate

8

2 !humerus

adult (25-5o+ years) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

8

humerus

adult (25-50+ vears) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aPDlicable or indetenninate

mximal portion of shaft without

8

2 Ilong bone indetenninate

.ent

indetenninate

Iadult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

8

2 Ilong bone indetenninate

.ent

indetenninate

Iadult (25-5o+ years) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

8

8 Ilong bone indetenninate

ent

indetenninate

!adult (25-50+ years) !bone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

8

8 Ilong bone indetenninate

ent

indetenninate

!adult (25-50+ years) !bone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

8

1S llone: bone indetenninate

,ent

indetenninate

Iadult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-aoplicable or indetenninate

adult (25-50+ years) Ibone texture and/or size lindetenninate

non-applicable or indetenninate

8

lunate

I

~ 4;;5~

'5

t;;j

63

0

0

87

0

0

~

~"'

$

~

if~ ~

$

$

¢

~

~

tv

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

198

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

210

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

'

0

0

0

0

0

non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indetenninate
non-aoolicable or indetenninate
non-apolicable or indetenninate
non-applicable or indetenninate

8

8

t

~

~

~-

8

Ci

,q;

I

~$

~

,q;

4¥"

0

0

0

0

0

24.5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

26

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

20.4

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

21.5

32.5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

101

llO

95

103

ll9

74.5

447212/020018

non-applicable or indetenninate

0

130

119

non-applicable or indetenninate

0

181

103

~·

....;

-4;"

non-applicable or indetenninate

0

446

95

~·

~

~.f

$

~

~

c

-ct;

1:1;·

non-applicable or indetenninate

0

0

Std.Dev.

.q;

....;

Inon-aIJI>licable or indetenninate

0

0
110

""

~

~

non-applicable or indetenninate

0

0
101

~"'

!

,q;

4¥"

non-applicable or indetenninate

~

f..,"

~$

$
r:5

non-aoolicable or indetenninate

0

0
130

# !

$
r:5

non-applicable or indetenninate

I

~

$

~

non-app1tca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-app1tca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-appucable or
indetenninate
non-appucame or
lindetenninate
non-applicable or
I Iindetenninate
Hnon-appltcable or
indeterminate
non-app1tca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-app11ca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-app1tca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-appuca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-app11ca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-appuca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-app11ca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-app11ca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-appllcal>le or
indetenninate
non-appuca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-app11ca1>1e or
indetenninate
non-appltcame or
indetenninate

0

0
181

.f

r:5

-ct;

0

387
Mean

~

~"'

~

non-aDDlicable or indetenninate
amellar bone tormatton on
periosteal surface
amellar bone tonnat1on on
periosteal surface
amellar bone tonnatton on
periosteal surface
ameuar bone tonnation on
,eriosteal surface
non-applicable or indetenninate

-·

8

LOGICAL EVIDENCE

74.5

0

0

0

0

0

0

19.5

13

0

0

136 112.5

0

106

0

30.5

30.5

0

22.5

0

26.5

26.5

33.5

25.5

32

32.5

30.5

14.5

30.5 24.25

14.5

21.975

24.125

33.5

25.5

32

32.5

14.5

2.475

3.126

14.5

8.1585

136 112.5

106

Table E-3
Dental Measurement Means
(measurements reported in millimeters)

Table E-3
Dental Measurement Means
(measurements reported in millimeters)

I

BURIAL TOOTH
22
358
27
358
27
194
194
22
22
257
22
257
158
27
26
22
27
51
26
27
22
171
22
379
22
195
27
195
27
46
22
115
27
211
446
27
51
22
27
171
435
27
27
206
446
22
22
435
27
74
22
206
27
139
139
22
22
211
442
22
22
404
27
220
87
27
27
185
185
22
27
157
27
393
27
121
201
22
205
27
423
27
15
27
157
22
22
165
237
27
22
74
337 .
27

447212/020018

SEX
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

CERV.MD
4.40
4.40
4.90
4.90
4.90
4.90
4.60
4.70
5.20
4.90
5.30
5.70
5.05
5.10
4.50
5.40
5.90
5.50
4.95
5.00
5.10
5.20
6.00
5.20
5.00
5.00
5.20
5.65
5.70
5.50
5.601
5.251
4.80
5.20
5.251
5.501
5.55
5.50
5.65
5.40
5.40
4.901
5.40!
5.45i
5.00!
5.00
5.00

BURIAL TOOTH I SEXi
177
221
2
205
22i
2
182
27:
2
202
27
2
197
27
2
260
27
2
182
22
2
61
27
2
260
22
2
220
22
2
121
22
2
393
22
2
197
22
2
177
27
2
165
27
2
387
22
2
201
27
2
25
2
221
288
22!
2
22:
280
2
278
27:
2
25
27
2
278
22
2
73
22!
2
175
27
2
175
22
2
146
22
2

CERV.BL
6.15
6.40
6.40
6.40
6.45
6.45
6.50
6.50
6.50
6.55
6.60
6.60
6.70
6.70
6.80
6.80
6.80
6.85
6.90
6.90
6.90
6.90
6.90
6.95
7.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
7.00
7.10
7.10
7.15
7.20
7.20
7.20
7.20
7.20
7.25
7.25
7.30
7.30
7.35
7.35
7.35
7.40
7.40
7.40

'

447212/020018

CERV.MD CERV.BL
5.05
7.40
5.40
7.40
5.40
7.40
5.30
7.45
5.30
7.45
5.30
7.45
5.50
7.45
5.00
7.50
5.10
7.50
5.25
7.50
5.40
7.50
5.50
7.50
5.50
7.50
5.10
7.55
5.45
7.55
5.10
7.60
5.80
7.60
5.10
7.65
5.55
7.65
5.60
7.70
5.80
7.70
4.85
7.75
5.90
7.80
5.40
8.00
6.20
8.50
6.70
8.50
5.55
7.00
5.28
7.17
STD=.40
STD=.47

Page2 of 2

""'0
"'
l?Jl
i:i...

... § § § §
§
.s
...."' + + -+ + -+
1:
5

~

r:--- r:--- r:--"')
<"?
('<")
I

...
"'Ol C?
=
N

<'l
I

00
('<")

('<")

BURIAL

oro oro

r:--- r:---

E--

....
5

0\

oO <'l
--!. I --!.

.. - '° '°
00

N
0\

Table E-5
Discrete Traits of the Cranium and Dentition

oO
N

\0

N

~

Ol

..
·;::

i5

§§§§§

.. + - -+ + +
"'
. + - -..= - 0

~

0

00

oro 00 ('<")
~ r:--~
<'"i <'l
--!. --!. --!. I
0

"'1"

\0
ll;<
0\
0 <'l
·;:: N <'l

N
0\

0\

~

('<")

('<")
('<")

~
I

"'1"

"')

N

('<")

oi

~

-<

'r'lt'"--\Ol:"--00

-0"'1"\0N

r-:

~

r-: r-:

:/: :;: :f:

:f:

oi

:f:

c;Nf0~~&'1

.c:o-oooi~r:---'<l"orooo°'

~

..="' "'= ..=
= :c
== s r....
5

~

Ol

~

Ol

5

Ol

E::::

TRAIT

63 auditory exostosis
63 auditory exostosis
63 Inca bone
63 mylohyoid bridge
63 supramastoid crest
63 tympanic dehiscence
63 tympanic dehiscence
157 mylohyoid bridge
157 supramastoid crest
165 Inca bone
165 mylohyoid bridge
165 Os japonicum
165 Os japonicum
198 Inca bone
210 auditory exostosis
210 auditory exostosis
210 Inca bone
210 mylohyoid bridge
210 mylohyoid bridge
210 Os japonicum
210 Os japonicum
210 palatine torus
210 supramastoid crest
210 supramastoid crest
210 tympanic dehiscence
210 tympanic dehiscence
218 Inca bone
218 mylohyoid bridge
218 Os japonicum
218 Os japonicum

~

447212/020016

SIDE
left
right
axial
right
right
left
right
left
left
axial
left
left
right
axial
left
right
axial
/left
right
left
right
axial
left
right
left
right
axial
left
left
rfaht

SCORE
absent
absent
absent
complete
present intermediate
absent
absent
absent
present
present
absent
absent
simple total division
present
absent
absent
absent
absent
absent
absent
absent
present
present robust
present robust
absent
absent
absent
absent
absent
absent

Page 1 of 6

Table E-5
Discrete Traits of the Cranium and Dentition
HAU•-•U

Page2of 6

HAU•-•U

Shoveling

Absent

Faint

Trace

Semishovel

Semishovel

Shovel

Shovel

Barrel

Total

Upper Central Incisors

45.65%

26.63%

17.93%

6.52%

1.09%

2.17%

0.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Upper Lateral Incisors

40.74%

20.63%

15.87%

7.94%

3.70%

8.47%

0.53%

2.12%

100.00%

2.20%

4.41%

0.44%

0.00%

Upper Canines

74.89%

5.73%

8.81%

3.52%

Lower Central Incisors

96.05%

2.82%

1.13%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Lower Lateral Incisors

96.12%

3.40%

0.49%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

100.00%

-----

100.00%

Flat

Trace

Weak

Moderate

Pronounced

Total

Upper Central Incisors

15.26%

45.26%

29.47%

9.47%

0.53%

100.00%

Upper Lateral Incisors

12.97%

20.54%

43.7.8%

12.43%

10.27%

100.00%

Double Shoveling

Absent

Faint

Trace

Semi-Double Shovel

Double
shovel

Pronounced
double shovel

Extreme
Double Shovel

Total

Upper Central Incisors

97.95%

1.54%

0.00%

0.51%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Labial Convexity

Upper Lateral Incisors

91.96%

3.02%

3.52%

1.51%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

Upper Canines

93.16%

1.28%

2.56%

2.56%

0.43%

0.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Upper Anterior Premolars

96.21%

1.42%

1.42%

0.95%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Lower Central Incisors

100.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Lower Lateral Incisors

100.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

100.00%

------ -

------

-

100.00%

-·---

Tuberculum Dentale

Absent

Faint

Trace

Strong

Pronounced

Weakcuspule

Strong Cusp

Total

Upper Central Incisors

56.91%

15.43%

12.77%

10.11%

4.79%

0.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Upper Lateral Incisors

69.52%

6.95%

5.35%

5.88%

6.95%

4.81%

0.53%

100.00%

Upper Canines

56.28%

7.44%

9.30%

7.91%

10.23%

8.84%

0.00%

100.00%

Peg-Shaped Incisor

Normal

Reduced

Peg

Total

Upper Lateral Incisors

98.00%

0.00%

2.00%

100.00%

Canine Mesia! Ridge

Ridges
Equal

Mesia! Ridge
Larger

Moderate Part
of TD

Large Part of TD

Total

Upper Canines

78.11%

9.45%

6.97%

5.47%

100.00%

Canine Distal Acc. Ridge

Absent

Faint

Devel.

Very Pronounced

Total

Upper Canines

46.23%

4.52%

14.57%

13.57%

14.57%

6.53%

100.00%

Lower Canines

59.35%

12.20%

14.23%

8.94%

3.25%

2.03%

100.00%

~uuu5•7

IMesial and Distal Acc. Cusps

Absent

Upper Anterior Premolars

92.56%

7.44%

Upper Posterior Premolars

94.90%

5.10%

Weakly Developed Moderately Devel.

Present

100.00%

"""I'

Tricusped Premolars

Absent

Cusp Present

Upper Anterior Premolars

99.11%

0.89%

Upper Posterior Premolars

99.51%

- -

-

-~-

- --·

...

-

Total

---~-

---

100.00%

0.49%

100.00%

Metacone

Absent

Attached
Ridge

Faint Cuspule

Weak Cusp

Cusp

Large Cusp

Very Large
Cusp

Upper First Molars

0.00%

0.00%

0.43%

0.43%

25.64%

43.59%

29.91%

In termed

Upper Second Molars

0.00%

0.00%

0.85%

2.99%

42.31%

44.02%

9.83%

Upper Third Molars

1.55%

1.03%

9.79%

36.60%

34.54%

13.40%

3.09%

Hypocone

Absent

Faint Ridge

Faint Cuspule

Small Cusp

Moderate cusp

Large Cusp

Very Large
Cusp

Upper First Molars

0.00%

0.42%

1.27%

2.54%

18.22%

41.10%

36.44%

Upper Second Molars

19.31%

5.15%

7.73%

21.03%

22.32%

16.31%

8.15%

Upper Third Molars

19.25%

18.18%

25.13%

17.65%

13.90%

3.74%

2.14%

Total
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%

Total
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%

•·auu

Metaconule

Absent

Cuspule

Trace Cuspule

Small Cuspule

Small Cusp

Medium Cusp

Upper First Molars

73.21%

4.02%

11.16%

8.93%

2.23%

0.45%

Total

Upper Second Molars

65.93%

10.18%

9.29%

10.18%

3.98%

0.44%

Upper Third Molars

62.50%

6.77%

6.77%

18.23%

4.69%

1.04%

100.00%
100.00%
100.00%

Carabelli's Trait

Absent

Groove

Pir

Small Y-shape

Large Y-shape

Small Cusp

Upper First Molars

45.02%

6.93%

7.79%

7.36%

8.66%

14.29%

4.76%

Upper Second Molars
!upper Third Molars

Medium Cusp Large Cusp

84.32%

2.54%

4.24%

3.81%

1.69%

2.54%

0.42%

0.42%

82.47%

1.03%

3.09%

2.58%

3.09%

5.67%

1.55%

0.52%

100.00%
100.00%
100.00%

Free PegVery Large Cusp shaped Crown

Parastyle

Absent

Pit

Small Cusp

Medium Cusp

Large Cusp

Upper First Molars

98.32%

0.84%

0.00%

0.84%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

Upper Second Molars

98.32%

0.00%

0.00%

1.68%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

Upper Third Molars

95.96%

1.01%

2.53%

0.51%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

447212/020018

Total

5.19%

Total

.

100.00%
100.00%
100.00%

Page4of 6

Table E-5
Discrete Traits of the Cranium and Dentition

Total
Enamel Extensions

Absent

Faint

Medium

Long

Upper Anterior Premolars

87.43%

12.00%

0.57%

0.00%

Upper Posterior Premolars

91.93%

8.07%

0.00%

0.00%

Upper First Molars

73.44%

23.96%

1.56%

1.04%

Upper Second Molars

60.78%

33.33%

4.90%

0.98%

Upper Third Molars

74.52%

22.93%

2.55%

0.00%

Lower Anterior Premolars

98.44%

1.56%

0.00%

0.00%

Lower Posterior Premolars

97.87%

2.13%

0.00%

0.00%

Lower First Molars

69.89%

29.03%

1.08%

0.00%

Lower Second Molars

51.81%

37.31%

7.77%

3.11%

Lower Third Molars

62.07%

35.63%

1.15%

1.15%

One Root

Two Roots

Three Roots

Upper Anterior Premolars

2.92%

49.64%

47.45%

Upper Posterior Premolars

3.23%

79.03%

17.74%

One Root

Two Roots

Three Roots

Four Roots

Upper First Molars

1.20%

2.40%

95.81%

0.60%

Upper Second Molars

5.75%

10.92%

83.33%

0.00%

Upper Third Molars

18.80%

22.56%

57.89%

0.75%

Peg-Shaped Molar

Normal

Shriveled

Peg-Shaped

Upper Third Molars

98.51%

0.99%

0.50%

Odontome

Absent

Present

Upper Anterior Premolars

96.60%

3.40%

Upper Posterior Premolars

95.81%

4.19%

Lower Anterior Premolars

100.00%

0.00%

Lower Posterior Premolars

100.00%

0.00%

100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%

Total
Upper Premolar Root Number

100.00%
100.00%

----

Upper Molar Root Number

Total

--~-----

100.00%
100.00%
100.00%

Total
100.00%

Total
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%

ICongenital Absence

Present

Tooth Absent

Upper Lateral Incisors

100.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Upper Posterior Premolars

99.07%

0.93%

100.00%

Upper Third Molars

100.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Lower Central Incisors

100.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Lower Posterior Premolars

100.00%

0.00%

!Lower Third Molars

100.00%

0.00%

100.00%

·~~~~~~j--~

!Lower Canine Root Number
!Lower Canines

One Root
98.37%

100.00%

I Two Roots
I 1.63%

Total
100.00%

Two Cusps, Mesia!
Much Larger
One or Two Cusps

Two Cusps,
Mesia! Larger

Two Cusps,
Two Cusps, Equal Two Cusps, Distal Much Two Cusps, Distal Very
Size
Distal Larger
Larger
Much Larger

Premolar Lingual Cusp

No Cusp

One Cusp

Lower Anterior Premolars

36.96%

8.26%

20.43%

16.96%

6.52%

2.61%

1.30%

0.43%

Lower Posterior Premolars

30.26%

7.46%

35.53%

16.23%

1.32%

0.88%

0.00%

0.00%

Three Cusps,
Equal Size

Three Cusps, Mesia!
Much Larger

Total

3.04%

0.87%

2.61%

100.00%

2.19%

4.82%

1.32%

100.00%

..... g .._

u•uuuui;

UlUUY"'

!Tome's Root

Absent

Present

Moderately Deep

Deep

Distal

Two Free Roots

Total

Lower Anterior Premolars

60.90%

9.02%

13.53%

12.03%

2.26%

2.26%

100.00%

Anterior Fovea

Absent

Groove Longer

Groove Long,
Ridge Robust

Lower Frrst Molars

22.51%

18.85%

28.80%

11.52%

18.32%

100.00%

Lower Second Molars

21.13%

14.43%

27.32%

19.59%

17.53%

100.00%

Lowei: Third Molars

27.12%

19.77%

11.86%

18.08%

23.16%

100.00%

1

Weak Ridge, Ridge and Groove
Faint Groove
Larger

I

Total

y

x

+

Total

Lower First Molars

83.33%

7.07%

9.60%

100.00%

Lower Second Molars

30.81%

44.44%

24.75%

100.00%

Lower Third Molars

38.04%

22.83%

39.13%

100.00%

Groove Pattern

1-4Present

Present

Cusp 6 Present

Total

Lower First Molars

4.41%

82.84%

12.75%

100.00%

Lower Second Molars

66.50%

29.56%

3.94%

100.00%

Lower Third Molars

32.61%

42.93%

24.46%

100.00%

Cusp Number

447212/020018

Table E-5
Discrete Traits of the Cranium and Dentition

Page6 of 6

Deflecting Wrinkle

Absent

Medial Ridge
Straight

MR Deflected
Distally

MR Contacts
Cusp4

Total

Lower First Molars

50.32%

12.26%

26.45%

I0.97%

100.00%

Lower Second Molars

78.95%

9.36%

8.77%

2.92%

100.00%

Lower Third Molars

70.35%

12.79%

12.79%

4.07%

100.00%

Protostylid

Absent

Pit in Bnccal
Groove

Buccal Groove
Curved Distally

Faint Secondary
Groove

Groove More
Prounced

Lower First Molars

47.96%

23.98%

26.24%

0.45%

0.45%

Secondary Groove
Weak or
Easily Seen
Small Cusp

Cusp with
Free Apex

Total
100.00%

0.45%

0.45%

0.00%

Lower Second Molars

61.06%

19.71%

17.79%

0.00%

0.48%

0.48%

0.48%

0.00%

100.00%

Lower Third Molars

65.63%

6.25%

24.48%

0.52%

0.00%

0.52%

1.56%

1.04%

100.00%

Cusps

Absent

Very Small

Small

Medium

Large

Very Large

Total

Lower First Molars

5.03%

3.52%

8.04%

12.56%

28.14%

42.71%

100.00%

Lower Second Molars

66.83%

8.91%

5.94%

8.91%

6.93%

2.48%

100.00%

Lower Third Molars

33.51%

9.04%

10.64%

12.77%

17.55%

16.49%

100.00%

Cusp6

Absent

Much
Smaller than
Cusps

Smaller than
Cusps

Equal to Cusp S

Larger than
Cusps

Much Larger than
Cusps

Total

Lower First Molars

88.06%

4.98%

3.98%

1.49%

0.00%

1.49%

100.00%

Lower Second Molars

96.60%

0.49%

2.43%

0.49%

0.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Lower Third Molars

76.68%

3.63%

12.95%

5.18%

1.04%

0.52%

100.00%

-·------------

-----

....

Cusp7

Absent

Faint Cusp

Faint Tipless Cusp

Small Cusp

Medium Cusp

Large Cusp

Total

Lower First Molars

91.00%

1.42%

2.37%

3.32%

1.90%

0.00%

100.00%

Lower Second Molars

97.18%

1.41%

0.94%

0.47%

0.00%

0.00%

100.00%

Lower Third Molars

93.62%

1.60%

2.66%

1.60%

0.53%

0.00%

100.00%

One Root

Two Roots

Three Roots

48.72%

50.64%

0.64%

100.00%

Lower Molar Root Number
Lower First Molars

------

----

-·--

-~------

-------·--- - -

Total

---~---------------

-----

Lower Second Molars

4.29%

7.36%

88.34%

100.00%

Lower Third Molars

13.89%

81.25%

4.86%

100.00%

n

0

~

$':

~-

g

(1)

~

~

CT
~

[
~

(J)

>--3

~
(J)
C/l

~

~

[

~~

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Plaque Type 2
Provenience: Feature 336 (depicted).
Frequency: 1
Description: Universal plate with changeable inscriptions. Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal.
Makers mark: none
References:

Cincinnati Coffin Company (1879, 1880, 1881) Universal Plate #1
Cincinnati Coffin Company (1879, 1881, 1883) Inscription No. 5

Estimated date range: ca.1879-1881

F-1

:I
i
i

l

I

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM
0

Plaque Type 3

Plaque Type 4

Provenience: Feature 419 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 313 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Inscription= "OUR DARLING".

Description: Made of a hard, non ferrous metal. Inscription = "OUR BABE".

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References:

posSioly Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880, 1881, 1883) No. 19
Kregel Casket Company (1895) No. 57

Estimated date range: none
Estimated date range: ca.1879-1895 (includes dates from associated hardware types)

F-2

F-3

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Plaque Type 6a
Provenience: Feature 418 (depicted); Features 250, 397, 422.

Plaque Type 6b
Provenience: Feature 235 (depicted).

Frequency:4
Description: Universal plate with changeable inscriptions. Silver plate on white metal
(Cincinnati Coffin Company 1880, 1881, 1883). Inscription= ''AT REST".

Description: Universal plaque with changeable inscriptions. Silver plated on white metal
(Cincinnati Coffin Company 1880, 1883). Inscription= ''MOTHER".

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References:

R~ferences:

Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880, 1881), Universal Plate No. 3
Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880, 1881, 1883), Inscription No. 5
Plate= Hacker-Norton and Trinkley (1984:28) no date

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1883

Cincinnati CoffinCompany(l880, 1883) Inscription No. 3
Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880), Universal Plate No. 3
Plate= Hacker-Norton and Trinkley (1984:28) no date

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1883

F-4

F-5

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Plaque Type 9a

Plaque Type 6c
Provenience: Feature 397 (depicted); Feature 418.

Provenience: Feature 276 (depicted).

Frequency:2

Frequency: I

Description: Universal plate with changeable inscriptions. Silver plated on white metal
(Cincinnati Coffin Company 1880, 1883). Inscription= ''OUR LOVED ONE".

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Inscription= "AT REST".
Makers mark: ''PAT. JUNE 1st 1880 No. 64

Makers mark: none
References:

References: none

Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880), Universal Plate No. 3
Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880, 1883) Inscription No. 20
Hacker-Norton and Trinkley (1984: 28) no date

Estimated date range: >1880

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1883

F-6

F-7

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

---------------------,

I
I
l
I
I
I
I
F=========;::: - - - - - - - - _I
0 0 0 0 0 0 o{ r) r) (°J- rJ ()- rJ -,

t:::========== = = =======I
6.5 inches

Plaque Type 9b

.,
I

Plaque Type 10

Provenience: Feature 72 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 295 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Inscription= "AT REST".

Description: A thin, cupreous metal plate, very poorly preserved. Inscription= "[AT RE]ST".

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardware types)

Estimated date range: none

F-8

F-9

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project
--------..,--------~~----,~~------

"/'/-o."0.;d;~z_'!Jd;:Zi;;~rw:.;;,,,;,.:;..~;;,.f~~-'::..:..·.

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

---··--·----

,

Plaque Type 13

Plaque Type 14

Provenience: Feature 423 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 99 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Inscription= "AT REST".

Description: A thin lead sheet. Inscription= "AT REST".

Makers mark: #2060

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-10

F-11

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Plaque Type 15

Plaque Type 16

Provenience: Feature 43 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 57 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: A thin lead sheet. Inscription not readable.

Description: A thin brass or copper plaque. Inscription= "OUR DARLJNG".

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-12

F-13

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Plaque Type 17

Plaque Type 19

Provenience: Feature 318 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 39 (depicted); Feature 367.

Frequency: 1

Frequency:2

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Inscription= ''OUR DARLING".

Description: A thin lead sheet. Inscription = ''AT REST".

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: Cincinnati Coffin Company (1879) No. 577.

References: none

Estimated date range: ca.1879-1881 (including dates from associated hardware types)

Estimated date range: none

F-14

F-15

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Plaque Type 20
Provenience: Feature 368 (depicted).

Plaque Type 21
Provenience: Feature 365 (depicted); Features 8, 334, 362.

Frequency: 1
Description: A thin lead sheet. The design is barely visible. Inscription = ''OUR LOVED ONE".

Description: Cast metal name plate (Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company, 1905).
Inscription= "AT REST".

Makers mark: none
Makers mark: none
References: none
References:
Estimated date range: ca.1895 (date from associated hardware type)

Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company (1905) No. 92E
Dockall, Powell, and Steele (1996:69) Plaque Type C = 1910-1925
Rose (1985:96) ca.1900-1927

Estimated date range: ca.1893-1905 (including dates from associated hardware types).

F-16

F-17

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM
~

0

l

z

~

~

5

Plaque Type 22

Plaque Type 23

Provenience: Feature 361 (depicted); Feature 387.

Provenience: Feature 21 (depicted); Feature 90.

Frequency:2

Frequency:2

Description: Cast metal name plate (Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company, 1905).
Inscription = ''REST IN PEACE".

Description: Thin, cupreous metai very poorly preserved. ·
Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none
References: none
References:

Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company (1905) No. 60F
Rose (1985:47) with a different inscription= 1900-1925

Estimated date range: ca. 1905 (date from associated hardware type(

Estimated date range: ca.1895-1905 (including dates from associated hardware types)

F-18

F-19

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

CM
0

2

-;,

4

5

0

2

J

4

5

j_

Plaque Type 24

Plaque Type 25

Provenience: Feature 267 (depicted); Feature 337.

Provenience: Feature 7 (depicted).

Frequency:2

Frequency: 1

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Inscription= ''AT REST".

Description: Made of a hard, ferrous metal. Inscription= ''OUR DARLING".

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: S&CO. #125

References:

References: none

DockaR PoweR and Steele (1996:60) Plaque B = 1900-1915
Rose (1985:59) 1900-1927

Estimated date range: none
Estimated date range: ca.1879-1881 (dates from associated hardware types)

F-20

F-21

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

c

ti

ti

0

0

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

c

IJ

Plaque Type 27

Plaque Type 26
Provenience: Feature 151 (depicted); Features 178, 273, 404.

Provenience: Feature 266 (depicted).

Frequency:4

Frequency: 1

Description: A thln, cupreous metal plate. Inscription = "AT REST".

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Inscription= "AT REST".

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: Taylor, et. al. (1986:34) 1891-1937

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-22

F-23

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

Plaque _Type 28

Plaque Type 29

Provenience: Feature 239 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 209 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: A thin cupreous metal plate, very poorly preserved. Inscription= ''OUR
DARLING".

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Inscription= "OUR BABE".
Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none
References: none
References: none
Estimated date range: none
Estimated date range: none

F-24

F-25

!

'I

'!

I

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project
CM

Plaque Type 30

Plaque Type 32

Provenience: Feature 366 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 79 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: A thin lead sheet. Inscription= "AT REST".

Description: A thin, cupreous metal sheet, very poorly preserved, with inscription ''AT REST".

l\fakers mark: none

l\fakersmark:none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-26

F-27

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Plaque Type 33

Plaque Type 34

Provenience: Feature 262 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 388 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: Made of a har~ non-ferrous metal. Inscription "AT REST".

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Inscription ''AT REST".

l\'lakersmark:none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: Rose (1985:71) 1900-1927.

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: ca.1893-1905 (dates from associated hardware types).

F-28

F-29

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

Plaque Type 35

Plaque Type 36

Provenience: Feature 391 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 264 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Inscription= ''OUR LOVED ONE".

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Inscription= ''AT REST".

Makers mark: none

~akersmark:none

References: Hacker-Norton and Trinkley (1984:25) with a different inscription - no date

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-30

F-31

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Provenience: Feature 145 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 10 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: A thin cupreous metal sheet with an illegible inscription

Description: A thin, cupreous metal plaque. Inscription unknown.

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-32

F-33

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

Ornament Type 1

Ornament Type 2

Provenience: Feature 336 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 336 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: A hard, non-ferrous metal in the shape of an acorn.

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal in the shape of oak leaves.

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: ca.1879-1881 (dates from associated hardware type).

Estimated date range: ca.1879-1881 (dates from associated hardware type).

F-34

F-35

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

Ornament Type 3

Ornament Type 4

Provenience: Feature 387 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 3 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal.

Description: Made of a cupreous metal. A wheat design.

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: Zanesville Coffin Company (1880) Ornament No. 23

References: none

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905 (including dates from associated hardware types).

Estimated date range: none

F-36

F-37

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery El)cavation Project

CM

l

0

Ornament Type 5

Ornament Type 6

Provenience: Feature 175 (depicted); Feature 380.

Provenience: Feature 110 (depicted).

Frequency:2

Frequency: 1

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal Shaped like a Dove.

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal. Unidentified fraternal symbol.

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: #38

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905 (dates from asso.ciatedhardware types).

Estimated date range: none

F-38

F-39

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

Coffin Ornament

Ornament Type 7
Provenience: Feature 201 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 395 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal Cross ornament (Kregel Casket Company,
1895).

Description: Made of a hard, non-ferrous metal Unidentiµed shape.

Makers mark: none
References:

Makers mark: none
References: none

Kregel Casket Company (1895) No. 91X.
McReynolds (1981:49) 1890-1920

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: ca.1895

F-40

F-41

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

Ornament Impression
Provenience: Feature 185 (depicted).

Coffin Ornament
Provenience: Feature 3 (depicted).

Frequency: 1
Description: A floral design of cupreous metal

Description: Fragment of a flower made from cuprepus metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-42

F-43

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

Provenience: Feature 185 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 262 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: Stems from a floral bouquet, made of a hard, non-ferrous metal.

Description: Made of a thin cupreous metal, a flower design.

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-44

F-45

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM
I...·_____
0

I

2

Caplifter Type 1

Caplifter Type 2

Provenience: Feature 211 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 397 (depicted); Feature 421.

Frequency: 1 .

Frequency:2

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References:

Estimated date range: none

Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880) Caplifter No. 30
Kregel Casket Company (1895) Caplifter No. 8
Lebo (1988:70) 1880-1934
found attached to Escutcheon Type 25 (ca.1880-1895)

Estimated date range: ca.l880-1895

F-46

F-47

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

CM

Caplifter Type 4

Caplifter Type 3
Provenience: Feature 373 (depicted); Feature 344.

Frequency: 1 ·

Frequency:2

Description: har~ non-ferrous metal

Description: har~ non-ferrous metal

Makersm11rk:none

Makers m11rk: none
References:

Provenience: Feature 72 (depicted).

Zanesville Coffin Company (1880) Capli:fter No. 3
Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880, 1881) Caplifter No. 6

References: none
Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardware type).

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905 (includes dates from associated hardware types)

F-48

F-49

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0
0

Caplifter Type 5a (small)

Caplifter Type 5b (large)

Provenience: Feature 435 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 182 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1 ·

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers m~rk: none

Makers m~rk: none

References: none

References:

Kogon and Mayer (1995:147) Late Period, post-1881.
found attached to Escutcheon Type 21

Estimated date range: none
Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardware type).

F-50

F-51

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project
----------------

-

CM

CM
0

Caplifter Type 6

Caplifter Type 7

Provenience: Feature 267 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 251 (depicted); Feature 235.

Frequency: 1

Frequency:2

Description: Silver plated caplifter or thumbscrew (Cincinnati Coffin Company, 1879, 1880,
1881)

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal
Makers mflrk: none

Makers m?rk: none
References: Kregel Casket Company (1895) Capscrew No. 30
References: Cincinnati Coffin Company (1879, 1880, 1881) No. 4
Estimated date range: ca.1895-1905 (includes dates from associated hardware types).
Estimated date range: ca.1879-1881

F-52

F-53

................_

~~~----------------

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

(J\

Caplifter Type 8

Caplifter Type 9

Provenience: Feature 205 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 387 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: found attached to Escutcheon Type 2

References:

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905 (dates from associated hardw~e types).

Dockall, Boyd, et. al, (1996:146) = 1907
Kregel Casket Company (1895) No. 26
Rose (1985:90) 1890-1927

Estimated date range: ca.1895-1905 (includes dates from associated hardware types)

F-54

F-55

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Centetery Excavation Project

CM
CM

Caplifter Type 10
Provenience: Feature 332 (depicted).

Caplifter Type 11
ovenience: Feature 265 (depicted).

Frequency: 1
Description: silver plated white metal (Cincinnati Coffin Company 1S79, 1881)

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

l\iakersntark:none
References: Cincinnati Coffin Company (1879, 1881) Thumbscrew No. 0
Estimated date range: ca.1879-1881

Estimated date range: none

F-56

F-57

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

l

CM

CM
0

5

0

Caplifter Type 12

Caplifter Type 13

Provenience: Feature 338 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 189 (depicted).

Frequency: l

Frequency: l ·

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mftrk: none

Makers mflrk: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-58

F-59

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

CM

Escutcheon Type 1

Escutcheon Type 2

Provenience: Feature 419 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 409 (depicted); Features 201, 205, 226.

Frequency: 1

Frequency:4

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous meta4 covered with copper or gold foil.

Makers mark: #24

Makers mark: #12

References: none

References: found attached to caplifter Type 8

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: ca.1895-1905 (dates from associated hardware types)

F-60

F-61

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

CM

Escutcheon Type 3

Escutcheon Type 4

Provenience: Feature 280 (depicted); Features 80, 187, 248, 403.

Provenience: Feature 249 (depicted); Features 53, 123, 132, 139, 286, 323, 344, 352.

Frequency:5

Frequency:9

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers m~rk: none

Makers mark: none

References:· Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company (1905) No. 45
Hacker-Norton and Trinkley (1984:31) no date
Found attached to Thumbscrews Type 7 and 36.

References: found attached to thumbscrew Type 36 =ca. 1905
Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905 (dates from associated hardware types).

Estimated date range: ca.1895-1905 (includes dates from associated hardware types).

F-62

F-63

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

CM

Escutcheon Type 5

Escutcheon Type 6

Provenience: Feature 276 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 178 (depicted); Feature 305.

Frequency: 1

Frequency:2

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers m~rk: none

Makers mark: #68

References: none

References: found attached to Thumbscrew Type 14

Estimated date range: >1880 (date from associated hardware type).

Estimated date range: none

F-64

F-65

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Escutcheon Type 7

Escutcheon Type 8

Provenience: Feature 373 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 373 (depicted): Features 348, 386.

Frequency: 1

Frequency:3

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References:

References:

Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880, 1881) Caplifter plate No. 6
Zanesville Casket Company (1880) Caplifter No. 3
Hacker-Norton and Trinkley (1984:31) Sargent & Co. (ca. 1920:872) #21

Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880) No. $R
Zanesville Coffin Company (1880) Capijfter No. 5

Estimated date range: ca.1880
Estimated date range: ca.1880-1881

F-66

F-67

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Provenience: Feature 43 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 381 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: l

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers m11rk: none

References: found attached to Thumbscrew Type 18

References:

Estimated date range: none

Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company (1905) No. 348
Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880) No. 138
found attached to Thumbscrew Type 20 = ca.1880-1905

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905

F-68

F-69

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

CM
0

Escutcheon Type 11

5

Escutcheon Type 12

Provenience: Feature 92 (depicted); Feature 73.

Provenience: Feature 308 (depicted).

Frequency:2

Frequency: l

Description: ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: found attached to thumbscrew Type 4 = ca.1879-1881.

Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardw~re types).

Estimated date range: ca.1879-1881 (dates from associated hardware types).

F-70

F-71

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Escutcheon Type 14

Escutcheon Type 13
Provenience: Feature 21 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 182 (depicted); Features 28, 205.

Frequency: 1

Frequency:3

Description: A thin, copper or brass plate with pres$ed design

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers m~rk: #940

References: found attached to a ferrous-covered thumbscrew.

References: ·Chattanooga-Coffin and Ca-sket·C{)mpany (1905) No. 940
Found attached to Thumbscrew Type 8 = ca.1905.

Estimated date range: none
Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905 (includes dates from associated hardware types).

F-72

F-73

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM
CM

Escutcheon Type 15

Escutcheon Type 16

Provenience: Feature 116 (depicted); Feature 331.

Provenience: Feature 435 (depicted).

Frequency:2

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers m;trk: none

Makers mark: none

References:

References: found attached to Thumbscrew Type 27

Cincinnati Coffin Company (1879, 1880) No. 3 thumbscrew plate
found attached to Thumbscrew Type 25

Estimated date range: none
Estimated date range: ca.1879-1880 (includes dates from associated hardwftre types).

F-74

F-75

i

I

I

~-------------------------~-----

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

N
Vt

n
' :r
l

_t;,,.

(J\

Escutcheon Type 17

Escutcheon Type 18

Provenience: Feature 435 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 268 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: l

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-76

F-77

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project
'

CM

l

J

0

Escutcheon Type 19

Escutcheon Type 20

Provenience: Feature 185 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 387 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: l

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: # 19

Makers mark: none

References: none

References:

Estimated date range: none

5

Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company (1905) No. 76
Rose (1985:42) no date
Hacker-Norton and Trinkley (1984:31) no date
found attached to Thumbscrew Type 26 = ca.1905

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905 (includes dates from associated hardw~re types).

F-78

F-79

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

Escutcheon Type 21

Escutcheon Type 22

Provenience: Feature 182 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 243 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: hard non-ferrous metal

Description: thin, cupreous metal

Makers mark: Smith S. Pattern No. 5

Makers mark: none

References: found attached to Caplifter Type 5b

References: found attached to a thumbscrew that was covered with ferrous concretion.

Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardware type).

Estimated date range: none

F-80

F-81

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

CM
0

Escutcheon Type 23

5

Escutcheon Type 24

Provenience: Feature 251 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 338 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: found attached to Caplifter Type 7 = ca.1895

References: none

Estimated date range: ca.1895-1905 (dates from associated hardware types) .

Estimated date range: none

. F-82

F-83

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

----'-----------------------~-,-----------

CM

Escutcheon Type 25

Provenience: Feature 428 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 397 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard non-ferrous metal

l\1akersm~rk:none

Makers mark: #30
References:

Escutcheon Type 26

Cincinnati Casket Company (1880) Capli:fter No. 30
Kregel Casket Company (1895) Capli:fter No. 8
found attached to Capli:fter Type 2 = ca.1880-1895

References: none
Estimated date range: >1880 (date from associated hardware type).

Estimated date range: ca.1880

F-84

F-85

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

CJ\
Escutcheon Type 27

Thumbscrew Type 1

Provenience: Feature 189 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 211 (depicted); Features 4, 65, 206, 265, 334, 338, 364, 419.

Frequency: 1

Frequency:9

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers m?rk: none

Makers m;irk: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: ca.1895-1905 (dates from associated hardware types)

F-86

F-87

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

I

0

()
·~

Thumbscrew Type 2
Provenience: Feature 336 (depicted); Features 26, 53, 57, 79, 103, 123, 125, 145, 146, 171, 228,
250,273,350,352,378,382,393,410,418.

Thumbscrew Type 3
Provenience: Feature 313 (depicted).
Frequency: 1

Frequency: 21
Description: hard, non-ferrous metal
Description: hard, non-ferrous metal
Makers mark: none
Makers m?rk: none
References: Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880) No. 132?
References: none
Estimated date range: ca.1879-1895 (:includes dates from associated hardw~re types).
Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905 (dates from associated hardware types)

F-88

F-89

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

I•

0

0

Thumbscrew Type 4

Thumbscrew Type 5

Provenience: Feature 308 (depicted); Feature 313.

Provenience: Feature 421 (depicted); Features 358, 366, 397, 399, 422, 426, 445.

Frequency:2

Frequency: 8

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References:

References: none

Cincinnati Coffin Company (1879, 1881) No. 7.
Found attached to Escutcheon Type 12

Estimated date range: ca.1875-1895 (dates from associated hardwiire types).
Estimated date range: ca.1879-1895 (includes dates from associated hardware types).

F-90

F-91

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project
'.

Thumbscrew Type 6

Thumbscrew Type 7

Provenience: Feature 406 (depicted); Features 348, 368, 373, 396, 428.

Provenience: Feature 297 (depicted); Features 176, 272, 286, 298, 382.

Frequency: 6

Frequency:6

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

l\fakersmark:none

l\fakers mark: none

References: Trinkley and Hacker-Norton (1984:8) Type III, post-1900.

References:

Trinkley and Hacker-Norton (1984:8) Type I= 1860-1900
Found attached to Escutcheon Type 3 =ca. 1905

Estimated date range: ca.1879-1895 (dates from associated hardware types).
Estimated date range: ca. 1905 (date from associated hardware type)

F-92

F-93

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

0

Thumbscrew Type 8

Thumbscrew Type 9

Provenience: Feature 92 (depicted); Features 26, 28, 41, 60, 72, 73, 93, 226, 240, 381, 409.

Provenience: Feature 306 (depicted); Feature 344.

Frequency: 12

Frequency:2

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

l\'lakersm?rk:none

l\fakersmark:none

References:

References: Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company (1905) No. 373.

Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company (1905) No. 940.
Found attached to Escutcheon Type 14 = ca.1905

Estimated date range: ca. 1880-1905 (includes dates from associated hardware types).
Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905 (includes dates from associated hardw~re types).

F-94

F-95

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Thumbscrew Type 10

Thumbscrew Type 9

Provenience: Feature 53 (depicted); Features 24, 25, 38, 42, 49, 63, 64, 76 111 126 130 132
153, 154, 172, 177, 196.
'
'
'
'
'

Provenience: Feature 344 (depicted).

Frequency: 18
Description: hard, non-ferrous metal
Makers m~rk: none
References: none
Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardware types).

F-96

F-97

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

I.

Thumbscrew Type 12

Thumbscrew Type 11 (small)
Provenience: Feature 276 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 20 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mftrk: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: >1880 (date from associated hardware type).

Estimated date range: none

F-98

F-99

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

I.

Thumbscrew Type 13

Thumbscrew Type 14

Provenience: Feature 380 (depicted); Feature 446.

Provenience: Feature 305 (depicted); Feature 178.

Frequency:2

Frequency:2

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References:

Dockall, Boyd, et. al (1996) = 1907
Found attached to Escutcheon Type 6

Estimated date range: none
Estimated date range: none

F-100

F-101

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

Thumbscrew Type 15
Provenience: Feature 15 (depicted); Features 308, 318, 319.

Thumbscrew Type 17
Provenience: Feature 372 (depicted); Features 7, 30, 39, 43, 137, 150, 183, 184, 262, 333, 344,
366, 367, 423.

Frequency: 4
Frequency: 15
Description: hard, non-ferrous metal
Description: hard, non-ferrous metal
Makers mftrk: none
Makers mark: none
References:

Kogon and Mayer (1995: 146) =late period, post 1881
Zanesville Coffin Company (1880) Thumbscrew No. 22

Estimated date range: ca.1879-1881 (includes dates from associated hardware types).

F-102

References: none
Estimated date range: ca.1880-1895 (dates from associated hardware types)

F-103

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

Thumbscrew Type 18

Thumbscrew Type 19

Provenience: Feature 43 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 381 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: Found attached to Escutcheon Type 9.

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905 (dates from associated hardware types).

F-104

F-105

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

-

(J\

Thumbscrew Type 20

Thumbscrew Type 21

Provenience: Feature 59 (depicted); Feature 175.

Provenience: Feature 122 (depicted).

Frequency:2

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mnrk: none

Makers mark: none

References:

References: none

Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company (1905) No. 348?
Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880) No. 13S
McReynolds (1981:55) = ca.1890-1920

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905

F-106

F-107

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

0

Thumbscrew Type 22

Thumbscrew Type 23

Provenience: Feature 182 (depicted); Features 138, 189, 192, 193, 194, 197, 205, 210, 404.

Provenience: Feature 75 (depicted).

Frequency: 10

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1905 (dates from associated hardware types).

Estimated date range: none

F-108

F-109

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

I
ni

~I

Thumbscrew Type 24 (small)

Thumbscrew Type 25 (small)

Provenience: Feature 114 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 116 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: I

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: found attached to Escutcheon Type 15 = ca.1879-1880

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: ca.1879-1880 (dates from associated hardware types)

F-110

F-111

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

Thumbscrew Type 27

Thumbscrew Type 26
Provenience: Feature 361 (depicted); Features 251, 387.

Provenience: Feature 435 (depicted).

Frequency:3

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mJ)rk: none

Makers mark: none

R-eferences:

References: Found attached to Escutcheon Type 16.

Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company (1905) No. 76
Rose (1985:96) ca. 1900-1927
Dockall, Powell, and Steele (1996:116) Thumbscrew Type A= 1916-1927
Found attached to Escutcheon Type 20

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: ca.189 5-1905 (inc;ludes dates from associated hardware types).

F-112

F-113

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

N

0
i

·--····---···------·"

Thumbscrew Type 28

Thumbscrew Type 29

Provenience: Feature 155 (depicted); Feature 265.

Provenience: Feature 268 (depicted); Feature 269.

Frequency:2

Frequency:2

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers m~rk: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References:

McReynolds (1981:31) = ca.1890-1920.
Found attached to Escutcheon Type 18.

Estimated date range: none
Estimated date range: ca.1880-1881 (dates from associated hardware types).

F-114

F-115

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

Thumbscrew Type 30

Thumbscrew Type 31

Provenience: Feature 269 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 90 (depicted); Features 100, 234, 257.

Frequency: 1

Frequency:4

Description: Silver-plated thumbscrew (Zanesville Coffin Company, 1880)

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: Zanesville Coffin Company (1880) No. 26.

References: Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company (1905) No. 80

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1881 (includes dates from associated hardware types).

Estimated date range: ca. 1905

F-116

F-117

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

0

Thumbscrew Type 33 (small)

Thumbscrew Type 32
Provenience: Feature 428 (depicted); Feature 370.

Provenience: Feature 385 (depicted).
Frequency: 1

Frequency:2

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none
References: Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880) No. 11.
Estimated date range: ca.1875-1880 (includes dates from associated hardware types).

F-118

References: none
Estimated date range: none

F-119

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

l

0

Thumbscrew Type 34

Thumbscrew Type 35

Provenience: Feature 180 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 205 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: Cincinnati Coffin Company (1880, 1881) No. 14.

Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardware type).

Estimated date range: >1800 - ca.1905 (includes dates from associated hardware types).

F-120

F-121

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

0

Thumbscrew Type 36
Provenience: Feature 249 (depicted); Features 8, 149, 187, 195, 248, 388, 392.

Thumbscrew Type 37 (small)
Provenience: Feature 208 (depicted).
Frequency: 1

Frequency: 8
Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers m;trk: none

References:

References: Hacker-Norton and Trinkley (1984:3l) no date.

Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Company (1905) No. 76.
Found attached to Escutcheon Type 4.

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: ca.1893-1905 (includes dates from associated hardware types).

F-122

F-123

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

Thumbscrew Type 38

Thumbscrew Type 40

Provenience: Feature 185 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 151 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: National Biscuit Company

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-124

F-125

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Thumbscrew Type 41

Thumbscrew Type 42

Provenience: Feature 109 (depicted); Features 140, 259.

Provenience: Feature 239 (depicted).

Frequency:3

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardware type).

Estimated date range: none

F-126

F-127

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

0

Thumbscrew Type 43

Thumbscrew Type 44

Provenience: Feature 198 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 140 (depicted).

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Description: hard, non-ferrous metal

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: Kogon and Mayer (1995:146) Early period, pre-1871.

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardware type).

F-128

F-129

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

\.

0

-

Thumbscrew Type 45 (small)
Provenience: Surface (depicted)

Handle Type 1
Provenience: Feature 211 (depicted); Features 79, 127, 166, 167, 177, 195, 210, 257, 274, 305,
309, 352.

Frequency: 1
Frequency: 13
Description: hard, non-ferrous metal
Description: Double lug swingbail
Makers mark: none
Makers mark: #680
References: none
References: none
Estimated date range: none
Estimated date range: ca. 1905 (date from associated hardware type).

F-130

F-131

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village -Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Handle Type 2

Handle Type 3

Provenience: Feature 336 (depicted); Feature 182.

Provenience: Feature 123 (depicted); Features 99, 228, 229, 274, 446.

Frequency:2

Frequency:6

Description: Double lug short bar. Gripping width= 13cm

Description: Double lug swingbail

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References:

Estimated date range: ca.1879-1905 (dates from associated hardware types)

Bail=Dockall, Boyd, et. al. (1996:137)= 1907-1908
Rose (1985:121) ca. 1890-1927.

Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardware type)

F-132

F-133

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Handle Type 4 (large)
Provenience: Feature 414 (depicted); Features 110, 152, 191, 192, 194, 200, 234, 237, 239, 240,
266,279,311,404,444.

Handle Type 4 (small)
Provenience: Feature 10 (depicted)
Frequency: 1

Frequency: 16
Description: Double lug swingbail
Description: Double lug swingbail
l\fakersmark:none
Makers mark: none
References: none
References:

Kogon and Mayer (1995:138) ="Scroll" - Early Period, pre-1871
Trinkley and Hacker-Norton (1984:7) =Type lI, 1860-1900

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardware type)

F-134

F-135

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Handle Type 5b

Handle Type 5a
Provenience: Feature 419 (depicted)

Provenience: Feature 328 (depicted)

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: Single lug swingbail

Description: Single lug swingbail

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: none

References: none

Estimated date range: none

Estimated date range: none

F-136

F-137

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

Handle Type 6 (small)

Handle Type 7

Provenience: Feature 313 (depicted)

Provenience: Feature 412 (depicted); Feature 413.

Frequency: l

Frequency:2

Description: Double lug swingbail

Description: Double lug swingbail

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References:

References: lug= Kogon and Mayer (1995) "Snakeskin 1" and "2", pre-1871 and post 1881

Zanesville Coffin Company (1880) No. 26
lug= Hacker-Norton and Trinkley (1984:22) no date

Estimated date range: none
Estimated date range: ca. 1879-1895 (includes dates from associated hardware types)

F-138

F-139

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Handle Type 8

Handle Type 9

Provenience: Feature 122 (depicted); Features 46, 70, 73, 113, 114, 207, 227, 251, 259, 420.

Provenience: Feature 422 (depicted); Features 345, 351, 370, 426, 442.

Frequency: 11

Frequency: 6

Description: Double lug swingbail

Description: Double lug swingbail

Makers mark: #17 on lug

Makers mark: # 17 on lug

References: Rose (1985:79) ca. 1890's-1900's

References:

Estimated date range: ca.1895-1905 (dates from associated hardware types)

Miller Bros. & Co. (1875) No. 41
McReynolds (1981:47) ca. 1890-1920
Lebo (1988:70) ca. 1880-1934
Lug= Trinkley and Hacker-Norton (1984:7) ca. 1870-1900

Estimated date range: ca.1875-1883 (includes dates from associated hardware types)

F-140

F-141

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Handle Type 11 (large)

Handle Type 10
Provenience: Feature 406 (depicted).

Provenience: Feature 345 (depicted)

Frequency: 1

Frequency: 1

Description: Double lug swingbail with tips. Silver plated with interchangeable handles
(Cincinnati Coffin Company, 1879, 1880, 1881)

Description: Double lug swingbail
Makers mark: none

Makers mark: #71 on lug; "Pat. July 8, [18]79"
References:
References:

swingbail = Kregel Casket Ct>; (1895)- ·
Cincinnati Coffin Company (1879, 1880, 1881) No. 71
Lebo (1988:57?) ca. 1880-1900

swingbail =Cincinnati Coffin Company (1879, 1880, 1881)
McReynolds (1981:31,47) ca. 1890-1920

Estimated date range: ca.1879-1881

Estimated date ran~e: >1879

F-142

F-143

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

CM

Handle Type 11 (small)

Handle Type 12

Provenience: Feature 421 (depicted)

Provenience: Feature 387 (depicted); Features 226, 361, 409.

Frequency: 1

Frequency:4

Description: Double lug swingbail

Description: Double lug swingbail

Makers mark: none

Makers mark: none

References: posSI"bly Cincinnati Coffin Company (1881) No. 236, silver plated

References:

Estimated date range: ca.1880-1895 (dates from associated hardware types)
#4121

Kregel Casket Company (1895) No. 324
lug= Dockall, Boyd, et. al. (1996:137) 1907-1908
lug= Hacker-Norton and Trinkley (1984:23) Sargent & Co. (ca. 1920:275)

Estimated date range: ca. 1880-1905 (includes dates from associated hardware types).

F-144

F-145

Allen Parkway Village-Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Handle Type 13
Provenience: Feature 418 (depicted); Features 103, 114, 250, 273, 291, 295, 296, 350, 393, 411.

Handle Type 14
Provenience: Feature 428 (depicted); Features 382, 410.

Frequency: 11

Frequency:3

Description: Double lug swingbail

Description: Double lug swingbail

l\'.lakersmark:#468

Makers mark: none

Refere~ces:

none

References: none

Estimated date range: ca. 1880-1883 (dates from associated hardware type)

F-146

Estimated date range: ca. 1880 (date from associated hardware types)

F-147

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Allen Parkway Village - Third New City Cemetery Excavation Project

Handle Type 15

Handle Type 16

Provenience: Feature 69 (depicted); Features 1, 4, 8, 34, 39, 42, 49, 50, 51, 52, 108, 151, 158,
172,176, 198,230,266,334,338,362,364,367,392.

Provenience: Feature 123 (depicted); Features 64, 72, 106, 140, 168, 175, 180, 260, 263, 280,
282, 286, 288, 302, 323.

Frequency:25

Frequency: 16

Description: Double lug swingbail

Description: Double lug swingbail

Makers mark: #57 T.M.Co.

Makers mark: #1016 on lug; #12 on bail with makers mark

References: none

References:

Estimated date range: ca.1905 (date from associated hardware types)

Chattanooga Coffin and Casket Co. (1905) No. 643
Taylor, et. al (1986:34?) ca. 1891-1937
Rose (1985:123) ca. 1890-1927

Estimated date range: >1880 - ca.1905 (includes dates from associated hardware types).

F-148

F-149

