A Cultural Resources Survey for the
Detention and Mitigation Basins,
Outfall Easements, and Remaining Portions
of the Preferred Alignment of Segment E
of the Grand Parkway Project
Harris County, Texas

Document No. 090167
PBS&J Job Nos. 100006099 and 100008595

A CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY FOR THE
DETENTION AND MITIGATION BASINS,
OUTFALL EASEMENTS, AND REMAINING PORTIONS OF
SEGMENT E OF THE GRAND PARKWAY PROJECT
HARRIS COUNTY, TEXAS
CSJ NO. 3510-05-002
TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 5343
Prepared for:
Texas Department of Transportation
7721 Washington
Houston, Texas 77251
and
Harris County Toll Road Authority
330 Meadowfern Dr.
Houston, TX 77067
Prepared by:
PBS&J
1250 Wood Branch Park Drive
Suite 300
Houston, Texas 77077
Principal Investigator:
Karla J. Córdova

Report Authors:
Darren Schubert
Karla J. Córdova
Dale Norton
Philip Bishop
J. Philip Washington

January 2010

Contents
Page
List of Figures ......................................................................................................................... iii
Abstract ................................................................................................................................... iv
I. INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 1
II. ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ....................................................................................... 4
PHYSIOGRAPHY ............................................................................................................. 4
GEOLOGY....................................................................................................................... 4
SOILS ............................................................................................................................. 4
CLIMATE AND VEGETATION .......................................................................................... 5
WILDLIFE ....................................................................................................................... 6
III. CULTURAL HISTORY ................................................................................................ 8
PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000–6500 B.C.) .................................................................... 8
ARCHAIC PERIOD (6500 B.C.–A.D. 700) ......................................................................... 8
LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 700–1519) ................................................................ 9
HISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1519–1954) ............................................................................ 10
Regional Native America....................................................................................... 10
European Contact and Anglo-American Settlement .............................................. 10
Hockley, Cypress, Katy ........................................................................................ 12
IV. PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ...................................................................................15
RECORDS REVIEW....................................................................................................... 15
RESULTS OF RECORDS REVIEW ................................................................................. 15
V. FIELD METHODOLOGY .............................................................................................20
VI. RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS OF AREAS SURVEYED AND ASSESSED ....................21
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ..............................................................23
REFERENCES ...............................................................................................................24
Appendices:
A
Maps of Surveyed Areas Showing Site Locations (not for public disclosure)
B
Representative Photographs of the Surveyed Areas

100006099/090167

ii

Contents

Figure
Page
1
2
3

Project Vicinity Map ................................................................................................ 2
Overview of wind pump ......................................................................................... 22
Concrete water tank .............................................................................................. 22

100006099/090167

iii

Abstract
In July, August, and December 2009, PBS&J archeologists conducted an intensive cultural resources
survey of the remaining approximately 52 hectares (129 acres) of proposed alignment for Segment E of
the Grand Parkway plus 10 detention and mitigation basins and 3 outfall easements located within and
adjacent to the proposed right of way easement for Segment E in Harris County, Texas. The project is
sponsored by the Harris County Toll Road Authority (HCTRA) and the Texas Department of
Transportation (TxDOT). The detention and mitigation basins, outfall easements, and remaining portions
of proposed alignment are part of the approximately 24.5-kilometer (15.2-mile) proposed four-lane
highway in western Harris County, Texas, between Interstate Highway 10 and U.S. Highway 290. The
proposed project alignment is located on a south to north alignment. The proposed detention and
mitigation basins will be used to provide floodplain mitigation and collect and control stormwater runoff
from the roadway during a storm event. The proposed project areas are located on private lands that will
be owned by TxDOT and managed by HCTRA in the future. Thus, the current effort is being conducted
under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5343.
The cultural resource survey was conducted based on guidelines set forth by the Potential Archeological
Liability Map of the Houston District. However, per TxDOT’s request and due to a change in the
originally proposed vertical Area of Potential Effect and the proximity of one of the ponds to the Bear
Creek drainage, this particular survey area was subjected to shovel testing regardless of the PALM data
recommendations of shovel testing of mounds only. A total of 112.2 hectares (277.7 acres) were surveyed
during the current project. No significant cultural resources were encountered during the survey. Due to
the absence of cultural materials within the areas surveyed and the moderate amount of disturbance across
portions of the project areas caused by road, drainage, and utility construction, as well as residential
development, PBS&J recommends that construction activities within the surveyed areas be allowed to
proceed without further consultation. All records generated and photographs taken will be curated at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin. No artifacts were observed or collected.

100006099/090167

iv

I. INTRODUCTION
In July, August, and December 2009, PBS&J archeologists conducted an intensive cultural resources
survey of the remaining approximately 52 hectares (ha) (129 acres [ac]) of Segment E of the Grand
Parkway project (State Highway [SH] 99) plus 10 detention and mitigation basins and 3 outfall easements
located within and adjacent to the proposed right of way (ROW) easement for Segment E in Harris
County, Texas. This project is sponsored by the Harris County Toll Road Authority (HCTRA). Fieldwork
was conducted by Phil Washington, Karen Belvin, Jason Maywald, Stephanie Martin, Evelyn Carroll, and
Ashley Brown under the direction of Project Archeologist Phil Bishop and Principal Investigator Karla J.
Córdova. Dale Norton acted as Project Coordinator.
The detention and mitigation basins and outfall easements as well as the remaining portions of the
proposed easement are part of the approximately 24.5 kilometers (km) (15.2 miles) of proposed four-lane
highway in western Harris County, Texas, between Interstate Highway (IH) 10 and U.S. Highway (US)
290. The proposed project alignment is located on a south to north alignment (Figure 1). The width of the
survey corridor will be 122 meters (m) (400 feet [ft]), which is consistent with the width of the area of
potential effect (APE). The depth of the APE associated with the road construction will be no more than
approximately 23 m (75 ft) below ground surface. The proposed detention ponds will be used to provide
floodplain mitigation and collect and control stormwater runoff from the roadway during a storm event.
The footprints of the detention and mitigation basins as well as the outfall easements vary for each
location and are presented in Appendix A. The depth of the APE associated with the construction of the
detention ponds and mitigation basins will be approximately 1.2 m (4 ft) below ground surface, and 1.5 m
(5 ft) below ground surface for the outfall easements. The impacts are based on construction schematics
available at the time of permit application and estimated on typical construction design. HCTRA and the
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) are seeking to obtain environmental permits and
clearances of the areas to be impacted.
Of the total survey corridor, approximately 169 ha (418 ac) were previously surveyed by PBS&J
archeologists between March 2002 and November 2003 (Turner and Bishop 2004). Since the March 2002
survey efforts, additional consultations were required as a result of a reevaluation of the proposed project.
The reevaluation consists of a proposed design change for a grade separation at the future West Road
between Longenbaugh Road and the future Tuckerton Road. In addition, inadvertent discrepancies
between the previously surveyed areas and the Potential Archeological Liability Mapping of the Houston
District (Houston-PALM) (Abbott 2001) within the APE required reevaluation to rectify these
discrepancies. Right of entry (ROE) was not obtained for particular parcels, and those areas are the ones
included in this report along with the newly proposed detention and mitigation basins and outfall
easements. Therefore, the current effort was undertaken under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5343 and
includes a total of five detention ponds, five mitigation basins, three outfall easements, and 52 ha (129 ac)
of ROW easement.

100006099/090167

1

End Project
Segment E

Begin Project
Segment E

LEON

TRINITY

MAD ISON
WA L K E R

ANGELINA

POLK

TYLER

HARDIN

AUSTIN

Datum: NAD 27
Projection: Texas State Plane
Zone: South Central
Units: Feet
ROW: Brown & Gay
Topo: NGS

HARRIS
FORT BEND

WHARTON

CHAMBERS

Proposed Mitigation Basins

Proposed Detention Basins
Easements

G A LV E S T O N

0

BRAZORIA

M ATA G O R D A

0

Figure 1
Proposed Grand Parkway Segment E
Vicinity Map
CSJ: 3510-05-002
Harris County, Texas

I

LIBERTY

Proposed ROW

1,000
7,500

Meters
2,000

Feet

3,000
15,000

4,000
22,500

Job No.: 100006099
Prepared by: PBS&J/19998

Scale: 1:90,000
Date: January 06, 2010

File: N:\TRANS\100004396\projects\mxd\SEG_E\REPORT\BL_SEG_E_VICINITY_Dbasin

I. Introduction

The archeological survey was conducted based on guidelines set forth by the Houston-PALM (Abbott
2001). However, the location of one of the detention ponds was shifted to an area that had already been
cleared for cultural resources. As a result of the increased vertical APE beyond the previously surveyed
and coordinated APE and the proximity to the Bear Creek drainage, TxDOT requested shovel testing to
be conducted at this particular location regardless of the PALM recommendations of shovel tests of
pimple mounds only. The Houston-PALM units in and near the proposed survey areas can be seen on the
maps in Appendix A. The objectives of the survey were to (1) locate archeological sites within the survey
area, (2) delineate the vertical and horizontal extent of any located sites, (3) assess the integrity of each
site, and (4) provide a preliminary evaluation of each site’s potential eligibility for listing on the National
Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and/or State Archeological Landmark (SAL) status. This report
describes and interprets the results of these investigations and provides recommendations for cultural
resource management.
The investigation was performed in compliance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966
(Public Law [PL] 89-665), as amended in 1974, 1976, 1980, and 1992; the National Environmental Policy
Act of 1969 (PL 91-190.83 Stat. 915, 42 USC 4321, 1970); the Procedures of the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation (36 CFR 800), 13 TAC 26, and other appropriate cultural resources legislation and
guidelines, as well as the guidelines set forth by the Register of Professional Archaeologists and the
Council of Texas Archeologists.

100006099/090167

3

II. ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
PHYSIOGRAPHY
The proposed project is located in the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas. This physiographic province ranges in
character from a smooth depositional plain bordered by bays and barrier islands along the Gulf of
Mexico, to rolling hills extending inland to the Balcones Fault Zone. The plain rises in elevation from sea
level to approximately 60 m (197 ft) above mean sea level (amsl) within 16 km (100 miles) of the
coastline. Narrow corridor valleys of small streams and broader valleys of larger streams break the
generally flat relief of the Gulf Coastal Plain. Salt domes and fault scarps occasionally interrupt this
relatively featureless topographic pattern. Some scattered salt domes express surface features as broad
mounds with as much as 30 m (98 ft) of relief. Faults are common in the region, but express little or no
surface relief (Bureau of Economic Geology 1996).
The landscape within this physiographic province is characterized as broad, nearly level, and gently
sloping coastal prairie with poorly defined drainage patterns. Agricultural industry has indelibly changed
the landscape, with an extensive network of levees, drainage ditches, and canals transecting the survey
corridor. Small streams (Mayde, Bear, and Cypress) flow through shallow, incised valleys that create the
most notable relief in the surrounding topography. The natural contour of the ground surface slopes
toward the coast and ranges in elevation from 43 to 55 m (140 to 180 ft) amsl within the survey corridor.
The vast majority of the preferred alignment crosses tracts of agricultural land that have been repeatedly
modified over the past century. Landfill and grading have extensively changed the face of the landscape
and virtually eliminated the natural contours. Most of the shallow depressions and paleomeander ridges
that once formed the pimple mound topography in the region have been decimated by logging and
agriculture. All of these mechanical impacts greatly reduce the likelihood of encountering cultural
materials in an undisturbed context.

GEOLOGY
Based on the 1992 Bureau of Economic Geology map of the geology of Texas, the surface geology of the
proposed project is underlain by the Lissie Formation. The Lissie Formation is a Pleistocene-aged fluvial
and deltaic unit that was deposited in response to several interglacial fluctuations in sea level (see Aronow
1976). The Lissie Formation generally parallels the present-day coast. Undrained depressions and pimple
mounds are common surface features of the Lissie Formation. These features have, for the most part, been
obliterated within the survey corridor by agricultural and urban landscape modifications.

SOILS
The Natural Resources Conservation Service maps of Harris County display seven soil series units within
the project area survey corridor. The soils in the area are attributed to a group of four soil associations that
are nearly level, loamy prairie soils. The Clodine-Addicks-Gessner, Wockley-Gessner, and the Katy-Aris
100006099/090167

4

II. Environmental Setting

soil associations are similar in that they drain somewhat poorly to poorly and are slowly permeable. The
Segno-Hockley association is attributed to a group of soils that are nearly level to gently sloping, loamy,
and forested, and are moderately well drained and moderately slowly permeable. Aris soils are found in
slightly lower places on the landscape and are more poorly drained than the Katy soils. The Gessner soils
make up the majority of the rice-producing areas in the county. These rural prairie landscapes are only
slightly to moderately susceptible to water erosion.
The Clodine-Addicks-Gessner association consists of level, loamy prairie soils, and the Clodine soils
appear as pimple mounds, slightly above the Addicks soils. The Gessner soils have a thin surface layer
and appear in low depressions. The Wockley-Gessner association consists of level, loamy prairie soils
exhibiting scattered, but generally smooth, pimple mounds. The Gessner soil components of this
association occur in subtle depressions. The Katy-Aris association consists of soils that are nearly level,
covering broad areas of the Coastal Plain. Katy soils are somewhat poorly drained, and the water table is
perched above a clay loam. Runoff is slow in these dark grayish brown soils. The Katy soils are friable
and have a medium acidity, whereas the Aris soils are friable and neutral. The Segno-Hockley association
exhibits the occasional pimple mound, but consists of level to gently sloping forested upland soils. Segno
and Hockley soils occupy similar positions on the landscape and are nearly level to gently sloping. The
surfaces of both soils are composed of friable, acidic, dark grayish brown, fine sandy loam, and are
slightly to moderately susceptible to water erosion. Below these surfaces, yellowish brown and gray
sandy clay loam is present. Most of this association is used for timber production, woodland grazing, and
improved pasture.
Soil mapping units identified within the proposed alignment include Addicks loam, Aris-Gessner
complex, Clodine loam, Gessner loam, Hockley fine sandy loam, 1 to 4 percent slopes, Katy fine sandy
loam, Wockley fine sandy loam, and waters (Wheeler 1976). In general, these soils have previously been
identified by Abbott (2001) as having a low to low-moderate geoarcheological potential.

CLIMATE AND VEGETATION
The project areas occur completely within the Gulf Prairies and Marshes vegetation region (Hatch et al.
1990). The Gulf Marshes occupy a narrow strip of low, marshy coastal area adjacent to the coast and
barrier islands. No portion of the survey corridor occurs specifically within the Gulf Marshes. The survey
corridor lies within the nearly flat plain that extends 48 to 129 km (30 to 80 miles) inland from the Gulf
Marshes and is referred to as the Gulf Prairies. The Gulf Prairies are characterized by nearly level
topography with nearly dissected plains having slow surface drainage. Elevation extends from sea level
along the coast up to 76 m (250 ft) amsl. Annual precipitation averages 107 centimeters (cm) (48 inches).
Mean annual temperature is typically 70 degrees Fahrenheit (Hatch et al. 1990).
The original vegetation types of the Gulf Prairies included tallgrass prairies and post oak (Quercus
stellata) savannah (Gould 1975). However, the Gulf Prairies experienced extensive conversion to
cropland and improved pasture for livestock grazing throughout the twentieth century, especially with the

100006099/090167

5

II. Environmental Setting

advent of affordable mechanized farm equipment after World War II (Lobpries 1994). Approximately
one-third of the Gulf Prairies is now cultivated mainly for rice, sorghum, corn, and improved pasture
grasses (Hatch et al. 1990). In recent decades, the Gulf Prairies have experienced rapidly increasing
conversion to suburban and industrial land use. The project area is typical of the Gulf Prairies region and
is characterized by a patchwork of cropland, pastureland, wetlands, and riparian corridors with scattered
suburban development. The southern portion of the survey corridor extends into an area of the Gulf
Prairies that is historically and locally known as the Katy Prairie.
Very little native prairie remains due to urbanization, agricultural activities, and suppression of wildfire
(Eubanks 1994; Smeins 1994). However, scattered isolated native prairie remnants may still be found
within the project area. These remnants are often characterized by an unusual microrelief topography
known as “gilgai” or “mima” mounds (Smeins 1994). Climax native grasses such as little bluestem
(Schizachyrium scoparium), big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii), indiangrass (Sorghastrum nutans),
eastern gamagrass (Tripsacum dactyloides), and gulf muhly (Muhlenbergia capillaries) dominate these
remnant prairie areas. Improved pasture grasses such as bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon) and bahiagrass
(Paspalum notatum), invaders such as johnsongrass (Sorghum halepense), giant ragweed (Ambrosia
trifida), and Brazilian vervain (Verbena braziliensis), and woody species such as eastern baccharis
(Baccharis halimifolia), Macartney rose (Rosa bracteata), and Chinese tallow-tree (Sapium sebiferum)
have replaced most of these native grasses throughout the remainder of the Katy Prairie. Species such as
post oak (Quercus stellata), loblolly pine (Pinus taeda), live oak (Quercus virginiana), water oak
(Quercus nigra), willow oak (Quercus phellos), sugarberry (Celtis laevigata), elms (Ulmus spp.), and
Chinese tallow-tree dominate isolated woods and wooded riparian areas along South Mayde Creek, Bear
Creek, Cypress Creek, and various other artificial or channelized drainages.

WILDLIFE
The region can be divided into several major wildlife habitat types, which coincide with the major
vegetative communities present. The major habitat divisions are defined as farmland, forest, rangeland,
nonforested wetlands, and forested wetlands. The distribution of habitat types in the area and the activity
patterns of many wildlife species result in some overlap of faunal communities. Forest-dwelling species
may occasionally occur in open areas around forest stands, and species particular to nonforested habitats
may occasionally be found in forested areas. Edge areas, or ecotones, between major habitats are often
preferred by wildlife species because of the diversity of food and cover usually provided by the overlap of
vegetative communities.
The majority of the survey areas lie within the eastern portion of the Texan Biotic Province. The Texan
Biotic Province is characterized as an ecotonal region of forest and grassland faunal associations.
However, cultivated crops, improved pasture grasses, and invasive brush have replaced most of the native
vegetation. Consequently, numerous native wildlife populations have declined. Many habitat specialists,
including the least shrew (Crypototis parva), Texas horned lizard (Phrynosoma comutum), and northern
bobwhite (Colinus virginianus) have experienced significant reductions in numbers and severely altered
100006099/090167

6

II. Environmental Setting

distributions, while other species, such as the coyote (Canis latrans), eastern meadowlark (Sturnella
magna), and mourning dove (Zenaida macroura) have increased in number and habitat occupation. Some
49 species of mammals occur (or have historically occurred) in the Texan Province, of which only 8 are
grassland species encroaching from the west, southwest, or north. Two species of land turtles occur in the
Texan Province. Nine of the 16 lizard species occurring in the Texan Province are eastern forest species,
and the remaining 7 are western grassland affiliates. Of the 39 species of snakes documented by Blair
(1950), 27 are eastern forest species and 12 are western. Five salamanders (all Austroriparian) and 18
species of frogs and toads (13 of which are Austroriparian) occur in the Texan Biotic Province.
The project borders the Austroriparian Biotic Province. Extensive pine and hardwood forests, swamps,
marshes, and other hydric communities characterize the Austroriparian Biotic Province. The range of the
Austroriparian Biotic Province extends from eastern Texas to the Atlantic coastal plain and as far north as
the Dismal Swamp of southeast Virginia (Dice 1943). The western boundary of the Austroriparian Biotic
Province is the western boundary of the pine and hardwood forest of the eastern Gulf Coastal Plain. The
ecological associations of the Austroriparian Biotic Province extend westward beyond this boundary, in
local areas, wherever soil conditions are favorable. At least 47 mammal species, 29 snake species, 10
lizard species, 2 land turtle species, 17 anuran species, and 18 urodele species are known to have occurred
in the Austroriparian Biotic Province in recent times (Blair 1950).

100006099/090167

7

III. CULTURAL HISTORY
The project area is located in the Southeast Texas Archeological Region of the Eastern Planning Region
of Texas as delineated by the Texas Historical Commission (THC). This region encompasses the 19
counties from the San Bernard and Brazos rivers east to the Sabine River and the state of Louisiana
(Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993). Archeological evidence gathered in this region shows a long and
prosperous occupation by a variety of people over time.
The cultural history of the region is generally divided into four primary periods: Paleoindian, Archaic,
Late Prehistoric, and Historic. These divisions are generally believed to reflect changes in subsistence as
reflected by the material remains and settlement patterns of the people occupying this portion of Texas in
prehistoric and historic times.

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000–6500 B.C.)
The earliest generally accepted culture of the Americas, the Paleoindian, appears to have extended over
most, if not all, of North America by the end of the Pleistocene epoch. It has been hypothesized that in
Texas the Pleistocene coastline extended as much as 40 km (25 miles) into the present Gulf of Mexico
and that rivers cut deep canyons into sediments deposited during previous periods of glaciation (Aten
1983). With the close of the Pleistocene came a period of climatic warming and a consequent rise in sea
level as surface water was released from glaciers and polar ice. Paleoindian cultural developments in the
Gulf Coastal Plain region, as in most areas of North America, appear to have been intimately related to
these gradual but vast changes in the world climate and local environmental conditions.
Occupation of the Texas Gulf Coast during the terminal Pleistocene is evidenced by the recovery of
several types of well-made, lanceolate, parallel-flaked projectile points such as Scottsbluff, Clovis,
Plainview, Angostura, and possibly San Patrice. The presence of these distinctive projectile point types
along the coastal plain appears to reflect activities that would typically have occurred in areas farther
inland where the environment is characterized by a mixture of deciduous and pine woodlands (Aten
1983). According to Aten (1983), this type of habitat typically supports low-density human populations.
Archeological evidence synthesized by Story (1990) from numerous counties composing the greater Gulf
Coastal Plain in Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Oklahoma supports the suggestion that the Paleoindian
groups probably existed in small nuclear families or bands that migrated widely in pursuit of seasonal
subsistence resources.

ARCHAIC PERIOD (6500 B.C.–A.D. 700)
Cultural developments adapted to widespread environmental change with the onset of the Holocene
epoch. Changes in the world climate caused sea levels to rise, inland prairies to expand, and regional
weather patterns to become more variable (Aten 1983). Generally termed the Archaic, this next period of
cultural development in the New World has been further subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late stages

100006099/090167

8

III. Cultural History

based on changes observed in the archeological record that appear to coincide with episodic shifts in the
Holocene climate and environment. It is commonly thought that human lifestyles and subsistence
strategies maintained patterns developed during the previous Paleoindian period, but with some notable
differences.
Aten (1983) suggests that Early Archaic groups, like their Paleoindian predecessors, probably continued
to migrate seasonally in small bands and relied on a generalized projectile point technology to facilitate
their hunting and gathering of a variety of faunal and vegetal foodstuffs. Despite a paucity of intact
Archaic components at sites in the upper Texas Gulf Coast region, it has been observed that Archaic lithic
technologies appear to show an increased diversity of functional types and styles over those associated
with the Paleoindian period. However, the level of craftsmanship and the use of fine exotic materials
appear to have declined. In addition, the greater array of Archaic projectile point styles appears to reflect
a greater degree of regional cultures. Story (1990) surmise that Archaic period human populations may
have become more dense, with individual bands covering less overall territory on their seasonal rounds.
Differentiation between Early, Middle, and Late Archaic sites in the upper Texas Gulf Coastal region,
without the benefit of sufficient associated cultural features and artifacts from which strong chronological
dates and sequences can be derived, has been based largely on observation and comparison of projectile
point styles associated with more-intact archeological contexts elsewhere in Texas and North America.
The assumption has been that similar point styles are probably related chronologically despite sometimesvast geographical distances. According to this reasoning, Early Archaic point types are usually considered
to include Baird, Bell, Andice, and Wells, whereas Bulverde, Carrollton, and Trinity points are usually
attributed to the Middle Archaic. Based on a relatively greater database for defining the Late Archaic,
point types considered diagnostic of this cultural stage typically include Gary, Kent, Yarbrough, Ellis,
Palmillas, and Refugio (Patterson 1979).

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 700–1519)
The Late Prehistoric, or Ceramic period, cultures experienced a relatively static environment. This period
began with the adoption of ceramics and lasted until interaction between European and aboriginal
populations became firmly established. Aten (1983) has divided the Late Prehistoric in the Galveston Bay
area into six chronological periods based on ceramic seriation: Clear Lake, Mayes Island, Turtle Bay,
Round Lake, Old River, and Orcoquisac. In Addicks Reservoir in northern Harris County, Wheat (1953)
identified two Ceramic period components. This division was based on the continued use of Late Archaic
dart point types in the earlier component and the addition of arrow points in the later component.
The addition of Perdiz and Scallorn arrow points to the inventory marks the beginning of the Late
Ceramic period. Ceramics of the earlier period may include Goose Creek Plain variety Anahuac, O’Neal
Plain variety, Conway, Mandeville Plain, Tchefuncte Plain, Goose Creek variety unspecified, and
Tchefuncte Stamped. In the Late Ceramic period, the ceramic inventory may include San Jacinto Incised
and Baytown Plain, varieties Phoenix Lake and San Jacinto (Aten 1983). It should be noted that several

100006099/090167

9

III. Cultural History

varieties of Goose Creek Plain as well as Goose Creek Incised (and Red-Filmed) and the occurrence of
bone tempering span much of the Ceramic period.

HISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1519–1954)
Regional Native America
When Europeans arrived on the northern Texas coast, they encountered two major native groups, the
Atakapa and the Karankawa Indians, who occupied separate territories divided in the area of the western
shore of Galveston Bay. The Atakapa, speaking a language of the Tunican family, displayed traits closely
related to the natives of southwestern Louisiana. The Karankawan groups spoke a language of the
Coahuiltecan family and were more closely related to the Indians farther south in Texas and Mexico.
In spite of differences in language and apparent cultural derivation, the Atakapa and Karankawa
maintained similar cultural patterns (Newcomb 1983). Both groups were nomadic, although the Atakapa
maintained semipermanent winter villages in the interior. The Atakapa subsisted on shellfish, fish, birds’
eggs, wild plants, deer, and bear, while the Karankawa ate shellfish, turtles, marine and land plants,
alligator, deer, bison, bear, and peccary. Conical huts and skin tents served as shelter for the Atakapa,
while the Karankawa lived in portable windbreak-style huts. Atakapan technology included pottery, bows
and arrows, dugout canoes, basketry, traps, manos and metates, drums and flutes, wooden bowls and
utensils, and grass fiber textiles. The Karankawa also used pottery and the bow and arrow, along with
dugout canoes propelled by poles, basketry, cane weirs, milling stones, drums and whistles, tambourines,
lances, clubs, axes, and bone tools. Both groups buried their dead in mounds and left refuse middens,
primarily composed of shell. Both wore breechcloths and skirts and decorated themselves with tattoos.
Both groups were equally unprepared to protect themselves and their cultural traditions from European
contact. By the late eighteenth century, both the Atakapa and Karankawa peoples were in serious decline
(Newcomb 1983).

European Contact and Anglo-American Settlement
Spanish explorers Piñeda (1519) and de Vaca (1528) initially explored the Gulf of Mexico and the
American Southwest. The Spanish Crown, in its quest to observe and record the character and economic
potential of the territory and its people, sanctioned both explorers. This activity by Spain occurred within
the context of greater colonial expansionist efforts undertaken by the primary Western European powers
throughout the sixteenth century. Following Piñeda’s initial maritime effort to map the Gulf Coast, the
earliest exploration of the Texas Gulf Coast territory was accomplished by Alvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca,
who was shipwrecked in 1528 along with other members of an expedition in the Gulf of Mexico led by
Pánfilo de Narváez (Weddle 1985).
Much historical speculation has occurred concerning whether the island of Malhado, upon which de
Vaca’s party was shipwrecked, is the current Galveston Island or nearby San Luis Island. In either case,
he lived among the Indians for the next several years and probably visited much of Galveston Island and
100006099/090167

10

III. Cultural History

the surrounding region during the Indians’ seasonal rounds before he decided to make his way toward
Panuco in Mexico and eventually back to Spain (Story 1990). De Vaca’s recollections of his adventures
along the Texas Gulf Coast and in the American Southwest were published years later after his return to
Spain.
De Vaca’s account served, in turn, as the basis upon which Hernando De Soto (1539) and Luis de
Moscoso (1542) conducted subsequent explorations of the region. However, by 1561, Spain was facing
increasing difficulties in maintaining its few colonies in Florida. The relatively poor economic prospects
for these colonies and increasing competition from other colonial powers quelled the Spanish Crown’s
interest in colonizing their Florida territories. As a result, the Texas Gulf Coast remained relatively
uninhabited by Europeans for the next two centuries until the threat of increased French exploration in the
territory stimulated the Spanish government to establish more-permanent settlements in the area (Weddle
1991). In 1685, René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, established Fort St. Louis along the Gulf Coast
southwest of the survey corridor (Tunnell and Ambler 1967). Plagued by disease, starvation, and Indian
attacks, the end came for Fort St. Louis in late 1688 or early 1689.
In 1722, the Spanish established the mission of Nuestra Señora del Espíritu Santo de Zúñiga (also called
La Bahía del Espíritu Santo) near the ruins of La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in an attempt to Christianize the
indigenous people. The mission was later moved to a site near the Guadalupe River, and in 1754, it was
again moved, this time to Goliad. It was during this time that the Franciscan missionaries laid the
foundation for the livestock industry of Texas. The missionaries’ stock formed the nucleus from which
vast herds of wild cattle and mustangs later developed in Texas.
Whereas Piñeda, de Vaca, and others developed maps of the greater Gulf Coast in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, Bénard de la Harpe (1721) completed the earliest detailed map of Galveston Bay
during an eighteenth-century expedition. De la Harpe was seeking to reestablish La Salle’s former trading
post and fortress on Matagorda Bay.
Spain’s defense of the region, then called Nuevo Santander, was to be achieved by establishing a series of
missions and associated presidios for their protection across western, central, and eastern Texas. Mission
Nuestra Señora de la Luz and its companion Presidio San Augustin de Ahumada composed the Spanish
ecclesiastical outposts in the Galveston Bay area. This mission, also known as Mission Orcoquisac after a
principal Indian village, was founded in about 1756. This mission met with considerable resistance from
the local tribes in the area and was ordered to relocate several times before the mission and its presidio
were abandoned in 1771 and officially discontinued in 1772 (Roell 2009).
With the United States’s purchase of the Louisiana Territory from France in 1803, the long-running
dispute over control of Texas shifted to include Spain and the United States, both of which claimed land
extending between the Rio Grande and Neches River. Increasing dissent against Spain’s imperial control
over New Spain gave rise to a series of revolutionary movements seeking to establish new independent
nations in Mexico and Texas. Despite Spain’s efforts at establishing a pair of military outposts just east of

100006099/090167

11

III. Cultural History

Galveston Bay called Atascosita and Salcedo, to limit foreign intrusions into the area, Mexican and Texan
revolutionaries displaced the Spanish at Salcedo in 1811 and the Gutierrez-McGee expedition effectively
took control of the Trinity River vicinity east of the survey corridor in the following year (Richner and
Bagot 1978).
Until 1821, when Mexico won its independence from Spain, the territory of Texas, which then extended
well north and west of the current areas of New Mexico, Colorado, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Utah,
remained a frontier of contention between Spain, Mexico, and the United States. Without sufficient
political and military presence on the part of the Mexican government, this controversial region
frequently attracted entrepreneurs and fugitives from Europe and adjacent upper and lower southern states
along the Atlantic coast.
The earliest Anglo-American families arrived in the San Jacinto River basin as participants in a
colonization effort led by Stephen F. Austin, first as a Spanish and later as a Mexican empresario. The
colonists received grants of land in proportion to their family status and time of arrival in the colony.
Some of the early colonists established the nearby New Kentucky settlement, hoping to exploit the rich
timberlands and shipping trade along the San Jacinto River. Other colonists chose to settle farther west in
the vicinity of the current project area to farm the open prairie lands along Buffalo Bayou and Bear Creek.
While many of the region’s early colonists settled on individual farmsteads that were sometimes distant
from other settlers, others settled in less-isolated locales to be near people of the same ethnicity or place
of origin. Some of these locales developed over time into communities and towns that served as cultural,
religious, and educational centers for the surrounding farm families. These early communities were often
located along primary transportation routes, such as the old Atascosita Road. As settlement in the general
project area increased through the middle and latter nineteenth century, some of the older roads were
abandoned and a network of newer roads and trails were developed.

Hockley, Cypress, Katy
Two communities were established in the vicinity of the project area by the 1840s. These early
communities heavily depended on agriculture as their primary source of income and subsistence. The
town of Hockley was established in 1835 by George Washington Hockley and is located on or near the
old Atascosita Road. Hockley is the oldest community in the vicinity of the survey corridor (Kleiner
2009). Cypress is another early community originally established by German immigrants who settled
along Cypress Creek in the 1840s and 1850s (Smith 2009).
Rail transportation developed in this portion of Texas in the mid-nineteenth century. Harris County
became one of the earliest areas in Texas to benefit from its arrival. Rail transportation greatly improved
the means of marketing agricultural produce and enhanced the development of towns and communities
located along the railroad’s route. The nearby Houston and Texas Central Railway was extended through
Hockley and Cypress in 1857, providing impetus for development and expansion of these town sites. By
1900 Hockley had general stores, a hotel, a cotton gin, saloons, a gristmill, and livestock breeders
100006099/090167

12

III. Cultural History

(Kleiner 2009). Beyond the town’s central street grid, which was developed along the railroad, the
community included a widely dispersed array of farms and ranches extending into the countryside.
Smaller community centers often consisted of little more than a local school attended by farm families
from the immediate surrounding area.
With the advent of railroads also came increased support for Texas’s publicly funded school system.
Many small schools that previously served only a few families were combined and relocated to moresubstantial towns, often located along the railroads. An example of this pattern occurred at Cypress,
which established its first public school in 1884. Cypress also became well known for a hot artesian well
located approximately 1.6 km (l mile) south and adjacent to the Houston and Texas Central Railway. This
well provided the basis for the Houston Hotwell Sanitarium and Hotel, touted in its day for the healing
powers of its mineral water (Smith 2009).
While Hockley and Cypress were founded in the prerailroad era, the town of Katy later developed as a
true “railroad town” when the Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad was extended through Cane Island in
1895. By 1910 Katy had hotels, livery stables, lumberyards, a water system, telephone lines, and saloons.
The Katy Independent School District formed in 1919, incorporating many small schools in the
immediate area including Schlipf, Sills, Stockdick, South Mayde, and Dischner. Katy, like many of its
neighboring communities, received its next big economic boost with the discovery and exploitation of oil
and gas. In 1934 the first well of the Katy Oil Field was drilled, introducing an era of petroleum
development that continues today (Rylander 2009; THC 1978).
Hockley, Cypress, and Katy share several things in common. First, all have developed and thrived along
the route of the regional railway system. It is largely by virtue of their location along the railway system
that they have survived into the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, whereas other towns not so well
positioned have long since been abandoned and forgotten. All three towns have benefited from the
discovery and exploitation of local oil and gas in the early part of the twentieth century. All three have
also suffered extensive destruction caused by the 1900 and 1915 hurricanes that swept across Galveston
Bay and the open prairies of Harris County. As a consequence, much of the built environment (houses,
barns, schools, businesses, etc.) that once existed in the Segment E area has been lost (THC 1978).
Despite the devastation caused by the hurricanes, the density and distribution of settlement across the area
rebounded rapidly to a level that is apparent on the 1918–1920 United States Geological Survey (USGS)
topographic maps. Hockley, Katy, and Cypress were rebuilt and continued to develop as locally important
market centers surrounded by farms and ranches.
Early historic settlers in northern and western Harris County subsisted by raising cattle and growing
cotton, com, and vegetables. Cotton was the principal cash crop through the end of the nineteenth century.
However, severe weather events and gradual depletion of the soil’s fertility prompted the experimental
introduction of rice around the turn of the twentieth century (Hobaugh et al. 1989:367; Lobpries 1994:1).
Although William Eule harvested the first rice crop on record in Texas in 1897 near Katy, the Seito
Saibara family brought Japanese seed rice to the Texas Gulf Coast in 1904 and has been credited with
100006099/090167

13

III. Cultural History

establishing the Gulf Coast rice industry (Dethloff 2009). By 1909, Texas farmers were planting 96,315
ha (238,000 ac) of rice. With the benefit of mechanized agriculture practices applied after World War II,
rice farmland in Texas peaked in 1954 at 259,808 ha (642,000 ac) (Lobpries 1995:75–77).
The suitability of the survey corridor for rice farming is apparent on the 1918–1920 USGS topographic
maps, which show the area between present-day US 290 and IH 10 as a broad, flat prairie. The clay-rich
soil in this area is suitable for both rice farm and ranch activities. Ranching and farming were often
alternated periodically to improve the fertility of the land. Agricultural irrigation was introduced by
William Eule around the turn of the twentieth century in order to overcome the uncertainties of rainfall in
the region (Rylander 2009). The Gertie Rice Farm, located south of County Road 529 and east of the
survey corridor, provides an example of an early rice irrigation system with a rectilinear grid of canals
supplying water to the rice field before it drains into the nearest creek. Much of the water needed to raise
the rice crop was obtained from wells drilled in shallow, water-bearing sand strata. Low berms or levees
were also constructed to help retain the water, particularly in the mid-twentieth century when heavy
farming equipment greatly improved the farmer’s ability to reshape the land.

100006099/090167

14

IV. PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Numerous cultural resource management studies have been conducted in the region, including large-scale
archeological survey, testing, and mitigation. These investigations have been conducted in association
with the construction of Barker and Addicks reservoirs. Aten (1983), Fields et al. (1983), and Stokes
(1985) have presented reviews of previous research along the upper Texas coast. In addition, Moore et al.
(1989) and Patterson (1995) have compiled extensive bibliographies for the archeology of this region.

RECORDS REVIEW
A site file review was conducted utilizing the files and maps at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) and the THC. The TARL records were reviewed for the location of recorded
archeological sites in the vicinity of the proposed project. The THC files were examined for the locations
of sites listed or determined eligible for listing on the NRHP and/or sites designated as SALs. The THC
files were also examined to determine the number and location of Official Texas Historical Markers in the
region. The Addicks, Cypress, Katy, and Warren Lake, Texas, 7.5-minute USGS topographic maps were
examined at TARL and the THC. To identify historic sites that may be eligible for NRHP listing, research
was conducted using historical maps of Harris County, TxDOT’s historic bridges database, local
historical literature, and agricultural publications. Informants and landowners were also contacted in the
area. Possible site locations were then examined in the field from publicly accessible property and
roadways to locate potential historic structures dating to ca. 1957 or earlier.

RESULTS OF RECORDS REVIEW
Known site locations were researched using the official site file records at TARL on May 5, 2009, which
revealed more than 1,000 previously recorded archeological sites in the surrounding Harris County area.
In Harris County, 241 sites are NRHP listed, and 85 are identified as SAL properties. None of the NRHP
or SAL properties are located in the survey corridor. As a result, the official archeological records review
identified one previously recorded cultural resource site (41HR796) located within 1 km of the project
area that is eligible for NRHP listing. This site is described in detail below. Furthermore, two more
archeological sites (41HR334 and 41HR975) were previously recorded within 1 km of the project area.
Neither of these sites are eligible for NRHP listing; they are also described below.
J.E. Pearce conducted the earliest professional investigations in the upper Texas Gulf Coast region under
the sponsorship of the Bureau of American Ethnology. Between 1918 and 1932, Pearce, then chairman of
the Department of Anthropology at the University of Texas, conducted or directed numerous
reconnaissance and excavation projects throughout East Texas (Pearce 1932). Pearce seems to have been
largely concerned with the relationship between Texas cultures and the “high cultures” of the Mississippi
Valley, the American Southwest, and Mesoamerica, as well as the role of Eastern Texas as a route for
diffusion between these cultures. His interest in the upper coast area must be considered somewhat

100006099/090167

15

IV. Previous Investigations

marginal. With the exception of excavation at the Caplen site, a prehistoric cemetery in Galveston
County, few of his investigations in the region were ever published (Campbell 1957).
Joe Ben Wheat (1953) conducted the next major investigation in the vicinity of the project in Addicks
Reservoir for the Smithsonian Institution’s River Basin Survey. Wheat conducted surveys in the late
1940s, along Langham Creek, South Mayde Creek, Bear Creek, and Buffalo Bayou. He recorded nine
archeological sites. Wheat performed excavations at several sites where he obtained data that resulted in
the development of a chronological sequence for the area based on lithic typology (Suhm et al. 1954).
Members of the Houston Archeological Society (HAS) have made considerable research efforts in the
Addicks area. Numerous surveys and excavations conducted by the HAS have contributed to our
understanding of prehistoric settlement patterns, chronology, and technological change (Patterson 1972,
1973a, 1973b, 1975, 1976, 1977, 1980a, 1980b). Most of this information has been published in the
Houston Archeological Society Newsletter.
Another comprehensive investigation of Addicks Reservoir was conducted under the auspices of the
Cullen Foundation for the City of Houston (Fields et al. 1983). In the course of this investigation, Fields
et al. (1983) surveyed numerous high probability areas and also sampled low probability areas. They
investigated 46 prehistoric and 18 historic sites. The preferred location for historic settlement was found
to be in upland situations, while all but two of the prehistoric sites were confined to pimple mounds in the
floodplains (Fields et al. 1983).
Shortly after the completion of the Addicks Reservoir survey, the United States Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE), Galveston District contracted to perform a survey at Bear Creek Park, which lies within
Addicks Reservoir. This investigation included the survey of approximately 37.8 percent of the 777-ha
(2,920-ac) park and resulted in the recording of five prehistoric and seven historic sites. Three of the
prehistoric sites were found clustered in a group of at least 26 natural pimple mounds (Howard and
Freeman 1983). The fourth site is located on a relatively isolated pimple mound, while the fifth is on an
upland margin. Two of the prehistoric sites provided temporally diagnostic artifacts that suggested
occupation during the Early and/or Late Ceramic periods. The remaining sites yielded only nondiagnostic
lithic debitage (Howard and Freeman 1983).
In the early spring of 1983, one of the sites (41HR436) recorded during the Addicks Reservoir survey was
tested (Kotter and Fields 1983). The testing was directed toward the assessment of the site’s eligibility for
the NRHP. Site 41HR436 is one of only a few known upland prehistoric sites in Addicks Reservoir. The
testing program, which included the excavation of 6 m2 (65 ft2) of the site, revealed two occupational
components: an Early Ceramic component represented by contracting- and expanding-stem dart points,
sandy paste ceramics, and a midden deposit; and a Late Ceramic occupational level that contained a
contracting-stemmed arrow point and a decrease in artifact frequency relative to the early ceramic levels.
The site was recommended for nomination to the National Register (Kotter and Fields 1983) and was
nominated by the USACE.

100006099/090167

16

IV. Previous Investigations

Another archeological investigation within Addicks Reservoir was an archeological survey for
improvements to Eldridge Road (Voellinger and James 1984). Two sites previously reported by Fields et
al. (1983) (41HR473 and 41HR188) were revisited by Voellinger and James (1984), but no additional
cultural resources were identified.
Hall (1981) reported the most comprehensive investigation within the east Texas coastal plain. In 1974
and 1975, investigations of 15 archeological sites were conducted along Allens Creek, a tributary of the
Brazos River, approximately 115 km (71.5 miles) from the Gulf Coast in Austin County. Excavations
from site 41AU36 contained 236 burials that could be segregated into four cemeteries dating from the
Middle Archaic through the Late Prehistoric period.
Work more specific to the project area and Segment E of the Grand Parkway survey corridor centers
predominantly near Cypress Creek located in the survey corridor. The work typically involved drainage
improvements implemented by the Harris County Flood Control District (HCFCD) and the USACE,
Galveston District.
In 1977, a survey conducted along Cypress Creek identified the presence of a prehistoric lithic and
ceramic sherd scatter (site 41HR334) in a terraced field several kilometers south of Cypress Creek within
the 100-year floodplain (see Appendix B, Sheet 2). The site measured 50 x 100 m (164 x 328 ft) in size.
Artifacts were found scattered across the area in spots with high visibility. Materials collected included
two bifacial tool fragments, one petrified wood projectile, an orange-brown-colored ceramic sherd, one
retouched lithic flake, and one projectile point.
In 1994, Moore Archeological Consulting conducted an approximate 121-ha (300-ac) survey for the
HCFCD in south Harris County. No sites were identified by the survey (Moore et al. 1994). Additional
work in the area in 1995 also revealed no new sites (Moore and Daigle 1995). Work conducted by GeoMarine Inc. in 1996 for the HCFCD identified two new prehistoric sites, 41HR789 and 41HR790; neither
site was recommended for further work (Ensor et al. 1996).
Moore Archeological Consulting conducted another survey of the area in 1996 for alternative alignments
of the proposed Grand Parkway project and identified a prehistoric lithic scatter and midden within the
survey corridor (see Appendix A, Sheet 3). In Moore’s 1996 report, the site was referred to as 41HR788.
However, upon further investigation by PBS&J of the online site files and maps of the Texas
Archeological Site Atlas, it was revealed that the site trinomial is actually 41HR796. According to Moore
et al. (1996), site 41HR796 is located north of Cypress Creek and was thought to span the entire width of
the Segment E survey corridor. Moore et al.’s 1996 extensive shovel testing of the site produced a “rich
midden,” 73 lithic flakes, a bifacial medial fragment and other expedient lithic tools, 203 pieces of burned
and unburned bone, 4 tooth fragments, and numerous pieces of charcoal. No ceramics were recovered
form site 41HR796, suggesting that it may date to the Archaic period (Moore et al. 1996). The midden
appeared in perfectly stratified, undisturbed deposits suggesting that the site may contain intact features.

100006099/090167

17

IV. Previous Investigations

The authors recommended site avoidance during highway construction and suggested that site 4lHR796 is
“almost certainly eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places” (Moore et al. 1996).
During October and November 2006, PBS&J archeologists conducted NRHP eligibility testing of site
41HR796 (Córdova 2007). The project was sponsored by the Grand Parkway Association (GPA) and
TxDOT. Forty-seven shovel tests were excavated during the testing effort as well as six 1-x-1-m
controlled excavation units. Results from these excavations indicate that the site was a seasonal campsite
intermittently occupied by small bands of people over a fairly long period of time. The depth of the
deposits and the overall density and variety of time-sensitive artifacts point to occupation dates ranging
from roughly A.D. 500 to 900, a time range that spans the Mayes Island period (A.D. 425–650) in the
lower levels through the Turtle Bay period (A.D. 650–900) in the upper levels. Although the site has been
impacted by agricultural activities, artificial lakes, and various construction events located in the
immediate vicinity, the results of the test excavations revealed that a sizeable portion of 41HR796
remains intact. Artifact analyses indicate that site 41HR796 has significant research potential regarding
prehistoric Early Ceramic settlement in this area of the Cypress Creek drainage and resource utilization
on the prairie portion of the inland coastal region. It also provides an opportunity to expand knowledge of
early ceramic technology and refine the chronological placement of arrow points in the region. Site
41HR796 was deemed eligible for listing on the NRHP, and PBS&J recommended that data recovery
excavations be conducted if disturbance to the site cannot be avoided.
In 1997 and 1998, further work for the HCFCD along various bayous in Harris County identified three
new sites: 41HR809, 41HR810, and 41HR811. All three sites were recommended for further work and
possible SAL status (Meyers 1997, 1998).
Between March 2002 and November 2003, PBS&J conducted a survey for the preferred alignment of
Segment E of Grand Parkway (Turner and Bishop 2004). The project was sponsored by the GPA,
TxDOT, and the Federal Highway Administration. Site 41HR796 was assessed during this effort that
eventually led to NRHP eligibility testing of the site. Historic site 41HR975 was also recorded during this
effort and consisted of three structural foundations and a collapsed outbuilding dating from the early to
mid-twentieth century. The site was described as not meeting the criteria for NRHP eligibility and as not
worthy of SAL designation. Not all areas of the preferred Segment E Grand Parkway alignment were
surveyed due to landowner access restrictions.
Additional recent surveys conducted in the vicinity of the proposed Segment E alignment include work
for the HCFCD conducted in 2007 by HRA Gray and Pape along South Mayde Creek. In 2004, Allen
Bettis conducted a project investigation for TxDOT on a plot of land located on the north side of US
290/SH 6 just north of the end point for the Segment E alignment. No sites were recorded during these
investigations.
The most recent survey in the area was conducted by PBS&J under Texas Antiquities Permit 5274 for the
preferred Segment E alignment. The fieldwork was conducted in May of 2009 as a result of a reevaluation

100006099/090167

18

IV. Previous Investigations

of the proposed project as well as to assess inadvertent discrepancies between the previously surveyed
area and the Houston-PALM (Abbott 2001) Approximately 139 ha (343.6 ac) were surveyed; no cultural
resources were identified (Schubert et. al 2009)
No other previously recorded cultural resource sites, locations of properties listed on the NRHP, sites
designated as SALs, Official Texas Historical Markers, or records of previously conducted cultural
resource surveys were found in the records search.

100006099/090167

19

V. FIELD METHODOLOGY
The investigations included a 100 percent pedestrian survey of the survey areas augmented with shovel
testing in designated areas recommended by the Houston-PALM. Shovel testing was also conducted at
the detention pond located in close proximity to Bear Creek in accordance with TxDOT’s
recommendations. The primary criteria used in developing the Houston-PALM included landform types,
soil types, and evidence of recent and historic land use. These mapping criteria are integrated with broad
environmental determinations interpreted from the Geologic Atlas of Texas and field reconnaissance of
the Houston area. Included in these determinations are factors such as upland, coastal, riparian, and
aquatic environments.
Based on the results of Abbott’s (2001) work, PBS&J developed a matrix of mapping criteria in
consultation with the Texas State Historic Preservation Officer. These criteria were utilized to map the
geoarcheological potential within the Houston Highway District. Based on the research design
recommendations set forth in the Houston-PALM, the high probability areas are represented in map units
1, 2, 2a, 3, and 3a (see Appendix A). These map units are defined as follows:
•

Unit 0 – Waterbodies; no survey recommended.

•

Unit 1 – Surface survey recommended; deep reconnaissance recommended if deep impacts are
anticipated.

•

Unit 2 – Surface survey recommended; no deep reconnaissance recommended.

•

Unit 2a – Surface survey of mounds only; no deep reconnaissance recommended.

•

Unit 3 – No surface survey recommended; deep reconnaissance recommended if deep impacts are
anticipated.

•

Unit 3a – No surface survey recommended; deep reconnaissance recommended if severe deep
impacts are anticipated.

•

Unit 4 – No survey recommended.

All property owners within the areas recommended for survey were contacted by letter and by a follow-up
telephone call. The areas surveyed during this effort can be seen on the maps in Appendix B.
The survey was conducted in four parallel pedestrian transects spaced at approximate 30-m (98-ft)
intervals across the width of each survey area. In cases where the full width of the survey corridor was
inaccessible due to disturbances by man-made landforms such as roads or levees, transects were
eliminated from the interval. Shovel tests were placed at 30-m (98-ft) intervals where shovel testing was
recommended by the Houston-PALM and at the detention pond close to the Bear Creek drainage. Shovel
testing near Bear Creek followed the Archeological Survey Standards for Texas established by the Texas
Historical Commission (THC). Each shovel test was excavated to a diameter of approximately 30 cm (12
inches), and depths of arbitrary 10-cm (4-inch) levels. Excavated soils from shovel tests were screened
using a 0.64-millimeter (¼-inch) hardware cloth. Dense soils dominated by clay were divided with hand
tools and separated for inspection. In areas heavily disturbed by agriculture, soils were excavated to
clayey horizons and terminated.
100006099/090167

20

VI. RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS OF AREAS
SURVEYED AND ASSESSED
The archeological survey included a 100 percent pedestrian survey within the proposed detention and
mitigation basins and outfall easement locations as well as the remaining unsurveyed portions of survey
corridor. This pedestrian survey was augmented with shovel testing where recommended by the HoustonPALM (Abbott 2001) and at the detention pond close to the Bear Creek drainage. Much of the survey
corridor and surrounding area have been subjected to rice farming since the mid-twentieth century.
Modifications of the landscape from rice-farming and other agricultural activities has likely destroyed
archeological sites. Most of the area surveyed during this effort was plowed, open grassy pasture
surrounded by berms, levees, and other rice farming modifications. Higher probability areas, such as near
Cypress Creek, were not excluded from such agricultural modifications. The portion of the project near
Cypress Creek, for example, is low-lying and seasonally inundated. The soils at this location, Addicks
loam and Gessner loam, pond water easily for long periods of time and have very shallow water tables.
These conditions may have been present historically and prehistorically. Elsewhere, soil types likely to
harbor pimple mounds, and thus Unit 2A in the Houston-PALM, have also been altered to such an extent
that pimple mounds have been leveled by plowing and other activities. These favored site locations have,
for the most part, been destroyed by agricultural activities within and near the survey corridor.
A total of 134 shovel tests were excavated throughout the survey corridor, typically terminating prior to
40 cm below surface. These shovel tests typically encountered silty or sandy clays. Shovel tests in
obviously disturbed soils, such as those on berms or levees, were attempted, although typically terminated
at a shallow depth. An isolated water well, windmill pump, and concrete water tank for cattle were
encountered toward the northernmost end of the proposed Segment E corridor within the centerline of the
proposed outfall easement (see Appendix A, Sheet 3). The steel windmill tower is a ladderback tower
composed of four vertical tapering corner posts and several steel supporting members. The windmill has
an enclosed gear house and an 18-blade wheel with a metal fantail. The sucker rod is no longer extant;
however, the well seal is intact. Remnants of a concrete storage tank are located adjacent to the windmill
and well seal (figures 2 and 3). A thorough examination of the area surrounding the wind pump was
performed at intervals not exceeding 5 m, and no additional structures, features, or ground depressions
were observed. Two shovel tests were excavated, one on each side of the wind pump, to exhaust the
possibility of encountering cultural materials. No cultural materials were observed in any of the excavated
shovel tests. No other cultural resources were observed within the areas surveyed.

100006099/090167

21

VI. Results of Investigations of Areas Surveyed and Accessed

Figure 2. Overview of wind pump facing southwest

Figure 3. Concrete water tank facing west

100006099/090167

22

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The proposed project crosses tracts of agricultural land that have been modified repeatedly over the past
century. Landfill and grading has extensively changed the face of the landscape and virtually eliminated
the natural contours. Most of the shallow depressions and paleo-meander ridges that once formed the
pimple mound topography in the region have been decimated by logging and agriculture. All of these
mechanical impacts greatly reduce the likelihood of encountering historic and prehistoric cultural artifacts
in an undisturbed context. According to the Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas, the proposed project
alignment crosses seven mapping units including areas mapped as open water; these can be found within
three general soil associations: Clodine-Addicks-Gessner, Wockley-Gessner, and Katy-Aris associations
(Wheeler 1976). Soil mapping units identified within the proposed alignment include Addicks loam, ArisGessner complex, Clodine loam, Gessner loam, Hockley fine sandy loam, 1 to 4 percent slopes, Katy fine
sandy loam, Wockley fine sandy loam, and waters. In general, these soils have previously been identified
by Abbott (2001) as having a low to low-moderate geoarcheological potential.
PBS&J archeologists did not encounter any significant cultural resources during this intensive survey of
the proposed detention and mitigation basins, outfall easements, and remaining portions of Segment E of
the Grand Parkway project in Harris County, Texas. The lack of archeological materials recorded may be
attributed to disturbance caused by previous construction activities and modern residential development,
and Pleistocene-aged soils traversed within the survey corridor. Due to the absence of cultural materials
within the areas surveyed and moderate disturbance across portions of the survey corridor caused by road,
drainage, and utility construction, as well as some residential development, PBS&J recommends that
construction activities within the areas surveyed be allowed to proceed without further consultation.

100006099/090167

23

REFERENCES
Abbott, J.T.
2001

Aronow, S.
1976

Houston Area Geoarcheology: A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report 27. Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.

Geology. In Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas, by F.F. Wheeler, pp. 43–45. U.S.
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station and the Harris County Flood Control District.

Aten, L.E.
1983

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.

Blair, W.F.
1950

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2:93–117

Bureau of Economic Geology
1992
Geologic Map of Texas. The University of Texas at Austin.
1996

Physiographic Map of Texas. The University of Texas at Austin.

Campbell, T.N.
1957
Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas. Texas Journal
of Science 9:448–471.
Córdova, Karla J.
2007
National Register of Historic Places Eligibility Testing of Site 41HR796, Harris County,
Texas (Texas Antiquities Permit No. 3522). Document 005706. PBS&J, Houston, Texas.
Dethloff, H.C.
2009
The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Harris County, Texas,” http://www.tsha.
utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles (accessed May 2009).
Dice, L.R.
1943

The Biotic Provinces of North America. The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.

Ensor, H.B., L.C. Nordt, and M. Prior
1996
Historic Properties Survey of Alternatives 6 and 19, Cypress Creek Flood Control
Project, Harris County, Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations No. 133. GeoMarine, Inc., Plano, Texas.
Eubanks, T.L.
1994
A History and Characterization of the Katy Prairie. Paper presented at the Katy Prairie
Conference. Texas Parks and Wildlife, Katy Prairie Land Conservancy, and West
Houston Association, Sponsors. April 29 and 30, 1994, Houston, Texas.
100006099/090167

24

References

Fields, R.C., M.D. Freeman, and S.M. Kotter
1983
Inventory and Assessment of the Cultural Resources at Addicks Reservoir, Harris County
Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 22. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Gould, F.W.
1975
Hall, G.D.
1981

The Grasses of Texas. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

Allen’s Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Archeological Survey Research Report 61. The University of Texas at Austin.

Hatch, S.L., K.N. Ghandi, and L.E. Brown
1990
Checklist of the Vascular Plants of Texas. MP-1655. Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Hobaugh, W.C., C.D. Stutzenbacker, and E.L. Flickinger
1989
At The Rice Prairies: Habitat Management for Migrating and Wintering Waterfowl in
North America. Texas Tech University Press, Lubbock.
Howard, M.A., and M.D. Freeman
1983
Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at Bear Creek Park, Addicks Reservoir,
Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations No. 23. Prewitt and Associates Inc.,
Austin, Texas.
Kenmotsu, N.A., and T.K. Perttula (editors)
1993
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document. Department
of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resources Management Report 3. Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Kleiner, D.J.
2009

The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Hockley, Texas,” http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/
handbook/ online/articles (accessed May 2009).

Kotter, S.M., and R.C. Fields
1983
National Register Testing of Site 41HR436, Addicks Reservoir, Harris County, Texas.
Report of Investigations No. 23. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Lobpries, D.
1994
1995

Meyers, A.D.
1997

A Waterfowl on the Katy Prairie (Utilization and Trends). Paper presented at the Katy
Prairie Conference.
Coastal Texas Prairie Waterfowl Management Plan. Texas Parks and Wildlife internal
working paper, unpublished. On file at PBS&J, Austin, Texas.

Archeological Survey of the Proposed Tomball Regional Detention Basin, Harris County,
Texas. Report of Investigations No. 197. Moore Archeological Consulting Inc., Houston.

100006099/090167

25

References

1998

An Archeological Survey of Four Flood Control Unit Rights of Way, Harris County,
Texas. Report of Investigations No. 202. Moore Archeological Consulting Inc., Houston.

Moore, E.M., P.V. Heinrich, L.B. Mallouf, L.W. Patterson, H. Simons, and L.C. Spotts
1989
Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern Region of Texas. Office of the State
Archeologist, Special Report 31. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Moore, E.M., R.G. Moore, N. Hubbard, and S.W. Moss
1996
A Cultural Resources Survey of the Preferred Alignment and an Archeological and
Historic Land Use Assessment of Alternative Alignments for Segment E of the Grand
Parkway within Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations No. 183. Moore
Archeological Consulting Inc., Houston.
Moore R.G., and R.P. Daigle
1995
Archeological Survey of a 50-acre Mitigation Bank on an Unnamed Tributary of Cypress
Creek in West-Central Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations No. 126. Moore
Archeological Consulting Inc., Houston, Texas.
Moore, R.G., W.E. Moore, and A. Mesrobian
1994
A Cultural Resources Survey of 136 Acres Comprising Floodwater Detention Basin
HCFCD Unit D500-04-00 Near Brays Bayou in Western Harris County, Texas. Report of
Investigations No. 84. Moore Archeological Consulting Inc., Houston.
Newcomb, W.W., Jr.
1983
Karankawa. In Southwest, edited by Alfonso Ortiz, pp. 359–366. Handbook of North
American Indians, vol. 10, William G. Sturtevant, general editor. Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.
Patterson, L.W.
1972
Letter to D.A. Story dated February 2, 1972. Miscellaneous Harris County Files, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin, Texas.
1973a

Some Lithic Blade Technology in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
44:89–112.

1973b

A Possible Arrow Point Development Example. Texas Archeology 17(3):8–9.

1975

Evidence of Prismatic Blade Technology in the Texas Archaic. In The Archaic of Texas,
edited by T.R. Hester. Center for Archeological Research Special Report 2. The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

1976

Technological Changes in Harris County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 48:171–188.

1977

An Archeological Complex in Harris County, Texas. Houston Archeological Society
Newsletter 54.

1979

A Review of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 50:103–124.

100006099/090167

26

References

1980a

41HR206, A Major Site in Harris County, Texas. In Papers on the Archeology of the
Texas Coast, edited by L. Highley and T.R. Hester. Center for Archeological Research,
Special Report 11. The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1980b

The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society Report 3.

1995

Bibliography of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas Coast. Houston Archeological Society
Special Publication No. 9.

Pearce, J .E.
1932

The Present Status of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 4.

Richner, J.J., and J.T. Bagot (assemblers)
1978
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Trinity River Basin, 1976–1977. Research Report 41.
Archeology Research Program, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas.
Roell, C.H.
2009

Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Nuestra Señora del Espíritu Santa de Zúñiga Mission,”
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/NN/uqn16.html
(accessed
May
2009).

Rylander, R.W.
2009
The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Katy, Texas,” http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/
handbook/online/articles (accessed May 2009).
Schubert, D., D. Norton, P. Bishop, and K. Córdova
2009
A Cultural Resources Survey of the Preferred Alignment for Segment E of the Grand
Parkway, Harris County, Texas, CSJ No. 3510-05-002. Texas Antiquities Permit No.
5274. Document No. 090089. PBS&J, Houston, Texas.
Smeins, F.E.
1994

Smith, M.L.
2009

Stokes, J.S.
1985

Habitat Features of the Katy Prairie. Presented at the Katy Prairie Conference. Texas
Parks and Wildlife, Katy Prairie Land Conservancy, and West Houston Association,
Sponsors. April 29 and 30, Houston, Texas.

The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Cypress, Texas,” http://www.tsha.utexas.
edulhandbooklonline/articles (accessed May 2009).

Cultural Resources Management Plan, Wallisville Lake Project, Chambers and Liberty
Counties, Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

100006099/090167

27

References

Story, D.A
1990

Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, vol. 1, by D.A, Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C.
Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163–366. Research Series No. 38.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville, Arkansas.

Suhm, D.A, Alex D. Kreiger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 25.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
1978
Katy, Texas, Historical Marker files in the Atlas of Texas Online. http://www.atlas.
thc.state.tx.us/atlas.
Tunnell, C.D., and J. Richard Ambler
1967
Archeological Excavations at Presidio San Agustin de Ahumada. Archeological Program
Report No. 6. Texas State Building Commission, Austin.
Turner, K.E., and Bishop, P.
2004
A Cultural Resources Survey of the Preferred Alignment for Segment E for the Grand
Parkway Project in Harris County, Texas. Texas Antiquities Permit No. 2772. Document
No. 040065. PBS&J, Houston, Texas.
Voellinger, M.W., and S.R. James Jr.
1984
Summary Report: A Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Eldridge Road
Improvement Areas, Harris County, Texas. Document 84050. Espey, Huston and
Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Weddle, R.S.
1985
1991

Wheat, J.B.
1953

Wheeler, F.F.
1976

Spanish Sea: The Gulf of Mexico in North American Discovery, 1500–1685. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.
French Thorn: Rival Explorers in the Spanish Sea, 1682–1762. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.

An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas. In The Addicks
Dam Site. River Basin Surveys Papers No. 4, Pt. 1, Bulletin of the Bureau of Ethnology
Bulletin 154, pp. 143−252. Smithsonian Institute, Washington, D.C.

Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station and the Harris
County Flood Control District.

100006099/090167

28

Appendix A
Maps of Surveyed Areas Showing Site Locations
(not for public disclosure)

NOT FOR PUBLIC DISCLOSURE
Begin Project
Segment E

k
kk
k
k
k k
k
k
k
k k
k k

k

PALM: TxDOT
ROW: Brown & Gay

k

Shovel Test
Wind Mill

Easements

Proposed Survey Area

Previously Recorded Archaeological Site

TxDOT PALM

0 - Water. No survey recommended.

Appendix A
Proposed Grand Parkway Segment E Remaining ROW,
Detention and Mitigation Basins, and Outfall Easements Survey Area Map.

1 - Surface Survey Recommended, Deep Reconnaissance Recommended if Deep Impacts are Anticipated.
2 - Surface Survey Recommended, No Deep Reconnaissance Recommended.

2a - Surface Survey of Mounds Only; No Deep Reconnaissance Recommended.
4 - No Survey Recommended.

0

Proposed Detention Basins
Proposed Mitigation Basins

300

Meters
600

Katy Quadrangle

900

Harris County, Texas
Sheet 1 of 3

1,200
Prepared By: PBS&J/19995

0

2,000

Feet

4,000

6,000

Job No.: 100006099

Scale: 1 " = 2,000 '
Date: Jan 07, 2010

File: N:\TRANS\100004396\prj\mxd\SEG_E\Rpt\BL_SEG_E_remainingROW_survey

k

k

k k
k k
k

I
Datum: NAD 83
Projection: Texas State Plane
Zone: South Central
Units: Feet

Proposed ROW
k

NOT FOR PUBLIC DISCLOSURE

41HR401

41HR1002

41HR334

k
k
k
k
k

kk
k

k
k

k

k

k

k
k

k

k

k

k
k

k

k

k

k

k

k

k
k

k

k

k

k

k
k

k

k

k

k

k

k
k

k
k

k
k

k
k
k

k

41HR975

k

k

k

k

I
Datum: NAD 83
Projection: Texas State Plane
Zone: South Central
Units: Feet
PALM: TxDOT
ROW: Brown & Gay

Proposed ROW
k

k

Shovel Test
Wind Mill

Easements

Proposed Survey Area

Previously Recorded Archaeological Site

TxDOT PALM

0 - Water. No survey recommended.

Appendix A
Proposed Grand Parkway Segment E Remaining ROW,
Detention and Mitigation Basins, and Outfall Easements Survey Area Map.

1 - Surface Survey Recommended, Deep Reconnaissance Recommended if Deep Impacts are Anticipated.
2 - Surface Survey Recommended, No Deep Reconnaissance Recommended.

2a - Surface Survey of Mounds Only; No Deep Reconnaissance Recommended.
4 - No Survey Recommended.

0

Proposed Detention Basins
Proposed Mitigation Basins

300

Meters
600

Katy & Warren Lake Quadrangle

900

Harris County, Texas
Sheet 2 of 3

1,200
Prepared By: PBS&J/19995

0

2,000

Feet

4,000

6,000

Job No.: 100006099

Scale: 1 " = 2,000 '
Date: Jan 07, 2010

File: N:\TRANS\100004396\prj\mxd\SEG_E\Rpt\BL_SEG_E_remainingROW_survey

NOT FOR PUBLIC DISCLOSURE

401

End Project
Segment E

41HR796

41HR334
k

k

k
k
k

k

k

k
k
k

k

k

k

k

k
k

k

k

k

k

k

k

k

k
k

k

k

k
k

k

k

k
k

I
Datum: NAD 83
Projection: Texas State Plane
Zone: South Central
Units: Feet
PALM: TxDOT
ROW: Brown & Gay

Proposed ROW
k

k

Shovel Test
Wind Mill

Easements

Proposed Survey Area

Previously Recorded Archaeological Site

TxDOT PALM

0 - Water. No survey recommended.

Appendix A
Proposed Grand Parkway Segment E Remaining ROW,
Detention and Mitigation Basins, and Outfall Easements Survey Area Map.

1 - Surface Survey Recommended, Deep Reconnaissance Recommended if Deep Impacts are Anticipated.
2 - Surface Survey Recommended, No Deep Reconnaissance Recommended.

2a - Surface Survey of Mounds Only; No Deep Reconnaissance Recommended.
4 - No Survey Recommended.

0

Proposed Detention Basins
Proposed Mitigation Basins

300

Meters
600

Warren Lake Quadrangle

900

Harris County, Texas
Sheet 3 of 3

1,200
Prepared By: PBS&J/19995

0

2,000

Feet

4,000

6,000

Job No.: 100006099

Scale: 1 " = 2,000 '
Date: Jan 07, 2010

File: N:\TRANS\100004396\prj\mxd\SEG_E\Rpt\BL_SEG_E_remainingROW_survey

Appendix B
Representative Photographs
of the Surveyed Areas

Appendix B: Representative Photographs of the Surveyed Area

One of two parallel ditches running east to west within one of the surveyed areas, facing east.

Large drainage ditch and field that has been cleared and leveled for home construction
within a mitigation basin survey area, facing south.

100006099/090167

B-1

Appendix B (Cont’d)

Dredge pile from Mayde Creek on southern edge of mitigation basin. Example of
vegetation in the frequently inundated mitigation basin survey area, facing south.

Old rice field now used for cattle grazing, facing north

100006099/090167

B-2

Appendix B (Cont’d)

West side of House and Hall Rd. detention basin and outfall easement.
Two large, parallel irrigation ditches bisecting survey area, facing west.

Fortified sand levee/road dividing multiple irrigation ditches and old rice paddies
currently being used for cattle grazing, facing east.

100006099/090167

B-3

Appendix B (Cont’d)

Very large irrigation pond/ditch at the end of the outfall easement survey area,
running north to south, facing north.

Irrigation pond levee and well pump at center of detention basin, facing west.

100006099/090167

B-4

Appendix B (Cont’d)

Edge of Mallard Lake at north edge of detention basin survey area, facing east.

100006099/090167

B-5

