FINAL CULTURAL RESOURCES REPORT FOR THE
SALT CREEK MIDSTREAM, LLC PROPOSED
WAHA II PIPELINE PROJECT ON STATE OF TEXAS LANDS
IN REEVES COUNTY, TEXAS
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9017

Authors:
Michael M. Margolis
Gary D. Edington
Jerry L. Riggs
Archeological Principal Investigator:
Gary D. Edington
October 15, 2019

Prepared by:
Enercon Services, Inc. (ENERCON)
1601 NW Expressway
Suite 1000
Oklahoma City, OK 73118

Prepared for:
Salt Creek Midstream, LLC
20329 State Highway 249
Suite 450
Houston, TX 77070

ENERCON Project Number: SCM~00017
Cultural Resources Report Number: 18-80

ABSTRACT

Enercon Services, Inc. (ENERCON), in support of Salt Creek Midstream, LLC, conducted an intensive
archeological survey for the proposed Waha II Pipeline Project. The proposed pipeline is approximately
27.33 miles in length, located near Pecos, Texas in Reeves County. This report encompasses only the two
State of Texas Lands, administered by the Texas General Land Office (TGLO), segments of the proposed
Waha II Pipeline Project which is approximately 0.69-miles (3,666 feet) in length in Reeves County. The
State of Texas Lands portion of the project area is mapped on the United States Geological Survey (USGS)
Toyah Lake, Tex. (1963), and Old X Ranch, Tex. (1963, Photorevised 1981), 7.5 Minute Quadrangles. The
construction corridor consists of a 50-foot-wide permanent pipeline right-of-way (ROW) and a 50-footwide temporary workspace corridor. The cultural resources survey corridor was 100 feet wide for the entire
0.69-mile length of the pipeline segment through the State of Texas Lands. The total area inspected during
the cultural resources survey of the State of Texas Lands was 8.43 acres (3.41 hectares).
The survey of the State of Texas property was completed under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9017. The
cultural resources field investigation on State of Texas Lands occurred on August 2 and 3, 2018 by J.
Matthew Oliver and Gary D. Edington and consisted of an intensive pedestrian survey utilizing transects
not spaced greater than 15 meters apart with shovel tests. The field investigation was conducted in
accordance with the Texas Historical Commission (THC) Archeological Survey Standards for Texas. The
entire project was supervised by Gary D. Edington, an ENERCON archeologist who meets the U.S.
Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualification Standards for archeology as set forth in 36 CFR 61.
The cultural resources survey resulted in the observation of two isolated finds (IF). IF#8 is a single lithic
flake of brown chert observed on the surface in the east tract of State of Texas Lands. IF#9 is a small
bulldozer push-pile of old wooden fence posts and barbed wire observed adjacent to the east fence line of
the east tract of Texas State lands. IF#8 and IF#9 lack information potential and are not eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL).
The cultural resources survey did not result in finding any additional historic or prehistoric artifacts,
features, cultural lenses, or sites over 50 years of age on State of Texas Lands. No archeological sites were
encountered, and no artifacts were collected. Therefore, it is recommended that the project will have no
effect on any cultural resources that may qualify for inclusion to the NRHP on State of Texas Lands. No
further cultural resources investigations are recommended prior to construction of the proposed Waha II
Pipeline project on State of Texas Lands. If cultural material, including sites, features, or artifacts that are
50 years old or older are encountered within the ROW during construction of this project, work in the area
must cease and the regional THC Archeologist must be immediately be notified.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page i

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT
INTRODUCTION
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Paleoindian Period
Archaic Period
Late Prehistoric Period
Protohistoric Period
Historic Period
Reeves County
BACKGROUND RESEARCH
METHODOLOGY
RESULTS
RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES CITED
APPENDIX A: AERIAL MAPS SHOWING CULTURAL RESOURCES. Contains
Confidential Cultural Resource Locations: Not For Public Distribution.
APPENDIX B: SHOVEL TEST LOG

i
1
5
6
6
7
7
7
7
9
10
12
12
23
24
26
29

LIST OF TABLES

Table 1. Soils within the study area by Arability, Parent Material, and Depth to
Restrictive Feature
Table 2. Previously Recorded Sites within One Mile of the APE of the Overall Project

6
10

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1. Vicinity Map
Figure 2.1. Topographic Map
Figure 2.2. Topographic Map
Figure 3. General overview of the APE facing east-southeast from the west boundary
of the west tract of State of Texas Lands, showing thin grasses and calcic soils.
Figure 4. General overview of the APE GSV, facing down from the west boundary of
the west tract of State of Texas Lands, showing thin grasses and calcic soils.
Figure 5. General overview of the APE, facing west from the east boundary of the west
tract of State of Texas Lands, showing thin grasses, with occasional mesquite
and creosote bush, and calcic soils.
Figure 6. General overview of the APE GSV, facing down from the east boundary of
the west tract of State of Texas Lands, showing thin grasses and calcic soils.
Figure 7. General overview of the APE facing east-southeast from the west boundary
of the east tract of State of Texas Lands, showing mesquite, sand sage and
mixed weeds and forb vegetation.
Figure 8. General overview of the APE GSV, facing down from the west boundary of
the east tract of State of Texas Lands, showing decaying organic materials.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

2
3
4
14
14
15

15
16

16

Page ii

LIST OF FIGURES (cont.)

Figure 9. General overview of the APE, facing east-southeast in central portion of the
east tract of State of Texas Lands, showing ground disturbance from a
multiple pipeline crossing and lease road.
Figure 10. General overview of the APE GSV, facing down in the central portion of the
east tract of State of Texas Lands, showing gravel laden soils and small weeds
and forbs.
Figure 11. General overview of the APE, facing west-northwest into the east tract of
the State of Texas lands from the fence just east of the east property
boundary, showing creosote, bush and broom weed.
Figure 12. General overview of the APE GSV, at the east boundary of the east tract of
the State of Texas Lands.
Figure 13. Dorsal view of IF#8, a single flake of brown chert with some edge
modifications.
Figure 14. Ventral view of IF#8, a single flake of brown chert with some edge
modifications.
Figure 15. General overview of IF#8, a single modified flake of brown chert on the
surface, facing west (the red arrow points to the flake).
Figure 16. General overview of IF#8, a single modified flake of brown chert on the
surface, facing east (the red arrow points to the flake).
Figure 17. General overview of ST#1 at IF#8, facing down.
Figure 18. General overview of ST#2 at IF#8, facing down.
Figure 19. IF#9, a bulldozed pile of earth, wooden fence posts and barbed wire, facing
northeast.
Figure 20. IF#9, a bulldozed pile of earth, wooden fence posts and barbed wire, facing
west (the spade was placed on IF#9 for scale).

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

17

17

18

18
19
19
20
20
21
21
22
22

Page iii

INTRODUCTION

Enercon Services, Inc. (ENERCON), in support of Salt Creek Midstream, LLC, conducted an intensive
archeological survey for the proposed Waha II Pipeline Project. The proposed pipeline is approximately
27.33 miles in length, located near Pecos, Texas in Reeves County (Figure 1). This report encompasses
only the two tracts of State of Texas Lands, administered by the Texas General Land Office (TGLO),
segment of the proposed Waha II Pipeline Project which is approximately 0.69-miles (3,666 feet) in length
(Figures 2.1-2.2). The State of Texas Lands portion of the project area is mapped on the United States
Geological Survey (USGS) Toyah Lake, Tex. (1963) and Old X Ranch, Tex. (1963, Photorevised 1981),
7.5 Minute Quadrangles (USGS 1963a, 1963b). The construction corridor consists of a 50-foot-wide
permanent pipeline right-of-way and a 50-foot-wide temporary workspace corridor. The cultural resources
survey corridor was 100 feet wide for the entire 0.69-mile length of the pipeline segment through the State
of Texas Lands. The total area inspected during the cultural resources survey was 8.42 acres (3.41 hectares).
The proposed project will involve installation of a 24-inch natural gas pipeline. The proposed project area
on State of Texas Lands is primarily comprised of desert scrub, desert scrub grassland in the uplands above
ephemeral dry lake beds. (Figures 2.1-2.2). Most of the construction will involve temporary vegetation
clearing along the ROW. The proposed 24-inch steel pipeline will be installed in an open cut trench. The
average depth of the trench would be a minimum eight feet, to allow a cover of six feet above the top of the
24-inch diameter pipeline. After construction the ROW is planned to be restored to pre-construction
contours and vegetation. Oil and gas development activity is prevalent along most of the ROW and portions
of the ROW will cross previously disturbed areas.
The survey of the State of Texas properties was completed under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9017. The
cultural resources intensive field investigation and report are intended to assist in adhering to the 1969
Antiquities Code of Texas. The cultural resources field investigation on State of Texas Lands occurred on
August 2 and 3, 2018 by J. Matthew Oliver and Gary D. Edington and consisted of an intensive pedestrian
survey utilizing transects not spaced greater than 15 meters apart with shovel tests. The field investigation
was conducted in accordance with the Texas Historical Commission (THC) Archeological Survey
Standards for Texas. The entire project was supervised by Gary D. Edington, an ENERCON archeologist
who meets the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualification Standards for archeology as set
forth in 36 CFR 61. Pursuant to 13 TAC 26.17, correspondence, field records, and photographs generated
during field investigations have been prepared for permanent curation at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, Austin, Texas.
The cultural resources survey resulted in the observation of two isolated finds (IF). IF#8 is a single lithic
flake of brown chert observed on the surface in the east tract of State of Texas Lands. IF#9 is a small
bulldozer push-pile of old wooden fence posts and barbed wire observed adjacent to the east fence line of
the east tract of Texas State Lands. IF#8 and IF#9 lack information potential and are not eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP).
The cultural resources survey did not result in finding any additional historic or prehistoric artifacts,
features, cultural lenses, or sites over 50 years of age on State of Texas Lands. No archeological sites were
encountered, and no artifacts were collected. Therefore, it is recommended that the project will have no
effect on any cultural resources that may qualify for inclusion to the NRHP on State of Texas Lands. No
further cultural resources investigations are recommended prior to construction of the proposed Waha II
Pipeline project on State of Texas Lands. If cultural material, including sites, features, or artifacts that are
50 years old or older are encountered within the ROW during construction of this project, work in the area
must cease and the regional THC Archeologist must be immediately be notified.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 1

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 2

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 3

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 4

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

The study area is situated within the Chihuahuan Basin and Playas biotic province of the Chihuahuan
Deserts ecoregion (Griffith et al. 2007). The Chihuahuan Basins and Playas are part of the larger
Chihuahuan Deserts which extend from the Madrean Archipelago of Arizona in the west to the Edwards
Plateau of west-central Texas. The boundaries of this area are defined by an arid climate with some of the
lowest precipitation rates in Texas, with annual rainfall recorded at eight to fourteen inches, which support
desert shrub vegetation dominated by creosote bush on the alkaline or gypsiferous soils (Griffith et al.
2007). The elevation of the Chihuahuan Basins and Playas range from 1,200 to 4,500 feet above mean sea
level (amsl) with local relief varying from 25 to 500 feet (Griffith et al. 2007:10). The major drainage of
the approximately 12,625 square mile ecoregion is the Pecos River which carries runoff from New Mexico
to the north (Griffith et al. 2007:8-9). Otherwise, the ecoregion is primarily internally drained, resulting in
alkaline soils, but an efficient recharge rate of local aquifers.
The presence of the quality groundwater did not go unnoticed by settlers and early 20th century inhabitants
who made use of the abundant ground water with irrigation wells with flow rates between several hundred
to 2000 gallons per minute (Griffith et al. 2007:9). The primary crops on these irrigated agricultural fields
have included cotton, pecans, alfalfa, tomatoes, onions, chili peppers, and the famous melons, particularly
cantaloupe from Reeves County (Griffith el al. 2007; Geiser 2017). The ranching and irrigation based
agricultural practices developed from the late 19th to 20th century in the region have altered the native
environment. In the El Paso area, and to the west, aquifer drawdown has led to over a 100 foot decline in
ground water levels from those recorded at the turn of the 20th century and salt build up in soils has led to
the abandonment of Pecos Valley agricultural fields which were previously productive farmlands in the
1900s (Griffith et al. 2007:9). The agricultural and industrial uses of the Pecos River in New Mexico and
Texas have reduced water levels in the river which was described by early observers as being 4 to 15 feet
deep, and up to 100 feet wide, and as fast, deep, and wide (Griffith et al. 2007:9; Hayter 2010), into a gentle,
slow, shallow, and narrow channel. As an example, the early history of settlement in the region of modern
Pecos, Texas was related to the encampments of cowboys in the region due to the safe ford for cattle across
the mighty Pecos River to the east of the modern town site (Smith 2010a). The historic to modern grazing
practices have also altered the environment in the region. The former grasslands which previously supported
cattle have been reduced by overgrazing to dessert shrubs lands suitable only for sheep and goats (Griffith
et al. 2007:8).
The desert setting of the study area results in relatively sparse vegetation and excellent ground surface
visibility. The dominant creosote bush is an example of the resilient regional flora which can tolerate the
diurnal temperature range, low moisture conditions, and high evapotranspiration rates of the region.
Additional ecotones include the high saline environments of the playas where saltbush and alkali sacaton
may be found along the margins of these dry saltpans and playas (Griffith et al. 2007:8). Honey mesquite,
yucca, and mixed grasses are found intermittently in the region.
The study area ranges from approximately 2,665 feet to 2,573 feet (812 to 784 meters) amsl. The northwest
portion of the State of Texas Lands has the lowest elevation, with the highest point occurring at the southeast
area of the Texas State Lands on the undulating ridge east of the Toyah Lake basin.
According to the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), the proposed project on State of Texas
Lands crosses three mapped soil units: the Orla association, nearly level, the Delnorte-Chilicotal
association, rolling, and the Reakor Association, nearly level (USDA 2018). The general soil attributes are
presented in Table 1 and discussed below. The Orla association, nearly level soils are mapped on the
western tract of the State of Texas Lands. These soils are typically a clay loam up to five inches in depth,
underlain by gypsiferous material as shallow as 20 to 40 inches (51 to 102 cm), with a depth to bedrock of
Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 5

over 80 inches (203 cm), which is considered not prime farmland. The Delnorte-Chilicotal association,
rolling soils are mapped on over 90 percent of the east tract of State of Texas Lands, and are a gravelly to
very gravelly loam which is not considered prime farmland, the soil association can be very shallow with
petrocalcic features as shallow as seven to 30 inches (18 to 73 cm) in depth (USDS 2018). The Reakor
association, nearly level soils are mapped on the extreme east portion of the east State of Texas Lands tract
and are a well-drained soil with a relatively shallow depth to calcic or petrocalcic features, and an overall
depth to bedrock of over 80 inches (USDA 2018). Overall, the soils in the two tracts of State of Texas
Lands can be quite shallow to a calcic or petrocalcic feature (USDA 2018). These shallow soils are unlikely
to contain buried cultural deposits.
Table 1. Soils within the study area by Arability, Parent Material, and Depth to Restrictive Feature
Depth to Petrocalcic
Soil Unit*
Arability
Parent Material
Restrictive Feature
Orla
Not prime
Loamy gypsiferous materials of lacustrine or
20–40 inches
association,
farmland
alluvial origins
(51–102 cm)
nearly level
DelnorteDelnorte=Calcareous loamy materials
Delnorte=7-30 inches
Chilicotal
Not prime
containing igneous gravel
(18-73 cm)
association,
farmland
Chilicotal=Loamy gravelly piedmont
Chilicotal=6-20 inches
rolling
sediments from igneous mountains
(15-51 cm)
Reakor
Not prime
20–40 inches
Loamy alluvium derived from mixed sources
association,
farmland
(51–102 cm)
nearly level
*Data compiled from USDA (2018)
Reeves County has a subtropical semi-desert climate with relatively short mild winters and long hot
summers. The average daily temperature is 46 Fahrenheit (°F) in the winter and 83°F in the summer. Annual
rainfall averages about 12 inches (29.5 centimeters [cm]) and it is distributed evenly throughout the year,
with a long growing season for crops from April through September. The average humidity ranges from 40
to 70 percent due to a general paucity of thunderstorms and heavy rainfall and the fact that on average, only
one-third of winters have any measurable snowfall (Jaco 1980).

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Based on the archeological record, people have inhabited Texas for at least the last 12,000 years. The
prehistory of the Southern High Plains has been commonly broken into five temporal periods. The dates
assigned to those periods differ between authors but generally include the Paleoindian Period (ca. 11,5008,500 B.P.), Archaic Period (ca. 8,500-1500 B.P.), Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1,500 B.P. to 500 B.P.),
Protohistoric Period (ca. A.D. 1450-1650), and Historic Period (ca. 1650-1950) (adapted from Boyd 2004).
A summary of the culture history of the region is summarized below. For additional information on the
cultural history of the region and a more detailed review than is possible here, the reader is directed to the
works by Patterson (1995), Ensor and Carlson (1991), Perttula (2004), and Turner, Hester, and McReynolds
(2011).
Paleoindian Period
Evidence for prehistoric occupation of the area is relatively scarce in the Paleoindian Period (ca. 11,5008,500 B.P.). It is highly likely that earlier sites have been lost to erosion due to the geological context of the
Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 6

area (Boyd 1997:7). Paleoindian sites are more common on the eastern Edwards Plateau, although sites and
isolated artifacts have been recorded. Although there is growing evidence for human presence in the
Americas, Clovis is the first well-defined cultural horizon in the region. The remains of large herbivores
are found in association with Clovis artifacts but there is a growing body of evidence for the procurement
of smaller animals and plants during this time. The Clovis projectile points are lanceolate in shape and have
fluted bases. Subsequent Paleoindian projectile points include Folsom and Plainview (Turner, Hester, and
McReynolds 2011:45). These projectile points were typically hafted to spears, which were often thrown
with the aid of atlatls.
Archaic Period
With the extinction of megafauna, the Archaic Period (ca. 8,500-1,500 B.P.) is generally defined by broader
subsistence practices and an increase in intensity of resource exploitation. The climate transitioned from
relatively wet in the Early Archaic Period to relatively dry in the Late Archaic Period. Additionally,
temperatures appear to have increased which resulted in changes to the biotic community. Fire cracked rock
and oxidized rock is relatively common during this period and likely results from hearths and ovens (Collins
2004). Although resource exploitation is inferred to be more intense, subsistence appears to be focused on
seasonal mobility tied in part to bison hunting (Boyd 1997). Campsites and rock shelters have been
identified from this period, mostly from the Late Archaic. Projectile points are normally barbed spear or
dart points, and plant-processing tools increase through time (Johnson and Holliday 2004).
Late Prehistoric Period
The Late Prehistoric or Ceramic Period (ca. 1,500 B.P. to 500 B.P.) is marked by the presence of ceramics
and smaller projectile points indicating the switch from atlatl and spear to the bow and arrow (Johnson and
Holliday 2004). Due to further drying of the climate, bison appear to become scarcer in this region. Trading
is inferred to have occurred with Southwestern groups including the Jornada Mogollon (Boyd 1997).
Brownware pottery was imported from the Puebloans and habitation structures from this period include pit
houses. Campsites were still likely used during parts of the year and would be representative of seasonal
mobility. Subsistence practices included the introduction of corn. In the latter part of the period, prestige
goods like Olivella shell beads, turquoise, non-local pottery, and obsidian become more common.
Protohistoric Period
The Protohistoric Period (ca. A.D. 1500-1700) begins with direct and indirect European influences in the
region. The end of the period coincides with an increase in European presence and their effects on traditional
lifestyles. Limited access to Europeans goods occurs, but there is relatively minimal change from the Late
Prehistoric. Trade goods include bells, spikes, glass beads, and nails. European settlement did not seriously
begin to disrupt aboriginal habitation until after AD 1700 (Patterson 1995:249). European diseases,
probably introduced by explorers and early traders, did begin to have impacts as early as AD 1528. At least
seven epidemics were recorded among the tribes of the study area between that date and AD 1890 (Ewers
1974). The Tonkawa appear to have been joined by the Ervipiame from northern Mexico (Hester 1980).
Subsequent immigration by the Lipan Apache, Kiowa, and Comanche appear to change control of the area.
Historic Period (A.D. 1700 to 1950)
Spanish explorers began expeditions in the Gulf of Mexico beginning in the early 1500s followed by
Catholic missionaries accompanied by Spanish soldiers. The Spanish, while teaching locals Christianity
and farming, attempted to make loyal Spanish citizens. The first missions were established in Mexico, but
were later built in California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas (Campbell 2003:36-38). The French,
partially to stem the advance of the Spanish, wanted to increase their fur trading territory and gain control
Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 7

of the Mississippi River valley. By 1682, LaSalle, a Frenchman, launched an expedition down the
Mississippi River that claimed all of the lands drained by the river for France followed by a colonization
effort to settle the mouth of the Mississippi River. Subsequent to the French incursion into the region, the
Spanish increased the rate of establishing settlements in Texas (Campbell 2003:41-45, 48).
The Spanish mission system did not expand during the eighteenth century. Native American attacks and a
lack of colonists contributed to the decline of Spanish settlement in Texas. In 1762, the Spanish acquired
Louisiana from the French, which slowed the need to settle east Texas. In 1800, Spain ceded Louisiana to
France, who then sold it to the United States. From 1800 to the 1820s, the population of Texas decreased
as a result of the effects of the Mexican Revolution. In 1821, Mexico finally became an independent nation,
separate from Spain. This newly independent country encouraged Anglo-American settlement within
Texas; this effort was led by Stephen F. Austin. Austin came to an agreement with the Mexican government
in which he would bring settlers to Texas and, in return, he would be rewarded with land and money. By
1830, ten thousand Anglo-Americans, mostly from the American southeast, had settled in Texas (Campbell
2003:105-110).
Texas operated as an independent nation for 10 years (1836 to 1846) and during this time, the Mexican
government never truly recognized its independence. In 1846, Texas was annexed by the United States and
it was now up to the U.S. government to settle the border dispute with Mexico. The Mexicans claimed the
international border as the Nueces River, while the U.S. claimed the Rio Grande River as the demarcation
line. After two years of skirmishes and an attack on Mexico City, the United States succeeded in its efforts;
with the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, Mexico recognized the Rio Grande as the border and ceded the entire
southwest to the Pacific Ocean to the U.S. (McComb 1989:57).
At the time of annexation by the United States, west Texas was relatively unexplored territory, home to
various Native American groups. Settlers began slowly pushing into this territory in the mid-nineteenth
century. In 1848, the U.S. Army stationed troops in west Texas and created travel routes through this new
territory, which would become corridors for pioneers traveling to California. These included the Chihuahua
Trail, which led from Mexico to Indianola, Texas, and Horsehead Crossing and Castle Gap in Crane County,
all of which were utilized as trade networks during the prehistoric period as well as forming part of a historic
transportation corridor linking Mexico, the U.S. and Canada. Castle Gap functioned as a primary route for the
U.S. Cavalry, California Forty-niners, cattle drives, and stage coach/wagon trains.
During the Civil War, Texas was a large contributor to the Confederacy, but differed significantly from
other southern states. Texas was a frontier state, with a diversified population of Mexicans, AngloAmericans, and Native Americans. The state also had a large European immigrant population, many of
whom were small farmers. Two-thirds of the farmers in the state were non-slave holding, which meant that
the agricultural economy was maintained following the Civil War. In addition, cattle ranches were a large
industry, resulting in economic diversity. Thus, Texas was not as negatively impacted economically as other
southern states during post-Civil War Reconstruction (Campbell 2003:209, 213).
The Native American groups of Texas saw the defeat of the Confederacy and the weakening of Texas as a
chance to regain lands they had lost. During this period, the Comanche and Apache occupied the areas of
west Texas, and restricted non-Native settlement and expansion in the region through raiding. In response
to this increase of Native American raiding, the United States sent troops to reoccupy several forts. By
1874, a major campaign was initiated in Texas that took away Native Americans’ horses, destroyed their
villages, and forced them to return to their reservations. The consolidation of Native Americans on
reservations allowed for Anglo-Americans to settle permanently in west Texas (Campbell 2003:291, 295).
Following these campaigns, the military sent troops to conduct detailed expeditions of the former Native
American lands. By 1876, several of the counties northeast of the project area were surveyed by parties
Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 8

from Fort Concho. Ranchers moved into these areas and began raising large herds of cattle, as the demand
for beef had risen after the Civil War. New cattle trails developed throughout west Texas, where large herds
were driven hundreds of miles north to the mid-western railroad routes. In 1881, the Texas and Pacific
Railway extended their rail lines through west Texas; up to this point, rail transportation was only available
in east Texas. Between the 1870s and 1890s, 8,000 miles of railway track were laid, connecting the entire
state. The new railroads significantly reduced the time and distance it took the cattle industry to transport
their herds to market (Campbell 2003:297, 306).
The expansion of the railroad connected the rural communities of west Texas with the booming cities to
the east. Towards the end of the nineteenth century, cattle ranchers began to fence off their herds and create
small communities on the frontier. In 1895, a law was passed that broke up these larger ranches, allowing
farmers to purchase smaller tracts of land. This led to the end of open-range ranching and attracted
additional settlers. West Texas communities grew slowly due to poor soil conditions and the difficulty of
accessing water. People began to farm corn and cotton on the newly settled land, but ranching was still the
dominant economic activity of west Texas at the end of the nineteenth century.
Reeves County is located in the Trans-Pecos region of Texas on the southwest side of the Pecos River. It is
bordered by Loving and Ward Counties to the northeast across the Pecos River, Pecos County to the
southeast, Jeff Davis County to the southwest, and Culberson County to the west. Reeves County totals
2,538 square miles of primarily flat to undulating lands, with mountainous areas found in the southern point
of the county (Smith 2010b). The Texas and Pacific Railway was constructed through the area in 1881 with
railway section houses at Pecos and Toyah, and in 1883 Reeves County was separated from Pecos County
to the southwest, and Pecos was designated the county seat in 1884 during the formal organization of the
county (Smith 2010b). By 1885, the community of Pecos reported 150 residents and the community of
Toyah reported 75 residents, and by 1890, Reeves County had a population of 1,290 persons (Smith 2010b).
The census of 1900 counted 1,847 residents in the county, with 63 farms being reported totaling 900,000
acres of farmland and 51,000 head of cattle (Smith 2010b). Intermittent droughts affected the region and
the acres of farmland and size of the cattle herds in the county fluctuated over the next 20 years, but the
population had increased to 4,457 residents (Smith 2010b). The discoveries of oil in the county in the 1920s
contributed to the economy, but the large boom experienced in the Hendrick Field to the east did not extend
into Reeves County, and it was not until the 1930’s that oil fields in Reeves County brought significant
economic and population growth, and by 1940 the population had increased to 8,006 residents (Smith
2010b). The 1950s discoveries of the of the Toyah Gas Field and the Geraldine-Ford field were significant
in the county, but again did not compare to the “giant fields” discovered elsewhere in the region Smith
(2010b) Nevertheless, the population of the county enumerated in 1960 was 17,644 and has declined since
to 16,526 residents in 1970, and 15,801 residents in 1980. The decline in population is at odds with the
increased economic activity in the region as the area experienced a significant oil and gas drilling boom in
the 1970’s and early 1980s (Smith 2010b). The 1990 census counted 15,852 residents, and in 2010, 13,783
residents were counted, and the current July 1, 2017 estimated population is at 15,281 residents (Smith
2010b; United States Census Bureau [USCB] 2018a). Since inception in 1883, the economy has been based
on agriculture and mineral extraction, with oil and gas development being the primary economic activity
over the last nine decades, while crops have included cotton, hay, wheat, barley and fruits and vegetables
such as onions, peppers, pecans and peaches, and cantaloupes (Smith 2010b, Jaco 1980).
Pecos, Texas has had a colorful history since the nineteenth century beginning of the town on the east side
of the Pecos River as a cattle camp. Later, the Texas and Pacific Railway constructed Pecos Station in 1891
on land George A Knight offered the railroad, and the community of Pecos Station evolved, later to be
called Pecos City and finally, Pecos (Smith 2010a). In the 1890’s Pecos was known for some famous
gunfights which took place there (Smith 2010a). Nevertheless, growth and opportunity developed in Pecos,
in the 1890s. In 1900 the three-room school at Pecos, which opened in 1883, had 111 students and three
teachers, which caused expansion to two schools, with 148 students and four teachers for the subsequent
Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 9

1900-1901 term (Smith 2010a). In 1885, the population of Pecos was 150 residents, which grew to 4,000
by 1929 when the residents voted to incorporate their town (Smith 2010a). By 1940, Pecos had 4,800
residents, and the construction of the Pecos Army Airfield during World War II increased the population
to 6,500 in 1943, with continued growth indicated with 8,054 residents noted in 1952, until the population
peaked in 1970 with 14,200 residents (Smith 2010a). In 1990, the population was 12,069 and in 2000, 9,501
residents were enumerated, with a decline to 8,780 residents listed in the 2010 census, and a current estimate
of 9,922 residents for July 1, 2017 (Smith 2010b; USCB 2018b).

BACKGROUND RESEARCH

Prior to field investigations, an address-restricted records search was conducted online at the Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas (the Atlas) to locate previously recorded archeological sites, archeological
surveys, NRHP properties, and State Antiquities Landmarks (SALs). This research was conducted to
determine if any known resources could be affected, as well as the types of resources in the area, and the
probability of encountering the resources during fieldwork. A site file check was conducted by Michael
Margolis, an ENERCON archeologist who meets the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s Professional
Qualification Standards for archeology as set forth in 36 CFR 61, which resulted in the determination that
no previously recorded sites were within the proposed APE on State of Texas Lands. Based on the Atlas,
five archeological resources, sites 41RV6, 41RV81, 41RV27, 41RV109, and 41RV110 have been recorded
within one mile of the APE of the entire proposed Waha II Pipeline Project APE. The previously recorded
site attributes are presented from west to east in Table 2 and discussed below.
Table 2. Previously Recorded Sites within One Mile of the APE of the Overall Project
Site

Cultural Period

General Site Description

41RV6

Late Prehistoric
Unassigned
Prehistoric

Points, bifaces, stone beads

Distance to Project
APE
380 feet (117 m)

Surficial lithic flake scatter

955 feet (291 m)

41RV27

Potential Paleo to
Archaic

Thermal feature, large notched
biface tool

4,962 feet (1,512 m)

41RV109

Unassigned
Prehistoric

Thermal feature, a scraper, and a
unimarginal tool

1,190 feet (363 m)

41RV110

Unassigned
Prehistoric

Eight features, (one noted as a
potential pit house) ~20 cores,
~50 nondiagnostic tools

1,825 feet (557 m)

41RV81

Recommendation
Not assessed
No further work
recommended
No further work
recommended/
recommended not
eligible for
SAL/NRHP
No further work
recommended/
recommended not
eligible for
SAL/NRHP
Not recommended
for further work
within recording
project ROW
/undetermined
overall

Site 41RV6 is a three to four acre site recorded in 1979 based on the surface collections of a local informant.
Materials reported in the private artifact collection included “dart points, Toyah, Scallorn arrow points
bifaces, stone beads” the site is noted to be primarily a surface collection. The cultural affiliation of the site
is listed as a “Late Prehistoric site, possibly affiliated with Jumno (sic)” (Jumano). Little additional
information is known about the site, and it is not clear if subsurface testing has ever occurred at the site, or
Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 10

if the site has been assessed for the NRHP or SAL listings. According to the Atlas, site 41RV6 is plotted
over 380 feet (117 m) from the APE and will not be impacted by the proposed project.
Site 41RV81 is a 70 by 70 m lithic scatter of unknown cultural affiliation recorded in 2015 by Turpin and
Sons. Observed cultural materials were listed as 10 scattered chert flakes with no observed thermal features.
The site is listed as a surface manifestation with no soil depth. Previous disturbances included a pipeline
and a well pad, and it was estimated that the site was only 10 percent intact. No further work was
recommended at the site, and it was noted that the site had very low research potential. Site 41RV81 is
plotted over 955 feet (291 m) from the APE and will not be impacted by the proposed project.
Site 41RV27 is a small (13 by 4 m) site recorded in 2000 by Anthony E Brown; John A. Peterson Associates,
consisting of a two-meter diameter burned caliche feature, an associated “large” flaked tool, and a few
pebbles of burned caliche outside the feature. Trowel testing of the thermal feature to 15cm failed to reveal
any subsurface materials. No diagnostic materials are listed, but the ‘large notched tool” lead the speculation
that the site represents a single component Paleoindian to Archaic cultural affiliation for the small site. The
site was not recommended for further archeological work and was recommended as not eligible for the SAL
or NRHP. Site 41RV27 is over 4,962 feet (1,512 m) from the APE and will not be impacted by the proposed
project.
Site 41RV109 is a small 76 m2 site recorded in 2017 by Versar Inc, consisting of a concentration of fire
cracked rock (FCR) and burned caliche (BC) with an associated end scraper and unimarginal tool. The
feature of FCR/BC was localized in a 2 by 2 m area containing 49 pieces of FCR and BC. The site form
notes that no additional cultural materials were present, and that six shovel tests excavated in the vicinity
of site 41RV109 were all negative for subsurface deposits. No further archeological work was
recommended at the site, and it was recommended that site 41RV109 was not eligible for the NRHP or
SAL listings. Site 41RV109 is over 1,190 feet (363 m) from the APE and will not be impacted by the
proposed project.
Site 41RV110 is an 11,917 m2 site recorded in 2017 by Versar Inc, consisting of eight prehistoric features
including three FCR/BC concentrations and five charcoal stains. One stain is postulated to be a potential
pit house. Observed artifacts are listed as “hundreds of artifacts including flakes, ~20 cores, ~50 unifacial
and unimarginal tools of grey, white and black chert, purple quartzite”. Whole and partial manos of quartzite
and sandstone are listed, as well as shell fragments, and 700+ scattered FCR and BC. The site is noted to
be disturbed/truncated by an existing pipeline and County Road 1450. The site is estimated to be 75 to 85
percent intact. An unstated number of shovel tests were placed at the site, with “one flake and charcoal are
noted in an STP”. The top of the deposits below surface is list as 12, and the depth of deposits is listed as
22. No further work was recommended at site 41RV110 as the intact materials were noted to be outside of
the study area of the project. Similarly, the site was recommended as not eligible for SAL or other listings.
Site 41RV110 is over 1,825 feet (557 m) from the APE and will not be impacted by the proposed project.
Based on the Atlas, there are two mapped projects within a mile of the study area. The previous
archeological studies within one mile of the project include THC Atlas Numbers 8500058345, and
8400004696. These studies, and the overall background research of the region suggests that the study area
is located within a larger area where climatic conditions, burrowing rodents, and the effects of ranching and
oil and gas exploration have each effected the cultural landscape, leading to two types of general settings.
Wind erosion and extensive bioturbation from rodent burrowing, and sheep and cattle grazing have exposed
the upper surface of the landscape within the Chihuahuan Basins and Playas. With the exception of a few
geomorphological locations, archeological sites of all ages may be located on the exposed ground surface
and/or were never buried (Hall 2006:2-7). The majority of archeological sites are located on eroded surfaces
and therefore lack vertical integrity and stratigraphy (Hall 2006:2-15). Intact archeological deposits may be
encountered where there are depositional processes, such as (a) colluvial; (b) eolian sand deposits associated
Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 11

with the playa margins; (c) upland playa and lake fill deposits; and (d) within and adjacent to extant and/or
extinct draws and/or drainages of Late-Pleistocene to early Holocene age (Hall 2006:2-7, 2-11; Johnson
and Holliday 2004:285, 290, 294). Within the State of Texas Lands segment of the proposed Waha II
Pipeline project the former setting is predominant, and many sites would be expected to be resting on the
surface.

METHODOLOGY

The cultural resources field investigation followed the THC’s Archeological Survey Standards for Texas.
The project area was surveyed by using parallel pedestrian transects spaced no more than 15 m apart. The
entire 100 foot (30 m) wide survey corridor within the proposed project area on University Lands was
subjected to pedestrian survey for cultural resources.
Shovel testing density within the survey followed minimum standards outlined by the THC and the Council
of Texas Archeologists’ practices and procedures, which call for 16 shovel tests per mile in settings which
have the potential for buried deposits. Shovel testing was not required in areas where ground surface
visibility (GSV) was greater than 30 percent, or areas with slopes greater than 20 percent, or which did not
exhibit potential for buried deposits. Shovel test pits are not excavated in areas with standing water, or in
areas in which underground utilities are present.
Shovel tests generally measure 30 cm in diameter and are excavated by hand digging to bedrock, a
stratigraphic deposit (e.g. subsoil) that was determined to be below Holocene aged deposits, or to 80-100
cm (dependent on soil matrix consistency and hardness). All shovel test pit fill was passed through ¼ inch
mesh screen or gone through by hand if the soil would not pass through the screen. Shovel test pits were
excavated in arbitrary 10 cm levels unless stratigraphic changes were observed.
The cultural resources field investigation of the 100 foot (30 m) wide survey corridor exceeded the
minimum standards outlined by the THC and the Council of Texas Archeologists’ practices and procedures
(13 TAC 26.5 and 26.20).

RESULTS

The cultural resources field investigation of the Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands study area
occurred August 2 and 3, 2018 by ENERCON archeologists J. Matthew Oliver and Gary Edington, who
meets the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualification Standards for archeology as set forth
in 36 CFR 61. The entire project was supervised by Gary D. Edington. The cultural resources survey
corridor was 100 foot wide for the entire 0.69-mile (3,666 feet) length of the pipeline segment through the
State of Texas Lands. The total area inspected during the cultural resources survey was 8.42 acres (3.41
hectares).
During the fieldwork, the weather was seasonal, with low temperatures in the lower 70s°F and daily high
temperatures ranged from 95°F to the low 100s°F with partly cloudy to cloudy skies and relatively low
winds. The vegetation within the study areas was typically desert scrub-shrub with creosote bush, mesquite,
intermittent thin mixed grasses, occasional narrow leaf yucca, and a variety of forbs. The west tract of State
of Texas Lands is located in the undulating uplands west of US Highway 285, south of Dry Salt Lake and
west of the Lake Toyah basin (Figure 2.1). The terrain was gently undulating with observable topographic
variation and the vegetation was thin mixed grasses with occasional creosote bush and mesquite which
Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 12

provided good to excellent GSV averaging over 90 percent (Figures 3 to 6). The surface is deflated by
eolian and sheet erosion with areas of exposed gypsum and calcic soils present (Figures 3 to 6). This tract
has experienced minimal oil field development. Due to the deflated and limited soils present in this tract of
State Lands, the probability of intact buried archeological deposits was very low. No shovel tests were
placed within the west tract of State Lands.
The east tract of State of Texas Lands is located in the rolling uplands east of Barrilla Draw and Lake
Toyah. The APE crosses a low ridge on the northeast portion of the tract, and a shallow drain flows to the
northeast off the ridge while the rest of the tract slopes moderately to the west (Figure 2.2). Vegetation was
denser, with taller mesquite, creosote bush, and a variety of forbs, but GSV remained over 80 percent
(Figures 7 to 12). This tract has been subjected to extensive oilfield disturbances in the last decade (Figure
2.2) and the APE crosses two 21th century two track roads, two recent lease roads, and five pipeline ROWs
(Figure 9). The recent disturbances have impacted approximately 40 percent of the ground surface of the
APE. Caliche gravels were present on the surface in the desert floor setting, soil development was limited
and most of the area was deflated by eolian actions and sheet erosion. The setting had a low probability of
buried cultural material, and only two shovel tests were placed within the east tract of State Lands.
The cultural resources investigation of the proposed Waha II Pipeline Project on State of Texas Lands
resulted in the observation of two isolated finds (IF), IF#8 and IF#9. IF#8 consists of a single flake of brown
chert observed on the surface west of a small mapped drain (Figures 13 to 16). The flake exhibited some
retouch flaking on the margins indicating possible use as an expedient tool. A pedestrian grid at 3-5 m
intervals of the area of IF#8 failed to locate any additional cultural materials on the surface in the vicinity
despite the generally good GSV of 60 to 80 percent. Two shovel tests placed in the vicinity of the artifact
were negative for cultural resources (Figure 2.2, 17 to 18; Appendix B). The shovel tests indicated silty tan
calcic soils with caliche gravels to 70 cm in depth in ST1, and to 40 cm in depth over bedrock at ST2. Due
to the lack of any additional cultural materials or features at the location, the flake was noted as an IF.
IF#9 consists of a small pile of earth, fence posts, and barbed wire observed adjacent to the east fence line
of the west tract (Figures 19 to 20). No additional cultural materials were present at the location of IF#9.
The observed fencing materials are possibly over 50 years of age, but the small bulldozer created pile of
earth and fencing appears to be the result of fence replacement activities in 2008, or lease road and gate
construction in 2012, which are evident on modern aerial images from the last 10 years. Due to the unknown
date of the small bulldozer created pile of earth and fencing, the feature was noted as IF#9.
The cultural resources survey of the two tracts of State of Texas Lands on the Waha II pipeline did not
result in the observation of any additional cultural materials over 50 years of age within the ROW.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 13

Figure 3. General overview of the APE facing east-southeast from the west boundary of the west
tract of State of Texas Lands, showing thin grasses and calcic soils.

Figure 4. General overview of the APE GSV, facing down from the west boundary of the west tract
of State of Texas Lands, showing thin grasses and calcic soils.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 14

Figure 5. General overview of the APE, facing west from the east boundary of the west tract of
State of Texas Lands, showing thin grasses, with occasional mesquite and creosote bush, and calcic
soils.

Figure 6. General overview of the APE GSV, facing down from the east boundary of the west tract
of State of Texas Lands, showing thin grasses and calcic soils.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 15

Figure 7. General overview of the APE facing east-southeast from the west boundary of the east
tract of State of Texas Lands, showing mesquite, sand sage and mixed weeds and forb vegetation.

Figure 8. General overview of the APE GSV, facing down from the west boundary of the east tract
of State of Texas Lands, showing decaying organic materials.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 16

Figure 9. General overview of the APE, facing east-southeast in central portion of the east tract of
State of Texas Lands, showing ground disturbance from a multiple pipeline crossing and lease
road.

Figure 10. General overview of the APE GSV, facing down in the central portion of the east tract of
State of Texas Lands, showing gravel laden soils and small weeds and forbs.
Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 17

Figure 11. General overview of the APE, facing west-northwest into the east tract of the State of
Texas lands from the fence just east of the east property boundary, showing creosote, bush and
broom weed.

Figure 12. General overview of the APE GSV, at the east boundary of the east tract of the State of
Texas Lands.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 18

Figure 13. Dorsal view of IF#8, a single flake of brown chert with some edge modifications.

Figure 14. Ventral view of IF#8, a single flake of brown chert with some edge modifications.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 19

Figure 15. General overview of IF#8, a single modified flake of brown chert on the surface, facing
west (the red arrow points to the flake).

Figure 16. General overview of IF#8, a single modified flake of brown chert on the surface, facing
east (the red arrow points to the flake).

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 20

Figure 17. General overview of ST#1 at IF#8, facing down.

Figure 18. General overview of ST#2 at IF#8, facing down.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 21

Figure 19. IF#9, a bulldozed pile of earth, wooden fence posts and barbed wire, facing northeast.

Figure 20. IF#9, a bulldozed pile of earth, wooden fence posts and barbed wire, facing west (the
spade was placed on IF#9 for scale).

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 22

RECOMMENDATIONS

Enercon Services, Inc. (ENERCON), in support of Salt Creek Midstream, LLC, conducted an intensive
archeological survey for the proposed Waha II Pipeline Project. The proposed pipeline is approximately
27.33 miles in length, located near Pecos, Texas in Reeves County. This report encompasses only the State
of Texas Lands administered by the Texas General Land Office (TGLO) segment of the proposed Waha II
Pipeline Project which is approximately 0.69-miles (3,666 feet) in length. The State of Texas Lands portion
of the project area is mapped on the United States Geological Survey (USGS) Toyah Lake, Tex. (1963) and
Old X Ranch, Tex. (1963, Photorevised 1981), 7.5 Minute Quadrangles (USGS 1963a, 1963b). The
construction corridor consists of a 50-foot-wide permanent pipeline right-of-way and a 50-foot-wide
temporary workspace corridor. The cultural resources survey corridor was 100 feet wide for the entire 0.69mile length of the pipeline segment through the State of Texas Lands. The total area inspected during the
cultural resources survey of the State of Texas Lands was 8.42 acres (3.41 hectares).
The survey of the State of Texas property was completed under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 9017. The
cultural resources intensive field investigation and report are intended to assist in adhering to the 1969
Antiquities Code of Texas. The cultural resources field investigation on State of Texas Lands occurred on
August 2 and 3, 2018 by J. Matthew Oliver and Gary D. Edington and consisted of an intensive pedestrian
survey utilizing transects not spaced greater than 15 meters apart with shovel tests. The field investigation
was conducted in accordance with the Texas Historical Commission (THC) Archeological Survey
Standards for Texas. The entire project was supervised by Gary D. Edington, an ENERCON archeologist
who meets the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualification Standards for archeology as set
forth in 36 CFR 61. Pursuant to 13 TAC 26.17, correspondence, field records, and photographs generated
during field investigations have been prepared for permanent curation at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, Austin, Texas.
The cultural resources survey resulted in the observation of two isolated finds (IF). IF#8 is a single lithic
flake of brown chert observed on the surface in the east tract of State of Texas Lands. IF#9 is a small
bulldozer push-pile of old wooden fence posts and barbed wire observed adjacent to the east fence line of
the east tract of Texas State lands. IF#8 and IF#9 lack information potential and are not eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) listings.
The cultural resources survey did not result in finding any additional historic or prehistoric artifacts,
features, cultural lenses, or sites over 50 years of age on State of Texas Lands. No archeological sites were
encountered, and no artifacts were collected. Therefore, it is recommended that the project will have no
effect on any cultural resources that may qualify for inclusion to the NRHP on State of Texas Lands. No
further cultural resources investigations are recommended prior to construction of the proposed Waha II
Pipeline project on State of Texas Lands. If cultural material, including sites, features, or artifacts that are
50 years old or older are encountered within the ROW during construction of this project, work in the area
must cease and the regional THC Archeologist must be immediately be notified.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 23

REFERENCES CITED

Boyd, Douglas K.
1997 Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A synthesis of Late Prehistory and History of Lake Alan Henry
and the Texas Panhandle-Plains. Reports of Investigations, No. 110. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
2004 The Palo Duro Complex. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy K Perttula, pp.
296-330. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Campbell, R.
2003 Gone to Texas: A History of the Lone Star State. Oxford University Press, New York.
Collins, Michael B.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy K Perttula, pp.
101-126. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Ensor, H. B., and D .L. Carlson (editors)
1991 Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie Zone, Harris
County, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 8, Archeological Research Laboratory,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Ewers, John C.
1974 The Influence of Epidemics on the Indian Populations and Cultures of Texas. Plains Anthropologist
8:104-115.
Geiser, S. W.
2010 Fruits Other Than Citrus. In the History of Texas Online. Available at
https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/aff01. Accessed December 20, 2017.
Griffith, Glenn, Sandy Bryce, James Omernik, and Anne Rogers 2007 Ecoregions of Texas. Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality, Austin.
Hall, S. A. 2006 Geoarcheologic Map of Southeastern New Mexico, in Southeastern New Mexico
Regional Research and Resource Management Strategy, pp. 2-4 to 2-21 ed. Hogan, P
Historic Preservation Division, Department of Cultural Affairs, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Hayter, Delmar J.
2010 Pecos River. In In the History of Texas Online. Available at
https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/rnp02. Accessed December 20, 2017.
Hester, Thomas R.
1980 Digging into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archeologists. Corona Publishing
Company, San Antonio.
Jaco, H. B.
1980 Soil Survey of Reeves County, Texas. USDA/SCS Publication.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 24

Johnson, Eileen, and Vance T. Holliday
2004 Archaeology and Late Quaternary Environments of the Southern High Plains. In The Prehistory of
Texas, edited by Timothy K Perttula, pp. 283-295. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
McComb, David G.
1989 Texas: A Modern History. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Patterson, L.W.
1995 The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:239-264.
Perttula, Timothy K.
2004 Chapter 1. An Introduction to Texas Prehistoric Archaeology. In: The Prehistory of Texas.
Edited by Timothy K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Anthropology Series Number 9. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Smith, Julia Cauble
2010a Pecos, TX. In the History of Texas Online. Available at
https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hep04. Accessed January 15, 2018.
2010b Reeves County. In the History of Texas Online. Available at
https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hcr06. Accessed January 16, 2018.
Turner, Ellen Sue, Thomas R. Hester, and Richard L. McReynolds
2011 Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Completely Revised Third Edition. Taylor Trade Publishing,
Lanham, Maryland.
United States Census Bureau (USCB)
2018a QuickFacts Reeves County, Texas. Available from https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table
/reevescountytexas/PST045217. Accessed August 20, 2018.
2018b QuickFacts Pecos city, Texas. Available from https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table
/pecoscitytexas/PST045217. Accessed August 20, 2018.
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2018 Web Soil Survey. Natural Resources Conservation Service. Available from
http://websoilsurvey.sc.egov.usda.gov/App/WebSoilSurvey.aspx. Accessed August 20, 2018.
United States Geological Survey (USGS)
1963a Toyah Lake, Texas-Reeves Co. Quadrangle, Texas. 7.5 Minute Series (Topographic) Photorevised
1981 United States Department of the Interior Geological Survey. Washington, D.C.
1963b Old X Ranch, Tex. Quadrangle, Texas-Reeves Co. 7.5 Minute Series (Topographic) Photorevised
1981 United States Department of the Interior Geological Survey. Washington, D.C.

Cultural Resources Report: Proposed Waha II Pipeline Project State of Texas Lands Segments

Page 25

APPENDIX A:

AERIAL MAPS SHOWING CULTURAL RESOURCES

Contains Confidential Cultural Resource Locations

NOT FOR PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION

Page 26

Page 27

Page 28

APPENDIX C:

SHOVEL TEST LOG

Page 29

Shovel
Test

UTM NAD83
Zone 13

Setting/Visibility

MO #1

3466113 N
657461 E

Thin creosote bush vegetation on
caliche gravel laden desert floor,
GSV 80 percent

MO #2

3466116 N
657156 E

Thin creosote bush and broom weed
vegetation on caliche gravel laden
desert floor, GSV 80 percent

Observed Soils
0–70cm tan/light brown
silty loam, caliche pebbles,
no observable color or
textural changes
0-40cm tan/light brown
silty loam, caliche pebbles
40 cm indurated rock

Cultural
Materials
Negative

Negative

Page 30

