Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

August 16, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2012-46: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 1,360-Meter Ernst B
Pipeline in Southwestern La Salle County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during an archaeological survey of the Ernst B
Pipeline right-of-way on August 14, 2012 (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Ernst B Pipeline on large topographic map.

Background Review
La Salle County History
Indian artifacts found in La
Salle County indicate that
the area has been occupied
for about 11,000 years.
Plentiful food sources such
as wild game, fruits, seeds,
and roots made the land
hospitable. Early technology
included tools from wood
and stone, woven basketry,
sewed rabbitskin robes, and
a very effective weapon was
the atlatl, a throwing stick
that greatly increased the
deadliness of their spears
(Leffler 1996). Perhaps as
early as 1,300 years ago,
they learned to make pottery
and to hunt with bows and
a r r o w s . D u r i n g t h e Figure 2. Ernst B Pipeline on Holland Dam (1974) topographic
seventeenth and eighteenth map.
centuries, the Coahuiltecan
Indians native to La Salle County were squeezed out by other Indian who were migrating into the
area and by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken
to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place (Leffler
1996).
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the La Salle County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the huntergatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences in
1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending a hunting
party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each other in the
semiarid environs of south Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents (Campbell and
Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced Native American groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. Beginning in the late
1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio Road, a camino real, to
and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are documented accounts

of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to establish any sort of
permanent bases in present-day La Salle County (Chipman 1992)
After the Mexican War of Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its
citizens to settle in Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that
included territory now in La Salle County. None of the recipients seem to have made use of the land,
however. By 1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated
almost solely by Indians (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of La Salle County lay in the
disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for desperate
characters until about 1865. New settlers who lived in jacals or dugouts were frequently being
harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part to being pursued by the Texas Rangers, and
being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave La Salle County by 1877. By 1880,
cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an important part of
the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators combined to make
sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
As with rest of the nation, during the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced
to cut back their once-lucrative vegetable production, and they fell back on raising poultry, hogs, and
dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county in the 1950s
certainly bolstered La Salle County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim to most of the
land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively increasing part of the
county’s development (Leffler 1996).
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Very few, and sparsely scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in La Salle County.
There are only 99 archaeological sites recorded within the county, and a large number of those were
found on pipeline surveys. Nevertheless, the time-diagnostic artifacts discovered in La Salle County
provide evidence that the landscape was occupied as early as 11,000 years before the present.
The site types are as varied as the landscape. Large open campsites with numerous hearths, or
campfires, a wide assortment of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal
remains are most commonly located along stream or river terraces. Where gravels outcrop, either
along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are sometimes exposed
in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric quarries (Atlas 2012).
Of the 99 sites, 54 are prehistoric open campsites, and 45 are prehistoric lithic scatters. The more
significant and deeply buried open campsites with archaeological research potential lie close to
streams. Historic components on these same prehistoric sites include historic windmills and areas
of scattered glass and ceramic sherds, or in some cases there are large trash dumps. One unique
historic site is Fort Ewell (41LS19), an adobe structure located on the old Laredo to San Antonio
Road, and that served the U.S. Army from 1852-1854. The only State Archaeological Landmark
(SAL) recorded in La Salle County is the County Courthouse in Cotulla (Leffler 1996; Atlas 2012).
Finally, one of the more potentially significant archaeological sites in the South Texas archaeological
region is located in La Salle County; this being the Oulline Site (41LS3). The Oulline Site covers

approximately 40 acres, about eight miles north of Cotulla. Diagnostic artifacts recovered from this
large open campsite range in age from Paleoindian through the Late Prehistoric periods, and
demonstrate the potential for other significant archaeological sites to exist in the area (Hester et al.
1969).
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicates that no
professional archaeological surveys have been conducted within one mile (1,609 meters), and no
archaeological sites have been recorded within one mile of the current project areas. However, as
shown in Figure 2, Tierras Antiguas has conducted a professional survey of the Winslow Trunkline;
no archaeological sites found within one mile of the Ernst B Pipeline (Nickels 2012).
Historic Maps and Aerial Photographs
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Ernst B Pipeline passes
through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard source of review is
the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the Perry Castañeda
Library at the University of Texas at Austin. A second standard research source consulted is a very
comprehensive and large collection of old maps and aerial photographs compiled by the Texas
Department of Transportation from dozens of historic archives throughout the state of Texas. In this
case, two historic topographic maps were found. The earliest is a 1916, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (1:62,500) topographic map, and the second is a 1942, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(1:62,500) topographic map (Maps 2012).
No structures were shown on either of these maps in the vicinity of the current projects. However,
these maps are many times incomplete, or not to scale by today’s standards, and that should be
considered when the pipelines are constructed. Technically, any structures older than 45 years are
now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be considered when
the lateral is constructed.
Soils
The Ernst B Pipeline crosses three soil types. However they offer varying depths, sedimentation and
deposition rates, and a small, broad, and ephemeral drainage courses through the northern area. As
such, the soils and their proximity to these streams likewise imply the potential for the preservation
of intact cultural resources to exist. Figure 3 shows the soils that are to be intersected by the pipeline
(Web Soil Survey 2012). Table 1 then presents a brief description of each type, and their potential
to contain buried and intact cultural deposits.

Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the Ernst B Pipeline.
Table 1. Ernst B Pipeline Soils.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact Archaeological
Potential

Maverick clay (MCC)

Moderately deep saline clay on broad,

Minimal to Moderate to about 16

convex upland plains

inches below the surface

Very deep loamy soils in narrow

Minimal to Moderate to about 34

drainageways on uplands

inches below the surface

W ebb very fine sandy loam

Deep loamy soils on gently undulating

Minimal to about 14 inches below

(W CB)

uplands

the surface

Poteet very fine sandy loam (Pt)

Field Survey Results
A thorough 100-percent pedestrian survey of the surface was conducted along the right-of-way.
Although surface visibility ranged from 95 to 100-percent, no prehistoric or historic cultural
materials were observed. The upland soils in this area are shallow, deflated and eroded, exposing
clay hardpan in several areas; and although the drainage in this area appears to be substantial on a

topographic map, in reality, they are generally broad and ephemeral swales, with no terraces. Animal
burrow backdirt piles were frequent, but a thorough examination of those again revealed no evidence
of cultural material. Machine-pushed brush piles were also common along the proposed right-ofway.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations

Based upon the negative findings during this survey, and the at best moderate potential for
significant archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area, we recommend that
construction of the Ernst B Pipeline as it is currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned, with
no further archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously
undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development of the pipelines, such finds
should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological
consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
August 10, 2012].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hester, T. R., L. D. White, and J. White
1969 Archeological Materials from the Oulline Site (41LS3) and Other Sites in La Salle
County, Southwest Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. XXI, No. 2.
Leffler, J.
1996

La Salle County. The New Handbook of Texas, Vol. 4, pp. 83-86.Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.

Maps
2012

Perry Castañeda Library Map Collection. Cotulla, 1916, 1942 USACE
Topographic Maps. [Accessed August 10, 2012].

Nickels, D. L.
2012 A Cultural Resources Survey of the 11.2-Mile Winslow Trunkline, La Salle
County, Texas. Archaeology Report #93. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations, Martindale, Texas.

Perry Castañeda Library
2012 Perry Castañeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed August 10, 2012].
Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2012 La Salle County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed August
10, 2012].

