GPR Survey
Ewing Cemetery, Harrison County, TX
January 3, 2012

Submitted to:
James Brenner
Texas Cemetery Restoration
10122 Cherry Tree Drive
Dallas, TX 75243
January 18, 2012

Kent A. Schneider, Ph.D.
Archeology Store
9790 Misty Cove Lane
Gainesville, GA 30506

Management Summary
Thirteen (13) probable unmarked graves were identified in the radar data (Figure 1).
Any ground disturbing activities in the areas of unmarked graves noted in this report or
areas within the survey grid where no graves were observed should proceed with
caution.
Introduction
Ewing Cemetery, also known as Hall’s Church (Ewing Chapel) cemetery is located in
Harrison County, Texas (Photo 1). From Marshall, Texas, take Hwy 59 south. About 4.1
miles after crossing I-20, take FM 2625 west approximately 1.8 miles. Turn north onto
FM 3017 (Middle Rosborough Springs Road). Photos of grave markers can be found at
http://www.txgenes.com/txharrison/cems/ewinghallcem.htm.
The site is fairly flat in all directions. At the time of the GPR survey, the ground cover
was grassed with some bare areas but much of the site was covered by leaves.
Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) was used to determine the presence of graves not
marked with head or foot stones. A cart-mounted digital GSSI SIR3000 control unit and
a 400MHz antenna were used to collect data on transects separated by 2 feet (61 cm).
One hundred seventy eight (178) lines of radar data were collected. A total of 14396
linear feet were surveyed with the GPR antenna. Data was post processed using
GPR_Slice software. Each line of radar data was examined for anomalies that might be
probable burials. The radar data was composited into 20 amplitude slice maps to
approximately 8 feet deep and 1 amplitude map was selected for data presentation in
this report.
The GPR Survey
Once the grid was set up, the GPR survey consisted of pulling a radar antenna across
the ground to collect data called radargrams. Detailed field notes were kept noting the
names and locations of marked graves. A red slash was entered into radargrams at
each marked grave. Each radargram was then post- processed to create images.
GPR involves the observation of the reflected component of transmitted electromagnetic
waves into the subsurface. The reflections, unlike that of acoustical waves, occur at the
interfaces of materials of differing electrical conductivity or permittivity. The depth of
penetration for radar waves is frequency dependent and the attenuation of the radar
wave in the ground is rather quick compared to that of seismic - a few meters compared
to kilometers.
The GPR output is a series of radar wavelet traces or scans produced on a chart
recorder or computer screen as an antenna is pulled across the ground surface. The
radar wave perturbations can directly yield reflection depth and the relative strength of
the reflections such that the form and location of a buried object or feature can be
ascertained rather readily. If the velocity of the radar waves can be determined then the
conversion of travel-time, between the transmitter and receiver, of the reflected wave,

can be converted to distance similar to that done in seismic studies. Mathematical
protocols such as “stacking”, migration, and deconvolution are now commonly applied
to GPR data in order to bring out the finest details regarding the stratigraphy and shape
of subsurface reflectors or features.
Survey Grid.
A grid measuring 2-180 feet north-south (Y direction) by 3-204 feet east-west (X
direction) was established at the site (Figure 2). The cemetery had been previously
recorded by Texas Cemetery Restoration. The corners were marked and recorded
using pins. Tapes were pulled along the north-south direction to guide antenna travel
and to help make survey notes. Spacing between parallel profiles was 2 feet. Data
was collected in the Y direction (the north-south profile), incrementing west (the X
direction) at 12 scans/sec. The time window was set to 50ns to provide good resolution
to about 8 feet in depth after test runs to observe signal attenuation and optimum
penetration depth for the features sought. Radar profiles were acquired in forward and
reverse directions on alternate lines.
Because radar waves are subject to severe attenuation with depth and the time of
travel, later arriving reflections were amplified using an exponential gain curve to
maximize the dynamic range in the recorded data. Filter settings used in recording the
data were set to 100 MHz for the high pass filter and 800 MHz for the low pass filter for
this particular antenna. The recorded radar reflections were digitized at 512
samples/scan at 16 bit resolution.
Depth of Penetration
Several methods exist for determining the velocity of microwaves within the ground. A
noninvasive procedure was used for estimating the microwave velocity beneath Ewing
Cemetery. The method involves fitting curves to hyperbolic reflections recorded on the
radargrams from subsurface objects. The hyperbolas for (cylindrical) objects occur
because of the broad directional response function of the ground antenna. Objects that
are not directly beneath the antenna get recorded as microwaves are sent over a broad
range of angles. The travel times however, from objects that are recorded off to the
side of an antenna take progressively longer travel times the further they are from being
directly beneath the antenna. The net effect for buried point objects is to create a
hyperbolic reflection pattern.
Measurements of the microwave velocity for the survey were estimated at the site using
the hyperbola fitting method. Shown in Figure 3 is a hyperbola from an existing grave.
A hyperbola was fitted to this target using an option in the filtering menu of GPR-SLICE
V7.0 Software. A dielectric permittivity of 7.44, corresponding to a velocity of about
11.0 cm/ns was estimated for a recording depth of approximately 8 feet. This estimate
was made using the 400 MHz antenna. Microwaves are “dispersive” which means that
the microwave velocity can sometimes depend on the frequency transmitted into the
ground. The GPR antenna, although it has a central frequency near 400 MHz, other
energy at different frequencies are propagated into the ground. For estimating the

depth of the radar reflections, however, the estimated velocity of the microwaves
ignores the possibility of dispersion.
Although the estimated depth of penetration for the survey was approximately 8 feet,
many anomalies representing probable burials are quite shallow, the tops of the graves
being within the first 1-3 feet. The survey results shown are based on a depth of 2-3
feet.
Radargram Signal Processing
Before the radargram data was used to construct images, signal processing on the raw
radargrams was implemented. The processes applied to the recorded data are briefly
described:
1) Regaining of the radargrams in post processing was implemented to account for
limitation in the control unit for the SIR 3000 to apply direct gain during recording.
Small adjustments were made just below the ground surface reflection for
regaining.
2) DC drift removal was implemented during the radargram conversion to remove
low frequency signal which cause the radar pulse to float away from the 0 line.
The DC drift was removed in a time domain moving filter.
Other signal processing options are available in GPR-SLICE v7.0 Software such as
bandpass filtering. These filters are generally applied in the event that strong line
noises are seen in the radargrams. Particularly for high-conductive soils, the signal-tonoise ratios are much weaker since recorded reflections need more amplification during
recording.
Time Slice Processing
Radargrams represent vertical slices taken across the ground. Time slices represent
horizontal slices taken across the survey area. Time slices can be used to show
variations in reflected return amplitudes at various depths across a site. Time slices are
found by cutting data from all the radar profiles in a specified time window and
presenting the information from this slicing window in a pixel map. Depending upon the
time window in which the slicing is made across the parallel profiles, depth information
regarding important targets can be determined.
The radar signals within the designated time window are averaged in the vertical and
some averaging in the horizontal direction was used. The squared amplitude of the
recorded reflected amplitudes across the time window was computed and averaged
every .5 feet along the profile direction. Overlapped time slice datasets were created for
input into a 3D data volume. The overlapping process helps to create a smoother 3D
volume which would be useful for during graphic and animation display of the data.
The time slices were interpolated using an inverse distance algorithm. Data within a 5
foot search radius were used to weight data in estimating the interpolated reflection
data. The gray scale was selected to show the data. In some cases the data are

presented in either a linear, square root, or logarithm transform to delineate various
features which have a large dynamic range in recorded reflection intensity. In addition,
minimum and maximum thresholding was applied to the data to enhance suspected
anomalies within the datasets.
The time slices are presented as depth slices by using the nominal microwave velocity
of 11.0cm/ns estimated for the soils at the site. Twenty time slices to a depth of
approximately 8.3 feet were prepared for analysis. One time slice was selected to show
probable unmarked grave locations in this report. The written report is by no means
meant to replace the study of the full animation dataset that is available on CD
accompanying this report showing the complete 2D depth slices.
Results
Unmarked Graves
Figure 1 shows 13 red dots which have a high probability of representing unmarked
graves. The background color is gray scale, the preferred color, since it is the author’s
experience that color rich backgrounds may bleed colors masking grave anomalies.
Many anomalies can be seen in the radar data. A conservative approach was used in
marking anomalies as graves. Tree roots, rocks, buried and decayed tree stumps, can
give signatures which appear to be but may not be graves. Radar signatures with a low
probability of being graves are not reported. A mosaic was encountered during post
processing and corrected to the extent possible in the software. The faint vertical lines
between X52 feet and X98 feet form a rectangle that encloses the boundaries of the
mosaic correction. There are many complex explanations for mosaicing including soil
change and diurnal changes. Probable unmarked grave GPR file number and locations
are:
file
2
10
38
42
60
62
62
65
197
212
216
222
235

line
4
18
48
52
66
68
68
72
82
98
100
104
114

distance
56
157
157
159
136
100
136
138
111
112
81
110
96

notes

seen in field
seen in field
very good
seen in field
seen in field
seen in field, maybe too deep
seen in field very good
seen in field very good
seen in field very good
seen in field, very good

Conclusion
Thirteen high probability unmarked graves were noted in the GPR data. No excavation
should proceed within the unmarked burial areas. Caution is urged when excavating
areas where no graves were noted.

Photos Referenced

Photo 1. Ewing Cemetery area map

Figures Referenced

Figure 1. GPR Map of Ewing Cemetery, red rots are probable unmarked graves

Figure 2. Map of Ewing GPR grid

Figure 3. Fitting a hyperbola to estimate depth

