Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

October 22, 2014
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2014-5: A Cultural Resources Survey of the 257-Meter Faith Yana
N Pipeline, Webb County, Texas
Ms. Judy Vader
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Ms. Vader,
This letter provides a Final Report of our cultural resources survey of the Faith Yana N Pipeline
(Figures 1 and 2).
The right-of-way (ROW) and surrounding area was examined by two archaeologists on September
29, 2014 resulting in the discovery of no prehistoric or historic cultural materials. Our observations
of the Project Area revealed that the area in general has been disturbed by land clearing as part of
ranchland management, as well as road and fence construction in recent historic times (see, for
example, Figure 3).
In sum, no evidence of cultural material was observed along or adjacent to the pipeline right-of-way.
Based upon the absence of cultural materials, and the at best minimal potential for significant
archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area, we recommend that construction of
the Faith Yana N Pipeline as currently planned be allowed to proceed, with no further archaeological
investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously undiscovered cultural resources are
encountered during development of the pipeline, such finds should be examined and evaluated by
Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

Figure 1. Faith Yana N Pipeline on large topographic map.

Figure 2. Faith Yana N Pipeline on East Losa Tank (1984) 7.5' USGS
topographic map.

Figure 3. Archaeologist surveying the Faith Yana N Pipeline ROW; facing east.

