PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Nine, Number Two, February 2019

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Andy Burchard
Miranda Bible
Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

O Wind ...If Winter comes,
can Spring be far behind?
Shelley

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Program Information:

4

Upcoming Events

4a

Courthouses of Texas

5

SWFAS

6

From the Editor’s Desk
I was asked to speak in Church last Sunday, and decided to tell
a story about my father when he was a boy. Comments afterward reminded me of how far from the frontier we are today.
People really thought I’d made the whole thing up! But it’s true,
and here it is:
My father, Verne Cain, was the oldest of five boys.. They lived in the mountains of Colorado and went to a one-room schoolhouse. (That’s the first thing people today can’t believe. Imagine eight grades in one room!). The youngest brother, Bobby, misbehaved in
some way—he was only six. The teacher held his hands behind his back and marched him
up and down the aisle. Outraged, Daddy and the next-oldest brother jumped up, held the
teacher’s hands behind her back and marched her up and down the aisle.
You won’t be surprised to hear that she went to their parents and informed them that neither my dad, nor Bobby, could come to school any more. Being the oldest boy, Daddy
was responsible, after the parents, for the younger ones, and he wasn’t about to let a sixyear-old be sentenced to lifetime illiteracy.
They had an aunt and uncle about 50-60 miles away, across the road from a different
school. Daddy set up a tent near them and he and Bobby lived there through the snow and
blizzards that characterize winter in the Rocky Mountains. People said to me, “But their
parents looked after them!” No, they didn’t. Very few cars then and no paved roads. 50-60
miles is a long way on horseback, and it’s doubled when you have to get home to take
care of the livestock.
They both went to school.
Of course Bobby’s kids are my first cousins, and we have often reflected on the lesson
they taught us: Education is IMPORTANT!
2

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of January 16, 2019
The meeting was called to order by Vice President Scott Brosowske at 7 p.m. in the Amarillo Downtown Library.
There were 14 persons in attendance.
PROGRAM: The program for the evening was a professionally produced Documentary video from the 1987 TAS Field
School. This Field School was held at The Buried City complex on Wolf Creek in Ochiltree County. The video was well
done and enjoyed by the PAS audience.
MINUTES: Following a motion by Rolla Shaller and second by Elaine Maples, the minutes from the previous meeting
(Nov. 14, 2018) were accepted as printed in the PASTIMES newsletter.
TREASURER’S REPORT: Treasurer Pam Allison reported a current balance of $2354.29 in the regular account.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported ending December 2018 balances of $2,452.96 in the Money Market Account, and $5,147.42 in the Certificate of Deposit.
OLD BUSINESS:
Scott Brosowske reported that preparations for the 2019 TAS Annual Meeting (to be held in Amarillo) continue on-track.
There will be a pre-visit this spring by several TAS members from Tarrant County to check out the Amarillo meeting
facilities in the Downtown Embassy Suites.
Scott Brosowske announced that Bonnie Pitblado of Oklahoma University has been rescheduled to speak at our April
TAS meeting. (Bonnie was scheduled to speak at the 2018 Studer Banquet, which was cancelled due to weather concerns) She will be speaking about her Paleo-Indian Research.
NEW BUSINESS:
A slate of scheduled tours will need to be organized for the Annual TAS Meeting in October. PAS members are encouraged to brainstorm tour ideas relevant for our area and the TAS membership. Some initial thoughts from Scott are:
• Alibates in-depth tours

•
•

•

PPHM planned tours

•

Rock Art tours in PaloDuro Canyon

•

A pending PAS speaker for this spring is from the BLM. He would like some volunteer help with field work at the Cross
Bar Ranch (the only BLM land in Texas) when he visits Amarillo this spring. Contact Scott if you are interested.
Other pending events were mentioned as follows:
The West Texas Knapp-in will be at Roaring Springs (near Matador) on January 24 and 25.
GeoArcheologists, TPWD Archeologists, and TAS personnel will be visiting PaloDuro Canyon State Park again on the
weeks of February 18 and 25. This is another round of pre-work for the upcoming TAS Field School in June, 2019.
The upcoming 2019 Southwest Federation Meeting is March 30 in Midland at Midland College.
The 2019 Stone Age Fair in Perryton is scheduled for the third weekend in April.
The meeting adjourned at 8:05 p.m.

Respectfully submitted,
Andy Burcham, Secretary

3

PROGRAM INFORMATION
Alex Hunt
George Hunt (1881-1942) was a Kiowa man who attended boarding school,
worked as a Baptist minister, and held a place of importance among his tribe.
Hunt also worked as a cultural mediator between the Kiowa tribe and EuroAmerican academics. He was a key informant for a number of well-known
scholars who published influential works on the Kiowa tribe, including Wilbur Nye, Mildred Mayhall, and Alice Marriott. Moreover, Hunt was himself a
scholar who published several historical essays. The focus in this paper is on
the relationship between George Hunt, Charles Goodnight, and J. Evetts Haley. Hunt was involved in visits to Goodnight’s ranch and in the production of
Goodnight’s “Old Texas” film based on a 1916 buffalo hunt. In addition,
Hunt corresponded with J. Evetts Haley when Haley was working on Goodnight’s biography. Hunt and Haley had different purposes, as Haley was interested primarily in early interactions between Goodnight and the Comanches while Hunt was interested in more recent Kiowa history. Hunt’s interactions with Haley demonstrate the degree to which Hunt fought to “shape the
narrative” of indigenous history.
Alex Hunt comes from a long line of outdoorsmen and frontier types. He is
originally from Alaska, went to school at Colorado State University, and got
his PhD in English at the University of Oregon. He has been at WTAMU
since 2002 and is the founding director of the Center for the Study of the
American West. He publishes on Western American literature and history,
often taking an interdisciplinary approach.

Upcoming Events
February 20

7:00 p.m.
5:30 p.m.

Regular meeting, PAS. Amarillo Public Library, Downtown Branch, Upstairs.
Please join us for our pre-meeting dinner, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor.

February 18 and 25

GeoArcheologists, TPWD Archeologists, and TAS personnel will be visiting PaloDuro
Canyon State Park again on the weeks of February 18 and 25. This is another round of
pre-work for the upcoming TAS Field School in June, 2019.

March 30

SWFAS, Midland at Midland College. Information on Page Six.

April, third weekend. 30th.

2019 Stone Age Fair, Perryton.

4

COUNTY COURTHOUSES OF TEXAS
POTTER COUNTY
Potter County, cut out from Bexar County, was established in 1887. Amarillo (Spanish for Yellow), named for a nearby
creek of that name, became the county seat. In the following year, 1888, the first Potter County Courthouse was built.
Potter was named for Robert Potter (1799-1842). Born in Granville, North Carolina, Potter was one of those men who ran
into trouble in the East and decided to come to Texas and start over. He served as one of four delegates from Nagadoches
Municipality to the Convention of 1836, where he voted for Independence from Mexico, signed the Texas Declaration of
Independence and helped to write the Constitution of the Republic of Texas. He was Secretary of the Texas Navy and
Commander of the Port of Galveston.
He was in the Battle of San Jacinto, where he refused to sign the treaty with Santa Anna, and pressed for the Mexican
President’s execution. Settling into his home at Caddo Lake, with a new wife and two children, he was soon elected Senator. He served from November 1840 until he was killed in March 1842. He was 43 years old, and had been in Texas barely seven years. Read a longer account of his life at https://cemetery.tspb.texas.gov/pub/user_form.asp?pers_id=11
*****
Potter County’s first Courthouse, 1887, was a frame building, 20 X 42. The clerk had a tent behind the structure. The following year a masonry edifice was built. It cost $66,000, but it included the jail. It was torn down and the materials were
used for the 1896 structure.

1906 4th courthouse

1896 3rd courthouse

1984-1986 6th courthouse

1932 5th courthouse
5

6

