Sedimentology (2000), 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change: a review
and look forward
È RN E. TO
È RNQVIST²
MICHAEL D. BLUM* and TORBJO
*Department of Geosciences, University of Nebraska ± Lincoln, 214 Bessey Hall, Lincoln,
NE 68588-0340, USA (E-mail: mblum1@unl.edu)
²Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago,
845 West Taylor Street, Chicago, IL 60607-7059, USA (E-mail: tor@uic.edu)
ABSTRACT
Fluvial landforms and deposits provide one of the most readily studied
Quaternary continental records, and alluvial strata represent an important
component in most ancient continental interior and continental margin
successions. Moreover, studies of the long-term dynamics of ¯uvial systems and
their responses to external or `allogenic' controls, can play important roles in
research concerning both global change and sequence-stratigraphy, as well as in
studies of the dynamic interactions between tectonic activity and surface
processes. These themes were energized in the ®nal decades of the twentieth
century, and may become increasingly important in the ®rst decades of this
millennium.
This review paper provides a historical perspective on the development of
ideas in the ®elds of geomorphology/Quaternary geology vs. sedimentary
geology, and then summarizes key processes that operate to produce alluvial
stratigraphic records over time-scales of 103±106 years. Of particular interest are
changes in discharge regimes, sediment supply and sediment storage en route
from source terrains to sedimentary basins, as well as changes in sea-level and
the concept of accommodation. Late Quaternary stratigraphic records from the
Loire (France), Mississippi (USA), Colorado (Texas, USA) and Rhine±Meuse
(The Netherlands) Rivers are used to illustrate the in¯uences of climate change
on continental interior rivers, as well as the in¯uence of interacting climate and
sea-level change on continental margin systems.
The paper concludes with a look forward to a bright future for studies of
¯uvial response to climate and sea-level change. At present, empirical ®eldbased research on ¯uvial response to climate and sea-level change lags behind:
(a) the global change community's understanding of the magnitude and
frequency of climate and sea-level change; (b) the sequence-stratigraphic
community's desire to interpret climate and, especially, sea-level change as
forcing mechanisms; and (c) the modelling community's ability to generate
numerical and physical models of surface processes and their stratigraphic
results. A major challenge for the future is to catch up, which will require the
development of more detailed and sophisticated Quaternary stratigraphic,
sedimentological and geochronological frameworks in a variety of continental
interior and continental margin settings. There is a particular need for studies
that seek to document ¯uvial responses to allogenic forcing over both shorter
(102±103 years) and longer (104±106 years) time-scales than has commonly been
the case to date, as well as in larger river systems, from source to sink. Studies
of Quaternary systems in depositional basin settings are especially critical
because they can provide realistic analogues for interpretation of the preQuaternary rock record.
Keywords Climate change, ¯uvial sedimentology, Quaternary geology, sea-level
change, sequence stratigraphy.
# 2000

International Association of Sedimentologists

2

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
INTRODUCTION
Studies of continental stratigraphic records,
Quaternary and ancient, were energized in the
®nal decades of the twentieth century by two
somewhat distinct trends that emerged within the
geosciences. First, there was increasingly widespread recognition that human activities were
altering climatic and environmental conditions
over very short time-scales. Since the stratigraphic record is the only empirical record of
global change (Burke et al., 1990), studies of the
magnitude and frequency of past global changes,
Quaternary and ancient, were seen as a means to
provide a context for observed historical trends
and predicted near-future conditions. Second,
development of sequence-stratigraphic concepts
and methods (e.g. Vail et al., 1977; Jervey, 1988;
Posamentier & Vail, 1988; Posamentier et al.,
1988) provided a potential unifying framework
for much of sedimentary geology, especially
coastal and marine strata, but their application
to continental deposits has been controversial.
At a basic level, global change and sequencestratigraphic research have in common a focus on
changes in process through time in response to
external forcing, and it is hard to envisage any
scenario for the ®rst decades of this millennium
in which these issues will be less important. In
addition, an important third trend has begun to
emerge, as there is now a deeper appreciation of
the magnitude and frequency of tectonic activity
in plate boundary, continental interior and
passive margin settings, and relationships between tectonic activity and surface processes (e.g.
Molnar & England, 1990; Molnar et al., 1993;
Merritts & Ellis, 1994; Pinter & Brandon, 1997;
Burbank & Pinter, 1999). This third trend will
further energize studies of continental records,
since integrative models of this kind must be
tested against, and re®ned by, studies of
Quaternary and ancient strata.
Fluvial landforms and deposits provide one of
the most readily studied Quaternary continental
records, and alluvial strata represent an important
component in most ancient continental interior
and continental margin successions. Moreover,
modern ¯uvial environments are critical to human activities, and ancient ¯uvial deposits are
important repositories for hydrocarbons, groundwater and other resources. Studies of the longterm dynamics of ¯uvial systems, and their
responses to external or `allogenic' controls,
therefore have a broad range of applications.
This paper provides an overview of ¯uvial
# 2000

3

responses to climate and sea-level change, and
attempts to: (a) develop a historical perspective;
(b) outline a basic process framework, with
illustrations of ¯uvial responses to climate and
sea-level change from Late Quaternary contexts;
and (c) suggest key areas of emphasis for the ®rst
decades of this millennium.

HISTORICAL STARTING POINTS
Studies of ¯uvial responses to climate and sealevel changes have evolved somewhat differently
within the ®elds of geomorphology and
Quaternary geology vs. sedimentary geology.

Geomorphology and Quaternary geology
Several concepts from the late 1800s and early
1900s have played key roles in studies of ¯uvial
response to climate and sea-level change. One of
these was base level, de®ned by Powell (1875) as
the lower limit to which rivers can erode their
valleys, with his `grand' or ultimate base level
corresponding to sea-level. A second concept was
that of the graded stream, which Gilbert (1877)
suggested was adjusted in terms of channel slope,
or longitudinal pro®le, so that the available
discharge could transport the amount of sediment
supplied by the drainage network, and the
channel bed was neither aggrading nor degrading.
Mackin's (1948) discussion of the graded stream
is better known and more detailed, and also
focused on equilibrium long pro®les that are
adjusted to prevailing conditions of discharge
and sediment load.
One of the ®rst empirical studies of ¯uvial
response to climate change was by Penck &
BruÈckner (1909), whose examination of terraces
along tributaries to the Danube in southern
Germany gave birth to the concept of four
Pleistocene glacial±interglacial cycles. This
model for Quaternary climate change remained
dominant until the development of oxygenisotope records from ocean basins in the
1960s and 1970s, and con®rmation of the
Milankovitch theory of glaciation (Hays et al.,
1976). Critical to the present discussion, Penck
& BruÈckner (1909) linked aggradation to glacialperiod sediment supply, and incision with
¯oodplain abandonment and terrace formation
to interglacial periods (Fig. 1A). By contrast,
Lamothe (1918) in the Somme Valley of France,
and Fisk (1944) in the Lower Mississippi Valley

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

4

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

of the USA, focused on the role of glacioeustasy. Fisk's (1944) well-known model suggested valley incision, ¯oodplain abandonment

A

and terrace formation during sea-level fall and
lowstand, followed by valley aggradation during transgression and highstand (Fig. 1B,C).
Older Deckenschotter
(Günz Glaciation)

Younger Deckenschotter
(Mindel Glaciation)

Hochterrassen

Elevation (m)

500

(Riss Glaciation)

Niedterrassen

450

(Würm Glaciation)

River Save

400
350
0

5

10

15

Distance (km)

B

uplands

Mississippi River
Trench

Mississippi River

Sea Level
low

low

sands and
gravels

bedrock

Sea Level
low

alluvial
fans

Williana
Terrace

low

high

alluvial
fans

alluvial
fans
sands and
gravels

Bentley
Terrace Montogomery
Terrace
Prairie
Terrace

Sea Level

backswamp

high

sands and
gravels

C

braided stream and
backswamp deposits

Mississippi River

Mississippi River

alluvial
fans

high

alluvial
fans

alluvial
fans
Tertiary

Sea Level

high

zone of Holocene
meanderbelt migration

glacial period valley
cutting episodes
Holocene
floodplain

Fig. 1. (A) Penck & BruÈckner's (1909) model for terraces in southern Germany, linking aggradation to glacial
cycles, and incision to interglacials (adapted from Bowen, 1978; original from Penck & BruÈckner, 1909). (B) Fisk's
(1944) model for valley development during an individual eustatic cycle, illustrating cutting during sea-level fall,
and the different stages of ®lling during sea-level rise and highstand. (C) Fisk's model for terraces of the Gulf
Coastal Plain in Louisiana (USA), linking incision to glacial cycles, and aggradation to interglacials (B and C
modi®ed from Fisk, 1944).
# 2000

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
This `continental interior' vs. `continental margin' dichotomy, or a focus on upstream vs.
downstream controls depending on study area
location, was still prevalent in the last decades
of the twentieth century.

Upstream controls in continental interiors
As described by Butzer (1980), a `glacial' vs.
`interglacial' dichotomy, following Penck &
BruÈckner (1909), also persisted for some time,
and it was commonly assumed that present
¯oodplains represented the Holocene, the ®rst
terrace was from the last Pleistocene glacial, the
second terrace was from the penultimate glacial,
and so on. Clear turning points can be traced to
the development of radiocarbon dating (Libby,
1952) and to the hydraulic geometry studies of
Leopold & Maddock (1953). Radiocarbon dating
techniques provided an opportunity to develop
chronological frameworks for climate change
from palaeobiological and other indicators,
and, independently, for alluvial successions.
Moreover, the effective limits of radiocarbon
eventually served to focus attention on the last
full-glacial and the Holocene (last 20 kyr).
Leopold & Maddock (1953), by contrast, initiated
a generation of efforts that developed quantitative
relations between discharge regimes, sediment
load and measures of channel geometry (e.g.
width, depth, sinuosity, meander wavelength,
slope).
Several papers from the 1960s illustrate the
immediate impact of hydraulic geometry. Among
these are Schumm's (1965) general model for
¯uvial response to climatic change, Dury's (1965)
studies of `under®t' streams and Schumm's
(1968a) discussion of the concept of channel
metamorphosis, based on studies of the
Murrumbidgee River, south-eastern Australia
(Fig. 2). A subsequent series of in¯uential papers
by Schumm and colleagues in the 1970s and early
1980s served to caution against developing general models for ¯uvial response to climate change.
In concise summaries of this work, Schumm
(1977, 1991) notes the importance of: (a) spatial
and temporal scale; (b) convergence of responses
given different external forcing mechanisms; (c)
divergence of response following similar external
inputs; (d) differential sensitivity of ¯uvial systems to external controls due to differing thresholds for change; and (e) complex response due to
internal system dynamics. These issues suggest
that ¯uvial responses to climate change may be
# 2000

5

geographically circumscribed, nondeterministic
and nonlinear.
Many of these ideas are re¯ected in review
papers by Knox (1983, 1996) and Starkel (1987,
1991), and Bull's (1991) monograph. Knox (1983),
for example, summarized the Holocene record
from the USA, and argued that climate change
produces time-parallel discontinuities in alluvial
successions over broad areas, even though the
direction of change may differ between regions.
He suggested this could be due to the way
changes in global atmospheric circulation are
manifested regionally, and/or the intrinsic characteristics of each system. Starkel (1987, 1991)
also recognized the variability of ¯uvial response
to climate change over the last 15 kyr, and
differentiated classes of European rivers on the
basis of relationships between tectonic highlands,
Pleistocene ice extent, the former periglacial
region, isostatic rebound and sea-level change.
Starkel's papers emanated from international
projects that demonstrate increased interest in
¯uvial systems and climate change during the last
two decades (Gregory, 1983; Gregory et al., 1987,

edge of floodplain
modern
river

Stuart H

ighway

younger
palaeochannel

older palaeochannel

0

3 km

Fig. 2. Concept of channel metamorphosis, introduced
by Schumm (1968a) based on studies of the
Murrumbidgee River, Australia. Map shows modern
highly sinuous Murrumbidgee River, vs. older
channel with larger meanders, and an even older lowsinuosity channel (adapted from Schumm &
Brakenridge, 1987; original from Schumm, 1968a).

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

6

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

1996; Starkel et al., 1991; Branson et al., 1996;
Benito et al., 1998).

Downstream controls in continental margins
Fisk's (1944) investigations of the Lower
Mississippi Valley coupled valley evolution to
glacio-eustasy and changes in stream gradients,
and played a fundamental role in development of
models for ¯uvial response to sea-level change.
According to Fisk, the valley was deeply incised
and swept clean of sediments to a point some
1000 km upstream from the present Gulf of
Mexico shoreline due to increased channel
gradients during the Last Glacial Maximum sealevel lowstand. Braided-stream surfaces formed
when gradients decreased during latest
Pleistocene to middle Holocene sea-level rise,
with a transition to a meandering regime during
the late Holocene sea-level highstand. Fisk's
model was so in¯uential that many workers
assigned successively older terraces in the lower
reaches of river valleys to successively older
interglacials. Extreme examples of this type of
thinking can be found in studies along the Gulf
Coast of the USA that inferred short-lived periods
of sea-level rise for terraces that did not ®t into
the standard model of four glacial±interglacial
cycles (e.g. Bernard & Leblanc, 1965).
Further empirical studies of continental margin
systems have been less visible, perhaps because
of the perceived power of Fisk's model. It is
therefore appropriate that the Mississippi has
played a role in reassessment of ¯uvial responses
to sea-level change. Saucier's (1994, 1996) work,
for example, shows that the Mississippi was
never completely excavated, and did not feel the
effects of sea-level change as far upstream as Fisk
had envisaged. Saucier also assigned braidedstream surfaces to the last glacial period, and
suggested they record ¯uvial responses to glacially induced changes in discharge and sediment
load, whereas the transition to a meandering
regime occurred in the earliest Holocene with the
loss of a glacial source for sediment and water.
A variety of conceptual, experimental and
theoretical models of river response to base-level
change appeared in the 1970s and 1980s. Leopold
& Bull (1979), for example, used observations
from modern rivers to suggest the upstream
effects of base-level rise were limited, whereas
Begin et al. (1981) and Begin (1988) used ¯ume
studies coupled with a diffusion-based model to
show that vertical lowering of base-level (as along
# 2000

a fault block) results in long-pro®le lowering by
nickpoint migration at rates that diminish in the
upstream direction. Slingerland & Snow (1988)
developed a numerical sediment-transport model
to simulate long-pro®le evolution in response to
base-level fall, and suggested a series of complex
autogenic oscillations of cutting and ®lling might
result from a single allogenic perturbation. At a
broader conceptual level, Summer®eld (1985)
suggested the in¯uence of sea-level fall will vary
with geometric relationships between the slope of
the coastal plain and the slope of the shelf as it
becomes emergent (Fig. 3). For example, Brown &
Wilson (1988) and Leckie (1994) discuss the
Canterbury Plains of New Zealand, where aggradation occurred during glacial periods because of
newly exposed shelf gradients that were less

A

Slope of Coastal Plain < Slope of Shelf
SL 1
channel extension
with deep incision

SL 2

B Slope of Coastal Plain > Slope of Shelf

SL 1
channel extension
with progradation
and aggradation

C

SL 2

Slope of Coastal Plain = Slope of Shelf

SL 1
channel extension
but no significant
incision or aggradation

SL 2

Fig. 3. Model for ¯uvial response to sea-level fall as a
function of coastal plain and shelf gradients. (A)
Incision through coastal prism (depositional shoreline
break) due to steeper gradients exposed on the inner
shelf as sea-level falls; (B) aggradation and
progradation due to sea-level fall across a shelf that
has a gradient shallower than the coastal plain; (C)
channel extension with little incision, other than that
necessary to contain the channel itself, due to no
gradient differences between coastal plain and
exposed shelf during sea-level fall. Adapted from
Summer®eld (1985).

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
98°W

97°W

96°W

Brazos R.
San Bernard R.
Colorado R.

94°W

Sabine R.

Trinity R.

30°N

29°N

95°W

7

30°N

Houston

29°N

Guadalupe R.
incised
valleys
Nueces R.
deltas

28°N

Corpus
Christi

e
ed
g
el
f
27°N
98°W

steep than the permanently subaerial alluvial
plains.
Most recently, workers have examined interactions between upstream climatic and downstream
sea-level controls in the lowermost reaches of
coastal plain rivers. As discussed later, these
efforts have concentrated on rivers of the Texas
Gulf Coastal Plain (USA) and on the Rhine±
Meuse of The Netherlands. The 1980s and 1990s
also witnessed the emergence of high-resolution
seismic-stratigraphic studies on continental
shelves. Suter & Berryhill (1985), for example,
demonstrated channel extension and delta progradation across the Gulf of Mexico shelf during
the last sea-level fall and lowstand. Subsequent
work by others continued to document the extent
and variability of ¯uvial channels and deltaic
strata on the shelves and at shelf edges (Fig. 4).
Important examples include work by Morton &
Suter (1996) and Anderson et al. (1996) for the
north-western Gulf of Mexico (USA), and Tesson
et al. (1993; also Tesson & Gensous, 1998) for the
Rhone shelf of the Meditteranean.

Sedimentary geology
Eustatic sea-level change played an important
role in explanations of cyclicity in preQuaternary sedimentary rocks during the ®rst
two-thirds of the twentieth century (e.g. Wanless
& Weller, 1932; Sloss, 1963; Wheeler, 1964).
However, a period of waning enthusiasm for
sea-level change accompanied development of
# 2000

fans
0

50

100 km

sh

Fig. 4. Valleys and deltas of the
north-west Gulf of Mexico shelf
during the last full-glacial
period, as identi®ed in highresolution seismic data (adapted
from Suter & Berryhill, 1985;
Anderson et al., 1996).

28°N

? ?

97°W

27°N
96°W

95°W

94°W

plate tectonics on one hand, and facies models on
the other (Dott, 1992), such that studies in the
1960s and 1970s commonly focused on tectonic
activity coupled with autogenic processes to
explain stratal patterns. Sedimentary geologists
have also long recognized the importance of
climate in the production of sediments, as well
as the range of depositional systems, environments and facies, but attempts to explain changes
in alluvial successions through time with reference to climate change are a recent innovation.
There is little question that plate tectonics
plays the overriding role in organization of landmasses into sediment source regions, transport
routes and sedimentary basins, and is thus
primarily responsible for the accumulation of
thick successions of alluvial strata. The following
discussion refers readers to Miall (1996) for a
comprehensive discussion of the role of tectonic
activity in the development of alluvial successions, and instead highlights alternative trends
from the last three decades. Of greatest signi®cance is the emergence of sequence-stratigraphic
models and their emphasis on the interwoven
concepts of sea-level, base level and accommodation. Most recently, workers have begun to
examine links between alluvial successions and
climate change.

Sea-level, base level and accommodation
Development of sequence-stratigraphic concepts, beginning with publications of Vail and

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

colleagues from Exxon Production Research in
AAPG Memoir 26 (Payton, 1977) initiated a wave
of research into the responses of depositional
systems to sea-level change. Publication of the
®rst Exxon cycle charts (Vail et al., 1977) gave rise
to new views on the pervasiveness of sea-level
changes through geological time.
The origins of this wave of research, as it
pertains to `¯uvial sequence stratigraphy', lagged
behind development of the general model, and can
be traced to SEPM Special Publication 42 (Wilgus
et al., 1988), which contained two papers that
catalysed discussion over the next decade. The
®rst was by Jervey (1988) which introduced the
term `accommodation' as the space available
below base level for sediments to accumulate, a
function of eustatic sea-level change and subsidence (i.e. relative sea-level change). The second
was by Posamentier & Vail (1988), in which ¯uvial
response to sea-level change played a prominent
role in the development of conceptual models for
`systems tracts', the basic building blocks in the
Exxon model. Their process framework rests on
the premise that rivers adjust longitudinal pro®les
in response to sea-level change, and they argued
that: (a) widespread ¯uvial deposition characterizes the early stages of relative sea-level fall; (b)
valley incision and sediment bypass characterizes
the late stages of sea-level fall and lowstand; and
(c) ®lling of valleys occurs during transgression
and highstand.
The Exxon views on sequence stratigraphy
have been carefully scrutinized, accepted by
some, and criticized by others (e.g. Galloway,
1989; Miall, 1991, 1996; Helland-Hansen &
Gjelberg, 1994; Shanley & McCabe, 1994). Some
criticisms are grounded on scienti®c shortcomings, but others re¯ect an unfortunate use of
genetic terminology for Exxon systems tracts (see
Van Wagoner, 1995a, for a historical perspective),
as well as contradictions within and between
publications from the Exxon group as a whole.
For example, numerous ®gures in Posamentier &
Vail (1988) show widespread ¯uvial deposition
during sea-level fall, but the text commonly infers
¯uvial incision and sediment bypass during that
time. Moreover, Posamentier & Vail (1988) illustrate the development of systems tracts with
respect to eustasy, and/or various combinations
of eustasy and subsidence. By contrast, Van
Wagoner et al. (1988) provide an operational view
that follows the original de®nition by Mitchum
et al. (1977), and systems tracts are `de®ned
objectively' on the basis of key bounding surfaces,
position within a sequence, stratal geometry and
# 2000

isolated, high-sinuosity
fluvial deposits

Base Level
low

high

tidally-influenced fluvial deposits

amalgamated fluvial deposits

valley incision and formation of terrace deposits

1-10's m

8

low-sinuosity,
high-gradient rivers
1-10's km

Fig. 5. Shanley & McCabe's (1993, 1994) model for
development of depositional sequences in mixed
¯uvial±coastal±marine strata of the Cretaceous
Western Interior basin of the USA, in response to
base-level change. They illustrate the concept of
incision and sediment bypass during base-level fall
that is common to many sequence stratigraphic
models, followed by valley ®lling, ®rst with
amalgamated ¯uvial deposits, then tidally in¯uenced
strata and ®nally low net-to-gross ¯uvial deposits.

facies associations, and the `terms lowstand and
highstand are not meant to imply a unique period
of time or position on a cycle of eustatic or
relative change of sea-level'.
Nevertheless, SEPM Special Publication 42
resulted in a ¯urry of interest in the concepts
of sea-level, base level and accommodation,
and in how ¯uvial and other continental
systems ®t within the mostly marine-derived
sequence-stratigraphic model (see the review by
Shanley & McCabe, 1994). `Incised valleys'
emerged as a focus of attention; according to
Van Wagoner et al. (1990), `incised valleys'
contain signi®cant erosional relief, truncate
older strata, juxtapose ¯uvial or estuarine
sandstone on marine deposits, and de®ne a
signi®cant basinward shift of facies due to
relative sea-level fall. Dalrymple et al. (1994)
de®ned two types of `incised valleys', those

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
SB3

9

AST
BST

SB2

FST
AST
BST
FST

50-100 m

SB1

5-10 km
SB3
SB3

AST
AST
BST

SB2

SB1

palaeosol

FST
AST
BST

SB2
SB1

FST

BST
FST
AST
BST
FST
AST

SB3

AST
BST
AST
BST

SB2
SB1

SB3
SB2
SB1

AST
BST
AST

Relative Base-Level
Change

erosional suspended-load bedloadscouring
deposits
dominated
deposits

FST BST AST

SB

SB

Fig. 6. Hinterland depositional sequence model of Legarreta and colleagues, based on Cretaceous nonmarine strata
in Argentina. FST = forestepping systems tract, BST = backstepping systems tract, AST = aggradational systems
tract, SB = sequence boundary. Downdip is to the left. Modi®ed from Legarreta & Uliana (1998).

formed by relative sea-level fall, and those
formed in response to some other mechanism.
They argued the ®rst type should have sequence boundaries at their base and will be
®lled by predictable successions of ¯uvial and
estuarine facies due to relative sea-level rise
(Zaitlin et al., 1994), whereas the second type
will be dif®cult to recognize since they may
occur within a succession of ¯uvial strata, and
have no signi®cance in the Exxon sequencestratigraphic sense.
A variety of explanatory models for ¯uvial
sequence stratigraphy have been published that
focus on linking ¯uvial and nearshore marine
strata. Shanley & McCabe (1991, 1993, 1994)
recognized depositional sequences based on
interbedded ¯uvial and marine strata from the
Cretaceous of the Western Interior foreland basin
of Utah (USA). Their interpretations are grounded
on correlations between alluvial strata and coeval
shorelines that step basinward or landward, as
well as recognition of systematic vertical changes
in sandbody amalgamation and/or isolation
# 2000

(Fig. 5). Posamentier & Allen (1993) proposed a
variant on the standard sequence model that
applies to foreland basins, whereas Howell &
Flint (1996) discussed active extensional settings.
Van Wagoner (1995b) developed a detailed model
for Cretaceous foreland basin strata of the Book
Cliffs in Utah (USA) that, among other things, has
served as a catalyst for debate in the literature (see
Yoshida et al., 1998; Van Wagoner, 1998) and,
more informally, among the sedimentology community as a whole.
Fully nonmarine models have been proposed
as well. Legarreta & Uliana (1998) propose a
model for Mesozoic continental basins in
Argentina that includes: (a) a coarsening-upwards `forestepping' systems tract that is laterally con®ned and dominated by amalgamated
channel sandstones; (b) a ®ning-upwards `backstepping' systems tract; and (c) an `aggradational' systems tract (Fig. 6). Wright & Marriott
(1993) propose a generic model that is not
based on actual examples, but incorporates
systems tracts terminology and emphasizes

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

# 2000

Cycle-Bundle

450

400

350

Mega-Cycle

Studies that link ¯uvial deposition to climate
change in the pre-Quaternary record are relatively
sparse when compared with the volume of
literature on ¯uvial responses to sea-level or
base-level change that has been generated following introduction of sequence-stratigraphic concepts. By far the most common theme is the
interpretation of ancient climate from individual
features (e.g. palaeosols) within alluvial successions, as opposed to interpretations of ¯uvial
response to climate change. Much of this work is
summarized by Parrish (1998) and not repeated
here. Instead the discussion below focuses on
examples where workers have speci®cally interpreted depositional responses to climate change.
A number of workers have inferred climate
change as a control based on transitions between
¯uvial and other strata. Over time-scales of 106±
107 years, Olsen & Larsen (1993) suggest the Late
Devonian of East Greenland can be subdivided
into depositional complexes similar in concept to
Exxon's systems tracts. Interpreted changes from
braidplain environments to terminal ¯uvial systems that pass laterally to aeolian environments,
then to a meandering stream-dominated setting
were attributed to shifts towards more arid and
then more humid conditions. A number of
studies also interpret transitions between ¯uvial
and other strata due to climate changes over timescales of 104±105 years (Milankovitch scales).
These include Cojan's (1993) work on Upper
Cretaceous to Palaeocene ¯uvial and lacustrine
strata in the Provence Basin of southern France,
Yang & Nio's (1993) studies of Permian
Rotliegendes strata of the Dutch North Sea,
Clemmensen et al.'s (1994) summary of interbedded ¯uvial and aeolian rocks of Permian to
Triassic age in the UK, and Dubiel et al.'s (1996)
discussion of inter®ngering ¯uvial and aeolian

no sandstone bodies

Cycle
(max)

Climate change

500

Cycle (min)

relationships between alluvial architecture, palaeosols and changes in accommodation that
relate speci®cally to ¯oodplain sedimentation.
Gibling & Bird (1994) and Aitken & Flint
(1995), among others, use Carboniferous examples from Canada and the USA to discuss
overall sequence architecture, the role of palaeosols, and the recognition, variability and
importance of `inter¯uve' sequence boundaries.
Most recently, Martinsen et al. (1999) use the
accommodation to sediment supply ratio (A/S
ratio) described in Muto & Steel (1997) to
interpret changes in alluvial architecture.

Height Above Base of Kap Graah Group (m)

10

300

250
0

5

10

Thickness of Sandstone Body (m)
Fig. 7. Interpreted cyclical changes in sandbody
thicknesses deposited by meandering rivers from the
Andersson Land Formation, Devonian Kap Graah
Group of East Greenland (after Olsen, 1994). Cycle
(min) indicates cycles de®ned by minimum
thicknesses, whereas Cycle (max) indicates the
opposite de®nition. Mega-cycles are interpreted to
re¯ect
the
Milankovitch
eccentricity
period,
calculated at 95 kyr for the Devonian, whereas
individual cycles are interpreted to represent
precessional periods of 17 or 20 kyr.

strata within the Permian Cutler Group of the
western USA.
Changes within fully alluvial successions have
been ascribed to the in¯uence of Milankovitchscale climate changes as well. Olsen (1990, 1994),
for example, examined the Late Devonian
Andersson Land Formation of east Greenland,
the axial meandering stream-dominated complex
described above. He identi®ed two scales of
cyclicity in the thickness of channel sand bodies,
which were interpreted to represent climatically

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
controlled changes in discharge regimes at
Milankovitch-scale periodicities of 100 kyr and
~ 20 kyr (Fig. 7). Smith (1994) suggested that
changes in channel sandbody geometry, sand-tomud ratios, sediment accumulation rates and
types of palaeosols in Plio-Pleistocene strata from
Arizona (USA) occurred during a tectonically
quiescent period and might instead re¯ect climate
changes.
Modelling ¯uvial responses to climate change
in the pre-Quaternary record has not been
common practice, but a number of important
efforts can be identi®ed. Perlmutter & Matthews
(1989) propose a cyclostratigraphic model that
emphasizes Milankovitch-scale climate change
superimposed on tectonically driven basin evolution. Key model components include weathering
and sediment production, discharge regimes, and
transport ef®ciency as they relate to variations in
climate, as well as how these factors control the
spatial patterns of clastic environments and
temporal evolution of clastic successions. Paola
et al. (1992) use a diffusion-based model to
examine the roles of sediment ¯ux, rates of
subsidence, changes in sediment grain-size
(gravel vs. sand) and water supply on patterns
of deposition in foreland basins at time steps of
107 and 105 years. This study is not speci®cally
concerned with causal mechanisms, but the
authors note that sediment ¯ux, changes in
grain-size and variations in water supply can
have several causes, including climate change.
Variations in sediment ¯ux and grain size are
important in both time steps, with both resulting
in progradation or retrogradation of gravel fronts.
By contrast, cyclical changes in water supply play
a signi®cant role in shorter time steps only,
resulting in progradational cycles during time
periods when water supply is increasing. Paola
et al. (1992) suggest that over time-scales of
105 years (Milankovitch time-scales), patterns of
deposition for foreland basin settings most closely re¯ect surface processes, whereas over longer
time-scales basin subsidence and other tectonically controlled factors become dominant.

GENERAL PROCESS FRAMEWORK
Promising avenues of research lie at the interface
between Quaternary and ancient ¯uvial systems,
especially studies of ¯uvial responses to climate
and sea-level changes at time-scales of 106 years
or less. The following section focuses on how
# 2000

11

rivers produce stratigraphic records over these
time-scales; the section concentrates on alluvial
channels because of their mobile beds and banks,
the rapidity with which such systems can
respond to allogenic controls, and the fact that
such rivers provide the common link between
Quaternary and ancient records.

Channel geometry and depositional style
Process-based interpretations of ¯uvial responses
to climate and sea-level change should be linked
in some way to controls on the mutually
dependent variables of channel geometry and
depositional style. Numerous discussions of
alluvial channel process and form, as well as
¯uvial depositional processes and systems, are
readily available elsewhere and not repeated here
(e.g. Knox, 1976; Leopold & Bull, 1979; Richards,
1982; Miall, 1985, 1995, 1996; Schumm, 1985;
Ferguson, 1987; Nanson & Croke, 1992; Bridge,
1993a,b, 1995; Orton & Reading, 1993; Van den
Berg, 1995; Brierley, 1996; Nanson & Knighton,
1996; Knighton, 1998; Fielding, 1999). Instead,
four fundamental relationships can be distilled
from this body of literature: (a) cross-sectional
and plan view geometry of a `graded stream' is
adjusted to prevailing discharge regimes and
sediment loads, and maintains a statistically
constant size and shape over some interval of
time (102±103 years); (b) ¯uvial facies and depositional systems are linked to channel geometry
through the spatial distribution of depositional
landforms and environments; (c) changes in the
relationship between discharge and sediment
load result in changes in one or more geometric
variables, for example width, depth, width-todepth ratio, sinuosity or slope; and (d) changes in
channel geometry result in changes in the lateral
and vertical distribution of depositional environments and facies.

Aggradation and degradation: changes in
sediment storage
Aggradation or degradation often accompanies
changes in channel geometry and depositional
style, and results in changes in sediment storage
per unit valley length due to changes in channel
bed and ¯oodplain elevation. Width-averaged
bedload transport rates (qs) re¯ect stream
power per unit channel length, W = gQS
(where W = stream power, g = speci®c weight,
Q = discharge and S = channel bed slope;

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

12

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

Bagnold, 1973). Channel beds aggrade when
sediment supply exceeds maximum bedload
transport rates, degrade when the reverse is true
and maintain stable long pro®les when there is a
balance between stream power and sediment
supply (Fig. 8).
Theoretical models to describe aggradation or
degradation are widely published in the engineering, geomorphological and sedimentological literature (e.g. Torres & Jain, 1984; Wyroll, 1988;
Paola et al., 1992; Leeder & Stewart, 1996). Such
models are ultimately based on the sediment
continuity equation, which can be written in its
simplest one-dimensional form as:
dz/dt + dqs/dx = 0

(1)

where z = bed elevation, t = time, qs = width-averaged sediment transport rate and x = distance
along the channel. For a channel bed that is in
equilibrium (`graded') and neither aggrading nor
degrading, dz/dt = 0, hence dqs/dx = 0. From this
simple relationship, three end-member situations
for aggradation can be derived: (a) sediment
overloading (holding discharge constant) from
an upstream point source (typical of an alluvial
fan) will result in a downstream-tapering wedge
of channel-bed aggradation (i.e. the `down®lling'

flat

coarse
fine
sediment size

steep
channel slope

discharge
degradation

Sediment Supply

aggradation

Stream Power

Fig. 8. Balance model for aggradation and degradation
of alluvial channels, emphasizing changes in the
relationship between discharge and sediment supply.
Channels aggrade when sediment supply exceeds
transport capacity of the discharge regime, and
degrade when the reverse is true. Redrawn from a
widely circulated diagram that originated as an
unpublished drawing by W. Borland of the USA
Bureau of Reclamation, and was based on an equation
by Lane (1955).
# 2000

of Schumm, 1993); (b) sediment overloading from
upstream and lateral sources (drainage network
feeding a main valley axis) will result in a
relatively constant thickness of channel-bed
aggradation; and (c) base-level rise under conditions of constant sediment supply will result in
downstream decreases in sediment transport
rates, and downstream increasing rates of channel-bed aggradation (the `back®lling' of Schumm,
1993). Degradation can be triggered in a variety of
ways, and from both upstream and downstream
directions, but always results in channel incision
and ¯oodplain abandonment, net sediment removal, and production of an unconformity.
A simple two-dimensional view of channel-bed
aggradation and degradation is shown in Fig. 9A,
but may be complicated by a number of factors.
For example, under equilibrium conditions channels could migrate laterally but undergo no
signi®cant aggradation or degradation, which
translates into no net change in sediment storage.
This does not mean that a stable stream cannot
leave behind a deposit, since lateral migration of
a channel belt results in cannibalization of older
sediments and emplacement of new deposits. In
this case, interpretation of true aggradation and
development of multistoried channel belts vs.
simple lateral migration is not a simple issue, and
should be grounded on observations of deposit
thicknesses that exceed the vertical distance
between the maximum depth of autogenic scour
(Salter, 1993) and the upper limit to ¯oodplain
accretion as a channel belt migrates laterally. For
example, recent studies demonstrate that depths
of autogenic scour at ¯ow con¯uences and at
channel bends can be up to ®ve times deeper than
the mean channel depth (Best & Ashworth, 1997),
and depths of scour can be signi®cantly below
contemporary sea-level positions.
Perhaps equally important are cases where
there is little, if any, change in channel-bed
elevation, but ¯oodplain height increases or
decreases (e.g. Blum & Valastro, 1994; Fig. 9B).
For example, ¯oodplain abandonment can take
place without signi®cant channel incision due to
a reduction in peak discharges and overbank
¯ooding. Lateral migration of a channel belt then
produces a basal erosional unconformity that
traces laterally up to soils that developed on the
abandoned ¯oodplain surface. By contrast, formerly stable terrace surfaces can be buried by
renewed overbank ¯ooding if ¯ood magnitudes
increase. Finally, changes in channel-bed and
¯oodplain elevation may occur at different rates,
and in some instances in opposite directions (cf.

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
Tebbens et al., 1999), due to changes in channel
geometry. This variety of possible geometric
responses suggests that inferences of ¯uvial

13

aggradation and/or incision are less than straightforward, and should be based on evidence that
bears on changes in both channel-bed and ¯oodplain elevations, wherever possible.

Controls on changes in discharge, sediment
supply and sediment storage
Changes in channel geometry, depositional style
and net sediment storage are dependent variables
over time-scales of interest here, and re¯ect
prevailing conditions of discharge and sediment
supply. What controls changes in discharge and
sediment supply over these time-scales?

Discharge regimes
Alluvial channel size re¯ects the volume of water
that must be transmitted on a relatively frequent
basis, with recurrence intervals for channelforming discharges that range from 1 to 30 years
(Williams, 1978; Knox, 1983; Lewin, 1989).
Overviews of ¯ood characteristics in various
climates can be found in Baker et al. (1988),
McMahon et al. (1987, 1992) and Waylen (1996),
whereas Pazzaglia et al. (1998) discuss possible
relationships between rates of uplift, rates of
erosion, river long pro®les and ¯ood hydrographs. Critical to the present discussion is the
potential impact of climate change on ¯ood
magnitude and frequency, and how this might
vary to the extent that global climate change
impacts different river systems in the same or
different ways.
In this context, Knox (1983) summarizes a
variety of historical period data that illustrate
Fig. 9. Changes in sediment storage within valley
cross-sections, and possible stratigraphic results. Each
scenario begins with lateral migration of a single-story
channel belt. (A) Channel-bed degradation and
¯oodplain abandonment with terrace formation, then
channel-bed aggradation to produce a multistory
channel belt, with ¯oodplain deposition over
previously stable terrace surfaces characterized by
palaeosols (hachures). (B) Reduction in channel size,
¯oodplain abandonment and terrace formation
without signi®cant channel-bed degradation, then
channel enlargement with ¯oodplain deposition over
previously stable terrace surfaces characterized by
palaeosols. (C) Signi®cant reduction in channel size
accompanied by channel-bed aggradation, ¯oodplain
abandonment and terrace formation, followed by
channel enlargement accompanied by channel-bed
degradation
and
¯oodplain
deposition
over
previously stable terrace surfaces characterized by
palaeosols.
# 2000

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

14

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

how climate change can impact ¯ood regimes of
individual rivers. For small drainages in the midlatitude USA, he shows that ¯ood discharge per
unit area increases (holding recurrence intervals
constant) with decreasing precipitation due to
decreases in vegetation cover and corresponding
increases in surface runoff. Moreover, he uses a
long time series of annual ¯oods from the upper
Mississippi River to illustrate relationships between ¯ood magnitudes and independently identi®ed changes in global atmospheric circulation.
These data show that circulation changes have
signi®cant impacts on the magnitude of rare
events (recurrence intervals > 10 years), but lesser
impact on more frequent ¯oods (Fig. 10). More
recently, Knox (1987, 1993) documents changes in
middle to late Holocene channel-forming and
extreme ¯oods, and concludes that minor changes
in climate produced changes in bankfull discharges ranging from 70 to 130% of present-day
values.
Another important approach is illustrated by
Probst (1989), who examines the spatial structure
of runoff ¯uctuations from larger European rivers
during the historical period, and shows periods
with positive and negative deviations from longterm averages. Most commonly all rivers varied inphase, but at other times runoff regimes of rivers
within present-day oceanic and continental regimes (Rhone, Loire, Garonne, Seine and Rhine)
were out-of-phase with rivers in the core
Mediterranean region of southern Europe (Ebro,
Guadalquivir and Po). From these relationships, it
might be envisaged that discharge regimes in the
two areas should respond simultaneously to

global climate change, but in different directions
due to the regional manifestations of changes in
global atmospheric circulation. Similar in-phase
and out-of-phase relationships between regional
precipitation changes and changes in atmospheric
circulation are well documented (e.g. Lau, 1988;
Hurrell, 1995; Rogers, 1997; Dai et al., 1997).
In aggregate, these studies serve to illustrate
four points that are of particular relevance. First,
changes in atmospheric circulation through time
have a direct impact on the magnitude and
frequency of ¯oods. Second, these changes are
not directly proportional to increases or decreases
in precipitation, but are instead buffered by other
variables that in¯uence runoff rates, especially
vegetation. Third, ¯ood regimes are especially
sensitive to changes in climatic inputs, such that
small changes in climate can signi®cantly increase or decrease ¯ood magnitudes. Finally,
responses of ¯ood regimes to climate change
should be geographically circumscribed since
global changes in circulation may result in
simultaneous changes in discharge regimes everywhere, but some regions will be out-of-phase with
others in terms of the direction of change.

Sediment supply
Routing of sediments in river systems is a topic
that resides at the interface between studies of
modern processes, Quaternary landscape evolution and development of the pre-Quaternary
stratigraphic record. Hovius & Leeder (1998) note
that sedimentary basins record erosion of the
continents, whereas drainage networks are the

Flood Magnitude (m 3s-1)

p = 2%, RI = 50 yrs
3000
p = 5%, RI = 20 yrs
2000

p = 10%, RI = 10 yrs

1000
p = 99%, RI ~ 1 yrs
0
1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

Year
Fig. 10. Changes in ¯ood magnitudes due to changes in atmospheric circulation, Mississippi River at St. Paul,
Minnesota, USA (after Knox, 1983). Data represent a time series of all ¯oods that exceeded 368 m3 s±1, and was
disaggregated into time periods de®ned by dominant types of atmospheric circulation (meridional vs. zonal).
Flood probabilities were then calculated for each period, with p = the probability that a ¯ood with a given
magnitude will be equalled or exceeded in any given year, and RI = average recurrence interval.
# 2000

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
`negative imprint' of this same record, and their
existence must be inferred from stratigraphic
data. Especially pertinent, then, are the allogenic
controls on erosion from upland source terrains
and delivery to depositional basins.
There is a long history to discussions of
climatic controls on sediment supply, with
studies by Langbein & Schumm (1958) and
Fournier (1960) among the ®rst to develop
quantitative relationships between climate, erosion and sediment yield. Langbein & Schumm
(1958), in particular, indicate that sediment
yield increases with increasingly effective precipitation through the arid to semi-arid transition,
then decreases towards more humid climates due
to the increasing importance of vegetation.
Compilations by Walling & Webb (1983, 1996)
suggest the Langbein & Schumm (1958) curve
may be applicable for the midcontinent USA
where it was derived, but when other climate
regimes, especially subtropical and tropical, are
taken into account then sediment yield increases
with precipitation at values greater than
~ 1000 mm yr±1. Because of the mitigating effect
of vegetation in each of these relationships, they
are most applicable for that part of Earth history
when land plants have been common. In the
absence of land plants, sediment supply would
most likely increase as precipitation increases
(e.g. Schumm, 1968b).
There is an equally long history to discussions
of relationships between sediment yield and
measures of relief or rates of uplift. Indeed,
Walling & Webb's (1983, 1996) compilations
show the highest rates of sediment yield in
orogenic belts that surround the Paci®c Ocean.
Moreover, speci®c sediment yields (yields per
unit area) decrease as drainage area increases,
which emphasizes the importance of small and
steep catchments for sediment production.
Milliman & Syvitski (1992), for example, show
that up to 80% of sediments delivered to the
oceans is derived from small catchments within
active orogens, and suggest that sediment yield is
a log-linear function of drainage area and maximum elevation.
Hovius (1998) presents the most comprehensive study of sediment supply to date, based on
examination of 97 intermediate and large drainage basins around the world. He indicates that
speci®c sediment yield can be estimated using
the following empirical relationship:
lnE = ± 0´416 lnA + 4´26 3 10±4H + 0´15T
+ 0´095TR + 0´0015R + 3´58
# 2000

(2)

15

where E is speci®c sediment yield (t km±2 yr±1), A
is drainage basin area (km2), H is mean height
(relief) of the drainage basin (m), T and TR
are mean annual temperature and annual temperature range (°C), and R is speci®c runoff
(mm km±2 yr±1). This equation explains only
49% of the observed variance and, although
vegetation was not considered, Hovius suggests
that inclusion of other variables does not substantially improve the explanatory power. Hovius
(1998) also uses Milliman & Syvitski's (1992)
larger data set to show that speci®c sediment
yield varies with tectonic setting and rates of rock
uplift, with contractional orogens far outpacing
other settings, and low-relief cratons yielding
very low values.
To the extent that drainage area, tectonic
setting, average rates of uplift and total relief
remain relatively constant for individual river
systems over time-scales of 103±105 years, Hovius'
(1998) equation suggests signi®cant variations in
speci®c sediment yields with changes in climatic
parameters such as temperature and runoff.
However, Leeder et al. (1998) model erosion rates
and discharge regimes during the late Pleistocene
full-glacial and the Holocene, contrasting the
USA Basin and Range province with the
Mediterranean region, and in doing so illustrate
a key point that deserves emphasis. In much the
same way as changes in discharge regimes can
vary regionally, Leeder et al. (1998) show the
same global climate change can produce out-ofphase responses for the Basin and Range and
Mediterranean regions, when measured in terms
of runoff and sediment yield, sediment ¯ux to the
depositional basin, relative changes in lake or sealevel and development of a stratigraphic record
(Fig. 11). In addition to the above, an important
factor that cannot be gleaned readily from the
present interglacial world is the high rates of
erosion and sediment production that accompanies widespread glaciation (e.g. Hallet et al.,
1996).

Sediment storage en-route to depositional
basins
At any point in time, there is a disparity between
the liberation of sediments from uplands and
sediment yields past some point in the drainage
network. The difference is related to sediments
that are temporarily stored in the drainage network as colluvial, alluvial fan and ¯uvial deposits. This amount can be considered in the context
of the sediment delivery ratio (Walling, 1983),

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

MARINE

Great Basin
glacial

Low

Great Basin
glacial

LAKE LEVEL

Great Basin
interglacial

Mediterranean
glacial

SEDIMENT
SUPPLY

High

Low

High
Low

SEA LEVEL

Mediterranean
interglacial

High

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

16

Mediterranean
glacial

LACUSTRINE

Mediterranean
interglacial

Low

SEDIMENT
SUPPLY

Great Basin
interglacial

High

Fig. 11. Model for changes in sediment supply in Mediterranean vs. USA Great Basin climates during glacial and
interglacial periods. Diagram on left illustrates conditions that might apply to a marine basin, whereas diagram on
the right illustrates conditions for a lacustrine basin. Both diagrams illustrate a succession of possible out-ofphase responses. After Leeder et al. (1998).

de®ned as Sd = Sy/ER, where Sy is sediment yield
past a given point in the drainage network, and
ER equals total erosion from the drainage basin
above that point.
Compilation of sediment delivery ratios from a
variety of settings indicates that they typically
decrease as drainage area increases and stream
gradients decrease, with very high values for very
small drainage basins, and values as low as 0´1±
0´2 for drainage areas > 1000 km2 (Walling, 1983).
Data from modern settings are strongly biased by
human activities that have increased rates of
erosion, increased sediment storage within small
catchments and trapped sediments within arti®cial reservoirs. For example, Meade et al. (1990)
note that roughly 10% of all sediment eroded
from the conterminous USA presently reaches the

ocean basins, but up to 20% of all sediment is
trapped by reservoirs constructed on a few large
rivers. As a result, continent-wide sediment
delivery of 20±30% (Sd = 0´2±0´3) or more may
be more representative.
Changes in the sediment delivery ratio can
signi®cantly imprint the stratigraphic record.
Hovius' (1998) view that drainage networks are
the negative imprint of basin ®lling would
correctly imply that basin margin sediment
delivery over geological time must approach
100%. It follows that over shorter periods of time,
individual segments, or perhaps entire drainage
networks, must have delivery ratios greater than
average values, and must in some cases be greater
than 1 during periods when previously stored
sediments are ¯ushed basinward.

Fig. 12. (A) Contrasts between `vacuum cleaner' vs. `conveyor belt' models for sediment supply to basin margins.
The vacuum cleaner derives all sediment from more distal parts of the basin by means of excavation of a valley at
the basin margin, whereas the conveyor belt relies on sediment delivery from a large hinterland drainage network,
and does not require deep incision with complete sediment bypass during sea-level fall. (B) Calculation of
relative contribution of vacuum cleaner vs. conveyor belt model, using the palaeovalley ®ll from the last glacial
cycle of the Colorado River, Texas, as an example. Dip and strike dimensions and thickness of palaeovalley ®ll
based on data presented in Blum (1993) and Aslan & Blum (1999), with data on sediment supply taken from
Hovius (1998). For vacuum cleaner calculation, V = volume of palaeovalley ®ll, r = average density of earth
materials, D = duration of glacial cycle falling stage and lowstand (kyr), and VC = mass of sediments produced by
complete excavation of the valley over duration D. For conveyor belt calculation, sy = speci®c sediment yield
(tons km±2 yr±1), A = drainage area (km2), SY = total sediment yield from drainage network (t yr±1), D = as above.
For both calculations, CB = mass of sediments delivered from the conveyor belt during time interval D.
# 2000

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change

Role of sea-level change

envisage how sea-level or base-level change can
have a signi®cant impact on discharge regimes
or liberation of sediments, since these are
mostly upstream-controlled. Nevertheless, since
much of the literature implies relative sea-level

The following discussion asks a simple question ± exactly how does sea-level change affect
a ¯uvial system? To begin, it is dif®cult to

A

Large Hinterland
Sediment Source

ca
Va vate
lle d
y

De
lta
s

Ex

sta
gh
Hi

tan

Lo

dF

ws

an

s

tan

dD

elt

as

F
Va illed
lle
y

CONVEYOR
BELT MODEL

VACUUM
CLEANER
MODEL

Incised Valley
Sediment Source

nd

Drainage
Basin

Lo

ws

Highstand
Shoreline
Lowstand
Shoreline

B

Be Conv
lt S ey
ou or
rce

V = 22.5 km

3
-3

ρ = 2700 kg m
10
-2

sy = 120 t km

A = 100,000 km
2

D = 60 kyrs
9
VC = 60.8 x 10 t in 60 kyrs

km

-1

yr
2

Vac
u

um

-1

SY = 12 x 10 t yr
D = 60 kyrs
10

CB = 72 x 10 t in 60 kyrs

100

Cle

ane

km

rS

our

ce
20

km

Vacuum Cleaner
= 8.4%
Conveyor Belt
VE = 250 x

# 2000

17

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

30 m

18

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

Fig. 13. De®nition sketch for ¯uvial response to sea-level change along a continental margin with a distinct
highstand depositional shoreline break. Diagram illustrates concepts of channel extension during sea-level fall
and lowstand, vs. upstream limits of onlap during sea-level rise and highstand. Also, average slope of the channel
above the limits of sea-level in¯uence is shown as changes, and re¯ect a long-term tectonically controlled baselevel of erosion.

controls over sediment supply, it is important
to ®rst look at what sea-level change does not
do.
Nowhere is confusion more apparent than in
sequence-stratigraphic models for `incised valleys' (hereafter valleys or palaeovalleys, since all
valleys are incised, by de®nition) that assume
relative sea-level fall produces incision, and an
upstream-propagating wave of stream rejuvenation, which produces sediments that entirely
bypass the coastal plain and newly emergent
shelf to provide a critical volume of sediment for
systems tracts further basinward. This is referred
to here as a `vacuum cleaner' model for sediment
supply, as contrasted with a `conveyor belt'
model, where sediments are continuously delivered to the basin margin from a large inland
drainage (Fig. 12A). Figure 12(B) illustrates these
models with reference to the Colorado River,
Texas Gulf Coast (USA), and shows that the
volume of sediments produced by complete
`vacuum cleaner' excavation of a valley during
the last glacio-eustatic falling stage and lowstand
would be an order of magnitude less than the total
volume delivered by the `conveyor belt' during
that same interval of time.
The `vacuum cleaner' model has intellectual
roots in Fisk (1944), yet subsequent work in the
Lower Mississippi Valley clearly shows that
complete sediment bypass was not the case (e.g.
Saucier, 1994, 1996; Blum et al., 2000). The same
# 2000

can be said for other large ¯uvial systems of the
Gulf Coastal Plain of the USA (Blum et al., 1995;
Blum & Price, 1998), for large rivers of southern
Europe such as the Rhone and Po (Mandier, 1988;
Amorosi et al., 1999), the Rhine±Meuse system in
north-west Europe (e.g. Pons, 1957; Berendsen
et al., 1995; Kasse et al., 1995; ToÈrnqvist, 1998)
and the Nile (Stanley & Warne, 1993). In fact, it is
dif®cult to ®nd an example where complete
sediment bypass in response to base-level fall
has actually been documented on Quaternary
river systems that have signi®cant hinterland
drainage areas and discharge to a depositional
basin. Hence, to the extent that Quaternary
systems provide ground-truth for sequencestratigraphic models, the body of evidence
actually points in a different direction. These
conclusions are supported by modelling results of
Leeder & Stewart (1996), which demonstrate that
high rates of sediment supply can overcome baselevel fall, and result in progradation without
signi®cant incision.
Given a continental margin setting with a
pronounced
depositional
shoreline
break
(Fig. 13), and a shelf that is as steep or steeper
than the coastal plain, why should rivers not
completely bypass sediments during sea-level
fall? Simply put, given the in¯ux of sediments
from the `conveyor belt', complete sediment
bypass of a coastal plain and shelf during sealevel fall would require signi®cant downstream

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
increases in slope and stream power (b > a in
Fig. 13), and corresponding downstream increases in rates of sediment transport. In most
cases, some incision through a highstand depositional shoreline break takes place as the channel
extends across the newly exposed shelf
(Posamentier et al., 1992; Blum, 1993; Talling,
1998; ToÈrnqvist et al., 2000), with corresponding
net removal of previously stored sediment, but it
seems unlikely that the depth of incision will
produce slopes that exceed those further upstream from the limits of sea-level in¯uence (i.e.
b > a is not likely). Hence if the valley upstream
from the limits of long pro®le adjustment aggrades due to sediment overloading, or laterally
migrates due to equilibrium conditions, this
mode of behaviour is simply translated further
basinward. Periods of complete sediment bypass
should only occur when sediment supply from
upstream sources decreases relative to maximum
sediment transport rates, such that the valley
further upstream is also incising.
On the other hand, sea-level rise along a
continental margin with the con®guration described above (Fig. 13) results in channel shortening, decreases in the distance over which
sediments can be stored and, in most cases,
¯attening of channel slope. Discharge is conserved, but reductions in slope will result in
corresponding downstream decreases in stream
power and sediment transport rates. These conditions result in net valley aggradation that in
turn may play a signi®cant role in adjustments of
channel geometry and depositional style (discussed more fully below). However, even within
long periods of overall net valley aggradation
driven by sea-level rise (time-scales of 103±
104 years), signi®cant intervals of incision and/
or sediment bypass can occur if sediment supply
decreases relative to stream power, as shown by
Blum (1990, 1993) for the Colorado River of the
Texas Gulf Coast (USA), ToÈrnqvist (1998) for the
Rhine±Meuse and Blum et al. (2000) for the
Lower Mississippi Valley.
Turning back to the original question, the
fundamental responses to sea-level change appear
to be channel extension or shortening, coupled
with changes in the elevation of channel bases
and ¯oodplain surfaces, in order to keep pace
with a shoreline that is advancing or retreating
and changing its elevation. All other adjustments
take place within this context, and should be
regarded as nondeterministic, since they depend
on alluvial valley, coastal plain, shoreface and
shelf gradients (see Fig. 3), discharge and sedi# 2000

19

ment supply from the drainage network and local
physiographical factors. With respect to the latter,
Leckie (1994) provides an example from the
Canterbury Plains of New Zealand, where incision has occurred during Holocene sea-level rise
because of steep alluvial plain gradients in
combination with high-energy wave attack.
Moreover, Schumm (1993), Wescott (1993) and
Ethridge et al. (1998) note that ¯uvial systems
possess several degrees of freedom by which they
can adjust channel parameters to changes in base
level, a discussion not repeated here.
Many recent papers (e.g. Butcher, 1990;
Nummedal et al., 1993; Posamentier & Weimer,
1993; Schumm, 1993; Koss et al., 1994; Merritts
et al., 1994; Shanley & McCabe, 1994; Leeder &
Stewart, 1996) have emphasized the issue of how
far inland sea-level actually controls ¯uvial
incision and aggradation. Again, Fisk's (1944)
work in the Lower Mississippi Valley has been
extremely in¯uential, postulating eustatic control
more than 1000 km upstream from the modern
shoreline. This view has been challenged by more
recent studies in the same area (e.g. Saucier, 1994,
1996) that, in turn, are now cited as critical
evidence in numerous recent reviews (Shanley &
McCabe, 1994; Emery & Myers, 1996; Miall, 1996,
1997; North, 1996). Shanley & McCabe (1993)
propose strong generalizations, suggesting that
sea-level control typically extends 100±150 km
updip from the coeval shoreline. However, in
most of these studies it is not clear how the
landward limit of sea-level control is actually
de®ned.
For this paper, and for the purposes of discussion and comparison, the landward limit is
de®ned as the upstream extent of coastal onlap
due to sea-level rise (see Fig. 13). In late
Quaternary contexts, this consists of the intersection between the modern ¯oodplain and the
¯oodplain surface from the Last Glacial
Maximum (~ 20 ka), and is not necessarily the
same as the landward extent of incision due to
sea-level fall (cf. Ethridge et al., 1998). By contrast, the basinward limit of sea-level in¯uence is
de®ned as the maximum distance of channel
extension and delta progradation during sea-level
fall. Table 1 summarizes a variety of data from
¯uvial systems from Europe and the Gulf Coastal
Plain of the USA. These data suggest the landward limit of onlap due to sea-level rise correlates
to hinterland sediment supply, and is inversely
related to the gradient of the onlapped ¯oodplain
surface. Accordingly, this distance is highly
variable and ranges from at least 300±400 km

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

20

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

Table 1. Relationship between drainage area, onlapped lowstand ¯oodplain gradient and aggradation distance for
six late Quaternary ¯uvial systems. Channel extension and onlap distances are measured with respect to the
average highstand shoreline. Data from the Rhone taken from Mandier (1988) and Tesson et al. (1993).

River system

Drainage area
(km2)

LGM ¯oodplain
gradient (cm km±1)

LGM channel
extension (km)

Holocene onlap
distance (km)

Nueces (Texas, USA)
Trinity (Texas, USA)
Rhone (France)
Colorado (Texas, USA)
Rhine±Meuse (The Netherlands)
Mississippi (Louisiana, USA)

40 000
50 000
99 000
100 000
254 000
3 344 000

50
20
130
80
25
15

> 200
150
50±60
100±120
800
150 ± 200*

40
90
100
90
150
> 300 ± 400

* The present birdfoot delta is also extended close to this amount.

for the low-gradient, high-sediment-supply
Mississippi River, to ~ 40 km for steep-gradient,
low-sediment-supply systems like the Nueces
River of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain. Channel
extension during lowstand re¯ects shelf physiography, and ranges from 800 km or so for the
Rhine, 100±200 km for rivers of the Texas Gulf
Coastal Plain (Colorado, Trinity, Nueces), to very
short distances for the Mississippi, since it now
discharges to the shelf edge. The Rhine is a
special case, since during the last lowstand it
¯owed across the very low-gradient North Sea,
then was diverted south-westward through the
Strait of Dover and discharged to the Atlantic
(Gibbard, 1995; Bridgland & D'Olier, 1995).

Role of accommodation
Few would argue that the concept of accommodation plays a critical role in sedimentology in the
new millennium. This section again asks a basic
question: what exactly is accommodation?
To begin, many workers recognize that Jervey's
(1988) de®nition of accommodation uses a `stratigraphic' (as opposed to `geomorphic') de®nition
of base level that can be traced to Barrell (1917),
Sloss (1962) and Wheeler (1964) among others.
These differing de®nitions for base level are not
trivial. The geomorphic view de®nes the lower
limits to erosion, and extends upstream from sealevel into the subaerial landscape as a `base level
of erosion' that de®nes the graded longitudinal
pro®le (see Bull, 1991), but has no signi®cance
offshore beyond the ¯uvial system. By contrast,
the stratigraphic de®nition de®nes the upper
limits to deposition, and was intended to be used
in marine systems as well. However, as Wheeler
(1964) noted, stratigraphic base level does not
control anything ± it is not a cause but an effect.
# 2000

In the ¯uvial context, stratigraphic base-level
changes in response to changes in geomorphic
base level (lake or sea-level), climate-related and
geomorphic parameters (¯ood magnitudes, sediment supply, channel geometries, etc.) and rates
of uplift or subsidence. It follows from the above
that accommodation is not exactly a control
either. Instead, increases or decreases in accommodation are at least in part a response to changes
in geomorphic base level, which de®nes the lower
limits to accommodation, and in ¯uvial contexts
the upper limits are de®ned by changes in
discharge regimes and sediment supply as they
control equilibrium ¯oodplain heights.
It also seems that accommodation, as it is
commonly used, somewhat imprecisely mixes
processes that operate over a range of rates and
temporal scales; it is dif®cult to reconcile the
time-scales over which sediments are deposited
in the ®rst place, whether or not those deposits
will be preserved in the stratigraphic record, and
the manner in which ancient alluvial successions
are interpreted in terms of changes in accommodation or an accommodation/sediment supply
ratio. It may be more precise to consider these
issues in much the same manner as Kocurek &
Havholm (1993) and Kocurek (1998), who differentiate `accumulation' vs. `preservation' space in
the context of aeolian sequences. In a ¯uvial
context, accumulation space (`process-scale' or
real-time accommodation) would be the volume
of space that can be ®lled within present
process regimes, and is fundamentally governed
by the relationship between stream power
and sediment load, and how this changes in
response to geomorphic base level. However,
preservation in the stratigraphic record occurs
when subsidence lowers these deposits below
possible depths of incision and removal. As

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
accumulations subside towards this depth, the
probability of preservation increases, but it is
only assured when this depth is reached. Hence
preservation space (net accommodation?) lies
below the maximum depths of incision. For a
continental margin, like that shown in Fig. 13,
preservation space would lie below the lowstand
longitudinal pro®le.
Accommodation as a term in the vocabulary of
sedimentary geology is certainly here to stay.
However, it might be most useful to use accommodation explicitly in the same manner as
Kocurek & Havholm (1993) and Kocurek (1998)
use accumulation space, and future discussions
should be explicit about deposition- vs. preservation-scale processes, since they operate at different rates, as well as over different time-scales, but
ultimately result in what is preserved in the
stratigraphic record. While accommodation remains a useful concept, the stratigraphic concept
of base level is the same as the upper limits of
accommodation ± it is not a control on anything,
has outlived its usefulness, and it should simply
be abandoned.

MAGNITUDE AND FREQUENCY OF
CLIMATE AND SEA-LEVEL CHANGE
Fluvial systems respond to climate changes within their catchments and/or relative sea-level
changes that occur at their mouths. Over timescales of interest here, climate change occurs
because of global-scale changes in radiation
balance and atmospheric or ocean circulation,
and sea-level changes have a globally coherent
`eustatic' component. However, global-scale
changes are manifested in speci®c regions in a
variety of ways. The following section outlines
key elements of climate and sea-level change,
as viewed from the Quaternary vs. the
Phanerozoic.

The Quaternary
The Quaternary provides a unique perspective on
the dynamism of the Earth's climate and oceanographic systems, and has been the subject of
intense study over the past three decades. Recent
publications that summarize records and mechanisms of Quaternary climate and/or sea-level
change include Crowley & North (1991), Broecker
(1995), Pirazzoli (1996), Lowe & Walker (1997)
and Bradley (1999).
# 2000

21

The
most
signi®cant
development
in
Quaternary palaeoclimatology over the last 3±4
decades has been the new picture of glacial±
interglacial cycles that emerged from studies of
oxygen-isotope records in deep-sea sediments
(e.g. Shackleton & Opdyke, 1973; Imbrie et al.,
1984; Chappell & Shackleton, 1986; Shackleton,
1987). Isotope records are responsible for the
widespread acceptance of the Milankovitch theory of climate change (Hays et al., 1976; Imbrie &
Imbrie, 1979), and provide a model for major
changes in global climate and ice volume, as well
as the corresponding eustatic component of sealevel over the last several millions of years (see
the recent review by Pillans et al., 1998). There
has been a high-amplitude 100-kyr periodicity to
full glacial±interglacial cycles during the middle
to late Pleistocene, but lower amplitude 40-kyr
cycles dominated prior to that. One important
implication pertains to the concept of `average
conditions', since only a small percentage of the
last 106 years resembled full interglacial (presentday) or full glacial (20 ka) conditions (with
eustatic sea-level at ±120 to ±130 m). As noted
by Porter (1989), up to 80% of any middle to late
Pleistocene 100-kyr glacial cycle witnessed global
temperatures that were cooler than full interglacial conditions, but not as cold as a full glacial,
and eustatic sea-level was at ±15 to ±85 m
(Fig. 14A).
More recently, work on ice cores and the
marine record shows that signi®cant climate
changes at scales of 103 and 104 years are superimposed on the 100-kyr glacial±interglacial cycles discussed above (e.g. Johnsen et al., 1992;
Bond et al., 1993, 1997; Grootes et al., 1993; Bond
& Lotti, 1995; Behl & Kennett, 1996), and provides
an exciting picture of the complexity of the last
glacial, as well as the Pleistocene±Holocene
transition. `Dansgaard±Oeschger cycles' (D-O cycles), for example, consist of abrupt warming over
a period of decades to centuries, followed by
cooling trends that last 1±2 kyr. D-O cycles are
themselves bundled together into cooling trends
that last 10±15 kyr (`Bond cycles'), culminate
with massive iceberg discharges and deposition
of large quantities of ice-rafted debris into the
North Atlantic (`Heinrich events'), and are
followed by abrupt warming (Fig. 14B). The
causal mechanisms for these cycles are not
completely understood, but they must in some
way re¯ect the internal dynamics, and feedback
within, the coupled atmosphere±cryosphere±
ocean system (Bradley, 1999), and their effects
are propagated around the ocean basins via

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

22

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

Fig. 14. (A) Eustatic sea-level curve based on precision U±Th dating of corals from Huon Peninsula, Papua New
Guinea (after Chappell et al., 1996), with oxygen isotope stages (boundaries shown by dashed lines). (B)
Comparison of the proportion of the planktonic coldwater foraminifera Neogloboquadrina pachyderma (sinistral)
in marine core VM 23±81 (after Bond et al., 1993).

impacts on the large-scale thermohaline circulation and formation of North Atlantic deep
water (Broecker, 1997).
Regional climate changes are more complex
than the global picture due to the way global
changes in atmospheric circulation are manifested in different regions; for the last 20 kyr,
many regions show signi®cant departures in
magnitude and/or direction from global climatic
# 2000

trends (COHMAP Project Members, 1988; Wright
et al., 1993; Kutzbach et al., 1997). Local sea-level
changes also most commonly depart from eustasy
in both rate and magnitude, and sometimes in
direction, due to local to regional tectonics,
mantle response to accumulation and melting of
ice sheets, glacio- and hydro-isostatic deformation of coastlines, and migration of ocean water
mass to geoidal lows (Tushingham & Peltier,

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change

Ma

warm cool

67

Mean Global
Temperature

low

cold

high

warm

55

144

cool

105

245
286

253

cool

208

warm

183

408
438

505

570

421
458

warm

360

cool warm

333

CAMB

ORDOVIC SIL DEVON CARBONIF PERM TRIAS JURASSIC CRETAC. CENOZOIC

Ma

Global
Sea Level

?

560

Fig. 15. Estimated eustatic sea-level and global
temperature changes through the Phanerozoic,
illustrating warm and cool modes. Adapted from
Frakes et al. (1992).

1992; Lambeck, 1993; Fleming et al., 1998; Peltier,
1998). Strong eustatic signatures may be present
at some localities, but all sea-level change is
essentially relative.

Pre-Quaternary
A broad range of climate and sea-level change
is evident from the Phanerozoic record (Frakes,
1979; Crowley & North, 1991; Frakes et al.,
1992; Parrish, 1998), and only small parts of
this record may resemble the Quaternary `icehouse'. Perhaps the most important distinction
# 2000

23

within the Phanerozoic is between what Frakes
et al. (1992) refer to as alternating `warm' and
`cool' modes with average durations of 50 Myr,
and the long-wavelength cycles of relative sealevel change evident in Haq et al. (1987, 1988;
Fig. 15). For the purposes of this paper, such
climate changes are initiated by the agglomeration and break-up of supercontinents, and/or by
migrations of landmasses into different latitudinal belts, and are beyond the time-scales of
interest here.
Of great interest, however, are the externally
forced cyclical climate and sea-level changes that
might go on within these longer-term modes. For
example, there is little reason to believe that
Milankovitch-scale radiation-forced changes have
not been signi®cant throughout the Phanerozoic
(Barron & Moore, 1994), even though their
periodicity, amplitudes and phase relations may
have changed. Indeed, calculations by Berger
et al. (1989) and Berger & Loutre (1994) show that
wavelengths of the present 100 kyr eccentricity
cycle have varied little since 500 Ma, whereas the
obliquity (currently 41 kyr) and precessional
(currently 23 and 19 kyr) components were shorter at 500 Ma (~ 30 kyr, 19 and 16 kyr, respectively)
due to changes in Earth±Moon distance and day
length. Even though Milankovitch-scale changes
were present throughout the Phanerozoic, they
operated within a context de®ned by plate
tectonics and long-term evolution of the biosphere. Accordingly, this type of external forcing
should have different manifestations in cold
modes, when continental landmasses were located in more polar latitudes and glaciation was
widespread, than in warm modes when evidence
for signi®cant glaciation is lacking (Frakes et al.,
1992).
Two caveats should be kept in mind. First,
Broecker (1997) stresses the possible ampli®cation of relatively limited orbital forcing by
changes in the ocean thermohaline circulation
during considerable parts of Phanerozoic history. Second, and equally important, is the
ampli®cation or suppression of ¯ood regimes
that occurs even with minor changes in
climate, and the manner by which such
changes are manifested in channel geometry,
¯uvial depositional styles, sediment transport
rates and changes through time in net sediment
storage. The key question is how to recognize
pre-Quaternary ¯uvial responses to climate
change, sea-level change, or some combination
of the two, and disentangle them from tectonic
effects or autogenic processes.

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

24

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

FLUVIAL RESPONSE TO CLIMATE
AND SEA-LEVEL CHANGE:
RECOGNITION
Potential ¯uvial responses to climate and sealevel change vary by position within the system,
and the ability to store sediment over various
lengths of time. At one extreme are the high
stream powers and high sediment delivery ratios
common in the upper reaches of drainage networks. To the extent that these settings often
possess bedrock channels with discontinuous
¯oodplains, and short residence times for sediment as a whole, there is little potential for
records of ¯uvial response to climate change that
span signi®cant lengths of time (> 104 years). By
contrast, lower-gradient mixed bedrock/alluvial
valleys with signi®cant drainage areas (> 103 km2)
commonly have continuous ¯oodplains and low
sediment delivery ratios. These settings typically
show long-term rates of incision that may outpace
rates of rock uplift (Hovius, 1999), and serve as
the `conveyor belts' for sediment delivery to basin
margins, with sediment residence times measured in multiples of 104±106 years. As a result,
mixed bedrock/alluvial valleys commonly contain records of ¯uvial landscape evolution over
late Cenozoic time-scales, but have little to no
actual preservation space.
Alluvial valleys within subsiding basins represent the opposite extreme, and provide the
critical link between Quaternary and ancient
systems. Present-day continental interior basins
occur within tectonically active drylands, where
drainage integration has not proceeded to the
extent that ¯uvial systems reach marine basins, or
in subsiding reaches of ¯uvial systems that are
en-route to a marine basin. Rift and pull-apart
basins of the arid western USA provide examples
of the former, whereas the Himalayan foreland
provides an example of the latter. Continental
margin systems are numerous, but much of the
present-day landscape is drained by a relatively
few large, long-lived rivers (e.g. Potter, 1978) that
discharge to passive margins or ¯ooded forelands,
whereas smaller ¯uvial systems typically drain to
rifted or sheared margins. Sediments delivered to
basins enter preservation space when they subside below maximum depths of incision, but until
that time they can be remobilized by a variety of
processes, and transported out of the basin
(continental interior) or elsewhere within the
basin (both continental interior and continental
margin settings).
# 2000

Types of response
Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
can be disaggregated into stratigraphic, morphological and sedimentological components. As
de®ned here, stratigraphic responses (stratigraphic architecture) are produced by aggradation
due to increasing accumulation space, degradation as accumulation space decreases and lateral
migration when there is no change in accumulation space. These types of responses serve to
differentiate the larger-scale aspects of alluvial
successions that mostly re¯ect allogenic controls
(climate change, sea-level change, tectonic
activity). Lower-gradient mixed bedrock/alluvial
valleys typically contain ¯ights of downwardstepping terraces and underlying ®lls that demarcate long-term valley incision punctuated by
relatively short periods (103±104 years) of lateral
migration and perhaps minor aggradation. Fluvial
systems in subsiding basins are characterized by
just the opposite, long-term net aggradation,
punctuated by relatively short periods (103±
104 years) of incision and/or lateral migration.
Stratigraphic responses are perhaps best de®ned
in terms of unconformity-bounded stratigraphic
units of varying scale (i.e. the `allostratigraphic
units' of the North American Commission on
Stratigraphic Nomenclature, 1983; see also
Walker, 1990, 1992; Autin, 1992; Blum &
Valastro, 1994); de®nition of allostratigraphic
units is independent of lithological characteristics, but should include: (a) basal erosional
unconformities that trace laterally and upwards,
eventually truncating older landscape or palaeolandscape elements that are commonly de®ned by
palaeosols; and (b) upper boundaries that represent intact or truncated former ¯oodplain surfaces
that are/were de®ned by palaeosols or coals
(Fig. 16).
For lower-gradient mixed bedrock/alluvial valleys, the vertical separation between allostratigraphic units re¯ects the frequency of responses
to allogenic forcing, but also must correlate to
long-term rates of uplift; with increasing rates of
uplift, the preservation of older units becomes
increasingly fragmentary. By contrast, for continental margin systems, vertical separation between allostratigraphic units re¯ects the
frequency of responses, sediment supply and
relative sea-level change (eustasy vs. subsidence),
and with increasing rates of subsidence, preservation in the stratigraphic record becomes increasingly likely. Two scenarios highlight this
relationship. First, contrast slowly subsiding vs.

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change

25

Fig. 16. Concept of allostratigraphic units of varying scale (scale bar applies to both diagrams, and vertical
hatchures represent soil pro®les with the relative degree of soil development represented by length of hatchure).
(A) Mixed bedrock/alluvial valley setting, with ¯ights of downward-stepping terrace surfaces and underlying ®lls,
and a complex valley ®ll with multiple allostratigraphic units. Older and higher terraces are commonly
discontinuous and dissected, with signi®cant thicknesses of strata removed; they also may represent long periods
of time, and multiple lateral migration, aggradation and incision events within a limited elevation range that are
not readily differentiated due to degree of preservation. Younger mostly intact terraces and the complex valley ®ll
may represent the last glacial cycle. (B) Continental margin situation, where sea-level has fallen then risen,
resulting in downward-stepping then aggradational successions of allostratigraphic units bounded by palaeosols.
Vertical hatchures represent palaeosols and, in each diagram, the solid grey line encloses a single 100-kyr glacial±
interglacial cycle. In (B), the relative degree of palaeosol development is shown schematically by the length of the
hatchure (sandy facies only, with muddy facies slightly different), and is a proxy for the duration of subaerial
exposure before burial. As de®ned here, unconformities that bound allostratigraphic units are equivalent in
concept to the higher-order bounding surfaces of Miall (1996), the basal valley ®ll unconformity in (B) would be a
strongly time-transgressive equivalent to the Exxon sequence boundary as classically de®ned, and the welldeveloped alluvial plain palaeosol would be equivalent to the `inter¯uve sequence boundaries' discussed by
various workers. After the work of Blum & Price (1998) on the Colorado River, Texas (USA).

# 2000

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

26

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

B

e
ill els
yv nn
we ha
De eoc
la
pa

Prosna River

A

Latest
Pleistocene
braided
channels

valley
wall

in
ity

early
Holocene
meander
loops

Tr

late
Holocene
meander
loops

Ri
ve
r

0

1 km

0

1 km

Fig. 17. (A) Channel changes in plan-view interpreted for the Prosna River in Poland (after Schumm &
Brakenridge, 1987; original from Kozarski & Rotnicki, 1977), with latest Pleistocene braided channels, followed by
large early Holocene meandering channels, and small late Holocene meandering channels. (B) Contrast between
palaeochannels (Deweyville allostratigraphic units) from the last glacial cycle (OIS 2±4) and the modern channel
of Trinity River, Texas Gulf Coastal Plain (see Blum et al., 1995).

rapidly subsiding continental margins during
eustatic sea-level fall; relative sea-level fall will
be greater along the slowly subsiding margin,
hence vertical separation of allostratigraphic
units will be signi®cantly greater. Second, during
eustatic sea-level rise, relative rates of rise will be
signi®cantly greater along the rapidly subsiding
margin, as will vertical separation of allostratigraphic units. Indeed, in rapidly subsiding
settings, key stratigraphic markers like palaeosols
may not form during eustatic sea-level fall due to
lack of separation between units, or during
eustatic sea-level rise due to continuous deposition and burial.
Morphological responses re¯ect changes in
channel geometry, and occur within the context
provided by differentiation of allostratigraphic
units. Clear and unambiguous recognition of
plan-view changes is limited to Late Quaternary
examples, where channel patterns are preserved
on terrace surfaces. Examples include braided to
sinuous single-channel transitions that occurred
along many European rivers (Fig. 17A; Starkel,
1991), and changes in meander dimensions
# 2000

within single-channel systems of the Texas Gulf
Coast (Fig. 17B; Blum et al., 1995). In theory,
changes in cross-sectional dimensions (width,
depth, width-to-depth ratio) can be recognized
in both Quaternary and ancient settings, although
in practice a number of complicating factors arise
(see Ethridge & Schumm, 1978; Williams, 1987;
Rotnicki, 1991; Wohl & Enzel, 1996). A wellstudied Holocene example is provided by Knox
(1987, 1993), who cored a large number of
palaeochannel ®lls from small streams in
Wisconsin (USA) to establish changes in channel
cross-sectional area through time. A promising
technique for the future may be the estimates of
palaeochannel depth from detailed descriptions
of the heights of cross-strata and strata sets. This
method is based on establishment of relationships
between thicknesses of preserved cross-strata and
the dimensions of parent bedforms (Best & Bridge,
1992; Bridge, 1997; Leclair et al., 1997), coupled
with empirical relations that relate dune height to
palaeo¯ow depth.
As de®ned here, sedimentological responses
can be viewed within the context of alluvial

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change

A

CHINJE VILLAGE

27

B

2000
1800
1600
1400

Metres

1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Proportion of Thick
Sandstone Bodies

0

1 km

VE = 25x

Fig. 18. (A) Proportion of thick sandstone bodies in the Siwalik succession at Chinje Village, Pakistan, relative to
mudstone-dominated intervals. The diagram illustrates changes in sandstone proportions through time at several
possible levels of cyclicity (after Willis, 1993b). (B) Line drawings of palaeosol-bounded stratigraphic units in the
Siwalik succession. Stippled pattern illustrates sandbodies, white indicates mudstones, vertical hatchures
indicate palaeosols and arrows indicate palaeocurrent directions (after Willis & Behrensmeyer, 1994).

architecture, initially described as the geometry,
proportion and spatial distribution of different
types of ¯uvial deposits (Leeder, 1978; Allen,
1978).
Sedimentological
responses
re¯ect
changes in channel geometry and the spatial
distribution of depositional environments, and
also occur within the context provided by
differentiation of allostratigraphic units and
bounding unconformities, or stratigraphic architecture as de®ned here. Sedimentological responses can be de®ned in a number of ways,
depending on the types of data available, and
range from simple descriptions of textural
changes to detailed description and quanti®cation of changes in the proportions of different
lithofacies, facies associations and bounding
surfaces. Outstanding detailed descriptions of
alluvial strata can be found in the series of papers
that discuss the Neogene Siwalik succession of
northern Pakistan (Willis, 1993a,b; Willis &
Behrensmeyer, 1994; Khan et al., 1997; Zaleha,
1997). Among the many characteristics highlighted are successions of palaeosol-bounded
# 2000

¯oodplain facies, and quasi-cyclical vertical
changes in mean grain-size and the proportions
of thick sandstone bodies relative to muddy
¯oodplain facies (Fig. 18).
Palaeosols deserve special mention (Wright,
1986; Retallack, 1986, 1990; Mack et al., 1993;
Birkeland, 1999), and a critical issue is the degree
to which palaeosols represent allogenic or autogenic controls. There is, for example, a long
history to the use of palaeosols to subdivide and
correlate ¯ights of Quaternary terraces and underlying ®lls; a key underlying premise in studies of
this kind is the soil chronosequence and how soil
pro®les are increasingly well developed with
increasing durations of subaerial exposure (see
Birkeland, 1999, for a recent summary). By contrast, studies of Holocene soils as analogues for
pre-Quaternary strata (e.g. Aslan & Autin, 1998), or
pre-Quaternary palaeosols themselves (e.g. Allen,
1974; Leeder, 1975; Bown & Kraus, 1987; Kraus,
1987; Willis & Behrensmeyer, 1994; Behrensmeyer
et al., 1995), have more commonly focused on how
palaeosol characteristics are related to aggradation

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

28

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

rates, distance to active channel belts or ¯oodplain
hydrology. However, the advent of sequence
stratigraphy has drawn attention to the use of
palaeosols as key stratigraphic markers that trace
from inter¯uves into adjacent palaeovalleys, and
therefore serve as sequence-bounding unconformities (e.g. Wright & Marriott, 1993; Gibling &
Wightman, 1994; Aitken & Flint, 1996; Blum &
Price, 1998; McCarthy & Plint, 1998). Moreover, it
is important to realize that palaeosols with lesser
degrees of development, or perhaps different
characteristics, may serve as boundaries to smaller-scale allostratigraphic units (e.g. Blum & Price,
1998; see Fig. 16B). Indeed, most important from a
stratigraphic point of view may be differences in
the duration of periods of nondeposition and the
degree of development of pedogenic characteristics, which may provide an index of the timescales over which different allostratigraphic units
form. Clearly, palaeosols deserve close scrutiny in
the future.

FLUVIAL RESPONSE TO CLIMATE
CHANGE: EXAMPLES
Recognition of ¯uvial response to climate change
in continental interiors often becomes a question
of spatial and temporal scale, the degree of
temporal resolution possible given existing dating
methods and predilection of the investigator for
autogenic (everything is `complex response') vs.
allogenic (everything is climate change) controls.
There are few `smoking guns' for any particular
model, and within the Quaternary community,
standards for correlation of changes in alluvial
successions increase with decreasing age, such
that debate can ensue regarding discrepencies of
101±102 years as the age of deposits approach the
period of historical monitoring. On the one hand
it seems unlikely that autogenic mechanisms can
result in mappable stratigraphic units that can be
traced over signi®cant distances within, or correlated between, river systems, whereas on the
other hand there is every reason to assume that
¯uvial systems are sensitive to climatically controlled changes in discharge and sediment load.
However, there is also every reason to assume
that: (a) ¯uvial response to global climate change
will vary spatially such that different regions may
be out of phase; and (b) the frequency of
adjustments to global climate change will vary
between river systems due to different thresholds
for change, i.e. differential sensitivity.
# 2000

Because of the numerous uncertainties, the
most convincing studies interpret chronologically
controlled alluvial stratigraphic frameworks within the context of independent records of climate
change. A number of reviews or regional syntheses have been published, with most focusing on
the last 20 kyr and often concerning small
systems. These include Knox's (1983) summary
of Holocene records from the USA, Bull's (1991)
documentation of Quaternary histories for several
¯uvial systems in the western USA & New
Zealand, Starkel's (1991) summary of late
Pleistocene and Holocene changes in European
rivers, Bravard's (1992) summary of late
Pleistocene and Holocene data from France
(especially the Rhone), Macklin & Lewin's
(1993) discussion of Holocene records in
England, Schirmer's (1995) discussion of central
European (mostly German) rivers during the last
20 kyr and Knox's (1996) overview of global
records from the last 20 kyr. There is no reason
to provide an additional review here; instead, two
case studies are used to demonstrate contrasting
styles of ¯uvial responses to climate change.

Loire River, France
The Loire is one of the larger rivers in Europe,
with a drainage area of ~ 120 000 km2. The Loire is
typical of many mid-latitude continental interior
¯uvial systems in that it has a ¯ight of downwardstepping terraces and underlying ®lls that demarcate long-term valley incision punctuated by
relatively short periods of lateral migration and
minor aggradation.
Recent work by Straf®n et al. (2000) in the
upper Loire recognized ®ve allostratigraphic
units from the last glacial period (oxygen-isotope
stages 2±4; hereafter OIS 2±4) through the
Holocene (OIS-1; Fig. 19). Terrace surfaces with
braided channel traces occur at elevations of 17
and 12 m above the modern low-water channel
and de®ne the upper boundaries to two glacialage allostratigraphic units (T6 and T5). Underlying ®lls are 6±10 m in thickness, and interpreted
to represent high concentrations of coarse sand
and gravel along valley axes under periglacial
climatic conditions, and moderate-magnitude
¯oods produced by snowmelt runoff. Inter-vening
periods of valley incision represent diminished
sediment supply due to increased slope stability,
and/or perhaps increased ¯ood magnitudes
and sediment transport capacity associated with
moderately warm periods. The last signi®cant
period of valley incision corresponds to the latest

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change

29

A
T2

Loire

T5

T3

T2
R.

280

fossil
frost wedge
casts & involutions

T4

T2

T5
T3

T8

270
265

T7

260

T5

T4

275

255

?
0

?

T6

1 km

T5
T2

T3

?

l

T4

modern

Pre-Quaternary
deposits

?

250
245

Metres above sea level

T6

240
235
230

B

Surface Soil

res

225

C
Spoil
OF
P
OF
PB

Fig. 19. (A) Aerial photo and schematic geomorphic and stratigraphic cross-section from a portion of the Loire
River, France, illustrating large late Pleistocene braided stream surfaces (T5) and Holocene surfaces with clear
high-sinuosity single-channel traces (modi®ed from Straf®n et al., 2000). (B) Typical glacial period facies, with
sets of trough cross-strata, but no overbank facies (unit T5 in (A)). (C) Typical late Holocene facies, illustrating
overbank facies with palaeosols resting on point bar gravel (unit T2 in (A)). PB = point bar gravel, OF = overbank
®ne sand, P = weakly developed palaeosol.
# 2000

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

30

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

Pleistocene±Holocene transition, and Holocene
allostratigraphic units are part of a complex
valley ®ll, some 5±7 m in thickness, that was
deposited by a succession of single-channel
systems of varying sinuosity. Early to middle
Holocene units display high-sinuosity meandering planforms, whereas late Holocene units have
lower sinuosity channels (Fig. 19A).
Stratigraphic, morphological and sedimentological responses of the Loire to climate change
during the last glacial cycle can be discussed at
two contrasting scales. First, as is the case for
many larger European rivers, transition from a
glacial to interglacial climate produced fundamental transformations in channel geometry and
depositional style. Glacial-age units record deposition by braided channels, and systematically
lack ®ne sandy and muddy overbank strata
(Fig. 19B), whereas Holocene units were deposited
by sinuous single channels, and contain appreciable thicknesses of ®ne-grained overbank
facies (Fig. 19C). Second, high-amplitude, lowfrequency adjustments characterized the relatively long glacial period, with only two extended
periods of sediment storage punctuated by episodes of valley incision over a period of 50±60 kyr.
By contrast, low-amplitude, high-frequency adjustments have been typical of the relatively short
Holocene, with little if any net valley incision or
net changes in sediment storage, and only minor
adjustments in channel geometry. However, relatively frequent changes in climatically controlled
¯ood regimes have resulted in alternating periods
of ¯oodplain stabilization with soil development
vs. high-magnitude ¯ooding and burial of palaeosols by overbank facies.
Over longer time periods, records of ¯uvial
activity in the Loire are strongly biased in favour
of the long glacial periods, whereas short interglacial periods like the Holocene would seem to
have a low potential to be recorded in the
landscape. This type of situation may be typical
of many continental interior river systems in the
unglaciated mid-latitudes and subtropics.

Mississippi River, USA
The Mississippi River served as the principal
conduit for meltwater and sediment discharging
from the southern margins of Pleistocene ice
sheets, and the Lower Mississippi Valley (LMV)
provides an example of the response of a large,
long-lived, low-gradient ¯uvial system to the
growth and decay of ice sheets. Indeed, landforms and deposits of the LMV (Fig. 20A) testify
# 2000

to the scale, complexity and dynamism of this
continental-scale ¯uvial system, as do the changing interpretations through time.
Blum et al. (2000) used stratigraphic relations
between chronologically controlled loess units
and subjacent ¯uvial deposits to provide a model
for LMV history (Fig. 20B) that differs from both
Fisk (1944) and Saucier (1994). In this model: (a)
major braided stream surfaces are either late
Illinoian (OIS 6) or late Wisconsin age (OIS 2);
(b) there is little evidence for preserved ¯uvial
deposits from the last interglacial period (OIS 5)
through much of the valley; and (c) deposits from
the early Wisconsin substage (OIS 4) are preserved
in protected settings only. At a ®ner level of detail,
a difference in elevation of up to 5 m between three
successive late Wisconsin terraces indicates that
large braided stream surfaces were rapidly constructed, incised and abandoned in response to
high-frequency ¯uctuations in the delivery of
meltwaters and outwash from the former ice
margin and the drainage of large proglacial lakes.
The tremendous volumes of meltwaters during
this time also resulted in the simultaneous
occupation of two large-scale channel courses
(Western and Eastern Lowlands), as well as
breaching of a new bedrock gap (Thebes Gap)
through which the modern river ¯ows. Subsurface
data are not suf®cient to distinguish allostratigraphic units; however, from surface mapping,
three major units might be inferred to represent the
last deglaciation (a period of 10±12 kyr) within the
main valley and in over¯ow courses (Fig. 20C).
Unlike the Loire, where ¯ights of terraces
record long-term valley incision punctuated by
relatively short periods (104 years) of lateral
migration and minor aggradation, the stratigraphic, morphological and sedimentological
record of the low-gradient LMV at any point in
time will always be biased in favour of the most
recent period of deglaciation. Maximum ¯oodplain elevations of only 100 m can be found at
distances of 1000 km upstream from the present
highstand shoreline, so there is little opportunity
for long-term progressive downcutting and development of terrace ¯ights, and strata from the
penultimate glacial period (OIS 6) are only
preserved due to the wholesale abandonment of
that channel course in favour of the present
combined Mississippi±Ohio valley. Within the
context of these longer-term controls, large ¯uctuations in discharge and sediment loads delivered from the ice margin during deglaciation
serve to ensure that relatively short periods of
time (~ 10 kyr) at the end of successive 100-kyr

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change

that records of this kind must be more widespread than presently interpreted, but reasonable
con®dence in such interpretations is hampered
by a number of factors. Among these, the
temporal resolution provided by existing dating
techniques is the most obvious and most important limitation. High-resolution palaeomagnetic
chronologies, for example those of the Neogene
Siwalik succession (Khan et al., 1997), permit
calculation of average time periods represented

As discussed above, several examples of preQuaternary ¯uvial response to climate change
have been described in the literature. It is clear

A B
0

1000 km

N

0

25 km

Eastern
Lowlands
Western entrance
Lowlands
entrance

Glacial
Limit

Palaeo-Ohio
Valley
Thebes
Gap

MO IL

Cape
Girardeau

o R.

Pre-Quaternary records

Ohi

glacial cycles (late OIS 6 and late OIS 2) dominate
the landscape, and deposits from earlier parts of a
glacial cycle or previous interglacial periods are
not widely preserved.

Map
Area

31

Cairo
Pt-2

River

y

Ridge

BT

Pt-1

Poplar
Bluff

Pt-3

issip

eys
ow
l

Pt-2

KY
TN

N

Cr

MO
AK

Miss

Pt-4

x

pi

Pt-1

C
X
Ozark
Plateau

Western
Lowlands
Pt-4

10's of m

Pt-2

Eastern
Lowlands

Y

Crowleys
Ridge

Uplands

Pt-2

Pt-1

Pt-3

Holocene
floodplain

Pt-1
Holocene
floodplain

Pvl1

Holocene
channel belt

Older Pleistocene or Pre-Quaternary Bedrock
Fig. 20. (A) Landsat image of northern part of the Lower Mississippi alluvial valley (USA), with braided late
Pleistocene vs. sinuous meandering Holocene channel belts. (B) Sur®cial geological map of the area shown in (A).
(C) Schematic cross-section of inferred stratigraphic relationships along x±y in (A). Pt-4 = loess-covered terrace
and underlying glacio-¯uvial deposits from the OIS 6 glacial period, Pt-3 = terrace and underlying glacio-¯uvial
deposits from the OIS 2 full-glacial period, Pt-2 and Pt-1 = braided stream surfaces and underlying deposits from
the OIS 2 late-glacial period. Thicknesses of deposits are schematic only, but data in Saucier indicates 50±60 m is
not uncommon. Holocene ¯oodplain in Western Lowlands represents deposits of smaller streams that head on the
Ozark Plateau to the west. After Blum et al. (2000).
# 2000

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

32

by speci®c unconformity-bounded intervals of
deposition that are well within the Milankovitch
scale, and would seem to offer the best chance to
evaluate ¯uvial responses to climate change.
Within relatively well-constrained successions
such as these, periods of incision and ¯oodplain

abandonment with formation of palaeosols, as
well as changes in channel morphology and
depositional style that occur across unconformities (especially when de®ned in part by palaeosols), are excellent candidates for interpreting
¯uvial responses to climate change.

Bedrock Valley Walls or
Older Pleistocene

A

Bedrock Valley Walls or
Older Pleistocene

Colorado River

ELA

10 m

CBA-1

CBA-2

0
0

B

Scale

2 km

CBA-3

Beaumont
Surface

Colorado
Channel

Caney Creek
Floodplain
C BA - 2
C BA - 1

Floodplain

C BA - 3

ELA

Austin

104°

C

Beaumont
Surface

96°

36°

Bastrop

160

60

CBA-3

150 km

Gulf of
Mexico

Wharton

80

0

Eagle Lake

100

B

Fig. 22

28°

Columbus

120

La Grange

Smithville

Elevation above MSL (m)

140

A

C
Dr olor
ain ado
ag
e

32°

CBA-2
ELA

40
upstream limits of onlap and sea-level
control on stratigraphic architecture

20
250

225

200

175

150

125

100

75

50

25

Distance upstream from highstand shoreline (km)
Fig. 21. Schematic cross-sections of the late Pleistocene and Holocene valley ®ll of the Colorado River, Texas
Coastal Plain, illustrating downstream persistence of allostratigraphic units with downstream changes in stacking
patterns. (A) The bedrock-con®ned degradational valley near La Grange, Texas, and (B) the lower valley near
Wharton. Beaumont surface is the last interglacial highstand surface (see Fig. 21A), ELA = Eagle Lake
Alloformation of late Pleistocene full-glacial age, whereas CBA-1±3 = Columbus Bend Alloformation Members 1±3,
of latest Pleistocene and Holocene age. Caney Creek was the active channel until 200±300 years ago, when the
lower 90 km avulsed to its present position. (C) Long pro®les for ELA, CBA-2 and CBA-3, illustrating crossover
point, and upstream limits of onlap. Inset map shows locations for (A) and (B), with long pro®le in (C) extending
between these two locations. Modi®ed from Blum & Price (1998).
# 2000

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
FLUVIAL RESPONSES TO CLIMATE
AND SEA-LEVEL CHANGE:
EXAMPLES
At some point upstream, ¯uvial systems
become completely independent of high-frequency (< 106 years) sea-level change. However, the reverse is not true, and there is no
point moving in the downstream direction
where the in¯uence of climate and climatically
controlled changes in discharge and sediment
supply can go to zero ± if it does not rain,
nothing happens. Moreover, since glacioeustasy is a function of climate change, it
seems likely that some sort of autocorrelation
will arise between the effects of climate vs. sealevel change. It follows from the above that
continental margin ¯uvial systems must in
some way re¯ect the in¯uence of both controlling mechanisms, although in some cases the
in¯uences of sea-level change and subsidence
may overwhelm the recognizable signature of
other factors. Nevertheless, Quaternary systems
in continental margin settings provide unique
opportunities to isolate the nature of these
interactions, as discussed in the two case
studies below.

Colorado River, Texas
From studies of late Pleistocene and Holocene
strata of the Colorado River, Gulf Coastal Plain of
Texas (USA), Blum (1993) de®ned interactions
between climate and sea-level change in terms of:
(a) the downstream continuity of allostratigraphic
units and component facies as a re¯ection of
climatic controls; and (b) the corresponding
downstream changes in stratigraphic architecture
as a re¯ection of the increasing in¯uence of sealevel change (Fig. 21). Subsequent work con®rms
these relationships for palaeovalleys that span the
last 300±400 kyr (Blum & Price, 1998). Individual
palaeovalleys correspond to 100-kyr glacial±
interglacial cycles, and are partitioned by lowering of sea-level below highstand depositional
shoreline breaks, when channels incise and
valley axes become ®xed in place as they extend
across the subaerially exposed shelf. During
falling stage and lowstand, multiple episodes of
lateral migration, minor aggradation and degradation occur within the extended valleys in
response to climatic controls on discharge and
sediment supply. Transgression and highstand
then results in channel shortening, and valleys
begin to ®ll; as valley ®lling nears completion,
# 2000

33

overbank facies spread laterally and bury soils
that developed on the downdip margins of the
previous highstand alluvial plain. Complete
valley ®lling promotes avulsion, with relocation
of valley axes before the next sea-level fall, such
that successive 100-kyr palaeovalley ®lls have a
distributary pattern (Fig. 22A). Individual palaeovalleys range from 15 to 20 m in thickness at the
updip limits of sea-level in¯uence, to > 35 m at
the present highstand shoreline, whereas they
extend 15±40 km along strike.
Within
individual
unconformity-bounded
palaeovalley sequences, alluvial architecture re¯ects interactions between changes in climate
and sea-level (Fig. 22B). During the glacial period,
regional climate was more temperate than today
and the shoreline was in a midshelf position or
further basinward. Allostratigraphic units from
this time period consist of amalgamated channelbelt sands with few overbank facies, and are
bounded by well-drained palaeosols; these units
can be 10±15 m in thickness, and extend 2±5 km
along strike. Transition to the interglacial period
resulted in increases in sea surface size and
temperature, `subtropical' land surface temperatures, and deeper inland penetration of tropical
moisture, that in turn produced increases in the
depth and ¯ashiness of ¯oods. Superimposed on
this overall trend were higher-frequency climate
changes as well (Toomey et al., 1993). As a result,
multiple episodes of aggradation, lateral migration and some incision with sediment bypass
occurred contemporaneously with the late stages
of transgression and sea-level highstand, but in
response to climatic controls on discharge regimes and sediment supply. Even in upstream
reaches, beyond any in¯uence of sea-level,
Holocene units contain an abundance of ®negrained overbank facies (as was the case for the
Loire as well), and sand bodies are less amalgamated (Blum & Valastro, 1994; Blum et al., 1994).
These characteristics are enhanced within the
lower valley by a forced shortening of channels
and ¯attening of gradients.
Aslan & Blum (1999) also show that in far
downstream reaches, rates of valley ®lling and
style of avulsion during sea-level rise and highstand play a strong role in alluvial architecture.
During early transgression, when the shoreline is
still some distance basinward, avulsion occurs by
reoccupation of abandoned falling stage and
lowstand channels, with erosion and reworking
of older channel-belt sands (Fig. 23A). By contrast, accumulation space is rapidly generated as
the shoreline moves closer, rates of valley ®lling

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

34

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

increase and avulsion occurs by repeated diversion into ¯oodplain depressions. This produces
successions of massive to laminated ¯oodbasin
muds that encase thin (< 5 m) ribbon-like crevasse
channels and thin (< 2±3 m) sheet-like splay
sands (Fig. 23B), and comprise up to 50% of the
total valley ®ll (comparable to the `avulsion
deposits' of Smith et al., 1989). Deposits of

# 2000

individual avulsions are separated by massive to
slickensided muds or buried soil horizons that
represent periods of slow sediment accumulation
or ¯oodplain stability between episodes of avulsive deposition. As ®lling of accumulation space
nears completion, avulsion by channel reoccupation again becomes the dominant process, and
again results in amalgamated channel belts

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
Active
channel

Avulsion
node

(Fig. 23C). During the most recent avulsion, the
Colorado River abandoned its valley from the last
glacial cycle, and reoccupied a Pleistocene channel belt from the previous interglacial highstand
(see Fig. 22A).

A

Amalgamated
channelbelt
sand bodies

B

Rhine±Meuse Rivers, The Netherlands
falling stage and
lowstand
palaeochannels

Al
l
rid uvia
ge l

Floodbasin
muds

Crevasse
sheet sands
"Ribbon"
sands

C

Active
alluvial
ridge

Avulsion
path

Abandoned
alluvial
ridge
Floodbasin
muds

35

Isolated channel
belt sands

Fig. 23. Model for changes in avulsion styles during
valley ®lling in response to sea-level rise. (A)
Avulsion by reoccupation of falling stage and
lowstand channels during early stages of valley
®lling, when rates of ¯oodplain aggradation are very
low. (B) Avulsion by frequent crevassing into
¯oodplain depression in response to rapid increases
in accumulation space that correspond to high
rates of sea-level rise. (C) Avulsion by reoccupation
of older channel belts, when sea-level highstand
has been reached, and accumulation space is nearly
®lled (after Aslan & Blum, 1999).

Studies of the Rhine±Meuse Rivers during the
last glacial cycle also clearly document interactions between upstream and downstream
controls. During much of the last glacial (OIS
2±4) the Rhine mouth was located beyond the
Strait of Dover, up to 800 km downstream from
the present shoreline (Gibbard, 1995; Bridgland
& D'olier, 1995), and direct sea-level in¯uence
was limited to reaches that are now submerged
in the English Channel. Throughout the glacial
cycle as a whole, periglacial conditions with
sparse vegetation and continuous permafrost
alternated with a temperate climate comparable
to present-day, and it is generally assumed that
sediment supply to the Rhine and Meuse was
considerably higher when periglacial conditions
prevailed (e.g. Vandenberghe, 1995). Recent
work by ToÈrnqvist et al. (2000) suggests that
during the sea-level fall associated with OIS 4,
substantial deposition occurred near the present Dutch shoreline despite net incision,
similar to the Colorado River, as described
above. The Rhine and Meuse were also predominantly aggrading braided systems during
the Last Glacial Maximum sea-level lowstand
(OIS 2, 25±13 ka; Kasse et al., 1995), and
climate change continued to play a paramount
role during deglaciation as sea-level rose rapidly. As examples, during the relatively warm
Bùlling±Allerùd interstadial (the last D-O
Cycle), which corresponds to extreme rates of
eustatic sea-level rise (meltwater pulse 1 of

Fig. 22. (A) Perspective map view and schematic cross-section of Pleistocene (Beaumont Formation) and Holocene
alluvial plains of the Colorado River, Texas, illustrating large-scale stratigraphic architecture dominated by
multiple cross-cutting incised valley ®lls. Individual valley ®lls are interpreted to represent 100 kyr glacial±
interglacial cycles based on physical stratigraphic relations, mostly downdip onlap and burial of successively
older alluvial plain palaeosols, especially the onlap of ¯oodplain facies and palaeosols from one highstand by
¯oodplain facies and palaeosols from successively younger highstands. A series of thermoluminescence ages
support these age relations. The Holocene alluvial plain surface was recently abandoned, when the channel
avulsed to reoccupy an older Pleistocene meanderbelt. Location shown in inset map of Fig. 21. After Blum & Price
(1998). (B) Interpreted post-Beaumont valley ®ll cross-section along line A±A¢, based on a series of continuous
cores with 2 km spacing. Lowstand channelbelt sandbody equivalent to ELA in Fig. 20, whereas strata that overlie
well-drained palaeosols are equivalent to CBA (individual members not differentiated). After Aslan & Blum
(1999).
# 2000

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

36

W

E

+14
+12

33ka

+10

Present-day
floodplain surface

+8

Age (ka)

Altitude (m)

MSL

6

5

4

3

+2
2

5
5 ka

Rotterdam

66ka

1

-2
-4

7

-6
-10

Rotterdam

Last Glacial Maximum
floodplain surface

-12
-14
-16

The
Netherlands

7 ka

Ribbon-like
channel belts

-8

22ka

44ka

+6
+4

00
11ka

Lobith

8 8kaka

0

30 km

-18

Lobith
Lobith

N

Rhine

Meuse

0

50 km

Fig. 24. Holocene rise of the (ground)water table in the Rhine±Meuse Delta as a function of relative sea-level rise
(relative sea-level curve indicated to the left; mainly after Van de Plassche, 1982), primarily based on ~ 100 14C
ages of basal peats (Van Dijk et al., 1991). Spacing of the (ground)water gradient lines (isochrons with ages) de®ne
rates of creation of accumulation space. Ribbon-like channel belts encased in thick, organic-rich overbank
successions dominate downdip areas, whereas sheet-like channel belts are typical of conditions with lower rates
of increase in accumulation space. Note the intersection point between the Last Glacial Maximum and modern
longitudinal pro®les to the far east, representing the landward limit of onlap.

Fairbanks, 1989), as well as during the earliest
part of the Holocene (meltwater pulse 2), the
Rhine±Meuse incised in response to reductions
of sediment supply due to re-establishment of
dense vegetation (Pons, 1957; Kasse et al., 1995;
Berendsen et al., 1995; ToÈrnqvist, 1998).
Well-documented rates of rise in (ground)water tables in the present Rhine±Meuse delta
during the middle to late Holocene are interpreted as a proxy for sea-level rise (Van Dijk
et al., 1991; Fig. 24), which is in turn interpreted to have played a prominent role in the
development of alluvial architecture. The database for interpretation of the Holocene record
includes > 200 000 boreholes (an average of 50±
100 boreholes km±2) plus some 1000 radiocarbon ages (e.g. Berendsen, 1982; ToÈrnqvist,
1993; Berendsen et al., 1994), and permits
unparalleled documentation of changes in
alluvial architecture through time. For the
middle Holocene, prior to 4 ka, rates of sealevel controlled (ground)water-table rise were
very high (typically > 1´5 mm yr±1). The record
from this time consists of a succession of
anastomosed (ToÈrnqvist, 1993) or straight
(Makaske, 1998) distributaries with ribbon-like
channel belts (width-to-thickness ratios < 15)
# 2000

encased in lacustrine muds and organics (Van
der Woude, 1984), and avulsion frequency was
very high (ToÈrnqvist, 1994). By contrast, meandering single-channel distributaries with sheetlike channel belts (width-to-thickness ratios
> 50) and more homogeneous overbank deposits
have dominated the late Holocene sea-level
highstand, and avulsion frequency was signi®cantly less. There are striking similarities
between the middle to late Holocene Rhine±
Meuse, the Texas Gulf Coast examples described above and recent re-evaluations of the
middle to late Holocene of the Lower
Mississippi Valley (Aslan & Autin, 1999).

Pre-Quaternary records
How can interactions between climate and sealevel change be recognized in the preQuaternary record? The bad news is that
interactions de®ned by the downstream continuity of allostratigraphic units and component
facies, with corresponding downstream changes
in stratigraphic architecture, may be dif®cult to
identify. For example, the intersection between
lowstand and highstand ¯oodplain surfaces
de®ned along both the Texas Coast and in

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
The Netherlands will not be preserved, which
may be typical of most passive margin settings
where subsidence rates decrease landward.
Indeed, as a general rule, stratigraphic units
deposited during falling stage to lowstand
should occur deeper within palaeovalley ®lls,
and stand the best chance of preservation,
whereas strata deposited during highstand will
more commonly be removed during subsequent
sea-level falls (cf. ToÈrnqvist, 1995; Blum &
Price, 1998; ToÈrnqvist et al., 2000). However,
the good news is there is no reason to assume
that interactions between climate and sea-level
change will not occur, and downstream continuity of strata should be the rule, not the
exception. Moreover, future interpretations of
these interactions will at least in part rely on
the well-tested method of developing modern
analogues, only at `sequence' time-scales (see
discussion below).
In this context, it is worthy of note that models
developed from the pre-Quaternary record (e.g.
Shanley & McCabe, 1991, 1993, 1994; Wright &
Marriott, 1993; Olsen et al., 1995; Currie, 1997;
Zhang et al., 1997) infer relationships between
alluvial architecture and sea-level change that are
very similar to what is observed in Late
Quaternary successions. Although details differ
(compare Shanley & McCabe, 1993; Wright &
Marriott, 1993), a common pattern would be
amalgamated high net-to-gross channel belts that
rest on what is interpreted to be a sequence
boundary, and overlain by isolated ribbon-like
sand bodies that are encased in laterally extensive
mudstone-dominated successions. Many workers
have interpreted the sequence boundary to re¯ect
incision and sediment bypass during sea-level
fall, and the amalgamated character of overlying
sand bodies re¯ects low accommodation, whereas
the more isolated sand bodies upsection re¯ect
increasing accommodation due to relative sealevel rise and/or highstand. For the Late
Quaternary examples discussed above, the
basal palaeovalley unconformity would be interpreted as a composite erosion surface, cut
during multiple periods of incision alternating
with lateral migration and minor aggradation
during falling stage and lowstand. Moreover,
the contrast between laterally amalgamated and
more isolated sand bodies that inter®nger with
mud-rich successions re¯ect fundamentally different glacial vs. interglacial climate regimes,
respectively, upon which are superimposed sealevel controls on overall palaeovalley-®ll architecture.
# 2000

37

SYNTHESIS AND A LOOK FORWARD
The discussion above has addressed the history of
research on ¯uvial responses to climate and sealevel change, outlined a basic process framework
for investigations of this kind, and provided
examples of ¯uvial response to climate and sealevel change from work on Quaternary systems.
The Mississippi River, which has long played an
important role in the ¯uvial community, can be
used to illustrate a key concept that may play a
role in the future. In a previous summary of
Mississippi River response to glaciation and
deglaciation, Wright (1987) noted that an idealized model would predict some crossover point
where aggradation due to glacial sediment loading gives way downstream to incision due to
glacio-eustatic lowstand. Wright recognized that
this crossover is more conceptual than real; the
synthesis here takes this a step further and
suggests this crossover is best viewed as a
metaphor for how workers in different settings,
Quaternary and ancient, have focused on causal
mechanisms that reside in their own backyard. A
bright future for studies of ¯uvial response to
climate and sea-level change can be envisaged for
the new millennium, one that will become
increasingly integrative with respect to both
upstream and downstream controls, as well as
how they operate in tandem to produce the
landscape and stratigraphic record. This review
concludes by suggesting some key issues for the
future.

Quaternary systems
The ®rst 2±3 decades of this millennium should
be an exciting time to study Quaternary ¯uvial
systems, with challenges that await at both ends
of the temporal scale. On the one hand, it will be
important to keep pace with research in highfrequency climate and sea-level change. For
example, how do ¯uvial systems respond to the
Dansgaard±Oeschger events that are so prominent
in records from Greenland and the North
Atlantic? Holocene records clearly show that
river systems respond in dramatic fashion to
relatively subtle climate changes, but are there
upper limits to the frequency of responses that
can be interpreted from the late Pleistocene and
Holocene stratigraphic record, and were river
systems during the glacial period as sensitive to
rapid climate changes as their interglacial counterparts? To date, much of the high-pro®le, wellfunded work has focused on documentation of

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

38

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

climate changes per se. However, humans live on,
and interact with, the Earth's surface, which has
received considerably less attention and funding.
Understanding the spatial dimensions and
signi®cance of high-frequency climate and sealevel changes, and their effects on surface processes, will require more precise, systematically
de®ned, whole-system (from source to sink) and/
or regional stratigraphic and geochronological
frameworks than are now widely available.
On the other hand, it is equally important to
study longer-wavelength cycles of ¯uvial landscape evolution. It is fair to say that most detailed
research on ¯uvial response to climate change
during the last 3±4 decades has focused on the
last 20 kyr. While important, this relatively short
period encompasses only the tail end of a single
100-kyr glacial to interglacial cycle. Very little is
actually known about ¯uvial responses to complete glacial±interglacial cycles, or how the ®rst
70±80% of the last cycle have preconditioned
¯uvial processes during the last 20±30% of the
cycle. A number of studies have begun to address
¯uvial responses to climate change at
Milankovitch scales. Antoine (1994), for example,
uses stratigraphic relationships between loess
sheets and ¯uvial deposits in the Somme Valley
of France to develop a relative-age geochronological framework, and then infers cycles of
aggradation, degradation and terrace formation
at the 100-kyr scale. Bridgland (1994) also infers
100-kyr cyclicity for terraces of the Thames in
England. Moreover, terraces of the Meuse in the
southern Netherlands span the entire Quaternary,
and have been used to develop numerical models
of long-term ¯uvial response to climate change
and tectonic uplift, suggesting 100-kyr cycles of
aggradation and incision (Veldkamp & Van den
Berg, 1993). Investigations such as these also
provide an opportunity to link studies of ¯uvial
response to climate and sea-level change over
longer time-scales with new ideas on relationships between tectonics and surface processes
(e.g. Burbank & Pinter, 1999).
Two issues emerge as fundamental to future
advancements in understanding the responses of
Quaternary ¯uvial systems to climate and sealevel change over both shorter and longer timescales. First, there is a clear need to develop and
apply more sophisticated geophysical techniques
to explore three-dimensional relationships at
both the stratigraphic and alluvial architecture
scales. Applications of ground-penetrating radar
(GPR) and shallow high-resolution seismic will
become increasingly important in this regard.
# 2000

GPR has, for example, been applied in a number
of ¯uvial contexts, but mostly at the alluvial
architecture scale, and more speci®cally with
reference to internal structure at the channel bar
scale (e.g. Huggenberger, 1993; Bridge et al., 1995,
1998). Future applications of high-resolution
geophysical techniques in Late Quaternary continental strata are not without problems, especially at the stratigraphic architecture scale, but
may prove to be essential for developing linkages
between continental strata and the high-resolution records that have been, and will continue to
be, documented for alluvial±deltaic strata on the
now submerged shelves. This, in turn, must play
a critical role in developing an understanding of
the relative importance of upstream vs. downstream controls at both the stratigraphic and
alluvial architecture scales, and the evolution of
¯uvial systems from source to sink.
Second, and equally important, is a corresponding need to develop, re®ne and apply new
dating techniques. Radiocarbon has served as the
clear reference standard for almost ®ve decades,
and has had a profound impact on understanding
the dynamics of terrestrial systems over the last
20±30 kyr. However, many records remain poorly
constrained because they lack organic matter in
key stratigraphic contexts, and the time period
covered by radiocarbon represents only 30±40%
of a single glacial±interglacial cycle. On the near
horizon, application and re®nement of the various luminescence techniques seem to offer the
most promise. In theory, luminescence techniques measure the time elapsed since sand- and
silt-sized grains were exposed to solar radiation
during transport, and can provide numerical ages
for deposits within the middle to late Pleistocene
and Holocene. For ¯uvial deposits, optically
stimulated luminescence (OSL) has considerable
advantages over the older technique of thermoluminescence (TL), since only minutes of exposure are required during transport (Duller, 1996;
Aitken, 1998). Both TL and OSL have been
used in ¯uvial contexts; examples include
TL dating of ¯uvial deposits in the Lake Eyre
basin of Australia (Nanson et al., 1988, 1992),
Murrumbidgee River palaeochannels in southeastern Australia (Page et al., 1996), Saharan wadi
systems (Blum et al., 1998) and Texas Gulf Coast
¯uvial deposits (Blum & Price, 1998), as well as
OSL dating of ¯uvial deposits of the Ebro
drainage in Spain (Fuller et al., 1998), the Loire
in France (Straf®n et al., 2000) and the Rhine±
Meuse in The Netherlands (ToÈrnqvist et al.,
2000).

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change

Pre-Quaternary systems
Two fundamental issues can be identi®ed that
should play a role in interpretations of ¯uvial
responses to high-frequency (time-scales of 104±
106 years) climate and sea-level change in the preQuaternary record. First, future interpretations
must at least in part rely on the development of
`sequence-scale' Quaternary analogues. There is,
at present, a paucity of good analogues that: (a)
extend beyond the relatively short latest
Pleistocene and Holocene period into geologically resolvable time-scales (multiples of 104±
106 years); (b) include depositional basin settings
where preservational processes operate; and (c)
describe ¯uvial responses to allogenic controls in
sedimentological terms that facilitate recognition
in the ancient record. Further detailed study of
Quaternary analogues may also provide a mechanism by which cross-fertilization of methods
and perspectives from geomorphology and sedimentology can occur, and traditional disciplinary
and other barriers can be dismantled.
Second, and perhaps more dif®cult, will be
changes in the philosophy of interpretation. It
seems clear that the development of sequence
stratigraphy resulted in a paradigm shift with
respect to how sedimentologists view the responses of ¯uvial systems to sea-level change.
However, the same intellectual hurdle has yet to
be crossed with respect to the signi®cance of
climate change, which both causes and covaries
with sea-level, and is one of the dominant
controls on changes in sediment delivery to
depositional basins through time. Clear recognition and interpretation of ¯uvial responses to
climate change certainly remains dif®cult, and for
the time being may require well-constrained
geochronological frameworks that demonstrate
rates of change comparable to known climate
forcing functions, coupled with an approach
where possible alternatives are eliminated and
the only one that remains must be the most
viable. However, part of the hurdle will involve a
willingness to explicitly consider climate change
as a forcing mechanism; for example, many
features described in ancient successions are
remarkably similar in scale and kind to that
observed in Late Quaternary records, but they are
commonly interpreted in terms of autogenic
variation superimposed on tectonic controls. No
analogues clearly demonstrate, as opposed to
assume, this particular model, and the assumption of autogenic variation may not be as justi®ed
today as it might have been in the past given
# 2000

39

present views on the magnitude, frequency and
signi®cance of climate change.

Importance of modelling
Although modelling efforts are discussed elsewhere in this issue (Paola, 2000), it seems clear
that integration of different `¯uvial' models will
be a major challenge for the near future (cf.
Nystuen, 1998). As appropriately stated by Paola
in this issue, presently available numerical
models should be considered temporary building
blocks that will ultimately merge together. Four
broad classes of models can be distinguished: (a)
the predominantly autogenic and exclusively
aggradational numerical models of alluvial architecture (e.g. Bridge & Leeder, 1979; Mackey &
Bridge, 1995; Heller & Paola, 1996); (b) sequencestratigraphic models that focus on incision and/or
aggradation in downdip parts of the ¯uvial
system (e.g. Nummedal et al., 1993; Leeder &
Stewart, 1996); (c) numerical models that focus
primarily on long-term ¯uvial incision and/or
sediment
production
in
the
hinterland
(Veldkamp & Van den Berg, 1993; Leeder et al.,
1998); and (d) the unscaled and scaled physical
(analogue) models that have provided important
qualitative insight into ¯uvial responses to varying rates and directions of sea-level change (Wood
et al., 1993, 1994; Koss et al., 1994; Paola, 2000),
or how alluvial architecture varies with aggradation rate (e.g. Ashworth et al., 1999).
In the future, linkage of models that focus on
both continental interiors and continental margins (e.g. Veldkamp & Van Dijke, 1998), as well as
integrating model results with real-world data
(e.g. Leeder et al., 1996), must become increasingly important so as to more clearly understand
relations between sediment production, transport
and deposition at time-scales that reside at the
interface between the traditional interests of
geomorphologists/Quaternary geologists and sedimentary geologists (103±106 years). As noted by
Paola in this issue, model development can
proceed at higher rates than ®eld studies; hence
the ®rst decades of this millennium offer signi®cant opportunities for new and creative ®eldbased investigations that are designed to constrain and validate quantitative models.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We appreciate the invitation from the
Sedimentology editorial board to write this paper.

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

40

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

Comments by Peter Friend, Mike Leeder and
editor Jim Best were very helpful. We also
appreciate numerous discussions with our various collaborators, students and colleagues, but
stress that this is a selective review that re¯ects
our own perspectives on the subject matter.

REFERENCES
Aitken, J.F. and Flint, S.S. (1995) The application of highresolution sequence stratigraphy to ¯uvial systems: a case
study from the Upper Carboniferous Breathitt Group, eastern Kentucky, USA. Sedimentology, 42, 3±30.
Aitken, J.F. and Flint, S.S. (1996) Variable expressions of
inter¯uvial sequence boundaries in the Breathitt Group
(Pennsylvanian), eastern Kentucky, USA. In: High
Resolution Sequence Stratigraphy: Innovations and
Applications (Ed. by J. A. Howell and J. F. Aitken), Spec.
Publ. Geol. Soc., 104, 193±206.
Aitken, M.J. (1998) An Introduction to Optical Dating. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Allen, J.R.L. (1974) Studies in ¯uviatile sedimentation:
implications of pedogenic carbonate units, Lower Old Red
Sandstone, Anglo-Welsh outcrop. Geol. J., 9, 181±208.
Allen, J.R.L. (1978) Studies in ¯uviatile sedimentation: an
exploratory quantitative model for the architecture of
avulsion-controlled suites. Sedim. Geol., 21, 129±147.
Amorosi, A., Colalongo, M.L., Fusco, F., Pasini, G. and
Fiorini, F. (1999) Glacio-eustatic control of continentalshallow marine cyclicity from Late Quaternary deposits
of the southeastern Po Plain, northern Italy. Quat. Res., 52,
1±13.
Anderson, J.B., Abdulah, K., Sarzalejo, S., Siringin, F. and
Thomas, M.A. (1996) Late Quaternary sedimentation and
high-resolution sequence stratigraphy of the East Texas
Shelf. In: Geology of Siliciclastic Shelf Seas (Ed. by M. De
Batist and P. Jacobs), Spec. Publ. Geol. Soc., 117, 95±124.
Antoine, P. (1994) The Somme valley terrace system (northern
France); a model of river response to Quaternary climatic
variations since 800,000 BP. Terra Nova, 6, 453±464.
Ashworth, P.J., Best, J.L., Peakall, J. and Lorsong, J.A. (1999)
The in¯uence of aggradation rate on braided alluvial
architecture: ®eld study and physical scale-modelling of
the Ashburton River gravels, Canterbury Plains, New
Zealand. In: Current Research in Fluvial Sedimentology:
Proceedings of 6th International Conference on Fluvial
Sedimentology (Ed. by N. D. Smith and J. J. Rogers), Spec.
Publ. Int. Assoc. Sediment., 28, 333±346.
Aslan, A. and Autin, W.J. (1998) Holocene ¯ood-plain soil
formation in the southern lower Mississippi Valley:
Implications for interpreting alluvial paleosols. Geol. Soc.
Am. Bull., 110, 433±449.
Aslan, A. and Autin, W.J. (1999) Evolution of the Holocene
Mississippi River ¯oodplain, Ferriday, Louisiana: insights
on the origin of ®ne-grained ¯oodplains. J. Sedim. Res., 69,
800±815.
Aslan, A. and Blum, M.D. (1999) Contrasting styles of
Holocene avulsion, Texas Gulf Coastal Plain. In: Current
Research in Fluvial Sedimentology: Proceedings of 6th
International Conference on Fluvial Sedimentology (Ed. by
N. D. Smith and J. J. Rogers), Spec. Publ. Int. Assoc.
Sediment., 28, 193±209.
# 2000

Autin, W.J. (1992) Use of alloformations for de®nition of
Holocene meanderbelts in the middle Amite River, southeastern Louisiana. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 104, 233±241.
Bagnold, R.A. (1973) The nature of saltation and bedload
transport in water. Proc. Royal Society, London, 322A, 473±
504.
Baker, V.R., Kochel, R.C. and Patton, P.C. (Eds). (1988) Flood
Geomorphology. John Wiley, New York.
Barrell, J. (1917) Rhythms and the measurement of geological
time. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 28, 745±904.
Barron, E.J. and Moore, G.T. (1994) Climate Model
Application in Palaeoenvironmental Analysis. SEPM Short
Course no. 33.
Begin, Z.B. (1988) Application of diffusion-erosion model to
alluvial channels which degrade due to base-level lowering.
Earth Surf. Proc. Landf., 13, 487±500.
Begin, Z.B., Meyer, D.F. and Schumm, S.A. (1981)
Development of longitudinal pro®les of alluvial channels
in response to base-level lowering. Earth Surf. Proc. Landf.,
6, 49±68.
Behl, R.J. and Kennett, J.P. (1996) Brief interstadial events in
the Santa Barbara basin, NE Paci®c, during the past 60 kyr.
Nature, 379, 243±246.
Behrensmeyer, A.K., Willis, B.J. and Quade, J. (1995)
Floodplains and palaeosols of Pakistan Neogene and
Wyoming Palaeogene deposits: a comparative study.
Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol., 115, 37±60.
Benito, G., Baker, V.R. and Gregory, K.J. (Eds). (1998)
Palaeohydrology and Environmental Change. John Wiley,
Chichester.
Berendsen, H., Hoek, W. and Schorn, E. (1995) Late
Weichselian and Holocene river channel changes of the
rivers Rhine and Meuse in the Netherlands (Land van Maas
en Waal). PalaÃoklimaforschung, 14, 151±171.
Berendsen, H.J.A. (1982) De genese van het landschap in het
zuiden van de provincie Utrecht, een fysisch-geogra®sche
studie. Utr. Geogr. Studies, 25, 1±255.
Berendsen, H.J.A., Faessen, E.L.J.H. and Kempen, H.F.J.
(1994) Zand in Banen. Zanddiepte-Attentiekaarten van het
Gelders Rivierengebied. Provincie Gelderland, Arnhem.
Berger, A., Loutre, M.F. and Dehant, V. (1989) Astronomical
frequencies for pre-Quaternary palaeoclimate studies. Terra
Nova, 1, 474±479.
Berger, A. and Loutre, M.F. (1994) Astronomical forcing
through geologic time. In: Orbital Forcing and Cyclic
Sequences (Ed. by P. L. de Boer and D. G. Smith), Spec.
Publ. Int. Assoc. Sediment., 19, 15±24.
Bernard, H.A. and Leblanc, R.J. (1965) Resume of the
Quaternary Geology of the Northwestern Gulf of Mexico
Province. In: The Quaternary of the United States (Ed. by H.
E. Wright and D. G. Frey), pp. 137±185. Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
Best, J.L. and Ashworth, P.J. (1997) Scour in large braided
rivers and the recognition of sequence stratigraphic boundaries. Nature, 387, 275±277.
Best, J.L. and Bridge, J.S. (1992) The morphology and
dynamics of low amplitude bedwaves upon upper stage
plane beds and the preservation of planar laminae.
Sedimentology, 39, 737±752.
Birkeland, P.W. (1999) Soils and Geomorphology. Oxford
University Press, New York.
Blum, M.D. (1990) Climatic and eustatic controls on Gulf
Coastal Plain ¯uvial sedimentation: an example from the
Late Quaternary of the Colorado River, Texas. In: Sequence
Stratigraphy as an Exploration Tool: Concepts and Practices

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
in the Gulf Coast (Ed. by J. M. Armentrout and B. F. Perkins)
Gulf Coast Section of the Society of Economic
Palaeontologists
and
Mineralogists
Foundation,
Proceedings of the 11th Annual Research Conference, pp.
71±83.
Blum, M.D. (1993) Genesis and architecture of incised valley
®ll sequences: a Late Quaternary example from the Colorado
River, Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas. In: Siliciclastic Sequence
Stratigraphy: Recent Developments and Applications (Ed.
by P. Weimer and H. W. Posamentier), Mem. Am. Assoc.
Petrol. Geol., 58, 259±283.
Blum, M.D. and Price, D.M. (1998) Quaternary alluvial plain
construction in response to interacting glacio-eustatic and
climatic controls, Texas Gulf Coastal Plain. In: Relative Role
of Eustasy, Climate, and Tectonism in Continental Rocks
(Ed. by K. W. Shanley and P. J. McCabe), Spec. Publ. Soc.
Econ. Paleont. Miner., 59, 31±48.
Blum, M.D. and Valastro, S. Jr (1994) Late Quaternary
sedimentation, Lower Colorado River, Gulf Coastal Plain
of Texas. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 106, 1002±1016.
Blum, M.D., Toomey III, R.S. and Valastro, S. Jr (1994) Fluvial
response to Late Quaternary climatic and environmental
change, Edwards Plateau of Texas. Palaeogeogr.
Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol., 108, 1±21.
Blum, M.D., Morton, R.A. and Durbin, J.M. (1995)
`Deweyville' terraces and deposits of the Texas Gulf
Coastal Plain. Trans. Gulf Coast Assoc. Geol. Soc., 45, 53±
60.
Blum, M.D., Kocurek, G., Deynoux, M., Swezey, C., Lancaster,
N., Price, D. and Pion, J.-C. (1998) Quaternary wadilacustrine-aeolian depositional cycles and sequences,
Chott Rharsa Basin, Tunisia. In: Quaternary Deserts and
Climatic Change (Ed. by A. S. Alsharhan, K. Glennie, G. L.
Whittle and C. G. St. C. Kendall), pp. 539±552. Balkema
Press, Rotterdam.
Blum, M.D., Guccione, M.J., Wysocki, D.A. and Robnett, P.C.
(2000) Late Pleistocene evolution of the Central Mississippi
Valley, Southen Missouri to Arkansas. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull.,
112, 221±235.
Bond, G., Broecker, W., Johnsen, S., McManus, J., Labeyrie,
L., Jouzel, J. and Bonani, G. (1993) Correlations between
climate records from North Atlantic sediments and
Greenland ice. Nature, 365, 143±147.
Bond, G., Showers, W., Cheseby, M., Lotti, R., Almasi, P.,
Demenocal, P., Priore, P., Cullen, H., Hajdas, I. and Bonani,
G. (1997) A pervasive millennial-scale cycle in North
Atlantic Holocene and glacial climates. Science, 278,
1257±1266.
Bond, G.C. and Lotti, R. (1995) Iceberg discharges into the
North Atlantic on millennial time scales during the last
glaciation. Science, 267, 1005±1010.
Bowen, D.Q. (1978) Quaternary Geology. Pergamon Press,
Oxford.
Bown, T.M. and Kraus, M.J. (1987) Integration of channel and
¯oodplain suites, I. Developmental sequence and lateral
relations of alluvial paleosols. J. Sedim. Petrol., 57, 587±601.
Bradley, R.S. (1999) Paleoclimatology. Academic Press, San
Diego.
Branson, J., Brown, A.G. and Gregory, K.J. (Eds). (1996)
Global
Continental
Changes:
The
Context
of
Palaeohydrology. Spec. Publ. Geol. Soc. London, 115.
Bravard, J.-P. (1992) Rapport no. 2: Les rythmes d'evolution
morphologique des valleÁes Francaises au Tardiglaciaire et
l'Holocene. Bull. Assoc. Geographes Francais.
# 2000

41

Bridge, J.S. (1993a) Description and interpretation of ¯uvial
deposits: a critical perspective. Sedimentology, 40, 801±810.
Bridge, J.S. (1993b) The interaction between channel geometry, water ¯ow, sediment transport and deposition in
braided rivers. In: Braided Rivers (Ed. by J. L. Best and C.
S. Bristow), Spec. Publ. Geol. Soc. Lond., 75, 13±71.
Bridge, J.S. (1995) Description and interpretation of ¯uvial
deposits: a critical perspective. Sedimentology, 42, 382±389.
Bridge, J.S. (1997) Thickness of sets of cross-strata and planar
strata as a function of formative bedwave geometry and
migration, and aggradation rate. Geology, 25, 971±974.
Bridge, J.S. and Leeder, M.R. (1979) A simulation model of
alluvial stratigraphy. Sedimentology, 26, 617±644.
Bridge, J.S., Alexander, J., Collier, R.E.L., Gawthorpe, R.L.
and Jarvis, J. (1995) Ground-penetrating radar and coring
used to document the large-scale structure of point-bar
deposits. Sedimentology, 42, 839±852.
Bridge, J.S., Collier, R.E.L. and Alexander, J. (1998) Largescale structure of Calamus River deposits (Nebraska, USA)
revealed using ground-penetrating radar. Sedimentology,
45, 977±986.
Bridgland, D.R. (1994) Quaternary of the Thames. Geological
Conservation Review Series 7. Chapman & Hall, London.
Bridgland, D.R. and D'olier, B. (1995) The Pleistocene
evolution of the Thames and Rhine drainage systems in
the southern North Sea Basin. In: Island Britain: a
Quaternary Perspective (Ed. by R. C. Preece), Spec. Publ.
Geol. Soc., 96, 27±45.
Brierley, G.J. (1996) Channel morphology and element
assemblages: A constructivist approach to facies modelling.
In: Advances in Fluvial Dynamics and Stratigraphy (Ed. by
P. A. Carling and M. R. Dawson), pp. 263±298. John Wiley,
Chichester.
Broecker, W.S. (1995) The Glacial World According to Wally.
Eldigio Press, Palisades.
Broecker, W.S. (1997) Thermohaline circulation, the achilles
heel of our climate system: Will man-made CO2 upset the
current balance? Science, 278, 1582±1588.
Brown, L.J. and Wilson, D.D. (1988) Stratigraphy of Late
Quaternary deposits of the northern Canterbury Plains. NZ
J. Geol. Geoph., 31, 305±335.
Bull, W.B. (1991) Geomorphic Responses to Climate Change.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Burbank, D.W. and Pinter, N. (1999) Landscape evolution: the
interactions of tectonics and surface processes. Basin Res.,
11, 1±6.
Burke, K., Francis, P. and Wells, G. (1990) Importance of the
geological record in understanding global change.
Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. (Glob. Plan.
Change Sect.), 89, 193±204.
Butcher, S.W. (1990) The nickpoint concept and its implications regarding onlap to the stratigraphic record. In:
Quantitative Dynamic Stratigraphy (Ed. by T. A. Cross),
pp. 375±385. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Butzer, K.W. (1980) Holocene alluvial sequences: problems of
dating and correlation. In: Timescales in Geomorphology
(Ed. by R. A. Cullingford, D. A. Davidson and J. Lewin), pp.
131±142. John Wiley, New York.
Chappell, J. and Shackleton, N.J. (1986) Oxygen isotopes and
sea-level. Nature, 324, 137±140.
Chappell, J., Omura, A., Ezat, T., McCulloch, M., Pandol®, J.,
Ota, Y. and Pillans, B. (1996) Reconciliation of late
Quaternary sea-levels derived from coral terraces at Huon
Peninsula with deep sea oxygen isotope records. Earth
Planet. Sci. Lett., 141, 227±236.

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

42

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

Clemmensen, L.B., éxnevad, I.E.I. and De Boer, P.L. (1994)
Climatic controls on ancient sedimentation: some late
Palaeozoic and Mezosoic examples from NW Europe and
the Western Interior of the USA. In: Orbital Forcing and
Cyclic Sequences (Ed. by P. L. de Boer and D. G. Smith),
Spec. Publ. Int. Assoc. Sediment., 19, 439±457.
COHMAP Project Members. (1988) Climatic changes of the
last 18,000 years: Observations and model simulations.
Science, 241, 1043±1052.
Cojan, I. (1993) Alternating ¯uvial and lacustrine sedimentation: tectonic and climatic controls (Provence Basin, S.
France, Upper Cretaceous/Palaeocene). In: Alluvial
Sedimentation (Ed. by M. Marzo and C. Puigdefabregas),
Spec. Publ. Int. Assoc. Sediment., 17, 425±438.
Crowley, T. and North, G.R. (1991) Palaeoclimatology. Oxford
University Press, New York.
Currie, B.S. (1997) Sequence stratigraphy of nonmarine
Jurassic±Cretaceous rocks, central Cordilleran forelandbasin system. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 109, 1206±1222.
Dai, A., Fung, I.Y. and Del Genio, A.D. (1997) Surface
observed global land precipitation variations during 1900±
88. J. Clim., 10, 2943±2962.
Dalrymple, R.W., Boyd, R. and Zaitlin, B.A. (Eds) (1994)
History of research, types and internal organisation of
incised-valley systems: Introduction to the Volume. In:
Incised-Valley Systems: Origin and Sedimentary Sequences
(Ed. by R. W. Dalrymple, R. Boyd and B. A. Zaitlin), Spec.
Publ. Soc. Econ. Paleont. Miner., 51, 3±10.
Dott, R.H. Jr (1992) An introduction to the ups and downs of
eustasy. In: Eustasy: the Historical Ups and Downs of a
Major Geological Concept (Ed. by R. H. Dott, Jr), Geol. Soc.
Am. Mem., 180, 1±16.
Dubiel, R.F., Huntoon, J.E., Condon, S.M. and Stanesco, J.D.
(1996) Permian deposystems, palaeogeography, and palaeoclimate of the Paradox Basin and vicinity. In: Palaeozoic
Systems of the Rocky Mountain Region (Ed. by M. W.
Longman and M. D. Sonnenfeld), pp. 427±444. Rocky
Mountain Section, SEPM.
Duller, G.A.T. (1996) Recent developments in luminescence
dating of Quaternary sediments. Progr. Phys. Geogr., 20,
127±145.
Dury, G.H. (1965) Principles of Under®t Streams. United
States Geol. Surv. Prof. Pap., 452-A.
Emery, D. and Myers, K.J. (Eds). (1996) Sequence
Stratigraphy. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Ethridge, F.G. and Schumm, S.A. (1978) Reconstructing
palaeochannel morphologic and ¯ow characteristics: methodology, limitations and assessment. In: Fluvial
Sedimentology (Ed. by A. D. Miall), Can. Soc. Petrol. Geol.
Mem., 5, 703±721.
Ethridge, F.G., Wood, L.J. and Schumm, S.A. (1998) Cyclic
variables controlling ¯uvial sequence development:
Problems and perspectives. In: Relative Role of Eustasy,
Climate, and Tectonism in Continental Rocks (Ed. by K. W.
Shanley and P. J. McCabe), Spec. Publ. Soc. Econ. Paleont.
Miner., 59, 17±29.
Fairbanks, R.G. (1989) A 17,000-year glacio-eustatic sea-level
record: in¯uence of glacial melting rates on the Younger
Dryas event and deep-ocean circulation. Nature, 342, 637±
642.
Ferguson, R. (1987) Hydraulic and sedimentary controls of
channel pattern. In: River Channels: Environment and
Process (Ed. by K. S. Richards), pp. 17±29. Blackwell
Science, Oxford.
Fielding, C.R. (1999) Varieties of ¯uvial form: the relevance to
# 2000

geologists of an expanded reality. In: Varieties of Fluvial
Form (Ed. by A. J. Miller and A. Gupta), pp. 497±505. John
Wiley, Chichester.
Fisk, H.N. (1944) Geological Investigation of the Alluvial
Valley of the Lower Mississippi River. Mississippi River
Commission, Vicksburg.
Fleming, K., Johnston, P., Zwartz, D., Yokoyama, Y.,
Lambeck, K. and Chappell, J. (1998) Re®ning the eustatic
sea-level curve since the Last Glacial Maximum using farand intermediate-®eld sites. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 163,
327±342.
Fournier, F. (1960) Climat et Erosion: la relation entre
lõÂerosion du sol par lõÂeau et les precipitations atmospheriques. Presse Universitaire de France.
Frakes, L.A. (1979) Climates Throughout Geologic Time.
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Frakes, L.A., Francis, J.E. and Syktus, J.I. (1992) Climate
Modes of the Phanerozoic. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Fuller, I.C., Macklin, M.G., Lewin, J., Passmore, D.G. and
Wintle, A.G. (1998) River response to high-frequency
climate oscillations in southern Europe over the past 200
k.y. Geology, 26, 275±278.
Galloway, W.E. (1989) Genetic stratigraphic sequences in
basin analysis I: architecture and genesis of ¯ooding-surface
bounded depositional units. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull.,
73, 125±142.
Gibbard, P.L. (1995) The formation of the Strait of Dover. In:
Island Britain: a Quaternary Perspective (Ed. by R. C.
Preece), Spec. Publ. Geol. Soc., 96, 15±26.
Gibling, M.R. and Bird, D.J. (1994) Late Carboniferous
cyclothems and alluvial paleovalleys in the Sydney Basin,
Nova Scotia. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 106, 105±117.
Gibling, M.R. and Wightman, W.G. (1994) Palaeovalleys and
protozoan assemblages in a Late Carboniferous cyclothem,
Sydney Basin, Nova Scotia. Sedimentology, 41, 699±719.
Gilbert, G.K. (1877) Report on the Geology of the Henry
Mountains. Government Printing Of®ce, Washington, DC.
Gregory, K.J. (Ed). (1983) Background to Palaeohydrology.
John Wiley, Chichester.
Gregory, K.J., Lewin, J. and Thornes, J.B. (Eds). (1987)
Palaeohydrology in Practice. John Wiley.
Gregory, K.J., Starkel, L. and Baker, V.R. (Eds). (1996) Global
Continental Palaeohydrology. John Wiley.
Grootes, P.M., Stuiver, M., White, J.W.C., Johnsen, S. and
Jouzel, J. (1993) Comparison of oxygen isotope records from
the GISP2 and GRIP Greenland ice cores. Nature, 366, 552±
554.
Hallet, B., Hunter, L. and Bogen, J. (1996) Rates of erosion and
sediment evacuation by glaciers: a review of ®eld data and
their implications. Global Planet. Change, 12, 213±235.
Haq, B.U., Hardenbol, J. and Vail, P.R. (1987) Chronology of
¯uctuating sea-levels since the Triassic. Science, 235, 1156±
1167.
Haq, B.U., Hardenbol, J. and Vail, P.R. (1988) Mesozoic and
Cenozoic chronostratigraphy and cycles of sea-level change.
In: Sea-Level Changes: an Integrated Approach (Ed. by C. K.
Wilgus, B. S. Hastings, C. G. S. C. Kendall, H. W.
Posamentier, C. A. Ross and J. C. Van Wagoner), Spec.
Publ. Soc. Econ. Paleont. Miner., 42, 71±108.
Hays, J.D., Imbrie, J. and Shackleton, N.J. (1976) Variations in
the earth's orbit: Pacemaker of the ice ages. Science, 194,
1121±1132.
Helland-Hansen, W. and Gjelberg, J.G. (1994) Conceptual

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
basis and variability in sequence stratigraphy: a different
perspective. Sedim. Geol., 92, 31±52.
Heller, P.L. and Paola, C. (1996) Downstream changes in
alluvial architecture: an exploration of controls on channelstacking patterns. J. Sedim. Res., 66, 297±306.
Hovius, N. (1998) Controls on sediment supply by large rivers.
In: Relative Role of Eustasy, Climate, and Tectonism in
Continental Rocks (Ed. by K. W. Shanley and P. J. McCabe),
Spec. Publ. Soc. Econ. Paleont. Miner., 59, 3±16.
Hovius, N. (1999) Macro scale process-systems of mountain
belt erosion. In: Geomorphology and Global Tectonics (Ed.
by M. A. Summer®eld), pp. 77±105. John Wiley, Chichester.
Hovius, N. and Leeder, M. (1998) Clastic sediment supply to
basins. Basin Res., 10, 1±5.
Howell, J.A. and Flint, S.S. (1996) A model for high resolution
sequence stratigraphy within extensional basins. In: High
Resolution Sequence Stratigraphy: Innovations and
Applications (Ed. by J. A. Howell and J. F. Aitken). Spec.
Publ. Geol. Soc., 104, 129±138.
Huggenberger, P. (1993) Radar facies: recognition of facies
patterns and heterogeneities within Pleistocene Rhine
gravels, NE Switzerland. In: Braided Rivers (Ed. by J. L.
Best and C. S. Bristow), Spec. Publ. Geol. Soc., 75, 163±176.
Hurrell, J.W. (1995) Decadal trends in the North Atlantic
Oscillation regional temperatures and precipitation.
Science, 269, 676±679.
Imbrie, J. and Imbrie, K. (1979) Ice Ages. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Imbrie, J., Hays, J.D., Martinson, D.G., McIntyre, A., Mix,
A.C., Moreley, J.J., Pisias, N.G., Prell, W.L. and Shackleton,
N.J. (1984) The orbital theory of Pleistocene climate:
support from a revised chronology of the marine d18O
record. In: Milankovitch and Climate (Ed. by A. L. Berger, J.
Imbrie, J. Hays, G. Kukla and B. Saltzman), pp. 269±306.
Reidel.
Jervey, M.T. (1988) Quantitative geological modeling of
siliciclastic rock sequences and their seismic expression.
In: Sea-Level Changes: an Integrated Approach (Ed. by C. K.
Wilgus, B. S. Hastings, C. G. S. C. Kendall, H. W.
Posamentier, C. A. Ross and J. C. Van Wagoner), Spec.
Publ. Soc. Econ. Paleont. Miner., 42, 47±69.
Johnsen, S.J., Clausen, H.B., Dansgaard, W., Fuhrer, K.,
Gundestrup, N., Hammer, C.U., Iversen, P., Jouzel, J.,
Stauffer, B. and Steffensen, J.P. (1992) Irregular glacial
interstadials recorded in a new Greenland ice core. Nature,
359, 311±313.
Kasse, K., Vandenberghe, J. and Bohncke, S. (1995) Climatic
change and ¯uvial dynamics of the Maas during the late
Weichselian and early Holocene. PalaÃoklimaforschung, 14,
123±150.
Khan, I.A., Bridge, J.S., Kappelman, J. and Wilson, R. (1997)
Evolution of Miocene ¯uvial environments, eastern Potwar
plateau, northern Pakistan. Sedimentology, 44, 221±251.
Knighton, D. (1998) Fluvial Forms and Processes. Edward
Arnold, London.
Knox, J.C. (1976) Concept of the Graded Stream. In: Theories
of Landform Development (Ed. by W. N. Melhorn and R. C.
Flemel), pp. 169±198. Publications in Geomorphology, State
University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, NY.
Knox, J.C. (1983) Responses of river systems to Holocene
climates. In: Late Quaternary Environments of the United
States, Vol. 2, the Holocene (Ed. by H. E. Wright and S. C.
Porter), pp. 26±41. University of Minnesota Press.
Knox, J.C. (1987) Climatic in¯uence on Upper Mississippi
Valley ¯oods. In: Flood Geomorphology (Ed. by V. R. Baker,
# 2000

43

R. C. Kochel and P. C.Patton), pp. 279±300. John Wiley and
Sons, New York.
Knox, J.C. (1993) Large increases in ¯ood magnitude in
response to modest changes in climate. Nature, 361, 430±
432.
Knox, J.C. (1996) Fluvial systems since 20,000 yrs BP. In:
Global Continental Palaeohydrology (Ed. by K. J. Gregory, L.
Starkel and V. R. Baker), pp. 87±108. John Wiley and Sons,
New York.
Kocurek, G. (1998) Aeolian system response to external
forcing factors ± a sequence stratigraphic view of the
Saharan region. In: Quaternary Deserts and Climatic
Change (Ed. by A. S. Alsharhan, K. Glennie, G. L. Whittle
and C. G. S. C. Kendall), pp. 327±337. Balkema Press.
Kocurek, G. and Havholm, K.G. (1993) Eolian sequence
stratigraphy: A conceptual framework. In: Siliciclastic
Sequence Stratigraphy: Recent Developments and
Applications (Ed. by P. Weimer and H. W. Posamentier),
Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Mem., 58, 393±410.
Koss, J.E., Ethridge, F.G. and Schumm, S.A. (1994) An
experimental study of the effects of base-level change on
¯uvial, coastal plain and shelf systems. J. Sedim. Res., B64,
90±98.
Kozarski, S. and Rotnicki, K. (1977) Valley ¯oors and changes
of river channel patterns in the north Polish Plain during
the late WuÈrm and Holocene. Quaestiones Geographicae, 4,
51±93.
Kraus, M.J. (1987) Integration of channel and ¯oodplain
suites, II. Vertical relations of alluvial paleosols. J. Sedim.
Petrol., 57, 602±612.
Kutzbach, J.E., Gallimore, R., Harrison, S.P., Behling, P.,
Selin, R. and Laarif, F. (1997) Climate and biome simulations for the last 21,000 years. Quat. Sci. Rev., 17, 473±506.
Lambeck, K. (1993) Glacial rebound and sea-level change: an
example of a relationship between mantle and surface
processes. In: Relationships Between Mantle Processes and
Geological Processes at or Near the Earth's Surface (Ed. by
R. Wortel, U. Hansen and R. Sabadini), Tectonophysics,
223, 15±37.
Lamothe, L. (1918) Les anciennes nappes alluviales et lignes
de Rivage du bassin de la Somme et leurs rapports avec
celles de la Meditarranee occidentale. Bull. Soc. Geol., Fr.,
18, 3±58.
Langbein, W.B. and Schumm, S.A. (1958) Yield of sediment in
relation to mean annual sediment. Trans. Am. Geophys
Union., 39, 1076±1084.
Lane, E.W. (1955) The importance of ¯uvial morphology in
hydraulic engineering. Am. Soc. Civil Eng. Proc., 81 (745),
1±17.
Lau, N.-C. (1988) Variability of the observed midlatitude storm
tracks in relation to low-frequency changes in the circulation pattern. J. Atmos. Sci., 45, 2718±2743.
Leckie, D.A. (1994) Canterbury Plains, New Zealand ±
Implications for sequence stratigraphic models. Am.
Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull., 78, 1240±1252.
Leclair, S.F., Bridge, J.S. and Wang, F. (1997) Preservation of
cross-strata due to migration of subaqueous dunes over
aggrading and non-aggrading beds: comparison of experimental data with theory. Geosci. Canada, 24, 55±66.
Leeder, M.R. (1975) Pedogenic carbonates and ¯ood sediment
accretion rates: a quantitative model for alluvial arid-zone
lithofacies. Geol. Mag., 112, 257±270.
Leeder, M.R. (1978) A quantitative stratigraphic model for
alluvium, with special reference to channel deposit density

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

44

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

and interconnectedness. In: Fluvial Sedimentology (Ed. by
A. D. Miall), Can. Soc. Petrol. Geol. Mem., 5, 587±596.
Leeder, M.R. and Stewart, M.D. (1996) Fluvial incision and
sequence stratigraphy: alluvial responses to relative sealevel fall and their detection in the geologic record. In:
Sequence Stratigraphy in British Geology (Ed. by S. P.
Hesselbo and D. N. Parkinson), Spec. Publ. Geol. Soc., 103,
25±39.
Leeder, M.R., Mack, G.H., Peakall, J. and Salyards, S.L.
(1996) First quantitative test of alluvial stratigraphic
models: Southern Rio Grande rift, New Mexico. Geology,
24, 87±90.
Leeder, M.R., Harris, T. and Kirkby, M.J. (1998) Sediment
supply and climate change: implications for basin stratigraphy. Basin Res., 10, 7±18.
Legarreta, L. and Uliana, M.A. (1998) Anatomy of hinterland
depositional sequences: Upper Cretaceous ¯uvial strata,
Neuquen Basin, West-Central Argentina. In: Relative Role of
Eustasy, Climate, and Tectonism in Continental Rocks (Ed.
by K. W. Shanley and P. J. McCabe), Spec. Publ. Soc. Econ.
Paleont. Miner., 59, 83±92.
Leopold, L.B. and Bull., W.B. (1979) Base level, aggradation,
and grade. Proc. Am. Phil. Soc., 123, 168±202.
Leopold, L.B. and Maddock, T. (1953) The Hydraulic
Geometry of Stream Channels and Some Physiographic
Implications. Prof. Pap. United States Geol. Surv., 252.
Lewin, J. (1989) Floods in ¯uvial geomorphology. In: Floods:
Hydrological, Sedimentological, and Geomorphological
Implications (Ed. by K. Beven and P. Carling), pp. 265±
284. John Wiley, Chichester.
Libby, W.F. (1952) Radiocarbon Dating. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Lowe, J.J. and Walker, M.J.C. (1997) Reconstructing
Quaternary Environments. Addison-Wesley Longman,
Harlow.
Mack, G.H., James, W.C. and Monger, H.C. (1993)
Classi®cation of paleosols. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 105, 129±
136.
Mackey, S.D. and Bridge, J.S. (1995) Three-dimensional
model of alluvial stratigraphy: theory and application. J.
Sedim. Res., B65, 7±31.
Mackin, J.H. (1948) Concept of the graded river. Geol. Soc.
Am. Bull., 59, 463±512.
Macklin, M.G. and Lewin, J. (1993) Holocene river alluviation
in Britain. Z. Geomorph. N. F. (Suppl.)-Bd., 88, 109±122.
Makaske, B. (1998) Anastomosing rivers. Nederl. Geogr.
Studies, 249, 1±287.
Mandier, P. (1988) Le Relief de la Moyenne VallEÁe du Rhone
au Tertiaire et au Quaternaire. Doc. du BGRM, No 151,
Paris.
Martinsen, O.J., Ryseth, A., Helland-Hansen, W., Flesche, H.,
Torkildsen, G. and Idil, S. (1999) Stratigraphic base level
and ¯uvial architecture. Ericson Sandstone (Campanian),
Rock Springs Uplift, W. Wyoming, USA. Sedimentology, 46,
235±260.
McCarthy, P.J. and Plint, A.G. (1998) Recognition of inter¯uve
seqeunce boundaries: Integrating paleopedology and sequence stratigraphy. Geology, 26, 387±390.
McMahon, T.A., Finlayson, B.L., Haines, A. and Srikanthan,
R. (1987) Runoff variability: a global perspective. In: The
In¯uence of Climate Change and Climate Variability on the
Hydrologic Regime and Water Resources (Proceedings of the
Vancouver Symposium, August 1987). IAHS Publ., 168,
3±11.
McMahon, T.A., Finlayson, B.L., Haines, A.T. and
# 2000

Srikanthan, R. (1992) Global Runoff. Continental
Comparisons of Annual Flows and Peak Discharges.
Catena Paperback, Catena-Verlag.
Meade, R.H., Yuzyk, T.R. and Day, T.J. (1990) Movement and
storage of sediment in rivers of the United States and
Canada. In: Surface Water Hydrology (Ed. by M. G. Wolman
and H. C. Riggs) Geological Society of America, Geology of
North America Series, Vol. 0-1, pp. 255±280.
Merritts, D. and Ellis, M. (1994) Introduction to special section
on tectonics and topography. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 12135±
12141.
Merritts, D.J., Vincent, K.R. and Wohl, E.E. (1994) Long river
pro®les, tectonism, and eustasy: a guide to interpreting
¯uvial terraces. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 14031±14050.
Miall, A.D. (1985) Architectural element analysis: a new
method of facies analysis applied to ¯uvial deposits. EarthSci. Rev., 22, 261±308.
Miall, A.D. (1991) Stratigraphic sequences and their chronostratigraphic correlation. J. Sedim. Petrol., 61, 497±505.
Miall, A.D. (1995) Description and interpretation of ¯uvial
deposits: a critical perspective. Sedimentology, 42, 370±384.
Miall, A.D. (1996) The Geology of Fluvial Deposits. Springer,
Berlin.
Miall, A.D. (1997) The Geology of Stratigraphic Sequences.
Springer, Berlin.
Milliman, J.D. and Syvitski, J.P.M. (1992) Geomorphic /
tectonic control on sediment discharge to the ocean: the
importance of small mountainous streams. J. Geol., 100,
525±544.
Mitchum, R.M. Jr, Vail, P.R. and Thompson III, S. (1977)
Seismic stratigraphy and global changes of sea-level, part 2:
the depositional sequence as a basic unit for stratigraphic
analysis. In: Seismic Stratigraphy ± Applications to
Hydrocarbon Exploration (Ed. by C. E. Payton), Am.
Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Mem., 27, 53±62.
Molnar, P. and England, P. (1990) Late Cenozoic uplift of
mountain ranges and global climate change: chicken or egg?
Nature, 346, 29±34.
Molnar, P., England, P. and Martinod, J. (1993) Mantle
dynamics, uplift of the Tibetan Plateau, and the Indian
monsoon. Rev. Geophys., 31, 357±396.
Morton, R.A. and Suter, J.R. (1996) Sequence stratigraphy and
composition of Late Quaternary shelf margin deltas, northern Gulf of Mexico. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull., 80, 505±
530.
Muto, T. and Steel, R.J. (1997) Principles of regression and
transgression: the nature of the interplay between accommodation and sediment supply. J. Sedim. Res., 67, 994±
1000.
Nanson, G.C. and Croke, J.C. (1992) A genetic classi®cation of
¯oodplains. Geomorphology, 4, 459±486.
Nanson, G.C. and Knighton, A.D. (1996) Anabranching rivers;
their cause, character and classi®cation. Earth Surf. Proc.
Landf., 21, 217±239.
Nanson, G.C., Young, R.Y., Prices, D.M. and Rust, B.R. (1988)
Stratigraphy, sedimentology, and Late Quaternary chronology of the channel country of western Queensland. In:
Fluvial Geomorphology of Australia (Ed. by R. F. Warner),
pp. 151±175. Academic Press, Sydney.
Nanson, G.C., Price, D.M. and Short, S.A. (1992) Wetting and
drying of Australia over the past 300 ka. Geology, 20, 791±
794.
North, C.P. (1996) The prediction and modelling of subsurface
¯uvial stratigraphy. In: Advances in Fluvial Dynamics and

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
Stratigraphy (Ed. by P. A. Carling and M. R. Dawson), pp.
395±508. John Wiley, Chichester.
North American Commission on Stratigraphic Nomenclature.
(1983) North American Stratigraphic Code. Am. Assoc.
Petrol. Geol. Bull., 67, 841±875.
Nummedal, D., Riley, G.W. and Templet, P.L. (1993) Highresolution sequence architecture: a chronostratigraphic
model based on equilibrium pro®le studies. In: Sequence
Stratigraphy and Facies Associations (Ed. by H. W.
Posamentier, C. P. Summerhayes, B. U. Haq and G. P.
Allen), Spec. Publ. Int. Assoc. Sediment., 18, 55±68.
Nystuen, J.P. (1998) History and development of sequence
stratigraphy. In: Sequence Stratigraphy ± Concepts and
Applications (Ed. by F. M. Gradstein, K. O. Sandvik and N.
J. Milton), pp. 31±116. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Olsen, H. (1990) Astronomical forcing of meandering river
behavior: Milankovitch cycles in Devonian of East
Greenland. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol., 79,
99±115.
Olsen, H. (1994) Orbital forcing on continental depositional
systems ± lacustrine and ¯uvial cyclicity in the Devonian of
East Greenland. In: Orbital Forcing and Cyclic Sequences
(Ed. by P. L. de Boer and D. G. Smith), Spec. Publ. Int.
Assoc. Sediment., 19, 429±438.
Olsen, H. and Larsen, P.H. (1993) Structural and climatic
controls on ¯uvial depositional systems: Devonian of East
Greenland. In: Alluvial Sedimentation (Ed. by M. Marzo and
C. Puigdefabregas), Spec. Publ. Int. Assoc. Sediment., 17,
401±423.
Olsen, T., Steel, R.H., Hùgseth, K., Skar, T. and Rùe, S.-L.
(1995) Sequential architecture in a ¯uvial succession:
sequence stratigraphy in the Upper Cretaceous Mesaverde
Group, Price Canyon. Utah. J. Sedim. Res., B65, 265±280.
Orton, G.J. and Reading, H.G. (1993) Variability of delatic
processes in terms of sediment supply, with particular
emphasis on grain size. Sedimentology, 40, 475±512.
Page, K., Nanson, G. and Price, D. (1996) Chronology of
Murrumbidgee River palaeochannels on the Riverine Plain,
southeastern Australia. J. Quat. Sci., 11, 311±326.
Paola, C. (2000) Quantitative models of sedimentary basin
®lling. Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 121±178.
Paola, C., Heller, P.L. and Angevine, C.L. (1992) The largescale dynamics of grain size variation in alluvial basins, 1.
Theory. Basin Res., 4, 73±90.
Parrish, J.T. (1998) Interpreting Pre-Quaternary Climate from
the Geologic Record. Columbia University Press, New York.
Payton, C.E. (Ed). (1977) Seismic Stratigraphy ± Applications
to Hydrocarbon Exploration. AAPG Mem., 27.
Pazzaglia, F.J., Gardner, T.W. and Merritts, D.J. (1998)
Bedrock ¯uvial incision and longitudinal pro®le development over geologic time scales determined by ¯uvial
terraces. In: Rivers Over Rock: Fluvial Processes in
Bedrock Channels (Ed. by K. J. Tinkler and E. E. Wohl),
AGU Monogr., 107, 207±235.
Peltier, W.R. (1998) Post-glacial variations in the level of the
sea: implications for climate dynamics and solid-earth
geophysics. Rev. Geophys., 36, 603±689.
Penck, A. and BruÈckner, E. (1909) Die Alpen im Eiszeitalter.
Tauchnitz, Leipzig.
Perlmutter, M.A. and Matthews, M.D. (1989) Global cyclostratigraphy: a model. In: Quantitative Dynamic Straitgraphy
(Ed. by T. A. Cross), pp. 233±260. Prentice Hall, Englewood
Cliffs.
Pillans, B., Chappell, J. and Naish, T.R. (1998) A review of the
Milankovitch climatic beat: template for Plio-Pleistocene
# 2000

45

sea-level changes and sequence stratigraphy. Sedim. Geol.,
122, 5±21.
Pinter, N. and Brandon, M.T. (1997) How erosion builds
mountains. Sci. Am., 276, 74±79.
Pirazzoli, P.A. (1996) Sea-Level Changes. John Wiley,
Chichester.
Pons, L.J. (1957) De geologie, de bodemvorming en de
waterstaatkundige ontwikkeling van het Land van Maas en
Waal en een gedeelte van het Rijk van Nijmegen. Versl.
Landbouwk. Onderz., 63-11, 1±156.
Porter, S.C. (1989) Some geological implications of average
Quaternary glacial conditions. Quat. Res., 32, 245±262.
Posamentier, H.W. and Allen, G.P. (1993) Siliclastic sequence
stratigraphic patterns in foreland ramp-type basins.
Geology, 21, 455±458.
Posamentier, H.W. and Vail, P.R. (1988) Eustatic controls on
clastic deposition II ± Sequence and systems tract models.
In: Sea-Level Changes: an Integrated Approach (Ed. by
C. K. Wilgus, B. S. Hastings, C. G. S. C. Kendall, H. W.
Posamentier, C. A. Ross and J. C. Van Wagoner), Spec. Publ.
Soc. Econ. Paleont. Miner., 42, 125±154.
Posamentier, H.W. and Weimer, P. (1993) Siliciclastic
sequence stratigraphy and petroleum geology nÄ Where to
from here? Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull., 77, 731±742.
Posamentier, H.W., Jervey, M.T. and Vail, P.R. (1988) Eustatic
controls on clastic deposition I ± Conceptual frameworks.
In: Sea-Level Changes: an Integrated Approach (Ed. by
C. K. Wilgus, B. S. Hastings, C. G. S. C. Kendall, H. W.
Posamentier, C. A. Ross and J. C. Van Wagoner), Spec. Publ.
Soc. Econ. Paleont. Miner., 42, 109±124.
Posamentier, H.W., Allen, G.P., James, D.P. and Tesson, M.
(1992) Forced regressions in a sequence stratigraphic
framework: Concepts, examples, and exploration signi®cance. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull., 76, 1687±1709.
Potter, P.E. (1978) Signi®cance and origin of big rivers. J. Geol.,
86, 13±33.
Powell, J.W. (1875) Exploration of the Colorado River of the
West and its Tributaries. Government Printing Of®ce.
Washington, DC.
Probst, J.-L. (1989) Hydroclimatic ¯uctuations of some
European Rivers since 1800. In: Historical Changes of
Large Alluvial Rivers, Western Europe (Ed. by G. E. Petts),
pp. 41±55. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Retallack, G.J. (1986) Fossil soils as grounds for interpreting
long-term controls on ancient rivers. J. Sedim. Petrol., 56, 1±
18.
Retallack, G.J. (1990) Soils of the Past ± An Introduction to
Palaeopedology. Unwin Hyman, Boston.
Richards, K. (1982) Rivers. Methuen, London.
Rogers, J.C. (1997) North Atlantic storm track variability and
its association to the North Atlantic Oscillation and climate
variability of Northern Europe. J. Clim., 10, 1635±1647.
Rotnicki, K. (1991) Retrodiction of palaeodischarges of meandering and sinuous alluvial rivers and its palaeohydroclimatic implications. In: Temperate Palaeohydrology (Ed. by
L. Starkel, K. J. Gregory and J. B. Thornes), pp. 431±471.
John Wiley, Chichester.
Salter, T. (1993) Fluvial scour and incision: models for their
in¯uence on the development of realistic reservoir geometries. In: Characterization of Fluvial and Aeolian Reservoirs
(Ed. by C. P. North and D. J. Prosser), Spec. Publ. Geol. Soc.,
73, 33±51.
Saucier, R.T. (1994) Geomorphology and Quaternary Geologic
History of the Lower Mississippi Valley. Mississippi River
Commission, Vicksburg.

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

46

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

Saucier, R.T. (1996) A contemporary appraisal of some key
Fiskian concepts with emphasis on Holocene meander belt
formation and morphology. Engineering Geol., 45, 67±86.
Schirmer, W. (1995) Valley bottoms in the late Quaternary. Z.
Geomorph. N. F. (Suppl.)-Bd., 100, 27±51.
Schumm, S.A. (1965) Quaternary palaeohydrology. In: The
Quaternary of the United States (Ed. by H. E. Wright and D.
G. Frey), pp. 783±794. Princeton University Press.
Schumm, S.A. (1968a) River Adjustment to Altered
Hydrologic Regimen: the Murrumbidgee River and
Palaeochannels, Australia. Prof. Pap. United States Geol.
Surv., 598.
Schumm, S.A. (1968b) Speculations concerning palaeohydrologic controls of terrestrial sedimentation. Geol. Soc. Am.
Bull., 79, 1573±1588.
Schumm, S.A. (1985) Explanation and extrapolation in
geomorphology: seven reasons for geologic uncertainty.
Trans. Jap Geomorphol. Union., 6, 1±18.
Schumm, S.A. (1977) The Fluvial System. John Wiley, New
York.
Schumm, S.A. (1991) To Interpret the Earth. Ten Ways to Be
Wrong. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
Schumm, S.A. (1993) River response to baselevel change:
Implications for sequence stratigraphy. J. Geol., 101, 279±
294.
Schumm, S.A. and Brakenridge, G.R. (1987) River responses.
In: North America and Adjacent Oceans During the Last
Deglaciation (Ed. by W. F. Ruddiman and H. E. Wright), The
Geology of North America. K-3, pp. 221±240. Geological
Society of America.
Shackleton, N.J. (1987) Oxygen isotopes, ice volume and sealevel. Quat. Sci. Rev., 6, 183±190.
Shackleton, N.J. and Opdyke, N.D. (1973) Oxygen isotope and
palaeomagnetic stratigraphy of equatorial Paci®c core V28±
238: oxygen isotope temperatures and ice volumes on a 105
and 106 year scale. Quat. Res., 3, 39±55.
Shanley, K.W. and McCabe, P.J. (1991) Predicting facies
architecture through sequence stratigraphy: an example
from the Kaiparowits Plateau. Utah. Geology, 19, 742±745.
Shanley, K.W. and McCabe, P.J. (1993) Alluvial architecture
in a sequence stratigraphic framework: a case study from the
Upper Cretaceous of southern Utah, U.S.A. In: Quantitative
Modelling of Clastic Hydrocarbon Reservoirs and Outcrop
Analogs (Ed. by S. S. Flint and I. D. Bryant), Spec. Publ. Int.
Assoc. Sediment., 15, 21±55.
Shanley, K.W. and McCabe, P.J. (1994) Perspectives on the
sequence stratigraphy of continental strata: report of a
working group at the 1991 NUNA Conference on High
Resolution Sequence Stratigraphy. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol.
Bull., 74, 544±568.
Slingerland, R.L. and Snow, R.S. (1988) Stability analysis of a
rejuvenated ¯uvial system. Z. Geomorph. N. F. (Suppl.)-Bd.,
67, 93±102.
Sloss, L.L. (1962) Stratigraphic models in exploration. Am.
Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull., 46, 1050±1057.
Sloss, L.L. (1963) Sequences in the cratonic interior of North
America. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 74, 93±113.
Smith, G.A. (1994) Climatic in¯uences on continental deposition during late-stage ®lling of an extensional basin, southeastern Arizona. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 106, 1212±1228.
Smith, N.D., Cross, T.A., Duf®cy, J.P. and Clough, S.R. (1989)
Anatomy of an avulsion. Sedimentology, 36, 1±23.
Stanley, D.J. Warne, A.G. (1993) Nile Delta: recent geological
evolution and human impact. Science, 260, 628±634.
Starkel, L. (1987) The evolution of European rivers ± a
# 2000

complex response. In: Palaeohydrology in Practice (Ed. by
K. J. Gregory, J. Lewin and J. B. Thornes), pp. 333±339. John
Wiley, Chichester.
Starkel, L. (1991) Long-distance correlation of ¯uvial events in
the temperate zone. In: Temperate Palaeohydrology (Ed. by
L. Starkel, K. J. Gregory and J. B. Thornes), pp. 473±495.
John Wiley, Chichester.
Starkel, L., Gregory, K.J. and Thornes, J.B. (Eds).
(1991) Temperate Palaeohydrology. John Wiley, Chichester.
Straf®n, E.C., Blum, M.D., Colls, A. and Stokes, S. (2000)
Alluvial stratigraphy of the Loire and Arroux Rivers,
Burgundy, France. Quaternaire, 10, 271±282.
Summer®eld, M.A. (1985) Plate tectonics and landscape
development on the African continent. In: Tectonic
Geomorphology (Ed. by M. Morisawa and J. Hack), pp. 27±
51. Allen and Unwin, Boston.
Suter, J.R. and Berryhill, H.L. Jr (1985) Late Quaternary shelfmargin deltas, northwest Gulf of Mexico. Am. Assoc. Petrol.
Geol. Bull., 69, 77±91.
Talling, P.J. (1998) How and where do incised valleys form if
sea-level remains above the shelf edge? Geology, 26, 87±90.
Tebbens, L.A., Veldkamp, A., Westerhoff, W. and
Kroonenberg, S.B. (1999) Fluvial incision and channel
downcutting as a response to Lateglacial and Early
Holocene climate change: the River Meuse lower reach. J.
Quat. Sci., 14, 59±75.
Tesson, M., Allen, G.P. and Ravenne, C. (1993) Late
Pleistocene shelf-perched lowstand wedges on the Rhone
continental shelf. In: Sequence Stratigraphy and Facies
Associations (Ed. by H. W.Posamentier, C. P. Summerhayes,
B. U. Haq and G. P. Allen), Spec. Publ. Int. Assoc.
Sediment., 18, 183±196.
Tesson, M. and Gensous, B. (1998) LõÂenregistrement des cycles
climatiques et eustatiques quaternaires de marges recentes
du bassin Nord-Mediterraneen. C. R. Academie des
Sciences, Paris, Sciences de la Terre Des Planetes, 326,
121±127.
Toomey, R.S., Blum, M.D. and Valastro, S. Jr. (1993) Late
Quaternary climates and environments of the Edwards
Plateau, Texas. Glob. Plan. Change, 7, 299±320.
ToÈrnqvist, T.E. (1993) Holocene alternation of meandering and
anastomosing ¯uvial systems in the Rhine-Meuse Delta
(central Netherlands) controlled by sea-level rise and
subsoil erodibility. J. Sedim. Petrol., 63, 683±693.
ToÈrnqvist, T.E. (1994) Middle and late Holocene avulsion
history of the River Rhine (Rhine-Meuse delta,
Netherlands). Geology, 22, 711±714.
ToÈrnqvist, T.E. (1995) Discussion: alluvial architecture of the
Quaternary Rhine±Meuse river system in the Netherlands.
Geol. Mijnb., 74, 183±186.
ToÈrnqvist, T.E. (1998) Longitudinal pro®le evolution of the
Rhine±Meuse system during the last deglaciation: interplay
of climate change and glacio-eustasy? Terra Nova, 10, 11±
15.
ToÈrnqvist, T.E., Wallinga, J., Murray, A.S., De Wolf, H.,
Cleveringa, P. and De Gans, W. (2000) Response of the
Rhine-Meuse system (west-central Netherlands) to the last
Quaternary glacio-eustatic cycles: a ®rst assessment. Global
Planet. Change, in press.
Torres, W.F.J. and Jain, S.C. (1984) Aggradation and
Degradation of Alluvial Channel Beds. Iowa Institute for
Hydraulic Research Report 274, University of Iowa, Iowa
City.
Tushingham, A.M. and Peltier, W.R. (1992) Validation of the
ICE-3G model of WuÈrm-Wisconsin deglaciation using a

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

Fluvial responses to climate and sea-level change
global database of relative sea-level histories. J. Geophys.
Res., 97, 3285±3304.
Vail, P.R., Mitchum, R.M. and Thompson III, S. (1977)
Seismic stratigraphy and global changes of sea-level, part
4: global cycles of relative changes of sea-level. In: Seismic
Stratigraphy ± Applications to Hydrocarbon Exploration
(Ed. by C. E. Payton), Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Mem., 26, 83±
97.
Van den Berg, J.H. (1995) Prediction of alluvial channel
pattern of perennial rivers. Geomorphology, 12, 259±279.
Vandenberghe, J. (1995) Postglacial river activity and climate:
state of the art and future prospects. PalaÃoklimaforschung,
14, 1±9.
Van de Plassche, O. (1982) Sea-level change and water-level
movements in the Netherlands during the Holocene. Meded.
Rijks Geol. Dienst, 36, 1±93.
Van der Woude, J.D. (1984) The ¯uviolagoonal palaeoenvironment in the Rhine/Meuse deltaic plain. Sedimentology,
31, 395±400.
Van Dijk, G.J., Berendsen, H.J.A. and Roeleveld, W. (1991)
Holocene water level development in The Netherlands'
river area; implications for sea-level reconstruction. Geol.
Mijnb., 70, 311±326.
Van Wagoner, J.C. (1995a) Overview of sequence stratigraphy
of foreland basin deposits: Terminology, summary of
papers, and glossary of sequence stratigraphy. In:
Sequence Stratigraphy of Foreland Basin Deposits (Ed. by
J. C. Van Wagoner and G. T. Bertram), Am. Assoc. Petrol.
Geol. Mem., 64, ix±xxi.
Van Wagoner, J.C. (1995b) Sequence stratigraphy and marine
to nonmarine facies architecture of foreland basin strata,
Book Cliffs, Utah, U.S.A. In: Sequence Stratigraphy of
Foreland Basin Deposits (Ed. by J. C. Van Wagoner and G. T.
Bertram), Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Mem., 64, 137±223.
Van Wagoner, J.C. (1998) Sequence stratigraphy and marine to
nonmarine facies architecture of foreland basin strata, Book
Cliffs, Utah, U.S.A.: Reply. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull.,
82, 1607±1618.
Van Wagoner, J.C., Posamentier, H.W., Mitchum, R.M., Vail,
P.R., Sarg, J.F., Loutit, T.S. and Hardenbol, J. (1988) An
overview of the fundamentals of sequence stratigraphy and
some key de®nitions. In: Sea-Level Changes: an Integrated
Approach (Ed. by C. K. Wilgus, B. S. Hastings, C. G. S. C.
Kendall, H. W. Posamentier, C. A. Ross and J. C. Van
Wagoner), Spec. Publ. Soc. Econ. Paleont. Miner., 42, 39±45.
Van Wagoner, J.C., Mitchum, R.M., Campion, K.M. and
Rahmanian,
V.D.
(1990)
Siliciclastic
Sequence
Stratigraphy in Well Logs, Cores, and Outcrops: Concepts
for High-Resolution Correlation of Time and Facies: AAPG
Methods in Exploration 7. AAPG, Tulsa.
Veldkamp, A. and Van den Berg, M.W. (1993) Threedimensional modelling of Quaternary ¯uvial dynamics in
a climo-tectonic dependent system. A case study of the
Maas record (Maastricht, The Netherlands). Global Planet.
Change, 8, 203±218.
Veldkamp, A. and Van Dijke, J.J. (1998) Modelling long-term
erosion and sedimentation processes in ¯uvial systems: A
case study for the Allier/Loire system. In: Palaeohydrology
and Environmental Change (Ed. by G. Benito, V. R. Baker
and K. J. Gregory), pp. 53±66. John Wiley, Chichester.
Walker, R.G. (1990) Facies modeling and sequence stratigraphy. J. Sedim. Petrol., 60, 777±786.
Walker, R.G. (1992) Facies, facies models and modern
stratigraphic concepts. In: Facies Models (Ed. by R. G.
# 2000

47

Walker and N. P. James), pp. 1±14. Geological Association of
Canada, St. John's.
Walling, D.E. (1983) The sediment delivery problem. J.
Hydrol., 65, 209±237.
Walling, D.E. and Webb, B.W. (1983) Patterns of sediment
yield. In: Background to Palaeohydrology (Ed. by K. J.
Gregory), pp. 69±100. John Wiley, Chichester.
Walling, D.E. and Webb, B.W. (1996) Erosion and sediment
yield: a global overview. In: Erosion and Sediment Yield:
Global and Regional Perspectives (Ed. by D. E. Walling and
B. W. Webb), Int. Assoc. Hydrol. Sci. Publ., 236, 3±20.
Wanless, H.R. and Weller, J.M. (1932) Correlation and extent
of Pennsylvanian cyclothems. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 43,
1003±1016.
Waylen, P.R. (1996) Global hydrology in relation to palaeohydrological change. In: Global Continental Palaeohydrology
(Ed. by K. J. Gregory, L. Starkel and V. R. Baker), pp. 61±86.
John Wiley, Chichester.
Wescott, W.A. (1993) Geomorphic thresholds and complex
response of ¯uvial systems ± some implications for
sequence stratigraphy. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull., 77,
1208±1218.
Wheeler, H.E. (1964) Baselevel, lithostratigraphic surface, and
time stratigraphy. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 75, 599±610.
Wilgus, C.K., Hastings, B.S., Kendall, C.G.S.C., Posamentier,
H.W., Ross, C.A. and Van Wagoner, J.C. (Eds) (1988) SeaLevel Changes. An Integrated Approach. Spec. Publ. Soc.
Econ. Paleont. Miner., 42, 1±407.
Williams, G.P. (1978) Bankfull discharge of rivers. Water Res.
Res., 14, 1141±1154.
Williams, G.P. (1987) Palaeo¯uvial estimates from dimensions
of former channels and meanders. In. Flood Geomorphology
(Ed. by V. R. Baker, R. C. Kochel, and P. C. Patton), pp. 321±
334. John Wiley and Sons.
Willis, B. (1993a) Ancient river systems in the Himalayan
foredeep, Chinji village area, northern Pakistan. Sedim.
Geol., 88, 1±76.
Willis, B. (1993b) Evolution of Miocene ¯uvial systems in the
Himalayan foredeep through a two kilometer thick succession in northern Pakistan. Sedim. Geol., 88, 77±122.
Willis, B.J. and Behrensmeyer, A.K. (1994) Architecture of
Miocene overbank deposits in northern Pakistan. J. Sedim.
Res., B64, 60±67.
Wohl, E.E. and Enzel, Y. (1996) Data for palaeohydrology.
In: Global Continental Palaeohydrology (Ed. by K. J.
Gregory, L. Starkel and V. R. Baker), pp. 23±60. John
Wiley, Chichester.
Wood, L.J., Ethridge, F.G. and Schumm, S.A. (1993) The
effects of rate of base-level ¯uctuation on coastal-plain,
shelf and slope depositional systems: an experimental
approach. In: Sequence Stratigraphy and Facies
Associations (Ed. by H. W. Posamentier, C. P.
Summerhayes, B. U. Haq and G. P. Allen), Spec. Publ.
Int. Assoc. Sediment., 18, 43±53.
Wood, L.J., Ethridge, F.G. and Schumm, S.A. (1994) An
experimental study of the in¯uence of subaqueous shelf
angles on coastal plain and shelf deposits. In: Siliciclastic
Sequence Stratigraphy. Recent Developments and
Applications (Ed. by P. Weimer and H. W. Posamentier),
Am. Ass. Petrol. Geol. Mem., 58, 381±391.
Wright, H.E. Jr (1987) Synthesis: Land south of the ice sheets.
In: North America and Adjacent Oceans During the Last
Deglaciation (Ed. by W. F.Ruddiman and H. E. Wright), GSA
Geology of North America, Vol. K-3, pp. 479±488.
Wright, H.E., Jr, Kutzbach, J.E., Webb, T., Ruddiman, W.F.,

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

48

M. D. Blum and T. E. ToÈrnqvist

Street-Perrott, F.A. and Bartlein, P.J. (Eds). (1993) Global
Climates Since the Last Glacial Maximum. University of
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Wright, V.P. (Ed). (1986) Paleosols. Princeton University
Press, Princeton.
Wright, V.P. and Marriott, S.B. (1993) The sequence stratigraphy of ¯uvial depositional systems: the role of ¯oodplain
sediment storage. Sedim. Geol., 86, 203±210.
Wyroll, K.-H. (1988) Determining the causes of Pleistocene
stream aggradation in the central coastal areas of western
Australia. Catena, 15, 39±51.
Yang, C.-S. and Nio, S.-D. (1993) Application of high
resolution sequence stratigraphy to the Upper Rotliegend
in the offshore. In: Siliciclastic Sequence Stratigraphy (Ed.
by P. Weimer and H. W. Posamentier), Am. Assoc. Petrol.
Geol. Mem., 58, 285±316.
Yoshida, S., Miall, A.D. and Willis, A. (1998) Sequence

# 2000

stratigraphy and marine to nonmarine facies architecture of
foreland basin strata, Book Cliffs, Utah, U.S.A. Am. Assoc.
Petrol. Geol. Bull., 82, 1596±1606.
Zaitlin, B.A., Dalrymple, R.W. and Boyd, R. (1994) The
stratigraphic organization of incised-valley systems associated with relative sea-level change. In: Incised-Valley
Systems: Origin and Sedimentary Sequences (Ed. by R. W.
Dalrymple, R. Boyd and B. A. Zaitlin), Spec. Publ. Soc.
Econ. Paleont. Miner., 51, 45±60.
Zaleha, M.J. (1997) Fluvial and lacustrine palaeoenvironments
of the Miocene Siwalik Group, Khaur area, northern
Pakistan. Sedimentology, 44, 349±368.
Zhang, Z., Sun, K. and Yin, J. (1997) Sedimentology and
sequence stratigraphy of the Shanxi Formation (Lower
Permian) in the northwestern Ordos Basin, China: an
alternative sequence model for ¯uvial strata. Sedim. Geol.,
112, 123±136.

International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 47 (Suppl. 1), 2±48

