THE JOHNSON SITE: TYPE SITE OF THE ARANSAS
FOCUS OF THE TEXAS COAST~

Introduction

The purpose of this paper is two-fold: (1) to record
the data from one completely excavated small site which has
been placed in the Aransas focus of the Texas coast; (2) to
present a general outline of the Aransas focus culture and
indicate present opinion concerning its place in both space
and time.
Thus far no excavated site on the Texas coast has been
reported with full descriptive details." Various individuals
have briefly described archaeological materials from numerous points along the 400 miles of Texas coast,s Others have
referred to the significance of Texas coastal archaeology in
connection with the problems of cultural relationships between Mexico and the Mississippi Valley.’ Only one archaeologist, E. B. S~iyles, has attempted to synthesize the rather
heterogeneous data on the archaeology of the coastal strip,
*Portions of this paper are drawn from a thesis submitted in partial fulfillment
of requirements for the Ph. D. degree at Harvard University in 1947.
= One exception to this statement should be noted, the Bee County terrace sites
reported by Sellards (1940)o
However, these sites are located 30 to 50 miles inland
£rom the nearest salt water (Copano Bay).
~Anderson, 1932; Douglas, 1903; Duffen, 1940; Ekholm, 1944, p. 443; Gatschet,
1891, p. 55; Jackson, 1940, pp. 99-107, 115-119L 128-130; Krieger, 1945a, pp. 41-43;
MacNeish, 1947, pp. 6-8; Martin, n. d, 1929, 1930a, 1930b, 1931, 1936; Mason, J.
,Alden, 1935; Mason, Otis T., 1880, p. 442; Patterson, 1936, pp. 19-20, 1937a, pp.
38-39, 56, 1937b, p. 38; Pearce, 1919, pp. 227-228~ 1932a, pp. 670-672, 1932b, pp.
4~, 46-47, 49-51, 54, 1932c, 1935, pp. 4, 97, 1938, pp. 1, 6-8, 14; Potter, 1930; Reed,
Clyde T., 1937; Reed, Erik K., 1938; Roberts, 1940, p. 80; Smith, 1936, pp. 98-I02,
105-110, 194t, pp. 1, 6-7; Thomas, 1891, p. 217; "Woodbury, George, 1937; Woodbury, George and Edna, 1935; Wright, 1940, pp. 38, 40, 41, 42, 44o4L
4Fewkas~ 1907, pp. 272-2?3; Krieger, 1943, p, 156, 1945a, pp. 41-43, 194~b, pp.
510-511, 1947, pp. 202-207; MacNeish, 1947, pp. 9-14; Mason, J. Alden, 1935, 1937,
1938, p. 214, 1943; Pearce, 1919, p. 234, 1932b, pp. 146-147; Phillips, 1940, p. 365;
Waring and Holder, 1945, p. 30.

The Johnson Si$e

41

but this synthesis involved very little data derived from excavation. Sayles described in outline form four cultural
units in the Texas coastal area: an Attacapan Phase in the
eastern section; an early pre-ceramic Oso Phase and a later
Rockport Phase (with pottery) in the central section; and
a Brownsville Phase in the southern section?

This paper is concerned only with a portion of the central section of the Texas coast, the area where Sayles locates
his Oso and Rockport Phases. In this area another preceramic cultural unit, the Aransas focus, must now be recognized. The Aransas focus, which cannot be identified
with the Oso Phase of Sayles, is based on three excavated
sites in the Aransas Bay area: the Johnson site, the KentCrane site, and the Live Oak Point site .(see Plate 2). In
each of these sites a Rockport component overlies an -&ransas component. In this section of the coast scattered materials attributable to the Aransas focus have also been
found. This report is concerned with the Johnson site,
where the Aransas focus was first recognized. It is hoped
thereby to establish at least one reference point in the archaeology of the Texas coast.
The Natural Setting
The Johnson site is a small shell midden that was discovered by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter during
their site survey of the Aransas Bay area in the years 19271929.~ Aransas Bay is located in the central section of the
~Sa~les, 1935.
The scattered data on these cultural units are to be found as
follows. Attacapan Phase: p. 41; Table !3, p. 124; Map E, p. 136. O$o Phase: pp.
40, 117; Table $, p. 102; Table 9, p. 110; Table 13, p. 124; Map A, p. 128; Plate
III, B, p. I0; Plate X, d-f, p. 42; Plate XXV, [, b, p. 88; see also Gladwin, 1937, pp.
32, 36, 39, Plates III, VIII, IX.
Rockport Phase: pp. 35, 40, 117; Table I, p. 102;
Table 9, p. 110; Table 13, p. 124; Map Co p. 132; Plate X, d-f, p. 42. Brownsville
Phase: pp. "40, 117; Table $, p. 102; Table 13, p. 124; Plate X, d-f, p. 42; Map (2.
p. 132.
a In this paper the term "Rockport focus" is used instead of Sayles’ ’*Roekport
phase". These terms are roughly equivalent and refer to the late lmttery horizon of
the central section of the Texas coast.
~Martin, n. d., Site I2, p. 7.

42

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleon~olog~ca~ Society

Texas coast. The Johnson site is on the west side of Live
Oak Peninsula some four miles west of the town of Rockport (Aransas County) and lies on the flat, muddy beach
of a small inlet of Copano Bay (Plate 2). Today the site
is approximately 350 meters from the shore line.
This locality is a part of what is known to physiographers as the Coastal Prairie.’ The terrain o/~ the Coastal Prairie
is very flat and in places marshy. As the name implies, it
is predominantly grassland; but there are local areas of woodland, notably along stream courses and on sandy ridges. Live
Oak Peninsula is a sandy wooded area, being covered with
a chaparral or thorny brush vegetation, but there is evidence
which indicates that in aboriginal times Live Oak Peninsula
was a grass-covered prairie. Within the last hundred years
chaparral vegetation has moved northward and eastward
along the Texas coast,* and Price and Gunter~° have presented historical evidence showing that as late as 1870 the
entire Aransas Bay coast line was truly a prairie.
The climate of the Aransas Bay area has certain unfavorable aspects from the point of view of human occupation
under aborigina! conditions. Temperatures are mesothermal,
but precipitation is unreliable. Little rainfall occurs in the
winter, limiting the surface water supply during that season. In some years rainfall is so deficient that such years
may be classified by climatologists as desert years?* Even
today agriculture is not profitable in this area, unfavorable
climate and poor soil being the principal factors. It is therefore not surprising to find in this area the archaeological
remains of a prehistoric people who lived by hunting along
the shore and by fishing and shellI:ish collecting in the shallow coastal waters.
’Fenneraaa, 1938, pp. 100-120.
*Tharp, 1939, p. 8.
*°Prlce and Gunter, 1942, pp.
a~Rumell, 1945, pp. 43, 46-47.

12-13.

The Jo}~nson Site

43

Excavation
The Johnson site was excavated on three separate occasions. Sometime during the years 1927-~929 Martin and
Potter’" dug a small test pit in the central part of the shell
heap. Later, in the summer of 1930, A. M. Wilson did further testing for the University of Texas. Wilson ran a trench
~rom one edge of the midden to its center and then dxtg a
large circular area in the center, removing about thirty per
cent of the total area of the midden. The peripheral remnant was completely excavated by a University of TexasWorks Progress Administration expedition," under the direction of William A. Duffen, during the period of October 9 to November 6, 1940. Of the three excavations,
only the last was adequately controlled."
Site Description
In his survey report Martln’~ describes the Johnson site
t~ Martin, n. d., p. 7.

as being circular in plan, with a diameter of about 20 meters, and rising approximately 75 centimeters above the surrounding land. He believes that the original diameter must
have been about 15 meters and its height not less than 1.8
meters. To explain this presumed loss of elevation he cites

two factors: first, the heavy weight of the shell accumulation has led to settling; second, the area has been plowed
several times, and this has not only lowered the height by
spreading the shell debris but it has also loosened it and
thereby hastened erosion. The latter seems to be the more

importani factor, if not the only one.
Wilson’s field notes quote Martin’s description without
adding further details concerning the size and shape of the
Ks Martin, n. d., p. 7.
~*Work Project No. 16770.
In the records at the University of Texas this site
is known as 72D9-19. Permission to excavate was given by the land-owner, Mr. Bert
Johnson, of the nearby town of Fulton.
**A brief reference to the work of Dut~en at this site is to be found in a newspaper feature article by Brlster (1940).

44

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

shell midden. Duffen’s excavation data, however, indicate
that the shell midden was elliptical rather than circular in
plan, having a maximum width of 27.5 meters and a maximum length of 35 meters. The earlier excavations had removed the point of highest elevation, making it impossible
for Duf£e~ to measure the height of the original heap above
the surrounding plain.
As for the maximum thickness of the shell deposit, Martin states that his test pit "was dug to a depth of over four
feet (1.2 meters), and the lowest strata of shell was.~:not
reached.’’~° Wilson’s field notes mention that the greatest
thickness measured about 1.5 meters and that this was near
the center of the midden. Duffen, who excavated the thinner marginal area, records a maximum depth of 67 centimeters. We may therefore picture the shell midden as resembling a piano-convex lens with a maximum thickness
of approximately 1.5 meters and an average diameter of
some 30 meters.
Scattered around the shell midden, at distances varying from 90 to 250 meters, are small circular deposits of
shell. These are miniatures of the main shell midden. One
such deposit, which is located about 180 meters northeast
of the large heap, seems to represent the average shape and
size. It is quite round and has a diameter of 1.5 meters. Another, situated some 90 meters east of the large heap, is
somewhat elongated, being 1.5 meters long and 1.2 meters
wide. Excavation showed that its maximum thickness was
15 centimeters.
The area surrounding the site has little relief, and there
are no streams in the immediate vicinity. The slope from
the shell midden to the bay shore is so gradual that it is
scarcely perceptible. According to local inhabitants the shell
heap is far enough away from the bay to escape inundation
during most storms. Only during the most severe hurri-

The Johnson Site

4~

canes does water reach it. That water does reach the shell
heap is attested by Wilson’s report that he found driftwood
lodged in bushes which grew in the center.
Contents of the Shell Midden
The Johnson site is a typical maritime midden. The bulk
of its contents, as revealed by excavation, consists of shells
and dark soil. The shells represented are principally oyster,
conch or whelk, clam, scallop, and moon shell, with oyster
predominating and the others occurring in about the same
order of frequency as they are named. Duffen made a representative collection of the shells which occurred in the
Johnson site and these have been identified as follows:1’
SCIENTIFIC NAME
Ostrea virginica Gmelin
Ostrea sp?
Busycon perversum Say
Busycon perversum Kieneri Phil.
Busycon pym~m Dillwyn
Fasciolaria papillosa Sowerby
(-- gigantea of author’s no.n Kiener)
Fasciolaria distans Lamarck
Macrocallista nimbosa Solander
Vemts campectoinensis Gmelin
Dinocardium, rolmstum Solander
Area ponderosa Say
Area transversa Say
Chione eancellata Linne
Pecten gtT~bus amplicostatus Dall
Polinices duplicata Say
Brachidontes recurvus Rafinesque
Lucina floridana Conrad
Diodora cayenensis Lamarck
Oliva sayana Ravenel
Murex pomum Gmelin
Littorina irrorata Say
Praticolella berlandieriana Moricaud

COMMON NAME
Common oyster
Oyster
Left-handed conch or whelk
Kiener’s conch or whelk
Pear conch or whelk
Conch or whelk
Conch or whelk
Sunset clam
Yucatan little-neck clam
Heart clam
Heavy ark shell
Transverse ark shell
Chione
\Vide-ribbed scallop
Moon shell or shark-eye
Curved mussel
((Has no common name)
Limpet
Panama shell
Apple snail
Periwinkle
Land snail

~:The marine forms were identified by Messrs. William J. Clench and Richard
W. Foster, respectively Curator and Assistar~t Curator of Mollusks, Museum of Comparative Zoo!ogy, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. The one land form
(last on the list) was identified by Mr. Merrill Champion, Research Assistant, of the

46

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

All of these mollusks except the last one on the list are
marine forms, and presumably all were brought to the site
by its occupants. The exception is the land snail, which
probably got there on its own. It should be stated that all
of these forms are living on the Texas coast today. It is probably fair to assume that most, if not all, of these mollusks
were collected for food by the inhabitants of the site. All
of the various forms listed are edible.
Scattered throughout the midden were the bones of mammals, turtles, fish, and birds. Forms that have been identified
are listed below." These forms suggest the range of animal
life that was hunted and whose flesh supplemented the shellfish diet. The bones of some of these forms, as will be noted
later, were used for making tools and ornaments.
SCIENTIFIC NAME
Odocoileus
Procyon
Tayassu
Cauls
Lepus caIifornicus
Thoonomys
Bison
Terrapene
CheIydra (?)
Balistes
Chaetodipterus
Gavin immer
Anatidae
Anas platyrbynchos
Anas ac~uta
Anas americana
Spatula clypeata
Buteo sp.

COMMON NAME
Deer
Porpoise or mantee
Raccoon
Peccary
Probably coyote
Jack rabbit
Pocket gopher
Bison
Turtle
Snapper turtle
Triggerfish
Fish
Common loon
Duck
Mallard
Pintail
Widgeon
Shoveller
Hawk

~s The bird bones were identified by Dr. A. Wetmore, Secretary of the U. S. National Museum; the rabbit bones by Dr. David H. Johnson, Associate Curator ol[ Mammals, U. S. National Museum; and the remainder of the bo~:es by Dr. T. E. White,
Assistant Curator of Vertebrate Paleontology, Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard
University.

The Johnson Site

Less common than shell or bone were flint chips, lumps
of burned clay, small pieces of asphalt, artifacts of shell,
bone, stone, and clay. Traces of fire were found in the form
of ash and charred bone. Included in the midden were six
human burials.
No stratigraphic divisions were discernible, although
Wilson states that the deposit gradually grew lighter in tone
as he worked downward toward the bottom of the midden.
The surface of the dark soil at the base of the midden was
quite irregular, and in the central portion Wilson noted
shallow trenches, one of which was about 2.5 meters long,
45 centimeters wide, and 6 to 8 centimeters deep. These
trenches seemed to parallel each other and to be oriented
northwest-southeast. The scanty descriptive data available
do not permit fruitful interpretation of these trenches.
One important question concerning the contents of the
Johnson shell midden has to do with the location of the
potsherds. Martin’s survey report mentions finding projectile points, but nothing is said about pottery. Wilson says
that a few potsherds were found, but he neglects to indicate just where they were found. Duffen’s excavation failed
to turn up a single potsherd in the midden deposit, and no
trace of pottery was found in the area adjacent to the site.
Recalling the location of the area excavated by Wilson, it
is probably safe to conclude that the potsherds occurred
in the uppermost part of the midden, somewhere near the
center. This conclusion is supported by the fact that at the
nearby Kent-Crane site, which also belongs to the Aransas
focus, pottery is confined to the uppermost levels of the
shell midden deposit.
Burials

Six burials were encountered during the excavation o/~
the Johnson site, one by Wilson in 1930, and five by Duffen
in 1940. All of these burials had presumably been placed in
pits that were dug into the shell midden deposit, but excavation failed to reveal evidences o£ pit outlines. The burials

48

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

were fairly well scattered over the shell midden area, one
(No. 1) in the center, two (No. 5 and No. 6) in the northeast quadrant, two (No. 2 and No. 3) in the southwest
quadrant, and one (No. 5) in the northwest quadrant. Only the two in the southwest quadrant were definitely assoc.iated with each other in any way, Burial 2 having been
disturbed by the interment of Burial 3.
Burial 1. This burial, found by Wilson in 1930, was
located somewhere near the center of the shell midden and
at a depth of approximately 60 centimeters below the surface. An adult male (?)" lay on the back in an extended
position, the body having a north-south alignment. The
field notes do not record whether the head pointed north
or south. It may have pointed north, as in the case of the
only other extended burial at this site (No. 3). A small projectile point was found in the thoracic cavity just above the
vertebral column, and near the pelvis were small bits of
red ochre.
Burial 2. This burial evidently had. been disturbed by
digging the pit for Burial 3, with which it was in close contact. The bones, which consisted of a skull with most of
the face missing, a humerus, and an ulna, did not occur in
any semblance of anatomical order. They belonged to an
adult male. Data on position and orientation could not be
obtained. These bones were located at a depth varying from
22 to 37 centimeters below the surface of the midden and
44 centimeters above its base.
Burial 3. As stated above, Burial 3 explains the disturbed condition of Burial 1. Burial 3 is that of an adult
fully extended on the back, the head pointing north. This
a Data on sex and age were taken from the osteometric records of Dr. Marcus S.
Goldstein.
These records are on file in the Department of Anthropology at the University of Texas.

PLATE 2
Map showing location of three Aransas focus sites on the Texas coast.

Plate 2

The Johnson Site

49

burial lay 30 centimeters below the surface of the shell midden and 35 centimeters above the soil surface at the base
of the deposit.
Burial 4. Again we find a disturbed condition. Only
the pelvic bones and the lower extremities of an adult were
found, but they remained in anatomical order. No trace
of the upper part of the body could be discerned, and there
was no evidence which would help to explain the disturbed
condition. From the arrangement of the remaining bones
it might be inferred that the head was pointing toward the
south and that the body lay on the back with the legs semiflexed. This~ burial lay directly on the dark earth at the
base of the shell heap and at a depth of 62 centimeters below the surface at that point.

Bu~al 5. This was a child burial, semi-flexed, lying on
the right side, with the hands placed beneath the face, th~
head pointing northeast. It lay at the base of the midden
under 35 centimeters of shell deposit.
Burial 6. This was an adult that had been placed in a
fully flexed prone position, with the hands near the face.
The head pointed north. The skeletal remains lay only 15
centimeters above the base of the midden and under 42 centimeters of shell deposit.
Analysis of these burial data shows that two different
types of burial are represented, extended and flexed. Disregarding Burial 2, which was too badly disturbed to yield
useful information, there are two extended burials and three
flexed burials. The two extended burials are identical in all
significant details, but there is a certain amount of variation in the position and orientation of the flexed burials.
Of these flexed burials two are semi-flexed and one fully
flexed; .and the body attitude is different in each case--prone, right side, and supine, but the last is doubtful. In
the extended burials orientation appears to be north in both
cases, but in the flexed burials two are south and one northeast.

50

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The burial evidence suggests the possibility that two different groups of people may be involved. In additional support of this evidence, there is the fact that the flexed burials are segregated in the northern part of the midden,
whereas the extended burials occur near the center and in
the southwest quadrant. The field records indicate that the
flexed buria!s were in a much poorer state of preservation,
which may or may not be meaningful. The vertical distribution of the burials in the mound also supports this interpretation, the flexed burials all lying at or very near the
base of the mound. Unfortunately, there is no burial furniture to aid in cultural identification, and the skeletal material is so poorly preserved that osteometric measurements
and morphological observations were not feasible. This situation will have to be checked against clearly established
burial sequences when and if these are developed in the
area. For the present, sinc~ practically all of the site seems
to represent occupation by only one cultural group, we
will assume that this group showed some variety in burial
cusEom.

Description of the Artifacts
The artifacts from the Johnson site, as indicated in the
preceding section, were acquired by three individuals on
three separate occasions. Those from Duffen’s excavation
are by far the most numerous and are described below. The
nine projectile points reported by Martin have not been
examined and are not included in the descriptions. As for
the artifacts from Wilson’s test excavation, two very small
collections survive at the University of Texas which probably, but not certainly, contain the objects excavated by
Wilson. Artifacts from these two small collections are not
illustrated in this paper, but reference is made to them in
a few places for the sake of completing the record. In each
instance a specific statement points out the uncertain provenience.
The objects from Duffen’s excavation are not numerous, numbering only 127, and of these 20 are unclassifiable

The ~oh~o~ S~te

51

fragments. All of these objects are fashioned from three
kinds of raw materials, namely, shell, bone, and stone. Approximate percentages of these materials run as follows:
shell 55 ~:, bone 30 %, and stone 15 %.
SHELL OBJECTS.
These number 71 and are made from
only two kinds of shell, conch (Busycon perversum Say and
Fasciolaria papillosa Sowerby) and oyster (Ostrea virginica
Gmelin). Only one object is made of oyster shell. The conch
shell objects are chiefly tools which are adapted for hammering, cutting, piercing, and scraping purposes.

Conch Shell Hammers. One of the most characteristic
tools is a hammer made from the conch. Twenty-two of
these were well distributed both horizontally and vertically
over the area excavated in 1940, but none is reported from
the excavation of 1930, doubtless because such tools were
overlooked.
This hammer was formed by selecting a large conch
shell and removing all or nearly all of the larger outer whorl,
leaving the columella and most of the spire (Plate 3, a). It
is possible that many such hammers were made from shells
whose outer whorls had already been removed for use in
making adzes or other tools. All of these hammers show battering on the outermost whorl margin remaining on the
spire. The battered area is invariably opposite the shell aperture, evidently the strongest and most convenient area. The
amount of battering varies from light to very heavy, and
in the latter cases the original angular whorl margin of the
spire has been reduced to a rounded eminence. In five specimens the battered area has been broken through, leaving irregular holes of varying sizes. As a rule the innermost whorls
of the spire are intact, but in three hammers this apical part
of the spire is missing.
In fourteen specimens the ~’handle’" or columella part
of the hammer shows clear evidences of purposeful smooth~
ing along the irregularly broken edges of the whorl. The
whorl was removed as closely as possible to the columella,

52

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

and the more ragged parts of the edge were slightly ground.
The "handle" in these specimens has a smooth feel to the
hand. The anterior or cana! end of the columella shows no
traces of having been abraded to form a gouge or chisel
edge. However,. the tip at this end has been damaged in
fifteen of the twenty-two hammers. Only one of these has
been broken at any appreciable distance toward the spire
or "head" of the hammer. Apparently the handle was not
the weaker of the two component parts of this tool.
These hammers range in length from 14.4 to 19.5 centimeters in specimens whose ends are undamaged or only
slightly damaged. The average length of this undamaged
series is 17.6 centimeters. Maximum spire diameters range
from 5.6 to 10 centimeters and average 7.2 centimeters.

That these tools saw heavy duty is shown by the amount
of battering on the outer whorl margins of the spires. It
is perhaps gratuitous to speculate on their actual use, but
they could have been used to rough out other shell tools, to
break mammal long bones or skulls, and possibly to open
mollusk shells.
Conch Shell Adzes. Five shell adzes occur in the Johnson site tool assemblage. All are made from the large outer
whorl of a heavy conch shell. The longitudinal axis of each
adze corresponds to the longtitudinal axis of the original
conch shell. Four of these adzes include that portion of the
outer whorl which reverses the direction of its curve to
f6rm the canal of the shell They thus have a sinuous longitudinal profile (Plate 3, c), whereas the fifth adze has only
a simple curved profile (Plate 3, b). Four of the adzes are
rectanguloid in outline (Plate 3, b), with the cutting edge

PLATE
Artifacts from the Johnson site, Texas coast. A, conch shell hammer; B-C conch
shell adzes; D, conch shell scraper; E, oyster shell digging tool; F columella gouge; G,
tubular sandstone pipe with bone stem; H, conch columella awl; I, hand stone; J-K,
deer ulna awls; L, deer metapodial awl.

Plate 3

The Johnson Site

53

somewhat wider than the poll; the fifth is definitely ovoid,
and the cutting edge comes to a rounded point (Hate 3, c).
The cutting edge, which is broadly convex in outline
in all but one of the adzes, is made by beveling from the
concave face of the shell. In only one specimen is there
any evidence of grinding on the convex face side of the
cutting edge. In two of the adzes it is possible to determine
that the cutting edge is ground on the posterior or spire
end of the shell fragment. If the cutting edge is made on
the posterior end, all traces of the spire margin are ground
away; but if the cutting edge is made on the opposite end,
the thickened spire margin is us~ally left on the poll.
These adzes appear to have been roughly chipped into
shape. There is no evidence of sawing and then breaking.
The lateral edges appear to be lightly smoothed by purposeful abrasion, or, even conceivably, by abrasion incidental
to halting and use. The length ranges from 9.5 to 11.3 centimeters and the maximum width from 5.7 to 7.4 centimeters. The average thickness is approximately 5 millimeters.
In addition to the five adzes described above, there are
also twelve worked fragments of conch whorl. One of these
may be an unfinished adze. It has been worked into a rectangular shape and looks very much like the adzes, but
there is no trace of a beveled cutting edge. Then there are
three fragments that have the appropriate size and outline
for the poll portions of adzes. Seven additional large conch
whorl fragments seem to represent the process of making
adzes. Two of these are large and triangular in outline, having been removed from the parent shell and roughly shaped.
The remaining five are more or less rectangular in outline
and show varying amounts of chipping and smoothing along
the side. Beyond this there is no indication of their intended
use, but only a little more work and a ground cutting edge
would have produced an adze.

Concbo Columella Gouges. Three large conch columellae
(Fasciolaria papillosa Sowerby) have been fashioned into

54

Texas Archeological an~ Paleontological Society

gouges. In each tool the anterior or canal end of the columella has been ground diagonally on one side to give a narrow,
convex, chisel-like cutting edge (Hate 3, f). The ground
area actually represents a diagonal section of the canal, for
the deep natural groove may be seen separating the two
sides of the canal. Light grinding is evident on the opposite
side of the bit. These adzes range from 10.5 to 12.5 centimeters in length and seem to represent about half of the
original columella. The end opposite the cutting edge is
roughly broken, either transversely or diagonally, with no
indication of having been ground. Maximum diameters
range from 2.2 to 2.9 centimeters.
Three additional large conch columellae show signs of
having been worked. The whorl fracture edges have been
smoothed, but there is no further evidence of shaping.
Conch Columella Awls. One of the most common types
of shell objects in the Johnson site is an awl made from the
columella of the conch. Sixteen of these came from the shell
midden itself, and seven others came from the surface of a
small shell-covered area about 180 meters northeast of the
midden. The latter duplicate in all respects those from the
main shell midden.
These awls are made from columellae of all sizes, varying from tiny to fairly large and heavy (Plate 4, a-b, e;
Hate 3, h). In length they range from 3.4 to 12.2 centimeters and average about 6.5 centimeters. The whorl fracture edges are smooth in all cases, and one end of the colume[la has been shaped to a point. In the majority of cases
it is the canal end of the columella which has received this
treatment. Only in the smaller columellae does the spire
end serve as the point. In the larger awls the point is flattened (Plate 3, h), but in the smaller it is conical (Plate 4,
a-b, e).
It is quite likely that some of these columella awls were
formed by wave action on the beach and were collected for
use by the occupants of the site. On a sloping sandy beach

The Johnson Site

55

today one can see columellae being rolled back and forth
by the waves. Inasmuch as one end is heavier than the other,
differential wear will eventually form a pointed end. Even
if formed in this natural mamaer, their presence in such
numbers in the shell midden indicates that they were transported there by human agency.

Conch Shell Scrapers. Two quadrangular sections of
the outer whorl of the conch appear to have been used as
scrapers (Plate 3, d). In each specimen the slightly convex
lip of the whor! forms a sharp edge which shows minute
chipping and abrasion on both sides, though the convex face
side of the shell shows more than the concave. The edge
feels smooth to the touch. Such a tool could have served
equally well as a scraper or as a knife. Both of these objects
are approximately the same shape and size, the larger having
a maximum length of 10.7 centimeters.

Perforated Oyster Shells. In that part of the midden
excavated by Duffen only one perforated oyster shell was
recovered, but Wilson mentions finding six or eight such
shells. The latter are not now represented in the collections
from the Johnson site. The shell from Duffen’s excavation is a large one (Plate 3, e), having a length of 14.8 centimeters and a width of 8 centimeters, and it has a roughly
rectangular perforation about 3 centimeters from the umbo.
This hole is 2.8 by 3.5 centimeters, and its edges have been"
roughly rounded but they are not smooth. The margins of
the shell show no signs of abrasion or battering. Presumably
this specimen was some sort of digging implement.
BoNE .’,~’~D AN’rLrR OBjrc-rs. The bone and antler objects from the Johnson site number 37, of which five are unclassifiable artifact fragments and bits of worked bone o~
antler. These objects were made from mammal and bird
bones and consist of perforating and flint~knapping tools
and a few ornaments in the form of beads.
Awls. Eleven complete or nearly complete deer ulna
awls are represented. Ten additional deer ulna tools are dam-

56

Texas ArcheoIogicaI ~nd Paleontological Society

aged in such a way that it is not possible to distinguish them
from flakers. Inasmuch as no flakers are present in the Johnson bone tool series, it is assumed that all twenty-one specimens are ulna awls. Of the twenty-one, five came from the
excavation of a small shell-covered area some 90 meters east
of the shell heap. Three of the eleven definitely identifiable
awls have short, stubby points (Plate 3, k) ;.the remainder
have longer and more slender points, and one of these has
been sharpened to a very fine point (Plate 3, j). The longest
complete ulna awl is 12.7 centimeters in length, the shortest
g centimeters.
Two deer metapodial awls were found, one complete
(Plate 3, 1) and one a fragment. In each the rear portion
of the shaft below the articular head has been cut away, the
part remaining being ground to a long sharp point.
Splinter awls are represented by only one specimen
(Plate 4, g). It consists of a short section of the shaft of
a mammal long bone.
One ander tine, represented by the tip only, has been
ground down to a very sharp conical point (Plate 4, h).
An.tler Flak.ers. Four antler tips with bluntly ground
points apparently represent flakers (Plate 4, f). These fragments range from 3.2 to 7.9 centimeters in length.
Beads. The only beads of any kind that occur in the
Johnson series are three short sections of bird long bones.
One of these is unfinished, for the ends are not neatly ground
as they are in the remaining two beads. This unfinished bead
shows how such bones were cut. A shallow encircling groove
was formed and then the bone was snapped in two at the
weakened place. The two finished beads are shown in Plate
PLATE 4
Artifacts from the Johnson site, Texas coast. A-B, E, conch columdla awls; C-D,
bone beads; F antler flaker; G, bone splinter awl; H, antler awl; l-Q, flint projectile
points.

The Johnson Site

4, c-d. The larger (d) is 2.9 centimeters long and 8 millimeters in diameter; the smaller (c) is 2.4 centimeters long
and 4 millimeters in diameter. Neither bead shows any trace
of the incised decoration which occurred in some tubular
bone beads from the Kent-Crane site, which has a large
Aransas component.
Miscellaneous Bone Obiects. Three bone fragments present further evidence of cutting by the method of encircling
with a groove and then breaking. One is a deer ulna fragment, one the articular head of a small bone, and the third
a section of a bird bone.
Quite a number of antler fragments were scattered
through the midden deposit. Only one of these is of any
special interest, for it shows the method of removing tines.
This was done in precisely the same manner as bird and mammal long bones were cut.
STONU OBoV~aTS. Objects of stone are in a minority at
the Johnson site, the total nurnber being twenty, and some of
these are unidentifiable fragments. They include tools for
purposes of piercing, cutting, hammering, abrading, and
food grinding. One large tubular stone pipe was found, the
first on the Texas coast to be encountered in cultural context.

Projectile Points. Martins mentions that he found nine
projectile points at the Johnson site, seven coming from the
surface and two from his test pit. Their form is not described, and it is not possible to determine if any of them
are shown in the plates which illustrate his report.
Twelve projectile points were obtained during the course
of Duffen’s excavation, and a thirteenth was collected from
the beach northwest of the shell midden. Three of these
points have their stems broken away and are unclassifiable.
None of the projectile points can be regarded as arrowpoints.
~°Martin, n. d., p. 7.

58

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

The material is flint and quartzite, with only one specimen
being fashioned from the latter material. The flint occurs
in colors ranging from gray through buff and yellow to
light brown.
Nine projectile points are illustrated in Plate 4, i-q. They
show considerable variation for so small a sample, including
triangular, leaf-shaped, side-notched, and plain-stemmed
forms. One is almost equilaterally triangular with a straight
base (Plate 4, i), and the base has been thinned, leaving the
thickest area up near the apex of the triangle. Two are leafshaped (Plate 4, j-k) and have convex bases. They differ
only in cross section, one having a rhomboidal cross section
(Plate 4, j), the other a lenticular cross section (Plate 4, k).
The plain-stemmed points vary in size and shoulder development. The largest is shown at Plate 4, 1, which is virtually
identical in size and shape with the point collected from the
beach northwest of the midden. The point at Plate 4, m, is
similar to the preceding in form but is smaller, and the
broad-stemmed point at Plate 4, n, appears to have been reworked from a previously damaged specimen. The fragment at Plate 4, o, is notably thick. The side-notched points
include one with a very broad, convex base (Plate 4, p) and
a smaller specimen with a concave base (Plate 4, q).
In the collections previously referred to, which are
doubtfully attributable to this site, are two projectile points
which duplicate two of the ~orms derived from Duffen’s
excavation. One is a small triangular point similar to that
shown in Plate 4, i, except that it is a little broader at the
base. The other is almost a duplicate of the point shown in
Plate 4, m.
Knives. Only one medial fragment of what appears to
be a knife was found at the Johnson site. Another knife
fragment is present in one of the collections tentatively
identified as having been derived from Wilson’s excavation.
In this same collection is a small triangular blade or knife
with a very thick point and a base consisting of the original
weathered cortex of the parent stone.

The Johnson Site

Miscellaneous Chipped Stone Objects.

59

One small oval

flint flake shows minute chipping at its narrower end, the
retouched edges being very thin and sharp. One fragment
looks somewhat like the expanded stem of a T-shaped drill,
the only suggestion of the presence of a chipped stone drill
in the Johnson site tool assemblage.
Tubular Stone Pipe. One of the most interesting objects found at the Johnson site is a tubular sandstone pipe
with a stem made from the shaft of a bird bone (Plate 3, g).
Although similar pipes have been reported from the Texas
coastal region,~’ this is the first occurrence in cultural context. This pipe was found in four large fragments, and
these fragments were associated with a bird long-bone tub~
which fits the smaller of the two end openings. In cross
section (Plate 3, g) the pipe is roughly rectangular, but
only one side is really flat, the remaining three being convex. The two ends are rounded. The longitudinal section
shown in Plate 4, g, indicates that an elongated conical
"bowl" was made and that this was joined by a small cylindrical hole at the stem end. The bone stem fits rather
snugly into the latter and was apparently cemented to it
with asphalt or some other adhesive substance.
The pipe is large and heavy. With the stem fitted into
its probable original position, the pipe has an over-all length
of 19.1 centimeters, but the length of the stone portion is
15.8 centimeters. The total length of the bone tube is 5.1
centimeters, its diameter 7 millimeters. The aperture at
the ’~bowl" end is oval in outline, with maximum and minimum diameters of 4.2 and 2.9 centimeters respectively; and
the small aperture at the stem end is approximately 1.2
centimeters in diameter.
Hand Stones for Grinding. This type of tool is represented by only one example. This is oval in outline (Plate 3, i)
~’*Jackson, 1940, pp. 99-107, 115-I19, 128-130; Martin, 1929, p. $1, 1930b, p.
!1; Pearce, 1932a, p. 672, 1932b, p. $0, 1938, p. 9; Reed, Clyde T., 1937.

6O

Tewas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

and shows evidences of abrasion on only one face. This
abraded area is slightly convex and covers nearly all of the
face. This tool was made from a flat slab of sandstone, its
edges having been pecked into shap.e. It has a length of 11
centimeters, a width of 7.2 centimeters, and an average
thickness of 1.7 centimeters.
Grinding Slabs. One thin sandstone fragment has a shallow basin covering one side and appears to be part of a grinding slab, the companion piece to the hand stone described
above. This fragment has a length of 16.3 centimeters.
Abrading Stones. One flat, irregular fragment of sandstone has a smoothly abraded depression in the center of one
flat face. The opposite face is smoothly convex, exhibiting
wear over the whole area. Evidently this stone is a fragment of what was once a hand stone, and this is supported
by the fact tha~ a small pot portion of the margin shows evidence of pecking to give a rounded edge.
Hammerstones. One small core of a poor grade flint
shows evidences of battering along its more prominent edges.
It has a maximum diameter of 4.1 centimeters. In one of
the doubtful Wilson collections is an oval water-worn pebble which shows heavy battering along its circumference.
ASVH^Lnr. Small lumps of asphalt are reported to have
been found throughout the midden deposit. None of these
was brought into the laboratory, so that it is not possible to
say if any of them had textile impressions like the lumps
of asphalt fro rathe Kent-Crane site.
B.~r~D C~.AY. Scattered throughout the midden deposit,
and especially near the base of the central portion, were
amorphous lumps of baked c!ay. Of thirty samples bought
to the laboratory, the range of maximum diameters runs
from 2.2 to 7.9 centimeters. The color varies from light
gray to buff. These lumps are rather hard and somewhat
diiticult to break, and may be the remains of hearths.
PotteRY. The few potsherds derived from Wilson’s excavation have not survived, but his description of them

The Johnson Site

61

leaves no doubt as to their identity. He states that some of
them have asphalt-coated interior surfaces, which is a distinctive trait of Rockport focus pottery.~ This is the only
clear evidence of a Rockport focus occupation at this site,
and from its scanty representation we can postulate only a
very brief occupation by that group. The apparent location
of the potsherds in the o.pper part of the shell midden has
already been discussed.
Discussion of the Johnson Site
The Johnson site is regarded as a relatively pure Aransas
occupation, the few potsherds reported from the upper part
of the midden being the only clear jndicati0n of Rockport
focus occupation. There is no way of knowing how long
the Johnson site was occupied, but the occupation was more
than likely of a seasonal nature. The fact that today the
site is inundated during hurricanes may help to explain its
small size. It was probably a good place to get shellfish,
but not too favorable a location otherwise. The midden deposit did not exhibit any striking stratigraphic breaks, which
indicates that there were no long interruptions in occupation.
The homogeneity of the culture, as we!l as the small size of
the midden, argues for a relatively short occupation. The
absence of European objects may be noted, and the presence
of pottery in the upper part of the midden should be emphasized.
The Johnson site presents the first specific information
on the various types of animals, fish, birds, and shellfish that
were used for food by the peoples of the Aransas focus. It
also shows that some sort of vegetable food was ground by
means of hand stone and grinding slab. The rarity of these
milling stones, however, would appear to indicate that this
type of food was of minor importance in their diet.
mMartin, n. d., pp. 1-11, 1929, p. 52, 1930b, pp. 7, 11, 1931; Potter, 1930;
Sayles. 1935, Table ~, p. 102. Martin and Potter have reported sixty-two sites and
localities which have yielded Rockport focus pottery. These are located in the central
section otr the coast, extending from Matagorda Bay wes:ward and-southward to Baffin
Bay.

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleontological Society

62

Additional information is obtained on the circular areas
of shell which Martin= has interpreted as debris floorings
in a temporary form of shelter. The site provides the first
quantit.ative data on the size, shape, and thickness of these
circular shell areas. They seem to be round or oval and have
a diameter of about 1.5 meters. This information supports
Martin’s theory of their origin. It is not possible to determine the relationship of these shell areas to the main midden
deposit at this site. They are probably not earlier than the
midden, but they could well be either contemporary or
later. The excavation of one circular shell area yielded ulna
awls identical in form with those found in the midden. This
suggests that it belongs to the same culture as the midden
and that the two are of about the same age. However, ulna
awls are very common tools and are not distinctive enough
to give much weight to the argument. We can only tentatively include the circular shell areas as elements of Aransas
culture.
The Johnson site furnishes most of the information about
burial types of the Aransas horizon. There is some variation in burial custom. We have suggested the possibility
that the extended burials may belong to the Rockport horizon, but of this there is no clear proof. For the present we
record both flexed and extended burials for the Aransas
~OCUS.

The presence of baked clay at this site calls for comment.
Here it does not seem to be associated with pottery, as Martins has suggested, but appears to antedate the pottery horizon. This adds to the argument against Martin’s theory~ of
this baked clay being the by-product of firing pottery. That
cannot be the whole explanation.
Finally, attention is. again called to the fact that the tubular stone pipe from the Johnson site is the first to be found
=Martin, n. d., pp. 2-3, 7-11; !929, p. 52; 1930b, p. 7.
"~4Martin,
~z IbM.

1931,

pp.

53-55.

The Johnson Site

63

in unmistakable cultural context. We can now be reasonably certain that it belongs to the pre-pottery horizon on
the Texas coast. It probably survived into Rockport times,
but this needs confirmation.
The Aransas Focus’*
The name o£ the Aransas/?ocus is derived £rom Aransas
Bay, /?or it was in this area that the/?irst sites assigned to it
were excavated. The Johnson site is considered to be the
type site. This was the first site where the Aransas culture
was recognized as something separate and apart/?tom other
cultures on the Texas coast. Three sites/?urnish all the trustworthy data available on this /?ocus at the present time.
These sites are the Johnson site, the Kent-Crane site, and
the Live Oak Point site. Other sites have shown Aransas
types o/? arti/?acts mixed with typical materials o/? the Rockport horizon, but their status is not clear because o/? the lack
o/? stratigraphic data /?or those sites. Thus the geographic
distribution o/? the Aransas/?ocus is very limited at the present time, being con/?ined to the Live Oak Peninsula lying between Aransas Bay and Copano Bay.
The principal basis /?or distinguishing an Aransas /?ocus
is the absence o/? pottery/?tom the lower levels o/? some shell
midden sites. In the three sites re/?erred to above pottery
was/?ound only in the upper parts o/? the midden deposits.
On the positive side the Aransas /?ocus is based on a special
complex o/? shell, bone, and stone arti£acts. Undoubtedly
some o/? these Aransas types survived into the Rockport horizon, but there is no evidence which indicates that they survived in quantity. Under these circumstances it is not possible to segregate the Aransas materials in surface collections
showing both Aransas and Rockport occupation.
The known Aransas sites are all shell middens and are located on the shores o/? bays, not on the open Gul/? shores o/?
"~ This preliminary outline of Aransas t~ocus culture is based on all the data which
have been analyzed up to the time of writing (November, 1937).
It includes information derived from excavation at both the Kent-Crane and Live Oak Point sites.

64

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

the offshore islands which characterize the central section of
the Texas coast. The occupants of these sites were principally food collectors and hunters. The sea furnished a large
part of their food. The fairly extensive shell middens show
how important shellfish were in their diet, the principal
forms collected being oyster, clam, and conch. From the sea
they must have taken more fish than the midden refuse now
indicates. From the sea they also took various forms of turtle, and there is some evidence that they hunted one sea
mammal, either the manatee or the porpoise. They were
also effective hunters, for the middens contain bones of such
large mammals as bison and deer. They also hunted the peccary, the raccoon, and the rabbit. Aquatic birds were taken
in considerable numbers, judging from the frequency of
their bones. These include the loon and several forms of
duck, as mallard, pintail, widgeon, and shoveler. The hawk
was also taken. The rare occurrence of milling stones suggests that wild seeds and grains were not an outstanding element of their diet. There is no evidence that agriculture
was practiced.
No definite traces of house remains have yet been found.
It is not even certain that any of the circular shell areas,
commonly reported in this section of the coast, belong to the
Aransas focus. These areas have been interpreted as debris
floorings of temporary shelters. It is possible that some of
these may prove to be of Aransas origin, for one at the Johnson site yielded bone awls similar to those of the nearby
Aransas shell midden. This is the ful! extent of the evidence
to date. However, the mode of living strongly indicates a
form of coastal nomadism, and it is very likely that some
type of temporary shelter was the only habitation in use.
Very litde is known about Aransas burial customs, for
few burials have been found that can be assigned definitely
to this focus. It can be said that the dead were buried in
the shell middens, in either a flexed or an extended position,
unaccompanied by ornaments or mortuary offerings of a

The Johnson Site

durable material.~ As yet there is no information on the
physical type of the Aransas population.
Materials provided by the coastal environment were extensively used for making tools and utensils. Conch shell,
because of its large size and toughness, was the favored material. From it hammers, adzes, gouges, scrapers, and awls
were made, and these tool types occur in considerable numbers. There is some evidence that conch shell containers
were used. Large oyster shells were centrally perforated,
possibly for halting and use as some sort of digging tool;
and clam shells were occasionally chipped along one edge
to form knives or scrapers.
Bone from the animals taken in hunting was also a commonly utilized raw material, though the types of objects
made from it are not numerous. Most common are cylindrical beads of bird bone and awls and pin-like objects of
mammal bone. The beads, pins, and certain split-bone awls
often bear incised and drilled geometric designs of a simple
sort--triangles, diamonds, and zigzag lines, crosshatched
bands, or all-over crosshatching.~ Antler was used for making awls and flint-knapping tools, but these are comparatively rare.
Although stone of any sort is very rare on the Texas
coast, a fairly large number of stone tools occur in Aransas
sites. This stone must have been obtained from inland localities, either through trade or travel. Large forms of projectile points are numerous, the leading types having plain
stems or side notches.’~ A less common but easily recognized
mat a site on Bafl~n Bay, Clyde T. Reed (!937, pp. 218-221) removed a number of burials from an area adjacent to a shell midden deposit. Two burials contained
~emale skeletons associated with tubular stone pipes.
Reed states that no pottery was
£ound at ,this site, and it may therefore be an Aransas site. If so, we can tentatively
record burials containing tubular stone pipes as an Aransas trait. In this report Reed’s
interest is in the pipes, and he does not give £urther details on burial custom.
"~ This decoration of bone objects is found only at the Kent-Crane site.
~The Kent-Crane site provides the largest sample of projectile points l%om the
Aransas foe.s.

66

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

form is triangular; it is short and thick, with a thinned base,
and the lateral edges are often alternately beveled. No small,
thin projectile points occur, which is the basis for the conclusion that the bow was not in use. The large projectile
points which occur in Aransas sites are thus interpreted as
tips for darts or spears, but there is no direct evidence suggesting the use of the spear-thrower. Knives of chipped
stone occur but are not common, and the same may be said
for gravers and scrapers. The small end-scrapers, characteristic of the later Rockport focus, are entirely lacking. Abrading stones, usually irregular pieces of sandston_e, are rather
common and were probably used in shaping and sharpening
the various shelI and bone tools. Hammerstones, hand
stones, and grinding slabs are rare, the last being represented
principally by fragments., The large tubular stone pipe with
bone mouthpiece is rare in the known Aransas sites, but isolated finds have been reported in the central section of the
Texas coast and may belong to the Aransas focus.
Basketry containers were used, as is shown by impressions preserved in asphalt, and only twined techniques are
indicated. It seems likeIy that baskets were sometimes waterproofed with asphalt. Matting is also indicated by a few
asphalt impressions, but no precise data on techniques have
been obtained. In addition to its probable use for waterproofing baskets, asphalt was also used as an adhesive substance for attaching projectile points to their shafts."
Baked clay fragments, so commonly reported in sites of
this area, are definitely associated with the Aransas focus.
An adequate explanation of their origin has yet to be advanced. No pottery has been found in the Aransas levels
of any known site.
On the basis of the factual data presented above, certain
inferences may be made. These inferences must be regarded
as attempts to translate inert artifacts into industrial proThis data on asphalt comes from the Kent-Crane site.

The Johnson Site

cesses and social activities. For example, the presence of heavy cutting tools of conch shell, especially adzes and gouges,
suggests that woodworking was o1~ some importance. It is
difficult to conceive of a people so closely associated with the
sea not having boats, and it seems likely that these shell cutting tools were used principally for the manufacture of dugout boats. There is no trace of any special fishing apparatus,
but we know that baskets were made; nets and basketry
traps for taking fish are definite possibilities. The scrapers
of chipped stone and of shell suggests skin processing, and
it is unlikely that the skins of such large mammals as the bison and deer went unused. Perforating tools of bone and
shell may well have been employed in making articles from
dressed skin. Trade with the interior is suggested by the
tools of chipped stone, flint being foreign to the coastal region. Marine shell objects have been occasionally reported
from the Central Texas area, and there may have been some
sort of trade involving the exchange of flint and shell. Finally, pigment and the tubular stone stone pipe suggest ceremonial activity.

As stated earlier in this paper, the Aransas focus cannot
be identified with the Oso Phase of Sayles, which is also a
pre-ceramic culture of the same area. When we compare the
types of artifacts from the Aransas and Oso complexes, a
number of striking differences immediately become evident.
The Aransas is characterized by a much larger number of
different types than the Oso, and there is much greater emphasis on shell and bone. Important Aransas types not listed
for the Oso include hammers, adzes, gouges, scrapers, and
awls of conch shell; oyster shell digging tools; clam shell
knives or scrapers; awls, pins, and beads of bone, some decorated with incised and drilled designs; antler tools; tubular
stone pipe with bone stem; hand stones and grinding slabs;
and lumps of asphalt bearing impressions of basketry and
matting. Among the Oso traits not appearing in Aransas
sites are hand axes; small core scrapers; small, carefully
chipped end-scrapers; certain projectile point types, espe-

68

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

cially small, finely made arrowpoints; pendants of freshwater shell; beads of human bone; and one negative trait-the absence of mane and metate. These differences between
the Aransas and Oso seem to outweigh the similarities, for
only the following traits are shared: absence of pottery, leafshaped knives and blades; side-scrapers; triangular, stemmed,
and side-notched dart points; and hammerstones. The Aransas focus thus has a flavor all its own, and its separation from
the Oso can be justified, certainly until we have a better
sampling of the Oso. The relationship between the two cultures cannot be determined at the present time.
In attempting to determine the approximate age of the
Aransas focus only two approaches appear to be feasible at
the present time. One of these is the direct historical approach, by which an attempt is made to work backward
from the known oeriod of the historic Rockport focus. The
other involves co-nsideration of cultural relationships with
the pre-pottery cultures of the adjacent Central Texas area.
We have no evidence, or even a suggestion of it, that
European materi.als are associated with the Aransas focus.
From this we can assume that it is prehistoric in date, which
would mean at least prior to Pineda, Garay, and Cabeza de
Vaca or roughly before 1500 A. D. This date is safely behind the earliest possibility of any European objects having
been introduced on the Texas coast, even by way of eastern
Mexico. This date is also supported by the stratigraphic position of the Aransas focus beneath the Rockport focus,
which is unquestionably associated with European materials
at Another promising approach to dating the Aransas focus is through study of
the clay dunes which occur on the Texas coast southward from Corpus Christi Bay
(Price, 1933, pp. 932-935). Dr. W. Armstrong Price of Corpus Christi has recently
demonstrated that a large number of clay dunes contain archaeological materials. Combined geological and archaeological investigation of this situation may very well develop a
sequence that will be useful £or dating purposes. This situation is undoubtedly the key
to the "buried sites" of Sayles’ Oso Phase (Sayles, 1935; see footnote 5, this paper).
a2In the upper horizon at the Live Oak Point site, ;for instance, two types of
small arrowpoints were made of both fli1~t and glass.

The Johnson Si$e

69

in a number of sites,s: The account of Cabeza de
Vaca,~ who appears to have been in the central section of
the Texas coast in 1533-1534, indicates that pottery and
the bow (characteristic of the Rockport focus) were known
at that time, and there is also some evidence in the Cabeza
de Vaca account that the bow had not been known very
long." Identities in certain chipped stone artifacts between
the Rockport focus and the Austin focus of Central Texas
help to substantiate the historic dating of the Rockport, for
Kelley has dated the Austin focus as after 1500 A. D.~
The projectile points of the Aransas focus show similarities to those of the pre-pottery cultures of Central Texas
which Kelley has grouped into an Edwards Plateau aspect.~
A few Aransas projectile points appear to be intrusive from
the Central Texas area. We are thus able to suggest at least
partial contemporaneity of the Aransas focus with the Edwards Plateau cultures. Further study will doubtless make
the nature of this time relationship more precise.~ Attention has already been called to evidences of trade between
coastal and inland peoples.
Some of the characteristic shell artifact types of the
Aransas focus have counterparts in other cultures along the.
Gulf Coast, both in northeastern Mexico and the southeastern United States. In the Huasteca Ekholm~ describes and
illustrates one conch columella gouge which he interprets as
a polishing tool. This comes from the Las Flores site, which is
Period V in date. In the Rio Grande delta area Anderson~

~aHodge, 1907, pp. 87-88.
~ Ibid., p. 73.
~Kelley, 1947; see also Krieger, 1946, pp. !65-168.
:~ Kelley, 1947.
a~At the Morhiss site, near Victoria, Texas, there appears to be a mixture of
Aransas focus materials with a local facies of the Edwards Plateau culture. Analysis
of the materials from this site will doubtless provide precise data for correlation purposes.
:s Ekholm, 1944, p. 482 and Fig. $2, d’.
~Anderson, 1932, p. 30.

70

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleontological Society

reports the occurence of both conch shell gouges and adzes..
These appear to belong to the Brownsville culture‘° and are
identical with the Aransas types. One conch shell adze has
been collected from the surface of a pottery site in Orange
County, Texas, very near the Louisiana-Texas boundary.’~ In
the Tchefuncte culture of the Lower Mississippi Valley
gouges, adzes, and conch shell containers are present,~ and
some of these are remarkably similar to types from the Aransas focus. Likewise in the St. John’s River area of northeastern Florida Wyman" and Moore" report considerable
numbers of shell adzes, gouges, and containers of conch
shell. Some of these are in shell heaps that contain no pottery, and others are in shell heaps that contain early types
of pottery.
These occurrences of similar types of shell objects along
the northwestern and northern coasts of the Gulf of Mexico, and along the southern Atlantic coast, are of special
interest. The most striking feature is the general early date
indicated, especially when the tools are present in such numbers as to have meaning. These tools seem to occur princi-.
pally in pre-pottery cultures or in cultures which only recently have acquired pottery. This evidence suggests that
such shell too!s may have been among the traits belonging
to a widely distributed phase of the Eastern Archaic along
the Gulf and southern Atlantic coasts. If such be the case,
then a part of the Aransas culture may be derived from this
early sub-stratum of culture in the Southeast. This hypothesis cannot be confirmed, however, until more field in*"IBM., pp. 29-31; MacNelsh, 1947, pp. 6-8; Sayles, 1935, pp. 40, 117, Table
p. 102, Table 13,’p. 124, Plate X, d-f, p. 42, Map C, p. 132.
’aSite ET-839, Arnold Reconnaissance Survey; data on file at the University
Texas.
*:Ford and Quimby, 1945, pp. 49-51 and Fig. 15, d-g.
’* Wyman, 1869, p. 454 and Plate 10, Fig 4.
~Moore, 1892-1894, Vol. 27, pp. 12-13, 113-115 (Mt. Taylor); Vol. 27,
615-623 (Orange Mound); Vol. 27, pp. 623-624 (Long Bluff); Vol. 27, pp. 708-72~
(Mulberry Mound).

The Johnson Site

71

vestigation has been done along the Gulf and southern Atlantic coasts of the United States. The shell midden sites of
this long coast line have not received sufficient attention in
recent years. From the evidence cited above, we believe that
a systematic sampling of shell heaps would throw additiona!
light on the Eastern Archaic stage of culture.

Concl~sion
This paper has described the data derived from excavation of the Johnson site, type site of the Aransas focus of
the Texas coast. The Aransas focus represents the culture
of a nomadic group of food collectors, fishers, and hunters
who camped along the shores of the bays and left midden
deposits consisting principally of shell, bone, and earth. They
made extensive use of shell and bone for tools, but ornaments were chiefly made of bone. Pottery and the bow were
not known. The Aransas focus cannot be identified with
the Oso Phase of Sayles, but it does show similarities in projectile point types to the pre-pottery cultures of the Edwards Plateau. In shell tools it shows some sort of vague relationship with early horizons along the Gulf coast of the
southern United States and northeastern Mexico.
A date for the beginning of the Aransas culture cannot
be supplied at the present time, but there is evidence which
shows that around 1500 A. D. it was supplanted by the
Rockport focus, which is identified with the historic Indians of the central section of the Texas coast, among them
almost certainly the Karankawa. The Aransas focus may be
ranked with other pre-pottery cultures of the eastern United
States in what has come to be known as the Eastern Archaic
stage of culture. Its position in a marginal area, however,
led to its persistence until a relatively late date.
Attention is called to the fact that the Aransas focus
offers no indication of human migration or diffusion of
culture from Mexico to the southeastern United States by
way o£ the Texas coast.

Texas Archeological and Paleont~ologioal Society

"t2

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, A. E.
1932. Artifacts of the Rio Grande ddta region. Bnllelitt o[ the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
Brister, Bernard
1940. Anthropologist uncovers new phase o~ culture of coastal Indians i~ sands
Aransas County. Corlms Christi Caller, November 26, p. lB.

]:~nglas, J~mes
1903.

Human bones found near Galveston, a letter communicated by Mr. James
Douglas. Bulletin of the American Geographical Society of New Yorl~ Vot.
~$, ]qo. f, pp. $48-$49.

Duffen, William A.
1940. Morhiss site.
Ekholm, Gordon F.
1944. Excavations

Texas Archaeo!ogical News, No. 2, pp. 16-18.

and

at Tampico

Panuco

in ’the Huasteca,

Mexico.

American

M~eum o[ Natural History, Anthropological Pa$ers, Vol. ~8, pt.
Fenneman, Ncvla M.
19~8. Physiography of eastern United Stat~.
~ewk~, J~s¢ Walter
1907. Certain antiquities o~ eastern Mexico.
A.nnaal Re~ort~ pp. 221-284.

New York and ~ndon.
Bureau o[ American Etbnolo~,

Ford, Jam~ A., ~d Qu~by, G~rge I., Jr.
The Tchefuncte culture, an e~ly ~cupatlon of the Lower M~ippl
Memoirs o[ the ~ciely ]or A~ican Archaeology, No. 2.
Gasher, Albert S.
189I. The Karan~wa Indians, the coast~ ~ple of Texas.

Peabody M~eum,

pers, Vol. 1, No. 2.
Gladwin~ Harold S.
1937. Excavations at Snaketowa, II, compar~on and th~ries.

Gila P¢~b!o, Medal-

lion Papers, No. 26.
Hodge, Frederick W.
1907. The narrative of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca.
the Southern United Stat~, I$28-I~43," pp. 3-126.
Jackson, A. T.
1940. Tubular pipes and other tubes in Texas.

In: "Spanish Explorers
New York.

Bulletin o] lhe Texas Arcbeological

and Paleontological Sociely, Vol. 12, pp. 99-137.
Kelley, ~. Charles
1947. The cultural affiliations and chronological position of the Clear Fock foc~.
American

Antiquity

(in

~ress.)

Krieger, Alex D.
1943. Archeologicat horizons in the Caddo area.

In: "El N-:te de Mexico g

1 Sur

de Estados Unidos," Tercera Reunion de Mesa Redonaa de la ~eledad Mexicana de Antropologla, pp. 154-1~6.
1945a. Some sugg~tions on archaeological terms. B:tllc/ht of the Texas Arebeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 16, pp. 41-~ 1.
!945b. An inquiry into supposed Mexican influences on a prehistoric "cult" in the
southern United States.
American Anlbro~ologis~, VoL 47, No.
1946.

Culture complexes and

chronology

Texa~ Publical&n, No. 4640.

in

northern Texas.

The Un~ersily

The Johnson Site
1947.

The first symposium on the Caddoan archaeological area.
Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 198-207.

MacNeish, Richard S.
1947. A preliminary report on coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico.
Vol. 13, No. I, pp. 1-15.

73
American Antiquity,

American Antiquity,

Martin, George C.
n.d.
Preliminary archaeological survey o£ a portion o~ the Texas coast made by
George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929.
Privately
printed.
Bulletin of the
1929. Notes on some Texas coast campsites and other remains.
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 1, pp.
1930a. A vase and some carved stones and pebbles ~rom Nueces County, Texas, .Bul-

letin of the Texas Archeologlcal and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 18-20.
1930b. Two sites on the Callo del Oso, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeotogical and Paleontological Society, Vo!. 2, pp. 7-17.
1931. Texas coastaI pottery. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, VoL 3, pp. $3-56.
!936. The Indian tribes of the Mission Nuestra Senora del Rei’ugio.
San Antonio.
Mason, J. Alden
1935. The place of Texas in pre-Columbian relationships between the United States
and Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vo]. 7, pp. 29-46.
1937. Further remarks on the precolumbian relationships between the United States
and Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 9, pp. 120-129.
193$. Observations on the present status and problems ot~ Middle American archaeology. American Antiquit3,, Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 206-223; No. 4, pp.
1943. Summary of Section on Cultural Relations between Northern Mexico and
the Southern United States.
In: "El Notre de Mexico y el Sur de Eatados
Unidos," Tercera Reunion de Mesa Redonda de la Sociedad Mexicana de
tropologia, pp. 348-351.
Mason, Otis T.
1880. Summary of correspondence of the Smithsonian Institution previous to January I, 1880, in answer to Circular No. 316. Smithsonian Institution, Annual
Report for tI~e Year 1879, pp. 428-44g.
Moore, Clarence Bloomfleld
Ig92-94. Certain shell heaps o~ the St. John’s River, Florida.
Hitherto unexplored.
The Amerh’a~ Naturalist, "Col. 26, pp. 912-922; Vol. 27, pp. 8-13, 113-117~
605-624, 708-723; Wol. 2g~ pp.
Patterson, J. T.
1936. The corner-tang flint artifacts of Texas. University of Texas, Anthropological Papers, Vo!. 1, No. 4.
1937a. Boat-shaped artifacts of the Gulf southwest states.
University of Texas,
thropotogical Papers, Vol. l, No. 2.
1937b. Supplementary notes on the corner-tang artifacts.
University of Texas, Anthroi~ological Papers, Vot. 1, No. 5, pp.
Pearce, J. E.
1919. Indian mounds and other relics of Indian life in Texas.
American Anthropologlst, Vol. 21, No. :~, pp. 223-2:}4,
1932a. The archaeology of East Texas.
American Anthropologist, Vol. 34, No. 4,
pp. 6~0-687.
Bulletin of the Texas Arch¢ologi19)2b. The present status ox Texas archeology.
cal and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 44-54.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

74

1932c. Significance of the East Texas archaeological field. In: "Conference on Southern Prehistory, Birmingham, Alabama, December 18-20, 1932," National
Research Council, Washington, D. C., pp. $3-58.
1935.
1938.

Tales that dead men tell. University o] Texas, Anthropological Papers, Vol.
1, No, 1.
Geographic influence and civilization, with especial reference to Indian Texas.
The Texas Geographic Magazine, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp.

Phillips, Phillip.
1940. Middle American influences on the archaeology of the southeastern United
States. In: "’The Maya and Their Neighbors," New York and London, pp.
349-367.
Potter, Wendell H.
1930. Ornamentation on the pottery of the Texas coastal tribes.

Bulletin of

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 41-44.
Price, W. Armstrong
1933.

Role o£ disastrophism in topography of Corpus Christi area, South Texas.
Bulletin of the American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Vol.
pp. 907-962.

Price, W. Armstrong, and Gunter, Gordon.
1942. Certain recent geological ~nd biological changes in South Texa~, with consideration of probable causes.
Proceedings and Transactions of the Texas
Academy of Science for 1942, pp. 3-21.
R~I, Clyde T.
1937. A Carankawa fire implement. Bulletin of the Texas Arcbeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, pp. 218-221.
Reed, Erik K.
1939. Burials at Mission Espiritu Santo.

Central Texas Archeologist, No. 4, pp.

85-95.
Roberts, l:rank H. H., Jr.
1940. Developments in the problem of the North American Paleo-Indian.
In:
"Essays in Historical Anthropology of North America~" Smlthsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 100, pp. $1-116.
Russell, Richard Joel
Annals of
1945. Climates o£ Texas.
Vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 37-$2.

the Association

Sayles, E. B.
1935. An archaeologica! survey of Texas.

of

American Geographers,

Gila Pueblo, Medallion Papers, No. 17.

Sdlards, E. H.
1940. Pleistocene artifacts and asmelated fossils from Bee County, Texas.
of the Geological Socitty of America, Vol.

Smith, Victor J.
193~. The pottery horizons of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas
Paleon~ological Society, VoL 8, pp. 94-112.
1941.

A survey of Indhn life in Texas.
Circular No. $.

Tharp, Benjamin Carroll
1939. The vegetation of Texas.

Bulletin

$I~ pp. 1627-1658.
Archeological and

West Texas Historical and Scientific Society,

Texas Academy Publications in Natural History,

Non-Technical Series, No. 1.
Thomas, Cyrus
1891. Catalogue of prehistoric works east of the Rocky Mountains.
American Ethnology, Bulletin 12.

Bureau

The Johnson Site
Warlng, A. J., and Holder, Preston
194L

A prehistoric ceremonial complex in the southeastern United States.
cat~ Anthropologist, Vol. 47, No. 1, pp. 1-34.

Ameri-

Woodbury, George
1937.

Notes on some skeletal remains of Texas.
cal Pa~ers, Vol. I, No. $, pp. 7-16.

University of Texas, Anthropologi-

Woodbury, George zad Edna
193L

Prehistoric skeletal remains from
Papers, No. 18.

the Texas coast.

Gila Pueblo, Medallion

Wright, Welty
1940.

The type, distribution, and occurrence of ttbat gravers ~n Texas. Bulletin of
~he Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, VoL 12, :pp. 31-48.

Wyman, Jeftrles
1869. On the fresh-water shell-heaps of the St. John’s River, east Florida.
American Naturalls~, Vol. 2, No. 8, pp. 393-403; No. 9, pp. 447-46~.

The

