Stephen F. Austin State University

ScholarWorks SFA
Spatial Science

Forestry and Agriculture, Arthur Temple College of
(ATCOFA)

8-12-2007

GIS Aided Archaeological Research of El Camino
Real de Los Tejas with Focus on the Landscape and
River Crossings along El Camino Carretera.
Jeffrey M. Williams
Arthur Temple College of Forestry and Agriculture, jmwilliams@sfasu.edu

Follow this and additional works at: http://scholarworks.sfasu.edu/spatialsci
Part of the Archaeological Anthropology Commons, Geographic Information Sciences
Commons, Geomorphology Commons, Historic Preservation and Conservation Commons,
Physical and Environmental Geography Commons, Remote Sensing Commons, Soil Science
Commons, and the United States History Commons
Recommended Citation
Williams, Jeffrey M., "GIS Aided Archaeological Research of El Camino Real de Los Tejas with Focus on the Landscape and River
Crossings along El Camino Carretera." (2007). Spatial Science. Paper 2.
http://scholarworks.sfasu.edu/spatialsci/2

This Dissertation is brought to you for free and open access by the Forestry and Agriculture, Arthur Temple College of (ATCOFA) at ScholarWorks
SFA. It has been accepted for inclusion in Spatial Science by an authorized administrator of ScholarWorks SFA.

GIS Aided Archaeological Research of

El Camino Real de Los Tejas
with Focus on the Landscape and River Crossings along

El Camino Carretera.

by
Jeffrey M. Williams
2007

GIS Aided Archaeological Research of El Camino Real de Los Tejas with Focus
on the Landscape and River Crossings along El Camino Carretera.

By

JEFFREY M. WILLIAMS, Bachelor of Science

Presented to the Faculty of the Graduate School of
Stephen F. Austin State University
In Partial Fulfillment
Of the Requirements
For the Degree of
Master of Spatial Science

STEPHEN F. AUSTIN STATE UNIVERSITY
August 2007

© Copyright by Jeffrey M. Williams, 2007
All Rights Reserved

ABSTRACT†

Many generations of indigenous pathways through the forests of eastern
Texas have their origins obscured in antiquity.

Utilized by early European

explorers, these pathways became modified through heavy use and the
expansions and improvements needed to accommodate easy passage of
European horses and carts and finally the heavy wagons of Anglo-American
settlers. The first road through Texas, El Camino Real de Los Tejas, utilized
portions of these early trails.
El Camino Carretera (known as the cart road) is an early segment of El
Camino Real de los Tejas that crossed the Sabine River at the boundary
between Texas and Louisiana. Using historical documents as well as empirical
archaeological surveys, existing segments of El Camino Carretera have been
located, mapped, and documented. Additionally, a GIS geodatabase model has
been developed for managing the archaeological data with physical landscape
data in a spatially responsive medium allowing for an integrated study of the
landscape forces influencing the selection of a preferred road location.

†

Keywords: Archaeology, Geographic Information Systems, GIS, Geodatabase, Remote Sensing,
Sabine County, El Camino Real de Los Tejas, Camino Carretera, and Camino Chabinan.

i

PREFACE

Under the leadership of Dr. James E. Corbin, late Professor of
Archaeology with Stephen F. Austin State University, a design was outlined to
develop a regional archaeological landscape model managed by a Geographic
Information System that would incorporate contextual information from both
historical and archaeological research.

The ultimate goal of this landscape

model was to be a “tool” that could be used for the identification of potential
landscape areas meeting the archaeological criteria for Spanish/Indian pathways
through eastern Texas (Dr. Corbin’s 30 year archaeological research interest).
Due to Dr. Corbin’s untimely death in the fall of 2004 however, the scope
of this research design narrowed to focus on a specific area of eastern Texas for
documenting the development of an archaeological geodatabase data model
encompassing the attributes associated with landscape parameters of identified
Spanish roads.

Additionally this research design has taken on the added

responsibility of documenting the processes and procedures of locating,
measuring, describing, and identifying existing Spanish road features.
Although studied and researched by many historians and archaeologists,
Dr. Corbin was the only professional archaeologist to actively pursue and

ii

document tangible physical locations of El Camino Real de Los Tejas through
eastern Texas.
As developed, the archaeological landscape model presented here now
includes physical parameters such as topography, hydrology, geology, and soils.
The model also includes data complied by Dr. Corbin’s long standing
archaeological and archival research in locating and documenting the actual
locations of Spanish and French Colonial activities in East Texas.

Dr. James E. Corbin identifies a segment of the original El Camino Real de Los Tejas in
Sabine County, Texas (March 26, 2004).

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

An attempt to recognize all of those who donated their time and expertise
to this project would surely leave out an important contribution; therefore, I would
like to express my deepest gratitude to all who aided in the encouragement of my
research. First and foremost, I would like to acknowledge Dr. James E. Corbin,
a premier East Texas Archaeologist, a mentor, and a friend whose spirit guided,
supported, and inspired me through the difficult days of completing the field
surveys without him. I would like to also acknowledge the support and research
of Connie Hodges, an early Texas roads historian from Shelbyville, Texas.
Connie’s research laid the foundation for locating existing segments of Spanish
roads in Sabine County. Connie’s communications with local land owners, other
early road historians, and the “old timers” who live along El Camino Real were an
invaluable resource. I would like to thank the Arthur Temple College of Forestry
and Agriculture for their generous support and specifically Dr. I-Kuai Hung, my
thesis advisor and friend, who was indispensable in shaping the final product of
this research.

Dr. Daniel Unger and Dr. Michael Legg graciously provided

encouragement and support. I would like to also thank Dr. Jerry Williams, the
Graduate School representative and close friend of Jim’s, for his time and
patience. To my family, I love you always.
iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT

i

PREFACE

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS

v

LIST OF FIGURES

vii

INTRODUCTION

1

OBJECTIVES

5

LITERATURE REVIEW

15

Landscape Setting

16

Cultural History of the Region

22

Geospatial Technology and Archaeology

53

METHODOLOGY

60

Phase 1

60

Historic Research

61

Study Area

64

Field Survey

67

Landscape Data

79

v

Phase 2

86

Archaeological Geodatabase

86

Data Analysis

98

Archaeological Landscape Visualization Model
RESULTS

103
106

Historic Research

106

Remote Sensing

120

Field Survey

127

Data Analysis

145

Definition of a Spanish Road

154

Archaeological Landscape Visualization Model

156

DISCUSSION

174

CONCLUSION

179

BIBLIOGRAPHY

189

APPENDIX A

204

APPENDIX B

205

APPENDIX C

206

APPENDIX D

207

VITA

208

vi

LIST OF FIGURES
Figures
Figure 1: Project study area in eastern Texas.

6

Figure 2: 1807 map of road going through Nacogdoches to
Natchitoches on the Red River.

8

Figure 3: 1863 ownership map of Sabine County, Texas showing
El Camino Real de Los Tejas as the northern boundary
of the James Mason property.

10

Figure 4: Texas State Highway 21 to San Antonio.

12

Figure 5: Close up view of the study area within Sabine County

17

Figure 6: Geologic formations within the study area.

19

Figure 7: Historic range of Caddo settlement.

24

Figure 8: Cultural timeline of East Texas.

26

Figure 9: Close up of an early 18th century French map showing
Caddo settlements along road systems.

29

Figure 10: Portion of the Weches USGS 1:24,000 topographic
quadrangle map showing the Mission Tejas area.

31

Figure 11: Father Antonio Margil de Jesús with Caddo.

35

Figure 12: Locations of Spanish Missions and Presidios.

36

Figure 13: Locations of Caddo archaeological sites with European
trade goods within buffer distance.

38

Figure 14: Le Maire map of 1718. Historical Maps of
Louisiana: online.

40

vii

Figure 15: Plan and profile view of Presidio Nuestra Senora de
Pilar de Los Adaes [Capital of the Province of Texas].

42

Figure 16: 1886 Sanborn Fire Insurance map of downtown
Nacogdoches showing old Stone Fort built
by Antonio Gil Y’Barbo.

44

Figure 17: Juan Pedro Walker’s 1806 map of roads leading to
Nacogdoches.

46

Figure 18: 1840 boundary survey map between the Republic of
Texas and the United States.

49

Figure 19: Oxen pulling a wagon in eastern Texas.

50

Figure 20: 1863 map of road network and Sabine River crossings
by Captain William Von Rosenberg, C.S.A..

51

Figure 21: Ferry crossing at Sabinetown.

52

Figure 22: The Original Texas Land Survey (OTLS) over an
IKONOS satellite image.

53

Figure 23: Flow of Research Processes.

58

Figure 24: Close up view of the study area.

66

Figure 25: Preliminary field map using USGS 1:100,000
topographic quadrangle of study area.

68

Figure 26: GPS point data collected during the field survey.
Yellow triangles = First two years; Red triangles =
Second two years.

72

Figure 27: The author recording road depression data during
a field survey.

73

Figure 28: GIS globally unique identifier (GUID) number with
individual segment and sample numbers.

74

Figure 29: GPS enabled handheld computer running ArcPad 7.0.

75

viii

Figure 30: GPS data collection using a Trimble GeoXH GPS
receiver with a high-gain Zepher antenna.

76

Figure 31: Partial list of road attributes collected during the
field survey.

77

Figure 32: Physical landscape data used in study.

80

Figure 33: Bathymetric data for Toledo Bend Reservoir.

82

Figure 34: Space Imaging’s IKONOS satellite image dated
February 1, 2003.

83

Figure 35: Georeferenced 1936 aerial photographs over a
USGS 1:100,000 topographic quadrangle showing
routes across the Sabine River.

85

Figure 36: Conceptual data flow of the Archaeological
Geodatabase Model.

87

Figure 37: Structure of the file geodatabase developed for
the archaeological visualization model.

89

Figure 38: Exporting geodatabase using Export XML Workspace
Document Wizard.

90

Figure 39: Contour line feature class within hypsography feature
dataset.

91

Figure 40: Raster catalogs and raster datasets for the project.

92

Figure 41: Topological rule set where each linear feature must
be covered by a sample point.

94

Figure 42: Annotation feature class from the Geographic
Information Naming System for Sabine County.

95

Figure 43: Terrain feature class built “on-the-fly” from the
Topographic feature dataset.

96

ix

Figure 44: Exporting geodatabase using Export XML
Workspace Document Wizard.

97

Figure 45: Geodatabase schema from ESRI’s
Geodatabase Designer.

98

Figure 46: Data for determining the criteria for Spanish road
placement.

99

Figure 47: Depth-to-width ratio used for calculating impacts on the
archaeological record.

102

Figure 48: Additional area identified for continued search for
old roads.

103

Figure 49: Conceptual design of the archaeological visualization
model process.

105

Figure 50: Historic crossings over the Sabine River.

107

Figure 51: Spanish carretera [wooden two wheeled cart]
in Gruene, Texas.

109

Figure 52: Aerial photograph of the Highway 21 Bridge over the
Sabine River at Gaines Ferry.

111

Figure 53: The location of Crow’s Ferry.

114

Figure 54: Rock crossing used by the Spanish.

115

Figure 55: The OTLS showing the Mason and Gaines properties.

116

Figure 56: High hills known to the Spanish as La Questa Alta.

118

Figure 57: Old Carter’s Ferry Road Bridge over Patroon Bayou.

121

Figure 58: Merritt Mountain seen from the Texas side of
Toledo Bend Reservoir.

122

Figure 59: 1930s photograph of Pendleton Ferry on the
Sabine River.

123

x

Figure 60: 1936 aerial photograph draped over a 10-meter
Digital Terrain Model created from bathymetric
Contours.

124

Figure 61: Location of Crow’s and Patterson’s ferries with old
road system. Logging tramways are in light blue.

125

Figure 62: Crossing used by the Spanish to ford the Sabine
River.

127

Figure 63: Results of the first pedestrian field survey.

128

Figure 64: Old road cut [depression] through the forest in
La Questa Alta.

129

Figure 65: Terrain feature class used for analysis in
La Questa Alta.

130

Figure 66: Close up of old road segment winding around the
contours of the land to lessen the grade.

131

Figure 67: Looking east at road cut through La Questa Alta area.

132

Figure 68: The modern Carter’s Ferry road crossing
La Questa Alta.

133

Figure 69: Old road segments [in red] passing through
Puerto de Patrón.

134

Figure 70: USGS 1:100,000 topographic quadrangle draped
over 10-meter DTM for 3D view of Puerto de Patrón.

135

Figure 71: Located old road segments across La Questa Alta.

136

Figure 72: Historic springs in La Questa Alta.

137

Figure 73: Road cut to old home site adjacent to Carter’s
Ferry Road.

139

xi

Figure 74: Flowering pear tree at old home site along
Carter’s Ferry Road.

140

Figure 75: Connie Hodges and Dr. Jim Corbin survey old
home site adjacent to identified old road system.

141

Figure 76: Map of old road segments located next to
Carter’s Ferry Road.

144

Figure 77: Typical old road cut profile through La Questa Alta.

145

Figure 78: Four basic road shapes identified from field surveys.

147

Figure 79: Slope percent derived from 10-meter DTM.

148

Figure 80: Aspect derived from DTM showing a preference
for southwest facing slopes.

149

Figure 81: Weches Formation exposed on Boregas Creek
at old road crossing.

151

Figure 82: Partial coverage of soils data from the NRCS
extracted for the study area.

152

Figure 83: Erosion impacting an old road cut.

153

Figure 84: Distance to perennial water demonstrated that the
identified old road system was a well watered route.

154

Figure 85: Road system viewed in 3D-environment during
spatial analysis.

157

Figure 86: Parallel old road cuts visible from State Highway 21.

158

Figure 87: Areas identified for additional pedestrian field surveys.

159

Figure 88: Additional survey results showing old road segments.

161

Figure 89: Old road segment east of the old Geneva Post Office.

162

xii

Figure 90: Old road depression cut by Highway 21
west of Geneva.

163

Figure 91: The “Dugouts” west of Geneva.

164

Figure 92: Surveyed old road segments south of Geneva.

165

Figure 93: Portion of old road system west of McMahan’s
Chapel.

166

Figure 94: Old road segments paralleling King’s Road.

168

Figure 95: Located road segments at Lobanillo Cuts.

169

Figure 96: Parallel old road segments crossing the
Lobanillo Cuts area.

170

Figure 97: Two complexes of parallel road segments in the
Lobanillo Cuts area.

171

Figure 98: Looking east at deep parallel old road depressions
in the Lobanillo Cuts area.

172

Figure 99: Connie Hodges surveying the deep parallel road
segments at Lobanillo Cuts.

173

Figure 100: The King’s Highway State Historical Marker on
Highway 21.

180

Figure 101: Toledo Bend Reservoir in 1968.

182

Figure 102: Old road cut near Lobanillo Creek.

184

Figure 103: Four basic road types identified from the field survey.

185

Figure 104: Camino Carretera and Camino Chabnian identified
from research.

187

xiii

INTRODUCTION

Remote Sensing, Geographic Information Systems (GIS), and Global
Positioning Systems (GPS), when combined, form the technological foundation
of the geospatial sciences. Independently and combined, these technologies
have been used extensively by archaeological researchers to identify, document,
quantify, predict, and visualize human environmental utilization. In recent years
the archaeological sciences have embraced these landscape level analysis tools
as a means to visualize a hypothetical distribution of a phenomenon under study
as it relates to certain limiting, enhancing, or dynamic landscape variables.
When combined with remote sensing imagery and GPS derived locations, a GIS
can manage archaeological data in a spatially responsive medium facilitating an
integrated understanding of the landscape forces influencing the selection of
preferred locations (Aronoff 2005:6-7; Gao 2002:447-453; Harris 2002:139-142;
Wheatley and Gillings 2002:16-18).
Composed of physical disturbances, the archaeological record at the
landscape level is at best an incomplete catalog of the interactions of human
activity and the natural environment. Some of the interactions (i.e., disturbances)
may represent actions or events of significance or importance while others may
simply represent an unintentional byproduct of a human activity (e.g., erosion or
1

surface buildup). When combined with traditional archaeological and historical
research, a GIS provides a powerful tool that can enhance a researcher’s
perspective of the relationship between the context of human events and the
space in which the events occur.

This in turn leads to a more complete

understanding of the cultural behaviors, the sociological ideals, and the
economies and human value structures creating the distribution (Ebert 1992:173174; Harris 2002:134-140; Holliday 1992:101-112; Hodder 1995:164-168;
Richards 1995:216-219; Schiffer 1987:126-132).
Defined as the region between the Trinity River and the Louisiana border,
East Texas encompasses the pine forests of Texas. By the time of the earliest
European incursions into East Texas in the late 17th century, many trails,
pathways, or traces linked long established Caddo villages nestled deep in the
piney woods of Texas.

Utilizing these existing trails, the Spanish came to

eastern Texas to curtail French interests in trade with the Indians by establishing
a series of missions and presidios [forts] near Indian settlements. To facilitate
communication with the frontier, the Spanish created roads that linked the
missions and presidios by clearing and widening the existing trails. The network
of roads that they opened became known collectively as El Camino Real, or The
King’s Highway, linking the eastern most frontier missions with San Antonio to
the south.

The earliest road documented is El Camino Real de los Tejas

established by Governor Alonso de Léon’s 1690 expedition to the Tejas Indians

2

living on the Neches River near present day Alto (Abler 1974:330-335; Corbin
1991:191-199).
Landscape influences that were inherent in the selection and development
of these early roads can be studied by careful observation of road placement.
The influence of landscape on the ordering of human space, specifically in the
selection of one place over another, is of special interest to the archaeologist.
Based on the assumption that humans are closely tied to the natural
environment, landscape level archaeological analysis examines physical
landscape variables on the premise that these environmental factors are
significant in the selection of activity locations.

At the landscape level, GIS in

archaeological research is used to incorporate a combination of environmental
variables with contextual information (e.g., historical, archival, genealogical, or
ethnographical data) leading to the identification and interpretation of spatial
patterns not easily observed in the archaeological record which in turn can lead
to a more complete understanding of the relationship between humans and the
environmental choices that were made (Allen et al. 1990:382-386: Carr
1991:221-224; Church et al. 2000:135-136; Savage 1990:22-32).
An early road segment of El Camino Real de los Tejas known as El
Camino Carretera or the cart road has been located and surveyed, and used for
determining the landscape variables associated with early Spanish road
placement. El Camino Carretera crossed the Sabine River (now under Toledo

3

Bend Reservoir) in Sabine County, Texas and is the first road mentioned by the
Spanish that links the eastern most Spanish missions of Nuestra Señora de los
Dolores de los Ais, in present day San Augustine, Texas with the mission San
Miguel de los Adaes near present day Robeline, Louisiana.

Using historical

documents, maps, and transcripts of oral interviews as well as the results of
previous archaeological research into early Texas and Louisiana roads, a GIS
geodatabase model design framework has been created for managing
archaeological evidence with physical landscape data (i.e., topography, geology,
hydrology, and soils). The developed GIS geodatabase model has been used as
an integrated research oriented archaeological landscape visualization system
for determining limiting and enhancing landscape factors identified for Spanish
road placement.

This set of landscape criteria has been used to develop a

definition of what constitutes a Spanish road’s expression in the archaeological
record, and has led to the discovery and identification of additional existing
remnants of 17th and 18th century Spanish road features in eastern Texas.

4

OBJECTIVES

The project outlined in this document focuses on evaluating a specific
landscape area originally identified by Dr. James E. Corbin as being critical to the
understanding of early Spanish Colonial travel and trade in eastern Texas
(Figure 1). To facilitate locating existing Spanish road segments as well as the
extraction of physical landscape variables, emphasis was placed on the
development of a GIS managed archaeological landscape visualization model.
The creation and implementation of this GIS required that an integrated
archaeological geodatabase design framework be created and tested.
The research outlined in this document compliments and adds to the general
historical knowledge of the East Texas region by locating and describing an
existing but not recognized segment of El Camino Real de Los Tejas.
Additionally, this research adds to archaeological GIS theory by documenting the
development and use of a geodatabase design framework that incorporates a set
of landscape criteria for road placement to aid in the discovery and identification
of additional existing remnants of 17th and 18th century Spanish road features in
East Texas.

5

6

The fundamental objectives of this research were to:
1) Identify potential Spanish road locations through historic research.
2) Locate and survey existing Spanish road segments.
3) Define a Spanish road based on physical attributes of existing
segments; thereby developing a set of landscape criteria for Spanish
road placement.
4) Design and create a geodatabase data model incorporating physical
landscape data with Spanish road variables through an iterative
process of archaeological landscape visualization and spatial analysis.
5) Identify supplementary areas for field surveys to locate additional road
segments.
6) Document the processes, procedures, and results of designing and
implementing a GIS archaeological landscape visualization model.
The Texas Historical Commission’s Department of Antiquities Protection
published a report in 1993 titled “Archaeology in the Eastern Planning Region,
Texas: A Planning Document” that outlines the need for improvement of the
overall understanding of the archaeological record of East Texas. To accomplish
this task, the report recommends to “concentrate survey efforts in areas subject
to development pressures within the region and in counties with high numbers of
sites with unknown research potentials,” and to “require the study of
geomorphological data as a standard aspect of regional or areal studies.” They

7

also include, as an important management goal, the development of an
accessible computer database including the creation of a regional GIS (Perttula
1993:27-29).
While the need for a comprehensive archaeological database for the East
Texas region is recognized by the Texas archaeological community, the need for
specialized and specifically focused studies is also recognized as important to a
cultural understanding of the area. The volumes of primary sources available to
the researcher pertaining to Spanish activities in the East Texas region indicate
that formal and informal systems of communication were utilizing clearly defined
road networks (Figure 2).

Figure 2. 1807 map of road going through Nacogdoches to Natchitoches on the Red River.
By Anthony Nau, Zebulon Pike’s cartographer. East Texas Research Center.

8

Military, government, and commerce documents mention activities
referencing placenames that often described physical features on the landscape.
Many early documents only record landscape references of special note such as
difficult stream crossings, but generally leave the written record bare of the
landscape descriptions sought after by modern researchers.
Nevertheless, travel over El Camino Real de Los Tejas is well
documented. The road was the main life link of support for the early Spanish
colonies, and the importance of the first road through East Texas can not be
overstated in the terms of the heritage of the Texas people. The road united the
cultural history of the Caddo nation with the Spanish and the French, and it
ultimately integrated the cultural heritage of the Anglo- and African American
immigrants who utilized the road as a pathway to the land that was to become
Texas.
In 1911 the Texas chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution
(DAR) adopted a resolution calling for formal identification and marking of the
historic route of El Camino Real. Mrs. Lipscomb Norvelle, Chairwoman of the
Western Division of National Old Trails Roads of the DAR, wrote that “closely
identified with the glorious history of Texas are the deeds and achievements of
the communities peopling the route of its most historic landmark, the King’s
Highway” (Norvelle 1945:167-170). Under the guidance of Mrs. Norvelle, the
DAR continued to promote the need for identifying and marking the road.

9

Public interest grew, and in 1915 the Texas State Legislature appropriated
$5,000.00 to survey and mark the original route. A professional railroad right-ofway surveyor, Major V. N. Zively, C. E. was commissioned to physically survey
the route utilizing land ownership records, diaries, and archival documents.
Completing the work in 1916, Zively reported that in East Texas the road “was
very definitely located by the field notes of land surveys,” and that in many cases
the surveys were “bounded on one side by the old road” (Figure 3) (Zively
1916:2).

Figure 3. 1863 ownership map of Sabine County, Texas showing El Camino Real de Los Tejas
as the northern boundary of the James Mason property. East Texas Research Center.

10

The DAR raised private funds that were supplemented by later Legislative
appropriations to mark the route surveyed by Zively by erecting large granite
markers every five miles along the 540 miles of original road in Texas. In 1918
the DAR presented the historic trail, marked by 123 granite stones, to the State
of Texas. Major Zivley’s field notes and maps were bound in book form and
distributed to counties along the surveyed route.

As interest grew, many

celebrations honoring events and persons associated with the early Texas road
became commonplace in communities along the surveyed route. In 1924 the
Texas State Highway Department took control of highway construction across
Texas, and in 1929 the Texas Legislature formally adopted Zivley’s route and
directed the Department to maintain and preserve the road along the original
route (Norvelle 1945:322-362).
Generally acknowledged as closely paralleling Zively’s original route,
State Highway 21 between the Sabine River and San Antonio commemorates
the early Texas road (Figure 4). Completely paved by 1949, Highway 21 has
been widened, leveled, and straightened over the years obliterating many of the
physical road features identified by Zivley. Nevertheless, interest in El Camino
Real has never waned, as many communities along the route continue to
celebrate their heritage with events honoring the early road.

11

Figure 4. Texas State Highway 21 to San Antonio (Williams 2007).

In 1991, to commemorate the 300th anniversary of the road, the Texas
Legislature authorized the Old San Antonio Road Preservation Commission to
draft a comprehensive preservation plan for the early road. The Legislature also
directed the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) to prepare a report on
the disposition of the historic trail. The report resulted in a published document
of current research into El Camino Real with recommendations for identifying and
protecting existing cultural features of the early road (McGraw et al. 1991:3-4).

12

Introduced in Congress in 1998, legislation known as El Camino Real de
los Tejas National Historic Trails Act resulted in the U.S. Department of Interior’s
National Park Service (NPS) conducting a feasibility study of designating El
Camino Real de los Tejas a National Historic Trail. The NPS concluded that the
early Texas road meets the criteria for inclusion in the National Historic Trails
system and that it “is nationally significant because of its use for exploration,
conquest, missionary supply, settlement, cultural exchange, and military
campaigns” (NPS 1998:3-27).
A comprehensive feasibility stud, developed by the NPS under the
National Historic Trails Act, set “specific objectives and practices to be observed
in the management of the trail, including the identification of all significant natural,
historical, and cultural resources to be preserved,” and that “a protection plan for
any high potential historic sites or high potential route segments” be developed.
In the feasibility study, the NPS also recommended various means of public
participation in experiencing El Camino Real de los Tejas through interpretive
trails and programs at existing segments of the road (NPS 1998:68-72).
In October of 2004, after passing in both the Senate and House of
Representatives, President George W. Bush signed into law the bill designating
El Camino Real de los Tejas as a National Historic Trail under the administration
of the NPS. Under the law, publicly owned lands along El Camino Real de los
Tejas come within the jurisdiction of the NPS while privately owned lands can

13

only become certified as part of the trail system through voluntary consent. The
law also encourages the formation of local associations or partnerships for the
promotion of economic development and support of heritage tourism along El
Camino Real de los Tejas (Public Law 108 - 342 October 18, 2004).
For more than 300 years, crossing more than 500 miles of Texas, El
Camino Real de los Tejas continues to be an important component of Texas
history. First serving as a corridor of communications between Caddoan villages,
then serving Spanish and French colonial interests, and finally as the main
corridor for American colonization of Texas, this early road is a monument to a
shared cultural heritage.

14

LITERATURE REVIEW

The complex nature of designing a geodatabase that combines
archaeological, historical, and physiographical data in GIS managed landscape
visualization system, requires that three broad areas of applicable literature be
investigated. The first subject reviewed was the physical setting of the research
area. Readings included physiographic and cultural references of the region with
a specific emphasis on the physical landscape attributes that affect formation
processes of the archaeological record (e.g., geology, hydrology, soils, slope and
topographic relief).
The second area of literature reviewed were documents pertaining to the
archaeology and history in which the research subject occurs.

Utilizing the

extensive collection of the East Texas Research Center (ETRC), a State of
Texas historic document archive housed at Stephen F. Austin State University,
as well as Dr. Corbin’s comprehensive personal collection of reference material,
a detailed analysis of Spanish colonial activity pertaining to roads through East
Texas has been outlined.
The third area of literature examined was the applied use of geospatial
technologies in archaeology with a focus on GIS and archaeological theory.
Along with current trends of spatial data capture, data management, and data
15

integration, the literature reviewed included the development and use of
geodatabase designs utilizing “state-of-the-science” technology.

Landscape Setting

The selected research area is wholly within north-central Sabine County,
Texas. It includes a portion of western Toledo Bend Reservoir and the flooded
Sabine River valley (Figure 5). Located in the gently rolling hills of East Texas,
Sabine County lies within the Gulf Coastal Plain Physiographic Province of North
America.

This province is characterized by low topographic relief, extensive

marshy tracts, altitudes below 152 meters (500 feet), and sedimentary geologic
formations.
Within Texas, the Gulf Coastal Plain Physiographic Province is divided
into geographic regions based on physiographic and moisture conditions. The
East Texas Timber Belt is a geographic region that supports abundant pine and
oak woodlands and is characterized by a gently rolling to level sandy terrain,
annual rainfall in excess of 102 centimeters (40 inches), and an average growing
season of over 240 days (Bray, 1904:11-16).

The Pine Woods subdivision of

the East Texas Timber Belt is the dissected sandy forest lands with rolling relief
whose western boundary is approximately the 109 centimeters (43 inches)
rainfall line (Chambers 1948:8-10).

16

17

The geologic character of Sabine County is dominated by formations
representing tremendous sedimentary deposition during the Tertiary Period of
the Cenozoic Era (Fisher, 1965:24-31). Across the county (Figure 6), indurated
sandstone formations contact each other to form low escarpments or cuestas
that are landward facing and that dip toward the Gulf of Mexico at a steeper
angle than the present land surface. Between the cuestas and their backslopes
are found rolling hills that range from 30 to 183 meters (98 to 600 feet) in relief
with inter-ridge drainages being deflected slightly eastward at the base of the
cuesta’s front. The backslopes of the cuestas consist of rolling hills and prairies
(Fisher, 1965:24).
The geologic formations of the region are composed of light-colored
tuffaceous clays with interbedded fine to medium grained light-colored quartz
sandstone lenses with abundant fossil wood.

Outcrops of the Weches

Formation, a glauconitic marl exposed by erosion, and thin lenses of small
rounded gravels, as well as great quantities of silicified wood are found
throughout the region (Fisher 1965:31; Sellards et al. 1932:780-787).
Floodplains of the streams and rivers that cut through the cuestas are
typically 1.5 to 16 kilometers (1 to 10 miles) wide and generally occur 30 to 46
meters (98 to 151 feet) below the normal elevation of the land (Fenneman
1938:11-13). The Sabine River (now impounded by Toledo Bend Reservoir)
once provided the eastern boundary line for Sabine County. Abundant perennial

18

19

springs feed the many streams that drain the county. Dissected by numerous
streams, Sabine County has an elevation that ranges from approximately 50
meters (164 feet) in the south to 160 meters (590 feet) in the north near Matlock
Hills. The northern portion of the county drains to the east into Toledo Bend
Reservoir. Flooded in the mid-1960s with the completion of the dam near the
site of old Bevil’s Ferry in Newton County, the 185,000-acre impoundment of
Toledo Bend Reservoir drowned the Sabine River valley and its early Spanish
crossings as well as the earliest Anglo-American river port towns (Bureau of
Economic Geology (BEG) 1992; 1977).
An incomplete and unpublished soil survey for Sabine County exists;
however, only a very small portion of northern Sabine County has been mapped.
Communications with the county Natural Resource Conservation Service
(NRCS) office yielded a limited amount of information on the soils within the area.
Soils along the lower elevation drainages are mainly composed of level
sandy loam surfaces that are frequently flooded over loamy subsoil. Along the
eastern slopes of the county, the soil has a thin layer of fine sand over red and
gray clay. These soils occur at the head of drainages with steeply sloping to
moderate side slopes. The south and west portion of the county have soils that
are composed of thin fine sand lenses over red clay on gently sloping convex
ridges (NRCS, personal communication 2004).

20

Rainfall in Sabine County averages 123.11 centimeters (48.47 inches) per
year, with approximately 52 percent of the total annual precipitation generally
occurring from April through September. This is the growing season for most
crops in East Texas. In winter, the average temperature is 10.56° C (51° F) and
the average daily minimum temperature is 3.89° C (39° F).

In summer the

average temperature is 27.2° C (81° F) and the average daily maximum
temperature is 33.9° C (93° F) (NRCS, personal communication 2004).
Sabine County is within the Austoriparian Biotic Province of Texas. This
province is characterized by pine and pine-oak forests on the uplands, and by the
abundant oak, elm, and ash hardwoods in the lowlands (Blair 1950:98-99). Pure
stands of long-leaf pine once dominated the rolling and deep sandy uplands with
mixtures of loblolly and shortleaf pine, red oak, postoak, blackjack oak, and
sweetgum dominating the woodlands between the long-leaf area and the coastal
prairies to the south (Cruikshank and Eldredge 1939:7-8).
As defined by Tharp (1939), the research area lies completely within the
Pine Forest Vegetation Region of Texas. The Pine Forest Region is composed
of many diverse habitats consisting of pine and pine/hardwood uplands,
hardwood dominated bottomlands, natural grasslands and prairies, and low wet
areas consisting of swamps, marshes, and bogs (Tharp 1939:2-4). Grasslands
in Sabine County consist of pasturelands (improved and unimproved), old fields,
and right-of-ways. Managed pastureland, which is the most common type of

21

grassland in the area, is typically dominated by improved varieties of common
grasses.

Cultural History of the Region

Archaeological evidence gathered in the region, shows a long and
prosperous habitation by a varieties of people over time. During the Archaic and
earlier periods (ca. 8,000 BCE), the migratory bison hunters of the plains would
have found abundant resources in the rolling forested prairies of East Texas.
The seasonal food gathering activities of these people gradually gave way to
semi-permanent food producing activities of the Woodlands Period (ca. 3,000
BCE), due in part to the rich natural environment. By the time the first Europeans
began to explore the East Texas in the late 1600’s, the cultures they encountered
had established an adaptive system that allowed for flourishing populations
(Ewers 1969:103-104). First the Spanish and then the French documented and
recounted stories of the natural bounty of East Texas and the peoples who lived
here.

Yet, the large flourishing populations of native peoples had largely

disappeared by the time that permanent European settlements were being
established (Castañeda 1939:46-98).
Prior to the coming of the Europeans, the gently rolling oak and pine
forests of eastern Texas were home to a linguistically related people known as

22

the Caddo.

These were the southwestern group of a much larger cultural

tradition extending south from Oklahoma, southwest from Arkansas, and west
from Louisiana. By the time European explorers encountered the Caddo, they
had been living along the rivers and waterways of East Texas for over a
thousand years.
The Caddo were an agriculturally advanced people who grew surpluses of
corn and who had ceremonial centers characterized by large populations and flat
topped earthen temple and burial mounds. At the time of European contact and
although living as different tribes in different areas, the Caddo were organized
into three separate confederacies with the Hasinai, or Texas (Tejas) as the
Spanish were to call them, being composed of eight tribes living in scattered
hamlets (Newcomb 1995:282-284 [1961]; Swanton 1996:7-10 [1942], 1984:315317 [1952]).
Archaeological investigations in East Texas have demonstrated that long
before the Caddo there was wide spread diffusion of cultural practices not native
to East Texas (Fox, 1983:8-30). Most notably is that artifacts recovered from the
period immediately preceding the emergence of the Caddo show a distinct
tradition of southeastern woodland artifact styles including anthropomorphic and
effigy ceramic vessels and the building of large earthen temple and burial
mounds indicating that the Caddo of East Texas were a western extension of the

23

mound builders of the Mississippian culture (Figure 7) (Shum and Krieger
1954:144-149).
The Mississippian culture conducted extensive trade with Mesoamerica
through an overland trade route known as the Gilmore Corridor (named for the
spatial distribution

of

Mesoamerican

trade

goods found

in

excavated

archaeological sites). The mound building Caddo of East Texas were centered
where the route enters the forested region of the southeastern United States
(Forbis 1975:94-95; Gorenstein 1975:7-9).

Figure 7. Historic range of Caddo settlement (Williams 2007).

24

Archaeological excavations of the Caddo Mounds at the George C. Davis
site (Caddo Mounds State Park west of Alto) and excavations at the Washington
Square mound site (T.J. Rusk Elementary School campus in Nacogdoches)
indicate that these population centers, along with small dispersed extended
family hamlets and the far away trade centers, were connected by a network of
pathways or trails. From the volume of Mesoamerican trade goods recovered
from mound sites of the Mississippian culture, a great many traders must have
traveled these trails over countless years visiting each population center with
high quality goods and new ideas and technologies from far distant cultures
(Forbis 1975:94-95; Smith 1995:7-8).
As Europeans begin exploring these early indigenous trails they often
documented their journeys. First the Spanish and then the French meticulously
recorded their early explorations along these routes; some writing official reports,
some drawing maps, some keeping diaries, and others writing memoirs. From
these early accounts we can learn much of the landscape being crossed, the
peoples and habitations encountered, as well as the religious and political
motivating forces of the various explorers’ patrons. Begun as routes of conquest,
these early trails quickly became paths of conversion and later of commerce
resulting in a series of permanent roads with missions, presidios, and ranchos
established to protect this vital link of communications (Figure 8).

25

26

The main road linking the northern province of Texas with its support and
supply from the interior of New Spain was called El Camino Real (The King’s
Highway or The Royal Road). The first written documentation of a road in East
Texas comes from the accounts of De Soto’s expedition in the mid-summer of
1542. Although briefly noted in the accounts, it is apparent that the mention of a
road is significant, where peopled areas producing abundant maize (corn) were
connected by trails that were developed enough that the Spanish considered
them roads.

These accounts would indicate that the arteries linking the

settlements in the province of the Caddo were more than likely wide enough to
accommodate a large army of horsemen, solders, livestock, and camp followers
(Robertson 1993;146-147 [1933]; Swanton 1985:262 [1939]).
By the mid- 17th century all of the major European powers were gaining
territory in the new world. Spain, whose industries and economy were drained
from repeated warfare, was struggling to hold onto its frontier territories and was
only able to maintain its power by the annual gold and silver tributes from its
colonies in New Spain. Fearing the loss of commerce from French raiders in the
West Indies, Spain embarked on an aggressive policy of colonizing and
expanding the hold on its territories (Dunn 1971:17-19 [1917]).
In July of 1684, French explorer Réné Robert Cavelier Sieur de la Salle
received a commission from King Louis XIV to build a fort at the mouth of the
Mississippi River. Setting sail with 280 solders, settlers, and servants in four

27

vessels including the frigate La Belle (found and excavated in Matagorda Bay by
the Texas Historical Commission between 1996 and 1997), la Salle, through a
series of miscalculations and unfortunate events, overshot the mouth of the
Mississippi River to land on the coast of Texas and became stranded near
Matagorda Bay in February of 1685 (Castañeda 1976a:285-287 [1936]; Morfi
1935:124-125).
An English translation of the journal of Henri Joutel, la Salle’s trusted
lieutenant, gives perhaps the best first hand account of travel through East
Texas. Joutel was left in charge of Fort St. Louis (found and excavated by the
Texas Historical Commission between 1999 and 2002) while la Salle was
exploring to the northeast in search of the “great river.” Joutel described in detail
the hardships of life at the fort, and after the murder of la Salle he describes the
journey through the lands of the Caddo while in search of a French trading post
on the Red River (Joutel 1968:39-63).
Joutel described each village encountered as they moved farther
northeast. Passing from one village to the next, the survivors of la Salle’s
expedition were led across roads by Indian guides who would go ahead to give
the elders of each village advance notice of their coming. Finally reaching a
French trading post on the Red River after a six month journey (Figure 9), Joutel
and the remainder of la Salle’s ill fated colony would eventually make their way
back to Canada and France (Joutel 1968:173-175).

28

After learning of the French plans to establish a foothold on the coast of
Texas, the Spanish crown immediately ordered the Viceroy of New Spain to
undertake two expeditions to locate the French settlement. Both failed, and it
was not until 1689 that Alonso de Léon’s expedition discovered the ruins of Fort
St. Louis. Returning to the Viceroy with two surviving Frenchmen who had been
living with the Caddo, de Léon proved in fact that the French were moving into
Texas to establish trade with the Indians (Castañeda 1976a:352-353).

th

Figure 9. Close up of an early 18 century French map showing Indian settlements along road
systems. East Texas Research Center.

29

According to Dr. James Bruseth, Deputy State Historic Preservation
Officer and Director of the Archaeology Division of the Texas Historical
Commission, artifacts recovered from the excavations of the French frigate La
Belle have been claimed by France as French property under Maritime Law. The
claim resulted in an international treaty brokered by the U. S. Department of
State between France and the State of Texas whereby the artifacts are
recognized as French national treasures residing in Texas in perpetuity. In 2004,
the remains of a French sailor, found during the La Belle’s excavation, were
buried in the Texas State Cemetery in Austin. The State funeral was attended by
the French Ambassador to the United States and presided over by a priest of
French decent. A granite marker placed in the cemetery chronicles the sailor’s
journey.

Descendants of the two surviving Frenchmen from la Salle’s failed

expedition, who were captured and questioned by de Léon in 1689, live in
northern New Mexico (Jim Bruseth, personal communication 2007).
At almost the same time as de León’s return, the Viceroy received news
that France and Spain were at war once again. Quickly giving permission for
another expedition to the Tejas, the Viceroy appointed de Léon as leader with
Father Massanet as head of the missionaries. In March of 1690 de Léon’s fifth
entrada was begun with one hundred and ten solders and five missionaries
(Morfi 1935:152-153; Dunn 1971:110-123 [1917]).

30

Arriving at the Tejas village on the Neches River on May 22 of 1690,
Father Massanet built and consecrated a mission on the first of June that he
named San Francisco de los Tejas (Figure 10). In a letter to Don Carlos de
Siguenza, Father Massanet wrote that at the San Marcos River they met “an
Indian who was thoroughly acquainted with the road into the country of the Tejas,
and he showed us the way until we met with the governor of the Tejas.” He also
mentioned sending an Indian messenger to the governor [chief] of the Tejas
“telling him to light fires along the road by which they should come, and that we
would answer by the same signal” (Casis 1991:375).

Figure 10. Portion of the Weches USGS 1:24,000 topographic quadrangle map showing
the Mission Tejas area (Williams 2007).

31

In his report to the Viceroy, de Léon suggested the need for Spanish
settlements and at least four presidios to secure the allegiance of the Tejas. In
September of 1690 Father Massanet reported to the Viceroy the conditions of the
conversions of the Indians and how best to proceed in extending the missionary
work (Castañeda 1976a:359 [1936]). The King of Spain had received a detailed
account of these events and consequently ordered another expedition for
conversion of the Tejas. The Viceroy appointed D. Domingo Terán de los Ríos
and sent him to the Tejas with fifty solders, fourteen Franciscan missionary
fathers, and seven lay brothers (Morfi 1935:153-155).
Arriving among the Tejas in the late summer 1691, Terán quickly
exhausted his supplies and was forced to return to Mexico leaving the
missionaries behind.

Not until the winter of 1692 did the Viceroy show any

interest in the missions among the Tejas when he ordered Captain Diego Ramón
to propose the best means of communicating with the missions.

Ramón

suggested that “a party of twenty men from Monclova could take the missionaries
the desired supplies, since the road was now well known” (Castañeda 1976a:372
[1936]).
Before an expedition to relieve the missionaries could be mounted,
difficulties with the solders left to guard the missionaries began to arise with the
Indians. In the early fall of 1693 the heavy church ornaments and the church bell
were secretly buried and the mission San Francisco de los Tejas was burned to

32

the ground while Father Massanet and the remaining Spaniards slipped away in
the night (Castañeda 1976a:375-376 [1936]).
The temporary abandonment of the Tejas missions was overshadowed by
the economically devastating French and Spanish wars. Taking advantage of
Spain’s weakened ability to defend her territories; French aggression in lands
east of the Mississippi River occupied Spanish attention (Morfi 1935:155-165). In
1701 the Council of the Indies again became interested in East Texas when they
suggested that the “Viceroy of New Spain should be instructed to send special
envoys to the Tejas Indians, asking them not to allow the English to pass through
their lands while attempting to reach New Spain” (Castañeda 1976b:14 [1936]).
In 1713, Louis Juchereau de St. Denis founded a French settlement at
Natchitoches on the Red River and set out on an expedition to reach the Spanish
settlements at San Juan Bautista on the Rio Grande River. His arrival in 1714
greatly surprised the Viceroy and other Spanish officials who believed that
French designs of trade with the Tejas had ended almost twenty years before.
Arriving in Mexico City in 1715, St. Denis, who believed that Christian missions
among the Tejas would be good for French trade, offered his services in leading
a Spanish entrada to reestablish the missions in East Texas (Castañeda
1976b:29-32 [1936]; Morfi 1935:168-172).
Domingo Ramón was chosen as leader of the expedition with St. Denis as
Capitan. The expedition consisted of twenty-five soldiers, thirty or so settlers,

33

and several missionaries along with Father Francisco Hidalgo, who with Father
Massanet had established the San Francisco de los Tejas mission twenty-five
years before.

Leaving the mission at San Juan Bautista in April 1716, the

expedition reached the Tejas by the end of June. The Ramón expedition
reestablished the old mission calling it Nuestro Padre San Francisco de los Tejas
with Father Hidalgo as its missionary.
Ramón continued east, founding mission La Purísima Concepción near a
Tejas village on the Angelina River, mission Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe de
los Nacogdoches with Father Fray Antonio Margil de Jesús as missionary (Figure
11), mission San José de los Nasones for the Nazoni and Nadaco tribes, and in
the fall of 1716, after returning from a visit to Natchitoches, the mission of San
Miguel de los Adaes near Arroyo Hondo between the Sabine and Red Rivers.
The mission Nuestra Señora de los Dolores de los Ais was founded in the
country of the Ais (in present day San Augustine) halfway between the missions
Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe de los Nacogdoches and San Miguel de los
Adaes (Figure 12) (Tous 1991:21-24 [1930]; Morfi 1935:185-188).
Ramón’s visit to Natchitoches in 1716 with St. Denis confirmed that the
French were establishing permanent trading posts. Seeing a well built fort on an
island in the Red River garrisoned by thirty men did nothing to ease Ramón‘s
mind. He had also seen numerous French trade goods among the Indians near
the missions including guns, colored glass beads, knifes, and iron hatchets

34

leading him to conclude that “proper methods must be adopted if they were to
hold the land of the Tejas” (Morfi 1935:186-187).

Figure 11. Father Antonio Margil de Jesús with Caddo.
East Texas Research Center.

Archaeological excavations at the site of the mission Nuestra Señora de
los Dolores de los Ais in San Augustine uncovered numerous glass trade beads

35

36

and ceramic and iron goods of both French and Spanish manufacture (Corbin
1977:3-6; Corbin et al. 1984:61-74). Spanish and French trade goods have also
been recovered from the site of mission San José de los Nasones on the east
fork of the Angelina River and from a Caddo hamlet known as the Deshazo Site
(excavated prior to the impoundment of Lake Nacogdoches) where several
artifacts of non-native manufacture were found in burials dating from 1650 to
1770 (Figure 13). The Deshazo Site is a few miles east of the hypothesized
location of the presidio built to protect mission La Purísima Concepción. The
artifacts included iron knives, glass trade beads, European ceramic shards, and
a brass hand bell (Story 1982:113-128).
European artifacts have also been found in the surrounding vicinity of the
San Pedro Creek valley near the site of mission Nuestro Padre San Francisco de
los Tejas yielding trade beads, gun parts, a historic trade pipe, and a breech
block from a Spanish vesro [cannon] (Erickson and Corbin 1996:3-5). According
to Dr. Tim Perttula, contract archaeologist and author of numerous articles and
books related to Caddo archaeology, recent investigations in Mission Tejas State
Park, along the San Pedro creek drainage, have identified Caddo structures
whose artifacts included Spanish metal and gun parts. Jay Blaine, a foremost
early European metal expert, identified the metal gun parts and determined that
they may predate 1700. Reworked French gun flints were also recovered in
these investigations (Tim Perttula, personal communications 2007).

37

38

Ramón’s concerns over proper support from the Spanish government
were well founded because by early 1719 the missions were no better off than
they were when established. Several years before, St. Denis had presented a
crude map of his overland route to the Spanish Viceroy, prompting new concerns
by Spanish officials that the French knew more about the northern provinces of
New Spain than they did. While in Mexico City, St. Denis had been interrogated
about French interests in the northern provinces of New Spain.
Renewed threats of French settlement sparked interest in maps of the
region, and largely based on St. Denis’ report, Juan Manuel de Oliván Rebolledo,
a member of the Royal Audiencia, created several maps of the route across
Texas that were kept secret by Spanish officials. The French however, created
maps with descriptions of the land in the northern provinces of New Spain that
were widely published. A French missionary with a background in geography and
cartography, Francois Le Maire, compiled enough information over many years
to draft a detailed map showing the overland route from Louisiana across New
Spain (Figure 14) (Jackson et al. 1990:8-26).
In the spring of 1719, war again broke out between the French and
Spanish, and responding to orders to expel the Spaniards from Texas, St. Denis
attacked and captured the mission San Miguel de los Adaes. News of the attack
quickly spread fear, and a general panic followed. Withdrawing to the Trinity
River, the settlers, solders, and missionaries waited for reinforcements. When

39

none came, they made their way to the settlements on the San Antonio River.
Once again the missions of eastern Texas were abandoned (Castañeda
1976b:110-117 [1936]; Morfi 1935:190-191).

Figure 14. Le Maire map of 1718. Historical Maps of Louisiana: online. Louisiana State University.

Acting under royal orders to use the “greatest application and care” in
supporting the missions as well as the royal order to prepare presidios for
denying French passage through the frontier, the Viceroy appointed the Marquis
of San Miguel de Aguayo to lead the expedition to recover the missions
(Castañeda 1976b:121-123 [1936]).

Setting out in late 1720, de Aguayo’s

expedition is chronicled by Bachelor Juan Antonio de la Peña. Keeping a diary,

40

Padre Peña mentioned travel over the road several times. In March of 1721 he
stated that they “took a road over clear and level land,” and that they had “left the
old road which is rugged and full of thickets” (Peña 1981:45).
The Aguayo expedition reached the Tejas and reoccupied the abandoned
missions in late July and early August. In early November of 1721, de Aguayo
received a dispatch, dated May 6, 1721, from the King of Spain ordering him not
to wage war on the French while securing the province but to establish the
capital of the province of Texas at Los Adaes.

At the orders of the King, he

selected, built, and garrisoned a strong presidio with a stockade of pointed logs
one-half league from the mission San Miguel de los Adaes and less than seven
leagues from Natchitoches (Figure 15); thereby fortifying the entry way to the
provinces of Texas against future French incursions (Castañeda 1976b:143-145).
In 1723 the newly appointed Viceroy of New Spain informed the King that
abuses of the management of the presidios were draining the royal treasury.
The King ordered the Viceroy to conduct an inspection of the presidios and to
make recommendations concerning the protection of the frontier.

Brigadier

General Pedro de Rivera was assigned this task and starting out in 1724, he
completed his inspections of the presidios of New Spain in 1728. Endorsing all
of Rivera’s recommendations, the Viceroy ordered a reduction of the military
force in East Texas by ordering the abolishment of the presidio of Nuestra
Señora de los Dolores de los Tejas on the Angelina River. In a letter to the

41

Viceroy, General Rivera stated that “since the year 1715 when it was founded, its
garrison has not been employed in any action that may justify the object of its
erection.” Nevertheless, in 1730 the lack of adequate protection resulted in the
permanent removal of three missions from eastern Texas to the San Antonio
River (Bolton 1970:5-6 [1915]; Morfi 1967:243-279 [1935]).

Figure 15. Plan and profile view of Presidio Nuestra Senora de Pilar de Los Adaes [Capital of the
Province of Texas]. East Texas Research Center.

42

When compared to other missions established on the San Antonio River,
the East Texas missions were very poor and ill attended by the Indians. From
this time on, however, the missions enjoyed relative stability, although
disagreements over the placement of the border between Spanish and French
territories continued to cause minor hostilities. By the time of the French cession
of Louisiana to the Spanish in 1763 the boundary question concerned the
importation of contraband trade goods. Yet having access to a river port, the
French settlements dominated trade with the Indians (Bolton 1970:32-34 [1915]).
Antonio Gil Y’Barbo, a Spaniard born in 1729 at Los Adaes, had
established, by 1772, the largest ranch in East Texas along El Camino Real de
Los Tejas. As a trader with the Indians, he gained great personal wealth and the
support of the Spanish authorities concerned with keeping French traders out of
the Tejas provinces. Captain Y’Barbo commanded the respect of the Indians as
well as being a leader of his Spanish comrades.

Nevertheless, due to the

reduced need for frontier defenses, Y’Barbo would lead in 1773, at an order from
the King of Spain, the people of Los Adaes back to San Antonio under great
personal suffering. East Texas was once again abandoned to French traders.
Capitan Y’Barbo would eventually win permission to return to East Texas from
the Viceroy in Mexico City and would lead his people back to East Texas in 1779
to continuously occupy the region until the present day (Figure 16) (Jackson
1986:96-97: King 1949:48-50).

43

Figure 16. 1886 Sanborn Fire Insurance map of downtown Nacogdoches showing the old Stone
House [Fort] built by Antonio Gil Y’Barbo (Williams 2007). The Stone Fort was torn down in 1901
and rebuilt as a replica on the grounds of the Stephen F. Austin State Teachers College in 1936
for the Texas Centennial celebration.

44

Although earlier maps exist showing a road through East Texas, such as
Guillaume Délisle’s map published in Paris in 1718 showing the route of la
Salle’s expedition with roads linking named settlements, the first cartographically
accurate map to record the placement of roads in East Texas comes from Juan
Pedro Walker when he accompanied Colonel Simón de Herrera to East Texas in
1806 during a border dispute with the Americans (Figure 17). Defining the roads
he traveled in relation to topographic features, Walker drafted a map titled “Route
de Nacogdoches au Rio Trinidad” that shows a relatively accurate depiction of
two segments El Camino Real de Los Tejas; a northern route and a southern
more direct route between Nacogdoches and the crossing of the Neches River
near the old mission site of San Francisco de los Tejas.

45

Figure 17. Juan Pedro Walker’s 1806 map of roads leading to Nacogdoches.
East Texas Research Center.

Walker’s map is remarkably accurate in that it shows physical features as
well as places he visited along the road segments. Some of the features include
the ranch of Barr and Davenport, Indian traders on the Angelina River near the
old site of mission La Purísima Concepción, and the ranch of Bernardo D’Ortolan
on the old road near Loco Bayou (Corbin 1991:192-196).
According to Dr. Tom Middlebrook, State Archaeological Steward for
Nacogdoches County, the D’Ortolan house and an adjacent servant’s house
were located, identified, and partially excavated on a low terrace along the
eastern shore of Lake Nacogdoches. European ceramics, metal, and glass as

46

well as Caddoan pottery were recovered and are being analyzed for publication
(Tom Middlebrook, personal communication 2005).
As other map makers entered Texas and began to define physical
features on maps, the placement and identification of roads became a focal point
for immigration, importation, and communications.

The formal set of roads

established early on the Spanish frontier took on a different role as pioneer
settlers from the United States began to immigrate to Spanish Texas.
In the fall of 1821, Mexico won its independence from Spain. The late
1820s and early 1830s were, for the eastern province of Mexico, a period of
restless political decisions first encouraging open American settlement and then
a tightening of restrictions after a series of attempted rebellions (Welborn
1973:14-24). As Boundary Commissioner for the Mexican government, General
Manuel de Mier y Terán was concerned over Mexico’s lack of proper control over
the eastern provinces, and on his inspection of the Texas boundary in 1828,
wrote in his diary that “great numbers of foreigners who have entered the frontier
are vicious and wild men with evil ways” (Jackson 2000:79-80).
Terán’s concern was correct because by 1832 open rebellion had erupted
and by mid-1836, Texas was no longer under control of the Mexican government.
With the formation of the new Texas government, the boundary dispute begun
with Spain and continuing with Mexico now centered on negotiations between the
Republic of Texas and the United States. A joint Texas and American Boundary

47

Survey Commission would finally determine the exact boundary as being the
center of the Sabine River channel when the river was surveyed by the
Commission in 1840 (Figure 18) (Welborn 1973:24-25).
As the Anglo-European population pressures of the United States
increased, more Anglo-pioneer settlers began to colonize the wilder lands of the
East Texas frontier. In the years 1824 to 1833 the rate of Anglo immigration into
East Texas was an average of 28 families per year. Dropping slightly in the
turbulent years of 1834 and 1835, the rate of Anglo immigration increased to
greater than 60 families per year by 1836. In the following years, the rate of
immigration into East Texas more than doubled per year. By the time of
statehood in 1845 more than 200 families per year were immigrating into East
Texas (Lathrop 1949:60).

48

Figure 18. 1840 boundary survey map between the Republic of Texas and the United States.
East Texas Research Center.

The Anglo-pioneer settlers brought their large heavy wagons pulled by
teams of oxen impacting the early Spanish roads by rutting and clearing wider
avenues through the forests (Figure 19).

They leveled stream crossing grades

and built ferries. They built log roads and temporary bridges in wet areas, and
they modified the landscape by the shear passage of their numbers (Figure 20).

49

Figure 19. Oxen pulling a wagon in eastern Texas. East Texas Research Center.

The 1835 “Guide to Texas Emigrants,” besides describing the benefits of
the natural resources of Texas, also discusses the various roads and river
crossings between settlements in Texas.

Marilyn Sibley wrote in her book

“Travelers in Texas 1761 – 1860” that early roads in Texas were in reality routes
that were in a constant state of needed repairs. She stated that many travelers
recorded the difficulties of the various routes that, affected by the weather, were
impassable because they were wet and soggy. Other travelers had better luck
during the dry seasons and described the routes as being “better than any roads
found anywhere in the United States” (Sibley 1967:26-30; Woodman 1974:32-33
and 54-55 [1835]).

50

Figure 20. 1863 map of road network and Sabine River crossings by Captain William Von
Rosenberg, C.S.A.. Texas Historic Overlay Map Project; Texas Department of Transportation.

As Anglo-Americans immigrated to Texas, the main road into Texas (El
Camino Real) was improved to accommodate heavy wagons by straightening
and leveling difficult turns and grades. In 1839, the Congress of the Republic of
Texas passed a bill calling for the improvement of the road (Norvell 1945:199).
At suitable river crossings, ferries were established providing passage for a fee

51

(Figure 21).

Along the road early pioneers began to find choice areas with

abundant fertile lands to clear and cultivate, resulting in the early road becoming
a reference point for land division and ownership (Figure 22).

Figure 21. Ferry crossing at Sabinetown. East Texas Research Center.

Established by these early settlers, farms and ranches began to spread
out away from the main road resulting in new roads to link the scattered frontier
settlements (Crocket 1962:87 and 127).

52

Figure 22. The Original Texas Land Survey (OTLS) over an IKONOS satellite image (Williams
2007).

Geospatial Technology and Archaeology

By managing archaeological data in a landscape level GIS, an analysis
and visualization tool is developed for combining disparate historical data with
spatial data in a fashion that can be investigated and manipulated to produce
useful research products.

Current archaeological research theory recognizes

the value of GIS for regional and landscape analysis. As an archaeological tool,

53

the greatest potential use of GIS is as a research oriented landscape
visualization system for studying the spatial relationships between humans and
their cognitive environments.

A GIS can manage archaeological data in a

spatially responsive medium allowing for an integrated understanding of the
landscape forces influencing the selection of preferred locations (Harris
2002:139-142; Wheatley and Gillings 2002:16-18).
A landscape level GIS can be used effectively with historic documents to
create useful research tools for understanding the selection of one location over
another based on landscape and cultural opportunities or limitations. The ability
to visualize landscape change over time, the ability to visualize the character of
the landscape in a 3D-environment, and the ability to incorporate multiple types
of data, both historic and current, into a single analysis and visualization tool is a
strength that GIS brings to the understanding of archaeology (Harris 2002:139142; Wheatley and Gillings 2002:16-18).
Although an early limitation, technological advances have overcome some
of the early usability issues of an integrated GIS, software advances have eased
the strain of managing spatial databases, and state and federal agencies have
adopted GIS standards for land use planning and monitoring resulting in volumes
of easily accessible spatially enabled environmental data (Allen et al. 1990:382386).

In “The Archaeologist's Workbench: Integrating GIS, Remote Sensing,

EDA, and Database Management,” the authors conclude that technology is no

54

longer the most significant issue but rather it is the possibility of arranging the
technology [tools] in a manner that facilitates the exploratory investigation of
perceived or unanticipated relationships (Farley et al. 1990:160-164).
In “Landscape: A Unifying Concept in Regional Analysis,” Crumley and
Marquardt develop the line of reasoning that landscape is the manifestation of
the relationship and interaction of humans with the physical environment.
Therefore, landscape is a dynamic spatial unifier where the definition of
environmental relationships varies between specific scales and human centers of
activity.

The authors conclude that landscape provides the foundation for

integrating ecology with historical factors, long used by archaeologists, to study
and document social and material change (Crumley and Marquardt 1990:73-79).
A landscape level context aware GIS, based on the assumption that humans are
closely tied to the natural and cultural environments, can be used to examine the
intricacies of the topographic setting with the environmental variables of known
archaeological sites yielding quantifiable parameters of choices.
GIS has been used by the Arkansas Historic Preservation Program
(AHPP) to integrate historic maps and documents for identifying segments of the
Trail of Tears route through Arkansas. In 1830, the Cherokee Indians of the
southeastern United States were forcibly marched to the Oklahoma Indian
Territory. Resulting in thousands of deaths, the routes followed by the Cherokee
became known as the Trail of Tears.

55

Recognized as an important cultural

heritage feature, the routes crossing nine states are administered by the NPS
under the Trail of Tears National Historic Trails Act. Using modern geospatial
technologies, AHPP has integrated the use of historic maps with remote sensing
in a GIS for identifying unclear routes of the Trail of Tears. Once verified by field
surveys, the data are submitted to the NPS for inclusion in their Long Distance
Trails GIS (Files 2000:online).
Traditionally the integration of historic data from disparate sources,
including landscape resource data, has been costly in terms of time and dollars.
While GIS provides a cost effective yet simple structure for integrating and
accessing data based on spatial location, at its core is the database that, when
properly designed, can facilitate exploration of archival or historical data within
the geography of its logical relationships.

Complex queries of attribute

information can be combined with geographical criteria for creation of data that
can be geographically visualized; potentially leading to further composite
questions. The resultant data can also be added back to the database creating
additional complex relationships of behavior and interaction (Church et al.
2000:142-145; Gregory 2003:56-59; Wheatley and Gillings 2002:90-94).
By its very nature, archaeology is spatially oriented and therefore an ideal
application for GIS.

Nevertheless, the development of an archaeological

geodatabase and the cultural observations contained within the datasets is a
complex and intricate undertaking that many scholars believe is influenced by

56

contemporary understanding of the events, and the meaning attached to the
event, place, or thing (Kvamme 1989:139-203; Mitchell 1999:11-14; Oliver
2001:175-188).
Robust archaeological geodatabase designs have been developed over
specific landscapes for the creation of archaeological site prediction models. The
models have shown to be a cost effective method of reducing the area and the
time needed for pedestrian archaeological surveys.

These sorts of predictive

models are based on the assumption that humans are closely tied to the natural
and cultural environments, so the creation of an accurate digital representation of
the landscape is absolutely necessary to avoid incorrect and ineffective models
(Clement et al. 2001:online; Hageman and Bennett 2000:113-127). While
predictive models focus on representations of the landscape as a resource to be
exploited and utilized; thereby taking on value, they often under represent the
value of the features linking the resources.
Therefore, a well thought out and well designed GIS database is a critical
component for studying the relationships between spatial features and the
attributes that characterize the feature.

The Environmental Systems Research

Institute (ESRI) geodatabase data model provides this structure in a
customizable format that can be manipulated to model real world interactions and
relationships. The geodatabase is an object-oriented data model that stores the
geometry and attributes of spatial features in a single database. The

57

Figure 23. Flow of Research Processes.

58

geodatabase can incorporate general relationships among features along with
the complex natural behaviors of those features in a design that can enforce the
integrity of the behavior or relationship.
ESRI defines a well designed geodatabase data model as having a
comprehensive architecture with all the necessary data to accommodate different
users with similar needs. Thorough documentation of the processes and steps
used to create the data model are considered by ESRI to be a crucial component
of the geodatabase data model design (Zeiler 1999:182-184).
Geodatabase data models provide a template for sharing the “best
practices” scientific methodology of data development and manipulation for a
specific GIS application. Data models allow for better decision making, reduce
costs by sharing successful GIS implementations, and provide a common
framework for data standards (ESRI 2002:online).
The ESRI Press book “Modeling Our World: The ESRI Guide to
Geodatabase Design” sums up the development of a geodatabase data model
by stating that the purpose is to make “GIS datasets smarter by endowing them
with natural behaviors, and to allow any sort of relationship to be defined among
features.” For archaeology, the geodatabase data model facilitates the inclusion
of contextual data in a framework that expands the ability of the researcher to
understand relationships and behaviors of data as it relates to the spatial extent
under study (Zeiler 1999:5-8).

59

METHODOLOGY

The basic objectives of the research outlined in this document were to
demonstrate that a GIS managed archaeological landscape visualization model
can be developed using an integrated geodatabase design framework and that
this model can be used in an iterative process leading to the discovery and
identification of additional remnants of Spanish road features in East Texas. To
facilitate these objectives, the research methods were divided into two broad
phases.

Figure 23 illustrates the flow of the research processes used for this

project.

Phase 1

Phase 1 consisted of historic research, selection of a study area, a field
survey to locate existing Spanish roads, and the collection of physical landscape
data.

Historic research into Spanish activities in East Texas provided the

archaeological context of the investigation.

The examination of historic

documents also helped identify travel preferences across the landscape and
helped limit a geographical area for study.

60

Historic Research

Phase 1 included historic research of reputable translations of Spanish,
French, and English colonial documents. Legal documents from the Republic
and State of Texas pertaining to historic roads in eastern Texas were also
examined.

Using this information, temporal boundaries were selected and

specific Spanish activity areas were targeted for inclusion in this study.
Within the last one-hundred years, many scholarly publications have
documented these early accounts of exploration in Texas utilizing a variety of
primary documents and period translations from the Latin American collections of
the University of Texas, the Spanish archives at the National Library in Mexico
City, as well as the Archivo de las Indies in Seville, Spain. These documents
have aided in the development of a more complete understanding of the
settlement patterns, the kinship associations, and the utilization of the natural
landscape for subsistence by the first European explorers.
Although a complete understanding of this period in East Texas does not
exist, many scholarly attempts have been made to provide a comprehensive
picture of this time period. The one dominant historical premise that these
research publications have in common is that they are centered on the
exploration of early indigenous trails, later to become roads linking the northern

61

Spanish empire with its Capital in Mexico City, 2,414 kilometers (1,500 miles)
south.
As a place of value, the early road segment of El Camino Real de los
Tejas known as El Camino Carretera (the cart road) is the first road mentioned
by the Spanish that links the eastern most Spanish missions and presidios.
Spanish references to the specific area of El Camino Carretera begin in 1727
with Brigadier General Pedro de Rivera’s report to the Spanish Crown. In 1767
both the Marqués de Rubi and Nicolas de la Fora chronicle their trip across this
area on their way to the Capital of the Province of Texas at Los Adaes. Using
historical documents and maps as well as transcripts of oral interviews, this study
focused on examining the evidence as it related to physical landscape features.
The Spanish network of roads through the lands of the Caddo was vital for
communication with the frontier.

Spanish efforts to curtail French interests in

trade with Caddo settlements consumed volumes of correspondence that
traveled over the roads by countless couriers to Spanish officials in San Antonio
and beyond.

Dr. James Corbin spent 30-years researching El Camino de los

Tejas both as actual locations on the landscape and as mentioned in primary
Spanish documentation.

Dr. Corbin’s notes and files were graciously made

available for this research. The volumes of notes referencing specific locations
provided an in-depth look at previously located Spanish road features, ranchos,
missions, Caddo villages, and other specific locations mentioned in the Spanish

62

correspondence as well as Spanish motivations for maintaining frontier defenses
so far from their base of support.
East Texas road historian and Shelby County Archaeological Steward,
Connie Hodges, has conducted many years of research along the old San
Antonio road in Sabine County and has contributed to many significant research
projects and publications. Her research uncovered historic documentation
relating to El Camino Carretera, and she has conducted oral interviews and land
ownership research in the specific area of El Camino Carretera.

Her extensive

notes and GPS located historic features were also graciously made available to
this study. Her research provided the foundation for identification, by Dr. Corbin,
of an existing Spanish road system within the study area.
Scanned digital copies of historic maps from the ETRC were incorporated
into the GIS as raster data.

These historic maps included an 1863 San

Augustine and Sabine County land ownership map (Figure 3) showing the
surnames of landowners and an 1840 Republic of Texas and United States
Boundary Commission map of the Sabine River (Figure 18) showing ferries, road
crossings, and river port towns.
By examining historic maps and comparing them to the modern character
of the landscape, the shared ideals and values of the countless generations of
humans who have developed a sense of place here, is manifested as a
distinctive community pattern. Wood and Fels (1992) suggest that, "maps are

63

embedded in a history they help construct." They continue with the concept that
the historical relationship of humans and the value of place are inherent in maps
and that the maps themselves reveal these patterns (Wood and Fels 1992: 2847).
With over four hundred years of historic documents relating to European
travels in East Texas, it is easy to notice that the documents refer to the Tejas as
being friendly and welcoming of the Europeans. In almost all cases, pathways or
trails are mentioned in relation to traveling in the Tejas provinces, and in many
cases the early explorers refer to these Tejas pathways as roads. Some Spanish
references to roads of the Tejas refer to other well used roads, differing routes,
and forested and open areas. With the Capital of the Province of Texas being at
Los Adaes (Robeline, Louisiana), it is not hard to imagine the travel of dozens of
couriers, solders, settlers, supply pack trains, and missionaries across the road
from San Antonio to the Capital.

Study Area

Using the historical research, an area was selected for study. Located in
the rolling hills of north-central Sabine County, Texas, it encompassed the
general area believed to have been crossed by El Camino Carretera.

64

The study area included approximately 40,145 hectares (99,201 acres)
and lies at the southern end of a set of rugged hills, identified as the Matlock Hills
on the 1:100,000 scale Natchitoches U. S. Geological Survey (USGS)
quadrangle. The area is along the southern side of a deeply dissected northwest
trending ridge overlooking Patroon Bayou to the northeast (Figure 24). South of
the study area, the land slopes more gently to the west and south. In contrast to
the deeply dissected north running drainages on the northern side of the study
area, the southern side has gently sloping wide flat fingers of land forming ridge
extending toward the south and west with wide spring fed creek bottoms spaced
at almost regular intervals between them.
The study area is in a region dominated by pine forests interspersed with
natural grasslands. The Angelina River to the west and the Sabine River to the
east along with their spring fed tributaries provide abundant fresh water to the
area. The climate is moderate with a long growing season and abundant rainfall.
The soils are fertile and support diverse vegetation and wildlife. These factors,
when taken together, provide a rich environment for human occupation.
State Highway 21 runs through the study area and through present day
Geneva, Texas. A gravel county road angles northeast out of Geneva, crosses
Boregas Creek near its head, and crosses a northwest trending low range of hills
before crossing State Highway 87 and the bridge over Patroon Bay [named for
the drowned Patroon Creek] on Toledo Bend Reservoir.

65

66

The gravel road out of Geneva terminates at the southern end of a
peninsula extending into the reservoir opposite Merritt Mountain, Louisiana. As
identified by previous owners, the old Carter homestead (owners of the middle
and upper ferries of the Sabine River in the 1890s) is located on the
southwestern slope of Merritt Mountain (L’Herisson 1981:106-108). A review of
modern Sabine County road maps identified the northeast road out of Geneva as
the Carter’s Ferry road while a review of Louisiana road maps reveals that there
is a Carter’s Ferry road on Merritt Mountain.

Field Survey

The delineation of a specific study area was the first step in locating and
identifying existing Spanish road segments. By using historical data combined
with archaeological field survey techniques, the actual locations of identified
Spanish activities were examined.
Previous archaeological investigations within the study area were
compared with 19th century land ownership maps and studied for clues to road
features. Custom field maps of the study area were prepared from digital copies
of USGS 1:100,000 quadrangle maps obtained from the Texas Natural
Resources Information System (TNRIS) and were included as the first raster

67

datasets of the developing geodatabase model created in ESRI’s ArcGIS 9.1
software (Figure 25).
Following a preliminary examination of the area, Dr. Corbin confirmed the
identification of an old road system in the correct alignment with the local
geography and in the correct location to be a Spanish road following the routes
mentioned by Brigadier General Rivera in 1727, by the Marqués de Rubi in 1767,
and again by Nicolas de la Fora in 1767.

Figure 25. Preliminary field map using USGS 1:100,000 topographic quadrangle of study area
(Williams 2007).

68

Recent archaeological surveys of old roads systems have identified early
segments of El Camino Real de Los Tejas, and techniques have been developed
for locating and recording these road networks. As Principal Investigator, Corbin
describes the use of multiple routes of El Camino Real and writes in an
“Archaeological Survey and Cultural Resource Assessment of Mission Tejas
State Historical Park, Houston County, Texas,” that a recently located linear
depression has been identified as an old road segment that matches the general
route shown on Walker’s 1806 map of El Camino Real (Erickson and Corbin
1996:3-29).
A portion of a road network discovered during a cultural resource survey
of Fort Boggy State Park in Leon County, Texas was potentially identified as a
segment of a north-south road linking an upper and lower segment of El Camino
Real. Eleven road segments located during the survey linked historic house sites
and activity areas, and one very deep and wide segment spanned the entire
length of the 809 hectare (2,000 acres) park. Specific field survey techniques
were developed for locating and mapping road segments during this award
winning cultural resource survey (Corbin et al. 1994:78-85).
Following Dr. Corbin’s identification of a road system within the Sabine
County study area, a pedestrian survey strategy was prepared and conducted
using the cultural resource survey techniques developed by Dr. Corbin for
locating and documenting old road networks.

69

The primary method used for identifying an old road segment was to find,
within an undisturbed area of forest, a slight to extreme linear depression
approximately 1 to 2 meters (3.3 to 6.6 feet) wide and follow it, looking for a
reason or purpose for it being there. If the depression stayed consistent in width,
the depth could be explained by the natural wearing of carts or wagons, oxen,
mules, and foot traffic versus mechanical modification, and the depression could
not be explained by natural processes such as erosion or by modern farming,
hunting, logging, or forest management activities, then the depression was
considered a historic road segment and was assigned a segment number
(Filchner et al. 1957:44-54; Hester et al. 1975:13-36).
The linear integrity of the depression was also important in the selection
criteria as an old road segment in that the depression must lead from some
apparent specific place of origin in the general direction to be traveling to another
specific place. In other words, the individual linear depression segments must
connect to form a network leading to or through a previously defined activity
space of Spanish origin.
The methods used to identify and survey an old road varied not only with
ease of access, but also according to prevailing landscape conditions. In some
areas, the steepness or lack of slope would dictate the technique while in other
areas, the thickness of vegetation would dictate the techniques used. However
once located, the primary method of identifying a linear depression as a road

70

segment was to walk back and forth, in a zig-zag manner, across the feature in
the general direction in which the linear feature is oriented.

This method was

used not only to define the spatial extent of the feature but also to identify any
additional parallel road features. It was common practice to move the road up or
down slope creating areas of parallel road segments when a road became
impassible from erosion or heavy traffic (Dr. Corbin, personal files 2005).
The technique of documenting a linear road feature was consistent across
the landscape surveyed. The most important factor considered, however, was
that visibility through forested cover must be at least 20 to 30 meters (66 to 98
feet) to facilitate the identification of the depression as a linear road feature and
to be able to see and document the physical characteristics of the depression.
The vegetative ground cover of East Texas is at its minimum during the late
winter months of January, February, and March; therefore, the optimum field
survey time starts after hunting season in mid-January and lasts until the ground
cover vegetation begins to leaf out in mid- to -late March or early April.
Once a road depression had been identified using the methods previously
mentioned, a GPS point was taken at the survey’s arbitrary starting location. The
linear feature was then walked in each direction from the starting point using the
GPS to capture either line or point features. A sample location was established
at every major change in the road depression such as a bend or turn, an obvious
change in slope, a width or depth change, a creek crossing, or road intersection

71

(Figure 26). If long stretches of road depression had similar physical features,
the sample locations were also chosen based on the location that best
characterizes the physical parameters seen (Hester et al. 1975:13-36).

Figure 26. GPS point data collected during the field survey.
Red triangles = Second two years (Williams 2007).

Yellow triangles = First two years;

Detailed descriptions and measurements at each location were recorded
with a focus on identifying physical characteristics of the road and landscape
features at that location (Figure 27). Each sample location was documented by a
globally unique identifier (GUID) number referencing the specific feature’s

72

location in the database. Each sample location also included attributes that
incorporated the road segment and sample number.

Figure 27. The author recording road depression data during a field survey.

Since the direction of survey was based on convenience, the individual
sample location numbers were not consecutive; the GUID number, however,
remained unique and was associated with the individual road segment number
(Figure 28).
At each sample location, data was collected using ESRI’s ArcPad 7.0 field
mapping application running on a GPS enabled handheld computer (Figure 29).
73

A feature class (point, line, or polygon) created for ArcPad included, as attributes,
the individual variables of the road depression.

Figure 28. GIS globally unique identifier (GUID) number with individual segment and sample
numbers.

The attributes were captured in customized forms created in ESRI’s
ArcPad Application Builder program. This program allowed for creation of easily
managed field data entry forms that were constrained within defined data
parameters (i.e., slope not to exceed 30 degrees).

74

Figure 29. GPS enabled handheld computer running ArcPad 7.0.

In the laboratory, the field collected GPS positions (captured as feature
classes) were post-processed using Trimble’s Pathfinder software and the
ArcGIS GPSCorrect application.

Post-processing was used to differentially

correct the GPS data by removing the combination of errors associated with
delays of timed radio frequencies and a satellite’s orbit and location in space.
This results in greater horizontal positional accuracy. The data collected during
the later seasons were collected using H-Star technology allowing for an even
greater level of precision (Figure 30). The positional accuracy of features located
during the later seasons was considered to be within a radius of 0.50 meters (1.6
feet) from the center of the mapped feature. The positional accuracy of located

75

features prior to using the H-Star technology was considered to be 2 to 5 meters
(6.6 to 16.4 feet) (Trimble 2005:2-9).

Figure 30. GPS data collection using a Trimble GeoXH GPS receiver with a high-gain Zepher
antenna. Data was post-processed for differential correction using H-Star technology.

In the field, the width and depth of the depression were measured using a
steel metric tape, and in certain areas a clinometer was used to determine the
local slope or a soil probe was used to determine the surface soil characteristics.
In addition to the data collected in the ArcPad application, a metric range pole
was digitally photographed in the foreground with pictures looking down both

76

directions of the depression.

Also, a brief characterization of the location

including topography, geology, hydrology, soils, vegetation, and landscape
position was recorded. When processed, the point, line, or polygon file from
each road segment included, in separate attribute fields, the spatial coordinates,
the measured variables, the digital photographs, and the descriptive comments
collected from the field survey (Figure 31).

Figure 31. Partial list of road attributes collected during the field survey.

77

Additional cultural features located along the survey route were also
recorded and photographed.

It was expected that numerous indicators of

previous settlement activities would be encountered.

Previous historical

research, oral histories, and first-hand accounts indicated that many homes were
located close to or on the early roads of East Texas. These recorded features
included but were not limited to lateral road depressions, the remains of houses
or old home sites expressed by foundation stones, farm features such as cattle
dip tanks or farm outbuildings, wells or well depressions, springs or other water
sources, and cemeteries. Within the surveyed area, any depressions that were
considered a road created by modern hunting, forestry, or agricultural activities
were also documented by digital photographs creating a dataset of depressions
with their physical characteristics considered not being of Spanish origin.
Due to the optimum field survey time for identifying road systems starting
after hunting season in mid-January and only lasting until the ground cover
vegetation greens up limiting visibility through the forest, the pedestrian survey of
the study area was conducted over four field seasons beginning in 2003 and
ending in 2006. The multi-year survey allowed for complex road areas to be
visited over and over again during various seasons of the year and allowed for
iterative development and use of the archaeological geodatabase model.

78

Landscape Data

Phase 1 also included creation of a GIS application for managing the data
collected from the field survey and for inclusion of the physical landscape data of
the study area. The GIS was created using, as a spatial reference standard, the
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinate system for Zone 15 North with
the 1983 North American Datum (NAD83).
Several maps of various scales published by the USGS were used to aid
in developing a list of landscape variables encompassing the study area.
Supplemented with additional ancillary data including map data from the NRCS
and the Texas Bureau of Economic Geology (BEG), the comprehensive list of
physical landscape data included existing digital data regardless of scale or
lineage. Figure 32 shows the list of physical landscape data used in this study.
The data was reprojected, with coordinate transformations where necessary, to
the spatial reference standard outlined above.

The GIS was used to create

landscape variables not identified during the field survey or included in the
collection of physical landscape data. Examples of GIS data creation include the

79

derivation of slope and aspect from a Digital Terrain Model (DTM) or the
calculation of distance from a cultural feature to perennial water.

Figure 32. Physical landscape data used in study.

Vector data included the National Elevation Dataset (NED) contour lines
and elevation points, National Hydrography Dataset (NHD) stream lines and
water bodies, NRCS soils data, BEG surface geology, and Texas Department of
Transportation (TxDOT) road and street data.

Also a dataset of bathymetric

contours for Toledo Bend Reservoir was included (Figure 33).

The Original

Texas Land Survey (OTLS), a vector dataset of original 1836 survey lines, from
the Texas General Land Office (GLO) was included in the GIS.

80

Raster data included a 10 meter (32.8 feet) resolution Digital Elevation
Model (DEM) from the USGS and 1 meter (3.3 feet) digital orthophoto quarter
quadrangles (DOQQ) flown during the winter of 1996 [leaf-off] from TNRIS, as
well as 1 meter (3.3 feet) color infrared (CIR) aerial photography from the U. S.
Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Farm Services Agency (FSA) National Aerial
Imagery Program (NAIP) flown in the summer of 2004 [leaf-on].

Seamless

Digital Raster Graphics (DRG) of USGS 1:250,000, 1:100,000 and 1:24,000
topographic quadrangles from a database connection with the Forest Resources
Institute (FRI) Spatial Data Engine (SDE) were also used.

81

Figure 33. Bathymetric data for Toledo Bend Reservoir.

FRI was instrumental in aiding the search and recovery efforts of the
Space Shuttle Columbia disaster by providing geospatial (GIS, GPS, and remote
sensing) support in early February of 2003. The shuttle’s debris path roughly
paralleled Highway 21 across East Texas, and during the shuttle recovery effort,
current high-resolution satellite imagery as well as historic aerial photography
became available for the region encompassing the study area. High-resolution
multispectral satellite imagery from Space Imaging’s IKONOS satellite was

82

provided to FRI and was panchromatic sharpened (resolution merged) providing
a nominal resolution of 0.67 meters (2.2 feet) of the region encompassing the
study area. The satellite imagery was obtained and used as a planning aid for
the field surveys (Figure 34).

Figure 34. Space Imaging’s IKONOS satellite image dated February 1, 2003 (Williams 2007).

Black and white aerial photographs from 1960 and 1968 of the Toledo
Bend Reservoir region also became available during the shuttle recovery efforts.
The aerial photographs encompass several historic road crossings, ferry
locations, and drowned river port towns. TNRIS maintains the Texas State Aerial
Photograph Archives which house these photographs.

83

These archives were

searched to determine the years of available coverage.

Photographs

encompassing the study area were located and digitized by scanning at 600 dpi
before being georeferenced to 1996 DOQQs of the area using the
Georeferencing application in ArcGIS.

Aerial photography of the area

encompassing historic ferries and early crossings of the Sabine River from 1936
and 1940 (pre-impoundment Toledo Bend Reservoir) were provided to this study
by The University of Texas at Austin’s Center for Space Research (CSR).
The georeferenced historic aerial photography was used to create feature
classes within the flooded Sabine River valley of farm locations and connecting
roads, logging tramways and river crossings (Figure 35). The vector feature
classes were created by “heads-up” digitizing the visible physical features, and
the attribute type field was populated with the type of feature created (i.e., road,
river or stream crossing, farm, tramway, etc…).
The inclusion of georeferenced historic aerial photography in the GIS
aided in the interpretation of the parameters affecting the selection of road or
river crossing locations; and in places, the associated impacts of the physical
positioning of historic features on the landscape and the resultant settlement
patterns along these early roads could easily be seen. The historic photography
added a temporal component to the research and contributed to the
understanding of why certain areas were chosen over other locations.

84

Figure 35. Georeferenced 1936 aerial photographs over a USGS 1:100,000 topographic
quadrangle showing routes across the Sabine River (Williams 2007).

Additional raster data consisted of scanned digital copies of historic maps.
These maps were used as references for physical features and although not
drawn to adequate detail and scale, the maps provided valuable historical
information for the study.

85

Phase 2

Phase 2 began with the creation of an archaeological geodatabase
incorporating physical landscape attributes with surveyed road attributes. It also
included developing a set of landscape criteria for Spanish road placement, and
in addition to constructing the archaeological geodatabase; it included the
development and documentation of an iterative process of archaeological
landscape visualization and spatial analysis.

Using the results of these

processes, Phase 2 also included supplementary field surveys for locating
additional road segments.

Archaeological Geodatabase

With the completion of Phase 1, the design of an archaeological
geodatabase data model proceeded utilizing the information collected on the
physical parameters that constitute a Spanish road. Conceptually, the process of
creating an archaeological geodatabase design for this research necessitated
that the physical variables of a Spanish road and the physical landscape
variables crossed by the road be known.

Figure 36 illustrates the conceptual

progression where data are developed in an archaeological geodatabase,
analyzed in a GIS, and returned to the geodatabase framework.

86

Figure 36. Conceptual data flow of the Archaeological Geodatabase Model.

This process created a robust system for handling complex spatial
analysis where the resulting data were reintroduced into the archaeological
geodatabase creating a dynamic model of archaeological landscape interaction.
To accomplish this conceptualized data flow model, the design of the

87

geodatabase was tested and revised until it met the requirements of the
archaeological landscape visualization model.
ESRI’s geodatabase data model is an object-oriented geographic model
that represents a geographic feature as a relational object with a discrete spatial
location. The relational object is stored in a single row of a table in a relational
database management system (RDBMS). The geometry of the feature is stored
in a field of type Shape while the attributes of the feature are stored where each
field type represents a single attribute of the feature.
This research project originally created a personal geodatabase using
ArcGIS 9.1. The personal geodatabase datasets are stored in Microsoft Access
data files, but this had serious limitations due to reduced performance when the
size exceeded 500 MB. The personal geodatabase has a maximum size limit of
2 GB; therefore, two personal geodatabases were created. One for vector files
only and the other for raster files that quickly reached the 2 GB limit.
At the release of ESRI’s ArcGIS 9.2 software, the inefficiency of the
personal geodatabase was circumvented by the availability of a file geodatabase
system where the datasets are stored as folders in a file system (Figure 37).

88

Figure 37.
model.

Structure of the file geodatabase developed for the archaeological visualization

There is no limit on the size of the file geodatabase and each dataset can
hold up to 1 TB of data. Both the raster and vector personal geodatabases were
migrated to a single ArcGIS 9.2 file geodatabase using the Export XML
Workspace Document Wizard in ArcCatalog (Figure 38).

89

Figure 38. Exporting geodatabase using Export XML Workspace Document Wizard.

Within the geodatabase, feature datasets were created for the grouping of
similar feature types sharing a common spatial reference and geographic area.
Feature

datasets

included

topography,

hydrology,

geomorphology,

land

ownership, political boundaries, and transportation. Within each feature dataset,
feature classes were created for each specific data type.

Feature classes

included soil series and surface geology as polygons under the geomorphology

90

feature dataset or rivers and streams as lines, lakes and reservoirs as polygons,
and springs as points under the hydrology feature dataset (Figure 39).

Figure 39. Contour line feature class within hypsography feature dataset.

Raster datasets and raster catalogs were created for the various rasters
and were included in the file geodatabase for faster display at all scales.

A

raster dataset is a mosaic of two or more individual rasters while a raster catalog
has a table where each record defines the individual raster dataset that is
91

included in the catalog. Unlike the raster dataset, the raster catalog is displayed
without mosaicing the imagery thereby reducing the computational overhead
needed for display. Both the raster dataset and the raster catalog are managed
by the geodatabase which means that rasters are stored and wholly contained
within the file geodatabase rather than having a pointer to the raster files stored
elsewhere (Figure 40).

Figure 40. Raster catalogs and raster datasets for the project.

92

By allowing the geodatabase to manage the raster datasets and raster
catalogs, faster display at various scales is achieved, and the geodatabase is
more flexible in its portability because it contains all of the data.
Once the feature datasets and feature classes were defined, data
collected from the field survey and from the various physical landscape data
holders was imported into the feature classes. After the importation, the data
was validated by visual inspection for correct alignment with the USGS 1:24,000
or 1:100,000 quadrangles.

For the field survey data, validation included

scrutinizing the attribute tables for duplicate segment, sample, or GUID numbers.
To validate the linear features captured during the field survey, a topology was
created with the rule that each line must be covered by a sample point before the
line segment could inherit the physical properties collected at the point feature
(Figure 41).

93

Figure 41. Topology rule that each linear feature must be covered by a sample point.

Additional data types included in the geodatabase were tables of ancillary
data

including

conversion

factors

for

Spanish

length

measurements,

classification codes, copies of field notes, and previous archaeological surveys of
the region. Annotation feature classes were also included in the geodatabase for
labeling features. The Geographic Names Information System (GNIS) was used

94

to extract the annotation feature class for the physical landscape of the study
area (Figure 42).

Figure 42. Annotation feature class from the Geographic Names Information System for Sabine
County.

A new temporary data type called terrain has been introduced with the
ArcGIS 9.2 geodatabase. Terrains are 3D Triangulated Irregular Network (TIN)
based surfaces that reside in a feature dataset and reference the feature classes
in that dataset. A terrain data type was created for this project in a feature
dataset called Topography that included Toledo Bend Reservoir bathymetry,
elevation contour lines, and elevation point feature classes (Figure 43).

95

Figure 43. Terrain feature class built “on-the-fly” from the Topographic feature dataset.

Terrains can utilize very large point datasets but require the ArcGIS 3D
Analyst extension for creation of the terrain surface “on-the-fly” in the
geodatabase. Terrains were useful for quickly visualizing the 3D character of the
landscape at any scale because they use pyramiding to improve performance.
The pyramids only reference the data needed for a specific view and not the
entire dataset for “on-the-fly” construction of a surface from feature class
measurements.
Using ESRI’s Geodatabase Designer (an add-in for ArcGIS) in
ArcCatalog, documenting and exporting the geodatabase design or schema was

96

easily accomplished.

Geodatabase Designer captured the schema without

difficulty so that it could be edited and then exported as an xml file (Figure 44).

Figure 44. Exporting geodatabase using Export XML Workspace Document Wizard.

The xml file could be used in Geodatabase Designer or ESRI’s ArcCatalog
Geodatabase wizard to export or import the schema into a new geodatabase.
The object-oriented design of the geodatabase supports the definition of custom
feature datasets that incorporate feature classes; class attributes, attribute
tables, and relationship classes that govern the spatial behaviors of features on
97

the landscape. The design of a data schema that incorporated these custom
properties allowed for repeated iterations of design testing where each iteration
was refined for added functionality of the data schema (Figure 45).

Figure 45. Geodatabase schema from ESRI’s Geodatabase Designer.

Data Analysis

Landscape resources that were inherent in the selection and development
of Spanish roads can be studied by careful observation of both historic patterns
of settlement and road placement. To facilitate the examination of the natural
resource influences on the locations of early Spanish roads however, a clear
understanding must be developed of the physical properties associated with the

98

remains of an existing Spanish road. Therefore, a set of criteria for Spanish road
placement was created by extracting the physical landscape variables at each
sample location of the field survey (Figure 46).

Figure 46. Data for determining the criteria for Spanish road placement.

Based on the assumptions that humans prefer certain physical locations
for travel and that cultural features do not occur uniformly across the landscape,
the arrangement of located Spanish roads was analyzed to help describe the

99

physical aspects of a Spanish road. The attributes collected at each sample
location along with extracted physical landscape variables were investigated,
through spatial data analysis, for any hidden trends or patterns that could help
define a Spanish road.
At the outset Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) was used in conjunction
with spatial analysis techniques including overlay and proximity relationship
analysis.

Analysis included using the point locations collected during the field

survey to derive slope percent and degree from the DEM raster dataset as well
as to extract surface geology and soil series polygon values. Elevation in feet
and meters were calculated, topographic position was determined, and distance
to perennial water was computed using the ArcGIS Near Tool of the Proximity
Toolset.
In order to have a single numerical value of the impact of a Spanish road
on the landscape, a simple ratio was calculated using measurements from the
field survey. Exploration of the sample data revealed that to define the depth of a
road feature at any given location, the depth data measured on both sides of the
road depression must be combined for an averaged road depth variable
[Intermediate Depth] before being used to calculate a depth-to-width ratio
variable.

The depth-to-width ratio variable was calculated by dividing the

intermediate depth by the width at each sample location as a single measure of
that sample point’s archaeological impact on the physical environment at that

100

location. The higher the depth-to-width ratio number, the greater the impact; and
conversely with a lower depth-to-width ratio number, the impact on the
archaeological record is much less. For example, a road depression that has a
depth of 1 meter (3.3 feet) and a width of 2 meters (6.6 feet) has a depth-to-width
ratio value of 0.50, while a road location that has a depth of 0.50 meters (1.6
feet) and a width of 2 meters (6.6 feet) has a depth-to-width ratio value of 0.25
(Figure 47).
The first set of Spanish road placement criteria data from the analysis was
visualized in ArcMap and led to the selection of additional areas to be surveyed
(Figure 48). For this project it was important that the data be explored freely
without assumptions; thereby, allowing for a deeper understanding of the data
relationships, data irregularities, and the overall data structure. The data itself
revealed its inherent underlying structure through EDA and allowed an insight to
develop in how best to approach interpreting the data. For archaeology, this is a
method or philosophy as to how data analysis should be conducted by allowing
the data to reveal its underlying structure without preconceived assumptions.

101

102

Figure 48. Additional area identified for secondary survey (Williams 2007).

Archaeological Landscape Visualization Model

A GIS managed archaeological landscape visualization model was
developed for this study and utilized to visualize changing road criteria over time
across the landscape as well as to visualize the character of the landscape in a
3D-environment. The ability to incorporate multiple types of data, both historic
and current, into a single analysis and visualization tool is a strength that GIS

103

brings to the understanding of the landscape forces influencing the selection of
preferred Spanish road locations.
The archaeological landscape visualization model is a conceptual process
model that provided the logical framework for an integrated dynamic flow of data
capture, historic research, and spatial data analysis in a geodatabase data model
design.

Figure 49 illustrates this conceptual model.

In the model, historic

research, field surveys, and data analysis are happening concurrently.

By

mapping archaeological evidence in a landscape level GIS, a spatial analysis
and integrated visualization tool was created through repeated iterations of
refinement and was used to discover regional cultural landscape resources by
limiting or confining the potential placement of Spanish road features on the
landscape.

104

Figure 49. Conceptual design of the archaeological visualization model process.

105

RESULTS

Results of this study include information gained from historic research, the
locating of existing Spanish road features, the development of landscape criteria
defining what constitutes a Spanish road’s expression in the archaeological
record, and the creation of an archaeological geodatabase used as a landscape
visualization model in an iterative process for locating additional road segments.

Historic Research

One of the main documents used for this research was a Shelby County
court case located in the archives of Robert Bruce Blake housed in the ETRC.
In the early 20th century, R. B. Blake, transcribed, translated, and collected
documents of Spanish, Mexican, and early Texas history that are available for
research. This 1852 Shelby County document is an official courthouse record of
a land dispute requiring the empirical knowledge of early Texas settlers. The
document, Russell versus Mason, contained a series of depositions pertaining to
land ownership between two roads, and the court was attempting to establish
which road was called El Camino Real in 1824.

106

Several prominent Texas citizens gave their account of using the roads in
the early 1800s. Of the seventeen individuals interviewed in the court case, only
those who entered Texas after 1825 remembered that there was only one road
that crossed the Sabine River at a place known as Gaines Ferry. The remainder
of the early Texas citizens remembered two roads. Before 1818, they used an
upper road that crossed the Sabine River near Crow’s Ferry a couple of miles
upriver from Gaines Ferry (Figure 50).

Figure 50. Historic crossings over the Sabine River (Williams 2007).

107

Almost all of those who used the upper road referred to it as Camino
Carretera. The early Texans all agreed that Camino Carretera forked from the
main road “near where Juan Maximillian lived” and “crossed Boregas Creek at
the Jack Cedar place” before traveling through a row of steep hills and crossing
Patroon Bayou about six miles from the Sabine River at Crow’s Ferry (Shelby
County District Court Clerk 1852:87-118).
Eighty year old David Watman testified that when he first came to Texas in
1797, at the age of 18, there was only one road known as the King’s Highway or
the cart road. James Gaines, who built Gaines Ferry in 1819, testified that, when
he first came to Texas in 1812, Camino Carretera crossed the Sabine River at
Crow’s near a saline [presumably a salt lick], called by the Spanish salinilla. All
of the depositions generally agreed that after Gaines established a ferry across
the Sabine in 1819 [near the present site of the Highway 21 Bridge]; this newer
road took on the name of El Camino Real and was sometimes mistakenly
referred to as Camino Carretera (Shelby County District Court Clerk 1852:105108).
In the 1852 deposition of Stephen Mora, he stated that in 1812 he
“frequently traveled the Camino Carretera driving carts for Davenport,” an Indian
trader licensed by the Spanish (Figure 51). He continued his statement saying
that “all the people called the Camino Carretera because it was a big road.
People in traveling would sometimes say, I will go Camino Chabinan and some

108

say Camino Carretera,” and that “the upper road was called Camino Carretera,
and the road by Milam was called Camino Chabinan. The Camino Carretera and
Camino Chabinan forked this side of the Palo Gaucho and east of Earl’s”
(Shelby County District Court Clerk 1852:108-109).

Figure 51. Spanish carretera [wooden two wheeled cart] in Gruene, Texas.

Burrell Thompson also stated in his 1852 deposition that the “main road
from Nacogdoches to Natchitoches led by San Augustine and crossed the Palo
Gaucho at Sneed’s and the Lobanillo where Earl now lives, and went by
Strother’s farm, where Maximillian formerly lived. There the road forked; the right
hand went to Gaines Ferry…,” and “the other road turned off at Maximillian’s…”
and crossed “…the Sabine River at Crow’s Ferry” (Shelby County District Court
Clerk 1852:93-94).
109

There are many clues to the location of this early road in the court case.
First, the road forked at Maximillian’s with Camino Carretera continuing to the
north.

Historic research of land ownership indicated that in 1796 Juan Ignacio

Pifermo was granted land along El Camino Real that he willed, after his death, to
his nephew Juan Maximillian.

At the time of the court case, Maximillian was

living on Rio de Agua [Waters Creek] whose name later changed to Maddox
Creek.
The next clue is that Camino Carretera crossed a low range of steep hills
and continued to the crossing of Patroon Creek about six miles northwest of
Crow’s Ferry.

The locations of Gaines Ferry, Crow’s Ferry, and Patterson’s

Ferry were shown on an 1840 Republic of Texas and United States Boundary
Commission map (Figure 18).

This map was relatively accurate in its

representation of the Sabine River channel. Gaines Ferry has retained its name
into the present and its location is known [Pendleton Bridge area of Hwy 21]
(Figure 52).

110

Figure 52. Aerial photograph of the Highway 21 Bridge over the Sabine River at Gaines Ferry
(Williams 2007).

In the 1852 court depositions, Juan Maximillian testified that he and his
uncle “hacked a bridle path” across their property starting from the El Camino
Real to the location of Chabinan’s crossing, later to become Gaines Ferry. After
Chabinan built a chalan, or flat boat, at this crossing, the road became known as
Camino Chabinan or the Chabinan Road [presumably an earlier pathway that
Maximillian and his uncle widened]. Chabinan was killed when a mule kicked
him into the river, but the Paso de Chalan, or pass of the flat boat, continued to

111

be operated for several years after Miquel Crow married Chabinan’s widow
(Shelby County District Court Clerk 1852:87-118).
In 1797 Vincenti Micheli was granted land on both sides of the Sabine
River where he intended to build a ferry at the Salinas Crossing, but when he got
to the location, he found Miquel Crow operating a chalan and claiming the east
bank as a right-of-inheritance.

After receiving permission from the Spanish

Government, Crow was allowed to continue operating a ferry at this location for
several more years. Eventually moving his ferry nearer the mouth of Patroon
Bayou, Crow’s Ferry became a well known and heavily used crossing (Dr.
Corbin, personal files 2005).
W. T. Block, in the Texas Gulf Historical and Biographical Record (1991),
wrote that Mary Sabinal [Chabinan] Campbell, born at Crow’s Ferry in 1795, told
the story of her life to the Galveston Daily News in 1879. He wrote that Mary’s
father was Chabinan, but she took her step-father’s name and appeared as
“Mary Crow, wife of James Campbell” in the 1826 Atascosita Census. Mary had
met and married James Campbell at Crow’s Ferry in 1816. James Campbell, a
distinguished sailor who served with Commodore Perry on Lake Erie and on the
U.S.S. Constitution during the War of 1812, was a privateer smuggling trade
goods into Spanish Texas. Leaving Crow’s Ferry in 1817, Mary moved with her
husband to the infamous pirate town of Campeachy on Galveston Island where

112

James Campbell soon became one of Jean Lafitte’s most trusted captains (Block
1991: 2-17).
In the 1852 Shelby County District Court case, the deposition of Sarah
Mitchell also stated that she lived at Crow’s Ferry from 1812 through 1814. Her
name was Sarah Evens at the time and her husband, John Evens, operated the
ferry for Peggy Crow at the crossing of Camino Carretera. Donald McDonald, in
his 1852 sworn deposition, stated that when he came to Texas in 1824, there
were two roads with one leading to Gaines Ferry and one leading to Crow’s
Ferry. He stated that the upper road crossed at Crow’s and “was called the
King’s Highway or sometimes the Camino Carretera” (Figure 53).

He also

stated that the “Crow’s Ferry Road looked to be an old road and how long it had
been used I cannot say” (Shelby County District Court Clerk 1852:87-118).

113

Figure 53. The location of Crow’s Ferry (Williams 2007).

Crow’s Ferry [the middle ferry] became Thompson’s Ferry in 1850 and
finally Carter’s Ferry in the 1890s. The upper ferry was first known as McGuffin’s
then Patterson’s Ferry. It also became known as Carter’s Ferry in the late 1890s
after Carter bought the crossing.
According to the court case, the Spanish ford was at a shallow crossing
upriver from Crow’s Ferry at a place known as the Salstre Prairie.

Samuel

Davenport, an early Spanish and Indian trader, in another court case in 1823

114

called this the Pass of Salines or the pass of the Arroyo de las Boregas (Shelby
County District Court Clerk 1852:87-118) (Figure 54).

Figure 54. Rock crossing used by the Spanish (Williams 2007).

With an overlay of the OTLS, the GIS allowed for a very quick assessment
of the location of the Pifermo grant, Maddox Creek (Rio de Agua), and the
general locations of Juan Maximillian’s residence and Jack Cedar’s place on the
Boregas creek. An unpublished thesis from Louisiana State University identified
the location of the Crow grant on the east side of the Sabine, and the OTLS

115

identified land on the west side of the Sabine as belonging to James Mason
(Figure 55). An 1863 Sabine County ownership map clearly showed a segment
of road across the upper portion of the Mason grant that aligns with the general
location of the road to Jack Cedar’s place and the crossing on Boregas Creek.

Figure 55. The OTLS showing the Mason and Gaines properties (Williams 2007).

A review of a modern Sabine County road map identified the northeast
road out of Geneva as the Carter’s Ferry Road while a review of Louisiana roads
revealed that there is a Carter’s Ferry Road on Merritt Mountain. Using the DEM
overlaid with a vector road layer in a 3D-enviornment showed that after Carter’s
Ferry Road crossed the Boregas Creek, it crossed through a set of rugged

116

northwest trending hills. The hills are a high place above the Sabine River valley,
and they have typical questa topography of gentle to rolling southwestern slopes
and a steep eastern drop off with steeply dissected and eroded streams.
Spanish references to this specific area began in 1727 with Pedro de
Rivera’s report to the Spanish crown of Presidio de las Tejas where he
mentioned crossing some sizable hills and camping at “an uninhabited location
on the east side of a creek called El Patrón” [Patroon Bayou] a day before
crossing El Rio de San Francisco de las Sabinas on the way to the mission San
Miguel de los Adeas (Jackson 1995:37).
In 1767 Marqués de Rubi documents crossing high hills of oak and pine
before reaching the steep Arroyo del Patrón. Crossing through dense forests,
Rubi wrote that “the travel was step-by-step,” and that “we took the Camino Real
….” and followed it “to the Sabinas [Sabine] River, which flows toward the eastsoutheast at the place where we forded. Two leagues before this river, we came
to the large Arroyo del Patrón, whose deep channel makes it uncrossable during
floods. Its overflow sometimes reaches the Sabinas River, creating a sea that
covers the tall trees along this road” (Jackson 1995:128-129).
Nicolas de la Fora, in his 1767 trip to the mission at San Miguel, wrote that
they came to the site of La Questa Alta [high hills] before arriving at El Patrón
arroyo and that “to the east-south-east is the Sabinas river which we forded in
shallow water” (Kinnaird 1958:167).

From this time on, Spanish travelers

117

referred to La Questa Alta, Arroyo del Patrón, and El Patrón or Puerto de Patrón
as physical features of note before arriving at the shallow fords of the Sabine
River. La Questa Alta mentioned by the early Spanish travelers matches the
description of the low range of steep hills mentioned in the 1852 Shelby County
court document (Figure 56).

Figure 56. High hills known to the Spanish as La Questa Alta (Williams 2007).

Another clue to the location of El Camino Carretera, using the court
depositions, is that the road crossed Boregas Creek at a rock crossing on Jack

118

Cedar’s place. Current research has shown that Jack Cedar was known to have
settled on land at the northeast end of Pifermo’s grant along Boregas Creek
before 1800 and to have married the daughter of the commander of the small
Spanish military post on Boregas Creek guarding El Camino Carretera (Dr.
Corbin, personal files 2004).
At most major creeks and rivers flowing through East Texas, evidence
exists to support a correlation in the placement of early Spanish road crossings
with exposures of the Weches geologic formation. The choice of rock crossings
would have undoubtedly dictated road selection and placement. Corbin (1991) in
“Retracing the Camino De Los Tejas from the Trinity River to Los Adaes: New
Insights in East Texas History,” has identified Weches outcrops at locations on
the Trinity, Neches, and Angelina rivers that occur at locations documented by
several different travelers during the early 18th century.
Although only briefly mentioned in documents of the journey across El
Camino Real de Los Tejas, in each case the crossings were identified as being
significant enough to be reported as events requiring the attention of the entire
party (Corbin 1991:191–219).

While at the Neches River, Padre Peña writes

in July of 1721 that the Marquis de Aguayo “ordered the construction of a bridge
because the river was very flooded. Its construction took six days. It was 32
varas [27 meters] long and four and a half [3.8 meters] wide. It was so well done
and so stable that it was given the blessings of the Church” (Peña 1981:56).

119

Remote Sensing

Historic research continued when not conducting field surveys, and
between the first and second field seasons, the collected aerial photography was
analyzed to aid in outlining the following field season. The analysis also aided in
interpreting where on the landscape to anticipate encountering this old road
feature. The 1996 DOQQs showed that most of this road had been covered by
construction of FM 276 east of State Hwy 87, yet the old bridge over Patroon
Bayou can still be seen at low water times of the year.
Historic aerial photography was combined with current imagery and used
as a valuable tool in understanding change over time. To be able to look at the
Carter’s Ferry Road area within the current impoundment of Toledo Bend
Reservoir, the 1936, the 1940, the 1960, and the 1968 black and white aerial
photographs were imported into the GIS and combined with high-resolution
imagery from Space Imaging’s IKONOS satellite.

On the 1936 photographs,

Carter’s Ferry Road was seen crossing a small bridge over Patroon Creek and
angling southeast past several farms (Figure 57).

Burrell Thompson testified in

the 1852 court case that he built the first two bridges over Patroon Creek in 1832
while he was operating the ferry at Crow’s (Shelby County District Court Clerk
1852: 93).

120

Figure 57. Old Carter’s Ferry Road Bridge over Patroon Bayou (Williams 2007).

Bathymetric contours for this area of Toledo Bend showed that Carter’s
Ferry Road continued south down a low ridge above the Sabine River channel
for almost seven miles and almost all the way to Merritt Mountain (Figure 58).
Current satellite imagery showed the old Carter’s Ferry Road joining a new road
just before the long bridge over Patroon Bay and running down the peninsula to
dead-end at the lake.

121

Figure 58. Merritt Mountain seen from the Texas side of Toledo Bend Reservoir.

After digitizing the features into the GIS, the farms and the interconnecting
farm roads, visible on the 1936 photographs, showed a pattern of main roads,
logging tramways, and numerous less traveled outlier roads for the area
submerged by Toledo Bend. Louisiana State Highway 6/Texas State Highway
21 is the only paved road visible as it crossed the Sabine River at the newly
constructed Pendleton Bridge [built in the 1933 with the discontinuation of
Pendleton (Gaines) Ferry] (Figure 59).

122

Figure 59. 1930s photograph of Pendleton Ferry on the Sabine River.
Transportation.

Texas Department of

Farther to the northeast, a heavily used road coming down to the river
from the east (Louisiana side) was clearly seen, and a heavily used connecting
road on the Texas side was also seen running northwest along the ridge above
the river. This location was presumed to be upper crossing known as Patterson’s
then finally Carter’s Ferry.

Although no flat boat or ferry was seen at the

crossing, it appeared to still have heavy use in 1936 (Figure 60).

123

Oral histories documented the use of this location, by Chabinan/Crow
descendents, to “walk” across the Sabine River as late as the early 1960s.
Known by the locals as the easiest passage across the Sabine River, this
crossing was used until the impoundment of Toledo Bend Reservoir (Connie
Hodges, oral interviews 2007).

For the Spanish, getting on to the northeast

running ridge just east of the crossing, between Bayou San Miguel and Bayou La
Nana, would have been the fastest route to reach the Spanish settlements on
Bayou Scie [See].

Figure 60. 1936 aerial photograph draped over a 10-meter Digital Terrain Model (DTM), created
from bathymetric contours, showing the used Patterson’s Ferry crossing (Williams 2007).

124

On the Louisiana side a heavily used road can be seen running down to a
bluff over the river on the north side of Merritt Mountain. This road is the current
Carter’s Ferry Road seen on the modern Louisiana road map. A large area of
cleared fields was located here which corresponded with the Carter homestead
at the old Crow place (Figure 61).

Figure 61. Location of Crow’s and Patterson’s ferries with old road system. Logging tramways
are in light blue (Williams 2007).

On the Texas side of this crossing a possible road at this location was
obscured by a tramway. This particular tram was joined by a similar tramway

125

running down the tip of the low ridge all the way to the river. There appeared to
be an area cut out of a bluff at the end of the road. Four historic salt works are
known to have existed in this general area, and this is roughly where the early
Texans in the Shelby County court case identified a Spanish crossing called
Paso de los Salinas. Immediately south of this crossing on the high ground east
of Merritt Mountain is the headwaters of Salter Creek whose name possibly
indicates a salt intrusion or other geologic feature exposed at the Salinas.
Ripples in the river at this location indicated a shallow rock crossing on the
river just below the confluence of Bayou La Nana and the river. By turning east
immediately after crossing at this ford, the Spanish could have easily crossed the
narrow Bayou La Nana and climbed the ridge above Patterson’s/Carter’s Ferry
on the way to San Miguel de los Adaes (Figure 62).

126

Figure 62. Crossing used by the Spanish to ford the Sabine River (Williams 2007).

Field Survey

Following the research of historic accounts, a pedestrian field survey was
conducted with the collected sample data being used for determining landscape
variables associated with early Spanish road placement. The linear distance
covered during the field survey was just over 7.9 kilometers (4.9 miles) while the
total area surveyed was 162.0 hectares (400.3 acres) with 4.6 kilometers (2.9
miles) of old road features being located and recorded (Figure 63).
127

Figure 63. Results of the first pedestrian field survey (Williams 2007).

The first segment identified was parallel to the existing Carter’s Ferry
Road along the eastern side of steep hills [La Questa Alta] east of Boregas
Creek.

Georeferenced in the GIS, a 1940 USGS 15-minute quadrangle map of

this area along with the 1936 aerial photographs showed that the present
alignment of Carter’s Ferry Road had not changed indicating the road
depressions were of an older origin. The depth of the old road cuts [depressions]
indicated extremely heavy and repeated use over time (Figure 64).

128

Figure 64. Old road cut [depression] through the forest in La Questa Alta.

Beginning at this location and preceding west, the old road utilized the
north facing side slope of a dissected stream drainage [headwaters of Dorsey
Creek] between two peaks rising 15 to 20 meters (49 to 66 feet) above the road
(Figure 65).

129

Figure 65. Terrain feature class used for analysis in La Questa Alta (Williams 2007).

The difficulty of the terrain crossed in this area was noteworthy because of
the steepness of the slopes on both sides of the drainage. To ease the grade,
the old road winds around the contour of the landscape with the road depression
basically on the surface rather than cut directly through the slope as the current
road does. In one area, the old road cut makes a wide flat S turn in an attempt to
ease the grade of the slope even more (Figure 66).

130

Figure 66. Close up of old road segment winding around the contours of the land to lessen the
grade (Williams 2007).

The old road crisscrosses Carter’s Ferry Road several times finally ending
up above the current road where it straightened out toward the west. In this
location the old road is 2 meters (6.6 feet) wide, and ranges from 1.5 to 3 meters
(4.9 to 9.8 feet) deep. At the top of the slope, the road cut takes on a noticeably
wide V shape approximately 2 meters (6.6 feet) wide (Figure 67). At the steepest
point of the grade, the road was moved down slope twice as it became too rutted
to use, creating parallel road depressions. They appeared to be temporarily or

131

lightly used because they ranged from 0.5 to 1meter (1.6 to 3.3 feet) deep and
were only about 40 meters (131.2 feet) long before they rejoined the main road
cut.

Figure 67. Looking east at road cut through La Questa Alta area.

After recording this first road segment, additional road depressions were
located parallel to Carter’s Ferry Road on both the north and south sides. Some
segments would wind several dozen meters away from Carter’s Ferry Road while
others would be adjacent to the drainage (bar) ditch of the modern road. The old
road depressions cross back and forth across Carter’s Ferry Road, and in many
132

places the old road would have been in the same alignment as the modern road
(Figure 68). Many years of county road maintenance have removed most
indications of this old road.

Figure 68. The modern Carter’s Ferry Road crossing La Questa Alta (Williams 2007).

Rising out of the Sabine River valley after crossing Patroon Bayou, this old
road system heads west and passes between two isolated peaks (Figure 69).

133

Figure 69. Old road segments [in red] passing through Puerto de Patrón (Williams 2007).

These two peaks are over 150 meters (492 feet) tall and rise well above
the surrounding topography. They are major features on the landscape, and
when viewed in ArcScene, ESRI’s ArcGIS 3D-visualization application, their
prominence is easy to perceive. When viewed from the Louisiana side, looking
toward the west, these peaks provide a clear landmark for identifying the location
of the road going between them to the interior provinces of New Spain and
support of the Patrón [Spanish Crown] (Figure 70). In 1767 Father Gaspár José

134

de Solis, on his inspections of the Texas missions, wrote in his diary that they
went through Puerto de Patrón or Patrón Gap before coming to the Sabine River,
which indicated that these peaks were known as places of importance because
they identified the location of the road to “civilization” from the frontier.

Figure 70. USGS 1:100,000 topographic quadrangle draped over 10-meter DTM for 3D view of
Puerto de Patrón [looking west] (Williams 2007).

As the old road reached the top of the dissected drainage, it leveled out
affording a much easier passage as it followed the crest of a wide ridge toward
the west. Through this area nineteen old road segments totaling 1,128 meters

135

(3,701 feet) were located creating an older road system paralleling Carter’s Ferry
Road sometimes on the south side and sometimes on the north (Figure 71).

Figure 71. Located old road segments [in red] across La Questa Alta (Williams 2007).

In many places the old road depressions are visible from the modern road.
Sometimes the old road cut was crosscut by the modern road and in places the
road depressions became very faint. The average width of these road segments
was 2.6 meters (8.5 feet) and they averaged 1.2 meters (3.9 feet) in depth.

136

There is a clear flowing spring 100 meters (328 feet) north of Carter’s
Ferry Road approximately 3.2 kilometers (2 miles) east of Boregas Creek.

A

spring is mentioned at this approximate location in the 1852 Shelby County court
case as being a landmark on the road identified as EL Camino Carretera. This
would have been the first water available after climbing the steep grade out of the
Sabine River valley and would have been looked for by those traveling the road
(Figure 72).

Figure 72. Historic springs in La Questa Alta.

137

The springs of Sabine County are well documented as being fresh and
soft, but with high iron and sulfates. A number of the historic documents related
to travel on El Camino Real list springs as points of reference or as destinations
(Brunne 1975:5-9).

Many important springs are within the study area, and

several of these are noted in historic references.

South of Highway 21,

McMahan Chapel utilized nearby springs for religious gatherings, and Sulphur
Springs, also south of Highway 21, was a gathering spot for early travelers
seeking the healing properties of the water.
Many water features were mapped while surveying the old road system.
These included intermittent and perennial streams, five springs or seeps, and ten
abandoned wells or well depressions (Appendix A).

In numerous locations,

lateral depressions were also mapped to the extent that it became obvious that
they were secondary roads. Theses included a section of an old railroad grade,
old logging tramways, forest silviculture activities, old community roads, and old
agricultural roads such as linear depressions leading to farm features such as an
old corral or barn sites.
Many false leads were also followed while trying to connect road
segments into the overall road system. Most led to nowhere, yet each feature
encountered was mapped with the GPS and photographed for comparison with
the heavily used old road system. Each of these was considered a non-Spanish
road feature (Appendix B). By investigating all of the road features encountered

138

during the survey, it became obvious that some of the additional roads features
were secondary roads; that is that they exhibited characteristics that were in high
contrast with the older road system. While some were erosional features and
some were made by livestock, presumably cattle, quite a few were old road cuts
leading to homes sites (Figure 73).

Figure 73. Road cut to old home site adjacent to Carter’s Ferry Road.

A total of sixteen house or old home sites were located during the survey.
Most were easily identified because of a standing structure; however, some were
identified as home sites only by a well or well depression or by the linear

139

arrangement, in a rectangular pattern, of Weches rock placed on the ground for
foundation piers.

Besides an old road cut leading to the location, almost all of

the sites were also identified by the surround vegetation. Large very old oak,
hickory, or elm trees surrounding a house site were the most common visual
indicator; yet in some cases, fruit trees such as pear, persimmon, or peach were
visible. Flowering yard ornamental plants were also visible, such as iris or rainlily. Often wisteria vines were climbing every available surface (Figure 74).

Figure 74. Flowering pear tree at old home site along Carter’s Ferry Road.

140

During the spring survey of 2004, Dr. Corbin identified a house site just
west of the Boregas Creek rock crossing and south of the old road that yielded
ceramics, glass, and metal from the early 1800s. The house site was located in
an area of recently cut forest (Figure 75). The ground visibility was very good
and artifacts and foundation stones were easily seen.

Figure 75. Connie Hodges [left] and Dr. Jim Corbin [right] survey old home site adjacent to
identified old road system. Well depression is in the notch of the bushes at the right rear.

141

Just west of the house site was a 2 meter (6.6 feet) diameter well
depression approximately 1.5 meters (4.9 feet) deep. The well was between the
house and the old road, possibly offering refreshment to passersbys.

Land

ownership records showed that this property was on the northeast corner of the
Pifermo Grant mentioned in the 1852 court case. All of the house sites and
abandoned homes encountered during the survey were mapped and
photographed (Appendix C).
Numerous cemeteries are within the study area, but only six were in the
surveyed area. The cemeteries were mapped and recorded adding to the overall
inventory of human activity within the study area. Mason Cemetery is east of
Highway 87, and is where James Mason (the defendant in the 1852 Shelby
County District Court case) is buried. Buckley, a 20th century African-American
cemetery, is adjacent to Carter’s Ferry Road and was built over a segment of the
old road. Closer to Boregas Creek is King Cemetery approximately 135 meters
(443 feet) north of the modern road. King Cemetery has several exceptional
Woodman-of-the-World headstones from the early 20th century as well as several
older Weches cut rock crypts.
South of Highway 21 is the Gasby-New Zion Cemetery. The Gasby-New
Zion Cemetery has a long and distinguished history because of the many
prominent pioneer African-Americans who settled in the region and who are
interred here.

Farther west near Lobanillo Creek, the first African-American

142

Baptist Church in Texas was formed in 1868 as the County Line Missionary
Baptist Church. Southwest of Lobanillo Creek is McMahan’s Chapel Cemetery.
McMahan’s Chapel was established in 1833 as the first protestant church in
Texas. The first church built was an oak log building near well known springs.
Many renowned pioneer Texans are buried in McMahan Chapel Cemetery.
Near the end of the surveyed area, in western Sabine County, is the
Scurlock Cemetery.

The Scurlock families were distinguished early Texas

pioneers who fought in the Texas revolution against Mexico.

William Scurlock

fought at both the battles of Goliad and San Jacinto. He later served in the
Republic of Texas Congress, and he fought in the Mexican War of 1845.
William’s brother Mial was killed during the fall of the Alamo. Several Weches
cut rock crypts were also seen in this cemetery (Appendix D).
The field survey was concluded upon reaching the community of Geneva.
The entire length of Carter’s Ferry Road was surveyed starting just east of
Highway 87 and extending southwest to its intersection with FM 330 in Geneva
for a total length of 7.9 kilometers (4.9 miles). Across this stretch of survey, thirtynine additional segments of old road depressions were mapped (Figure 76).

143

Figure 76. Map of old road segments located next to Carter’s Ferry Road (Williams 2007).

The entire survey recorded a total of fifty-eight individual road segments
with a linear total of 4.6 kilometers (2.9 miles) of road features making up the old
road system. The average depth was just over 2 meters (6.6 feet), and they had
an average width of 2.7 meters (8.9 feet) (Figure 77).

144

Figure 77. Typical old road cut profile through La Questa Alta.

Data Analysis

The result of repeated heavy travel across the Spanish roads from
countless pack trains, 2 wheeled carts, and later 4 wheeled wagons has left its
imprint in the archaeological record. Using the data collected during the field
survey, a careful investigation of the physical setting crossed by the recorded
road system was conducted in order to develop a set of landscape criteria for

145

defining what constitutes a Spanish road’s expression in the archaeological
record.
The appearance of an old road feature in the forest ranged from a wide V
to a flat bottomed U extending through the forest as a linear depression or cut in
the landscape.

Four basic shapes were identified with many of the road

segments exhibiting more than one shape across its length (Figure 78).

All of

the located road cuts fit into the four categories, yet each of the four categories
had wide ranges of depths and widths across their lengths.
Although the individual road segments had greater variability, the average
depth-to-width ratio across the entire road system was 0.98 indicating that the
combined impact of each of the four categories on the surface of the ground was
severe.

The combined segments had an average impact on the surface of

approximately 2 meters (6.6 feet) in depth and 2 meters (6.6 feet) in width across
the entire road system length.
Elevation of the individual road segments was extracted from the DTM
resulting in a range of values that increased toward the east with lower elevations
to the west as the crest of the questa gently gives way to the southwestern facing
backslopes. The elevation across the roads ranged from 78 meters (226 feet) to
160 meters (525 feet).

146

147

Slope and aspect were also calculated in the GIS from the DTM. Slope is
a measure of gradient or the maximum spatial change across a surface and was
expressed as a percent. The average slope across the entire road system was
7.9 percent; however, the greatest change in gradient was along the eastern
section of the study area where the old road climbed out of the Sabine River
valley (Figure 79). As the old road climbed through La Questa Alta, it was on a
12.4 percent slope that gradually gave way to the crest with a much gentler slope
of 6.3 percent.

Figure 79. Slope percent derived from 10-meter DTM. The questa front is facing east (Williams
2007).

148

Aspect calculates the direction a slope faces and is expressed by a
cardinal direction such as NNW or ESE. The majority of road segments located
during the survey crossed southwest facing slopes that may have been selected
for because of their more gentle nature (Figure 80).

Figure 80. Aspect derived from DTM showing a preference for southwest facing slopes
(Williams 2007).

149

The located road segments occurred more often in forested areas than in
clearings like open pasture. The major forest cover type was pine-hardwood.
Topographic position on the landscape was determined in the field using a scale
of 1 to 5, where 1 is a flat creek bottom and 5 is a ridge. The mid-values are the
description of slope such as toe of the slope [2], side slope [3], or crest of the
slope [4]. The majority of road features identified were on a forested side slope
with a predominance of pine and hardwood trees.
The Reklaw and Weches formations are the primary surface geology
crossed by the old road system. The Weches Formation overlies the Reklaw
Formation and at the contact of the two, low scarps form from the more resistant
strata of clay-ironstone. In many places this forms a gravelly surface of reddish
brown ironstone with shallow quartz sandstone deposits. The contact of the two
formations was utilized as a hard rock crossing over Boregas Creek (Figure 81).

150

Figure 81. Weches Formation exposed on Boregas Creek at old road crossing.

Published soils for this area are incomplete. Enough information exists,
however, to characterize the soils crossed by the old road system. The majority
of road segments crossed various soils types of fine sand and clay loam, yet
approximately 14 percent of the road segments crossed Cuthbert Gravelly Fine
Sandy Loam while both Kirvin Fine Sandy Loam and Trawick Clay Loam were
each crossed by 12 percent of the recorded road segments (Figure 82).

151

Figure 82. Partial coverage of soils data from the NRCS extracted for the study area (Williams
2007).

Cuthbert Gravelly Fine Sandy Loam was a moderately deep upland soil in
areas leading into major drainages. It overlaid yellowish red clay subsoil and
was found along the eastern end of the surveyed roads in the area of La Questa
Alta.

Kirvin Fine Sandy Loam was found along the mid-section of the roads

surveyed. It was a deep soil with about 15 percent gravel that was found on
ridges and interstream divides. Trawick Clay Loam was found on the side slopes
above drainages and was a dark red deep soil that is well drained.

152

Soil

compaction was very noticeable in the road cuts, and in certain areas, erosion or
deflation had impacted the profile of the road (Figure 83).

Figure 83. Erosion impacting an old road cut.

Using the Spatial Analyst Near Tool of the Proximity Toolbox in ArcGIS,
the final parameter measured was distance to perennial water. The distance-towater class was considered Near because in all cases, the distance from any
road segment to water, either as a spring or seep, a stream, or a well, was less
than 500 meters (1,640 feet). The distance-to-water class indicated that this

153

route may have been selected for because of the proximity of available water
(Figure 84).

Figure 84. Distance to perennial water demonstrated that the identified old road system was a
well watered route (Williams 2007).

Definition of a Spanish Road

Determining the physical properties of an early Spanish road and the
relationships that these properties had with the landscape helped to develop a

154

definition of an early Spanish road’s expression in the archaeological record.
The definition developed from these parameters was specific to the landscape
crossed by the old road system within Sabine County.
The Spanish road was characterized by deep imprints on the landscape
from many years of heavy and repeated traffic across the road. In many places
this imprint was seen as discontinuous segments of a wide shallow V or a flat
bottomed U shaped depression extending in a linear fashion through the forest.
Many of the discontinuous road segments were separated by more than the
visual range through the forest; yet by following the general compass direction
from the last identified road segment, a new road segment was found. The
discontinuous road segments aligned with each other to form a road system with
an apparent direction conforming to historical records of Spanish activity
locations. The depressions were combined into one or more four basic shapes
with many variations in depth, width, and shape across each road segment
length. The narrow and rounded, very narrow and rounded, and the wide and
rounded were the most common shapes.
The greatest changes in elevations were a factor of climbing out of or into
the Sabine River valley while attempting to reach the easy passage of a ridge or
a suitable crossing of Patroon Bayou.

In trying to reduce the effort of crossing

steep grades, the road utilized side slopes as it wound around the contours of the
landscape. To lessen the need to cross streams, the road used wide somewhat

155

level ridges where possible. Southwestern facing backslopes were also used
and afforded a much easier grade and may have been selected for this attribute.
The Spanish road segments occurred more often in pine-hardwood
forested areas suggesting preservation due to fewer landscape alterations. The
gravelly surface deposits of the Reklaw and Weches formations, and the gravelly
soils that formed over them, appear to have been sought out for better
compaction and traction.

Hard rock crossings at the contact of the Weches

Formation and the underlying Reklaw Formation were utilized for easy passage
over major streams, and the proximity to water either as a spring, seep, or
stream indicated that the selection of a route with abundant available water was
preferred.

Archaeological Landscape Visualization Model

The GIS managed archaeological landscape visualization model was used
to combine historic research and spatial data analysis with the field survey data
as an aid in visualizing the located road segments across the surveyed area. As
they were recorded, the road segments were viewed in a 3D-environment to help
in understanding the direction and the position the specific route took across the
landscape (Figure 85).

156

Figure 85. Road system viewed in 3D-environment during spatial analysis (Williams 2007).

As new road segments were located, their changing physical parameters
were incorporated into the model. The model was then used, in a dynamic and
concurrent process, as a single analysis and visualization tool for understanding
the landscape crossed by the specific road segments. To aid in comprehension
of the road system, records acquired from historic research were combined with
the Spanish road characterization.

Along with this information, other road

segments previously located near or parallel to existing Sabine County roads

157

were used to aid in locating additional road features resulting in a complete
Spanish road system across Sabine County.
Along Highway 21 in western Sabine County, several segments of the old
road can be seen as the modern highway right-of-way (ROW) cuts across the
road system (Figure 86). Many years of improvements, along with the widening
and straightening of Highway 21, has obliterated most of the old road, yet it was
possible to locate and map enough segments to develop a strategy for filling in
the missing pieces.

Figure 86. Parallel old road cuts visible from State Highway 21.

158

Using

the

archaeological

landscape

visualization

model,

suitable

landscape areas were quickly identified that conformed to the Spanish road
characterization and that fit historic references. Most of the identified areas were
parallel to and could be viewed from the modern roads; however, a pedestrian
survey was required to cover thickly forested areas (Figure 87).

Figure 87. Areas identified for additional pedestrian field surveys (Williams 2007).

During the late spring, the field survey continued across the newly
identified areas. The survey used the same techniques previously mentioned to

159

locate and record old road segments; however, this was a much larger area and
required more interaction with the archaeological landscape visualization model
to isolate potential road locations.

As old road segments were located, the

archaeological landscape visualization model was updated to incorporate the
latest findings. This provided an efficient method of evaluating specific areas for
possible routes, and when combined with knowledge acquired from the previous
field surveys, it was instrumental in locating additional road segments.
Results of this continued research included the surveying of an additional
452.4 hectares (1,117.9 acres) for an additional linear total of 26 kilometers (16.2
miles).

This supplementary survey resulted in locating and recording one

hundred and seven old road segments totaling 9.7 kilometers (6.0 miles) of which
only 5.3 kilometers (3.3 miles) are considered of Spanish origin (Figure 88).

160

Figure 88. Additional survey results showing old road segments in red (Williams 2007).

The additional field survey continued past Geneva and included areas
parallel to Highway 21 as well as areas parallel to Sabine County roads in the
vicinity of Geneva.

The town of Geneva, first known as Jimtown, was

established in the 1850s on the Old San Antonio Road in an area with abundant
spring water. Within Geneva, east of and adjacent to the old Post Office, a
portion of the old road can be seen (Figure 89).

161

Figure 89. Old road segment east of the old Geneva Post Office.

Farther west along Highway 21, before reaching the San Augustine
County line, several additional old road segments can also be seen from the
highway.

Highway 21 cuts into the old road in many places removing all traces

except for a few segments of old road that veer away from the highway ROW or
in places an occasional cut bank not associated with the modern highway (Figure
90).

162

Figure 90. Old road depression cut by Highway 21 west of Geneva.

West of Lobanillo Creek and north of Highway 21 are a set of springs
known as Lobanillo Springs. These springs were once on land owned by Antonio
Gil Y’Barbo and were a part of his Lobanillo rancho. The springs are known to
have been used by a nearby wayside inn during the 1820s, and for early
travelers, these springs were a welcome destination. In 1976 these springs were
surveyed where it was learned that immediately south of the springs is a deeply
eroded segment of El Camino Real known locally as the “Dugout” (Brunne
1981:394).
163

The “Dugout” is an eroded trench cut into the hillside rising out of the
western side of the Lobanillo Creek bottom.

It is west of and immediately

adjacent to an occupied house. This extreme road feature is approximately 5
meters (16.4 feet) deep and 4 meters (13.1 feet) wide and filled with household
trash (Figure 91). The springs were almost completely covered by erosion from
the hillside.

Figure 91. The “Dugouts” west of Geneva.

South of Geneva opposite FM 330, a faint road depression split into two
segments as they spread out along south facing ridges. These depressions were

164

very shallow and in places were lost in the undergrowth only to be seen again
farther on down slope as faint traces. They did not conform to the Spanish road
characterization and all signs of them were lost approximately 1 kilometer (0.62
miles) south of Highway 21 (Figure 92).

Figure 92. Surveyed old road segments south of Geneva (Williams 2007).

An old community road system was identified from property ownership
maps. This road system was the route identified in western Sabine County by
Major V. N. Zively in 1915 as being the King’s Highway. It had many segments
coming from the north and east that connected together before crossing

165

Lobanillo Creek.

It has sections that are still in use, but it also has many

segments that are no longer used (Figure 93).

Figure 93. Portion of old road system west of McMahan’s Chapel.

This road system was surveyed as it runs southwest from Geneva
crossing first Maddox and then Lobanillo creeks before it connected with the road
to McMahan’s Chapel. There are many farms with houses along this road. After

166

passing McMahan’s Chapel Cemetery, the old road swung west and crossed
Palo Gaucho Bayou before creating deep parallel cuts on the west side of the
bayou as it climbed out of the bottomlands onto the crest of a southeast running
ridge.
King’s Road, an east to west road, cuts off the bend of Highway 21
through Geneva joining Highway 21 approximately 3 kilometers (1.8 miles) west
and east of Geneva. Along the south side of King’s Road east of Maddox Creek,
is a singular road cut that is 152 meters (499 feet) long, 3 meters (9.8 feet) deep,
and 2.5 meters (8.2 feet) wide. On the north side of the road is a much shallower
road cut. Along King’s Road, fourteen discontinuous old road segments were
located and recorded for a total of 1.1 kilometers (0.68 miles) of old road
features. The old road segments conform to the Spanish road characterization
as they parallel King’s Road sometimes on one side of the road and sometimes
on the other (Figure 94).

167

Figure 94. Old road segments paralleling King’s Road (Williams 2007).

By using the archaeological landscape visualization model to evaluate
landscape choices that fit historic references and that conformed to the definition
of a Spanish road, it became obvious that the fork of the roads mentioned in the
depositions of the 1852 Shelby County Court case was in the vicinity of the
intersection of King’s Road and Highway 21 west of Geneva.
On the west end, King’s Road swings due north about 350 meters
(1,148.3 feet) south of the Highway 21 intersection. By taking into account a
Spanish roads expression in the archaeological record, a large area comprised of

168

25 hectares (62 acres) was selected for additional pedestrian surveys. Within
this area, forty-nine old road segments were located in a complex of parallel
roads curving down across a north facing side slope of a ridge extending west
into the Lobanillo Creek bottom (Figure 95).

Figure 95. Located road segments at Lobanillo Cuts (Williams 2007).

The Lobanillo Cuts are made up of forty-nine individual road segments
that have a combined length of 1.9 kilometers (1.2 miles) with the largest and
deepest road cut being 3.5 meters (11.5 feet) deep and 6 meters (19.7 feet)
wide. The most common of the four basic road shapes in the Lobanillo Cuts was

169

wide and flat, and the average depth was 1.6 meters (5.3 feet) with the average
width being 3.8 meters (12.5 feet). The greatest concentration of road cuts was
composed of seven parallel roads features (Figure 96).

Another concentration

was composed of four parallel road features each 3 meters (9.8 feet) deep and 3
meters (9.8 feet) wide (Figure 97).

Figure 96. Parallel old road segments crossing the Lobanillo Cuts area (Williams 2007).

170

Figure 97. Two complexes of parallel road segments in the Lobanillo Cuts area (Williams 2007).

This area has an 8 percent grade and is crossed by the deep fine grained
sands and sandstones of the Carrizo Sands geologic formation and the Darco
Loamy Fine Sand soil series. The deep parallel road cuts indicated that the soil
and underlying geologic formation could not support the volume of traffic using
the roads resulting in the parallel road complexes (Figure 98).

171

Figure 98. Looking east at deep parallel old road depressions in the Lobanillo Cuts area. In
contrast to built up logging tramways, these depression features joins together just out of view
toward the east and approximately 60 meters (197 feet) to the west.

The number of very deep road cuts as well as the average width of 3.8
meters (12.5 feet) also indicated that this route was used by heavy AngloAmerican wagons rather than the two wheeled carts of the Spanish (Figure 99).
All four of the previously identified basic road shapes are expressed in this
complex of interconnecting road segments.

172

Figure 99. Connie Hodges surveying the deep parallel road segments at Lobanillo Cuts.

The value of using a GIS managed archaeological landscape visualization
model was demonstrated with the identification of these large road complexes.
The model allowed the archaeological evidence to be viewed in such a way that
an understanding was gained for the placement of the roads in relation to the
physical landscape. Used in a dynamic iterative process of historic research,
field surveys, and data analysis, this model allowed for comparing the changing
road parameters with possible landscape choices and helped to gain a deeper
understanding of the forces influencing the travel of those who followed the road.

173

DISCUSSION
The deep and narrow nature of many of the located road segments of El
Camino Real and El Camino Carretera can be explained by the repeated use of
supply pack trains or carts traveling in single file across the same route over and
over again.
In December of 1721, after leaving Los Adaes on their return trip to
Mexico, the Aguayo expedition came upon its second convoy of supplies on the
road. Padre Peña wrote that “His Lordship [the Marquis de Aguayo] encountered
the awaited second convoy from La Bahía. On that same day he sent to Los
Adaes 100 of its loads of flour and other provisions.
maintenance during the journey” (Peña 1981:73).

The rest was kept for

Peña does not mention the

animals used to carry the loads nor does he mention the size of the first or the
second convoys, but presumably the pack trains must have been large enough
that sending 100 of its loads to Los Adaes was just a small portion of the much
larger second convoy.

This reference indicated that it was not uncommon for

very large pack trains or convoys of two-wheeled carts to cross the roads while
supplying the missions and presidios.
Not wanting to get off of the roads for fear of getting lost or losing the road,
the early Spanish explorers stayed on the same road over and over again

174

creating the depressions seen today.

According to the 1557 account of De

Soto’s expedition, Moscoso’s army appeared to have been staying on the road to
the Caddo as “they feared lest they get lost in some unpeopled region,” so that
when a guide led them “off the road for two days,” Moscoso had him put to death
before returning to the roadway (Swanton 1985:262 [1939]).
The landscape influences affecting road placement were studied by
careful observation of these early roads. The influence of the physical landscape
on the selection of one place over another was of special interest to this
archaeological research, as was the historical context in which events creating
the old road system occurred. The development of a GIS for inclusion of linear
features, as expressed in the archaeological record, posed unique challenges in
mapping the remains of physical features because the features were often
incomplete; having been destroyed, buried, or otherwise obscured as in a
forested environment. Nevertheless, the ability to visualize the character of the
physical landscape while incorporating both historic and field research into a
single analysis tool is a strength that GIS brought to this research.
The development and use of a GIS geodatabase model as an integrated
research oriented archaeological landscape visualization system demonstrated
that a landscape level GIS can be used effectively to examine archaeological
evidence as it relates to physical landscape features influencing the selection of
preferred locations for Spanish road placement.

175

The archaeological landscape

visualization model was designed and used as a dynamic process of landscape
resource visualization and spatial analysis. An understanding of the landscape
position of a road segment and the landscape forces influencing the selection of
that location were refined through repeated iterations of analysis that allowed for
determination of limiting or enhancing landscape factors that when combined
with field survey data and a Spanish road’s definition were used for locating
additional road segments.
Dr. James Bruseth, Deputy State Historic Preservation Officer and
Director of the Archaeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission, stated
that the ability to have iterative processes in archaeological investigations
provides an invaluable tool for investigating the associations and relationships of
discovered archaeological features and the artifacts recovered with the features
(Jim Bruseth, personal communication 2007).
By its very nature, archaeology is a spatially oriented science and
therefore an ideal geospatial application. In the research presented here, the
use of a GIS managed archaeological landscape visualization model was
essential for understanding the selection of one location over another. Based on
landscape opportunities or limitations, the model was used within the constraints
of the archaeological attributes and parameters associated with located road
segments. The interactive and iterative design process continually redefined the
data model as the GIS application was developed. This led to the identification

176

of locations to be looked at, and through continued field surveys, to the
identification of major road complexes at Lobanillo Cuts meeting the historic
description of the lower El Camino Real to the Sabine River crossing at Gaines
Ferry.
Historic research showed that Juan Maximillian and his uncle cut a bridle
path across their property from El Camino Real to what became, after 1818, the
road to Gaines Ferry. Due to the overwhelming archaeological evidence of the
large road complexes curving east from Lobanillo Cuts, the deep old road cuts
paralleling King’s Road toward the east, and historical documents providing oral
history of the roads location, it was determined that the Lobanillo Cuts are the
lower road to the Sabine River sometimes known as Camino Chabinan, El
Camino Real, The King’s Highway, Gaines Ferry Road, or the Old San Antonio
Road.
From this location, the old road system paralleling Highway 21 to Geneva
and then northeast along Carter’s Ferry Road, is El Camino Carretera mentioned
in the historic documents. Physical features of note mentioned in General Pedro
de Rivera’s 1727 report to the Spanish Crown such as crossing La Quest Alta,
going past the steep Arroyo del Patrón, and crossing over El Patrón or Puerto de
Patrón before arriving at the shallow fords of El Rio de San Francisco de las
Sabinas have been identified along this route. The physical landscape features
given names and mentioned by early travelers of these roads had meaning and

177

conveyed meaning to others intent on traveling to these outposts. La Questa
Alta or Puerto de Patrón are but a couple mentioned frequently by the early
travelers. Whether they were names of prominent features easily recognized, or
they described some feature to be overcome or even if they describe a
destination, these places were important enough to be used and reused.

As a

place of value, El Camino Carretera is the first road mentioned by the Spanish
linking the eastern most Spanish missions with the avenue of their support
hundreds of kilometers to the south.

Isolated on the Spanish frontier, the

outposts of the Texas Province of New Spain relied on and heavily used El
Camino Carretera.
Determining the physical landscape parameters crossed by the located
road segments, along with the development of a definition of a Spanish road’s
archaeological expression, made it possible to understand the nature of the
road’s appearance through the forest.

The calculation of a single numerical

value [depth-to-width ratio] representing the impact of a Spanish road on the
landscape also made it possible to gage potential affects on additional areas of
interest that had similar landscape characteristics.

When used in an integrated

GIS archaeological landscape visualization model, repeated iterations of historic
research, field surveys, and spatial data analysis have demonstrated that
landscape resources can be determined and used effectively to locate Spanish
road features on the landscape.

178

CONCLUSION

By the late 17th century the earliest European explorations into East Texas
were utilizing the many trails, traces, or pathways that linked long established
Caddo villages. Coming to East Texas to curb French interests in trade with the
Indians, the Spanish established missions and presidios along the trails near
Caddo settlements. To supply and communicate with these frontier outposts, the
Spanish cleared and widened the existing trails, creating a network of roads that
linked the series of missions and presidios. Established by Governor Alonso de
Léon’s 1690 expedition, El Camino Real de los Tejas or The King’s Highway
provided a lifeline of support that existed for over one hundred years.
Used as a corridor of immigration in the 19th century, Anglo-Americans
traveled The King’s Highway or the Old San Antonio Road in ever increasing
numbers. Road improvements and ferry crossings became common, and the
road became a formal and well known entry way into Texas. Persisting into the
20th century, the Old San Antonio Road or El Camino Real was memorialized by
the creation of Texas State Highway 21 following the route of the old road. The
locations of the old road, first identified by Major Zivley in 1915, have been
commemorated by the erection of State Historical Markers (Figure 100).

179

Figure 100. The King’s Highway State Historical Marker on Highway 21 with the granite marker
placed by the Texas chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution in 1918 marking Major
V. N. Zivley’s surveyed route.

El Camino Carretera is an early segment of El Camino Real de los Tejas
that has been documented in numerous historic references.

El Camino

Carretera crossed the Sabine River at a well known ford in eastern Sabine
County, Texas.

Pedestrian archaeological surveys were conducted over a

defined study area in north central Sabine County and resulted in the location

180

and identification of existing portions of El Camino Carretera. Using historical
research with the data collected from archaeological field surveys, spatial data
analysis was conducted in a GIS managed archaeological landscape
visualization system specifically developed for managing archaeological
evidence with physical landscape data.
Remote sensing using historic aerial photography identified flooded ferry
crossing locations mentioned in the historic literature and provided a way of
visualizing and analyzing landscapes of the past that can not be visited in the
present (Figure 101). Road networks, farms, and forestry related activities were
identified from the historic aerial photographs which helped to locate areas where
connecting road segments might be located.

181

Figure 101. Toledo Bend Reservoir in 1968. (Williams 2007).

Additionally, individual road segments, located during the initial field
survey, were used for determining physical landscape variables associated with
road placement.

The resulting set of landscape criteria supported the

development of a definition for what constitutes a Spanish road’s expression in
the archaeological record. Using this information, the archaeological landscape
visualization model aided in the discovery and identification of additional existing
remnants of 17th and 18th century road features.

182

A Spanish road in East Texas is characterized by deep imprints on the
landscape from many years of heavy and repeated traffic across the road (Figure
102). Deep linear depressions were the most common expression of an old road
segment.

Discontinuous road segments formed a wide shallow V or a flat

bottomed U shaped depression extending linearly through the forest. Although
discontinuous, the individual road segments were aligned with each other to form
a singular road system. Even with great variation in depth, width, and shape
across each road segment length, the linear depressions conformed to one or
more four basic shapes of rounded and narrow, very narrow and rounded, wide
and rounded, or flat and wide (Figure 103).
Elevation, slope, and aspect crossed by the roads were selected for in an
attempt to reduce the effort required to cross steep grades and to lessen the
need to cross difficult areas such as streams or wet bottomlands. Gravelly soils
were crossed more often suggesting that these areas were sought out for better
compaction and traction.

183

Figure 102. Old road cut [center rear] near Lobanillo Creek.

The contact zones of the Weches and Reklaw geologic formations were
used for easy passage over major streams because of the hard rock exposed at
accessible crossings. The location of existing old road segments also suggested
that a route with abundant available water was preferred. Occurring more often
in heavily forested areas, existing road remnants may have been preserved
because of fewer landscape alterations.

184

Figure 103. Four basic road types identified from the field survey.

185

The research results presented here contributed to the identification of
existing road features associated with El Camino Carretera and El Camino Real
de Los Tejas.

The total linear distance covered during the entire four season

survey was just over 33.9 kilometers (21.1 miles), and the total area covered was
614.4 hectares (1,518.2 acres). A summary of the findings are as follows:

ROAD NAME

# OF SEGMENTS

Camino Carretera

TOTAL LENGTH

62

4.9 kilometers (3.0 miles)

Camino Chabinan [Gaines Ferry Road] 82

5.3 kilometers (3.3 miles)

Other old road segments

21

4.0 kilometers (2.5 miles)

165

14.2 kilometers (8.8 miles)

El Camino Real de los Tejas

Of the one hundred and sixty-five located old road segments,
approximately one hundred and forty-four, totaling 10.2 kilometers (6.3 miles),
are considered to be portions the two roads known as El Camino Real discussed
in the 1852 Shelby County Court case (Figure 104).
The cultural inventory outlined in this document adds to the historical
knowledge of the East Texas region by providing an inventory of existing Spanish
road features following routes first serving as corridors of communication and
trade between Caddo villages, then as avenues supporting colonial interests, and
finally as major entry ways for Anglo-American colonization of Texas. Adding to

186

archaeological GIS theory as well, this research documented the development
and use of a geodatabase design framework for creation of an archaeological
landscape visualization model used to locate and identify existing but not
recognized segments of El Camino Real de Los Tejas.

Figure 104. Camino Carretera and Camino Chabnian identified from research.

The King’s Highway continues to be an important component of Texas
history. Texas State Highway 21 was designated as a National Historic Trail
administered by the National Park Service because it approximates the original

187

El Camino Real de Los Tejas route through Texas.

The importance of this

National Trail has been deemed worthy enough by the United States government
to be protected and preserved in perpetuity as a historically significant resource
of our national legacy.

188

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aronoff, Stan
2005 Remote Sensing for GIS Managers. ESRI Press, Redlands.
Allen, Kathleen M. S., Stanton W. Green, and Ezra B. W. Zubrow
1990 Interpreting Space. In Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, edited
by Kathleen M. S. Allen, Stanton W. Green, and Ezra B. W. Zubrow, pp. 382386. Taylor & Francis, London.
Abler, R. F.
1974 The Geography of Communications. In Transportation Geography:
Comments and Readings. Edited by Michael Hurst, pp. 327-345. McGrawHill, New York.
Atwood, W. W.
1940 The Physiographic Provinces of North America. Ginn and Company,
New York.
Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Volume II,
No. 1. San Angelo.
Block, W. T.
1991 A Buccaneer Family in Spanish East Texas: A Biographical Sketch of
Captain James and Mary Sabinal Campbell. In Texas Gulf Historical and
Biographical Record, XXVII, Number 1. pp. 2-17. Electronic document,
http://www.wtblock.com/wtblockjr/james.htm, accessed December 10, 2003.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1991 The Spanish Occupation of Texas. In Documentary Evidence For The
Spanish Missions of Texas, Volume 22, Spanish Borderlands Sourcebooks,
edited by Arthur R. Gomez, pp. 3-28. Reprinted. Originally published 1912,
Southwestern Historical Quarterly 16 (1): 1-26.

189

Bolton, Herbert E.
1970 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies in Spanish Colonial
History and Administration. Reprinted. The University of Texas, Austin.
Originally published 1915, Volume 3, The University of California Publications
in History.
Bradford, A. L. and T. N. Cambell (editors)
1950 Journal of Lincecum's Travels in Texas, 1835. In Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, Volume LIII. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Bray, W. L.
1904 Forest Resources of Texas. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of
Forestry, Bulletin No. 47. Washington, D. C.
Brunne, Gunnar
1981 Springs of Texas. Volume 1. Branch-Smith, Fort Worth.
Brunne, Gunnar
1975 Major and Historical Springs of Texas. Texas Water Development
Board, Report 189, Second Printing. Texas Water Development Board,
Austin.
Bureau of Economic Geology (BEG)
1992 Geologic Atlas of Texas: Palestine Sheet. The University of Texas
at Austin, Austin.
Bureau of Economic Geology (BEG)
1977 Land Resources of Texas. The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin.
Carlstrom, Brian and Carrie Cordova
1998 Development of a GIS for Long Distance Historic Trails. In Proceedings
of the 18th Annual ESRI International Users Conference. Electronic
document, http://gis.esri.com/library/userconf/proc98/PROCEED/TO550/
PAP504/P505.htm,accessed December 12, 2003.
Carr, Christopher
1991 Left in the Dust: Contextual Information in Model-Focused Archaeology.
In The Interpretation of Archaeological Spatial Patterning, edited by Ellen M.
Kroll and T. Douglas Price, pp. 221-256. Plenum Press, New York.

190

Casis, Lilia M.
1991 Letter of Fray Damian Massanet to Do Carlos de Siguenza relative to
the Discovery of the Bay of Espiritu Santo. In Documentary Evidence For
The Spanish Missions of Texas, Volume 22, Spanish Borderlands
Sourcebooks, edited by Arthur R. Gomez, pp. 83-120. Reprinted. Originally
published 1916, in Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, edited by Herbert E.
Bolton, pp. 353-387. Scribner’s, New York.
Castañeda, Carlos E.
1976a The Mission Era: The Finding of Texas 1519-1693. In Our Catholic
Heritage in Texas 1519-1936, Volume I, edited by Paul J. Foik, Texas
Knights of Columbus Historical Commission. Reprinted. Arno Press, New
York. Originally published 1936, Von Boeckmann-Jones Company, Austin.
Castañeda, Carlos E.
1976b The Mission Era: The Winning of Texas 1693-1731. In Our Catholic
Heritage in Texas 1519-1936, Volume II, edited by Paul J. Foik, Texas
Knights of Columbus Historical Commission. Reprinted. Arno Press, New
York. Originally published 1936, Von Boeckmann-Jones Company, Austin.
Castañeda, C. E.
1939 Catholic Heritage in Texas, 1519 - 1936. Volume IV. Von-BoeckmannJones Company, Austin.
Chambers, W. T.
1948 Geographic Regions of Texas. In The Texas Geographic Magazine,
Volume XII, No. 1, Dallas.
Church, Tim, R. Joe Brandon, and Galen R. Burgett
2000 GIS Applications in Archaeology: Method in Search of Theory. In
Practical Applications of GIS for Archaeologists: A Predictive Modeling Kit,
edited by Konnie L. Westcott and R. Joe Brandon, pp. 135-155. Taylor &
Francis, London.
Clement, Christopher Ohm, Sahadeb De, and Robin Wilson Kloot
2001 Using GIS to Model and Predict Likely Archaeological Sites. In
Proceedings of the 21st Annual ESRI User Conference. Electronic
document, http://gis.esri.com/library/userconf/proc01/professional
/papers/pap651/p651.htm, accessed October 10, 2003.

191

Corbin, James E. and John P. Hart
1998 The Washington Square Mound Site: A Middle Caddo Mound Complex
in South Central East Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 69, edited by Timothy K. Perttula and Lind W. Ellis, pp. 47-78. Texas
Archeological Society, Austin.
Corbin, James E., Heather A. Brown, Mary G. Canavan, and Sharon Toups
1984 Mission Delores de los Ais. San Augustine County, Texas. Texas
Antiquities Permit 419. Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches.
Corbin, James E., Jeffrey M. Williams, Victor J. Galan, and Rebecca St. John
1994 Cultural Resource Survey of Fort Boggy State Park Leon County,
Texas. A Report Submitted to the Department of Antiquities Protection.
Texas Antiquities Permit 1121. Stephen F. Austin State University,
Nacogdoches.
Corbin, James E.
1991 Retracing the Camino De Los Tejas from the Trinity River to Los
Adaes: New Insights into East Texas History. In A Texas Legacy: The Old
San Antonio Road and the Caminos Reales a Tricentennial History, 1691
– 1991, editors A. Joachim McGraw, John W. Clark, Jr., and Elizabeth A.
Robbins, pp. 191-220. Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Austin.
Corbin, James E.
1977 Archaeological Research at 41SA25, Mission Delores De Los Ais. A
Preliminary Report Submitted to the Texas Historical Commission. Stephen
F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches.
Crockett, George Louis
1962 Two Centuries in East Texas: A History of San Augustine County
and Surrounding Territory: From 1685 to the Present Time. Southwest
Press, Dallas.
Cruikshank, J. W. and I. F. Eldredge.
1939 Forest Resources of Southeastern Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture. Publication No. 326. Washington, D. C.

192

Crumley, Carole L. and William H. Marquardt
1990 Landscape: A Unifying Concept in Regional Analysis. In Interpreting
Space: GIS and Archaeology, edited by Kathleen M. S. Allen, Stanton W.
Green, and Ezra B. W. Zubrow, pp. 73-79. Taylor & Francis, London.
De Cordova, J.
1858 Burning Prairies or Woodland; Texas, Her Resources and her
Public Men. J. B. Lippincott & Co., Philadelphia.
Dictionary of American Biography
1958 Dictionary of American Biography. Volume X; Troye-Zunser. Charles
Scriber's Sons, New York.
Dumble, E. T.
1918 The Geology of East Texas. University of Texas Bulletin No. 1869.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Dunn, William E.
1971 Spanish and French Rivalry in the Gulf Region of the United States,
1678-1702: The beginnings of Texas and Pensacola. Reprinted. Book for
Libraries Press, New York. Originally published 1917, University of Texas
Bulletin No. 1705, University of Texas Press, Austin.
Ebert, James I.
1992 Distributional Archaeology. Reprint 2001. University of Utah Press,
Salt Lake City.
Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI)
2002 ArcGIS Brings Topology to the Geodatabase. In ArcNews online.
Electronic document, http://www.esri.com/news/arcnews/
summer02articles/arcgis-brings-topology.html, accessed November 2, 2003.
Erickson, Elizabeth and James E. Corbin
1996 Archaeological Survey and Cultural Resource Assessment of Mission
Tejas State Historical Park, Houston County, Texas. Antiquities Permit No.
1273. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Ewers, J. C. (editor)
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830 by Jean Louis Berlandier. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D. C.

193

Farley, James A., W. Fredrick Limp, and Jami Lockhart
1990 The Archaeologist's Workbench: Integrating GIS, Remote Sensing,
EDA, and Database Management. In Interpreting Space: GIS and
Archaeology, edited by Kathleen M. S. Allen, Stanton W. Green, and Ezra B.
W. Zubrow, pp. 141-164. Taylor & Francis, London.
Fenneman, N. M.
1938 Physiography of the Eastern United States. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York.
Filchner, Wilhelm, Erich Przybyllok, and Toni Hagen
1957 Route-Mapping and Position-Locating in Unexplored Regions.
Academic Press, New York.
Files, Jim
2000 GIS Helps Uncover Lost Sections of the Trail of Tears. In ArcUser
Online. Electronic document, http://www.esri.com/news/arcuser
/1003/trailoftears.html, accessed April 9, 2004.
Fisher, W. L.
1965 Rock and Mineral Resources of East Texas. Bureau of Economic
Geology. Report of Investigations 54. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Forbis, Richard G.
1975 Eastern North America. In North America, edited by Shirley
Gorenstein, pp. 74-102. St. Martin’s Series in Prehistory. St. Martin’s Press,
New York.
Forghani, Alan and Denise Gaughwin
2000 Spatial Information Technologies to aid Archaeological Site
Mapping. Electronic document, http://gisdevelopment.net/application
/archaeology/site/archs0005.htm, accessed November 2, 2005.
Fox, Daniel E.
1983 Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of the Past 450 Years.
Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.
Freund, M. (editor)
1954 Gustav Dresel's Houston Journal: Adventures in North America and
Texas, 1837 - 1841. University of Texas Press, Austin.

194

Gao, Jay
2002 Integration of GPS with Remote Sensing and GIS: Reality and
Prospect. In Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, Volume 68,
Number 5, edited by James W. Merchant, Kimberly A. Tilley, and James B.
Case, pp. 447-453. American Society of Photogrammetry and Remote
Sensing, Bethesda.
Gibaldi, Joseph
1995 MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers. Fourth Edition. The
Modern Language Association of America, New York.
Gorenstein, Shirley
1975 Introduction. In North America, edited by Shirley Gorenstein, pp. 1-17.
St. Martin’s Series in Prehistory. St. Martin’s Press, New York.
Gregory, Ian N.
2003 A Place in History: A Guide to Using GIS in Historical Research. History
Data Service. Oxbow Books, Oxford.
Hageman, Jon B. and David Bennett
2000 Construction of Digital Elevation Models for Archaeological
Applications. In Practical Applications of GIS for Archaeologists: A Predictive
Modeling Kit, edited by Konnie L. Westcott and R. Joe Brandon, pp. 113127. Taylor & Francis, London.
Harris, Trevor M.
2002 GIS in Archaeology. In Past Time, Past Place: GIS for History,
edited by Anne Kelly Knowles, pp. 131-143. ESRI Press, Redlands.
Hester, Thomas R., Robert F. Heizer, and John A. Graham
1975 Field Methods in Archaeology. 6th edition. Mayfield Publishing
Company, Palo Alto.
Hodder, Ian
1995 Material Culture in Time. In Interpreting Archaeology: Finding
Meaning in the Past, edited by Ian Hodder, Michael Shanks, Alexandra
Alexandri, Victor Buchli, John Carman, Jonathan Last, and Gavin Lucas, pp.
164-168. Routledge, London.

195

Holliday, Vance T.
1992 Soil Formation, Time, and Archaeology. In Soils in Archaeology:
Landscape Evolution and Human Occupation, edited by Vance T. Holliday,
pp. 101-117. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington D. C.
Hunt, C. B.
1974 Natural Regions of the United States and Canada. W.H. Freeman
and Company, San Francisco.
Hunt, C. B.
1967 Physiography of the United States. W.H. Freeman and Company,
San Francisco.
Jackson, Jack, Robert S. Weddle, and Winston DeVille
1990 Mapping Texas and the Gulf Coast: The Contributions of SaintDenis, Oliván, and Le Maire. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.
Jackson, Jack
1995 Imaginary Kingdom: Texas as Seen by the Rivera and Rubí Military
expeditions, 1727 and 1767. Texas State Historical Association. Austin.
Jackson, Jack
1986 Los Mesteños: Spanish Ranching in Texas, 1721 – 1821. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
Jackson, Jack (editor)
2000 Texas by Terán. Translated by John Wheat. University of
Texas Press, Austin.
Johnson, E. H.
1931 The Natural Regions of Texas. The University of Texas Bulletin.
No. 3113. The University of Texas Bureau of Business Research. Austin.
Jordan, Terry and Matti Kaups.
1985 The American Backwoods Frontier. John Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore.

196

Jordan, T. G.
1973 Pioneer Evaluation of Vegetation in Frontier Texas. In
Southwestern Historical Quarterly. Volume LXXVI. No. 3. The Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.
Joutel, Henri
1968 The Journeys of Réné Robert Cavelier Sieur De La Salle. Edited by
Isaac J. Cox. Volume II. The Pemperton Press, Austin.
Kenmotsu, Nancy A., James E. Bruseth, and James E. Corbin
1993 Moscoso and the Route in Texas: A Reconstruction. In The Expedition
of Hernando de Soto West of the Mississippi, 1541-1543, edited by Gloria A.
Young and Michael P. Hoffman, pp. 106-131. Proceedings of the De Soto
Symposia 1988 and 1990. University of Arkansas Press, Fayetteville.
King, Nyal C.
1949 Captain Antonio Gil Y’Barbo Founder of the Modern Nacogdoches
1729-1809. Master’s Thesis, Stephen F. Austin State Teachers College,
Nacogdoches.
Kinnaird, Lawrence
1958 The Frontiers of New Spain: Nicolas De LaFora’s description 1766 –
1768. In Quivira Society Publications Volume XIII, edited by George P.
Hammond, pp. 160 – 183. The Quivira Society, Berkeley.
Kvamme, Kenneth L.
1989 Geographic Information Systems in Regional Archaeological
Research and Data Management. In Archaeological Method and Theory,
edited by Michael Schiffer, pp. 139-203. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Lathrop, Barnes F.
1949 Migration Into East Texas 1835-1860: A Study from the United
States Census. The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Lay, Bennett
1960 The Lives of Ellis P. Bean. University of Texas Press, Austin.

197

L’Herisson, Lawrence E.
1981 The Evolution of the Texas Road and the Subsequential Settlement
Occupancy of the Adjacent strip of Northwestern Louisiana: 1528 – 1824.
Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Geography, Louisiana State
University, Natchitoches.
McGraw, A. Joachim and Elizabeth A. Robbins
1991 A Travelers View of the Historic Landscape. In A Texas Legacy:
The Old San Antonio Road and the Caminos Reales a Tricentennial
History, 1691 – 1991, editors A. Joachim McGraw, John W. Clark, Jr.,
and Elizabeth A. Robbins, pp. 239-245. Texas State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.
Mitchell, Andy
1999 Geographic Patterns and Relationships: The ESRI Guide to GIS
Analysis. ESRI Press, Redlands.
Morfi, Juan A.
1967 History of Texas 1673-1779. Translated by Carlos E. Castaneda.
Reprinted. Arno Press, New York. Originally published 1935, Quivira Society
Publications, Volume IV, Part 2. Lancaster Press, Lancaster.
Morfi, Juan A.
1935 History of Texas 1673-1779. Translated by Carlos E. Castaneda.
Quivira Society Publications, Volume IV, Part 1. Lancaster Press, Lancaster.
National Park Service (NPS)
2005 GPS Mapping Methodology for Earthwork Management and
Evaluation. U.S. Department of the Interior. Electronic document, http://
www.cr.nps.gov/hps/gis/reports/datadict/intro.htm, accessed August 10,
2005.
National Park Service (NPS)
1998 El Camino Real de los Tejas: Texas/Louisiana. National Historic
Trail Feasibility Study and Environmental Assessment. U.S. Department
of the Interior. Washington, D. C.
Newcomb, W. W.
1995 The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. Reprinted.
The University of Texas Press, Austin. Originally published 1961, The
University of Texas Press, Austin.

198

New Handbook of Texas
1996 New Handbook of Texas. Volume VI. The Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.
Norvelle, Helen P.
1945 King’s Highway: The Great Strategic Military Highway of America El
Camino Real; The Old San Antonio Road. National Old Trails Road of
Texas, Austin.
Oliver, Laurent
2001 The Archaeology of the Contemporary Past. In Archaeologies of the
Contemporary Past, edited by Victor Buchli and Gaven Lucas, pp. 175188. Routledge, London.
Peña, Juan A.
1981 Aguayo Expedition into Texas: 1721. Translated by Richard Santos.
Jenkins Publishing Company, Austin.
Perttula, Timothy K.
1993 Goals for the Eastern Planning Region. In Archaeology in the
Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by Nancy
Adele Kenmotsu and Timothy K. Perttula, pp. 27 - 32. Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Price, A.
1944 Place Names in Texas. In The Texas Geographic Magazine.
Volume VII. No. 2. The Texas Geographic Society, Dallas.
Public Law 108 – 342
2004 108th Congress (S. 2052) 118 STAT. 1370 October 18, 2004.
Electronic document http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c108:P.L.108342, accessed November 2, 2005.
Richards, Colin
1995 Knowing about the Past. In Interpreting Archaeology: Finding
Meaning in the Past, edited by Ian Hodder, Michael Shanks, Alexandra
Alexandri, Victor Buchli, John Carman, Jonathan Last, and Gavin Lucas,
pp. 216-219. Routledge, London.

199

Riley, Derrick
1987 Air Photography and Archaeology. University of Pennsylvania
Press, Philadelphia.
Robertson, James A.
1993 The Account by a Gentleman From Elvas. Translated by James A.
Robertson. Originally published in 1933. In The De Soto Chronicles: The
Expedition of Hernando De Soto to North America in 1539-1543, edited by
Lawrence A. Clayton, Vernon J. Knight, Jr., and Edward C. Moore. The
University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
Savage, Stephen H.
1990 GIS in Archaeological Research. In Interpreting Space: GIS and
Archaeology. Edited by Kathleen M. S. Allen, Stanton W. Green, and
Ezra B. W. Zubrow. pp. 22-32. Taylor & Francis, London.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932 Stratigraphy. In The Geology of Texas. Volume I. Bureau of
Economic Geology. Austin, Texas.
Schambach, Frank E.
1993 The End of the Trail: Reconstruction of the Route of Hernando de Soto’s
Army through Southwest Arkansas and East Texas. In The Expedition of
Hernando de Soto West of the Mississippi, 1541-1543. Edited by Gloria A.
Young and Michael P. Hoffman. pp. 78-105. In Proceedings of the De Soto
Symposia 1988 and 1990. University of Arkansas Press, Fayetteville.
Schiffer, Michael B.
1987 Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record. University of
Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Shelby County District Court Clerk
1852 Russell Heirs vs James Mason; Statement of Facts. District Court of
Shelby County, pp. 87-118. In R. B. Blake Collection, Volume LXV, pp. 313352. East Texas Research Center, Nacogdoches.
Shum, Dee Ann and Alex D. Krieger
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Volume 25. Texas Archeological Society, Austin.

200

Sibley, Marilyn M.
1967 Travelers in Texas 1761-1860. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Smith, Todd F.
1995 The Caddo Indians: Tribes at the Convergence of Empires, 1542-1854.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Society of American Archaeology (SAA)
2003 Editorial Policy, Information for Authors, & Style Guide. Electronic
document, http://www.saa.org/publications/, accessed August 2003.
Steck, Francis B.
1991 Forerunners of Captain De León’s Expedition to Texas, 1670-1675. In
Documentary Evidence for the Spanish Missions of Texas. Volume 22.
Spanish Borderlands Sourcebooks, edited by Arthur R. Gomez, pp. 29-56.
Reprinted. Originally published 1932, In Southwestern Historical Quarterly 36
(1): 1-28.
Story, Dee Ann (editor)
1982 The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches, Texas: The Site, Its Setting,
Investigation, Cultural Features, Artifacts of Non-native Manufacture, and
Subsistence Remains, Volume 1. Texas Antiquities Permit Series, No. 7.
Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.
Swanton, John R.
1996 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
Reprinted Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D. C. Originally
published 1942, Bulletin No. 132, Bureau of American Ethnology,
Smithsonian Institution, Washington D. C.
Swanton, John R.
1985 Final Report of the United States De Soto Expedition Commission.
Reprinted. Smithsonian Classics of Anthropology, Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D. C. Originally published 1939, United States House of
Representatives Document No. 71, 76th Congress, 1st Session, Washington
D. C.
Swanton, John R.
1984 The Indian Tribes of North America. Reprinted. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D. C. Originally published 1952, Bulletin No. 145, Bureau
of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, Washington D. C.

201

Texas Geographic Information Council (TGIC)
1999 Texas Land Classification System: Recommendations for New Land
Use Land Cover Datasets for Texas; A report to the GIS Manager’s
Committee. Electronic document, htttp://www.dir.state.tx.us/tgic/pubs/lulcreport.pdf, accessed October 2000.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD)
1984 Caddoan Mounds: Temples and Tombs of an Ancient People. Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Tharp, B. C.
1939 The Vegetation of Texas. In Texas Academy Publications in
Natural History. The Texas Academy of Science. Anson Jones Press,
Houston.
Tous, Gabriel
1991 Ramón Expedition: Espinosa’s Diary of 1716.
In Documentary
Evidence For The Spanish Missions of Texas. Volume 22. Spanish
Borderlands Sourcebooks, edited by Arthur R. Gomez, pp. 137-161.
Reprinted. Originally published 1930, in Preliminary Studies of the Texas
Catholic Historical Society 1(4):2-24.
Trimble Navigation Limited
2005 H-Star Technology Explained. Electronic document,
http://trl.trimble.com/docushare/dsweb/Get/Document-224437/022501071_H-Star%20technology%20explained_0805.pdf, accessed July 2006.
Tukey, John W.
1977 Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley Series in Behavioral
Science: Quantitative Methods, edited by Frederick Mosteller. AddisonWesley, Reading.
Welborn, C.A.
1973 The Red River Controversy: The Western Boundary of the
Louisiana Purchase. Nortex Offset Publications, Natchitoches.
Weniger, D.
1984 The Explorers' Texas: The Lands and Waters. Eakin Press, Austin.

202

Wheatley, David and Mark Gillings
2002 Spatial Technology and Archaeology: The Archaeological
Applications of GIS. Taylor & Francis, New York.
Whitley, Thomas G. and Lacey M. Hicks
2001 Using a GIS Approach to Extract Potential Prehistoric and Historic
Period Travel Corridors Across a Portion of Northern Georgia. ESRI Online
Papers on GIS in Archaeology. Electronic document, http://www.esri.com/
industries/archaeology/papers.html, accessed July 30, 2004.
Williams, Jeffrey M.
2007 Data extraction and map production using ESRI’s ArcGIS 9.2 with data
sources from the United States Geological Survey, the United States
Department of Agriculture, The University of Texas at Austin’s Bureau of
Economic Geology and Center Space Research, the Texas Natural Resource
Information System, and the East Texas Research Center at Stephen F.
Austin State University. Nacogdoches, Texas.
Wood, Dennis and John Fels
1992 The Power of Maps. Guilford Press, New York.
Woodman, David Jr.
1974 Guide to Texas Emigrants. Reprinted Texian Press. Originally
published 1835, M. Hawes, Boston.
Zeiler, Michael
1999 Modeling our World: The ESRI Guide to Geodatabase Design.
ESRI Press, Redlands.
Zivley, V. N.
1916 Field Notes and Detail Maps of The Kings Highway from
Pendleton’s Ferry on the Sabine River, to Paso de Francia on the Rio
Grande. Texas State Library, Austin.

203

APPENDIX A

Water Sources

Spring at Lobanillo Cuts

Spring

Stream

Boregas Creek

Well depression

Brick well

204

APPENDIX B

Spanish Road

versus

205

Non-Spanish Road

APPENDIX C

Old Home Sites

206

APPENDIX D

Cemeteries

King’s Cemetery

McMahan Chapel Cemetery

Scurlock Cemetery

Gasby-New Zion Cemetery

Buckley Cemetery

Mason Cemetery

207

VITA

Jeff Williams graduated summa cum laude from Stephen F. Austin State
University in 1995 with a Bachelor of Science degree in Geography with a minor
in Anthropology. After college, Jeff worked for several years providing GIS and
remote sensing services for a nationwide environmental consulting firm. Leaving
the private sector, Jeff entered public service at the state level as a GIS Project
Manager for the Resource Protection Division of Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department. At the national level, Jeff served as Geospatial Project Manager for
creation of the National Biological Information Infrastructure housed at the
Houston Advanced Research Center.

After returning to Nacogdoches, Jeff

participated as a geospatial first responder during the Space Shuttle Columbia
search and recovery. Jeff is currently employed as the GIS Systems
Administrator for the Arthur Temple College of Forestry and Agriculture at
Stephen F. Austin State University where he maintains the GIS laboratories while
working with students applying geospatial technologies to ecological research.

Style manual: Society for American Archaeology’s Editorial Policy, Information
for Authors, and Style Guide (SAA 2003).
This manuscript was prepared and typed by J.M. Williams.
208

