Negative Findings Short Report

Archeological Survey of a Proposed El Paso International Airport
Runway Expansion, El Paso County, Texas
Texas Antiquities Code Permit #4608

Submitted to
Mark Denton, Debra Beene, Ed Baker
Texas Historical Commission
Monica Lombraña
El Paso International Airport

Submitted by
Samuel Cason
Principal Investigator, El Paso Office
Geo-Marine, Inc.
4725 Ripley Drive, Suite A
El Paso, Texas 79922

May 23, 2008

Negative Findings Short Report

Archeological Survey of a Proposed El Paso International Airport
Runway Expansion, El Paso County, Texas
Texas Antiquities Code Permit #4608

Submitted to
Mark Denton, Debra Beene, Ed Baker
Texas Historical Commission
Monica Lombraña
El Paso International Airport

Submitted by
Samuel Cason
Principal Investigator, El Paso Office
Geo-Marine, Inc.
4725 Ripley Drive, Suite A
El Paso, Texas 79922

May 23, 2008

ABSTRACT
On August 18, 2007 Geo-Marine, Inc. conducted an intensive cultural resources survey under
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4608. The El Paso International Airport proposes to construct a
1,100 ft. expansion of runway 8R-26L in El Paso County, Texas. Since the proposed
construction activity will disturb lands owned and administered by a city municipality, a cultural
resources review under the Texas Antiquities code is required.
The current survey was
conducted to fulfill state regulations and to inform the environmental assessment for the
undertaking.
The proposed runway expansion consists of a 1,100 ft. long extension (500 ft. wide), a 1,000 ft.
safety extension (500 ft. wide), a taxiway "L" expansion, and a holding pad. The total survey
acreage for this project is approximately 32 acres.
No cultural materials were discovered within the survey block. Geo-Marine recommends a
finding of no effect to historic properties for the proposed undertaking, and no further work is
required.

1

Archeological Survey of a Proposed El Paso International Airport
Runway Expansion, El Paso County, Texas
Project Background
The El Paso International Airport (EPIA) proposes to construct a 1,100 ft. expansion of runway
8R-26L in El Paso County, Texas (Figure 1 and 2). Since the proposed construction activity will
disturb lands owned and administered by a city municipality, a cultural resources review under
the Texas Antiquities code is required. The current survey was conducted to fulfill state
regulations and to inform the environmental assessment for the undertaking. Archaeological
fieldwork was conducted by Geo-Marine archaeologist Samuel Cason on August 18, 2007.
Description of the Undertaking
The proposed runway expansion consists of a 1,100 ft. long extension (500 ft. wide), a 1,000 ft.
safety extension (500 ft. wide), a taxiway "L" expansion, and a holding pad. The total survey
acreage for this project is approximately 32 acres (Figure 1).
Construction will require mechanical excavation and preparation of the ground surface, and the
activities have the potential to disturb archaeological deposits that may be within the
construction footprint.
Environment
The project area is situated in the southern Hueco Bolson on the east side of El Paso. The local
environment is characteristic of the Chihuahuan Desert Biotic Province. Vegetation consists of
mesquite, tarbush, soaptree yucca, prickly pear, and broom snakeweed. Sediments in the intact
areas consist of eolian sands with dune hummocks up to 1m in height. A pipeline is under
construction in the central portion of the project area. It runs north-south along an existing twotrack road. The trench had recently been backfilled, so there were no subsurface exposures.
Previous Investigations
Prior to the commencement of fieldwork, a search for previously recorded sites and
investigations was conducted using the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL)
online site atlas. Archaeological investigations in the vicinity of the project area consist of a
1985 survey by the University of Texas in El Paso for the EPIA, a linear pipeline survey
performed by TRC Solutions in 2006, and a yet un-accessioned survey that has not been fully
updated in the Texas state archaeological database. Approximately 30 previously recorded sites
are recorded within a one mile radius of the current project area; the closest site is located
approximately 625 meters from the survey block. The overall site assemblage is characterized
by small prehistoric campsites with thermal features and artifact scatters.

2

Project Area Description and Methodology
The survey block corresponds with the "no object zone" boundary on construction project map
(Figure 2). An estimated 85 percent of the survey block is occupied by a preexisting disturbance
- a raised runway corridor built up approximately 2 m above the intact ground surface (Figures 3,
4, and 5). This corridor extends more than a 1/2 mile beyond the paved runway. The
construction of the raised runway bed has undoubtedly disturbed any cultural deposits that might
have been under its footprint. Run-off from the raised runway and associated construction
activities (vehicle turnouts, borrow pits, gravel piles) have impacted the margins of the survey
block as well (Figure 6). Survey of this area consisted of a single transect along the perimeter of
the raised runway bed (corresponding with the edge of the survey block), examining the
boundary between the raised bed and intact sediments.
The remaining 15 percent of the survey block is a partially intact surface on the south side of the
project area, where the object-free zone overlaps intact sediments (Figure 7). This area was
surveyed with 15 m interval transects. The intact sediments consist of large dune hummocks
with an estimated 80 percent surface visibility.
Survey Results and Management Recommendations
No cultural materials were discovered within the survey block. Geo-Marine recommends a
finding of no effect to historic properties for the proposed undertaking, and no further work is
required.

3

El Paso International

scale 1:24000

Figure 1. Project location map on El Paso and Fort Bliss SE USGS 7.5’ topographic maps.

4

Figure 2. Technical illustration of the proposed undertaking.

5

Figure 3. Project overview from center of survey area facing east from end of runway safety
zone. Photo by Sam Cason, 7-18-07.

Figure 4. Project overview from center of survey area. View facing west. Large X marks end of
runway, pipeline construction in foreground. Photo by Sam Cason, 7-18-07.

6

Figure 5. View of built-up runway pad from northeast edge of project area facing south. This
image shows the amount of infill construction associated with the existing runway corridor.
Photo by Sam Cason, 7-18-07.

Figure 6. View facing north of disturbances along the north edge of the project area. Photo by
Sam Cason, 7-18-07.

7

Figure 7. View facing west along the southern edge of the project area. Photo by Sam Cason,
7-18-07.

8

