ARCHAEOLOGICAL FIELD SURVEY
FOR THE PROPOSED I-30 ROCKWALL CELLULAR TOWER,
ROCKWALL, ROCKWALL COUNTY, TEXAS

by
Melissa M. Green

Principal Investigator
Melissa M. Green

for
Aarcher, Inc.
200 Rufe Snow North, Suite 108
Keller, Texas 76248

TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NUMBER 5533

SHORT REPORT NUMBER 308

Geo-Marine, Inc.
2201 K Avenue, Suite A2
Plano, Texas 75074

June 2010

ABSTRACT

Geo-Marine, Inc., under contract with Aarcher, Inc., conducted an archaeological survey of a
proposed cellular tower and compound location at 730 E. IH 30 in Rockwall, Rockwall County,
Texas. The project consists of the construction of a 190-ft monopole tower with a nearly square
compound at the base measuring about 527.41 sq ft (0.01-acre) in the northwest corner of a cityowned water tower compound. A 100-ft long, 12-ft wide concrete access easement will be built
from the alley to the compound. Survey consisted of surface inspection and a shovel test.
Disturbances observed within and surrounding the proposed cellular tower compound location
indicate a low potential for intact archaeological materials, and no artifacts or archaeological
features were identified in or near the project area.
As this is a permitted project, all records and photographs generated will be permanently housed
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.

ii

INTRODUCTION
The following report presents the results of an archaeological investigation of a small parcel of
land that has been leased for the construction of a cellular tower and compound on a city-owned
parcel in Rockwall, Rockwall County, Texas (Geo-Marine, Inc., project number 30509.00.52).
Under a new Programmatic Agreement between the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, as part of the Section 106 review process for
new cell tower sites, the environmental firm Aarcher, Inc., must submit FCC Form 620 to the
State Historic Preservation Officer. Among the required attachments to the form are either 1) an
archaeological field survey report; or 2) an Exception Letter. Geo-Marine, Inc. (GMI), was
contracted by Aarcher, Inc., to perform an archaeological survey of the land prior to construction
in order to satisfy the requirements of this Programmatic Agreement. As the City of Rockwall is a
subentity of the State of Texas, a Texas Antiquities Code permit (number 5533) was obtained for
the project.
The proposed cell location, identified as the I-30 Rockwall location, is located in the City of
Rockwall on city property east of Lake Ray Hubbard and along the west access road of IH 30. It
is located at the end of an alley between White Hills Drive to the east and Vigor Way to the west
behind a Grandy’s Restaurant (Figures 1 and 2). It is located in an upland, completely urban
setting.
The project involves the installation of a 190-foot (ft) tall monopole tower inside a nearly square
(527.41 sq ft or 0.01 ac) compound. Ground disturbance for construction of such facilities
typically involves excavation up to 18 inches (in) for placement of an equipment shed, removal of
any trees, and installation of fence posts; however, the use of heavy equipment can add up to 30 ft
of disturbance around the 3,008-sq ft (0.069-acre) tower compound. The cell tower facility will
be accessible by a 12 ft wide concrete easement coming in from the alley along the north side of
the water tower inside the fenced water tower parcel.
Archaeological investigations focused on the area that will be directly disturbed by the tower
project. GMI Senior Archeologist Melissa Green conducted the fieldwork on February 4, 2010,
and also served as Principal Investigator for the project. The following report documents the
methodology and findings of the survey. All records generated from this project will be
permanently housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.
PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY
The project area is located in central Rockwall County in the Blackland Prairie physiographic
zone. Low rolling plains covered with black, calcareous clay soils dissected by numerous streams
characterize the Blackland Prairie. These soils support predominantly grasses, primarily little
bluestem and Indiangrass; shrubs and trees are present along stream bottoms and in floodplains
(Diamond et al. 1987).
Rockwall County is on the divide between the Trinity and Sabine rivers, with the eastern portion
of the county draining into the Sabine and the western portion draining into the Trinity; in this
case the East Fork of the Trinity. The general upland plain extends as a broad, undulating
expanse (Pringle 1977:53).
1

The East Fork of the Trinity River merges with the main Trinity River channel roughly 28 miles
south the project area (Bureau of Economic Geology 1987). Major creeks (e.g., Squabble,
Buffalo) and their tributaries in the vicinity of the project area currently empty into Lake Ray
Hubbard which is dammed just beyond the Rockwall/Kaufman county line approximately 6 miles
to the south.

GEOLOGY AND SOILS
The underlying geology for the project area consists of the Upper Cretaceous Marlbrook Marl
(Bureau of Economic Geology 1972). The soil association mapped for this area is Houston BlackHeiden, which are moderately and well drained, calcareous soils that are clayey throughout and
are located on prairies. The individual soil at this location is Houston Black clay, 1 to 3 percent
slopes. This soil is gently sloping on broad watershed divides, and its profile consists of 35.5 cm
(14 inches) of very dark gray, calcareous clay overlying about 117 cm (46 inches) of dark gray
calcareous clay. This is underlain by about 30 cm (12 inches) of dark gray calcareous clay
containing yellowish brown mottles that ends in 218 cm (86 inches) of light brownish gray, gray,
and yellowish brown shaly clay (Pringle 1977: 14-15).

CULTURAL HISTORY
Although the chronological framework for the upper Trinity River basin is not well developed,
the available data allow the delineation of a generalized chronology (Table 1). Investigations at
Joe Pool Lake (Peter and McGregor 1988) have provided evidence for a refinement of the
chronology for the Late Prehistoric period, but the overall regional applicability of the phases
recognized at Joe Pool Lake remains to be demonstrated. Prikryl (1990) has presented a
chronological sequence of six periods. Unfortunately, his sequence relies almost totally on
diagnostic artifacts from surface contexts and comparisons to dated contexts distant from the
upper Trinity River basin. The generalized chronology presented here reflects the present state of
knowledge as interpreted from the Joe Pool Lake investigations. Details of these periods are
found elsewhere and will not be discussed here.

Table 1
Prehistoric Chronological Framework for the Upper Trinity River Basin
(after Peter and McGregor 1988)

Cultural Stage

Time Period

Paleo-Indian

ca. 11,000–6000 B.C.

Archaic

6000 B.C.–A.D. 700

Late Prehistoric

A.D.

700–1600

Protohistoric

A.D.

1600–1800

4

METHODS
Prior to field investigation, documents were examined to better estimate the potential for
archaeological sites within the project area. The Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (restricted
access) was consulted to determine if any known archaeological projects had been undertaken
within one mile of the present project area and whether any previously recorded archaeological
sites exist within this area. There have been three archaeological projects conducted, but no sites
recorded, within a mile of this location. Two of the surveys were conducted in 1986 by the State
Department of Highway and Public Transportation and are presumably associated with IH-30.
The current cell tower location area was part of these surveys. A portion of a 1963 linear survey
conducted by the National Parks Service along the edge of Lake Ray Hubbard, north and west of
this area was also noted.
Examination of several versions of the Rockwall, Texas, 7.5 minute topographic quadrangle
(1969, 1963 photorevised in 1968 and photoinspected in 1973) and aerial photographs (2001,
2004, and 2009) indicates that the region in which the proposed cell tower is located was mostly
rural until about a decade or so when it gradually become more urbanized.
Fieldwork for the present project consisted of an archaeological survey of the cellular tower site.
Particular attention was given to surface exposures and landforms, as well as any recent land
alterations. One shovel test was excavated within the area of proposed impact. All soil was
screened through ¼-in hardware mesh, and the results were documented on a standardized form.
Detailed notes and photographs were taken of the area, including any disturbances, and all
cultural deposits or remains.

RESULTS
The parcel investigated is city-owned and houses one of the city’s water towers. Prior to erecting
the water tower, the parcel was leveled and built-up with fill dirt and is slightly higher in
elevation t on three sides. The parcel is fenced in tall chain-link with three strands of barbed wire
at the top. A single gate is found at the front of the parcel where a driveway comes off of the
alley (Figure 3). A new, separate gate is proposed just to the north of the existing gate and east of
the electrical compound in the northeast corner of the tower parcel. The proposed gate will open
onto a concrete drive (staked location was observed) that will circle to the north of the tower and
to the proposed cell compound location (also staked) at the northwest corner of the parcel (Figure
4). The parcel is covered in mowed grasses and a scattered line of red-tipped photinias are found
inside the fence around the parcel (Figure 5). A single photinia will be removed at the proposed
gate location.
To ensure that the area of potential effect would be adequately investigated, the tower parcel was
walked in 5-m transects and the ground surface was visually examined. A geotechnical core
sample had been recently excavated in the location of the staked tower and compound (Figure 6).
There was no evidence of archaeological materials observed. A shallow shovel test (0-25 cm)
was excavated in the center of the compound location, and the soil profile consisted of a very thin
humus layer of dark gray (10YR 4/1) clay over grayish brown (2.5YR 5/2) and very pale brown
(10YR 8/3) mottled clay (Figure 7). The soil colors are represented in the soil description for this
area, but is jumbled rather than layered. No artifacts were identified in the shovel test fill.

5

Figure 3. Entry to water tower parcel; looking west northwest. Note slight rise of parcel.

Figure 4. Staked access to the proposed cell location in northwest corner; looking west.

6

Figure 5. General overview of proposed cell location; looking west.

Figure 6. Evidence of geotechnical core sampling; looking northwest.

7

Figure 7. Shovel test excavated in the center of the proposed cell tower compound.

RECOMMENDATIONS
No cultural materials were observed during surface and subsurface investigations of the proposed
I-30 Rockwall cell tower compound impact area. The leveling and filling of the parcel for the
water tower construction has created an artificial surface pad that would not contain
archaeological remains or deposits. In addition, the upland setting is not conducive to prehistoric
settlement. These observations indicate a low to no potential for archaeological materials. No
historic properties were identified within the area of potential effects in this proposed alternative
cell tower compound location. Therefore, the project may proceed without further investigation.

8

REFERENCES CITED

Bureau of Economic Geology
1972 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Dallas Sheet. [revised 1988] Bureau of Economic Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Diamond, D. D., D. H. Riskind, and S. L. Orzell
1987 A Framework for Plant Communities Classification and Conservation in Texas.
Texas Journal of Science 39(3):203–221.
Peter, D. E., and D. E. McGregor (editors)
1988 Late Holocene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek Drainage. Joe Pool Lake
Archaeology Project, vol. I. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Prikryl, D.
1990 Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and Chronologies
along the Trinity River, North-Central Texas. Report 37. Office of the State
Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Pringle, F. B.
1977 Soil Survey of Kaufman and Rockwall Counties, Texas. U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with Texas Agricultural
Experimental Station.

9

