ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
PHASE I JOHNSON CREEK
CONSERVATION PLAN,
ARLINGTON, TEXAS
by
Kristen J. Bastis

Principal Investigator
Melissa M. Green

for
Applied Ecological Services, Inc.
Brodhead, Wisconsin

TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 4295

MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS OF INVESTIGATIONS
NUMBER 368

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PHASE I
JOHNSON CREEK CONSERVATION PLAN,
ARLINGTON, TEXAS

by
Kristen J. Bastis

Principal Investigator
Melissa M. Green

for
Applied Ecological Services, Inc.
17921 Smith Road
P.O. Box 256
Brodhead, Wisconsin 53520

on behalf of
Arlington Parks and Recreation
P.O. Box 231
Arlington, Texas 76004

TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 4295

MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS OF INVESTIGATIONS
NUMBER 368

Geo-Marine, Inc.
2201 K Avenue, Suite A2
Plano, Texas 75074

January 2007

ABSTRACT

As part of the Johnson Creek Conservation Plan, the City of Arlington, Texas has proposed bank
restoration and park enhancements along Johnson Creek and two small tributaries of Johnson
Creek in Arlington. The current project area, Phase I of the Conservation Plan, is the full length
of Johnson Creek between Nolan Ryan Expressway and Sanford Street. Cultural resources
investigations were undertaken to determine the presence/absence of archeological resources and
to evaluate identified resources for their eligibility for inclusion on the National Register of
Historic Places, as per section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended,
or as a designated State Archeological Landmark under the Antiquities Code of Texas. Fieldwork
for the pedestrian survey and geoarcheological studies was undertaken on October 26, 27 and
November 11, 2006, by Geo-Marine, Inc.
Large portions of the proposed project area were heavily disturbed by previous construction,
dumping, flooding, erosion and erosion control measures. A total of six shovel tests was
excavated, none of which contained cultural materials. The creek banks were carefully examined
and though a buried A horizon was identified in the flood plain, it does not appear to extend a
significant distance from the creek banks, and is not likely to contain archeological remains. As a
result of the current investigation, it is recommended that the proposed project would have no
effect on historic properties. Documents from this project will be permanently housed at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT....................................................................................................................................iii
1. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... 1
2. GEOLOGY/SOILS ..................................................................................................................... 7
3. CULTURAL BACKGROUND .................................................................................................. 9
Previous Studies..................................................................................................................... 10
4. METHODS ............................................................................................................................... 11
5. RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .............................................................................. 15
Geoarcheological Investigations ............................................................................................ 18
Recommendations.................................................................................................................. 22
REFERENCES CITED.................................................................................................................. 27

v

LIST OF FIGURES

1. Map of project area, Phase I of the Johnson Creek Conservation Plan..................................... 2
2. Aerial photograph showing the proposed Phase I Johnson Creek project area and
the Cultural Resource and Geoarcheological Investigations..................................................... 3
3. Photograph of the man-made lake in survey area 1................................................................. 12
4. Photograph of the recent alterations to the tributary of Johnson Creek between
survey areas 2 and 3 ................................................................................................................ 12
5. Photograph of the recent erosion control measures to the tributary of Johnson Creek
between survey areas 2 and 3 .................................................................................................. 13
6. Photograph of the washed out path in survey area 2 ............................................................... 16
7. Photograph of the two-track, near the trailer park, in survey area 2 ....................................... 16
8. Photograph of the tributary in survey area 3, to the west of Johnson Creek ........................... 17
9. Photograph of a water line marker indicating sub surface disturbance in survey area 2......... 19
10. Photograph of a pipe crossing Johnson Creek, indicating disturbance of survey area 2......... 19
11. Photograph of erosion control measure................................................................................... 20
12. Photograph of discharge and erosion control measure on Johnson Creek in survey area 2 .... 20
13. Photograph documenting dumping in survey area 2 ............................................................... 21
14. Photograph of Exposure 1 of the geoarcheological investigation ........................................... 22
15. Photograph of Exposure 2 of the geoarcheological investigation ........................................... 23
16. Johnson Creek Geoarcheological Exposures 1 and 2.............................................................. 24
17. Photograph of Pleistocene sediments on the bank of Johnson Creek observed during
the geoarcheological investigation .......................................................................................... 25

vii

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

As part of the Johnson Creek Conservation Plan, the City of Arlington, Texas, has proposed bank
restoration and park enhancements along Johnson Creek and two small tributaries of Johnson
Creek in Arlington. The current project area, Phase I of the Conservation Plan, is the full length
of Johnson Creek between Nolan Ryan Expressway and Sanford Street. Under contract to
Applied Ecological Services, Inc., and the City of Arlington, Geo-Marine, Inc. (GMI; project
#30557.00.01), conducted cultural resources investigations to determine the presence/absence of
archeological resources and to evaluate identified resources for their eligibility for inclusion on
the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), as per section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, or as a designated State Archeological Landmark under
the Antiquities Code of Texas. This work was conducted under Antiquities Permit number 4295.
The pedestrian survey fieldwork was undertaken on October 26 and 27, 2006, by Kristen Bastis
and James Gillentine (archeologists) of GMI. Geoarcheological studies were undertaken on
November 11, 2006, by Kristen Bastis and David Shanabrook (geoarcheologist) of GMI. Melissa
Green, also of GMI, served as Principal Investigator for the project.
Phase I of the proposed Johnson Creek Conservation Plan will extend between Nolan Ryan
Expressway and Sanford Street (Figures 1 and 2) and consists of channel stabilization and
restoration, bank regrading, bottomland riparian plantings, construction of bike trails, boardwalks,
and other associated trail structures, establishing a sedimentation pond, and restoring the Rangers
pond. The project area varies between 300 and 800 ft in width approximately following the
contours of Johnson Creek and the two tributaries.
Most of the project area is contained within the flood plain of Johnson Creek, while the remainder
occupies upland deposits. Large portions of the project area were heavily disturbed by previous
construction of the lake and spillway between Nolan Ryan and Randol Mill Road and by a
landscaped park and bike path between Randol Mill Road and Sanford Street. The construction
of water, sewer, and utility lines also disturbed the area. Flood deposits and erosion were also
noted along the banks of Johnson Creek.

1

2

Figure 1. Map of project area, Phase I of the Johnson Creek Conservation Plan.

g:\\30557.00.01\GIS\Fig_1.mxd

Sanford Road

Gated
community

Randol Mill Road

( 5
!

( 2
!

( 4
!

( 3
!

( 6
!

( 1
!

250

100

500

200

1,000
Feet

400
Meters

¯

Source: USGS digital orthophoto quarter quadrangles,
Arlington NW, 1995 and Euless SW, 1995.

0

0

Phase 1a boundary (approximate)
Manhattan construction area
Fence seperating Cowboys site from Johnson Creek
Construction
!
( Sterile shovel test

The following report will summarize the environmental and cultural background, present methods
utilized, and summarize the results of the work conducted. All notes, forms, and photographs
produced as a result of this project will be permanently housed at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

5

CHAPTER 2
GEOLOGY/SOILS

The proposed project area along Johnson Creek lies at the joint of two distinct Cretaceous-age
formations. The Woodbine Formation lies on the west side of Johnson Creek and the Eagle Ford
Formation lies to the east (Bureau of Economic Geology 1972). The Woodbine Formation varies
between 175-250 ft thick. The upper part of the Woodbine is largely composed of reddish brown,
fine-grained, well-sorted sandstone. Large, discoidal concretions are sometimes found near the
top. Occasionally, areas of gray shale are encountered, as are marine megafossils and oyster
reefs. The Eagle Ford Formation varies between 200-300 ft in thickness. The upper part of the
Eagle Ford Formation is composed of sandstone and sandy limestone and the middle part is platy
medium to dark gray sandstone and sandy limestone. Bentonitic hard limestone bed marks the
base of the lower part. A Pleistocene fluvatile deposit covers the Cretaceous formations at the
confluence of Johnson Creek and the Trinity River. The Pleistocene fluvatile deposit seems to
continue up Johnson Creek farther than is noted on the Dallas Sheet of the Geologic Atlas of
Texas (Bureau of Economic Geology 1972). Ecologically, the Woodbine and Eagle Ford
Formations are expressed by the Eastern Crosstimbers, a narrow band of woodlands sandwiched
between the Blackland Prairie to the east and the Grand Prairie to the west (Peter and McGregor
1988:10).
Four soil map units are shown along the proposed Phase I Johnson Creek project by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (SCS): Gasil-Urban land complex, 1 to 8
percent slopes; Pulexas-Urban land complex, occasionally flooded; Crosstell-Urban land, and
Urban land (Ressel 1981: Map 39). Pulexas-Urban land occupies the largest portion of the rightof-way; it is found in narrow bands on either side of Johnson Creek. Gasil-Urban land complex,
1 to 8 percent slopes, also occupies a large portion of the right-of-way. It is found in a band on the
west side of Johnson Creek adjacent to the Pulexas-Urban land. Crostell-Urban land complex is
only found on the east side of Johnson Creek adjacent to the band of Pulexas-Urban land. Urban
Land is found only at the north end of the project area where construction of the old Arlington
and new Ameriquest Stadiums has significantly altered the soil.
Pulexas-Urban land complex, occasionally flooded, is a deep and nearly level soil found in
narrow flood plains of streams that drain sandy and loamy areas. These soils flood irregularly at
4 to 20 year intervals. The soil complex is composed of 50 to 60 percent Pulexas soil and 15 to
20 percent Urban land. About 25 percent of the map unit may consist of very similar Whitesboro
7

soils. In addition, anywhere from a few inches to two feet of loamy fill may be present in some
areas. To a depth of 163 cm (64 in), Pulexas soils consist of light yellowish brown and yellowish
brown fine sandy loam with thin strata of loam, fine sandy loam, or clay loam. Once again,
Urban lands are too heavily altered to permit identification of the underlying soil (Ressel
1981:45).
Gasil-Urban land complex, 1 to 8 percent slopes, is a deep and gently sloping soil that forms on
uplands. This map unit is composed of 40 to 70 percent Gasil soil and 15 to 50 percent Urban
land, while as much as 20 percent of the map unit may contain Crosstell, Konsil, Rader, or Stilsid
soils. The typical soil profile for the Gasil soils begins with a fine sandy loam A horizon about
25 cm (10 in) thick that is light yellowish brown in the upper part and yellowish brown in the
lower part. The underlying subsoil consists of brownish sandy clay loam from 25 to 191 cm (1075 in) below surface. The Urban lands are areas too heavily altered by construction to identify
the original soils (Ressel 1981:31-32).
Crosstell-Urban land, 1 to 6 percent slopes, is a deep, gently sloping to sloping loamy soil on
convex ridges and side slopes of ridges. This map unit is composed of 50 to 65 percent Crosstell
and 15 to 40 percent Urban land and less than 25 percent closely similar soils. The typical soil
profile for the Crosstell soils begins with a surface layer 10 cm (4 in) thick, of neutral brown fine
sandy loam. The subsoil ranges from 10-104 cm in depth and is composed of three parts; the
upper part from 10 to 45 cm (4 to 18 in) is yellowish red clay. The middle part from 45 to 71 cm
(18 to 28 in) is yellowish red clay with yellow mottles and the lower part from 71-104 cm (2841 in) is brownish yellow clay with light gray mottles. Below that, to a depth of 152 cm (60 in) is
light gray stratified shale. Urban lands are too heavily altered to permit identification of the
underlying soil (Ressel 1981:45).
Urban land consists of areas that have been heavily impacted by construction. Between 85 and
100 percent of the map unit is covered by buildings, roads, parking lots, etc. (Ressel 1981). The
area defined as Urban land was impacted by the old Arlington Stadium and the construction of
the current Ameriquest Stadium appears to have affected an even larger area.

8

CHAPTER 3
CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The Paleo-Indian occupation of the upper Trinity River basin is known primarily through
diagnostic projectile points from surface collections or stratigraphically mixed contexts.
Excavation of the Aubrey site, a well-preserved Clovis-period site in Denton County, has
indicated that subsistence efforts did not focus on big game animals alone; rather, the entire range
of prairie and forest species was used (Ferring 1989). Although considerable debate has recently
occurred concerning the pre-Clovis occupation of the New World, the usually accepted timeframe
of 10,000-12,000 years ago for Clovis-period peoples is probably a reasonable estimate for the
first human occupation of Northcentral Texas.
The following Archaic period (6000 B.C. to A.D. 700) is one of great stability. A larger variety
of diagnostic artifacts, such as projectile points, is thought to indicate the development of
regionally based social groups, while an increasingly complex tool kit probably represents a more
intensive utilization of local resources. Sites in upland or terrace contexts are often mixed with
later materials, while single component sites are more likely to be found in alluvial deposits.
The Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 700 to 1600) in Northcentral Texas is marked by the
introduction of the arrow point and ceramics into the region. Although most Late Prehistoric sites
in this area appear to be seasonally reoccupied by highly mobile hunter-gatherers, sites such as
Cobb-Pool (Peter and McGregor 1988) and Harbor Pointe (Cliff et al. 1986) indicate that more
sedentary peoples with an economy based on horticulture were present in the region.
The Protohistoric period (A.D. 1600 to 1800) represents the initial entry of European peoples into
the region. Documented contacts between Europeans and the inhabitants of Northcentral Texas
occurred only late in the period; consequently, information on site locations and ethnohistoric
details are almost nonexistent. The indirect effects of European contact, such as trade goods and
disease, however, would have had a significant impact upon the Native American populations.
The earliest Anglo-American settlement in the immediate area did not occur until the 1840s.
Bird’s Fort, the earliest settlement in Tarrant County, was established after the Battle of Village
Creek in May 1841 and was apparently abandoned in 1842 (Cutrer 2006). Early settlements in
the vicinity of present-day Arlington include Bird’s Fort, Watson, and Johnson Station. The City
of Arlington was founded in 1876 as a market town along the Texas and Pacific Railroad. It
9

remained a small, rural community until after World War II, when industrial developments such
as the General Motors plant (1951) and Great Southwest Industrial District (1956) were built.
During this period, the population of Arlington grew ten-fold, from 4,240 before World War II to
44,775 in 1961 (Shannon 2006). The population had grown to 332,969 by 2000 (City of
Arlington 2006).

PREVIOUS STUDIES
Two surveys were conducted in the immediate vicinity of Johnson Creek as part of the
Thoroughfare Transportation Plan. The Baird Farm Road Extension and Rodgers Road surveys
were conducted by Geo-Marine, Inc., in February of 2006. Both of these projects included the
examination of a section of the bank of Johnson Creek which falls within the current project area,
labeled Exposure 1 (see Figure 2).
As part of the Thoroughfare Transportation Plan, the City of Arlington will extend the existing
Baird Farm Road south from IH-30 to Chapel Road. The proposed road right-of-way will cross
both Johnson Creek and several tributaries; consequently a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 404
permit was required for the project. A cultural resources investigation was conducted as part of
the permitting process.
Large portions of the right-of-way were disturbed by previous construction, large-scale
excavations, and dumping. In all, nine shovel tests were excavated during the Baird Farm Road
project, with historic materials being recovered in two shovel tests. These shovel tests were in
proximity to Chapel and Sanford roads. This fact, together with the high degree of disturbance
noted in the area, the limited range of artifacts recovered, and lack of any structures on the older
maps of Tarrant County consulted for the project, led to the conclusion that these artifacts were
not related to an historic occupation of the area. The only section of the proposed right-of-way to
cross alluvial deposits was near Randol Mill Road. Although the Johnson Creek channel was
cemented and not available for examination, a nearby exposure along a tributary channel
indicated that Pleistocene-age deposits are present at the surface in this area. As a result of these
investigations, it was recommended that no significant cultural deposits will be impacted by the
proposed construction.
As part of the Thoroughfare Transportation Plan, the City of Arlington also plans to extend
Rogers Road between Collins Street/FM 157 and the Nolan Ryan Expressway. Since the
proposed road will cross Johnson Creek, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 404 permit was
required for the project. The cultural resources investigations were undertaken as part of the
permitting process.
Large portions of the proposed right-of-way were heavily disturbed by previous construction and
extensive dumping. A total of six shovel tests was excavated during the project, three of which
contained historic materials. These artifacts consisted of concrete and asphalt fragments, as well
as wire, and are associated with an area where extensive fill deposits and dumping were noted.
The artifacts observed in these shovel tests are thought to be related to this fill episode. As a
result of the investigation, it was recommended that no significant cultural deposits will be
impacted by the proposed construction.

10

CHAPTER 4
METHODS

The Texas Site Atlas (nueces.thc.state.tx.us) was consulted prior to beginning field work. No
previously recorded sites are mapped within a 1-mile radius of the project area. The project area
was divided into three survey areas (see Figure 2). Survey area 1 is located north of Randol Mill
Road. The area surrounding the current lake has been extensively landscaped and none of the
original topography remains (Figure 3). Survey area 2 is located between Randol Mill Road and
Sanford Street and includes a tributary to the east of Johnson Creek. Survey area 3 is located on a
tributary to the west of Johnson Creek. The tributary in survey area 3 is separated from Johnson
Creek by a recently constructed drainage and erosion control measure (Figures 4 and 5).
All three areas were surveyed using pedestrian survey and judgmental shovel testing. The survey
began by documenting survey area 1, the landscaped area around the lake at the north end of the
project area, with digital photographs. Then areas 2 and 3 were surveyed using pedestrian survey
and shovel testing beginning at Randol Mill Road, following the east bank to the confluence of
the eastern tributary, and continuing along the north bank of the tributary to Stadium Road. The
survey continued along the east bank of Johnson Creek, south of the eastern tributary from the
confluence to Sanford Street. Then the survey was continued on the west bank of Johnson Creek
across the confluence of the western tributary north to Randol Mill Road. Area 3 was surveyed
starting at the west end of the tributary following the south bank to the recently constructed
drainage control measure.
Judgmental shovel tests were excavated in areas deemed likely to contain archeological deposits.
A total of six shovel tests was placed in the project area; all in survey area 2 (see Figure 2). Each
shovel test measured 30-x-30 cm in size and was excavated in approximately 20 cm levels to
subsoil. The results of the shovel tests were recorded on standardized forms. Digital photographs
were taken to illustrate the conditions of the project area. No cultural material was recovered.
All notes, forms and photographs will be permanently housed at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

11

Figure

3.

Photograph of the man-made lake in survey area 1

Figure 3. Photograph of the man-made lake in survey area 1.

figure

4.
Photograph of the recent alterations to the tributary of Johnson Creek between survey
areas 2 and 3

Figure 4. Photograph of the recent alterations to the tributary of Johnson Creek between survey areas 2 and 3.

12

Figure

5.
Photograph of the recent erosion control measures to the tributary of Johnson Creek
between survey areas 2 and 3

Figure 5. Photograph of the recent erosion control measures to the tributary of Johnson Creek between survey areas 2
and 3.

13

CHAPTER 5
RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The project area was divided into three survey areas; survey area 1 is located at the north end of
the project area and consists of the section around the man-made lake north of Randol Mill Road.
Survey area 2 is located between Randol Mill Road and Sanford Street and includes a tributary to
the east of Johnson Creek. Survey area 3 is located on a tributary to the west of Johnson Creek.
The tributary in survey area 3 is separated from Johnson Creek by a recently constructed drainage
and erosion control measure.
Starting at the north end, with survey area 1, the project area begins at Nolan Ryan Expressway
west of Ameriquest Stadium trending southwest, crossing Richard Green Linear Park, containing
a man-made lake and a significantly altered landscape. Survey area 1 was documented with
digital photographs but was not shovel tested due to previous impacts. Comparing the 2001 aerial
photos (see Figure 2) with those presented in the Soil Survey of Tarrant County, Texas (Ressel
1981) shows that extensive changes were made to the channels between Nolan Ryan Expressway
and Randol Mill Road. A large, man-made lake to the west of Ameriquest Stadium and the
stadium itself were not present in 1981. The channel between the lake and under Randol Mill
Road appears to have been straightened. The project area then crosses Randol Mill Road heading
south along Johnson Creek to the west of Ameriquest Stadium parking lots and to the east of the
new Dallas Cowboys stadium property to Sanford Street.
The creek banks in survey area 2 are of a relatively uniform, 6-8 foot depth. Johnson Creek has
well developed meanders between Randol Mill Road and Sanford Street. Approximately half
way between Randol Mill Road and Sanford Street a section of the existing path has washed
away (Figure 6). A sewer outflow points upstream, and the turbulent water created by storm
water flowing downstream met by a counter flow caused the bank to erode and the path to
collapse. Just north of the washed out section of path, the soil profile is truncated and the bank
profile changes to Pleistocene sediments. This is discussed further in the results of the
geoarcheological investigations. Survey area 2 contains a paved path with landscaped and
manicured lawn border surrounded by lightly to moderately wooded areas. The paved path is
fairly level and loosely follows the contours of the creek bank and extends along a tributary east
of Johnson Creek, to the north of a trailer park, to Stadium Drive. A cleared two-track leading
from Sanford Street to Johnson Creek west of the trailer park is included in survey area 2 (Figure
7). It appears that some erosion control measures were made at this point on the east side of the
15

figure

6.

Photograph of the washed out path in survey area 2

Figure 6. Photograph of the washed out path in survey area 2.

figure

7.

Photograph of the two-track, near the trailer park, in survey area 2

Figure 7. Photograph of the two-track, near the trailer park, in survey area 2.

16

creek where a run off channel was created near the trailer park. Survey area 2 was shovel tested
using judgmental placement of shovel tests. A total of six shovel tests was excavated in areas
deemed likely to contain archeological deposits; however, no cultural material was observed.
Survey area 3 surrounds part of a tributary on the west side of Johnson Creek between a gated
community and the Dallas Cowboys property. Survey area 3 was not shovel tested due to the
shallow bedrock, and the previous impacts of utility lines, erosion and erosion control measures.
The tributary on the east side of Johnson Creek, in survey area 2, has a similar depth to that of
Johnson Creek; however, the tributary on the west side of Johnson Creek, survey area 3, is
shallow with bedrock at a depth of 2 to 3 feet (Figure 8). The composition of the underlying
geologic formations accounts for the difference in depth of the tributaries. On the west side of the
creek the Woodbine Formation is more resistant to erosion than the Eagle Ford Formation on the
east side of the creek; as a result the west tributary is shallow and the east one is deeper.

figure

8.

Photograph of the tributary in survey area 3, to the west of Johnson Creek

Figure 8. Photograph of the tributary in survey area 3, to the west of Johnson Creek.

The profiles of shovel tests number 1 and 3 are similar 10 YR 3/2 very dark grayish brown (10YR
3/2) sandy loam mixed soils with overburden (0-40 cmbs). Shovel tests 4, 5, and 6 are very dark
grayish brown (10 YR 3/2) loamy clay with mottles of black clay mixed with gravel (0-40 cmbs).
Shovel test 2 has a different soil profile due to its location in the bottom of the creek valley. The
profile consists of 7.5 YR strong brown medium grained sandy loam alluvial sediment (080 cmbs). No cultural material was observed and all shovel tests appear to be in disturbed or, in
the case of shovel test 2, recent soils. Recent disturbance of the project area includes;
construction of sewer and water lines, erosion control measure, culverts, run off channels, flood
17

deposits, and dumping (Figures 9-13). Evidence of dumping is present throughout the project
area and includes concrete and asphalt fragments, large pieces of metal, plastic, carpeting, and
domestic items including clothing and bedding. The modern trash is most likely the result of
dumping but some of it may also be flood debris.

GEOARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The general geology of the Johnson Creek survey area consists of a thin veneer of Quaternary
alluvium resting unconformably on Late Cretaceous-age bedrock. The Quaternary deposits
consist of clay, silt, sand, and a minor amount of gravel ranging in thickness from roughly 1
meter to perhaps 5 or 6 meters in thickness. The two Late Cretaceous units that are present are
the Woodbine Formation to the west and the Eagle Ford Shale to the east. The Woodbine
Formation in this area is fine grained, iron rich sandstone that tends to be somewhat resistant to
erosion. It weathers a dark orange color, tends to form low ridges with relatively steep sides, and
acts as a source of sand and iron-rich minerals for the Quaternary sediments. This unit dips
gently to the south and east into the East Texas Embayment and is conformably overlain by the
dark gray, limey shales of the Eagle Ford Formation. The contact between the Woodbine and the
Eagle Ford trends north-northeast and Johnson Creek tends to follow this boundary through much
of the study area (Bureau of Economic Geology 1972). The Eagle Ford is probably the source of
the clay and silt in the Quaternary sediments as well as much of the calcareous deposits they
contain.
The Quaternary sediments observed in the study area can be grouped into two distinct units. The
first group consists of orange and red colored Pleistocene-age terrace deposits located on both
sides of the creek just west of Ameriquest stadium and extending downstream to the north and
east. These deposits were not observed in detail but are probably part of the large Pleistocene
terrace system located along the West Fork of the Trinity River and its major tributaries. The
other group of deposits is Holocene in age and consists of alluvially deposited clay, silt, sand, and
gravel that are tan, brown, and gray in color. Both of these units appear to be confined to the
valley of Johnson Creek or its tributaries and both rest unconformably on the Cretaceous bedrock.
It is likely that the Holocene units rest unconformably on the Pleistocene deposits although a
clear contact was not observed.
As noted before, Johnson Creek tends to follow the contact between the Woodbine and Eagle
Ford Formations through much of the study area before turning sharply to the east roughly in the
area where the Pleistocene terrace deposits first appear as the creek approaches the flood plain of
the West Fork of the Trinity. The Johnson Creek flood plain appears to be very narrow in much
of the study area; approximately a few hundred meters wide or less. The creek’s channel is
deeply entrenched, roughly 4 to 6 meters, and there are many indications that there is a wide
variation between average and peak water flow. The channel itself is highly sinuous with well
developed cut banks and point bars. There is extensive evidence of attempts to prevent further
channel movement in the form of chunks of concrete, pieces of asphalt, and similar material. In
the area of Ameriquest Stadium, the flow of the creek has also been altered by flow from storm
sewers and other surface drainage systems. These have caused considerable alteration of the
creek’s more natural flow regime resulting in extreme rates of erosion and deposition, particularly
in the northern portion of the study area near Ameriquest Stadium. In the southern portion, the
higher flow rates may have increased the level of creek entrenchment and increased the level of
exposure along the cut banks.
18

figure

9.

Photograph of a water line marker indicating sub surface disturbance in survey area 2

Figure 9. Photograph of a water line marker indicating sub surface disturbance in survey area 2.

figure

10.

Photograph of a pipe crossing Johnson Creek, indicating disturbance of survey area 2

Figure 10. Photograph of a pipe crossing Johnson Creek, indicating disturbance of survey area 2.

19

figure

11.

Photograph of erosion control measure

Figure 11. Photograph of erosion control measure.

figure

12.

Photograph of discharge and erosion control measure on Johnson Creek in survey area 2

Figure 12. Photograph of discharge and erosion control measure on Johnson Creek in survey area 2.

20

figure

13.

Photograph documenting dumping in survey area 2

Figure 13. Photograph documenting dumping in survey area 2.

Two sections of the bank were exposed, examined and recorded in survey area 2; one on the west
bank, west of the trailer park and the other southwest of Ameriquest Stadium (Figures 14–16; see
Figure 2). Detailed descriptions are found in Appendix A. Both of the observed bank profiles or
exposures consist of over 4 m of alluvial deposits consisting of fining upward sequences capped
by a thick, dark colored, well developed soil overlain by 40 cm to 1.3 m of sandy, very recent
alluvium. The level of soil development, the lack of a Bt soil horizon, and the absence of any soil
reddening would strongly suggest that the fining upward sequences are both of mid- to late
Holocene age. As noted in earlier studies (Hunt and Kuehn 2006a, 2006b), these soil profiles
appear very similar to the West Fork Paleosol which is very common in the valley of the Trinity
River just to the north, although they do lack the well developed clay skins and gastropod shells
which are so characteristic of that paleosol and these sediments contain much more sand. On the
other hand, the lack of any soil development or darkening due to the accumulation of organic
material both point toward the sediments overlying these sequences being very recent, perhaps
less than a few decades, old. This would fit with the other evidence of high rates of recent
erosion and deposition. This sequence of sediments is exposed for a considerable distance along
the creek near Exposure 1.
The presence of a thick, intact buried soil of mid- to late Holocene age in portions of the study
area raises the possibility that there may be buried, sealed cultural deposits there. This possibility
would seem to be greater in the southern portion of the study area where Johnson Creek has been
altered less and the deposits appear more intact than farther north where the current flow regime
has been more extreme and the amount of preserved sediment seems to be much less. North of
Exposure 2, there seems to be little chance of buried, sealed deposits since the Johnson Creek
21

figure

14.

Photograph of Exposure 1 of the geoarcheological investigation

Figure 14. Photograph of Exposure 1 of the geoarcheological investigation.

valley is filled with older Pleistocene sediments (Figure 17). However, given that the paleosol
encountered is relatively deeply buried, any preserved cultural deposits may be below the
potential level of disturbance.

RECOMMENDATIONS
The pedestrian survey of the Johnson Creek project area found that large sections have been
adversely affected by construction, excavation, erosion, flooding, and dumping. The entire
project area north of Randol Mill Road appears to have little or no remaining contextual integrity
due to construction; these construction efforts include the construction of the man-made lake and
the straightening of the Johnson Creek channel.

22

figure

15.

Photograph of Exposure 2 of the geoarcheological investigation

Figure 15. Photograph of Exposure 2 of the geoarcheological investigation.

Although a buried A horizon was found along most of the Johnson Creek flood plain within the
project area, it is unclear how far from the creek banks the paleosol extends. The examination of
Exposure 3 in the north end of Johnson Creek showed that Pleistocene-age soils are present in
this portion of the project area. No cultural materials were found in the examined creek banks.
As a result of the current investigation, no significant cultural deposits were identified during the
pedestrian survey. Although a paleosol is present within the Johnson Creek flood plain, it does
not appear to extend a significant distance from the creek banks. The paleosol is also overlaid by
40-120 cm of sandy alluvium; consequently, the primarily surficial impacts of the proposed
improvements would not impact the paleosol and any potential living surface. As a result of
these investigations, it is recommended that the proposed Johnson Creek bank restoration and
park improvements would not affect any historic properties; therefore, no further work is
required.

23

Exposure 1

Exposure 2
0

C

50
C

2Ab

100

150
2Blb
2Ab
2B2 bca

200

250

2Cl cca

2Bb

300

350

2C2
400
2C

440
g:\\30xx\30557.00.01\Graphics\Figures\Figure 16.ai

Figure 16. Johnson Creek Geoarcheological Exposures 1 and 2.

24

figure

17.
Photograph of Pleistocene sediments on the bank of Johnson Creek observed during the
geoarcheological investigation

Figure 17. Photograph of Pleistocene sediments on the bank of Johnson Creek observed during the geoarcheological
investigation.

25

REFERENCES CITED

Bureau of Economic Geology
1972 Dallas Sheet. Geologic Atlas of Texas.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

City of Arlington
2006 Planning and Development Services. www.ci.arlington.tx.us/planning/2000_census.
html, accessed February 8, 2006.
Cliff, M. B., D. E. Peter, S. M. Hunt, D. Shanabrook, T. Carter, and V. Green
1996 Archeological Evaluation of the Harbor Pointe Site (41DL369), Dallas County,
Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations No. 120. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano,
Texas.
Cutrer, T. W.
2006 Fort Bird. The Handbook of Texas Online www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/
articles/FF/qcf26.html), accessed February 8, 2006.
Ferring, C. R.
1989 The Aubrey Clovis Site: A Paleoindian Locality in the Upper Trinity River Basin,
Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:9-11.
Hunt, S. M., and D. D. Kuehn
2006a Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Baird Farm Road Extension, City of
Arlington, Tarrant County, Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations No. 359,
Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano, Texas.
2006b Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Rogers Road Extension, City of
Arlington, Tarrant County, Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations No. 358,
Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano, Texas.

27

Peter, D. E., and D. E. McGregor (editors)
1988 Late Holocene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek Drainage. Joe Pool Lake
Archaeological Project, Volume I. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas
Ressel, D. D.
1981 Soil Survey of Tarrant County, Texas.
Conservation Service.

U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil

Shannon, G. W.
2006 Arlington, Texas.
The Handbook of Texas Online www.tsha.utexas.edu/
handbook/online/articles/AA/hja13.html, accessed February 8, 2006.

28

APPENDIX A
JOHNSON CREEK EXPOSURES

Exposure 1 West side of creek just south of sharp meander bend and perhaps 30 meters north of
exposure described by Hunt and Kuehn 2006a, 2006b. Long stretch of cut bank
(approximately 100 m minimum) that is well exposed and free of vegetation and
cover.
Depth (cm)

Soil Zone

Description

0-40

C

40-142

2Ab

142-184

2B1b

184-314

2B2bca to
2C1cca

314-444

2C2

Olive brown (2.5Y 4/3 dry) slightly clayey sand; massive; firm to friable;
slightly darker in upper few centimeters and upper surface is covered in leaf
litter; common open rootlet holes; abundant woody roots and rootlets;
abundant sand on soil partings; abrupt, smooth boundary
Very dark gray (10YR 3/1 dry) slightly sandy, silty clay; coarse, strong
blocky with silt coats on ped faces; firm to very firm; bioturbated with
common insect and worm burrows; common fine rootlets and few woody
roots; gradual boundary
Grayish brown (10YR 5/2 dry) sandy clay; medium blocky; very firm;
common fine orange Fe mottles; few fine rootlets; several large vertical
krotovina filled with dark colored clay; top slightly darker and base abrupt
and marked by appearance of white calcareous deposits
Grayish brown (10YR 5/2 dry) at top darkening to dark grayish brown
(10YR 4/2) with depth as zone becomes moister silty clay; very firm; weak
blocky; texture obscured by level of calcareous cement; upper 65 cm has
abundant white calcareous deposits in pores and along rootlet traces,
common light gray calcareous concretions, and abundant orange Fe mottles;
below 80 cm, zone has common black FeMn stain, few fine hard black
FeMn concretions, and common fine open rootlet traces; gradual, indistinct
boundary
Dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) slightly sandy, silty clay; massive;
increasingly sandy and silty with depth being a slightly clayey sand at the
base; heavily mottled orange; common large vertical krotovina filled with
dark clay from zone 2Ab.

A-3

Exposure 2 East side of creek, west of parking lots for Ameriquest Stadium, and just north of
collapsed section of concrete walkway. Exposure is a small knoll on point bar side of
creek between main channel which is flowing over sandstone bedrock to the west and
washover chute to the east. Deposits just downstream are very recent loose,
unconsolidated sand. Within 100 meters downstream, the creek is cutting through
orangish-red Pleistocene deposits resting on sandstone bedrock.
Depth (cm)

Soil Zone

Description

0-130

C

130- 229

2Ab

229-429

2Bb to 2C

Yellowish brown (10YR 5/4 dry) silty fine grained sand; massive; firm to
friable; abundant rootlets in upper 30 cm; abrupt, smooth, slightly wavy
boundary
Dark gray (10YR 4/1 dry) very sandy clay; blocky but structure partially
obscured by level of calcareous cement; dense; few fine orange Fe mottles;
few orange, flat sandy ironstone pebbles; common woody roots; clear to
abrupt boundary
Gray (10YR 6/1 dry at top to 10YR 5/1 moist at base) clayey, silty fine
grained sand; massive; firm; heavily mottled (60%) orange (10YR 5/8
strong brown) in upper 40 cm, amount of mottling decreases slowly with
depth; common large, vertical krotovina filled with dark clay; common flat,
1-4 cm sized flat, orange sandstone and ironstone pebbles; unit probably
rests on sandstone bedrock but contact obscured.

A-4

