ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
FAULT LINE AND BRAYS BAYOU
SEGMENTS OF THE MISSION BEND
TRAILS SYSTEM, FORT BEND AND
HARRIS COUNTIES, TEXAS
by
Kristen J. Bastis

for
Naismith Engineering, Inc.
Austin, Texas
on behalf of
Mission Bend Greenbelt Association
c/o Van De Wiele Engineering, Inc.
Houston, Texas

TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 4464

SHORT REPORT NUMBER 218

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
FAULT LINE AND BRAYS BAYOU SEGMENTS OF THE
MISSION BEND TRAILS SYSTEM,
FORT BEND AND HARRIS COUNTIES, TEXAS

by
Kristen J. Bastis

Principal Investigator
Melissa M. Green

for
Naismith Engineering, Inc.
600 West Street
Suite 300
Austin, Texas 78701

on behalf of
Mission Bend Greenbelt Association
c/o Van De Wiele Engineering, Inc.
2925 Briarpark, Suite 275
Houston, Texas 77042

TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 4464

SHORT REPORT NUMBER 218

Geo-Marine, Inc.
2201 K Avenue, Suite A2
Plano, Texas 75074

August 2007

INTRODUCTION
The Mission Bend Greenbelt Association has proposed the construction of two additional
segments of the Mission Bend Trails system. The project areas are part of a greenbelt trail system
in a largely residential area of Mission Bend, west of Houston (Figure 1). The purpose of the
cultural resources investigation is to determine the presence/absence of archeological resources in
these project areas and to evaluate identified resources for their eligibility for inclusion in the
National Register of Historic Places, as per Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act
of 1966, as amended, or as a designated State Archeological Landmark under the Antiquities
Code of Texas.

The project consists of an intensive survey of two segments of hike and bike trails that encompass
approximately 6,850 feet (ft) in Fort Bend and Harris counties. The Fault Line Trail (Fort Bend
County) is 2,400 linear ft long. The project area starts at Addicks-Clodine Road and trends
southwest through an existing greenbelt. An extension (1,450 linear ft) of the Mission Bend
Walking Trail will connect to the Fault Line Trail and loop around the fields and playground to
the north and west of Mission Bend Elementary School. The Brays Bayou Trail (Harris County)
measures 3,000 linear ft long, begins at Rees Elementary School on Kensley Drive, trends
northeast along Brays Bayou, and ends at Vineyard Drive. The trails will be constructed using a
compacted 6-inch caliche base and 6 inches of decomposed granite with steel edging and will
vary in width from 6 to 8 ft based on site conditions. The trail construction is funded through the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Trail Grant program. Fieldwork for the intensive surveys
was undertaken on March 19, 2007, by Geo-Marine, Inc. (GMI project #30522.00.02), under
contract to Naismith Engineering, Inc., and The Mission Bend Greenbelt Association under Texas
Antiquities Permit Number 4464. Kristen Bastis, Project Archaeologist for GMI, conducted the
fieldwork, and Melissa M. Green served as the GMI Principal Investigator for the project.

The Fault Line project area (Figure 2; see Figure 1) and the Brays Bayou project area (Figure 3;
see Figure 1) are entirely situated in an upland environment in an area of moderately productive
soils developed into a large residential area in the 1980s. Large portions of the project areas were
heavily disturbed by previous construction of the surrounding residential communities and the
requisite infrastructure that accompanies large-scale development (i.e., water, sewer, gas, utility
lines, culverts, and storm drains).
1

Brays Bayou Trail

Fault Line Park

Project area
0

1,500 3,000 4,500 Feet

0

400

800 1,200 Meters

¯

Source: USGS 7.5 Series:
Clodine, TX 1982

G:\30xx\30522.00.02\GIS\Figure 1.mxd

Figure 1. Location of Fault Line Park and Brays Bayou project areas.

2

ne Rd
Addicks-Clodi

1
San Marino Dr

2
3

4
5
6
Camino del Sol

7
Salida del Sol

12

11
13

Channelized drainage

8
9

10

Mission Bend
Elementary School

14

Beechnut Drive

Negative shovel test
Project area

Existing trail
0

200

400 Feet

0
50 100 Meters
Source: USDA-FSA DOQ
Clodine, TX 2004

¯
G:\30xx\30522.00.02\GIS\Figure 2.mxd

Figure 2. Location of shovel tests along the proposed Fault Line Trail.

3

th
es
W

e
eim

rR

d

2

Vineyard Dr

1

Winmont Ct

3

Noblewood Way

Westheimer Place Dr

Westmeadow Dr

Whitesage Ct
4

5

Negative shovel test
Project area
0

0

200

50

400 Feet

100 Meters

¯

Source: USDA-FSA DOQ
Clodine, TX 2004

G:\30xx\30522.00.02\GIS\Figure 3.mxd

Figure 3. Location of shovel tests along the proposed Brays Bayou Trail.

4

The proposed project areas lay over the Quaternary-age Beaumont Formation. The Beaumont
Formation consists of three separate units: clay, silt, and fine sand. The spatial pattern of these
units is indicative of fluvial coastal marsh, and sandy littoral deposits. The project areas are
predominantly clayey sand and silt of moderate permeability and drainage and high sheer strength
(Bureau of Economic Geology 1968). The Beaumont Formation significantly predates the range
of human occupation of the North American Continent (Abbott 2001). The project areas are
characteristic of stable or erosional Pleistocene landforms lacking Holocene veneers (Abbott
2001).

Three soils are mapped in the Fault Line project area: the Bernard-Edna complex, 0 to 2 percent
slopes with an average of 0.8 percent slope, the Katy-Waller complex, and the Edna fine silty
loam (Mowery et al. 1960). Three soils are also mapped in the Brays Bayou project area: the
Bernard-Edna complex, 0 to 2 percent slopes with an average of 0.8 percent slope, the Bernard
clay loam, and the Edna fine silty loam (Wheeler 1976).

The following report summarizes the environmental and cultural background; presents methods
utilized, and summarizes the results of the work conducted. All notes, forms, and photographs
produced as a result of this project will be permanently housed at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

METHODS
Prior to fieldwork, a review of the site files at the Texas Historical Commission (THC) Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas was undertaken. This review examined the records for known sites
within 1 mile of the project areas. Any sites that fall within the project areas would be field
examined to determine their current status. In addition, historic maps of the area or county and
early road or soils maps that might yield locations of historic sites were examined.

An intensive survey was conducted in both project areas. Judgmental shovel tests were excavated
in areas deemed likely to contain archeological deposits. Each shovel test measured 30-x-30 cm
in size and was excavated in approximately 20-cm levels to subsoil. The soil was screened
through 0.25-inch hardware cloth and put back into the hole and tamped down. The results of the
5

shovel tests were recorded on standardized forms. Digital photographs were taken to illustrate
the conditions of the project areas.

RESULTS
The examination of the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas revealed no known prehistoric or
historic-era archaeological sites within the Fault Line or Brays Bayou project areas.

No

prehistoric archeological sites have been recorded in the 1-mile study area around the Fault Line
Trail project area; however, three historic-era sites have been recorded in the 1-mile study area
around the Brays Bayou project area. In total, six archeological surveys were conducted within
the 1-mile study area around the project areas (Texas Archeological Sites Atlas 2007). Four of
the surveys were linear surveys along existing roads, and the remaining surveys were a linear
survey and a small rectangular survey within the confines of the current boundary of Barkers
Reservoir.

Three historic-era sites (41HR519, 41HR520, and 41HR522) are located within the 1-mile study
area around the Brays Bayou Trail project area. Sites 41HR519 and 41HR520 are located
approximately 35 meters apart and may be part of an agricultural complex dating to the 1940s–
1950s (Ensor 1983a, b). Site 41HR522 is also historic and located 0.75 mile due south of sites
41HR519 and 41HR520 on Barker-Clodine Road. The site probably dates post-1930; however,
some of the material dates circa 1880 (Ensor 1983c). The examination of the Fort Bend and
Harris counties soil survey maps depicted the area as rural with few roads (Mowery et. al 1960;
Wheeler 1976). The situation was very similar in the early 1980s. On the 1982 USGS 7.5'
Clodine topographic quad, the closest paved roads were Winkleman to the east, FM 1446 to the
west, and Boss Gaston Road to the south; what is currently West Park Tollway to the north was a
two-lane unimproved farm lane.

The project areas are two separate segments that are each approximately one-half mile long
through greenbelts in residential neighborhoods. The greenbelt containing the Fault Line project
area is approximately 30 m wide, consistently nearly level, and covered in manicured grass and
associated forbes along with planted trees (i.e., pine, palm, magnolia, and other ornamental
deciduous trees). A total of 14 shovel tests was excavated along this proposed trail. The Fault
6

Line Trail project area begins at a two-lane divided road 0.56 mile northeast of Mission Bend
Elementary school and traverses southwest through the nearly level greenbelt surrounded by
residential neighborhoods to Mission Bend Elementary School and loops around the playground
and fields to the north and west of the school (see Figures 1 and 2).

The project area begins at Addicks-Clodine Road just south of the intersection with Los Altos
Drive and heads southwest through 85 m of greenbelt, where Shovel Test 1 was excavated
(Figure 4). The project area crosses Marisol Drive and continues through 75 m of greenbelt
where Shovel Test 2 was excavated, then crosses San Marino Drive and continues through the
largest section of greenbelt (200 m) where Shovel Tests 3, 4, and 5 were excavated (Figure 5).
The project area crosses Alta Mar Drive, then through 125 m of greenbelt where Shovel Test 6
was excavated and crosses Camino Del Sol Drive. The project area continues through a 55-m
section of greenbelt where Shovel Test 7 was excavated, continues through an opening in a chain
link fence to where Shovel Test 8 was excavated and continues another 54 m to Salida Del Sol
Drive (Figure 6). The project area continues southwest another 70 m, where Shovel Test 9 was
excavated, before crossing Golondrina Road.

The existing Mission Bend Walking Trail is

located between Golondrina Road and Soneto Drive (Figure 7). The project area continues west
from Soneto Drive, and follows the north edge of the Mission Bend Elementary School property
for 200 m where Shovel Tests 10, 11, and 12 were excavated (Figure 8). The project area then
turns southwest for 50 m at a large cylindrical tank (Figure 9). The project area then trends due
south and runs along the west edge of the property for 125 m where Shovel Tests 13 and 14 were
excavated. The loop is completed by running the project area from the southwest corner to the
northeast corner of the property 250 m through the playground behind the school (Figure 10).
The school property is level and covered in manicured grass and clover, with a few large planted
deciduous trees. There was standing water in the northwest corner of the school property (see
Figure 9). The drainage appears to be affected by the construction of the school and a large
cylindrical tank in the northwest corner of the property (see Figure 8). An east-west swale runs
parallel about 15 m south of the northern property line and empties into a storm drain near the
northeast corner of the school property.

The profiles of the shovel tests in the Fault Line Trail project area are variable. Shovel Tests 1, 5
and 6 seem to be undisturbed; however, Shovel Tests 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, and 9 have at least 35 cm of fill
over the natural soils. The shovel tests excavated on the school property all have approximately
7

Figure 4. Photograph of the Fault Line project area between Addicks-Clodine Road and Marisol Drive facing
southwest.

Figure 5. Photograph of the Fault Line project area between San Marino Drive and Alta Mar Drive; facing northeast.

8

Figure 6. Photograph of the Fault Line project area between chain link fence and Salida Del Sol Drive; facing
northeast.

Figure 7. Photograph of the existing Mission Bend Walking Trail between Golondrina Road and Soneto Drive; facing
northeast.

9

Figure 8. Photograph of the Fault Line project area northern edge of the Mission Bend Elementary School property
with a cylindrical tank in the northwest corner; facing west.

Figure 9. Photograph of the Fault Line project area northwest corner of the Mission Bend Elementary School property
with standing water; facing southwest.

10

Figure 10. Photograph of the Fault Line project area overview of the Mission Bend Elementary School playground;
facing northeast.

30 cm of fill over natural soils. The shovel test profile includes fill of mixed clays (i.e., dark gray
brown, light gray, strong brown, and brown with white gravel inclusions) over natural soils, 20
cm of dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay over light gray (10Y/R 5/1) clay. No cultural material was
observed in any of the shovel tests.

The 2001 aerial depicts the current development of the area into residential properties. On the
soil map and the 1982 topographic map a straight, east-west drainage runs along a farm road
crossing the Fault Line Trail project area; however, no evidence of this channelized drainage was
found in the project area during the survey. The aerial photograph depicts a greenbelt along a
channelized drainage terminating just east of Tomayo Drive, 0.2 mile east of the project area, (see
Figure 2). It is possible that the drainage continues underground or was diverted into the storm
water system as part of the development of the surrounding area.

11

The Brays Bayou Trail project area begins at Vineyard Drive and trends southwest through a
greenbelt following the Brays Bayou channel through a residential neighborhood to Rees
Elementary School. The review of the available maps of the project area found that Brays Bayou
has not been altered significantly in the last 25 years. On the soil map, Brays Bayou is a natural
intermittent drainage (Wheeler 1976). However, on the 1982 topographic map, Brays Bayou had
been channelized. A comparison between the 2001 aerial photos (see Figure 2) and maps in the
Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas (Wheeler 1976), shows that minor modifications were made
to the course of the Brays Bayou drainage in the channelization process. The project area is an
artificial berm that serves as the west bank of the Brays Bayou channel.

The project area begins at Vineyard Road and trends southwest for 350 meters where a line of
planted trees borders the fence for 50 m (Figure 11). Shovel Test 1 was excavated 25 m
southwest of Vineyard Drive, Shovel Test 2 was excavated 175 m southwest of Vineyard Drive,
and Shovel Test 3 was excavated where the project area turns to the south. The project area turns
due south for 200 m passing to the east of the Winmont Court, Noblewood Way, and Whitesage
Court cul de sacs (Figures 12 and 13). Shovel Test 4 was excavated to the east of the Whitesage
Court cul de sac within the project area. The project area then arches to the west for 200 m along
the edge of a dry, storm-water retention pond, containing the remnants of an old sidewalk or
walking trail (Figures 14 and 15). Shovel Test 5 was excavated south of the retention pond. The
project area then passes to the south of the Westmeadow cul de sac and ends at Westheimer Place
Drive across the street from Rees Elementary School (Figures 16 and 17). The project area is
level, covered in manicured grass and wild flowers, with rushes at the water’s edge.

The profiles of shovel tests in Brays Bayou project area demonstrated that the berm serving as the
west bank of Brays Bayou is artificial. The soil is mixed clays from the surface to 30–50
centimeters below surface (cmbs). It is unclear if the dark gray brown clay encountered at 30–50
cmbs is in fact natural soil or spoil from the channelization of the drainage. The section of the
berm to the east of Noblewood cul de sac has eroded, and evidence of old erosion control
measures was observed (i.e., remnant of hay bales). There is modern trash in the bayou channel
along the water’s edge, which may be the collection of litter along a low point on the landscape.
There is no evidence of episodic dumping present in the project area. No cultural material was
observed in any of the shovel tests.

12

Figure 11. Photograph of the Brays Bayou project area from Vineyard Drive; facing southwest.

Figure 12. Photograph of the Brays Bayou project area from shovel test 3; facing south.

13

Figure 13. Photograph of the Brays Bayou project area with culverts and erosion; facing south.

Figure 14. Photograph of the dry, storm-water retention pond west of the Brays Bayou project area with remnant of a
sidewalk; facing southwest.

14

Figure 15. Photograph of the Brays Bayou project area with culvert and dry storm-water retention pond; facing
southwest.

Figure 16. Photograph of the Brays Bayou project area south of the Westmeadow cul de sac; facing southwest.

15

Figure 17. Photograph of the end of the Brays Bayou project area at Rees Elementary School; facing west.

RECOMMENDATIONS
The intensive survey of the proposed Fault Line Trail and Brays Bayou Trail project areas,
situated in greenbelts, indicates that large sections have been affected by the construction of
residential neighborhoods and the landscaping and infrastructure that support them.

No cultural deposits were identified during the intensive survey of either the Fault Line or Brays
Bayou project areas. Shovel tests indicate the area has been covered in fill and/or disturbed and
the greenbelts are a product of the residential development in the area, not untouched remnants of
the natural landscape.

It is recommended that the proposed hike and bike trails would not affect any historic properties;
therefore, no further work is required.

16

REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001 Houston Area Geoarcheology: A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program Report 27. Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Division, Austin, Texas
Bureau of Economic Geology
1968 Houston Sheet. Geologic Atlas of Texas.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Ensor, H. B.
1983a Site Form 41HR519. Texas Historical Commission, Texas Archeological Sites Atlas.
Retrieved March 2007 from http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/.
1983b Site Form 41HR520. Texas Historical Commission, Texas Archeological Sites Atlas.
Retrieved March 2007 from http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/.
1983c Site Form 41HR522. Texas Historical Commission, Texas Archeological Sites Atlas.
Retrieved March 2007 from http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/.
Mowery, I. C., G. S. McKee, F. M. Matanzo, and E. Francis
1960 Soil Survey of Fort Bend County, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service.
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas
2007 Texas Historical Commission, Texas Archeological Sites Atlas. Retrieved March
2007 from http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/.
United States Geologic Service
1982 7.5' Clodine, Texas, topographic quadrangle. U.S. Geological Survey, National
Cartographic Information Center Washington, D.C.
17

Wheeler, F. F.
1976 Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas.
Conservation Service.

18

U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil

