HRA Gray & Pape
ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT
FOR THE PROPOSED
TERRY HERSHEY PARK HIKE AND BIKE TRAIL PROJECT
IN HARRIS COUNTY, TEXAS
Lead Agency:
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT), Houston District
TxDOT CSJ Number 0912-71-701
Texas Antiquities Permit Number 5402

Prepared for:
Ratnala & Bahl, Inc.
11767 Katy Freeway, Suite 510
Houston, Texas 77079
And
Harris County Public Infrastructure Department
Prepared by:
HRA Gray & Pape, LLC.
1428 West Alabama
Houston, Texas 77006
Principal Investigator: Kristi Soltysiak

N

O

V

E

M

B

E

R

1

0

,

2

0

0

9

HRA Gray & Pape Project # 534.00

November 10, 2009

ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT
FOR THE PROPOSED
TERRY HERSHEY PARK HIKE AND BIKE TRAIL PROJECT
IN HARRIS COUNTY, TEXAS

Lead State Agency:
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT), Houston District
TxDOT CSJ Number 0912-71-701
Texas Antiquities Permit Number 5402

Prepared for:
Ratnala & Bahl, Inc.
And
Harris County Public Infrastructure Department

Prepared by:
Kristi Soltysiak

_____________________________________
Kristi Soltysiak

Principal Investigator

ABSTRACT
In September 2009, HRA Gray & Pape, LLC, of Houston, Texas, at the request of Ratnala &
Bahl, Inc. and on behalf of the Harris County Public Infrastructure Department, conducted an
archeological assessment of approximately 3.2 kilometers (2 miles) for a proposed hiking and
biking trail system in the Terry Hershey Park along the Addicks Dam in Harris County, Texas.
The Texas Department of Transportation has been identified as the Lead Agency for this
project. Work for this project was completed as part of the Texas Department of
Transportation’s Project CSJ Number 0912-71-701 by the Houston District.
The goals of the assessment were to determine if the initiation of this project would affect any
previously identified historic properties as defined by Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended (36 CFR 800), and to establish whether or not
previously unidentified archeological resources were located within the project’s Area of
Potential Effect. All fieldwork and reporting activities were completed with reference to state
(Antiquities Code of Texas) and federal (National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as
amended [36 CFR 800]) guidelines, and according to standards set forth by the Texas
Department of Transportation Programmatic Agreement for Enhancement Projects.
The project’s Area of Potential Effect subsumes less than 4 hectares (10 acres) and is defined
as all property within the construction footprint to be assessed within a 30-meter (100-foot)
wide corridor for the length of the proposed trail. The Area of Potential Effect generally
extends to shallow depths typical of road improvement projects.
The investigation discussed in this report took place on property under recreation lease by the
Harris County Public Infrastructure Department from the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, Galveston District. Work completed for this survey was conducted under Texas
Antiquities Permit number 5402, issued by the Texas Historical Commission’s Division of
Archeology in September 2009.
Research indicated that three of the earliest recorded sites (41HR4, 41HR9, and 41HR182) in
Harris County had been previously identified within the project area. However, the results of
the archeological assessment, including judgmental shovel testing and a walkover surface
inspection, did not result in positive relocation of any archeological material associated with
these three sites. Field observations indicated that the project’s Area of Potential Effect has
been heavily disturbed by previous construction of Addicks Dam and spillway, highway
construction of Interstate 10, creek bank erosion and channalization, belowground utility
installation, and concrete paving. It is likely that these sites, at least within the project area,
have been destroyed as a result of past urbanization and ongoing development. In addition, no
new archeological sites were recorded during the assessment. Based on the negative results of
the archeological assessment, HRA Gray & Pape, LLC recommends no further work and that
the project be allowed to proceed as planned.

i

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
In September 2009, HRA Gray & Pape, LLC, of Houston, Texas, at the request of Ratnala &
Bahl, Inc. and on behalf of the Harris County Public Infrastructure Department, conducted an
archeological assessment of approximately 3.2 kilometers (2 miles) for a proposed hiking and
biking trail system in the Terry Hershey Park along the Addicks Dam in Harris County, Texas.
The Texas Department of Transportation has been identified as the Lead Agency for this
project. Work for this project was completed as part of the Texas Department of
Transportation’s Project CSJ Number 0912-71-701 by the Houston District.
The purposes of the archeological assessment were to determine if the initiation of this project
would affect any previously identified historic properties as defined by Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended (36 CFR 800), and to establish
whether or not previously unidentified archeological resources were located within the
project’s Area of Potential Effect.
Trail construction will consist of a concrete or asphalt trail built within an easement measuring
less than 30 meters (100 feet) wide, although a 30-meter (100-foot) wide corridor was
subjected to survey. Therefore, the 30-meter (100-foot) wide corridor along the length of the
project is defined as the Area of Potential Effect. The project’s Area of Potential Effect
subsumes less than 4 hectares (10 acres) and generally extends to shallow depths typical of
road improvement projects.
As proposed, new trail construction will begin at Park Row north of Interstate 10 and head
north for approximately 150 meters (500 feet) immediately east of a large apartment complex.
Just south of the Addicks Dam, the trail will turn east and continue straight along the dam for
2.2 kilometers (1.4 miles) to North Eldridge Parkway. Here, the trail would turn south along
North Eldridge Parkway and terminate at North Dairy Ashford Street adjacent to a Conoco
Phillips gas station. Between these points another trail segment will stem south along the
Addicks Reservoir Spillway/channelized segment of South Mayde Creek and continue south
of Interstate 10 where it will join an existing trail.
The archeological assessment for the area discussed in this report took place on property under
recreation lease by the Harris County Public Infrastructure Department from the United States
Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District. Work conducted to complete this survey was
conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit number 5402, issued by the Texas Historical
Commission’s Division of Archeology in September 2009. All fieldwork and reporting
activities were completed with reference to state (Antiquities Code of Texas [13 TAC 26;
1969 as amended 1997]) and federal (National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended
[36 CFR 800]) guidelines as set forth by the Texas Historical Commission and the Council of
Texas Archeologists and according to standards set forth by the Texas Department of
Transportation Programmatic Agreement for Enhancement Projects.
Fieldwork was conducted by HRA Gray & Pape, LLC Principal Investigator Kristi Soltysiak,
and Crew Chief Jessica Campbell. All project work was supervised by project Principal
ii

Investigator Kristi Soltysiak. The archeological assessment was conducted on September 16,
2009. Fieldwork required a total of 16 person hours to complete. Site file research was
completed prior to fieldwork mobilization by Charles E. Bludau, Jr. Graphics were produced
by Graphics Director Tony Scott. Report content was prepared by Kristi Soltysiak. The
report was edited and produced by Jessica Campbell.
Coordination with The Texas Department of Transportation’s Houston District Archaeologist
and Houston Area Potential Archeological Liability Map were valuable in determining the
level of effort appropriate to insure an adequate project area assessment. The entire project
area was also subjected to reconnaissance-level walkover survey and photo-documentation of
previous disturbances. Two judgmentally-placed shovel tests were excavated to determine
whether intact soils may be present within the project’s Area of Potential Effect. On of these
shovel tests was placed near previously recorded Site 41HR4. Both shovel tests were negative
for archeological deposits. Shovel testing was not conducted at the exact locations of
previously recorded sites due to the substantial amount of surface disturbance and landscape
alteration observed resulting from past urbanization and ongoing development.
Field observations indicated that the project’s Area of Potential Effect has been highly modified
from its natural condition and as a result has been heavily disturbed by previous construction
of Addicks Dam, a high-tension utility corridor, highway construction of Interstate 10, and
other previous nearby roadway projects involving extensive excavation, leveling, grading, and
paving. It is most likely that the previously recorded sites have been destroyed as a result of
urbanization and development. In addition, no new or previously identified archeological sites
were recorded during the assessment. Based on the negative results of the archeological
assessment, HRA Gray & Pape, LLC recommends no further work and that the project be
allowed to proceed as planned.

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT................................................................................................................................. i
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY .................................................................................................. ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS........................................................................................................... iv
LIST OF FIGURES ................................................................................................................... iv
1.0

INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 1

1.1 Project Description.......................................................................................................... 3
1.2 Organization of the Report.............................................................................................. 3
1.3 Acknowledgements......................................................................................................... 4
2.0

NATURAL SETTING.................................................................................................... 5

2.1 Physiography and Geomorphology................................................................................. 5
2.2 Soils................................................................................................................................. 6
2.3 The Houston Area Potential Archeological Liability Map ............................................. 6
2.3.1 Likelihood of Intact Archeological Deposits.......................................................... 7
3.0

CULTURAL SETTING.................................................................................................. 8

3.1 Historic Development of Harris County ....................................................................... 10
4.0

METHODOLOGY ....................................................................................................... 12

4.1 Site File and Literature Review .................................................................................... 12
4.2 Field Methods ............................................................................................................... 12
5.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................. 16

5.1 Results of Site File and Literature Review ................................................................... 16
5.2 Results of Field Investigations...................................................................................... 17
6.0

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ....................................................... 19

7.0

REFERENCES ............................................................................................................. 20

APPENDIX A: TERRY HERSHEY PARK HIKE AND BIKE TRAIL
PROJECT SCHEMATICS
APPENDIX B: TxDOT’s HOUSTON-PALM

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Project Area Location in Harris County, Texas ........................................................ 2
Figure 2. Project Area Overview on 2004 Aerial Background Showing Field Survey Results
and Representative Photographs (Sheet 1of 2) ................................................................. 13
Figure 3. Project Area Overview on 2004 Aerial Background Showing Field Survey Results
and Representative Photographs (Sheet 2 of 2) ................................................................ 14
iv

1.0 INTRODUCTION
HRA Gray & Pape, LLC. (HRA Gray & Pape), at the request of Ratnala & Bahl, Inc.
conducted a combination of archeological assessment including judgmental shovel testing and
visual surface inspection of 3.2 kilometers (2 miles) of property proposed for the construction
of a hike and bike trail system in the Terry Hershey Park in west Harris County, Texas (Figure
1). The assessment survey was conducted on behalf of the Harris County Public Infrastructure
Department (HCPID). The Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) has been identified
as the Lead Agency. Work completed for this project was conducted for TxDOT Project CSJ
Number 0912-71-701.
The goals of the archeological investigation were to determine if the initiation of this project
would affect any previously identified historic properties as defined by Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended (36 CFR 800), and to
establish whether or not previously unidentified archeological resources were located within
the project’s Area of Potential Effect (APE).
The assessment survey completed for the area discussed in this report took place on property
under recreation lease by the HCPID from the United States Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE), Galveston District. Work completed for this survey was conducted under Texas
Antiquities Permit number 5402, issued by the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC’s)
Division of Archeology in September 2009. All fieldwork and reporting activities were
completed with reference to state (Antiquities Code of Texas 1969, as amended in 1997) and
federal (NHPA of 1966, as amended [36CFR 800] and the United States Department of the
Interior (USDI 1981; 1983) guidelines as set forth by the THC and the Council of Texas
Archeologists (CTA) and according to standards set forth by the TxDOT Programmatic
Agreement for Enhancement Projects.
The NHPA of 1966 (P.L.89-665, as amended by P.L. 91-243, 93-54, 94-422, 94-458, and 96515) established the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) to list properties significant
in American history, architecture, archeology, or culture, and directed the heads of federal
agencies to take into account the effect of federal or federally assisted undertakings on eligible
districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects. Executive Order 11593, Protection and
Enhancement of the Cultural Environment (1971) and the Archeological and Historic
Preservation Act of 1974 which strengthened this directive and mandated recovery,
preservation, and analysis of significant data gathered in relation to a federal undertaking.
Procedures for complying with federal regulations are given in Procedures for the Protection
of Historic and Cultural Properties (36 CFR 800) and the NRHP (36 CFR 60). The steps that
a federal agency must take to insure proper review of any undertaking funded or permitted by
that agency and to comply with the requirements of Section 106 of the NHPA are elucidated
by 36 CFR 800. According to 36 CFR 800, all NRHP and NRHP-eligible properties that may
be impacted must be identified. The Criteria of Effect (36 CFR 800.3[a]) must then be applied
in consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) to determine whether the
undertaking will have an effect on any National Register or National Register-eligible

Project Area Location
in Harris County, Texas

GAL Ce, 1983

GAL Ce, 1986
GAL Ce, 1983

GAL Ce, 1983

Topographic Imagery Provided by ESRI Online GIS Services

GAL Ce, 1986

GAL Ce, 1983

GAL COE, 1983
GAL Ce, 1983

GAL Ce, 1986
41HR9

Unknown

HR-C069, Unknown Cemetery
PAI Inc., 2003

Perrenial Environmental, 2003

FHA, 2001

FHA, 2001
41HR4

41HR182

TWDB, 1996

MAC Inc., 2006

Unknown, 1993

Prewitt Assoc., 1985

EPA, 1979
FHWA,
FHWA, 1987
1987
EPA, 1979
MAC Inc., 2005

Addicks, Texas (2995-342)

LEGEND
1.6-Kilometer (1-Mile) Study Area

Previously Recorded Site Centroids

Proposed Hike and Bike Trail

Previously Recorded Site Boundary

USGS 7.5' Quadrangle Reference

Previously Recorded Cemetery Boundary
Previously Recorded Area Survey
Previously Recorded Linear Survey

0

0.5

0

0.8

1
Miles

USGS 7.5' Quadrangle Reference

Hedwig Village, Texas (2995-341)

Figure Created in ArcGIS 9.2 for HRA Gray & Pape, Project # 534.00 on 08-20-09

HR-C068, Memorial Oaks Cemetery
Unknown, 1993

1.6
Kilometers

Project Area Location in Harris County, Texas
Figure 1
2

properties. The Criteria of Adverse Effect (36 CFR. 800.3 [b]) is then to be applied to any
effected properties to determine the nature of the effect. If no adverse effect will result from
the undertaking, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) must be furnished
with documentation of this finding. If the undertaking will have an adverse effect, the agency
must consult with the ACHP and the SHPO to consider alternatives that could avoid, mitigate,
or minimize the adverse effects (ACHP 2004).

1.1 Project Description
The project area can be located on the Addicks (#2995-342) and Hedwig Village (#2995-341),
Texas United States Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle maps.
Trail construction will consist of a concrete or asphalt trail built within an easement measuring
less than 30 meters (100 feet) wide. As proposed, new trail construction will begin at Park
Row north of Interstate 10 (I-10) and head north for approximately 150 meters (500 feet)
immediately east of a large apartment complex. Just south of the Addicks Dam, the trail will
turn east and continue straight along the dam for 2.2 kilometers (1.4 miles) to North Eldridge
Parkway. Here, the trail would turn south along North Eldridge Parkway and terminate at
North Dairy Ashford Street adjacent to a Conoco Phillips gas station. Between these points
another trail segment will stem south along the Addicks Reservoir Spillway/channelized
segment of South Mayde Creek and continue south of I-10 where it will join an existing trail.
The archeological APE for this project has been defined as all property located within the
proposed project construction footprint within the 30-meter (100-foot) wide survey corridor.
The total project includes approximately 4 hectares (10 acres). The depth of the APE is
anticipated to reach shallow depths and is estimated at less than 1 meter (3 feet) (see Appendix
A for project schematics).
The current conditions of the APE consist primarily of vegetated property that is highly
disturbed and composed primarily of displaced soils and fill material including crushed
gravels. Following past earth-moving activities, the majority of the project area appears to
have been re-vegetated with grasses, evergreen tree saplings, and various types of shrubbery.
For the length of the project, surface visibility ranges between 0 and 100%.

1.2

Organization of the Report

This report is organized into six numbered chapters. Chapter 1.0 provides an overview of the
project. Chapter 2.0 presents an overview of the environmental setting and geomorphology of
the project area. Chapter 3.0 presents a discussion of the cultural context associated with the
project area. Chapter 4.0 presents the methodology developed for this investigation. The
results of this investigation are presented in Chapter 5.0. Chapter 6.0 presents a summary of
the work conducted and provides management recommendations.
Project schematics are provided in Appendix A. A copy of the TxDOT Houston Area
Potential Archeological Liability Map (Houston-PALM) for this project is provided in
Appendix B.

3

1.3 Acknowledgements
The field survey was conducted by Principal Investigator Kristi Soltysiak and Crew Chief
Jessica Campbell on September 16, 2009 and required 16 person hours to complete. This
report was prepared by Kristi Soltysiak. Graphics for this report were prepared by Tony Scott.
Jessica Campbell produced the report.

4

2.0

NATURAL SETTING

2.1 Physiography and Geomorphology
The Texas Coastal Plain makes up part of the larger Gulf Coastal Plain, a low level to gently
sloping region extending from Florida to Mexico. The Texas Coastal Plain reaches as far
north as the Ouachita uplift in Oklahoma, and as far west as the Balcones escarpment in
central Texas. The basic geomorphological characteristics of the Texas coast and associated
inland areas, which includes Harris County, resulted from depositional conditions influenced
by the combined action of sea level changes from glacial advance in the northern portions of
the continent, and subsequent downcutting and variations in the sediment load capacity of the
region’s rivers. Locally, Harris County is underlain by relatively recent sedimentary rocks and
unconsolidated sediments ranging in age from the Miocene to Holocene (Abbott 2001; Van
Siclen 1991).
Although older geologic units have been identified in the region (Abbott 2001; Barnes 1982;
Van Siclen 1991), units relevant to the study of long-term human occupation in modern-day
Harris County include the Beaumont Formation, generally believed to predate human
occupation in the region, the so-called “Deweyville Terraces”, stratigraphically positioned
between the Beaumont and Recent deposits. Quaternary Beaumont Formation underlies the
project area (Barnes 1982). These deposits are made up of clay, silt, and sand. This includes
stream channel, point bar, natural levee, back swamp, and mud flat deposits (Barnes 1982).
Gilgae, a succession of microbasins and microknolls in generally level areas or microvalleys
and microridges parallel to the slope are common microfeatures.
The date of deposition for the Deweyville Terraces is not known. However, Abbott (2001:16)
among others believes the north-south oriented terraces aggraded during the Late Pleistocene
from overbank deposition of rivers and streams prior to the beginning of the Holocene.
Abbott suggests that aggradation ended by approximately 20,000 years before present (B.P.)
(Abbott 2001:106). However, meanders of rivers cut valleys through these terraces regularly
during the Holocene and then abandoned them. This process leaves large, flat, open, and well
drained areas favored for campsites. While all depositional facies other than channels have
the potential to preserve archeological sites, behaviorally, human activity favors well drained,
sandy channel-proximal localities over floodbasin muds (Abbott 2001:126). Overlaying these
deposits may be relatively thick or thin Holocene deposits, laid down in the Harris County
area by alluvial or eolian factors, or potentially, marshy environments.
Topographic relief is the result of downcutting of sediments from fluvial action associated
with the many rivers, bayous, and creeks within and around Harris County. Major drainages
include the Brazos River to the west, the Colorado River to the north, and the San Jacinto
River to the east. Creeks and bayous that border or dissect Harris County include Spring and
Cypress creeks to the north, Cedar Bayou to the east, Buffalo Bayou in central Harris County,
and Clear Creek, Brays Bayou, and Keegans Bayou to the south.

5

2.2 Soils
The project area contains soils that have been mapped and described by Wheeler (1976), and
updated by the National Cooperative Soil Survey Web Soil Survey (NCSS WSS 2009). Soils
recorded within the project area consist of Aris-Urban land complex (As), Katy fine sandy
loam (Kf), and Clodine-Urban land complex (Ce). Resulting from urbanization and
development, each of these soils has been characterized by Abbott (2001) as having low to
low-moderate probability for containing intact buried archeological deposits (Abbott 2001:23).
Descriptions of each soil map unit using the official soil series classifications of the Soil
Survey Staff, Natural Resource Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture (SSS NRCS USDA 2009) are summarized below.
The Aris-Urban land complex (As) is composed of 20- 75% of Aris soil, 10- 75% Urban land
soil, and 5- 20% of other soils. Aris soil has a friable, neutral, dark grayish brown fine sandy
loam surface layer about 18 centimeters (7 inches) thick. The next layer extends 53
centimeters (21 inches) deep and is made up of friable, slightly acidic, grayish brown fine
sandy loam. Below this is a layer of firm, medium acid, gray sandy clay loam that extends to
a depth of 71 centimeters (28 inches). The layer that follows is characterized by very firm,
strongly acidic, dark gray clay containing mottles of red and strong brown extending to a
depth of 117 centimeters (46 inches). The final layer has a depth of 152 centimeters (60
inches) and has very firm, medium acid, gray clay. At that depth, it grades to a slightly acidic,
very firm, light gray clay loam. Urban land soils classification is impractical due to their
alteration caused by buildings and other urban structures. Urban land areas can consist of
altered Aris soil. Small areas of Katy, Gessner, Clodine, and Addicks soils are also found in
this complex (Wheeler 1976). The Aris-Urban land complex is composed of highly disturbed
soils that have been subjected to previous construction within and near the city of Katy.
Katy fine sandy loam (Kf) begins with 25 centimeters (10 inches) of dark grayish brown and
46 centimeters (18 inches) of brown, medium acid, friable fine sandy loam. Below this is a 56
centimeters (22 inch) layer of prominently mottled gray, red, and yellowish brown, very firm,
slightly acidic, clay loam. Extending to a depth of 163 centimeters (64 inches) is a
prominently mottled light gray, strong brown, and red, very firm, slightly acidic, clay loam
(Wheeler 1976).
The Clodine-Urban land complex (Ce) is composed of 20-85% of Clodine soils, 10-75%
Urban land soil, and 5-20% of other soils. Clodine soil has a dark gray loam surface layer.
The following layer is gray loam. Next is a layer of light brownish gray loam. Urban land
soils classification is impractical due to their alteration caused by buildings and other urban
structures (Wheeler 1976).

2.3 The Houston Area Potential Archeological Liability Map
In Harris County, and five other counties in the Greater Houston area, data regarding these soil
associations, the landforms they occupy, cultural and natural resource distribution, and historic
and modern land use data were combined by Abbott (2001) to develop the Houston-PALM, a
cultural resource management tool that predicts the likelihood of detecting deeply buried intact
6

cultural resources in various topographic settings around Houston. According to Abbott
(2001:154), “The Houston-PALM….is predicated on the potential for archeological
preservation and integrity”. The development of the PALM is based on a set of three mapping
criteria. These include landforms, soils, and land use (Abbott 2001:156)
The Houston-PALM model also recommends the type of archeological survey strategy that
should be implemented for a given PALM Map Unit, of which there are four major groupings.
For Houston-PALM Map Unit 1 surface survey is recommended and deep reconnaissance is
only recommended if deep impacts are anticipated. PALM Map Unit 2 only surface survey is
recommended. For Map Units 3 and 3a are similar and recommend no surface survey,
although Map Unit 3 recommends deep reconnaissance if deep impacts are anticipated, while
Unit 3a recommends deep reconnaissance only if severe impacts are anticipated. For PALM
Map Unit 4 no survey is recommended.
The Houston-PALM provided by the TxDOT for this project indicates that the project is
located entirely within property categorized as Map Unit 4 (no survey recommended). The
Unit 4 classification is undoubtedly due to the amount of previous disturbance to the general
area including dam construction, commercial development, and roadway construction.
2.3.1

Likelihood of Intact Archeological Deposits

Given the environmental and cultural setting of the project area, underlying soils, previous
development and disturbances resulting from past dam and roadway construction, known sites
in the project area are very likely to be completely destroyed. In addition, the potential to find
intact resources that may be eligible for listing in the NRHP is generally considered very low
although area near the old natural channel of South Mayde Creek located just outside of the
APE could contain intact buried deposits. While, it could be predicted that prehistoric and
historic sites would most likely be located in less disturbed portions of the APE near this
waterway, even these locations have been subjected to past leveling, grading, in-filling, and
berm construction during the channalization process of the waterway, utility, dam, and
spillway construction.

7

3.0 CULTURAL SETTING
Most sites near the coast between the Brazos River and Sabine Lake consist of middens of
clams found in estuaries or exposed in cutbanks along streams (Aten 1983; Patterson and
Hudgins 1985). These middens usually contain faunal material as well as cultural remains
such as lithic tools and pottery. Inland sites are less likely to consist of middens and are more
similar to generalized open campsites. In both areas, sites are found near stream channels.
Addicks Reservoir was one of the earliest projects conducted in the area (Wheat 1953). The
research done during that project initialized the formation of the Galveston Bay Focus and the
development of a cultural sequence of the region based on lithics and ceramics (Aten 1983).
Property associated with the Addicks Reservoir was investigated through an unsystematic
archeological survey conducted in 1947 by Joe Ben Wheat. Two sites identified during this
survey, Site 41HR5 (the Doering Site) and Site 41HR7 (the Kobs Site), were excavated and
the results contributed to the development of a relative chronology for the region (Wheat
1953).
In early 1982, a systematic survey of portions of the Addicks Reservoir was conducted by
Prewitt and Associates. The survey, covering approximately 3943 acres, concentrated on high
probability areas such as the Langham, Bear, South Mayde, and Turkey Creek floodplains. In
general, prehistoric sites were identified near reliable water sources and within naturally
occurring pimple mounds. The survey revisited 9 previously recorded sites and discovered 39
previously unrecorded prehistoric sites. Historic sites identified during this survey included
farmsteads, domestic home sites, dump sites, and cemeteries, the majority of which dated to
the late nineteenth or early twentieth centuries.
Aten (1983) and Story et al. (1990) have aptly described the cultural context of the upper
coastal region. This information is merged with the archeological data here to give a complete
picture of life on the Upper Texas Coast. Along the Upper Texas Coast, the Paleo-Indian
period begins around 12,000 B.P. and ends near 9000 B.P. (Aten 1983; Story et al. 1990).
This period is poorly represented in the archeological evidence for the region (Aten 1983) and
no sites for this period have been verified. Isolated artifacts include Clovis, Angostura,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, Plainview, and Golondrina point types (Aten 1983). Sites from this
stage would be either buried by alluvium or found in upland sites.
The Transitional Archaic period begins about 9000 B.P. and ends around 7500 B.P. (Aten
1983; Story et al. 1990). This stage is also poorly represented in the archeological work in the
area but isolated finds of Bell/Calf Creek, Early-Side Notched, and Early Expanding Stemmed
dart points are attributed to this time period. The Archaic stage is thought to include a shift
towards a diet more geared towards plant processing but still includes hunting. Plant
processing technology seen during the entire Archaic period includes stone-lined hearths and
baking pits as well as milling tools (Story et al. 1990). Groups began to travel over less of the
landscape and population density seems to have risen.

8

Beginning at 7500 B.P. and spanning 2500 years (Aten 1983), the Early Archaic period in this
region has not been well documented. The sites may have been destroyed or deeply buried
(Aten 1983; Story et al. 1990). In situ, Early Archaic remains have been found at the Addicks
Reservoir as well as other localities in the area (Story et al. 1990). Points from this period
include Bell, Carrollton, Trinity, Wells, and Early Stemmed. It is possible that the Carrollton,
Trinity, and Wells points continued to be used into the middle Archaic (Patterson 1996).
The Middle Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.P.) reveals the earliest surviving shell middens
(Aten 1983). These middens often contain remains of shellfish, such as oysters and estuarine
clams, faunal material from terrestrial and aquatic vertebrates, and the earliest known human
burials in the region (Aten 1983). Characteristic projectile points include Bulverde, Williams,
Lange, and Pedernales types.
The Late Archaic lasted from 3000 to 2000 B.P. and shows evidence for population increase
(Aten 1983). By 2500 B.P., the climate in this area was essentially like the modern climate.
Ground stone artifacts made from materials from southwestern Arkansas and found in context
with human burials in cemeteries such as the Ernest Witte Site indicate the possibility of trade
(Hall 1981). Projectile points differ from earlier periods in that they are corner-notched or
expanding-stemmed forms, such as the Kent, Ellis, and Pontchartrain types. Other types can
be found, such as the un-notched Pamillas. These types are thought to precede the Gary type,
which can be found into the Late Prehistoric (Story et al. 1990). During the Late Archaic,
more utilitarian biface tools are prevalent as well as are bone tools. Late Archaic assemblages
are very similar to the early part of the Late Prehistoric stage (Aten 1983).
The transition from the Late Archaic stage to the Late Prehistoric is indicated by the
introduction of ceramics into the assemblage (Aten 1983). Cultural shifts during the Late
Prehistoric include the possible adoption of a more sedentary lifestyle and major technological
changes, such as sandy paste ceramics and late in the stage, the bow and arrow (Story et al.
1990). The cultural tradition during the Late Prehistoric along the Upper Gulf Coast has been
designated as Woodland. Story et al. (1990) has suggested the use of the term Mossy Grove
Tradition to define cultural patterns of the region. The Trinity River seems to be a dividing
line in this tradition with cultures east of the river being more similar to those in Louisiana
than to those west of Galveston Bay. The eastern tradition also seems to have begun earlier
than that in the west, beginning about 2000 B.P. and lasting 600 years (Aten 1983; Story et al.
1990).
Story et al. (1990) splits the Mossy Grove Tradition into five distinct time intervals on the
coast, while noting that only two are found inland. Aten (1983) defined these intervals for the
area between the Brazos River and Galveston Bay as the Clear Lake (1850 to 1525 B.P.),
Mayes Island (1525 to 1300 B.P.), Turtle Bay (1300 to 950 B.P.), Round Lake (950 to 600
B.P.), and Old River (600 to 250 B.P.) periods based on ceramic styles. Only the Round Lake
period is recognized by Aten for the West Bay-Brazos Delta due to the low artifact class
diversity compared to areas east of Galveston Bay as well as a time discrepancy in which
equivalent periods are later in time than those to the east (Aten 1983).

9

Early ceramics from this area are similar to Tchefuncte period wares found near Sabine Lake
and into Louisiana and include sandy paste varieties such as Mandeville Plain, Goose Creek
Plain (Anahuac variety), and Tchefuncte Plain (Aten 1983; Story et al. 1990). These early
sites appear similar to pre-ceramic sites due to the low number of ceramic sherds found. The
appearance of sandy paste and sand-tempering occurs about 1900 B.P. with the O’Neal Plain
(variety Conway) being a good example (Aten 1983). Rocker-stamped decorations, a
distinctive marker for this period, are uncommon in the West Bay-Brazos Delta, as are incised
wares (Aten 1983).
The Mayes Island period brought about the introduction of the bow and arrow, which was
probably used along with the atlatl until the historic period (Aten 1983; Story et al. 1990).
The arrow points during this period included both notched and expanding-stemmed forms
(Aten 1983; Story et al. 1990).
Ceramic indicators for the Turtle Bay period include Goose Creek red-filmed along with other
decorated ceramics, all of which are rare in the West Bay-Brazos Delta area. At the beginning
of the Round Lake period, the earliest use of grog or large crushed ceramic particles as
tempering agents is seen. Typical varieties include Baytown Plain (variety San Jacinto) and
San Jacinto Incised. Along with these types, a reduction in Goose Creek types is seen. Aten
(1983) describes this period as having an increase in population due to the larger number of
sites in more specialized locations.
During the Old River period, a resurgence of Goose Creek ceramics is seen as the Baytown
types decrease in popularity. Contact with Europeans begins near the end of this period, but
visible changes in material culture are not seen until about A.D. 1750 along with a rapid
decline in population (Story et al. 1990).

3.1 Historic Development of Harris County
Harris County was formed as Harrisburg County on December 22, 1836. The county was
renamed Harris in December 1839 to honor John Richardson Harris, an early pioneer who had
established Harrisburgh in 1826, the first town site in the county. Harrisburgh was established
at the confluence of Buffalo Bayou and Brays Bayou and by the 1830s had become the major
port of entry for the region and a transportation hub. Roads ran northwest to the Brazos
communities of San Felipe and Washington, east to the ferry landing that crossed the San
Jacinto, and west paralleling Brays Bayou to the Oyster Creek Community near present day
Stafford in Fort Bend County (Henson 2009).
Under Mexican rule, the area surrounding Harrisburg (as it came to be spelled by 1832) was
known as the San Jacinto District. The district stretched east from Lynchburg on the San
Jacinto River, west to the location of present day Richmond, and from Clear Creek in the
south to Spring Creek in the north. Harrisburg County encompassed this same territory with
the addition of Galveston Island. The modern boundaries of Harris County were established
in 1838 (Henson 2009).

10

The lands that would become Harris County comprised the southeastern border of Austin’s
Colony. In July of 1824, 29 titles were granted to lands in future Harris County, with an
additional 23 grants made between 1828 and 1833. These original grants concentrated mainly
on the watercourses of the region. The early settlers in the region were mostly from the
southern United States who brought with them their African slaves. In the 1840s, large
numbers of German and French immigrants settled in Harris County. The Hispanic presence
in the region was relatively sparse prior to an influx of immigrants following the Mexican
Revolution reflecting the ephemeral nature of Spanish and Mexican colonization (Henson
2009).

11

4.0

METHODOLOGY

4.1 Site File and Literature Review
Site file research was initiated by reviewing records maintained by the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas and by consulting on-line research archives maintained
by the THC. Research was conducted within a 1.6-kilometer (1-mile) study radius of the
project area to identify all previously recorded archeological sites, historical markers, and
historic structures eligible for NRHP listing. Site file research was used to provide a historic
context to the archeological survey.

4.2 Field Methods
The archeological investigations associated with the current undertaking were designed to
identify and record the existence of cultural resources within the defined project boundaries.
The APE was subjected to an archeological assessment including a pedestrian survey, limited
judgmental shovel testing, and visual surface inspection along a single transect within a 30meter (100-foot) wide survey corridor (Figures 2 and 3).
Per THC guidelines, minimum standards for surface reconnaissance and subsurface testing on
linear projects call for 16 shovel tests per 1.6 kilometers (1 mile), within a 30-meter (100-foot)
wide corridor or 2 shovel tests per acre for projects between 4 and 40 hectares (11 and 100
acres) in size. Our survey strategy used the THC standards as a guide, while focusing our
assessment efforts attempting to relocate and re-assess the condition of previously recorded
sites within the project area. Coordination with the USACE Staff Archaeologist, Jerry
Androy, resulted in the determination that an attempt to relocate Site 41HR9 at the base of the
Addicks Dam was not warranted since the site has certainly been destroyed by previous dam
construction and ongoing dam maintenance activities (Jerry Androy, personal communication
2009). Therefore, the area previously recorded as Site 41HR9 was not subjected to
belowground investigation, rather the area was subjected to a pedestrian survey and photodocumentation (Figure 2). Attempts to relocate and assess Sites 41HR4 and 41HR182 within
the APE included conducting a visual inspection of the general area surrounding the recorded
location of each site to gather an understanding of how much previous urbanization and
development has occurred since the sites were recorded as early as the 1940s (Figures 2 and
3). Although judgmental shovel testing at these sites was planned to determine if intact
deposits may be still be present, inspection of the surface conditions at these sites indicated
that shovel testing was not warranted due to the highly modified landscape and heavily
disturbed ground surface (Figures 2 and 3).
Coordination with the USACE Staff Archaeologist also specified that subsurface investigation
via shovel testing was not permitted by the USACE along the Addicks Dam since the entire
area has been confirmed as highly disturbed and would not contain any intact archeological

12

#
*
#
*

C
¬
«

41HR9

#
*

Addicks Dam Rd

¬
«B

#
*

Hedwig Village, TX (2995-341)

Addicks, TX (2995-342)

Figure Created in ArcView 9.2 for HRA Gray & Pape Project # 534.00 on 09-21-2009

*

#
*

A1

#
*

Jo
rd

Park
Row

(
!

#
*

en
#
*

#
*

¬
«A

A. Overview of the area from 14315 Park Row
showing paved roadway along City of Houston
easement. View is to the north.

#
* #
*
#
*
#
*

#
*
41HR4

#
*
Old Katy Rd

#
*

#
*

#
*

A2

#
*

B. Overview of the proposed trail near
Site 41HR9. View is to the west.

Katy Fwy

BP Way

Westlake Park Blvd

Grisby Rd

(
!

41HR182

#
*

#
*

LEGEND
Proposed Hike and Bike Trail
Project APE & Survey Corridor

#
*

Previously Recorded Site Centroid

C. Overview of the proposed trail at Site 41HR9.
View is to the east.

Previously Recorded Site Boundary
Figure Match Lines
(
!

Negative Shovel Test

A1

Shovel Test Number
USGS 7.5' Quadrangle Topographi c Boundary

USGS 7.5' Quadrangle Topographic Reference
0

50

100

200

300
Meters

0

300

600

Feet
1,200

®

Project Area Overview on 2004 Aerial Background
Showing Field Survey Results and Representative Photos
(Sheet 1 of 2)
Figure 2
13

Hedwig Village, TX (2995-341)

E

Addicks Dam Rd

A1

ND
Redhaw St

Blackhaw St

Figure Created in ArcView 9.2 for HRA Gray & Pape Project # 534.00 on 09-21-2009

N Eldridge Pkwy

Addicks, TX (2995-342)

D

41HR4

ai r

yA

sh f
ord

D. Overview of utility corridor east of spillway looking
toward Site 41HR4. View is to the south.

E. Overview of the project area from Addicks Dam
facing south on N. Eldridge Pkwy.

F. Overview of the location of Site 41HR4 showing
utility lines. highly disturbed ground surface and
spillway infrastructure. View is to the north.

G. Overview of the area to the west from Site 41HR4
centroid looking at proposed trail, showing built up
ground surface. View is to the east.

H. Overview of the area looking southwest from the
Site 41HR4 centroid, showing modified ground
surface toward channelized creek/spillway.

I. Overview of Site 41HR182 showing ground
disturbances. View is to the south.

St

A2
G
F

H

I

Memorial View Dr

41HR182

LEGEND
Proposed Hike and Bike Trail
Project APE & Survey Corridor
Previously Recorded Site Centroid
Previously Recorded Site Boundary
Figure Match Lines
Negative Shovel Test
A1

Shovel Test Number
USGS 7.5' Quadrangle Topographic Boundary

USGS 7.5' Quadrangle Topographic Reference
0

50

100

200

Project Area Overview on 2004 Aerial Background
ShowingField Survey Results and Representative Photos
(Sheet 2 of 2)

Figure 3

300
Meters

0

300

600

Feet
1,200

14

deposits (Jerry Androy, personal communication 2009). Therefore, a visual inspection and
judgmental shovel testing of potentially undisturbed portions elsewhere within the APE was
conducted while previously disturbed areas were photo-documented and examples of
disturbances can be seen on Figures 2 and 3 above. Minimal judgmental shovel testing was
conducted within the overhead high-tension utility corridor that used to contain a portion of
the natural channel of South Mayde Creek (see Figures 2 and 3). Shovel testing was not
warranted within the remainder of the project area due to extensive landscape alteration.
Shovel tests, where excavated, measured 30 by 30 centimeters (12 by 12 inches) in diameter.
Vertical control of each shovel test was maintained by excavating in arbitrary 10-centimeter
(4-inch) levels. One wall of each shovel test was profiled and the walls and floor of each
shovel test were inspected for color or texture change potentially associated with the presence
of cultural features. Descriptions of soil texture and color followed standard terminology and
soil color charts (Munsell 2000). Additional information concerning the encountered soils
such as mottling, disturbance, and moisture level was recorded on standardized forms for each
excavation. Whenever possible, shovel tests were to be excavated into sterile subsoil, although
disturbances and the presence of fill material beyond the anticipated depth of the APE did not
warrant this. All friable soils were to be screened through 0.64-centimeter (0.25-inch) wire
mesh, while soils with high clay content were hand sorted. However, the presence of fill
material containing various sizes of gravels and highly disturbed clayey sand indicated that
screening the excavated soils was not warranted.
No cultural resources were located as a result of the investigation. However, cultural
resources, if located, were to be defined according to the THC standards (as referenced in 13
TAC 26.20). Delineation shovel tests were to be excavated in 4 radiating directions in
intervals between 10 and 30 meters (30 and 100 feet) within the confines of the survey
corridor. In general, 2 sterile shovel tests in each cardinal direction would be used to define a
site’s size and location. At a minimum, between 6 and 8 delineation shovel tests would have
been excavated unless surrounding landforms or topography suggested the presence of a
natural site boundary. A discussion laboratory analysis and/or curation procedures are not
included here, since no resources were identified.

15

5.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS
For the proposed Terry Hershey Park hike and bike trail system project, the archeological
assessment survey completed for the area discussed in this report took place on property under
recreation lease to the HCPID by the USACE, Galveston District.

5.1 Results of Site File and Literature Review
A preliminary search of the online Texas Archeological Atlas, maintained by the THC, and a
review of The Handbook of Texas Online indicate that no historic events or historic
individuals are likely to be associated with the project area. Background research indicated
that 3 archeological sites (41HR4, 41HR9, and 41HR182) have been previously recorded
within and immediately adjacent to the proposed trail (see Figures 1 and 2). Little is known
about Sites 41HR4 and 41HR9, other than they are prehistoric in nature and were excavated in
1947 by Joe Ben Wheat (Wheat 1953). Site 41HR182 was classified as a prehistoric streamside campsite and chipping station site that measures about 30 meters (100 feet) in diameter.
Surface collection of Site 41HR182 yielded several projectile points and a single pottery sherd
that is recorded as probably being Goose Creek.
In addition to these sites located within and adjacent to the project area, there are
approximately 54 previously identified sites located within a 1.6-kilometer (1-mile) radius of
the project area (see Figure 1). A large majority of these sites are prehistoric campsites where
artifacts recovered included lithic flakes and pottery sherds. Most of the sites were recorded
by Leland Patterson in the early 1970s along the original banks of South Mayde Creek.
A number of previously conducted cultural resources have been conducted within and near the
project area since the early 1980s (see Figure 1). The majority of past surveys have been
conducted on behalf of the USACE, Galveston District within the Addicks Reservoir north of
the project area. Since the 1990s, several other surveys encompassed small portioned of the
current project area (see Figure 1). Each of these surveys appears to have attempted to revisit
sites previously recorded by Wheat in the 1940s and Patterson in the 1970s.
A block-area survey was completed in 1993 for the proposed expansion of the Terry Hershey
Park within the portion of the current project area that is located south of I-10 near the modern
channel of South Mayde Creek (see Figure 1). The survey was conducted by Moore
Archeological Consultants, Inc. and included the attempted relocation of 3 known sites,
including 41HR182 recorded adjacent to the current project area (Moore 1993). Although the
abstract form provided on the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas does not specify which sites the
author, Roger Moore is referring to, it indicates that 2 of the 3 sites were located under at least
1.5 meters (5 feet) of fill material. Moore documented the relocation of the third site and
determined that the site was “very eroded and essentially disturbed” (Moore 1993).

16

5.2 Results of Field Investigations
Activities undertaken during the assessment included a pedestrian survey, judgmental shovel
testing, and visual surface inspection to confirm suspected disturbance within the APE (Figure
2). As a result, a total of 2 judgmentally placed shovel tests were excavated within the project
area along a north south oriented high-tension utility corridor (Figure 2). These shovel tests
were excavated to determine whether intact natural sediments may have been present near the
spillway or whether the area contained fill material. Additional testing elsewhere in the APE
was not warranted as a result of prior belowground disturbance (see Figures 2 and 3). Both
shovel tests were negative for the presence of archeological materials. Observed soils were
typically disturbed to below the anticipated depth of the APE and contained dark yellowish
brown (10YR 3/6) compact clayey sand comprised of 25% gravels of various sizes. The
natural ground surface could not be reached below the anticipated depth of impact.
The revisit to known Site 41HR4 resulted in a determination that the site has been completely
destroyed by urbanization. The 2004 aerial photograph used as a base map for Figures 2 and 3
of this report was the most recent aerial photograph available but does not accurately represent
the extent to which recent expansion of the I-10 corridor and additional recent development
has encroached upon the southern boundary of known Site 41HR4. In addition, the aerial
photograph does not accurately depict the massive amount of landscape modification that has
occurred at the junction of I-10 and the man-made channel of South Mayde Creek, which now
functions as relief for the Addicks Reservoir spillway. At this junction, the new I-10
westbound service road is now located approximately 60 meters (197 feet) south of the
recorded site centroid of Site 41HR4. The general area is covered with a minimum of 1 meter
(3 feet) of fill. This was evident by a visibly marked rise in elevation from the I-10 corridor
and the soil profile of a shovel test excavated within the APE just east of Site 41HR4. Based
on this information, Site 41HR4 has been obliterated by the roadway expansion,
channalization, erosion, and otherwise extensive displacement of in situ sediments. No shovel
tests were excavated at the recorded Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of Site
41HR4 due to the presence of compact gravels and low-lying terrain with a “carved-out”
appearance. However, 1 of 2 excavated shovel tests described above was placed within the
APE just east of Site 41HR4 in an effort to determine whether the area contained any intact
soils or large quantities of fill as suspected (see Figures 2 and 3).
An attempt to relocate Site 41HR182 was limited to photo-documentation of the recorded site
centroid and a general pedestrian survey with documentation of observed surface conditions.
HRA Gray & Pape’s site revisit further documented extensive changes to the natural ground
surface including the presence of a paved parking lot with overhead lighting components and
buried electric cables. In fact, 1 of the overhead lighting poles is situated at the previously
recorded UTM coordinates of Site 41HR182. In addition, the eastern bank of the modernized
channel of South Mayde Creek is located approximately 2.5 meters (8.2 feet) west of the
recorded site centroid. The eroding profile of the eastern cutbank was examined for exposed
artifacts. No artifacts were recorded within the cutbank and the profile indicated that the area
has been highly modified in recent years by development and channalization of the natural
creek channel. No shovel tests were excavated at the previously recorded location of Site
41HR182 since past disturbance including the presence of concrete pavement, underground
17

power cables, and the eroded and modernized cutbank of the creek indicated that shovel
testing would not be productive.
In addition, as discussed above in Section 5.1, Roger Moore’s 1993 survey of the Terry
Hershey Park resulted in the determination that 2 of 3 known sites (including Site 41HR182)
were located beneath a minimum of 1.5 meters (5 feet) of fill and that the third known site was
disturbed and was highly eroded. Although the information available online does not specify
which sites Moore determined were located beneath fill and which site was disturbed, because
the current proposed project will involve belowground construction to shallow depths of less
than 1 meter (3 feet), it was determined that the current project will not affect Site 41HR182,
intact or not.

18

6.0 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This report presents the findings of an archeological assessment including a pedestrian survey,
judgmental shovel testing, and visual inspection of the ground surface along 3.2 kilometers (2
miles) for a proposed hiking and biking trail system in the Terry Hershey Park along the
Addicks Dam in Harris County, Texas. The Lead Agency for this project is the TxDOT.
Fieldwork was conducted on September 16 2009 and required a total of 16 person hours to
complete. All fieldwork and reporting activities were completed with reference to state (Texas
Antiquities Code [13 TAC 26]) under Texas Antiquities Permit Number 5402, and federal (36
CFR 800; 36 CFR 60) guidelines.
Initial investigation consisted of a background literature and site file search to identify the
presence of recorded archeological sites within the APE or in close proximity to the proposed
project. As a result, 3 known sites (41HR4, 41HR9, and 41HR182) were located within or
immediately adjacent to the APE. Approximately 54 additional archeological sites had been
recorded within a 1.6-kilometer (1-mile) study radius of the project area, primarily along the
natural channel of South Mayde Creek, which has been completely altered since construction
of the Addicks Dam. An appropriate testing strategy was developed primarily by using the
Houston-PALM as a planning tool by which to identify locations within the APE with the
highest likelihood of containing intact prehistoric archeological resources and by assessing
locations thought likely to contain historic archeological resources.
Two judgmental shovel tests were excavated within the project APE to confirm suspected
disturbances. Shovel testing elsewhere in the project area was not warranted as a result of
recent extensive landscape modifications involving the construction of Addicks Dam and
spillway, channalization of South Mayde Creek, the expansion of the I-10 roadway, and
general urbanization and development. Both shovel tests were negative for the presence of
any archeological materials and both contained fill material with gravels of various sizes
beyond the anticipated depth of impact within the APE. No exposed archeological materials
were observed on the ground surface as a result of the walkover inspection. Attempts to
relocate Sites 41HR4, 41HR9, and 41HR182 were not successful. It is the opinion of HRA
Gray & Pape that these sites have been destroyed by past construction and urbanization as
described above.
The results of the survey indicate that previously recorded sites or unknown archeological
sites are not located within the surveyed area. Based on these results, HRA Gray & Pape
recommends no further work and that the project be allowed to proceed as planned. With
regard to 36 CFR 800, the results of this survey specifically fall under section § 800.4(d.1): No
historic properties affected.

19

7.0 REFERENCES
Abbott, James T.
2001 Houston Area Geoarcheology: A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division.
Advisory Council for Historic Preservation (ACHP)
2004 36 CFR Part 800 Protection of Historic and Cultural Properties. Federal Register,
September 2, 1986, as amended in August 2004. Washington, D.C.
Androy, Jerry
2009 Personal Communication, email correspondence, August 26, 2009. USACE Staff
Archaeologist
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
Barnes, Virgil E.
1982 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Houston Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Hall, G. D.
1981 Allen’s Creek: A Study in the Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley, Texas.
Research Report 61. Austin: Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at
Austin.
Henson, Margaret Swett
2009 Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. "Harris County"
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/HH/hch7.html
(accessed September 2, 2009).
Moore, Roger G.
2003 A Cultural Resources Survey of an Expansion of the Harris County, Precinct 3, Terry
Hershey Park, Houston (Harris County), Texas. Report of Investigations, No. 88.
Moore Archaeological Consultanting, Inc. Houston, Texas.
Munsell Color
2000 Munsell Soil Color Charts.
Macbeth Division of Kollomorgan Instruments
Corporation, New Windsor, New York.
National Cooperative Soil Survey, Web Soil Survey (NCSS WSS)
2009
NCSS
Web
Soil
Survey
[Online
WWW].
Available
URL:
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx[Accessed 10 April 2009].

20

Patterson, Leland
1996 Southeast Texas Archeology. Report No. 12, Houston Archeological Society.
Patterson, L. W., and J. D. Hudgins
1985 Paleo-Indian Occupations in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 56.
Soil Survey Staff, Natural Resources Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture (SSS NRCS USDA)
2009 Official Soil Series Descriptions [Online www]. Available URL:
http://soils.usda.gov/soils/technical/classification/osd/index.html" [Accessed 10 April
2009].
Story, D. A., J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, et al.
1990 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain. 2 vols. Research Series
No. 38. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey
The Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division (formerly the Division of Antiquities
Protection)
1969 The Antiquities Code of Texas (Vernon's Texas Code Annotated [V.T.C.A.], Natural
Resource Code, Title 9, Chapter 191) as amended 1997.
United States Department of the Interior, Interagency Resources Division (USDI)
1983 Archeology and Historic Preservation: Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and
Guidelines. 48 FR 190: 44716-44742. Washington, D.C.
1981

Department of the Interior’s Regulations, 36 CFR Part 60: National Register of
Historic Places. Washington, D.C.

Van Siclen, D.C.
1991 Surficial Geology of the Houston Area: An Offlapping Series of Pleistocene (&
Pliocene?) Highest Sea Level Fluviodeltaic Sequences. Transactions of the Gulf Coast
Association of Geological Societies 41:651-666
Wheat, J.B.
1953 The Addicks Dam Site: An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Sam Basin,
Southeast Texas. River Basin surveys Papers No. 4, Part 1. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulleting 154:143-252.
Wheeler, F. F.
1976 Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, Washigton, D.C.

21

APPENDIX A:
TERRY HERSHEY PARK HIKE AND BIKE TRAIL
PROJECT SCHEMATICS

...\environmental\sht-lay1.dgn 3/4/2009 2:56:34 PM

APPENDIX B:
TxDOT’s HOUSTON-PALM

