.

Archeolog1cal Surveys of

f~llE

GRANGER AND NORTH FORK
RESERVOIRS
Vol. l

THE GRANGER REPORT .

@]

IT@~® ITU
from the Texas A & M

RESEARCH FOUNDATION
College Station, Texas

I

Archeological Surveys of Granger
and North Fork Reservoirs
Vol. l
The Granger Report

by
Gary L. Moore
Harry J. Shafer
and
Carol S. Weed

Report submitted, with corrections, to the National
Park Service by Texas A & M Research Foundation in
partial fulfillment of terms in Contract No. C-3545( 75).

Report No. 38a
Anthropology Laboratory
Texas A&M University
February 1978

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

ABSTRACT . . . . .

. i ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .

iv

FOREWORD . . . .

v

I NT RO DUCT ION. .

....

ENVIRONMENT .
Location .
Geology .
Soils . .
Climate .
. . . . . .
Vegetational Communities.
Faunal Assemblages . .

.....

....

4
4
7
10
10
11
14

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND.

18

SURVEY RESULTS . . . . . . . .

21
24
24

Methodology and Procedures.
Site Typology

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

25

ARTIFACTS . . . .

66

.....

Methods and Analysis . . .
Description of Assemblage . .

....

RECOMMENDATIONS . . . . .

.

67
67
79

RESEARCH ACCOMPLISHMENTS ..

86

REFERENCES CITED.

91

APPENDIX I

i

LI ST OF FIGURES

Page
Figure

- Area Map showing location of Granger Reservoir

3

2 - Physiography . .

6

3 - Lithic resource map

9

4 - Vegetation map . .

17

5 - Site location map

23

6 - Core trench monitoring, 41WM21

28

7 - Subsurface testing, 41WM124

• 37

8 - Site 41WM286, lithic procurement

54

9 - Site 41WM293, deeply buried hearth

58

10 - Adaptive model - Prairie centered

74

11 - Adaptive model - Prairie ecotone .

77

LI ST OF TABLES

Table

- Topographic and vegetation zones
2 - Site typo logy

. .

12
62

. .

3 - Granger Reservoir Artifacts

70

4 - Participants, Georgetown Meeting

80

5 - Parameters of Site typology

82

ii

ABSTRACT

The results of intensive archeological surveys of the Granger (Vol. I)
and North Fork (Vol. II) Reservoirs on the San Gabriel River, Texas, are
reported.
The Granger Reservoir survey found or relocated 58 archeological sites
that will be or have been adversely affected by the proposed impoundment
of water and related construction activities . Fifteen additional sites
were noted beyond the flood pool limits of the 528-foot elevation and below
the dam structure.
All the archeological resources from both surveys have been recommended for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places as an archeological
district.
Site locations, descriptions and recommendations for further archeological
investigations in the Granger Reservoir are presented in this volume.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The completion of this study was made possible by the cooperation of a
number of individuals and agencies. Their assistance i~ acknowledged here
and we wish to point out that this is but a token of our appreciation of
their aid.
The assistance and cooperation provided by National Park Service, Interagency
Archeological Services, Denver, deserves special mention. Specifically,
Roy Reaves III and Judy Shafer of the Denver Office aided directly in our
field work.
Curtis Tunnell and Alton Briggs of the Texas Historical Commission who
visited the sites and made valuable suggestions are to be thanked for their
help.
Students, staff and faculty also provided iinvaluable aid in both the field
and laboratory phases. Personnel who conducted the actual field survey, under the general direction of Gary L. Moore and Patience Patterson, who were
co-supervisors, were Laura Hillier and John Ippolito. They are to be thanked
for their efforts and dedication under often adverse condictions.
Dr. Harry J. Shafer and Dr. Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr. served as Co-principal Investigators, and Edward Baxter, Staff Archeologist, coordinated the phases
of the study.
Reed Smith and Edie Schaffer aided in the drafting chores, photographic work
was done by Paul Nettell and Johnny D. George, and typing was done by B.J .
Strode, Pat Dering and Anita Demirs.

iv

1

INTRODUCTION

An archeological survey of areas to be affected by the proposed Granger
Reservoir, Williamson County, Texas, was conducted by members of the Texas
A&M University Anthropology Research Laboratory during the months of MayOctober, 1976. The Anthropology Research Laboratory performed the archeologi c.al services acting on a cost-reimbursable contract (No. C3545(75)) with
the United States Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Rocky
Mountain Region, Interagency Archeological Services, Denver. The Texas A&M
Research Foundation administered the contract.
The project was proposed by the Interagency Archeological Services, Denver,
since, as the Service stated:
Earlier research has provided the beginnings of a survey inventory of the Districts but these attempts, both formal and casual,
have already yielded a substantial number of unsystematically
co 11 ected data.
Now the Corps of Engineers has purchased the
land within each impoundment area, an intensive and complete
survey i s fe as i b1e.
The Texas A&M Anthropology Research Laboratory, acting through the Texas
A&M Research Foundation, proposed the following objectives in response to
the National Park Service's Request for Proposals:
l.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Conduct an intensive, systematic site survey of the reservoir
district, including revisiting the 58 archeological sites which
have been recorded.
Conduct an analysis of the modern natural environment of the
study area in order to define specific microenvironments based
on topography, plant and soil asssociations. This analysis will
also focus on the distribution of natural resources such as
chert, fuel, water, etc. relevant to the prehistoric occupation.
Synthesize the survey data (incorporating information gathered
during previous archeological surveys and excavations by TASP)
in order to accomplish objectives 5-7 below.
Evaluate each site against the published criteria for the eligibility for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
using information derived from objectives 1-3.
Establish a typology of archeological sites in the study area
based on: (a) surface morphology; (b) surface artifactual inventory; (c) modern environmental setting.
Generate a tentative model of the subsistence and settlement
systems appropriate to each major prehistoric stage in the study
based on this survey data.
Design a sampling program which will: (a) yield data on the full
range of variation of site types defined in objective 5 above;
(b) facilitate the testing of the various subsistence-settlement
systems advanced in objective 6 above.

The major archeological contract agreements after revision were as follows:

2

FIGURE 1

Area map showing the relationship
of Granger and North Fork Reservoirs
in Williamson County, Texas

r

\

LOCA T I ON

MAP

'\

..

/"'

•

'\

~

,/

..s'C>-?

1..)
,,,,.,...

'\

,

,~
\

·------- .. .. /5
( .......... .....

........_

'"

\/

,,

,,
,,
,,
I

/

/

/

I

..

I

I

I

' ·............ .....I

BURNET

L .. )

"

BE L/ L

\

I

300

'

\

----·'

kilo mete rs

'

\

TEM P L E

\,, / ' '

TEXA S

0

•

/"'

(
'
·\

'•
\

\

\

Jay lor

-@-

$

~

0

Interstate highway
U.S. highway
Reservoir area

10
kil ome t ers

20

~

''

k

Cr

,,

''\

., , / '

,

_,,,,,.., /

ee

.............

I

\

....

"

''

ec.• . ,.. , "'
0 ;

4

l.

The contractor shall conduct archeological investigations in
the areas to be affected by the reservoir impoundments behind
the Corps of Engineers' Granger dam, in the San Gabriel River
Basin, Williamson County, Texas. The work includes revisiting
and limited testing, as appropriate, of the previously recorded
58 archeological sites, and recording and testing, as appropriate,
of the other sites expected to be discovered and recorded in a
complete survey of the proposed project lands.
2. The contractor shall evaluate all archeological remains according
to the criteria for nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places and provide recommendations for each regarding its eligibility for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
The contractor shall provide an explanation of professional consideration for each site not recommended for nomination.
Upon notice to proceed, the Texas A&M archeologists commenced work, utilizing
the aforementioned objectives as an interim research design. The survey was
conducted by a two man crew. Preliminary analysis and report preparation
for the survey was performed by Gary L. Moore. Subsequently, the final report
for the Granger Survey and its companion volume, the North Fork Survey, were
completed by various Anthropology Laboratory personnel. This report documents
the results of the Granger reservoir survey.

ENVIRONMENT

The Granger Reservoir District is located in the northeastern corner of
Williamson County, Texas (Fig. l). The reservoir will extend along the San
Gabriel River and will cover portions of Willis Creek. Elevation in the
district varies from 450 to 500 feet above mean sea level. The estimated
maximum area of the lake and adjacent district land is 17.3 square miles.
Topography
Granger Reservoir is located on the West Gulf Coastal Plain Section of the
Atlantic Plain Province and the Edwards Plateau Section of the Great Plains
Province (Hunt 1974; Godfrey, McKee and Oakes 1973) (Fig. 2).
The Granger District lies near the center of the south-central portion of
the Blackland Prairie, one of the major land resource areas of Texas (Godfrey,
Carter and McKee 1975 ). Because of the vectorial effect of dip plains (influenced by both the eastward continental slope from the Rocky Mountains and
southward tilt of the Red River tip plain), the Blackland Prairie has a southeastward orientation. This southeastward slope, which dips 90 feet per hundred
miles, is as uniform as any place in the country (Hill 1901) and the area i s
characterized by well dissected moderately rolling hills.

5

FIGURE 2
Major Physiographic zones in central
Texas and their relationship to
Williamson County. The cross Timbers
and Prairies Zone is also referred to
as the Grande Prairie, the southern
portion of which extends into western
Williamson County and here is more
regionally distinguished as the
Lampasas cut Plain, a heavily eroded
segment of the Edwards Plateau

6

No•th~
Reservoir

survey areas ~

WILLIAMSON
COUNTY

~

Granger

Reservoir

@

Edwards Plateau

~

Cross Timbers and Prairies

@

Post Oak Savannah

@ B l ackland

11 ES

Prairies

1976

7

The San Gabriel River has locally altered the general plane of the Blackland
Prairie by forming gently sloping Plio~Pleistocene bluffs which overlook the
modern floodplain. The floodplain includes Willis Creek and is approximately
four miles wide. The river bottoms are not considered part of the Blackland
Prairies (Collins 1972:14).
The Granger area has a low to moderate relief with broad river valleys and
gently rolling and well rounded hills. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(Department of the Army 1972:11-15) terms the Granger portion of the San
Gabriel as Reach 3, and characterizes the river as having a meandering flattened gradient (less than 10 feet per mile) and as having alluvial stream
banks and beds which contain noticeable deposits of sand, gravel and shell
fragments.
Geology
A large inland sea covered the Blackland Prairies area during Cretaceous
ti mes. The Larami de Uplift caused the sea to slowly recede in a southeastward direction, depositing alternating strips of arenaceous and calcareous
materials . Geological sediments are therefore more recent in the east than
in the west. Five parallel north-south geological entities have been recognized in the Blackland Prairies. They are, from west to east, the Eagle Ford,
Austin, Taylor, Navarro and Midway Groups (Hill 1901). The Granger District
lies in the region of the Taylor Group, which forms the local bedrock geology
of the area. As the largest geologic subdivision of the Blackland Prairie,
the Taylor Group gives the prairie its typical configuration (Collins 1972:
16) .

The Uvalde formation, composed of Plio-Pleistocene clays, caliche, sands,
and gravels form a mantle over the Taylor Formation and comprise the bluffs
which overlook the San Gabriel River Valley. Silty clays and gravels have
accumulated to a depth of 30 feet in the older Pleistocene river channel,
which is flanked by the Uvalde bluffs (Sellards, Adkins and Plummer 1958:778).
The majority of the archeological sites studied in this report are found in
these aggraded clays and silts, which were presumably deposited by overbank
flooding.
Exposed rock formations are rare and the underlying Upper Cretaceous bedrock
formations, belonging to the Taylor and Navarro groups, consist of poorly consolidated clays, clay shales, clay sands and clay marls, and are usually found
buried under 50-200 feet of more recent alluvium (George Reude, Co~ps of Engineers Geologist, personal communication 1977). The shales and marls dip
towards the southeast in a monoclinal structure.
A mantle of Plio-Pleistocene clays, caliche, sands and gravels of the Uvalde
formation covers the bedrock (Eddy 1973:14), and these floodplain-originated
deposits from the uplands which surround the San Gabriel valley. The Uvalde
gravels are a shallow but important local aquifer and provided a wide range
of lithic resources, especially flint, to the prehistoric occupants of the
area. Pleistocene gravel deposits within the confines of the valley also provided important lithic resources in prehistoric times.

8

FIGURE 3
Map showing the surface distribution
of major lithic (Pleistocene and Uvalde
gravel) outcrops. The stream corridors
also provide a resource zone for lithics
as gravels here consist of limestone and
cherty materials.

9

10

Soils
In this area the Bl ackland Prairie lies on the Houston Black-Heiden-Ferris
soil series associat ion, a black clay derived from the limestone of the
Taylor Marl geological group . The "A" horizon grades directly into the "AC"
horizon, and the "B horizon is lacking. Soil is basic, containing up to 6%
CaC03 equivalent . Becoming very hard when dry and extremely plastic when
wet , the soil possesses a great ability to shrink and swell, and is typical
vertisol (Collins 1972:19). The soil is adequate in organic content, and
has a high cation exchange capacity. Moisture stress is lessened by the low
evaporation rate from this fine textured soil.
11

Clay vertisols are t he most common soil order in the Granger Reservoir.
Most of the uplands in the area are covered with Houston Black-Heiden-Austin
soils which are dark, calcareous, clayey soils changing with depth to light
marls or chalks (Godfrey, Carter and McKee 1975:12; Godfrey, McKee and Oakes
1973) . Within some of the larger stream valleys, such as the San Gabriel,
the soils indicate alluvial modification with increases in silt and sand;
hO'Wever, they generally retain a cracking clayey character.
In the San Gabriel River valley, the soil is mostly Catalpa clay, a friable
ddrk-brown overlying a light yellowish brown layer. Less co1TA11on is the Trinity
clay, a black calcareous form; drainage is poor on the Trinity clay.
Climate
The Central Texas region is characterized by humid, hot sulTlllers and generally
cool winters. Temperatures range from the low loo 0 •s F during the summer to
relatively mild 30-60° F averages during the winter. The coldest month typically is January, when temperatures average 360 F (Department of the Army
1972:11-10). The frost-free growing season currently averages 251 days and
presently allows for double cropping of some crops.
Rainfall is primari ly orographic, averaging 33.8 inches annually with two
peaks recognized in May and September (Carr 1967).
Biota
The Balconian Biotic Province is a region of intermediate ecological conditions between the eastern forests and the western deserts. Granger Reservoir
is located just eas t of the Balconian zone, within the Texas Biotic Province,
according to Blair (1950). The Texas Province has three main vegetational
zones. Sandy soils support an oak-hickory forest, while clay soils originally
supported a tall-grass prairie. A mesic forest grows in the alluvial valleys,
which provide avenues for the westward dispersal of forest inhabiting species
(Tharp 1926). This province is a broad ecotone between the Austroriparian
forests and semi-ari d grasslands.

11

VEGETATION
The Granger Reservo i r District lies within the Blackland Prairies vegetation area of Texas (Gould 1969:11). The Blackland Prairie extends in a
20-150 mile wide belt from Bexar County to the Red River. No vegetation
association in East Texas equals the Blackland Prairie in ~ize (Tharp 1926:
55).
Oak-forest borders the prairie on the east. To the west lies the Balcones
Escarpment and its characteristic oak-juniper-mesquite woodland (Bray 1904).
A triple ecotone of oak-juniper-mesquite, oak-forest and the Fort Worth
Prairie forms the northern boundary of the contiguous Blackland Prairies
(Tharp 1926:55; Dyksterhuis 1946:3).
Efforts to place the Blackland Prairie within one of the seven major associations of the North American grasslands formation have met with mixed
results. Shantz and Zon (1924:123) considered it part of the Tall Grass
Prairie Association , while Dodd (1968:349) called it a southern extension
of the True Prairie . Recent quantitative studies by Collins, Smeins and
Riskind (1975:85-86) have demonstrated that the Blackland Prairie has elements of the True, Coastal and Tall Grass Prairies.
The San Gabriel River has forrred its own environment within the context of
the Blackland Prairie by cutting and partially filling a long narrow valley
through the area. Since the river valleys which dissect the Blackland Prairie are not considered edaphically or vegetationally to be part of that area
(Godfrey 1964:4; Co l lins 1972:14) the discussion will be divided into an
"upland" or prairie section, and a lowland or woodlands section.
The San Gabriel River has carved a wide floodplain out of the Blackland
Prairie. The floodplain vegetation differed from the uplands most signifi cantly in its woody component, which was lacking in the true pre-contact
Blackland Prairie (Collins 1972). Tharp (1952:58, 62) treated water associated vegetation of the Blackland Prairie under the separate headings
"water-course vegetations" and hydrosere vegetation".
11

For the purposes of this brief study the San Gabriel River Valley vegetation
zones were delimited on the basis of the topographic unit (or units) with
which they were associated. Four major vegetation zones were recognized
within the eleven topographic units of the river valley: (1) upland prairie
vegetation; (2) intermittent stream flood vegetation; (3) permanent stream
flood vegetation; and (4) terrace vegetation. This relationship between the
vegetation zones and topographic units is expressed in Table l and shown in
Figure 3.
Uplands
The upland vegetation occupies the sloping valley walls and the land beyond
the bluffs which overlook the San Gabriel River Valley. Although the prairie
technically does not include the river valley itself, the valley has many
of the floristic components of the prairie and the aboriginal populations
certainly exploited the adjacent prairie environment.

12

TABLE l
Topographic and Vegetation Zones

Topographic Zones:

Granger Reservoir

Code No.

Zone Des cription

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
4/ 5
5/ 7

Upland - above 500 ft. contour line
Upland slope
Minor tributary (to secondary or primary stream)
Minor tributary (lst or 2nd Terrace)
Secondary stream (lst of 2nd Terrace)
Secondary stream floodplain
Primary stream (lst or 2nd Terrace)
Primary stream floodplain
Gravel bar
Deltic: confluence primary and secondary streams
Deltic: confluence minor tributary to secondary and/ or primary
stream

Botanical Zones:
Code No.
2
3

4

Granger Reservoir

Zone Description

Topographic Zone

Upland Vegetation Prairie
Stream Floodplain Vegetation
Intermittent Stream Floodplain Vegetation
Terrace Vegetation

l'
6,
3,
4,

2
8, 9, 4/ 5
5/7
5/ 7

13

The native vegetati on of the Blackland Prairie uplands has been severely
altered by farming and ranching practices. In the late 1800's the prairie
was heavily ranched , but by 1880 tillage had increased to the point that the
Blacklands were no l onger considered cattle range (Collins 1972:9). By
1926 destruction of the Blackland Prairie had advanced to the point that
Tharp was led to state "A few native hay meadows have been preserved and
constitute accurate representation of the composition of the original prairie
vegetation as the pioneer first saw it (Tharp 1926:50).
In 1972 Collins
completed the first quantitative study of the Blackland Prairie, but because
of the disruption of the native grassland he was forced to use the relict
method of vegetation remnant study (Collins 1972:2). Since archeologists
are interested in pre-contact vegetation, the prairie discussion will emphasize Collins' remnant study .
11

The portion of the Blackland Prairie within which the Granger District is
located has been classified as an Andropodon - Schizachyrium - Eriochloa .
type (ibid.: Fig. l ) . This community was dominated by Andra o on gerardii
(33%), Schizachyrium scoparium (37%), and Eriochloa sericea 22% (Collins
et al. 1975:80) . Al though these grasses were encountered in the present
study, they did not occur in such abundance or frequency as they occurred in
Collins' remnant plots. Several secondary species were recognized in both
the remnant study and the present study. These plants included Ruellia nudiflora, Scutellaria drummundii, Brazoria scutellariodes, Schrankia ucinata,
Aster ericoides, Kuhnia eupatoriodes, Psoralea tenuiflora, Sisyrinchium ·
varians, and Rosa foliosa. Vernal components not encountered in the present
study but listed by Collins (1972:51-56) included Baptisia nutalliana, Chaerophyllum tainturieri , Centaurea americana, Circium texanum, Galium irrgatum,
Coreopsis basalis, Lupinus texensis, Oenothera speciosa, and Polytaenia nutalli.
Stream Floodplain
Water oak (Quercus nigra), black walnut (Juglans nigr(), cottonwood (Populus
deltoides), pecan (Carya illinoiensis), American elm Ulmus americana), red
maple (Marus rubra) and box elder (Acer negundo) dominate the vegetation of
the San Gabriel River and Willis Creek floodplains. The understory is composed of yaupon (Ilex vomitoria and I. decidua), dogwood (Cornus drummondii)
and wild plum (Prunus americana). Herbaceous vegetation is often sparse in
closed canopy areas and includes Elephantopus .?.Q_., Geum canadense, and Verbesina ~·
Vines are predominant in much of the understory along the San Gabriel River
and Willis Creek floodplains. These plants include Virginia creeper (Parthenocissus quinquefolia), grapevine (Vitis mustangensis) and catbrier (Smilax
bona-nox).
Intermittent Stream
The variability of vegetation within this zone is dependent upon the annual
availability of water in the adjacent streambed. Common woody plants within
this zone include slippery elm (Ulmus crassifolia), red ash (Fraxinus Yennsylvanica), red mullberry (Marus rubra) and mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa .
Throughout the area the stream bank is dotted with the exotic Melia azadarach,
and occasional mesic cottonwoods (Platanus occidentalis), American elms (Ulmus
americana) and black willow (Salix nigra).

14

Understory and herbaceous vegetation varies with the thickness of the canopy
and proximity to fl ooding within the stream bed. In many areas the growth
of understory vegetation has been checked by flooding or light restriction
due to a thick canopy . Common understory plants include snow berry (S~mphori­
carpos ~.), s outhe rn black-haw (Viburnum rufidulum), yaupon (Ilex vom1toria
and l· decidua), wi t h scattered gum-elastic (Bumelia lanuginosiiTilnd buckeye
(Aesculus glabra).
·
In many open areas, such grasses as broomsedge (Andropogon vir inicus),
switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) and indiangrass (Sorgastrum nutans are mixed
with the ubiquitous and i nvading bermuda grass (Cynodon dactylon).
Terrace
Several low terraces in the river valley support a mixed woodland - open
grassland vegetation. The woody vegetation is often composed of invading
mesquite (Prosopis landulosa), slippery elm (Ulmus crassifolia), with bois
d'arc (Machura pomifera , oaks (Quercus ~.), and an occasional willow
(Silex nigra). Much of this woody vegetation is young, indicating that a
recent invasion of woody plants has occurred. Quite often herbaceous vegeta tion is dominated by coastal bermuda (Cynodon dactylon), with a few scattered
upland prairie grasses.
ANIMALS
Forty-nine species of mamma 1s occur in the Texas Pro vi nee. Forty-one of
these occur i n the Aust ro ri pa ri an provi nee wi.t h the remaining eight coming in
from the grassland zone to the west. Some of the rrore coITD'Tion manrna 1i an species
found in Williamson County, according to Davis (1960), include: Didelphis
marsu i al is (opossum), Procyon 1otor (raccoon), Mephiti s meri tis (striped
skunk , Urocyon cinereoar enteus (gray fox), Sciurus niger fox squirrel),
Geomys bursarius Plains pocket gopher), Peromyscus maniculatus (deer mouse),
Sigmodon hispidus (hispid cotton rat), Neotoma floridanus (Florida wood rat),
S livila us floridanus (eastern cotton tail rabbit) and Odocoileus virginianus
white-tail~d deer).
Sixteen species of lizard also occur in the Texas Province. Some of the more
conman ones are Anolis carolinensis and Sceloporus undulatus from the Austroriparian zone and Crot ophytus collaris, Sceloporus olivaceous and Phrynosoma
cornutum from the grasslands. Thirty-nine species of snakes also occur in
this zone, iracluding Agkistrodon mokasen, A. piscivorus and Crotalus horridus.
Twenty-three species of amphibians are found in this area, with Rana catesbeina (bull frog) and B_. pipens (leopard frog) being some of the more common
ones. Two species of land turtles live in the Texas Province. These are
Terrepene carolina (eastern box turtle) and T. ornata (western box turtle).
Freshwater turtles are represented by two species of Pseudemys.
Fish that are likely to occur in the San Gabriel River and its tributary
streams, according to Kemp (1971), include:
Micropterus punctulatus
Chaenobryttus gulosus

spotted bass
warmouth

15

Lepomis macrochirus
Lepomis cyanellus
Lepomis megalotis
Aplodinotus grunniens
Amia calva
replsosteus ~·
Ictalurus nata lis
Ictalurus melas
Ictalurus punctatus
Ictiobus ~·

blue gill sunfish
green sunfish
longear sunfish
freshwater drum
bowfin
gar
yellow bullhead catfish
black bullhead catfish
channel catfish
buffalo

The preceeding li sts of vertebrates represent some of the more common
animals which are found in Williamson County today. The list may have been
larger in prehistoric times with the addition of Bison (Bison bison) and
possibly prong horn antelope (Antilocapra americana). It does give an idea
of the diversity of animals which may have been used for food.
Mammals would have made up the bulk of the meat intake with such species
as opossum, raccoon , striped skunk, gray fox, hispid cotton rat, Florida
wood rat, eastern cottontail and white-tailed deer making up the bulk of the
diet. Additions for the Balconian Province would include the jack rabbit and
the rock squirrel. Other small rodents, lizards, snakes and amphibians would
be utilized to a lesser extent. Terrestrial and aquatic turtles would have
also been important.
Birds would have been important, especially if the wild turkey were in the
area. Migratory water fowl may also have been important in the late fall
through to early spring.
Fish which would have been important to the prehistoric populations would
include freshwater drum, bowfin, gar, catfish and buffalo.
The variety of animal resources in this area is remarkable and would provide
a fair ly easy subsistence regime utilizing resources from both the Balconian
and Texan Biotic Provinces. The people could also take advantage of the di versity of the vegetational zones to increase their efficiency. In the Texan
zone, three areas could be exploited: the forests, the grasslands and the
mesic alluvial forests.
Deer probably provided the majority of the meat for most of the year. The
potential of the smaller marrmals and reptiles should not be ruled out as a
major subsistence system. Dependency on deer could be a risky venture, while
the smaller animals would provide a supplementary and easily replaceable resource which could be exploited very heavily with little adverse effect on
the population. Bi son could have been utilized, but the inconsistency of
bison herds in the area would have made for a much more nomadic way of life.
The potential food resources in this area are good, and a wide diversity of
animal remains should be found in the refuse of prehistoric sites. This report gives broad information on two ecological zones. All of these animals
may never occur together, but these species should be found if a general study
of prehistoric subsistence were undertaken.

16

FIGURE 4
Map showing the vegetation and
topographic zones in Granger
Reservoir and the distribution of
archeological sites relative to
these zones.

r---

.-<

VEGETATION 8. TOPOGRAPH IC ZONES
GRAN GER RESERVO IR
e
-

Archeolo91col sites
·Minor tributary

--.... Secondary stream

- - ' Primary stream

0

,,, ~

m il e

~

~

I

VEGETATION ZON E S

TOPOGRAPHI C Z ONES

D

Sec on dar y str eam

ITJIJ

P ri mary

I

stream

I

S Ire om
>Floo dp lain

L_j Secondary stream floodp l otn

l Vegetat ion

Pr i mary stream f l oodpla i n
Gro vel bar

•

t=

Del t i c confluence primary 8

D

Minor tributa r y

[ill
EJj

•

•

•

De lt ic conflu ence secondary 8
Upland

a

i?J>l

Terrace

CJ

Terroc e

=

seco n'd ory stream .;

upland sl ope

~
minor trib

Secondary Stream

J F l oodpla i n Vegeta ti on

} Upl and Pro in e Vegelol i on

} Terrace Vege ta t ion

18

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

A discussion of archeological research in the San Gabriel Valley is presented
here in order that the findings from the Granger survey can be viewed from
the perspective of the area's prehistory.
Professional archeological work in the survey area and vicinity began in
1963 with reconnaissance of the North Fork and Granger (formerly Laneport)
reservoir areas (Shafer and Corbin 1965). Following the recommendations provided by these surveys, Eddy (1973) tested three sites in the Granger Lake
area and Prewitt (1974) reported the findings of test excavations at LoeveFox and the results of additional survey work in the same area. Recently,
intensive surveys have been conducted at both Granger and North Fork Reservoirs (Patterson anq Moore 1976). Outside the survey area, historical archeologi cal work near San Gabriel defined the Spanish Colonial San Xavier
Mission complex (Gilmore 1969) .
One notable result of the San Gabriel research efforts, together with other
work in central Texas (e .g. Shafer 1963; Johnson, Suhm and Tunnel 1962;
Sorrow, Shafer and Ross 1967; Wesolowsky, Hester and Brown 1976) is the demonstrated 10-11 ,000 year long culture history of this portion of the state.
An excellent model of the chronology of Central Texas is presently available
on the basis of the works listed above and others (e.g. Patterson 1977).
This chronology is based primarily on changes in projectile point form and
to a lesser degree on shifting emphasis within associated tool assemblages.
Using these chronological guides, it is theoretically possible to detect
changes through time in the location and distribution of certain kinds of
sites.
Spatial parameters are more difficult to define and interpret. On a general
level, archeologists working in Central Texas in the past have relied on
the application of the Midwestern Taxonomic system of Kelley (1947) and Suhm,
Krieger and Jelks (1954) and on their definition of the spatial boundaries
of cultural traditions as exemplified by projectile point distributions.
While this approach served the purpose of placing attention on similarities
and differences from one geographic area to the next, it was limited in that
it served purely descriptive ends. Also, the rigid application of the concept
in Texas tended to obscure possible intra-areal differences. For example,
there are subtle but obvious differences in the. Archaic materials along the
Leon River when compared to those along the Colorado River (Shafer, personal
communication). These differences are ignored, however, as emphasis is placed
on the similarities in projectile point types and both areas are included in
the Edwards Plateau aspect (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954: Fig. 4). Such a
classificatory scheme lacks the flexibility of detecting the kinds of differences that could mark sensitive boundaries between prehistoric groups.
Central Texas archeological sites appear in several different forms and in
three principal topographic settings: prairie, plateau/bluff and riverine
floodplain. However, there is a definable relationship between certain kinds
of sites and environmental settings (see Survey Results for a more detailed
discussion). For example, burned rock middens occur in the limestone plateau

19
country of western Williamson County (North Fork Reservoir). This type of
site, which indicates repeated utilization of one locality for processing
specific resources , is topographically associated with limestone outcrops
and plateau plant resources. The zone with the largest diversity of resources is the prairie setting, as opposed to the more restricted bluff or
riverine zones. In the prairie setting, it has been assumed that the location and character of the archeological sites are the results of patterned
subsistence and resource utilization strategies (Eddy 1974; Prewitt 1976).
The hunting and gathering lifeway usually implies a degree of mobility in
the annual movemen t of the human populations as they exploit the plant and
animal resources (Flannery 1972:228). The degree of mobility or length of
time spent in any one location depends upon the resources available and the
ability of technology to exploit those resources (Jochim 1976:66). Additional factors may affect the exploitability of a particular area. These
factors include increased knowledge of available resources, a shift in the
territorial range that would incorporate access to new or more abundant resources, improved technology, change in population density and/or ecological
change. For reasons just discussed territorial behavior can be expected from
hunting/gathering groups and, we assume, was operative in the San Gabriel
Valley. This is not to say that territorial boundaries were not contested
as Prewitt's (1974) data at the Loeve-Fox Site suggests that intergroup warfare was practiced.
Shafer and Bryant (1976) in presenting an adaptive model for the San Gabriel
Valley have suggested that no single resource zone such as the Edwards Plateau margin, Taylor Prairie or Blackland Prairie, and the riverine environments transecting these zones contained sufficient resources to provide
year-round sustenance for groups of hunters and gatherers. These zones
taken together, however, could have provided the necessary resources to sustain such populations indefinitely (cf. Campbell 1975; Shafer 1975). Because no one resource zone was sufficient to provide year-round subsistence,
it is suggested that a successful adaptation required individuals and groups
to participate in a seasonal round within recognized territorial ranges. The
groups, probably organized on a band level, were presumed to be essentially
egalitarian in structure, and individual statuses, if they existed, cannot
be determined from the available archeological record. Prewitt (1974:49)
has suggested that status might be indicated in the associations with burial
I-13 at the Loeve-Fox Site. For the most part, however, identifying sociotechnic artifacts will be difficult because burials, where such contexts are
best preserved, were not a pattern for the Archaic in Central Texas until the
Transitional period (Shafer 1971).
Eddy (1974) and Prewitt (1976) have discussed views on the settlement strategies of the prehistoric groups who utilized the Granger Lake area. Eddy
(1974:105-106), in his study of three sites in the Granger Lake area, concl uded that:
... Archaic Stage sites along the San Gabriel River of Central
Texas were located according to vegetation habits containing
a few desirable resources. These key resources were the principal determinants of the locational choice. Thus the close
proximity of the site to the selected and highly valued resources was a decision to reduce the exploitative effort.

20

A corollary statement is: that the increased distance to other
habits progressively and systematically reduced their resource
use. To paraphrase, the aboriginal peoples of Central Texas
were efficiently lazy in their everyday, routine work.
Prewitt (1976), in his discussion of the Late Archaic occupation at the
Loeve-Fox Site, postulates the following model to explain the exploitative
system for the Central San Gabriel River occupation during the San Marcos
and Twin sisters phase: l) the proximity of the most desirable of unequally
valued resources (predominantly food as opposed to raw materials or tools)
partially determined site locations. Hypothesis: Prehistoric campsites will
be found to reflect a consistently patterned distribution in relation to the
proximity of unequally valued resources as determinable from paleoenvironmental
data; 2) site locations were determined in part by the surface topography.
Hypothesis: Prehistoric campsites will be found to occur in areas which are
consistent in their paleo-topography; 3) knowledge of specific site location
was retained by the peoples inhabiting the area, or alternatively, circumstances determining the choice of site locations were relatively constant
through time. Hypothesis: Prehistoric campsites will be found to reflect
evidence of repeated use consistent with each site's paleotopography and proximity to resources ; 4) when available resources at a given site were temporarily depleted to a certain point of efficiency in energy expending vs. yield,
then the people moved to another site with the foreknowledge that a suitable,
previously-used site was available. Hypothesis: Prehistoric campsites will
be found to be relatively numerous and will reflect repeated use; 5) seasonal
variation of available resources may have dictated the need of the people to
move from one locality to another. Hypothesis: Prehistoric campsites will
be found to contain evidence that certain resources which are available only
during certain seasons of the year were collected or utilized and that the
locus of any site or set of sites will co-vary with the paleo-distribution
of these resources; 6) regardless of whether seasonality or simple temporary
resource depletion was responsible for these people moving from one site to
another, each site was repeatedly occupied through time. Hypothesis: Prehistoric campsites will be found to reflect repeated use through the accumulation of debris in deep stratified context.
In order to confirm Prewitt's model, campsites would l) need to show a pattern
in terms of their l ocation on topographic features; and 2) exhibit stratification or other evidence of repeated utilization. Nonetheless, the Prewitt
model does outline succinctly one possible interpretation of a subsistency
strategy with applicability to the Granger Complex. It is obvious that the
basis of Prewitt's argument centers on environment/resource potential.
Justification of such a model is only legitimized if an adequate description
of the present environment, with all its seasonal variations, is presented.
While both Prewitt and Eddy's model imply a minimax strategy of energy expenditure, Prewitt takes a more flexible, and we think a more reasonable, approach. However, both archeologists do not take into consideration the potential exploitation sphere for any site in the area (or the site catchment
areas as defined by Vita-Finzi and Higgs 1970). Furthermore, the application
of both model s needs to be expanded to a diversity of resource zones (not just
to the prairie-riverine environment) to be adequately tested. We suggest, for
example, that the choices of campsites were based on the proximity to water;

21

to the availability of an adequate supply of fuel (for instance, firewood
which would be an important criterion to a prairie environment); to food
resources; and, on a low level of priority, to mineral resources. Indeed
the occupation of any location in the Granger Lake basin would allow access
to all food resources within an hour's walk. In other words, we reject
Eddy's model in that it is inconsistent with the exploitative strategies of
known hunters and gatherers. Prewitt's model has a limited application both
in time and space. It was intended to apply to the late Prehistoric Period
in the Granger Lake area. It seems doubtful that the people who occupied the
Granger Lake sites limited their settlement exclusively to that area. Pre witt's model becomes applicable if expanded both temporally and spatially.
The arguments just presented create a background for further discussion concerning appropriate models for the interpretation of the Granger survey data .
There are two appropriate models which have applicability and which will be
more fully discussed in the Survey Results section.

SURVEY RESULTS

Prior to field reconnaissance, an inspection was made of the files and maps
in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at Balcones Research Center,
Austin. It was found that a total of 41 sites had been previously recorded
within the Granger Reservoir boundaries. Given the 528-foot projected flood
pool elevation, of the 41 total only 29 previously recorded sites were to be
directly affected by the reservoir impoundment, actual dam construction, or
borrow areas. The remaining 12 sites were not affected or could not be relocated. The relative location of all investigated sites is shown in Figure
5.

Maps used during the field reconnaissance included U.S.G.S. 7.5-minute quadrangle maps. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers supplied project maps for the
Granger Reservoir, and in addition supplied low and medium altitude aerial
coverage of both the North Fork and Granger reservoirs.
A survey form designed specifically for the San Gabriel project was utilized
to record the presence of archeological materials. Artifact collections were
made on a selective basis, because of the paucity of material at some sites.
Photographs were taken of the general environment and specific site localities.
All artifacts, photographs and survey forms, as well as maps and field notes,
are now housed in the Texas A&M Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas. Newly discovered archeological sites, as well as
additional data on previously known sites, have been recorded with the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, the University
of Texas at Austin.
A discussion of survey procedures used during the Granger survey is presented
forthwith.

22

FIGURE 5
Map of Granger Reservoir showing
site locations.

:\

,

11 1

.

'"

;9\

•

• 1 10

' in

,...--_

s::

'-'

~

N

~
GRANGER RESERVO IR
ARCH EOL OGICAL SURV E Y A REA
•

Den ot es orcheo l o g i co l si t e

'""
160

•

N

w

'

24

Methods and Procedures
Because it was necessary to achieve as close to a 100 percent coverage of the
survey area as poss i ble, no fonnalized sampling strategy was employed during
survey. Rather, the survey was accomplished by a two-person survey team who
systematically walked the area. Movement of the team and visibility of the
ground was impaired to some extent by exceptionally heavy grass growth and
the dense stream-side biota. Nonetheless, approximately 85% of the defined
area was covered. Additionally, all of the exposed stream banks were examined
by boat.
As a significant po rtion of the sites were small, with a limited amount of
artifactual material present, a sample of materials was collected from selected sites. These artifact samples together with those reported by Shafer
and Corbin (1965) were considered to be representative of the various assemblages present in the area. No specific collection methodology was employed,
as opposed to the more systematic collection techniques utilized on selected
North Fork sites. By employing such a cross-check as opposed to various artifact collection strategies, it was hoped to compare the representativeness of
the various collections based on the stages of manufacturing identified for
each co 11 ect ion.
Following is a discussion of the survey results and a brief description of
the typology used to classify the sites.
Site Typology
Survey results revealed that there were generally eight types of sites in
eleven different topographic settings. The actual site types and descriptions
were supplied by the Corps of Engineers Scope-of-Work presented later in this
report. The categories do not in all cases represent descriptions of site
types by function, but are a combination of functional and descriptive attributes. Those types are listed below and in Table 2. In conjuction with Table
2, a chronological chart showing the various temporal sequences for Central
Texas is provided in Table 3.
l)

2)

Lithic procurement sites. The sites are most commonly locations of Pleistocene chert outcrops in the upland margins of
the reservoir basin. However, gravel bar formations in the
river and stream beds were also included in this category.
These sites show evidence of prehistoric chipping activity
and are believed to be the source of the majority of chipped
implements which were manufactured in the Granger Reservoir
District.
Lithic processing sites . These sites were recorded throughout
the study area. They were characterized by scatters and concentrations of lithic debitage and represent the various stages
of the lithic reduction sequence (see Artifact section for further discussion).

25
3)

4)

5)
6)
7)
8)

Deeply stratified sites. The alluvial terraces immediately
adjacent to the two waterways were found to be the location
for this type of site. The deeply stratified soils commonly
contained buried hearths, floral and faunal remains and
chipped stone artifacts (Fig. 9).
Environmental data sites. · Environmental data sites are distinguished as those that contained data which promised to be
useful in environmental reconstruction. Sites in close pro ximity to suspected subsistence resources, sites containing
organic materials which might be analyzed for the prehistoric
uses of those resources, ~ites containing data which might
contribute to paleo-climatic reconstruction, and sites which
might be studied to establish the geological history of the
study area were included in this general framework.
Ossuary sites. These sites were distinguished by the presence
or suspicion of human burials.
·
Historic sites. Locations which showed evidence of habitation
or human alteration during historic times were placed in this
category.
Burned rock middens. These are distinguished by sizable
accumulations of burned and cracked 1i me stone mixed with charcoal and ash stained soil as well as cultural debris.
Unique sites. These were sites which exhibited characteristics
which set them apart from other sites in the reservoir basin.
Such sites would include paleo-Indian sites, bison procurement
sites, and palentological sites.

It should be emphasized that some of the sites discussed in this report represent multi-functional locations of human behavior and may be described utilizing more than one of the above categories. The breakdown of sites by type
location and temporal period together with recommendations is presented in
Table 2.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

Narrative descriptions of each site are presented in thi.s section.
to previous investigations are also included.

References

41WM21 - Centerline Site
Reference: Prewitt 1974:136, 139; Patterson and Moore 1976:59; Moore 1976;
Moore 1977.
41WM21 is located on the north bank of the San Gabriel River about l .5 mile s
south of Friendship, Texas. The site is situated on the centerline of the
Granger Dam.
The first published data on 41WM21 was included in the Loeve-Fox Site Report
by Elton R. Prewitt, 1974. In that report Prewitt made the following

26
observations about 41WM21. "The site is contained within alluvial terrace
deposits on the ins i de of a meander of the river. Scattered midden debris
(including mussel, animal bones, burned rock and flint flakes) and several
intact stone hearths were observed in the exposed sites of the diversion
channel. The top of the midden debris is covered by about five feet of
sterile alluvium. The bottoms of the deposits are about 20 feet below ground
surface. No diagnostic artifacts were recovered. However, reported artifacts indicate an Archaic and possible post-Archaic affiliation."
During the course of the archeological survey of the Granger District members
of the Texas A&M Ant hropology Laboratory revisited 41WM21 and made the following observations: l) The horizontal extent of the site was much greater than
is suggested in the Prewitt report. It extends over 300 meters on an eastwest axis. 2) The vertical distribution of the site extends from the present
ground surface to more than 7 r.ieters in depth. Thirty-one burned rock hearths
were noted in the diversion channel cut surface and 17 distinct cultural levels
were located. 3) The cultural levels (living surfaces?) were thin zones of
snail and mussel shell, burned and unburned bone, charcoal and lithic debris.
The burned rock hearths were located in these cultural levels. Each level
appeared to be separated by sterile alluvial deposit. 4) The surface of
the north side of the diversion channel had been cleared of all growth and
this clearing had resulted in an unknown degree of surface disturbance.
5) The original river channel on the south side of the diversion channel had
been filled and an existing dam structure extended into the site area. 6)
The exposed cultura l materials were being subjected to repeated flood erosion.
Based upon these observations, a series of test excavations were undertaken.
Two units revealed in situ cultural deposits and that those deposits were
distinct zones, separated by sterile alluvial strata. Another test unit,
which was located in the lower portion of the site near the water level, resulted in the documentation of five cultural deposits within 47 vertical centimeters (see Moore 1977).
It was at this time that ongoing construction activities forced a shift of
emphasis to the north side of the diversion channel in the area of the proposed
dam center line. A core trench along the dam axis was being excavated and
archeological monitoring activities were centered on that location.
A large
trench,
inspect
(Figure

"paddle wheel" scraper was being used to remove the dirt from the core
and each time the machine would pass through the monitor crew would
the cut and document any cultural deposits which had been exposed
6).

Twenty-five hearths were located in this manner and it was evident that the
site extended about 92 meters to the north of the diversion channel. These
hearths were recorded at depths from 140 centimeters to 268 centimeters below
the present ground surface (Figures 5A and 58). Core trench excavations did
not extend beyond this depth and it was impossible to determine the vertical
extent of the site in that location. An examination of the topographic map
of the area and the results of core testing along the center line, suggest
that the formation rises in elevation as it moves to the north and away from
the diversion channel.

27

FIGURE 6
Mon i toring core trench activities, 41WM21.
A)
B)

Investigating newly exposed
feature;
Clearing matrix from around
a burned rock feature.

29
Subsequent to the core trench monitoring activities an additional test pit
was excavated to expose a portion of bone which had been noted during an
earlier inspection. The excavation revealed a part of a deer skull with
one 4-point antler still intact (Moore 1977). The skull was located in a
thin, lower lens of snail shell, and like other lenses found contained lithic
debris and burned rock.
The sampling of a site such as 41WM21 was complicated by many factors, not
usually encountered in archeological testing. Ongoing construction activities had destroyed a major portion of the site and continue to alter much
of the remaining area.
Based on the known information,recommendations were made for the emergency
testing of 41WM21. The research design was directed toward the segment of
the site which had suffered the least amount of destruction, and which was
to be preserved for the duration of any archeological investigation. Therefore, the choice of the excavation area was not determined upon archeological
evidence alone, but was balanced against the practicalities of investigating
a site in the midst of an intensive construction project.
It was stressed that such a localized excavation would be expected to yield
limited data in regard to the overall character of the site. The cultural
anatomy of 41WM21 was most certainly not uniform throughout the site area,
and it was possible that important archeological components would be missed,
even utilizing the most careful sampling techniques. This was not to say
that localized excavations should be considered in a negative vein. In
sorre cases it is better to explore a small segment thoroughly enough to establish its structure confidently, than to expend the same time and resources
drawing from a large segment, when the principal result can only be average
non-structural perimeters of the segment.
One of the most important considerations in the proposed investigation of
41WM21 or any other site in the Granger Reservoir was the development of
a research design which could be incorporated into existing and future archeological programs. Aside from the obvious need for standard and well documented
archeological techniques close attention should be paid to the presence of the
numerous occupation lenses present in the site. The recovery of charred plant
materials from those lenses combined with tests for fossil pollen was suggested
as an opportunity for the first study of the economic use of plants for the
Middle Archaic in the Central Texas sequence. Also charred plant materials
were expected which would be sufficiently abundant to securely date the cultural and alluvial deposits by the C-14 dating technique.
The research design was therefore oriented towards the recovery of data useful to the reoonstruction of the local environrrental setting at the time of
the prehistoric utilization. The temporally diagnostic artifacts recovered
during the initial testing of 41WM21 suggested a Central Texas Archaic affiliation. The absence of environmental data pertaining to that time period and
the suspected availability of the resources to address that problem, i solated
41WM21 as a singularly significant site. Other cultural data were sought and
were expected during recovery operations, but the environmental aspect was to
remain as the area of prime investigative importance.

30
The results of the archeological testing of 41WM21 are reported by Moore
(1977). Based on the known data of that testing exercise and the now total
destruction of 41WM21 by construction activities, no additional investigations are recommended nor are they possible.
41WM22 - Speegle Site
Reference:

Prewitt 1974:139; Patterson and Moore 1976:59.

41WM22 is a large site located at the confluence of Pecan Branch Creek and
the San Gabriel River. The site is bordered on the north by County Road
347 and on the west by the Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad. The southern
and eastern boundaries of the site are Pecan Branch Creek and the San Gabriel
River, respectively. The site is locatedonemile northeast of the community
of Circleville, Texas.
Most of the surface area of the site (200,000 square meters) has been disturbed by cultivation, but subsurface testing by the Texas A&M field team
showed intact cultural remains below the 18-inch plow zone. The maximum
depth of the site was not established during the testing exercise.
The site is characterized by scattered flint debris and burned rock, evident
on the cultivated surface of the field. Many stages of the lithic manufacturing process are represented at 41WM22, and the site is located in close
proximity to a Pleistocene gravel outcrop which underlies the Blackland
Prairie to the north. These gravel deposits (ref. 41WM286) show evidence of
extensive prehistoric utilization throughout the Granger Reservoir district,
and a close examination of the lithic debitage present at the occupation sites
should show the relationship between the quarry and manufacturing sites.
Previous investigations in the reservoir area and surrounding sites, and the
testing by the Texas A&M field team, suggest that sites of this nature may
contain areas of specialized activities. Intact, buried hearths, lithic
manufacturing locales, and occupational surfaces would be expected if the
site were subjected to an extensive excavation.
Temporally diagnostic artifacts recovered from the site indicate a Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric occupation at 41WM22. Although preliminary testing did not establish the maximum depth of the site, any additional investigations should be directed toward the possible location of an early component.
Previous investigations at Granger Reservoir have resulted in the opinion
that the local soils are not conducive to the preservation of pollen spores.
Efforts should continue to isolate areas which might contain evidence of the
pollen record. However, organic materials related to the prehistoric occupation are evident and any recovery operation should incorporate plans for
maximum floral and faunal analysis.
The location of 41WM22, at the upper end of the reservoir district, and the
apparent horizontal extent of the cultural remains make the site important
in the overall consideration of the prehistoric occupation of the San Gabriel
River.

31

The majority of the area of 41WM22 is located outside of the 528-foot flood
pool limits of Granger Reservoir. It is recommended that no excavation be
considered for this site and that the site be preserved. Farming activities
which might further disturb the site should be curtailed and surface stabilization steps should be taken in the flood pool portion of 41WM22.
41WM117 Reference : Shafer and Corbin 1965:47-48; Patterson and Moore 1976:62 .
41WM117 is a large s ite in a cultivated field, upstream from Hoxie Bridge .
It is bordered on the south by the alluvial terrace of the San Gabriel River
and on the north by County Road 416. The eastern limits of the site are
defined by a modern gravel pit . The western boundaries are undetermined .
The site is located three miles northeast of the community of Circleville,
Texas.
The horizontal extent of the site is estimated to be in excess of 100,000
square meters, and cultural debris has been exposed as the result of cultivation and the construction of a now-removed farmhouse and associated out-buildings . Based on the testing of 41WM117 by the Texas A&M field team, the esti mated depth of the site is less than one-half meter. It is expected that
considerable horizontal disp l acement. of cultural materials has taken place.
41WM117 is a good example of sites in the study area which were found on
high terrace structures which border the Blackland Prairie. It is believed
that these sites functioned as the location of lithic procurement and processing activities. An examination of the lithic debris leaves little doubt
that many stages of lithic reduction may be documented at 41WM117 and that the
source of most of the altered cherts is within the site confines. No evidence
of intact burned rock hearths or middens was recorded, and it is unlikely
that these features could be located through excavation.
Collected and observed artifacts place the site in the Early Archaic to
Late Prehistoric periods of the Central Texas sequence. The site has been
subjected to intense, uncontrolled surface collections for many years, and
earlier occupations might have been represented at one time.
Due to the
which may
present.
should be

disturbed nature of the site, it is doubtful that organic materials
have been deposited as a result of prehistoric occupation will be
However, if intact cultural stratigraphy is encountered, efforts
directed toward the recovery of possible floral and faunal remains.

41WM117 should lend itself to the study of sites which occur on the upland
border areas. If the sites in Granger Reservoir were chosen because of resource availability, this site is a prime example of lithic procurement and
use.
The site is located above the conservation pool limits, but entirely within
the 528-foot flood pool. Any conditions which might cause the water level
of Granger Reservoir to exceed the conservation pool limits would also cause
irreparable damage to 41WM117. It is recommended that mitigation research

32
designs be directed toward limiting s urface collection and that analysis
be conducted to establish relationships between lithic source materials and
subsequent manufacturing techniques.
41WM118 - Dobias - Vi tek Site
Reference:
1976:62.

Eddy 1973, 1974; Shafer and Corbin 1965:48; Patterson and Moore

The Dobias-Vitek Site is on the left bank of the San Gabriel River at a
location 6.7 river miles downstream from the Highway 95 bridge and 0.5 miles
southeast of Hoxie Bridge . A north-south farm lane bisects the cultural
refuse, providing a convenient reference line for designations of the eastern
or western halves of the site .
Some of the site area (7500 square meters) has suffered from cultivation
and slope wash disturbance, but the full height of stratigraphy is present
within the pecan grove in the eastern portion of the site. Eddy (1973)
reports that the cultural deposits extend to a depth of 1.5 meters below the
present ground surface and that intact features are present.
The surface of 41WM118 appears as a scattering of stone tools and lesser
amounts of animal bone and molluscan shells. Cultural material is plentifully concentrated in the plowed field to the west of the farm road. The
distribution of artifacts to the east of the road, in a wooded area, is much
less conspicuous from the surface. Here the occupational debris was largely
buried by the floodplain sediments and is only brought to the surface by the
burrowing activities of some large animals.
The artifact inventory which was compiled as a result of the Eddy test excavations places the site in Transitional Archaic and Late Prehistoric association. Most of the stages of lithic manufacture are present at 41WM118.
Pottery was also present at this site. A more detailed description of the
recovered artifacts is available in the Eddy report.
Even if pollen studies cannot be made, the organic materials present at 41WM118
would be significant in establishing prehistoric subsistence and in determining guidelines for settlement pattern studies.
The excellent reporting of Eddy and the extensive testing conducted during
his investigations signify that the Dobias-Vitek Site will contribute a
wealth of informati on to future studies in the Granger Reservoir district.
Any additional studies in the area should incorporate this available data.
The design of an acceptable and reasonable mitigation plan for the Granger
Reservoir district should be directed toward maximum data retrieval. It
i s apparent that al l the sites recorded during the course of the survey can not be preserved or totally excavated. Therefore, based on the previous
testing of 41WMll 8, the available data already recovered and the presence of
similar sites with i n the reservoir district, it is recommended that the site
be considered as an alternate choice for future excavation. If, however,
other si'tes do not reflect the known qualities of 41WM118, additional excavations are suggested.

33
41WM119 Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:49; Patterson and Moore 1976:62.

41WMll9, which is located a short distance east of Highway 95 and bounded
on the south by County Road 347 and on the east by the Missouri-Kansas-Texas
Railroad, is a site which is located outside of the flood pool elevations
and was not inspected by the Texas A&M University survey team. Shafer and
Corbin report that thinly scattered occupational debris was found over about
one-half an acre of a cultivated field on the slope of a high terrace. That
survey party failed to find any artifacts, but the land owner had several
projectile points, including a Castroville and a Pedrenales he had recovered
from the site. No additional investigations are recommended.
41WM120 Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:49; Patterson and Moore 1976:62.

41WM120 is a scatters site on the south side of upper Willis Creek. It is
bordered on the west by County Road 346 and on the south by an abandoned farm
road. 41WM120 is 2.8 miles southeast of the town of Granger, Texas.
The entire site area (2500 square meters) had been disturbed by extensive
cultivation. Subsurface testing by the Texas A&M field party showed that
the cultural materials extended only to 30 centimeters in depth and no intact
cultural features can be expected.
The thinly scattered midden debris at 41WM120 is characteristic of other
sites of that nature in the reservoir district. Future excavations in the
area should be directed toward the documentation of "like" sites which have
not suffered from modern farming practices.
The artifacts recovered from 41WM120 indicate that the site may be placed
in the Terminal Archaic of the Central Texas chronological sequence.
No organic materials were observed during the survey at 41WM120. The recovery
of such material is doubtful in situations where the entire site has been
disturbed.
Although 41WM120 has been subjected to continued cultivation, it is important
to document sites of this nature. It is suspected that such sites were the
locations of infrequent, but repeated use. Other sites in the area exhibit
long-term utilization and the relationship between the two types needs to
be established.
Due to the horizontal and vertical displacement of the cultural remains at
41WM120, no additional investigations are recommended.
41WM121 Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:50; Patterson and Moore 1976:62.

34
41WM121 was a site which was reported at the confluence of Willis Creek
and Sore Finger Creek. It was described as a large surface site, but the
1976 inspection showed that the site had been destroyed by dam construction
activities.
Shafer and Corbin reported that the entire area of occupation was being
cultivated and apparently all of the cultural refuse was restricted to the
surface. A triangular knife, an ovoid knife, a blade fragment, two thick
bifacial implements, and two utilized flakes were collected from the surface.
No additional investigations are possible at this site.
41WM122 Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:50; Patterson and Moore 1976:63.

41WM122 is located outside survey limits at the confluence of Willis Creek
and the San Gabriel River. The site was not examined by the Texas A&M University field party.
The site was described in the Shafer and Corbin report as a promising site
which was found on a relatively low, flat terrace between Willis Creek and
the San Gabriel River. It is approximately 1.5 miles southeast of Friendship, Texas. In recent years flood waters from the two streams have cut
a gully through this terrace, exposing a rich, buried occupation zone. The
land owner reported that many projectile points have been found in this erosional cut, especially after heavy rains. Although the Shafer party found
only a thick bifacial implement and three utilized flakes, it was apparent
that a prolific zone is present.
No additional investigations are recommended under the Granger Reservoir
mitigation plan, but monitoring activities should be conducted to assure
that channel and water flow alterations which may result from the dam construction do not contribute to additional site destruction.
41WM123 Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:51; Patterson and Moore 1976:63.

41WM123 was also beyond the survey area and was not inspected by the Texas
A&M University survey party. Shafer and Corbin reported that the site lay
across Willis Creek from 41WM122 and consisted of cultural refuse thinly
scattered over a hillside. The area of occupation is about an acre, all
of which was under cultivation at that time. An unidentified expanding
stem dart point, a discoidial scraper, and a thick bifacial implement were
collected. No further work is recommended at this site.
41WM124 - Bryan Fox Site
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:51; Prewitt 1974:139-140; Patterson and
Moore 1976:63; Moore 1977.

35
The Bryan Fox Site is located on the west bank and on an outside bend of
the San Gabriel River. It is contained on the north by County Road 346A
and on the west by a farm road. Surface cultural debris continues to the
south across a small gully to a point 40 meters beyond that erosional feature. 41WM124 is located 2.5 miles northeast of the community of Circleville, Texas.
A concentrated accumulation of burned rock covers one portion of the site.
Part of the site has been altered by a gravel quarry and another portion
has been altered by cultivation. The part of the site between the midden
deposit and the river is covered by a dense growth of trees and seems to be
undisturbed except for natural erosion. Occupational debris extends to a
depth of six meters and covers an area of 64,000 square meters.
Evidence of the prehistoric utilization of 41WM124 is, first and foremost,
apparent in the burned rock midden which covers one portion of the site.
This. heavy concentration of burned rock and flint debris has been the object
of repeated excavations by relic hunters. It would be difficult to assess
the degree of damage to the midden deposit, but a conservative estimate would
be that more than 50 percent of the component no longer contains in situ
cultural remains.
- -Deeper occupations at 41WM124 may be observed in the river bank and in the
recent erosional gully which cuts through the southern portion of the site.
Additional cultural materials were noted from an area to the southwest of
41WM124 in a gravel deposit on the left bank of an old channel scar in the
floodplain of the San Gabriel River. Prewitt (1974:140) reports that a local
collector recovered a partially burned Scottsbluff point and various Early
Archaic style projectile points from the site. The site was recorded as
41WM151 but given the close proximity of this site to 41WM124, it is questionable whether they should be separated into two different sites.
Temporally diagnostic artifacts recovered from the Bryan Fox Site indicate
that the site may have been the location of prehistoric utilization from
the Early Archaic period through the Late Prehistoric. Prehistoric organic
remains were found to be present and well preserved at 41WM124. Future investigations at this site should include extensive reclamation efforts to
determine paleoecological conditions and possible subsistence techniques.
A local collector has reported the presence of human skeletons and the recovery and documentation of these burials might serve to augment the findings
at the Loeve-Fox Site (41WM230).
Texas A&M investigations demonstrate that the site may be divided into three
areas or components of interest. The first and most apparent is the badly
disturbed burned rock concentration which covers a major portion of the site.
A careful examination should be made of this Middle to Late Archaic component
to determine what areas have not been destroyed by relic hunters, and excavation efforts should be directed toward that portion of the site. Test units
were excavated by Texas A&M in an effort to determine the depth of the
first component and the nature of the archeological materials. As suspected,
some of the areas bordering existing potholes contained intact cultural
materials. A heavy concentration of burned rock was encountered within the
uppermost 30 centimeters. Below that point, from 30 to 50 centimeters, the
burned rock constituted a lesser percentage of the fill, but still remained

36

FIGURE 7
Subsurface testing at a deeply stratified site (41WM124).

I

-

38

the predominant material in the archeological structure. The many potholes ,
which remain as the result of uncontrolled relic hunting, suggest a burned
rock midden depth of over one meter.
Burned rock accumulations of this magnitude are found to be uncommon
Granger district. These midden type structures are usually recorded
Balcones Escarpment and westward throughout central Texas . Although
are reported as food preparation sites, their exact function remains
subject of debate and conjecture.

in the
on the
they
the

Close attention should be paid to feature association and structure, limestone resources and topographic location. The research design of any mitigation plan should be directed toward the areal distributions of this type
site in relation to its resource exploitation potentiality. Studies should
be made which will evaluate the role of scheduling and seasonality and the
nutritional value of available food resources.
The second component is the deep occupation which was tested in a recent
erosional gully wh i ch cuts through the southern portion of the site. Cultural debris was found to extend to a depth of more than six meters and was
characterized by a series of stratified lenses of occupation. Preliminary
testing did not de f ine the horizontal extent of this component . A full-scal e
excavation should be directed toward determining those horizontal limits .
The exposure of a number of buried cultural lenses could result in the defining of specialty areas and the recovery of preserved plant and animal
materials. The carbon-14 dating of the abundant charred plant remains should
contribute to the establishment of a time frarrework within which the development
of the component may be placed. Pollen and soil samples should be taken t o
furth er aid in understanding the environmental conditions at the time of
occupation.
The third component , the gravel bar deposit, should be explored to determine
if culturally intact materials remain. This portion of the site could provide data regarding the early prehistoric utilization of the Granger distri ct.
An overall conside ration should be given to the interrelationship of the
three archeologi cal components present at 41WM124.
41WM125 Reference : Shafer and Corbin 1965:51, 52; Patterson and Moore 1976:63.
41WM1 25 i s lo cated outs ide the flood pool and was not evaluated during t he
1976 Granger Reservoir District survey effort . The following description
of 41WM125 is taken from the Shafer and Corbin report. "This concentrated
midden is located approximately four miles northeast of Circleville and on
the south side of the river. Here occupational refuse was obs erved on a
hill wes t of a l ar ge spring and onto the adjacent floodplain. On the hill t op, t he midden soi l i s l ess eroded, i s quite ashy, and has a depth of at
l east two feet as evidence d by a deep armadillo burrow. Included in the
artifacts found on the surface are a triangular knife, a burin, two end
s cr apers , two side scrapers, nine thi ck bifacial implements, two choppers,
five ma nos , and a hammer s tone.
11

39
Since 41WM125 will not be affected by the construction of Granger Reservoir,
no additional work is recommended. Steps should be taken to preserve this
area from future damage .
41WM126 Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:52; Patter.son and Moore 1976:63.

41WM126 is marked on the map at the confluence of a s~all, unnamed creek with
the San Gabriel River. The area of the site is limited on the north by the
San Gabriel River . The southern and eastern limits of the site are defined
by a sharply rising topography and an absence of surface soils. The site
is located 3.2 miles northeast of the community of Circleville, Texas.
The site area (2500 square meters) has not been cultivated and is covered
by a dense growth of timber. Test excavations showed a depth in excess of
one meter and intact cultural features should be expected if the site is
excavated.
Although little cultural debris was present on the surface of
41WM126, the location and nature of the topographic feature indicated the
possibility of an intact and stratified cultural site. No diagnostic artifacts which might date the period of site occupation were recovered. Any
additional investigations should address that problem.
The stratigraphic integrity of 41WM126 should lend itself to the recovery
of organic materials for dating and subsistence studies. No such samples
were noted during the testing, but this may be the result of the limited
testing conducted by the Texas A&M field team. Continued investigations at
41WM126 might serve to corroborate, refine, or refute the interpretations
of other sites in the Granger Reservoir district. It is recommended that
41WM126 be considered as an alternate site for investigations in the final
Granger Reservoir mitigation plan.
41WM127
Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:53; Patterson and Moore 1976:63.

41WM127 was not relocated during the 1976 survey. It was described as a
small area of scattered cultural debris on the south side of the river in an
area restricted to a slight rise paralleling a small slough which cuts
through the floodplain . The entire area has been cultivated. No additional
investigations are recommended for 41WM127.
41WM128 Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:53; Patterson and Moore 1976:64.

41WM128 is located on the east bank of the San Gabriel River and is limited
on the east by a small slough which cuts through the floodplain. The south ern boundary is marked by a rise in topography, and the northern extent of
the site is unknown. The site is four miles northeast of the community of

40
Circleville, Texas. This small site (250 square meters) was first noted
as an area of scattered lithic debris. Subsurface testing by th~ Texas A&M
field team revealed that the site had a cultural depth of no more than 40
centimeters. It would be difficult to assign the site to a particular topological category. Flint debris and burned rock were noted by the survey
party, but no features such as hearths were noted.
41WM128 is one of the few sites in the Granger Reservoir District which has
yielded a pottery sample. The association of that artifact type would place
the site in the Late Prehistoric period of the Central Texas sequence. An
Archaic component may be present at 41WM128, but was not documented during
the course of the survey.
No organic materials were observed during the inspection of 41WM128. Shallow
sites of thi.s nature do not lend themselves to the recovery of such samples,
and it is doubtful that the site would produce data which might be applied
to a reconstruction of the prehistoric environment. In many ways, archeological surveys are not sufficient to evaluate the cultural significance of
single sites. 41WM128 is a small, tightly contained site which could be
considered of marginal importance when larger, more complex sites are present
in the area. However, we suspect that these small sites may play an integral
part in the overall understanding of the settlement patterns of the Granger
Reservoir District. It is recommended that 41WM128 be considered as an
alternate for mitigation investigation.
41WM129 - Spillway Site
Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:54; Patterson and Moore 1976:64.

41WM129 is located adjacent to the spillway works of the Granger Reservoir
Dam. The site is contained on the north and east by the San Gabriel River
and on the west by a farm lane. The southern boundaries of the site are
a small erosional gully and the spillway channel. 41WM129 is 1.8 miles
southeast of the former community of Friendship, Texas.
A portion of this large surface site (25,000 square meters) has been altered
by cultivation, but much of the site remains intact. The Texas A&M field
party did not conduct subsurface testing to establish the depth of the cultural material because of the vertical exposure provided by erosional features. An inspection of erosional features did not show significant vertical
distribution of prehistoric occupation. Many stone tools and the expected
lithic debris were scattered over the surface of the site. This cultural
material was most apparent in the plowed field and in animal burrows in the
wooded section. Collected and observed artifacts place the site in the Late
Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods of the Central Texas sequence. Additional investigations should be directed toward the problem of chronological
control. Due to the expected absence of depth of the cultural deposits, it
is doubtful that organic materials, which may have been deposited as a result
of prehistoric occupation, will be present. However, if intact cultural
stratigraphy is encountered, efforts should include the recovery of possible
floral and faunal remains.

41

The location of 41WM129 at the lower end of the Reservoir District and the
apparent horizontal extent of the cultural remains make the site important
in the overall consideration of the prehistoric occupation of the San Gabriel River. 41WM129 is located below the Granger Reservoir Dam and adjacent
to the spillway works. Present construction plans do not entail the destruction of any portion of the site. It is recommended that the site be preserved
and monitored for possible damage from construction or erosion which might
take place due to river channel alteration .
41WM130 - Hoxie Bridge Site
Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:54; Patterson and Moore 1976:64.

41WM130 is located on a large alluvial terrace immediately downstream from
Hoxie Bridge. The site is bound on the west by County Road 416 and on the
north by the San Gabriel River. The southern limits of the site are marked
by a farm lane. The eastern boundaries of 41WM130 are vague and should be
established during future investigation. Extensive cultural debris is scattered throughout the site area (25,000 square meters) . Although the site
is located in a cultivated field, subsurface tests resulted in the documentation of intact cultural materials below the plowed zone. These features
and other prehistoric occupation indicators are believed to extend to a depth
of two meters. Artifacts recovered during the testing indicate that 41WM130
was occupied during the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods. Controlled
excavation of the site should demonstrate the occupational sequence which
took place during that time.
The formulation of any research design for the investigation of 41WM130
should place emphasis on the recovery of organic materials which may be
used to date the site and to reconstruct the prehistoric environment. The
proximity of 41WM130 to two quarry si~es (41WM284 and 41WM294) and the large
inventory of lithic manufacturing deb1tage present at 41WM130 make the site
important in understanding the stone technology of the Granger Reservoir
District. Two chert sources were readily available to the prehistoric inhabitants of the area. It is suspected that the Pleistocene gravel outcrops,
which border the reservoir basin, contributed the largest percentage of
cherts which were used by the aboriginal populations; but investigations
have shown that some raw materials were collected from the river gravels.
Extensive studies should be made to determine the relationship between the
occupation site and the lithic procurement areas. Since 41WM130 is located
entirely within the conservation pool limits of the reservoir and will be
destroyed by the lake waters, it is recommended that extensive excavations
be conducted prior to dam closure*.
41WM131 - Newton Site
Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:55; Patterson and Moore 1976:64.

*A thorough study of the 41WM130, 41WM284 and 41WM294 site complex was conducted under a separate contract by Texas A&M University (Bond 1978).

42
41WM131 was found just east of 41WM130 . Small creeks to the east and west
of the site serve as boundaries for the surface debris . The confluence of
the western creek with the San Gabriel River marks the southern limits of
occupation, .and a large cu l tivated field bounds the site on the south. This
site is one mile north of Highway 1331. This small site (2500 square meters)
is believed to have suffered minimal damage from cultivation or erosion.
Some lithic debitage is present on the surface and subsurface testing showed
that intact cultural materials are present. No diagnostic artifacts were
recovered, and it is impossib le to assign the site to a temporal position
in the Central Texas prehistoric sequence. Any investigative efforts should
be aimed at dating the site.
Organic materials were noted during the survey testing and it is expected
that the site would yield data regarding the subsisten ce patterns of the
prehistoric inhabitants. The proximity of 41WM131 to 41WM130, and the
obvious similarities between the two sites, suggest tha t thP. investigation
of either site would yield data regarding the other. It is recommended that
41WM131 be considered as an alternate excavation choice to 41 WM130.
41WM132 Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:55; Patterson and Moore 1976:64.

41WM132 is in a plowed f i eld on a high terrace above the San Gabriel River
about 0.2 miles northeast of 41WM124. County Road 348A serves as the west ern boundary of the site, and a steep drop in topo$rap~y to the.south and
toward the river marks the extent of cultural remains in that direction.
A farm lane in the northern portion of the site and a decrease in elevation
to the east bound the site in those areas. Extensive lithic debitage and
burned rock were observed on the plowed surface of the site. The estimated
area of occupation is 15,000 square meters and the depth may extend to one
meter. The recovered diagnostic artifacts from 41WM132 place the site in the
Early Archaic to the Late Prehistoric periods of Central Texas chronology.
Although the possibility of pollen recovery at 41WM132 is doubtful, additional soil samples should be collected throughout the reservoir. Isolated
areas may exist which will be conducive to pollen retention. Organic samples should be expected, and an analysis of tho~e ma~erials would aid in
reconstructing the environmental-cultural relati?nships. 4~WM132 is located
near 41WM124, and associations between the two sites may exist. Therefore,
it is recommended that minor testing be conducted at 41WM132 in conjunction
with the major excavation at 41WM124.
41WM133 - Loeve Site
Reference: Eddy 1973, 1974; Shafer and Corbin 1965:56; Prewitt 1974:140;
Patterson and Moore 1976:64; Moore 1977.
41WM133 is located on an outside bend of the San Gabriel River close to the
Loeve-Fox Site (41WM230) . The ~ite is contai~ed in a small area (375 square
meters) and is limited to the river bank margins. 41WM133 does not extend
upstream beyond a recent erosional gully which divides it from 41WM230.

43
The Loeve Site was recommended by Shafer and Corbin for a large scale excavation because of the presence of Late Prehistoric artifacts and a large
concentration of cultura 1 debris within the upper component. Later i nspecti on of the site by Eddy revealed deeply buried hearths in a river bank.
Seven hearths were studied and radiocarbon dates obtained from two of these
structures indicate an age of around 5000 B.C. It was apparent that the
Loeve Site could contribute information about the ~arly occupation of the
Granger Reservoir District.
At the time of the inspection of 41WM133 by the Texas A&M field team , the
outward appearance of the site had changed little from the scene as described
by Eddy. Additional erosion had taken pl ace on the river bank and had exposed previously undocumented hearths. One hearth in particular contained
fragments of burned wood which should be of sufficient size for radiocarbon
dating. The Texas A&M field team did remove one sample of burned wood to
examine the age of the deep hearth localities and to cross-e xamine Eddy's
data. One date of 8500 + 130 B.P. (TX 2675) was obtained in one of the deep
hearths. Full-scale, controlled excavation should be directed toward that
end.
Considerable time was spent by the Texas A&M su~ve~ t~am looking for diagnostic artifacts which would serve as chronologic indicators of the cultural
deposits of the site. No such diagnostic artifacts were recovered during
the period of inspection. The heavy overgrowth of vegetation served to
mask the ground surface and hinder efforts to delineate the horizontal extent of the site. Drawing upon this available data, a summation of the
character of 41WM133 may be made. The site is located on a remnant point
bar formation which was developed by alluvial fill contributed by a fastmoving river. Thi s is demonstrated by the presence of multiple gravel
stringers in the exposed bank. Eddy described the occupation as a "tightly
contained campsite" placed upon mud and gravel bars within the point bar.
Two major components are described in detail and a minor component was discussed briefly. The upper component, from which L~te Prehistoric and Transi tional Archaic materials were recovered, was described as totally disturbed
by the relic hunting activities of the former land owner. Texas A&M test
excavations confirmed this proposition. Modern and prehistoric cultural
debris was noted at a depth of three feet in the five test units excavated
by the field party.
The lower deposit, which contained deeply buried hearths dating to 5000 B.C .,
was described in detail. The hearths were located on gravel stringers and
contained, at the time of the Eddy ~xcavation,.little charcoa~ which might
be used for dating purposes. The middle and minor component is dated as
Middle Archaic. This date is based on the recovery of Middle Archaic artifacts by the former land owner. These artifacts were not available for analysis by members of the Texas A&M Anthropology Laboratory team. Various cultural lenses were described and were characterized by the presence of burned
rock, flint debris, some snail shell and very little fresh water mus sel shell.
As is the case at 41WM124, three archeological components are suspected at
41WM133 but in this instance the components appear in a vertical column.
The upp~nnost component, which contains Late Prehistoric and Transitional
Archaic materials, has been described by Eddy as being totally destroyed.

44

In order to explore the lower component, it will be necessary to remove a
portion of the late occupation; although~ situ materials should not be
e~pected, a sample of cultural debris should be collected. The middle and
mi~or cultural level is the Middle Archaic component. Investigations in
this zone should be directed toward the documentation of in situ materials
and the recovery of floral and faunal remains for an environmental analysis.
The lower component, dated at 5000 B. C., should be the subject of intensive
~xcavation. The relatively large number of hearths which have been recorded
in the river bank indicate that the site was subjected to extensive and
repeated use during this early time. As was noted in the discussion of the
early component at 41WM124, efforts should be made to define the horizontal
limits of the site.
4~WM133 offers the opportunity for the study of a tight ly contained campsite which has seen use over the past 7000 years. The stratigraphic positioning of the cultural materials should lend itself to the understanding of the
cultural technology of the Granger Reservoir District.

41WM134 - Allison Cemetery Site
Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:56-57; Patterson and Moore 1976:65.

41WM134 is located on a high terrace south of Willis Creek at the location of
the former Allison Cemetery . The site is two miles southwest of the remains
of Friendship, Texas. The site is a rich lithic manufacturing site which
shows no depth of cultural deposit. No evidence such as burned rock was
found to suggest that the site had any other function than as a location for
the manufacture of stone implements.
The observed diagnostic artifacts place the site in the Late Archaic and
Late Prehistoric periods of the Central Texas chronological sequence. The
lithic debitage covers an area of over 45,000 square meters, and chert
debris - ranging from cores to complete~ tools and projectile points - is
evident. It is recommended that extensive, controlled surface collections
be conducted at 41WM134. Analysis of such collections should aid in better
understanding the lithic manuf~ctur~ng pr?cesses which were practiced during
the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods.
41WM135 Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:57; Patterson and Moore 1976:65; Eddy
1973, 1974.
41WM135 is largely a lithic procurement site with scattered lithic debris.
The 500-square-meter area, which is.located o~e-fourth mile east of 41WM134,
seems to have no cultural depth. Since the time of the Shafer and Corbin
survey, the site has been largely destroyed by ~ravel quarrying activities
and cultivation. The previous survey resulted in the recovery of a triangular knife a side scraper, a thick bifacial implement, and a mano. No
additional investigations are recommended at this site.

45

41WM136 Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:57; Patterson and Moore 1976:66.

~1WM136 is much like 41WM135 . The materia l on this site is thinly scattered
l~ an area 2500 meters square , one -fourt h mile from 41WM135. Test excava-

tions showed no depth of cultural deposits . The Shafer and Corbin survey
d?cumented an Ensor dart point, which would suggest a Late Archaic affiliation. No further work is recommended for 41WM136 .
41WM137 Reference:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:58; Patterson and Moore 1976 :65.

41WM137 was not relocated during the Texas A&M University survey . The site
was reported as being located about 2.5 miles southeast of Granger on a low
north terrace of Wi 11 is Creek, one-eighth mile east of the County Road 346
bridge. Shafer and Corbin stated that it consisted of light evi de nce of
occupation found at the south end of a large field. From this area two
utilized flakes and a small fragment of copper wire were collected. ' Based
on that information, no additional work is recommended at 41WM137.
41WM138 - Granger Site
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:58; Patterson and Moore 1976:65.
41WM138 is a small concentration of lithic debris at the edge of a culti vated field north of upper Willis Creek. The site is located at the confluence of the tributary to Willis Creek, one-fourth mile east of County
Road 348. Texas A&M University shovel tests showed that cultural material s
extended below the surface but were confined to the plow zone. The horizontal extent of the site was not established. The 1965 survey recorded
three separate occupational areas along the creek terrace. A dart point
w~s the only artifact collected fr?m.the s~rface.and.would indicate a transi·t1onal Archaic occu pation. No add1t1onal invest1gat1ons are recommended
for 41WM138.
41WM151
Reference:

Prewitt 1974:140; Patterson and Moore 1976:65; Moore 1977.

41WM151 was found in a gravel quarry pit due west of 41WM124. This site may
be a continuation of 41WM124. Please refer to the description of 41WM124
in this report for additional data.
41WM152 - Field Site
Reference: Prewitt 1974:140-141; Patterson and Moore 1976:65.
41WM152 is on the north bank of the San Gabriel River about one-fourth
mile downstream from 41WM133. It is a site of thinly scattered debris

46

contained within a 50 ,000 square meter area on an alluvial terrace. The
depth of the site was not determined, and no diagnostic artifacts were recovered~ nor have any been reported . It is recommended that 41WM152 not
be _considered for additional investigations in the Granger Reservoir District mitigation plan.
41WM153 Reference:

Prewitt 1974 :141; Patterson and Moore 1976:65.

4~WM153 is located on the north bank of the San Gabriel River one-eighth

mile west of Hoxie Bridge. It is a site of extensive nc cupational debris
scattered over a grassy knoll on the second river terrace . It has not
been disturbed by cultivation and covers an area of 4800 square meters.
The cultural depth is estimated at 0.5 meters. Intact hearths, occupation
surfaces and lithic manufacturing areas may exist. It is reco!TITiended that
4~W~l53 be considered as an alternate choice for excavation when the final
mitigation design is developed.
41WM154 Reference:

Prewitt 1974:141; Patterson and Moore 1976:66 .

41WM154 is located on the north bank of the San Gabriel River, 25 meters

eas~ of Hoxie Bridge. The site.is chara~teriz~d by the prese~ce of historic debris eroding from alluvial deposits adJacent to the river. The

m~terial appears to be of late 19th and early 20th century vintage . These

historic artifacts are apparent at a depth of two meters below the present
ground surface. No additional investigations are recommended for 41WM154.

41WM155 Reference:

Prewitt 1974:141; Patterson and Moore 1976:66.

~1WM155 is in a gravel quarry south of the Sa~ Gabrie~ Rive~. The site
is located about two miles east of the community of Circleville, Texas at
the junction of two roads which provide access to the quarry. This lithic
procurement and processing site may have a depth of 0.5 meters. Prewitt
reported that the artifacts appeared to be of Late Archaic origin. No fur ther work is recorrmended.
41WM156 Reference:

Prewitt 1974:141; Patterson and Moore 1976:66.

41WM156 is a lithic procurement area.on a small terrace.overlooking the San
Gabriel River. It is partially cu~tiv~ted and extends in depth to 0.7
meters. The surface area of the site is 40,000 square meters. The site

47
i~ located outside of the survey area above the 528 foot flood pool elevation , and no further investigations are recommended.

41WM157 Reference:

Prewitt 1974:142; Patterson and Moore 1976:66.

41WM157 was recorded on the edge of the flood plain just downstream from
41WM156 on the south side of the San Gabriel River. The site was recorded
as an area of thinly scattered cultural debris, observed on a natural knoll
on the edge of the floodplain. The deposit appears to be thin and covers
a~ a~ea of only 250 square rreters. As was the case in many other scattered
l~thic sites, no diagnostic artifacts were recovered which might place the
site in a temporal framework for the Granger Reservoir District~ Since more
promising sites are available for investigation , no further work is recom mended.
41WM158 Reference:

Prewitt 1974:142; Patterson and Moore 1976:66.

41WM158 is another lithic procurement site located on a prominent knol l at
the edge of the floodplain , just upstream from 41WM156 and overlooking site
41WM126 on the south side of the San Gabriel River. It is a surface site,
and the estimated area of occupation is 5000 square meters. No diagnostic
artifacts were recovered from 41WM158. The site is not recommended for
additional investigations.
41WM159 Reference:

Prewitt 1974:142; Patterson and Moore 1976:66 .

41WM159 is outside the flood pool limits and is described as thinly scattered debris and gravel deposits on the front slope of the river terrace. No
additional investigations are recommended for 41WM159.
41WM162 Reference:

Prewitt 1974:142-143; Patterson and Moore 1976:66.

41WM162 is again beyond the survey are~. It was noted in a previous survey
report as debris on an exposed gravel hil~ overlooking a small drainage
which runs northward to the river. The site appeared to have a depth of
several feet and intact hearths with charcoal were noted. No recommendations for additional investigations are made for the Granger Reservoir Dist~ict Mitigation plan; however, this site should be monitored for the possibility of future damage.

48

41WM163 Reference:

Prewitt 1974:143; Patterson and Moore 1976:66-67.

41WM163 is located on the west bank of an outside bend of the San Gabriel
River. The site is limited by a small creek to the south and extends into
a cultivated field to the west. 41WM163 is one mile northeast of the community of Circleville, Texas . Lithic debris, mussel shells and bone fragments were noted in the alluvial fill. The site covers an area of 2500
square meters and extends to a depth of over one meter. No diagnostic artifacts were noted, but a local collector reports the recovery of a human
burial from the site. Organic materials were pres ent which would aid in
environmental reconstruction and site dating. It is recommended that the
site be tested in conjunction with 41WM230 and 41WM124 for additional
human burials. Efforts should be made to preserve the portion of the site
in the flood pool .
41WM164 Reference:

Prewitt 1974:143; Patterson and Moore 1976:67.

41WM164 was not located during the 1976 survey. It was reported as being
on the north bank of the San Gabriel River between State Highway 95 and
the Missouri~Kansas-Texas Railroad just northeast of Circleville. The site
was described as two intact fire hearths observed in deeply buried gravel
stringers. - Charcoal was noted in association with the hearths . Prewi tt
suggested that it appeared to be similar in age content to the lower components at 41WM133. It is believed that flood erosion has destroyed the site
subsequent to the recording of the features. No additional investigations
are suggested for 41WM164.
41WM165 Reference:

Prewitt 1974:143-144; Patterson and Moore 1976:67.

41WM165 is located on a high terrace south of the San Gabriel River. The
site is one mile west of the Granger Reservoir Dam. Cultural debris was
noted in a 3600 square meter area in a plowed field along the edge of the
terrace. Artifacts observed from this site include numerous Late PaleoIndian and Early Archaic styles (e.g. Scottsbluff, Golondrina, Plainviewlike, Angosture-like, Gower, ~ell ~nd others). '.he ~ite.appears to be one
of the most extensive early sites in the reservoir district. Investigations
o{ sites of this nature are needed to establish the early chronology of the
settlement and occupation of the Granger Reservoir District. It is recommended that extensive excavations be conducted at 41WM165 to meet that
need. The research design for the investigation of 41WM165 should include
plans for the preservation of the portion of the site outside the project
limits.

49
41WM170 Reference:

Prewitt 1974:144 ; Patterson and Moore 1976:67.

41WM170, a series of deeply bur ied hea t h on the outside bend of the San
Gabriel Ri ver , is a site which may be si mi lar in nature to 41WM133 . The
hearths were recorded at a de pth of ab ut seven meters . The horizontal extent of the site i s not known . No di agnos tic artifacts were recovered, but
charcoal was noted within the hea rths. The site is not recommended for additional investigat i ons because of th _ presence of other deeply stratified
sites within the Grange r Rese r voir Di str;c t. Cont ingent upon the results
of the i nvesti gati ons of 41WMl33 and 41 W
Ml65, it may be necessary to return
to this site for additional charcoa l sampl es.
41WM171 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976: 56 _

41WM171, located out side t he f lood pool, i s a large quarry site north of
the fonner town of Fri ends hi p, Texas , on a high gravel terrace . The site
is 250 square meters in area and has no cultural depth. No additional investigations are recomme nded for 41WM171.
41WM178 Reference:

Patter son and Moore 1976:56.

41WM178 is a s ingl e hearth eroding out of the surface of the south bank of
the San Gabriel River at t he bridge of t he Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad .
The site is located one-half mil e nort heast of the cormnunity of Circleville ,
Texas. No additional fe atures were noted, and it is impossible to postulate
whether the site i the l ocat i on of a si ngle short-term occupation or if it
is the remainder of a l ar ge r site wh i ch has eroded away into the river. No
other cultural materi al s were observed at this location. No further work
is recommended.
41WM191 Reference :

Patterson and Moore 1976: 67 .

41WM191 was outside t he survey limits be l ow the dam structure, and no data
are available on i ts l ocation.
41WM209 Reference:

Patterson an d Moore 1976 :68 .

41WM209 was a large site on a l ow te r r ace between Willis Creek and the San
Gabriel River. The site has bee n tota ll y destroyed by dam construction and
therefore no additional work i s recommended.

51

and 41WM179; however, no gravel stringers appeared to be associated with
these hearths, and no diagnostic materials have been found. No further
work is recommended for 41WM265.
41WM266 - Wilson Fox Site
Reference:

Prewitt 1974:145; Patterson and Moore 1976:68.

41WM266 is located on the south bank of the San Gabriel River across and
downstream from site 41WM133. 41WM266 was found on a primary alluvial terrace. This cultural level is covered by a second terrace which has served
to seal the site from modern surface disturbance. The area of occupation
is difficult to establish, but burned rock can be seen eroding out of the
bank for a distance of 17 meters. The depth of occupation is one meter in
a zone seven meters below the present ground surface. No additional investigations are recommended for this site.
41WM267 - Cervenka Site
Reference:

Prewitt 1974:145- 146; Patterson and Moore 1976:68.

41WM267 is located one-fourth mile north of Hoxie Bridge. The site is
bounded on the south by County Road 416 and on the east by County Road 358 .
The edge of the Blackland Prairie to the west limits the extent of the site
in that direction. The northern limit of the site is unknown but may extend
as far north as a modern gravel pit, and would encompass what has been referred to as 41WM29l. This extensive site is in alluvial and colluvial
deposits, banked against the edge of the Blackland Prairie. The site is
shallowly buried, and exposures in a recent erosional gully indicate a depth
of two to two and one-half meters. Materials reported from the site appear
to be Early and Middle Archaic in age. The debris includes mussel shells,
burned rock~ flint flakes and bone fragments, in addition to worked flint
pieces. Charcoal has been observed with the deposits. It is recommended
that extensive excavations be conducted to gain control over the apparent
Early Archaic debris and to explore the dual food resources which were available to the inhabitants.
41WM284 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:68.

41WM284 is a large quarry site located on a hillside south of the San Gabriel
River and adjacent to sites 41WM130 and 41WM294. Although the site has no
cultural depth, it covers an area of 132,000 square meters. Like 41WM286,
41WM284 should be investigated to provide data regarding lithic procurement
and processing for the Granger Reservoir District. More specifically, it
should include investigations to establish the relationships between the occupation and lithic manufacturing sequences present at 41WM130. It is recommended that extensive surface collections be conducted at this site to
establish those relationships.

52

41WM285 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:69.

41WM285 is a small hearth and scattered lithic debris site located south
of Willis Creek, one eighth mile southeast of the County Road 358 bridge .
The horizontal area is 100 square meters and there is no subsurface extension of cultural materials. No additional work is recommended.
41WM286 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:69.

41WM286 is located on the northern border of the survey area. It covers
a region 800,000 square meters in size and extends into the uplands beyond
the flood pool limits. It is bordered on the west by County Road 358 and
the south by Sore Finger Creek. The northern and eastern limits were not
established. The site is five miles east of the town of Granger, Texas.
Most of the site area has suffered from cultivation (Fig. 8) and natural
erosion, although some portions of 4~W~286 remain intact in pastures which
may be found on the site's eastern limits. No depth of cultural materials
was observed, nor would it be expected in a site of this nature. The surface of 41WM286 appears as an extensive exposure of Pleistocen gravels. A
close inspection of these cherts reveals that a large number of the nodules
have been artificially altered. The numerous cores suggest that the site
was an important and rewarding lithic procurement locale during prehistoric
times. No diagnostic artifacts were recovered during the field inspection,
and it is believed that the site may have ~een_use_during the entire sequence
of cultural history in the Granger Reservoir District.
41WM286 is unique among the lithic_pr?curement.sites ~ecause of the observed
absence of certain stages of the lith1c reduction series. Other than depleted cores, no lithic debitage was located . Other quarry sites in the
area exhibit the flakes and blades which are expected in sites of that
nature. Closer evaluation of 41WM286 is needed to establish if this observation is simply the result of sampling error, or if in fact the debitage is
not p~esent.
Extensive investigations are needed to document the relationships between
lithic procurement sites and inhabitational locations. It is recommended
that surface collections be conducted at 41WM286 to evaluate those relationships.
41WM287 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:69 .

41WM287 is a small site located on a terrace of Sore Finger Creek, north of
Highway 971. The site extends east of the conservation pool elevation and

FIGURE 8

Lithic procurerrent site, 41WM286,
numerous Pleistocene chert
gravels are observable beb1een
the rows of maize.

I •

55

covers an area of 1000 square meters. The entire area is under cultivation,
and there appear to be no buried cultural deposits. Scattered lithic debris
and natural chert deposits characterize the nature of the site. No diagnostic artifacts were observed during the survey. No organic materials which
might prove useful in reconstructing the prehistoric environment were noted.
The recovery of such material is doubtful in situations where the entire site
has been disturbed. No additional investigations are recommended for 41WM287.
41WM288 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:69.

41WM288 is another quarry site on a gently sloping hillside adjacent to 41WM
287. It covers an area of 20,000 square meters, and shovel testing by the
Texas A&M University field party showed no depth of cultural deposits. As
is the case on most of the upland sites in the Granger Reservoir District,
the entire site has suffered from modern farming practices. No additional
investigations are recommended.
41WM289 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:69.

41WM289 is another quarry site on a high terrace above a tributary to Sore
Finger Creek. No depth was observed, and the area of utilization is 10,000
square meters. It is recommended that 41WM289 not be included in the miti gation plan for additional studies.
41WM290 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:69.

41WM290 is a hillside quarry which may be an extension of 41WM289, although
the chert outcrop is at a higher elevation. It is 400,000 square meters in
area and has no depth. No additional studies are recommended.
41WM291 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:69.

41WM291 is probably an extension o'. 41WM267, and additional comments are
included in a discussion of that site.
41WM292
Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:69-70.

56
41WM292 is a small surface site one-half mile downstream from Hoxie Bridge.
The estimated area of occupation ;s 100 square meters, and shovel tests
determined that there was no depth of archeological materials. Although
sorre lithic debris was noted on the surface, it is doubtful that data would
be present which might be of aid in understanding the cultural history of
the reservoir basin. No additional investigations are recommended.
41WM293 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:70.

41WM293 is a single hearth eroding out of the river bank 100 meters east
of Hoxie Bridge on the north bank of the San Gabriel River. The depth of
the hearth is two meters below the present ground surface (Fig. 9). Charcoal and bone are present in the hearth matrix and should be collected for
dating and environmental studies. It is recommended that limited testing
be conducted at this site.
41WM294 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976: 70.

41WM294 is a lithic outwash from a terrace north of 41WM284. Extensive
flint debris is present in a once previously plowed field, and a limited
amount of quarrying is evident. The area of occupation is 10,000 square
meters, and the cultural depth is unknown. 41WM294 should be tested in
conjunction with the investigations of 41WM130 and 41WM284 to establish the
inter-relationships between the three sites.
41WM295 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:70.

41 WM295 is 1ocated on the north bank of Wi 11 is Creek on an outside bend of
that tributary. It is bounded on the east by County Road 358 and on the
south by an abandoned farm lane. The northern limits of the site are evident at a sharp rise in topography, and the site extends eastward to the
former location of a farm house. The site is a thin scatter of chert debris
and burned rock. No diagnostic artifacts were recovered, but the lithic
debitage is reminiscent of that found at 41WM165. It is recommended that
41WM295 be tested in conjunction with 41WM165 for the determination of a
possible paleo-Indian component.
41WM296 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:70.

41WM296 is a very light scatter of flakes near an old house site on a terrace north of Willis Creek. This site may be an extension of 41WM295. The
1000 square meter area shows little chance of undisturbed subsurface cultural
materials. No additional investigations are recommended.

FIGURE 9

Deeply buried hearth at site 41WM293.
A - Hearth buried approximately 2 m
below the top of the north bank
of the San Gabriel River.
B - Closeup of the hearth pictured
in A; the trowel indicates the
horizontal position of the hearth
below a sloping lens of naturally
deposited gravels .

I

•

A

B

59

41WM297 - Bone Bed Site
Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:70.

41WM297 is located north of Willis Creek about one-half mile west of the
Granger Reservoir Dam. The site has been bisected by a man made channel
which has exposed a fossil bone deposit. Minimal archeological testing is
recommended, but a paleontological inspection of the site should be made
prior to dam closure.
41WM298 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:70 .

41WM298 was a thin site which contained some lithic debris and burned rock.
The site was located on the center line of the Granger Reservoir Dam and
has been totally destroyed by dam construction. No additional investigations
are recommended or possible.
41WM299 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:70.

41WM299 is a small 100 square meter site which was recorded on the south
side of the San Gabriel River one-fourth mile upstream from Hoxie Bridge.
The cultural debris is confined to the present ground surface, and no diagnostic artifacts were recovered during the survey. No further work is
recommended.
41WM300 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:70-71.

41WM300 was located adjacent to the ~ported area of 41WM125. The site is
a small lithic scatter located in a small garden plot adjacent to an abandoned farm house. The surface site occupies an area of 10 square meters.
No depth was observed during testing. No additional investigations are
recommended at 41WM300.
41WM301 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:71.

41WM301 is located one-eighth mile southeast of 41WM132 on the primary
river terrace . Thi s lithic procurement and manufacturing site was noted
at the edge of a cultivated field and covers a surface area of 2700 square
meters. Texas A&M University field party excavations could determine no
cultural depth to the site. No organic materials were noted which might
be used in environmental reconstruction; likewise, no diagnostic artifacts
were noted. No further work is recommended.

60
41WM302 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:71.

41WM302 is located one-fourth mile east of 41WM137. The site was recorded
as a small lithic scatter along and in a drainage north of Willis Creek.
The site is one meter in depth and covers an area of 60 square meters.
Organic materials were noted in the deposits and might be used in determining subsistence patterns among the aboriginal populations. However, the
60 square meters of this site do not seem conducive to additional investigations and therefore none are recommended.
41WM303 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:71.

41WM303 is located on the south bank of the San Gabriel River. The site
is across the river and immediately south of 41WM301. Burned rocks and
lithic debris were scattered on a gravel bar emerging from the south bank of
the river. The estimated area of occupation is 200 square meters, and no
depth of cultural deposit was evident. No additional work is recommended.
41 WM305 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:71.

41WM305 is located south of the San Gabriel River, on the margins of the
flood pool limits. The site was noted as a chipping/quarrying location and,
as with previously reported quarry sites, the 820 square meter site has no
apparent depth. No additional investigations are recommended.
41 WM306 Reference:

Patterson and Moore 1976:71.

41WM306 is located 100 meters east of County Road 348 and one-fourth mile
south of Machu Cemetery. The site is a light deposit of lithic material
located in a cultivated field on the Blackland Prairie. No depth was ob served at the location, and no additional investigations are recommended.
41WM370 Reference:

Personal coITOTiunication, Elton Prewitt.

41WM370 was verbally reported as a hearth structure between 41WM124 and 41
WM132. It is recommended that this site be tested in conjunction with the
two previously mentioned sites.

61

Conclusions and General Results
Survey within the reservoir impoundment area
toric and historic archeological sites. The
general recommendations for these sites have
additional sites were noted beyond the flood
elevation.

revealed 61 definable prehislocations, descriptions and
just been presented. Nine
pool limits of 528- foot

Final analysis of the sites recorded in the course of the survey has shown that
it was possible to determine, through observation and testing, the chronologic
and typologic nature of most of the sites. Definitive statements concerning
cultural/environmental adaptations cannot be presented based upon the limited
amount of time and funds available for the survey of the Granger Reservoir
District. The data recovered during the course of the survey does suggest
that some sites contain unique and/or compatible resources which will contribute to the study of seasonality, settlement patterns, subsistence techniques, population density, and environmental conditions. If the Prewitt
model is correct, we may then assume that the sites existed as a result of
a combination of cultural and environmental considerations.
Topographically, the valley system lends itself to a definition of sites
based upon their locality. The dominant features upon which sites were
repetitively found included point bars, terraces, and the San Gabriel and
tributary river levees. The valley was utilized from 7000 B.C. through the
Proto-historic period, based upon the diagnostic artifacts reported for the
area. It is obvious that the older sites are predictably located on the
older, Pleistocene terraces.
However, results show that a majority of the sites recorded are biased in
favor of those which are younger. This is primarily due to the following
three circumstances: the repetitive inundation and subsequent sedimentation
of various localities by the river; the cutting and destruction of features
by river action; and the much heavier concentration of artifactual material
present, which may be a result of more intensive, longer occupations of
those localities than is apparent on the older sites.
Site Survey Results and Conclusions
In an effort to determine if any of the sites were located with respect to
a specific resource(s) a simple series of chi-square tests were run. The
attributes which were examined in relation to site location are as follows:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)

present vegetational zone
present topographic situation
rank of nearest stream (permanent water source)
distance to nearest permanent water source
distance of closest raw material source (lithic)
nature of closest raw material source (lithic)
site type
site size

Gra-n-g-e-r-Re-s-e-rvo--i-r-srre-ryp-o~rugJ

SITE NUMBERS 41WM:
z:
.......
0

~

u
0

_J

V)

c:::
w

1-

w

::E:

::=:2
c:(
c...

OUTSIDE SURVEY LIMITS
FLOOD POOL
CONSERVATION POOL
OTHER
UNDETERMINED
UNIQUE SITES
BURNED ROCK MIDDEN
HISTORIC SITES
OSSUARY SITES
ENVIRONMENTAL DATA
DEEPLY STRATIFIED
LITHIC PROCESSING
LITHIC PROCUREMENT

21

22

117 118 119 120 121

x
x

x
x

x

V)

z:
0

.......
l-

e:(

0

z:
w

::E:
::E:

0

u
w

c:::

NOT RECOMMENDED
ALTERNATE
TESTING
EXTENSIVE EXCAVATION
COLLECTING
PRESERVATION

x

x

x

x
x

132

x

x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

\/

A

x

x

x
x
x

x
x

x
x

2-7 1-4

x
x
x

v

A

x

x
x

x

x

x
x

x

1-6 1-3 4-5

3

UNDETERMINED
PERIOD

x

122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131

x

1

1-8

x

1-3 1-3

1-6

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

-

O'I
N

x

SITE NUMBERS 41WM:
z

0
,_.
1-

c::i::

u

0

_J

(/')

c::::
w
w

1~

~

c::i::
c....

OUTSIDE SURVEY LIMITS
FLOOD POOL
CONSERVATION POOL
OTHER
UNDETERMINED
UNIQUE SITES
BURNED ROCK MIDDEN
HISTORIC SITES
OSSUARY SITES
ENVIRONMENTAL DATA
DEEPLY STRATIFIED
LITHIC PROCESSING
LITHIC PROCUREMENT

133 134

135 136

137 138 151

x
x
x

x
x

x
x

x

NOT RECOMMENDED
........
ALTERNATE
1c::i::
Cl
TESTING
z
w
EXTENSIVE EXCAVATION
0
u
COLLECTING
w
c::::
_I PRESERVATION

x

x
x

x
x

x
x

x

x

x

x

-i

QI

x
x
x

0_,

ro

x

x
x

x
x

x
x

x

x
x

x

1-7 1-3

3

x

(/')

z

x

3

x

X?

N

n

x

0

::::::i

rt

-

x

0..

x

x
8

x

x

0

~
~

x

x

UNDETERMINED
PERIOD

152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 162 163 164

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x
CTI

w

SITE NUMB ERS 41WM:
z

0
.......

1-

c:::r:
u
0

_J

(/)

c::::

w

1-

w
::E
c:::r:
c::::
c:::r:
0...

OUTSIDE SURVEY LIMITS
FLOOD POOL
CONSERVATION POOL
OTHER
UNDETERM IN ED
UNIQUE SITES
BURNED ROCK MIDDEN
HISTORIC SITES
OSSUARY SITES
ENVIRONMENTAL DATA
DEEPL Y STRATIFIED
LITHIC PROCESSING
LITHIC PROCUREMENT

165 170

x

171

178 191 209

x

x

x

210 230 258 265 266

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

267 284 285 286

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

288 289

x
x

x
x

x

x

x

x
x

287

x

x
-

-i

x
x
x
x

x

x
x

x
x

QI

x

r::r
.......
(!)

x

N

x

x

x

x
x

x
x

x
x

x

x

CJ

x
x

0

::l

rt-

0..

UNDETERMINED
PERIOD
NOT RECOMMENDED
ALTERNATE
!;: TESTING
Cl
z:
w
EXTENSIVE EXCAVATION
::!!::
::E
COLLECTING
0
u
w
c:::: PRESERVATION

x

(/)

z:
0
.......

1-5

2-8

x

x

x

2-7

1-4

x

x

x
x

x

x

X?

x

X?

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

X?
X?
O"l

.+:::>

SI TE NUMBERS 41WM:

290

OUTSIDE SURVEY LIMITS
FLOOD POOL
lex:: CONSERVATION POOL
u
0
OTHER

x
x
x

z:
0
.......

29 1

292

293

294

29 5

296

297

V')

0:::
LLJ

1LLJ

::E:

c:x::
0:::
c:x::
0...

299

300

301

302

303

305

306

370

x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x
x

x

x

x
x

x
x

x
x

x
x

__J

UNDETERMI NED
UNIQUE SITES
BURNED ROC K MIDDEN
HISTORIC SITES
OSSUARY SITES
ENVIRONMENTAL DATA
DEEPLY STRATIFIED
LITHIC PROCESSING
LITHIC PROCUREMENT

298

x

x

x

x

x

x
x
-l
Q.>

O"
......

<D

x
x
x
x

x

x

N

("")

x
x

x

x

x
x

0

x
x

::s
rt

a.

UNO ET ERM I NED
PERIOD
NOT RECOMMENDED
ALTERNATE
lTESTING
ex::
Cl
z:
EXTENSIVE EXCAVATION
~
::;::::
COLLECTING
0
u
0:::
PRESERVATION

2-7

x

V')

x

x

z:
0
.......

x
x

LLJ

LLJ

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x
(j)

CJ1

66

No at tempt was made to temporally place the sites, as much of the chrono1ogi cal da ta are arbitrary, based upon the presence, i,n some cases, of one
or two poss ibly diagnostic lithic forms . Therefore, time was held as a
const ant .
The s i te t ype and the sites' location in relation to the environmental variables previously lis t ed were being examined. Using a Standard SPSS program,
we determined the incidence of occurrence for each type, and then tried to
determine us ing simple correlation and chi-square for confirmation if site
type was related to any of the environmental variables . There were no significant (at the confidence level of .05) correlations between site type,
vegetati onal zone, topographic zone, closest raw material source, nature
of clo sest raw material source or distance to nearest permanent water source.
However , there appears to be a correlation between limited activity sites
and stream rank. The concentration of sites is along the San Gabriel River,
with a full-ra nge of sites identified along its course. However, special use,
limited activity and quarry sites appear to correlate (at the expected .05
level) with rank 2 and 3 streams. This is not totally unexpected, as permanent water is available year-round along the San Gabriel, and only seasonally along the rank 2 and 3 streams. Additionally, more topographic variability is noted along the secondary streams, perhaps making more accessible
raw l i thic materials, but limiting hunting and/or gathering activities.
The factor of time must, somehow, be taken into consideration for these
tenuous patterns to have validity. Selection for specific vegetational and
topographic localities has definitely occurred, with site placement indicating
centralization in or der to maximize resource availability and minimize distance to those resources. However, we are again confronted with the lack
of temporal control, except on the most superficial level. It would appear
that while the collection of data about specific environmental variables is
valuable in helping to recreate a general picture of exploitative strategies
within the Granger reservoir area, the lack of tight chronological placement
for the sites and environmental data for concomitant time periods, make it
virtuallyimpossible to conclude, with specificity, long term trends in either
economic patterning or site placement.

ARTIFACTS

The artifactual assemblage of Granger Reservoir was analyzed from a technological standpoint. Stress was placed on platform type, presence or absence
of cortex, and manufacturing stage. Interpretation of the assemblage from
a functional angle was held to a minimum because of the small number of artifacts recovered. Previous work in the Granger Area had appreciably reduced
pos s ible assemblage sizes. In addition, extensive collection by local resi dents over the years had further reduced the number of diagnostic artifacts
from the localities. Nonetheless, from each site where a collection was made,
as representative a sample of the various technological stages as possible
was collected.

67
Method of Analysis
The chipped stone analysis of Granger Survey materials was conducted utilizing two major morphological criteria: 1) debitage, which is waste material
resulting from the manufacture of stone tools; or 2) tools, which are any
chipped stone materials shc:Ming evidence of utilization. The majority of
the Granger chipped stone samples fall into the first category and is described using terminology as defined by Patterson (1977), based on Muto (1971).
A third category, which included hammerstones, manos and burned rock, was
only counted and not analyzed in any systematic manner.
Debitage
FLAKES
The flake sample was sorted on the basis of the relative position from which
they were removed from the core. For example, the chert nodules are angular
to subrounded cobbles possessing a crusted outer surface called cortex. If
the outer surface of a flake is totally covered by cortex, the flake is described as a cortex flake; if only a portion of the outer surface is cortex,
then the term secondary cortex is used. Flakes that exhibit no cortex are
referred to as interior flakes. All flakes classified under these headings
also exhibit prominent bulbs of force and were presumably (although not
necessarily) removed using a hard, probably stone, hammer.
Another flake category used in the analysis is the thinning flake (Muto 1971:
Fig. 15). It is classified separately from those above because of the functional implications these flakes provide. Thinning flakes are the residue
from the reduction and thinning processes in the manufacture of thin biface
tools. Thinning flakes have a series of attributes that set them apart from
the previously defined categories.
The remaining flake category is flake fragments. A flake fragment has no
platform and/or bulb or percussion, or is a small debitage piece which, be-.
cause of size, cannot be adequately analyzed for technological or morphological characteristtcs.
The number of specimens in each flake category for Granger is shown below:
Cortex
Secondary Cortex
Interior
Thinning Flakes
Flake Fragments
TOTAL

23
124
110
76
297
630

68

Di scuss i on of frequency statistics would be meaningless in view of the
sample size and its distribution. The entire sequence of core reduction is
indicated in the sample, from removing initial flakes to final thinning of
biface cores ; however only five sites show the presence of the entire sequence . Th is f indi ng could indicate three things: either the knappers
gathered their cobbles from gravel deposits in the immediate proximity of
the s i t es; that virtually no core reduction was done at lithic resource procurement locations; or, more likely, our samples were insufficient to gauge
the full nature of reduction activities at most sites.
TOOLS
The method of analys is utilized in the tools recovered was that defined in
Patte rs on' s Mas t er' s Thesis on an existing collection from the North Fork
Reservoir area ( 41 WM88). In past years, analyses of stages of lit hi c a rti fact manufacture have been published (Sharrock 1966; Muto 1971; Collins 1975).
These lith i c reduction sequences or models offer a suitable framework to
study what Collins (1975:15) refers to as "the adaptive role of lithic technology in the broader cultural context." Patterson (1977) synthesized and
applied a sequence derived from the models of Sharrock (1966), Muto (1971)
and Coll i ns (1975) to a lithic collection (41WM88) from the North Fork
Re servoir area .
In discus si ng the lithic reduction sequence utilized as a processual
typological tool, five stages or artifact groups are recognized:
(1) core biface or flake; (2) thick biface (blank) or trirrured flake;
(3) thinned biface (blank); (4) thinned biface with form (preform);
and (5) final product . The production of lithic utensils should,
however , be viewed as a continuum. As Collins (1975:16) points
out, the s tages or steps along the continuum are not sharply delineated
from one another but are distinct enough to merit separation, thereby
identifying certain manufacturing processes. Within this system
there are certain optional steps such as trimming, shaping, rejuvenation , or even utilization as an option at any given point on the cont inuum. In reaching each of the five stages of the continuum it i s
necessary to utilize a mode of reduction. Each stage is generally
the precursor to the next stage in the reduction sequence. Manufacturing proce sses required to reach the stages in the lithic sequence
are trirmning , shaping and thinning (Patterson 1977:19,22) .
One important aspect of lithic utensil production is the human error !actor,
or what i s termed "t echnological failure". As Patterson (1977 :22) points
out, many specimens in collections have been terrred or typed as finished
products ; actually, they are only failures within the reduction sequence.
As s uch, t hey become a part of the archeological context and are viewed as
fo ss ilized stages along the continuum of lithic production.
11

11

As was st ated previously, the lithic reduction sequence is made up of five
s tage s.
Ancillary t o reaching Stage l of the sequence there must be an
acqui s ition of r aw materials. The raw materials are lithic subs tances (flint) having the qualities of "elasticity, homogeneity;
are cryptocrystalline, isotropic and highly siliceous" (Crabtree

69
1972 :4-5) . Th e l i t hic materials ideally have no planes of
weak ness, no i nclus ions that would impair conchoidal fracturing,
the same properties in all directions in the substances and
are able to return to their former state after being depressed
by appl ication of force (Crabtree 1972:33-71; Semenov 1964:33)
(Patt erson 1977:36).
Stage l - Core biface or f lake. This primary stage is usually represented
by a la rge fl ake or core biface . In some instances they may still retain
evidence of cortex. Evidence of flaking on at least one face is a criterion.
Intenti onal form i s not neces sarily introduced at this stage (Fig . 16).
Stage 2 - Th i ck biface or tri~d flake (blank). Bifacial working of the
stone to reduce the mass, usually in thickness, shows at this stage. Often
the artifa ct begi ns to take on a very rough subtriangular or lanceolate
form, but relative to the finished product, is still thick.
Sta e 3 - Thinned biface blank . These are generally thinned with some
intentional form evident. Re uction in thickness rather than in overall
s ize is usually the process here. Up through this stage, utilization
of the lithic debitage as tools themselves has to be considered.
Through the next stages utilization of the debitage would
be kept to only light cutting and scraping operations most
likely. This i s because as reduction proceeds the flakes
become thinner and flatter; this would cause less tensile
strength in the flake. Thi s reduction process is an ideal,
when the thinning flake hinges, runs too deep, or the artifact
breaks due to end shock, technological failures occur (Patterson
1977:43) .
Stage 4 - Thinned biface with form (preform). In this stage, for the most
part , they have been thinned and a triangular or lanceolate form is very
clear (Patterson 1977:43) .
Stage 5 - Final product. In the last stage of the sequence the artifact takes
its form, usually as a dart point or arrow point.
Tools, then, are utilized objects resulting from reduction. In the case of
the large uni facial tools, the first or second manufacturing stage was reached
and either the flake or the core was removed from further reduction by the
maker' s choice to utilize it as it was. Unifacial tools comprise, for the
most part , the major category of tools with the exception of the Stage V
artifacts , or final products, which are dart points.
During the Granger survey a total of 152 tools were recovered. As noted in
the breakdown below the majority of tool types identified fall into three
categori es : Stage I bifaces, Stage II bifaces or biface fragments. The
latter were uni formly too small to allow for inclusion into one of the manufacturing stage categories .

Tab 1e 3 .

Provenience

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
1

3

2

1

3

4

2

I

2

22
117
120

1

1

2

1

1

125
126

10

11

12

13

Gran ger Re se r voir Ar t ifacts

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

9

6

8

3

2

1

3

4

2

1

1

132

3

18

133
134
136

1

1

1

1

1
5

1

1

2

4

1

1

2

1
4

1
1

7

153

1

2

155
1

165

4

6

1

1

3

11

1

4

2

2

9

3

171

16

3
3

11
38

4

8

4

26

10

1

1

4

1

2

3

9

19

28

12

104

11

2

9

2

3

3

16

1

266

1

2

267

2

1

284

3

286

6

288

1

3

39

5
1

11

I4

1

1

15

8

1

1

4

2

2

16

4

23

9

1

1

3

1

7

11

10

1

3

1

2

1

51

1

1
13 I 12

I

1

1

2

1

258

2

3

2

289
290
291
292
293

3

1

5

4

2

1

295

3

5

42

1
3

1

2

7

2

9

13

36

7

3

l
3

1
1

l

296
298
299

2
5

2

300
301

1

1

2

302
303

l

305
306

l

Total s

8

1
1

4

1

4
3
3

1
l

27

9
2

2

3

11
48

26

2

4

163

2
6

Totals

2

1

138

23

2

1
14

22

1

4

130

21

19
9
4

1
1

l

2
4

l

l

2

6

46
24
3
97
2
10
59
37
7
6
9
0
2
73
14
0
71
3
9
27
16
17
7
0

1

1

1

1

1

1

22

1

3

6

41

l

6
3

76 110 1:)97 124 23

894

l

6

1

2

5

45

47

26

11

47

KEY
= Chopper Too 1
2 = Dart Point
3 = End Scraper
4 = Burin
5 = Burned Rock
6 = Mano
7 = Ceramic
8 = Projectile Point
Fragrrent
o = Core
10 = Hamrrerstone Fragment
11 = Harrrrerstone
12 = Uniface Fragment
13 = Uniface
14 = Stage I
15 = Stage I I
16 = Stage III
17 = Stage IV
18 = Biface Fragment
19 = Thinning Flake
20 = Interior Flake
21 = Flake Fragrrent
22 = Secondar Corte x Flake
23 = Initial Cortex Fla ke

.........

0

71

Un iface
Un iface fragment
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IV
Bi face fragments
Dart point
Projectile point
End scraper
TOTAL

5
2
45
47
27

11
48

l
6

l
152

At six sites, collections included all or all but one of the manufacturing
stages. Each of these sites was initially typed as lithic processing and/
or procurement locality. However, the pattern is tenuous at best, and
the distribution of the tools over all the sites demonstrates no significant
trends.
11

11

PREHISTORIC ADAPTIVE MODELS

One of the primary weaknesses to the settlement models presented by Eddy
(1973) and Prewitt (1976) is that both are Granger District specific and do
not take into consideration breadth of the archeological universe within ·
which the prehistoric inhabitants of the Granger District ranged. Considerations on this geographic scale would have to be on a regional level and
the models presented here are structured from a regional perspective.
The models are designed to draw attention to the basic needs of any prehis-.
toric foraging adaptation, and, given the environmental parameters, how t~e1r
behaviors toward acquiring or satisfying those needs might be structured 1n
the study area. The Granger District is considered to be but a mere segment
in the territorial catchment of prehistoric groups at any point in time.
Time is held constant for the moment but will be discussed later.
The models assume that territorial behavior was operative at least most of
the time in the annual settlement round of the prehistoric foragers of Central Texas. Furthermore, it is assumed that distinct ethnic units will display stylistic preferences that can be used to identify these units archeologically in time and space. Binford (1962:219) has noted that characteristics which can be termed stylistic include fonnal qualities that are not
directly explicable in terms of the nature of the raw materials, technology
of production, or variability in the structure of the technological and
11

72

s oci al subsystem of the total cultural system. He (ibid.) goes on to state
that t hese formal qualities are believed to have their primary functional
conte xt in providing a symbolically diverse yet pervasive artifactual envir onment promoting group solidarity and serving as a basis for group awareness and identity. Artifacts which are stylistically sensitive and occur
in suffici ent numbers for quantitative analysis are projectile points. The
ass umption that stylistic variation among projectile point forms at one
point in time will reveal shadows of prehistoric territorial catchment areas
can be tes ted by a f actor analysis of the attributes of samples selected
along a north-s outh and east -west line. The question is how do we know
that th e styl is tic patterns are going to parallel ethnic patterns; the answer i s th at we do not know but once a pattern is observed, it can be compared wi th th e distribution of other elements that may display like distributions.
11

11

11

An othe r major assumption used in formulating the models is that human popul ations in central Texas whose lifeways are based on foraging will incorporate the nece ss ary environmental diversity in their range to provide the
year-around availability of food resources. We would predict that their
range would include the greatest diversity of plant, animal and mineral resource s available within their technological means. Given this and considering the resources known to occur in the limestone plateau, prairie and
oak forest regions no one zone would expectedly provide the necessary resources to sustain a foraging population throughout the year; taken together,
however, these three broad environmental zones and the intersecting riverine
corridor might provide the needed elements.
The major archeological indication of prehistoric human activity is clearly
along the riverine zone. We are also assuming that the river corridors
were major avenues for interzonal movement. Inter-valley movement probably
occurred but not nearly as frequently as would transit along the rivers.
Archeological remains markedly decrease in frequency as one moves away from
the main streams and although tertiary streams such as Battleground Creek
(Shafer 1974) display a trace of prehistoric utilization, this trace can
be st be explained by transient groups utilizing the shelter and resources
along these little streams during the course of their movement.
The models are both environment-centered in which the present environment is
used as a baseline of information to infer possible subsistence strategies.
The lack of paleoenvironmental data from the Granger Reservoir locality has
precluded any actua l paleoenvironmental reconstruction. BryantandShafer's
(1977) paleoenvironmental model for central Texas implies only a very gradual
change from late Pleistocene times to the projected late prehistoric conditions . Using the present environment as a resource base it may be possible
to infer subsistence patterns through time.
The first model to be discussed, the Prairie Centered Adaptation, places the
Granger District in a much larger geographic region which includes major
e nvironmental zones such as the limestone plateau west of the Balcones Escarpment, the Blackland and associated prairies, and the oak belt extending
to the Brazos River Valley. The area is outlined on the north and south by

3

FIGURE 10
Prairie-centered adaptation model
proposed for the Archaic period.
This model focuses on the San GabrielLittle River catchment areas emphasizing
the Blackland Prairie Zone and the edge
effect created by the bordering plateau
(Grand Prairie) and post oak savanna .

PRAIRIE-CENTERED ADAPTATION MODEL

,.,----__

I I
I I I I I I (

w~E

PLATEAU
0

10

20

....... HH

I

BLACK LAND
PRAIRIE
RIV ERINE CORRIDOR

I

POSTOAK
SAVANNA

:J:~~:!.';~.:;~;;:;!::{'Ni~

~ hyp othet ic al

direc tion of populati on movement

II 11 I hypothetica l border of Son Gabr i el catchment

kilometer s

"'-...J

.+:::>

75

hypoth et ica l t erri t orial margins drawn along the divide between the Brazos
and t he Colo ra do Rivers . While these lines are represented as hypothetical
boundari es t o i l lus t rate the concept of the model, they may have some
cult ural va l i dity during the Middle and Late Archaic periods based on the
styl is ti c differences in certain projectile point forms observed by Shafer
betwee n the areas delineated.
The model proposed t hat the prehistoric populations utilizing the prairie
zones ra nge d eas t and west along the river corridors into the plateau and
post oak sa vanna i n order to take advantage of the broadest possible range
i n pl ant and animal and mineral resources. These three broad zones together
wi th th e i ntersect ing rive r ine corridor would offer the greatest diversity
of resources available for the section of Central Texas. The model centers
on the San Gabriel for convenience but the diversity is certainly more
pronounced along an east-west transect than along a north-south transect
whe re th e monotony of the prairie is broken only by another stream corridor.
Movement wi t hin thi s hypothetical territorial catchment would be dictated
by seasonal availability of resources and shelter; the populations would
expectedly exercise the option to rank first those resources that would offer
the gre at est ha r vest with the least effort (Jochim 1976). A choice between
pecans an d acorns , for example, would likely favor pecans.
An alternate model termed Prairie Ecoto~e adaptation emphasizes the prai~ie
as an ecotone between a Plateau adaptation and a Postoak savanna adaptation.
Th e prairi e sites would yield a mixture of elements indigeneous to the other
two zones an d the rivers would serve as corridors for rrovement. This rrodel
would al so set the prairie as the zone of territorial contention between the
t wo ad apta t i ons. The evidence of warfare at Loeve-Fox (Prewitt 1974)
provide s an interes t ing example for this possibility. This model, however,
of fers a much narrower range of resources excluding the oak forest on one
hand and t he plateau on the other. In terms of predicting human behavior,
we find thi s the least likely of the two models.
In order t o tes t the validity of the two models,abundant and excellent
controll ed archeological data will be required. The large collections e~­
pect ed f rom the mitigation of the North Fork and Granger Lakes will provide
s ufficien t data to test the relationships between those two areas. In
t e rms of the north-south parameters, an examination of the stylistically
sens i tive elements along a north-south line from the Colorado River to the
Leon Ri ver for speci fic chronological periods should show geographic patte rning if it exists. Likewise, a similar study along the San Gabriel
River co r ridor from North Fork to its confluence with the Little River
should al so reveal continuity or discontinuity between zones. Interzonal
movemen t might be t raced by examining to see which material culture elements
are mo stly zo ne specific (such as burned rock middens) and which ones are
no t . The di stribution of items made of zone specific resources should also
be emphas i zed s uch as the distribution of granite and quartzite manos and
hammers tones (coming from the Colorado basin or Llano uplift), sandstone
l'l'et at es and abraders (from the Postoak savanna area), are examples of artif act s t hat might be used to test these models.

76

FIGURE 11
Prairie Ecotone model proposed for
the Archaic period. This model
proposes that the Blackland Prairie
served as an ecotone between two
separate populations, one centered
in the plateau (Grande Prairie) and
the other in the post oak savanna zone.

PRAIRIE ECOTONE MODEL

W-E
PLATEAU
0

10
kilometers

20

::\: ::::\:

BLACKLAND
PRAIRIE

POSTOAK
SAVANNA

' : ' : ( RI V ERINE COR RID OR ~£:~(!.::-:;~~;.~::·_;:~~~:~-::;

;;>~

~hyp othetica l

direction of population movement

Ill! I hypothetical border of Son Gabriel catchment

~""
---J
---J

78
Eventually time must be considered in the models because cultural adaptations are never static. Viewing the region from the breadth of time indicated in the Central Texas cultural chronology, three broad chronological
periods will be discussed: the late Paleo-Indian, Archaic and Post-Archaic
adaptations.
The paucity of Paleo-Indian materials reported in the Granger Distric would
seem to suggest that the area was one of low population density during that
period. Although it is suspected that this is actually the case, there may
be other alternatives which could explain the small number of early occupation sites. With the exception of one site, 41WM165, the Paleo-Indian occupations were limited to locales which had been exposed through erosion or
had suffered from mdoern gravel quarrying activities. The failure of the
Texas A&M University survey party to document numerous Paleo-Indian sites
might be attributed to two factors: 1) the sites were not visible for inspection because of their deeply buried nature; or 2) the constant meandering of the San Gabriel River has destroyed many of the eary sites.
The number and size of sites increased through the Archaic period. If this
observation can be interpreted as a reflection of actual population fluctuation, then we might assume that the Archaic sequence brought a growing exploitation of the District. However, it is difficult to determine if that
increase is the result of a greater population density, the product of a
more thorough utilization of the available resources, or simply that the
Archaic remains represent a much longer increment of time.
Based on site frequencies, the late Prehistoric period is represented by a
slight decrease in sites which yielded diagnostic artifacts attributable
to that stage of aboriginal occupation of the reservoir basin. Here again,
we may be seeing the results of a shorter time increment than is found in
the Archaic Period.
We are confronted, then, with a problem of reliability. The number of sites
recorded would seem to indicate, upon analysis, a definite population fluctuation through time. However, the samples for Granger are obviously biased,
due to factors previously outlined. Therefore, the applicability of a population model as stated must be considered limited. The population and sociotechnic model for the sequence of Central Texas occupations presented by
Weir (1975) is not applicable here since his data was drawn exclusively from
the Edwards Plateau.
Inform!tion on the site distribution a~d variability of the late Paleo-Indian period (as represented by such sites as 41WM165) is negligible and
therefore we cannot be sure that the model would be applicable for this
period. If we assume a lower population density for Central Texas 9500
years ago, then the area of catchment for the earliest populations would
likely be much larger than for the later Archaic groups.
Information on the Archaic adaptations in Central Texas is substantial but
has not been viewed from a regional perspective. Weir's attempt to synthesize the culture history of Central Texas is limited since he includes only
the Edwards Plateau. We are considering Central Texas to be composed of

79
several prehi stori c territorial catchrrents and not as a homogeneous cul t ural area. W
e feel that the IT()dels described above are IT()St applicable
for t he Arc hi ac period . We would expect some territorial realignrrent due
to population change or changing ecological conditions through the long
Arc hai c pe riod (ca. 8500 - 1200 B. P.) and shifting distribution of artifact
pattern s th rough t ime might be an indication of this kind of behavior. Th e
intermittent appea rance of bison in the Central Texas prairies (Dillehay 1974)
~r i n t he oak savannah of the Edwards Plateau might cause temporary shifts
in foraging pattern s an d in north-south moverrent of populations and may be
doc urren ted provided the archeological data is good enough to correlate the
spec ifi c archeologi cal assemblages with the occurrence of bison remains .
Thi s ass oci ation seems especially critical for the latest Post-Archaic phase .
As i ndi cat ed in the proposed scope-of-work, we had hoped to make some subst ant ive statements regarding the population and settlerrent patterns during
eac h major chronological period within the Granger District. Had we been
abl e t o do t hi s , some of the data needed to examine the above models would
be at hand .

RECOMMENDATIONS

Subsequent to the field surveys of Granger and North Fork Reservoirs, but
pr ior to the preparation of this report, a mitigation plan was developed t o
dea l with the cultural resources which are to be affected by the inundation
of the reser voir basins. The mitigation design grew out of a rreeting held
De ce mber 13 and 14, 1976 at the U.S. Anny Corps of Engineers Office at the
No rth Fork Reservoir, Georgetown, Texas (see Table 4 for list of partici pant s ) . At that time Objective No. 7 of the TAMU Survey Proposal was fulfill ed verbally during the rreeting .
Th e meeting was conducted at the request of the U.S . .Army Corps of Engineers
and resulted in a Request for Proposals issued by the Corps of Engineers,
Fort Worth District. It was their desire to begin mitigation investigation
as soon as poss ible . While the TAMU Anthropology Laboratory staff maintained
that an optimum mitigation research design would not be possible without
f ull analys i s of the survey results, it was agreed that the construction
scheduling fo r t he reservoirs demanded prompt action . Therefore, verbal
di scussion of t he possible recomrrendations insued at the rreeting.
Since t he Corps of Engineers' interpretations of the rreeting's recomrrenda ti ons have s ub sequently been implemented into contractual or precontractual
agreements, prior to submission of this report, the TAMU Anthropology Labora t ory presents here the Scope-of-l~ork adopted by the Conps of Engineers for
th e mit i gation activities for both reservoirs . It is reflective of the
recomrrendation s made by TAMU during the December rreeting. Sites in the
Granger Res ervoir locality are marked by an asterisk in Table 7.

'80

Table 4.

Participants, December 13 and 14, 1976 Georgetown Meeting

Texas A&M Anthropology Laboratory
Patience Patterson
Ed Baxter
Harry Shafer
Gary L. Moore
Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth
Sam Garrett
Larry Banks
Sue Hazen
Bud Horsman
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Granger and North Fork
Ron Zunker
Texas Archeological Survey
Dave Dibble
Elton Prewitt
North Texas State University
Scott Hayes
National Park Service, Denver
Roy Reaves I II
Judy Shafer
Texas Historical Commission
Alton Briggs

81

CORPS OF ENGINEERS SCOPE-OF-WORK

To be as responsive as possible in compliance with pertinent legislation
(Public Law 89-665, Executive Order 11593, and Public Law 93-29), the
plan of archeological mitigation at the San Gabriel (North Fork and Granger) projects has a multipurpose design. Basically, the plan to be used
consists of three different concepts: conservation, preservation, and
data recovery. The remainder of work to be performed is based on the conclusions of a meeting between three former archeological consultants, the
State Historic Preservation Officer's staff, the National Park Service,
and the Crops of Engineers on 13-14 December 1976. This proposed scope
of se,rvices is primarily concerned with that portion of the program related
to data recovery. Information obtained during and as a result of data
recovery will be used to form a basis for site preservation techniques to
be applied where warranted.
Sites representing the full range of known potential for contributing
additional information to the current state of knowledge have been selected
on an individual or dual basis to provide the maximum results possible.
The data recovery program is also designed as a pilot study to determine
the point of diminishing returns and the validity of using this technique
in archeological conservation. By use of statistically valid sampling it
is intended that maximum data recovery be achieved and at the same time
limit excavation to a minimum required to achieve data recovery in order to
preserve sites or portions of sites for future research potential and reduce costs of mitigation in the best interests of archeological goals, historic preservation, and the public interest.
The decision to stop work on each particular site or cluster of sites will
be based on the curve of diminishing returns and in consultation with the
Corps of Engineers. However, it is anticipated that some subjective professional intuitiveness be considered in such determinations.
In order to accomplish this task, sites have been selected individually
and collectively based on the nine basic parameters and are shown in the
tabulation on the following page (Table 5).
Individual site descriptions will be provided separately from this scope
of services.
METHODOLOGY
In order to perform the work required, the contractor shall develop a program based on this scope of services oriented toward resolving as many of
the research problems included herein and addressing new problems which may
arise during its course of investigation.
The contractor shall be well informed on the state of the pertinent regional
archeology and fully qualified to formulate research questions dealing with
the endangered cultural remains. The research suggestions enumerated below

Table 5.

Nine Basic Parameters of Site Typology
for North Fork and Granger Reservoir Sites.

Lithic
Processing
Sites

Li thi c
Procurement
Sites

Deeply
Stratified
Sites

Sites with
En vi ronmenta l
Data

Ossuary
Sites

Unique
Sites

Burned
Rock
Midden

41WM 65

41WMll7

41WM124

41WM 53

41WM124

41 WM 71

4HJM 57

117

134

133

56

163

165

66

130

165

214

124

230

258

73

134

267

215

129

295

330

165

286

230

130

297

331

295

267

133

328

360

370

230
258
267
293
297
370
00

N

83

in t hi s s cope of work are not intended to be limiting but to provide a
mi nimum of recognized research problems.
Th e contractor shall develop a model of excavation units and amount of
data recovery necessary to plot a curve for detennining the point of dimini shing returns ; The model shall be as flexible as possible to reflect
and adjust to data being recovered.
The contracto r should orient the proposal toward creative and useful research topi cs to ass ure that data recovery is adequate to mitigate the
impact of t he sites' destruction on the data categories that give the
sites their significance. To this end, and to form the basis for higher
levels of inquiry such as professional interpretations, the proposals
should , at minimum, adequately consider culture history. This is a reconstruct ed sequence of events placed in a time-space framework with
appropri at e profess ional explanations where possible . Some of the objectives sought in a culture history reconstruction should be (1) a
paleoenvironmental reconstruction and relationships to available resources
wi th models of exploitation, (2) a settlement and population history,
(3) socioeconomic reconstruction for each definable time period, and (4)
expl anations for the cultural dynamics of the local sequence defined.
Explan ations s hould deal with two levels of culture history: synchronic,
or functional rel ationships, and diachronic, or culture change relationships through time and space.
In add i tion to the generalized problem-orientation presented above, excavations could provide infonnation which may be of use in solving the following probl ems:
Burned Rock Midden
Inves tigations s hould be directed towards developing a synthesizing statement on t he structure and functions of this type site which will provide
comparative data for further investigations at Granger and North Fork
Lakes, etc. Excavations of middens and the surrounding area will attempt
to settle the dispute between the two major hypotheses on the function of
the burned rock midden, or present an alternative. To illuminate the
functional and structural characteristics, the following possible areas or
questions could be addressed :
Wh at i s t he hearth/artifact distribution within the burned
rock midden?
What i s the activity or pursuit that was associated with the
burned rock midden?
If burned rock middens were utilized for cooking as most
investigations have s uggested, then what foodstuff was being
cooked?
Define the activities within and immediately surrounding the
burned rock midden.
Why was there an abrupt disappearance of this type of site
between 1000- 500 B.C.?

84

Is there more t han one type of burned rock midden, and if
so, is there a tempo ra l or functional distribution which
can be develo ped i nt o a predict ive model?
What is the are al di stri buti on of the burned rock midden in
relation to reso urce expl oitat ion seasonality.
After defining what possi ble fo od was being exploited, a determination of
t he nutritional quality cou l d be made by presenting a nutritional breakdow n or assessment of these potenti ally exploitable resources.
Quarry and Procurement Si tes
In vest i gations at the quarry and procurement sites should also stress
horizontal distribution i n an attempt to reveal interartifact, interfeature
relationship s . Questions and areas of investigation which could be addressed are as follows:
Determine subsis t ence activities as possibly delineated by
the nature of tool assembl age .
Was there differenti al pro curement at the quarry through
time?
What were the expl oi t ati on or quarrying techniques employed?
If there exi sts more than one type of lithic mate rial, determine
the differences in t hese mate r ia ls. Obtain samples and data
which can be compared at a later date with the materi als found
at other quarri es .
Replicate the knappi ng t echn iques to illuminate reduction ·
strategies.
Was a segment of thi s reduct i on sequence performed at one place
and the rest el sewhere ?
Is there evidence of trade wi th t hi s material?
How can quarries be dated? Det ermine the chronology of the site.
Deepl y Stratifed Sites/S i ngle Component Sites
Investigations at these si te s shoul d include horizontal as well as vertical
comparisons. Intersite , i nte rfe at ure, and i nterartifact relations should
be exploited.
Poss ible areas or questi ons t o be addressed could be as follows:
What are the relati ons bet ween the deeply stratified sites and
the so-called sin gl e component si tes? Are these differences merely
a reflection of a conti nuous occupation through time?
What relations exis t between these sites, as living areas, with
nearby quarry sites ? Wit h burned rock middens?
What changes in food procure ment are exhibited through time?
What environment al factors have contributed to the prolonged
usage of certai n areas?
Can seasonal cycles be det ermined from these sites?

85

Do artifact assemblages reflect the same information that
can be obtained at quarry areas?
Can nutritional data be derived from the materials at these
and other sites?

DESCRIPTION OF SERVICES TO BE PERFORMED
In addition to completion of an excavation program, the contractor shall
conduct additional survey work on fee-owned land which has not been previously examined. Any new sites discovered will be subject to limited
testing as necessary to determine depth, areal extent, elevation, and
significance. A brief environmental setting of each site shall also be
included. The contractor shall notify the Corps of Engineers in writing
upon completion of the survey as to the results thereof.
The contractor shall also conduct an archival study and subsequent physical
examination of historic sites within the project boundaries.
The contractor shall, in consultation with the contracting agency, employ
other archeologists or specialists in other fields to act as consultants
and in aiding in the actual data recovery process. The contractor, in
the process of formulating the research design to this scope of work, shall
devise methods of research that will allow articulation of the research
problem(s) with the expected data recovery. The anticipated methods and
the sites to be used for data recovery are as follows:
41WM165 - extensive data recovery
258 - machine stripping of upper layer to reveal possible
lower association
297
minimal
data recovery
(295
133 - extensive data recovery
230 - extensive data recovery, with a physical anthropologist
in the field to oversee the removal of human remains
124 - minor excavation
163 - limited testing to determine presence of osteological
remains; preservation of material in situ
117 - limited surface sarrµling
134 - extensive, controlled surface collection
267 - excavation for extensive data recovery
286 - surface collections
53 - recovery for adequate sample; not to exceed 20 percent
of site
330 - extensive testing at one of these at archeologists'
(331
discretion, very limited sampling at other to insure
continuity
73 - compl ete data recovery
328 - data recovery not to exceed 3 percent to show
( 65 comparisons, if any, between sites
66
56 - minor excavation
57 - minor excavation

86

(

41WM214 intensive data recovery for comparison of two sites
215
360 - grab sampling in and around midden
71 - strip and screen plow, test below plow zone for features

RESEARCH ACCOMPLISHMENTS

The research designs for any scientific project are usually drafted anticipating the ideal or optimal circumstances. The proposed scope-of-work for
the Granger Reservoir project designed by TAMU in response to the National
Park Service request for proposals was certainly drafted with this optimism
in mind. The ideal often differs markedly from the real and the planned
research design for the Granger District turned out to be less practical
than what we expected. As rrentioned earlier, the survey conditions were
very poor and permitted only a minimal surface inspection of most sites,
prevented collecting at most sites, and made correlation with sites and
resource zones sometimes difficult. In truth, we fell short of our intended
goal of gaining the kinds and quality of information that would be sufficient
to establish predictive models for site type, temporal placement, environmental setting and resource availability which could be used to draft a mitigation plan for the district. In retrospect, we feel that given the data
provided by the survey, the mitigation plan presented at the aforementioned
meeting at the North Fork Reservoir Corps of Engineers Office was a feasible
one and has resulted in a valuable and comprehensive body of new archeological
data for central Texas. In that sense, the survey was a success although
t~e. anticipated anthropological objectives fell short of what we had initially invisioned.
A review of the original scope of work for Granger Reservoir proposal RF-76228 entitled "An Archeological Investigation of the North Fork and Granger
Reservoirs, Williamson County, Texas" and the arrendment dated March 25, 1976
in a letter to Dr. Frank W. Eddy from the principal investigators is summarized below together with the accomplishrrents for each item. This section
is to provide the reader with an indication of which objectives were or were
not fulfilled and why.
Item No. l. Conduct an intensive, systematic site survey of each reservoir
(Granger and North Fork), including revisiting all the 152 archeological sites
which have been recorded. In a request for amendment to this proposed statement, the number of archeological sites to be visited was reduced since previously recorded sites in the general area of both reservoirs were beyond
the presently defined reservoir limits. We therefore examined all sites
that we could relocate during a near 100% coverage of the Granger District.
This survey was conducted by an experienced two person team following the
procedures outlined under Item l of Methods in the original proposal.
Here again, we should emphasize that surveying conditions were as bad as
could be expected due to overgrown abandoned farmlands and unusually heavy
rains during the course of the work. Several previously recorded sites could

87

not be relocated and although new sites were found, their assessment was
made difficult by the lack of surface exposure. Also, the anticipated
uses of good surface collections for temporal and functional assessments
of sites was not possible.
Item No. 2. Conduct an analysis of the modern natural environment of the
study area in order to define specific microenvironments based on topography,
plant and soil associations. This analysis will also focus on the distribution of natural resources such as chert, fuel, water, etc. relevant to the
prehistoric occupation. The justification for this effort was presented in
Item 2 under Methods. Operating under the guidance of Dr. Vaughn M. Bryant,
Jr. the vegetation study was conducted by Phil Dering, graduate student in
the Botany Department of Texas A&M University. Dering's information was
used to draft the distributional maps shown in Figure 4 and were coded for
the computer analysis.
Some of the objectives listed under Item No. 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 under Methods
were not realized. Item 2.1, for example, was to determine the potential
plant foods that were available for utilization (i.e., seeds, nuts, roots,
flowers) in each of the vegetational zones. Item 2.2 was to make an assessment of which vegetational zones would have provided plant materials needed
for the construction of tools, weapons, and housing; Item 2.3 was to examine
each vegetational zone from the standpoint of trying to assess the animal
life that each might have contained. In order to accornplish ·the first objective
a year-around record of the seasonal variations in the olant and animal
'
behavior was needed.
Limited field research time'and funds precluded
the completion of such a study. The second objective required at the most
some advanced knowledge on the technology and material culture of each
chronological period and at the least a general overall framework of the
technologies. Information on the uses of perishable elements of the environment for use in the manufacture of tools, housing, etc. is simply not available for Central Texas and such statements regarding the uses of pecan wood,
or prairie grasses, for example, would be purely speculative and might lead
to misguided assumptions by other researchers once the speculations appeared
in print. We can and have advanced propositions concerning the concentrations
of likely resources in the broad vegetational zones described in this report
but since the greatest resource density is in the riverine belt and bottom1ands, one would expect that this is where the archeological site density
would occur. The site distributions shown in Figure 4 bear this out. The
riverine belt is so narrow that one can transect virtually all microenvironments within 1 km of the river and would therefore have access to any poten tial resource that occurred in the prairie or riverine zone.
Item 2.3 under Methods focused attention on the faunal resources that occur
in each vegetational zone. The only zone where a confident prediction can
be made regarding the occurrence of specific faunal elements is the river
where aquatic resources were available. The economically important mammals
that occupy the terrestrial habitats range such that no single vegetation
zone would expectedly house a given species. The best breakdown here would
be to view the animals, reptiles and fishes from the perspective of prairie,
woodlands and aquatic habitats. Given the statement made in the paragraph

88

above about the narrow riverine belt, we would expect that the prehistoric
foragers would concentrate their settlements in the areas accessible to the
greatest ecological diversity, in essence, we predict that they were intui tively practicing the edge effect in terms of human ecology. Given this,
then the animals in each of the three major zones cited above and the vegetati onal zones described earlier in this report would be available to the
inhabitants from virtually any location along the river, terraces or bluffs .
Item No. 3 states that a synthesis of previously gathered data for the
Granger District was planned . This study was carried out in order to
establi s h a temporal and functional paradigm. It was hoped that by using
artifact and other associations data we could
classify sites under
general and functional headings and keyed to geomorphic and environmental
settings to design tentative settlement models for each chronological period.
A synthesis of the previously gathered data was carried out and much of this
information was utilized to establish the general classification of sites
described earlier. Temporal placement of sites in the Granger District is
not an easy task even when temporally diagnostic artifacts are recovered
from the surface or erosional features. The Granger Lake basin exhibits a
long history of channel cut and fill sequences, terrace erosion, etc., and
landforms utilized by prehistoric populations for campsites or work areas
were subjected to scouring by sheet erosion, overbank flooding and were either
buried or cut away partly or completely by channel movement. These processes
were continuous and ceased only when the lake water impoundment began. As a
result of these processes, a particular site may be the result of a complex
history of geomorphic events and was utilized intermittently over a long
period of time; sites 41WM21, 124, 133 and 2 are prime examples of this
complexity. Surfaces that have been exposed for several thousand years will
often exhibit diagnostic materials covering long periods of time.
Using artifacts and other cultural material to assess site function
met with only minimal success. The functional assessments are included in
the site descriptions and site classification study and are limited to
basically three broad classes: lithic procurement, campsites and spacial
preparation sites (burned rock middens)/campsites. The range of cultural
activities can only be determined on a general basis due to the nature of the
archeological materials we have to work with, namely lithic, occasionally
faunal and, less often, discrete cultural features. Sites of more particular
activities are difficult to factor out due to the long history of valley util ization, complexity of the geomorphic situation and the nature of the data
base that leads one to draw only broad functional generalizations . In sum,
the realities of the geologic, geomorphic and archeologic s ituations in the
Granger Di s trict precluded meaningful model s of the temporal di stribution of
~ ites by fun c ti~n
based on previously gathered data.
Item No. 4 was to evaluate each site against the published criteria for their
eligibility for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places . National Register forms for each site were submitted to the National Park Servi ce at the North Fork Reservoir office of the Corps of Engineers on December
13, 1976 . Subsequently, the Granger Di strict was nominated as an archeologi cal
di strict to be placed on the National Register. The criteria for th e requirements of eligibility were met (John Clark, personal co11111unication) but none of
the cLlltural resources were placed on the National Register.

89

Item No. 5 was to establish a typology of archeological sites in the study
area based on surface morphology, surface artifactual inventory and modern
environmental setting. We had planned to establish the site typology on the
basis of the following criteria:
A.

Surface morphology
1. Site of site based on the extent of surface artifactual
debris;
2. obvious cultural features such as soil stains, rock middens,
etc.;
3. condition of cultural resource;
B. Surface artifact inventory
l. estimated density of surface debris per square foot of
sit.e;
2. functional range of activities indicated by surface debris;
3. temporal phases and periods presented;
C. Modern Environmental Setting
1. landform upon which sites are located (e.g., floodplain,
older terrace, etc.);
2. distance to nearest water and nature of that water source;
3. soil classification;
4. vegetational assemblage.
The criteria used to classify sites were Al, A2, B2, B3, Cl, C2 and C4. Criterion A3 could not be consistently employed due to the dense vegetation cover.
Brief testing was conducted where it was necessary to examine for intact deposits and these data are provided in the Site Descriptions. It was not
feasible to use criterion Bl again because of the den~e vegetation obscuring
the ground surface. B2 was used in a broad sense, but as a sample from a site
grew larger, as shown in our testing of sites 41WM21, 133 and 124, then the
range of activities increased. Making funtional judgements on the basis of
small samples was indeed tenuous,but in circumstances where limited activities would b0 expected such as lithir. resource outcrop, functional statements
made on the basis of the artifact samples would exp_ectedly have more validity.
At Site 41WM284, however, Bond (1978: 240-259) found not only lithic procurement as one of the major activities, but discovered traces of late Paleo-Indian
materials occurring on the surface. of the ancient gravel deposit.
Criterion B3 was addressed in the site descriptions but because of reasons
stated in the section Survey Results and Conclusions, this was not a criteria
used in establishi-ng the site typology. Simply, good temporal control is
lacking for most of the recorded sites.
Item No. 6 was to generate a tentative model of the substance and settlement
systems appropriate to each major prehistoric stage. This objective was only
partially fulfilled again due to the quality of the survey data. Chronological control was poor and the surface collections from the 1976 field work
added little to the existing collections. Extreme depths could be observed
from some sites exposed along the river banks or in deep erosional cuts but
dating these deposits was virtually impossible due to the absence of temporally diagnostic artifacts. Depth alone cannot be used with certainty as a
guide of antiquity; due to the repeated cutting and filling of old channels,
deposits near the waters edge may range from terminal Pleistocene to as late
as the Middle Archaic as sites such as 41WM21 and 41WM133 revealed.

90

The adaptive models presented in this report consider the Granger District
as part of a territorial catchment of groups of foragers. The absence of
data on the distribution and function of sites through time prevents us from
formulating a more substantive model. The model was based on the predicted
bahavior of foraging adaptations in a region of moderate resource means. We
would expect some changes through time to be manifested even if it can be
demonstrated that most of the Archaic is represented by an adaptive continuum
as knowledge is gained on the plant and animal behavior and how these resources
can be most economically exploited. We must also consider the possibility of
population influxes upsetting the local adaptive schetre. But considering the
nature and quality of the archeological data base in central Texas, this would
be the most challenging mode of cultural change to document and explain.
Basically, the adaptive model that best fits , archeology based on our interpretations of the sequence of foraging adaptations, perhaps continuous, occupying territorial ranges that capitalized on the ecological diversity of the
eastern edge of the Edwards Plateau, the narrow bands of prairies and the postoak region east of the prairies and the major streams transecting these major
ecological belts. It would be essential for the populations to exercise
a mobile settlement pattern to adjust to the seasonal or periodic availability
of plant and animal resources and to develop an efficient technology to exploit
t~ese resources. We argue for a conservative model of adaptation in that the
risk of rroving out of or into a foreign area would be too great due to the
l~ck of knowledge of the plant and animal behavior and how these resources
might be effectively utilized in the new region. It would therefore be an
ecologically sound strategy to remain in an area that provided the maximal
security for the resident populations unless some dramatic environmental or
population change took place. We chose not to engage in a speculative model
based on a suspect typology of site function using such categories as base
camp, hunting camp, fishing station, etc., which imply a non-evolutionary pattern of utilization for a region. Although these settlement models are popular in American archeology, they are applicable only in areas where site preservation is excellent and where functional assessments are secure, situations
sometimes met in arid lands displaying short, or interrupted culture histories.
For temporate environments such as Central Texas, site preservation may appear
to be good but in truth the preservation of what may be termed discrete activity loci or living floors is usually very poor or virtually non-existent. Functional studies of artifacts and features have hardly begun in Central Texas
and until more confident statements can be made regarding how a particular
tool or tool set was used, archeologists should avoid assuming that the function of a stone tool can be determined merely by its shape.
Item No. 7 proposed to design a sampling program for the mitigation phase of
the Granger Lake study. A mitigation plan was offered at the December 13 and
14 meetin~!Satthe North Fork Office based on information at hand at that time.
Since contract decisions for the mitigation were based on presentation, designing a thorough sampling program supported by the completed analysis of
the survey data was preempted as explained in the section Recommendations.

91
REFERENCES CITED
Binford, Lewis R.
1962
Archeology as Anthropology.
(2), pp. 217-225.

American Antiquity, Vol. 28

Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
Vol. I I, No. l.

The Texas Journal of Science,

Bond , Cl e11 L.
1978
Three Archeological Sites at Hoxie Bridge, Williamson
County, Texas. Anthropology Laboratory Report No. 43,
Texas A:&M University, College Station, Texas.
Bray, W.
1904

The Timber of the Edwards Plateau of Texas; Its Relation
to Climate, Water Supply, and Soil. U.S. Departrrent of
Agriculture Forestry Bulletin No. 49.

Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr. and Harry J. Shafer
1977
The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironrrent of Texas: A Model for
the Archeologist. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
,, Vol. 48:1-25.
Camp be 11, T. N.
1975
The Payaya Indians of Southern Texas. Special Publication
No. l, Southern Texas Archeological Association. San Antonio.
Carr, J., Jr.
1967
The Climate and Physiography of Texas.
ment Board Report No. 53.

Texas Water Develop-

Collins, Michael B.
1975
Lithic Technology as a Means of Processual Inference. In
Lithic Technology Making and Using Stone Tools. E. Swanson,
Ed., Mouton Publishers, distributed by Al dine, Chicago.
Collins, O.B., F. Srreins, and D. Riskind
1975
Plant Co111T1unities of the Blackland Prairie of Texas. In
Priarie, A Multiple View. M.K. Wali, Ed., University of
North Dakota Press, Grand Forks.
Davis, William B.
1960
The Mammals of Texas.
letin No. 41.

Texas Game and Fish Commission.

Department of the Army
1972
Final Environmental Statement: Laneport, North Fork and
South Fork Lakes, San Gabriel River, Texas. U.S. Army
Engineer District, Fort Worth, Texas.

Bul-

92
Di 11 eh ay , T. D.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison population changes on the Southern
Plains. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19-65, pp. 180-196.
Dodd, J. D.
1968

Grassland Associations in North America. In Grass Systematics, F.W. Gould, Ed., McGraw-Hill, New York.

Dykstehuis, E.J.
1946
The Vegetation of the Ft. Worth Prairie.
16:2-29.
Eddy, Frank
1973

Ecology Monographs

Salvage Archeology in the Laneport Reservoir District, Central Texas. Unpublished manuscript released to the National
Park Service by the Texas Archeological Survey.

Flannery, Kent V.
1974
Archeological Systems Theory and Early MesoAmerica. In
Contemporary Archeology, Ed. by Mark P. Leone. Southern
Illinois University Press, Carbondale.
Freeman, Martha D.
1976
A History of the Hoxie San Gabriel Ranch, Williamson County,
Texas. Research Report No. 63, Texas Archeological Survey,
Austin.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1969
The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical Site
Identification. State Building Commission Archeological
Program, Report No. 16, Austin.
Godfrey, C.
1964

A Summary of the Soils of the Blackland Prairie of Texas.
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, MP-698.

Godfrey, Curtis L., Gordon S. McKee and H. Oakes
1973
General Soil Map of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station, Texas A&M University, in cooperation with the Soil
Conservation Service, United States DepartrTEnt of Agriculture .
Godfrey, Curtis L., Clarence R. Carter and Gordon S. McKee
1975
Resource Areas of Texas. Texas A&M University and the Depart~nt of Agriculture, College Station.
Gauld, F.
1969
Hi 11 , R.
1901

Texas Plants - A Checklist and Ecological Summary.
Agricultural Experiment Station MP-585. Revised.

Texas

Geography and Geology of the Blackland Grand Prairies, Texas.
U.S. Geological Survey 21st Annual Report, Part 7.

93
Hunt, Charles B.
1974
Natural Regions of the United States and Canada. W.H.
Freeman and Company, San Francisco.
Jochim, Michael A.
1976
Hunter-Gatherer Subsistence and Settlernent: A Predictive
Model. Studies in Archeology Series. Academic Press,
New York.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962
Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich,
Footbridge and Oblate Sites. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 5.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947
The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position ·.of the
Clear Creek Focus. American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 2:97109.
Kemp, Robe rt J.
1971
Freshwater Fishes of Texas.
ment, Bulletin 5-A.

Texas Parks and Wildlife Depart-

Moore, Gary L.
1976
An Archeological Assessment of Sites 41WM21, 41WM124 and
41WM133 in Granger Reservoir, Williamson County, Texas.
Anthropology Research Laboratory Report No. 32, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas.
1977

Muto, Guy R.
1971

An Archeological Assessrnent of Sites 41WM21, 41WM124 and 41 WM133 in Granger Reservoir, Williamson County, . Texas. Texas
A&M University Anthropology Research Laboratory Report No.
32, College Station, Texas.
A Technological Analysis of the Earl~ Stages in the Manufacture of Lithic Artifacts. Unpublished Master's Thesis,
Idaho State University, Pocatello.

Patterson, Patience E.
1977
A Lithic Reduction Sequence: A Test Case in the North Fork
Reservoir Area, Williamson County, Texas. Unpublished
Master's Thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Patterson, Patience E. and Gary L. Moore
1976
An Archeological Study of North Fork and Granger Reservoirs,
A Preliminary Report. Texas A&M University Anthropology
Research Laboratory Report No. 34, College Station, Texas.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974
Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County, Texas; Research Report No. 49, Texas Archeological
Survey, Austin.

94
Prewitt, Elton R. - Continued
1976
Late Archaic Occupations at the Loeve-Fox Site: The San
Marcos and Twin Sisters Phases. In The Texas Archaic: A
Symposium. T.R. Hester, Ed., Center for Archeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special
Report No. 2.
Shafer, Harry J.
1963
Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace
Site in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 23, pp. 56-81.
1971

Investigations into South Plains Premistory, West Central
Texas. Pahers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Proj1ect,
No. 20. T e University of Texas at Austin.

1974

Brushy Creek Watershed, Williamson County, Texas: An Archeological Survey of Structure No. 31. Anthropology Research
Laboratory Report No. 2, Texas A&M University, College Station.

1975

An Archeological Survey of the Mart Sewer Treatment Plant
Site. Anthropology Research Laboratory Report No. 18,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas.

Shafer, Harry J. and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
1976
An Archeological Investigation of the North Fork and Granger
Reservoirs, Williamson County, Texas. Proposal No. RF-76-228,
submitted by the Texas A & MResearch Foundation, Anthropology
Research Laboratory, to the U.S. Department of the Interior,
National Park Service.
Shafer, Harry J. and James E. Corbin
1965
An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of the North
Fork, South Fork, and Lane ort Reservoirs, Williamson Count ,
exas. Report submitted to the National Park Service by
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project.
Shantz, H. and R. Zon
1924
The Physical Basis of Agriculture: Natural Vegetation. In
Atlas of American Agriculture, Part I, Section E. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Washington, D.C.
Sharrock, Floyd W.
1966
Prehisoric Occupation Patterns in Southwest Wyoming and
Cultural Relationships with the Gre.at Basin and Plains
Culture Areas. Anthropological Reports, No. 77, University
of Utah.
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer and Richard E. Ross
1967
Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Survey Program, No. 11, Austin, Texas.

95
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and E.B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook to Texas Archeology.
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Tharp, B.C.
1926

Bulletin of

Structure of Texas Vegetation East of the 98th Meridian.
University of Texas Bulletin 2606:45-54. Austin.

Vita-Finzi, C.and E. S. Higgs
1970
Prehistoric Economy in the Mount Carmel Area of Palestine:
Site Catchment Analysis. Proceedings of the Prehistotic
Society, Vol. 36.
Weir, Frank A.
1977
The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph ..D. Dissertation,
Washington State University, Pullman.
Wesolowsky, Al B., Thomas R. Hester and Douglas R. Brown
1976
Archeological Investigations at the Jetta Court Site (41TVl 51), Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 47, Austin, Texas.

