Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

March 14, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report of a Cultural Resources Survey of the Haning B Pipeline in Central
Dimmit County, Texas
Mr. David Black
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Mr. Black,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during an archaeological survey of the Haning
B Pipeline right-of-way on March 14, 2012 (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1. Haning B Pipeline on county-wide topographic map.

Figure 2. Haning B Pipeline on MacDonald Lake (1982) topographic map.

Dimmit County Prehistory and History
Other than early work done by A. T. Jackson in 1932, perhaps the earliest systematic archaeological
survey in Dimmit County was conducted by Parker Nunley and Thomas Hester in 1964 and 1965.
Their work resulted in the documentation of 24 archaeological sites in the county, ranging in age
from the Early Archaic through the Later Prehistoric Toyah phase (Nunley and Hester 1966).
Indian artifacts found in Dimmit County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable.
Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes, and
a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their
spears (Hester 1984; Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery
and to hunt with bows and arrows. “During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the
Coahuiltecan Indians native to Dimmit County were squeezed out by other Indian who were
migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the
Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in to
take their place” (Leffler 1996:646).
“No permanent Spanish settlement seems to have been established in the future Dimmit County.
Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio

Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. After the Mexican War of
Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its citizens to settle in Texas.
Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that included territory now in
Dimmit County. None of the recipients seems to have made use of the land, however. By 1836, when
Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated almost solely by Indians”
(Leffler 1996:646).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of Dimmit County lay in the
disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for desperate
characters until about 1865. Carrizo Springs was founded in 1865, with the new settlers who lived
in jacals or dugouts frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part tobeing
pursued by the Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave
Dimmit County by 1877, and in 1880 Carrizo Springs became the county seat for the newly formed
county. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an
important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators
combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
Although the residents of Dimmit County learned to cope with the sparse annual rainfall, artesian
wells ushered in an era of large vegetable truck farms in the 1890s, and Dimmit County became
known as part of the Texas Winter Garden Region, one of the most prolific vegetable-growing areas
in the country.
As with rest of the nation, the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced to cut
back their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on raising
poultry, hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county
in the 1950s certainly bolstered Dimmit County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim
to most of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively
increasing part of the county’s development (Leffler 1996).

Background Review
Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Even though only a handful of scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in Dimmit
County (e.g., Nunley and Hester 1966), these very few surveys have identified over 160
archaeological sites. Archaeological remains such as Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview artifacts indicate
that the area was likely occupied by Native Americans as early as 11,000 years ago.
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say
what bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of Dimmit County before then.
Only cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods. Archaeologists have
documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including large open campsites that are
most commonly located along stream or river terraces with numerous campfires, where a wide
variety of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal remains are found.
Where gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient

gravels are sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or
prehistoric quarries.
Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the lack
of cultural resource surveys near the PA that would have located sites, rather than the probable nonexistence of sites. In fact, the PA lies to the west of a large archaeological survey conducted in
anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al. 1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live
Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years
ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering
natural food resources available in the area. In addition, archaeologists from the Center for
Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted archaeological
investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir. A number of different types of
structures were investigated, the purpose being to extract as much information as possible about
architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns during the last half of the 19th century within the
reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met
the challenges of living in a frontier area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming
of law and order, railroads, and modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archaeological sites indicates that
no professional documented archaeological surveys have been conducted one mile south of the
Project Area (PA), and no archaeological sites have been recorded. However, as shown in Figure 2,
a survey of the Haning Lateral was conducted in by TAAI in December 2011, resulting in the
discovery of no archaeological sites (Nickels 2011, 2012).
Old Maps, Aerial Photographs, Historic Research
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the Dimmit County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the huntergatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences in
1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending a hunting
party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each other in the
semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents (Campbell and
Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are
documented accounts of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to
establish any sort of permanent structures (Chipman 1992).
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Hening Lateral passes
through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard source of review is
the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the Perry Casteñada
Library at the University of Texas at Austin. A second standard research source consulted for old

maps and aerial photographs is a very comprehensive and large compilation of old maps and aerial
photographs compiled by the Texas Department of Transportation from dozens of historic archives
throughout the state of Texas.
In this case, the only map found was a 1939 Asherton U.S. Army Corps of engineers topographic
map (Map 2012). This map shows no structures existing on or near the Haning B Pipeline at that
time. Technically, any structures old than 45 years are now considered of interest by the Texas
Historical Commission, and this should be considered when the lateral is constructed.

Soils Map
The Haning B Pipeline crosses three soil types that offer varying depths, sedimentation and
deposition rates, and broad, shallow streams course through the area. As such, the soils and their
proximity to streams likewise imply the potential for the preservation of intact cultural resources to
exist. Figure 3 shows the soils that are intersected by the Haning B Pipeline, as well as surrounding
soil types (Web Soil Survey 2012). Table 1 then presents a brief description of each type, and their
potential to contain buried and intact cultural deposits.

Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the Haning B Pipeline.

Table 1. Soils Dissected by the Haning B Pipeline.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact Archaeological
Potential

Catarina clay (Cf)

Deep clay on frequently flooded
bottomlands

Minimal to about 6 inches below
the surface

Catarina clay (CGB)

Deep clayey soils on gently sloping
upland areas

Minimal to Moderate to about 26
inches below the surface

Maverick clay loam (MKC)

Moderately deep clay loam on ridges
and summits on convex interfluves

Minimal to Moderate to about 17
inches below the surface

Field Survey Results
A thorough pedestrian survey of the surface was conducted along over 50 percent of the right-ofway. Those specific areas that were afforded a 100-percent examination included stream crossings
and their approaches. Although surface visibility ranged from 95 to 100-percent, no prehistoric or
historic cultural materials were observed. The upland soils in this area are shallow, deflated and
eroded, exposing clay hardpan in several areas. Natural low cutbanks along streams as well as
machine-cuts along the right-of-way were also examined (Figures 4 and 5). Animal burrow backdirt
piles were frequent, but a thorough examination of those again revealed no evidence of cultural
material. Machine-pushed brush piles were also common along the proposed right-of-way. No
evidence of either prehistoric or historic cultural resources was observed during the survey.

Figure 4. Shallow drainage along the southern Figure 5. Shallow drainage along the middle
portion of the right-of-way; facing southwest. portion of the right-of-way; facing northwest.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Based upon the negative findings during this survey, and the minimal potential for significant
archaeological deposits to exist in the upland soils in the area, we recommend that construction of
the Haning B Pipeline as currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned, with no further
archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously undiscovered
cultural resources are encountered during development of the pipeline, such finds should be
examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
March 1, 2012].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke
Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series:
Volume 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Hester, T. R.
1984 Fragments, Flints, and Footprints: The Prehistory of Dimmit County. In Dimmit
County Mesquite Roots, Volume I, pp. 1-6, edited by L. K. Tidwell. Wind River
Press. Austin, TX.
Leffler, J.
1996

Dimmit County. The New Handbook of Texas Online, Volume 6, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Map
2012

Asherton U.S. army Corps of Engineers Map, 1939. Perry Casteñeda Library
Map Collection. Catarina USACE Topographic Map.
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo [Accessed March 1, 2012].

Nickels, D. L.
2011 Final Letter Report of a Cultural resources Survey Background Review of the
Haning Lateral in Central Dimmit County, Texas. Submitted to Flatrock
Engineering and Environmental, Ltd., December 8, 2011.
2012 Final Letter Report of a Cultural resources Survey Background Review of the
Re-Aligned Haning Lateral in Central Dimmit County, Texas. Submitted to
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd., February 17, 2012.
Nunley, P., and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. XVIII, No. 3, pp. 233-253.
Perry Casteñeda Library
2012 Perry Cesteñeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed March 1, 2012].
Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2012 McMullen County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed March 1,
2012].

