AN INTENSIVE CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY
OF THE
HAUSMAN ROAD PROJECT
SAN ANTONIO, BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS

Prepared for:

URS CORPORATION
San Antonio, Texas

Prepared by:
RABA KISTNER ENVIRONMENTAL, INC.
San Antonio, Texas

By:
Pollyanna Clark, Principal Investigator and Chris Murray, Archaeologist

Antiquities Permit Number 6593
RKEI Project No. ASF12‐152‐00
September 9, 2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.

ABSTRACT.......................................................................................................................................... i

II.

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY .............................................................................................................. ii

III.

INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................................ 1

IV.

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING.............................................................................................................. 3
A.
Project Area Setting ............................................................................................................ 3
B.
Flora and Fauna .................................................................................................................. 3
C.
Geology and Soils................................................................................................................ 3

V.

CULTURAL CONTEXT ........................................................................................................................ 4
A.
Prehistoric Chronology (10,000 B.C. ‐ A.D. 1500s) ............................................................. 4
B.
Historic Chronology (A.D. 1500s ‐ Early 1900s) ................................................................ 10

VI.

METHODS....................................................................................................................................... 16
A.
Archival Research Methods .............................................................................................. 16
B.
Field Methods ................................................................................................................... 16

VII.

RESULTS ......................................................................................................................................... 17
A.
Results of Archival Research ............................................................................................. 17
B.
Survey Results ................................................................................................................... 17

VIII.

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................... 21

IX.

REFERENCES CITED......................................................................................................................... 23
LIST OF TABLES

Table 1
Table 2
Table 3
Table 4

Soils within Project Area
Previously Recorded Archeological Sites within One Kilometer (0.62 miles) Radius of the APE
Locations and Findings of Backhoe Trenching Excavations
Soil Descriptions from the Backhoe Trenching Excavations
LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
Figure 5
Figure 6
Figure 7

USGS Topographic Map of the Project Area
Aerial Map of the Project Area
Previous Surveys and Recorded Sites
Trench Locations Plotted on a Topographic Map
Trench Locations Plotted on an Aerial Map
Site 41BX50 Location Map (Plotted on a Topographic Map)
Site 41BX50 Location Map (Plotted on an Aerial Map)
LIST OF APPENDICES

Appendix A
Appendix B

Cox|McLain Environmental Consulting (CMEC) Memorandum from July 2012
Texas Historical Commission Cultural Resources Clearance Letter for Leon Creek (LC)‐9

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

i

Archeological Survey

Appendix C

Photographs

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

ii

Archeological Survey

I.

ABSTRACT

Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc. (RKEI) performed an intensive cultural resources survey of the
proposed Hausman Road improvements project located in central Bexar County, Texas. Work was
conducted to ensure compliance with the Antiquities Code of Texas and Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended since U.S Army Corps of Engineers involvement is
anticipated.
The cultural resources survey of the project area consisted of visual inspection of the ground surface for
cultural materials supplemented with mechanical backhoe trenching. Work was performed under
Antiquities Permit Number 6593.
The Area of Potential Effects (APE) extends approximately 3.4 miles from Loop 1604 to IH 10. The width
of the APE is defined as the existing right‐of‐way that varies from approximately 80 to 100 feet;
however, the right‐of‐way widens to 128 feet at Leon Creek. The maximum depth for the Hausman
Road project area is 15 feet associated with the proposed installation of the concrete storm sewer
pipeline. Approximately 11 acres of new right‐of‐way consisting of narrow (three to six foot) strips and
easements will be added along the existing Hausman Road right‐of‐way. The APE covers approximately
41 total acres.
The results of the background study determined that approximately half of the APE had been previously
surveyed for cultural resources and that four previously recorded sites, 41BX41, 41BX50, 41BX1858, and
41BX1889, are located within or adjacent to the APE (THC 2013) (Dayton 2012).
A total of 21 trenches were excavated within the APE and ten of the 21 trenches produced cultural
materials. Based on the results of the survey, the boundary of site 41BX50 was redrawn. Site 41BX50 is
a sparse campsite consisting of fire‐cracked rock and flakes. The site is ephemeral, possesses little, if
any research value, and is not considered eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) or eligible for designation as a State Archeological Landmark (SAL).
Based on the paucity of observed and recovered cultural materials, it is unlikely that potentially NRHP‐
eligible or SAL‐designated sites will be impacted by the proposed project. Cultural resources clearance is
recommended for the project.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

i

Archeological Survey

II.

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

URS Corporation (CLIENT) contracted with Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc. (RKEI) on behalf of the City
of San Antonio (COSA) to perform an intensive cultural resources survey for proposed improvements on
Hausman Road in San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. A cultural resources survey of the project area was
performed to ensure compliance with the Antiquities Code of Texas and Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended since U.S Army Corps of Engineers involvement is
anticipated. Work was performed under Antiquities Permit Number 6593.
The Area of Potential Effects (APE) extends approximately 3.4 miles from Loop 1604 to IH 10. The width
of the APE is defined as the existing right‐of‐way that varies from approximately 80 to 100 feet;
however, the right‐of‐way widens to 128 feet at Leon Creek. The maximum depth for the Hausman
Road project area is 15 feet associated with the proposed installation of the concrete storm sewer
pipeline. Approximately 11 acres of new right‐of‐way consisting of narrow (three to six foot) strips and
easements will be added along the existing Hausman Road right‐of‐way. The APE covers approximately
41 total acres.
The results of the background study determined that approximately half of the APE had been previously
surveyed for cultural resources and four previously recorded sites, 41BX41, 41BX50, 41BX1858, and
41BX1889, are located within or adjacent to the APE (THC 2013) (Dayton 2012).
The intensive survey of the APE included a 100 percent pedestrian survey of the APE that entailed visual
inspection of the ground surface for cultural resources supplemented by mechanical backhoe trench
excavations. Deep testing via backhoe trench excavations enabled the identification of deeply buried
deposits. The trench wall profiles were examined for cultural features, soil horizons, and artifacts while
the backdirt was examined for cultural materials. A total of 21 trenches were excavated within the APE
and ten of the 21 trenches produced cultural materials.
The survey resulted in the re‐delineation of site 41BX50. The site possesses little research value and no
further work has been recommended. The site is not considered eligible to be listed in the NRHP or
designated as a SAL. No further work is recommended and RKEI recommends that proposed
construction activities proceed as planned.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

ii

Archeological Survey

III.

INTRODUCTION

URS Corporation (CLIENT) contracted with Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc. (RKEI) on behalf of the City
of San Antonio (COSA) to perform an intensive cultural resources survey for the proposed improvements
on Hausman Road in San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.
Figure 1 provides a map of the project area plotted on the Castle Hills, Texas (2998‐311) and Helotes,
Texas (2998‐312), 7.5 minute United States Geological Survey (USGS) topographic quadrangle. Figure 2
provides a map of the project area plotted on a 2012 aerial photo.
The City of San Antonio (COSA) is the project owner and is providing funding for the project. A cultural
resources survey of the Hausman Road project area was recommended to ensure compliance with the
Antiquities Code of Texas and Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as
amended, since U.S Army Corps of Engineers involvement is anticipated.
COSA plans to improve Hausman Road from Loop 1604 to I‐10, a distance of approximately 3.4 miles.
Hausman Road is currently a two‐lane road with two 12‐foot lanes. The existing right‐of‐way varies
from approximately 80 to 100 feet wide along the length of the project. The project includes the
installation of a 24‐ to 36‐inch diameter reinforced concrete storm sewer pipe under Hausman Road at
approximately 5‐15 feet in depth. Beginning at Loop 1604 and proceeding east to I‐10, the following
approximate sections will include the listed proposed roadway improvements:








Loop 1604 to Woller Road (2,900 feet) – Right‐of‐way will be increased to 94 feet to
accommodate four 12‐foot lanes, five foot bike lanes, a 16 foot depressed grassy median and
seven foot wide sidewalks.
Woller Road to Huntsman (1,050 feet) – Right‐of‐way will be increased to 86 feet to
accommodate four 11‐foot lanes, five foot bike lanes, a 14 foot center turn lane and seven foot
wide sidewalks.
Huntsman to Leon Creek Bridge (5,560 feet) – Right‐of‐way will be increased to 90 feet to
accommodate two 11‐foot inside lanes, two 12‐foot outside lanes, a 14 foot center turn lane
and seven foot wide sidewalks. In this section, there is a 7 foot wide sidewalk on the north side
of Hausman and a 10 foot hike and bike trail on the south side. There are no bike lanes in the
roadway section.
Leon Creek Bridge (500 feet) – Right‐of‐way will be increased to 128 feet to accommodate four
12‐foot lanes, a four foot raised median, a seven foot wide sidewalk on the north side and a
three foot shoulder on the south side. A separate 16 foot wide bridge for pedestrians will be
constructed to the south from the vehicular bridge.
Leon Creek Bridge to I‐10 (7,800 feet) – Right‐of‐way will be increased to 95 feet to
accommodate four 12‐foot lanes, a 16 foot depressed grassy median, a 7 foot wide sidewalk on
the north side of Hausman and a 10 foot hike and bike trail on the south side.

The Area of Potential Effects (APE) extends approximately 3.4 miles from Loop 1604 to IH 10. The width
of the APE is defined as the existing right‐of‐way that varies from approximately 80 to 100 feet;
however, the right‐of‐way widens to 128 feet at Leon Creek. The maximum depth for the Hausman
Road project area is 15 feet associated with the proposed installation of the concrete storm sewer
pipeline. Approximately 11 acres of new right‐of‐way consisting of narrow (three to six foot) strips and
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

1

Archeological Survey

easements will be added along the existing Hausman Road right‐of‐way. The APE covers approximately
41 total acres.
The archival and historic background review followed a comprehensive and thorough background study
and recommendations provided by Cox|McLain Environmental Consulting (CMEC) in July 2012. The
archeological site and survey information discussed in the memorandum was verified with data listed in
the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Sites Atlas. A copy of the CMEC memorandum is included in
Appendix A. The CMEC 2012 memorandum indicated that the SAWS detention pond east of Leon Creek
and south of Hausman Road and the line to the detention pond (System C East ‐ Sta 170+00 to Sta
179+00 +/‐) will need to be surveyed. However, this detention pond and associated line have now been
removed from the current Hausman Road design and therefore, survey of this area is not needed.
The results of the background study determined that approximately half of the APE had been previously
surveyed for cultural resources and four previously recorded sites, 41BX41, 41BX50, 41BX1858, and
41BX1889, are located within or adjacent to the APE (THC 2013) (Dayton 2012).
RKEI performed an intensive cultural resources survey of 3.4 mile APE (41 total acres) to ensure
compliance with the Antiquities Code of Texas and Section 106 of the NHPA of 1966, as amended. This
survey was performed to determine whether cultural resources are located within the APE, and, if so,
assess the significance and eligibility for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SALs) and/or for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP).
The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival and historic background review, an 100
percent pedestrian survey of the project area that entailed visual inspection of the ground surface for
cultural materials supplemented with deep testing via mechanical backhoe trenching, and a report
suitable for review by the THC in accordance with the THC’s Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter
26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources
Management Reports. Pollyanna Clark, Archaeologist was the Principal Investigator for the project. Ms.
Clark, Chris Murray, Archaeologist, and David Calame, Archeological Steward, performed the cultural
resources survey from August 19, 2013 to August 23, 2013. David Calame and Jimmy Deloach operated
the backhoe. The work entailed surface inspection for cultural materials and observations of backhoe
trench excavations. Work was performed under Antiquities Permit Number 6593.
A total of 21 trenches were excavated within the APE and ten of the trenches produced cultural
materials. The survey resulted in the re‐delineation of the site boundary of site 41BX50 that has been
recorded with the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL). Site 41BX50 possesses little
research value and no further work is recommended. Site 41BX50 is not considered eligible for listing in
the NRHP or for designation as SAL.
No further work is recommended and RKEI recommends that proposed construction activities proceed as
planned. Should the construction activities for project area change, further work may be required.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

2

Archeological Survey

IV.

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

A.

Project Area Setting

According to the National Weather Service Southern Region Headquarters’ San Antonio Climate
Summary the City of San Antonio is located in the south‐central portion of Texas on the Balcones
escarpment. Northwest of the city, the terrain slopes upward to the Edwards Plateau, and to the
southeast, it slopes downward to the Gulf Coastal Plains. Soils are blackland clay and silty loam on the
Plains and thin limestone soils on the Edwards Plateau.
The entire length of the APE on the north and south sides of Hausman Road are lined with utilities (gas,
water, electrical, and fiber optic cable). Views of the project area are presented in Appendix B, Photos 1
through 16.
B.

Flora and Fauna

The APE is located in the Blackland Prairie Vegetation Area, which is predominantly rangeland.
Blackland Prairie is classed as a true prairie with little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium var. frequens)
as the climax dominant species (Gould 1975). The location of the APE is less than a mile from the
Edwards Plateau Vegetation area and will therefore be better defined as the transitional zone between
the Blackland Prairie Vegetation Area and the Edwards Plateau Vegetation Area. The rough, rocky areas
like those of the APE typically support a brush over‐story complex made up of live oak (Quercus
virginiana), shinnery oak (Quercus havardii), various junipers, and Honey Mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa)
(Gould 1975). According to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Departments map of the Vegetation Types of
Texas, the project area is designated as Live Oak – Ashe Juniper Parks. This Vegetation type is typically
seen as an area with a medium to high canopy and a tall to open understory. Some of the species found
in this designation are various species of oak, cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia), hackberry (Cletis laevigata),
flameleaf sumac (Rhus copallina), Agarita (Mahonia trifoliolata), Mexican persimmon (Diospyros sp.),
saw green briar (Smilax bona‐nox), and little bluestem to name a few (TPWD 1984).
The project area is located within the Balconian Biotic Provinces of Texas (Blair 1950). The Balconian
Province only exists in central Texas and is contained within the Edwards Plateau geographic province
(Neck 1986). Some of the common mammals within the area include nine‐banded armadillo (Dasypus
novemcinctus), black‐tailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus), eastern cottontail rabbits (Sylvilagus
flordanusi), white‐tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), opossum (Didelphis virginianus) raccoon (Procyon
lotor), and white footed mouse (Peromycus leucopus). Blair (1950) lists at least 75 species of reptiles
and amphibians found within the Balconian Biotic Province. Also, the bird species composition in the
project area is fairly diverse with numerous breeding, migrant, and wintering species present (Smith and
Beuchner 1947). According to the study of aerial photographs, the project area is surrounded by urban
development; therefore, it is most likely that not all the animals listed above will be found within or near
the project area.
C.

Geology and Soils

A review of the 1983 Geologic Atlas of Texas, San Antonio Sheet, shows the west and east portions of
the APE are underlain by limestones, mudstones, and other components of the Late Cretaceous Buda
Limestone and Del Rio Clay, while the central portion of the APE is underlain by Holocene‐era alluvium
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

3

Archeological Survey

and terrace deposits associated with Huesta and Leon Creeks, which converges just south of the APE
(Dayton 2012) (Stoeser et al. 2007).
According to the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Web Soil Survey (WSS), there are eight
different soil mapping units within the APE (NRCS 2013). Soils within the project area are summarized
below in Table 1.
Table 1. Soils within Project Area
Map Unit
Symbol
LvB
TaB

Map Unit Name
Lewisville silty clay, 1 to 3 percent
slopes
Eckrant cobbly clay, 1 to 5 percent
slopes

Percent of APE
29
28

Cb

Crawford and Bexar stony soils

13

Ca

Anhalt clay, 0 to 1 pecrent slopes

10

PaB

Patrick soils, 1 to 3 percent slopes,
rarely flooded

9

Vab

Sunev loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes

5

Tf

Tinn and Frio soils, o to 1 percent
slopes, frequently flooded

4

HnB

Heiden clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes

2

Approximately 29 percent of the APE consists of Lewisville silty clay with one to three percent slopes
(LvB). This soil type typically develops on stream terraces and is well drained. Soils are deep and tend to
be a silty clay down to 62 inches below surface.
Approximately 28 percent of the APE is comprised of Eckrant cobbly clay with one to five percent slopes
(TaB). This soil type typically develops on ridges and is well‐drained. Soils tend to be a stony clay that
terminates at bedrock between eight and 20 inches below the surface.
Approximately 13 percent of the APE is made up of Crawford and Bexar stony soils (Cb). Cb soils consist
of stony clay in texture and overlain limestone bedrock, which is 20 to 40 inches deep. Soils are well‐
drained with moderately‐low to moderately‐high capacity to transmit water.
Approximately 10 percent of the APE is made up of Anhalt clay with zero to one percent slopes (Ca).
This soil type typically develops on plains and is well‐drained. Soils tend to be clay and terminate at
bedrock between 20 and 40 inches below the surface.
Approximately nine percent of the APE is made up of Patrick soils with one to three percent slopes,
rarely flooded (PaB). This soil type typically develops on paleoterraces and is well drained. Soils are
deep and tend to be a clay loam for the first 17 inches and a very gravelly sand to 60 inches below the
surface.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

4

Archeological Survey

Approximately five percent of the APE is made up of Sunev loam with one to three percent slopes (VaB).
This soil type typically develops on stream terraces and is well drained. Soils are deep and tend to be
loam down to 62 inches below surface.
Approximately four percent of the APE is made up of Tinn and Frio soils with zero to one percent slopes,
frequently flooded (Tf). This soil type typically develops in floodplains and is moderately well‐drained.
Soils are deep and tend to be a silty clay loam for the first 50 inches followed by clay to 80 inches below
the surface.
Finally, approximately two percent of the APE is made up of Heiden clay with one to three percent
slopes (HnB). This soil type typically develops on ridges and plains. The soils are well‐drained with low
to moderately low capacity to transmit water. Soils are deep and tend to be clay to 80 inches below the
surface (NRCS 2013).

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

5

Archeological Survey

V.

CULTURAL CONTEXT

A.

Prehistoric Chronology (10,000 B.C.–A.D. 1500s)

The project area falls within the southern portion of the Central Texas archeological region. The
archeological record for Central Texas reflects the entire North American cultural sequence; thus,
evidence of human occupation spans a time period of roughly 12,000 years. The Central Texas cultural
sequence that follows is divided into region‐specific cultural‐historical periods within four broad cultural
stages—Paleo‐Indian, Archaic, Late Prehistoric, and Historic. These four major cultural stages are briefly
summarized in the following cultural history of the Central Texas area, which derives primarily from the
work of Black (1989), Hester (2004), Prewitt (1981, 1985), Suhm (1960), Suhm et al. (1954), and Weir
(1976).
Paleo‐Indian
The earliest widely accepted human occupation of North America is termed the Paleo‐Indian stage
(10,000–6000 B.C.). Cooler, wetter conditions were in place 12,000 years ago, and although a general
drying trend continued through Paleo‐Indian times, climatic conditions were more stable than during
the subsequent Holocene. This period is often characterized as a culture of small but highly mobile
bands of foragers who were specialized hunters of Pleistocene megafauna. Most Paleo‐Indian sites are
deeply buried and difficult to find, leaving the highly visible, but often fortuitously discovered,
mammoth kill sites as the primary evidence of Paleo Indian life‐ways. Recent studies address this bias
and emphasize that large kills probably contributed little to overall food requirements. Rather, a
primary reliance on other game animals and plant resources was more likely (Ferring 1989). Subsistence
in this period certainly included large herbivores such as mammoth, bison, and horse, but was probably
based more consistently on smaller animals such as various species of turtle, land tortoise, alligator,
mice, badger, and raccoon (Collins et al. 1989; Story 1990) and, presumably, also included an array of
plants (Collins 1998). The defining Paleo‐Indian trait is the fluted point tradition. Projectile points of the
earliest Paleo‐Indian period were made from high quality toolstone and indicate high technical skill in
flaking, exhibiting a hallmark “flute,” which is a long, shallow flake scar that extends from the base
toward the tip of the point on one or both sides.
The Paleo‐Indian stage in North America is the earliest substantiated cultural period. The Paleo‐Indian
stage in Central Texas falls into early and late subperiods, which encompass three archeological
complexes. The Llano and Folsom complexes comprise the Early Paleo‐Indian subperiod (10,000–8000
B.C.), and the Plano complex reflects the Late Paleo‐Indian subperiod (8000 6000 B.C.). These
complexes are not unique to Central Texas, for their ranges extended into the Southwest and Great
Plains. The Early Paleo‐Indian subperiod is based on two projectile point styles: Clovis and Folsom.
The Llano complex is represented by the Clovis projectile point, the oldest point type found in North
America. Much research energy has been devoted to the makers of Clovis points, but the material
record of Llano peoples is largely limited to hunting activities. Clovis assemblages include the diagnostic
fluted lanceolate Clovis point, along with engraved stones, bone and ivory points, stone bolas, and ochre
(Collins 1995; Collins et al. 1992). Sites with Clovis components reported in Central Texas include
Kincaid Rockshelter (Uvalde County), Wilson‐Leonard and Crockett Gardens (Williamson County), Gault
(Bell County), Horn Shelter 2 (Bosque County), and Pavo Real (Bexar County). Surface finds of distinctive
Clovis points are reported from a number of other localities (Meltzer and Bever 1995). By about 11,000
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

6

Archeological Survey

years ago the cool, wet climatic conditions of the Pleistocene had given way to Holocene warming and
drying. This change coincides with the extinction of Pleistocene megafauna, most notably the
mammoth, and is concurrent with the earliest record of the Folsom complex. Like the Llano complex,
the Folsom complex is best known for the Folsom projectile point. Shorter than Clovis points, “classic”
Folsom points exhibit fine parallel flaking and large flutes that extend across most of each face. Midland
points, commonly believed to occur later in time, may represent unfluted Folsom points, apparently
made to offset the production risks involved in fluting (Amick 1995). Another trademark of the Folsom
complex is the association of Folsom points with the remains of now‐extinct bison (Bison antiquus),
usually found in the context of massive kills of bison herds run into ravines. Such sites are conspicuous,
and thus much of what is known about Folsom subsistence and technology comes from lithic artifacts
found at these sites or nearby processing sites. Folsom tool kits consisted of the fluted Folsom and the
thin, unfluted (Midland) points, large thin bifaces, and end scrapers that were more conducive to
specialized hunting, particularly of Bison antiquus (Collins 1995:382). By approximately 10,000 years
ago, the climate trended toward more moderate conditions, and megafauna from the Early Paleo‐Indian
subperiod were no longer available. Most of the associated faunal evidence dated to the Late Paleo‐
Indian Plano complex reflects a human subsistence pattern based on deer and other smaller animals.
Horn Shelter No. 2 (Forrester 1985) located on the Brazos River in Bosque County, Hinds Cave (Shafer
and Bryant 1977) in Val Verde County, and Wilson‐Leonard (Collins 1998) in Williamson County have
yielded subsistence data indicating that a variety of vertebrate fauna was consumed by the Late Paleo‐
Indian peoples.
The Late Paleo‐Indian Plano complex is represented by a greater diversity of projectile points (e.g.,
Plainview, Angostura, Scottsbluff, and Golondrina), which, still in lanceolate form, were unfluted. In
contrast to evidence from the earlier subperiod, late subperiod points are associated with modern bison
(Bison bison) and often occur as surface finds throughout Central Texas. The beginning of Prewitt’s
(1981) Early Archaic, or Circleville phase, is considered in this report as the Late Paleo‐Indian Plano
complex, but it has also been called the “Pre‐Archaic” (see Sollberger and Hester 1972). The Late Paleo‐
Indian Plano complex defies convenient labeling, as it exhibits a unique blend of lanceolate and
stemmed points that appear to correspond with lifeways reflective of Archaic subsistence alongside
Paleo‐Indian mobility. Again, little is known about the complex in Central Texas, but toward the latter
part of the Late Paleo‐Indian period, lanceolate points began to be replaced by stemmed points.
Settlement‐subsistence strategies probably more closely approximated those of the Archaic than Early
Paleo‐Indian. More diverse sites are associated with this period, including not only the mass bison kills,
which by the Late Paleo‐Indian period consist only of modern bison, but also campsites and residences.
Archaic
Toward the end of the Late Paleo‐Indian period a great variety of projectile point styles began to appear.
The subsequent Archaic period (6000 B.C.–A.D. 700) is broadly characterized by stemmed and side‐
notched dart points and by the appearance of ground and pecked stone tools. The Archaic represents a
more generalized style of hunting and gathering as a way of life, and the subsistence pattern may have
become more diffuse, reflecting a greater exploitation of local environments as smaller game animals,
fish, and wild plant foods increased in dietary importance. Like their predecessors, Archaic peoples
apparently continued to follow a nomadic way of life, traveling seasonally to utilize different food
resources in various localities (cf. Weir 1976). McGraw and Hindes (1987:47) have noted that:

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

7

Archeological Survey

In northern and central Bexar County, major occupation sites are situated on stream
terraces and are usually associated with one or a series of spatially proximate, often
buried, burned rock middens. An extensive distribution of chipped stone debitage and
a variety of diagnostic projectile points indicate recurring occupations that span
several thousand years. Major Late Prehistoric sites, in contrast, are often physically
discrete from these earlier sites.
The Archaic is generally divided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods (Black 1989; Collins 1995; Story
1985) based on diagnostic projectile point styles and associated radiocarbon assays (Collins 1995). By
the Middle Archaic in southern Central Texas, some regional differences are apparent archeologically, as
evidenced primarily by increased techno‐stylistic diversity among projectile point types. Interplay
between influential factors of population increase and environmental change toward greater aridity and
climatic variability probably drove adaptive change throughout the Archaic. The following discussion
follows Story’s (1985) broader subdivisions of the Early, Middle, and Late Archaic, although Prewitt’s
(1981) discussion of\various phases within these periods provides much of the information discussed.
The most archeologically obvious changes from the Paleo‐Indian to the Early Archaic (6000–2500 B.C.)
are the appearance of ground stone implements and the shift from the lanceolate points of the Paleo‐
Indian tradition to the stemmed and side‐notched dart points emblematic of the Archaic. Three
recognized point styles (Angostura, Early Split Stem [Gower and Jetta], and Martindale‐Uvalde) indicate
that the makers tended to occupy the better‐watered eastern part of the Edwards Plateau (Collins
1998:65). Assemblages also include Clear Fork and Guadalupe bifaces, manos, metates, hammerstones,
burins, circular scrapers, and a variety of bifaces. Few burials have been assigned to this period (Prewitt
1981:77–79; Story 1985:34–35), and settlement/subsistence systems are “hypothesized to have been
diffuse, utilizing a variety of resources and frequently shifting the loci of subsistence activities rather
than intensifying the use of any specified resource” (Story 1985:39). Projectile point types constitute
the primary source of information about the Early Archaic, but Prewitt (1981, 1985) uses point types to
define four phases: the Circleville, San Geronimo, Jarrell, and Oakalla, respectively. This refinement is
questioned by some as unsubstantiated since few intact sites are known (see Black 1989:26; Black and
McGraw 1985), but the tendency for many Early Archaic sites to occur around the Balcones Escarpment
leads several researchers to infer that this area was a refuge from drier conditions in Central Texas and
on the coastal plains (McKinney 1981; Story 1985). Concentrations of Early Archaic sites along the
southern and eastern margins of the Edwards Plateau may be indicative of climatic conditions at the
time, as these environments had more reliable water sources and a diverse subsistence base (Story
1985:31, 34). Convincing paleoenvironmental data on the climatic conditions of this period is,
nonetheless, still lacking.
Early Archaic sites are small (Weir 1976:115–122), suggesting that populations were highly mobile and
that their densities were low (Prewitt 1985:217). Early Archaic sites are usually described as open
campsites (such as Loeve [Williamson County], Wilson‐Leonard, Richard Beene [Bexar County], Sleeper
[Blanco County], Jetta Court [Travis County], Youngsport and Landslide [Bell County], Camp Pearl Wheat
[Kerr County]) or lithic procurement stations. Only a few campsites located in rockshelters (e.g., Kincaid
Rockshelter) occur on the Edwards Plateau during this period. The location of lithic procurement sites is
determined by the natural distribution of cherts. Large and varied burned‐rock features (Sleeper, Camp
Pearl Wheat, Wilson‐Leonard, Richard Beene) become common in the latter part of the Early Archaic,
and domestic structures (Turkey Bend Ranch) and caches (Linder) are also known in the Early Archaic
(Collins 1998:64). Freshwater mussel, deer, and small game appear to have been important food
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

8

Archeological Survey

resources. Hearths are occasionally found at Early Archaic sites and can be stonelined, basin‐shaped, or
flat. The appearance of ground stone signifies a shift to plant resources, and the diversification of lithic
technology appears to reflect an increased reliance on gathering.
The Middle Archaic (2500–400 B.C.) marks the first period of Central Texas distinctiveness as an
archeological region. The subperiod exhibits more numerous and more varied sites than the preceding
Early Archaic. This cultural manifestation is characterized by a population increase; the development of
regionally distinct cultural patterns; and changes in settlement patterns, economic and social systems,
and technology (Prewitt 1985). In addition, territorial boundaries may have begun to emerge (Story
1985:39). Burned‐rock middens, which often consist of massive amounts of fire‐cracked limestone, are,
however, the preeminent archeological features of the Middle Archaic. Many of these middens may
represent earthen ovens used to process live oak acorns (Weir 1976), as well as for roasting succulents
or other plants and animals. Many Central Texas tree species disappeared from the paleoenvironmental
record at this time, leaving live oak forests to dominate the landscape. A renewed focus on deer, which
themselves were well suited for the oak‐savannah environment, is likely. Weir (1976:124–130) suggests
that an expansion of oak forests influenced the development of an economic system that focused on the
exploitation of deer, acorns, and other hardwood nuts. Prewitt (1985:222–226) notes that the
abundance of rock middens indicates a greater reliance on plant foods, although tool kits still imply a
strong reliance on hunting.
Middle Archaic sites in Central Texas are represented by rockshelters, campsites, lithic quarries, and kill
sites (Weir 1976), as well as by the burned‐rock middens that first appeared toward the end of the Early
Archaic. Other features include basin hearths and large flat hearths. Data concerning mortuary practices
are few except for the end of the Middle Archaic, for which cremations have been reported (Prewitt
1981:81). Three generalized point styles characterize this subperiod: Bell‐Andice‐Calf Creek, Taylor, and
Nolan‐Travis. Bifaces, a variety of scrapers, unifaces, and grinding stones are also present. Prewitt
(1981:73) suggests that the proportion of projectile points (50 percent) compared to total number of
tools is indicative of a balance between the exploitation of plant and animal resources.
Late Archaic (400 B.C.–A.D. 700.) life‐ways began similarly to those of the Middle Archaic, but prominent
changes occurred, characterized by the emergence of new cultural patterns as well as the intensification
of preexisting ones (Story 1985:45). Coastal marine shells, used either as ornaments or as raw materials
for ornaments, were exchanged with inland groups in return for finished lithic tools and/or siliceous raw
material (Story 1985:48). The use of burned‐rock middens throughout the Late Archaic appears to have
been a major part of the subsistence strategy as a decrease in the importance of hunting, inferred from
the low ratio of projectile points in relation to other tools in site assemblages, may have occurred
(Prewitt 1981:74). Bison, which had been absent from the area for most of the Archaic, however, were
once again available in the region (Dillehay 1974).
Late Archaic sites include rockshelters, campsites, and large cemeteries. The establishment of these
large cemeteries along drainages suggests strong territorial ties by certain groups (Story 1985:40).
Cemeteries, burial sites where at least two individuals were buried in proximity, imply repeated use of
space for the burial of a group’s dead. The location and use of the larger cemeteries are believed to be
the result of the same cultural group using a place on the landscape to reaffirm their rights of descent
and control/access to critical resources (see discussion in Taylor 1998 and Taylor et al. 1995:627–631).
Late Archaic cemeteries in South and Central Texas exhibit a significant energy investment and often
contain mortuary furniture. When artifacts are found in burial contexts, they represent discrete points in
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

9

Archeological Survey

time, or part of the package of tools or objects that would have been used during a particular
occupation period. Burial artifacts, then, provide the unique opportunity to glimpse an assemblage that
may not be possible in other site contexts where multiple occupations may be overprinted, as is
common in terrace settings. From general ethnographic studies of hunter‐gatherer groups, it is
suspected that grave goods represent a sampling of utilitarian and ornamental items used and
possessed in life by those individuals, hinting at the social status and personality of the deceased
(Binford 1971), and a recognition that such burial goods would be needed in the deceased’s next life
(Perttula 2001).
In Central Texas, on the Edwards Plateau, burials in sinkholes and caves appear to be relatively common
(Kibler 2001). Below the escarpment, however, cemeteries are found along river drainages and often
contain mortuary goods. There appears to be an association of deer antler and deer antler racks in late
Middle Archaic and Late Archaic mortuary contexts. Evidence of this association is primarily based on
items recovered from large burials in riverine settings at such sites as Loma Sandia (41LK28) in Live Oak
County, Olmos Dam (41BX1) in the Blackland Prairie below the Edwards Plateau escarpment in Bexar
County, and Ernest Witte (41AU36) along the lower Brazos River in Austin County (Perttula 2001). More
than 200 burials were interred in the large cemetery at Loma Sandia (Live Oak County) between 850 and
550 B.C., during the latter part of the Middle Archaic period (Taylor and Highley 1995). Loma Sandia
burial goods contained the functional tool forms that a hunter‐gatherer would need on a day‐to‐day
basis. Analysis of the burials at this site revealed some disparity between grave goods associated with
males and those associated with females. At this site, males exclusively had thin bifaces, unifaces, antler
racks, and modified mussel shells, but women were found with shark teeth, asphaltum, and certain dart
points (Morhiss, Abasolo, and Pedernales) (Lukowski 1988).
At Olmos Dam (41BX1), a Late Archaic cemetery in Bexar County, the majority of the individuals had
associated grave goods (Lukowski 1988). Included were freshwater and marine shell ornaments, red
ochre, bone artifacts, and stone artifacts; especially numerous were antlers and antler racks. Many of
the burials in this cemetery were lying in a flexed position. Some of the burials at the Olmos Dam site
displayed evidence of violence, including a small dart point (possibly a Godley or a Palmillas) found
within the skull of an adult male (Lukowski 1988). At Olmos Dam, unlike Loma Sandia, antler racks also
covered the graves of women and children. Excavations at the Ernest Witte site (41AU36), in Austin
County on the Brazos River, encountered four separate burial episodes resulting in burial groups from
the Middle Archaic (Group 1), the Late Archaic (Group 2), the Transitional Archaic (Group 3), and the
Late Prehistoric (Group 4) (Hall 1981). Group 1 contained 61 interments with only one Pedernales point
and six bone artifacts. Group 2, dating to the Late Archaic period, exhibited a significantly greater
investment in mortuary tradition than did any of the other cemetery groups at this site. Group 2
contained 14 interments with grave artifacts of dart points, marine and freshwater shell ornaments,
antler and antler racks, ochre, bone artifacts, and ground stone. Burial Group 3 consisted of 10
interments; the only associated artifacts were seven Godley points buried with one individual. Group 4
was composed of 13 interments with no associated mortuary furniture.
A rich Late Archaic mortuary tradition emerged in South Texas, where many large cemeteries depict
common themes of grave offerings of marine and freshwater shell ornaments, antlers and antler racks,
stone tools, and red ochre (Hester 1970, 1971). The flexed burial is also a common characteristic in all
of these cemeteries.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

10

Archeological Survey

Other features found at Late Archaic sites include basin hearths, arcuate hearths, earth ovens, and
mussel shell caches. The lithic assemblages contain a variety of dart point styles (e.g., Bulverde,
Pedernales‐Kinney, Lange‐Williams‐Marshall, Marcos‐Montell‐Castroville, Ensor‐Frio‐Fairland, and Darl);
Erath, San Gabriel, and Hare bifaces; gravers; scrapers; a variety of unifaces and bifaces; grinding stones;
and boatstones. Except for Montell and Fairland, the point styles for the Late Archaic are among the
most widely distributed dart points (Prewitt 1985). Other artifacts include ulna flakers, bone beads and
awls, stone and marine shell gorgets, and freshwater mussel shell pendants (Prewitt 1981:81–82).
Late Prehistoric
The Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 700–1500) is marked by the replacement of atlatl‐and‐dart with bow
and‐arrow technology. Ceramics were also adopted within this period. Basin‐shaped and flat hearths
and burned clay/charcoal lenses and pits are the predominant archeological features. There is a
continuation of Late Archaic burial practices with flexed and semi‐flexed burials occurring near
habitation sites, usually in cemeteries but also as isolated occurrences. Some burials were cremations,
carried away from cemeteries and placed in shallow pits. The period is divided into two main periods,
the Austin (A.D. 700–1300) and Toyah (A.D. 1300–1500), and each is marked by distinctive cultural
traits. Once believed to be contemporaneous, Jelks’s (1953, 1962) work at the Blum and Kyle
Rockshelter sites in Hill County demonstrated the temporal separation between Austin and Toyah
components by locating stratigraphically distinct Perdiz arrow points above older Austin phase Scallorn
arrow points. The Late Prehistoric chronology of southern Texas is closely aligned with that of Central
Texas, particular in terms of Toyah cultural manifestations (Hester 1995:443).
The Austin phase is characterized by a shift to the use of the bow and arrow. Common are Scallorn and
other related side‐notched (e.g., Edwards) arrow points, as well as broad‐based hunting and gathering
as the main mode of subsistence (Turner and Hester 1999:173). Common artifacts for this period
include numerous bifaces, Clear Fork gouges, scrapers, grinding stones. Typical features included basin
hearths, pits, and cemeteries. The interments at Austin phase cemeteries such as Loeve‐Fox
(41WM230; Prewitt 1981, 1974) and the Coleman site (41BX568; Potter et al. 2005) show evidence of
increased nutritional stress and social violence. In addition, the mortuary program followed by Austin
phase populations appears to contrast with that of the Late Archaic period peoples in the area (Potter et
al. 2005). There is less investment in mortuary goods or personal adornment during this phase, and the
antlers that occur in numerous Late Archaic cemeteries are poorly represented in Late Prehistoric
cemeteries.
The broad‐based subsistence patterns of the Austin phase focused largely on gathering, though hunting
of deer along with exploitation of freshwater mussels and snails is also suggested to have been
important (Prewitt 1981:83; Ricklis and Collins 1994). The diagnostic projectile points of the Austin
period are the Scallorn and Granbury. Austin phase components have been found at sites along
waterways throughout Bexar County (e.g., Cibolo Creek [sites 41BX379, 41BX746, 41BX1005], Salado
Creek [sites 41BX699, 41BX1007, 41BX1433]), the San Antonio River [site 41BX567] and the Medina
River [sites 41BX1076, 41BX1104]) (THC 2011). Friday bifaces and unifaces, other bifaces, scrapers,
ground stone, ulna flakers, and bone awls are among the wide variety of tools. Other artifacts include
painted stones, bone beads, and marine shell beads and pendants. Projectile points are proportionately
more common during the Austin phase as hunting appears to have become increasingly important. The
widespread occurrence of Scallorn points outside of Central Texas and the frequency of marine shell
indicate a broad cultural entity and/or extensive trade networks in the Late Prehistoric.
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

11

Archeological Survey

The Toyah phase is the best known of the Late Prehistoric phases. It is distinct from the preceding Austin
phase and is marked archeologically by Perdiz and similar contracting‐stem arrow points, pottery,
beveled‐edge bifacial knives, perforators, and end scrapers (Black 1986, 1989; Creel 1991; Hester 1980,
1995; Jelks 1962; Johnson 1994; Kelley 1986; Prewitt 1981).
Perishable artifacts such as cordage and basketry are found at some sites. Corncobs have also been
recovered, indicating either trade relations with agricultural peoples or some degree of horticulture
(Prewitt 1981:74). Extensive trade relations are also indicated by the presence of Caddo ceramics, such
as Bullard Brushed among other imported types. Toyah phase burials occasionally contain artifacts, but
it is not established that these are grave goods. Perdiz and Cliffton points found in burials may be from
fatal wounds and indicative of increased conflict. Sites in Bexar County associated with the Toyah phase
have been recorded in Government Canyon (e.g., 41BX133, 41BX141) and along Cibolo Creek (41BX372),
the Medina River (41BX528), and Culebra Creek (41BX1422, 41BX1423) (THC 2011).
During the Toyah phase, a climatic shift to moister conditions allowed the savannas and grasslands to
advance, bringing the return of the bison. Subsistence strategies shifted even further toward hunting in
response to the reoccupation of Central Texas by bison (Dillehay 1974). Deer, however, probably
continued to be an important resource (Black and McGraw 1985). The importance of bison to the Toyah
economy is readily deduced from the makeup of artifact assemblages represented at a number of
archeological sites. The Buckhollow site (41KM16) in Kimble County produced an abundance of Perdiz
arrow points of many varieties (Johnson 1994). Also found were Harahey knives, most of them
containing four beveled edges. The use wear is representative of cutting bison hides and flesh—a
hypothesis supported by the recovery of large numbers of bison bones. Also indicative of the
importance of bison is the recovery of large end scrapers from the site. The presence of edge rounding
and polish on bit ends indicates use on fresh hides, most of which were probably bison (Johnson 1994).
The Hinojosa site (41JW8), located in Jim Wells County in southern Texas, represents a Late Prehistoric
Toyah base camp dating from A.D. 1300–1500 (Black 1986). Specialized hunting adaptations are evident
from the archeological materials, though a broad subsistence base of fish, softshell turtle, aquatic birds,
and mussel shell was also exploited. Deer figured prominently in the overall assemblage, with bison and
pronghorn antelope also contributing a significant portion to overall subsistence (Black 1986). A
significant component of the highly adaptive bison‐oriented Toyah phase tool kit is the end scraper used
for processing hides. Creel (1991) has suggested that these tools are indicative of the importance of
trade in bison hides during the Late Prehistoric and Early Historic periods. Bison bones occur in great
frequency in many Late Prehistoric Toyah phase sites. Excavations at 41LK201 and 41MC222 along the
Frio River drainage contained abundant bison bone (Hester 1980; Highley 1986).
B.

HISTORIC CHRONOLOGY (A.D. 1500s–EARLY 1900s)
Historic Native American

The historic period (post‐A.D. 1500) in Central Texas represents the local expression of sweeping cultural
change for native groups across North America. The effects of the Spanish missions roughly correspond
to the first European influence in Texas. In the 1600s native groups sought refuge at the missions from
encroaching Apache and, later, Comanche groups. Changes through gradual cultural adoption and
exchange of Spanish life‐ways and materials occurred throughout the seventeenth century. After the
1700s, European material culture became pervasive. Metal, glass, European clothing, and guns became

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

12

Archeological Survey

important to native peoples due to native groups’ inevitable engagement in the European capitalistic
economy that replaced the native groups’ barter system.
The early history of South and Central Texas is the most richly documented in the state. The numerous
expeditions into these parts of the region resulted in records and journals that provide sparse glimpses
into the past of the native peoples. Nevertheless, limited ethnographic cultural data exist for the native
groups that occupied this immediate area preceding the establishment of the missions. Campbell and
Campbell (1996) present a list of the groups occupying Mission San Juan and Mission Espada, as well as
the other missions in the area. For many of the groups listed, however, original territorial ranges can
only be speculated, and their material culture cannot be differentiated from other groups residing in the
missions at the time. In the nineteenth century, the term “Coahuiltecan,” for Coahuilteco, was coined by
a Mexican linguist for a related group of native languages in the region (Campbell and Campbell
1996:17). The name came from the Mexican state of Coahuila, which included the northern part of New
Spain and most of the area occupied by present‐day Texas. Over the last century, the term
“Coahuiltecan” was widely adopted for use in referring to the whole of the native groups living on the
southern Texas plains region and into Mexico. Although the term originally described a group of related
languages, it devolved into a common misinterpretation that was applied to a widespread ethnically
related culture believed to speak the same Coahuiltecan language. This terminology was far from
correct. In fact, the people who were subsumed under this umbrella term represented distinct ethnic
groups with distinct cultures and diverse languages and dialects (Hester 1998).
Few Historic Native American archeological sites have been investigated in the San Antonio/Bexar
County area. Supposed sites relating to the historic Indian contact period are usually characterized by
multiple components that span a long period of time. Since the historic Indian period lasted only
roughly 200 years, the material evidence occurs at shallow depths below surface or entirely on the
surface. Consequently, it is prone to modern disturbance. Stratigraphic separation between the Late
Prehistoric and Historic Native American contact components is often limited or nonexistent.
Excavations at site 41MC296, a historic native encampment on Elm Creek in McMullen County, illustrate
that European trade items were introduced to the South Texas native peoples in advance of the Spanish
entrada. Conversely, at the Olmos Dam site (41BX1) in Bexar County, historic‐era seasonal
encampments made by native peoples traveling the “Peyote Trail” to northern Mexico were
documented as late as the 1920s (Lukowski 1988).
Numerous river crossing sites with possible contact period components were identified during historical
research and survey for the Applewhite Reservoir in San Antonio. They include the
Dolores/Perez/Applewhite Crossing (41BX682); Pampopa/Paso del Talon (41BX680), one of the
documented crossings used by Native Americans prior to Spanish use; Sabinitas/Jett/Palo Alto Crossing
(41BX857); and Paso de las Garzas (41BX697) (Hindes 1992). Archeological investigations were
conducted at the Pampopa‐Talon crossing site (41BX528), where important roads connecting San
Antonio to points along the Rio Grande pass over the Medina River. Between 1731 and 1737, the
Pampopa fled mission confinement and were pursued to their rancherias near the “Old Ford” of the
Medina River. Historic accounts tell of encampments of the Pampopa and other Indian groups nearby
(Thoms and Ahr 1995). The Pampopa Crossing/Ford has been positively identified at sites 41BX527 and
41BX528 on the Medina River.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

13

Archeological Survey

Spanish Exploration and Settlement
The initial European presence in Texas occurred in 1519 when Álvarez de Piñeda mapped the coastline
of Texas under the order of Francisco Garay, then governor of Jamaica. Piñeda laid claim to all the land
between Florida and the Rio Grande in the name of the Spanish Crown. His explorations were followed
by those of Alvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca in the 1530s. Cabeza de Vaca was a member of the 1527–1528
expedition of Pánfilo de Narváez, a large expedition charged with surveying much of the land in the
southeastern United States. While inland, the Narváez group became separated from the ships. Because
of hostile Indians and food shortages, Narváez led his men in improvised watercrafts along the Gulf of
Mexico coastline, hoping to reach the Pánuco River. A hurricane destroyed most of the group, but
shipwrecked a few of the men, including Cabeza de Vaca, on the Texas coast, probably on present‐day
Galveston Island, in 1528. Cabeza de Vaca lived among the coastal Indians for the next eight years.
After being enslaved by hostile Indians, he eventually made his escape, arriving at a Mexican outpost to
the west in 1536. He was the first non‐Indian to wander through the Texas region, and his writings
about his travels are the first accounts of the area, generating excitement over the prospect of gold and
leading to subsequent Spanish expeditions to the region in search of the precious commodity. Soon,
Spanish authorities commissioned Francisco Vázquez de Coronado, governor of the Mexican province of
Nueva Galicia, to lead an expedition into the American Southwest in 1540 in search of the fabled Seven
(Golden) Cities of Cibola to the north (Fehrenbach 1968:23). The expedition was a dismal failure in its
attempt to find the legendary gold, but did succeed in exploring some of Texas and New Mexico. In
1539, Hernando de Soto’s expedition landed in present‐day Florida and over the next four years traveled
across the southeastern United States. After de Soto’s death at the Mississippi River, Luis de Moscoso
de Alvarado took command of the expedition. By 1542, the Moscoso group had traveled as far west as
Texas (Hester 1989:199) in an attempt to reach New Spain (present‐day Mexico).
As it became apparent that there were no cities of gold to exploit, settlement was somewhat slowed
until French interest in the region stimulated the Spanish to renew their colonizing efforts. After word
came in 1685 that Rene‐Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, had established an outpost somewhere on
the Texas coast, the Spanish were motivated to send various expeditions to locate and eradicate the
outpost. The threat that the French presented became almost an obsession with the Spanish:
The specter of French invasion brooded over the Spanish colony in New Mexico for nearly
two centuries. Somewhere—perhaps from the wilds of New France, perhaps from the
coast of the Gulf of Mexico, at some incalculable distance—an indeterminable number of
Frenchman were periodically thought to threaten the silver mines of New Spain….Beset
with internal problems, woefully conscious of their weakness and isolation, New
Mexicans started at the very shadow of intruders on the vague periphery of their
province [John 1975:155].
This attitude encouraged the establishment of missions and presidios in East Texas to buffer against
further French encroachment into the region (Fox 1989:85).
Alonso de León led various expeditions into Texas between 1686 and 1690. In 1691, Domingo Terán was
appointed governor of the province. He, accompanied by Padre Massanet, set out to determine what
French activities were occurring in the region and to establish a series of missions among the Indians. In
this pursuit, they came into the region of San Antonio, both commenting on the fine plains and large
numbers of buffalo they encountered (McGraw and Hindes 1987:64). Padre Massanet called the area

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

14

Archeological Survey

“San Antonio de Padua” in honor of St. Anthony of Padua and suggested that it would make a suitable
location for a mission. A small garrison of men was left there, and the Presidio of San Antonio de Béxar
was initiated (McGraw and Hindes 1987:64). At least one source believes that the site of the presidio
was initially called “the ‘level lands without woods’ which . . . de Terán and Massanet crossed when they
continued their journey” (Habig 1968:160).
Activities in the area were curtailed during the Eleven Years’ War of Spanish Succession (1702–1713);
but when the Frenchman Louis Juchereau de St. Denis traveled over much of the province undetected in
1714, the Spanish were galvanized into action. A series of missions was planned throughout the frontier
areas of New Spain. For example, in 1716, an expedition led by Captain Domingo Ramón set out for East
Texas to establish missions and a presidio, including one at a site between the Red and Sabine rivers at
Los Adaes (de la Teja 1988:51–51).
In response to the remoteness of the settlements in East Texas, the Spanish soon recognized that a stop
point was necessary to bridge the distance between the newly settled missions and San Juan Bautista on
the Rio Grande. The need for an intermediate location had been evident for some time, and “Terán . . .
considered the upper San Antonio River valley, with its abundant water supply, woods and agricultural
land, the ideal site for missions and towns” (de la Teja 1988:53). Of like mind was Fray Antonio de San
Buenaventura Olivares who had been impressed with the area during his visit in 1709. Martín de
Alarcón, who had been recently appointed as governor to the province, considered the opinions. It was
decided that two missions were to be founded: one on the San Antonio River and one on the San
Colorado River, with the former established first. The viceroy ordered not only missionaries and solders
to populate the new missions, but settlers and families, artisans, and livestock as well (de la Teja
1988:55).
The three‐pronged approach—presidio, mission, and civilian colonists—that the Spanish used for
settlement proved to be more successful than the establishment of mission and presidio or presidio
alone (Gilmore 1991). This was certainly true in the case of San Antonio. On May 1, 1718, a group led
by Alarcón and including Fray Olivares founded the Mission San Antonio de Valero on San Pedro Creek,
and on May 5, 1718, the presidio and the villa of San Antonio de Béxar were established. Although
ceremonially the city was founded in 1718, no actual construction was begun until 1719 due to the lack
of men and materials (McGraw and Hindes 1987:66).
Five missions were built on the San Antonio River, all within a 12‐mile radius of the present city of San
Antonio. They are, in order of establishment, as follows: Mission San Antonio de Valero (1718), Mission
San José (1720), Mission Nuestra Señora de la Purísima Concepción (1731), Mission San Juan de
Capistrano (1731), and Mission San Francisco de la Espada (1731). The last three had initially been
established in East Texas, but were relocated to the San Antonio River area. All of the missions in
present‐day San Antonio were administered by the order of Saint Francis. San José was under the
authority of the College of Zacatecas, and the remaining four were under the authority of the College of
Querétaro. In 1773, all the San Antonio missions were placed under the auspices of the College of
Zacatecas (Jackson 1986:33). Each ministered to different groups of Indians.
In 1722, a short‐lived mission, San Francisco Xavier de Najera, was founded for 50 families of Ervipiami
Indians brought in from the Brazos River. This mission was closed in 1726 with the residents probably
being absorbed into Mission Valero (Schuetz 1968:11). One source (Scurlock et al. 1976:133) places the
location of this mission somewhere midway between Missions San Antonio de Valero and San José.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

15

Archeological Survey

During the early 1700s, population growth was slow in the San Antonio area. Initially, most inhabitants
were members of military households. Alarcón’s first settlement had included “an engineer, stone
mason, blacksmith, and a number of women and children” (de la Teja 1988:56). Fray Celiz, the
chronicler of the Alarcón expedition, noted that the first attempts in 1718 to locate settlement sites
were unsuccessful. A stable water supply for the missions was necessary for both crop production and
human and animal consumption. Because of the relatively arid San Antonio environment, the missions
needed an effective way to enhance the available water supply. The Franciscans adopted a system of
irrigation ditches—called acequias—introduced into Spain by Moslems, and began construction in 1719
on a 15‐mile network of seven gravity‐flow ditches, five dams, and an aqueduct to distribute water to
about 3,500 acres of cultivated land (National Park Service [NPS] 2005). Once the first of the acequias
was operational, settlers “expected a large crop of maize, beans, and other produce” (de la Teja
1988:57).
By 1721, San Antonio had become a series of wood and mud huts (jacales), typical of a Spanish frontier
settlement. All settlers, both military and civilian, were dependent on the garrison for defense,
communications, and, initially, civil administration. The missions of San Antonio attracted a variety of
Indian groups, primarily Coahuiltecan and Karankawan hunter‐gatherers, during the mid‐1700s, but also
attracted Indians of other origins, some of whom were fleeing Spanish disruptions in Nuevo León and
other regions of northern Mexico (Hester 1989:200).
However, not all Indian groups were interested in what the missions had to offer:
When our arms were first introduced in Texas, our foremost object was the propagation
of faith, by the means of evangelic predication; but, notwithstanding the endeavors and
apostolic zeal of the Reverend Missionaries, we could not succeed in gathering the
Indians around the Missions. Used to a roving and unrestrained life, the Nations of that
extended territory refused to submit to the merciful yoke of the Church, finding it rather
burdensome, owning to their depraved habits. Unable to attract them to us of their own
free will, we never availed ourselves of force. . . . [Buquor 1935:2].
Mission settlements were disrupted frequently from 1721 to 1749 by raiding Apaches. Even after a
formal truce had been signed in 1749, thievery and limited hostilities took place throughout the rest of
the century (de la Teja 1988:61). Hostilities also were occurring with various Comanche bands, who
disapproved of the tentative link between the Spanish and the Apache during the last half of the 1700s.
At the expense of the Spanish Crown, colonists from the Canary Islands had been sent to colonize other
areas with great success. The harsh economic conditions that existed on the islands, coupled with the
promise of land, made the islanders eager emigrants (de la Teja 1988:67). On March 9, 1731, a group of
colonists from the Canary Islands came to the area and were to have a profound effect on the region.
As originally conceived, an additional 400 islander families would immigrate into the region. When it
became apparent that this endeavor would be too costly, the plan was abandoned and no additional
families were ever recruited (de la Teja 1988:68). The Canary Islanders were given control over lands
previously allotted to the military settlers. They also were given control over the town council and
effectively barred established settlers from participating in local government (de la Teja 1988:68).
Eventually, local elections took place in which the sitting council elected its successors. Although these
elections were full of irregularities, in the end they did provide a means by which new settlers could
share in town government.
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

16

Archeological Survey

Initially, town lots were only distributed among Canary Islanders. The distribution of land to the
islanders involves the first record of the San Antonio Town Tract (on which the city proper is located).
Captain Juan Antonio Pérez de Almazán, who served as commander and superior justice (justicia mayor)
of San Antonio, began to lay the tract for the town of San Antonio in 1731. He had to work around the
existing presidio and missions (de la Teja 1988:122) because, in general, the land west of San Pedro
Creek was considered less desirable because of its vulnerability to Indian attack.
Population growth in the area continued at a steady rate due to a variety of factors and in part to
established access into the region via El Camino Real, also known as the King’s Highway or the Old San
Antonio Road. This “road” was not one fixed route, but one that altered with the season and the year.
San Antonio de Béxar, as an established way‐station, became a hub for the various routes (McGraw and
Hindes 1987).
Land use outside of Béxar during the Spanish period was chiefly confined to large‐scale ranching
activities. Ranching during the eighteenth century was very relaxed. Round‐ups amounted to little more
than the gathering of wild, unbranded stock when meat or hide and tallow were needed (McGraw and
Hindes 1987:71). This lax attitude can be attributed primarily to the small population and the lack of
markets. However, some ranches in what is today Bexar County were more productive (McGraw and
Hindes 1987:72).
Outside political factors during the latter half of the eighteenth century had a great impact on the
region. The completion of the Seven Years’ War (1754–1762) and the signing of the Treaty of Paris in
1763 resulted in the French and Spanish ceding most of the lands east of the Mississippi River to
England, and Spain acquiring the Louisiana Territory from France. This, of course, put an end to the
years of Spanish paranoia and called for a reassessment of the situation in New Spain (McGraw and
Hindes 1987:74). Local effects included the selection of Béxar as the new provincial capital.
The American Revolution encouraged economic growth in the region. Cattle from the ranches in the
Béxar area were rounded up for sale in Louisiana to the Spanish who were fighting the British along the
Gulf Coast (McGraw and Hindes 1987). Another change in the region was the beginning secularization
of the missions by 1794. Secularization—the transition from mission status into secular Spanish society,
based on official royal decree—was in part a result of the missions’ decline in status as a response to the
removal of the French threat. The second factor in secularization was the decline of the missions’
indigenous inhabitants in the 1790s as those populations assimilated into Spanish society, achieving a
major goal of the mission system, through intermarriage or conversion to Christianity. Pressure from
the surrounding civilians for mission farmland (labores) increased as mission populations fell, and
eventually secularization was complete by 1824 as the last of the labores were privatized, divided, and
distributed among the remaining mission Indians and the local population (Reese 1995: K‐9; Spanish
Missions 2001).
Political events continued to have a rapid impact on the region. The Louisiana Purchase in 1803 brought
about the establishment of a “no‐man’s land” between the Texas and Louisiana border. Both Spain and
America were eager to avoid a costly war. The Louisiana Purchase, however, did generate increased
American interest in Texas. Many from the former French province were eager to emigrate (Reese
1995).

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

17

Archeological Survey

VI.

METHODS

A.

Archival Research Methods

Background research was completed to identify location and distribution of previously recorded
archeological sites and investigations within the vicinity of project area. Research was carried out
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas. The THC’s Archeological
Sites Atlas (2013) was also consulted. Soil survey reports, topographic and geologic maps, and
aerial images were examined to obtain information on topography, soils, vegetation, geology, the
local environment, and levels of development in and around the project area.
B.

Field Methods

The intensive survey of the APE included a 100 percent pedestrian survey of the APE that entailed visual
inspection of the ground surface for cultural resources supplemented by mechanical backhoe trench
excavations. Deep testing via backhoe trench excavations enabled the identification of deeply buried
deposits as well as delineation of the horizontal and vertical extent of potential cultural deposits
identified within the wall profiles of the trench. The trench wall profiles were examined for cultural
features, soil horizons, and artifacts and the backdirt was examined for cultural materials. Each trench
measured approximately four meters in length by one meter in width and was excavated until sterile
soils were encountered.
Backhoe trench excavations were excavated in accordance with THC and CTA survey guidelines and a
bucketful from each 10 centimeter strata of excavated soils was screened through ¼‐inch wire‐mesh
screens. Trenches were excavated until pre‐Holocene deposits are reached. The geographic
coordinates of each trench were recorded using a handheld GPS (Global Positioning System). Upon
completion, all trenches were backfilled.
The APE was documented. All work complied with THC and CTA survey standards for the overall project
area unless documented field conditions warranted otherwise. Newly discovered prehistoric and
historic archeological sites were defined in compliance with THC/CTA survey standards and policies
including requirements for assessing historical sites and cemeteries.
Field notes were maintained and included information pertaining to terrain, vegetation, soils, land
forms, backhoe trench data, and cultural material observed. Standardized backhoe trench forms were
completed for every shovel test and backhoe trench. These forms will include location data, depth, soil
type, and notations on artifacts encountered. Digital photographs with a photo log were completed as
appropriate. The locations of all trenches, shovel tests, and profile cuts were recorded via handheld
Global Positioning System (GPS) units utilizing the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinate
system and the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83) map datum.
This survey set out to employ a non‐collection policy for cultural materials. Non‐diagnostic artifacts
(e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass) were described, sketched, and/or photo‐documented in
the field and replaced in the same location in which they were found. In the event that diagnostic
artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, marked historic materials) were identified in the field, they
were to be collected and placed in plastic bags labeled with relevant provenience information. Non‐
diagnostic artifacts were photo‐documented in the field.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

18

Archeological Survey

VII.

RESULTS

A.

Results of Archival Research

A search of THC’s online sites Atlas determined that a total of 26 previously recorded sites are located
within a one kilometer (0.61 mile) radius of the APE. Four previously recorded sites are located within or
directly adjacent to the APE (THC 2013) (Dayton 2012):
1. 41BX41 – Prehistoric campsite possibly destroyed by residential development
2. 41BX50 – Prehistoric site recorded in 1970, with depth potential and unknown area,
recommended for testing. Artifacts recovered from 41BX50 site consisted of two bifaces
recovered from the surface
3. 41BX1858 – Concrete foundations associated with 20th‐century ranching complex; low data
potential, no further work recommended, not recommended as NRHP/SAL eligible
4. 41BX1889 – Minor ranching site, low density of materials and no structures, mostly 20th century,
but some possibility of 19th century, not recommended as NRHP/SAL eligible
The results of the background records review determined that approximately half of the APE had been
previously surveyed for cultural resources. In 2007, the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT)
sponsored a survey along Loop 1604 performed by the Center for Archaeological Research at the
University of Texas at San Antonio (CAR‐UTSA). No sites were discovered within the current APE during
this 2007 investigation (THC 2013) (Dayton 2012).
In 2005, COSA sponsored a survey conducted by Abasolo Consultant who recommended that site
41BX1889 is not eligible for designation as SAL or for listing in the NRHP (THC 2013). In 2010, the Bexar
County Flood Control (BCFC) conducted a survey for proposed drainage improvements on Huesta Creek
(LC‐9). This work was performed by SWCA, Inc. who recommended cultural resources clearance for the
project (THC 2013) (Dayton 2012). The THC concurred with their findings and recommendations and a
copy of the THC cultural resources clearance letter for LC‐9 in included as Appendix B. A list of
previously recorded sites within one kilometer (0.61 miles) of the APE is presented below in Table 2.
Table 2. Previously Recorded Archeological Sites within One Kilometer (0.62 miles) Radius of the APE
Trinomial

Description

Distance from APE

41BX41

Prehistoric campsite possibly destroyed by residential
development.

Adjacent to the APE

41BX50

Prehistoric site with depth potential and unknown
area, recommended for testing.

Within the APE

41BX1858

41BX1889

Concrete foundations associated with 20th‐century
ranching complex; low data potential, no further work
recommended, not recommended as NRHP/SAL
eligible.
Ranching site, low density of materials and no
structures, mostly 20th century
th
but some possibility of 19 century, not
recommended as NRHP/SAL eligible.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

19

Within the APE

Within the APE

Archeological Survey

Trinomial
41BX40
41BX47

Description

Distance from APE

Prehistoric site recommended for further work,
Archaic, possible Paleoindian.
Early‐Middle Archaic, intact features, recommended
NRHP/SAL eligible.

Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE

41BX48

Paleoindian points found on surface.

41BX49

Prehistoric site destroyed by residential construction.
Prehistoric site with potential for deep deposits;
testing recommended.
Prehistoric burned rock midden; testing
recommended.

41BX53
41BX72
41BX127

Prehistoric site recommended for testing.
Possibly intact prehistoric burned rock middens,
recommended for testing.
Possibly intact prehistoric burned rock middens,
recommended for testing,
recommended SAL eligible.

41BX231
41BX232
41BX233

Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended.

41BX234

Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended.

41BX505

Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended.

41BX597

Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended.

41BX631
41BX1419

Minor prehistoric site, also a historic military camp
recommended for further work.
Minor prehistoric site, low density, but recommended
for preservation because on UTSA campus
(educational use).

41BX1480

Historic limestone well, no further work.

41BX1810

Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended.

41BX1811

Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended.

41BX1812

Early 20th century farmstead, no further work.

41BX1890

Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended.

COSA Historic
Landmark
Benko Family
Cemetery

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Moos Homestead
Historic Texas Cemetery dating to late 19th century.

20

Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE
Within one kilometer of
the APE

Archeological Survey

To summarize, four sites are located within or adjacent to the APE. However, no sites, including any listed
or potentially eligible for listing in the NRHP or designated SALs, occur within or adjacent to the APE (THC
2013). A map showing the previously surveyed areas and recorded sites is included as Figure 3. There
exists a high probability that sites may exist within the APE. For these reasons, an archeological survey of
the APE was recommended to assess potential impacts to cultural resources.
B.

Survey Results

The survey consisted of 100 percent visual inspection of the ground surface for cultural materials
supplemented with mechanical backhoe trenching excavations. The entire length of the APE on the north
and south sides of Hausman Road is heavily disturbed and lined with utilities (gas, water, electrical, and
fiber optic cable).
Trenches were excavated within the APE where utilities could be avoided. Trenches were also excavated
on those areas assessed as having a higher probability to contain buried intact cultural deposits. From
west of Leon to Roadrunner Way, the APE consisted of very shallow soils with exposed bedrock. Soils
generally consisted of silty clay soils. Ground surface visibility ranged between zero and eighty percent. A
total of 21 trenches were excavated within the APE and ten of the 21 trenches produced cultural
materials. The trench locations and contents are described below in Table 3.
Table 3. Locations and Findings of Backhoe Trenching Excavations

Unit

Dimensions (in
centimeters):
length (L), depth (D), and
width (W)

Location

Findings

Northing – 3271501
Easting – 0538655

Negative for cultural resources.

Negative for cultural resources.

370 L x 80 D x 64 W

Northing – 3271501
Easting – 0539015
Northing – 3271505
Easting – 0538899
Northing – 3271497
Easting – 0538301

Trench 5

334 L x 76 D x 66 W

Northing – 3271492
Easting – 0538162

Trench 6

345 L x 100 D x 62 W

Trench 7

333 L x 60 D x 70 W

Trench 8

255 D

Trench 9

368 L x 210 D x 64 W

Trench 1

380 L x 142 D x 60 W

Trench 2

302 L x 29 D x 67 W

Trench 3

375 L x 76 D x 67 W

Trench 4

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Northing – 3271489
Easting – 0538133
Northing – 3271491
Easting – 0538090
Northing – 3271487
Easting – 0537945
Northing – 3271485
Easting – 0537849

21

Negative for cultural resources.
Positive for cultural resources: Found
one flake between 0‐35 cmbs.
Positive for cultural resources: Found
one flake and seven pieces of burned
rock (all near surface)
Negative for cultural resources.
Negative for cultural resources.
Negative for cultural resources.
Positive for cultural resources: Found
one flake south of 41BX50 and one
biface fragment between 0‐45 cmbs.

Archeological Survey

Unit

Trench 10

Dimensions (in
centimeters):
length (L), depth (D), and
width (W)

320 L x 189 D x 60 W

Trench 11 300 L x 250 D x 62 W

Location

Northing – 3271485
Easting – 0537824
Northing – 3271483
Easting – 0536905

Trench 13 365 L x 280 D x 67 W

Northing – 3271483
Easting – 0536975
Northing – 3271509
Easting – 0536899

Trench 14 330 L x 254 D x 64 W

Northing – 3271510
Easting – 0536922

Trench 15 360 L x 290 D x 64 W

Northing – 3271526
Easting – 0536948

Trench 16 420 L x 295 D x 64 W

Northing – 3271412
Easting – 0536833

Trench 12 310 L x 290 D x 62 W

Trench 19 350 L x 270 D x 60 W

Northing – 3271437
Easting – 0536427
Northing – 3271449
Easting – 0535783
Northing – 3271449
Easting – 0537940

Trench 20

Northing – 3271453
Easting – 0537969

Trench 17

270 L x 47 D x 76 W

Trench 18

38 L x 135 D x 63 W

380 L x 290 D x 60 W

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

22

Findings
Found one piece of FCR at 50 cmbs.
Negative for cultural resources.
Positive for cultural resources: Found
one lithic tool at 125 cmbs.
Found one large flake in river cobble
layer.
Noticed fire‐cracked rock (FCR) on
ground surface adjacent but outside
APE.
Positive for cultural resources: Found
two flakes between 165‐290 cmbs.
Positive for cultural resources: Found
one piece of FCR between 0‐30 cmbs
and found three flakes and one core
between 170‐280 cmbs.
Positive for cultural resources: Found
one flake and one core between 120
‐ 180 cmbs.
Positive for cultural resources –
Found one small flake between 0‐50
cmbs, one flake between 150‐190
cmbs, one failed blank or perform at
190 cmbs, and three flakes and one
piece of burned rock at 242 cmbs.
Most flakes found in loose,
unconsolidated river gravel layers.
Positive for cultural resources: Found
one side scraper at 33 cmbs; one
burned rock piece at 35 cmbs; two
flakes around 130 cmbs; one flake
around 193 cmbs; and one
flake/endscraper around 196 cmbs.
Negative for cultural resources.
Negative for cultural resources.
Positive for cultural resources –
Positive for cultural resources: found
one flake at 43 cmbs; one flake and
one piece of FCR between 0‐150
cmbs.
Negative for cultural resources.

Archeological Survey

Unit

Trench 21

Dimensions (in
centimeters):
length (L), depth (D), and
width (W)
365 L x 160 D x 6 W

Location
Northing – 32712760
Easting – 0534216

Findings
Negative for cultural resources.

A tabular description of soil characteristics from excavated backhoe trenches is presented below in
Table 4.
Table 4. Soil Descriptions from the Backhoe Trenching Excavations
Unit
Trench 1

Description of Soil Characteristics (Depths in cmbs)
0‐24 cmbs: Dark brown silty clay;
24‐142 cmbs: Dark brown clay.
Trench 1 was placed at the eastern side of the project area. Negative for cultural resources.

Trench 2

0‐29 cmbs: Brown silty clay (northern end) ‐ hit bedrock;
0‐8 cmbs: Brown silty clay (southern end) – hit bedrock.
Trench 2 was placed at the eastern side of the project area. Negative for cultural resources.

Trench 3

0‐37 cmbs: Dark brown silty clay;
37‐60 cmbs: Brown gravelly silty clay;
60‐76 cmbs: Light brown silty clay.
Trench 3 was placed at the eastern side of the project area. Negative for cultural resources.

Trench 4

0‐35 cmbs: Dark brown silty clay (7.5YR 3/1) ‐ one flake;
35‐80 cmbs: Reddish brown clay (negative for cultural resources) (7.5YR 3/3).
Positive for cultural resources: Found one flake between 0‐35 cmbs.

Trench 5

0‐18 cmbs: Dark brown silty clay (7.5YR 3/2) – seven pieces of burned rock and one flake;
18‐37 cmbs: Brown gravelly silty clay (negative for cultural resources) (7.5YR 4/3);
37‐76 cmbs: Light brown cobbly silty clay (negative for cultural resources) (7.5YR 6/4).
Positive for cultural resources: Found seven pieces of burned rock and one flake between 0‐18
cmbs.

Trench 6

0‐22 cmbs: Brown clayey silt;
22‐50 cmbs: Dark brown silty clay;
50‐65 cmbs: Brown silty clay;
65‐100 cmbs: Light brown calcareous clayey silt.
Negative for cultural resources.

Trench 7

0‐15 cmbs: Brown clayey silt;
15‐60 cmbs: Light brown rocky clayey silt.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

23

Archeological Survey

Unit

Description of Soil Characteristics (Depths in cmbs)
Negative for cultural resources.

Trench 8

0‐130 cmbs: Brown clayey silt;
130‐160 cmbs: Light brown gravelly silt;
160‐215 cmbs: Brown sand;
215‐255 cmbs: Unconsolidated gravelly brown sand.
Negative for cultural resources.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

24

Archeological Survey

Unit
Trench 9

Description of Soil Characteristics (Depths in cmbs)
0‐72 cmbs: Dark brown clayey silt (7.5YR 3/1) – one flake and one biface fragment found between 0
45 cmbs and one piece of FCR at 50 cmbs;
72‐162 cmbs: Light brown clayey silt (negative for cultural resources);
162‐210 cmbs: Light brown gravelly silt (negative for cultural resources).
Trench excavated south of site 41BX50. Positive for cultural resources: one flake and one biface
fragment found between 0‐45 cmbs and one piece of FCR at 50 cmbs.

Trench 10

Trench 11

Trench 12

0‐30 cmbs: Dark brown clayey silt;
30‐130 cmbs: Brown clayey silt;
130‐189 cmbs: Light brown clayey silt.
Trench excavated south‐southwest of 41BX50. Negative for cultural resources.
0‐75 cmbs: Brown clayey silt (negative for cultural resources)(7.5YR 5/2);
75‐250 cmbs: Brown gravelly clayey silt (10YR5/3) – One lithic tool and one large flake was found
at 125 cmbs within river cobbles layer; indicative of water movement and alluvial deposits.
Trench 11 was excavated on first terrace above Leon Creek. Positive for cultural resources: one
lithic tool and one large flake found within river deposits context.
0‐40 cmbs: Dark brown gravelly clayey silt (negative for cultural resources);
40‐165 cmbs: Brown clayey silt (negative for cultural resources);
165‐290 cmbs: Loose, brown gravelly silt (10YR5/3) – found two flakes.
Positive for cultural resources: two flakes found within river deposits context.

Trench 13

0‐70 cmbs: Brown gravelly silt – (positive for cultural resources) (7.5 YR3/1): found one piece of FCR
between 0‐30 cmbs;
70‐160 cmbs: Brown silt (negative for cultural resources);
160‐280 cmbs: Brown gravelly silt (positive for cultural resources) (10YR5/3): Found three flakes
and one core between 170‐280 cmbs.
Positive for cultural resources: Found three flakes and one core between 170‐280 cmbs. Artifacts
were found in a loose deposit of alluvium; patina visible on flakes shows that the flakes were
once on the ground surface (the current location is not a primary deposit).

Trench 14

0‐60 cmbs: Brown silt‐alternating bands (positive for cultural resources) (7.5YR3/1): found one
flake at 50 cmbs;
60‐120 cmbs: Gravelly brown silt (negative for cultural resources);
120‐180: Brown silt (positive for cultural resources) (10YR5/3): Found one flake and one core
between 120 ‐ 180 cmbs;
180‐254 cmbs: Gravelly brown silt (negative for cultural resources).
Positive for cultural resources: Found one flake and one core between 120 ‐ 180 cmbs.

Trench 15

0‐160 cmbs: Dark brown silt (positive for cultural resources) (7.5YR4/2): Found one small flake
between 0‐50 cmbs and one flake between 150‐190 cmbs.
160‐290 cmbs: Light brown cobbly silt (positive for cultural resources) (7.5 YR5/6): Found one
failed blank or perform at 190 cmbs and three flakes and one piece of burned rock at 242 cmbs.
Positive for cultural resources: Found one small flake between 0‐50 cmbs, one flake between 150‐
190 cmbs, one failed blank or perform at 190 cmbs, and three flakes and one piece of burned rock

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

25

Archeological Survey

Unit

Trench 16

Description of Soil Characteristics (Depths in cmbs)
at 242 cmbs. Most flakes found in loose, unconsolidated river gravel layers.
0‐35 cmbs: Dark brown gravelly silt (positive for cultural resources) (10YR4/2): found one side
scraper at 33 cmbs and one piece of burned rock at 35 cmbs;
35‐135 cmbs: Brown cobbly silt/loose (positive for cultural resources) (10YR4/2): found two flakes
around 130 cmbs;
135‐235 cmbs: Dark brown silt (no gravels) (positive for cultural resources) (10YR5/3): found one
flake around 193 cmbs and one flake/endscraper around 196 cmbs;
235‐420 cmbs: Light brown sandy cobbly silt (layer negative for cultural resources).
Trench 16 was excavated on the first terrace above Leon Creek, south of Hausman Rd. Positive
for cultural resources: found one side scraper at 33 cmbs and one piece of burned rock at 35
cmbs; found two flakes around 130 cmbs; and found one flake around 193 cmbs and one
flake/endscraper around 196 cmbs.

Trench 17

0‐47: Dark brown silty clay with limestone cobbles
Negative for cultural resources. Hit bedrock at 47 cmbs. Trench 17 was excavated on the south
side of Hausman Road and south of site 41BX41, a previously‐recorded prehistoric campsite. No
evidence of site 41BX41 was encountered.

Trench 18

0‐40 cmbs: Brown silt with some rocks;
40‐70 cmbs: Brown rocky silt (numerous river cobbles);
70‐135 cmbs: Reddish brown rocky silt.
Excavated on the first terrace above Maverick Creek. Negative for cultural resources.

Trench 19

0‐150 cmbs: Light brown silt (positive for cultural resources) (7.5YR6/6): found one flake at 43 cmbs
one flake and one piece of FCR between 0‐150 cmbs;
150‐270 cmbs: Light brown cobbly silt (layer negative for cultural resources).
Trench 19 was excavated across the street from 41BX50. Positive for cultural resources: found one
flake at 43 cmbs; one flake and one piece of FCR between 0‐150 cmbs.

Trench 20

0‐40 cmbs: Dark brown silt;
40‐290: Brown silt.
Trench 20 was excavated across the street from 41BX50 and consisted of alluvium. Negative for
cultural resources.

Trench 21

0‐140 cmbs: Dark brown clay;
140‐160 cmbs: Brown clay.
Trench 21 was excavated in field on west side of the APE. Negative for cultural resources.

Maps showing the trench locations plotted on a topographic and aerial map are included as Figure 4 and
Figure 5, respectively.
Trenches 1 through 3 were excavated toward the east side of the APE and did not produce cultural
materials. Trench 4 was excavated on the north side of Hausman Rd. and screened soils produced one
flake between zero and 35 cmbs. The single flake is considered an isolated find. Views of Trench 4 and
the chert flake are included in Appendix C, Photos 17 through 19.
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

26

Archeological Survey

Trenches Excavated within the Vicinity of 41BX50
Trenches 5 through 10 and Trenches 19 and 20 were excavated within the vicinity of site 41BX50, a
prehistoric campsite with unknown depth potential and was recommended for testing. However,
artifacts recovered from 41BX50 only consisted of two bifacial surface finds, one of which was a possible
projectile point (THC 2013).
Trenches 5, 9, and 19 produced cultural materials. Trench 5 was excavated on the north side of
Hausman Rd. Soils screened between zero and 18 cmbs produced seven pieces of burned rock and one
flake. Views of Trench 5 and the flake are included in Appendix C, Photos 20 through 21.
Trenches 6, 7, and 8, and 10, excavated on the north side of Hausman Rd., did not produce cultural
materials. Trench 9, excavated on the south side of Hausman Rd and south of 41BX50 produced cultural
materials. The screened soils produced one flake and one biface fragment found between zero and 45
cmbs and one piece of fire‐cracked rock (FCR) at 50 cmbs. Views of Trench 9 before digging and artifacts
recovered from the trench are included in Appendix C, Photos 23 and 24.
Trench 19, excavated on the south side of Hausman Rd and south of 41BX50 tested positive for cultural
resources. Screened soils produced one flake at 43 cmbs and another flake and one piece of fire‐
cracked rock between zero and‐150 cmbs. A view of the chert flakes found in Trench 19 is included in
Appendix C, Photos 43. Trench 20, excavated on the south side of Hausman RD, south of 41BX50, did
not produce cultural material; soils consisted entirely of silty alluvium from zero to 290 cmbs.
Site 41BX50 was originally recorded north and outside the APE. The results of the backhoe trenching
revealed that the site extends into the APE. The new boundary of 41BX50 has been recorded with TARL.
The bulk of 41BX50 ‐located north and outside of the APE‐ has been heavily disturbed due to extensive
land modifications and earthmoving activities. The area has been covered with off‐site, quarried gravel
fill and large boulders. A view of the location point for 41BX50 from the Atlas, located outside of the
APE, shows the area covered with quarried gravels is shown in Appendix C, Photo 44. A map of the
redefined site boundary of 41BX50 plotted on a topographic and aerial map is included as Figures 6 and
7, respectively.
Trenches Excavated along Leon Creek
Trenches 11 through 16 were excavated along Leon Creek. All trenches produced cultural materials
from a river deposits layer consisting of unconsolidated, silty alluvium with numerous cobbles. Due to
the nature of the deposits in which most of the artifacts were found within Trenches 11 through 16, the
artifacts are believed to be secondary deposits, washed downstream from other sites located north of
the APE. Trench 11 was excavated on first terrace above Leon Creek and screening of soils produced
one lithic tool and one large flake found within a river deposits context. Before and after views of
Trench 11 and the scraper tool are provided in Appendix C, Photos 25 through 27.
Trench 12 was positive for cultural resources: screened soils produced two flakes found within river
deposits context between 165 and 290 cmbs. Before and after views of Trench 12 and the chert flakes
are provided in Appendix C, Photos 28 through 30.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

27

Archeological Survey

Trench 13 produced cultural materials consisting of three flakes and one core found within screened
soils between 170‐280 cmbs. Artifacts were found in a loose deposit of alluvium and the patina visible
on flakes shows that the flakes were once on the ground surface; thus, the current location is not a
primary deposit. Photos of Trench 13 and the patinated flakes and one core are included in Appendix C,
Photos 31 and 32.
Trench 14 produced cultural material consisting of one flake and one core from screened soils between
120 ‐ 180 cmbs. Before and after views of Trench 14 and the three chert flakes are provided in
Appendix C, Photos 33 through 35.
Trench 15 tested positive for cultural resources. During screening of soils, we found one small flake
between zero and 50 cmbs, one flake between 150‐190 cmbs, one failed blank or perform at 190 cmbs,
and three flakes and one piece of burned rock at 242 cmbs. Most of these flakes were found in loose,
unconsolidated river gravel layers. Before and after views of Trench 15 and the chert flakes are
provided in Appendix C, Photos 36 through 38.
Finally, Trench 16 was excavated on the first terrace above Leon Creek, south of Hausman Rd. and
tested positive for cultural resources. In the screened soils, we found one primary chert flake at 33
cmbs and one piece of burned rock at 35 cmbs; two flakes around 130 cmbs; and one flake at 193 cmbs
and another flake/endscraper at 196 cmbs. Before and after views of Trench 16 and the endscaper and
chert flakes are included in Appendix C, Photos 39 through 42.
Trench 17 was excavated on the south side of Hausman Road, south of site 41BX41, a prehistoric
campsite presumably destroyed by a residential development (THC 2013). Trench 17 was negative for
cultural resources. No evidence of site 41BX41 was encountered in the trench. Trench 17 consisted of
very shallow, silty clay soils mixed with limestone cobbles and bedrock was encountered at 47 cmbs.
Trench 18 was excavated on the first terrace above Maverick Creek and did not produce cultural
materials. Trench 21 was excavated field towards the west half of the APE, on the north side of
Hausman Rd. and south of previously recorded site 41BX1889. Site 41BX1889 is a minor historic
ranching site, determined not eligible for listing in the NRHP or for designation as a SAL (THC 2013).
Trench 21 did not produce cultural materials and no evidence of site 41BX1889 was uncovered in the
trench excavations and screening.
The areas surrounding Huestra Creek were not resurveyed since these areas had been previously
surveyed by SWCA, Inc. in 2009. During the 2009 survey, SWCA, Inc. recorded site 41BX1858 which
consists of concrete foundations associated with a 20th‐century ranching complex. The site possesses
low data potential and no further work was recommended. Site 41BX1858 was not recommended as
NRHP or SAL eligible. Cultural resources clearance was received from the THC in 2010 (see Figure 3 and
Appendix B).
No additional archeological materials, deposits, or features were found on the ground surface or in any
subsurface context.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

28

Archeological Survey

VIII.

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

RKEI performed an intensive cultural resources survey of the proposed Hausman Road widening project
located in central Bexar County, Texas. Work was conducted to ensure compliance with the Antiquities
Code of Texas and Section 106 of the NHPA of 1966, as amended.
The cultural resources survey of the project area consisted of visual inspection of the ground surface for
cultural materials supplemented with mechanical backhoe trenching. Work was performed under
Antiquities Permit Number 6593.
The APE extends approximately 3.4 miles from Loop 1604 to IH 10. The width of the APE was defined as
the existing right‐of‐way that varies from approximately 80 to 100 feet; however, the right‐of‐way
widens to 128 feet at Leon Creek. The maximum depth for the Hausman Road project area is 15 feet
associated with the proposed installation of the concrete storm sewer pipeline. Approximately 11 acres
of new right‐of‐way consisting of narrow (three to six foot) strips and easements will be added along the
existing Hausman Road right‐of‐way. The APE covers approximately 41 total acres.
The results of the background study determined that approximately half of the APE had been previously
surveyed for cultural resources and that four previously recorded sites are located within or adjacent to
the APE (THC 2013) (Dayton 2012):
1. 41BX41 – Prehistoric campsite possibly destroyed by residential development
2. 41BX50 – Prehistoric site with depth potential and unknown area, recommended for testing
3. 41BX1858 – Concrete foundations associated with 20th‐century ranching complex; low data
potential, no further work recommended, not recommended as NRHP/SAL eligible
4. 41BX1889 – Minor ranching site, low density of materials and no structures, mostly 20th century,
but some possibility of 19th century, not recommended as NRHP/SAL eligible
The intensive survey of the APE included a 100 percent pedestrian survey of the APE that entailed visual
inspection of the ground surface for cultural resources supplemented by mechanical backhoe trench
excavations. Deep testing via backhoe trench excavations enabled the identification of deeply buried
deposits. The trench wall profiles were examined for cultural features, soil horizons, and artifacts and
the backdirt was examined and a sample screened for cultural materials.
The entire length of the APE on the north and south sides of Hausman Road are lined with utilities (gas,
water, electrical, and fiber optic cable). A total of 21 trenches were excavated within the APE and ten of
the 21 trenches produced cultural materials.
The six trenches (Trenches 11 through 16) excavated along Leon Creek trenches produced cultural
materials; however, all artifacts were recovered from an unconsolidated, silty alluvium layer with
numerous river cobbles. The artifacts were not found on a former living surface, rather they were
washed in and re‐deposited; and subsequently lack archeological context.
No evidence of prehistoric campsite 41BX41 was encountered in Trench 17. The site was presumably
destroyed by previous residential development. The areas surrounding Huestra Creek were not
resurveyed since these areas had been previously surveyed by SWCA, Inc. in 2009. During the 2009
survey, SWCA, Inc. recorded site 41BX1858 which consists of concrete foundations associated with a
20th‐century ranching complex. The site possesses low data potential and no further work was
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

29

Archeological Survey

recommended. Site 41BX1858 was not recommended as NRHP or SAL eligible. Cultural resources
clearance was received from the THC in 2010. Trench 21 did not produce cultural materials and no
evidence of the minor ranching site 41BX1889 was uncovered in the trench excavations and screening.
Site 41BX1889 was not recommended as NRHP or SAL eligible.
Based on the results of the survey, the boundary of site 41BX50 was redefined. Site 41BX50 is a sparse
campsite consisting of fire‐cracked rock and flakes. The site is located on both sides of an overflow
channel of Leon Creek and now totals approximately 4.78 acres. The site potentially extends to the
north beyond the APE. The site is ephemeral, possesses little, if any research value, and is not
considered eligible for listing in the NRHP or eligible for designation as a SAL.
RKEI has determined that no NRHP‐eligible archeological sites [36 CFR 800.16.(l)] or SALs (13 TAC
§26.12) will be affected by this project. It is recommended that cultural resources be cleared for the
project. Upon receiving concurrence from the THC, RKEI recommends that construction activities
proceed as planned. Should the project area change, further work may be required.
In the unlikely event that cultural materials are encountered during construction, all work should cease
at the location of the findings, and an Archaeologist at the THC‐Archeology Division should be
contacted. In such a case, work will not commence until authorized by the required agencies.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

30

Archeological Survey

IX.

REFERENCES CITED

Amick, D. S.
1995 Patterns of Technological Variation among Folsom and Midland Projectile Points in the
American Southwest. Plains Anthropologist 40:23–38.
Binford, L.
1971 Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their Potential. In Approaches to the Social Dimensions of
Mortuary Practices, edited by J. A. Brown, pp. 6–29. Memoirs of the Society for American
Archaeology 25.
Black, S. L.
1986 The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site, 41JW8: A Toyah Horizon Campsite in Southern Texas.
Special Report 18. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
1989

Central Texas Plateau Prairie. In From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central,
South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S. L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J.
Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 17–38. Research Series No. 33. Arkansas Archaeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Black, S. L., and A. J. McGraw
1985 The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity within the Upper Salado
Creek
Watershed, South‐Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report No. 100. Center for
Archaeological Research, University of Texas, San Antonio.
Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93‐117.
Brown, K.M.
1985 Three Caches of Guadalupe Tools from South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
56:75‐126.
Brown, T. E., N. B. Waechter, and V. E. Barnes. Robert Hamilton Cuyler
1983 Geologic Atlas of Texas, San Antonio Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology. Memorial Edition.
1974; revised 1983; reprinted 2000.
Buquor, P. S. (translator)
1935 “Communication Touching the Conversation of the Indians, A.D. 1730,” by Don Juan de Aquina,
Governor and Captain General of New Spain. From Translation of Historical Documents Found in
the Archives of Bexar County at San Antonio in Texas. Eugene C. Barker Texas History Center.
University of Texas at Austin.
Bureau of Economic Geology (BEG)
1996 Physiographic Map of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Calame, David Sr.
2001 Guadalupe Bifaces from Frio and Medina Counties, Texas
2011 Personal communication on December 21, 2011.
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

31

Archeological Survey

Campbell, T. N., and T. J. Campbell
1996 Indian Groups Associated with Spanish Missions of the San Antonio Missions National Historical
Park. Special Report, No. 16. Second Printing. Center for Archaeological Research, the University
of Texas at San Antonio.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:361‐400.
1998

Background to the Archeological Investigations. In Introduction, Background, and Syntheses, vol.
1. Wilson‐Leonard: An 11,000‐Year Archeological Record of Hunter‐Gatherers in Central Texas,
assembled and edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 55–67. Studies in Archeology 31. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin and Archeology Studies Program, Report
10, Texas Department of Transportation Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.

Collins, M. B., G. L. Evans, T. N. Campbell, M. C. Winans, and C. E. Mear
1989 Clovis Occupation at Kincaid Shelter, Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:3–4.
Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, and P. J. Headrick
1992 Engraved Cobbles from the Gault Site, Central Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
8:13‐15.
Creel, D.
1991 Bison Hides in Late Prehistoric Exchange in the Southern Plains. American Antiquity 56(1):40‐49.
De la Teja, J. F.
1988 Land and Society in 18th Century San Antonio de Bexar, A Community on New Spain’s Northern
Frontier. Ph.D. Dissertation. The University of Texas at Austin. University Microfilms
International, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Dillehay, T. D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist
19(65):180–196.
Fehrenbach, T. R.
1968 Lone Star, A History of Texas and Texans. American Legacy Press, New York.
Ferring, R.
1989 The Aubrey Clovis Site: A Paleoindian Locality in the Upper Trinity River Basin, Texas. Current
Research in the Pleistocene 6:9–11.
Forrester, R. E.
1985 Horn Shelter Number 2: The North End, A Preliminary Report. Central Texas Archeologist
10:21‐35.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

32

Archeological Survey

Fox, A. A.
1989 From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas,
by T. R. Hester, S. L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement,
pp. 85–92. Research Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Fox A. A., I. W. Cox, S. A. Tomka, J. M. Hunziker
2002 San Antonio River Improvement Project, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas:Archaeological
Background Historical Mission Reach. Center for Archaeological Research, the University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Gilmore, K.
1991 French, Spanish, and Indian Interaction in Colonial Texas. Paper presented at the Symposium on
Historic Indian Period Archeology and Ethnology. Council of Texas Archeologists Spring Meeting,
April 5, 1991.
Habig, M. A.
1968 San Antonio’s Mission San José; State and National Historic Site, 1720–1968. Franciscan Herald
Press, Chicago.
Hall, G. D.
1981 Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley, Texas. Research
Report No. 61. Texas Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at Austin.
Hester, T. R.
1970 An Interim Statement on Archaeological Research at Chaparrosa Ranch, Texas. Submitted to the
State Archeologist's Office, Austin.
1971 Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 42:51–148.
1980 Digging into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archeologists. Corona Publishing, San
Antonio, Texas.
1989 Texas and Northeastern Mexico: An Overview. In Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on
the Spanish Borderlands West, edited by D. H. Thomas, pp. 191 211. Columbian Consequences,
vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
1995 The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:427‐459.
1998 Coahuiltecan: A Critical View of an Inappropriate Ethnic Label. La Tierra 25(4)3:7.
2004 The Prehistory of South Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 127–151.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Highley, C. L.
1986 Archaeological Investigations at 41LK201: Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas. Choke
Canyon Series, Vol. 11. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

33

Archeological Survey

Hindes, K. V.
1992 Historic Roads and River Crossings in the Lower Medina Valley. In Historic Archaeological
Investigations in the Applewhite Reservoir Project Area, by M. Green, R. Moir, and K. Hindes, pp.
27–49. Archaeology Research Program, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Jackson, J.
1986 Los Mestenos, Spanish Ranching in Texas, 1721–1821. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.
Jelks, E. B.
1953 Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 24:189‐207.
1962

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas. Archeology Series No.
5. Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.

John, E. A. H.
1975 Storms Brewed in Other Men’s Worlds: The Confrontation of Indians, Spanish, and French in the
Southwest, 1540–1795. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Johnson, L.
1994 The Life and Times of Toyah Culture Folk: The Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16, Kimble
County, Texas. Report 38. Office of State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission; and Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Kelley, J. C.
1986 Jumano and Patarabueye: Relations at La Junta de los Rios. Anthropological Paper No. 77.
Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Kibler, K. W.
2001 An Overview of Archeological and Paleoenvironmental Research Potential of Caves and Other
Karst Features at the Camp Bullis Military Reservation, Bexar and Comal Counties, Texas. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas. Draft Report. Submitted to U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Fort Worth District. Draft on file at the Texas Historical Commission, State and Federal Review
Section.
Long, Christopher
2011 "BEXAR COUNTY," Handbook of Texas Online
(http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hcb07), accessed November 22, 2011.
Lukowski, P. D.
1988 Archaeological Investigations at 41BX1, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Survey report 135.
Center for Archaeological Research, the University of Texas at San Antonio.
McGraw, A. J., and K. Hindes
1987 Chipped Stone and Adobe: A Cultural Resources Assessment of the Proposed Applewhite
Reservoir, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 163. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

34

Archeological Survey

McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southwestern Texas: The Problem of the Paleoindian‐
Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:91–120.
Meltzer, D. J., and M. R. Bever
1995 Paleoindians of Texas: An Update on the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:47–81.
National Park Service (NPS)
2005 The Acequia System. San Antonio Missions National Historical Park. National Park Service, U.S.
Department
of
the
Interior,
Official
Missions
Site.
Retrieved
from
http://hotx.com/missions/acequia.html.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2013 United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Soil Data Mart,
http:\\soildatamart.nrcs.usda.gov/. Accessed September 9, 2013.
National Weather Service (NOAA) Southern Region Headquarters
2013 San Antonio Climate Summary. http://www.srh.noaa.gov/images/ewx/sat/satclisum.pdf
(accessed September 9, 2013).
Perttula, T. K.
2001 Hunter‐Gatherer Mortuary Practices in the Rio Grande Plains and Central Coastal Plains
Archeological Regions of Texas. La Tierra 28:3, 4.
Potter, D. R., R. B. Pickering, and C. E. Mear
2005 Salvage Excavation at the Coleman Cemetery Site, 41BX568. La Tierra 32:1
Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Culture Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56:65 89.
1985 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 13:175.
Reese, N.
1995 Historic Background for Brooks Air Force Base. In Brooks Air Force Base Historic Preservation
Plan, by D. E. Peter, M. B. Cliff, J. Freeman, K. L. Kane, with contributions by M. Brown, M. D.
Freeman, N. Reese, and F. Winchell, pp. K‐1 K‐ 40. Submitted to U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Fort Worth District, and Brooks Air Force Base, San Antonio.
Ricklis, R. A., and M. B. Collins
1994 Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County,
Texas. Studies in Archeology 19, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Schuetz, M. K.
1968 The History and Archaeology of Mission San Juan Capistrano, San Antonio, Texas. Volume I:
Historical Documentation of the Artifacts and Description of the Structures. Report 10. State
Building Commission, Archeological Program, Austin.
Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

35

Archeological Survey

Scurlock, D., A. Benavides, Jr., D. Isham, and J. W. Clark, Jr.
1976 An Archeological and Historical Survey of the Proposed Mission Parkway, San Antonio, Texas.
Archeological Survey Report 17. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Shafer, H. J., and V. B. Bryant, Jr.
1977 Archeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas A&M
University, College Station. Annual report to the National Science Foundation.
Sollberger, J.B. and W.B. Carroll
1985 Guadalupe Tools: Were They Used for Defleshing Hides? La Tiera 12(1):18‐22.
Sollberger, J. B., and T. R. Hester
1972 The Strohacker Site: A Review of Pre‐Archaic Manifestations in Texas. Plains Anthropologist
17(58):326–344.
Spanish Missions
2001 “Spanish
Missions.”
Handbook
of
Texas
Online
handbook/online/articles/SS/its2.html (accessed April 5, 2006).

http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/

Story, D. A.
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Food
Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19–56. Anthropological Papers No. 75,
Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
1990

Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf
Coastal Plain, vol. 1, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G.
Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163 366. Research Series No. 38. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Suhm, D. A.
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. In A Review of Texas Archeology, Part One, edited by E. B.
Jelks, E. M. Davis, and H. F. Sturgis. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society (for 1958)
29:63‐108.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.
Taylor, A. J.
1998 Mortuary Practices and Territoriality: Archaic Hunter‐Gatherers of Southern Texas and the Loma
Sandia Site (41LK28). Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, the University of Texas at
Austin.
Taylor, A. J., and C. L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric Cemetery and
Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, the University of Texas at Austin.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

36

Archeological Survey

Taylor, A. J., M. L. Marchbank, and F. K. Meskill
1995 Relative Dating of Human Skeletal Remains. In Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia
Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas, by A. J. Taylor and
C. L. Highley, pp. 581–631. 2 Vols. Studies in Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, the University of Texas at Austin.
Taylor, F.B., R. B. Hailey, and D.L. Richmond
1991 Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in
cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2013 Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/, accessed August 15, 2013.
Thoms, A. V., and S. W. Ahr
1995 The Pampopa‐Talon Crossings and Heermann Ranch Sites: Preliminary Results of the 1994
Southern Texas Archaeological Association Field School. La Tierra 22(2):34–67.
Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1999 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of the Texas Indians. Gulf Publishing, Lanham, MD.
Weir, F. A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
Washington State University, Pullman.

Hausman Road Project
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

37

Archeological Survey

FIGURES

LEGEND

PROJECT
LOCATION

PROJECT LIMITS

V
U
1604

Bexar

10
§
¦
¨

San Antonio

V
U
16

V
U
345

VICINITY MAP
87
¤
£
PROJECT
LOCATION

¦
§
¨
35

¦
§
¨
10

_
^

281
¤
£

10

35

BEGIN
PROJECT

90
¤
£

¦
§
¨
37

¦
§
¨
410

35

END
PROJECT

87
¤
£
87
¤
£

281
¤
£

¦
§
¨

90
¤
£

¦
§
¨

¦
§
¨

181
¤
£

¦
§
¨
37

BEXAR COUNTY

BEXAR COUNTY

STATE
0

0

I

TOPOGRAPHIC MAP (USGS)
INTENSIVE CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY
HAUSMAN ROAD FROM LOOP 1604 TO I-10
SAN ANTONIO, BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS

SOURCE: USGS 7.5 Minute Topographic Quadrangle Helotes Provided by Texas Natural Resources Information System (TNRIS) - 1992

250

1,000

500

2,000

1,000

METERS
4,000

1 INCH = 4,000 FEET

FEET

FIGURE 1

Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.
12821 West Golden Lane
San Antonio, Texas 78249
P 210 :: 699 :: 9090
F 210 :: 699 :: 6426
www.rkci.com
TBPE Firm Number 3257

LEGEND

PROJECT
LOCATION

PROJECT LIMITS

V
U
1604

Bexar

10
§
¦
¨

San Antonio

V
U
16

V
U
345

VICINITY MAP
87
¤
£
PROJECT
LOCATION

10

§
¦
¨
BEGIN
PROJECT

V
U
1604

¦
§
¨
35

¦
§
¨
10

_
^

281
¤
£

10

35

UTSA BLVD

90
¤
£

410

HAUSMAN

¦
§
¨
37

¦
§
¨

35

END
PROJECT

87
¤
£
87
¤
£

281
¤
£

¦
§
¨

90
¤
£

¦
§
¨

¦
§
¨

181
¤
£

¦
§
¨
37

BEXAR COUNTY

DE ZAVALA

BABCOCK

BEXAR COUNTY

STATE
0

0

I

AERIAL PHOTOGRAPH

INTENSIVE CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY
HAUSMAN ROAD FROM LOOP 1604 TO I-10
SAN ANTONIO, BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS

SOURCE: 2012 Aerial Photograph Provided by The City of San Antonio (COSA)

250

1,000

500

2,000

1,000

METERS
4,000

1 INCH = 4,000 FEET

FEET

FIGURE 2

Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.
12821 West Golden Lane
San Antonio, Texas 78249
P 210 :: 699 :: 9090
F 210 :: 699 :: 6426
www.rkci.com
TBPE Firm Number 3257

Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.

k
ee

P 210 :: 699 :: 9090
F 210 :: 699 :: 6426
www.rkci.com
TBPE Firm Number 3257

PREVIOUS SURVEYS AND ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES

ric
ve
a
M

r
kC

12821 West Golden Lane
San Antonio, Texas 78249

V
U
1604

UTSA BLVD

END
PROJECT

Huesta Creek

41BX1889

41BX1858

SOURCE: 2012 Aerial Photograph Provided by The City of San Antonio (COSA)

Leo
n

Cr e
ek

INTENSIVE CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY
HAUSMAN ROAD FROM LOOP 1604 TO I-10
SAN ANTONIO, BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS

10
§
¨
¦

41BX41

HAUSMAN RD

41BX50

BEGIN
PROJECT

REVISIONS:
No.

LEGEND
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE (CENTROID)

#
*
! !

! !

PREVIOUSLY SURVEYED (LINEAR)
! !

BABCOCK

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY AREA

hC
nc
Fre

ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE (AREA)

k
ree

PREVIOUSLY CLEARED BY SWCA (2010)
PREVIOUSLY SURVEYED (AREA)

NOTE: This Drawing is Provided for Illustration Only, May Not be to Scale and is Not Suitable for Design or Construction Purposes

0

µ

400 800

DESCRIPTION

PROJECT No.:
ASF12-152-00
ISSUE DATE:
09/05/2013
DRAWN BY:
CCL
CHECKED BY:
PAC
REVIEWED BY:
MTK

eek
er Cr
n
b
e
Hu

STREAM

DATE

1,600
FEET

1 INCH = 1,600 FEET

FIGURE

3

c 2012 by Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.

Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.
12821 West Golden Lane
San Antonio, Texas 78249

±
³

±
³

T-19 T20

±
³

T-5

±
³

T-4

±
³

±
³

10
§
¨
¦

T21

erick C r e e k

1604

M av

V
U

UTSA BLVD

T18

T17

³
±

³±
±
³
³
±
±
³
³
³
±

³
±

³
³±
³ ±
³±
³
³±
³±
±
±
³ ±
±
³

T1

³
±

T3 ±
³±
³ T2

C re

ek

³
±

HAUSMAN RD

END
PROJECT

BEGIN
PROJECT

Le

on

INTENSIVE CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY
HAUSMAN ROAD FROM LOOP 1604 TO I-10
SAN ANTONIO, BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS

±
³

T6

TRENCH LOCATION MAP

±
³ ±
³

T7

T8

SOURCE: USGS 7.5 Minute Topographic Quadrangle Helotes Provided by Texas Natural Resources Information
System (TNRIS) - 1992

T10 T-9

P 210 :: 699 :: 9090
F 210 :: 699 :: 6426
www.rkci.com
TBPE Firm Number 3257

REVISIONS:

T-13 T-14

³
±
³ ±
T-11
±
³

T-16

No.

DE ZAVALA RD

T-15

³
±
³
±

NEGATIVE TRENCH
POSITIVE TRENCH
ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY AREA

NOTE: This Drawing is Provided for Illustration Only, May Not be to Scale and is Not Suitable for Design or Construction Purposes

DESCRIPTION

±
³

T-12

±
³

BABCOCK

±
³

LEGEND

DATE

µ

0

150 300

0

500 1,000

600
METERS

2,000
FEET

1 INCH = 2,000 FEET

PROJECT No.:
ASF12-152-00
ISSUE DATE:
09/05/2013
DRAWN BY:
CCL
CHECKED BY:
PAC
REVIEWED BY:
MTK

FIGURE

4

c 2012 by Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !
! !

! !

! !

!

! !

!

!

! !

!
!

! !

!

!
!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

! !

! !

! !

! !
! !

!

!
!
!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!

!
!

!

!
!
!

!

!

!
!
!

!

! !

! !

!
!

!

! !

!

!

!

!
!
!

!

!

!

Leo
n

! !

!

!

! !

!
!

! !
!

!
! !

!

! !
! !

!

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!!
!

!

!

³ ±
±
³ T2

³
±

!
!
!

! !

! !

!

! !

!

! !

!

!

!

!
! !

!
!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!
!

!
!

!
!

!
!

T-12
!

DE ZAVALA RD

!

!

!

!

! !

!!

! !

±
³

!

!
!

!

! !

!
!
!

! !

! !
! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

±
³

! !

!

! !

!

!

!
!

! !

!!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

T-16

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!
!

!

! !
! !

DESCRIPTION

!

!

! !

! !

! !
! !

! !

W HAUSMAN RD

!
!

!

! !

±
³

! !

DATE

!

! !

!

!
!

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

No.

!

!

!

!

! !

!

! !

!

!

! !

!

!

! !
!

!

!
!

!

!
!

!

!

REVISIONS:

! !

! !

!

±
³

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

EB

!

!

!

!

LA
K

ek T-13 T-14
re
³
C
±
³ ±
T-11
on
Le
!

!

!

!

!

!

T-15

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

EZ
E
RE

!

!

!!

! !

! !

!

!

! !

! !

!

!

!

!
!

!

! !

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

DR

!
!

!

!

!

! !

!

!
!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!
!

!

!

BEGIN
PROJECT

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!
!

! !

!

! !

!

!

!

! !

!

!

! !

! !

!

!

! !

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

T3

T1

³
³ ±
³±
³±
³±
³±
³±
±
±
³ ±
³
! !

!

!

! !

! !

³
±

!

!

!

! !

! !

! !

!

!
!

!

!

! !

!

!

! !

!!
!
!

! !

³
±

!

! !

!

!

!

!

HAUSMAN RD

!

!

³³
³±
³
±
±
³
±
±
!

!

!

!

! !

T17

³
±

!

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

!

!
!
! !

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!
! !

! !

!

!

! !

!

!
!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

! !

! !

!

!

T18

!

!

!

!

! !

!

! !

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

!

END
PROJECT

!

! !

! !

! !
!

!

! !

!

! !
!
!!

! !

! !

!

! !
! !

! !

! !

!

! !

!
!

!
!

! !

! !

!

!

! !

! !

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

! !

!

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

!

! !

!

!

!

!

! !

! !
!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

! !

!

!

!

!

! !

! !

! !

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!

!

! !

!

!

!

!
!

!

!
!

! !

!

!

! !

!

!
! !

!

!

!
!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

! !

! !

!
!

!

!

! !

! !

!

! !

! !

! !

! !
!

! !

! !

! !

!

!

! !

!

!

! !

!

!

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

! !

!
!!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
! !

!

! !

³
±

!

10
§
¨
¦

! !

! !

!

!

UTSA BLVD

k

T21
!

! !

!

!
!!

!

!

!

!

Cree
Maverick

Huesta Creek

! !

!

Cr e
ek

!

!

VALPARAISO WAY

!

U
V

! !

! !

! !

!
!

!

! !

!

!
! !
! !
! !
!

!

! !
! !

!

!

!

!

±
³

! !

!

! !

!
!

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

T-4

!
!

P 210 :: 699 :: 9090
F 210 :: 699 :: 6426
www.rkci.com
TBPE Firm Number 3257

! !

!

! !

! !

! !
! !
!

±
³

±
³

±
³

±
³

W HAUSMAN RD

T-19 T20

!

!

±
³

±
³

T-5

T6

! !

!

!

!
! !
!
!

!
!

T7

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
! !

±
³ ±
³

!

!

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!
!

! !

! !
!

! !

T10 T-9

!

k
ee

!

!

!

! !

! !

!
!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

r
kC
!

!

!

! !

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

SOURCE: 2012 Aerial Photograph Provided by The City of San Antonio (COSA)

!

! !

!

INTENSIVE CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY
HAUSMAN ROAD FROM LOOP 1604 TO I-10
SAN ANTONIO, BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS

!

!

!

!

!

!

1604

12821 West Golden Lane
San Antonio, Texas 78249

!

! !

!

!

TRENCH LOCATION MAP

! !

!

! !

Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.

!

!

!

!

!

! !

! !

!

!

ric
ve
a
M
T8

!

!

! !

!

!

!

! !
!
!

! !

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

!

! !

! !

!

!

!

! !

! !

!

!

!

!
! !

!

!

! !

! !

!
!

! !

!

! !

!

! !

!

! !

!

!

! !

! !

!

!

! !

!

! !

!

! !

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

!
!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!
!

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!
!
!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

! !
!

!!

! !

!

!

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

0

400 800

1,600
FEET
!

!

!

1 INCH = 1,600 FEET

!

PROJECT No.:
ASF12-152-00
ISSUE DATE:
09/05/2013
DRAWN BY:
CCL
CHECKED BY:
PAC
REVIEWED BY:
MTK

FIGURE

5

!

!
!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

! !

500
METERS

!

!

!

!

!

! !

! !
! !

!

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

! !

! !

!

!

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

! !
!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!
!

!

!

! !

!

! !

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY AREA

! !

!

125 250

!

k
ree

!

!

0

!

STREAM

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

!
!

! !

!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

POSITIVE TRENCH

hC
nc
Fre
! !

! !

!

³
±
³
±

µ

eek
er Cr
n
b
e
Hu
! !

! !

!

NEGATIVE TRENCH

!

!!

! !

!
! !

! !
!

!

! !

BABCOCK

! !

LEGEND

!

c 2012 by Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

! !

!
!

!

! !

! !

!

!

!

! !

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!

! !

!

!

! !

NOTE: This Drawing is Provided for Illustration Only, May Not be to Scale and is Not Suitable for Design or Construction Purposes

! !

!
!

! !

!

!

!

Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.
12821 West Golden Lane
San Antonio, Texas 78249

V
U
1604

UTSA BLVD
SITE 41BX50

HAUSMAN RD

BEGIN
PROJECT

SITE 41BX50 LOCATION MAP

10
§
¨
¦

INTENSIVE CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY
HAUSMAN ROAD FROM LOOP 1604 TO I-10
SAN ANTONIO, BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS

SOURCE: USGS 7.5 Minute Topographic Quadrangle Helotes Provided by Texas Natural Resources Information
System (TNRIS) - 1992

P 210 :: 699 :: 9090
F 210 :: 699 :: 6426
www.rkci.com
TBPE Firm Number 3257

REVISIONS:
No.

DATE

DESCRIPTION

DE ZAVALA RD

BABCOCK

LEGEND
SITE 41BX50 (AREA)
NOTE: This Drawing is Provided for Illustration Only, May Not be to Scale and is Not Suitable for Design or Construction Purposes

µ

0

150 300

0

500 1,000

600
METERS

2,000
FEET

1 INCH = 2,000 FEET

PROJECT No.:
ASF12-152-00
ISSUE DATE:
09/09/2013
DRAWN BY:
CCL
CHECKED BY:
PAC
REVIEWED BY:
MTK

FIGURE

6

c 2012 by Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.

!

! !

! !

! !

! !
!

! !

!
!

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!

! !

!
!

!

Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

12821 West Golden Lane
San Antonio, Texas 78249

!

!
!

!
!

!
!

!
!

!
!
!
!

!
!

! !
! !

!

! !

! !

! !
! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

!

! !

Leon Creek

! !

!

!

!

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

SOURCE: 2012 Aerial Photograph Provided by The City of San Antonio (COSA)

!

W HAUSMAN RD
! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

! !

REGENCY WOOD

! !

! !

ARIS

! !

! !

!

!

! !

! !

S
PAS

! !

! !

D
OR

! !
! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!

!
!

!

!

!
!

!
!

LEGEND

!
!

!

!

!
!
!

!

SITE 41BX50 (AREA)
! !

! !

! !

!

!

!

!

STREAM

!
!
!
!

!
!
!
! !
! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

HO
PK
IN

SG
LA

DE

NG
ST
O

K
OA

M

PT
ON

No.

LA

IA

HA

REVISIONS:
DATE

DESCRIPTION

NC
CO

REGENCY WAY

! !

!

!

! !

LE
TOT

!

LAVEL SPG

! !

!

!

VALPARAISO WAY

INTENSIVE CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY
HAUSMAN ROAD FROM LOOP 1604 TO I-10
SAN ANTONIO, BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS

!

!
!

!

SITE 41BX50 LOCATION MAP

!

P 210 :: 699 :: 9090
F 210 :: 699 :: 6426
www.rkci.com
TBPE Firm Number 3257

!

!

!

DA
L

E
KI

N
TO
S
NG

N
RA

CH

N

W

0
0

µ

EL

L

15
50

30
100

1 INCH = 200 FEET

60
METERS

200
FEET

PROJECT No.:
ASF12-152-00
ISSUE DATE:
09/09/2013
DRAWN BY:
CCL
CHECKED BY:
PAC
REVIEWED BY:
MTK

FIGURE

7

! !

NOTE: This Drawing is Provided for Illustration Only, May Not be to Scale and is Not Suitable for Design or Construction Purposes
! !

!

!

! !
! !
!
!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!

! !
! !
!
! !

!

c 2012 by Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.

APPENDIX A
COX|MCLAIN ENVIRONMENTAL CONSULTING (CMEC) MEMORANDUM FROM JULY 2012

MEMORANDUM
TO:

Lena Camarillo – Poznecki-Camarillo, Inc.

FROM:

Chris Dayton – Cox|McLain Environmental Consulting (CMEC)

DATE:

July 31, 2012

RE:

Proposed Improvements to Hausman Road from Loop 1604 to IH 10, San
Antonio, Bexar County, TX – Summary of Archeological Background Review and
Recommendations – UPDATED

Project Description
The City of San Antonio (COSA) plans to improve Hausman Road from Loop 1604 to IH 10, a distance of
approximately 3.4 miles in Bexar County, Texas (see Figure 1 and Appendix A). Hausman Road is
currently a two-lane road with two 12-foot lanes. The existing right-of-way varies from approximately 80
to 100 feet wide along the length of the project. Beginning at Sta. 144+10 to Sta. 166+95 near
Roadrunner Way and continuing east, the proposed roadway construction would involve widening the
right-of-way to approximately 90 feet and adding a 14-foot wide center turn lane. A 10-foot wide hike
and bike trail and two 11 to 12-foot wide travel lanes in either direction would be constructed along the
remainder of the corridor. From Sta. 169+21 to Sta. 174+2, the proposed right-of-way would be
approximately 128 feet. The proposed bridge at this location would feature a four-foot median
separating the travel lanes. A pedestrian bridge would also be included, separated from the vehicular
bridge by 10 feet. From Sta. 177+03 to Sta. 190+25 the 16-foot median would be normal while from Sta.
190+25 to 234+60, the median would be inverted and the proposed right-of-way would be
approximately 95 feet. The project also includes the installation of a 36-inch diameter reinforced
concrete storm sewer pipeline under the road at approximately 5-15 feet in depth.
Cox|McLain Environmental Consulting, Inc. (CMEC) understands that the project is locally managed and
funded and would therefore be subject to the Antiquities Code of Texas but not Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA).
Background Review Results
For the purposes of the background review, the archeological area of potential effects (APE) includes the
footprint of the proposed roadway and drainage improvements, covering a total of approximately 40
acres, the bulk of which is occupied by the existing Hausman Road pavement and disturbed right-of­
way. Based on engineering documents on file with COSA and included here as Appendix A, CMEC
1

estimates that approximately 5 acres of new right-of-way will be added. The new right-of-way generally
consists of narrow (3-10 feet) strips along the edges of the existing right-of-way. The new right-of-way
widens to 28-48 feet along the south side of the S-curve over Huesta Creek for a distance of
approximately 0.25 miles.
Geologically, the west and east ends of the APE are underlain by limestones, mudstones, and other
components of the Late Cretaceous Buda Limestone and Del Rio Clay (often exposed at the surface),
while the central one-third is underlain by Holocene-era alluvium and terrace deposits associated with
Huesta and Leon Creeks, which join just south of the APE (Stoeser et al. 2007). Soils in the western onefourth of the APE are generally thin, rocky series such as Crawford and Bexar stony soils, Anhalt clay, and
Eckrant cobbly clay, while the remainder of the APE contains deeper series such as Tinn and Frio soils,
Sunev loam, and Lewisville silty clay interleaved with thinner Patrick and Eckrant soils (NRCS 2012).
Keyword and map-based searches were carried out within the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas
maintained by the Texas Historical Commission (THC) and the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL) to identify coverage areas for previous archeological surveys as well as previously recorded
resources such as cemeteries, historical markers, National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) properties
and districts, State Archeological Landmarks (SALs), and archeological sites within and near the APE.
Atlas data and COSA historic landmarks and districts are shown in Figure 1.
The following resources were identified in or immediately adjacent to the APE (THC 2012):





41BX41 – Prehistoric campsite possibly destroyed by residential development
41BX50 – Prehistoric site with depth potential and unknown area, recommended for testing
41BX1858 – Concrete foundations associated with 20th-century ranching complex; low data
potential, no further work recommended, not recommended as NRHP/SAL eligible
41BX1889 – Minor ranching site, low density of materials and no structures, mostly 20th century
but some possibility of 19th century, not recommended as NRHP/SAL eligible

The following resources were identified within one kilometer (0.62 miles) of the APE (THC 2012):















41BX40 – Prehistoric site recommended for further work, Archaic, possible Paleoindian
41BX47 – Early-Middle Archaic, intact features, recommended NRHP/SAL eligible
41BX48 – Paleoindian points found on surface
41BX49 – Prehistoric site destroyed by residential construction
41BX53 – Prehistoric site with potential for deep deposits; recommended for testing
41BX72 – Prehistoric burned rock midden recommended for testing
41BX127 – Prehistoric site recommended for testing
41BX231 – Possibly intact prehistoric burned rock middens, recommended for testing
41BX232 – Possibly intact prehistoric burned rock middens, recommended for testing,
recommended SAL eligible
41BX233 – Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended
41BX234 – Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended
41BX505 – Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended
41BX597 – Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended
41BX631 – Minor prehistoric site, also a historic military camp recommended for further work

2










41BX1419 – Minor prehistoric site, low density, but recommended for preservation because on
UTSA campus (educational use)
41BX1480 – Historic limestone well, no further work
41BX1810 – Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended
41BX1811 – Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended
41BX1812 – Early 20th century farmstead, no further work
41BX1890 – Minor prehistoric site, no further work recommended
COSA Historic Landmark: Moos Homestead
Benko Family Cemetery – Historic Texas Cemetery, late 19th century

Approximately one-half of the APE has been covered by previous archeological surveys, including
portions of the following, listed as they appear from left to right in Figure 1:









Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) survey along Loop 1604 carried out by the Center
for Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio (CAR-UTSA) in 2007
COSA survey carried out by EComm, now AmaTerra, in 2011
COSA survey carried out by Abasolo Consultants in 2005
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) survey carried out by an unknown entity in 1979
Bexar County Flood Control (BCFC) survey for drainage improvements on Huesta Creek carried
out by SWCA in 2010
COSA survey carried out by ACI in 2010
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) survey carried out by an unknown entity in 1994
TxDOT surveys along IH-10 in 1991 and 2007

At least two additional projects, both on behalf of USACE, have been carried out in the Leon Creek area
but are not shown in the Atlas. In the late 1960s and early 1970s a large area survey was conducted
along Leon Creek. In 2007, Geo-Marine, Inc. (GMI) conducted a targeted survey of sites recorded during
the earlier Leon Creek work to evaluate current conditions. This survey included coverage in the center
of the APE at the location of 41BX41, although the exact extent of that coverage is unclear.
Recommendations
Based on topography, soils, and spatial trends in the local archeological record, the primary high
probability areas for archeological resources along the Hausman Road APE are the areas around Huesta
and Leon Creeks. The Huesta Creek crossing is the location of the proposed bridge which will include
the largest single segment of new right-of-way in the current project. However, this area was entirely
covered by the 2010 BCFC survey, which found heavy disturbance and erosion and a single minor
historic-age site, 41BX1858 (Galindo et al. 2010). The area between the creeks has been subjected to
recent residential development that may have already destroyed 41BX41, the single known site along
that portion of the APE, but this destruction has not been fully confirmed to COSA’s satisfaction.
Per July 30, 2012 comments from COSA City Archeologist Kay Hindes, CMEC recommends pedestrian
field study supplemented by backhoe trenching as required by soil conditions within the east half of the
APE, from 41BX41 to IH 410, with particular emphasis on the areas around 41BX41 and 41BX50. The
latter was recommended for testing but it appears that additional work was never performed, and the
site has not been fully delineated (THC 2012). The pedestrian survey and backhoe trenching at 41BX41
and 41BX50 will need to be undertaken within both existing and proposed right-of-way, as allowed by
3

utilities and field conditions. Ms. Hindes’ July 30 comments on an earlier draft of this document are
reproduced in full below:
(1) I want the area of site 41BX41 field checked again to confirm (at sufficient depth) that no portion of that
site still exists within the existing and/or proposed ROW--backhoe trenching will most likely be required;
(2) I concur that additional field survey work needs to be done, particularly in the area of 41BX50 (this may
include testing and mitigation)--see above;
(3) I also concur that the eastern portion of the project area will have to be surveyed, in particular between
the Leon Creek and IH10 (see above re backhoe trenching);
(4) The SAWS detention pond east of Leon Creek and south of Hausmann Road will need to be surveyed as
well as the line to the detention pond (ibid). (K. Hindes personal communication 2012)

References
Galindo, M. J., A. Mod, and J. McGilvray
2010 Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Hausman Road Phase I Improvement
Project LC-9, Directive Number VI-E, Bexar County, Texas. SWCA Environmental Consultants,
Austin.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2012 Soil Survey Geographic (SSURGO) Database. Streaming Google Earth interface provided by
California Soil Resource Laboratory, University of California – Davis; available at
http://casoilresource.lawr.ucdavis.edu/drupal/node/902.
Data provided by U.S.
Department of Agriculture/NRCS. Accessed July 24, 2012.
Stoeser, D. B., N. Shock, G. N. Green, G. M. Dumonceaux, and W. D. Heran
2007 Geologic Map Database of Texas. United States Geological Survey, Department of the
Interior. Available online at: http://pubs.usgs.gov/ds/2005/170/. Downloaded May 21,
2009.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2012 Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Data Sets. Texas Historical Commission and the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory. Available at http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us, accessed July
24, 2012.
Thornton, M., M. D. Freeman, and J. Dowling
2010 Archaeological Survey of the Leon Creek Greenway: Segment II of the Linear Creekway
Program, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. Texas Historical Commission and the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory. ACI Consulting, Austin.
Figures
1. Location of Archeological APE
Appendices
A. Project Layout/ROW Exhibits
4

*

#
*

#
*
#
*
#
*

#
*
#
*

41BX440

TxDOT
2007

#
*

V
U
1604

41BX1481

#
*

41BX1478

#
*

41BX1480

#
*

#
*41BX1479
#
*

#
*

41BX234

41BX231

#
*

Benko
Family

#41BX1232
*

41BX1420
41BX230

41BX1419

41BX1890

#
*

41BX49

COSA
2011

#
*

#41BX47
*

#
*

ue
s

ta

C

re
ek

41BX1889

#
*

BCFC 2010

#41BX631
*
#
*41BX233

41BX1772

Moos Homestead
41BX11

#
*

#
*41BX597

#
*41BX48

TxDOT
1991, 2007

USACE 1994

41BX41

#
*

# 41BX50
*

St

P ecan G l a d

COSA 2005

#
*

41BX1858

#
*

# 41BX51
*

#
* #
*41BX232
# #
*
*41BX127
41BX72
#
* 41BX53

41BX40

H

#
*

#
*

#
*

#
* 41BX1812

COSA
2010

¨
§
¦
10

#
*41BX1810

e

(
!

#
*

#
*

41BX69

#
*

reek
Leon C

EPA 1979

41BX1811

# 41BX505
*
Locke Hill
School

41BX1600

#
*

41BX314

French Creek
Woller Farm

Project Area

#
*

1km Buffer
Recorded Archeological Site

0

Previous Archeological Project
COSA Historic Landmark Site
Cemetery
Topo: USGS, Castle Hills, Tex., 1992; Helotes, Tex., 1992

0

¯

C
Co
om
maall
C
Co
ou
un
nttyy

K
Keen
nd
daallll
C
Co
ou
un
nttyy
B
Baan
nd
deerraa
C
Co
ou
un
nttyy

500
Meters
1,500
Feet

¨
§
¦
10

New Braunfels

£
¤
281

Project
Area
M
Meed
diin
naa
C
Co
ou
un
nttyy
90
£
¤

B
Beexxaarr
C
Co
ou
un
nttyy

¨
§
¦
§
¨
¦

10
San Antonio

¨
§
¨
§ ¦
¦
410

Figure 1
Location of
Archeological APE

35

37

£
¤
87

Bexar
County

Prepared for: City of San Antonio
Scale: 1:19,685
Project No.: 036-005-001
Prepared by: AT
Date: 7-23-12

1 in = 500 m

File: G:\Projects\CityofSanAntonio\Hausman_Road\Figures\Arch_20120723.mxd

APPENDIX B
2010 TEXAS HISTORICAL COMMISSION CULTURAL RESOURCES CLEARANCE LETTER
FOR LEON CREEK (LC)‐9

APPENDIX C
PHOTOGRAPHS

Photo 1. APE along south side of Hausman Rd., facing east from
Loop 1604.

Photo 2. APE along south side of Hausman Rd., facing east at the
Kyle Seale Pkwy.

Water Utility
Manway Cover

Photo 3. APE along the south side of Hausman Rd., facing east at
Pecan Glade Rd.

Photo 4. APE along the north side of Hausman Rd., facing southwest
from Huesta Creek.

Photographs were taken on 8/19-22/13.

APPENDIX C

ASF12-152-00

Photo 5. APE along the south side of Hausman Rd., facing east
towards Maverick Creek from Babcock Rd.

Photo 6. APE along the north side of Hausman Rd., facing west
towards Maverick Creek from Jetlyn Dr.

Photo 7. APE along the north side of Hausman Rd., facing east from
Jetlyn Dr.

Photo 8. APE along the south side of Hausman Rd., facing east from
Ridge Oak Pkwy.

Photographs were taken on 8/19-22/13.

APPENDIX C

ASF12-152-00

Communication
Utilities
Photo 9. APE along south side of Hausman Rd., facing west from
Leon Creek.

Photo 10. APE along the south side of Hausman Rd., facing east
towards Leon Creek.

Photo 11. APE along the south side of Hausman Rd., facing east
from JV Bacon Pkwy.

Photo 12. APE along the north side of Hausman Rd., facing east
from the AT&T property.

Photographs were taken on 8/19-22/13.

APPENDIX C

ASF12-152-00

Photo 13. APE along south side of Hausman Rd. adjacent from
Northside ISD property, facing east.

Photo 14. APE along the south side of Hausman Rd. near Trench 19.

Photo 15. APE along the south side of Hausman Rd., facing east
from Langston Well Rd.

Photo 16. APE along the north side of Hausman Rd., facing east
from University Heights Rd.

Photographs were taken on 8/19-22/13.

APPENDIX C

ASF12-152-00

Photo 17. Trench 4 before excavation, photo taken facing south.

Photo 18. Trench 4 after excavation, photo taken facing south.

Photo 19. Chert flake found in Trench 4.

Photo 20. Trench 5 before excavation, photo taken facing
southeast.

Photographs were taken on 8/19-22/13.

APPENDIX C

ASF12-152-00

Photo 21. East profile of Trench 5, photo taken facing east.

Photo 22. Chert flake found in Trench 5.

Photo 23. Trench 9 before excavation, photo taken facing
northeast.

Photo 24. Artifacts found in Trench 9, including FCR, biface
fragment, and a chert flake.

Photographs were taken on 8/19-22/13.

APPENDIX C

ASF12-152-00

Photo 25. Trench 11 before excavation, photo taken facing
northeast.

Dorsal View

Photo 26. North profile of Trench 11, photo taken facing northeast.

Side View

Photo 27. Dorsal and side view of the scraper tool found in Trench
11.

Photo 28. Trench 12 before excavation, photo taken facing
southwest.

Photographs were taken on 8/19-22/13.

APPENDIX C

ASF12-152-00

Photo 29. Trench 12 after excavation, photo taken facing south.

Photo 30. Two chert flakes found in Trench 12.

Photo 31. Trench 13 after excavation, photo taken facing north.

Photo 32. Artifacts found in Trench 13, including three chert flakes
and a possible core.

Photographs were taken on 8/19-22/13.

APPENDIX C

ASF12-152-00

Photo 33. Trench 14 before excavation, photo taken facing
southeast.

Photo 34. West profile of Trench 14, photo taken facing northwest.

Photo 35. Three chert flakes found in Trench 14.

Photo 36. Trench 15 before excavation, photo taken facing
southwest.

Photographs were taken on 8/19-22/13.

APPENDIX C

ASF12-152-00

Photo 37. Trench 15 after excavation, photo taken facing north.

Photo 38. Six chert flakes found in Trench 15.

Photo 39. Trench 16 before excavation, photo taken facing
southwest.

Photo 40. East profile of Trench 16, photo taken facing southeast.

Photographs were taken on 8/19-22/13.

APPENDIX C

ASF12-152-00

End Scrapper

Photo 41. Artifacts found in Trench 16, including a large chert
primary flake and an end scrapper.

Photo 42. Four chert flakes found in Trench 16.

Photo 43. Two chert flakes found in Trench 19.

Photo 44. General view of terrain around 41BX50. Note quarried
gravels in foreground of photo.

Photographs were taken on 8/19-22/13.

APPENDIX C

ASF12-152-00

